<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Chronic activation of the epithelial immune system of the fruit fly's salivary glands has a negative effect on organismal growth and induces a peculiar set of target genes</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Genomics 2010, 11:265. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-11-265"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Ahmed Abdelsadik, Thomas Roeder"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 8.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 7.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Abdelsadik and Roeder BMC Genomics 2010, 11:265
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/265

Open Access

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Chronic activation of the epithelial immune system
of the fruit fly's salivary glands has a negative effect
on organismal growth and induces a peculiar set of
target genes
Research article

Ahmed Abdelsadik1,2 and Thomas Roeder*1,3

Abstract
Background: Epithelial and especially mucosal immunity represents the first line of defence against the plethora of
potential pathogens trying to invade via the gastrointestinal tract. The salivary glands of the fruit fly are an
indispensable part of the gastrointestinal tract, but their contribution to the mucosal immunity has almost completely
been neglected. Our major goal was to elucidate if the fly's salivary glands are able to mount an immune response and
what the major characteristics of this immune response are.
Results: Ectopic activation of the IMD-pathway within the salivary gland cells is able to induce an immune response,
indicating that the salivary glands are indeed immune competent. This reaction is characterized by the concurrent
expression of numerous antimicrobial peptide genes. In addition, ectopic activation of the salivary gland's immune
response induces morphological changes such as dwarfism throughout all developmental stages and a significantly
decreased length of the salivary glands themselves. DNA-microarray analyses of the reaction revealed a complex
pattern of up- and downregulated genes. Gene ontology analyses of regulated genes revealed a significant increase in
genes associated with ribosomal and proteasomal function. On the other hand, genes coding for peptide receptors
and some potassium channels are downregulated. In addition, the comparison of the transcriptional events induced
following IMD-activation in the trachea and the salivary glands shows also only a small overlap, indicating that the
general IMD-activated core transcriptome is rather small and that the tissue specific component of this response is
dominating. Among the regulated genes, those that code for signaling associated protease activity are significantly
modulated.
Conclusions: The salivary glands are immune-competent and they contribute to the overall intestinal immune system.
Although they produce antimicrobial peptides, their overall response is highly tissue-specific. Our analysis indicates
that chronic activation of the salivary gland's immune system is costly, as it induces severe reduction in growth
throughout development. The IMD-regulated increase in expression levels of the fly's presenilin representatives opens
the opportunity to use the salivary glands for studying the physiological and pathophysiological role of these genes in
a simple but functional environment.
Background
The immune system is indispensable for multicellular
organisms to cope with different pathogens such as bacteria, viruses or fungi. Most animals solely rely on their
innate immune system that utilizes phagocytosis, encap* Correspondence: troeder@zoologie.uni-kiel.de
1

Christian-Albrechts-University of Kiel, Zoophysiology, Olshausenstraße 40 D24098 Kiel, Germany

sulation, or antimicrobial peptides among many other
strategies[1,2]. Even in vertebrates, where it functions as a
first line of defence, it is indispensable for normal life.
Interest in innate immunity was revitalized by the identification of Toll-receptors in Drosophila [3] and since then
the fly has served as one of its most informative models
[4]. The phylogenetically most ancient type of innate
immune systems, the epithelial immunity, has almost

Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
© 2010 Abdelsadik and Roeder; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative

BioMed Central Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Abdelsadik and Roeder BMC Genomics 2010, 11:265
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/265

completely been overlooked. Epithelial cells, including
those of the airways and the intestine, as the most important ones, are able to launch a protective, antimicrobial
response if confronted with pathogens. Most notably,
both epithelia react with expression of antimicrobial peptide genes [5,6]. The intestinal immune system is in a special position, because it not only has to fight pathogens,
but at the same time, it has to protect the endogenous
microbiota. Thus, holding a homeostatic balance
between tolerance and profound immune responses is
the most important regulatory task of the intestinal
immune system. Deregulation of this homeostatic equilibrium might end up into chronic inflammatory diseases
of the epithelium, such as Crohn's disease and ulcerative
colitis. In Drosophila, a wealth of information regarding
the architecture of innate immune systems has accumulated over the last decade. Although most studies
focussed on the systemic immune response, some information regarding epithelial immunity, especially about
intestinal immunity were generated. In Drosophila, only
two signalling pathways converge onto activation of NFκB factors, the Toll- and the IMD-pathway [4]. Now, it is
common knowledge that epithelial immune responses in
the fly rely on the IMD-pathway. We have shown that, at
least in the airway epithelium, the inability of the Tollpathway to function properly, is due to the lack of vital
pathway members [7]. Nevertheless, it has to be mentioned that other pathways, not directly converging onto
NF-κB activation, such as the JNK- or the JAK/STATpathway are operative in epithelial immunity [8,9].
In the intestinal epithelium, two major response types
have been reported following pathogen challenge. These
reactions are the release of antimicrobial peptides and the
production of reactive oxygen species [10-13]. The intestine's function in Drosophila is to digest microbe-rich
food such as decaying fruits while protecting the fly from
infections. Expression of AMPs is enhanced by activation
of the IMD pathway and provides a partial protection
against entomopathogenic bacteria such as Pseudomonas
entomophila[14]. Another arm of the immune response
that complements the IMD response of AMP genes is the
production of reactive oxygen species (ROS). Apparently,
this system is sufficient to cope with most pathogens[10,11]. IMD-mediated response of AMP-genes
seems to be a back up system to control ROS-response
against pathogens[12,13].
In general, the intestinal epithelium appears to be
refractory towards pathogen confrontation, presumably
due to the presence of inhibitory signals, either those that
digest peptidoglycans as the most important pathogen
associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) or those that
repress IMD-mediated expression[15,16]. Taken together,
regulation of antimicrobial responses in the intestinal

Page 2 of 10

epithelium appears to be a complex network including
activation and inhibition at different levels [17-19].
Another part of the digestive system that may have the
potential to mount an immune response has largely been
overlooked, the salivary glands. Salivary glands are an
integral part of the intestinal tract, often enabling the
uptake and transport of ingested material into the digestive tract. They are the gatekeepers of the intestinal system, being essential for various aspects of the intestine's
immunity. Drosophila salivary glands consist of two
major cell types: secretory cells that synthesize and
secrete high levels of protein and duct cells that form the
simple tubes connecting the secretory cells to the larval
mouth. Salivary glands differentiate without further cell
division and increase in size simply by increasing the volume of individual cells. In recent studies, salivary glands
served as a model to study aspects of relevant for organogenesis and the role of various different genes in this process [20-22]. Here we show that salivary glands can
mount a protective immune response that is characterized by the expression of antimicrobial peptide genes.
Using ectopic expression of the pgrp-lc gene, a procedure,
which has already been shown to activate innate immune
responses in the fly [23,24], we specifically activate the
immune response of the salivary glands. Fly larvae experiencing a sustained activation of their salivary gland
IMD-pathway show a pronounced phenotype that is
characterized by reduced overall size of the organ and
reduced size of the flies. In addition to various antimicrobial peptide genes, expression of numerous other genes
with relevance for signalling, including proteases with
signalling activities such as presenilin or signal peptide
peptidase is regulated in this organ.

Results
A major prerequisite for the current study was the ability
to specifically target the salivary glands of larval flies
without any confounding expression. This is required to
manipulate expression of certain genes within this tissue
only. Salivary gland secretion (sgs) proteins are believed
to be restricted to salivary glands. To evaluate if this specific expression pattern is operational for the corresponding Gal4-lines, we used the bipartite Gal4/UAS
expression control system and crossed the Gal4-driver P
[Sgs3-GAL4.PD]TP1 to UAS-flies carrying gfp under
control of the UAS-promotor. The expression of the GFPprotein is, as expected, exclusive for the salivary glands
(Fig. 1A).
Targeted expression of PGRPs was shown to be sufficient for activation of the IMD-pathway, one major arm
of the fly's innate immune system. It enables immune
activation without any contact to pathogens in a spatially
restricted manner, in those tissues that are immune com-

Abdelsadik and Roeder BMC Genomics 2010, 11:265
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/265

Page 3 of 10

Figure 1 Using the Gal4/UAS-system, activation of the salivary glands can be achieved by genetic means. Proteins of the salivary gland secretion family are believed to be restricted to the salivary glands. Crossing the sgs3::gal4 line with a UAS::gfp responder line revealed that expression is
indeed restricted to the salivary glands (A). Based on the UAS/Gal4 system for ectopic activation, the IMD-pathway, which is instrumental in epithelial
immunity, can be activated by targeted overexpression of peptidoglycan recognition receptors. The membrane bound PGRP-LC activates in a cellautonomous way, whereas the soluble PGRP-LE activates in an organ-wide, systemic way (B). If the pgrp-le gene is expressed in the salivary glands
only, the antimicrobial peptide gene drosomycin (here used as a reporter for immune system activity and visualized by drosP::gfp) is expressed in defined parts of the intestine only (but not on the salivary glands) (C).

petent. We used two different effector lines, enabling
either production of the membrane protein PGRP-LC or
of the soluble receptor PGRP-LE. Ectopic production of
PGRP-LC is expected to induce a cell-autonomous
immune response, whereas that of PGRP-LE is expected
to induce an organ-wide or even systemic response (Fig.
1B). In initial experiments, it became apparent that ectopic expression of the pgrp-le gene in the salivary glands
only induces activation also in other parts of the intestinal
system (Fig. 1C), indicating that it acts as an organ-wide
activator. In contrast, the primary effects of pgrp-lc
expression remain restricted to the salivary glands. All
following experiments were performed with the pgrp-lc
construct allowing to focus on the effects of IMD-pathway activation in the salivary glands only.

To evaluate if the salivary glands of larval Drosophila
are able to react to an immune challenge and to characterize this reaction type, we performed two types of
experiments. First, conventional oral infection experiments were used to evaluate if this epithelial tissue is able
to launch a classical immune response, characterized by
increased expression of antimicrobial peptide genes.
Using promotor indicator lines, where gfp expression is
under transcriptional control of antimicrobial peptide
gene promoters, no response could be observed using
infection with Erwinia carotovora (data not shown).
Using these oral infection experiments with Erwinia
carotovora and qRT-PCR, we evaluated a set of three
antimicrobial peptide genes; namely, drosomycin,
cecropin and diptericin. Whereas expression of drosomy-

Abdelsadik and Roeder BMC Genomics 2010, 11:265
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/265

Page 4 of 10

cin is reduced, both, cecropin and diptericin expression is
increased approximately 5 fold (Fig. 1). To show that
ectopic pgrp-lc expression is able to induce an autonomous immune response in the larval salivary glands, we
isolated salivary glands of control animals (parental lines)
and those of the sgs3-Gal4 X UAS-pgrp-lc crosses. Isolation was performed manually from early 3rd larval instars
and the salivary glands were thoroughly freed from
attached fat body material. This material was used for
quantitative real-time PCR experiments following standard procedures. We tested the expression levels of the
canonical set of antimicrobial peptide genes, including
metchnikowin (metch), defensin (def ), drosocin (dros),
drosomycin (drs), cecropin (cec) and diptericin (dipt).
Expression of all of them, except that of drosomycin, is
upregulated between 10 and more than hundred fold (Fig.
2). Greatest changes are seen for diptericin and defensin
with approx. 80 and 160 fold increases, respectively.
Expression of drosomycin on the other hand, is instead
downregulated significantly.
Flies, where we activated the immune response in the
salivary glands show a distinctive phenotype, they are
much smaller than their relatives from the parental lines.
Adults derived from the crosses are approximately 10%
smaller than their relatives of the parental lines that were
kept under identical conditions (Fig. 3A, B). This differ-

Figure 3 Chronic ectopic activation of the IMD-pathway in the
salivary glands only had a significant effect on growth and body
length of the animals. Adult males, where PGRP-LC is ectopically expressed in the salivary gland have an approximately 10% reduced
body length if compared with the parental line (A, B). A similar reduction can be seen in the pupal length of both types of animals (C, D). Regarding the lengths of isolated salivary glands from the corresponding
animals, these differences are even more pronounced (E, F). For A, C, E,
median values of at least 20 measurements +/- SEM. Statistically significant differences are marked by an asterik (p < 0.05).

Figure 2 Infection and ectopic activation of the IMD-pathway induces expression of antimicrobial peptides in the salivary glands.
Oral infection of early 3rd instar with the insect pathogen Erwinia carotovora was used to monitor transcriptional changes in 3 selected antimicrobial peptide genes, drosomycin (drs), cecropin (cec) and
diptericin (dipt)(white bars). Ectopic overexpression of the prgp-lc gene
in the larval salivary glands was achieved using the Gal4/UAS system
(sgs3::gal4 X UAS::pgrp-lc). Salivary glands of early 3rd instar larvae were
isolated from these crossing and a parental line (responder line) used
for control. Quantitative real-time PCR was performed with oligonucleotides comprising approximately 150 bp of the corresponding antimicrobial peptide genes; drosomycin (drs), cecropin (cec), diptericin
(dipt), metchnikowin (metch), drosomycin (dros) and defensin (def)
(grey bars). Results are the mean of at least 3 experiments performed
in triplicate. Controls are set to 1. Statistically significant differences
(compared with controls are marked by an asterik (p < 0.05).

ence in size is not restricted to adults, but it can also be
seen in pupae (Fig. 3C, D) and wandering 3rd instars
respectively (controls: 954 μm ± 45.6 μm; experimental
animals: 696 μm ± 68 μm; difference is statistically significant - p < 0.05). Here, also differences of about 15% are
conspicuous (Fig. 3C, D). A very similar decrease in
length is apparent for the salivary glands themselves,
which are more than 20% shorter than those isolated
from the parental lines (Fig. 3E, F).
An unbiased study of the effects mediated by ectopic
IMD-pathway activation in the larval salivary glands was
performed using DNA-microarray analyses. Therefore,
we isolated the salivary glands exactly as described above,
amplified and labeled the material and hybridized it onto
microarrays covering most known genes of the fly. If the

Abdelsadik and Roeder BMC Genomics 2010, 11:265
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/265

salivary gland transcriptomes of control larvae and those
of larvae that experienced a chronic IMD-pathway upregulation that was restricted to the salivary glands, significant differences can be observed. A total of 458 genes are

Page 5 of 10

significantly upregulated and 579 genes are significantly
downregulated (Fig. 4).
Gene ontology analysis using the Fatigo program package [25] revealed significant peculiarties of both, the up-

Figure 4 DNA-microarray analyses of the transcriptional changes within the salivary glands that occur following chronic activation of the
IMD-pathway in these cells only. Cohorts of genes were identified that are either upregulated (additional file 3) or downregulated (additional file
4). Only those genes are included, where these differences are greater than twofold and the differences are statistically significant (evaluated with the
SAM software package). Gene ontology analyses were performed with these cohorts of genes and compared to the complete set of Drosophila genes
using the Fatigo software tool [25] revealed some statistically significant differences (A, top). Comparison of the set of upregulated genes with the
complete set of Drosophila genes revealed some groups of genes that are highly enriched in this cohort (top). In addition, KEGG pathway analysis
identified the oxidative phosphorylation as being significantly enriched in this cohort of genes. The cohort of downregulated genes includes two
functional groups, being significantly different from the total number of genes (A, bottom). The corresponding lists are summarized in additional file
5. Venn diagram analyses showed that only a small minority of the up- or downregulated genes are classical immune relevant genes (additional file
1). Similarly, the intersection with those genes that are regulated upon an experimental infection with the insect pathogen Erwinia carotovora in two
different epithelial tissues are rather small (B). In addition, small groups of genes are identical if compared with genes upregulated in the trachea following the same experimental manipulation (IMD-activation) and with susceptibility genes for gut infection (C), SG IMD up means the cohort of genes
upregulated following IMD activation (see additional files 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5), gut and trachea Erwinia up means the groups of genes upregulated in the
trachea or the gut following infection with Erwinia carotovora [9,27], trachea IMD up means the list of genes upregulated following IMD activation in
the larval trachea [27], gut infection susceptibility means those genes that have been identified as having an influence on oral infection in a genome
wide RNAi screen [8].

Abdelsadik and Roeder BMC Genomics 2010, 11:265
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/265

and downregulated genes in the larval salivary glands following activation of the IMD-pathway (Fig. 4A). GO
ontology analysis in comparison with all Drosophila
genes revealed that some functional groups are significantly enriched in the cohort of upregulated genes. Most
significantly is the clustering of gene products associated
with ribonucleoprotein complexes, the proteasome and
with cation transporter activities. KEGG pathway analysis of these genes revealed a significant enrichment of the
oxidative phosphorylation pathway (Fig. 4A, top, additional file 1). The cohort of downregulated genes shows a
clustering of genes associated with peptide receptor
activity and alkali metal ion binding (Fig 4A, bottom,
additional file 1). 24 ribosomal proteins in total are
among the upregulated genes in the salivary glands and 7
genes coding for proteasome subunits. Regarding the
downregulated genes, peptide receptor coding genes are
conspicuous. In addition to allatostatin receptors, a
tachykinin-like, a SIFamide and a gonadotropin-releasing
hormone receptor are downregulated (additional file 1).
In the group of alkali metal ion binding, ion channels,
especially potassium channels are present (such as shaker
b and ether a go-go).
A more detailed analysis of cohorts of regulated genes
revealed only a minor overlap with the canonical set of
immune genes set up in the Lemaitre lab http://
www.cnrs-gif.fr/cgm/immunity/index_gb.html (Fig. 4B,
C). This comprehensive list is a compilation of genes
identified in whole genome wide infection studies [26]
and bioinformatics analysis of Drosophila genes. Only 11
genes in the upregulated and 18 genes in the downregulated cohort are classified as immune genes, meaning that
just 2-5% of all regulated genes fall into this category.
Based on Venn-diagram analysis, we compared the
cohort of upregulated genes with those upregulated following an experimental infection with the insect pathogen Erwinia carotovora either in the trachea or the gut
[9,27](Fig. 4B). Overlaps are also not high with 15 genes
in common between Salivary glands upregulated and
either the tracheal or the gut infection upregulated
cohorts (Fig. 4B, additional file 2).
Using a similar experimental approach, i.e. ectopic activation of the epithelial immune system through expression of the pgrp-lc gene, we identified the regulated
transcriptomes in the larval airway epithelium, the trachea. For these experiments, animals with the same
genetic background, which are of the same age, and were
held under identical conditions, were used [7]. The overlaps in the cohorts of regulated genes are slightly larger
(22) (Fig. 4C). Thus, these experiments indicate that NFkB dependent gene expression is highly context-dependent, meaning that different tissues activate largely different sets of genes if the IMD-pathway is activated
ectopically. In addition, a total of 31 genes are shared with

Page 6 of 10

the set of genes identified as involved in susceptibility to
gut infections [8] (Additional files 3 and 4. Larval salivary
glands are an exquisite model for studying the molecular
basis of autophagic cell death. In the experimental flies,
we found no histological signs of autophagic cell death. In
addition, we only found very few genes that are usually
associated with autophagic cell death to be regulated (up:
maf-s, rab-7. Obp-99, elf-5A, cyclophilin-1, CG10992,
CG9760; down: comm3). This finding is in-line with earlier observations that NF-kB activation is not necessary
for cell death of salivary glands, thus excluding confounding influences from factors related to autophagy in the
salivary glands [28].
Verification of differential expression was performed
with a small subset of obviously interesting genes, that
came out of the DNA-microarray studies as being regulated (Additional file 5). Among them are e.g. sod or thor,
but presumably as the most important ones, those that
are involved in signaling through protease activity. These
are the two presenilin-like genes of Drosophila and the
signal peptide peptidase (spp). For all these genes, we
were able to verify the differential expression (Fig. 5).
Experiments were performed with isolated salivary gland
material from control as well as from experimental animals.

Discussion
The salivary glands of the fly are an important part of the
digestive tract and thus should contribute to the immune
response of the entire organ. In addition, salivary gland
function is indispensable for normal life, making it necessary to protect this organ. A partial protection is achieved

Figure 5 Verification of differential expression of some highly interesting genes, which are regulated following IMD-activation
within the salivary glands. RNA is isolated from pure salivary glands
(freed of contaminating material) of both experimental groups and the
results are the means of at least three independent experiments performed in duplicate. All genes are transcribed at significantly higher
rates in the experimental tissues compared with controls (p < 0.05).

Abdelsadik and Roeder BMC Genomics 2010, 11:265
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/265

through its architecture, because the salivary gland secretion moves into the intestinal system, making it hard for
bacteria to overcome this constant flow. We got a first
impression of the yet uncharacterized interplay between
salivary glands and digestive system, while taking a look
at those animals that ectopically express pgrp-le in the
salivary glands only. This soluble protein, although produced in the salivary glands only, can migrate through the
entire intestinal tract thus functioning as a general activator of the intestinal immune response. It shows that products of the salivary gland have in general the potential to
modulate the intestinal immune system, highlighting its
importance for intestinal immune homeostasis.
Salivary gland cells, similarly as most epithelial cells,
are indeed able to launch an immune response if confronted with an orally applied pathogen. Our experiments
demonstrate that two out of three antimicrobial peptide
genes are expressed at significantly higher levels; namely,
cecropin (cec) and diptericin (dipt). Nevertheless, this
increase is not sufficient to be visible in promotor gfp
indicator strains. Conventional oral infections are hard to
perform and the response characteristics are variable,
making it not trivial to identify the major response characteristics of this epithelial immune response. Alternatively, the forced IMD-activation, enables a more focused
view on the major characteristics of this type of immune
system. Within the salivary gland cells, the response following forced IMD-pathway activation comprises
increased expression of antimicrobial peptide genes,
which is generally accepted to be the "normal" reaction to
this type of stimulus. This clearly shows that the larval
salivary gland is an immune competent epithelium, similarly as the intestinal, the airway or the subcuticular epithelium [5-7,29]. Regarding the set of AMP genes that
showed an increased expression, the exceptional role of
drosomycin (drs) is suspicious. The lack of Toll-mediated
immune signaling appears to be a common feature of all
epithelial immune systems characterized in the fly so far
[6,29]. Drosomycin is thought to be the major Toll-pathway dependent antimicrobial peptide; a lack of drosomycin upregulation would thus be in-line with the absence
of Toll-mediated signaling in epithelial immunity. Nevertheless, it is puzzling that in the trachea, the only epithelial tissue where a similar experimental approach has
been performed, Drosomycin is the major AMP that
comes up following infection or ectopic IMD-pathway
activation [7]. It has to be mentioned that drosomycin
expression is striking in adult salivary glands, which is
congruent with earlier findings [6].
Chronic activation of the salivary gland's immune system comes along with costs for the animal. Reduced sizes
in both, the salivary glands and of the entire organism in
all its developmental stages, are the result of this activation. The reason for this remains unclear, but apparently,

Page 7 of 10

chronic activation impairs the function of the salivary
glands, which in turn might result in a reduced capacity
to take up nutrients. Therewith, this ectopic regime of
epithelial immune system activation shares some commonalities with chronic inflammatory diseases of barrier
epithelia [30]. Growth retardation is also seen in children
suffering from inflammatory bowel diseases [30]. In these
children, malnutrition is obviously not the sole reason for
this growth retardation, but the production and regulation of proinflammatory cytokines may also be relevant
for this phenotype [31]. Induced expression of membrane
tethered proteases such as Presenilin or SPP may thus be
a link, as one can speculate that they trigger signaling
events while freeing signaling ligands from the membrane. Nevertheless, we have no experimental data if the
phenotype inducing processes are restricted to the salivary glands or if they can be attributed to e.g. an
increased antimicrobial activity in the intestinal lumen,
which in turn may interfere with the microbiota.
Although this possibility could not be ruled out, gnotobiotic flies do not show such a significant effect on growth
parameters as the one observed in our study.
Surprisingly, only a relatively small group of genes
among the cohorts of up- and downregulated ones can be
assigned to the set of Drosophila immune genes [26].
Although expression of a complex set of AMP genes is
induced, most other induced genes apparently have nothing to do with "conventional" immune responses. This
obvious difference between a "conventional" immune
response and that of an immune competent epithelium is
not restricted to the fly's salivary glands, it can also be
seen in another epithelium of the fly, the airways [7,27].
Apparently, morphological changes that result from
chronic immune pathway activation may be one reason
for this incongruence. Very surprising is the small overlap
between the cohorts of up- or down-regulated genes
between the salivary glands and those seen following a
natural infection in either the gut or the airways. The
same is true for the comparison between IMD-activated
transcription in the salivary glands and in the airways,
although both experiments were performed with a very
similar design. Despite the fact that in both tissues IMDpathway activation induces an immune response, most
parts of the induced response differ substantially between
both organs. This indicates that IMD-dependent signaling has only a very small core response shared by all
organs and that the tissue specific response is far more
important in shaping the transcriptional response following IMD-pathway activation.
A classification according to the gene ontologies
revealed some very interesting aspects in both cohorts of
genes (up- and downregulated). Among the upregulated
genes, both, the ribosome associated as well as the proteasome associated proteins are significantly enriched.

Abdelsadik and Roeder BMC Genomics 2010, 11:265
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/265

Functionally, this would mean that both, the translational
capacity and the targeted degradation of proteins
intended to proteasomal degradation, are enhanced.
KEGG pathway analysis revealed only the oxidative phosphorylation as significantly enriched pathway, which we
currently do not understand. Among the cohort of downregulated genes, peptide receptors are conspicuous. A
total of six peptide receptors, including all allatostatin
receptors [32] are downregulated. In before, it has not
been known that this high number of different neuropeptides have the ability to modulate the activity of salivary
glands, which is up to now ascribed to biogenic amines
only [33]. Some of the genes that are not part of a conspicuous gene ontology are nevertheless of great interest.
Intramembrane proteolysis is thought to be a highly relevant way in cell signaling, which can be fulfilled by only a
very small number of proteases. Among them, the presenilin-like proteases are of prime importance. Presenilin
proteases gained substantial interest following identification of presenilin mutants being causative for some forms
of familial Alzheimer disease [34]. They are part of the
gamma-secretase complex, thus having a central role in
the formation of amyloid plaques [35]. This concerted
activation of the proteases highly relevant for countless
signaling systems, may be one major reason for the different transcriptomic responses that can be seen both in the
trachea and the salivary gland following identical experimental stimulation protocols. Their role in the immune
response of this epithelium is completely enigmatic. Nevertheless, these results offer a unique opportunity to use
this natural system to study the physiological significance
of them in this extremely simplified model system. The
fly's salivary glands are of very simple organization, made
of only two cell types. In addition, high amounts of pure
material can be generated and the organ is highly amenable to specific genetic interventions of different types
including RNAi-mediated gene silencing or specific and
timed overexpression.
Two other genes, which are known to be associated
with stress or immune responses are also upregulated in
this organ, the superoxide dismutase (SOD) and the integrator of stress responses dThor. In the intestinal epithelium, the redox homeostasis appears to be one major way
to fight infections while protecting the endogenous
microbiota. In this context, reactive oxygen species generated by the dual oxidase Duox are apparently of prime
importance. In the salivary gland, only the SOD appears
to be upregulated, pointing to a role in defence of the own
epithelium in response to a real or to an anticipated infection.

Conclusions
Salivary glands are an integral part of the gastro-intestinal
tract. In the fruit fly, they are indispensable for efficient

Page 8 of 10

food intake. As they are blind ending tubular organs, they
are particularly prone to infections. We were able to show
that the fly's salivary glands are able to mount an immune
response if they are confronted with pathogens. This
response primarily depends on the production of antimicrobial peptides. To study this response in detail, we
established an ectopic expression control system that
allows activation the epithelial immune system of the salivary glands without pathogen contact. Although they
produce antimicrobial peptides, their overall response
appears to be specific for the salivary glands. Chronic
activation of the salivary gland's immune system is costly,
as it induces severe reduction in growth throughout
development. This negative effect could be seen in all
developmental stages. Surprisingly, a number of different
genes are regulated upon ectopic activation of the IMDpathway. Among them are proteins involved in presenelin
function. Studying this molecule, which is central to
Alzheimer pathology, may allow us to unravel some of the
aspects of presenelin function in a simple but functional
environment.

Methods
Fly strains and experimental manipulation

For the ectopic expression experiments, we used the Gal4
driver line P [Sgs3-GAL4.PD]TP1, which directs expression into the salivary glands of larvae and adults only.
Ectopic activation of the immune system was achieved by
crossing these flies to either UAS-pgrp-le or UAS-pgrp-lc
comprising flies [24]. UAS-pgrp-le containing flies also
carry a drsP::gfp cassette (flies were generously provided
by KV Andersen and S Kurata). For control experiments,
we generally used the responder line (mainly UAS-pgrplc). Flies were raised on standard cornmeal-agar medium
at 20°C.
Infection experiments

For infection experiments, early 3rd instar larvae were
confronted with the gram-negative bacterium Erwinia
carotovora according to protocols used in oral infection
experiments. Overnight cultures of the bacterium were
centrifuged, concentrated (OD600 = 100) and mixed with
banana at a ratio of 1:1. Larvae were allowed to feed for 6
h on these bacteria, subsequently, they were allowed to
feed for another 6 h on normal medium and the salivary
glands were prepared out of the animals and used for further experiments. Using this material, we performed
qRT-PCR analyses for drosomycin, cecropin and diptericin (at least using 3 independent experiments).
Molecular biology

Manually extraction for the salivary glands of the 3rd larvae instars followed by total RNA extracted using
RNAmagic solution from (Bio-Budget technologies

Abdelsadik and Roeder BMC Genomics 2010, 11:265
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/265

GmbH, Krefeld, Germany). cDNA-synthesis was performed using CapFinder as described[36]. Amplification
of the cDNA was performed for 26 cycles taking advantage of a long and accurate PCR system. The integrity and
quality of the amplificate was checked by gel electrophoresis. This material was used for RT-PCR experiments,
qRT-PCR experiments and the production of labeled
hybridization probes for DNA-microarray analysis.
cDNA used for downstream applications shouldn't have
any contamination of the fat bodies and thus was used
only, if amplification with oligonucleotides matching the
fat body specific gene P6 was not successful. Quantitative
RT-PCR was performed with a Lightcycler (Roche Diagnostics, Ingelheim, Germany) using the Takara SYBR
Green Real-time PCR kit (Takara Bio Inc, Japan). Probe
sets were normalized against the housekeeping gene Rpl
32. At least three independent experiments were performed in duplicate.
Microarray experiments were essentially performed as
described before[7]. In brief, equal amounts of amplified
and purified cDNA were subjected to T7-based cRNA
synthesis. The synthesis was performed with the T7
MEGAscript kit (Ambion, Applera, Darmstadt, Germany) supplemented with aaUTPs (Ambion, Applera,
Darmstadt, Germany) for the labeling of the cRNA. Following purification, approximately 10 μg of aminoallyl
modified-cRNA was coupled to succinimidyl modifiedCy3 und -Cy5 dyes (GE Healthcare, Freiburg, Germany)
in the presence of 50% DMSO and 0.05 M NaHCO3 (pH
9.0) [37]. Coupling reaction was carried out for two hours
in the dark followed by purification and precipitation of
the labeled cRNA. After assessment of the labeled cRNA
approximately 2-3 μg (or 150pmol) of Cy3 and Cy5
labeled probe were used for hybridization. Hybridisation
was carried out at 42°C overnight. After hybridization,
slides were washed twice with 1 × SSC, 0.1% Triton-X100 at 60°C for 15 minutes and with 0.1 × SSC, 0.1% Triton-X-100 at 37°C for 15 min. Subsequently, they were
washed with 0.1 × SSC for 30 seconds at room temperature and rinsed with water before dried.
Microarray analysis and bioinformatics

Gene expression analysis was performed using the Drosophila OLIGO 14k_version1 gene chip (Canadian Drosophila Microarray Center, University of Toronto, Canada).
The slides were scanned with the GenePixTM4000B
scanner (Axon Instruments, Molecular Devices, Munich,
Germany). For spot finding and generating preliminary
result files the raw scanned image files were analyzed
using GenePixPro version 6.0 whereas data normalization, quality assurance and control, filtering and clustering were carried out with GeneTraffic (Iobion, Agilent,
Waldbronn, Germany) and statistical analysis with the
SAM-program package. In search of functional composi-

Page 9 of 10

tion of genes significantly affected upon infection and
ectopic expression we used the bioinformatics web tool
FatiGO[25].
The DNA-microarray experiments have been deposited in the GEO-database (accession number: GSE20938).

Additional material
Additional file 1 Venn diagram analysis of Drosophila Salivary glands
genes upregulated following IMD-pathway activation compared with
various sets of genes. This file contains lists of those genes from Venn-diagram analyses of genes upregulated in the salivary glands following IMDactivation with various other sets of genes, identified in other experiments.
Additional file 2 Venn diagram analysis of Drosophila Salivary glands
genes upregulated following IMD-pathway activation with various
gene lists involved in reaction to infection. This file contains lists of
those genes from Venn-diagram analyses of genes upregulated in the salivary glands following IMD-activation with various other sets of genes
derived from infection experiments of different tissues.
Additional file 3 Drosophila Salivary glands: Genes upregulated following IMD-pathway activation. This file contains a list of those genes
whose expression in the salivary glands is upregulated significantly following activation of the IMD-pathway.
Additional file 4 Drosophila Salivary glands: Genes downregulated
following IMD-pathway activation. This file contains a list of those genes
whose expression in the salivary glands is downregulated significantly following activation of the IMD-pathway.
Additional file 5 Drosophila Salivary glands genes upregulated following IMD-pathway activation - ribonucleoprotein complex. This file
contains a list of those genes whose expression in the salivary glands is
upregulated significantly. It comprises only those genes with an annotation
as ribonucleoprotein complex.
Authors' contributions
AA performed the experiments, TR conceived the study and participated in its
design and coordination and drafted the manuscript. Both authors read and
approved the final manuscript.
Acknowledgements
We would like to acknowledge financial support of the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft. This work is an integral part of the SFB Transregio 22 (Teilprojekt
A7) and the Cluster of Excellence "Inflammation@interfaces". In addition, we
would like to thank Shoichiro Kurata (Tohoku University, Japan), Kathryn V.
Anderson (Sloan Kettering Institute, New York, USA) and the Bloomington
Drosophila Stock Center (Indiana University, Bloomington, USA) for fly strains.
AA received a personal grant of the egyptian government.
Author Details
1Christian-Albrechts-University of Kiel, Zoophysiology, Olshausenstraße 40 D24098 Kiel, Germany, 2South Valley University of Aswan, Zoology Department,
Faculty of Science at Aswan, Aswan Branch, 81528 Aswan, Egypt and
3Forschungszentrum Borstel, Dept. Immunology and Cell Biology, Parkallee 140, 23845 Borstel, Germany
Received: 3 November 2009 Accepted: 26 April 2010
Published: 26 April 2010
© 2010 Abdelsadik andfrom: distributedBioMed Central Ltd.the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
This is an Open2010, 11:265 http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/265
BMC article is available article licensee under the terms of
Genomics Access Roeder;

References
1. Silverman N, Paquette N: Immunology. The right resident bugs. Science
(New York, NY) 2008, 319(5864):734-735.
2. Leclerc V, Reichhart JM: The immune response of Drosophila
melanogaster. Immunological reviews 2004, 198:59-71.
3. Lemaitre B, Nicolas E, Michaut L, Reichhart JM, Hoffmann JA: The
dorsoventral regulatory gene cassette spatzle/Toll/cactus controls the
potent antifungal response in Drosophila adults. Cell 1996,
86(6):973-983.

Abdelsadik and Roeder BMC Genomics 2010, 11:265
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/265

4.
5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.

24.

Lemaitre B, Hoffmann J: The host defense of Drosophila melanogaster.
Annual review of immunology 2007, 25:697-743.
Ferrandon D, Jung AC, Criqui M, Lemaitre B, Uttenweiler-Joseph S,
Michaut L, Reichhart J, Hoffmann JA: A drosomycin-GFP reporter
transgene reveals a local immune response in Drosophila that is not
dependent on the Toll pathway. The EMBO journal 1998,
17(5):1217-1227.
Tzou P, Ohresser S, Ferrandon D, Capovilla M, Reichhart JM, Lemaitre B,
Hoffmann JA, Imler JL: Tissue-specific inducible expression of
antimicrobial peptide genes in Drosophila surface epithelia. Immunity
2000, 13(5):737-748.
Wagner C, Isermann K, Fehrenbach H, Roeder T: Molecular architecture
of the fruit fly's airway epithelial immune system. BMC genomics 2008,
9:446.
Cronin SJ, Nehme NT, Limmer S, Liegeois S, Pospisilik JA, Schramek D,
Leibbrandt A, Simoes Rde M, Gruber S, Puc U, et al.: Genome-wide RNAi
screen identifies genes involved in intestinal pathogenic bacterial
infection. Science (New York, NY) 2009, 325(5938):340-343.
Buchon N, Broderick NA, Poidevin M, Pradervand S, Lemaitre B:
Drosophila intestinal response to bacterial infection: activation of host
defense and stem cell proliferation. Cell host & microbe 2009,
5(2):200-211.
Ha EM, Oh CT, Bae YS, Lee WJ: A direct role for dual oxidase in
Drosophila gut immunity. Science (New York, NY) 2005,
310(5749):847-850.
Ha EM, Oh CT, Ryu JH, Bae YS, Kang SW, Jang IH, Brey PT, Lee WJ: An
antioxidant system required for host protection against gut infection
in Drosophila. Developmental cell 2005, 8(1):125-132.
Liehl P, Blight M, Vodovar N, Boccard F, Lemaitre B: Prevalence of local
immune response against oral infection in a Drosophila/Pseudomonas
infection model. PLoS pathogens 2006, 2(6):e56.
Ryu JH, Ha EM, Oh CT, Seol JH, Brey PT, Jin I, Lee DG, Kim J, Lee D, Lee WJ:
An essential complementary role of NF-kappaB pathway to
microbicidal oxidants in Drosophila gut immunity. The EMBO journal
2006, 25(15):3693-3701.
Vodovar N, Vinals M, Liehl P, Basset A, Degrouard J, Spellman P, Boccard F,
Lemaitre B: Drosophila host defense after oral infection by an
entomopathogenic Pseudomonas species. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 2005,
102(32):11414-11419.
Bischoff V, Vignal C, Duvic B, Boneca IG, Hoffmann JA, Royet J:
Downregulation of the Drosophila immune response by
peptidoglycan-recognition proteins SC1 and SC2. PLoS pathogens 2006,
2(2):e14.
Zaidman-Remy A, Herve M, Poidevin M, Pili-Floury S, Kim MS, Blanot D, Oh
BH, Ueda R, Mengin-Lecreulx D, Lemaitre B: The Drosophila amidase
PGRP-LB modulates the immune response to bacterial infection.
Immunity 2006, 24(4):463-473.
Lhocine N, Ribeiro PS, Buchon N, Wepf A, Wilson R, Tenev T, Lemaitre B,
Gstaiger M, Meier P, Leulier F: PIMS modulates immune tolerance by
negatively regulating Drosophila innate immune signaling. Cell host &
microbe 2008, 4(2):147-158.
Pal S, Wu L: Guts and glory: balancing microbes and the immune
response. Developmental cell 2005, 8(1):1-2.
Lee WJ: Bacterial-modulated signaling pathways in gut homeostasis.
Science signaling 2008, 1(21):pe24.
Andrew DJ: Regulation and formation of the Drosophila salivary
glands. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 1998, 842:55-69.
Andrew DJ, Henderson KD, Seshaiah P: Salivary gland development in
Drosophila melanogaster. Mechanisms of development 2000, 92(1):5-17.
Isaac DD, Andrew DJ: Tubulogenesis in Drosophila: a requirement for
the trachealess gene product. Genes & development 1996, 10(1):103-117.
Roeder T, Isermann K, Kabesch M: Drosophila in asthma research.
American journal of respiratory and critical care medicine 2009,
179(11):979-983.
Takehana A, Katsuyama T, Yano T, Oshima Y, Takada H, Aigaki T, Kurata S:
Overexpression of a pattern-recognition receptor, peptidoglycanrecognition protein-LE, activates imd/relish-mediated antibacterial
defense and the prophenoloxidase cascade in Drosophila larvae.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America 2002, 99(21):13705-13710.

Page 10 of 10

25. Al-Shahrour F, Minguez P, Tarraga J, Medina I, Alloza E, Montaner D,
Dopazo J: FatiGO +: a functional profiling tool for genomic data.
Integration of functional annotation, regulatory motifs and interaction
data with microarray experiments. Nucleic acids research 2007:W91-96.
26. De Gregorio E, Spellman PT, Rubin GM, Lemaitre B: Genome-wide
analysis of the Drosophila immune response by using oligonucleotide
microarrays. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America 2001, 98(22):12590-12595.
27. Wagner C, Isermann K, Roeder T: Infection induces a survival program
and local remodeling in the airway epithelium of the fly. Faseb J 2009,
23(7):2045-2054.
28. Lehmann M, Jiang C, Ip YT, Thummel CS: AP-1, but not NF-kappa B, is
required for efficient steroid-triggered cell death in Drosophila. Cell
death and differentiation 2002, 9(5):581-590.
29. Onfelt Tingvall T, Roos E, Engstrom Y: The imd gene is required for local
Cecropin expression in Drosophila barrier epithelia. EMBO reports 2001,
2(3):239-243.
30. Cezard JP, Touati G, Alberti C, Hugot JP, Brinon C, Czernichow P: Growth in
paediatric Crohn's disease. Hormone research 2002, 58(Suppl 1):11-15.
31. Walters TD, Griffiths AM: Mechanisms of growth impairment in pediatric
Crohn's disease. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol 2009, 6(9):513-523.
32. Kreienkamp HJ, Larusson HJ, Witte I, Roeder T, Birgul N, Honck HH, Harder
S, Ellinghausen G, Buck F, Richter D: Functional annotation of two
orphan G-protein-coupled receptors, Drostar1 and -2, from Drosophila
melanogaster and their ligands by reverse pharmacology. The Journal
of biological chemistry 2002, 277(42):39937-39943.
33. Baumann O, Dames P, Kuhnel D, Walz B: Distribution of serotonergic and
dopaminergic nerve fibers in the salivary gland complex of the
cockroach Periplaneta americana. BMC physiology 2002, 2:9.
34. Link CD: Invertebrate models of Alzheimer's disease. Genes, brain, and
behavior 2005, 4(3):147-156.
35. Takasugi N, Tomita T, Hayashi I, Tsuruoka M, Niimura M, Takahashi Y,
Thinakaran G, Iwatsubo T: The role of presenilin cofactors in the
gamma-secretase complex. Nature 2003, 422(6930):438-441.
36. Franz O, Bruchhaus I, Roeder T: Verification of differential gene
transcription using virtual northern blotting. Nucleic acids research
1999, 27(11):e3.
37. t'Hoen PA, de Kort F, van Ommen GJ, den Dunnen JT: Fluorescent
labelling of cRNA for microarray applications. Nucleic acids research
2003, 31(5):e20.
doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-11-265
Cite this article as: Abdelsadik and Roeder, Chronic activation of the epithelial immune system of the fruit fly's salivary glands has a negative effect on
organismal growth and induces a peculiar set of target genes BMC Genomics
2010, 11:265

</pre>
</body>
</html>
