<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Constitutive expression of a grapevine polygalacturonase-inhibiting protein affects gene expression and cell wall properties in uninfected tobacco</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Research Notes 2011, 4:493. doi:10.1186/1756-0500-4-493"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Erik Alexandersson"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Alexandersson et al. BMC Research Notes 2011, 4:493
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1756-0500/4/493

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Constitutive expression of a grapevine
polygalacturonase-inhibiting protein affects gene
expression and cell wall properties in uninfected
tobacco
Erik Alexandersson1,4†, John VW Becker1,5†, Dan Jacobson1, Eric Nguema-Ona1, Cobus Steyn1, Katherine J Denby2,3
and Melané A Vivier1*

Abstract
Background: Polygalacturonase-inhibiting proteins (PGIPs) directly limit the effective ingress of fungal pathogens
by inhibiting cell wall-degrading endopolygalacturonases (ePGs). Transgenic tobacco plants over-expressing
grapevine (Vitis vinifera) Vvpgip1 have previously been shown to be resistant to Botrytis infection. In this study we
characterized two of these PGIP over-expressing lines with known resistance phenotypes by gene expression and
hormone profiling in the absence of pathogen infection.
Results: Global gene expression was performed by a cross-species microarray approach using a potato cDNA
microarray. The degree of potential cross-hybridization between probes was modeled by a novel computational
workflow designed in-house. Probe annotations were updated by predicting probe-to-transcript hybridizations and
combining information derived from other plant species. Comparing uninfected Vvpgip1-overexpressing lines to
wild-type (WT), 318 probes showed significant change in expression. Functional groups of genes involved in
metabolism and associated to the cell wall were identified and consequent cell wall analysis revealed increased
lignin-levels in the transgenic lines, but no major differences in cell wall-derived polysaccharides. GO enrichment
analysis also identified genes responsive to auxin, which was supported by elevated indole-acetic acid (IAA) levels
in the transgenic lines. Finally, a down-regulation of xyloglucan endotransglycosylase/hydrolases (XTHs), which are
important in cell wall remodeling, was linked to a decrease in total XTH activity.
Conclusions: This evaluation of PGIP over-expressing plants performed under pathogen-free conditions to exclude
the classical PGIP-ePG inhibition interaction indicates additional roles for PGIPs beyond the inhibition of ePGs.

Introduction
Polygalacturonase-inhibiting proteins (PGIPs) are extracellular leucine-rich repeat (eLRR) proteins present in
plants with recognition and inhibition capabilities
towards fungal endopolygalacturonases (ePGs; [1]). ePGs
are capable of hydrolyzing the homogalacturonan component of plant cell wall pectin and are among the first
enzymes to be secreted during fungal infection. These
enzymes play a major role in the virulence of several
* Correspondence: mav@sun.ac.za
† Contributed equally
1
Institute for Wine Biotechnology, Department of Viticulture and Oenology,
Faculty of AgriSciences, Stellenbosch University, Stellenbosch, South Africa
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

phytopathogenic fungal and bacterial species [2-5]. Most
notably, two ePGs of the necrotrophic fungus Botrytis
cinerea are required for its full virulence on different
plant hosts [4,5].
PGIPs differentially inhibit ePGs from not only a
diverse range of fungi, but also different ePG isoforms
from the same fungus [1]. This is also well illustrated
for grapevine VvPGIP1 and ePGs from Aspergillus niger
and B. cinerea, where differential inhibition towards
these ePGs was observed in in vitro assays [6]. Further
in vitro evidence suggests that the interaction and resultant inhibition of ePG by PGIP leads to prolonged existence of molecules with the ability to up-regulate the
plant’s defense response [7]. Thus, it has been suggested

© 2011 Alexandersson et al.; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited

Alexandersson et al. BMC Research Notes 2011, 4:493
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1756-0500/4/493

that PGIPs protect plants from fungal infection not only
by inhibiting fungal macerating enzymes and thereby
directly limiting tissue damage, but also by switching on
plant defense signaling pathways [8].
Although these in vitro experiments have contributed
significantly to our understanding of the PGIP-ePGs
interaction, recent findings have highlighted the need to
better understand the in planta roles of PGIP. For
example, it was shown that over-expression of Vvpgip1
reduces the symptoms of BcPG2 from B. cinerea in
tobacco leaves, without any evidence for an in vitro
interaction [9]. From this work it appeared that the in
vivo environment provided a context for this specific
PGIP-ePG pair that could not be created in vitro. It was
proposed that VvPGIP1 might bind to pectin as was
shown for bean PGIPs [10] and that VvPGIP1 did not
directly inhibit BcPG2, but perhaps rather shielded the
most exposed and vulnerable positions in the pectin,
thereby indirectly protecting against ePG actions [9].
Numerous studies have reported that high levels of
pgip gene expression reduce the susceptibility towards
B. cinerea, confirming the importance of PGIP in plant
defense. These include over-expression of the pear pgip
gene in tomato [11] and grapevine [12], Arabidopsis
pgip genes over-expressed in Arabidopsis [13], a bean
pgip gene in tobacco [14] and the grapevine pgip gene
in tobacco [6]. In contrast, silencing of Arabidopsis Atpgip1 led to enhanced susceptibility [15]. Recently, Veronico et al. [16] reported that the expression level and
pattern of a native pea Pvpgip could be linked to the
degree of resistance to cyst nematode infections. Interestingly, no ePG transcripts could be derived from the
cyst nematode nor was a correlation seen between PGIP
expression and a native pea ePGs, suggesting that PGIPs
have a role in plant-pathogen interactions outside of the
classical PGIP-ePG inhibition. More light was shed on
the in planta role of PGIPs when Kanai et al. [17] presented data from Arabidopsis knock-out mutants and
over-expressing lines, indicating that Atpgip1 transcripts
prolonged seed germination by influencing pectin degradation in the seed coat. Furthermore, the authors presented evidence that Atpgips are under the control of
ABI5, a bZIP-type transcription factor that binds to
ABRE elements.
Tobacco is a commonly used species to monitor
plant-pathogen interactions and is suitable for PGIP
over-expression studies since it has negligible PGIP
activity against Botrytis ePGs [6,18]. We have previously
demonstrated that transgenic tobacco plants overexpressing Vvpgip1 leading to an increased PGIP
enzyme activity are less susceptible to B. cinerea infection in both detached leaf and whole-plant time-course
fungal infection assays [6]. These lines are considered to
be PGIP-specific resistant lines (i.e. the resistance

Page 2 of 17

phenotype could be correlated with VvPGIP1 overexpression, activity levels as well as ePG-inhibition profiles) and as such provide a valuable genetic resource to
study the possible role(s) of PGIPs in plant defence.
To this end, global gene expression, hormone profiling
and subsequently, cell wall analysis were conducted on
two Vvpgip1 over-expressing lines with previously characterized resistance phenotypes in the absence of an
infecting pathogen. The presence of PGIP, under these
pathogen-free conditions, caused altered expression of
genes related to a range of mechanisms, including primary metabolism, cell wall organization and metabolism,
water transport, photosynthesis and defense responses.
An in silico cross-species co-expression analysis revealed
that many of these gene families were also co-expressed
in Arabidopsis. Analysis of cell wall components of the
plants over-expressing Vvpgip1 showed a composition
similar to wild-type (WT) with only a slight decrease in
rhamnose content. However, the change in gene expression was accompanied by higher lignin content,
increased level of auxin and, following Botrytis infection,
a stronger jasmonic acid response. Furthermore, transcriptional down-regulation of a group of xyloglucan
endotransglycosylase/hydrolases (XTHs) with key roles
in cell wall restructuring and remodeling led to a
reduced XTH enzyme activity in the uninfected transgenic tobacco. Taken together, these findings suggest
that altered PGIP expression has an effect on the cell
wall structure, also affecting fundamental mechanisms
such as primary metabolism.

Materials and methods
Plant material and growth conditions

Transgenic Nicotiana tabacum SR1 (Petit Havana)
Vvpgip1 line 37 and 45 described in [6] and WT plants
were grown in a mixture of soil and peat moss (Jiffy
Products International AS, Norway) at 24°C and 55%
relative humidity with a light intensity of 120 μmol m2
s-1 over a 16 h light period. Plants were supplemented
with liquid organic fertilizer every two weeks (Nitrosol®,
Fleuron (Pty) Ltd, South Africa). Leaf material from leaf
positions three to five, where leaf three is the youngest
and first fully expanded leaf, from healthy 6 to 8-weekold transgenic and control tobacco plants was flash frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C for RNA
extraction, lignin analyses and phytohormone profiling.
For hormone profiling during Botrytis infection, B.
cinerea pathogenic cultures were prepared as described
in [6]. Plants were grown in 100% relative humidity and
infections performed with four inoculation spots per leaf
of 5 μL of a B. cinerea spore suspension (1 × 103 spores
in a 50% grape juice medium per spot). Infections were
allowed to progress for 0, 18, 24 and 30 h before tissue
immediately surrounding and including the infection

Alexandersson et al. BMC Research Notes 2011, 4:493
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1756-0500/4/493

spots (15 mm diameter) were harvested (separate plants
per infection time point were infected and harvested to
eliminate wound-response effects). For cell wall component analysis and XTH activity assays, transgenic lines
were first established on MS medium supplemented
with kanamycin [19] and then transferred to soil and
grown under natural light conditions at a controlled
temperature. Leaves from leaf position 3, 4 and 5 were
harvested when the plants reached the six leaf stage.
RNA extraction and microarray analyses

For microarray analysis leaves of the same age and position from individuals of two transgenic lines were compared to the same WT plant. RNA from 0.5 to 1 g
finely ground plant material was extracted using a
sodium perchlorate extraction buffer (5 M sodium perchlorate, 0.3 M Tris-HCl pH 8.3, 8.5% polyvinylpolypyrollidone (PVPP), 2.0% PEG 4000, 1.0% b-mercaptoethanol, 1.0% SDS). After shaking for 30 min at room
temperature samples were centrifugated and plant debris
was removed by passing the supernatant through a syringe plugged with cotton wool. Several phenol/chloroform extractions were performed before precipitating
the RNA with 2.5 M LiCl at -20°C overnight. The pellet
was washed with 70% ethanol and the resuspended
RNA was purified using the RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen
GmbH, Hilden, Germany). RNA integrity was ensured
on 1.2% formaldehyde gels and purity was determined
by 260/230 and 260/280 absorbance ratios (>2).
Twenty-five μg RNA was used in each cDNA synthesis reaction in a total volume of 30 μL. Before denaturation at 70°C for 10 min, 2 μL of oligo d(T) primers
(500 μg/mL) were added. After denaturation, first strand
buffer and DTT were added according to the manufacturer’s recommendation (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA,
USA). A 2:3 (aa-dUTP:dTTP) aminoallyl-dNTP
(Ambion, Austin, TX, USA) mix was added (0.5 mM
each of dATP, dCTP and dGTP; 0.2 mM aa-dUTP and
0.3 mM dTTP) before incubation at 46°C for 2 min,
after which 200 U of SuperScript III Reverse Transcriptase (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) was added. The
same amount of enzyme was added following incubation
for 4 h at 46°C, after which cDNA synthesis proceeded
overnight.
RNA was hydrolyzed by 10 μL 1 M NaOH and 0.5 M
EDTA and incubated at 65°C for 15 min. To neutralize
the pH, 10 μL 1 M HCl solution was added before unincorporated aminoallyl dUTP and free amines were
removed using the RNeasy Mini Kit. cDNA was quantified using a Nanodrop and dried down to volumes of
less than 1 μL in a vacuum dryer. Five μL of 0.1 M
Na2CO3, pH 9.0, was added to the cDNA, and the mixture incubated at 37°C for 10 min. Cy3 or Cy5 (Amersham Biosciences, Buckinghamshire, UK) ester was

Page 3 of 17

added and the coupling allowed to proceed for 1 h in
the dark at room temperature. Uncoupled dyes were
removed by purification with the RNeasy Mini Kit.
Probe labeling efficiency of Cy-esters was estimated by
measuring the absorbance at 550 nm and 650 nm. Similar amounts of labeled samples were hybridized on
TIGR 10 K potato microarrays (version 3). Pre-hybridization was done under lifterslips (Erie Scientific, Portsmouth, NH, USA) with a pre-warmed solution
containing 5X saline-sodium citrate (SSC) buffer, 0.1%
SDS and 1% BSA at 42°C for at least 30 min. The slides
were then washed in five times of deionized water and
finally briefly submerged in ethanol before short centrifugation. The combined Cy-labeled probes (28 μL) were
mixed with 30 μL of a 2X hybridization buffer (50% formamide, 5X SSC and 0.2% SDS), 1 μL each of COT1
DNA (1 μg/uL) and poly(A)-DNA (12 μg/μL) added, for
a total volume of 60 μL, denatured at 90°C for 3 min,
and subsequently applied to the slide using lifterslips.
Slides were incubated for 16 h at 42°C in hybridization
chambers (ArrayIt, Telechem International, Sunnyvale,
CA, USA) and successively washed in low stringency
(2X SSC, 0.5% SDS; heated to 55°C), medium stringency
0.5X SSC) and high stringency (0.05X SSC) wash buffers
for 5 min each and then briefly submerged in ethanol
prior to short centrifugation. Slides were scanned with
an Axon GenePix 4000A scanner using the GenePix 5.1
software (Molecular Devices, Sunnyvale, CA, USA).
Three microarray slides in total were hybridized: two
slides using Vvpgip1 line 37 and WT, with a dye swap
included to account for dye bias; and one slide with
Vvpgip1 line 45 and WT. The result files were analyzed
using the Limma package in R 2.9.1 [20]. Spots flagged
as “bad” by the GenePix software were removed from
further analysis. Background correction was done by the
normexp method [21] with an offset of 50 to avoid
negative intensities and normalization was then done by
print-tip loess. The duplicateCorrelation function was
used to estimate a common value for within-array duplicated spots [21]. Finally, fold changes and standard
errors were obtained by fitting a linear model to each
gene and standard errors were smoothed by empirical
Bayes. Genes with a p-value below 0.05 after false discovery rate (FDR) control were regarded as significant.
The microarray data was deposited in GEO (GSE26324).
Real-time quantitative PCR

For RT-qPCR analyses RNA was DNase treated (Qiagen
GmbH, Hilden, Germany). cDNA was synthesized using
SuperScript III Reverse Transcriptase according to the
manufacturer’s specifications (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA,
USA) using 1 μg of RNA. Both oligo d(T) and random
primers were added to obtain full length cDNA. cDNA
samples were diluted 1:25 in dH 2 O before 5 μL of

Alexandersson et al. BMC Research Notes 2011, 4:493
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1756-0500/4/493

sample was added to 15 μL of LightCycler FastStart
DNA Master SYBR Green I mix, prepared according to
the manufacturer’s recommendations (Roche Diagnostics GmbH, Mannheim, Germany) with a final primer
concentration of 500 nM. RT-qPCR was performed
using the LightCycler Instrument (Roche Applied
Science).
Transcript specific primers were designed using Primer Express (Applied BioSystems) with default settings.
Primer sequences for the tobacco genes xyloglucan
endotransglycosylase (XTH, Genbank Acc AB017025.1)
and tubulin used as reference gene (TUB, Genbank Acc
AB052822) were: XTH forward 5’-AGTCCAAGTTTGTAACACC-3’ and reverse 5’-TCTGTCCTTAGTGCATTCTG-3’, amplification product 175 bp; TUB
forward 5’-TCTGGCTGCTCTGGAAA-3’ and reverse
5’-GCATACAAGACACCATCAAAT-3’, amplification
product 197 bp. cDNA amplification conditions were as
follows: denaturation at 95°C for 10 min, followed by 45
cycles of denaturation, 95°C for 10 s; primer annealing
at 58°C for 10 s and primer extension at 72°C for 8 s,
during which data acquisition was performed. Melting
curve analysis was performed by increasing the temperature by 0.1°C/s in the interval 65°C to 95°C. PCR efficiencies for each sample were calculated using
LinRegPCR software [22]. The efficiencies were used to
calculate relative expression in a mathematical model
[23].
XTH activity determination

To determine the XTH activity in tobacco leaves, a dotblot assay based on the method described in [24] was
used. Whatman 3MM paper was coated with 1% (w/v)
Tamarind seed xyloglucan (Megazyme) dissolved in aqueous 0.5% (w/v) 1,1,1-trichloro-2-methylpropan-2-ol
(Sigma-Aldrich, Steinheim, Germany). Eight leaves were
harvested per leaf position and frozen in liquid nitrogen.
Two leaves from two individual plants were pooled to
ensure adequate amounts of material. This was done for
all the lines tested and for leaf position three, four and
five. Four extractions were done per biological repeat
and each extract’s activity was measured in triplicate as
described above. Boiled extracts served as negative control, while a batch of cauliflower extract served as positive control for each assay [24].
Total protein was extracted from 20 mg of freezedried material for 6 h in 1 mL 50 mM NaOAc, pH 5.5,
with gentle agitation at 8°C. The supernatant was collected after centrifugation at 9600g for 20 min at 4°C.
The protein concentration was determined by the Bradford method [25] with bovine serum albumin as standard. 10 μl of each extract containing 6 nmol of the SRconjugate (XLLGol-SR) was spotted on the 3MM paper
at 4°C and then incubated at room temperature for 12 h

Page 4 of 17

between cellulose acetate sheets and several tissue
papers to apply an even load. It was then washed for 4
h in 100 mL of 50% ethanol, rinsed in acetone and
dried.
The fluorescence was measured with the IVIS ® 100
Imaging System (Caliper Life Sciences) using the DsRed
filter (570 nm excitation, 615 nm emission) with a 1 s
exposure. The Living Image software (Caliper Life
Sciences, Hopkinton, MA, USA) was used to identify
regions of interest (ROI) and quantify the total efficiency
per cm2 for each fluorescent spot. Background fluorescence was subtracted from all values, which were then
normalized to total protein.
Cell wall analysis

Cell wall materials were extracted according to a protocol modified from [26]. Briefly, frozen tobacco leaves
were immersed in liquid nitrogen and ground with a
mortar and a pestle into a fine powder. Ground material
was subsequently boiled with 80% ethanol for 20 min,
washed in methanol:chloroform (1:1) for 24 h and finally
washed with methanol. Tobacco tissues were left to
incubate in methanol:chloroform (1:1) for another 24 h,
due to the high level of lipids and others fatty materials
(e.g. waxes) present. The remaining material (also called
alcohol-insoluble residues, AIR) was dried in an oven at
70°C.
Total cell wall monosaccharide composition was
determined on transgenic tobacco over-expressing
Vvpgip1 line 37 and WT. AIR (2 to 4 mg) from different
leaf position (3 to 5) were hydrolyzed using 2 M trifluoroacetic acid (2 M TFA, 2 h at 110°C), followed by a
18 h methanolysis at 80°C with dry 2 M methanolic
HCl. The generated methyl glycosides were converted
into their TMS derivatives at 80°C and separated by gas
chromatography (Hewlett Packard 5890 series II). The
gas chromatographer was equipped with a flame ionization detector. The oven temperature program was 2 min
at 120°C, 10°C/min to 160°C, and 1.5°C/min to 220°C
and then 20°C/min to 280°C. Monosaccharides were
identified based on their retention time and quantified
by determination of their peak areas. The GC-FID was
calibrated by using a range of increasing concentration
of a mixture of our nine standard sugars and the sugar
composition was expressed in molar percentage of
monosaccharide. Myo-inositol (90 μL of 1 mg/mL solution) was used as an internal standard. In the final analysis, glucose was removed because of likely
contamination of the cell wall fractions by starchderived glucose.
Histochemical lignin assays and lignin quantification

The lignin content of the WT and Vvpgip1 lines 37 and
45 was estimated in leaf sections with potassium

Alexandersson et al. BMC Research Notes 2011, 4:493
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1756-0500/4/493

permanganate staining followed by transmission electron
microscopy according to [27]. Additionally, the lignin
content in the stems of the same lines was estimated by
staining with a solution of phloroglucinol according to
[28].
Quantification of lignins in the WT and transgenic
lines Vvpgip1 line 37 and 45 was done using the acetyl
bromide method as described in [29], with some modifications as described below. Dried tobacco leaf material
(leaves three to five of eight week old plants) was utilized to isolate AIR, consisting of cell wall material. Leaf
tissue was ground in liquid nitrogen and extracted twice
with 80% aqueous methanol following homogenization.
Following centrifugation at 12 000xg for 10 min, the pellets were washed three times with 96% ethanol and
twice with a solution of 96% ethanol:hexane (2:1). The
resulting AIR pellets were dried overnight at 70°C. Five
to ten mg of the AIR was used to determine the percentage of lignin contained therein. The AIR was washed
with 25% acetyl bromide (in acetic acid), after which it
was incubated in 1 mL of the same solution at 70°C for
30 min. The mixture was cooled to room temperature,
and 0.9 mL of NaOH and 0.1 mL of hydroxylamine
hydrochloride (0.1 M) added. The volume was subsequently adjusted to 10 mL with acetic acid. The solution
was incubated overnight and the absorbance measured
at 280 nm with a procedural blank. The lignin content
of the samples was calculated as follows: % lignin content = (absorbance × 100)/(SAC × AIR (g l-1)); where
SAC is the specific absorption coefficient of lignin, for
which the value of 20 gl-1 cm-1 was used.
Analysis of phytohormones using GC/MS

Leaf tissue flash frozen in liquid nitrogen was extracted
according to the method of Schmelz et al. [30], with
some modifications as described below. Approximately
100 mg of tissue was ground to a fine powder prior to
the addition of extraction solvent (n-propanol/water/
HCl) and internal standard (o-anisic acid), of which 30
ng per sample was added. Samples were vortexed to
ensure homogenization prior to partitioning with
dichloromethane. For the conversion of phytohormone
acids to their corresponding methyl esters, the organic
phase (dichloromethane/propanol) was derivatized in 4
mL glass vials for 30 min using 4 μL of a 2 M trimethylsilyldiazomethane solution in hexane. The activity of the
derivatization agent was subsequently quenched with 4
μL of a 2 M acetic acid solution, also in hexane.
Vapor phase extraction of the derivatized organic
phase proceeded according to [30], with the exception
that commercially available Super Q filters were used
(Analytical Research Systems, Inc., Gainesville, FL,
USA). Briefly, the derivatized sample was evaporated at
70°C and passed through a Super Q filter under a N 2

Page 5 of 17

flow of 500 mL/min. To ensure complete vaporization
of less volatile compounds the vial was subsequently
heated to 200°C for 2 min while passing the vapor
through the filter.
The analytes were eluted from the Super Q filter
with 150 μL CH 2 Cl 2 and analyzed by a Trace Gas
Chromatograph (GC) (ThermoFinningan, Milan, Italy)
coupled to a Trace Mass Spectrometer (MS) (Thermo
MassLab, Manchester, UK). GC/MS conditions were
amended from that described in [30]. Briefly, 2 μL of
the dichloromethane (BDH, Poole, England) eluent was
injected in the split/splitless injector of the GC, operated in the splitless mode (purge time 3.5 min, 50 mL/
min) at 280°C. Compounds were separated on a Factor
Four VF5-MS capillary column (Varian, Palo Alto, CA,
USA) with dimensions 30 m 1. × 0.25 mm i.d. × 0,25
μm f.t. Flow of the carrier gas (Helium) through the
column was 0.7 mL/min in the constant flow mode.
The oven program used was 40°C, hold 1 min, ramp
15°C/min to 250°C, hold 5 min, ramp 20°C/min, and
hold 2 min. In order to avoid carryover a post-run was
performed after each analysis at 280°C under a headpressure of 300 kPa. The temperature of the MS interface was kept at 280°C and the source at 200°C. The
MS-detector was operated in Electron Impact (EI)
mode at 70 eV and Selected Ion Monitoring (SIM)
mode. The electron multiplier voltage was set at 500
V. Three carboxylic acid methyl ester analytes were
detected and quantified using SIM with retention
times and ion mass to charge ratios (m/z) as follows:
methyl salicylate (8.39 min, m/z 92, 120, 152); methyl
jasmonate (12.38 min, m/z 83) and methyl indole-3acetate (13.81 min, m/z 130). The internal standard, oanisic acid methyl ester was eluted at 9.70 min with
m/z 92, 120 and 152.
For quantification the internal standard method was
used. Calibration curves were constructed for each analyte over the range from 2 to 200 ng.mL-1. The regression equations and their correlation coefficients
obtained for SA, MeJA and IAA are detailed respectively: y = 0.0370x+0.2511 (r 2 = 0.9924), y = 0.0087x
+0.0303 (r 2 = 0.9954) and y = 0.0120x + 0.0238 (r 2 =
0.9964). The limit of quantification (LOQ) was established to be 2 pg for all analytes. Salicylic acid, indole-3acetic acid, methyl jasmonate, o-anisic acid, trimethylsilyldiazomethane, hexane and 1-propanol were purchased
from Sigma-Aldrich (Steinheim, Germany).
Bioinformatics workflow for probe evaluation and
annotation

The interpretation of the microarray results was challenged by the potential ambiguity in probe to transcript
hybridizations and incomplete annotations of the genes
of the two plant species involved.

Alexandersson et al. BMC Research Notes 2011, 4:493
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1756-0500/4/493

Probe Specificity and annotation

BLAST was used to map all of the extant N. tabacum
ESTs (PlantGDB-derived unique transcripts version
number 173a; [31]) to the probes they would likely
hybridize to on the TIGR 10 K potato microarray and
the result stored as a graph denoting the relationships
between potential transcripts and probes. A threshold of
80% identity over at least a 100 bp region was used to
identify transcripts that would be likely to hybridize to
microarray probes.
As annotated genome sequences are available for
neither S. tuberosum nor N. tabacum, EST datasets
were used for annotation based analysis. However, the
annotation was incomplete and out of date for both the
EST datasets for S. tuberosum (from which the probes
were designed) and N. tabacum. Prot4EST [32], which
encompasses BLASTX [33], ESTScan [34] and DECODER [35] was modified in order to run on 100 ×
2.83Ghz cores high performance computing architecture
(Stellenbosch University) and the EST sequences from
both S. tuberosum and N. tabacum translated into their
corresponding protein sequences. The PLAZA [36] protein translations and associated GO and Interpro annotation for the complete genomes of Ostreococcus
lucimarinus, Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, Physcomitrella
patens, Sorghum bicolor, Oryza sativa, Vitis vinifera,
Populus trichocarpa Carica papaya and Arabidopsis
thaliana were downloaded. BLASTP and OrthoMCL
[37] were used to create orthologous clusters based on
sequence similarity of all proteins resident in PLAZA
with the translated S. tuberosum and N. tabacum ESTs.
GO and Interpro annotations found for members of the
resultant orthologous clusters were projected onto the
orthologous members for S. tuberosum and N. tabacum
proteins. Subsequently, with the use of the probe-totranscript graph described above, annotations from both
S. tuberosum and N. tabacum were assigned to the corresponding probes.
A graph structure was created to represent all of the
resulting clusters, their associated annotation, assignment to probes and corresponding expression values.
The resulting graph structure stored in XGMML and
Cytoscape [38] were used for visualization and querying.
In order to create Additional file 1, a Perl program was
written to parse the graph structure, extract all connected components (e.g. clusters described above), and
parse the BLASTP results to extract the most similar
protein in Arabidopsis or rice (if no Arabidopsis match
was found).
GO Enrichment

Significantly differentially expressed probes were determined by Limma as described above. The projected
annotation for the differentially expressed probes was

Page 6 of 17

then analyzed for Enrichment of Gene Ontology Terms
by GOEast using default settings [39].
Pathway and cross species co-expression analysis

BLAST was subsequently used to map all of the
sequences associated with Arabidopsis gene identifiers
onto specific probesets on the ATH1 Affymetrix microarray (thus yielding a direct map of S. tuberosum orthologous clusters to Arabidopsis probesets). A program
was written in Perl to download the expression data
from over 1700 Arabidopsis Affymetrix microarrays
available at CressExpress [40]. Vectors of each probeset
in the Affymetrix microarrays were created, including
expression information from each microarray in the collection. Each of the differentially expressed S. tuberosum
orthologous clusters were then analyzed for co-expression in Arabidopsis using these vectors and a Hierarchical Clustering Algorithm testing Pearson coefficient
correlations thresholds of 0.05, 0.1 or 0.2 to select the
clusters representing the highest levels of co-expression.
Visualization of affected genes divided into metabolic
pathways or other processes was done by MapMan
using a mapping file previously developed for the potato
TIGR 10 K microarray [41].
Statistical analysis

Excel (Microsoft) and GenStat (VSN International) were
used to generate Student’s t-tests and ANOVAs as indicated in the text.

Results and discussion
Transgenic plants from various species with increased
levels of polygalacturonase-inhibiting proteins (PGIPs)
are known to have better protection against pathogenesis by B. cinerea and Pierce’s disease [11-14], whereas
Arabidopsis plants with pgip silencing show increased
susceptibility towards Botrytis infection [15]. Clearly,
PGIP expression levels affect pathogen infection and
host-pathogen interaction.
The two Vvpgip1-overexpressing tobacco lines
Vvpgip1 line 37 and 45, which are the focus of this
study, were selected for further profiling from a population of transgenic lines considered to have PGIP-specific
resistance phenotypes, since pgip over-expression, PGIP
activity and ePG inhibition correlated with resistance
against B. cinerea as shown Joubert et al. [6]. In order
to shed more light on the possible processes associated
to PGIP expression in planta and the role of PGIP leading to increased pathogen resistance, gene expression
and hormone profiling was conducted. These analyses
together with biochemical analyses of the cell wall confirmed that healthy un-infected PGIP transgenic plants
have altered gene expression, hormone levels and cell
wall structure.

Alexandersson et al. BMC Research Notes 2011, 4:493
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1756-0500/4/493

Global gene expression profiling

When the study was initiated, no microarray platform
for tobacco was available. Instead, genome-wide expression in tobacco plants was monitored by the TIGR 10 K
potato microarray, since these two species in the Solanaceae family have a high degree of sequence conservation and the heterologous hybridization system using
microarray probes for potato ESTs has previously been
used and evaluated [42]. Unfortunately, the latest annotation for the potato microarray was created in 2006,
and thus did not contain the latest information on gene
function. Further complicating matters is the potential
ambiguity introduced by cross-hybridization that is
bound to occur under heterologous hybridization.
To address these issues, the degree of cross-hybridization of tobacco transcripts to the potato probes was

Page 7 of 17

modeled by sequence similarity analysis of all of the
tobacco ESTs as compared to the sequences reported
for each probe on the microarray. This was achieved by
generating a graph structure based on probe sequences
and tobacco ESTs, which was used to estimate probe
specificity and redundancy. Figure 1 gives an example
overview of the graph structure, which were also used
to update and re-annotate the microarray’s probe annotations based on the tobacco transcripts likely to hybridize to a certain probe and by creating orthologous
clusters based on the comparisons to nine sequenced
plant genomes included in PLAZA [36]. By this
approach a table of GO terms associated to each probe
was generated and subsequently used for GO term
enrichment analysis (Additional file 2). This file can be
downloaded for future use when analyzing gene

Figure 1 Example of the graph structure. The graph structure was used to assess possible cross-hybridization and probe redundancy as well
as to improve annotation of probes. a. Graph structure of probes with significant change in signal in Vvpgip1 line 37. b. Detailed view of part of
the graph structure showing differentially expressed probes in Vvpgip1 line 37. c. Example of an orthologous cluster. Probes are marked as green
squares, blue circles represent a unique identifier for the orthologous cluster and matching transcripts are included as unfilled triangles.

Alexandersson et al. BMC Research Notes 2011, 4:493
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1756-0500/4/493

Page 8 of 17

expression data generated by the TIGR 10 K potato
(version 3) microarray. Heterologous hybridization on
arrays has been estimated before [43,44]. However, we
are unaware of a study that also takes into account the
affect of cross-hybridization on the probe annotation of
the microarray and subsequent GO term enrichment
analysis.
By processing expression data in Limma a total of 318
probes were found to be differentially expressed with a
false discovery rate (FDR) of ≤ 0.05 in both Vvpgip1 line
37 and 45 in comparison to WT (Table 1). Because the
two transgenic lines most likely have different genotypic
backgrounds due to the independent insertion events
during transformation, we regard this approach to be
technically more correct than considering the two lines
as biological replicates by combining the expression data
prior to Limma analysis. It is also a more conservative
approach since considering the lines as biological replicates would almost double the number of probes (735)
showing significant differential expression. A complete
list of probes with significant difference in expression is
included as Additional file 1 and a selection in Additional File 3. The majority of the probes were downregulated, whereas only 58 were up-regulated in comparison to WT plants (Table 1). The remaining 41
probes showed opposite regulation in the two lines. The
oppositely regulated probes can be a result of positional
effects related to the insertion of the Vvpgip1 expression
cassette in the tobacco genome and thus reflect true differences between the transgenic lines. Alternatively, it
might arise from rapid fluctuation in the abundance of
certain transcripts caused by PGIP over-expression.
Differentially expressed probes were analyzed by examining the graph structure of orthologous clusters and by
examining top hits based on sequence identity (Figure 1;
Additional file 1). Because of the probe ambiguity and
the likelihood that many probes bind different transcripts, the exact number of differentially expressed
genes monitored could not be determined. In fact, since
the tobacco genome still remains un-sequenced, probe
redundancy and specificity can only be estimated at this
point. However, based on the graph structure we
approximate that the 318 differentially expressed probes
correspond to ca 250 genes.
Table 1 Differentially expressed probes in Vvpgip1 line
37 and 45 in comparison to WT (FDR, p < 0.05)
Vvpgip1 line 37

Vvpgip1 line 45

Probes

Down

Down

219

Down

Up

16

Up

Down

25

Up

Up

58

Total

318

A manual categorization of clusters and probes were
done with the help of the MIPS 2.0 database [45], and
probes were consequently divided into functional groups
according to Additional file 1. Probes for which no
sequence information was available are also listed if a
significant change in signal intensity was observed.
More than 15% of all clusters identified could not be
functionally classified since the level of identity to other
sequences was too low or no informative annotation
could be inferred from related genes.
Even if the changes in expression were generally
subtle there was an over-representation of certain functional groups among the differentially expressed genes
when dividing genes by GO terms or MapMan categories. GO term enrichments were based on probes
with a significant change in signal in both transgenic
lines in comparison to the wild-type (WT). The full graphical representation of enriched terms can be found in
Additional file 4.
Four broad groups of affected probes fall under the
categories of cell wall biogenesis and organization, carbon metabolism, photosynthesis and stress defense signaling, whereas more specific groups of interest would
be glucan and polysaccharide metabolic processes, water
transport as well as response to auxin and brassinosteroid stimuli and to cyclopentones. Biosynthesis of jasmonic acid (JA) requires several cyclopentenone precursors
and these have been suggested to be able to fulfill some
of the JA roles in vivo [46]. Among the molecular function categories are glycolysis, energy transfer, cell wall
components and water channel activity. Enrichment of
cellular components linked to the chloroplast and mitochondrial compartments further strengthen the picture
of differences in metabolism between the PGIP overexpressing lines and WT.
Functional groups of differentially expressed genes
between the two transgenic lines and WT plants were
visualized in MapMan using a mapping file previously
developed specifically for the potato TIGR 10 K microarray [41]. As could be expected from the GO enrichment analysis results, the largest changes were seen in
different metabolic pathways. A concordance between
the lines was seen for groups of genes linked to cell wall
modification and degradation, glycolysis, starch synthesis
and photosystem-light reactions (Additional file 5).
In order to examine whether the changes in gene
expression coupled to an augmented level of Vvpgip1
expression seen in this study were similar to the expression pattern observed in other plant systems, the coexpression of Arabidopsis genes associated to the orthologous clusters based on sequence similarity were investigated. Strikingly, several gene families affected in the
transgenic lines were also found to be co-expressed in
Arabidopsis, e.g. members of the XTHs, peroxidases

Alexandersson et al. BMC Research Notes 2011, 4:493
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1756-0500/4/493

UDP epimerases and JAZs (Additional file 1; Additional
file 3). The similarities in transcriptional patterns related
to pgip expression suggest that there is a degree of conservation of these effects between the two species.
Furthermore, these similarities between our transgenic
system and Arabidopsis PGIP expression strengthen the
notion that the changes seen in expression pattern is
due to Vvpgip1 over-expression per se and not due to
other general properties of PGIPs, such as possible
indirect effects resulting from the fact that VvPGIP1 is a
secreted, apoplastic protein as discussed as further discussed in Summary and Conclusions.
Hormone profiling

As part of the general comparison between the transgenic lines with resistance phenotypes to the susceptible
controls, a hormone profile of salicylic acid (SA), indoleacetic acid (IAA) and jasmonic acid (JA) was established
(Figure 2). Under the non-infecting conditions used in
this study, IAA levels were statistically significantly
increased in the transgenic lines, SA levels were slightly
lower in the transgenic lines compared to the WT,
whereas JA levels were below the detection level in both
transgenic lines and WT. Hormone profiling was also
performed during a Botrytis infection time series (Figure
3). After infection, JA was detectable and both transgenic lines displayed higher JA levels than WT at 18
and 24 h after infection (p = 0.045 at 24 h) at the local
lesions. For SA and IAA no definite differences were
seen between the groups of transgenic lines and WT
following Botrytis infection.

Page 9 of 17

Comparing the hormone data with the gene expression analysis, no genes involved in SA biosynthesis were
differentially expressed and there was no enrichment of
GO terms related to SA regulation. Thus, in spite of
SA’s involvement in pathogen defense signaling, no
strong link between Vvpgip1 over-expression and SA
and SA-related mechanisms could be established in
uninfected or infected tissue. This is in line with an earlier report on PGIP-regulation in Arabidopsis [13].
In contrast to SA, indole-acetic acid (IAA) levels without Botrytis infection were statistically separable into
two groups with the transgenic lines containing higher
levels of IAA grouped together (Figure 2). Interestingly,
corresponding to the increase in IAA levels there is an
over-representation of genes responding to auxin stimulus in the transgenic lines from the microarray data.
The down-regulation of the Aux/IAA transcriptional
repressors of auxin induced genes, which belong to a
large family of transcription factors, could possibly be
linked to the over-representation of genes responding to
auxin stimulus detected in the pgip over-expressing
lines. Auxin promotes the degradation of Aux/IAA transcriptional repressors making it possible for auxin
response factors (ARFs) to activate the transcription of
auxin-responsive genes. Furthermore, increased auxin
levels enhance the binding of Aux/IAA proteins to the
F-box protein TIR1 leading to ubiquitination and degradation of the Aux/IAA proteins (reviewed in [44]). The
expression level of several components of protein degradation and proteolysis were affected, e.g. cullin, a family
involved in SCF E3 ubiquitin ligase complexes, ubiquitin

Figure 2 Phytohormone content. Salicylic acid (SA) and indole-acetic acid (IAA) content (ng g-1 fresh weight) measured as their corresponding
methyl esters in WT and transgenic lines. The total pool of SA (dark-blue bars) present in plants as free and methylated forms were analyzed.
Both SA and IAA levels (light-blue bars) were significantly different from WT in both transgenic lines as indicated by p-values (two-tailed Student’s
t-test). Statistical groups as determined by one-way ANOVA (multi-comparison Bonferroni test, p <0.05) are given as letters. No jasmonic acid
(total) was detected in the samples. N represents the number of biological repeats and error bars are given as two times the standard deviation.

Alexandersson et al. BMC Research Notes 2011, 4:493
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1756-0500/4/493

proteins, ubiquitin-protein ligase and F-box proteins as
well as a number of proteases. The high number of differentially expressed genes involved in protein degradation might be a consequence of changes in hormone
signaling, as ubiquitination and targeting for proteosome
degradation are common strategies in plant hormone
signaling.
Under uninfected conditions JA levels were below the
detection level. However, both transgenic lines had a
stronger JA response following Botrytis infection than
WT at the local lesions (Figure 3). On the transcriptional level under un-infecting conditions, Vvpgip1 overexpression affected JAZ genes and cyclopentone responsive elements linked to JA regulation and biosynthesis.
Like SA, JA was recently suggested to play an important
role in signaling leading to Systemic Acquired Response
(SAR; [45]). In Vvpgip line 37, expression of a LOX
gene and a 12-oxophytodienoate-reductase were changed. These enzymes are involved in jasmonate biosynthesis and indicative of an association between PGIPs and
JA-mediated signaling. The down-regulation of JAZ
genes, which are repressors of JA signaling, indicates
that JA signaling pathways might be ‘primed’ and could
explain the quicker response in JA levels observed in
the transgenic lines when challenged with a pathogen
(Figure 3).
Related to ethylene signaling, s-adenosylmethionine
synthetase (SAM), a member of a gene family involved
in ethylene biosynthesis, was down-regulated together
with an ethylene response factor (AtERF3) belonging to
the B1 subfamily of the ERF/AP2 transcription factor
family. The latter functions in adaptation to stress and
has been shown to be induced by ethylene, JA and
pathogens. AtERF1 is also a positive regulator of ET and
JA signaling and a possible integration point in the
cross-talk between ET and JA signaling pathways
(reviewed in [47,48]).
PGIP expression influences the cell wall by lower XTH
activity and increased lignin content

A large number of affected probes matched cell wallassociated genes indicating that cell wall modifications
are taking place as an effect of PGIP over-expression.
Many differentially expressed probes were linked to lignin and pectin metabolism.
Several tobacco xyloglucan endotransglycosylases
(XTHs) representing members of XTH Group I and II
were markedly down-regulated. Xyloglucan is the most
abundant hemicellulose in dicotyledonous plants and
plays a central role in the structure of plant cell walls by
cross-linking cellulose microfibrils [49,50] and XTH
enzymes are believed to be important for regulation of
cell wall strength, extensibility and tissue integrity [51].
XTH Group I and II have in vitro been shown to

Page 10 of 17

mediate transglucosylation between xyloglucans, in contrast to group III that catalyzes xyloglucan endohydrolysis [52]. It should, however, be noted that the isoforms
are grouped according to phylogenetic relationship and
that the enzyme activity of all members have not yet
been determined.
Because of the important role in cell wall remodeling
and marked down-regulation, XTH expression and
enzyme activity were investigated further. Indeed, a
decrease in XTH expression around the same levels
observed in the microarray analysis could be confirmed
by RT-qPCR for a tobacco XTH gene belonging to the
class I subfamily (Figure 4a). The down-regulation was
also confirmed in two additional VvPGIP1 over-expressing lines tested (data not shown). Moreover, a dot-blot
enzyme activity assay showed that the general transcriptional down-regulation of XTHs led to a decrease in total
XTH activity in leaves of both lines (Figure 4b). Thus,
the transcriptional regulation of XTHs had a clear effect
on XTH activity, which strengthens the idea that PGIPs
have a direct or indirect effect on cell wall modification
possibly leading to changes in xyloglucan metabolism.
In tobacco leaves, down-regulation of an XTH
(NtXET-1) with consequent reduced XTH activity, was
previously reported to result in a shift towards xyloglucan with a higher molecular weight, resembling that of
older leaves [53]. The authors noted that the cell walls
may be strengthened by the reduced turnover and
hydrolysis of xyloglucan and it was suggested that the
resultant wall strengthening may hold implications for
plant-pathogen interactions. XTH activity also increases
during fruit ripening and the expression of V. vinifera
VvXTH1 reaches a maximum at the fully ripe stage
when berry softening occurs [54]. Interestingly, VvXTH1
expression in grape berries is inversely correlated to
VvPGIP1 expression, which instead steadily declines
until grape berries reach the fully ripe stage [55]. This
inversely correlated expression resembles the correlation
between Vvpgip1 and XTHs in the transgenic tobacco.
Related to xyloglucan modification, a beta-D-xylosidase
with the closest sequence identity to Arabidopsis
AtXyl4, which is involved in the hydrolysis of the xylan
backbone [56], was down-regulated.
Many affected cell wall-associated genes were involved
in either lignin or pectin metabolism. The role of lignification in pathogen defense is well documented [57] and
cell walls with increased lignin content provide the plant
with an effective physical barrier against phytopathogens
[58]. Cinnamoyl-CoA reductases (CCR), caffeoyl-CoA
O-methyltransferases and beta-glucosidases were differentially expressed and are all involved in monolignol
biosynthesis or modification. Monolignol bricks are
exported to the cell wall, and then assembled to lignins
in muro by laccases and peroxidases [59] and changed

Alexandersson et al. BMC Research Notes 2011, 4:493
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1756-0500/4/493

Page 11 of 17

Figure 3 Phytohormone profiling following Botrytis infection. The hormones (a) salicylic acid (SA) (b) indole-acetic acid (IAA) and (c)
jasmonic acid (JA) were measured as their corresponding methyl esters. Two to three plants per time point were used. Error bars are given as
two times the standard deviation.

expression was seen for members of the class III peroxidase family. Recently, it was shown by RNAi silencing
that several enzymes in monolignol biosynthesis are crucial for defense against powdery mildew penetration in

wheat [60]. In tobacco mutants, down-regulation of a
CCR has been shown to lead to changes in the lignin
profiles and the syringyl-guaiacyl (S/G) ratio, but not
necessarily to altered lignin content [61].

Alexandersson et al. BMC Research Notes 2011, 4:493
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1756-0500/4/493

Page 12 of 17

Figure 4 Expression and activity of XTH. a. Expression of Nicotiana tabacum xyloglucan endotransglycosylase (XTH, Genbank Acc AB017025.1)
in Vvpgip1 lines 37 and 45 relative to the untransformed control (WT). Standard deviation of the mean relative expression of four technical
repeats per plant line is shown with error bars. b. Total XTH activity in tobacco leaves determined by a dot-blot enzyme activity assay. Leaves
representing leaf position 3 was used for the assay. A two-tailed Student’s t-test showed that p < 0.05 for both transgenic lines in comparison to
WT. N denotes the number of biological repeats.

Because of the changes seen in gene expression and
the known importance of lignin in plant defense, the lignin content was determined. An increased deposition of
lignin in leaf and stem tissue of the transgenic lines was

observed and by absolute quantification an increased lignin content could be confirmed for Vvpgip1 line 37 and
a similar trend was seen in line 45 (Figures 5a, b and 6).
The increase of lignin in the cell walls of the PGIP-

Figure 5 Lignin content determined by staining. Leaf and stem sections of WT and transgenic lines (Vvpgip1 line 37 and 45) expressing the
Vvpgip1 transgene. a. Sections corresponding smaller parts of the leaf were stained with potassium permanganate and studied by transmission
electron microscopy according to [27]. Lignin in the cell walls stain darker in the transgenic lines. b. Stem sections were hand cut with a razor
and stained with a solution of phloroglucinol according to Ruzin [28]. The intensity of the pink-red stain indicates increased lignin deposition in
the secondary xylem. Stem sections were taken from the same internode of plants of the same growth stage; leaves for embedding and
sectioning were from the same position on plants of the same age (6-8 leaf stage).

Alexandersson et al. BMC Research Notes 2011, 4:493
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1756-0500/4/493

Page 13 of 17

Figure 6 Cell wall lignin content in leaves. The lignin content of untransformed control (WT) and transgenic Vvpgip1 line 37 and 45 is
expressed as the percentage contained in the alcohol-insoluble residue (AIR). Lignin content was determined with the acetyl bromide lignin
method, as described in [29]. Statistical analyses (two-tailed Student’s t-test) could separate the WT from the Vvpgip1 line 37 (p = 0.035) but not
Vvpgip1 line 45, for which a similar trend was seen (p = 0.20). Standard deviation is given as error bars. N represents the number of biological
repeats.

specific resistant lines should impact positively on
pathogen resistance.
Even if most evidence for the influence of plant hormones on the plant cell wall is indirect, there is a strong
belief that phytohormones influence cell wall biosynthesis and remodeling [62]. Auxin, for example, has an
effect on cell wall structure and expansion, acting in
combination with brassinosteroids, which was the only
other hormone-related GO category enriched in the
transgenic lines. Previous work indicates that increased
IAA content can be coupled to regulation of XTH and
the increased deposition of lignin, as was observed in
the transgenic lines [63-65]. Catalá et al. [65] reported a
down-regulation of a tomato XTH gene (LeXET2) by
auxin and transgenic tobacco lines overproducing IAA
exhibited increased lignin content and altered lignin
composition [63]. Sitbon et al. [64] suggested that the
increased lignin deposition may have resulted from
increased peroxidase activity, brought about by
increased IAA levels and in the transgenic lines, expression levels of several class III peroxidases changed.
However, with the exception of a cytosolic ascorbate
peroxidase and in line 45 one peroxidase similar to the
Arabidopsis peroxidase 53 precursor, the peroxidases are
all down-regulated. Whether these changes are a direct
result of constitutive over-expression of pgip influencing
IAA, remains to be seen. Alternatively, the changes seen
in cell wall remodeling and metabolism reported here,
possibly caused by the interaction of PGIPs in the cell
wall, leads to increased IAA-levels.

Among the differentially expressed genes related to
pectin biosynthesis and composition was a galacturonosyltransferase-like protein (GATL), which is closely
related to other galacturonosyltransferase involved in
pectin and/or xylan synthesis. Five Arabidopsis GATL
mutants were recently characterized and shown to have
altered pectin and hemicellulose properties [66]. A putative pectinesterase was also down-regulated. These
enzymes modify the degree of methylesterification of
pectic homogalacturonan affecting cell wall strengthening (reviewed in [67]). PGIP has been shown to directly
interact with pectin in vitro by binding a negatively
charged homogalacturonan motif [10]. Examining Arabidopsis PGIP knock-out and over-expressing lines, a
recent report further strengthened the link between
PGIP and pectin stability by showing that constitutive
PGIP over-expression increased the amount of pectin
deposited in the seed coat [17].
Several other down-regulated cell wall-associated
genes were involved in sugar metabolism. UDP-glucose
epimerases (4-UGE) are known to be involved in the
channeling of activated galactose to arabinogalactan proteins [68] and to xyloglucan and pectins [26,69]. Other
genes related to cell wall biosynthesis and in muro
remodeling observed to have altered expression patterns
were a beta-galactosidase and a cellulose synthase-like
gene.
The overall change in the expression of genes related
to cell wall composition and structure observed led to
the analysis of the leaf cell wall content of eight

Alexandersson et al. BMC Research Notes 2011, 4:493
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1756-0500/4/493

monosaccharides in Vvpgip1 line 37. However, with the
exception of rhamnose, which is associated to rhamnogalacturonan I (RG-I) pectin polysaccharides, the cell
wall composition was similar to WT (Figure 7). The differential expression of several genes involved in cell wall
remodeling and the confirmation that the composition
did not change significantly suggest that cell wall organization, rather than composition is affected by the presence of the PGIP. Future studies will focus on the
architecture and cross-linking of cell wall components,
specifically with regards to pectin content and
composition.
PGIP expression induces a shift in primary metabolism

Apart from genes related to the cell wall and hormone
biosynthesis and signaling, several genes involved in primary metabolism showed a change in expression (Additional file 1). Among these were enzymes involved in
glycolysis, the OPP pathway and the TCA cycle. Several
genes involved in nitrogen metabolism and catabolism
were also affected. Interestingly, some metabolic genes
that could be linked to sink-source tissue regulation
were identified, e.g. cell wall invertases and an L-asparaginase 4 precursor [70,71]. Cell wall invertases are
believed to be key enzymes in the transaction between
sink and source tissues and a down-regulation of activity
leading to a decrease in hexose sugar availability is an
indication of a transformation from sink to source
(reviewed in [71]).

Page 14 of 17

Defense mechanisms are energy intensive and during
pathogen attack it is necessary for the plant to regulate
metabolic pathways in order to deprive the pathogen of
energy resources at the same time as it recruits energy
for its own defense response (reviewed in [72]). Our
results indicate that the Vvpgip1 over-expressing lines
have adjustments of the primary metabolism even before
pathogen attack which might be indicative of a ‘primedlike’ state. Alternatively, the changes seen in primary
metabolism might also be linked to the changes
observed in cell wall remodeling and metabolism, which
probably affects energy demand and biosynthesis of various building blocks needed. These aspects need further
investigation, specifically also in the presence of an
infecting pathogen.

Summary and conclusions
Taken together, there is clear evidence that transgenic
lines over-expressing Vvpgip1 have altered cell wall
properties compared to their untransformed counterparts, even in the absence of pathogen infection. In
addition, increased levels of auxin in uninfected tissue
and an amplified JA response following Botrytis infection were seen. Interestingly, there were subtle changes
in the transcription of a large number of genes representing different distinct functional sets, notably related
to cell wall functions, primary metabolism and stress
responses. Among the more markedly down-regulated
genes were XTHs, and we could show that the decrease

Figure 7 Cell wall component analysis. Total cell wall monosaccharide was determined in tobacco leaves (leaf position 3) for two WT and
three Vvpgip1 line 37 biological repeats. Letters represent statistical groups (within each metabolite) as determined by one-way ANOVA (multicomparison Bonferroni test, p < 0.05).

Alexandersson et al. BMC Research Notes 2011, 4:493
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1756-0500/4/493

in XTH expression led to a lowered XTH activity. The
alteration of XTHs, together with an increased deposition of lignin also observed, are possible contributors to
the reduced Botrytis susceptibility observed in these
PGIP-specific resistant lines.
The current hypothesis is that PGIP’s involvement in
plant defense is limited to the inhibition of ePGs limiting tissue maceration and necrosis. Also, following inhibition of ePG by PGIP, it is believed that the lifetime of
molecules with elicitor activity towards the activation of
plant defenses are extended [7]. But, since the conditions primarily studied here were with the pathogen
absent, neither the inhibition of ePG nor the extension
of the lifetime of oligogalacturonides were involved.
PGIP may directly influence defense responses in the
plant possibly by strengthening the cell walls; whether
by virtue of its structural features, which contains a LRR
structure shared with many receptor involved in pathogen recognition or its integration in the cell wall.
However, at this stage we cannot exclude that the
effects of the Vvpgip1 over-expression observed are due
to properties specific to VvPGIP1. Putatively, these
could originate from more general properties of the protein, e.g., as an effect of its cellular transportation and
presence in the apoplast. Still, the cross-species coexpression analysis shows that important genes like
members of XTHs, peroxidases, UDP epimerases and
JAZs are selectively co-expressed also with PGIPs in
Arabidopsis, and thus gives some evidence that these
groups of genes are specifically affected by the PGIP
expression levels.
Lately, other evidence indicating a broader role of
PGIPs has been presented. For example, studies have
shown that PGIP-encoding gene regulates floral organ
number in rice, that the expression of a pea PGIP affects
the resistance to nematode invasion without the detection of ePGs in either organism and that PGIP expression influences seed imbibition [16,17,72]. In addition to
the inhibition of ePGs and subsequent signaling events,
these observations of PGIP’s effects on plant development and pathogen resistance together with the work
presented in this manuscript, are shedding new light on
the in planta roles of PGIP.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Table of probes displaying differential expression.
Table of all probes displaying differential expression. Differential
expression (Log2) between control plants and Vvpgip1-transformed lines
37 and 45 (FDR <0.05). Probes are divided into orthologous clusters
based on sequence similarity (see Materials and Methods). Functional
category, name, an arbitrary set identification number and number of
hybridizing transcripts are given for each orthologous cluster. The
sequence similarity (%) and amino acid length of similar sequence for
the top hit in Arabidopsis of each probe sequence is also included. If no
match was found in Arabidopsis the top hit for rice was instead given.

Page 15 of 17

The descriptions presented are derived from the top hits. The level of coexpression of Arabidopsis genes associated to two or more of the
orthologous clusters based on sequence similarity are given as Pearson
coefficients correlations with different stringency (0.05, 0.1 or 0.2). Asterisk
denotes that only a trend (p < 0.15) was seen in Vvpgip1 line 45.
Additional file 2: Updated Gene Ontology (GO terms) associated
with each probe on the TIGR 10 k microarray. Updated GO terms
associated with each probe on the TIGR 10 k microarray. GO terms were
updated with information retrieved from nine plant species with the
help of a graph structure. The table is compatible for use with GOEast if
saved as a tab-delimited file.
Additional file 3: A selection of differentially expressed genes.
Probes are divided into orthologous clusters based on sequence
similarity and expression ratios are given in Log2-scale. Top hits based on
sequence similarity are given for either Arabidopsis or rice and includes
the corresponding gene description. Related citations are given in the
heading literature. Shaded orthologous clusters indicate that associated
Arabidopsis genes based on sequence identity were co-expressed
(Pearson coefficient correlation < 0.2) with one or more additional
Arabidopsis genes linked to the orthologous clusters. Asterisks denote
that only a similar trend for differential expression was observed in
Vvpgip 1 line 45 (FDR < 0.15). For more details on constructions of
orthologous clusters and cross-species co-expression analysis, see
Materials and Methods.
Additional file 4: Gene ontology enrichments. GO enrichment of
probes showing significant difference in signal intensity in Vvpgip1 line
37 and 45 in comparison to WT. (A) Biological process (B) Cellular
compartment and (C) Molecular function. The gene ontology maps were
generated in GOEast [39]. Enriched terms are colored in yellow and the
intensity of the color yellow denotes the level of enrichment. Red arrows
stand for relationship between two enriched GO terms, black solid
arrows stand for relationship between enriched and not enriched terms
and black dashed arrows stand for relationship between two not
enriched GO terms.
Additional file 5: MapMan overview of metabolic categories
comparing Vvpgip1 line 37 and 45. A MapMan mapping file adopted
for the TIGR 10 K potato microarray was used [41]. Expression values
were filtered after FDR-adjustment (p < 0.05).

Acknowledgements and funding
This work was supported by funding from the National Research Foundation
(NRF), the Wine Industry Network of Expertise and Technology (Winetech),
the South African Table Grape Industry (SATI) and the South African
Technology and Human Resources for Industry Programme (THRIP). Postdoctorial funding for EA was provided by Carl Tryggers Stiftelse för
Vetenskaplig Forskning, Sweden, and for ENO by Claude Leon Foundation,
South Africa. Andreas G.J. Tredoux, Institute for Wine Biotechnology is
acknowledged for technical support in optimizing the hormone profile
method.
Author details
1
Institute for Wine Biotechnology, Department of Viticulture and Oenology,
Faculty of AgriSciences, Stellenbosch University, Stellenbosch, South Africa.
2
Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Cape Town, Private
Bag, Rondebosch, Cape Town, South Africa. 3School of Life Sciences and
Warwick Systems Biology Centre, University of Warwick, Wellesbourne
Campus CV35 9EF, UK. 4Department of Plant Protection Biology, Swedish
Agricultural University, P.O. Box 102, SE-230 53 Alnarp, Sweden. 5African
Centre for Gene Technologies, Experimental Farm, University of Pretoria,
Lynnwood Ridge, Pretoria, South Africa.
Authors’ contributions
EA did the microarray data and statistical analyses. JVWB performed the
microarrays, qPCR and hormone and lignin profiling experiments. DJ
constructed the bioinformatical workflow and graph structures. ENO
determined the cell wall composition and CS did the XTH enzyme activity

Alexandersson et al. BMC Research Notes 2011, 4:493
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1756-0500/4/493

assay. KJD participated in the design of the microarray study. MAV
conceived the study.
EA, JVWB, DJ and MAV drafted the manuscript. All authors read and
approved of the final manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 19 July 2011 Accepted: 13 November 2011
Published: 13 November 2011
References
1. De Lorenzo G, D’Ovidio R, Cervone F: The role of polygalacturonaseinhibiting proteins (PGIPs) in defense against pathogenic fungi. Annu Rev
Phytopathol 2001, 39:313-335.
2. Rodriguez-Palenzuela P, Burr TJ, Collmer A: Polygalacturonase is a
virulence factor in Agrobacterium tumefaciens biovar 3. J Bacteriol 1991,
173(20):6547-6552.
3. Shieh MT, Brown RL, Whitehead MP, Cary JW, Cotty PJ, Cleveland TE,
Dean RA: Molecular genetic evidence for the involvement of a specific
polygalacturonase, P2c, in the invasion and spread of Aspergillus flavus
in cotton bolls. Appl Environ Microbiol 1997, 63(9):3548-3552.
4. ten Have A, Mulder W, Visser J, van Kan JA: The endopolygalacturonase
gene Bcpg1 is required for full virulence of Botrytis cinerea. Mol Plant
Microbe Interact 1998, 11(10):1009-1016.
5. Kars I, Krooshof GH, Wagemakers L, Joosten R, Benen JA, van Kan JA:
Necrotizing activity of five Botrytis cinerea endopolygalacturonases
produced in Pichia pastoris. Plant J 2005, 43(2):213-225.
6. Joubert DA, Slaughter AR, Kemp G, Becker JV, Krooshof GH, Bergmann C,
Benen J, Pretorius IS, Vivier MA: The grapevine polygalacturonaseinhibiting protein (VvPGIP1) reduces Botrytis cinerea susceptibility in
transgenic tobacco and differentially inhibits fungal polygalacturonases.
Transgenic Res 2006, 15(6):687-702.
7. Cervone F, Hahn MG, De Lorenzo G, Darvill A, Albersheim P: HostPathogen Interactions: XXXIII. A Plant Protein Converts a Fungal
Pathogenesis Factor into an Elicitor of Plant Defense Responses. Plant
Physiol 1989, 90(2):542-548.
8. Federici L, Di Matteo A, Fernandez-Recio J, Tsernoglou D, Cervone F:
Polygalacturonase inhibiting proteins: players in plant innate immunity?
Trends Plant Sci 2006, 11(2):65-70.
9. Joubert DA, Kars I, Wagemakers L, Bergmann C, Kemp G, Vivier MA, van
Kan JA: A polygalacturonase-inhibiting protein from grapevine reduces
the symptoms of the endopolygalacturonase BcPG2 from Botrytis
cinerea in Nicotiana benthamiana leaves without any evidence for in
vitro interaction. Mol Plant Microbe Interact 2007, 20(4):392-402.
10. Spadoni S, Zabotina O, Di Matteo A, Mikkelsen JD, Cervone F, De
Lorenzo G, Mattei B, Bellincampi D: Polygalacturonase-inhibiting protein
interacts with pectin through a binding site formed by four clustered
residues of arginine and lysine. Plant Physiol 2006, 141(2):557-564.
11. Powell AL, van Kan J, ten Have A, Visser J, Greve LC, Bennett AB,
Labavitch JM: Transgenic expression of pear PGIP in tomato limits fungal
colonization. Mol Plant Microbe Interact 2000, 13(9):942-950.
12. Aguero CB, Uratsu SL, Greve C, Powell AL, Labavitch JM, Meredith CP,
Dandekar AM: Evaluation of tolerance to Pierce’s disease and Botrytis in
transgenic plants of Vitis vinifera L. expressing the pear PGIP gene. Mol
Plant Pathol 2005, 6(1):43-51.
13. Ferrari S, Vairo D, Ausubel FM, Cervone F, De Lorenzo G: Tandemly
duplicated Arabidopsis genes that encode polygalacturonase-inhibiting
proteins are regulated coordinately by different signal transduction
pathways in response to fungal infection. Plant Cell 2003, 15(1):93-106.
14. Manfredini C, Sicilia F, Ferrari S, Pontiggia D, Salvi G, Caprari C, Lorito M, De
Lorenzo G: Polygalacturonase-inhibiting protein 2 of Phaseolus vulgaris
inhibits BcPG1, a polygalacturonase of Botrytis cinerea important for
pathogenicity, and protects transgenic plants from infection. Physiol Mol
Plant Pathol 2005, 67:108-115.
15. Ferrari S, Galletti R, Vairo D, Cervone F, De Lorenzo G: Antisense expression
of the Arabidopsis thaliana AtPGIP1 gene reduces polygalacturonaseinhibiting protein accumulation and enhances susceptibility to Botrytis
cinerea. Mol Plant Microbe Interact 2006, 19(8):931-936.
16. Veronico P, Melillo MT, Saponaro C, Leonetti P, Picardi E, Jones JT: A
polygalacturonase-inhibiting protein with a role in pea defence against

Page 16 of 17

17.

18.

19.
20.

21.

22.

23.
24.

25.

26.

27.

28.
29.

30.

31.

32.
33.

34.

35.
36.

37.
38.

39.

the cyst nematode Heterodera goettingiana. Mol Plant Pathol 2011,
12(3):275-287.
Kanai M, Nishimura M, Hayashi M: A peroxisomal ABC transporter
promotes seed germination by inducing pectin degradation under the
control of ABI5. Plant J 2010, 62(6):936-947.
Xu ZS, Xiong TF, Ni ZY, Chen XP, Chen M, Li LC, Gao DY, Yu XD, Liu P,
Ma YZ: Isolation and identification of two genes encoding leucine-rich
repeat (LRR) proteins differentially responsive to pathogen attack and
salt stress in tobacco. Plant Sci 2009, 176:38-45.
Murashige T, Skoog F: A Revised Medium for Rapid Growth and Bio
Assays with Tobacco Tissue Cultures. Physiol Plant 1962, 15(3):473-497.
Smyth GK: Limma: linear models for microarray data. In In: Bioinformatics
and Computational Biology Solutions using R and Bioconductor, R. Gentleman,
V. Carey, S. Dudoit, R. Irizarry, W. Huber (eds.). Edited by: . Springer, New York;
2005:397-420.
Ritchie ME, Silver J, Oshlack A, Holmes M, Diyagama D, Holloway A,
Smyth GK: A comparison of background correction methods for twocolour microarrays. Bioinformatics (Oxford, England) 2007, 23(20):2700-2707.
Ramakers C, Ruijter JM, Deprez RH, Moorman AF: Assumption-free analysis
of quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) data. Neurosci
Lett 2003, 339(1):62-66.
Pfaffl MW: A new mathematical model for relative quantification in realtime RT-PCR. Nucleic Acids Res 2001, 29(9):e45.
Fry SC: Novel ‘dot-blot’ assays for glycosyltransferases and glycosyl
hydrolases: optimisation for xyloglucan endotransglycosylase (XET)
activity. Plant J 1997, 11:1141-1150.
Bradford MM: A rapid and sensitive method for the quantitation of
microgram quantities of protein utilizing the principle of protein-dye
binding. Anal Biochem 1976, 72:248-254.
Nguema-Ona E, Andeme-Onzighi C, Aboughe-Angone S, Bardor M, Ishii T,
Lerouge P, Driouich A: The reb1-1 mutation of Arabidopsis. Effect on the
structure and localization of galactose-containing cell wall
polysaccharides. Plant Physiol 2006, 140(4):1406-1417.
Fromm J, Rockel B, Lautner S, Windeisen E, Wanner G: Lignin distribution
in wood cell walls determined by TEM and backscattered SEM
techniques. J Struct Biol 2003, 143(1):77-84.
Ruzin SE: Plant Microtechnique and Microscopy New York: Oxford University
Press; 1999.
de Ascensao AR, Dubery IA: Soluble and wall-bound phenolics and
phenolic polymers in Musa acuminata roots exposed to elicitors from
Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. cubense. Phytochemistry 2003, 63(6):679-686.
Schmelz EA, Engelberth J, Tumlinson JH, Block A, Alborn HT: The use of
vapor phase extraction in metabolic profiling of phytohormones and
other metabolites. Plant J 2004, 39(5):790-808.
Duvick J, Fu A, Muppirala U, Sabharwal M, Wilkerson MD, Lawrence CJ,
Lushbough C, Brendel V: PlantGDB: a resource for comparative plant
genomics. Nucleic Acid Res 2008, 36(Database issue):D959-965.
Wasmuth JD, Blaxter ML: prot4EST: translating expressed sequence tags
from neglected genomes. BMC Bioinformatics 2004, 5:187.
Altschul SF, Madden TL, Schaffer AA, Zhang J, Zhang Z, Miller W,
Lipman DJ: Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new generation of protein
database search programs. Nucleic Acid Res 1997, 25(17):3389-3402.
Lottaz C, Iseli C, Jongeneel CV, Bucher P: Modeling sequencing errors by
combining Hidden Markov models. Bioinformatics (Oxford, England) 2003,
19(Suppl 2):ii103-112.
Fukunishi Y, Hayashizaki Y: Amino acid translation program for full-length
cDNA sequences with frameshift errors. Physiol Genomics 2001, 5(2):81-87.
Proost S, Van Bel M, Sterck L, Billiau K, Van Parys T, Van de Peer Y,
Vandepoele K: PLAZA: a comparative genomics resource to study gene
and genome evolution in plants. Plant Cell 2009, 21(12):3718-3731.
Li L, Stoeckert CJ Jr, Roos DS: OrthoMCL: identification of ortholog groups
for eukaryotic genomes. Genome Res 2003, 13(9):2178-2189.
Cline MS, Smoot M, Cerami E, Kuchinsky A, Landys N, Workman C,
Christmas R, Avila-Campilo I, Creech M, Gross B, et al: Integration of
biological networks and gene expression data using Cytoscape. Nat
Protoc 2007, 2(10):2366-2382.
Zheng Q, Wang XJ: GOEAST: a web-based software toolkit for Gene
Ontology enrichment analysis. Nucleic Acid Res 2008, 36(Web Server
issue):W358-363.

Alexandersson et al. BMC Research Notes 2011, 4:493
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1756-0500/4/493

40. Srinivasasainagendra V, Page GP, Mehta T, Coulibaly I, Loraine AE:
CressExpress: a tool for large-scale mining of expression data from
Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol 2008, 147(3):1004-1016.
41. Rotter A, Usadel B, Baebler S, Stitt M, Gruden K: Adaptation of the
MapMan ontology to biotic stress responses: application in solanaceous
species. Plant Methods 2007, 3:10.
42. Rensink WA, Lee Y, Liu J, Iobst S, Ouyang S, Buell CR: Comparative
analyses of six solanaceous transcriptomes reveal a high degree of
sequence conservation and species-specific transcripts. BMC Genomics
2005, 6:124.
43. Renn SC, Aubin-Horth N, Hofmann HA: Biologically meaningful expression
profiling across species using heterologous hybridization to a cDNA
microarray. BMC Genomics 2004, 5(1):42.
44. Rise ML, von Schalburg KR, Brown GD, Mawer MA, Devlin RH, Kuipers N,
Busby M, Beetz-Sargent M, Alberto R, Gibbs AR, et al: Development and
application of a salmonid EST database and cDNA microarray: data
mining and interspecific hybridization characteristics. Genome Res 2004,
14(3):478-490.
45. Schoof H, Ernst R, Nazarov V, Pfeifer L, Mewes HW, Mayer KF: MIPS
Arabidopsis thaliana Database (MAtDB): an integrated biological
knowledge resource for plant genomics. Nucleic Acid Res 2004,
32(Database issue):D373-376.
46. Stintzi A, Weber H, Reymond P, Browse J, Farmer EE: Plant defense in the
absence of jasmonic acid: the role of cyclopentenones. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 2001, 98(22):12837-12842.
47. Gutterson N, Reuber TL: Regulation of disease resistance pathways by
AP2/ERF transcription factors. Curr Opin Plant Biol 2004, 7(4):465-471.
48. Bari R, Jones JD: Role of plant hormones in plant defence responses.
Plant Mol Biol 2009, 69(4):473-488.
49. McNeil M, Darvill AG, Fry SC, Albersheim P: Structure and function of the
primary cell walls of plants. Ann Rev Biochem 1984, 53:625-663.
50. Carpita NC, Gibeaut DM: Structural models of primary cell walls in
flowering plants: consistency of molecular structure with the physical
properties of the walls during growth. Plant J 1993, 3(1):1-30.
51. Saladie M, Rose JK, Cosgrove DJ, Catala C: Characterization of a new
xyloglucan endotransglucosylase/hydrolase (XTH) from ripening tomato
fruit and implications for the diverse modes of enzymic action. Plant J
2006, 47(2):282-295.
52. Rose JK, Braam J, Fry SC, Nishitani K: The XTH family of enzymes involved
in xyloglucan endotransglucosylation and endohydrolysis: current
perspectives and a new unifying nomenclature. Plant Cell Physiol 2002,
43(12):1421-1435.
53. Herbers K, Lorences EP, Barrachina C, Sonnewald U: Functional
characterisation of Nicotiana tabacum xyloglucan endotransglycosylase
(NtXET-1): generation of transgenic tobacco plants and changes in cell
wall xyloglucan. Planta 2001, 212(2):279-287.
54. Nunan KJ, Davies C, Robinson SP, Fincher GB: Expression patterns of cell
wall-modifying enzymes during grape berry development. Planta 2001,
214(2):257-264.
55. De Ascensao ARFDC: Isolation and characterization of a
polygalacturonase-inhibiting protein (PGIP) and its encoding gene from
Vitis vinifera L . PhD thesis, Stellenbosch University. 2001.
56. Minic Z, Rihouey C, Do CT, Lerouge P, Jouanin L: Purification and
characterization of enzymes exhibiting beta-D-xylosidase activities in
stem tissues of Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol 2004, 135(2):867-878.
57. Nicholson RL, Hammerschmidt R: Phenolic compounds and their role in
disease resistance. Annu Rev Phytopathol 1992, 30:369-389.
58. Ride JP: Cell walls and other structural barriers in defense. In In:
Biochemical Plant Pathology, J.A. Callow (Ed). Edited by: . John Wiley and
Sons, New York; 1983:215-236.
59. Kaneda M, Rensing KH, Wong JC, Banno B, Mansfield SD, Samuels AL:
Tracking monolignols during wood development in lodgepole pine.
Plant Physiol 2008, 147(4):1750-1760.
60. Bhuiyan NH, Selvaraj G, Wei Y, King J: Gene expression profiling and
silencing reveal that monolignol biosynthesis plays a critical role in
penetration defence in wheat against powdery mildew invasion. J Exp
Bot 2009, 60(2):509-521.
61. Piquemal J, Lapierre C, Myton K, O’Connell A, Schuch W, Grima-Pettenati J,
Boudet AM: Down-regulation of Cinnamoyl-CoA Reductase induces
significant changes of lignin profiles in transgenic tobacco plants. Plant J
1998, 13:71-83.

Page 17 of 17

62. Sanchez-Rodriguez C, Rubio-Somoza I, Sibout R, Persson S: Phytohormones
and the cell wall in Arabidopsis during seedling growth. Trends in Plant
Science 2010, 15(5):291-301.
63. Sitbon F, Hennion S, Sundberg B, Little CH, Olsson O, Sandberg G:
Transgenic Tobacco Plants Coexpressing the Agrobacterium tumefaciens
iaaM and iaaH Genes Display Altered Growth and Indoleacetic Acid
Metabolism. Plant Physiol 1992, 99(3):1062-1069.
64. Sitbon F, Hennion S, Anthony Little CH, Sundberg B: Enhanced ethylene
production and peroxidase activity in IAA-overproducing tobacco plants
with increased lignin content and altered lignin deposition. Plant Sci
1999, 141:165-173.
65. Catala C, Rose JK, York WS, Albersheim P, Darvill AG, Bennett AB:
Characterization of a tomato xyloglucan endotransglycosylase gene that
is down-regulated by auxin in etiolated hypocotyls. Plant Physiol 2001,
127(3):1180-1192.
66. Kong Y, Zhou G, Yin Y, Xu Y, Pattathil S, Hahn MG: Molecular analysis of a
family of Arabidopsis genes related to galacturonosyltransferases. Plant
Physiol 2011, 155(4):1791-1805.
67. Pelloux J, Rusterucci C, Mellerowicz EJ: New insights into pectin
methylesterase structure and function. Trends Plant Sci 2007,
12(6):267-277.
68. Andeme-Onzighi C, Sivaguru M, Judy-March J, Baskin TI, Driouich A: The
reb1-1 mutation of Arabidopsis alters the morphology of trichoblasts,
the expression of arabinogalactan-proteins and the organization of
cortical microtubules. Planta 2002, 215(6):949-958.
69. Rosti J, Barton CJ, Albrecht S, Dupree P, Pauly M, Findlay K, Roberts K,
Seifert GJ: UDP-glucose 4-epimerase isoforms UGE2 and UGE4 cooperate
in providing UDP-galactose for cell wall biosynthesis and growth of
Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant Cell 2007, 19(5):1565-1579.
70. Lea PJ, Sodek L, Parry MAJ, Shewry PR, Halford NG: Asparagine in plants.
Ann Appl Biol 2007, 150:1-26.
71. Wingler A, Roitsch T: Metabolic regulation of leaf senescence: interactions
of sugar signalling with biotic and abiotic stress responses. Plant Biol
(Stuttgart, Germany) 2008, 10(Suppl 1):50-62.
72. Jang S, Lee B, Kim C, Kim SJ, Yim J, Han JJ, Lee S, Kim SR, An G: The
OsFOR1 gene encodes a polygalacturonase-inhibiting protein (PGIP) that
regulates floral organ number in rice. Plant Mol Biol 2003, 53(3):357-369.
doi:10.1186/1756-0500-4-493
Cite this article as: Alexandersson et al.: Constitutive expression of a
grapevine polygalacturonase-inhibiting protein affects gene expression
and cell wall properties in uninfected tobacco. BMC Research Notes 2011
4:493.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
