<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Origins of the amphiploid species Brassica napus L. investigated by chloroplast and nuclear molecular markers</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:54. doi: 10.1186/1471-2229-10-54"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Charlotte J Allender, Graham J King"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 8.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 7.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Allender and King BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:54
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/54

Open Access

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Origins of the amphiploid species Brassica napus L.
investigated by chloroplast and nuclear molecular
markers
Research article

Charlotte J Allender*1 and Graham J King2

Abstract
Background: The amphiploid species Brassica napus (oilseed rape, Canola) is a globally important oil crop yielding
food, biofuels and industrial compounds such as lubricants and surfactants. Identification of the likely ancestors of each
of the two genomes (designated A and C) found in B. napus would facilitate incorporation of novel alleles from the
wider Brassica genepool in oilseed rape crop genetic improvement programmes. Knowledge of the closest extant
relatives of the genotypes involved in the initial formation of B. napus would also allow further investigation of the
genetic factors required for the formation of a stable amphiploid and permit the more efficient creation of fully fertile
re-synthesised B. napus. We have used a combination of chloroplast and nuclear genetic markers to investigate the
closest extant relatives of the original maternal progenitors of B. napus. This was based on a comprehensive sampling
of the relevant genepools, including 83 accessions of A genome B. rapa L. (both wild and cultivated types), 94
accessions of B. napus and 181 accessions of C genome wild and cultivated B. oleracea L. and related species.
Results: Three chloroplast haplotypes occurred in B. napus. The most prevalent haplotype (found in 79% of accessions)
was not present within the C genome accessions but was found at low frequencies in B. rapa. Chloroplast haplotypes
characteristic of B. napus were found in a small number of wild and weedy B. rapa populations, and also in two
accessions of cultivated B. rapa 'brocoletto'. Whilst introgression of the B. napus chloroplast type in the wild and weedy
B. rapa populations has been proposed by other studies, the presence of this haplotype within the two brocoletto
accessions is unexplained.
Conclusions: The distribution of chloroplast haplotypes eliminate any of the C genome species as being the maternal
ancestor of the majority of the B. napus accessions. The presence of multiple chloroplast haplotypes in B. napus and B.
rapa accessions was not correlated with nuclear genetic diversity as determined by AFLPs, indicating that such
accessions do not represent recent hybrids. Whilst some chloroplast diversity observed within B. napus can be
explained by introgression from inter-specific crosses made during crop improvement programmes, there is evidence
that the original hybridisation event resulting in to B. napus occurred on more than one occasion, and involved
different maternal genotypes.
Background
Brassica napus (rapeseed, oilseed rape, Canola) is an oilseed crop of global economic significance. Over 50 million tonnes of rapeseed were produced in 2007 from an
area of 30 million hectares [1]. In addition both tuberous
(swede or rutabaga) and leafy forms (fodder rape and
kale) of the species are grown as vegetables for human
consumption and animal fodder. Oilseed B. napus has
* Correspondence: charlotte.allender@warwick.ac.uk
1

Warwick HRI, University of Warwick, Wellesbourne, Warwick, CV35 9EF, UK

Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

only achieved economic importance in the past forty
years following an intensive breeding programme to
decrease nutritionally undesirable components of the oil
and meal, and to increase yields. Attention initially
focused on reducing levels of erucic acid in the seed oil,
and then reducing levels of aliphatic glucosinolate in the
meal to make it more palatable and safer for livestock.
More recently, varieties yielding oils suitable for conversion to biodiesel and industrial lubricants have been
developed. As with other crops, ongoing breeding programmes aim to increase overall harvestable yield and

© 2010 Allender and King; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Com-

BioMed Central mons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Allender and King BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:54
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/54

quality, with resistance to crop pests and pathogens as
major targets. Whilst successful, the collateral effect of
these improvements has been the production of elite
varieties that possess only a fraction of the genetic diversity available in the wider Brassica genepools. This is
causing increasing concern, particularly with respect to
lack of resistance to insect and other pests. Sources of
new alleles that can easily be transferred into elite breeding lines are required in order to maintain and increase
yield, provide new functional and adaptive disease resistance loci, and refine oil qualities to serve a variety of
nutritional and industrial purposes.
The relationships between the six major cultivated
Brassica species were originally described by U [2], who
associated the diploid species B. rapa, B. oleracea and B.
nigra L. with the amphiploids B. juncea L., B. carinata A.
Br. and B. napus. Each of the amphiploids contains a
combination of two diploid genomes. B. napus (n = 19)
contains both the A and C genomes of its two progenitors, B. rapa (A genome, n = 10) and B. oleracea and
related wild species (C genome, n = 9). Recreation of stable B. napus by crossing B. rapa and B. oleracea is difficult, but possible. Re-synthesized B. napus may be
generated by crossing both diploid and tetraploid B. rapa
and B. oleracea, although only a very small proportion of
the attempted pollinations result in a viable hybrid plant
[3]. In a current research context, the production of
hybrids from diploid parents is commonly enhanced
through embryo rescue or somatic hybridisation [4]
although such plants often have a relatively high frequency of chromosomal rearrangements and reduced
fertility [5,3].
The nature, direction and geographic location of the
initial hybridisation events that led to the generation of B.
napus remain unclear. B. napus is thought to be a relatively new species, since the earliest reliable documented
record appears only 500 years ago, and although feral
populations are common, no truly wild populations have
been recorded ([6] and references therein). The location
or locations of the original hybridisations is also unclear,
as is whether they occurred in a wild or domesticated
context. Both B. rapa and C genome species (particularly
B. oleracea) have wide geographic ranges and geographically distinct centres of diversity. The earliest molecular
studies suggested that the maternal parent of B. napus
was likely to be B. oleracea, due to similarities in restriction patterns of their chloroplast genomes [7]. Subsequent RFLP analysis indicated that B. montana, a C
genome relative of B. oleracea, had an identical chloroplast type to B. napus, and supported the contention that
the maternal parent was not A genome B. rapa [8].
The identities of the A and C genome subtaxa involved
in the original hybridisation that led to the formation of
B. napus are not known, although [9] suggested that the

Page 2 of 9

genotype of the original A genome parent could be
closely related to that of a B. rapa accession 'Spring Broccoli Raab'. However, the authors noted that post speciation introgression of B. napus genome fragments into the
B. rapa accession could also explain their findings. Other
studies have detected introgression of B. rapa into different B. napus genotypes [10]. Evidence based on either
chloroplast or nuclear markers has suggested that B.
napus appears to have resulted from several independent
hybridisation events [9,8]. More recently, diversity in the
Brassica chloroplast genome was characterised using
nine microsatellite markers [11]. The study found 10 different haplotypes in the 15 B. napus individuals tested,
although none of these haplotypes were shared by any
other A or C genome species. Whilst of interest, such
studies are restricted in value due to limited sampling and
use of different marker systems that makes direct comparison or compilation impossible.
In order to establish a more robust basis for clarifying
the origins of B. napus, and in particular to ascertain the
species which was the likely maternal parent, we used
both nuclear and chloroplast molecular markers. It was
hoped that this approach would also provide baseline evidence to clarify the possible polyphyletic origins of the
species. We carried out a detailed sampling of the genepools of the potential A and C genome donor species by
surveying a total of 367 accessions representing 15 species. This included 94 B. napus accessions, together with
10 accessions of B. montana, the putative maternal ancestor of B. napus [8]. Representatives of B. nigra (B genome,
n = 8) and the amphiploids B. carinata (BC genome, n =
17) and B. juncea (AB genome n = 18) were also included
for comparison.

Methods
In total we sampled 198 accessions representing 6 Brassica species (B. napus, B. rapa, B. carinata, B. juncea, B.
nigra and B. montana) in order to determine diversity
using chloroplast SSRs. Data are directly comparable with
the 171 samples of B. oleracea and related C genome species previously described in [12]. Where possible, we
selected accessions that had already been used in other
published studies, particularly with regard to the B. napus
and B. rapa accessions used in [8]. The B. napus accessions represent all B. napus crop types, with an emphasis
on oilseeds due to their prevalence in an agricultural setting (global area sown and opportunities for gene flow to
populations of related wild species). DNA was extracted
from young leaves of a single seedling or single seeds as
described in [12]. Most accessions were represented by a
single sample. Tests on three individuals of five different
B. montana accessions failed to detect more than one
haplotype per accession (data not shown). Although it is
likely that intra-accession chloroplast polymorphism is

Allender and King BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:54
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/54

present, particularly within wild accessions, this is compensated by the large number of accessions sampled. Six
primer pairs were used to amplify chloroplast SSRs, with
PCR products visualised and scored on an ABI 3100
Genetic Analyzer (Applied Biosystems) following the
methods described in [12].
A subset of 93 accessions were analysed for nuclear
genome diversity using AFLPs using the restriction
enzymes EcoRI and MseI. This subset was chosen to be
representative of the chloroplast haplotypes detected
using the SSRs, whilst including a more thorough representation of particular groups of interest such as B. rapa
brocoletto and B. montana. The number of accessions
was limited to 93 in this analysis to avoid potential problems when combing data derived from different PCR
reactions and to allow for control samples. Methods were
based on those described by [13] except that we used a
fluorescent detection system. A pre-selective step was
carried out using the primers 5'-GACTGCGTACCAATTCA-3'and
5'-GATGAGTCCTGAGTAAC-3'which
anneal to the EcoRI and MseI adapters respectively. Selective amplifications with two primer pairs were then carried out, the primer sequences being identical to the preselective pairs with the addition of EcoRI-AAC-3'/MseICAG-3'and EcoRI-AAG-3'/MseI-CAA-3'. The EcoRI
selective primer was labelled with FAM at the 5'end. Fragments were sized using an ABI 3100 Genetic Analyzer
(Applied Biosystems) with a Genescan Rox 500 internal
size standard and then scored using GeneMarker (Softgenetics) software. We examined peak heights across each
trace and any peaks with a height less than the mean were
regarded as absent. Traces from samples which had an
overall mean peak height <200 relative fluorescence units
(rfu) were disregarded in order to ensure only high quality data were analysed. As a control, AFLP analysis was
carried out on six replicates of the same B. nigra sample
to assess the robustness of the data.
The diversity of B. rapa and B. napus was assessed
using Nei's measure of gene diversity H [14]) based on the
frequencies of the haplotypes present in each species.
The AFLP data were analysed using Principal Coordinates Ordination (PCO) as implemented in the programme PAST (Øyvind Hammer and David Harper,
available from http://folk.uio.no/ohammer/past/) using
the DICE similarity metric. Nei's H was also calculated
for B. rapa, B. oleracea and related C genome species, and
B. napus using AFLP-SURV [15]. A Neighbour-Joining
tree (Figure 1) based on the genetic distance measure of
Link et al. [16] was constructed from the AFLP data using
the software package TreeCon [17]. Support for the tree
was assessed using 100 bootstrap replicates. Chloroplast
haplotype data were also mapped onto this tree.

Page 3 of 9

Results
Chloroplast Diversity

In total, 18 chloroplast haplotypes were resolved among
the six Brassica species tested in this study. The sample
details are given in Additional File 1 and the hapolotypes
in Additional File 2. Combined with haplotypes previously established for C genome species accessions [12], a
total of 38 haplotypes were present in the 367 Brassica
accessions tested (Table 1). B. rapa exhibits a relatively
high level of chloroplast polymorphism with H = 0.61. B.
napus on the other hand is more diverse than B. oleracea
(as reported in [12], H = 0.07) and with only 3 haplotypes
detected in 94 accessions, we calculated H = 0.33.
The three amphiploid species all possess chloroplast
haplotypes characteristic of either of their respective progenitors (as originally proposed by [1]). B. juncea shares
haplotype A:05 with B. rapa, whilst B. carinata and B.
nigra share haplotype B:01. Three haplotypes (A:01, A:06
and C:01) are present amongst B. napus accessions with
A:06 being the most prevalent (75 out of 94 accessions).
This haplotype was also shared by two B. rapa (ssp. ruvo crop type brocoletto) accessions. Haplotype A:06 is not
present in any of the 171 C genome (including B. oleracea
and B. montana) accessions. The A:01 haplotype occurs
primarily in kale and spring oilseed B. napus accessions,
whilst haplotype C:01 is only found in three kale accessions.
AFLP Diversity

Of the six B. nigra control samples tested, four resulted in
an AFLP trace with average peak height >200 rfu. From a
total of 102 bands only three were scored differently
between the four individuals, resulting in an overall fingerprint reproducibility of 97.1%. In total, 83 samples
generated AFLP traces meeting the quality criterion. We
calculated the number of polymorphic bands including
the data from B. nigra (Table 2). The B. nigra samples
contained 8 markers which were monomorphic among
the A and C genome species tested. The two AFLP
primer pairs yielded a total of 102 polymorphic bands
across 83 accessions. B. napus had the highest mean
number of bands per sample at 35.9, compared to B. rapa
and the C genome species.
The PCO analysis based on the DICE similarity metric
where the B. nigra replicates were included revealed that
the first three eigenvalues explained 53.8% of the variation. The PCO plot (Figure 2) shows that the B. napus, B.
rapa and C genome species fall into well defined clusters,
with only two exceptions. We carried out the PCO both
excluding (Figure 2a) and including (Figure 2b) the B.
nigra samples. Omitting the B. nigra samples had the
effect of increasing the resolution of the PCO due to the
relative differences in genetic distance between the A and
C genome species and B genome B. nigra. The C genome

Allender and King BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:54
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/54

Page 4 of 9

Figure 1 NJ tree of AFLP data. Chloroplast halptypes of each accession are indicated. Accessions with the A:06 (common B. napus) chloroplast haplotype are shown in bold and underlined. Numbers at nodes indicate % bootstrap support (out of 100 bootstrap replicates).

Allender and King BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:54
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/54

Page 5 of 9

Table 1: Species tested in this study or in Allender et al. (2007) and the chloroplast haplotypes detected using 6 SSRs.
Species

n

Haplotypes detected

Chloroplast SSR Haplotypes (n)

B. napus

94

3

A:01 (16), A:06 (75), C:01 (3)

B. rapa

88

6

A:01 (46), A:02 (2), A:03 (4), A:04 (15), A:05 (16), A:06 (5)

B. montana

10

7

C:01 (1), C:06 (3), C:19 (1), C:20 (2), C:21 (1), C:22 (1), C:23 (1)

†B. oleracea

106

4

C:01 (102), C:02 (1), C:04 (2), C:11 (1)

B. juncea

4

1

A:05 (4)

B. carinata

4

2

B:01 (2), B:02 (2)

†B. bourgaei

1

1

C:01 (1)

†B. cretica

9

6

C:01 (2), C:05 (3), C:15 (1), C:24 (1), C:26 (1), C:27 (1)

†B. hilarionis

4

2

A:01 (3), C:25 (1)

11

2

C:01 (10), C:03 (1)

4

3

C:17 (2), C:13 (1), C:14 (1)

16

4

C:01 (1), C:08 (12), C:16 (2), C:18 (1)

4

3

C:01 (1), C:08 (2), C:09 (2)

†B. incana
†B. insularis
†B. macrocarpa
†B. rupestris
†B. villosa

13

† Indicates

6

C:01 (1), C:07 (11), C:09 (3), C:10 (1), C:11 (4), C:12 (3)

3

B. nigra

1

B:01 (3)

data taken from Allender et al. (2007)

accessions (comprising several different but closely
related species) are more loosely grouped than both the
B. rapa and B. napus samples, indicating the greater
genetic diversity within the C genome species. The two
accessions falling outside of the species clusters include
one B. rapa ('1' on Figure 2a) sampled from a weedy population located in a B. napus oilseed rape field in the UK,
and an accession ('2') sampled from a spring oilseed B.
napus variety 'Comet'. For both B. rapa and B. napus,
samples with haplotypes more commonly found in other
species are found within the conspecific cluster - they are
not distinguishable by the AFLP analysis.
The neighbour-joining tree we constructed from these
data (Figure 1) clusters accessions into species groups
with relatively high levels of bootstrap support. All B.
rapa accessions group together. All B. napus accessions
(kale, swede and oilseed) also cluster, although there is
very little in the way of internal structure within this
group. The branch lengths in the B. napus group also

appear to be shorter than for other species, indicating less
intra-specific differentiation. This shows that although
more markers are amplified in the B. napus samples,
there is less variability in these markers. The situation is
slightly more complex for the C genome species. Four of
the six B. montana accessions form a well defined group
within the other C genome accessions with 69% bootstrap
support, whilst the other two accessions are distributed
more widely within the C genome group.

Discussion
The chloroplast haplotypes found in B. napus effectively
rule out most of the C genome species from the maternal
lineage of nearly all of the B. napus samples tested. Only
three samples (all kale types) had a haplotype commonly
associated with B. oleracea. A small number of B. napus
samples shared haplotype A:01 with both B. rapa and B.
hilarionis. The most prevalent haplotype in B. napus
(A:06) occurs elsewhere in only a small number of B. rapa

Table 2: AFLP summary statistics for the species groups tested; C genome species include B. oleracea and wild related
species.
Species Group

n

Mean Bands present per
sample

Diversity (H)

C genome

21

26.4

0.191

B. rapa

36

26.6

0.155

B. napus

22

35.9

0.111

B. nigra

(4)

23.2

0.018

Allender and King BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:54
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/54

Page 6 of 9

0.2

B

0.1
0

-0.5

-0.4

-0.3

-0.2

-0.1

A

-0.2

C genome species

B. oleracea and
C genome
species

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

-0.1

0.35
B. napus

0.3

B. napus

-0.4

B. napus (C:01)

B. napus (C:01)
B. napus (A:01)

0.25

C genome species

-0.3

B. napus (A:01)

B. nigra
-0.5

B. oleracea

B.
B. oleracea nigra

B. rapa

-0.6

B. rapa

-0.7

0.2

B. rapa (A:06)

B. rapa (A:06)

0.15
0.1
0.05
0
-0.5

-0.4

-0.3

-0.2

-0.1

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

-0.05

B. rapa

-0.1

2

-0.15

1
B. napus

-0.2

Figure 2 Plot of first and second eigenvalues of the AFLP data. Species clusters are identified along with samples with an atypical chloroplast
haplotype. A - without B. nigra sample, B - with B. nigra sample to show the relative separation of the species clusters.

samples. Three of these A:06 B. rapa accessions are from
the UK and were collected from wild or weedy populations occurring within or alongside B. napus oilseed rape
fields. The remaining two samples are 'brocoletto' types
from Italy. There are two explanations for the co-occurrence of A:06 in B. rapa and B. napus. One is that the
original donor of A:06 was not sampled in this study, and
that any occurrence of A:06 in B. rapa is the result of
recent or historical introgression from B. napus into B.
rapa. An introgressed origin of the A:06 chloroplast is
suggested as this haplotype is more common in UK populations which exist in close proximity to oilseed rape [18].
Additionally, B. napus was historically grown very widely
in the UK in the 19th Century as a fodder crop (swedes
and turnips occupied at least 598 k ha in England in 1881;
[19]), providing further opportunity for introgression.
We sampled most of the geographical and morphological diversity of B. rapa. Outside of the UK, haplotype
A:06 only occurred in two of the eight brocoletto accessions tested. The AFLP analysis shows that these accessions are not recent hybrids with B. napus or B. oleracea
since they cluster as expected with the rest of the B. rapa

samples in the PCO plot and the NJ tree (figures 1 and 2).
The AFLP analysis is sensitive to inter-specific hybrids as
demonstrated by the single weedy B. rapa individual ('1'
on Figure 2a - chloroplast haplotype A:04) which falls
between the B. rapa and B. napus clusters in the PCO
plot. We tested this B. rapa sample further with three
nuclear CAPS (cleaved amplified polymorphic sequence)
markers and three nuclear SSRs. These markers revealed
the presence of both A and C genome alleles (data not
shown). Interestingly, the three UK wild/weedy individuals with the A:06 haplotype do not have C genome markers as tested by the AFLPs. They also cluster with the rest
of the B. rapa accessions. We conclude that either the
introgression event must have been followed by many
generations of back crossing to B. rapa, or that the C
genome fragments were lost rapidly within a few generations.
The relatively recent origin of B. napus as a species is
supported by the reduced diversity as determined by
Nei's measure of gene diversity within B. napus, compared to the A and C genome ancestral genepools. It is
difficult at present to be certain whether the original

Allender and King BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:54
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/54

hybridisation event(s) involved more than one chloroplast haplotype. However, multiple hybridisation events
are indicated by the presence of three different cytoplasms among the B. napus samples tested. Again, this
could alternately be explained by post-speciation introgression. This is indeed the case for some spring oilseed
types and fodder rape types where B. rapa and B. oleracea
are documented to have been used in B. napus breeding
programmes [3,20]. A:01 and C:01 haplotypes also occur
in non-oilseed B. napus crop types, namely rape kales and
fodder kales, where crop improvement programmes may
also at least be responsible in part for their presence.
However, only two accessions of these kale and fodder
types with A:01 or C:01 chloroplasts are classed as
'advanced cultivars' (i.e. resulting from a formal modern
crop improvement programme). The remainder are 'traditional varieties or landraces' so are less likely to have
been developed from deliberate inter-specific crossing.
As with B. rapa, the AFLP analysis does not differentiate
between the different cytoplasmic types of B. napus, with
a single exception. A sample from the spring oilseed variety 'Comet' (A:01 haplotype) falls outside of the well
defined cluster of B. napus samples, and in fact groups
within the C genome cluster. The reasons for this are
unclear and further testing would be required for confirmation of this result. The presence of haplotype A:01 in
B. hilarionis as reported by [12] is intriguing and may
shed light on the common ancestry of A and C genome
species. Although it is possible that B. hilarionis represents a source of the A:01 chloroplast in B. napus this is
unlikely since B. hilarionis is endemic to Cyprus.
The B. nigra sample included in the AFLP analysis provided both an outgroup for clustering analysis and a control. Overall reproducibility of the five replicates was
97.1% as only three bands out of a total of 102 were
scored differently. The chloroplast haplotype (B:01)
found in the three different B. nigra accessions is very distinct from those found in the A or the C genome, and the
PCO analysis of AFLP data shows that the other Brassica
samples tested are more similar to each other than they
are to B. nigra. This in agreement with the findings of
[21], in their investigation of the phylogeny of the Brassicaceae.
The tree constructed from the AFLP data shows good
discrimination between B. napus, the C genome species,
and B. rapa. However, intra-specific relationships remain
mostly unclear. This is probably due to the relatively low
marker to sample ratio (102:83). Future studies may
improve resolution through the use of massively parallel
sequencing technologies rather than the anonymous
markers produced using AFLP. However, intra-specific
relationships were not the primary focus of this study,
and the PCO and NJ tree clearly indicate that intra-spe-

Page 7 of 9

cific cytoplasmic differences are not always associated
with whole genome diversity.
In contrast with [8], we did not find that any of the ten
B. montana accessions tested shared a chloroplast haplotype with B. napus. We were not able to test exactly the
same accession used by Song and Osborn as no further
seed was available. A further 'B. montana' accession (not
the same as that used by Song and Osborn) was originally
included in our study. However subsequent taxonomic
verification based on plant morphology revealed it to be
incorrectly identified, and indeed it was very similar in
appearance to B. napus. The AFLP data for this accession
also indicated it was B. napus. Even though none of our B.
montana accessions shared the A:06 chloroplast haplotype with B. napus, three of them did possess the next
most closely related haplotype (C:06 - see [12]). It is possible that the RFLP markers used by [8] did not distinguish between these chloroplast genomes.
The B. oleracea chloroplast type has been detected previously in another B. napus accession, 'New Zealand
Rawara' and this was proposed as further evidence to
support a polyphyletic origin for B. napus [8]. We tested
the ploidy level of one individual of this accession using
flow cytometry, and discovered that it was in fact B. oleracea. However, three other verified B. napus samples in
our study did contain the C:01 chloroplast common in B.
oleracea. We did not find more than one of the B. rapa
chloroplast haplotypes in B. napus, unlike [8] who
detected two. Our sampling strategy was based on maximising the coverage of the A and C genome genepools by
only testing one individual per accession. As with material derived from most ex situ genetic resource collections, many of the accessions are sampled from wild
populations, local selections and open-pollinated varieties, and as such one would expect a degree of variation
within accessions. In addition to cases of mis-identification as demonstrated above, there is always potential for
apparent differences between studies to result from
within-accession variation arising either from natural
diversity or contamination of seed lots. We minimised
these factors through using either ploidy analysis or by
visual taxonomic confirmation of plants. Confirmation of
the taxomomy of accessions will be facilitated in future by
the ongoing efforts in genetic resource collections to provide online visual records of mature plants.
Multiple hybridisation events consistent with a polyphyletic origin were also indicated by the results of [9]
who found that a sample of B. napus 'asparagus kale' differed in RFLP profile from other B. napus tested, suggesting an additional diploid parental genotype. We also
found that five out of the six asparagus kale accessions in
our study had the A:01 chloroplast haplotype typical of B.
rapa. Most of these are traditional varieties and unlikely
to have been selected through formal crop improvement.

Allender and King BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:54
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/54

Page 8 of 9

Such evidence suggests that B. napus may indeed have
multiple origins. In addition, [9] also found that a B. rapa
accession ('spring broccoli raab' - another name for the
brocoletto crop type) shared a unique marker with the
majority of B. napus samples in their study. This marker
was absent from all other potential diploid progenitors,
including B. oleracea. Interestingly, the spring broccoli
raab sample tested was the only B. rapa to possess markers more commonly associated with the C genome. The
authors suggest that the presence of (presumably introgressed) C genome fragments may have facilitated the
inter-specific hybridisation which lead to the formation
of a stable B. napus.
A recent study also based on chloroplast SSRs did not
find any haplotypes in common between B. napus, B.
oleracea and B. rapa [11]. Five varieties of B. napus were
tested using nine SSRs and the authors detected eleven
unique haplotypes, indicating that their nine markers
detected a much higher level of intra-accession diversity
than our six. Since the B. napus haplotypes were much
more similar to those found in B. rapa than B. oleracea,
the authors suggested that B. rapa was a much more
likely maternal progenitor for B. napus than B. oleracea.
This supports the findings of our study. However, as the
authors indicated, SSR markers mutate at a relatively high
rate, leading to the possibility of homoplasy and parallel
origins of allele size. This, in addition to the hybridized
origins of a significant portion of Brassica breeding material means that chloroplast SSRs alone may not provide
sufficient information for conclusions to be drawn on
maternal ancestry.
Artificial (re-synthesised) B. napus is known to
undergo a relatively high frequency (compared to natural
B. napus) of genomic rearrangements, including nonreciprocal translocations, due to pairing between homeologous chromosomes at meiosis [5]. Evidence has accumulated through several studies that a genetic factor
regulating chromosome pairing is present in B. napus
[22]. Control of chromosome pairing is required in order
prevent the formation of unbalanced gametes and aneuploid progenies which reduced fertility. Identification of
the closest extant relatives of the original A and C
genome genotypes involved in the initial hybridisations
leading to B. napus should allow closer investigations of
these mechanisms and enable the resynthesis of a more
meiotically stable artificial B. napus.

tors may have occurred. However, the use of inter-specific hybrids (and re-synthesised B. napus) in modern
crop improvement programmes is most likely responsible
for some of the observed diversity. Natural post-speciation introgression (or chloroplast capture) is also a possibility since B. napus (A:06) chloroplasts are observed at a
frequency of 0.12 in some B. rapa populations sympatric
with oilseed rape fields [18]. B. napus samples with 'atypical' cytoplasm are not usually distinguishable from those
harbouring the prevalent chloroplast haplotype in terms
of nuclear genome diversity. Our results are consistent
with those of [9] who suggested that B. rapa 'spring broccoli raab' may be the closest extant relative of the maternal ancestor of B. napus. Our study based on chloroplast
haplotypes and 102 AFLP markers provides further support to their inference, based on 38 nuclear and 6 chloroplast RFLP probes, since the prevalent B. napus
haplotype was also found in two additional accessions of
the same crop type.
Given that no truly wild populations of B. napus have
been documented, it seems reasonable to suggest that the
initial hybridisations must have occurred in a cultivated
context rather than a wild setting [6]. If the A:06 chloroplast haplotype detected in the two brocoletto accessions
is not the result of chloroplast capture, then it is possible
to envisage hybridisation occurring between brocoletto
and B. oleracea crops growing in the same location. The
brocoletto crop type originates from southern Italy, and a
similar crop is also grown in Portugal. In both of these
areas, it is highly likely that brocoletto would have been
cultivated alongside B. oleracea crops such as kales, cabbages and broccolis, providing the necessary opportunities for inter-specific crosses to occur. Further work on
the genetic diversity of the brocoletto crop type is
required to verify such speculation.
Future genetic improvement of B. napus crops (e.g.
focusing on abiotic stress tolerance, pest and disease
resistance and other yield increases) will depend to a
large degree on utilising the diversity present within the
ancestral A and C genepools. It is clear that hybridisation
between B. rapa and B. oleracea is very rare in nature,
and knowing which genotypes of the parental species
were involved will allow a greater understanding of the
mechanisms and genetic factors controlling the creation
of stable amphiploids, and this will facilitate the incorporation of novel alleles from the wider Brassica genepool.

Conclusions
Our study indicates that it is highly unlikely that B. oleracea or any of the C genome species are closely related to
the maternal progenitor of most B. napus accessions. The
detection of two other chloroplast SSR haplotypes at low
frequencies in B. napus does suggest that multiple
hybridisation events involving different maternal ances-

Authors' Information
Charlotte Allender is the Assistant Manager of the
Genetic Resources Unit at Warwick HRI which maintains
globally significant vegetable seed collections. Her
research interests centre on the processes and partitioning of genetic diversity in crops and their wild relatives.
Graham King has wide experience of quantitative genet-

Allender and King BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:54
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/54

ics underlying crop trait improvement. His group at
Rothamsted Research are involved in comparative
genomics, epigenetics and developmental biology with a
focus on seed development of oilseed brassicas. He leads
the UK Oilseed Rape Genetic Improvement Network and
his group host the http://www.brassica.info website.

Additional material
Additional file 1 Table S1. Details of the samples and accessions used in
this study. 'ID' is a unique identifier for each sample, a * in the second column indicates data have been taken from [12]. The samples included in the
AFLP analysis are identified.
Additional file 2 Table S2. Allelic constitution of the new chloroplast haplotypes detected in this study using the 6 chloroplast SSRs as well as those
detected in samples used for the AFLP analysis

Page 9 of 9

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.
15.

Authors' contributions
CJA conceived of the study, carried out the molecular marker work, analysed
the data and drafted the manuscript. GJK provided intellectual input and assistance with drafting the manuscript. Both authors have read and approved the
final manuscript.
Acknowledgements
This work was funded by the UK Biotechnology & Biological Sciences Research
Council, the Natural Environment Research Council, the Department for the
Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra), and by the University of Warwick.
We are grateful to Joel Allainguillaume and Pippa Bell for providing DNA of
wild and weedy B. rapa. Seeds were kindly provided by the Warwick HRI
Genetic Resources Unit (UK), The Center for Genetic Resources (The Netherlands), The Nordic Genebank, The Institute of Plant Genetics and Crop Plant
Research (Germany), the Research Institute of Crop Production (Czech Republic), the National Plant Germplasm System (USA) and the N.I. Vavilov All-Russian
Scientific Research Institute of Plant Industry.
Author Details
1Warwick HRI, University of Warwick, Wellesbourne, Warwick, CV35 9EF, UK and
2Rothamsted Research, Harpenden, Hertfordshire, AL5 2JQ, UK

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.
21.

22.
Received: 2 September 2009 Accepted: 29 March 2010
Published: 29 March 2010

Song KM, Osborn TC, Williams PH: Brassica taxonomy based on nuclear
restriction fragment length polymorphisms (RFLPs). Theor Appl Genet
1988, 75:784-794.
Palmer JD, Shields CR, Cohen DB, Orton TJ: Chloroplast DNA evolution
and the origin of amphiploid Brassica species. Theor Appl Genet 1983,
65:181-189.
Flannery ML, Mitchell FJG, Coyne S, Kavanagh TA, Burke JI, Salamin N,
Dowding P, Hodkinson TR: Plastid genome characterisation in Brassica
and Brassicaseae using a new set of nine SSRs. Theor Appl Genet 2006,
113:1221-31.
Allender CJ, Allainguillaume J, Lynn J, King GJ: SSRs reveal uneven
distribution of genetic diversity in chloroplast genomes of Brassica
oleracea L. and (n = 9) wild relatives. Theor Appl Genet 2007,
114:609-618.
Vos P, Hogers R, Bleeker M, Reijans M, Vandelee T, Hornes M, Frijters A, Pot
J, Peleman J, Kuiper M, Zabeau M: AFLP - A New Technique For DnaFingerprinting. Nuc Acid Res 1995, 23:4407.
Nei M: Analysis of gene diversity in subdivided populations. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 1973, 70:3321-3323.
Vekemans X, Beauwens T, Lemaire M, Roldan-Ruiz I: Data from amplified
fragment length polymorphism (AFLP) markers show indication of size
homoplasy and of a relationship between degree of homoplasy and
fragment size. Mol Ecol 2002, 11:139-151.
Link W, Dixens C, Singh M, Schwall M, Melchinger AE: Genetic diversity in
European and Mediterranean faba bean germ plasm revealed by RAPD
markers. Theor Appl Genet 1995, 90:27-32.
Peer Y Van de, De Wachter RL: TREECON for Windows: a software
package for the construction and drawing of evolutionary trees for the
Microsoft Windows environment. Comput Applic Biosci 1994,
10:569-570.
Allainguillaume J, Harwood T, Ford CS, Cuccato G, Norris C, Allender CJ,
Welters R, King GJ, Wilkinson MJ: Rapeseed cytoplasm gives advantage
in wild relatives and complicates genetically modified crop
biocontainment. New Phytol 2009, 183:1201-1211.
Board of Agriculture: (British Parliamentary Paper). Agricultural Returns
of Great Britain. Defra (1900) Agricultural & Horticultural Census: June
1900 for England; 1882.
Olsson G, Moore K, Åkerberg E, (eds): Svalöf 1886-1986: Research and
Results in Plant Breeding LTS Förlag, Stockholm; 1986.
Warwick SI, Black LD: Molecular systematics of Brassica and allied
genera (subtribe Brassicinae, Brassiceae) - chloroplast genome and
cytodeme congruence. Theor Appl Genet 1991, 82:81-92.
Jenczewski E, Alix K: From Diploids to Allopolyploids: The Emergence of
Efficient Pairing Control Genes in Plants. Critical Reviews in Plant Sciences
2004, 23:21-45.

© 2010 Allender and King; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
This is an Open Access from: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/54
BMC articleBiology 2010, 10:54distributed under the terms
Plant is available article

References
1. Food and Agriculture Organisation StatisticalDatabase FAOSTAT
[http://faostat.fao.org/]
2. Nagaharu U: Genome analysis in Brassica with special reference to the
experimental formation of B. napus and peculiar mode of fertilisation.
Jap J Bot 1935, 7:389-452.
3. Olsson G: Species crosses within the genus Brassica. II. Artificial Brassica
napus L. Hereditas 1960, 46:351-86.
4. Ozminkowski RH, Jourdan P: Comparing the resynthesis of Brassica
napus by interspecific somatic and sexual hybridisation. 1. Producing
and identifying hybrids. J Am Soc Hort Sci 1994, 119:808-815.
5. Parkin IAP, Sharpe AG, Keith DJ, Lydiate DJ: Identification of the A and C
genomes of amphidiploid Brassica napus (oilseed rape). Genome 1995,
38:1122-1131.
6. Gómez-Campo C, Prakash S: Origin and domestication. In Biology of
Brassica Coenospecies Edited by: Gomez-Campo C. Elsevier, Amsterdam;
1999:33-58.
7. Erickson LR, Straus NA, Beversdorf WD: Restriction patterns reveal origins
of chloroplast genomes in Brassica amphiploids. Theor Appl Genet 1983,
65:201-206.
8. Song KM, Osborn TC: Polyphyletic origins of Brassica napus: new
evidence based on nuclear and RFLP organelle analysis. Genome 1992,
35:992-1001.

doi: 10.1186/1471-2229-10-54
Cite this article as: Allender and King, Origins of the amphiploid species
Brassica napus L. investigated by chloroplast and nuclear molecular markers
BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:54

</pre>
</body>
</html>
