<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Meeting program</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Allergy, Asthma & Clinical Immunology 2006 2:1. doi:10.1186/1710-1492-2-4-1"/>
<meta name="Author" content=" "/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Allergy, Asthma & Clinical Immunology 2006, 2:1
http://www.aacijournal.com/content/2/4/1

ALLERGY, ASTHMA & CLINICAL
IMMUNOLOGY

MEETING ABSTRACTS

Open Access

Meeting program
Meeting Program

Thursday, October 26, 2006

Canadian Society Of Allergy And Clinical Immunology
Annual Scientific Meeting October 26 To 29, 2006 Final
Program Target Audience

0900-1700 CSACI/ALLERGEN TRAINEE DAY
Chairs: Drs. Judah Denburg and Kent HayGlass
THIS SESSION WILL BE HELD AT THE INTERCONTINENTAL HOTEL
360 Rue St-Antoine Ouest - RoomSaint-Jacques - 3rd
Floor
0745-0845 Breakfast - Saint-JacquesFoyer
0845-0900 Welcome
Dr. Kent HayGlass, Chair, CAIDATI, University of
Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB
0900-0930 Keynote Presentation: “Immunology
Platform of the Allergen Birth Cohort”
Dr. Mike Cyr, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON
0930-0940 Q and A
0940-1025 Trainee Oral Presentations
1040-1130 Break and Poster Viewing
1130-1245 Trainee Oral Presentations
1300-1400 Luncheon -Saint-JacquesFoyer
1400-1430 Keynote Presentation:“Epigenetics: What’s
the Buzz?”
Dr. Ruey Su, Post-doctoral Fellow, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB
1430-1440 Q and A
1440-1540 Trainee Oral Presentations
1555-1645 Poster Viewing Reception - SaintJacquesFoyer
1645-1700 Poster Awards and Adjournment
ALL OTHER SESSIONS WILL BE HELD AT THE
FAIRMONT THE QUEEN ELIZABETH HOTEL
1200-1300 LUNCHEON - Mackenzie
1300-1600 NON-PROFIT SUMMIT (Closed) Mackenzie
Chair: Dr. Eric Leith
1600-2000 REGISTRATION - Mezzanine
1615-1750 CAAIF BOARD OF DIRECTORS
MEETING (Closed) - Mackenzie
1800-2100 CSACI BOARD OF DIRECTORS
MEETING (Closed) - Mackenzie
1830-2100 NATIONAL RESIDENT EDUCATIONAL
PROGRAM (NREP) DINNER AND MEETING
(Closed) Matapedia
Chairs: Drs. Sean Mace and Per Lidman

The Canadian Society of Allergy and Clinical Immunology (CSACI) Annual Meeting is designed for clinicians,
researchers, trainees/students, and allied health professionals involved and/or interested in the study of allergy,
asthma, and immunology.
Objectives

Upon completion of the Annual Meeting, participants
should be able to discuss the latest advances in the
research, diagnosis, and treatment of allergic and immunologic disease.
Please refer to the individual session descriptions in this
program for additional, more detailed learning objectives.
Maintenance of Certification - Maintien Du Certificat

This event is an Accredited Group Learning Activity
(Section 1) as defined by the Maintenance of Certification program of The Royal College of Physicians and
Surgeons of Canada.
As an accredited provider, the Canadian Society of
Allergy and Clinical Immunology has approved this
program.
La présente activité constitue une activité de formation
collective agréée conformément è la définition précisée
dans le programme de Maintien du certificat du Collàge
royal des médecins et chirurgiens du Canada.
En tant que prestataire agréé, la société canadienne de
l’allergie et l’immunologie clinique a approuvé ce
programme.
Accredited Group Learning Activity (Section 1) Activités
De Formation Collective Agréées (Section 1)

The Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of
Canada has contributed to the sponsorship of this meeting through a National Specialty Society Annual Meeting Grant.
Le Collàge royal des médecins et chirurgiens du
Canada commandite la présente réunion par l’octroi
d’une Subvention pour la réunion annuelle d’associations
nationales de spécialistes.

Allergy, Asthma & Clinical Immunology 2006, 2:1
http://www.aacijournal.com/content/2/4/1

Friday, October 27, 2006

0700-1630 REGISTRATION - Mezzanine
0715-0830 PLENARY BREAKFAST SYMPOSIUM* Marquette/Jolliet
Sponsored by Novartis Pharmaceuticals Canada
Inc.
Topic: Severe Asthma: Pathophysiology and
Management
Speaker: Dr. Robert Schellenberg, UBC Pulmonary
Research Lab, Vancouver, BC
Chair: Dr. Allan Becker
0800-1600 VISIT EXHIBITS - Hochelaga 1-3
0830-0840 OPENING REMARKS BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE CSACI - Grand Salon
Dr. Susan Waserman
0840-1010 PLENARY SESSION I - FOOD
ALLERGY - Grand Salon
Chairs: Drs. Susan Waserman and Zave Chad
0840-0910
Speaker: Dr. Scott Sicherer, Jaffe Food Allergy Institute, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY
Topic: Peanut Allergy: New Insights with Practical
Implications for Diagnosis and Management
Objectives:
• To understand new epidemiologic features of peanut allergy
• To apply current research findings to the diagnosis,
prevention, and treatment of peanut allergy
• To understand current approaches toward
improved therapy of peanut allergy
0910-0940 Speaker: Dr. Deena Mandell, Wilfrid Laurier University, Waterloo, ON
Topic: “Anaphylaxis How Do They Live with It?
“Objectives:
• To present the perspective of families on the challenges of living with anaphylaxis
• To identify what families find most and least helpful for managing safety
• To help physicians understand how they can help
families manage issues of safety
0940-1000 Speaker: Dr. Shideh Mofidi, Jaffe Food
Allergy Institute, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New
York, NY
Topic: Nutritional Management of Food Allergies
Objectives:
• To identify practical approaches to food allergen
avoidance and to recognize the role of diet in the
treatment of food allergy

Page 2 of 31

• To understand the impact of food allergen avoidance on growth and nutritional adequacy of the diet
• To review basic principles of feeding in infants and
children with food allergies
1000-1010 Discussion Period
0900-1000 NREP SESSION - Hochelaga 4
1010-1030 REFRESHMENT BREAK AMONG THE
EXHIBITORS - Hochelaga 1-3
1030-1200 PRIMARY CARE/ALLIED HEALTH
SYMPOSIUM - St-Maurice
SLEEP DISORDERS - THE TROJAN HORSE OF
ATOPY
Chairs: Ms. J. Gillespie and Dr. Charles Frankish
1030-1055 Speaker: Dr. Robert Brouillette, Montréal
Children’s Hospital, Montréal, QC
Topic: Sleep Disorders in the Pediatric Population
Where It Starts and Should Stop!
Objectives:
• To recognize sleep disorders in children using easily
accessible diagnostic tools
• To understand causes of and treatment options for
sleep disorders and to be aware of outcomes in
untreated pediatric sleep disorders
• To understand the immunologic aspects of sleep
disorders
1055-1120 Speaker: Dr. John Kimoff, Royal Victoria
Hospital, Montréal, QC
Topic: Snoring in Adulthood: Much More than a
Lousy Bed Partner
Objectives:
• To recognize and assess adults with sleep disorders
using easily accessible diagnostic tools
• To understand the importance of diagnosis of sleep
disorders and to be aware of treatment options
• To recognize how sleep disorders affect the immune
system
1120-1145 Speaker: Dr. Najib Ayas, Vancouver General Hospital, Vancouver, BC
Topic: The Public Health and Economic Impact of
Sleep Apnea
Objectives:
• To understand the public health and economic
implications of sleep apnea
• To understand the cost-effectiveness of therapy for
sleep apnea
1145-1200 Panel Discussion

Allergy, Asthma & Clinical Immunology 2006, 2:1
http://www.aacijournal.com/content/2/4/1

Page 3 of 31

1030-1225 THE JEFFREY MODELL CANADIAN
IMMUNODEFICIENCY NETWORK SYMPOSIUM Grand Salon
Chair: Dr. Bruce Mazer
1030-1040 Speaker: Dr. Adelle Atkinson, The Hospital
for Sick Children, Toronto, ON
Topic: Overview of the Network and Its Goals
1040-1110 Speaker: Dr. Elie Haddad, Hôpital Sainte
Justine, Montréal, QC
Topic: “Wiskott-Aldrich Syndrome: A Disease of the
Cytoskeleton. What Does It Mean?”
Objectives:

“Advances in Autoimmune Diseases, Allergy, and
Immune Regulation”
Chairs: Drs. Judah Denburg and Dean Befus
1330-1410 Speaker: Dr. John Gordon, University of
Saskatchewan. Saskatoon, SK
Topic: “Tolerogenic Dendritic Cells as a Therapeutic
Tool in Allergy”
Objectives:

• To describe the role of Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome
protein (WASP) in the rearrangement of the
cytoskeleton
• To understand the role of the cytoskeleton in the
homeostasis of the immune system
• To understand how abnormal or absent WASP
may induce the biological and clinical WiskottAldrich Syndrome phenotype

1410-1420 Discussion Period
1420-1500 Speaker: Dr. Kelly McNagny, University of
British Columbia, Vancouver, BC
Topic: “Stem Cells and Allergies”
Objectives:

1110-1140 Speaker: Dr. Stuart Turvey, BC Children’s
Hospital, Vancouver, BC
Topic: “Clinical Application of Molecular Testing for
Primary Immune Deficiency”
Objectives:
• To understand the presentation of primary immune
deficiency
• To understand the diagnostic strategies in primary
immune deficiency
• To appreciate the benefits of molecular diagnosis in
primary immune deficiency
1140-1210 Speaker: Dr. Christine McCusker, Montréal
Children’s Hospital, Montréal, QC
Topic: “Home Immune Globulin Therapies”
Objectives:
• To describe implementation of home therapy
• To discuss its advantages and disadvantages
• To define available treatment options
1210-1225 Discussion Period
1215-1330 LUNCHEON SYMPOSIUM* - Marquette/
Jolliet
Sponsored by GlaxoSmithKline
Speaker: Dr. Frederick Hargreave, Firestone Institute of Respiratory Health, Hamilton, ON
Topic: “Using Sputum or NO to Guide Treatment
of Airway Inflammation”
Chair: Dr. Richard Warrington
1330-1515 PLENARY SESSION II - Grand Salon

• To review immune regulation in asthma
• To understand the potential for immunologic tolerization of asthma pathophysiology

• Role of mast cell and eosinophil trafficking in autoimmune diseases
• Role of CD34 in mast cell and eosinophil function
• Role of CD34 proteins in cell fats
1500-1515 Discussion Period
1515-1530 REFRESHMENT BREAK AMONG THE
EXHIBITORS - Hochelaga 1-3
1530-1700 PLENARY SESSION II - continued Grand Salon
1530-1610 Speaker: Dr. Kathy Siminovitch, Mount
Sinai Hospital, Toronto, ON
Topic: “Molecular Cascades and Cell Signaling in
Autoimmunity”
Objectives:
• To outline major strategies for identifying gene variants underlying common diseases
• To describe advances in the genetic dissection of
several common autoimmune diseases
• To demonstrate the utility of genetic data in unraveling the molecular pathophysiology of autoimmune
disease
1610-1650 Speaker: Dr. Robert Inman, Toronto Western Hospital, Toronto, ON
Topic: “Recent Advances in Mechanisms and Therapeutic Interventions in Spondyloarthritis”
Objectives:
• To understand the new concepts in microbes and
arthritis
• To update new therapies for spondyloarthritis
1650-1700 Discussion Period

Allergy, Asthma & Clinical Immunology 2006, 2:1
http://www.aacijournal.com/content/2/4/1

1700-1730 NREP SESSION - Saguenay
1700-1800 RCPSC ALLERGY AND CLINICAL
IMMUNOLOGY SPECIALTY COMMITTEE MEETING (Closed) - Matapedia
Chair: Dr. Donald Stark
CAAIF FUNDRAISING DINNER AND SILENT
AUCTION
Le Windsor - Versailles/Windsor Ballrooms
1900-2400
Saturday, October 28, 2006

0700-1430 REGISTRATION - Mezzanine
0800-1430 VISIT EXHIBITS - Hochelaga 1-3
0815-0930 PLENARY BREAKFAST SYMPOSIUM* Marquette/Jolliet
Sponsored by Schering Canada
Speaker: Dr. Philippe Devillier, Hôpital Foch, Suresnes, France
Topic: Comparative Pharmacologic Profiles of
Antihistamines
Chair: Dr. Eric Leith
0930-1030 INTEREST SECTION BREAKOUT SESSIONS (Please check at the on-site CSACI registration
desk for room assignments)
ALLIED HEALTH “CSI MONTRÉAL”
Chairs: Ms. J. Gillespie and Dr. Michael Mandl
Discussion of the clinical, scientific, and investigation/
management of active case files in cases submitted by
the membership.
ASTHMA
Chair: Dr. Harold Kim
ANAPHYLAXIS
Chair: Dr. David Fischer
IMMUNOLOGY
Chair: Dr. Bruce Mazer
PEDIATRICS
Chair: Dr. Timothy Vander Leek
RHINOSINUSITIS
Chair: Dr. Paul Keith
1030-1100 REFRESHMENT BREAK AMONG THE
EXHIBITORS - Hochelaga 1-3
1100-1130 ANNUAL GENERAL MEEETING CSACI (MEMBERS ONLY) - Grand Salon
Chairs: Drs. Susan Waserman and Richard Warrington
1130-1200 ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING - CAAIF
(MEMBERS ONLY) - Grand Salon
Chairs: Drs. Eric Leith and Allan Becker
1215-1330 PLENARY LUNCHEON SYMPOSIUM* Marquette/Jolliet
Sponsored by AstraZeneca
Pro-Con Debate
Dr. Charles Chan, University Health Network,
Toronto, ON

Page 4 of 31

Dr. Pierre Ernst, McGill University Health Centre,
Montréal, QC
Topic: Timely Escalation of Maintenance Therapy
Will Achieve Better Asthma Outcomes
Chair: Dr. Susan Waserman
FREE AFTERNOON
1415-1515 CSACI JOURNAL MEETING (closed)
(Room to be confirmed)
1730-1930 LIBATION AMONGST THE POSTERS
- Grand Salon
Chairs: Drs. Dean Befus, Richard Warrington, Kent
HayGlass, and Stuart Carr
CSACI ANNUAL DINNER AND
AWARDS PRESENTATION
1930-2200
Marquette/Jolliet
1930 DINNER
2100 AWARDS PRESENTATION
Sunday, October 29, 2006

0730-1100 VISIT EXHIBITS - Hochelaga 1-3
0730-0900 PLENARY BREAKFAST SYMPOSIUM*
- Marquette/Jolliet
Sponsored by Merck Frosst Canada Inc.
Speaker: Dr. Keith Payton, London Health Sciences
Centre, London, ON
Topic: The Role of Rhinitis in Asthma
Chair: Dr. Robert Schellenberg
0900-1030 PLENARY SESSION III - OCCUPATIONAL ALLERGY SYMPOSIUM
Grand Salon
Chairs: Drs. Eric Leith and Charles Frankish
0900-0940 Speaker: Dr. Catherine Lemiàre, Hôpital du
Sacré-Coeur, Montréal, QC
Topic: Airway Inflammation and Occupational
Asthma: Insight from Induced Sputum
Objectives:
• To be aware of the type of airway inflammation
seen in occupational asthma
• To understand the importance of assessing airway
inflammation in the investigation of occupational
asthma
• To be able to recognize occupational eosinophilic
bronchitis
0940-1020 Speaker: Dr. André Cartier, Hôpital du
Sacré-Cour, Montréal, QC
Topic: “Update of Clinical Aspects of Occupational
Lung Diseases”
Objectives:
• To provide update on new etiologies of occupational
asthma

Allergy, Asthma & Clinical Immunology 2006, 2:1
http://www.aacijournal.com/content/2/4/1

• To provide update on risk factors for occupational
asthma
• To provide update on the investigation of occupational asthma
1020-1030 Discussion Period
1030-1100 REFRESHMENT BREAK AMONG THE
EXHIBITORS - Hochelaga 1-3
1100-1230 PLENARY SESSION III - continued Grand Salon
1100-1140 Speaker: Dr. Denis Sasseville, Royal Victoria Hospital, Montréal, QC
Topic: “Occupational Skin Diseases”
Objectives:
• To recognize irritant and allergic occupational contact dermatitis
• To develop a systematic approach to diagnosis
• To understand the principles and techniques of
patch testing in contact dermatitis
1140-1220 Speaker: Dr. J. David Miller, Carleton University, Ottawa, ON
Topic: “Population Health Aspects of Mould in NonIndustrial Workplaces and Residences”
Objectives:
• To provide an explanation of the advice from
Health Canada on mould and health
• To review areas of consensus on the population
health effects of mould between Health Canada, the
World Health Organization, and the US National
Academy of Sciences panel reports on asthma (2000)
and building dampness and health (2004)
1220-1230 Discussion Period
1230-1245 CLOSING REMARKS BY CSACI PRESIDENT - Grand Salon
Dr. Charles Frankish
Note: Program is subject to change
*Breakfast and luncheon symposia are nonaccredited sessions
Mission Statement

The mission of the Canadian Society of Allergy and
Clinical Immunology is the advancement of the knowledge and practice of allergy, clinical immunology, and
asthma for optimal patient care. The Society is also
dedicated to improving the quality of life of people with
allergies through research, advocacy, and continued professional and public education.
CPD COMMITTEE
Dr. Charles Frankish (Chair)
Dr. Zave Chad

Page 5 of 31

Dr. Keith Payton
Dr. Susan Waserman
Annual Scientific Program Committee 2005

Dr. Robert Schellenberg (Chair)
Dr. Susan Waserman
Dr. Allan Becker
Dr. Dean Befus
Dr. Zave Chad
Dr. Judah Denburg
Dr. Charles Frankish
Ms. Jo-Anna Gillespie
Dr. Kent T. HayGlass
Dr. Redwan Moqbel
Dr. Richard John Warrington

2007 Csaci Annual Scientific Meeting Edmonton,
Alberta September 27TH To 30TH, 2007
Edmonton Festival City
Check out our Web site for future developments
2006 Awards Recipients

• Bram Rose Memorial Lectureship - Dr. Scott
Sicherer
• David McCourtie Memorial Lectureship Dr. André Cartier
• CSACI Award for Research in Immunology Dr. Kathy Siminovitch
• The Jerry Dolovich Award - Dr. Zave Chad
• The Royal College Speaker - Dr. Robert Inman

The Csaci and Caaif Gratefully Acknowledge the
Following Companies For Their Generous
Support: Platinum Sponsors
ALTANA PHARMA
ASTRAZENECA
GLAXOSMITHKLINE
MERCK FROSST
NOVARTIS
Gold Sponsors
SCHERING CANADA INC.
Silver Sponsors
TALECRIS BIOTHERAPEUTICS
Bronze Sponsor
ROSS LABORATORIES
Article Categories:
○ Annual Scientific Meeting
Allergy, Asthma, and Clinical Immunology
Volume 02, Issue 04, December 2006, Pages 138-163
Annual Scientific Meeting

Allergy, Asthma & Clinical Immunology 2006, 2:1
http://www.aacijournal.com/content/2/4/1

Meeting Abstracts
Annual Scientific Meeting, Montreal, October 26-29, 2006
Digital Ischemia Related to Gemcitabine

R. Khouqeer, M. Almarzouqi, M. Baron
Introduction: We present the occurrence of gemcitabine-induced digital ischemia in a 73-year-old female
with a history of breast cancer metastatic to the peritoneum and the lung. She presented with painful purple fingers after 10 days of her second cycle of
gemcitabine. She had no prior history of Raynaud’s or
any vascular diseases. Case Report: A 73-year-old
female was diagnosed with breast cancer in May of
1992, for which she was treated with adjuvant chemotherapy (cyclophosphamide and Adriamycin), radiation, and then surgical resection. In addition to that
she received tamoxifen for 5 years. However, in the
autumn of 2000, she was diagnosed with infiltrating
adenocarcinoma carcinoma of the omentum consistent
with metastases from the breast and therefore was
placed back on tamoxifen. She failed this therapy, as
evidenced by recurrent ascites, and she was started on
navelbine for a total of eight cycles, with an excellent
response. However, in November 2001 her disease
appeared to have progressed, with evidence of
increased ascites. Her chemotherapy was stopped, and
she was started on Arimidex. The ascites resolved. She
had progressive disease in May 2003 and therefore was
switched to Megace. Then in October 2003 she was
switched to gemcitabine, which was tolerated well during the first and second cycles. After 10 days of the
second cycle she started to develop a bluish discoloration of all her fingers, which was associated with
severe pain. She had normal pulses and no ischemic
changes in her feet. Her past medical history included
DM2, asthma, A.fib, pneumonias, and no history of
blood transfusion or any liver disease. She is a nonsmoker and does not consume any alcohol. The physical examination of her fingers revealed good radial and
ulnar pulses. The physical examination also revealed
blue fingertips (all 10) and severe tenderness, with
small ulcers on her fingers. Laboratory investigations:
normal CBC, LFT, renal, ESR 115, CRP 49, +ANA
(Spk)1:80, -ve ACLA, ANCA, and Cryo and normal
LAC and C3, C4. ECHO showed normal EF, MR, TR,
PAP 41. An angiogram showed slow distal filling with
very slight improvement with nitro challenge. In hospital she was started on ASA and nifedipine XL for 1
week, with little response. She was put on Solu-Medrol
60 mg IV for 1 week and then switched to oral prednisone 50 mg Q wk, which was tapered down to 5 mg
Q wk over 11 weeks, with a good response that
was apparent within 2 weeks after initiating the

Page 6 of 31

corticosteroids. Conclusion: This case illustrates that
gemcitabine alone may produce digital ischemia. This
is only the third case in which this has been reported
to occur in patients not on other chemotherapeutic
agents as well.
Management of Anaphylaxis in a Tertiary Care Emergency
Department

Anne K. Ellis, James H. Day
Background: Publications regarding the emergency
management of anaphylaxis report rates of epinephrine
administration between 16 and 57%; EpiPen prescription
rates vary from 0 to 22%. Objective: To document treatment, observation, and discharge strategies for patients
with anaphylaxis in a tertiary care emergency department (ED) in Canada. Methods: Retrospective chart
review of ED visits from 1999 to 2002; all charts with a
discharge diagnosis of “anaphylaxis” or “allergic reaction” were evaluated; if symptoms/signs were consistent
with anaphylaxis included in the study. Management
strategies, total observation time, and discharge management/advice were analyzed descriptively and compared
to symptomatology via chi-square. Results: 129 patients
were treated for an acute systemic allergic reaction consistent with anaphylaxis in the period reviewed. Average
age was 31.8 years (range 0.9-79), and 62 (48.0%) were
female. Details of management strategies are presented
in the Table.
The overall rate of epinephrine use was 79.1%, but it
was given as first-line therapy in only 66 (51.1%) and
was given subcutaneously (SC) by ED personnel in all
cases. Documented hypotension and/or decreased SaO2
resulted in higher rates of corticosteroid administration
(p < .034). Pediatric cases (≤12 yr) were significantly
less likely to receive corticosteroids and H2 antagonists
(p < .025), and trended toward decreased epinephrine
use (p = .08).
Average ED observation time was 3.8 hours. Nineteen patients had a documented biphasic reaction (13
were discharged from the ED prior to the second
phase); 4 were subsequently admitted (total admission
rate 8.4%). Conclusions: Anaphylaxis was treated with
epinephrine by the ED at a higher rate than reported
elsewhere but was not routinely administered first line
and was given SC, rather than IM, discordant with
published guidelines. Anaphylaxis was more likely to
be labeled an “allergic reaction,” leading to underreporting, and EpiPens remained underprescribed,
although more frequently than reported elsewhere.
Average observation time was 4 hours, which was
insufficient for 13 patients (10%) who returned after
discharge from the ED with biphasic reactivity. Despite

Allergy, Asthma & Clinical Immunology 2006, 2:1
http://www.aacijournal.com/content/2/4/1

improvements, anaphylaxis continues to be an underdiagnosed and under-treated condition. Support: This
study was internally funded.
Allergen-Induced Changes in Adhesion Molecule
Expression and Function on Bone Marrow Progenitor
Cells in Asthmatic Subjects

A. Catalli, J. Thomson, I. Babirad, M. Duong, R. Watson,
G. Gauvreau, P.M. O’Byrne, R. Sehmi, McMaster University and St. Joseph’s Healthcare, Hamilton, ON
Rationale: Eosinophilic airway inflammation is an
underlying feature of asthma and is associated with
activation of hematopoietic events in the bone marrow.
Understanding the mechanisms regulating progenitor
cell mobilization and trafficking from the bone marrow
into the airways may be important for the development
of effective asthma treatment. Objectives: We set out to
characterize preferential activation of adhesion pathways for the mobilization of hematopoietic progenitor
cells from the bone marrow. Methods: Bone marrow
aspirates were obtained from mild asthmatics pre- and
several time points post-allergen challenge. Low-density nonadherent mononuclear cells were harvested by
density gradient centrifugation on Percoll. Changes in
expression of b1 (CD49d/a4b1, CD49e/a5b1) and b2
(CD11b/Mac-1) integrins on CD34 + 45 + progenitor
cells were assessed by flow cytometry. A sequential
multigating strategy was used to enumerate level and
intensity of expression. Adhesion of an enriched CD34
+
cell population to fibronectin (20 μg/mL coated
wells) following SDF-1 stimulation was similarly enumerated by flow cytometry. Results: There was a significant decline in CD49d levels on CD34+45+ cells 24 hr
post-allergen challenge as compared to baseline (preAg: 10.7 ± 3.8 vs post-Ag; 3.0 ± 0.9, p = .02, n = 9 and
13, respectively), which had begun to recover by 48
hrs. There was no significant allergen-induced change
in CD49e or CD11b expression (CD49e: 34.8 ± 3.4 vs
32.4 ± 7.0, n = 13 and CD11b: 4.1 ± 1.1 vs 2.7 ± 1.0,
n = 14 in pre vs post, respectively). Adhesion to fibronectin was attenuated 24 hr post-allergen challenge,
corresponding to the decline in CD49d expression, and
had begun to recover by 72 hrs. Conclusion: Our data
suggest that down-regulation of b1 integrin expression,
as well as the associated adhesive properties of progenitor cells, may be responsible for reducing the
tethering forces to extracellular matrix components
such as fibronectin within the bone marrow, thus facilitating the egress of CD34+ 45+ cells to the peripheral
circulation during an allergic inflammatory response.
Support: This abstract is funded by the Canadian Institutes for Health Research and Father Sean O’Sullivan
Research Council.

Page 7 of 31

Family Asthma Program© Parent and Caregiver Objective
Outcomes

N.L. Ross, C.A. Gillespie, B.A. Kulbaba, S.E. Filuk, L.J.
Stewart, J.C. St. Vincent, D.L. Stockwell, N.F. Cisneros,
A.B. Becker, The Children’s Asthma Education Centre,
University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB
The Children’s Asthma Education Centre (CAEC)
evaluated the effectiveness of our Family Asthma Program© (FAP) in meeting objectives of asthma education.
Current guidelines for asthma education recommend
that programs be evaluated. Asthma education objectives listed in The Canadian Network for Asthma Care
Asthma Educator’s Guide are to improve patients’
asthma knowledge and skills; improve patients’ selfassessment abilities/skills; improve patients/caregivers’
self-confidence; improve patients’ adherence to behaviours that promote asthma self-management; and
improve the relationships between patients and health
care professionals. We evaluated 98 families of children
ages 3 to 11 years from our FAP from April 2005 to
May 2006. During the first session families are given a
questionnaire and asked whether they agree, disagree or
are unsure about the following four statements: I feel
comfortable asking my doctor about asthma; I feel confident I can manage my child’s asthma; When my child
has an asthma attack I know what to do; I know when
and how to give my child’s asthma medicine. After the
final session the families completed the same
questionnaire.
Conclusion: The CAEC FAP effectively meets objectives for asthma education. There is significant improvement in the families’ knowledge and confidence in
managing their child’s asthma even among parents who
already felt comfortable about discussing asthma with
their physician.
Molecular Markers of Eosinophilopoiesis: Multiplex Q-PCR
Analysis of GATA-1, MBP, and IL-5 Receptor mRNA
Expression in Peripheral Blood

A.K. Ellis, L. Crawford, J.A. Denburg, Division of Clinical
Immunology and Allergy, Department of Medicine,
McMaster University, Hamilton, ON
Rationale: Using colony assays and flow cytometry,
we have shown that eosinophil/basophil (Eo/B) progenitor phenotype and function are associated with
both atopic risk at birth and early childhood clinical
outcomes. We have also recently demonstrated that
real-time polymerase chain reaction (Q-PCR) can
reveal kinetic patterns of expression in cord blood
(CB) of several Eo/B lineage-specific genes, specifically
GATA-1, MBP, and IL-5Ra, as surrogate molecular
markers of Eo/B differentiation. These same methods
have yet to be established in peripheral blood (PB)

Allergy, Asthma & Clinical Immunology 2006, 2:1
http://www.aacijournal.com/content/2/4/1

samples. Objective: To use Q-PCR to determine the
kinetic patterns of expression of CB Eo/B-lineage specific genes in PB to evaluate surrogate markers of Eo/B
differentiation. Methods: PB non-adherent mononuclear cells (PB NAMNC) were isolated from random
fresh samples and incubated in the presence of IL-5.
At 24, 48, and 72 hours post-stimulation, RNA was
isolated, reverse transcribed, and expression of IL-5Ra,
GATA-1, and MBP was determined using comparative
Q-PCR in a multiplex reaction. Relative expression
ratios of stimulated to unstimulated cells were calculated using the delta-delta Ct method. Results: Stimulation of PB NANMC with IL-5 resulted in an upregulation of GATA-1 expression, peaking at 24 hours,
with a slower return to baseline expression than that
observed in CB. MBP expression was minimally altered
at all time points, compared with CB, where slow upregulation, maximal at 72 hours, had been observed.
There was completely stable expression IL-5Ra, similar
to that seen in CB. Conclusion: Multiplex Q-PCR analysis of mRNA from PB demonstrates expression of
critical Eo/B lineage-specific events. Further investigation of the validity and utility of Q-PCR analyses of PB
for surrogate, molecular markers Eo/B differentiation,
and their relationship to atopy and atopic outcomes
are underway. Funding Sources: This research was
funded by AllerGen NCE and in part by the AllerGen/
Bayer/CAAIF Immunodeficiency and Immunomodulation of Allergic Inflammation Clinician-Scientist
Research Fellowship.
The Effect of Respiratory Rate, Tidal Volume, and
Temperature on Exhaled Breath Condensate Volume

R. Amin, S. Balkovec, F. Ratjen, P. Subbarao, The Hospital for Sick Children and The University of Toronto,
Toronto, ON
Background: Exhaled breath condensate (EBC) has
been proposed as a non-invasive marker of lower airways inflammation. To assess its potential applicability
in infants, we developed an in vitro system to test the
effects of respiratory rate (RR), tidal volume, and temperature of the cooling device on EBC collection
volume. Methods: A mechanical ventilator (Evita XL,
Drager, Germany) was used to modulate tidal volumes
and respiratory rates over the range expected for infants.
The ventilator delivered 100% relative humidity. The
temperature at the EBC collection point was 34°C. The
ventilator was connected via a modified two-way valve
(Hans-Rudolph Inc, Kansas) separating inspiratory and
expiratory flow to a modified R-Tube for EBC collection. EBC was collected for tidal volumes from 20 to
120 mL in increasing increments of 20 mL. For each
tidal volume, EBC was collected over 20-minute periods
for respiratory rates ranging from 20 to 70 breaths per

Page 8 of 31

minute in increments of 10 breaths/min. The temperature of the cooling device was modulated by storing the
R-Tube sleeve at -80°C, -20°C, and -8°C for at least 1
hour prior to sample collection. Data were analyzed
using factorial ANOVA and linear regression. Results:
EBC volume ranged from 0.37 to 3.8 mL. Using factorial
ANOVA, both tidal volume and respiratory rate were
found to be significant factors in determining EBC
volume (p < .05). A trend toward significance was
observed for the sleeve temperature (p = .053). EBC
volume had the strongest correlation with tidal volume
(r = .74, p < .05) followed by respiratory rate (r = .13,
p = .4). The linear regression model found that tidal
volume had the greatest effect on EBC volume, followed
by respiratory rate; temperature had a minimal effect.
Conclusions: Exhaled breath condensate collection rates
using a modified R-Tube in an in vitro model collects
adequate amounts of fluid for analysis. Tidal volume
had the strongest effect on EBC.
Alternaria Allergy and Fall Asthma Admissions

C.A. Gillespie, S.E. Filuk, N.L. Ross, B.A. Kulbaba, L.J.
Stewart, W.T.A. Watson, A.B. Becker, The Children’s
Asthma Education Centre, Children’s Hospital, Winnipeg, MB
Background: Fall is the peak season for asthma exacerbations. Alternaria levels increase in prairie agricultural
regions in the fall. At the Children’s Hospital in Winnipeg, as a small pilot project, we asked whether children
who were admitted to hospital in fall were more likely
to be allergic to Alternaria than children admitted in
winter. Methods: Families of children ≥3 years old
admitted to hospital for asthma in September and October 2004 (n = 67) and December 2004 through February
2005 (n = 28) were approached during or following
admission for study participation. Children were
excluded if they lived outside Winnipeg, had additional
respiratory conditions, or were deemed otherwise unsuitable. Following written consent, a questionnaire to
gather pertinent history was completed, children were
skin-tested to common aeroallergens, including Alternaria, and spirometry was performed when possible.
Results: Participation included a total of 15 children,
with 1 child being admitted in both seasons. Although
nonsignificant, results indicated a trend toward a positive relationship between Alternaria allergy and fall
admissions.
Conclusions: Due to the small number of participants
it is difficult to make any definite conclusions. However, health care providers and asthma educators
should be aware of the trend, especially in prairie
regions. Appropriate management plans and education
may help lower the admission risk for Alternaria-sensitive individuals.

Allergy, Asthma & Clinical Immunology 2006, 2:1
http://www.aacijournal.com/content/2/4/1

Regulation of Progenitor Cell Traffic in Allergic
Inflammatory Responses: Stromal Cell-Derived Factor
1-Stimulated Adhesive Responses of Cd34+ Cells

Jennifer V. Thomson, Irene M. Babirad, Roma Sehmi,
Firestone Institute for Respiratory Health, McMaster
University, Hamilton, ON
Stromal cell-derived factor 1a (SDF-1; CXCL12) is a
potent progenitor cell chemoattractant and is thought to
retain CD34 + progenitor cells within hematopoietic
compartments, such as the bone marrow (BM). Ligation
of SDF-1a coupling to its exclusive receptor, CXCR4,
results in mobilization of CD34+ cells to the peripheral
circulation (PB). Little, however, is known about the
interplay of chemokines in mediating the egress of CD34+
cells from the BM in allergic inflammation. We have
previously shown that 24-hour post-allergen (Ag) challenge in dual-responder asthmatics, BM CD34 + cells
showed significant attenuation in CXCR4 expression and
reduced migrational responsiveness to SDF-1a in vitro.
This was associated with a significant increase in the proportion of CD34+ cells expressing CXCR4 in PB. We propose that increased mobilization of progenitor cells may
reflect changes in SDF-1a-stimulated adhesive interactions of progenitor cells with BM extracellular matrix
components. In the current study we investigated modulation of adhesive interactions of progenitors to fibronectin in vitro. We found that SDF-1a stimulated adhesion
of CD34+ progenitor cells to fibronectin in a dose-dependent manner optimal at 10 ng/mL (p < .05). The adherence of CD34+ cells was significantly inhibited by antiVLA4 > anti-VLA-5 > anti-VLA4 + VLA-5 (69 ± 13%,
59 ± 28%, 58 ± 29% inhibition, respectively; p < .05). Preexposure to CCR5-acting proinflammatory chemokines
such as RANTES (200 ng/mL) and MIP-1a (20 ng/Ml)
inhibited SDF-1a-stimulated adhesion of CD34+ cells to
fibronectin (82 ± 12%, 60 ± 32% inhibition, respectively,
p < .05). Our findings show that SDF-1a maintains the
retentivity of progenitor cells to the bone marrow
through adhesion to fibronectin and attenuation of this
adhesive response may promote the egress of progenitor
cells to the PB in an allergic inflammatory response. This
work was supported by the Canadian Institutes for
Health Research and the Ontario Thoracic Society.
Asthma Care Maps Are a Valuable Tool in the
Management of Asthma

Peter Strachan, Cathy Gillespie, Leslie Galloway, Nancy
Ross, Allan Becker, Section of Allergy and Clinical
Immunology, Department of Pediatrics and Child
Health, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB
Background: Patient education is an important underpinning of asthma care. The Children’s Asthma Education
Centre (CAEC) provides asthma education for children
with asthma and their families. However, many children

Page 9 of 31

with asthma and their families do not get referred for
asthma education. Children’s Hospital recently introduced
an in-patient care map for children with an asthma exacerbation. Hypothesis: Introduction of an in-patient asthma
care map increases rates of referral for asthma education.
Methodology: Retrospective analysis of medical records for
children admitted to hospital in September 2000 (before
introduction of the care map) and September 2005 (after
introduction) was carried out. We assessed (1) proportion
of children referred to CAEC, (2) duration of admission,
(3) pulmonary function testing, (4) discharge use of inhaled
corticosteroids, and (5) repeat emergency department visits
within 3 months. Results: There was a highly significant
increase from 13 of 26 children referred to CAEC in 2000
to 24 of 24 children in 2005 (p < .0001). The care map was
also associated with a significant increase in PFTs (from 7
to 76%). Significantly more children were discharged using
inhaled corticosteroids (85 vs 100%) and there was a reduction in subsequent ER visits from 31 to 17%. Also, the average length of admission decreased from 59 hours in 2000
to 39 hours in 2005 (p < .0001). Conclusion: An asthma
care map results in significantly more asthma education for
children admitted to hospital with an asthma exacerbation.
In addition, the care map was associated with shorter duration of hospitalization and decreased likelihood of subsequent emergency department visits.
Hereditary Angioedema: Literature Review and a
Case Report

Farag I. Farag, Ashraf A. Abdel-Naby, Hanan Taha,
Amgad Abd-Ellatief, Faculty of Medicine, Suez Canal
University, Egypt; International Medical Center, Egypt;
Holding Company of Biological Products and Vaccines
(VACSERA), Egypt; Omega Laboratories Limited,
Canada
Hereditary angioedema (HAE) is a rare genetic disease
of the complement system manifesting as recurrent
attacks of massive edema of the skin and respiratory and
gastrointestinal systems. The basic defect in HAE is the
deficiency or dysfunction of the C1-esterase inhibitor
(C1-INH). We report here a case of HAE that was misdiagnosed as a combination of intractable asthma and
skin allergy for 30 years until successfully diagnosed and
treated at VACSERA and the International Medical Center in Egypt. Subject and Methods: The case was a 48year-old male with positive consanguinity and a family
history suffering since 2002 from severe recurrent episodes (7 days/month) of a wheezy chest, shortness of
breath, and edema of the face, neck, and body with dysphagia, constipation, and abdominal cramps. Antihistamines, bronchodilators, and megadoses of corticosteroids
were ineffective in aborting the attacks. Onset started
at age 16; it was mild at first and then worsened with
age. C4 and C1-INH serum levels during episodes were

Allergy, Asthma & Clinical Immunology 2006, 2:1
http://www.aacijournal.com/content/2/4/1

2 mg/dL (normal 10-40) and 9 mg/dL (normal 15-35),
establishing the diagnosis of HAE. Marked clinical
improvement and elevation of C4 and C1-INH levels
were detected when the patient was maintained on danazol (600 mg/day). Conclusions: We conclude that HAE,
albeit rare, should be included in the differential diagnosis of intractable asthma associated with skin allergy.
A Case of Hemolytic Anemia Following Intravenous
Immunoglobulin Administration in a Patient with Chronic
Urticaria

Sari M. Herman, Stephen Betschel, Gordon Sussman,
Department of Medicine, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON; Division of Clinical Immunology and Allergy,
Department of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto,
ON
Purpose: To report an unusual case of hemolytic anemia following intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG)
administration. We review the published literature examining hemolytic anemia with the use of intravenous
immunoglobulin and the evidence for its use in chronic
urticaria. Design: Case report. Methods: We report a case
of a 54-year-old man with a 7-year history of chronic
urticaria refractory to conventional therapy who was
treated with IVIG. Results: A 3-day course of treatment
with IVIG (1 g/day) was initiated. After the first infusion
our patient developed a headache. A week after completion of therapy he developed arthralgias and jaundice.
Laboratory studies revealed a normocytic anemia (hemoglobin 106 g/L) with polychromasia and a few spherocytes present, hyperbilirubinemia (total bilirubin 79
μmol/L), and a low haptoglobin (<0.0583 g/L) despite a
negative direct Coombs’ test. Laboratory values returned
to normal approximately 2 weeks after the onset of the
hemolytic reaction. Complete clearing of his urticaria
occurred within 2 days after the IVIG treatment. Recurrence of his urticaria appeared 2 months later. Conclusions: IVIG has been used for the treatment of chronic
urticaria in patients unresponsive to conventional therapies with short-term results. Although IVIG therapy is
generally safe, hemolytic anemia is a potentially serious
complication that is often overlooked. Clinicians should
be aware of possible adverse effects related to intravenous
immunoglobulin therapy. Close monitoring of hemoglobin levels with IVIG therapy is recommended.
Asthmatic and Non-Asthmatic Children Have Similar
Levels of Body Dissatisfaction

J.L.P. Protudjer, G.D.M. Marchessault, C. Benoit, A.L.
Kozyrskyj, A.B. Becker, John Buhler Research Centre,
Winnipeg, MB
Rationale: Body image is important to preadolescents.
Youth with asthma may have experiences that decrease
or alter their body image, resulting in greater body

Page 10 of 31

dissatisfaction; however, the few studies that have
explored this association suggest that asthmatic children
often have greater body dissatisfaction that non-asthmatics. Methods: Children enrolled in a cohort study
born in Manitoba in 1995 were assessed by pediatric
allergists for asthma at age 8 to 10. We administered
the Children’s Body Shape Drawing Questionnaire to
assess overall body dissatisfaction (absolute difference
between perceived current body shape and desired body
shape) and queried feature-specific satisfaction using the
Healthy Youth Survey (1 = very satisfied; 5 = very dissatisfied) in both asthmatic and non-asthmatic boys and
girls. Results: In total, 532 children were assessed for
both asthma status and body dissatisfaction. Using the
Wilcoxon Mann-Whitney U test, we found no difference
(p = .69) in body dissatisfaction in asthmatic versus nonasthmatic children. Neither asthmatic boys and girls
(p = .22) nor non-asthmatic boys and girls (p = .26) had
differences in overall body dissatisfaction. Asthmatic and
non-asthmatic boys had the same median level of body
dissatisfaction (median = 9.00; range = 4 (most satisfied)
to 27 (most dissatisfied)), as did asthmatic versus nonasthmatic girls (median = 8.00). No differences in facial
(p = .91), muscle (p = .44), weight (p = .37), or height
(p = .48) dissatisfaction were found between asthmatics
and non-asthmatics. Conclusions: Asthma does not
affect body dissatisfaction in preadolescent children.
Based on other literature, we speculate that other sociocultural factors, such as peer pressure and media, and
biologic factors, such as puberty, influence body dissatisfaction in preadolescent children independent of a
chronic disease such as asthma. Funding: Canadian
Institutes of Health Research, AllerGen, Manitoba Institute of Child Health, National Training Program in
Allergy and Asthma.
A Role for CD34 in the Development of Allergic Asthma
in Mice

Marie-Renée Blanchet, Steven Maltby, Jamie Haddon,
Kelly M. McNagny, The Biomedical Research Center,
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC
Migration of mast cells and eosinophils to the lung
during allergic asthma leads to persistent inflammation
and the development of airway hyperresponsiveness,
presumably due to the release of potent inflammatory
factors. Previously we showed that expression of CD34
is essential for efficient mast cell migration; therefore,
we examined the role of this sialomucin in allergic
inflammation. CD34KO and wild-type (WT) mice were
sensitized and challenged with chicken ovalbumin
(OVA). Airway hyperresponsiveness was tested using a
metacholine challenge. Differential cell counts were performed on bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) cells. Histologic preparations were stained with hematoxylin-eosin

Allergy, Asthma & Clinical Immunology 2006, 2:1
http://www.aacijournal.com/content/2/4/1

and toluidine blue for evaluation of tissue inflammation
and mast cells counts. BAL eosinophils were also
stained for CD34 expression, sorted, and evalulated via
in vitro migration assays. We found that CD34KO mice
had far fewer cells in BAL than WT controls (1.162 ±
0.32 compared with 2.946 ± 0.417 × 10 6 cells/mL in
WT; p = .0015). All hematopoietic subsets were significantly reduced, and histologic analysis revealed attenuation of both inflammation and mast cell counts in
CD34KO mice (inflammation score: 6.57 ± 1.15 vs 10.33
± 0.92 in WT, p = .03; mast cell counts: 6.28 ± 1.5/section vs 18.17 ± 1.5 in WT, p = .0002). Similarly, airway
hyperresponsiveness in CD34KO OVA-challenged mice
was lower and comparable to that of unsensitized WT
mice. Interestingly, BAL and tissue-derived eosinophils
in WT mice were found to express significant levels
CD34, and we found a 57.2% reduction in the ability of
CD34KO eosinophils to chemotax toward eotaxin in an
in vitro migration assay compared with WT eosinophils.
Taken together our results suggest that CD34 plays an
important role in mast cell and eosinophil migration,
presumably by reducing adhesion and enhancing invasiveness, and that this mucin may offer a target for therapeutic intervention.
Is There a Correlation Between Skin-Prick Tests and
Bronchial Hyperresponsiveness in Children?

J.J. Liem, R. Rabbani, A.L. Kozyrskyj, A.B. Becker, Section
of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, Department of
Pediatrics and Child Health, University of Manitoba;
The Manitoba Institute of Child Health, Department of
The Children’s Hospital Foundation, University of Manitoba; Departments of Community Health Sciences and
Pediatrics and Child Health, Faculties of Medicine and
Pharmacy, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB
Background: Allergists frequently use the skin-prick
test to detect sensitization to aeroallergens in patients
with asthma. It is assumed that sensitization on the
skin reflects inflammation in the airways, resulting in
bronchial hyperresponsiveness. Rationale: To determine if allergen sensitization is associated with bronchial hyperresponsiveness in children. Methods: The
SAGE cohort is a birth cohort study of all children
born in the province of Manitoba, Canada, in 1995. A
case-control group of these children was assessed by
asthma specialists and diagnosed with asthma, rhinitis,
or neither. They were then allergy tested to common
aeroallergens and underwent a methacholine challenge
to determine the concentration of methacholine
required to drop their FEV1 by 20% (PC20). Spearman’s correlations were determined between the total
number of positive skin-prick tests with PC20. Results:
723 children were assessed from across the province of
Manitoba (urban and rural locations). Four children

Page 11 of 31

refused skin-prick testing and 58 children did not perform proper methacholine challenges. The correlations
between the number of skin-prick tests and total mean
wheal diameters with PC20 were -0.296 (p < .0001)
and -0.310 (p < .0001), respectively. When stratified by
gender, the correlation for boys was -0.310 (p < .0001)
and -0.331 (p < .0001) for the number of skin-prick
tests and total mean wheal diameters, respectively. For
girls, the correlation was lower at -0.260 (p < .0001)
and -0.269 (p < .0001), respectively. Conclusion: The
total number and mean wheal diameters of positive
skin-prick tests have a weak correlation with bronchial
hyperresponsiveness. The correlation was stronger in
boys than girls. Sensitization to allergens is associated
with airway hyperresponsiveness.
Likelihood of Adrenaline Auto-Injector Prescriptions in
Food Allergy Patients

D.A. Fischer, H.L. Kim, Barrie, ON, Kitchener, ON, University of Western Ontario, London, ON
Introduction: Adrenaline is the drug of choice for anaphylactic food allergies. Many patients are neither
referred to an allergist nor prescribed an adrenaline
auto-injector (AAI) despite a suitable history. We examine the likelihood of primary care providers prescribing
AAIs in patients with eventually confirmed food allergy.
Methods: All food allergy patients in two office-based
practices were prospectively assessed over a 7-month
period. All patients with a history compatible with an
IgE-mediated food reaction and a confirmatory positive
skin-prick test were included. The percentage of
patients having an AAI prescribed by the referring physician was calculated. Also, the percentage of AAIs prescribed based on age and the food allergen involved
were calculated. The food allergy categories were peanut, tree nuts, egg, milk, crustacea, and miscellaneous.
The percentage of AAIs prescribed in each centre was
calculated. Results: The likelihood of an AAI being prescribed to any patient was 80 in 182 (44%). In Barrie 44
of 85 (51.8%) and in Kitchener 36 of 97 (37.1%) had
AAIs prescribed. For individual allergens, the results
were milk, 2 of 13 (15.4%); egg, 10 of 30 (33.3%); peanut, 42 of 81 (51.9%); tree nuts, 17 of 36 (47.2%); crustacea, 11 of 24 (45.8%); and miscellaneous, 6 of 18
(33.3%). When stratified for age, the results were age <
2, 13 of 46 (28.2%); age 2 to 5, 24 of 44 (54.5%); age 6
to 16, 17 of 38 (44.7%), age > 16, 26 of 54 (48.1%).
Conclusions: Patients with anaphylactic food allergies
were underprescribed AAIs. Patients with milk and egg
allergies were less likely to have an AAI prescribed. Primary care providers were less likely to prescribe autoinjectors to very young children. Physician education is
required to increase prescriptions for AAIs for appropriate patients.

Allergy, Asthma & Clinical Immunology 2006, 2:1
http://www.aacijournal.com/content/2/4/1

The Relationship between Sputum Eosinophils and
Exercise-Induced Bronchoconstriction in Asthma

M. Duong, P. Subbarao, E. Adelroth, G. Obminski,
T. Strinich, M.D. Inman, S. Pedersen, P.M. O’Byrne,
McMaster University, Hamilton, ON; University of Toronto, Toronto, ON; Umea University, Umea, Sweden;
University of Southern Denmark, Kolding, Denmark
Background: Airway eosinophils are important effector
cells in the inflammatory processes of asthma. In the
present study, the relationship between eosinophilic airway inflammation and exercise-induced bronchoconstriction (EIB) and the responses to inhaled
corticosteroid therapy were examined. Methods:
Twenty-six steroid-naïve asthmatics with EIB were randomized to two 3-week periods of low (40 or 80 μg)
and high-dose (160 or 320 μg) inhaled ciclesonide in a
double-blind crossover trial, with two parallel arms and
a washout period of 3 to 8 weeks. Baseline and weekly
exercise challenges and sputum analyses were performed
during each treatment period (total of 4) to assess
response. Results: Baseline sputum eosinophils ≥5% were
found in 10 subjects. Sputum eosinophils were significantly correlated to EIB severity (Spearman’s rho -0.61;
p < .01). Sputum eosinophil count was also a significant
predictor of the temporal response of EIB to high- (160
and 320 μg) but not low-dose (40 and 80 μg) ciclesonide
therapy. The latter was characterized by a steep slope of
improvement at week 1, with little additional improvement thereafter, irrespective of sputum eosinophil
counts. In contrast, subjects with sputum eosinophilia
demonstrated an improvement in EIB, which continued
to increase with time without plateau by 3 weeks of
high-dose therapy, whereas non-eosinophilic subjects
receiving high-dose therapy demonstrated a limited and
time-independent improvement similar to that of lowdose therapy. Conclusions: These results suggest that
eosinophilic inflammation significantly contributes to
the mechanisms of EIB and is a useful marker in the
prediction of EIB response to inhaled corticosteroid
therapy.
Efflux of Peripheral Blood Basophils after Allergen
Inhalation by Mild Asthmatics Using Cell Surface Staining
with an Antibody to CD203C

M.Y. Evans, E.J. Farrell, T.X. Strinich, A.J. Baatjes, M.Y.
Duong, G.M Gauvreau, McMaster University, Hamilton,
ON
Introduction: Eosinophils and basophils are circulating
granulocytes that play a central role in the pathogenesis
of allergic inflammation. In response to inhaled allergen
there is an accumulation of eosinophils in the airways,
which is coincident with an efflux of eosinophils from
the circulation. Basophils have also been shown to accumulate in allergen-challenged (AC) airways; however,

Page 12 of 31

these cells have not routinely been measured in the circulation due to their low numbers and lack of commercially available basophil markers. We evaluated different
staining methods to determine which can most accurately track basophils in peripheral blood (PB). Methods:
PB was obtained at baseline and 0.5, 2, 4, 6, and 24
hours after allergen and diluent inhalation from eight
mild asthmatic subjects. Basophils were stained by three
methods: (a) direct surface immunostaining with antiCD203c (Immunotech) and enumeration by flow cytometry; (b) indirect surface immunostaining with an
antibody cocktail (Becton Dickinson) and enumeration
by flow cytometry, and (c) chemical staining with alcian
blue and enumeration using a hemocytometer. Eosinophils were enumerated by flow cytometry using CD45/
SSC plots and gating on the eosinophil population.
Results: There was a decrease in PB eosinophils after
AC when compared to diluent (p < .05), with a maximal
decrease occurring at 2 hours, and complete resolution
by 24 hours post-AC. There was also a decrease in PB
basophils after AC when compared to diluent when
staining with CD203c (p < .05), with a maximal decrease
at 6 hours and complete resolution by 24 hours. We did
not observe a decrease in PB basophils after AC compared to diluent using the BD antibody cocktail or
alcian blue (p > .05). Conclusion: We observed efflux of
basophils from PB of asthmatic subjects after inhaled
allergen challenge using direct immunostaining of PB
basophils with anti-CD203c.
Socio-Economic Factors Related to Asthma Control in
Children

Shannon Cope, Wendy Ungar, Richard Glazier, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON
Despite the established effectiveness of inhaled corticosteroids in the prevention of asthma exacerbations,
poor control remains common in children with asthma
in Canada and has led to unnecessary morbidity and
health care costs, especially among low-income, innercity, and minority families. The objective is to determine
the socio-economic predictors of asthma control, as
defined by the 2003 Canadian Pediatric Asthma Consensus Guidelines (CPACG), in children. A cross-sectional
design was used to analyze data from a completed
CIHR-funded study that recruited participants from
seven sites in the Greater Toronto Area from 2000 to
2003. The following information was collected on 879
children aged 1 to 18 years with a documented diagnosis
of asthma and a prescription for an asthma medication
in the previous year: demographics, medical history,
medication use, health services use, asthma education,
allergen exposures, and health-related quality of life.
Multiple linear regression is being used to analyze
asthma control (based on six CPACG control parameters,

Allergy, Asthma & Clinical Immunology 2006, 2:1
http://www.aacijournal.com/content/2/4/1

including daytime symptoms, nighttime symptoms,
need for b2-agonists, physical activity level, exacerbations, and school absences). Logistic regression on
unacceptable asthma control is also being conducted.
The impact of the following factors is being investigated
using stepwise backward analysis: income adequacy,
drug plan, parent education, parent employment, ethnicity, parent immigration, language, parent marital status, and physical environment characteristics. These
analyses are being adjusted for demographic, community, need, and health care use factors. The relative
importance of the control parameters is also being
explored using linear regression models. Three levels of
asthma control (acceptable, poor, and unacceptable) are
being compared with the level of HRQL using a
weighted kappa statistic. Results indicate that only 3.1%
of patients met the requirements for acceptable control
by satisfying all six parameters. Among remaining
patients, 19.5% satisfied five parameters, 22.2% satisfied
four parameters, and 55.2% satisfied three or fewer
parameters.
The Risk of Peanut Allergy in Siblings of Peanut-Allergic
Children

S. Huq, J.J. Liem, J.L.P. Protudjer, A.L. Kozyrskyj,
A.B. Becker
Rationale: Parents are frequently concerned about
development of peanut allergy in younger siblings of a
peanut-allergic child. We sought to determine the risk
of peanut allergy in these children. Methods: In 20052006, a survey was sent to 441 households of children
born in 1995 in Manitoba (as part of the SAGE project).
Parents were asked whether their 10-year-old child
(index child) had any recognized food allergies and were
asked to list siblings and any possible food allergies that
they may have. Skin-prick tests ± RASTs were performed on the index children. The likelihood (odds ratio
[OR]) of peanut allergy in siblings of peanut-allergic
children versus non-peanut-allergic children was determined. Results: 370 of 441 (83.9%) of the surveys were
completed (urban, rural, and First Nations communities). Twenty-nine (7.8%) children were peanut allergic
(physician diagnosis ± skin-prick test/RAST/oral challenge). Five children were sensitized but not allergic to
peanut. Nine children did not have siblings. There were
43, 9, and 568 siblings of peanut-allergic, peanut-sensitized but not allergic, and non-peanut-allergic children,
respectively. The number of siblings with peanut allergy
was 13 (2.1% of total siblings. The risk of a sibling of a
peanut-allergic sibling was increased (n = 4, 9.3%) compared with siblings (n = 9, 1.6%) of a non-peanut-allergic child (OR = 6.37, 95% CI = 1.88-21.62). Conclusions:
Children are more likely to be allergic to peanut if they
have a peanut-allergic sibling. Clinicians must be aware

Page 13 of 31

of this risk and consider testing of younger siblings
before peanut is introduced to the diet.
Seasonal Variation in Onset of Urticaria.

D.A. Fischer, Barrie, ON, University of Western Ontario,
London, ON
Introduction: Although most episodes of urticaria are
thought to be from an immune response to the presence
of a virus, many physicians still inform their patients
that there is an eventually identifiable cause. We present
data on onset of urticaria related to the seasons involved
to identify whether there is a pattern that mimics viral
infections versus random allocation. Methods: All urticaria patients in an office-based practice over 1 year
were asked during which month their urticaria started.
Results were based on a November 2004 to February
2006 survey. Patients were included starting in January
2004, but because of increased waiting-list time data
from early 2006 were also included, adjusted to reflect
increased wait times in late 2005. Results: 198 consecutive cases of idiopathic urticaria of at least 3 days’ duration were assessed. Patients with subsequent chronic
urticaria were also included. The data were divided into
tertiles: 75 (38%) presented in first tertile (Jan-Apr), 35
(18%) in the second tertile (May-Aug), and 88 (44%) in
the third tertile (Sept-Dec). The most active months
were March (26) and November (32). The least active
were May (6) and July (9). Conclusions: Urticaria of
“unknown origin” are often felt to be immunologic
responses to viruses, but viral serology is too unreliable
to prove this. This study shows that patients present
with urticaria with seasonal differences that reflect when
viruses are more like to be involved (first and third tertiles). The number of cases was much worse in March
and November and much improved in May and July,
also suggesting a viral pattern and not random onset.
Development of an Algorithm to Better Predict Clinical
Responsiveness to Peanut

Andrea Marrin, Kevin Sun, Susan Waserman, Manel
Jordana, Kent HayGlass, Department of Allergy and
Immunology, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON;
Department of Immunology, University of Manitoba,
Winnipeg, MB
Objectives: The only treatment for peanut allergy is
avoidance; however, the majority of peanut-allergic people will accidentally ingest peanut. Skin tests and peanut-specific serum IgE (ImmunoCap) cannot definitively
predict who is allergic. This study examines the relationship between skin-prick tests, peanut-specific serum IgE
levels, and cytokine production by mononuclear cells
(PBMCs) to generate an algorithm to better predict clinical responsiveness to peanut. Methods: Four groups
were identified: (1) true positives (TP): subjects with a

Allergy, Asthma & Clinical Immunology 2006, 2:1
http://www.aacijournal.com/content/2/4/1

clinical history of peanut allergy and a positive peanut
skin test; (2) false positives (FP): subjects who tolerate
peanut but have a positive peanut skin test; (3)
unknown reactivity (U): subjects with a positive skin test
but no history of having ingested peanut; (4) nonatopic
controls (C). PBMCs were isolated and cultured in the
presence and absence of peanut. Cytokines were measured at baseline and in the presence of crude peanut
extract. Analysis of the supernatants was performed
using the Luminex multiELISA system. Findings: Eightyfive subjects have so far been recruited: TP, 30; FP, 17;
U, 16; C, 22. Peanut-specific IgE levels were 0 to >100
kU/L in TP and U and 0 ti 27 kU/L in FP. C had undetectable peanut-specific IgE. There was increased
expression of Th2 cytokines (IL5, IL9, and IL13) in TP
compared with C. The Th1 cytokine IFN-gamma was
also increased in TP compared with C. Relevance: Peanut-allergic patients demonstrated an increase in Th2
cytokine expression compared with nonatopic controls.
The variability in peanut-specific IgE levels among peanut-allergic individuals demonstrates the difficulty with
this measurement for predicting peanut allergy. The
next phase will consist of the development of an diagnostic algorithm to be tested in patients with unknown
reactivity (Group 3).
The Effect of Early Life Stress on Airway Inflammation
Later in Life

R.S. Vig, A.D. Befus, H. Vliagoftis
Rationale: Asthma exacerbations develop during periods of stress in 20 to 35% of asthmatics. Stress also
strongly correlates with difficult to manage asthma, frequent and lengthier hospitalizations, and functional disability in children. Although psychological stress in
adults can induce asthma exacerbations, little is known
about the effects of asthma in the neonate. Neonatal
stress may induce permanent psychological, neurologic,
and physiologic changes that may also affect the
immune system. We hypothesize that mice stressed
early in life will develop augmented airway inflammation
and airway hyperresponsiveness (AHR) to an allergen
challenge compared with unstressed mice. Methods:
Mouse litters underwent a daily 3-hour maternal separation on days 1 to 10 after birth, during which other litters were left unhandled. On days 31 and 36, mice were
sensitized to chicken egg ovalbumin (OVA) via an IP
injection with aluminum hydroxide and were later challenged intranasally (days 42 and 44) with OVA or saline.
Measured outcomes included bronchoalveolar lavage
fluid (BAL) cell count, BAL differential cell counts, BAL
cytokine levels, and AHR (measured by whole-body
plethysmography). Results: All OVA-challenged mice
had increased AHR and total BAL inflammation

Page 14 of 31

compared with saline-challenged animals. Interestingly,
OVA challenged maternally separated males showed a
significant reduction (≅50%) in BAL inflammation compared with unstressed controls. Reduced inflammation
was also present in females. However, AHR of stressed
mice following OVA challenge were comparable to
unstressed groups. Cytokine analysis of OVA challenged
BAL fluid show significant reductions in maternally
separated interferon-g and interleukin (IL)-4 levels, with
no change in IL-5, -6, -9, or -13. Conclusions: These
findings suggest that neonatal stress down-regulates airway inflammatory responses and alters the cytokine
milieu in BAL fluid. We are assessing factors associated
with this reduction in inflammation, such as plasma corticosteroids and developmental changes in the lung,
such as alveolar size, that may be a result of early-life
stress in mice.
Airway Hyperresponsiveness Predicts Increased Th1-Like
Antiviral Immunity in Children with and without Asthma

R. Douville, J. Liem, Y. Li, N. Bastien, A. Becker, A.
Kozyrskyj, K.T. HayGlass, CIHR National Training Program in Allergy and Asthma Research; Departments of
Immunology, Medical Microbiology, and Pediatrics/Child
Health, University of Manitoba; Canadian Science Center for Human and Animal Health; Department of Community Health Sciences, Faculties of Medicine and
Pharmacy, Winnipeg, MB
Rationale: Severe respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) and,
more recently, human metapneumovirus (MPV), infections causing bronchiolitis, have a substantial epidemiologic association with asthma pathogenesis. Emerging
evidence suggests that they may also be triggers of
asthma exacerbation. Here we evaluated the relationship
between human recall cytokine responses to these
viruses, current clinical status, and airway hyperresponsiveness as measured by methacholine challenge (PC20).
Methods: Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC)
from ≅300 children (8-9 years old) were cultured with
live RSV and MPV. The frequency and intensity of Th1like (IFN-g CXCL10), Th2-like (IL-13), CCL5, and IL-10
virus-specific recall responses in the supernatants were
quantified. Clinical parameters, such as allergist-diagnosed asthma and airway hyperresponsiveness (PC 20),
were related to virus-specific cytokine responses. Subsequently, virus-specific responses were stratified based on
corticosteroid use. Results: Children with allergist-diagnosed asthma and evidence of airway hyperresponsiveness demonstrated increased production of Th1
cytokines and IL-10 in response to MPV compared with
healthy controls (IFN-g; p < .05 and IL-10; p < .05).
Non-asthmatic children with airway hyperresponsiveness
demonstrated similarly increased Th1 antiviral

Allergy, Asthma & Clinical Immunology 2006, 2:1
http://www.aacijournal.com/content/2/4/1

responses. Weak negative correlations between antiviral
IFN-g and IL-10 responses and PC 20 values was
observed in this child cohort (p < .01). Concomitantly
reduced CCL5 production was observed among hyperresponsive asthmatic children compared with healthy
controls. Both asthmatic status and airway hyperresponsiveness contributed to this phenotype. Conclusions: Airway hyperresponsiveness predicts increased Th1-like
antiviral immunity in children both with and without
asthma. Asthmatic status can further amplify these
immunoregulatory changes. Support: CIHR, Canada
Research Chair in Immune Regulation, Tom and Mindel
Olenick Award in Immunology, Manitoba Health
Research Council.
Epigenetic Regulation of the Balance of Th1/Th2 Recall
Responses in Atopic Asthmatic Individuals

Ruey-Chyi Su, Allan Becker, Anita L. Kozyrskyj, Kent T.
HayGlass, CIHR National Training Program in Allergy
and Asthma Research, Departments of Immunology,
Community Health Sciences, and Pediatrics/Child
Health, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB
Chromatin remodeling, including histone-tail modifications and DNA methylation, regulates cytokine
expression during in vitro differentiation of Th1/Th2
cells. Murine studies demonstrate that increased histone acetylation leads to increased cytokine gene
expression. However, little is known about its role in
human cytokine gene regulation. We hypothesized that
epigenetic modifications play a regulatory role in maintaining Th2-like recall responses in atopic asthmatic
humans. Specifically, we examined how Th1/Th2 recall
responses are affected by inhibiting histone deacetylase
(HDAC) activity with trichostatin A (TSA). Subjects
were asthmatic (allergist-diagnosis), positive HDM
(house dust mite)-specific skin-prick test, and methacholine challenge. Ex vivo PBMCs from 31 atopic asthmatic and 29 healthy controls, 8- to 10-year-old
children, were treated with TSA to increase cellular
histone acetylation before stimulation with HDM or
streptokinase (SK, a bacterial recall antigen). Ag-specific stimulation resulted in IL-5, IL-13, IFN-g, and
CXCL-10 responses in both populations. Inhibiting
HDAC activity resulted in enhanced IL-5 and IL-13
production (median increases 50 to 70%, p = .0003)
and concomitantly reduced IFN-g and CXCL-10
responses (median reductions 20 to 80%, p values <
.0001). Second, we found that atopic asthmatics
are significantly less sensitive to the effects of
increased histone acetylation during HDM recall
responses than healthy controls. Both Th1 decreases
and Th2 increases were consistently less (p < .035 to
.0001) than in control individuals. Finally, increasing

Page 15 of 31

acetylation resulted in a broad shift toward increased
Th2 bias (ie, decreased IFN-g:IL-13 and IFN-g:IL-5
ratios) in both HDM and SK recall responses. Collectively, these findings demonstrate that (i) interfering
with endogenous acetylation results in an immunologic
shift toward increased Th2 expression in human Agspecific recall responses and (ii) atopic asthmatic individuals exhibit a more rigid pattern of regulation of
cytokine/chemokine genes in HDM-responsive cells
than do nonatopic individuals. This study provides the
foundation for better understanding of epigenetic
mechanisms that are involved in the maintenance of
allergen-specific cytokine and chemokine responses.
Support: CIHR Canada Research Chair in Immune
Regulation and AllerGen. R.-C. S. holds a CIHR postdoctoral fellowship and is a trainee member of the
CIHR National Training Program in Allergy and
Asthma and AllerGen.
vitamin D stimulation of Bronchial Smooth Muscle Cells
Induces Autocrine, Contractility, and Remodeling
Processes

Yohan Bossé, Karim Maghni, Thomas J. Hudson, McGill
University and Génome Québec Innovation Centre, Montréal, QC; University of Montréal, Sacré-Coeur Hospital,
Research Centre, Montréal, QC
Genetic variants in the vitamin D receptor (VDR) gene
were recently associated with asthma. The biological
mechanisms explaining this association is unknown but
are likely to involve many cell types given the pleiotropic effect of its ligand, vitamin D. Considering the prominent role of bronchial smooth muscle cells (BSMCs)
in the pathogenesis of asthma, experiments were conducted to explore the gene regulatory effects of vitamin
D in these cells. Using RT-PCR and Western blot, it
was shown that VDR is present both at the mRNA transcript and protein levels in human BSMCs. The functionality of the receptor was then demonstrated by
showing a more than 200-fold change in the expression
of the 24-hydroxylase (CYP24A1) gene following vitamin
D stimulation. Microarray experiments were then performed to identify differentially regulated genes and
pathways in BMSCs treated or not with vitamin D. A
total of 729 probe sets on the U133 plus 2.0 Affymetrix
GeneChip showed fold-change differences above the 1.5
threshold using the Robust Multichip Average (RMA)
intensities. This corresponds to 231 unique genes that
were up-regulated and 215 unique genes that were
down-regulated following vitamin D stimulation. A high
similarity between microarray and real-time PCR results
was observed for 13 random genes, with a concordance
correlation coefficient of 0.91. Real-time PCR was
also performed to confirm the regulation of asthma

Allergy, Asthma & Clinical Immunology 2006, 2:1
http://www.aacijournal.com/content/2/4/1

candidate genes. To identify the biological relevance of
this regulation, biological pathways analyses were performed. The most significant network of up-regulated
genes included genes involved in morphogenesis, cell
growth, and survival, as well as genes encoding structural proteins such as VEGF, IL6, FN1, and COL1A1,
which are potentially involved in airway remodeling.
Genomic and Non-Genomic Effects of Dexamethasone on
Equine Peripheral Blood Neutrophils

L. Lecoq, A. Lavoie-Lamoureux, P. Vincent, J.P. Lavoie,
Université de Montréal, Saint-Hyacinthe, QC
Glucocorticoids exert potent anti-inflammatory actions
in a cell type-specific manner and are among the most
prescribed drugs for the treatment of equine inflammatory diseases. They are believed to exert their effects primarily through interruption of cytokine-mediated
pathways via gene expression (transactivation) or gene
repression (transrepression). More recently, the presence
of non-genomic pathways has also been described. Currently, little is known concerning the non-genomic
effects of dexamethasone (DEX) on neutrophils and the
requirement of glucocorticoid receptor (GR) activation
for this response. The objective of this study was to
evaluate the genomic and non-genomic responses of
equine neutrophils to glucocorticoids and the dependency of their receptors in these processes. The genomic
effects of corticosteroids were assessed by studying the
IL-8, TNF-a, and the Toll-like receptor (TLR)-4 mRNA
expression using real-time RT-PCR. Peripheral blood
neutrophils from six healthy horses, isolated using ficoll
(purity >96% and viability >98%), were incubated at
37°C, 5% CO2 for 6 hours in the presence of 100 ng/mL
LPS, and 10 -6 M DEX alone or combined with the GR
inhibitor RU486 (10-5 M). The non-genomic effects on
neutrophils (oxidative burst) were studied using whole
blood from three horses incubated in a water bath with
10-6 M DEX (20, 25, and 30 minutes) and 5 μM dicholorofluorescein (DCF) and then stimulated with 5 ng/
mL phorbol-myristate acetate in the presence of RU486
(10-5 M). The oxidative burst of neutrophils was evaluated using flow cytometry. DEX significantly down-regulated the LPS-induced IL-8, TNF-a, and TLR-4 mRNA
expression. Pre-treatment with DEX (25 and 30 minutes) similarly attenuated the PMA-induced oxidative
burst of neutrophils. In both studies, the responses
observed were attenuated in the presence of RU486. In
conclusion, DEX may attenuate neutrophil inflammatory
response through receptor-mediated genomic and nongenomic pathways. This finding may contribute to the
rapid response (minutes) observed following corticosteroid administration in selected equine inflammatory
processes.

Page 16 of 31

Fast Food Consumption, Overweight, and Asthma in
Preadolescents

Xiao-Mei Mai, Elizabeth A.C. Sellers, Allan B. Becker,
Anita L. Kozyrskyj, Faculty of Pharmacy, Pediatrics and
Child Health and Manitoba Institute of Child Health,
University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB
Background: Fast food consumption and being overweight are suggested to be associated with asthma in
children. Aims: To evaluate the interactive effect of fast
food consumption and overweight on asthma in preadolescents. Material and Methods: A case-control study
comprised 246 children with pediatric allergist-diagnosed asthma and 477 non-asthmatic controls at age 8
to 10 years. Information on fast food consumption was
obtained from survey questionnaire and defined as eating burgers/fast food once or twice per week on average
in the last 12 months. Overweight was defined as body
mass index ≥85th percentile of age- and gender-specific
growth charts. The likelihood of asthma according to
fast food consumption and overweight status, adjusted
for inclusive covariates, was determined in logistic
regression analyses. Results: Fast food consumption was
significantly associated with asthma (crude OR 1.70,
95% CI 1.23-2.34). The association was significant in
boys and not in girls. Fast food consumption was not
linked to overweight. Children who had fast food consumption and were overweight had a two times
increased risk of asthma (adjusted OR 1.99, 95% CI
1.18-3.34). Children who had fast food consumption and
were not overweight had a similar risk (adjusted OR
1.74, 95% CI 1.14-2.64). Children who were overweight
and rarely had fast food consumption (never or occasionally) were not at a significant risk of asthma
(adjusted OR 1.43, 95% CI 0.80-2.54). The combined
effect and the effect of fast food consumption alone
were significant in boys. The combined effect and the
effect of overweight alone were at a marginal significance in girls. Conclusions: The interactive effect of fast
food consumption and overweight was weak. Fast food
consumption alone may increase the risk of asthma in
boys.
Leptin Is Associated with Asthma in Overweight Children

Xiao-Mei Mai, Carla Taylor, Allan B. Becker, Anita L.
Kozyrskyj, Faculty of Pharmacy, Pediatrics and Child
Health and Manitoba Institute of Child Health, Human
Nutritional Sciences, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg,
MB
Background: Leptin is an inflammatory adipokine associated with obesity and cardiovascular disease. Aims: To
evaluate the levels of serum leptin in relation to asthma
in overweight and normal weight children. Materials:
Serum levels of leptin were analyzed in 87 asthmatic

Allergy, Asthma & Clinical Immunology 2006, 2:1
http://www.aacijournal.com/content/2/4/1

children diagnosed by a pediatric allergist and 126 nonasthmatic controls (8-10 years). Among the 213 children, 69 children were classified as being overweight
according to body mass index (BMI) ≥85th percentile of
gender- and age-specific growth charts. The serum
levels of leptin were analyzed by ELISA. Results: Overweight was associated with threefold increases in leptin
compared with normal weight (geometric mean [GM]
13.87 vs 4.14 ng/mL, p < .0001). The levels of leptin
were higher in asthmatic than non-asthmatic children
(GM 7.32 vs 5.37 ng/mL, p = .03). Differences by
asthma status were significant in overweight (GM 20.29
vs 10.49 ng/mL, p < .001) but not normal-weight children (GM 4.39 vs 3.94 ng/mL, p = .45). In overweight
children, multiple linear regression analysis showed that
leptin was increased 1.7 times in asthmatic versus nonasthmatic children (p = .003), independent of gender,
age, BMI percentile, maternal and paternal asthma, current passive smoke, and breast-feeding. Besides asthma
status, female gender and increase in BMI percentile
predicted elevated levels of leptin in overweight children
(p < .001 for both). Conclusions: Leptin is increased in
children with asthma, particularly those who are overweight and may play a role in airway inflammation in
those children.
Adjuvant Monoclonal Antibody Treatment in a Patient
with Allergic Asthma and Previously Failed
Immunotherapy

Kyla J. Hildebrand, Timothy Vander Leek, Per Lidman,
Stuart Carr
A 6-year-old patient was referred with a 2-year history
of persistent nasal congestion and intermittent wheeze,
dyspnea, and chest tightness. Symptoms were exacerbated by cats and dust, with no seasonal component.
Initial spirometry revealed FEV1/FVC of 75%, FEF 25 to
75% was 48% predicted, and there was a 19% increase in
FEV1 post-bronchodilator. Skin testing was positive for
cats and dogs but negative for other common aeroallergens. Diagnoses of allergic asthma and rhinoconjunctivitis were made and treatment was initiated with
intranasal mometasone, inhaled HFA-beclomethasone
200 μg bid, and salbutamol as needed. Lung function
remained inadequately controlled, and she was started
on budesonide/formoterol 200/6 μg 2 puffs bid instead.
Reversible airflow obstruction persisted, and her symptoms remained consistently worse with unavoidable or
secondhand animal exposures. Therefore, she was considered a candidate for cat and dog allergen immunotherapy. She was unable to achieve maintenance
immunotherapy, repeatedly developing anaphylaxis
(expiratory wheeze, respiratory distress, and marked airflow obstruction on spirometry) and requiring epinephrine on several occasions. Omalizumab is a humanized

Page 17 of 31

monoclonal antibody directed against the Fc component
of human IgE, preventing binding to the high-affinity
IgE receptor (FceRI) on mast cells and basophils. It has
been approved as adjuvant treatment for moderate-tosevere allergic asthma. Our patient started omalizumab
150 mg monthly, and specific immunotherapy was continued to modify her immune response in the longer
term. She was able to tolerate increasing immunotherapy doses without incident and successfully achieved
maintenance shortly after starting omalizumab. With a
year of combined therapy, her asthma symptoms have
improved significantly, and she has tolerated a reduction
in her budesonide/formoterol dose. She also tolerates
unavoidable animal exposures with only mild symptoms.
There have been several small studies of omalizumab
and immunotherapy for seasonal rhinitis. We believe
this to be the first case report using omalizumab to
facilitate previously failed immunotherapy in a patient
with allergic asthma.
Validity of a Measure of Postpartum Depression in Health
Care Database Studies of Childhood Asthma

L. Yallop, P. McGrath, B. MacNeil, A.B. Becker,
A.L. Kozyrskyj
Rationale: To determine the validity of a health care
database definition of postpartum depression for future
use in population-based studies on the origin of asthma.
Methods: Using health care database records, postpartum depression in mothers was defined in the 1995
Manitoba birth cohort on the basis of physician visits,
hospitalizations, or prescription medications for depression or anxiety. A sample of mothers solicited in 20052006 from the birth cohort was queried on the presence
of postpartum (1-item, 4-point, self-report Likert scale
on feelings of depression or hopelessness) and of
depression 10 years after giving birth (PHQ-9, a validated 9-item depression scale). Sensitivity and specificity
of the database definition for postpartum depression
were determined, using maternal survey response as the
gold standard. Results: Maternal reports of postpartum
depression were available for 418 mothers of children
recruited for study. Twenty percent of the mothers in
the sample had postpartum depression as defined by the
database measure. Forty-seven percent of mothers had
some amount of postpartum depression according to
self-report. Of the mothers who reported postpartum
depression, 17% continued to experience depression 10
years after giving birth, as measured by the PHQ-9.
Using maternal report as the gold standard, the sensitivity of the database definition of postpartum depression
was 78% and the specificity was 82%. Conclusions: A
database definition of postpartum depression, based on
prescription use and health care visits for depression
within 1 year following birth, is a valid method to

Allergy, Asthma & Clinical Immunology 2006, 2:1
http://www.aacijournal.com/content/2/4/1

Page 18 of 31

identify postpartum depression in population-based
health care database studies.

Peripheral Blood Leukocytes from Asthmatic Horses
(Heaves) Present an Aberrant Response to Bacterial
Extracts

Bacterial Infections Including Pericarditis in Two New
Cases of Interleukin-1 Receptor-Activated Kinase 4
Deficiency: Importance of Early Imaging to Diagnose
“Silent Infections” and Blood IL-6 Assay to Direct
Definitive Diagnosis

A. Lavoie-Lamoureux, J. Martin, J.-P. Lavoie, Department of Clinical Sciences, Veterinary Medicine Faculty,
University of Montreal, Montreal, QC; Department of
Physiology, Meakins-Christie Laboratories, McGill University, Montreal, QC
Rationale: It has been suggested that susceptibility of
allergic individual to LPS and other bacterial wall products found in house dust predisposes asthmatic individuals to the onset of clinical exacerbations. Here we
compare the response to bacterial wall components of
neutrophils and other peripheral blood (PB) leukocytes
from horses with heaves with that of healthy controls.
Methods: Neutrophils from control (n = 5) and heavesusceptible horses (n = 6), isolated from PB using an
immunomagnetic technique, were stimulated for 5
hours in the presence of LPS (100 hg/mL) and fMLP
(10 -8 M). Differential mRNA expression was studied
using real-time PCR. In separated experiments, neutrophils were stimulated for 1 hour with LPS (100 hg/mL
or 1 μg/mL) to assess integrin expression (CD18) using
flow cytometry. Concurrently, the neutrophil-depleted
PB leukocyte fraction was cultured in the presence of
LPS and fMLP for 5 hours to evaluate gene expression.
Results: Compared with control animals, LPS- and
fMLP-stimulated neutrophils from heave-susceptible
horses had a significant decreased expression of IL-8
and an increased expression of TNF-a. Moreover, neutrophil-depleted PB leukocytes from heave-affected
horses had a greater expression of proinflammatory
genes both before (TNF-a) and after stimulation with
bacterial extracts (IL-8, IL-1b). No difference between
groups was observed concerning neutrophils expression
of surface integrins. Conclusion: Neutrophils and other
PB leucocytes from heave-affected horses have an
abnormal inflammatory response to bacterial extracts ex
vivo. These results suggest that LPS and other bacterial
wall components present in house dust may lead to
inappropriate inflammatory response in susceptible individuals. Further experiments are needed to determine
the association of this altered response to the development of allergic airway diseases.

Andrew C. Issekutz, Tong-Jun Lin, Marian B. Macken,
Cheng-Lung Ku, Horst von Bernuth, Jean-Laurent Casanova, Departments of Pediatrics and Diagnostic Imaging,
Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS; Laboratory of Human
Genetics of Infectious Diseases, University of Paris René
Descartes, Paris, France; Pediatric Immunology - Hematology Unit, Necker-Enfants Malades Medical School,
Paris, France
We present two unrelated Canadian patients with
interleukin-1 receptor-activated kinase 4 (IRAK-4) deficiency, a defect in innate immunity. Patient 1, a 16year-old boy, had pneumococcal meningitis at 14
months, S. aureus pericarditis at 20 months, and then
osteomyelitis, staphylococcal cellulitis, and at age 10
years multiple liver abscesses progressing silently to
rupture and generalized peritonitis due to S. aureus.
Patient 2 presented at 4 months with a left cervical
mass, but a CT scan revealed extensive bilateral cervical
suppurative adenitis due to S. aureus. After therapy and
resolution, at 8 months a mass recurred in the right
submandibular region and CT scans showed multiple
lymph node abscesses, including in the paratracheal
nodes, yielding S. aureus. Both patients have been well
(#1 for 6 years, #2 for 12 months) on cotrimoxazole ±
penicillin prophylaxis and repeated immunization with
pneumococcal vaccine. Presentations were remarkable
for minimal or no fever, leukocytosis, ESR, and CRP
response to these infections. Symptoms were vague,
nonspecific, and delayed. Ultrasound and CT scans
revealed extensive involvement of tissue and abscess
formation, often involving areas not clinically suspected.
Stimulation of blood leukocytes with IL-1b, bacterial
endotoxin (LPS), peptidoglycan, or poly-IC failed to
induce IL-6 production (<200 pg/mL; normal donors
1,000-16,000 pg/mL depending on stimulus). The TNFa response was similarly deficient. Both patients had
IRAK-4 gene mutations. Thus, IRAK-4 deficiency can
present with staphylococcal pericarditis. This immunodeficiency is important to consider when there are
repeated or extensive bacterial infections but minimal
symptoms and acute-phase response. Stimulated wholeblood IL-6 or TNF-a production is of great value for a
presumptive diagnosis, prior to sequencing of IRAK-4
genes. Support: Canadian Institutes of Health Research
(CIHR).

The Molecular Basis for Glucocorticoid-Mediated Survival
of Primary Human Neutrophils

Arash S. Saffar, Stéphane Dragon, Peyman Ezzati, Lianyu Shan, Abdelilah Soussi Gounni, Department of
Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB
Glucocorticoids are potent anti-inflammatory drugs
that inhibit apoptosis of human neutrophils through

Allergy, Asthma & Clinical Immunology 2006, 2:1
http://www.aacijournal.com/content/2/4/1

unknown mechanisms. In this study we show that dexamethasone, a classic glucocorticoid, significantly inhibited apoptosis of primary human neutrophils by
inducing protein neosynthesis specifically through the
glucocorticoid receptor independently of transrepression. In dexamethasone-treated neutrophils, enhanced
levels of the prosurvival protein Mcl-1 were associated
with decreased translocation and cleavage of the proapoptotic molecules Bid and Bax into mitochondria.
Furthermore, dexamethasone inhibited release of Smac
from mitochondria, indicating maintenance of mitochondrial membrane integrity. Among the inhibitor of
apoptosis proteins, XIAP levels were maintained by dexamethasone, correlating with decreased protease activity
of caspases 8, 9, and 3. In conclusion, our results
demonstrate that in contrast to most immune cells,
human neutrophils mount a robust antiapoptotic
response to glucocorticoids by enhancing prosurvival
proteins and blocking the intrinsic pathway of apoptosis.
The 13C Glucose Breath Test in Children: A Simple, NonInvasive Tool to Assess the Relationship between Insulin
Resistance, Obesity, and Asthma

N. Saurek-Aleksandrovska, A.L. Kozyrskyj, R. Rabbani,
A.B. Becker, E.A.C. Sellers
Rationale: To validate the 13C glucose breath test in
children as a measure of insulin resistance (IR), which
has been proposed as a mechanism to explain the association between obesity and asthma. Methods: Data were
obtained from a case-control study of the 1995 Manitoba birth cohort. Fasting blood glucose and insulin
were obtained to calculate the homeostasis model
assessment of insulin resistance (HOMA-IR, a validated
measure of IR in children) and the 13C glucose breath
test was administered. Asthma was diagnosed by a
pediatric allergist and the BMI z-score was calculated
from height and weight measurements. The 13C breath
test was compared with HOMA-IR and multiple linear
regression analysis was conducted to determine best
predictors of HOMA-IR. Results: 415 children were
recruited (152 asthmatic, 263 non-asthmatics). Fifteen
percent had a significant degree of IR as measured by
HOMA-IR, 6% as measured by the 13 C breath test.
Using HOMA-IR as a standard, the sensitivity of the
13
C glucose breath test was 16% (0.07-0.27), and the
specificity was 96% (0.93-0.98). The Pearson correlation
between 13C breath test and HOMA-IR was r = -.345,
p < .0001. From the multiple regression results (r2 = .278),
significant predictors of HOMA-IR were the BMI zscore (B = 0.611, p < .0001) and the interaction between
BMI z-score and 13C values (B = -0.019, p < .0001). No
significant associations were found between 13 C and
asthma status, even following stratification for overweight status. Conclusions: The 13 C breath test is a

Page 19 of 31

specific but not sensitive measure of IR and best predicts
IR in combination with BMI z-score. It may be a useful,
simple, non-invasive tool to measure IR in epidemiologic
studies. However, at this preliminary stage of data collection we found no association between IR status and
asthma in children.
Exogenous Nitric Oxide Regulates Cyclooxygenase-2
Expression and Prostaglandin D2 Generation in Mouse
Bone Marrow-Derived Mast Cells

Tae Chul Moon, A. Dean Befus, Pulmonary Research
Group, Department of Medicine, University of Alberta,
Edmonton, AB
Mast cells (MCs) are important effector cells in allergic and inflammatory responses. They play these roles
through selective secretion of various mediators after
IgE-dependent and/or IgE-independent activation. Nitric
oxide (NO) is an important signaling molecule that regulates MC function. NO can depress MC allergic
responses such as leukotriene (LT), cytokine, and chemokine production, as well as MC degranulation. However, the role of NO on prostaglandin (PG) D 2
production, an important lipid mediator produced in
MC, is unclear. In PG synthesis, cyclooxygenase (COX)
is important enzyme. There are two isozymes of COX:
constitutively expressed COX-1 and inducible COX-2. It
is well established that mouse bone marrow-derived
mast cells (BMMCs) exhibit biphasic PGD2 biosynthesis;
COX-1-dependent immediate and COX-2-dependent
delayed PGD2 production following COX-2 expression,
when BMMCs are stimulated with stem cell factor
(SCF), IL-10, and IL-1b. The role of NO on COX-2
expression and PGD2 generation in BMMC was investigated using NO donors, S-nitrosoglutathione (SNOG)
and S-nitroso-N-acetylpenicillamine (SNAP). We
observed that exogenous NO augmented COX-2 protein
expression and increased COX-2-dependent PGD2 generation in response to SCF, IL-10, and IL-1b. Even
though both SNAP and SNOG augmented COX-2 protein expression and COX-2-dependent PGD2 generation,
no effects of NO donors were observed on COX-2
mRNA expression after 2 hours of activation. For COX1, NO donors did not affect its protein expression.
However, in contrast to the augmentation of COX-2
expression and activity, we observed that SNOG (100500 μM) but not SNAP (up to 500 μM) inhibited COX1-dependent PGD 2 generation. These results suggest
that exogenous NO regulates PGD2 production by MCs
in inflammatory states through regulation both of COX1 and COX-2. Furthermore, these findings help us
understand the role of NO in MC function and the regulatory mechanisms of lipid mediator generation in
MCs in inflammatory disease. Support: CIHR and the
Korea Research Foundation (KRF-2005-214-C00111).

Allergy, Asthma & Clinical Immunology 2006, 2:1
http://www.aacijournal.com/content/2/4/1

Endotoxin Protection against Atopy: Phenotypic
Differences between First Nations and Non-First Nations
Children

S. Huq, A.B. Becker, A.L. Kozyrskyj
Rationale: Endotoxin has been shown to be protective
against atopic phenotypes in some environments but
not others. We sought to determine the association
between indoor endotoxin levels and atopic phenotypes
in First Nations (FN) and non-FN children. Methods:
This was the SAGE case-control study of the 1995 Manitoba cohort, consisting of 246 asthmatic and 477 nonasthmatic controls at age 8 to 10 years. FN or Metis
status was self-declared in 150 children, 55% living on a
reserve. Atopic dermatitis, allergic rhinitis, and asthma
were diagnosed by a pediatric allergist. Atopy was
defined as one or more positive skin-prick tests to common allergens and BHR (bronchial hyperresponsiveness)
as methacholine <8 mg/mL. Endotoxin levels were analyzed by LAL assay from dust samples collected during
a home inspection. The likelihood (odds ratio [OR]) of
asthma phenotype according to endotoxin level quartiles
<61 eu/g, 61 to 97 eu/g, 98 to 141 eu/g, and >141 eu/g,
adjusted for gender, maternal asthma, mould and
tobacco smoke exposure at birth, and current mould,
was determined in logistic regression analyses. Results:
Mean endotoxin levels were significantly higher in FN
homes than in non-FN homes (189.9 vs 108.7 eu/g, p =
.03). Endotoxin was protective against atopic dermatitis
in non-FN children, with adjusted ORs of 0.47 (95% CI
0.23-0.97) for midquartile levels and of 0.23 (95% CI
0.09-0.55) for the highest levels. Third quartile levels
also suggested protection against BHR asthma (OR =
0.52, 95% CI 0.27-1.00), BHR (OR = 0.60, 95% CI 0.341.05) and atopy (OR = 0.63, 95% CI 0.37-1.08). In FN
children, the adjusted OR for atopy was 0.19 (95% CI
0.05-0.75) for exposure at the highest level. No other
associations were observed for endotoxin and atopic
phenotypes. Conclusions: Endotoxin protects against atopic dermatitis in non-FN children and against atopy in
FN children. These findings may be the outcome of
genetic differences superimposed on environmental
exposures.
The Impact of Mould on Asthma and Bronchial
Hyperresponsiveness: Differences between First Nations
and Non-First Nations Children

S. Huq, A.B. Becker, A.L. Kozyrskyj
Rationale: First Nations’ (FN) homes have high levels
of indoor mould. While indoor mould has been linked
to respiratory problems, its association with asthma is
controversial. We sought to determine the risk of
asthma in children from exposure to indoor mould in
FN and non-FN homes. Methods: This was the SAGE
case-control study of the 1995 Manitoba cohort,

Page 20 of 31

consisting of 246 children with pediatric allergist-diagnosed asthma and 477 non-asthmatic controls at age 8
to 10 years. FN status was self-declared in 150 children,
55% living on a reserve. Information on current mould
exposure was obtained from home inspection and a survey questionnaire. Bronchial hyperresponsiveness (BHR)
was defined as methacholine <8 mg/mL. Endotoxin
levels were analyzed by LAL assay from dust samples
collected during the home inspection. The likelihood
(odds ratio [OR]) of asthma according to current mould
exposure, adjusted for gender, maternal asthma, mould
and tobacco smoke exposure at birth, and endotoxin
levels, was determined in logistic regression analyses.
Results: Sixty-eight percent of FN and 67% of non-FN
children had current mould in the home. Asthma was
three times more likely in FN children exposed to
indoor mold (95% CI 1.02-9.70). The adjusted OR for
BHR asthma was 4.00 (0.86-18.8) in FN children, and
the OR for BHR alone was 1.56 (95% CI 0.60-4.05). No
associations were observed for indoor mould and
asthma phenotypes in non-FN children. Conclusions:
Indoor mould is associated with asthma in FN but not
FN children. While these results may be subsequent to
biased reporting by FN families, the higher risk of BHR
asthma suggests that mould may be acting as a respiratory irritant in FN homes. The extent of exposure to
mould may be determined by the levels of b-glucan in
dust samples, which are currently being assayed.
Comparison of Ciclesonide Uptake and Activation in
Hypotonic Versus Isotonic Suspensions and Fatty Acid
Conjugate Formation of Desisobutyryl-Ciclesonide in a
Hypotonic Ciclesonide Suspension in Rabbit Nasal
Mucosa

R. Nave, H. Sato, T. Nonaka, M. Wingertzahn, T. Mochizuki, S. Takahama, S. Kondo, ALTANA Pharma AG,
Konstanz, Germany; Teijin Institute for Biomedical
Research, Teijin Pharma Limited, Tokyo, Japan;
ALTANA Pharma, Florham Park, NJ
Background: Ciclesonide (CIC) is a novel corticosteroid under development for treatment of asthma and
allergic rhinitis (AR). CIC is converted to pharmacologically active desisobytyryl-ciclesonide (des-CIC) by upper
and lower airway intracellular esterases. Unlike available
isotonic intranasal corticosteroid suspensions, CIC is
formulated in a hypotonic suspension that may enhance
delivery of CIC to nasal mucosa. The purpose of this
study was to evaluate the in vivo uptake and activation
of CIC to des-CIC in hypotonic and isotonic suspensions and confirm the formation of fatty acid conjugates
of des-CIC when delivered to the nasal mucosa of rabbits as a hypotonic suspension. Method: The uptake of
CIC and its activation were compared in a hypotonic
suspension versus an isotonic suspension in nasal

Allergy, Asthma & Clinical Immunology 2006, 2:1
http://www.aacijournal.com/content/2/4/1

mucosa of Japanese white rabbits. Both suspensions
were administered intranasally as a single dose (143 μg/
animal, 4 animals/suspension). Ciclesonide and des-CIC
concentrations were measured in nasal mucosa extracts
(0.5, 2, and 4 hours post-administration) using high-performance liquid chromatography with tandem mass
spectrometric detection. Subsequently, retention of desCIC and formation of fatty acid conjugates of des-CIC
(des-CIC-oleate and des-CIC-palmitate) were determined in nasal mucosa extracts (5 animals/time point)
0.5, 8, 12, 16, and 24 hours post-administration of a
hypotonic CIC suspension. Results: The hypotonic
suspension achieved higher concentrations of CIC (25.3fold, 34.2-fold [p = NS], and 16-fold [p < .05]) and desCIC (5.7-fold, 11.6-fold, and 13.7-fold; p < .05 for all) at
0.5, 2, and 4 hours post-administration, respectively, versus isotonic suspension. Furthermore, it was determined
that des-CIC is further metabolized to form inactive
fatty acid conjugates. The highest mean concentrations
of des-CIC-oleate (167.5 pmol/g tissue) and des-CICpalmitate (3.1 pmol/g tissue) were present in nasal
mucosa at 8 hours and 16 hours, respectively. des-CIC,
des-CIC-oleate, and des-CIC-palmitate were present up
to 24 hours post-administration (45.5, 50.3, and 1.3
pmol/g tissue, respectively). Conclusion: A hypotonic
CIC suspension provides better absorption of CIC in
vivo and higher tissue concentrations of des-CIC compared with an isotonic suspension. Similar to findings in
the lung, the formation of reversible fatty acid conjugates of des-CIC, which may serve as a slow-release
pool of des-CIC, was confirmed in rabbit nasal tissue.
Airway-Specific Activation and Metabolism of the
Corticosteroid Ciclesonide

R. Nave, H. Sato, T. Nonaka, T. Mochizuki, S. Takahama, S. Kondo, Altana Pharma AG, Konstanz, Germany; Teijin Institute for Bio-Medical Research, Teijin
Pharma Limited, Tokyo, Japan
Rationale: Ciclesonide (CIC) is a novel corticosteroid in
clinical development for the treatment of asthma and
allergic rhinitis. Previous studies have shown that CIC is
converted to a pharmacologically active metabolite, desisobutyryl-ciclesonide (des-CIC), by endogenous esterases in
human lung. However, CIC metabolism in the nose has
not been well established. Therefore, a series of studies
have been conducted to characterize CIC metabolism in
nasal mucosa. Methods: Human nasal epithelial cells
(HNECs) were incubated with CIC 0.1 μM for 1 hour, and
metabolite concentrations were measured over 24 hours.
The reversibility of fatty acid conjugates of des-CIC was
assessed by incubating HNEC with des-CIC 1 μM for 6
hours and then monitoring intra- and extracellular metabolite concentrations over 24 hours. Specific esterases that
convert CIC to des-CIC were identified by preincubating

Page 21 of 31

HNECs with esterase inhibitors for 30 minutes prior to
incubation with CIC 5 μM for 6 hours. Compound concentrations were measured using high-performance liquid
chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry. Results:
CIC metabolites were detected at all time points after
incubation of HNECs with CIC. Intracellular des-CIC and
fatty acid conjugates of des-CIC were still detectable 24
hours after removal of des-CIC from the medium. In the
absence of esterase inhibitors, ≅90% of CIC was metabolized to des-CIC and fatty acid conjugates of des-CIC. Carboxylesterase and cholinesterase inhibitors caused a dosedependent decrease in CIC metabolism. Conclusions:
These data confirm CIC activation to des-CIC in nasal
mucosa via a similar mechanism to that observed in the
lung. Ciclesonide is rapidly converted to des-CIC by carboxylesterases and cholinesterases, and reversible fatty
acid conjugates of des-CIC are maintained intracellularly
for at least 24 hours.
Efficacy and Safety of Ciclesonide for the Treatment of
Perennial Allergic Rhinitis

E.O. Meltzer, S. Kunjibettu, N. Hall, W. Berger, C.
LaForce, P.F. Darken, T. Shah, M.A. Wingertzahn,
Allergy and Asthma Medical Group and Research Center, San Diego, CA; Altana Pharma, Florham Park, NJ;
Allergy and Asthma Associates of Southern California,
Mission Viejo, CA; North Carolina Clinical Research,
Raleigh, NC
Rationale: Ciclesonide is a new corticosteroid under
investigation for the treatment of allergic rhinitis. Study
objectives were to demonstrate the efficacy of intranasal
CIC 200 μg once daily (OD) in the treatment of PAR and
to assess quality-of-life effects and safety. Methods: In a
phase III, multicenter, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study, adults and adolescents (n = 471)
with a ≥2-year history of PAR received intranasal administration of CIC 200 μg (2 sprays per nostril) or placebo
OD for 6 weeks. Patient-assessed total nasal symptom
score (TNSS), physician-assessed overall nasal signs and
symptoms severity (PANS), and quality of life as assessed
by the Rhinoconjunctivitis Quality of Life Questionnaire
(RQLQ) were evaluated. Results: Ciclesonide significantly
reduced the average am and pm reflective TNSS compared with placebo after 6 weeks of treatment (p < .001).
Additionally, ciclesonide significantly reduced the average
am and pm instantaneous TNSS after 6 weeks of treatment (p = .001). At end point, a greater decrease from
baseline was observed in the PANS for the CIC group
(p = .051 versus placebo). An appreciable improvement
in the combined RQLQ scores at end point was also
observed in patients treated with CIC compared with
placebo (p = .011). The frequency of adverse events
was similar among patients treated with CIC or placebo.
Conclusions: Ciclesonide administered intranasally was

Allergy, Asthma & Clinical Immunology 2006, 2:1
http://www.aacijournal.com/content/2/4/1

significantly superior to placebo in relieving nasal symptoms and provided appreciable improvement in healthrelated quality of life in adult and adolescent patients
with PAR. Ciclesonide was also well tolerated with a
safety profile that was comparable with placebo.
Efficacy and Safety of Ciclesonide Nasal Spray for the
Treatment of Seasonal Allergic Rhinitis

P.H. Ratner, J.H. van Bavel, F. Hampel, P.F. Darken,
N. Hall, T. Shah, M.A. Wingertzahn, Sylvana Research,
San Antonio, TX; Allergy and Asthma Associates, PLLC,
Austin, TX; Central Texas Health Research, New Braunfels,
TX; Altana Pharma, Florham Park, NJ
Rationale: Intranasal corticosteroids are considered the
most effective treatment for the management of allergic
rhinitis (AR) symptoms. The objective of this study was to
evaluate the efficacy and safety of a new corticosteroid in
development for the treatment of asthma and AR, ciclesonide (CIC), in patients with seasonal AR (SAR). Methods:
In this phase III, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial,
patients with SAR (age ≥ 12 years) were randomized to
receive intranasal CIC 200 μg (n = 164) or placebo (n =
163) once daily for 28 days. Patient-assessed total nasal
symptom score (TNSS), physician-assessed overall nasal
signs and symptoms severity (PANS), and Rhinoconjunctivitis Quality-of-Life Questionnaire (RQLQ) were evaluated. Adverse events (AEs) were monitored throughout
the study. Results: CIC significantly improved the average
of am and pm reflective TNSS and instantaneous TNSS
versus placebo from days 1 through 14 (primary end
point) and over the 28-day treatment period (p < .001).
Furthermore, CIC showed similar improvements in both
am and pm placebo-adjusted reflective TNSS, suggesting a
24-hour effect. At day 15, CIC improved RQLQ by -1.17 ±
0.10 compared with improvement of -0.72 ± 0.10 with placebo (p = .002). The frequency of treatment-related AEs
was low and comparable between treatment groups, and
the placebo-adjusted epistaxis rate for CIC was 1.8%. Conclusions: CIC administered intranasally was superior to
placebo in relieving nasal symptoms in adult and adolescent patients with SAR. CIC was well tolerated, with a
safety profile comparable with placebo and a low epistaxis
rate. These data support the continued clinical development of CIC nasal spray.
Interleukin-17 Enhances Interleukin-1b-Mediated CXCL-8
Release from Human Airway Smooth Muscle Cells

Stéphane Dragon, Muhammad Shahidur Rahman, Jie
Yang, Helmut Unruh, Andrew J. Halayko, Abdelilah
Soussi Gounni, Departments of Immunology and Physiology and Sections of Respiratory Diseases and Thoracic
Surgery, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB
Recent studies into the pathogenesis of airway disorders such as asthma have revealed a dynamic role for

Page 22 of 31

airway smooth muscle cells in the perpetuation of airway inflammation via secretion of cytokines and chemokines. In this study, we evaluated whether IL-17 could
enhance IL-1b-mediated CXCL-8 release from human
airway smooth muscle cells (HASMCs) and investigated
the upstream and downstream signaling events regulating the induction of CXCL-8. CXCL-8 mRNA and protein induction were assessed by real-time RT-PCR and
ELISA from primary HASMC cultures. HASMCs transfected with site-mutated AP-1/NFB CXCL-8 promoter
constructs were treated with selective p38, MEK-1/2,
and PI3-K inhibitors to determine the importance of
MAPK and PI3-K signaling pathways, as well as AP-1
and NF-B promoter binding sites. We demonstrate IL17 induced and synergized with IL-1b to up-regulate
CXCL-8 mRNA and protein levels. Erk-1/2 and p38
modulated IL-17 and IL-1b CXCL-8 promoter activity;
however, IL-1b also activated the PI3-K pathway. The
synergistic response mediating CXCL-8 promoter activity was dependent on both MAPK and PI3-K signal
transduction pathways and required the cooperation of
AP-1 and NF-B cis-acting elements upstream of the
CXCL-8 gene. Collectively, our observations indicate
MAPK and PI3-K pathways regulate the synergy of IL17 and IL-1b to enhance CXCL-8 promoter activity,
mRNA induction, and protein synthesis in HASMCs via
the cooperative activation of AP-1 and NF-B trans-acting elements.
Immunologic Responses in a Murine Model Following
Exposure to Beryllium Metal Particles

Fariba Salehi, Séverine Audusseau, Natalya Karp, Joseph
Zayed, Bruce Mazer, Meakins-Christie Laboratories,
McGill University, Montreal, QC; University of Montreal,
Montreal, QC
Chronic beryllium disease (CBD) is a progressive granulomatous lung disease. CBD is caused by exposure to
beryllium (Be) and is characterized by mononuclear cell
infiltration and granulomatous inflammation in the lung.
A proposed immunologic basis for this disease states
that affected individuals have a Be-specific hypersensitivity response involving CD4+ T lymphocytes. The objective of this study is to determine the immunologic
effects of different particles size of Be metal on C3H/
HeJ mice following a nose-only inhalation exposure. We
examined the role of Be metal, total and respirable particles, in the development of granulomatous inflammation in the lung, proliferation of T lymphocytes, and
production of Th1-type cytokines. The beryllium lymphocyte proliferation test was used to explore the presence of a beryllium-specific immune response in the
lung and spleen. Although our results did not show any
significant difference or higher stimulation index (SI)
among groups, the proliferation was higher for exposed

Allergy, Asthma & Clinical Immunology 2006, 2:1
http://www.aacijournal.com/content/2/4/1

groups than control (620 CPM vs 350 CPM). The standard histology of the lung showed granulomatous
inflammation that may be more evident by extending
the exposure period. Flow-cytometric analysis of cells
stained with fluorescence labeled antibodies for intracellular cytokine and surface markers indicated a significantly greater expression of CD4+, CD8+, and IFN-g for
both Be particles. Cytokine assays of bronchoalveolar
lavage revealed higher amounts of IL-12 and IFN-g in
Be-exposed groups. Taken together, this study is a
unique murine model to explore the immunologic effect
of Be particles to induce lung disease that may enhance
our knowledge to identify a scientifically based threshold
to protect workers against CBD.
Eosinophil-Derived Tryptophan Catabolites Inhibit
Lymphocyte Survival via Glutamate Receptors

M. Ghaffari, S.O. Odemuyiwa, V. Lam, A. Ghahary,
M. Duszyk, R. Moqbel, Departments of Medicine and
Physiology, Pulmonary Research Group, University of
Alberta, Edmonton, AB; Department of Plastic Surgery,
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC
Aim of Study: Eosinophils express indoleamine 2,3dioxygenase, which catalyzes the catabolism of tryptophan to kynurenines (KYN), leading to the inhibition of
T-cell proliferation. Although tryptophan depletion was
suggested to cause T-cell death, the mechanism is still
poorly understood. However, exposure of T cells to
NMDA results in T-cell death via activation of NMDA
glutamate receptors. Quinolinic acid, a catabolite of
tryptophan, is an NMDA receptor agonist. We, therefore, investigated the expression of glutamate receptors
by eosinophils and T cells to understand the mechanism
of KYN-induced T-cell inhibition. Methodology: RTPCR, flow cytometry, and Western blotting were used to
detect the expression of glutamate receptors in eosinophils and T cells. Intracellular calcium was measured in
fura-3-loaded eosinophils and T cells via flow cytometry.
Apoptosis was assessed using a Vybrant apoptosis detection kit (Molecular Probes). Results: Eosinophils but not
T cells express mRNA group III metabotropic receptors
(mGluR2 and mGluR7). Resting lymphocytes express
only NMDA receptors that are up-regulated following
activation with phytohemagglutinin. Activation of eosinophils and lymphocytes with glutamate, NMDA, and
quinolinic acid resulted in significant calcium flux, a
response enhanced in activated lymphocytes. ACPD, an
agonist of metabolic glutamate receptors, increased
intracellular calcium only in activated lymphocytes,
while 100 pg/mL GM-CSF resulted in a viability of 95%
in human eosinophils after 36 hours of incubation and
incubation with glutamate resulted in 60% viability.
Only 25% of eosinophils remained viable during this
time period. In contrast, treatment of activated

Page 23 of 31

lymphocytes with NMDA resulted in T-cell apoptosis.
Conclusions: Human eosinophils express functional glutamate receptors. Activation of glutamate receptors
increases the survival of human eosinophils in culture
while glutamate and tryptophan catabolites, through glutamate receptors, may induce cell death in T cells. Thus,
eosinophil-dependent tryptophan-induced T-cell death
may result from activation of glutamate receptors by
quinolinic acid, in addition to tryptophan depletion.
Funding: AllerGen NCE Inc.
Allergen-Specific T and B Cells in Allergic Patients Are
Not Increased Compared with Nonallergic Persons

A. Ueno, C. Lu, L. Williams, B. Serushago, T. Bowen,
J. Storek, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB
Background: Allergic disease is thought to be caused
by increased (compared with nonallergic state) production by plasma cells of IgE against innocuous substances
such as pollens. These pathogenesis could be one of the
following: (1) allergic individuals may have similar numbers of allergen-specific T and B cells, but the propensity of their B cells to differentiate into plasma cells
producing large amounts of IgE may be increased; or (2)
allergic individuals may have increased numbers of allergen-specific B or T cells, helping B cells differentiate
into IgE-producing plasma cells. Methods: We studied
blood mononuclear cells from 10 individuals with allergic disease (with symptoms of asthma, rhinitis, or
eczema and a positive skin-prick test to at least one of
nine common aeroallergens) and 10 nonallergic individuals (with no symptoms of asthma, rhinitis, or eczema
and with a negative skin-prick test to the nine common
aeroallergens). Using flow cytometry, allergen-specific T
(B) cells were defined as CD3 + and CD4 + (CD19 + or
CD20+) cells proliferating (diluting CFSE) when stimulated for 7 days with the nine aeroallergens. Allergenspecific Th2 cells were defined as CD3+ and CD4+ cells
proliferating upon the stimulation with the aeroallergens
and producing interleukin-4. Results: The counts of
allergen-specific T cells, Th2 cells, and B cells were
similar in the allergic patients and the nonallergic controls. Conclusion: This suggests that allergic and nonallergic B cells differ not in the number but in their
propensity to differentiate into plasma cells producing
large amounts of IgE.
Effects of Nitric Oxide-Mediated Tyrosine Nitration on
Enzymatic Activity of Mast Cell Aldolases

Yokananth Sekar, A. Dean Befus, Pulmonary Research
Group, Department of Medicine, University of Alberta,
Edmonton, AB
Mast cells (MCs) are effector cells of IgE-mediated
allergic diseases. MCs can produce nitric oxide (NO),
and both endogenous and exogenous NO have

Allergy, Asthma & Clinical Immunology 2006, 2:1
http://www.aacijournal.com/content/2/4/1

regulatory effects on MC. We hypothesized that protein
tyrosine nitration, a post-translational modification
mediated by NO, plays a regulatory role in MC. In a
hypothesis-generating proteomic approach, nitrated proteins of HMC-1, a human mast cell line, were assessed
using two-dimensional electrophoresis and Western blot
with antinitrotyrosine antibody. Mass spectrometry was
used to characterize proteins selectively nitrated upon
treating the cells with SNOG, a NO donor. A 500 μM
of SNOG for 4 hours selectively nitrated aldolase A in
HMC-1 cells. Western blot analysis with antialdolase
antibody revealed that there are multiple isoforms of
aldolases with the same Mr but different pI in HMC-1.
Some of the isoforms are constitutively nitrated, whereas
others show SNOG-induced nitration. Mass spectrometric analysis of aldolase spots that are constitutively
nitrated confirmed the presence of peptides of two isoforms A and C of aldolase in HMC-1, whereas the form
of aldolase selected for study from SNOG-induced nitration revealed peptides of aldolase A only. RT-PCR using
isoform-specific primers confirmed mRNA level expression of aldolase A and C in human MCs, HMC-1, and
LAD-2. SNOG-induced nitration of aldolase reduced the
enzymatic activity in the supernatant of the HMC-1 cell
homogenate. As the effect of nitration of aldolase
depends on the tyrosine residues that are nitrated, identification of those specific tyrosine molecules among the
13 tyrosine residues of aldolase is of functional significance. Using mass spectrometry we are working to characterize the tyrosine residues of MC aldolase that are
targets for nitration. Thus, the decrease in enzymatic
activity of MC aldolase on its nitration may play a regulatory role on MC phenotype and function. Acknowledgement: The Canadian Institutes of Health Research
and Alberta Lung Association.
Respiratory Syncytial Virus-Infected Dendritic Cells Induce
Specific CD3CD4CD25 Lymphocytes and Eosinophil
Activation

Francis Davoine, Redwan Moqbel, Darryl Adamko,
Campus Saint-Jean and Pulmonary Research Group,
Department of Medicine, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB
Rationale: Asthma exacerbation is among the principal
causes of pediatric visits to emergency clinics. Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) infection in early childhood is
often associated with inflammatory asthma development.
Benign viral respiratory tract infections in the days or
weeks prior to asthma exacerbation are also frequently
reported by patients and parents. Dendritic cells (DCs)
and T lymphocytes play an important role in the regulation of the immune response while eosinophils play a
key role in the inflammation observed in asthma.
Hypothesis: Virus induces DC and T cell priming that

Page 24 of 31

leads to eosinophils activation. Methods: Primary DC
cultures were infected with RSV and cocultured with
purified T cells. Proliferation and phenotyping of DCs
(CD11c and HLA-DR) and T cells (CD4, CD8, CD3,
and CD25) were done using four-colour flow cytometry.
Measurement of eosinophils activation was done using
OPD colorimetric assay to determine eosinophil peroxidase (EPO) release. Results: We observed an increased
expression of CD11c and HLA-DR on DCs induced by
RSV. Coculture of RSV, DCs, and T cells induced a specific increase of CD3CD4CD25 subpopulation (16 ± 3%,
n = 4, p < .05) compared with uninfected coculture controls (6 ± 2%). Media of RSV, DCs, and T cells cocultures induced release of EPO by eosinophils. No effect
was observed in single-population conditions. Conclusion: RSV is capable of inducing activation of a specific
subset of T cells only when cocultured with activated
DCs. Therefore, this activation induces the release of
factors that lead to eosinophils activation and cytotoxic
granule release. The mechanism of RSV-DCs-T cells
interactions is not yet resolved, but it might provide a
new understanding of the relationship between viral
respiratory tract infections and exacerbation of asthma.
Respiratory Syncytial Virus Infection Influences the
Immune System toward a Th2 Response: The Role of
Indoleamine 2,3-Dioxygenase

Farnam Ajamian, Francis Davoine, Solomon O. Odemuyiwa, Redwan Moqbel, Darryl Adamko, Pulmonary
Research Group, Department of Medicine, University of
Alberta, Edmonton, AB
Background: Asthma is the most common chronic disease of childhood. Lower respiratory tract infection with
respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) during infancy is linked
with asthma. The airway inflammation observed in
asthma is associated with the predominance of Th2 lymphocytes and related cytokines. Indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO) induction in dendritic cells (DCs) is a
major mechanism of DC-induced Th1 cell apoptosis,
which likely contributes to the Th2 polarization seen in
asthma. IDO is the rate-limiting enzyme in extrahepatic
catabolism of tryptophan and is induced by IFN-g.
Kynurenine (kyn) is the main product of this catabolism.
Viral infection of macrophages, eosinophils, and DCs in
the respiratory airway can induce IFN-g release, and this
could result in increased IDO activity with subsequent
perpetuation of Th2 imbalance in asthmatics. Hypothesis: RSV infection induces IDO that contributes to Th2
bias in asthma. Methods: We incubated human monocytic cell line (THP1) and primary human DCs with RSV
(MOI 0.1-10). Flow cytometry and confocal microscopy
was used to confirm infection. Kynurenine level was
measured in culture media using a spectrophotometric
method based on Ehrlich reaction. Results: RSV infects

Allergy, Asthma & Clinical Immunology 2006, 2:1
http://www.aacijournal.com/content/2/4/1

up to 25% (n = 3) of DCs and 35% (n = 3) of THP1
cells. DCs infected with RSV (MOI = 5) for 4 days
increased kynurenine release (90 μM) compared with
uninfected control DCs (10 μM) (n = 2). Conclusion:
RSV infects THP1 and DCs in vitro. DC infection with
RSV results in increased IDO activity as measured by
kynurenine release. This observation provides a new
mechanism through which respiratory infection with
RSV in childhood might contribute to skewing the
immune system toward Th2 response.
Airway Side Population Cells: Progenitors of Multiple Cell
Types

T.-L. Hackett, F. Shaheen, G. Singhera, D. Dorscheid,
S. Van Eeden, R. Hegele, D.A. Knight, T. Bai
Introduction: The bronchial epithelial cell is the first
cell of contact and a physical barrier to the external
environment. These cells are continuously exposed to
and injured by pollutants, allergens, and viruses as part
of their normal function. Detailed cellular examination
of bronchial biopsies and BAL fluid has provided convincing evidence of epithelial damage and aberrant
repair in asthma. This excessive epithelial damage and
fragility can arise from an enhanced susceptibility to
injury and/or an inadequate repair response or a combination of both. It is therefore important to understand
the regulatory mechanisms involved in mucosal repair.
Although several cell types have been postulated as having progenitor function in the airways, the identity of
the resident stem/progenitor cell(s) in human airways is
still unclear. The rapid efflux of the fluorescent DNAbinding dye Hoechst 33342 identifies a rare side population (SP) of cells (<1% of epithelial cells), which are
enriched for stem/progenitor cell activity. For this reason, we have used the bronchial airways of sheep to
identify and characterize bronchial epithelial stem/progenitor cells. Methods: Epithelial cells (40 × 10 6 )
obtained from sheep airways via pronase digestion were
stained with Hoechst 33342 and propidium iodide and
then sorted using fluorescence-activated cell sorting. SP
and non-SP were then collected and plated for tissue
culture. Results: The bronchial epithelium contained a
viable population of cells that showed the SP phenotype
and comprised <0.1% of total epithelial cell population
(200,000 cells). The SP population was composed of
both CD45 + (85%) and CD45 - (15%) subsets. When
placed in culture, a single SP cell gave rise to a heterogeneous colony of cells, whereas non-SP cells failed to
grow. Conclusions: Our findings illustrate that bronchial
epithelial SP cells have the potential to produce a
diverse phenotype of cells. We speculate that these cells
may play an important role in both homeostasis and
repair of the airways, and further work is required to
characterize these cells.

Page 25 of 31

Lower Cortisol Levels Associated with Childhood Asthma:
The Role of Maternal Depression

L. Yallop, B. MacNeil, A.B. Becker, A.L. Kozyrskyj
Rationale: Maternal depression has been associated
with abnormal cortisol levels and in other studies with
asthma in children. We investigated the relationship
between cortisol levels, maternal depression, and asthma
in school-age children. Methods: Data were obtained
from the SAGE case-control study of the 1995 Manitoba
birth cohort. Mothers were surveyed on the presence of
postpartum and current depression (PHQ questionnaire). Thirty-six mothers were found to have recurrent
depression. Asthma in the child was diagnosed by a
pediatric allergist and blood samples were assayed for
cortisol levels using ELISA. Logistic regression was conducted with SPSS to predict the association between
cortisol levels and asthma (odds ratio, OR), adjusted for
treatment with inhaled corticoteroids (ICS) and frequency of health care. Results: Morning plasma cortisol
levels measured in 595 children, ages 8 to 10 years, ranged from 3.1 to 254.8 ng/mL (mean 50.3 ng/mL). Children with asthma had lower mean cortisol levels
compared with non-asthmatic children (47.2 ng/mL vs
52.1 ng/mL; p = .05). Mean cortisol levels were lower
(46.6 ng/mL) in children of mothers with recurrent
depression than those without, but not significantly so.
Normal morning cortisol levels (>50 ng/mL) were 30%
less likely in children with asthma (unadjusted OR 0.71,
95% CI 0.49-1.01). Compared with children with normal
cortisol levels/not receiving ICS, the OR for asthma in
children with normal cortisol levels/ICS use was 36.9
(95% CI 7.83-173), with low cortisol levels/ICS use was
10.4 (95% CI 4.56-23.7), and with low cortisol levels/no
ICS use was 1.82 (1.03-3.24). Maternal recurrent depression increased the association between low cortisol
levels and asthma among children not receiving ICS.
Conclusions: Not surprisingly, ICS users were mostly
likely to be asthmatic children, and ICS lowered cortisol
levels in some children. However, in the absence of ICS
use, low cortisol levels were more likely in children with
asthma, and this association was modified by maternal
recurrent depression.
Age-Dependent Ontogeny of Toll-Like Receptor 4
Expression on Peripheral Lymphocytes and Their
Suppression by a T Helper 2 Inflammatory Cytokine

Jella An, Andrée-Anne Banville-Langelier, Pierre Fiset,
Julie Guay, Oumnia Hajoui, Qutayba Hamid, Bruce
Mazer, Meakins-Christie Laboratories, McGill University,
Montreal, QC
The hygiene hypothesis suggests that decreased exposure to pathogenic microbes in early life is a potential
cause of the rapid increase of allergic diseases. Microbial
products such as lipopolysaccharide (LPS) have been

Allergy, Asthma & Clinical Immunology 2006, 2:1
http://www.aacijournal.com/content/2/4/1

shown to antagonize T helper type 2 (Th2) responses
implicated in allergic disease upon binding Toll-like
receptor 4 (TLR4), but this protective effect was only
seen in children. Recent studies have shown that CD4+
natural killer (NK) T cells may play a prominent role in
the pathogenesis of allergic diseases via rapid production
of Th2 cytokines. To determine the expression and
function of TLR4 on peripheral lymphocytes and its
dependency on age and atopic status, we used three-colour flow cytometry to analyze stained cells for atopic
and nonatopic children and adults (n = 120). We also
studied the effect of interleukin 4 (IL-4) and LPS stimulation on TLR4 immunopositive cells, simulating
ongoing allergic inflammation and microbial infection,
respectively. We found that TLR4 expression is significantly higher on peripheral T (7.72 ± 2.1% vs 2.21 ±
0.7%) and B cells (38.99 ± 4.4% vs 20.45 ± 6.3%) and
lower on NK T cells (4.09 ± 1.0% vs 8.31 ± 2.9%) in
children compared with adults, regardless of atopic
status. In each patient group, IL-4 down-regulated
TLR4+CD4+ T cells but up-regulated TLR4+CD4+ NK T
cells, whereas it had little effect on TLR4 + B cells. As
well, IL-4 increased IL-4 production by NKT cells,
detected by intracellular staining. LPS did not affect
TLR4 expression on peripheral lymphocytes or NK
T-cell cytokine production after 24 hours of stimulation.
In conclusion, our results confirm that the expression
and function of TLR4 on peripheral lymphocytes are
dependent on age, potentially explaining the increased
susceptibility to immune regulation by LPS in children.
The observed suppression of TLR4+ T cells and activation of NK T cells by the Th2-type inflammatory cytokine may also explain the chronicity of allergic disease.
Allergy Management Behaviours and Sources of Stress
for Schools and Families Living with Life-Threatening
Food Allergies

Janice Butler, Newfoundland and Labrador Centre for
Applied Health Research, Faculty of Medicine, Memorial
University, St. John’s, NF
The purpose of this study was to describe the
approaches taken by individuals, families, and school
staff to the management of life-threatening food allergies
and to describe the sources of stress associated with
managing this condition. This was a cross-sectional
descriptive study employing both quantitative and qualitative research methods using two instruments developed for the study. In 2003, the principals from 40
randomly selected schools in Newfoundland and Labrador were interviewed, as were 25 parents of children
with food allergies attending schools in the province; 21
of the parents and 4 teens each also participated in one
of four focus groups. The results suggested that the
reported number of students with food allergies in

Page 26 of 31

provincial schools has increased. While most schools
demonstrated a positive approach to managing students
with food allergies, one-quarter of the schools studied
had many deficiencies in allergy management that may
contribute to negative outcomes for families living with
this stressful condition. Balancing individual rights, feelings of uncertainty, and increased workload were
sources of stress for principals. Many parents of children
with life-threatening food allergies reportedly felt inadequately prepared by health professionals to safely manage their child’s food allergy. Parents also identified
inconsistent allergy management among schools in this
province. The sources of stress for families included a
perceived lack of control over allergies, inadequate public understanding and support, and the lack of reprieve
from daily worries. The results of this study support the
need for a comprehensive provincial school policy on
food allergy management, improved education by health
professionals for school staff and families living with
food allergies, and a public education and awareness
campaign to increase understanding about the challenges of living with food allergies.
Asthma Economics Conference

Mark Greenwald, Noel Kerin, Frank P. Fiti, Asthma
Society of Canada, Toronto, ON
Asthma, as one of the most prevalent chronic diseases
in Canada, generates a high burden in both private
industry and society at large. In June 2005, the Asthma
Society of Canada and the Schulich School of Business
brought together expertise in health care, public policy,
and economics to integrate diverse viewpoints and ideas
about asthma management in Canada. Through interactive workshops, participants identified major strengths
and weaknesses of current asthma care in Canada. A
common theme of the conference was the inability of
traditional measures of disease burden to adequately
assess the total burden of chronic diseases, such as
asthma. Traditional mechanisms measure direct costs of
the disease in the form of increased direct spending on
the health care system. However, indirect costs, in the
form of lost time at work, presenteeism (lost productivity of workers who attend work but are unable to maintain productivity due to illness), and missed school days,
are not measured. Likewise, the effects on the economy
of lower productivity are not measured. Present estimates of indirect costs are not tracked and are believed
by some to approach the direct costs to the health care
system. Changing the attitude of policy makers from a
“preventing costs” mindset to an “investment for future
returns” mindset will allow for the recognition that
investing the necessary time and money in the health of
workers and children now will yield substantially greater
financial return in the years to come. The conference

Allergy, Asthma & Clinical Immunology 2006, 2:1
http://www.aacijournal.com/content/2/4/1

participants suggested a number of changes and innovations to improve asthma care. They identified the need
for a national and cohesive strategy for asthma management in Canada. A strategy that would focus on early
identification of the disease, patient and health care provider education, and tracking the long- term costs of the
disease and measuring the indirect costs noted above.
Exacerbation of Pulmonary Symptoms in a Mouse Model
of Allergic Asthma Following Exposure to Concentrated
Ambient Particles and Ozone

Nivedita Khannna, Pascal Djiadeu, Stacey A. Ritz,
Nades Palaniyar, Frances Silverman, Jeremy A. Scott,
Divisions of Occupational and Respiratory Medicine,
Department of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto,
ON; The Hospital for Sick Children Research Institute,
Toronto, ON; Northern Ontario School of Medicine, Sudbury, ON; Gage Occupational and Environmental Health
Unit, St. Michael’s Hospital Research Centre, Toronto,
ON
Rationale: Asthma is an inflammatory disease of the
airway, and air pollution is known to have a significant
impact on asthma-related morbidity. In this study we
sought to investigate whether co-exposure to concentrated ambient particles (CAP) and ozone affects the
airway hyperresponsiveness and associated inflammation
in an acute murine model of allergic asthma. Methods:
We have established an ovalbumin (OVA) sensitization
and challenge model of allergic asthma in mice. Animals were sensitized by injection of OVA (i.p.; 25 μg/
mouse in alum) or PBS at days 0 and 7, followed by
aerosol challenge (6% OVA in PBS or PBS alone) on
days 14 to 16 (25 min/day). Twenty-four hours after the
last exposure to the allergen, conscious, freely moving
animals were exposed to CAP (200-1,000 μg/m3) using
the Harvard Ambient Particle Concentrator and ozone
(200 ppb-2 ppm) for 4 hours. Pulmonary function and
airway responsiveness were subsequently assessed using
a ventilator-based system (flexiVent). Bronchoalveolar
lavage was performed for further assessment of immune
end points with Western blotting and ELISA (ie, cytokine profiles, surfactant protein [SP] A, and SP-D).
Results: We observed increased maximum responsiveness (p = .007) and a trend toward decreased EC50 for
methacholine, indicative of increased airway responsiveness, in the pollution-exposed OVA-sensitized and
-challenged animals (n = 4/group). Collectin levels were
altered differentially between the CAP- and ozoneexposed and -unexposed mice. Conclusions: We
conclude that ambient particle exposure + ozone exacerbated airway hyperresponsiveness to methacholine and
altered surfactant protein secretion in airway-sensitized
mice. Support: AllerGen NCE, National Sanitarium
Association.

Page 27 of 31

Th2 Inflammation Seen in Allergic Disease Inhibits Toll-Like
Receptor 4 Expression and Regulatory Functions in T Cells

D. Préfontaine, P.O. Fiset, A.-A. Banville-Langelier, M.
Mazer, Q. Hamid, B. Mazer, Meakins-Christie Laboratories, McGill University, Montreal, QC
Background: In support of the hygiene hypothesis, bacterial lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced signaling through
Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) would promote TLR4+ CD4+
T helper lymphocytes (possibly regulatory T or T-reg
cells), which would limit Th2 inflammation seen in allergic
diseases. In turn, Th2 inflammation down-regulates
expression of TLR4, but the mechanism is currently
unclear. Hypothesis: We hypothesized that CD4+ T cells
either from allergic children or stimulated under Th2 conditions would display reduced TLR4 expression compared
with nonatopic controls or unstimulated cells and that
Th2 transcription factors will correlate with TLR4 downregulation. We hypothesized that atopy and Th2 conditions inhibit T-reg cell phenotype and function. Methods:
Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) isolated
from atopic and nonatopic children (2-18 years old) were
incubated for 24 hours with or without IL-4 or LPS. RNA
extracted from CD4 ± fractions (isolated by MACS) or
from PBMC was used for RT-PCR. The following gene
expression profiles were determined by real-time qPCR:
TLR4, IL-4, IL-10, STAT6, GATA-3, and FOXP3. Fluorescent ICC was used to colocalize FOXP3+TLR4+ cells in
PBMCs incubated with medium, IL-4, or LPS. Results: IL4 stimulation of PBMCs specifically reduced TLR4 expression in CD4+ T cells. IL-4 stimulation increased IL-4 and
Th2 transcription factors (STAT6 and GATA-3) transcript
levels more importantly in CD4 + cells from atopic
patients. TLR4 promoter analysis revealed the presence of
STAT6 and GATA3 binding sites. IL-4 up-regulated
FOXP3 gene expression in CD4+ cells regardless of atopic
status and increased its expression among TLR4+ PBMCs.
LPS also up-regulated both FOXP3 and IL-10 regulatory
cytokine mRNA levels, whereas IL-4 down-regulated IL10. Conclusions: These data suggest that Th2 inflammation
and atopy reduce the expression of TLR4, especially in
CD4+ T cells, possibly through Th2 transcription factors.
Although IL-4 promoted the development of FOXP3
+
TLR4+ T-reg cells, it may reduce their immunosuppressive function through down-regulation of IL-10.
Small Interfering Ribonucleic Acid Decreases Interleukin13 Receptor a1 (IL-13Ra1) Expression and Signaling
Through IL-13Ra1 in Human Tonsillar B Cells

Oumnia Hajoui, Julie Guay, Andrée-Anne Banville-Langelier, Bruce Mazer, Meakins Christie Laboratories,
McGill University and McGill University Health CentreMontreal Children’s Hospital, Montreal, QC
Background: Our laboratory has demonstrated that
human B lymphocytes synthesize IL-13 and that

Allergy, Asthma & Clinical Immunology 2006, 2:1
http://www.aacijournal.com/content/2/4/1

production of this cytokine is crucial for maintaining
IgE production. IL-13 mediates its effect through a complex receptor system, including IL-4Ra and IL-13Ra1.
Objective: We evaluated if human IL-13Ra1 expression
could be diminished by small interfering RNA (siRNA).
Methods: Purified B cells were isolated from human tonsils. Three micrograms of siRNA for IL-13Ra1 (Dharmacon, Denver, CO) were transfected using the Human
B Cell Nucleofector Kit (Amaxa Inc, USA) and then cultured. Expression of IL-13Ra1 mRNA was assessed by
real-time PCR. Signal transduction via IL-13Ra1 was
assessed by examination of phospho-STAT6+ cells. Analysis of CD38 and CD27 expression on phospho-STAT6
+
cells was examined by flow cytometry before or after
transfection with siRNA. Results: Transfection of B cells
with IL-13Ra1-specific siRNA inhibited expression of
IL-13Ra1 mRNA following 24 hours of anti-CD40/IL4
stimulation by 52%. Using the ratio of IL-13Ra1
mRNA/housekeeping-gene, untransfected B cells had a
ratio of 4.65 ± 0.2 compared with 2.2 ± 1.64 for siRNA
transfected cells. Control siRNA (Vector pmax-GFP)
had no significant effect on IL-13Ra1 mRNA expression
(ratio 4.11 ± 1.3). We examined signaling through IL13Ra1 by examining increases in phospho-STAT6 by
flow cytometry following addition of IL-13. IL-13
induced phospho-STAT6 expression in 69.3 ± 0.9% B
cells; incubation with siRNA diminished this to 57.4 ±
0.4%. This was highly specific as there was no change in
response to IL-4 following transfection with IL-13Ra1
siRNA. IL-13Ra1 was expressed on all B-cell lineages
examined, and siRNA transfection diminished IL-13R
signaling in both mature (CD38+) and memory (CD27+)
B cells. Conclusion: Our results show that siRNA significantly inhibits IL-13Ra1 mRNA expression, but the
inhibition using our current method of transfection is
not complete. This is demonstrated by the small but significant inhibition of IL-13-mediated signal transduction.
siRNA-mediated inhibition of IL-13Ra1 equally affects
mature and memory B-cell subsets.
Identifying the Presence and Function of the FceR1
Receptor in Human Normal and Small Airway Epithelium

Elana Hochstadter, Julie Guay, Abdel Soussi-Gouni, Barbara Tolloczko, Bruce D. Mazer, Meakins Christie
Laboratories, McGill University and McGill University
Health Centre-Montreal Children’s Hospital, Montreal,
QC
Background: The FceR1 receptor is commonly found
on mast cells and basophils and is known to bind to
immunoglobulin IgE (IgE) with high affinity. Upon stimulation by an antigen, FceR1 transduces signals causing mast cell degranulation, resulting in the symptoms
of hypersensitivity reactions such as allergic rhinitis,
asthma, and systemic anaphylaxis. Recently, FceR1 has

Page 28 of 31

been found on tissues such as smooth muscle, which
may contribute to airway reactivity. Objective: To determine the presence and function of the FceR1 receptor
on normal airway epithelium (NAEC) and small airway
epithelium (SAEC). Methods: Human normal and small
airway epithelial cells lines were purchased from CLONETECH (Cambrex Corporation, East Rutherford, NJ)
and the levels of receptor expression were determined
using PCR and flow cytometry. To assess signal transduction, we measured intracellular Ca +2 ([Ca 2+ ]i)
changes using fluorescent microscopy. FceR1 function
was demonstrated by assessing cytokine mRNA following anti-IgE stimulation using conventional RT-PCR.
Results: FceR1 mRNA was detected on both NAEC and
SAEC by conventional RT-PCR. Flow cytometry demonstrated the expression of the FceR1 on both normal and
small airway epithelium; however, there was greater
expression of FceR1 on SAEC. Cross-linking of FceR1
on NAEC with anti-IgE lead to increases in [Ca+2]i. The
mean baseline level of [Ca2+]i was approximately 40 nM,
while the mean peak [Ca 2+ ]i level was 160 nM. Realtime PCR demonstrated increased levels of mRNA for
the cytokine IL-13 in NAEC and SAEC, with higher
levels of mRNA found in the latter. Conclusion: Human
airway epithelium expresses FceR1; however, there is a
greater concentration of FceR1 on small airway versus
normal airway epithelium. Cross-linking of FceR1 causes
an increase in cytokine mRNA levels as well as intracellular calcium levels, demonstrating its involvement in
cell activation. Signaling via FceR1 on airway epithelium
may play an important role in inducing the inflammation found in allergic asthma.
Toll-Like Receptor 4 Expression on B Lymphocytes in
Pediatric and Adult Populations

Andrée-Anne Banville-Langelier, Jella An, Julie Guay,
Pierre Fiset, David Prefontaine, Monty Mazer, Qutayba
Hamid, Bruce Mazer, Meakins Christie Laboratories,
McGill University, and McGill University Health CentreMontreal Children’s Hospital, Montreal, QC
Background: Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are an integral
part of innate immunity and allow cells to recognize
and rapidly respond to important microbial patterns.
Stimulation of TLR-4 by endotoxins in early life is associated with a lower incidence of allergic diseases; this
effect appears to be lost in adulthood. Considerable
focus has been put on the expression of TLR-4 on T
cells and dendritic cells, but little is known about the
expression and function of TLR-4 on B lymphocytes,
which are responsible for the production of IgE. Objectives: We evaluated TLR-4 expression on peripheral B
lymphocytes as part of a cross-sectional study in atopic
and nonatopic children from ages 2 to 18. Methods:
Subjects were recruited from the Pediatric Test Center

Allergy, Asthma & Clinical Immunology 2006, 2:1
http://www.aacijournal.com/content/2/4/1

of the Montreal Children’s Hospital and a questionnaire
was administered to determine presence of a history of
atopic diseases. Three to 5 cc of anticoagulated blood
was taken to be stained for the presence of TLR-4 on all
peripheral cell subsets. Aliquots were also incubated
with interleukin-4 13.5 ng/mL or LPS 25 μg/mL for 24
hours prior to analysis. The cells were stained for presence of the pan-B lymphocyte marker CD19, TLR-4,
and the presence of sIgD, CD38 and CD27. Data on
other cell populations studied will be presented in
accompanying abstracts. Results: Children ages 2 to 18
had an average of 39.3 ± 4% TLR+ cell in their CD19+
population, (n = 56) compared with adults (20 ± 6%)
(n = 10). There was no significant difference between
atopic and nonatopic children. TLR-4 + B lymphocytes
could be found on B cells of varying maturities:
CD19 + IgD + (18 ± 4%) CD19 + CD38 + (8 ± 0.6%) and
memory B cells CD19 + CD27 + (9 ± 2%). IL-4 did not
cause any changes in B-cell TLR4 expression; however,
incubation with LPS increased TLR4 expression on
immature and mature B cells but not on memory B lymphocytes. Conclusion: B lymphocytes in children express
TLR-4 on twice as many B lymphocytes as in comparable
adult volunteers, and B cells in children exhibited signaling through TLR-4. LPS recognition may influence the
production of IgE in pediatric atopic diseases.
Role of L-Arginine Metabolism in Murine Allergic Asthma

Michelle L. North, Nivedita Khanna, Hartmut Grasemann, Frances Silverman, Jeremy A. Scott, Divisions of
Occupational and Respiratory Medicine, Department of
Medicine, University of Toronto, The Hospital for Sick
Children, and Gage Occupational and Environmental
Health Unit, St. Michael’s Hospital Research Centre,
Toronto, ON
Rationale: The semi-essential amino acid l-arginine
plays an important role in smooth muscle function and
tissue homeostasis. The nitric oxide synthase (NOS) and
arginase biochemical pathways both use l-arginine as
substrate to produce nitric oxide/l-citrulline and
ornithine/urea, respectively. Disruption of the delicate
balance between these competing pathways likely contributes to the pathogenesis of airway disease, including
asthma. Therefore, we performed a comprehensive
examination of the enzymes and transporters involved
in l-arginine uptake and metabolism in a murine model
of allergic asthma. Objective: To examine alterations in
the arginine biochemical pathway in a murine model of
acute allergic asthma. Methods: We used an acute ovalbumin (OVA)-sensitization and challenge model of
allergic asthma. Mice were sensitized on days 0 and 7
and challenged with nebulized OVA (6%) on days 14 to
20. Pulmonary function testing and methacholine
responsiveness were performed using a ventilator-based

Page 29 of 31

system (flexiVent). Western blotting was used to examine the expression profiles of proteins related to L-arginine uptake and metabolism (ie, arginases 1 and 2,
nNOS, iNOS, eNOS, and the cationic amino acid transporters), and arginase activity was determined in lung
homogenates. Results: OVA-sensitized and challenged in
our acute model of allergic asthma exhibited altered pulmonary function and increased airway responsiveness to
MCh. ArgI, ArgII, iNOS, and nNOS protein expression
levels were increased in the OVA-sensitized and challenged mice. These changes in expression were paralleled by a concomitant increase in arginase activity,
whereas the mechanisms of uptake were unaffected (ie,
cationic amino acid transporters). Conclusions: These
results support the contention that the arginase and
NOS isozymes may compete for substrate in asthma.
l-Arginine metabolism could contribute to the pathogenesis of asthma and may be a possible drug target for
therapeutics. Support: AllerGen NCE, Ontario Thoracic
Society/Glaxo Smith-Kline Award, National Sanitarium
Association.
The Transcription Factor Wilms’ Tumor 1 Regulates Matrix
Metalloproteinase 9 through a Nitric Oxide-Mediated
Pathway

Marcelo Marcet-Palacios, Marina Ulanova, Florentina
Duta, Lakshmi Puttagunta, Samira Munoz, Derrick Gibbins, Marek Radomski, Lisa Cameron, Irvin Mayers,
Dean Befus, Department of Medicine, University of
Alberta. Edmonton, AB
Matrix metalloproteinase 9 (MMP-9) is released by
lung epithelial cells (LECs) in conditions such as asthma
and COPD. Expression of MMP-9 correlates with the
severity of these disorders. However, transcriptional regulation of this enzyme is poorly understood. We have
reported that nitric oxide (NO) is required for MMP-9
gene induction. NO activates soluble guanylate cyclase
(sGC) to produce cGMP, which can activate protein
kinase A (PKA). PKA then translocates to the nucleus
and phosphorylates numerous transcription factors, thus
mediating gene activation. We observed a highly conserved CA repeat in the 5’ flanking region of the MMP9 promoter. Phylogenic analysis identified a 100%
homology in human, cow, rat, and mouse. This highly
conserved region contained potential binding sites for a
transcription factor called Wilms’ tumor 1 (WT1) as
detected with the transcription factor search system.
WT1 is regulated by a PKA-mediated phosphorylation
that reduces WT1 DNA binding affinity, resulting in its
subsequent translocation to the cytosol. We postulate
that WT1 is an MMP-9 gene repressor, regulated by a
NO-mediated pathway. Immunohistochemistry analysis
in normal human lung identified WT1 in the epithelium. Additionally, WT1 was expressed in five human

Allergy, Asthma & Clinical Immunology 2006, 2:1
http://www.aacijournal.com/content/2/4/1

LEC lines. Neither TNF nor a cocktail containing LPS,
PMA, and IFN-g changed WT1 expression. These treatments, however, induced WT1 translocation from the
nucleus to the cytosol. Translocation was blocked with
the NO synthase inhibitor 1400 W that also reduced
MMP-9 gene expression and enzyme activity. WT1
knock-down through small interfering RNA (siRNA)
up-regulated MMP-9 activity in the presence of 1400
W. Additionally chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChiP)
revealed a decreased level of WT1 binding to the MMP9 promoter after TNF treatment in vivo. Thus, WT1 is
an MMP-9 gene repressor in LEC. NO prevents this
repression, potentially through a PKA-mediated pathway. These findings will help us understand the regulatory mechanisms controlling MMP-9 gene expression in
health and lung disease.
Article Categories:
○ Annual Scientific Meeting
Allergy, Asthma, and Clinical Immunology
Volume 02, Issue 04, December 2006, Pages 164-165
Annual Scientific Meeting

Addendum
Abstracts From The Annual Scientific Meeting, Winnipeg,
September 22-25, 2005 Novel RAG1 mutation in a case of
severe combined immunodeficiency

Adelle Atkinson, Junyan Zhang, Eyal Grunebaum and
Chaim M. Roifman, Department of Paediatrics, The
University of Toronto
Objective: Rearrangement of the V(D)J in B and T
cells, which is essential to the development of normal
immune function, depends on the recombinase activating enzymes RAG1 and RAG2. Mutations in RAG1 or
RAG2 typically lead to a spectrum of disorders ranging
from the B - T - SCID to Omenn’s syndrome (OS). We
present here a unique presentation of RAG1 deficiency.
Patient: A 6 month-old girl presented with severe
respiratory distress which deteriorated significantly in
spite of antibiotic therapy. Eventually, there was some
response to treatment with corticosteroids. She had normal number of circulating lymphocytes, no eosinophilia,
erythroderma or lymphoid organ enlargement. Results:
Investigation of the immune system done early on
showed normal numbers of CD3 + T cells which
expressed either CD4 or CD8. Subsequent analysis of
the T cell receptor repertoire demonstrated that nearly
all CD3 + T cells were clonal in origin. One clone
expressed CD4 while the other expressed CD8. This
extremely restricted T cell repertoire as well as the lack
of circulating B cells prompted the analysis of RAG1
gene. This analysis revealed a novel homozygous T to C
substitution at nucleotide position 2686 and confirmed

Page 30 of 31

the need for hematopoietic stem cell transplant. Conclusions: This case underscores that a high index of suspicion for the presence of an immunodeficiency and an
in-depth analysis of the immune system is required even
when the widely available flow cytometry standard analysis shows normal T cell numbers which express CD4
or CD8. Especially in the absence of circulating B cells.
This more extensive analysis will aid in making the correct diagnosis such that appropriate management
options can be considered.
Myeloperoxidase localization and release from the
nucleus of neutrophils

Salahaddin Mahmudi-Azer*, Furquan Shaheen, Andrew
Sandford, Peter D. Paré, The James Hogg iCAPTURE
Centre, St. Paul’s Hospital, Dept. of Medicine, University
of British Columbia, Canada.
Myeloperoxidase (MPO) plays a central role in the
pathogenesis of diverse infectious and inflammatory diseases. MPO has been shown to localize to neutrophil
azurophilic granules and is released during cell activation and phagocytosis. We used a combination of
immunofluorescent staining with confocal microscopy,
immunogold-labelling and peroxidase staining with electron microscopy, flowcytometry of cell nuclei and subcellular fractions, electro-permeabilization with MPO
secretion assays, a leptomycin-B (LMB) inhibition assay
and immunoprecipitation with western blot analysis to
examine the intracellular localization/storage of MPO
and the molecular mechanisms underlying its release
following IL-8 activation. We found that in addition to
azurophilic granules, a much larger quantity of neutrophil MPO is pre-stored in the cell nucleus and released
to the extracellular space following cell activation. Cell
surface upregulation of MPO and release from the
nucleus following neutrophil activation is regulated by
the nuclear export molecule exportin 1. LMB (specific
exportin1 inhibitor) inhibits IL-8 induced MPO release
and cell surface upregulation. We conclude that the in
human neutrophils the cell nucleus is the main source
of MPO storage and release to the extracellular space.
These results suggest a novel and prominent role for
the neutrophil nucleus in inflammatory events related to
the MPO-hydrogen peroxide-halide system.
Bone marrow transplant from HLA matched unrelated
donors for severe combined immune deficiency

Grunebaum E, Atkinson A, Reid B and Roifman C.M.
Division of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, Hospital
for Sick Children
Introduction: Bone Marrow Transplant (BMT) from
related HLA identical donor (RID) is the treatment of
choice for patients with severe combined immune deficiency (SCID). In the absence of RID, HLA from haplo-

Allergy, Asthma & Clinical Immunology 2006, 2:1
http://www.aacijournal.com/content/2/4/1

Page 31 of 31

identical (half) related donors (HID) are often used.
However HID is associated with reduced survival and
long-term immune reconstitution failure. We have
therefore used HLA matched unrelated donors (MUD)
instead of HID in the past 15 years. Methods: We studied hematopoietic engraftment, graft versus host disease (GVHD) development, infections and long term
survival in infants diagnosed with SCID that received
MUD BMT between 1989 and 2004. Lymphocyte
engraftment and detailed immune evaluation were performed in children that survived more than 2 years after
transplant. Results: Twenty two infants underwent MUD
BMT following myelo-ablative conditioning in a Canadian pediatric referral center specializing in such procedures. Molecular diagnosis was available in 64% of the
patients. Donor lymphocyte engraftment, humoral and
cellular immune function and T-cell repertoire were
normal in all patients that were evaluated more than 2
years after transplant and off immuno-suppression, and
they were sustained for more than 14 years of follow up.
Acute graft versus host disease occurred in 18/22
patients, despite prophylaxis, and it was the most common cause of death. Overall, survival was 74% and was
even better for patients with mutations in the IL-2
receptor pathway (5/6 surviving more than 6 years).
Furthermore, survival of patients who presented with
low B cells, previously estimated to have unfavorable
outcome, was not significantly lower than in other
forms of SCID in this study. Conclusions: MUD BMT
leads to long term survival, engraftment and immune
function in SCID patients and should be the preferred
treatment for clinically stable infants that do not have a
RID.
Article Categories:

Question

p Value

Pre (%)

Post (%)

Change (%)

Comfortable with MD

93.9

96.9

3.1

.549

Confident to manage

58.2

89.8

31.6

<.001

Know what to do

60.2

98.0

37.8

<.001

Asthma medicine

75.5

99.0

23.5

<.001

Season Admitted

Alternaria +ve

Alternaria -ve

Fall

9

2

Winter

2

3

Published: 15 December 2006

doi:10.1186/1710-1492-2-4-1
Cite this article as: : Meeting program. Allergy, Asthma & Clinical
Immunology 2006 2:1.

○ Annual Scientific Meeting

Treatment
Total patients treated w/epinephrine

n (%)
102 (79.1)

EpiPen (self-administered)

24 (18.6)

Epinephrine via ED personnel

86 (66.7)

IV access secured

76 (58.9)

IV fluid bolus
H1 antagonists

35 (27.1)
122 (94.6)

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:

H2 antagonists

32 (24.8)

• Convenient online submission

Corticosteroids

64 (49.6)

b2-Agonists

• Thorough peer review

38 (29.5)

Admitted to hospital after initial mgt

8 (6.2)

Discharge Dx = anaphylaxis

53 (41.1)

EpiPen prescribed on discharge

76 (58.9)

Discharge therapy/adviceDischarge prescription including
corticosteroids

37 (28.7)8
(6.2)

• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
