<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>1471-2105-6-S4-S4.fm</title>
<meta name="Author" content="petere"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 7.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 5.0.5 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
BMC Bioinformatics

BioMed Central

Open Access

Research article

HmtDB, a Human Mitochondrial Genomic Resource Based on
Variability Studies Supporting Population Genetics and Biomedical
Research
Marcella Attimonelli*1, Matteo Accetturo1, Monica Santamaria1,
Daniela Lascaro1, Gaetano Scioscia2, Graziano Pappadà2, Luigi Russo2,
Luigi Zanchetta2 and Mila Tommaseo-Ponzetta3
Address: 1Dipartimento di Biochimica e Biologia Molecolare, Università di Bari, Via E. Orabona 4, 70126 Bari (Italy), 2Java Technology Center,
IBM Semea Sud, Via Tridente 42/14, 70125 Bari (Italy) and 3Dipartimento di Zoologia, Università di Bari, Via E. Orabona 4, 70126 Bari (Italy)
Email: Marcella Attimonelli* - m.attimonelli@biologia.uniba.it; Matteo Accetturo - m.accetturo@biologia.uniba.it;
Monica Santamaria - monicasantamariait@yahoo.it; Daniela Lascaro - daniela.lascaro@biologia.uniba.it;
Gaetano Scioscia - g_scioscia@it.ibm.com; Graziano Pappadà - graziano_p@yahoo.it; Luigi Russo - luigidamiano_russo@yahoo.it;
Luigi Zanchetta - gigizanc@tin.it; Mila Tommaseo-Ponzetta - m.tommaseo@biologia.uniba.it
* Corresponding author

from Italian Society of Bioinformatics (BITS): Annual Meeting 2005
Milan, Italy, 17–19 March 2005
Published: 1 December 2005
</supplement>
<supplement> <title> <p>Italian Society of Bioinformatics (BITS): Annual Meeting 2005</p> </title> <editor>Rita Casadio, Alessandro Guffanti, Manuela Helmer-Citterich, Giancarlo Mauri, Luciano Milanesi, Graziano Pesole, Cecilia Saccone and Giorgio Valle</editor> <note>Research articles</note>

BMC Bioinformatics 2005, 6(Suppl 4):S4

doi:10.1186/1471-2105-6-S4-S4

Abstract
Background: Population genetics studies based on the analysis of mtDNA and mitochondrial
disease studies have produced a huge quantity of sequence data and related information. These data
are at present worldwide distributed in differently organised databases and web sites not well
integrated among them. Moreover it is not generally possible for the user to submit and
contemporarily analyse its own data comparing them with the content of a given database, both for
population genetics and mitochondrial disease data.
Results: HmtDB is a well-integrated web-based human mitochondrial bioinformatic resource
aimed at supporting population genetics and mitochondrial disease studies, thanks to a new
approach based on site-specific nucleotide and aminoacid variability estimation. HmtDB consists of
a database of Human Mitochondrial Genomes, annotated with population data, and a set of
bioinformatic tools, able to produce site-specific variability data and to automatically characterize
newly sequenced human mitochondrial genomes. A query system for the retrieval of genomes and
a web submission tool for the annotation of new genomes have been designed and will soon be
implemented. The first release contains 1255 fully annotated human mitochondrial genomes.
Nucleotide site-specific variability data and multialigned genomes can be downloaded. Intra-human
and inter-species aminoacid variability data estimated on the 13 coding for proteins genes of the
1255 human genomes and 60 mammalian species are also available. HmtDB is freely available, upon
registration, at http://www.hmdb.uniba.it.
Conclusion: The HmtDB project will contribute towards completing and/or refining haplogroup
classification and revealing the real pathogenic potential of mitochondrial mutations, on the basis
of variability estimation.

Page 1 of 9
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2005, 6:S4

Background
Thanks to its outstanding features, mitochondrial DNA
(mtDNA) has been widely exploited both in population
genetics and mitochondrial disease studies. In particular,
the high mutation rate, absence of recombination, and
maternal transmission make this molecule suitable for
evolutionary studies aimed at tracing the migrations
which led to the colonization of the various geographic
areas of the world. Nevertheless, mitochondrial DNA also
plays an important role in the oxidative metabolism of the
cell, as it encodes for different subunits of the proteins
involved in the respiratory chain. Hence, mutations occurring in mitochondrial DNA can alter the oxidative phosphorylation which seriously damages cells and tissues.
Mitochondrial DNA is a haploid molecule, and the
number of identical copies of mitochondrial DNA per
human cell ranges from 10000 to 100000 molecules.
However, due to an inefficient repair system, mitochondrial DNA mutations are more easily fixed with respect to
nuclear DNA, thus making mtDNA transitorily heteroplasmic (i.e., different molecules of mtDNA may be
present in the same cell: wild-type and mutated). Indeed
the mtDNA population rapidly becomes homoplasmic
being the mutation fixed in one individual. If this mutation is not apparently deleterious and is transmitted to the
following generations, then this mutation can be considered fixed in the lineage.
The mtDNA genome of two unrelated individuals may
differ by about 50 nucleotides [1,2]. However, the
number of mitochondrial Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (mtSNPs) between two unrelated individuals is
proportional to their divergence time. Study of these polymorphisms in various human populations has allowed
to group differing human mtDNAs in haplogroups, each
containing a subset of mtDNA sharing characteristic
mutations acquired from the same ancestral mtDNA molecule. Hence, various population lineages may be
described by means of a phylogenetic network, in which
the top nodes define haplogroups and the tips haplotypes
[3]. Major haplogroups are ethnic-specific, and their classification is becoming increasingly well defined with the
growth in the type and quantity of molecular data available.
Mitochondrial disorders – associated with dysfunctions of
the Oxidative Phosphorylation (OXPHOS) system – are
caused by genetic defects both in the mitochondrial and
nuclear genome, leading to energy metabolism errors, and
have an estimated frequency of 1 out of 10000 live births.
Due to the important role played by the OXPHOS system
in ATP production, the causes and effects of mitochondrial disorders are extremely heterogeneous and complex.
This explains the pressing need for further research on this

topic, despite the many studies on mitochondrial disorders published in the last 20 years.
Population genetics studies based on analysis of mtDNA
and mitochondrial disease studies have produced a huge
quantity of sequence data and related information. Classified as RFLPs, mtDNA SNPs, pathogenic mutations,
HVS1 and HVS2 sequences, and complete mtDNA
sequences, these data are now distributed worldwide in
variously organized databases and web sites, not all well
integrated. Several specialized mitochondrial databases
for human and primates have been designed and implemented, providing good quantity and quality of human
mitochondrial data: MITOMAP [4], HVRBASE [5],
mtSNPs [6] and mtDB (Ingmann et al, http://www.gen
pat.uu.se/mtDB). The two last databases report frequency
data associated with mitochondrial SNPs, whereas MITOMAP simply associates mtSNP with the different phenotypes and to literature data.
HmtDB, the resource presented here, is aimed at filling
the gap, gathering all the complete human mitochondrial
genomes worldwide distributed and enriching sequence
information with statistically validated variability data
estimated through the application of specific algorithms
implemented in an automatically running Variability
Generation Work Flow (VGWF). A second work flow,
called Classification Work Flow (CWF) is implemented in
the resource to perform automatic classification of newly
sequenced genomes. Here we describe in detail HmtDB
aims and design as well as its potential applications and
future developments.

Results
HmtDB Aims and design
The aims of HmtDB are (1) to collect and integrate all
human mitochondrial genomes publicly available, (2) to
produce and provide the scientific community with sitespecific nucleotide and aminoacid variability data estimated on all available human mitochondrial genome
sequences through the automatic application of VGWF,
(3) to allow researchers to analyse their own human mitochondrial sequences (both complete or partial) in order
to detect automatically any nucleotide variants according
to the revised Cambridge Reference Sequence (rCRS) and
to predict their haplogroup paternity. This is automatically performed thanks to the application of the CWF.

VGWF is applied both to the entire HmtDB genome collection and to continent-specific subgroups. The resulting
site-specific variability values highlight functional constraints in both control and coding regions and, thus, distinguish polymorphic sites from constrained ones. From a
population genetics point of view, this allows complete
and/or refined mitochondrial haplogroup classification,

Page 2 of 9
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2005, 6:S4

Figure query pages
HmtDB 1
HmtDB query pages. Design of pages related to Query function as it will be implemented in the database. a) Multicriterion
query form. b) Example of a query result.

Page 3 of 9
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2005, 6:S4

Figure relational database
HmtDB 2
HmtDB relational database. HmtDB relational structure includes 24 tables, storing complete set of HmtDB data linked to
each other.

providing a more precise interpretation of population
sequence data and thus a refinement of phylogenetic
models. From a clinical point of view, it contributes
towards shedding light on the real pathogenic potential of
certain mitochondrial mutations, not yet clearly associated with any mitochondrial pathology.
Architecture and macro-functions
HmtDB is a bioinformatic platform which allows storage,
query and analysis of human mitochondrial sequences. It

is available at the web address http://www.hmdb.uniba.it
through a log-in procedure, after free registration.
This web-based application is organized as a relational
database, storing complete human mitochondrial
genomes, data related to the sample and the subject from
which the mtDNA was extracted, and the results of variability analyses performed through the automatically running VGWF implemented in the resource itself. A webservice interface to the PubMed public database also

Page 4 of 9
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2005, 6:S4

allows automatic retrieval of reference information during
sequence annotation.
Five macro-functions have been designed for HmtDB and
are available to users after they have completed the log-in
procedure. From the first page, users can (1) browse
through the contents of the database, in order to view and
download multialigned sequence data and site-specific
nucleotide variability data, both regarding the entire database and continent-specific subsets; (2) analyse their own
mitochondrial sequences in order to classify them automatically according to the latest mitochondrial haplogroup classification; (3) view the history of previously
performed analyses and, if necessary, recover them,
thanks to the existence of a personal session for each user
(this is why users must register their access to HmtDB);
(4) query the database through (a) a simple text search
form or (b) a multicriterion form made up of pop-up
menus and free text retrieval windows; (5) submit a new
human mitochondrial genome through an easy-to-fill-in
web interface. Functions 4 and 5 have been designed but
are not yet implemented. Figures 1a and 1b show the
design of the "Query" pages, as they will appear and
implemented.
Structure and content of database
The HmtDB database is of relational type, designed and
implemented using the DB2 IBM Database Management
System. Currently, it is composed of 24 tables (Figure 2)
which store human mitochondrial genome sequences and
their characteristic data such as geographic, ethnic and/or
population and linguistic information, as well as information about the source from which the DNA was extracted
and the method used to extract and sequence it. The 24
tables also include data tables for observed and simulated
site-specific nucleotide and aminoacid variability calculated through HmtDB, haplogroup classification, mitochondrial aminoacid similarity values obtained from the
mtREV substitution matrix [7], users, and publications.
Finally tables reporting data from the MITOMAP database
about nucleotide and aminoacid mitochondrial polymorphisms and pathological mutations are part of the database.

At present, 1255 human mitochondrial sequences are
stored in the database. Each entry is represented by a
human mitochondrial sequence, and can be viewed
through its Genome Card. The information associated
with each Genome Card is grouped in two categories:
manually annotated data derived from source databases
(see section on "DATA SOURCE") and data produced by
the application of nucleotide and aminoacid site variability software ("HmtDB WORKFLOWS"). In the first category, the associated information is: geographic origin of
the subject from whom the mtDNA comes, sex, age, dis-

ease acronym (if the genome sequence is part of a mitochondrial disease study), biological source of mtDNA,
bibliographic references, haplogroup and haplotype code
as reported from the authors, and the sequencing protocol
adopted. These are subdivided into several tables, e.g.,
GENOME, REFERENCES, INDIVIDUAL DATA, COUNTRY, ETHNIC GROUPS, etc.. Missing information are left
empty.
Data in the second category are mtSNPs, deletions and/or
insertions determined by comparing each genome with
the revised Cambridge Reference Sequence [8,9]. Nucleotide and aminoacid site-specific variability values are
also associated with each mtSNP. The aminoacid intermammalian site-specific variability values estimated for
the 13 mtCDS from 60 mammal species whose mitochondrial genome has been completely sequenced are also
annotated. These data are structured in the tables entitled
NT_VARIABILITY, NT_VARIABILITY_SIM (for simulated
data: see VGWF section) and AA_VARIABILITY.
Moreover information about mtSNPs with phenotypic
effect, derived from MITOMAP database annotations
(MITOMAP_DNA and MITOMAP_AA tables in Figure 2),
are linked to information on mtSNPs presented by each
single mitochondrial sequence, and shown on the relative
Genome Card. This constitute a good example of how a
relational database structure can link various types of data
coming from different sources.
Mitochondrial haplogroup classification is also stored in
the database (HAPLOGROUP table in Figure 2). It is a
summary of human mitochondrial haplogroup data
available in the literature, revised by A.Torroni. For each
haplogroup, the code and set of mtSNPs defining it are
annotated in the HAPLOGROUP table. In this way, the
VGWF can predict the haplogroup paternity of each
genome, shown on the Genome Card.
Due to the existence of "personal sessions" for users
accessing HmtDB, tables USER and USER ANALYSIS have
also been incorporated in its structure.
Web interfaces
Web interfaces for database query, analyses, query results
and analysis results, submission and personal sessions
have all been developed using Java Server Pages (JSP). JSPs
are more efficient, easier to use, more powerful and more
portable than traditional CGI. They have been extensively
linked to each other, so that users can easily access data
independently from the navigation starting point. A complete set of "help" information, widely distributed
throughout each web page, supports users during navigation and interpretation of data derived from the applica-

Page 5 of 9
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2005, 6:S4

tion of the HmtDB VGWF to human mitochondrial
genomes.
The "Welcome" page is the first page of HmtDB. It gives
some general information about the resource, and offers
the possibility of registering (through an appropriate
form) or of logging in directly to HmtDB (provided that a
previously successful registration has been completed).
After log-in, users access a main menu page, from which
HmtDB macro-functions are available.
The HmtDB browsing function allows the selection of a
specific genome through a menu reporting the list of the
database source Accession Numbers, displaying the
Genome Card of the selected genome. This is the page on
which most of the results available through HmtDB are
shown: both CWF and VGWF analytical results are displayed, together with information from MITOMAP and
mtREV mitochondrial substitution indices [7] associated
with each mitochondrial aminoacid SNP detected in each
annotated sequence. It is also possible to access, through
many links, continent-specific nucleotide and aminoacid
site variability values, and simulated site-specific nucleotide variability values. Help information about these
results can also be obtained by mouse moves. A download
section, providing the multialignment of the entire contents of the database, multialignments for continent-specific subsets, and site-specific variability data, is also
available in the browsing function.
The "Analysis" page offers the possibility of inserting a
human mitochondrial sequence and analysing it according to the CWF procedure. Results are shown through the
generation of a new Genome Card on which the relative
haplogroup classification is displayed, as well as the
VGWF results on mitochondrial nucleotide variants
detected for that sequence.
The "Query" and "Submission" pages have not yet been
implemented, and the words "work in progress" highlight
this condition. However, it is worth mentioning that, if a
new human mitochondrial sequence is submitted,
HmtDB automatically checks that it is not already present
in the database, and in any case the new sequence is analysed according to the CWF procedure.
Lastly, the "My HmtDB Sessions" page displays the list of
analyses performed by each user, together with the date
and completion status (marked by different colours).

Methods
Data source
The first bulk of data stored in the database consists of
1255 human mitochondrial sequences, of which 560 are

coding region sequences only, and the rest are complete
genomes. They were retrieved from GenBank http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Entrez, EMBL http://srs.ebi.ac.uk,
MITOMAP http://www.mitomap.org, GOBASE http://
megasun.bch.umontreal.ca/gobase,
Mitokor
http://
www.mitokor.com and mtDB http://www.genpat.uu.se/
mtDB. The total resulting dataset is composed of 2291
genomes analysed with the CleanUP program [10] in
order to detect redundancies automatically. CleanUP software is periodically applied to the entire set of human
mitochondrial genomes publicly available, searching for
sequences with 100% similarity and 100% overlaps. A
screen of the CleanUP results distinguishes identical
sequences derived from the same individual (artificial
redundancy due to the presence of the same sequence in
different databases) from identical sequences derived
from different individuals (biological redundancy). Only
biological redundancies were recovered, yielding the
present dataset of 1255 sequences, corresponding to 1006
haplotypes, at present stored in HmtDB. The number of
haplotypes is the number of non-redundant sequences
obtained through the CleanUP application. Future
updates will be carried out periodically, partly relying on
authors' direct submissions.
Information on the annotation of genomes in HmtDB is
derived from the entry of the database from which the
sequences were retrieved. Further data such as geographic
origin, age, sex, haplogroup, disease acronym, tissue, and
sequencing method were extracted from the relative literature. Ethnic information was annotated following the
Ethnologue database http://www.ethnologue.com.
Quality of the sequences stored in HmtDB is under the
responsibility of the sequence producers and of the source
databases. Anyway in case of personal submissions, a
check for possible errors will be made before the submission procedure is complete.
Inter-species aminoacid site variability was estimated on
the multialignment of the 13 mtCDS of 60 complete
mitochondrial genomes from various mammal species.
These were retrieved from the AMmtDB database [11].
Information about polymorphic and pathological mutations was retrieved from MITOMAP and is organized in
tables describing the phenotypic effect of each mutation.
HmtDB workflows
The execution of both CWF and VGWF procedures
requires the application of a set of bioinformatics methods described below. Figure 3 reports the VGWF flow
chart. The first step of both procedures is alignment of the
human mitochondrial genomes. In the case of CWF, this
is performed between the sequence to be analysed and the

Page 6 of 9
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2005, 6:S4

Prepare 6 different multialignments: 1
total and 5 continent-specific

Figure 3
Variability Generation Work Flow (VGWF)
Variability Generation Work Flow (VGWF). Starting from the multialignment of all the genomes stored in the database
and of continent-specific subsets performed with MAFFT program, three variability analyses are executed separately: nucleotide variability values for both the entire set of genomes and the continent-specific subsets are estimated through SiteVar program applied on real dataset (right hand side of the Work Flow) and on 100 simulated multialignments obtained through an
automatic procedure for each continent-specific genomes dataset (in the middle of the Work Flow); aminoacid variability data
(left hand side of the Work Flow) are produced by applying MitVarProt software to the 13 multialigned mitochondrial protein
coding genes, automatically selected from the entire starting nucleotide multialignment and translated into aminoacid
sequences through TRANSEQ program; the data produced through this three procedures are inserted in NT_VARIABILITY,
NT_VARIABILITY_SIM and AA_VARIABILITY tables of the relational HmtDB structure respectively.

rCRS sequence; in the case of VGWF, it is performed on all
the contents of the database and on continent-specific
subsets. In both cases, multialignment is carried out by
executing the MAFFT program [12], a multiple sequence
alignment program suitable for a great number of long
sequences, based on fast Fourier transform, which allows
rapid detection of similar segments. Nucleotide and aminoacid variability data are produced by applying SiteVar
[13] and SiteVarProt [14] software, respectively, to the
multialigned genomes. The versions implemented in
HmtDB are revised versions developed in collaboration
with David Horner, with the aim of adapting the software
to analysis of mitochondrial sequences. In particular, the
SiteVar algorithm has been improved by assigning differ-

ent scores to transition and transversion and by considering gapped sites. In particular, the scores now considered
are: 1 for each transition, 2 for each transversion in the
site, and 2 for a gapped site. The SiteVarProt program is
transformed into MitVarProt, in which the Blosum-like
index is replaced with indices derived from the mtRev substitution matrix [7] based on multialigned mitochondrial
codified proteins, and a score for gapped sites has also
been introduced. The 13 mitochondrial coding for the
protein genes (mtCDS) of the human mitochondrial
genome are automatically selected from the entire nucleotide multialignment stored in the database, by means of
pattern matching. Translation into aminoacid sequences
is then executed by applying the TRANSEQ program

Page 7 of 9
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2005, 6:S4

(EMBOSS package) on the single gene-specific multialignment. The resulting aminoacid multialignments are submitted to site-specific variability analyses through the
MitVarProt software.
CWF
CWF procedure is performed on a single human mitochondrial sequence (Query), and aims at predicting its
haplogroup paternity. It consists essentially of an automatic comparison between Query and rCRS sequences,
with the aim of detecting the pattern of Query mtSNPs.
Matching an obtained pattern against the haplogroup
classification stored in HmtDB can predict the Query
sequence haplogroup paternity. A Genome Card of the
analysed genome is generated and displayed, on which
haplogroup paternity is expressed as a list of haplogroups
for which a match was found, and a percentage value of
the detected variations with respect to the total number of
variations defining the haplogroup. Also in this case, a
complete set of links, supported by help information,
allows users to navigate through the data and to retrieve
information about haplogroups.
VGWF
VGWF is performed both on the entire contents of the
database, and on continent-specific subsets. It aims at estimating nucleotide and aminoacid site-specific variability
through the application of appropriate software to multialigned data. Also in this case, the procedure is completely
automatic (including division of the entire dataset into
continent-specific subsets) and is repeated each time the
contents of the database is significantly updated, as the
site-specific variability software performs statistical estimates whose results change significantly only in cases of
considerable changes in the starting data (number of
sequences). In order to make these results statistically
more significant, bootstrap values are also estimated. This
is done by an automatic simulated sampling procedure
which, starting from real data stored in the database, estimates a number M of sequences equal to the number of
the less numerous continent-specific dataset. Then M
sequences from each continent-specific dataset and from
the entire database are chosen at random 100 times, and
100 site-specific nucleotide variability values are estimated for each subset on these simulated samples. The
final result, consisting of the mean site-specific variability
value plus its standard deviation, estimated for each dataset on the 100 simulated values, is then displayed in
appropriately formatted tables, and can also be downloaded. The simulated variability values statistically support real ones, as they provide an idea of the statistical
significance of the dimension of the real samples: the
closer the simulated value is to the real value, the more
"ideal" is the dimension of the real sample stored in the
database.

Conclusion
Progress in sequencing techniques is making the sequencing of complete genomes increasingly easy, in terms of
human resources, so that since 2000 the number of complete genomes has significantly increased [3,15-26], paving the way for "mitochondrial population genomics"
[27,28]. This new era opens up new perspectives both in
population genetics and mitochondrial disease studies,
especially when new approaches, such as site-specific variability estimation, are followed.
The HmtDB project is intended to store and analyse
human mitochondrial genomes in a well-integrated webbased bioinformatic resource, in order to support population genetics and mitochondrial disease studies, thanks to
a new approach based on site-specific nucleotide and aminoacid variability estimation. This will contribute towards
completing and/or refining haplogroup classification on
the basis of variability values obtained from HmtDB, in
order to detect new haplogroups and/or modifying existing classifications. In addition, site-specific variability
may reveal the real pathogenic potential of mitochondrial
mutations, excluding those which present too high interand intra-species nucleotide and aminoacid variability
values (indicative of low functional constraints in the
region presenting them), and focusing attention on those
mutations presenting more intriguing variability values.
In this way, HmtDB may contribute in a more rigorous
way to quantitative estimation of the pathogenetic proneness of mutated sites and to the detection of ethnic-specific sites, and consequently to refining haplogroups.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the "Ministero Università e Ricerca Scientifica", Italy (PRIN2003; Progetto MURST Cluster C03/2000, CEGBA), MIUR
– Functional Genomics and by a fund from ESF (P.O.P. 2000–2006). Accetturo M. was supported by a fellowship and fund from ESF (P.O.P. 2000–
2006). We thank Prof. Antonio Torroni of the Dept. of Genetics and
Microbiology of the University of Pavia, for his invaluable support and
advice regarding human mtDNA haplogroup classification.

References
1.
2.
3.

4.

5.

Wallace DC, Brown MD, Lott MT: Mitochondrial DNA variation in
human evolution and disease. Gene 1999, 238:211-230.
Smeitink J, van den Heuvel L, DiMauro S: The genetics and Pathology of Oxidative phosphorylation. Nature Reviews Genetics 2001,
2:342-352.
Torroni A, Rengo C, Guida V, Cruciani F, Sellitto D, Coppa A, Calderon FL, Simionati B, Valle G, Richards M, Macaulay V, Scozzari R:
Do the four clades of the mtDNA haplogroup L2 evolve at
different rates? Am J Hum Genet 2001, 69:1348-1356.
Brandon MC, Lott MT, Nguyen KC, Spolim S, Navathe SB, Baldi P,
Wallace DC: MITOMAP: a human mitochondrial genome
database – 2004 update. Nucleic Acids Research 2005, 33(Database):D611-613.
Handt O, Meyer S, von Haeseler A: Compilation of human
mtDNA control region sequences. Nucleic Acids Research 1998,
26:126-129.

Page 8 of 9
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2005, 6:S4

6.
7.
8.

9.

10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.

17.
18.
19.
20.

21.
22.
23.

24.

25.

26.

Tanaka M, Takeyasu T, Fuku N, Li-Jun G, Kurata M: Mitochondrial
genome single nucleotide polymorphisms and their phenotypes in the Japanese. Ann N Y Acad Sci 2004, 1011:7-20.
Adachi J, Hasegawa M: Model of amino acid substitution in proteins encoded by mitochondrial DNA. J Mol Evol 1996,
42:459-468.
Anderson S, Bankier AT, Barrell BG, de Bruijn MH, Coulson AR,
Drouin J, Eperon IC, Nierlich DP, Roe BA, Sanger F, Schreier PH,
Smith AJ, Staden R, Young IG: Sequence and organization of the
human
mitochondrial
genome.
Nature
1981,
290(5806):457-465.
Andrews RM, Kubacka I, Chinnery PF, Lightowlers RN, Turnbull DM,
Howell N: Reanalysis and revision of the Cambridge reference
sequence for human mitochondrial DNA. Nat Genet 1999,
23:147.
Grillo G, Attimonelli M, Liuni S, Pesole G: CLEANUP: a fast computer program for removing redundancies from nucleotide
sequence databases. Comput Appl Biosci 1996, 12:1-8.
Lanave C, Liuni S, Licciulli F, Attimonelli M: Update of AMmtDB: a
database of multi-aligned metazoa mitochondrial DNA
sequences. Nucleic Acids Res 2000, 28:153-154.
Katoh K, Misawa K, Kuma K, Miyata T: MAFFT: a novel method
for rapid multiple sequence alignment based on fast Fourier
transform. Nucl Acids Res 2002, 30:3059-3066.
Pesole G, Saccone C: A novel method for estimating substitution rate variation among sites in a large dataset of homologous DNA sequences. Genetics 2001, 157:859-865.
Horner DS, Pesole G: The estimation of relative site variability
among aligned homologous protein sequences. Bioinformatics
2003, 19:600-606.
Ingman M, Kaessmann H, Paabo S, Gyllensten U: Mitochondrial
genome variation and the origin of modern humans. Nature
2000, 408:708-713.
Finnila S, Hassinen IE, Majamaa K: Phylogenetic analysis of mitochondrial DNA in patients with an occipital stroke Evaluation of mutations by using sequence data on the entire
coding region. Mutat Res 2001, 458:31-39.
Finnila S, Lehtonen MS, Majamaa K: Phylogenetic network for
European mtDNA. Am J Hum Genet 2001, 68:1475-1484.
Finnila S, Majamaa K: Phylogenetic analysis of mtDNA haplogroup TJ in a Finnish population. J Hum Genet 2001, 46:64-69.
Maca-Meyer N, Gonzalez AM, Larruga JM, Flores C, Cabrera VM:
Major genomic mitochondrial lineages delineate early
human expansions. BMC Genet 2001, 2:13.
Herrnstadt C, Elson JL, Fahy E, Preston G, Turnbull DM, Anderson C,
Ghosh SS, Olefsky JM, Beal MF, Davis RE, Howell N: Reducedmedian-network analysis of complete mitochondrial DNA
coding-region sequences for the major African, Asian, and
European haplogroups. Am J Hum Genet 2002, 70(5):1152-71.
Erratum in: Am J Hum Genet 2002, 71(2):448-9.
Kong Q-P, Yao Y-G, Sun C, Bandelt H-J, Zhu C-L, Zhang Y-P: Phylogeny of East Asian mitochondrial DNA lineages inferred
from complete sequences. Am J Hum Genet 2003, 73:671-676.
Kivisild T, Tolk H-V, Parik J, Wang Y, Papiha SS, Bandelt HJ, Villems R:
The emerging limbs and twigs of the East Asian mtDNA
tree. Mol Biol Evol 2002, 19:1737-1751.
Derbeneva OA, Sukernik RI, Volodko NV, Hosseini SH, Lott MT,
Wallace DC: Analysis of mitochondrial DNA diversity in the
Aleuts of the commander islands and its implications for the
genetic history of Beringia. Am J Hum Genet 2002, 71:415-421.
Tanaka M, Cabrera VM, Gonzalez AM, Larruga JM, Takeyasu T, Fuku
N, Guo LJ, Hirose R, Fujita Y, Kurata M, Shinoda K, Umetsu K,
Yamada Y, Oshida Y, Sato Y, Hattori N, Mizuno Y, Arai Y, Hirose N,
Ohta S, Ogawa O, Tanaka Y, Kawamori R, Shamoto-Nagai M, Maruyama W, Shimokata H, Suzuki R, Shimodaira H: Mitochondrial
genome variation in eastern Asia and the peopling of Japan.
Genome Res 2004, 14(10A):1832-1850.
Coble MD, Just RS, O'Callaghan JE, Letmanyi IH, Peterson CT, Irwin
JA, Parsons TJ: Single nucleotide polymorphisms over the
entire mtDNA genome that increase the power of forensic
testing in Caucasians. Int J Legal Med 2004, 118(3):137-146.
Palamichamy MG, Sun C, Agrawal S, Bandelt H-J, Kong Q-P, Khan F,
Wang C-Y, Chaudhuri TK, Palla V, Zhang Y-P: Phylogeny of mitochondrial DNA macrohaplogroup N in India, based on complete sequencing: implications for the peopling of South
Asia. Am J Hum Genet 2004, 75:966-978.

27.
28.

Hedges SB: Human evolution. A start for population genomics. Nature 2000, 408(6813):652-653.
Richards M, Macaulay V: The mitochondrial gene tree comes of
age. Am J Hum Genet 2001, 68:1315-1320.

Publish with Bio Med Central and every
scientist can read your work free of charge
"BioMed Central will be the most significant development for
disseminating the results of biomedical researc h in our lifetime."
Sir Paul Nurse, Cancer Research UK

Your research papers will be:
available free of charge to the entire biomedical community
peer reviewed and published immediately upon acceptance
cited in PubMed and archived on PubMed Central
yours — you keep the copyright

BioMedcentral

Submit your manuscript here:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/info/publishing_adv.asp

Page 9 of 9
(page number not for citation purposes)

</pre>
</body>
</html>
