<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>The MetJ regulon in gammaproteobacteria determined by comparative genomics methods</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Genomics 2011, 12:558. doi:10.1186/1471-2164-12-558"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Anne M Augustus"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Augustus and Spicer BMC Genomics 2011, 12:558
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/558

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

The MetJ regulon in gammaproteobacteria
determined by comparative genomics methods
Anne M Augustus1 and Leonard D Spicer1,2*

Abstract
Background: Whole-genome sequencing of bacteria has proceeded at an exponential pace but annotation
validation has lagged behind. For instance, the MetJ regulon, which controls methionine biosynthesis and
transport, has been studied almost exclusively in E. coli and Salmonella, but homologs of MetJ exist in a variety of
other species. These include some that are pathogenic (e.g. Yersinia) and some that are important for
environmental remediation (e.g. Shewanella) but many of which have not been extensively characterized in the
literature.
Results: We have determined the likely composition of the MetJ regulon in all species which have MetJ homologs
using bioinformatics techniques. We show that the core genes known from E. coli are consistently regulated in
other species, and we identify previously unknown members of the regulon. These include the cobalamin
transporter, btuB; all the genes involved in the methionine salvage pathway; as well as several enzymes and
transporters of unknown specificity.
Conclusions: The MetJ regulon is present and functional in five orders of gammaproteobacteria: Enterobacteriales,
Pasteurellales, Vibrionales, Aeromonadales and Alteromonadales. New regulatory activity for MetJ was identified in
the genomic data and verified experimentally. This strategy should be applicable for the elucidation of regulatory
pathways in other systems by using the extensive sequencing data currently being generated.

Background
The advent of fast sequencing techniques over the past
few decades has led to an exponential increase in the
number of fully sequenced organisms, particularly bacteria with their smaller genomes. Although a great deal
of data is being generated, much of it is in the form of
annotations based on automated similarity searches. It is
important to validate these annotations and extend the
use of the databases by organizing the genes into coherent pathways.
Here sequenced bacterial genomes were used to determine the full extent of the MetJ regulon in gammaproteobacteria. This regulon is controlled by the
transcription factor MetJ which represses genes involved
in methionine biosynthesis and transport [1-4]. Figure 1
shows various metabolic pathways involving methionine
and Table 1 gives the functions of the genes. To date,
* Correspondence: spicer@biochem.duke.edu
1
Department of Biochemistry, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina,
27710, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

the MetJ regulon has been studied almost exclusively in
E. coli and the closely-related Salmonella, but it is likely
that the complement of repressed genes extends beyond
that known in these organisms.
Previously, genes in the regulon were recognized on
an individual basis by identifying DNA binding sites for
MetJ, called metboxes, or by showing regulation via
MetJ, methionine or its derivative S-adenosylmethionine
(AdoMet) which is the co-factor for MetJ. Efforts to do
large-scale, undirected searches for MetJ-regulated genes
have been limited to E. coli [5,6]. By expanding our
search to all sequenced bacteria, the dataset we had
available for this study included 206 sequenced organisms representing 41 genera in 5 orders.
In this study, we have identified the conserved members that form the core of the regulon in all the organisms. While each species has a unique spectrum of
regulated genes, the over-all regulon includes all the
genes involved in methionine biosynthesis, salvage and
transport. We have identified some previously unknown
members of the regulon and, in addition, have

© 2011 Augustus and Spicer; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Augustus and Spicer BMC Genomics 2011, 12:558
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/558

Page 2 of 18

Figure 1 Methionine as the center of various metabolic pathways. Key is in upper-right. Genes regulated by MetJ are in black; other genes
are in gray.

experimentally confirmed that some of these are regulated by MetJ in vivo.

Results
MetJ homologs and metboxes

Based on BLAST searches, MetJ homologs exist only
within the gammaproteobacteria, and only within five
orders: Enterobacteriales (Ent), Pasteurellales (Pas),

Vibrionales (Vib), Aeromonadales (Aer) and Alteromonadales (Alt). These orders are shown in the phylogenetic tree in Figure 2 which was generated by the
Orthologous Matrix Project based on whole genome
comparisons of sequenced bacteria [7]. The most recent
revision (December, 2010) includes most species that
were part of this study. The gammaproteobacteria represent an important group of bacteria that are intimately

Augustus and Spicer BMC Genomics 2011, 12:558
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/558

Table 1 Functions of the genes involved in methionine
utilization
gene

function1

Page 3 of 18

Table 1 Functions of the genes involved in methionine
utilization (Continued)
megL

~methionine gamma-lyase

Regulators

pcbC

~oxygenase

metJ

Various unregulated genes

AdoMet-dependent transcriptional repressor

metR
homocysteine-dependent transcriptional activator
Biosynthetic enzymes

ahcY

adenosylhomocysteinease

asd

aspartate semialdehyde dehydrogenase

metL

aspartokinase II/homoserine dehydrogenase II

def

peptide deformylase

metA

homoserine O-succinyltransferase

fmt

metX

homoserine O-acetyltransferase

10-formyltetrahydrofolate : L-methionyl-tRNAfMet Nformyltransferase

metY

~O-acetylhomoserine sulfhydrylase

metB

cystathionine gamma-synthase

folE
glyA

GTP cyclohydrolase I
serine hydroxymethyltransferase

metC

cystathionine beta-lyase

luxS

S-ribosylhomocysteine lyase

5,10-methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase
methionine synthase (B12-dependent)

map

methionine aminopeptidase

metG

methionyl-tRNA synthetase

metE

methionine synthase (B12-independent)

mtnN

metK

S-adenosylmethionine (AdoMet) synthetase

methylthioadenosine (MTA) nucleosidase/Sadenosylhomocysteine (AdoHcy) nucleosidase

metF
metH

Methionine salvage pathway genes
ybdH

~MTR transporter (ATPase subunit)

mtrC

~MTR transporter (permease subunit)

mtrB
mtrY

~MTR transporter (substrate-binding subunit)
~function unknown

mtnK

5-methylthioribose (MTR) kinase

mtnA

S-methyl-5-thioribose-1-phosphate isomerase

mtnD

1,2-dihydroxy-3-keto-5-methylthiopentene dioxygenase

mtnC

2,3-diketo-5-methylthio-1-phosphopentane phosphatase

mtnB

methylthioribulose-1-phosphate dehydratase

mtnE

methionine aminotransferase

Functions predicted from sequence similarity are marked with a tilde (~).

~alcohol dehydrogenase

mtrA

1

mtnU ~nitrilase
Transporters
metN

methionine transporter (ATPase subunit)

metI

methionine transporter (permease subunit)

metQ

methionine transporter (substrate-binding subunit)

metT

~methionine transporter (Na+/H+ antiporter family)
vitamin B12 (cobalamin) outer membrane transporter

btuB
mtsA

~cobalt transporter (substrate-binding subunit)

mtsB
mtsC

~cobalt transporter (ATPase subunit)
~cobalt transporter (permease subunit)

nhaP

~Na+/H+ antiporter

Other regulated genes
mmuP

S-methylmethionine permease

mmuM S-methylmethionine : homocysteine methyltransferase
MHT1

~homocysteine S-methyltransferase

dppA

~transporter (substrate-binding subunit)

dppB
dppC

~transporter (permease subunit)
~transporter (permease subunit)

dppD

~transporter (ATPase subunit)

MHT2

~homocysteine S-methyltransferase

arcD

~amino acid permease

metE2a ~methionine synthetase (B12-independent)
mtcB

cystathionine beta-synthase

mtcC

cystathionine gamma-lyase

involved in human life. They not only include the causative agents of diseases like cholera (Vibrio cholerae),
chancroid (Haemophilus ducreyi), typhoid (Salmonella
enterica) and the plague (Yersinia pestis), but they also
include species that provide benefits such as aiding in
the digestion of humans (Escherichia coli) and cows
(Mannheimia succiniciproducens), acting as an agricultural insecticide (Photorhabdus luminescens), and being
used in environmental bioremediation (Shewanella oneidensis). The five orders of interest all cluster in one part
of the tree so it appears that MetJ entered the bacterial
lineages at their common origin. All the sequenced
organisms within these five orders have MetJ homologs
with the exception of symbiotic Ent species (colored in
orange). Almost all these species have lost MetJ as part
of the massive reductions their genomes underwent during their shift to a symbiotic lifestyle. We note that
three species (Marinobacter aquaeolei, Saccharophagus
degradans and Teredinibacter turnerae) were annotated
as Alt but they lack a MetJ homolog and metboxes, and
they do not cluster with other Alt species, so they may
have been misclassified. They were thus excluded from
the analysis.
In order to look for metboxes in all these species, the
known metboxes from E. coli were used as a training set
to identify potential metboxes. High-confidence
sequences that occurred with genes which were part of
the known MetJ regulon in E. coli were used to create
the final bit matrix for the final search, as described in
the Methods. Methionine-related genes which had
potential metboxes in a large number of species, particularly across multiple orders, make up the final list of
candidate genes. Table 2 summarizes the membership in
the MetJ regulon, indicating how many species within

Augustus and Spicer BMC Genomics 2011, 12:558
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/558

Page 4 of 18

ella

Es
ch
eri
ch
ia

is
nc
Fra
10

lla
xie
Co

la
el
on
gi
Le

lla
ne
lmo
Sa

Xyle
lla

r
bacte
Citro bacter
tero
En
iella
Klebs bacter
Crono ia
Erwin

Xanth
omon
as

Yersinia

Gammaproteobacteria
Acinetobac

ter

c
noba
*Mari

ter

Ent

Alt

Psychro.

a
wan
ell

e
r
za
te
en
ac
f lu
ib
in
at
H.
e g la
gr
l
Ag eure ilus
st
ph ia es
Pa sto eim gen
Hi nnh cino
c
Ma .su
ro.
A
leu
i
A.p ucrey
H.d asuis
ar
H.p

o
Vibri

She

Ha
mil Baum
ton
ella annia

Aer Vib

Photobacterium
Aeromonas

*S *
ac Te
ch re
ar di
op nib
ha ac
g u te
Id
P.
s r
ha Coiom
lop lw ari
Alt
ero lan elli na
P. a m k t i a
tla ona s
nti s
ca

P

Pas

s
na
mo
do
seu

Serrati
a
Pecto
bacte
rium
Dick
e
Sod ya
Edw alis
Pho ardsie
lla
t
Pro orhab
dus
teu
s

Bl

oc
hm

an
ni
a

W

igg
Bu
ch
les
ne
wo
ra
rth
ia

Figure 2 Phylogenetic tree of the gammaproteobacteria. Species with MetJ homologs are color-coded by order: Alt, Alteromonadales
(green); Aer, Aeromonadales (blue); Vib, Vibrionales (purple); Pas, Pasteurellales (red); Ent, Enterobacteriales (orange for symbiotes, yellow for the
rest). Selected other species are show in black. Three species marked with an asterisk were assigned to Alt but do not cluster with other Alt
species.

an order have the gene, and how many of those genes
have metboxes. Figure 3 maps the degree of regulation
for each gene onto the metabolic pathways involving
methionine. A full list of candidate metboxes that were
identified is available as Additional file 1 (Table S1),
while a full list of candidate genes is available as Additional file 2 (Table S2). The spectrum of regulation
shown in Table 2 and Figure 3 varies a great deal for
each species, but, as expected, the known biosynthetic
and transporter genes are well-represented.
For the entire complement of the MetJ regulon, most
organisms regulate 70-80% of the genes, particularly
Ent, Vib and Alt. For the Aeromonads, A. hydrophila
regulates 94% of its genes, while Tolumonas only does
57%. The Pasteurellales are also highly variable, with
repression percents ranging from 27% for Aggregatibacter to 69% for Pasteurella. Among the Ent symbiotes,

only two species, Hamiltonella defensa and Baumannia
cicadellinicola, have MetJ homologs, and it is a pseudogene in the latter. (We note that the classification of
genes as pseudogenes in this paper is based on the genome annotation and therefore could be affected by
sequencing errors. However in the case of symbiotic
species, pseudogenization and gene loss are common
features of reductive genome evolution [8].) These species are also the only symbiotes with metboxes, although
with a limited distribution; in H. defensa only metNIQ
has them, while in B. cicadellinicola only metE/R have
them. The metbox regions for these genes are highly
similar to those of other Ent species (70% identical to
the corresponding regions of E. coli) and appear to be
conserved from the common ancestor.
In addition to the Ent symbiotes, Sodalis glossinidius
(Ent) and Haemophilus ducreyi (Pas) show a great deal

Augustus and Spicer BMC Genomics 2011, 12:558
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/558

Page 5 of 18

Table 2 Composition of the MetJ regulon for the five orders
Ent

Sym

Pas

Vib

Aer

Alt

All

122

16

20

16

3

29

206

metJ

*122 (122)

2 (0)

20 (15)

16 (16)

3 (3)

29 (28)

192 (184)

metR

*122 (122)

2 (1)

19 (3)

16 (16)

3 (3)

26 (22)

188 (167)

species

metL

122 (117)

–

–

16 (16)

3 (2)

26 (24)

167 (159)

metA

*122 (120)

3 (0)

–

16 (15)

3 (3)

27 (9)

171 (147)

–

–

*19 (19)

–

–

–

19 (19)

metY

12 (0)

–

1 (0)

4 (0)

3 (2)

*25 (18)

45 (20)

metB
metC

*122 (122)
*119 (81)

3 (0)
3 (0)

–
19 (0)

16 (16)
16 (0)

3 (3)
–

25 (25)
24 (8)

169 (166)
181 (89)

metF

*122 (122)

13 (0)

18 (2)

16 (16)

2 (2)

23 (23)

194 (165)

metF2

–

–

–

–

–

5 (4)

5 (4)

metH

*112 (1)

–

9 (0)

*16 (16)

3 (2)

*28 (26)

168 (45)

metE

*122 (122)

13 (1)

17 (14)

16 (16)

3 (3)

19 (18)

190 (174)

metK

*122 (119)

14 (0)

20 (15)

16 (3)

3 (0)

29 (7)

204 (144)

ybdH/2

*101 (79)

–

–

–

–

–

101 (79)

mtrA
mtrC

*41 (19)
41 (19)

–
–

–
–

–
–

–
–

–
–

41 (19)
41 (19)

mtrB/2

*40 (26)

–

–

–

–

–

40 (26)

mtrY/2

31 (9)

–

–

–

–

–

31 (9)

mtnK

*38 (35)

–

–

1 (0)

–

1 (1)

40 (36)

metX/1/2

mtnA

*38 (35)

–

–

–

–

1 (1)

39 (36)

mtnD

35 (29)

–

–

–

–

1 (1)

36 (30)

mtnC

35 (35)

–

–

–

–

mtnB
mtnE

*35 (35)
*105 (99)

–
–

–
–

–
–

–
–

22 (1)
2 (2)
3 (1)

57 (36)
37 (37)
108 (100)

metNIQ

164 (159)

*122 (121)

1 (1)

20 (16)

16 (16)

3 (3)

2 (2)

metT

–

–

–

*11 (11)

2 (2)

*26 (26)

39 (39)

btuB

*116 (34)

–

3 (0)

16 (6)

3 (2)

27 (6)

165 (48)

mtsABC

–

–

–

10 (6)

–

–

10 (6)

nhaP

–

–

10 (0)

*16 (16)

2 (2)

1 (0)

29 (18)

*21 (21)
9 (9)

–
–

–
–

–
–

–
–

–
–

21 (21)
9 (9)

mmuPM
MHT1/dppABCD

–

–

5 (0)

1 (1)

2 (2)

6 (6)

14 (9)

metE2a

*28 (28)

–

–

–

–

–

28 (28)

mtcBC

20 (4)

–

–

–

–

2 (0)

22 (4)

–

–

–

–

2 (0)

5 (5)

7 (5)

MHT2/arcD

pcbC/megL

The number of species within an order that have each gene are indicated and the number of those genes that have metboxes is in parentheses. Symbiotic
Enterobacteria have been counted separately. Genes from an order that were tested experimentally for repression are marked with an asterisk.

of attrition in the MetJ regulon. S. glossinidius lives as a
symbiote of tsetse flies but unlike the other symbiotic
species, it has not reduced its genome significantly.
However, while the genome is about the same size as E.
coli, S. glossinidius has only about half as many intact
genes. For our genes of interest, metE2a, metH, metL,
mtnK, mtnA, mtnC, mtnE and btuB are identifiable as
(unannotated) pseudogenes. Other than metH and metL,
it retains the full complement of biosynthetic enzymes.
In the case of H. ducreyi, an obligate pathogen, almost
all genes of the MetJ regulon have been lost and it
retains only metJ, metK and metNIQ. Of these, only

metK retains its metboxes, so we may be seeing the first
stage of the loss of metJ from this organism.
Regulation by MetJ

In order to confirm their regulation by MetJ, some of
the candidate genes were chosen for further study. The
ability of MetJ to regulate the genes was assessed in vivo
using an ONPG assay where the native operators (400
base pairs upstream of the coding sequence) were used
to direct expression of lacZ. We cannot assume all foreign promoters will be functional in E. coli, but we are
interested only in the expression of the gene in the

Augustus and Spicer BMC Genomics 2011, 12:558
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/558

Page 6 of 18

Figure 3 Summary of genes regulated by MetJ in the various metabolic pathways. The extent of regulation for each gene in the MetJ
regulon is mapped onto a compressed pathway of methionine metabolism. Genes are annotated for their presence in an order, as well as the
percent of those genes that have metboxes. Symbiotic bacteria have been excluded from “Ent” (Enterobacteriales), but are included in “All”. Key
is in upper-right; other features are the same as in Figure 1.

presence of MetJ relative to the expression without
MetJ, i.e. the repression ratio (RR). (We also note that
we had difficulty transforming constructs containing H.
influenzae operators into E. coli, although constructs
from the other species could be readily transformed.)
We tested the known E. coli genes as well as some
negative controls to determine the variability of repression. We then included a selection of genes from a variety of other organisms. Figure 4 shows the repression
ratios for the various operators tested. The negative controls show ratios close to 1.00 while most of the
repressed genes have ratios < 0.25. A gel shift was also
performed to verify direct MetJ binding to the DNA
sequences (Additional file 3 Figure S1), and those operators which were bound by MetJ are displayed as black
bars in Figure 4. Ec.exbB is black because it shares an
intergenic region with Ec.metC, but it is not regulated

by MetJ in vivo. Ec.metH is white because it has no
metboxes, but is strongly repressed in vivo by indirect
regulation through MetR [9]. Ec.metJ itself shows fairly
weak repression which is consistent with previous
reports [10,11] and arises from the fact that one of its
three promoters is constitutive and non-repressible. It is
therefore likely that other genes with ratios around 0.50
are either weakly or indirectly repressed. Individual
genes are discussed below.
Transcription regulators

MetJ is auto-regulated in 96% of the species where it
occurs, although this repression is fairly weak. As
described above, it was only repressed by half in our
ONPG assay. In most species the gene occurs as part of
a conserved cluster which includes metB, metL and

Augustus and Spicer BMC Genomics 2011, 12:558
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/558

Figure 4 ONPG assay for testing regulation in vivo. The results
of the ONPG assay are summarized as the ratio of expression under
repressed conditions (wt E. coli) to that under derepressed
conditions (ΔmetJ). Black bars indicate the operator sequence was
bound by MetJ in a gel-shift assay (Figure S1), while white bars
were not bound. Species abbreviations are: Ec, Escherichia coli K12
W3110; Hi, Haemophilus influenzae Rd KW20; KIM, Yersinia pestis KIM;
Kp, Klebsiella pneumoniae; So, Shewanella oneidensis; Vc, Vibrio
cholerae N16961; Ye, Yersinia enterocolitica; Yp, Yersinia
pseudotuberculosis YPIII.

metF (Figure 5), and it typically shares an intergenic
region, and metboxes, with metB.
In addition to MetJ, some genes of the MetJ regulon
are also regulated by MetR, a transcriptional activator of
the LysR family. This protein primarily controls the
expression of genes at the end of the pathway: metF,
metE and metH, but also metA, glyA, luxS and metR
itself. This gene is well represented in 91% of the species, and has metboxes in 89% of those. It almost always
co-occurs with metE and they are divergently transcribed from a common intergenic region with common
metboxes. In Alteromonas macleodii, an Alt species
which lacks metE, metR is instead located 1 kilobase
away from metH.
Methionine biosynthesis genes: homocysteine formation

In the canonical biosynthetic pathway, the backbone of
methionine comes from aspartate, which is also the

Page 7 of 18

Figure 5 Genomic organization of the genes in the metJBLF
cluster. Species are: Ec, Escherichia coli K12 MG1655 (Ent); Hi,
Haemophilus influenzae Rd KW20 (Pas); Vc, Vibrio cholerae N16961
(Vib); Ah, Aeromonas hydrophila (Aer); So, Shewanella oneidensis (Alt);
Cp, Colwellia psychrerythraea (Alt); and Kk, Kangiella koreensis (Alt).
Genes are color-coded and spaces have been introduced between
adjacent genes in order to align homologs vertically. In cases where
a large number of other genes intervene between those of interest,
a separation symbol is used://. Sites of metboxes are indicated by a
circled X. Genes which were tested for repression in this paper are
displayed with their repression ratio above the gene arrow.

precursor to lysine, threonine and isoleucine (Figure 1).
Consequently, the three steps to convert aspartate to
homoserine are catalyzed by the isoforms MetL (aspartokinase II, homoserine dehydrogenase II), ThrA (aspartokinase I, homoserine dehydrogenase I) and LysC
(aspartokinase III), as well as the unique enzyme Asd
(aspartate semialdehyde dehydrogenase). We note that
all organisms without metL (mostly symbiotes and Pasteurellales) have thrA (distinguishable because it clusters
with thrB and thrC) so it is possible that thrA provides
the necessary function in those species. In almost every
species of interest, the metL gene forms an operon with
metB, and thus is regulated by the metB promoter (Figure 5). The only exceptions are Idiomarina, where metB
has been lost, and Kangiella, where the operon has been
expanded to include metX2 and metF.
The immediate precursor to methionine is homocysteine which can be made in multiple ways. Homoserine,
created by MetL, is first activated by either succinylation
or acetylation, and this represents the first committed
step in methionine biosynthesis. These reactions are
normally carried out by the unrelated proteins MetA
(homoserine O-succinyltransferase) and MetX (homoserine O-acetyltransferase), however the two proteins do
not have strict specificities [12]. Homocysteine can then
be generated by either direct sulfhydrylation, a single

Augustus and Spicer BMC Genomics 2011, 12:558
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/558

step using inorganic sulfur, or by transsulfuration, a two
step process using cystathionine as an intermediate with
cysteine as the sulfur donor. The first reaction is usually
catalyzed by MetY (O-acetylhomoserine (thiol)-lyase),
while the second set of reactions is carried out by MetB
(cystathionine gamma-synthase) and MetC (cystathionine beta-lyase). However, just as with MetA and MetX,
there is a certain amount of promiscuity in the functions
of MetY, MetB and MetC [13], particularly since they all
belong to the same transsulfuration family of pyridoxaldependent enzymes (Additional file 4 Figure S2).
For the first step of homoserine activation, almost all
our species of interest use MetA (83%), and it has metboxes in most of them (86%). In addition, the E. coli
protein is known to be feedback inhibited by methionine
and AdoMet, and to be regulated at the level of transcription by MetR as well as MetJ. In most Ent and
some Alt and Aer it occurs close in the genome to
metH, the B 12 -dependent methionine synthase, even
seeming to form an operon in Pseudoalteromonas and
Alteromonas species.
The species without MetA either lack de novo biosynthesis (Ent symbiotes and H. ducreyi) or use MetX
homologs (Pas and the Alt species Idiomarina and Kangiella). These genes all have metboxes. In addition, five
Alt (three Pseudoalteromonas, Alteromonas and Idiomarina) and one Ent (Pantoea sp. At-9b) have a MetX
homolog even though they also have MetA (or MetX1
in the case of Idiomarina). These genes do not have
metboxes. The few metX genes that exist seem to have
arisen from horizontal gene transfer; metX in Pas likely
came from Listeria or a close relative [12].
In addition to replacing MetA with MetX, Pas species
also replaced MetB with MetB2 from Gram-positives
[14]. These two genes are not located close to each
other on the chromosome so they may represent independent transfers. Possibly the native MetB was not capable of or efficient at recognizing the acetylated product
of MetX; E. coli MetB can act on acetyl-homocysteine
although not as efficiently as the succinylated substrate
[13]. MetC remains to convert cystathionine to homocysteine. One of the H. influenzae strains (PittGG) lacks
MetB2 and MetX is a pseudogene so it may have lost
the ability to synthesize methionine. While all the Pas
metX genes have metboxes and they were shown to be
functional in H. influenzae, albeit weakly (RR = 0.52),
only one of the metB2 genes has potential metboxes.
With the notable exception of Pas, succinylation by
MetA and transsulfuration using MetB and MetC
appears to be the ancestral pathway for homocysteine
synthesis as these genes are well represented in all the
orders. In almost all cases (98%) metB has metboxes,
while metC has metboxes only in about half the Ent and
a handful of Alt. Among the Ent symbiotes, only

Page 8 of 18

Baumannia and Blochmannia have the three genes, but
none of them have metboxes. metB is a pseudogene in
Yersinia pestis strains, which explains its known methionine auxotrophy [15]. Although it relies on transport to
meet its methionine needs, Y. pestis has not yet lost any
of the other genes associated with biosynthesis, or the
metboxes that regulate them.
MetY homologs, which create homocysteine via direct
sulfhydrylation, are eclectically represented in the five
orders, but unlike MetA, MetB and MetC, the distribution of the MetY homologs does not match the phylogeny, so they are probably not inherited. There are
metboxes in most of the Aer and Alt species and the
gene from Shewanella is strongly repressed by MetJ (RR
= 0.11). Almost all the species with MetY also have
MetA, MetB and MetC so they may be able to use both
pathways for homocysteine synthesis. The Alt Idiomarina is unique in that it lacks MetA, MetB and MetC
and only has MetX1 and MetY, which form an operon
and therefore presumably function together. Kangiella is
odd in that it has metB, but not metY or metC. Probably
MetB in this organism is capable of converting the
MetX2 product directly to homocysteine through direct
sulfhydrylation, a secondary function that E. coli MetB
also has [13].
Methionine biosynthesis genes: methionine formation

Homocysteine is converted to methionine using one of
two unrelated enzymes: MetH, which requires vitamin
B12 (cobalamin) as co-factor, and MetE. For organisms
which have both proteins (~70% of our species), MetH
is preferred when B 12 is available since it is a much
more efficient enzyme than MetE. MetH has metboxes
in Vib, Aer and Alt species, but rarely in Ent or Pas.
MetE, on the other hand, has metboxes in almost every
species. This is probably because, in the absence of
repression, the metE gene is very highly expressed to
overcome the fact that it is such an inefficient enzyme
[16]. In E. coli, this expression also requires MetR so it
is not surprising that, with the exception of symbiotes,
all species with metE also have metR, although the
reverse is not true. As said before, metE typically shares
a locus with metR, with the two genes being divergently
transcribed from a common intergenic region in almost
all species.
The terminal methyl group for methionine comes
from the donor 5-methyltetrahydrofolate which is made
by the enzyme MetF (5,10-methylenetetrahydrofolate
reductase) and is usually in a glutamylated form. MetF
has metboxes in almost all species (85%), the primary
exception being Pas. In addition, there are four Alt species (Psychromonas ingrahamii, Shewanella piezotolerans, Colwellia psychrerythraea and Pseudoalteromonas
haloplanktis) that lack the ortholog of E. coli metF, but

Augustus and Spicer BMC Genomics 2011, 12:558
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/558

instead have a gene we will refer to in this paper as
metF2. This is only weakly similar to metF, but contains
the same conserved domain (cd00537; PF02219).
Because it occurs in species without metF, and because
3 of the 4 genes have metboxes, this gene likely performs the same function.
All but seven organisms have one or both of metE and
metH, along with metF and thus can presumably synthesize methionine from homocysteine. Four of these deficient species are the symbiotes Hamiltonella,
Wigglesworthia, Riesia and the Pas H. ducreyi which
also lack the pathway for homocysteine synthesis. The
Pas A. succinogenes and Alt Idiomarina lack metE, metH
and metF while retaining the genes necessary for homocysteine synthesis. In the case of Idiomarina, it was
shown that it is capable of growing in the absence of
methionine [17] so it must have another pathway for its
creation. It does not have any close homologs of metH
or metE, but A. succinogenes has homologs of both
metH (MHT2) and metE (metE2b and metE2c) so possibly one or more of these can complement the loss. The
Aer A. salmonicida lacks only metF while retaining the
synthases, so only its methyl donor is unknown.
S-adenosylmethionine synthesis

Methionine can be further converted into S-adenosylmethionine (AdoMet) by the essential enzyme MetK.
AdoMet is primarily used as a methyl donor but is also
required for synthesis of polyamines, autoinducers and
other molecules [18,19]. Crucially for the MetJ regulon,
AdoMet is the co-factor for MetJ, which thus detects
methionine levels only indirectly. The metK gene has
metboxes in most Ent and Pas, but only a handful of
Vib and Alt and no Aer. In many Gram-positive bacteria, which all lack MetJ, methionine biosynthesis is
regulated by an AdoMet riboswitch [20,21]. Thus it
seems that AdoMet synthesis is usually coordinately
regulated as a part of methionine metabolism.
Methionine salvage

The methionine salvage (MS) pathway allows the recycling of methylthioadenosine (MTA), produced during
polyamine synthesis and other reactions, back to
methionine (reviewed in [22]). MTA, which is a potent
inhibitor of its parent reaction, is cleaved to
methylthioribose (MTR) by the ubiquitous nucleosidase
MtnN (5’-methylthioadenosine/S-adenosylhomocysteine
nucleosidase). In E. coli, which lacks the MS pathway,
MTR is excreted [23] and this may be true for other
species which lack the pathway.
The enzymes which convert MTR to methionine in
Enterobacteria are (in order of reaction): MtnK (5methylthioribose kinase), MtnA (S-methyl-5-thioribose1-phosphate isomerase), MtnB (methylthioribulose-1-

Page 9 of 18

phosphate dehydratase), MtnC (2,3-diketo-5-methylthio1-phosphopentane phosphatase), MtnD (1,2-dihydroxy3-keto-5-methylthiopentene dioxygenase) and MtnE
(methionine aminotransferase). The pathway is illustrated in Figure 1. The final step can actually be catalyzed by multiple aminotransferases, such as tyrB in
Klebsiella [24], while mtnV, the aminotransferase in
Bacillus subtilis, was found to be dispensable [25].
Nevertheless, the mtnE gene is special because it only
occurs in species that have (or whose ancestors had) the
MS pathway, it clusters with other MS genes, and it is
the only aminotransferase with metboxes. There are also
some alternate proteins used by other species. For
instance the single enzyme MtnP (methylthioadenosine
phosphorylase) can be used in place of MtnN and
MtnK, while MtnW (2,3-diketo-5-methylthiopentyl-1phosphate enolase) and MtnX (2-hydroxy-3-keto-5methylthiopentenyl-1-phosphate phosphatase) can be
used in place of the bifunctional enzyme MtnC. None of
these alternate enzymes have close homologs in our species of interest however.
In addition, these genes co-occur with a probable
MTR transporter initially identified in Bacillus cereus
[26]. It has not been functionally characterized yet, but
is similar to other sugar transporters and has an S-box
(AdoMet riboswitch) in B. cereus as well as metboxes in
gammaproteobacteria. We will refer to the three components of this ABC transporter as mtrACB. The mtrB
gene is usually closely followed by a gene of unknown
function (COG5276) which we refer to as mtrY since its
role is a mystery. Another gene, called mtnU, is closely
associated with the MS genes. It is a nitrilase (from conserved domain cl11424) but its specificity is unknown. It
was proposed to have a regulatory function in B. subtilis
because it was produced at much lower levels than the
other proteins [25]. Finally, another protein of unknown
function, the putative alcohol dehydrogenase ybdH, also
co-occurs with the MS genes and shares regulation by
common intergenic metboxes.
Figure 6 shows the distribution and genomic context
of the MS genes in our species of interest. Genes are
color-coded and arranged to highlight the general conservation of the clusters. For all the MS genes tested,
repression by MetJ was generally very tight (RR ≤ 0.12
for ybdH, mtnA, mtnB, mtnK, mtnE and mtrB in E. coli,
Yersinia or Klebsiella, but 0.42 for mtrA in Klebsiella).
The presence of metboxes between ybdH and mtnE
(formerly ybdL) in E. coli was also noted by the Church
group [27]; they generated knock-outs of the metboxes
which caused an increase in the expression of both
genes as determined by quantitative real-time PCR.
The full complement of genes exists only in the Enterobacteria, although individual species have suffered various rearrangements and losses. In Klebsiella, the mtnB

Augustus and Spicer BMC Genomics 2011, 12:558
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/558

Page 10 of 18

Figure 6 Genomic organization of the genes of the methionine salvage pathway. The different patterns are represented by one species for
each genus with a unique pattern: Ec, Escherichia coli K12 MG1655; Ck, Citrobacter koseri; Eclo Enterobacter cloacae ATCC 13047; Kp, Klebsiella
pneumoniae NTUH-K2044; Cs, Cronobacter sakazakii; Pa, Pantoea ananatis; Pa2, Pantoea sp. At-9b; Ea, Erwinia amylovora; Ye, Yersinia enterocolitica;
Sp, Serratia proteamaculans; Dd, Dickeya dadantii Ech703; Patr, Pectobacterium atrosepticum; Sg, Sodalis glossinidius; Ps, Pseudoalteromonas sp.
SM9913. Genes are color-coded and spaces have been introduced between adjacent genes in order to align homologs vertically. Pseudogenes
in S. glossinidius have letters after the locus number. In cases where a large number of other genes intervene between those of interest, a
separation symbol is used://. Groups of metboxes are indicated by circled numbers based on which genes they are adjacent to. These are filled
in black if there is strong conservation (≥70% identity to a reference species), outlined in black for weaker conservation (≥60% identity), and
outlined in gray for more divergent sequences. The reference species were C. koseri for groups 1, 3 and 4; and P. atrosepticum for group 2.
Genes which were tested for repression in this paper are displayed with their repression ratio above the gene arrow. In the case of Yersinia,
ratios in parentheses refer to Y. pseudotuberculosis.

gene was inverted and moved to the middle of a cluster
of ~15 genes that were inserted between mtnA and
mtnD. In the branch leading to E. coli, Salmonella and
Citrobacter the entire cluster has been deleted, causing
the flanking genes, ybdH and mtnE, to come together
and share common regulation by the group 4 metboxes.
In C. rodentium, even ybdH and mtnE were lost, but the
upstream and downstream genes are the same as in the
other species in that branch indicating that this was a
localized deletion. In C. koseri, the entire MS cluster has
then apparently been re-acquired, causing a duplication
of the group 4 metboxes. For Yersinia pestis, all the
strains except for Angola and Pestoides have lost the

enzymes. They retain ybdH and the mtrACBY cluster,
but mtrA is a pseudogene in all of them.
Oddly enough, one of the three Pantoea species
(strain At-9b) has two mtrB genes. Pat9b_0820 occurs
next to mtrAC, just like in other Pantoea and closely
related Erwinia strains, while Pat9b_3290 occurs separate from the other MS genes in a cluster with ybdH
and mtrY, which otherwise do not occur in Pantoea and
Erwinia. Of all the other species with the MS pathway,
only Serratia shares this pattern for the three genes.
This suggests that in Pantoea sp. At9b, and maybe Serratia as well, the genes were re-acquired as a group. We
note that none of the flanking genes are the same for

Augustus and Spicer BMC Genomics 2011, 12:558
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/558

these two species so the synteny only includes this 3gene cluster. Since these genes also have different trees
than the other MS genes, we distinguish them as
ybdH2-mtrB2-mtrY2.
In addition, 3 of the 51 Escherichia/Shigella strains
(UMN026, S88 and SE15) have acquired genes for mtnK
and mtnA, apparently from alphaproteobacteria which
have the most similar homologs. These genes form a
cluster with a gene that is weakly similar to mtnB, but is
most similar to the native fucA (D-ribulose-phosphate
aldolase). We will refer to it as mtnB2. The insertion of
the cluster was presumably phage-mediated as the genes
are adjacent to a KpLE2 prophage. The genes co-occur
with a fourth gene that is only found in these three E.
coli strains and is annotated as a sugar permease. It is
possible this cluster of genes is involved in the transport
and enzymatic alteration of a sugar with unknown specificity. None of these genes have metboxes.
Enterobacteria at the base of the tree, Edwardsiella,
Photorhabdus, Proteus and Xenorhabdus, lack all the
genes associated with the MS cluster. The pathway is
also lacking in the other orders, although some genes
do unexpectedly show up in a handful of other species,
e.g. an mtnK homolog in one Vib species (Aliivibrio).
Among the Alt we find mtnE in two Shewanella species;
mtnC in Ferrimonas and all 20 Shewanella species;
mtnB and mtnU in Pseudoalteromonas haloplanktis; and
the entire mtn cluster in Pseudoalteromonas sp.
SM9913. Although we initially believed this was a result
of horizontal gene transfer, phylogenetic trees for the
genes match those of the organisms. Furthermore the
metboxes, which are only preserved in the two Pseudoalteromonas, appear quite divergent from the Ent
examples in the same context. This suggests that these
genes have been in their genomes for a long time.
Transporters

There are two known systems for methionine transport
in the gammaproteobacteria. The most widespread is
the ABC transporter MetNIQ which has been characterized in E. coli [3,4]. Except for two Alt species (Psychromonas and Ferrimonas), this transporter only occurs in
Aer, Vib, Pas and Ent. The other transporter was
recently identified in Gram-positive bacteria, as well as
homologs in Vibrio and Shewanella, called MetT [26].
This is a member of the NhaC Na+/H+ antiporter family
and only occurs in Alt, Aer and Vib species. Thus metT
appears to be the ancestral transporter that was lost at
the time Pas branched off (see Figure 2), while metNIQ
may be a newcomer that was introduced after most of
the Alt species had already speciated. About 68% of Aer
and Vib species retain both transporter systems. In
almost all cases the transporter genes have metboxes
and all the genes that were tested showed repression by

Page 11 of 18

MetJ: Ec.metN (RR = 0.05), Vc.metT (0.08) and Sh.metT
(0.21). Thus all species, except for some symbiotes and
two Alteromonads (Alteromonas and Kangiella), have
methionine-specific transporters. In the case of Alteromonas, the only transporter with metboxes is
MADE_2464 which is a putative polysaccharide transporter (conserved domain cl10513) and thus seems unlikely. In the case of Kangiella, one uncharacterized gene
with potential metboxes has some similarity to dipeptide
transporters: Kkor_1992 (DUF1302 superfamily). Homologs of this gene occur in other Alt species, but not with
metboxes.
Vitamin B12, or cobalamin, is the necessary co-factor
for the methionine synthase MetH, as well as some
other enzymes. It is transported across the outer membrane by BtuB. Expression of this gene is known to be
regulated by a riboswitch [28,29]. Regulation by MetJ
was not suspected because E. coli and Salmonella lack
metboxes. However, btuB genes in a third of our species
of interest do have potential metboxes and the Yersinia
ones we tested are functional (RR = 0.06 for Y. pseudotuberculosis, 0.25 for Y. pestis but 1.01 for E. coli which
lacks the metboxes). The metboxes are located at the
start of transcription, which includes the sizeable riboswitch, thus they are on average ~300 bp away from the
start of translation. There are no other genes for which
the metboxes are typically so far away. If it is the case
the metboxes must precede riboswitches, then this suggests that no other gene in our study is also regulated
by a riboswitch.
Another candidate transporter is similar to mtsABC, a
metal transporter from Streptococcus [30]. This was
also identified as part of the methionine regulon in
Gram-positives [26]. Among our species, it only exists
in Vib but has metboxes 60% of the time. It is annotated
as a potential cobalt transporter which may link it to
cobalamin utilization, just like btuB.
Finally, there is an NhaP Na+ /H + antiporter family
member in Pas, Vib, Aer and one Alt species. This is a
transporter of unknown specificity. It has metboxes in
some Vib and Aer species, but only when it shares an
operator with metH. Although this pattern suggested
that these metboxes should be specific to metH, when
tested with the ONPG assay the nhaP gene from V. cholerae had the same level of repression as metH (0.46 vs.
0.50).
Other regulated genes

There are various other genes that do not fit into the
main categories of synthesis, salvage and transport. The
mmuPM operon is composed of two genes: mmuP
codes for an S-methylmethionine permease while
mmuM codes for a specialized homocysteine methyltransferase that uses S-methylmethionine as its substrate

Augustus and Spicer BMC Genomics 2011, 12:558
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/558

[31,32]. MmuP is similar to other amino acid permeases
like AroP and LysP while MmuM belongs to the same
family as MetH. These genes exist in a random handful
of Ent species. Among the 51 sequenced Escherichia/
Shigella strains, only six K12 strains have homologs, and
in those species they occur as part of the CP4-6 prophage. In strain BW2952, a subsequent deletion of ~100
kb led to the loss of mmuM and the fusion of the N-terminus of mmuP with the C-terminus of mhpD. This has
happened recently enough that the metboxes have not
been lost yet. For the other species, however, the homologs are not associated with a phage insertion. Furthermore, except for Pectobacterium the metboxes appear to
be the same for all the species (≥60% identity to Klebsiella), suggesting a common origin for them. The
mmuPM metboxes are unusual in that they occur very
close to the start of translation, only 2 bases away in E.
coli. For the other metboxes in this study, the average
gap is ~75 bases. It was previously shown by immunoblotting that MmuM expression was reduced by high
methionine concentrations [32]. We tested the operators
for Ec.mmuP and Kp.mmuP and both were highly
repressed (RR = 0.02) in the presence of MetJ.
There are several homologs of the two methionine
synthases, MetH and MetE. MetH (and MmuM) belong
to the MHT (homocysteine/selenocysteine methylase)
superfamily (conserved domain cl14105). All the closely
related genes from our species of interest are shown in
Figure 7A. These proteins correspond to the homocysteine-binding domain of MetH only and thus lack the
tetrahydrofolate, B12 and AdoMet binding domains [33].
Like mmuPM, these genes co-occur with transporters
and therefore may represent a specific transporter paired
with a cognate enzyme (Figure 7B). There are two subgroups that have metboxes: MHT1 is defined by the fact
that these genes co-occur next to a putative peptide
ABC transporter (similar to E. coli dppABCD) while
MHT2 is defined by the genes’ co-occurrence next to a
member of the APC family of amino-acid transporters
(similar to arcD from Pseudomonas). Among all the species of interest, the transporter genes only occur in these
clusters with MHT homologs, making it more likely that
they function together. We were not able to include
these genes in the current study, but it would be desirable to test them later for activity and regulation.
MetE belongs to the CIMS-C-terminal-like family
(conserved domain cd03311) and Figure 7C shows the
other homologous genes. These proteins are half the
size of MetE, which probably arose from an ancient
duplication event [34]. Genes in the MetE1 group have
no metboxes and occur downstream of a protein of
unknown function (pfam08908) which only occurs with
MetE1, suggesting these two proteins share a related
function. None of the genes in the MetE2 cluster occur

Page 12 of 18

in a conserved environment, or adjacent to any putative
transporter. Most of the genes in the MetE2a subgroup
have metboxes. We tested Klebsiella pneumoniae and
found that it was strongly repressed (RR = 0.02) by
MetJ. Since all the organisms with MetE2a also have
MetE, it is not clear what role this enzyme plays in
metabolism.
In addition to the main MetNIQ cluster, there are various other components of this transporter system. There
are six other 3-gene clusters with varying gene orders:
metNIQ, metIQN and metQNI. These are referred to as
metD2-7 in Table S2. There are two 2-gene clusters
(metNI) and four isolated metQ homologs. (The number
of homologs of metN was on the order of several thousand, so only those that cluster with metI or metQ are
included in Table S2.) None of these genes are very
common and very few of them have metboxes. MetQ is
the periplasmic substrate-binding component and since
MetNIQ can transport both D- and L-methionine, it
was proposed that metQ and its only homolog in E. coli,
called nlpA, could be specific for the different enantiomers [35]; unfortunately this was shown to be unlikely.
However, some of the MetQ homologs in other species
may show specificity.
Except for NlpA, none of the other MetNIQ homologs
occur in E. coli, even though it is known to have a second methionine-specific transporter [36]. The high-affinity transporter, which can transport both D- and Lmethionine, was called metD and was subsequently
identified as metNIQ. The low-affinity transporter,
which is specific to L-methionine, was called metP and
is still unknown, although it was shown to not be
mmuP, the S-methylmethionine permease [3,35].
Among the E. coli genes with metboxes, the only
uncharacterized transporter is yjhF which is similar to
gluconate transporters, but was shown not to be able to
transport gluconate [37].
All the genes described above are likely members of
the MetJ regulon. In addition, there are three other
potential members that have functions related to
methionine metabolism, but which we consider to be
unlikely. The operon mtcBC encodes the genes involved
in reverse transsulfuration – the conversion of methionine to cysteine. MtcB is a cystathionine beta-synthase
and is related to the cysteine synthases CysK and CysM.
MtcC is a member of the transsulfuration family of
enzymes, related to MetB, MetC and MetY. In our species of interest, these two genes only occur in 20 Ent
and 2 Alt where they always occur together. Another
potential member of the regulon is MegL. This is
another transsulfuration family protein and is similar to
methionine-gamma-lyase which is involved in methionine degradation [38,39]. There are several MegL-like
genes, but only one group has metboxes. This group

Augustus and Spicer BMC Genomics 2011, 12:558
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/558

Page 13 of 18

Figure 7 Genes containing methionine synthase domains. (A) Members of the MHT superfamily. Proteins were aligned with the first ~350
residues of E. coli metH which contains the MHT domain. (B) mmuM, MHT1 and MHT2 (in red) occur in clusters with transporters mmuP,
dppABCD and arcD (in blue) respectively. (C) Members of the CIMS-C-terminal-like family. Proteins were aligned with the C-terminal half of E. coli
metE which is the more conserved half. Genes have been collapsed by genus and are indicated by the species abbreviation of one
representative member of the genus. The number in parentheses afterwards indicates the number of species which were excluded. Species
color-coding is as described in Figure 2. Genes with metboxes are in bold and marked with an asterisk.

always clusters with an oxygenase similar to isopenicillin
N synthase (PcbC, COG349).
For all these genes the number of homologs with metboxes is small. In the case of MegL only a few closely
related Shewanella species have them. In addition to the
paucity of metboxes, if the functional prediction is

correct then it seems unlikely that they would be
repressed by MetJ. They act to reduce methionine concentrations, so during times of MetJ activation (high
methionine), these proteins should also be activated to
allow for recyling of the sulfur group. Nevertheless, in
Klebsiella mtcBC seem to be upregulated by MetJ,

Augustus and Spicer BMC Genomics 2011, 12:558
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/558

although the mechanism is not clear [14]. We include
them as potential members of the regulon until they can
be tested for actual regulation.

Discussion
The various regulons

The genes in the MetJ regulon in E. coli make up the
core of the regulon that is consistently repressed in
other gammaproteobacteria species. This includes all
the genes involved in methionine biosynthesis and
transport, although not every gene is regulated in
every species. In addition, comparative genomics methods have identified other genes, such as the methionine salvage pathway, which does not occur in E. coli,
but which is consistently regulated in all the species
where it is found. With only a few exceptions, the
methionine utilization genes that form the MetJ regulon in gammaproteobacteria are the same as those in
Gram-positive bacteria, despite major differences in
regulatory mechanisms [26].
Novel members of the regulon that we were able to
verify experimentally are btuB (vitamin B12 transporter),
metX (homoserine O-acetyltransferase), metY (possible
O-acetylhomoserine sulfhydrylase), metH (B12-dependent methionine synthase), metE2a (possible methionine
synthase), mtnKADCB (methionine salvage pathway
enzymes), and the transporters mtrACB, metT and
nhaP. We also identified some potential members that
we were not able to test at this time: metF2 (possible
5,10-methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase), MHT1 and
MHT2 (possible methionine synthases), mtcBC (reverse
transsulfuration enzymes), megL (possible methionine
gamma-lyase) and mtsABC (metal transporter). These
novel genes highlight one of the major advantages of
genomics-based methods since most of these genes do
not exist in E. coli, and the others, like btuB and metH,
are not regulated by MetJ.
There are some genes that appear never to have metboxes in the species we studied. These include asd, glyA
and folE which are peripheral genes in the methionine
biosynthetic pathway; mtnN, luxS and ahcY which are
involved in recycling S-adenosylhomocysteine back to
homocysteine; metG, fmt, def and map which generate
methionyl-tRNA, formylate it, deformylate it and
remove initial methionine from translated proteins; and
the genes involved in cysteine metabolism. We note that
folE was previously identified as a possible target for
MetJ based on microarray data [6]. We could not identify metboxes for any of the folE homologs in the five
orders and a gel-shift assay performed with E. coli folE
showed no binding under our conditions (Figure S1).
However, in the ONPG assay folE had weak repression
so it may be indirectly regulated.

Page 14 of 18

The various organisms

The spectrum of regulated genes is undoubtedly related
to the particular environments these organisms live in,
as sulfur, and thus methionine, concentrations can vary
a great deal [19]. One observation we can make from
this study is that organisms which have developed an
endosymbiotic (e.g. Buchnera aphidicola and Sodalis
glossinidius) or obligate pathogenic (e.g. Haemophilus
ducreyi and Yersinia pestis) lifestyle tend to lose regulon
genes, as well as MetJ itself and the metbox sites. There
are a variety of patterns of loss that likely reflect the
degree of symbiosis as well as the time-scale involved.
For instance the Ent symbiotes which lack MetJ have
also lost all their metboxes and most regulon genes,
while Yersinia pestis has a largely intact regulon with
loss of only a few genes and no change in metbox
distribution.
For free-living organisms there is likely to be a synergistic effect from the environmental niche in which the
bacteria find themselves. For instance many Enterobacteria have a methionine salvage pathway which can utilize MTR as a sulfur source. In addition to endogenous
production of MTR, these species likely can transport it
from organisms like E. coli which excrete it into the
common milieu. Likewise, S-methylmethionine is commonly produced by plants, and organisms with the
mmuPM genes, like the plant pathogen Pectobacterium,
can utilize this as a substrate for methionine synthesis.
The various pathways

There are a variety of biosynthetic pathways on display
in Figure 1, but there is clearly an ancestral pattern for
methionine biosynthesis via MetA, MetB, MetC and the
synthases MetE and MetH. Some organisms have
replaced these with alternate pathways, such as MetX
and MetB2 in Pas, or have acquired additional genes
that may function in parallel, such as the many transsulfuration enzymes with unknown specificities. In particular, the spectrum of present, absent, regulated, and
unregulated genes in Table S2 provides a rich resource
for identifying non-canonical pathways or filling gaps in
known ones. Alternate routes for methionine production
may include reliance on transport of precursors, such as
MTR and S-methylmethionine as well as homocysteine,
or recycling pathways, such as methionine salvage which
regenerates methionine molecules that derive their backbone from ribose rather than aspartate. For each species,
a delineation of the full pathway would be necessary to
understand the place of methionine biosynthesis within
the metabolism of the whole organism. Such systemwide information is useful in metabolic engineering for
production of organic molecules [40], as well as in the
development of drugs for prokaryotic-specific proteins

Augustus and Spicer BMC Genomics 2011, 12:558
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/558

such as those of the methionine salvage pathway [41]
and the cobalamin-independent methionine synthase
MetE [42].

Conclusions
This study is designed to use data from bacterial genome sequencing projects to gain a more complete
understanding of the regulon controlled by MetJ in all
the organisms in which it is found. We have identified
over 2000 binding sites for ~35 genes and operons from
206 gammaproteobacteria species. Among these are
genes expected from the E. coli MetJ regulon, as well as
some new ones. For some of these genes we were also
able to verify their regulation by MetJ experimentally.
Methods
Bioinformatics analysis

The genomes (and plasmids) for all sequenced species
within the five orders containing MetJ homologs (Enterobacteriales, Pasteurellales, Vibrionales, Aeromonadales
and Alteromonadales) were accessed from the Genome
Information Broker [43,44] website in January, 2011.
This was a total of 206 species. Orthologous genes were
identified using BLAST searches [45], as well as consideration of the genomic environment. In most cases this
identification was straight-forward since we were only
interested in a subset of the gammaproteobacteria. However in some cases, particularly metR (part of the LysR
family) and btuB (part of the TonB family), it was not
always possible to confidently identify orthologs. For
determining entire gene families (e.g. metE and metH in
Figure 7), an e-value of e-25 was used as the threshold.
Gene alignments were made using ClustalW within
MEGA5 [46]. Trees were made in MEGA5 using Neighbor-Joining with 500 bootstrap replicates. Data for the
phylogenetic tree of gammaproteobacteria in Figure 2
was downloaded from the Orthologous Matrix Project
[7,47] and manipulated in MEGA5.
Metbox identification

An initial information weight matrix [48] was made
using known metboxes for genes of the E. coli MetJ regulon (metA, metJ/BL, metC, metE/R, metF, metK, metNIQ, and mmuPM). The matrix is based on the
information content of each base in each position of the
metbox using the equation:
Riw (base, position) = 2 + log2 frequency (base, position) (1)

Since the binding site is palindromic the data was
symmetrized for each half-metbox.
This matrix was used to do a preliminary scan for
metboxes in the 400-bp upstream of genes homologous
to the E. coli MetJ regulon since those were likely to be

Page 15 of 18

real hits. One representative species from each genus
was queried to reduce bias. To determine potential metboxes, a bit score was calculated for each 8-bp sequence
by summing the values for the actual base at each position using the values in the matrix. Although each MetJ
homodimer binds to a single 8-bp sequence, functional
repression requires two or more adjacent sites [49]. A
single metbox was required to have a bit-score greater
than or equal to 1/4 the value of the consensus
sequence, while the total site was required to have a bitscore greater than or equal to the value of the consensus
sequence. These thresholds are arbitrary but were
empirically found to be good at identifying known metboxes while reducing the number of false positives. The
searches were performed using custom perl scripts. The
832 half-metboxes identified this way were used to create the final matrix (Table 3). This was then used to
look for metboxes in the operators of all annotated
genes in all species. The searches were not restricted to
intergenic regions because of the possibility of incorrect
automated annotation of genes. In practice, most of the
high-confidence sites were located in intergenic regions,
typically within ~75 bp of the start of translation. For
determining whether particular metbox sequences are
conserved or not, the metboxes were aligned and the
percent of identical bases was determined relative to a
reference species. The DNA compared include the metboxes as well as 8 basepairs on both sides since the
flanking DNA is expected to vary more than the MetJ
binding sites.
lacZ reporter and ONPG assay

A reporter plasmid was made from pBR322 [50] by:
removing the ampicillin resistance gene; making a silent
mutation in the tetracycline resistance gene to remove
an NheI site; and adding NsiI and KpnI sites by primeramplification of the plasmid. The full-length E. coli lacZ
Table 3 Information weight matrix used to search for
metboxes
Count1

Riw (bits per base)2

1 (8)

3 (6)

4 (5)

1 (8)

2 (7)

3 (6)

4 (5)

634

156

721

37

1.61

-0.42

1.79

-2.49

C

6

25

84

573

-5.12

-3.06

-1.31

1.46

G

135

560

27

4

-0.62

1.43

-2.95

-5.70

T
1

2 (7)

A

57

91

0 > 13

218

-1.87

-1.19

-7.70

0.07

This refers to the number of times each base occurred at each position in
the (symmetrized) metbox. The frequency used in Equation 1 is the count
divided by the total number of half-metboxes: 832. The consensus sequence
is highlighted in bold.
2
Riw is the information content for each base at each position calculated
using Equation 1. The consensus sequence is highlighted in bold.
3
The occurrence of T (A) at position 3 (6) was zero, so this was changed to 1
to allow the log to be taken.

Augustus and Spicer BMC Genomics 2011, 12:558
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/558

gene sequence was amplified from strain W3110 with
flanking NheI and KpnI sites, then cloned into the modified pBR322. This construct is referred to as pBZT.
Operator sequences were cloned between the NheI and
NsiI sites.
The candidate operators were cloned from one of
eight bacteria: Escherichia coli W3110 and Haemophilus
influenzae Rd KW20 (both courtesy C. Raetz, Duke University), Klebsiella pneumoniae and Yersinia pestis KIM
(both courtesy S. Abraham, Duke University), Yersinia
pseudotuberculosis YPIII and Yersinia enterocolitica
8081 (both courtesy V. Miller, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill), Vibrio cholerae N16961 (courtesy
M. Kuehn, Duke University) and Shewanella oneidensis
MR-1 (courtesy J. Frederickson, Pacific Northwest
National Laboratory).
When necessary, genomic DNA was prepared by centrifuging an overnight culture of bacteria (1.5 ml) and
resuspending the cells in 500 μl buffer containing 100
mM Tris, pH 8 and 50 mM EDTA. SDS was added to 1%
to lyse the cells. 250 μl of 7.5 M ammonium acetate was
added, then 500 μl phenol-chloroform. After spinning
the sample down, the top 500 μl was removed and 1 ml
isopropanol was added to precipitate the DNA. The
DNA was washed with 70% ethanol, air-dried, then resuspended in 50 μl TE (10 mM Tris, pH 8, 1 mM EDTA).
Operator sequences were amplified by PCR from the
genomic DNA using PfuUltra II HotStart 2× (Stratagene) with primers that produced flanking NsiI and
NheI sites. (For operators which contained these sites,
PstI and SpeI, respectively, were used instead to produce
compatible ends.) These operators were cut and gel-purified then inserted into pBZT. All insertions were verified by sequencing. In cases where the insertion differed
from the published sequence, a second independent
construct was prepared to verify the polymorphism. In
no case were these changes in the proposed metboxes.
We note that our Klebsiella strain does not match any
of the published genomes, but is most similar to K.
pneumoniae NTUH-K2044.
Reporter plasmids were transformed into E. coli strain
MC4100 (Δ(argF-lac)169) [51,52], which is missing the
entire lac operon, and TK4100 (MC4100 metJ::camr), a
metJ knock-out strain (courtesy R. Greene, Duke University). Expression from the operator was measured using a
b-galactosidase assay [53]. In brief, overnight cultures of
the transformed strains were diluted 1/100 into fresh LB
and grown for 2 hours at 37°C to mid-log phase (OD
typically between 0.3 and 0.6). Aliquots of the cells were
diluted into assay buffer (50 mM phosphate, pH 7, 100
mM NaCl and 1 mM DTT) and permeabilized with 10%
toluene for at least 15 minutes at room temperature.
ONPG was added to a final concentration of 1 mg/ml
and the samples were then incubated at 37°C until they

Page 16 of 18

turned yellow, at which point they were quenched with
an equal volume of 100 mg/ml sodium carbonate. Samples were spun down 5 min at max speed in a microcentrifuge, and the absorbance at 420 nm was then
measured. The spectrometer was blanked against a parallel reaction made with untransformed MC4100. Miller
units were calculated using the following equation:
1 Miller unit = Abs420 ÷ vol (µl) ∗ time (min) ∗ OD600 (2)

For each construct in each strain, at least two colonies
were chosen, and triplicate samples were assayed for
each colony. Results are represented as the ratio of the
activity during repressed conditions (MC4100) to that
during derepressed conditions (ΔmetJ), and shown with
the standard deviation for the six measurements.
Gel shift assay

Operators were tested directly for MetJ binding using a
gel-shift assay. For each plasmid, primers in the vector
were used with MangoMix (Bioline) to amplify a 636-bp
fragment incorporating the 400-bp operator. 50 μl PCR
reactions were cleaned up using SureClean Plus (Bioline)
and the precipitated DNA was resuspended to the same
starting volume with TES Buffer (20 mM Tris, pH 8, 1
mM EDTA, 150 mM NaCl). 1 μl of the PCR mix
(approximately 10 ng DNA) was used in a 30 μl reaction
with 0 or 50 nM MetJ. Samples were run on a 7.5% TGE
gel (25 mM Tris, 192 mM glycine, and 2 mM EDTA)
containing 250 μM AdoMet, then stained with Vistra
Green (GE Healthcare) and imaged with a Typhoon 9410
phosphorimager using a 520 BP 40 fluorescence filter.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Table_S1_List_of_candidate_metboxes. Spreadsheet
of all likely metboxes found in this study.
Additional file 2: Table_S2_List_of_loci_for_MetJ_regulon_genes.
Spreadsheet of all genes that form the MetJ regulon in all species,
whether or not they have metboxes.
Additional file 3: Figure_S1_Gel_shift. Gel shift assay showing MetJ
binding to operator DNA. Each lane is ~10 ng DNA with or without 50
nM MetJ in the presence of 250 μM AdoMet. Genes are indicated by
locus number and those which share an operator are linked by a brace.
The molecular weight marker is GeneRuler 1 kb Plus DNA Ladder
(Fermentas).
Additional file 4: Figure_S2_Tree_of_transsulfuration_enzymes. Tree
of transsulfuration enzymes. Genes have been collapsed by genus and
are indicated by the species abbreviation of one representative member
of the genus. The number in parentheses afterwards indicates the
number of species which were excluded. Species color-coding is as
described in Figure 2. Genes with metboxes are in bold and marked with
an asterisk.

Acknowledgements
We thank Drs. S. Abraham, J. Frederickson, R. Greene, M. Kuehn, V. Miller, and
C. Raetz for generously providing bacterial strains or genomic DNA. Financial

Augustus and Spicer BMC Genomics 2011, 12:558
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/558

Page 17 of 18

support for this work was in part from NIH Grant RR-022854 and Duke
University.
18.
Author details
1
Department of Biochemistry, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina,
27710, USA. 2Department of Radiology, Duke University, Durham, North
Carolina, 27710, USA.

19.

20.
Authors’ contributions
AMA conceived of the study, did the bioinformatics and biochemical
analysis and drafted the manuscript. LDS assisted in study coordination,
periodically reviewed results and helped draft the manuscript. All authors
read and approved the final manuscript.

21.

Received: 18 August 2011 Accepted: 14 November 2011
Published: 14 November 2011

22.

References
1. Old IG, Phillips SE, Stockley PG, Saint Girons I: Regulation of methionine
biosynthesis in the Enterobacteriaceae. Prog Biophys Mol Biol 1991,
56(3):145-185.
2. Greene RC: Biosynthesis of methionine. In Escherichia coli and Salmonella.
Edited by: Neidhardt FC. Washington, DC: American Society for
Microbiology Press; 1996:542-560.
3. Gal J, Szvetnik A, Schnell R, Kalman M: The metD D-methionine
transporter locus of Escherichia coli is an ABC transporter gene cluster. J
Bacteriol 2002, 184(17):4930-4932.
4. Merlin C, Gardiner G, Durand S, Masters M: The Escherichia coli metD
locus encodes an ABC transporter which includes Abc (MetN), YaeE
(MetI), and YaeC (MetQ). J Bacteriol 2002, 184(19):5513-5517.
5. Liu R, Blackwell TW, States DJ: Conformational model for binding site
recognition by the E. coli MetJ transcription factor. Bioinformatics 2001,
17(7):622-633.
6. Marincs F, Manfield IW, Stead JA, McDowall KJ, Stockley PG: Transcript
analysis reveals an extended regulon and the importance of proteinprotein co-operativity for the Escherichia coli methionine repressor.
Biochem J 2006, 396(2):227-234.
7. Altenhoff AM, Schneider A, Gonnet GH, Dessimoz C: OMA 2011: orthology
inference among 1000 complete genomes. Nucleic Acids Res 2011, , 39
Database: D289-294.
8. Toft C, Andersson SG: Evolutionary microbial genomics: insights into
bacterial host adaptation. Nat Rev Genet 2010, 11(7):465-475.
9. Cai XY, Maxon ME, Redfield B, Glass R, Brot N, Weissbach H: Methionine
synthesis in Escherichia coli: effect of the MetR protein on metE and
metH expression. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1989, 86(12):4407-4411.
10. Saint-Girons I, Duchange N, Cohen GN, Zakin MM: Structure and
autoregulation of the metJ regulatory gene in Escherichia coli. J Biol
Chem 1984, 259(22):14282-14285.
11. Shoeman R, Coleman T, Redfield B, Greene RC, Smith AA, Saint-Girons I,
Brot N, Weissbach H: Regulation of methionine synthesis in Escherichia
coli: effect of metJ gene product and S-adenosylmethionine on the in
vitro expression of the metB, metL and metJ genes. Biochem Biophys Res
Commun 1985, 133(2):731-739.
12. Gophna U, Bapteste E, Doolittle WF, Biran D, Ron EZ: Evolutionary plasticity
of methionine biosynthesis. Gene 2005, 355:48-57.
13. Hacham Y, Gophna U, Amir R: In vivo analysis of various substrates
utilized by cystathionine gamma-synthase and O-acetylhomoserine
sulfhydrylase in methionine biosynthesis. Mol Biol Evol 2003,
20(9):1513-1520.
14. Seiflein TA, Lawrence JG: Two transsulfurylation pathways in Klebsiella
pneumoniae. J Bacteriol 2006, 188(16):5762-5774.
15. Englesberg E: The irreversibility of methionine synthesis from cysteine in
pasteurella pestis. J Bacteriol 1952, 63(5):675-680.
16. Urbanowski ML, Stauffer LT, Plamann LS, Stauffer GV: A new methionine
locus, metR, that encodes a trans-acting protein required for activation
of metE and metH in Escherichia coli and Salmonella typhimurium. J
Bacteriol 1987, 169(4):1391-1397.
17. Hou S, Saw JH, Lee KS, Freitas TA, Belisle C, Kawarabayasi Y, Donachie SP,
Pikina A, Galperin MY, Koonin EV, et al: Genome sequence of the deep-sea
gamma-proteobacterium Idiomarina loihiensis reveals amino acid

23.
24.

25.
26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.
33.

34.

35.

36.

37.

38.

fermentation as a source of carbon and energy. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2004, 101(52):18036-18041.
Fontecave M, Atta M, Mulliez E: S-adenosylmethionine: nothing goes to
waste. Trends Biochem Sci 2004, 29(5):243-249.
Sekowska A, Kung HF, Danchin A: Sulfur metabolism in Escherichia coli
and related bacteria: facts and fiction. J Mol Microbiol Biotechnol 2000,
2(2):145-177.
Winkler WC, Nahvi A, Sudarsan N, Barrick JE, Breaker RR: An mRNA
structure that controls gene expression by binding Sadenosylmethionine. Nat Struct Biol 2003, 10(9):701-707.
McDaniel BA, Grundy FJ, Artsimovitch I, Henkin TM: Transcription
termination control of the S box system: direct measurement of Sadenosylmethionine by the leader RNA. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2003,
100(6):3083-3088.
Sekowska A, Denervaud V, Ashida H, Michoud K, Haas D, Yokota A,
Danchin A: Bacterial variations on the methionine salvage pathway. BMC
Microbiol 2004, 4:9.
Schroeder HR, Barnes CJ, Bohinski RC, Mallette MF: Biological production of
5-methylthioribose. Can J Microbiol 1973, 19(11):1347-1354.
Heilbronn J, Wilson J, Berger BJ: Tyrosine aminotransferase catalyzes the
final step of methionine recycling in Klebsiella pneumoniae. J Bacteriol
1999, 181(6):1739-1747.
Sekowska A, Danchin A: The methionine salvage pathway in Bacillus
subtilis. BMC Microbiol 2002, 2:8.
Rodionov DA, Vitreschak AG, Mironov AA, Gelfand MS: Comparative
genomics of the methionine metabolism in Gram-positive bacteria: a
variety of regulatory systems. Nucleic Acids Res 2004, 32(11):3340-3353.
Bulyk ML, McGuire AM, Masuda N, Church GM: A motif co-occurrence
approach for genome-wide prediction of transcription-factor-binding
sites in Escherichia coli. Genome Res 2004, 14(2):201-208.
Nahvi A, Barrick JE, Breaker RR: Coenzyme B12 riboswitches are
widespread genetic control elements in prokaryotes. Nucleic Acids Res
2004, 32(1):143-150.
Nou X, Kadner RJ: Coupled changes in translation and transcription
during cobalamin-dependent regulation of btuB expression in
Escherichia coli. J Bacteriol 1998, 180(24):6719-6728.
Janulczyk R, Pallon J, Bjorck L: Identification and characterization of a
Streptococcus pyogenes ABC transporter with multiple specificity for
metal cations. Mol Microbiol 1999, 34(3):596-606.
Neuhierl B, Thanbichler M, Lottspeich F, Bock A: A family of Smethylmethionine-dependent thiol/selenol methyltransferases. Role in
selenium tolerance and evolutionary relation. J Biol Chem 1999,
274(9):5407-5414.
Thanbichler M, Neuhierl B, Bock A: S-methylmethionine metabolism in
Escherichia coli. J Bacteriol 1999, 181(2):662-665.
Goulding CW, Postigo D, Matthews RG: Cobalamin-dependent methionine
synthase is a modular protein with distinct regions for binding
homocysteine, methyltetrahydrofolate, cobalamin, and
adenosylmethionine. Biochemistry 1997, 36(26):8082-8091.
Gonzalez JC, Banerjee RV, Huang S, Sumner JS, Matthews RG: Comparison
of cobalamin-independent and cobalamin-dependent methionine
synthases from Escherichia coli: two solutions to the same chemical
problem. Biochemistry 1992, 31(26):6045-6056.
Zhang Z, Feige JN, Chang AB, Anderson IJ, Brodianski VM, Vitreschak AG,
Gelfand MS, Saier MH Jr: A transporter of Escherichia coli specific for Land D-methionine is the prototype for a new family within the ABC
superfamily. Arch Microbiol 2003, 180(2):88-100.
Kadner RJ, Watson WJ: Methionine transport in Escherichia coli:
physiological and genetic evidence for two uptake systems. J Bacteriol
1974, 119(2):401-409.
Peekhaus N, Tong S, Reizer J, Saier MH, Murray E, Conway T:
Characterization of a novel transporter family that includes multiple
Escherichia coli gluconate transporters and their homologues. FEMS
Microbiol Lett 1997, 147(2):233-238.
Manukhov IV, Mamaeva DV, Rastorguev SM, Faleev NG, Morozova EA,
Demidkina TV, Zavilgelsky GB: A gene encoding L-methionine gammalyase is present in Enterobacteriaceae family genomes: identification
and characterization of Citrobacter freundii L-methionine gamma-lyase.
J Bacteriol 2005, 187(11):3889-3893.

Augustus and Spicer BMC Genomics 2011, 12:558
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/558

Page 18 of 18

39. Sato D, Nozaki T: Methionine gamma-lyase: the unique reaction
mechanism, physiological roles, and therapeutic applications against
infectious diseases and cancers. IUBMB Life 2009, 61(11):1019-1028.
40. Wendisch VF, Bott M, Eikmanns BJ: Metabolic engineering of Escherichia
coli and Corynebacterium glutamicum for biotechnological production
of organic acids and amino acids. Curr Opin Microbiol 2006, 9(3):268-274.
41. Riscoe MK, Ferro AJ, Fitchen JH: Methionine recycling as a target for
antiprotozoal drug development. Parasitol Today 1989, 5(10):330-333.
42. Tower PA, Johnson LL, Ferro AJ, Fitchen JH, Riscoe MK: Synergistic activity
of 5-trifluoromethylthioribose and inhibitors of methionine synthesis
against Klebsiella pneumoniae. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1991,
35(8):1557-1561.
43. Fumoto M, Miyazaki S, Sugawara H: Genome Information Broker (GIB):
data retrieval and comparative analysis system for completed microbial
genomes and more. Nucleic Acids Research 2002, 30(1):66-68.
44. Genome Information Broker for Microbial Genomes. [http://gib.genes.nig.
ac.jp/].
45. Camacho C, Coulouris G, Avagyan V, Ma N, Papadopoulos J, Bealer K,
Madden TL: BLAST+: architecture and applications. BMC Bioinformatics
2009, 10:421.
46. Tamura K, Peterson D, Peterson N, Stecher G, Nei M, Kumar S: MEGA5:
Molecular Evolutionary Genetics Analysis Using Maximum Likelihood,
Evolutionary Distance, and Maximum Parsimony Methods. Mol Biol Evol
2011, 28(10):2731-2739.
47. The Orthologous Matrix Project. [http://www.cbrg.ethz.ch/research/
orthologous].
48. Schneider TD: Information content of individual genetic sequences. J
Theor Biol 1997, 189(4):427-441.
49. Belfaiza J, Parsot C, Martel A, de la Tour CB, Margarita D, Cohen GN, SaintGirons I: Evolution in biosynthetic pathways: two enzymes catalyzing
consecutive steps in methionine biosynthesis originate from a common
ancestor and possess a similar regulatory region. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
1986, 83(4):867-871.
50. Balbas P, Soberon X, Merino E, Zurita M, Lomeli H, Valle F, Flores N,
Bolivar F: Plasmid vector pBR322 and its special-purpose derivatives–a
review. Gene 1986, 50(1-3):3-40.
51. Casadaban MJ: Transposition and fusion of the lac genes to selected
promoters in Escherichia coli using bacteriophage lambda and Mu. J Mol
Biol 1976, 104(3):541-555.
52. Peters JE, Thate TE, Craig NL: Definition of the Escherichia coli MC4100
genome by use of a DNA array. J Bacteriol 2003, 185(6):2017-2021.
53. Miller JH: Experiments in Molecular Genetics. Cold Spring Harbor, NY: Cold
Spring Harbor Laboratory Press; 1972.
doi:10.1186/1471-2164-12-558
Cite this article as: Augustus and Spicer: The MetJ regulon in
gammaproteobacteria determined by comparative genomics methods.
BMC Genomics 2011 12:558.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
