<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Taxonomy of bacterial fish pathogens</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Veterinary Research 2011, 42:20. doi:10.1186/1297-9716-42-20"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Brian Austin"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Austin Veterinary Research 2011, 42:20
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/20

VETERINARY RESEARCH

REVIEW

Open Access

Taxonomy of bacterial fish pathogens
Brian Austin

Abstract
Bacterial taxonomy has progressed from reliance on highly artificial culture-dependent techniques involving the
study of phenotype (including morphological, biochemical and physiological data) to the modern applications of
molecular biology, most recently 16S rRNA gene sequencing, which gives an insight into evolutionary pathways
(= phylogenetics). The latter is applicable to culture-independent approaches, and has led directly to the
recognition of new uncultured bacterial groups, i.e. “Candidatus“, which have been associated as the cause of some
fish diseases, including rainbow trout summer enteritic syndrome. One immediate benefit is that 16S rRNA gene
sequencing has led to increased confidence in the accuracy of names allocated to bacterial pathogens. This is in
marked contrast to the previous dominance of phenotyping, and identifications, which have been subsequently
challenged in the light of 16S rRNA gene sequencing. To date, there has been some fluidity over the names of
bacterial fish pathogens, with some, for example Vibrio anguillarum, being divided into two separate entities
(V. anguillarum and V. ordalii). Others have been combined, for example V. carchariae, V. harveyi and V. trachuri as
V. harveyi. Confusion may result with some organisms recognized by more than one name; V. anguillarum was
reclassified as Beneckea and Listonella, with Vibrio and Listonella persisting in the scientific literature.
Notwithstanding, modern methods have permitted real progress in the understanding of the taxonomic
relationships of many bacterial fish pathogens.
Table of contents
1. Introduction
2. Bacterial fish pathogens
3. Isolation of fish pathogens: the culture-dependent
approach
4. Approaches to characterization
4.1 Phenotype
4.2 Immunological methods
4.3 Chemotaxonomy
4.3.1 Lactococccus piscium
4.3.2 Mycobacterium neoarum
4.3.3 Nocardia
4.3.4 Renibacterium salmoninarum
4.4 Molecular/genetic methods

uncultured

fish

6.1
6.2
6.3
6.4

Motile aeromonas septicaemia
Aeromonas salmonicida
Enteric redmouth (ERM)
Vibriosis

7. The role of phylogenetics in bacterial fish pathology
8. Conclusions
9. References

1. Introduction
“What’s in a name?” (William Shakespeare; Romeo
and Juliet)

5. New species of fish pathogens recognized by 16S
rRNA sequencing
5.1 New and
“Candidatus”

6. Taxonomic developments associated with specific
bacterial fish pathogens

pathogens:

Correspondence: brian.austin@stir.ac.uk
Institute of Aquaculture, Pathfoot Building, University of Stirling, Stirling FK9
4LA, Scotland, UK

The Swedish botanist Carl Linnaeus (1707-1778), who
was also known as Carolus Linnaeus and Carl von Linné,
is undoubtedly the Father of Taxonomy, and was responsible for developing a system for naming and ranking living organisms. His lasting contribution was the
development of a simplified naming system in Latin with
consistency across all living organisms, i.e. the binomial
system, in which each organism has a unique two-word

© 2011 Austin; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Austin Veterinary Research 2011, 42:20
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/20

name - incorporating genus and species. A simplistic
view is that Linnaeus made order out of chaos. Yet, for
Linnaeus and his contemporaries, the process was comparatively easy, and involved only large organisms, which
were clearly visible to the naked eye (= macro-organisms)
and easily seen morphological characteristics (= a category of phenotypic characters). Thus, these early classifications (= the process of arranging organisms into
groups) were based on limited but easily visible data, and
the outcomes were largely obvious, for example a dog is
notably different from a horse and would therefore
belong in separate species.
The founding father of microbiology, the Dutch textile
merchant and lens maker, Antonie van Leeuwenhoek
(1632-1723), observed small organisms initially from the
proximity of his teeth (= bacteria and protozoa?), and
these entities were termed “animalcules”, which he
wrote about in a letter to the Royal Society of London
in 1676. His careful illustrations suggested morphological variation between the cells. Yet, another two centuries were to pass before serious attempts at naming and
ordering bacteria started. Thus, bacterial taxonomy has
progressed from the simplistic approach involving a
small number of readily observable characteristics, such
as morphology as deduced from observation using light
microscopes, to the modern applications of molecular
biology. With improvements in knowledge, there have
been refinements in taxonomic processes and an
increase in reliability. It should be remembered that taxonomy (= the theory of classification, nomenclature and
identification) is a man-made process, i.e. the organisms
included in any classification have not chosen to be
placed in the groups that have been created by human
beings. Nevertheless if done properly, taxonomy has
value in:
• Understanding biodiversity, namely the range of
organisms in a given habitat
• Communication between scientists, thus enabling
exchange of information about similar organisms
• Cataloguing information - the name is the key to a
catalogue of information about the organism
• Enabling identification, such that new isolates may
be readily and reliably identified
• Providing an insight into evolutionary pathways
(= phylogenetics).
To be effective, taxonomy should be
- based on a high information content
- reproducible, and
- stable,
otherwise confusion will surely result.

Page 2 of 13

Since the start of bacterial taxonomic processes in the
nineteenth century, there has been a progression in the
type of information used in the procedure. It may be
argued that early bacteriologists had considerable taxonomic insight judging from the conclusions reached from
the comparatively simple data that were available. However, taxonomy is a dynamic science, with new developments/methods being incorporated into processes
including the descriptions of bacterial species. Since the
1950 s, bacterial taxonomy has evolved rationally, encompassing numerical methods [1,2], chemotaxonomy (e.g.
[3,4]), and molecular techniques [5]. Taxonomy has progressed from a highly artificial process involving limited
amounts of phenotypic data to the recognition of more
natural relationships between organisms, based on comparatively large amounts of varied and reliable data covering multiple aspects of the biology of an organism, and
including phenotypic, chemotaxonomic, genotypic and
phylogenetic date, i.e. a polyphasic approach. However,
the current dominance of 16S rRNA gene sequencing
although revolutionising some aspects of bacterial classification needs to be treated cautiously as overreliance on
the approach may lead to erroneous conclusions [5].
Nevertheless, it is apparent that sequencing methods are
instrumental with the explosion of new species names,
which have greeted the arrival of the twenty-first century.
Whereas, the information content of many of the new
species descriptions is generally high, an unwelcome
trend is that many new taxa (= taxonomic groups) are
described solely after the study of only single strains.
Therefore, the diversity/variability within the new taxon
cannot be adequately assessed. Also, it is impossible to
determine whether a single strain is effectively an outlier
or a median representative of the group (in future years,
will it be regarded as typical or atypical of the group?).
However, taxonomy is often ignored by many microbiologists in other specialisms, and there may well be
concern that basic principles could be forgotten, e.g. is
the purity and authenticity of cultures always verified
before use? Where culturing is not possible, there is the
possibility of analyzing the nucleic acids, determining
species composition, and even proposing new taxa, i.e. by
the use of culture-independent approaches.

2. Bacterial fish pathogens
There has been a steady increase in the numbers of bacterial species associated with fish diseases, with new
pathogens regularly recognised in the scientific literature
[6]. However, the names of many bacterial fish pathogens
have been subjected to taxonomic change over time, with
some species split, for example Vibrio anguillarum biotype 2 becoming re-classified as a separate species
V. ordalii [7,8]. In other cases, different nomenspecies
have been combined, for example V. carchariae,

Austin Veterinary Research 2011, 42:20
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/20

V. harveyi and V. trachuri into V. harveyi, which had precedence because it was the first name to be proposed,
albeit as the luminous Achromobacter harveyi [9-11].
The oldest known fish pathogen, V. anguillarum, has
undergone name changes to Beneckea [12] and Listonella
[13]; neither of which was widely accepted. However,
Listonella remains a valid name and is mentioned in the
current edition of Bergey’s Manual of Systematic Bacteriology, and Beneckea has been consigned to the history
books. A positive aspect of sequencing methods is that
there has been a progression towards the Orwellian
notion of “Order out of Chaos” even if scientists do not
always appreciate the significance of the data.

3. Isolation of fish pathogens: the culturedependent approach
With the rapid development in molecular biology, it is not
always necessary to culture an organism in order to enable
its study, including the allocation of a species name. Thus,
the concept of culture-independent techniques was developed and refined. Sensitivity and specificity increased, but
without culturing there was an inability to carry out associated studies, such as the determination of pathogenicity
factors. The attraction of culture-dependent approaches is
that a pure culture may be obtained and deposited in culture collections as reference material for use by others.
This raises a concern about the usefulness of cultures. An
assumption is made that pathological material may be used
for the recovery of a pure culture of the aetiological agent.
This will depend on using appropriate media and incubation conditions, and assumes that the organism is in a
form that may be cultured and that the microbiologist
picks the “correct” colony. If mixed growth occurs or if the
pathogen is largely overgrown by opportunists/secondary
invaders/saprophytes, then there is concern that the actual
pathogen will be missed. In addition, infections resulting
from two or more organisms working synergistically will
undoubtedly be mis-diagnosed if the diagnostician chooses
only one culture for study. However, there are only a comparatively few indications of disease resulting from multiple
species, such as Aeromonas hydrophila with A. salmonicida
[6]. It is speculative how many diagnoses (if any) are made
of contaminants rather than the actual pathogen. Moreover, it is surprising that only two species of anaerobic bacteria, namely Clostridium botulinum and Eubacterium
tarantellae, have been implicated as fish pathogens [6]. Of
course, this could reflect the general lack of use of appropriate anaerobic procedures by microbiologists rather than
the absence of anaerobic pathogens.
4. Approaches to characterization
4.1 Phenotype

Traditionally, bacteria were characterized phenotypically,
and undoubtedly for some groups, e.g. the

Page 3 of 13

Enterobacteriaceae, a wealth of knowledge emerged particularly from the 1950’s onwards. Currently, emphasis
on phenotype has declined with a concomitant move
towards molecular-based approaches. Nevertheless, phenotypic data have a role in polyphasic studies whereby
many facets of the biology of an organism are studied
[14]. Phenotyping leads the way with diagnoses worldwide; emphasis often being placed on commercial kits
and the use of manufacturer’s probabilistic databases to
achieve an acceptable identification. Although the
approach has standardized diagnoses, the weakness is
that most identification systems have been developed for
medically important bacteria that grow within 24-48 h
at 35-37°C. Consequently, the reliability of these kits for
use with fish pathogens which need lower incubation
temperatures for longer periods needs to be questioned
[6,15]. In particular, the API 20E system includes the
use of sugar fermentation reactions, which may be influenced by the presence of plasmids [6]. Moreover, there
may be confusion over the interpretation of the profiles.
For example, some of the profiles of A. hydrophila are
similar to those of A. allosaccharophila and A. sobria;
Yersinia ruckeri may be confused with Hafnia alvei;
moreover Tenacibaculum maritimum and Pseudomonas
anguilliseptica are indistinguishable by API 20E [6]. Problems may result when data from rapid commercial kits
are used in conjunction with conventional diagnostic
schemes, which have been developed for traditional and
often laborious phenotypic characters. Also, some of the
traditional tests, e.g. the Voges Proskauer reaction, are
not noted for their reproducibility and may introduce
errors into the taxonomic process and lead to mis-identification [16].
Undoubtedly, selective media have proved useful for
the recovery of some fish pathogens, with an example
including selective kidney disease medium (SKDM) for
Renibacterium salmoninarum [17]. However, selective
media are only available for a minority of all fish pathogens, therefore recovery is dependent on more general
culturing methods. Specially developed diagnostic procedures have aided identification of some group, e.g. the
glucose motility deep cultures have benefitted the recovery and identification of V. anguillarum [18].
4.2 Immunological methods

The development and availability of standardized immunological (antibodies and kits) reagents have improved
diagnoses considerably [6,19,20], and enhanced the reliability of methods for the detection of pathogens, including Mycobacterium spp., Photobacterium damselae
subsp. piscicida [21], Piscirickettsia salmonis [22], R. salmoninarum [23] and Streptococcus iniae [24]. Tentative
diagnoses, including of asymptomatic infections, may
result from use of monospecific polyclonal or

Austin Veterinary Research 2011, 42:20
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/20

monoclonal antibodies in a range of antibody-based procedures, including the indirect fluorescent antibody test
(iFAT), whole-cell (slide) agglutination, precipitin reactions, complement fixation, immunodiffusion, antibodycoated latex particles, co-agglutination using antibodycoated staphylococcal cells, passive haemagglutination,
immuno-India ink technique (Geck) or enzyme linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA; reviewed by [25]), the latter of which may also be used for serology, i.e. detecting
antibodies in the host to specific pathogens [26]. Antibody-based methods are used effectively for detecting
exposure to fish viruses, such as Koi herpes virus [27],
but bacterial pathogens pose a more complicated picture
with cross reactivities likely unless specific known molecules/antigens are used to coat the ELISA plates rather
than whole pathogens [19]. Techniques are often sensitive, specific, rapid and reliable, and in some cases may
be used in the field [6]. This is in marked contrast to
molecular biology, which may be much slower and relies
on specialist, well equipped laboratories.
4.3 Chemotaxonomy

Chemotaxonomy involves the investigation of chemical
constituents of bacteria, and is particularly useful for the
study of Gram-positive bacteria. The molecules studied
include fatty acids, polar lipids, lipopolysaccharide (nature of the chain length of the fatty acid and the sugar in
the Lipid A moiety; [28]), menaquinones, naphthoquinones, ubiquinones, mycolic acids, peptidoglycan, polyamines, teichoic and teichuronic acids and isoprenoid
quinones [29]. Mycolic acids, which are useful taxonomic markers, are present in Gram-positive bacteria
with high G+C ratios of their DNA [4], and have been
reported for a range of fish pathogens, including Mycobacterium chelonei subsp. piscarium [3] and M. shottsii
[30]. The length of the mycolate side chain has been
correlated to 16S rRNA gene sequence homology [31].
Specific examples for which reliable chemotaxonomic
data exist for Gram-positive bacterial fish pathogens are
detailed below:
4.3.1 Lactococccus piscium

The long chain cellular fatty acids of Lactococcus piscium
were reported to be straight chain saturated, mono-unsaturated and cyclopropane-ring types. The major acids
corresponded to hexadecanoic acid, Δ 11-octadecanoic
acid and Δ 11-methylenoctadecanoic acid [32].
4.3.2 Mycobacterium neoarum

The cell wall chemotype has been given as IVA, with
glycolated muramic acids, mycolic acids and MK-9, as
the predominant isoprenoid quinone, being present [33].
4.3.3 Nocardia

Nocardia salmonicida contains LL-diaminopimelic acid
(DAP) and glycine but not meso-DAP, arabinose or
galactose in the cell wall (i.e. Type I). The major cellular

Page 4 of 13

fatty acids are hexdecanoic, octadecanoic, octadecanoic
and 10-methyloctadecanoic acid [34].
N. seriolae contains meso-diaminopimelic acid, arabinose and galactose, indicative of chemotype IVA. Mycolic acids containing 44-58 carbon atoms are present.
The cellular fatty acids are dominated by n-C16:0, n-C16:1
and n-C18:1; 10-methyl-C19:0 is also present as a major
component in some isolates. The predominant isoprenoid quinone is tetrahydrogenated menaquinone with
eight isoprene units [34].
4.3.4 Renibacterium salmoninarum

Chemotaxonomic traits of R. salmoninarum have been
highlighted in part because of the comparative difficulty
with obtaining conventional phenotypic test results. Thus,
the cell wall peptidoglycan was deduced to contain D-alanine, D-glutamic acid, glycine and lysine as the diamino
acids [35]. The principal cell wall sugar was glucose,
although arabinose, mannose and rhamnose were also present; mycolic acids were absent [36]. Methyl-branched
fatty acids form > 92% of the total fatty acid component of
the cells, with 12-methyltetradecanoic (anteiso-C15), 13methyldecanoic (iso-C 15 ) and 14-methylhexadecanoic
(anteiso-C17) as the major components. Straight chain
fatty acids generally account for 1% of the total fatty acids,
and unsaturated fatty acids are not detected at all. Over
81% of the total fatty acids are composed of the lower
melting point anteiso acids, which may contribute to
membrane fluidity at low temperatures. Unsaturated
menaquinones with nine isoprene units are present.
All strains contain diphosphatydylglycerol, 2 major and
6 or 7 minor glycolipids and two unidentified minor phospholipids [37].
4.4 Molecular/genetic methods

Molecular/genetic methods involving 16S rRNA gene
sequencing [38], reverse transcriptase-sequencing
[39,40] and polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based gene
sequencing [41] have been useful additions to the
armoury of techniques applicable to bacterial taxonomy
[29,31]. DNA hybridization, which is regarded as the
“gold standard” for demonstrating the presence or
absence of new species, was introduced into bacterial
taxonomy during the 1960s (e.g. [42]). Genotypic classification involving sequencing of the 16S and 23S RNA
genes (the latter is less popular) is regarded as the definitive standard for determining phylogenetic relationships of bacteria [29,38]. In particular, the genes are
regarded as having all the attributes of useful, relevant
and stable biological markers being present and homologous in all bacteria. Also, they are not prone to the
effects of gene transfer [29]. Yet, the exact homology
values have a profound effect on interpretation of the
outputs. Thus, homology values of ≤ 98.7% (97% according to [31]) indicates membership of different species,

Austin Veterinary Research 2011, 42:20
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/20

and this correlates well with DNA hybridization results.
Yet, occasionally higher homology values may be attributed to distinct species groupings [43]. By themselves,
16S rRNA gene sequences are insufficient to describe a
new species, but may be used indicatively and in conjunction with DNA:DNA hybridization [31]. However,
sequencing has permitted the recognition of new variants. For example, sequencing revealed a new variant
among Israeli isolates of Streptococcus iniae [44]. Moreover, 16S rRNA cataloguing has been useful in providing
information about the position of species in existing
classifications. Thus, small-subunit rRNA sequencing
and DNA:DNA hybridization revealed that Pasteurella
piscicida was related to Photobacterium damsela leading
to the proposal that the pathogen be re-classified as Ph.
damsela(e) subsp. piscicida [45]. Furthermore, R. salmoninarum was deduced to be a member of the actinomycete subdivision, being related to Arthrobacter,
Brevibacterium, Cellulomonas, Jonesia, Micrococcus, Promicromonospora, Stomatococcus and Terrabacter
[46,47]. The evolutionary relationship of R. salmoninarum to Arthrobacter was reinforced as the result of
genome sequencing, which suggested that the genome
of the former had been reduced significantly since its
divergence from a common ancestor [48].
Nucleic acid fingerprinting methods, including
amplified fragment-length polymorphism PCR (AFLP),
pulsed field gel electrophoresis (PFGE), random amplified polymorphic DNA (RAPD), rep-PCR (repetitive
element primed PCR), REP-PCR (repetitive extragenic
palindromic-PCR), ERIC-PCR (enterobacterial repetitive intergenic consensus sequences-PCR), BOX-PCR
(derived from the boxA element) and ribotyping, provide information at or below the subspecies level [31].
Of these, AFLP and ribotyping are extremely useful
and standardized.
It is unfortunate that with the increasing use of molecular methods, the description of bacterial groups has
been often met with the use of minimal phenotypic
data, which causes problems for diagnostics especially in
laboratories, which are not equipped for molecular biology [6]. In these situations where distinguishing phenotypic feature have not been or could not be provided
then the species should be referred to as a geno[mo]species. Nevertheless, molecular methods have revolutionized taxonomy, and led to the description of an
increasing number of new taxa. The methodologies may
be culture-independent, allowing for the study of uncultured organisms but there are issues with genomic fluidity [29]. “Candidatus“ describes uncultured prokaryotes
for which phylogenetic relationships have been determined, and authenticity confirmed by methods such as
in situ probing [29].

Page 5 of 13

Sequencing of the 16S rDNA is becoming an accepted
procedure for the identification of fish pathogens, for
example V. harveyi [49] and confirming its synonymy
with V. carchariae [9,10], and has been instrumental in
the recognition of new pathogens, including Streptococcus dysgalactiae [50], S. parauberis (previously recognised as S. uberis genotype II; [51]) and Vagococcus
salmoninarum [8,52], and confirmed the presence of
Lactococcus garvieae in Taiwan [53].
DNA:DNA and RNA:DNA hybridization, 16S RNA
cataloguing, and 5S and 16S rRNA sequencing techniques have been used with increasing regularity and success. A review of PCR with emphasis on validation of
the techniques and problems with diagnosis has been
published [54]. PCR has been used successfully to identify hard-to-isolate fish pathogens, such as Mycobacterium spp. in sea bass (Dicentrarchus labrax) [55] and M.
chelonei in a cichlid oscar (Astronotus ocellatus) [56].
Moreover, PCR has been useful with distinguishing different species from within the same genus, such as Lactococcus garvieae from L. lactis [57], from related
genera, i.e. L. garvieae, S. difficilis, S. iniae and S. parauberis [58], and with an admirable level of specificity [59].
The sensitivity of PCR is clearly a positive attribute
particularly with slow growing and/or nutritionally fastidious pathogens that are otherwise difficult to study in
the laboratory. Of relevance, a PCR was developed
[60,61], which detected only 22 cells of R. salmoninarum; a sensitivity of 10 cells was reported by others
[62]. Similarly, PCR detected only 102 colony forming
units (CFU) of N. seriolae in yellowtail [63].
A recent development is multi locus sequence analysis
(MLSA), which permits the genotypic examination of
micro-organisms by comparison of the sequences of
multiple, i.e. 12 or more, house-keeping genes. The benefit of using multiple genes is that the outputs are more
informative and less likely to generate results that are
distorted by recombination of single loci [29]. The
resulting phylogenetic trees are capable of recognizing
deeply branching clusters and permit the delineation of
groups within a species or genus [64].
5. New species of fish pathogens recognized by 16S rRNA
sequencing

16S rRNA sequencing has helped the description of fish
pathogens where phenotypic characterization alone does
not permit their incorporation in classifications. For
example, a new disease of Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar)
was linked to the Streptobacillus moniliformis and the
fusobacteria group on the basis of sequence homology;
biochemical traits did not permit identification [65]. The
newly described cause of a mycobacteriosis in Chesapeake Bay (USA) striped bass (Morone saxatilis) was

Austin Veterinary Research 2011, 42:20
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/20

equated to a new species, M. shottsii, with confirmation
by 16S rRNA sequence homology in which the pathogen
was linked most closely to M. marinum and M. ulcerans
(similarity = 99.2%) [30]. In one study, M. gordonae was
identified by 16S rRNA sequencing [66]. Furthermore,
phylogenetic analysis based on 16S rRNA gene sequencing together with partial sequences from the 65 kDa
heat-shock protein (hsp65) and the beta-subunit of the
bacterial RNA polymerase (rpoB) genes and the 16S-23S
internal transcribed spacer 1 (ITS 1) region named
other novel mycobacteria as M. stomatepiae and M. barombii [67].
During an examination of 16S rRNA sequences, two
isolates of motile aeromonads from diseased elvers in
Spain were described as a new species, Aeromonas allosaccharophila [68], albeit phenotypically heterogeneous
[69]. This heterogenicity has caused problems for reliable phenotypic-based diagnoses.
Francisella became recognized as the cause of a new
disease of Atlantic cod (Gadus morhua) in Norway in
which the affected fish displayed white granuloma in the
viscera and skin. Isolates were recovered, and determined to possess the key phenotypic characters of Francisella, viz. non-motile, strictly aerobic Gram-negative
intracellular coccobacilli which produced H 2 S from
cysteine-containing media [70]. 16S rRNA sequencing
revealed a 99.17% homology to Francisella philomiragia
[71], although a slightly higher value of 99.3% was published [70] with the proposal for a new subspecies, i.e.
Francisella philomiragia subsp. noatunensis, to accommodate the organisms. There was 92.2-99.0% homology
with Francisella philomiragia housekeeping genes,
groEL, shdA, rpoB, rpoA, pgm and atpA. A DNA:DNA
hybridization of 68% was recorded between the fish
pathogen and Francisella philomiragia [70].
Pasteurella skyensis was recovered from diseased
Atlantic salmon in Scotland, linked to the family Pasteurellaceae by phenotypic analysis, and elevated to a
new species largely as a result of 16S rRNA sequencing
that identified the closest neighbour as Pasteurella phocoenarum (homology = 97.1%; [72]).
Piscirickettsia salmonis was named to accommodate
isolates from diseased salmon in Chile, of which LF-89
was studied in detail [73] with 16S rRNA conforming to
the gamma subdivision of the Proteobacteria with similarities to the family Rickettsiales, and in particular Wolbachia persica (similarity = 86.3%) and Coxiella burnetii
(similarity = 87.5%) more than to representatives of Ehrlichia, Rickettsia or Rochalimaea leading to the description of a new genus and species [73]. Other rickettsias
not conforming exactly with Piscirickettia salmonis have
been described. For example, an organism recovered
from white sea bass (Atractascion nobilis) was reported
to have a 96.3-98.7% 16S rDNA homology with

Page 6 of 13

Piscirickettsia salmonis [74], which was considered by
the authors to be too low for a confirmed identity. A
Tasmanian isolate from Atlantic salmon was distinct
from Piscirickettsia in terms of sequence alignment of
the 16S rRNA, and for the present regarded as a rickettsial-like organism (RLO; [75]).
Pseudomonas plecoglossicida, the causal agent of bacterial ascites of ayu (Plecoglossus altivelis), was described
as a new species as a result of 16S rRNA gene sequence
analysis confirming distinctiveness from P. putida biovar
A. DNA:DNA hybridization confirmed the isolates to be
a new centre of variation insofar as < 50% homology
was recorded with other pseudomonads, including
P. putida [76].
Streptococcus phocae was recognized as a cause of systemic disease in Atlantic salmon farmed in Chile. Phenotypic testing linked the pathogen with the streptococci,
notably Gemella, but analysis of 16S rRNA genes provided a link to S. phocae [77].
Tenacibaculum soleae was recovered from diseased
sole (Solea senegalensis) in Spain, and confirmed as a new
species largely on account of 16S rRNA homology values
of 94.8-96.7% with other members of the genus [78].
Two groups of bacteria were recovered from Atlantic
salmon with winter ulcer disease/syndrome [79], of
which one cluster was found to be closest to Moritella
marina (43% re-association by DNA:DNA hybridization), and was named as V. viscosus. By 16S rDNA
sequencing, the closest match was with Moritella [79]
and M. marina (99.1% sequence homology) so that the
organism was re-classified to Moritella, but as a
new species, as M. viscosa [80], despite the high
sequence homology [29]. Separately, 19 Icelandic and one
Norwegian isolate from shallow skin lesions on Atlantic
salmon, and the type strain of V. marinus NCIMB 1144
were identified as V. marinus after an examination of
phenotypic data and analyses by numerical taxonomy [81].
On the basis of 16S rRNA sequencing, the species was
transferred to Moritella as M. marina [82].
5.1 New and uncultured fish pathogens: “Candidatus“

Molecular techniques have permitted the recognition of
uncultured pathogens belonging to new groupings for
which the name of “Candidatus“ has been used. “Candidatus arthromitus” has been recovered from rainbow trout
(Oncorhynchus mykiss) with summer enteritic syndrome,
which is a gastro-enteritis [83,84]. The organism was
observed in histological preparations to which nested polymerase chain reaction was used, with confirmation by
sequencing [85]. “Candidatus piscichlamydia salmonis”
was detected by RT-DGGE in intracellular inclusions, i.e.
epitheliocysts, in Atlantic salmon with proliferative gill
inflammation [86]. “Candidatus clavochlamydia salmonicola” is an intracellular organism, causing epitheliocystis in

Austin Veterinary Research 2011, 42:20
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/20

Atlantic salmon, which was recognized as novel as a result
of 16S rRNA sequencing [87].

6. Taxonomic developments associated with
specific bacterial fish pathogens
From the early literature, a question-mark has hung
over the reliability of some bacterial names insofar as
there was often negligible evidence to support the use of
those names. Concern may also be expressed about the
value of studies based on only single isolates where concern about the reasons for choice of the culture may be
aired. Some of the controversy surrounding specific diseases/pathogens follows:
6.1 Motile aeromonas septicaemia

Aeromonas hydrophila (= A. formicans and A. liquefaciens) would appear to have worldwide distribution and
to be a pathogen, causing motile aeromonas septicaemia,
of many species of freshwater fish. Indeed, there are
reports of a spread into marine fish, notably ulcer disease of cod [88]. Since its initial recognition in the literature, a wealth of knowledge has been accumulated
about many facets of its biology (see [6]). A new variant
A. hydrophila subsp. dhakenis, which was originally
recovered from children with diarrhoeae in Bangladesh,
was determined to be pathogenic to rainbow trout [89].
However overall, there has been some doubt about the
role of A. hydrophila as a pathogen, and in some cases
it may well be present in fish tissue only as a secondary
invader [6]. Moreover with developments in the taxonomy of motile aeromonads [90], the accuracy of some of
the early published identifications may be justifiably
questioned. Could other motile aeromonads be associated with fish disease and may have been confused
previously with A. hydrophila [89]?
It is clear that there is phenotypic, serological and
genotypic heterogeneity within the descriptions of fish
pathogenic A. hydrophila [e.g. 91, 92], and other motile
aeromonads have been implicated as the aetiological
agents of (fish) diseases. Thus, 8 isolates reported as
pathogenic to eel in Spain were identified by numerical
taxonomy as A. jandaei [93,94]. Certainly, the current
approach of allocating species names as a result of the
examination of 16S rRNA gene sequences has encompassed fish pathogenic motile aeromonads. For example,
isolates from diseased fish which were recovered in
Aeromonas DNA Hybridization Group 2 (= A. hydrophila) were equated with a new group, A. bestiarum
[95]. Subsequently, A. sobria (A. sobria biovar sobria
and A. veronii biovar sobria were reported as pathogenic
to rainbow trout [89]. Indeed, A. sobria has been previously found to have a role as a fish pathogen, with isolates recovered from wild spawning gizzard shad
(Dorosoma cepedianum) in Maryland, USA during 1987

Page 7 of 13

[15,96]. Also, A. veronii has been recovered from Siberian sturgeon (Acipenser baerii) with identification of the
pathogen resulting from phenotyping and 16S rRNA
gene sequencing [97].
6.2 Aeromonas salmonicida

Aeromonas salmonicida is one of the oldest described
fish pathogens, being isolated initially from diseased
hatchery-maintained brown trout (Salmo trutta) in
Germany, and named as “Bacillus der Forellenseuche” or
bacillus of trout contagious disease. The history of the
organism reveals a plethora of synonyms including
Bacillus devorans, Bacterium salmonica, Bacterium salmonicida, Bacillus truttae and Bacillus salmonicida [6].
The 7th edition of Bergey’s Manual of Determinative
Bacteriology (1957) placed the pathogen in the genus
Aeromonas within the family Pseudomonadaceae [98].
Later, there was a transfer to the family Vibrionaceae
and subsequently to its own family, i.e. the Aeromonadaceae [99]. Re-classification was based primarily on
phenotyping [100]. Thus in 1953, the first detailed
description of the pathogen was published, and from an
examination of 10 isolates, it was concluded that Bacterium salmonicida was homogeneous in cultural and biochemical characteristics [100]. Numerous studies have
addressed the homogeneity of the species (e.g. [101]).
The basic description is of an organism, which comprises non-motile (motility and flaA and flaB flagellar
genes have been reported [52,82]), fermentative, Gramnegative rods, which produce a brown water-soluble pigment on tryptone-containing agar, do not grow at 37°C,
and produce catalase and oxidase [6]. Cultures have the
ability to dissociate into rough, smooth and G-phase
(= intermediate) colonies [102]. The pathogen has
spread from its dominance in salmonids to cyprinids
and marine flatfish [6]. An ongoing issue surrounds the
intraspecies structure, i.e. the validity of subspecies
achromogenes, masoucida, pectinolytica, salmonicida
and smithia, and the status of so-called atypical isolates.
A. salmonicida subsp. salmonicida, isolates of which
have been obtained almost exclusively from outbreaks of
furunculosis in salmonids, is regarded as homogeneous,
and is referred to as “typical” [103]; all other isolates are
considered as heterogeneous and “atypical” [6]. So called
atypical strains may demonstrate weak, slow or nonpigment production [104,105], catalase [106] or oxidasenegativity [e.g. 106, 107], nutritional fastidiousness for
blood products [108], slow growth, i.e. ≥ 5 days compared with 1-2 days for typical isolates [106,108], and be
pathogenic for fish other than salmonids, e.g. cyprinids
(e.g. [106,108,109]) and marine flatfish, namely dab
(Limanda limanda), plaice (Pleuronectes platessa),
flounder (Platichthys flesus) and turbot (Scophthalmus
maximus) [110-112], and cause ulceration rather than
furunculosis [6,113]. The deviation in characteristics

Austin Veterinary Research 2011, 42:20
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/20

from the typical to atypical isolates has made typing difficult [114-116]. Even 16S rDNA sequencing has not
helped with the clustering of atypical forms (e.g. [117]).
Smith [118] recognized heterogeneity in the species
description of A. salmonicida. She examined six isolates
of non-pigmented A. salmonicida, which were clustered
as Group I in her numerical taxonomy study, for which
a separate new species name was proposed, i.e. A. achromogenes, but the proposal was not adopted widely.
A second non-pigmented group was described by
Kimura [119], and named as A. salmonicida subsp.
masoucida. Schubert [120] considered these nonpigmented isolates as subspecies, and coined the names
of A. salmonicida subsp. achromogenes and A. salmonicida subsp. masoucida, respectively. Pigmented strains
(= typical) were classified as A. salmonicida subsp. salmonicida [120]. The precise relationship of the subspecies has been the subject of detailed discussion. In
particular, it was contended that subsp. achromogenes
and masoucida were more closely related to A. hydrophila than to A. salmonicida [121]. Later, it was mooted
that subsp. masoucida bridged typical A. salmonicida
and A. hydrophila [122]. Yet, A. salmonicida subsp.
masoucida is non-motile, sensitive to A. salmonicida
bacteriophages, possesses an antigenic profile specific to
A. salmonicida, and shares a DNA homology of 103%
with A. salmonicida [92]. By PCR, a combination of
achromogenes with masoucida could be justified, but
this was not substantiated by ribotyping and RAPD analyses [114]. Phenotypic data suggest a case for combining subsp. masoucida with salmonicida, and subsp.
achromogenes with Haemophilus piscium, which is the
causal agent of ulcer disease of trout [123]. Examination
of the small subunit rRNA gene sequences revealed
99.9% homology of an authentic strain of H. piscium
with A. salmonicida subsp. salmonicida [124]. So far,
the comparative uniqueness of subsp. smithia has been
indicated from several studies (e.g. [114]). The complication is with aberrant strains of A. salmonicida from fish
species other than salmonids.
DNA homology was used to reveal that all isolates of
A. salmonicida (including A. salmonicida subsp. masoucida) were highly related, i.e. 96-106% homology, when
hybridized against A. salmonicida subsp. salmonicida
[92]. It was opined that A. salmonicida subsp. masoucida and some atypical isolates did not warrant separate
subspecies status, because they were regarded as variants
of other well-recognized groups. Also as a result of genotypic analyses, it was reported that typical and atypical
isolates of A. salmonicida were very closely related, with
minimal divergence [125]. Using DNA:DNA re-association, it was concluded that typical A. salmonicida were
recovered in a homogeneous group, whereas the atypical
representatives were more diverse [126]. From

Page 8 of 13

numerical taxonomy and DNA:DNA hybridization, similar conclusions resulted regarding the homogeneity of
typical isolates of A. salmonicida [101]. However using
16S rRNA sequencing techniques, it was reported that
subspecies achromogenes and masoucida were indistinguishable, and only differed from subspecies salmonicida
by two bases [68].
The relation of A. salmonicida to other aeromonads
has been discussed. Eddy [127] focused on the inability of
A. salmonicida to produce 2,3-butanediol from glucose,
and the absence of motility, which were in contrast to
the genus description [128]. A new genus, i.e. Necromonas, was proposed with two species, namely N. salmonicida for the typical isolates and N. achromogenes for the
non-pigmented strains [118]. This proposal was not formally widely accepted, although Cowan [129] used the
suggestion in his landmark identification scheme for
medically important bacteria. Subsequent serological and
bacteriophage sensitivity data supported the relationship
between A. salmonicida and the motile aeromonads.
Common antigens between A. hydrophila and A. salmonicida subsp. masoucida and other isolates of A. salmonicida were reported [122,130]. Furthermore, serological
cross-reactions between A. salmonicida and motile aeromonads were discussed [131]. Moreover, A. hydrophila
cultures were found to be sensitive to A. salmonicida
bacteriophages [132,133]. The outcome of all the studies
is that DNA homology supports the classification of A.
salmonicida in the genus Aeromonas (e.g. [92,122,126]).
There are certainly outstanding questions about the
validity and taxonomic placing of Haemophilus piscium
[123], but an authentic reference strain was not deposited any in any recognized culture collection at the time
of its first isolation. Later, it was concluded that the
organism was not a bona fide Haemophilus because of
the lack of requirement for haemin or NAD [134]. In
particular H. piscium differed from the type species of
the genus, H. influenzae, in the inability to reduce
nitrate or alkaline phosphatase and to grow at 37°C, in
conjunction with a higher G+C ratio of the DNA. It was
commented that there was only a low similarity between
H. piscium and other Haemophilus spp. in a numerical
taxonomic study [135]. A link with atypical, achromogenic A. salmonicida was made [122]. This link was
reinforced by bacteriophage sensitivity, when it was concluded that H. piscium is an atypical A. salmonicida
[136]. Other workers have supported this view (e.g.
[114]). However with the absence of an authentic, original type strain, the definitive taxonomic position of
H. piscium is only speculative.
A lack of congruence has been reported between the
results of molecular (PCR, RAPD and ribotyping) and
phenotypic methods in taxonomy of aeromonads [114].
Moreover, there are problems of inter-laboratory

Austin Veterinary Research 2011, 42:20
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/20

differences and lack of standardisation in test methods
[137]. The outcome is that the definitive classification of
A. salmonicida has not been achieved, to date.
6.3 Enteric redmouth (ERM)

There has been discussion about the taxonomic position
of the aetiological agent of ERM. Strong agglutination
with Salmonella enterica subsp arizonae O group 26,
and a weak reaction with O group 29 was reported
[138]. In addition, biochemical similarities with enterics,
notably Enterobacter liquefaciens, Serratia marcescens
subsp. kiliensis as well as Salmonella enterica subsp. arizonae were mentioned [138]. Serological cross-reactions
were also recorded with Hafnia alvei [139]. Nevertheless, a new species, i.e. Yersinia ruckeri was described
although there was only a 30-31% DNA homology with
Y. enterocolitica and Y. pseudotuberculosis [140]. This
compares to DNA homologies of 24-28% and 31% with
Serratia marcescens and Serratia liquefaciens, respectively [141]. Indeed, it has been suggested that the causal agent of ERM should belong in a new genus of the
Enterobacteriaceae [142]. A complication developed
when a new non-motile form of the pathogen was
recovered from rainbow trout. By 16S rRNA sequencing
and a homology of 100%, the organisms were linked to
Y. ruckeri but regarded as a new biogroup [143]. Similar
non-motile variants were also recovered from previously
vaccinated rainbow trout in Spain [144].
6.4 Vibriosis

The causal agent of “red-pest” in eels was first designated as Bacterium anguillarum [6]. Subsequently, an
outbreak among eels in Sweden led to the use of the
name Vibrio anguillarum. Numerous studies have
pointed to heterogeneity in V. anguillarum initially
with the delineation of two sub-groupings/biotypes (e.
g. [12]). This increased to 3 [145] and then 4 subgroups/phena within the species definition [146,147].
Ribotyping has confirmed the heterogeneity [148],
although a single taxon, homogeneous by ribotyping
but heterogeneous by LPS profiles, plasmid composition, serogrouping, and BIOLOG-GN fingerprints and
API 20E profiles was described [149,150]. Biotype II
became recognized as a separate species, i.e. V. ordalii
[151], which is homogeneous by plasmid profiling,
ribotyping and serogrouping, accommodates two LPS
groups, but is heterogeneous by BIOLOG-GN fingerprints and API 20E profiles [150].
Serology has been widely used for diagnosis, but has
complicated the understanding of V. anguillarum [151],
and the establishment of serotypes has to some extent
traversed species boundaries. With V. anguillarum, serogroup 02 and 05, there are common antigens with V.
ordalii [152] and V. harveyi [149], respectively. Initially,

Page 9 of 13

three serotypes were recognised for isolates from salmonids from the northwest USA, Europe, and the Pacificnorthwest (USA) [103]. This number increased to
6 [128], and then 10 [153] and upwards [148,154]. Serogroup O1 dominates the number of isolates available
for study and the relative importance to fish pathology
[149,155-157]. Serogroup O2 has been further subdivided into serogroup O2a and O2b [158].
V. anguillarum was re-classified initially to Beneckea
[12] and then to a newly proposed genus Listonella [13],
but the changes were not widely accepted.

7. The role of phylogenetics in bacterial fish
pathology
The techniques described above are relevant for the taxonomy of bacterial fish pathogens. Yet, molecular methods, namely sequencing of the 16S rRNA gene, permit
the study of evolutionary relationships, i.e. phylogenetics, which may be viewed as phylogenetic trees,
which are interpreted by cladistics and used in defining
taxa. The approach is essential in the study of the evolutionary tree of life, but is it strictly necessary for fish
pathology and the recognition of species? One concern
is the comparative fluidity by which genes may be
exchanged, such as by horizontal gene transfer, and the
impact of this movement on the outcome of the taxonomic/phylogenetic process.
8. Conclusions
There has been a resurgence of interest in bacterial taxonomy partially because of the current focus on biodiversity and the development of reliable molecular
methods [159], notably 16S rRNA sequencing. Undoubtedly, these molecular approaches have led to greater
confidence and accuracy in the reporting of bacterial
names. Nevertheless, it is conceded that bacterial taxonomy is a specialist subject, which is not of interest to all
fish pathologists. However, it cannot be overstated that
there is a real value for good taxonomy as a means of
communication. In terms of fish pathology, taxonomy
enables the recognition of new pathogens, improvements in the understanding of relationships between
taxa, an appreciation of variation within existing nomenspecies including the recognition of new subspecies and
biogroups, and facilitates accurate commentary about all
aspects of biology from epizootiology to pathogenicity
(e.g. [160]), although the position of so-called atypical
isolates in taxonomic hierarchies is often difficult to
determine [161].
For the future, a range of new techniques, including in
situ hybridization, probe hybridization, microarray techniques and restriction enzyme digestion, are entering
taxonomic use, and are likely to be used in fish pathology. The impact of these new approaches is difficult to

Austin Veterinary Research 2011, 42:20
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/20

predict, but will undoubtedly be incorporated in some
fish bacteriology laboratories.
Competing interests
The author declares that he has no competing interests.
Received: 30 April 2010 Accepted: 23 November 2010
Published: 2 February 2011
References
1. Sneath PHA: The application of computers to taxonomy. J Gen Microbiol
1957, 17:201-226.
2. Sokal RR, Michener CD: Numerical Taxonomy. WH Freeman, London; 1958.
3. Arakawa CK, Fryer JL: Isolation and characterization of a new subspecies
of Mycobacterium chelonei infections for salmonid fish. Helgoländer
Meeresuntersuch 1984, 37:329-342.
4. Brennan PJ: Mycobacterium and other actinomycetes. In Microbial Lipids.
Volume 1. Edited by: Ratledge C, Wilkinson SG. Academic Press, London;
1988:203-298.
5. Kämpfer P: The characterization of prokaryote strains for taxonomic
purposes. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol 2010, 60:7.
6. Austin B, Austin DA: Bacterial Fish Pathogens: Disease in Farmed and
Wild Fish. Springer-Praxis, Goldalming, 4 2007.
7. Schiewe MH, Trust TJ, Crosa JH: Vibrio ordalii sp. nov.: a causative agent
of vibriosis in fish. Curr Microbiol 1981, 6:343-348.
8. Schmidtke LM, Carson J: Characteristics of Vagococcus salmoninarum
isolated from diseased salmonid fish. J Appl Bacteriol 1994, 77:229-236.
9. Gauger E, Gómez-Chiarri M: 16S ribosomal DNA sequencing confirms the
synonymy of Vibrio harveyi and V. carchariae. Dis Aquat Org 2002,
52:39-46.
10. Pedersen K, Verdonck L, Austin B, Austin DA, Blanch AR, Grimont PAD,
Jofre J, Koblavi S, Larsen JL, Tiainen T, Vigneulle M, Swings J: Taxonomic
evidence that Vibrio carchariae Grimes et al. 1985 is a junior synonym of
Vibrio harveyi (Johnson and Shunk 1936) Baumann et al. 1981. Int J Syst
Bacteriol 1998, 48:749-758.
11. Thompson FL, Hoste B, Vandemeulebroecke K, Engelbeen K, Denys R,
Swings J: Vibrio trachuri Iwamoto et al., 1995 is a junior synonym of
Vibrio harveyi (Johnson and Shunk 1936) Baumann et al. 1981. Int J Syst
Evol Microbiol 2002, 52:973-976.
12. Baumann P, Bang SS, Baumann L: Phenotypic characterization of Beneckea
anguillara biotypes I and II. Curr Microbiol 1978, 1:85-88.
13. MacDonell MT, Colwell RR: Phylogeny of the Vibrionaceae and
recommendations for two new genera, Listonella and Shewanella. Syst
Appl Microbiol 1985, 6:171-182.
14. Vandamme P, Pot B, Gillis M, de Vos P, Kersters K, Swings J: Polyphasic
taxonomy, a consensus approach to bacterial systematics. Microbiol Rev
1996, 60:407-438.
15. Toranzo AE, Santos Y, Nieto TP, Barja JL: Evaluation of different assay
systems for identification of environmental Aeromonas strains. Appl
Environ Microbiol 1986, 51:652-656.
16. Sneath PHA, Johnson R: The influence of numerical taxonomic similarities
of errors in microbiological tests. J Gen Microbiol 1972, 72:377-392.
17. Austin B, Embley TM, Goodfellow M: Selective isolation of Renibacterium
salmoninarum. FEMS Microbiol Lett 1983, 17:111-114.
18. Walters GR, Plumb JA: Modified oxidation/fermentation medium for use
in the identification of bacterial fish pathogens. J Fish Res Bd Can 1978,
35:1629-1630.
19. Adams A, Thompson KD: Recent applications of biotechnology to novel
diagnostics for aquatic animals. Rev Sci Tech 2008, 27:197-209.
20. Goerlich R, Schlüsener HJ, Lehmann J, Greuel E: The application of
monoclonal antibodies to diagnosis of Aeromonas salmonicida infections
in fishes. Bull Europ Assoc Fish Pathol 1984, 4:66.
21. Jung TS, Thompson KD, Adams A, Morris DJ, Snedden K: The production of
monoclonal antibodies against Photobacterium damselae subsp. piscicida
and their application in immunohistochemistry. J Fish Dis 2001, 24:64-67.
22. Steiropoulos NA, Yuksel SA, Thompson KD, Adams A, Ferguson HW:
Detection of Rickettsia-like organisms (RLOs) in European sea bass
(Dicentrarchus labrax, L) by immunohistochemistry, using rabbit antiRickettsia salmonis serum. Bull Eur Assoc Fish Pathol 2002, 22:428-432.

Page 10 of 13

23. Adams A, Thompson KD, Morris D, Farias C, Chen SC: Development and
use of monoclonal antibody probes for immunohistochemistry, ELISA
and IFAT to detect bacterial and parasitic fish pathogens. Fish Shellfish
Immunol 1995, 5:537-547.
24. Klesius P, Evans J, Shoemaker C, Yeh H, Goodwin AE, Adams A,
Thompson KD: Rapid detection and identification of Streptococcus iniae
using a monoclonal antibody-based indirect fluorescent antibody
technique. Aquaculture 2005, 258:180-186.
25. Adams A: Advances in disease diagnosis, vaccine development and other
emerging methods to control pathogens.Edited by: Burnell G, Allan G. New
Technologies in Aquaculture, Improving Production, Efficiency, Quality and
Environmental Management, Woodhead, England; 2009:Chapter 7:197-211.
26. Saeed MO, Plumb JA: Serological detection of Edwardsiella ictaluri Hawke
lipopolysaccharide antibody in serum of channel catfish Ictalurus
punctatus Rafinesque. J Fish Dis 1987, 10:205-209.
27. Adkinson MA, Gilad O, Hedricks RP: An enzyme linked immunosorbent
assay (ELISA) for detection of antibodies to the Koi herpes virus (KHV) in
the serum of Koi Cyprinus carpio. Fish Pathol 2005, 40:53-62.
28. Mayer H, Masoud H, Urbanik-Sypniewska T, Weckesser J: Lipid A
composition and phylogeny of Gram-negative bacteria. Bull Jap Fed Cult
Collect 1989, 5:19-25.
29. Scheifer KH: Classification of bacteria and Archaea: past, present and
future. Syst Appl Microbiol 2009, 32:533-542.
30. Rhodes MW, Kator H, Kotob S, van Berkum P, Kaattari I, Vogelbein W,
Quinn F, Floyd MM, Butler WR, Ottinger CA: Mycobacterium shottsii sp
nov., a slowly growing species isolated from Chesapeake Bay striped
bass (Morone saxatilis). Int J Syst Evol Microbiol 2003, 53:421-424.
31. Tindall BJ, Rosselló-Móra R, Busse HJ, Ludwig W, Kämpfer P: Notes on the
characterization of prokaryote strains for taxonomic purposes. Int J Syst
Evol Microbiol 2010, 60:249-266.
32. Williams AM, Fryer JL, Collins MD: Lactococcus piscium sp. nov. a new
Lactococcus species from salmonid fish. FEMS Microbiol Lett 1990,
68:109-114.
33. Backman S, Ferguson HW, Prescott JF, Wilcock BP: Progressive
panophthalmitis in chinook salmon, Oncorhynchus tshawytscha
(Walbaum): a case report. J Fish Dis 1990, 13:345-353.
34. Isik K, Chun J, Hah YC, Goodfellow M: Nocardia salmonicida nom. rev., a
fish pathogen. Int J Syst Bacteriol 1999, 49:833-837.
35. Fiedler F, Draxl R: Biochemical and immunochemical properties of the
cell surface of Renibacterium salmoninarum. J Bacteriol 1986, 168:799-804.
36. Sanders JE, Fryer JL: Renibacterium salmoninarum gen. nov., sp. nov., the
causative agent of bacterial kidney disease in salmonid fishes. Int J Syst
Bacteriol 1980, 30:496-502.
37. Embley TM, Goodfellow M, Minnikin DE, Austin B: Fatty acid, isoprenoid
quinone and polar lipid composition in the classification of
Renibacterium salmoninarum. J Appl Bacteriol 1983, 55:31-37.
38. Fox GE, Pechman KR, Woese CR: Comparative cataloging of 16S
ribosomal ribonucleic acid: molecular approach to procaryotic
systematics. Int J Syst Bacteriol 1977, 27:44-57.
39. Lane DJ, Field KG, Olsen GJ, Pace NR: Reverse transcriptase sequencing of
ribosomal RNA for phylogenetic analysis. Meth Enzymol 1988,
167:138-144.
40. Sanger F, Nicklen S, Coulson AR: DNA sequencing with chain-terminating
inhibitors. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1977, 74:5463-5467.
41. Saiki RK, Gelfand DH, Stoffel S, Scharf SJ, Higuchi R, Horn GT, Mullis KB,
Erlich HA: Primer-directed enzymatic amplification of DNA with a
thermostable DNA polymerase. Science 1988, 239:487-491.
42. De Ley J, Park IW, Tijtgat R, van Ermengem J: DNA homology and
taxonomy of Pseudomonas and Xanthomonas. J Gen Microbiol 1966,
42:43-56.
43. Fox GE, Wisotzkey JD, Jurtshuk P Jr: How close is close: 16S rRNA
sequence identity may not be sufficient to guarantee species identity.
Int J Syst Bacteriol 1992, 42:166-170.
44. Kvitt H, Colorni A: Strain variation and geographic endemism in
Streptococcus iniae. Dis Aquat Org 2004, 61:67-73.
45. Gauthier G, Lafay B, Ruimy R, Breittmayer V, Nicolas JL, Gauthier M,
Christen R: Small-subunit rRNA sequences and whole DNA relatedness
concur for the re-assignment of Pasteurella piscicida (Snieszko et al.)
Janssen and Surgalla to the genus Photobacterium as Photobacterium
damsela subsp. piscicida comb. nov. Int J Syst Bacteriol 1995,
45:139-144.

Austin Veterinary Research 2011, 42:20
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/20

46. Gutenberger SK, Giovannoni SJ, Field KG, Fryer JL, Rohovec JS: A
phylogenetic comparison of the 16S rRNA sequence of the fish
pathogen, Renibacterium salmoninarum, to Gram-positive bacteria. FEMS
Microbiol Lett 1991, 77:151-156.
47. Stackebrandt E, Wehmeyer U, Nader H, Fiedler F: Phylogenetic relationship
of the fish pathogenic Renibacterium salmoninarum to Arthrobacter,
Micrococcus and related taxa. FEMS Microbiol Lett 1988, 50:117-120.
48. Wiens GD, Rockey DD, Wu ZN, Chang J, Levy R, Crane S, Chen DS, Capri GR,
Burnett JR, Sudheesh PS, Schipma MJ, Burd H, Bhattacharyya A, Rhodes LD,
Kaul R, Strom MS: Genome sequence of the fish pathogen Renibacterium
salmoninarum suggests reductive evolution away from an
environmental Arthrobacter ancestor. J Bacteriol 2008, 190:6970-6982.
49. Ransangan J, Mustafa S: Identification of Vibrio harveyi isolated from
diseased Asian sea bass Lates calcarifer by use of 16S ribosomal DNA
sequencing. J Aquat Anim Health 2009, 21:150-155.
50. Nomoto R, Munasinghe LI, Shimahara Y, Yasuda H, Nakamura A, Misawa N,
Itami T, Yoshida T: Lancefield group C Streptococcus dysgalactiae infection
responsible for fish mortalities in Japan. J Fish Dis 2004, 27:679-686.
51. Doménech A, Fernández-Garayzábal JF, Pascual C, Garcia JA, Cutuli MT,
Moreno MA, Collins MD, Dominguez L: Streptococcosis in cultured turbot,
Scophthalmus maximus (L.), associated with Streptococcus parauberis.
J Fish Dis 1996, 19:33-38.
52. Wallbanks S, Martinez-Murcia AJ, Fryer JL, Phillips BA, Collins MD: 16S rRNA
sequence determination for members of the genus Carnobacterium and
related lactic acid bacteria and description of Vagococcus salmoninarum
sp. nov. Int J Syst Bacteriol 1990, 40:224-230.
53. Chen SC, Liaw LL, Su HY, Ko SC, Wu CY, Chaung HC, Tsai YH, Yang KL,
Chen YC, Chen TH, Lin GR, Cheng SY, Lin YD, Lee JL, Lai CC, Weng YJ,
Chu SY: Lactococcus garvieae, a cause of disease in grey mullet, Mugil
cephalus L., in Taiwan. J Fish Dis 2002, 25:727-732.
54. Hiney MP, Smith PR: Validation of polymerase chain reaction-based
techniques for proxy detection of bacterial fish pathogens: framework,
problems and possible solutions for environmental applications.
Aquaculture 1998, 162:41-68.
55. Knibb W, Colorni A, Ankaoua M, Lindell D, Diamant A, Gordin H: Detection
and identification of a pathogenic marine mycobacterium from the
European seabass Dicentrarchus labrax using polymerase chain reaction
and direct sequencing of 16S rRNA sequences. Mol Mar Biol Biotechnol
1993, 2:225-232.
56. McCormick JI, Hughes MS, McLoughlin MF: Identification of
Mycobacterium chelonae in a cichlid oscar Astronotus ocellatus Cuvier, by
direct cycle sequencing of polymerase chain reaction amplified 16S
rRNA gene sequences. J Fish Dis 1995, 18:459-461.
57. Zlotkin A, Eldar A, Ghittino C, Bercovier H: Identification of Lactococcus
garvieae by PCR. J Clin Microbiol 1998, 36:983-985.
58. Mata AI, Gibello A, Casamayor A, Blanco MM, Domínquez L, FernándezGarayzábal JF: Multiplex PCR assay for the detection of bacterial
pathogens associated with warm-water streptococcosis in fish. Appl
Environ Microbiol 2004, 70:3183-3187.
59. Aoki T, Park CI, Yamashita H, Hirono I: Species-specific polymerase chain
reaction primers for Lactococcus garvieae. J Fish Dis 2000, 23:1-6.
60. León G, Maulén N, Figueroa J, Villanueva J, Rodríguez C, Vera MI,
Krauskopf M: A PCR based assay for the identification of the fish
pathogen Renibacterium salmoninarum. FEMS Microbiol Lett 1994,
115:131-136.
61. León G, Martinez MA, Etchegaray JP, Vera MI, Figueroa J, Krauskopf M:
Specific DNA probes for the identification of the fish pathogen,
Renibacterium salmoninarum. Wld J Microbiol Biotechnol 1994, 10:149-153.
62. Magnüssen HB, Fridjónsson ÓH, Andrésson ÓS, Benediktsdóttir E,
Gudmundsdóttir S, Andrésdottír V: Renibacterium salmoninarum, the
causal agent of bacterial kidney disease in salmonid fish, detected by
nested reverse transcription-PCR of 16S rRNA sequences. Appl Environ
Microbiol 1994, 60:4580-4583.
63. Miyoshi Y, Suzuki S: PCR method to detect Nocardia seriolae in fish
samples. Fish Pathol 2003, 38:93-97.
64. Soria-Carrasco V, Talavera G, Igea J, Castresana J: The K tree score:
quantification of differences in the relative branch length and topology
of phylogenetic trees. Bioinformatics 2007, 23:2954-2956.
65. Maher M, Palmer R, Gannon F, Smith T: Relationship of a novel bacterial
fish pathogen to Streptobacillus moniliformis and the fusobacteria group,
based on 16S ribosomal RNA analysis. Syst Appl Microbiol 1995, 18:79-84.

Page 11 of 13

66. Sakai M, Konno T, Tassakka ACMAR, Ponpornpisit A, Areechon N, Katagiri T,
Yoshida T, Endo M: Characterization of a Mycobacterium sp. isolated from
guppy Poecilia reticulata, using 16S ribosomal RNA and its internal
transcribed spacer sequences. Bull Eur Assoc Fish Pathol 2005, 25:64-69.
67. Pourahmad F, Cervellione F, Thompson KD, Taggart JB, Adams A,
Richards RH: Mycobacterium stomatepiae sp. nov., a slowly growing nonchromogenic species isolated from fish. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol 2008,
58:2821-2827.
68. Martinez-Murcia AJ, Esteve C, Garay E, Collins MD: Aeromonas
allosaccharophila sp. nov., a new mesophilic member of the genus
Aeromonas. FEMS Microbiol Lett 1992, 91:199-206.
69. Huys G, Kämpfer P, Swings J: New DNA-DNA hybridization and
phenotypic data on the species Aeromonas ichthiosmia and Aeromonas
allosaccharophila: A. ichthiosmia is a later synonym of A. veronii HickmanBrenner et al. 1987. Syst Appl Microbiol 2001, 24:177-182.
70. Mikalsen J, Olsen AB, Tengs T, Colquohoun DJ: Francisella philomiragia
subsp noatunensis subsp nov., isolated from farmed Atlantic cod (Gadus
morhua L.). Int J Syst Evol Microbiol 2007, 57:1960-1965.
71. Nylund A, Ottem KF, Watanabe K, Karlsbakk E, Krossoy B: Francisella sp
(Family Francisellaceae) causing mortality in Norwegian cod (Gadus
morhua) farming. Arch Microbiol 2006, 185:383-392.
72. Birkbeck TH, Laidler LA, Grant AN, Cox DI: Pasteurella skyensis sp nov.,
isolated from Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar L.). Int J Syst Evol Microbiol
2002, 52:699-704.
73. Fryer JL, Lannan CN, Giovannoni SJ, Wood ND: Piscirickettsia salmonis gen.
nov., the causative agent of an epizootic disease in salmonid fishes. Int J
Syst Bacteriol 1992, 42:120-126.
74. Arkush KD, Mcbride AM, Mendonca HL, Okihiro MS, Andree KB, Marshall S,
Henriquez V, Hedrick RP: Genetic characterization and experimental
pathogenesis of Piscirickettsia salmonis isolated from white seabass
Atractascion nobilis. Dis Aquat Org 2005, 63:139-149.
75. Corbeil S, Hyatt AD, Crane MStJ: Characterisation of an emerging
rickettsia-like organism in Tasmanian farmed Atlantic salmon Salmo
salar. Dis Aquat Org 2005, 64:37-44.
76. Nishimori E, Kita-Tsukamoto K, Wakabayashi H: Pseudomonas
plecoglossicida sp nov., the causative agent of bacterial haemorrhagic
ascites of ayu, Plecoglossus altivelis. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol 2000, 50:83-89.
77. Romalde JL, Ravelo C, Valdes I, Magariños B, de la Fuente E, Martin CS,
Avendano-Herrera R, Toranzo AE: Streptococcus phocae, an emerging
pathogen for salmonid culture. Vet Microbiol 2008, 130:198-207.
78. Pineiro-Vidal M, Carballas C, Gomez-Barreiro O, Riaza A, Santos Y:
Tenacibaculum soleae sp nov., isolated from diseased sole (Soleae
senegalensis Kaup). Int J Syst Evol Microbiol 2008, 58:881-885.
79. Lunder T, Sorum H, Holstad G, Steigerwalt AG, Mowinckel P, Brenner DJ:
Phenotypic and genotypic characterization of Vibrio viscosus sp nov and
Vibrio wodanis sp nov isolated from Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar) with
“winter ulcer”. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol 2000, 50:427-450.
80. Benediktsdóttir E, Verdonck L, Spröer C, Helgason S, Swings J:
Characterization of Vibrio viscosus and Vibrio wodanis isolated from
different geographical locations: a proposal for re-classification of Vibrio
viscosus as Moritella viscose comb. nov. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol 2000,
50:479-488.
81. Benediktsdóttir E, Helgason S, Sigurjónsdóttir H: Vibrio spp. isolated from
salmonids with shallow skin lesions and reared at low temperature.
J Fish Dis 1988, 21:19-28.
82. Urakawa H, Kita-Tsukamoto K, Stevens SE, Ohwada K, Colwell RR: A
proposal to transfer Vibrio marinus (Russell 1891) to a new genus
Moritella gen. nov. as Moritella marina comb. nov. FEMS Microbiol Lett
1998, 165:373-378.
83. Del-Pozo J, Crumlish M, Ferguson HW, Turnbull JF: Retrospective crosssectional study on “Candidatus arthromitus“ associated rainbow trout
gastroenteritis (RTGE) in the UK. Aquaculture 2009, 290:22-27.
84. Michel C, Bernardet JF, Daniel P, Chilmonczyk S, Urdaci M, de Kinkelin P:
Clinical and aetiological aspects of a summer enteritic syndrome
associated with the sporulating segmented filamentous bacterium
“Candidatus Arthromitus“ in farmed rainbow trout, Oncorhynchus mykiss
(Walbaum). J Fish Dis 2002, 25:533-543.
85. Del-Pozo J, Turnbull J, Ferguson H, Crumlish M: A comparative molecular
study of the presence of “Candidatus arthromitus“ in the digestive
system of rainbow trout, Oncorhynchus mykiss (Walbaum), healthy and
affected with rainbow trout gastroenteritis. J Fish Dis 2010, 33:241-250.

Austin Veterinary Research 2011, 42:20
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/20

86. Stevenson RMW, Daly JG: Biochemical and serological characteristics of
Ontario isolates of Yersinia ruckeri. Can J Fish Aquat Sci 1982, 39:870-876.
87. Karlsen M, Nylund A, Watanabe K, Helvik JV, Nylund S, Plarre H:
Characterization of “Candidatus Clavochlamydia salmonicola“: an
intracellular bacterium infecting salmonid fish. Environ Microbiol 2008,
10:208-218.
88. Larsen JL, Jensen NJ: An Aeromonas species implicated in ulcer-disease of
the cod (Gadus morhua). Nord Veterinaermed 1977, 29:199-211.
89. Orozova P, Barker M, Austin DA, Austin B: Identification and pathogenicity
to rainbow trout, Oncorhynchus mykiss (Walbaum), of some aeromonads.
J Fish Dis 2009, 32:865-871.
90. Carnahan AM, Altwegg M: Taxonomy. In The Genus Aeromonas Edited by:
Austin B, Altwegg M, Gosling PJ, Joseph S, Wiley, Chichester 1996, 1-38.
91. Allen DA, Austin B, Colwell RR: Aeromonas media, a new species isolated
from river water. Int J Syst Bacteriol 1983, 33:599-604.
92. MacInnes JI, Trust TJ, Crosa JH: Deoxyribonucleic acid relationships
among members of the genus Aeromonas. Can J Microbiol 1979,
25:579-586.
93. Esteve C: Numerical taxonomy of Aeromonadaceae and Vibrionaceae
associated with reared fish and surrounding fresh and brackish water.
System Appl Microbiol 1995, 18:391-402.
94. Esteve C, Biosca EG, Amaro C: Virulence of Aeromonas hydrophila and
some other bacteria isolated from European eels Anguilla anguilla
reared in fresh water. Dis Aquat Org 1993, 16:15-20.
95. Ali A, Carnahan AM, Altwegg M, Lüthy-Hotenstein J, Joseph SW: Aeromonas
bestiarum sp. nov. (formerly genomospecies DNA group 2 A. hydrophila)
a new species isolated from non-human sources. Med Microbiol Lett 1996,
5:156-165.
96. Toranzo AE, Baya AM, Romalde JJ, Hetrick FM: Association of Aeromonas
sobria with mortalities of adult gizzard shad, Dorosoma cepedianum
Lesueur. J Fish Dis 1989, 12:439-448.
97. Ma Z, Yang H, Li T, Luo L, Gao JL: Isolation and identification of
pathogenic Aeromonas veronii isolated from infected Siberian sturgeon
(Acipenser baerii). Wei Sheng Wu Xue Bao 2009, 49:1289-1294, (article in
Chinese).
98. Snieszko SF: Genus IV. Aeromonas Kluyver and van Niel 1936, Bergey’s
Manual of Determinative Bacteriology.Edited by: Breed RS, Murray EGD,
Smith NR. Williams and Wilkins, Baltimore; , 7 1957:189-193.
99. Colwell RR, MacDonell MT, De Ley J: Proposal to recognize the family
Aeromonadaceae fam. nov. Int J Syst Bacteriol 1986, 36:473-477.
100. Griffin PJ, Snieszko SF, Friddle SB: A more comprehensive description of
Bacterium salmonicida. Trans Am Fish Soc 1953, 82:129-138.
101. Austin DA, McIntosh D, Austin B: Taxonomy of fish associated Aeromonas
spp., with the description of Aeromonas salmonicida subsp. smithia
subsp. nov. Syst Appl Microbiol 1989, 11:277-290.
102. Duff DCB: Dissociation in Bacillus salmonicida, with special reference to
the appearance of the G form of culture. J Bacteriol 1937, 34:49-67.
103. Pacha RE, Kiehn ED: Characterization and relatedness of marine vibrios
pathogenic to fish: physiology, serology and epidemiology. J Bacteriol
1969, 100:1242-1247.
104. Koppang EO, Fjølstad M, Melgård B, Vigerust M, Sørum H: non-pigmentproducing isolates of Aeromonas salmonicida subspecies salmonicida:
isolation, identification, transmission and pathogenicity in Atlantic
salmon, Salmo salar L. J Fish Dis 2000, 23:39-48.
105. Nakatsugawa T: Atypical Aeromonas salmonicida isolted from cultured
shotted halibut. Fish Pathol 1994, 29:193-198.
106. Kaku Y, Yamada Y, Wakabayashi H: Characterization of atypical Aeromonas
salmonicida isolated from an epizootic ulcerative disease in carp
(Cyprinus carpio). Fish Pathol 1999, 34:155-162.
107. Wiklund T, Bylund G: Skin ulcer disease of flounder Platichthys flesus in
the northern Baltic Sea. Dis Aquat Org 1993, 17:165-174.
108. Austin B: Recovery of “atypical” isolates of Aeromonas salmonicida, which
grow at 37°C, from ulcerated non-salmonids in England. J Fish Dis 1993,
16:165-168.
109. Goodwin AE, Merry GE: Are all Koi ulcer cases associated with infection
by atypical Aeromonas salmonicida? Polymerase chain reaction assays of
Koi carp skin swabs submitted by hobbyists. J Aquat Anim Health 2009,
21:98-103.
110. Pedersen K, Kofod H, Dalsgaard I, Larsen JL: Isolation of oxidase-negative
Aeromonas salmonicida from disease turbot Scophthalmus maximus. Dis
Aquat Org 1994, 18:149-154.

Page 12 of 13

111. Wiklund T, Dalsgaard I, Eerola E, Olivier G: Characteristics of “atypical”
cytochrome-oxidase negative Aeromonas salmonicida isolated from
ulcerated flounder (Platichthys flesus (L.). J Appl Bacteriol 1994, 76:511-520.
112. Wiklund T, Dalsgaard I: Atypical Aeromonas salmonicida associated with
ulcerated flatfish species in the Baltic Sea and the North Sea. J Aquat
Anim Health 1995, 7:218-224.
113. Goldschmidt-Clermont E, Hochwartner O, Demarta A, Caminada AP, Frey J:
Outbreaks of an ulcerative and haemorrhagic disease in Arctic char
Salvelinus alpinus caused by Aeromonas salmonicida subsp smithia. Dis
Aquat Org 2009, 86:81-86.
114. Austin B, Austin DA, Dalsgaard I, Gudmundsdóttir BK, Høie S, Thornton JM,
Larsen JL, O’Hici B, Powell R: Characterization of atypical Aeromonas
salmonicida by different methods. Syst Appl Microbiol 1998, 21:50-64.
115. Høie S, Dalsgaard I, Aase IL, Heum M, Thornton JM, Powell R: Polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) based typing analysis of atypical isolates of the fish
pathogen Aeromonas salmonicida. Syst Appl Microbiol 1999, 22:403-411.
116. Lund V, Jenssen LM, Wesmajervi MS: Assessment of genetic variability and
relatedness among atypical Aeromonas salmonicida from marine fishes,
using AFLP fingerprinting. Dis Aquat Org 2002, 50:119-126.
117. Yamada Y, Kaku Y, Wakabayashi H: Phylogenetic intrarelationships of
atypical Aeromonas salmonicida isolated in Japan as determined by 16S
rDNA sequencing. Fish Pathol 2000, 35:35-40.
118. Smith IW: The classification of Bacterium salmonicida. J Gen Microbiol
1963, 33:263-274.
119. Kimura T: A new subspecies of Aeromonas salmonicida as an etiological
agent of furunculosis on “Sakuramasu” (Oncorhynchus masou) and pink
salmon (O. gorbuscha) rearing for maturity. Fish Pathol 1969, 3:34-44, Part
1. On the serological properties.
120. Schubert RHW: Genus II. Aeromonas Kluyver and van Niel 1936, 398,
Bergey’s Manual of Determinative Bacteriology.Edited by: Buchanan RE,
Gibbons NE. Williams and Wilkins, Baltimore; , 8th 1974:345-348.
121. Popoff M: Bacterioses, generalities - Aeromonas et Aeromonose.
Mimeograph. Institut National de la Recherche Agronomique; 1970, 1-38.
122. Paterson WD, Douey D, Desautels D: Relationships between selected
strains of typical and atypical Aeromonas salmonicida, Aeromonas
hydrophila, and Haemophilus piscium. Can J Microbiol 1980, 26:588-598.
123. Snieszko SF, Griffin P, Friddle SB: A new bacterium (Haemophilus piscium
n. sp.) from ulcer disease of trout. J Bacteriol 1950, 59:699-710.
124. Thornton JM, Austin DA, Austin B, Powell R: Small subunit rRNA gene
sequences of Aeromonas salmonicida subsp. smithia and Haemophilus
piscium reveal pronounced similarities with A. salmonicida subsp.
salmonicida. Dis Aquat Org 1999, 35:155-158.
125. McCarthy DH: Some ecological aspects of the bacterial fish pathogen Aeromonas salmonicida. Aquatic Microbiology Symp Soc Appl Bacteriol 1980,
6:299-324.
126. Belland RJ, Trust TJ: DNA:DNA reassociation analysis of Aeromonas
salmonicida. J Gen Microbiol 1988, 134:307-315.
127. Eddy BP: Cephalotrichous, fermentative Gram-negative bacteria: the
genus Aeromonas. J Appl Bacteriol 1960, 23:216-248.
128. Kluyver AJ, Van Niel CB: Prospects for a natural system of classification of
bacteria. Z Bakteriol Parasiten, Infekt Hyg, Orig 1936, 94:369-403, 2 Abt.
129. Cowan ST: Cowan and Steel’s Manual for the Identification of Medical
Bacteria. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2 1974.
130. Kimura T: A new subspecies of Aeromonas salmonicida as an etiological
agent of furunculosis on “Sakuramasu” (Oncorhynchus masou) and pink
salmon (O. gorbuscha) rearing for maturity. Part 2. On the morphological
and physiological properties. Fish Pathol 1969, 3:45-52.
131. Liu PV: Observations on the specificities of extra-cellular antigens of the
genera Aeromonas and Serratia. J Gen Microbiol 1961, 24:145-153.
132. Popoff M: Étude sur les Aeromonas salmonicida. II. Caracterisation des
bactériophages actifs sur les “Aeromonas salmonicida“ et lysotypie. Ann
Recherch Vét 1971, 2:33-45.
133. Popoff M: Intérêt diagnostique d’un bactériophage spécifique des
Aeromonas salmonicida. Ann Rech Vét 1971, 2:137-139.
134. Kilian M: A taxonomic study of the genus Haemophilus, with the
proposal of a new species. J Gen Microbiol 1976, 93:9-62.
135. Broom AK, Sneath PHA: Numerical taxonomy of Haemophilus. J Gen
Microbiol 1981, 126:123-149.
136. Trust TJ, Ishiguro EE, Atkinson HM: Relationship between Haemophilus
piscium and Aeromonas salmonicida revealed by Aeromonas hydrophila
bacteriophage. FEMS Microbiol Lett 1980, 9:199-201.

Austin Veterinary Research 2011, 42:20
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/20

137. Dalsgaard I, Gudmundsdóttir BK, Helgason S, Høie S, Thoresen OF,
Wichardt UP, Wiklund T: Identification of atypical Aeromonas salmonicida:
inter-laboratory evaluation and harmonization of methods. J Appl
Microbiol 1998, 84:999-1006.
138. Ross AJ, Rucker RR, Ewing WH: Description of a bacterium associated with
redmouth disease of rainbow trout (Salmo gairdneri). Can J Microbiol
1966, 12:763-70.
139. Steinum T, Sjastad K, Falk K, Kvellestad A, Colquhuin DJ: An RT PCR-DGGE
survey of gill-associated bacteria in Norwegian seawater-reared Atlantic
salmon suffering proliferative gill inflammation. Aquaculture 2009,
293:172-179.
140. Ewing WH, Ross AJ, Brenner DJ, Fanning GR: Yersinia ruckeri sp. nov., the
redmouth (RM) bacterium. Int J Syst Bacteriol 1978, 28:37-44.
141. Steigerwalt AG, Fanning GR, Fife-Asbury MA, Brenner DJ: DNA relatedness
among species of Enterobacter and Serratia. Can J Microbiol 1976,
22:121-137.
142. Bercovier H, Mollaret HH: Genus XIV. Yersinia van Loghem 1944, 15AL. In
Bergey’s Manual of Systematic Bacteriology. Volume I. Edited by: Krieg NR,
Holt JG. Williams and Wilkins, Baltimore; 1984:489-506.
143. Austin DA, Robertson PAW, Austin B: Recovery of a new biogroup of
Yersinia ruckeri from diseased rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss,
Walbaum). Syst Appl Microbiol 2005, 26:127-131.
144. Fouz B, Zarza C, Amaro C: First description of non-motile Yersinia ruckeri
serovar I strains causing disease in rainbow trout, Oncorhynchus mykiss
(Walbaum), cultured in Spain. J Fish Dis 2006, 29:339-346.
145. Smith IW: A disease of finnock due to Vibrio anguillarum. J Gen Microbiol
1961, 74:247-252.
146. Kaper JB, Lockman H, Remmers EF, Kristensen K, Colwell RR: Numerical
taxonomy of vibrios isolated from estuarine environments. Int J Syst
Bacteriol 1983, 33:229-255.
147. Pazos F, Santos Y, Magariños B, Bandín I, Núñez S, Toranzo AE: Phenotypic
characteristics and virulence of Vibrio anguillarum - related organisms.
Appl Environ Microbiol 1993, 59:2969-2976.
148. Olsen JE, Larsen JL: Ribotypes and plasmid content of Vibrio anguillarum
strains in relation to serovar. Appl Environ Microbiol 1993, 59:3863-3870.
149. Austin B, Alsina M, Austin DA, Blanch AR, Grimont F, Grimont PAD, Jofre J,
Koblavi S, Larsen JL, Pedersen K, Tiainen T, Verdonck L, Swings J:
Identification and typing of Vibrio anguillarum a comparison of different
methods. Syst Appl Microbiol 1995, 18:285-302.
150. Austin B, Austin DA, Blanch AR, Cerdà M, Grimont F, Grimont PAD, Jofre J,
Koblavi S, Larsen JL, Pedersen K, Tiainen T, Verdonck L, Swings J: A
comparison of methods for the typing of fish-pathogenic Vibrio spp. Syst
Appl Microbiol 1997, 20:89-101.
151. Schiewe MH: Taxonomic status of marine vibrios pathogenic for
salmonid fish. Dev Biol Stand 1981, 49:149-158.
152. Muthiara LW, Raymond BT, Dekievit TR, Stevenson RHW: Antibody
specificities of polyclonal rabbit and rainbow trout antisera against
Vibrio ordalii and serotype O:2 strains of Vibrio anguillarum. Can J
Microbiol 1993, 39:492-499.
153. Sørensen UBS, Larsen JL: Serotyping of Vibrio anguillarum. Appl Environ
Microbiol 1986, 51:593-597.
154. Grisez L, Ollevier F: Comparative serology of the marine fish pathogen
Vibrio anguillarum. Appl Environ Microbiol 1995, 61:4367-4373.
155. Pedersen K, Dalsgaard I, Larsen JL: Characterization of atypical Aeromonas
salmonicida isolates by ribotyping and plasmid profiling. J Appl Bacteriol
1996, 80:37-44.
156. Pedersen K, Tiainen T, Larsen JL: Plasmid profiles, restriction length
polymorphisms and O-serotypes among Vibrio anguillarum isolates.
Epidemiol Infect 1996, 117:471-478.
157. Kitao T, Aoki T, Fukodome M, Kawano K, Wada Y, Mizuno Y: Serotyping of
Vibrio anguillarum isolated from diseased freshwater fish in Japan. J Fish
Dis 1983, 6:175-181.
158. Tiainen T, Pedersen K, Larsen JL: Immunological reactivity of Vibrio
anguillarum sero-subgroups O2a and O2b, and comparison of their
lipopolysaccharide profiles. Curr Microbiol 1997, 34:38-42.
159. O’Hici B, Olivier G, Powell R: Genetic diversity of the fish pathogen
Aeromonas salmonicida demonstrated by random amplified polymorphic
DNA and pulsed-field gel electrophoresis analyses. Dis Aquat Org 2000,
39:109-119.

Page 13 of 13

160. Umelo E, Trust TJ: Identification and molecular characterization of two
tandomly located flagellin genes from Aeromonas salmonicida A449.
J Bacteriol 1997, 179:5292-5299.
161. McIntosh D, Austin B: Atypical characteristics of the salmonid pathogen
Aeromonas salmonicida. J Gen Microbiol 1991, 137:1341-1343.
doi:10.1186/1297-9716-42-20
Cite this article as: Austin: Taxonomy of bacterial fish pathogens.
Veterinary Research 2011 42:20.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
