<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>A comprehensive gene expression atlas of sex- and tissue-specificity in the malaria vector, Anopheles gambiae</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Genomics 2011, 12:296. doi:10.1186/1471-2164-12-296"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Dean A Baker"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Baker et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:296
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/296

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

A comprehensive gene expression atlas of
sex- and tissue-specificity in the malaria vector,
Anopheles gambiae
Dean A Baker1*, Tony Nolan2, Bettina Fischer3, Alex Pinder2, Andrea Crisanti2 and Steven Russell1,3

Abstract
Background: The mosquito, Anopheles gambiae, is the primary vector of human malaria, a disease responsible for
millions of deaths each year. To improve strategies for controlling transmission of the causative parasite,
Plasmodium falciparum, we require a thorough understanding of the developmental mechanisms, physiological
processes and evolutionary pressures affecting life-history traits in the mosquito. Identifying genes expressed in
particular tissues or involved in specific biological processes is an essential part of this process.
Results: In this study, we present transcription profiles for ~82% of annotated Anopheles genes in dissected adult
male and female tissues. The sensitivity afforded by examining dissected tissues found gene activity in an
additional 20% of the genome that is undetected when using whole-animal samples. The somatic and
reproductive tissues we examined each displayed patterns of sexually dimorphic and tissue-specific expression.
By comparing expression profiles with Drosophila melanogaster we also assessed which genes are well conserved
within the Diptera versus those that are more recently evolved.
Conclusions: Our expression atlas and associated publicly available database, the MozAtlas (http://www.tissue-atlas.
org), provides information on the relative strength and specificity of gene expression in several somatic and
reproductive tissues, isolated from a single strain grown under uniform conditions. The data will serve as a
reference for other mosquito researchers by providing a simple method for identifying where genes are expressed
in the adult, however, in addition our resource will also provide insights into the evolutionary diversity associated
with gene expression levels among species.

Background
For organisms in which large-scale mutagenic studies
are problematic, gene expression catalogues are an
important tool for annotating processes on a gene-bygene basis. In the malarial vector Anopheles gambiae,
studies have focused on differential expression in males
and females [1,2], on samples collected before and after
the bloodmeal [2,3] and in dissected tissues such as the
midgut [2], salivary glands [4,5], ovaries [2,6], head and
carcass [7,8]. However, since these studies often involve
different mosquito strains, different experimental platforms and analysis by different statistical methods,
comparison among treatments is challenging. Here, we
* Correspondence: dab55@cam.ac.uk
1
Department of Genetics, University of Cambridge, Downing Street,
Cambridge CB1 3QA, UK
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

provide a comprehensive expression atlas and associated
publicly available database, the MozAtlas (http://www.
tissue-atlas.org), cataloguing the relative strength and
specificity of gene expression in tissues of male and
female mosquitoes using a single genome-wide platform,
protocol and analysis.
We employed transcriptional profiling to analyse RNA
levels in whole body mosquito samples, eight separate
somatic tissues (head, salivary gland, midgut, Malpighian
tubules, thoracic and abdominal carcass) and the reproductive tissues (testis, accessory gland, ovary) of males
and females separately. In common with the majority of
sexually reproducing organisms, Anopheles has specialized reproductive traits. Of particular interest is the
female-specific activity of blood-feeding, which provides
protein for egg development and is a key determinant in
Plasmodium transmission. In contrast, male mosquitoes

© 2011 Baker et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Baker et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:296
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/296

Page 2 of 12

feed entirely on sugar, are not adapted for digesting
blood and do not transmit malaria. Consequently, those
tissues involved in acquiring, ingesting and digesting
blood are expected to display substantial sexual
dimorphism at the level of gene expression.
In this paper we summarize the functions and
sequence level divergence of genes with sexually
dimorphic or tissue enriched expression patterns to
determine which genes, if any, are rapidly evolving. In
addition, by comparing Anopheles expression profiles
with matched tissues in Drosophila melanogaster, we
assess evolutionary conservation of expression profiles
within the Diptera and identify genes recently evolved in
Anopheles with tissue specific patterns of expression.
Such traits provide ideal candidates for use in population control, where vital or fertility-related genes may be
targeted by genetic knockout [9]. With the ongoing
development of insect genetics it has become increasingly likely that some pest populations, including mosquitoes, may be controlled with genetic modification
[10-15].

Results
Gene expression coverage

We have analysed gene expression among Anopheles
males and females using Affymetrix whole-genome
microarrays. The microarray platform contains 16,942
unique Anopheles probes corresponding to 10,622 of
the annotated protein-coding genes, equating to 82% of
the genes in the genome. Female tissues were dissected
at 24 hour intervals for a three day period following the
blood-meal to provide information on the relative
strength and specificity of gene expression in adult mosquito tissues throughout oogenesis. Equivalent male tissues were dissected from siblings in parallel. Array
quality was first assessed by calculating the Pearson correlation coefficient between samples. Gene expression
was highly similar among replicates (R>= 0.92), indicating that variation in our experiment was low (Additional File 1). While indicating biological replicates are
highly consistent, individual-to-individual variation in
gene expression will of course be masked by the effect
of tissue pooling. After quality control, we detected
expression of 10,031 probes corresponding to 7253
unique genes across Anopheles tissues. Hierarchical
clustering with probe intensities indicates good discrimination of tissues, with expression distributed according to tissue and sex (Additional File 2). The fraction of
expressed genes varied from 51% to 74% among samples (Figure 1B). Corresponding Drosophila organs analyzed on a similar array platform using the same
normalization procedure, found similar levels of relative
gene activity. Approximately 20% of Anopheles transcripts in dissected samples are absent from whole-body

Figure 1 Global expression coverage. (A) The proportion of
probes giving at least 3 out of 4 mismatch calls in either male or
female samples for tissue in the MozAtlas and FlyAtlas. (B) Tissue
breadth. “House-keeping” genes were identified to have a taustatistic under 0.15 (n = 909), and narrow expression a tau-statistic
above 0.85 (n = 3446). Overall, only a third of genes were detected
in all tissues.

estimates, and only a third of transcripts are recorded
across all tissues (Figure 1B).
Sexually dimorphic gene expression

To investigate sexually dimorphic expression, a linear
model was fit to male and female tissue samples. On the
basis of differential expression, we identified probes as
either male-biased or female-biased with a 2-fold change
of intensity and statistical significance at the Q<0.05 level
(Additional File 3). Overall, 54% of genes are sexually
dimorphic in at least one organ, including a substantial
degree of sex-biased expression in most somatic tissues.
Of the 3924 sexually dimorphic genes, 72% are detected
in whole-body male and female samples, with the
remaining 28% only in dissected tissues (Figure 2A). Each
tissue displays a moderate degree of sexual dimorphism,
however, by and large, somatic tissues are closely related
irrespective of sex when clustered according to expression level (Figure 2B). Thus, each tissue exhibits a specific
gene expression profile that is overlaid with sex-specific
functions. Sexually dimorphic expression is most skewed

Baker et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:296
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/296

Page 3 of 12

Figure 2 Sexually dimorphic expression. (A) The proportion of sexually dimorphic expression in each tissue versus total sexual dimorphism.
The ratio of female- to male-biased expression is provided (female:male). All ratios deviate significantly from equality (Chi-squared test; P < 0.05).
(B) Hierarchical clustering of probes among tissues and sex with Euclidean Distance; female (red), male (blue). Branch support was estimated
with 10,000 bootstrapped replicates. Expression enrichment against carcass for the (C) ovary and (D) testis. Significant gonad enrichment is
highlighted in dark grey (ANOVA; M > 2; Q < 0.05). Inset figures show the proportion of gonad enrichment which is also sexually dimorphic in
whole-body samples, i.e. 51% female-biased (dark red); 7% male-biased expression (dark blue).

in the head, with a high number of female-biased genes
detected; in particular we found an over-representation
of odorant receptor genes with female biased expression.
However, overall, and in all other somatic tissues, there
was approximately equal numbers of male- and femalebiased genes.
Sexual dimorphism at the gene expression level is associated with different and distinct functional categories
(Additional File 4). For example, genes with ‘digestion’,
‘protein metabolism’ and ‘proteolytic’ functions, especially ‘serine-type endopeptidase’ are over-expressed in
the midgut of females. Genes enriched for ‘cellular homeostasis’, ‘ligase activity’ and ‘transporter activity’ are
enriched in the female salivary gland, while the malpighian tubules display an over-representation of genes associated with ‘ion transportation’. In comparison, maleelevated genes are largely associated with ‘carbohydrate
metabolic activity’, ‘ion transporter activity’ and ‘iron ion
binding’ within the midgut, salivary gland and Malpighian tubules, as well as the carcass. Ultimately, many of
the genes elevated in either sex are of unknown function.
Tissue specific gene expression

In the somatic and reproductive organs examined, a
subset of genes showed considerable specificity (Figure

3A). The highest proportion of tissue-specific expression
occurs in the testis, where approximately 10% of transcripts are unique. In comparison, ovary specific genes
account for ~4% of expression in the tissue, and several
of the ovary-specific genes are members of the chorion
family. We also found a set of 54 accessory-gland
expressed genes, absent from other tissues, representing
~2% of the expression in this tissue (Figure 3A). In common with the Drosophila Acps, our Anopheles candidates
are over-represented in the top 10% of intensity values
recorded for the accessory gland (c2 = 9.45; d.f.= 1; P <
0.003), and many contain secretory domains necessary
for transfer to females. Non-reproductive tissues also
have a substantial number of genes with specific expression patterns, the majority in a single sex: these are especially prevalent in the midgut, salivary gland and carcass.
Previous studies indicate that genes with restricted
expression have elevated rates of sequence divergence
amongst related species [16]. We conducted a largescale survey of SNP A/S ratios using data from dbSNP
to determine if such genes were evolving rapidly in Anopheles [17]. First, 11,224 genes with at least one coding
SNP were collected. In total, ~100,000 coding-region
SNPs and 316,043 intronic SNPs were identified, corresponding to SNP densities of 5.6 and 7.19 SNPs,

Baker et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:296
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/296

Figure 3 Tissue-specific expression patterns. (A) Tissue specific
transcription was investigated on the basis of probe detection (3
out of 4 mismatch calls). Instances where probes were detected in a
single tissue and a single sex are also highlighted: Female (red),
male (blue). (B) SNP A/S ratio for genes with tissue-specific
expression. 95% C.I. was estimated with 10,000 bootstrapped
replicates.

respectively, per 1,000 nucleotides. For our entire dataset, the number of non-synonymous coding SNPs per
non-synonymous site (A) was 0.0033, the number of
synonymous coding SNPs per synonymous site (S) was
0.0068, and the A/S ratio was 0.49.
SNP A/S estimates of < 1 suggest that most nucleotide
substitutions have been eliminated by selection, i.e. purifying selection, whereas SNP A/S > 1 indicate that
non-synonymous nucleotide substitutions have been
maintained, i.e. positive selection. As expected, many tissue-specific genes display a higher ratio of A/S SNP
ratio than those ubiquitously expressed throughout the
organism, i.e. fewer non-synonymous mutations have
been eliminated by selection and are evolving more
rapidly (Figure 3B). For example, genes expressed in
reproductive tissues including the testis, ovary and the
male accessory gland have the highest rates of sequence
divergence within Anopheles. Non-reproductive tissues
including the head and Malpighian tubules show less
deviation, while genes specifically expressed in the salivary gland and midgut have only marginally higher A/S
SNP ratios than ubiquitously expressed genes.

Page 4 of 12

a comparison of ovary and carcass expression indicates
over half the ovary-enriched genes are female-biased in
whole-body samples (Figure 2C), less than 10% of testisenriched genes are male-biased, largely because they are
undetected in whole-body samples (Figure 2D). Our
new dataset allowed us to revisit the issue of genome
position and expression in reproductive and somatic tissues. We found that genes expressed in the testis, but
not the ovary, are under-represented on the X chromosome (Figure 4A). In addition, male-biased somaticallyexpressed genes are also under-represented on the X
chromosome (Figure 4B). We find that SNP polymorphisms in testis-expressed genes show higher A/S ratios on
the X chromosome than on the autosomes (c2 = 26.5 df
= 1, P < 2.54 × 10-7; Figure 4C). Even though this finding is consistent with the expectation that X chromosomes are hostile to testis-expressed genes, the same
pattern was not observed with somatic tissues (c2 = 0.13
df = 1, P = NS; Figure 4D).
Comparative evolution with Drosophila melanogaster

To estimate evolutionary divergence in tissue expression
profiles, orthology relationships in Drosophila and Anopheles (Insecta: Diptera) were traced back to a common
Metazoan ancestor; Tribolium casteneum (Insecta:
Coleoptera), Apis melifera (Insecta: Hymenoptera) or Caenorhabditis elegans (Nematoda: Rhabditida) (Figure 5A).
From this analysis, we estimate that over half of the genes

Chromosomal distribution of tissue expression

Across a range of Metazoan species, genes with elevated
male expression are non-randomly distributed around
the genome [18]. However, in Anopheles, previous global
estimates of sex-biased expression failed to identify this
property [1]. Anopheles tissue dissections provide substantially more information about male-specific gene
expression than whole-body samples. For example, while

Figure 4 Gene expression for major chromosome arms. (A)
Germline only expression; testis (blue), ovary (red). (B) Somatic only
expression; male (blue), female (red). (C) Germline only X vs
autosomal SNP A/S ratio. (D) Somatic only X vs autosomal SNP A/S
ratio. (Chi-squared Test; *P < 0.05). Grey bars represent expected
proportions. 95% C.I. was estimated with 10,000 bootstrapped
replicates.

Baker et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:296
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/296

Page 5 of 12

Figure 5 Orthology Relationships. (A) The oldest common ancestor in gene-families to either a Dipteran, Coleopteran, Hymenopteran or
Metazoan ancestor. (B) Expression divergence of tissues for one-to-one orthology pairs (n = 4234). Euclidean distance was used to calculate
similarity among tissues within and between species. Branch support was estimated with 10,000 bootstrapped replicates. Drosophila (grey);
Anopheles (black). (C) Mean expression of Anopheles orthologue clusters and (D) mean expression of Drosophila orthologues clusters. Mean
relative expression (RA) level for each cluster according to grayscale. (E) The number of overlapping orthologous genes between Anopheles and
Drosophila expression clusters calculated with a hypergeometric probability distribution after multiple correction. Light grey (P < 0.05); Dark grey
(P < 0.01).

Baker et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:296
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/296

in the Anopheles and Drosophila genomes are in 1:1
orthology relationships (n = 6726; Additional File 5); ~95%
of which can be traced back to one of the outgroups used
in our analysis with the remaining pairs specific to the
Dipteran clade. Using these orthologues, we first compared mosquito expression with the same tissues in Drosophila [19]. Rather than relying on an absolute measure of
gene expression, relative measures of abundance (RA)
were calculated for each gene (See Methods). Hierarchical
clustering of RA across gene pairs showed that global patterns of expression in homologous organs were often
more similar between species than between unrelated tissues within a species (Figure 5B). For some organs (i.e.
ovary, gut carcass, head), a large proportion of transcriptional variation was conserved between Anopheles and
Drosophila, suggesting that the underlying gene networks
have similar functional constraints.
To identify conserved expression signatures underling
the above patterns, we used hierarchical clustering with
pair-wise correlation coefficients to identify co-expressed
genes for each species. We chose clusters with an average similarity of greater than 0.8 and more than 50
genes for further analysis. Overall, 11 clusters meet
these criteria in Anopheles and Drosophila, representing
2884 and 2913 genes respectively (Figure 5C-D; Additional File 6). Adjusting these thresholds, changes the
number of groups identified, but were selected to provide a dataset with reasonably sized gene clusters of
highly similar expression profiles.
Between species, we evaluated orthologues in each
cluster and found several groups with significant overlap
(Figure 5E). Typically, co-expression groups are elevated
in one or two tissues. For example, a significant number
of orthologues are expressed in the head of both the
Anopheles A1 cluster and the Drosophila D7 cluster
(Figure 5E). Gene Ontology (GO) annotations for these
genes are enriched for ‘phototransduction’ and ‘signal
transduction’, indicating a close associated with normal
physiological functions within head (Table 1). We also
found conserved signatures that correspond to expression in the Malpighian tubules, midgut and carcass. A
notable exception is that Anopheles salivary gland
expression (A4), shares most enrichment with Drosophila orthologues from the male accessory gland (D1,
D2). Overall, the largest clusters are expressed in reproductive tissues (Figure 5C-D). Orthologues with testis
expression in Anopheles, are spread over a number of
Drosophila clusters. We further note that a large proportion of orthologues are expressed in the female
ovary. Typically, clusters with elevated ovary expression
show significant overlap between Anopheles and Drosophila, and as expected, over-represented GO annotations involve basic cellular processes (Table 1).

Page 6 of 12

Table 1 Orthology cluster overlap, tissue expression and
enriched gene ontology annotations
Anopheles Drosophila Tissue

GO

A1

D7

Head

phototransduction
signal transduction

A2
A3

D9
D8, D9

Carcass

metabolic process
cellular respiration

A4

D1, D2

SG, AG

protein folding
signal peptide processing

A5
A6
A7

D10
D11
D10, D11

MT
transmembrane transport
Midgut
carbohydrate metabolic process
Midgut/MT

A9

D3, D4

Testis

microtubule-based process
spermatogenesis

A10, A11

D6

Ovary

nucleic acid metabolic process
oogenesis, cell cycle
eggshell formation

SG = salivary gland; AG = Accessory Gland; MT = Malpighian tubules.
Gene ontology significance level (P < 0.01).

Single-copy and multi-copy gene families

Our phylogenetic analysis indicated that 5932 families
contain a single Anopheles gene, whereas another 971
families show evidence of Anopheles expansion. In this
latter set, duplications with narrow expression patterns
(i.e. tau-statistic > 0.85), often arose during the Dipteran split and are most prevalent in the male testis
(Figure 6A). However, as well as the testis, a high incidence of duplication events are genes with salivary
gland, midgut or Malpighian tubule restricted expression (Figure 6A). Within single-copy families, 143
groups are narrowly expressed in the same Anopheles
and Drosophila tissues (Figure 6B). Such expression is
prevalent with head and testis expression, but while
these genes might be expected to evolve rapidly, the
majority date back to Metazoan and Hymenopteran
clades.
Online MozAtlas Database

For researchers interested in comparing their own
experiments to the MozAtlas, we have constructed an
online database and web-browser for querying tissue
expression in Anopheles (http://www.tissue-atlas.org).
The single gene query displays tables of normalized
expression for each probe and tissue available. In addition, this search displays available orthology relations, a)
one-to-one Drosophila melanogaster orthologues and
corresponding relative gene expression estimates, and b)
a gene tree of all mosquito, fly and outgroups within the
gene family. We also provide a BLAST and batch
searching facilities to output expression values for larger
lists of genes that may then be used for further downstream analysis.

Baker et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:296
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/296

Page 7 of 12

Figure 6 Gene copies, family origins and tissue expression. (A)Anopheles gene expansions with restricted expression patterns (n = 325; taustatistic = 1). (B) Single-copy gene-families with narrow spatial expression profiles in both Drosophila and Anopheles tissues (n = 143; tau-statistic
> 0.85).

Discussion
To help improve the functional annotation of the Anopheles gambiae genome we have generated the MozAtlas, a unified catalogue of tissue-specific gene
expression from a single mosquito strain. In Drosophila
melanogaster, cataloguing tissue expression patterns has
been useful, especially for inferring biological functions,
since the majority of genes encoded in the genome are
not ubiquitously expressed [19]. As with the fruit fly,
Anopheles gene expression also exhibits substantial tissue specificity, with only a third of detectably expressed
genes found in all tissues. Thus, the MozAtlas is a useful
resource for better understanding the mosquito genome,
providing direct evidence of genes with tissue restricted
expression. Below we highlight the utility of MozAtlas
for identifying classes of gene with tissue or sex-biased
expression that may be exploited for vector control.
Analysis of the MozAtlas also identifies gene expression
features that are of interest from an evolutionary perspective, revealing both highly conserved and speciesspecific aspects of insect biology. Of particular interest,
given that malaria parasites are only transmitted through
female mosquitoes, we separately catalogued gene
expression for each tissue in males and females, thus
providing both tissue and sex-specific views of gene
expression in the adult.
A major finding from our analysis is the substantial
degree of sexually dimorphic gene expression we find at
the tissue level: more than half of the genes for which
we detect expression exhibit sexual dimorphism in

terms of expression level. The head, in particular, has a
significantly higher number of female-biased genes and
of these, odorant receptors are significantly over-represented (Additional File 4). When searching for a bloodmeal, female mosquitoes are attracted to odours emitted
by humans, a behaviour mediated by receptors in the
antennal sensilla [7]. This activity is not exhibited by
males, who feed entirely on nectar, and we presume that
the female elevated expression of odorant binding molecules reflect this biology. The identification of molecules
associated with female-specific aspects of odorant detection may provide targets for controlling malaria transmission [20].
We identified other sexually dimorphic expression signatures that appear to be associated with female characteristics, in particular, adaptation to hematophagy. For
example in the female salivary gland we found an overrepresentation of genes with protein and lipid catabolic
activity, ion transport and cellular homostasis functions.
We suggest that these reflect the fact that, in females,
the salivary gland produces compounds to disarm host
hemostatic and immune responses, thus allowing mosquitoes to take a blood-meal. Similarly, many proteins
found in the midgut are only synthesized by blood-feeding females [3,21]: numerous digestive and proteolytic
molecules implicated in blood digestion were identified
as female elevated in our analysis.
In contrast, elevated male gene activity is largely associated with carbohydrate metabolism and ion transport
activity. Since male mosquitoes feed entirely on sugar,

Baker et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:296
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/296

these results were not surprising. However, somewhat
more novel is that iron binding molecules are up-regulated in males. While in female mosquitoes iron is especially important for egg development and is strongly
influenced by blood-feeding [22], iron metabolism has
diverse physiological and developmental roles [23].
Although females obtain iron from the blood meal, the
sugar diet of males may necessitate more efficient iron
uptake and up-regulation of genes that encode iron
binding functions.
In both somatic and reproductive tissues, we identified
genes with considerable specificity. Tightly controlled,
tissue-specific expression is of interest for understanding
the basic biology of a species, and is likely to be key in
the development of next generation insect control
agents. For example, genes uniquely expressed in particular tissues could be targets for inducing sterility or
providing regulatory elements to drive localised expression of transgenes. In this respect, the highest proportion of Anopheles tissue-specific expression is in the
testis, with approximately 10% of transcription uniquely
detected in this tissue. Testis specific expression of
genes with important roles in spermatogenesis, sperm
competition or sperm-egg interactions present a set of
targets with potential for inducing male sterility.
After mating, Anopheles females undergo distinct
behavioural and physiological changes due to the transfer of both sperm and proteins produced in the male
accessory glands [24]: proteins secreted by males and
passed to females in seminal fluid could provide a route
for altering female fertility. Via specific expression profiling of accessory glands we have identified a new set of
potential Anopheles Acp genes that will enable further
investigation of sexual conflict within the mosquito. Sexual antagonism between males and females may be
expected to cause rapid Acp sequence evolution [25].
We find that among tissue-specific genes, those
expressed in the accessory gland have a higher A/S ratio
than in many tissues, including the testis. Slower evolutionary rates in the Anopheles testis might be explained,
in part, by their mating behaviour: in polyandrous
insects genes involved in spermatogenesis are often
under strong positive selection as a result of post-copulatory male-male competition [25], whereas these pressures in the testis are expected to be absent from the
largely monandrous Anopheles mosquitoes [26].
Genes with ovary specific expression provide potential
targets for inducing female sterility in mosquitoes given
that they are closely associated with egg formation.
Chorion components of the fruit fly eggshell, for example, provide the embryo with protection from the physical environment, and disrupting their function causes
female sterility [27]. Recently, proteomic techniques

Page 8 of 12

have identified Anopheles eggshell constituents, several
of which we find to be specifically expressed in the
ovary, making them favourable candidates for use in
population control [28].
In terms of genome structure, we show that genes
with male-biased expression are non-randomly distributed around the Anopheles genome. Two mechanisms
have been proposed to explain the disparity in chromosomal distribution of male expressed genes. First, during
spermatogenesis the X chromosome of males becomes
inactivated: since few testis genes are expressed postmeiotically, evidence suggests that chromosomal inactivation has promoted autosomal duplication events from
X-linked genes [18,29,30]. There is compelling evidence
that X-linked inactivation also occurs in nematodes [31]
and mammals [32], however, an under-representation of
male-biased somatically-expressed genes on the X chromosome indicates that other forces are also at work.
Second, since males only have one X chromosome, polymorphisms beneficial to one sex may arise that are detrimental to the other sex. Such antagonistic sexual
selection may eventually lead to sequence changes and
demasculinization of the X chromosome [33], and consistent with this expectation, genes on the Anopheles X
chromosome have less sequence polymorphism than on
the autosomes.
Identifying expression divergence within and between
closely-related species provides important insights into
the selective pressures underlying gene regulation
[34,35]. The opportunity to compare divergence between
Drosophila and Anopheles, separated by some 250 million years of evolution, allows us to explore gene and
tissue evolution over a considerable time scale. We find
that expression similarity in one-to-one orthologues of
the midgut, head, carcass and ovary expressed genes is
well conserved in the Diptera and, as expected, genes in
conserved co-expression clusters perform integral physiological functions.
In contrast, tissues such as the testis, often show considerable transcriptional variation between closely
related species [36,37]. It’s been proposed that testis
gene regulation plays a critical role in the initial formation of reproductive isolation [38]. In addition to the
Anopheles testis, expression in other tissues is also
highly divergent: for example, expression in the Malpighian tubules is largely not conserved between Anopheles and Drosophila. As an organ with a key role in
detoxification and osmoregulation, this divergence may
reflect fundamental differences in the diet of each insect
[39]. In addition, salivary gland and male accessory
gland expression cluster within rather than between species, evidence for a bout of simultaneous evolution since
the last common ancestor was shared. Indeed, no

Baker et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:296
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/296

significant co-expression was detected between species,
indicating that secretory organ functions have diverged
during the Dipteran split.
Recent Anopheles gene duplications are often expressed
in the testis and, in Drosophila, extreme expansions also
have spermatogenesis-related functions [40]. As well as
the testis, other tissues display narrow expression profiles
of recent origin in Anopheles. Certainly, the blood meal
imposes a range of challenges on the digestive system of
mosquitoes and, in part, explains a predominance of
gene duplications with salivary gland, Malpighian tubule
or midgut expression. Even between members of the
same mosquito subgenera, salivary proteins can diverge
rapidly over time [41]: our data suggests that this evolutionary pattern may also be common in Malpighian
tubule proteins and, to a lesser extent, proteins within
the midgut. However, specifically expressed genes in
large families do not necessarily highlight unique functions, since homologues may perform the same or similar
functions in a larger set of tissues. Gene families with single members are of interest for identifying unique processes, given that closely related homologues are not
found within the genome. Narrowly expressed singlecopy families were detected dating back to Metazoan and
Hymenopteran clades, perhaps accompanying the emergence of differentiated organs. It will be of considerable
interest for insect control programs to determine
whether such proteins perform integral functions in their
specific tissues, given that as single copies they should
perform unique roles within the organism.

Conclusions
We have generated a tissue and sex-specific gene
expression atlas for Anopheles gambiae and used it to
explore mosquito biology related to reproduction, feeding and gene evolution. Given that Anopheles is the
major vector of one of the world’s most debilitating diseases, our dataset provides an important reference for
other mosquito researchers wishing to explore potential
roles for genes of interest. Of particular importance is
the identification of uniquely expressed genes that may
serve as tissue-specific drivers in transgenic constructs
or potential knockout targets in the next generation of
insect control agents.
Methods
RNA collections and microarray platform

Male and female mosquito siblings were separated at
pupation and allowed to emerge into separate cages to
prevent mating. 3-day old, non-mated females were
blood-fed and female tissues were dissected at 24 hour
intervals for a three day period following the bloodmeal. Equivalent male tissues were dissected from agematched siblings in parallel. Dissections were carried

Page 9 of 12

out in phosphate-buffered saline using dissecting needles
and a 28 gauge needle to cleanly separate connected tissues from each other. ‘Midgut’ samples were dissected
clear of the foregut, hindgut and malphigian tubules to
include the anterior midgut and stomach. ‘Head’ samples were produced by severing at the neck and include
brain, eyes, cuticle and some fat body. ‘Ovary’ samples
include both ovaries and the common oviduct. ‘Salivary
gland’ samples include the salivary duct, lateral lobes
and median lobe. Salivary glands were rinsed extensively
in PBS to remove the majority of fat body associated
with the glands. ‘Carcass’ includes the thoracic and
abdominal carcass and all tissues therein excluding
those tissues individually described in the MozAtlas.
Dissected tissues were placed immediately in Trizol to
minimize the impact of dissection on the transcriptome.
For each of four biological replicates, tissues were
pooled from a minimum of 10 mosquitoes dissected at
each time point. For each tissue and sex, an equal quantity of total RNA was pooled from three time points
sampled after the blood-meal to obtain gene expression
estimates throughout oogenesis (24, 48, 72 hrs). Each
RNA sample (50 ng) was subsequently amplified in two
cycle cDNA target labelling to generate biotinylated
cRNA probes for hybridization on to Affymetrix microarrays [42].
Estimates of gene expression

Oligonucleotide probes and genes were mapped to
AgamP3 genome assembly. Unless otherwise stated,
datasets were analyzed with the R statistical programming language using programs maintained as part of the
Bioconductor suite [43]. In addition to microarray datasets for Anopheles, matching tissues obtained from the
Drosophila FlyAtlas were re-analyzed with the same normalization procedure (GEO: GSE1690; GSE7763). Intensity values between arrays were first standardized within
tissues for each species separately using the robust
multi-array analysis package [44,45]. The expression
presence and absence calls were assessed with the signal
to noise ratio of the perfect match and mismatch probes
provided on Affymetrix arrays. Probes were used in
further analysis only if they were deemed to be present
in at least three tissue replicates. All estimates of differential expression were adjusted for multiple testing
using the false discovery rate method [46]. Array data
has been submitted to the Gene Expression Omnibus
under GSE21689.
Sexual dimorphism and tissue specificity

Sexual dimorphism was determined with a linear model
of gene expression fit to male and female samples for
each tissue as implemented in the LIMMA library [47].
On the basis of differential expression, we subsequently

Baker et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:296
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/296

identified probes as either male-biased or female-biased
where there was a significant 2-fold change of intensity
in one sex, in addition to statistical significance at the
Q< 0.05 level (Additional File 3). Two measures of tissue specificity were also calculated: probe detection and
tissue expression breadth. Probes were deemed tissuespecific if at least 3 out of 4 mismatch calls were found,
but only in a single tissue and sex. In comparison, tissue
breadth was measured by normalizing against maximal
expression to generate the tau-statistic [48]. The resulting tau-statistic falls within the range of 0 to 1, in
which higher values indicate greater tissue-biased
expression. Anopheles and Drosophila Gene Ontology
annotations (Biological Process, Molecular Function,
Cellular Component) and the enrichment of functions
were determined using FlyMine with a 1% false discovery rate for multiple testing correction [49].
SNP polymorphism

When sequences are available for multiple individual in
a species, the ratio of observed non-synonymous mutation rate (A) to the synonymous mutation rate (S) can
be utilized as an estimate of the selective pressure. To
estimate sequence polymorphism within Anopheles we
conducted a large-scale survey of dbSNP [17]. While it
is not possible to measure selective constraint on individual proteins directly using this approach, it has been
demonstrated that when a group of genes are measured
together, estimates of variation are robust and in good
agreement with A/S for divergence [50].
Expression divergence

Since microarray platforms were designed separately for
Drosophila and Anopheles, probes have different affinities to their target RNAs, making the normalization of
orthology expression between chips difficult. In order to
compare tissue expression profiles between species, each
gene was represented as a vector of relative expression
abundance (RA) across the sampled tissues to avoid
over-estimating divergence based on absolute expression
intensity. Where genes are represented by multiple
probes, the maximum intensity value recorded in each
tissue was used for subsequent analysis. Since the FlyAtlas does not have separate samples for males and
females, we combined male and female samples in the
MozAtlas to make comparisons between species. Hierarchical clustering of orthologues was performed with
measures of RA within and between species. For genewise clustering, we used Pearson correlation coefficient
as the distance measure and defined similarity between
clusters using average-linkage clustering. Co-regulated
genes were defined as any group with an average similarity of greater than 0.8 that also contained more than
50 genes. Among species clusters, orthologue overlap

Page 10 of 12

was subsequently investigated with a hypergeometric
probability distribution to determine enrichment.
Orthology classification

DNA and protein sequences were obtained for D. melanogaster and A. gambiae (Ensembl v50) [51], Tribolium casteneum (Version 3; BeetleBase) [52], Apis
melifera (Version 2; BeeBase) [53] and Caenorhabditis
elegans (ws160; Ensembl v50) [51]. One-to-one orthology relationships were determined using Inparanoid
with default parameters, we selected the longest available translation for each annotated protein [54]. Best
reciprocal hits between species were grouped together
into broader gene-families, and the sequences aligned
with MUSCLE [55]. Tree topologies were subsequently
reconstructed with both dS (synonymous substitution
rate), dN (nonsynonymous substitution rate), nucleotide and protein distance measures using TreeBest
[56,57]. From back-translation of protein alignments,
TreeBest creates a consensus tree by merging the
results of neighbour joining and maximum likelihood
(ML) trees. By default, ML trees based on protein
alignment are built under the WAG model, while ML
tree based on DNA are built under the HKY model,
which models non-uniform base composition and transition/transversion rate bias [58]. Orthology relationships are described as one-to-one, one-to-many and
many-to-many gene relationships.

Acknowledgements
This study was funded by a Grant from the Foundation
for the National Institutes of Health through the Grand
Challenges in Global Health initiative.
Additional material
Additional file 1: Figure S1 - Correlation of gene expression
between replicate samples.
Additional file 2: Figure S2 - Hierarchical clustering of probe
intensity.
Additional file 3: Figure S3 - Sexual dimorphism of tissue gene
expression.
Additional file 4: Table S1 - Gene Ontology annotation of sexual
dimorphic gene expression.
Additional file 5: Table S2 - One-to-one orthology relationships and
gene expression.
Additional file 6: Table S3 - Cluster annotation of one-to-one
orthology relationships.

Author details
1
Department of Genetics, University of Cambridge, Downing Street,
Cambridge CB1 3QA, UK. 2Department of Life Sciences, Sir Alexander
Fleming Building, Imperial College London, Imperial College Road, London
SW7 2AZ, UK. 3Cambridge Systems Biology Centre, Tennis Court Road,
Cambridge CB2 1QR, UK.

Baker et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:296
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/296

Authors’ contributions
DAB conceived, analysed and designed the study, performed microarray
experiments with BF, and wrote the paper. TN and AP reared the
mosquitoes and dissected the tissue samples. TN, SR and AC participated in
the design of this study and helped write the paper. AC and SR raised the
funding. All authors read and approved the final document.
Received: 31 January 2011 Accepted: 7 June 2011
Published: 7 June 2011
References
1. Hahn MW, Lanzaro GC: Female-biased gene expression in the malaria
mosquito Anopheles gambiae. Curr Biol 2005, 15:R192-193.
2. Marinotti O, et al: Genome-wide analysis of gene expression in adult
Anopheles gambiae. Insect Mol Biol 2006, 15:1-12.
3. Dana AN, Hong YS, Kern MK, Hillenmeyer ME, Harker BW, Lobo NF,
Hogan JR, Romans P, Collins FH: Gene expression patterns associated
with blood-feeding in the malaria mosquito Anopheles gambiae. BMC
Genomics 2005, 6:5.
4. Arcà B, Lombardo F, Valenzuela JG, Francischetti IM, Marinotti O, Coluzzi M,
Ribeiro JM: An updated catalogue of salivary gland transcripts in the
adult female mosquito, Anopheles gambiae. J Exp Biol 2005, 208:3971-86.
5. Calvo E, Pham VM, Lombardo F, Arcà B, Ribeiro JM: The sialotranscriptome
of adult male Anopheles gambiae mosquitoes. Insect Biochem Mol Biol
2006, 36:570-5.
6. Koutsos AC, Blass C, Meister S, Schmidt S, MacCallum RM, Soares MB,
Collins FH, Benes V, Zdobnov E, Kafatos FC, Christophides GK: Life cycle
transcriptome of the malaria mosquito Anopheles gambiae and
comparison with the fruitfly Drosophila melanogaster. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 2007, 104:11304-9.
7. Biessmann H, Nguyen QK, Le D, Walter MF: Microarray-based survey of a
subset of putative olfactory genes in the mosquito Anopheles gambiae.
Insect Mol Biol 2005, 14:575-89.
8. Iatrou K, Biessmann H: Sex-biased expression of odorant receptors in
antennae and palps of the African malaria vector Anopheles gambiae.
Insect Biochem Mol Biol 2008, 38:268-74.
9. Burt A: Site-specific selfish genes as tools for the control and genetic
engineering of natural populations. Proc Biol Sci 2003, 270:921-928.
10. Heinrich J, Scott M: A repressible female-specific lethal genetic system
for making transgenic insect strains suitable for a sterile-release
program. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2000, 97:8229-8232.
11. Thomas DD, Donnelly CA, Wood RJ, Alphey LS: Insect population control
using a dominant, repressible, lethal genetic system. Science 2000,
287:2474-2476.
12. Franz AW, Sanchez-Vargas I, Adelman ZN, Blair CD, Beaty BJ, James AA,
Olson KE: Engineering RNA interference-based resistance to dengue
virus type 2 in genetically modified Aedes aegypti. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2006, 103:4198-4203.
13. Phuc HK, Andreasen MH, Burton RS, Vass C, Epton MJ, Pape G, Fu G,
Condon KC, Scaife S, Donnelly CA, et al: Late-acting dominant lethal
genetic systems and mosquito control. BMC Biol 2007, 5:11.
14. Windbichler N, Papathanos PA, Catteruccia F, Ranson H, Burt A, Crisanti A:
Homing endonuclease mediated gene targeting in Anopheles gambiae
cells and embryos. Nucleic Acids Res 2007, 35:5922-5933.
15. Fu G, Lees RS, Nimmo D, Aw D, Jin L, Gray P, Berendonk TU, WhiteCooper H, Scaife S, Kim Phuc H, et al: Female-specific flightless phenotype
for mosquito control. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2010, 107:4550-4.
16. Larracuente AM, Sackton TB, Greenberg AJ, Wong A, Singh ND, Sturgill D,
Zhang Y, Oliver B, Clark AG: Evolution of protein-coding genes in
Drosophila. Trends Genet 2008, 24:114-123.
17. Sherry ST, et al: dbSNP: the NCBI database of genetic variation. Nucleic
Acids Res 2001, 29:308-311.
18. Sturgill D, Zhang Y, Parisi M, Oliver B: Demasculinization of x
chromosomes in the Drosophila genus. Nature 2007, 450:238-241.
19. Chintapalli VR, Wang J, Dow JA: Using FlyAtlas to identify better
Drosophila melanogaster models of human disease. Nat Genet 2007,
39:715-720.
20. Carey AF, Wang G, Su C, Zwiebel LJ, Carlson JR: Odorant reception in the
malaria mosquito Anopheles gambiae. Nature 2010, 464:66-71.

Page 11 of 12

21. Warr E, Aguilar R, Dong Y, Mahairaki V, Dimopoulos G: Spatial and sexspecific dissection of the Anopheles gambiae midgut transcriptome. BMC
Genomics 2007, 8:37.
22. Dunkov B, Georgieva T: Insect iron binding proteins: insights from the
genomes. Insect Biochem Mol Biol 2006, 36:300-309.
23. Nichol H, Law JH, Winzerling JJ: Iron metabolism in insects. Annu Rev
Entomol 2002, 47:535-559.
24. Rogers DW, Whitten MM, Thailayil J, Soichot J, Levashina EA, Catteruccia F:
Molecular and cellular components of the mating machinery in
Anopheles gambiae females. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008,
105:19390-19395.
25. Haerty W, Jagadeeshan S, Kulathinal RJ, Wong A, Ravi Ram K, Sirot LK,
Levesque L, Artieri CG, Wolfner MF, Civetta A, et al: Evolution in the fast
lane: rapidly evolving sex-related genes in Drosophila. Genetics 2007,
177:1321-1335.
26. Tripet F, Touré YT, Dolo G, Lanzaro GC: Frequency of multiple
inseminations in field-collected Anopheles gambiae females revealed by
DNA analysis of transferred sperm. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2003, 68:1-5.
27. Galanopoulos VK, Orr W, Szabad J, Kafatos FC: Genetic analysis of chorion
formation in Drosophila melanogaster: I. The effects of one somaticspecific and seven germ-line-specific mutations. Dev Genet 1989,
10:87-97.
28. Amenya DA, Chou W, Li J, Yan G, Gershon PD, James AA, Marinotti O:
Proteomics reveals novel components of the Anopheles gambiae
eggshell. J Insect Physiol 2010, 56:1414-1419.
29. Vibranovski MD, Zhang Y, Long M: General gene movement off the ×
chromosome in the Drosophila genus. Genome Res 2009, 19:897-903.
30. Kemkemer C, Hense W, Parsch J: Fine-scale analysis of × chromosome
inactivation in the male germline of Drosophila melanogaster. Mol Biol
Evol 2010.
31. Bean CJ, Schaner CE, Kelly WG: Meiotic pairing and imprinted ×
chromatin assembly in Caenorhabditis elegans. Nat Genet 2004,
36:100-105.
32. Khil PP, Smirnova NA, Romanienko PJ, Camerini-Otero RD: The mouse ×
chromosome is enriched for sex-biased genes not subject to selection
by meiotic sex chromosome inactivation. Nat Genet 2004, 36:642-646.
33. Wu CI, Xu EY: Sexual antagonism and × inactivation–the SAXI
hypothesis. Trends Genet 2003, 19:243-247.
34. Khaitovich P, Hellmann I, Enard W, Nowick K, Leinweber M, Franz H,
Weiss G, Lachmann M, P ääbo S: Parallel patterns of evolution in the
genomes and transcriptomes of humans and chimpanzees. Science 2005,
309:1850-1854.
35. Zhang Y, Sturgill D, Parisi M, Kumar S, Oliver B: Constraint and turnover in
sex-biased gene expression in the genus Drosophila. Nature 2007,
450:233-237.
36. Ranz JM, Castillo-Davis CI, Meiklejohn CD, Hartl DL, et al: 2003, Sexdependent gene expression and evolution of the Drosophila
transcriptome. Science 2003, 300:1742-1755.
37. Meiklejohn CD, Parsch J, Ranz JM, Hartl DL: Rapid evolution of malebiased gene expression in Drosophila. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2003,
100:9894-9899.
38. Voolstra C, Tautz D, Farbrother P, Eichinger L, Harr B: Contrasting evolution
of expression differences in the testis between species and subspecies
of the house mouse. Genome Res 2007, 17:42-49.
39. Wang J, Kean L, Yang J, Allan AK, Davies SA, Herzyk P, Dow JA: Functioninformed transcriptome analysis of Drosophila renal tubule. Genome Biol
2004, 5:R69.
40. Hahn MW, Han MV, Han SG: Gene family evolution across 12 Drosophila
genomes. PLoS Genet 2007, 3:e197.
41. Arcà B, Lombardo F, Francischetti IM, Pham VM, Mestres-Simon M,
Andersen JF, Ribeiro JM: An insight into the sialome of the adult female
mosquito Aedes albopictus. Insect Biochem Mol Biol 2007, 37:107-27.
42. Affymetrix GeneChip Expression Analysis: Technical Manual. 701021 Rev. 5.
Santa Clara, CA, Affymetrix; 2004.
43. Gentleman RC, Carey VJ, Bates DM, Bolstad B, Dettling M, Dudoit S, Ellis B,
Gautier L, Ge Y, Gentry J, Hornik K, et al: Bioconductor: open software
development for computational biology and bioinformatics. Genome Biol
2004, 5:R80.
44. Irizarry RA, et al: Exploration, normalization, and summaries of high
density oligonucleotide array probe level data. Biostatistics 2003,
4:249-264.

Baker et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:296
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/296

Page 12 of 12

45. Wu Z, Irizarry RA, Gentleman R, Martinez-Murillo F, Spencer F: A ModelBased Background Adjustment for Oligonucleotide Expression Arrays. J
Am Stat Assoc 2004, 99:909.
46. Hochberg Y: Controlling the false discovery rate: a practical and
powerful approach to multiple testing. J Royal Stat Soc B 1995,
57:289-300.
47. Smyth GK: Linear models and empirical bayes methods for assessing
differential expression in microarray experiments. Stat Appl Genet Mol Biol
2004, 3:Article 3.
48. Yanai I, Benjamin H, Shmoish M, Chalifa-Caspi V, Shklar M, Ophir R, BarEven A, Horn-Saban S, Safran M, Domany E, et al: Genome-wide midrange
transcription profiles reveal expression level relationships in human
tissue specification. Bioinformatics 2005, 21:650-659.
49. Lyne R, Smith R, Rutherford K, Wakeling M, Varley A, Guillier F, Janssens H,
Ji W, Mclaren P, North P, et al: FlyMine: an integrated database for
Drosophila and Anopheles genomics. Genome Biol 2007, 8:R129.
50. Liu J, Zhang Y, Lei X, Zhang Z: Natural selection of protein structural and
functional properties: a single nucleotide polymorphism perspective.
Genome Biol 2008, 9:R69.
51. Flicek P, Aken BL, Ballester B, Beal K, Bragin E, Brent S, Chen Y, Clapham P,
Coates G, Fairley S, et al: Ensembl’s 10th year. Nucleic Acids Res 2010, 38:
D557-562.
52. Wang L, Wang S, Li Y, Paradesi MS, Brown SJ: BeetleBase: the model
organism database for Tribolium castaneum. Nucleic Acids Res 2007, 35:
D476-479.
53. Elsik CG, Worley KC, Zhang L, Milshina NV, Jiang H, Reese JT, Childs KL,
Venkatraman A, Dickens CM, Weinstock GM, et al: Community annotation:
procedures, protocols, and supporting tools. Genome Res 2006,
16:1329-1333.
54. O’Brien KP, Remm M, Sonnhammer EL, Inparanoid : A Comprehensive
Database of Eukaryotic Orthologs. NAR 2005, 33:D476-D480.
55. Edgar RC: MUSCLE: a multiple sequence alignment method with reduced
time and space complexity. BMC Bioinformatics 2004, 5:113.
56. TreeSoft: Softwares for Phylogenetic Trees. [http://treesoft.sourceforge.
net/treebest.shtml].
57. Ruan J, et al: TreeFam: Update. Nucleic Acids Res 2008, 36:D735-D740.
58. Guindon S, Lethiec F, Duroux P, Gascuel O: PHYML Online-a web server
for fast maximum likelihood-based phylogenetic inference. Nucleic Acids
Res 2005, 33:W557-W559.
doi:10.1186/1471-2164-12-296
Cite this article as: Baker et al.: A comprehensive gene expression atlas
of sex- and tissue-specificity in the malaria vector, Anopheles gambiae.
BMC Genomics 2011 12:296.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
