<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Searching for the elusive typhoid diagnostic</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Infectious Diseases 2010 10:45. doi:10.1186/1471-2334-10-45"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Stephen Baker"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Baker et al. BMC Infectious Diseases 2010, 10:45
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2334/10/45

COMMENTARY

Open Access

Searching for the elusive typhoid diagnostic
Stephen Baker1,2*, Michael Favorov3, Gordon Dougan4

Abstract
Typhoid (enteric) fever is still a common disease in many developing countries but current diagnostic tests are
inadequate. Studies on pathogenesis and genomics have provided new insight into the organisms that cause
enteric fever. Better understanding of the microorganisms explains, in part, why our current typhoid methodologies
are limited in their diagnostic information and why developing new strategies may be a considerable challenge.
Here we discuss the current position of typhoid diagnostics, highlight the need for technological improvements
and suggest potential ways of advancing this area.
Background
Enteric (typhoid) fever remains a common disease in
many parts of the world where access to clean water is
limited. In places such as India, Nepal, Pakistan, Indonesia and parts of sub-Saharan Africa typhoid is still a substantial public health problem [1-4]. In these areas,
febrile disease is common, so accurate diagnosis facilitates treatment selection, particularly as antimicrobial
resistance is emerging [5]. Enteric fever is an all encompassing term for the disease caused by several serovars
of Salmonella enterica including (S.) Typhi and (S.)Paratyphi A. Although globally S. Typhi is the most common
cause, S. Paratyphi A infections occur in significant
numbers in some parts of the world and is often associated with travelers [6-9]. In contrast, S. Paratyphi B
and C are relatively uncommon. This article focuses
specifically on S. Typhi and the disease it causes;
typhoid. With respect to other invasive Salmonella, S.
Typhi causes a greater disease burden and there is a
superior level of understanding of this organism. However, all of the arguments presented here are poignant
for the diseases caused by other human invasive Salmonella pathovars.
Despite WHO recommendations, few countries have
taken on typhoid immunization [10], this is in part
related to uncertainties about disease burden. The best
incidence assessment is based on available, sparse surveillance information, estimated that in 2000 there were
21,650,974 illnesses and 216,510 deaths due to typhoid
and that paratyphoid caused 5,412,744 illnesses [2].
* Correspondence: sbaker@oucru.org
1
Oxford University Clinical Research Unit, The Hospital for Tropical Diseases,
Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam

These data is extrapolated from limited studies and
such figures, therefore, may be imprecise, this is compounded by a lack of accurate diagnosis. Therefore, new
diagnostics will play a key role in decreasing the incidence of typhoid fever, by permitting governments to
accurately assess the particular burden of disease and
apply vaccination regimes accordingly. The development
of cheap and reliable enteric fever diagnostics would
undoubtedly benefit long term disease control and
treatment.
Presently, direct blood culture, followed by microbiological identification is the gold standard, any potential
new test needs to offer a higher diagnostic rate than this
procedure [11]. Blood culturing of S. Typhi, whilst considered “routine”, is expensive and requires specialist
facilities and personnel. Furthermore, S. Typhi and S.
Paratyphi A are not always culturable even if good
microbiological facilities are available. Diagnostics based
on serology, antigen detection or DNA are available but
have limitations. In the document entitled ‘The diagnosis, treatment and prevention of typhoid’, the WHO
state that ‘the method used as the gold standard for the
laboratory diagnosis of typhoid should approach 100%
each for sensitivity, specificity, and positive and negative
predictive values’[11]. However, current tests need significant improvement to reach such rigorous standards.
In view of these problems, is the goal set by WHO
achievable and what are the barriers? Significant
advances have been made in our understanding of the
biology and genomics of both S. Typhi and S. Paratyphi
A [12-15]. Using this information we can reassess
typhoid diagnostics and consider the potential and the
limitations of different approaches (Figure 1).

© 2010 Baker et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Baker et al. BMC Infectious Diseases 2010, 10:45
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2334/10/45

Page 2 of 8

Figure 1 Identifying the techniques and issues which surround the development of a new enteric fever diagnostic test. Samples,
targets, methods and issues.

Typhoid infections
S. Typhi causes typhoid, a fecal-oral infection leading to
systemic disease (Figure 2). Tissue invasion drives a
potentially close encounter with the immune system.
However, S. Typhi is an immuno-modulatory pathogen
which goes to great lengths to avoid detection by the
immune host defenses. The pathogenesis of typhoid
fever in man has received only limited attention. This is
mainly because both S. Typhi and S. Paratyphi A are
host-restricted to humans and there is no known zoonotic reservoir. Experimentation using surrogate hosts and
S. enterica serotypes (e.g. S. Typhimurium) suggests that
tissue invasion occurs predominantly through M cells
on Peyer’s patches in the terminal ileum (Figure 2)
[16,17]. Whilst these mechanisms have never been
directly proven for typhoid, it is clear that S. Typhi has
predominantly forsaken ongoing transmission in the
habitat of the mammalian gastrointestinal tract of most
enteric bacteria, in the favor of systemic dissemination.
The infection eventually localizes to the bone marrow
and ultimately the gall bladder where the internal transmission cycle is completed as organisms are shed in
bile, potentially in high numbers (Figure 2).
S. Typhi (and S. Paratyphi A) is highly clonal, exhibiting limited genome variation, suggesting this organism
is recently evolved [15,18]. The genetic basis of the
switch from an enteric to a systemic lifestyle is
imprinted in its genetic makeup. Many genes associated
with intestinal persistence (e.g. shdA, ratB) or interaction with host surfaces (e.g. fimbria, pili etc.) are inactivated, limiting potential mechanisms for colonizing
within and between hosts. For example, genes that

contribute to fluid release (e.g. sopA) or intracellular
survival (e.g. sopE2, sseJ,) are inactivated [13,18]. Thus,
invading S. Typhi may follow a simple default pathway
favoring limiting activation of the inflammatory
response. S. Typhi (but not S. Paratyphi A) also
expresses the Vi capsular polysaccharide, that possesses
immuno-modulatory properties, potentially further dampening the immune response [19,20]. One of the consequences of minimal early inflammation is a lack of the
classical gastroenteritis associated with other gastrointestinal pathogens. Additionally, humans do not react
clinically to the initial invasion step and there is an
incubation period before disease symptoms emerge,
which occurs during the systemic phase of infection.
This stage is one of the early confounders to typhoid
diagnostics, the temporal distance between infection and
disease hinders the detection of the organism.
The presence of bacteria in any tissue may be transient, as cells traffic or become activated. Thus, trafficking
in blood may only occur during a limited window, making a positive blood culture challenging. This situation
may be exacerbated as many patients reach microbiological facilities at a later stage of infection or may be “self
treated” with antimicrobials. Thus, there are a number
of characteristics of the pathogenesis of typhoid that
impinge on diagnostics [21,22]. An obvious caveat is the
low number of bacteria in the blood and other tissues.
It is theoretically possible that there are actually high
levels of organisms in the blood but that these are present in an ‘unculturable’ form. For example, the rapid
transfer of bacteria in a semi-quiescent form from
within an intracellular vacuole to laboratory media may

Baker et al. BMC Infectious Diseases 2010, 10:45
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2334/10/45

Page 3 of 8

Figure 2 The lifestyle of Salmonella Typhi in the human host and implications for diagnostics. A; For S. Typhi infection, the organism
normally enters the human host through oral ingestion of an infectious dose. B; S. Typhi does not replicate in large numbers in the intestine
and shedding may be sporadic and limited. C; Invasion occurs through the terminal ileum, perhaps a short time after ingestion, M cells may be
the preferred portal of entry. D; S. Typhi is transferred to monocytic cells and is trafficked to the reticulo-endothelial system, potentially in a semidormant state. E; S. Typhi re-emerges at an unknown time from the reticulo-endothelial system, possibly as the acquired immune response is
activated, and re-enters the blood stream in low numbers. F; S. Typhi seeds into the liver, the gall bladder and the bone marrow where it can
reside and may be detected for months or years. G; S. Typhi can enter into the bile duct and be shed sporadically, potentially in high numbers
into the environment via the intestine.

kill this fastidious and delicate organism. S. Typhi is certainly less robust than many other Salmonella. Bone
marrow is the most sensitive culture route but this is an
invasive procedure and is seldom performed outside
specialist hospitals. Volunteers challenged with virulent
and attenuated S. Typhi strains only shed the organism
sporadically in stools, potentially compromising the
stool culturing approach [23,24].
Many systemic pathogens exhibit the ability to
undergo antigenic variation, thus allowing the organism
to divert the immune response. Analysis of multiple S.
Typhi genomes shows a lack of obvious evidence for
any amount of immune selection on the organism.
Furthermore, no known S. Typhi antigens exhibit significant evidence for variation, a fact highlighted by comparing gene sequences between phylogenetically
representative S. Typhi [12]. These data provide further
evidence of the ability of S. Typhi to cause a systemic
infection without stimulating a significant inflammatory
response and transfer from the gastrointestinal lumen to
the reticuloendothelial system in a relatively undetected
fashion. Indeed, one may argue that the ability of S.
Typhi to avoid immune detection constitutes the organism as a “stealth” pathogen and this has significant
implications for diagnostics.
The lack of immune selection on the organism suggests that S. Typhi predominantly occupies an privileged

niche within the host, a predominantly intracellular
pathogen that can survive for long periods in this state.
Indeed, frequent relapses associated with the recrudescence of the pathogen and the lack of immune protection in typhoid patients to re-infection further supports
a dampening of immunity [25]. Thus, S. Typhi may
induce only weak immunity, including a muted antibody
response. It is worth noting that in typhoid endemic
areas many individuals who have never reported typhoid
exhibit serological evidence that they have been infected
by the pathogen [26]. Thus, it is highly feasible that
many people who get exposed by S. Typhi do not progress to develop the recognized disease syndrome, or
individuals have a small amount of constant boosting
due to prolonged exposure.
An additional caveat for an effective and appropriate
diagnostic test is the cross section of organisms that can
cause a disease syndrome that is, clinically, indistinguishable from typhoid fever. Depending on the location, a number of viral, parasitic and bacterial pathogens
can mimic the basic features of typhoid thus confounding the issues of sample collection, clinical management
and efficient diagnosis.

The limitations of microbiological culture
S. Typhi are ordinarily cultured from 5-10 ml of blood in
30-50 ml of broth. The probability of recovering

Baker et al. BMC Infectious Diseases 2010, 10:45
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2334/10/45

organisms is increased at greater blood volumes, compromising diagnosis in children. In the developed world,
blood culture is semi-automated, exploiting sophisticated
culture apparatus. Blood taken from patients is inoculated into vessels which are designed to fit in specific
machines and contain specialized media, often there is
minimal or no dilution of the sample into this media. In
this way, the whole process can be captured by an integrated system and a particular laboratory may become
dependent on the same supplier, which has particular
financial constraints. The advantage of this approach is
that it improves specificity and standardization.
The main limitation to the wide spread distribution of
semi-automated blood culture systems is cost. Blood
culture facilities are rare in many developing countries,
often limited only to major hospitals in large cities.
Access to receiving a blood culture becomes, therefore,
the limiting factor to typhoid diagnosis. It is worth speculating that alternative culture systems, made available
at a lower cost and less dependent on expensive consumables, could encourage more facilities to be established in poorer regions. It is also worth noting that in a
single tropical setting blood infections may be caused by
a wide range of other gram negative and gram positive
organisms (e.g. S. Typhi, Streptococci, Leptospira, etc.),
parasites (e.g. Plasmodium) and viruses (e.g. dengue)
[27,28]. Blood culture may or may not be a suitable
assay for a specific infection, depending on the pathogen
and the location.
Taken that there are only low levels of S. Typhi present in blood, how might we improve approaches to
direct culture? Could S. Typhi culture be further optimized, by taking advantage of some atypical biochemical
properties of the organism? Examination of the S. Typhi
genome highlights metabolic and scavenging pathways
inactivated by the accumulation of pseudogenes [18].
Examples include the cobalamin pathway, many metabolic transporters and iron uptake systems. Understanding specific biochemical pathways that are up-regulated
under defined conditions may permit some modeling of
conditions in which S. Typhi can be grown more efficiently. In short, could we use a method that we define
as “metabolomic modeling” to design recovery media to
enrich for S. Typhi? This approach is certainly worth
considering but may only have a marginal effect on bacterial recovery.
Ultimately, the low level of bacteria in the sample may
set an impenetrable practical barrier which may only be
circumvented by purification or enrichment technology.
The culturing of bone marrow biopsies is more sensitive
than that of blood culture and a modified technique to
take bone marrow in a more straightforward and somewhat less brutal manner would be desirable [29].

Page 4 of 8

The limitations of serology
The first typhoid diagnostic, the Widal test, was developed in 1896. The methodology is dependent on agglutination; S. Typhi cells are used to detect antibodies in
blood. This crude assay is a visual test that monitors
agglutinating antibodies that react with S. Typhi [30].
Problems associated with the use of Widal are somewhat obvious and may apply to other serologically based
assays for typhoid. S. Typhi is a relatively invariant
pathogen so antigenic variation per se should not be a
significant confounder. However, S. Typhi is a member
of the Enterobacteriaceae. Many of the surface antigens
of the Enterobacteriaceae demonstrate significant conservation and induce antibodies that are cross-reactive.
Consequently, as humans mature they accumulate antibodies that are cross-reactive with S. Typhi. Thus, it
may be impossible to develop a specific diagnostic kit
for typhoid using semi-purified antigens. Indeed, any
such kit would likely yield significant false positives.
S. Typhi expresses a number of immunogenic structures on the surface, some of which provide a basis for
serology identification. These include O (lipopolysaccharide), H (flagella) and the somewhat less immunogenic Vi capsule. S. Typhi exhibiting variation in these
antigens are uncommon, with notable exceptions. S.
Typhi found in Indonesia express variant H antigens
including H:j and H:z66 [31-34]. Vi-negative S. Typhi
isolates have been reported in Pakistan but are rare
[35,36]. Therefore, S. Typhi expressing O (O9, O12), Vi
and H:d are ubiquitous in most endemic areas. Seroprevalence studies have been performed in endemic
regions to determine antibody titers to O, H and Vi in
the general population [26,37]. Many individuals in
endemic areas have cross-reactive antibodies even
though they have no clinical record of typhoid. Additionally, such raised antibody levels frequently cannot be
detected in patients with culture confirmed typhoid.
Problems have also been encountered during the testing
of commercial serological tests, including Typhidot and
Tubex [38,39]. These assays were assessed in population-based typhoid surveillance studies in several countries and in all locations the sensitivity and specificity
for Tubex and Typhidot was only around 70% and 80%
respectively [40,41].
Clearly the abundance and avidity of anti-S. Typhi
antibodies varies and it is difficult to imagine how a
clean diagnostic assay with high specificity could be produced targeting these classical antigens. Can other antigen/antibody complexes be used as more accurate
diagnostics? This is an under-studied area with few S.
Typhi specific antigens being investigated in any detail.
Experiments utilizing convalescent serum from typhoid
patients, indicates that individuals can respond to a

Baker et al. BMC Infectious Diseases 2010, 10:45
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2334/10/45

range of S. Typhi antigens [26]. However, such
responses appear to be variable and no obvious
immuno-dominant antigens have been identified. Studies may be confounded by the fact that in vitro grown
S. Typhi are used to measure responses, a factor that
would eliminate the detection of any antigen exclusively
expressed in the host. This could be an important consideration as many surface structures, e.g. pili, have such
properties.
A potentially productive area may be to search for
novel antigens which are specific for S. Typhi. Candidate
targets could be identified initially by bioinformatics.
Novel candidates could be expressed in systems such as
yeast to minimize contamination with cross-reactive
antigens. A pool of highly purified specific antigens
could be screened using serum from typhoid patients
and appropriate controls. Protein microarrays could be
exploited in the screening [42]. Testing in a cohort of
patients could reveal specific patterns or quantities of
antibodies which would be indicative of typhoid infection. Ultimately, novel antigen(s) could be placed onto
membrane to form the basis of a low cost rapid test.
This is an open and uninvestigated area and with a suitable assay and patient material, it may be one of the
most straightforward ways to initially develop a low cost
and highly specific test.

The limits of DNA detection
The detection of specific DNA sequences within the
genome of S. Typhi would appear to be an attractive
proposition. Is a robust DNA-based test a real option
for routine typhoid diagnostics? Many S. Typhi PCRbased assays have targeted the fliC gene, utilizing nested
primers to improve sensitivity [43-47]. There is an additional sensitivity benefit of PCR, in that it can theoretically amplify DNA from dead or unculturable bacteria.
Various PCR-based studies on typhoid suggest that the
assay is specific and sensitive and relatively straight forward to perform. Indeed, such studies have yielded sensitivities >90%. However, we believe PCR offers only
limited potential for typhoid diagnostics. Currently there
is no validated PCR test in common use, only in-house
systems which are open to differing interpretation and
none would meet the rigors of quality control to make
this assay used worldwide.
Massi et al. utilized a real-time system based on fliC
to detect S. Typhi in patients with clinically diagnosed
typhoid [48]. They were able to amplify fliC from all
culture-positive and negative blood samples tested but
reported a higher gene copy number in culture positives
(1,000 - 45,000), compared to negatives (<1000). However, this real-time PCR data is somewhat contradictory
with the microbiological data, which demonstrates that
bacteria/ml of blood is generally low with the majority

Page 5 of 8

of patients having <1 organism/ml of blood [21]. It is
somewhat surprising that typhoid patients may have
between a 1,000 to 45,000 times more dead bacteria
than live bacteria in the blood.
We recently found disappointingly poor PCR sensitivity
using a three color real-time PCR assay that was capable
of detecting S. Typhi, S. Paratyphi A and an incorporated
internal control [49]. When tested on spiked and control
samples the assay demonstrated high specificity and sensitivity. However, when tested on DNA extracted from
2 ml of blood taken from 100 culture confirmed typhoid
patients the sensitivity rate was less that 50%. Thus confirming that PCR results are related to the actual colony
forming units found in the blood. The assay did, however, demonstrate 100% sensitivity on culture positive
bone marrow samples, which are known to harbor significantly more bacteria [22]. For these reasons we believe
that DNA amplification may not be an easy route
towards developing a robust diagnostic. Collecting and
then extracting DNA from a large volume of blood is not
a straightforward option, due to large concentrations of
human DNA. Analyzing stool or urine samples may
be an alternative approach. A DNA or bacterial capture
system or even a culture enrichment step prior to amplification may improve molecular sensitivity. However,
molecular diagnostics are not a cost effective or a
straightforward to perform as other methods, not every
diagnostic laboratory in an endemic setting would be
able to perform such an assay. However, if simplified and
new technology is applied it an area that warrants further
independent studies.

Host factors other than antibodies
Is it possible to identify host specific responses to
typhoid that are distinct from other febrile diseases such
as malaria or dengue? If so, what sort of responses
should we look for? Typhoid patients display a number
of symptoms including fever and mount a number of
immune and physiological responses. Such responses
can be examined by simple stimulation assays, exploiting
whole blood, cell fractions or serum. Currently, there
has been no precise correlate of infection or biomarker
for typhoid identified. An expansive, yet costly option
would be to take an approach based on human microarrays [50]. Transcriptional analysis of RNA extracted
from the blood of typhoid patients could be performed
to identify specific genes, pathways, interactions or transcriptional regulatory hubs that are activated in the host
during infection. Microarray data is often publicly available and comparative analysis with the transcriptional
profile from patients with other diseases could be studied at databases such as InnateDB http://www.innatedb.ca/. Such analysis may highlight suitable targets
that could be tracked in patients [51].

Baker et al. BMC Infectious Diseases 2010, 10:45
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2334/10/45

Mass spectrometry, proteomics or similar expression
monitoring technologies could be applied to identify
particular genes or pathways that are functionally activated during typhoid. Once a gene or transcriptional
pathway is identified, expression could be monitored
using DNA or protein probes. This approach may be a
long term aim and comparative analysis with similar
materials from other diseases would be an essential
requirement. Blood would most likely be the assay
material of choice and this in itself may present limitations if responses are localized to deeper tissues. However, this approach is highly novel, powerful and worthy
of further investigation and investment.
An further alternative approach would be to identify
potential biomarkers, i.e. discover a physiological signature or metabolic product associated with typhoid. The
signature could be of host or bacterial origin or a combination of both that is/are produced in real time during
infection. The science of host metabolomics is growing
with the development of applications such as NMR and
Mass Spectrometric technologies. Metabolomics could,
theoretically, work on a range of bodily fluids, including
blood and urine and may detect specific small or complex macromolecules. Some research groups have developed systems for identifying biomarkers in biological
material from patients infected with various pathogens
such as Tuberculosis [52,53]. Surface-enhanced laser
desorption/ionization time-of-flight (SELDI-TOF) mass
spectroscopy has also been utilized in studying SARS
protein biomarkers, as reviewed by Mazzulli et al. [54].
SELDI-TOF may add insight into those proteins that are
expressed in serum, blood, saliva, urine or any other
biological material that may harbor specific markers for
typhoid infections. Some early studies on pathogenesis
and diagnostics did focus on the detection of S. Typhi
antigens such as Vi in the urine of patients and this is
worth revisiting in view of a substantial increase in the
sensitivity of detection technologies [55,56].

Typhoid carriers
What about the diagnosis of typhoid in carriers infected
with S. Typhi or S. Paratyphi A [57,58]? Clearly, such individuals warrant special consideration as they are a silent
threat to others in the population. Monitoring S. Typhi in
the stool is one option but shedding may be low level or
sporadic. Further, stool sampling at a routine level is
expensive, time consuming and unpopular, although
improved bacterial recovery methods could be one
approach. We know of no obvious signature that can be
used to categorically identify S. Typhi carriers. However,
important studies have indicated that typhoid carriers may
produce higher levels of Vi antibodies over extended periods compared to acutely infected patients [59,60]. This
may be in part because Vi is a polysaccharide and the

Page 6 of 8

immune response to Vi is T cell-independent, stimulating
poor memory. However, carriers may receive continual,
natural boosting when the organisms are reseeded, potentially in high numbers (Figure 2), back into the intestinal
tract. If we could develop simple, cheap and none invasive
Vi antibody assays these may prove valuable in identifying
carriers.

Concluding remarks
The ultimate question is which direction do we follow
in terms of developing typhoid diagnostics and how can
these be applied to location with limited resources? In
the short term, it appears that whilst current techniques
are limited there is no real alternative without extensive
research and culturing remains the inadequate gold
standard. However, laboratories in developing countries
with typhoid should be prepared to evaluate new diagnostics as they evolve. As a way forward for culture, it
may be prudent to investigate specialized growth media
that would favor the regeneration of S. Typhi from
blood. Simple methods for enriching the small population of bacteria present in blood using simple direct
enrichment procedures that do not rely on growth
could be considered.
DNA methodology has specific limitations that are
similar to those presented with bacterial culture.
Advancement in this field would require the capture
and amplification from a smaller number (maybe even a
single organism) from blood or other bodily fluids. Such
a task is not insurmountable but it will be a challenge
to make it cost effective.
Serological advancements will rely on the identification of novel S. Typhi-specific antigens that are conserved and highly immunogenic in the human host.
We will need simple methods to prepare highly purified antigens free of potentially cross reacting materials
and antigen pools may be needed to increase sensitivity. Serological approaches may be more tractable to
convert into a simple, cheap and rapid test. Host
response assays will have to be developed through the
application of genomics and highly sensitive Mass
Spectrometric, NMR or similar sensitive physical
assays. Looking for host or pathogen material in biological samples is an area that clearly warrants further
investigation.
Once targets have been identified, the next limiting
step, with respect to locations with limited resources is
developing a reliable test that is affordable. With the
identification of novel targets is should be feasible to
create simple point of care assays aimed at these specific
targets. However, making such tests that can be manufactured at a reasonable cost that can aid typhoid diagnostics in the locations where they are required most
may add an additional hurdle.

Baker et al. BMC Infectious Diseases 2010, 10:45
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2334/10/45

Acknowledgements
This was supported by the Wellcome Trust and the International Vaccine
Institute, Seoul, Korea. SB is supported by an OAK foundation fellowship
through Oxford University.
Author details
1
Oxford University Clinical Research Unit, The Hospital for Tropical Diseases,
Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam. 2The Centre for Tropical Medicine, Nuffield
Department of Clinical Medicine, Oxford University, Oxford, UK. 3The
International Vaccine Institute, Kwanak-gu, Seoul, Korea. 4The Wellcome Trust
Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge, UK.
Authors’ contributions
SB, MF and GD were responsible for the concept, the content and the
writing of the manuscript. All authors have read and approved this
manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 27 August 2009 Accepted: 5 March 2010
Published: 5 March 2010
References
1. Bhan MK, Bahl R, Bhatnagar S: Typhoid and paratyphoid fever. Lancet
2005, 366(9487):749-762.
2. Crump JA, Luby SP, Mintz ED: The global burden of typhoid fever. Bull
World Health Organ 2004, 82(5):346-353.
3. Karkey A, Aryjal A, Basnyat B, Baker S: Kathmandu, Nepal; Still an Enteric
Fever Capital of the World. JIDC 2008, 2(6):461-465.
4. Parry CM, Hien TT, Dougan G, White NJ, Farrar JJ: Typhoid fever. N Engl J
Med 2002, 347(22):1770-1782.
5. Chau TT, Campbell JI, Galindo CM, Van Minh Hoang N, Diep TS, Nga TT,
Van Vinh Chau N, Tuan PQ, Page AL, Ochiai RL, et al: Antimicrobial drug
resistance of Salmonella enterica serovar typhi in asia and molecular
mechanism of reduced susceptibility to the fluoroquinolones. Antimicrob
Agents Chemother 2007, 51(12):4315-4323.
6. Connor BA, Schwartz E: Typhoid and paratyphoid fever in travellers.
Lancet Infect Dis 2005, 5(10):623-628.
7. Ochiai RL, Wang X, von Seidlein L, Yang J, Bhutta ZA, Bhattacharya SK,
Agtini M, Deen JL, Wain J, Kim DR, et al: Salmonella paratyphi A rates,
Asia. Emerg Infect Dis 2005, 11(11):1764-1766.
8. Sood S, Kapil A, Dash N, Das BK, Goel V, Seth P: Paratyphoid fever in India:
An emerging problem. Emerg Infect Dis 1999, 5(3):483-484.
9. Woods CW, Murdoch DR, Zimmerman MD, Glover WA, Basnyat B, Wolf L,
Belbase RH, Reller LB: Emergence of Salmonella enterica serotype
Paratyphi A as a major cause of enteric fever in Kathmandu, Nepal.
Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 2006, 100(11):1063-1067.
10. WHO: Typhoid vaccines. Weekly Epidiomiological Record 2000,
32(75):257-265 [http://www.who.int/immunization/
wer7532typhoid_Aug00_position_paper.pdf].
11. WHO: The diagnosis, treatment and prevention of typhoid fever.
Communicable Disease Surveillance and Response Vaccine and Biologicals
2003, 7-18 [http://whqlibdoc.who.int/hq/2003/WHO_V&B_03.07.pdf].
12. Holt KE, Parkhill J, Mazzoni CJ, Roumagnac P, Weill FX, Goodhead I, Rance R,
Baker S, Maskell DJ, Wain J, et al: High-throughput sequencing provides
insights into genome variation and evolution in Salmonella Typhi. Nat
Genet 2008, 40(8):987-993.
13. McClelland M, Sanderson KE, Clifton SW, Latreille P, Porwollik S, Sabo A,
Meyer R, Bieri T, Ozersky P, McLellan M, et al: Comparison of genome
degradation in Paratyphi A and Typhi, human-restricted serovars of
Salmonella enterica that cause typhoid. Nat Genet 2004, 36(12):1268-1274.
14. Parkhill J, Dougan G, James KD, Thomson NR, Pickard D, Wain J,
Churcher C, Mungall KL, Bentley SD, Holden MT, et al: Complete genome
sequence of a multiple drug resistant Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi
CT18. Nature 2001, 413(6858):848-852.
15. Roumagnac P, Weill FX, Dolecek C, Baker S, Brisse S, Chinh NT, Le TA,
Acosta CJ, Farrar J, Dougan G, et al: Evolutionary history of Salmonella
typhi. Science 2006, 314(5803):1301-1304.

Page 7 of 8

16. Galan JE, Curtiss R: Cloning and molecular characterization of genes
whose products allow Salmonella typhimurium to penetrate tissue
culture cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1989, 86(16):6383-6387.
17. Jones B, Pascopella L, Falkow S: Entry of microbes into the host: using M
cells to break the mucosal barrier. Curr Opin Immunol 1995, 7(4):474-478.
18. Holt KE, Thomson NR, Wain J, Langridge GC, Hasan R, Bhutta ZA, Quail MA,
Norbertczak H, Walker D, Simmonds M, et al: Pseudogene accumulation in
the evolutionary histories of Salmonella enterica serovars Paratyphi A
and Typhi. BMC Genomics 2009, 10:36.
19. Raffatellu M, Chessa D, Wilson RP, Dusold R, Rubino S, Baumler AJ: The Vi
capsular antigen of Salmonella enterica serotype Typhi reduces Toll-like
receptor-dependent interleukin-8 expression in the intestinal mucosa.
Infect Immun 2005, 73(6):3367-3374.
20. Raffatellu M, Chessa D, Wilson RP, Tukel C, Akcelik M, Baumler AJ: Capsulemediated immune evasion: a new hypothesis explaining aspects of
typhoid fever pathogenesis. Infect Immun 2006, 74(1):19-27.
21. Wain J, Diep TS, Ho VA, Walsh AM, Nguyen TT, Parry CM, White NJ:
Quantitation of bacteria in blood of typhoid fever patients and
relationship between counts and clinical features, transmissibility, and
antibiotic resistance. J Clin Microbiol 1998, 36(6):1683-1687.
22. Wain J, Pham VB, Ha V, Nguyen NM, To SD, Walsh AL, Parry CM,
Hasserjian RP, HoHo VA, Tran TH, et al: Quantitation of bacteria in bone
marrow from patients with typhoid fever: relationship between counts
and clinical features. J Clin Microbiol 2001, 39(4):1571-1576.
23. Tacket CO, Sztein MB, Losonsky GA, Wasserman SS, Nataro JP, Edelman R,
Pickard D, Dougan G, Chatfield SN, Levine MM: Safety of live oral
Salmonella typhi vaccine strains with deletions in htrA and aroC aroD
and immune response in humans. Infect Immun 1997, 65(2):452-456.
24. Woodward WE: Volunteer studies of typhoid fever and vaccines. Trans R
Soc Trop Med Hyg 1980, 74(5):553-556.
25. Wain J, Hien TT, Connerton P, Ali T, Parry CM, Chinh NT, Vinh H,
Phuong CX, Ho VA, Diep TS, et al: Molecular typing of multiple-antibioticresistant Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi from Vietnam: application to
acute and relapse cases of typhoid fever. J Clin Microbiol 1999,
37(8):2466-2472.
26. House D, Wain J, Ho VA, Diep TS, Chinh NT, Bay PV, Vinh H, Duc M,
Parry CM, Dougan G, et al: Serology of typhoid fever in an area of
endemicity and its relevance to diagnosis. J Clin Microbiol 2001,
39(3):1002-1007.
27. Zimmerman MD, Murdoch DR, Rozmajzl PJ, Basnyat B, Woods CW,
Richards AL, Belbase RH, Hammer DA, Anderson TP, Reller LB: Murine
typhus and febrile illness, Nepal. Emerg Infect Dis 2008, 14(10):1656-1659.
28. Murdoch DR, Woods CW, Zimmerman MD, Dull PM, Belbase RH, Keenan AJ,
Scott RM, Basnyat B, Archibald LK, Reller LB: The etiology of febrile illness
in adults presenting to Patan hospital in Kathmandu, Nepal. Am J Trop
Med Hyg 2004, 70(6):670-675.
29. Gilman RH, Terminel M, Levine MM, Hernandez-Mendoza P, Hornick RB:
Relative efficacy of blood, urine, rectal swab, bone-marrow, and rosespot cultures for recovery of Salmonella typhi in typhoid fever. Lancet
1975, 1(7918):1211-1213.
30. Parry CM, Hoa NT, Diep TS, Wain J, Chinh NT, Vinh H, Hien TT, White NJ,
Farrar JJ: Value of a single-tube widal test in diagnosis of typhoid fever
in Vietnam. J Clin Microbiol 1999, 37(9):2882-2886.
31. Baker S, Holt K, Vosse van de E, Roumagnac P, Whitehead S, King E,
Ewels P, Keniry A, Weill FX, Lightfoot D, et al: High-throughput genotyping
of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi allowing geographical assignment
of haplotypes and pathotypes within an urban District of Jakarta,
Indonesia. J Clin Microbiol 2008, 46(5):1741-1746.
32. Baker S, Hardy J, Sanderson KE, Quail M, Goodhead I, Kingsley RA, Parkhill J,
Stocker B, Dougan G: A novel linear plasmid mediates flagellar variation
in Salmonella Typhi. PLoS Pathog 2007, 3(5):e59.
33. Moshitch S, Doll L, Rubinfeld BZ, Stocker BA, Schoolnik GK, Gafni Y,
Frankel G: Mono- and bi-phasic Salmonella typhi: genetic homogeneity
and distinguishing characteristics. Mol Microbiol 1992, 6(18):2589-2597.
34. Frankel G, Newton SM, Schoolnik GK, Stocker BA: Unique sequences in
region VI of the flagellin gene of Salmonella typhi. Mol Microbiol 1989,
3(10):1379-1383.
35. Baker S, Sarwar Y, Aziz H, Haque A, Ali A, Dougan G, Wain J, Haque A:
Detection of Vi-negative Salmonella enterica serovar typhi in the

Baker et al. BMC Infectious Diseases 2010, 10:45
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2334/10/45

36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

41.

42.

43.

44.

45.

46.

47.
48.

49.

50.
51.

52.
53.

54.

55.

peripheral blood of patients with typhoid fever in the Faisalabad region
of Pakistan. J Clin Microbiol 2005, 43(9):4418-4425.
Wain J, House D, Zafar A, Baker S, Nair S, Kidgell C, Bhutta Z, Dougan G,
Hasan R: Vi antigen expression in Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi
clinical isolates from Pakistan. J Clin Microbiol 2005, 43(3):1158-1165.
House D, Chinh NT, Diep TS, Parry CM, Wain J, Dougan G, White NJ,
Hien TT, Farrar JJ: Use of paired serum samples for serodiagnosis of
typhoid fever. J Clin Microbiol 2005, 43(9):4889-4890.
Lim PL, Tam FC, Cheong YM, Jegathesan M: One-step 2-minute test to
detect typhoid-specific antibodies based on particle separation in tubes.
J Clin Microbiol 1998, 36(8):2271-2278.
Prakash P, Sen MR, Mishra OP, Gulati AK, Shukla BN, Nath G: Dot enzyme
immunoassay (Typhidot) in diagnosis of typhoid fever in children. J Trop
Pediatr 2007, 53(3):216-217.
Dutta S, Sur D, Manna B, Sen B, Deb AK, Deen JL, Wain J, Von Seidlein L,
Ochiai L, Clemens JD, et al: Evaluation of new-generation serologic tests
for the diagnosis of typhoid fever: data from a community-based
surveillance in Calcutta, India. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis 2006,
56(4):359-365.
Ochiai RL, Acosta CJ, Danovaro-Holliday MC, Baiqing D, Bhattacharya SK,
Agtini MD, Bhutta ZA, Canh do G, Ali M, Shin S, et al: A study of typhoid
fever in five Asian countries: disease burden and implications for
controls. Bull World Health Organ 2008, 86(4):260-268.
Barbour AG, Jasinskas A, Kayala MA, Davies DH, Steere AC, Baldi P,
Felgner PL: A genome-wide proteome array reveals a limited set of
immunogens in natural infections of humans and white-footed mice
with Borrelia burgdorferi. Infect Immun 2008, 76(8):3374-3389.
Ali A, Haque A, Haque A, Sarwar Y, Mohsin M, Bashir S, Tariq A: Multiplex
PCR for differential diagnosis of emerging typhoidal pathogens directly
from blood samples. Epidemiol Infect 2009, 137(1):102-107.
Ali K, Zeynab A, Zahra S, Akbar K, Saeid M: Development of an ultra rapid
and simple multiplex polymerase chain reaction technique for detection
of Salmonella typhi. Saudi Med J 2006, 27(8):1134-1138.
Levy H, Diallo S, Tennant SM, Livio S, Sow SO, Tapia M, Fields PI, Mikoleit M,
Tamboura B, Kotloff KL, et al: PCR method to identify Salmonella enterica
serovars Typhi, Paratyphi A, and Paratyphi B among Salmonella Isolates
from the blood of patients with clinical enteric fever. J Clin Microbiol
2008, 46(5):1861-1866.
Massi MN, Shirakawa T, Gotoh A, Bishnu A, Hatta M, Kawabata M: Rapid
diagnosis of typhoid fever by PCR assay using one pair of primers from
flagellin gene of Salmonella typhi. J Infect Chemother 2003, 9(3):233-237.
Ambati SR, Nath G, Das BK: Diagnosis of typhoid fever by polymerase
chain reaction. Indian J Pediatr 2007, 74(10):909-913.
Massi MN, Shirakawa T, Gotoh A, Bishnu A, Hatta M, Kawabata M:
Quantitative detection of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi from blood
of suspected typhoid fever patients by real-time PCR. Int J Med Microbiol
2005, 295(2):117-120.
Nga TVT, Karkey A, Dongol S, Thuy HN, Dunstan S, Holt K, Tu LTP,
Campbell JI, Chau TT, NVV C, et al: Comparison of blood culture and
realtime PCR for the detection of Invasive Salmonella serovars in blood
and bone marrow specimens from enteric fever patients. Manuscript
under consideration .
Cummings CA, Relman DA: Using DNA microarrays to study host-microbe
interactions. Emerg Infect Dis 2000, 6(5):513-525.
Lynn DJ, Winsor GL, Chan C, Richard N, Laird MR, Barsky A, Gardy JL,
Roche FM, Chan TH, Shah N, et al: InnateDB: facilitating systems-level
analyses of the mammalian innate immune response. Mol Syst Biol 2008,
4:218.
Hodgetts A, Levin M, Kroll JS, Langford PR: Biomarker discovery in
infectious diseases using SELDI. Future Microbiol 2007, 2:35-49.
Kashino SS, Pollock N, Napolitano DR, Rodrigues V Jr, Campos-Neto A:
Identification and characterization of Mycobacterium tuberculosis
antigens in urine of patients with active pulmonary tuberculosis: an
innovative and alternative approach of antigen discovery of useful
microbial molecules. Clin Exp Immunol 2008, 153(1):56-62.
Mazzulli T, Low DE, Poutanen SM: Proteomics and severe acute
respiratory syndrome (SARS): emerging technology meets emerging
pathogen. Clin Chem 2005, 51(1):6-7.
Barrett TJ, Snyder JD, Blake PA, Feeley JC: Enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay for detection of Salmonella typhi Vi antigen in urine from typhoid
patients. J Clin Microbiol 1982, 15(2):235-237.

Page 8 of 8

56. Fadeel MA, Crump JA, Mahoney FJ, Nakhla IA, Mansour AM, Reyad B, El
Melegi D, Sultan Y, Mintz ED, Bibb WF: Rapid diagnosis of typhoid fever
by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay detection of Salmonella
serotype typhi antigens in urine. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2004, 70(3):323-328.
57. Levine MM, Black RE, Lanata C: Precise estimation of the numbers of
chronic carriers of Salmonella typhi in Santiago, Chile, an endemic area.
J Infect Dis 1982, 146(6):724-726.
58. Khatri NS, Maskey P, Poudel S, Jaiswal VK, Karkey A, Koirala S, Shakya N,
Agrawal K, Arjyal A, Basnyat B, et al: Gallbladder carriage of Salmonella
paratyphi A may be an important factor in the increasing incidence of
this infection in South Asia. Ann Intern Med 2009, 150(8):567-568.
59. Ferreccio C, Levine M, Astroza L, Berrios G, Solari V, Misraji A, Pefaur C: [The
detection of chronic Salmonella typhi carriers: a practical method
applied to food handlers]. Rev Med Chil 1990, 118(1):33-37.
60. Lanata CF, Levine MM, Ristori C, Black RE, Jimenez L, Salcedo M, Garcia J,
Sotomayor V: Vi serology in detection of chronic Salmonella typhi
carriers in an endemic area. Lancet 1983, 2(8347):441-443.
Pre-publication history
The pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed here:
[http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2334/10/45/prepub]
doi:10.1186/1471-2334-10-45
Cite this article as: Baker et al.: Searching for the elusive typhoid
diagnostic. BMC Infectious Diseases 2010 10:45.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
