<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Environmental and molecular analysis of the floral transition in the lower eudicot Aquilegia formosa</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="EvoDevo 2011, 2:4. doi:10.1186/2041-9139-2-4"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Evangeline S Ballerini"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Ballerini and Kramer EvoDevo 2011, 2:4
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/4

RESEARCH

Open Access

Environmental and molecular analysis of the
floral transition in the lower eudicot Aquilegia
formosa
Evangeline S Ballerini1,2, Elena M Kramer1*

Abstract
Background: Flowering is a critical transition in plant development, the timing of which can have considerable
fitness consequences. Until recently, research into the genetic control of flowering time and its associated
developmental changes was focused on core eudicots (for example, Arabidopsis) or monocots (for example, Oryza).
Here we examine the flowering response of Aquilegia formosa, a member of the eudicot order Ranunculales that is
emerging as an important model for the investigation of plant ecology and evolution.
Results: We have determined that A. formosa has a strong vernalization requirement but little or no photoperiod
response, making it a day neutral (DN) plant. Consistent with this, the Aquilegia homolog of FLOWERING LOCUS T
(AqFT) is expressed in both long and short days but surprisingly, the locus is expressed before the transition to
flowering. In situ hybridizations with homologs of several Arabidopsis Floral Pathway Integrators (FPIs) do not
suggest conserved functions relative to Arabidopsis, the potential exceptions being AqLFY and AqAGL24.2.
Conclusions: In Aquilegia, vernalization is critical to flowering but this signal is not strictly required for the
transcriptional activation of AqFT. The expression patterns of AqLFY and AqAGL24.2 suggest a hypothesis for the
development of Aquilegia’s determinate inflorescence whereby their differential expression controls the progression
of each meristem from inflorescence to floral identity. Interestingly, none of the Aquilegia expression patterns are
consistent with a function in floral repression which, combined with the lack of a FLC homolog, means that new
candidate genes must be identified for the control of vernalization response in Aquilegia.

Background
The genus Aquilegia (Ranunculaceae, Ranunculales) is
emerging as an important new model system for evolutionary, ecological, and developmental research [1-3].
Aquilegia (columbine) is a member of an early diverging
lineage of the eudicots, arising prior to the genome
duplication that occurred at the base of the core eudicot
radiation [4,5]. The genus consists of approximately 70
species that have diversified across the northern hemisphere over the past 1 to 5 million years, exhibiting
wide variation in floral morphology and ecological habitat [6-8]. The rapid speciation of the genus is linked to
shifts in pollinator syndromes, which include changes in
flower color, orientation and, perhaps most importantly,
* Correspondence: ekramer@oeb.harvard.edu
1
Dept. of Organismic and Evolutionary Biology, Harvard University, 16
Divinity Ave., Cambridge, MA, 02138, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

nectar spur morphology [9,10]. Several characteristics
make Aquilegia amenable to genetic research. Plants are
self-compatible and their recent, rapid speciation has
left most species in the genus capable of inter-breeding,
providing a useful tool for carrying out QTL analyses
[11]. In addition, Aquilegia has a relatively small diploid
genome (n = 7, approximately 300 Mbp; [3], S. A.
Hodges, pers. comm.) for which several genomic tools,
such as two fingerprinted Bacterial Artificial Chromosome (BAC) libraries and an Expressed Sequece Tag
(EST) database, have already been developed. A complete genome sequence has recently been released
http://www.phytozome.net/ and the compilation of
detailed genetic and physical maps is currently underway. In addition, virus induced gene silencing (VIGS)
has been successfully utilized in Aquilegia for transient
gene knockdown [12,13]. One drawback of many Aquilegia species, however, is their relatively long generation

© 2011 Ballerini and Kramer; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Ballerini and Kramer EvoDevo 2011, 2:4
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/4

Page 2 of 20

time, which is tied in part to a slow transition to
flowering.
The transition from vegetative to reproductive growth
marks a key developmental stage in a plant’s life history.
Flowering time has a direct connection to reproductive
fitness and variation in the process can lead to reproductive isolation, an important factor in the speciation
process [14-17]. Factors affecting flowering time are,
therefore, likely to be strong components influencing
adaptation of plant populations to their environments.
While many factors can affect flowering time, including
water and nutrient availability, stress, and hormone signaling, two of the primary environmental factors influencing flowering time - photoperiod and temperature are highly associated with seasonality. Flowering time in
plants is most often categorized based on responses to
these seasonal cues. Regarding photoperiod, plants are
categorized as long day (LD), short day (SD), or day
neutral (DN) depending on which photoperiodic conditions promote flowering. One of the most common temperature responses is that of vernalization, whereby
plants flower in response to an extended exposure to
cold temperatures. In nature, such a requirement
ensures that a plant does not flower until after winter,
which is particularly relevant for a temperate genus
such as Aquilegia.
To date, the genetics of flowering time control have
been most extensively studied in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana). In Arabidopsis, flowering occurs when a

Photoperiod

group of genes known as the Floral Pathway Integrators
(FPI) are up-regulated in the shoot apical meristem
(SAM). These genes integrate signals from the photoperiod, vernalization, autonomous, and GA pathways to
induce the expression of floral meristem identity genes
and produce a flower. Figure 1 provides a simplified
schematic overview of this genetic network, showing the
rather complex interactions that exist between the FPI
genes. Following environmental induction of flowering,
a cascade of gene expression is induced in the plant
apex to confer inflorescence and floral meristem identity
[18]. In the apical meristem, FLOWERING LOCUS T
(FT), a mobile floral signal produced in leaves, induces
expression of the genes SUPPRESSOR OF OVEREXPRESSION OF CONSTANS 1 (SOC1) and AGAMOUSLIKE 24 (AGL24), which confer inflorescence meristem
identity on the apex [19,20]. SOC1 and AGL24 physically interact and positively regulate both each other
and LEAFY (LFY) in the lateral meristems of the inflorescence [21,22]. LFY contributes to the induction of
APETALA1 (AP1), which itself positively feeds back on
LFY [23,24]. Together, LFY and AP1 confer floral meristem identity (FMI) on the lateral meristems, with LFY
interacting with various cofactors to regulate the expression of floral homeotic genes in specific regions of the
floral meristem and AP1 acting to suppress continued
AGL24 expression in the FM [25-27].
As a facultative LD plant, Arabidopsis flowers rapidly
under LD conditions and many loci important to this

Vernalization

LHY/CCA1
TOC1
GI

FRI
CO

CRY2
PHYA
PHYB

FLC
FT

SOC1

AP1

Autonomous
FCA
FY
FPA
FVE
FLK
FLD
GA Signaling

AGL24
LFY

Light
Quality
Flowering

Floral Pathway
Integrators

Figure 1 A simplified schematic showing flowering time gene interactions in Arabidopsis thaliana. Based on [28,32,37,89-91]. Floral
Pathway Integrators are highlighted in grey.

Ballerini and Kramer EvoDevo 2011, 2:4
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/4

response have been identified. Not surprisingly, several
of these encode proteins involved in light perception,
such as the phytochromes (PHYA, PHYB, PHYC, PHYD,
PHYE) and the cryptochromes (CRY1 and CRY2), or
genes that are critical to the maintenance of the central
oscillator of the circadian clock (LHY, CCA1, TOC1, GI)
(reviewed in [28]). Signals perceived by the photoreceptors and genetic input from the central oscillator are
integrated to allow plants to sense changes in daylength.
The gene CONSTANS (CO) is important for this integration process and directly regulates FT transcription
in a positive manner to induce flowering under inductive long days [29]. The expression of CO mRNA is
positively regulated by GIGANTEA (GI), which is a central member of the clock and has a circadian expression
pattern [30,31]. Work by Valverde et al. [32] highlighted
the important roles of the photoreceptors in CO protein
stability under different light regimes, demonstrating
that CO protein is degraded in darkness. Thus, in Arabidopsis, the coincidence of CO mRNA expression, CO
protein stability, and resultant FT up-regulation only
occurs during LD conditions, making Arabidopsis a
facultative LD plant.
In addition to inductive long days, many Arabidopsis
ecotypes exhibit a vernalization requirement. Naturally
occurring mutations in the vernalization pathway result
in the rapid cycling lines that are often used for genetic
research [33-35]. While the photoperiod pathway is
responsible for promoting flowering, the vernalization
pathway is inhibitory and in Arabidopsis, this inhibition
is largely mediated by the MADS-box gene FLOWERING LOCUS C (FLC) [36]. FLC has been shown to bind
the promoter regions of the FPI genes FT and SOC1,
presumably preventing their up-regulation by CO [36].
Before vernalization, FLC expression levels are high
while those of SOC1 and FT are low [36]. These high
levels of FLC are largely due to the activity of FRIGIDA
(FRI), which has recently been shown to promote positive chromatin changes at the FLC locus [36]. Natural
variation at the FRI locus produces ecotypes showing
reduced FLC expression and rapid flowering without
vernalization [33]. In ecotypes with functional alleles of
FRI and FLC, several Polycomb Repressive Complex 2
components as well as associated proteins, including
VERNALIZATION INSENSITIVE 3 (VIN3), VERNALIZATION 1 (VRN1), and VERNALIZATION 2 (VRN2),
act during vernalization to alter the structure of the FLC
locus, leaving it in a stably repressed state [36]. Upon
returning to inductive long day conditions after vernalization, promotional signals from the photoperiod pathway can then induce expression of FT, SOC1 and the
other FPIs. In the event that a plant does not experience
environmental inductive signals to flower, the autonomous pathway helps ensure that it still has the

Page 3 of 20

opportunity to reproduce. In Arabidopsis, members of
the autonomous pathway, including FCA, FY, FPA, FVE,
and FLOWERING LOCUS K (FLK), reduce FLC RNA
levels via RNA metabolism or chromatin-state regulation [37,38].
While studies in Arabidopsis have provided valuable
insight into the genetic regulation of flowering time
(especially regarding flowering in response to environmental stimuli), there is tremendous variation in the
flowering time trait across flowering plants. Studying the
trait in diverse taxa will establish a comparative framework from which we can gain a better understanding of
how the genetics of flowering time evolved. To date,
genetic information on the regulation of flowering is largely limited to other core eudicot taxa such as pea,
tomato, poplar, cucurbit, and morning glory, and to
several of the monocot cereals such as rice, wheat, and
barley. As a basal eudicot, studying flowering time in the
genus Aquilegia will add an intermediate point of comparison between the core eudicots and the monocots.
Flowering time in the genus Aquilegia has been examined to a limited extent by researchers working to
improve horticultural practices. Data from these papers
are often conflicting and are confounded by the use of
hybrid varieties that may exhibit atypical phenotypes.
One constant, however, is that Aquilegia varieties show
a strong response to vernalization after reaching floral
competency around the 12 to 15-leaf stage [39]. This
requirement is also observed in the main focus of recent
genetic research, the species Aquilegia formosa (S.A.
Hodges pers. comm.). Distributed throughout western
North America, Aquilegia formosa has both broad latitudinal and altitudinal ranges, extending from Baja California to Alaska and from sea level to approximately
3,000 feet in elevation. This distribution includes populations that experience varied photoperiod and temperature regimes. Considerable genetic and genomic
research has recently focused on populations of A. formosa found at approximately 38° north latitude and
approximately 2,500 meters above sea level [3,40]. These
high altitude populations are buried under snow from
November through May or June, depending on winter
precipitation, and typically flower in July through
August. Despite these field observations, no controlled
experiments have ever been conducted on flowering
time response in A. formosa to determine what environmental signals control this transition. Since many
genetic aspects of flowering time response appear to be
broadly conserved, an important first step in studying
the process is to identify Aquilegia homologs of the Arabidopsis loci and begin to study their regulation. The
current study tackles both of these goals and finds that
while photoperiod has a slight effect on flowering time
in A. formosa, vernalization is the primary ecological

Ballerini and Kramer EvoDevo 2011, 2:4
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/4

factor promoting flowering in these populations. Analyses of the Aquilegia homologs of the Arabidopsis flowering time loci reveal some evidence of conservation,
but a surprising degree of divergence. They have also
provided insight into the developmental changes that
define flowering in Aquilegia. This work now lays the
foundation for all future studies of natural variation in
Aquilegia flowering time response as well as providing a
framework for manipulation of this process.

Results
Photoperiod and vernalization response in Aquilegia
formosa

Based on the known phenology of A. formosa, we
hypothesized that it would likely flower in response to
long days and vernalization, similar to Arabidopsis. In
order to test these hypotheses, we compared the flowering times of plants grown in controlled laboratory conditions under various photoperiod and vernalization
regimes. Initial studies indicated a strong requirement
for vernalization so we focused on comparing flowering
time of plants vernalized and grown in short days (SD:
8L/16D) to that of plants vernalized and grown in long
days (LD: 16L/8D).
Although Aquilegia is self-compatible, the use of isogenic lines is complicated by a strong susceptibility to
inbreeding depression (S.A. Hodges, pers. comm.; [41]).
Therefore, we used F2 hybrids of Aquilegia formosa collected from two populations located in eastern California and Nevada at roughly 2,500 meters above sea level.
Plants were germinated and grown in either SD or LD
conditions at 20°C until reaching approximately the 12
to 15 leaf stage at which point they were vernalized for
eight weeks at 4°C in SD and then returned to their original SD or LD conditions.
We note that LD grown plants differed in appearance
from their SD-grown siblings in that the latter showed
much less leaflet and petiole expansion (See Additional
File 1: Figure 1). On average, plants grown in SD took
slightly longer to flower than plants grown in LD with
mean days to flowering of 28.6 and 24.1 respectively, not
including three SD plants that did not flower (Figure 2A).
When the three non-flowering SD plants are included in a
rank test analysis, the median flowering time three plants
grown in SD and LD is 29 and 20 days, respectively, and
the distribution of flowering time differs significantly
(Mann-Whitney U = 2.3, n1 = 25, n2 = 20, P < 0.5 twotailed). Dropping the three plants that did not flower, the
median flowering time of SD plants drops to 26 days and
the distributions of flowering time between SD and LD
grown plants no longer differ significantly (Mann-Whitney
U = 1.8, n1 = 22, n2 = 20, P > 0.5 two-tailed).
Since both LD and SD groups were vernalized under SD
light conditions at 4°C, a control group of LD plants was

Page 4 of 20

shifted to SD conditions but maintained at 20°C in order
to rule out a shift in daylength as initiating flowering. Of
the plants that were not vernalized, 78% (n = 14) did not
flower after 85 days “post-vernalization”, indicating that a
shift in daylength alone does not promote flowering and
affirming the importance of vernalization for floral induction in A. formosa (Figure 2A). Importantly, this study has
also revealed that there is some natural genetic variation
in response to vernalization as 22% (n = 4) of the non-vernalized plants did flower without vernalization, but the
range over which these plants flowered was much wider
than the vernalized plants. In addition, we have occasionally observed rare individuals grown from wild collected
seed that flower very early, before plants reach the size
when competence to respond to vernalization is thought
to begin [39].
Morphological dynamics of vernalization response

Given that A. formosa showed such a strong response to
vernalization treatment, we decided to study the SAM
before, during, and immediately after vernalization to
see when the meristem transitions from a vegetative to
an inflorescence meristem. Chiefly, we wanted
to address whether the meristem showed developmental
responses during vernalization or whether these changes
occurred after the plants were removed from cold treatment. Plants were grown in LD at 20°C. Upon reaching
12 to 15 leaves, plants were moved to vernalization conditions, SD at 4°C. Apical meristems were collected and
prepared for histology at five time-points, just prior to
vernalization, two weeks into vernalization, six weeks
into vernalization, eight weeks into vernalization (also
the last day of vernalization), and one-week post vernalization. Five plants were examined at each time point
and the meristem morphologies were highly consistent
across all plants sectioned at a given time point.
Aquilegia formosa produces a cymose inflorescence in
which the SAM is transformed into an inflorescence
meristem, produces two lateral bracts each with axillary
meristems and is then consumed by a terminal flower.
The axillary meristems in turn repeat this developmental
pattern. Prior to vernalization, the meristem consists of
a small round dome flanked by leaf primordia and older
leaves (Figure 2B). The SAM and leaf insertion points
are all on the same horizontal plane, indicating very little internodal elongation. After two weeks of vernalization, there may be some subtle elongation of the
meristem but by six weeks into vernalization, the meristem has clearly become vertically elongated (Figure 2B).
Internodal elongation separates the most recently produced lateral organs from the rosette leaves and darkly
stained meristems appear to be developing in the axils
of these leaves, which is not observed at earlier stages
(Figure 2B). By eight weeks, the terminal meristem has

Ballerini and Kramer EvoDevo 2011, 2:4
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/4

Page 5 of 20

Figure 2 Flowering time of A. formosa in different light regimes and meristematic development during vernalization. (A) Flowering
time of A. formosa plants grown under three different light/temperature regimes: constant SD with eight weeks of 4°C, LD with eight weeks of
4°C SD, or LD with eight weeks of 20°C SD. Day 1 is the first day that vernalized plants were removed from vernalization and LD non-vernalized
plants were moved back into LD. Time to flowering was measured as the number of days following removal from vernalization when an
inflorescence was visible above the leaf crown. The x-axis after 85 days when the experiment was ended. (B) A. formosa meristem development
through vernalization. The SAM just prior to vernalization (Pre), two weeks into vernalization (two weeks), six weeks (six weeks) into vernalization,
eight weeks into vernalization (eight weeks), and one week following vernalization (one week post).

clearly transitioned to floral identity and sepals are
beginning to develop. Well-defined axillary meristems
are present, which may have inflorescence or floral identity (Figure 2B). One week following vernalization, the
sepals of the terminal flower have elongated to nearly
the height of the floral meristem and petal and stamen
primordia are present. The axillary floral meristems
have defined sepal primordia (Figure 2B). Axillary meristems subsequently produced by the secondary meristems are present in adjacent sections (data not shown).
Thus, while photoperiod may have some impact on
growth rate after vernalization, the meristem actually
transitions to flowering during cold treatment.
Flowering time genetics

In order to identify Aquilegia homologs of the Arabidopsis flowering time loci, we used complementary
approaches of querying the Aquilegia DFCI Gene Index
along with targeted amplification of genes of interest. A
summary of Aquilegia homologs is found in Table 1.

Floral pathway integrators

MADS-domain containing genes, defined by the conserved MCM1/AGAMOUS/DEFICIENS/SRF domain,
form a large and important family of transcription factors
in plants, including the FPI genes SOC1, AGL24, and
AP1. The evolution of this family is very complex, with
the presence of numerous lineage-specific duplication
events that often make it impossible to assign strict
orthology to homologous genes from different taxa [42].
Our first step was to classify all of the cloned and/or
annotated Aquilegia type II MADS box genes in the context of a broad phylogenetic analysis (See Additional File
2: Figure 1). This revealed two representatives of the
AP1/FUL lineage, two of StMADS11/AGL24/SVP and
one of TM3/SOC1 (Table 1). The two Aquilegia FUL-like
homologs appear to have been derived from a previously
characterized Ranunculales-specific duplication event
and are, therefore, ancestral to all three of the core eudicot paralogous lineages containing Arabidopsis AP1, FUL
and AGL79 [43]. Phylogenetic analysis of the two

Ballerini and Kramer EvoDevo 2011, 2:4
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/4

Page 6 of 20

Table 1 Arabidopsis and Aquilegia gene names and
accession numbers
Arabidopsis gene

Locus ID

GI

AT1G22770

AqGI

HQ173334

CO

AT5G15840

AqCO

HQ173331

FT
PHYA

AT1G65480
AT1G09570

AqFT
AqPHYA

HQ173333
GQ471030

PHYB

AT2G18790

AqPHYB

GQ471031

CRY1

AT4G08920

AqCRY1

DR915774

CRY2

AT1G04400

AqCRY2

DT748827

SOC1

AT2G45660

AqSOC1

HQ173336

AGL24

AT4G24540

AqAGL24.1

HQ173338

AqAGL24.2

HQ173339

Photoperiod and circadian regulation

AqLFY
AqFL1

HQ173335
DT758909

AqFL2

HQ322376

AqFRI

HQ173332

PHYA and PHYB as well as CRY1 and CRY2 orthologs
from Aquilegia were identified (See Additional File 2: Figure 5). A search of the Aquilegia DFCI Gene Index did
not reveal any homologs to the circadian clock gene
TOC1 but sequence fragments with similarity to CCA1
and LHY were obtained (DT742775, TC22162). These
were not pursued further since the core circadian clock is
not the focus of this study. We also recovered 5’ and 3’
ends of an apparent Aquilegia GI ortholog, termed AqGI,
and these regions were used to obtain the complete cDNA
sequence using RT-PCR. Similar to LFY, the lineage evolution of GI is rather straightforward and phylogenetic analyses support our identification of AqGI as orthologous to
Arabidopsis GI (See Additional File 2: Figure 6).
On the other end of the spectrum, there are 17 genes in
the Arabidopsis genome that show some similarity to CO
based on the presence of conserved B-box and CCT
domains, including two very recent paralogs of CO,
COL1 and COL2 [48]. Genomic searches of other taxa
such as rice and barley have likewise revealed the presence of multiple CO-like genes, indicating a complex
history for the gene family. It can thus be difficult to
determine orthology between CO homologs from different taxa. A potential Aquilegia CO ortholog was obtained
by targeted amplification and identical fragments were
found in the Aquilegia DFCI Gene Index. In addition to
AqCO, two other CO-like genes, A. formosa TC932 and
A. formosa DR918, were identified from the DFCI Gene
Index. Phylogenetic analysis revealed that the product of
the targeted cloning falls within a highly supported clade
that also includes Arabidopsis CO and Oryza Hd1, with
monocot and core eudicot homologs each forming
monophyletic groups and AqCO sister to the core eudicot homologs (See Additional File 2: Figure 7). This indicates that AqCO is a close homolog of Arabidopsis CO
but the Aquilegia locus is also equally related to the
recent Arabidopsis paralogs COL1 and COL2.

LFY
FUL

AT5G61850
AT5G60910

FRI

AT4G00650

Aquilegia gene Accession number

clade with Arabidopsis MFT and we will refer to this
locus as AqMFT.
LFY is not part of a complex gene family and homologs are most often represented by a single copy in
angiosperms, the primary exceptions being taxa that
have experienced relatively recent genome duplications
[45-47]. Consistent with this, we isolated one LFY
homolog from Aquilegia with 59% nucleotide identity to
Arabidopsis LFY and phylogenetic analysis clearly indicates that it is the Aquilegia LFY ortholog, AqLFY (See
Additional File 2: Figure 4).

AGL24-like genes, AqAGL24.1 and AqAGL24.2, in the
context of a larger nucleotide dataset for the StMADS11
clade indicates that these loci diverged prior to a duplication event that led to the formation of AGL24 and SVP
lineages, however there is little support for the topology
(See Additional File 2: Figure 2A). Thus, determining
strict orthology between the Aquilegia AGL24-like genes
and Arabidopsis homologs is not currently possible. The
single representative of the TM3 clade identified so far,
AqSOC1, belongs to the lineage of eudicot genes that
also includes Arabidopsis SOC1 to the exclusion of the
other Arabidopsis genes in the TM3 clade (See Additional File 2: Figure 2B).
In addition to FT, there are five other phosphatidylethanolamine binding protein (PEBP) genes in the Arabidopsis genome: TERMINAL FLOWER (TFL), TWIN
SISTER OF FT (TSF), BROTHER OF FT AND TFL
(BFT), MOTHER OF FT AND TFL (MFT), and ACT
(Arabidopsis thaliana CENTRORADIALIS). We used a
targeted approach to identify homologs of FT and TFL
in Aquilegia. Although TFL is primarily thought of as a
regulator of inflorescence structure, tfl mutants also
show early flowering, suggesting an additional role in
flowering time [44]. We also identified a third PEBP-like
gene in the Aquilegia DFCI Gene Index. Phylogenetic
analysis confirms that the loci we obtained by targeted
cloning represent homologs of FT and TFL, and are
therefore termed AqFT and AqTFL, respectively (Additional File 2: Figure 3). Although the presence in Arabidopsis of the recent Brassicaceae-specific FT paralog
TSF rules out the possibility of strict orthology between
FT and AqFT, the AqFT locus is clearly a member of
the FT subfamily and is more closely related to FT than
any of the other PEBP family members. The other PEBP
gene identified in the EST database comes out in a

Vernalization and autonomous pathways

We did not have an a priori expectation to recover
homologs of the Arabidopsis vernalization pathway loci

Ballerini and Kramer EvoDevo 2011, 2:4
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/4

Page 7 of 20

A.
2.5

AqFT

seedling
pre-vernalization
during vernalization
post-vernalization

Relative Expression

2

1.5

1

0.5

0

3-leaf

6-leaf

9-leaf

12-leaf

pre-vern

4-week
vern

6-week
vern

post-vern

B.
3.0

seedling
pre-vernalization
post-vernalization

Relative Expression

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0

AqFT

AqLFY

Seedling:pre-vern

9.7

2.4

-1.1

3.0

8.0

4.6

Pre-:post-vern

-1.8

2.8

1.4

1.4

1.3

-1.1

Fold change

AqFUL1

AqAGL24.1

AqAGL24.2

AqSOC1

Figure 3 Gene expression levels of Aquilegia flowering time homologs over the course of development. A. AqFT expression levels over
the course of pre-vernalization development followed by during vernalization and post-vernalization time points, +/- the standard error. B. All
FPI homologs were assayed for relative expression at three time points: seedlings, pre-vernalization (pre-vern) 12 to 15 leaf plants, and seven-day
post-vernalization (post-vern) plants. Plant apices and young leaves were collected for RNA isolation 7.5 h after dawn in LD. Relative mean
expression of genes from six plants at each developmental time point, +/- the standard error. Fold change between the seedling and the prevernalization and the pre-vernalization and the post-vernalization values is presented for each gene.

since it appears that this program is less conserved than
other flowering time pathways [49]. Even though FLC
plays a critical role in vernalization response in Arabidopsis, it is well-known that homologs of FLC have not
been identified outside the core eudicots [50,51]. Despite
recovering many MADS-box genes in the Aquilegia
DFCI Gene Index, we were unable to identify loci belonging to the FLC subfamily (See Additional File 2: Figure 1).
Aquilegia loci involved in chromatin remodeling are
being annotated in the context of another project and so
were not pursued in this study, but two genes showing
similarity to FRI were found. Phylogenetic analysis of
these loci and several FRI-like genes from various taxa

reveal that one of the genes, termed AqFRI, is a member
of the clade that also contains FRI from Arabidopsis (See
Additional File 2: Figure 8).
Sequence fragments with homology to the autonomous pathway genes FCA and FY were identified in the
Aquilegia EST database (AqFCA: TC28874, AqFY:
TC32137; L. Holappa and E. Kramer pers. comm.).
Given their pleiotropic roles in RNA processing and
chromatin remodeling [52,53], it is not surprising that
there are similar genes present in Aquilegia, but whether
they will have a role specific to flowering time or will
more generally effect plant developmental and regulatory processes is unknown.

Ballerini and Kramer EvoDevo 2011, 2:4
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/4

Page 8 of 20

Figure 4 Schematic of a racemose inflorescence and an Aquilegia dichasial cymose inflorescence and AqLFY in situ expression
patterns. In a racemose inflorescence (A), such as those of Arabidopsis and Antirrhinum, the apical meristem remains indeterminate.
Secondary indeterminate inflorescences (coflorescences) may form in the axillary meristems of the first few nodes, followed by the
production of determinate flowers in the subsequent axillary meristems. In the Aquilegia cymose inflorescence (B), the apical meristem
produces two bracts with axillary meristems and then terminates in a flower. Secondary inflorescences develop from these axillary
meristems. The secondary inflorescences also terminate in a flower with tertiary inflorescences developing in the axils of these flowers. This
process repeats indefinitely. Expression of AqLFY in a pre-vernalization apical meristem (C), apical meristems four weeks into vernalization
(D, E), apical meristems six weeks into vernalization (F, G), an apical meristem eight weeks into vernalization (H), a later inflorescence
shown with three hierarchical degrees of floral and inflorescence meristems (I) and developing flowers at stage 7 (J) and stage 9 (K). Ap =
apical meristem, Ax = axillary meristem, lf = leaf, b = bract, sp = sepal, p = petal, st = stamen, sd = staminodia, c = carpel. Solid
arrowheads indicate location of incipient bract, open arrowheads indicate petal and stamen primordia. Asterisk in J: Due to the floral
architecture of Aquilegia, the basal-most primordium in a vertical rank of organs may be a petal or a stamen. These are indistinguishable at
early stages so we cannot differentiate between the two possibilities in this section. Scale bar = 50 μm C-D, I; 100 μm E-H; 200 μm J-K.
sp = sepal.

Ballerini and Kramer EvoDevo 2011, 2:4
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/4

Page 9 of 20

Figure 5 AqTFL1 and AqAGL24.2 in situ expression patterns. AqTFL1 expression in four-week (A) and six-week (B, C) vernalized apices.
AqAGL24.2 expression in six-week (D, E) vernalized apices and in a higher order post vernalized inflorescence (F). Ap = apical meristem, Ax =
axillary meristem, Lax = leaf axillary meristem, lf = leaf, b = bract, sp = sepal, open arrowheads indicate petal and stamen primordia, arrows
indicate AqAGL24 expression in leaves. Scale bar = 100 μm A-C; 50 μm D-F.

Regulatory pathways controlling AqFT

In several taxa including Arabidopsis, rice, poplar, and
cucurbit, there is evidence that the regulation of FT
homologs in response to environmental conditions is a
key trigger controlling the induction of flowering
[54-58]. In Arabidopsis and grasses, homologs of GI,
CO, and FT form a regulatory module to promote
flowering under distinct photoperiod conditions
(reviewed [29]). Additionally, in some Arabidopsis ecotypes, vernalization is critical to the alleviation of factors that repress FT expression prior to flowering. To
gain an understanding for whether and how AqFT is
regulated by environmental conditions, we analyzed
its expression in the context of the proposed GI-COFT photoperiod regulon as well as in response to
vernalization.
First, we assayed whether AqFT showed any diurnal
expression variation in reference to AqGI and AqCO.
Plants were entrained in either LD or SD immediately
upon removal from vernalization. Ten days later, leaf samples were taken every four hours starting at presumptive
dawn (0 h) and quantitative RT-PCR was used to examine
the relative expression of AqGI, AqCO, and AqFT. Expression levels of these genes were normalized to the expression of the Aquilegia homolog of isopentyl pyrophosphate:
dimethylallyl pyrophosphate isomerase2 (AqIPP2) at each
time point [59]. Values presented for each time-point are
relative to normalized values of the gene of interest from a

control sample that consisted of a mix of all cDNAs used
in the experiment.
AqGI expression was very similar to what has been
observed in other systems with a narrow SD peak at 8 h
and a broader LD peak between 8 to 12 h (See Additional File 1, Figure 2). Under both conditions, AqCO
reaches its peak around presumptive dawn (0 h) then is
quickly down-regulated, but it shows a much stronger
diurnal signal in SD than LD (See Additional File 2,
Figure 2). There is an approximately 12X difference in
AqCO expression between the low and high points in
SD, while in LD it only varies approximately 3X. In contrast to Arabidopsis, it appears that AqCO baseline transcription is generally quite high in Aquilegia. We had
no difficulty detecting a signal from AqCO in Northern
blot analyses (data not shown), whereas in Arabidopsis,
PCR amplification of CO is necessary before expression
can be detected by Northern [30]. In addition, when
running standard curves for quantitative RT-PCR, AqCO
could always be detected several cycles prior to AqGI,
AqFT, and AqIPP2 (data not shown).
While AqGI and AqCO show diurnal regulation in
both SD and LD, the expression pattern of AqFT is
more complex (See Additional File 2 Figure 2). In SD,
AqFT has near zero relative expression at all time points
except for at 8 h, where there is a spike in expression.
Although the amplitude of the spike is variable, all samples show a distinct uptick relative to the 4 h time point

Ballerini and Kramer EvoDevo 2011, 2:4
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/4

Page 10 of 20

Figure 6 AqFL1 and AqSOC1 in situ expression patterns. AqFL1 expression in four-week (A) and six-week (B) vernalized apices. AqSOC1
expression in a transverse section of a post-vernalization peduncle (C), a longitudinal section of a post-vernalization inflorescence (D), and a
four-week vernalized apex (E). Ap = apical meristem, Ax = axillary meristem, b = bract, Lax = leaf axillary meristem, lf = leaf. Scale bar = 100 μm
A-C; Scale bar = 200 μm D, E.

Ballerini and Kramer EvoDevo 2011, 2:4
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/4

(data not shown). The expression pattern of AqFT in LD
conditions is not clearly suggestive of diurnal regulation.
Instead, it appears that AqFT expression in LD is
expressed at relatively high levels throughout the day
with the highest (16 h) and lowest (4 h) points of
mRNA abundance differing only approximately 3X.
Generally, AqFT exhibits higher overall expression levels
in LD than in SD (See Additional File 2, Figure 2). In
summary, although all three loci show evidence of diurnal regulation, their patterns are not clearly related to
one another and, possibly consistent with a day-neutral
condition, AqFT is expressed under both SD and LD
conditions.
The diurnal experiments were all conducted in postvernalization plants so the question remained as to how
vernalization might regulate AqFT expression. Therefore, we used qRT-PCR to examine AqFT expression in
early seedlings though vernalization to post-vernalization
growth. Plants were grown under LD conditions and all
samples were taken at 7 h post dawn. These data show
that AqFT expression gradually increases during vegetative development, reaching a peak four weeks into vernalization before decreasing again (Figure 3A).
Floral pathway integrator expression patterns

Most of the Arabidopsis FPIs show moderate to strong
up-regulation coincident with the floral transition
[19,54,60]. By characterizing the expression of Aquilegia
FPI homologs before and after vernalization, we hoped
to gain insight into whether increased expression of
these loci is similarly associated with flowering and
inflorescence development in A. formosa. Quantitative
RT-PCR was used to assess the expression levels of
AqAGL24.1, AqAGL24.2, AqSOC1, AqLFY and AqFL1 in
unvernalized plants at both seedling and 12 to 15 leaf
stages and in plants following an eight week vernalization period (Figure 3B). We did not pursue expression
studies of the other Aquilegia FUL-like gene, AqFL2, as
preliminary studies indicate that it is only expressed at
very low levels in late stage flowers (A. Litt pers.
comm.). AqLFY, AqAGL24.1, and AqAGL24.2 all show
statistically significant increases in expression (Student’s
t-test probability <0.05) following vernalization, with the
approximately three-fold increase in AqLFY being the
most dramatic. AqFL1 expression shows a slight, statistically non-significant increase following vernalization
while AqSOC1 shows a slight non-significant decrease in
expression following vernalization. If these results are
examined in the context of the seedling expression patterns, we see that, with the exception of AqFL1, the FPI
homologs are expressed at very low levels in three-leaf
seedlings relative to pre-vernalization plants at the 12 to
15 leaf stage (Figure 3B). The most dramatic expression
increases between the three-leaf and pre-vernalization

Page 11 of 20

stages is seen in AqAGL24.2, which rises approximately
eight-fold (compare with AqFT, shown for reference,
which also shows a strong induction of approximately
ten-fold). AqLFY, AqAGL24.1, and AqSOC1 show moderate transcription increases in the range of two- to
five-fold. Unlike the other FPI homologs, expression of
AqFL1 commences early and is relatively stable at the
various developmental time points we examined.
In Arabidopsis, the Floral Pathway Integrators control
the transition to flowering in part by conferring inflorescence and/or floral identity to meristems. Because
inflorescence meristems are by definition indeterminate
while floral meristems are determinate, the demarcation
pattern of inflorescence and floral meristems also contributes to inflorescence architecture. Therefore, along
with their role in flowering time, the FPIs are also crucial to inflorescence architecture. In Arabidopsis, a plant
with an indeterminate inflorescence similar to that
shown in Figure 4A, the apical meristem maintains
inflorescence meristem identity throughout the period
of flowering, producing lateral determinate floral meristems. Aquilegia has a determinate cymose inflorescence,
depicted in Figure 4B, in which inflorescence identity is
a transient state rather than a persistent one. Every
inflorescence meristem, starting with the primary apical
meristem, produces two lateral bracts each with its own
axillary inflorescence meristem, and then is itself transformed into a determinate floral meristem. The axillary
meristems reiterate this pattern repeatedly during flowering. To gain a better understanding for how FPI
homologs may be functioning to both promote flowering and determine inflorescence architecture during the
floral transition in A. formosa, we further analyzed their
spatio-temporal expression patterns before, during, and
after vernalization using in situ hybridization. To aid in
descriptions of floral development, Aquilegia floral
stages are presented in reference to Arabidopsis floral
stages in Additional File 3, Table 1.
The expression of LFY homologs is indicative of floral
meristem identity in many taxa [61] and, consistent with
this, qRT-PCR data demonstrate that AqLFY is strongly
induced following vernalization and the floral transition
(Figure 3B). In situ hybridization of the AqLFY transcript shows that prior to vernalization, the gene is
expressed in leaf primordia and young leaves as well as
at the margins of older leaves, but is not expressed in
the SAM or in axillary meristems (Figure 4C). While
there is some variation in the developmental stages of
the four- and six-week vernalized apices, generally by
four weeks into vernalization the apical meristem has
begun to elongate and AqLFY is detected in the flanks
of the meristem while being notably absent from the
central zone and incipient axillary meristems (Figure 4
D, E). This expression appears to be concentrated in the

Ballerini and Kramer EvoDevo 2011, 2:4
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/4

regions that will give rise to the opposite bracts subtending the first axillary meristems of the inflorescence
(Figure 4 D, E). Figure 4F represents a developmental
stage that typically occurs between four and six weeks
of vernalization, at which point the first axillary meristems on the inflorescence are well-formed. At this stage,
AqLFY is now seen throughout the central region of the
apical meristem and in the bracts subtending the axillary
meristems, but is not detected in the axillary meristems
themselves (Figure 4F). In six-week vernalization apices
that are at a slightly later developmental stage, AqLFY is
strongly expressed throughout what is now a stage three
terminal flower, including the differentiating sepal primordia (Figure 4G). The axillary meristems have further
developed and exhibit AqLFY expression patterns similar
to those of four-week apical meristems, indicating that
they are reiterating the transition to inflorescence identity and then floral identity (Figure 4G Eight weeks into
vernalization, the terminal flower is at approximately
stage 5, with well-differentiated sepals and initiating
petal and stamen primordia. AqLFY is expressed in the
sepals and the peripheral regions of the meristem containing the petal, stamen and incipient staminodium primordia, but is no longer expressed in the central region
of the meristem (Figure 4H). Looking at later stages of
the inflorescence, AqLFY expression can be simultaneously visualized in three hierarchically-staged meristems (Figure 4I). In the primary meristem, a stage 8
flower with well-defined stamens, AqLFY is detected
strongly in the stamens. The secondary meristems are at
earlier stages of floral development, approximately stage
3 and 4, and AqLFY is present throughout the floral
meristem including the developing sepals. AqLFY is conspicuously absent from the incipient tertiary meristems,
which are young inflorescence meristems, but it is
detected in the bracts subtending these meristems.
As flowers continue to develop, AqLFY is gradually
turned off in the developing organs in a basipetal fashion (Figure 4J, K). AqLFY appears to decline in the apex
before carpel primordia begin to initiate and is then
progressively excluded from the staminodia (sterile
organs found in a whorl between the carpels and stamens in Aquilegia) followed by the most apical stamens
(Figure 4J). In late stage flowers, AqLFY is detected in
the proximal filaments of the most basal stamens and
throughout the petal but is also detected in the tips of
developing carpels, indicating reactivation at late stages
(Figure 4K).
In contrast to the LFY-like genes, TFL1 homologs
have been linked to the maintenance of indeterminacy
in inflorescence meristems [62,63]. We studied AqTFL1
expression with the hypothesis that the locus would be
expressed in inflorescence meristems complementary to
AqLFY. Obvious staining was not detected in pre-

Page 12 of 20

vernalized apices, although signal can be seen in leaves,
particularly the petiole (data not shown). In four- and
six-week vernalized plants, weak to moderate expression
is detected in a zone subtending the axillary meristems,
as if demarcating a boundary between the axillary meristem and the primary apical meristem (Figure 5A-C).
Transcripts were also detected on the adaxial sides of
bracts subtending axillary meristems (Figure 5A-C). We
were never able to recover mutually exclusive expression
patterns of AqLFY and AqTFL1.
Like TFL1, AGL24 contributes to inflorescence meristem identity in Arabidopsis [20]. Of the two Aquilegia
AGL24 homologs, we had greater success with the
AqAGL24.2 probe. The strongest AqAGL24.2 expression
was detected in six-week vernalization apices (Figure 5
D, E). In these apices, AqAGL24.2 expression is concentrated in axillary meristems and in the young bracts
subtending these meristems (Figure 5 D, E). At this
stage, the sepal primordia are barely beginning to form
on the terminal flower. Weak expression is detected in
the edges of these sepal primordia and continues in the
flanks of the pedicel and in the flanks of the peduncle,
however, expression is not detected throughout the apical dome of the terminal flower at this stage (Figure 5
D, E). Interestingly, expression is detected in the axillary
meristems of older leaves, in meristems where AqLFY
expression was not detected (labelled Lax in Figure 5E).
In older flowers, there may be some AqAGL24.2 expression in developing sepals and early petal and stamen
primordia, but expression is not strong enough to be
definitive (Figure 5F). AqAGL24.2 expression can also be
seen in lateral portions of young leaves, similar to
AqLFY (Figure 5D).
Spatial expression of AqFL1 was difficult to assess. In
several sections, increased staining appears concentrated
in the meristematic regions of the apex. Similarly, staining appears somewhat concentrated in the axillary meristems and in leaf tips in four-week vernalized apices
(Figure 6A). In some early stage six-week vernalized
apices, AqFL1 expression is more strongly detected
throughout the dome of the apical floral meristem,
including in the bract primordia and in the tips of
young leaves and leaflets, however, strong expression
was not detected consistently (Figure 6B). The qRT-PCR
data show that AqFL1 is expressed at consistent levels at
all of the developmental stages we tested, including in
very young seedlings (Figure 3B). Therefore, it may be
that AqFL1 has constitutive weak to moderate expression relative to the background and does not have specific expression in inflorescence or floral meristems.
Contrary to SOC1 in Arabidopsis, AqSOC1 shows
strong and consistent expression in vasculature throughout the aerial portions of the plant (roots were not
examined), including leaf and stem vasculature. Vascular

Ballerini and Kramer EvoDevo 2011, 2:4
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/4

expression was easily detected at all time points examined (pre-, during, and post-vernalization) and does not
appear to change during vernalization (Figure 6C-E),
consistent with qRT-PCR data (Figure 3B). Weak
expression was also detected in the central region of
some apical meristems (Figure 6E).

Discussion
Aquilegia is poised to become an important new model
system for exploring many aspects of plant biology from
genetics, genomics, and development to evolution and
ecology. Because of the unique nature of the Aquilegia
species complex and the position of Aquilegia within
the angiosperm phylogeny, studying a trait such as flowering time can provide insight into both macro- and
microevolutionary questions. In addition, a more comprehensive understanding of flowering control in Aquilegia will help researchers manipulate this important trait,
potentially reducing generation time and thereby
increasing efficiency of further genetic research in the
genus. Our data show that vernalization is a key regulator of flowering in these accessions of A. formosa and
suggest that photoperiod has little or no role. Nevertheless, we have discovered that Aquilegia has homologs of
loci known to function in the photoperiod pathway
along with those from the FPI, vernalization, and autonomous flowering programs.
Response to environmental signals

Plants have evolved several genetic mechanisms to
judge seasonality and determine the best time to initiate reproductive growth. The ability to measure day
length and temperature is key to establishing seasonally controlled responses. While taxa such as Arabidopsis use both photoperiod and vernalization to
regulate flowering, in the high elevation Aquilegia formosa populations that we sampled, it appears that
temperature has taken a priority over photoperiod.
Somewhat unexpectedly, we found that the floral transition actually occurs during the vernalization period
(Figure 2B). In this case vernalization was under SD
conditions, but exposure to SD alone without a corresponding drop in temperature does not induce a
strong flowering response (Figure 2A). Although the
statistical measures of flowering time in SD versus LD
vary in significance depending on the inclusion of
three SD plants that did not flower, we believe that the
measured differences in flowering time between LD
and SD are more likely attributable to differences in
the rate of inflorescence elongation in SD versus LD,
not in the timing of the transition of the apical meristem from a vegetative meristem to an inflorescence
meristem. This conclusion is strongly supported by the
finding that the floral transition occurs during

Page 13 of 20

vernalization. We did not test the effect of vernalizing
using LD conditions, in part because the natural phenology of these plants would always have vernalization
occurring during fall or winter when days are short. It
is also important to note that previous studies of Aquilegia floral induction response did test vernalization
under LD or even constant light and still saw strong
acceleration of flowering by cold treatment [64], so it
is reasonable to conclude that SD is neither sufficient
nor required for floral induction in A. formosa.
This is not to say that A. formosa does not show
developmental responses to SD. In comparison to those
grown in SD, LD plants generally produced leaves that
were borne on much longer petioles and each of the
leaf blades expanded to a greater degree, effectively producing larger plants (See Additional File 1: Figure 1). In
our study, three of the SD plants had not flowered 85
days after vernalization and several of the SD plants
only produced one to three flowers on an inflorescence
that showed little elongation (data not shown). A possible explanation for this is that although these SD plants
had 12 to 15 leaves prior to vernalization, they were not
physiologically capable of responding to induction or
producing robust inflorescences, possibly due to insufficient energy stores or lesser biomass. This difference in
inflorescence size was not observed in one of our pilot
studies where all plants were grown in LD conditions
prior to vernalization and were shifted into different LD
and SD conditions only after vernalization (data not
shown). Consistent with this observation, it has been
reported that in some Aquilegia species, inflorescence
height is affected by both the duration of vernalization
and photoperiod [64]. Thus, although day length alone
is not the primary environmental trigger promoting
flowering, growth in long days may be important for
increasing plant biomass prior to vernalization, insuring
that plants are competent to flower and capable of producing larger inflorescences that bear more flowers following vernalization. In addition, we have uncovered
evidence for natural variation in Aquilegia’s requirement
for vernalization, much like what has been observed for
Arabidopsis [33-35], which will require further study.
Flowering time gene homologs

We have identified a diverse set of flowering time
homologs in Aquilegia formosa. These genes provide a
framework for studying the genetic basis of variation in
flowering time control between populations of A. formosa and across the Aquilegia genus. For some loci
involved in the regulation of flowering time in Arabidopsis, we can be fairly confident that we have identified
the orthologous gene from Aquilegia. GI and LFY, for
example, usually exist as single copy genes [45,47].
Other Arabidopsis genes involved in flowering time,

Ballerini and Kramer EvoDevo 2011, 2:4
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/4

however, belong to gene families with much more complicated evolutionary histories, making it difficult to
assign homology. In comparing Aquilegia to Arabidopsis, at least three genome duplications are spanned: one
specific to the Ranunculales, one at the base of the core
eudicots, and one specific to the Brassicaceae [4,65].
Similarly, the grass model systems have experienced
their own independent genome duplications [66]. These
events make it impossible to assign strict orthology
between many of the Aquilegia MADS-box genes and
the homologous Arabidopsis or grass flowering time
genes, although we have recovered homologs of the critical AP1/FUL/VRN1, AGL24/SVP/VRT2 and SOC1/
OsMADS50 lineages. Likewise, CO has two closely
related paralogs in Arabidopsis, COL1 and COL2, and
within the PEBP gene family, there is a closely related
recent paralog of FT in Arabidopsis, TSF. Regardless of
whether or not simple orthology can be identified
between Arabidopsis, grass and Aquilegia genes, studying the identified Aquilegia homologs will help us to
understand the evolution of function across these gene
families. One notable exception to this list is a clear
homolog to FLC. Studies in the grasses have already
found that vernalization response is not controlled by
FLC homologs in those systems [49], so it appears that
vernalization pathways across the angiosperms are not
composed of homologous components. It will be necessary, therefore, to identify new candidates for the regulation of vernalization response in Aquilegia.
AqFT expression and the floral transition

Extensive research into the photoperiodic control of
flowering time in Arabidopsis has highlighted the
importance of GI, CO, and FT. Mutations in any of
these genes result in delayed flowering in inductive long
day conditions relative to wild type. These loci have
been placed in a genetic pathway whereby GI positively
regulates CO, which in turn positively regulates FT. Elements of this pathway appear to be conserved across
angiosperms with different photoperiod responses,
including the SD-flowering monocot rice [67]. However,
this study is the first examination of the diurnal regulation of these genes in a potentially day neutral plant.
Overall, the expression of AqGI appears to be conserved
relative to diverse angiosperm orthologs [67-70], perhaps indicating a conserved role in the central oscillator
of the circadian clock [68]. Contrary to AqGI, the diurnal expression patterns of AqCO and AqFT are not conserved between Aquilegia and Arabidopsis, particularly
in regard to the expression of the loci relative to one
another. These findings suggest that the GI-CO-FT regulatory module is not functioning in the same manner
in Aquilegia but that does not mean that AqFT plays no
role in floral promotion. In the day neutral species

Page 14 of 20

Solanum tuberosum, ectopic CO expression does not
promote flowering but the FT homolog is still known to
induce floral transition in the closely related Solanum
lycopersicon [71,72]. In this regard, it is important to
note that AqFT shows 83% amino acid similarity with
Arabidopsis FT, including the functionally critical position 83 tyrosine [73], so there is every reason to believe
that the proteins are biochemically equivalent.
We were surprised to find that AqFT is actually
expressed at significant levels before vernalization and
the floral transition. This expression increases gradually
throughout vegetative development, reaching a peak at
four weeks into vernalization, a period that is associated
with the floral transition based on histology and AqLFY
expression. The variation that exists between biological
samples at the four-week vernalization point may reflect
some variation among individuals in the exact timing of
the transition to flowering (Figure 3A). The gradual upregulation of AqFT is reminiscent of a similar pattern
observed in Populus, where the FT homolog PtFT1 has
been shown to promote flowering in a dosage-dependent manner [65]. Thus, although FT homologs have
been shown to promote flowering in many dicot and
monocot systems, a perfect correlation between their
expression and floral induction is not always observed.
This suggests that the exact mechanisms by which FT
homologs are regulated or specifically achieve their
function can vary. Along these lines, one possible explanation for the upward trend in AqFT expression is that
the gene functions on a very fine threshold of expression such that the difference between the pre-vernalization and 4-week vernalization expression levels is
enough to initiate flowering. Another possibility is that
vernalization regulates flowering downstream or in parallel to AqFT function, including regulation of AqFT
protein localization [74], which appears to be the primary FT regulatory mechanism in regard to photoperiod
in the Cucurbits [58]. Distinguishing between these possibilities will require the identification of AqFT loss-offunction mutants or the development of Aquilegia transgenics since VIGS, which tends to produce silenced sectors, is not well suited to the analysis of non-cell
autonomous gene functions.
FPI homolog expression in response to vernalization

In studying the expression of AqCO and the selected
Aquilegia FPI homologs before and after vernalization,
we hoped to identify loci that are differentially expressed
in response to vernalization with the thought that such
genes may function in either repression or induction of
flowering. In particular, the Arabidopsis FPIs are
strongly up-regulated in inflorescence and floral meristems and thus if their functions are conserved with the
Aquilegia homologs, we would expect them to be

Ballerini and Kramer EvoDevo 2011, 2:4
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/4

similarly up-regulated following vernalization in A. formosa. While several of the FPI homologs show statistically significant increases in expression after
vernalization, these differences are rather subtle. AqLFY
is the only locus to show an expression increase of
greater than two-fold following vernalization treatment,
which is consistent with AqLFY playing a conserved role
in initiating the floral transition downstream of vernalization. Although AqLFY is strongly expressed pre-vernalization in developing compound leaves, expression in
meristems is only observed after four to six weeks of
vernalization and, based on other histological features,
appears to coincide with the establishment of floral meristem identity. Strong expression of AqLFY in young
leaves and leaflets may indicate a role for the gene in
the development of Aquilegia’s compound leaves, which
has been shown for LFY homologs in legumes and suggested for homologs in Eschscholtzia [75-77].
The functional antagonist of LFY in Arabidopsis is the
inflorescence identity gene TFL1, which is expressed in
a complementary manner to LFY [78]. The unusual
expression pattern of AqTFL1 subtending axillary meristems does not rule out a similar function in Aquilegia,
however, since the protein is known to function noncell-autonomously [79]. It is, therefore, important to
note that AqTFL expression is only associated with
young axillary meristems and disappears once the meristems transition to a terminal position (Figure 5B, C),
which also corresponds to the full expression of floral
identity as denoted both by sepal initiation and constitutive expression of AqLFY.
The remaining FPI homologs - AP1, SOC1 and
AGL24 - are all MADS box-containing proteins and
exhibit complex interactions in Arabidopsis [21,26,80].
Adding further complication is the opposing role of
SVP, a paralog of AGL24 and a floral repressor [81],
although there is evidence that at some stages of floral
development the AP1, AGL24 and SVP proteins may
work cooperatively rather than antagonistically [80].
Neither of the AqAGL24 homologs shows strong up- or
down-regulation relative to floral induction (which is
seen respectively for Arabidopsis AGL24 and SVP) but
the spatial localization of AqAGL24.2 is consistent with
a function in inflorescence meristem identity. This raises
interesting questions as to the ancestral functions of the
gene lineage predating the apparent core eudicot duplication that gave rise to AGL24 and SVP - did it promote
or repress flowering? However, there is simply not
enough functional evidence for homologs either post- or
pre-dating the duplication event to draw clear conclusions. The expression data for AqFL1 is rather uninformative, being fairly moderate and constitutive, both
temporally and spatially. It remains possible that AqFL1
functions in floral meristem identity or the promotion

Page 15 of 20

of flowering, as has been seen for homologs in many
other taxa (reviewed [82]), but this function could be
delimited by differential expression of other co-factors,
candidates for which include the AqAGL24s or Aquilegia SEPALLATA homologs [80,83]. The expression of
AqSOC1 is more dramatically divergent from what is
observed for SOC1 in Arabidopsis, which is strongly
induced by flowering and is expressed in apical meristems [84]. AqSOC1 exhibits strong vascular staining
with little or no expression in the meristem at any of
the time points assessed using in situ hybridization, suggesting that AqSOC1 either plays a very different role or
exerts its effect on flowering in a different manner than
the Arabidopsis homolog. Work on several SOC1-like
genes in grasses underscores the fact that while these
loci are often involved in flowering time, their phylogenetic relationships are poorly resolved and their exact
functions may vary considerably [85,86].
On the whole, it is important to note that the developmental expression of the floral transition is the initiation of inflorescences, which represent a dramatically
different developmental program relative to vegetative
development. Furthermore, the genetic basis of evolutionary shifts between determinate (cymose) and indeterminate (racemose) inflorescence structures are a
major question in angiosperm evolution. In Aquilegia,
the expression patterns for AqLFY, AqAGL24.2 and
AqTFL suggest a hypothesis for the genetic control of
meristem identity transitions during Aquilegia cyme
development: 1) axillary meristems initially express
AqAGL24.2 and are subtended by a zone of AqTFL, 2)
AqLFY becomes expressed in the flanks of the meristem,
marking the arising opposite bracts, 3) after bract initiation, AqLFY becomes constitutive throughout the now
terminal meristem, AqAGL24.2 is down-regulated and
the subtending AqTFL disappears. It remains to be
determined exactly how much overlap occurs in AqLFY
and AqAGL24.2 expression during the transition from
inflorescence to floral identity. Also, although
AqAGL24.2 and AqTFL are detected in pre-vernalization
apices by qRT-PCR, no signal was detected in or around
the vegetative meristems by in situ hybridization. This
leaves open the question of whether the loci might play
some role in repressing flowering before vernalization or
strictly function in inflorescence identity.

Conclusions
While we continue to gain a better understanding of the
nuances of flowering time control in Arabidopsis, details
on this response in other plant lineages remain scarce.
FT homologs have been shown to play critical roles in
the induction of flowering in all taxa examined so far,
including LD, SD, and day neutral plants. In A. formosa,
photoperiod has little or no effect on the timing of the

Ballerini and Kramer EvoDevo 2011, 2:4
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/4

floral transition and the expression pattern of AqFT is
not strictly linked to flowering. This suggests that AqFT
is primarily regulated at the protein level or has a necessary cofactor or target that is independently regulated by
vernalization. We have confirmed that vernalization is a
very important stimulus to flowering in Aquilegia.
Unlike Arabidopsis where vernalization essentially controls the competence of specific ecotypes to respond to
inductive long days, in Aquilegia vernalization itself is
the inductive signal. Aside from a FRI homolog, however, we have not been able to identify any Aquilegia
candidates for floral repressors that would function analogously to FLC. Downstream components of the flowering pathway, show evidence of functional conservation
in the cases of AqLFY and AqAGL24.2 but not for the
AqSOC1 and AqFL1 homologs. Thus, further studies of
the vernalization response and floral promotion pathways in the Aquilegia species complex will require both
functional tests and the identification of new candidate
loci, a process that will provide a unique opportunity to
study the independent derivation and diversification of
these genetic programs.

Methods
Measurement of flowering time

Aquilegia formosa seed was collected from two localities,
Lundy Canyon, CA and Stewart Creek, NV. Both localities are at approximately 38° north latitude and
approximately 2,500 meters above sea level. Plants from
these seeds were grown in the greenhouses at Harvard
University and were then crossed to one another creating an F2 generation of hybrids from the two localities.
F2 seeds were cold stratified at 4°C for eight weeks to
promote germination. Seedlings were germinated and
grown in either long- or short-day conditions in controlled-environment growth chambers. All plants were
grown at approximately 20°C with SD plants exposed to
8 hr light/16 hr dark and LD plants exposed to 16 hr
light/8 hr dark. When plants had at least 12 leaves,
plants from both LD and SD growth conditions were
moved into vernalization at 4°C under short day conditions. A group of plants grown in LD was shifted to SD
but remained at 20°C to serve as a vernalization control.
After eight weeks, plants were transferred back to their
original conditions. Flowering time was measured as the
number of days after removal from vernalization (or in
the case of the control, the shift back to LD) at which
an inflorescence was visible emerging from the apex of
the sheathing leaf bases. The number of leaves present
at the time of floral transition was not used as a measure of flowering time as plants grown in LD versus SD
have very different leaf phenotypes, especially regarding
size. Further complicating the use of leaf count for measuring flowering time is the fact that in A. formosa,

Page 16 of 20

axillary meristems commonly do not remain dormant.
These meristems produce leaves and contribute to the
overall photosynthetic output of the plant, but often do
not produce inflorescences unless apical dominance is
released.
Histology

F2 seeds were cold stratified as in the flowering time
experiment before being germinated and grown in LD at
20°C until reaching 12 to 15 leaves. Plants were vernalized at 4°C for eight weeks. Apices from five plants at
each time point (before vernalization, two weeks vernalization, six weeks vernalization, eight weeks vernalization,
and one week post vernalization) were collected and
fixed in FAA. Following dehydration, apices were
embedded in Paraplast Plus for sectioning. Sections were
stained using a solution of 0.025% Alcian blue 8 GX and
0.01% Safranin O in a 0.1 M acetate buffer (pH5) (both
stains, Sigma-Aldrich Corp., St. Louis, MO, USA).
Gene cloning

In cases where BLAST ([87]) searches of the Aquilegia
DFCI Gene Index http://compbio.dfci.harvard.edu/tgi/
cgi-bin/tgi/gimain.pl?gudb=Aquilegia did not identify our
genes of interest, degenerate primers were designed to
conserved protein domains (Additional File 3 Table 3).
Targeted loci were amplified from a mix of cDNA prepared from 10 μg of RNA isolated from pre- and postvernalized apices and young leaves. RT-PCR fragments
were cloned using the TOPO-TA Cloning Kit and
TOP10 competent cells (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA)
and several clones per cloning reaction were sequenced
using Big Dye technology. Specific primers were then
designed for use with the SMART RACE cDNA Amplification Kit (Clontech, Mountain View, CA, USA) in order
to amplify 5′ and 3′ gene ends for subsequent cloning
and sequencing (Additional File 3 Table 3). In cases
where gene fragments were identified from the DFCI
Gene Index, specific primers were designed to obtain
full-length sequences (Additional File 3: Table 3).
Phylogenetic analysis

For all gene trees, homologs to the flowering time genes
were identified for a variety of seed plant taxa by using the
BLAST algorithm [87] to search the GenBank and The
Institute for Genomic Research (TIGR) databases or
through literature searches. With the exception of the
MADS box gene phylogeny (See Additional File 2: Figure
1), phylogenetic analyses were carried out on amino acid
alignments using parsimony criteria in PAUP* [88]. The
MADS box tree presented in Additional File 2: Figure 1
was estimated using neighbor joining criteria as implemented by PAUP. For all datasets, amino acid sequences
were initially aligned using Clustal W and then adjusted

Ballerini and Kramer EvoDevo 2011, 2:4
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/4

by hand using MacVector (Cary, NC, USA). For the large
scale MADS-box gene phylogeny (See Additional File 2:
Figure 1), the MIK domains were used, while full length
sequences were used for the focused StMADS11 and TM3
phylogenies (See Additional File 2: Figure 2). For the COlike genes, the alignment was edited down to the conserved B-box and CCT domains. Similarly, for the LFY
and FRI alignments, only regions that could be unambiguously aligned were used in the analysis. The entire coding
sequence was used for the FT-like, GI, phytochrome and
cryptochrome datasets. In all cases, the tree presented is
the strict consensus of all most parsimonious trees. Bootstrap analyses of 1,000 replicates were run and bootstrap
values are presented at all nodes with greater than 50%
support.
Quantitative real-time PCR

For the diurnal regulation experiment, total RNA was
extracted from young leaves using the RNAqueous kit
and Plant Isolation Aid (Ambion, Austin, TX, USA). For
the developmental series looking at the FPIs, tissue was
collected at z = 7.5 h in LD and RNA was isolated from
plant apices and young leaves using Plant RNA Isolation
Reagent (Invitrogen). The RNA was treated with Turbo
DNase (Ambion) to remove genomic DNA contamination. cDNA was synthesized from 5 μg of RNA using
Superscript II reverse transcriptase (Invitrogen) and
oligo (dT) primers. Real time PCR reactions were carried out using the Brilliant II SYBR Green QPCR Master
Mix (Stratagene, Cedar Creek, TX, USA/La Jolla, CA,
USA) in the Stratagene Mx3005P QPCR System. Each
25 μl reaction included 5 μl of cDNA that had been
diluted 1:100 and had a final primer concentration of
300 nM for each primer. A list of primers is included in
Additional File 3: Table 4. Standard curves were run for
all primer pairs to ensure high efficiency. For AqGI,
AqCO, AqFT, and AqIPP2, the annealing temperature
was 55°C and the extension was 30 seconds. The
annealing temperature for AqAGL24.1, AqAGL24.2,
AqSOC1, AqLFY, and AqAP1 was 60°C with a 20-second
extension. For each data point, three biological samples
were taken for the diurnal expression experiment and
six biological samples were taken for each point in the
developmental series. Expression for each biological
sample was assayed from two replicates per reaction
plate with three independent reaction plates run per
gene. Efficiency-corrected comparative quantification
was used to quantify relative expression using a pool of
all sample cDNAs as a calibrator and using AqIPP2 (isopentyl pyrophosphate:dimethylallyl pyrophosphate isomerase) expression for normalization. Variability
resulting from technical replicates was negligible compared to the variability from biological replicates so only
biological variability is presented here.

Page 17 of 20

In situ hybridization

A microwave fixation system was used to fix tissue
and prepare for embedding (Microwave Research
Applications model BP-111-RS, Laurel, MD, USA).
The power setting was 55 for all steps. Collected plant
tissue was fixed in ice cold FAA (50 ethanol:35 RNAse
free water:10 37% formaldehyde:5 glacial acetic acid;
microwave temperature setting 37°C, 3 × 15 minutes
on ice). Tissue was then dehydrated through an ethanol series (50%, 70%, 95%, 100% × 2; microwave temperature setting 67°C, 1.2 minutes in room
temperature water bath) before clearing in citrosolve
(50 ethanol:50 citrosolve,100% citrosolve; microwave
temperature setting 67°C, 1.5 minutes in room temperature water bath). Following tissue clearing, tissue
was gradually infiltrated with Paraplast Extra (50 citrosolve:50 Paraplast Extra; microwave temperature setting 67°C, 10 minutes in hot water bath, followed by
100% Paraplast Extra × 5, 30 minutes in hot water
bath). To aid the infiltration process, tissue was
vacuum infiltrated in melted Paraplast Extra for 2
minutes prior to each microwave step. Tissue was
then embedded in blocks in Paraplast Extra.
Embedded tissue was stored at 4°C until use.
In situ probes were designed for each gene (AqLFY,
AqTFL, AqFL1, AqSOC1.1, AqAGL24.2) to be approximately 300 to 400 bp long in the 3′ region of genes,
including some of the 3′ UTR. Primers used for probe
amplification can be found in Additional File 3: Table 3.
Probe fragments were amplified from Aquilegia formosa
cDNA and cloned into the TOPO TA vector (Invitrogen). Following linearization of the vector, two sets of
digoxigenin-labeled probes were transcribed in both the
sense and anti-sense orientation using T7 or T3 RNA
polymerase (Roche Diagnostics, Indianapolis, IN, USA).
One set of probes was alkaline hydrolized to generate
smaller probes in the 150 to 200 bp size range while the
other set was left full length. A Reichert-Jung microtome and disposable steel blades were used to section
samples to 8 μm. RNA in situ hybridization was carried
out according to the protocol in Kramer et al. (2005).
Sections were counterstained using 1% calcofluor and
imaged using both white and fluorescent light in the
Harvard Center for Biological Imaging on a Leica Leitz
DMRD microscope (Leica Microsystems, Bannockburn,
IL, USA) equipped with a Retiga EXi imaging system (Q
Imaging, Surrey, BC, Canada).

Additional material
Additional File 1: Photoperiod Data. Figure 1: Basic morphology of
plants grown in either LD or SD. A. LD- and SD-grown vegetative plants
shown from above. LD plants generally have slightly fewer leaves borne
on longer petioles and with more expanded laminae than SD plants. B.

Ballerini and Kramer EvoDevo 2011, 2:4
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/4

LD- and SD-grown flowering plants shown from the side. LD plants
exhibit more internodal expansion in their inflorescences and produce
more flowers. Figure 2:Diurnal expression of AqGI, AqCO, and AqFT genes.
A. Quantitative real-time RT-PCR on AqGI, AqCO and AqFT using tissue
samples collected over the span of 24 hours. Each data point is the
mean of three biological samples. Error bars are the standard error of the
biological samples. In some cases, the error bars are smaller than the
point width and cannot be seen. Shaded areas represent darkness. B.
Summary of diurnal regulation of GI, CO and FT homolog expression in
Arabidopsis, Aquilegia and Oryza. Based on [67,92,93]. While the
expression of GI orthologs is highly conserved, that of CO and FT is
much less so. One consistency across all three taxa is that expression of
FT homologs is correlated with promotion of flowering: FT is expressed
in LD in Arabidopsis, in both LD and SD in day neutral Aquilegia, and in
SD in Oryza.
Additional File 2: Phylogenetic Analyses. Figure 1: Neighbor joining
tree showing the relationships of annotated Aquilegia type II MADS-box
genes to genes from other taxa (Arabidopsis, Petunia, Oryza and
gymnosperms). Representatives from Aquilegia are indicated with a
diamond. Subfamilies are identified on the right after Becker and
Theissen [42]. Numbers at the major nodes are bootstrap values >50
from 1,000 replicates and asterisks at internal nodes indicate bootstrap
support >50. Figure 2: StMADS11 (A) and TM3 (B) related MADS-box
gene trees. The strict consensus of the most parsimonious trees
generated from analysis of amino acid sequence alignments. Numbers at
nodes are bootstrap values greater than 50 generated using 1,000
replicates. The tree was rooted using gymnosperm sequences. The two
AqAGL24 homologs are equally related to Arabidopsis AGL24 and
Arabidopsis SVP with little support for nodes. AqSOC1 belongs to the
clade including Arabidopsis SOC1 with weak support. Figure 3: FT gene
family tree. The strict consensus of the most parsimonious trees
generated from nucleotide sequence alignments. Bootstrap values are
presented at nodes when >50. Aquilegia formosa and Arabidopsis
thaliana representatives are in bold. The tree was rooted using Picea
sitchensis CO226804. Figure 4: LFY homolog tree. The strict consensus of
the most parsimonious trees generated from amino acid sequence
alignments. The tree was rooted with Psilotum, Angiopteris and
Ceratopteris sequences. Figure 5: Phytochrome (A) and cryptochrome (B)
homolog trees. The most parsimonious trees generated from amino acid
alignments. The phytochrome tree was rooted with the phyA and phyC
clades while the cryptochrome tree was rooted such that the cry1 and
cry2 clades are each monophyletic. Figure 6: GIGANTEA homolog tree.
The strict consensus of the most parsimonious trees generated from
amino acid sequence alignments. The tree was rooted with the monocot
sequences. Figure 7: CO gene family tree. The strict consensus of the
most parsimonious trees generated from amino acid alignments.
Bootstrap values are presented at nodes when >50. Aquilegia formosa
and Arabidopsis thaliana representatives are in bold. The CO tree was
rooted using Aquilegia formosa DR918, Solanum lycopersicum BT013685,
and Arabidopsis thaliana COL13 NM130356.4. Figure 8: FRIGIDA and FRIlike unrooted tree. Unrooted strict consensus of the most parsimonious
trees generated using amino acid alignments.
Additional File 3: Tables. Table 1: Arabidopsis and Aquilegia floral
development stages. Based on [94] and [95]. Table 2: Gene cloning
primer list. Table 3: qRT-PCR primer list. Table 4: qRT-PCR Primer List.

Abbreviations
ACT: Arabidopsis CENTRORADIALIS; AP1: APETALA1; BAC: Bacterial Artificial
Chromosome; BFT: BROTHER OF FT; CO: CONSTANS; CRY: CRYPTOCHROME;
DN: Day Neutral; EST: Expressed Sequence Tag; FM: Floral Meristem; FMI:
Floral Meristem Identity; FPIs: Floral Pathway Integrators; FLC: FLOWERING
LOCUS C; FLK: FLOWERING LOCUS K; FT: FLOWERING LOCUS T; GI:
GIGANTEA; IPP2: ISOPENTYL PYROPHOSPHATE:DIMETHYLALLYL
PYROPHOSPHATE ISOMERASE2; LD: Long Day; LFY: LEAFY; MADS: MCM1/
AGAMOUS/DEFICIENS/SRF; MFT: MOTHER OF FT; PEBP:
Phosphatidylethanolamine Binding Protein; PHY: PHYTOCHROME; SAM:
Shoot Apical Meristem; SD: Short Day; TFL: TERMINAL FLOWER; TSF: TWIN

Page 18 of 20

SISTER OF FT; VIGS: Virus Induced Gene Silencing; VIN3: VERNALIZATION
INSENSITIVE 3; VRN1: VERNALIZATION 1; VRN2: VERNALIZATION 2.
Acknowledgements
We thank Dr. Scott Hodges for providing information regarding growing
conditions of Aquilegia formosa. We thank Billie Gould for providing
Aquilegia phytochrome and cryptochrome sequences. We thank Dr. Scott
Hodges, Dr. Sarah Mathews, Dr. Faye Rosin, members of the Kramer
laboratory and ## anonymous reviewers for critical comments on the
manuscript. This work was supported by NSF-BE award #0412727 to EMK
(lead PI, Scott Hodges).
Author details
Dept. of Organismic and Evolutionary Biology, Harvard University, 16
Divinity Ave., Cambridge, MA, 02138, USA. 2Dept. of Genetics, University of
GA, Fred. C. Davison Life Sciences Complex, Athens, GA, 30602, USA.
1

Authors’ contributions
ESB and EMK designed the experiments and worked together to draft the
manuscript. ESB performed all of the experiments described. Both authors
read and approved of the final manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 20 January 2011 Accepted: 17 February 2011
Published: 17 February 2011
References
1. Hodges SA, Kramer EM: Columbines. Current Biology 2007, 17:R992-R994.
2. Kramer EM, Hodges SA: Aquilegia as a model system for the evolution
and ecology of petals. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society BBiological Sciences 2010, 365:477-490.
3. Kramer EM: Aquilegia: A new model for plant development, ecology and
evolution. Annual Review of Plant Biology 2009, 60:17.
4. Vision TJ, Brown DG, Tanksley SD: The origins of genomic duplications in
Arabidopsis. Science 2000, 290:2114-2117.
5. De Bodt S, Maere S, Van de Peer Y: Genome duplication and the origin of
angiosperms. Trends in Ecology & Evolution 2005, 20:591-597.
6. Munz PA: Aquilegia: the cultivated and wild columbines. Gentes Herbarum
1946, 7:1-150.
7. Hodges SA, Arnold ML: Columbines - a geographically widespread
species flock. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America 1994, 91:5129-5132.
8. Hodges SA: Rapid Radiation Due to a Key Innovation in Columbines
(Ranunculaceae: Aquilegia) Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press; 1997.
9. Hodges SA: Floral nectar spurs and diversification. International Journal of
Plant Sciences 1997, 158:S81-S88.
10. Whittall JB, Hodges SA: Pollinator shifts drive increasingly long nectar
spurs in columbine flowers. Nature 2007, 447:706-U712.
11. Prazmo W: Cytogenetic studies on the genus Aquilegia. IV. Fertility
relationships among the Aquilegia species. Acta Societatis Botanicorum
Poloniae 1965, 34:667-685.
12. Gould B, Kramer E: Virus-induced gene silencing as a tool for functional
analyses in the emerging model plant Aquilegia (columbine,
Ranunculaceae). Plant Methods 2007, 3:6.
13. Kramer EM, Holappa L, Gould B, Jaramillo MA, Setnikov D, Santiago PM:
Elaboration of B gene function to include the identity of novel floral
organs in the lower eudicot Aquilegia. Plant Cell 2007, 19:750-766.
14. McNeilly T, Antonovics J: Evolution in closely adjacent plant
populations.4. Barriers to gene flow. Heredity 1968, 23:205-218.
15. O’Neil P: Selection on flowering time: An adaptive fitness surface for
nonexistent character combinations. Ecology 1999, 80:806-820.
16. Hall MC, Willis JH: Divergent selection on flowering time contributes to
local adaptation in Mimulus guttatus populations. Evolution 2006,
60:2466-2477.
17. Hendry AP, Nosil P, Rieseberg LH: The speed of ecological speciation.
Functional Ecology 2007, 21:455-464.
18. Schmid M, Uhlenhaut NH, Godard F, Demar M, Bressan R, Weigel D,
Lohmann JU: Dissection of floral induction pathways using global
expression analysis. Development 2003, 130:6001-6012.

Ballerini and Kramer EvoDevo 2011, 2:4
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/4

19. Samach A, Onouchi H, Gold SE, Ditta GS, Schwarz-Sommer Z, Yanofsky MF,
Coupland G: Distinct roles of CONSTANS target genes in reproductive
development of Arabidopsis. Science 2000, 288:1613-1616.
20. Yu H, Xu YF, Tan EL, Kumar PP: AGAMOUS-LIKE 24, a dosage-dependent
mediator of the flowering signals. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America 2002, 99:16336-16341.
21. Liu C, Chen H, Er HL, Soo HM, Kumar PP, Han JH, Liou YC, Yu H: Direct
interaction of AGL24 and SOC1 integrates flowering signals in
Arabidopsis. Development 2008, 135:1481-1491.
22. Lee J, Oh M, Park H, Lee I: SOC1 translocated to the nucleus by
interaction with AGL24 directly regulates LEAFY. Plant Journal 2008,
55:832-843.
23. Wagner D, Sablowski RWM, Meyerowitz EM: Transcriptional activation of
APETALA1 by LEAFY. Science 1999, 285:582-584.
24. Liljegren SJ, Gustafson-Brown C, Pinyopich A, Ditta GS, Yanofsky MF:
Interactions among APETALA1, LEAFY, and TERMINAL FLOWER1 specify
meristem fate. Plant Cell 1999, 11:1007-1018.
25. Weigel D, Alvarez J, Smyth DR, Yanofsky MF, Meyerowitz EM: Leafy
Controls Floral Meristem Identity in Arabidopsis. Cell 1992, 69:843-859.
26. Yu H, Ito T, Wellmer F, Meyerowitz EM: Repression of AGAMOUS-LIKE 24 is
a crucial step in promoting flower development. Nature Genetics 2004,
36:157-161.
27. Liu C, Zhou J, Bracha-Drori K, Yalovsky S, Ito T, Yu H: Specification of
Arabidopsis floral meristem identity by repression of flowering time
genes. Development 2007, 134:1901-1910.
28. McClung CR: Plant Circadian Rhythms. Plant Cell 2006, 18:792-803.
29. Putterill J, Laurie R, Macknight R: It’s time to flower: the genetic control of
flowering time. Bioessays 2004, 26:363-373.
30. Suarez-Lopez P, Wheatley K, Robson F, Onouchi H, Valverde F, Coupland G:
CONSTANS mediates between the circadian clock and the control of
flowering in Arabidopsis. Nature 2001, 410:1116-1120.
31. Mizoguchi T, Wright L, Fujiwara S, Cremer F, Lee K, Onouchi H,
Mouradov A, Fowler S, Kamada H, Putterill J, et al: Distinct roles of
GIGANTEA in promoting flowering and regulating circadian rhythms in
Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 2005, 17:2255-2270.
32. Valverde F, Mouradov A, Soppe W, Ravenscroft D, Samach A, Coupland G:
Photoreceptor regulation of CONSTANS protein in photoperiodic
flowering. Science 2004, 303:1003-1006.
33. Johanson U, West J, Lister C, Michaels S, Amasino R, Dean C: Molecular
analysis of FRIGIDA, a major determinant of natural variation in
Arabidopsis flowering time. Science 2000, 290:344-347.
34. Gazzani S, Gendall AR, Lister C, Dean C: Analysis of the molecular basis of
flowering time variation in Arabidopsis accessions. Plant Physiology 2003,
132:1107-1114.
35. Michaels SD, He YH, Scortecci KC, Amasino RM: Attenuation of
FLOWERING LOCUS C activity as a mechanism for the evolution of
summer-annual flowering behavior in Arabidopsis. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 2003,
100:10102-10107.
36. Kim DH, Doyle MR, Sung S, Amasino RM: Vernalization: winter and the
timing of flowering in plants. Annual Review of Cell and Developmental
Biology 2009, 25:277-299.
37. Simpson GG: The autonomous pathway: epigenetic and posttranscriptional gene regulation in the control of Arabidopsis flowering
time. Current Opinion in Plant Biology 2004, 7:570-574.
38. Baurle I, Dean C: The timing of developmental transitions in plants. Cell
2006, 125:655-664.
39. Shedron KG, Weiler TC: Regulation of growth and flowering in Aquilegia X
hybrida Sims. Journal of the American Society for Horticultural Science 1982,
107:878-882.
40. Hodges SA, Whittall JB, Fulton M, Yang JY: Genetics of floral traits
influencing reproductive isolation between Aquilegia formosa and
Aquilegia pubescens. American Naturalist 2002, 159:S51-S60.
41. Herlihy CR, Eckert CG: Genetic cost of reproductive assurance in a selffertilizing plant. Nature 2002, 416:320-323.
42. Becker A, Theissen G: The major clades of MADS-box genes and their
role in the development and evolution of flowering plants. Molecular
Phylogenetics and Evolution 2003, 29:464-489.
43. Litt A, Irish VF: Duplication and diversification in the APETALA1/
FRUITFULL floral homeotic gene lineage: Implications for the evolution
of floral development. Genetics 2003, 165:821-833.

Page 19 of 20

44. Ratcliffe OJ, Amaya I, Vincent CA, Rothstein S, Carpenter R, Coen ES,
Bradley DJ: A common mechanism controls the life cycle and
architecture of plants. Development 1998, 125:1609-1615.
45. Frohlich MW, Meyerowitz EM: The search for flower homeotic gene
homologs in basal angiosperms and gnetales: A potential new source of
data on the evolutionary origin of flowers. International Journal of Plant
Sciences 1997, 158:S131-S142.
46. Baum DA, Yoon H-S, Oldham RL: Molecular evolution of the transcription
factor LEAFY in Brassicaceae. Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution 2005, 37:14.
47. Bomblies K, Doebley JF: Molecular evolution of FLORICAULA/LEAFY
orthologs in the Andropogoneae (Poaceae). Molecular Biology and
Evolution 2005, 22:1082-1094.
48. Griffiths S, Dunford RP, Coupland G, Laurie DA: The evolution of
CONSTANS-like gene families in barley, rice, and Arabidopsis. Plant
Physiology 2003, 131:1855-1867.
49. Trevaskis B, Hemming MN, Dennis ES, Peacock WJ: The molecular basis of
vernalization-induced flowering in cereals. Trends in Plant Science 2007,
12:352-357.
50. Vandenbussche M, Theissen G, Van de Peer Y, Gerats T: Structural
diversification and neo-functionalization during floral MADS-box gene
evolution by C-terminal frameshift mutations. Nucleic Acids Research 2003,
31:4401-4409.
51. Reeves PA, He YH, Schmitz RJ, Amasino RM, Panella LW, Richards CM:
Evolutionary conservation of the FLOWERING LOCUS C-mediated
vernalization response: Evidence from the sugar beet (Beta vulgaris).
Genetics 2007, 176:295-307.
52. Marquardt S, Boss PK, Hadfield J, Dean C: Additional targets of the
Arabidopsis autonomous pathway members, FCA and FY. J Exp Bot 2006,
57:3379-3386.
53. Manzano D, Marquardt S, Jones AME, Baurle I, Liu FQ, Dean C: Altered
interactions within FY/AtCPSF complexes required for Arabidopsis FCAmediated chromatin silencing. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America 2009, 106:8772-8777.
54. Kobayashi Y, Kaya H, Goto K, Iwabuchi M, Araki T: A pair of related genes
with antagonistic roles in mediating flowering signals. Science 1999,
286:1960-1962.
55. Kardailsky I, Shukla VK, Ahn JH, Dagenais N, Christensen SK, Nguyen JT,
Chory J, Harrison MJ, Weigel D: Activation tagging of the floral inducer
FT. Science 1999, 286:1962-1965.
56. Kojima S, Takahashi Y, Kobayashi Y, Monna L, Sasaki T, Araki T, Yano M:
Hd3a, a rice ortholog of the Arabidopsis FT gene, promotes transition to
flowering downstream of Hd1 under short-day conditions. Plant and Cell
Physiology 2002, 43:1096-1105.
57. Bohlenius H, Huang T, Charbonnel-Campaa L, Brunner AM, Jansson S,
Strauss SH, Nilsson O: CO/FT regulatory module controls timing of
flowering and seasonal growth cessation in trees. Science 2006,
312:1040-1043.
58. Lin MK, Belanger H, Lee YJ, Varkonyi-Gasic E, Taoka KI, Miura E, XoconostleCazares B, Gendler K, Jorgensene RA, Phinney B, Lough TJ, Lucas WJ:
FLOWERING LOCUS T protein may act as the long-distance florigenic
signal in the cucurbits. Plant Cell 2007, 19:1488-1506.
59. Farre EM, Harmer SL, Harmon FG, Yanovsky MJ, Kay SA: Overlapping and
distinct roles of PRR7 and PRR9 in the Arabidopsis circadian clock.
Current Biology 2005, 15:47-54.
60. Michaels SD, Ditta G, Gustafson-Brown C, Pelaz S, Yanofsky M, Amasino RM:
AGL24 acts as a promoter of flowering in Arabidopsis and is positively
regulated by vernalization. Plant Journal 2003, 33:867-874.
61. Moyroud E, Tichtinsky G, Parcy F: The LEAFY Floral Regulators in
Angiosperms: Conserved Proteins with Diverse Roles. Journal of Plant
Biology 2009, 52:177-185.
62. Shannon S, Meeks-Wagner DR: A mutation in the Arabidopsis Tfl1 Gene
affects inflorescence meristem development. Plant Cell 1991, 3:877-892.
63. Weigel D, Nilsson O: A developmental switch sufficient for flower
initiation in diverse plants. Nature 1995, 377:495-500.
64. Garner JM, Armitage AM: Influence of cooling and photoperiod on
growth and flowering of Aquilegia L. cultivars. Scientia Horticulturae 1998,
75:83-90.
65. Cui LY, Wall PK, Leebens-Mack JH, Lindsay BG, Soltis DE, Doyle JJ, Soltis PS,
Carlson JE, Arumuganathan K, Barakat A, Albert VA, Ma H, dePamphilis CW:
Widespread genome duplications throughout the history of flowering
plants. Genome Research 2006, 16:738-749.

Ballerini and Kramer EvoDevo 2011, 2:4
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/4

66. Paterson AH, Bowers JE, Chapman BA: Ancient polyploidization predating
divergence of the cereals, and its consequences for comparative
genomics. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America 2004, 101:9903-9908.
67. Hayama R, Yokoi S, Tamaki S, Yano M, Shimamoto K: Adaptation of
photoperiodic control pathways produces short-day flowering in rice.
Nature 2003, 422:719-722.
68. Dunford RP, Griffiths S, Christodoulou V, Laurie DA: Characterisation of a
barley (Hordeum vulgare L.) homologue of the Arabidopsis flowering
time regulator GIGANTEA. Theoretical and Applied Genetics 2005,
110:925-931.
69. Miwa K, Serikawa M, Suzuki S, Kondo T, Oyama T: Conserved expression
profiles of circadian clock-related genes in two Lemna species showing
long-day and short-day photoperiodic flowering responses. Plant and
Cell Physiology 2006, 47:601-612.
70. Hecht V, Knowles CL, Schoor JKV, Liew LC, Jones SE, Lambert MJM,
Weller JL: Pea LATE BLOOMER1 is a GIGANTEA ortholog with roles in
photoperiodic flowering, deetiolation, and transcriptional regulation of
circadian clock gene homologs. Plant Physiology 2007, 144:648-661.
71. Martinez-Garcia JF, Virgos-Soler A, Prat S: Control of photoperiod-regulated
tuberization in potato by the Arabidopsis flowering-time gene
CONSTANS. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America 2002, 99:15211-15216.
72. Lifschitz E, Eviatar T, Rozman A, Shalit A, Goldshmidt A, Amsellem Z,
Alvarez JP, Eshed Y: The tomato FT ortholog triggers systemic signals
that regulate growth and flowering and substitute for diverse
environmental stimuli. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
the United States of America 2006, 103:6398-6403.
73. Hanzawa Y, Money T, Bradley D: A single amino acid converts a repressor
to an activator of flowering. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America 2005, 102:7748-7753.
74. Tamaki S, Matsuo S, Wong HL, Yokoi S, Shimamoto K: Hd3a protein is a
mobile flowering signal in rice. Science 2007, 316:1033-1036.
75. Busch A, Gleissberg S: EcFLO, a FLORICAULA-like gene from Eschscholzia
californica is expressed during organogenesis at the vegetative shoot
apex. Planta 2003, 217:841-848.
76. Champagne CEM, Goliber TE, Wojciechowski MF, Mei RW, Townsley BT,
Wang K, Paz MM, Geeta R, Sinhaa NR: Compound leaf development and
evolution in the legumes. Plant Cell 2007, 19:3369-3378.
77. Hofer J, Turner L, Hellens R, Ambrose M, Matthews P, Michael A, Ellis N:
UNIFOLIATA regulates leaf and flower morphogenesis in pea. Current
Biology 1997, 7:581-587.
78. Bradley D, Ratcliffe O, Vincent C, Carpenter R, Coen E: Inflorescence
commitment and architecture in Arabidopsis. Science 1997, 275:80-83.
79. Conti L, Bradley D: TERMINAL FLOWER1 is a mobile signal controlling
Arabidopsis architecture. Plant Cell 2007, 19:767-778.
80. Gregis V, Sessa A, Dorca-Fornell C, Kater MM: The Arabidopsis floral
meristem identity genes AP1, AGL24 and SVP directly repress class B
and C floral homeotic genes. Plant Journal 2009, 60:626-637.
81. Hartmann U, Hohmann S, Nettesheim K, Wisman E, Saedler H, Huijser P:
Molecular cloning of SVP: a negative regulator of the floral transition in
Arabidopsis. Plant Journal 2000, 21:351-360.
82. Litt A: An evaluation of A-function: Evidence from the APETALA1 and
APETALA2 gene lineages. International Journal of Plant Sciences 2007,
168:73-91.
83. Pelaz S, Ditta GS, Baumann E, Wisman E, Yanofsky MF: B and C floral organ
identity functions require SEPALLATA MADS-box genes. Nature 2000,
405:200-203.
84. Borner R, Kampmann G, Chandler J, Gleissner R, Wisman E, Apel K, Melzer S:
A MADS domain gene involved in the transition to flowering in
Arabidopsis. Plant Journal 2000, 24:591-599.
85. Komiya R, Yokoi S, Shimamoto K: A gene network for long-day flowering
activates RFT1 encoding a mobile flowering signal in rice. Development
2009, 136:3443-3450.
86. Higgins JA, Bailey PC, Laurie DA: Comparative genomics of flowering time
pathways using Brachypodium distachyon as a model for the temperate
grasses. Plos One 5:e10065.
87. Altschul SF, Madden TL, Schaffer AA, Zhang JH, Zhang Z, Miller W,
Lipman DJ: Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new generation of protein
database search programs. Nucleic Acids Research 1997, 25:3389-3402.

Page 20 of 20

88. Swofford DL: PAUP*: Phylogenetic analysis using parasimony (*and other
methods). Sunderland, Massachusetts: Sinauer Associates;, 4.0 b10 2002.
89. Michaels SD, Amasino RM: Loss of FLOWERING LOCUS C activity
eliminates the late-flowering phenotype of FRIGIDA and autonomous
pathway mutations but not responsiveness to vernalization. Plant Cell
2001, 13:935-941.
90. El-Assal SED, Alonso-Blanco C, Peeters AJM, Wagemaker C, Weller JL,
Koornneef M: The role of cryptochrome 2 in flowering in Arabidopsis.
Plant Physiology 2003, 133:1504-1516.
91. Moon J, Lee H, Kim M, Lee I: Analysis of flowering pathway integrators in
Arabidopsis. Plant and Cell Physiology 2005, 46:292-299.
92. Fowler S, Lee K, Onouchi H, Samach A, Richardson K, Coupland G,
Putterill J: GIGANTEA: a circadian clock-controlled gene that regulates
photoperiodic flowering in Arabidopsis and encodes a protein with
several possible membrane-spanning domains. Embo Journal 1999,
18:4679-4688.
93. Turck F, Fornara F, Coupland G: Regulation and identity of florigen:
FLOWERING LOCUS T moves center stage. Annual Review of Plant Biology
2008, 59:573-594.
94. Smyth DR, Bowman JL, Meyerowitz EM: Early flower development in
Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 1990, 2:755-767.
95. Tucker SC, Hodges SA: Floral ontogeny of Aquilegia, Semiaquilegia, and
Enemion (Ranunculaceae). International Journal of Plant Sciences 2005,
166:557-574.
doi:10.1186/2041-9139-2-4
Cite this article as: Ballerini and Kramer: Environmental and molecular
analysis of the floral transition in the lower eudicot Aquilegia formosa.
EvoDevo 2011 2:4.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
