<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Host range, host specificity and hypothesized host shift events among viruses of lower vertebrates</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Veterinary Research 2011, 42:67. doi:10.1186/1297-9716-42-67"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Isabel Bandín"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Bandín and Dopazo Veterinary Research 2011, 42:67
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/67

REVIEW

VETERINARY RESEARCH

Open Access

Host range, host specificity and hypothesized
host shift events among viruses of lower
vertebrates
Isabel Bandín and Carlos P Dopazo*

Abstract
The successful replication of a viral agent in a host is a complex process that often leads to a species specificity of
the virus and can make interspecies transmission difficult. Despite this difficulty, natural host switch seems to have
been frequent among viruses of lower vertebrates, especially fish viruses, since there are several viruses known to
be able to infect a wide range of species. In the present review we will focus on well documented reports of
broad host range, variations in host specificity, and host shift events hypothesized for viruses within the genera
Ranavirus, Novirhabdovirus, Betanodavirus, Isavirus, and some herpesvirus.
Table of Contents
1. Introduction
2. Ranaviruses - Interspecies and interclass transmission
3. Betanodaviruses - The role of mutation and reassortment in host specificity
4. Novirhabdoviruses - Infectious haematopoietic necrosis virus and viral haemorrhagic septicaemia virus,
two different strategies within the same genus
5. Infectious salmon anaemia virus: Orthomyxoviruses
"made for the change"
6. Herpesviruses: Very host specific viruses?
7. Aquabirnaviruses - Putative candidate for interspecies
transmission but still not demonstrated
8. Conclusions
9. Authors' contributions
10. Competing interests
1. Introduction
The successful replication of a viral agent in a host is a
complex process which consists of a number of interactions, most of them related to the coevolution of pathogen and host. This coevolution often leads to a species
specificity of the virus and can make interspecies transmission difficult. Therefore, natural host range switches
by viruses are rare events. However, when they occur
* Correspondence: carlos.pereira@usc.es
Unidad de Ictiopatología-Patología Viral, Departamento de Microbiología y
Parasitología, Instituto de Acuicultura, Universidad de Santiago de
Compostela, Spain

the results can become severe because the viruses may
then spread widely through non previously adapted, and
therefore immunologically naïve host populations.
Upon transmission to a new host species, viruses must
usually adapt to a new genetic and immunologic environment in order to replicate and spread to other individuals within the species [1]. The high rates of mutation
and replication of RNA viruses, such as human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and influenza, facilitate the
occurrence and fixation of those mutations that become
beneficial under certain conditions [2]. Viral adaptations
to new hosts primarily manifest as amino acid substitutions which can allow more efficient virus cell entry into
the new host [3,4], block interactions with detrimental
host proteins [5,6] or promote escape from both the
new and the old host’s immune responses [7,8].
Influenza A is the paradigm of a virus capable of
interspecies and interclass transmission. Those viruses
are found in humans as well as in other animals, including swine, horses and birds, waterfowl being considered
the natural reservoir [9]. Subtypes of Influenza A are
distinguished by the two surface glycoproteins: haemagglutinin (HA) and neuraminidase (NA). Periodically a
subtype of influenza can make the shift from aquatic
birds to humans, possibly through an intermediate host,
resulting in a widespread pandemic in an immunologically naïve population. These antigenic shifts can occur
either through the transfer of an entire virus from one

© 2011 Bandín and Dopazo; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Bandín and Dopazo Veterinary Research 2011, 42:67
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/67

host to another or through a reassortment process
where genomic segments of the avian virus mix with
genomic segments of a virus currently circulating in
humans.
A number of proteins have been implicated in determining host specificity of the virus. Influenza haemagglutinin binds to sialic acid linked to galactose on the
surface of the targeted cell, and the differing nature of
the sialic acid-galactose linkages in birds and humans
provides an important barrier to host shift events. In
this sense, a number of amino acid substitutions have
been produced in influenza haemagglutinin to adjust to
the different receptors [10-14]. Neuraminidase, the protein responsible for cleaving the haemagglutinin from
the receptor surface, also seems to be adapted to the
particular sialic acid linkages [15]. Proteins in the viral
replication complex (PA, PB1, PB2 and NP) have also
been implicated in limiting host range by restricting
replication and intra-host spread in mammals (for a
review see [16]). In particular, a specific substitution in
the PB2 gene has been identified as crucial for replication and intra-host spread in mammals [17-19].
Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus
(SARS-CoV) is a recently identified human coronavirus. The extremely high homology of the viral genomic sequences between the viruses isolated from
humans (huSARS-CoV) and those of palm civet origin
(pcSARS-CoV) suggested possible palm civet-to-human
transmission. Genetic analysis revealed that the spike
(S) protein of pcSARS-CoV and huSARS-CoV was subjected to the strongest positive selection pressure during transmission, and there were six amino acid
residues within the receptor binding domain of the S
protein that were potentially important for SARS progression and tropism. It has been demonstrated that
the double substitution of two amino acid residues of
pcSARS-CoV for those of huSARS-CoV made pcSARSCoV capable of infecting human cells [4], suggesting
that these two residues are involved in the palm civethuman transmission.
Under certain circumstances, even a genetically stable
DNA virus can gain the mutation required to adapt to a
new host. That is the case of canine parvovirus (CPV)
which emerged in 1978 as the cause of new enteric and
myocardial diseases in dogs. The new virus spread globally in a pandemic and has since remained endemic in
dogs throughout the world [20,21]. Phylogenetic analysis
showed that all CPV isolates obtained so far, termed
CPV type 2, descended from a single ancestor closely
related to the feline panleukopenia virus (FPV) which
infects cats, mink and raccoons, but not dogs or cultured dog cells [21]. FPV and CPV type 2 isolates differ
by as little as 0.5% in DNA sequence and it is possible
that changes of only two amino acid residues in the

Page 2 of 15

capsid protein could have introduced the canine host
range [22,23]. During 1979 a CPV variant (CPV type 2a)
emerged, spread worldwide within 1 year and replaced
the CPV type 2 strain. CPV type 2a contained five substitutions in the capsid sequence compared to CPV type
2 and also infected and caused disease in cats [24-26].
Therefore, the emergence of CPV seems to have been a
multistep process, where a small number of mutations
in the capsid protein gene allowed the virus to efficiently
infect and spread within a new host order [27].
Viruses of lower vertebrates include a large number of
viral agents, belonging to different viral families and
genera, with RNA and DNA genomes, and displaying
different host specificities. In fact, some viruses have a
very narrow host range, whereas others are known to be
able to infect a wide range of species. The wide host
range suggests that, in any moment along the viral evolution, those viruses may have been involved in different
host shift events. In the present review we will focus on
well documented or hypothesized cases of host shift as
well as variations in host range for the genera Ranavirus, Novirhabdovirus, Betanodavirus, Isavirus and several herpesvirus. However, the suspicion for interspecies
transmission in other fish viruses remains.

2. Ranaviruses - Interspecies and interclass
transmission
Iridoviruses are large double stranded DNA viruses with
an icosahedral capsid ranging from 120 to 350 nm in
diameter. Ranavirus is one of the five genera within the
family Iridoviridae. Among the five genera, two contain
viruses of invertebrates (genera Chloridiridovirus and
Iridovirus), whereas the remaining three genera (Lymphocystivirus, Megalocytivirus and Ranavirus) contain
viruses that infect lower vertebrates [28]. The family
also includes several viruses than remain unassigned to
any genus. None of the iridoviruses are known to infect
homeothermic vertebrates. A variety of molecular characteristic such as GC content, nucleotide sequence and
inferred amino acid sequence of key genes, such as the
major capsid protein gene (MCP), can be used to distinguish genera and species within genera [29].
Although the disease was known before [30], the lymphocystis disease virus (LCDV), the first known iridovirus was discovered in 1962 [31]. Since then,
iridoviruses have been linked to disease in frogs, salamanders and other amphibians, reptiles [29,32], and
more than 140 wild and cultured fish species in different
parts of the world [29,32,33]. Interestingly, most of these
fish iridoviruses have been shown to be more closely
related to frog virus 3, the type species of the genus
Ranavirus, than to Lymphocystivirus. In fact, ranaviruses
have become important pathogens for cultured and wild
finfish, not only due to the severity of the diseases that

Bandín and Dopazo Veterinary Research 2011, 42:67
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/67

they cause but also because of their rapid global emergence in recent years [34].
Members of the genus Ranavirus infect vertebrates of
three different taxonomic classes: amphibians, reptiles
and fish [35]. Since the identification of epizootic hematopoietic necrosis virus (EHNV), first isolated from redfin perch [36] and the first iridovirus associated with
epizootic mortality in vertebrates [37], ranaviruses have
caused epizooties in other fish species: sheatfish and catfish in Europe [38], largemouth bass [39] and ornamental fish (imported from Asia) in the USA [40], as well as
grouper cultured in Asia [41,42]. In addition, ranaviruses
have been isolated from diseased frogs, salamanders,
turtles and snakes in different parts of the world
[43-47]. At present the International Committee on
Taxonomy of Viruses [48] recognizes six species within
the genus based on analysis of host range, sequence
identity, and protein and RFLP profiles [49,50], but
there are also many additional isolates as well as a number of tentative species (Table 1). FV-3, EHNV, Bhole
Iridovirus (BIV), Ambystoma tigrinum virus (ATV) and
European catfish virus (ECV) are five closely-related
viral species that share over 90% sequence identity
within the MCP and other genes, but clearly differ from
each other in host range and RFLP profiles. The sixth
species is Santee-Cooper ranavirus (SCRV) that along
with Singapore grouper iridovirus (SGIV), a tentative
species, are the most divergent members of the genus.
The MCP genes of these two viruses show approximately 80% and 70% sequence identity, respectively,
with the MCP genes of the 5 other ranavirus species
[51,52].
Several of these viruses have been demonstrated to
have broad host specificity, suggesting the potential for
interspecies and interclass transmission. A good example
is BIV, which was isolated originally from diseased
ornate burrowing frog (Limnodynastes ornatus) tadpoles
in Australia [53] and has been shown experimentally to
be pathogenic for other species of frog [54,55], and also
for a fish species, barramundi (Lates calcarifer) [56,57].
Moreover, BIV has been associated with the “spinning
tilapia” syndrome which causes epizootic mortalities in
fry populations of tilapia (Oreochromis mossambicus)
[56,58]. A case of interspecies transmission was demonstrated by Cunningham et al. [59], who infected common frogs Rana temporaria with two ranavirus isolates
obtained from diseased toads (Bufo bufo). In addition,
apparently identical FV3 strains were isolated from dead
or moribund free-living threespine stickleback fish (Gasterosteus aculeatus) and sympatric tadpoles of the redlegged frog (Rana aurora) [60], and FV3 and FV3-like
viruses have been reported to infect sympatric amphibian species including ranid and hylid tadpoles, larval
salamanders and newts [61]. Moreover, it has been

Page 3 of 15

experimentally demonstrated that FV3·is pathogenic for
pike (Esox lucius) [62]. A very interesting case of crossclass infection was found studying ATV infection of salamanders. Phylogenetic analyses of sequence data from
the MCP gene of ATV isolates from very different locations indicate that they are more closely related to fish
ranaviruses, such as EHNV, than to other amphibian
ranaviruses, such as FV3 [63]. These data suggested that
ATV possibly originated via a host switch from fish, and
was spread across North America due to the substantial
trade of salamander larvae sold for bait [63-65].
In a very recent and interesting study Jancovich et al.
[66] obtained evidence for host shifts among ranaviruses
and proposed that the ancestral ranavirus was a fish
virus. Those authors performed a dot plot comparison
of the EHNV genome with that of other ranaviruses
previously sequenced (ATV, FV, TFV, Grouper iridovirus and SGIV) and the results obtained indicated that
EHNV is more closely related to the amphibian ranaviruses than to the GIV-like viruses infecting fish, as
shown by other phylogenetic analyses previously performed [67]. In fact, Jancovich et al. [66] observed two
lineages, FV3/TFV (frog lineage) and EHNV/ATV (fish/
salamander lineage), and the existence of two major
genomic inversions that can be visualised on the dot
plot. These inversions would correspond to rearrangements of segments in the FV3-like lineage, which means
that EHNV/ATV is closer to the most recent common
ancestor (MRCA) of ranaviruses. These authors postulate that there must have been at least three species
jumps, from fish to frogs, from fish to salamanders and
from frogs to reptiles, and perhaps as many as four species jumps, including a jump from tetrapod amphibians
back to fish. A new ranavirus isolate obtained recently
from dead wild edible frogs (Pelophylax esculentus) in
Denmark, which showed a 98.8% nucleotide identity in
the MCP gene with EHNV [68], would support that
hypothesis.
It has been suggested that after the divergence into
the salamander virus and frog virus lineages a subsequent host specific evolution could have occurred that
would have limited cross transmission between both
hosts, at least in laboratory infections [47]. However,
there are some data that indicate that ranavirus transmission between these species occurs in nature. In this
sense, an FV-3-like virus has been isolated from
spotted salamander suffering from mortalities [69], and
a model of FV3/FV3-like virus transmission in aquatic
amphibian communities postulates that transmission of
the virus occurs between anuran (i.e. frogs) and urodele (i.e. salamanders) species [61]. There is also some
evidence that salamander ranavirus isolates are also
isolated from or detected in laboratory-infected frogs
[70].

Bandín and Dopazo Veterinary Research 2011, 42:67
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/67

Page 4 of 15

Table 1 Ranaviruses recognised by the ICTV
Virus species1 or isolates

Host species

Geographic range

Ambystoma tigrinum virus (ATV)

Tiger salamander; South American frog (95% similarity)2

North Dakota, Utah, USA; Northern
Patagonia, Argentina

Regina ranavirus

Tiger salamander; South American frog (95% similarity)

Southern Canada; Arizona, USA,
Northern Patagonia, Argentina

Bohle iridovirus (BIV)

Burrowing frog; tilapia (Oreochromis mossambicus) Australian anurans
(experimentally); Barramundi (experimentally).
Giant toad (sero-related)

Northern and Northeastern Australia.

Epizootic haematopoietic necrosis
virus (EHNV) EHNV-related

Redfin perch; rainbow trout

Australia

Pikeperch

Denmark
Finland

Venezuela

European catfish iridovirus (ECV)

Catfish; Black bullhead (experimentally)

France, Italy

European sheatfish iridovirus (ESV)

Sheatfish

Germany

Frog virus 3 (FV-3)

Giant toad (sero-related);
Tiger frog

Venezuela
Thailand

Hermann’s tortoise

Switzerland

Pig frog

China

Spotted salamander

Southern Ontario, Canada

Green frog, American bullfrog
Box turtle virus 3

Tennessee, USA; Brazil

Box turtle

USA

Bufo bufo United Kingdom virus

Common toad

UK

Lucké triturus virus 1
Rana temporaria United Kingdom
virus
Bufo marinus Venezuelan iridovirus
1

Frog
Eur. common frog
Giant toad

USC
UK
Venezuela and Australia

Redwood Park virus

Red-legged frog tadpole

USA

Stickleback virus

Threespine stickleback

USA

Tadpole virus 2 and Tadpole edema Common frog, Green frog, red-leg frog
virus

France, North America

Tiger frog virus (TFV)
Tortoise virus 5

Tiger frog
Tortoise

Thailand, China
USA

Santee Cooper ranavirus (SRCV),

Largemouth bass; black crappie

USA

Doctor fish virus (DFV)

Doctor fish

North America (first imported from)
Asia

Guppy virus 6 (GV6)

Guppy

North America (first imported from)
Asia

Largemouth bass virus (LMBV)

Largemouth bass

USA

Edible frog

Italy

Grouper

Singapore

Hermann’s tortoise

Switzerland

1. The five ranavirus species recognised by the ICTV are shown in italics.
2. The virus isolated from frog showed 95% sequence similarity with the type species.
From reviews by Holopainen et al. [67], Mao et al. [50], Whittinton et al. [32] and Williams et al. [29].
Fish: tilapia (Oreochromis mossambicus); barramundi (Lates calcarifer); redfin perch (Perca fluviatilis); rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss); turbot (Scophthalmus
maximus); pikeperch (Stizostedion lucioperca); Catfish (Ictalurus melas); black bullhead (Ameiurus melas); sheatfish (Silurus glanis); threespine stickleback
(Gasterostelus aculeatus); Largemouth bass (Micropterus salmoides); black crappie (Pomoxis nigromaculatus); doctor fish (Labroides dimidatus); guppy (Poecilia
reticulata); grouper (Epinephelus tauvina). Amphibians: Tiger salamander (Ambystoma tigrinum); South American frog (Atelognathus patagonicus); burrowing frog
(Limnodynastes ornatus); Australian anurans (Litorea terraereginae and L. latopalmata); giant toad (Bufo marinus); tiger frog (Rana tigrina); pig frog (Rana grylio);
spotted salamander (Ambystoma maculatum); green frog (Rana clamitans), American bullfrog (R. catesbeiana); common toad (Bufo bufo); pipiens frog (Rana
pipiens); European common frog (Rana temporaria); red-legged frog (Rana aurora); common frog (Rana temporaria); edible frog (Pelophylax esculentus). Reptiles:
Hermann’s tortoise (Testudo hermanni); box turtle (Terrapene carolina carolina and T. carolina bauri); tortoise (Testudo horsfieldi).

Bandín and Dopazo Veterinary Research 2011, 42:67
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/67

3. Betanodaviruses - The role of mutation and
reassortment in host specificity
Piscine nodaviruses belong to the genus Betanodavirus,
within the family Nodaviridae [71]. Betanodaviruses are
the aetiological agents of the disease known as viral nervous necrosis (VNN) or viral encephalopathy and retinopathy (VER), a devastating neuropathological
condition that affects marine fish worldwide [72]. The
affected fish developing clinical signs show abnormal
swimming, neurological problems and buoyancy control
loss.
The disease typically occurs in an outbreak form in
larval and juvenile fish, and several species have been
shown to be specially affected such as sea bass (Lates
calcarifer and Dicentrarchus labrax), groupers (Epinephelus akaara, Epinephelus fuscogutatus, Epinephelus
malabaricus, Epinephelus moara, Epinephelus septemfasciatus, Epinephelus tauvina, Epinephelus coioides and
Cromileptes altivelis), striped jack (Pseudocaranx dentex), parrotfish (Oplegnathus fasciatus), tiger puffer
(Takifugu rubripes), and flatfish (Verasper moseri, Hippoglossus hippoglossus, Paralichthys olivaceus, Scophthalmus maximus) [73]. The affected fish species and
geographical ranges of clinical VNN described so far are
provided in Table 2.
Betanodaviruses are small (25-30 nm), nonenveloped,
icosahedral RNA viruses. The genome consists of two
single stranded, positive-sense molecules. The larger
genomic segment, RNA1 (3.1 kb), encodes the RNA
dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) of approximately
100 kDa, also named protein A [74,75]. The smaller segment, RNA2 (1.4 kb), encodes the capsid protein of
about 42 kDa [74,76]. In addition, a subgenomic RNA3
is synthesised during RNA replication from the 3’ terminus of RNA1.
Betanodaviruses have been classified into four genotypes, designated SJNNV (striped jack nervous necrosis
virus), TPNNV (tiger puffer nervous necrosis virus),
RGNNV (red grouper nervous necrosis virus) and
BFNNV (barfin flounder nervous necrosis virus), using
a partial sequence of RNA2, the T4 region, which is a
highly variable region of around 400 nt [77,78]. These
types exhibit different capabilities for infecting fish
species. Thus, RGNNV shows the broadest host range
and causes disease in a variety of warm-water fish species, BFNNV is restricted to cold-water marine fish
species and TPNNV infects only one species [72].
With regards to the SJNNV type, although for several
years it was considered to be restricted to a few species
present in Japanese waters [72,78], in recent years it
has been found in Senegalese sole Solea senegalensis
[79,80] as well as gilthead sea bream Sparus aurata

Page 5 of 15

and sea bass cultured in the Iberian Peninsula [79].
More recent studies [81] reported that most of the
betanodavirus strains infecting Senegalese sole and
gilthead sea bream, previously typed as SJNNV on the
basis of the T4 region, were in fact RGNNV/SJNNV
reassortants. Olveira et al. [81] observed that the reassortant strains exhibited a slightly modified SJNNV
capsid, with three different amino acid positions in all
strains (the differences increased to a maximum of six
in some strains). One of these changes observed in
residue 247 was encoded by the nucleotide triplet 737739, which was included in the region between nucleotides 695 and 765, described previously by Ito et al.
[82] as a host specificity determinant. Another change
in the amino acid sequence at residue 270 was also
observed on the C-terminal side of the capsid protein.
These results confirmed that C-terminal protruding
domains of the capsid protein are involved in host specificity, as reported previously by Iwamoto et al. [83]
and Ito et al. [82]. It is well known that even a small
number of amino acid substitutions in the capsid proteins can have dramatic effects on the host specificity
of different animal viruses [84]. In this case, the
changes observed in the SJNNV capsid seem to have
allowed it to efficiently infect and spread within two
new hosts, causing epizootic outbreaks in Senegalese
sole and gilthead sea bream, which were not previously
considered susceptible to SJNNV.
Other authors have also reported the existence of
reassortants among betanodavirus isolates obtained from
symptomatic sea bass harbouring an RNA1 segment of
SJNNV type and an RNA2 of RGNNV type [85]. These
data indicated that both combinations of genomic segments of SJNNV and RGNNV genotypes are successful
and allow the resultant reassortant strains to produce
disease. Interestingly, a certain relationship between the
type of reassortant and the susceptible host species
seems to exist: SJ/RG affecting sea bass and RG/SJ
affecting Senegalese sole and gilthead sea bream.
Souto et al. [86] experimentally demonstrated the
pathogenicity of the reassortant RG/SJ strains for Senegalese sole and compared it to that of the parental
strains (RGNNV and SJNNV). Mortality was recorded
only in the fish infected with the RG/SJ strains and
betanodavirus were re-isolated from dead fish, fulfilling
the River’s postulates. However, virus was detected by
RT-PCR and isolated from all pools of fish inoculated
with RGNNV and SJNNV strains. These results indicate
that both genotypes can replicate in Senegalese sole
with no evident pathological effects and that the
changes produced after the reassortment account for
the pathogenicity for Senegalese sole.

Bandín and Dopazo Veterinary Research 2011, 42:67
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/67

Page 6 of 15

Table 2 Fish species affected -in natural infections- by viral nervous necrosis (VNN).
Family

Common name

Species

Anguillidae

European eel

Anguilla anguilla

Carangidae

Striped Jack

Pseudocaranx dentex

References

Geografic Range

[146,147]

Taiwan

[148]

Japan

Purplish amberjack

[149]

Japan

Trachinotus blochii

[146,147]

Taiwan

T. falcatus
Centropomatidae

Seriola dumerili

Pompano

[146,147]

Taiwan

Barramundi

Lates calcarifer

Japanese sea bass

Lateolabrax japonicus

[158]

Japan

Tilapia

Oreochromis niloticus

[159]

Europe

Eleotridae

Sleepy cod

Oxyeleotris lineolatus

[73]

Australia

Gadidade

Atlantic cod
Haddock

[160-163]
[160,161]

Atlantic Canada, Atlantic USA, Norway, UK
Atlantic Canada, Atlantic USA

Sea bass

Gadus morhua
Melanogrammus
aeglefinus
Dicentrarchus labrax

[156,164-168]

Martinique, Italy, Greece, Spain, Malta, Portugal, Israel

White grouper

Epinephelus aeneus

[156]

Israel, Philippines

Cichlidae

Percichthydae
Serranidae

[73,146,147,150-157] Taiwan, India, Singapore, Malaysia, Australia, Israel, Tahiti,
Indonesia

Red spotted grouper

E akaara

[169, 170,

Taiwan, Japan

Yellow grouper

E. awooara

146, 147, 171]

Taiwan

Orange-spotted
grouper

E. coioides

[172]

Philippines

Blackspotted grouper

E. fuscogutatus

[171]

Taiwan

Brownspotted
grouper

E. malabaricus

[168,173]

Thailand

Dusky grouper

E. marginatus

[73]

Mediterranean

Kelp grouper

E. moara

[174]

Japan

Sevenband grouper
Greasy grouper

E. septemfasciatus
E. tauvina

[175,176]
[73,177]

Japan, Korea
Malaysia, Phillipines, Singapore

Humpback grouper

Chromileptes altivelis

[146,147,178]

Spottet coral grouper Plectropomus maculatus [179]
Latridae

Striped trumpeteer

Latris lineata

Lutjanidae

Firespot snapper

Lutjanus erythropterus

[146,147]

Taiwan

Monacanthidae

Thread-sail filefish

Stephanolepis cirrhifer

[180]

Thailand

Striped mullet

Mugil cephalus

[156]

Israel

Oplegnathidae

Golden mullet
Japanese parrotfish

Liza auratus
Oplegnathus fasciatus

[181]
[182]

Caspian sea (Iran)
Japan

Rock porgy

O. punctatus

[148,168]

Japan

Paralicthyidae

Japanese flounder

Paralichthys olivaceus

[183]

Japan

Pleuronectidae

Barfin flounder

Verasper moseri

[149]

Japan

Halibut

Hippoglossus
hippoglossus

[184,185]

Norway, UK

Mugilidae

Winter flounder

[73]

Taiwan, Indonesia
Thailand

Pleuronectes americanus [160]

Australia

Atlantic Canada

Plotosidae

Catfish

Tandanus tandanus

[73]

Australia

Poecilidae

Guppy

Poecilia reticulata

[186]

Singapore

Rachycentridae
Sciaenidae

Cobia
Red drum
Shi drum
White seabass

Scophthalmidae

Turbot

Sebastidae

Rachycentron canadum [146]
Sciaenops ocellatus
Umbrina cirrosa

[156,187]
[168,188,189]

Atractoscion nobilis

[190]

Scophthalmus maximus [191]

Taiwan
Korea, Israel
France, Italy
California (USA)
Norway

Sebastes oblongus

[192]

Siluridae

Chinese catfish

Parasilurus asotus

[147]

Taiwan

Soleideae

Dover sole

Solea solea

[163]

UK

Senegalese sole

Solea senegalensis

[82]

Iberian Peninsula

Gilthead sea bream
Tiger puffer

Sparus aurata
Takifugu rubripes

[82,193-195]
[174]

Israel, France, Italy, Iberian Peninsula
Japan

Sparidae
Triodontidae

Korea

Bandín and Dopazo Veterinary Research 2011, 42:67
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/67

4. Novirhabdoviruses - Infectious haematopoietic
necrosis virus and viral haemorrhagic septicaemia
virus, two different strategies within the same
genus
Novirhabdovirus is one of the six established genera
within the family Rhabdoviridae, and it is one of the
two genera of this family known to infect aquatic animals (along with the Vesiculovirus genus). Two of the
four recognised species of the genus are infectious haematopoietic necrosis virus (IHNV), the aetiological agent
of infectious haematopoietic necrosis (IHN), and viral
haemorrhagic septicaemia virus (VHSV), the causative
agent of viral haemorrhagic septicaemia (VHS). Novirhabdovirus possess enveloped bullet-shaped virions. The
viral genome consists of a linear non-segmented, negative-sense, single-stranded RNA of approximately 11
kilobases and contains 6 genes in the order 3’-N-P-MG-NV-L-5’ [87]. These viral species are quite different
in terms of host range: quite narrow in the case of
IHNV -apparently limited to salmonid fish-, and very
broad for VHSV, including diverse fresh water and marine fish species.
IHNV is the type species for the genus Novirhabdovirus and it is one of the most serious viral pathogens
of salmonid fish, infecting wild [88] and cultured salmonids in the USA, Europe and Asia [89]. The virus
causes an acute systemic disease that can affect all five
species of Pacific salmon (sockeye salmon Oncorhynchus nerka, pink salmon O. gurbuscha, chinook salmon O. tshawytscha, chum salmon O. keta, and coho
salmon O. kisutch,) as well as Atlantic salmon (Salmo
salar), and rainbow trout (O. mykiss) [89]. However,
not all salmonid species are equally susceptible to
IHNV [90-93]. Garver et al. [90] have reported differences in susceptibility of sockeye salmon and rainbow
trout to the different phylogenetic groups of IHNV
established in North America (U, M and L) [94]. Isolates belonging to the U genogroup were highly virulent for sockeye salmon, while the M genogroup IHNV
isolates were highly virulent for rainbow trout.
Although not demonstrated, the U genogroup specificity for sockeye salmon is hypothesised to be associated with long-term coevolution of IHNV with
sockeye salmon over centuries [90,94]. In contrast to
the U genogroup situation, the M genogroup specificity for rainbow trout may reflect a relatively recent
host-parasite interaction. The origin of the M genogroup may have involved a host shift of the U genogroup IHNV from sockeye salmon to rainbow trout
during the 1970s, followed by a relatively rapid evolution and divergence in rainbow trout [94,95]. If this
hypothesis is true, it would be interesting to know the
mechanisms involved in the adaptation of the virus to

Page 7 of 15

the new host as this apparently caused a loss of virulence for its original host.
Until the mid-1980s, VHS was regarded as a disease
affecting only rainbow trout and a few other freshwater
fish species in aquaculture in continental Europe. Since
then, however, VHSV has been isolated from a large
range of free-living marine fish species, either diseased
or asymptomatic, throughout the northern hemisphere.
So far, VHSV has been isolated from more than 70 different fish species (for a review see references [96,97]).
Different studies based on different gene sequences,
including nucleoprotein (N), glycoprotein (N) and nonstructural (NV) protein genes, have identified the existence of four genotypes of VHSV [98-101]. Genotype I
group isolates from continental Europe are pathogenic
for rainbow trout, as well as several marine isolates from
the Baltic sea; genotype II includes a number of marine
isolates obtained from the Baltic sea with no clear link to
rainbow trout aquaculture; genotype III comprises isolates from around the United Kingdom and the Flemish
Cap area in the Northwestern Atlantic Ocean, and genotype IV includes VHSV strains isolated from Korea and
Japan, both the Pacific and the Eastern coast of North
America, and more recently the Great Lakes region.
The use of phylogenetic tools has provided considerable genetic evidence indicating that rainbow trout
pathogenic VHSV emerged from a genotype I-type marine ancestor [98,101-103]. The shift could be explained
by the occurrence of a single introduction or adaptation
event followed by expansion of this “new” genotype
virus within trout aquaculture [98,101]. It has been suggested that the feeding of unpasteurised raw marine fish
to farmed fish, a common practice in the early days of
fish farming, could have been a likely route for the
introduction of marine VHSV within rainbow trout
aquaculture [104]. Only a limited number of amino acid
residues might be involved in the determination of
VHSV virulence for salmonids and this highlights the
potential risk that marine strains may pose to freshwater
aquaculture [105]. Snow & Cunningham [106] observed
an increase in the virulence of the turbot isolate 860/94
following a number of passages in rainbow trout,
although that increasing virulence was not accompanied
by a difference in the consensus sequence in the
glycoprotein.
Some phylogenetic studies indicate that VHSV may
have been present in marine fish species in Europe for
centuries and that the genotypes became separated a
long time before fish farming was established in Europe
and North America [107]. However, no isolates from
wild marine fish were included in this study. Subsequent
studies on molecular clocks supported this hypothesis
and showed the existence of a molecular clock for

Bandín and Dopazo Veterinary Research 2011, 42:67
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/67

European marine isolates without positive selection and
a molecular clock for European freshwater isolates with
positive selection [98]. In this sense, it has been estimated that the North American and European VHSV
types diverged around the year 1500, and that the European freshwater and marine isolates diverged around
1950 [98].
In spite of the lack of reports on the definition of
molecular determinants involved in host specificity,
some studies performing comparative analysis of the
complete genome sequences provide clues to the possible involvement of a small number of nucleotides
[105,108]. To demonstrate their implication in host specificity, the availability of infectious clones to generate
recombinant IHNV and VHSV viruses will be helpful
(see Biacchesi [109]).

5. Infectious salmon anaemia virus:
Orthomyxoviruses “made for the change”
Infectious salmon anaemia virus (ISAV), the etiological
agent of infectious salmon anaemia (ISA), is an RNA
virus of the family Orthomyxoviridae, the only member
of the genus Isavirus [110]. The genome of ISAV consists of eight segments of linear negative-sense singlestranded RNA. Viral particles are enveloped, with a diameter of 90-140 nm, and show surface projections consisting of a combined haemagglutinin-esterase (HE)
protein encoded on segment 6 [111] and a separate
fusion (F) protein encoded on segment 5 [112].
ISA is characterized by high mortality, and natural
outbreaks have only been described in farmed Atlantic
salmon. However, ISAV has been reported in both wild
salmonid and non-salmonid fish [113-115], and the
virus may, under experimental conditions, persist and
replicate in other salmonid (Salvelinus alpinus, O.
mykiss, O. keta, O. kisutch) [116-119] and non-salmonid
fish (Clupea harengus, Gadus morhua) [120,121].
The HE surface glycoprotein is the molecule with the
highest sequence variability, and is assumed to be of
importance in determining virulence. Most of the variation in this molecule is concentrated on a small highly
polymorphic region (HPR). It is widely assumed that the
source of the virulent ISAV isolates is an ISAV variantdesignated HPR0- without any deletion in the HPR
gene. The non-virulent nature of HPR0 viruses was indicated by the lack of disease in vivo and by their failure
to replicate in cell culture [113,122]. The widely held
model suggests that virulent variants of the HPR0 archetype arise by deletion of several nucleotides in the HPR
[113,123,124]. The driving forces behind the differential
deletion patterns in the HPR could be analogous to a
phenomenon described for Influenza A neuraminidase,
where varying lengths of the stalk region have been
reported, a property that was associated to host range

Page 8 of 15

adaptation [125,126]. Following this theory and on the
basis of a phylogenetic analysis of the HPR region,
Mjaaland et al. [123] suggested that European ISA outbreaks may have been the result of several independent
introductions of virus into farmed Atlantic salmon from
wild fish, followed by adaptation to the new host
through parallel but varied hemagglutinin gene
deletions.
A recent study by Markussen et al. [127] has provided
evidence for the role of recombination and reassortment
in the evolution of ISAV. Those authors have demonstrated the existence of a new marker of virulence next
to one of the two potential cleavage sites in the F protein and suggest that a single amino acid mutation may
alter the recognition site, having a direct effect on the
virulence of the virus. Markussen et al. [127] also suggested that the alterations at the cleavage site of the
ISAV F protein together with deletions in the HPR
region, most likely represent an adaptation of ISAV to
Atlantic salmon from an unidentified reservoir, which
leads to disease in densely populated fish farms.
However, Kibenge et al. [128] have postulated an
alternative evolutionary model, which, in contrast to the
widely accepted deletion theory, suggests that the original ancestral ISAV was virulent and that the insertion of
specific motifs resulted in its attenuation. This last theory would not support a wild origin of ISAV because
“wild” viruses are expected not to be as virulent as the
farming-associated viruses. In natural conditions a balance between the virus and the host is expected to be
maintained. However, this balance will be broken under
intensive rearing conditions, conducive to an increase of
virulence.

6. Herpesviruses: Very host specific viruses?
Herpesviruses (HVs) infect a wide variety of vertebrate
hosts including mammals, birds, reptiles, amphibians
and fish, and at least one invertebrate group, bivalve
molluscs. HV share a characteristic virion structure,
which consists of a large, linear, double-stranded DNA
genome, an icosahedral capsid, a proteinaceous matrix
(the tegument) and an envelope containing viral proteins [129].
HV taxonomy has recently undergone a revision by
the ICTV [48], in which the previous family Herpesviridae was raised to the order Herpesvirales and split
into three families: Herpesviridae, which divides into
the subfamilies Alpha, Beta and Gammaherpesvirinae,
containing mammalian, avian and reptilian viruses;
Alloherpesviridae containing fish and amphibian
viruses; and Malacoherpesviridae containing one single virus Ostreid herpesvirus (OsHV-1). Table 3 presents a list of fish and amphibian HV isolated in cell
culture.

Bandín and Dopazo Veterinary Research 2011, 42:67
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/67

Table 3 Members of the family Alloherpesviridae and
other fish herpesvirus isolated in cell culture.
Genus
Cyprinivirus

Viral species

Common name
(abbreviation)

Cyprinid herpesvirus 1

Page 9 of 15

was first isolated from the moribund larval Japanese
oyster Crassostrea gigas, a variant of OsHV-1 (termed
OsHV-1var) was detected in the Manila clam Ruditapes
philipinarum [133] and subsequently in French scallops
Pecten maximus [132].

Cyprinid herpesvirus 2
Cyprinid herpesvirus 3 Koi Herpesvirus (KHV)
Ictalurivirus

Ictalurid herpesvirus 1 Channel cat fish virus (CCV)
Ictalurid herpesvirus 2 Ictalurus melas herpesvirus
(ICmHV)
Acipenserid
White sturgeon HV2
herpesvirus 2

Salmonivirus

Salmonid herpesvirus
1

HV salmonis (HPV)

Salmonid herpesvirus
2

Oncorhynchus masou virus
(OMV)
Yamame tumor virus (YTV)
Oncorhynchus kisutch virus
(OKV)
Coho salmon tumor virus
(COTV)
Coho salmon herpes virus
(CSH)

Batrachovirus

Ranid herpesvirus 1
Ranid herpesvirus 2

Lucké tumor HV (LTHV)
Frog virus 4 (FV-4)

Other
herpesvirus
Anguillid herpesvirus HV anguillae
1
Percid herpesvirus 1

HV vitreum, walleye HV

As a general rule, the natural host range of mammalian and avian HV is highly restricted, and most herpesviruses are thought to have evolved in association with
single host species [129], but exceptions have been
reported among mammals [130]. On the basis of a comparative phylogenetic study of different hosts and fish
herpesviruses, Waltzek et al. [131] indicate that some
fish (salmonid, ictalurid and ciprinid) and ranid HV may
have coevolved with their hosts, at least at the tips of
the phylogenetic tree. However, the phylogenetic analysis revealed an overall discordance between HV and
host lineages. One example of these discordances is provided by the family Acipenseridae (sturgeons), an
ancient fish lineage and the sturgeon HV (AciHV1 and
AciHV2) which are not sister taxa, with AciHV2 being
the sister group of the ictalurid HV. Another example is
provided by the eel HV (AngHV1), which grouped
tightly with cyprinid HV. These authors suggested that
the lack of cospeciation at deep nodes in the phylogenetic tree may indicate the existence of interspecies
transmission.
There is clear evidence of interspecies transmission of
OsHV-1 in marine bivalves [132,133]. Although OsHV-1

7. Aquabirnaviruses - Putative candidate for
interspecies transmission but still not
demonstrated
Aquabirnavirus is one of the four genera of the family
Birnaviridae. The type species of the genus is infectious
pancreatic necrosis virus (IPNV), the first fish virus isolated and characterised in cell culture [134]. Aquabirnaviruses have a non-enveloped, icosahedral capsid
approximately 60 nm in diameter containing a bisegmented, double-stranded RNA genome. The smaller
genomic segment, segment B (2.8 kb), encodes the putative RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (VP1). The larger
RNA segment (segment A; 3.1 kb) contains two partially
overlapping open reading frames (ORF), a large ORF
encoding the polyprotein and a small ORF encoding
VP5 [135].
During the 1960’s most of the reports on IPNV were
associated with disease in juvenile salmonids. However,
in the following years, isolations of aquatic birnaviruses
were made from a large number of aquatic animals,
most of them from animals with no evidence of disease,
reaching 80 different species, including freshwater and
marine species of fish and shellfish worldwide [136].
Although no studies have been performed on the capability of aquabirnaviruses for interspecies or interclass
transmission, such events would explain their wide
range of host species.
Most aquabirnaviruses are antigenically related and
belong to serogroup A, which includes nine serotypes
(A1-A9), whereas a few isolates represent an antigenically unrelated serogroup (serogroup B) [136,137]. Six
genogroups with a clear correspondence to the established serotypes have been identified [138,139]. In addition, a seventh genogroup has been proposed [140] to
include yellow tail ascites virus (YTAV), isolated in
Japan from an epizootic in yellowtail (Seriola quinqueradiata) [141]. This genogroup also includes other birnavirus strains isolated from a variety of marine fish and
molluscan shellfish in Japan, which have been tentatively
named marine birnavirus (MABV) [142]. The high
diversity of types of this virus could be a result of a long
process of adaptation to new species. In addition,
recently a molecular phenomenon was discovered
among aquabirnaviruses, which could contributes to
adaptation and replication in new hosts: natural reassortment. Thus, Romero-Brey et al. [143] in an analysis
of IPNV-like strains isolated from different species of
wild fish captured in the Flemish Cap, Newfoundland

Bandín and Dopazo Veterinary Research 2011, 42:67
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/67

[144], reported the existence of natural reassortant
strains harbouring a WB type segment A and Ab type
segment B (WB/Ab reassortant). Subsequent studies on
aquatic birnaviruses isolated from wild fish in Galician
coastal waters (NW Spain) [145] confirmed the presence
of natural reassortants of the same type in a larger proportion of the population than in the Flemish Cap. The
lack of information about segment B of most aquabirnavirus isolates reported in the literature means it is not
known if reassortment is a common phenomenon in
nature. Putative involvement of genetic reassortment in
the spreading of aquabirnaviruses and colonisation of
such a high number of aquatic species seems an interesting topic to study.

8. Conclusions
The wide host range shown by many viruses affecting
lower vertebrates is well known. In fact, for some of
them -those historically most extensively studied- the
list of susceptible species is surprisingly extensive. The
best example are aquabirnaviruses. However, some
others are only virulent to one or to a very narrow
number of species. This diversity of host specificity patterns has not been well studied, and it is therefore
poorly understood at present. In this sense, the status of
knowledge varies dramatically among the different viral
groups. In fact, for many of them only characterisation
of field isolates has been performed, focusing on natural
hosts, transmission pathways, genetic variation, etc. In a
few cases, however, experimental studies have been conducted to document variations in host specificity
between viral species (as for betanodaviruses) or
between strains within a viral species (IHNV and
VHSV). For some viruses, there is field data to support
interspecies and interclass transmissions (ranavirus), for
others, interspecies and interclass transmission is
hypothesised based on phylogenetic relationships (novirhabdovirus, herpesvirus). For some, the molecular basis
of host-specific virulence and/or host specificity has
been investigated (ISAV, betanodavirus).
Compared with the examples from mammalian viruses
described in the introduction, there are no absolutely
certain examples of host shifts in fish viruses, but there
are some that have been hypothesised based on reasonable evidence. The viruses tackled in this review are the
few for which some information has been documented
and is available at present, and could be summarised as
follows.
Ranaviruses constitute a group of viruses with a broad
host range, for which the interspecies and interclass
transmission has been well documented; in addition, evidence for host shifts based on phylogenies and genome
analyses is also available; however, to our knowledge,

Page 10 of 15

the molecular determinants and/or mechanisms for
host-specificity have not been investigated.
A variation in host-specificity among the four viral
genotypes of betanodaviruses is well documented. In
addition, molecular determinants for their host specificity patterns have been investigated using natural reassortants and chimeric recombinant viruses. From these
studies, specific amino acid changes have been identified
as putatively associated with differences in host
specificity.
In the case of novirhabdoviruses, variations in host
specificity have been demonstrated among viral strains
within both species -IHNV and VHSV-, although to a
higher extent within VHSV. Although not scientifically
demonstrated from a molecular basis, host shift/adaptation events could be hypothesised based on phylogenetic
analyses. Moreover, whole genome sequence comparisons and infectious clones of IHNV and VHSV are now
available, which are being used to study, and more deeply understand, host specificity determination in these
viruses.
Several studies on the molecular basis of virulence of
ISA virus have indicated that changes located in the
haemagglutinin (HPR) and in the fusion protein are
associated with outbreaks in Atlantic salmon. Based on
phylogenetic analysis, it has been hypothesised that
these changes could have been involved in a change in
host specificity.
Phylogenetic analysis comparing fish herpesvirus and
host lineages have revealed discordances that may suggest the existence of interspecies transmission. In addition, in mollusk bivalves there is field evidence of
interspecies transmission of herpesviruses.
Finally, regarding aquabirnaviruses little information
other than broad host range and diversity of IPNV (and
aquabirnavirus in general) genogroups, has been
reported. Similarly, there is no demonstration of variations in host specificity among different viral strains, and
no studies on host specificity are available; the recently
demonstrated occurrence of natural reassortment among
field isolates could have some implication in determining
the host specificity and virulence of these viruses, and
will probably be investigated in the future.

9. Authors’ contributions
Both authors carried out the compilation and analysis of
references related to the subject, as well as the writing
and edition of the manuscript. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript.
10. Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing
interests.

Bandín and Dopazo Veterinary Research 2011, 42:67
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/67

11. Acknowledgements
The authors want to thanks Gael Kurath for her very interesting suggestions
that helped to improve the quality of this review.
Received: 19 July 2010 Accepted: 18 May 2011 Published: 18 May 2011
References
1. Webby R, Hoffmann E, Webster R: Molecular constraints to interspecies
transmission of viral pathogens. Nat Med 2004, 10(Suppl 12):S77-S81.
2. Moya A, Holmes EC, Gonzalez-Candelas F: The population genetics and
evolutionary epidemiology of RNA viruses. Nat Rev Microbiol 2004,
2:279-288.
3. Ito T, Couceiro JN, Kelm S: Molecular basis for the generation in pigs of
influenza A viruses with pandemic potential. J Virol 1998, 72:7367-7373.
4. Qu X-X, Hao P, Song X-J, Jiang S-M, Liu Y-X, Wang P-G, Rao X, Song H-D,
Wang S-Y, Zuo Y, Zheng A-H, Luo M, Wang H-L, Deng F, Wang H-Z, Hu ZH, Ding M-X, Zhao G-P, Deng H-K: Identification of two critical amino acid
residues of the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus spike
protein for this variation in zoonotic tropism transition via a double
substitution strategy. J Biol Chem 2005, 280:29588-29595.
5. Mangeat B, Turelli P, Caron G, Friedli M, Perrin L, Trono D: Broad
antiretroviral defence by human APOBEC3G through lethal editing of
nascent reverse transcripts. Nature 2003, 424:99-103.
6. Stremlau M, Owens CM, Perron MJ, Kiessling M, Autissier P, Sodroski J: The
cytoplasmic body component TRIM5alpha restricts HIV-1 infection in Old
World monkeys. Nature 2004, 427:848-853.
7. Smith DJ, Lapdes AS, de Jong JC, Bestebroer TM, Rimmelzwaan GF,
Osterhaus AD, Fouchier RA: Mapping the antigenic and genetic evolution
of influenza virus. Science 2004, 305:371-376.
8. Wei X, Decker JM, Wang S, Hui H, Kappes JC, Wu X, Salazar-Gonzalez JF,
Salazar MG, Kilby JM, Saag MS, Komarova NL, Nowak MA, Hahn BH,
Kwong PD, Shaw GM: Antibody neutralization and escape by HIV-1.
Nature 2003, 422:307-311.
9. Webster RG, Bean WJ, Gorman OT, Chambers TM, Kawaoka Y: Evolution
and ecology of influenza A viruses. Microbiol Rev 1992, 56:152-179.
10. Connor RJ, Kawaoka Y, Webster RG, Paulson JC: Receptor specificity in
human, avian and equine H2 and H3 Influenza virus isolates. Virology
1994, 205:17-23.
11. Matrosovich M, Tuzikov A, Bovin N, Gamabaryan A, Klimov A, Castrucci MR,
Donatelli I, Kawaoka Y: Early alterations of the receptor-binding
properties of H1, H2 and H3 avian influenza virus hemagglutinins after
their introduction into mammals. J Virol 2000, 74:8502-8512.
12. Nobusawa E, Aoyama T, Kato H, Suzuki Y, Tateno Y, Nakajima K:
Comparison of complete amino-acid-sequences and receptor-binding
properties among 13 serotypes of hemagglutinins of influenza a-viruses.
Virology 1991, 182:475-485.
13. Rogers GN, Paulson JC, Daniels RS, Skehel JJ, Wilson IA, Wiley DC: Single
amino-acid substitutions in Influenza hemagglutinin change receptorbinding specificity. Nature 1983, 304:76-78.
14. Vines A, Wells K, Matrosovich M, Castrucci MR, Ito T, Kawaoka Y: The role of
influenza a virus hemagglutinin residues 226 and 228 in receptor
specificity and host range restriction. J Virol 1998, 72:7626-7631.
15. Baigent SJ, McCauley JW: Influenza type A in humans, mammals and
birds: determinants of virus virulence, host range and interspecies
transmission. Bioessays 2003, 25:657-671.
16. Naffakh N, Tomoiu A, Rameix-Welti MA, van der Werf S: Host restriction of
avian influenza viruses at the level of the ribonucleoproteins. Annu Rev
Microbiol 2008, 62:403-424.
17. Hatta M, Gao P, Halfmann P, Kawaoka Y: Molecular basis for high
virulence of Hong Kong H5N1 influenza A viruses. Science 2001,
293:1840-1842.
18. Steel J, Lowen A, Mubareka S, Pales P, Baric R: Transmission of influenza
virus in a mammalian host is increase by PB2 amino acids 627K or
627E/701N. PLoS Pathog 2009, 5:e10000252.
19. Subbaran EK, London W, Murphy BR: A single amino-acid in the PB2 gene
of influenza A virus is a determinant of host range. J Virol 1993,
67:1761-1764.
20. Parrish CR: Emergence, natural history, and variation of canine, mink and
feline parvovirus. Adv Virus Res 1990, 38:402-450.

Page 11 of 15

21. Truyen U, Gruenberg A, Chang SF, Obermaier B, Veijalainen P, Parrish CR:
Evolution of the feline subgroup parvoviruses and the control of canine
host range in vivo. J Virol 1995, 69:4792-4710.
22. Chang SG, Sgro JY, Parrish CR: Multiple amino acids in the capsid
structure of canine parvovirus coordinately determine the canine host
range and specific antigenic and hemagglutination properties. J Virol
1992, 66:6858-6867.
23. Horiuchi M, Goto H, Ishiguro N, Shinagawa M: Mapping of determinants
of the host range for canine cells in the genome of canine parvovirus
using canine parvovirus/mink enteritis virus chimeric viruses. J Gen Virol
1994, 75:1319-1328.
24. Parrish CR, Have P, Foreyt WJ, Evermann JF, Senda M, Carmichael LE: The
global spread and replacement of canine parvovirus strains. J Gen Virol
1988, 69:1111-1116.
25. Parrish C, Aquadro C, Strassherim ML, Evermann JF, Sgro JY, Mohammed H:
Rapid antigenic-type replacement and DNA sequence evolution of
canine parvovirus. J Virol 1991, 65:6544-6552.
26. Truyen U, Evermann JF, Vieler E, Parrish CR: Evolution of canine
parvovirus involved loss and gain of feline host range. Virology 1996,
215:186-189.
27. Hueffer K, Parker JSL, Weichert WS, Geisel RE, Sgro JY, Parrish CR: The
natural host range shift and subsequent evolution of canine parvovirus
resulted from virus-specific binding to the canine transferring receptor. J
Virol 2003, 77:1718-1726.
28. Chinchar GD, Essbauer S, He JG, Hyatt A, Miyazaki T, Seligy V, Williams T:
Family Iridoviridae. In Virus Taxonomy. Edited by: Fauquet CM, Mayo MA,
Maniloff J, Desselberger U, Ball LA. 8th Report ICTV, Elsevier Academic Press,
San Diego, CA; 2005:145-158.
29. Williams T, Barbosa-Solomieu V, Chinchar VG: A decade of advances in
iridovirus research. Adv Virus Res 2005, 65:173-248.
30. Watson SW: Virus Diseases of Fish. Trans Am Fish Soc 1954, 83:331-341.
31. Walker R: Fine structure of lymphocystis virus of fish. Virology 1962,
18:503-505.
32. Whittington RJ, Becker JA, Dennis MM: Iridovirus infections in finfishcritical review with emphasis on ranaviruses. J Fish Dis 2010, 33:95-122.
33. Essbauer S, Ahne W: Viruses of lower vertebrates. J Vet Med B Infect Dis Vet
Public Health 2001, 48:403-475.
34. Schloegel LM, Daszak P, Cunningham AA, Speare R, Hill B: Two amphibian
diseases, chytridiomycosis and ranaviral disease, are now globally
notifiable to the World Organization for Animal Health (OIE): an
assessment. Dis Aquat Organ 2010, 92:101-108.
35. Chinchar GD: Ranaviruses (family Iridoviridae): Emerging cold-blooded
killers. Arch Virol 2002, 147:447-470.
36. Langdon JS, Humphrey JL, Williams LM, Hyatt AD, Westbury HA: 1st virus
isolation from Australian fish-an iridoviurs-like pathogen from redfin
perch, Perca fluviatilis L. J Fish Dis 1986, 9:263-268.
37. Langdon JS, Humphrey JL, Williams LM: Outbreaks of an EHNV-like
iridovirus in cultured rainbow trout in Salmo gairdneri Richardson in
Australia. J Fish Dis 1988, 11:93-96.
38. Ahne W, Brémont M, Hedrick RP, Hyatt AD, Whittington RJ: Iridoviruses
associated with epizootic haematopoietic necrosis (EHN) in aquaculture.
World J Microbiol Biotechnol 1997, 13:367-373.
39. Plumb JA, Grizzle JM, Young HE, Noyes AD: An iridovirus isolated from
wild largemouth bass. J Aquat Anim Health 1996, 8:265-270.
40. Hedrick RP, McDowell TS: Properties of iridoviruses from ornamental fish.
Vet Res 1995, 26:423-427.
41. Chua FHC, Ng ML, Ng KL, Loo JJ, Wee JY: Investigation of outbreaks of
novel disease, “sleepy grouper disease” affecting the brown-spotted
grouper Epinephelus tauvina Forskal. J Fish Dis 1994, 17:417-427.
42. Qin QW, Chang SF, Ngoh-Lim GH, Gibson-Kueh S, Shi C, Lam TJ:
Characterization of a novel ranavirus isolated from grouper Epinephelus
tauvina. Dis Aquat Organ 2003, 53:1-9.
43. Benetka V, Grabensteiner E, Gumpenberger M, Neubauer C, Hirschmüller B,
Möstl K: First report of an iridovirus (Genus Ranavirus) infection in a
Leopard tortoise (Ceochelone pardalis pardalis). Vet Med Austria 2007,
94:243-248.
44. Bollinger TK, Mao J, Schock D, Brigham RM, Chinchar BG: Pathology,
isolation and molecular characterization of an iridovirus from tiger
salamanders in Saskatchewan. J Wildl Dis 1999, 35:413-429.

Bandín and Dopazo Veterinary Research 2011, 42:67
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/67

45. Hyatt AD, Williamson M, Coupar BE, Middleton D, Hengstberger SG,
Gould AR, Selleck P, Wise TG, Kattenbelt J, Cunningham AA, Lee J: First
identification of a ranavirus from green pythons (Chondropython viridis).
J Wildl Dis 2002, 38:239-252.
46. Jancovich JK, Davidson EW, Morado JF, Jacobs BL, Collins JP: Isolation of a
lethal virus form the endangered tiger salamander Ambystoma tigrinum
tebbinsi. Dis Aquat Organ 1997, 31:161-167.
47. Marschang RE, Becher P, Posthaus H, Wild P, Thiel HJ: Isolation and
characterization of an iridovirus from Hermans tortoises (Testudo
hermanni). Arch Virol 1999, 144:1909-1922.
48. International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses. [http://www.ictvonline.
org].
49. Hyatt AD, Gould AR, Zupanovic Z, Cunningham AA, Hengstberger S,
Whittington RJ, Kattenbelt J, Coupar BE: Comparative studies of piscine
and amphibian iridoviruses. Arch Virol 2000, 145:303-331.
50. Mao J, Hedrick RP, Chinchar VG: Molecular characterization, sequence
analysis and taxonomic position of newly isolated fish iridoviruses.
Virology 1997, 229:212-220.
51. Mao J, Wang J, Chinchar GD, Chinchar VG: Molecular characterization of a
ranavirus isolated form largemouth bass Micropterus salmoides. Dis Aquat
Organ 1999, 37:107-114.
52. Ting JW, Wu MF, Tsai CT, Lin CC, Guo IC, Chang CY: Identification and
characterization of a novel gene of grouper iridovirus encoding a purine
nucleoside phosphorylase. J Gen Virol 2004, 85:2883-2892.
53. Speare R, Smith J: An iridovirus-like agent isolated from the ornate
burrowing frog Lymnodynastes ornatus in northern Australia. Dis Aquat
Organ 1992, 14:51-57.
54. Cullen BR, Owens L, Wittington RJ: Experimental infection of Australian
anurans (Limnodynastes terraereginae and Litoria latopalmata) with Bohle
iridovirus. Dis Aquat Organ 1995, 23:83-92.
55. Cullen BR, Owens L: Experimental challenge and clinical cases of Bohle
iridovirus (BIV) in native Australian anurans. Dis Aquat Organ 2002,
49:83-92.
56. Ariel E, Owens L: Epizootic mortalities in tilapia Oreochromis
mossambicus. Dis Aquat Organ 1997, 29:1-6.
57. Moody NJG, Owens L: Experimental demonstration of pathogenicity of a
frog virus, bohle iridovirus, for a fish species, barramudi Lates calcarifer.
Dis Aquat Organ 1994, 18:95-102.
58. McGrogan DG, Ostland VE, Byrne PJ, Ferguson HW: Systemic disease
involving an iridovirus-like agent in cultured tilapia, Oreochromis
niloliticus L.-a case report. J Fish Dis 1998, 21:149-152.
59. Cunningham AA, Hyatt AD, Russell P, Bennet PM: Experimental
transmission of ranavirus disease of common toads (Bufo bufo) to
common frogs (Rana temporaria). Epidemiol Infect 2007, 135:1213-1216.
60. Mao J, Green DE, Fellers G, Chinchar VG: Molecular characterization of
iridoviruses isolated from sympatric amphibians and fish. Virus Res 1999,
63:45-62.
61. Duffus ALJ, Pauli BD, Woxney K, Brunetti CR, Berrill M: Frog Virus 3-like
infections in aquatic amphibian communities. J Wildl Dis 2008,
44:109-120.
62. Bang Jensen B, Kjær Ersbøll A, Ariel E: Susceptibility of pike Esox lucius to
a panel of Ranavirus isolates. Dis Aquat Organ 2009, 83:169-179.
63. Jancovich JK, Davidson EW, Parameswaran N, Mao J, Chinchar VG,
Collins JP, Jacobs BL, Storfer A: Evidence for emergence of an anphibian
iridoviral disease because of human-enhanced spread. Mol Ecol 2005,
14:213-224.
64. Picco AM, Collins JP: Amphibian commerce as a likeky source of
pathogen pollution. Conserv Biol 2008, 22:1582-1589.
65. Schloegal LM, Picco AM, Lilpatrick AM, Davies AJ, Hyatt AD:
Magnitude of the US trade in amphibians and presence of
Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis and ranavirus infection in imported
North American bullfrogs (Rana catesbeiana). Biol Conserv 2009,
142:1420-1426.
66. Jancovich JK, Brémont M, Touchman JF, Jacobs BL: Evidence for multiple
recent host species shifts among the ranaviruses (family Iridoviridae). J
Virol 2010, 84:2636-2647.
67. Holopainen R, Ohlemeyer S, Schütze H, Bergmann SM, Tapiovaara H:
Ranavirus phylogeny and differentiation based on major capsid protein,
DNA polymerase and neurofilament triplet H1-like protein genes. Dis
Aquat Organ 2009, 85:81-91.

Page 12 of 15

68. Ariel E, Kielgast J, Svart HE, Larsen K, Tapiovaara H, Jensen BB, Holopainen R:
Ranavirus in wild edible frogs Pelophylax kl. esculentus in Denmark. Dis
Aquat Organ 2009, 85:7-14.
69. Docherty DE, Meteyer CU, Wang J, Mao J, Case ST, Chinchar VG: Diagnostic
and molecular evaluation of three iridovirus-associated salamander
mortality events. J Wildl Dis 2003, 39:556-566.
70. Schock DM, Bollinger TK, Chinchar VG, Jancovich JK, Collins JP:
Experimental evidence that amphibian ranaviruses are multi-host
pathogens. Copeia 2008, 2008:133-143.
71. Schneemann A, Ball LA, Delsert C, Johnson JE, Nishizawa T: Family
Nodaviridae. In Virus Taxonomy. 8th Report ICTV. Edited by: Fauquet CM,
Mayo MA, Maniloff J, Desselberger U, Ball LA. Elsevier Academic Press, San
Diego, CA; 2005:865-872.
72. Munday B, Kwang J, Moody N: Betanodavirus infections of teleost fish: a
review. J Fish Dis 2002, 25:127-142.
73. OIE (Office International des Epizooties): Manual of Diagnostic Tests for
Aquatic Animals. OIE, Paris;, 4 2003, Manual, Chapter 2.1.7. Viral
encephalopathy and retinopathy,.
74. Nagai T, Nishizawa T: Sequence of the non-structural protein gene
encoded by RNA1 of striped jack nervous necrosis virus. J Gen Virol 1999,
80:3019-3022.
75. Tan C, Huang B, Chang S, Ngoh G, Munday B, Che S, Kwang J:
Determination of the complete nucleotide sequences of RNA1 and
RNA2 from greasy grouper (Epinephelus tauvina) nervous necrosis virus,
Singapore strain. J Gen Virol 2001, 82:647-653.
76. Delsert C, Morin N, Comps M: A fish encephalitis virus that differs from
other nodaviruses by its capsid protein processing. Arch Virol 1997,
142:2359-2371.
77. Nishizawa T, Mori K, Furuhashi M, Nakai T, Furusawa I, Muroga K:
Comparison of the coat protein genes of five fish nodaviruses, the
causative agents of nervous necrosis in marine fish. J Gen Virol 1995,
76:1563-1569.
78. Nishizawa T, Furuhashi M, Nagai T, Nakai T, Muroga K: Genomic
classification of fish nodaviruses by molecular phylogenetic analysis of
the coat protein gene. Appl Environ Microbiol 1997, 63:1633-1636.
79. Cutrín JM, Thiéry R, Leao P, Olveira JG, Barja JL, Bandín I: Emergence of
pathogenic betanodaviruses belonging to SJNNV genogroup in farmed
fish species from the Iberian Peninsula. J Fish Dis 2007, 30:225-222.
80. Thiéry R, Cozien J, de Boisséson C, Kerbat-Boscher S, Névarez L: Genomic
classification of new betanodaviruses isolates by phylogenetic analysis
of the coat protein gene suggests a low host-fish species specificity. J
Gen Virol 2004, 85:3079-3087.
81. Olveira JG, Souto S, Dopazo CP, Thiéry R, Barja JL, Bandín I: Comparative
analysis of both genomic segments of betanodaviruses isolated from
epizootic outbreaks in farmed fish species provides evidence for genetic
reassortment. J Gen Virol 2009, 90:2940-2951.
82. Ito Y, Okinaka Y, Mori K-I, Sugaya T, Nishioka T, Oka M, Nakai T: Variable
region of betanodavirus RNA2 is sufficient to determine host specificity.
Dis Aquat Organ 2008, 79:199-205.
83. Iwamoto T, Okinaka Y, Mise K, Mori K-I, Arimoto M, Okuno T, Nakai T:
Identification of host-specificity determinants in betanodaviruses by
using reassortants between striped jack nervous necrosis virus and
sevenband grouper nervous necrosis virus. J Virol 2004, 78:1256-1262.
84. Baranowski E, Ruiz-Jarabo CM, Domingo E: Evolution of cell recognition by
viruses. Science 2001, 292:1102-1105.
85. Toffolo V, Negrisolo E, Maltese C, Bovo G, Belvedere P, Colombo L, Dalla
Valle L: Phylogeny of betanodaviruses and molecular evolution of their
RNA polymerase and coat proteins. Mol Phylogenet Evol 2007, 4:298-308.
86. Souto S, Olveira JG, Dopazo CP, Barja JL, Bandín I: Betanodavirus infection in
Senegalese sole: the role of reassortment. 8th Int. Symp Viruses of Lower
Vertebrates, Santiago de Compostela, Spain; 2010, 83.
87. Tordo N, Benmansour A, Calisher C, Dietzgen RC, Fang R-X, Jackson AO,
Kurath G, Nadin-Davis S, Tesh RB, Walker PJ: Family Rhabdoviridae Genus
Novirhabdovirus. In Virus Taxonomy. 8th Report ICTV. Edited by: Fauquet
CM, Mayo MA, Maniloff J, Desselberger U, Ball LA. Elsevier Academic Press,
San Diego, CA; 2005:635-636.
88. Williams IV, Amend DF: A natural epizootic of infectious hematopoietic
necrosis in fry of sockeye salmon (Onchorhynchus nerka) at Chilko Lake,
British Columbia. J Fish Res Board Can 1976, 33(7):1564-1567.

Bandín and Dopazo Veterinary Research 2011, 42:67
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/67

89. Bootland LM, Leong JC: Infectious hematopoietic necrosis virus.Edited by:
Woo PTK, Bruno DW. CAB International, New York; 1999:57-121, Fish
diseases and disorders, volume 2.
90. Garver KA, Batts WN, Kurath G: Virulence comparisons of infectiuous
hematopoietic necrosis virus U and M genogruoups in sockeye salmon
and rainbow trout. J Aquat Anim Health 2006, 18:232-243.
91. LaPatra SE: Factors affecting pathogenicity of infectious hematopoietic
necrosis virus (IHNV) for salmonid fish. J Aquat Anim Health 1998,
10:121-131.
92. LaPatra SE, Fryer JL, Rohovec JS: Virulence comparison of different
electropherotypes of infectious hematopoietic necrosis virus. Dis Aquat
Organ 1993, 16(2):121-131.
93. LaPatra SE, Grober WJ, Rohovec JS, Fryer JL: Size related susceptibility of
salmonids to two strains of infectious hematopoietic necrosis virus.
Trans Am Fish Soc 1990, 119(1):25-30.
94. Kurath G, Garver KA, Troyer RM, Emmenegger EJ, Einer Jensen K,
Anderson ED: Phylogeography of infectious hematopoietic necrosis virus
in North America. J Gen Virol 2003, 84:803-814.
95. Troyer RM, Kurath G: Molecular epidemiology of infectious hematopoietic
necrosis virus reveals complex virus traffic and evolution within
southern Idaho aquaculture. Dis Aquat Organ 2003, 55:175-185.
96. Skall HF, Olesen NJ, Mellergaard S: Viral haemorrhagic septicaemia virus in
marine fish and its implications for fish farming - a review. J Fish Dis
2005, 28:509-529.
97. OIE (Office International des Epizooties): Manual of Diagnostic Tests for
Aquatic Animals. Paris; 2010 [http://www.oie.int/eng/normes/fmanual/
A_summry.htm], Chapter 2.3.9. Viral haemorrhagic septicaemia virus, OIE (on
line edition.
98. Einer-Jensen K, Ahrens P, Forsberg R, Lorenzen N: Evolution of the fish
rhabdovirus viral haemorrhagic septicaemia virus. J Gen Virol 2004,
85:1167-1179.
99. Einer-Jensen K, Ahrens P, Lorenzen N: Parallel phylogenetic analyses using
the N, G or Nv gene from a fixed group of VHSV isolates reveal the
same overall genetic typing. Dis Aquat Organ 2005, 67:39-45.
100. Snow M, Cunningham CO, Melvin WT, Kurath G: Analysis of the
nucleoprotein gene identifies distinct lineages of viral haemorrhagic
septicaemia virus within the European marine environment. Virus Res
1999, 63:35-44.
101. Snow M, Bain N, Black J, Taupin V, Cunningham CO, King JA, Skall HF,
Raynard RS: Genetic population structure of marine viral haemorrhagic
septicaemia virus (VHSV). Dis Aquat Organ 2004, 61:11-21.
102. Dixon PF: VHSV came from the marine environment: clues from the
literature, or just red herrings? Bull Eur Ass Fish Path 1999, 19:60-65.
103. Stone DM, Way K, Dixon PF: Nucleotide sequence of the glycoprotein
gene of viral haemorrhagic septicaemia (VHS) viruses from different
geographical areas: a link between VHS in farmed fish species and
viruses isolated from North Sea cod (Gadus morhua L.). J Gen Virol 1997,
78:1319-1326.
104. Meyers TR, Winton JR: Viral hemorrhagic septicemia in North America.
Annu Rev Fish Dis 1995, 5:3-24.
105. Betts AM, Stone DM: Nucleotide sequence analysis of the entire coding
regions of virulent and avirulent strains of viral haemorrhagic
septicaemia virus. Virus Genes 2000, 20:259-262.
106. Snow M, Cunningham CO: Virulence and nucleotide sequence analysis of
marine viral haemorrhagic septicaemia virus following in vivo passage
in rainbow trout Onchorhynchus mykiss. Dis Aquat Organ 2000, 42:17-26.
107. Benmansour A, Basurco B, Monnier AF, Vende P, Winton JR, de Kinkelin P:
Sequence variation of the glycoprotein gene identifies three distinct
lineages within field isolates of viral haemorrhagic septicaemia virus, a
fish rhabdovirus. J Gen Virol 1997, 78:2837-2846.
108. Campbell S, Collet B, Einer-Jensen K, Secombes CJ, Snow M: Identifying
potential virulence determinants in viral haemorrhagic septicaemia virus
(VHSV) for rainbow trout. Dis Aquat Organ 2009, 86:205-212.
109. Biacchesi S: The reverse genetics applied to fish RNA viruses. Vet Res
2011, 42:12.
110. Kawaoka Y, Cox NJ, Haller O, Hongo S, Kaverin N, Klenk H-D, Lamb RA,
McCauley J, Palese P, Rimstad E, Webster RG: Genus Isavirus. In Virus
Taxonomy. 8th Report ICTV. Edited by: Fauquet CM, Mayo MA, Maniloff J,
Desselberger U, Ball LA. Elsevier Academic Press, San Diego, CA;
2005:681-693.

Page 13 of 15

111. Falk K, Aspehaug V, Vlasak R, Edresen C: Identification and characterization
of a viral structural proteins of infectious salmon anemia virus. J Virol
2004, 78:3063-3071.
112. Aspehaug VT, Mikalsen AB, Snow M, Biering E, Villoing S: Characterization
of the infectious salmon anemia virus fusion protein. J Virol 2005,
79:12544-12553.
113. Cunningham CO, Gregory A, Black J, Simpson I, Raynard RS: A novel
variant of infectious salmon anaemia virus (ISAV) haemagglutinin gene
suggests mechanisms for virus diversity. Bull Eur Ass Fish Pathol 2002,
22:366-374.
114. Plarre H, Devold M, Snow M, Nylund A: Prevalence of infectious salmon
anaemia virus (ISAV) in wild salmonids in western Norway. Dis Aquat
Organ 2005, 66:71-79.
115. Raynard RS, Murray AG, Gregory A: Infectious salmon anaemia virus in
wild fish from Scotland. Dis Aquat Organ 2001, 46:93-100.
116. Nylund A, Alexandersen S, Jakobsen P, Rolland JB: Infectious salmon
anemia (ISA) in brown trout. J Aquat Anim Health 1995, 7:236-240.
117. Nylund A, Kvenseth AM, Krossøy B, Hodneland K: Replication of the
infectious salmon anaemia virus (ISAV) in rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus
mykiss, Walbaum, 1792). J Fish Dis 1997, 20:275-279.
118. Rolland JB, Winton JR: Relative resistance of Pacific salmon to infectious
salmon anaemia virus. J Fish Dis 2003, 26:511-520.
119. Snow M, Raynard R, Bruno DW: Comparative susceptibility of Arctic char
(Salvelinus alpinus), rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss) and brown
trout (Salmo trutta) to the Scottish isolate of infectious salmon anaemia
virus. Aquaculture 2001, 196:47-54.
120. Grove S, Hjortaas MJ, Reitan LJ, Dannevig BH: Infectious salmon anaemia
virus (ISAV) in experimentally challenged Atlantic cod (Gadus morhua).
Arch Virol 2007, 152:1829-1837.
121. Nylund A, Devold M, Mullins J, Plarre H: Herring (Clupea harengus): a host
for infectious salmon anaemia virus (ISAV). Bull Eur Assoc Fish Pathol 2002,
22:311-318.
122. Cook-Versloot M, Griffiths S, Cusack R, McGeachy S, Ritchie R: Identification
and characterization of infectious salmon anemia virus (ISAV)
hemagglutinin gene highly polymorphic region (HPR) type 0 in North
America. Bull Eur Ass Fish Pathol 2004, 24:203-208.
123. Mjaaland S, Hungnes O, Teig N, Dannevig BH, Thorud K, Rimstad E:
Polymorphism in the infectious salmon anemia virus hemagglutinin
gene: importance and possible implications for evolution and ecology
of infectious salmon anemia disease. Virology 2002, 304:379-391.
124. Nylund A, Devold M, Plarre H, Isdal E, Aarseth M: Emergence and
maintenance of infectious salmon anemia virus (ISAV) in Europe: a new
hypothesis. Dis Aquat Organ 2003, 56:11-24.
125. Air GM, Laver WG, Luo M, Stray SJ, Legrone G, Wbster RG: Antigenic,
sequence, and crystal variation in influenza B neuraminidase. Virology
1990, 177:578-587.
126. Castrucci MR, Kawaoka Y: Biologic importance of neuraminidase stalk
length in influenza A virus. J Virol 1993, 113:725-735.
127. Markussen T, Monceyron Jonassen C, Numanovic S, Braanen S, Hjortaas M,
Nilsen H, Mjaalanad S: Evolutionary mechanisms involved in the virulence
of infectious salmon anaemia virus (ISAV), a piscine orthomyxovirus.
Virology 2008, 374:515-527.
128. Kibenge FSB, Kibenge MJT, Wang Y, Qian B, Hariharan G, McGeachy S:
Mapping of putative virulence motifs of infectious salmon anemia virus
surface glycoprotein genes. J Gen Virol 2007, 88:3100-3111.
129. Davison AJ, Eberle F, Hayward GS, McGeoch DJ, Minson AC, Pellett PE,
Roizman B, Studdert MJ, Thiry E: Family Herpesviridae. In Virus Taxonomy.
8th Report ICTV. Edited by: Fauquet CM, Mayo MA, Maniloff J, Desselberger
U, Ball LA. Elsevier Academic Press, San Diego, CA; 2005:193-212.
130. McGeoch DJ, Rixon FJ, Davison AJ: Topics in herpesvirus genomics and
evolution. Virus Res 2006, 117(1):90-104.
131. Waltzek TB, Kelley GO, Alfaro ME, Kurobe T, Davison AJ, Hedrick RP:
Phylogenetic relationships in the family Alloherpesviridae. Dis Aquat
Organ 2009, 84:179-194.
132. Arzul I, Nicolas J-L, Davidson AJ, Renault T: French scallops: a new host for
ostreid herpesvirus-1. Virology 2001, 290:342-349.
133. Arzul I, Renault T, Lipart C, Davidson AJ: Evidence for interspecies
transmission of oyster herpesvirus in marine bivalves. J Gen Virol 2001,
82:865-870.
134. Wolf K, Snieszko SF, Dunbar DE, Pyle E: Virus nature of infectious
pancreatic necrosis in trout. Proc Soc Exp Med Biol 1960, 104:105-108.

Bandín and Dopazo Veterinary Research 2011, 42:67
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/67

135. Delmas B, Kibenge FSB, Leon JC, Mundt E, Vakaharia VN, Wu JL: Family
Birnaviridae. In Virus Taxonomy. 8th Report ICTV. Edited by: Fauquet CM,
Mayo MA, Maniloff J, Desselberger U, Ball LA. Elsevier Academic Press, San
Diego, CA; 2005:561-569.
136. Reno PW: Infectious pancreatic necrosis and associated aquatic
birnaviruses.Edited by: Woo PTK, Bruno DW. CABI Publishing, New York;
1999:1-55, In Fish Diseases and Disorders vol 3.
137. Hill BJ, Way K: Serological classification of infectious pancreatic necrosis
virus strains determined (IPN) virus and other aquatic birnaviruses. Annu
Rev Fish Dis 1995, 5:55-57.
138. Blake S, Ma J-Y, Caporale DA, Jairath S, Nicholson BL: Phylogenetic
relationships of aquatic birnaviruses based on deduced aminoacid
sequences of genome segment A cDNA. Dis Aquat Organ 2001, 45:89-102.
139. Cutrín JM, Barja JL, Nicholson BL, Bandín I, Blake S, Dopazo CP: Restriction
fragment length polymorphism and sequence analysis: an approach for
genotyping infectious pancreatic necrosis virus reference strains and
other aquabirnaviruses isolated from Northwestern Spain. Appl Environm
Microbiol 2004, 70:1059-1067.
140. Nishizawa T, Kinoshita S, Yoshimizu M: An approach for genogrouping of
Japanese isolates of aquabirnaviruses in a new genogroup, VII, based on
the VP2/NS junction region. J Gen Virol 2005, 86:1973-1978.
141. Sorimachi M, Hara T: Characteristic and pathogenicity of a virus isolated
form yellowtail fingerlings showing ascetic. Fish Pathol 1985, 19:231-238,
(in Japanese).
142. Hosono N, Suxuki S, Kusuda R: Evidence for relatedness of Japanese
isolates of birnavirus form marine fish to IPNV. J Fish Dis 1994,
17:433-347.
143. Romero-Brey I, Bandin I, Cutrín JM, Vakharia VN, Dopazo CP: Genetic
analysis of aquabirnaviruses isolated from wild fish reveals occurrence
of natural reassortment of infectious pancreatic necrosis virus. J Fish Dis
2009, 32:585-595.
144. Romero-Brey I, Bandin I, Dopazo CP, Barja JL: Isolation of marine birnavirus
from new species of wild fishes. Am Fish Soc Fish Health Sec Newslet 2003,
31:21-23.
145. Cutrín JM, Lago M, Bandín I, Areoso E, Dopazo CP: Phylogenetic analysis of
infectious pancreatic necrosis virus (IPNV) isolated from wild fish in the
Galician coastal waters (NW Spain). 8th Int Symp Viruses of Lower
Vertebrates, Santiago de Compostela, Spain; 2010, 25.
146. Chi SC, Lee KW, Hwang SJ: Investigation of host range of fish nodavirus
in Taiwan. 10th Int Conf Eur Ass of Fish Pathol, Dublin (Ireland) 2001,
Abstract 0-49.
147. Chi SC, Shieh JR, Lin SJ: Genetic and antigenic analysis of
betanodaviruses isolated from aquatic organisms in Taiwan. Dis Aquat
Organ 2003, 55:221-228.
148. Mori K, Nakai T, Muroga K, Arimoto M, Mushiake K, Furusawa I:
Properties of a new virus belonging to nodaviridae found in larval
striped jack (Pseudocaranx dentex) with nervous necrosis. Virology
1992, 187:368-371.
149. Muroga K: Viral and bacterial diseases in larval and juvenile marine fish
and shellfish, a review. Fish Pathol 1995, 30:71-85.
150. Awang AB: Sea bass (Lates calcarifer) larvae and fry production in
Malaysia. Diseases of barramundi (Lates calcarifer) in Australia, a review.
In Management of Wild and Cultured Sea Bass/Barramundi Lates calcarifer,
ACIAR, Canberra. Edited by: Copland JW, Grey DI. Queensland, Australia;
1987:144-147.
151. Azad IS, Shekhar MS, Thirunavukkarasu AR, Poornima M, Kailasam M,
Rajan JJS, Ali SA, Abraham M, Ravichandran P: Nodavirus infection causes
mortalities in hatchery produced larvae of Lates calcarifer, first report
from India. Dis Aquat Organ 2005, 63:113-118.
152. Chang SF, Ngoh GH, Kueh S: Detection of viral nervous necrosis
nodavirus by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction in locally
farmed marine food fish. Singapore Vet J 1997, 21:39-44.
153. Glazebrook JS, Campbell RSF: Diseases of barramundi (Lates calcarifer) in
Australia, a review.Edited by: Copland JW, Grey DI. Management of Wild
and Cultured Sea Bass/Barramundi Lates calcarifer, ACIAR, Canberra,
Queensland, Australia; 1987:204-206.
154. Glazebrook JS, Heasman MP, De Beer SW: Picorna-like viral particles
associated with mass mortalities in larval barramundi, Lates calcarifer
(Bloch). J Fish Dis 1990, 13:245-249.
155. Renault T, Haffner P, Baudin LF, Breuil G, Bonami JR: Mass mortalities in
hatchery-reared sea bass (Lates calcarifer) larvae associated with the

Page 14 of 15

156.
157.

158.

159.

160.

161.

162.

163.

164.
165.

166.

167.

168.

169.

170.

171.

172.

173.

174.

175.

176.
177.

presence in the brain and retina of virus-like particles. Bull Eur Ass Fish
Pathol 1991, 11:68-73.
Ucko M, Colorni A, Diamant A: Nodavirus infections in israeli mariculture.
J Fish Dis 2004, 27:459-469.
Zafran , Harada T, Koesharyani I, Yuasa K, Hatai K: Indonesian hatchery
reared seabass larvae (Lates calcarifer) associated with viral nervous
necrosis (VNN). Ind Fish Res J 1998, 4:19-22.
Jung SJ, Miyazaki T, Miyata M, Oishi T: Histopathological studies on viral
nervous necrosis in a new host Japanese sea bass Lateolabrax japonicus.
Bull Fac Bioresour Mie-Univ 1996, 6:9-16.
Bigarre L, Cabon J, Baud M, Heimann M, Body A, Lieffring F, Castric J:
Outbreak of betanodavirus infection in tilapia, Oreochromis niloticus (L.)
in freshwater. J Fish Dis 2009, 32(8):667-673.
Gagné N, Johnson SC, Cook-Versloot M, MacKinnon A-M, Olivier G:
Molecular detection and characterization of nodavirus in several marine
fish species from the Northeastern Atlantic. Dis Aquat Organ 2004,
62:181-189.
Johnson SC, Sperker SA, Leggiadro CT, Groman DB, Griffiths SG, Ritchie RJ,
Cook MD, Cusak RR: Identification and characterization of a piscine
neuropathy and nodavirus from juvenile Atlantic cod from the Atlantic
coast of North America. J Aquat Anim Health 2002, 14:124-133.
Pantel S, Korsnes K, Bergh O, Vik-Mo F, Pedersen J, Nerland AH: Nodavirus
in farmed Atlantic cod Gadus morhua in Norway. Dis Aquat Organ 2007,
77:169-173.
Starkey WG, Ireland JH, Muir KF, Jenkins ME, Roy WJ, Richards RH,
Ferguson HW: Nodavirus infection in Atlantic cod and Dover sole in the
UK. Vet Rec 2001, 149:179-181.
Bellance R, Gallet de Saint-Aurin D: L’encéphalite virale du loup de mer.
Caraïbes Medical 1988, 2:105-114, (in French).
Bovo G, Nishizawa T, Maltese C, Borghesan F, Mutinelli F, Montesi F, De
Mas S: Viral encephalopathy and retinopathy of farmed marine fish
species in Italy. Virus Res 1999, 63:143-146.
Breuil G, Bonami JR, Pepin JF, Pichot Y: Viral infection (picorna-like virus)
associated with mass mortalities in hatchery-reared sea-bass
(Dicentrarchus labrax) larvae and juveniles. Aquaculture 1991,
97:109-116.
Le Breton A, Grisez L, Sweetman J, Ollevier F: Viral nervous necrosis (VNN)
associated with mass mortalities in cage reared sea bass, Dicentrarchus
labrax (L.). J Fish Dis 1997, 20:145-151.
Skliris GP, Krondiris JV, Sideris DC, Shinn AP, Starkey WG, Richards RH:
Phylogenetic and antigenic characterization of new fish nodavirus
isolates from Europe and Asia. Virus Res 2001, 75:59-67.
Chi SC, Lo CF, Kou GH, Chang PS, Peng SE, Chen SN: Mass mortalities
associated with viral nervous necrosis (VNN) disease in two species of
hatchery-reared grouper, Epinephelus fuscogutatus and Epinephelus
akaara (Temminck & Schlegel). J Fish Dis 1997, 20:185-193.
Mori K, Nakai T, Nagahara M, Muroga K, Mekuchi T, Kanno T: A viral disease
in hatchery-reared larvae and juveniles of redspotted grouper. Fish
Pathol 1991, 26:209-210.
Lai YS, Murali S, Chiu HC, Ju HY, Lin YS, Chen SC, Guo IC, Fang K, Chan CY:
Propagation of yellow grouper nervous necrosis virus (YGNNV) in a new
nodavirus-susceptible cell line from yellow grouper, Epinephelus awoara
(Temminck & Schlegel), brain tissue. J Fish Dis 2001, 24:299-309.
Maeno Y, de la Peňa LD, Cruz-Lacierda E: Nodavirus infection in hatcheryreared Orange-Spotted Grouper Epinephelus coioides, first record of viral
nervous necrosis in the Philippines. Fish Pathol 2002, 37:87-89.
Danayadol Y, Direkbusarakom S, Supamattaya K: Viral nervous necrosis in
brownspotted grouper, Epinephelus malabaricus, cultured in Thailand. In
Diseases in Asian aquaculture II. Edited by: Shariff M, Arthus JR, Subasunghe
RP. Fish Health section. Asian Fisheries Society, Manila; 1995:227-233.
Nakai T, Nguyen HD, Nishizawa T, Muroga K, Arimoto M, Ootsuki K:
Occurrence of viral nervous necrosis in kelp grouper and tiger puffer.
Fish Pathol 1994, 29:211-212.
Fukuda Y, Nguyen HD, Furuhasi M, Nakai T: Mass mortality of cultured
sevenband grouper, Epinephelus septemfasciatus, associated with viral
nervous necrosis. Fish Pathol 1996, 31:165-170.
Sohn SG, Park MA: Viral diseases of cultured marine fish and shrimp in
Korea. Fish Pathol 1998, 33:189-192.
Chua FHC, Loo JJ, Wee JK: Mass mortality in juvenile greasy grouper,
Epinephelus tauvina, associated with vacuolating encephalopathy and
retinopathy.Edited by: Shariff M, Arthur JR, Subhasinghe P. Diseases in

Bandín and Dopazo Veterinary Research 2011, 42:67
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/67

178.

179.

180.

181.

182.

183.

184.

185.

186.

187.

188.

189.

190.

191.
192.

193.

194.
195.

Asian Aquaculture II, Fish Health Section. Asian Fisheries Society, Manila;
1995:235-241.
Zafran Koesharyani JF, Yuasa K, Harada T, Hatai K: Viral nervous necrosis in
humpback grouper Chromileptes altivelis larvae and juveniles. Fish
Pathol 2000, 35:95-96.
Pirarat N, Ponpornpisit A, Traithong T, Nakai T, Lakagori T, Maita M, Endo M:
Nodavirus associated with pathological changes in adult spottet coral
groupers (Plectropomus maculates) in Thailand with viral nervous
necrosis. Res Vet Sci 2009, 87:97-101.
Pirarat N, Katagiri T, Maita M, Nakai T, Endo M: Viral encephalopathy in
hatchery-reared juvenile thread-sail filefish (Stephanolepis cirrhifer).
Aquaculture 2009, 288:349-352.
Zorriehzahra MJ, Nakai T, Sharifpour I, Gomes DK, Chi SC, Soltani M,
Mohd D, Hj H, Sharif Roani M, Saidi AA: Mortality wild golden mullet (Liza
auratus) in Iranian waters of the Caspian Sea, associated with viral
nervous necrosis like agent, Iran. J Fish Sci 2005, 45:43-58.
Yoshikoshi K, Inoue K: Viral nervous necrosis in hatchery-reared larvae
and juveniles of japanese parrotfish, Oplegnathus fasciatus (Temminck &
Schlegel). J Fish Dis 1990, 13:69-77.
Nguyen HD, Mekuchi T, Imura K, Nakai T, Nishizawa T, Muroga K:
Occurrence of viral nervous necrosis (VNN) in hatchery-reared juvenile
Japanese flounder Paralichthys olivaceus. Fish Sci 1994, 60:551-554.
Grotmol S, Totland GK, Kvellestad A, Fjell K, Olsen AB: Mass mortality of
larval and juvenile hatchery-reared halibut (Hippoglossus hippoglossus L.)
associated with the presence of virus-like particles in vacuolated lesions
in the central nervous system and retina. Bull Eur Ass Fish Pathol 1995,
15(5):176-180.
Starkey WG, Ireland JH, Muir KF, Shinn AP, Richards RH, Ferguson HW:
Isolation of nodavirus from Scottish farmed halibut, Hippoglossus
hippoglossus (L). J Fish Dis 2000, 23(6):418-422.
Hegde A, The HC, Lam TJ, Sin YM: Nodavirus infection in freshwater
ornamental fish, guppy, Poecilia reticulata- comparative characterization
and pathogenicity studies. Arch Virol 2003, 148:575-586.
Oh MJ, Jung SJ, Kim SR, Rajendran KV, Kim YJ, Choi TJ, Kim HR, Kim JD: A
fish nodavirus associated with mass mortality in hatchery-reared red
drum, Sciaenops ocellatus. Aquaculture 2002, 211:1-7.
Comps M, Trindade M, Delsert C: Investigation of fish encephalitis viruses
(FEV) expression in marine fishes using DIG-labelled probes. Aquaculture
1996, 143:113-121.
Pavoletti E, Prearo M, Ghittino M, Ghittino C: Casi di encefaloretinopatia in
ombrina (Umbrina cirrosa) con descrizione della sintomatologia clinica e
del quadro anatomoistopatologico. Boll Soc It Patol Ittica 1998, 23:24-33.
Curtis PA, Drawbridge M, Iwamoto T, Nakai T, Hedrick RP, Gendron AP:
Nodavirus infection of juvenile white seabass, Atractoscion nobilis,
cultured in southern California, first record of viral nervous necrosis
(VNN) in North America. J Fish Dis 2001, 24:263-271.
Bloch B, Gravningen K, Larsen JL: Encephalomyelitis among turbot
associated with a picornavirus-like agent. Dis Aquat Organ 1991, 10:65-70.
Kim SR, Jung SJ, Kim YJ, Kim JD, Jung TS, Choi TJ, Yoshimizu M, Oh MJ:
Phylogenic comparison of Viral Nervous Necrosis (VNN) viruses
occurring seed production period. J Korean Fish Soc 2001, 35:237-241.
Bitchava K, Xylouri E, Fragkiadaki E, Athanassopoulou F,
Papanastassopoulou M, Sabatakou O: First incidence of clinical signs of
nodavirus infection in sea bream, Sparus auratus L. Israeli J Aquaculture
2007, 59:3-9.
Comps M, Raymond JC: Virus-like particles in the retina of the sea-bream,
Sparus aurata. Bull Eur Ass Fish Pathol 1996, 16:161-163.
Dalla Valle L, Zanella L, Patarnello P, Paolucci L, Belvedere P, Colombo L:
Development of a sensitive diagnostic assay for fish nervous necrosis
virus based on RT-PCR plus nested PCR. J Fish Dis 2000, 23:321-327.

doi:10.1186/1297-9716-42-67
Cite this article as: Bandín and Dopazo: Host range, host specificity and
hypothesized host shift events among viruses of lower vertebrates.
Veterinary Research 2011 42:67.

Page 15 of 15

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
