<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>1475-9292-2-6.fm</title>
<meta name="Author" content="csproduction"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 7.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 5.0.5 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Kinetoplastid Biology and Disease

BioMed Central

Open Access

Focus

The role of apoptotic mimicry in host-parasite interplay: is death
the only alternative for altruistic behavior?
Marcello A Barcinski*1,2, Maria Elisabete Costa Moreira2, José Mario de
Freitas Balanco1, João Luiz M Wanderley2,3 and Adriana C Bonomo2,3
Address: 1Department of Parasitology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, University of São Paulo, Brazil, 2Division of Experimental Medicine,
National Cancer Institute, Brazil and 3Institute of Microbiology, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
Email: Marcello A Barcinski* - barcinsk@inca.gov.br; Maria Elisabete Costa Moreira - mariacm@inca.gov.br; José Mario de
Freitas Balanco - mbalanco@usp.br; João Luiz M Wanderley - wmjoao@zipmail.com.br; Adriana C Bonomo - abonomo@inca.gov.br
* Corresponding author

Published: 25 June 2003
Kinetoplastid Biology and Disease 2003, 2:6

Received: 10 June 2003
Accepted: 25 June 2003

This article is available from: http://www.kinetoplastids.com/content/2/1/6
© 2003 Barcinski et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article: verbatim copying and redistribution of this article are permitted in all
media for any purpose, provided this notice is preserved along with the article's original URL.

Multicellular organisms can clearly benefit from the noninflammatory elimination by apoptosis of unnecessary
and potentially harmful cells. Recently accumulated data
show that unicellular organisms such as pathogenic
trypanosomatids can also take advantage of different
apoptotic features [1]. As a matter of fact, similarities
between multicellular organisms and the multicellular
organization of unicellular organisms in the control of
very basic mechanisms in cell physiology are not restricted
to apoptosis, but extend to different cell biological phenomena such as cell-cycle control, multiplication, and differentiation [2]. Indeed, examples of mammalian-derived
cytokines able to induce cell multiplication, protein phosphorylation, and protection from death in unicellular
pathogenic trypanosomatids have been described [3,4].
These examples allow the postulation that the usage, by a
population of unicellular parasites, of cellular and molecular processes normally operating in the host, is an efficient adaptive strategy. One such example is the capacity
of different members of the genera Trypanosoma and Leishmania to take advantage of different features of the apoptotic process to establish a host-parasite relationship,
without death as the necessary outcome. This will be the
subject of the present commentary.
Indeed, we have described that amastigotes [5] and metacyclic promastigotes (manuscript in preparation) of Leishmania L. amazonensis display phosphatidylserine (PS) on
the outer leaflet of their cellular membrane. This molecular moiety induces an anti-inflammatory response of the
macrophages through the activation of a specific receptor

[6]. Macrophages are the obligatory habitat of Leishmania
spp in the mammalian hosts and, paradoxically, are also
the effector leishmanicidal cells when properly stimulated
by the adaptive immune response of the host [7]. The PSdependent anti-inflammatory response is characterized
by inhibition of nitric oxide synthesis and activation of
TGFβ and IL-10 production; the net result is an increase in
internalization and a facilitated intramacrophagic proliferation of the parasite [5]. PS exposure is one of the most
precocious and widespread features of a cell primed for
apoptosis; it is essential for the non-inflammatory disposal of dying cells [8], and thus allows apoptosis to occur
without disturbing normal organogenesis and normal
adult cell renewal. This same feature, in an apoptoticmimicry fashion, seems to be important for the establishment of Leishmania spp as an obligatory intramacrophagic
parasite of mammalian hosts. In the present context, two
alternative explanations for the capacity of exposing PS
can be formulated. PS exposure can be viewed as a property of genes that have been selected in ancestors of
present day Leishmania spp. due to coding for advantageous features which were – and still are – not necessarily
part of the very complex phenomena of programmed cell
death. However, they might have played a role in the
establishment and maintenance of the present day Leishmania/host parasitic relationship by allowing for the survival of the parasite within its mammalian hosts.
Alternatively, PS exposure by the parasite might really be
part of a cell death program. Indeed, in our hands, if the
PS-exposing amastigotes are kept in vitro at 34°C, they
undergo typical apoptotic oligonucleososmal DNA cleavPage 1 of 2
(page number not for citation purposes)

Kinetoplastid Biology and Disease 2003, 2

age (unpublished result). This strongly suggests that the
complete mechanism of cell death is present, and eventually operational, in this unicellular organism. Our present
data cannot, of course, distinguish between both of the
phylogenetic alternatives described above. Neither can it
answer to the question of whether PS exposure by the parasite is an independent phenomenon or is part of the
molecular demands of a fully operational cell death program. To start with, we still have no clear-cut evidence
whether the PS in the parasite's surface is synthesized by
the parasite itself, or is derived from the host. The following are strong evidence indicating that the former is the
case: (a) it is a fact that axenically grown metacyclics
expose PS; (b) plasma membrane translocases, which are
capable of regulating PS exposure, have been described in
promastigotes of Leishmania tropica [9]; and (c) amastigotes derived from susceptible Balb/c mice systematically
expose more PS on their outer surface than amastigotes
derived from resistant C57Bl/6 mice (manuscript in preparation). In addition, considering that the source of the
exposed PS is the parasite itself, we do not know whether
PS exposure occurs only when the amastigote is released
from the macrophage, or if it already occurs inside the
phagolysosome. This latter possibility is very interesting
and enables us to hypothesize that a quorum sensing
mechanism defines the moment of PS exposure and subsequent macrophage rupture. If this is true, PS exposure
on the outer membrane leaflet defines a metacyclic amastigote. We are currently investigating this possibility.
Finally, and central to the present discussion, it is not clear
either if the PS-exposing parasites are the truly infective
forms, or if they only contribute to infectivity due to their
PS-depended macrophage inactivation properties. If,
indeed, PS exposure is part of a cell death program, and
the PS positive parasites are the infective ones, they must
be rescued from death within the phagolysosomal environment. This is, by itself, a fascinating biological question. If, on the contrary, the infective forms are the PS
negative ones, with the PS positive forms facilitating infectivity, a truly cooperative system is operating here. In both
situations, however, PS exposure, with its consequent
macrophage inactivation, is the relevant phenotype for
parasite persistence in the host. Parasite death by apoptosis is, in the present situation, just a side effect. Interestingly, Trypanosoma cruzi, a parasite displaying just a
transient intramacrophagic phase in the vertebrate host, is
endowed with the capacity of inducing apoptosis in the
host's T lymphocytes [10]. This parasite, which displays
only traces of PS in its lipid composition, takes advantage
of the interaction with the macrophages of the PS exposed
by the T lymphocytes, in a very similar way to what Leishmania L. amazonensis does with PS on its own surface.

http://www.kinetoplastids.com/content/2/1/6

like features (e.g. morphological changes, DNA cleavage,
caspase activation, etc) have been described in unicellular
parasites in a wide variety of working conditions, with
parasite death as the final read out [11]. In all such cases,
discussion is focused on the biological significance of this
type of death: is it just the end point of the parasite's lifecycle, or does it have any beneficial consequence for the
parasite population and can thus be considered an altruistic type of death? Furthermore, these descriptions have
raised arguments supporting that the phylogenetic origin
of programmed cell death predates multicellularity. The
postulation that forces imposed by the demands of a parasitic life-style have selected cell death or any other feature
of the apoptotic process in those vertebrate infective
eukaryotes seems to us a very reasonable alternative. The
development of molecular biology and the increasing
progress in the competence for genome sequencing and
for searching molecular phylogenies will certainly bring
new answers to such exciting questions.

References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

6.
7.
8.
9.

10.

11.

Ameisen JC: On the origin, evolution, and nature of programmed cell death: a time line of four billion years Cell Death
and Differentiation 2002, 9:367-393.
Christensen ST, Leick V, Rasmussen L and Wheatley DN: Signaling
in unicellular eukaryotes International Review of Cytology 1998,
177:181-253.
DosReis GA and Barcinski MA: Apoptosis and Parsitism:from
the parasite to the host immune response Advances in Parasitology 2001, 49:133-161.
Barcinski MA and Costa Moreira ME: Cellular response of protozoan parasites to host-derived cytokines Parasitology Today
10:352-355.
Balanco JMF, Costa Moreira ME, Bonomo A, Bozza PT, AmaranteMendes G, Pirmez C and Barcinski MA: Apoptotic mimicry by an
obligate intracellular parasite downregulates macrophage
microbicidal activity Current Biology 2001, 11:1870-1873.
Fadok VA, Bratton DL, Rose DM, Pearson A, Ezekewitz RAB and
Henson PM: A new receptor for phosphatidylserine-specific
clearence of apoptotic cells Nature 2000, 405:85-90.
Reed SG and Scott P: T cells and cytokine responses in leishmaniasis Current Opinion in Immunolgy 5:524-531.
Savill J and Fadok VA: Corpse clearance defines the meaning of
cell death Nature 2000, 407:784-788.
Tripathi A and Gupta CM: Transbilayer translocation of membrane phosphatidylserine and its role in macrophage invasion in Leishmania promastigotes Molecular & Biochemical
Parasitology 2003, 128:1-9.
Freire de Lima CG, Nascimento DO, Soares MB, de Mello FG, Bozza
PT, Castro Faria Neto HC, Dos Reis GA and Lopes MF: Uptake of
apoptotic cells drives the growth of a pathogenic trypanosome in macrophages Nature 2000, 403:199-203.
Debrabant A, Lee N, Bertholet S, Duncan R and Nakhasi HL: Programmed cell death in trypanosomatids and other unicellular organisms International Journal for Parasitology 2003, 33:257-267.

Except for the differential usage of apoptotic features in
the two examples discussed above, different apoptosis-

Page 2 of 2
(page number not for citation purposes)

</pre>
</body>
</html>
