<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Telling the whole story in a 10,000-genome world</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Biology Direct 2011, 6:34. doi:10.1186/1745-6150-6-34"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Robert G Beiko"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Beiko Biology Direct 2011, 6:34
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/34

RESEARCH

Open Access

Telling the whole story in a 10,000-genome world
Robert G Beiko

Abstract
Background: Genome sequencing has revolutionized our view of the relationships among genomes, particularly in
revealing the confounding effects of lateral genetic transfer (LGT). Phylogenomic techniques have been used to
construct purported trees of microbial life. Although such trees are easily interpreted and allow the use of a subset
of genomes as “proxies” for the full set, LGT and other phenomena impact the positioning of different groups in
genome trees, confounding and potentially invalidating attempts to construct a phylogeny-based taxonomy of
microorganisms. Network and graph approaches can reveal complex sets of relationships, but applying these
techniques to large data sets is a significant challenge. Notwithstanding the question of what exactly it might
represent, generating and interpreting a Tree or Network of All Genomes will only be feasible if current algorithms
can be improved upon.
Results: Complex relationships among even the most-similar genomes demonstrate that proxy-based approaches
to simplifying large sets of genomes are not alone sufficient to solve the analysis problem. A phylogenomic
analysis of 1173 sequenced bacterial and archaeal genomes generated phylogenetic trees for 159,905 distinct
homologous gene sets. The relationships inferred from this set can be heavily dependent on the inclusion of other
taxa: for example, phyla such as Spirochaetes, Proteobacteria and Firmicutes are recovered as cohesive groups or
split depending on the presence of other specific lineages. Furthermore, named groups such as Acidithiobacillus,
Coprothermobacter and Brachyspira show a multitude of affiliations that are more consistent with their ecology
than with small subunit ribosomal DNA-based taxonomy. Network and graph representations can illustrate the
multitude of conflicting affinities, but all methods impose constraints on the input data and create challenges of
construction and interpretation.
Conclusions: These complex relationships highlight the need for an inclusive approach to genomic data, and
current methods with minor alterations will likely scale to allow the analysis of data sets with 10,000 or more
genomes. The main challenges lie in the visualization and interpretation of genomic relationships, and the
redefinition of microbial taxonomy when subsets of genomic data are so evidently in conflict with one another,
and with the “canonical” molecular taxonomy.
Reviewers: The manuscript was reviewed by William Martin, W. Ford Doolittle, Joel Velasco and Eugene Koonin.

Background
Our current understanding of microbial diversity, function, and ecology owes a great deal to the ready availability of genome sequence data for a multitude of
microorganisms. Genomes, predicted genes and functional annotations can be easily acquired from many
online databases, and many of these offer multiple
methods of automated retrieval. With a small amount of
coding skill, a researcher can couple the acquisition of
data with an analytical pipeline to produce up-to-date
Correspondence: beiko@cs.dal.ca
Faculty of Computer Science, Dalhousie University, 6050 University Avenue,
Halifax, NS B3H 1W5 Canada

information about the evolution and function of an
ever-expanding list of organisms. The sampling of diversity is neither random nor representative, and the current list of available genomes reflects particular interests
in medically or industrially important pathogens, extremophiles, and organisms with important economic value
(e.g., agricultural pests and commensals). Nonetheless,
the breadth of sampling is impressive, with members of
36 bacterial and archaeal phyla sequenced by the end of
2009, and the unequal representation of different
lineages allows comparative studies to be carried out at
shallow and deep levels. Furthermore, sequencing projects are now targeting “gaps” in genomic diversity,

© 2011 Beiko; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Beiko Biology Direct 2011, 6:34
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/34

directly via the GEBA project [1] and indirectly through
various environmental genomic studies [2,3].
Major phylogenomic studies have used large genomic
data sets to construct phylogenies or other similaritybased relationships among genomes, with the goal of
inferring patterns and/or processes with as comprehensive a data set as possible. Some analyses have claimed
that their recovered structures (tree or network) are an
explicit representation of organismal relationships (e.g.,
a Tree of Life), while others have presented similar
structures only as a representation of genetic affinities
with no attached claim of having found the “true” relationships among species. The most familiar approaches
involved the use of a subset (typically of size 1-50) of
genes that are widespread or universal in their distribution, with phylogenetic analysis based on a concatenated
alignment of these genes. For example, the hypothesis
that all known organisms can be split into three
domains (Eukarya, Archaea and Bacteria) was originally
based on the analysis of small-subunit ribosomal DNA
(SSU) sequences [4,5]. Concatenated alignment or
“supermatrix” approaches have been used to propose
deep phylogenetic relationships for all three domains of
life [6-9]. Another class of approaches used to infer
genomic relationships are based on the abstraction of
genes as a set of binary presence/absence criteria. Phylogenetic profiles describe each genome in terms of the
presence and absence of proteins from different homologous or orthologous gene sets: early genome trees
based on this type of representation were largely congruent with reference trees based on marker genes,
which was taken as evidence that genomic data could be
used to infer higher-order relationships among groups
of organisms [10,11]. A modified version of this
approach served as the basis of the Ring of Life hypothesis [12], and variations that use quantitative rather than
qualitative presence/absence information have revealed
interesting alternative genetic affinities, especially when
reweighting schemes are used [13]. Lienau et al. [14]
combined evidence from protein phylogenetic data and
gene presence/absence information into a “megamatrix”, analogous to a large multiple sequence alignment, to construct a parsimony tree which was claimed
to be similar to that of [8]. Yet another type of analysis
considers many individual gene trees, either combining
them into a single “supertree” that reflects frequently
observed phylogenetic patterns [15-17], or using statistics to summarize and assess the support of different
topological features [18,19].
Many algorithms can be used to execute the necessary
steps of a phylogenomic analysis. The customary first
step after the retrieval of annotated genome sequences
is the inference of homologous relationships using an
algorithm such as BLAST [20]. Naïve pairwise

Page 2 of 36

comparison of sequences using BLAST immediately
imposes a quadratic scaling of the analysis with increasing amounts of data: a full all-versus-all comparison of
1000 sequences using BLAST requires 1,000,000 pairwise comparisons, but the same analysis on 10,000
sequences requires 100,000,000 comparisons. Programs
such as CD-HIT [21] and UCLUST [22] aim to avoid
all-versus-all sequence comparisons by building clusters
of similar sequences on the fly, and using only a single
“seed” sequence from each cluster for comparative purposes. In this way, seed sequences are intended to serve
as proxies for non-seed sequences in their clusters, with
a concomitant trade-off of accuracy to realize increased
performance. Other strategies such as FastBLAST [23]
aim to minimize the number of comparisons performed,
although such methods are still time-consuming when
data sets are large. Once these initial comparisons have
been completed, many options are available for
sequence alignment and phylogenetic inference. These
methods typically aim to maximize a function that
describes the fit of a given alignment or tree instance to
the data, using a model of sequence substitution to
represent rates of evolutionary change between different
types of nucleotide or amino acid residue. Exhaustive
alignment and phylogeny approaches cannot be applied
to data sets with > 10 sequences, but heuristic
approaches have been developed that sacrifice the guarantee of optimality for the benefit of being able to run
on much larger sequence data sets. Current methods
have been applied to data sets comprising over 100,000
sequences [24]. However, the sacrifices made by some
methods may not be acceptable, and other types of analysis such as phylogenetic network reconstruction and
inference of lateral genetic transfer have fewer heuristic
algorithms available [25].
Scaling up analyses to the currently available 1000
genomes and future sets comprising > 10,000 genomes
will obviously depend on the availability of methods that
can efficiently analyze large data sets. Such methods will
need to exploit recurring patterns in genomic data, with
the goal of reducing the total amount of data that needs
to be subjected to intensive analysis, for instance by
identifying and removing redundant gene sequences or
even entire genomes. A final challenge in large-scale
phylogenomics is the interpretation of large sets of trees
and other data structures: visual summaries are vital to
understanding, but inspection of a phylogenetic tree or
network with even 100 leaves can be a daunting task.
The goal of this paper is to examine the currently available set of sequenced microbial genomes for evidence of
repeated structure, perform a rapid phylogenomic analysis of these genomes in a manner similar to previous
large-scale studies (e.g., [16,18]) using newly available
algorithms, and explore different techniques for

Beiko Biology Direct 2011, 6:34
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/34

visualizing conflicting relationships, either across the
entire data set or with a particular focus on a taxonomic
group of interest. By analyzing a set of over 1000 genomes using techniques described above and new tools
and techniques from the literature, we can anticipate
the challenges that will arise with much larger genomic
data sets comprising both novel phyla and many representatives from intensively sampled taxonomic groups.

Results and Discussion
Sampling of taxonomic groups and “protein space": is
there any evidence for saturation?

Although the sampling of microbial genomes is heavily
biased in favour of certain types of organisms [26,27],
the taxonomic diversity of sequenced genomes continues to increase (Figure 1). While well-represented
phyla such as the Proteobacteria and Firmicutes continue to grow, the period from 2007-2009 saw a 50%
increase in the number of represented phyla, with the

Page 3 of 36

addition of Deferribacteres, Dictyoglomi, Elusimicrobia,
Gemmatimonadetes, Korarchaeota, Nitrospirae, Synergistetes and Verrucomicrobia, and a bacterium (Thermobaculum terrenum) that is not yet formally assigned to a
phylum. Some of these phyla may be quite limited in
their genetic diversity; for example, the genus Dictyoglomus is the only known representative of its phylum thus
far [28]. However, other phyla such as Synergistetes
[29,30] are known to harbour considerably more diversity, and the Verrucomicrobia are an extremely diverse
group with few cultivated representatives. The Verrucomicrobia also contain proteins such as tubulins that are
rare or absent from other bacterial phyla [31], suggesting that many proteins with homology to no currently
known protein still remain to be discovered in the mass
of as-yet-uncultured and unsequenced microbial diversity. The number of distinct genera has doubled since
2006, as has the total number of sequenced isolates.
Even well-sampled groups have seen substantial

Figure 1 Accumulation of new genomes and taxonomic groups from 1995-2009. The total number of sequenced genomes available at
NCBI is shown in dark blue, the total number of distinct genera in light blue, and the total number of phyla in purple. Numbers in yellow boxes
correspond to counts of phyla from the purple curve.

Beiko Biology Direct 2011, 6:34
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/34

increases: in 2008-2009, the number of proteobacterial
genera with sequenced representatives increased from
183 to 229.
Since LGT can produce a distribution of proteins that
is patchy across the SSU rDNA tree, taxonomic groups,
and any other hierarchical relationship that might be
proposed [32-34], it is not necessarily the case that the
first sequenced representative of a genus or phylum will
contain many proteins that are “new” in the sense of
having homology to no presently known proteins. Relative to an established database of sequences, a newly
sequenced gene might be considered novel under several
different criteria. The weakest condition of novelty
accepts all genes from a newly sequenced genome as
novel, regardless of their similarity to existing sequences.
At the end of 2009, there were a total of 3,478,477
annotated proteins in bacterial and archaeal genomes.
Some newly annotated proteins are 100% identical to an
existing protein, in which case only one needs to be

Page 4 of 36

included in the sequence alignment and phylogenetic
inference steps, while the others can be restored in the
appropriate location in the final tree or network.
Removing all but one copy from each set of identical
sequences reduces the data set by 16.9%, to 2,891,231
unique proteins (Figure 2). Since the number of BLAST
comparisons in a naïve all-versus-all analysis increases
with the square of the number of sequences, filtering
unique sequences would reduce the number of pairwise
comparisons by 30%. A homologous set is defined theoretically as a group of one or more proteins in which
each protein is homologous with every other protein in
the set; such sets are assumed to be maximal, in the
sense that all homologous pairs of proteins are assigned
to the same homologous set. In practice, empirical,
putative homologous sets inferred from sequence data
rarely satisfy both of the above criteria, since homology
is not always detectable from sequence similarity, and
fusion proteins (among others) produce “partial

Figure 2 Accumulation of proteins encoded by sequenced genomes. The count of proteins (in millions) is shown for different nested
criteria of uniqueness: the total count of annotated proteins is shown in blue, the count of unique sequences in red, the total count of
homologous sets in light green, and the subset of these that are orphans (no detectable homologs at a BLAST threshold of 1 × 10-10) in dark
green.

Beiko Biology Direct 2011, 6:34
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/34

homology” relationships that make perfect sets impossible to define. On this data set, a simple BLAST threshold criterion used to infer homology based on sequence
similarity identified 418,214 homologous sets of proteins; over half of these sets (255,417) were orphan proteins in homologous sets of size 1. The increase in
protein numbers parallels that of genomes outlined
above, with counts of total proteins, unique proteins,
homologous sets and orphans more than doubling in
the period 2005-2009.
Sequencing many isolates from a given species or
genus will tend to add less genetic diversity to the existing pool as more examples accumulate, but there is no
sign of saturation in the number of “interesting” (distinct and/or novel) proteins here either. The concept of
“open” versus “closed” pan-genomes was introduced by
[35], and bears directly on the question of the net result
of sampling additional genomes within a given taxonomic unit whose members are expected to display
some level of genomic similarity that is due to recent
shared ancestry and common descent (typically, genus
or named species). Figure 3a shows the increase in the
number of homologous sets of proteins as additional
members of specific genera are sampled, for 20 genera
with at least ten sequenced representatives each. Within
this group, Brucella is a notable outlier (also noted by
[36]) with the tenth added genome increasing the count
of homologous sets by < 1%. This suggests that the
sampled members of Brucella are largely clonal, with little variation in gene content. The other 19 genera show
similar patterns of homologous set accumulation with
increased sampling, although the precise gain for any
given number of genomes varies across genera and also
depends on which genomes are sampled. For example,
adding a tenth genome to an existing set of nine
increases the number of homologous sets by over 6% in
genus Mycoplasma (Figure 3b), but only 3% in Escherichia, a genus noted for its variation in gene content
[37]. Mycoplasma and Clostridium stand out as genera
with particularly large variation in gene content: this is
not necessarily surprising for Clostridium, a highly heterogeneous group that is likely in need of further taxonomic refinement [38]. The variation in homologous set
gain arising from different random orderings of genome
addition is also informative about the spread of genetic
variation within a genus. Heavily biased sampling of a
few different groups (e.g., named species) can produce
large variation, since some added genomes will be nearly
identical to others already in the set, while others will
represent new subgroups and add many new homologous gene sets. Genera with large standard deviations
such as Clostridium and Mycobacterium have imbalanced internal structures as the sampled genomes are
dominated by a few pathogenic species such as C.

Page 5 of 36

botulinum and M. tuberculosis, and genomes in both
groups have a wide range of gene counts: different
amounts of novelty will result if the tenth added genome is M. leprae (1284 genes) or M. smegmatis (3490
genes). Synechococcus is a particularly perverse case
where multiple phylogenetically distinct groups have
been assigned to the same genus [39]. Although sequencing additional members of any genus yields diminishing
numbers of additional gene families, these examples
show that even after a few dozen representatives of a
given genus have been sequenced, there is still more
genetic novelty in that group that has yet to be
observed. Given the amount of novel genetic information in new genomes and the increasing rate at which
genomes are being sequenced, there is consequently no
reason to suspect that the rate of accumulation of novel
genes will decrease in the near future.
Can certain genes or genomes serve as proxies for the
complete set?

Trees based on SSU rDNA, and to a lesser extent other
marker genes such as RpoB [40,41] have been used as
the basis for evolutionary and taxonomic classification
of microbes. This strategy implies the acceptance that a
particular gene or set of genes among thousands can
serve as a proxy for the evolutionary relatedness of
organisms [42]. In the case of SSU rDNA and informational proteins in general, the soundness of this claim
has been put forward based on supposed essentiality
and recalcitrance to LGT [43,44], although empirical
evidence for transfer of even universal ribosomal proteins has been shown [45,46]. In addition to these
“genetic proxies”, many studies have aimed to use simplify the analyzed data set by using “genomic proxies”,
in which a small subset of the available members of a
given taxonomic group are chosen to represent the
entire group.
Proxy-based approaches reduce the size of the data set
that needs to be considered, often by one or more
orders of magnitude, thereby expanding the range of
algorithms that can be applied, and simplifying the
visualization and interpretation of results. Such methods, however, necessarily fall short when the fundamental assumptions of proxy approaches are violated. Broad
generalizations based on SSU data are only valid to the
extent that SSU rDNA faithfully tracks organismal and
genomic patterns of inheritance and relatedness.
Although many different approaches have produced
results that are claimed to be “similar” to the SSU
rDNA tree, it is clear that (i) even though the standards
for its analysis are higher than for many other genes
due to the availability of many examples and the careful
mapping of structural information onto reference alignments, the analysis of SSU rDNA is still subject to the

Beiko Biology Direct 2011, 6:34
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/34

Page 6 of 36

(a)

(b)

Figure 3 Relationship between sampling depth of congeners and pangenome size. (a) Percent increase in pan-genome size (number of
proteins assigned to previously unobserved homologous sets vs. total number of proteins) as the number of sequenced members of a genus
increases from x (current # of organisms) to x + 1. Markers indicate average values for each x over ten randomized replicate sets for six selected
genera, while lines without markers show results for another fifteen genera. (b) Percent increase for 21 genera as the number of sequenced
representatives increases from nine to ten. Gray bars indicate average values over ten replicates, while error bars indicate the standard deviation.

Beiko Biology Direct 2011, 6:34
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/34

usual biases that confound phylogenetic analysis [47];
(ii) the evolutionary histories of many other genes do
not match that of SSU rDNA; and (iii) genome-level
relationships are more correctly represented with a network or graph, and genome networks will differ considerably from a network based only on SSU sequences,
which would likely contain relatively few, localized reticulations that reflect phylogenetic uncertainty. As for
the use of genome-level proxies, the highly reticulated
nature of relationships among prokaryotes means that
choosing one microorganism to stand in for others cannot be done naïvely (for instance, based only on species
or genus-level taxonomy), as many important linkages
will be missed.
Members of the same named species and different
species within the same genus (Figure 4) can differ dramatically in terms of their common gene inventory, and
the taxonomic affinities of the genes they contain. The
similarity of sequence-based taxonomic affinities was
assessed for many pairs of conspecific and congeneric
genomes, both in terms of the affinity of each member
of the pair for the other, and in terms of the overall
similarity of their patterns of taxonomic matches to
each other and to other taxonomic groups. The latter
was assessed by building proportional counts of affinities
for proteins in each genome to proteins of other taxonomic groups, and computing the Euclidean distance
between these sets of counts for the pair of genomes
under consideration. The affinity differences shown in
Figure 4 reflect the degree to which these patterns of
matching differ from one another (see Methods). The
majority of genomes from paired conspecific organisms
(Figure 4a) have 85% or more homologous gene sets in
common, but many pairs nonetheless show considerable
differences in their affinities. The two members of
Chlorobium phaeobacteroides (affinity difference = 0.65)
show different affinities to other members of their own
family: 53.2% of encoded non-orphan proteins in C.
phaeobacteroides strain BS1 match best to genus Prosthecochloris, whereas proteins in strain DSM 266 tend
to best match the congener C. limnicola (39.0%) and
genus Pelodictyon (32.4%), the other member of the
“Chlorobium/Pelodictyon group” within family Chlorobiaceae. While the large proportion of shared genes in
the chosen B. melitensis pair is expected, the level of
affinity difference is high but due largely to differential
affinities to other species in genus Brucella, including B.
abortus, B. microti, B. ovis, B. suis and B. canis. Similarly, differences in affinities within the delta-proteobacterial species Anaeromyxobacter dehalogenans largely
reflect different proportions of best matches to Anaeromyxobacter species K and Fw109.
At the genus level, there is considerably more variation in gene content and affinity (Figure 4b). The

Page 7 of 36

genomes from species Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae
and Actinobacillus succinogenes have stronger affinities
to members of genera Haemophilus and Mannheimia,
respectively, than they do to each other. Affinity differences of a similar nature are seen for Rhizobium leguminosarum (strongest affinity to Agrobacterium) and
Rhizobium sp. NGR234 (strongest affinity to Sinorhizobium), and for other prominent groups such as Haemophilus. Although the affinity differences here are
determined largely by differential associations at the
next-highest taxonomic rank, the variable genome in
each of the above cases consists of genes with affinities
to many different taxonomic groups in other families,
classes and phyla: these differences are potentially very
important but may be missed by proxy-or aggregationbased approaches.
Data set reduction strategies and genome phylogeny

A common approach to inferring putative evolutionary
relationships among genomes is to build trees or networks based on pairwise distances between genomes.
Distance-based approaches are popular because they can
be very efficient, with the widely used neighbor-joining
algorithm having a time complexity of O(n3), meaning
the computation time scales cubically with increasing
numbers of input sequences [48]. The first distancebased genome phylogenies were based on the proportion
of homologous sets that are shared in common between
different pairs of genomes [10]. Refinements of this
basic approach include distances based on the similarity
of all putatively orthologous loci between each pair of
genomes rather than the binary presence/absence criterion. Conditioned reconstruction [49] is a gene contentbased approach that aims to correct for the tendency of
small genomes to share many loci in common (a large
proportion of which is typically a “universally conserved
core": [50,51]), and was used to propose a novel ringlike structure to describe genomic relationships. Conditioned reconstruction approaches are highly dependent
on the choice of conditioning genome, although alternatives have been proposed that eliminate the need for a
choice of specific genome [52,53]. Other artifacts
include the tendency of small genomes to group with
one another due to independent loss of similar sets of
loci [11], which can be remedied to some extent by normalization for genome size and correction for unequal
evolutionary rates [54]; and the tendency of methods to
yield “phylogenetic compromises” in the face of conflicting signals that arise due to LGT [55].
If distances between genomes can be calculated efficiently, then genome phylogeny approaches, even
though subject to biases and certain oversimplifying
assumptions, can be used to assess the impact of including or excluding particular taxa on the overall inferred

Beiko Biology Direct 2011, 6:34
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/34

Page 8 of 36

(a)

(b)

Figure 4 Affinity differences between randomly selected genome pairs. The relationship between the percentage of encoded proteins that
are not shared between two genomes (% variable) and the difference between taxonomic profiles of best BLAST matches is shown for
randomly chosen pairs of conspecific (Figure 4a) and congeneric (Figure 4b) organisms. Highly divergent pairs are identified by their species or
genus name.

Beiko Biology Direct 2011, 6:34
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/34

relationships. Given the prominence of LGT and statistical artifacts, a genome phylogeny cannot be taken as an
authoritative statement about organismal or genomic
relationships, nor does it constitute proof that such relationships even have meaning [56]. The implied relationships can nonetheless yield insights into genomic
affinities, especially in cases where the positioning of a
taxonomic group contradicts other data sources such as
SSU rDNA or concatenated informational proteins, or
the position of a group changes depending on which
other groups are included or excluded, or the weightings
of different genes are changed [13]. Figure 5 shows a
normalized BLASTP-based genome phylogeny constructed for 1073 genomes, rooted between the Bacteria
and Archaea and aggregated into taxonomically cohesive
groups up to the level of phylum. Although named taxonomic groups show a great deal of cohesion in this tree,
there are some unusual features and intriguing exceptions. For example, the bacterial phyla Nitrospirae and
Aquificae and a subset of Mollicutes are found in different positions within the Proteobacteria. Aquificae are
sister to the Epsilon-proteobacteria, a relationship that
has been proposed elsewhere, while the Mollicutes are
sister to a number of alpha-proteobacterial genera that
are also reduced in size. The Nitrospirae do not appear
as a separate phylum, but rather as a close affiliate of

Page 9 of 36

the Delta-proteobacteria, an association reported elsewhere based on 16S analysis [57] and conserved gene
order [58]. Another anomaly is the Gamma-proteobacterium Shewanella denitrificans, which branches within
the Epsilon-proteobacteria as sister to genus Arcobacter,
when the remainder of its congeners branch as expected
within the Gamma-proteobacteria. The Spirochaetes are
split into three groups, with genus Brachyspira as sister
to the Fusobacteria and Leptospira as sister to group
comprising another set of Mollicutes (Mycoplasma and
Ureaplasma) and cellulolytic Fibrobacter succinogenes,
the lone representative of phylum Fibrobacteres in the
set. Another unusually positioned genome in the set is
the Firmicute (class Clostridia) Coprothermobacter proteolyticus, which branches with other major thermophile-containing phyla Dictyoglomi, Synergistetes, and
Thermotogae near the base of the bacterial tree. It is
unclear whether this association is driven by legitimate
genetic affinities, or is simply a consequence of a lack of
affinity of these groups for other phyla in the tree, and
an analog of the well-studied long-branch attraction
artifact [59] in phylogenetics.
To investigate the consequences of using a smaller
data set, a tree was constructed from the same starting
set of pairwise distances, but including only those genera with two or more sequenced representatives. For

Figure 5 Normalized BLASTP-based distance tree for 1173 completely sequenced genomes. Cohesive taxonomic groupings are
represented using triangles, while cohesive subgroups separated from other members of their parent group are identified with parentheses in
the tip label.

Beiko Biology Direct 2011, 6:34
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/34

each of these genera, the two largest representatives
were chosen, with the added condition that both genomes must be members of different named species if
possible. The tree for the resulting set of 298 genomes
is shown in Figure 6. While many major lineages from
Figure 5 are now missing, several differences in the position of the lineages that remain are apparent. A striking
difference is the separation of the Delta-proteobacteria
from the other members of their phylum; instead they
appear as sisters to the Aquificae (represented here by
the lone genus Sulfurihydrogenibium). Thermotogae and
Dictyoglomi remain together at the base of the bacterial
tree; the branching order of other phyla is changed, but
support for relationships above the phylum level is
notoriously weak and unstable [15]. In the absence of
Fusobacteria, genus Brachyspira rejoins the main lineage
of Spirochaetes, although Leptospira remains as a separate group. S. denitrificans remains as sister to Arcobacter in the Epsilon-proteobacteria.
These phylogenies necessarily condense a great deal of
information into a relatively simple set of distance
scores. Approaches such as Neighbor-Net [60,61] build
networks that can represent alternative, incompatible (in
the sense of a tree) phylogenetic signals from a distance
matrix. Figure 7 (Proteobacteria) and Figure 8 (all other

Page 10 of 36

bacterial phyla + Archaea) show the network constructed with the same distance data that were used to
build the tree in Figure 6: the full data set could not be
analyzed in this fashion due to memory limitations in
SplitsTree. Interpretation of this network is subject to
the following properties and constraints. First, the network is shown as a cladogram (all edges are of equal
length) to emphasize discordance in the data set, and
alternative affinities shown in the network typically do
not carry the same weight. Second, all splits in this network must be circularly compatible [60], which limits
the representation to a two-dimensional, planar graph,
with the consequence that many alternative affinities
may still not be displayed. Finally, as described in [62]
and elsewhere, splits graphs do not clearly show “longdistance” affinities between taxa. Nonetheless, relaxing
the strict tree requirement can reposition groups and
highlight cases where strong disagreement exists.
Although most phyla and classes show similar degrees
of cohesion in Figure 7 as they do in Figure 6, certain
lineages are positioned in ways that may be suggestive
of strongly conflicting signals. For example, the
hyperthermophilic bacterial groups Dictyoglomi, Aquificae and Thermotogae are concentrated in one region of
the graph, in close proximity to thermophilic members

Figure 6 Normalized BLASTP-based distance tree for 298 completely sequenced genomes from 149 distinct genera. Groups are
summarized as in Figure 5.

Beiko Biology Direct 2011, 6:34
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/34

Page 11 of 36

Gamma-proteobacteria

Figure 7 Neighbor-net showing relationships among 298 completely sequenced genomes (focused on Proteobacteria). Proteobacterial
divisions and outlying groups are indicated with separate blue regions.

of class Clostridia such as Caldicellulosiruptor and Thermoanaerobacter, suggesting potential lateral connections
between these groups. The Aquificae-delta-proteobacterial association in Figure 6 may reflect a specific linkage
between the sulphate-reducing Desulfovibrio and the
sulphur-oxidising Sulfurihydrogenibium. The Spirochaetes are supported by splits that separate them from
the other genomes, although Leptospira appears to be
the most weakly connected member of this group.
Based on its reported “vertical” history and lifestyle,
Thermoplasma might be expected to bridge the Euryarchaeota (its putative phylum based on 16S and concatenated informational protein phylogeny: [7]) and the
Crenarchaeota from which it appears to have acquired
many genes [63-65]. However, this genus shows no
stronger association with the Crenarchaeota than does
any other group of Euryarchaeota. Within the Proteobacteria, several outlying groups from the genome trees
are also outliers in the network, including the gammaproteobacterial genera Francisella and Acidithiobacillus
and S. denitrificans which remains a close partner with
Arcobacter. As is the case with Leptospira, genomes that
flank larger groups in the graph may have particularly
strong affinities for other major lineages; examples here
in addition to those listed above include Blochmannia,

the Alpha-proteobacterial genus Zymomonas, and the
Halobacteria. Other affinities may not be apparent either
because they are not reflected in the pairwise genomic
distances, or due to the constraints of the neighbor-net
approach. To carry out a thorough examination of the
affinities of different genomes, a protein-by-protein analysis is necessary.
Phylogenomic analysis of 1173 microbial genomes

Model-based phylogenetic analysis of orthologous genes
is a computationally demanding task. Whereas the analyses above made use of a simple reciprocal best match
criterion for inferring orthologous sequences between
pairs of genomes, phylogenetic tree construction
requires the definition of orthologous sets which can
range in size from 1 to 1173 in this data set. It is not
sufficient to greedily assemble sets by adding all
sequences that share a significant BLAST match at
some threshold: Harlow et al. [66] demonstrated that
this straightforward approach led to the inclusion of >
87% of proteins in a single, massive “blob”, with nonhomologous gene or protein pairs connected via fusion
proteins and false-positive BLAST matches. Markov
clustering as implemented in e.g., TribeMCL [67] is a
popular graph clustering approach that treats the set of

Beiko Biology Direct 2011, 6:34
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/34

Page 12 of 36

Bacteroidetes

Figure 8 Neighbor-net showing relationships among 298 completely sequenced genomes (focused on other bacterial phyla and the
Archaea). Red regions indicate distinct phyla and outlying genomes and groups.

matches as a graph by modelling proteins as nodes and
each BLAST match between a pair of proteins as an
edge connecting those two nodes. The clustering strategy then models the “flow” through different parts of
the graph using random walks, and cuts the graph in
areas of low connectivity. While benchmarking has suggested that Markov clustering is effective in recovering
orthologous relationships, and its time complexity is O
(n2), making it relatively efficient, is it is non-phylogenetic in nature and in practice does not scale well to
graphs with millions of vertices.
An alternative to the graph clustering approach is to
assemble sequences into putative homologous sets
which can contain > 10,000 sequences in some cases,
and use a more-explicitly phylogenetic strategy to

subdivide these sets into groups of putative orthologs.
BranchClust [68] is an example of such an approach,
which allows the user to retain a certain proportion of
duplicates from a subset of genomes in a cluster. The
approach applied here is similar to BranchClust in that
it bases orthology decisions on a phylogenetic tree, but
is much stricter in the constitution of orthologous sets.
The program UCLUST [22] builds protein clusters at a
given level of amino acid identity by iterating through a
list of proteins, adding a protein to an existing cluster if
it is at least k% identical to the “seed” protein for that
cluster; if no such identity relationship is found, then
the protein is used as the seed for a new cluster. The
performance of this algorithm depends on the structure
of sequences in the data set: if many similar proteins are

Beiko Biology Direct 2011, 6:34
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/34

present, then many comparisons will be saved, but if all
proteins in the set are sufficiently dissimilar then an allversus-all comparison will still be necessary. A critical
advantage of methods such as UCLUST and CD-HIT is
the potential to avoid making all-versus-all comparisons;
adding more homologs that satisfy the identity criterion
to an existing data set will result in a linear, rather than
quadratic, increase in the number of comparisons that
need to be made.
Since even UCLUST could not process all 3.7 million
proteins in a single run, a hierarchical approach based
on genome taxonomy was implemented (see Methods);
this strategy produced 424,219 clusters with sizes
between 1 (orphan proteins) and 21,182. The entire
clustering procedure took approximately 30 hours to
complete: by contrast, all-versus-all BLAST comparisons
for the genome phylogeny analysis above required
approximately 70,000 CPU hours. An iterative approach
to multiple sequence alignment construction and trimming was performed, based in large part on the use of
hidden Markov models to construct accurate alignments
with detailed confidence scores. FastTree [24] was used
to infer trees from these multiple sequence alignments.
Orthologous sequence sets were recovered from the
resulting trees by first collapsing groups of in-paralogs,
and then by identifying subtrees (clans) in which no
genome was represented twice. The procedure of multiple sequence alignment, phylogenetic inference and tree
trimming took approximately 90 hours to complete.
A total of 159,905 putatively orthologous sets were
recovered using the above procedure (Figure 9a), covering a total of 2,616,080 proteins (68.0% of the original
protein set). Of these, 98,175 (61.4%) contain ten or
fewer leaves, while only ten trees cover even half of the
genomes in the set. The lack of “universal” or “nearly
universal” orthologs in this set may reflect failure of the
clustering approach to unite distantly related orthologous sets across all bacterial and archaeal phyla, and
may also be a consequence of the aggressive approach
taken to separate subsets of paralogous sequences. In
spite of this subdivision of clusters, Figures 9b, c, d and
9e show that many clusters covered multiple taxonomic
groups at every rank. While 104,323 sets covered only a
single phylum, over 55,000 sets still contained proteins
from 2-24 phyla. A majority of clusters contained
sequences from > 1 taxonomic order. The remainder of
this work is focused on the recovery of sequences with
close affinities to particular taxonomic groups of interest, rather than the construction of a complete summary
tree or network; as a consequence the analyses reported
below will likely be less sensitive to a failure of the
approach to assemble distantly related sequence sets.
Focusing on relationships without comparison to a
reference “vertical” tree removes the need to express

Page 13 of 36

affinities as being either concordant or discordant with
respect to some arbitrary reference. Genes with patchy
distributions might nonetheless produce trees that do
not disagree with a reference phylogeny, even if many
intervening taxa are missing and the distribution might
better be explained by LGT.
A straightforward approach to assess the phylogenetic
affinities of a particular group is to identify all trees that
contain members of that group (possibly with the additional condition that all members of the group be
resolved cohesively in the tree, i.e. a clan sensu [69]),
and then identify the most likely sister group in each of
those trees (see Methods for details). This analysis was
performed for the gamma-proteobacterial genus Acidithiobacillus, a group separated from the other genomes
in its class by the Beta-proteobacteria in Figures 5, 6
and 7. Historically, Acidithiobacillus was split from a
highly heterogeneous genus, Thiobacillus, which was
postulated before gene sequencing was widespread but
ultimately shown to contain members of several proteobacterial classes when subjected to SSU analysis [70].
The species represented here, Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans, is an obligate autotroph that that can oxidise Fe2+,
elemental sulphur or thiosulphate and related compounds, and grows at pH < 2.0 [71,72]. A total of 837
trees contained a grouping of Acidithiobacillus with a
single genus as sister, while an additional 795 trees had
multiple genera as the sister group to Acidithiobacillus.
Figure 10 shows the affinities for the 504 trees covering
the 34 most-frequently observed sister taxa; another 179
genera were observed among the remaining 333 trees,
but are not shown in this figure. The most common
partner of Acidithiobacillus is Halothiobacillus, another
gamma-proteobacterial sulphur-oxidising organism that
was removed from genus Thiobacillus by [70], while the
next most common partner is a sulphur-oxidising Betaproteobacterium, Thiomonas, which was removed from
Thiobacillus by [73]. The majority of other affinities are
to members of these two classes, but genera from other
classes such as the acidophilic alpha-proteobacterium
Acidiphilum are observed, as well as acidophiles from
phyla Actinobacteria and Verrucomicrobia. Examination
of the functional annotations of proteins from Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans ATCC 23270 indicated that some
of the proteins apparently shared with the other genera
named above revealed proteins associated with sulphur,
but also a wide range of other metabolic (e.g., transaldolase) and informational (e.g., aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase) proteins, as well as transporters and other
membrane proteins. Such affinities can be summarized
using functional categories of genes, but no class of
function appears to be recalcitrant to transfer. Although
many partners appear to share ecological properties in
common with Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans, the

Beiko Biology Direct 2011, 6:34
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/34

Page 14 of 36

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

Figure 9 Frequency distribution and taxonomic coverage of putatively orthologous protein sets of different sizes. Panel (a) shows the
number of orthologous sets based on the number of proteins they contain. Only the retained sets of size ≥ 4, which can generate unrooted
phylogenetic trees that are informative, are shown. Panels (b)-(e) show the number of taxonomic groups covered by sets at the taxonomic ranks
of phylum, order, genus and species.

Beiko Biology Direct 2011, 6:34
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/34

Page 15 of 36

Figure 10 Taxonomic groups most frequently found in association with proteins from genus Acidithiobacillus. The 34 most-frequently
observed sister taxa (see Methods for details), covering a total of 504 trees, are shown in decreasing order of co-occurrence. An additional 795
trees in which Acidithiobacillus has multiple partners are not summarized, nor are 333 trees covering 179 other partner genera. Blue = Gammaproteobacteria, red = Beta-proteobacteria, green = Alpha-proteobacteria, yellow = Delta-proteobacteria, orange = unclassified Proteobacteria
(Magnetococcus), gray = other phyla. Alternating light and dark shades of the same color are used when two or more members of the same
group are adjacent to one another in the chart.

adaptive role of LGT (if indeed it is adaptive) manifests
itself in ways much more subtle than simple transfer of
obvious pathways, e.g. those directly involved in sulphur
metabolism.
As noted above, the position of genus Brachyspira in
genome phylogenies appears to depend on the inclusion
or exclusion of the phylum Fusobacteria: when this phylum is excluded (Figure 6), Brachyspira branches with
most other members of the phylum Spirochaetes. Representatives of both groups are found together in some
habitats such as in adhering to the intestinal mucosa of
patients with irritable bowel syndrome [74], suggesting
an opportunity for habitat-directed LGT. Individual

genes that are similar between Brachyspira and Fusobacterium have indeed been noted in the literature, including a beta-lactamase [75] and a symporter in close
proximity to a mobile element in Brachyspira [76]. Figure 11 shows the partners of Brachyspira, summarized
at the phylum level. The most commonly observed single partner of this genus is in fact the phylum Proteobacteria, which is not suggested by any of the tree or
network analyses above. Spirochaetes are second in the
list of affinities, followed by Firmicutes and Fusobacteria.
Why then does the Brachyspira-Fusobacteria association
appear in the genome tree of Figure 5? It may be that
the similarities between proteins of these two groups (as

Beiko Biology Direct 2011, 6:34
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/34

Page 16 of 36

Figure 11 Phylogenetic affinities of proteins from genus Brachyspira. All trees which contained ≥ 1 Brachyspira genome in a cohesive
grouping (i.e., a clan) are summarized.

well as those of Firmicutes) are particularly strong due
to recent transfer, with large normalized scores that
exert a strong influence on the pairwise genome distances. A breakdown of affinities at the genus rather
than phylum level identifies very different key partners:
the three most-frequent partners to Brachyspira are all
Spirochaetes, while the top ten also include one Firmicute (genus Clostridia), two Fusobacteria, a genus from
phylum Fibrobacteres, another Spirochaete genus, one
from Tenericutes and finally a lone proteobacterial
genus. Although in aggregate, the affinity of Brachyspira
with Proteobacteria is quite strong, this affinity is spread
out over a total of 70 genera.
The position of C. proteolyticus in the genome phylogeny was particularly interesting, as this organism was
the only member of the relatively well-sampled Firmicutes phylum to branch with members of other phyla.
This observation is consistent with the phylogeny
reported by [77] which placed two species of Coprothermobacter as sisters to Fervidobacterium and

Thermotoga, and the analysis of [58] that placed this
organism apart from the other Firmicutes. Other thermophilic Clostridia have been sequenced, including
representatives of genera Thermoanaerobacter, Carboxydothermus, and Caldicellulosiruptor. Several alternative
approaches were used to characterize the affinities of C.
proteolyticus. First, an affinity analysis was carried out at
the level of phylum (with Firmicutes subdivided into its
two main classes, Bacilli and Clostridia), to determine
which of the four clostridial thermophiles had significant
affinities to other major groups. C. proteolyticus and to a
lesser extent Carboxydothermus hydrogenoformans
(Figure 12) show phylogenetic affinities with Proteobacteria and other groups in addition to Clostridia and
Bacilli. By contrast, Thermoanaerobacter tencongensis
and Caldicellulosiruptor obsidianus match the Clostridia
almost exclusively. This simple analysis, however, does
not consider the extent of sampling effort within the
order Thermoanaerobacterales, to which all of these
four organisms belong. Indeed, T. tengcongensis and C.

Beiko Biology Direct 2011, 6:34
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/34

Page 17 of 36

Figure 12 Most-frequently observed phylogenetic partners of four thermophilic members of class Clostridia. The proportion of gene
trees in which each genome has the indicated phylum or class as its sister is shown. Firmicute classes are highlighted in red, while sister groups
comprising multiple phyla are shown in gray.

obsidianus both have other congeners present in the
data set, dramatically increasing the likelihood that their
best matches will fall within order Clostridia due to selfmatches at the genus or family level. A second analysis
was carried out by removing all non-self members of
Thermoanaerobacterales from the trees, and re-running
the comparison. Although T. tengcongensis and C. obsidianus match a greater number of non-clostridial organisms in the second analysis, C. proteolyticus and C.
hydrogeniformans still show much stronger affinities to
non-Clostridia and non-Firmicute groups. The strongest
non-Firmicute affinities of C. proteolyticus in the revised
analysis are to phyla Thermotogae and Dictyoglomi,
which along with phylum Synergistetes are its closest
partners in the genome tree in Figure 5.
Holloway and Beiko [78] formalized the structure of
an intergenomic affinity graph (IAG) which represents
each genome as a node in a graph, with nodes connected by edges when some evidence for strong affinity
(e.g., BLAST similarity, shared gene content or phylogenetic proximity) is observed. IAGs were previously constructed (although not named as such) by [79-82]. Here
the IAG structure is applied to sets of genomes, aggregated at different taxonomic levels, to assess whether

named taxonomic groups are indeed cohesive when
phylogenetic evidence is considered. Figure 13 shows an
IAG based on genus-level affinities from the set of trees
generated above. This cluster is similar to the graph
generated by [81] using a combination of compositional
similarity and gene tree proximity, although the largest
component of the graph in [81] contains a much larger
number of genomes from Firmicutes and other phyla in
addition to the Proteobacteria. A total of 37 distinct
clusters were recovered, with some genera not included
because their affinities with other genera did not meet
minimum threshold requirements (see Methods). Some
clusters are homogeneous at the phylum level: phyla
Aquificae, Cyanobacteria, Deferribacteres, Deinococcus/
Thermus, Fusobacteria, Planctomycetes, Synergistetes,
Tenericutes, and Verrucomicrobia each localized to a
single cluster which contained members of no other
phylum. Large phyla tended to be split across several
clusters, with Proteobacteria spanning eleven, Actinobacteria spanning four, and Euryarchaeota four: notably,
the Firmicutes were all in a single cluster. Six clusters
contained representatives from more than one phylum:
the single cluster containing the largest number of Actinobacteria has one genus (Rubrobacter) that connects to

Beiko Biology Direct 2011, 6:34
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/34

Page 18 of 36

Figure 13 Intergenomic affinity graph for 455 genera built from 159,905 input trees. Each pink circle represents a genus, and blue edges
connect genera with affinities that satisfy the minimum incidence criteria (see Methods). Circled genera in the largest component correspond to
proteobacterial genera identified in Figure 10, with blue, red and green indicating members of the Gamma, Beta and Alpha subdivisions
respectively. Clusters that are heterogeneous at the phylum level are indicated with abbreviated names of their constituent phyla: Ac =
Actinobacteria, Un = Unclassified Bacteria, Cx = Chloroflexi, Eu = Euryarchaeota, Ko = Korarchaeota, Cr = Crenarchaeota, Ni = Nitrospirae, Ch =
Chlorobi, δ-Pr = Delta-proteobacteria, Fi = Firmicutes, Di = Dictyoglomi, Th = Thermotogae, Ad = Acidobacteria, Ge = Gemmatimonadetes, Sp =
Spirochaetes.

the unclassified bacterial genus Thermobaculum, which
in turn is connected to a Chloroflexus (Sphaerobacter)
and a Chlorobi (Thermomicrobium). Notably, all four of
these organisms are thermophilic. A single cluster contains all genera from phyla Crenarchaeota and Korarchaeota, along with several methanogenic and other
genera of Euryarchaeota. A group of sulphur-metabolizing Delta-proteobacteria is connected to phylum Nitrospirae, a single Chlorobi and the Chloroflexus genus
Dehalococcoides. All Acidobacteria (three genera) and
the lone Gemmatimonadetes genus are connected in a
single cluster. The Spirochaetes cluster together, but the
unusual genus Leptospira is also connected to a single
delta-proteobacterial genus, Bdellovibrio. Finally, the
position of Coprothermobacter in this IAG is consistent
with previous analyses shown above, since it is connected to the three Firmicute genera Bacillus, Clostridium, and Thermoanaerobacter, but is also linked to
Dictyloglomi, which are in turn linked to all genera in
phylum Thermotogae.

The largest cluster in the graph contains the majority of
gamma-, beta-and alpha-proteobacterial genera. Acidithiobacillus and many of its partners from the analysis shown
in Figure 10 are present in this graph; in particular, sulphur-metabolizing organisms and acidophilic genera are
connected to one another, with acidophilic genera responsible for the inclusion of Alpha-proteobacteria in this cluster. The diverse genera Pseudomonas (9 partners),
Shewanella (10 partners) and Burkholderia (11 partners)
are critical hubs in this graph, linking groups that would
otherwise be divided into separate clusters. Many of the
bridges induced by these and other organisms are taxonomically inconsistent but suggestive of LGT driven by common ecological roles, or arising opportunistically due to
presence in the same habitat. Groups that are taxonomically and ecologically cohesive tend to share many connections; for example the enteric bacteria which are also
found in the largest cluster, connected to the environmental organisms above (Burkholderia, acidophiles, etc.)
through insect endosymbiont genomes.

Beiko Biology Direct 2011, 6:34
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/34

Page 19 of 36

Figure 14 Intergenomic affinity graph for 53 classes. Node and edge representations are as in Figure 13; class name and parent phylum are
shown for each node in the graph.

An IAG was constructed at the class level to assess
higher-order affinities. The resulting graph (Figure 14)
contains only five connected components, three of
which are relatively small (Dictyoglomi with Thermotogae; three verrucomicrobial classes connected with one
another; and a pairing of Chlorobi with class Dehalococcoidetes from phylum Chloroflexi, consistent with the
genus-level IAG). The second-largest component contains all Archaeal orders with the exception of Halobacteria, which associate instead with Actinobacteria in the
largest component. Notable hubs in the largest component include Actinobacteria, which is connected to eight
other phyla; Gamma-proteobacteria, which is connected
to three other phyla in addition to all other classes of
Proteobacteria; and the Delta-proteobacteria which are
connected to a remarkable ten other phyla and three
other classes of Proteobacteria. This wide range of affinities may help to explain the unusual placement of this
group in the genome phylogeny of Figure 6, and is consistent with the alternative affinities seen in the genuslevel IAG. Although different groups within this class
are likely responsible for different observed connections,
the number of associations seen indicates an important
role for this class in LGT to various distantly related
groups. Interestingly, the Epsilon-proteobacteria connect
only to two other classes: the Gamma-proteobacteria
and Aquificae. There is uncertainty about whether

Aquificae are “early-branching” thermophiles with affinities to other such groups including Thermotogae, or
whether they are close relatives to Epsilon-proteobacteria that have been extensively remodelled through
LGT and other evolutionary processes [16,83-85]. The
affinities in this IAG certainly suggest no strong association with other exclusively or largely thermophilic phyla.
The connection between Spirochaetes and Fusobacteria
may be driven by the affinities of Brachyspira shown
above.
Given the diverse set of conflicting relationships
exhibited by many different microbial groups at all levels
of taxonomic classification, it is evident that a genome
tree will necessarily fail to adequately describe the complex web of relatedness seen in prokaryotes. Furthermore, the susceptibility of tree approaches to artifacts
arising from conflicting signals [55] can produce groups
in the tree (clades, clans, etc.) that are potentially supported by none of the data. Network methods are an
obvious remedy to the limitations of tree approaches,
and several new techniques and algorithms [25,61,86-88]
have been proposed. Two particularly promising algorithms are galled networks and cluster networks [89],
which can explicitly show reticulate connections
between otherwise distant taxa without introducing an
exhaustive set of splits between them. Furthermore,
these approaches require no reference tree for

Beiko Biology Direct 2011, 6:34
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/34

Page 20 of 36

Figure 15 Galled network centered on C. proteolyticus. Straight lines represent tree edges, while reticulation edges are shown with curved
lines. Lineages with close affinities to C. proteolyticus are highlighted in green.

comparative purposes, unlike reconciliation or “HGT/
LGT” networks [90-92]. A disadvantage of these
approaches is that all input trees must be rooted: given
a set of trees covering variable sets of taxa, with potentially rampant LGT and variable rates of evolution disrupting any consistent pattern that might be expected, it
is difficult to justify any rooting strategy that might be
proposed. Still, if these algorithms can be further
refined, they will provide an avenue by which complex
intergenomic relationships can be visualized in a phylogenetic context (as opposed to the non-phylogenetic
IAGs shown above). Figure 15 shows a cluster network
built with Dendroscope [93], which shows connections
among taxa with previously reported affinities to C. proteolyticus. Trees including this species as well as representatives from Dictyoglomi, Thermotogae, Aquificae
and optionally other Clostridia were selected, with the
additional requirement that Archaea be represented for
rooting purposes (although interdomain transfers are
certainly possible). Only 13 trees satisfied these taxonomic requirements: the relevant RefSeq identifiers and
annotated functions for proteins from C. proteolyticus
are shown in Table 1. The functions span a wide range
of activities (core metabolism, DNA repair, replication,
etc.) and are quite different from the transcriptional and
translational proteins that are typically used to produce

reference trees. At the chosen threshold (see Methods),
the cluster network identifies three distinct partners for
C. proteolyticus. Within class Clostridia, C. difficile and
a group comprising Desulforudis, Finegoldia, and Anaerococcus are connected to C. proteolyticus, while
Table 1 RefSeq identifiers and annotated functions of C.
proteolyticus proteins included in the cluster network of
Figure 15.
RefSeq GI

Annotated function

206895185 MoaAnifBpqqE family protein
206895224 Dihydropteroate synthase
(dihydropteroatepyrophosphorylase)
206895314 Phosphoribosylformylglycinamidine synthase II
206895389 Fructose-1,6-bisphosphate aldolase, class II
206895496 Anaerobic ribonucleoside-triphosphate reductase activating
protein
206895498 Dimethyladenosine transferase
206895580 Formate–tetrahydrofolate ligase
206895681 DNA mismatch repair protein
206896085 Replication factor C subunit
206896220 Phosphate transport system regulatory protein PhoU
206896247 S-adenosylmethionine:tRNA ribosyltransferase-isomerase
206896383 Hypothetical protein
206896487 Hydrogenase expressionformation protein HypE

Beiko Biology Direct 2011, 6:34
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/34

affinities with phylum Aquificae are also seen, although
notably to only a subset of members of this phylum.
Inspection of the 13 input trees, however, suggests that
some important relationships are missed by the cluster
network: notably, four of the 13 input trees have C. proteolyticus in close association with either Dictyoglomi or
Thermotogae or both of these phyla, an association that
is not seen in the galled network.

Conclusions
Telling the whole story

There is no shortage of “genome trees” in the literature.
Inferred trees have been explicitly claimed as a “Tree of
Life” [8,14], as a null hypothesis of vertical descent to be
taken seriously [16,18] or rejected as ludicrous given the
amount of disagreement in the data [33], and completely
bypassed based on a lack of strong statistical support for
any particular structure [94]. Also notable is the disagreement about the extent of LGT, which will vary
depending on the specific data set analyzed, the analytical technique used (e.g., identification of phylogenetically discordant sequences, gene content or tree
comparisons), and the method used to count LGT
events. Strong statistical support has been used to argue
that recovered relationships should be treated as canonical, but simulation studies have shown that robust statistical support can be assigned to phylogenetic
relationships that are incorrect [55]. It is evident from
the analyses performed above and elsewhere that strict
hierarchical relationships must not be taken at face
value, but examined carefully to determine which components of the genomic data, if any, are consistent with
the reported relationships.
It is evident too that traditional concatenation
approaches are not adequate to the task of dealing
with highly reticulated relationships. Informational
proteins appear in lists of transferred genes, with
implied transfer distances (e.g. between proteobacterial
classes, or bacterial phyla) that are unlikely to be
explainable due to artifacts of phylogenetic inference.
If the probability of transfer of any particular gene is
nonzero, then adding genomes will only diminish the
candidate set of “transfer-free” genes; as soon as a set
is contaminated with LGT examples, incorrect topological relationships are likely to emerge [95]. Since the
purpose of concatenation is to reinforce weak phylogenetic signals that cannot be robustly recovered from
any single gene, the concatenation approach would
seem to be particularly vulnerable to the effects of
conflicting signals in the data. Techniques such as
Concaterpillar [96] can address discordant signals up
to a point, but still need some degree of cohesion
among the input alignments as a basis for building
consistent sets.

Page 21 of 36

Using all of the available data (or, more precisely, all
data that can be examined using a particular approach)
can reveal a multitude of alternative affinities. Even the
genome trees in Figures 5 and 6 reveal conflict in two
ways: in comparison with each other, and through comparison with SSU-based microbial taxonomy. The repositioning of certain groups such as the Deltaproteobacteria, Aquificae, Brachyspira, and Mollicutes
hints at a conflicting set of relationships (based only on
pairwise distances between genomes!) that cannot be
represented in a single tree, and the odd positioning of
Acidithiobacillus, C. proteolyticus and other lineages
relative to their taxonomic partners suggests a potential
disconnect between SSU rDNA and other important
components of the genome. The phylogenetic network
in Figures 7 and 8 introduces two-dimensional relationships to accommodate some amount of incongruence,
but the conclusions that can be drawn from inspection
of such a heavily reticulated network are limited to a
general confirmation of discordance in the data, and a
possible tendency for particularly heterogeneous lineages
to fall at the fringes of their taxonomic groups. The
highlighted genera in Figure 7, and loosely connected
assemblages in Figure 8 (e.g., Spirochaetes, Thermoplasma, and the two main Firmicute divisions) again
hint at multiple attractions, but cannot confirm specific
identities. Clearer examples of networks (i.e., with fewer
reticulations) are presented in [61] and elsewhere; these
rely on less discordance in the data or more-aggressive
filtering criteria. The galled network in Figure 15 has
the potential to show a much clearer picture of the
complex relationships among lineages, but imposes constraints on the input trees that are not reasonable when
rates of LGT are high.
Affinity graphs set aside questions of phylogeny in
favour of capturing strong relationships among a set of
input taxa. The connections in these graphs can be generated in a number of ways, such as sequence identity
of encoded proteins [80], optimization of best BLAST
matches [78], surrogate patterns of LGT [81] or sister
relationships in phylogenetic trees ([81]; this work). By
expressing a genome as a set of affinities, connections
can be recovered without recourse to tree rootedness
and the “verticality” or “laterality” of relationships. This
approach not only identified groups that appear to be
most strongly influenced by LGT such as the thiosulphate-metabolizing bacteria, C. proteolyticus and Leptospira, but guarantees that connections in the graph are
supported by some component of the input data.
The case of the thiosulphate-reducing acidophiles,
exemplified by Acidithiobacillus, gives a particularly
compelling historical example of the tortuous relationship between taxonomy, phylogeny, and ecology. The
original genus Thiobacillus was split into several genera

Beiko Biology Direct 2011, 6:34
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/34

across three proteobacterial classes in recognition of
both the ecological and metabolic diversity of these
organisms, and the story told by SSU rDNA analysis
[70]. However, LGT seems to be reinforcing the cohesion of these groups, with many trees suggesting transfer
between Acidithiobacillus and other acidophiles. While
some of the > 200 genera with which Acidithiobacillus
showed strong affinities may represent artifacts, the picture of the evolution of these groups is undoubtedly
complex.
A similar pattern is emerging for thermophiles such as
C. proteolyticus. Thermophiles have been previously
identified as substantial exchangers of genes to the point
where some thermophiles such as Aquifex aeolicus and
Thermotoga maritima appear to be hybrids comprising
significant numbers of genes from lineages as diverse as
the Epsilon-proteobacteria, thermophilic Clostridia, and
the Archaea [16,85,97]. C. proteolyticus is a thermophile
and a member of the Clostridia, a group noted elsewhere for its frequent exchange of genes with other
groups [98,99]. The resulting genetic composition of
this organism is sufficiently complex that it appears connected in many summaries to other phyla.
Klenk and Göker [27] suggested that sequencing
microbial genomes for taxonomic breadth rather than
specific industrial, ecological or medical reasons will
break long branches and reinforce genomic relationships
in a Tree of Life. However, the results for acidophiles,
thermophiles and other groups suggests otherwise:
rather than revealing a clear and “true” pattern of affinities among lineages, new genomes may simply
increase the patchwork of affinities without yielding
further insights into the evolutionary origins of major
lineages (e.g., the patterns of cellular division and inheritance that might provide a framework for hypotheses of
vertical descent). Aggregation techniques will combine
these data and generate trees that are “largely congruent
with the SSU tree”, at the cost of hiding a great deal of
conflicting information. While it is true that extremophilic lineages may represent a worst-case scenario for
the recovery of vertical relationships, when one considers the effect of setting aside various types of extremophiles, and the large uncertainty at deep phylogenetic
levels (which is likely to be sensitive to even a small
number of LGT events), one must ask what relationships remain that can be confidently asserted above the
genus or family level.
...with very large data sets

Taken together, the pan-genome (Figure 3) and affinity
analysis (Figure 4) indicate that even within a single
named species or genus, there is a great deal of gene
content variation and affinity variation for constituents
of the “core” genome. This variability makes it difficult

Page 22 of 36

to defend the exclusion of sequenced genomes from a
full analysis, at least without an initial pre-screening
phase. Holloway and Beiko [78] proposed the use of an
efficient first-pass technique to remove genomes with
no affinities to the groups of interest; if the genus-level
affinity screen of Acidithiobacillus is to be taken as an
example, then one might discard all genera not present
in the list of > 200 with high affinities, or even filter
more aggressively as was done in Figure 10. Since many
alternative affinities shown in Figure 4 involve disagreement at the species level or finer, a screening pass
might be used to remove congeners whose affinities outside of their own genus are similar to other congeners
that are retained. Aggregation of species or genus pangenomes would be another option, removing most
members of homologous sets that have consistent affinities with other lineages (e.g., ribosomal proteins).
Even with simplifications outlined above, a set comprising > 10,000 sequenced genomes covering > 1000
genera (a likely outcome of sequencing efforts such as
GEBA, and the rapidly diminishing costs of sequencing
technology more generally) will still present a formidable analytical challenge. One can imagine a series of
phylogenomic approaches that progressively sacrifice
precision and optimality in favour of reduced computation time. A wholly impractible strategy would be to use
the guaranteed optimal (for a given scoring scheme)
Smith-Waterman [100] algorithm to do an exhaustive
pairwise comparison of all protein sequences, greedily
aggregate into large “blobs”, and then use exact alignment methods [101] and exhaustive likelihood-based
tree search approaches to generate massive trees within
which orthologous sets (or mostly orthologous sets) can
be identified. The alternative approach used in this work
required less than one week of computation on a single
CPU, and could conceivably scale well to much larger
data sets using a combination of filtering as above, parallel processing and by exploiting repeated structure in
the protein sequence data.
While the approach used here supports very rapid
analysis of large sequence data sets, it currently sacrifices too much precision to support a full phylogenomic
analysis, as demonstrated by the failure to recover any
ubiquitous or nearly ubiquitous orthologous sequence
sets. Several refinements to the approach, particularly at
the level of orthology inference, need to be explored.
The rate of false negatives (i.e., pairs of proteins that
had a BLAST match at or better than a given threshold,
but failed to end up in the same cluster, was quite high
even at relatively high levels of stringency: for example,
of the 440,173,605 pairs of proteins that matched with a
BLAST e-value of 1 × 10 -50 or less, only 250,974,989
(57.0%) ended up in the same cluster. This number is
strongly influenced by the way in which matches are

Beiko Biology Direct 2011, 6:34
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/34

counted: for example, splitting a cluster containing 20
proteins into two subclusters of size ten would yield
10
2×
= 90 true positives, and 100 false negatives,
2
for an overall sensitivity of 47.4%. Nonetheless, full
orthologous set recovery will require the development of
approaches that still avoid the quadratic scaling of allversus-all comparisons, while retaining more information about clustered sequences. One approach with considerable potential is the hierarchical amalgamation of
proteins into a profile or hidden Markov model representation, which would aggregate many proteins into a
single statistical summary for comparative purposes
instead of discarding all but one member of the cluster.
An obvious alternative to ab initio inference of orthologous relationships is to start with an existing reference
database of putative orthologs or homologs such as
OMA [102], MBGD [103], EggNOG [104] or OrthoMCL
[105] as a scaffold, and overlay new sequences to the
existing reference sets. This can be accomplished using
either complete homology search against the reference
database, or by building statistical models for each of
the reference database families and assigning new
sequences to the set that corresponds to the best-matching model. Such approaches will however depend on the
scaling of the original algorithm used to build the reference database: in cases where the clustering approach
requires all-versus-all comparisons as an initial step,
constructing sets on 10,000 genomes may not be
feasible.
A persistent challenge in the analysis of these data sets
lies in the reporting of relationships, particularly in
mapping these relationships into a tree or network. A
widely used technique for static visualization of trees
with many leaves is to collapse cohesive named groups
(as was done in Figures 5 and 6), or to color leaves
according to some taxonomic, genomic or ecological criterion. This strategy, and interactive techniques for
expanding and collapsing clans or clades, and focusing
on particular parts of the tree [93,106] are effective
when the relationships shown are hierarchical and
strictly bifurcating. However, network representations
generate additional challenges for layout and interpretation: indeed the full Neighbor-net of 1173 genomes
could not be inferred and visualized in SplitsTree due to
processor and memory limitations. It is evident too that
the sacrifice of clarity made by Neighbor-net to allow
some conflicting relationships to be shown, does not
produce an effective visualization for entire microbial
genomes. Cluster networks, reconciliation networks and
IAGs are better in this regard as they make explicit connections between taxa with strong affinities, but the
resulting structure can saturate with alternative

Page 23 of 36

connections: even the tree in Figure 15, which is based
on only 13 trees covering a subset of all taxa, contains
12 reticulations in addition to the underlying multifurcating tree. Interference between these edges limits the
interpretability of the static image. The key to extracting
the desired information from network representations
will be in effective use of data screening, thresholding
and filtering techniques prior to building the network,
and the use of interactive focus-plus-context [107]
approaches to emphasize key relationships.

Methods
Genomes and system used in this study

A total of 1180 completely sequenced prokaryotic genomes, containing a total of 3,849,772 predicted proteincoding genes were acquired from NCBI on September
29, 2010. A complete list of genomes can be obtained
by filtering the page http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genomes/lproks.cgi to include only those genomes released
up to that date. To restrict this set to those genomes
collected in complete years, a subset of 1052 genomes
released up to December 31, 2009 was also assembled.
Assignments at the taxonomic levels of superkingdom
(= domain), phylum, class, order, family, genus, and
named species were also collected from NCBI: in cases
where a label was undefined at a given level, the value
of the next-highest level was propagated downward with
the addition of the prefix “Unclassified”.
All analyses for which times are reported were carried
out on a 360-CPU-core Linux cluster consisting of Intel
Xeon X5460 processors with 3.16 GHz clock speed and
average 4 GB of RAM per core. Times reported are
approximate as there may have been small performance
losses due to network latency on the cluster and competition for disk and network access with other running
processes.
Assessment of protein inventories and affinities

Comparative protein inventories of sequenced genomes
were first assessed using a string comparison to extract
matches at the 100% identity level. Distinct sequences
remaining after this analysis were subjected to an allversus-all BLASTP comparison using the BLAST+ package, version 2.2.23, with default parameters used apart
from an expectation value threshold of 1 × 10-3, and the
use of soft masking of low-complexity regions. From
this set, different analyses were performed using morestringent expectation value thresholds.
Novel proteins were identified in a temporal fashion as
follows: starting with genomes sequenced in the year
1995, all proteins were assessed to determine whether
they had a BLAST match better than a specified threshold of 1 × 10-10 to a protein already in the set. Proteins

Beiko Biology Direct 2011, 6:34
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/34

lacking homologous matches at this threshold were considered to be novel proteins and used to increment the
total count of homologous sets seen thus far. Proteins
matching no other protein in the database were labelled
as orphans.
Pan-genome analysis required the definition of
homologous sets of sequences with an indication of
which sets were represented in which genomes. For
each genus with at least ten sequenced representatives, homologous sets were built by considering the
proteins encoded by each genome in turn. Each protein encoded by the initial genome was compared
against each other protein from the same genome,
and those pairs with BLAST e-value ≤ 1 × 10 -5 and
local alignments covering at least 70% of the length of
the matching sequence were merged into the same
homologous set. Each subsequent genome was compared against the existing homologous sets, with
matching proteins added to the appropriate set, and
proteins with no match used as the seeds for new
sets. After the final genome was added in this way, a
complete set of phylogenetic profiles, indicating
which homologous sets cover which genomes, was
obtained. A single pan-genome analysis for a given
genus was performed by choosing k reference genomes at random, and then assessing the effect of adding a randomly chosen genome k + 1. The percentage
gain in homologous sets from the addition of genome
k + 1 was expressed as the ratio of proteins in novel
homologous sets in the newly added genome, to the
total number of proteins present in the first k genomes. This procedure was repeated ten times for each
combination of genus and value of k, and values were
summarized by computing the mean and standard
deviation of the ten replicates.
The affinities of congeneric and conspecific genomes
were assessed by first partitioning their encoded protein sets into shared (core) and variable components.
A protein from a genome was marked as shared if it
had at least one BLAST match to a protein in the
other genome satisfying the minimum sequence similarity criteria (e-value ≤ 1 × 10-5, local alignments covering at least 70%). Closest affinities were then
assessed by finding the best BLAST match (smallest evalue) between each protein from the genome and the
rest of the database, including its partner at the genus
or species level, but excluding all other members of
the same genus or species. For each genome in a pair,
its affinity profile was computed as the proportion of
its core proteins that had a best match to the partner
genome and other non-self lineages. The affinity difference is equal to the Euclidean distance between these
profiles. All pairs of congeneric organisms were from
different named species.

Page 24 of 36

Calculation of genome distances and construction of
genome trees and networks

Genome-level analyses were based on the computation
of distances between each pair of genomes in our set.
These distances were computed as described in [108],
by first identifying reciprocal best-matching (RBM) proteins and then computing a normalized bit score for
each such RBM pair a, b. The normalization was computed as follows:
S (x, y) =

min(Sa,b , Sb,a )
min(Sa,a , Sb,b )

where Sa, bis the bit score of the BLAST match using
sequence a as query and b as subject. The calculation
therefore divides the lesser score between the two proteins by the greater of the two protein self-scores. Seven
small genomes failed to return any RBMs when compared against certain distantly related genomes; these
small genomes were removed from the set, leaving a
total of 1173 genomes. For the reduced set, all genera
having two or more genomes were identified. The largest genome from each such genus was added to the
set, as was the largest genome from a different named
species within the same genus, if available. For genera
with only a single representative named species, the second-largest genome from the same species was instead
added to the set.
Genome trees were inferred using the FastME application, version 1.1 [109] with default parameter settings.
Networks were constructed using the Neighbor-net
algorithm as implemented in Version 4.11.3 of SplitsTree [61]. The “use weights” option was disabled to
allow the construction of reticulated cladograms; otherwise all default parameters were used.
Phylogenomic analysis

Detailed phylogenomic analysis was performed using a
pipeline of hierarchical inference of putative homologs,
multiple sequence alignment with quality checking, and
phylogenetic inference with trimming to isolate putative
sets of orthologs. While UCLUST [22] is computationally efficient and uses relatively little memory, ab initio
clustering of > 3 million sequences is not possible with
the freely available 32-bit implementation. UCLUST was
therefore first applied to sets of genomes aggregated at
the taxonomic level of order. All protein sequences
from genomes associated with a given order were collected into a single multiple-FASTA file, sorted in
decreasing order of length and then clustered with
UCLUST version 3.0.617 using an identity threshold of
60% for clustering. This procedure was then repeated at
the phylum level, using only those proteins that were
retained as cluster seeds in the first round of clustering.

Beiko Biology Direct 2011, 6:34
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/34

The phylum-level cluster seeds were then compared
against one another using all-versus-all BLASTP with a
maximum e-value threshold of 1 × 10-10. Phylum-level
seeds that matched at this level or better were used to
build master sets, and at this stage all of the clustered
proteins that were removed at the order or phylum level
were restored to their respective clusters. The resulting
sets contain putatively homologous proteins. This procedure yielded a total of 424,219 separate clusters containing a total of 3,849,448 proteins and 1,216,174,052
amino acid residues.
Multiple sequence alignment was carried out using an
iterative process, based on MUSCLE [110] and HMMER
3.0 [111], that yielded quality scores useful in trimming
uncertain positions and entire sequences from alignments. Three steps were performed, with repetition as
necessary, to generate high-quality alignments: (i) initial
alignments were constructed using the recommended
“fast” settings of MUSCLE (-maxiters 1 -diags -sv -distance1 kbit20_3); (ii) these alignments were used to
build hidden Markov models in HMMER using the
“hmmbuild” program with default parameters; (iii)
sequences were realigned to the HMM using the
“hmmalign” program. This last step generates quality
scores ranging from 1 to 10 for each residue in each
position of the alignment, and these were used to trim
uncertain regions from the alignment. First, the average
quality score for all residues of each sequence was calculated. Any sequence with an average quality score less
than 9.0 was removed from the set. Removal of one or
more sequences from the alignment in this fashion triggered a reanalysis of the remaining sequences starting
with a new MUSCLE alignment. When no further
sequences were removed in this fashion, average quality
scores were then computed for each column of the
alignment, and any column with an average quality
score < 8.0 was removed. Any data set with fewer than
4 remaining sequences or 50 alignment columns was
not subjected to phylogenetic analysis. At the end of
this step, 107,696 clusters (25.4% of all original clusters),
3,052,033 proteins (79.3%), and 1,033,204,827 amino
acid residues (85.0%) remained. The low retention of
initial clusters is likely due in large part to the elimination of clusters of size 1, 2 and 3, along with protein
sequences too short to satisfy the minimum length
criterion.
Phylogenetic inference was performed using FastTree
version 2.1.0 [24]. FastTree uses the Jones-TaylorThornton amino acid substitution model by default; we
retained this and all other default parameters, except for
those recommended by the authors to improve the
effectiveness of the tree search at a slight cost of
increased running time (flags: -spr 4 -mlacc 2 -slownni).
Many of the resulting trees contained > 1 sequence for

Page 25 of 36

at least one genome in our set, and needed to be pared
down to build sets of putative orthologs by subdividing
the tree into representative subtrees [66] in which no
genome is represented more than once. The first step in
this procedure was to identify clans [69] that contained
sequences exclusively from a single genome; these sets
were treated as in-paralogs, and all but one of the
sequences in this clan were removed. Any trees that still
had > 1 sequence from one or more genomes after this
step were subdivided into representative subtrees by
identifying the largest representative subtree, i.e. the largest subtree with a maximum of one protein from any
given genome. These subtrees were iteratively pruned
from the larger tree in decreasing order of size until the
remaining tree was itself representative, or until the largest candidate subtree for pruning had fewer than four
sequences. These pruning procedures were implemented
using the Phylo library in BioPython [112].
Taxonomic affinities for particular groups G0 of interest were recovered by identifying the subsets of inferred
trees containing a clan C0 which contained all sequences
from G0 and no sequences from any other taxonomic
group. Unless the tree contained only one sequence not
from G0, the internal edge separating G0 from all genomes not in G 0 is adjacent to two other edges which
define clans C1 and C2 which cover genome sets G1 and
G2. These two clans are candidate sister groups for C0:
placing a root anywhere within C1 would make C2 the
sister group to C0, and vice versa. Whichever of C1 and
C2 contained the largest number of leaves was used to
root the tree, thus choosing the smaller clan as sister to
C0. If the selected sister clan contained only genomes
from a single group at a particular given taxonomic
level, the count of partners between G0 and the group
represented by the sister clan was incremented by one.
If the sister clan was heterogeneous, then the count of
partners containing multiple groups was instead incremented by one. The phylogenetic inference and pruning
step yielded 159,905 clusters containing a total of
2,616,080 proteins (68.0% relative to the initial clusters)
and 873,468,715 amino acid residues (71.8%).
An intergenomic affinity graph (IAG: [78]) summarizes strong affinities between individual genomes or
higher-level groupings by representing each entity (genome or group) as a vertex in a graph. Edges between
vertices indicate evidence for evolutionary affinities.
IAGs in this analysis were built by aggregating genomes
at the genus and class levels, and searching the set of
inferred trees for examples where two classes were
cohesive (i.e., clans) and adjacent in a tree; edges were
created between vertices if certain minimum threshold
criteria were satisfied. The first criterion was established
by identifying the strongest affinity (largest number of
observed sisters to any nonself group) for each group

Beiko Biology Direct 2011, 6:34
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/34

Page 26 of 36

Gi, and requiring all other candidate partner groups for
G i to have at least k% as many edges as this strongest
connection. For example, if genus Pseudomonas had the
genus Cellvibrio as its closest partner in 100 trees, then
k = 20% would require other candidate genera to be
partnered with Pseudomonas in at least 20 other trees to
generate a link between the two genera in the IAG. In
practice this led to genera represented by very small
genomes becoming hubs in the IAG since their maximum affinity count might be less than 5, and any other
group with at least one connection would then be
attached to this genus. An additional minimum count
requirement c was added to further filter the set of
results: no affinity observed fewer than c times would be
included in the IAG, even if the count otherwise satisfied the k% requirement. At the genus level, k was set to
20% and c set to 5, while at the class level k was set to
10% and c to 5.
Galled networks were constructed using Dendroscope
version 2.7.4 [93]. Since the full set of trees could not be
combined into a single graph due to algorithmic and
visualization constraints, subsets of trees were selected to
address particularly the relationship between C. proteolyticus, its presumed closest relatives based on 16S rDNA
analysis (class Clostridia), and candidate partner taxa
identified in previous analysis, specifically phyla Aquificae, Dictyoglomi and Thermotogae. Trees were subselected based on the requirement that members of all
these groups were present. Additionally, since these network algorithms require rooted trees as input, selected
trees were further required to contain at least one representative from domain Archaea to serve as an outgroup
to the bacterial sequences for rooting purposes. Although
such a scheme will be compromised by interdomain
LGT, the recovered affinities of C. proteolyticus may not
be impacted if the LGT events are not “close” to the target genome, i.e. the implied partners in an interdomain
transfer are not ancestors of or sisters to C. proteolyticus.
Since input trees covered overlapping but non-identical
sets of genomes, the Z-closure procedure [113] was used
to impute missing taxa prior to network construction. A
threshold of 0.65 was used for network construction:
above this level, many relationships were collapsed into
multifurcating nodes and no reticulations were present,
while a much larger set of reticulations appeared when
thresholds of 0.50 were used.

variety of options for the future and this is very valuable.
The analysis itself is also interesting and important. I
have nothing in particular to say about potentially surprising results for the locations or affinities of particular
groups though I do want to point out the especially
important results about not just the volume of reticulation, but the high level of reticulation between specific
non-sister groups.
A few specific comments on the paper with quotes
from the author followed by my own comments:
Page 8:"Some newly annotated proteins are 100% identical to an existing protein, in which case only one or
the other needs to be included in a sequence alignment
or phylogenetic analysis”.
That depends on your methods and goals. For example, if you are trying to build a phylogeny of genomes,
you definitely want to include these identical genes as
they are very strong evidence for which genomes are
sisters.

Reviewers’ comments

Author response

Reviewer’s report 1

If we include a trivial self-homology criterion in the definition of homologous sets, then I think that orphans can
be said to be in homologous sets of size 1. In any case, I
have hopefully removed the ambiguity by adding “...in
homologous sets of size 1” to the end of the offending sentence. See further discussion on this matter below.

Joel Velasco, Cornell University, USA
Overall, I think that this is an exciting and interesting
paper well worth publication. There is lots of careful,
foundational discussion on how large-scale genome phylogenies can be done as well as a presentation of a

Author response

Indeed, all I meant was that you don’t need to run
MUSCLE or RAxML on identical sequences. I have
reworded to the following:
Some newly annotated proteins are 100% identical to
an existing protein, in which case only one or the
other needs to be included in the sequence alignment
and phylogenetic inference steps, while the others can
be restored in the appropriate location in the final
tree or network.
Page 8:"Using a simple BLAST threshold criterion, a
total of 418,214 homologous sets of proteins was identified; over half of these (255,417) were orphan proteins.”
What is a “homologous set of proteins"? Is one set a
set of proteins all of which are homologous to each
other? In that case, none of these could be orphans
since to be an orphan is just to NOT be homologous to
any other protein in a particular set. I guess you mean
that the proteins were divided into equivalence classes
based on homology and the orphans were thus in sets
of size one. If so, this makes sense, but the language is a
bit confusing. Also, you should be careful here, “a simple BLAST threshold criterion” probably means something like > x% sequence identity but this is not
transitive and so what happens if A+B meet the crierion
and B+C do, but A+C don’t?

Beiko Biology Direct 2011, 6:34
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/34

The transitivity question is a vexing problem, but in
this case I used a temporal approach to identifying
homologs, as described in the second paragraph of
“Assessment of protein inventories and affinities” in the
Methods section, so transitivity is not an issue. It’s a
subtle distinction, but I’m not actually building sets here:
as long as you match any protein that has already been
seen, you’re not the seed for a new homologous set. The
method doesn’t care about the specific protein that was
matched.
Page 9:Discussion of Figure 3 (and so relevant for the
caption of Figure 3 on page 55).
I am a bit confused by exactly how you got the numbers in Figure 3. You say on page 9, “homologous sets of
proteins” and later “gene family count” and the section
ends with “novel genes”. In the caption on page 55:"Percent increase in pan-genome size (number of previously
unseen homologs vs. total number of homologs)...” But
what is a homolog? Homology is a two-place relational
term. So an unseen homolog makes no sense (to be a
homolog of anything, you have already seen what it is
homologous to). It could mean a gene which is homologous to another gene which we previously thought was
an orphan. But this is not an increase in the size of the
pan-genome, but a redundancy. I assume you mean to
say the number of previously unseen genes divided by
total genes previously known. This meaning is closest to
the pan-genome idea of your citation [35]. But “novel
genes” should be distinguished from novel gene families
and from novel proteins ([36] explicitly uses proteins
instead of genes in their measure of novelty but then discusses the “proteome”). A novel protein can come from a
previously known gene and a novel gene can come from
a previously known gene family. Also, it should be clear
whether “novel” means just novel within the group, or
the discovery of a unique gene which is not previously
known anywhere. These come apart because of LGT.
The former is typically the relevent one for pan-genome
discussions, but in the context of discussing large-scale
phylogenies (including multiple genera) “uniqueness”
probably means unique relative to all genes in the
analysis.
Terms like “homolog” and “homologous gene set” are
used throughout the text in numerous places and so if
they don’t make sense here, they should be changed
throughout.
Author response

First, “gene family” was a mistake: I have corrected the
single instance of “gene family” to “homologous set”,
which should be clarified by the added definition of
homologous sets.
Second, since homology is a transitive criterion (setting
aside the thorny question of fusion proteins and partial

Page 27 of 36

homology), I think it is reasonable to generalize the idea
of a homologous pair of genes/proteins to a homologous
set in which each gene/protein is homologous to all the
other genes/proteins in the set. This forms the intuitive
basis for phylogenetic profiling and other techniques. I
have changed a few instances that referred to the presence or absence of a particular “homologous protein”
(with the hanging question of “homologous to what?”), to
refer instead to the presence/absence of a protein from a
particular homologous set.
I now provide this definition on p.9:
A homologous set is defined theoretically as a group
of one or more proteins in which each protein is
homologous with every other protein in the set; such
sets are assumed to be maximal, in the sense that all
homologous pairs of proteins are assigned to the
same homologous set. In practice, empirical, putative
homologous sets inferred from sequence data rarely
satisfy both of the above criteria, since homology is
not always detectable from sequence similarity, and
fusion proteins (among others) produce “partial
homology” relationships that make perfect sets impossible to define.
Orphan proteins are defined immediately afterward as
being members of homologous sets of size 1.
The Figure 3 caption has also been changed:
Percent increase in pan-genome size (number of proteins assigned to previously unobserved homologous
sets vs. total number of proteins)
Page 9:"Genera with large standard deviations such as
Clostridium and Mycobacterium have such internal
structures”.
I do believe that these groups have internal structure,
but not merely because of variance. As you point out,
biased sampling in a group alone will cause variance. If
the tenth genome sampled just happens to gain no new
genes, you will get variance (if the others do have new
genes). The internal structure of the group could be
anything you like-say, a genus with 3 species. On the
other hand, what to my mind is a more structured
group-say a genus with 10 different species and one
sample from each species with each equally spaced in
genetic distance from the rest-you will tend to get about
the same benefit out of any of the 10th genomes and so
there will be very little variance.
Author response

I think this is what I was trying to say. I have added
further illustration to the Clostridium/Mycobacterium
example to clarify this:

Beiko Biology Direct 2011, 6:34
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/34

Genera with large standard deviations such as Clostridium and Mycobacterium have imbalanced internal structures as the sampling effort is dominated by
a few pathogenic species such as C. botulinum and
M. tuberculosis, and genomes in both groups have a
wide range of gene counts: different amounts of
novelty will result if the tenth added genome is M.
leprae (1284 genes) or M. smegmatis (3490 genes).
Page 10:"There is consequently no reason to suspect
that the rate of accumulation of novel genes will
decrease in the near future”.
I don’t understand this sentence. There is diminishing
marginal utility in the sense that each new genome in a
group brings less novelty than the previous genome.
Similarly, genomes from new groups aren’t as valuable
as new groups were previously due to just plain old vertical history but besides that, LGT dictates that the
more samples you have, the more incoming and outgoing LGT genes you will have. So you could say that
there is no reason to suspect that we will cease to discover new genes, but you can’t say that the rate of accumulation won’t decrease. Of course it will decrease
unless the diminishing returns is continually compensated for by increased rates in sequencing. Now this
may well happen, but the context seems to indicate that
this exponential growth in sequencing isn’t playing a
role in the claim.
Author response

That’s exactly what I meant, and I have reworded to
clarify the point:
Given the amount of novel genetic information in
new genomes and the increasing rate at which genomes are being sequenced, there is consequently no
reason to suspect that the rate of accumulation of
novel genes will decrease in the near future.
Page 10:"Broad generalizations based on SSU data are
only valid if SSU rDNA faithfully tracks organismal and
genomic patterns of inheritance and relatedness.”
This depends on how broad the generalization is and
exactly what counts as faithful. For example, if rRNA
doesn’t perfectly track organismal history (and so is not
faithful), it can still be a reliable basis for some broad
generalizations (e.g. LGT is more common between
groups X and Y than between X and Z, archaea and
bacteria diverged very deeply in the past, etc.)
Author response

Changed “if” to “to the extent that”.
Page 11:"localized reticulations that reflect phylogenetic uncertainty.”
I am not sure how a reticulation can represent uncertainty. Unresolved nodes can certainly do this.

Page 28 of 36

Reticulations in a network can indicate that genes that
have discordant histories and so in some sense uncertainty as to the organismal phylogeny, but they aren’t
really representing uncertainty, but actual evidence of
real reticulation.
Author response

Actually, reticulations can indeed represent uncertainty
or ambiguity in a relationship: see for instance Ho SYW,
Jermiin LS (2004) Tracing the Decay of the Historical
Signal in Biological Sequence Data. Syst Biol 53:623-637.
They are particularly useful in cases where you can’t settle on A+B or A+C in a tree, but can definitely rule out
A+D.
Page 12:"The genomes from species Actinobacillus
pleuropneumoniae and Actinobacillus succinogenes have
stronger affinities to members of genera Haemophilus
and Mannheimia, respectively, than they do to each
other.” (and other related sentences from pages 11+12).
I am confused by Figure 4 and the broader discussion
of the whole issue on pages 11 and 12. Take Figure 4a.
In the caption on page 56, you say that the data comes
from a pair of genomes of the same species. But then
what does it mean for a shared protein to be a best
blast match to a different partner? Does it mean that at
least one member of these pairs is a better match to
something else? Or that each of them is individually a
better match to something else? For example, A might
be the best blast match to the conspecific B, but B’s
best match might be C. I would assume that this would
be the most common case. For example, if conspecific A
+B form a clade for a given gene and then there is a
transfer between B+C, B+C will now show the affinity,
but A will not now be closer to something else. Given
this, how is the affinity difference calculated?
Author response

There are two distinct concepts here, neither of which
was explained in sufficient detail in the earlier version of
the Methods. For a given pair of conspecific or congeneric
genomes, one can ask whether their proteins tend to
match one another most frequently. Even if they do not,
one genome might still be able to serve as a valid proxy
for the other if their overall pattern of taxonomic
matches is similar. The affinity differences shown in Figure 4 are based on the dissimilarity (Euclidean distance)
between the match profiles of one genome vs. the other.
This value is large when proteins from genome 1 tend to
match lineages A, B, C and D, while proteins from genome 2 match to lineages E, F, G and H.
I have added two sentences in the Methods to clarify
this:
For each genome in a pair, its affinity profile was
computed as the proportion of its core proteins that
had a best match to the partner genome and other

Beiko Biology Direct 2011, 6:34
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/34

non-self lineages. The affinity difference is equal to
the Euclidean distance between these profiles.
On page 11, you say, “The two members of Chlorobium phaeobacteroides show different affinities to other
members of their own family: 53.2% of encoded proteins
in C. phaeobacteroides strain BS1 match best to genus
Prosthecochloris, whereas proteins in strain DSM 266
tend to best match the congener C. limnicola (39.0%)
and the closely related genus Pelodictyon (32.4%).” First,
53.2% of what? Total encoded proteins or just those
that are shared with its conspecific partner? Second, the
two numbers of the DSM 266 strain add to over 70%
which looks to be higher than the data point on Figure
4a. This can be reconciled depending on what that data
point represents, but this really needs to be spelled out.
Author response

First, 53.2% of all non-ORFan proteins. Reworded.
Second, the data point in Figure 4ais dependent on the
overall profile similarity of the two genomes, rather than
the percentage of proteins from each genome that do not
have a protein from the other genome as their best
match.
On page 12 you seem to be assuming there is some
kind of symmetry here where if A is close to B, its congeneric C is close to some other D. Or maybe all of the
examples just happen to have this feature, but it is a
bizarre and unlikely one. If A and B were sharing a lot
of genes, A’s congeneric C would naturally be close to
both A and B. But in all the mentioned examples, there
seems to be a new fourth group involved. Is there a biological explation for this surprising find?
Author response

No such assumption is made-indeed the reciprocal affinities for the two Chlorobium cases are quite different,
with strain BS1 having a stronger affinity for DSM than
vice versa. The point of the affinity differences is to test a
weaker assumption, namely, even if two congeners are
not each others’ best matches due to LGT, can one nonetheless still tell a similar “story” as the other due to similar affinity patterns with other lineages? In the cases
described here, the answer is clearly no.
Page 30:"However, the results for acidophiles (and
thermophiles, see e.g. [16]) may suggest otherwise:
rather than revealing the true affinities of lineages, new
genomes may simply increase the patchwork of affinities
and confuse the accurate recovery of evolutionary
origins.”
The broader point is correct, that lots of extra genomes will increase the number of affinities and in theory, this might not help. But more data probably will
help. However you deal with discordance in the first
place, say concatenation, can in some cases be a bad
idea, but the expectation is that more data works better.

Page 29 of 36

If it actually leads you away from the truth, this is the
case where the new data is actually misleading evidence (possible). But again, the solution to misleading
evidence is to have more evidence. If the new data
leads to less confidence in the answer we thought was
good before, there is a very good chance it was misleading evidence before. And in any case, the overall
evidence being inconclusive is probably what we
should think if we are in such a case (we happen to
have had it right before, but we can’t know that is the
case). Smaller data sets in some cases can lead us to
be more confident of a particular answer due to less
discordance, but they are more likely to lead us to be
confident in the wrong answer. This being said, there
are serious computational and practical reasons that
including more data is not always better. But those
aside, more data is better. – At least, it is clear that
this is what happens if the model of LGT is that there
is a vertical signal which we are trying to detect and
then a bunch of other conflicting signals due to horizontal transfers. If we are trying to do more than
recover the vertical signal and don’t want to hide conflicting data, etc. then more conflicting data which is
at a weaker strength is actually worse.
Author response

This is an excellent point, and the original sentence was
poorly phrased. I was trying say that more data are not
likely to reinforce the notion that phylogenetic patterns of
microbial evolution are knowable and/or easily recovered, if only we had representatives of Lineages X, Y and
Z. Hopefully the following wording clarifies the point:
...rather than revealing a clear and “true” pattern of
affinities among lineages, new genomes may simply
increase the patchwork of affinities without yielding
further insights into the evolutionary origins of major
lineages (e.g., the patterns of cellular division and
inheritance that might provide a framework for
hypotheses of vertical descent).

Reviewer’s report 2

William Martin, Heinrich-Heine-Universität, Germany
This reviewer commented on the manuscript, but did
not provide a response for publication.
Author response

This review, although not for publication, was helpful
and led me to make the following changes to the manuscript:
- Addition of several new references
- Correction of grammatical/punctuation mistakes
- Important changes to the Abstract regarding the
thrust of the entire article

Beiko Biology Direct 2011, 6:34
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/34

- Explicit reporting of % of retained/discarded
sequences
- The addition of panels b-e in Figure 9, and a short
discussion of these
I also provided a different interpretation of the clustering pipeline, which is not suitable for the main manuscript but complements the description in the Methods
section:
(1) Proteins that are at least 60% identical (which is
quite similar) to a “seed” protein are temporarily
removed from consideration. We retain a set of seeds
at the order level.
(2) These seeds are compared with one another at the
phylum level, at the same 60% identity threshold.
Again, seed sequences are identified, and sequences
matching these seeds are removed.
(3) The phylum-level seeds are compared to one
another using BLAST, at an e-value threshold of 1010
. Sets of seeds that satisfy this criterion are grouped
into a single cluster, and then all of the matching
sequences that were removed in steps 1 and 2 are
put back.
As long as the proxies are able to represent the clusters
they cover, then no information is lost in the progression
up from lower ranks to higher ones. With the preliminary
UCLUST-based approach I used here, however, the high
level of false negatives indicates that quite a bit of information was lost by reducing sequence sets to proxies at
the order and phylum level. This is one of the reasons
why I emphasize the need for more-sensitive methods
than the simple “proxy protein” approach presented here.
Even so, the new Figure 9c shows that many clusters
span quite a few orders/phyla, even after the filtering
steps below are carried out.
The motivation here is not to highlight the taxonomy,
but rather to exploit the fact that hierarchical aggregation will work best if it can toss out many similar proteins earlier in the process. Since taxonomic groups do
show some degree of gene content cohesion, the choice to
aggregate in taxonomic terms is intended to exploit this
property.
Reviewer’s report 3

Eugene V. Koonin, National Center for Biotechnology
Information, NIH, USA
Review of “Telling the Whole Story in a 10,000-Genome World” by Robert G. Beiko
This is a highly impressive study by virtue of the sheer
number of trees analyzed (> 150,000). Much of the article is devoted to overcoming the genuinely formidable
technical difficulties that hamper phylogenomic analysis

Page 30 of 36

on this scale. These problems emerge at every step,
from the identification of orthologs to tree or network
visualization.
Under these circumstances, I found the presentation
of the Methods lacking. In my view, all the procedures
need to be described with a considerably greater precision, in order to assess the true utility of the approaches
described in the article. From what I did glean from the
Methods, I am rather concerned with the robustness of
the identification of orthologous sets. Although the twostep approach employed here-clustering first, then FastTree-seems to be quite reasonable, the clustering procedure is very restrictive, so there are likely to be many
false negatives, and it is unclear how many there are. So
it is uncertain to what extent the results are impacted.
The author recognizes the problem but does not offer a
remedy. I wonder whether it would make sense to use
existing clusters of (putative) orthologs like EggNOGs as
seeds, then assign new sequences to these seeds, then
use FastTree to refine, and only then identify new
(rather small) clusters among the remaining sequence
de novo.
Author response

Concerning the presentation of the Methods, I hope that
my responses to the previous referees clarifying the calculation of genomic affinity differences (i.e., Figure 4), the
taxonomic coverage of the final orthologous sets (see Figure 9b-e) and the number of proteins and residues
retained at each step of the pipeline (see Methods) gives
some further clarity. In addition to this, I have given a
characterization of the level of false negatives in the second half of the Discussion, which further illustrates the
aggressive subdivision of clusters.
Basing clusters on existing orthologous sets is a viable
strategy, but relies on these algorithms themselves being
scalable and robust. Any algorithm that requires an allvs-all comparison to begin with, is going to fail when
genomic databases get sufficiently large. I have added a
paragraph to address this:
An obvious alternative to ab initio inference of orthologous relationships is to start with an existing reference database of putative orthologs or homologs such
as OMA [102], MBGD [103], EggNOG [104]and
OrthoMCL [105]as a scaffold, and overlay new
sequences to the existing reference sets. This can be
accomplished using either complete homology search
against the reference database, or by building statistical models for each of the reference database families
and assigning new sequences to the set that corresponds to the best-matching model. Such approaches
will however depend on the scaling of the original
algorithm used to build the reference database: in
cases where the clustering approach requires all-

Beiko Biology Direct 2011, 6:34
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/34

versus-all comparisons as an initial step, constructing
sets on 10,000 genomes may not be feasible.
The article does not have far reaching biological conclusions beyond the somewhat trite point that evolutionary relationships in such a complex, huge set of
genomes are...well, complex. This is understandable and
might not be a deficiency in itself as the paper is primarily methodological, a proof of principle in a sense.
However, the title of the paper seems to imply that the
whole story is indeed told here, which is certainly not
the case.
Author response

The main aims of this paper are:
- To critically examine the validity of proxy-based
approaches in phylogenomic inference by quantifying
the diversity and disagreement that we know about
know now, and to project what might happen in the
future;
- Given the complexities that are present, to assess
the extent to which modern computational methods
are able to handle a rapidly expanding genomic data
set, and to propose an analytical framework that can
scale well with increasing data set sizes;
- Given the degree of discordance that results (and
that has been described elsewhere, although not in
much depth for the groups I focus on), assess the
strengths and limitations of different visualization
approaches.
Since the specific pipeline I used needs further investigation and refinement, and since none of the groups of
interest was comprehensively explored, there is indeed no
basis for claiming “far reaching biological conclusions”
from this work. However, the Acidithiobacillus/acidophile
story in particular provides an interesting insight into
the relationship between trait-based, genome-based and
16S-based taxonomy, echoing earlier results from thermophiles and emerging results from some habitats (particularly the human and other animal-associated
microbiomes). Anyone who wants to claim that 16Sbased taxonomy is useful in this context will have to
address the disconnect with other key genomic and phenotypic properties of these organisms.
Reviewer’s report 4

W. Ford Doolittle, Dalhousie University, Canada
This impressive paper is a bit like prokaryotic genome
evolution itself: amazingly complex and with tantalizing
hints of underlying order, but the only certainty is in
the details. I’m not competent to critique the methods
Prof. Beiko employs here, but do want to add a few
comments, mostly about words and concepts and the

Page 31 of 36

shifting nature of the connections between systematics
and phylogenetics. I see this paper as pivotal to a renegotiation of these connections, and it would be interesting to know if Prof. Beiko does too.
There was systematics before Darwin and there will be
systematics after LGT. What Darwin did was claim that
systematics, properly understood, is phylogenetics. That
natural classifications are naturally hierarchical because
phylogenetics is about lineage bifurcation is half of his
theory. But if phylogenetics-by which I mean the generation of phyla, not the making of trees-is more complicated than that, then there is no uniquely justifiable
way to convert phylogenies to classifications, which
become once again a matter for negotiation, not
discovery.
“Once again” is especially appropriate in the microbial
context because-as Woese has reminded us repeatedlybefore 16S rRNA became the “universal molecular
chronometer”, microbial systematists had given up on
any larger evolutionary taxonomy and were learning to
be content with identification being the only realizable
goal of classification. What LGT means is that identification may now also be the only justifiable goal.
But the community at large has yet to accept that, and
Prof. Beiko seems a bit reluctant to come right out and
say it himself, in this otherwise admirable essay. Instead
he still speaks of LGT as something which “complicates
our efforts to assess the degree to which different organisms are related” rather than as something which defines
their relationships. Probably many people doing phylogenetics, whether seeking to make trees or nets, still
believe that there is something we might call a true phylogenetic position for any species or strain or individuals, and that is a matter for discovery, not negotiation.
But once we accept genomic mosaicism (and Prof.
Beiko’s figures, especially Figure 10, provide stunning
illustrations), we are obliged to ask which genes count
most in determining this position and whether a preponderance of genes disagreeing with rRNA is enough
to trump its claim. Indeed we could ask whether we
might allow phenotypic characters (and especially medically relevant ones) of the sort on which Bergey’s Manual of Determinative Bacteriology was based in the prerRNA days, back in the door. There are instances in
which such characters are more predictive of broader
clinical phenotype than is phylogenetic position based
on trusted markers (for example Ogura et al. 2009, Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 106:17939-44), and in the metagenomic and human microbiomic communities the notion
that taxonomic inventories are less useful than surveys
of functional gene repertoires has gained wide acceptance. Once again, we can hope for useful guides to
identification but a truly natural hierarchical classification is not achievable, in practice or principle.

Beiko Biology Direct 2011, 6:34
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/34

Author response

I maintain, as I did in Biology & Philosophy last year,
that the tree of cell divisions is a worthwhile construct
because it reflects the need for some degree of evolutionary and ecological continuity from one generation to the
next. This tree is the proving ground for LGT, because
obviously not all genes can be successfully transferred (=
acquired, integrated, and fixed via drift or selection) into
all lineages at all times. Even if every gene has been
transferred at least once in its long history (a proposition
I can easily accept), most of its existence will nonetheless
consist of boring old vertical inheritance. So the success
of an LGT event will depend on the cell’s current genetic,
genomic, physiological and ecological state, with most
states prohibiting most transfers from occurring. Further
to these constraints, one needs to consider the differential
effects of “buying” a gene via LGT relative to merely
“renting” it: in the latter case, a gene is of negligible or
only transient benefit and is relatively quickly shunted
into the processes of loss that have been documented by,
for instance, Weilong Hao and Brian Golding. This is in
a way reminiscent of the idea of LGT as global “churn”
put forth by the papers of Charles Kurland in the early
2000s. Although I think the Kurland work is entirely too
dismissive of the importance of LGT, the core idea is
nonetheless worth thinking about: if we can distinguish
bought genes from rented ones, then we might refine our
ideas about the long-term impact of LGT on prokaryotic
groups.
I don’t expect this approach to suddenly give us a
magical Tree of Cells/Life that solves the problems of
phylogenetic classification-indeed, given the degree to
which LGT events in Acidithiobacillus appear to be
Haphazard Orthologous Replacements of Random Stuff,
the effect of distinguishing bought vs. rented might not
get us too far in that direction. It might, though, remove
a lot of edges in an inferred network that are supported
by very few genes, if such events correspond to neutral
“LGT rain” and the resulting genes are on the way to
destruction. Even if we don’t get closer to a clear history
of cellular lineages, such a refinement might allow us to
focus on network features that correspond to LGT highways that are at least partially adaptive.
But I think that we can, to some extent, use a structure
that is mostly tree-like to relate at least some lineages
back to a certain point. I say “to some extent” because
some sets of genomes like those of acidophiles or thermophiles may prove to be hopeless cases (although many
more potential relationships will nonetheless be rejected
than supported by LGT). I say “mostly tree-like” because
recombination obviously messes things up dramatically
at the tips, and because of recent work by Jeffrey Lawrence that demonstrated the difficulty (impossibility?) of
establishing clean bifurcations within enteric bacteria

Page 32 of 36

due to protracted periods of speciation. Finally, “back to
a certain point” reflects the problems of signal saturation
due to excessive genetic change, the effects of bias and
other phenomena that are not directly linked to LGT,
along with the possibility that LGT has basically homogenized gene content since a particular time in the
ancient past. Chasing these answers is worthwhile, but is
probably not going to yield a taxonomy that can account
for everything unless we are willing to accept a certain
amount of imprecision or statistical guesswork.
So is trait-or phenotype-based classification the
answer? From a utilitarian standpoint, sure, especially
when you consider the possibility that microbe X with
functions Y today can pick up new traits via LGT and
suddenly become able to do Z. Using genetic or microbiological diagnostics that target the trait of interest rather
than, say, 16S, will stand a chance of picking up this
novel change. But such definitions will be necessarily utilitarian and pluralistic: for the purposes of defining “natural” taxonomic ranks and relationships, I think the tree
of cellular divisions is the right choice. The problem, of
course, is that the ToC is unlikely to be completely
knowable.
Apart from changes I have made in response to other
referees’ comments softening a perceived verticalist
stance, I have not brought this discussion into the main
manuscript. This is in part because there is some duplication with my 2010 paper in Biology and Philosophy,
and in part because I think it deviates too far from the
main aims of the paper, which is to quantify and
acknowledge the complexities of the data, and to propose
viable pathways to support their analysis. The questions
you raise are fundamental, and I think a key component
of moving this work forward is that we need to acknowledge that what we need may exist, but the nature of the
molecular data may not allow us to know it in its
entirety.
Doolittle response in a second review

Either we don’t really disagree or are agreeing to. It’s
actually hard to think of any evolutionary biological
argument that does not to take the form that the TOL/
TOC debate has taken. First we all endorse model A,
then model B is cast in opposition to it, then it is
accepted that both have merit, but efforts are made to
quantify their relative applicabilities-with A-ists and Bists each trying to bias the results in their favor. Then
(though we are not quite there yet) we come to realize
that there is no agreeable-upon measure of relative
strength. He and I would agree that it is possible (but
not proveable) that no gene in any genome is the product of an unbroken lineage of vertical descent events
dating back 3.8 billion years, and that it is probable
(even proven) that very few are. This to me is total victory for us “enthusiastic lateralists”. But he and I would

Beiko Biology Direct 2011, 6:34
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/34

also agree that vertical descent events outnumber LGTs
a gazillion to one, and that much can be learned by
mapping events (LGTs and other) to trees made from
core genes, seemingly a capitulation to the camp of
“committed verticalists”.
Author response Part of the problem lies in casting the
debate as a metaphorical Agincourt between two opposing camps-the teeming hordes of Charles VI who are verticalists by default or by intention, and the outnumbered
and besieged band of Henry V who seek to overturn the
existing order. One can even imagine a hand gesture for
the lateralists to use after the battle-index and middle
fingers on one hand raised and crossed by the index finger from the other hand. But the simple fact of the matter is that four billion years is a long time, and it takes
very little in terms of bias and confounding factors to
mess it up, whether or not there is an ‘it’ to begin with.
That a convincing Tree of Life cannot be recovered from
molecular sequences should come as no surprise, nor
should the fact that shallower relationships can indeed
be interpreted to some extent as cohesive lineages against
which ecological and phylogenetic hypotheses can be
tested.
So what it boils down to mostly is the meaning of
words like “relationship” and “natural” (with respect to
classification), and whether we think higher taxa are
anything but reified conveniences. And maybe there is
one substantive quibble, about the Tree of Cells. Any
model we accept for the origin of eukaryotes will violate
treeness (which I take to preclude anastomoses), as will
the primary and any number of secondary plastid endosymbioses. And then we have to admit that quite large
chunks of DNA can be transferred between prokaryotic
cells of different “species” by conjugation, which involves
a sort of cell fusion, albeit temporary. So really even the
Tree of Cells has issues.
Author response I don’t want to get into an argument
about whether mitochondria have free will, but it seems
to me that by the time the prokaryote has cast off its last
pretenses of being a free-living organism in its own right,
it’s pretty obvious to see who’s in charge. Which is to say
that any sort of lateral event implicating members of different “species” according to some undefined biological
species concept, is necessarily going to be asymmetric
and require that one of the participants take primary
responsibility for outer membranes, cytokinesis, exchange
of nutrients and metabolites with the environment,
defence, and so on. These types of event are unquestionably of tremendous evolutionary significance, and the
contributions of both partners are of obvious importance
to genotype, phenotype and role of any successor lineages.
But I think the inherent asymmetry in these events
allows a particular kind of Tree of Cells to remain as a
construct.

Page 33 of 36

Acknowledgements and Funding
I am very grateful to referees Joel Velasco, Eugene Koonin, Ford Doolittle
and Bill Martin for their comments which led to substantial improvements
to the manuscript. I also thank Eric Talevich for improvements to the Phylo
module of BioPerl that allowed ortholog identification to be performed. I
would also like to thank members of my research group and the
Leverhulme Trust Questioning the Tree of Life network for many productive
conversations.
This work was supported by funding from the (Canadian) Natural Sciences
and Engineering Research Council, Genome Atlantic, and an infrastructure
grant from the Canada Foundation for Innovation. RGB is supported by the
Canada Research Chairs program.
The article-processing charge for this manuscript was covered by the
Leverhulme Trust as part of the project ‘Questioning the Tree of Life’.
Authors’ contributions
RGB designed and executed the analyses, and wrote the manuscript.
Competing interests
The author declares that he has no competing interests.
Received: 3 February 2011 Accepted: 30 June 2011
Published: 30 June 2011
References
1. Wu D, Hugenholtz P, Mavromatis K, Pukall R, Dalin E, Ivanova NN, Kunin V,
Goodwin L, Wu M, Tindall BJ, Hooper SD, Pati A, Lykidis A, Spring S,
Anderson IJ, D’haeseleer P, Zemla A, Singer M, Lapidus A, Nolan M,
Copeland A, Han C, Chen F, Cheng JF, Lucas S, Kerfeld C, Lang E,
Gronow S, Chain P, Bruce D, Rubin EM, Kyrpides NC, Klenk HP, Eisen JA: A
phylogeny-driven genomic encyclopaedia of Bacteria and Archaea.
Nature 2009, 462:1056-1060.
2. Kennedy J, Codling CE, Jones BV, Dobson AD, Marchesi JR: Diversity of
microbes associated with the marine sponge, Haliclona simulans, isolated
from Irish waters and identification of polyketide synthase genes from
the sponge metagenome. Environ Microbiol 2008, 10:1888-1902.
3. Simon C, Wiezer A, Strittmatter AW, Daniel R: Phylogenetic diversity and
metabolic potential revealed in a glacier ice metagenome. Appl Environ
Microbiol 2009, 75:7519-7526.
4. Woese CR, Fox GE: Phylogenetic structure of the prokaryotic domain: the
primary kingdoms. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1977, 74:5088-5090.
5. Woese CR, Kandler O, Wheelis ML: Towards a natural system of
organisms: proposal for the domains Archaea, Bacteria, and Eucarya.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1990, 87:4576-4579.
6. Baldauf SL, Roger AJ, Wenk-Siefert I, Doolittle WF: A kingdom-level
phylogeny of eukaryotes based on combined protein data. Science 2000,
290:972-977.
7. Brochier C, Forterre P, Gribaldo S: An emerging phylogenetic core of
Archaea: phylogenies of transcription and translation machineries
converge following addition of new genome sequences. BMC Evol Biol
2005, 5:36.
8. Ciccarelli FD, Doerks T, von Mering C, Creevey CJ, Snel B, Bork P: Toward
automatic reconstruction of a highly resolved tree of life. Science 2006,
311:1283-1287.
9. Hampl V, Hug L, Leigh JW, Dacks JB, Lang BF, Simpson AG, Roger AJ:
Phylogenomic analyses support the monophyly of Excavata and resolve
relationships among eukaryotic “supergroups”. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2009, 106:3859-3864.
10. Snel B, Bork P, Huynen MA: Genome phylogeny based on gene content.
Nat Genet 1999, 21:108-110.
11. Wolf YI, Rogozin IB, Grishin NV, Tatusov RL, Koonin EV: Genome trees
constructed using five different approaches suggest new major bacterial
clades. BMC Evol Biol 2001, 1:8.
12. Rivera M, Lake JA: The ring of life provides evidence for a genome fusion
origin of eukaryotes. Nature 2004, 431:152-155.
13. Gophna U, Doolittle WF, Charlebois RL: Weighted genome trees:
refinements and applications. J Bacteriol 2005, 187:1305-1316.
14. Lienau EK, DeSalle R, Allard M, Brown EW, Swofford D, Rosenfeld JA,
Sarkar IN, Planet PJ: The mega-matrix tree of life: using genome-scale
horizontal gene transfer and sequence evolution data as information
about the vertical history of life. Cladistics 2010, 26:1-11.

Beiko Biology Direct 2011, 6:34
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/34

15. Creevey CJ, Fitzpatrick DA, Philip GK, Kinsella RJ, O’Connell MJ,
Pentony MM, Travers SA, Wilkinson M, McInerney JO: Does a tree-like
phylogeny only exist at the tips in the prokaryotes? Proc R Sci B 2004,
271:2551-2558.
16. Beiko RG, Harlow TJ, Ragan MA: Highways of gene sharing in prokaryotes.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005, 102:14332-14337.
17. Pisani D, Cotton JA, McInerney JO: Supertrees disentangle the chimerical
origin of eukaryotic genomes. Mol Biol Evol 2007, 24:1752-1760.
18. Puigbò P, Wolf YI, Koonin EV: Search for a ‘Tree of Life’ in the thicket of
the phylogenetic forest. J Biol 2009, 8:59.
19. Puigbò P, Wolf YI, Koonin EV: The tree and net components of prokaryote
evolution. Genome Biol Evol 2010, 2:745-756.
20. Altschul SF, Madden TL, Schäffer AA, Zhang J, Zhang Z, Miller W,
Lipman DJ: Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new generation of protein
database search programs. Nucleic Acids Res 1997, 25:3389-3402.
21. Li W, Godzik A: Cd-hit: a fast program for clustering and comparing large
sets of protein or nucleotide sequences. Bioinformatics 2006,
22:1658-1659.
22. Edgar RC: Search and clustering orders of magnitude faster than BLAST.
Bioinformatics 2010, 26:2460-2461.
23. Price MN, Dehal PS, Arkin AP: FastBLAST: homology relationships for
millions of proteins. PLoS ONE 2008, 3:e3589.
24. Price MN, Dehal PS, Arkin AP: FastTree 2–approximately maximumlikelihood trees for large alignments. PLoS ONE 2010, 10:e9490.
25. Woolley SM, Posada D, Crandall KA: A comparison of phylogenetic
network methods using computer simulation. PLoS ONE 2008, 3:e1913.
26. Pace NR: Mapping the tree of life: progress and prospects. Microbiol Mol
Biol Rev 2009, 73:565-576.
27. Klenk HP, Göker M: En route to a genome-based classification of Archaea
and Bacteria? Syst Appl Microbiol 2010, 33:175-182.
28. Galperin MY: Sorting out the mix in microbial genomics. Environ Microbiol
2008, 10:3187-3192.
29. Hugenholtz P, Hooper SD, Kyrpides NC: Focus: Synergistetes. Environ
Microbiol 2009, 11:1327-1329.
30. Marchandin H, Damay A, Roudière L, Teyssier C, Zorgniotti I, Dechaud H,
Jean-Pierre H, Jumas-Bilak E: Phylogeny, diversity and host specialization
in the phylum Synergistetes with emphasis on strains and clones of
human origin. Res Microbiol 2010, 161:91-100.
31. Lee KC, Webb RI, Janssen PH, Sangwan P, Romeo T, Staley JT, Fuerst JA:
Phylum Verrucomicrobia representatives share a compartmentalized cell
plan with members of bacterial phylum Planctomycetes. BMC Microbiol
2009, 9:5.
32. Sharma AK, Spudich JL, Doolittle WF: Microbial rhodopsins: functional
versatility and genetic mobility. Trends Microbiol 14:463-469.
33. Dagan T, Martin W: Ancestral genome sizes specify the minimum rate of
lateral gene transfer during prokaryote evolution. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2007, 104:870-875.
34. Kloesges T, Popa O, Martin W, Dagan T: Networks of Gene Sharing among
329 Proteobacterial Genomes Reveal Differences in Lateral Gene
Transfer Frequency at Different Phylogenetic Depths. Mol Biol Evol 2011,
28:1057-1074.
35. Tettelin H, Masignani V, Cieslewicz MJ, Donati C, Medini D, Ward NL,
Angiuoli SV, Crabtree J, Jones AL, Durkin AS, Deboy RT, Davidsen TM,
Mora M, Scarselli M, Margarit y Ros I, Peterson JD, Hauser CR,
Sundaram JP, Nelson WC, Madupu R, Brinkac LM, Dodson RJ, Rosovitz MJ,
Sullivan SA, Daugherty SC, Haft DH, Selengut J, Gwinn ML, Zhou L,
Zafar N, Khouri H, Radune D, Dimitrov G, Watkins K, O’Connor KJ, Smith S,
Utterback TR, White O, Rubens CE, Grandi G, Madoff LC, Kasper DL,
Telford JL, Wessels MR, Rappuoli R, Fraser CM: Genome analysis of
multiple pathogenic isolates of Streptococcus agalactiae: implications
for the microbial “pan-genome”. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005,
102:13950-13955.
36. Trost B, Haakensen M, Pittet V, Ziola B, Kusalik A: Analysis and comparison
of the pan-genomic properties of sixteen well-characterized bacterial
genera. BMC Microbiol 2010, 10:258.
37. Welch RA, Burland V, Plunkett G, Redford P, Roesch P, Rasko D, Buckles EL,
Liou SR, Boutin A, Hackett J, Stroud D, Mayhew GF, Rose DJ, Zhou S,
Schwartz DC, Perna NT, Mobley HL, Donnenberg MS, Blattner FR: Extensive
mosaic structure revealed by the complete genome sequence of
uropathogenic Escherichia coli. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2002,
99:17020-17024.

Page 34 of 36

38. Stackebrandt E, Kramer I, Swiderski J, Hippe H: Phylogenetic basis for a
taxonomic dissection of the genus Clostridium. FEMS Immunol Med
Microbiol 1999, 24:253-258.
39. Robertson BR, Tezuka N, Watanabe MM: Phylogenetic analyses of
Synechococcus strains (cyanobacteria) using sequences of 16S rDNA and
part of the phycocyanin operon reveal multiple evolutionary lines and
reflect phycobilin content. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol 2001, 51:861-871.
40. La Scola B, Zeaiter Z, Khamis A, Raoult D: Gene-sequence-based criteria
for species definition in bacteriology: the Bartonella paradigm. Trends
Microbiol 2003, 11:318-321.
41. Minegishi H, Kamekura M, Itoh T, Echigo A, Usami R, Hashimoto T: Further
refinement of the phylogeny of the Halobacteriaceae based on the fulllength RNA polymerase subunit B’ (rpoB’) gene. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol
2010, 60:2398-2408.
42. Dagan T, Martin W: The tree of one percent. Genome Biol 2006, 7:118.
43. Jain R, Rivera MC, Lake JA: Horizontal gene transfer among genomes: the
complexity hypothesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 96:3801-3806.
44. Sorek R, Zhu Y, Creevey CJ, Francino MP, Bork P, Rubin EM: Genome-wide
experimental determination of barriers to horizontal gene transfer.
Science 2007, 318:1449-1452.
45. Coenye T, Vandamme P: Organisation of the S10, spc and alpha
ribosomal protein gene clusters in prokaryotic genomes. FEMS Microbiol
Lett 2005, 242:117-126.
46. Chen K, Roberts E, Luthey-Schulten Z: Horizontal gene transfer of zinc and
non-zinc forms of bacterial ribosomal protein S4. BMC Evol Biol 2009,
9:179.
47. Woese CR, Achenbach L, Rouviere P, Mandelco L: Archaeal phylogeny:
reexamination of the phylogenetic position of Archaeoglobus fulgidus
in light of certain composition-induced artifacts. Syst Appl Microbiol 1991,
14:364-371.
48. Studier JA, Keppler KJ: A note on the neighbor-joining algorithm of
Saitou and Nei. Mol Biol Evol 1988, 5:729-731.
49. Lake JA, Rivera MC: Deriving the genomic tree of life in the presence of
horizontal gene transfer: conditioned reconstruction. Mol Biol Evol 2004,
21:681-690.
50. Harris JK, Kelley ST, Spiegelman GB, Pace NR: The genetic core of the
universal ancestor. Genome Res 2003, 13:407-412.
51. Charlebois RL, Doolittle WF: Computing prokaryotic gene ubiquity:
rescuing the core from extinction. Genome Res 2004, 14:2469-2477.
52. McCann A, Cotton JA, McInerney JO: The tree of genomes: an empirical
comparison of genome-phylogeny reconstruction methods. BMC Evol Biol
2008, 12:312.
53. Spencer M, Bryant D, Susko E: Conditioned genome reconstruction: how
to avoid choosing the conditioning genome. Syst Biol 2007, 56:25-43.
54. Sangaralingam A, Susko E, Bryant D, Spencer M: On the artefactual
parasitic eubacteria clan in conditioned logdet phylogenies: heterotachy
and ortholog identification artefacts as explanations. BMC Evol Biol 2010,
10:343.
55. Beiko RG, Doolittle WF, Charlebois RL: The impact of reticulate evolution
on genome phylogeny. Syst Biol 2008, 57:844-856.
56. Doolittle WF, Bapteste E: Pattern pluralism and the Tree of Life
hypothesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2007, 104:2043-2049.
57. Castro HF, Williams NH, Ogram A: Phylogeny of sulfate-reducing bacteria.
FEMS Microbiol Ecol 2000, 31:1-9.
58. Kunisawa T: Evaluation of the phylogenetic position of the sulfatereducing bacterium Thermodesulfovibrio yellowstonii (phylum Nitrospirae)
by means of gene order data from completely sequenced genomes. Int
J Syst Evol Microbiol 2010, 60:1090-1102.
59. Huelsenbeck JP, Hillis DM: Success of phylogenetic methods in the fourtaxon case. Syst Biol 1993, 42:247-264.
60. Bryant D, Moulton V: Neighbor-net: an agglomerative method for the
construction of phylogenetic networks. Mol Biol Evol 2004, 21:255-265.
61. Huson DH, Bryant D: Application of phylogenetic networks in
evolutionary studies. Mol Biol Evol 2006, 23:254-267.
62. Beiko RG: Gene sharing and genome evolution: networks in trees and
trees in networks. Biol Philos 2010, 25:659-673.
63. Matte-Tailliez O, Brochier C, Forterre P, Philippe H: Archaeal phylogeny
based on ribosomal proteins. Mol Biol Evol 19:631-639.
64. Frickey T, Lupas AN: PhyloGenie: automated phylome generation and
analysis. Nucleic Acids Res 2004, 32:5231-5238.

Beiko Biology Direct 2011, 6:34
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/34

65. Gupta SK, Banerjee T, Basak S, Sahu K, Sau S, Ghosh TC: Studies on
codon usage in Thermoplasma acidophilum and its possible
implications on the occurrences of lateral gene transfer. J Basic
Microbiol 45:344-354.
66. Harlow TJ, Gogarten JP, Ragan MA: A hybrid clustering approach to
recognition of protein families in 114 microbial genomes. BMC
Bioinformatics 2004, 5:45.
67. Enright AJ, Van Dongen S, Ouzounis CA: An efficient algorithm for largescale detection of protein families. Nucleic Acids Res 2002, 30:1575-1584.
68. Poptsova MS, Gogarten JP: BranchClust: a phylogenetic algorithm for
selecting gene families. BMC Bioinformatics 2007, 8:120.
69. Wilkinson M, McInerney JO, Hirt RP, Foster PG, Embley TM: Of clades and
clans: terms for phylogenetic relationships in unrooted trees. Trends Ecol
Evol 2007, 22:114-115.
70. Kelly DP, Wood AP: Reclassification of some species of Thiobacillus to the
newly designated genera Acidithiobacillus gen. nov., Halothiobacillus
gen. nov. and Thermithiobacillus gen. nov. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol 2000,
50:511-516.
71. Hallberg KB, Johnson DB: Biodiversity of acidophilic prokaryotes. Adv Appl
Microbiol 2001, 49:37-84.
72. Robertson LA, Kuenen JG: The genus Thiobacillus. Prokaryotes 2006,
5:812-827.
73. Moreira D, Amils R: Phylogeny of Thiobacillus cuprinus and other
mixotrophic thiobacilli: proposal for Thiomonas gen. nov. Int J Syst
Bacteriol 1997, 47:522-528.
74. Swidsinski A, Weber J, Loening-Baucke V, Hale LP, Lochs H: Spatial
organization and composition of the mucosal flora in patients
with inflammatory bowel disease. J Clin Microbiol 2005,
43:3380-3389.
75. Voha C, Docquier JD, Rossolini GM, Fosse T: Genetic and biochemical
characterization of FUS-1 (OXA-85), a narrow-spectrum class D betalactamase from Fusobacterium nucleatum subsp. polymorphum.
Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2006, 50:2673-2679.
76. Matson EG, Thompson MG, Humphrey SB, Zuerner RL, Stanton TB:
Identification of genes of VSH-1, a prophage-like gene transfer agent of
Brachyspira hyodysenteriae. J Bacteriol 2005, 187:5885-5892.
77. Etchebehere C, Pavan ME, Zorzópulos J, Soubes M, Muxí L:
Coprothermobacter platensis sp. nov., a new anaerobic proteolytic
thermophilic bacterium isolated from an anaerobic mesophilic sludge.
Int J Syst Bacteriol 1998, 48:1297-1304.
78. Holloway C, Beiko RG: Assembling networks of microbial genomes using
linear programming. BMC Evol Biol 2010, 10:360.
79. Lima-Mendez G, Van Helden J, Toussaint A, Leplae R: Reticulate
representation of evolutionary and functional relationships between
phage genomes. Mol Biol Evol 2008, 25:762-777.
80. Halary S, Leigh JW, Cheaib B, Lopez P, Bapteste E: Network analyses
structure genetic diversity in independent genetic worlds. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 2010, 107:127-132.
81. Popa O, Hazkani-Covo E, Landan G, Martin W, Dagan T: Directed networks
reveal genomic barriers and DNA repair bypasses to lateral gene
transfer among prokaryotes. Genome Res 2011.
82. Dagan T, Artzy-Randrup Y, Martin W: Modular networks and cumulative
impact of lateral transfer in prokaryote genome evolution. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 2008, 105:10039-44.
83. Cavalier-Smith T: The neomuran origin of archaebacteria, the
negibacterial root of the universal tree and bacterial megaclassification.
Int J Syst Evol Microbiol 2002, 52:7-76.
84. Griffiths E, Gupta RS: Signature sequences in diverse proteins provide
evidence for the late divergence of the Order Aquificales. Int Microbiol
2004, 7:41-52.
85. Boussau B, Guéguen L, Gouy M: Accounting for horizontal gene transfers
explains conflicting hypotheses regarding the position of aquificales in
the phylogeny of Bacteria. BMC Evol Biol 2008, 8:272.
86. Jin G, Nakhleh L, Snir S, Tuller T: Efficient parsimony-based methods
for phylogenetic network reconstruction. Bioinformatics 2007, 23:
e123-128.
87. Huson DH, Scornavacca C: A survey of combinatorial methods for
phylogenetic networks. Genome Biol Evol 2011, 3:23-35.

Page 35 of 36

88. Kunin V, Goldovsky L, Darzentas N, Ouzounis CA: The net of life:
reconstructing the microbial phylogenetic network. Genome Res 2005,
15:954-9.
89. Huson DH, Rupp R, Berry V, Gambette P, Paul C: Computing galled
networks from real data. Bioinformatics 2009, 15:i85-93.
90. Hallett MT, Lagergren J: Efficient algorithms for lateral gene transfer
problems. In Proceedings of the 5th annual international conference on
computational molecular biology (RECOMB01). Edited by: Lengauer T. New
York: ACM Press; 2001:149-156.
91. Beiko RG, Hamilton N: Phylogenetic identification of lateral genetic
transfer events. BMC Evol Biol 2006, 6:15.
92. Park HJ, Jin G, Nakhleh L: Bootstrap-based Support of HGT Inferred by
Maximum Parsimony. BMC Evol Biol 10:131.
93. Huson DH, Richter DC, Rausch C, Dezulian T, Franz M, Rupp R:
Dendroscope: An interactive viewer for large phylogenetic trees. BMC
Bioinformatics 2007, 8:460.
94. Susko E, Leigh J, Doolittle WF, Bapteste E: Visualizing and assessing
phylogenetic congruence of core gene sets: a case study of the gammaproteobacteria. Mol Evol Biol 2006, 23:1019-1030.
95. Bapteste E, Susko E, Leigh J, Ruiz-Trillo I, Bucknam J, Doolittle WF:
Alternative methods for concatenation of core genes indicate a lack of
resolution in deep nodes of the prokaryotic phylogeny. Mol Biol Evol
2008, 25:83-91.
96. Leigh JW, Susko E, Baumgartner M, Roger AJ: Testing congruence in
phylogenomic analysis. Syst Biol 2008, 57:104-115.
97. Zhaxybayeva O, Swithers KS, Lapierre P, Fournier GP, Bickhart DM,
DeBoy RT, Nelson KE, Nesbø CL, Doolittle WF, Gogarten JP, Noll KM:
On the chimeric nature, thermophilic origin, and phylogenetic
placement of the Thermotogales. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2009,
106:5865-70.
98. Dagan T, Roettger M, Bryant D, Martin W: Genome networks root the tree
of life between prokaryotic domains. Genome Biol Evol 2010, 2:379-392.
99. He M, Sebaihia M, Lawley TD, Stabler RA, Dawson LF, Martin MJ, Holt KE,
Seth-Smith HM, Quail MA, Rance R, Brooks K, Churcher C, Harris D,
Bentley SD, Burrows C, Clark L, Corton C, Murray V, Rose G, Thurston S, van
Tonder A, Walker D, Wren BW, Dougan G, Parkhill J: Evolutionary dynamics
of Clostridium difficile over short and long time scales. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 2010, 107:7527-32.
100. Smith TF, Waterman MS: Identification of common molecular
subsequences. J Mol Biol 147:195-197.
101. Lipman DJ, Altschul SF, Kececioglu JD: A tool for multiple sequence
alignment. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1989, 86:4412-4415.
102. Altenhoff AM, Schneider A, Gonnet GH, Dessimoz C: OMA 2011:orthology
inference among 1000 complete genomes. Nucleic Acids Res 2011, 39:
D289-94.
103. Uchiyama I, Higuchi T, Kawai M: MBGD update 2010:toward a
comprehensive resource for exploring microbial genome diversity.
Nucleic Acids Res 2010, 38:D361-5.
104. Muller J, Szklarczyk D, Julien P, Letunic I, Roth A, Kuhn M, Powell S, von
Mering C, Doerks T, Jensen LJ, Bork P: eggNOG v2.0:extending the
evolutionary genealogy of genes with enhanced non-supervised
orthologous groups, species and functional annotations. Nucleic Acids Res
2010, 38:D190-5.
105. Chen F, Mackey AJ, Stoeckert CJ Jr, Roos DS: OrthoMCL-DB: querying a
comprehensive multi-species collection of ortholog groups. Nucleic Acids
Res 2006, 34:D363-8.
106. Munzner T, Guimbretiere F, Tasiran S, Zhang L, Zhou Y: TreeJuxtaposer:
Scalable Tree Comparison using Focus+Context with Guaranteed
Visibility. ACM Transactions on Graphics 2003, 22:453-462.
107. Card SK, Mackinlay JD, Shneiderman B: Readings in Information Visualization:
Using Vision to Think San Francisco: Morgan Kaufmann Publishers; 1999.
108. Clarke GD, Beiko RG, Ragan MA, Charlebois RL: Inferring genome trees by
using a filter to eliminate phylogenetically discordant sequences and a
distance matrix based on mean normalized BLASTP scores. J Bacteriol
2002, 184:2072-2080.
109. Desper R, Gascuel O: Fast and accurate phylogeny reconstruction
algorithms based on the minimum-evolution principle. J Comput Biol
2002, 9:687-705.

Beiko Biology Direct 2011, 6:34
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/34

Page 36 of 36

110. Edgar RC: MUSCLE: multiple sequence alignment with high accuracy and
high throughput. Nucleic Acids Res 2004, 32:1792-1797.
111. Durbin R, Eddy S, Krogh A, Mitchison G: Biological sequence analysis:
probabilistic models of proteins and nucleic acids Cambridge University Press;
1998.
112. Cock PJ, Antao T, Chang JT, Chapman BA, Cox CJ, Dalke A, Friedberg I,
Hamelryck T, Kauff F, Wilczynski B, de Hoon MJ: Biopython: freely available
Python tools for computational molecular biology and bioinformatics.
Bioinformatics 2009, 25:1422-1423.
113. Huson DH, Dezulian T, Klöpper T, Steel MA: Phylogenetic super-networks
from partial trees. IEEE/ACM Trans Comput Biol Bioinform 2004, 1:151-8.
doi:10.1186/1745-6150-6-34
Cite this article as: Beiko: Telling the whole story in a 10,000-genome
world. Biology Direct 2011 6:34.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
