<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>The whole-organism heavy chain B cell repertoire from Zebrafish self-organizes into distinct network features</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Systems Biology 2011, 5:27. doi:10.1186/1752-0509-5-27"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Rotem Ben-Hamo"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Ben-Hamo and Efroni BMC Systems Biology 2011, 5:27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/5/27

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

The whole-organism heavy chain B cell repertoire
from Zebrafish self-organizes into distinct
network features
Rotem Ben-Hamo, Sol Efroni*

Abstract
Background: The adaptive immune system is based on selected populations of molecularly distinct individual B
and T cell clones. However, it has not been possible to characterize these clones in a comprehensive and
informatics manner to date; attempts have been limited by the number of cells in the adaptive immune system
and an inability to quantify them. Recently, using the Zebrafish (ZF) Danio rerio as a model organism and parallel
sequencing as the quantifying technology, Weinstein et al. overcame this major hurdle and quantified the entire
heavy chain B-cell repertoire in ZF. Here, we present a novel network analysis of the data from the Weinstein
group, providing new insights into the network structure of the B-cell repertoire.
Results: Using a collection of computational methods, the IgM sequences from 14 fish were analyzed. This analysis
demonstrated that the B-cell repertoire of the ZF is structured along similar lines to those previously detected in
limited parts of the human B-cell immune system. The analysis confirms the validity of the global data and the
evolutionary placement of the ZF based on known sequence motifs. Recombination events in the repertoire were
quantified, and demonstrated a lack of shared recombined V, J groups across fish. Nevertheless, it was
demonstrated that a similar network architecture is shared among fish. However, the network analysis identified
two distinct populations within the group; these findings are compatible with the occurrence of an immune
response in a subset of the fish. The emerging connectivity network was demonstrated and quantified, and
mutation drifts within the groups were characterized. Dissection of sequence data revealed common network
features of the B-cell repertoire as well as individual differences.
Conclusion: The ZF B-cell repertoire reveals an underlying order that is compatible with self-organization
representing every portion of the sequence-based network. This pattern varies in individual specimens, perhaps as
a response to an immune challenge. However, a sequence-non-specific network that maintains a common
architecture of sequence diversity was detected.
The common feature among different individuals can be captured by the network architecture and characteristics,
rather than specific clones. We believe that further study of the dynamics of this network could provide insight
into modes of operation of the immune system.

Background
The immune system is a remarkably adaptive defense
and maintenance system that has evolved in vertebrates
to protect against invading pathogenic microorganisms
and to maintain homeostasis. The immune system has
two arms: the innate arm, which is activated by innate
ligands, and the adaptive arm, which includes T cells
* Correspondence: sol.efroni@biu.ac.il
The Mina and Everard Goodman Faculty of Life Science, Bar Ilan University,
Ramat-Gan, 52900, Israel

and B cells that recognize antigens via their specific
antigen receptors (TCR and BCR) [1,2].
B cells, a component of the adaptive immune system,
mature within the bone marrow; when they exit to the
periphery as naive B cells they express a unique antigenbinding receptor, immunoglobulin (Ig), on their membrane. When activated by the antigen specific to its
membrane-bound antibody, a B cell proliferates and differentiates to generate plasma cells that secrete Ig molecules, and also memory cells [1,3,4].

© 2011 Ben-Hamo and Efroni; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Ben-Hamo and Efroni BMC Systems Biology 2011, 5:27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/5/27

B-cell maturation depends on rearrangement of the Ig
in a process known as V (D) J rearrangement. By
randomly choosing V, D and J genes among many
alleles, the recombination provides a variety of antigen
sequences. The process is highly conserved in jawed
vertebrates [5,6]. The whole collection of various,
rearranged immune receptors is known as the B-cell
repertoire.
Additional variability within the B-cell repertoire arises
from somatic hypermutation (SHM) - a recombination
process that occurs in germinal centers in which the
recombined immunoglobulin undergoes error-prone
replication during an in vivo selection process. These
mutations are several orders of magnitude more frequent than in genes encoding other proteins [7-11]. Several mutations yield amino acid substitutions that
improve antigen binding by increasing the antigen affinity and diversity [12].
The Zebrafish (ZF), Danio rerio, offers unique opportunities for studying the ontogenetic development of the
immune system. A great advantage in studying this
organism is the optical transparency of ZF during early
development and the fact that it shares many orthologous genes with mouse and man (e.g., rag1 and rag2).
This gives the species considerable relevance over other
traditional developmental models [13-15]. The ZF
immune system has approximately 300,000 antibodyproducing cells. This is a small number compared to an
estimated 10 12 cells in humans. Therefore, ZF is an
excellent model organism for global quantitative analysis
of the immune system, including the B-cell repertoire.
Technically, questions concerning the B cell repertoire
have been limited by: (1) the scale of the system, with
more than 1012 cells in humans and a similar order of
magnitude in mice; (2) an inability to measure diversity
within the whole population of B cells. The scale of the
system is solved by using ZF as a model organism, with
105 B cells generating an immune system of comparable
complexity. Quantifying diversity is currently approachable using platforms of massive parallel sequencing.
While such systems cannot sequence recombined
regions (~200 bp in length) from 1012 cells within a reasonable time frame, they are capable of sequencing
recombined regions from the approximate 10 5 cells
of ZF.
Recently, Weinstein et al. [16] constructed the
sequence reads of 640 million bases of zebrafish antibody heavy chain cDNA from 14 zebrafish in four
families, and the data are publicly available. The authors
characterized and analyzed the antibody repertoire of
zebrafish by analyzing complementary determining
region 3 (CDR3) of the heavy chain.
The concept of network architecture has changed the
perspective on biological phenomena recently [17-19].

Page 2 of 12

Research has demonstrated the importance of network
architecture in terms of phenotype classification, emergence and function (for a recent review, see [20]). Such
research suggests, for example, that the topological prominence of a protein in a protein interaction is a good
predictor of its biological importance. Network architecture analysis provides the tools to study structural properties in networks. One important method is centrality
analysis. Such analysis ranks vertices in a network
according to their connectivity within a network structure [18,21,22]. Centrality indices of a network include
the Degree of each vertex (the number of physical connections a vertex has) and the Betweenness of a vertex
which measure the number of shortest paths that the
vertex lies on (high Betweenness signifies this vertex as
one that resides on several short paths). Betweenness of
a node is the proportion of shortest paths among all
pairs of reachable nodes that go through the node;
Betweenness measures the centrality of a node in the
global network structure [23].
Protein-Protein interaction networks (PPI) becoming a
key strategy for uncovering the inner mechanism of a
cell, these networks systematically determine both the
potential and actual protein interactions in selected
model organisms, such as the S. cerevisiae. PPI networks
identify every node with a specific protein and the edges
stands for identified direct physical interaction. The protein interactions and its position in the network are
likely to correlate with the protein functional properties.
The nodes themselves possess characteristics that carry
important information about their role in the system, (e.
g highly connected nodes tend to be more essential)
[23-26].
In the present study, the dataset of Weinstein et al.
[16] was analyzed to characterize the whole recombined
sequence, and to investigate V (D) J distribution among
all 14 fish and the mutations that occur within the
sequences. In addition, the Weinstein data were
extended to characterize the connectivity network of the
ZF B-cell repertoire and study mutation drifts as multiple nodes within the groups. Unlike PPI networks here
every node represent a different sequence in the repertoire and edges represents mutations or indels (insertion
or deletion) that may occurred. This form of networkbased interpretation facilitates the identification of
unique sequences versus groups of sequences and indicates their centrality in the network. Using these computational tools that facilitate the dissection of sequence
data, the fundamental repertoire architecture was examined to investigate how the repertoire varies among
individuals and the common network features that dictate the B-cell repertoire. Further, we report that in the
dataset of Weinstein et al. there are two distinct
immune behaviors, which have not been identified in

Ben-Hamo and Efroni BMC Systems Biology 2011, 5:27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/5/27

previous analyses [16,27]. We hypothesize that these distinct immune behaviors are immune responses that may
be the result of external perturbations such as a yet
unknown pathogenic response.

Results and Discussions
Network Analysis

The Ig network that emerged from the Ig sequences in
each fish was analyzed. In addition, to highlight the specific choices in the selection process, the observed network was compared with an artificial, randomly-based
network. The Random network algorithm randomly
chose a combination of three germline sequences (V, D
and J) in order to build a “naive” sequence, then the
algorithm randomly put point mutations, deletions and
insertions into every sequence. The random network
does not represent a population of B cell but the lowest
level of organization, one with no bias toward any specific germline combination or mutation.
The network analysis separated a group of five fish
with highly developed networks from the remaining

Page 3 of 12

nine fish that demonstrated more naïve, less differentiated networks. Figure 1 and 2 illustrates all networks
that emerged from the individual fish classified to two
groups according to their specific network behavior and
organization, and figure 3 the random network. It is reasonable to suppose that the more differentiated networks reflect an immune response, while the less
connected networks reflect a more stable state.
A metric evaluation of the Ig network architecture
demonstrated major differences between the groups.
Each vertex in the network refers to a different
sequence and the size of the vertex represents the number of identical sequences. A red edge indicates a point
mutation between the two sequences, a blue edge indicates one deletion and a green edge represents deletion
and mutation. Each component is marked by a distinct
color, so that the node color ascribes the node to a specific connected component of the network.
Fish in the highly connected group exhibit large clusters of components. Such clusters may be the network
equivalent of an immune system response to a foreign

Figure 1 Ig networks were divided into groups according to the repertoire profile. Poorly connected networks that were constructed from
nine fish. Every node represents a sequence and the node size refers to the number of identical sequences; node color refers to the connected
component that the node is a part of (every connected component has a different color).

Ben-Hamo and Efroni BMC Systems Biology 2011, 5:27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/5/27

Page 4 of 12

Figure 2 Highly connected Ig networks from five fish that showed similar repertoire profile. Every node represents a sequence and the
node size refers to the number of identical sequences; node color refers to the connected component that the node is a part of (every
connected component has a different color).

Figure 3 Random Ig Network that was constructed from random perturbations over the germline sequences. This network contains
50,000 sequences that were fitted into 43,491 vertices. Maximum vertex size is 18 and maximum Degree in the network is 16. Every node
represents a sequence and the node size refers to the number of identical sequences; node color refers to the connected component that the
node is a part of (every connected component has a different color).

Ben-Hamo and Efroni BMC Systems Biology 2011, 5:27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/5/27

Page 5 of 12

and figure 5 demonstrates differences between the random network indices and the average indices across all
14 fish. This contrast demonstrates how different the
self-organized architecture of the immune network is
from a randomly-based architecture. While the
sequences themselves may portray a random-like distribution with no preferred sequences across individuals,
the network reveals a shared blueprint. This kind of
visualization reveals three levels of architecture, from
the most naive unbiased network to a highly connected
network, which may unfold the specific processes of the
immune response.
As described previously, networks can be assessed by
studying and comparing their centrality indices, and in
the present study we examined the Degree and
Betweenness of the vertex in every network and the size
of the vertex. This analysis demonstrated that poorly
connected fish have vertices that contain a maximum of
10% of their sequences, while highly connected fish have
vertices that contain 50% of their sequences. Furthermore, the vertices in connected fish were of much
higher degree than in poorly connected fish, as were

Betweenness

antigen. The rationale behind this categorization of
inflamed vs. naive fish is that the basis for network
behavior is similarity between clones, or clonal expansion. The components are highly connected, and the
vertices in these clusters are bigger than those of relative
networks. In the poorly connected group of fish (such as
fish D) the same distribution of all sequences is
observed and the highly connected, massive components
are noticeably absent from such networks. We would
expect to observe 975 (39V × 5D × 5J) connected clusters, representing all the possible V (D) J combinations.
However, hundreds of thousands of components were
identified. Therefore, the mutation process is such that
once sequences have been generated, the network algorithm cannot connect them to one another in a single
step.
In addition, the random network displays a very different network structure, with all indices differing markedly from networks observed in fish Ig sequences.
Differences were observed in vertex degree, the number
of identical sequences and the number of unconnected
vertices. Figure 4 presents the three distinct populations

Max clone percen le
Figure 4 Centrality indices differ among three populations. Differences between random, poorly connected and highly connected networks,
in terms of Betweenness VS the percentile of the biggest clone, compared with the number of sequences in the fish. This index measures the
biggest clone in every fish (percentage) in order to compare fish with different numbers of sequences. Big clones will not normally characterize
a “stable” state.

Ben-Hamo and Efroni BMC Systems Biology 2011, 5:27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/5/27

Page 6 of 12

Figure 5 Comparison between centrality indices in the real Ig networks and the random one.

levels of network Betweenness centrality, indicating several connected clones that could be the result of an
immune response in those fish.

sequences (Figure 8). Perhaps more importantly, there
was a scarcity of rare combinations, accounting for less
than 0.001% of all sequences (i.e. combinations found in
fewer than 10 sequences).

V/J segment analysis

The Ig sequences from the original paper by Weinstein
et al. were obtained from 14 fish, with each family being
raised in separate aquaria and having normal interactions with the environment including the development
of natural internal flora [16]. V and J segments from all
14 fish were analyzed, and germline sequences were
matched with sequence reads to demonstrate their distribution among individual fish.
The analysis suggested that the 14 ZF could be separated
into two distinct groups. In five of them, the same five that
presented with highly connected network architecture, at
least 40% of the Ig sequences could be attributed to single
germline combinations, in both V and J genes. Figure 6
demonstrates the distribution of J gene alleles among the
fish; figure 7 demonstrates the average distribution of V
and J genes. The five fish marked by yellow squares in figure 6(A) represent fish with over 40% specific V or J
sequences. This skewing of the B-cell clonal repertoire
cannot be explained by errors in PCR amplification
because the over-expression accounts for a specific V or J
germline gene and not for a specific sequence. PCR amplification errors produce a bias towards specific overexpressed sequences but not to a specific germline.
To investigate whether specific clones dominate the
repertoire, VJ recombination was quantified across the
fish. Specific combinations accounted for up to 6% of all

Mutation Analysis

One of the hallmarks of the adaptive immune system is
its ability to recognize large numbers of antigens. B-cell
repertoire diversity is generated by two distinct processes that modify the Ig sequence.
The primary repertoire is generated in the bone marrow by a process of V (D) J recombination, with further
diversification via two pathways: (1) somatic hypermutation (SHM), a process that introduces a high frequency of point mutations into the variable region gene
of the Ig; (2) relatively rare insertions and deletions of
nucleotides. Recent studies have demonstrated that the
molecular processes of SHM and class-switch recombination (CSR) require the activity of activation-induced
cytidine deaminase (AID), which removes C to form a U
nucleotide on the mRNA sequence. This change activates proteins that mediate SHM and CSR [28-30].
By aligning the sequences to their germline, the type
of mutations that occurred could be quantified. This
kind of analysis in the V and J segments revealed that
46% of all mutations originated from C residues, as
shown in Figure 9; this finding is consistent with the
AID mechanism [31].
Silent (synonymous) mutations do not result in
the replacement of amino acids, as opposed to
non-synonymous mutations, which change the sequence

Ben-Hamo and Efroni BMC Systems Biology 2011, 5:27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/5/27

Page 7 of 12

(a)

(b)

Figure 6 VJ genes distribution across fish shows similar architecture as the networks. (A) J gene distribution across fish. Five fish
demonstrate that more than 40% of their sequences are sourced from a specific gene; the same fish had highly connected network
architecture. (B) The same fish demonstrate a similar behavior in their choices of specific V genes, as shown for fish H and fish F. Fish with highly
connected network architecture had distinct germline representation.

(a)

% of sequences

J genes Distribution

same three major replacements (peaks in Figure 10a) as
in humans (C-to-T, A-to-G, G-to-A), and more silent
mutations in C-to-T and in G-to-A. It was reasoned
that such a bias would reduce the tendency of somatic
mutations to occur in C compared to A nucleotides.
A recent study has demonstrated that the over-expression of codons with silent mutations in C/T is not

(b)

V genes Distribution

% of sequences

of amino acids in the resulting polypeptide. Silent vs.
replacement mutations in the V and J genes were investigated (Figure 10A). The results were compared with
published data concerning V genes in humans [28],
which demonstrate that somatically mutated human
IgVH genes accumulate C-to-T base exchanges that are
predominantly silent. The ZF sequences manifested the

Figure 7 Average gene distribution. (A) The J gene average distribution across all 14 fish. (B) The V genes average distribution across all 14
fish. Average distribution was adjusted to the number of sequences in every fish by calculating the percentile; the figure demonstrates how VJ
sequences are used across the entire population.

Ben-Hamo and Efroni BMC Systems Biology 2011, 5:27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/5/27

Page 8 of 12

Figure 8 The distribution of all possible V and J combination in all 14 fishes, resulting in 195 possibilities.

Figure 9 Percentage of mutations in the V and J genes in all 14 fishes; 46% of mutations from C, 36% of mutations from G, 14% of
mutations from A and 4% mutations from T.

Ben-Hamo and Efroni BMC Systems Biology 2011, 5:27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/5/27

(a)

Page 9 of 12

(b)

Figure 10 Silent (white areas of bars) vs. replacement (black areas of bars) mutations. (A) Percentage of mutations in all 14 fish as
constructed from the data. (B) Percentage of somatic mutation exchanges in humans as presented in [28].

merely a mechanism to reduce the propensity for
change in C but is balanced by the use of more changeable codons and AAs [32].
ZF share several orthologous genes with mouse and
human, which gives this species considerable relevance
over other traditional developmental models [13]. Moreover, previous works have identified several regions of
the ZF and human genome that encode the same or
similar genes [33-35]. In addition, the results presented
herein reinforce the similarity between these two species
at the level of the mutation process and base specificity.
Sequence Motifs

Sequences motifs are a collection of amino acid residues
found in various organisms, and shared sequence motifs
can imply an evolutionary link between organisms. Certain
amino acid residues are unique to the VH genes of various
vertebrate species [4,36,37], and considered markers for
the sequence homogenization process in Ig gene evolution.
The recurring sequences FDYWGKGTMVTVST and
FDYWGKGTMVTVSS were previously identified in two
teleost fish species, Arctic charr (Salvelinus alpinus) and
rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss) [4,36,38], which are
separated from their common ancestor by 12-20 million
years. The same motif, FDYWGKGTMVTVSS, was
evident in the zebrafish DH-JH region and the sequence
motif FDYWGKGTMVTVST was absent (Figure 11).
Two new motifs, probably resulting from favorable
mutations that occurred during evolution, were
identified; from both motifs: FDYWGKGTMVTVTS and
FDYWGKGTKVTVSS.
In addition to the DH-JH region motifs identified, the
specific motif EDTAVYYCAR was present in the VH

region; part of this motif (AVYYCAR) was previously
identified in the TCR cDNA V region of Horn shark
(Heterodontus francisci ) [39]. These findings support
the idea that the Ig heavy chain in teleosts is evolutionarily stable.

Conclusion
Comprehensive analysis of the first sequenced whole
organism Ig repertoire, as provided by Weinstein et al.,
resulted in the following conclusions:
• By comparing somatic mutation exchange across
silent and replacement mutations, a remarkable
similarity between human and ZF was evident,
a similarity that places the ZF within a proper
context as a relevant model for studying selection
mechanisms.
• The ZF evolutionary context was investigated by
comparing sequence motifs identified in ZF to evolutionary adjacent fish species.
• VJ combination analysis across individuals was carried out in order to investigate how recombined VJ
regions are used in different individuals. This analysis revealed that specific portions of the repertoire
are utilized by the recombination mechanisms, while
others are clearly absent (figure 8).
• Mora et al. demonstrated that the data from Weinstein et al. prove that “antibody diversity is not limited by the sequences encoded in the genome” [40].
Furthermore, the authors demonstrated an intriguing
set of properties that they derived from the data.
However, the original paper by Weinstein et al. and
the paper by Mora et al. do not demonstrate the

Ben-Hamo and Efroni BMC Systems Biology 2011, 5:27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/5/27

Page 10 of 12

(a)
Arca c charr (Salvelinus alpinus
)
and rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus
mykiss), (Andersson and
Matsunaga,1995;Andersson and
matsunaga,1998;Andersson, et al.,
1991)
Zebra sh

(b)

Figure 11 Motifs found in ZF and the proximity to humans. (A) Motif in the zebrafish sequences identified in this work compared to
sequence motifs that were previously identified in Arctic charr (Salvelinus alpinus) and rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss) [1-3]. (B) Phylogenetic
tree representing the proximity between humans and fish (zebrafish, arcatic char, rainbow trout).

clear stratification of the group of fish, as presented
in this study. This research has demonstrated that
there are two distinct groups of fish. One group presents a uniform use of VJ recombination and a connected, uniform-like network of Ig molecules, while
the other presents a much higher frequency of a
subset of VJ recombination and a highly connected
sub-network of Ig molecules.
We hypothesize that these two groups represent two
distinct populations. The group that represents a random-like pattern of behavior is composed of fish with a
basal immune response, while the second set of fish
represents those with a more complex immune response
that may be the result of external perturbations. The
network transformation performed over sequences
demonstrates this visually by highlighting the special
connectivity patterns, and quantifiably by using network
architecture metrics that demonstrate major differences
between the two groups.
The mechanisms that determine the connections
made by individual sequences across the network, and
the meaning of these network connections, are the

subject of future work. The temporal behavior of the
network during an immune response will undoubtedly
shed light on the specific choices made among clones.
The shape of the immunological repertoire is at the
heart of our understanding of an immune response, selfnon-self discrimination, autoimmunity and immune
modulation. As current technologies facilitate organismwide measurements, a better understanding of this fundamental system is tied to our ability to influence the
immunological repertoire in a clinically related manner.

Methods
All sequences were obtained from supporting online
information from the report published by Weinstein
et al. [16]. A total of 14 fish and approximately one million sequences were used. Germline sequences were
obtained from Danilova et al. [41].
The Zebrafish heavy chain has 39 V genes, 5 D genes
and 5 J genes: overall, there are 975 (39 × 5 × 5)
optional combinations of V (D) J sequences [16]. Here,
using BLAST [42] alignment, V and J germline
sequences were matched. From a sequence perspective,
the five D genes were very close. Therefore, D gene

Ben-Hamo and Efroni BMC Systems Biology 2011, 5:27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/5/27

alignment was not used as an indicator and the D
region was defined for analyses as the segment between
the identifiable parts of V and J [27].
All sequences with a BLAST E-value higher than 10-8
were removed from the analysis owing to insufficient fit
to either V or J (overall, less than 0.5% sequences were
extracted). Results presented have been normalized
across individual fish.
Mutation analysis was carried out by aligning each
sequence to its germline and tallying base substitutions,
deletions and insertions in the sequence. Once all mutations were determined, the ORF was identified and the
type of mutation was tagged as silent or replacement,
thus tallying the amount of silent and replacement
mutations and their frequencies within the four nucleotides. The results were compared with the analysis previously carried out on humans [28]. The nucleotide
sequences were translated into amino acid sequences in
order to be analyzed and to allow the search for specific
motifs that are consistent in the majority of sequences.
This analysis revealed a pattern that was previously
found in other vertebrates.
Network analysis was carried out using Pajek [43], a
program for network layout and analyses. Each vertex in
the network represents a different sequence. The size of
the vertex is comparable to the number of sequences
matching a specific vertex perfectly. The distance
between a pair of connected nodes in the network is
one mutation (red edge), one deletion (blue edge) or
mutation and deletion (green edge). Nodes in every
cluster are colored differently, such that each cluster
represents a connected component inside the whole network. In other words, in every component there is a
path connecting every two vertices. Network centrality
indices, which are a key measurement in assessing any
network, were calculated using Pajek and are presented
in the results section.
Acknowledgements
The authors wish to thank Irun Cohen for his help.
Dr. Sol Efroni is supported by the European Union through the IRG program.
This work has been supported by the Israel Science Foundation (ISF) 1601/
10, ISF-Bikura.
Authors’ contributions
RBH and SE designed, analyzed and wrote the paper. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript.
Received: 19 September 2010 Accepted: 10 February 2011
Published: 10 February 2011

Page 11 of 12

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.
9.

10.
11.
12.
13.
14.

15.
16.

17.

18.
19.
20.
21.
22.

23.
24.
25.

26.

27.
28.

29.
References
1. Richard A, Goldsby TJK, Barbara A, Osborne : KUBY IMMUNOLOGY. W.H.
Freeman & Company; 2000.
2. Cohen IR: Tending Adam’s garden: evolving the cognitive immune self.
San Diego, CA: Academic Press; 2000.
3. Parham P: The immune System. New York, Garland Publishing Press; 2009.

30.

Andersson E, Matsunaga T: Evolutionary stability of the immunoglobulin
heavy chain variable region gene families in teleost. Immunogenetics
1998, 47(3):272-277.
Hansen JD, McBlane JF: Recombination-activating genes, transposition,
and the lymphoid-specific combinatorial immune system: a common
evolutionary connection. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol 2000, 248:111-135.
Li Z, Chang Y: V(D)J recombination in zebrafish: Normal joining products
with accumulation of unresolved coding ends and deleted signal ends.
Mol Immunol 2007, 44(7):1793-1802.
Clark LA, Ganesan S, Papp S, van Vlijmen HW: Trends in antibody
sequence changes during the somatic hypermutation process. J
Immunol 2006, 177(1):333-340.
Kepler TB, Perelson AS: Somatic hypermutation in B cells: an optimal
control treatment. J Theor Biol 1993, 164(1):37-64.
Foster SJ, Dorner T, Lipsky PE: Somatic hypermutation of VkappaJkappa
rearrangements: targeting of RGYW motifs on both DNA strands and
preferential selection of mutated codons within RGYW motifs. Eur J
Immunol 1999, 29(12):4011-4021.
Berek C, Milstein C: The dynamic nature of the antibody repertoire.
Immunol Rev 1988, 105:5-26.
Kleinstein SH, Louzoun Y, Shlomchik MJ: Estimating hypermutation rates
from clonal tree data. J Immunol 2003, 171(9):4639-4649.
Jolly CJ, Wagner SD, Rada C, Klix N, Milstein C, Neuberger MS: The
targeting of somatic hypermutation. Semin Immunol 1996, 8(3):159-168.
Yoder JA, Nielsen ME, Amemiya CT, Litman GW: Zebrafish as an
immunological model system. Microbes Infect 2002, 4(14):1469-1478.
Willett CE, Cherry JJ, Steiner LA: Characterization and expression of the
recombination activating genes (rag1 and rag2) of zebrafish.
Immunogenetics 1997, 45(6):394-404.
Trede NS, Langenau DM, Traver D, Look AT, Zon LI: The use of zebrafish to
understand immunity. Immunity 2004, 20(4):367-379.
Weinstein JA, Jiang N, White RA, Fisher DS, Quake SR: High-throughput
sequencing of the zebrafish antibody repertoire. Science 2009,
324(5928):807-810.
Tavazoie S, Hughes JD, Campbell MJ, Cho RJ, Church GM: Systematic
determination of genetic network architecture. Nat Genet 1999,
22(3):281-285.
Jeong H, Mason SP, Barabasi AL, Oltvai ZN: Lethality and centrality in
protein networks. Nature 2001, 411(6833):41-42.
Ozier O, Amin N, Ideker T: Global architecture of genetic interactions on
the protein network. Nat Biotechnol 2003, 21(5):490-491.
Barabasi AL: Scale-free networks: a decade and beyond. Science 2009,
325(5939):412-413.
Girvan M, Newman ME: Community structure in social and biological
networks. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2002, 99(12):7821-7826.
Zotenko E, Mestre J, O’Leary DP, Przytycka TM: Why do hubs in the yeast
protein interaction network tend to be essential: reexamining the
connection between the network topology and essentiality. PLoS
Comput Biol 2008, 4(8):e1000140.
He XL, Zhang JZ: Why do hubs tend to be essential in protein networks?
Plos Genetics 2006, 2(6):826-834.
Jeong H, Mason SP, Barabasi AL, Oltvai ZN: Lethality and centrality in
protein networks. Nature 2001, 411(6833):41-42.
Park JY, Barabasi AL: Distribution of node characteristics in complex
networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America 2007, 104(46):17916-17920.
Yook SH, Oltvai ZN, Barabasi AL: Functional and topological
characterization of protein interaction networks. Proteomics 2004,
4(4):928-942.
Mora T, Walczak AM, Bialek W, Callan CG Jr: Maximum entropy models for
antibody diversity. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2010, 107(12):5405-5410.
Zheng NY, Wilson K, Jared M, Wilson PC: Intricate targeting of
immunoglobulin somatic hypermutation maximizes the efficiency of
affinity maturation. J Exp Med 2005, 201(9):1467-1478.
Papavasiliou FN, Schatz DG: The activation-induced deaminase functions
in a postcleavage step of the somatic hypermutation process. J Exp Med
2002, 195(9):1193-1198.
Muramatsu M, Sankaranand VS, Anant S, Sugai M, Kinoshita K, Davidson NO,
Honjo T: Specific expression of activation-induced cytidine deaminase
(AID), a novel member of the RNA-editing deaminase family in germinal
center B cells. J Biol Chem 1999, 274(26):18470-18476.

Ben-Hamo and Efroni BMC Systems Biology 2011, 5:27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/5/27

Page 12 of 12

31. Tanaka A, Shen HM, Ratnam S, Kodgire P, Storb U: Attracting AID to
targets of somatic hypermutation. J Exp Med 207(2):405-415.
32. Hershberg U, Shlomchik MJ: Differences in potential for amino acid
change after mutation reveals distinct strategies for kappa and lambda
light-chain variation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006, 103(43):15963-15968.
33. Barbazuk WB, Korf I, Kadavi C, Heyen J, Tate S, Wun E, Bedell JA,
McPherson JD, Johnson SL: The syntenic relationship of the zebrafish and
human genomes. Genome Res 2000, 10(9):1351-1358.
34. Postlethwait JH, Woods IG, Ngo-Hazelett P, Yan YL, Kelly PD, Chu F,
Huang H, Hill-Force A, Talbot WS: Zebrafish comparative genomics and
the origins of vertebrate chromosomes. Genome Res 2000,
10(12):1890-1902.
35. Liu TX, Zhou Y, Kanki JP, Deng M, Rhodes J, Yang HW, Sheng XM, Zon LI,
Look AT: Evolutionary conservation of zebrafish linkage group 14 with
frequently deleted regions of human chromosome 5 in myeloid
malignancies. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2002, 99(9):6136-6141.
36. Andersson E, Matsunaga T: Evolution of immunoglobulin heavy chain
variable region genes: a VH family can last for 150-200 million years or
longer. Immunogenetics 1995, 41(1):18-28.
37. Kabat EA: The paucity of species-specific amino acid residues in the
variable regions of human and mouse Bence-Jones proteins and its
evolutionary and genetic implications. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1967,
57(5):1345-1349.
38. Andersson E, Tormanen V, Matsunaga T: Evolution of a VH gene family in
low vertebrates. Int Immunol 1991, 3(6):527-533.
39. Rast JP, Litman GW: T-cell receptor gene homologs are present in the
most primitive jawed vertebrates. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1994,
91(20):9248-9252.
40. Mora T, Walczak AM, Bialek W, Callan CG Jr: Maximum entropy models for
antibody diversity. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107(12):5405-5410.
41. Danilova N, Bussmann J, Jekosch K, Steiner LA: The immunoglobulin
heavy-chain locus in zebrafish: identification and expression of a
previously unknown isotype, immunoglobulin Z. Nat Immunol 2005,
6(3):295-302.
42. McGinnis S, Madden TL: BLAST: at the core of a powerful and diverse set
of sequence analysis tools. Nucleic Acids Res 2004, , 32 Web Server:
W20-25.
43. Batagelj VMA: Pajek: A program for large network analysis. Connections
1998, 47-57.
doi:10.1186/1752-0509-5-27
Cite this article as: Ben-Hamo and Efroni: The whole-organism heavy
chain B cell repertoire from Zebrafish self-organizes into distinct
network features. BMC Systems Biology 2011 5:27.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
