<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>PseudoMLSA: a database for multigenic sequence analysis of Pseudomonas species</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Microbiology 2010, 10:118. doi: 10.1186/1471-2180-10-118"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Antoni Bennasar, Magdalena Mulet, Jorge Lalucat, Elena Garc_a-Vald_s"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 8.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 7.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Bennasar et al. BMC Microbiology 2010, 10:118
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/10/118

Open Access

DATABASE

PseudoMLSA: a database for multigenic sequence
analysis of Pseudomonas species
Database

Antoni Bennasar*1,3, Magdalena Mulet1, Jorge Lalucat1,2 and Elena García-Valdés1,2

Abstract
Background: The genus Pseudomonas comprises more than 100 species of environmental, clinical, agricultural, and
biotechnological interest. Although, the recommended method for discriminating bacterial species is DNA-DNA
hybridisation, alternative techniques based on multigenic sequence analysis are becoming a common practice in
bacterial species discrimination studies. Since there is not a general criterion for determining which genes are more
useful for species resolution; the number of strains and genes analysed is increasing continuously. As a result,
sequences of different genes are dispersed throughout several databases. This sequence information needs to be
collected in a common database, in order to be useful for future identification-based projects.
Description: The PseudoMLSA Database is a comprehensive database of multiple gene sequences from strains of
Pseudomonas species. The core of the database is composed of selected gene sequences from all Pseudomonas type
strains validly assigned to the genus through 2008. The database is aimed to be useful for MultiLocus Sequence
Analysis (MLSA) procedures, for the identification and characterisation of any Pseudomonas bacterial isolate. The
sequences are available for download via a direct connection to the National Center for Biotechnology Information
(NCBI). Additionally, the database includes an online BLAST interface for flexible nucleotide queries and similarity
searches with the user's datasets, and provides a user-friendly output for easily parsing, navigating, and analysing
BLAST results.
Conclusions: The PseudoMLSA database amasses strains and sequence information of validly described Pseudomonas
species, and allows free querying of the database via a user-friendly, web-based interface available at http://
www.uib.es/microbiologiaBD/Welcome.html. The web-based platform enables easy retrieval at strain or gene
sequence information level; including references to published peer-reviewed articles, and direct external links to more
specialized strain information databases (StrainInfo) and GeneBank (NCBI). The PseudoMLSA is intended to provide
helpful strain-sequence information for a better and more comprehensive discriminative multigenic sequence based
analysis of this special group of bacteria, contributing to enhance our understanding of the evolution of Pseudomonas
species.
Background
The genus Pseudomonas includes many species of environmental, clinical, agricultural, and biotechnological
interest [1]. Pseudomonas is a large genus, currently comprised of more than 100 species that are phenotypically
and genotypically well defined. Furthermore, new species
are continuously being added to the genus, while others
have been reclassified as Burkholderia, Ralstonia, Comamonas, Acidovorax, Hydrogenophaga, etc. The species
* Correspondence: toni.bennasar@uib.es
1

Departament de Biologia, Microbiologia, Universitat de les Illes Balears,
Campus UIB, 07122 Palma de Mallorca, Spain

Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

currently classified as Pseudomonas have been compiled
in a taxonomical web database [2].
Besides the phylogenetic, phenotypic, chemotaxonomical and serotyping descriptions, the recommended
method for discriminating bacterial species is DNA-DNA
hybridisation [3]. However, this method has limitations
(it is time consuming, needs experience, does not define
distances between species, and is not cumulative). In contrast, the MultiLocus Sequence Analysis (MLSA) is a
rapid and robust classification method for the genotypic
characterisation of a more diverse group of prokaryotes
(including entire genera) using the sequences of multiple
protein-coding genes [4]. In fact, Gevers and Coenye [5]

© 2010 Bennasar et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons

BioMed Central Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Bennasar et al. BMC Microbiology 2010, 10:118
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/10/118

have stated that multigenic sequence analysis, or MLSA,
is starting to become a common practice in taxonomic
studies, and in the future it may replace DNA-DNA
hybridisations for bacterial species discrimination.
The principal aim of the MLSA procedure is the characterisation of bacterial isolates by combining the information contained in the sequences of several specific
genes. The ideal, though probably unfeasible, approach
for the classification of microorganisms based on MLSA
would rely on the selection of a universal set of genes that
permits the hierarchical classification of all prokaryotes
[4,6]. However, genes that can be perfectly informative
within a given genus or family may not be useful or even
present in other taxa. For this reason, a more viable
approach for microorganism classification schemes based
on MLSA would be to design different gene sets useful
for strains within a particular group, genus, or even family. Currently, each researcher selects specific genes that
are not commonly used for other species; indeed, different genes are often selected for the same species. There is
not a general criterion for determining which genes are
more useful for taxonomic purposes [5]. As a result,
sequences of different genes have been scattered
throughout several databases. In order for this sequence
information to be useful for future MLSA identificationbased projects, it needs to be collected in a common
database.
In many cases, the 16S rRNA gene sequence is not sufficiently discriminative for taxonomic purposes [7-9].
Consequently, several attempts have been made to identify other genes that can be used to determine the relatedness between genera or species. For example, the high
rate of evolution of gyrB (gyrase subunit B) makes this
gene valuable when discrimination within and between
genera is needed. In the genus Pseudomonas, several
other genes, ampC, citS, flicC, oriC, oprI, and pilA, from
19 environmental and clinical Pseudomonas aeruginosa
isolates were analysed [10]. The 16S rRNA and oprF
genes were also compared in 41 isolates of Pseudomonas
fluorescens from clinical and environmental origin [11].
The gacA and rpoB genes were selected by de Souza [12]
and Tayeb [8] to be analysed for the genus Pseudomonas.
Yamamoto and Harayama [13] initially worked with 20
strains of P. putida, and 2 genes (gyrB and rpoD) were
analysed and compared with 16S rRNA gene sequences
of the same species. These authors later extended the
study to other species of the genus Pseudomonas. The
analysis of 125 strains of 31 species permitted the discrimination of complexes in the genus Pseudomonas [9].
Other authors showed an improved resolution in the phylogenetic relationships among Pseudomonas species by
the combined analysis of several genes, such as atpD,
carA, recA, and 16S rDNA, and new clusters were defined
in the genus Pseudomonas [14]. The number of genes

Page 2 of 6

analysed is increasing, as is the case for the analysis of 10
genes in 58 Pseudomonas strains that generated 280 new
entries in databases [15].
The possibility of Whole Genome Sequencing (WGS)
represents a revolution for evolutionary and taxonomic
analysis. Seventeen strains in the genus Pseudomonas
have already been sequenced. For large bacterial populations the epidemiological or ecological approaches need
simple methodological routines for which MLSA will
remain a highly efficient and inexpensive technique useful for identifying species and strains relationships. Evidently, at least for sometime more than one technique
will coexist.
Some facts are emerging from these recent analyses.
The number of strains and genes analysed is increasing
continuously, and the strains analysed are not solely bacterial pathogens. The number of genes that should be
analysed does not need to be the same for identification
purposes, depending on the genetic diversity of each
group. The initial recommendation for typing clinical isolates was seven genes. The ad hoc committee for the reevaluation of the species definition proposed a minimum
of five housekeeping genes to achieve an adequately
informative level of phylogenetic data [3]. P. stutzeri is a
well studied example of a highly diverse species, and six
genes were initially chosen to define the existing genomovars [16], but this number was later reduced to three:
gyrB, rpoD, and 16S rDNA [17]. The usefulness of these
genes in clarifying taxonomical descriptions has been
demonstrated for Pseudomonas strain OX1 [18] and for
the proposal of P. chloritidismutans as a junior name of P.
stutzeri genomovar 3 [19].
Currently, the sequence data that have been generated
for several genes are dispersed in databases, and the compilation of all these data is, while not difficult, labour
intensive. However, a secondary database for MLSA is
needed, one that is more specific and focused on
Pseudomonas type strains to facilitate the species identification of Pseudomonas isolates. A good example is the
recently available website called "EzTaxon" [20]. This
website contains 16S rRNA gene sequences from all
prokaryotic type strains, and represents an attempt to
make the routine identification of isolates less time consuming. The compilation of an updated forum for the
well-characterised (both phenotypically and genotypically) strains of Pseudomonas and for all of the genes
analysed from these strains is the main objective of the
new PseudoMLSA database.

Construction and content
The PseudoMLSA database runs on a Mac OS X platform
(version 10.4.11) with the Apache web server version
1.3.41 (Darwin), MySQL server (version 5.1.34) and PHP
(version 5.2.4). The web server and all parts of the data-

Bennasar et al. BMC Microbiology 2010, 10:118
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/10/118

base are hosted at the Microbiology Area of the Biology
Department of the Universitat de les Illes Balears (UIB),
Spain. We have used the generic relational BioSQL model
[21] to support and develop a shared database schema for
storing sequence data, features, and annotation in a way
that is interoperable between the BioPerl, BioPython, and
BioJava projects. We have used MySQL as a supported
Relational Database Management System (RDBMS), plus
the associated python library. GenBank files are used to
supply and maintain the information necessary for the
database. The sequences, features, and annotations are
introduced into the database using BioPython based
scripts [22] and the SeqIO module [23]. The web interfaces that allow access the information available in the
database online were written in the PHP programming
language. The PseudoMLSA database includes tables of
taxonomic information (strains, Pseudomonas validated
species names, strain equivalencies) that are routinely
updated. Finally, several interfaces for in silico molecular
biology services were implemented for post-processing
available sequence data. The installed programs include
BLAST [24], a CLUSTAL W Multiple Sequence Alignments form [25] and the programs for phylogenetic inference included in the PHYLIP package [26].

Utility and Discussion
The aims of this database project are: 1) maintenance of a
well-described Pseudomonas type and strain collection,
2) construction of a sequence-based database of selected
genes of members of the genus, and 3) implementation of
analytical bioinformatics tools for the multi-sequencebased identification of Pseudomonas species. The database presented here and named PseudoMLSA, consists of
more than 1,000 sequence entries from 99 Pseudomonas
species with validly published names of the taxa concerned. The database covers more than 400 different
strain entries (including type strains for each species),
with information on strain equivalencies when it exists,
together with the accession numbers and other features
for 146 different genes. The list of genes includes the rrn
operon genes (the 16S rRNA and 23S rRNA genes, the
internally transcribed spacer ITS1, and the tRNA-Ala and
tRNA-Ile genes), housekeeping (atpD, gyrB, recA, rpoB,
rpoD, etc.), and functional genes (car, cat, nir, nor, nos,
etc.). The data from the species Pseudomonas stutzeri are
overrepresented in the PseudoMLSA database. Our laboratory has studied this species extensively for more than
20 years, and a large number of sequences of multiple
genes have been accumulated. Furthermore, the existence
in P. stutzeri of 19 well characterised genomic groups,
called genomovars [27], has been a valuable test data set
for the routine characterisation of new isolates on the
basis of sets of gene sequences.

Page 3 of 6

The implementation and data acquisition functions of
the PseudoMLSA database are based on emerging standards for biological data [21,28], and therefore allow for
the subsequent use of public routines (BioJava, BioPython and BioPerl). The database schema allows for several features, such as GenBank accession numbers, to be
merged and stored as a single record (Figure 1). Gene
sequences are obtained from primary databases like GenBank [29] and semi-automatically curated. Information
for strains of Pseudomonas species is included in the
databases from the GenBank report (data are imported
through known accession numbers). In order to make use
of validated information for Pseudomonas species and
strains, the database schema includes tables that are
responsible for updating and relating the validly
described Pseudomonas species names with the corresponding synonymous names. Furthermore, additional
database tables are maintained with the corresponding
strain name equivalencies. Finally, all taxonomic names
are maintained with, and linked out to, key taxonomic
information sources like StrainInfo.net [30], a bioportal
offering an integrated view of publicly available microbial
cultures and their downstream information to facilitate
the daunting task of tracking down an interesting strain
of a given taxon. The StrainInfo.net bioportal [31] brings
together the records of biological material kept at multiple biological resource centres into a single portal interface, with direct pointers to the relevant information at
the collections' websites, providing both historical traces
and geographical distribution of the strains they keep in
culture. In addition, the information for Pseudomonas
species and/or strains is automatically linked to related
sequences in the public domain and refers to existing scientific publications that deal with the organism.
Since the alignment of nucleotide or amino acid
sequences is one of the most important tools for
researchers involved in gene sequence comparison for
identification purposes, users can also upload their own
sequence datasets to query against. The basic local alignment search tool (BLAST), which predominates as the
fastest and most widely-used tool, has been included as a
web-based interface to search against the PseudoMLSA
sequence database. The BLAST program is widely used
for sequence similarity searches [32] because it provides
an easy way for a user to perform BLAST searches via a
web server, and it suits the general purpose of searches
against the curated PseudoMLSA database. Additionally,
a web interface for PHYLIP programs [26,33] is implemented to carry out more precise evolutionary studies.
The PseudoMLSA database offers an interface for
choosing between a user-definable set of target databases,
and inputting user uploaded query sequences by pasting
them directly into the query box, or by uploading

Bennasar et al. BMC Microbiology 2010, 10:118
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/10/118

Page 4 of 6

Figure 1 General overview of the process for maintenance, queries, and analysis of gene sequences using the PseudoMLSA Database server http://
www.uib.es/microbiologiaBD/Welcome.html. The isolate, strain or Pseudomonas species information can be easily queried by searching against
several fields. Furthermore, users can do sequence-based searches against database including user's own sequence datasets. Advanced searches are
possible via configurable BLAST parameters. A more fine-tuned clustering analysis can be carried out with programs included in the PHYLIP package.

sequences as FASTA files from a local computer. Users
can also manipulate the BLAST parameters to glean
more specific information. The results of a BLAST query
to PseudoMLSA are presented with the typical BLAST
report format which includes the query sequence name,
subject sequence names, subject source database, bit
score (linked to the pair-wise alignment result), percent
identity, and E-values.
The number of gene sequences for strains in the genus
Pseudomonas is continuously increasing, yet these
sequences are scattered throughout existing databases.
As a result, methods and databases are needed to integrate information from a variety of sources and to support faster and powerful analyses. In addition, in the
specific case of the genus Pseudomonas, 16S rRNA gene
sequence-based identification alone provides poor resolution due to the gene's slow evolution rate [8,34]. Moreover, the excess of sequences for non-type strains,
together with the need for peer-reviewed databases of
16S rRNA gene sequences (routinely used for the identifi-

cation of bacteria), creates discrepancies. The combined
use of the 16S rRNA gene and other molecular sequences
to analyse the phylogeny of Pseudomonas could provide a
systematic approach to reduce such discrepancies.
Achieving this goal requires building on the analysis initially conducted by the Yamamoto [9,13] and Tayeb [8]
groups, who sequenced the genes gyrB, rpoD and rpoB
respectively, and expanding it to include all known
Pseudomonas species.
The PseudoMLSA Database server provides cumulative
and reliable information to facilitate MultiLocus
Sequence Analysis for studies of Pseudomonas taxonomy,
phylogeny, and evolution. Furthermore, it serves as a reference repository for MLST, an unambiguous procedure
for characterising isolates of bacterial species using the
sequences of internal fragments of usually seven housekeeping genes. This method assigns as distinct alleles the
different sequences present within a bacterial species
and, for each isolate, the alleles at each loci define the
allelic profile or sequence type [35]. Consequently, the

Bennasar et al. BMC Microbiology 2010, 10:118
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/10/118

Page 5 of 6

information held in the PseudoMLSA database could play
two essential roles in the field of Pseudomonas research:
first, to fulfil the need for the integration of information
about the genus Pseudomonas that is currently widely
dispersed across existing databases; and second, as a platform for a consistent identification procedure based on
the analysis of sets of multiple gene sequences to settle
the difficulties in assigning new isolates to already existing Pseudomonas species, and for defining novel species.

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Conclusions
In summary, the relational database and the accompanying analysis utilities described here are necessary tools for
integrating and linking sets of sequence information from
different genes of the genus Pseudomonas, including universal genes with different rates of evolution (rrn, ITS,
gyrB, rpoD), and specific genes for performing intra- and
intergeneric comparisons on groups or species (for example, catecol-1,2-dioxigenase is characteristic of Palleroni's
RNA homology group I of the genus Pseudomonas [1], or
nosZ for denitrifying Pseudomonas). The PseudoMLSA
Database is intended to provide reference sequences from
strains, as well as Pseudomonas species information, both
of which can be particularly helpful for MLSA of
Pseudomonas. Ultimately, the purpose of the database is
to afford a portable, accurate, and, highly discriminating
system that can be used for the characterisation of
Pseudomonas strains and isolates by nucleotide sequence
based approaches via the internet.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by projects CGL2006-09719/BOS, CGL 2008-03242/
BOS and CGL 2009-12180 from the CICYT (Spain) and FEDER funding. M. Mulet
was the recipient of a predoctoral fellowship from the Plà Balear de Recerca i
Desenvolupament Tecnològic de les Illes Balears (PRIB).

Availability and requirements
The PseudoMLSA database is freely accessible through a
web-server at http://www.uib.es/microbiologiaBD/Welcome.html for searches for Pseudomonas strains and
multigenic
sequence-related
information.
The
PseudoMLSA database is easily queried from this web
interface and whithout special requirements. Researchers
involved in the characterisation of Pseudomonas strains
are invited to use the database, make suggestions and
submit their sequences. All comments, queries, requests
and corrections should be sent by email to
toni.bennasar@uib.es
. Furthermore, notifications for new entries in the GenBank for Pseudomonas gene sequences, will be gratefully
acknowledged and should be sent to this address via
email and accompanied by a reference to a published,
peer-reviewed article. Users of PseudoMLSA are
requested to cite this article when referencing the database. PseudoMLSA currently contains 1,297 entries of
Pseudomonas gene sequences, but is expected to grow
continuously thanks to the rapid development of MLSA
and genome projects.

Authors' contributions
AB designed the database and interface, performed the installation of required
software, curated the database, and drafted the manuscript. MM helped to
define the user requirements and prepared the strain, sequence, and reference
data for the database. EGV conceived of the study and participated in its coordination. EGV interacted with AB to select and introduce the data. JL provided
specialist knowledge on Pseudomonas taxonomy and phylogenetic analysis
based on sequence data. JL and EGV equally oversaw the project. All authors
helped to draft, read and approved the final manuscript.

Author Details
1Departament de Biologia, Microbiologia, Universitat de les Illes Balears,
Campus UIB, 07122 Palma de Mallorca, Spain, 2Institut Mediterrani d'Estudis
Avançats (IMEDEA CSIC-UIB), Campus UIB, 07122 Palma de Mallorca, Spain and
3Institut Universitari d'Investigació en Ciències de la Salut (IUNICS-UIB), Campus
UIB, 07122 Palma de Mallorca, Spain
Received: 21 July 2009 Accepted: 21 April 2010
Published: 21 April 2010
© 2010 Bennasar et al; from: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/10/118
This is an Open Access licensee BioMed Central Ltd. terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
BMC article is available article distributed under the
Microbiology 2010, 10:118

References
1. Palleroni NJ: Genus I Pseudomonas Migula 1894. In Bergeys's Manual of
Systematic Bacteriolgy Volume 2. Edited by: Krieg NR, Holt JG. Baltimore.
Maryland USA: The Williams and Wilkins Co; 1984:323-379.
2. List of Prokaryotic names with Standing in Nomenclature
(Pseudomonas) [http://www.bacterio.cict.fr/p/pseudomonas.html]
3. Stackebrandt E, Frederiksen W, Garrity G, Grimont P, Kämpfer P, Maiden M,
Nesme X, Rosselló-Mora R, Swings J, Trüper H, et al.: Report of the ad hoc
committee for the re-evaluation of the species definition in
bacteriology. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol 2002, 52:1043-1047.
4. Gevers D, Cohan F, Lawrence J, Spratt B, Coenye T, Feil E, Stackebrandt E,
Peer Y Van de, Vandamme P, Thompson F, Swings J: Opinion: Reevaluating prokaryotic species. Nat Rev Microbiol 2005, 3:733-739.
5. Gevers D, Coenye T: Phylogenetic and genomic analysis. In Manual of
Environmental Microbiology Third edition. Edited by: Hurst CJ, Crawford RL,
Garland JL, Lipson DA, Mills AL, Stetzenbach LD. ASM Press Whashington
DC; 2007:157-168.
6. Santos S, Ochman H: Identification and phylogenetic sorting of
bacterial lineages with universally conserved genes and proteins.
Environ Microbiol 2004, 6:754-759.
7. Adékambi T, Drancourt M, Raoult D: The rpoB gene as a tool for clinical
microbiologists. Trends Microbiol 2009, 17:37-45.
8. Ait Tayeb L, Ageron E, Grimont F, Grimont P: Molecular phylogeny of the
genus Pseudomonas based on rpoB sequences and application for the
identification of isolates. Res Microbiol 2005, 156:763-773.
9. Yamamoto S, Kasai H, Arnold D, Jackson R, Vivian A, Harayama S:
Phylogeny of the genus Pseudomonas: intrageneric structure
reconstructed from the nucleotide sequences of gyrB and rpoD genes.
Microbiology 2000, 146:2385-2394.
10. Kiewitz C, Tümmler B: Sequence diversity of Pseudomonas aeruginosa:
impact on population structure and genome evolution. J Bacteriol
2000, 182:3125-3135.
11. Bodilis J, Barray S: Molecular evolution of the major outer-membrane
protein gene (oprF) of Pseudomonas. Microbiology 2006, 152:1075-1088.
12. de Souza J, Mazzola M, Raaijmakers J: Conservation of the response
regulator gene gacA in Pseudomonas species. Environ Microbiol 2003,
5:1328-1340.
13. Yamamoto S, Harayama S: Phylogenetic relationships of Pseudomonas
putida strains deduced from the nucleotide sequences of gyrB, rpoD
and 16S rRNA genes. Int J Syst Bacteriol 1998, 48:813-819.

Bennasar et al. BMC Microbiology 2010, 10:118
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/10/118

14. Hilario E, Buckley T, Young J: Improved resolution on the phylogenetic
relationships among Pseudomonas by the combined analysis of atpD,
carA, recA and 16S rDNA. Antonie Van Leeuwenhoek 2004, 86:51-64.
15. Frapolli M, Défago G, Moënne-Loccoz Y: Multilocus sequence analysis of
biocontrol fluorescent Pseudomonas spp. producing the antifungal
compound 2,4-diacetylphloroglucinol. Environ Microbiol 2007,
9:1939-1955.
16. Cladera A, Bennasar A, Barceló M, Lalucat J, García-Valdés E: Comparative
genetic diversity of Pseudomonas stutzeri genomovars, clonal
structure, and phylogeny of the species. J Bacteriol 2004,
186:5239-5248.
17. Mulet M, Gomila M, Gruffaz C, Meyer J, Palleroni N, Lalucat J, García-Valdés
E: Phylogenetic analysis and siderotyping as useful tools in the
taxonomy of Pseudomonas stutzeri: description of a novel genomovar.
Int J Syst Evol Microbiol 2008, 58:2309-2315.
18. Cladera A, Sepúlveda-Torres LC, Valens-Vadell M, Meyer J, Lalucat J, GarcíaValdés E: A detailed phenotypic and genotypic description of
Pseudomonas strain OX1. Syst Appl Microbiol 2006, 29:422-430.
19. Cladera A, García-Valdés E, Lalucat J: Genotype versus phenotype in the
circumscription of bacterial species: the case of Pseudomonas stutzeri
and Pseudomonas chloritidismutans. Arch Microbiol 2006, 184:353-361.
20. Chun J, Lee J, Jung Y, Kim M, Kim S, Kim B, Lim Y: EzTaxon: a web-based
tool for the identification of prokaryotes based on 16S ribosomal RNA
gene sequences. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol 2007, 57:2259-2261.
21. BioSQL Project Main Page [http://www.biosql.org/wiki/Main_Page]
22. Chapman B, Chang J: Biopython: Python tools for computational
biology. ACM SIGBIO Newsletter 2000, 20:15-19.
23. Knight J: SEQIO: A C Package for Reading and Writing Sequences. 1996.
Distributed by the author
24. Altschul S, Gish W, Miller W, Myers E, Lipman D: Basic local alignment
search tool. J Mol Biol 1990, 215:403-410.
25. Thompson J, Higgins D, Gibson T: CLUSTAL W: improving the sensitivity
of progressive multiple sequence alignment through sequence
weighting, position-specific gap penalties and weight matrix choice.
Nucleic Acids Res 1994, 22:4673-4680.
26. Felsenstein J: PHYLIP - Phylogeny Inference Package (Version 3.2).
1989, 5:164-166.
27. Rossello R, García-Valdés E, Lalucat J, Ursing J: Genotypic and phenotypic
diversity of Pseudomonas stutzeri. Syst Appl Microbiol 1991, 14:150-157.
28. Croce O, Lamarre M, Christen R: Querying the public databases for
sequences using complex keywords contained in the feature lines.
BMC Bioinformatics 2006, 7:45.
29. GenBank at NCBI [http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Genbank/]
30. Dawyndt P, Vancanneyt M, De Meyer H, Swings J: Knowledge
accumulation and resolution of data inconsistencias during the
integration of microbial information sources. IEEE Trans Knowledge Data
Eng 2005, 17:1111-1126.
31. StrainInfo [http://www.straininfo.net/]
32. McGinnis S, Madden T: BLAST: at the core of a powerful and diverse set
of sequence analysis tools. Nucleic Acids Res 2004, 32:W20-25.
33. Lim A, Zhang L: WebPHYLIP: a web interface to PHYLIP. Bioinformatics
1999, 15:1068-1069.
34. Moore ERB, Mau MAA, Böttger EC, A HR, Collins MD, Peer Y van de, de
Wachter R, Timmis KN: The determination and comparison of the 16S
rRNA gene sequences of species of the genus Pseudomonas (sensu
stricto) and estimation of the natural intrageneric relationships. Syst
Appl Microbiol 1996, 19:478-492.
35. Maiden M, Bygraves J, Feil E, Morelli G, Russell J, Urwin R, Zhang Q, Zhou J,
Zurth K, Caugant D, et al.: Multilocus sequence typing: a portable
approach to the identification of clones within populations of
pathogenic microorganisms. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1998, 95:3140-3145.
doi: 10.1186/1471-2180-10-118
Cite this article as: Bennasar et al., PseudoMLSA: a database for multigenic
sequence analysis of Pseudomonas species BMC Microbiology 2010, 10:118

Page 6 of 6

</pre>
</body>
</html>
