<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Primary Neuronal Precursors in Adult Crayfish Brain: Replenishment from a Non-neuronal Source</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Neuroscience 2011, 12:53. doi:10.1186/1471-2202-12-53"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Jeanne L Benton"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Primary Neuronal Precursors in Adult Crayfish Brain:
Replenishment from a Non-neuronal Source
Benton et al.
Benton et al. BMC Neuroscience 2011, 12:53
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/12/53 (2 June 2011)

Benton et al. BMC Neuroscience 2011, 12:53
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/12/53

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Primary Neuronal Precursors in Adult Crayfish
Brain: Replenishment from a Non-neuronal Source
Jeanne L Benton, Yi Zhang, Colleen R Kirkhart, David C Sandeman and Barbara S Beltz*

Abstract
Background: Adult neurogenesis, the production and integration of new neurons into circuits in the brains of
adult animals, is a common feature of a variety of organisms, ranging from insects and crustaceans to birds and
mammals. In the mammalian brain the 1st-generation neuronal precursors, the astrocytic stem cells, reside in
neurogenic niches and are reported to undergo self-renewing divisions, thereby providing a source of new
neurons throughout an animal’s life. In contrast, our work shows that the 1st-generation neuronal precursors in the
crayfish (Procambarus clarkii) brain, which also have glial properties and lie in a neurogenic niche resembling that
of vertebrates, undergo geometrically symmetrical divisions and both daughters appear to migrate away from the
niche. However, in spite of this continuous efflux of cells, the number of neuronal precursors in the crayfish niche
continues to expand as the animals grow and age. Based on these observations we have hypothesized that (1) the
neuronal stem cells in the crayfish brain are not self-renewing, and (2) a source external to the neurogenic niche
must provide cells that replenish the stem cell pool.
Results: In the present study, we tested the first hypothesis using sequential double nucleoside labeling to track
the fate of 1st- and 2nd-generation neuronal precursors, as well as testing the size of the labeled stem cell pool
following increasing incubation times in 5-bromo-2’-deoxyuridine (BrdU). Our results indicate that the 1stgeneration precursor cells in the crayfish brain, which are functionally analogous to neural stem cells in vertebrates,
are not a self-renewing population. In addition, these studies establish the cycle time of these cells. In vitro studies
examining the second hypothesis show that Cell Tracker™ Green-labeled cells extracted from the hemolymph, but
not other tissues, are attracted to and incorporated into the neurogenic niche, a phenomenon that appears to
involve serotonergic mechanisms.
Conclusions: These results challenge our current understanding of self-renewal capacity as a defining characteristic
of all adult neuronal stem cells. In addition, we suggest that in crayfish, the hematopoietic system may be a source
of cells that replenish the niche stem cell pool.

Background
It is now well established that neurogenesis occurs not
only during embryogenesis and early postembryonic
development, but also in the brains of many adult vertebrates and non-vertebrates, including in the human hippocampus and olfactory bulb [1]. The production of
adult-born neurons is regulated by a variety of factors
such as environmental enrichment, diet, circadian signals,
serotonin, and nitric oxide [2,3]. Studies suggest that the
new neurons may play a role in learning and memory [4],

* Correspondence: bbeltz@wellesley.edu
Neuroscience Program, Wellesley College, 106 Central Street, Wellesley, MA
02481, USA

and many diseases have also been linked to a dysregulation of adult neurogenesis [5].
Neurogenic niches are specialized vascularized microenvironments containing stem cells that serve as the 1 st
generation neuronal progenitors in the mammalian brain
[6]. In the adult subventricular (SVZ) and subgranular
(SGZ) zones in rodents, relatively quiescent neural stem
cells with glial properties [7] give rise to more rapidly
proliferative transit amplifying cells; these expand the
progenitor pool and produce neuroblasts that divide yet
again. The SVZ generates neuroblasts that migrate
towards the olfactory bulb where they differentiate into
olfactory interneurons, while the SGZ generates cells that
become hippocampal neurons [8]. The neural stem cells

© 2011 Benton et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Benton et al. BMC Neuroscience 2011, 12:53
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/12/53

that initiate these lineages are proposed to be slowly
dividing, self-renewing populations. However, due to the
complexity of mammalian neurogenic niches where several precursor cell generations coexist, there is limited in
vivo evidence for these properties [9,10].
In the crayfish Procambarus clarkii, 1 st -generation
neuronal precursors that have glial properties are
located in a niche on the ventral surface of the brain,
midway between two proliferation zones (lateral, LPZ;
medial, MPZ) where neuronal differentiation occurs
(Figure 1A) [11]. The niche cells label with an antibody
generated against glutamine synthetase (GS), an enzyme
that converts glutamate to glutamine, and which is also

Page 2 of 19

a marker of astrocytes and early stem cells in the vertebrate brain [12,13]. When labeled immunocytochemically for GS, the entire system generating neurons in the
adult crayfish brain is revealed (Figure 1A) [11,14]. As
in mammals, the crayfish neurogenic niche is intimately
associated with the vasculature, as it sits on a blood vessel that is confluent with the niche via a vascular cavity
(Figure 1B) (see also [11]). The 1 st -generation cells
divide relatively slowly and their daughters migrate
along streams (Figure 1A, D) formed by processes of the
niche cells [11]. Thus, these 1st-generation cells in the
crustacean brain function as both precursor and support
cells. The migratory 2 nd -generation precursor cells

Figure 1 Neurogenesis in the adult crayfish brain. A. Crayfish were exposed to BrdU for 6 hours followed by immediate sacrifice. Confocal
image of a crayfish hemi-brain labeled immunocytochemically for BrdU (green) and glutamine synthetase (blue) and counterstained with
propidium iodide (red), a marker of nucleic acids. BrdU-labeled cells are observed within both the lateral (LPZ) and medial (MPZ) proliferation
zones. Precursor cells located in a niche (rectangle) generate daughter cells that migrate along the streams to either the LPZ or MPZ. B. Dextranfluorescein (green) injections into the pericardial sinus show that the “vascular cavity” of the niche (arrowhead) is confluent with the vasculature.
The niche lies on a blood vessel (arrows). Propidium iodide (red), and glutamine synthetase (blue) labeling are also shown. Sidebar shows each
channel separately. C. A triple-labeled M-phase cell close to the niche is immunolabeled with glutamine synthetase (cyan), phophohistone-H3
(green) and BrdU (red). The asterisk marks the vascular cavity. [Image from 17] D. Model summarizing events leading to the production of
olfactory and accessory lobe interneurons in adult crayfish brain [Image from 29]. 1st generation precursors reside within a neurogenic niche
where they divide symmetrically. Both daughter cells appear to migrate to the proliferation zones towards either the LPZ or the MPZ. At least
one more division will occur in the LPZ and MPZ before the progeny (third- and subsequent-generations) differentiate into neurons. Black
arrows indicate direction of precursor cell migration; curved arrows indicate locations of cell divisions. Scale bars: A, 100 μm; B, 20 μm, side bar
20 μm; C, 20 μm; C inset, 10 μm.

Benton et al. BMC Neuroscience 2011, 12:53
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/12/53

require 5-7 days to traverse the streams [11]. After these
reach the proliferation zones in cell cluster 9 or 10, they
divide at least once more; their daughters differentiate
into interneurons innervating olfactory and higher order
processing regions, the olfactory and accessory lobes,
respectively [11,15,16].
Many aspects of this sequence leading to the production of neurons in the adult crayfish brain are reminiscent of adult neurogenesis in the mammalian brain,
suggesting that adult neurogenesis may be governed by
common ancestral mechanisms that have been retained
in a phylogenetically broad group of species, or, alternatively, reflect convergence on common mechanisms.
However, in contrast to the intermingling of precursor
cell generations in the mammalian neurogenic niche,
the 1st -generation precursors comprising the niche in
crayfish are segregated from their migratory daughters,
which in turn are separated from their descendants
residing in the proliferation zones. As a result of this
compartmentalization of the lineage, the relationships
among the precursors is clear and quantitative changes
in each generation are easily assessed.
Studies exploring the mode of division of the 1st-generation precursors in crayfish revealed that these cells
undergo geometrically symmetrical divisions (Figure 1C)
[17]. These divisions often occur in the niche near
where the streams emerge, or in the initial segments of
the stream. The cytoplasm of the dividing/migratory
cells is GS-labeled (Figure 1C, inset), a characteristic feature of the niche cells, thus confirming the ancestry of
these cells, although it is not known if all niche cells are
competent to become neuronal precursors. At any given
time, the majority of niche cells are in G 1 of the cell
cycle [11]. The fact that these divisions often occur in
the proximal parts of the migratory stream and that
pairs of cells are frequently observed along the migratory route, indicates that both daughter cells exit from
the niche. These data therefore suggest that the outcome of these mitoses is unlike the self-renewing divisions that are generally associated with stem cells where
one daughter remains at the site of division to maintain
the stem cell pool and the other pursues a different fate.
In the present study, we calculated the cycle time of
the 1st-generation niche precursor cells, confirming that
these are a slowly dividing population (cycle time >48
hrs). Further, we have directly tested the self-renewal
capacity of the 1st-generation niche precursor cells. The
results of these studies confirm our original suspicion
that these neuronal precursors are not self-renewing,
although as the cells that initiate the lineage that produces adult-born neurons, they serve a function that is
analogous to the stem cells in the mammalian niche.
These data raise crucial questions, because the niche
population is known to expand as the animals grow and

Page 3 of 19

age over several years, while the length of the precursor
cell cycle increases [17]. Why isn’t the supply of 1st-generation precursor cells in the niche depleted over time,
as they divide and their daughters migrate away? By
what mechanisms do the number of niche cells expand
as the animals grow? Our data strongly indicate that
neuronal precursors are recruited to the niche from an
extrinsic source. Moreover, in vitro experiments show
that, among several cell types, those harvested from the
hemolymph are uniquely attracted to the niche and that
this affinity may involve serotonergic mechanisms.
Taken together, these data suggest that the hematopoietic system may be a source of cells that can replenish
the niche cell population as these 1st-generation neuronal precursors divide and their daughters migrate to the
proliferation zones.

Methods
Animals

Experiments were conducted using two closely related
sympatric species of freshwater crayfish (Procambarus
clarkii and Procambarus acutus) obtained from a commercial supplier (Carolina Biological Supply Company,
Burlington, NC). Crayfish were maintained in aquaria
with artificial pond water at room temperature and were
kept on a 12/12 light/dark cycle. All dissections and
manipulations were executed in mid-afternoon, in order
to standardize the impact of circadian phenomena.
In vivo BrdU incubations and detection

In order to monitor the proliferation of cells in the
niche, stream and Cluster 10 over time, crayfish were
incubated in 5-bromo-2’-deoxyuridine (BrdU; Sigma, St.
Louis, MO; No. B5002; 12, 72 or 120 hr; 2 mg/ml pond
water) or in a solution of serotonin and BrdU in pond
water (18, 24 hr). The dose of serotonin used (10 -9M)
was based on our results from previous studies [18].
Brains of 6 crayfish (carapace length [CL] 11-15 mm)
from each group were dissected in cold crayfish saline
(205 mM NaCl, 5.4 mM KCl, 34.4 mM CaCl2, 1.2 mM
MgCl2 and 2.4 mM NaHCO3) at the specified time points.
Brains were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde in 0.1 M phosphate buffer (PB; 20 mM NaH2PO4, 80 mM Na2HPO4;
pH 7.4) and processed according to a protocol modified
from Zhang et al., 2009 [17]. Briefly, following 2N HCl
treatment for 30 min, antibodies (rat anti-BrdU, 1:50;
Accurate Chemical, Westbury, NY; No. OBT0030G;
mouse anti-glutamine synthetase, 1:100; Becton Dickinson,
San Diego, CA; 610517) were applied overnight. Following
rinses in 0.1 M PB with 0.3% Triton X-100 (PBTx), brains
were incubated in donkey anti-rat IgG Cy2 (1:100; Jackson
ImmunoResearch, West Grove, PA; No. 712-225-153) and
donkey anti-mouse IgG Cy5 (1:100; Jackson ImmnoResearch; No. 715-175-151) antibodies overnight. The brains

Benton et al. BMC Neuroscience 2011, 12:53
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/12/53

Page 4 of 19

Standard immunohistochemical methods, as described
above, were used to label serotonin in the niche. The
following antibodies were utilized: goat anti-5-HT
(1:1000; Immunostar, Inc., Hudson, WI), mouse antiglutamine synthetase (1:100; Becton Dickinson), donkey
anti-goat IgG Cy2 and donkey anti-mouse IgG Cy5
(each at 1:100; Jackson ImmunoResearch).

Detection of the incorporated EdU was accomplished by
the Click-iT™ reaction, a copper-catalyzed covalent reaction between a fluorophore-coupled azide molecule and
an alkyne (in the EdU; Click-iT™ -EdU Alexa Fluor® 488
Imaging Kit No. C10337). Secondary antibodies, donkey
anti-mouse IgG Cy5 and donkey anti-rat IgG Cy3 (1:100;
Invitrogen) followed washes in PBTx. This protocol provided clear images of cells that were either doubly or singly labeled because there is no cross reactivity between the
antibodies that bind to BrdU and EdU. Cells with BrdU+
and/or EdU+ labeling in the nucleus, and with glutamine
synthetase labeling in the cytoplasm were included in
counts of proliferating cells in the niche and streams. Only
those cells that doubled-labeled with the nuclear stain propidium iodide and glutamine synthetase, and were located
around the vascular cavity, were considered niche cells.

Pulse-chase BrdU-IdU double nucleoside labeling to
determine BrdU clearing time

Niche and dissociated cell co-cultures to test for cell
affinities

Groups of crayfish were exposed initially to BrdU (2 mg/
ml) for 6 or 24 hr. As prior experiments had ruled out
clearing times of less than 12 hours, in the current experiments the crayfish were placed in fresh pondwater for periods of 12 - 102 hr, followed by 6 hr in IdU (2 mg/ml).
Brains were removed from the animals at 12-hr intervals
and processed and analyzed as in Sullivan et al. [11]. Briefly,
BrdU and IdU were detected using a monoclonal rat antiBrdU (1:50; Accurate Chemical) and monoclonal mouse
anti-BrdU (1:50; BD Biosciences Pharmingen, San Jose, CA;
No. 347580). Because of the different affinities of these primary antibodies, application of the appropriate secondary
antibodies (donkey anti-rat CY2 and donkey anti-mouse
CY5; 1:100; Jackson Immunoresearch, West Grove, PA)
results in double labeling of cells that have incorporated
BrdU and single labeling of cells that incorporate only IdU
[11].

Dissected and desheathed brains of juvenile crayfish (1114 mm CL), were placed in culture medium (45 mg/ml
bovine serum albumin in crayfish saline plus Gentamicin
(50 μg/ml; Sigma, G1397; pH 7.4). Cells from hematopoietic tissue (HPT), hepatopancreas and green gland were
dissociated using a protocol modified from [19]. Each tissue type was washed in filtered crayfish saline and then
incubated in 250 μl of 0.1% collagenase (Type I) and 0.1%
collagenase (Type IV) in filtered crayfish saline for 40 min
at 18-20°C. The enzyme buffer was then removed and the
tissue washed with 200 μL culture medium, gently passing
the tissue through a pipette to separate the cells. After the
cells settled, the supernatant was removed and CellTracker™ Green CMFDA (CTG; 10 μM in culture medium; 5-chloromethylfluorescein diacetate; Invitrogen,
Carlsbad, CA) was added to the cells for 20 min, followed
by centrifugation (800 × g; 4° C; 10 min). The pellet was
resuspended in 0.2 ml culture medium. The cell count
was calculated with a hemocytometer, and the cell density
adjusted to 5.5 × 10 5 cells/ml. For CTG labeling of hemocytes (blood cells), hemolymph from 3-4 crayfish was
immediately added to anticoagulant buffer (NaCl, 0.14 M;
EDTA, 10 mM; trisodium citrate, 30 mM; citric acid, 26
mM; glucose, 0.1 M; pH 4.6; [19]) in a 1:2 proportion,
then centrifuged, resuspended in saline and incubated in
CTG as described above.
The CTG-labeled cell types were introduced into separate Petri dishes containing culture medium with 2-4 dissected brains at a density of at least 5.5 × 10 5 cells/ml,
and distributed by slow circular movement of the dish
before placing the co-culture in an incubator for 6 hr at
18°C. Alternative treatment solutions included crayfish
culture medium with serotonin at 10-9M or methiothepin
mesylate salt at 10-8M (MMS, a specific P. clarkii 5-HT2ß
antagonist [20]; Sigma, M149) into which CTG-labeled

were rinsed in PB and mounted in Fluoro-Gel (Electron
Microscopy Sciences, Hatfield, PA). In experiments using
both BrdU and serotonin incubations, the cell bodies in
the niche were labeled with the nuclear stain propidium
iodide (PI, 10 μg/ml; 10 min at 18-20°C; Sigma). The PIlabeled profiles were counted, using the GS labeling as a
guide for outlining the boundaries of the niche.
Immunohistochemical localization of serotonin

Pulse-chase BrdU-EdU double nucleoside labeling to test
self-renewal capacity

Two substitute nucleosides, BrdU and 5-ethynyl-2’-deoxyuridine (EdU), a modified synthetic thymidine analog,
were used in a pulse-chase experiment to test whether or
not the dividing niche cells are self-renewing. Crayfish (46 mm CL) were incubated in BrdU (2 mg/ml in pond
water) for 24 hr, then placed in fresh pond water for a
duration of either 3.5 days or 7 days, after which they were
incubated in EdU (10 μM in crayfish saline) during the last
6 hr prior to sacrifice. We used our standard protocol to
process dissected, fixed brains for 20 min in 2 N HCL, followed by PBTx rinses and overnight incubation in rat
anti-BrdU (1:50; Accurate Chemical) and mouse anti-glutamine synthetase (1:100; Becton Dickinson). Following
PBTx rinses, a fresh preparation of Alexa 488 Click-iT
reaction cocktail was applied for 2 hr at 18-20°C.

Benton et al. BMC Neuroscience 2011, 12:53
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/12/53

Page 5 of 19

hemocytes were introduced, along with dissected
desheathed brains. Two other co-culture conditions were
tested with CTG-labeled hemocytes: (1) brains which had
not been desheathed; and (2) brains from animals treated
for 5 days prior to dissection with p-chlorophenylalanine
(PCPA, 10 -4M), an irreversible inhibitor of tryptophan
hydroxylase [21].
All co-cultures were checked for persistence of the
CTG label at the beginning and end of the incubation
period. Brains were processed immunocytochemically
for mouse anti-glutamine synthetase and propidium
iodide, as described above.

at intervals of 1 μm and saved as both three-dimensional stacks and two-dimensional projections. Cell profiles were counted by tracing projections of the cells
onto transparent sheets attached to the screen of the
confocal monitor. Images of control and experimental
animals were randomized, and cell counting was carried
out blind. For blood smear analysis, four 5-10 μm confocal stacks were taken from non-overlapping regions
on one slide. Image preparation and assembly were
done in Adobe Photoshop 7 (Adobe Systems, San Jose,
CA). Adjustments were made only to the color balance
and contrast of the images.

Glutamine synthetase labeling of circulating hemocytes

Statistics

Hemolymph samples (~100 μl) were drawn from the pericardial sinus of crayfish (11-15 mm CL) with a 1 ml syringe and a 25 3/4 g needle. Hemolymph was spread on
slides prepared with 0.01% poly-L-lysine to promote cell
adhesion. Hemolymph cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde for 15 min, rinsed for 1 hr with PBTx, and
incubated with donkey anti-mouse IgG FAB (Jackson
ImmunoResearch; 1:10) and donkey anti-rabbit IgG (Jackson ImmunoResearch; 1:100); samples were fixed again
with 4% paraformaldehyde. These treatments were done
in order to prevent non-specific binding of subsequent
antibodies. Hemolymph smears were then rinsed for
another hour, and all but one of the samples from the
deprived animals were incubated overnight at 4°C with
mouse anti-GS; the slide without this antibody served as a
no-primary control to test the specificity of the secondary
antibody. Slides were rinsed for 1 hr with PBTx, incubated
with donkey anti-mouse IgG CY5 (1:500) for 30 min at
room temperature, and rinsed again with PBTx. Finally,
the hemolymph smears were incubated with propidium
iodide (10 μg/ml) for 5 min at 18-20°C, rinsed with PB
and mounted with Fluoro-Gel.

Comparisons among different treatments of animals were
carried out with one-way ANOVA analysis followed by
Tukey’s multiple comparison test using SPSS (IBM),
unless otherwise indicated. Chi-square analysis (SPSS) was
used to determine the significance of cell-type affinity in
co-cultures.

Dextran injection into the pericardial sinus and vascular
cavity labeling

Dextran-fluorescein (MW 3000; 0.5 ml of a 1 mM solution
in crayfish saline) was injected into the pericardial sinus of
crayfish (20 mm CL). Animals were maintained in pond
water for 5 min following injection, during which animals
were actively moving around. The brains were then dissected and fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde in PB, processed
immunocytochemically for GS, and counter-stained with
propidium iodide, as described above. Brains were
mounted in Fluoro-Gel and viewed with a confocal
microscope.
Microscopy and counting protocol

Images were acquired on a Leica TCS SP5 confocal
microscope equipped with argon 488 nm, and 561 and
633 nm diode lasers. Serial optical sections were taken

RT-PCR

Total RNA was extracted from crayfish tissues with TRIZOL reagent according to the manufacturer’s instructions
(Invitrogen). Reverse transcription was performed following the RNA extraction, and first-strand cDNA was
synthesized with a random hexamer and SuperScript III
reverse transcriptase (Invitrogen). PCR amplification of
cDNA was performed using REDTaq ready mix PCR reaction mix (Sigma). The forward and reverse primers of 5HT 1a and 5-HT 2b were designed based on published
sequences for P. clarkii (GenBank accession numbers
EU131667 and EU131666). They are 5’-AGAACACGACGAGCGATGA-3’ and 5’-GCCAAGAATGACGGAAGTAA-3’ (5-HT 1a ) and 5’-GATCTGTCCGCTGGAAG
AAG-3’ and 5’-ACCTGAAGCTCGAGTCGTGT-3’ (5HT2b). In the negative control, ddH2O was used instead of
the cDNA template.
Western Blot

Brain samples were lysed with RIPA lysis buffer (50 mM
Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100, 1%
Nadeoxycholate, 0.1% SDS and Halt proteinase inhibitor
[Pierce, USA; No. 78430]). Total protein concentration
was determined by the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) protein
assay method (Pierce; No. 23227). Protein samples (40 μg
total protein in each sample) separated by 10% SDSPAGE were electroblotted onto an Immuno-PSQ PVDF
membrane (0.2 μm, Millipore). The membrane was
blocked with 4% skimmed milk in TBST buffer (10 mM
Tris pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% Triton X-100) for 1 hr
at room temperature. Incubation with 5-HT1a or 5-HT2b
antibody (1:500 and 1:10,000 respectively, gift from D.
Baro, Georgia State University, Atlanta, GA) was typically

Benton et al. BMC Neuroscience 2011, 12:53
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/12/53

done for 16 hr at 4°C on a rocking platform. HRPcoupled goat anti-rabbit IgG antibody (Jackson ImmunoResearch; No. 111-035-003) was added and incubated
at 24°C for 1 hr. After washing, signals were developed
by reaction with WESTSAVEup (AbFrontier, Korea) and
visualized according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
To re-probe for actin in the samples on the same membrane, the initial probed antibodies were removed from
the PVDF membrane by submerging the membrane in
stripping buffer (2% SDS, 100 mM b-mercaptoethanol,
62.5 mM Tris-HCl pH 6.7) at 50°C for 30 min with occasional agitation. The PVDF membrane was then washed
in TBST, blocked and reprobed sequentially with mouse
actin (Chemicon, USA; MAB1501; 1:3000) and goat-antimouse IgG HRP (Jackson ImmunoResearch; No. 115035-003). Signals were developed as described above.

Results
I. Testing the Self-renewal Capacity of Crayfish Neural
Stem Cells

Our previous morphological studies indicated that the 1stgeneration neuronal precursor cells residing in the neurogenic niche in the crayfish brain undergo only geometrically symmetrical divisions, and that both daughter cells
migrate from the niche towards the proliferation zones
[17], suggesting that the niche precursors are not selfrenewing. In the proliferation zones, the 2nd-generation
cells divide at least once more and their descendants differentiate into interneurons innervating the primary olfactory regions (the olfactory lobes) and higher-order
processing areas (the accessory lobes) [11,15]. One goal of
the current experiments was to directly test the selfrenewal capacity of the 1st-generation neuronal precursors
in the adult crayfish brain, to be certain that asymmetric
divisions and retention of daughter cells in the niche were
not overlooked in prior studies.
Long BrdU incubations and niche cell cycle time

If the niche cells are self-renewing, increasingly long
incubation times in BrdU followed by immediate sacrifice might be expected to label increasing numbers of
cells in the niche, as observed in crustacean embryos
where neuroblasts are surrounded by their progeny
[22,23]. However, regardless of whether crayfish are
incubated in BrdU for 24, 72 or 120 hr (Figure 2A, C)
we observe only 2-4 BrdU-labeled cells in the niche, 1-2
on either side of the vascular cavity. The migratory
streams, which are the only egress from the niche, do
contain more BrdU-labeled cells in the 120-hr than the
24-hr preparations (2-tailed t-test, p < 0.05; Figure 2B),
as might be expected if the speed of migration is slow
relative to the niche cell cycle time. However, in no case
did we find more than 10 labeled cells, with gaps
between them, spaced along the streams (Figure 2C).
The small number of BrdU-labeled migrating cells, even

Page 6 of 19

after long BrdU incubation times (and the long migration time of 5 to 7 days [11]), excludes the possibility
that the niche cells cycle rapidly. If these 1st-generation
niche precursor cells have a cycle time of less than
24 hr, then one would expect to see much higher numbers of cells in the streams and a greater difference in
the numbers between the 24-hr and 120-hr BrdU-exposure times. Further, a few migrating cells are in the cell
cycle and proceed through mitosis during migration
[17], as do cells in the rostral migratory stream [24].
The degree of BrdU incorporation during migration
along the streams can be expected to be similar in all
groups (24, 72 and 120 hr), and so differences between
the counts at shorter (i.e., 24 or 72 hr) vs. longer
(120 hr) BrdU exposures (but shorter than the migration
time) represent the output of the niche, from which
cycle time can be deduced. Using this approach, we
infer a minimum cell cycle time of 48 hr for the niche
precursor cells. Consistent with this result, we find no
change in the number of cells in the streams between
24 and 72 hr (Figure 2B).
Another approach to estimating cycle time is to consider that the migratory streams are, essentially, a sink
receiving the cells produced by the niche. BrdU cell
labeling should reach a plateau at the maximal migration time (~120 hr), reflecting the output of the niche
precursor cells over that period. Indeed, the maximum
number of BrdU-labeled cells we have observed along
the total length of the streams in the present study is 10
(Figure 2B), including cells that may have incorporated
the BrdU during migration. Dividing by the ~5-day
migration time therefore also suggests a maximal niche
output of ~2 cells/day. Given that there are generally
two cells in S-phase in the niche at any specific time
(one on each side of the niche) and making the assumption that both daughter cells migrate away from the
niche [17], this suggests that each niche precursor cell
divides no more than once every 48 hr. Because a few
cells in the streams will have arisen from mitoses during
migration [17], a 48-hr cycle time is therefore a conservative estimate of the length of the cell cycle in the 1stgeneration niche precursors.
BrdU clearing time and double-nucleoside labeling

In order to further test the self-renewal capacity of the
niche precursor cells, double-nucleoside labeling experiments were conducted. In order to design these experiments, a knowledge of the BrdU clearing time was
necessary, and this was defined using a BrdU-IdU pulsechase approach. Two groups of crayfish were incubated
in BrdU for either 6 hr or 24 hr and then returned to
fresh pond water. Crayfish were then sacrificed at 12-hr
intervals after the end of the BrdU incubation; these
crayfish were exposed to IdU during the last 6 hr prior
to sacrifice. In order to determine the BrdU clearing

Benton et al. BMC Neuroscience 2011, 12:53
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/12/53

Page 7 of 19

Figure 2 Experiments reveal the cell cycle time and lack of self-renewal capacity of the 1st generation neuronal precursors. A. Graph of
average numbers of BrdU-labeled cells in the niche after BrdU incubation for 24, 72 or 120 hours, followed by immediate sacrifice. The mean
number of BrdU-labeled cells is between 2 and 3 for all groups, and there is no statistical difference between groups. B. Graph of average
numbers of BrdU-labeled cells in the streams after BrdU incubation times of 24, 72 and 120 hrs. Mean counts are shown for the streams
between the niche and Cluster 9, between the niche and Cluster 10, and the combined counts in the streams. C. Live crayfish were incubated in
BrdU for 24 hours and then maintained in fresh pond water for 7 days. Just before sacrifice, they were treated with EdU (green) for 6 hours.
Fixed brains also were labeled immunocytochemically for glutamine synthetase (blue) to reveal the niche and streams (C, D). S phase cells in the
niche and streams are labeled only with EdU, demonstrating that migration is uni-directional (away from the niche) and that niche cell divisions
are not self-renewing. D. Higher magnification image of the LPZ. The BrdU-labeled cells, which were labeled first in the sequence, are found
only in the proliferation zones (MPZ and LPZ) and not in the niche. Arrow indicates direction of migration. Scale bars: C, 100 μm; D, 50 μm.

time, the crayfish brains were examined for the first
appearance of cells that were labeled solely for IdU.
This occurred 30-36 hours for the crayfish that were
incubated in BrdU for 6 hr, and 42-48 hr for those that
were incubated in BrdU for 24 hr, in what appeared to
be glial cells near cell cluster 6 in the brain. The clearing time for the BrdU therefore is slightly longer for
longer exposures to the nucleoside. Even more important, however, is the finding that the clearing time for
BrdU in crayfish is much longer (>30 hr) than in mammals, where this is estimated to be as short as 2 hr [25].
To test the self-renewal capacity of the niche precursor
cells, pulse-chase BrdU-EdU studies were then conducted.

Animals were maintained in pond water for 3.5 or 7 days
between the BrdU (24 hr) and EdU (6 hr) exposures, and
sacrificed immediately after the EdU incubation. Based on
the clearing time analysis, BrdU would have persisted for
42-48 hr after the BrdU was removed, or through roughly
half of the 3.5 day maintenance period in pond water.
These experiments result in only EdU-labeled cells in the
niche; all BrdU labeling is confined to the streams (3.5
days) and/or proliferation zones (3.5 and 7 days) (Figure
2C, D). These data demonstrate that the earlier-labeled
(BrdU) group of cells has migrated away from the niche,
and that none are left behind to divide and maintain the
niche population, consistent with our earlier findings [17].

Benton et al. BMC Neuroscience 2011, 12:53
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/12/53

These studies also confirmed the migration time (5-7 days,
[11]) along the streams, because many BrdU-labeled cells
in the 3.5 day group had not yet reached the proliferation
zones.
II. Niche Cell Numbers Can Increase Without Niche Cell
Divisions

Incubation of animals in 10 -9 M serotonin, which is
known to stimulate neurogenesis in these animals
[18,26-29], increases the number of BrdU-labeled cells in
the Cluster 10 proliferation zones but does not alter the
number of S phase (BrdU-labeled) cells in the niche

Page 8 of 19

(Figure 3C) or streams [29]. However, the total number
of cells in the niche in serotonin-treated animals
increases by >20% in 24 hr (Figure 3). This highly significant increase (ANOVA, p < 0.0001, followed by a TukeyKramer HSD) in the total number of niche cells in the
absence of an increase in the number of S phase cells,
may also suggest that the 1st-generation neuronal precursor cells in the crayfish niche are not self-renewing
because their numbers can increase without additional
cell divisions among the niche cells. The underlying
assumption here, however, is that all of the niche cells
have the potential to become neuronal precursors, an

Figure 3 In vivo exposure to serotonin increases total niche cell numbers, but does not alter the number of dividing niche cells. A.
Images of niches stained with propidium iodide from control (A) and 24-hr 10-9 M serotonin-treated (B) crayfish. C. Graph of mean numbers of
BrdU+ cells per niche in controls and those exposed to 10-9 M serotonin for 18 and 24 hours. 5-HT does not alter the number of BrdU-labeled
cells in the controls (ANOVA: p = 0.960). The number of BrdU-labeled niche cells is lower in this experiment than the one graphed in Figure 2A
because these crayfish were slightly larger/older; the cell cycle of niche precursors slows as the animals age [17]. D. However, there are
significant increases in the number of propidium iodide stained cells in the niche in 5-HT-treated crayfish compared with untreated controls
(ANOVA: p < 0.0001 followed by Tukey multiple comparisons). Different letters above the histograms indicate significant differences among the
groups. Error bars = standard error of the means. n = numbers of niches per group. Scale bar refers to A and B, 50 μm.

Benton et al. BMC Neuroscience 2011, 12:53
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/12/53

idea that is supported by four lines of previously published evidence (see Discussion).
III. Possible Extrinsic Sources of Neuronal Stem Cells

To explore possible relationships between the niche and
other tissues, several cell types (green gland, hepatopancreas, hematopoietic tissue, hemocytes) were isolated from
their respective tissues and labeled with the fluorescent
marker CellTracker™ Green CMFDA (CTG; Invitrogen).
Labeled cells were then introduced into culture dishes
containing freshly dissected, desheathed crayfish brains,
followed by a 6-hr incubation period at 18°C. The distribution of labeled cells in each culture dish was subsequently
visualized to determine whether cells showed any affinity
for the brains and/or associated niches.
Of the various cell types tested, most remained evenly
distributed in the culture dishes and showed no particular
attraction to the brains or niches (Table 1). For instance,
in brains incubated with CTG-labeled cells from hepatopancreas, 10 out of 11 niches were devoid of labeled cells
in the vascular cavity and niche. In contrast, cells extracted
from the hemolymph showed a remarkable affinity for the
niche. In 77% of niches co-cultured with CTG-labeled circulating hemocytes, these cells were found in the vascular
cavity of the niches (Figure 4A) and among the precursor
cells in the niches (Figures 4B, 5); some of these cells also
labeled for glutamine synthetase (Figure 5A), a marker of
the 1st-generation niche precursor cells in these crayfish
(Figure 1A, C).
IV. Serotonin and the Neurogenic Niche

Our studies (e.g., Figure 3) suggest that serotonin may
serve as a signal to attract cells to the niche. To explore
this possibility, immunocytochemical techniques were

Page 9 of 19

used to ask whether the niche contains serotonin. Indeed,
serotonin immunoreactivity is found in a discontinuous
ring at the rim of the vascular cavity (Figure 6A, B). How
this structure may be associated with the niche precursor
cells is not known, as none of the niche cells were themselves labeled. The cellular origins of this structure are
not known.
Because increased serotonin levels expand the niche precursor cell population in vivo and because serotonin is
localized around the vascular cavity, we further explored
the relationship between circulating cells and the niche by
introducing serotonin or the P. clarkii-specific 5-HT2ß
receptor antagonist methiothepin mesylate salt (MMS)
into the brain-hemocyte co-cultures. Our hypothesis was
that if serotonergic mechanisms are involved in the attraction between hemocytes and the niche in our co-cultures,
then serotonin or molecules that would interfere with serotonergic mechanisms might alter the behavior of the cell
type responsible for increases in the number of niche cells.
Indeed, in brain-hemocyte co-cultures to which 10 -9 M
serotonin was added, labeled cells were found in only 17%
of the niches/vascular cavities, a significantly lower rate of
cell incorporation into the niche than brain-niche co-cultures incubated in normal medium without serotonin
(Table 1). Likewise, in brain-hemocyte co-cultures to
which 10-8 M of the P. clarkii-specific 5-HT2b receptor
antagonist MMS [20] was added to the normal culture
medium, CTG-labeled cells were found in only 5 of the 16
vascular cavities, and no CTG-labeled cells were found in
the niche cell clusters (Table 1). These results demonstrate
a change in cell behavior as a result of exposure to serotonin or MMS, suggesting that serotonergic signaling
mechanisms may at least partly explain the affinity
between the CTG-labeled hemocytes and the niche. This

Table 1 Hemocytes are attracted to the neurogenic niche
1. Dissociated cells from crayfish tissues labeled with CTG.
Green Gland

Total number of niches

Percent of niches with CTG labeled cells

10

0%

Hepatopancreas

11

9%

Hematopoietic Tissue

12

9%

Hemocytes

30

77%

Hemocytes + 5-HT × 10-9 M

12

17%

Hemocytes + MMS × 10-8 M

16

31%

5-day PCPA pretreatment

8

12.5%

Sheath left on dissected brain

12

0%

2. Changes in cell culture medium with CTG labeled hemocytes

3. Treatment prior to co-culture, culture + CTG labeled hemocytes

The relationship between the neurogenic niche and dissociated CellTracker™ Green (CTG)-labeled cells from four crayfish tissues (green gland, hepatopancreas,
hematopoietic tissue and hemolymph) was examined in co-cultured, desheathed brains. Complete exposure to the niche/ventral brain surface appears to be
essential for the niche region to attract CGT-labeled hemocytes in vitro, because no cells are attracted to the niche when sheathed brains are placed in coculture with CTG-labeled hemocytes. The number and the percentage of total niches containing CTG+ cells appear in the second and third columns. The Chisquare test of independence was used to test the significance of these findings; the result is chi square (7, N = 111) = 34.8885, p < 0.001, indicating that the
number of niches containing CTG+ cells was significantly dependent on the cell type. The attraction of hemocytes to the niche relative to other cell types is
therefore of statistical significance.

Benton et al. BMC Neuroscience 2011, 12:53
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/12/53

Page 10 of 19

Figure 4 CellTracker™-labeled cells are found in the vascular cavity and in the neurogenic niche. A-B. Projections of confocal stacked
images of neurogenic niches. A. Position of a CTG-labeled cell in the vascular cavity with all fluorescence channels merged. Ai. Glutamine
synthetase (GS, left) labeling of the niche; propidium iodide (PI, center) labeling of all cell nuclei, revealing the niche cell cluster with arrow
pointing to the nucleus of the CTG-labeled cell; CTG-labeled cell (right). B. In another co-cultured brain, a CTG-labeled cell (arrowhead) resides in
the cavity and a second CTG-labeled cell (arrow) is embedded in the outer edge of the niche. Bi. Top, GS labeling of the niche; Middle, PI
labeling of cell nuclei with arrowhead and arrow pointing to the corresponding nuclei with CTG-labeling in B; Bottom, CTG-labeled cells. Scale
bars: A, 50 μm; Ai, 20 μm; B and Bi, 20 μm.

Benton et al. BMC Neuroscience 2011, 12:53
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/12/53

Page 11 of 19

Figure 5 Some CellTracker™-labeled cells in the niche are also immunoreactive for glutamine synthetase. A. Projections of stacked
images from the most ventral region of the neurogenic niche reveal a CTG-labeled cell just below its surface. Ai. Confocal scans taken deeper in
the niche expose the CTG-labeled cell. An arrow drawn between A and Ai show the same CTG-labeled cell at different depths within the niche.
Aii are the separate channels for GS labeling in the niche (top); PI revealing cell nuclei (middle); and CTG-labeled cell (bottom). B. Other CTGlabeled cells, although not labeled with glutamine synthetase (GS), have interesting morphological characteristics. In B there are labeled cells just
outside the niche (arrowheads), one with a long process extending into the niche (arrow), and another CTG-labeled cell that appears to be
inserting into the outer margin of the niche. Bi. Top, middle bottom are separate channels: GS labeling the niche (top); PI revealing cell nuclei,
arrowheads pointing to the respective CTG-labeled cells in B (middle); and CTG-labeled cells with arrow pointing to the fine process coming
from one of these (bottom). Scale bars: A, Ai, Aii and B, 20 μm; Bi, 10 μm.

Benton et al. BMC Neuroscience 2011, 12:53
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/12/53

Page 12 of 19

Figure 6 Serotonin is localized in the neurogenic niche and serotonin receptor subtypes are expressed in hemocytes and brain. A. The
neurogenic niche labels immunohistochemically for glutamine synthetase (blue) and serotonin (green). The vascular cavity is outlined by a rim of
serotonin labeling, clearly seen in a higher magnification image shown in B. The additional serotonin labeling observed in (A) near the niche is
localized in terminals in the accessory lobe. C. RT-PCR reveals the expression of 5-HT1a (left) and 5-HT2b (right) receptor subtype mRNAs in brain
(lanes 1, 6), nerve (lanes 2, 7), hematopoietic tissue (HPT, lanes 3, 8), hemocytes (lanes 4, 9) and the negative control (lanes 5, 10). D. Western
blot for 5-HT1a (top) and 5-HT2b (middle) receptor proteins, with actin control (bottom). Scale bars: A, 50 μm; B, 10 μm.

Benton et al. BMC Neuroscience 2011, 12:53
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/12/53

conclusion is also supported by experiments where crayfish were exposed to PCPA for 5 days to decrease serotonin synthesis, prior to dissecting the brains for co-cultures.
In these preparations, attraction of hemocytes to the niche
was also severely reduced (Table 1).
We also hypothesized that if serotonin is acting directly
to attract cells to the niche, some circulating hemocytes
should contain serotonin receptors. RT-PCR shows that
mRNAs of serotonin receptor subtypes 1a and 2b are
present not only in the nervous system, but also in hematopoietic tissue (HPT) and hemocytes (Figure 6C). In
Western blots, antibodies against crustacean 5-HT1a and
5-HT 2b receptors label proteins around 37 kDa and
80 kDa, respectively (Figure 6D).
V. Glutamine Synthetase Immunoreactivity: A Marker of
Neuronal Precursor Cells and a Subtype of Hemocytes

Among the CTG-labeled cells extracted from the circulation that were attracted to the niche, are cells that
show immunoreactivity to glutamine synthetase (e.g.,
Figure 5A), which is also a marker of the 1st-generation
neuronal precursors in the procambarid neurogenic
niche (see Figure 1A, C). We therefore asked whether
any cells circulating in the hemolymph label for this
marker. Indeed, one type of circulating cell labels immunocytochemically with GS antibodies (Figure 7), a finding that has been confirmed by Western blot analysis
[14]. The GS-immunoreactive cells have fine cytoplasmic granules and often have pseudopodia and/or processes (e.g., Figure 7D), consistent with the phenotype
of semi-granular hemocytes [30,31].

Discussion
Self-renewal of neural stem cells

Numerous questions punctuate any discussion of adult
neurogenesis. Central to these issues is the idea that the
primary, 1st-generation neuronal precursors are capable
of long-term self-renewal and of generating lineages that
produce neuronal and glial cells. In mammals, the selfrenewal ability of stem cells was largely established in
vitro via neurosphere and adherent monolayer cultures
[10]. Suh et al. [9] provided the first in vivo evidence of
stem cell properties of hippocampal neural progenitors in
the adult mammalian brain, where type 2 Sox2-positive
cells were shown to self-renew and give rise to both neurons and astrocytes. The question of self-renewal of primary adult neuronal precursors in non-vertebrates is of
interest because of the paucity of in vivo data from vertebrate systems and for evolutionary reasons. Because adult
neurogenesis is found in a diverse group of vertebrate
and invertebrate species, it is crucial to understand the
properties of neuronal precursors across this range, and
to recognize shared features that persist in the face of
evolutionary pressures. Evolutionary conservation and/or

Page 13 of 19

convergence, are frequent features of fundamental biological mechanisms (e.g., ionic basis of the action potential
[squid axon, [32]], mechanisms of learning [Aplysia californica, [33]] and cell death [C. elegans, [34]]). Indeed,
many characteristics of adult neurogenesis in crayfish are
strikingly convergent with those in mammals, such as the
presence of a vascularized niche that supports the progenitor cells, which serve as both precursor and support
cells, and the directed migration of intermediate precursor cells. While these features may or may not represent
the conservation of an early mechanism shared by a common ancestor of crayfish and mammals, the parallels are
close. Common strategies may well emerge from the
study of such models (such as the possible tissues from
which neuronal precursor cells can be derived), that have
potential implications for phylogenetically more
advanced organisms.
A characteristic feature of neurogenic niches in vertebrate and invertebrate organisms is vascularization [35]. In
the decapod crustacean brain, the 1st-generation neuronal
precursors reside in a niche that has many of the same
properties as stem cell niches in vertebrate and non-vertebrate systems [11,16]. The crayfish niche lies on top of a
blood vessel; communication with the circulation via a
vascular cavity has been demonstrated by injecting fluorophores conjugated to dextran into the pericardial sinus
and allowing the heart to distribute the dye (Figure 1B), or
by injection into the dorsal artery that perfuses the midbrain [11].
There has been debate surrounding the properties of the
primary neuronal precursors in the decapods, with some
arguing in favor of a neuroblast that persisted after embryogenesis, residing among supporting niche cells, as a
source of adult-born neurons [36,37]; this hypothesis
states that large, tetraconate-typical neuroblasts act as
neuronal stem cells in both Panulirus argus and P. clarkii,
and that these undergo rapid, self-renewing divisions [37].
These studies have shown the presence of a large nucleus
that differs significantly in size and shape from the nuclei
of other cells in the neurogenic niche, and which has
therefore been identified as a putative neuroblast. However, functional or developmental data in support of the
neuroblast hypothesis, or evidence of asymmetric divisions, are lacking. Further, our histological and electron
microscopic studies in P. clarkii have not revealed consistently-placed distinctive, large cells in the niche cell cluster
[[17]; Allodi and Beltz, unpublished results]. In contrast,
we have argued that adult neurogenesis in the decapods
does not depend on the function of single, persistent neuroblasts but rather on a population of cells that appear to
act as both precursor and support cells [11]. This hypothesis is based in part on the finding that all niche cells in
P. clarkii, including those that are mitotic, label with an
antibody against glutamine synthetase, suggesting a

Benton et al. BMC Neuroscience 2011, 12:53
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/12/53

Page 14 of 19

Figure 7 Hemocytes from crayfish were labeled immunocytochemically for glutamine synthetase. A. GS+ cells (blue) were found in a
small percentage (1-3%) of crayfish hemocyte samples (n = 24 smears from 12 crayfish). B. A no-primary control showed that the antibody was
specific for GS (no non-specific labeling in the blue channel, Bii), although many cells were labeled with propidium iodide (Bi). C, D. Higher
magnification images reveal some cells that have a high cytoplasmic to nuclear ratio; other GS+ cells had one or more pseudopodia (D, arrow).
There are three categories of circulating cells in crayfish based on morphological criteria [31], two of which can be distinguished in Ei. The
image in Ei shows the outline of the cytoplasm and nucleus of a GS+ cell (arrowhead), which appears to be of the semi-granular variety. A large
granular hemocyte (white arrow) with large refractive granules is also in the field of view. The fluorescent channel alone (Eii, arrowhead) and Eiii
(composite: Ei plus Eii) reveal one labeled GS+ hemocyte. Hemocytes were counter-stained with propidium iodide (red) and were imaged using
confocal microscopy (A-D) and Nomarski optics (Ei, Eiii). Scale bars: A, 50 μm; B, 100 μm; others, 10 μm.

Benton et al. BMC Neuroscience 2011, 12:53
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/12/53

relationship among all the niche cells. Further, labeling of
all niche cells with an antibody against the G1-phase marker MCM2-7 (except when they are progressing through S
to M phase), suggests that these are not terminally differentiated cells as one would expect if some niche cells are
serving in a support role for other, actively dividing neuronal precursors. In addition, niche precursor cells undergo
geometrically symmetrical divisions and both daughters
appear to exit the niche (Figure 1C) [17], a feature that is
uncharacteristic of neuroblasts. Finally, the fact that animals living in enriched conditions have significantly higher
numbers of primary neuronal precursor cells actively in Sphase (BrdU-labeled) in the niche relative to animals
reared in deprived conditions [38] confirms that the neuronal precursor cells are not uniquely endowed neuroblasts, but rather comprise a population of cells whose
status in the cell cycle can be adjusted in response to local
conditions. The mode of division of the niche precursors
also caused us to focus our attention on the question of
self-renewal among these cells. The primary goal of the
present study, therefore, was to directly test the selfrenewal capacity of these primary neuronal precursor cells.
Our current data indicate that the 1st-generation neuronal precursor cells in the crayfish brain are not selfrenewing and, therefore, that there must be a source
extrinsic to the niche that is capable of replenishing this
population of cells: (i) If the niche cells are self-renewing, increasing the incubation time in the S-phase marker BrdU might be expected to label increasing numbers
of cells in the niche. However, regardless of BrdU incubation time, we observe the same number (2-4) of
BrdU-labeled cells in the niche (Figure 2A). (ii) Pulsechase BrdU-EdU experiments, where animals were
maintained in pond water for several days between
BrdU and later EdU treatments, result in only EdUlabeled cells in the niche; BrdU labeling is confined to
cells in the migratory streams and/or proliferation zones
(Figure 2C, D). Our interpretation of this result is that
the earlier BrdU-labeled cohort of cells has migrated
away from the niche, and that none are left behind to
maintain the niche population. It is highly unlikely that
the BrdU label in these cells could have been diluted
below detection, because the cycle time of the niche
precursors (>48 hr) and the BrdU clearing time (36-42
hr) are relatively long compared to the length of the
chase period (3.5 or 7 days).
A direct test of the niche cell cycle time has been complicated by the small pool of actively cycling niche cells
and their apparently rapid departure from the niche. It is
known that the cycle time of the niche cells decreases as
the animals grow and age [17]. In small crayfish (<15 mm
CL), BrdU labeling over periods of <4 hr does not reliably
label niche cells, and labeling that does occur is very
weak; issues related to BrdU uptake as well as speed of

Page 15 of 19

progress in the S phase to incorporate a detectable level
of BrdU may contribute to this lag time. BrdU labeling
for 6 or more hours invariably labels 2-4 niche cells, 1-2
on either side of the vascular cavity. When two cells are
labeled, each of these is half the size of a singly labeled
cell. Our interpretation of this observation is that the
pairs of labeled cells represent cells that have undergone
M phase during the BrdU incubation, and that unpaired,
large cells have not yet reached M phase. Only on rare
occasions have there been >4 BrdU labeled cells observed
in a niche in animals of any size that are maintained in
control conditions.
“Steady-state” in the crayfish niche is, therefore, 2-4 cells
(see Figure 2A). As more than 4 cells rarely accumulate in
the niche in crayfish exposed to control conditions, the
usual method for determining the length of the cell cycle
(TC) by defining the percentage of cells relative to steady
state that incorporate BrdU during incremental increases
in BrdU exposure time (e.g., 1 hr, 2 hr, 3 hr, 4 hr) [39], is
not applicable. Such a graph changes sharply from 0% to
100% (3-4 cells) within 6 hr for small crayfish (<15 mm
CL). Constant exposure to BrdU for 8 hr [17], 10 hr [11],
24, 72 or 120 hr (Figure 2) or for two weeks [11] yields
precisely the same result.
For these reasons, we infer the cycle time of the niche
cells by counting BrdU-labeled cells in the migratory
streams, which are the only conduit by which cells leave
the niche. We reason that if the niche cells have a short
cycle time, then increasing incubation times in BrdU over
1-5 days should lead to large increases in BrdU-labeled
cells in the streams, as the transit time from the niche to
the Cluster 9 and 10 proliferation zones (MPZ and LPZ,
respectively) is 5-7 days [11], a time that was confirmed in
the current set of experiments. However, regardless of
whether the animals were exposed to BrdU for 24, 72 or
120 hours (Figure 2B), the streams always contained fewer
than 10 cells. The long migration time for the 2nd-generation precursors and the stability of their numbers even
following a long BrdU exposure (e.g., 120 hr), suggests a
slow cycle time for the 1st-generation niche precursor cells
[>48 hr].
A final possibility that could account for our BrdU-EdU
results, is if chromosomes segregate non-randomly during divisions, so that the older “parental” DNA is retained
in daughter stem cells, while the new strands are relegated to the daughter that will differentiate. This immortal strand hypothesis proposed by Cairns in 1975 [40]
predicts that the stem cell DNA will not be labeled with
pulsed nucleotide analogs after their first division; hence
these markers would be ineffective in revealing the 1stgeneration neuronal precursors. We believe this situation
does not apply to the crayfish niche because of the numbers of mitotic cells that we have observed; in all cases
these have been geometrically symmetrical divisions and

Benton et al. BMC Neuroscience 2011, 12:53
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/12/53

segregation of BrdU-labeled DNA into both daughters
was observed in telophase cells. While our experiments
cannot completely rule out the possibility that niche cells
transition sporadically to a self-renewing mode (e.g.,
[41]), this phenomenon would have to be a common
event in order to maintain the niche cell population.
A source of neuronal stem cells?

Based on these data indicating that the 1st-generation
neuronal precursor cells in crayfish are not self-renewing, we asked what tissues might replenish the supply of
neuronal precursors in the brains of these animals. An
external source is necessary in order to maintain niche
cell numbers, so that the niche is not depleted of precursor cells as these divide and the daughters migrate
away. We have tested a variety of cell types that were
labeled with CellTracker™ Green, using in vitro co-cultures with dissected brains. In these studies, we asked
whether any of these cell types show an affinity for the
brain and/or niche. The only cell type that was consistently associated with the niches in these co-cultures
were cells extracted from the circulation (Figures. 4, 5;
Table 1). The specific identity(ies) of these hemocytes
has not been determined, although the granular cytological features and processes observed in many of these
suggest they may be of the semi-granular variety that
have been proposed by some to be hematopoietic stem
cells in crustaceans [30,31]. Co-cultures created with
dissected brains and CTG-labeled cells from a variety of
other tissues do not show the attraction for the niche
observed with labeled hemocytes (Table 1).
Incubation of live crayfish in serotonin for 18-24 hr
increases the number of niche cells (Figure 3A, B, D),
without any change in their cell cycle time (BrdU labeling).
This indicates that a source extrinsic to the niche must
have the capacity to replenish the niche cell population,
and that serotonin can influence this process. We therefore performed additional co-culture experiments with
serotonin or the P. clarkii-specific 5-HT 2b receptor
antagonist MMS to test whether hemocyte affinity for the
niche was influenced by serotonergic mechanisms. Indeed,
these treatments significantly reduced the number of cells
found in the vascular cavity and niche. We hypothesize
that the cultured brains/niches may be a source of serotonin that attracts the hemocytes, and that the presence of
serotonin in the culture may obliterate or mask any signaling gradient. Further, the finding that MMS severely
reduces the ability of CTG-labeled cells to invade the vascular cavity, may indicate that the attraction of labeled
cells to the niche is mediated at least in part by 5-HT2ß
receptors. In support of this serotonin hypothesis, a discontinuous ring of serotonin immunoreactivity is found at
the rim of the vascular cavity (Figure 6A). The cellular

Page 16 of 19

source of this serotonergic labeling is not known, as the
niche cells themselves do not label; this issue is currently
under investigation. We anticipate, however, that serotonin’s influence is necessary but not sufficient, because
other serotonergic structures in the brain do not attract
hemocytes, suggesting that additional factors, presently
unidentified, are likely to be important in the affinity
between hemocytes and the niche. Further, we presume
that the molecular machinery underlying the attraction of
hemocytes for the niche must be acquired during the process of hemocyte maturation and their release from the
hematopoietic tissues, as the cells dissociated from hematopoietic tissues show little affinity for the niche in our cocultures.
There are additional reasons for suspecting a close relationship between the hematopoietic system and the niche
in crayfish: (1) The crayfish niche is a discrete organ that
is physically isolated from other tissues with the exception of the circulatory system, with which the niche has
contact through the vascular cavity (e.g., Figure 1B) and
the extracellular milieu, as there appears to be no membrane enclosing the niche. The migratory streams connecting the niche with the proliferation zones have been
shown to support migration only away from the niche
[11], and it is therefore unlikely that they participate in
the maintenance or renewal of the niche cell population.
We therefore propose that, by way of the vascular connection, the hematopoietic system has the opportunityto
interact with the niche via its production of circulating
cells. (2) A small population of hemocytes labels immunocytochemically for glutamine synthetase (GS), a marker of the niche stem cells (Figure 7) (see also [14]).
Further, the proportion of GS-immunoreactive hemocytes increases after 2-3 weeks of environmental enrichment, a treatment that also promotes neurogenesis in
these animals [38]. (3) Hemocytes express 5-HT1a and 5HT 2ß receptors (Figure 6C, D). Cells that expand the
niche pool in response to serotonin would be expected to
express these receptors, if the serotonergic effect is a
direct one. The finding that addition of serotonin or
MMS to the culture alters the affinity of vascular cells for
the niche is also consistent with the presence of these
receptors on hemocytes. (4) Niche precursor cells have
the same large dimensions and unusual chromatin pattern that are seen in some circulating and perivascular
cells that are thought to be of hematopoietic origin, and
indeed semi-thin sections show one cell type (Type III)
that has a stalk connecting the cell body to the niche
[17]. This feature is highly reminiscent of CTG-labeled
hemocytes that insert into the niche (e.g., Figure 5B),
although the semi-thin sections in our previous studies
were prepared from freshly dissected and fixed brains
from untreated crayfish.

Benton et al. BMC Neuroscience 2011, 12:53
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/12/53

Significance of these findings

This work provides an example of 1st-generation neuronal precursor cells that apparently do not undergo selfrenewing divisions, indicating that these neuronal precursors in adult crayfish must be replenished from a
source external to the neurogenic niche. Our experiments also show that in co-cultures, hemocytes have an
affinity for the niche, and that some of these cells
extend processes and express glutamine synthetase, as
do the 1st-generation neuronal precursors that comprise
the niche. A small percentage of cells extracted from
the hemolymph of crayfish also label with the niche cell
marker glutamine synthetase. The findings that serotonin treatment in vivo increases the niche cell population, that serotonin is localized to the rim of the
vascular cavity, and that serotonin receptors are found
in hemocytes, are consistent with the behavior of these
cells in niche co-cultures, where flooding the culture
dish with serotonin or the 5-HT2ß receptor antagonist
MMS interferes with their affinity for the niche. For all
of these reasons, we propose that the hematopoietic system is a potential source of primary neuronal precursor
cells in crayfish. We do not know, however, whether
cells recruited into the niche go through a gradual
transformation to become resident bipolar niche cells
that will at some later time become primary neuronal
precursors (an “assembly line” or “inventory” model).
This scenario would suggest that the niche cells represent progressive stages in the transformation and activation to 1st-generation neuronal precursors. Alternatively,
newly recruited cells may be fast-tracked through the
niche, escorted by the niche cells, as they progress
through the cell cycle and divide (a “conveyor belt” or
“just-in-time” model). Experiments designed to differentiate between these alternatives, as well as in vivo studies to track labeled hemocytes over periods of several
days or weeks, are currently underway. By either scenario, however, the studies of Ayub et al. [38] show that
the numbers of niche cells actively engaged in the cell
cycle can be adjusted, presumably in response to local
signals that are, in turn, influenced by the animal’s living
conditions. These findings confirm that the 1st-generation neuronal precursors are not single (or a few) specially-endowed cells, but rather a dynamic population
whose proliferative potential is regulated.
The idea that hematopoietic stem cells may play a
central role in adult neurogenesis is not a new proposal.
Mammalian bone marrow cells have a proclivity to
migrate to the brain when infused into a host animal
[42-44]. In studies where bone marrow cells were
grafted into the lateral ventricle they migrated throughout the brain, including areas undergoing active postnatal neurogenesis. The descendants of these cells express
a variety of glial and neuronal markers, including GFAP

Page 17 of 19

and F4/80 (a microglial marker) [42], NeuN and NSE
[45], NeuN and GFAP [46], and MAP-2, NeuN and
GFAP [47], and in some studies these cells developed
the characteristics of astrocytes [43]. In vitro, bone marrow cells have been induced by various means to form
neurons [48-52], and in one study the bone marrowderived neurons responded to depolarizing stimuli,
showing a rapid and reversible calcium increase in
response to acetylcholine [52], a response characteristic
of neurons. While the identities of specific types of bone
marrow cells that are the source of neurons and glia in
these studies is not always clear, other experiments specifically used hematopoietic cells, and found that in the
brain these could acquire neural features and express
neural genes [53,54]. However, additional studies suggested that cell fusion may account for the acquisition
of such broad properties by stem cells [55-58]. Nevertheless, the idea persists in the literature that cells
derived from bone marrow can transdifferentiate into
neuronal and glial precursors in response to signals in
the brain.

Conclusions
Our conclusion from these studies is that the 1st generation neuronal precursor cells comprising a neurogenic
niche in the adult crayfish brain are not self-renewing.
The corollary of this finding is that these neuronal precursor cells must be replenished from a source extrinsic
to the niche. Our in vitro data point to the hematopoietic
system as one possible source of neuronal precursor
cells, a finding that, if confirmed in further in vivo studies, has profound mechanistic, developmental and evolutionary implications.
Abbreviations
5-HT: 5-hydroxytryptamine (serotonin); BrdU: 5-bromo-2-deoxyuridine; CTG
CellTracker™ Green; EdU: 5-ethynyl-2’-deoxyuridine; GS: glutamine synthetase;
LPZ: lateral proliferation zone; MMS: methiothepin mesylate salt; MPZ: medial
proliferation zone; PCPA: p-chlorophenylalanine;
Acknowledgements
The authors thank P. Carey and V. LePage for care of the animals used in
these studies, B. Hennessey for consultations about statistics, D. Baro
(Georgia State University, Atlanta) for the 5-HT1crust and 5-HT2bCrust
antibodies and J. M. Sullivan for his critical reading of the manuscript. This
work was supported by National Institutes of Health R01 MH67157, National
Science Foundation IOS 0818259 and National Science Foundation DBI
0922895.
Authors’ contributions
JLB conceived the study, designed and executed most of the experiments,
and participated in data interpretation and in manuscript preparation. YZ
conducted the studies for Figure 2A and the protein analysis for Figure 6CD, participated in experimental design, in data interpretation and manuscript
preparation. CRK conducted the experiment described in Figure 1C, and
provided technical support for other experiments and manuscript
preparation. DCS participated in the design of the study and executed the
experiments for dye injection of the vascular system. BSB carried out
experiments for Figure 6A-B and was involved in the overall design of the

Benton et al. BMC Neuroscience 2011, 12:53
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/12/53

study, data interpretation and manuscript preparation. All authors have read
and approved the final manuscript.
Received: 14 February 2011 Accepted: 2 June 2011
Published: 2 June 2011
References
1. Kempermann G: Adult Neurogenesis: Stem Cells and Neuronal Development in
the Adult Brain Oxford University Press; 2006.
2. Beltz BS, Sandeman DC: Regulation of life-long neurogenesis in the
decapod crustacean brain. Arth Struc Dev 2003, 32:39-60.
3. Jang MH, Song H, Ming GI: Regulation of adult neurogenesis by
neurotransmitters. In Adult Neurogenesis. Edited by: Gage FH, Kempermann
G, Song H. New York: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press; 2008:397-423.
4. Abrous DN, Wojtowicz JM: Neurogenesis and hippocampal memory
system. In Adult Neurogenesis. Edited by: Gage FH, Kempermann G, Song H.
New York: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press; 2008:445-461.
5. Brundin P, Winkler J, Masliah E: Adult neurogenesis and
neurodegenerative diseases. In Adult Neurogenesis. Edited by: Gage FH,
Kempermann G, Song H. New York, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press;
2008:503-533, (2008).
6. Doetsch F: A niche for adult neural stem cells. Curr Opin Genet Dev 2003,
13:543-550.
7. Doetsch F, Caille I, Lim DA, Garcia-Verdugo JM, Alvarez-Buylla A:
Subventricular zone astrocytes are neural stem cells in the adult
mammalian brain. Cell 1999, 97:703-16.
8. Kokovay E, Shen Q, Temple S: The incredible elastic brain: how neural
stem cells expand our minds. Neuron 2008, 60:420-9.
9. Suh H, Consiglio A, Ray J, Sawai T, D’Amour KA, Gage FH: In vivo fate
analysis reveals the multipotent and self-renewal capacities of Sox2+
neural stem cells in the adult hippocampus. Cell Stem Cell 2007, 1:515-28.
10. Zhao C, Deng W, Gage FH: Mechanisms and functional implications of
adult neurogenesis. Cell 2008, 132:645-60.
11. Sullivan JM, Benton JL, Sandeman DC, Beltz BS: Adult neurogenesis: a
common strategy across diverse species. J Comp Neurol 2007, 500:574-84.
12. Wen CM, Cheng YH, Huang YF, Wang CS: Isolation and characterization of
a neural progenitor cell line from tilapia brain. Comp Biochem Phys A: Mol
Integ Phys 2007, 149:167-80.
13. Wen CM, Huang JY, Ciou JH, Kao YL, Cheng YH: Immunocytochemical and
molecular characterization of GBC4 as a tanycyte-like cell line derived
from grouper brain. Comp Biochem Phys A 2009, 153:191-201.
14. Zhang Y, Beltz BS: Glutamine synthetase, a functionally active enzyme in
the crayfish brain [abstract]. Soc Neurosci 2010, 36:s737.14.
15. Sullivan JM, Beltz BS: Newborn cells in the adult crayfish brain
differentiate into distinct neuronal types. J Neurobiol 2005, 65:157-70.
16. Sullivan JM, Sandeman DC, Benton JL, Beltz BS: Adult neurogenesis and
cell cycle regulation in the crustacean olfactory pathway: from glial
precursors to differentiated neurons. J Mol Histol 2007, 38:527-42.
17. Zhang Y, Allodi S, Sandeman DC, Beltz BS: Adult neurogenesis in the
crayfish brain: proliferation, migration, and possible origin of precursor
cells. Dev Neurobiol 2009, 69:415-36.
18. Benton JL, Goergen EM, Rogan SC, Beltz BS: Hormonal and synaptic
influences of serotonin on adult neurogenesis. Gen Comp Endocrinol
2008, 158:183-90.
19. Söderhäll I, Bangyeekhun E, Mayo S, Söderhäll K: Hemocyte production
and maturation in an invertebrate animal; proliferation and gene
expression in hematopoietic stem cells of Pacifasticus leniusculus. Dev
Comp Immunol 2003, 27:661-72.
20. Spitzer N, Edwards DH, Bar DJ: Conservation of structure, signaling and
pharmacology between two serotonin receptor subtypes from decapod
crustaceans, Panulirus interruptus and Procambarus clarkii. J Exp. Biol 2008,
211:92-105.
21. Diefenbach TJ, Sloley BD, Goldeberg JI: Neurite branch development of an
identified serotonergic neuron from embryonic Helisoma: evidence for
autoregulation by serotonin. Dev Biol 1995, 167:282-293.
22. Scholtz G, Dohle W: Cell lineage and cell fate in crustacean embryos - a
comparative approach. Int J Dev Biol 1996, 40:211-20.
23. Sullivan JM, Macmillan DL: Embryonic and postembryonic neurogenesis
in the ventral nerve cord of the freshwater crayfish Cherax destructor. J
Exp Biol 2001, 290:49-60.

Page 18 of 19

24. Menezes JRL, Smith CM, Nelson KC, Luskin MB: The division of neuronal
progenitor cells during migration in the neonatal mammalian forebrain.
Molec Cell Neurosci 1995, 6:496-508.
25. Kuhn HG, Cooper-Kuhn CM: Bromodeoxyuridine and the detection of
neurogenesis. Curr. Pharmaceut Biotech 2007, 8:127-131.
26. Beltz BS, Benton JL, Sullivan JM: Transient uptake of serotonin by
newborn olfactory projection neurons. Pro Natl Acad Sci 2001, 98:12730-5.
27. Benton JL, Beltz BS: Effects of serotonin depletion on local interneurons
in the developing olfactory pathway of lobsters. J Neurobiol 2001,
46:193-205.
28. Sandeman DC, Benton JL, Beltz BS: An identified serotonergic neuron
regulates neurogenesis in the crayfish brain. Dev Neurobiol 2009,
69:530-545.
29. Zhang Y, Benton JL, Beltz BS: 5-HT receptors mediate lineage-dependent
effects of serotonin on adult neurogenesis in Procambarus clarkii. Neur
Dev 2011, 6(1):2.
30. Chaga O, Lignell M, Söderhäll K: The haematopoietic cells of the
freshwater crayfish, Pacifasticus leniusculus. Anim Biol 1995, 4:59-70.
31. Johansson MW, Keyser P, Sritnyalucksana K, Söderhäll K: Crustacean
hemocytes and hematopoiesis. Aquaculture 2000, 191:45-52.
32. Hodgkin AL, Huxley AF: Quantitative description of membrane current
and its application to conduction and excitation in nerve. J Physiol 1952,
117:500-544.
33. Kandel ER, Schwartz JH: Molecular biology of learning: modulation of
transmitter release. Science 1982, 218:433-43.
34. Stanfield GM, Horvitz HR: The ced-8 gene controls the timing of
programmed cell deaths in C. elegans. Mol Cell 2000, 5:423-33.
35. Tavazoie M, Van der Veken L, Silva-Vargas V, Louissaint M, Colonna L,
Zaidi B, Garcia-Verdugo JM, Doetsch F: A specialized vascular niche for
adult neural stem cells. Cell Stem Cell 2008, 3:279-88.
36. Schmidt M: Identification of putative neuroblasts at the base of adult
neurogenesis in the olfactory midbrain of the spiny lobster, Panulirus
argus. J Comp Neurol 2007, 503:64-84.
37. Song CK, Johnstone LM, Edwards DH, Derby CD, Schmidt M: Cellular basis
of neurogenesis in the brain of the crayfish, Procambarus clarkii:
Neurogenic complex in the olfactory midbrain from hatchlings to adults.
Arth Struct Dev 2009, 38:339-360.
38. Ayub N, Benton JL, Zhang Y, Beltz BS: Environmental enrichment
influences neuronal stem cells in the adult crayfish brain. Dev Neurobiol
2011, 71:351-361.
39. Smith CM, Luskin MB: Cell cycle length of olfactory bulb neuronal
progenitors in the rostral migratory stream. Dev Dyn 213:220-227.
40. Cairns J: Mutation selection and the natural history of cancer. Nature
1975, 255:197-200.
41. Zhang YV, Cheong J, Ciapurin N, McDermitt DJ, Tumbar T: Distinct selfrenewal and differentiation phases in the niche of infrequently dividing
hair follicle stem cells. Cell Stem Cell 2009, 5:267-78.
42. Eglitis MA, Mezey E: Hematopoietic cells differentiate into both microglia
and macroglia in the brains of adult mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci 1997,
94:4080-5.
43. Kopen GC, Prockop DJ, Phinney DG: Marrow stromal cells migrate
throughout forebrain and cerebellum, and they differentiate into
astrocytes after injection into neonatal mouse brains. Proc Natl Acad Sci
1999, 96:10711-6.
44. Brazelton TR, Rossi FM, Keshet GI, Blau HM: From marrow to brain:
expression of neuronal phenotypes in adult mice. Science 2000,
290:1775-9.
45. Mezey E, Chandross KJ, Harta G, Maki RA, McKercher SR: Turning blood
into brain: cells bearing neuronal antigens generated in vivo from bone
marrow. Science 2000, 290:1779-82.
46. Mahmood A, Lu D, Wang L, Li Y, Lu M, Chopp M: Treatment of traumatic
brain injury in female rats with intravenous administration of bone
marrow stromal cells. Neurosurgery 2001, 49:1196-203, discussion 1203-4.
47. Chen J, Sanberg PR, Li Y, Wang L, Lu M, Willing AE, Sanchez-Ramos J,
Chopp M: Intravenous administration of human umbilical cord blood
reduces behavioral deficits after stroke in rats. Stroke 2001, 32:2682-8.
48. Sanchez-Ramos JR: Neural Cells Derived from Adult Bone Marrow and
Umbilical Cord Blood. J Neurosci Res 2002, 69:880-893.
49. Sanchez-Ramos JR, Cardozo-Pelaez F, Song S: Differentiation of neuron-like
cells from bone marrow stromal cells. Mov. Disord 1998, 13(Suppl):122.

Benton et al. BMC Neuroscience 2011, 12:53
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/12/53

Page 19 of 19

50. Sanchez-Ramos J, Song S, Cardozo-Pelaez F, Hazzi C, Stedeford T, Willing A,
Freeman TB, Saporta S, Janssen W, Patel N: Adult bone marrow stromal
cells differentiate into neural cells in vitro. Exp Neurol 2000, 164:247-56.
51. Sanchez-Ramos JR, Song S, Kamath SG, Zigova T, Willing A, CardozoPelaez F, Stedeford T, Chopp M, Sanberg PR: Expression of neural markers
in human umbilical cord blood. Exp Neurol 2001, 171:109-15.
52. Kohyama J, Abe H, Shimazaki T, Koizumi A, Nakashima K, Gojo S, Taga T,
Okano H, Hata J, Umezawa A: Brain from bone: efficient “metadifferentiation” of marrow stroma-derived mature osteoblasts to
neurons with Noggin or a demethylating agent. Differentiation 2001,
68:235-44.
53. Goolsby J, Marty MC, Heletz D, Chiappelli J, Tashko G, Yarnell D,
Fishman PS, Dhib-Jalbut S, Bever CT Jr, Pessac B: Hematopoietic
progenitors express neural genes. Pro Natl Acad Sci 2003, 100:14926-31.
54. Gottschling S, Eckstein V, Saffrich R, Jonás A, Uhrig M, Krause U,
Seckinger A, Miesala K, Horsch K, Straub BK, Ho AD: Primitive and
committed human hematopoietic progenitor cells interact with murine
neural cells and are induced to undergo self-renewing divisions. Exp
Hematol 2007, 35:1858-71.
55. Morshead CM, Benveniste P, Iscove NN, van der Kooy D: Hematopoietic
competence is a rare property of neural stem cells that may depend on
genetic and epigenetic alterations. Nat Med 2002, 8:268-73.
56. Wagers AJ, Sherwood RI, Christensen JL, Weissman IL: Little evidence for
developmental plasticity of adult hematopoietic stem cells. Science 2002,
297:2256-59.
57. Wells WA: Is transdifferentiation in trouble? J. Cell Biol 2002, 157:15-18.
58. Coyne TM, Marcus AJ, Woodbury D, Black IB: Marrow stromal cells
transplanted to the adult brain are rejected by an inflammatory
response and transfer donor labels to host neurons and glia. Stem Cells
2006, 24:2483-92.
doi:10.1186/1471-2202-12-53
Cite this article as: Benton et al.: Primary Neuronal Precursors in Adult
Crayfish Brain: Replenishment from a Non-neuronal Source. BMC
Neuroscience 2011 12:53.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
