<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>A regulatory network of two galectins mediates the earliest steps of avian limb skeletal morphogenesis</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Developmental Biology 2011, 11:6. doi:10.1186/1471-213X-11-6"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Ramray Bhat"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Bhat et al. BMC Developmental Biology 2011, 11:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/11/6

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

A regulatory network of two galectins mediates
the earliest steps of avian limb skeletal
morphogenesis
Ramray Bhat1, Kenneth M Lerea1, Hong Peng1, Herbert Kaltner2, Hans-Joachim Gabius2, Stuart A Newman1*

Abstract
Background: The skeletal elements of vertebrate embryonic limbs are prefigured by rod- and spot-like
condensations of precartilage mesenchymal cells. The formation of these condensations depends on cell-matrix
and cell-cell interactions, but how they are initiated and patterned is as yet unresolved.
Results: Here we provide evidence that galectins, b-galactoside-binding lectins with b-sandwich folding, play
fundamental roles in these processes. We show that among the five chicken galectin (CG) genes, two, CG-1A, and
CG-8, are markedly elevated in expression at prospective sites of condensation in vitro and in vivo, with their
protein products appearing earlier in development than any previously described marker. The two molecules
enhance one another’s gene expression but have opposite effects on condensation formation and cartilage
development in vivo and in vitro: CG-1A, a non-covalent homodimer, promotes this process, while the tandemrepeat-type CG-8 antagonizes it. Correspondingly, knockdown of CG-1A inhibits the formation of skeletal elements
while knockdown of CG-8 enhances it. The apparent paradox of mutual activation at the gene expression level
coupled with antagonistic roles in skeletogenesis is resolved by analysis of the direct effect of the proteins on
precartilage cells. Specifically, CG-1A causes their aggregation, whereas CG-8, which has no adhesive function of its
own, blocks this effect. The developmental appearance and regulation of the unknown cell surface moieties
("ligands”) to which CG-1A and CG-8 bind were indicative of specific cognate- and cross-regulatory interactions.
Conclusion: Our findings indicate that CG-1A and CG-8 constitute a multiscale network that is a major mediator,
earlier-acting than any previously described, of the formation and patterning of precartilage mesenchymal
condensations in the developing limb. This network functions autonomously of limb bud signaling centers or
other limb bud positional cues.

Background
The formation of the vertebrate limb skeleton has
become a paradigm of developmental biology due to its
suitability for the study of processes such as tissue induction, cell differentiation, and spatial patterning of differentiated cell types [1]. A key cellular event in the early
developing limb is the formation of condensations - highdensity spot- or rod-shaped aggregates of precartilage
mesenchymal cells [2-4]. These aggregates arise from
and, once formed, are surrounded by, uncondensed
mesenchymal cells embedded in a loose extracellular
* Correspondence: newman@nymc.edu
1
Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, New York Medical College,
Valhalla, NY 10595, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

matrix (ECM). Only the condensed cells differentiate
into chondrocytes. Thus condensations prefigure the limb
cartilage primordia, which directly form the skeletal elements, or more usually are replaced by bone.
Although molecular and cellular changes accompanying the formation of limb precartilage condensations
have been studied extensively (see [3,5], for reviews),
and computational models simulating their generation
in vitro and in vivo have been put forward (reviewed in
[6]), the detailed mechanisms by which condensations
are initiated and become arranged in spatial patterns,
particularly in vivo, are still not fully understood. While
it is well accepted that mesenchymal condensation
involves local changes in cell-ECM and cell-cell adhesive
interactions, some of the proposed mediators of this

© 2011 Bhat et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Bhat et al. BMC Developmental Biology 2011, 11:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/11/6

process, such as tenascin, NCAM and N-cadherin, have
been shown not to be essential for normal limb development in mice [7-9]. Fibronectin remains a viable candidate for an indispensible ECM determinant of
condensations [10-12]. But cell clusters that anticipate
fully formed condensations (“protocondensations”) are
seen in vitro as early as 17 h [13], at least 12 h before
fibronectin is detectable.
The proximate ECM, matricellular, and cell adhesive
mediators of limb precartilage condensation must therefore be induced by molecules or cell activities that act
earlier in development. While condensations are sometimes treated as downstream manifestations of a program initiated by the limb bud’s signaling centers like
the apical ectodermal ridge (AER) and the zone of
polarizing activity (ZPA) (e.g., [14]), there is little evidence relating cellular states induced by such centers to
production of the molecules that mediate cell aggregation. Moreover, formation of limb-like arrays of skeletal
elements can still proceed when global positional cues
are disrupted [15,16]. And whereas inducers of ECM
production such as activins, TGF-bs and BMPs have
been shown to act early in the limb chondrogenic pathway [17,18], it is unclear how they exert their effects in
a patterned fashion.
In amniotes, such as birds and mammals, the formation of condensations and their differentiation occur in
a proximodistal order [19]. In both the fore and hind
limb buds a single proximal structure, the stylopod,
develops first, followed by two parallel elements, the
zeugopod, and a distal series of regularly spaced digits,
the autopod. Any candidates for the early-acting determinants of precartilage condensation must be expressed
in accordance with this timetable.
Here we report on the role of a class of endogenous
lectins with b-sandwich folding known as galectins [20]
in the morphogenesis and patterning of limb condensations. Attention was drawn to these molecules for their
demonstrated roles in mediating cell-cell and cell-matrix
interactions and eliciting potent biosignaling [21-23] as
well as for the unsurpassed capacity of glycans (to
which they bind) to store biological information, embodied in the concept of the sugar code (reviewed in [24]).
We pursued the galectins in more detail when we found
that a subset of them was expressed in a condensationassociated fashion earlier than any previously described
molecules.
Galectins are frequently found within the extracellular
environment (a requirement for molecular agents of tissue-scale patterning), and mediate and regulate cell-cell
and cell-matrix adhesion [25], key processes in the formation of condensations. Despite the widespread occurrence of b-galactosides on cells, galectins are known
to target distinct glycoconjugates, with their spatial

Page 2 of 20

organization in membrane microdomains playing a decisive role [26].
Galectins are widespread among metazoans although
the number of galectins varies widely between species.
In contrast to amphibians, such as Xenopus, which has
12 galectins [27], and mammals, where the complexity
of the galectin network is even higher [28], galectin
expression in the chicken is confined to five completely
characterized genes [29,30]. This represents a major
advantage in gaining insights on functional divergence/
overlap among these homologous proteins in the limbforming system.
The five members of the chicken galectin (CG) family
are assigned to three groups with characteristic structural
features: the three homodimeric proto-type proteins CG1A, CG-1B and CG-2, most closely related to mammalian
galectins-1 and -2, respectively, the chimera-type CG-3
with a collagenase-sensitive stalk, and the tandem-repeattype CG-8 with two different lectin domains covalently
connected by a linker, related to mammalian galectin-8
(for recent overviews see [29,31,32]).
CG-1A crystallizes as a homodimer with a substantial
interface area [33]. In gel filtration after purification
from chicken liver it runs completely as a homodimer
[34], the structure of which has been confirmed by
ultracentrifugation [31]. The monomeric status of CG-8
has also been confirmed by gel filtration and ultracentrifugation [29].
By comprehensive analysis we found that the genes
specifying CG-1A and CG-8 are expressed at elevated
levels during the initiation and early stages of condensation formation in chicken limb precartilage mesenchyme
in vitro and in vivo. The corresponding proteins also
appear in a condensation- and early cartilage noduleand primordia-specific manner, with binding reactivity
to the labeled CGs exhibiting the expected condensation
association, but significant differences in specificity of
localization.
Addition of these lectins obtained by recombinant
production has dramatic and opposite effects on condensation in vitro, with CG-1A enhancing and CG-8
suppressing the process. These effects are borne out
in vivo, where exogenous CG-1A induces ectopic skeletal elements and exogenous CG-8 inhibits formation of
normal elements. Experiments involving inhibition of
function further confirm that the two galectins are
antagonists of each other. However, CG-1A and CG-8
also upregulate one another’s gene expression at the
mRNA level. To resolve the apparent paradox of the
mutual antagonism and cooperation of these molecules
we looked more closely at the direct effect of the proteins on precartilage mesenchymal cells. In a real-time
turbidimetric agglutination assay we found that CG-8,
though not adhesive in its own right, interferes with the

Bhat et al. BMC Developmental Biology 2011, 11:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/11/6

direct cell-cell adhesion mediated by CG-1A. Our findings suggest that morphogenesis of individual condensations can be brought about by the action of CG-1A, but
that condensation patterning depends on a multiscale
local-autoactivation-lateral-inhibition network comprising CG-1A and CG-8.

Results
Galectin expression in limb bud mesenchyme in vitro

The previous characterization of the complete panel of
CGs affords the opportunity to comprehensively study
expression profiles. We first measured the relative levels
of gene expression of all CGs in high density monolayer
“micromass” cultures of freshly dissociated uncondensed
leg precartilage mesenchymal cells by quantitative realtime PCR (qRT-PCR) of reverse-transcribed mRNA. Of
the five CGs, the levels of expression of the prototype
CG-1A and the tandem-repeat-type CG-8 were found to
be several-fold higher than that of CG-1B and CG-2,
both in the freshly dissociated cells and in the micromass cultures. The efficiencies of amplification of CG1A, CG-1B and CG-8 were similar, and that of CG-2
about 20 percent higher (see Methods). The substantially higher amplification levels of CG-1A and CG-8
compared to the other galectins thus represent real differences in mRNA expression levels. The expression of
CG-3 was negligible during the stages of condensation
formation and patterning. Evidently, gene expression
among CGs is differentially regulated with a preference
for one of three homodimeric proteins (CG-1A) and the
only tandem-repeat-type CG (CG-8). We thus focused
on CG-1A and CG-8 and assayed for their expression at
various points along the developmental time-table of
micromass cultures, during which the mesenchymal
cells undergo focal condensation and then differentiate
into cartilage nodules.
CG-1A gene expression increased about 7-fold within
the first two days of culture, i.e., during the period of condensation formation (Figure 1a). The CG-8 mRNA level
rose as well, but not as sharply as that of CG-1A (~2.5
fold) (Figure 1b). Message levels of both then steadily
declined to about 15% (CG-1A) and 20% (CG-8) of their
expression maxima by the fifth and sixth day of cultures,
by which time the condensations had differentiated into
nodules of cartilage. The period of condensation patterning
and morphogenesis was thus temporally associated with
the maximal expression levels of both CG-1A and CG-8.
We next visualized the spatial distribution of mRNAs
specific for CG-1A and CG-8 in vitro by in situ hybridization of 2-day cultures with gene-specific digoxigenin-labeled
riboprobes. CG-1A and CG-8 mRNAs were both detected
with strong signal intensity within cells that were part of
the condensations, as well as in a small number of scattered,
isolated cells in the intercondensation mesenchyme (Figure

Page 3 of 20

1c,d). Control cultures, incubated without a probe or with
“sense” riboprobes, failed to show any staining, confirming
the specificity of the hybridization reaction.
The presence of CG-1A protein in leg bud micromass
cultures was monitored at various stages of development
(i.e., uncondensed, condensing, condensed and differentiating, differentiated, etc.) by indirect immunostaining
using an antibody preparation free from cross-reactivity to
any other CG. CG-1A was strongly localized in a spot-like
pattern in cultures in which the condensations were in the
process of forming (day 1; Figure 1e), already formed (day
3; Figure 1f,g), or had already differentiated into cartilage
(day 6; Figure 1h). The immunostaining for CG-8 protein
in vitro had a similar nodular pattern (Additional file 1,
Figure S1a,b). The intensity of the staining increased and
its spatial localization became more specific as the condensations grew larger and the cultures matured.
Galectins are early and specific markers of precartilage
condensations

In order to confirm that the galectins were specifically
localized to the condensations, micromass cultures that
had been incubated for two days and subsequently fixed
for staining were treated with anti-CG-1A antibody and
with Dylight 594-conjugated goat anti-rabbit secondary
antibody to monitor localization of CG-1A (Figure 2a).
The same cultures were processed with FITC-labeled
peanut agglutinin (PNA; Figure 2b), a plant lectin, and
with DAPI to mark the nuclei (Figure 2c). The glycan
moiety to which PNA binds is a known marker for precartilage mesenchymal condensations [35]. We found
that CG-1A and glycans reactive with PNA colocalized
in the 2-day condensations. The same field viewed
by phase-contrast optics (Figure 2d) showed that the
stained condensations were surrounded by non-condensed mesenchyme, which, significantly, stained very
sparsely with PNA and for CG-1A.
Monitoring the reactivity with PNA is one of the earliest-described methods for detection of limb precartilage
mesenchymal condensations in vivo and in vitro [35,36].
Both PNA and the antibody against CG-1A stained the
earliest detectable condensations at 18 h of incubation
(Figures 2g,h). Staining for CG-1A as well as CG-8 was
also observed as early as 9 h of incubation (Figures 2f,
Additional file 1, Figure S1c). Although morphological
condensations have not yet appeared in such early cultures, the CG-1A- and -8-dependent staining is enhanced
compared to the surrounding mesenchyme in patches of
a similar spatial scale to condensations. We infer that
these patches, which at this stage are only relatively, not
specifically, enriched in CG-1A and CG-8, are the early
primordia of the future condensations, and ultimately
cartilage nodules. These “proto-condensations” are not
reactive with PNA (Figure 2e at 9h), making CG-1A and

Bhat et al. BMC Developmental Biology 2011, 11:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/11/6

Page 4 of 20

Figure 1 Gene and protein expression of CG-1A and CG-8 correlates spatially and temporally with precartilage condensation pattern
formation in vitro. (a) Relative expression of CG-1A measured by qRT-PCR at successive stages of development of leg-bud micromass cultures. (b)
Relative expression of CG-8-specific mRNA measured in the same samples as (a). Differences between mRNA values at 24 h and dissociated but
uncultured 5-day leg autopod precartilage cells (0 h calibrator samples) were statistically analyzed by Student’s t-test. Results are shown as mean ±
S.E.M. (* p < 0.05). (c, d) Gene expression of (c) CG-1A and (d) CG-8 in 2-day leg micromass cultures, assayed by in situ hybridization, is spatially
coincident with condensations. Images are representative of two independent results. Inset in (c), condensation at same magnification from
no-probe control culture. (e-h) Spatial localization of CG-1A protein in vitro by indirect immunostaining at (e) 15 h, (f, g) day 3 (low and high
magnification, respectively) and day 6 (h). Inset in (e), region at same magnification from center of control culture in which no primary antibody
was applied. Inset in (h), region at same magnification from 6 day culture stained for cartilage with Alcian blue. Images (c), (d) and (g) are at the
same magnification; scale bar in (c) represents 0.2 mm. Images (e), (f) and (h) are at same magnification; scale bar in (e) represents 1 mm.

CG-8 the earliest markers thus far reported for condensing precartilage mesenchyme.
In order to determine if the enhanced staining of
CG-1A/-8 in condensations was due to increased protein
level in condensed cells or an artifact of higher density at
these sites, we co-immunostained cultures for each of the
two CGs and for cell nuclei, using DAPI. The ratio
between mean fluorescence intensity within and outside
condensations was calculated individually for the galectins
and for DAPI. The mean intensity of CG-1A and CG-8
fluorescence in condensation mesenchyme after normalization to intensity of their staining in non-condensed

cells was 3.5- and 2.5-fold that of DAPI fluorescence in
condensations, respectively after the latter had been normalized to staining of non-condensed cell nuclei (Additional file 1, Figure S1d,e). Thus, both galectins were
preferentially present in cells that participated in leg condensation morphogenesis. Similar results were obtained
with myoblast-free wing bud mesenchyme (not shown).
CG-1A and CG-8 are expressed in condensations of
developing limb buds

Using labeled CG-1A- and CG-8-specific riboprobes, the
spatial organization of mRNA production was assayed in

Bhat et al. BMC Developmental Biology 2011, 11:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/11/6

Figure 2 CG-1A is an early endogenous marker for limb
precartilage condensations in vitro. (a-d) A microscopic field in a
2-day leg micromass culture showing (a) indirect
immunolocalization of CG-1A, (b) staining with FITC-conjugated
peanut agglutinin (PNA); and (c) DAPI. The same field was
photographed under (d) phase-contrast microscopy. (e-f) 9-hour
fixed cultures incubated with (e) HRP-conjugated PNA fail to show
staining but when immunostained for (f) CG-1A show patchy
“proto-condensations” at 9 h of incubation (black arrowheads). (g-h)
18-hour fixed cultures incubated with (g) HRP-conjugated PNA or
immunostained for (h) CG-1A show fully formed condensations of
similar spatial patterns. Images (a-h) are at same level of
magnification; scale bar in (a) represents 0.2 mm.

leg buds of 5-6-day chicken embryos. In 5-day leg buds
mRNAs of both CG-1A and CG-8 were concentrated
strongly in the zeugopod region, staining both the premuscle masses and cartilage primordia. In contrast,
staining was relatively sparse subjacent to the apical
ectodermal ridge (AER) (Figure 3a, Additional file 2,
Figure S2a). In 6-day leg buds the staining for digit primordia made them discernible from the relatively clear
interdigital tissue (Figures 3b, Additional file 2, Figure
S2b). This is consistent with our in vitro findings (Figure
1c), where the condensations contained CG-1A-specific
mRNA, while the pericondensation mesenchyme did not.

Page 5 of 20

In sections of early developing leg buds at 3½-days
(Figure 3c), CG-1A protein was present throughout the
mesoblast (Figure 3c, blue box), but sparse in the somatopleural mesenchyme underlying the leg bud and the
contiguous flank (Figure 3c, yellow box), and in the
region subjacent to the AER. The spatial pattern of
CG-8-specific staining in 3½-day leg sections was similar
to that of CG-1A (Additional file 2, Figure S2c).
In 5-day leg-bud sections (Figure 3d), CG-1A-specific
staining was more intense in the tibiotarsal (blue box) and
fibular condensations than in the surrounding uncondensed mesenchyme (yellow box). The prospective
autopod area was relatively devoid of stain except for a
crescent-shaped focus in the posterior part, representing
the condensation of the fourth digit (blue arrowhead). The
corresponding regions of 5-day limbs stained less distinctly
for CG-8 (Additional file 2, Figure S2d). The perichondrium and the outer circumferential part of the stylopod
also showed positivity for both CG-1A (Figure 3d, white
arrowhead) and CG-8 (Additional file 2, Figure S2d, white
arrowhead).
In 6-day leg bud sections stained for CG-1A protein
(Figure 3e), the stylopod, which had been sectioned along
a plane orthogonal to its long axis, showed very sparse
staining in its central region (Figure 3e, red arrowhead),
which consisted of cartilage at this stage. Premuscle
masses in the mid-leg region showed intense staining of
fusiform cells for CG-1A. In the autopod region, the
third and fourth digits could clearly be discerned on the
basis of intense CG-1A staining (Figure 3e, yellow box)
and moderate staining for CG-8 in their distal crescents
(Additional file 2, Figure S2e, yellow box, crescent-shaped
signaling centers in the most distal part of the digits;
[18]), in the nascent joints at their proximal ends, and in
the perichondria (Additional file 2, Figure S2e).
Perichondrial and digital crescent staining of both
CG-1A and CG-8 rendered the digit primordia discernible from the non-condensing tissue between the leg
bud ectoderm and the precartilage primordia, and interdigital mesenchyme, which was not positive for either
CG-1A or CG-8 (Figure 3e, blue box and Additional file
2, Figure S2e, blue box, respectively). Staining was
strong in the prospective region of the “fifth digit” (Figure 3e, violet box, for CG-1A). Here, the precartilage
cells condense and differentiate into cartilage only to
regress later [37]. Digital primordia (yellow and violet
boxes) show round mesenchymal cells and no fusiform
myoblasts or tendinocytes. The in vivo staining of
CG-1A is consistent with our in vitro results. That is,
the interdigit and interstitial mesenchyme, which corresponds to the intercondensation mesenchyme in vitro,
stained minimally compared to the intense CG-1A signal and moderate CG-8 staining intensity in prospective
and differentiated cartilage primordia in vivo and in

Bhat et al. BMC Developmental Biology 2011, 11:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/11/6

Page 6 of 20

Figure 3 CG-1A is localized to developing chicken leg bud precartilage condensations. (a) Staining by in situ hybridization for CG-1A
mRNA in the core of a 5-day leg bud with the distal-most cells underlying the AER unstained (red arrowhead). Inset shows control 5-day leg
bud with probe omitted. In a 6-day leg (b), digits stain for CG-1A mRNA (black arrowheads) but interdigits are unstained (red arrowhead) (c)
Indirect immunostaining for CG-1A protein in the 3½-day leg bud stylopod is predominantly extracellular (high-magnification view of the field
enclosed by the blue box). Flank cells are sparsely stained (yellow box). (Scale bar: 50 μm). (d) In a 5-day leg section there is staining for CG-1A
in the stylopod perichondrium (white arrowhead) but not its core (red arrowhead). In the zeugopod, the two intensely stained primordia (blue
box) are separated by a region of unstained cells (yellow box). The developing autopodium is unstained except for a crescent representing the
fourth digit condensation (blue arrowhead). Inset shows leg section with primary antibody omitted. (e) The peristylopod mesenchyme in a 6-day
leg section stains for CG-1A, but not the core (red arrowhead). Fusiform cells in the intensely stained mid-leg were confirmed in companion
sections to be myoblasts. Strong CG-1A staining is seen in the perichondria and leading edges of the third and fourth digits (yellow box), and in
the ultimately regressing “fifth” digit condensation (violet box). Interdigit cells as well as those subjacent to the ectoderm stain sparsely (blue
box). The fourth and fifth digits are marked as d4 and d5. (f) 5-day wing stylopod, showing intense CG-1A staining in the humeral crescent. Inset
shows a comparable region (at lower magnification) of a control wing with primary antibody omitted. (Scale bar (e): 1 mm). Pull-out images
were photographed using a 63× objective (Scale bar: 50 μm).

Bhat et al. BMC Developmental Biology 2011, 11:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/11/6

Page 7 of 20

condensations and nodules in vitro. The “humeral crescent” and some of the differentiated chondrocytes in the
stylopod region of a 5-day wing bud stained heavily for
CG-1A (Figure 3f), also consistent with in vitro results
on myoblast-free wing mesenchyme.
Binding reactivity for CG-1A and -8 is generally localized
to condensations

Using biotinylated CG-1A and CG-8 as probes, the spatial localization of accessible sites for CG-1A and CG-8
were probed in leg-bud sections at various developmental stages. In early 3½-day leg sections, the staining of
CG-1A-binding sites closely corresponded spatially with
the localization of the proteins; in particular, they were
found throughout the core of the leg bud and were
absent in the flank region and subjacent to the AER
(Figure 4a). In 5- and 6-day leg sections the spatial localization of CG-1A binding reactivity corresponded generally with that of CG-1A itself (Figure 4b,d) with
intense staining in cartilage primordia, digit perichondria and in vivo condensations (red arrowheads) relative
to interstitial and subridge mesenchymal cells (yellow
arrowhead). However, the interdigit cells also stained
almost as intensely as the digit perichondria (blue
arrowhead). The staining for accessible sites of CG-8
binding (Figure 4c, 5-day leg section; and 4e, 6-day leg
section) was more uniform.
In vitro, binding of biotinylated CG-1A was in evidence by about 15 hours of culture (Figure 4g) and localized strongly to condensations in 2-day cultures (Figure
4i). This raised two questions: (i) which is the first to
exhibit patterned expression, CG-1A or the ligand(s) to
which it binds? and (ii) does one of these molecules
influence the expression of the other? Whereas CG-1A
stains protocondensations in 9-hour cultures (Figure 2f),
the staining for accessible binding sites at this stage was
very sparse (data not shown). Treatment of cultures
with exogenous CG-1A, however, increased the area of
reactivity and the staining intensity (Figure 4j).
The staining with biotinylated CG-8 as probe was
more diffuse than that with labeled CG-1A, with a discernible presence in non-condensing cells and slightly
more intense staining in condensations (Figure 4k). In
contrast to staining for CG-8 protein (see above) the
higher density of cells in the condensations probably
accounts for the slightly higher staining intensity of CG8 binding activity in these foci. Treatment of cultures
with exogenous CG-8 had no effect on the spatial pattern of accessible CG-8-binding sites (not shown). To
determine whether the detected binding was dependent
on the lectin site we tested the effect in presence of lactose. Indeed, the binding reactivity was inhibited when
the fixed cultures were incubated with a mixture of biotinylated galectins and lactose (Figure 4h).

Figure 4 Dynamics of the CG-1A and -8 binding reactivity in
chicken leg bud mesenchyme. (a) Staining by biotinylated CG-1A
for its binding sites in a 3½-day chicken leg section. (b) Staining for
CG-1A binding reactivity in 5-day leg sections in the zeugopod (red
arrowheads) and in the autopod (blue arrowhead) and a more diffuse
spatial localization of CG-8 binding reactivity (c). (d) Staining showing
CG-1A binding reactivity in a 6-day leg-bud in the prospective digit
primordia (red arrowheads), moderate staining in the interdigital
mesenchyme (blue arrowhead) and lack of staining in the interstitial
mesenchyme (yellow arrowhead), and (e) more diffuse staining for CG8 binding reactivity. Images (a-c) have the same scale, as do images (d)
and (e), with the scale bars in (a) and (d) representing 1 mm. (f-h)
Micromass cultures of leg bud mesenchyme at 15 h of incubation. The
culture in (g) shows the spatial pattern of CG-1A binding reactivity
using a biotinylated CG-1A probe. The two flanking panels show
control cultures. In (f) the biotinylated CG-1A probe was omitted and
in (h) the culture was treated with probe that had been pre-incubated
overnight with 50 mM lactose. Diameter of the micromass cultures,
~3 mm. (i) Condensation-specific expression of CG-1A-reactive sites in
a 2-day leg micromass culture. (j) Addition of 10 μg/ml CG-1A
increases extent of its reactivity and expands its localization to
precondensation cells, in contrast to the nodular pattern seen in the
untreated culture (i). (k) Staining profile of CG-8-reactive sites with
biotinylated CG-8 in 2-day leg micromass culture show them to be
present both outside and inside condensations. The staining within
the condensations is more intense than in the pericondensation
regions. Images (i-k) are at the same magnification; scale bar in (i)
represents 0.2 mm.

CG-1A increases condensation number and causes fusion
of condensations

Probing the tissue level and cellular localization of CG-1A
shows that it is mostly present on the surfaces of and
between cells within the precartilage mesenchymal

Bhat et al. BMC Developmental Biology 2011, 11:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/11/6

condensations in vitro and in ovo [38]. This pattern suggests
that it may have a role in the morphogenesis of the condensations. To address this, we added CG-1A in increasing
amounts to freshly prepared leg micromass cultures and
assayed for alteration in condensation patterning by staining
the cultures fixed on the third day with PNA. Below 5 μg/
ml CG-1A, there was no discernible change in pattern. At
10 μg/ml, the number of condensations increased and their
mean size decreased (Figure 5b) compared to untreated
control cultures (Figure 5a). When the concentration was
increased to 20 μg/ml, adjacent condensations began to

Page 8 of 20

fuse (Figure 5c). Addition of CG-1A did not increase the
diameter of the micromass cultures, nor did it lead to overgrowth of the monolayered cells.
We also took advantage of the blocking capacity of the
antibody preparation. Cultures treated with 10 μg/ml
polyclonal anti-CG-1A antibody, grown for three days,
fixed and stained with DAPI to visualize the condensation pattern, exhibited a decrease in both the size and
number of condensations, and the condensations were
spaced further apart (Figure 5e, compare with untreated
control culture Figure 5d).

Figure 5 Addition of CG-1A increases condensation number and density in vitro and induces ectopic cartilage in vivo. (a) PNA staining
of a 2-day control leg culture. (b) Addition of 10 μg/ml CG-1A increases the condensation number, with a concomitant decrease in size. (c)
Treatment with 20 μg/ml CG-1A causes the condensations to fuse. (d) Untreated control 2-day micromass culture fixed and stained with DAPI.
(e) Culture treated with 10 μg/ml anti-CG-1A antibody, fixed at day 2, and stained with DAPI. Photomicrographs (a-e) are at same level of
magnification; bar in (a) represents 0.25 mm. (f) Graph showing change in condensation number upon addition of 10 μg/ml CG-1A and 10 μg/
ml anti-CG-1A antibody, respectively. (g) Graph showing change in inter-condensation distance upon addition of 10 μg/ml CG-1A and 10 μg/ml
anti-CG-1A antibody, respectively. (h) Graph showing change in condensation size upon addition of 10 μg/ml CG-1A and 10 μg/ml anti-CG-1A
antibody, respectively. All three variables (condensation number, size and inter-condensation distance) were statistically analyzed using one-way
analysis of variance comparing means by the Tukey-Kramer post-hoc analysis. Results are shown as means ± S.E.M. (* p < 0.05). (i) 5½ day wing
bud injected on with CG-1A, fixed and stained with Alcian blue on day 8, shows the presence of an ectopic digit in the site of injection (black
arrowhead). Inset of i shows the ectopic digit in detail. (j) Untreated 8½ day control wing stained with Alcian blue showing three digits; with
discernible patency of joint space between the second digit phalange and 1st metacarpal in the inset of (j). (k) Contralateral wing bud of (j),
injected with CG-1A on the 5th day, fixed and stained with Alcian blue showing fusion of the phalange and 1st metacarpal of the second digit
and obliteration of their joint space (inset of k).

Bhat et al. BMC Developmental Biology 2011, 11:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/11/6

Using a separate approach, small interfering (si)RNA
oligonucleotides directed against CG-1A-specific mRNA
were transfected by lipofection into cells of freshly prepared leg mesenchymal cultures. These cultures were
grown for three days along with mock-treated counterparts, using oligonucleotides with a scrambled sequence,
and these were also fixed and stained with DAPI. The
decrease in expression level of CG-1A due to silencing
was assessed both by indirect immunofluorescence
(Additional file 3, Figure S3a,b and c show CG-1A staining control, of siRNA-treated and of mock-transfected
micromass cultures, respectively) and by qRT-PCR
(Additional file 3, Figure S3d, target mRNA levels averaged 1/4 of control values). There was no change in
condensation pattern between the control using mock
transfection and untreated cultures. In contrast, condensations in siRNA-treated cultures decreased in number
as well as in size, and were spaced further apart (Additional file 3, Figure S3e,f show DAPI stained untreated
and siRNA-treated cultures, respectively).
In order to quantitate the effect of CG-1A addition and
inhibition (by siRNA or blocking antibody) in vitro, three
variables were measured: mean condensation number,
mean condensation size and mean inter-condensation distance. The condensation number upon CG-1A addition
and inhibition was 2.2-fold and 0.5-fold that of control,
respectively (Figure 5f). The mean inter-condensation distance upon CG-1A addition was 0.5-fold that of control
and upon anti-CG-1A antibody addition, 1.5-fold that of
control (Figure 5g). The mean condensation size with
CG-1A addition was lower (0.4-fold control size), whereas
with CG-1A inhibition (by antibody treatment) it was not
significantly altered (Figure 5h). The change in condensation number (Additional file 3, Figure S3g) and size
(Additional file 3, Figure S3h) after CG-1A knockdown by
RNAi were consistent with CG-1A antibody treatment,
although, unlike the latter, the former did not significantly
alter the mean inter-condensation distance (Additional
file 3, Figure S3i).
To determine whether our in vitro results had relevance in vivo, CG-1A was injected between days 5 and 6
into the wings of 10 chicken embryos. The injections
were performed between the second and third digit primordia (the interdigit mesenchyme at this stage still
retaining digit-forming potential; [39]) and also in the
prospective digit mesenchyme. The right wings of 10
control 6-day embryos were subjected to injections of
bovine serum albumin (BSA). By 8½ days, the cartilage
pattern visualized by Alcian blue staining showed no
change in either the control untreated (Figure 5j) or
BSA treated wings. Of the 10 experimental embryos,
seven survived, and there was no change in wing phenotype in one of them. In four of the CG-1A-injected
wings, however, there was an ectopic cartilage element

Page 9 of 20

between the second and third digit primordia (Figure 5i;
fixed at 8 days). In the other two wings fusion between
the phalange and the metacarpal was observed
(Figure 5k; inset shows obliteration of the joint space
between the two cartilage elements). There were no
such fusions in control 8½-day wings (Figure 5j; inset
showing patent joint space between metacarpal and
phalange).
CG-1A siRNA (or its scrambled control oligo) mixed
with the transfection agent Lipofectamine was injected
into the uncondensed wing autopod field of 5-day
embryos, which were grown until 7½ days, fixed and
stained for cartilage. The wings of five embryos injected
with control oligo were all similar in cartilage morphogenesis to the untreated counterparts. Injection of the CG-1A
siRNA into the autopod, however, resulted in lack of any
digital primordia (Additional file 3, Figure S3j) in comparison to the developing cartilage primordia in the counterpart untreated wings (Additional file 3, Figure S3k) in
three of four embryos in which the injections were made.
Treatment with exogenous CG-8 decreases condensation
number and size

Leg bud micromass cultures were treated with 10 μg/ml
CG-8, grown for 3 days, and fixed and stained with
PNA. In these cultures, there was a decrease in the
number and size of the condensations (Figure 6b) compared to control cultures (Figure 6a). The mean condensation number of treated cultures was 0.75-fold that of
the control value (Figure 6e), and the mean size of the
condensations and the mean inter-condensation distance
were 0.5-fold (Figure 6f) and 1.6-fold (Figure 6g) that of
controls, respectively. Although we found that addition
of exogenous CG-8 at several-fold the concentration
used here induces apoptosis in these cultures, we saw
no evidence of reduction in the diameter of the micromasses nor denuded areas in the micromass cell monolayer with this treatment.
Treatment of cultures with 10 μg/ml anti-CG-8 antibody
(Figure 6d), in contrast, resulted in a significant increase in
mean condensation number (control culture shown in Figure 6c). The condensation number in treated cultures was
1.5-fold that of the control value (Figure 6e), and the
mean size of the condensations and the mean intercondensation distance were both 0.5-fold that of control
values (Figure 6f, g).
In vivo, CG-8 was injected into the right wings of
embryos between days 5 and 6, which were then grown
to days 7-8. Of 10 injected embryos, seven survived.
In 3/7 cases the injection resulted in complete absence
of cartilage primordia (impaired growth of humerus,
radius and ulna with absence in growth of the autopod
elements; Figure 6i compared to control Figure 6h), and
in 4/7 cases, shortening of the zeugopod elements

Bhat et al. BMC Developmental Biology 2011, 11:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/11/6

Page 10 of 20

Figure 6 Addition of CG-8 decreases condensation number and density in vitro and impairs digit development in vivo. (a) Staining by
PNA of a 2-day control leg culture (b) Culture treated with 10 μg/ml CG-8, showing a decrease in number of condensations, with a concomitant
and uniform decrease in their sizes. (c) Control 2-day culture stained with DAPI. (d) Culture treated with 10 μg/ml rabbit polyclonal anti-CG-8
antibody, fixed at day 2, and stained with DAPI. (e) Graph showing change in condensation number upon addition of 10 μg/ml CG-8 and
10 μg/ml polyclonal anti-CG-8 antibody, respectively. Photomicrographs (a-e) are at same level of magnification; scale bar in (a) represents 0.25
mm. (f) Graph showing change in inter-condensation distance upon addition of 10 μg/ml CG-8 and 10 μg/ml polyclonal anti-CG-8 antibody,
respectively. (g) Graph showing change in condensation size both upon addition of CG-8 and polyclonal anti-CG-8 antibody, respectively. The
three variables (mean condensation number, mean size and mean inter-condensation distance) were compared as in the legend to Figure 5.
(h-i) Wing bud (i) injected with CG-8 on 5th day of incubation, fixed and stained with Alcian blue, reveals absence of any cartilage primordia in
the autopod and poorly stained, smaller zeugopodial cartilage in comparison with (h) control left wing. (j-k) Right wing bud injected on 5th day
of incubation with (j) CG-8 and (k) contralateral untreated control wing bud, both stained with Alcian blue at day 9, showing decrease in length
of zeugopodial primordia due to CG-8 treatment. (l) Graph showing decrease in zeugopodial cartilage primordium length when CG-8 was
injected into 5-day wing buds. The primordium lengths were analyzed using one-way analysis of variance comparing means by the TukeyKramer post-hoc analysis. Results are shown as mean ± S.E.M. (*p < 0.05).

(Figure 6j compared to control Figure 6k)). The reduction in zeugopodial element length was on the average
40 percent of the control value (Figure 6l).
CG-1A and CG-8 constitute a positive gene expression
feedback loop

Since galectins can affect gene expression (e.g., human
galectin-1 via Sp1 transactivation [40]), we next tested for
a potential effect on this level. The gene expression of CG1A was assayed by qRT-PCR in cultures treated with 10

μg/ml CG-8 at 18 hours. We found a 4-fold increase in
mRNA level due to the treatment (Figure 7a). Injection of
CG-8 into the autopod of 5-day wing buds in ovo also led
to ectopic interdigital CG-1A RNA expression on day 6
(Additional file 3, Figure S3m) compared to uninjected
counterpart wings (Additional file 3, Figure S3l). The upregulation in gene expression of CG-8 upon treatment with
10 μg/ml CG-1A in 18-hour cultures was 6-fold (Figure
7b). Thus, even though CG-1A and CG-8 had opposite
effects on the condensation pattern, they were actually

Bhat et al. BMC Developmental Biology 2011, 11:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/11/6

Page 11 of 20

Figure 7 Multiscale interactions of CG-1A and CG-8. (a) CG-1A gene expression assayed by qRT-PCR in 18 h cultures treated with 10 μg/ml
CG-8 (blue bar) was 4-fold that of untreated controls (black bar). (b) CG-8 gene expression in 18 h cultures treated with 10 μg/ml CG-1A (blue
bar) was 6-fold that of untreated controls (black bar). Difference between relative mean mRNA values was statistically analyzed by Student’s ttest. Results are shown as mean ± S.E.M. (* p < 0.05). (c) Scheme of the principle of optical aggregometry (turbidimetry). (d) Graph comparing
the aggregation of 5-day leg bud autopod cells induced by addition of CG-1A, CG-1A pre-incubated with lactose or maltose (osmolarity control),
and CG-8 as well as its N-terminal domain. Lysing cells with Triton X-100 (green bar) provides a baseline for maximal light transmission under
the conditions of the assay. The maximum possible transmission achieved by Triton X-100 treatment is considered 100%. Results are shown as
mean ± S.E.M. (e) Plot showing the cell aggregation in real time induced by CG-1A. (f) Plot showing real-time cell aggregation induced by CG1A in cells preincubated with either CG-8 (green) or its N-terminal domain (orange). Control aggregation (dotted blue line) occurred in cells not
pre-treated with CG-8. The aggregation values in assays with the N-terminal domain of CG-8 represent the mean of two independent
experiments. (g) Plot showing real-time change in cell aggregation when CG-1A was added first (to initiate the aggregation) and then CG-8 was
added at different time-points (red: CG-8 added at 0.5 s, green: CG-8 added at 1 s; blue: CG-8 added at 2 s). The ordinate axis units shown in e, r
and g are arbitrary units and are comparable. Values for e, f and g are mean ± S.E.M.

upregulating each other’s gene expression. This suggested
that their effect on the pattern occurred at a level different
from transcriptional regulation per se.
CG-1A aggregates limb cells directly and CG-8
antagonizes aggregation

In general, galectins are potent adhesion/growth-regulatory effectors with cell-type selectivity, positively or negatively affecting cell-cell or cell-matrix interactions and also
influencing gene expression of matrix components, as
shown for human galectin-1 [41,42]. Thus, CG-1A may
also affect condensation-related functions indirectly by

influencing the expression, transport or degradation of cell
adhesion or ECM molecules. In order to determine
whether CG-1A or CG-8 presence influences condensation morphogenesis and patterning we designed an in
vitro agglutination assay (a scheme of the working principle is shown in Figure 7c; for more details, see Materials
and Methods). When 100 μg CG-1A was added to a constantly stirred suspension of freshly dissociated 5-day leg
autopod cells, they underwent aggregation (Figure 7d).
This aggregation was inhibited by lactose but not by maltose used as osmolarity control, indicating that the precartilage cell aggregation by CG-1A is dependent on its lectin

Bhat et al. BMC Developmental Biology 2011, 11:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/11/6

site. CG-8, or its N-terminal domain, both present in solution as monomers [29], when added in similar concentrations, did not bring about any cell aggregation. The CG1A-induced aggregation, when traced in real time, rose
sharply upon addition of the galectin and then gradually
plateaued by 2 min (Figure 7e). When CG-1A was added
to cells that had been pre-exposed to CG-8 or its N-terminal domain, the aggregation that resulted was less than
half of that caused by CG-1A alone (Figure 7f). The presence of CG-8 thus impaired the aggregability by CG-1A.
When the treatments were reversed and CG-8 was added
at various points after CG-1A-dependent aggregation had
begun, the aggregation ceased or dropped to about half
the aggregation levels brought about by CG-1A alone (Figure 7g).

Discussion
This paper establishes a causal association between
avian limb skeletogenesis and a class of cell-cell and
cell-matrix adhesion modulating gene products, the
galectins. Of the three major interrelated processes in
limb skeletal development, i.e., the morphogenesis of
precartilage condensations [2,5], the spatiotemporal patterning of the condensations [3,43], and the specification
of the identity of each skeletal element [44-46], we here
demonstrate that CG-1A and CG-8 (two of the five
CGs) are involved in at least the first two processes.
Classic experiments by Zwilling ([16]; later confirmed
by Ros and coworkers [15]) have shown that randomized limb cells, when re-introduced under the limb
ectoderm, are able to give rise to a skeleton. When cultured on plastic at high densities, dissociated early-stage
limb bud cells organize themselves into regularly spaced
condensations (reviewed in [3]), and later cartilage
nodules, and thus replicate key events in morphogenesis
occurring during limb skeletal development in vivo
([11,13,47]; reviewed in [3]). It was therefore reasonable
to assume that both the formation and spatiotemporal
patterning of limb condensations is dependent on local
cell-cell interactions and ensuing signaling processes
[17,43,48-53]. In this context, an orchestration of expression of glycans along with counter-receptors (lectins) is
an attractive concept, which guided us to the analysis of
galectins, known for marked developmental regulation
([54]; see also [55] for information on glycans).
The CG-1A activity reported appears to underlie the
observations in a study from nearly three decades ago
[56] describing enhancement in the number of chicken
limb precartilage condensations in vitro by a lectin from
adult liver. Our initial studies of CG-1A expression,
which suggested that this galectin was expressed earlier
in vitro than fibronectin (up to now the best candidate
for an ECM mediator of condensation; [11,12,47], and
indeed earlier than ligands for PNA, these epitopes

Page 12 of 20

being among the earliest so far known molecular condensation markers [35,36], warranted pursuing detailed
expression and functional studies with this and the
other four CGs.
Expression of CG-1A and CG-8 in condensing limb
mesenchyme

We found that production of CG-1A and CG-8 (two out
of the five CGs) mRNA and proteins were spatially and
temporally associated with the formation of condensations
in vitro. By tracing the localization of these galectins back
to when they first appear within proto-condensations, we
confirmed that they are indeed the earliest condensationassociated proteins reported so far.
The gene and protein expression profiles of both CGs
were associated with precartilage mesenchymal condensations and early cartilage primordia in vivo. Similar to
in vitro results, cells which did not participate in forming
the cartilage primordia (and subsequently bone) were negative for CG-1A- or CG-8-specific mRNA and protein. Our
use of an ectoderm-depleted, muscle-free limb precartilage
mesenchymal population [57,58] in in vitro experiments
permitted us to track the expression of galectins in a pure
cell lineage independently of tissue interactions. Whereas
no relevant data were available previously on the tandemrepeat-type CG-8, CG-1A has been analyzed immunohistochemically in embryogenesis, where it is especially strongly
expressed in myogenic tissue and skin [59,60].
Expression of galectin binding sites in condensing limb
mesenchyme

Galectins, by definition, have binding affinity towards
galactose-containing glycans. As with mammalian galectins, the 4’- and 6’-OH groups of galactose serve as key
contact sites [61]. CG-1A preferentially targets multivalent
glycans with N-acetyllactosamine termini when probed
with free glycans and glycoproteins [62,63]. The observation of a gradient of decreasing binding constants during
saturation of a multivalent ligand can underlie high-avidity
cell aggregation even at low galectin loading [64]. The
measurement of dissociation kinetics under zero-force
conditions corroborated the relevance of galectin-1 in
transient cell interactions [65]. Regarding natural glycoconjugates, developmental regulation of CG-1A-reactive
glycans was noted in liver [66]. With respect to the biochemical nature of galectin-reactive determinants, mammalian galectins are also known to bind glycomimetic
peptides and distinct motifs (e.g., in oncogenic H-ras)
independent of the lectin site [25]. While elucidation of
the biochemical structure of the CG-1A and CG-8 ligands
in condensing leg mesenchyme was not addressed here,
we assayed the spatial pattern of accessible sites by using
these galectins, after activity-preserving biotinylation, as
markers. The use of endogenous lectins as probes has

Bhat et al. BMC Developmental Biology 2011, 11:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/11/6

clear advantages over glycophenotyping with plant lectins
in providing information of potential functional significance. We found different patterns of localization for the
accessible binding sites of CG-1A and CG-8. The binding
reactivity of CG-1A was condensation-specific, its temporal expression lagged behind that of CG-1A, and was
apparently subject to induction by CG-1A itself. In contrast, accessible sites for CG-8 were present both in condensing and non-condensing mesenchyme and were
unaffected by CG-8 addition in vitro.
Role of galectins in precartilage condensation

We next examined if perturbing galectin concentrations
will affect condensation morphology and pattern. We
found that CG-1A and CG-8 had opposite effects on the
condensation pattern: whereas addition of CG-1A
increased the number and spatial density of condensations,
CG-8 decreased both. Interestingly, the addition of either
galectin resulted in a decrease of mean condensation size.
We confirmed these effects in vivo as well: injection of
CG-1A into the developing wing mesenchyme resulted in
extra digits or fusion of existing digits. The injection of
CG-8, in contrast, impaired the development and/or size
of the cartilage primordia. Significantly, inhibition of the
function of one galectin brought about a similar phenotype in vitro as the addition of the other, i.e., CG-1A inhibition was equivalent to CG-8 addition and vice versa.
The relationships between the various types of treatment
are shown schematically in Figure 8.
We also found in isolated pure populations of precartilage mesenchymal cells that CG-1A and CG-8 constitute
a positive feedback loop at the gene expression level, i.e.,
they upregulate each other’s expression. This finding
might seem to conflict with the fact that CG-1A has an
inductive effect and CG-8 an inhibitory effect on condensation formation. This apparent contradiction was
resolved by probing the interaction between CG-1A and
CG-8 by an aggregometry assay that provides evidence
for the direct effect of galectins on limb precartilage cells.

Figure 8 Scheme of effects of CG-1A and -8 perturbations on
condensation pattern in vitro.

Page 13 of 20

We found that CG-1A by itself was able to aggregate dissociated 5-day leg cells within two minutes. Given this
rapid response, it is likely that CG-1A acts in a direct
manner to mediate adhesion between cells. The developmental relevance of these rapidly forming aggregates is
suggested by a recent study in which cells identical to
those used here were permitted to recover from trypsinization and levitated in an ultrasound trap. Such cells
formed aggregates via their native attachment moieties,
also within two minutes, and contained detectable
amounts of the chondrogenic transcription factor Sox9
in their nuclei within three hours [67].
CG-8 behaved differently from CG-1A in the aggregometry assay. Not only did it not aggregate cells, it also
interfered with the ability of CG-1A to do so. The basis
for CG-8’s effect may be due to its sharing a common
ligand for one of its two domains with CG-1A, thus
blocking CG-1A’s binding without mediating CG-1A-like
cross-linking. This would be analogous to the functional
divergence in post-binding events known from human
galectins-1 and -3 competing for the same ligand [68,69].
Alternatively, distinct binding sites of the two galectins
may be close enough on the cell surface for the nonaggregatory CG-8 to cause steric hindrance of the binding of the aggregatory CG-1A. Although it is formally
also possible that CG-1A and CG-8 may interact directly
to form a complex, this may require special conditions,
as in solid-phase assays [70]. Given that the N-terminal
domain of CG-8 (derived from the first four exons of
CG-8, encoding one lectin site [29]) gives the same
results in our assay as full-length CG-8, we favor the
hypothesis that the N-terminus of CG-8 and CG-1A
share a common ligand and compete with each other for
binding.
Different ligand specificity and/or cross-linking capacity can account for non-overlapping binding profiles of
CG-1A and CG-8. We suggest that the opposing roles
of CG-1A and CG-8 in mediating precartilage condensation in vitro and in vivo are due to the cell-protein and
protein-protein interactions reflected in the results of
aggregometry assay and may occur by any of the
hypothesized mechanisms. Interestingly, our preliminary
evidence shows that the other CGs (i.e., CG-1B, -2 and
-3), which are expressed in condensing precartilage
mesenchyme (albeit to a minimal extent), are able to
aggregate 5-day leg bud cells by one-third to half the
extent of CG-1A. This implies that the expression and
accessibility of binding sites for CGs is differentially
regulated, and this in turn may regulate the ability of
the CGs to cross-link cells. It also shows that the
aggregability of CG-1A is not a generic property of
proto-type galectins but is a product of orchestrated
expression dynamics of both components of the CG-glycan recognition system.

Bhat et al. BMC Developmental Biology 2011, 11:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/11/6

A dynamical schema for limb patterning based on
galectins and their binding sites

We propose that the difference in regulation and spatial
distribution of binding sites for CG-1A and CG-8, in
concert with the lectins’ properties, underlie the spatial
patterning of the condensations. Local elevation of
homodimeric, and thus cross-linking, CG-1A will simultaneously induce the cells to aggregate and favor further
presentation of its ligand(s). This will increase the affinity of the extracellular environment within the condensations for CG-1A, effectively limiting its diffusion. CG1A will also induce the expression of CG-8, but since
CG-8 binding reactivity is uniformly distributed
throughout the precondensed field of cells, CG-8, unlike
CG-1A, will spread by diffusion from its sites of production (i.e., the prospective condensations). By interfering
with the cell-adhesive function of CG-1A in regions peripheral to the incipient condensation, where CG-1A is
sparse, CG-8 acts as a long-range lateral inhibitor of
condensation formation. Since CG-1A is a local activator of condensation by also indirectly inducing its own
expression via the positive feedback loop with CG-8, the
two galectins may constitute the core molecules of a
locally auto-activatory laterally inhibitory (LALI) network [71,72] that can mediate pattern formation of limb
skeletal elements [3,73]. Computer simulations based on
a partial-differential-equation representation of cells
incorporating this network, using biologically plausible
parameter choices, indeed exhibit quasiperiodically
spaced “condensations” as well as responses to the addition of exogenous “CG-1A” similar to those seen in our
experiments (Tillman Glimm, R. B. and S. A. N., in
preparation).
Finally, we speculate on the possible relevance of our
findings to limb development in non-avian tetrapods.
All documented tetrapod species have orthologs of the
avian CG-8 gene, and one or more homologs of CG-1A
(ENSEMBL database, http://www.ensembl.org). In chickens, CG-1A (formerly called C-16) has a paralogous
gene CG-1B (or C-14). Based on the rates of amino acid
substitutions, which establish the basis for the unique
redox-dependent shape changes of CG-1B [33,74], in
relation to the likely evolutionary pathway, duplication
of an ancestral CG-1 gene into CG-1A and -1B genes
was calculated to have occurred around divergence of
birds and mammals [75]. In non-avian and non-reptilian
tetrapods (i.e., amphibians and mammals) the single
CG-1A homolog, known as galectin-1, is actually an
ortholog of CG-1B based on its chromosomal location.
The Anolis lizard genome, like chicken, has two galectin-1-like genes, orthologs of CG-1A and CG-1B, suggesting that the duplication of an ancestral galectin-1
gene occurred after the phylogenetic split between saurians and mammals, but before evolutionary pathways of

Page 14 of 20

birds and lizards diverged. Significantly, using in situ
hybridization with a CG-1A-specific probe, we have
localized cognate gene expression in the prospective
digit primordia of Pogona vitticeps (bearded dragon)
embryos (unpublished work).
Given that galectin-1 -/- mice show no skeletal
abnormalities [76], it seems unlikely that galectin-1 acts
exclusively in place of CG-1A in mediating mammalian
limb development. However, compensatory mechanisms
in the complex galectin network have so far not been
studied in KO models. The identity of the early inducer
of mammalian limb mesenchymal condensations thus
still needs to be determined, and our results point
toward analysis of galectins. Given that mammals have
at least four other proto-type galectins, any one of them
with the property of specifically aggregating precartilage
limb mesenchymal cells and interacting in a positive
feedback expression loop with a CG-8-like protein, such
as human galectin-8, a matricellular protein known to
modulate cell adhesion (for a review, see [77]), could
potentially substitute for CG-1A. This interplay can constitute a similar limb-patterning mechanism in
mammals.

Conclusions
We have shown that a regulatory network consisting of
the galectins CG-1A and CG-8 and their respective cell
surface binding moieties, operating at the levels of gene
expression and protein-protein interaction, organizes
avian limb bud mesenchyme into discrete skeletal elements. This network acts earlier than other known
determinants or markers of skeletal pattern formation.
Its ability to rapidly pattern randomized cells into regular arrangements of condensations in vitro is indicative
of its self-organizing dynamics and of its independence
of any limb bud signaling centers, prepatterns of transcription factors, or other early-expressed molecular
gradients.
Methods
Chicken embryos

Fertilized White Leghorn chicken eggs were obtained
from Moyer’s Chicks, Quakertown, PA. Eggs were incubated in a humidified incubator at 39°C for 5-8 days,
blunt end upwards for embryos used for cell cultures
and horizontally for in ovo manipulations.
Micromass cell culture

Primary cultures were prepared by pooling mesenchymal tissue dissected from the myoblast-free (distal 0.3
mm) [57,58] autopod field of leg (or in some cases
wing) buds of stage 24 [78] chicken embryos (~4½ day
of incubation). Cultures that contained any myoblasts,
which had a distinctive bipolar morphology by 2 d, were

Bhat et al. BMC Developmental Biology 2011, 11:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/11/6

Page 15 of 20

discarded. Cells were dissociated with trypLE Express
solution (Gibco, Grand Island, NY), filtered through
Nytex 20 μm monofilament nylon mesh (Tetko, Briarcliff Manor, NY), washed and resuspended in medium
for plating at 2.5×10 5 cells per 10 μl spot. Cell spots
were deposited in Costar 24-well tissue culture plates
(Corning Inc., Corning, NY) and allowed to attach for 1
h before the wells were flooded with 1 ml of serum-free
defined medium (henceforth called DM; [79]: 60%
Ham’s F12, 40% Dulbecco’s modified Earle’s Medium
(DMEM), 5 μg/ml insulin, 100 nM hydrocortisone, 50
μg/ml ascorbic acid, 5 μg/ml chicken transferrin (Sigma,
St. Louis, MO). Medium was changed daily. Under these
conditions the cells grew as monolayers. Some cultures
were treated with 5-20 μg/ml of either CG-1A or CG-8
(in DM). In experiments where change in pattern formation was assayed, the CGs were added to freshly prepared cultures and then replaced with galectin-free
media after 24 h. Inhibition (of galectin) studies used 10
μg/ml of anti-CG-1A and anti-CG-8 antibodies (rabbit
polyclonal; IgG). Selected cultures were stained with
Alcian blue at pH 1.0 at 5 or 6 days to verify the occurrence of chondrogenesis [80].
Quantitative real-time PCR

Total RNA was isolated from cell cultures or dissociated
leg-bud cells with the Absolutely RNA Microprep kit
(Stratagene, La Jolla, CA). RNA was quantified with a
NanoDrop ND-1000 microspectrophotometer (NanoDrop
Technologies, Rockland, DE). Per culture yields were similar for all treatment groups. Using a one-step protocol,
comparative qRT-PCR was performed using a Mx3005P
instrument (Stratagene) with the Brilliant II SYBR Green
QRT-PCR one-step mastermix kit (Stratagene). Primers
(Table 1) were designed with the Beacon Designer program (Premier Biosoft, Palo Alto, CA) and the Primerselect option of the DNASTAR Lasergene 7.1 software
package (GATC Biotech, Konstanz, Germany), and evaluated using the qPCR simulation program Amplify 3×
http://engels.genetics.wisc.edu/amplify/. The threshold
cycle (Ct) was determined as the mean of three biological
replicates by using the adaptive baseline algorithm in the
MX3005P software package. All measurements were

normalized to b-actin expression and analyzed by the ΔΔ
Ct method [81].
The efficiencies of PCR amplification, calculated
according to the method of Liu and Saint [82], averaged
0.52 for CG-1A (range: 0.49-0.54), 0.51 for CG-1B (0.500.54), 0.43 for CG-2 (0.39-0.48) and 0.51 for CG-8 (0.470.60). We therefore estimate that the PCR amplification
efficiencies for CG-1A and CG-8 are comparable, within
a factor of 1.02 of each other and within factors of 1.007
and 1.21 for CG-1B and CG-2, respectively.
CG production, labeling and antibody generation

CG-1A, full-length CG-8 and its N-terminal domain were
obtained by recombinant production, purified by affinity
chromatography as central step and checked for purity
by one- and two-dimensional gel electrophoresis
[29,63,83]. The proteins were used as antigens to generate polyclonal antibodies in rabbits, and resulting affinitypurified immunoglobulin G preparations were routinely
checked for lack of cross-reactivity to the other CGs systematically, including complete removal of any such reactivity by a further affinity chromatography on CG-loaded
resins [84]. Biotin labeling was performed with 0.5 mg
lectin (in 2 ml 2 mM phosphate-buffered saline at pH 8.0
containing 20 mM lactose to protect amino acid side
chains required for ligand binding for 14 h at 4°C using 3
mg biotinyl-N-hydroxysuccinimide ester (Sigma, Munich,
Germany) dissolved in dimethylformamide, the extent of
biotin incorporation determined by mass spectrometry
and the carbohydrate-dependent binding activity of the
biotinylated CGs ascertained by solid-phase and cell
assays [29,85].
Immunostaining and signal ratioing

Limb mesenchymal cultures were fixed for 20 min with
100% methanol precooled to -20°C, washed three times
for 5 min with PBS and permeabilized with 0.02% Triton X-100 for 10 min. Very early (6-9 h) cultures were
fixed with Bouin’s solution, having yielded optimal signal-to-noise ratio and antigen reactivity in comparative
analysis on tissue sections [31,86]. Immunohistochemistry was performed on fixed cultures using HistostainPlus kit (Zymed Inc., San Francisco, CA) according to

Table 1 Primer sets used for qRT-PCR
Gene of interest

Accession number

Forward primer (5’ to 3’)

Reverse primer (5’ to 3’)

b-actin

NM205518

CGGTACCAATTACTGGTGTTAGATG

GCCTTCATTCACATCTATCACTGG

CG-1A

NM206.905.1

ATGGAGCAAGGACTGGTTGTTAC

TTAGCTGAACTTAATAGCTTTCACTTTAAAG

CG-1B

NM205.495.1

ATGGCTTGTCAGGGACC

TTACTCCCAGCTGACAGACC

CG-2

XM001234438.1

ATGGCTAGAATGTTTGAAATGTTCAACCTGG

TCACTCCACCTTGAAGGAGGTAAC

CG-3

NM214591.1

ATGTCGGACGGTTTCTCTC

TTAAATCATGGAGGTCAAAACAC

CG-8

NM001010843.1

ATGATGTCCTTGGATGGAC

CTACCAGCTCCTCACATC

Bhat et al. BMC Developmental Biology 2011, 11:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/11/6

the manufacturer’s protocol. Briefly, the cultures were
incubated with 5 mg/ml affinity-purified polyclonal rabbit anti-CG-1A or anti-CG-8 antibodies for 2 h at room
temperature. Following removal of unbound primary
antibody by repeated PBS washes the cultures were successively incubated for 10 min each with solutions containing a biotinylated broad-spectrum secondary
antibody, the streptavidin-peroxidase conjugate and a
1:2:1 combination of 0.6% hydrogen peroxide, diaminobenzidine (DAB) substrate solution and a substrate buffer. Finally, cultures were then rinsed with water and
photographed under a binocular dissecting microscope
at 1.2× magnification to visualize the staining pattern of
the whole micromass culture or through an inverted
microscope at 16× or 32× objective magnification to
visualize selected fields. Controls for antigen dependence
of staining were incubated without primary antibodies,
or secondary antibodies. Another set of control cultures
were incubated with primary antibodies pre-incubated
with the respective galectins for saturation.
To verify the condensation-specific expression of
galectins, cultures were stained for CG-1A (or CG-8)
and for cell nuclei using DAPI. The border between a
single condensation and its surrounding uncondensed
mesenchyme was photographed using a high-magnification objective (63× oil immersion lens) under filters that
allowed the visualization of DAPI fluorescence and that
of the fluorophore DyLight 594 conjugated to the secondary goat anti-rabbit antibody. After grayscaling the
images, the mean fluorescence intensity was measured
in three different but equal-sized areas (encompassing
~3 cells) inside and outside condensations, and intensity
values of the condensed cells were compared to those of
the non-condensed cells. Quantitative comparison to
analogous values obtained for DAPI resulted in normalized values for the density-dependent differential fluorescence in the cultures.
For immunostaining of tissue sections, whole embryos
were fixed overnight in 4% paraformaldehyde. 10 μm
paraffin sections were deparaffinized, rehydrated, treated
for antigen retrieval by microwaving for 5 min in a bath
of 1% zinc sulfate solution [87], and incubated in blocking solution (from Histostain-plus kit; Zymed Laboratories) prior to incubation with primary anti-galectin
antibodies at room temperature for 1 hour. Antigen
detection was performed using the Histostain-Plus kit
following the manufacturer’s protocol.
Lectin histochemistry

Biotinylated CG-1A and -8 were used to visualize the
spatial distribution of accessible sites reactive with CG1A and CG-8 in vitro and in leg sections. Using a protocol similar to that described above for indirect immunohistochemistry and tested for a mammalian galectin

Page 16 of 20

including specificity controls [88], fixed mesenchymal
cultures were incubated with 5 μg/ml biotinylated CG1A or CG-8 at 4°C overnight. This was followed by
treatment with the streptavidin-peroxidase conjugate
and chromogenic substrates as described above. Control
cultures were treated with biotinylated CGs that had
been pre-incubated with lactose. Peanut agglutinin staining was performed on cultures fixed on days 2 or 3.
Cultures were incubated with 50 μg/ml horseradish-peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated PNA (Sigma, St. Louis, MO)
for 1 h followed by DAB color reaction. In fluorescence
colocalization experiments, cultures were incubated at
room temperature for 1 h with 50 μg/ml FITC-conjugated PNA (Sigma).
Whole mount in situ hybridization

In situ hybridization was performed on whole embryos
essentially as described [89]. Clone 1A/B and Clone 15/
1, containing inserts (405 base pairs for CG-1A and 948
base pairs for CG-8) into the pGEM-4Z vector (Promega, Mannheim, Germany), were linearized with HindIII and EcoRI, for synthesis of labeled antisense strands
SP6 polymerase and T7 polymerase, respectively, and
the digoxigenin-based DIG RNA labeling kit were used
(Roche, Indianapolis, IN). Probe synthesis was carried
out for 2 h at 37°C, followed by a 15 min incubation at
37°C with 2 μl of RNase-free DNase I to remove the
DNA template. Probe concentration was determined by
absorbance at 260 nm. Probes were evaluated for digoxigenin incorporation by slot blotting using the BCIP/
NBT liquid substrate detection system (Sigma, St. Louis,
MO). All the prehybridization and post hybridization
washes were performed using the BioLane HTI 16V tissue processing robot (Intavis Bioanytical Instruments,
Koeln, Germany).
In ovo manipulation of wing buds and cartilage staining

Chicken eggs were candled on the third day of incubation to locate the position of the embryos and 3-4 ml of
albumin was removed [90]. Between 5-6 days ~1 μg of
CG-1A or CG-8 (2 μg/ml in nuclease-free PBS) was
injected into the mesenchyme of the autopod field of
the wing bud. Control embryos were injected with identical amounts of BSA. The egg was resealed and the
embryos were allowed to grow for 2-3 more days. The
use of wing buds was preferred to leg buds due to
access. The sites of galectin injections included the
interdigit mesenchyme and digit primordia. Embryos at
7½ - 8½ days of incubation were washed in PBS, fixed
in 5% trichloroacetic acid overnight, and then stained
overnight in 0.1% Alcian blue in acid alcohol. Following
overnight destaining in acid alcohol, embryos were
dehydrated in absolute ethanol and cleared in methyl
salicylate.

Bhat et al. BMC Developmental Biology 2011, 11:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/11/6

Knockdown of CG-1A

In order to inhibit production of CG-1A within limb
mesenchymal cultures, siRNA oligonucleotide targeting
the sequence (5’-GAGAGTGTGTCAAGGTCAA-3’)
corresponding to nucleotides 44-62 of the CG-1A open
reading frame and the scrambled control were designed
using the on-line siRNA design tool on http://Invitrogen.com. For each culture, 2 μg of oligonucleotides
incubated for 20 min with 10 μl of Metafectene Pro
(Biontex Laboratories, Munich, Germany) and added
dropwise to the cultures. The cultures were harvested
and checked for knockdown by assaying CG-1A-specific
levels by qRT-PCR and CG-1A protein levels by indirect
immunofluorescence. For injections, 2 μg of oligonucleotides and 2 μl of Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen,
Carlsbad, CA) were both dissolved in 30 μl of nuclease
free water (Fisher Scientific, Pittsburgh, PA), mixed and
incubated for 20 mins. Each 5-day wing bud was
injected with 1.5-2 μl of the mixture.
Limb cell turbidimetry

The capacity of galectins to directly mediate cell-cell
adhesion was assayed by a turbidimetric method adapted
from platelet clotting studies [91,92]. Briefly, cells were
dispersed uniformly in DM inside a cuvette. Light transmitted through the cuvette is detected by a sensor. The
suspended particles (e.g., cells) scatter light, but the turbidity is reduced if the cells are caused to aggregate. The
effect of galectins on precartilage mesenchymal cells was
assayed using a Chrono-Log lumi-aggregometer model
600 (Havertown, PA). The cell density was 2.5 × 106 per
ml and the concentration of CG-1A and CG-8 (or its Nterminal domain) used was 10 μg/ml. In control experiments the suspension was made 5 mM in lactose or maltose. Maximal light transmission resulting from
aggregation in this experimental setup was determined
by lysing the cells with Triton X-100, allowing the light
to pass through with negligible scattering.
Statistics of pattern formation

The effect of CGs, their antibodies and CG-1A-specific
siRNA on the in vitro condensation pattern was assessed
quantitatively in terms of three variables: condensation
size, condensation number and intercondensation distance. Control and treated cultures were grown for 2
days, fixed with absolute methanol and stained with
DAPI. Concentrations of galectins and their antibodies)
were chosen for the condensation pattern-perturbing
experiments by trial and error to ensure the diameters
of the treated micromasses at 2 days did not differ from
untreated controls. Mammalian galectins 1 and 8 have
been shown to be pro-apoptotic [93]. While we have
seen this effect with CG-8 (but not CG-1A [38]), the
concentrations of the CGs used in the experiments

Page 17 of 20

described here were only 20% of the pro-apoptotic levels
of CG-8.
The cultures were photographed under low magnification (2.5×) and the images were binarized using ImageJ
software http://rsb.info.nih.gov/ij/. The smallest condensation was chosen by eye from among all the culture
pictures and was set as the threshold for the lower limit
of condensation size measurement. Image J was then
used to automatically measure the number and sizes of
condensations in each picture.
For measurement of inter-condensation distances, an
arbitrary point was chosen on the boundary of each
condensation. This point was then connected with the
point on the boundary of the condensation that was
farthest from it, such that the line connecting the two
points lay within the condensation. Since most of the
condensations were quasi-circular, the line joining the
two points represented an approximation to the diameter of the condensation. The mid-point of this axis
was taken to be the center of the condensation. The
centers of the condensations were then connected to
those of neighboring condensations and the intercondensation distances were measured. In cultures
which were immunostained using a color reaction, the
whole micromasses were photographed and the resulting images were then grayscaled and segmented into
stacks using multiOtsu thresholding [94].
The values of the condensation numbers, sizes and
inter-condensation distances were represented as fold
means +/- S.E.M. The statistical significance of the difference between groups and controls was assessed by
one-way analysis of variance with Tukey-Kramer posthoc analysis. The difference was taken to be significant
if the p-value was < 0.05.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Figure S1: CG-1A and -8 protein expression in
vitro. (a-b) Spatial localization of CG-8 by indirect immunostaining in
3-day micromass leg bud mesenchymal cultures shown at low
magnification (a) and high magnification (b). (c) Spatial localization of
CG-8 by indirect immunostaining in 9-hour fixed cultures shows its
moderately specific presence within proto-condensations (black
arrowheads). (d) Graph showing condensation-specific fluorescence for
CG-1A relative to DAPI fluorescence in non-condensed cells. (e) Graph
showing condensation-specific fluorescence for CG-8 relative to DAPI
fluorescence in non-condensed cells. Values for (d) and (e) are mean ±
S.E.M. (* p < 0.05).
Additional file 2: Figure S2: Expression of CG-8 in developing chick
leg buds. (a-b) Spatial expression of CG-8-specific mRNA in (a) 5-day and
(b) 6-day leg buds by in situ hybridization. (c-d) Staining for CG-8 in the
prospective stylopod area of a (c) 3½-day and (d) 5-day chick leg bud
section, visualized by immunohistochemistry with hematoxylin
counterstain. (e) Staining for CG-8 protein in 6-day leg bud section (only
autopod and distal edge of zeugopodial primordia shown). The leading
edge of the fourth digit primordia (outlined by the red box) shows
strong crescent-shaped CG-8-specific staining (red arrowhead) at its distal
edge with weak staining in cells both inside the primordia and outside.

Bhat et al. BMC Developmental Biology 2011, 11:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/11/6

The CG-8-specific staining within the crescent fills up the extracellular
space (outlined by the yellow box) whereas the extracellular space in the
interdigit area is clear of CG-8 staining (outlined by blue box). The pullout detail image in red box was photographed with 10× objective and
the scale bar represents 0.2 mm. The detail images enclosed by yellow
and blue boxes were photographed with 63 × oil immersion objective
and the scale bar in the blue box represents 50 μm.
Additional file 3: Figure S3: Knockdown of CG-1A expression by
RNAi decreases condensation number and size. (a) Indirect
immunolocalization of CG-1A in a 2-day control leg culture. (b, c)
Treatment of 2-day leg cultures with (b) CG-1A siRNA and (c) scrambled
control oligo, both stained for CG-1A protein. (d) Relative CG-1A
expression measured by qRT-PCR in untreated control, upon treatment
with the scrambled control oligonucleotide, and with CG-1A siRNA.
Analysis was done using Student’s t-test. Results are shown as mean ±
S.E.M. (*p < 0.05). (e) Control 2-day culture stained with DAPI. (f) Culture
treated with CG-1A-targeting siRNA, fixed at day 2, and stained with
DAPI. Photomicrographs (a-c) are at same level of magnification; bar in
(a) represents 0.2 mm. Photomicrographs (d) and (e) are at same
magnification and the bar in (d) represents 0.25 mm. (g) Graph showing
change in mean condensation number upon knockdown of CG-1Aspecific mRNA by RNAi (number in untreated control shown by black
bar). (h) Graph showing change in mean condensation size upon
knockdown of CG-1A-specific mRNA by RNAi. (i) Graph showing lack of
significant alteration in mean inter-condensation distance upon
treatment with CG-1A-targeting siRNA. The three variables (condensation
number, size and inter-condensation distance) were analyzed as in the
legend to Figure 5. (j, k) Untreated 7-day control wing stained with
Alcian blue showing two digit primordia (j), whereas injection of CG-1A
siRNA-Lipofectamine mixture into the counterpart wing on the 5th day of
incubation resulted in the autopodium lacking any cartilage (k). (l, m)
Untreated 6-day control wing stained for CG-1A mRNA shows a digit-like
pattern in the autopodium (l) whereas injection of CG-8 in the
counterpart wing on the 5th day of incubation leads to increased spatial
localization and stronger CG-1A mRNA staining (m).

Page 18 of 20

4.
5.
6.

7.
8.

9.
10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.
Acknowledgements
S.A.N. acknowledges support from the National Science Foundation’s
program in Frontiers of Integrative Biological Research and H.-J.G. from the
EC GlycoHIT program. S.A.N. and H.-J.G. are grateful to Harold Morowitz and
Eric Smith for inviting them to a workshop on glycobiology at the Santa Fe
Institute, where this work was first conceived.
Author details
Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, New York Medical College,
Valhalla, NY 10595, USA. 2Chair of Physiological Chemistry, Fakulty of
Veterinary Medicine, Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich,
Veterinärstrasse13, D-80539 Munich, Germany.
1

Authors’ contributions
RB carried out the in vitro and embryological manipulations, the quantitative
RT-PCR assays and the in situ hybridizations. RB and KML performed the
aggregometric assays, and RB and HP the histochemical assays. HK prepared
and characterized the galectins and galectin-related reagents. H-JG and SAN
conceived of the study and, with RB and KML designed the experiments.
SAN, RB and H-JG wrote the manuscript, which was read and approved by
all the authors.

17.

18.

19.
20.

21.

22.

Received: 7 January 2011 Accepted: 1 February 2011
Published: 1 February 2011
References
1. Gilbert SF: Developmental biology. Sunderland, MA: Sinauer Associates;, 9
2010.
2. Hall BK, Miyake T: Divide, accumulate, differentiate: cell condensation in
skeletal development revisited. Int J Dev Biol 1995, 39:881-893.
3. Newman SA, Bhat R: Activator-inhibitor dynamics of vertebrate limb
pattern formation. Birth Defects Res C Embryo Today 2007, 81:305-319.

23.

24.

Fell HB, Canti RG: Experiments on the development in vitro of the avian
knee-joint. Proc R Soc Lond B 1934, 116:316-351.
Hall BK, Miyake T: All for one and one for all: condensations and the
initiation of skeletal development. Bioessays 2000, 22:138-147.
Newman SA, Christley S, Glimm T, Hentschel HG, Kazmierczak B, Zhang YT,
Zhu J, Alber M: Multiscale models for vertebrate limb development. Curr
Top Dev Biol 2008, 81:311-340.
Saga Y, Yagi T, Ikawa Y, Sakakura T, Aizawa S: Mice develop normally
without tenascin. Genes Dev 1992, 6:1821-1831.
Cremer H, Lange R, Christoph A, Plomann M, Vopper G, Roes J, Brown R,
Baldwin S, Kraemer P, Scheff S, Barthels D, Rajewsky K, Wille W: Inactivation
of the N-CAM gene in mice results in size reduction of the olfactory
bulb and deficits in spatial learning. Nature 1994, 367:455-459.
Luo Y, Kostetskii I, Radice GL: N-cadherin is not essential for limb
mesenchymal chondrogenesis. Dev Dyn 2005, 232:336-344.
Downie SA, Newman SA: Morphogenetic differences between fore and
hind limb precartilage mesenchyme: relation to mechanisms of skeletal
pattern formation. Dev Biol 1994, 162:195-208.
Frenz DA, Jaikaria NS, Newman SA: The mechanism of precartilage
mesenchymal condensation: a major role for interaction of the cell
surface with the amino-terminal heparin-binding domain of fibronectin.
Dev Biol 1989, 136:97-103.
Gehris AL, Stringa E, Spina J, Desmond ME, Tuan RS, Bennett VD: The
region encoded by the alternatively spliced exon IIIA in mesenchymal
fibronectin appears essential for chondrogenesis at the level of cellular
condensation. Dev Biol 1997, 190:191-205.
Moftah MZ, Downie SA, Bronstein NB, Mezentseva N, Pu J, Maher PA,
Newman SA: Ectodermal FGFs induce perinodular inhibition of limb
chondrogenesis in vitro and in vivo via FGF receptor 2. Dev Biol 2002,
249:270-282.
Zeller R, Lopez-Rios J, Zuniga A: Vertebrate limb bud development:
moving towards integrative analysis of organogenesis. Nat Rev Genet
2009, 10:845-858.
Ros MA, Lyons GE, Mackem S, Fallon JF: Recombinant limbs as a model to
study homeobox gene regulation during limb development. Dev Biol
1994, 166:59-72.
Zwilling E: Development of fragmented and of dissociated limb bud
mesoderm. Dev Biol 1964, 89:20-37.
Leonard CM, Fuld HM, Frenz DA, Downie SA, Massagué J, Newman SA:
Role of transforming growth factor-β in chondrogenic pattern formation
in the embryonic limb: stimulation of mesenchymal condensation and
fibronectin gene expression by exogenous TGF-β and evidence for
endogenous TGF-β-like activity. Dev Biol 1991, 145:99-109.
Montero JA, Lorda-Diez CI, Gañan Y, Macias D, Hurle JM: Activin/TGFβ and
BMP crosstalk determines digit chondrogenesis. Dev Biol 2008,
321:343-356.
Saunders JW Jr: The proximo-distal sequence of origin of the parts of the
chick wing and the role of the ectoderm. J Exp Zool 1948, 108:363-402.
Villalobo A, Nogales-Gonzalés A, Gabius H-J: A guide to signaling
pathways connecting protein-glycan interaction with the emerging
versatile effector functionality of mammalian lectins. Trends Glycosci
Glycotechnol 2006, 18:1-37.
André S, Sanchez-Ruderisch H, Nakagawa H, Buchholz M, Kopitz J,
Forberich P, Kemmner W, Böck C, Deguchi K, Detjen KM, et al: Tumor
suppressor p16INK4a–modulator of glycomic profile and galectin-1
expression to increase susceptibility to carbohydrate-dependent
induction of anoikis in pancreatic carcinoma cells. FEBS J 2007,
274:3233-3256.
Roda O, Ortiz-Zapater E, Martinez-Bosch N, Gutiérrez-Gallego R, VilaPerello M, Ampurdanés C, Gabius H-J, André S, Andreu D, Real FX,
Navarro P: Galectin-1 is a novel functional receptor for tissue
plasminogen activator in pancreatic cancer. Gastroenterology 2009, 136:
e1371-1375, 1379-1390.
Wang J, Lu ZH, Gabius H-J, Rohowsky-Kochan C, Ledeen RW, Wu G: Crosslinking of GM1 ganglioside by galectin-1 mediates regulatory T cell
activity involving TRPC5 channel activation: possible role in suppressing
experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis. J Immunol 2009,
182:4036-4045.
Gabius HJ: The sugar code: fundamentals of glycosciences. Weinheim
Chichester: Wiley-VCH; 2009.

Bhat et al. BMC Developmental Biology 2011, 11:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/11/6

25. Gabius H-J: Cell surface glycans: the why and how of their functionality
as biochemical signals in lectin-mediated information transfer. Crit Rev
Immunol 2006, 26:43-79.
26. Kopitz J, Bergmann M, Gabius H-J: How adhesion/growth-regulatory
galectins-1 and -3 attain cell specificity: Case study defining their target
on neuroblastoma cells (SK-N-MC) and marked affinity regulation by
affecting microdomain organization of the membrane. IUBMB Life 2010,
62:624-628.
27. Shoji H, Nishi N, Hirashima M, Nakamura T: Characterization of the
Xenopus galectin family. Three structurally different types as in
mammals and regulated expression during embryogenesis. J Biol Chem
2003, 278:12285-12293.
28. Gabius H-J: Animal and human lectins. In The Sugar Code Fundamentals of
glycosciences. Edited by: Gabius H-J. Weinheim: Wiley-VCH; 2009:317-328.
29. Kaltner H, Solis D, André S, Lensch M, Manning JC, Mürnseer M, Sáiz JL,
Gabius H-J: Unique chicken tandem-repeat-type galectin: implications of
alternative splicing and a distinct expression profile compared to those
of the three proto-type proteins. Biochemistry 2009, 48:4403-4416.
30. Cooper DN: Galectinomics: finding themes in complexity. Biochim Biophys
Acta 2002, 1572:209-231.
31. Kaltner H, Solis D, Kopitz J, Lensch M, Lohr M, Manning JC, Murnseer M,
Schnölzer M, André S, Sáiz JL, Gabius H-J: Prototype chicken galectins
revisited: characterization of a third protein with distinctive
hydrodynamic behaviour and expression pattern in organs of adult
animals. Biochem J 2008, 409:591-599.
32. Kaltner H, Kübler D, López-Merino L, Lohr M, Manning JC, Lensch M,
Seidler J, Lehmann WD, André S, Solís D, Gabius H-J: Towards
comprehensive analysis of the galectin network in chicken: unique
diversity of galectin-3 and comparison of its localization profile in
organs of adult animals to the other four members of this lectin family.
Anat Rec .
33. Varela PF, Solis D, Diaz-Mauriño T, Kaltner H, Gabius H-J, Romero A: The
2.15 A crystal structure of CG-16, the developmentally regulated
homodimeric chicken galectin. J Mol Biol 1999, 294:537-549.
34. Beyer EC, Zweig SE, Barondes SH: Two lactose binding lectins from
chicken tissues. Purified lectin from intestine is different from those in
liver and muscle. J Biol Chem 1980, 255:4236-4239.
35. Aulthouse AL, Solursh M: The detection of a precartilage, blastemaspecific marker. Dev Biol 1987, 120:377-384.
36. Milaire J: Lectin binding sites in developing mouse limb buds. Anat
Embryol (Berl) 1991, 184:479-488.
37. Burke AC, Feduccia A: Developmental patterns and the identification of
homologies in the avian hand. Science 1997, 278:666-668.
38. Bhat R Molecular and dynamical mediators of avian limb pattern
formation 2010 Ph.D. thesis. New York Medical College, Valhalla, NY.
39. Hurle JM, Colombatti A: Extracellular matrix modifications in the
interdigital spaces of the chick embryo leg bud during the formation of
ectopic digits. Anat Embryol (Berl) 1996, 193:355-364.
40. Fischer C, Sanchez-Ruderisch H, Welzel M, Wiedenmann B, Sakai T, André S,
Gabius H-J, Khachigian L, Detjen KM, Rosewicz S: Galectin-1 interacts with
the α5β1 fibronectin receptor to restrict carcinoma cell growth via
induction of p21 and p27. J Biol Chem 2005, 280:37266-37277.
41. André S, Kojima S, Yamazaki N, Fink C, Kaltner H, Kayser K, Gabius H-J:
Galectins-1 and -3 and their ligands in tumor biology. Non-uniform
properties in cell-surface presentation and modulation of adhesion to
matrix glycoproteins for various tumor cell lines, in biodistribution of
free and liposome-bound galectins and in their expression by breast
and colorectal carcinomas with/without metastatic propensity. J Cancer
Res Clin Oncol 1999, 125:461-474.
42. Camby I, Decaestecker C, Lefranc F, Kaltner H, Gabius H-J, Kiss R: Galectin-1
knocking down in human U87 glioblastoma cells alters their gene
expression pattern. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2005, 335:27-35.
43. Yang Y: Growth and patterning in the limb: signaling gradients make
the decision. Sci Signal 2009, 2:pe3.
44. Vargas AO, Fallon JF: The digits of the wing of birds are 1, 2, and 3. A
review. J Exp Zool B Mol Dev Evol 2005, 304:206-219.
45. Scherz PJ, McGlinn E, Nissim S, Tabin CJ: Extended exposure to Sonic
hedgehog is required for patterning the posterior digits of the
vertebrate limb. Dev Biol 2007, 308:343-354.

Page 19 of 20

46. Zhu J, Nakamura E, Nguyen MT, Bao X, Akiyama H, Mackem S: Uncoupling
Sonic hedgehog control of pattern and expansion of the developing
limb bud. Dev Cell 2008, 14:624-632.
47. Frenz DA, Akiyama SK, Paulsen DF, Newman SA: Latex beads as probes of
cell surface-extracellular matrix interactions during chondrogenesis:
evidence for a role for amino-terminal heparin-binding domain of
fibronectin. Dev Biol 1989, 136:87-96.
48. Newman SA, Frisch HL: Dynamics of skeletal pattern formation in
developing chick limb. Science 1979, 205:662-668.
49. Merino R, Gañan Y, Macias D, Economides AN, Sampath KT, Hurle JM:
Morphogenesis of digits in the avian limb is controlled by FGFs, TGFβs,
and noggin through BMP signaling. Dev Biol 1998, 200:35-45.
50. Miura T, Shiota K: TGFβ2 acts as an “activator” molecule in reactiondiffusion model and is involved in cell sorting phenomenon in mouse
limb micromass culture. Dev Dyn 2000, 217:241-249.
51. Kingsley DM: Genetic control of bone and joint formation. Novartis Found
Symp 2001, 232:213-222, discussion 222-234, 272-282.
52. Mariani FV, Martin GR: Deciphering skeletal patterning: clues from the
limb. Nature 2003, 423:319-325.
53. Tickle C: Making digit patterns in the vertebrate limb. Nat Rev Mol Cell
Biol 2006, 7:45-53.
54. Barondes SH: Soluble lectins: a new class of extracellular proteins. Science
1984, 223:1259-1264.
55. Habermann FA, Sinowatz F: Glycobiology of fertilization and early
embryonic development. In The Sugar Code Fundamentals of glycosciences.
Edited by: Gabius H-J. Weinheim: Wiley-VCH; 2009:403-417.
56. Matsutani E, Yamagata T: Chick endogenous lectin enhances
chondrogenesis of cultured chick limb bud cells. Dev Biol 1982,
92:544-548.
57. Newman SA, Pautou M-P, Kieny M: The distal boundary of myogenic
primordia in chimeric avian limb buds and its relation to an accessible
population of cartilage progenitor cells. Dev Biol 1981, 84:440-448.
58. Brand B, Christ B, Jacob HJ: An experimental analysis of the
developmental capacities of distal parts of avian leg buds. Am J Anat
1985, 173:321-340.
59. Levi G, Teichberg VI: Patterns of expression of a 15 K beta-D-galactosidespecific lectin during early development of the avian embryo.
Development 1989, 107:909-921.
60. Akimoto Y, Obinata A, Hirabayashi J, Sakakura Y, Endo H, Kasai K, Hirano H:
Changes in expression of two endogenous beta-galactoside-binding
isolectins in the dermis of chick embryonic skin during development in
ovo and in vitro. Cell Tissue Res 1995, 279:3-12.
61. Solis D, Romero A, Kaltner H, Gabius H-J, Diaz-Mauriño T: Different
architecture of the combining site of the two chicken galectins revealed
by chemical mapping studies with synthetic ligand derivatives. J Biol
Chem 1996, 271:12744-12748.
62. Wu AM, Singh T, Liu JH, Krzeminski M, Russwurm R, Siebert HC, Bonvin AM,
André S, Gabius H-J: Activity-structure correlations in divergent lectin
evolution: fine specificity of chicken galectin CG-14 and computational
analysis of flexible ligand docking for CG-14 and the closely related CG16. Glycobiology 2007, 17:165-184.
63. Wu AM, Wu JH, Tsai MS, Kaltner H, Gabius H-J: Carbohydrate specificity of
a galectin from chicken liver (CG-16). Biochem J 2001, 358:529-538.
64. Dam TK, Gabius H-J, André S, Kaltner H, Lensch M, Brewer CF: Galectins
bind to the multivalent glycoprotein asialofetuin with enhanced
affinities and a gradient of decreasing binding constants. Biochemistry
2005, 44:12564-12571.
65. Dettmann W, Grandbois M, André S, Benoit M, Wehle AK, Kaltner H,
Gabius H-J, Gaub HE: Differences in zero-force and force-driven kinetics
of ligand dissociation from beta-galactoside-specific proteins (plant and
animal lectins, immunoglobulin G) monitored by plasmon resonance
and dynamic single molecule force microscopy. Arch Biochem Biophys
2000, 383:157-170.
66. Lips KS, Kaltner H, Reuter G, Stierstorfer B, Sinowatz F, Gabius H-J:
Correspondence of gradual developmental increases of expression of
galectin-reactive glycoconjugates with alterations of the total contents
of the two differentially regulated galectins in chicken intestine and
liver as indication for overlapping functions. Histol Histopathol 1999,
14:743-760.

Bhat et al. BMC Developmental Biology 2011, 11:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/11/6

67. Edwards GO, Coakley WT, Ralphs JR, Archer CW: Modelling condensation
and the initiation of chondrogenesis in chick wing bud mesenchymal
cells levitated in an ultrasound trap. Eur Cell Mater 2010, 19:1-12.
68. Kopitz J, von Reitzenstein C, André S, Kaltner H, Uhl J, Ehemann V, Cantz M,
Gabius H-J: Negative regulation of neuroblastoma cell growth by
carbohydrate-dependent surface binding of galectin-1 and functional
divergence from galectin-3. J Biol Chem 2001, 276:35917-35923.
69. Sanchez-Ruderisch H, Fischer C, Detjen K, Welzel M, Wimmel A, Manning JC,
André S, Gabius H-J: Tumor suppressor p16INK4a: downregulation of
galectin-3, an endogenous competitor of the pro-anoikis effector
galectin-1, in a pancreatic carcinoma model. FEBS J 2010, 277:3552-3563.
70. Solis D, Maté MJ, Lohr M, Ribeiro JP, Lopez-Merino L, André S, Buzamet E,
Cañada FJ, Kaltner H, Lensch M, et al: N-domain of human adhesion/
growth-regulatory galectin-9: preference for distinct conformers and
non-sialylated N-glycans and detection of ligand-induced structural
changes in crystal and solution. Int J Biochem Cell Biol 2010, 42:1019-1029.
71. Meinhardt H, Gierer A: Pattern formation by local self-activation and
lateral inhibition. BioEssays 2000, 22:753-760.
72. Nijhout HF: Gradients, diffusion and genes in pattern formation. In
Origination of Organismal Form: Beyond the Gene in Developmental and
Evolutionary Biology. Edited by: Müller GB, Newman SA. Cambridge, MA.:
MIT Press; 2003:165-181.
73. Zhu J, Zhang YT, Alber MS, Newman SA: Bare bones pattern formation: a
core regulatory network in varying geometries reproduces major
features of vertebrate limb development and evolution. PLoS One 2010,
5:e10892.
74. López-Lucendo MF, Solis D, Sáiz JL, Kaltner H, Russwurm R, André S,
Gabius H-J, Romero A: Homodimeric chicken galectin CG-1B (C-14):
Crystal structure and detection of unique redox-dependent shape
changes involving inter- and intrasubunit disulfide bridges by gel
filtration, ultracentrifugation, site-directed mutagenesis, and peptide
mass fingerprinting. J Mol Biol 2009, 386:366-378.
75. Sakakura Y, Hirabayashi J, Oda Y, Ohyama Y, Kasai K: Structure of chicken
16-kDa beta-galactoside-binding lectin. Complete amino acid sequence,
cloning of cDNA, and production of recombinant lectin. J Biol Chem
1990, 265:21573-21579.
76. Poirier F, Robertson EJ: Normal development of mice carrying a null
mutation in the gene encoding the L14 S-type lectin. Development 1993,
119:1229-1236.
77. Cludts S, Decaestecker C, Mahillon V, Chevalier D, Kaltner H, André S,
Remmelink M, Leroy X, Gabius H-J, Saussez S: Galectin-8 up-regulation
during hypopharyngeal and laryngeal tumor progression and
comparison with galectin-1, -3 and -7. Anticancer Res 2009, 29:4933-4940.
78. Hamburger V, Hamilton HL: A series of normal stages in the development
of the chick embryo. J Morphol 1951, 88:49-92.
79. Paulsen DF, Solursh M: Microtiter micromass cultures of limb-bud
mesenchymal cells. In Vitro Cell Dev Biol 1988, 24:138-147.
80. Lev R, Spicer SS: Specific staining of sulfate groups with alcian blue at
low pH. J Histochem Cytochem 1964, 12:309.
81. Livak KJ, Schmittgen TD: Analysis of relative gene expression data using
real-time quantitative PCR and the 2(-Delta Delta C(T)) Method. Methods
2001, 25:402-408.
82. Liu W, Saint DA: A new quantitative method of real time reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction assay based on simulation of
polymerase chain reaction kinetics. Anal Biochem 2002, 302:52-59.
83. Sarter K, André S, Kaltner H, Lensch M, Schulze C, Urbonaviciute V, Schett G,
Herrmann M, Gabius H-J: Detection and chromatographic removal of
lipopolysaccharide in preparations of multifunctional galectins. Biochem
Biophys Res Commun 2009, 379:155-159.
84. Lensch M, Lohr M, Russwurm R, Vidal M, Kaltner H, André S, Gabius H-J:
Unique sequence and expression profiles of rat galectins-5 and -9 as a
result of species-specific gene divergence. Int J Biochem Cell Biol 2006,
38:1741-1758.
85. André S, Pei Z, Siebert HC, Ramström O, Gabius H-J: Glycosyldisulfides
from dynamic combinatorial libraries as O-glycoside mimetics for plant
and endogenous lectins: their reactivities in solid-phase and cell assays
and conformational analysis by molecular dynamics simulations. Bioorg
Med Chem 2006, 14:6314-6326.
86. Lohr M, Kaltner H, Lensch M, André S, Sinowatz F, Gabius H-J: Cell-typespecific expression of murine multifunctional galectin-3 and its

Page 20 of 20

87.

88.

89.

90.

91.

92.
93.
94.

association with follicular atresia/luteolysis in contrast to pro-apoptotic
galectins-1 and -7. Histochem Cell Biol 2008, 130:567-581.
Shi SR, Chaiwun B, Young L, Cote RJ, Taylor CR: Antigen retrieval
technique utilizing citrate buffer or urea solution for
immunohistochemical demonstration of androgen receptor in formalinfixed paraffin sections. J Histochem Cytochem 1993, 41:1599-1604.
Szabo P, Dam TK, Smetana K Jr, Dvoránková B, Kübler D, Brewer CF,
Gabius H-J: Phosphorylated human lectin galectin-3: analysis of ligand
binding by histochemical monitoring of normal/malignant squamous
epithelia and by isothermal titration calorimetry. Anat Histol Embryol
2009, 38:68-75.
Acloque H, Wilkinson DG, Nieto MA: In situ hybridization analysis of chick
embryos in whole-mount and tissue sections. Methods Cell Biol 2008,
87:169-185.
Saunders JW Jr: Operations on limb buds of avian embryos. In Methods in
Avian Embryology. Edited by: Bronner-Fraser M. San Diego: Academic Press;
1996:125-145.
Nicholson NS, Panzer-Knodle SG, Haas NF, Taite BB, Szalony JA, Page JD,
Feigen LP, Lansky DM, Salyers AK: Assessment of platelet function assays.
Am Heart J 1998, 135:S170-178.
Pogliani E, Deliliers GL, Ferrari R, Pozzoli E, CoFrancesco E, Praga C: Platelet
aggregometry and anti-platelet isoantibodies. Haemostasis 1975, 4:23-35.
Hsu DK, Liu FT: Regulation of cellular homeostasis by galectins. Glycoconj
J 2004, 19:507-15.
Liao P-S, Chen T-S, Chung P-C: A fast algorithm for multilevel
thresholding. J Inf Sci Eng 2001, 17:713-727.

doi:10.1186/1471-213X-11-6
Cite this article as: Bhat et al.: A regulatory network of two galectins
mediates the earliest steps of avian limb skeletal morphogenesis. BMC
Developmental Biology 2011 11:6.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
