<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>1471-2105-5-27.fm</title>
<meta name="Author" content="csproduction"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 7.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 5.0.5 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
BMC Bioinformatics

BioMed Central

Open Access

Software

CisOrtho: A program pipeline for genome-wide identification of
transcription factor target genes using phylogenetic footprinting
Henry R Bigelow†, Adam S Wenick†, Allan Wong and Oliver Hobert*
Address: Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, Columbia University, College of Physicians and Surgeons, 701 West 168th Street,
New York, NY 10032, USA
Email: Henry R Bigelow - hrb46@columbia.edu; Adam S Wenick - asw33@columbia.edu; Allan Wong - aw310@columbia.edu;
Oliver Hobert* - or38@columbia.edu
* Corresponding author †Equal contributors

Published: 12 March 2004
BMC Bioinformatics 2004, 5:27

Received: 21 January 2004
Accepted: 12 March 2004

This article is available from: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/5/27
© 2004 Bigelow et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article: verbatim copying and redistribution of this article are permitted in all
media for any purpose, provided this notice is preserved along with the article's original URL.

Abstract
Background: All known genomes code for a large number of transcription factors. It is important
to develop methods that will reveal how these transcription factors act on a genome wide level,
that is, through what target genes they exert their function.
Results: We describe here a program pipeline aimed at identifying transcription factor target
genes in whole genomes. Starting from a consensus binding site, represented as a weight matrix,
potential sites in a pre-filtered genome are identified and then further filtered by assessing
conservation of the putative site in the genome of a related species, a process called phylogenetic
footprinting. CisOrtho has been successfully used to identify targets for two homeodomain
transcription factors in the genomes of the nematodes Caenorhabditis elegans and Caenorhabditis
briggsae.
Conclusions: CisOrtho will identify targets of other nematode transcription factors whose DNA
binding specificity is known and can be easily adapted to search other genomes for transcription
factor targets.

Background
Transcription factors are among the most common regulatory proteins in a cell. They subserve a variety of functions during development and homeostasis, yet in most
cases the full spectrum of target genes regulated by a given
transcription factor is unknown. The identification of
transcription factor target genes is a challenging task since
most transcription factors have the inherent capacity to
tolerate a significant amount of variation in their cis-regulatory binding sites [1]. These variations, which are usually experimentally determined, are commonly
represented by a weight matrix with which genomes can
be searched [2-4]. However, the usually sparse and widely
varying data on transcription factor binding sites together

with the large search space of a genome leads to many
false hits, thus necessitating further filtering. This can be
done by imposing the criteria of conservation of the cisregulatory sequence in a related species that has diverged
long enough ago to cause only functionally relevant DNA
sequences to be conserved ("phylogenetic footprinting")
[1,5-13]. We describe here a program pipeline that will
identify targets of a transcription factor with a defined cisregulatory target specificity, using two invertebrate model
system genomes, those of C. elegans and C. briggsae
[14,15].

Page 1 of 7
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2004, 5

Implementation
CisOrtho is written in ANSI C++ with the use of the SGI
Standard Template Library http://www.sgi.com/tech/stl/
and a supporting freely available options-parsing interface
Opt-3.19 (http://nis-www.lanl.gov/~jt/Software/ or from
http://dev.wormbase.org/CisOrtho). It consists of 1541
lines of code in 11 source files. The program has two
parameters which affect either size (memory) or runtime:
Ngenes, number of ortholog-matched gene pairs to consider; D, number of total hits per gene to be reported.
Memory is approximately Ngenes* D* 200 bytes; runtime
is approximately linear in Ngenes, D and the length of
DNA to be searched. For exhaustive settings (Ngenes =
12000, D = 10), total memory is 23.2 MB and runtime 17
minutes on a 2.8 GHz Xeon processor. A more typical run
(Ngenes = 500, D = 3) takes 3.9 MB and 42 seconds. Since
memory requirement does not depend on the length of
DNA to be searched, a search on the Human and Mouse
genome would be feasible on a machine with 256 MB.

Results and discussion
Procedure overview
The procedure presented here is aimed at finding genes
likely to be regulated by a given transcription factor for
which a collection of binding sites is available. There are
four steps (Fig. 1). In the first step, annotation files (GFF
files) are used to define, classify, and associate with genes,
every non-exonic region in the C. elegans and C. briggsae
genomes. The second step consists of building a position
weight matrix for the set of aligned binding sites, and
using it as a scanning window to search the non-exonic
regions for the N highest scoring hits, where N is defined
by the user. In the third step, we use an available file that
provides a one-to-one C. elegans/C. briggsae orthologmapping [15] to filter out all ortholog pairs that do not
have high-scoring hits for both ortholog members. The
fourth step involves sorting the remaining hit-pairs
according to the scores of the hits and the number of mismatches between the hits, and finally outputting this in
HTML tables. The whole procedure can be conducted at a
user-friendly web interface at http://dev.wormbase.org/
CisOrtho. A screenshot is shown in Fig. 2. It is also available for download at the same website.
Identification of non-exonic regions
We classified all non-exonic genomic regions into several
types based entirely on the exon boundary annotations
from General Feature Format (GFF) files http://
www.sanger.ac.uk/Projects/C_elegans/WORMBASE/
GFF_files.shtml. We defined nine types of regions, based
on the exons surrounding the region (Fig. 3). These region
types were used only to label the final hits, and were not
used in the algorithm to rank them or filter them. They are
included merely to aid the user who wants to further
inspect the results manually. We excluded exonic regions

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/5/27

from our analysis since a) they are unlikely to contain
transcription factor bindings sites and b) the high conservation of coding sequences between species would negate
the utility of "phylogenetic footprinting".
Scanning window scoring procedure
Starting with the input of experimentally defined binding
sites of a dimeric homeodomain transcription factor complex composed of the TTX-3 and CEH-10 proteins
[16](ASW and OH, submitted), we first use the hidden
Markov model software package HMMER [17] with the
command 'hmmbuild --null <background-frequencyfile> --prior <prior-frequency-file> <output-positionweight-matrix> <input-binding-site-alignment>.' The
position weight matrix is an n × 4 matrix where n is the
length of the transcription factor binding site alignment
input used (in our case, either 14 or 16 nucleotides). The
matrix is defined as:


effective frequency of nucleotide j in position i
mij = 1000 *int eger  log 2 

 background frequency of nucleotide j in searchdatabase







where the effective frequency is determined as the normalized, prior-adjusted, weighted sum of counts of each
nucleotide in the alignment columns, in which the
sequence weights are determined using a tree-based
scheme. We use the resulting position weight matrix as
input to CisOrtho. Then, CisOrtho finds approximately
the N (option -t) highest scoring hits, with the restriction
that no single gene has more than D (option -d) hits. The
score for a given sequence window is simply the sum of
the n cells of the position weight matrix corresponding to
the position and nucleotide of the sequence window. For
example, the sequence AACTCG would be given the score
m1A + m2A + m3C + m4T + m5C + m6G for a 4 × 6 position
weight matrix |mij|. This scoring scheme is simply the logodds scoring used by the original HMMER software,
adapted as a scanning window algorithm via CisOrtho.
We note that known target genes of TTX-3 do not contain
clustered binding sites [16](ASW and OH, submitted)
which allowed us to eschew clustering of binding sites as
a search criteria. It is possible that previously described
searches for transcription factor targets which used the
clustering criteria [2,3] may result in too many false-negative results.
The effect of options -t and -d warrants further comment.
To find approximately N (option -t) highest-scoring hits
in a large amount of DNA, CisOrtho must first estimate
the raw minimum score cutoff which yields this many
hits. Technically, this is achieved by scoring every 100th
sequence window, finding the top N/100 hits, and using
the lowest score of those as the cutoff in the full search.
Since the criterion for acceptance is a raw score cutoff, the
actual number of hits retrieved in the whole sequence cannot be controlled precisely, but depends on the statistics

Page 2 of 7
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2004, 5

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/5/27

Figure 1
Flow chart of program pipeline
Flow chart of program pipeline. Information is shown as rectangles, procedures as ovals. The only user defined inputs are
the Transcription Factor Binding Site Alignment file and the number of hits to retrieve. All other input files are downloaded
from sources mentioned in the text.

of the sequence and position weight matrix. Furthermore,
since no gene is allowed more than D associated hits
(option -d), the total number retrieved will be lower if
there is a lot of clustering and thus many genes have more
than D actual hits. If the user wants to perform an exhaustive search, the special value of zero for -t indicates using
no score cutoff, thus accepting all windows as hits. Likewise, the -d option can be set to an arbitrarily high value
(in the downloaded software). These settings may be of
interest in preliminary runs to determine the clustering
behavior of the hits. More restrictive settings should then
be used based on the results of the preliminary run.

Orthology-based filtering and HTML tables
First, CisOrtho retrieves the set of all C. elegans/C. briggsae
ortholog pairs provided as a one-to-one mapping in the
file orthologs-2.00 ftp://ftp.wormbase.org/pub/wormbase/
briggsae/run25_analysis_freeze2.00/orthologues/. Then,
for each ortholog pair in this list, CisOrtho finds the highest scoring hit for each of the C. elegans and C. briggsae
orthologs, and stores the two hits as a 'hit-pair'. Note that
there is no restriction on which region type (3' intergenic,
5' intergenic, etc.) each hit comes from. For example, the
C. elegans highest-scoring hit may be 'intronic1' while the
C. briggsae hit may be 3'-intergenic. Each hit in the hit-pair
is described by the score, nucleotide sequence and type of
region in which it occurs. In addition, for each of the
directly adjacent genes, the coding strand, gene name and

Page 3 of 7
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2004, 5

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/5/27

Figure 2
Screenshot of the Web Interface
Screenshot of the Web Interface. The address is: http://dev.wormbase.org/CisOrtho. The program will be eventually run
by WormBase at http://www.wormbase.org.

relative position of the hits in relation to the flanking
genes are provided (Fig. 3). Finally, for the hit-pair itself,
the number of mismatches between C. elegans and C.
briggsae hits is given, along with the average, maximum
and minimum scores from the pair of hits. Several HTML
output files are generated with the information sorted
into columns, and each hit-pair appearing as a grouped
pair of lines. The HTML tables are each sorted primarily
and secondarily by some combination of the mismatch

number and average, maximum or minimum score (Fig.
4). The user has also the option to display multiples target
sites located in a hit pair (this option takes into account
that transcription factors often bind to multiple sites in a
promoter)(Fig. 2).
Validation of the procedure
TTX-3 is a LIM homeodomain transcription factor that we
have previously shown to be required for interneuron

Page 4 of 7
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2004, 5

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/5/27

Figure 3
Classification of non-exonic regions
Classification of non-exonic regions. A hypothetical gene arrangement is shown. "5' intergenic": between exon1 and
exon1 of two separate genes; "3' intergenic": between the last exon of both genes. "5'/3' intergenic": between first exon of one
gene and last exon of the other gene; "intronic#": between any two exons of one gene; "other": all other possible combinations. In cases where the gene flanking a segment is known to exhibit alternative splicing, the segment was prefixed with 'alt_',
i.e. 'alt_intronic#', 'alt_3'intergenic', etc. Two other categories, BEGIN and END, denote regions at the beginning or ending of
the chromosome, in the case of C. elegans, or of the sequencing reads in the case of C. briggsae. There were two exceptions to
the procedure. The first was due to the fact that the C. briggsae genome we used was an unassembled collection of 578 individual sequence reads. 112 of these reads had no exon annotations, and were ignored in this study. Of these 112, only two were
greater than 10,000 bases long, with an average length of 3679.3 nucleotides. Secondly, there were 16 C. elegans and 35 C.
briggsae exon annotations one nucleotide long. By visual inspection, we determined that for C. elegans these exons were in fact
longer than one nucleotide, but noncoding: in all cases the single nucleotide is 'A' and when spliced forms a TGA stop codon.
They were treated as non-existent for this study, which has very little effect on the procedure except that the last true intron
of the gene will be considered its 3' region. For C. briggsae, they appear to be errors in the gene annotations and fall within
introns. Thus, they were treated as part of the intron in which they occur.

Figure 4
Output of the program pipeline
Output of the program pipeline. Hits of a search with the TTX-3 consensus binding site is shown. num: number in list. mis:
Number of base mismatches between first C. elegans and first C. briggsae hits. segtype: Type of non-exonic region (see Figure
3). str1/2: negative (N) or positive (P), strand on which the first/second of the two genes that flank the identified target site are
located; offset1/2: distance of the target site to the flanking gene(s) (in relation to the start codon if the target site is 5' or
located in an intron; in relation to the stop codon if the site is 3' to the gene; in the latter two cases, the number has a positive
value); ID: cosmid name of the flanking genes, name: flanking gene names (if available). Gene IDs/names are linked to the
WormBase gene model at http://www.wormbase.org, which contains further information about the gene. In case there are
multiple target sites located in a defined inter/intragenic region, there is an option to report the n highest scoring hits for each
ortholog. If this option is used, the top-scoring C. elegans or C. briggsae hit in each hit-pair will be highlighted, and the next n-1
hits will be gray. Color coding: Orthologous C. elegans/C. briggsae genes ("hit-pairs") are color coded in blue (Y39A3B.5 and
CBG15122 are orthologs) and green (M01E10.2 and CBG15118 are orthologs).

Page 5 of 7
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2004, 5

differentiation in C. elegans [16]. More recently, we found
that TTX-3 binds together with the Paired-type
homeodomain transcription factor CEH-10 to a 16 base
pair target site, conserved in seven direct TTX-3/CEH-10
target genes (ASW and OH, submitted). We have used CisOrtho to identify new target genes of the TTX-3/CEH-10
homeodomain proteins on a genome-wide level, using as
an input the experimentally determined, 16 bp TTX-3/
CEH-10 consensus binding site (ASW and OH, submitted). We sorted the list of hit-pairs that CisOrtho provided
by average score between the two species. We have experimentally verified hits from this list using either or both of
two criteria: When fused to a heterologous reporter gene,
the putative target should be expressed in the same neuron type as the ttx-3 gene and the reporter gene should not
be expressed in that neuron in ttx-3 null mutant animals
[16]. We have generated 15 new reporter gene fusions for
the top 26 hits. 14 of these reporter gene fusions satisfy
the experimental criteria to represent targets of TTX-3/
CEH-10 (ASW and OH, submitted). We have also generated reporter fusions to lower scoring hit-pairs. For example, 11 out of 17 tested predicted sites that ranked
between 42 and 112 in the hit-score list were experimentally confirmed to be TTX-3 targets (ASW and OH,
submitted).
We have also made use of the C. elegans/C. briggsae mismatch feature of CisOrtho and generated reporter fusions
to predicted binding sites with a low score yet almost perfect conservation between C. elegans and C. briggsae. 13/22
tested sites from this "low-mismatch" list fulfilled the
experimental criteria to be TTX-3/CEH-10 targets (ASW
and OH, submitted). We also note many cases in which
conserved binding sites are located in introns (first intron
or later introns); in most cases examined by reporter gene
fusions, these sites were functional. Finally, we note that
the representation of the starting matrix did not significantly change upon inclusion of new, experimentally verified TTX-3/CEH-10 target sites. Taken together, CisOrtho
has been successfully used to identify new target genes for
a transcription factor.

Conclusions
CisOrtho is complementary to but also extends previous
approaches to identify transcription factor targets. Previously described phylogenetic footprinting approaches
undertook an unbiased search for phylogenetically conserved sequence patches in non-coding regions, assumed
to be transcription factor binding sites [6-8], [11-13]. Providing a complement to these approaches, CisOrtho
undertakes a more targeted search, finding phylogenetically conserved regulatory targets of defined transcription
factors whose DNA binding site specificity is known. CisOrtho extends previously described approaches to identify target genes for specific transcription factors which did

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/5/27

not utilize the phylogenetic footprinting aspect for filtering [2,3], or – in cases where phylogenetic footprinting
was used – were not conducted in an unbiased, genome
wide manner [10,18]. CisOrtho rather takes advantage of
GFF files to allow appropriate annotation and subsequent
searching of all genomic non-coding sequence space and
produces a user-friendly output from the search. While we
have limited our approach to the genomes of C. elegans
and C. briggsae, CisOrtho can as easily be applied to other
genomes that are annotated in the commonly used GFF
format.

Availability
CisOrtho is available through a web interface at http://
www.wormbase.org/cisortho (Fig. 2). For users who want
to run the program locally, or with a wider range of
parameters or different inputs, CisOrtho is freely available
as precompiled executables for Windows (win32) and
Mac OS X, and as a source code distribution for Unix/
Linux with traditional 'configure' script and Makefiles.
Also provided in the distribution is the Perl script snip.plx,
which initially isolates the non-exonic genomic sequence
to be searched by CisOrtho, according to GFF (General
Feature Format) genome annotation files. Users experienced in Perl may modify this script to output genomic
sequence based on different criteria. For example, if a user
wanted to search only 3' regions of genes, this could be
implemented by editing snip.plx.

Authors' contributions
HRB wrote the software and web interface, ASW provided
the original concept and worked with HRB on improving
the program, AW had the original idea to use HMMER
software as a scanning window search procedure and
wrote an earlier non-ortholog based search program. OH
initiated and supervised the study and prepared the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript.

Acknowledgements
We thank Jack Chen for assistance in installing the website, and Lincoln
Stein for generously providing web hosting on WormBase. This work was
funded by the NIH.

References
1.
2.

3.

4.

Bulyk ML: Computational prediction of transcription-factor
binding site locations. Genome Biol 2003, 5:201.
Sosinsky A, Bonin CP, Mann RS, Honig B: Target Explorer: An
automated tool for the identification of new target genes for
a specified set of transcription factors. Nucleic Acids Res 2003,
31:3589-3592.
Berman BP, Nibu Y, Pfeiffer BD, Tomancak P, Celniker SE, Levine M,
Rubin GM, Eisen MB: Exploiting transcription factor binding
site clustering to identify cis-regulatory modules involved in
pattern formation in the Drosophila genome. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A 2002, 99:757-762.
Tronche F, Ringeisen F, Blumenfeld M, Yaniv M, Pontoglio M: Analysis of the distribution of binding sites for a tissue-specific
transcription factor in the vertebrate genome. J Mol Biol 1997,
266:231-245.

Page 6 of 7
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2004, 5

5.

6.

7.
8.
9.

10.
11.

12.
13.
14.
15.

16.

17.
18.

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/5/27

Tagle DA, Koop BF, Goodman M, Slightom JL, Hess DL, Jones RT:
Embryonic epsilon and gamma globin genes of a prosimian
primate (Galago crassicaudatus). Nucleotide and amino acid
sequences, developmental regulation and phylogenetic
footprints. J Mol Biol 1988, 203:439-455.
Cliften PF, Hillier LW, Fulton L, Graves T, Miner T, Gish WR, Waterston RH, Johnston M: Surveying Saccharomyces genomes to
identify functional elements by comparative DNA sequence
analysis. Genome Res 2001, 11:1175-1186.
Wasserman WW, Palumbo M, Thompson W, Fickett JW, Lawrence
CE: Human-mouse genome comparisons to locate regulatory sites. Nat Genet 2000, 26:225-228.
Kellis M, Patterson N, Endrizzi M, Birren B, Lander ES: Sequencing
and comparison of yeast species to identify genes and regulatory elements. Nature 2003, 423:241-254.
GuhaThakurta D, Palomar L, Stormo GD, Tedesco P, Johnson TE,
Walker DW, Lithgow G, Kim S, Link CD: Identification of a novel
cis-regulatory element involved in the heat shock response
in Caenorhabditis elegans using microarray gene expression
and computational methods. Genome Res 2002, 12:701-712.
Loots GG, Ovcharenko I, Pachter L, Dubchak I, Rubin EM: rVista for
comparative sequence-based discovery of functional transcription factor binding sites. Genome Res 2002, 12:832-839.
Webb CT, Shabalina SA, Ogurtsov AY, Kondrashov AS: Analysis of
similarity within 142 pairs of orthologous intergenic regions
of Caenorhabditis elegans and Caenorhabditis briggsae.
Nucleic Acids Res 2002, 30:1233-1239.
McGuire AM, Hughes JD, Church GM: Conservation of DNA regulatory motifs and discovery of new motifs in microbial
genomes. Genome Res 2000, 10:744-757.
Levy S, Hannenhalli S, Workman C: Enrichment of regulatory signals in conserved non-coding genomic sequence. Bioinformatics
2001, 17:871-877.
The-C.elegans-Sequencing-Consortium: Genome sequence of the
nematode C. elegans: a platform for investigating biology.
Science 1998, 282:2012-2018.
Stein LD, Bao Z, Blasiar D, Blumenthal T, Brent MR, Chen N, Chinwalla A, Clarke L, Clee C, Coghlan A, Coulson A, D'Eustachio P, Fitch
DH, Fulton LA, Fulton RE, Griffiths-Jones S, Harris TW, Hillier LW,
Kamath R, Kuwabara PE, Mardis ER, Marra MA, Miner TL, Minx P,
Mullikin JC, Plumb RW, Rogers J, Schein JE, Sohrmann M, Spieth J, Stajich JE, Wei C, Willey D, Wilson RK, Durbin R, Waterston RH: The
Genome Sequence of Caenorhabditis briggsae: A Platform
for Comparative Genomics. PLoS Biol 2003, 1:E45.
Altun-Gultekin Z, Andachi Y, Tsalik EL, Pilgrim D, Kohara Y, Hobert
O: A regulatory cascade of three homeobox genes, ceh-10,
ttx-3 and ceh-23, controls cell fate specification of a defined
interneuron class in C. elegans. Development 2001,
128:1951-1969.
Eddy SR: Profile hidden Markov models. Bioinformatics 1998,
14:755-763.
Conkright MD, Guzman E, Flechner L, Su AI, Hogenesch JB,
Montminy M: Genome-wide analysis of CREB target genes
reveals a core promoter requirement for cAMP
responsiveness. Mol Cell 2003, 11:1101-1108.

Publish with Bio Med Central and every
scientist can read your work free of charge
"BioMed Central will be the most significant development for
disseminating the results of biomedical researc h in our lifetime."
Sir Paul Nurse, Cancer Research UK

Your research papers will be:
available free of charge to the entire biomedical community
peer reviewed and published immediately upon acceptance
cited in PubMed and archived on PubMed Central
yours — you keep the copyright

BioMedcentral

Submit your manuscript here:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/info/publishing_adv.asp

Page 7 of 7
(page number not for citation purposes)

</pre>
</body>
</html>
