<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Moving towards a complete molecular framework of the Nematoda: a focus on the Enoplida and early-branching clades</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:353. doi:10.1186/1471-2148-10-353"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Holly M Bik"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Bik et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:353
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/353

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Moving towards a complete molecular framework
of the Nematoda: a focus on the Enoplida and
early-branching clades
Holly M Bik1,2,3*, P John D Lambshead2, W Kelley Thomas3, David H Lunt4

Abstract
Background: The subclass Enoplia (Phylum Nematoda) is purported to be the earliest branching clade amongst all
nematode taxa, yet the deep phylogeny of this important lineage remains elusive. Free-living marine species within
the order Enoplida play prominent roles in marine ecosystems, but previous molecular phylogenies have provided
only the briefest evolutionary insights; this study aimed to firmly resolve internal relationships within the hyperdiverse but poorly understood Enoplida. In addition, we revisited the molecular framework of the Nematoda using
a rigorous phylogenetic approach in order to investigate patterns of early splits amongst the oldest lineages
(Dorylaimia and Enoplia).
Results: Morphological identifications, nuclear gene sequences (18S and 28S rRNA), and mitochondrial gene
sequences (cox1) were obtained from marine Enoplid specimens representing 37 genera. The 18S gene was used
to resolve deep splits within the Enoplia and evaluate the branching order of major clades in the nematode tree;
multiple phylogenetic methods and rigorous empirical tests were carried out to assess tree topologies under
different parameters and combinations of taxa. Significantly increased taxon sampling within the Enoplida resulted
in a well-supported, robust phylogenetic topology of this group, although the placement of certain clades was not
fully resolved. Our analysis could not unequivocally confirm the earliest splits in the nematode tree, and outgroup
choice significantly affected the observed branching order of the Dorylaimia and Enoplia. Both 28S and cox1 were
too variable to infer deep phylogeny, but provided additional insight at lower taxonomic levels.
Conclusions: Analysis of internal relationships reveals that the Enoplia is split into two main clades, with groups
consisting of terrestrial (Triplonchida) and primarily marine fauna (Enoplida). Five independent lineages were
recovered within the Enoplida, containing a mixture of marine and terrestrial species; clade structure suggests that
habitat transitions have occurred at least four times within this group. Unfortunately, we were unable to obtain a
consistent or well-supported topology amongst early-branching nematode lineages. It appears unlikely that singlegene phylogenies using the conserved 18S gene will be useful for confirming the branching order at the base of
the nematode tree-future efforts will require multi-gene analyses or phylogenomic methods.

Background
Members of the phylum Nematoda can be found in
nearly every habitat on earth, with high abundances and
diverse arrays of species existing in both marine and terrestrial habitats. Nematodes are ubiquitous and integral
to ecosystem functioning-they facilitate processes such as
nutrient cycling, sediment stability, and even pollutant
* Correspondence: h.bik@unh.edu
1
Nematode Research Group, Department of Zoology, The Natural History
Museum, Cromwell Road, London SW7 5BD, UK
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

distribution in marine systems [1], yet we lack a comprehensive understanding of global diversity within this phylum. Out of an estimated 1 million to 100 million
nematode species [2], fewer than 27,000 have been formally described, representing the largest taxonomic deficit for any group of animals [3,4]. This minimal sampling
of nematode diversity has implications for our understanding of systematic relationships, as adequate taxon
sampling has been identified as a major factor for building accurate phylogenies [5].

© 2010 Bik et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Bik et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:353
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/353

Marine free-living nematodes are particularly understudied compared to their terrestrial and parasitic counterparts, with only ~4,000 species known to science.
The order Enoplida (subclass Enoplia) contains a diverse
group of primarily marine taxa; these nematodes represent the largest marine species in terms of physical size,
and can reach up to several millimetres in length [6].
Many Enoplids are thought to be active predators (due
to the complex array of teeth and mandibular structures
exhibited in several families), and play important ecological roles within meiofaunal communities. However,
evolutionary relationships within the Enoplida are poorly
understood-published phylogenies have been overly reliant on terrestrial and parasitic species, (with the exception of Meldal et al. [7]), and have inadequately sampled
the known diversity of the Enoplida [7-10].
Before the advent of molecular techniques, a number
of taxonomic classifications attempted to catalogue the
substantial morphological diversity observed within the
subclass Enoplia. Filipjev [11] was the first author to
produce a comprehensive morphological classification of
free-living nematodes, and subsequent revisions that
included a focus on the Enoplia were completed by
Pearse [12], Chitwood and Chitwood [13], Clark [14],
De Coninck [15], Andrassy [16], Maggenti [17], Lorenzen [18], and Siddiqi [19]. Morphological schemes primarily differed in their placement of the Tripyloididae,
Alaimidae, Ironidae (all currently grouped in the Enoplida), and the Mononchoidea (now grouped under the
subclass Dorylaimia). Lorenzen’s [18] framework is the
currently accepted classification system for free-living
marine Enoplids, and has been used as the basis for
Platt & Warwick’s [20] ubiquitous illustrated keys for
identifying genera.
De Ley and Blaxter [8,21] proposed the first comprehensive classification of the Enoplia based on SSU
sequence data, following on from the original molecular
phylogeny by Blaxter et al. [22]. This framework outlined two ranks within the Enoplia, orders Enoplida and
Triplonchida; seven suborders were denoted within the
Enoplida (Enoplina, Oncholaimina, Ironina, Tripyloidina,
Trefusiina, Campydorina and Alaimina), and three
within the Triplonchida (Diphtherophorina, Tobrilina,
and Tripylina). Despite this proposed classification, De
Ley and Blaxter’s framework was based on relatively few
gene sequences compared to the most recent molecular
phylogenies [10]. These subsequent frameworks also
offered limited insight regarding the Enoplida, with only
a few authors sequencing additional species to supplement publically available data [7,10]. In a study focused
on marine species, Meldal et al. [7] noted that the
monophyly of some Enoplid families was highly supported (e.g. the Oncholaimoidea and Tripyloididae),
whilst other families were suspected to be polyphyletic

Page 2 of 14

(e.g. the Ironidae). Holterman et al. [9] and Van Megen
et al. [10] recovered the Bastianiidae and the Rhabdolaimidae within the Enoplida, despite De Ley and Blaxter’s
original placement within the order Plectida (subclass
Chromadoria). Van Megen et al.’s [10] recent phylogeny
of nematodes utilised more Enoplid sequences than any
prior investigation (39 sequences representing 22 genera). Despite this expansion, taxon sampling remained
sparse for some groups and the placement of many
major clades in the Enoplida remained unresolved.
These published phylogenies have also transformed
our understanding of relationships amongst major
nematode clades. However, there is continued uncertainty surrounding the basal splits within the Nematoda.
Earlier frameworks identified both the Enoplia and Dorylaimia as early-branching nematode taxa [7,22],
although these studies reported a polytomy at the basal
node. Holterman et al. [9] and Van Megen et al.’s [10]
large-scale analysis both recovered the Enoplia as the
earliest-branching clade amongst nematodes, although
support values for this topology were low-only 0.81
(Bayesian posterior probability) and 65% (ML bootstrap),
respectively. Understanding the order of early splits is
crucial for accurately reconstructing nematode evolution; molecular phylogenies provide a valuable glimpse
back in time, given the non-existent fossil record for
nematodes. The Enoplia (a primarily marine group) and
Dorylaimia (a terrestrial group) represent very different
life histories-if Dorylaimids were to be confirmed as the
earliest branching lineage, it may imply a terrestrial origin for the phylum [21], and challenge the widely held
view that nematodes first arose in marine environments.
Enoplids are often assumed to be the oldest nematode
group [9,23], despite the continued lack of resolution in
molecular phylogenies. Certain developmental traits in
Enoplid species appear to represent plesiomorphic
states, such as the symmetric embryonic cleavage that
can be observed in Tobrilus diversipapillatus and several
other marine species; in contrast, nematodes in other
clades show asymmetric patterns that are unique
amongst metazoa [4,24]. In addition, Enoplid species
retain a nuclear envelope in mature spermatozoa (a plesiomorphic trait in male gamete development), compared to all other nematode groups, which show a clear
loss of this structure [25-27].
There is currently little morphological and developmental evidence to insinuate ancestral traits amongst the
Dorylaimia, but the absence of evidence does not preclude Dorylaimids from representing the earliest-splitting
nematode clade. De Ley and Blaxter [21] present an intriguing discussion that suggests a resemblance (and potentially common ancestry) between Dorylaimid mouth
structures and protrusible ‘introvert’ structures seen
Kinorhyncha, Priapulida, and juvenile Nematomorpha.

Bik et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:353
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/353

Dorylaimid species exhibit vastly different lifestyles and
span a broad ecological range-this diversity has prompted
speculation of an early terrestrial evolution and radiation
within this group [8]; however, Dorylaimids possess surprisingly little genetic divergence despite this high diversity, which may alternatively signify a quite recent
evolutionary origin for these terrestrial species. A molecular framework with firm support at the basal node will
be necessary for resolving the longstanding debate about
early splits within the Nematoda.
This study aimed to resolve phylogenetic relationships
within the Enoplida using greatly increased taxon sampling and sequence data from multiple genes. Prior to
this investigation, few publically available full-length
SSU sequences were available for Enoplid nematodes.
Morphological data and up to three gene sequences
(18S, 28S and cox1) were collected from a total of 254
nematodes from the order Enoplida, representing 37
genera collected from marine habitats. Large-scale phylogenies were constructed in order to assess the overall
placement of the Enoplia in the nematode framework,
elucidate major clades within the previously undersampled Enoplida, and investigate lower taxonomic relationships amongst Enoplid genera.

Results
Resolving relationships within the Enoplida

The 18S rRNA gene and the D2/D3 region of the 28S
rRNA gene were both amplified from a total of 254
Enoplid nematodes, and cox1 was additionally isolated
from a subset of 99 specimens. All gene sequences were
subsequently deposited in GenBank (Accession Numbers listed in Additional file 1). Amongst different phylogenetic topologies, clade membership and lower
taxonomic relationships within the Enoplida were consistent between trees. Congruent topologies were
obtained using both small and large 18S datasets (comprised of Enoplid taxa only and all nematode taxa,
respectively). Certain higher clade relationships in the
Enoplida remained unresolved; the placement of the Syringolaimus/Campydora/Rhabdolaimidae and Ironidae/
Alaimina clades were often unstable, and the order of
sub-clades within the Oncholaimoidea/Oxystominidae
group, often changed between trees. In this study, both
28S and cox1 were too variable for inferring deep phylogeny. Alignments of 28S sequences showed regions of
high variability and uncertain orthology between divergent groups and consequently higher clade relationships
did not always correspond well with 18S data. Other
authors have used these genes to elucidate relationships
at the genus level or below [28-30], and in our analyses
lower taxonomic relationships inferred from 28S data
largely agreed with 18S topologies. In a few cases, 28S
added further insight to relationships amongst genera

Page 3 of 14

compared to 18S phylogenies (e.g. within the family Tripyloididae). Fewer inferences were possible from the
limited cox1 dataset, but many genus-level relationships
corresponded well with 28S and 18S tree topologies.
A molecular framework of the Enoplia

The Enoplia is divided into two orders, the Triplonchida
and the Enoplida (Figure 1). This separation is highly supported in ML and Bayesian analyses, and agrees with previous molecular frameworks [8-10]. The Triplonchida was
consistently recovered as monophyletic, in line with previous phylogenies [7-9]; this group contained three well
supported sub-clades (bootstraps >94% and posterior
probabilities >0.98), and arrangement of taxa within this
group agrees with the most recent nematode phylogeny by
Van Megen et al. [10]. Unfortunately, online sequence
databases did not contain many 28S sequences from Enoplid nematodes, so it was not feasible to clarify lower taxonomic relationships for terrestrial clades within the
Triplonchida-only marine taxa were sequenced during this
study.
ML and Bayesian analyses recovered five distinct
lineages within the order Enoplida (Figure 1). Clade I
contains only the Rhabdolaimidae, the genus Syringolaimus and Campydora demonstrans. Clade II contains the
Alaimina and Ironidae (excluding Syringolaimus) as sister taxa. The Tripyloididae and the Trefusiidae (including the genera Tripylina and Trischistoma) were
recovered as sister taxa in Clade II. Clade IV contained
both the Oxystominidae and the superfamily Oncholaimoidea. Finally, the genera representing the superfamily
Enoploidea sensu Lorenzen [18] plus the Leptosomatidae
represented Clade V within the Enoplida.
The Oxystominidae and superfamily Oncholaimoidea
(Clade IV, Figure 1) were always recovered as a monophyletic grouping in tree topologies, although the relationships between sub-clades are not fully resolved in
either ML or Bayesian topologies. Support values for the
Oncholaimoidea-Oxystominidae clade were not always
high in ML analyses (ranging from 50-75%), but this
grouping was recovered with high support in Bayesian
topologies (>0.97). The Oncholaimoidea is firmly supported as monophyletic in 18S, 28S and cox1 tree topologies (support values of 100% and 0.97) and includes
both the Oncholaimidae and the Enchelidiidae, in line
with previous phylogenies [7,8,10]. The Enchelidiidae
appears to be a more recently derived clade within the
Oncholaimoidea; this family is consistently recovered as
a monophyletic, although support values vary (ML
55-75% and Bayesian 0.95). The family Oncholaimidae is
confirmed to be paraphyletic, as first suggested by Van
Megen et al.’s [10] topology.
Within the Oncholaimidae, the genera Oncholaimus
and Viscosia appear to exhibit substantial molecular

Bik et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:353
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/353

Page 4 of 14

Figure 1 Maximum Likelihood and Bayesian 18S phylogenies of the Enoplia. Maximum Likelihood and Bayesian phylogenies of the
Enoplia, outlining major clades within the Triplonchida and Enoplida. (A) Majority-rule ML Tree built using 18S sequence data from 381 taxa,
with estimation of the P-Invar parameter and partitions according to 18S secondary structure. Pictograms denote marine (blue drop) and
terrestrial/freshwater (green leaf) lineages within the Enoplida. (B) Bayesian tree built using 18S sequence data from 381 taxa, using the GTR+G+I
model of nucleotide substitution and partitions according to 18S secondary structure.

diversity. According to genetic data, most shallow water
Oncholaimus specimens were placed in a clade next to
Viscosia; the primary shallow-water clades containing
the majority of Oncholaimus and Viscosia specimens
isolated in this study are denoted by a black square in
Additional file 2, Figure S1. However, there also
appeared to be another divergent group of Oncholaimus
nematodes within the Oncholaimoidea. Two shallow
water sequences obtained from GenBank, Oncholaimus
spp. and Viscosia sp., appeared more closely related to
the divergent Oncholaimus group containing deep-sea
specimens, and not to the main clades representing specimens from intertidal sediments.
The placement of genera within the Oxystominidae is
not overly stable in 18S trees, and this group is sometimes recovered as paraphyletic (Clade IV, Figure 1a).
The four sub-clades (Oncholaimoidea, Thalassoalaimus/
Cricohalalaimus/Litinium, Oxystomina, and Halalaimus)
were observed to vary consistently in regard to their
internal placement and splitting order. The genus Halalaimus is consistently recovered as a long-branch clade,
and it is possible that this taxon has a destabilizing effect

on the internal topology of the Oncholaimoidea/Oxystominidae clade.
This study always recovered the families Tripyloididae
and Trefusiidae within a single clade (Clade III, Figure 1),
despite varying support values (ML 54-82% and Bayesian
0.96); this clade also contains two terrestrial genera formerly grouped within the Tripylidae, Tripylina and
Trischistoma. Molecular evidence has firmly placed the
terrestrial Tripylidae family within the Triplonchida, and
not within the Enoplida; Tripylina and Trischistoma are
strongly supported (ML usually >90% and Bayesian 0.92)
within the Enoplida, suggesting that their past classification within the Tripylidae was based on homoplasious
morphological characters.
Large subunit sequences were able to add further
resolution regarding relationships within the Tripyloididae. Data from 18S suggest that the genera Bathylaimus
and Tripyloides do not form distinct, separate lineages
(Additional file 2, Figure S1). Maximum Likelihood phylogenies built using 28S data from the same Enoplid
specimens (Additional file 2, Figure S2) clearly differentiate one genus from the other and denote a sister

Bik et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:353
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/353

relationship for these two taxa. However, mitochondrial
trees (Additional file 2, Figure S3) resemble 18S topologies-cox1 does not indicate a clear distinction between
genera, as indicated by 28S data.
The proposed monophyly of the superfamily Enoploidea [7,8] is not upheld by the present study. The Enoploidea sensu Lorenzen [18] instead appears to be
paraphyletic, with all genera recovered in a well supported clade that additionally included the Leptosomatide (Clade V, Figure 1). This large grouping contains
the Enoplidae, Thoracostomopsidae, Anoplostomatidae,
Phanodermatidae, Anticomidae, and Leptosomatidae.
The Anoplostomatidae sensu Lorenzen [18] (comprising
the genera Anoplostoma and Chaetonema) appears to be
polyphyletic; the genus Anoplostoma is an early branching clade within the Enoploidea, while the genus Chaetonema occupies a more derived position. The
Leptosomatidae was not extensively sampled (only two
gene sequences representing genera Leptosomatides and
Syonchus were obtained during this study), but specimens from this family were always recovered within a
single clade with high support (100% bootstrap support
in ML and posterior probabilities of 0.99 in Bayesian
trees). The Anticomidae was also recovered as monophyletic. The branching order of clades within the Enoploidea was unresolved in Bayesian trees and exhibited
low support in ML topologies; denser taxon sampling
within these families may help to resolve the exact
branching order in future studies. The Thoracostomopsidae, Enoplidae and Phanodermatidae were always
recovered within a monophyletic clade (ML 100% and
Bayesian 0.99). The Phanodermatidae and Enoplidae
were usually recovered as sister taxa, although support
values are low under ML analysis (40-50%) and not
especially high in Bayesian topologies (0.91).
Both 18S and 28S data suggest that species within the
Phanodermatidae are morphologically similar but genetically diverse. In this study, most specimens identified
within this group had few distinguishing features; ribosomal sequence data confirms the monophyly of the
Phanodermatidae, but tree topologies appear to divide
the family into three distinct clades (Additional file 2,
Figure S1). The observed clustering of taxa was identical
in both 18S and 28S tree topologies. Mitochondrial trees
did not resolve the Phanodermatidae as monophyletic
(possibly due to the inclusion of fewer mitochondrial
sequences and/or the presence of divergent haplotypes),
but cox1 trees additionally support the grouping of taxa
observed in ribosomal phylogenies (Additional file 2,
Figure S3).
The divergent clade containing the Rhabdolaimidae,
the genus Syringolaimus, and Campydora demonstrans
was recovered with high support (ML 98% and Bayesian
0.99) in 18S topologies (Clade I, Figure 1). The

Page 5 of 14

Rhabdolaimidae was consistently recovered as a sister
taxon to Campydora demonstrans, despite low support
values (ML < 50% and Bayesian 0.70). Previous studies
insinuated a close relationship between Syringolaimus
(formerly grouped within the Ironidae) and Campydora
[7,9,10], and our results uphold these findings. Relationships amongst other species in the Ironidae remain
unresolved, although it appears that at least several genera form a monophyletic grouping. Dolicholaimus and
Ironus were consistently recovered as single clade with
high support (ML 100% and Bayesian 0.98). This study
was only able to obtain gene sequences from two Ironidae genera; additional sampling will be required to
resolve placement of other taxa within this group.
The Alaimina was recovered in accordance with Van
Megen et al. [10], and was often observed to form a sister relationship with the Ironidae (Clade II, Figure 1).
This clade arrangement showed minimal support in ML
topologies, but Bayesian trees recovered high support
values for this Alaimina/Ironidae association (0.97).
Resolving the order of early branching nematode clades

The large-scale Maximum Likelihood topologies recovered in this study agree broadly with previously published nematode phylogenies [7,9,10], recovering all
major nematode clades and providing increased resolution at certain nodes. We found good agreement across
optimality criteria with both Bayesian and Maximum
Likelihood methods; our analyses revealed that the Dorylaimia and Enoplia split early from other nematode
lineages, although tree topologies did not definitively
resolve the branching order of these two groups.
Three scenarios (all with low support) were observed
across ML tree topologies: 1) the Dorylaimia splitting
first from all other nematodes (Figure 2), 2) the Enoplia
splitting first from all other nematodes, or 3) the Dorylaimia and Enoplia placed as sister taxa in a single clade
that appears as a sister taxon to all other nematodes.
The first and second scenarios were the most common
across different parameters and outgroup taxa (Table 1);
the third scenario was only rarely recovered. The choice
of outgroups and phylogenetic parameters had a significant impact on this branching order of nematode clades
(summarized in Table 1). The Dorylaimia was always
observed to split off first when nematode taxa were analysed alongside the purportedly closest metazoan relative, the Nematomorpha (Figure 2). The Enoplia was
repeatedly observed to split off at the basal node using
either the Priapulida or Kinorhyncha as outgroups, but
when these same datasets were partitioned according to
secondary rRNA structure the Dorylaimia was instead
recovered as the earliest branching clade. The Tardigrade outgroup usually recovered the Dorylaimia splitting off at the basal node, although occasionally the

Bik et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:353
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/353

Page 6 of 14

could not reject the hypothesis that a tree with Dorylaimida and Trichinellida as a monophyletic group was
equally good as the paraphyly of these groups. A topology containing Enoplia as part of the basal split was
found to be significantly worse (at the 5% level) to a
basal branching of paraphyletic Dorylaimia. Yet if Dorylaimia was constrained to be monophyletic rather than
paraphyletic then Enoplia branching first was not found
to be a significantly worse topology.

Discussion
A revised framework for the Enoplia

Figure 2 Maximum Likelihood 18S phylogeny recovering the
Dorylaimia as the earliest splitting lineage. An example of a
Maximum Likelihood 18S topology recovering the Dorylaimia as the
earliest splitting nematode clade. Tree built using 1355 taxa
(including Nematomorpha as outgroup taxa), estimation of the
P-Invar parameter, and partitions according to 18S secondary
structure.

Enoplia and Dorylaimia were recovered as sister taxa.
Adding a second, third, or fourth outgroup to the dataset did not improve resolution at the base of the tree,
and the Dorylaimia and Enoplia were alternately recovered as the earliest branching nematode lineage. When
four different non-nematode phyla were included in
gene alignments (representing a mix of close relatives
and more distant taxa according to the phylogenies proposed in Dunn et al. [31]), the Enoplia was usually
observed as the earliest-splitting lineage. However, when
the same four non-nematode phyla were used in conjunction with Gblocks analysis (thus removing divergent
or saturated alignment positions), the Dorylaimia was
instead recovered as the earliest branching clade.
The Trichinellida (a group of animal parasites) was
often recovered as a sister taxon to all other Dorylaimid
species, but occasionally these two clades were resolved
as paraphyletic (Table 1); previous molecular frameworks
have supported the monophyly of the Dorylaimia [9,10].
The frequent paraphyly of Trichinellida in this study suggests that more intensive sampling of the diversity of this
order and the Dorylaimida may be required to fully
understand their systematic affinities. Removal of the Trichinellida did not result in an unequivocal basal splitoutgroup choice continued to dictate the order of splits
at the base of the tree. Bayesian phylogenies did not
recover the Trichinellida and Dorylaimia within a monophyletic clade and did not resolve the branching order of
early-splitting nematode lineages.
We tested support for the alternative split patterns at
the base of the nematode phylogeny using the Shimodaira-Hasegawa log likelihood ratio test [32]. This test

This study represents the first comprehensive phylogeny
of the nematode order Enoplida, a group of primarily
marine free-living species; our investigation has obtained
the first gene sequences from some Enoplid genera (e.g.
Chaetonema, Bathyeurystomina, Pareurystomina) and
even families (Leptosomatidae) that were formerly
absent from public sequence databases. The resulting
phylogeny has significantly resolved the molecular framework of the Enoplia as first outlined by De Ley and
Blaxter [8,21], elucidating five major clades within the
order Enoplida and providing substantial insight regarding relationships amongst lower taxonomic levels. Most
notably, our analyses firmly place the Leptosomatidae
within the superfamily Enoploidea (in line with many
early morphological classifications [13-15,17]), while the
Oxystominidae is consistently recovered in a major
clade alongside the Oncholaimoidea; previous frameworks incorrectly placed both these families within the
Ironina [8,21].
The suborder Oncholaimina appears to encompass
both the Oxystominidae and the Oncholaimoidea; these
families were consistently recovered as a major clade
within the Enoplida, in line with Van Megen et al.’s [10]
topology. Morphological evidence also lends support to
this proposed relationship-Lorenzen noted that species
from these two families possess ‘orthometaneme’ type
metanemes with associated caudal filaments [18]; most
other Enoplid taxa that possess this specific type of
metaneme do not have associated caudal filaments, with
the exception of a few isolated species. Despite a large
number of specimens included from the Oncholaimoidea/Oxystominidae, the internal topology of subclades
in this lineage remains largely unresolved.
The present data firmly support early historical classifications [11,15,16] and previous molecular studies
[10,33,34] which placed the Trefusiidae within the Enoplida. Terrestrial genera Trischistoma and Tripylina
were also recovered within the Enoplida, despite their
historical placement within the Dorylaimia based on
morphology [16,18] or within the Triplonchida according to molecular evidence [8,21,23]. Holterman et al. [9]
first suggested the placement of Trischistoma within the

Bik et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:353
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/353

Page 7 of 14

Table 1 Characterising the earliest splits in the maximum likelihood phylogeny of Nematoda
Nematode Taxa and
Treatment

Outgroup

Additional Non-nematode
Phyla

Earliest Splitting
Clade

Bootstrap Support for Earliest
Split

All Taxa

Priapulida
+Kinorhyncha

Tadigrada, Nematomorpha

Enoplia

19%

All Taxa

Kinorhyncha

(none)

Dorylaimia*

41%

All Taxa

Nematomorpha

(none)

Dorylaimia*

75%

All Taxa

Priapulida

(none)

Dorylaimia*

45%

All Taxa

Tardigrada

(none)

Dorylaimia*

49%

All Taxa (No P-invar estimate)

Priapulida
+Kinorhyncha

Tardigrada, Nematomorpha

Enoplia

19%

All Taxa (No P-invar estimate)

Kinorhyncha

(none)

Enoplia

34%

All Taxa (No P-invar estimate)

Priapulida

(none)

Enoplia

29%

All Taxa (No P-invar estimate)

Nematomorpha

(none)

Dorylaimia*

76%

All Taxa (No P-invar estimate)

Tardigrada

(none)

Doryla+Enop

20%

All Taxa (No P-invar estimate)

Tardigrada

Nematomorpha

Dorylaimia*

60%

All Taxa (No P-invar estimate)

Kinorhyncha

Nematomorpha

Enoplia

21%

All Taxa (No P-invar estimate)

Priapulida

Nematomorpha

Doryla+Enop*

39%

All Taxa (No P-invar estimate)

Kinorhyncha

Tardigrada

Enoplia

24%

All Taxa (No P-invar estimate)

Priapulida

Tardigrada

Doryla+Enop*

55%

All Taxa (No P-invar estimate)

Kinorhyncha
+Priapulida

(none)

Doryla+Enop*

47%

All Taxa

Kinorhyncha
+Priapulida

Tardigrada

Doryla+Enop*

61%

All Taxa

Kinorhyncha
+Priapulida

Nematomorpha

Enoplia

32%

All Taxa

Priapulida

Tardigrada, Nematomoprha

Enoplia

19%

All Taxa

Kinorhyncha

Tardigrada, Nematomoprha

Enoplia

30%

All Taxa, Gblocks alignment

Priapulida
+Kinorhyncha

Tardigrada, Nematomorpha

Dorylaimia

35%

All Taxa, Gblocks alignment

Nematomorpha

(none)

Dorylaimia*

71%

Trichinellida Removed

Priapulida
+Kinorhyncha

Tardigrada, Nematomorpha

Doryla+Enop

48%

Trichinellida Removed

Kinorhyncha

(none)

Enoplia

57%

Trichinellida Removed

Nematomorpha

(none)

Dorylaimia

76%

Trichinellida Removed

Priapulida

(none)

Enoplia

54%

Trichinellida Removed

Tardigrada

(none)

Doryla+Enop

53%

Long Branch, Outlier taxa
removed

Priapulida
+Kinorhyncha

Tardigrada, Nematomorpha

Enoplia

25%

Long Branch, Outlier taxa
removed

Nematomorpha

(none)

Dorylaimia*

69%

Basal split recovered using different combinations of nematode taxa, outgroup taxa, and phylogenetic parameters; all topologies utilized stem/loop gene
partitions according to rRNA secondary structure. “Earliest splitting clade” identifies the group that diverges most basally from all other nematodes. “Doryla
+Enop” indicates the Dorylaimia and Enoplia as a monophyletic group. Outgroup taxa were chosen according to the phylogeny of animal phyla by Dunn et al.
(2008). Asterisk (*) denotes topologies where the Trichnellida and Dorylaimida are recovered as paraphyletic, with Trichnellida splitting first in all cases.

Enoplida; Meldal [35] confirmed that both Trischistoma
and Tripylina were excluded from the Triplonchida, but
was unable to resolve their exact placement. Our analysis here (like that of Van Megen et al. [10]) strongly
indicated that the Trefusiidae includes, or is closely
associated with, the genera Trischistoma and Tripylina.
This investigation consistently recovered the Tripyloididae as a sister taxon to the clade containing the

Trefusiidae, Tripylina, and Trischistoma. Such a relationship was first suggested by Siddiqi [19] who placed
the Tripylidae species and the Tripyloididae together in
the order Tripylida based on morphology. The molecular framework outlined by Van Megen et al. [10] recovered a similar association between these taxa, although
this relationship demonstrated low support values in
their analysis (ML bootstraps <50%).

Bik et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:353
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/353

Within the Tripyloididae, morphological evidence
seems to support the observed separation between Bathylaimus and Tripyloides in 28S phylogenies (Additional
file 2, Figure S2). Taxonomic descriptions outline distinct anatomical differences between these two genera,
relating to buccal cavity morphology, amphid shape,
shape and position of cervical setae, tail shape, and spicule shape in male specimens [20]. The extent of this
morphological differentiation seems to suggest an older
split between the two genera (as suggested by 28S topologies) rather than a more recent divergence (e.g. according to 18S data).
Ribosomal topologies suggest that the Ironidae and
Alaimina may reside within a single suborder; these two
groups were usually recovered as sister taxa, and this
relationship was highly supported in Bayesian topologies
(0.97). The exact placement of the Ironidae/Alaimina
clade was not fully resolved; some trees denoted this
clade as an independent lineage within the Enoplida,
while other topologies suggested a sister relationship
with the Tripyloididae/Trefusiidae clade (e.g. Figure 1a).
Previous molecular investigations returned similar
results [7,9,10]; molecular data confirmed the placement
of the Alaimina and Ironidae within the Enoplida, but
other studies were also unable to resolve the exact placement of these taxa. Historical morphological classifications have also struggled to firmly place these two
groups. The Ironidae and Alaimina were formerly
classed within either the Dorylaimia [11,15,17,18,36] or
the Enoplida [13,16]. Several taxonomists proposed a
close relationship between the Ironidae and the Tripylidae [13-15], and both Filipjev [11] and Chitwood and
Chitwood [13] insinuated a close relationship between
the Ironidae and Alaimina. Only a handful of gene
sequences from each group were included in the present
analysis; increased sampling in future molecular studies
may be able to firmly resolve the placement of these
two groups.
This study supports previous topologies [10] that
denote the Rhabdolaimidae, the genus Syringolaimus
and Campydora demonstrans as members of an independent, highly supported clade. However, our analyses
do not support a sister relationship between Syringolaimus and Campydora that was previously recovered by
Van Megen et al. [10]. The overall placement of this
divergent clade amongst Enoplid lineages was not well
resolved. Morphological evidence has previously suggested a close relationship between the Rhabdolaimidae
and Syringolaimus; most classifications grouped Syringolaimus within the Ironidae [11,14,15,18], but some
placed this genus within the Rhabdolaimidae in the Araeolaimida [16,37]. The genus Campydora was historically classified within the Dorylaimia based on
morphology [15,36,38]; only Siddiqi [19] was the only

Page 8 of 14

author to suggest a relationship with the Enoplia based
on the structure of the pharynx and amphids. The current placement of Syringolaimus clearly denotes the
polyphyly of the Ironidae sensu Lorenzen [18], a finding
that was originally put forth by Meldal et al. [7] upheld
in later phylogenies [10]. Our analyses suggest that the
Syringolaimus/Campydora/Rhabdolaimidae clade represents a sister group to the Tripyloididae/Trefusiidae
clade; however, support values for this sister relationship
were usually very low in ML topologies (<50%), and not
significantly high in Bayesian phylogenies (0.91).
The placement of the Anticomidae suggests that species within this group represent a major Enoplid family.
Previous morphological classifications largely considered
the Anticomidae as a subfamily within the Leptsomatidae [11,14-16] and only a few authors separated this
group and raised it to family rank [18,39]. Lorenzen’s
[18] separation of the Anticomidae was based on the
left-hand position of gonads and the existence of preanal tubules in males of these species (the latter feature
not being present in any members of the Leptosomatidae). Although the Leptsomatidae and Anticomidae are
both placed within the Enoploidea, these taxa were
never recovered as a monophyletic clade, supporting the
morphological separation of these two groups.
The Anoplostomatidae sensu Lorenzen [18] appears to
be an artificial, polyphyletic taxon. The two member
genera, Anoplostoma and Chaetonema, were originally
grouped together on the basis of buccal cavity and
cephalic capsule structure; however, this study never
recovered these two genera within a monophyletic
group, despite both being consistently recovered within
the superfamily Enoploidea. Previous morphological
classifications placed Chaetonema within the Enchelidiidae [11] or within the Enoploidea as a member of the
Rhabdodemaniidae [15,16]. Anoplostoma was first placed
within the Phanodermatidae [11], but later excluded
completely from the Enoploidea and considered part of
the Oncholaimoidea [11,14-16]. Most historical taxonomic classifications did not suggest a close relationship
between Chaetonema and Anoplostoma, and phylogenetic analysis confirms that these two genera represent
independent lineages.
Molecular data upholds the classification of the Thoracostmopsidae, Enoplidae, and Phanodermatidae defined
by Lorenzen [18]. These three taxa form a large, wellsupported clade within the Enoploidea, supporting previous morphological classifications of this superfamily
[14-18]. Tree topologies also suggest a sister relationship
between the Phanodermatidae and Enoplus (the sole
genus within the Enoplidae); support values for this
pairing were weak in most trees, despite this topology
being consistently recovered across different datasets
and phylogenetic parameters. Morphological similarities

Bik et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:353
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/353

between Thoracostomopsidae and Phanodermatidae
were previously suggested by Lorenzen [18], supporting
the association between these two groups in molecular
frameworks. Lorenzen markedly diverged from earlier
classifications by considering Enoplus as the only genus
within the Enoplidae, basing this separation on differences in metaneme structure, gland arrangements, and
the absence of onchia. All other genera previously
placed within this group were moved into the Thoracostomopsidae (divided into subfamilies Thoracostomopsinae, Trileptiinae, and Enoplolaiminae). Our investigation
only included Thoracostomopsidae species representing
the subfamily Enoplolaiminae; further analysis is needed
to determine whether genera within the subfamilies
Thoracostomopsinae and Trileptiinae also belong within
the Thoracostomopsidae sensu Lorenzen.
Cryptic diversity has recently been uncovered in wellknown marine nematode species [40,41], and evidence
from the Enoplida has revealed further unexpected
genetic diversity in several groups. Ribosomal 18S and
28S data suggest that the genera Oncholaimus and Viscosia (Oncholaimoidea) represent artificial, paraphyletic
taxonomic groupings. Both groups are known to be taxonomically difficult genera, containing many species
with very similar morphology. For specimens identified
during the present study, it was often impossible to definitively assign an Oncholaimid specimen as belonging to
either genus; the position of the largest subventral tooth
was usually the only character that could be used to
identify the correct genus of female specimens, and this
feature was often obscured if a specimen was awkwardly
mounted or exhibited a buccal cavity filled with detritus.
Ribosomal topologies imply that morphologically similar
Oncholaimus and Viscosia species represent multiple
divergent lineages within the Oncholaimoidea (Additional file 2, Figure S1), suggesting that both genera
should be the focus of an extensive taxonomic revision.
High genetic diversity was also observed within the
morphologically homogeneous Phanodermatidae; species
within this family have few distinct anatomical characters, possessing a smooth cuticle, typical pocket-shaped
amphids, and little buccal cavity ornamentation. Specimens identified during this study did not display any
distinct differences in morphological features, despite
ribosomal topologies indicating a complex genetic structuring. The Oncholaimoidea and Phanodermatidae
represent the two most densely sampled groups within
this study-similarly intensive sampling efforts will be
needed to determine true extent of molecular diversity
in other nematode families.
Phylogenetic splits according to habitat

Internal relationships within the Enoplida demonstrate
that nematode lineages are primarily separated

Page 9 of 14

according to habitat (Figure 1A). Both Bayesian and
Maximum Likelihood tree topologies resolved two primary Enoplid clades: one comprised entirely of terrestrial/freshwater species (the Triplonchida), and a second
clade containing mostly marine taxa and a few freshwater species (the Enoploidea, Alaimina, Tripyloididae,
etc.). The phylogenetic structure of the Enoplida suggests that habitat transitions have occurred at least five
times during the evolution of the Enoplida, supporting
previous evidence proposing that such habitat transitions are relatively common amongst nematode species
[42]. Within the Tripyloididae/Trefusiidae clade, the terrestrial genera Trischistoma and Tripylina may have
arisen from marine ancestors, with the Trefusiidae
representing a subsequent reversal back to marine habitats. The genus Campydora and the Rhabdolaimidae are
two terrestrial taxa that also appear to have arisen independently in a divergent nematode lineage. The phylogenetic relationships in Figure 1A also suggest that
marine species of the Ironidae (e.g. Dolicholaimus sp.)
may be descendents of terrestrial ancestors, although
further taxon sampling within the Ironidae may be
needed to clearly elucidate patterns within this clade.
Past morphological classifications did not typically separate Enoplid genera according to habitat-Maggenti [43]
was the sole taxonomist to propose separate terrestrial
and marine lineages within the Enoplia (superorders
Marenoplica and Terraenoplica), whereas other authors
vociferously dismissed this structure [19]. Molecular
data appears to support a division primarily (but not
exclusively) based on habitat, with several transitions
scattered throughout the tree. Citing multiple habitat
switches within the Chromadorida, Holterman et al.
[42] suggested that nematode species only need simple
physiological adaptations to move between different
physical environments, supporting this seemingly arbitrary pattern of transitions observed in the Enoplida.
Resolving the earliest splits within Nematoda

Despite exhaustive topological tests and greatly
improved taxon sampling, our large-scale phylogenies
were unable to resolve the earliest-splitting lineage
within the Phylum Nematoda. Dense taxon sampling
has greatly improved recent molecular frameworks [10],
but our results indicate that the placement of certain
clades is unstable even using a large-scale sampling
effort. In the this study, Maximum Likelihood methods
using a large SSU dataset alternatively recovered both
the terrestrial Dorylaimid clade and the primarily marine
Enoplid clade as the earliest-splitting nematode group,
while large-scale Bayesian analyses consistently returned
a polytomy at the basal node of the nematode tree.
There are two primary viewpoints regarding outgroup
choice during phylogeny reconstruction. Some authors

Bik et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:353
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/353

believe that the most reliable phylogenies are obtained
when using the closest sister taxa as an outgroup
[44-46], while others advocate the inclusion of both
close relatives and more distantly related species [47,48].
An alternative tactic focuses on alignment positions;
eliminating divergent (and thus, poorly aligned) sites
increases the likelihood of homology (and correct phylogenies) if alignments are unambiguous [49,50]. Although
the relationships amongst Metazoan phyla are still hotly
debated, mounting molecular evidence supports the
Nematomorpha as the sister phylum to the Nematoda
[31,51-53]. Taking into account different phylogenetic
viewpoints, it would be reasonable to argue that the
most robust clade placements should occur when using
the Nematomorpha alone as an outgroup (representing
the closest relative), multiple non-nematode phyla in
combination, or utilising Gblocks-trimmed alignments
containing only well-aligned sites. However, these three
scenarios give conflicting results: the Dorylaimia is
always recovered as the earliest-splitting clade when the
Nematomorpha is used as a single outgroup (Figure 2),
while the Enoplia is most often observed as the earliest
splitting lineage when multiple non-nematode phyla are
included in gene alignments. When variable ribosomal
regions are removed from alignments using the Gblocks
program, the Dorylaimia instead splits off first when
multiple non-nematode phyla are present.
Many authors currently assume that Enoplids are earliest branching nematode group [9,23] and both Holterman et al. [9] and Van Megen et al. [10] reported the
Enoplida as the earliest splitting lineage in their published phylogenies, although support values for this
topology were low (0.81 PP and 63% ML bootstrap,
respectively). In addition, neither study details any rigorous empirical tests to confirm the stability of tree topologies. Molecular frameworks of nematodes generally
agree that the Enoplia branched off at some early point
in evolutionary history of the phylum [7,9,10,54]-while it
is certainly possible that this group diverged first from
other nematode groups, the current evidence to support
this hypothesis is not strong. We find highest bootstrap
support instead for an alternative scenario, the terrestrial
Dorylaimia being part of a basal split. Our tests however
were unable to resolve either topology as significantly
more likely than the other and we do not consider this
topology yet resolved.
This unstable topology observed amongst early-splitting clades is likely related to the choice of a single, conserved gene for phylogeny reconstruction. Currently, the
18S gene is the only locus known to resolve deep phylogenetic relationships amongst nematodes. Other genes
such as LSU and cox1 are only informative at shallower
taxonomic levels [29]; in this study, neither gene produced coherent tree topologies for inferring deeper

Page 10 of 14

clade relationships (Additional file 2, Figures S2 and S3).
Resolving the base of the nematode tree will require
intensive efforts to locate other informative genes-ideally
protein-coding-which can supplement evolutionary
inferences from SSU data. Phylogeny reconstruction in
other taxa has already embraced multi-gene phylogenies
[e.g. [55,56]], and efforts are now moving towards phylogenomic methods [57,58].

Conclusions
The sampling effort in this study was by no means
exhaustive; isolated specimens represent only a small
portion of the diversity within the Enoplida and many
genera still remain unsampled in this ubiquitous marine
group. Nevertheless, increased taxon sampling within
the order Enoplida was able to clearly elucidate major
clades and clarify evolutionary relationships amongst
genera. The internal structure of the Enoplida is consistent and supported by different analysis methods and
data from multiple genetic loci; the resulting molecular
phylogenies exhibit clear differences between past morphological classifications and have further refined the
molecular framework first proposed by De Ley and
Blaxter [8]. Tree topologies suggest that the two main
clades within the Enoplia are primarily separated
according to habitat (consisting of the terrestrial Triplonchida and mostly marine Enoplida), with habitat
transitions occurring at least five times amongst Enoplid
species. Ribosomal sequence data further suggests that
some morphologically homogenous groups (e.g. Oncholaimidae, Phanodermatidae) exhibit extensive molecular
diversity, and further investigation will be required to
fully describe this unexpected genetic structure and subsequently revise taxonomic frameworks. Despite dense
taxon sampling and rigorous empirical tests, our largescale phylogenies were unable to recover a well-supported topology amongst early-splitting lineages. The
Dorylaimia and Enoplia were both recovered as the earliest-branching clade using a wide range of phylogenetic
parameters and outgroup taxa. Future molecular studies
of nematodes will need to incorporate phylogenomic
methods in order to resolve longstanding questions
regarding relationships at the base of the nematode tree.
Methods
Materials

Samples were collected from several intertidal locations
(coastal sites in New England, the United Kingdom, and
South Africa), as well as offshore sediments (off-coast
California, Bellinghausen Sea, Southern Indian Ocean,
and Iberian Margin). All marine sediments were immediately fixed in DESS preservative [59] using an equal
ratio of preservative to sediment. The meiofauna fraction of all samples was extracted via decantation and

Bik et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:353
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/353

floatation in Ludox® using a 45 μm sieve according to
the methods of Somerfield et al. [60]. Individual nematodes were picked out of the meiofauna fraction using a
fine wire instrument, mounted on slides, and identified
down to genus level; video capture images were
recorded for all specimens in order to retain a voucher
of morphology before specimens were destroyed for
molecular analysis.
Isolation and sequencing of 18S rRNA genes

Genetic data was obtained from a total of 254 Enoplid
nematodes, with both 18S rRNA (Accession numbers
HM564399-HM564654) and 28S rRNA (Accession
numbers HM564655-HM564910) obtained from every
specimen; mitochondrial cox1 sequences were additionally obtained from a subset of 99 specimens (Accession
numbers HM564911-HM565012). Genomic DNA was
extracted using a proteinase K digestion [9]. Individual
specimens were picked into microcentrifuge tubes containing 25 μl distilled water, followed by the addition of
25 μl lysis buffer (containing 0.2 M NaCl, 0.2 M TrisHCl (pH 8.0), 1% b-mercaptoethanol and 800 μg/ml
proteinase K). Tubes were incubated for 2 h at 65°C and
750 rpm in an Eppendorf Thermomixer (Eppendorf,
Hamburg, Germany), followed by a final 5 min at 100°C
and 750 rpm. Final lysates were stored at −20°C. All
PCR reactions were conducted using a DyNAzyme EXT
PCR kit (New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA, USA),
with a final reaction volume of 25.75 μl. Each reaction
contained 2μl of nematode genomic DNA, 18.25 μl sterile water, 0.4 μM of each primer (Integrated DNA technologies, Coralville, IA, USA) 2.5 μl 10× DyNAzyme
EXT Buffer containing MgCl2 (final reaction volume 1.5
mM MgCl2), 0.5 μl dNTP mix containing 10 μM each
nucleotide, and 0.5 μl DyNAzyme EXT DNA polymerase (0.5 enzyme units in final reaction volume). Nearly
full-length 18S rRNA genes (~1600 bp) were amplified
from all nematodes using primer sets G18S4 and 26R,
22F and 13R, and 24F1 and 18P [7,22]. The D2/D3
expansion segment of the 28S rRNA gene (~600 bp)
was additionally amplified from all specimens using primers D2A and D3B [28]. A fragment of the cox1 gene
(~400 bp) was isolated from a subset of 99 nematodes
using primers JB3 and JB5 [30]. The following PCR profile was used to amplify all primer sets: 94°C for 5 min
followed by 35 cycles of denaturation at 94°C for 30 seconds, annealing at 54°C for 45 seconds, extension at 72°
C for 2 minutes, with a final extension of 72°C for 10
min. All PCR products were visualized on a 1.5% agarose gel containing ethidium bromide.
Successful PCR reactions were purified using a QIAquick PCR purification kit (QIAGEN, Valencia, CA,
USA). Sequencing reactions were carried out using a
BigDye Terminator v3.1 cycle sequencing kit (Applied

Page 11 of 14

Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA), with individual
sequencing reactions having a final volume of 10 μl.
Each reaction contained 3 μl 5X ABI sequencing buffer,
2 μl of 2 μM forward or reverse primer, 1 μl BigDye
Terminator v1.1, and either 2μl or 4 μl of purified PCR
product. Sequencing reactions were carried out using
the following thermal profile: 96°C for 1 minute followed by 25 cycles of 96°C for 10 seconds, 50°C for
5 seconds, and 60°C for 4 minutes. Cycle-sequence products were purified via ethanol precipitation and
sequenced using an ABI 3130 genetic analyzer.
Sequence Alignment and Phylogenetic Analysis

Pre-aligned structural alignments of the 18S rRNA gene
were downloaded from release 98 of the SILVA rRNA
database [61] and imported into the ARB software suite
[62]. Enoplid sequences generated during this investigation were incorporated into nematode secondary structure alignments via the Positional Tree (PT) Server
function in the ARB software suite. Alignment quality
was assessed by first constructing Neighbour-Joining
trees in ARB; some manual editing was necessary to
ensure that all secondary structure motifs were properly
aligned. Short sequences (<1000 bp) and sequences of
dubious quality were removed from the alignment. The
Tardigrada, Kinorhyncha, Priapulida and Nematomorpha
were chosen as outgroups, representing the closest relatives of the Phylum Nematoda [31]; final alignments contained up to 1428 sequences, incorporating nematode
and outgroup taxa (final ARB databases containing 18S
and 28S alignments are available in Additional file 3). In
total, the 18S dataset contained 354 unique sequences
(including 52 nematodes from the Triplonchida) representing 37 genera from the order Enoplida. In this study,
LSU sequences (~600 bp representing the D2/D3 expansion segment) were obtained from every Enoplid nematode represented by an 18S sequence; amplification
difficulties meant that cox1 (~400 bp) was only obtained
from a subset of 94 specimens in total. In addition, fewer
LSU and cox1 sequences were available from GenBank.
Final LSU datasets contained 280 Enoplid sequences, and
final cox1 datasets contained 105 taxa.
Structural alignments were used to construct largescale Maximum Likelihood trees using Randomized
Axelerated Maximum Likelihood (RAxML) version 7.04
[63,64], hosted at the Vital-IT unit of the Swiss Institute
of Bioinformatics (http://phylobench.vital-it.ch/raxmlbb/). Support values were generated from RAxML runs
using 100 bootstrap replicates. Bayesian inference was
used to supplement topological inferences. Data was
submitted to the CIPRES project cluster hosted at the
University of California, San Diego and analysed using
MrBayes3.2 (http://www.phylo.org/sub_sections/portal/);
datasets were run for up to 4,000,000 generations using

Bik et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:353
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/353

the GTR+I+G model of nucleotide substitution,
4 MCMC chains, and a heating temperature of 0.06.
Deep phylogeny was investigated using the 18S rRNA
gene, using both a large dataset (representing all major
nematode clades), as well as a smaller dataset comprising only Enoplid and Dorylaimid taxa. Small subunit
phylogenies were built using both Maximum Likelihood
and Bayesian Inference methods (Figure 1). Large-scale
Maximum Likelihood phylogenies were constructed
using 1336 nematode taxa and utilised four closely
related metazoan phyla [31] as outgroup taxa (Nematomorpha, Priapulida, Kinorhyncha, and Tardigrada). The
small dataset contained a total of 377 Enoplid sequences
and utilised Dorylaimid nematodes as outgroup taxa.
Extensive tests were carried out on Maximum Likelihood phylogenies in order to determine the robustness
of tree topologies; trees were constructed using different
phylogenetic parameters and combinations of taxa. The
stability of clade placements was assessed in comparison
with published phylogenies and other tree topologies
obtained during the present study. The placement of
major nematode clades and the internal topology of the
Enoplida were evaluated in every phylogeny. Nematode
taxa were analysed alongside both single and multiple
outgroups, using different outgroup combinations to
assess topological changes. Secondary structure information was used to separate gene alignments according to
stem and loop structures present in folded ribosomal
subunits; tree topologies from these partitioned gene
alignments were compared to non-partitioned ML runs.
To assess the impact of seemingly rogue taxa, longbranch clades and taxa of incertae sedis were both
removed and included in analyses to test for any potentially destabilising effects. Phylogenies were constructed
using outputs from the Gblocks program [50], which
selects conserved blocks from 18S alignments and eliminates poorly aligned sites and potentially saturated or
overly divergent regions. Finally, trees were constructed
both with and without the P-invar parameter in RAxML
which estimates the proportion of invariable sites, as
there is some evidence to suggest that this parameter
interferes with estimates of among-site rate variation
[65-67].
Both 28S and cox1 sequences were used to supplement inferences from 18S data and provide further resolution at lower taxonomic levels. Despite downloading
pre-aligned LSU structural alignments from the online
SILVA database, the LSU dataset was poorly aligned
and it was difficult to infer homology amongst variable
regions. However, it was still possible to align sequences
within closely related taxa (below the family level)
and construct Maximum Likelihood trees. LSU datasets
contained a total of 393 taxa, utilising Dorylaimid
sequences for outgroup comparisons. Protein-coding

Page 12 of 14

cox1 sequences were analysed using both Maximum
Likelihood and Bayesian Inference, with gene alignments
partitioned according to codon position. Datasets contained a total of 105 taxa, with sequences from Pellioditis marina (a Rhabditid nematode) used for outgroup
comparisons. One mitochondrial sequence (TCR 89,
Litinium sp.) exhibited a very long branch length within
both ML and Bayesian topologies; additional trees were
constructed without this particular sequence, but
excluding this long-branch taxon did not have any
impact on tree topology.
The support for alternate topologies was assessed
using the Shimodaira-Hasegawa log likelihood test [32]
implemented in RAxML. Nematomorpha were used as
outgroup and alternate topologies varied the groups
involved in the basal nematode split.

Additional material
Additional file 1: List of all taxa included in phylogenetic analysis.
List of all sequences utilised during this study, including taxonomic
identification, accession number, and genetic locus.
Additional file 2: Supplementary 18S, 28S and cox1 phylogenies.
Figure S1: Expanded Maximum Likelihood 18S phylogeny of the Enoplia,
fully expanded and annotated with taxonomic classifications. Tree built
using 18S sequence data from 81 taxa, with estimation of the P-Invar
parameter and partitions according to 18S secondary structure. The black
square within Oncholaimoidea represent the primary shallow-water
clades containing the majority of Oncholaimus and Viscosia specimens
isolated in this study. Figure S2: Maximum Likelihood phylogeny of the
nematode subclass Enoplia, built using sequences from the D2/D3
expansion region of the 28S gene. Tree constructed using 433 taxa, with
estimation of P-Invar parameter. No alignment regions were excluded
from the analysis. Figure S3: Bayesian phylogeny of the nematode order
Enoplida built using cox1 gene sequences. Tree constructed using a 3
alignment partitions according to codon positions, using 2 million
generations, and chain heating temperature of 0.1.
Additional file 3: ARB databases containing 18S and 28S structural
alignments for all nematode taxa used in phylogenetic analyses.
Final rRNA gene alignments utilised for phylogenetic analyses in this
study, contained in a database accessible using the ARB software suite
(http://www.arb-home.de/).

Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank David Thistle (NSF grant OCE-0727243),
Veerle Huvenne, and Adrian Glover for providing deep-sea sediment cores,
and further thank Alan Hughes and Lawrence Hawkins for advice and
support during this investigation. This work was supported by a Systematics
Research Fund Grant (Systematics Association/Linnean Society) to HB and a
National Science Foundation award DEB 0228692 to WKT.
Author details
Nematode Research Group, Department of Zoology, The Natural History
Museum, Cromwell Road, London SW7 5BD, UK. 2School of Ocean and Earth
Science, National Oceanography Centre, European Way, Southampton SO14
3ZH, UK. 3Hubbard Center for Genome Studies, University of New
Hampshire, 35 Colovos Road, Durham, NH 03824, USA. 4Department of
Biological Sciences, University of Hull, Cottingham Road, Hull HU6 7RX, UK.

1

Authors’ contributions
HMB carried out nematode extraction and sequencing, sequence alignment,
tree building, and drafted the manuscript. DHL participated in sequence

Bik et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:353
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/353

alignment and tree building. WKT participated in nematode sequencing and
aided in designing the study. PJDL conceived the study and participated in
its design and coordination. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript.
Received: 16 August 2010 Accepted: 12 November 2010
Published: 12 November 2010
References
1. Snelgrove PVR, Blackburn TH, Hutchings P, Alongi D, Grassle JF, Hummel H,
King G, Koike I, Lambshead PJD, Ramsing NB, Solis-Weiss V, Freckman DW:
The importance of marine sediment biodiversity in ecosystem
processes. Ambio 1997, 26:578-583.
2. Lambshead PJD: Marine Nematode Biodiversity. In Nematology: Advances
and Perspectives. Volume 1. Edited by: Chen ZX, Chen SY, Dickson DW.
Wallingford: CABI Publishing; 2004:439-468.
3. Hugot JP, Baujard P, Morand S: Biodiversity in helminths and nematodes
as a field of study: an overview. Nematology 2001, 3:199-208.
4. Malakhov VV: Nematodes: structure, development, classification, and
phylogeny Washington, WA: Smithsonian Insitution Press; 1994.
5. Zwickl DJ, Hillis DM: Increased taxon sampling greatly reduces
phylogenetic error. Systematic Biology 2002, 51:588-598.
6. Platonova TA, Gal’tsova VV: Nematodes and their role in the marine benthos
New Delhi: Amerind Publishing Co. Pvt. Ltd.; 1985.
7. Meldal BHM, Debenham NJ, De Ley P, Tandingan De Ley I, Vanfleteren JR,
Vierstraete AR, Bert W, Borgonie G, Moens T, Tyler P, Austen MC, Blaxter M,
Rogers AD, Lambshead PJD: An improved molecular phylogeny of the
Nematoda with special emphasis on marine taxa. Molecular Phylogentics
and Evolution 2007, 42:622-636.
8. De Ley P, Blaxter M: Systematic position and phylogeny. (Chapter 1). In
The Biology of Nematodes. Edited by: Lee D. Reading: Harwood Academic
Publishers; 2002:1-30.
9. Holterman M, van der Wurff A, van den Elsen S, van Megen H, Bongers T,
Holovachov O, Bakker J, Helder J: Phylum-wide analysis of SSU rDNA
reveals deep phylogenetic relationships among nematodes and
accelerated evolution toward crown clades. Molecular Biology and
Evolution 2006, 23:1792-1800.
10. Van Megen H, Van den Elsen S, Holterman M, Karssen G, Mooyman P,
Bongers T, Holovachov O, Bakker J, Helder J: A phylogenetic tree of
nematodes based on about 1200 full-length small subunit ribosomal
DNA sequences. Nematology 2009, 11:927-950.
11. Filipjev IN: The classification of the free-living nematodes and their
relation to the parasitic nematodes. Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections
1934, 89:1-64.
12. Pearse AS: An Introduction to Parasitology Springfield, Illinois: Charles C.
Thomas; 1942.
13. Chitwood BG, Chitwood MB: An Introduction to Nematology, second edition
Baltimore, MD: Monumental Printing Company; 1950.
14. Clark WC: A revised classification of the Enoplida (Nematoda). New
Zealand Journal of Science 1961, 4:123-150.
15. De Coninck LAP: Systématique des Nématodes. In Traite de Zoologie
Edited by: Grassé P-P 1965, 4:1-731.
16. Andrássy I: Evolution as a Basis for the Systematization of Nematodes
London, San Francisco, Melbourne: Pitman Publishing; 1976.
17. Maggenti AR: Nemata. In Synopsis and classification of living organisms.
Volume 1. Edited by: Parker SP. New York: McGraw-Hilll Book Co;
1982:879-929.
18. Lorenzen S: Entwurf eines phylogenetischen Systems der freiloebenden
Nematoden. Veröffentlichungen des Instituts für Meeresforschung in
Bremerhaven (Supplement) 1981, 1-472, (English Translation: Lorenzen, S.,
1994. The Phylogenetic Systematics of Freelinving Nematodes. The Ray
Society, London, 1383 pp).
19. Siddiqi MR: Phylogenetic relationships of the soil nematode orders
Dorylaimida, Mononchida, Triplonchida and Alaimida, with a revised
classification of the subclass Enoplia. Pakistan Journal of Nematology 1983,
1:79-110.
20. Platt HM, Warwick RM: Free-Living Marine Nematodes, Part I: British Enoplids
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press; 1983.
21. De Ley P, Blaxter ML: A new system for Nematoda: combining
morphological characters with molecular trees, and translating clades
into ranks and taxa. In Proceedings of the Fourth International Congress of

Page 13 of 14

22.

23.
24.

25.
26.
27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.
37.

38.
39.

40.

41.

42.

Nematology, 8-13 June 2002, Tenerife, Spain. Edited by: Cook R, Hunt DJ.
Nematology Monographs and Perspectives; 2004:633-653.
Blaxter ML, De Ley P, Garey JR, Liu LX, Scheldeman P, Vierstraete A,
Vanfleteren JR, Mackey L, Dorris M, Frisse LM, Vida JT, Thomas WK: A
molecular evolutionary framework for the phylum Nematoda. Nature
1998, 392:71-75.
Abebe E, Andrássy I, Traunspurger W: Freshwater nematodes: ecology and
taxonomy Wallingford, UK: CABI Publishing; 2006.
Schierenberg E: Unusual cleavage and gastrulation in a freshwater
nematode: developmental and phylogenetic implications. Development
genes and evolution 2005, 215:103-108.
Baccetti B, Dallai R, Dezio SG, Marinaria A: The evolution of the nematode
spermatozoon. Gamete Research 1983, 8:309-323.
Justine J-L: Male and female gametes and fertilisation. In The biology of
nematodes. Edited by: Lee DL. London: Taylor 2002:73-119.
Yushin VV: Ultrastructure of spermatogenesis in the free-living marine
nematode Anticoma possjetica (Enoplida: Anticomidae). Nematology 2003,
5:777-788.
De Ley P, Félix MA, Frisse LM, Nadler SA, Sternberg PW, Thomas WK:
Molecuar and morphological characterisation of two reproductively
isolated species with mirror-image anatomy (Nematoda: Cephalobidae).
Nematology 1999, 1:591-612.
De Ley P, Tandingan De Ley I, Morris K, Eyualem A, Mundo-Ocampo M,
Yoder M, Heras J, Waumann D, Rocha-Olivares A, Burr AHJ, Baldwin JG,
Thomas WK: An integrated approach to fast and informative
morphological vouchering of nematodes for applications in molecular
barcoding. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 2005,
360:1945-1958.
Derycke S, Remerie T, Vierstraete A, Backeljau T, Vanfleteren J, Vincx M,
Moens T: Mitochondrial DNA variation and cryptic speciation within the
free-living marine nematode Pellioditis marina. Marine Ecology Progress
Series 2005, 300:91-103.
Dunn CW, Hejnol A, Matus DQ, Pang K, Browne WE, Smith SA, Seaver E,
Rouse GW, Obst M, Edgecombe GD, Sørensen MV, Haddock SHD, SchmidtRhaesa A, Okusu A, Møbjerg Kristensen R, Wheeler WC, Martindale MQ,
Giribet G: Broad phylogenomic sampling improves resolution of the
animal tree of life. Nature 452:745-749.
Shimodaira H, Hasegawa M: Multiple comparisons of log-likelihoods with
applictions to phylogenetic inference. Molecular Biology and Evolution
1999, 16:1114-1116.
Rusin LY, Aleshin VV, Vladychenskaya NS, Milyutina IA, Kedrova OS,
Petrov NB: Trefusiidae are a subtaxon of marine Enoplida (Nematoda):
evidence from primary structure of hairpin 35 and 48 loops of SSU rRNA
gene. Molecular Biology 2001, 35:778-784.
Holterman M: Phylogenetic relationships within the phylum Nematoda
as revealed by ribosomal DNA, and their biological implications.
Wageningen University; 2008.
Meldal BHM: Phylogenetic systematics of the phylum Nematoda:
evidence from molecules and morphology. University of Southampton,
PhD Thesis; 2004.
Thorne G: A monograph of the nematodes of the superfammily
Dorylaimoidea. Capita Zoologica 1939, 8:1-261.
Gerlach SA, Riemann F: The Bremberhaven checklist of aquatic
nematodes. A catalogue of nNematoda Adenophorea excluding the
Dorylaimida. Part I. Veröffentlichungen des Institutes für Meeresforschung
Bremerhaven, Sonderdruck 1973, 4:1-404.
Jairajpuri MS, Ahmad W: Dorylaimida, Free living, Predacious and PlantParasitic Nematodes New Delhi: Oxford & IBH Publishing Co. Pvt. Ltd; 1992.
Hope WD, Murphy DG: A taxonomic hierarchy and checklist of the
genera and higher taxa of marine nematodes. Smithsonian Contributions
to Zoology 1972, 137:1-101.
Derycke S, Backeljau T, Vlaeminck C, Vierstraete A, Vanfleteren J, Vincx M,
Moens T: Spatiotemporal analysis of population genetic structure in
Geomonhystera disjuncta (Nematoda, Monhysteridae) reveals high levels
of molecular diversity. Marine Biology 2007, 151:1799-1812.
Derycke S, Fonseca G, Vierstraete A, Vanfleteren J, Vincx M, Moens T:
Disentangling taxonomy within the Rhabditis (Pellioditis) marina
(Nematoda, Rhabditidae) species comple using molecular and
morphological tools. Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society 2008, 152:1-15.
Holterman M, Holovachov O, Van den Elsen S, van Megen H, Bongers T,
Bakker J, Helder J: Small subunit ribosomal DNA-based phylogeny of

Bik et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:353
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/353

43.

44.
45.
46.
47.
48.

49.
50.
51.
52.
53.

54.
55.

56.

57.

58.

59.

60.

61.

62.

63.

64.

basal Chromadoria (Nematoda) suggests that transitions from marine to
terrestrial habitats (and vice versa) require relatively simple adaptations.
Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution 2008, 48:758-763.
Maggenti AR: Nematode higher classification as influenced by species
and family concepts. In Concepts in Nematode Systematics. Edited by:
Stone AR, Platt HM, Khalil LF. London: Academic Press; 1983:25-40.
Mayden RL, Wiley EO: The fundamentals of phylogenetic systematics Stanford,
CA: Stanford University Press; 1992.
Stuessy TF: Plant Taxonomy: The Systematic Evaluation of Comparative Data
New York: Columbia University Press; 1990.
Lyons-Weiler J, Hoelzer GA, Tausch RJ: Optimal outgroup analysis.
Biological Journal of the Linnean Society 1998, 64:493-511.
Maddison WP, Donoghue MJ, Maddison DR: Outgroup analysis and
parsimony. Systematic Zoology 1984, 33:83-103.
Sanderson MJ, Shaffer HB: Troubleshooting Molecular Phylogenetic
Analyses. Annual Review of Ecology, Evolution and Systematics 2002,
33:49-72.
Smith AB: Rooting molecular trees: Problems and strategies. Biological
Journal of the Linnean Society 1994, 51:279-292.
Castresana J: Selection of conserved blocks for their use in phylogenetic
analysis. Molecular Biology and Evolution 2000, 17:540-552.
Giribet G, Dunn CW, Edgecombe GD, Rouse GW: A modern look at the
Animal Tree of Life. Zootaxa 2007, 1668:61-79.
Halanych KM: The new view of animal phylogeny. Annual Review of
Ecology and Systematics 2004, 35:229-256.
Glenner H, Hansen AJ, Sorensen MV, Ronquist F, Huelsenbeck JP,
Willerslev E: Bayesian inference of the metazoan phylogeny: A combined
molecular and morphological approach. Current Biology 2004,
14:1644-1649.
Blaxter ML: Caenorhabditis elegans is a nematode. Science 1998,
282:2041-2046.
Hines HM, Hunt JH, O’Connor TK, Gillespie JJ, Cameron SA: Multigene
phylogeny reveals eusociality evolved twice in vespid wasps. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Science USA 2007, 104:3295-3299.
Shalchian-Tabrizi K, Minge MA, Espelund M, Orr R, Ruden T, Jakobsen KS,
Cavalier-Smith T: Multigene phylogeny of Choanozoa and the origin of
animals. PLoS ONE 2008, 3:e2098.
Hackett SJ, Kimball RT, Reddy S, Bowie RCK, Braun EL, Braun MJ,
Chojnowski JL, Cox WA, Han K-L, Harshman J, Huddleston CJ, Marks BD,
Miglia KJ, Moore WS, Sheldon FH, Steadman DW, Witt CC, Yuri T: A
phylogenomic study of birds reveals their evolutionary history. Science
2008, 320:1763-1768.
Burki F, Inagaki Y, Bråte J, Archibald JM, Keeling PJ, Cavalier-Smith T,
Sakaguchi M, Hashimoto T, Horak A, Kumar S, Klaveness D, Jakobsen KS,
Pawlowski J, Shalchian-Tabrizi K: Large-scale phylogenomic analyses
reveal that two enigmatic protist lineages, Thelonemia and
Centroheliozoa, are related to photosynthetic chromalveolates. Genome
Biology and Evolution 2009, 1:231-238.
Yoder M, Tandingan De Ley I, King IW, Mundo-Ocampo M, Mann J,
Blaxter M, Poiras L, De Ley P: DESS: a versitile solution for preserving
morphology and extractable DNA of nematodes. Nematology 2006,
8:367-376.
Somerfield PJ, Warwick RM, Moens M: Meiofauna Techniques. In Methods
for the Study of Marine Benthos. 3 edition. Edited by: Eleftheriou A, McIntyre
A. Oxford: Blackwell Science; 2005:229-272.
Pruesse E, Quast C, Knittel K, Fuchs BM, Ludwig W, Peplies J, Glöckner FO:
SILVA: a comprehensive online resource for quality checked and aligned
ribosomal RNA sequence data compatible with ARB. Nucleic Acids
Research 2007, 35:7188-7196.
Ludwig W, Strunk O, Westram R, Richter L, Meier H, Kumar Y, Buchner A,
Lai T, Steppi S, Jobb G, Förster W, Brettske I, Gerber S, Ginhart AW, Gross O,
Grumann S, Hermann S, Jost R, König A, Liss T, Lüßmann R, May M,
Nonhoff B, Reichel B, Strehlow R, Stamatakis A, Stuckmann N, Vilbig A,
Lenke M, Ludwig T, et al: ARB: a software environment for sequence
data. Nucleic Acids Research 2004, 32:1363-1371.
Stamatakis A: RAxML-VI-HPC: Maximum Likelihood-based phylogenetic
analyses with thousands of taxa and mixed models. Bioinformatics 2006,
22:2688-2690.
Stamatakis A, Hoover P, Rougemont J: A rapid bootstrapping algorithm
for the RAxML web-servers. Systematic Biology 2008, 75:758-771.

Page 14 of 14

65. Yang Z: Computational Molecular Evolution Oxford, UK: Oxford University
Press; 2006.
66. Gu X, Fu Y-X, Li W-H: Maximum likelihood estimation of the
heterogeneity of substitution rate among nucleotide sites. Molecular
Biology and Evolution 1995, 12:546-557.
67. Stamatakis A: The RAxML 7.0.4 Manual. 2008 [http://icwww.epfl.ch/
~stamatak/index-Dateien/software/RAxML-Manual.7.0.4.pdf].
doi:10.1186/1471-2148-10-353
Cite this article as: Bik et al.: Moving towards a complete molecular
framework of the Nematoda: a focus on the Enoplida and earlybranching clades. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010 10:353.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
