<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title></title>
<meta name="Creator" content="Adobe InDesign CS4 (6.0.6)"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Adobe PDF Library 9.0"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Bininda-Emonds BMC Biology 2011, 9:59
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/59

CO M M E N TA R Y 	

Open Access

Inferring the Tree of Life: chopping a
phylogenomic problem down to size?
Olaf RP Bininda-Emonds*
See research article: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/55

Abstract
The combination of molecular sequence data and
bioinformatics has revolutionized phylogenetic
inference over the past decade, vastly increasing the
scope of the evolutionary trees that we are able to
infer. A recent paper in BMC Biology describing a new
phylogenomic pipeline to help automate the inference
of evolutionary trees from public sequence databases
provides another important tool in our efforts to derive
the Tree of Life.
The Tree of Life
The Holy Grail of phylogenetic research is to reconstruct
the evolutionary relationships for all of life, currently, if
vaguely, estimated to range somewhere between 3 and
100 million species [1]. Hundreds of years of systematic
research have arguably yielded a reasonable idea of how
the main branches of the Tree of Life are arranged, at
least for eukaryotic organisms. Nevertheless, numerous
problematic branches naturally remain, as does the
question of how the main branches come off the tree
trunk. In large part, much of the challenge going forward
will be to fill in this scaffold formed by the major
branches to provide a complete evolutionary picture of
the approximately 1.7 million - and counting - described
species on the planet.
In our attempts to derive the Tree of Life, the limiting
factor has always been the amount of data available to us.
Prior to the molecular revolution, phylogenetic data were
comparatively limited, with only morphology being
generally available (ignoring early molecular data sources
such as DNA-DNA hybridization or immunogenetic and
serological data). These data were sufficient to provide us
with a general overview, but the resolution was often
*Correspondence: olaf.bininda@uni-oldenburg.de
AG Systematik und Evolutionsbiologie, IBU - Fakultät V, Carl von Ossietzky
Universität Oldenburg, Carl von Ossietzky Strasse 9-11, 26111 Oldenburg, Germany

limited. So, for example, whereas the main groupings, or
orders, of eutherian mammals were relatively uncontro­
versial, their relationships to one another were not.
Similarly, the large morphological differences between
the animal phyla made them easy to distinguish, but
often difficult to place relative to one another.
The growing abundance of DNA sequence data whether in the form of individual genes, expressed
sequence tags (ESTs), or whole genome data - has
brought a wealth of new information into play, sometimes
contradicting classical hypotheses and often providing
more resolution than morphology could alone. The past
15 years have witnessed an explosive growth in sequenc­
ing effort and in public databases of sequence information
such as GenBank and its sister databases EMBL and
DDBJ. Indeed, the amount of information in GenBank is
staggering. As of April 2011, the nearly 200  million
sequence records in the traditional and whole genome
divisions comprised nearly 320  billion bases for almost
250,000 species. The growing use of next-generation and
next-next-generation sequencing technologies promises
to accelerate the growth rate even further.
Despite this, the amount of molecular data remains
limited and our data matrices are very sparse, even for
well sampled groups such as green plants or mammals
[2]. Paradoxically, sparse and limited as the data are, they
are still stretching the limits of what we can process
currently, from the point of view of both data collection
and actual phylogenetic analysis. The phylogenomic
pipeline developed by Peters and colleagues [3] repre­
sents the latest in a series of automated solutions (for
example, [4-7], in addition to those listed in [3]) to both
of these problems, all of which are geared to facilitate
large-scale phylogenomic analyses using publicly avail­
able sequence data. Using their pipeline, they were able
to construct a comprehensive molecular tree of over
1,100 species of Hymenoptera (bees, ants, wasps, and
sawflies; Figure 1), presenting the state-of-the-art with
respect to hypotheses of evolutionary relationships with­
in the group (Figure 2).

© 2011 Bininda-Emonds; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Bininda-Emonds BMC Biology 2011, 9:59
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/59

Page 2 of 4

Figure 1. Representative species of Hymenoptera. The pictured hymenopteran species clockwise from top left are the German wasp (Vespula
germanica), red bull ant (Myrmecia gulosa), Argid sawfly (Arge humeralis) and European honey bee (Apis mellifera) (images courtesy of Richard
Bartz, user Quartl, Bruce Marlin and Jon Sullivan, respectively; all were obtained from Wikimedia Commons under the Creative Commons
Attribution/Share-Alike License except the honey bee, which has been released into the public domain).

Taken together, these phylogenomic pipelines epito­
mize the revolution that the combination of molecular
sequence data and bioinformatics has wrought on
phylogenetic research in the past 20 years. Our evolu­
tionary trees are larger and more complete than ever,
giving hope that the Tree of Life might be realised soon.
However, obstacles still stand in our way.

Quality control: guarding against the black box
The potential Achilles heel of any automated process is
the need to balance minimizing human intervention
against ensuring data quality, a trade-off that becomes
increasingly relevant as ever larger amounts of data are
processed. Phylogenomic pipelines, in particular, must
combat the well-known problem that public, non-curated
sequence databases like GenBank are replete with errors
[8], ranging from simple sequencing errors to more
serious problems including contamination, false identi­
fications and erroneous annotations. However, even
GenBank’s curated RefSeq database is not immune to
these problems [9].

The wealth of quality controls (for example, reciprocal
BLAST searches against a reference genome) imple­
mented by Peters and colleagues in their pipeline should
be sufficient to catch most obvious instances of contami­
nation or widely divergent nuclear copies of mitochon­
drial genes (or ‘numts’ as they are commonly known).
Because it does not tend to rely on GenBank’s gene
annotations, the pipeline can also potentially correct for
falsely annotated gene sequences. Indeed, such auto­
mated orthology assessment (which, it must be pointed
out, is not entirely without its limitations) underlies its
construction of homologous sets of nuclear genes. The
pipeline also builds in cutting edge tools targeting issues
known to impact negatively on phylogenetic analysis.
Thus, the final data set comprises maximally informative
and overlapping alignment subsets that have been pruned
of regions of dubious alignment quality across species as
well as having been controlled for compositional bias in
the sequence data.
Importantly, the Peters et al. pipeline, like most others,
is only semi-automated, consisting basically of a

Bininda-Emonds BMC Biology 2011, 9:59
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/59

Page 3 of 4

Figure 2. Phylogenetic tree of the Hymenoptera. Using a new phylogenomic pipeline that they have developed, Peters et al. [3] were able to
construct a comprehensive phylogeny across the group (underlying data for the image courtesy of Ralph Peters) from the public sequence data
available in GenBank. Key: green, ‘Symphyta’; orange, Ichneumonoidea; dark blue, Proctotrupomorpha; cyan, Evanioidea; red, Aculeata.

framework of programs to be used in conjunction with
one another. This setup not only permits new tools to be
plugged into the pipeline, but also provides the
investigator with the opportunity to examine the output
at each stage of the process and to catch any errors
missed or made by the programs. Whether or not this is
done in practice remains to be seen.
Where all phylogenomic pipelines thus far fall short,
however, is on the taxonomic side of things. Although
GenBank provides a taxonomy of species names com­
piled using several recognized sources, they readily admit

they themselves are not an authoritative taxonomic
source. Thus, the sequences for a given species might be
split across different taxonomic synonyms. More insidious
and worrisome, however, is when sequences have been
assigned to the wrong species by the original investi­
gators. Estimates of the frequency of such incidences of
taxonomic misidentification are rare, but the few case
studies indicate it to be significant, potentially upwards of
20% for some groups [10]. Whereas a component could
be built into the pipeline to correct the synonymy
problem, tracking down the misidentification problem is

Bininda-Emonds BMC Biology 2011, 9:59
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/59

difficult at best, and utterly impossible in a black-box
approach.

The computational challenge
Phylogenetic analysis represents a difficult problem
computationally because the number of trees increases
super-exponentially with the number of species in the
analysis. Thus, whereas there are only 3 possible rooted
trees that link 3 species, there are already 15 possible
trees that link 4 species and 105 that link 5. With only 67
species, we already face a forest of trees (2.8  ×  10111) to
search through that is larger than the volume of the
universe in cubic Ångstroms.
In tackling this problem, the input of computer
scientists has proven invaluable over the past decade. The
combination of more efficient implementations, cleverer
heuristic search strategies, and parallel computing means
that computationally intensive likelihood-based analyses
of a scale that was unthinkable even with methods like
maximum parsimony not even a decade ago are now
increasingly commonplace. The Peters et al. pipeline
takes full advantage of these developments, using
RAxML, one of the fastest maximum likelihood programs
available, for the final phylogenetic analysis. Thus, their
analyses of the hymenopteran data sets (over 1,100 species
and 80,000 sites) required only 9 days on a medium-size
cluster, complete with estimates of support obtained via
bootstrapping. (For comparison, parsimony analyses
without bootstrapping of the 500 species and 759 sites of
the so-called ‘Zilla’ data set for green plants, one of the
largest phylogenetic matrices of its day, required nearly
12 months of CPU time in 1997.) Indeed, the Peters et al.
matrices only represent medium-size problems for
RAxML, which has successfully analysed a data set of
nearly 10,000 aligned sites for over 55,000 flowering plant
species [11].
But, how accurate are these phylogenomic trees, given
that we are searching through the equivalent of an
exponential number of universes of forests? Fortunately,
the answer would appear to be ‘pretty good’. The phylo­
genies obtained by Peters et al. generally reconstruct
uncontroversial relationships within Hymenoptera, with
unusual groupings being traced back more to issues of
data quality (for example, lack of overlap, large amounts
of missing data). Similarly, simulation studies show that
accuracy is relatively constant (±90%) across problem
sizes ranging from 4 to 4,096 species for numerous
methods, including maximum likelihood using RAxML
[12]. These represent problem sizes currently being
investigated and provide hope that the analysis of even
larger problems will be tractable and present the same
degree of accuracy in the future.

Page 4 of 4

Moving forward
The growing ease with which we can generate, collate,
and analyse molecular sequence data within a phylo­
genomic framework has contributed significantly to the
dramatic expansion of the scope of systematic research
over the past decade. In this, solutions such as the one
provided by Peters and colleagues will play an important
role in our full-scale assault on the Tree of Life, especially
given its open nature and applicability to any taxonomic
group of interest. At the same time, however, it is
important to remember that these bioinformatic solu­
tions merely represent tools to further our research
objec­ ives and cannot replace a critical assessment of
t
both the underlying data and the results they present.
The Tree of Life is coming increasingly within our reach,
but we still must take care not to grasp automatically at
the first solution that comes along.
Published: 20 September 2011
References
1.	 May R: Unanswered questions in ecology. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B 1999,
354:1951-1959.
2.	 Sanderson MJ, Driskell AC: The challenge of constructing large
phylogenetic trees. Trends Plant Sci 2003, 8:374-379.
3.	 Peters RS, Meyer B, Krogmann L, Borner J, Meusemann K, Schütte K, Niehuis
O, Misof B: The taming of an impossible child: a standardized all-in
approach to the phylogeny of Hymenoptera using public database
sequences. BMC Biol 2011, 9:55.
4.	 Hibbett DS, Nilsson RH, Snyder M, Fonseca M, Costanzo J, Shonfeld M:
Automated phylogenetic taxonomy: an example in the
homobasidiomycetes (mushroom-forming fungi). Syst Biol 2005,
54:660-668.
5.	 Wu D, Hartman A, Ward N, Eisen JA: An automated phylogenetic tree-based
small subunit rRNA taxonomy and alignment pipeline (STAP). PloS one
2008, 3:e2566.
6.	 Ciccarelli FD, Doerks T, von Mering C, Creevey CJ, Snel B, Bork P: Toward
automatic reconstruction of a highly resolved tree of life. Science 2006,
311:1283-1287.
7.	 Robbertse B, Reeves JB, Schoch CL, Spatafora JW: A phylogenomic analysis
of the Ascomycota. Fungal Genet Biol 2006, 43:715-725.
8.	 Bidartondo MI: Preserving accuracy in GenBank. Science 2008, 319:1616.
9.	 Hassanin A, Bonillo C, Bui XN, Cruaud C: Comparisons between
mitochondrial genomes of domestic goat (Capra hircus) reveal the
presence of numts and multiple sequencing errors. Mitochondrial DNA
2010, 21(3-4):68-76.
10.	 Sanderson MJ: Construction and annotation of large phylogenetic trees.
Aust Syst Bot 2007, 20:287-301.
11.	 Smith SA, Beaulieu JM, Stamatakis A, Donoghue MJ: Understanding
angiosperm diversification using small and large phylogenetic trees. Am J
Bot 2011, 98:404-414.
12.	 Bininda-Emonds ORP, Stamatakis A: Taxon sampling versus computational
complexity and their impact on obtaining the Tree of Life. In Reconstructing
the Tree of Life: Taxonomy and Systematics of Species Rich Taxa. Volume 72.
Edited by Hodkinson TR, Parnell JAN. CRC Press; 2006:77-95.

doi:10.1186/1741-7007-9-59
Cite this article as: Bininda-Emonds ORP: Inferring the Tree of Life: chopping
a phylogenomic problem down to size? BMC Biology 2011, 9:59.

</pre>
</body>
</html>
