<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>1745-6150-5-47 1..17</title>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1221/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Bittner et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:47
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/47

HYPOTHESIS

Open Access

Some considerations for analyzing biodiversity
using integrative metagenomics and gene
networks
Lucie Bittner1†, Sébastien Halary2†, Claude Payri3, Corinne Cruaud4, Bruno de Reviers1, Philippe Lopez2,
Eric Bapteste2*

Abstract
Background: Improving knowledge of biodiversity will benefit conservation biology, enhance bioremediation
studies, and could lead to new medical treatments. However there is no standard approach to estimate and to
compare the diversity of different environments, or to study its past, and possibly, future evolution.
Presentation of the hypothesis: We argue that there are two conditions for significant progress in the
identification and quantification of biodiversity. First, integrative metagenomic studies - aiming at the simultaneous
examination (or even better at the integration) of observations about the elements, functions and evolutionary
processes captured by the massive sequencing of multiple markers - should be preferred over DNA barcoding
projects and over metagenomic projects based on a single marker. Second, such metagenomic data should be
studied with novel inclusive network-based approaches, designed to draw inferences both on the many units and
on the many processes present in the environments.
Testing the hypothesis: We reached these conclusions through a comparison of the theoretical foundations of
two molecular approaches seeking to assess biodiversity: metagenomics (mostly used on prokaryotes and protists)
and DNA barcoding (mostly used on multicellular eukaryotes), and by pragmatic considerations of the issues
caused by the ‘species problem’ in biodiversity studies.
Implications of the hypothesis: Evolutionary gene networks reduce the risk of producing biodiversity estimates
with limited explanatory power, biased either by unequal rates of LGT, or difficult to interpret due to (practical)
problems caused by type I and type II grey zones. Moreover, these networks would easily accommodate additional
(meta)transcriptomic and (meta)proteomic data.
Reviewers: This article was reviewed by Pr. William Martin, Dr. David Williams (nominated by Pr. J Peter Gogarten)
& Dr. James McInerney (nominated by Pr. John Logsdon).

Background
Studying biodiversity

Improving knowledge of biodiversity will benefit conservation biology[1], enhance bioremediation studies[2],
and could lead to new medical treatments[3]. However
there is no standard approach to estimate and to compare the diversity of different environments, or to study
its past, and possibly, future evolution. Part of the
* Correspondence: eric.bapteste@snv.jussieu.fr
† Contributed equally
2
UMR CNRS 7138 Systématique, Adaptation, Evolution, Université Pierre et
Marie Curie, Paris, France

problem is that analyses of biodiversity require both a
clear definition of the term biodiversity, e.g. what are
the relevant units of biodiversity considered, and a consensus on the methods relevant to quantify these units.
However, biodiversity is a complex notion, which raises
multiple questions that can be addressed from distinct
perspectives[4]. First, compositional[5] or element-based
accounts of biodiversity[6] can inquire “What is there?”.
Then, scientists describe the variety of life forms (or
bio-specifics[6]) present in an ecosystem, such as the
genes, organisms, species, clades, and communities. Second, functional[5] account of biodiversity[6] can

© 2010 Bittner et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Bittner et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:47
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/47

examine what these elements are doing: “What is happening out there?”. Here, the focus shifts towards the
many functions fulfilled in the ecosystem. Third, a process-based perspective can address evolutionary questions, such as: “How did these elements and functions
evolve?”. Studies thus concentrate on how diversity is
generated and sustained by processes, such as mutation,
recombination, lateral gene transfer, ecological pressures, and the like. These profoundly different viewpoints lead to distinct estimates of natural diversity,
highlighting most important issues regarding the identification and systematisation of biodiversity.
The element-based perspective typically offers various
measures of biodiversity reflecting either the number
and/or the phylogenetic diversity of bio-specifics, or
their complementarity in various environments[7,8]. It
resulted in multiple biodiversity indices serving different
purposes[9]. In particular, Faith[6,10] suggested to
account for the whole hierarchy of bio- specifics (from
lower-level genetic units to higher clades) and for within
species diversity. However, the inventory of species and the inventory of elements in general - has been criticized by philosophers for providing a static rather than
a dynamic account of biodiversity, neglecting biological
processes[11]. Element-based approaches cleave the ecosystem into known static bits and pieces[12,13], while
deeper analyses of natural variation require a more integrated and dynamic understanding of the processes
affecting the ecosystem as a whole[14]. Then, relevant
estimates of biodiversity cannot only be based on indices
derived from lists of elements, they should also quantify
the likelihood that a given ecosystem, as a whole, will
continue producing natural diversity[15]. Problematically, details of the functional integration of the many
elements of an ecosystem, and of the evolutionary processes affecting their diversity, are almost always largely
unknown. Hence, practical (and quantitative) processbased studies of biodiversity have only recently got
under way.
Since no single perspective provides a satisfactory
account of biodiversity, confronting multiple approaches
can suggest possible improvements in biodiversity studies. Here we contrast two approaches that are among
the many tools used for studying biodiversity: microbial
metagenomics[16] and DNA barcoding[17]. Based on
their divergences, we propose an integrative approach
aiming at the simultaneous examination (or even better
at the integration) of the elements-based, function-based
and process-based perspectives in biodiversity studies,
thanks to massive sequencing of multiple environmental
markers. We argue that it should be preferred over
DNA barcoding and metagenomic studies based on a
single marker for a variety of organisms for which the
definition of species is ambiguous (prokaryotes and

Page 2 of 17

eukaryotes alike). Finally, we discuss how network-based
analyses of such molecular datasets could benefit biodiversity studies.
The two diverging tracks of microbial metagenomics and
DNA barcoding Species is not the relevant unit in
metagenomic studies

Both studies of microbial metagenomics and DNA barcoding initially adopted an element-based perspective of
biodiversity[18]. They focused on the identification and
the quantification of compositional units rather than on
the processes sustaining the diversity (with, later, major
exceptions concerning metagenomics). Interestingly
however, microbial metagenomics and DNA barcoding
differed in their units of interest.
Microbial metagenomics is an assumed gene-centric
perspective, that consists of the direct sequencing of
environmental DNA[19]. It uses either one marker
(sequenced at very high depth)[20] or many (generally
randomly amplified)[21] to analyze phylotypes and/or
functional categories[22]. Phylotypes are groups of
homologous sequences (usually the 16 S rRNA) whose
members share more than a given percentage of similarity (e.g. over 99% of sequence identity). They are defined
to assign environmental sequences[23] to a taxon of
reference, by BLASTing[24] the phylotypes against databases of identified taxa[25,26]. This ‘taxonomic’ assignation highly depends on the gene’s conservation across
taxa, the depth of the taxonomic sampling in the databases, the taxon richness and evenness in the environmental sample, the sequence read length and the impact
of lateral gene transfer (LGT) in the environment and in
the reference database[27]. LGT is caused by processes
such as transposition, transduction, and conjugation.
LGT results in significant variations in the gene content
of even closely related strains thriving in different environments[28]. Consequently, a single gene, even the
16 S, provides limited information about biodiversity
[29-32], and does not necessarily allow reliable prediction of community metabolism, physiology, biochemistry
and ecology[33]. Typically, different ecosystems that
cannot be distinguished by their phylotypes can be distinguished by their functions[33].
Importantly, microbial metagenomicists acknowledge
that phylotypes are defined ad hoc [27] in order to
obtain discrete categories, usable in various calculations
of diversity (such as rarefaction curves or Chao1 estimates[8,9]). Likewise, environmental sequences are
binned into functional categories, based on BLAST
searches against reference databases[23,34] (KEGG[35],
Pfam[36], SEED[36]). Such practical units aim at sampling the total genetic diversity to expand our knowledge of the gene content, functional significance and
genetic variability in natural communities[1,22,33]. A

Bittner et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:47
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/47

key point here is that microbial metagenomics does not
use species as the standard unit to describe and to
quantify biodiversity.
There are good reasons for this choice: species pose
at least two major problems to microbial diversity studies. First, species raise the problem of inter-approach
pluralism[37]. Microbiologists studying prokaryotes do
not adhere to a single (unified) species concept[37].
Rather, they recognize different but equally legitimate
rules (or ‘species concepts’) to group individual
microbes as members of a given species taxon[37].
These rules rest on distinct criteria, many of which are
based on different evolutionary and ecological processes, capturing diverse important features of microbial diversity[38,39]. Consequently, there is no
guarantee that individual microbes should always fall
into recognizable discrete groups, showing tight genotypic and phenotypic similarity as well as genetic connectivity[40-43]. For a given set of individuals in a
given environment, this plurality of legitimate rules
can and does produce a plurality of valid incompatible
groups[44-48] (Figure 1A). However, if different species concepts are used to assess the diversity in different environments, estimates of the number and
composition of species are not directly comparable.
Second, species raise the issue of intra-approach pluralism[37] in microbial biodiversity studies (Figure 1A).
Even with a given species concept, one can sort the
same organisms into conflicting classifications, depending on the empirical evidence at hand. In prokaryotes,
this conflict in species definition is largely due to the
prevalence of LGT. For instance, since recombination is
usually limited to parts of a genome, the definition of
recombining-species depends on which part of the genome is selected[46,49]. Likewise, given the frequency of
LGT, and since genetic isolation occurs on a gene-bygene basis in prokaryotes[49], different clusters of genes
of an organism’s genome legitimately support different
-uncoupled- evolutionary histories[37]. It affects the
identification of phylogenetic- species. Hence, in the
absence of a unified species concept, counting species
will always be problematic, method-, marker-, and possibly sample-dependent. Instead, more precise operational
units could be used to capture genetic biodiversity at
multiple levels, and ideally to reveal the evolutionary
processes taking place in an environment[38,39].
Species is the relevant unit in DNA barcoding studies

DNA barcoding contrasts with metagenomics. DNA
barcoding is currently mostly used on multicellular
eukaryotes but with the ambition of studying the entire
diversity of life. It is a minimalistic strategy, that has
aided taxonomic work and biodiversity studies, by sorting and clustering specimens collected in the field,

Page 3 of 17

contributing to species discovery by flagging genetically
distinct lineages. Barcoders sequence 400-600 base pairs
of a single molecular marker (or barcode) with a strict
uniparental inheritance[17,50], such as the mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase 1 gene[51], to divide life into
such natural units. Comparative analyses of these barcodes can serve to define species boundaries (although
it is not their only use), and to study genetic diversity
within these species. Pairwise distances (usually p-distances) are inferred from the barcodes of all specimens
under study. Under the assumption that pairs of
sequences from a same species are more similar than
pairs of sequences from different species[50], the presence of multiple species in a sample should produce a
characteristic barcode-gap[50,52], separating sequences
with low p-distances from sequences with high p-distances on an histogram of p-distances frequencies[52]
(Figure 1B). Such graphs are used to compute a minimal
p-distance over which two sequences do not belong to
the same species. Alternative approaches use maximum
likelihood-based methods, models of coalescence and
speciation processes, to delineate groups of specimens
belonging to a same species from barcode sequences
[53,54]. In both cases, these barcode-based species are
tentatively assigned to a known species by comparison
with sequences from previously recognized taxa[55] to
refine estimates of intra-specific genetic variation. In
absence of matches with reference species, each group
of specimens sharing very similar barcodes is identified
and counted as a new species. Their monophyly on a
representative gene tree is sometimes a further condition[50,56]. Finally, in DNA barcoding, when such
groups are proposed, no additional genes are generally
required to evaluate biodiversity. No functional analysis
is achieved.
In what follows, we won’t question DNA barcoding
first objective (i.e. to assign unknown specimens to
already recognized species, thanks to a DNA-library of
named specimens). This approach has the potential to
produce estimates of the genetic diversity within
accepted species. Our claim will only concern DNA barcoding second - exploratory- goal (i.e. enhancing the
discovery of new species, particularly in cryptic, microscopic and other organisms with complex or inaccessible
morphology, considering that genetic-species could be
delineated based on the analysis of the genetic distances
between unassigned specimens, using the working
hypothesis that inter-specific genetic distances should
have greater values than intra-specific ones). More precisely, the fact that DNA barcoding and microbial metagenomics offer separate recipes to estimate biodiversity
raises questions concerning which units and methods
provide the most informative account of biodiversity
using molecules.

Bittner et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:47
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/47

Page 4 of 17

Figure 1 Four remarkable situations when distinct species concepts are applied. Each species concept groups a set of organisms, as
members of a species taxon, as illustrated by a colored circle (purple for the phylogenetic species, green for the recombining or biological
species, blue for the morphological species, pink for the barcode-based species). The overlap between groups is indicated by red dashes. A. In
prokaryotes, the groups defined by the various species concepts are largely not nested. A unified species concept would be a poor descriptor of
biodiversity: inter-approach pluralism is an issue for species definition. So is intra-approach pluralism, as indicated by smaller circles
corresponding to the incongruent groups proposed by different markers, for a given species concept. B. Exploratory use of DNA barcoding to
define groups of specimens belonging to a same species. On a histogram of p-distances frequencies, the identification of a barcode gap
provides a threshold over which two specimens cannot belong to the same species. The monophyly of specimens falling in a same group can
also be assessed. C. The ideal case: all the species concepts identify the same sets of organisms. Intra- and inter-approach pluralisms are not a
problem. A unified species concept is a good descriptor of biodiversity D. Type I grey zone: the species concepts produce a series of nested
groups. Ranking these groups is an issue. E. Type II grey zone: the species concepts produce partially non-nested groups. Inter- and intraapproach pluralism can be problematic. For cases D & E, pragmatic descriptors would be more accurate and informative about biodiversity than
a unified species concept.

Presentation of the hypothesis
The pragmatical road to integrative metagenomics

Differences in assessment of biodiversity by DNA barcoding and microbial metagenomics may be reasoned by
contrasting their biological scope: microbial metagenomics mostly studies prokaryotes[16] (affected by
LGT) and DNA barcoding has yet mostly studied eukaryotes[56] (resistant to LGT). Certainly, estimates of the
diversity of elephants and the diversity of E. coli are
pretty different questions. However, a deeper explanation of the differences between DNA barcoding and

microbial metagenomics probably lies in their distinct
underlying philosophies, with respect to the ‘species
problem’.
Identifying species problems

Unlike microbial metagenomics, DNA barcoding implicitly endorses a unified species concept (USC). At first
look, an USC offers a unique advantage: the possibility
of unambiguous definitions of species, and thus of informative units that can be compared in biodiversity studies. The most popular USC is the general lineage

Bittner et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:47
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/47

concept [57,58] of de Queiroz[59]. In that theory,
species correspond to separately evolving lineages of
metapopulations. The various rules defining diverse
species taxa (ecological, phylogenetic, biological, and so
on) do not directly define the species boundaries. They
only capture distinct secondary properties of the species,
providing operational criteria that emphasize different
processes responsible for some coherence between
organisms. The species boundaries can however be
derived by analyzing how the groups defined by these
distinct secondary operational criteria overlap. In particular, if they all largely agree, the species is simply
bounded by the intersection of the groups (Figure 1C).
All the species members then share a common biochemistry, physiology, sexual behaviour, phylogeny, and
ecology. In that ideal case, a group of organisms identified by DNA barcoding only provides a good proxy for
the species boundaries, and a valuable measure of biodiversity. One might however wonder whether the different groups proposed by distinct secondary concepts
should always largely intersect, and if not, whether
counting species, using DNA barcoding groups as a
proxy, provides meaningful estimates of biodiversity.
When different criteria support conflicting (or weakly
overlapping) groups of organisms, a ‘grey zone’ appears
[58]. For us, two sorts of grey zones (Figure 1D&1E)
strongly confuse species-based estimates of biodiversity
attempted by DNA barcoding. First, when the various
secondary properties defining the groups arose at different times in the process of speciation, the groups that
can be proposed will be typically nested (Type I grey
zone, Figure 1D). Such compatible albeit incongruent
groups have been very often reported in studies of
eukaryotic diversity[60-63]. Second, the different criteria
can define partly overlapping (e.g. not nested) sets of
organisms (Type II grey zone, Figure 1E). Many biological processes lead to this result, such as incomplete lineage sorting associated with very rapid or recent
speciations[61], introgression[51], hybridization and
polyploïdy[62]. Differences in organellar and/or nuclear
evolution also produce legitimate disagreement between
groups inferred using these two sources of characters,
when nuclear and organellar genomes have distinct coalescence times [64], effective population sizes[65,66], or
when biparental inheritance[67,68] and heteroplasmy
[69] of the organelles is undetected. Moreover, in organisms and lineages with variable frequencies of sexual
reproduction[63] and clonality[62], several combinations
of the migration rates[70], ranges and modes of dispersal[63] equally generate non-nested genetic, morphological, ecological, and phylogenetic groups. Type II grey
zones were notably reported in 17% of the 89 studies
conducted using phylogenetic and non- phylogenetic
concepts to analyze the diversity of multicellular

Page 5 of 17

eukaryotes (e.g. grass, fungi, and metazoans)[60]. Importantly, no such estimate has yet been compiled for unicellular eukaryotes: the level of incongruence between
groups used to define the species boundaries may be
comparable to that of multicellular eukaryotes, but the
correspondence between DNA sequence clusters, ecotypes and morphospecies is still largely unknown for
protists [61-63,70,71].
Dealing with species problems

Type I grey zones confronts DNA barcoding studies of
biodiversity to serious practical issues. Identifying bona
fide species in such a continuum of groups within
groups poses the famous ranking problem, e.g. the need
for decision criteria to assign monophyletic lineages to
distinct taxonomical ranks. Unfortunately, the USC, that
justifies DNA barcoding approach, does not offer any
additional operational criteria to decide where the species ends and starts[59]. A comparable conundrum was
for thinstance met when biologists attempted to discriminate species from varieties in the XIX century. When
no real boundary but only arbitrary differences existed
between the two, Darwin compared the ranking problem
to defining the indefinable[59]. He concluded that we,
not nature, draw divisions - and identify species - for
pragmatic reasons.
It is thus important to wonder whether DNA barcoding operates pragmatic divisions, relevant for biodiversity analyses, and in particular defines species so they
can be compared between studies. Some considerations
suggest that it is unfortunately not the case. First, there
is no universal barcode[72-76]: different markers must
be used for different organisms. Thus, biodiversity studies cannot always compare like to like. Second, not all
datasets present a nice barcode gap, which affects the
delineation of groups. Moreover many artefacts produce
barcode gaps, hindering the identification of bona fide
species[76,77]. For instance, the threshold over which
two sequences are considered too distant to belong to
the same species is directly affected by the sampling
effort[61,78], and by the biology of the organisms under
study. In particular, issues of hidden paralogy, presence
of nuclear copies of mitochondrial genes[79], cases of
biparental inheritance[67,68], variable coalescence times
[80,81], unequal molecular evolutionary rates[82] and
migration rates[77] can bias groups definitions. Unlike
phylotypes in microbial metagenomics analyses, units by
which biodiversity is counted are not held constant in
independent DNA barcoding studies[83]. Typically, the
pairwise distance corresponding to species membership
changes with the sampling effort and between samples
[50]. Thus direct quantitative and qualitative comparisons of biodiversity estimates are not feasible, which seriously limits the evaluation of the extent and of the

Bittner et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:47
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/47

evolution of biodiversity, across environments and over
time.
Type II grey zones, which result from the genuine
identification of different types of lineages, caused by
distinct processes pose a different practical puzzle. It
extends the problem of inter-approach pluralism to
DNA barcoding analyses. The USC leads to the identification of species that are actually heterogeneous in
terms of biological processes and structures. For that
reason, species have limited explanatory power[37]. The
groups proposed by DNA barcoding approaches no
longer convey much information about the ecology,
physiology, etc. of the species and about the processes
(migration, interbreeding, adaptations, duplications,
transpositions, etc.) sustaining these properties. Biodiversity measures based on a single feature will unfortunately provide an unrepresentative estimate. The larger
the type II grey zone, the bigger the issue. Hence, it
might appear more pragmatic to devise additional units
with explanatory and predictive utility, for instance
interbreeding groups, ecological groups, smallest phylogenetic groups worthy of recognition, to assess what
processes crucially maintain biodiversity[60,84,85]. This
solution seems even more relevant if, for type II grey
zone, the use of different barcodes produces different
groups (Figure 1E). Such cases of intra- approach pluralism may further distort biodiversity estimates in DNA
barcoding studies, since disagreement between barcodes
is not unexpected[61,71,86].
Corallinales as a case-study

Corallinales are a worldwide distributed order of red
algae with calcite in their cell walls. They often reproduce asexually via thallus fragmentation, direct asexual
spores, produce unattached rhodoliths and grow on
every favourable substratum (i.e. shells, drifting woods,
drifting algae). Delineating species within Corallinales is
difficult, because environmental conditions (such as the
strength of currents) impact their morphology and collected specimens are generally sterile. DNA barcoding
approaches were recently applied to small, geographically restricted, datasets of Corallinales[87,88]. It was
reported that intra- specific genetic diversity was at least
twice smaller than the inter-specific genetic diversity
between already recognized morpho-species, suggesting
that DNA barcode studies could help discovering new
species of Corallinales. However, analyses of additional
sequences from two markers (240 mitochondrial CO1
genes and 495 plastidial psbA genes), mainly from South
Pacific Ocean (Additional file 1) unravelled both type I
and type II grey zone related issues for these taxa.
For 206 specimens sharing these two markers, BCG
[78] and MYC[53] methods proposed inconsistent
method-, locality- and gene-dependent estimates of the

Page 6 of 17

number of Corallinales species present in the dataset.
Methodological biases and artefacts (e.g. the use of an
incorrect ultrametric tree in the MYC approach or of a
wrong model of evolution) can for sure explain some of
the disagreement between methods (inter-approach
pluralism). Yet, even for a given method the two markers generally returned incompatible estimates (Table
1). The closest assessments between CO1 and psbA presented an average of 45% of groups with different specimen contents. This intra-approach pluralism is
problematic because it was impossible to determine
whether and which of these incompatible groups may
correspond to a unified ‘species’. Each group had a
lower degree of genetic diversity than that reported as
bona fide intra-specific distance in previous studies
[87-89]. All showed a comparable coherence in terms of
monophyly and morphology, and a similar lack of geographical coherence (data not shown). Partitioning the
dataset by sampling sites also had a dramatic effect on
biodiversity analyses (Table 2). For both markers, histograms of p-distances comprising the entire dataset
showed no clear gap, while every site specific sub-sample presented a gap, seemingly defining an unambiguous
limit for intra- and inter- genetic diversity (Figure 2).
However, the genetic distances inferred from each site
to define a species were highly variable. Problematically,
between localities, some inter-specific distances overlapped with intra-specific distances (type I grey zone),
and sometimes conflicted (type II grey zone)(Table 2).
No standard threshold to define Corallinales species
with CO1 or psbA could be proposed.
Importantly, these inconsistent estimates can be
explained by different evolutionary processes, with opposite influences, that sustain Corallinales biodiversity. On
the one hand asexual reproduction and somaclonal
mutation tend to produce divergent lineages and should
produce congruent groups between markers; on the
other hand, many other processes tend to mix genomes
and should produce incongruent groups between markers. First, CO1 and psbA had different rates of evolution
(Figure 3A). The fact that more species were generally
detected with CO1 than with psbA, although these two
markers had equally resolved phylogenies (41,6% of
nodes with a support >80% for CO1 and 37,7% of such
nodes for psbA), could be due to the faster evolutionary
rate of mitochondrial DNA compared to plastidial DNA.
Second, the mutually incompatible groupings proposed by these markers could reflect lineage sorting, as
illustrated in previous studies on seaweeds[90]. Since
CO1 and psbA maximum likelihood trees (reconstructed
with a GTR+I+G4 model, 1000 bootstrap replicates by
RaxML[91]) showed at least one strongly supported
phylogenetic conflict, we also suspect that organellar
inheritance has not been strictly maternal in these

Bittner et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:47
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/47

Page 7 of 17

Table 1 Biodiversity estimates for each method and marker
gene\methods

BCG lower limit
(nj tree)

BCG higher limit
(nj tree)

MYC
(UPGMA tree)

206 sequences of CO1 without EM

129 ESUs
i = 0,0087

37 ESUs
i = 0,137

121 ESUs
(117-129)

206 sequences of CO1
with EM (HKY85)

130 ESUs
i = 0,01

38 ESUs
i = 0,259

128 ESUs
(118-130)

206 sequences of CO1
with EM (GTR+I+G)

55 ESUs
i = 0,620

64 ESUs
i = 0,531

128 ESUs
(125-129)

206 sequences of psbA
without EM

52 ESUs
i = 0,066

52 ESUs
i = 0,071

90 ESUs
(74-101)

206 sequences of psbA
with EM (HKY85)

54 ESUs
i = 0,075

11 ESUs
i = 0,224

91 ESUs
(61-94)

206 sequences of psbA
with EM (GTR+I+G)

55 ESUs
i = 0,081

63 ESUs
i = 0,047

81 ESUs
(35-100)

Each column corresponds to the results of a given method. Each line was inferred with specific settings and evolutionary models (EM). Uncorrected p-distances
were calculated using MEGA 4.1[112]. Parameters for two evolutionary models (HKY85; GTR with a gamma distribution splitting into 4 categories - GTR+I+G4)
were calculated using PALM http://palm.iis.sinica.edu.tw/index.html and MrModeltest version 2.2[113], and then used to calculate corrected p-distances using
PAUP* version 4b10[114]. NJ (Neighbor-Joining) and UPGMA trees were built using PAUP* version 4b10, considering no evolution model and then a HKY85, and
finally a GTR+I+G model. A ‘relative time from branching rate’ was determined with the UPGMA trees using the GENIE v3.0 software[115]. Since it was not
possible to identify a barcode gap unambigously, we defined a range of BCG estimates, based on the histogram of p-distances. The first empty class of
frequency defined the lower limit for the intraspecific distance (BCG lower limit). The higher limit of the intraspecific distance (BCG higher limit) was defined as
the left bound of the 95% confidence interval of the Normal distribution followed by the histograms of p-distances. The number of estimated monophyletic
groups corresponding to species (ESUs) is indicated in bold. Values of i correspond to the upper bound estimated for the intraspecific pairwise-distance for the
BCG methods. For the MYC method, a range of estimated ESUs is given into rounded bracket (confidence interval of 95%).

Table 2 Inferred intra and interspecific pairwise-distances for CO1 and psbA by sampling locality.
n
=

CO1
sequences identity
average

CO1
intra ESUs
variation

CO1
inter ESUs
variation

psbA
sequences identity
average

psbA
intra ESUs
variation

psbA
inter ESUs
variation

Fiji

56

84.87%

0-3 bp
i < 0,0065

> 11 bp
j >0,023

89.64%

0-39 bp
i < 0,071
(£)

> 45 bp
j >0,083

New Caledonia

46

84.73%

0-7 bp
i < 0,015

> 16 bp
j >0,034

89.02%

0-20 bp
i < 0,036

> 48 bp
j >0,088

Vanuatu

34

83.19%

0-12 bp
i < 0,026
(£)

> 29 bp
j >0,062

87.93%

0-19 bp
i < 0,035

> 30 bp
j >0,015
(£)

Chesterfield

21

84.10%

0-1 bp
i < 0,0021

> 21 bp
j >0,045

89.94%

0-35 bp
i < 0,064

> 49 bp
j >0,090

Europe

14

84.73%

0-8 bp
i < 0,017
(£)

> 46 bp
j >0,099

89.42%

0-1 bp
i < 0,0018

> 22 bp
j >0,040
(£)

Morea (French
Polynesia)

12

84.05%

0-1 bp
i < 0,0021

> 37 bp
j >0,080

88.46%

0-19 bp
i < 0,035

> 48 bp
j >0,088

Philippines

10

84.79%

0-12 bp
i < 0,026
(£)

> 48 bp
j >0,104

89.60%

0-2 bp
i < 0,0036

> 48 bp
j >0,088

Caribbean

6

87.58%

0-7 bp
i < 0,015

> 53 bp
j >0,114

90.40%

0-3 bp
i < 0,0055

> 42 bp
j >0,077

Indonesia

4

87.42%

1 bp
i < 0,0021

> 66 bp
j >0,143

89.30%

2 bp
i < 0,0036

> 64 bp
j >0,118

Global

206

83.17%

0-4 bp
i < 0,0087

> 7 bp
j >0,015

88.15%

0-36 bp
i < 0,066

> 37 bp
j >0,068

For each locality, for n specimens, the table presents the average sequence identity, the inferred intraspecific (i) and interspecific (j) distances, without EM, and
their corresponding variation in number of base pairs for the identified ESUs. Cells in bold indicates when intra- specific and inter-specific distances conflict, for a
given marker, between different sites. Cells with a (£) indicates when intra-specific and inter-specific distances conflict, for a given marker, between a local site
and the genetic threshold based on the global sampling.

Bittner et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:47
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/47

Page 8 of 17

Figure 2 Histograms of the frequency of p-distances for CO1 and psbA in a Corallinales Dataset. A. Results for the CO1 dataset: the
horizontal axis represents the pairwise sequence divergence (p-distances) for the specimens of a given class of frequency; the vertical axis
corresponds to the number of pairs of specimens of each class. ‘n’ indicates the number of specimens sampled for a given locality. Barcode
gaps are indicated by a star. Inferred interspecific distances are reported in green, inferred intraspecific distances are reported in red. B. Results
for the psbA dataset. Same legend. On the global sampling, no barcode gap can be defined. Several discontinuities exist in the distribution, as
represented by the grey area. When more data are included (data not shown), the barcode gap disappears.

Corallinales. Two processes - the coalescence of sporelings and the fusion of crustose individuals- may have
produced genetic mergers[92]. In addition, phylogeographic analyses indicated that individual Corallinales
are good dispersers, as identical sequences of CO1 and
psbA were found over 1800 to 6300 kms of distance
(Figure 3.B). Thallus fragmentation and reattachment on
drifting substrates[93], and a quick dispersal of haploid
spores by strong currents can introduce individuals in a
locality, which generates apparent “barcode gaps”, if the
incoming individuals are genetically different from the
majority of the local population. Yet, at a larger scale,
this dispersal of Corallinales results in a continuum of
genetic diversity (Figure 2).
Both theories and case-studies indicate that grey-zone
related issues are common[51,60] rather than the exception, which too often limits the efficacy of methods
based on a single marker to enumerate “what is there”

in a pragmatic way. Consistently, the use of a larger
number of barcodes[8,27] and of more data is recommended to test when DNA barcoding proposes robust
groupings[51,64,94-96], as advocated by the tenants of
an integrative taxonomy combining DNA barcoding
with other lines of evidence[97,98]. Typically, corroborative data (ecology, morphology, other genes) can help to
assign species status to barcode groups. When groups
are robust, intra-approach pluralism is - at least - not
an issue. Yet, as the sequencing of additional independent barcodes is increasingly recognized a requirement
to design robust DNA barcoding analyses, the scope of
DNA barcoding will likely expand, and become some
sort of multi-marker ... metagenomics. This transition is
possible because, although these approaches are rooted
in distinct philosophies about species, for most organisms, they largely face similar practical issues as they
lack a pragmatic way to define these units.

Bittner et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:47
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/47

Page 9 of 17

Figure 3 Gene networks of CO1 and psbA datasets. A. Sequence diversity of CO1 (in red) and psbA (in blue) datasets for the same 206
specimens represented by gene homology networks, using the same scale and the same parameters for display. Nodes are sequences, and
edges lengths are roughly proportional to the percentage of sequence identity between sequences. Closer sequences are more identical. CO1
displays more genetic diversity than psbA, thus has evolved faster in these specimens. B. Network- based phylogeographic analysis of CO1 and
psbA sequences only showing sequences sharing 100% identical sequences but found in distinct geographical sites. Same networks for
sequences presenting over 98% of identity. Nodes are sequences, colored according to their geographical origin: orange for Fiji; yellow for New
Caledonia - ‘Grande Terre’; dark blue for Vanuatu; purple for New Caledonia - Chesterfield; sky-blue for Europe; pink for French Polynesia; dark
green for Philippines; grey for the Caribbean; light green for Indonesia. The colour coded table indicates the corresponding distances between
each pair of sites. The sequences with the highest proportion of identical matches are displayed closer in the graph.

Testing the hypothesis
The highway of strategic networks

To date, metagenomic analyses of multiple random markers seem the most pragmatic recipe to study “what is
out there” when informative species taxa cannot be
easily identified. However, an inclusive framework is still
required to organize vast amounts of molecular data,
and to provide information about two other key questions of biodiversity studies: “what is happening?” and
“how did this diversity evolve?” Remarkable biodiversity
studies have already offered deep biological insights by
integrating the results of genetic, taxonomic (using phylotypes) and functional analyses of metagenomic (and
metatranscriptomic) datasets, with explicit concerns for
the processes maintaining the diversity in communities
and environments [31,33,99-102]. For instance, Qu et al.
[101] unravelled dynamic microbial communities in

chicken cecal microbiomes, adjusting to their hosts diet,
thanks to mobile DNA elements carrying abundant antibiotic resistances[101]. We will briefly argue that further
developments of evolutionary gene networks (EGN) may
be a natural follow-up for such studies of integrative
metagenomics, be they used to investigate the diversity
of one or several environments, or of a set of specimens.
EGN are very inclusive graphs, amenable to specific
mathematical investigations (see Additional file 2 for all
the related technical terms below), showing both the
rarest and the dominant sequences under study. They
offer a structured framework to represent and to compare the genetic, functional and processual diversity of
multiple datasets in a single analysis. In an EGN, each
node corresponds to a sequence (ideally an ORF), with
or without taxonomic and functional assignation. Two
nodes are connected by edges if their sequences show

Bittner et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:47
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/47

Page 10 of 17

Figure 4 An example network. Nodes (circles) are connected by edges (black lines), which may be assigned values or lengths. Blue and green
nodes do not share any connections, so they fall into two separate subnetworks (called connected components). Likewise, any two blue nodes
are connected by one or more paths. The shortest path between nodes A and Z is displayed in red. Densely connected parts of the network are
called modules and are represented in purple here. Some nodes have remarkable topological properties. For example, node B has a high
betweenness since it has a high probability of lying in the shortest path between two random nodes. Nodes P, on the opposite, are called
peripheral, since they are highly eccentric.

significant similarity (Figure 4). Edges can be weighted,
for instance using the best BLAST score of pairwise
comparisons of sequences, so that most similar
sequences are closer on the graph. Since not all gene
forms resemble one another however, discontinuous
variations will structure the graph.
An EGN is not fully connected, but comprises multiple subnetworks (connected components) of various
sizes and shapes, clustering some sequences together to
the exclusion of others. Such connected components
define Operational Gene Families (OGF), which organise
the data in a molecular space (Figure 5). In practice,
these EGNs are easy to reconstruct. Hundreds of thousands of DNA (or proteic) sequences are all BLASTed
against each other. The results of these BLASTs (the
best BLAST scores between two sequences, their percent of identity, the length over which they align, etc.)
are stored in databases. Groups of homologous
sequences (the OGF) are then inferred using clustering
algorithms (such as the simple linkage algorithm). The
BLAST score or the percentage of identity between each
pair of sequences is used to weight the corresponding
edges. The same procedure can be applied by including

sequences of mobile genetic elements in the analyses to
figure what OGF are currently mobilized. New samples
and sequences can also be very easily added to the
analysis.
Observing what and how many OGF are shared (or
not) between various samples may be a first step for a
biodiversity study. OGF will vary with the threshold
retained to define significant similarities, and in that
regard OGF definition is just as arbitrary as the decision
on where to apply new species names. However, since
EGN analysis is inclusive, OGF are defined simultaneously for different samples and environments, and the
diversity of different samples can then be compared in
one study. The richness and evenness of OGF in a sample, or the complementarity between samples, can be
measured with usual diversity indices and methods
applied to OGF (Shannon, Pielou, Chao1, ACE, rankabundance or saturation curves)[7-9]. Furthermore,
since EGNs are mathematical objects, their topological
properties[103,104] (Figure 4) can be exploited to the
benefit of biodiversity studies.
For instance, let’s assume that sodium exporters are
strongly enriched in marine environments, while

Bittner et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:47
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/47

Page 11 of 17

Figure 5 An inclusive evolutionary gene network . This graph is a section of an EGN reconstructed using 454 reads from 4 marine
environments. Each node represents a genetic sequence. Two nodes are connected by an edge when their corresponding sequences present a
significant similarity. All nodes from a given connected component fall into an Operational Gene Family (OGF). Colors correspond to the
environment of origin of the sequences, so single coloured OGFs are environment specific. Some OGFs show more genetic variability (indicated
by a D), others are highly conserved. T marks OGFs with homologous copies carried on mobile elements. A/R indicates abundant/rare
sequences. Circles identify modules, pg indicates when these modules are amenable to studies of population genetics. Topological properties of
the connected components, along with the distribution of various colors, are not random. Genetic diversity in the red and blue environments
seems complementary, as 77% the connected components separate sequences from these two environments.

potassium exporters are strongly enriched in soils,
reflecting the abundance of these ions in these environments[19]. In an EGN comprising sequences from soil
and marine samples, OGF with sequences of potassium
exporters, and OGF with sequences of sodium exporters, should have more representatives, thus comprise
more nodes than average OGF. If in addition novel
forms of potassium exporters recently evolved in some
soils only (e.g. in farm soils), these new sequences will
occupy remarkable -peripheral- positions in OGF with
potassium exporters, affecting the very topology of the
EGN. Centrality measures, useful for identifying nodes
with remarkable positions in a graph can be used to single out such peripheral sequences, since sequences only
associated with farm soils will loosely connect with the
other potassium exporters sequences. Moreover, the
genetic diversity[105] introduced by these new forms of
potassium exporters can be quantified by measuring
their impact on the diameter of the OGF (the larger its

diameter, the more genetically diverse the OGF is). In
general, EGNs may thus prove helpful to identify what
sequences and gene families play an important functional role, and had their evolution likely impacted by
their milieu (Figure 5).
Suppose now that the novel forms of potassium
exporters from a given farm soil are all strongly connected in one OGF. In terms of graph theory, they
belong to a module[106], which may typically serve to
reveal the evolutionary and ecological processes sustaining the diversity in this environment. If the number of
organisms in the farm sample was large relatively to the
number of sequences obtained, each sequence in the
module likely comes from a different organism[107].
Thus, standard population genetics techniques applied
on these sequences could provide both refined estimates
on the extent of recombination[16] and on the selective
pressures acting [108] on potassium exporters sequences
in that sample. Similar investigations could be extended

Bittner et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:47
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/47

to get global estimates, by considering all the sequences
from a given sample, falling in all the modules present
in the EGN. Finally, global estimates on the processes
maintaining the genetic and functional diversity in the
samples (e.g. transposition, transfer, molecular regulation and duplication) can also be obtained by counting
the relative proportions of OGF with duplicated
sequences, homology to transposons[101,109], phages
[22,33] or plasmids[110], or harbouring toxin/antitoxin
systems[111]. Integration of these various lines of
knowledge on bioprocesses and biospecifics in a single
EGN might then suggest what evolutionary process
affect what OGF (and thus what functions), in what
environment (Figure 5).

Implications of the hypothesis
Biodiversity is far too complex to be adequately
addressed by any single approach. For that reason, DNA
barcoding approaches and the massive sequencing of
multiple markers are obviously not mutually exclusive.
However, the latter can comprise the former (while the
opposite is not true). Since integrative metagenomics is
more inclusive than DNA barcoding, we recommend
scientists designing biodiversity studies to use either both
approaches as complementary, or for pragmatic reasons when species problems are observed or expected-, to
couple integrative metagenomics with EGNs methods.
This latter protocol has the potential to improve the
identification and the quantification of biodiversity. It
reduces the risk of producing biodiversity estimates with
limited explanatory power, biased either by unequal rates
of LGT, or difficult to interpret due to (practical) problems caused by type I and type II grey zones. Moreover,
it would be easy to include (meta)transcriptomic and
(meta)proteomic data in such EGNs, as it would only
require the inclusion of such additional molecular
sequences in the analyses. The resulting EGNs would
then provide a precious framework and useful mathematical tools for studying the almost instantaneous changes
in biodiversity, and the immediate catalytic potential of
different environments[100]. Relative variations in EGNs,
for environmental samples obtained over time or across
sites, would thus return relevant indications on the flexibility and resilience of the environment.
Reviewers’ comments
Review by William Martin (Institut fuer Botanik III,
Heinrich-Heine Universitaet Duesseldorf Universitaetsstr.
1, 40225 Duesseldorf, Germany)

This is a fine paper underscoring the need to take metagenomic data and network approaches into consideration in biodiversity issues. There is no need for major
revision in my view, but I came away with three
impressions.

Page 12 of 17

Number one, a real life example comparing barcode
and “metanet” data for biodiversity investigation, head
to head, would perhaps be instructive.
We agree. We added a new section entitled ‘Corallinales as a case-study’ to better illustrate the limit of barcode approaches on real datasets, and how this limit
could be in part explained by highlighting two evolutionary processes (unequal evolutionary rates in markers and
high organismal dispersal range) using two very simple
gene networks (Figure 3A and 3B). First, using identical
settings for the display, a metanet showed that, for the
same 206 specimens, CO1 sequences present more divergence than psbA sequences, which means that CO1 had
a higher rate of evolution than psbA in these organisms.
Second, we used metanets to identify which identical
sequences (or nearly identical ones, depending on the
threshold selected) were found in geographically different
sites, thus testifying of the long distance dispersal of these
taxa. We hope that this very simple case study will
encourage future metanet analyses of Corallinales
(through the sequencing of additional genes from such
specimens), and then allow a much finer head to head
comparison. We also revised our example of a real environmental metanet (Figure 5) to better illustrate modules,
environmental specific gene families, abundant families,
rare families, transferred families and what parts of the
graph singled out markers that are amenable to population genetics analyses.
Second, in the network analyses, a threshold of
sequence similarity has to be introduced; in the paper,
the sentence reads: “Two nodes are connected by edges
if their sequences show significant similarity”. Deciding
where to draw that line is just as arbitrary as the decision on where to apply new species names or where to
delineate taxon × from taxon y using barcode data. That
needs to be said, I think, to be honest that there is no
easy way out of these problems and that networks pose
new problems of similar nature as the old ones.
We agree and edited the text to make this point clear.
An important difference however with separated DNA
barcode analyses and the metanet approach is that
metanets are inclusive. Thus the diversity of various
datasets can be directly compared, as a same threshold
is applied to quantify comparable ‘elements’ in all of
these datasets simultaneously.
Third, taxonomists often used, and still use, the trusty
concept of “discontinuous variation” when it comes to
drawing lines. That concept would be useful here, as
much of these biodiversity debates concern the question
of discontinuity in variation. (Darwin recognized that).
Discontinuous variation is indeed of great importance,
and we now mention it in the revised version of the MS.
In metanet analyses, discontinuous variations can be
easily identified at two levels. First there are

Bittner et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:47
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/47

discontinuities between the different Operational Genes
Families (OGFs). Second, certain type of discontinuous
variation can be unambiguously detected within a OGF
using centralities. Typically, OGFs comprising two clusters of sequences only bridged by one intermediate
sequence but no other direct connections is an obvious
case of discontinuity. These remarkable patterns can be
quantified, and their numbers between datasets compared in a single inclusive analysis.
Some thought could be give to that, or not.
These are definitely important questions. We thank the
referee very much for his helpful comments on these
three essential points.
Review by Dr. David Williams (nominated by J Peter
Gogarten) (Department of Molecular and Cell Biology,
University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT 06269-31258, USA)

This article tackles two areas linked by the ‘species concept’ problem: the ideal of a universally applicable measure of biodiversity across all Domains of life, and a
standardised and inclusive way of dealing with the nebulous data from metagenomic surveys. The arguments are
clearly presented and I agree with them. Ultimately,
EGNs fulfill the authors’ billing as a useful addition to
the metagenomic toolkit with more potential for integrative analyses.
Many metagenome studies group similar sequences
together (’binning’) to allow quantitative analyses. Evolutionary Gene Networks (EGNs) place clustered
sequences into operational gene families (OGFs) which
are analogous to bins but place an emphasis on the
diversity and process information within and between
these units which I think is a good thing. However,
OGFs and lower-level modules are ultimately determined by arbitrary cutoffs in BLAST scores or a chosen
clustering method respectively. The authors state there
are multiple ways of defining clusters and EGN subunits. To what extent do biodiversity conclusions vary
with different BLAST cutoff scores and module definitions/clustering approaches? Are potential variations
great enough for a recommendation towards specific,
standardised clustering approaches or cutoff scores?
Indeed, conclusions may vary with the different BLAST
cutoff scores selected: higher cutoff scores will define more
stringent OGFs (e.g. OGFs with sequences showing more
identity), lower cutoff scores will define looser OGFs (e.g.
OGFs with more divergent sequences, such as fused or
fissioned sequences, fast evolving sequences, and so on).
Importantly, EGNs can then be different as the cutoff
changes, especially when the processes sustaining diversity changed over time. As such, EGNs provide a great
way to test whether such changes occurred (and for
which gene families it occured). That’s why we would
recommend to explore a range of cutoff scores: from very

Page 13 of 17

low ones (e.g. BLAST scores of 1e-5 to study the evolution
of biodiversity over the longest time period possible) to
very high ones (e.g. BLAST scores of 0 plus 100% of identity between sequences). If the number of OGFs plateaus
as a function of these cutoff scores, then one can be confident that the structure and the biodiversity observed in
the EGN is robust over time. What is essential however
is that the EGNs are both inclusive and grounded in a
pragmatic perspective: the questions one wants to
address determine what level of cut-off is required. Consequently, it is also important to keep in mind that both
high and low cutoff scores have their merits. Consider
two extreme cases. First, at low BLAST scores (e.g. of 1e5), some families will show diverging sequences, but other
won’t, suggesting that the later have a much more constrained evolution than the former. Second, very high
cutoff scores (e.g. BLAST scores of 0 plus 100% of identity) will allow for instance to identify identical
sequences dispersed over long geographical distances.
If rates of evolution across a metagenome vary, is a
common BLAST cutoff score across one or more datasets appropriate for inferring the potentially heterogenous processes causing diversity? If inferences of
evolutionary processes are to be inferred from network
topology, do the authors consider it feasible or desirable
to use models of sequence evolution to provide evolutionary distances for weighting edges instead of BLAST
scores?
For some studies, simple EGNs (with homology or
BLAST scores) will be very useful and sufficient to
improve our knowledge on biodiversity and its evolution.
In other cases, it can certainly be desirable to use models
of sequence evolution to provide evolutionary distances
to weight the edges of EGNs, instead of BLAST scores, in
particular when sequences fall in a tight cluster (which
means that all of them can be aligned). In general
though, developing new evolutionary models (and distances) to generate EGNs with weighted edges that take
into account heterogenous evolutionary processes seems a
most interesting prospect.
Review by Dr. James McInerney (nominated by John
Logsdon) (Molecular Evolution and Bioinformatics Unit,
Biology Department, NUI Maynooth, Ireland)

I think this is a very interesting manuscript. The authors
step back from any particular ecological dataset and
consider the approaches that are being taken, their likely
outcomes and their potential shortfalls. My own personal opinion is that we will really only begin to do meaningful microbial ecology when sequencing methods are
invented that provide us with very long sequences.
Some of the results presented here give a glimpse of the
kinds of analysis that should be carried out (specifically
the homology networks).

Bittner et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:47
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/47

We agree with the referee and thank him very much
for his interest in homology networks.
I agree with the authors that barcoding cannot get us
very far in the prokaryotic world and there are serious
limitations and serious questions about what is really
being addressed when a barcode is derived from an
organism.
We feel that it is a very important point: there are
cases where the aims and scopes of DNA barcoding
should be critically assessed. Assuming that this
approach can be used as an exploratory tool to identify
new species (which is the second aim of DNA barcoding,
the first being to assign unknown specimens to already
recognized species, thanks to a DNA-library of named
specimens) will work in every case might lead to misleading results, caused by sampling artefacts and an excessive confidence in the existence of discontinuous
variations (assumed rather than tested) in one’s dataset.
This claim should not be seen as a negative one however,
but as a positive incentive for further critical developments in molecular based biodiversity studies (e.g. by
promoting critical barcoding analyses, as well as the use
of other approaches, when needed).
My points are relatively minor and relate to the text
and some clarifications I would like to see with certain
sentences. I hope this manuscript encourages more discussion of microbial ecology and in particular the methods and what the experiments really mean.
Specific points:
In your abstract you say that you came to your conclusions by evaluating the” two molecular approaches
for assessing biodiversity. However, there are more than
these two approaches, so perhaps it is best to drop the
word ‘the’.
We agree and corrected the sentence.
on page 3, you write: “Based on their divergences, we
propose that an integrative approach aiming at the
simultaneous examination (or even better at the integration) of the elements- based, function-based and process-based perspectives in biodiversity studies, thanks to
massive sequencing of multiple environmental markers.”
This sentence does not read properly. Perhaps you did
not mean to include the word ‘that’?
We agree and corrected the sentence.
On page 4, when discussing LGT, you use the sentence “It affects the identification of phylogenetic-species.” I presume it is LGT that affects the identification
of phylogenetic species (also, I am not sure the hyphen
is necessary). Perhaps this sentence can be changed to
be more explicit?
We changed the text accordingly.
On page 4, you start a paragraph with “The contrast
with DNA barcoding [...]” I found this opener difficult
to interpret. What is being contrasted with what?

Page 14 of 17

We revised that part of the MS, including additional
sub-titles to clarify what was contrasted with what.
On page 5, the sentence “First, when the various secondary properties defining the groups arose at different
times in the process of speciation, the proposed groupings are nested (Type I grey zone, Figure 1D)” changes
tense and makes it difficult to read.
We changed the text accordingly.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Corallinales dataset.
Additional file 2: Glossary.

Acknowledgements
We thank Ford Doolittle, J. Leigh, F.J. Lapointe for critical reading of this
manuscript, and two anonymous referees on a former version of the
manuscript, as well as all the collectors. LB was supported by an MENRT
grant from the French government.
Author details
1
UMR CNRS 7138 Systématique, Adaptation, Evolution, Muséum National
d’Histoire Naturelle, Paris, France. 2UMR CNRS 7138 Systématique,
Adaptation, Evolution, Université Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris, France. 3UR227,
IRD-BPA5, Nouméa, Nouvelle-Calédonie, France. 4Genoscope, Centre National
de Séquençage, Evry, France.
Authors’ contributions
PC & BdR conceived of the study, and collected the specimens. LB & CC
carried out the molecular genetic studies. SH and LB conceived of and
performed the analyses, and drafted the manuscript, PL & EB conceived of
and performed the analyses, and wrote the manuscript. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 21 July 2010 Accepted: 30 July 2010 Published: 30 July 2010
References
1. Morgan GJ: Evaluating Maclaurin and Sterelny’s Conception of
Biodiversity in Cases of Frequent, Promiscuous Lateral Gene Transfer.
Biology and Philosophy 2010.
2. Brennerova MV, Josefiova J, Brenner V, Pieper DH, Junca H: Metagenomics
reveals diversity and abundance of meta-cleavage pathways in
microbial communities from soil highly contaminated with jet fuel
under air-sparging bioremediation. Environ Microbiol 2009, 11:2216-2227.
3. Wolcott RD, Gontcharova V, Sun Y, Dowd SE: Evaluation of the bacterial
diversity among and within individual venous leg ulcers using bacterial
tag-encoded FLX and titanium amplicon pyrosequencing and
metagenomic approaches. BMC Microbiol 2009, 9:226.
4. Doolittle WF, Zhaxybayeva O: Metagenomics and the Units of Biological
Organization. Bioscience 2010, 60:102-112.
5. Callicott JB, Crowder LB, Mumford K: Current normative concepts in
conservation. Conservation Biology 1999, 13:22-35.
6. Faith DP: Biodiversity Stanford, CA 94305-4115 The Metaphysics Research
Lab, Center for the Study of Language and Information, Stanford University
2007.
7. Lozupone CA, Knight R: Species divergence and the measurement of
microbial diversity. FEMS Microbiol Rev 2008, 32:557-578.
8. Hughes JB, Hellmann JJ, Ricketts TH, Bohannan BJ: Counting the
uncountable: statistical approaches to estimating microbial diversity.
Appl Environ Microbiol 2001, 67:4399-4406.

Bittner et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:47
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/47

9.

10.
11.

12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.

19.

20.
21.

22.

23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.

29.
30.

31.

32.

33.

Hughes JB, Hellmann JJ: The application of rarefaction techniques to
molecular inventories of microbial diversity. Methods Enzymol 2005,
397:292-308.
Faith DP: Phylogenetic pattern and the quantification of organismal
biodiversity. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 1994, 345:45-58.
Norton BG: Conservation biology and environmental values: can there
be a universal earth ethic? Protecting biological diversity: roles and
responsibilities Montréal: McGill-Queen’s University Press 2001.
Potvin C: Biodiversity Washington, DC: National Academy of Sciences/
Smithsonian InstitutionWilson EO 1988.
Ehrenfeld D: Why put a value on biodiversity? Biodiversity Washington, DC:
National Academy Press/Smithsonian InstitutionWilson EO 1988.
Takacs D: The idea of biodiversity: philosophies of paradise Baltimore: The
John Hopkins University Press 1996.
Angermeier PL, Karr JR: Biological integrity vs. biological diversity as
policy directives: Protecting biotic resources. Bioscience 1994, 44:690-697.
Hugenholtz P, Tyson GW: Microbiology: metagenomics. Nature 2008,
455:481-483.
Hebert PD, Cywinska A, Ball SL, deWaard JR: Biological identifications
through DNA barcodes. Proc Biol Sci 2003, 270:313-321.
Huse SM, Welch DM, Morrison HG, Sogin ML: Ironing out the wrinkles in
the rare biosphere through improved OTU clustering. Environ Microbiol
2010.
Tringe SG, von Mering C, Kobayashi A, Salamov AA, Chen K, Chang HW,
Podar M, Short JM, Mathur EJ, Detter JC, Bork P, Hugenholtz P, Rubin EM:
Comparative metagenomics of microbial communities. Science 2005,
308:554-557.
Quince C, Curtis TP, Sloan WT: The rational exploration of microbial
diversity. ISME J 2008, 2:997-1006.
Eisen JA: Environmental shotgun sequencing: its potential and
challenges for studying the hidden world of microbes. PLoS Biol 2007, 5:
e82.
Williamson SJ, Rusch DB, Yooseph S, Halpern AL, Heidelberg KB, Glass JI,
Andrews-Pfannkoch C, Fadrosh D, Miller CS, Sutton G, Frazier M, Venter JC:
The Sorcerer II Global Ocean Sampling Expedition: metagenomic
characterization of viruses within aquatic microbial samples. PLoS One
2008, 3:e1456.
Simon C, Daniel R: Achievements and new knowledge unraveled by
metagenomic approaches. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 2009, 85:265-276.
Altschul SF, Gish W, Miller W, Myers EW, Lipman DJ: Basic local alignment
search tool. J Mol Biol 1990, 215:403-410.
Huson DH, Auch AF, Qi J, Schuster SC: MEGAN analysis of metagenomic
data. Genome Res 2007, 17:377-386.
Wu M, Eisen JA: A simple, fast, and accurate method of phylogenomic
inference. Genome Biol 2008, 9:R151.
Bent SJ, Forney LJ: The tragedy of the uncommon: understanding
limitations in the analysis of microbial diversity. ISME J 2008, 2:689-695.
Legault BA, Lopez-Lopez A, Alba-Casado JC, Doolittle WF, Bolhuis H,
Rodriguez- Valera F, Papke RT: Environmental genomics of
“Haloquadratum walsbyi” in a saltern crystallizer indicates a large pool
of accessory genes in an otherwise coherent species. BMC Genomics
2006, 7:171.
Achenbach LA, Coates JD: Disparity between bacterial phylogeny and
physiology. ASM News 2000, 66:714-715.
Kim BK, Park YD, Oh HM, Chun J: Identification and characterization of
metagenomic fragments from tidal flat sediment. J Microbiol 2009,
47:402-410.
Debroas D, Humbert JF, Enault F, Bronner G, Faubladier M, Cornillot E:
Metagenomic approach studying the taxonomic and functional diversity
of the bacterial community in a mesotrophic lake (Lac du Bourget–
France). Environ Microbiol 2009, 11:2412-2424.
Treusch AH, Kletzin A, Raddatz G, Ochsenreiter T, Quaiser A, Meurer G,
Schuster SC, Schleper C: Characterization of large-insert DNA libraries
from soil for environmental genomic studies of Archaea. Environ
Microbiol 2004, 6:970-980.
Dinsdale EA, Edwards RA, Hall D, Angly F, Breitbart M, Brulc JM, Furlan M,
Desnues C, Haynes M, Li L, McDaniel L, Moran MA, Nelson KE, Nilsson C,
Olson R, Paul J, Brito BR, Ruan Y, Swan BK, Stevens R, Valentine DL,
Thurber RV, Wegley L, White BA, Rohwer F: Functional metagenomic
profiling of nine biomes. Nature 2008, 452:629-632.

Page 15 of 17

34. Meyer F, Paarmann D, D’Souza M, Olson R, Glass EM, Kubal M, Paczian T,
Rodriguez A, Stevens R, Wilke A, Wilkening J, Edwards RA: The
metagenomics RAST server - a public resource for the automatic
phylogenetic and functional analysis of metagenomes. BMC
Bioinformatics 2008, 9:386.
35. Kanehisa M, Goto S, Kawashima S, Okuno Y, Hattori M: The KEGG resource
for deciphering the genome. Nucleic Acids Res 2004, 32:D277-280.
36. Overbeek R, Begley T, Butler RM, Choudhuri JV, Chuang HY, Cohoon M, de
Crécy-Lagard V, Diaz N, Disz T, Edwards R, Fonstein M, Frank ED, Gerdes S,
Glass EM, Goesmann A, Hanson A, Iwata-Reuyl D, Jensen R, Jamshidi N,
Krause L, Kubal M, Larsen N, Linke B, McHardy AC, Meyer F, Neuweger H,
Olsen G, Olson R, Osterman A, Portnoy V, Pusch GD, Rodionov DA,
Rückert C, Steiner J, Stevens R, Thiele I, Vassieva O, Ye Y, Zagnitko O,
Vonstein V: The subsystems approach to genome annotation and its use
in the project to annotate 1000 genomes. Nucleic Acids Res 2005,
33:5691-5702.
37. Ereshefsky M: Microbiology and the Species Problem. Biology and
Philosophy 2010.
38. Bapteste E, Boucher Y: Lateral gene transfer challenges principles of
microbial systematics. Trends Microbiol 2008, 16:200-207.
39. Bapteste E, Boucher Y: Epistemological impacts of horizontal gene
transfer on classification in microbiology. Methods Mol Biol 2009,
532:55-72.
40. Achtman M, Wagner M: Microbial diversity and the genetic nature of
microbial species. Nat Rev Microbiol 2008, 6:431-440.
41. Franklin LR: Bacteria, sex and systematics. Philos Sci 2007, 74:69-95.
42. Gevers D, Cohan FM, Lawrence JG, Spratt BG, Coenye T, Feil EJ,
Stackebrandt E, Van de Peer Y, Vandamme P, Thompson FL, Swings J:
Opinion: Re-evaluating prokaryotic species. Nat Rev Microbiol 2005,
3:733-739.
43. Hanage WP, Fraser C, Spratt BG: Fuzzy species among recombinogenic
bacteria. BMC Biol 2005, 3:6.
44. Touchon M, Hoede C, Tenaillon O, Barbe V, Baeriswyl S, Bidet P, Bingen E,
Bonacorsi S, Bouchier C, Bouvet O, Calteau A, Chiapello H, Clermont O,
Cruveiller S, Danchin A, Diard M, Dossat C, Karoui ME, Frapy E, Garry L,
Ghigo JM, Gilles AM, Johnson J, Le Bouguénec C, Lescat M, Mangenot S,
Martinez-Jéhanne V, Matic I, Nassif X, Oztas S, Petit MA, Pichon C, Rouy Z,
Ruf CS, Schneider D, Tourret J, Vacherie B, Vallenet D, Médigue C, Rocha EP,
Denamur E: Organised genome dynamics in the Escherichia coli species
results in highly diverse adaptive paths. PLoS Genet 2009, 5:e1000344.
45. Konstantinidis KT, Tiedje JM: Genomic insights that advance the species
definition for prokaryotes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005, 102:2567-2572.
46. Nesbo CL, Dlutek M, Doolittle WF: Recombination in Thermotoga:
implications for species concepts and biogeography. Genetics 2006,
172:759-769.
47. Rossello-Mora R, Amann R: The species concept for prokaryotes. FEMS
Microbiol Rev 2001, 25:39-67.
48. Stackebrandt E: Defining Taxonomic Ranks. Prokaryotes: A handbook on the
Biology of Bacteria New York: SpringerDworkin M , 1 2006, 29-57.
49. Lawrence J, Retchless A: The myth of bacterial species and speciation.
Biology and Philosophy 2010.
50. Hebert PD, Stoeckle MY, Zemlak TS, Francis CM: Identification of Birds
through DNA Barcodes. PLoS Biol 2004, 2:e312.
51. Funk DJ, Omland KE: Species-level paraphyly and polyphyly: frequency,
causes, and consequences, with insights from animal mitochondrial
DNA. Annu Rev Ecol Evol Syst 2003, 34:397-423.
52. Robinson EA, Blagoev GA, Hebert PDN, Adamowicz SJ: Prospects for using
DNA barcoding to identify spiders in species-rich genera. ZooKeys 2009,
27-46.
53. Pons J, Barraclough TG, Gomez-Zurita J, Cardoso A, Duran DP, Hazell S,
Kamoun S, Sumlin WD, Vogler AP: Sequence-based species delimitation
for the DNA taxonomy of undescribed insects. Syst Biol 2006, 55:595-609.
54. Monaghan MT, Wild R, Elliot M, Fujisawa T, Balke M, DJG I, Lees DC,
Ranaivosolo R, Eggleton P, Barraclough TG, Vogler AP: Accelerated Species
Inventory on Madagascar Using Coalescent-Based Models of Species
Delineation. Systematic Biology 2009, 58:298-311.
55. Ratnasingham S, Hebert PD: bold: The Barcode of Life Data System. Mol
Ecol Notes 2007, 7:355-364[http://www.barcodinglife.org].
56. Frezal L, Leblois R: Four years of DNA barcoding: current advances and
prospects. Infect Genet Evol 2008, 8:727-736.

Bittner et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:47
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/47

57. De Queiroz K: Different species problems and their resolution. BioEssays
2005, 27:1263-1269.
58. De Queiroz K: Species concepts and species delimitation. Systematic
Biology 2007, 56:879-886.
59. Ereshefsky M: Mystery of Mysteries: Darwin and the Species Problem.
Cladistics 2010, 26:1-13.
60. Agapow PM, Bininda-Emonds OR, Crandall KA, Gittleman JL, Mace GM,
Marshall JC, Purvis A: The impact of species concept on biodiversity
studies. Q Rev Biol 2004, 79:161-179.
61. Alverson AJ: Molecular systematics and the diatom species. Protist 2008,
159:339-353.
62. Finlay BJ: Protist taxonomy: an ecological perspective. Philos Trans R Soc
Lond B Biol Sci 2004, 359:599-610.
63. Weisse T: Distribution and diversity of aquatic protists: an evolutionary
and ecological perspective. Biodivers Conserv 2008, 17:243-259.
64. Hudson RR, Coyne JA: Mathematical consequences of the genealogical
species concept. Evolution 2002, 56:1557-1565.
65. Lynch M, Koskella B, Schaack S: Mutation pressure and the evolution of
organelle genomic architecture. Science 2006, 311:1727-1730.
66. Rynearson TA, Armbrust EV: Maintenance of clonal diversity during a
spring bloom of the centric diatom Ditylum brightwellii. Mol Ecol 2005,
14:1631-1640.
67. Barr CM, Neiman M, Taylor DR: Inheritance and recombination of
mitochondrial genomes in plants, fungi and animals. New Phytol 2005,
168:39-50.
68. Weihe A, Apitz J, Pohlheim F, Salinas-Hartwig A, Borner T: Biparental
inheritance of plastidial and mitochondrial DNA and hybrid variegation
in Pelargonium. Mol Genet Genomics 2009, 282:587-593.
69. Welch ME, Darnell MZ, McCauley DE: Variable populations within variable
populations: quantifying mitochondrial heteroplasmy in natural
populations of the gynodioecious plant Silene vulgaris. Genetics 2006,
174:829-837.
70. Foissner W: Protist diversity and distribution: some basic considerations.
Biodiv Conserv 2008, 17:235-242.
71. Amato A, Kooistra WH, Ghiron JH, Mann DG, Proschold T, Montresor M:
Reproductive isolation among sympatric cryptic species in marine
diatoms. Protist 2007, 158:193-207.
72. Erpenbeck D, Hooper JNA, Worheide G: CO1 phylogenies in diploblasts
and the ‘Barcoding of Life’–are we sequencing a suboptimal partition?
Mol Ecol Notes 2005, 6:550-553.
73. CBOL Plant Working Group: A DNA barcode for land plants. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2009, 106:12794-12797.
74. Seberg O, Petersen G: How many loci does it take to DNA barcode a
crocus? PLoS One 2009, 4:e4598.
75. Smith MA, Poyarkov N, Hebert PDN: CO1 DNA barcoding amphibians:
take the chance, meet the challenge. Molecular Ecology Resources 2008,
8:235-246.
76. Wiemers M, Fiedler K: Does the DNA barcoding gap exist? - a case study
in blue butterflies (Lepidoptera: Lycaenidae). Front Zool 2007, 4:8.
77. Papadopoulou A, Bergsten J, Fujisawa T, Monaghan MT, Barraclough TG,
Vogler AP: Speciation and DNA barcodes: testing the effects of dispersal
on the formation of discrete sequence clusters. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B
Biol Sci 2008, 363:2987-2996.
78. Meyer CP, Paulay G: DNA barcoding: error rates based on comprehensive
sampling. PLoS Biol 2005, 3:e422.
79. Lorenz JG, Jackson WE, Beck JC, Hanner R: The problems and promise of
DNA barcodes for species diagnosis of primate biomaterials. Philos Trans
R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 2005, 360:1869-1877.
80. Nichols R: Gene trees and species trees are not the same. Trends Ecol Evol
2001, 16:358-364.
81. Degnan JH, Rosenberg NA: Gene tree discordance, phylogenetic
inference and the multispecies coalescent. Trends Ecol Evol 2009,
24:332-340.
82. Erpenbeck D, Breeuwer JA, Parra-Velandia FJ, van Soest RW: Speculation
with spiculation?–Three independent gene fragments and biochemical
characters versus morphology in demosponge higher classification. Mol
Phylogenet Evol 2006, 38:293-305.
83. Silva PC: Historical review of attempts to decrease subjectivity in species
identification, with particular regard to algae. Protist 2008, 159:153-161.
84. Hey J: Genes, Categories and Species New York: Oxford University Press 2001.

Page 16 of 17

85. Mace GM, Gittleman JL, Purvis A: Preserving the tree of life. Science 2003,
300:1707-1709.
86. Evans KM, Wortley AH, Mann DG: An assessment of potential diatom
“barcode” genes (cox1, rbcL, 18 S and ITS rDNA) and their effectiveness
in determining relationships in Sellaphora (Bacillariophyta). Protist 2007,
158:349-364.
87. Robba L, Russell SJ, Barker GL, Brodie J: Assessing the use of the
mitochondrial cox1 marker for use in DNA barcoding of red algae
(Rhodophyta). American Journal of Botany 2006, 93:1101-1108.
88. Walker RH, Brodie J, Russell S, Irvine LM, Orfanidis S: Biodiversity of
Coralline algae in the north-eastern Atlantic including Corallina
caespitose sp. Nov. (Corallinoideae, Rhodophyta). Journal of Phycology
2009, 45:287-297.
89. Broom JES, Hart DR, Farr TJ, Nelson WA, Neill KF, Harvey AS,
Woelkerling WJ: Utility of psbA and nSSU for phylogenetic reconstruction
in the Corallinales based on New Zealand taxa. Molecular Phylogenetics
and Evolution 2008, 46:958-973.
90. Andreakis N, Procaccini G, Maggs C, Kooistra WHCF: Phylogeography of
the invasive seaweed Asparagopsis (Bonnemaisoniales, Rhodophyta)
reveals cryptic diversity. Molecular Ecology Resources 2007, 16:2285-2299.
91. Stamatakis A, Hoover P, Rougemont J: A Rapid Bootstrap Algorithm for
the RAxML. Web-Servers Systematic Biology 2008, 75:758-771.
92. Santelices B, Correa J, Aedo D, Flores V, Hormazábal M, Sánchez P:
Convergent biological processes in coalescing Rhodophyta. Journal of
Phycology 1999, 35:1127-1149.
93. Walters LJ, Smith CM: Rapid rhizoid production in Halimeda discoidea
Decaisne (Chlorophyta, Caulerpales) fragments: a mechanism for survival
after separation from adult thalli. Journal of Experimental Marine Biology
and Ecology 1994, 175:105-120.
94. Fitzhugh K: DNA Barcoding: An instance of Technology-driven Science?
BioScience 2006, 56:462-463.
95. Felsenstein J: Accuracy of coalescent likelihood estimates: do we need
more sites, more sequences, or more loci? Mol Biol Evol 2006, 23:691-700.
96. Knowles LL, Carstens BC: Delimiting species without monophyletic gene
trees. Syst Biol 2007, 56:887-895.
97. Dayrat B: Towards integrative taxonomy. Biol J Linn Soc 2005, 85:407-415.
98. Trewick SA: DNA Barcoding is not enough: mismatch of taxonomy and
genealogy in New Zealand grasshoppers (Orthoptera: Acrididae).
Cladistics 2008, 24:240-254.
99. Brulc JM, Antonopoulos DA, Miller ME, Wilson MK, Yannarell AC,
Dinsdale EA, Edwards RE, Frank ED, Emerson JB, Wacklin P, Coutinho PM,
Henrissat B, Nelson KE, White BA: Gene-centric metagenomics of the
fiber-adherent bovine rumen microbiome reveals forage specific
glycoside hydrolases. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2009, 106:1948-1953.
100. Frias-Lopez J, Shi Y, Tyson GW, Coleman ML, Schuster SC, Chisholm SW,
Delong EF: Microbial community gene expression in ocean surface
waters. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008, 105:3805-3810.
101. Qu A, Brulc JM, Wilson MK, Law BF, Theoret JR, Joens LA, Konkel ME,
Angly F, Dinsdale EA, Edwards RA, Nelson KE, White BA: Comparative
metagenomics reveals host specific metavirulomes and horizontal gene
transfer elements in the chicken cecum microbiome. PLoS One 2008, 3:
e2945.
102. Warnecke F, Luginbühl P, Ivanova N, Ghassemian M, Richardson TH,
Stege JT, Cayouette M, McHardy AC, Djordjevic G, Aboushadi N, Sorek R,
Tringe SG, Podar M, Martin HG, Kunin V, Dalevi D, Madejska J, Kirton E,
Platt D, Szeto E, Salamov A, Barry K, Mikhailova N, Kyrpides NC, Matson EG,
Ottesen EA, Zhang X, Hernández M, Murillo C, Acosta LG, Rigoutsos I,
Tamayo G, Green BD, Chang C, Rubin EM, Mathur EJ, Robertson DE,
Hugenholtz P, Leadbetter JR: Metagenomic and functional analysis of
hindgut microbiota of a wood-feeding higher termite. Nature 2007,
450:560-565.
103. Junker BH, Koschutzki D, Schreiber F: Exploration of biological network
centralities with CentiBiN. BMC Bioinformatics 2006, 7:219.
104. Killcoyne S, Carter GW, Smith J, Boyle J: Cytoscape: a community-based
framework for network modeling. Methods Mol Biol 2009, 563:219-239.
105. Yuhong Z, Shi P, Liu W, Meng K, Bai Y, Wang G, Zhan Z, Yao B: Lipase
diversity in glacier soil based on analysis of metagenomic DNA
fragments and cell culture. J Microbiol Biotechnol 2009, 19:888-897.
106. Dagan T, Artzy-Randrup Y, Martin W: Modular networks and cumulative
impact of lateral transfer in prokaryote genome evolution. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 2008, 105:10039-10044.

Bittner et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:47
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/47

Page 17 of 17

107. Johnson PL, Slatkin M: Inference of microbial recombination rates from
metagenomic data. PLoS Genet 2009, 5:e1000674.
108. Beja O, Spudich EN, Spudich JL, Leclerc M, DeLong EF: Proteorhodopsin
phototrophy in the ocean. Nature 2001, 411:786-789.
109. Brazelton WJ, Baross JA: Abundant transposases encoded by the
metagenome of a hydrothermal chimney biofilm. ISME J 2009,
3:1420-1424.
110. Palenik B, Ren Q, Tai V, Paulsen IT: Coastal Synechococcus metagenome
reveals major roles for horizontal gene transfer and plasmids in
population diversity. Environ Microbiol 2009, 11:349-359.
111. Walsh DA, Zaikova E, Howes CG, Song YC, Wright JJ, Tringe SG, Tortell PD,
Hallam SJ: Metagenome of a versatile chemolithoautotroph from
expanding oceanic dead zones. Science 2009, 326:578-582.
112. Tamura K, Dudley J, Nei M, Kumar S: MEGA4: Molecular Evolutionary
Genetics Analysis (MEGA) software version 4.0. Molecular Biology and
Evolution 2007, 24:1596-1599.
113. Nylander JAA: MrModeltest v2 Evolutionary Biology Centre, Uppsala
University 2004.
114. Swofford DL: PAUP* Phylogenetic Analysis Using Parsimony* and other
methods Sinauer Associates 2002.
115. Pybus OG, Rambaut A: GENIE: estimating demographic history from
molecular phylogenies. Bioinformatics 2002, 18:1404-1405.
doi:10.1186/1745-6150-5-47
Cite this article as: Bittner et al.: Some considerations for analyzing
biodiversity using integrative metagenomics and gene networks. Biology
Direct 2010 5:47.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
