<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Micro-evolutionary divergence patterns of mandible shapes in wild house mouse (Mus musculus) populations</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:306. doi:10.1186/1471-2148-11-306"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Louis Boell"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Micro-evolutionary divergence patterns of
mandible shapes in wild house mouse (Mus
musculus) populations
Boell and Tautz
Boell and Tautz BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:306
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/306 (18 October 2011)

Boell and Tautz BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:306
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/306

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Micro-evolutionary divergence patterns of
mandible shapes in wild house mouse
(Mus musculus) populations
Louis Boell and Diethard Tautz*

Abstract
Background: Insights into the micro-evolutionary patterns of morphological traits require an assessment of the
natural variation of the trait within and between populations and closely related species. The mouse mandible is a
particularly suitable morphological trait for such an analysis, since it has long been used as a model to study the
quantitative genetics of shape. In addition, many distinct populations, sub-species and closely related species are
known for the house mouse. However, morphological comparisons among wild caught animals require an
assessment in how far environmental and technical factors could interfere with the shape change measurements.
Results: Using geometric morphometrics, we have surveyed mandible shapes in 15 natural populations of the
genus Mus, with a focus on the subspecies Mus musculus domesticus. In parallel we have carefully assessed possibly
confounding technical and biological factors. We find that there are distinct differences on average between
populations, subspecies and species, but these differences are smaller than differences between individuals within
populations. Populations from summer-dry regions, although more ancestral, are less distinct from each other than
are populations from the more recently colonized northern areas. Populations with especially distinct shapes occur
in an area of sympatry of M. m. domesticus and M. spretus and on recently colonized sub-antarctic islands. We have
also studied a number of inbred strains to assess in how far their mandible shapes resemble those from the wild.
We find that they fall indeed into the shape space of natural variation between individuals in populations.
Conclusions: Although mandible shapes in natural populations can be influenced by environmental variables,
these influences are insufficient to explain the average extent of shape differences between populations, such that
evolutionary processes must be invoked to explain this level of diversity. We discuss that adaptive evolution may
contribute to shape changes between populations, in particular in newly colonized areas. A comparison between
inbred strains and wild mice suggests that the laboratory environment has no major systematic effect on the
mandible shape and that such strains can be used as representatives of the natural shape differences between
individuals.

Background
Understanding the genetic basis of morphological phenotypic variation is a classical theme in evolutionary
biology, with its roots going back to pre-Mendelian
times. The problem is nowadays usually addressed
within the framework of quantitative trait genetics and
geometric morphometrics [1,2]. The mouse (Mus musculus) mandible has long been used as a model for
approaching this question and associated evolutionary
* Correspondence: tautz@evolbio.mpg.de
Max-Planck Institut für Evolutionsbiologie, August-Thienemannstrasse 2,
24306 Plön, Germany

inferences [3-14]. While these quantitative genetic studies were conducted with laboratory strains, a desired
long-term prospect in this field is to transfer the gained
insights back to naturally evolved populations and to
study the genetics of micro-evolutionary change in the
wild.
There have been a number of comparative morphometric studies in wild house mice in different contexts
[15-27], but except for [25], all of them were limited to
specific instances of shape differences between small
numbers of populations or species and most of them
had a taxonomic focus. Not much is known therefore

© 2011 Boell and Tautz; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Boell and Tautz BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:306
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/306

on how large the shape differences between populations
within and between closely related species usually are,
nor how they are distributed. However, such information is vital to ask the question which evolutionary
forces act on shaping a morphological character, such as
the mandible. While there is little doubt that purifying
selection is required to maintain an optimal function of
the mandible, very little is known in how far positive
selection to new environmental conditions or neutral
divergence processes influence mandible shape between
populations and species. It is so far also unknown how
variation among inbred strains relates to natural variation. Hence, to lay the foundations for studying microevolutionary divergence processes of the mandible and
to eventually elucidate the genetic basis of shape differences, it is necessary to carefully record wild type variation in different populations and closely related species.
However, dealing with wild type variation of a shape
component poses a specific challenge. It is to be
expected that environmental influences, such as food, or
biological variables, such as age and size, have an influence on shape as well. In addition, since it can be
expected that the measured differences are subtle, technical error sources are also of concern, such as artefacts
that could be generated by the preparation method or
errors associated with the digitization process. Hence, it
is necessary to address the question in how far all of
these confounding factors could influence the measurements taken from wild caught animals.
While the relationship between mandible shape and
ecological niche has been investigated for several taxa at
the level of between-species diversity or higher [28-33],
so far only one study conducted on shrews found intraspecific covariation between mandible shape and environmental variables [34]. In the mouse mandible,
environmental influences have traditionally been investigated using hard diet vs. soft diet experiments, and diet
consistency has indeed been found to influence mandible growth and shape [15,16,35-37]. However, the magnitude of the shape change introduced by the difference
in diet consistency in relation to the shape differences
between natural populations has not been addressed in
these studies.
Here we have set out to assess the natural variation of
mouse mandible shape using wild caught specimens
(mostly from museum collections) and geometric morphometrics. The fundamental metric of shape difference
in our study is Procrustes distance, which is the Euclidean distance between landmark configurations in the
tangent shape space after Procrustes superimposition.
This metric has the advantage that it is intuitive, as it is
based on the tangent shape space (in contrast to Mahalanobis distances resulting from canonical variates analyses), and that it is comparable across experiments, if

Page 2 of 15

the shapes involved are not too different, which can be
generally assumed for mouse mandibles.
As pointed out above, a crucial prerequisite for such a
study is the assessment of technical error sources and
we have therefore conducted a number of experiments
specifically designed to get an estimate of the magnitude
of the different confounding factors. We have then combined these in a statistical model to obtain an estimate
of the likely combined influence of all these factors. We
find that the effect of technical and biological error
sources is on average smaller than the differences found
between populations and species. This implies that evolutionary (genetic) divergence must be invoked to
explain the level of phenotypic divergence among
populations.

Methods
Samples

Our study covers 24 populations and strains of the subgenus Mus including wild-caught, captive and inbred
mice (detailed in Table 1). 14 - 30 individuals were
scored for each population or strain (Table 1). Most
samples come from free-living mice, which were caught
in the field. They were obtained either as loans from
natural history museums (see additional file 1) or
directly from colleagues. Museum samples were taxonomically re-analysed, based on the character list provided
by Macholan [24]. Only unequivocally assignable material was used. The samples from Puente de Montañana
(Spain) (from Senckenberg Museum, Frankfurt) turned
out to be a mixture between M. musculus and M. spretus, which live sympatrically in this region. To assess
interspecific divergence, we included two samples of
each Mus macedonicus and Mus spretus. These species
(together with M. spicilegus) are the closest sister species
of M. musculus [38]. Only adult specimens were
included in the study, juveniles being identified by the
small size of their skull and mandibles and low tooth
wear. Only right hemimandibles were considered, except
in cases where only the left hemimandible of a specimen
was undamaged. Museum specimens are usually prepared using either detergent solution or dermestid beetles, but the preparation method is mostly not
documented. Hence, we assessed the influence of the
preparation method on the shape measurements (see
below).
Five wild-derived inbred strains were studied. Three of
them (Stlt, StrA, StrB [39]) are derived from M. m.
domesticus and were obtained from the breeding facility
in Studenec (Czech Republic). Their average ages at dissection were 21 weeks (ranging from 10 to 72 weeks),
23 weeks (ranging from 16 to 45 weeks) and 20 weeks
(ranging from 9 to 33 weeks), respectively. Samples of
PWD (M. m. musculus; JAX stock number 0046660; age

Boell and Tautz BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:306
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/306

Page 3 of 15

Table 1 Population and strains used in this study
Name

Species

Geographical origin

DOM EGYPT

M. m. domesticus

An Nawamis, Middle Egypt

DOM IRAN AHVAZ

M. m. domesticus

Ahvaz, South Iran

DOM IRAN TEHERAN

M. m. domesticus

DOM SICILY

M. m. domesticus

DOM SPAIN PUDEMONT

Source

N

ZFMK

29

R.S.

19

Teheran region, Iran

SMF

16

Sicily

SMF

29

M. m. domesticus

Puente de montanana, Spain

SMF

26

DOM KERG GOUILLOU

M. m. domesticus

Kerguelen islands Gouillou

J.L.C.

27

DOM KERG COCHONS

M. m. domesticus

Kerguelen islands Cochons

J.L.C.

27

DOM GER MUNICH

M. m. domesticus

Munich, Germany

ZSM

14

DOM GER FRANKFURT

M. m. domesticus

Frankfurt, Germany

SMF

23

MUS HUNGARY

M. m. musculus

Hungary

SMF

25

CAS JOHNSTON ATOLL

M. m. castaneus

Johnston Atoll

NMNH

14

MAC GREECE

M. macedonicus

Chios, Greece

SMF

16

MAC TURKEY

M. macedonicus

Southwest Turkey

SMF

17

SPR SPAIN PUDEMONT

M. spretus

Puente de montanana, Spain

SMF

29

SPR SPAIN MADRID

M. spretus

Madrid, Spain

R.R.

28

LAB INBRED BALB/CBYJ

mixed M. musculus ancestry

undefined origin

JAX

30

LAB INBRED FVB/NJ

mixed M. musculus ancestry

undefined origin

JAX

30

LAB INBRED C57BL/10J

mixed M. musculus ancestry

undefined origin

JAX

30

LAB INBRED C57BL/6J

mixed M. musculus ancestry

undefined origin

MPIG

18

DOM WD INBRED STLT

“M. m. domesticus”

Straas, Germany

J.P.

20

DOM WD INBRED STRA

“M. m. domesticus”

Straas, Germany

J.P.

20

DOM WD INBRED STRB

“M. m. domesticus”

Straas, Germany

J.P.

20

CAS WD INBRED EIJ

“M. m. castaneus”

Thonburi, Thailand

MPIG

15

MUS WD INBRED PWD

“M. m. musculus”

Kunratice, Czech Republic

MPIG

20

LAB INBRED = laboratory inbred strains, WD INBRED = wild derived inbred strains, ZFMK = Zoologisches Forschungsmuseum Alexander Koenig, Bonn; SMF =
Senckenberg Museum Frankfurt; ZSM = Zoologische Staatssammlung München; NHMN = National Museum of Natural History, Smithsonian Instititution,
Washington (see additional file 1 for further details on museum samples); JAX = Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor; MPIG = Max-Planck Institute for Genetics, Berlin;
R.S. = Rick Scavetta, J-L C. = Jean-Louis Chapuis, R.R. = Ruth Rottscheidt, J.P. = Jaroslav Pialek.

at dissection 10 to 12 weeks) and Cast/EiJ (M. m. castaneus; JAX stock number 000928; age at dissection 9 to
12 weeks) were from the breeding facilities at the MPI
for Genetics in Berlin.
Four sample sets represent classical inbred laboratory
mouse strains. Three of them (BALB/cByJ, FVB/NJ,
C57BL/10J) were obtained from the Jackson laboratory
(Bar Harbor, USA) (age of dissection 10 weeks). An
additional sample set of C57BL/6J mice (age at dissection 11 to 13 weeks) was obtained from the breeding
facilities at the MPI for Genetics in Berlin.
To record a comparative developmental series, juvenile
and adult specimens of C57Bl/6J and PWD were used. For
C57BL6/J, 15 two weeks old specimens, 16 four weeks old
specimens, and 17 six weeks old specimens were dissected
and scanned. 16 eight weeks old specimens were scanned
alive (anesthetized with Rompun/Ketamine). For PWD, 15
two weeks old specimens, 15 four weeks old specimens,
and 16 six weeks old specimens were dissected and
scanned. 18 eight weeks old specimens were scanned alive
(anesthetized with Rompun/Ketamine).

To investigate age effects in adult mice, the following
C57BL/6J mice were scanned alive (anesthetized with
Rompun/Ketamine) at different ages, resulting in the
following dataset: 16 eight weeks old animals, 10 ten
weeks old animals, 10 twelve weeks old animals, 10
fourteen weeks old animals, 4 sixteen weeks old animals,
4 eighteen weeks old animals, 4 nineteen weeks old animals, 4 twenty weeks old animals, 4 twenty-one weeks
old animals, and 5 twenty-three weeks old animals.
Preparation methods

For the preparation with detergent solution, mouse
heads were boiled for 1 hr in tap water, cooled for 1 hr
and then incubated in a solution of 12 g/L commercial
household detergent in tap water at 37°C for 3 days.
The hemimandibles were then manually prepared from
the heads and allowed to dry. For the preparation with
dermestid beetles, mouse heads were pre-prepared by
removing the fur and the brain, and the rest of soft tissue was removed by the beetles. The skulls were then
frozen to kill remaining beetles and larvae, then thawed

Boell and Tautz BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:306
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/306

and allowed to dry. To investigate the effects of preparation on shape, skulls of 15C57BL/10J were prepared following each protocol. In addition, 20 animals of DOM
IRAN AHVAZ were scanned alive (anesthetized with
Rompun/Ketamine) and afterwards prepared using the
detergent protocol.
Diet effects

Two approaches were used to study diet effects. In the
first we used laboratory outbred M. m. domesticus
derived from animals trapped in the Massif Central in
France [40] and fed them with soft diet versus hard diet.
The hard diet animals (17 offspring from four breeding
pairs) were fed on normal rodent pellets (Altromin standard diet No.1324). The soft diet animals (14 offspring
from two breeding pairs) were fed on a powder diet,
which has the same nutritional composition as the pellets
(Altromin standard diet No. 1321). To ensure health of
the mothers and to reduce maternal effects of the treatment, the food in the soft diet cages was changed from
pellets to powder only 2 weeks after birth of the experimental animals, approximately two weeks before weaning. All mice in the hard diet/soft diet experiment were
scanned alive (anesthetized with Rompun/Ketamine) at
8-10 weeks of age. Our second comparison was between
wild caught animals (representing natural food conditions) and their first generation offspring raised under
laboratory food conditions with pellets. For this we used
19 wild-caught M. m. domesticus from Ahvaz, Iran
(DOM IRAN AHVAZ), and 24 F1 offspring of 6 breeding
pairs of these mice. To quantify the impact of diet on
Procrustes distances, we compared for both experiments
the Procrustes distances of each “treatment” and “control” group to all of the wild mouse populations. Furthermore, we measured the Procrustes distances between
“treatment” and “control” groups to assess the magnitude
of distances caused solely by diet. Siblings were treated as
statistically independent of each other, i.e. potential
maternal or litter effects on shape would have been
missed, but this makes the analysis more conservative.
Data acquisition

All mandibles were scanned with a micro-computertomograph (microCT - VivaCT 40, Scanco, Bruettisellen,
Switzerland). Whenever possible, the material was
scanned “fresh”, (either alive but anesthetized, or in a
fresh, frozen/thawed cadaver, or in an ethanol-preserved
specimen). The resolution of the scans depended on the
material: 21 or 33 μm for prepared bone, 33 μm for alcohol preserved/fresh specimens, and 38 μm for anesthetized mice to keep the X-ray dosage low. In order to
produce two-dimensional lateral views of the hemimandibles for geometric morphometrics, the scans were
oriented as follows: hemimandibles were outlined in the

Page 4 of 15

tomographic slices, and the bone was segmented using a
visually determined threshold of 230 mg HA/ccm (this
unit is a standard measure of optical x-ray density of
materials). From the triangulated surface of the threedimensionally reconstructed hemimandible, the major
spatial axis of the hemimandible were automatically
determined as described in [41], and the 3D image datasets (both the original gray scale dataset as well as the
segmented binary dataset) were then aligned in 3D with
the direction of the major axis. From the aligned digital
gray-scale dataset, a virtual 2D X-ray image was produced by adding the linear attenuation coefficients (the
gray scale image values) in lateral direction (A. Laib,
Scanco, Bruetisellen, pers. comm.). All these operations
were done with the built-in software of the microCT system. Fourteen landmarks were digitized on each hemimandible using tpsDig2 [42] and tpsUtil [43], producing
a set of 28 raw coordinates for each specimen. The landmarks assessed in this study are depicted in Figure 1.
Statistical analyses

Most geometric morphometric analyses (except betweengroup PCA, see below) were performed in MorphoJ [44].
Analyses were carried out on different subsets of the
material as described in results. The raw coordinates of
each subset were subjected to a Procrustes fit in MorphoJ, whereby variation due to position, orientation and
size was removed from the data, leaving only shape variation for further analysis. CVA (canonical variates analysis) was used to calculate the Procrustes distances
between all samples in a given data subset (Procrustes
distances are a part of the CVA output in MorphoJ). Discriminant function analysis was used as an additional
tool for estimation of distinctness by numbers of misassigned specimens. Shape changes were visualized using
the “warped outline drawing” function in MorphoJ. Ttests with sequential Bonferroni correction on Procrustes
distances, calculation of Euclidean distances between
shape change vectors and individual Procrustes coordinate configurations, and between-group PCA on Procrustes coordinates (using the bga function [45]) were
performed in R [46]. Between-group PCA performs a
PCA on group means and projects the data points of the
individuals on the resulting axes. Procrustes coordinates
were calculated in MorphoJ and between-group PCA
using the bga function was then performed on Procrustes
coordinates. Data plots were also produced in R. Summary statistics and Pearson correlation between Procrustes variance and fraction of specimens misassigned in
DFA were calculated in PAST [47].
Technical error measurements

To assess the magnitude of digitization error, we compared corresponding interpopulation Procrustes

Boell and Tautz BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:306
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/306

Page 5 of 15

Figure 1 Positions of the 14 landmarks used in this study on the outline of a mouse hemimandible radiograph. LM1: Anterior terminus
of bone dorsal of the incisor; LM2: Minimum of depression on dorsal side of incisor ramus; LM3: Bone/teeth transition anterior of M1; LM4:
Intersection of ascending ramus with tooth row; LM5: Tip of processus coronoideus; LM6: Minimum of depression posterior to processus
coronoideus; LM7: Anterior margin of condylar articular surface; LM8: Posteroventral tip of condyle; LM9: Minimum of depression formed by
condyle and processus angularis; LM10: Posterodorsal tip of processus angularis; LM11: Posteroventral tip of processus angularis; LM12: Minimum
of depression formed by processus angularis and incisor ramus; LM13: Posterior margin of muscle insertion area on ventral side of incisor ramus;
LM14: Anterior margin of muscle insertion area on ventral site of incisor ramus.

distances between two independent rounds of digitization. In order to reduce the impact of digitization error
on the overall results, the average of both digitisations
was used in the subsequent analyses. To assess the influence of sample size, we used samples with large numbers of specimens (more than 20), reduced them
randomly to N = 15 and compared Procrustes distances
before and after sample size reduction. To assess the
influence of the preparation method, we scanned the
same specimens before vs. after preparation and compared the respective sets of Procrustes distances to all of
the wild mouse populations. We assessed also the influence of orientation of specimens inside the scanner by
scanning a subset twice in random orientations.
Simulation of the combined effects of technical errors
and environmental factors

In order to assess how the technical error sources (digitization error, preparation method, small sample size)
and the biological, non-genetic factors such as age, size
and plasticity might add up to influence the final shape
measurements, we ran the following simulation using R
and MorphoJ. First, after a common Procrustes superimposition, we calculated the differences between the
Procrustes mean shapes of the following seven sample
pairs: DOM EGYPT digitization round 1 vs. DOM
EGYPT digitization round 2 (digitization error), C57BL/
6J unprepared vs. C57BL/6J prepared (preparation),
DOM EGYPT all 30 specimens vs. DOM EGYPT

reduced to 15 specimens (sample size), C57BL/6J 8-14
weeks old vs. C57BL/6J 16-23 weeks old (age), C57BL/6J
with centroid size 524.77 - 565.68 vs. C57BL/6J with
centroid size 565.72 - 587.63 (size), DOM IRAN
AHVAZ from the field vs. F1 lab offspring of DOM
IRAN AHVAZ (diet 1), M. m. domesticus hard diet vs.
M. m. domesticus soft diet (diet 2). The resulting seven
“error shape change vectors” were used to calculate 128
“total error vectors”. Each “total error vector” was calculated in the following way: we assumed that each type of
error could act in either direction, i.e. we multiplied
each error shape change vector either by 1 or by -1. All
128 (= 27 ) possible sign combinations were used. We
further assumed that each error type would affect a
given sample with varying strength. Therefore, we multiplied each error shape change vector by a coefficient
randomly drawn from a normal distribution with mean
= 0.5 and S.D. = 0.15. The mean value of this distribution was set to 0.5 because we the error shape change
vectors have been constructed such as to correspond to
the maximum impact of age, size, diet, preparation and
sampling, respectively, and we considered it unrealistic
that each population should always be affected maximally by each factor. S.D. = 0.15 was chosen to optimally cover the range between 0 and 1, whilst avoiding
negative values. After multiplying each error shape
change vector with a sign and a strength coefficient, all
seven vectors were added together to give the total error
vector. These vectors were used to assess the degree of

Boell and Tautz BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:306
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/306

between-population variation, which is likely to occur as
a consequence of technical errors and non-genetic biological factors alone. To achieve this, we calculated the
Euclidean distances between all total error vectors. The
distribution of these error distances was then compared
to the intra- and interspecific Procrustes distances
between the populations of the wild mouse dataset
using sequential Bonferroni corrected t-tests.
Animal experimentation

All animal work followed the legal requirements, was
registered under number V312-72241.123-34 (97-8/07)
and approved by the ethics commission of the Ministerium für Landwirtschaft, Umwelt und ländliche Räume,
Kiel (Germany) on 27. 12. 2007.

Results
Technical error sources

Our study combines samples from heterogeneous
sources. It includes prepared skulls from wild-caught
mice as well as ethanol-preserved specimens and livescanned anesthetized mice. Also, the specimens were
not always positioned in the same way inside the scanner and sometimes it is not easy to locate landmarks
precisely and unambiguously on radiographs. Hence, it
was necessary to assess the errors introduced by these
technical factors. Because our metric of interest is Procrustes distances between populations, we quantified the
effect of error sources on this metric.
The digitization error (measured as the difference
between corresponding interpopulation Procrustes distances across two rounds of digitization) was found to
be 4% on average (S.D. 4%, max16%). The error resulting from small sample size was 12% (S.D. = 11%, max
60%). The error introduced by orientation differences of
specimens inside the scanner was negligible, i.e. not larger than expected from the error of digitization alone.
The errors introduced through differences in preparation protocols (unprepared versus detergent or dermestid beetles) were on average 16% (S.D. = 6%, max 23%).
Age, size and diet effects

Apparent differences between population samples in our
wild mouse dataset could also be influenced by biological variables, such as systematic differences in age, size
and environmental factors between populations. In this
context, size could be a proxy for unknown environmental effects such as temperature, diet or habitat/
population structure.
To assess the impact of age, we divided our sample of
8-23 weeks old animals - an age span which corresponds roughly to the span expectation for adult wild
mice [48] - into two age groups: 8-14 weeks old (N =
46) vs. 16-23 weeks old (N = 25). Our experiment thus

Page 6 of 15

mimics a strong systematic age difference between wild
population samples. The average difference between corresponding Procrustes distances to wild mouse populations for young vs. old mice was 7% (S.D. 4%, max 15%)
The Procrustes distance between the young and old
group was 0.0205. The shape difference between these
two groups is shown in Figure 2a.
To assess the impact of size differences on Procrustes
distances, we used the same C57BL/6J mice as for the
age experiment. This time, the mice were divided into
two groups (each N = 31) according to centroid size
(small mandibles: N = 31, mean = 556, S.D. = 9; large
mandibles: N = 31, mean = 572, S.D. = 6). The average
difference between corresponding Procrustes distances
to wild mouse populations for large vs. small mandibles
was 12% (S.D. 4%, max 18%). The Procrustes distance
between the young and old group was 0.0137. The
shape difference between these two groups is shown in
Figure 2b.
For mice caught in the field versus their offspring
raised on a laboratory diet, Procrustes distances to wild
mouse populations differed on average by 18% (S.D. =
10%, max = 36%) with a Procrustes distance between
treatments of 0.016. The shape difference between field
and laboratory animals in this experiment are shown in
Figure 2c. For the laboratory hard diet vs. soft diet comparison, they differed on average by 14% (S.D. = 8%,
max = 30%) with a Procrustes distance between treatments of 0.0202. The shape difference between hard
diet and soft diet animals in this experiment are shown
in Figure 2d.
Combined error and environmental factor estimate

To assess the combined effect of technical error and
age, size and diet effects on the final measurements, we
used the shape differences found in the experiments
described above to simulate the distribution of Procrustes distances to be expected under various combinations of the respective factors (see Methods). We found
that both, intraspecific and interspecific distances within
the wild mouse dataset are on average significantly larger (p intraspecific = 0.008, p interspecific = 3.8 -08 , after
sequential Bonferroni correction) than those created by
the combination of all confounding factors (Figure 3).
We conclude that technical error sources and nongenetic factors together are unlikely to fully explain the
shape differences that we describe in the following in
detail.
Wild mouse diversity

In a first set of comparisons we focussed on the wild
mouse diversity, i.e. mostly the samples from museums.
We used two different representations to assess the differences in mandible shape in this wild mouse dataset,

Boell and Tautz BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:306
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/306

Page 7 of 15

Figure 2 Pair wise shape differences between four categories in grey and red shading, region of overlap in brown. A) young versus old:
Adult C57BL/6J mice 8-14 weeks old (gray shape) vs. 16-23 weeks old (red shape) (exaggerated x12); B) adult C57BL/6J mice with smaller (gray
shape) vs. larger (red shape) mandibles (exaggerated x11); C) wild-caught Dom Iran Ahvaz (gray shape) vs. first generation offspring raised in
captivity (red shape) (exaggerated x15); D) mice fed soft diet (gray shape) vs. hard diet (red shape) (exaggerated x3). Shape changes were
calculated using discriminant function analysis between the respective groups.

namely a between-group PCA plot for all specimens and
comparisons between categories of distances (Figure 4).
All Procrustes distances between population samples are
listed in Table 2.
The two first between-group PC axes explain 52% of
variance between groups (Figure 4a). Axis 1 is mainly
determined by the species differences between M. musculus (samples 1 - 11) and the two other species (M. spretus
and M. macedonicus; samples 12 - 15). Three of the M. m.
domesticus population samples are situated at the periphery of the range of natural variation along the major axes.
One is a sample set that comes from a region of overlap
with M. spretus (DOM SPAIN PUDEMONT - sample 8).
This sample is distinct from other M. musculus along
PC1, in the opposite direction to M. spretus and M. macedonicus. The shape change along this axis implies changes
in the relative lengths of the angular process and the condyle (Figure 4b). The other two are from islands of the
Kerguelen Archipelago (DOM KERG GUILLOU and

DOM KERG COCHONS - samples 5 and 6) and represent
very recent colonisations. These samples are distinct from
other M. musculus along PC2, implying changes in the
length of the coronoid process and the height of the posterior ramus (Figure 4b).
When comparing the inter- and intraspecific Procrustes distance categories (Figure 4c), it appears that
the M. musculus populations are equally distant to M.
macedonicus and M. spretus, while the latter two are
closer to each other on average. Intraspecific distances
within M. musculus appear to be much higher than
within the two other species (note, however, that power
is low for this comparison, because there are only two
data points for intraspecific distances within M. macedonicus and M. spretus, hence the difference is not significant). When we focus on the M. m. domesticus
populations from the summer-dry regions (DOM IRAN
TEHERAN, DOM IRAN AHVAZ andDOM EGYPT),
we find lower distances among them, when compared to

Boell and Tautz BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:306
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/306

Figure 3 Comparison of Euclidean distances between
simulated technical error + environmental effect shape change
vectors versus intra- and interspecific distances in our wild
mouse reference dataset. All three categories have significantly
different means: simulation vs. intraspecific (p = 0.008); simulation
vs. interspecific (p = 3.8 × 10-8); intraspecific vs. interspecific (p =
0.028); after sequential Bonferroni correction. Whiskers represent
range of observed correlations.

the remainder of the M. musculus populations (p =
0.004 after sequential Bonferroni correction).
Stating that shape differences between population
means exist, is not the same as stating that populations
are distinct with respect to shape. To assess the degree
of distinctness between populations within M. musculus,
we performed a discriminant function analysis for each
population against the pooled remaining wild-caught M.
musculus. The results from cross-validation assessments
of the number of misassigned specimens of the populations are shown in Table 3. While all populations were
significantly distinct from the group formed of the
pooled remaining wild-caught mice, on average 19% of
the specimens were misassigned.
Wild versus inbred mice

Inbred mouse strains, which have previously been used
for quantitative genetic studies of mandible shape, have
evolved under laboratory conditions for numerous generations [34]. If this evolution or the inbreeding process
had changed mandible shape, not only would this be of
interest by itself, but it could also affect the evolutionary
implications of such quantitative genetic studies.

Page 8 of 15

Therefore, we were interested to assess whether mandible shapes of inbred strains differ from the range of
shapes found among wild mice.
To compare mandible shape differences between inbred
strains and wild populations, and among inbred strains, to
natural variation between individuals within populations
and between populations, we subjected inbred strains and
wild mouse populations to a common Procrustes superimposition and then calculated the corresponding sets of
Procrustes distances. The results are shown in Figure 5. It
can be seen that the distances among inbred strains and
between inbred strains and wild populations are much larger than the distances between wild populations, even
across species boundaries (p = 2 × 10-16, 9 × 10-12, 2 × 1016
, and 3 × 10-11, respectively, after sequential Bonferroni
correction). The phenotypic differences between inbred
strains are therefore not comparable in extent to differences between natural populations. On the other hand,
distances among inbred strains are not significantly different from distances between individuals within natural
populations (p = 0.3 after sequential Bonferroni correction), which are much larger than the average differences
between the populations themselves (p = 2 × 10-16 after
sequential Bonferroni correction). Therefore, the phenotypic differences between inbred strains correspond to the
level of inter-individual rather than inter-population variation, with the latter being of minor importance as compared to the former.
In order to assess the distribution of inbred strain
shapes along the major axes of the space of natural
inter-individual variation, we treated the inbred strains
as if they were individuals (which is also justified by the
fact that the are genetically homogeneous, i.e. represent
only a single genotype) and calculated Procrustes mean
shapes for them. These were then combined with the
wild mouse dataset and a PCA was performed on this
combined dataset. The results for the first four axes are
shown in Figure 6. The inbred strain mean shapes are
within the range of natural variation, although it seems
that some patterns might occur (see discussion).
Ontogenetic origin of shape differences between
individuals

In the context of genetic differences in mandible shape,
we were also interested to assess at which stage during
ontogeny shape space differences would already become
apparent. For this, we prepared a comparative ontogenetic series involving 2-8 weeks old mice from two
inbred strains, LAB INBRED C57BL76J and MUS WD
INBRED PWD. A between-groups-PCA of these samples (Figure 7) shows that the developmental trajectories
of shape are running approximately parallel along PC1,
and that some aspects of the characteristic shape difference between the lines are already present, albeit less

Boell and Tautz BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:306
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/306

Page 9 of 15

Figure 4 Distances within the wild mouse reference dataset. A) Between-group-PCA scatter plot of the first two PCs. B) Shape changes
along PC1 and PC2 (from gray to red in positive direction). C) Distance categories - all pair wise distances within a category are plotted. Only
the category “M. mac /M. spre intraspecific” represents two comparisons - the lower point the M. macedonicus and the upper point the M.
spretus intraspecific distances between the two populations each. Whiskers represent range of observed correlations.

pronounced, in the two week old animals of these
strains. The processes, which lead to mandible shape
differences between adults, thus appear to be initiated
early in development, before the onset of major growth.

Discussion
Knowledge of the natural variation of a trait is the basis
for studying the microevolution of the trait. Our study
aimed to assess the wild type shape space of the mouse

Boell and Tautz BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:306
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/306

Page 10 of 15

Table 2 Procrustes distances between the natural populations (× 10-2)
(1) (2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

(13

(14)

DOM EGYPT (1)
DOM GER FRANKFURT (2)

2.9

DOM IRAN TEHERAN (3)

1.8 3.5

DOM SPAIN PUDEMONT (4)

3.9 2.9

4.7

DOM IRAN AHVAZ (5)

2.4 3.4

2.9

DOM GER MUNICH (6)

2.8 2.5

3.0

3.6

2.8

DOM SICILY (7)

1.6 3.2

1.9

3.9

2.2

2.4

DOM KER GUILLOU (8)
DOM KER COCHONS (9)

3.3
2.9

3.4 3.6
3.7
3.9
2.7 4.3

3.8
3.2

3.4
3.9

3.5
2.9

2.7

MUS HUNGARY (10)

2.3

2.0

2.8

3.1 2.7

2.4

2.5

3.5

CAS JOHNSTON ATOLL (11)

2.5

2.8

2.9

3.8

3.5 3.8

3.0

3.2

3.0

2.5

MAC GREECE (12)

3.0

4.2

2.6

5.1

3.6

3.5 2.7

3.4

2.9

3.8

3.6

MAC TURKEY (13)

3.2

4.1

2.8

5.0

3.0

2.8

2.6 4.7

3.8

3.8

4.6

SPRE SPAIN PUDEMONT (14)

3.1

3.6

2.5

4.3

2.7

3.0

2.6

4.1 3.1

2.8

3.8

3.1

2.6

SPRE SPAIN MADRID (15)

3.1

4.3

2.2

5.3

2.9

3.1

2.4

4.5

3.4 3.6

4.3

2.7

1.5

3.2

mandible, which has become a major model for the evolution of morphological characters. However, dealing
with wild-caught animals implies that these will differ
with respect to age, size and previous diet. In addition,
dealing with museum specimens could introduce further
systematic differences caused by different preparation
conditions, which are often not recorded. Apart of diet
(see below) a systematic study on these possibly confounding factors has not been done before, but was evidently necessary, given that we record rather subtle
differences. We have therefore first designed a number
of tests to look at the influence of technical variables,
such as preparation method of the skull, suboptimal
sample size and digitization error. In addition we have
looked at the influence of biological variables, such as
age and size. The intuitively most important environmental factor that could influence mandible shape is
diet and we have therefore paid particular attention to

3.5

2.9

this. Previous studies on the influence of diet differences
had found that food consistency has an effect on mandible shape [15,16,35-37]. But we have asked here for the
first time how strongly these effects might confound
measured differences between wild mouse populations.
We found that there is indeed an effect of diet on
mandible shape, but even in the extreme hard diet/soft
diet shift experiment the effect is not more dramatic
than for age or size differences, and the Procrustes distances between diet treatment groups are also smaller
than the majority of intraspecific Procrustes distances.
Furthermore, since house mice are generalists, which
are not prone to specialize on any specific diet, we
assume that extreme diet consistency differences are
rare in nature (but see the case of Kerguelen mice
below).
While each of these tests and experiments showed
only a small influence on Procrustes distances between

Table 3 Distinctness analysis of the natural populations
populations

% specimens misassigned

Procrustes variance (× 10-3)

DOM EGYPT

20.7

1.19

DOM GER FRANKFURT

17.4

1.37

DOM IRAN TEHERAN

31.3

1.77

DOM IRAN AHVAZ

21.1

1.4

0

1.05

DOM GER MUNICH
DOM SPAIN PUDEMONT

21.4
7.7

0.92
1.4

DOM SICILY

24.1

1.44

DOM KERG COCHONS

3.7

0.75

CAS JOHNSTON ATOLL

28.6

1.92

MUS HUNGARY

28

1.84

average

19

1.4

DOM KERG GUILLOU

1.9

Boell and Tautz BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:306
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/306

Figure 5 Comparison of natural populations with inbred
strains. Procrustes distances between inbred strains and wild
populations and among inbred strains compared to distances
among wild populations (intra- and interspecific) and between
individuals within populations. Whiskers represent range of
observed correlations.

Page 11 of 15

populations, it could well be that taking together all
error sources and environmental factors would introduce more error in our data than any single error
source. However, it is possible to use the shape differences between “treatment” and “control” groups in these
experiments to calculate combined effects. We made
use of this option to simulate a distribution of Procrustes distances under various combinations of error
and environmental effects. This simulation is conservative in as far as it assumes cumulative effects of age,
size, and diet treatments, whereas a smaller number of
factors is likely to be relevant in real populations. Even
under this conservative model, the combined error and
environmental effect are unlikely to explain the average
Procrustes distance between natural populations.
Given that the differences we have measured between
the wild populations can apparently not fully be ascribed
to technical and environmental factors, it seems safe to
conclude that genetic factors contribute significantly to
mandible shape differences. This conclusion is further
supported by the fact that major shape differences exist
between inbred strains that were derived from the same
wild population at about the same time in the same
laboratory (inbred strains Stlt, StrB and StrA, see
below), i.e. the environmental influences should have
been very similar in this case, but this is not the case:
major differences are evident (see below). Furthermore,
our assessment of the ontogenetic origin of shape differences between inbred strains suggests that they become
manifest early in postnatal development, weeks before
weaning, such that dietary differences acting later in life
would only modulate already existing differences, rather

Figure 6 Scatter plots of the first four axes of a PCA comparison of the aggregate shape space of all individuals from the natural
populations with the Procrustes mean shapes of the inbred strains. Red symbols: wild derived inbred strains; green symbols: classical
inbred strains.

Boell and Tautz BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:306
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/306

Page 12 of 15

Figure 7 Ontogenetic origin of shape differences between inbred strains. A) scatter plot of the first two between-group PCs of two to
eight week old mice of each C57BL/6J (B6) and PWD. B) shape changes along PC1 and PC2 (from gray to red in positive direction).

than initiating them in the first place. Thus, the intraspecific diversity in mandible shape in the house mouse
is apparently to a high degree genetically determined
and can therefore be interpreted in an evolutionary context, involving an assessment of the role of selection and
neutral evolution in shape divergence.
The role of selection

Morphological traits in adults, such as mandible shape,
are expected to be directly exposed to purifying selection, since their integrity should directly contribute to
the fitness of the individual. This would imply that differences between populations should be driven by positive selection to new environmental conditions.
However, neutral accumulation of differences over time
would also be a possibility, in particular since there
appears to be little gene flow even between populations
of the same subspecies [40]. Some of the patterns that
we see in our data allow to address this question.
The strongest indicator for selective constraints and
only a small role for neutral divergence is the finding of
relative higher similarity of shapes for M. m. domesticus
populations from summer-dry habitats in Iran, Egypt
and Sicily. This is of particular relevance, since these
populations are at the same time the ones that are the
relatively oldest ones. Based on molecular and fossil evidence, it has been shown that M. m. domesticus mice
started to spread from the area of Iran into the Near
East and Northern Africa approximately 8, 000 years
ago, while the colonization of Sicily and Western Europe
started only 3, 000 years ago [49]. Thus, M. m. domesticus has originated in a summer-dry climate and is
expected to be optimally adapted to this. If one would
assume a neutral divergence of shapes, one would

expect that old populations are more different from
each other than young populations, but this does not
appear to be the case here. Instead, the younger populations in Western Europe show more morphological
divergence than the older populations from Africa and
the Near East. This divergence could be due to adaptive
effects in the wake of colonizing new environments with
new food sources, or could be due to the fixation of
new alleles during the colonisation bottlenecks. At present it is difficult to distinguish between these possibilities, but one can point out that the molecular analysis
of the populations has suggested that the colonisation
bottleneck was not very strong [50].
The most divergent populations among M. m. domesticus are the ones that were caught on the sub-Antarctic
islands of Guillou and Cochon, which are both part of
the Kerguelen Archipelago where mice have arrived less
than 200 years ago [51]. They occupy a new part of the
shape space, indicated by their separation on the second
PCA axis in comparison to the other wild-caught mice
(Figure 4a). It is indeed known that these island mice
have adapted to a new diet (preference for earth worms,
which are otherwise not much used by mice [52], i.e.
the common mandible shape difference along PC2
could have been caused by positive selection. On the
other hand, this does not explain why they differ so
much in PC1 (Figure 4a), although they live on ecologically very similar neighbouring islands. However, these
mice came actually from two genetically distinct source
populations [51], which could explain these differences.
This would therefore be a case where parallel selection
has led to some common changes (represented in PC2),
but within different genetic backgrounds, which are
responsible for the differences represented in PC1.

Boell and Tautz BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:306
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/306

While this interpretation is necessarily speculative (and
does also not rule out additional bottleneck effects), it
also corroborates the findings that we made in our companion paper on comparisons between mandible shape
QTLs obtained from different experiments [53].
Another indicator of a possible influence of selection
on shape comes from the finding that the M. m. domesticus population that lives in sympatry with a M. spretus
population (DOM SPAIN PUDEMONT) shows a shift
in shape space. In the PCA plot these mice are on opposite trajectories outside of the shape space of the other
mainland M. m. domesticus populations, including the
ones from the summer-dry regions, as well as from Germany (Figure 4a). The two species of mice included in
this dataset were caught in the same small village in a
single trapping campaign, suggesting that they share the
same habitat. Hence, one could interpret the divergence
of the M. m. domesticus shapes as a character displacement effect, in response to the interaction with M. spretus, which is the ancestral species in the region.
However, this situation will need to be further analysed
before a firm conclusion is possible, since it is so far not
known in which form the two species might ecologically
interact with each other.
Inbred mice

To interpret shape differences between inbred strains in
an evolutionary context, which means, with reference to
natural variation, it is critical to understand which level
of genetic diversity they reflect. Inbred strains are
genetically comparable to individuals since they represent a single genotype only. Any variance between individuals from an inbred strain should therefore be
ascribed to technical and environmental variance, while
the strain mean shapes represent the genotype of these
“individuals”. We find that the within-strain variance of
inbred strains is indeed much lower than the withinpopulation variance of wild caught mice (Figure 5).
Inbred strains represent thus essentially a random sample of chromosomes drawn from specific wild populations or admixed from various origins.
We find that inbred strains, which have been derived
from wild populations, differ from each other more than
the mean shapes between wild populations. This includes
inbred strains, which have been derived from the same
natural population, as is the case for the strains Stlt, StrA
and StrB in our study. The Procrustes distances between
these three strains (0.0373 - 0.0446) are as large as the
larger interspecific distances between wild populations.
The comparison of between- and within-population variation in wild mice (Figure 5) shows that inter-individual
variation within natural population is much larger in
comparison to differences between populations. The
opposite pattern is seen for inbred mice (Figure 5) where

Page 13 of 15

the within strain differences are small due to inbreeding.
The mandible shapes of inbred strains appear thus
indeed to represent random samples of the original wild
diversity, i.e. they “behave” as if they were individuals
drawn from wild populations. This interpretation does of
course not preclude possible additional changes due to
inbreeding and laboratory evolution.
Although the mandible shapes of the inbred strains in
our study are well within the range of natural variation,
their distribution in Figure 6 suggests that there may be
some pattern. The variation among inbred strains seems
to be limited along PC2, while PC4 separates classical
strains from wild-derived ones. While the former may
be ascribed to laboratory effects, it is more difficult to
speculate about a reason for this latter pattern. Perhaps
it is partially due to phylogeny, since the classical strains
have ultimately all been derived from the same admixed
base population [54]. These questions will have to be
revisited in the future.

Conclusion
Variance comparisons within and between populations
and closely related species are at the core of understanding micro-evolutionary divergence processes. We
have shown here that this can also be applied to shape
measurements in natural populations. Most importantly,
we show that the unavoidable technical and biological
variation in wild- caught samples is not as large as to
hide underlying genetic patterns. Our analyses have
identified some populations in which adaptive changes
of mandible shape may have occurred. Two of these
represent very recent invasions of islands, indicating
that the adaptation can be fast, although mandible shape
is controlled by many genes [9]. Our data provide also a
solid basis for a further study of variance components
and co-variance patterns (Boell, in preparation).
Additional material
Additional file 1: Museum samples. Collection numbers of museum
material and museum addresses.

Acknowledgements
We thank the museum staff K. Krohmann, R. Kraft, M. Hiermayer and D.F.
Schmidt for providing access to the museum material, R. Scavetta, M.R. Abai,
J.-L- Chapuis, J. Pialek, C. Grimm and R. Rottscheidt for providing samples
from fresh collections and inbred strains, H. Harre for help with scanning, A.
Lorenc for teaching how to use the R software, M. Volquardsen, A. Müller
and C. Pfeifle for animal care, P. Mitterroecker and C. Klingenberg for
discussion and A. Schunke, F. Chan and T. Harr for comments on the
manuscript.
Authors’ contributions
LB and DT designed the study, LB did the measurements and the statistics,
LB and DT wrote the manuscript. All authors have read and approved the
final manuscript.

Boell and Tautz BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:306
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/306

Received: 30 June 2011 Accepted: 18 October 2011
Published: 18 October 2011
References
1. Mitteroecker P, Gunz P: Advances in geometric morphometrics. Evol Biol
2009, 36:235-247.
2. Klingenberg CP: Evolution and development of shape: integrating
quantitative approaches. Nat Rev Genet 2010, 11:623-635.
3. Atchley WR, Plummer AA, Riska B: Genetic analysis of size-scaling patterns
in the mouse mandible. Genetics 1985, 111:579-595.
4. Atchley WR, Cowley E, Eisen EJ, Prasetyo H, Hakins-Brown D: Correlated
response in the developmental choreographies of the mouse mandible
to selection for body composition. Evolution 1990, 44:669-688.
5. Atchley WR: A model for development and evolution of complex
morphological structures. Biol Rev 1991, 66:101-157.
6. Cheverud JM, Routman EJ, Irschick DJ: Pleiotropic effects of individual
gene loci on mandibular morphology. Evolution 1997, 51:2006-2016.
7. Cheverud JM, Ehrich TH, Vaughn TT, Koreishi SF, Linsey RB, Pletscher LS:
Pleiotropic effects on mandibular morphology. II: differential epistasis
and genetic variation in morphological integration. J Exp Zool (Mol Dev
Evol) 2004, , 302B: 424-435.
8. Leamy LJ, Routman EJ, Cheverud JM: A search for quantitative trait loci
affecting asymmetry of mandibular characters in mice. Evolution 1997,
51:957-969.
9. Leamy LJ, Klingenberg CP, Sherratt E, Wolf JB, Cheverud JM: A search for
quantitative trait loci exhibiting imprinting effects on mouse mandible
size and shape. Heredity 2008, 101:518-526.
10. Klingenberg CP, Leamy LJ: Quantitative genetics of geometric shape in
the mouse mandible. Evolution 2001, 55:2342-2352.
11. Klingenberg CP, Leamy LJ, Routman EJ, Cheverud JM: Genetic architecture
of mandible shape in mice: effects of quantitative trait loci analyzed by
geometric morphometrics. Genetics 2001, 157:785-802.
12. Klingenberg CP, Mebus K, Auffray JC: Developmental integration in a
complex morphological structure: how distinct are the modules in the
mouse mandible? Evol Dev 2003, 5:522-531.
13. Klingenberg CP, Leamy LJ, Cheverud JM: Integration and modularity of
quantitative trait locus effects on geometric shape in the mouse
mandible. Genetics 2004, 166:1909-1921.
14. Ehrich TH, Vaughn TT, Koreishi SF, Linsey RB, Pletscher LS, Cheverud JM:
Pleiotropic effects on mandibular morphology I. Developmental
morphological integration and differential dominance. J Exp Zool (Mol
Dev Evol) 2003, 296B:58-79.
15. Renaud S, Auffray J-C: Adaptation and plasticity in insular evolution of
the house mouse mandible. J Zool Evol Res 2009, 48:138-150.
16. Renaud S, Auffray J-C, de la Porte S: Epigenetic effects on the mouse
mandible: common features and discrepancies in remodeling due to
muscular dystrophy and response to food consistency. BMC Evol Biol
2010, 10:28.
17. Auffray J-C, Alibert P, Latieule C: Relative warps analysis of skull shape
across the hybrid zone in the house mouse (Mus musculus) in Denmark.
J Zool Lond 1996, 240:441-455.
18. Corti M, Rohlf FJ: Chromosomal speciation and phenotypic evolution in
the house mouse. Biol J Linn Soc 2001, 73:99-112.
19. Davis SJ: Morphometric variation of populations of house mice (Mus
domesticus) in Britain and Faroe. J Zool Lond 1983, 199:521-534.
20. Gerasimov S, Nikolov H, Mihailova V, Auffray J-C, Bonhomme F:
Morphometric stepwise discriminant analysis of the five genetically
determined European taxa of the genus Mus. Biol J Linn Soc 1990,
41:47-64.
21. Scriven PN, Bauchau V: The effect of hybridization on mandible
morphology in an island population of the house mouse. J Zool Lond
1992, 226:573-583.
22. Slabova M, Frynta D: Morphometric variation in nearly unstudied
populations of the most studied mammal: the non-commensal house
mouse (Mus musculus domesticus) in the Near East and Northern Africa.
Zool Anz 2007, 247:91-101.
23. Pergams ORW, Ashley MV: Microevolution in island rodents. Genetica 2001,
112-113:245-256.
24. Macholán M: Key to European house mice. Folia Zool 1996, 45:209-217.
25. Macholán M: Morphometric analysis of European house mice. Acta Theriol
1996, 41:255-275.

Page 14 of 15

26. Macholán M: The mouse skull as a source of morphometric data for
phylogeny inference. Zool Anz 2008, 247:315-327.
27. Macholán M, Mikula O, Vohralík V: Geographic phenetic variation of two
eastern-Mediterranean non-commensal mouse species, Mus
macedonicus and M. cypriacus (Rodentia: Muridae) based on traditional
and geometric approaches to morphometrics. Zool Anz 2008, 247:76-80.
28. Caumul R, Polly PD: Phylogenetic and environmental components of
morphological variation: Skull, mandible, and molar shape in marmots
(Marmota, Rodentia). Evolution 2005, 59:2460-2472.
29. Monteiro LR, dos Reis SF: Morphological evolution in the mandible of
spiny rats, genus Trinomys (Rodentia: Echimyidae). J Zool Syst Evol Res
2005, 43:332-338.
30. Perez SI, Diniz JAF, Rohlf FJ, Dos Reis SF: Ecological and evolutionary
factors in the morphological diversification of South American spiny
rats. Biol J Linn Soc 2009, 98:646-660.
31. Young RL, Haselkorn TS, Badyaev AV: Functional equivalence of
morphologies enables morphological and ecological diversity. Evolution
2007, 61:2480-2492.
32. Figueirido B, Serrano-Alarcon FJ, Slater GJ, Palmqvist P: Shape at the crossroads: homoplasy and history in the evolution of the carnivoran skull
towards herbivory. J Evol Biol 2010, 23:2579-2594.
33. Taylor AB, Vogel ER, Dominy NJ: Food material properties and mandibular
load resistance abilities in large-bodied hominoids. J Human Evolution
2008, 55:604-616.
34. Rychlik L, Ramalhinho G, Polly PD: Response to environmental factors and
competition: skull, mandible and tooth shapes in Polish, water shrews
(Neomys, Soricidae, Mammalia). J Zool Syst Evol Res 2006, 44:339-351.
35. Levrini L, Deli R, Sfondrini F, Pantanali F: Consistency of diet and its effects
on mandibular morphogenesis in the young rat. Prog Orthod 2003, 4:3-7.
36. Maki K, Nishioka T, Shiori E, Takahashi T, Kimura M: Effects of diet
consistency on the mandible of rats at the growth stage: computed xray densitometric and cephalometric analysis. Angle Orthod 2002,
72:468-475.
37. Yamada K, Kimmel DB: The effect of dietary consistency on bone mass
and turnover in the growing rat mandible. Arch Oral Biol 1991,
36:129-138.
38. Tucker PK, Sandstedt SA, Lundrigan BL: Phylogenetic relationships in the
subgenus Mus (genus Mus, family Muridae, subfamily Murinae):
examining gene trees and species trees. Biol J Linn Soc 2005, 84:653-662.
39. Pialek J, Vyskocilova M, Bimova B, Havelkova D, Pialkova J, et al:
Development of unique house mouse resources suitable for
evolutionary studies of speciation. J Hered 2008, 99:34-44.
40. Ihle S, Ravaoarimanana I, Thomas M, Tautz D: An analysis of signatures of
selective sweeps in natural populations of the house mouse. Mol Biol
Evol 2006, 23:790-797.
41. Laib A, Barou O, Vico L, Lafage-Proust MH, Alexandre C, Rügsegger P: 3D
micro-computed tomography of trabecular and cortical bone
architecture with application to a rat model of immobilisation
osteoporosis. Med Biol Eng Comput 2000, 38:326-332.
42. Rohlf FJ: tpsDig, digitize landmarks and outlines, version 2.05 Department of
Ecology and Evolution, State University of New York at Stony Brook,
Software; 2005.
43. Rohlf FJ: tpsUtil, file utility program. version 1.26 Department of Ecology and
Evolution, State University of New York at Stony Brook, Software; 2004.
44. Klingenberg CP: MorphoJ: an integrated software package for geometric
morphometrics. Mol Ecol Resour 2011, 11:353-357.
45. Culhane AC, Perrière G, Considine EC, Cotter TG, Higgins DG: Betweengroup analysis of microarray data. Bioinformatics 2002, 18:1600-1608.
46. R Development Core Team: R: A language and environment for statistical
computing. Vienna: R Foundation for Statistical Computing; 2008 [http://
www.R-project.org], ISBN 3-900051-07-0.
47. Hammer Ø, Harper DAT, Ryan PD: PAST: Paleontological Statistics
Software Package for Education and Data Analysis. Palaeontol Electron
2001, 4:9.
48. Berry RJ, Jakobson ME: Life and death in an island population of the
house mouse. Exp Geront 1971, 6:187-197.
49. Cucchi T, Vigne J-D, Auffray J-C: First occurrence of the house mouse
(Mus musculus domesticus Schwarz & Schwarz, 1943) in the Western
Mediterranean: a zooarcheological revision of subfossil occurrences. Biol
J Linn Soc 2005, 84:429-445.

Boell and Tautz BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:306
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/306

Page 15 of 15

50. Baines JF, Harr B: Reduced X-linked diversity in derived populations of
house mice. Genetics 2007, 175:1911-1921.
51. Hardouin EA, Chapuis JL, Stevens MI, van Vuuren JB, Quillfeldt P, et al:
House mouse colonization patterns on the sub-Antarctic Kerguelen
Archipelago suggest singular primary invasions and resilience against
re-invasion. BMC Evol Biol 2010, 10:325.
52. Le Roux V, Chapuis J-L, Frenot Y, Vernon P: Diet of the house mouse (Mus
musculus) on Guillou island, Kerguelen archipelago, subantarctic. Polar
Biol 2002, 25:49-57.
53. Boell L, Gregorova S, Forejt J, Tautz D: An assessment of QTL effect sizes
and shape changes on the mandible of the house mouse (Mus
musculus) in a consomic strain panel - implications for epistasis and
evolvability of quantitative traits. BMC Evol Biol 2011, 11:309.
54. Beck JA, Lloyd S, Hafezparast M, Lennon-Pierce M, Eppig TA, Festing MFW,
Fisher EMC: Genealogies of mouse inbred strains. Nat Genet 2000,
24:23-25.
doi:10.1186/1471-2148-11-306
Cite this article as: Boell and Tautz: Micro-evolutionary divergence
patterns of mandible shapes in wild house mouse (Mus musculus)
populations. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011 11:306.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
