<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Positive selection of HIV host factors and the evolution of lentivirus genes</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:186. doi: 10.1186/1471-2148-10-186"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Katarzyna Bo_ek, Thomas Lengauer"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 8.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 7.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Bo¿ek and Lengauer BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:186
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/186

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Positive selection of HIV host factors and the
evolution of lentivirus genes
Research article

Katarzyna Bożek* and Thomas Lengauer

Abstract
Background: Positive selection of host proteins that interact with pathogens can indicate factors relevant for infection
and potentially be a measure of pathogen driven evolution.
Results: Our analysis of 1439 primate genes and 175 lentivirus genomes points to specific host factors of high genetic
variability that could account for differences in susceptibility to disease and indicate specific mechanisms of host
defense and pathogen adaptation. We find that the largest amount of genetic change occurs in genes coding for
cellular membrane proteins of the host as well as in the viral envelope genes suggesting cell entry and immune
evasion as the primary evolutionary interface between host and pathogen. We additionally detect the innate immune
response as a gene functional group harboring large differences among primates that could potentially account for
the different levels of immune activation in the HIV/SIV primate infection. We find a significant correlation between the
evolutionary rates of interacting host and viral proteins pointing to processes of the host-pathogen biology that are
relatively conserved among species and to those undergoing accelerated genetic evolution.
Conclusions: These results indicate specific host factors and their functional groups experiencing pathogen driven
evolutionary selection pressures. Individual host factors pointed to by our analysis might merit further study as
potential targets of antiretroviral therapies.
Background
Phylogenetic studies have shown that HIV emerged in
humans through at least eleven cross-species transmission events of simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV) from
non-human African primates. Three transmissions of
chimpanzee SIV (SIVcpz) from the central African chimpanzee subspecies (Pan troglodytes troglodytes) gave rise
to the HIV-1 groups M, N and O [1], with the group M
causing the AIDS pandemic. Other transmissions of
sooty mangabey (Cercocebus torquatus atys) SIV
(SIVsmm) gave rise to HIV-2 groups A-H [2,3].
SIV infection of African non-human primate host species (including sooty mangabeys, African green monkeys,
mandrills, and several others) is non-pathogenic despite
high levels of viremia [4-6]. Different levels of pathogenicity of immunodeficiency viruses in their host species
[4,7] as well as the lack of adaptation to their non-natural
species [8,9] show how interspecies differences can
* Correspondence: bozek@mpi-inf.mpg.de
1

Max Planck Institute for Informatics Computational Biology and Applied
Algorithmics Campus E1 4 66123 SaarbrÃ¼cken, Germany

Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

impact viral infectivity and drive adaptation. Host genetic
differences between individuals also affect the dynamics
of disease progression [10]. There is a growing list of
genes and alleles for which there is evidence of a positive
or negative effect on infection and disease progression.
Among them, several recently identified host factors
block or restrict retroviral infections in primates:
TRIM5α, a tripartite motif (TRIM) family protein [11];
apolipoprotein B editing catalytic polypeptide
(APOBEC3G), a member of the family of cytidine deaminases [12] and tetherin (BST-2, CD317) [13]. These
restriction factors constitute defense mechanisms of the
host acting in a species-specific manner [8,9] blocking
the viruses from replication in their non-natural host species and thus being potential agents of anti-HIV defense.
One feature of pathogenic HIV-1 infection that distinguishes it from non-pathogenic SIV infections is the high
level of chronic immune activation associated with accelerated T-cell turnover rates and apoptosis [5]. The basis
for this difference in pathogenicity is not understood,
however deciphering which viral and host factors are
responsible for the nonpathogenic course of natural SIV

© 2010 Bo¿ek and Lengauer; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Bo¿ek and Lengauer BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:186
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/186

infections could prove useful in developing more effective
treatments and prevention strategies for AIDS.
Positive selection, demonstrated in part by the rapidly
evolving immune system genes [14], reflects the evolution of the host defense against various infections. Several
HIV restriction factors have been shown to be under positive selection throughout primate evolution [15-18]. Due
to the relatively long generation times of primate species
with slow rate of genetic evolution in contrast to the short
generation times of viruses with high rates of genetic evolution and the potentially recent introduction of SIV into
primates [19], the impact of the selection pressures solely
from SIV on the host species is likely to be negligible.
However, genetic polymorphisms in genes interacting
with the virus can influence traits relevant for the susceptibility to lentiviral infection and point to a potential role
of a gene in infection and its contribution to disease.
Comparative genomics can offer insights into disease
mechanisms by correlating molecular differences that
arose during primate evolution with the variation in disease susceptibility.
There is ample scientific knowledge on HIV-1 human
protein interactions. The HIV-1 Human Protein Interaction Database is a catalogue of over 1400 human proteins
that participate in approximately 3000 unique HIV-1-tohuman protein interactions reported in peer reviewed
scientific literature [20]. The size and scope of this database allow for large-scale analyses of HIV-host molecular
interactions. Together with several fully sequenced primate genomes it allows for a systematic search for host
factors under positive selection that might be relevant for
infection and merit further investigation. Previous studies of positive selection in the HIV host factors focused
on individual examples [15-18], as well as on a set of 140
proteins compiled from the literature [21]. Here we analyze all 1439 genes available in the HIV-1 Human Protein
Interaction Database.
We explore genetic differences of HIV-interacting
genes among primates. We perform a comparative
genomics analysis of the HIV-interacting proteins in
search of positively selected genes in four different primate species. We characterize the positively selected
genes in terms of their biological function, role in the
protein-protein interaction networks and interactions
with the virus. We then analyze the relationship between
the strength of positive selection in the host proteins with
the evolutionary rates of the interacting proteins of five
immunodeficiency viruses in search of patterns in the
evolution of host-pathogen interactions.

Results
Positive selection

In order to find which of the 1439 host factors reported in
the HIV-1-Human Protein Interaction Database are

Page 2 of 15

under positive selection we extracted and aligned their
human genetic sequences with the respective homologs
in three monkey species: chimpanzee, orangutan and
rhesus macaque. We applied a measure of positive selection, based on the likelihood ratio test (LRT) for the presence of sites under positive selection. We considered a
significant LRT to be an indicator of a gene being under
positive selection. The number of positively selected sites
in each gene sequence constitutes a site-based score of
positive selection. In order to assess the robustness of,
and provide additional support for, the site-based score
we compared it with a sliding window score based on dN/
dS ratio (non-synonymous to synonymous nucleotide
substitution ratio) in sliding windows along the gene
sequence.
In case of a discrepancy between the two positive selection scores we used the more stringent LRT significance
as the indicator of positive selection, the sliding window
measure was used as a supporting score. We used both
tests to search for positive selection in all four primate
species and subsequently in the human and chimpanzee
gene sequences separately.
The site-based search for genes under positive selection
returned 152 genes having sites under positive selection
among all four primate species and in 97 genes having
sites under positive selection in the human-chimp comparison with an overlap of 49 genes. The full list of the
analyzed genes together with all scores is provided in the
Additional file 1. The genes were next ranked according
to their site-based and sliding window scores. The ranks
of genes obtained with the sliding window score correlate
with the site-based score ranks with a correlation coefficient of 0.65 in all species and 0.52 in the human-chimp
comparison (p < 0.01). This positive correlation of ranks
obtained with two different methods, together with the
high scores assigned to proteins reported to be under
positive selection in other studies (APOBEC3G [16,18],
TRIM5α [17] - Figure 1A) suggests that the ranks used in
further analyses are robust with respect to the scoring
method.
The recently identified host restriction factor tetherin
(BST-2, CD317) [13] was not included in the HIV-1
Human Interaction Database. We separately extracted,
aligned and performed the positive selection tests on the
tetherin sequences of the four primate species. Even
though positive selection in the primate tetherins has
been reported before [15], the site-based approach did
not result in significant LRT. However the sliding window
test showed this protein to be under positive selection
with a rank of 62 among the full list of 1182 genes
(APOBEC3G rank 6, TRIM5α - 38).
In order to inspect the distribution of positive selection
scores in subsets of the HIV-interacting genes we established an interaction grouping based on with which viral

Bo¿ek and Lengauer BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:186
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/186

Page 3 of 15

Figure 1 Distribution of the site-based score in the genes of four primate species. (A) Distribution of all gene scores. Positions of important host
factors are indicated. Colors indicate the functional group to which the factors belong: blue - membrane-related proteins, red - innate immune response proteins, magenta - both, black - none of the groups. (B) Median values of site-based scores in the interaction grouping. Shown are groups of
the size >2% of all interactions. Bar colors indicate the percentage of the genes under positive selection in each group as inferred by LRT (listed in
Table 1). CA protein (not shown on the figure) has less that 1% interactions reported in the dataset showing a high median of 1.3.

protein the host proteins interact. The interaction grouping showed variation in the distributions of site-based
scores as well as in the ratio of positively selected host
proteins among groups (Figure 1B). Permutation tests
revealed a significantly lower mean of the ranks based on
site-based scores of host genes interacting with gag protein and a comparatively higher mean for integrase (IN),
protease (PR), vpr and rev proteins (Table 1). The ranks
based on sliding window scores were additionally significantly lower for the envelope (Env)-, gp120-, gp41- and
capsid (CA)-interacting genes and higher for Vif- matrix
(MA)- and nucleocapsid (NC)-interacting genes. The
site-based ranking was limited to the 152 genes under
positive selection. The discrepancies of the significance of
mean ranks of gene groups between the two scorings
were due to the differing numbers of genes included in
both rankings. The mean group ranks in both scorings
are positively correlated with r = 0.52 (p ≈ 0.07). If we
consider only the 152 genes under positive selection the
correlation increases substantially to r = 0.92 (p < 0.05).
In order to additionally estimate positive selection that
acted along the more recent timescale after the primate
interspecies split we searched for single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the human gene sequences. We
found 61 genes containing positively selected SNPs with a
maximum number of 5 SNPs in a gene (BRCA1) and the
majority of genes having only one positively selected SNP
(43 out of 61). Among genes found to be under positive
selection using site-based method in the four primates
and in the human-chimp comparison, 10 and 4 genes,

respectively, were found to contain positively selected
SNPs. We found no significant correlation between the
presence of SNPs and positive selection in primates.
Gene Ontology

Subsequently, we searched for Gene Ontology (GO) [22]
terms enriched among the positively selected HIV-interacting genes. GO separates biological roles performed by
genes of different organisms into three separate ontologies: biological process, molecular function and cellular
component, each organized in a hierarchical manner with
more general terms preceding more specific terms in the
GO graph. We applied two statistical tests, Fisher's exact
test (FET) and Kolmogorov-Smirnov test (KS), to test for
the overrepresentation of terms in the three groups of
positively selected genes: in all four primates, in humanchimp comparison and human only as inferred from the
SNPs analysis resulting six enrichment tests in total. The
FET and KS test for two different aspects of enrichment enrichment of genes under positive selection and enrichment among high-ranking genes based on a positive
selection score. The GO annotation of the genes from the
HIV-1 Human Protein Interaction Database has been
previously reported [23], our goal was to find which
terms were specific for the three groups of genes being
under positive selection as compared to the full set of
HIV-interacting genes. The detailed results of all tests are
provided as Additional file 2. Here we list selected terms
that were significantly enriched (p < 0.05) in at least three
out of the six tests.

Bo¿ek and Lengauer BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:186
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/186

Page 4 of 15

Table 1: Ranking of viral proteins based on the relative evolutionary rate and characterization of interacting host genes.
rank

relative evol. rate

interacting genes

% genes under positive
selection

mean norm.
site-based rank

mean norm. sliding
window rank

gp120

1

4.36

434

12.9

0.452

0.481(+)

Vpu

2

3.82

22

18.2

0.292

0.520

Env

3

3.06

145

15.9

0.448

0.497(+)

p6

4

2.43

12

16.7

0.258

0.681

Rev

5

2.21

59

6.8

0.737(-)

0.757(-)

gp41

6

2.07

123

16.3

0.427

0.488(+)

Nef

7

2.02

168

12.5

0.432

0.526

Gag

8

1.87

45

13.3

0.105(+)

0.615

Vif

9

1.77

55

16.4

0.350

0.659(-)

Tat

10

1.77

636

11.0

0.522

0.606

MA

11

1.70

69

7.2

0.542

0.742(-)

NC

12

1.60

19

15.8

0.416

0.759(-)

Vpr

13

1.58

152

11.2

0.647(-)

0.614

RT

14

1.42

33

9.1

0.606

0.621

Pol

15

1.38

1

100.0

0.190

0.094

CA

16

1.37

21

28.6

0.235

0.373(+)

PR

17

1.30

71

21.1

0.709(-)

0.629(-)

IN

18

1.00

66

7.6

0.729(-)

0.727(-)

Positively selected host genes are inferred from the significance of the LRT. Signs in parentheses indicate significantly high (+) and low (-) mean
normalized rank of interacting host genes under positive selection. Ranks in both scorings are normalized to [0,1] range to facilitate comparison.

In the biological process ontology several terms related
to immune response were found to be enriched among
the positively selected genes (e.g. "antigen processing and
presentation", "immune response" - Figure 2A) and several immune response terms were enriched among the
high-ranking genes in all three groups of genes (e.g.
"innate immune response" and "defense response to
virus").

Among the terms of the cellular component ontology
we found evidence of genes related to the cellular membrane being under positive selection. Eight out of 14
terms of this ontology that were overrepresented in at
least four out of six enrichment tests were associated with
the cellular membrane (Figure 2B). The MHC protein
complex group of terms in this gene ontology also

Bo¿ek and Lengauer BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:186
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/186

appeared to be enriched among positively selected HIVinteracting genes.
In the molecular function ontology the terms enriched
in the positively selected genes are predominantly related
to receptor or signaling activity, e.g. "receptor activity",
"MHC class I and II activity", "transmembrane receptor
activity", "signal transducer activity".
Given the high enrichment of the terms "membrane"
and "innate immune response" we further analyzed genes
in those two functional groups. To identify the first group
we extracted all genes annotated with the GO term
GO:0016020 ("membrane" from the cellular component
ontology) and its subterms. To identify the innate
immune response genes we performed a two step procedure. First, we extracted all genes annotated with the GO
term GO:0045087 ("innate immune response" from the
biological process ontology) and its subterms and then we
searched our dataset for all proteins known to participate
in the innate immune response [24,25].
We found the membrane-related proteins to be overrepresented among the positively selected genes in all
four primates (chi-square test p < 0.05) and innate
immune response to be overrepresented in all three
groups of positively selected genes (chi-square test p <
0.001).
Protein-protein interaction networks

To characterize the importance of the HIV-interacting
proteins for the host and those among them being under
positive selection, we analyzed their position in the network of human protein-protein interactions (PPIs) and

Page 5 of 15

human-pathogen PPIs, based on the analysis of humanpathogen interactions for 190 pathogens, both bacterial
and viral, merged into 54 pathogen groups based on taxonomic similarity [26]. Dyer et al. [26] reported that both
viral and bacterial proteins preferentially interact with
human proteins that are either hubs - i.e., those involved
in many interactions, or bottlenecks - i.e., those central to
many human PPI network pathways suggesting that
pathogens may have evolved to interact with proteins
controlling critical processes in the host cell as a mechanism of disrupting the key elements of the host cellular
machinery. We inspected the distribution of the local
connectivity, centrality, number of interacting pathogens,
and number of pathogen groups for the host proteins in
the interaction grouping. Local connectivity of a protein
is defined as the number of human PPIs in which it participates; centrality is the fraction of shortest paths in
human PPI network between all protein pairs that pass
through the given protein. High centrality is characteristic of a bottleneck in an interaction network, high connectivity - of a hub.
We found that IN, p6, PR, Rev, reverse transcriptase
(RT), Vif, Vpr interact with host proteins of a significantly
high local connectivity. p6 and Rev interact with proteins
that are also highly central (Table 2). In contrast, gp41,
Env, CA and Gag seem to interact with host proteins of a
significantly lower local connectivity.
Given the low local connectivity of envelope-interacting host proteins, we investigated the distributions of the
local connectivity, centrality, number of interacting
pathogens and pathogen groups of the HIV-interacting

Figure 2 GO graphs of terms of the biological process (A) and cellular component (B) ontologies enriched among the positively selected
HIV-interacting genes. Brightness of the nodes indicates the number of enrichment tests in which a term was found to be overrepresented (p <
0.05), ranging from three (light nodes) to five (darkest nodes) significant results out of six enrichments tests. The red node represents the innate immune response term, blue nodes represent membrane-related terms.

Bo¿ek and Lengauer BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:186
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/186

proteins annotated with membrane-related GO terms.
These proteins were of 0.73-fold lower degree (p < 0.01),
interact with 0.69-fold lower number of pathogens (p <
0.01) and 0.93-fold lower number pathogen groups (p <
0.03).
All of the positively selected genes in the four primates
tend to be less connected (0.76-fold difference, p ≈ 0.05)
and less centrally located (0.74-fold difference, not significant, p ≈ 0.16) in the human PPI than the genes that
show no positive selection. No clear patterns were
observed in the number of interacting pathogens and
pathogen groups or in the positively selected genes in the
human-chimp comparison.
Virus evolutionary rates

In order to further characterize the host proteins interacting with the virus, we devised a measure of genetic
variability in the viral genes of immunodeficiency virus
species corresponding to the positive selection measure
in the primate genes. We aligned 175 genomes of five species of HIVs and SIVs and the genomes of the HIV-1 and
SIVcpz only (HIV-1/SIVcpz alignment). Viral gene
sequences extracted from the alignments were ranked
according to their relative evolutionary rates (Table 1), a
measure of genetic variability in the genes based on their
phylogenetic distances.
In order to determine how this ranking depended on
the distance measure, we recalculated the relative evolutionary rates based on Hamming distances. The ranks
based on distances inferred from phylogenetic trees correlated with the rates based on Hamming distance (r =
0.93, p < 0.001 in the alignment of all viruses and r = 0.94,
p < 0.001 in the HIV-1/SIVcpz alignment). The main goal
of the ranking was to compare the relative variability of
the viral genes in order to assess the correlation with the
positive selection of the interacting host genes. Regardless of the distance measure used in both of the alignments, Env and its two subproteins together with Vpu
and Rev were among the top 6 in the protein ranking.
Polymerase (Pol) and Pol-encoded proteins (RT, PR, IN)
together with CA were among the 5 lowest ranked proteins. The only discordance among the distance measures
and alignments were observed among the middle-ranked
genes (Nef, Gag, Vif, Tat, MA, NC, Vpr, RT).
Gene rank correlation

To investigate the relative rates of evolution among the
interacting host and virus genes we next calculated the
correlation between the strength of positive selection acting on the host factors and the rate of evolution of the
interacting viral genes. We calculated the correlation of
the host factor ranks assigned according to the site-based
and the sliding window scores and the viral gene ranks
assigned according to the relative evolutionary rate mea-

Page 6 of 15

sure. The ranks of interacting host and viral proteins
showed only minor but significant (p < 0.01) positive correlation (r = 0.18 in the site-based and r = 0.17 in the sliding window scoring). In the human-chimp comparison
the sliding window ranking produced the only significant
correlation (r = 0.14, p < 0.01).
Given the small but significant correlation of the ranks
of interacting host and virus proteins we devised an interaction binning test to investigate the proximate relationships between interacting gene ranks. Bins were defined
on the viral gene ranking, the ranks of host genes within
one bin were averaged. 18 bin sizes were tested containing all possible number of genes adjacent in the viral gene
ranking. The test showed a markedly increased correlation of approximate ranks of interacting viral and host
genes (Figure 3A). For example, binning interactions over
a bin of size 0.083, that averages host gene ranks interacting with 3 viral genes neighboring in the viral gene ranking increases substantially the correlation to r = 0.78 in
the site-based and r = 0.92 in the sliding window scoring
(Figure 3B). Permutation tests showed the significant correlations (p ≤ 0.05) in 14/18 bin sizes in the site-based
ranking and in 13/18 in the sliding window ranking. In
the human-chimp comparison only the correlation based
on the sliding window score was significant for 16/18 bin
sizes, with the correlation of 0.93 on average and of 0.88
for the 0.083 bin size. The high correlations obtained
after binning suggest that the viral genes of different evolutionary rates tend to interact with host factors under
commensurate levels of positive selection.

Discussion and conclusions
Understanding the genome-wide selection pressure on
HIV-interacting proteins can provide insights into the
evolutionary dynamics of host factors, the genetic basis
of differences between nonpathogenic and pathogenic
lentivirus infection and the roles of individual genes in
host-pathogen interaction and immunopathogenesis.
Only two of the host species analyzed in this study are
naturally infected with HIV/SIV (human and chimpanzee) moreover because these viruses have been recently
introduced into their host species [7] the selection pressures we observe are not driven by modern lentiviruses.
Even though the interaction data used is mainly human
and HIV-1 specific, the majority of interactions are
shared with SIVs and with many other viruses. Many of
the host factors found to be under positive selection
interact with multiple pathogens so the selection pressures on the host factors are likely to be driven by those
pathogens. However the comprehensive HIV interaction
data offers opportunity for a broad study of the evolution
of host-pathogen interactions. The interactions in the
HIV-1 Human Protein Interaction Database are catalogued manually based on a literature screen and cannot

Bo¿ek and Lengauer BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:186
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/186

Page 7 of 15

Table 2: Interaction specificities of HIV-related host factors in the interaction grouping.
proteins

centrality

pathogens

pathogen groups

PR

27

<0.01 (+)

<0.01 (+)

-

-

RT

20

0.01 (+)

<0.01 (+)

-

-

IN

49

<0.01 (+)

-

-

<0.01 (+)

Nef

97

-

0.03 (+)

-

-

Rev

42

<0.01 (+)

0.01 (+)

<0.01 (+)

<0.01 (+)

Tat

455

-

-

-

0.01 (-)

Vif

45

<0.01 (+)

-

-

<0.01 (+)

Vpr

98

<0.01 (+)

0.03 (+)

0.03 (+)

0.01 (+)

Vpu

20

-

<0.01 (+)

0.02 (+)

0.01 (+)

MA

54

-

-

-

<0.01 (+)

CA

18

0.03 (-)

-

-

-

NC

16

-

-

<0.01 (+)

-

p6

8

0.01 (+)

<0.01 (+)

<0.01 (+)

<0.01 (+)

Gag

26

0.01 (-)

-

0.01 (-)

<0.01 (+)

gp120

175

-

-

-

-

gp41

61

<0.01 (-)

-

0.01 (-)

<0.01 (-)

Env

Pol-encoded

local connectivity

57

0.04 (-)

-

-

-

Gag-encoded

Env-encoded
P-values of the significance of local connectivity, centrality, number of interacting pathogens and pathogen groups are indicated with a (+)
sign for high values and a (-) sign for low values.

be considered as fully validated. Nevertheless our screen
for positive selection points to a narrow set of potentially
interesting interactions that can be examined and validated individually.
In our analysis we identify ~10% of the 1439 HIV-interacting genes as being under positive selection based on
LRT of sites under positive selection in four primate species. Ortiz et al. [21] reported a similar fraction of genes
as being under positive selection based on the analysis of
140 genes. Among the 62 proteins analyzed in both this
study and by Ortiz et al. 13 are identified as being under

positive selection in the Ortiz et al. study. Among these,
11 are confirmed in our study either by showing significant LRT or being within the upper quintile of the sliding
window scores. The reasons for discrepancies between
the two studies might lie in different criteria of which
genes to analyze and an expanded number of species for
the analysis of individual genes in the Ortiz et al. study.
Three screens using small interfering RNA (siRNA)
have been reported [27-29] that search human genes having effect on HIV infection - so called HIV dependency
factors (HDFs). The overlap among the HDFs identified

Bo¿ek and Lengauer BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:186
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/186

Page 8 of 15

Figure 3 Correlation of the normalized ranks of the interacting host and viral proteins obtained from site-based and sliding window scoring of the host genes and relative evolutionary rates of the viral genes in the comparison of the all four primate species and the alignment
of all viruses. (A) Correlation coefficients of the ranks of interacting proteins averaged by bin size. Significant correlation coefficients (p ≤ 0.05) are
indicated by filled dots, the gray box indicates correlation coefficients of ranks plotted in panel B. (B) Plot of viral and host binned ranks. The correlation
coefficients obtained for each host gene scoring is indicated in the brackets, lines are fitted according to least sum of squares.

in the three studies and the proteins in the HIV interaction database is known to be small [30]. We scanned the
results of one of the siRNA screening studies [27] for the
presence of genes under positive selection detected in our
analysis. Among 32 genes common between ours and
Brass et al. studies only one protein (SP110) appeared to
be under positive selection.
Several host factors not identified as being under positive selection in the LRT showed an elevated dN/dS ratio
in the sliding window test. For example, tetherin, previously reported to be under positive selection [15], did not
show significant LRT but ranked among the top 5% of all
HIV-interacting proteins in the sliding window test.
However, in order to be able to identify genes with small
number of polymorphic sites in relatively long and conserved sequences we relied on the criterion of the significance of the LRT to assess positive selection.
Our functional analysis of the HIV-interacting host factors under positive selection pointed to two functional
groups showing evidence of positive selection: membrane-related proteins and innate immune response proteins. These functional groups were overrepresented
among the subsets of genes positively selected in all four
primates, in human-chimp comparison and human only
as inferred from the SNPs analysis (Figure 2). The interaction network of the virus proteins and the positively

selected host proteins discussed below is visualized in
Figure 4.
Among the membrane-related HIV-interacting proteins under positive selection we observe several that are
known to interact with other pathogens. C-type lectin
(CLEC4M) a transmembrane receptor expressed on the
surface of dendritic cells and macrophages, known to
bind gp120 [31], is a part of signaling pathways induced
by other pathogens such as Mycobacterium tuberculosis
[32], hepatitis C virus [33] and ebola virus [34]. Intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM1), a cell surface glycoprotein expressed in endothelial cells and cells of the
immune system involved in a range of interactions with
the HIV [35-38] is a receptor used by the rhinovirus [39].
Chemokine (C-X-C motif ) receptor 3 (CXCR3), a G-protein-coupled receptor expressed in activated T cells, NK
cells, and dendritic cells, suggested to interact with Nef
[40] and Tat [41], participates in the signaling cascade of
the T-cell activation in genital herpes simplex virus type 2
[42] and hepatitis C virus [43] infections. Binding to the
surface receptors of the host cell and internalization into
that cell are the first steps of the viral infection; the
genetic variability of the proteins expressed on the cell
surface therefore represents a potential host defense
mechanism to infection, preventing viral recognition and
efficient cell entry. The genetic variation in membrane
genes has been previously reported [44]. This variation

Bo¿ek and Lengauer BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:186
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/186

Page 9 of 15

Figure 4 HIV-human protein interaction network. Viral proteins are represented by the largest dots. The lightness of each dot indicates the rank
of relative evolutionary rates of the viral proteins with dark colors representing a high rank and light colors representing a low rank. Host proteins are
represented by smaller dots positioned among the interacting viral proteins. Nodes of the host factors discussed in the text are enlarged. Colors indicate the functional group to which the factors belong: blue - membrane-related proteins, red - innate immune response proteins, magenta - both.
The intensity of the colors indicates the positive selection score in the site-based scoring with stronger colors representing a high rank and less intensive colors representing a low rank. Only host proteins with significant LRT in the comparison of the four primates are shown. The network was rendered using Cytoscape [77].

might have resulted from previous infections and can
have impact on modern lentivirus restriction and primate
species susceptibility to infection.
We detected a substantial amount of genetic variation
in the membrane gene CD3E (rank 17 in the site-based, 3
in the sliding window score), coding for a part of the Tcell receptor CD3 complex (CD3-TCR). The highest concentration of positively selected residues was found in the

protein extracellular and transmembrane domains. The
CD3-TCR complex is known to participate in the mechanism responsible for different levels of immune activation
and T-cell apoptosis in pathogenic HIV-human and nonpathogenic SIV-monkey infections [45,46]. This and
other examples of membrane proteins being under positive selection suggests that other proteins in this func-

Bo¿ek and Lengauer BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:186
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/186

tional group might be relevant for differences in HIV
pathogenesis.
Similar to the membrane-related genes, we find the
innate immune response gene group to be significantly
enriched among the positively selected genes. The innate
immune response is the first line of defense against viral
infection detecting virus particles, modulating signaling
pathways leading to an increased interferon (IFN) production and inhibition of virus spread to limit pathogenesis. There is growing evidence that the variability in the
innate immune response proteins among primate species
might contribute to different levels of immune activation
in immunodeficiency virus infections [21,47].
We found interferon regulatory factor 7 (IRF7) to be
under positive selection both in the test of four primate
species and in the human-chimp comparison. IRF7 is a
transcriptional factor involved in signaling triggered by
the Toll-like receptor (TLR) TLR7 and TLR9 in response
to the SIV infection [47]. Previous studies have shown
that the genetic change in the primate IRF7 is correlated
with the immune activation in SIV infection of primates
[47]. Mutations in IRF7 might therefore be responsible
for an altered TLR7 and TLR9 signaling leading to different levels of immune activation between pathogenic and
nonpathogenic infections.
Caspase 1 (CASP1), a member of cysteine-aspartic acid
protease family is an example of innate immune response
gene under positive selection in primates (rank 31 in sitebased and 26 in sliding window scoring) that is also
located on a positively selected allele in humans. CASP1
is known to play a role in cellular apoptosis induced by
HIV-1 Vpr [48] and gp120 [49]. Caspase activation has
also been shown to participate in the cellular defense
against cowpox [50], baculovirus [51], and dengue virus
[52]. HIV-1 interaction with the caspase-regulated apoptosis might play a role in limiting the host immune
response to the virus and facilitating viral persistence.
Among the high-scoring innate immune response
genes under positive selection we also found Fas (APO-1,
CD95) (rank 13 in the site-based and 46 in the sliding
window scoring), a member of the tumor necrosis factor
(TNF) receptor family. The Fas-mediated pathway plays
an important role in HIV-1 immunopathogenesis. Fas has
been suggested to contribute to the loss of CD4+ T-cells
in progression to AIDS as a part of the TCR-CD3 signaling pathway [53,54]. High levels of positive selection in
Fas among primates and its regulatory relationship with
TCR-CD3 point to this molecular pathway being possibly
differently regulated among primates and partially
responsible for immunopathogenesis.
Hyperactivation of the immune system in response to a
pathogen recently introduced from another species can
result in severe pathogenesis (e.g. hantavirus [55]). Disentangling the interaction of the HIV with the innate

Page 10 of 15

immune response and the host-specific differences in primate species might thus be of therapeutic interest. The
examples of innate immune response genes under positive selection relevant for diverse immune activation in
HIV infection suggest that other genes reported by our
analysis might merit further study.
To gain further insight into the positively selected genes
we grouped them according to their interacting viral
genes and characterized each group with the use of the
positive selection score, gene roles in the PPI network
and the evolutionary rate of the corresponding viral gene.
Among the gene groups, genes interacting with the viral
envelope and its subunits show elevated scores of positive
selection. In contrast, we found limited evidence of positive selection in the genes interacting with viral Polencoded genes, with PR and IN in particular.
In the context of their role in the PPI network and
interactions with other pathogens the envelope and gp41interacting genes revealed a significantly low local connectivity, centrality and number of interacting pathogens
and pathogen groups. The same pattern was observed for
the group of membrane-related genes. This less crucial
role in the PPI and high specificity for the interacting
pathogens might be key factors allowing for the accelerated evolution of the membrane and envelope-interacting
genes. The less critical role of these proteins in the host
biology makes them potential drug targets, for example,
the chemokine receptor CCR5 is targeted by the Maraviroc antagonist [56].
In contrast to the host proteins interacting with the
viral envelope and its subunits we found significantly
higher local connectivity and centrality in human PPIs of
the host genes interacting with viral Pol-encoded genes.
Together with their higher conservation this suggests that
the crucial role of these highly connected genes in host
cellular biology could be an evolutionary constraint.
Pathogens might therefore interact preferentially with
highly connected human proteins not only as a strategy to
control critical host molecular processes [26] but also
because the lack of variation makes them a static target
for virus-host interaction.
The high variability of the viral envelope gene and its
subunits gp120 and gp41 [57,58] is in accordance with the
high positive selection score of envelope-interacting and
host membrane genes in general. Envelope proteins that
participate in the crucial steps of binding to the cell
receptors and coreceptors and membrane fusion [59,60],
are located on the surface of the virion and contain recognition sites for various adaptive immune responses. Thus
changes in optimal host cell receptor affinity and evasion
of host immune responses create selection pressure on
the Env gene. Together with the positive selection acting
on the host membrane genes it points to the viral recognition and host cell receptor affinity as processes in which

Bo¿ek and Lengauer BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:186
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/186

both the viral and host genes undergo accelerated evolution driven by viral evasion and host suppression.
Conversely, Pol-encoded proteins showed the least
genetic variation among viral proteins. These proteins
perform essential enzymatic functions common to all retroviruses, such as RNA retrotranscription, DNA integration and protein maturation and are unsurprisingly
among the most conserved HIV/SIV proteins. Host factors interacting with the Pol-encoded proteins also show
less genetic variation among the HIV-interacting genes,
suggesting that these interactions tend to be the conserved parts of the host-pathogen interface.
The significant correlation of the viral and host gene
ranks based on the rates of gene evolution further supports the hypothesis of reciprocal evolutionary effects
between interacting host and pathogen proteins [61].
Highly conserved processes tend to be those crucial for
viral replication; those less conserved might not be essential for the virus survival but involve accessory proteins
and might contribute to pathogenesis. The highest rates
of genetic change tend to be in the processes acting on
the viral envelope and host cell membrane as they involve
viral evasion and host pathogen immune recognition.
We identified and characterized host defense factors
under positive selection potentially involved in different
responses to immunodeficiency virus infections in primates. Identifying genetic differences in the interacting
proteins can open the way to biological testing of hypotheses regarding their role in various SIV/HIV infection
phenotypes with different levels of immune activation. In
addition to providing new insights into viral pathogenesis
and host immunity, the approach presented here provides
the potential for discovering new targets for antiviral
therapies based on the knowledge of crucial elements of
the host-pathogen interface and the pace of their evolution.

Methods
Primate sequence analysis
Sequences

From the University of California, Santa Cruz (UCSC)
Genome Browser Database (GBD) [62] we extracted the
gene sequences of human proteins reported in the HIV-1
Human Interaction Database [20] to interact with HIV-1
as well as of the respective homologs in three non-human
primate species: chimpanzee (Pan troglodytes), orangutan
(Pongo pygmaeus abelii) and rhesus macaque (Macaca
mulatta). We used all available primate species for which
genome sequences were publicly available and at least
partially annotated. Homologous sequences were aligned
using Threaded Blockset Aligner (TBA) [63] with the
human sequence as the reference and trimmed to their
coding parts based on the human gene annotation. We
excluded sequences of genes not identified in the human

Page 11 of 15

genome or in more than one non-human primate species.
We also excluded sequences composed of >50% gaps as
compared to the human sequence. This filter helped to
ensure that the results of the analysis are not influenced
by the lack of proper homolog identification. The information on the alignment quality is provided in Additional
file 3. Of the 1439 human proteins and 3643 unique interactions in the interaction database, 1182 proteins
involved in 2596 unique interactions fulfilled our alignment criteria.
Positive selection in primate species

The site-based score was based on the Bayes Empirical
Bayes (BEB) approach for inference of amino acids under
positive selection [64] as implemented in the PAML
package [65]. This approach uses a statistical distribution
to describe the variation of the dN/dS ratio among sites
and a LRT to compare two distributions: a distribution
that allows a subset of sites to have dN/dS >1 and a null
model that does not. If the result of the LRT is statistically
significant then one can infer a gene to be under positive
selection. An empirical Bayes test is then used to calculate the probability that a site belongs to the class of sites
whose dN/dS ratio is larger than 1. We applied two LRTs
implemented in the PAML package: M1a (NearlyNeutral)
to M2a (PositiveSelection) comparison and M7 (beta) to
M8 (beta&ω) comparison retaining the results of the
higher LRT. The first LRT compares the NearlyNeutral
null model which assumes two site classes one with 0 <
dN/dS < 1 and one with dN/dS = 1 to the alternative
model PositiveSelection which adds a site class of dN/dS
>1. The second LRT compares the beta null model which
assumes a beta distribution for dN/dS in the interval (0,1)
to the alternative model beta&ω which adds a site class
with dN/dS >1. The site-based score is based on the
weighted sum of sites with dN/dS >1 normalized by the
sequence length. We weighted these sites according to
the calculated probability P of a site being under positive
selection: by a factor of 3 for the sites with P > 0.99, a factor of 2 for the sites with P > 0.95, other sites by a factor of
1.
The sliding window score was based on the dN/dS ratio
averaged over each sliding window across the protein
gene sequence. We used the method of estimating the
dN/dS substitution rates of entire sequences by Yang and
Nielsen [66] also from the PAML package. The calculation of the dN/dS ratio was done in windows of 150 basepair length (50 amino acids) slid along the sequence by a
step of 30 base-pairs (10 amino acids). This test facilitates
the localization of regions with a high dN/dS ratio in gene
sequences rather than specific sites returned by the BEB
approach.
While there are potential false positives associated with
the LRT some genes might be missed by the sliding window approach due to a small number of positively

Bo¿ek and Lengauer BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:186
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/186

selected sites. We considered the LRT approach to be
more relevant for long and highly conserved primate
sequences and therefore we used the LRT significance as
the indicator of positive selection, the sliding window
measure was used as a supporting score.
Positive selection in humans

We used the haplotype map HapMap Phase II [67] to
search for the SNPs located in the gene regions (both
introns and exons) of the analyzed HIV-interacting
human proteins [20]. We then used the integrated haplotype score (iHS) introduced by Voight et al. [68] to identify those SNPs that might have emerged as a result of
positive selection. The cutoff of |iHS| ≥2 was used to
choose SNPs under positive selection. Out of 1335 SNPs
in the analyzed genes 88 showed |iHS| ≥2, slightly more
(6.6%) than expected from the standard normal distribution of the iHS. For each gene we calculated the number
of positively selected SNPs, and used their presence as
evidence of positive selection acting on a gene in the
human lineage.
Gene Ontology

We used the R package topGO [69] to score GO terms by
their overrepresentation in groups of genes. The method
makes use of the hierarchical structure of the GO by first
grouping genes related to each of the terms in the GO
graph and then processing the nodes bottom-up. Iteratively genes annotated to significant GO terms are
removed from more general parent terms to test how
enriched a node is if the genes from its children nodes are
not considered. We used FET to estimate the enrichment
of GO terms in the subset of genes identified as being
under positive selection and the KS test to test for the
enrichment of the GO terms among the high-scoring
genes in the gene ranking based on a positive selection
score. Both tests assess term enrichment among genes
under positive selection using the full set of HIV-interacting genes as a control. This helps to ensure that the significance of a term is not due to the general abundance of
genes assigned to this term in the full set of HIV-interacting genes.
Virus sequence analysis
Viral sequences

We searched the Los Alamos HIV sequence database [70]
for complete genomes of the following viral species: HIV1 and HIV type 2 (HIV-2), SIVcpz, rhesus macaque SIV
(SIVmac) and SIVsmm. Since our primary interest was in
estimating general patterns in large data sets rather than
in the analysis of individual genomes, we excluded SIV
species for which less than five genomes were available.
In order to minimize the bias associated with the overrepresentation in the public databases of the HIVs and to
obtain the highest variability of the HIV-1 genomes with
approximately equal distribution among groups, we addi-

Page 12 of 15

tionally filtered the HIV-1 group M genomes by retaining
only therapy-naïve patient sequences, only one sequence
annotated with both the same country and year and only
one sequence per patient. In case of several sequences of
the same year-country or patient category the longest
genome sequence was selected. This filter was applied
only to the HIV-1 group M sequences. All available HIV1 group N and O complete genome sequences were kept
as well as the reference HIV-1 sequence HXB2-LAIHXB2R (accession number NC_001802). We additionally
included one available Colobus guereza SIV (SIVcol)
genome in the dataset (GenBank AF301156) as an outgroup genome for further analyses. From the complete
genomes we extracted individual protein sequences
according to the original genome annotation. We aligned
these gene sequences using MUSCLE [71] and removed
those that included more than 50% insertions or deletions
as compared to the reference virus HXB2-LAI-HXB2R
gene sequence. We refer to the alignment of all viruses as
the full alignment. We computed an additional alignment
of the HIV-1 and SIVcpz viruses only (HIV-1/SIVcpz
alignment). The compiled dataset contained 76 HIV-1
genomes out of which 54 were M, 16 of type O and 6 of
type N, 30 HIV-2, 19 SIVcpz, 36 SIVmac and 14 SIVsmm
genomes. The filter applied to the HIV-1 group M
genomes resulted in a representative diversity of the subtypes, with 35% subtype B sequences, 17% C, 8% A, one
sequence of the D, E, F subtypes and 33% circulating
recombinant forms of subtypes A to G. After gene extraction, alignment and filtering there were, on average, 160
sequences of each protein in the full alignment (90 in the
HIV-1/SIVcpz alignment) approximately 45% of which
are HIV-1 sequences (80% in the HIV-1/SIVcpz alignment).
Evolutionary rates

Unlike primate gene sequences, lentiviral genomes are
highly variable, relatively short and contain overlapping
reading frames. Given the difficulty of estimating precise
selection pressures acting on such highly variable
genomes, instead of using classical methods of estimating
positive selection we developed a surrogate measure of
relative evolutionary rate as follows.
Across all host species, each protein of the immunodeficiency virus has the same specific biological role in the
viral life cycle and host species adaptation - a role that
necessitates interaction with a set of host proteins. These
roles and the resulting interactions present specific constraints and selection pressures on viral genes that contribute to the accumulation of genetic change with a rate
characteristic to each viral protein. Even though the date
of the introduction of the viral species into its respective
host species and the duration of the infections in each
host individual are unknown, the common functionality
of a viral protein in different host species determines its

Bo¿ek and Lengauer BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:186
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/186

ability to evolve at a specific rate. Therefore, we assumed
that the genetic change in the viral gene relative to the
genetic change in a reference gene in the same viral
genome is similar among different viruses [72,73]. Using
this assumption we introduced the relative evolutionary
rate measure and used it to assess the rate of accumulation of genetic change in different viral protein sequences
independently of the host species and the time of infection. This measure affords ranking viral genes according
to the amount of genetic change accumulated among
viral species.
We based the measure of relative evolutionary rate on
maximum likelihood (ML) trees of nucleotide sequences
estimated using the dnaml program [74], part of the
PHYLIP package [75]. Due to the potential errors in dating of the SIV sequences and the difficulty of estimating
evolutionary parameters with incomplete data from
highly variable viral populations [72,73], more advanced
phylogenetic methods [76] were not applied. We used the
gamma distribution for approximating the distribution of
evolutionary change at different sites with shape parameter 1 and nine rate categories [74]. These settings were
selected because they resulted in the trees with the highest likelihood in several tests over a range of parameters
on different viral genes.
We inferred a phylogenetic tree for each viral gene separately. Corresponding genes of the SIVcol genome were
used as an outgroup in each of the trees. The distance
between two gene sequences was defined as the sum of
branch lengths between the nodes representing those
sequences in the ML tree. Branches with low significance
(p > 0.05) were excluded; pairs of sequences having such a
branch between them were excluded from the calculation. Since the dataset of viral sequences was based on
complete viral genomes, each of the gene trees contained
corresponding sequences for each virus. We next calculated the relative evolutionary rate of each single
sequence pair by dividing the distance between the two
sequences of a viral gene by the distance between the reference gene sequences for the same pair of viruses. Integrase (IN) was chosen as the reference gene because its
phylogenetic tree had the shortest branches on average
resulting in mean relative evolutionary rates >1 for all
other genes.
To account for the differing numbers of sequences of
each viral species in the dataset we introduced a weighting scheme for the sequence distances to reduce the bias
in the mean evolutionary rate due to the overrepresentation of the HIV-1 sequences. The weighting resulted in
only minor changes in the viral gene ranking that did not
influence the overall results. Thus, we chose the more
parsimonious approach of not weighting.

Page 13 of 15

Gene rank correlation

In the site-based ranking we restricted the host factors to
the ones under positive selection as inferred from the
LRT. Both the viral and host gene rankings were normalized to the [0,1] range. The same procedure was repeated
on the positively selected genes inferred in the humanchimp comparison and correlated to the viral gene ranking based on the HIV-1/SIVcpz alignment.
Interaction binning test

The interactions were grouped into bins defined by viral
gene ranking. The ranks of host genes within bins were
averaged. Bins of different sizes were slid along the viral
gene ranking scale, advancing from one gene to adjacently ranked gene in each step. For each bin size we calculated the correlation between viral gene ranks and the
averaged host gene ranks. Because of the small number of
viral genes (18) a symmetrical approach of averaging over
viral gene ranks was not performed. We tested all 18 possible bin sizes. We then used the permutation procedures
described below to test for the significance of the correlation obtained for the averaged binned ranks of each bin
size.
Permutation procedures

In order to assess the statistical significance of previous
analyses we developed permutation tests of the HIVhuman interactions. The HIV-human interaction data
can be represented by a bipartite graph with nodes representing host and viral proteins and edges connecting
interacting host and viral proteins. We designed two procedures of permuting the host-virus interaction network.
The host-oriented test consists of retaining the degree of
each of the host gene nodes in the network and randomly
sampling a corresponding number of interacting viral
genes from the set of all viral genes. The virus-oriented
test consists of retaining the degree of each viral gene
node and randomly sampling a corresponding number of
interacting host genes. Performing two different permutation tests allowed us to test if certain results were due to
the differing numbers of interactions reported for different host and viral proteins. We developed additional permutation tests allowing for random node degrees in the
network and found the permutation tests conserving
aspects of the network topology to be more stringent in
assessing the statistical significance of our observations.
We therefore used the host- and virus-oriented tests to
assess statistical significance of the results of our analyses.

Additional material
Additional file 1 list of all analyzed genes, scores and annotations.
Additional file 2 detailed results of the GO term enrichment tests.
Additional file 3 information on the alignment quality.

Bo¿ek and Lengauer BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:186
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/186

Authors' contributions
KB and TL conceived this project and wrote the manuscript. KB designed the
study, and collected and analyzed the data. All authors read and approved the
final manuscript.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Christoph Bock and David Robertson for helpful comments on the manuscript.
Author Details
Max Planck Institute for Informatics Computational Biology and Applied
Algorithmics Campus E1 4 66123 SaarbrÃ¼cken, Germany
Received: 23 March 2010 Accepted: 18 June 2010
Published: 18 June 2010
This is an Open Access from: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/186
© 2010 Bożekavailable article licensee BioMed Central Ltd. of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
BMC article is and Lengauer; distributed under the terms
Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:186

References
1. Gao F, Bailes E, Robertson DL, Chen Y, Rodenburg CM, Michael SF,
Cummins LB, Arthur LO, Peeters M, Shaw GM, et al.: Origin of HIV-1 in the
chimpanzee Pan troglodytes troglodytes. Nature 1999,
397(6718):436-441.
2. Hirsch VM, Olmsted RA, Murphey-Corb M, Purcell RH, Johnson PR: An
African primate lentivirus (SIVsm) closely related to HIV-2. Nature 1989,
339(6223):389-392.
3. Gao F, Yue L, White AT, Pappas PG, Barchue J, Hanson AP, Greene BM,
Sharp PM, Shaw GM, Hahn BH: Human infection by genetically diverse
SIVSM-related HIV-2 in west Africa. Nature 1992, 358(6386):495-499.
4. Pandrea I, Sodora DL, Silvestri CA G: Into the wild: simian
immunodeficiency virus (SIV) infection in natural hosts. Trends
Immunol 2008, 29(9):419-428.
5. Silvestri G: Naturally SIV-infected sooty mangabeys: are we closer to
understanding why they do not develop AIDS? J Med Primatol 2005,
34(5-6):243-252.
6. Silvestri G, Paiardini M, Pandrea I, Lederman MM, Sodora DL:
Understanding the benign nature of SIV infection in natural hosts. J
Clin Invest 2007, 117(11):3148-3154.
7. Keele BF, Jones JH, Terio KA, Estes JD, Rudicell RS, Wilson ML, Li Y, Learn
GH, Beasley TM, Schumacher-Stankey J, et al.: Increased mortality and
AIDS-like immunopathology in wild chimpanzees infected with
SIVcpz. Nature 2009, 460(7254):515-519.
8. Bogerd HP, Doehle BP, Wiegand HL, Cullen BR: A single amino acid
difference in the host APOBEC3G protein controls the primate species
specificity of HIV type 1 virion infectivity factor. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2004, 101(11):3770-3774.
9. Jia B, Serra-Moreno R, Neidermyer W, Rahmberg A, Mackey J, Fofana IB,
Johnson WE, Westmoreland S, Evans DT: Species-specific activity of SIV
Nef and HIV-1 Vpu in overcoming restriction by tetherin/BST2. PLoS
Pathog 2009, 5:e1000429.
10. Heeney JL, Dalgleish AG, Weiss RA: Origins of HIV and the evolution of
resistance to AIDS. Science 2006, 313(5786):462-466.
11. Stremlau M, Owens CM, Perron MJ, Kiessling M, Autissier P, Sodroski J: The
cytoplasmic body component TRIM5alpha restricts HIV-1 infection in
Old World monkeys. Nature 2004, 427(6977):848-853.
12. Sheehy AM, Gaddis NC, Choi JD, Malim MH: Isolation of a human gene
that inhibits HIV-1 infection and is suppressed by the viral Vif protein.
Nature 2002, 418(6898):646-650.
13. Neil SJ, Zang T, Bieniasz PD: Tetherin inhibits retrovirus release and is
antagonized by HIV-1 Vpu. Nature 2008, 451(7177):425-430.
14. Endo T, Ikeo K, Gojobori T: Large-scale search for genes on which
positive selection may operate. Mol Biol Evol 1996, 13(5):685-690.
15. McNatt MW, Zang T, Hatziioannou T, Bartlett M, Fofana IB, Johnson WE,
Neil SJ, Bieniasz PD: Species-specific activity of HIV-1 Vpu and positive
selection of tetherin transmembrane domain variants. PLoS Pathog
2009, 2:e1000300.
16. Sawyer SL, Emerman M, Malik HS: Ancient adaptive evolution of the
primate antiviral DNA-editing enzyme APOBEC3G. PLoS Biol 2004,
2(9):E275.
17. Sawyer SL, Wu LI, Emerman M, Malik HS: Positive selection of primate
TRIM5alpha identifies a critical species-specific retroviral restriction
domain. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005, 102(8):2832-2837.
18. Zhang J, Webb DM: Rapid evolution of primate antiviral enzyme
APOBEC3G. Hum Mol Genet 2004, 13(16):1785-1791.

Page 14 of 15

19. Wertheim JO, Worobey M: Dating the age of the SIV lineages that gave
rise to HIV-1 and HIV-2. PLoS Comput Biol 2009, 5:e1000377.
20. Fu W, Sanders-Beer BE, Katz KS, Maglott DR, Pruitt KD, Ptak RG: Human
immunodeficiency virus type 1, human protein interaction database at
NCBI. Nucleic Acids Res 2009, 37(Database issue):D417-422.
21. Ortiz M, Guex N, Patin E, Martin O, Xenarios I, Ciuffi A, Quintana-Murci L,
Telenti A: Evolutionary Trajectories of Primate Genes Involved in HIV
Pathogenesis. Mol Biol Evol 2009.
22. Ashburner M, Ball CA, Blake JA, Botstein D, Butler H, Cherry JM, Davis AP,
Dolinski K, Dwight SS, Eppig JT, et al.: Gene ontology: tool for the
unification of biology. The Gene Ontology Consortium. Nat Genet 2000,
25(1):25-29.
23. Ptak RG, Fu W, Sanders-Beer BE, Dickerson JE, Pinney JW, Robertson DL,
Rozanov MN, Katz KS, Maglott DR, Pruitt KD, et al.: Cataloguing the HIV
type 1 human protein interaction network. AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses
2008, 24(12):1497-1502.
24. Sadler AJ, Williams BR: Interferon-inducible antiviral effectors. Nat Rev
Immunol 2008, 8(7):559-568.
25. Katze MG, Fornek JL, Palermo RE, Walters KA, Korth MJ: Innate immune
modulation by RNA viruses: emerging insights from functional
genomics. Nat Rev Immunol 2008, 8(8):644-654.
26. Dyer MD, Murali TM, Sobral BW: The landscape of human proteins
interacting with viruses and other pathogens. PLoS Pathog 2008,
4(2):e32.
27. Brass AL, Dykxhoorn DM, Benita Y, Yan N, Engelman A, Xavier RJ,
Lieberman J, Elledge SJ: Identification of host proteins required for HIV
infection through a functional genomic screen. Science 2008,
319(5865):921-926.
28. König R, Zhou Y, Elleder D, Diamond TL, Bonamy GM, Irelan JT, Chiang CY,
Tu BP, De Jesus PD, Lilley CE, et al.: Global analysis of host-pathogen
interactions that regulate early-stage HIV-1 replication. Cell 2008,
135(1):49-60.
29. Zhou H, Xu M, Huang Q, Gates AT, Zhang XD, Castle JC, Stec E, Ferrer M,
Strulovici B, Hazuda DJ, et al.: Genome-scale RNAi screen for host factors
required for HIV replication. Cell Host Microbe 2008, 4(5):495-504.
30. Bushman FD, Malani N, Fernandes J, D'Orso I, Cagney G, Diamond TL,
Zhou H, Hazuda DJ, Espeseth AS, König R, et al.: Host cell factors in HIV
replication: meta-analysis of genome-wide studies. PLoS Pathog 2009,
5:e1000437.
31. Gattegno L, Ramdani A, Jouault T, Saffar L, Gluckman JC: Lectincarbohydrate interactions and infectivity of human immunodeficiency
virus type 1 (HIV-1). AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses 1992, 8(1):27-37.
32. Srivastava V, Manchanda M, Gupta S, Singla R, Behera D, Das G, Natarajan
K: Toll-like receptor 2 and DC-SIGNR1 differentially regulate
suppressors of cytokine signaling 1 in dendritic cells during
Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection. J Biol Chem 2009,
284:25532-25541.
33. Pöhlmann S, Zhang J, Baribaud F, Chen Z, Leslie GJ, Lin G, Granelli-Piperno
A, Doms RW, Rice CM, McKeating JA: Hepatitis C virus glycoproteins
interact with DC-SIGN and DC-SIGNR. J Virol 2003, 77(7):4070-4080.
34. Alvarez CP, Lasala F, Carrillo J, Muñiz O, Corbí AL, Delgado R: C-type
lectins DC-SIGN and L-SIGN mediate cellular entry by Ebola virus in cis
and in trans. J Virol 2002, 76(13):6841-6844.
35. Chirmule N, Oyaizu N, Saxinger C, Pahwa S: Nef protein of HIV-1 has Bcell stimulatory activity. AIDS 1994, 8(6):733-734.
36. Fais S, Capobianchi MR, Abbate I, Castilletti C, Gentile M, Cordiali FP,
Ameglio FD F: Unidirectional budding of HIV-1 at the site of cell-to-cell
contact is associated with co-polarization of intercellular adhesion
molecules and HIV-1 viral matrix protein. AIDS 1995, 9(4):329-335.
37. Lafrenie RM, Wahl LM, Epstein JS, Hewlett IK, Yamada KM, Dhawan S: HIV1-Tat modulates the function of monocytes and alters their
interactions with microvessel endothelial cells. A mechanism of HIV
pathogenesis. J Immunol 1996, 156(4):1638-1645.
38. Tardif MR, Tremblay MJ: Presence of host ICAM-1 in human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 virions increases productive infection
of CD4+ T lymphocytes by favoring cytosolic delivery of viral material.
J Virol 2003, 77(22):12299-12309.
39. Greve JM, Davis G, Meyer AM, Forte CP, Yost SC, Marlor CW: The major
human rhinovirus receptor is ICAM-1. Cell 1989, 56:834-849.
40. van Marle G, Henry S, Todoruk T, Sullivan A, Silva C, Rourke SB, Holden J,
McArthur JC, Gill MJ, Power C: Human immunodeficiency virus type 1

Bo¿ek and Lengauer BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:186
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/186

41.

42.

43.

44.
45.

46.

47.

48.

49.

50.

51.

52.

53.

54.
55.

56.

57.

58.

59.

60.

Nef protein mediates neural cell death: a neurotoxic role for IP-10.
Virology 2004, 329(2):302-318.
Poggi A, Carosio R, Fenoglio D, Brenci S, Murdaca G, Setti M, Indiveri F,
Scabini S, Ferrero E, Zocchi MR: Migration of V delta 1 and V delta 2 T
cells in response to CXCR3 and CXCR4 ligands in healthy donors and
HIV-1-infected patients: competition by HIV-1 Tat. Blood 2004,
103(6):2205-2213.
Thapa M, Carr DJ: CXCR3 deficiency increases susceptibility to genital
herpes simplex virus type 2 infection: Uncoupling of CD8+ T-cell
effector function but not migration. J Virol 2009, 83(18):9486-9501.
Perney P, Turriere C, Portalès P, Rigole H, Psomas C, Blanc F, Clot J, Corbeau
P: CXCR3 expression on peripheral CD4+ T cells as a predictive marker
of response to treatment in chronic hepatitis C. Clin Immunol 2009,
132(1):55-62.
Murphy PM: Molecular mimicry and the generation of host defense
protein diversity. Cell 1993, 72(6):823-826.
Schindler M, Münch J, Kutsch O, Li H, Santiago ML, Bibollet-Ruche F,
Müller-Trutwin MC, Novembre FJ, Peeters M, Courgnaud V, et al.: Nefmediated suppression of T cell activation was lost in a lentiviral lineage
that gave rise to HIV-1. Cell 2006, 125(6):1055-1067.
Schindler M, Schmökel J, Specht A, Li H, Münch J, Khalid M, Sodora DL,
Hahn BH, Silvestri G, Kirchhoff F: Inefficient Nef-mediated
downmodulation of CD3 and MHC-I correlates with loss of CD4+T cells
in natural SIV infection. PLoS Pathog 2008, 4(7):e1000107.
Mandl JN, Barry AP, Vanderford TH, Kozyr N, Chavan R, Klucking S, Barrat
FJ, Coffman RL, Staprans SI, Feinberg MB: Divergent TLR7 and TLR9
signaling and type I interferon production distinguish pathogenic and
nonpathogenic AIDS virus infections. Nat Med 2008, 14(10):1077-1087.
Stewart SA, Poon B, Song JY, Chen IS: Human immunodeficiency virus
type 1 vpr induces apoptosis through caspase activation. J Virol 2000,
74(7):3105-3111.
Ohnimus H, Heinkelein M, Jassoy C: Apoptotic cell death upon contact
of CD4+ T lymphocytes with HIV glycoprotein-expressing cells is
mediated by caspases but bypasses CD95 (Fas/Apo-1) and TNF
receptor 1. J Immunol 1997, 159(11):5246-5252.
Komiyama T, Ray CA, Pickup DJ, Howard AD, Thornberry NA, Peterson EP,
Salvesen G: Inhibition of interleukin-1 beta converting enzyme by the
cowpox virus serpin CrmA. An example of cross-class inhibition. J Biol
Chem 1994, 269(30):19331-19337.
Cartier JL, Hershberger PA, Friesen PD: Suppression of apoptosis in insect
cells stably transfected with baculovirus p35: dominant interference by
N-terminal sequences p35(1-76). J Virol 1994, 68(12):7728-7737.
Nasirudeen AM, Liu DX: Gene expression profiling by microarray
analysis reveals an important role for caspase-1 in dengue virusinduced p53-mediated apoptosis. J Med Virol 2009, 81(6):1069-1081.
Petit F, Corbeil J, Lelièvre JD, Moutouh-de Parseval L, Pinon G, Green DR,
Ameisen JC, Estaquier J: Role of CD95-activated caspase-1 processing of
IL-1beta in TCR-mediated proliferation of HIV-infected CD4(+) T cells.
Eur J Immunol 2001, 31(12):3513-3524.
Badley AD, Pilon AA, Landay A, Lynch DH: Mechanisms of HIV-associated
lymphocyte apoptosis. Blood 2000, 96(9):2951-2964.
Nichol ST, Spiropoulou CF, Morzunov S, Rollin PE, Ksiazek TG, Feldmann H,
Sanchez A, Childs J, Zaki S, Peters CJ: Genetic identification of a
hantavirus associated with an outbreak of acute respiratory illness.
Science 1993, 262(5135):914-917.
Westby M, van der Ryst E: CCR5 antagonists: host-targeted antivirals for
the treatment of HIV infection. Antivir Chem Chemother 2005,
16(6):339-354.
Hahn BH, Gonda MA, Shaw GM, Popovic M, Hoxie JA, Gallo RC, WongStaal F: Genomic diversity of the acquired immune deficiency
syndrome virus HTLV-III: different viruses exhibit greatest divergence
in their envelope genes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1985, 82(14):4813-4817.
Holmes EC, Zhang LQ, Simmonds P, Ludlam CA, Brown AJ: Convergent
and divergent sequence evolution in the surface envelope
glycoprotein of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 within a single
infected patient. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1992, 89(11):4835-4839.
Berger EA, Murphy PM, Farber JM: Chemokine receptors as HIV-1
coreceptors: Roles in viral entry, tropism, and disease. Annu Rev
Immunol 1999, 17:657-700.
Deng H, Liu R, Ellmeier W, Choe S, Unutmaz D, Burkhart M, Di Marzio P,
Marmon S, Sutton RE, Hill CM, et al.: Identification of a major co-receptor
for primary isolates of HIV-1. Nature 1996, 381(6584):661-666.

Page 15 of 15

61. Woolhouse ME, Webster JP, Domingo E, Charlesworth B, Levin BR:
Biological and biomedical implications of the co-evolution of
pathogens and their hosts. Nat Genet 2002, 32(4):569-577.
62. Karolchik D, Kuhn RM, Baertsch R, Barber GP, Clawson H, Diekhans M,
Giardine B, Harte RA, Hinrichs AS, Hsu F, et al.: The UCSC Genome Browser
Database: 2008 update. Nucleic Acids Res 2008, 36(Database
issue):D773-779.
63. Blanchette M, Kent WJ, Riemer C, Elnitski L, Smit AF, Roskin KM, Baertsch R,
Rosenbloom K, Clawson H, Green ED, et al.: Aligning multiple genomic
sequences with the threaded blockset aligner. Genome Res 2004,
14(4):708-715.
64. Yang Z, Wong WS, Nielsen R: Bayes empirical bayes inference of amino
acid sites under positive selection. Mol Biol Evol 2005, 22(4):1107-1118.
65. Yang Z: PAML 4: phylogenetic analysis by maximum likelihood. Mol Biol
Evol 2007, 24(8):1586-1591.
66. Yang Z, Nielsen R: Estimating synonymous and nonsynonymous
substitution rates under realistic evolutionary models. Mol Biol Evol
2000, 17(1):32-43.
67. Sabeti PC, Varilly P, Fry B, Lohmueller J, Hostetter E, et al.: Genome-wide
detection and characterization of positive selection in human
populations. Nature 2007, 449(7164):913-918.
68. Voight BF, Kudaravalli S, Wen X, Pritchard JK: A map of recent positive
selection in the human genome. PLoS Biol 2006, 4(3):e72.
69. Alexa A, Rahnenführer J, Lengauer T: Improved scoring of functional
groups from gene expression data by decorrelating GO graph
structure. Bioinformatics 2006, 22(13):1600-1607.
70. Los Alamos National Laboratory HIV Sequence Database: [http://
www.hiv.lanl.gov/].
71. Edgar RC: MUSCLE: multiple sequence alignment with high accuracy
and high throughput. Nucleic Acids Res 2004, 32(5):1792-1797.
72. Müller-Trutwin MC, Corbet S, Tavares MD, Hervé VM, Nerrienet E, GeorgesCourbot MC, Saurin W, Sonigo P, Barré-Sinoussi F: The evolutionary rate
of nonpathogenic simian immunodeficiency virus (SIVagm) is in
agreement with a rapid and continuous replication in vivo. Virology
1996, 223(1):89-102.
73. Rey-Cuillé MA, Berthier JL, Bomsel-Demontoy MC, Chaduc Y, Montagnier
L, Hovanessian AG, Chakrabarti LA: Simian immunodeficiency virus
replicates to high levels in sooty mangabeys without inducing disease.
J Virol 1998, 72(5):3872-3886.
74. Felsenstein J, Churchill GA: A Hidden Markov Model approach to
variation among sites in rate of evolution. Mol Biol Evol 1996,
13(1):93-104.
75. Felsenstein J: PHYLIP (Phylogeny Inference Package) version 3.6.
Distributed by the author, Department of Genome Sciences, University of
Washington, Seattle 2005.
76. Drummond AJ, Rambaut A: BEAST: Bayesian evolutionary analysis by
sampling trees. BMC Evol Biol 2007, 7:214.
77. Shannon P, Markiel A, Ozier O, Baliga NS, Wang JT, Ramage D, Amin N,
Schwikowski B, Ideker T: Cytoscape: a software environment for
integrated models of biomolecular interaction networks. Genome Res
2003, 13(11):2498-2504.
doi: 10.1186/1471-2148-10-186
Cite this article as: Bo¿ek and Lengauer, Positive selection of HIV host factors and the evolution of lentivirus genes BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010,
10:186

</pre>
</body>
</html>
