<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Relationship between operon preference and functional properties of persistent genes in bacterial genomes</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Genomics 2010 11:71. doi:10.1186/1471-2164-11-71"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Marit S Bratlie"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Bratlie et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:71
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/71

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Relationship between operon preference and
functional properties of persistent genes in
bacterial genomes
Marit S Bratlie†, Jostein Johansen†, Finn Drabløs*

Abstract
Background: Genes in bacteria may be organised into operons, leading to strict co-expression of the genes that
participate in the same operon. However, comparisons between different bacterial genomes have shown that
much of the operon structure is dynamic on an evolutionary time scale. This indicates that there are opposing
effects influencing the tendency for operon formation, and these effects may be reflected in properties like
evolutionary rate, complex formation, metabolic pathways and gene fusion.
Results: We have used multi-species protein-protein comparisons to generate a high-quality set of genes that are
persistent in bacterial genomes (i.e. they have close to universal distribution). We have analysed these genes with
respect to operon participation and important functional properties, including evolutionary rate and protein-protein
interactions.
Conclusions: Genes for ribosomal proteins show a very slow rate of evolution. This is consistent with a strong
tendency for the genes to participate in operons and for their proteins to be involved in essential and well defined
complexes. Persistent genes for non-ribosomal proteins can be separated into two classes according to tendency
to participate in operons. Those with a strong tendency for operon participation make proteins with fewer
interaction partners that seem to participate in relatively static complexes and possibly linear pathways. Genes with
a weak tendency for operon participation tend to produce proteins with more interaction partners, but possibly in
more dynamic complexes and convergent pathways. Genes that are not regulated through operons are therefore
more evolutionary constrained than the corresponding operon-associated genes and will on average evolve more
slowly.

Background
The purpose of this study has been to improve our
understanding of operons in bacterial genomes by analysing the organisation of genes across a large set of
genomes. Operons are considered to be one of the
major structural and regulatory features of prokaryotic
genomes [1], but our understanding of the driving forces
behind operon formation and the balance between individually regulated genes versus genes in operons is still
incomplete. The analyses performed in this study focus
on the properties of genes and gene products in relationship to operon organisation.
* Correspondence: finn.drablos@ntnu.no
† Contributed equally
Department of Cancer Research and Molecular Medicine, Norwegian
University of Science and Technology, N-7006 Trondheim, Norway

Gene transcription is strongly regulated, and the transcription of individual genes is controlled by transcription factors. In prokaryotes the transcription of several
genes can be coordinated by the organisation of these
genes into operons, and normally about 50% of the
genes in prokaryotes are found in operons [2]. An
operon is transcribed into a single polycistronic mRNA,
and the genes in an operon often (but not always) code
for gene products in the same functional pathway.
The operon consists of a promoter, an operator site
and a set of structural genes [3]. The RNA polymerase
binds to the promoter site and initiates the transcription. The operon may contain a regulator gene, but this
can also be situated elsewhere in the genome. The regulatory protein coded by the regulator gene can bind to
the operator. A repressor will inhibit transcription of

© 2010 Bratlie et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Bratlie et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:71
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/71

the structural genes whereas an inducer will bind to the
repressor and prevent it from interacting with the
operator [1,3]. The operon structure leads to a strongly
coordinated expression or repression of a set of genes.
Genes in the same operon are usually separated by
fewer than 20 intergenic base pairs and are often conserved across species by vertical inheritance. However,
few operons remain intact over long periods of time and
operon dispersal is evident in many genomes. The selfish operon hypothesis is one of several theories behind
operon formation. This model implies that horizontal
gene transfer plays a critical role in gene cluster and
operon formation [4,5]. Others explain operon formation by the fact that new operons reduce the amount of
regulatory information that is required to specify optimal expression patterns and therefore operons should
be likely to evolve when the regulation is complex [6]. It
has also been suggested that genes encoding subunits of
a complex will benefit from being in an operon, because
the stochastic differences between the protein levels are
reduced [7]. The formation and folding of protein complexes may also occur more rapidly when the genes are
co-located in an operon [8].
For most organisms knowledge of operon structure is
based on computational methods. The most common
operon prediction methods are using one or more of
the following criteria: intergenic distance, conserved
gene clusters, functional relation, sequence elements and
experimental evidence [9,10]. We have used the operon
prediction data from Janga et al. [11] in our analyses.
These are signature-based predictions; regions upstream
of first transcribed genes contain higher densities of
sigma-70 promoter-like signals that distinguish them
from regions upstream of genes in the middle of operons [11].
The investigation of properties related to operon
structure and genome evolution builds on several previous studies that have identified orthologous gene sets
and used these to study evolution [12-15]. Here we have
used the continuously growing number of sequenced
bacterial genomes to build a large but robust set of
orthologous genes, allowing us to focus the analysis on
genes that seem to be essential to bacterial survival in
general, and not limited to specific classes of bacteria.
Orthologs are defined as genes derived from a single
ancestral gene in the last common ancestor of the compared species [16] and normally they perform equivalent
functions in all species. Orthologs can be divided into
two subgroups; with and without paralogs. Paralogs are
genes that are related via duplication events, and they
may perform biologically distinct functions compared to
their ancestral genes. Orthologs that are found only
once in each genome are also known as singletons,
whereas orthologs with paralogs are known as duplicates

Page 2 of 22

[17]. Sequence comparison between singletons and
duplicates has for example been used to elucidate the
relationship between gene duplication and evolutionary
rate [17,18].
Orthologs that are found in most species are often
identified as important and possibly essential genes. Several studies [19,13,14,20] have tried to identify essential
genes by deriving a minimal set of genes needed to sustain a functioning cell under ideal conditions, normally
meaning unlimited amounts of nutrients and no competition from other cells. The first two completely
sequenced bacteria were Haemophilus influenza and
Mycoplasma genitalium. With these two bacteria the
first minimal gene set was produced. Both H. influenza
and M. genitalium are parasitic bacteria with small genomes, and a comparison resulted in a minimal gene set
consisting of 256 genes [20]. Parasitic bacteria may have
extra genes for interaction with their host, thus some of
the genes described in [20] as essential are actually not
required for general survival and therefore not found in
all organisms [15].
Several computer programs and strategies are available
for identifying orthologs. Relevant examples are COGs
[21], TribeMCL [22], InParanoid [23] and OrthoMCL
[24]. The database of Clusters of Orthologous Groups
(COGs) of proteins [21,25] is a phylogenetic classification of proteins encoded in bacteria, archaea and eukaryotes. It is based on an all-against-all Blast search of
complete proteomes. The COGs are made with the
assumption that any group of at least three proteins
from distant genomes that are more similar to each
other than to any other proteins from the same genomes are likely to belong to an orthologous gene family.
This orthology concept is used to classify proteins into
groups. The InParanoid algorithm is based on pair-wise
similarity scores calculated by Blast and uses reciprocal
best hits between two species to find orthologs. While
InParanoid is able to handle only two genomes at a
time, OrthoMCL is designed to work with multiple genomes. OrthoMCL also identifies inparalogs (genes duplicated subsequent to speciation [16]) to be included in
orthologous groups as within-species Blast hits that are
reciprocally better than between-species hits [24]. It has
been shown that OrthoMCL has a very good overall
performance, compared to several other orthology
detection strategies [26].
Escherichia coli is one of the most studied model
organisms by biologists, and the genome has been studied intensively over several decades. This bacterium
can be grown easily in a simple nutrient broth in a culture bottle, and more molecular information is known
than for any other living organism [27]. We have therefore chosen to use E. coli O157:H7 EDL933 as a reference organism in this study; the gene names are

Bratlie et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:71
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/71

according to the gene names in E. coli and the results
from the analyses are presented in the context of the E.
coli genome. However, E. coli is here used only as a
template for presenting the general results. This means
that specific statements that are correct for the analysis
in general may not be correct for E. coli, although they
are presented in that context; e.g. a gene identified as an
“operon gene” because it is integrated in an operon in a
majority of the genomes may still be found as a nonoperon gene in E. coli.
In this study we have used Blast and OrthoMCL to
identify inter-genomic clusters of orthologous genes, followed by COG to verify and supplement the results
obtained from OrthoMCL. We have focused on identifying orthologs that are found in nearly all bacterial genomes included in this study, in total 113 genomes. We
have then used this gene set to analyse selected features
related to gene properties, organisation and evolution.
In particular we have studied the operon organisation of
the relevant genomes, trying to elucidate important
characteristics of genes with strong preference for
operon organisation compared to more flexible genes.

Results
Introduction

First the vocabulary is briefly described. A gene is classified as persistent if it is found in more than 90% of the
organisms examined. It has been shown that gene persistence is strongly correlated with essentiality [28].
Most of the persistent genes are therefore likely to be
essential, but not necessarily under the specific experimental conditions used for testing essentiality. An ortholog cluster is a set of orthologous genes from different
genomes, as identified by OrthoMCL, whereas a gene
cluster is a set of neighbouring genes in the genome,
organised e.g. in an operon. Each individual gene in an
ortholog cluster may be part of an operon (operon gene)
or not (non-operon gene) in a given genome. The ortholog cluster itself may be classified as having a strong or
weak operon preference, depending on the fraction of
genes in the cluster that are part of an operon. We will
use the terms strong and weak operon genes to describe
this. The proteins produced from these genes are
described in the same way, as strong and weak operon
proteins. The ortholog clusters are also classified as
duplicates or singletons, depending on whether the cluster contains paralogs or not. A cluster is also classified
as a singleton cluster if the paralogous gene is more
than 80% identical to the original gene, as it is likely
that the duplication has happened quite recently and
that the copy potentially may be lost again. Some ortholog clusters are also classified as fused or mixed. In the
“mixed” category 10% - 50% of the proteins in the cluster consist of fused domains, while in the “fused”

Page 3 of 22

category over 50% of the proteins are fused. The fused
and mixed clusters where normally excluded from the
statistical analysis (see later). The ribosomal proteins (rproteins) were often analysed as a separate class, in
accordance with previous studies (see e.g. [29]).
Selection of bacterial genomes

From the initial genome set, consisting of all bacterial
genomes that were fully sequenced at the time of the
initial analysis, only the strain with the longest genome
was kept, thereby reducing the risk for removing relevant genes from the analysis. Any additional genes
found in that strain will only affect the analysis if they
are present in more than 90% of all included genomes,
and in that case it seems reasonable to classify them as
persistent. This approach gave a total of 113 bacterial
genomes, with 109 circular and 4 linear genomes. A
total of 13 phyla are represented in the data set. The
dominating phylum is Proteobacteria (63 genomes), followed by Firmicutes (17), Actinobacteria (9) and Cyanobacteria (7). The remaining phyla (Aquificae,
Bacteroidetes/Cholorobi, Chlamydiae/Verrucomicrobia,
Chloroflexi, Deinococcus-Thermus, Fusobacteria, Planctomycetes, Spirochaetes, Thermotogae) are represented
with up to 4 genomes each. Symbiobacterium thermophilum has been classified both as an Actinobacterium
(TIGR) [30] and as a Firmicutes (NCBI) [31]. In spite of
the high G + C content in S. thermophilum, the genome
is more similar to the Firmicutes, which consist preferably of low G + C content bacteria [32]. We chose to
classify the bacterium as a Firmicutes. A full list of the
bacteria that were used in the analysis is given in supplementary material ([Additional file 1: Supplemental
Table S1]).
Clustering of gene orthologs

A total of 367,271 protein sequences from the 113 bacterial genomes were used as input to Blast and
OrthoMCL, which grouped 305,484 (83%) of these proteins into 27,295 clusters. The cluster size varied from 2
to 540 proteins, with a large number of clusters containing only 2 proteins. Amongst the clusters with more
than 2 proteins a large group containing 113 proteins
was observed. A graph showing cluster sizes is shown in
supplementary material ([Additional file 1: Supplemental
Figure S1]).
Identification of persistent genes

40 clusters from the OrthoMCL output contained singletons found in all 113 organisms. That is, these clusters contained 113 proteins from 113 different species.
In addition we included clusters containing genes from
at least 90% of the genomes (i.e. 102 organisms) and
clusters containing duplicates (paralogs). This resulted

Bratlie et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:71
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/71

in a list of 248 clusters. For clusters with duplicates we
identified the most likely ortholog in each case using a
score system based on rank in the Blast E-value score
list. In short, we assumed that real orthologs on average
are more similar to other proteins in the same cluster
than the corresponding paralogs. The real ortholog will
therefore appear with a lower total rank based on sorted
lists of E-values. This procedure is fully explained in
Methods. There were 34 clusters with too similar rank
scores for reliable identification of true orthologs. These
clusters (lolD, clpP, groEL, lysC, tkt, cdsA, rpmE, glyA,
trxB, ddl, dnaJ, dapA, folD, tyrS, hit, rpe, adk, serS, corC,
lgt, pldA, htrA, atpB, xerD, rnhB, pgi, accC, msbA, gap,
tuf, lepB, yrdC, fusA and ssb) represent persistent genes,
but since errors in identification of orthologs may affect
the analysis they were not included in the final data set.
We also removed genes located on plasmids as they
would have an undefined genomic distance in the analysis of gene clustering and gene order. By doing so one
of the clusters (recG) was only found in 101 genomes
and was therefore removed from our list. The final list
contained 213 clusters (112 singletons and 101 duplicates). An overview of all the 213 clusters is given in the
supplementary material ([Additional file 1: Supplemental
Table S2]). This table shows cluster IDs in accordance
with the output IDs from OrthoMCL and gene names
from our chosen reference organism, Escherichia coli
O157:H7 EDL933. The results are also compared to the

Page 4 of 22

COG database [21]. Not all proteins were initially classified into COGs, therefore we used COGnitor at NCBI
[33] to classify the remaining proteins. The orthologous
group classification in [Additional file 1: Supplemental
Table S2] is based on the properties of the clustered
proteins (singleton, duplicate, fused and mixed). As indicated in this table, we also find gene clusters with more
than 113 genes in the singletons category. These are
clusters which originally contained paralogs, but where
removal of paralogous genes located on plasmids
resulted in 113 genes. The distribution of functional
categories of the 213 orthologous gene clusters is shown
in Table 1.
Most of the persistent genes that have been identified
belong to the category of translation and replication,
which is consistent with earlier studies [13,12]. This
includes in particular a large group of r-proteins. The
categories of translation, replication, nucleotide transport, posttranslational modification and cell wall processes are overrepresented in our gene set compared to
both total and normalised gene distribution in the COG
database. This trend is confirmed by analysis of statistical overrepresentation with DAVID [34,35], showing
that gene ontology terms like translation, DNA replication, ribonucleotide binding, biopolymer modification
and cell wall biogenesis are significantly overrepresented
in the gene set when using E. coli as a reference (all pvalues < 0.001 after Benjamini and Hochberg correction

Table 1 Distribution of functional classes
COG functional class

Gene
distr.
(%)

Norm.
gene distr.
(%)

COG distr.
(%)

Norm.
COG distr.
(%)

J

Translation, ribosomal structure and biogenesis

35.2

37.8

4.7

9.0

L

Replication, recombination and repair

12.6

13.5

4.6

8.8

F

Nucleotide transport and metabolism

8.3

8.9

1.8

3.5

M

Cell wall/membrane/envelope biogenesis

6.5

7.0

3.6

6.9

O

Posttranslational modification, protein turnover, chaperones

5.2

5.6

3.9

7.4

R

General function prediction only

4.8

-

13.6

-

K

Transcription

4.8

5.2

4.5

8.6

H

Coenzyme transport and metabolism

3.9

4.2

3.5

6.7

U

Intracellular trafficking, secretion and vesicular transport

3.5

3.8

3.1

6.0

I

Lipid transport and metabolism

2.6

2.8

1.8

3.5

C

Energy production and conversion

2.6

2.8

5.0

9.5

S

Function unknown

2.2

-

26.1

-

D

Cell cycle control, cell division, chromosome partitioning

2.2

2.4

1.4

2.6

E

Amino acid transport and metabolism

2.2

2.4

5.2

10.0

G

Carbohydrate transport and metabolism

1.7

1.8

4.5

8.6

Q

Secondary metabolites biosynthesis, transport and catabolism

1.3

1.4

1.7

3.2

T

Signal transduction mechanisms

0.4

0.4

2.9

5.6

Functional class distribution of the 213 genes found in our analysis compared to the general distribution in the full COG database (expressed as percentages).
The normalised distribution is computed using only the COG groups actually found in the analysis, also excluding genes with only predicted or unknown
function.

Bratlie et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:71
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/71

for multiple hypothesis testing). Similarly, genes
involved in signal transduction mechanisms, carbohydrate transport, amino acid transport and energy production and conversion, as well as all categories not
observed in the set of persistent genes, are underrepresented. Also, the category of predicted genes is
underrepresented.
Comparison to minimal bacterial gene sets

We compared our list of 213 genes to various lists of
essential genes for a minimal bacterium. Mushegian and
Koonin [20] made a suggestion of a minimal gene set
consisting of 256 genes, while Gil et al. [13] suggested a
minimal set of 206 genes. Baba et al. [19] identified 303
possibly essential genes in E. coli by knockout studies
(300 comparable). In a more recent paper of Glass et al.
[14] a minimal gene set of 387 genes was suggested,
whereas Charlebois and Doolittle [12] defined a core of
all genes shared by sequenced genomes of prokaryotes
(147 genomes; 130 bacteria and 17 archaea). This core
consisted of 34 genes, including 11 r-proteins and 12
synthetases. Our core consists of 213 genes, including
45 r-proteins and 22 synthetases. Including archaea will
result in a smaller core, and therefore our results are
not directly comparable to the list from Charlebois and
Doolittle [12]. By comparing our results to the gene lists
from Gil et al. [13] and Baba et al. [19] we see a relatively good overlap (Figure 1). We have 53 genes in our

Figure 1 Similarity to minimal gene sets. Venn-diagram showing
our gene set compared to the gene sets from Gil et al. [13] and
Baba et al. [19]

Page 5 of 22

list that are not included in the other gene sets ([Additional file 1: Supplemental Table S3]). As mentioned by
Gil et al. [13] the largest category of conserved genes
consists of those involved in protein synthesis, mainly
aminoacyl-tRNA synthases and ribosomal proteins. As
we see in Table 1 genes involved in translation represent
the largest functional group in our gene set, contributing as much as 35%. One of the most important fundamental functions in all living cells is DNA replication,
and this group constitutes about 13% of the total gene
set in our data (Table 1).
Genomic distribution of orthologs

We looked into the possibility that gene clustering
might be a large scale feature with clustering of persistent genes into specific genomic regions, rather than
just a local operon-based feature. In Figure 2 the genomic range spanned by persistent genes is plotted for all
the 113 genomes. In circular genomes the window giving the shortest range was always selected; the procedure is further explained in Methods. The values are
calculated in percentage of genome size. As the figure
shows, there is a clear tendency that the persistent
genes in almost every case are spread throughout most
(80-100%) of the genome. However, there are some bacteria where the persistent genes cover a slightly smaller
genomic range (70-80%). These bacteria are Geobacillus
kaustophilus, Photobacterium profundum, Nocardia farcinica, Pseudomonas fluorescens and Streptomyces coelicolor. It is important to point out that this analysis only
shows that persistent genes tend to occupy a large genomic range. Most genes may still be clustered within that

Figure 2 Genomic range of persistent genes. Genomic range of
persistent genes expressed as a percentage of genome size. The
four linear genomes are marked with black points; the grey points
represent circular genomes.

Bratlie et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:71
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/71

range. This is further analysed below, as part of the gene
cluster and operon structure. Genomic distribution of
the orthologs in E. coli, the chosen model organism, is
shown as a genome atlas map [36] (Figure 3), and this
confirms the global distribution of persistent genes.
We also looked into the possibility that specific gene
pairs might show regular long range spacing across several genomes, for example due to large scale genome
folding. This was done by comparing median distance
(MED) to median absolute deviation (MAD) for all gene
pairs. However, this did not reveal any long range regular spacing of persistent genes (data not shown).
We then looked at local gene clustering. We used
Cytoscape [37] to visualise persistent gene pairs where
at least 50% of the genomes had an intergenic distance
of 500 base pairs or less (Figure 4a). This identified
many relatively stable gene clusters. The dominating
gene clusters correspond to well known operons, in particular the str locus containing the S10, spc and alpha
operons. These operons constitute the longest array of
genes conserved in bacterial genomes [38] and are
found in almost all genomes. The alpha operon is separated from the S10 and spc operons. All of the genes in
these three operons, except from prlA (secY) and rpoA,
are genes coding for r-proteins. Figure 4b shows the
genes involved in these three operons in E. coli. Also,
the atp and nusG/beta clusters are strongly conserved,
existing in most of the genomes. Other gene clusters in
Figure 4a are the dcw (division and cell wall) cluster, the
rpsB cluster, the fab cluster, the infC cluster, the trmD
operon, the nusA cluster, and the rps cluster.
Relative gene order of orthologs

We then looked into whether gene order of orthologous
genes is conserved across genomes. The reference gene
order and distribution in E. coli is shown in Figure 5.
Also shown is the other organisms’ gene distribution
sorted according to the reference gene order. Relatively
straight horizontal lines indicate compact gene clusters
(short distance) with conserved gene order. A useful
analogy may be a multiple sequence alignment: a
sequence alignment aligns equivalent residues in different sequences and highlights regions with similar (conserved) residues, whereas the genome alignment in
Figure 5 aligns equivalent genes in different genomes
and highlights regions with similar (conserved) gene
order. Gene clusters obtained from Figure 4a are indicated with the same colour in Figure 5.
Again we see a large region corresponding to the
alpha, spc and S10 operons that is clearly conserved in
most of the 113 organisms. This region is dominated by
r-proteins, mostly singletons, and this conservation of
gene order is likely to represent conserved operons. In
general we see that gene clusters from cluster analysis

Page 6 of 22

(Figure 4) correlate very well with conserved regions in
Figure 5.
We then looked into whether variation in gene order
observed in Figure 5 mainly reflects a normal evolutionary process, and therefore correlates with evolution in
general. Distances between complete genomes can be
computed by estimating the number of rearrangements
needed to transform one genome into another based on
gene order. Here we have used the Empirically Derived
Estimator (EDE) approach [39]. By using the EDE corrected distances we got a measure of similarities in gene
order between all 113 organisms. Additionally, evolution
at the level of amino acid sequence was calculated from
a multiple alignment of protein sequences of the persistent genes. Scoredist-corrected evolutionary distances
[40] were calculated based on the BLOSUM62 matrix.
Figure 6 plots distance by gene order (EDE score) compared to distance from amino acid sequence evolution.
The figure shows that change in gene order is correlated
with general sequence evolution, although the relationship is somewhat noisy.
The general quality of the sequence set can to a certain extent be confirmed by a sequence-based phylogenetic analysis, compared to the known classification of
the bacterial species. Figure 7 shows a phylogram computed on the combined multiple alignment of the persistent proteins, followed by a bootstrap analysis. A similar
phylogenetic analysis was also done based on the EDE
distances ([Additional file 1: Supplemental Figure S2]).
Operon structure and properties

To analyse the actual operons we used the operon predictions from Janga et al. [11]. Only well defined singleton and duplicate clusters were used, i.e. not the fused
(2 singletons, 3 duplicates) and mixed (1 singleton, 3
duplicates) clusters, giving a data set of 204 orthologs
across 113 organisms.
We first investigated how often the individual genes
were part of an operon. According to the above-mentioned operon predictions, the majority (76%) of our
persistent genes take part in operons.
Next we tested whether operons show preference for
singletons or duplicates. Counting the operon vs. nonoperon distribution of the two different categories in the
Janga predictions, we found that singletons are somewhat more often found in operons than duplicates
([Additional file 1: Supplemental Table S4], Fisher exact
test odds ratio 1.19, p-value 3.725 × 10-7).
We then tested whether operons preferably consist of
just one category (singletons or duplicates) or a mix of
these two categories. By counting identical versus mixed
gene pairs in the list by Janga et al. we found a clear
tendency for identical pairs ([Additional file 1: Supplemental Table S5], odds ratio 1.28, p-value < 2.2 × 10-16).

Bratlie et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:71
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/71

Page 7 of 22

Figure 3 Genomic distribution of persistent genes in E. coli. The genomic distribution of persistent genes shown as a genome atlas map for
the reference organism E. coli O157:H7. The genes are colour coded according to COG group.

Bratlie et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:71
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/71

Page 8 of 22

Figure 4 Gene clusters from gene pair distances. a) Gene clusters with intra-genomic pair-wise distance of at most 500 base pairs. Edges
indicate the number of organisms where the distance is within this cut-off (see legend). b) An overview showing the persistent genes in the
S10, spc and alpha operons found in E. coli O157:H7. The cluster number and gene type ([Additional file 1: Supplemental Table S2]; red:
singletons, blue: duplicates) is also indicated.

This probably reflects that it is more likely for the complete operon to be successfully duplicated rather than
just one single gene.
The fraction of genes assigned to operon in each
ortholog cluster was also related to COG categories.
The results show that the average operon fraction varies
from 67% in Posttranslational modification, protein
turnover, chaperons (COG category O) to 85% in Cell
wall/membrane/envelope biogenesis (COG category M)
and Energy production and conversion (C) ([Additional
file 1: Supplemental Table S6]).
For further analyses of operon structure we categorised all the 213 OrthoMCL gene clusters into strong
and weak operon genes (also indicated in [Additional
file 1: Supplemental Table S2]). A strong operon gene is
defined as an OrthoMCL cluster where genes are
located in an operon in at least 80% of the organisms,
and this gave 110 strong and 103 weak operon genes.
This gives a distinction between genes where operon

organisation is essential versus genes where some regulatory flexibility is possible. This operon classification is
given in [Additional file 1: Supplemental Table S2]. This
set was further split into r-protein genes (45), strong
operon genes (73) and weak operon genes (86), excluding fused and mixed genes as mentioned above, and this
set of 204 genes was used for most of the following
analyses.
We looked at the distribution of strong and weak
operon genes according to COG category and compared this to the overall distribution of COG categories in E. coli (Figure 8). Here r-protein genes were
included. The strong operon genes are overrepresented
in several of the COG categories compared to the
weak operon genes; Translation, ribosomal structure
and biogenesis (J), Transcription (K), Cell wall/membrane/envelope biogenesis (M), Energy production and
conversion (C), Lipid transport and metabolism (I) and
Secondary metabolites biosynthesis, transport and

Bratlie et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:71
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/71

Page 9 of 22

Figure 5 Relative order of persistent genes in all genomes. The red line indicates the gene order of the reference organism, E. coli O157:H7.
For the other genomes the order of the persistent genes has been sorted according to the reference organism, and the relative genomic
position of the genes plotted along the y-axis. Relatively flat horizontal lines in the plot indicate regions with conserved gene clustering
compared to the reference organism (i.e. we are moving short genomic distances between genes when they are sorted according to the E. coli
gene order). We see several such regions, marked with the same colours as in Figure 4. However, outside these regions the intra-genomic gene
distances are highly variable.

catabolism (Q). The translation category is strongly
influenced by the r-protein genes. On the other hand,
the weak operon genes are mainly overrepresented in
Replication, recombination and repair (L), Posttranslational modification, protein turnover, chaperones (O)
and Nucleotide transport and metabolism (F). This difference between strong and weak operon genes was
confirmed with DAVID (excluding r-proteins), showing
that whereas gene ontology terms like cell wall biogenesis and ATP metabolic process are overrepresented in
strong operon genes, terms like DNA replication,
response to stress and nucleotide binding are overrepresented in weak operon genes (p-values < 0.05 after
Benjamini and Hochberg correction).
Variation in evolutionary rate

In the phylogenetic analysis we looked at the total evolutionary distance based on all genes identified as persistent. However, there will obviously be inter-gene
variation in the evolutionary rate. This was analysed by
using pair-wise Blast bit scores normalised against alignment length; see Methods for further details.

Singleton versus duplicate genes

Earlier analyses [17] have found a difference in the evolutionary rate of singletons and duplicates, but this picture is
strongly influenced by the 45 r-proteins in our data set.
Analyses conducted with r-proteins included in the singletons category show that there is indeed a difference
regarding the evolutionary rate. The median of the average
bit scores (normalised over alignment length) is 0.81 for
the singletons and 0.73 for the duplicates (data not
shown), implying that genes in clusters dominated by singletons tend to be more similar to each other and evolve
slower than duplicates. However, it is conventional to
leave out r-proteins when looking at evolutionary rate [29]
because they are highly expressed and evolve more slowly
than other proteins. Without the r-proteins there was no
significant difference between the singletons and duplicates (median of average bit scores 0.71 and 0.72 respectively). As expected the r-proteins evolve slowly with a
median of average bit scores of 0.97. We also tested
whether there was any difference regarding protein length
for singletons and duplicates. When r-proteins were left
out, this analysis did not give any significant difference.

Bratlie et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:71
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/71

Page 10 of 22

Figure 6 Evolutionary distance between genomes. Correlation between evolutionary distance from amino acid sequences for all persistent
genes versus genomic gene order (EDE).

Strong versus weak operon genes

We then performed the same analyses as described
above, but comparing strong and weak operon proteins.
The ribosomal and the fused/mixed proteins were left
out of the analysis. The result is shown in Figure 9. The
median of average bit scores for strong and weak
operon proteins is 0.65 and 0.79 respectively, thus indicating that the strong operon genes evolve faster than
the weak operon genes (p-value 3.527 × 10 -5 ). As
already mentioned the r-proteins have a median of average bit scores of 0.97. There is also a difference regarding protein length for strong and weak operon proteins.
The proteins from weak operon genes (Figure 10) have
an average length of 497.31 amino acids compared to
335.06 amino acids for proteins from strong operon
genes (p-value 1.361 × 10-5).
Protein-protein interactions

It has been proposed that evolutionary rate of a protein
is influenced by the number of interaction partners [41];
all other things being equal a protein with more interactions should evolve more slowly. This is a controversial
topic, as others [42] claim that slow evolutionary rate is
a result of methods being biased towards counting more

interactions for abundant proteins, and abundant proteins are known to evolve slowly.
We used the Molecular INTeraction Database (MINT)
[43], and a reasonable subset of the 204 genes could be
mapped to database entries (Table 2). We then counted
interactions (both with and without self interactions) for
the different groups of proteins (Table 2), and evaluated
the significances by a bootstrap analysis with 10,000 permutations. The analysis showed significant overrepresentation of both strong and weak operon proteins in
interaction with r-proteins and significant under-representation of direct contacts between strong and weak
operon proteins and within weak operon proteins. It
also showed that both strong and weak operon proteins
have frequent self-interactions.
The 10 weak operon proteins that are responsible for
the majority of the interactions with the r-proteins (i.e.
they have more than 10 interactions) are in descending
order InfC (with 35 interaction partners), SpoT, UvrC,
PrsA, Pnp, DnaA, RpoC, Tgt, RpoD and Map (with 13
interaction partners).
In addition we counted the number of interactions for
strong and weak operon proteins represented in the
MINT database, and found on average 9.98 vs. 17.28 for

Bratlie et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:71
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/71

Page 11 of 22

Figure 7 Phylogram from persistent genes. Phylogram based on a multiple alignment of protein sequences from the all persistent genes.
Bacteria normally classified to the same phyla are marked with identical colour.

Bratlie et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:71
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/71

Page 12 of 22

Figure 8 Strong and weak operon genes according to COG categories. The graph includes ribosomal genes (Translation, ribosomal
structure and biogenesis (J)).

strong vs. weak operon proteins, respectively, or 7.22 vs.
11.60 if we excluded r-proteins from the analysis.
Interactions through shared pathways

In addition to direct physical interactions, genes and
gene products may also interact indirectly through
shared metabolic pathways and processes. This was analysed using the KEGG database [44]. A total of 134 of
our 204 proteins could be mapped to KEGG, and 129 of
these shared at least one pathway ([Additional file 1:
Supplemental Table S7]). These proteins and pathways
were then counted and analysed statistically, using a
permutation test ([Additional file 1: Supplemental Table
S7]). The analysis showed a statistically significant preference for strong operon proteins to share pathway (pvalue 0.001), and a significant lack of preference for
shared pathways between strong and weak operon genes
(p-value 0.988). In addition we counted the number of
pathways assigned to each protein for strong and weak
operon proteins, and saw a general preference for weak
operon proteins to be associated with more pathways
than strong operon proteins ([Additional file 1: Supplemental Figure S3]).

Discussion
Identification of persistent orthologs

The first step in our analysis was to identify orthologous
genes with close to universal distribution in a large set

of bacterial genomes, as such genes are more likely to
represent important functional and regulatory features
that have been conserved during evolution. The set of
publicly available genomes has a bias towards more
extensively studied bacteria, and in order to reduce this
bias somewhat we removed alternative strains of the
same bacterium, in each case keeping the longest genome for analysis. This will obviously not remove bias
completely, but it is a reasonable first step towards a
less biased data set. We did not remove symbiotic bacteria from the analysis, although such bacteria may survive with a reduced genome by utilising host genes. The
main reason for this decision was that we wanted to
focus on genes that normally are kept under strict control within the target genome, and although the host
may take over regulation of selected bacterial genes, this
may not change the need for strict co-regulation of certain gene sets through an operon structure. However,
we relaxed the inclusion criterion slightly by allowing
any particular gene to be missing in up to 10% of the
genomes.
We identified 213 persistent genes in total, based on
the corresponding protein sequences ([Additional file 1:
Supplemental Table S2]). This includes 69 genes found
in all 113 organisms (61% from the COG Translation,
ribosomal structure and biogenesis (J) category, in particular ribosomal genes), and 144 additional genes that
could be found in at least 90% of the genomes.

Bratlie et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:71
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/71

Page 13 of 22

Figure 9 Average protein bit score for strong and weak operon gene clusters. A box plot showing the different gene clusters ranked
according to average pair-wise bit score of the protein sequences (BitScore) normalised against alignment length (AliLen). The legend text
shows the median score of each group (weak operon 0.79 bits, strong operon 0.65 bits). Ribosomal genes are not included. When they are
included the numbers are 0.81 and 0.75, respectively.

There are several reasons why otherwise persistent
genes may appear to be missing in individual genomes.
It is possible that some of the missing genes actually
were in the input data, but that they were not retrieved
during the Blast search. It is also possible that legitimate
orthologs were missed by OrthoMCL.
Some of the bacteria in our data set depend upon
close parasitic or mutualistic relationship with eukaryotic hosts. This includes bacteria like Mycoplasma penetrans, Onion yellows phytoplasma, and Wigglesworthia
brevipalpis. Mycoplasmas are among the smallest selfreplicating organisms that are known today, and they
have lost biochemical pathways such as amino acid and
fatty acid biosynthesis [45]. Such bacteria exploit genes
from the host, and may therefore have a smaller genome
than free-living bacteria [12]. This can explain some
missing genes. However, it has been shown that inclusion of organisms with reduced genomes improves the
prediction of essentiality based on identification of persistent genes [28], which is an argument in favour of
including such genomes in the analysis.

Non-orthologous gene displacement (NOD) is a
mechanism by which essential genes may appear to be
lost. In that case non-orthologous genes are coding for
the same function in different bacteria [46]. These genes
may be unrelated to each other, or they may be paralogs
without significant similarity, and thus sequence similarity searches will not pick up these genes. This can be a
possible explanation for some of the missing genes in
our case, but we have not looked further into this.
During evolution proteins undergo different evolutionary processes, and some of these processes involve gene
fusion, leading to more complex proteins. Thus groups
of proteins may exist as individual genes in some organisms and as fused, multifunctional genes in other organisms. Previous analyses have shown that gene fusion
occurs approximately four times more often than gene
fission [47]. Multi-domain proteins or so-called fused
proteins represent a challenge when doing protein clustering. A fused protein with two domains will fit into
two different clusters, and the challenge is to find out
which cluster to put it in. The most reasonable solution

Bratlie et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:71
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/71

Page 14 of 22

Figure 10 Average protein length for strong and weak operon gene clusters. The median protein sequence length over all 113 proteins
for each of the 213 gene clusters plotted against median of normalised bit scores (see Figure 9). The legend text shows the median length for
each group (weak operon 497.31 residues, strong operon 335.06 residues). This plot and analysis excludes ribosomal proteins; when they are
included the corresponding number are 461.93 and 273.51, respectively.

would be to put it into two different protein clusters,
but this is not how OrthoMCL and many other tools
will handle the situation. OrthoMCL clustering is based
on Blast results, and when sorting proteins into clusters
the program considers the E-values. If a protein consists
of two fused domains, the domain with the best E-value
will be used for cluster assignment. This results in a
missing protein in another cluster, which of course is a

problem if we are looking for globally persistent genes.
In 9 out of the 213 clusters we found fused proteins.
The final gene set is dominated by ribosomal proteins.
In E. coli 53 r-proteins have been identified [48], but
our analysis reveals that only 23 r-proteins are persistent
in all of the 113 organisms. By also including r-proteins
that are persistent according to our 90% cut off criterion
we get a total of 45 r-proteins in our data set. The

Bratlie et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:71
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/71

Page 15 of 22

Table 2 Number of protein-protein interactions for the
different classes.
Interaction
Ribosomal

MINT db
Permutation
P-value

Operon

MINT db
Permutation
P-value

Non-operon

Ribosomal
(45/43/43)

Operon
(73/45/29)

Non-operon
(86/62/52)

54 (57)

138

363

121.7 (120.1)

97.1 (111.9)

245.3 (242.3)

0 (0)

0 (0)

1.0 (1.0)

20 (62)

56

16.9 (26.0)

94.2 (112.8)

0 (0)

MINT db
Permutation
P-value

1.0 (1.0)
57 (110)
112.8 (121.7)
1.0 (0.95)

The numbers shown are for all pairs of persistent genes found in MINT, both
without (and with) self interactions included. The table also shows the
average number of protein-protein interactions after 10,000 permutations,
and estimated p-values for getting a number of interactions after permutation
that is larger than the experimental one. The number of genes of each class
in the full set, represented in MINT and found as interaction pairs in MINT is
shown in the table header.

r-proteins are generally well conserved during evolution
and are found in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes. In
prokaryotes, the genes coding for r-proteins are often
found in conserved operons [49]. Our results also show
that the ubiquitous r-proteins are generally found with
only one copy in the genome, as only 6 of the 45 persistent r-proteins are found with duplicates. The duplicated
genes are rpsD (S4), rpsN (S14), rpsQ (S17), rpsR (S18)
and rpmB (L28).
Persistent orthologs represent essential genes

It is reasonable to expect that persistent orthologs are
somehow essential to cell survival, as they by definition
are well conserved across bacteria. This is a desired feature in this study, as it makes it more likely that regulatory or genomic structural features associated with these
genes are conserved. It is relevant to compare this gene
set to other essential gene sets, as this may serve as a
quality check, and also indicate important differences
between alternative strategies for identification of essential genes. Baba et al. [19] have identified 303 essential
genes in E. coli K-12 by knockout experiments.
Although our gene set is smaller than this list, the overlap is reasonably good; 122 of our 213 genes are essential according to these knockout experiments. There
may be several reasons why the rest of the genes have
not been identified as essential. In addition to potential
experimental problems (incomplete knockout) there
may be backup genes due to gene duplication (paralogs),
or the genes may be essential only under non-laboratory
conditions (e.g. stress handling). Gil et al. [13] used a
consensus strategy integrating different types of information as well as previous minimal gene sets to define
the core of a minimal gene set “able to sustain a

functional bacterial cell under ideal conditions”. When
comparing our gene set to both Gil et al. [13] and Baba
et al. [19] there are 53 genes that are unique to our
gene set ([Additional file 1: Supplemental Table S3]).
The dominating COG categories for these genes are
Nucleotide transport and metabolism (F), Translation,
ribosomal structure and biogenesis (J) and Replication,
recombination and repair (L). Many of these genes are
involved in processes that may become active during
stress. Our gene list includes genes that encode heat
shock proteins and proteins that induce the SOS
response, for instance UvrA, UvrB and UvrC, which all
are a part of the UvrABC nucleotide excision repair
complex [50]. The UvrD protein is a helicase involved
in DNA repair [51]. The Tig protein (also in our list) is
together with DnaK involved in folding of newly synthesised proteins, and it has been shown that cells without
tig and dnaK are not viable above 30°C [52]. We also
find the genes ruvA and ruvB encoding proteins in the
RuvABC complex. This complex functions in recombination pathways by binding to recombinational junctions and catalyzing strand cleavage. The ruv locus has
been shown to be induced during the SOS response to
DNA damage [53]. The recA and recR genes are also
important in repairing DNA damage. Such genes, as
well as others not described here, are essential for longterm survival under stress, but may not be identified as
essential under controlled and non-stressful laboratory
conditions.
Bubunenko et al. [54] have looked at the essentiality of
ribosomal and transcription anti-termination proteins.
According to their results, the majority of the 30S protein genes are essential, except the ribosomal protein
genes rpsF, rpsI, rpsM, rpsO, rpsQ and rpsT. All of these
last-mentioned genes are included in our list, and rpsI,
rpsM and rpsQ were also listed as essential by Baba et
al. [19] and Gil et al. [13].
Altogether, the gene set identified here seems to have
more genes that are important for stress tolerance than
some of the experimental gene sets. This is confirmed
by testing our subset of 53 genes not found in Baba et
al. or Gil et al. with statistical overrepresentation against
the E. coli genome with DAVID. This shows that gene
ontology terms like DNA repair, response to stress and
SOS response are significantly overrepresented in this
subset (p-values < 0.05 after Benjamini and Hochberg
correction).
The gene set can reproduce established bacterial
classification

Extensive similarity of genes across bacterial species may
in principle be the result of widespread horizontal gene
transfer. Although this seems very unlikely for this data
set, a phylogenetic analysis of the data may still help to

Bratlie et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:71
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/71

indicate potential problems. The analysis in Figure 7 is
based on merged protein sequences made from the 213
persistent genes. Not all of the genomes will contain all
the 213 genes, as we included clusters found in at least
90% of the genomes. However, the resulting phylogram
is still very robust with most bootstrap values close to
100%, except for a small number of branches (15) with
bootstrap values below 50%. We see that the analysis is
in excellent agreement with the known bacterial classification, and does not indicate any potential problems.
The correlation analysis of alignment distance vs. EDE
distance shows a clear correlation (Figure 6). However,
the phylogram based on EDE distances ([Additional file
1: Supplemental Figure S2]) is somewhat less consistent
with known bacterial classification. It is difficult to say
whether this is because gene order changes represent a
more complex evolutionary process (i.e. less easily captured by a single distance measure), or whether it
reflects real differences between these two processes.
Persistent genes are distributed across the genomes

We see in Figure 2 that most genomes have the persistent genes spread throughout the whole genome, relatively independent of genome size. The genome with
the smallest relative gene span is S. coelicolor, which is
one of the largest genomes in our data set. S. coelicolor
has a linear genome with a centrally located origin of
replication [55], and it has the genes located in the middle of the chromosome. According to Bentley et al. [55]
many streptomycetes can under laboratory conditions
undergo deletions and insertions at either end of the
chromosome without compromising viability. This can
be a reasonable explanation for the organisation of persistent genes in S. coelicolor.
The genomic distribution in E. coli O157:H7 in Figure
3 confirms the results from Figure 2; we see that the
persistent genes are distributed throughout most of the
genome. Though we here see clear instances of clustering, much of this is likely to represent operons. In addition to the local clustering, there is a clear tendency for
neighbouring clusters to be located on the same strand.
There also seems to be some degree of clustering with
respect to COG categories; relevant examples are Cell
wall/membrane/envelope biogenesis (M) and Energy
production and conversion (C). However, this has not
been investigated in more detail.
Operon structure is partly conserved

The initial operon analysis was based on a general clustering strategy with a quite relaxed criterion on gene
distance. This should give a relatively unbiased overview,
independent of any specific operon definition. This was
then followed by a more operon-specific analysis, based
on the operon data by Janga et al. [11].

Page 16 of 22

In general the gene clusters identified by the cluster
analysis represent known operons. If we compare Figure
4a, which is based on clustering on intra-genomic gene
distances, and Figure 5, which is showing gene order
conservation, we see that gene clusters representing
operon-like structures are quite easy to recognise. In
particular structures related to the S10, spc and alpha
operons in E. coli are clearly visible. The spc operon is
the most variable one, with 10 out of 12 genes persistent
(rpmD and rpmJ are missing). In the S10 operon, only
rpmC is missing due to our threshold (found in 100
genomes), whereas all genes of the alpha operon are
found in all of the 113 organisms. We also see that
these operons mainly consist of singletons (21 out of 25
genes). This underlines the evolutionary importance of
these genes, as the lack of paralogs most likely means
that they are under more strict control and selection
than most other genes.
There are also other gene clusters that correspond to
known operons. One of the largest clusters contains
genes belonging to the division and cell wall (dcw)
operon in E. coli [56], and contains mur, fts and mra
genes. The genes nusG-rplKAJL-rpoB belong to the
well-known beta operon, which is a classic bacterial
gene cluster [57]. Four of the genes in the next cluster
(rpsP-yfjA-trmD-rplS) are known to be a part of the
trmD operon [58] in E. coli. RplS, rpsP and the flanking
gene ffh are known to be essential for viability. Deletion
of the yfjA gene results in a five-fold reduced growth
rate of the cells [58]. The next cluster contains among
others the genes tsf/pyrH, that are a part of the common
cluster tsf-pyrH-frr [59]. The product of pyrH is involved
in biosynthesis, while the products of tsf and frr are
involved in translation. Janga et al. [59] suggest that the
conservation might be accounted for by the general
importance of macromolecular biosynthesis rather than
from a direct functional relationship. We also see that
the metY-nusA-infB operon is represented. This operon
encodes functions involved in both transcription and
translation [60], and the nusA gene is known to be
involved in feedback control of the operon [61]. The
cluster lacks the metY, rpsO and pnp genes. However,
rpsO and pnp are found as a small separate cluster consisting of only two genes, as shown in Figure 4. The full
gene order in this operon is therefore not sufficiently
conserved among the 113 genomes to be identified.
The genes encoding several important fatty acid biosynthetic enzymes, the fab cluster, are found with the
gene order plsX-fabH-fabD-fabG-acpP-fabF in E. coli,
and several of these genes are known to be essential for
growth [62]. We have identified 4 of these genes here.
Genes representing an incomplete atp (or unc) operon
are also found as a cluster in Figure 4a. The genes identified here are encoding the ATP synthase subunit B, C,

Bratlie et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:71
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/71

A and D respectively. There are two additional clusters
identified in our figure with a cluster size of three genes.
One of the clusters is a purely ribosomal protein cluster,
while the other one contains the infC gene encoding the
translation initiation factor IF-3 in addition to two genes
encoding ribosomal proteins.
There are several hypotheses regarding operon-formation, and the selfish-operon hypothesis [5] is maybe one
of the most referred models. In this model, horizontal
transfer of the complete operon is favoured over transfer
of single genes, by natural selection. In this way, co-regulation and co-expression will still be conserved. At the
time when the selfish-operon hypothesis was suggested,
it was believed that genes providing for essential functions would not be part of an operon because these
genes could not undergo the cycles of gene loss and
gain that is one of the hallmarks of the model. However,
it has later been found that essential genes preferentially
are located in operons [63], and that essential and other
ubiquitous genes still form new operons at significant
rate [6]. According to a work done by Fang et al. [64]
genes present in the majority of organisms and genes
present in very few organisms have a strong clustering
tendency, while genes of the intermediary category do
not cluster.
From our work it is quite obvious that most of the
persistent genes are found in operons. In particular the
r-proteins stand out, as 35 of the 45 persistent r-proteins are found in operons in more than 80% of the genomes, and the genes encoding RplD, RplP, RplB, RplW,
RpsK and RpsS are part of an operon in more than 110
of the genomes. Four of these proteins are part of the
large ribosomal subunit, which may indicate that proper
assembly of this subunit is particularly sensitive to a
correct stoichiometric ratio for these proteins compared
to other ribosomal components. For example r-protein
RpsT is found as an operon gene in only 22% of the
genomes, and the rpsT gene is not regarded as essential
according to Bubunenko et al. [54].
From the statistics regarding operon structure in the
different COG categories (based on predictions from
Janga et al. [11]), the genes in Energy production and
conversion (C) and Cell wall/membrane/envelope biogenesis (M) have the largest degree of operon organisation. Within these COG categories 85% of the genes in
our data set are found to be a part of an operon. As
already mentioned, the essential genes are preferentially
found in operons, and even in Post-translational modification, protein turnover, chaperones (O), which has the
lowest degree of operon structure, we find as many as
67% of the genes to be in an operon. However, in order
to fully explain these preferences we also have to consider the results on protein-protein interactions and
metabolic pathways (see following sections).

Page 17 of 22

Conservation of gene order has been studied in a
number of earlier reports [65-67]. The conclusion is
that strict gene order conservation seems to be very
rare. Prokaryotic genomes can be extensively reshuffled
during evolution, and the frequency of rearrangement
seems to be related to the phylogenetic distances [65].
This is consistent with our results shown in Figure 5.
Conservation of gene order in evolutionary distant genomes seems to be due to operon organisation [59]. This
is also is in accordance with our findings, as the gene
clusters with conserved order in general are associated
with known operons.
Weak operon proteins have more interaction partners

Our analyses of protein-protein interactions in the
MINT database showed that weak operon proteins on
average have more interaction partners than strong
operon proteins (17.3 vs. 10.0) and they also have more
self-interactions than strong operon proteins. It also
showed (Table 2) that weak operon proteins interact
more frequently with ribosomal proteins than with
strong operon proteins and other weak operon proteins.
But even if we exclude r-proteins from the analysis the
weak operon proteins have more interaction partners
than the strong operon proteins (11.6 vs. 7.2). The preference for r-proteins over other proteins (including
strong operon proteins) is even more striking as the
majority of the r-proteins show a very strong operon
preference. Most of the interactions with r-proteins are
formed by proteins from 10 weak operon genes; infC,
spoT, uvrC, prsA, pnp, dnaA, rpoC, tgt, rpoD and map.
These genes mainly belong to the COG categories
Translation, ribosomal structure and biogenesis (J),
Transcription (K) and Replication, recombination and
repair (L). The infC gene is a part of the infC-rpmI-rplT
operon [68] of ribosomal subunits. The spoT gene is
encoding one of the two proteins that control the bacterial response to stress, and this gene has been shown
to be associated with the pre-50S ribosomal particle
[69]. UvrC encodes for the UvrC protein, a component
of the UvrABC nucleotide excision repair complex [70].
The PrsA gene encodes ribose-phosphate pyrophosphokinase which is important for cellular metabolism and
found ubiquitously among all free-living organisms [71].
The pnp gene encodes polyribonucleotide nucleotidyltransferase, PNPase, in E. coli. PNPase is a component
of the RNA degradosome complex [72]. DnaA, encoded
by dnaA, initiates the chromosomal replication [73]
while rpoC encodes the beta subunit of the RNA polymerase [74]. The tgt gene encodes the enzyme that is
responsible for the posttranscriptional modification of
specific tRNAs with queuine [75]. The rpoD gene
encodes the RNA polymerase sigma 70 factor and is a
part of an operon which also includes rpsU and dnaG

Bratlie et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:71
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/71

[76]. The map (methionine aminopeptidase) gene has
been found to be essential for cell growth in E. coli [77].
The number of interactions within the r-proteins is
lower than anticipated. One source of error may be
experimental bias in the MINT database. However, we
do not think there is enough bias to seriously affect our
analysis with respect to properties of strong vs. weak
operon genes.
Strong operon proteins are often in large complexes and
linear pathways

Although interaction data often are related to shared
pathways, these pathways may also include indirect
interactions, e.g. through substrates. Therefore we also
used data from the KEGG database in order to get a
more complete picture of the interactome. From the
KEGG database we retrieved how often ribosomal,
strong and weak operon proteins were found in the
same pathway ([Additional file 1: Supplemental Table
S7]). This analysis is probably less reliable than the
interaction analysis, as the concept of shared pathways
is less clear cut than physical complex formation. However, we still believe that this analysis can indicate
important properties associated with operon formation.
All of the 45 ribosomal proteins were found in KEGG,
while only 44 of the 73 strong operon proteins and 45
of the 86 weak operon proteins were found in the database. To be able to say how often the different groups
are found in the same pathway, there was also a requirement that at least two genes from our data set had to be
found in the same pathway, which further reduced the
number of proteins to 41 and 43 for strong and weak
operon proteins, respectively. The results showed that rproteins were found only in pathways with other ribosomal proteins, while strong and weak operon proteins
often were found in the same pathway. It also showed
that weak operon proteins on average were found in
more pathways than strong operon proteins. Whereas
strong operon proteins mainly were assigned to just one
pathway, weak operon proteins frequently were assigned
to two or more pathways.
For further analysis we tried to categorise pathways
with persistent genes into four different groups. The
first group consists of large multi-protein complexes.
Typical examples are r-proteins (KEGG ece03010) and
the ATP synthetase complex (KEGG ece00190). In both
cases the components are mainly strong operon proteins. An alternative route towards complex formation is
a more step-wise process, where individual proteins are
exchanged at each step. A relevant example is nucleotide excision repair (KEGG ece03420), with mainly weak
operon proteins.
More traditional pathways can be subdivided in a
similar way. A linear pathway consists of a series of

Page 18 of 22

steps in a relatively strict order. Typical examples are
peptidoglycan synthesis (KEGG ece00550) and fatty acid
biosynthesis (KEGG ece00061), in both cases dominated
by strong operon proteins. The alternative layout consists of several relatively independent pathway steps
linked to a common node, forming a convergent (or
divergent) system. Examples are aminoacyl tRNA biosynthesis (KEGG ece00970), glutamate metabolism
(KEGG ece00251) and valine, leucine and isoleucine biosynthesis (KEGG ece00400), in all cases dominated by
weak operon proteins. However, several pathways do
not show a clear preference for strong or weak operon
proteins.
The preferences described above show that operons
are beneficial mainly for large systems, where most
components need to be available (in correct stoichiometric ratios) to make a functional system, like in relatively static multi-protein complexes or linear metabolic
pathways. The operon structure is not equally essential
when the interdependence between components is less
strict, like in more dynamic complexes or convergent
pathways. In these cases independent regulation may in
fact be beneficial. This is also consistent with the observation that weak operon proteins tend to be used in
more than one pathway, which may favour independent
regulation.
Weak operon genes evolve more slowly than strong
operon genes

An important implication of the results described above
is that weak operon genes should evolve more slowly
than strong operon genes. Intuitively it may be tempting
to assume the opposite, as operon formation may be
associated with essential and tightly regulated genes
under strong evolutionary selection. This is certainly the
case for ribosomal proteins, where the rate of evolution
is very low. However, this picture may change if we
exclude the ribosomal proteins. As the weak operon
proteins have more interaction partners and participate
in more pathways, they may actually be more constrained with respect to evolution.
We sorted the strong and weak operon genes according to average protein alignment bit score of each gene
cluster, excluding the r-proteins (Figure 9). This showed
that weak operon genes on average evolve slower than
strong operon genes. The result is to some extent dominated by genes at the extreme ends of the plot; a large
group of fast evolving strong operon genes to the left
and a similar group of slowly evolving weak operon
genes to the right. The strong operon genes to the left
are dominated by linear biosynthetic pathways, in particular peptidoglycan but also steroid, folat, pantothenate
etc. The pattern to the right is less clear, but we find
convergent pathways, chaperone subunits, DNA repair

Bratlie et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:71
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/71

subunits and subunits for enzymatic complexes in metabolic pathways. This indicates that the rapidly evolving
strong operon genes mainly are individual components
of individual biosynthetic pathways that are relatively
free to evolve, whereas proteins from the more slowly
evolving weak operon genes to a larger extent have several partners (directly or indirectly), and therefore evolve
more slowly.
We also used the same data to look for a similar bias
for singleton genes compared to duplicates. A previous
comparison of evolutionary rates in eukaryotes performed by Davis and Petrov [18] revealed a difference
between duplicates and singletons. They examined the
genomes of S. cerevisiae and C. elegans, and discovered
that the duplicates in both genomes evolved slower than
singletons. This observation is also supported by Jordan
et al. [17], but they demonstrated that the evolutionary
rate of duplicated genes accelerated immediately after
duplication, before it subsequently slowed down. Our
analysis did not reveal any significant differences. However, essential genes may be biased towards slow evolution independent of singleton/duplicate status. This may
mask out the subtle trends that were observed in previous studies.
The analysis also showed that singletons are slightly
overrepresented in strong operon genes. This basically
shows that although these genes have more freedom to
evolve through mutations, which only affects protein
properties, they are less free to evolve through duplication, which will affect the actual gene regulation. This is
consistent with the idea that operon genes in effect are
more strongly regulated than non-operon genes.
This analysis may in principle be biased by the more
rapid evolution in endosymbionts compared to free-living bacteria [78]. However, this will affect the result
only if the relative rate of evolution between groups of
genes is different for symbionts vs. non-symbionts,
otherwise it will only affect the range of evolutionary
rates that is observed.
Weak operon genes are longer than strong operon genes

The above discussion shows that weak operon genes to
a large extent represent independent subunits of otherwise complex systems. It is then relevant to ask whether
this increased independence may have been achieved by
integrating more functionality into each protein, e.g. by
fusion of genes that normally form operons. In that case
we should expect weak operon genes on average to be
longer than operon genes.
The plot of median protein length for strong vs. weak
operon genes showed a clear trend for strong operon
genes to be on average shorter than weak operon genes
(Figure 10). Gong et al. [79] have found that essential
genes are overrepresented with respect to short and

Page 19 of 22

long genes, and underrepresented with respect to average length genes. However, this picture is not seen in
our analysis. In E. coli the average protein length for the
full proteome is 300 ± 231 amino acids (at 1 SD). In
Figure 10 there seems to be relatively many proteins
around 300 amino acids.
For large, essential complexes it may be a good strategy to assemble these from many small components
that are easy to synthesise and fold rapidly (even under
stress). Gong et al. argue that short genes have low cost
(rapid synthesis, easy folding, no chaperones). This
makes a relatively robust system, given that the genes
are collected in an operon so that all components are
produced simultaneously and in correct stoichiometric
ratios. The same will be the case for well-defined linear
biosynthetic pathways.
On the other hand, the increased length of weak
operon genes indicates that these indeed may include
multi-domain proteins, and although these may be more
expensive to produce and fold correctly, the final products may be more robust and flexible with respect to
how they may be used.

Conclusions
This study illustrates the fundamental difference
between ribosomal and non-ribosomal proteins in bacteria. Genes for ribosomal proteins have a strong tendency to participate in operons and the proteins are
involved in formation of essential and well defined complexes, and this is consistent with a very slow rate of
evolution. Persistent non-ribosomal proteins can be
separated into two classes according to the tendency of
the genes to participate in operons. Those with a strong
tendency for operon participation have proteins with
fewer interaction partners, but seem to participate in
relatively static complexes and possibly linear pathways.
Proteins from genes with a weak tendency for operon
participation, on the other hand, tend to have more
interaction partners, but possibly in more dynamic complexes and convergent pathways. This means that the
proteins that are not regulated through operons actually
are more evolutionary constrained than the corresponding operon-associated proteins and will therefore on
average evolve more slowly.
Methods
BlastP and OrthoMCL

Complete proteomes from bacterial organisms were
downloaded from NCBI ftp-server [80]. All-against-all
analysis between full proteomes was done with BlastP
[81] on a computer cluster with a total memory of 304
GB. Maximal number of Blast hits was set to 1000,
unless the E-score from Blast exceeded a threshold of
10.

Bratlie et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:71
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/71

Results from BlastP were used as input to a modified
version of OrthoMCL (version 1.4) [24] suitable for analysis on bacteria, and executed with default settings.
OrthoMCL clustering data were loaded into a MySQL
database (version 5.0) for further processing.
Distinction between orthologs and paralogs

Identification of the most likely orthologous gene
amongst duplicates was done by re-analysing Blast
results for clusters with duplicated genes. It was
assumed that true orthologs in general would be more
similar to the other orthologs in the cluster, compared
to the paralogs. This was assessed by comparing the
ranking of gene copies in Blast output files for all nonduplicated genes in the cluster. The procedure is illustrated in [Additional file 1: Supplemental Figure S4]
and described in detail in the supplementary material.
The basic principle is that duplicated genes are
assigned scores according to relative rank in Blast output files for non-duplicated genes from the same
OrthoMCL cluster. The gene copy with lowest total
rank score (i.e. largest tendency to appear first of the
duplicated genes in the Blast output) is considered to
be the most likely ortholog. A clear difference in total
rank score between the first and the second gene copy
shows that this gene copy is clearly more similar to
the orthologs from other organisms in the cluster, and
therefore more likely to be the true ortholog. We
required the score difference to be at least 10% of the
smallest possible rank score Smin [Additional file 1] in
order to make a reliable distinction between the ortholog and its paralogs, but in most cases the difference
was significantly larger. If we do not consider horizontal gene transfer as a likely mechanism for these processes, this gene should be a reasonably good guess at
the most likely ortholog. This seems to be supported
by comparison with the essential genes identified by
Baba et al. [19]. They have listed 11 cases where multiple genes have been found within the same COG class,
indicating paralogs. For 6 cases where the list of
homologs includes both essential and non-essential
genes, according to knockout studies, our method
selected the essential gene in 5 out of 6 cases. This is
a reasonable result if we assume that orthologs are
more likely to be essential than paralogs.
Gene positions

Genes positioned on the lagging strand were reported
with their start position subtracted from genome size.
For linear genomes, the gene range was the difference in
start position between the first and the last gene. For
circular genomes we iterated over all possible neighbouring genes in each genome to find the longest possible distance. The shortest possible gene range was then

Page 20 of 22

found by subtracting the distance from the genome size.
Thus, the shortest possible genomic range covered by
persistent genes was always found.
Data analysis

For data analysis in general, Python 2.4.2 was used to
extract data from the database and the statistical scripting language R 2.5.0 was used for analysis and plotting.
Gene pairs where at least 50% of the genomes had a distance of less than 500 bp were visualised using Cytoscape 2.6.0 [37]. The empirically derived estimator (EDE)
[39] was used for calculating evolutionary distances
from gene order, and the Scoredist corrected BLOSUM62 scores [40] were used for calculating evolutionary distances from protein sequences. ClustalW-MPI
(version 0.13) [82] was used for multiple sequence alignment based on the 213 protein sequences, and these
alignments were used for building a tree using the
neighbour joining algorithm. The tree was bootstrapped
1000 times. The phylogram was plotted with the ape
package developed for R [83].
Operon predictions were fetched from Janga et al.
[11]. Fused and mixed clusters were excluded giving a
data set of 204 orthologs across 113 organisms. We
counted how often singletons and duplicates occurred
in operons or not, and used the Fisher’s exact test to
check for significance.
Genes were further classified into strong and weak
operon genes. If a gene was predicted to be in an
operon in more than 80% of the organisms, the gene
was classified as a strong operon gene. All other genes
were classified as weak operon genes. Ribosomal proteins constituted a group by themselves.
Protein-protein interactions from the Molecular
Interaction (MINT) database [43] were downloaded
and 4852 interactions including genes from our list
where extracted. Type of interactions across strong
operon genes, weak operon genes and ribosomal genes
were analysed and evaluated for significance by bootstrap analysis with 10,000 permutations on
interactions.
Pathway data was downloaded from the KEGG database [44]. Data was organised in a list such that all possible gene pairs sharing the same pathway made an
input to the list. Classification of strong operon, weak
operon and ribosomal genes regarding pathway preference were analysed and bootstrapped for significance
with 10,000 permutations.
Statistical overrepresentation of terms was analysed
with DAVID [34,35], using p-values after Benjamini and
Hochberg correction [84] for multiple hypothesis testing. The E. coli genome as represented in DAVID was
used as reference for overrepresentation. DAVID computes overrepresentation for a large number of different

Bratlie et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:71
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/71

terms. However, here we focussed on gene ontology
(GO) [85] as a relatively unbiased term set.
Additional file 1: Supplemental Tables S1 - S7 and Supplemental
Figures S1 - S4.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-1171-S1.PDF ]

Acknowledgements
The project has been supported by The National Programme for Research in
Functional Genomics in Norway (FUGE) in The Research Council of Norway.
FD has also been supported by The Svanhild and Arne Must Fund for
Medical Research. We are grateful to Tarjei S. Hveem and Pål Sætrom for
fruitful discussions and Feng Chen for helping us with the OrthoMCL
software.
Authors’ contributions
The project was initiated by FD. Data collection and analysis was done by
MSB and JJ. MSB drafted the initial manuscript, and all authors contributed
to the final version. All authors have read and approved the final
manuscript.
Received: 24 June 2009
Accepted: 28 January 2010 Published: 28 January 2010
References
1. Rocha EP: The organization of the bacterial genome. Annu Rev Genet
2008, 42:211-233.
2. Price MN, Arkin AP, Alm EJ: The life-cycle of operons. PLoS Genet 2006,
2(6):e96.
3. Jacob F, Monod J: Genetic regulatory mechanisms in the synthesis of
proteins. J Mol Biol 1961, 3:318-356.
4. Lawrence JG: Gene organization: selection, selfishness, and serendipity.
Annu Rev Microbiol 2003, 57:419-440.
5. Lawrence JG, Roth JR: Selfish operons: horizontal transfer may drive the
evolution of gene clusters. Genetics 1996, 143(4):1843-1860.
6. Price MN, Huang KH, Arkin AP, Alm EJ: Operon formation is driven by coregulation and not by horizontal gene transfer. Genome Res 2005,
15(6):809-819.
7. Swain PS: Efficient attenuation of stochasticity in gene expression
through post-transcriptional control. J Mol Biol 2004, 344(4):965-976.
8. Pal C, Hurst LD: Evidence against the selfish operon theory. Trends Genet
2004, 20(6):232-234.
9. Brouwer RW, Kuipers OP, van Hijum SA: The relative value of operon
predictions. Brief Bioinform 2008, 9(5):367-375.
10. Rogozin IB, Makarova KS, Wolf YI, Koonin EV: Computational approaches
for the analysis of gene neighbourhoods in prokaryotic genomes. Brief
Bioinform 2004, 5(2):131-149.
11. Janga SC, Lamboy WF, Huerta AM, Moreno-Hagelsieb G: The distinctive
signatures of promoter regions and operon junctions across
prokaryotes. Nucleic Acids Res 2006, 34(14):3980-3987.
12. Charlebois RL, Doolittle WF: Computing prokaryotic gene ubiquity:
rescuing the core from extinction. Genome Res 2004, 14(12):2469-2477.
13. Gil R, Silva FJ, Pereto J, Moya A: Determination of the core of a minimal
bacterial gene set. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 2004, 68(3):518-537.
14. Glass JI, Assad-Garcia N, Alperovich N, Yooseph S, Lewis MR, Maruf M,
Hutchison CA, Smith HO, Venter JC: Essential genes of a minimal
bacterium. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006, 103(2):425-430.
15. Koonin EV: Comparative genomics, minimal gene-sets and the last
universal common ancestor. Nat Rev Microbiol 2003, 1(2):127-136.
16. Koonin EV: Orthologs, paralogs, and evolutionary genomics. Annu Rev
Genet 2005, 39:309-338.
17. Jordan IK, Wolf YI, Koonin EV: Duplicated genes evolve slower than
singletons despite the initial rate increase. BMC Evol Biol 2004, 4:22.
18. Davis JC, Petrov DA: Preferential duplication of conserved proteins in
eukaryotic genomes. PLoS Biol 2004, 2(3):E55.

Page 21 of 22

19. Baba T, Ara T, Hasegawa M, Takai Y, Okumura Y, Baba M, Datsenko KA,
Tomita M, Wanner BL, Mori H: Construction of Escherichia coli K-12 inframe, single-gene knockout mutants: the Keio collection. Mol Syst Biol
2006, 2:2006 0008.
20. Mushegian AR, Koonin EV: A minimal gene set for cellular life derived by
comparison of complete bacterial genomes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1996,
93(19):10268-10273.
21. Tatusov RL, Koonin EV, Lipman DJ: A genomic perspective on protein
families. Science 1997, 278(5338):631-637.
22. Enright AJ, Van Dongen S, Ouzounis CA: An efficient algorithm for largescale detection of protein families. Nucleic Acids Res 2002, 30(7):1575-1584.
23. Remm M, Storm CE, Sonnhammer EL: Automatic clustering of orthologs
and in-paralogs from pairwise species comparisons. J Mol Biol 2001,
314(5):1041-1052.
24. Li L, Stoeckert CJ Jr, Roos DS: OrthoMCL: identification of ortholog groups
for eukaryotic genomes. Genome Res 2003, 13(9):2178-2189.
25. The database of Cluster of Orthologous Groups of proteins. http://www.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/COG/.
26. Chen F, Mackey AJ, Vermunt JK, Roos DS: Assessing performance of
orthology detection strategies applied to eukaryotic genomes. PLoS ONE
2007, 2(4):e383.
27. Alberts B, Johnson A, Lewis J, Raff M, Roberts K, Walter P: Molecular
Biology of the Cell. New York and London: Garland Science, Fourth 2002.
28. Gustafson AM, Snitkin ES, Parker SC, DeLisi C, Kasif S: Towards the
identification of essential genes using targeted genome sequencing and
comparative analysis. BMC Genomics 2006, 7:265.
29. Pal C, Papp B, Hurst LD: Highly expressed genes in yeast evolve slowly.
Genetics 2001, 158(2):927-931.
30. TIGR. http://www.tigr.org/.
31. NCBI. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/.
32. Ueda K, Yamashita A, Ishikawa J, Shimada M, Watsuji TO, Morimura K,
Ikeda H, Hattori M, Beppu T: Genome sequence of Symbiobacterium
thermophilum, an uncultivable bacterium that depends on microbial
commensalism. Nucleic Acids Res 2004, 32(16):4937-4944.
33. COGnitor. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/COG/old/xognitor.html.
34. Huang da W, Sherman BT, Lempicki RA: Systematic and integrative
analysis of large gene lists using DAVID bioinformatics resources. Nat
Protoc 2009, 4(1):44-57.
35. Dennis G Jr, Sherman BT, Hosack DA, Yang J, Gao W, Lane HC, Lempicki RA:
DAVID: Database for Annotation, Visualization, and Integrated Discovery.
Genome Biol 2003, 4(5):P3.
36. Stothard P, Wishart DS: Circular genome visualization and exploration
using CGView. Bioinformatics 2005, 21(4):537-539.
37. Shannon P, Markiel A, Ozier O, Baliga NS, Wang JT, Ramage D, Amin N,
Schwikowski B, Ideker T: Cytoscape: a software environment for
integrated models of biomolecular interaction networks. Genome Res
2003, 13(11):2498-2504.
38. Lecompte O, Ripp R, Thierry JC, Moras D, Poch O: Comparative analysis of
ribosomal proteins in complete genomes: an example of reductive
evolution at the domain scale. Nucleic Acids Res 2002, 30(24):5382-5390.
39. Moret BM, Wang LS, Warnow T, Wyman SK: New approaches for
reconstructing phylogenies from gene order data. Bioinformatics 2001,
17(Suppl 1):S165-173.
40. Sonnhammer EL, Hollich V: Scoredist: a simple and robust protein
sequence distance estimator. BMC Bioinformatics 2005, 6:108.
41. Fraser HB, Hirsh AE, Steinmetz LM, Scharfe C, Feldman MW: Evolutionary
rate in the protein interaction network. Science 2002, 296(5568):750-752.
42. Bloom JD, Adami C: Apparent dependence of protein evolutionary rate
on number of interactions is linked to biases in protein-protein
interactions data sets. BMC Evol Biol 2003, 3:21.
43. Chatr-aryamontri A, Ceol A, Palazzi LM, Nardelli G, Schneider MV,
Castagnoli L, Cesareni G: MINT: the Molecular INTeraction database.
Nucleic Acids Res 2007, , 35 Database: D572-574.
44. Ogata H, Goto S, Sato K, Fujibuchi W, Bono H, Kanehisa M: KEGG: Kyoto
Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes. Nucleic Acids Res 1999, 27(1):29-34.
45. Eberl M, Hintz M, Jamba Z, Beck E, Jomaa H, Christiansen G: Mycoplasma
penetrans is capable of activating V gamma 9/V delta 2 T cells while
other human pathogenic mycoplasmas fail to do so. Infect Immun 2004,
72(8):4881-4883.
46. Koonin EV, Mushegian AR, Bork P: Non-orthologous gene displacement.
Trends Genet 1996, 12(9):334-336.

Bratlie et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:71
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/71

47. Kummerfeld SK, Teichmann SA: Relative rates of gene fusion and fission
in multi-domain proteins. Trends Genet 2005, 21(1):25-30.
48. Coenye T, Vandamme P: Organisation of the S10, spc and alpha
ribosomal protein gene clusters in prokaryotic genomes. FEMS Microbiol
Lett 2005, 242(1):117-126.
49. Makarova KS, Ponomarev VA, Koonin EV: Two C or not two C: recurrent
disruption of Zn-ribbons, gene duplication, lineage-specific gene loss,
and horizontal gene transfer in evolution of bacterial ribosomal
proteins. Genome Biol 2001, 2(9):RESEARCH 0033.
50. Lin JJ, Sancar A: A new mechanism for repairing oxidative damage to
DNA: (A)BC excinuclease removes AP sites and thymine glycols from
DNA. Biochemistry 1989, 28(20):7979-7984.
51. Kang J, Blaser MJ: UvrD helicase suppresses recombination and DNA
damage-induced deletions. J Bacteriol 2006, 188(15):5450-5459.
52. Vorderwulbecke S, Kramer G, Merz F, Kurz TA, Rauch T, Zachmann-Brand B,
Bukau B, Deuerling E: Low temperature or GroEL/ES overproduction
permits growth of Escherichia coli cells lacking trigger factor and DnaK.
FEBS Lett 2004, 559(1-3):181-187.
53. Shurvinton CE, Lloyd RG: Damage to DNA induces expression of the ruv
gene of Escherichia coli. Mol Gen Genet 1982, 185(2):352-355.
54. Bubunenko M, Baker T, Court DL: Essentiality of ribosomal and
transcription antitermination proteins analyzed by systematic gene
replacement in Escherichia coli. J Bacteriol 2007, 189(7):2844-2853.
55. Bentley SD, Chater KF, Cerdeno-Tarraga AM, Challis GL, Thomson NR,
James KD, Harris DE, Quail MA, Kieser H, Harper D, et al: Complete genome
sequence of the model actinomycete Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2).
Nature 2002, 417(6885):141-147.
56. Francis F, Ramirez-Arcos S, Salimnia H, Victor C, Dillon JR: Organization and
transcription of the division cell wall (dcw) cluster in Neisseria
gonorrhoeae. Gene 2000, 251(2):141-151.
57. Teixeira DC, Eveillard S, Sirand-Pugnet P, Wulff A, Saillard C, Ayres AJ,
Bove JM: The tufB-secE-nusG-rplKAJL-rpoB gene cluster of the
liberibacters: sequence comparisons, phylogeny and speciation. Int J Syst
Evol Microbiol 2008, 58(Pt 6):1414-1421.
58. Persson BC, Bylund GO, Berg DE, Wikstrom PM: Functional analysis of the
ffh-trmD region of the Escherichia coli chromosome by using reverse
genetics. J Bacteriol 1995, 177(19):5554-5560.
59. Janga SC, Moreno-Hagelsieb G: Conservation of adjacency as evidence of
paralogous operons. Nucleic Acids Res 2004, 32(18):5392-5397.
60. Granston AE, Thompson DL, Friedman DI: Identification of a second
promoter for the metY-nusA-infB operon of Escherichia coli. J Bacteriol
1990, 172(5):2336-2342.
61. Bylund GO, Lovgren JM, Wikstrom PM: Characterization of mutations in
the metY-nusA-infB operon that suppress the slow growth of a
DeltarimM mutant. J Bacteriol 2001, 183(20):6095-6106.
62. Zhang Y, Cronan JE Jr: Transcriptional analysis of essential genes of the
Escherichia coli fatty acid biosynthesis gene cluster by functional
replacement with the analogous Salmonella typhimurium gene cluster. J
Bacteriol 1998, 180(13):3295-3303.
63. de Daruvar A, Collado-Vides J, Valencia A: Analysis of the cellular functions
of Escherichia coli operons and their conservation in Bacillus subtilis. J
Mol Evol 2002, 55(2):211-221.
64. Fang G, Rocha EP, Danchin A: Persistence drives gene clustering in
bacterial genomes. BMC Genomics 2008, 9:4.
65. Watanabe H, Mori H, Itoh T, Gojobori T: Genome plasticity as a paradigm
of eubacteria evolution. J Mol Evol 1997, 44(Suppl 1):S57-64.
66. Tamames J: Evolution of gene order conservation in prokaryotes. Genome
Biol 2001, 2(6):RESEARCH0020.
67. Dandekar T, Snel B, Huynen M, Bork P: Conservation of gene order: a
fingerprint of proteins that physically interact. Trends Biochem Sci 1998,
23(9):324-328.
68. Choonee N, Even S, Zig L, Putzer H: Ribosomal protein L20 controls
expression of the Bacillus subtilis infC operon via a transcription
attenuation mechanism. Nucleic Acids Res 2007, 35(5):1578-1588.
69. Jiang M, Sullivan SM, Wout PK, Maddock JR: G-protein control of the
ribosome-associated stress response protein SpoT. J Bacteriol 2007,
189(17):6140-6147.
70. Van Houten B, Croteau DL, DellaVecchia MJ, Wang H, Kisker C: ’Close-fitting
sleeves’: DNA damage recognition by the UvrABC nuclease system.
Mutat Res 2005, 577(1-2):92-117.

Page 22 of 22

71. Kadziola A, Jepsen CH, Johansson E, McGuire J, Larsen S, Hove-Jensen B:
Novel class III phosphoribosyl diphosphate synthase: structure and
properties of the tetrameric, phosphate-activated, non-allosterically
inhibited enzyme from Methanocaldococcus jannaschii. J Mol Biol 2005,
354(4):815-828.
72. Bralley P, Jones GH: Organization and expression of the polynucleotide
phosphorylase gene (pnp) of Streptomyces: Processing of pnp
transcripts in Streptomyces antibioticus. J Bacteriol 2004,
186(10):3160-3172.
73. Messer W: The bacterial replication initiator DnaA. DnaA and oriC, the
bacterial mode to initiate DNA replication. FEMS Microbiol Rev 2002,
26(4):355-374.
74. Zalenskaya K, Lee J, Gujuluva CN, Shin YK, Slutsky M, Goldfarb A:
Recombinant RNA polymerase: inducible overexpression, purification
and assembly of Escherichia coli rpo gene products. Gene 1990,
89(1):7-12.
75. Garcia GA, Koch KA, Chong S: tRNA-guanine transglycosylase from
Escherichia coli. Overexpression, purification and quaternary structure. J
Mol Biol 1993, 231(2):489-497.
76. Taylor WE, Straus DB, Grossman AD, Burton ZF, Gross CA, Burgess RR:
Transcription from a heat-inducible promoter causes heat shock
regulation of the sigma subunit of E. coli RNA polymerase. Cell 1984,
38(2):371-381.
77. Chang SY, McGary EC, Chang S: Methionine aminopeptidase gene of
Escherichia coli is essential for cell growth. J Bacteriol 1989,
171(7):4071-4072.
78. Moran NA, McLaughlin HJ, Sorek R: The dynamics and time scale of
ongoing genomic erosion in symbiotic bacteria. Science 2009,
323(5912):379-382.
79. Gong X, Fan S, Bilderbeck A, Li M, Pang H, Tao S: Comparative analysis of
essential genes and nonessential genes in Escherichia coli K12. Mol
Genet Genomics 2008, 279(1):87-94.
80. NCBI ftp-server. ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/genomes/Bacteria/.
81. Altschul SF, Madden TL, Schaffer AA, Zhang J, Zhang Z, Miller W,
Lipman DJ: Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new generation of protein
database search programs. Nucleic Acids Res 1997, 25(17):3389-3402.
82. Li KB: ClustalW-MPI: ClustalW analysis using distributed and parallel
computing. Bioinformatics 2003, 19(12):1585-1586.
83. Paradis E, Claude J, Strimmer K: APE: Analyses of Phylogenetics and
Evolution in R language. Bioinformatics 2004, 20(2):289-290.
84. Benjamini Y, Hochberg Y: Controlling the false discovery rate: a practical
and powerful approach to multiple testing. J R Statist Soc B 1995,
57(1):289-300.
85. Ashburner M, Ball CA, Blake JA, Botstein D, Butler H, Cherry JM, Davis AP,
Dolinski K, Dwight SS, Eppig JT, et al: Gene ontology: tool for the
unification of biology. The Gene Ontology Consortium. Nat Genet 2000,
25(1):25-29.
doi:10.1186/1471-2164-11-71
Cite this article as: Bratlie et al.: Relationship between operon
preference and functional properties of persistent genes in bacterial
genomes. BMC Genomics 2010 11:71.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
