<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>The diversity and evolution of cell cycle regulation in alpha-proteobacteria: a comparative genomic analysis</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4:52. doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-4-52"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Matteo Brilli, Marco Fondi, Renato Fani, Alessio Mengoni, Lorenzo Ferri, Marco Bazzicalupo, Emanuele G Biondi"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 8.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 7.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Brilli et al. BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4:52
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/4/52

Open Access

RESEARCH ARTICLE

The diversity and evolution of cell cycle regulation
in alpha-proteobacteria: a comparative genomic
analysis
Research article

Matteo Brilli1,2, Marco Fondi1, Renato Fani1, Alessio Mengoni1, Lorenzo Ferri1, Marco Bazzicalupo1 and
Emanuele G Biondi*1

Abstract
Background: In the bacterium Caulobacter crescentus, CtrA coordinates DNA replication, cell division, and polar
morphogenesis and is considered the cell cycle master regulator. CtrA activity varies during cell cycle progression and
is modulated by phosphorylation, proteolysis and transcriptional control. In a phosphorylated state, CtrA binds specific
DNA sequences, regulates the expression of genes involved in cell cycle progression and silences the origin of
replication. Although the circuitry regulating CtrA is known in molecular detail in Caulobacter, its conservation and
functionality in the other alpha-proteobacteria are still poorly understood.
Results: Orthologs of Caulobacter factors involved in the regulation of CtrA were systematically scanned in genomes of
alpha-proteobacteria. In particular, orthologous genes of the divL-cckA-chpT-ctrA phosphorelay, the divJ-pleC-divK twocomponent system, the cpdR-rcdA-clpPX proteolysis system, the methyltransferase ccrM and transcriptional regulators
dnaA and gcrA were identified in representative genomes of alpha-proteobacteria. CtrA, DnaA and GcrA binding sites
and CcrM putative methylation sites were predicted in promoter regions of all these factors and functions controlled
by CtrA in all alphas were predicted.
Conclusions: The regulatory cell cycle architecture was identified in all representative alpha-proteobacteria, revealing
a high diversification of circuits but also a conservation of logical features. An evolutionary model was proposed where
ancient alphas already possessed all modules found in Caulobacter arranged in a variety of connections. Two schemes
appeared to evolve: a complex circuit in Caulobacterales and Rhizobiales and a simpler one found in Rhodobacterales.
Background
Living cells continuously receive and process signals
coming from their environment, and by integrating this
information into their own internal state, are able to react
with appropriate responses which coordinate each function in the cell in order to divide and produce progeny.
Regulation of cell cycle progression needs to be a robust
but versatile process that integrates different exogenous
and endogenous signals and that guarantees fidelity and
controlled progression throughout the different phases.
Bacteria have evolved different regulation systems for
cell cycle coordination, probably due to different ecological and evolutionary constraints [1,2]. Alpha-proteobac* Correspondence: emanuele.biondi@unifi.it
1

Department of Evolutionary Biology, University of Florence, via Romana, 17,
Florence, Italy

teria subdivision is a very heterogeneous group of
bacteria and includes symbionts of plants (Rhizobia),
pathogens for animals (Brucella, Rickettsia) and plants
(Agrobacterium), photosynthetic bacteria (Rhodobacter)
and also several genera metabolizing C1-compounds
(Methylobacterium).
Together with this diversity of life styles and ecological
niches, the alpha-proteobacteria subdivision is also one
of the bacterial groups in which cell cycle regulation has
been studied in more detail and one of its members, Caulobacter crescentus, has recently become a model organism in these studies [3-6]. In this organism each cell
division is asymmetric—producing two functionally and
morphologically different cells, the replicating "stalked"
cell type and the vegetative "swarmer" type. After each
initiation of DNA replication, the replication fork is kept

Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
© 2010 Brilli et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons At-

BioMed Central tribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any
medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Brilli et al. BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4:52
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/4/52

blocked so that the Caulobacter cell cycle can follow a
pattern of once-and-only-once replication per division
(G1, S, and G2 phases are temporally distinguished).
Many factors are known to regulate cell cycle progression and most of them are members of the family of twocomponent signal transduction proteins, comprised of
histidine kinases and their response regulator substrates
[6]. Among those proteins CtrA is the master regulator of
the Caulobacter cell cycle, an essential response regulator
whose activity as a transcription factor varies as a function of the cell cycle [7-9]. CtrA controls various functions during cell cycle progression by activating or
repressing gene expression. CtrA also blocks the initiation of DNA replication through binding of the replication origin [7]. Among genes regulated by CtrA we can
find those involved in cell division (ftsZ, ftsA, ftsQ and
ftsW), the protease encoding gene clpP which is essential
in Caulobacter, the DNA methylase gene ccrM, flagellar
biogenesis genes, stalk biogenesis regulatory genes, pili
biogenesis genes such as pilA, and chemotaxis genes [1015].
CtrA activity and stability varies during the cell cycle.
Oscillation of CtrA levels, peaking at the predivisional
stage before cell division, is achieved by different mechanisms: transcription, proteolysis and phosphorylation
control as discussed in detail below.
DnaA and GcrA, and the DNA methyltransferase
CcrM are involved in controlling ctrA transcription
[11,16]. DnaA is a key element in cell cycle regulation
because it is required for the initiation of DNA replication; it also controls the transcription of about 40 genes
involved in nucleotide biogenesis, cell division, and polar
morphogenesis [17,18], and it activates the transcription
of the gcrA gene [19]. GcrA controls the transcription of
ctrA and genes involved in DNA metabolism and chromosome segregation, including those encoding DNA
gyrase, DNA helicase, DNA primase, and DNA polymerase III [19]. As a consequence of this genetic circuit,
CtrA accumulates out-of-phase with GcrA [19]. The
transcriptional loop of ctrA is closed by CcrM. CtrA activates the transcription of ccrM, which encodes for a DNA
methyltransferase whose abundance is cell cycle dependent. CcrM is able to activate dnaA promoter region
through methylation, closing the positive feedback composed by CtrA, DnaA and GcrA.
A second essential regulatory control on CtrA is carried
out by phosphorylation. In fact, CtrA must be phosphorylated to bind DNA and its phosphorylation depends on
cell cycle progression. An essential phosphorelay, composed of the hybrid histidine kinase CckA and the histidine phosphotransferase ChpT, is responsible for CtrA
phosphorylation [20,21].
DivK, which is a response regulator, plays an essential
role as a positive regulator of cell cycle progression

Page 2 of 16

because when phosphorylated, it indirectly inactivates
CtrA and thus promotes DNA replication. Two histidine
kinases are known to interact with DivK: PleC and DivJ
[22-25]. Bacterial histidine kinases can have alternatively
both kinase and phosphatase activities and these opposite
activities are modulated by conformational changes of
the protein [26]. A null Caulobacter pleC mutant produces almost symmetric cells at the division and displays
abnormal polar development. The DivJ histidine kinase
plays a role in controlling the length and location of the
stalk and cell division. PleC and DivJ are considered the
principal phosphatase and kinase, respectively, of DivK
and they are in opposite locations during cell cycle progression [27,28]. DivJ activity is also positively controlled
by the TacA/SpmX pathway, which is transcriptionally
activated by CtrA [10,29].
ChpT also transfers the phosphate to a second response
regulator named CpdR, which, together with RcdA, is a
factor involved in CtrA proteolysis mediated by ClpPClpX protease [30-32]. CtrA is degraded at the stalked
pole at the G1/S transition when the origin of replication
needs to be cleared and also in the stalked compartment,
where initiation of DNA replication occurs immediately
after cell division [33,34].
All these regulations are schematized in Figure 1 where
we illustrate the multilevel regulation of the Caulobacter
cell cycle. Two main oscillators are working during cell
cycle progression: (i) the transcriptional and epigenetic
circuit (CtrA-DnaA-GcrA-CcrM); (ii) the phosphorylation/proteolysis and transcription circuit (CckA-CtrADivK). The latter also involves coordination of CtrA proteolysis and cell division through regulation of DivK
activity.
Several of these regulatory mechanisms are at least partially redundant, and it has been demonstrated that only
phosphorylation of CtrA is indispensable during cell
cycle progression; in fact, cell cycle regulated transcription of ctrA can be substituted by constitutive transcription [20] and proteolysis can also be removed.
It has recently been demonstrated that asymmetric
division also takes place in Agrobacterium tumefaciens,
Sinorhizobium meliloti and Brucella abortus [35], indicating that at least some of the features governing cell cycle
progression in Caulobacter might also be present in other
species. For example, in Rhodobacter capsulatus, CtrA
and CckA are not essential but are required for the
expression of the GTA, a system for genetic exchanges
[36,37]. CtrA in Brucella controls cellular events similar
to those controlled by CtrA in Caulobacter, but through a
direct effect on different targets [38]. Moreover CtrA
from Caulobacter is able to bind the B. abortus ccrM promoter in vitro [39] and CtrA from B. abortus has been
shown to bind promoters of ccrM, pleC, rpoD, ftsE and
minC but not divK, ftsZ or the origin of replication, that

Brilli et al. BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4:52
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/4/52

Page 3 of 16

Figure 1 Cell cycle regulation in Caulobacter. Scheme of cell cycle regulation in Caulobacter with all factors analyzed in this paper. See the "introduction" for details.

are known CtrA targets in Caulobacter [38]. In
Silicibacter pomeroy three known mutants affect the
motility, two of which are cckA, ctrA [40].
ccrM is essential and cell cycle regulated in A. tumefaciens [41], as observed in B. abortus, where ccrM is also
essential and its overexpression impairs proper intracellular replication in murine macrophages [39], revealing a
link between cell cycle and pathogenetic activity.
We hereby undertook a comparative and integrative
analysis of factors controlling cell cycle regulation, and
the regulatory connections existing between them, looking for orthologous genes of factors that are involved in
controlling CtrA, the master regulator, in C. crescentus.
We also analyzed CtrA-regulated functions in 37 representative genomes of alphas. At the same time, binding
sites of DnaA, GcrA and the presence of putative methylation sites of CcrM were also suggested through bioinformatic analysis. All this information was used to

reconstruct the architecture of CtrA regulation throughout the phylogenetic tree of alpha-proteobacteria to
reveal evolutionary trends and insights into this complex
regulation.

Results
Evolutionary scheme of alpha-proteobacteria

To construct a robust phylogeny of alpha-proteobacteria,
a dataset of eight universal proteins from the Ribosomal
Database Project was downloaded. Proteins were aligned
separately and then the alignments were concatenated,
resulting in an alignment of 5056 amino acids that has
been used to construct a Neighbor-Joining tree (see
Methods) (Figure 2). A comparison with previous phylogenetic trees of alpha-proteobacteria [42] suggested that
the tree root lies in the branch connecting the Rickettsiales to the other alpha-proteobacteria. Unlike the work of
Gupta and Mok (2007), our tree shows Sphin-

Brilli et al. BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4:52
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/4/52

Page 4 of 16

Figure 2 Orthologous genes in alpha-proteobacteria. Presence (black) or absence (white) of genes (found using bidirectional best blast hit, BBH)
described in Figure 1 and involved in cell cycle regulation in the alpha-proteobacterial genomes. Proteins are indicated in the uppermost row and
they are ordered on the basis of their co-occurrence patterns (see Material and Methods). We show here a reduced dataset comprising one species
for each considered genus, for a total of 37 out of 65 alpha-proteobacteria analyzed (the complete results are listed in Table S2, Additional file 4). Organisms are ordered on the basis of their phylogenetic relationships as assessed by using a 5000-residue long concatamer of universal proteins [65],
the Neighbor-Joining method with a Dayhoff evolutionary model and 100 bootstrap replicates. A tree representation where nodes with a statistical
support of less than 75% have been collapsed (Figure 2, left) was chosen; Dark gray cells indicate the presence of a BBH with respect to the protein
corresponding to that column. Medium dark gray cells correspond to DivK proteins in those organisms that have an ambiguous position in the phylogenetic tree (Additional file 3, Figure S1); light gray cells correspond to organisms that have PleC but where DivK is absent or in doubt.

gomonadales branching off after the Rickettsiales and followed by the branching of Rhodospirillales, whereas in
other works the latter branched first.
Clusterization of alpha-proteobacteria based on the
orthology of cell cycle genes

By using the bidirectional best hit (BBH) approach (see
Material and Methods section) on 65 available genomes
of alpha-proteobacteria (Additional file 1, Table S1; legends of additional Figures and Tables are in Additional
file 2) we obtained a list of genes that are orthologous to
the 14 genes involved in the Caulobacter cell cycle, and
the results are reported in Figure 2 (see also Additional

file 3, Figure S1 and Additional file 4, Table S2).
ClpX, ClpP and DnaA are present in all alphas studied,
but surprisingly all other proteins analyzed can be absent
in several alphas. Transcription factors, GcrA and CtrA,
the DNA methyl-transferase CcrM and the hybrid histidine kinase CckA are present in most of the alpha-proteobacteria. Other modules, such as those of the DivJPleC-DivK two-component system, are present only in
clusters A and C of alpha-proteobacteria.
Genes with similar phylogenetic profiles (genes cooccurring in different genomes) are often functionally
related [43] justifying the use of our profiles to investigate
possible functional relationships; the dendrogram
obtained describes how similar the profiles of different

Brilli et al. BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4:52
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/4/52

genes are (see Methods and upper part of Figure 2) and it
confirms the functional association between divJ, pleC
and divK (encoding the two component system negatively
regulating CckA activity), and between cpdR and rcdA,
whose products are involved in CtrA proteolysis. Weaker
and possibly new functional associations concern the
gene pair ccrM/gcrA and divL/chpT. In addition, we visually inspected the phylogenetic profiles of these genes
between organisms, identifying seven groups (from A to
G, see Figure 2). This classification, based on orthology,
will be used as a reference in the following sections.
Cluster A includes Rhizobiales, Caulobacterales and
several Rhodobacterales, and is composed of the largest
number of sequenced genomes; this cluster is characterized by a nearly identical conservation of factors found in
Caulobacter. Although similarities are evident in this
cluster, a deeper analysis revealed substantial differences
that will be discussed in the next sections.
Cluster B, including other Rhodobacterales, shows a
substantial difference compared to cluster A; in fact, both
DivJ-PleC-DivK and RcdA-CpdR systems are missing.
Magnetospirillum and Rhodospirillum, which are
closely related, are the two members of cluster C. This
cluster is characterized by the presence of the PleC-DivK
system since DivJ is missing and by an almost complete
loss of the CpdR-RcdA system although Magnetospirillum possesses an rcdA orthologous gene.
Clusters D (Rhodospirillales) and F (part of Rickettsiales), even though they are separated in the tree reported
in Figure 2, share common features: i. members of the
CckA-ChpT-CtrA phosphorelay are missing at different
degrees (Granulibacter and Pelagibacter do not show
even ctrA orthologs); ii. DivJ-PleC-DivK and RcdA-CpdR
systems are missing. Despite these similarities, the two
groups diverge for the presence of CcrM and GcrA in
group D.
Organisms belonging to cluster E (Sphingomonadales)
show conservation of the phosphorelay CckA-ChpTCtrA and also often possess factors required for the temporally and spatially regulated proteolysis of CtrA, such
as CpdR and RcdA. However cluster E is characterized by
degeneration or a complete loss of the DivJ-PleC-DivK
regulation system. DivK or PleC orthologs can be found
in several organisms of this subgroup although their phylogeny often significantly deviate from the phylogenetic
tree of housekeeping genes (Additional file 5, Figure S2).
Finally, group G (remaining Rickettsiales), composed
mainly of pathogens, has few of the factors involved in
Caulobacter cell cycle progression regulation. It is however interesting to find a CckA-CtrA system whereas
ChpT orthologs cannot be found using the BBH
approach.

Page 5 of 16

CtrA regulon in alpha-proteobacteria

The regulatory circuit that controls cell cycle progression
in Caulobacter is also composed of crucial transcriptional
connections, such as CtrA control on divK and the CtrADnaA-GcrA-CcrM circuit. This transcriptional regulation level is discussed in this section and the following. In
particular, results obtained for the prediction of the CtrA
regulon in alpha-proteobacteria are described here.
Laub and collaborators [13,44] were able to identify a
set of genes plausibly constituting the CtrA regulon in
Caulobacter by combining varying evidence: 116 genes
were identified through chromatin immunoprecipitation
using phosphorylated CtrA; 88 genes were identified as
CtrA-dependent for normal expression levels, and 69 as
cell cycle regulated in a transcriptome analysis encompassing one complete cell cycle round. The 54 genes
within the overlap of all three data sets were identified as
members of the CtrA cell cycle regulon, and were used
here to build the position weight matrix (PWM) of CtrA
binding sites. Upstream sequences of these 54 genes were
retrieved and used to find enriched sequence motifs
using AlignAce [45]. The PWM obtained (Additional file
6, Table S3) corresponds to a 16-mer containing the
known CtrA binding motif and was used in a sliding window approach on a non-redundant subset of the genomes
used in this work. An output was obtained where genes in
a given genome have a score based on the presence of
CtrA sequence motifs in the region comprised of 100
nucleotides within the coding sequence to 400 nucleotides upstream of the start codon (see Methods for
details).
Is the CtrA PWM, based on Caulobacter data, valid for
all the alphas analyzed here? One might speculate that if a
ctrA gene taken from an alpha is able to complement
deletion in Caulobacter, the PWM built on Caulobacter
ctrA-controlled genes would also be valid for the bacterium where the complementing ctrA comes from. It has
been shown that the ctrA gene from R. prowazekii, named
czcR, is able to complement the deletion of ctrA in Caulobacter, confirming that the functionality (that is, the
binding site) is conserved between Rickettsia and Caulobacter [46]. Moreover other ctrA genes from species
taxonomically closer to Caulobacter, such as S. meliloti,
are able to complement the ctrA deletion in Caulobacter
(Biondi, unpublished data). Considering the phylogeny of
alphas and positions in the tree of R. prowazekii and S.
meliloti, it is reasonable to consider that the CtrA binding
site might be substantially conserved across the alphas.
Two kinds of results from this analysis are shown here:
(i) CtrA target genes belonging to our starting dataset of
cell cycle related genes (Figure 3) and (ii) enrichment of
COG (clusters of orthologous groups of proteins) categories of genome-wide CtrA regulons for each genome analyzed (Figure 4).

Brilli et al. BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4:52
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/4/52

Page 6 of 16

Figure 3 Transcriptional control of CtrA on cell cycle genes. Transcriptional control of CtrA on factors involved in regulation of cell cycle progression (see also Additional file 7, Table S4). Color bar represents p-values of the Z-score transformation of motif scores (Methods section for details).

In Figure 3 (see also Additional file 7, Table S4) we show
the p-values for the presence of CtrA binding sites
upstream of analyzed genes. CtrA controls the transcription of several genes involved in regulation of cell cycle
progression, including itself in most of the alphas analyzed (86%). Moreover, the number of genes controlled by
CtrA is maximal in cluster A. In this cluster CtrA controls
at least one gene of each of the following systems: DivJDivK-PleC, CpdR-RcdA-ClpPX and GcrA-DnaA-CcrM.
Several genes showed evolutionary conservation of CtrA
control among members of cluster A, such as DivJ, RcdA

and CcrM. The second important result arising from the
analysis shown in Figure 3 was that in Cluster B, where
the DivJ-PleC-DivK system is missing, CtrA controls both
CckA and DivL.
Each genome-wide regulon of CtrA was defined as the
list of genes with a Z-score (see Methods) ≥2 (corresponding to a p-value of ca. 0.023) in an organism. In Figure 4 (see also Additional file 8, Table S5), predicted
regulons of CtrA were analyzed for functional enrichment (percentage of genes in a COG category controlled
by CtrA) in genes belonging to functional categories.

Brilli et al. BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4:52
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/4/52

Page 7 of 16

Figure 4 Functions controlled by CtrA among alpha-proteobacteria. Enrichment of genes controlled by CtrA in COG categories (see also Additional file 8, Table S5). The scale corresponds to the p-value of the functional enrichment calculated as described in the Material and Methods. The pvalue is inversely correlated to the strength of the functional enrichment of each regulon, i.e. a lower p-value indicates stronger enrichment.

Brilli et al. BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4:52
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/4/52

Most enriched categories were Signal transduction mechanisms (enriched in 15 organisms), Cell wall/membrane/
envelope biogenesis (enriched in 10 organisms) and Cell
motility (enriched in 9 organisms), while cell cycle functions were enriched in six species, belonging to cluster A,
including Caulobacter and Neorickettsia sennetsu of cluster F. These results confirmed experimental data on the
functions controlled by CtrA (see Background section) in
Caulobacter suggesting that (i) the analysis of the regulon
is able to capture good candidates of CtrA targets and (ii)
the control of CtrA over these functions is at least partially evolutionarily conserved.
CtrA-DnaA-GcrA-CcrM connections

In Caulobacter, transcriptional regulation of ctrA is based
on a positive feedback loop that includes CtrA itself,
GcrA, DnaA and CcrM.
As reported in Figure S3 (Additional file 9) (see also
Additional file 7, Table S4) the presence of CcrM methylation sites upstream of cell cycle related genes was
assessed (see Methods section). For this analysis we used
the consensus methylation site of CcrM, i.e. GANTC
[47]. As reported elsewhere [39,48], methylation by CcrM
is conserved among alphas and ccrM genes from Caulobacter and S. meliloti which are able to cross-complement deletions, suggesting that the methylation site
might be conserved. In a homogeneous background of
DNA, the expected frequency of this sequence is 4/1024
nucleotides, i.e. two occurrences in the 500 bp long window that was used to define the promoter region for
motif finding. The average number of occurrences found
ranged from 0.4 to 1.5 methylation sites per promoter
(defined as the 500 bp from the first 100 bp of a gene to
400 bp upstream of the translation start site), according
to non-uniform distributions of nucleotides in these
genomes. Although some genes possess more predicted
methylation sites in their promoter region, it is not possible to derive a possible control of methylation in their
expression.
The consensus site of DnaA is very conserved among
bacteria, in fact, DnaA experimental binding sites in E.
coli and B. subtilis differ only by a nucleotide [49,50]
which corresponds to that found in Caulobacter, supporting the conclusion that its binding site is conserved
across alphas. Promoter regions of orthologs in all alphas
were also scanned using the DnaA matrix based on 15
known DnaA motifs in Caulobacter (see Methods section) and results are shown in Figure 5 (see also Additional file 7, Table S4). Again, is the DnaA binding site
conserved across the alpha proteobacteria? Following this
analysis, the promoter sequence of gcrA does not bear a
significant DnaA motif in Caulobacter, while elsewhere
the control of DnaA on the gcrA promoter has been proposed [51]. It is worth noting that a predicted DnaA motif

Page 8 of 16

is present upstream of the gcrA gene from two closely
related species Hyphomonas neptunium and Maricaulis
maris. Moreover, in Caulobacter, the presence of DnaA
binding sites was observed upstream of divJ and cckA,
targets that are not confirmed by previous experimental
analysis. As in the case of GcrA, the absence of conservation of putative binding sites at the taxonomic level was
observed, with the only exception being the suggested
DnaA control on CtrA in several species. This might be
caused by the low specificity of the DnaA and GcrA
matrices used for motif finding, but may also suggest that
in some alpha-proteobacteria the DnaA->GcrA->CtrA
circuit may be simplified by excluding GcrA. The control
of DnaA on CcrM is also interesting because it mainly
concerns those organisms where ccrM lacks CtrA binding
sites. The opposite is also true: ccrM is very often preceded by CtrA binding sites in Rhizobia and it lacks DnaA
motifs. This questions the existence of a DnaA->CcrM>CtrA circuit in Rhizobia and suggests an at least partial
decoupling of CtrA activity (modulated through control
of the divJ-pleC-divK system, which acts on the phosphorelay) from DNA replication triggered by DnaA. Otherwise, the absence of CtrA binding sites upstream of DnaA
might suggest the existence of other not yet identified
regulators, which may connect CtrA and DnaA in these
organisms.
Although GcrA is considered a DNA binding protein
activating transcription, no experimental evidence has
ever been proposed to demonstrate this behavior [19].
However it is still possible that DNA sequences are associated with the presence of this factor. GcrA putative
binding sites were searched for in promoter regions of
genes encoding factors involved in cell cycle regulation
using a strategy similar to the one followed to predict
CtrA regulons (see Methods section). In C. crescentus, as
reported in Figure 5 (see also Additional file 7, Table S4),
the existence of a putative GcrA binding motif (Additional file 10, Figure S4) upstream of ctrA and also the
presence of such motifs upstream of divJ was confirmed.
Concerning the other species, patterns of occurrence did
not respect phylogenetic relationships. The only gene for
which most of the organisms seem to possess a GcrA
binding site is clpX.
Verification of binding site prediction

The prediction of CtrA and DnaA binding sites across
alphas is based on Caulobacter data and we have already
discussed how, from previous studies, it is possible to
hypothesize that CtrA and DnaA (and also CcrM) binding sites are conserved across the alpha-proteobacteria.
However our prediction ability might be accurate only for
bacteria closely related to Caulobacter, but, going farther,
this confidence could decrease. To evaluate this bias in
binding site prediction, we counted the number of genes

Brilli et al. BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4:52
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/4/52

Page 9 of 16

Figure 5 Transcriptional control of GcrA and DnaA on cell cycle genes. GcrA and DnaA binding sites on factors involved in cell cycle regulation
among alpha-proteobacteria (see also Additional file 7, Table S4).

in each genome putatively controlled by CtrA and DnaA,
normalized for the genome size. We found (Figure 6A)
that the number of predicted genes is fairly constant and
depends only on the genome size (or number of genes),
suggesting that our prediction confidence is not biased by
the phylogenetic distance. This result also explains the
success of the complementations of ctrA deletion in Caulobacter by orthologs from other alpha proteobacteria, as
discussed in the previous sections [46,52]. We also evaluated whether the presence of CtrA and DnaA predicted
genes depended on the presence of CtrA and DnaA
themselves in the genomes or if it was an artifact of bioinformatic analysis. We therefore plotted the fraction of
genes controlled by CtrA and DnaA at small p-values in
three alpha proteobacteria possessing CtrA and DnaA
and in E. coli and B. subtilis, which possess only DnaA
(Figure 6B). From this analysis it is evident that, at lower
p-values, only organisms with CtrA keep a consistent
fraction of genes controlled by CtrA, while for DnaA,
which is present and active in all, every organism maintains a similar fraction of putatively controlled genes-even at lower p-values.
CtrA binding site consensus has been previously tested
experimentally in R. prowazekii, S. meliloti and B. abor-

tus, besides Caulobacter [38,46,52]. Here, we compared
the experimental consensus sequences with our bioinformatic PWM (Figure 6C), and our prediction coincides
with experimentally identified sequences. Our PMW corresponds also with a CtrA PMW previously found [53].
The DnaA binding site has been studied in very diverse
bacteria such as Gram-negative Escherichia coli and
Gram-positive Bacillus subtilis [49,50]. The DnaA binding site in these two species differs because of one nucleotide, suggesting that the binding site should also be very
conserved in alpha proteobacteria. We compared the predicted PWM for DnaA based on C. crescentus with experimental DnaA binding sites in E. coli, B. subtilis and S.
meliloti (Figure 6C) [49,50,54]. Our prediction, based on
nucleotide sequences that bind DnaA in Caulobacter,
corresponds to binding sites experimentally found in
other bacteria.
This verification was possible only for DnaA and CtrA,
while GcrA has been studied only in C. crescentus and
experimental data are available only in this organism. It
has not been clarified whether GcrA binds DNA directly
or through an unknown factor X [19]. Therefore, since
the knowledge on GcrA is still preliminary and experimental work still needs to be done, we limited the experi-

Brilli et al. BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4:52
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/4/52

Page 10 of 16

Figure 6 Verification of CtrA and DnaA binding site prediction. A. Number of genes putatively controlled by CtrA (dark gray) and DnaA (light gray)
across alpha-proteobacteria. B. Distribution of p-values assigned to each gene with respect to the CtrA binding and DnaA binding for three alphaproteobacteria (CCRE = C. crescentus, BABO = B. abortus, SMELI = S. meliloti) and species, possessing only DnaA (ECOLI = E. coli, BSUB = B. subtilis). The
distributions of CCRE, BABO, SMELI for CtrA start to diverge from the 'background' distributions represented by organisms not possessing CtrA at a p
< 0.05, while for DnaA this distribution is uniform among all five organisms. C. Consensus sequences of DnaA and CtrA in different bacteria found
experimentally elsewhere (see references near the sequences) compared with our PMWs. M = T or G, W = A or T.

Brilli et al. BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4:52
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/4/52

mental validation to CtrA and DnaA, for which data are
available. It should be noted, however, that both DnaA
and CtrA experimental verifications revealed that our
method is accurate and reliable.
Reconstruction of regulatory circuits

Based on data of Figures 2, 3, and 5, we reconstructed the
architecture of the seven clusters (A to G) found in the
BBH analysis; as discussed below, only four clusters
revealed a defined architecture as illustrated in Figure 7.
Models of CtrA regulation are shown in the clusters
(clusters A, B, C and E) where interactions between factors were found. This modeling is essential in order to
underline differences and conservation of several features
of cell cycle regulation in alpha proteobacteria.
Cluster A (Caulobacterales, Rhizobiales and several
Rhodobacterales) contains the larger number of genomes
analyzed here and the organization of cell cycle genes
resembles that observed in Caulobacter (see bottom part
of Figure 7 for details), i.e. it includes the phosphorelay
CckA-ChpT-CtrA/CpdR and also the proteolysis machinery composed by the ubiquitous ClpPX protease, CpdR
and RcdA, which is however absent in Xanthobacter. The
DivJ-PleC-DivK system is conserved and corresponding
genes are controlled by CtrA in all members of the cluster. CcrM also controls CtrA and GcrA.
Rhizobiales are different from bacteria similar to Caulobacter (B. japonicum, P. lavamentivorans and M. maris)
due to the absence of the CtrA control on GcrA which is
present only in the Caulobacter-like.
In cluster E, the CckA-ChpT-CtrA phosphorelay is
present with the second branch also leading to phosphorylation of CpdR that, together with RcdA, are thought to
be involved in controlling CtrA proteolysis. DivK is
absent in this cluster although a divK-like gene has been
found although it has an anomalous phylogeny (Additional file 3, Figure S1). In most members of cluster B,
CtrA controls its own promoter, other genes involved in
cell division and chromosome partitioning as well as
ccrM.
In cluster B, the CckA-ChpT-CtrA regulon is isolated
from GcrA, CcrM and DnaA while CtrA controls itself as
well as two factors involved in its phosphorylation, CckA
and DivL.
In this group, DivL lacks the kinase domain that is usually present only when DivK is also present (data not
shown, based on SMART database). In fact, DivK is
absent in cluster B together with its kinase/phosphatase.
The fact that CtrA controls its kinase creates theoretically
a feedback.
In cluster C, the CckA-ChpT-CtrA phosphorelay is
present while CpdR is absent. Also CtrA is not connected
with DnaA and CcrM and finally DnaA has binding sites
on ccrM and divL. Connections between DnaA/CcrM
and CtrA seem to be achieved by the PleC-DivK two-

Page 11 of 16

component system. No clear positive or negative transcriptional feedbacks of CtrA on other cell cycle factors
are present.
Cluster D contains the two cases among alphas, Granulibacter and Pelagibacter, where a ctrA ortholog has not
been found. The phosphorelay, even in organisms of cluster E that have CtrA, is degenerated; although cckA is
present, no orthologous gene of chpT has been found.
There is no explanation for the presence of CckA in
organisms with no CtrA. Since histidine phosphotransferases are difficult to annotate [10,20], it is possible that
other phosphotransferases substitute for ChpT in those
organisms containing both CtrA and CckA, as proposed
here for cluster G.

Discussion
The cell cycle 'engine' (controlling DNA replication, cell
division, morphogenesis of polar structures) is an essential machine in every living organism, and a major goal of
molecular cell biologists is to uncover how this engine
works in every organism. We have performed a bioinformatic analysis of cell cycle control genes in the alpha proteobacteria, taking cues from the well-characterized
control system in Caulobacter (see Background section
for details).
The procedure used here is able to detect only loss of
regulatory points with respect to Caulobacter. However,
the knowledge of conservations and variations from the
Caulobacter scheme can be extremely useful for future
studies of the cell cycle network in all alpha-proteobacteria.
Conservation and variability of the CtrA regulatory system

CtrA regulation is thought to play an essential role in
most alpha-proteobacteria cell cycle progression while its
activity varies during each cell cycle in response to several
levels of control in Caulobacter. As illustrated in Figure 7,
many regulators are connected with CtrA, via epigenetic,
transcriptional and post-translational mechanisms in
most of the clusters. The reconstructed architecture
within alpha-proteobacteria of regulatory pathways that
are involved in controlling CtrA activity is however surprisingly variable, suggesting diverse evolutionary pathways in each cluster.
CtrA, even if associated with variable regulatory circuits within alphas, shows conservation of the control of
certain functions (Figure 4) such as cell division, motility
and signal transduction, especially in cluster A where
CtrA is, in fact, the master regulator of cell cycle. The
ability to detect the same functions controlled by CtrA in
different organisms also suggests that the prediction
capability of CtrA-regulated genes is highly reliable.
The C. crescentus regulatory scheme of CtrA in other
members of cluster A shows several variations, especially
in Rhizobiales. For example, the control of CtrA on the

Brilli et al. BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4:52
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/4/52

Page 12 of 16

Figure 7 Regulatory circuits of clusters A, B, C, E. See the "Results" and "Discussion" sections for more details. Interactions via phosphorylation, as
well as proteolysis, were suggested only considering the interaction demonstrated in Caulobacter. Moreover, DivK inhibition on CckA was considered,
as in Biondi (2006), only in Caulobacter [20]. The presence of binding sites of transcription factors CtrA, DnaA and GcrA is shown as a continuous line
if predicted binding sites were present in at least 90% of the gene promoters of a cluster. In contrast, the connection is shown as a dotted line for
binding sites present in ca. 70%. The Caulobacter-like group corresponds to B. japonicum, P. lavamentivorans and M. maris.

response regulator divK, observed in C. crescentus, is
shifted to the gene encoding the DivK kinase (divJ) and/
or the phosphatase (pleC) in most Rhizobiales. This
observation may suggest that feedbacks can be conserved
even when connections are rewired.
Another interesting feature revealed by this study is the
control of CtrA on cckA and divL in several members of

the Rhodobacterales (cluster B), which is coupled to the
absence of the system regulating CckA activity (the DivK/
DivJ/PleC two-component system). Thus, in cluster A
members, CtrA controls the divK-divJ-pleC transcription
and DivK presumably inhibits CckA activation that is
indeed able to activate CtrA through a phosphorylation
cascade, while in cluster B Rhodobacterales our results

Brilli et al. BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4:52
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/4/52

suggest that CtrA acts directly on cckA transcription and
thus it may directly modulate the CckA quantity in the
cytoplasm.
Other regulatory circuits (DivL-DivK and DnaA-GcrA-CtrA)

Several conclusions can be made at the molecular level
from this bioinformatic approach on specific factors such
as DivL-DivK or the DnaA-GcrA-CtrA system. DivL, that
still lacks a precise function, and DivK, have been connected in previous studies since DivL was detected in a
yeast-two hybrid experiment using DivK as bait [55].
Alleles of divL were also able to complement divK defective alleles [24,56]. A further association between DivL
and DivK was found in our study whereby orthologs of
DivL can be found in alpha-proteobacteria either as complete kinases (such as in Caulobacter) or without the
kinase domain (data not shown); this latter form is always
associated with the absence of DivK--suggesting that the
kinase domain of DivL functions together with DivK.
This observation is also consistent with previous studies
that showed that DivL interacts with DivK using the
kinase domain and has two separate functions in Caulobacter [56]. The observation that in several alphas DivL
keeps only the sensor part is also paralleled by previous
studies showing that its kinase activity in Caulobacter is
dispensable [56].
It can be concluded from this study that the DnaAGcrA-CtrA regulatory system in Caulobacter is not conserved throughout alpha-proteobacteria. It is however
true that DnaA controls gcrA in several members of cluster A (surprisingly this control in Caulobacter was not
detected) and that GcrA controls ctrA in few alphas,
including in Caulobacter. This observation might suggest
that this important loop in the regulation of the Caulobacter cell cycle is instead dispensable in other bacteria
of cluster A. This conclusion is also consistent with the
result that regulation of ctrA transcription can be
removed without affecting Caulobacter viability although
robustness of the system might be compromised.
Evolution of alpha-proteobacteria cell cycle

Finally, the reconstruction of the evolution of the regulatory schemes found was undertaken following phylogeny
proposed elsewhere [42,57]. Rickettsiales (clusters F and
G) were excluded from this model due to their massive
genome reduction that has been previously shown to be a
consequence of the evolution of an obligate intracellular
life in eukaryotic cells [58].
The regulation of cell cycle progression in Caulobacter
has evolved in order to respond to a lifestyle in nutrientpoor environments but other alpha-proteobacteria
occupy different ecological niches, suggesting that cell
cycle regulation must respond to different requirements;
from an evolutionary perspective this means that features
found in Caulobacter should not be completely conserved in other alpha-proteobacteria, especially those

Page 13 of 16

experiencing different environments. Conversely, similarities between closer organisms were expected due to
common phylogenetic ancestries.
Gupta and Mok [42] proposed that Rhodospirillales and
Novosphingomonadales (clusters C, D and E) branched
earlier than the other alphas (clusters A and B), and after
Rickettsiales (clusters F and G). Two of those "older" clusters (C and E) show, in fact, a different arrangement of
regulatory factors although none show circularity of the
regulation created by feedbacks. From this primordial situation, when alphas were experimenting different
options, two situations seem to have evolved: a complex
circuit (cluster A) and a minimal organization (cluster B).
In both clusters two interlaced oscillators are present:
besides cluster A where this organization has already
been proposed [20], cluster B, also shows a CtrA autoregulatory circuit and a CtrA-CckA-ChpT-CtrA oscillator. It is also interesting to point out that the minimal circuit of cluster C corresponds to a situation where CtrA is
not essential.

Conclusions
This is the first systematic attempt to translate the information accumulated over the years on cell cycle regulation in the model Caulobacter system into a common
body of knowledge regarding the whole taxonomic group
of alpha-proteobacteria. Results suggest that the scheme
found in Caulobacter may work in closely related bacteria
such as those belonging to Caulobacterales and Rhizobiales while in other alphas this conservation is lost even
though several modules are present. Finally, this analysis
represents an important step for all future cell cycle studies in alpha-proteobacteria, offering many experimental
scenarios designed to confirm or reject the observations
made here.
Methods
Phylogenetic Tree

To construct our reference phylogenetic tree, from the
server of the RDP (ribosomal database project) [59], we
downloaded the E. coli sequences corresponding to universal proteins in prokaryotes: FusA, IleS, LepA, LeuS,
PyrG, RecA, RecG and RplB. Then we blasted these
sequences against alpha-proteobacterial genomes chosen for analysis, retrieving the BBH for each protein in
each genome. Each dataset was aligned using Muscle [60]
and the obtained multi-alignments were then joined
head-to-tail in a single concatamer of 5000 sites. This
alignment was used with the software Mega 4 [61] running the Neighbor-Joining algorithm, 500 bootstrap replicates and the Dayhoff model of evolution.
Ortholog Identification

We used a dataset comprising all completely sequenced
genomes of organisms belonging to the alpha-proteobac-

Brilli et al. BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4:52
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/4/52

teria for ortholog identification (Additional file 1, Table
S1). Orthologous genes were identified with the so-called
bidirectional best hit (BBH) criterion: the relation of gene
x in genome A and gene y in genome B is called bidirectional best hit, when x is the best hit of query y against all
genes in A and vice versa. We used two different datasets
of queries coming from C. crescentus and B. melitensis
and we also performed a phylogenetic analysis of those
proteins found using the BBH analysis; the Caulobacter
dataset is derived from experimental data [13] while that
from B. abortus is derived from both experimental [38]
and bioinformatic analysis performed using Caulobacter
genes. For multi-domain proteins we used separated
domains and discarded highly variable regions from the
analysis. The two sets of BBH sequences orthologous to
Caulobacter and Brucella sequences were then combined
to collect the maximum number of proteins. When C.
crescentus and B.melitensis sequences retrieved two different proteins for the same gene, we collected both of
them and used phylogenetic methods to solve the mismatch; when one of the two queries returned no BBH we
used only the one available. We used a 0.0001 e-value
threshold in the Blast analysis.
Regulons of CtrA, GcrA, DnaA and CcrM methylation sites
characterization

Genes directly regulated by CtrA in alpha-proteobacteria
genomes were identified using the following multilevel
approach:
1) A Position Weight Matrix (PWM) describing CtrA
binding sites in C. crescentus was obtained by using
the AlignAce program [45] on upstream sequences of
54 genes previously identified as being part of the
CtrA regulon [13]. We used such a matrix to scan all
genomes considered in this work (see Additional File
1, Table S1 for all organisms list) with a sliding window approach and a scoring function from Schneider
and collaborators (1986) [62]: Si = (1/L) Σj [2 +
log2(Fij)], where Fij is the frequency of base i at position j of the L-mer. This score, whose maximum for
the best match using a CtrA position weight matrix is
≈1.22, is a measure of the information content of a
potential binding site.
2) We retained only motifs having a score ≥30% of the
maximum score attainable with the given matrix and
located in the range -100 to 400 nucleotides from the
start codon of a gene.
3) Then we applied a Z-score transformation to highlight significant occurrences and take into account
the background DNA implicitly: Zi = (Si - <Si>)/σi,
where Si is calculated using the above formula, and
<Si> is the average score in an organism over all Lmers and σi is the corresponding standard deviation.

Page 14 of 16

For GcrA and DnaA the strategy followed was the
same, except that PWMs were obtained differently. For
GcrA we obtained a PWM describing a motif enriched
upstream of sequences controlled by GcrA as proposed
by others [19]. By using microarray and GcrA deficient
strains, a list of genes whose expression changes significantly when GcrA is mutated was obtained. We used the
48 genes with maximum fold change in that list. The corresponding upstream sequences were retrieved and analyzed with AlignAce [45] and MDscan [63]. In both cases
a high scoring motif (16 bp, see Additional file 10, Figure
S4) present in a high percentage of the input sequences
was obtained, and was used for subsequent scanning of
the genomes of our dataset (Figure 5 and Additional file
7, Table S4).
DnaA recognizes a sequence whose consensus in Caulobacter is [TC] [TCG] [AG]TCCACA as previously
reported [18]. In the same work, 15 DnaA binding sites
were shown and were used to build a position weight
matrix specific for DnaA (Additional file 10, Figure S4).
However AlignAce and MDscan were not able to identify
motifs for DnaA corresponding at least partially to the
proposed consensus using two datasets of genes previously proposed [18].
Both GcrA and DnaA were then analyzed as reported
in points 2 and 3 for CtrA. CcrM methylation targets
were searched using a regular expression modelling the
known target of this methyl-transferase (GANTC) [11].
Functional Enrichment

We took advantage of COG [64] categories to evaluate
the functional enrichment of the genes identified with the
approach described above. Supposing that the regulon
dataset of a genome is composed of N genes, we counted
the number of genes for each category and then repeated
the same count for 10,000 N-sized groups of genes randomly picked from the genome. We obtain a p-value
describing functional enrichment in the original dataset
by counting how many times a COG category is more
represented in the random group and then dividing it by
the total number of repetitions performed.

Additional material
Additional file 1 Table S1. The list of the 65 organisms used in this work.
Additional file 2 Detailed description of additional material. Legends
of additional Tables and Figures.
Additional file 3 Figure S1. Phylogenetic profiling of BBH hits in the 65genome dataset.
Additional file 4 Table S2. Bidirectional Best Hits.
Additional file 5 Figure S2. Phylogenetic trees of cell cycle related proteins.
Additional file 6 Table S3. CtrA, DnaA, GcrA and CcrM binding sites.
Additional file 7 Table S4. Numerical values for Figures 3, 5 and S3.
Additional file 8 Table S5. Numerical values for Figure 4.
Additional file 9 Figure S3. Control of CcrM on cell cycle genes.

Brilli et al. BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4:52
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/4/52

Additional file 10 Figure S4. Sequence logo of the putative GcrA motif.
Abbreviations
PWM: position weight matrix; BBH: bidirectional best hit; COG: clusters of
orthologous groups of proteins; SMART: simple modular architecture research
tool
Authors' contributions
EGB planned the project; MB performed the analysis; MF, RF, AM, LF and MB
helped with the analytical work and the writing process. EGB and MB wrote the
manuscript and created Tables and Figures. All authors read and approved the
final version of the manuscript.
Acknowledgements
We thank Prof. Michael Laub for critical reading of the manuscript. We thank
also Mary C. Forrest for editing. Emanuele G. Biondi is supported by the
"Fondazione Adriano Buzzati-Traverso" and "Ente Cassa di Risparmio di Firenze".
Author Details
1Department of Evolutionary Biology, University of Florence, via Romana, 17,
Florence, Italy and 2Laboratoire de Biométrie et Biologie Evolutive, UMR CNRS
5558, Université Lyon 1, 43, bvd du 11 novembre, Lyon, France
Received: 27 November 2009 Accepted: 28 April 2010
Published: 28 April 2010
© 2010 Brilli et Access from: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/4/52
This is an Openal; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
BMC article is Biology 2010, 4:52
Systems available article distributed under

References
1. Fawcett P, Eichenberger P, Losick R, Youngman P: The transcriptional
profile of early to middle sporulation in Bacillus subtilis. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 2000, 97:8063-8068.
2. Haeusser DP, Levin PA: The great divide: coordinating cell cycle events
during bacterial growth and division. Curr Opin Microbiol 2008,
11:94-99.
3. Bowers LM, Shapland EB, Ryan KR: Who's in charge here? Regulating cell
cycle regulators. Curr Opin Microbiol 2008, 11:547-552.
4. Laub MT, Shapiro L, McAdams HH: Systems biology of Caulobacter.
Annu Rev Genet 2007, 41:429-441.
5. Purcell EB, Boutte CC, Crosson S: Two-component signaling systems and
cell cycle control in Caulobacter crescentus. Adv Exp Med Biol 2008,
631:122-130.
6. Skerker JM, Laub MT: Cell-cycle progression and the generation of
asymmetry in Caulobacter crescentus. Nat Rev Microbiol 2004,
2:325-337.
7. Domian IJ, Quon KC, Shapiro L: Cell type-specific phosphorylation and
proteolysis of a transcriptional regulator controls the G1-to-S transition
in a bacterial cell cycle. Cell 1997, 90:415-424.
8. Quon KC, Marczynski GT, Shapiro L: Cell cycle control by an essential
bacterial two-component signal transduction protein. Cell 1996,
84:83-93.
9. Reisenauer A, Quon K, Shapiro L: The CtrA response regulator mediates
temporal control of gene expression during the Caulobacter cell cycle.
J Bacteriol 1999, 181:2430-2439.
10. Biondi EG, Skerker JM, Arif M, Prasol MS, Perchuk BS, Laub MT: A
phosphorelay system controls stalk biogenesis during cell cycle
progression in Caulobacter crescentus. Mol Microbiol 2006, 59:386-401.
11. Collier J, McAdams HH, Shapiro L: A DNA methylation ratchet governs
progression through a bacterial cell cycle. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2007,
104:17111-17116.
12. Jones SE, Ferguson NL, Alley MR: New members of the ctrA regulon: the
major chemotaxis operon in Caulobacter is CtrA dependent.
Microbiology 2001, 147:949-958.
13. Laub MT, Chen SL, Shapiro L, McAdams HH: Genes directly controlled by
CtrA, a master regulator of the Caulobacter cell cycle. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 2002, 99:4632-4637.
14. Skerker JM, Shapiro L: Identification and cell cycle control of a novel
pilus system in Caulobacter crescentus. EMBO J 2000, 19:3223-3234.
15. Wortinger M, Sackett MJ, Brun YV: CtrA mediates a DNA replication
checkpoint that prevents cell division in Caulobacter crescentus.
EMBO J 2000, 19:4503-4512.

Page 15 of 16

16. Collier J, Murray SR, Shapiro L: DnaA couples DNA replication and the
expression of two cell cycle master regulators. EMBO J 2006,
25:346-356.
17. Gorbatyuk B, Marczynski GT: Regulated degradation of chromosome
replication proteins DnaA and CtrA in Caulobacter crescentus. Mol
Microbiol 2005, 55:1233-1245.
18. Hottes AK, Shapiro L, McAdams HH: DnaA coordinates replication
initiation and cell cycle transcription in Caulobacter crescentus. Mol
Microbiol 2005, 58:1340-1353.
19. Holtzendorff J, Hung D, Brende P, Reisenauer A, Viollier PH, McAdams HH,
Shapiro L: Oscillating global regulators control the genetic circuit
driving a bacterial cell cycle. Science 2004, 304:983-987.
20. Biondi EG, Reisinger SJ, Skerker JM, Arif M, Perchuk BS, Ryan KR, Laub MT:
Regulation of the bacterial cell cycle by an integrated genetic circuit.
Nature 2006, 444:899-904.
21. Jacobs C, Domian IJ, Maddock JR, Shapiro L: Cell cycle-dependent polar
localization of an essential bacterial histidine kinase that controls DNA
replication and cell division. Cell 1999, 97:111-120.
22. Burton GJ, Hecht GB, Newton A: Roles of the histidine protein kinase
pleC in Caulobacter crescentus motility and chemotaxis. J Bacteriol
1997, 179:5849-5853.
23. Ohta N, Lane T, Ninfa EG, Sommer JM, Newton A: A histidine protein
kinase homologue required for regulation of bacterial cell division and
differentiation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1992, 89:10297-10301.
24. Sommer JM, Newton A: Pseudoreversion analysis indicates a direct role
of cell division genes in polar morphogenesis and differentiation in
Caulobacter crescentus. Genetics 1991, 129:623-630.
25. Wu J, Ohta N, Newton A: An essential, multicomponent signal
transduction pathway required for cell cycle regulation in Caulobacter.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1998, 95:1443-1448.
26. Weiss V, Kramer G, Dunnebier T, Flotho A: Mechanism of regulation of
the bifunctional histidine kinase NtrB in Escherichia coli. J Mol Microbiol
Biotechnol 2002, 4:229-233.
27. Jacobs C, Hung D, Shapiro L: Dynamic localization of a cytoplasmic
signal transduction response regulator controls morphogenesis
during the Caulobacter cell cycle. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2001,
98:4095-4100.
28. Wheeler RT, Shapiro L: Differential localization of two histidine kinases
controlling bacterial cell differentiation. Mol Cell 1999, 4:683-694.
29. Radhakrishnan SK, Thanbichler M, Viollier PH: The dynamic interplay
between a cell fate determinant and a lysozyme homolog drives the
asymmetric division cycle of Caulobacter crescentus. Genes Dev 2008,
22:212-225.
30. Iniesta AA, McGrath PT, Reisenauer A, McAdams HH, Shapiro L: A
phospho-signaling pathway controls the localization and activity of a
protease complex critical for bacterial cell cycle progression. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2006, 103:10935-10940.
31. Jenal U, Fuchs T: An essential protease involved in bacterial cell-cycle
control. EMBO J 1998, 17:5658-5669.
32. McGrath PT, Iniesta AA, Ryan KR, Shapiro L, McAdams HH: A dynamically
localized protease complex and a polar specificity factor control a cell
cycle master regulator. Cell 2006, 124:535-547.
33. Ryan KR: Partners in crime: phosphotransfer profiling identifies a
multicomponent phosphorelay. Mol Microbiol 2006, 59:361-363.
34. Ryan KR, Huntwork S, Shapiro L: Recruitment of a cytoplasmic response
regulator to the cell pole is linked to its cell cycle-regulated proteolysis.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2004, 101:7415-7420.
35. Hallez R, Bellefontaine AF, Letesson JJ, De Bolle X: Morphological and
functional asymmetry in alpha-proteobacteria. Trends Microbiol 2004,
12:361-365.
36. Lang AS, Beatty JT: Genetic analysis of a bacterial genetic exchange
element: the gene transfer agent of Rhodobacter capsulatus. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2000, 97:859-864.
37. Lang AS, Beatty JT: A bacterial signal transduction system controls
genetic exchange and motility. J Bacteriol 2002, 184:913-918.
38. Bellefontaine AF, Pierreux CE, Mertens P, Vandenhaute J, Letesson JJ, De
Bolle X: Plasticity of a transcriptional regulation network among alphaproteobacteria is supported by the identification of CtrA targets in
Brucella abortus. Mol Microbiol 2002, 43:945-960.
39. Robertson GT, Reisenauer A, Wright R, Jensen RB, Jensen A, Shapiro L,
Roop RM: The Brucella abortus CcrM DNA methyltransferase is

Brilli et al. BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4:52
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/4/52

40.
41.

42.
43.

44.

45.

46.

47.

48.

49.

50.

51.
52.

53.

54.
55.

56.

57.

58.
59.

60.
61.

62.
63.

essential for viability, and its overexpression attenuates intracellular
replication in murine macrophages. J Bacteriol 2000, 182:3482-3489.
Miller TR, Belas R: Motility is involved in Silicibacter sp. TM1040
interaction with dinoflagellates. Environ Microbiol 2006, 8:1648-1659.
Kahng LS, Shapiro L: The CcrM DNA methyltransferase of
Agrobacterium tumefaciens is essential, and its activity is cell cycle
regulated. J Bacteriol 2001, 183:3065-3075.
Gupta RS, Mok A: Phylogenomics and signature proteins for the alpha
proteobacteria and its main groups. BMC Microbiol 2007, 7:106.
Pellegrini M, Marcotte EM, Thompson MJ, Eisenberg D, Yeates TO:
Assigning protein functions by comparative genome analysis: protein
phylogenetic profiles. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1999, 96:4285-4288.
Laub MT, McAdams HH, Feldblyum T, Fraser CM, Shapiro L: Global
analysis of the genetic network controlling a bacterial cell cycle.
Science 2000, 290:2144-2148.
Roth FP, Hughes JD, Estep PW, Church GM: Finding DNA regulatory
motifs within unaligned noncoding sequences clustered by wholegenome mRNA quantitation. Nat Biotechnol 1998, 16:939-945.
Brassinga AK, Siam R, McSween W, Winkler H, Wood D, Marczynski GT:
Conserved response regulator CtrA and IHF binding sites in the alphaproteobacteria Caulobacter crescentus and Rickettsia prowazekii
chromosomal replication origins. J Bacteriol 2002, 184:5789-5799.
Stephens C, Reisenauer A, Wright R, Shapiro L: A cell cycle-regulated
bacterial DNA methyltransferase is essential for viability. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 1996, 93:1210-1214.
Wright R, Stephens C, Shapiro L: The CcrM DNA methyltransferase is
widespread in the alpha subdivision of proteobacteria, and its
essential functions are conserved in Rhizobium meliloti and
Caulobacter crescentus. J Bacteriol 1997, 179:5869-5877.
Hansen FG, Christensen BB, Atlung T: Sequence characteristics required
for cooperative binding and efficient in vivo titration of the replication
initiator protein DnaA in E. coli. J Mol Biol 2007, 367:942-952.
Ishikawa S, Ogura Y, Yoshimura M, Okumura H, Cho E, Kawai Y, Kurokawa
K, Oshima T, Ogasawara N: Distribution of stable DnaA-binding sites on
the Bacillus subtilis genome detected using a modified ChIP-chip
method. DNA Res 2007, 14:155-168.
Collier J, Shapiro L: Spatial complexity and control of a bacterial cell
cycle. Curr Opin Biotechnol 2007, 18:333-340.
Barnett MJ, Hung DY, Reisenauer A, Shapiro L, Long SR: A homolog of the
CtrA cell cycle regulator is present and essential in Sinorhizobium
meliloti. J Bacteriol 2001, 183:3204-3210.
McGrath PT, Lee H, Zhang L, Iniesta AA, Hottes AK, Tan MH, Hillson NJ, Hu
P, Shapiro L, McAdams HH: High-throughput identification of
transcription start sites, conserved promoter motifs and predicted
regulons. Nat Biotechnol 2007, 25:584-592.
Sibley CD, MacLellan SR, Finan T: The Sinorhizobium meliloti
chromosomal origin of replication. Microbiology 2006, 152:443-455.
Ohta N, Newton A: The core dimerization domains of histidine kinases
contain recognition specificity for the cognate response regulator. J
Bacteriol 2003, 185:4424-4431.
Reisinger SJ, Huntwork S, Viollier PH, Ryan KR: DivL performs critical cell
cycle functions in Caulobacter crescentus independent of kinase
activity. J Bacteriol 2007, 189:8308-8320.
Gupta RS: Protein signatures distinctive of alpha proteobacteria and its
subgroups and a model for alpha-proteobacterial evolution. Crit Rev
Microbiol 2005, 31:101-135.
Sallstrom B, Andersson SG: Genome reduction in the alphaProteobacteria. Curr Opin Microbiol 2005, 8:579-585.
Cole JR, Wang Q, Cardenas E, Fish J, Chai B, Farris RJ, Kulam-SyedMohideen AS, McGarrell DM, Marsh T, Garrity GM, Tiedje JM: The
Ribosomal Database Project: improved alignments and new tools for
rRNA analysis. Nucleic Acids Res 2009, 37:D141-145.
Edgar RC: MUSCLE: a multiple sequence alignment method with
reduced time and space complexity. BMC Bioinformatics 2004, 5:113.
Tamura K, Dudley J, Nei M, Kumar S: MEGA4: Molecular Evolutionary
Genetics Analysis (MEGA) software version 4.0. Mol Biol Evol 2007,
24:1596-1599.
Schneider TD, Stormo GD, Gold L, Ehrenfeucht A: Information content of
binding sites on nucleotide sequences. J Mol Biol 1986, 188:415-431.
Liu XS, Brutlag DL, Liu JS: An algorithm for finding protein-DNA binding
sites with applications to chromatin-immunoprecipitation microarray
experiments. Nat Biotechnol 2002, 20:835-839.

Page 16 of 16

64. Tatusov RL, Natale DA, Garkavtsev IV, Tatusova TA, Shankavaram UT, Rao
BS, Kiryutin B, Galperin MY, Fedorova ND, Koonin EV: The COG database:
new developments in phylogenetic classification of proteins from
complete genomes. Nucleic Acids Res 2001, 29:22-28.
65. Whelan S, Lio P, Goldman N: Molecular phylogenetics: state-of-the-art
methods for looking into the past. Trends Genet 2001, 17:262-272.
doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-4-52
Cite this article as: Brilli et al., The diversity and evolution of cell cycle regulation in alpha-proteobacteria: a comparative genomic analysis BMC Systems
Biology 2010, 4:52

</pre>
</body>
</html>
