<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>gb-2011-12-6-r56 1..15</title>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Broadbent et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R56
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/6/R56

RESEARCH

Open Access

A global transcriptional analysis of Plasmodium
falciparum malaria reveals a novel family of
telomere-associated lncRNAs
Kate M Broadbent1,2, Daniel Park2,3, Ashley R Wolf1,2, Daria Van Tyne4, Jennifer S Sims4, Ulf Ribacke4,
Sarah Volkman2,4,5, Manoj Duraisingh4, Dyann Wirth2,4, Pardis C Sabeti1,2,3,6† and John L Rinn1,2,7,8*†

Abstract
Background: Mounting evidence suggests a major role for epigenetic feedback in Plasmodium falciparum
transcriptional regulation. Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) have recently emerged as a new paradigm in
epigenetic remodeling. We therefore set out to investigate putative roles for lncRNAs in P. falciparum
transcriptional regulation.
Results: We used a high-resolution DNA tiling microarray to survey transcriptional activity across 22.6% of the
P. falciparum strain 3D7 genome. We identified 872 protein-coding genes and 60 putative P. falciparum lncRNAs
under developmental regulation during the parasite’s pathogenic human blood stage. Further characterization of
lncRNA candidates led to the discovery of an intriguing family of lncRNA telomere-associated repetitive element
transcripts, termed lncRNA-TARE. We have quantified lncRNA-TARE expression at 15 distinct chromosome ends and
mapped putative transcriptional start and termination sites of lncRNA-TARE loci. Remarkably, we observed
coordinated and stage-specific expression of lncRNA-TARE on all chromosome ends tested, and two dominant
transcripts of approximately 1.5 kb and 3.1 kb transcribed towards the telomere.
Conclusions: We have characterized a family of 22 telomere-associated lncRNAs in P. falciparum. Homologous
lncRNA-TARE loci are coordinately expressed after parasite DNA replication, and are poised to play an important
role in P. falciparum telomere maintenance, virulence gene regulation, and potentially other processes of parasite
chromosome end biology. Further study of lncRNA-TARE and other promising lncRNA candidates may provide
mechanistic insight into P. falciparum transcriptional regulation.

Background
The causative agent of the most severe form of human
malaria, Plasmodium falciparum, is a unicellular eukaryotic parasite transmitted through the bites of infected
mosquitoes. The most vulnerable population to malarial
disease is African children, but a staggering 3.3 billion
people - half the world’s population - are at risk for
malarial infection. Despite recent research advances
[1-6], the mechanisms P. falciparum utilizes to regulate
mutually exclusive expression of multi-gene virulence
families and stage-specific expression of approximately
* Correspondence: jrinn@broadinstitute.org
† Contributed equally
1
Department of Systems Biology, Harvard Medical School, 200 Longwood
Avenue, Boston, MA 02115, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

80% of its genome during pathogenic blood stage development remain elusive.
Most confounding is the scarcity of sequence-specific
transcription factors and cis-acting regulatory elements,
coupled with the apparent lack of both RNA interference
machinery and DNA methylation in the parasite [7,8].
However, the recent discovery of an expanded lineage of
27 ApiAP2 (apicomplexan apetela 2) transcription factors
may partially explain how the parasite regulates its unusual genome [9,10]. Additionally, it is becoming increasingly clear that chromatin remodeling and epigenetic
memory play an important role in blood stage-specific
expression and antigenic variation of virulence genes
[6,11,12]. Notably, while the parasite lacks many of the
conventional regulatory mechanisms of other organisms,
it has a full arsenal of conserved histone modifying

© 2011 Broadbent et al.; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Broadbent et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R56
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/6/R56

enzymes, and a higher than average number of RNAbinding proteins [8,13].
In eukaryotes spanning from yeast to humans, epigenetic regulation incorporates feedback from non-coding
RNAs. Specifically, long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs)
and small non-coding RNAs often interface with RNA
binding proteins and chromatin remodeling complexes
to modulate their targeted genomic loci [14-18]. For
example, in × chromosome inactivation at least seven
distinct lncRNAs coordinate the selection and silencing
of an entire chromosome [19]. As another example,
long telomeric repeat-containing RNA (TERRA) transcripts have been recently discovered as a major constituent of telomeric heterochromatin. TERRA interacts
with telomere-associated proteins such as telomerase, is
developmentally regulated, and is implicated in telomere
replication and structural maintenance processes
[20-25].
To investigate putative regulatory roles for lncRNAs in
P. falciparum, we designed a high-resolution DNA tiling
array to survey transcriptional activity during the parasite’s pathogenic human blood stage. We identified 60
lncRNA candidates and characterized their G+C content, evolutionary conservation, expression profile, and
correlation with neighboring genes. Notably, our transcriptional profiling and subsequent analysis revealed an
outlier on all fronts: a long telomere-associated noncoding RNA gene, termed lncRNA-TARE-4L, encoded
in the telomere-associated repetitive element (TARE)
tract of chromosome four.
Upon further investigation of the lncRNA-TARE-4L
locus, we discovered a multi-gene family of lncRNATAREs. We have mapped homologous lncRNA-TARE
loci on 22 of 28 P. falciparum chromosome ends, and
quantified the coordinated, stage-specific transcription
of 15 distinct lncRNA-TARE sequences using quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR). We additionally
employed rapid amplification of cDNA ends (RACE) to
map putative transcriptional start and termination sites
of lncRNA-TARE genes, including three sequences not
investigated by qRT-PCR. Our RACE results suggested
two dominant transcripts of approximately 1.5 kb and
3.1 kb are transcribed from the TARE 3 boundary
towards the telomere. Interestingly, we also found that
an upstream sequence type B (upsB-type) var virulence
gene is adjacent to each predicted lncRNA-TARE gene
and that lncRNA-TARE sequence is enriched with transcription factor binding sites only otherwise found in
upsB-type var gene promoters.
Our results complement the recent P. falciparum transcriptome studies of Otto et al. [5], Raabe et al. [26], and
others by providing stage-specific profiling and characterization of several previously unidentified P. falciparum
lncRNA candidates, including a long telomere-associated

Page 2 of 15

non-coding RNA family. Specifically, we have demonstrated that long telomere-associated lncRNAs are coordinately expressed after parasite DNA replication from at
least 18 chromosome ends. Taken together, this work
provides new insights into P. falciparum non-coding
RNA transcription and contributes a previously uncharacterized parallel between P. falciparum and model
eukaryote chromosome end biology.

Results
Tiling microarray experimental design

In order to comprehensively identify and characterize
long non-coding transcripts in P. falciparum, we
selected overlapping probes tiling approximately 22.6%
of the P. falciparum genome at 12-bp median resolution. Notably, our DNA tiling array design provides over
one order of magnitude denser probe coverage than previous P. falciparum transcriptional profiling arrays, and
is unique in that it deeply samples both genic and intergenic sequence [4]. Probes cover 561 Watson (+) strand
protein-coding genes, 699 Crick (-) strand protein-coding genes, two ribosomal RNA genes, and 1.73 Mb of
intergenic sequence on P. falciparum chromosomes 2,
3*, 4, 5*, 7, 9, 12* (asterisks indicates partial coverage;
see Materials and methods and Additional file 1 for
further genome coverage details).
We harvested RNA from highly synchronous 3D7 parasites to capture global transcriptional changes during the
parasite’s two major intraerythrocytic developmental
cycle transitions: ring to trophozoite and trophozoite to
schizont stage. During the P. falciparum intraerythrocytic
developmental cycle, the parasite first exports cytoadherence surface proteins to sequester itself in host tissue
(ring stage = 0 to 24 hours). This is followed by hemoglobin digestion and DNA replication (trophozoite stage =
24 to 36 hours), and, finally, nuclei segmentation and formation of 16 to 32 daughter merozoites (schizont stage =
36 to 48 hours) [27,28]. Specifically, we profiled the polyadenylated RNA population transcribed from both genomic strands at 18 (ring), 24 (ring/trophozoite), 30
(trophozoite), and 36 (trophozoite/schizont) ± 3 hours
post-erythrocyte invasion (hpi) using our custom DNA
tiling microarray.
Identification of lncRNA candidates

To identify transcriptionally active regions (TARs) along
the P. falciparum genome, we analyzed normalized
probe hybridization intensities using a window-based
scan statistic algorithm. As proposed by Guttman et al.
[29,30], a TAR can be reasonably defined as a contiguous stretch of tiling probes with signal intensity significantly above the background distribution of permuted
hybridization intensities. Briefly, we calculated a scan
statistic score for iterative window intervals, controlling

Broadbent et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R56
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/6/R56

Page 3 of 15

the probability of one or more intervals being erroneously called significant at 5% [31]. As the final step,
we merged overlapping intervals to define TAR boundaries. Taken together, this highly conservative approach
corrects for multiple testing and provides strong familywise type I error rate control in our set of significant
TARs.
Our transcriptional profiling approach identified 1,360
significantly expressed TARs. Specifically, 1,229 TARs
exhibited overlap with 872 probed PlasmoDB v6.5 protein-coding genes, 8 TARs overlapped the 2 probed
ribosomal RNA genes, and 123 TARs represented unannotated, putative non-coding transcripts from P. falciparum intergenic regions (Figure 1a). In summary, both
ribosomal RNA genes and 64.1% of protein-coding
genes on the array were identified as expressed in at
least one of the four time-points tested. This is consistent with previous studies showing that 70 to 90% of

(a)

1360 identified TARs

(b)

protein-coding genes are expressed during P. falciparum
intraerythrocytic development [3-5]. Coordinates for all
predicted TARs are included in Additional file 2.
We next investigated our expression data for known
patterns of gene regulation. We performed clustering
analysis to confirm the stage-specific transcription cascade expected for P. falciparum’s protein-coding genome (Figure 1b; Additional file 3), and ontology analysis
of stage-specific genes to confirm the parasite processes
known to occur during our time-points (Additional
file 4). As a further control, we confirmed that known
housekeeping genes such as seryl-tRNA synthetase
(PF07_0073) were not differentially expressed, while
early and late stage markers such as PFD0020c and
PFB0275w were maximally expressed in T18 and T36,
respectively (Figure 1c) [3-5]. Collectively, these analyses
confirmed the biological representation of our samples
and provided meaningful context to investigate lncRNA

(c)

T18 T24 T30 T36

6

T18
0
6

T24

8 ribosomal RNA
transcripts (2 genes)

1229 protein-coding
transcripts (872 genes)

0
6

T30
0
6

123 un-annotated
transcripts

−2
−1
0
1
2

T36
0

46 putative
small RNAs

77

(d)

1620 bp

(e)

T18 T24 T30 T36

11306 bp

PF07_0073

PFD0020c

PFB0275w

1698 bp

1139 bp

804 bp

3753 bp

lncRNA
candidate

lncRNA
candidate

6

T18

17 putative
novel proteincoding genes
or pseudogenes

0
6

T24
0

6

60 putative long
non-coding RNAs

T30
0
6

Additional characterization
parasite DNA

red blood cell
parasite

−2
−1
0
1
2

T36
0

***

lncRNA
candidate

Figure 1 Global transcriptional profiling reveals 60 putative P. falciparum long non-coding RNAs under developmental regulation. (a)
We identified 1,360 TARs along the P. falciparum genome, of which 1,229, 8, and 123 predicted transcripts exhibit overlap with known proteincoding genes, ribosomal RNA genes, and un-annotated intergenic regions, respectively. Further filtering of un-annotated transcripts for putative
lncRNAs eliminated 46 putative small RNAs and 17 putative novel protein-coding genes or pseudogenes, leaving a set of 60 putative lncRNAs
for additional characterization. (b,d) Protein-coding and putative lncRNA transcripts follow the global expression cascade expected during the P.
falciparum intraerythrocytic developmental cycle. The mean log2 probe hybridization for each transcript is plotted from time-points T18, T24, T30,
and T36 ± 3 hpi corresponding to the ring, ring/trophozoite, trophozoite, and trophozoite/schizont intraerythrocytic stages of parasite growth
(pictured below each column). Rows are mean centered. (c,e) Housekeeping gene seryl-tRNA synthetase (PF07_0073), early stage marker
(PFD0020c), and late stage marker (PFB0275w) exhibit expected differential expression patterns. Examples of putative lncRNAs are also shown,
including lncRNA-TARE-4L (***). Positive probe hybridization intensities are plotted from each sample after quantile normalization, log2
transformation, and median centering.

Broadbent et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R56
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/6/R56

expression during the parasite’s pathogenic human
blood stage.
We applied conservative criteria to identify bona fide
P. falciparum lncRNAs from the set of 123 expressed
intergenic transcripts. Namely, we required transcripts
to be larger than 200 nucleotides, eliminating 46 putative small RNAs from further analysis (Additional file 5).
We also eliminated transcripts having even marginal
protein-coding potential. Briefly, we used BLASTX to
translate the remaining 77 transcripts and search for significant protein matches across all 439,884 and
12,597,337 sequences represented in the Swissprot and
non-redundant protein sequence (nr) databases, respectively. We also searched subsets of both databases with
the following organism queries: Plasmodium, Plasmodium falciparum, and Plasmodium falciparum strain
3D7. While the large majority of analyzed transcripts
lacked any coding potential, BLASTX analysis predicted
that 17 transcripts might, in fact, be novel P. falciparum
genes or pseudogenes (Additional file 6). Thus, our conservatively filtered set of putative lncRNAs for additional
characterization consisted of 60 candidate sequences
(Figure 1a; Additional file 7).
Additional characterization of lncRNA candidates
highlights a novel telomere-associated lncRNA

To systematically prioritize the 60 putative lncRNAs for
functional follow-up, we looked for lncRNAs with similar
properties to known functional transcripts in P. falciparum
and/or bona fide lncRNAs in other organisms. We also
investigated the possibility that lncRNA candidates may be
spliced to nearby genes or represent un-annotated UTRs.
To this end, we assessed each lncRNA candidate’s G+C
content and evolutionary conservation, as well as the correlation between lncRNA and neighboring gene expression
profiles, and the distance between lncRNA and neighboring genes to infer transcript independence.
Known classes of functional non-coding RNA in
P. falciparum, such as ribosomal RNA and transfer
RNA, have high G+C content [32,33]. While high G+C
content is certainly not sufficient or necessary for function, we were nonetheless interested in the G+C content
of our putative lncRNAs. We found the average G+C
content of lncRNA candidates (15.4%) to be typical of
P. falciparum intergenic regions [34] and well below the
coding transcript average (23.7%). This is not an unexpected result and, importantly, indicates no systematic
hybridization bias towards detection of expressed noncoding regions with higher than expected G+C content.
Interestingly, however, this analysis highlighted one
lncRNA with similar G+C content (32.1%) to ribosomal
RNA transcripts (Figure 2a). We termed this candidate
lncRNA-TARE-4L, as it is encoded in the TARE tract
on the left end of chromosome four.

Page 4 of 15

We next explored the evolutionary conservation of
putative lncRNA sequences as an indicator of preserved
functionality [35]. We performed BLASTN sequence
alignment within the partially assembled, closely related
Plasmodium reichenowi chimpanzee parasite genome
and across six other partially sequenced, more distant
Plasmodium species (Figure 2b). We found that 19
lncRNAs exhibited some level of conservation in the
Plasmodium species investigated, but that only lncRNATARE-4L was strongly conserved across all species
tested. To assess the significance of this result, we
repeated this analysis for 600 size-matched random
intergenic sequences, as well as for ribosomal RNAs and
size-matched coding exons. We found that, respectively,
4.5%, 87.5%, and 33.3% had BLASTN hits to all Plasmodium species analyzed. Thus, the broad sequence conservation of lncRNA-TARE-4L is significant (P-value =
0.045) and more similar to the level of conservation
expected for ribosomal RNAs and coding regions. Interestingly, we also found that 23 of the 27 broadly conserved null intergenic sequences map to either the
telomeric or subtelomeric repeats.
The vast majority of P. falciparum genes are highly
expressed only once per 48-hour intraerythrocytic developmental cycle, and genes in related cellular processes
are induced together [3]. Given this model for functional
protein-coding transcripts, we reasoned that lncRNA
candidates are more likely biologically significant if
expressed in a stage-specific manner. Moreover, regulatory lncRNAs have been reported to act in cis to their
targeted loci [35-37]. Consistent with this notion,
lncRNAs that are both differentially expressed and
encoded nearby essential or pathogenic genes may be
involved in regulating these important loci. Figure 1d,e
shows that putative lncRNAs are developmentally regulated similar to protein-coding transcripts (see Materials
and methods and Additional file 3 for detailed comparisons). Additionally, we found that many lncRNA candidates neighbor essential genes and factors involved in
parasite pathogenesis (Additional file 8).
Given clear patterns of transcriptional regulation, we
next tested if the 60 candidate lncRNAs were likely to be
independent transcripts as opposed to un-annotated UTRs
or small spliced exons to neighboring coding genes. To
this end, we measured the Pearson correlation between
putative lncRNA and neighboring gene expression profiles,
conservatively selecting the most correlated, adjacent,
expressed gene as the neighboring gene (Additional file 7,
columns j and l; and see Materials and methods). We
found that 40 lncRNA candidates were highly correlated,
raising the possibility that they may be spliced to or represent UTRs of adjacent coding genes. Of the remaining
20 lncRNA candidates exhibiting patterns of correlation
consistent with independent transcription, 16 displayed

Broadbent et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R56
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/6/R56

(a)

Page 5 of 15

non-coding transcripts

20

protein-coding transcripts

density

15
10
5
*****
***

0
0%

10%

20%

30%

40%

G+C content
rRNA

(b)

rRNA

lncRNA-TARE-4L

5
10
15
20
25
30

putative lncRNAs

BLASTN
-log10(p-value)

i m i x ei lii di
um ow eu les a h e u
ar en ac ow .viv erg .yo aba
ip
lc ich llin kn P P.b P .ch
fa .re .ga P.
P
P. P P
Figure 2 Additional characterization of putative lncRNAs
highlights the striking properties of a telomere-associated
lncRNA. (a) Guanine-cytosine (G+C) content comparison between
predicted non-coding and protein-coding transcripts shows that
non-coding G+C content is typically lower than coding transcript G
+C content. lncRNA-TARE-4L (highlighted in red and indicated by
arrow) and ribosomal RNAs (indicated by asterisks) have high G+C
content. (b) The sequence of eight functional rRNAs is broadly
conserved across Plasmodium species. The sequence of 19 putative
lncRNAs is also significantly conserved in at least one other species
(BLASTN P-value < 0.01), suggesting a preserved functional role.
lncRNA-TARE-4L is strongly conserved across all eight species
analyzed. Such a broad level of conservation is rarely seen in
randomly sampled intergenic regions from P. falciparum (P-value =
0.045). Rows are ordered by number of species with BLASTN hits (Pvalue < 0.01), and then by strength of hits (defined by the product of
P-values). Species are clustered based on the phylogeny proposed by
Escalante and Alaya [86]. BLAST, basic local alignment and search
tool.

biologically meaningful variation across our time-points.
Thus, correlation analysis highlighted 16 candidates with
clear evidence of independent transcriptional regulation.
While the null distribution of correlations from adjacent pairs of coding genes demonstrated that approximately 30 of 40 highly correlated lncRNA candidates
may be UTRs or otherwise spliced to nearby genes, it
also suggested that 10 independent transcripts should
exhibit this level of correlation by chance (Additional
file 9). To further distinguish such potential transcripts,
we considered the distance of each putative lncRNA to
the nearest neighboring coding gene. We found that 11
lncRNA candidates were over 1 kb from a coding gene.
As the mean intron length in P. falciparum is 168 bp
[34], we considered this as evidence of independence
regardless of correlation value. Taken together, these
results point to a highly conservative set of 23 lncRNA
candidates based on correlation and distance analyses.
Strikingly, we found that lncRNA-TARE-4L exhibited
the strongest evidence of independent transcriptional
regulation. lncRNA-TARE-4L is flanked by the telomere
and an upsB-type var gene (Figure 3a). However, the
var gene is over 20 kb away and the exon structure of
var transcripts has been previously mapped [38,39].
Given a mean intron length of 168 bp and maximum
intron length of 4.9 kb in P. falciparum [34], the splicing of lncRNA-TARE-4L to the nearest neighboring
var gene would be biologically unprecedented. Moreover, correlation analysis revealed that lncRNA-TARE4L is anti-correlated with the nearest expressed gene
(r = -0.296). The nearest expressed gene (PFD0020c) is
an additional 20 kb beyond the silenced upsB-type var
gene and is profiled in Figure 1c for visual comparison
to lncRNA-TARE-4L (Figure 1e, asterisks).
Collectively, lncRNA-TARE-4L emerged as the lncRNA
candidate with the most promising properties for functional follow-up. lncRNA-TARE-4L is encoded in the
TARE 2-3 subtelomeric repeat region between the telomere and a silenced upsB-type var gene (Figure 3a), has
G+C content and sequence conservation similar to that
of functional ribosomal RNA, is sharply induced after
parasite DNA replication, and is clearly an independent
transcript.
As we further investigated the sequence properties of
lncRNA-TARE-4L, we found that homologous lncRNATARE sequences are encoded adjacent to upsB-type var
genes on 22 of 28 P. falciparum chromosome ends (Figure
3b) [40-42]. In five cases where there is no lncRNA-TARE
gene, there is similarly not an upsB-type var gene. This
perhaps suggests concurrent evolutionary pressure acting
on lncRNA-TARE and upsB-type var genes. Consistent
with this notion, the lncRNA-TARE loci are highly similar;
the average pairwise identity between sequences is 88.1%
(Additional file 10).

Broadbent et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R56
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/6/R56

Page 6 of 15

(b)
10000 bp

20000 bp

30000 bp

40000 bp 50000 bp

lncRNA-TARE-4L
10000 bp

Relative Expression

(a)

200
150
100
50

0
Chr1
Chr2
Chr3

20000 bp

Chr4
Chr6
Chr7

30000 bp

Chr8

upsB-type
var
var

Chr9
T2
0
T3
0
T4
0

.

40000 bp

Chr10
Chr11

T
el
50000 bp

TAREs 1-5

Rep20

.

lncRNA-TARE
E
s
TAREs
upsB-typevar

Chr12
Left arm

Right arm

Figure 3 The telomere-associated lncRNA-TARE family neighbors upsB-type var loci and is coordinately expressed during parasite
schizogony. (a) Dot plot analysis of the first 50,000 bp on chromosome 4 pinpoints lncRNA-TARE-4L in the TARE 2-3 region between the
telomere (Tel) and a silenced upsB-type var virulence gene. (b) Subtelomeric features are diagrammed on the 11 chromosomes (Chr) from
which we were able to specifically amplify lncRNA-TARE sequence. Features are not to scale, and grayed out chromosome ends were not
probed. Notably, an upsB-type var gene (orange) is located adjacent to each predicted lncRNA-TARE gene (red). Furthermore, qRT-PCR
amplification of 15 distinct lncRNA-TARE genes shows a coordinated pattern of late stage expression. lncRNA-TARE relative expression is plotted
in time-points T20, T30, and T40 ± 3 hpi with respect to T30. Error bars represent the propagated standard error of the mean (pSEM) from two
biological replicate experiments. Housekeeping gene PF08_0085 was used as the reference gene.

lncRNA-TARE loci are coordinately expressed from at least
15 chromosome ends

Given our evidence for expression of the TARE 2-3
region on chromosome 4 and conservation of this
region on 22 P. falciparum chromosome ends, we
hypothesized that the 22 TARE 2-3 regions may be
coordinately expressed. We thus set out to further
investigate the expression properties of lncRNA-TARE
loci in independent blood stage time courses. In line
with our array results, we expected lncRNA-TARE-4L,
and potentially other lncRNA-TARE genes, to be differentially expressed after parasite DNA replication.
We conducted two additional highly synchronous P.
falciparum time courses focused on stage-specific timepoints T20 (ring), T30 (trophozoite), and T36/T38/T40
(schizont) ± 3 hpi, and subsequently isolated RNA from
each stage. We were able to design specific primer pairs
targeting 15 chromosome ends and used qRT-PCR to
probe expression at the TARE 2-3 region. Primer pairs
were excluded if they did not have at least 90% amplification efficiency or amplified non-specific products
(Materials and methods; Additional file 11).
We found that the TARE 2-3 region is expressed on all
15 distinct chromosome ends tested. Remarkably, all 15
lncRNA-TARE genes are coordinately and strongly
induced after parasite DNA replication, with maximal

lncRNA-TARE transcript abundance observed in the T40
± 3 hpi time-point (Figure 3b). This result is the first
quantitative experimental evidence showing that 15, if
not more, P. falciparum chromosome ends are transcriptionally active between the parasite’s DNA replication
and cell division cycles. Taken together, we have validated and expanded the microarray discovery of
lncRNA-TARE-4L to define a novel telomere-associated
lncRNA family, termed lncRNA-TARE. We have also
shown that lncRNA-TARE is maximally expressed during
an important stage of parasite blood stage development.
RACE defines two dominant long telomere-associated
transcripts

We next pursued RACE to map putative transcriptional
start and termination sites of lncRNA-TARE. We used a
priming strategy in which both the 5’ and 3’ RACE reactions were primed using the same primer sequence, albeit
reverse complemented, to ensure amplification of a contiguous long transcript. Additionally, as we aimed to
investigate the transcript boundaries of multiple
lncRNA-TARE loci in parallel, we designed RACE primers to simultaneously target 20 lncRNA-TARE
sequences (Figure 4, black triangles; Additional file 11).
3’ RACE analysis suggested two dominant lncRNATARE species are transcribed from the centromere

Broadbent et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R56
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/6/R56

towards the telomere on at least 12 different chromosome ends (Figure 4; Additional files 12 and 13). Interestingly, we found that the longer transcript corresponded
to termination immediately after the TARE 2 element,
while the shorter transcript corresponded to termination
immediately prior to TARE 2. Additionally, the syntenic
termination site for seven distinct lncRNA-TARE family
members encompassing TARE 2 was identical and corresponded to the transcript model predicted by our slidingwindow algorithm (Materials and methods). In terms of
the shorter transcript, we again found that seven distinct
lncRNA-TARE species shared a precise syntenic termination site just upstream of TARE 2 (Figure 4, asterisks).
We discovered a single putative 5’ transcriptional start
site for the lncRNA-TARE locus on the left end of chromosome 3. Notably, this start site corresponded to the
boundary of the TARE 3 element (Figure 4; Additional
files 12 and 13). The intrinsic tendency of PCR amplification of multi-gene families to result in strongly biased
representation of certain family members [43] likely
explains the homogeneity of our cloned 5’ RACE products.
Collectively, our RACE results provide strong evidence
that long non-coding RNA genes are present in the
P. falciparum TARE 2-3 subtelomeric repeats. Furthermore, our results support a model of unidirectional
transcription towards the telomeres, as we were unable
to amplify transcripts of the opposite polarity. We note,
however, that our results do not explicitly rule out bidirectional transcription or the presence of alternative transcript models beyond the approximately 1.5 kb and
3.1 kb species defined here. For example, the high A+T
content of the P. falciparum genome poses a technical
barrier for 3’ RACE analysis, as internal A-rich regions
may hybridize with the 3’ RACE primer targeted to
poly-A transcript tails.
lncRNA-TARE loci are enriched with transcription factor
binding sites

An additional salient feature of lncRNA-TARE is that the
TARE 2-3 region contains approximately 15 occurrences
of the bipartite, palindromic subtelomeric var promoter
element 2 (SPE2) motif on average [44]. This pattern
seems to be non-random as there are only two SPE2enriched loci along the P. falciparum genome: the TARE
2-3 region and the upstream promoter element of subtelomeric upsB-type var genes. Notably, these two loci
account for 94% of 777 predicted SPE2 consensus sites,
and both the presence and position of SPE2 sites is conserved on intact chromosome ends (Figure 4; Additional
file 10) [10,42,44,45].
Moreover, Flueck et al. [44] and others [10,46,47] have
recently demonstrated that a member of P. falciparum’s
ApiAP2 transcription factor family specifically binds
subtelomeric SPE2 sites in late stage parasites. We thus

Page 7 of 15

further investigated, using qRT-PCR, the expression of
lncRNA-TARE-4L and the P. falciparum SPE2-interacting protein (PfSip2; PFF0200c). We compared expression at T30 ± 3 hpi during peak DNA replication to
expression at T36, T38, and T40 ± 3 hpi during parasite
schizogony. We found lncRNA-TARE-4L and PfSip2 to
have highly correlated late stage temporal profiles. Our
results also suggested that PfSip2 is expressed prior to
maximal lncRNA-TARE-4L expression, which may indicate PfSip2 induction of the lncRNA-TARE locus and/
or co-activation of lncRNA-TARE (Additional file 14).

Discussion
In the present work we have identified and characterized
several previously undetected lncRNAs in P. falciparum,
such as a novel family of 22 homologous lncRNA-TARE
genes that exhibit coordinated expression at a key stage in
the P. falciparum life cycle. This family of lncRNA-TAREs
encompasses the majority of known binding sites (SPE2)
for the ApiAP2 transcription factor PfSip2 (Figure 4; Additional file 10). As PfSip2 is expressed and specifically binds
subtelomeric SPE2 sites at the stage of maximal lncRNATARE transcription, these results suggest that PfSip2 binding may positively regulate the lncRNA-TARE locus [44].
Alternatively, lncRNA-TARE transcription may allow
PfSip2 binding, or in the case that both models are valid, a
regulatory feedback loop between PfSip2 binding
and lncRNA-TARE transcription may exist (Model 1 in
Figure 5) [48].
The only other conserved cluster of SPE2 sites is in
the upstream promoter element of upsB-type var genes.
This suggests that lncRNA-TARE may play a role in
subtelomeric upsB-type var gene regulation. Consistent
with this notion, all 22 lncRNA-TARE genes are
encoded adjacent to an upsB-type var gene. Moreover,
PfSip2 is implicated in silenced subtelomeric var gene
regulation [44]. Thus, lncRNA-TARE may help regulate
upsB-type var genes by directly or indirectly interacting
with and/or recruiting multiple copies of PfSip2 to chromosome ends (Model 2 in Figure 5) [49].
Mutually exclusive var gene regulation is known to
involve nuclear repositioning and heritable chromatin
memory marks [6,50-55]. An emerging theme in mammalian epigenetic regulation is the association of
lncRNAs with chromatin modifying complexes, which in
turn recruits these factors to their sites of action
[36,56-58]. Notably, the induction of lncRNA-TARE
transcription between P. falciparum DNA replication
and cell division is ideally timed to help initiate post-Sphase epigenetic memory marks at nearby upsB-type
var genes. Thus, it is possible that lncRNA-TARE may
interface with chromatin reading and/or writing factors
to modulate the precise epigenetic regulation of nearby
subtelomeric var loci (Model 3 in Figure 5).

Broadbent et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R56
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/6/R56

6,000

6,500

telomere

7,000

7,500

Page 8 of 15

8,000

TARE 1

8,500

9,000

9,500

10,000

10,500

11,000

11,500

TARE 2

12,000

TARE 3
predicted transcript

lncRNA- ARE-4L
T

lncRNA- ARE-4L
T
syntenic 3’ RACE products
8221
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

9821
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

11278

syntenic 5’ RACE products
predicted SPE2 sites

Figure 4 RACE suggests two long telomere-associated transcripts are transcribed in the TARE 2-3 region. 3’ RACE products of seven
distinct lncRNA-TARE sequences terminated at a precise syntenic site on either side of TARE 2 (asterisks). Taken together with the 5’ RACE
product suggests two species approximately 1.5 kb and 3.1 kb in length are transcribed towards the telomeres from the TARE 3 boundary.
Genome-wide, the palindromic SPE2 DNA motif (green triangles) is enriched only in the TARE 2-3 region from which lncRNA-TARE is transcribed
and in the upstream promoter element of upsB-type var genes. Primers are depicted as black triangles and numbers represent base-pair
coordinates corresponding to the left end of chromosome 4. SPE2, subtelomeric var gene promoter element 2.

Non-coding transcripts expressed from a conserved
bidirectional promoter in var gene introns provide some
precedent for the proposed link between lncRNA-TARE
and var gene regulation. Perhaps non-coincidentally,
both lncRNA-TARE and var gene ‘sterile’ transcripts
have a similar post-S-phase transcriptional profile [59].
However, while the 22 lncRNA-TARE loci exclusively
pair with upsB-type var genes, the previously described
var gene ‘sterile’ transcripts are expressed from both
silenced and activated var genes of all types [38,60].
Thus, lncRNA-TARE may provide a different and/or
additional level of regulation unique to subtelomeric
upsB-type var loci. We also note that in a complementary study by Raabe et al. [26], small subtelomeric noncoding RNAs ranging in size from 31 to 103 nucleotides
were identified in this region. Taken together, our
results perhaps support a model of long precursor transcripts being processed into small non-coding RNAs.
Interestingly, the origin and transcriptional profile of
lncRNA-TARE is strongly reminiscent of the eukaryotic
non-coding RNA family TERRA. Across numerous
eukaryotic model systems, TERRA is transcribed from
subtelomeric loci, associates with telomeric repeats, and
is implicated in telomere structural integrity and heterochromatin assembly [20-25,61-66]. Consistent with a
possible TERRA-like role for lncRNA-TARE, large

chromatin state changes occur at P. falciparum chromosome ends in concordance with maximal lncRNA-TARE
transcription (Model 4 in Figure 5) [67,68]. Moreover,
TERRA transcript levels are regulated by the cell cycle,
with lowest TERRA abundance observed during DNA
replication [22,69]. We similarly observe the lowest
lncRNA-TARE transcript levels at T30 ± 3 hpi, which
corresponds to peak parasite DNA replication.
In summary, several pieces of evidence point to a key
role for lncRNA-TARE in transcriptional and/or epigenetic
regulation of P. falciparum telomeric and subtelomeric
regions. This work motivates further experimentation to
resolve the mechanistic details of lncRNA-TARE and other
promising P. falciparum lncRNA candidates.

Conclusions
Our global transcriptional profiling study provides a catalyst for in-depth functional analyses of high-confidence
P. falciparum lncRNA candidates and for a full-genome
investigation of parasite strains beyond 3D7. We have
identified and characterized 60 putative lncRNAs using
conservative thresholds for statistical and biological significance, providing 23 strong candidates for further functional experimentation, such as RNA binding assays and
expression knockdown experiments. Such future studies
will be key in establishing a direct molecular link between

Broadbent et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R56
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/6/R56

Page 9 of 15

Protein-X
Protein-X

?

?
Protein-X

lncRNA-TARE

lncRNA-TARE
4
Protein-X

telomeric
heterochromatin
assembly

?

3

silencing
chromatin
memory marks

Protein-X
TXN
PfSip2

TXN
PfSip2

TXN
PfSip2

?
?
POL II

upsB-typevar

telomere
?
Protein-X

...

lncRNA-TARE gene
telomere replication,
repair, segregation,
structural maintenance

1

?
TXN
PfSip2

2

lncRNA-TARE

Figure 5 Potential models for lncRNA-TARE at P. falciparum chromosome ends. Model 1: PfSip2 binding at SPE2 sites induces lncRNA-TARE
transcription and/or vice versa. Model 2: lncRNA-TARE guides multiple copies of PfSip2 to chromosome ends. Model 3: lncRNA-TARE recruits
chromatin-remodeling factors to initiate post-S-phase silencing chromatin memory marks at upsB-type var loci. Model 4: lncRNA-TARE facilitates
telomeric heterochromatin assembly and/or interacts with telomere-associated proteins. POL II, RNA polymerase II; TXN, transcription factor.

specific lncRNA transcripts and parasite proteins and in
determining genes modulated by lncRNAs during P. falciparum blood stage development. Recent studies in model
eukaryotes suggest that lncRNAs represent a new paradigm in genome regulation and chromatin remodeling.
Hence, profiling the non-coding transcriptome of drugresistant parasites, parasites with mis-regulated virulence
gene phenotypes, and hyper-virulent clinical isolates is an
exciting new research direction in the quest to eradicate
malarial disease.

Materials and methods
Microarray design

The DNA tiling array was designed in conjunction with
Roche NimbleGen to tile a portion of the P. falciparum
genome with a targeted median probe spacing of 12 bp.
The 3D7 assembly (PlasmoDB v5.5) was used as the
reference sequence. The design targeted all of chromosomes 2, 4, 7 and 9 and partial chromosomes 3:106138147339, 5:947885-end, and 12:start-66805 (Additional
file 1). The three chromosomes tiled in their entirety
were selected at random. However, the four partially
tiled chromosomes represent regions of particular interest given our hypothesis that lncRNAs may be involved
in chromatin remodeling and clinically important parasite processes. Probes were variable length Tm-matched
long oligonucleotides, averaging 55 bp each. Probe
sequences were screened for excessive cross hybridization to 3D7 sequence: any probes with more than five
close Sequence Search and Alignment by Hashing Algorithm (SSAHA) matches were eliminated [70,71]. The
final design filled 366,479 probes on the array, 96.81% of

which are unique. The raw and normalized data discussed in this publication have been deposited in
NCBI’s Gene Expression Omnibus and are accessible
through accession [GEO:GSE27937].
Parasite culture, RNA preparation, and cDNA labeling for
microarray hybridizations

A clone of P. falciparum strain 3D7 was cultured using
standard methods [72,73] and total RNA isolated from
each sample as described [74]. Total RNA was cleaned
up with an RNeasy column (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA)
and concentrated in a Microcon YM-30 centrifugal filter
(Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA). Total RNA (1 μg) was
then subjected to poly-A selective amplification using
Message Amp II (Ambion, Foster City, CA, USA), substituting biased dNTP/NTP mixes (2A/T/U:1C/G) for the
solutions provided. The resulting aRNA was labeled with
Superscript II reverse transcriptase (Invitrogen, Carlsbad,
CA, USA) using random hexamers, and either Cy3- or
Cy5-dUTPs (GE Healthcare, Piscataway, NJ, USA) for 2
hours at 42°C following a 10-minute primer annealing
step at 65°C. The reaction was concentrated on a Microcon YM-30 column and subjected to array hybridization
per standard NimbleGen protocol.
Data normalization and quality control

Raw data from each sample was quantile normalized [75]
and log2 transformed prior to prediction of TARs along
the P. falciparum genome. We based our pre-processing
pipeline on established quality control metrics: removal
of non-biological variation and a strong correlation
between raw and normalized data [76]. Additional file 15

Broadbent et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R56
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/6/R56

shows log2(intensity) distributions of each sample before
and after quantile normalization, log2(intensity) boxplots
of each sample after quantile normalization, and all pairwise correlation scatterplots of data before and after normalization. Pearson correlation is equal to 1.0 between
raw and normalized data in all matched samples. Additional file 16 shows that, for each sample, we observed
only a minimal increase in median intergenic probe
hybridization intensity with number of G+C bases. Given
that we make no absolute or quantitative expression
comparisons of transcripts (only relative expression comparisons of the same transcript across time-points) and
we confirm no G+C content bias in predicted lncRNAs,
we deemed this inconsequential. Normalized data were
median centered (at zero) prior to expression profiling
and data browsing in Integrated Genomics Viewer [77].
Detection of TARs from tiling arrays

We wrote and implemented an iterative sliding window
algorithm to scan each sample’s normalized probe hybridization intensity values for statistically significant TARs.
Specifically, we used a single-step maxT permutation
procedure (1,000 permutations) to transform the mean
probe intensity score ‘T’ calculated in each of the
approximately 366,000 possible window slides along normalized data into a multiple-hypothesis adjusted P-value
[29-31]. We then discarded windows with adjusted
P-values greater than 0.05 to control the family-wise
error-rate of windows predicted to be significant at 5%.
We repeated this procedure a total of 28 times using window sizes of 5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 30, and 40 probes. Next, we
intersected all significant windows with PlasmoDB v6.5
gene annotations, and merged overlapping annotated
windows to define the boundaries of 1,229 protein-coding TARs and 8 ribosomal RNA TARs. Similarly, we
merged overlapping windows that did not overlap any
known or predicted gene to define the boundaries of 123
un-annotated TARs. BEDTools v4 was used for all data
intersections and unions [78]. Additional file 2 lists predicted TAR coordinates.
Filtering un-annotated TARs

We filtered un-annotated TARs by setting a minimum
length criterion of 200 bp and ensuring no BLASTX
predicted coding potential. Out of 123 predicted unannotated TARs, 46 were under 200 bp in length (Additional file 5). We retrieved FASTA sequence for the
remaining 77 from PlasmoDB v6.5, and used the NCBI
BLASTX web server to search for any significant protein
matches [79]. Default BLASTX settings (BLOSUM62,
word size 3, low complexity filtering, and so on) were
used except the Expect threshold for reporting match
significance (that is, coding potential) was set at 0.01.
Seventeen sequences with an Expect score < 0.01 were

Page 10 of 15

categorized as putative novel P. falciparum genes or
pseudogenes and were excluded from further lncRNA
characterization (Additional file 6). We searched both
the Swissprot and Non-redundant protein sequence (nr)
databases with the following organism queries: all organisms, Plasmodium, Plasmodium falciparum, and Plasmodium falciparum strain 3D7.
Gene Ontology term analysis of stage-specific genes

Gene Ontology (GO) term analysis of stage-specific genes
was performed using GOstat with default settings [80]
and Sanger GeneDB P. falciparum gene annotations.
Stage-specific genes were determined by intersection of
PlasmoDB v6.5 gene annotations with protein-coding
transcripts maximally expressed in each time-point. We
looked for overrepresented GO terms in stage-specific
genes versus the 1,360 protein-coding genes covered by
the array. Additional file 4 lists all genes covered by the
array, stage-specific genes, and the top four most overrepresented GO terms in each time-point.
Evolutionary sequence conservation

FASTA sequence for the 60 putative lncRNAs and 8 ribosomal RNA transcripts was retrieved from the 3D7 reference sequence (PlasmoDB v7.1). We also downloaded
genomic FASTA sequence from PlasmoDB v7.1 representing all eight sequenced or partially sequenced Plasmodium
species (P. falciparum, P. reichenowi, P. gallinaceum, P.
knowlesi, P. vivax, P. berghei, P. yoelli, and P. chaubadi).
We searched for sequence conservation using BLASTN
(WU-BLAST 2.0 MP-WashU (4 May 2006)) using the
same low-complexity filtering and context parameters as
the PlasmoDB v7.1 BLAST server (-filter seg -ctxfactor
2.00) and setting the Expect threshold for significance to
0.01. We recorded the lowest BLASTN P-value within
each species (Additional file 7, columns s to z).
The broad conservation of lncRNA-TARE-4L across
all eight Plasmodium species was determined to be significant by null permutations. We chose 600 random
intergenic regions from the 3D7 reference genome
(based on v.7.1 annotation). These intergenic regions
were sized to match the length distribution of the 60
putative lncRNAs, and were included in the WUBLAST search. Out of 600 random intergenic regions,
we found only 27 to be conserved across all 8 species,
yielding an empirical P-value of 0.045.
Expression profiling

To profile each predicted TAR, we calculated its expression in each time-point as the mean hybridization intensity
of probes tiling within or up to 25 bp on either side of the
predicted TAR start and stop coordinates. The expression
profile of each TAR was then mean centered across timepoints and visualized using a non-hierarchical clustering

Broadbent et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R56
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/6/R56

dimension reduction algorithm. Specifically, we used nonmetric multi-dimensional scaling (nMDS) as implemented
in the R-project ‘NeatMap’ package to order rows and preserve data topology. In development and validation of the
‘NeatMap’ package, Rajaram and Oono [81] have similarly
applied nMDS to visualize yeast cell cycle expression data.
We point the reader to Figure 1d of Rajaram and Oono
[81] and Figure 4 of Taguchi and Oono [82] for examples
and thorough discussion of the utility of nMDS in determining relational patterns of gene expression. Notably,
because nMDS is a non-linear numerical optimization
technique, multiple ordinations were run to select the
optimal solution.
We conducted a detailed comparison of lncRNA and
protein-coding expression, finding lncRNA candidates to
be expressed on par with protein-coding transcripts.
Included in Additional file 3 are additional visualizations
of protein-coding transcript versus putative lncRNA
expression, including standard heatmaps and nMDS
ordinated heatmaps without mean centering across
time-points. Additional file 3 also provides a histogram
of the maximum expression values for lncRNA candidates and protein-coding transcripts. Notably, we found
30 lncRNA candidates (50%) to be induced by greater
than two-fold across our time course samples (Additional file 7, column k). By comparison, 309 of 1,229
protein-coding transcripts (25%) match this criterion.
Nearest-neighboring genes

Nearest neighboring genes to the set of 60 putative
lncRNAs were extracted using the Cistrome Analysis
Pipeline and PlasmoDB v6.5 gene coordinates.
Correlation analysis

To infer putative lncRNA splicing or UTR relationships
with neighboring coding genes, we measured the Pearson correlation between putative lncRNA and neighboring coding gene expression profiles (Additional file 7,
column j). We conservatively defined the neighboring
coding gene to be the highest correlated, expressed gene
to either side of each putative lncRNA locus. We also
examined a null distribution of correlations from adjacent pairs of coding genes. We found the 60 candidate
lncRNAs to be enriched for high correlation to neighboring genes. 40 of these candidates were highly correlated (r > 0.9), whereas only 10 should be highly
correlated as demonstrated by our null distribution
(Additional file 9). We then further investigated the
expression profiles of lncRNA candidates with r < 0.9 to
ensure correlation values reflected biologically meaningful variation. We defined biologically meaningful variation as a greater than 0.5-fold change across timepoints.

Page 11 of 15

Mapping of homologous lncRNA-TARE sequences

We used the PlasmoDB v6.5 BLASTN web server to
record coordinates for homologous lncRNA-TARE
sequences based on the predicted lncRNA-TARE-4L
sequence. We then retrieved FASTA sequence of the
most telomere-proximal 50,000 bp on each chromosome
end from PlasmoDB v6.5, and used JDotter [83] software to create DNA dotplots mapping the telomeric
repeats, TAREs 1 through 5, Rep20, and the first predicted gene on each end. We placed each predicted
lncRNA-TARE gene onto the dotplot maps to confirm
that lncRNA-TARE maps to TARE 2 and the sequence
between TARE 2 and TARE 3 on 22 chromosome ends.
We then used Geneious to cluster (ClustalW) and investigate the conservation of lncRNA-TARE sequences.
Parasite culture for qRT-PCR analysis

Two independent biological replicate time courses were
performed to validate and investigate lncRNA-TARE
expression in more detail. For each time course, a freshly
thawed P. falciparum strain 3D7 clone was cultured using
standard methods [72] in human red blood cells at 4%
hematocrit. RPMI-HEPES medium was supplemented
with 5% human serum (O+) and 5% Albumax II (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA). Cultures were initially synchronized using two 5% sorbitol solution treatments [73]
spaced by 16 hours. To then obtain highly synchronized
cultures, newly formed ring-stage parasites were selected
for using 5% sorbitol solution treatments during the subsequent two re-invasion generations. Highly synchronized
cultures were expanded and harvested at stage-specific
time-points. Each harvested culture was centrifuged at
2,400 rpm in a Sorvall RT6000B, and packed red blood
cells lysed using a 0.05% (final concentration) saponin
solution. Liberated parasites were washed using phosphate-buffered saline (pH 7.4), pelleted at 13.2 rpm in a
microcentrifuge, resuspended in 1 ml TRIZOL reagent,
and stored at -80°C prior to RNA extraction.
RNA preparation for qRT-PCR and RACE analysis

TRIZOL-chloroform extraction was performed and the
aqueous layer applied to an RNeasy column (Qiagen).
On-column DNAse digestion was carried out for 30
minutes to remove genomic DNA. Eluted RNA was also
treated with TURBO DNase (Ambion) and cleaned up
on a second RNeasy column (Qiagen) to yield high-purity RNA samples.
qRT-PCR analysis

RNA (1 μg) from each time course sample was reverse
transcribed using a random priming strategy (Applied
Biosystems cDNA High Capacity Reverse Transcription
kit; Carlsbad, CA, USA) along with a minus reverse

Broadbent et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R56
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/6/R56

transcriptase control reaction for each sample to confirm genomic DNA removal. qPCR reactions were carried out using 800 nM of primers and Roche FastStart
SYBR Green Master mix (Indianapolis, IN, USA). Primer
annealing and extension (55°C/60 seconds) was carried
out for 40 cycles on an Applied Biosystems 7900
instrument.
We used PCR Miner software [84] to calculate both
the cycle threshold (Ct) of each qPCR reaction and the
amplification efficiency of each primer pair. We then
calculated the relative expression of each lncRNA-TARE
gene in each time course sample by averaging technical
replicates and using the reference gene PF08_0085 and
reference time-point T30 (trophozoite) for normalization. The error of normalized expression ratios was calculated using the delta method, based on a truncated
Taylor series expansion, to account for technical variability in both the target and reference gene measurements. Biological replicate experiments were analyzed in
isolation and then normalized expression measurements
were averaged. We used a Taylor limited expansion
method to determine how error propagated in the average expression value.
qRT-PCR primer design

Primer pairs to amplify predicted lncRNA-TARE genes
and the SPE2-binding protein PfSip2 (PFF0200c) were
designed using Premier Biosoft International AlleleID
7.6 software (Palo Alto, CA, USA). AlleleID primer
design software carries out highly specific primer design
by BLAST searching sequences and masking redundant
regions prior to primer design. We also independently
verified primer specificity using BLASTN on the PlasmoDB v6.5 website, and ensured single amplicon melting curves and no primer dimer formation. We required
primer pair amplification efficiency, as calculated by
PCR Miner software [84], to be at least 90% to ensure
reproducible results. We used the previously described
housekeeping gene P08_0085 (ubiquitin conjugating
enzyme 1) [74] to calculate all normalized relative gene
expression ratios. lncRNA-TARE and PfSip2 primer
sequences are listed in Additional file 11.
Rapid amplification of cDNA ends

We employed RNA ligase-mediated RACE following
manufacturer specifications (Ambion) and using 10 μg
of T40 ± 3 hpi RNA mixed 1:1 from two independent
time course extractions. We used Premier Biosoft International AlleleID 7.6 software to design primers targeting 20 lncRNA-TARE loci (Additional file 11). To map
the putative 5’ cap, we used a nested priming strategy
with primers spaced roughly 350 bp antisense to the target sequence. To map 3’ termini, we used a semi-nested
priming strategy using a single antisense primer to the

Page 12 of 15

target sequence and nested primers corresponding to
the 3’ adapter sequence. Notably, the 5’ RACE outer primer is the reverse complement of the 3’ RACE primer,
ensuring capture of contiguous transcripts. Minus
reverse transcriptase control reactions were included for
3’ RACE.
Outer and inner 5’ RACE PCR cycling was performed
using SuperTaq Plus polymerase (Ambion) and the following cycling conditions: 94°C for 3 minutes, 5 cycles of 94°C
for 30 seconds, 60°C for 30 seconds, 68°C for 3 minutes,
35 cycles of 94°C for 30 seconds, 55°C for 30 seconds,
68°C for 3 minutes, and a final extension for 10 minutes at
68°C. 3’ RACE PCR cycling was analagous except denaturation was performed at 94°C for 15 seconds and extension was performed at 68°C for 8 minutes. PCR products
were gel excised, purified using Qiagen MinElute Gel
Extraction Cleanup columns, and cloned into the pCR2.1TOPO vector (Invitrogen).
We sequenced 27 and 10 colonies corresponding to 3’
and 5’ RACE products, respectively, using Genewiz services and Geneious analysis software [85]. A total of 12
different lncRNA-TARE loci were unambiguously represented in sequenced 3’ RACE products. The original
chromosome and syntenic terminus coordinates on the
left end of chromosome 4 for each sequenced RACE
product are included in Additional file 12 along with a
graphical alignment of each sequenced RACE product
to the left end of chromosome 4 in Additional file 13.
RACE products were trimmed to exclude any low-quality base calls and vector sequence beyond the first four
bases prior to alignment.

Additional material
Additional file 1: DNA tiling array genome coverage. Number of
probes per 10 kb plotted by genomic position.
Additional file 2: All TARs. Chromosome, coordinates, and expression
profile for all 1,360 TARs identified along the P. falciparum genome.
Additional file 3: Comparison of lncRNA and protein-coding
expression. A figure providing a detailed comparison of lncRNA and
protein-coding expression. Standard heatmaps and non-metric multidimensional scaling ordinated heatmaps of lncRNA and protein-coding
transcript expression profiles without mean centering across time-points.
Maximum expression value histogram for lncRNAs versus protein-coding
transcripts.
Additional file 4: Stage-specific Gene Ontology analysis. All genes
represented on the array, stage-specific genes, and the top four overrepresented Gene Ontology terms in each time-point.
Additional file 5: Putative small RNAs. Chromosome, coordinates, and
length of 46 putative small RNAs eliminated from the lncRNA candidate
list.
Additional file 6: Putative genes or pseudogenes. Chromosome,
coordinates, length, and BLASTX results for 17 putative genes or
pseudogenes eliminated from the lncRNA candidate list.
Additional file 7: Putative lncRNAs. A table of 60 putative P. falciparum
lncRNAs and their properties. Characteristics of 60 P. falciparum lncRNA
candidates.

Broadbent et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R56
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/6/R56

Additional file 8: Neighboring genes. Nearest gene to each side of
lncRNA candidates and gene descriptions.
Additional file 9: Correlation analysis. Distribution of expression
correlations between putative lncRNAs and neighboring coding genes as
compared to the null model of adjacent pairs of coding genes.
Additional file 10: lncRNA-TARE homology and SPE2 sites. A figure
providing various characterizations of homologous lncRNA-TARE loci. Plot
of consensus identity, location of conserved SPE2 transcription factor
binding sites, and an un-rooted clustering of lncRNA-TARE loci.
Additional file 11: qRT-PCR and RACE primers. A table of primer
sequences used in this study. Gene-specific lncRNA-TARE/PfSip2
(PFF0200c) qRT-PCR primer sequences and family-specific lncRNA-TARE
RACE primer sequences.
Additional file 12: RACE syntenic transcript coordinates. Original
chromosome and syntenic coordinates on the left end of chromosome 4
for each sequenced RACE product.
Additional file 13: RACE sequencing alignments. Graphical alignments
of each sequenced RACE product to the left end of chromosome 4.
Additional file 14: PfSip2 and lncRNA-TARE-4L co-expression. qRTPCR investigation of the lncRNA-TARE-4L versus PfSip2 locus in
trophozoite and schizont stage samples.
Additional file 15: Raw and normalized data assessment. Probe
hybridization intensity distributions and correlation scatterplots for each
sample before and after quantile normalization.
Additional file 16: Probe hybridization intensity versus G+C content.
Boxplots of intergenic probe hybridization intensities for each sample.
Probes are grouped according to number of G+C bases.

Abbreviations
bp: base pair; GO: Gene Ontology; hpi: hours post-erythrocyte invasion;
lncRNA: long non-coding RNA; lncRNA-TARE: long non-coding RNA
telomere-associated repetitive element; lncRNA-TARE-4L: long non-coding
RNA telomere-associated repetitive element on chromosome four left;
nMDS: non-metric multi-dimensional scaling; PCR: polymerase chain reaction;
PfSip2: P. falciparum SPE2-interacting protein; qRT-PCR: quantitative real-time
PCR; RACE: rapid amplification of cDNA ends; SPE2: subtelomeric var gene
promoter element 2; TAR: transcriptionally active region; TARE: telomereassociated repetitive element; TERRA: telomeric repeat-containing RNA; upsB:
upstream sequence type B; UTR: untranslated region.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank M Koziol and D Shechner of the Broad Institute and
Harvard University for experimental assistance and for Figure 3b illustration
support, respectively. We would also like to thank members of the Broad
Institute-Harvard Malaria Initiative for helpful feedback throughout. This work
was supported by grants from the Gates Foundation and the National
Institutes of Health Director’s New Innovator Awards (1DP2OD00667-01). PCS
is a Packard and Burroughs Wellcome fellow. JLR is a Damon RunyonRachleff, Searle, Smith Family and Merkin Fellow. KB and DP are National
Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellows.
Author details
Department of Systems Biology, Harvard Medical School, 200 Longwood
Avenue, Boston, MA 02115, USA. 2Broad Institute, 7 Cambridge Center,
Cambridge, MA 02142, USA. 3Department of Organismic and Evolutionary
Biology, Harvard University, 26 Oxford Street, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA.
4
Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of
Public Health, 651 Huntington Avenue, Boston, MA 02115, USA. 5School of
Nursing and Health Sciences, Simmons College, 300 The Fenway, Boston,
MA 02115, USA. 6FAS Center for Systems Biology, Harvard University, 52
Oxford Street, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA. 7Beth Israel Deaconess Medical
Center, 330 Brookline Avenue, Boston, MA 02215, USA. 8Department of Stem
Cell and Regenerative Biology, Harvard University, 7 Divinity Avenue,
Cambridge, MA 02138, USA.
1

Page 13 of 15

Authors’ contributions
JR and PS conceived of the study and participated in its design,
coordination, and interpretation. DP carried out the computational design of
arrays. JS harvested and extracted samples for arrays, and KB harvested and
extracted samples for qRT-PCR and RACE. AW performed sample labeling
and array hybridizations. KB analyzed raw and normalized data and wrote/
implemented the sliding-window TAR detection algorithm. KB and DP
analyzed predicted TARs to assess biological validity and filter for lncRNA
candidates. KB and DP characterized putative lncRNAs, and KB designed/
performed qRT-PCR and RACE analysis. DW, MD, SV, DVT, and UR
contributed to the acquisition and interpretation of data. KB wrote the
manuscript, JR and PS critically revised the manuscript, and all authors have
read and given approval of the version to be published.
Received: 7 February 2011 Revised: 27 April 2011
Accepted: 20 June 2011 Published: 20 June 2011
References
1. Coleman BI, Duraisingh MT: Transcriptional control and gene silencing in
Plasmodium falciparum. Cell Microbiol 2008, 10:1935-1946.
2. Horrocks P, Wong E, Russell K, Emes RD: Control of gene expression in
Plasmodium falciparum - Ten years on. Mol Biochem Parasitol 2009,
164:9-25.
3. Bozdech Z, Llinas M, Pulliam BL, Wong ED, Zhu JC, DeRisi JL: The
transcriptome of the intraerythrocytic developmental cycle of
Plasmodium falciparum. Plos Biol 2003.
4. Le Roch KG, Zhou YY, Blair PL, Grainger M, Moch JK, Haynes JD, De la
Vega P, Holder AA, Batalov S, Carucci DJ, Winzeler EA: Discovery of gene
function by expression profiling of the malaria parasite life cycle. Science
2003, 301:1503-1508.
5. Otto TD, Wilinski D, Assefa S, Keane TM, Sarry LR, Bohme U, Lemieux J,
Barrell B, Pain A, Berriman M, Newbold C, Llinas M: New insights into the
blood-stage transcriptome of Plasmodium falciparum using RNA-Seq. Mol
Microbiol 2010, 76:12-24.
6. Scherf A, Lopez-Rubio JJ, Riviere L: Antigenic variation in Plasmodium
falciparum. Annu Rev Microbiol 2008, 62:445-470.
7. Baum J, Papenfuss AT, Mair GR, Janse CJ, Vlachou D, Waters AP,
Cowman AF, Crabb BS, de Koning-Ward TF: Molecular genetics and
comparative genomics reveal RNAi is not functional in malaria parasites.
Nucleic Acids Res 2009, 37:3788-3798.
8. Cui L, Miao J: Chromatin-mediated epigenetic regulation in the malaria
parasite Plasmodium falciparum. Eukaryot Cell 2010, 9:1138-1149.
9. Balaji S, Babu MM, Iyer LM, Aravind L: Discovery of the principal specific
transcription factors of Apicomplexa and their implication for the
evolution of the AP2-integrase DNA binding domains. Nucleic Acids Res
2005, 33:3994-4006.
10. Campbell TL, De Silva EK, Olszewski KL, Elemento O, Llinas M: Identification
and genome-wide prediction of DNA binding specificities for the
ApiAP2 family of regulators from the malaria parasite. PLoS Pathog 2010,
6:e1001165.
11. Chaal BK, Gupta AP, Wastuwidyaningtyas BD, Luah YH, Bozdech Z: Histone
deacetylases play a major role in the transcriptional regulation of the
Plasmodium falciparum life cycle. Plos Pathogens 2010, 6:e1000737.
12. Merrick CJ, Duraisingh MT: Epigenetics in Plasmodium: what do we really
know? Eukaryot Cell 2010, 9:1150-1158.
13. Coulson RM, Hall N, Ouzounis CA: Comparative genomics of
transcriptional control in the human malaria parasite Plasmodium
falciparum. Genome Res 2004, 14:1548-1554.
14. Rinn JL, Kertesz M, Wang JK, Squazzo SL, Xu X, Brugmann SA,
Goodnough LH, Helms JA, Farnham PJ, Segal E, Chang HY: Functional
demarcation of active and silent chromatin domains in human HOX loci
by noncoding RNAs. Cell 2007, 129:1311-1323.
15. Corcoran AE: The epigenetic role of non-coding RNA transcription and
nuclear organization in immunoglobulin repertoire generation. Semin
Immunol 2010, 22:353-361.
16. Gupta RA, Shah N, Wang KC, Kim J, Horlings HM, Wong DJ, Tsai MC,
Hung T, Argani P, Rinn JL, Wang Y, Brzoska P, Kong B, Li R, West RB, van
de Vijver, Sukumar S, Chang HY: Long non-coding RNA HOTAIR
reprograms chromatin state to promote cancer metastasis. Nature 2010,
464:1071-1076.

Broadbent et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R56
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/6/R56

17. Pandey RR, Mondal T, Mohammad F, Enroth S, Redrup L, Komorowski J,
Nagano T, Mancini-DiNardo D, Kanduri C: Kcnq1ot1 antisense noncoding
RNA Mediates lineage-specific transcriptional silencing through
chromatin-level regulation. Mol Cell 2008, 32:232-246.
18. Brockdorff N, Ashworth A, Kay GF, Mccabe VM, Norris DP, Cooper PJ,
Swift S, Rastan S: The product of the mouse Xist gene is a 15 kb inactive
X-specific transcript containing no conserved ORF and located in the
nucleus. Cell 1992, 71:515-526.
19. Lee JT: Lessons from X-chromosome inactivation: long ncRNA as guides
and tethers to the epigenome. Genes Dev 2009, 23:1831-1842.
20. Schoeftner S, Blasco MA: Developmentally regulated transcription of
mammalian telomeres by DNA-dependent RNA polymerase II. Nat Cell
Biol 2008, 10:228-236.
21. Schoeftner S, Blasco MA: Chromatin regulation and non-coding RNAs at
mammalian telomeres. Semin Cell Dev Biol 2010, 21:186-193.
22. Feuerhahn S, Iglesias N, Panza A, Porro A, Lingner J: TERRA biogenesis,
turnover and implications for function. FEBS Lett 2010, 584:3812-3818.
23. Redon S, Reichenbach P, Lingner J: The non-coding RNA TERRA is a
natural ligand and direct inhibitor of human telomerase. Nucleic Acids Res
2010, 38:5797-5806.
24. Azzalin CM, Reichenbach P, Khoriauli L, Giulotto E, Lingner J: Telomeric
repeat containing RNA and RNA surveillance factors at mammalian
chromosome ends. Science 2007, 318:798-801.
25. Deng Z, Norseen J, Wiedmer A, Riethman H, Lieberman PM: TERRA RNA
binding to TRF2 facilitates heterochromatin formation and ORC
recruitment at telomeres. Mol Cell 2009, 35:403-413.
26. Raabe CA, Sanchez CP, Randau G, Robeck T, Skryabin BV, Chinni SV,
Kube M, Reinhardt R, Ng GH, Manickam R, Kuryshev VY, Lanzer M, Brosius J,
Tang TH, Rozhdestvensky TS: A global view of the nonprotein-coding
transcriptome in Plasmodium falciparum. Nucleic Acids Res 2010,
38:608-617.
27. Goldberg DE, Cowman AF: Moving in and renovating: exporting proteins
from Plasmodium into host erythrocytes. Nat Rev Microbiol 2010,
8:617-621.
28. Maier AG, Cooke BM, Cowman AF, Tilley L: Malaria parasite proteins that
remodel the host erythrocyte. Nat Rev Microbiol 2009, 7:341-354.
29. Guttman M, Amit I, Garber M, French C, Lin MF, Feldser D, Huarte M, Zuk O,
Carey BW, Cassady JP, Cabili MN, Jaenisch R, Mikkelsen TS, Jacks T,
Hacohen N, Bernstein BE, Kellis M, Regev A, Rinn JL, Lander ES: Chromatin
signature reveals over a thousand highly conserved large non-coding
RNAs in mammals. Nature 2009, 458:223-227.
30. Guttman M, Mies C, Dudycz-Sulicz K, Diskin SJ, Baldwin DA, Stoeckert CJ,
Grant GR: Assessing the significance of conserved genomic
aberrations using high resolution genomic microarrays. PLoS Genet
2007, 3:e143.
31. Dudoit S, Shaffer JP, Boldrick JC: Multiple hypothesis testing in microarray
experiments. Stat Sci 2003, 18:71-103.
32. Chakrabarti K, Pearson M, Grate L, Sterne-Weiler T, Deans J, Donohue JP,
Ares M Jr: Structural RNAs of known and unknown function identified in
malaria parasites by comparative genomics and RNA analysis. RNA 2007,
13:1923-1939.
33. Upadhyay R, Bawankar P, Malhotra D, Patankar S: A screen for conserved
sequences with biased base composition identifies noncoding RNAs in
the A-T rich genome of Plasmodium falciparum. Mol Biochem Parasitol
2005, 144:149-158.
34. Gardner MJ, Hall N, Fung E, White O, Berriman M, Hyman RW, Carlton JM,
Pain A, Nelson KE, Bowman S, Paulsen IT, James K, Eisen JA, Rutherford K,
Salzberg SL, Craig A, Kyes S, Chan MS, Nene V, Shallom SJ, Suh B,
Peterson J, Angiuoli S, Pertea M, Allen J, Selengut J, Haft D, Mather MW,
Vaidya AB, Martin DM, et al: Genome sequence of the human malaria
parasite Plasmodium falciparum. Nature 2002, 419:498-511.
35. Mattick JS: The genetic signatures of noncoding RNAs. PLoS Genet 2009,
5:e1000459.
36. Koziol MJ, Rinn JL: RNA traffic control of chromatin complexes. Curr Opin
Genet Dev 2010, 20:142-148.
37. Orom UA, Derrien T, Beringer M, Gumireddy K, Gardini A, Bussotti G, Lai F,
Zytnicki M, Notredame C, Huang Q, Guigo R, Shiekhattar R: Long
noncoding RNAs with enhancer-like function in human cells. Cell 2010,
143:46-58.
38. Epp C, Li F, Howitt CA, Chookajorn T, Deitsch KW: Chromatin associated
sense and antisense noncoding RNAs are transcribed from the var gene

Page 14 of 15

39.

40.
41.
42.

43.
44.

45.

46.

47.

48.

49.

50.

51.
52.

53.
54.

55.

56.
57.
58.

59.

60.

61.

family of virulence genes of the malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum.
RNA 2009, 15:116-127.
Deitsch KW, del Pinal A, Wellems TE: Intra-cluster recombination and var
transcription switches in the antigenic variation of Plasmodium
falciparum. Mol Biochem Parasitol 1999, 101:107-116.
Figueiredo L, Scherf A: Plasmodium telomeres and telomerase: the usual
actors in an unusual scenario. Chromosome Res 2005, 13:517-524.
Scherf A, Figueiredo LM, Freitas-Junior LH: Plasmodium telomeres: a
pathogen’s perspective. Curr Opin Microbiol 2001, 4:409-414.
Lavstsen T, Salanti A, Jensen AT, Arnot DE, Theander TG: Sub-grouping of
Plasmodium falciparum 3D7 var genes based on sequence analysis of
coding and non-coding regions. Malaria J 2003, 2:27.
Esumi S, Kaneko R, Kawamura Y, Yagi T: Split single-cell RT-PCR analysis of
Purkinje cells. Nat Protoc 2006, 1:2143-2151.
Flueck C, Bartfai R, Niederwieser I, Witmer K, Alako BT, Moes S, Bozdech Z,
Jenoe P, Stunnenberg HG, Voss TS: A major role for the Plasmodium
falciparum ApiAP2 protein PfSIP2 in chromosome end biology. PLoS
Pathog 2010, 6:e1000784.
Painter HJ, Campbell TL, Llinas M: The Apicomplexan AP2 family: integral
factors regulating Plasmodium development. Mol Biochem Parasitol 2011,
176:1-7.
De Silva EK, Gehrke AR, Olszewski K, Leon I, Chahal JS, Bulyk ML, Llinas M:
Specific DNA-binding by apicomplexan AP2 transcription factors. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 2008, 105:8393-8398.
Voss TS, Kaestli M, Vogel D, Bopp S, Beck HP: Identification of nuclear
proteins that interact differentially with Plasmodium falciparum var gene
promoters. Mol Microbiol 2003, 48:1593-1607.
Bond AM, Vangompel MJ, Sametsky EA, Clark MF, Savage JC, Disterhoft JF,
Kohtz JD: Balanced gene regulation by an embryonic brain ncRNA is
critical for adult hippocampal GABA circuitry. Nat Neurosci 2009,
12:1020-1027.
Kino T, Hurt DE, Ichijo T, Nader N, Chrousos GP: Noncoding RNA gas5 is a
growth arrest- and starvation-associated repressor of the glucocorticoid
receptor. Science Signaling 2010, 3:ra8.
Duraisingh MT, Voss TS, Marty AJ, Duffy MF, Good RT, Thompson JK, FreitasJunior LH, Scherf A, Crabb BS, Cowman AF: Heterochromatin silencing and
locus repositioning linked to regulation of virulence genes in
Plasmodium falciparum. Cell 2005, 121:13-24.
Dzikowski R, Deitsch KW: Genetics of antigenic variation in Plasmodium
falciparum. Curr Genet 2009, 55:103-110.
Dzikowski R, Li F, Amulic B, Eisberg A, Frank M, Patel S, Wellems TE,
Deitsch KW: Mechanisms underlying mutually exclusive expression of
virulence genes by malaria parasites. EMBO Rep 2007, 8:959-965.
Scherf A, Riviere L, Lopez-Rubio JJ: SnapShot: var gene expression in the
malaria parasite. Cell 2008, 134:190-U112.
Freitas-Junior LH, Hernandez-Rivas R, Ralph SA, Montiel-Condado D,
Ruvalcaba-Salazar OK, Rojas-Meza AP, Mancio-Silva L, Leal-Silvestre RJ,
Gontijo AM, Shorte S, Scherf A: Telomeric heterochromatin propagation
and histone acetylation control mutually exclusive expression of
antigenic variation genes in malaria parasites. Cell 2005, 121:25-36.
Voss TS, Tonkin CJ, Marty AJ, Thompson JK, Healer J, Crabb BS, Cowman AF:
Alterations in local chromatin environment are involved in silencing and
activation of subtelomeric var genes in Plasmodium falciparum. Mol
Microbiol 2007, 66:139-150.
Bernstein E, Allis CD: RNA meets chromatin. Genes Dev 2005, 19:1635-1655.
Nagano T, Fraser P: Emerging similarities in epigenetic gene silencing by
long noncoding RNAs. Mamm Genome 2009, 20:557-562.
Tsai MC, Manor O, Wan Y, Mosammaparast N, Wang JK, Lan F, Shi Y,
Segal E, Chang HY: Long noncoding RNA as modular scaffold of histone
modification complexes. Science 2010, 329:689-693.
Su XZ, Heatwole VM, Wertheimer SP, Guinet F, Herrfeldt JA, Peterson DS,
Ravetch JA, Wellems TE: The large diverse gene family var encodes
proteins involved in cytoadherence and antigenic variation of
Plasmodium falciparum-infected erythrocytes. Cell 1995, 82:89-100.
Ralph SA, Bischoff E, Mattei D, Sismeiro O, Dillies MA, Guigon G, Coppee JY,
David PH, Scherf A: Transcriptome analysis of antigenic variation in
Plasmodium falciparum–var silencing is not dependent on antisense
RNA. Genome Biol 2005, 6:R93.
Deng Z, Campbell AE, Lieberman PM: TERRA, CpG methylation and
telomere heterochromatin: lessons from ICF syndrome cells. Cell Cycle
2010, 9:69-74.

Broadbent et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R56
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/6/R56

62. Horard B, Gilson E: Telomeric RNA enters the game. Nat Cell Biol 2008,
10:113-115.
63. Xu Y, Suzuki Y, Ito K, Komiyama M: Telomeric repeat-containing RNA
structure in living cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2010, 107:14579-14584.
64. Luke B, Lingner J: TERRA: telomeric repeat-containing RNA. EMBO J 2009,
28:2503-2510.
65. Caslini C, Connelly JA, Serna A, Broccoli D, Hess JL: MLL associates with
telomeres and regulates telomeric repeat-containing RNA transcription.
Mol Cell Biol 2009, 29:4519-4526.
66. Luke B, Panza A, Redon S, Iglesias N, Li Z, Lingner J: The Rat1p 5’ to 3’
exonuclease degrades telomeric repeat-containing RNA and promotes
telomere elongation in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Mol Cell 2008,
32:465-477.
67. Ponts N, Harris EY, Prudhomme J, Wick I, Eckhardt-Ludka C, Hicks GR,
Hardiman G, Lonardi S, Le Roch KG: Nucleosome landscape and control of
transcription in the human malaria parasite. Genome Res 2010,
20:228-238.
68. Westenberger SJ, Cui L, Dharia N, Winzeler E: Genome-wide nucleosome
mapping of Plasmodium falciparum reveals histone-rich coding and
histone-poor intergenic regions and chromatin remodeling of core and
subtelomeric genes. BMC Genomics 2009, 10:610.
69. Porro A, Feuerhahn S, Reichenbach P, Lingner J: Molecular dissection of
telomeric repeat-containing RNA biogenesis unveils the presence of
distinct and multiple regulatory pathways. Mol Cell Biol 2010,
30:4808-4817.
70. Ning Z, Cox AJ, Mullikin JC: SSAHA: a fast search method for large DNA
databases. Genome Res 2001, 11:1725-1729.
71. Morgulis A, Gertz EM, Schaffer AA, Agarwala R: WindowMasker: windowbased masker for sequenced genomes. Bioinformatics 2006, 22:134-141.
72. Trager W, Jensen JB: Human malaria parasites in continuous culture.
Science 1976, 193:673-675.
73. Lambros C, Vanderberg JP: Synchronization of Plasmodium falciparum
erythrocytic stages in culture. J Parasitol 1979, 65:418-420.
74. Sims JS, Militello KT, Sims PA, Patel VP, Kasper JM, Wirth DF: Patterns of
gene-specific and total transcriptional activity during the Plasmodium
falciparum intraerythrocytic developmental cycle. Eukaryot Cell 2009,
8:327-338.
75. Bolstad BM, Irizarry RA, Astrand M, Speed TP: A comparison of
normalization methods for high density oligonucleotide array data
based on variance and bias. Bioinformatics 2003, 19:185-193.
76. Thomassen GO, Rowe AD, Lagesen K, Lindvall JM, Rognes T: Custom
design and analysis of high-density oligonucleotide bacterial tiling
microarrays. PLoS One 2009, 4:e5943.
77. Robinson JT, Thorvaldsdottir H, Winckler W, Guttman M, Lander ES, Getz G,
Mesirov JP: Integrative genomics viewer. Nat Biotechnol 2011, 29:24-26.
78. Quinlan AR, Hall IM: BEDTools: a flexible suite of utilities for comparing
genomic features. Bioinformatics 2010, 26:841-842.
79. Gish W, States DJ: Identification of protein coding regions by database
similarity search. Nat Genet 1993, 3:266-272.
80. Beissbarth T, Speed TP: GOstat: find statistically overrepresented Gene
Ontologies within a group of genes. Bioinformatics 2004, 20:1464-1465.
81. Rajaram S, Oono Y: NeatMap–non-clustering heat map alternatives in R.
BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:45.
82. Taguchi YH, Oono Y: Relational patterns of gene expression via nonmetric multidimensional scaling analysis. Bioinformatics 2005, 21:730-740.
83. Brodie R, Roper RL, Upton C: JDotter: a Java interface to multiple dotplots
generated by dotter. Bioinformatics 2004, 20:279-281.
84. Zhao S, Fernald RD: Comprehensive algorithm for quantitative real-time
polymerase chain reaction. J Comput Biol 2005, 12:1047-1064.
85. Drummond AJ, Ashton B, Buxton S, Cheung M, Heled J, Kearse M, Moir R,
Stones-Havas S, Thierer T, Wilson A: Geneious v5.1.[http://www.geneious.
com/default,28,downloads.sm].
86. Escalante AA, Ayala FJ: Phylogeny of the malarial genus Plasmodium,
derived from rRNA gene sequences. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1994,
91:11373-11377.
doi:10.1186/gb-2011-12-6-r56
Cite this article as: Broadbent et al.: A global transcriptional analysis of
Plasmodium falciparum malaria reveals a novel family of telomereassociated lncRNAs. Genome Biology 2011 12:R56.

Page 15 of 15

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
