<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>CRISPR loci reveal networks of gene exchange in archaea</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Biology Direct 2011, 6:65. doi:10.1186/1745-6150-6-65"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Avital Brodt"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Brodt et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:65
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/65

RESEARCH

Open Access

CRISPR loci reveal networks of gene exchange
in archaea
Avital Brodt, Mor N Lurie-Weinberger and Uri Gophna*

Abstract
Background: CRISPR (Clustered, Regularly, Interspaced, Short, Palindromic Repeats) loci provide prokaryotes with
an adaptive immunity against viruses and other mobile genetic elements. CRISPR arrays can be transcribed and
processed into small crRNA molecules, which are then used by the cell to target the foreign nucleic acid. Since
spacers are accumulated by active CRISPR/Cas systems, the sequences of these spacers provide a record of the
past “infection history” of the organism.
Results: Here we analyzed all currently known spacers present in archaeal genomes and identified their source by
DNA similarity. While nearly 50% of archaeal spacers matched mobile genetic elements, such as plasmids or viruses,
several others matched chromosomal genes of other organisms, primarily other archaea. Thus, networks of gene
exchange between archaeal species were revealed by the spacer analysis, including many cases of inter-genus and
inter-species gene transfer events. Spacers that recognize viral sequences tend to be located further away from the
leader sequence, implying that there exists a selective pressure for their retention.
Conclusions: CRISPR spacers provide direct evidence for extensive gene exchange in archaea, especially within
genera, and support the current dogma where the primary role of the CRISPR/Cas system is anti-viral and antiplasmid defense.
Open peer review: This article was reviewed by: Profs. W. Ford Doolittle, John van der Oost, Christa Schleper
(nominated by board member Prof. J Peter Gogarten)
Keywords: CRISPR, Lateral Gene transfer, Horizontal gene transfer, viruses, archaea, competence

Background
CRISPR (Clustered, Regularly, Interspaced, Short, Palindromic Repeats)/Cas (CRISPR-associated) modules constitute acquired prokaryotic immune systems that
protect prokaryotes against parasitic genetic elements,
such as viruses [for recent reviews see [1-3]]. CRISPR/
Cas systems contain repeated sequences that are interrupted by short non-repetitive DNA segments (20-50 bp
long), termed spacers [4] (Figure 1). CRISPR arrays can
be transcribed and processed into small crRNA molecules, which then lead to degradation of foreign nucleic
acids by a mechanism based on complementary basepairing [5,6]. CRISPR/Cas systems also have a mechanism that prevents targeting the locus encoding the
CRISPR itself [7]. The systems are both adaptive,
* Correspondence: urigo@tauex.tau.ac.il
Department of Molecular Microbiology and Biotechnology, George S. Wise
Faculty of Life Sciences, Tel Aviv University, Ramat Aviv, 69978, Israel

heritable and can be used to determine a history of past
infections [7-9]
CRISPR elements can be found in almost all archaeal
genomes and in approximately 40% of sequenced bacterial genomes [10]. Archaeal CRISPR loci tend to be
larger than those found in bacterial genomes, most
archaeal genomes having more than one CRISPR/Cas
system [11]. Archaeal CRISPR/Cas has been shown to
confer almost 100% immunity in cases where spacers
were identical to the target sequence, but partial
matches also provide substantial immunity in archaea
[12]. A short seed sequence that requires a perfect
match has been recently discovered in bacteria [6], but
whether such seed also exists in archaea, remains to be
determined. Archaea have unique viral parasites that
probably cannot infect bacteria or eukaryotes. CRISPR/
Cas systems can sometimes accidentally acquire an
“auto-spacer”, identical to a genome fragment of the

© 2011 Brodt et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Number of spacers normalized
by the number of spacercontaining genomes, by phylum

Brodt et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:65
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/65

Page 2 of 10

Plasmid gene

200
180
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0

Crenarchaeota
Euryarchaeota
Korarchaeota
Nanoarchaeota
Thaumarchaeota

Virus or provirus gene
Transposase gene
Integrase gene

11.1%

8.3%

8.3%

Chromosomal mobilityrelated gene
CRISPR gene

17.8%
3.9%

House-keeping gene

1.1%

8.9%

40.6%

Hypothetical ORF

Archaeal phyla

Figure 1 Average number of CRISPR spacers per phylum,
normalized by the number of spacer-containing genomes. Error
bars represent standard error of the mean.

CRISPR-containing organism itself, which can presumably lead to cell death [10]. One may speculate that the
near-ubiquity of CRISPR/Cas in archaea implies that the
benefit of having this form of defense outweighs the
costs of the occasional autoimmunity event. Remarkably,
no self-targeting spacers were found in archaea [[10],
Sorek & Stern, personal communication]. Here we surveyed all archaeal spacers in order to gain insights into
the mobile elements that infect archaea and how DNA
is transferred among different species and strains.

Results and discussion
Crenarchaeota contain more CRISPR spacers

CRISPR/Cas systems are found across all archaeal phyla,
yet CRISPR spacers are distributed unevenly among
CRISPR-positive genomes (Figure 1). Despite the fact
that much fewer crenarchaeal species have been
sequenced, Crenarchaeal genomes have roughly the
same number of spacers in the CRISPR database as Euryarchaeal species (Figure 1), having a higher average
number of spacers per genome than genomes of the latter phylum (162.86 vs. 95.32, respectively, p = 0.003,
Mann-Whitney-Wilcoxon test).
Function and origin of spacer matches

Predictably, nearly 50% of spacer hits were mapped to
mobile genetic elements such as plasmids (Figure 2,
Additional File 1 Table S1) and viruses (including proviruses) (Additional File 2 Table S2). Mobile elementassociated genes, such as transposases (Additional File 3
Table S3), integrases (Additional File 4 Table S4), toxinantitoxin systems and restriction-modification systems
constituted (Additional File 5 Table S5) about 13% of
spacer matches. Nevertheless, a substantial number of
hits were found to match chromosomal genes, or noncoding regions in their close vicinity (Figure 2). These
genes either had housekeeping functions (Additional
File 6 Table S6), CRISPR-associated (Additional File 7

Figure 2 The function distribution of the filtered hits according
to the target gene, where the target is a coding sequence, or
the gene closest to the sequence match.

Table S7) or hypothetical ones (Additional File 8 Table
S8). For example, five spacers in the Methanococcus_vannielii CRISPR array match ORFs encoding hypothetical proteins in chromosomes of Methanococcus
maripaludis strains, and a spacer from Halorubrum
lacusprofundi matched the sliding clamp PCNA of Haloferax volcanii. The vast majority of these ORFs (32/35)
have no gene of putative viral function (e.g. tail or head
protein, integrase, etc) in their neighborhood (5 genes
upstream and 5 genes downstream). The presence of
spacers matching house-keeping genes from related species indicates that the CRISPR/cas system often comes
into contact with foreign DNA that is probably chromosomal in origin, primarily from other archaea, either by
transduction, conjugation or transformation. For example, a chromosomal region can move to a natural plasmid by recombination and the resulting plasmid can
subsequently be transferred by conjugation to a new
cell, which will now recognize it as foreign. Under such
circumstances, the CRISPR/Cas system could become
activated and acquire a spacer directly-derived from
plasmid, but originally being of chromosomal source.
Alternatively, this could be attributed to viral activity,
similar to generalized transduction in bacteriophages,
where occasionally defective archaeal viruses package a
portion of the host’s DNA, resulting in a defective
“transducing particle” which can enter an archaeal cell
and similarly trigger the CRISPR/Cas system.
Curiously, frequent targets of CRISPR/Cas systems are
cas (CRISPR-associated) genes belonging of other
CRISPR/Cas systems (Figure 2) (Additional File 7 Table
S7). This probably stems from the fact that CRISPR loci
are often plasmid-encoded (Additional File 9 Table S9),
but provides evidence that having one CRISPR/Cas system decreases the chances of acquiring additional such
systems. Accordingly, several archaeal species that have
multiple CRISPR loci [e.g. Haloarcula marismortui and
H. volcanii, see [13]], have only a single set of cas genes.

Brodt et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:65
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/65

Archaea are not immune to CRISPR autoimmunity

Several cases of intra-genomic matches of spacers that
could cause CRISPR-mediated autoimmunity [10] were
identified in our survey. While the same spacer occurring twice, on the chromosome and on a plasmid,
flanked by the same repeats, will be protected from
degradation due to the 5’ overlap of the repeat [7], a
plasmid-located spacer providing an exact match to a
sequence from a chromosomal gene would probably be
cleaved. This is the case for Halomicrobium mukohataei,
where the plasmid-located cas-less CRISPR array has
repeats that are identical to the chromosomal one,
implying that its spacers should be recognized by the
chromosomal CRISPR/Cas system. One such plasmid
encoded spacer, 39 bases long, is 100% identical to a
sequence in a putative ORF in the chromosome, which
should cause CRISPR “autoimmunity”. The fact that this
self-matching spacer is tolerated in this organism
implies that either the proto-spacer associated motif
(PAM) has been mutated in the chromosomal gene
sequence rendering the gene immune [3] or that the
chromosomal CRISPR/Cas system had become deactivated in this archaeon.
Spacers reveal gene transfer events across species
boundaries

Normally, when examining gene transfer in microbial
genomes one observes only genes that have been fixed,
at least in a specific population of cells. In contrast,
sequences found in CRISPR spacers can be used as indicators of whichever DNA the CRISPR-containing organism has encountered in some CRISPR/Cas-activation
context, such as phage infection. Since CRISPR/Cas
acquires DNA fragments that can be seen as “signatures” of foreign invaders, regardless of the function of
the genes, spacers can tell us which sources of foreign
DNA end up in the CRISPR-containing species. Most
spacers have best matches outside the specific CRISPR
containing species (Figures 3, 4, Additional File 10 Dataset 1), although usually falling within the same family of
organisms. In some cases this probably reflects the existence of viruses that are not strictly species-specific,
whereas other cases, where the hit is to a chromosomal
gene, are more difficult to explain (see above).
Obviously, in cases where the identity is not 100%, it
may reflect exposure to a virus from the same viral
family that has diverged in sequence, i.e. when viruses
co-evolved/co-diverged with their hosts, or might reflect
an instance where a virus is present in the database
whereas the genome of the related virus from which the
target-gene originated is not.
We observed 59 matches across archaeal genera
(including 43 hits to archaeal viruses) and 10 matches
to non-archaeal organisms (nine eukaryotes and one

Page 3 of 10

bacterium). Within the archaea, only a single crossorder/cross-family match was observed, in which a
spacer from Acidilobus saccharovorans (order Acidilobales) was nearly identical to a sequence from an insertion-sequence (IS200/IS605 family OrfB protein) in
Sulfolobus islandicus strain HVE10/4 (order Sulfolobales,
see GI:323476134 and [14]). In contrast, many intergenera matches were observed, especially cases where
spacers from one genus matched a virus known to infect
another. The most notable example are the 30 CRISPR
spacers of Metallosphaera sedula (family Sulfolobaceae)
that matched the genome of the Acidianus two-tailed
virus [15,16], a virus also found to match 10 spacers
present in another member of this family, Sulfolobus solfataricus strain P2. This is an indication that these twotailed viruses may infect a broad-host range within
Sulfolobaceae.
For spacers that match non mobility-associated ORFs
in other species, one may also consider an alternative
explanation, other than horizontal gene transfer. Spacers
that may have caused autoimmunity could have led to a
loss of the self-targeted gene, while orthologs of that
gene persist in other related species. While this scenario
can never be totally ruled out, one would expect that
such a phenomenon will often rely on existence of
related gene (or genes) in the organism that possessed
the spacer that compensate for the lost homolog. We
therefore looked for homologous genes by a BLASTX
search of the gene matching the spacer against the proteome of the organism where the spacer originated,
requiring E-value < E-5; > 66% sequence coverage and >
50% sequence similarity. Out of 26 spacers that had best
matches in coding genes of other species (Additional
File 6 Table S6, Additional File 8 Table S8), two encode
conserved essential proteins that were presumably never
lost (Orc1 and PCNA), 21 genes had no BLASTX
matches, and only three had related proteins present.
Thus, it appears that in general it is horizontal gene
transfer, rather than gene loss driven by autoimmunity
that underlies the accumulation of these spacers.
While the hits within archaea could be explained by
previously known mechanisms of gene transfer in this
domain (see above), hits matching eukaryotic or bacterial organisms are more difficult to explain. While Pseudomonas putida is known to harbor conjugative
plasmids which can, in principle, be transmitted to
archaeal cells, the gene that was recognized by H. lacusprofundi is chromosomal. Furthermore, P. putida is a
freshwater bacterium while H. lacusprofundi is an obligate halophile, implying that exposure to P. putida
DNA has probably been a rare event. The simplest possible explanation for these unusual spacers is that some
archaea can take up naked DNA from the environment
(i.e. natural competence), as was already demonstrated

Brodt et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:65
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/65

Page 4 of 10

 Red arrow - within genus
 Purple arrow – between genera
 Black arrow- between families, classes or domains
 Blue arrow- the target organism is a virus
 Boxes denote number of spacer hits between two
organisms (the default is 1 hit).

The query archaea
The target organism

Methanosarcina mazei
Methanosarcina acetivorans
Methanococcus vannielii
5

Methanococcus voltae
Methanococcus maripaludis
Methanocaldococcus sp. FS406-22
Methanocaldococcus jannaschii

2

Methanocaldococcus fervens

2

Methanocaldococcus vulcanius
Methanothermobacter thermautotrophicus
4
Methanothermobacter wolfeii
Methanothermobacter marburgensis
Methanosphaera stadtmanae
Halalkalicoccus jeotgali
Halorubrum lacusprofundi
Haloferax volcanii
Thermoproteus neutrophilus
3

Pyrobaculum islandicum
Metallosphaera sedula
3

Sulfolobus tengchongensis
2
3 10

7#

3

Sulfolobus tokodaii
Sulfolobus islandicus
Sulfolobus solfataricus

*

2

30
Sulfolobus sp. NOB8H2
#
Sulfolobus acidocaldarius
Stygiolobus

12

Acidianus hospitalis
Acidianus convivator

*

Acidilobus saccharovorans
Pseudomonas putida
Dictyostelium discoideum
Zea mays
Hordeum chilense
Homo sapiens
Pongo abelii
Mus musculus
Mesocricetus auratus
Drosophila melanogaster

@

Nasonia vitripennis @

Figure 3 A schematic phylogenetic tree of organisms that have contributed spacer sequences to archaea. The direction of arrows points
from the spacer towards its match. Red arrows, within genus matches; purple arrow, between genera matches; black arrows- matches between
families, classes or domains; blue arrows, the match is to a virus known to infect that species (not including provirus sequences within genomes
of cellular organisms). Boxes denote number of spacer hits between two organisms, absence of a box denoting a single match. “@”, “#” equal
best hits. Within species matches are not shown.

Between species
Within species

Location in the array

Figure 4 Distribution of the fractions of between-species (light
blue) and within species (dark blue) spacer hits according to
their location in the CRISPR array.

for thermophilic [17,18] and halophilic species (R.
Thane Papke, submitted). These DNA uptake events can
be non-specific, therefore introducing non-archaeal
DNA into the cell, and may include bacterial, protozoan
or even animal DNA. Although hits to eukaryotic (Additional File 11 Table S10) organisms had relatively low Evalues, since these organisms have large genomes, the
significance of these matches should be interpreted with
caution. We therefore repeated these BLASTN searches,
restricting the search to the genomes in question. Again,
E-values smaller than 0.00001 were obtained (for alignments see Additional File 12 AddFigure 1), indicating
that these matches are not due to some compositional
enrichment in those genomes that increases likelihood
of good matches to these spacers. Thus, a possible
explanation of this phenomenon is that similarly to our
own immune system, that is sometimes activated against
food antigens, archaeal CRISPR/Cas can become activated during the uptake of DNA for nutritional purposes [see [19]]. Since eukaryotic sequence space is still
poorly explored, and eukaryotic genomes contain a lot
of non-coding material that can rapidly lose sequence
similarity, it is possible that many more spacers are
eukaryote-derived.
Few archaeal spacers match metagenomic sequences

Counter to our expectations, there were only 49
matches (derived from 23 individual spacers) to metagenomic sequences, including viral metagenomes [20].
This is in contrast to the previous studies showing
excellent correspondence between CRISPR spacers from
metagenomes and viral communities from the same
environment [8,21,22]. When focusing on haloarchaeal
spacers and comparing them to the viral and microbial
metagenomes of the San Diego saltern [20], we observed
that a single spacer from H. lacusprofundi had six
matches in the microbial metagenome, while another H.
lacusprofundi spacer, a H. marismortui spacer and a
Halorhabdus utahensis collectively yielded 11 matches
in the viral metagenome from the same site (Additional
File 13 Table S11). The haloarchaeal genomes in our

Page 5 of 10

dataset originate from archaea isolated from the Dead
Sea, Israel (H. marismortui); Great Salt Lake, Utah, USA
(H. utahensis) and Deep Lake, Antarctica (H. lacusprofundi). Thus, it is possible that few viral types are shared
between these hyper-saline locations and the San Diego
saltern, due to high levels of viral endemism, as suggested previously for bacteriophages [23].
The location of spacer within the array can be used as an
indicator for selection

Anti-viral defense has been highlighted as the major
benefit of the CRISPR/Cas system to microorganisms.
As can be expected, CRISPR spacers of one archaeal
strain often match a virus known to infect another
strain of the same species. For example, six spacers
from Methanothermobacter thermautotrophicus strain
Delta H match the Methanobacterium phage psiM2
[24], whose natural host is M. thermautotrophicus strain
Marburg (Additional File 10 Dataset 1). New foreign
DNA is integrated by the CRISPR/Cas system right next
to the leader sequence, so older spacers tend to be at
the distal end of the array. Newly acquired, recently
integrated spacers have not had time for selection to
operate on them, while older spacers can accumulate
mutations unless they are under selection for retention.
Thus, only spacers that are advantageous to the organism would be retained over long periods of time. Since
anti-viral spacers are expected to be the most beneficial
and therefore result in the strongest selection for retention, we examined the array location distribution of
spacers that match archaeal viruses. As predicted, there
was an enrichment for virus-matching spacers compared
to the rest of the spacers in locations that are more distant from the CRISPR leader sequence (P = 0.024,
Mann-Whitney-Wilcoxon test, Figures 4, 5). Surprisingly, there was also an enrichment in spacers with
matches that fall outside the species which possesses the
CRISPR array (P = 0.002, Mann-Whitney-Wilcoxon test,
Figure 4), most of them matching viral sequences.

Normalized number of hits

0.45
0.4
0.35
0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0

110
11
-2
0
21
-3
0
31
-4
0
41
-5
0
51
-6
0
61
-7
0
71
-8
0
81
-9
91 0
-1
0
10 0
111
11 0
112
12 0
11
13 30
114
14 0
115
15 0
116
0

Normalized number of hits

Brodt et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:65
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/65

1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
1-10 11- 21- 31- 41- 51- 61- 71- 81- 91- 101- 111- 121- 131- 141- 15120 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 120 130 140 150 160
Location in the array

Figure 5 The distribution of the normalized number of hits
according to the location in the CRISPR array. Light - viral hits;
dark non-viral hits. Each result was normalized, dividing by the
number of matches in each location bin.

Brodt et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:65
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/65

Taken together, these findings can be interpreted as
strong selection for spacers that provide resistance to
viruses that are able to infect multiple hosts, or spacers
that match several different viral types. These spacers
can be thought of as the archaeal equivalent of broadly
cross-protecting antibodies able to confer immunity
against multiple strains of the same bacterial pathogen.

Conclusions
The rapid nature of spacer acquisition and loss in
CRISPR arrays makes spacers an important tool for the
study of the ecology of archaeal species. This work
demonstrates that there is much gene exchange within
and between archaeal genera, and that anti-viral spacers,
especially cross-protective ones, are preferentially
retained. While the primary role of CRISPR/Cas systems
appears to be to provide immunity against invading
DNA, many spacers that are acquired can target random, presumably harmless, genes, just as vertebrate
immune systems often recognize harmless antigens.
Methods
Spacer data

All available CRISPR spacers from archaea were downloaded from CRISPRdb http://crispr.u-psud.fr/crispr/
database [25] on 14.2.11. Following the exclusion of
spacers defined by CRISPRdb as questionable, we
retained 9219 out of 9424 spacers, derived from 78
archaeal genomes.
Filtering of hits

Spacers were compared by NCBI BLASTN against the
nr and env_nr nucleotide databases. BLASTN was preformed using a threshold of 0.001 for the E-value expectancy parameter, and setting the other parameters to
default values. Self-hits (i.e. hits of spacers against themselves within the CRISPR array context were filtered out
by removing all 100% identity hits where the organism
was the same and the locus of the spacer and the hit
sequence were the same, e.g. chromosome with chromosome or plasmid with plasmid).
We examined only hits that met all the following criteria: Coverage > = 0.5, Identity > = 0.85 and E-value <
= E-05(Additional File 14 Dataset 2).
Assignment of best hits

For all spacers that yielded hits that satisfied the above
criteria, the best match was identified for each spacer
individually. The best hit was judged as the sequence
producing the maximal score according to the formula:
3 * (value of identity) + (value of coverage). In a few
cases the best score according to this formula matched
more than a single hit. When multiple best hits pointed

Page 6 of 10

to different functional classes (Figure 2), a hit of the
spacer was counted once for each class.
For taxonomic assignment purposes, the best hits to
cellular organisms and their plasmids allowed direct
inference of origin. Hits to viruses were classified taxonomically by the known host species of the virus in
question, according to the literature. Assignments of
phylum, family, genus and species were according to
NCBI taxonomy
For functional classification, spacers were classified by
the type of mobile element they matched (virus or provirus, plasmid) or, in cases where they hit a chromosomal gene were classified as transposase gene, as
integrase gene, as housekeeping if the gene in question
had a putative cellular function, as a CRISPR gene if the
gene in question had an annotation of CRISPR (cas
genes/RAMP genes etc), as a mobility related gene (such
as toxin/anti-toxin or DNA restriction/modification, on
the chromosome) or as hypothetical if the gene was a
hypothetical ORF or had a general function prediction
only. The latter ORFs were also checked using BLASTP
to confirm that no better functional annotation can be
obtained by BLAST. This process was also performed
when there was no annotation available for the target
locus. Genes encoded on plasmids were classified as
plasmids and were not classified as transposons (i.e.
counted once) when the matches were to a plasmidencoded transposase. In the absence of a coding gene
hit, a hit was defined as being near a gene of a particular
category (e.g. virus, archaeal host gene), if the NCBI
BLAST annotation identified it being near such a feature
(gene). Genes with functions that classified as housekeeping or hypothetical were also checked with regard
to their gene neighborhood. In order to qualify as a
housekeeping gene or hypothetical ORF with no viral
feature, the gene had to be more than five genes apart,
both upstream and downstream of any putative viral
gene within the genome.

Reviwer’s comments
Reviewer’s report 1

W. Ford Doolittle, Dalhousie University.
Reviewer comments

This is a nice little exercise in bioinformatics, showing
that there is significant incorporation of non-mobile,
non-viral genes as CRISPR spacers. Because the genomic
databases are so skewed in terms of taxonomic inclusion, authors are wise to avoid getting very quantitative
about their results.
It is interesting to wonder and important to know
how these genes get into the recipients. The speculation
that many archaea have the equivalent of nonspecific

Brodt et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:65
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/65

transformation systems seems unavoidable — how else
would they acquire eukaryotic DNA? The latter imports
do raise further questions. Since there are relatively few
eukaryotic genomes and since so much of so many of
them is made up of non-coding sequences that would
be expected to lose BLASTN detectability quickly, one
might infer that most of the CRISPR sequences that
match nothing are actually eukaryotic. Could that be so?
It also seems a bit of a no-brainer that most CRISPR
phage hits are to phage infecting other (albeit congeneric)
species. If the CRISPR is active, will it not ensure that
phages that match it perfectly do not infect effectively?
And where the hit is to a chromosomal gene not from
the same species, cannot this simply mean that if it were,
there would have been an autoimmunity problem?
Author’s response:
“It is interesting to wonder and important to know
how these genes get into the recipients. The speculation
that many archaea have the equivalent of nonspecific
transformation systems seems unavoidable — how else
would they acquire eukaryotic DNA? “
We agree with this comment, but just to make the
message more pronounced we included the actual term
competence in the text as follows:”... take up naked
DNA from the environment (i.e. natural competence),”
The latter imports do raise further questions. Since
there are relatively few eukaryotic genomes and since so
much of so many of them is made up of non-coding
sequences that would be expected to lose BLASTN
detectability quickly, one might infer that most of the
CRISPR sequences that match nothing are actually
eukaryotic. Could that be so?
While we think that most CRISPR sequences come
from under-represented (database-wise) archaeal viruses
and not eukaryotes, we really liked that comment. Thus
we added the sentence “ Since eukaryotic sequence
space is still poorly explored, and eukaryotic genomes
contain a lot of non-coding material that can rapidly
lose sequence similarity, it is possible that many more
spacers are eukaryote-derived, “
It also seems a bit of a no-brainer that most CRISPR
phage hits are to phage infecting other (albeit congeneric) species. If the CRISPR is active, will it not ensure
that phages that match it perfectly do not infect
effectively?
Nevertheless there are cases where a few strains of the
same species have been sequenced, and there we do
observe hits within the species. We realized that the figure legend did not state that “Within species matches
are not shown.”, and have added that sentence.
And where the hit is to a chromosomal gene not from
the same species, cannot this simply mean that if it
were, there would have been an autoimmunity problem?

Page 7 of 10

Correct, and thus the adverb “Surprisingly” was
removed from the sentence which now reads” Most
spacers have best matches outside the specific
CRISPR...”
Reviewer’s report: 2

John van der Oost, Wageningen University Brodt and
co-workers report on an in silico analysis of CRISPR
spacers in archaeal genomes. Whereas half of the
spacers match with plasmids or viruses, a substantial
number of matches have been detected with chromosomal genes of other organisms, mainly archaea. This
observation has been interpreted as evidence for recombination events. The spacers with matches to viruses
tend to be located more towards the 3’ end of the
CRISPR, indicative of the selective pressure to retain
them. This study adds some details to the rapidly developing CRISPR field. The text requires serious polishing
and more careful phrasing Comments
1) CRISPR/Cas is name for the defense system,
CRISPR is the repetitive array;
when referring to gene(s), cas should be italics;
2) P.1, Background, line 3: should be: CRISPR arrays
can be transcribed and processed into small crRNA
molecules.
3) P.1, Background, line 4: should be: foreign nucleic
acid for degradation.
4) P.1, Conclusions, line 3: should be: anti-viral and
anti-plasmid defense.
5) P.2, Background, line 14-17: rephrase since archaeal
systems have not been studied in enough detail - there
may be a “seed; sequence there as well, as recently
described for the E. coli system;
6) P.3, Results & Discussion, line 3-4: higher numbers
of spacers - provide numbers in text
7) P.3, Results & Discussion, line 13: CRISPR should
be: CRISPR-associated.
8) P.3, Results & Discussion, line 22-31: Mention the
different types of recombination: Conjugation, Transfection, and Transformation.
9) P.3, Results & Discussion, last line: provide examples of CRISPR loci that reside on plasmid (add Suppl
Table).
10) P.4, Results & Discussion, line 14-16: identity is
not the only thing that matters, so does precence of
PAM motif - include this in analysis and discussion;
11) P.5, Results & Discussion, line 3: substitute
“organism” by “related virus";
Author’s response:
1) CRISPR/Cas is name for the defense system,
CRISPR is the repetitive array;
when referring to gene(s), cas should be italics;
Fixed

Brodt et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:65
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/65

2) P.1, Background, line 3: should be: CRISPR arrays
can be transcribed and processed into small crRNA
molecules
Fixed, in both abstract and main text.
3) P.1, Background, line 4: should be: foreign nucleic
acid for degradation.
Fixed
4) P.1, Conclusions, line 3: should be: anti-viral and
anti-plasmid defense.
Fixed
5) P.2, Background, line 14-17: rephrase since archaeal
systems have not been studied in enough detail - there
may be a “seed; sequence there as well, as recently
described for the E. coli system;
Rephrased to: “Archaeal CRISPR/Cas has been shown
to confer almost 100% immunity in cases where spacers
were identical to the target sequence, but partial
matches also provide substantial immunity in archaea
[12]. A short seed sequence that requires a perfect
match has been recently discovered in bacteria [6], but
whether such seed also exists in archaea, remains to be
determined”
6) P.3, Results & Discussion, line 3-4: higher numbers
of spacers - provide numbers in text.
Done
7) P.3, Results & Discussion, line 13: CRISPR should
be: CRISPR-associated
Fixed
8) P.3, Results & Discussion, line 22-31: Mention the
different types of recombination: Conjugation, Transfection, and Transformation.
Done
9) P.3, Results & Discussion, last line: provide examples of CRISPR loci that reside on plasmid (add Suppl
Table).
Done
10) P.4, Results & Discussion, line 14-16: identity is
not the only thing that matters, so does precence of
PAM motif - include this in analysis and discussion;
We thank the reviewer for pointing that possibility,
which we have overlooked. We have revised the text to:
“The fact that this self-matching spacer is tolerated in
this organism implies that either the proto-spacer associated motif (PAM) has been mutated in the chromosomal gene sequence rendering the gene immune [3] or
that the chromosomal CRISPR/Cas system had become
deactivated in this archaeon.” We also performed some
analysis, assuming that the Halomicrobium CRISPR/Cas
is CRISPR group 1, like Haloarcula to which some of its
cas genes show some similarity, we would expect the
PAM to be (t/a)GG (based on Mojica et al., Microbiology 2009), but we find CCC in the chromosome instead,
which should protect the gene from cleavage. This is
very nice, but because of the assumptions/guesswork

Page 8 of 10

involved we would rather not include these results in
the text.
11) P.5, Results & Discussion, line 3: substitute
“organism” by “related virus";
Fixed
Reviewer’s report: 3

Christa Schleper, University of Vienna (nominated by J.
Peter Gogarten, University of Connecticut)
The authors present an analysis of archaeal CRISPR
spacers searching for their potential origin by DNA
similarity searches in the public databases. As expected
and shown in earlier studies, the authors demonstrate
that most spacers are homologous to sequences of
viruses or other mobile genetic elements, but they find
also a considerable fraction of matches to classical chromosomally derived (or housekeeping) genes in other
organisms. By superimposing the identified protospacers
with taxonomic clusters, the authors give an overview of
the potential sources of the archaeal spacer sequences
which indicates potential routes of horizontal gene
transfer.
The manuscript is very clearly and concisely written
and it is inspiring. For example, I got the feeling that
the frequent exchange of DNA among Sulfolobales, as
often insinuated through conjugative and comparative
genomic studies is somewhat reflected in the CRISPR
world. It is also of interest to see, that several viruses in
archaea might have a broader host range than expected.
Of course a potential chromosomal DNA transfer
from eukaryotes, even humans, to archaea should be a
rather rare event(!). However, I think that the authors
should consider (and discuss) another potential mechanism to explain the general picture: Spacers, that were
perhaps originally self-directed against the own genome
and thus raised autoimmunity, might have caused selection for organisms, that have lost the respective target
gene. In that case, the spacer, which remained, was originally derived from a gene of the own chromosome,
but in today’s blast searches the next best match appears
to another (maybe even distantly related) organism. The
authors might find out about this possibility, by checking if another orthologue of that gene is found in the
chromosome of the spacer-carrying organism or not.
Furthermore, I think it is of importance, to include in
the analyses more than just the best BLAST matches. If
e.g. a Methanococcus spacer matches a human sequence
best, but the second best match with an almost identical
e-value is to a bacterium, then I would be far less convinced of a eukaryotic-archaeal transfer.
Minor comments:
it is not possible for the reader to identify the spacers
listed in tables 1-10. It would be helpfull to number the
spacers of each organism and to link them to the

Brodt et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:65
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/65

additional data set, in which the spacer sequences are
explicitly given (suppl. No. 12)
Figure 1: colour of Nanoarchaeota does not match
with colour legend- Figure 4: not all loci have 150
spacers. Explain how this figure should be interpreted.
thermophilic, halophilic is misspelled
Authors response:
I think that the authors should consider (and discuss)
another potential mechanism to explain the general picture: Spacers, that were perhaps originally self-directed
against the own genome and thus raised autoimmunity,
might have caused selection for organisms, that have
lost the respective target gene. In that case, the spacer,
which remained, was originally derived from a gene of
the own chromosome, but in today’s blast searches the
next best match appears to another (maybe even distantly related) organism. The authors might find out
about this possibility, by checking if another orthologue
of that gene is found in the chromosome of the spacercarrying organism or not.
This is an interesting suggestion, although one would
still need to explain how the autoimmunity emerged in
the first place, so exposure to foreign DNA that is similar
is not altogether excluded. We performed the analysis
suggested and added the following paragraph: “ For
spacers that match non mobility-associated ORFs in
other species, one may also consider an alternative explanation, other than horizontal gene transfer. Spacers that
may have caused autoimmunity could have led to a loss
of the self-targeted gene, while orthologs of that gene
persist in other related species. While this scenario can
never be totally ruled out, one would expect that such a
phenomenon will often rely on existence of related gene
(or genes) in the organism that possessed the spacer that
compensate for the lost homolog. We therefore looked
for homologous genes by a BLASTX search of the gene
matching the spacer against the proteome of the organism where the spacer originated, requiring E-value < E-5;
> 66% sequence coverage and > 50% sequence similarity.
Out of 26 spacers that had best matches in coding genes
of other species (Additional Table S6, Additional Table
S8), two encode conserved essential proteins that were
presumably never lost (Orc1 and PCNA), 21 genes had
no BLASTX matches, and only three had related proteins
present. Thus, it appears that in general it is horizontal
gene transfer, rather than gene loss driven by autoimmunity that underlies the accumulation of these spacers.”
Furthermore, I think it is of importance, to include in
the analyses more than just the best BLAST matches. If
e.g. a Methanococcus spacer matches a human sequence
best, but the second best match with an almost identical
e-value is to a bacterium, then I would be far less convinced of a eukaryotic-archaeal transfer.

Page 9 of 10

We have addressed this point by adding an additional
dataset that includes all hits that passed our threshold not just the best hits (Additional dataset 2). Regarding
the hits to eukaryotes, there were no close matches to
bacteria except for one case: the spacer that produced
29/29 nucleotide identity against two insect genomes
also gave a 27/27 match to hrpW gene in Pseudomonas
viridiflava a plant pathogen. Curiously this gene encodes
an effector protein that elicits plant responses so it is
imaginable that parts of it have been transferred from
bacteria to eukaryotes or vice versa. In any case two
fewer identical residues mean a weaker similarity by
more than an order of magnitude.
Minor comments:
it is not possible for the reader to identify the spacers
listed in tables 1-10. It would be helpfull to number the
spacers of each organism and to link them to the suppl.
data set, in which the spacer sequences are explicitely
given (suppl. No. 12). To address this, we have now
included the CRISPRdb reference of each spacer in all
the additional tables, which have been re-done and are
provided as Excel files. Thus, it is now easier to identify
individual spacers.
Figure 1: colour of Nanoarchaeota does not match
with colour legend. Fixed, Figure 4: not all loci have 150
spacers. Explain how this figure should be interpreted.
We have re-phrased the legend of this figure, hope it is
clearer now.
thermophilic, halophilic is misspelled. Fixed

Additional material
Additional file 1: Table S1. Spacers matching plasmids.
Additional file 2: Table S2. Spacers matching viruses and proviruses,
including non-coding sequences flanking a viral ORF.
Additional file 3: Table S3. Spacers matching transposable elements,
including non-coding sequences flanking a transposable element ORF.
Additional file 4: Table S4. Spacers matching integrases, including noncoding sequences flanking an integrase.
Additional file 5: Table S5. Spacers matching mobility associated genes,
such as restriction -modification systems and toxin-anti-toxin systems,
including non-coding sequences flanking such elements.
Additional file 6: Table S6. Spacers matching housekeeping genes,
including non-coding sequences flanking such genes.
Additional file 7: Table S7. Spacers matching CRISPR-related genes,
including non-coding sequences flanking CRISPRs.
Additional file 8: Table S8. Spacers matching hypothetical genes,
including non-coding sequences flanking such genes.
Additional file 9: Table S9. CRISPR arrays located on plasmids.
Additional file 10: DataSet 1. Best genomic matches of spacers
identified in this study.
Additional file 11: Table S10. Spacers matching eukaryotes.
Additional file 12: AddFigure 1. BLASTN alignments of spacer
sequences that match eukaryotic sequences.
Additional file 13: Table S11. Spacers matching metagenomes.

Brodt et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:65
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/65

Additional file 14: DataSet 2. All significant genomic matches of
spacers identified in this study, allowing multiple matches.

Acknowledgements
MNLW was supported by fellowships from the Edmond J. Safra
Bioinformatics Program and the Dan David foundation. AB was supported
by a fellowship from the Edmond J. Safra Bioinformatics program. UG was
funded by the McDonnell Foundation and the German-Israeli Project
Cooperation (DIP).
Authors’ contributions
AB participated in the design of the study, obtained and analyzed data,
performed statistical analysis and wrote the manuscript. MNLW conceived of
the study and participated in writing the manuscript. UG participated in the
design of the study, obtained and analyzed data, performed statistical
analysis and wrote the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 30 August 2011 Accepted: 21 December 2011
Published: 21 December 2011
References
1. Marraffini LA, Sontheimer EJ: CRISPR interference: RNA-directed adaptive
immunity in bacteria and archaea. Nat Rev Genet 2010, 11(3):181-190.
2. Karginov FV, Hannon GJ: The CRISPR system: small RNA-guided defense
in bacteria and archaea. Mol Cell 2010, 37(1):7-19.
3. Horvath P, Barrangou R: CRISPR/Cas, the immune system of bacteria and
archaea. Science 2010, 327(5962):167-170.
4. Sorek R, Kunin V, Hugenholtz P: CRISPR–a widespread system that
provides acquired resistance against phages in bacteria and archaea.
Nat Rev Microbiol 2008, 6(3):181-186.
5. Haurwitz RE, Jinek M, Wiedenheft B, Zhou K, Doudna JA: Sequence- and
structure-specific RNA processing by a CRISPR endonuclease. Science
2010, 329(5997):1355-1358.
6. Semenova E, Jore MM, Datsenko KA, Semenova A, Westra ER, Wanner B,
van der Oost J, Brouns SJ, Severinov K: Interference by clustered regularly
interspaced short palindromic repeat (CRISPR) RNA is governed by a
seed sequence. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2011, 108(25):10098-10103.
7. Marraffini LA, Sontheimer EJ: Self versus non-self discrimination during
CRISPR RNA-directed immunity. Nature 2010, 463(7280):568-571.
8. Andersson AF, Banfield JF: Virus population dynamics and acquired virus
resistance in natural microbial communities. Science 2008,
320(5879):1047-1050.
9. Tyson GW, Banfield JF: Rapidly evolving CRISPRs implicated in acquired
resistance of microorganisms to viruses. Environ Microbiol 2008,
10(1):200-207.
10. Stern A, Keren L, Wurtzel O, Amitai G, Sorek R: Self-targeting by CRISPR:
gene regulation or autoimmunity? Trends Genet 2010, 26(8):335-340.
11. Makarova KS, Haft DH, Barrangou R, Brouns SJ, Charpentier E, Horvath P,
Moineau S, Mojica FJ, Wolf YI, Yakunin AF, et al: Evolution and
classification of the CRISPR-Cas systems. Nat Rev Microbiol 2011,
9(6):467-477.
12. Manica A, Zebec Z, Teichmann D, Schleper C: In vivo activity of CRISPRmediated virus defence in a hyperthermophilic archaeon. Mol Microbiol
2011, 80(2):481-491.
13. Hartman AL, Norais C, Badger JH, Delmas S, Haldenby S, Madupu R,
Robinson J, Khouri H, Ren Q, Lowe TM, et al: The complete genome
sequence of Haloferax volcanii DS2, a model archaeon. PLoS One 2010,
5(3):e9605.
14. Guo L, Brugger K, Liu C, Shah SA, Zheng H, Zhu Y, Wang S, Lillestol RK,
Chen L, Frank J, et al: Genome analyses of Icelandic strains of Sulfolobus
islandicus, model organisms for genetic and virus-host interaction
studies. J Bacteriol 193(7):1672-1680.

Page 10 of 10

15. Haring M, Vestergaard G, Rachel R, Chen L, Garrett RA, Prangishvili D:
Virology: independent virus development outside a host. Nature 2005,
436(7054):1101-1102.
16. Prangishvili D, Vestergaard G, Haring M, Aramayo R, Basta T, Rachel R,
Garrett RA: Structural and genomic properties of the hyperthermophilic
archaeal virus ATV with an extracellular stage of the reproductive cycle.
J Mol Biol 2006, 359(5):1203-1216.
17. Lipscomb GL, Stirrett K, Schut GJ, Yang F, Jenney FE Jr, Scott RA,
Adams MW, Westpheling J: Natural competence in the hyperthermophilic
archaeon Pyrococcus furiosus facilitates genetic manipulation:
construction of markerless deletions of genes encoding the two
cytoplasmic hydrogenases. Appl Environ Microbiol 77(7):2232-2238.
18. Grogan DW, Stengel KR: Recombination of synthetic oligonucleotides
with prokaryotic chromosomes: substrate requirements of the
Escherichia coli/lambdaRed and Sulfolobus acidocaldarius recombination
systems. Mol Microbiol 2008, 69(5):1255-1265.
19. Redfield RJ: Genes for breakfast: the have-your-cake-and-eat-it-too of
bacterial transformation. J Hered 1993, 84(5):400-404.
20. Dinsdale EA, Edwards RA, Hall D, Angly F, Breitbart M, Brulc JM, Furlan M,
Desnues C, Haynes M, Li L, et al: Functional metagenomic profiling of
nine biomes. Nature 2008, 452(7187):629-632.
21. Anderson RE, Brazelton WJ, Baross JA: Using CRISPRs as a metagenomic
tool to identify microbial hosts of a diffuse flow hydrothermal vent viral
assemblage. FEMS Microbiol Ecol 2011, 77(1):120-133.
22. Sorokin VA, Gelfand MS, Artamonova II: Evolutionary dynamics of
clustered irregularly interspaced short palindromic repeat systems in the
ocean metagenome. Appl Environ Microbiol 2010, 76(7):2136-2144.
23. Desnues C, Rodriguez-Brito B, Rayhawk S, Kelley S, Tran T, Haynes M, Liu H,
Furlan M, Wegley L, Chau B, et al: Biodiversity and biogeography of
phages in modern stromatolites and thrombolites. Nature 2008,
452(7185):340-343.
24. Pfister P, Wasserfallen A, Stettler R, Leisinger T: Molecular analysis of
Methanobacterium phage psiM2. Mol Microbiol 1998, 30(2):233-244.
25. Grissa I, Vergnaud G, Pourcel C: The CRISPRdb database and tools to
display CRISPRs and to generate dictionaries of spacers and repeats.
BMC Bioinformatics 2007, 8:172.
doi:10.1186/1745-6150-6-65
Cite this article as: Brodt et al.: CRISPR loci reveal networks of gene
exchange in archaea. Biology Direct 2011 6:65.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
