<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>gb-2004-5-6-r38.fm</title>
<meta name="Author" content="csproduction"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 7.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 5.0.5 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Open Access

Volume
et al.
Budd
2004 5, Issue 6, Article R38

Research

Aidan Budd*, Stephanie Blandin*, Elena A Levashina† and Toby J Gibson*

comment

Bacterial α2-macroglobulins: colonization factors acquired by
horizontal gene transfer from the metazoan genome?

Addresses: *European Molecular Biology Laboratory, 69012 Heidelberg, Germany. †UPR 9022 du CNRS, IBMC, rue René Descartes, F-67087
Strasbourg CEDEX, France.
Correspondence: Toby J Gibson. E-mail: toby.gibson@embl.de

Received: 20 February 2004
Revised: 2 April 2004
Accepted: 8 April 2004

Genome Biology 2004, 5:R38

reviews

Published: 26 May 2004

The electronic version of this article is the complete one and can be
found online at http://genomebiology.com/2004/5/6/R38

reports

© 2004 Budd et al.; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article: verbatim copying and redistribution of this article are permitted in all media
for any purpose, provided this notice is preserved along with the article's original URL.
which exploit differentgene transfer.share almost and adapted eukaryotic host transfer protease inhibitor α<sub>2</sub>-macroglobulin
bacteria bymajor metazoan defense against invasive speciesbytrapping attacking proteases required byacquire colonizing genesinvasion.</
<p>Invasive bacteria are known to have captured none of theirhorizontal gene genes. They also readily <it>Helicobacter hepaticus</it>,
p>
provides a 2horizontal host tissues, Closely related bacteria, colonization genes. The from </it>and parasites for successful from other
Bacterial α -macroglobulins: colonization factors acquired such as <it>Helicobacter pylori the metazoan genome?

Abstract
Background: Invasive bacteria are known to have captured and adapted eukaryotic host genes.
They also readily acquire colonizing genes from other bacteria by horizontal gene transfer. Closely
related species such as Helicobacter pylori and Helicobacter hepaticus, which exploit different host
tissues, share almost none of their colonization genes. The protease inhibitor α2-macroglobulin
provides a major metazoan defense against invasive bacteria, trapping attacking proteases required
by parasites for successful invasion.

deposited research

Results: Database searches with metazoan α2-macroglobulin sequences revealed homologous
sequences in bacterial proteomes. The bacterial α2-macroglobulin phylogenetic distribution is
patchy and violates the vertical descent model. Bacterial α2-macroglobulin genes are found in
diverse clades, including purple bacteria (proteobacteria), fusobacteria, spirochetes, bacteroidetes,
deinococcids, cyanobacteria, planctomycetes and thermotogae. Most bacterial species with
bacterial α2-macroglobulin genes exploit higher eukaryotes (multicellular plants and animals) as
hosts. Both pathogenically invasive and saprophytically colonizing species possess bacterial α2macroglobulins, indicating that bacterial α2-macroglobulin is a colonization rather than a virulence
factor.

refereed research
information

Genome Biology 2004, 5:R38

interactions

Conclusions: Metazoan α2-macroglobulins inhibit proteases of pathogens. The bacterial
homologs may function in reverse to block host antimicrobial defenses. α2-macroglobulin was
probably acquired one or more times from metazoan hosts and has then spread widely through
other colonizing bacterial species by more than 10 independent horizontal gene transfers. yfhM-like
bacterial α2-macroglobulin genes are often found tightly linked with pbpC, encoding an atypical
peptidoglycan transglycosylase, PBP1C, that does not function in vegetative peptidoglycan
synthesis. We suggest that YfhM and PBP1C are coupled together as a periplasmic defense and
repair system. Bacterial α2-macroglobulins might provide useful targets for enhancing vaccine
efficacy in combating infections.

R38.2 Genome Biology 2004,

Volume 5, Issue 6, Article R38

Budd et al.

Background

The broad-spectrum protease inhibitor α2-macroglobulin
(α2M) and the complement factors C3, C4 and C5 belong to a
gene family present in all metazoans ranging from corals to
humans. These large (approximately 1,500 residue) proteins
all undergo proteolytic processing and structural rearrangement as part of their role in host defense. The family is characterized by a unique thioester motif (CxEQ; single-letter
amino-acid code), and a propensity for multiple conformationally sensitive binding interactions [1], which define their
functional properties. The highly reactive thioester bond is
buried inside the molecule in the native protein, protected
from precocious inactivation [2]. Upon proteolytic cleavage,
the thioester bond becomes exposed and can then mediate
covalent attachment to activating self and non-self surfaces,
in the case of complement factors, or covalent or noncovalent
crosslinking to the attacking proteases in the case of α2Ms [3].
The proteolytic activation of these proteins also mediates
interactions with receptors.
In contrast to complement factors, which are activated by
specific 'convertase' protease complexes, α2Ms have an accessible 'bait' region with target sites for many proteases. The
rearrangement of α2M that follows cleavage of the bait region
entraps the attacking protease in a cage-like structure, hindering protein substrates from reaching the protease active
site [4]. In this way, exported proteases that are essential for
parasitic infections can be rendered ineffective by α2M
entrapment [5-7]. Protease-reacted α2M is then cleared from
circulation by binding to the receptor CD91, triggering endocytosis. In addition, α2Ms bind cytokines and growth factors
and regulate their clearance and activity [8,9].
Vertebrate complement factors C3, C4 and C5 are part of an
activation cascade that leads to the assembly of the membrane-attack complex and lysis of the pathogen. Binding of C3
also targets pathogens for phagocytosis. Proteolytic activation of all three complement proteins yields anaphylatoxins
(cleaved amino-terminal fragments) which are recognized by
specific receptors and activate the inflammatory response at
the site of infection. In contrast to α2Ms, complement factors
also possess a carboxy-terminal domain extension, the netrin
or NTR module (PFAM:PF01759) [10]. Some members of the
complement/α2M family (for example, C5 and ovostatin)
have lost the thioester motif.
No α2M-related proteins have been found in any eukaryotes
outside metazoans. Within the Metazoa, representatives have
been found in all species examined, with a so-called 'C3-like'
protein sequenced from the cnidarian Swiftia exserta
(SWISS-PROT acc:Q8IYP1). There is no information from
sponges as yet. We may speculate that the gene family evolved
in an early metazoan in response to challenge from invasive
microorganisms exploiting the new niche provided by the
interstitial spaces and body cavities. The more derived role of
the complement factors, together with their extra netrin

http://genomebiology.com/2004/5/6/R38

domain, suggests that they arose by gene duplication from an
ancestral α2M-like gene. Apart from vertebrates, α2M-group
proteins have been most actively studied in arthropods. The
horseshoe crab Limulus has a plasma α2M that is a component of an ancient invertebrate defense system; it is able to
inhibit a wide range of proteases as well as to modulate
plasma cytolytic activity [11]. Limulus α2M forms tetramers,
binding covalently across the multimers rather than to the
attacking proteases, but still traps these in a cage-like structure after proteolytic activation [12]. In dipteran insects,
there are multiple α2M homologs, the thioester-containing
proteins (TEPs). The TEP genes have been amplified by a
process of tandem duplication into linked multigene families.
Drosophila melanogaster has six TEP genes, whereas the
mosquito Anopheles gambiae has 15 [13]. It is thought that
the impressive expansion of TEP genes in the mosquito might
be linked to the parasitic challenge provided by its bloodsucking lifestyle [13]. The first characterized TEP in mosquitoes, TEP1, binds to and promotes phagocytosis of bacteria
[14]. TEP1 also binds to Plasmodium berghei and mediates
its killing [15]. Thus the complement/α2M protein family is
part of an innate immune system in metazoans that long predates the immunoglobulin-based immune system of vertebrates, yet remains vital for combating parasites in all animal
lineages examined.
While reviewing the distribution of α2M/TEP proteins from
invertebrates [16], we conducted BLAST searches of the protein databases and were surprised to discover a number of
bacterial sequences with BLAST E-values indicating homology with α2M. Given the absence of α2Ms in all non-metazoan
eukaryotic lineages, it immediately seemed clear that horizontal gene transfer (HGT) of α2Ms must have occurred
between metazoans and bacteria. But which way? Here we
summarize the evidence for numerous horizontal transfers
between bacterial lineages and discuss some biochemical and
medical implications of the finding.

Results

Our BLAST2SRS server provides the species in the BLAST
output page: this is useful for quick visual surveys of the taxonomic distribution of a protein family. A BLAST2SRS search
with human α2M unexpectedly listed an entry (SWISS-PROT
accession number Q9X079) with E-value 2.3e-8 from Thermotoga maritima, a thermophilic eubacterium. With a
length of 1,538 residues, a signal sequence and a matching
CxEQ motif, there was no doubt that this was a genuine α2M
homolog. Numerous other bacterial sequences with lower Evalues but obvious topological equivalence were also listed:
for example, Escherichia coli YfhM (P76578) at 5.8e-5; Pseudomonas putida AAN66197 at 1.3e-4; Rhizobium meliloti
Q92VA6 at 5.0e-3. Profile searches with a metazoan α2M
alignment and subsequently with an alignment of the
stronger bacterial hits revealed a number of additional, highly
diverged homologs, some lacking the CxEQ. For example, E.

Genome Biology 2004, 5:R38

http://genomebiology.com/2004/5/6/R38

Genome Biology 2004,

(a)

(b)

Figure 1a shows an alignment of the segment spanning the
CxEQ motif for a representative set of bacterial α2M
homologs. Not all bact-α2Ms possess the CxEQ motif. Using
E. coli as the reference, YfhM is the archetype of a large group,

Bact-α2Ms are absent from the full proteomes of the following
anciently diverged free-living species: the hyperthermophilic
chemolithoautotroph Aquifex aeolicus, the thermophilic photolithoautotroph Chlorobium tepidum, the cyanobacteria
Synechocystis, Synechococcus and Prochlorococcus, all firmicutes including Bacillus subtilis, all actinobacteria including Streptomyces coelicolor, the β-proteobacterium
Nitrosomonas europaea and the δ-proteobacterium Geobacter metallireducens. Furthermore, possession of bactα2M is inconsistently represented within clades such as the
proteobacteria, spirochetes and cyanobacteria. This is well
illustrated by the two species of Helicobacter, one exploiting
the acidic stomach and the other the very different environment of the liver: only the latter has a bact-α2M. The H.
hepaticus genome lacks essentially all the proposed H. pylori
virulence factors and is believed to possess a quite different
set, adapted to its hepatobiliary habitat [20]. The irregular
phylogenetic correlation suggests that bact-α2Ms are

Genome Biology 2004, 5:R38

information

Bacterial α2-macroglobulin sequences

A survey of completely sequenced bacterial genomes was
undertaken to establish which lineages possessed bact-α2Ms
and which did not. Representative results are summarized in
Figure 2. It is clear that there is a highly inconsistent correlation of bact-α2M possession and phylogenetic relationship,
except for very closely related species.

interactions

coli has a second divergent homolog, YfaS (P76464). It is
noteworthy that not a single instance of an archaeal α2M
sequence could be found. Thus α2M-like sequences are
restricted to eubacteria and metazoans. No function has been
experimentally ascribed to any of the bacterial α2Ms (bactα2Ms).

Genomic context of bacterial α2-macroglobulins

refereed research

Figure 1
Sequence alignments
Sequence alignments. (a) Alignment detail of YfhM group bacterial α2macroglobulin sequences from bacterial proteomes plus human α2macroglobulin (α2M), centred on the conserved CxEQ thioester motif.
(b) Alignment of selected bacterial α2-macroglobulin signal peptides
possessing the conserved cysteine (C) residue. Signal peptides require a
run of hydrophobic residues preceded by a positively charged residue.
Cleavage is at the small (glycine (G)/alanine (A)) residue terminating the
signal peptide (marked by a dot). Aminoacylation of lipoproteins occurs in
the inner membrane at a C (marked by *) directly following the signal
peptide. An aspartate residue (D) after the C acts as a retention signal to
the inner membrane in E. coli, preventing lipoprotein transfer to the outer
membrane [17,18]. Alignments are color-coded using the Clustal X
defaults [66]. Blue denotes conserved hydrophobicity, as in the signal
peptide, while a strongly conserved C is colored pink. Accession numbers
are SWISS-PROT or NCBI genomes (NP, finished genome; ZP, provisional
assignment in unfinished genome). Species names follow the SWISS-PROT
convention.

deposited research

.*
------------MKKLRVAACMLMLALAGCDNNDNAPTAV
------------MKHLRVVACMIMLALAGCDNNDKTAPTT
MNQGQFWQQPGINKCYLAVILAFLLMLSGCDQSDSTDNKQ
------------MFNKGLLLACALALLSACDSSTPGKPAP
------------MLNKGLFLACALALLSACDSSTPDKPAP
-----MMRSGTRRMLLWAVLLVVAIGAVACKRNESGQLPA
-----MTSSGVRRMLLWVVLLTVALGSVACKRNESGQLPT
-----MLRPLVRGWIPRAVLLLTVAFSFGCNRNHNGQLPQ
-MTSSARLVSACRVFLCAMLFAALAVLAGCGSDTEERSDR
--------MNKQYFLSLFSTLAVALTLSGCWDKKQDEANA
---------MKKILKLVFILSLLIIAFVACKKDKEKQQTD
----MRYLCYIWKFFVFFGFIYVSTFLTACSDNKFVESYT
---------MLSSIKTLTACCLFMLCLAACSKKNVIEIKE
--------MIIRVCIRCFIVLTLVLGIGGCNFFGINSGRE

reports

Species Accession
Ecoli yfhM P76578
Salty
Q8ZN46
Pholu
NP:928670
Psepu
Q88QC4
Psesy
Q87VU0
Xanax
Q8PNC8
Xanca
Q8PBT0
Xylfa
Q9PDX7
Desde ZP:00129550
Pasmu
Q9CMZ1
Fusnu
EAA24785
Helhe
AAP77331
Cythu ZP:00120024
Anasp
Q8YM40

mostly with the thioester motif, and YfaS is the archetype of a
smaller, diverged group always lacking the motif. The
sequences of the YfhM group are sufficiently divergent that
accurate alignment proved time-consuming, but was
achieved over almost the whole sequence length, other than
the highly variable amino termini. We did not attempt to align
together the YfhM and YfaS groups and the metazoan α2Ms.
This would only be useful if the trees would be informative,
but the high divergence between the groups precludes accurate alignment, leading to unreliable tree calculation. (In
future, given more YfaS sequences and α2Ms from more
metazoan lineages and a solved three-dimensional structure
to guide alignment, this might be worth revisiting.) One feature apparent in many of the aligned YfhM sequences is a conserved cysteine directly following the signal peptide (Figure
1b), indicating palmitoylation. The presence of an aspartic
acid residue following the palmitoylated cysteine has been
shown in E. coli to dictate sorting to the inner membrane
[17,18], in which case YfhM will be found in the periplasmic
space, attached to the inner membrane. Given the CxEQ
motif, covalent trapping of proteases in the periplasmic space
seems to be the most likely function (whether the covalent
links are to the trapped protease or between the α2M multimers, as in the horseshoe crab Limulus [12]). The YfaS group of
bact-α2Ms lack a palmitoylable cysteine, so may be secreted,
while absence of the CxEQ motif indicates the molecular
function must be different, at least in part, though this does
not, of itself, rule out protease entrapment, as in chicken
ovostatin which also lacks the reactive thioester motif [19].

reviews

*. * **
. :
NTQNLLQMPYGCGEQNMVLFAPNIYV
YIKELKAYPYGCLEQTASGLFPSLYT
YIRELKAYPYGCLEQTTSGLFPALYT
YIRELYAYPYGCLEQTISGLYPSLYS
QIRALQAYPYGCLEQTTSGLYPSLYA
QIRALKAYPYGCLEQTASGLYPSLYA
ALQGALEYPYGCAEQTTSKGYAALLL
VLQGVFEYPYGCAEQTASKGYAALWL
LVDGLLTYPYGCTEQTISAAIPWVLI
LVDGLLTYPYGCTEQTISAAIPWVLI
LLMTLDRYPYGCAEQTTSRALPLLYL
Y
LVMMLDKYPYGCAEQTTSRALPLLYV
LLMTLDRYPYGCAEQTTSRAMPLLYV
IAVALQR PYGCTEQLVSAAYPLLYA
LLRWLDRYPYGCLEQTASRAMPLLYL
LSAYLESYPHACTEQLVSKSVPALVL
FKDFLDNYPYGCTEQLISQNFANILL
LIKSLLDYPYICLEQISSKGMAMLYI
RLKWLIRYPYGCIEQTTSSVLPQLFL
NLSYLIGYPYGCIEQTTSRAFPQLYL
GLDSLLLYPFGCTEQRISLARAGIGT
1.......10........20......

Budd et al. R38.3

comment

Species Accession Range
Human α2M P01023 961-986
Ecoli yfhM P76578 1176-1201
Salty
Q8ZN46 1168-1193
Pholu
NP:928670 1199-1224
Psepu
Q88QC4 1155-1180
Psesy
Q87VU0 1171-1196
Xanax
Q8PNC8 1154-1179
Xylfa
Q9PDX7 1155-1180
Borpe
Q7VVC2 1217-1242
Borpa
Q7W7E7 1217-1242
Rhime
Q92VA6 1356-1381
Agrtu
Q8U9N1 1358-1383
Rhilo
Q98K29 1369-1394
Caucr
Q9A2J0 1210-1235
Desde ZP:00129550 1276-1301
Sheon
NP:715708 1417-1442
Riccn
Q92HD6 1430-1455
Fusnu
EAA24785 1154-1179
Helhe
AAP77331 1366-1391
Cythu ZP:00120024 1335-1360
Magma ZP:00053598 1400-1425
Ruler

Volume 5, Issue 6, Article R38

R38.4 Genome Biology 2004,

Volume 5, Issue 6, Article R38

Budd et al.

http://genomebiology.com/2004/5/6/R38

Lifestyle

Species

Genomic context

Magnetospirillum magnetotacticum F

Lifestyles
F = Free-living

Homologs
α2M
PBPC
other
yfaA
yfaT
yfaQ
yfaP

Caulobacter crescentus

S
P

Rickettsia conorii

P

Bordetella pertussis

P

Ralstonia metallidurans

P

Neisseria meningitidis

P

α2M Present

Chromobacterium violaceum

F,P

Nitrosomonas europaea

F

α2M Absent

Ralstonia solanacearum

P

Burkholderia fungorum

P,S

Yersinia pestis

P

Pasteurella multocida

P,C

Salmonella typhimurium

P

Escherichia coli

Proteobacteria
bacteria

P

Rickettsia prowazekii

beta

Agrobacterium tumefaciens
Rhizobium meliloti

alpha

F

G,C,P

Shigella flexneri

P

Pseudomonas fluorescens

O,F

Pseudomonas aeruginosa

F,P

Pseudomonas putida

F,S

Xylella fastidiosa

P

Xanthomonas axonopodis

P

Xanthomonas campestris

P

Haemophilus influenzae

P

Vibrio cholerae

P

Desulfovibrio desulfuricans

F,S

Geobacter metallireducens

F

Helicobacter hepaticus

P

Helicobacter pylori

P

Wolinella succinogenes

C,O

Campylobacter jejuni

P

Fusobacteria

Fusobacterium nucleatum

C,P

Bacteroidetes

Bacteroides thetaiotamicron

G,C

Planctomycetes

Rhodopirellula baltica

F,O

Bacillus subtilis

F

Streptococcus pneumoniae

P

Mycobacterium tuberculosis

P

Bifidobacterium longum

G,C,O

Streptomyces coelicolor

F

Anabaena spp.

F,S

Nostoc punctiforme

F,S

Synechocystis spp.

F

Treponema pallidum

P

gamma

delta

epsilon

Firmicutes

Actinobacteria

Cyanobacteria

Spirochetes

Thermotogae
Chlorobi
Aquificae

P

Borrelia burgdorferi
Deinococcus-Thermus

Leptospira interrogans

P

Deinococcus radiodurans

F,O

Thermotoga maritima

F

Chlorobium tepidum

F

Aquifex aeolicus

F

Figure 2 (see legend on next page)

Genome Biology 2004, 5:R38

O = Organic residue
G = Gut bacterium
C = Commensal
S = Symbiotic
P = Pathogenic

http://genomebiology.com/2004/5/6/R38

Genome Biology 2004,

Volume 5, Issue 6, Article R38

Budd et al. R38.5

interactions

The STRING server was also used to check for any significant
coexpression of yfhM, yfaS and other members of the two
candidate operons, using E. coli data from the Stanford
microarray database [26]. All the genes associated with those
for bact-α2Ms are present in the experiments included in the
STRING database, and are expressed at levels significantly
above background. However, none of the genes exhibits coordinated variation in expression levels either with each other
or with any other genes in the E. coli genome under the conditions investigated.

refereed research

Microarray expression data

deposited research

The yfaS group of bact-α2Ms is likewise usually found in a
candidate operon, at least within the proteobacteria (Figure
2), in this case with four other gene families, defined by the E.
coli yfaA, yfaQ, yfaP and yfaT genes. All these genes have signal sequences and their encoded proteins are expected to be
secreted or periplasmic, but, otherwise, sequence analysis has
yielded no clues to their function. It is possible that all the
encoded proteins function to disrupt or resist host defenses.
The YfaS-like bact-α2Ms of the free-living and highly divergent Thermotoga, Deinococcus and Rhodopirellula (none of
which is known to be invasive) are not found associated with
most of these other genes.

reports

Calculation of sequence trees
An initial rough tree calculated from an alignment of yfhM
family sequences gave strong indications that several horizontal transfers had occurred among the available set. As
yfhM is always found together with pbpC, indicating that the
paired genes should have a shared phylogenetic history, a
quick check of the PBP1C tree was also done. The two trees,
which provide controls for each other's topologies, were very
similar, indicating that the apparent HGTs were unlikely to be
artifacts. Therefore, we undertook a more careful

Genome Biology 2004, 5:R38

information

The STRING server [21] was used to check for neighboring
genes that persistently co-occur with bact-α2Ms. Using either
yfhM or yfaS as seed, STRING reported two conserved gene
sets that are widely found with bact-α2Ms. The results are
summarized in Figure 2. The yfhM group always co-occurs
with pbpC, which encodes penicillin-binding protein 1C
(PBP1C). The gene topology is almost always consistent with
pbpC and yfhM being in the same operon (or co-transcribed
from a bidirectional promoter, as in Anabaena). The more
strongly an operon structure is conserved across species, the
more likely are the encoded proteins to have associated functions [22]. Moreover, products of conserved gene pairs very
often associate physically [23]. Therefore, if YfhM is involved
in colonizing or pathogenic lifestyles, so should be its partner.
PBP1C is a paralog of the periplasmic cell-wall biosynthesis
proteins PBP1A and PBP1B, though with the addition of a carboxy-terminal non-enzymatic domain of approximately 100
residues (PFAM:PF06832). The PBP1A and PBP1B peptidoglycan synthases each have two enzymatic domains, an aminoterminal transglycosylase and a carboxy-terminal transpeptidase (reviewed in [24]). Although it possesses the two enzymatic domains, studies have shown that PBP1C does not
substitute for these proteins in cell-wall biosynthesis during
vegetative growth [25]: indeed deletion of pbpC has a weak
phenotype not affecting cell viability in the laboratory,
although the number of peptide crosslinks is increased [25].
The transpeptidase domain in PBP1C is thought not to bind to
most of the β-lactams that inhibit the paralogous enzymes,
nor to be a functional transpeptidase [25]. One curious finding is that, in vitro, PBP1C accounts for 75% of transglycosylase activity, yet is responsible for only 3% of de novo
peptidoglycan biosynthesis in the cell [25]. As PBP1C does not

substitute for the biosynthetic enzymes, a possible role would
be in emergency repairs to the peptidoglycan, where its efficient transglycosylase activity would be appropriate.

reviews

'lifestyle' genes, affecting which niches a bacterium is able to
exploit. Although an association with colonization seems
clear (Figure 2), there is a strong bias in bacterial genome
sequencing in favor of pathogenic species: this currently precludes a statistical assessment and might create a misleading
phylogenetic perspective.

comment

Phylogenetic distribution of bacterial α2-macroglobulin homologs (α2M)
Figure 2 (see previous page)
Phylogenetic distribution of bacterial α2-macroglobulin homologs (α2M). Pink, species that possess bacterial α2-macroglobulin genes; yellow, species
without bacterial α2-macroglobulin genes. Shared genomic context is indicated for genes found to co-occur with bacterial α2-macroglobulin genes.
Because bacterial phylogeny has many uncertainties, the tree is simplified into multiple nodes representing three levels of divergence. There is little
phylogenetic consistency for bacterial α2-macroglobulin possession. Colonizing proteobacteria are overwhelmingly expected to have a bacterial α2macroglobulin gene, although exceptions occur, notably Helicobacter pylori, Vibrio cholerae and Neisseria meningitidis. No examples of bacterial α2macroglobulin genes have been found in colonizing Gram-positives in the Firmicutes or Actinobacteria, which include such major infectious clades as
streptococci and mycobacteria. Anabaena is a facultative plant symbiont, while other free-living cyanobacteria (here represented by Synechocystis) lack
bacterial α2-macroglobulin. Thermotoga maritima, Magnetospirillum magnetotacticum and Caulobacter crescentus are the only species possessing bacterial α2macroglobulin for which no apparent connection exists with niches linked to exploitation of higher eukaryotes. Genome context of bacterial α2Ms is based
on automated STRING annotation [21], supplemented by re-analysis of individual genomes. Double slanted bars between genes indicate that they are not
tightly linked. Bacterial α2-macroglobulins make up two distinct groups typified by the E. coli genes yfhM and yfaS. The members of the yfhM group (on the
left side of the figure) almost always co-occur with pbpC and are often, but not always, found adjacent to and on the same strand as one another in an
operon configuration. Members of the yfaS group (grouped on the right side of the figure), when present in β- or γ-proteobacteria, are linked to four
other gene families. All their predicted gene products also possess signal peptides, but are otherwise of unknown function. In other taxa, members of the
yfaS group of bacterial α2-macroglobulins are either unassociated with any of these gene families (planctomycetes and deinococci), or linked to a member
of just one of the families (thermotogae).

R38.6 Genome Biology 2004,

Volume 5, Issue 6, Article R38

(a)

Budd et al.

(b)

Yersinia pestis
0.60

http://genomebiology.com/2004/5/6/R38

Yersinia pestis

0.92
0.45

Pasteurella multocida

Pasteurella multocida

Rickettsia conorii

Shewanella oneidensis

Shewanella oneidensis
Desulfovibrio desulfuricans

0.96

Rickettsia conorii
Desulfovibrio desulfuricans

0.81

Caulobacter crescentus
0.96

Caulobacter crescentus

Agrobacterium tumefaciens

0.72

0.96

Rhizobium meliloti

Rhizobium loti

Rhizobium loti

Bradyrhizobium japonicum

Bradyrhizobium japonicum

Salmonella typhimurium

Salmonella typhimurium

Escherichia coli

0.94

0.97

Photorhabdus luminescens

Pseudomonas syringae

Pseudomonas putida

Pseudomonas putida

Bordetella pertussis

Bordetella pertussis

Xylella fastidiosa
0.95

Xanthomonas axonopodis

Xylella fastidiosa
Xanthomonas axonopodis

Helicobacter hepaticus

Helicobacter hepaticus

Fusobacterium nucleatum

0.72

Cytophaga hutchinsonii

Fusobacterium nucleatum
Cytophaga hutchinsonii

Magnetospirillum magnetotacticum

Magnetospirillum magnetotacticum

Ralstonia metallidurans

Ralstonia metallidurans

Chromobacterium violaceum

Chromobacterium violaceum

Leptospira interrogans

Leptospira interrogans

Trichodesmium erythraeum

Nostoc punctiforme

Nostoc punctiforme
0.94 Anabaena sp.

Escherichia coli
Photorhabdus luminescens

0.92

Pseudomonas syringae

0.74

Agrobacterium tumefaciens

0.92

Rhizobium meliloti

0.2

0.2

Anabaena sp.

Alpha-proteobacteria

Delta-proteobacteria

Fusobacteria

Not shared between trees

Beta-proteobacteria

Epsilon-proteobacteria

Spirochetes

Links to several taxa

Gamma-proteobacteria

Cyanobacteria

Bacteroidetes

Figure 3
Trees calculated from amino-acid sequence alignments
Trees calculated from amino-acid sequence alignments. (a) The YfhM group of bacterial α2-macroglobulins; (b) the PBP1Csthat always co-occur and are
usually found adjacent in the same operon. As shown by the key, branches are color-coded by taxon for easy visualization of phylogenetic inconsistencies.
All branches have Bayesian posterior probabilities of 1.0 (that is, are completely stable during resampling) unless otherwise indicated. Three branches not
shared between the trees are indicated by dotted lines: all other branches are congruent. The roots of the trees are not known, so the time vector of
deep internal branches is not clear. See Materials and methods for details of the tree calculation.

phylogenetic analysis with a view to improving the phylogenetic signal-to-noise ratio and using a method that is less
prone to rate variation artifacts than neighbor-joining.
Alignments were reviewed and edited by hand, then processed to remove especially noisy segments, as outlined in
Materials and methods. Trees were calculated with MrBayes,
a Bayesian resampling protocol that is now widely adopted
[27]: MrBayes approaches the quality of maximum-likelihood
methods while being quicker to calculate (though still computationally demanding). Results of the tree calculations are
presented in Figure 3. The two trees differ by only three
branch placements, indicating that the topologies are mostly
sound, except for a few branches with low support (low posterior probabilities). As the calculated trees are unrooted, the
ordering of the deepest branches cannot be mapped onto
time.

Fitting the observed tree topologies to the vertical
descent model
The number of ancestral genes required to explain an
observed tree topology can be determined by embedding the
sequence tree within a species tree. We prepared a species
tree for the bacterial species in Figure 3 such that currently
uncertain affinities were assigned in favor of the observed
trees: this will provide a minimum estimate of ancestral gene
number. The sequence tree topology was embedded into the
bacterial species tree using GeneTree [28]. The reconciled
tree required six gene-duplication events and 29 lineage-specific deletions. The last common ancestor (LCA) of the full set
had a minimum of three genes, the LCA of the proteobacteria
had four genes, while the LCA of the α/β-proteobacteria had
six genes. The tree reveals a tendency for increasing gene
number over time when vertical descent has strictly occurred.

Genome Biology 2004, 5:R38

http://genomebiology.com/2004/5/6/R38

Genome Biology 2004,

Budd et al. R38.7

The bacteroidete/fusobacteria/ε-proteobacteria grouping

reviews

This group consists of three unrelated taxa which exploit
niches related to the animal digestive system. The ε-proteobacterium Helicobacter hepatica colonizes mouse liver ducts,
Fusobacterium species colonize the teeth, Bacteroides thetaiotamicron (not shown on the tree owing to an incomplete
bact-α2M sequence) is a major gut bacterium, while a second
bacteroidete, Cytophaga hutchinsonii, exploits cellulose-rich
animal waste. Horizontal transfer into the ε-proteobacterium
H. hepaticus is clear-cut, as it is isolated on the trees from all
other proteobacteria, whereas other Helicobacter lack these
genes. Another transfer has occurred between fusobacterial
and bacteroidete lineages, but the direction is not clear. A
third HGT is likely to have originally introduced the genes
into these lineages but cannot be formally assigned without a
root.

comment

The problems of the vertical descent model are manifold.
First, all sequenced extant genomes have single copies of the
yfhM/pbpC genes, yet vertical descent shows a progression
toward increasing gene number over time. This requires late
but fully independent massive gene loss to have occurred in
all lineages. Second, the observed robust sequence tree topologies would require a clear affinity between cyanobacteria
and spirochetes, an affinity that has hitherto gone entirely
unnoticed in the field of bacterial phylogeny. Third, the
number of events (gene duplications and deletions) found to
be required under a model of vertical descent is based on a
species tree chosen to minimize this number (see Materials
and methods.) As the species tree used is unlikely to be accurate in places where bacterial phylogeny is unresolved, the
number of such events required under a vertical descent
model is probably greater than described (and hence, correspondingly less likely.)

Volume 5, Issue 6, Article R38

The isolated Magnetospirillum α-proteobacteria branch

Horizontal transfers of the yfhM and pbpC gene
couplet

The major proteobacterial grouping

interactions

This branch consists of three very unrelated taxa: cyanobacteria facultatively symbiotic with plants, spirochetes pathogenic to metazoans and a pair of closely related genera of βproteobacteria that each include free-living, symbiotic and
pathogenic forms. The deepest diverged in the group are the
Anabaena-like symbiotic cyanobacteria. The economically
significant Anabaena-Azolla symbiosis provides the nitrogen
fixation that fertilizes paddy fields [30]. As other free-living
cyanobacteria, such as Synechococcus, lack these genes, HGT
into this lineage is very likely. The isolation of the Ralstonia
and Chromobacterium clade from other proteobacteria also
indicates HGT into their lineage. HGT for Leptospira (the
causal agent of leptospirosis) is also indicated, as other spirochetes such as Borrelia burgdorferi (the causal agent of Lyme
disease) and Treponema pallidum (the causal agent of syphilis) lack these genes. Thus, this set of genes that are clearly
grouped together by molecular phylogeny, yet are found
within very diverse taxa, appear to have been transmitted
three times.

refereed research

Discussion
Sifting the evidence for bacterial HGT
There is increasing evidence that HGT has had - and continues to have - a major role in the adaptation of organisms,
especially prokaryotes, to exploiting new environments. Nevertheless, it is often hard to demonstrate HGT, and there is
considerable confusion about how to do so. The default

Genome Biology 2004, 5:R38

information

Of the 22 proteobacterial species sampled, 18 are exclusively
grouped together in the two trees. The species are all plant or
animal pathogens and symbionts - even the anaerobic sulfatereducing Desulfovibrio desulfuricans is a symbiont of deepsea hydrothermal vent polychete worms [29]. Sub-branches
compatible with vertical descent are present for five α-proteobacteria including Agrobacterium tumefaciens and for seven
γ-proteobacteria including E. coli. For bact-α2M and PBP1C
to have existed in proteobacteria before the α/γ split, these
gene sequences would have to be evolving more slowly than in
other parts of the tree. It is more likely that the genes spread
via HGT through these groups some time ago and then have
been vertically inherited (at least in part). The remainder of
the grouping consists of unambiguous HGT, although the
direction of transfer is not always clear-cut. The β-proteobacterium Bordetella pertussis has acquired the genes from a γproteobacterium. The δ-proteobacterium D. desulfuricans
has acquired the genes from an α-proteobacterium. An outlier set of α- and γ-proteobacteria, including Rickettsia
conorii and Yersinia pestis, indicate two further transfers,
but in this case the order of the transfers is not determined.
Therefore to create the topology of this grouping, a minimum
of four unique horizontal transfers has occurred.

The cyanobacteria/spirochete/β-proteobacteria grouping

deposited research

Difficulties in accounting for the observed YfhM and PBP1C
trees disappear if it is assumed that a number of horizontal
gene transfers have occurred. Vertical transmission then only
occurred among some sets of quite closely related bacteria.
There are four deeply diverged sets within the tree, which will
be discussed in turn.

Magnetospirillum magnetotacticum bact-α2M and PBP1C
are deeply diverged from all other species, including other αproteobacteria. This positioning away from its relatives indicates that HGT occurred into the Magnetospirillum lineage.
The strong divergence from other sequences may indicate
that the sequence has undergone rapid evolution. This latter
point may be addressed in future if the branch becomes populated by some closer relatives.

reports

Although bizarre evolutionary scenarios can always be
invoked, the given tree topologies are difficult to explain
solely by vertical descent from a common ancestral
eubacterium.

R38.8 Genome Biology 2004,

Volume 5, Issue 6, Article R38

Budd et al.

hypothesis should remain vertical transmission unless there
is good evidence for HGT. The over-hasty assignment of
recent bacterial-to-vertebrate gene transfers, solely on the
basis of BLAST E-values [31], has been firmly refuted [32,33].
Such premature HGT assignments have been surveyed and
used to provide guidelines for evaluating HGT [34,35]. Sometimes the evidence is clear-cut, as when adaptive genes are
carried on phage, plasmid or transposon. Inconsistent phylogenetic distribution may be evidence for HGT but must be
carefully balanced against gene-loss models, recognizing that
the two processes are not mutually exclusive. Phylogenetic
trees only provide good evidence for HGT when branching is
robust and clearly delimited by appropriate outgroups: the
HGT must carry a diagnostic molecular evolutionary signal.
One of the best paradigms for investigating recent and ongoing HGT in parasitic prokaryotes is the γ-proteobacterium
Vibrio cholerae, which acquired pathogenicity late in
recorded history. Free-living Vibrio species are common,
harmless aquatic microorganisms. The first recorded cholera
pandemic occurred in 1817, the sixth and seventh occurred
recently enough to be investigated with modern molecular
techniques, and the eighth is probably underway now (see
[36] for details). The basic pathogenicity genes ctxAB, which
encode cholera toxin, lie within the genome of the filamentous phage CTXφ [37]. Other pathogenicity gene 'islands'
include the toxin-co-regulated pilus, needed for colonization,
and the VSP-1 and VSP-2 islands, which appeared in strains
of the seventh pandemic and are suggested to have been integral to that event [38]. The recent O139 serotype arose by
wholesale replacement of the pre-existing gene cluster encoding lipopolysaccharide O side-chain synthesis, yielding an
outer surface with a different architecture, less susceptible to
pre-existing immunity [39]. Thus, pathogenic V. cholerae
continues to adapt to the invasive lifestyle, to a large extent
through HGT-mediated acquisition of new capabilities,
including, but not limited to, better avoidance of host
defenses. Although many of the functions encoded by the
genes within pathogenic islands are not understood, their
absence from the free-living Vibrio species is good evidence
that they have been incorporated, and then conserved,
because of a direct or indirect role in enhancing virulence.
Even though it is a γ-proteobacterium, the genomic sequence
data show that V. cholerae has not (re-)acquired a bact-α2M
gene. At least, not yet.

HGT of α2-macroglobulin among colonizing bacteria

Our unexpected finding that α2-macroglobulins, hitherto
only known from metazoans, are widely present in eubacterial genomes has provided one of the most clear-cut examples
of widespread HGT between extremely divergent bacterial
taxa that can be monitored by molecular phylogenetic
approaches. We have been able to infer a minimum of 11 independent HGTs for the major yfhM group among 27 sequences
tested. Because this group always coexists with a second gene,
pbpC, shared evolutionary history means the trees are con-

http://genomebiology.com/2004/5/6/R38

trolled for topological consistency, so that the assignment of
HGT is not in doubt. This work does not address an earlier
evolutionary history preceding the link-up of this gene pair.
It is striking that all four deeply diverged groups in the trees
include proteobacterial species. This alone clearly indicates
that HGT has occurred. Because this is the most heavily
researched bacterial taxon and provides most of the
sequenced genomes, it is not yet clear whether other taxa will
also show multiple independent acquisitions of bact-α2M and
pbpC. Currently, the trees show a minimum of 11 independent
HGT events, even if the originating (but unknown) taxon
were represented here. A twelfth HGT is indicated if bact-α2M
was originally captured from a metazoan (or vice versa).
Extensive gene loss is also likely to have contributed to the
phylogenetic distributions in Figure 2, particularly amongst
the α-,β-, and γ-proteobacteria, where possession seems the
default yet both vertical and horizontal transmission occur.
Quite possibly, a cycle of gain-loss-gain has repeatedly
occurred as strains adapt between colonization and free-living environments. The role of gene loss cannot be quantified
with current data, but this may become possible in the future
with more comprehensive genome coverage.
Where pathogenic bacteria and their eukaryotic hosts share
related genes that appear to be transferred from one to the
other, it is believed that the direction is overwhelmingly from
the eukaryote to the bacterium. The failure to find phylogenetic evidence for bacterium-to-vertebrate gene transfers is
consistent with this direction [32,33]. We expect that bactα2M was transferred from a metazoan host to a pathogenic
bacterium, but this is not yet demonstrable and remains supposition. Given a simple early metazoan, where the germ cells
would not be physically isolated from any bacterial infection,
one can see how selection could act to fix a bact-α2M gene
transferred in the opposite direction, if bact-α2M was originally bacterial. This issue may become resolvable in future
given much more extensive phylogenetic coverage.

Bacterial α2-macroglobulin in apparently free-living
bacteria
Many bacterial taxa contain a plethora of strains adapted for
free-living, symbiotic and pathogenic lifestyles. Examples
include the Ralstonia and Anabaena genera adapted to
plants, Escherichia and Treponema adapted to animals and
pseudomonads adapted to both. Many free-living bacterial
strains are also facultative colonizers. This creates some difficulty in cataloguing genes that are adapted to colonizing
niches versus free-living: it is rarely certain whether an
apparently free-living species never colonizes a higher organism, or is not part of a continuum of strains frequently
exchanging lifestyle genes. Given this caveat, we reviewed all
the currently completed genomes of bacteria that are not in
any way known to have close associations with higher eukaryotes. The available set of Gram-positive bacterial genomes
stand out as never possessing a bact-α2M gene (see below).

Genome Biology 2004, 5:R38

http://genomebiology.com/2004/5/6/R38

Genome Biology 2004,

The bact-α2M/PBP1C proteins also provide targets for medical intervention, for example by training host immunity, the
administration of anti-bact-α2M monoclonal antibody or in
combination therapies. Antibodies to bact-α2Ms should act
not just by promoting immune clearance but also to block the
bact-α2M activity, so that the host antibacterial proteases are
unhindered. This dual effect may provide an enhanced
prophylactic efficacy for vaccines that are augmented with
extra bact-α2M protein (probably as an inactive variant) or be
directly invoked by targeted anti-bact-α2M antibody administration for combating acute infection. PBP1C should also be
rendered dysfunctional by specific antibodies, perhaps in
combination with transglycosylase inhibitors such as the
antibiotic moenomycin.

Bact-α2Ms are spread widely amongst symbiotic and pathogenic bacteria. The implication is that protease inhibition is
often an aid to colonizing higher eukaryotes. The major form

Genome Biology 2004, 5:R38

information

Conclusions

interactions

The following assumptions lead us to a hypothesis for YfhM
bact-α2M/PBP1C as a periplasmic defense system. First, bactα2M and PBP1C form a complex, probably through the carboxy-terminal non-enzymatic domain of PBP1C. Second, the
complex resides in the periplasmic space, attached by acylation to the inner membrane. Third, bact-α2M functions to
entrap attacking proteases. Fourth, PBP1C is a transglycosylase that polymerizes glycan chains. Fifth, a periplasmic

The yfhM/pbpC gene pair in bacteria not only suggests experimental research strategies, but may have medical potential
to help combat pathogenic organisms. Predicted periplasmic
location and complexing of bact-α2M and PBP1C with each
other (and any other periplasmic proteins) should be
straightforward to investigate biochemically. Elucidation of
the host proteases entrapped by bact-α2Ms should reveal
which host defense proteases are targeted at which parasites,
leading to enhanced understanding of host defense mechanisms. Bact-α2M-inhibited proteases should be directly active
against pathogen proteins - or else act indirectly as, for example, do the proteases of the complement cascade. PbpC deletions should show increased sensitivity to lysozyme
treatments and pbpC/ivy double mutants, yet more so.

refereed research

The lipopolysaccharide (LPS) layer of the outer membrane of
Gram-negative bacteria provides a first line of defense. The
outer membrane barrier is sufficient to prevent the enzyme
lysozyme from lysing Gram-negative bacteria in culture [42].
Under attack from host immunity and antimicrobial peptides
[43], LPS can be disrupted or stripped away - for example,
when released into the circulation, it can lead to septic shock
[44] - leaving the peptidoglycan cell wall and inner membrane exposed. There is current interest in antibacterial strategies that endeavor to enhance lysozyme activity by coadministration with agents that disrupt the outer membrane,
such as EDTA [42].

Potential experimental and medical applications

deposited research

Bacterial α2-macroglobulin YfhM/PBP1C: a second line
of defense?

The role of the bact-α2M/PBP1C system is then perceived to
be defense at, and repair of, peptidoglycan breaches induced
by the host (Figure 4). PBP1C provides 75% of the transglycosylase activity in vitro, but only 3% of peptidoglycan biosynthesis in vivo [25]: it is a fast linear transglycosylase, ideal for
traversing and repairing a breach. During repair it will, however, be exposed to attacking proteases and may be rapidly
rendered dysfunctional. The role of bact-α2M will be to entrap
attacking proteases, protecting PBP1C and other periplasmic
proteins such as the high-affinity lysozyme inhibitor Ivy in E.
coli [45]. In this way, the fate of the invading bacterial cell will
depend on the relative balance of the host's attacking forces
versus the bacterial defense systems. Under an optimized
host attack, such defenses would be rapidly overwhelmed but
when (or where) the host is not well prepared, these defenses
may serve to prolong colonization.

reports

The Gram-positive firmicutes and actinobacteria stand out as
always lacking bact-α2M genes (Figure 2). However, certain
Gram-positives have found a more direct way to take advantage of α2M proteins. Pathogenic Streptococcus pyogenes
directly co-opt host α2M for defense against host proteases
through the cell-surface proteins GRAB and protein G
[40,41]. As Gram-positive bacteria do not possess an outer
membrane, defensive strategies are likely to differ from those
of Gram-negatives. Invasive Gram-positives are found to coat
themselves in a selected set of host proteins to obstruct host
defenses. Streptococcal GRAB mutants that are unable to
bind α2M have attenuated virulence [40]. It seems remarkable that prokaryotes have evolved two totally independent
strategies to take advantage of α2M. On the one hand, Grampositives are able to use the host's own protein, on the other,
Gram-negatives have acquired their own gene. The clear
implication is that α2M functionality has a wide and general
significance spanning many bacterial taxa.

defense is only needed when the outer membrane has been
breached and peptidoglycan is under attack.

reviews

Usage of host α2-macroglobulin by invasive Grampositive bacteria

Budd et al. R38.9

comment

Only three apparently free-living Gram-negatives (Magnetospirillum, Caulobacter and Thermotoga) have bact-α2Ms
while seven (Aquifex, Chlorobium, Synechocystis, Synechococcus, Prochlorococcus, Nitrosomonas and Geobacter) do
not. Thus this crude estimate would suggest that possession
of a bact-α2M gene is associated with colonization, not as a
core colonization factor, but as an accessory that enhances fitness for the colonization environment. Further, it may imply
that the three 'free-living' species possessing a bact-α2M gene
have undocumented facultative symbiotic capabilities with
higher eukaryotes.

Volume 5, Issue 6, Article R38

R38.10 Genome Biology 2004,

Volume 5, Issue 6, Article R38

Budd et al.

http://genomebiology.com/2004/5/6/R38

Outer membrane

Periplasmic space

Inner membrane
Bacterial cytoplasm
Peptidoglycan elements
Polypeptide
crosslinks
Glycan chain

Lipoprotein (LPP)

Phospholipid

PBP1C

Lipopolysaccharide (LPS)

Lysozyme

Ivy lysozyme inhibitor

Host-attacking peptidase

Bacterial α2-macroglobulin
non-proteolytically cleaved
form

Bacterial α2-macroglobulin
proteolytically cleaved
form

Figure 4
Schematic outline of the proposed defense of breaches of the bacterial outer membrane
Schematic outline of the proposed defense of breaches of the bacterial outer membrane. Host systems (whether antimicrobial peptides, antibody and/or
complement) have opened the outer membrane, allowing lysozyme and host proteases to attack periplasmic components, leading to a further breach of
the peptidoglycan. Host attack is hampered by protease trapping (bacterial α2-macroglobulin) and lysozyme inhibition (Ivy), giving PBP1C a chance to
repair the glycan chains. The fate of the colonizing bacterial cell will now depend on whether the bacterial defenses are exhausted or the host attacking
components are too limited to achieve cell lysis. Elements of the scheme are not drawn to scale.

of bact-α2Ms is typified by E. coli YfhM and is a periplasmic
protein that co-occurs with periplasmic PBP1C, a candidate
peptidoglycan repair enzyme. The distribution of the yfhM/
pbpC gene pair is inconsistent with the established bacterial
phylogeny. Molecular trees calculated for each of the proteins
are in good agreement with each other. Each tree provides a
control for the other tree's topology, allowing confidence in
the general topology. This allows us to state with high confidence that at least 11 separate gene transfers have occurred
between highly diverged bacterial taxa. An additional gene
transfer has occurred between bacteria and metazoans. We
are not yet able to determine in which direction this transfer
occurred, and therefore the title question is not yet
answerable.
The known properties of α2Ms and PBP1C point to a periplasmic line of defense at cell-wall breaches, mounted by the

YfhM bact-α2M and PBP1C. This defensive line should be sensitive to antibody-based therapeutic approaches, whether
enhanced vaccine efficacy or direct administration of
antibody.

Materials and methods
Sequence database searches
Bacterial α2Ms were clearly revealed in a search of SWISSALL
[46] using BLAST2SRS [47] in which the species names are
included in the BLAST output [48]. Profile searches as
described [49] using the EMBL Bioccelerators [50] supported
and extended the findings and were used to retrieve a set of
bacterial sequences. Reciprocal searches with bact-α2M profiles reconfirmed the findings with good E-values (<1.e-25).
The sets of proteomes provided by the BLAST server [51,52]
at the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI)

Genome Biology 2004, 5:R38

http://genomebiology.com/2004/5/6/R38

Genome Biology 2004,

[53] were surveyed to determine the presence or absence of
α2Ms in bacteria and in non-metazoan eukaryotes.

presence of invariant sites and using a gamma distribution
approximated by four different rate categories to model rate
variation between sites, estimating amino-acid frequencies
from the alignment. Trees were displayed and rooted in
Njplot [64].

Estimation of minimum yfhM gene number in the
bacterial last common ancestor

Sequence alignment and editing
Microarray expression data
STRING was used to investigate the expression patterns of
genes as detected by DNA microarray. The Stanford Microarray Database (SMD) [26,65] was used to verify that these
genes were indeed spotted on the arrays used by STRING,
and that the spots displayed intensities significantly higher
than background levels.

Acknowledgements

Calculation of sequence trees

References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

8.
9.

Genome Biology 2004, 5:R38

information

7.

Chu CT, Pizzo SV: alpha 2-macroglobulin, complement, and
biologic defense: antigens, growth factors, microbial proteases, and receptor ligation. Lab Invest 1994, 71:792-812.
Salvesen GS, Sayers CA, Barrett AJ: Further characterization of
the covalent linking reaction of alpha 2-macroglobulin. Biochem J 1981, 195:453-461.
Law SK, Dodds AW: The internal thioester and the covalent
binding properties of the complement proteins C3 and C4.
Protein Sci 1997, 6:263-274.
Sottrup-Jensen L: Alpha-macroglobulins: structure, shape, and
mechanism of proteinase complex formation. J Biol Chem 1989,
264:11539-11542.
Armstrong PB: The contribution of proteinase inhibitors to
immune defense. Trends Immunol 2001, 22:47-52.
Miyoshi S, Kawata K, Tomochika K, Shinoda S, Yamamoto S: The Cterminal domain promotes the hemorrhagic damage caused
by Vibrio vulnificus metalloprotease. Toxicon 2001,
39:1883-1886.
Woo PT: Cryptobia (Trypanoplasma) salmositica and salmonid
cryptobiosis. J Fish Dis 2003, 26:627-646.
Chu CT, Pizzo SV: Interactions between cytokines and alpha 2macroglobulin. Immunol Today 1991, 12:249.
Lysiak JJ, Hussaini IM, Webb DJ, Glass WF 2nd, Allietta M, Gonias SL:
Alpha 2-macroglobulin functions as a cytokine carrier to
induce nitric oxide synthesis and cause nitric oxide-dependent cytotoxicity in the RAW 264.7 macrophage cell line. J Biol

interactions

Preliminary trees were made by neighbor-joining [59] as
implemented in Clustal X, excluding gaps and correcting for
multiple substitutions with the Kimura PAM model. These
initial trees indicated that HGT had occurred, warranting
more careful assessment. Alignments were processed with
the Gblocks server [60] (for the divergent bact-α2Ms, the low
stringency settings were used). Gblocks heuristically removes
poorly conserved excessively divergent segments of alignments with low signal-to-noise ratio in order to enhance the
phylogenetic signal [61]. Processed alignments were used to
derive tree topologies using Bayesian inference of phylogeny
as implemented by MrBayes v2.01 [27] with maximum-likelihood branch-length estimates provided by PUZZLE [62].
MrBayes was used with four heated chains over 250,000 generations, sampling every 20 trees. The likelihoods of these
trees were examined to estimate the length of the burn-in
phase, and all trees sampled 20,000 generations later than
this point were used to create a consensus tree using the 50%
majority rule. Both MrBayes and PUZZLE were used with the
JTT model of amino-acid substitution [63], assuming the

refereed research

We thank Christian von Mering and Lars Jensen for helpful discussions. We
are grateful to Fotis Kafatos for his consistent support of the Anopheles TEP
studies.

deposited research

Sequences were aligned using Clustal X 1.83 [57]. Because
many sequences are very dissimilar to each other, misaligned
regions were to be expected. These were identified using the
'low scoring segments' check and either realigned using the
'realign selected range' option or were hand-edited in SeaView [58]. Corrections were assessed by both improvements to
conserved hydrophobic columns (indicating structurally
important residues) and with the 'low scoring segments'
check. Sequences excluded because they were either too
divergent to be aligned or may contain sequencing errors
included Deinococcus radiodurans and Bacteroides
thetaiotamicron.

reports

The program GeneTree [28] was used to evaluate the cost of
embedding the YfhM sequence tree in a bacterial species tree.
To compute the minimum gene number required in the last
common ancestor of the given bacterial set, we set the unresolved bacterial affinities to match the YfhM/PBP1C trees
(that is, cyanobacteria and spirochetes form a clade, as do
bacteroidetes and fusobacteria; within the proteobacteria, the
subgroup affinities were allocated to minimize the number of
duplications required in the observed trees). Magnetospirillum was excluded from the analysis as its position is not stable in the YfhM and PBP1C trees. Embedding the observed
tree topology in this bacterial species tree yielded a reconciled
tree requiring six duplication and 29 deletion events.

reviews

The STRING server [54] is a resource for exploring genome
context (for example, identifying groups of genes found in
close proximity in many different genomes [21]). Queries
with bact-α2Ms from E. coli or other bacteria yielded a recurring result: in most species the bact-α2Ms cluster consistently
with certain other gene families. This behavior is typical of
gene sets belonging to the same operon. These families were
retrieved and used for further database explorations, alignments and trees. To identify the location of these gene families in other genomes where linkage to bact-α2Ms is less direct
than those presented by STRING, we downloaded genomic
database entries from the NCBI, converted the format of
these files to EMBL using BioPerl [55], and assessed the location of the genes using Artemis [56]. In addition, linkage of
these gene families was investigated in organisms not
included in STRING using the same method.

Budd et al. R38.11

comment

Survey of genomic context

Volume 5, Issue 6, Article R38

R38.12 Genome Biology 2004,

10.

11.
12.

13.

14.

15.

16.
17.

18.
19.

20.

21.
22.
23.
24.
25.

26.

27.
28.
29.

30.
31.
32.

Volume 5, Issue 6, Article R38

Budd et al.

Chem 1995, 270:21919-21927.
Banyai L, Patthy L: The NTR module: domains of netrins,
secreted frizzled related proteins, and type I procollagen Cproteinase enhancer protein are homologous with tissue
inhibitors of metalloproteases. Protein Sci 1999, 8:1636-1642.
Armstrong PB, Quigley JP: Alpha2-macroglobulin: an evolutionarily conserved arm of the innate immune system. Dev Comp
Immunol 1999, 23:375-390.
Dolmer K, Husted LB, Armstrong PB, Sottrup-Jensen L: Localisation of the major reactive lysine residue involved in the selfcrosslinking of proteinase-activated Limulus alpha 2-macroglobulin. FEBS Lett 1996, 393:37-40.
Christophides GK, Zdobnov E, Barillas-Mury C, Birney E, Blandin S,
Blass C, Brey PT, Collins FH, Danielli A, Dimopoulos G, et al.: Immunity-related genes and gene families in Anopheles gambiae.
Science 2002, 298:159-165.
Levashina EA, Moita LF, Blandin S, Vriend G, Lagueux M, Kafatos FC:
Conserved role of a complement-like protein in phagocytosis revealed by dsRNA knockout in cultured cells of the mosquito, Anopheles gambiae. Cell 2001, 104:709-718.
Blandin S, Shiao S-H, Moita LF, Janse CJ, Waters AP, Kafatos FC,
Levashina EA: Complement-like protein TEP1 is a determinant of vectorial capacity in the malaria vector Anopheles
gambiae. Cell 2004, 116:661-670.
Blandin S, Levashina EA: Thioester-containing proteins and
insect immunity. Mol Immunol 2004, 40:903-908.
Fukuda A, Matsuyama S, Hara T, Nakayama J, Nagasawa H, Tokuda H:
Aminoacylation of the N-terminal cysteine is essential for
Lol-dependent release of lipoproteins from membranes but
does not depend on lipoprotein sorting signals. J Biol Chem
2002, 277:43512-43518.
Yamaguchi K, Yu F, Inouye M: A single amino acid determinant
of the membrane localization of lipoproteins in E. coli. Cell
1988, 53:423-432.
Nagase H, Harris ED Jr: Ovostatin: a novel proteinase inhibitor
from chicken egg white. II. Mechanism of inhibition studied
with collagenase and thermolysin. J Biol Chem 1983,
258:7490-7498.
Suerbaum S, Josenhans C, Sterzenbach T, Drescher B, Brandt P, Bell
M, Droge M, Fartmann B, Fischer HP, Ge Z, et al.: The complete
genome sequence of the carcinogenic bacterium Helicobacter hepaticus. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2003, 100:7901-7906.
von Mering C, Huynen M, Jaeggi D, Schmidt S, Bork P, Snel B:
STRING: a database of predicted functional associations
between proteins. Nucleic Acids Res 2003, 31:258-261.
Overbeek R, Fonstein M, D'Souza M, Pusch GD, Maltsev N: The use
of gene clusters to infer functional coupling. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 1999, 96:2896-2901.
Dandekar T, Snel B, Huynen M, Bork P: Conservation of gene
order: a fingerprint of proteins that physically interact. Trends
Biochem Sci 1998, 23:324-328.
Goffin C, Ghuysen JM: Multimodular penicillin-binding proteins: an enigmatic family of orthologs and paralogs. Microbiol
Mol Biol Rev 1998, 62:1079-1093.
Schiffer G, Holtje JV: Cloning and characterization of PBP 1C,
a third member of the multimodular class A penicillin-binding proteins of Escherichia coli. J Biol Chem 1999,
274:32031-32039.
Gollub J, Ball CA, Binkley G, Demeter J, Finkelstein DB, Hebert JM,
Hernandez-Boussard T, Jin H, Kaloper M, Matese JC, et al.: The
Stanford Microarray Database: data access and quality
assessment tools. Nucleic Acids Res 2003, 31:94-96.
Huelsenbeck JP, Ronquist F: MRBAYES: Bayesian inference of
phylogenetic trees. Bioinformatics 2001, 17:754-755.
Page RD: GeneTree: comparing gene and species phylogenies
using reconciled trees. Bioinformatics 1998, 14:819-820.
Cottrell MT, Cary SC: Diversity of dissimilatory bisulfite
reductase genes of bacteria associated with the deep-sea
hydrothermal vent polychaete annelid Alvinella pompejana.
Appl Environ Microbiol 1999, 65:1127-1132.
Hill DJ: Pattern of development of Anabaena in Azolla-Anabaena symbiosis. Planta 1975, 122:179-184.
Lander ES, Linton LM, Birren B, Nusbaum C, Zody MC, Baldwin J,
Devon K, Dewar K, Doyle M, FitzHugh W, et al.: Initial sequencing
and analysis of the human genome. Nature 2001, 409:860-921.
Salzberg SL, White O, Peterson J, Eisen JA: Microbial genes in the
human genome: lateral transfer or gene loss? Science 2001,
292:1903-1906.

http://genomebiology.com/2004/5/6/R38

33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.

39.

40.

41.
42.
43.
44.

45.
46.

47.
48.

49.
50.
51.

52.

53.
54.
55.

56.
57.
58.
59.

Stanhope MJ, Lupas A, Italia MJ, Koretke KK, Volker C, Brown JR:
Phylogenetic analyses do not support horizontal gene transfers from bacteria to vertebrates. Nature 2001, 411:940-944.
Genereux DP, Logsdon JM Jr: Much ado about bacteria-to-vertebrate lateral gene transfer. Trends Genet 2003, 19:191-195.
Ragan MA: Detection of lateral gene transfer among microbial
genomes. Curr Opin Genet Dev 2001, 11:620-626.
Faruque SM, Mekalanos JJ: Pathogenicity islands and phages in
Vibrio cholerae evolution. Trends Microbiol 2003, 11:505-510.
Waldor MK, Mekalanos JJ: Lysogenic conversion by a filamentous phage encoding cholera toxin. Science 1996,
272:1910-1914.
Dziejman M, Balon E, Boyd D, Fraser CM, Heidelberg JF, Mekalanos
JJ: Comparative genomic analysis of Vibrio cholerae: genes
that correlate with cholera endemic and pandemic disease.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2002, 99:1556-1561.
Bik EM, Bunschoten AE, Gouw RD, Mooi FR: Genesis of the novel
epidemic Vibrio cholerae O139 strain: evidence for horizontal transfer of genes involved in polysaccharide synthesis.
EMBO J 1995, 14:209-216.
Rasmussen M, Müller HP, Björck L: Protein GRAB of Streptococcus pyogenes regulates proteolysis at the bacterial surface by
binding
alpha2-macroglobulin.
J
Biol
Chem
1999,
274:15336-15344.
Sjobring U, Trojnar J, Grubb A, Akerstrom B, Björck L: Ig-binding
bacterial proteins also bind proteinase inhibitors. J Immunol
1989, 143:2948-2954.
Masschalck B, Michiels CW: Antimicrobial properties of lysozyme in relation to foodborne vegetative bacteria. Crit Rev
Microbiol 2003, 29:191-214.
Ganz T: Antimicrobial polypeptides. J Leukoc Biol 2003, 75:34-38.
Wiese A, Gutsmann T, Seydel U: Towards antibacterial strategies: studies on the mechanisms of interaction between antibacterial peptides and model membranes. J Endotoxin Res 2003,
9:67-84.
Monchois V, Abergel C, Sturgis J, Jeudy S, Claverie JM: Escherichia
coli ykfE ORFan gene encodes a potent inhibitor of C-type
lysozyme. J Biol Chem 2001, 276:18437-18441.
Boeckmann B, Bairoch A, Apweiler R, Blatter MC, Estreicher A,
Gasteiger E, Martin MJ, Michoud K, O'Donovan C, Phan I, et al.: The
SWISS-PROT protein knowledgebase and its supplement
TrEMBL in 2003. Nucleic Acids Res 2003, 31:365-370.
EMBL Blast sequence retrieval tool [http://blast2srs.embl.de]
Bimpikis K, Budd A, Linding R, Gibson TJ: BLAST2SRS, a web
server for flexible retrieval of related protein sequences in
the SWISS-PROT and SPTrEMBL databases. Nucleic Acids Res
2003, 31:3792-3794.
Thompson JD, Higgins DG, Gibson TJ: Improved sensitivity of
profile searches through the use of sequence weights and
gap excision. Comput Appl Biosci 1994, 10:19-29.
BIC web home page [http://eta.embl-heidelberg.de:8000]
Altschul SF, Madden TL, Schaffer AA, Zhang J, Zhang Z, Miller W, Lipman DJ: Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new generation of
protein database search programs. Nucleic Acids Res 1997,
25:3389-3402.
Wheeler DL, Church DM, Federhen S, Lash AE, Madden TL, Pontius
JU, Schuler GD, Schriml LM, Sequeira E, Tatusova TA, Wagner L:
Database resources of the National Center for
Biotechnology. Nucleic Acids Res 2003, 31:28-33.
NCBI BLAST [http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/BLAST]
STRING: functional association protein networks [http://
www.bork.embl-heidelberg.de/STRING]
Stajich JE, Block D, Boulez K, Brenner SE, Chervitz SA, Dagdigian C,
Fuellen G, Gilbert JG, Korf I, Lapp H, et al.: The Bioperl toolkit:
Perl modules for the life sciences. Genome Res 2002,
12:1611-1618.
Rutherford K, Parkhill J, Crook J, Horsnell T, Rice P, Rajandream MA,
Barrell B: Artemis: sequence visualization and annotation. Bioinformatics 2000, 16:944-945.
Chenna R, Sugawara H, Koike T, Lopez R, Gibson TJ, Higgins DG,
Thompson JD: Multiple sequence alignment with the Clustal
series of programs. Nucleic Acids Res 2003, 31:3497-3500.
Galtier N, Gouy M, Gautier C: SEAVIEW and PHYLO_WIN:
two graphic tools for sequence alignment and molecular
phylogeny. Comput Appl Biosci 1996, 12:543-548.
Saitou N, Nei M: The neighbor-joining method: a new method
for reconstructing phylogenetic trees. Mol Biol Evol 1987,
4:406-425.

Genome Biology 2004, 5:R38

http://genomebiology.com/2004/5/6/R38

60.
61.

63.
64.

Budd et al. R38.13

reviews

65.
66.

Gblocks
server
[http://woody.embl-heidelberg.de/phylo/
index.html]
Castresana J: Selection of conserved blocks from multiple
alignments for their use in phylogenetic analysis. Mol Biol Evol
2000, 17:540-552.
Schmidt HA, Strimmer K, Vingron M, von Haeseler A: TREE-PUZZLE: maximum likelihood phylogenetic analysis using quartets and parallel computing. Bioinformatics 2002, 18:502-504.
Jones DT, Taylor WR, Thornton JM: The rapid generation of
mutation data matrices from protein sequences. Comput Appl
Biosci 1992, 8:275-282.
Perriere G, Gouy M: WWW-query: an on-line retrieval system
for biological sequence banks. Biochimie 1996, 78:364-369.
SMD: home page [http://genome-www.stanford.edu/microarray]
Thompson JD, Gibson TJ, Plewniak F, Jeanmougin F, Higgins DG: The
CLUSTAL_X windows interface: flexible strategies for multiple sequence alignment aided by quality analysis tools.
Nucleic Acids Res 1997, 25:4876-4882.

Volume 5, Issue 6, Article R38

comment

62.

Genome Biology 2004,

reports
deposited research
refereed research
interactions
information

Genome Biology 2004, 5:R38

</pre>
</body>
</html>
