<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Quantifying the mechanisms of domain gain in animal proteins</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Genome Biology 2010 11:R74. doi:10.1186/gb-2010-11-7-r74"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Marija Buljan"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Buljan et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R74
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/7/R74

RESEARCH

Open Access

Quantifying the mechanisms of domain
gain in animal proteins
Marija Buljan*, Adam Frankish, Alex Bateman

Abstract
Background: Protein domains are protein regions that are shared among different proteins and are frequently
functionally and structurally independent from the rest of the protein. Novel domain combinations have a major
role in evolutionary innovation. However, the relative contributions of the different molecular mechanisms that
underlie domain gains in animals are still unknown. By using animal gene phylogenies we were able to identify a
set of high confidence domain gain events and by looking at their coding DNA investigate the causative
mechanisms.
Results: Here we show that the major mechanism for gains of new domains in metazoan proteins is likely to be
gene fusion through joining of exons from adjacent genes, possibly mediated by non-allelic homologous
recombination. Retroposition and insertion of exons into ancestral introns through intronic recombination are, in
contrast to previous expectations, only minor contributors to domain gains and have accounted for less than 1%
and 10% of high confidence domain gain events, respectively. Additionally, exonization of previously non-coding
regions appears to be an important mechanism for addition of disordered segments to proteins. We observe that
gene duplication has preceded domain gain in at least 80% of the gain events.
Conclusions: The interplay of gene duplication and domain gain demonstrates an important mechanism for fast
neofunctionalization of genes.

Background
Protein domains are fundamental and largely independent units of protein structure and function that occur
in a number of different combinations or domain architectures [1]. Most proteins have two or more domains
[2] and, interestingly, more complex organisms have
more complex domain architectures, as well as a greater
variety of domain combinations [2-4]. A possible implication of this phenomenon is that new domain architectures have acted as drivers of the evolution of
organismal complexity [3]. This is supported by a recent
study that experimentally showed that recombination of
domains encoded by genes that belong to the yeast mating pathway had a major influence on phenotype [5].
While there is evidence that in prokaryotes new
domains are predominantly acquired through fusions of
adjacent genes [6,7], determining the predominant

* Correspondence: mb613@cam.ac.uk
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton,
Cambridge, CB10 1SA, UK

molecular mechanisms that underlie gains of new
domains in animals has been more challenging [3].
The question of what mechanisms underlie domain
gains is related to the question of what mechanisms
underlie novel gene creation [3,8,9]. The recent
increased availability of animal genome and transcriptome sequences offers a valuable resource for addressing
these questions. The main proposed genetic mechanisms
that are capable of creating novel genes and also causing
domain gain in animals are retroposition, gene fusion
through joining of exons from adjacent genes, and DNA
recombination [3,8,9] (Figure 1). Since these mechanisms can leave specific traces in the genome, it may be
possible to infer the causative mechanism by inspecting
the DNA sequence that encodes the gained domain. By
using retrotransposon machinery, in a process termed
retroposition, a native coding sequence can be copied
and inserted somewhere else in the genome. The copy
is made from a processed mRNA, so sequences gained
by this mechanism are usually intronless and have an
origin in the same genome. This was proposed as a

© 2010 Buljan et al.; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any
medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Buljan et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R74
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/7/R74

Page 2 of 15

Figure 1 Summary of mechanisms for domain gains. This figure shows potential mechanisms leading to domain gains and the signals that
can be used to detect the causative mechanism. Domain gain by retroposition is illustrated as an example where the domain is transcribed
together with the upstream long interspersed nuclear element (LINE), but other means of retroposition are also possible [3]. The list of possible
mechanisms is not exhaustive and other scenarios can occur, such as, for example, exonization of previously non-coding sequence or gain of a
viral or transposon domain during retroelement replication. IR, illegitimate recombination; NAHR, non-allelic homologous recombination.

powerful means for domain shuffling, but the evidence
for its action is still limited [10,11]. Recent studies
observed a phenomenon where adjacent genes, or
nearby genes on the same strand, undergo intergenic
splicing and create chimerical transcripts [12-14]. This
suggested that if regulatory sequences between the two
genes were degraded during evolution, then exons of
the genes could be joined into a novel chimeric gene.
As a consequence of this, one would observe a gain of
novel exon(s) at protein termini. One example for this
mechanism is the creation of the human gene Kua-UEV
[15]. Recombination can aid novel gene creation by juxtaposing new gene combinations, thereby assisting exons
from adjacent genes to combine. Alternatively, recombination could also occur between exonic sequences of

two different genes [16]. The two main types of recombination are non-allelic homologous recombination
(NAHR) [8,17], which relies on short regions of homology, and illegitimate recombination (IR) [8,9,18], also
known as non-homologous end joining, which does not
require such homologous regions. In addition to these
mechanisms, new protein coding sequence can be
gained through: 1, deletion of the intervening sequence
between two adjacent genes and subsequent exon fusion
[19]; 2, exonization of previously non-coding sequence
[20]; and 3, insertion of viral or transposon sequences
into a gene [21]. Interestingly, direct examples for any
of these mechanisms are still rare.
Protein evolution has frequently been addressed by
studying the evolution of domain architectures [22,23].

Buljan et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R74
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/7/R74

Specific examples in animals have been reported for
domain gains through exon insertions into introns [24].
The extracellular function of these inserted domains
indicates the importance of this mechanism for the evolution of multicellular organisms. Additionally, more
recent whole-genome studies of domain shuffling have
also focused on domains that are candidates for exon
insertions into introns - for example, domains that are
surrounded by introns of symmetrical phases [25-27].
These studies have suggested that domain insertions
into introns - that is, gain of novel middle exons - have
had an important role in the evolution of eukaryotic
proteomes. The initial studies attributed intronic insertions to intronic recombination, and the more recent
studies have also acknowledged the potential role of
retroposition in this process.
In this work, we use the phylogenetic relationships
between genes from completely sequenced metazoan
genomes in order to address the question of what
mechanisms underlie the gains of novel domains. To do
this, we first identify a set of high-confidence domain
gain events and then look at the characteristics of the
sequences that encode these domains. Our results show
that gene fusion through joining of exons from adjacent
genes has been a dominant process leading to gains of
new domains. Two other mechanisms that have been
proposed as important contributors to gains of new
domains in animals, retroposition and insertion of exons
into ancestral introns through intronic recombination,
appear to be minor contributors. Furthermore, we
observe that most domain gain events have involved gene
duplication and that domain gains often relied on DNA
recombination. Based on the results presented here, we
propose that these gain events were frequently assisted
by NAHR, which played a role in creating gene duplicates
and in the juxtaposition of the ancestral genes concerned.

Page 3 of 15

domain annotations. To obtain a set of high-confidence
domain gains, we implemented an algorithm that
ensured that a gain is not falsely called when other
genes in that family had actually experienced multiple
losses of the domain in question. We also took into
account only those gains that had at least one representative sequence in a genome of better quality and we
discarded gains where there was only one sequence with
the gained domain, that is, gain was on the leaf of the
phylogenetic tree. We did this to overcome the issue of
erroneous gene annotations. We then refined the initial
domain assignments to find domains that were missed
in the initial Pfam-based annotation and then discarded
all dubious domain gain cases where there was evidence
that a domain gain was called due to incorrectly missing
Pfam annotations. After filtering for confounding factors
that could cause false domain gain calls and taking into
account only examples where the same transcript contains both the ancestral portion of the gene and a
sequence coding for a new domain, we were left with
330 events where we could be confident that one or
more domains had been gained by an ancestral protein
during animal evolution - we took into account only
gains of new domains, and not duplications of existing
domains. The final set will not be comprehensive, but
these filtering steps were necessary to ensure that we
have a set of high-confidence domain gain events. Moreover, none of these steps introduces a bias towards any
one mechanism over another. The only mechanism of
domain gain that we cannot detect after this filtering is
the case where amino acid mutations in the sequence
created signatures of a novel domain that was not previously present in any protein; for example, when point
mutations in the mammalian lineage created signatures
of a mammalian-specific domain.
Characteristics of the gained domains

Results
Set of high-confidence domain gain events

To find a set of high-confidence domain gain events, we
used gene phylogenies of completely sequenced animal
genomes from the TreeFam database [28]. TreeFam
contains phylogenetic trees of animal gene families and
is able to assign ortholog and paralog relationships
because it records the positions of speciation and duplication events in the phylogenies. We assigned domains
to the protein sequences in these families according to
Pfam annotation [29]. The Pfam database provides the
currently most comprehensive collection of manually
curated protein domain signatures. Its family assignments are based on evolutionarily conserved motifs in
the protein sequences.
It is important to distinguish real domain gain events
from domain gain calls caused by errors in gene and

To investigate which molecular mechanisms have
caused domain gains in our set of high-confidence
domain gain events, we examined the characteristics of
the sequences that code for the gained domains. As a
requirement, each gain event in our set has as descendants two or more genes with the gained domain. To
simplify the investigation, we only considered one representative protein for each gain event, and most (232 or
70%) of these were drawn from the human genome as
its gene annotation is of the highest quality. Sometimes
the same protein was an example for more than one
domain gain that occurred during evolution. We projected intron-exon boundaries and intron phases onto
the representative protein sequences to help identify the
possible causative mechanism. We also compared each
representative protein sequence with the orthologs and
paralogs in the same TreeFam family that lacked the

Buljan et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R74
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/7/R74

gained domain. This helped us to assign the characteristics of the gained domains.
We recorded domain gain position (amino-terminal,
carboxy-terminal or middle) as well as the number of
gained exons and whether the domain was an extension of
an existing exon (Figure 2). We observed two pronounced
trends: first, most of the domain gains (234 or 71% of the
events) occurred at protein termini. This was in agreement
with previous studies [30,31], and terminal domains were
significantly overrepresented among the gained domains
(P-value < 7.7 × 10-13, Chi-square test; Additional file 1).
Second, most of the gained domains (again 234 or 71%)
are coded for by more than one exon and therefore retroposition is excluded as a likely causative mechanism for
them. Figure 2 and evidence for other mechanisms of
domain gain, including analysis of gain events that have
possibly occurred through exonisation of non-coding
sequences [21] and through inclusion of mobile genetic
elements [32], is further discussed in Additional file 1.
Even though we do not expect that the final set of highconfidence domain gains is biased towards any of the
mechanisms, the total number of gain events in the set is
relatively small and this could introduce apparent dominance of one mechanism over another. Hence, we wanted
to test whether a larger set of domain gains would support the observed distribution of characteristics of gained
domains. We composed the larger (medium confidence)

Page 4 of 15

set by excluding two out of the three filtering criteria
(Additional file 2a). We left only the criteria for domain
gains to be supported by a gain in an organism with a
better quality genome, because the distribution of
domain gains that are reported only in one protein
showed a bias towards the genomes of lower quality (the
most gains were reported in Schistosoma mansoni and
Tetraodon nigroviridis (320 and 303 gains, respectively),
and among the organisms with least reported gains were
human and mouse (25 and 19 gains, respectively)). We
compared the high and medium confidence sets of gain
events (Additional file 3). The distribution of domain
gains in the medium-confidence set is overall similar to
the one in the set of high-confidence domain gains, thus
supporting the major conclusions we draw here. The
major difference between the two sets was in the number
of middle domains coded by one exon: there were 1.8
times more gains of a domain coded by a single novel
middle exon, and 1.6 times more gains of a domain
coded by an extension of a middle exon in the mediumconfidence set. The set of medium-confidence domain
gains is enriched with false domain gain calls caused by
discrepancies in the domain annotation of proteins from
the same TreeFam families. However, we cannot rule out
that some of these gains are real; hence, more supporting
cases for the mechanisms that can add domains to the
middle of proteins could be found in the larger set.

Figure 2 Distribution of domain gain events according to the position of domain insertion and number of exons gained. Gains at
amino and carboxyl termini and in the middle of proteins are shown separately. The first column in each group shows the fraction of gains
where the gained domain is coded by multiple new exons and the second where it is coded by a single new exon. The third column shows
the fraction of gains where the ancestral exon has been extended and the gained domain is coded by the extended exon as well as by
additional exons. Finally, the fourth column in each group shows cases where only the ancestral exon has been extended with the sequence of
a new domain.

Buljan et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R74
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/7/R74

Mechanisms that could be at play here are retroposition
and exonization of previously non-coding sequence, but
also recombination inside the gene sequence.
We chose a single representative transcript for each gain
event, but as a control we compared the characteristics of
the gained domain in all descendant TreeFam transcripts
with the gained domain. In most cases we found that
other descendants of the gain event had the same characteristics of domain gain as the representative protein (in
76% of descendants of a gain event, on average). This suggests that the causative mechanism can be investigated by
looking at the characteristics of the domain in one representative protein for each gain. Additionally, we tested
whether deficiencies in the current transcript assignments
introduce false domain gain calls and found that not more
than 4% of domain gain calls could be due to discrepancies
in gene annotations (Additional file 4) [33]. Hence, we
expect that these domains will not influence the overall
distribution of domain characteristics.
We were intrigued by the many gains coded by exon
extension. These domain gains are more likely to be
enriched in domains gained through exonisation of noncoding sequences compared to other categories of
domain gains. We would expect that when a new Pfam
family is formed from previously non-coding sequence
that it is more likely that this will be an intrinsically
unstructured region. Intrinsically unstructured or disordered regions lack stable secondary and/or tertiary structure, but are associated with important functions, such as
regulation and signaling [34-36]. We predicted disordered regions in all proteins from the study with the
IUPred software [37] and looked at the average percentage of disordered residues in each gained domain in our

Page 5 of 15

set and in all other domains present in these proteins
(Figure 3). We observed two prominent trends: first,
gained domains in general have a greater percentage of
disordered residues (on average, only 5% of residues of
all other domains in proteins are predicted to be disordered compared to an average of 21% of residues in the
gained domains); and second, domains with the greatest
percentage of disordered residues are those that have
been gained by extension of existing exons. These results
suggest a link between the evolution of new unstructured
domains and exonization of non-coding sequence.
Donor genes of the gained domains

We investigated whether duplication of the sequence of
the ‘donor genes’ preceded gains of these domains. We
selected the 232 gain events with human representative
proteins; the selected domain gain events cover those
events where at least one of the descendants is a human
protein. Hence, the time scale for these events ranges
from the divergence of all animals (around 700 million
years ago) to the divergence of primates (around 25 million years ago). We grouped descendants of each gain
event into the evolutionary group (primates, mammals,
vertebrates, bilaterates and animals) they span. Additional file 5 lists all gain events together with information about the evolutionary group of the descendants
with the gained domain. For each domain, we checked
whether any other human protein contains sequence
stretch similar to the gained domain. When there is a
sequence significantly similar to the gained domain
somewhere else in the genome, it is possible that the
original sequence was duplicated and that one copy was
the source of the gained domain. For this we used Wu-

Figure 3 Distribution of disordered residues in the gained domains according to the position of domain insertion and number of
exons gained. This graph shows the percentage of disordered residues in each category of domain gains. The fraction of events in each
category can be seen in Figure 2.

Buljan et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R74
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/7/R74

blastp [38] and found a potential origin for 129 (56%) of
the gained domains. For the remaining domains it is
possible that either the mechanism for domain gain did
not involve duplication of an existing ‘donor’ domain, or
that the two sequences have diverged beyond recognition. Hence, the set of domains without the potential
‘donor’ is enriched in events where the domain has been
gained through exonization of previously non-coding
sequence, or, for example, through gene fusion without
previous gene duplication.

Page 6 of 15

Evidence for the molecular mechanisms that caused
domain gains

Domains in the human lineage for which we can identify a potential donor protein and that are gained within
a single exon are possible candidates for retroposition
(26 cases). We checked these cases manually and found
that only one of them was plausibly mediated by this
mechanism (Figure 4a); the pre-SET and SET domains
in the SETMAR gene were most likely gained by retroposition and have an origin in the gene SUV39H1.

Figure 4 Examples of evidence for mechanisms that have caused domain gains. (a) An example of a domain gain mediated by
retroposition. TreeFam family TF352220 contains genes with a transposase domain (PF01359). The primate transcripts in this family have been
extended at their amino terminus with the pre-SET and SET domains. The representative transcript for this gain event is SETMAR-201
(ENST00000307483; left-hand side). Both gained domains have a significant hit in the gene SUV39H1 (ENSG00000101945; right-hand side) - the Set
domains of the donor and recipient proteins share 41% identity. Previously, it has been reported that the chimeric gene originated in primates
by insertion of the transposase domain (PF01359, with mutated active site and no transposase activity) in the gene that contained the pre-SET
and SET domains [21]. Here we propose that the evolution of this gene involved two crucial steps: retroposition of the sequence coding for the
pre-SET and SET domains and the already described insertion of the MAR transposase region [21]. The SET domain has lost the introns present
in the original sequence and the pre-SET domain has an intron containing repeat elements in a position not present in the original domain,
suggesting it was inserted later on. The likely evolutionary scenario here includes duplication of pre-SET and SET domains through retroposition,
insertion of the transposase domain and subsequent joining of these domains. The SETMAR gene is in the intron of another gene (SUMF1),
which is on the opposite strand, so it might be that SETMAR is using the other gene’s regulatory regions for its transcription. The top of the
figure shows the genomic positions of depicted genes. Arrowheads on the lines that represent chromosomal sequences indicate whether the
transcripts are coded by the forward or reverse strand. Transcripts are always shown in the 5’ to 3’ orientation and proteins in the amino- to
carboxy-terminal orientation. Exon projections and intron phases are also shown on the protein level. Pfam domains are illustrated as colored
boxes. Figure 4b and Additional file 8 use the same conventions. (b) An example of a domain gain by gene duplication followed by exon
joining. TreeFam family TF314963 contains genes with a lactate/malate dehydrogenase domain where one branch with vertebrate genes has
gained the additional UEV domain. Homologues, both orthologues and paralogues, without the gained domains are present in a number of
animal genomes. A representative transcript with the gained domain is UEVLD-205 (ENST00000396197; left-hand side). The UEV domain in that
transcript is 56% identical to the UEV domain in the transcript TSG101-201 (ENST00000251968), which belongs to the neighboring gene TSG101,
and the two transcripts also have introns with identical phases in the same positions. The likely scenario is that after the gene coding for the
TSG101-201 transcript was duplicated, its exons were joined with those of the UEVLD-205 ancestor and the two genes have been fused.

Buljan et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R74
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/7/R74

Interestingly, this gene lies within the intron of another
gene on the opposite strand, which implies a possible
means for overriding the need for the evolution of novel
regulatory signals. A similar observation has been
reported for the examples of evolution of novel human
genes [39]. The other 25 cases lacked supporting evidence for this mechanism (Additional file 6) [40-42].
The lack of evidence is not a definite proof that retroposition was not the active mechanism. However, over 70%
of the gained domains in the whole set are coded for by
more than one exon, and even though some of the retroposed sequences can acquire introns later on, intron
presence in the majority (234) of the gained domains
rules out retroposition as a likely widespread mechanism
of domain gain. Moreover, a number of possible candidates for a gain by retroposition in the human lineage
are better explained by joining of exons from adjacent
genes. With regard to other lineages, only the gains in
insects, with representative proteins from Drosophila
melanogaster, have numerous examples (22 cases) of a
gain of domain coded by one exon, leaving open the
possibility that retroposition might be a more important
mechanism for domain gain in insects than it is in other
lineages. However, overall this seems to be a rare
mechanism for domain gain in animals and there are
also indications of the importance of adjacent gene joining [11] and NAHR [43] in the formation of chimeric
genes in the Drosophila lineage.
Terminal gains of domains coded by multiple novel
exons are particularly interesting here because for these
events there is only one plausible causative mechanism:
joining of exons from adjacent genes (Figure 1). Even
though, because of the criteria we used, the number of
new exons gained at termini is a lower estimate, this is
still the most abundant type of event; 104 (32%) of all
events are amino-terminal (63 events) or carboxy-terminal (41 events) gains of domains encoded by multiple
new exons (Figure 2). We can discard retroposition and
recombination assisted insertions into introns as likely
mechanisms for these gains. However, it is possible that
recombination preceded domain gains, and even that
recombination did not juxtapose fully functional genes
but only, for example, certain exons of one or both of
the genes. Indeed, we have not found that these genes
exist as adjacent separate genes in the modern genomes
(Additional file 7) [44] and it is likely that these gains
were preceded by DNA recombination.
The search for the ‘donor gene’ of the gained domains
identified the possible origin of the domain for 60% of
domains encoded by new terminal exons. This implies
that duplication of a donor domain has frequently provided the material for subsequent exon joining and new
exon combinations. An illustration of this mechanism is
the gain of the UEV domain in the UEVLD gene (Figure

Page 7 of 15

4b). The gain has most likely occurred after the neighboring gene TSG101 has been duplicated and exons of one
copy joined with exons of the UEVLD ancestor. Two
similar examples are illustrated in Additional file 8a,b.
Because of the special attention that has been given to
domain insertions into introns in discussions on domain
shuffling during protein evolution [26,40], we have studied the middle gains of novel exons in more detail (see
also Additional files 6 and 9). Out of 49 domains
encoded by novel exons and gained in the middle of
proteins, 28 are surrounded by introns of symmetrical
phases, and hence give further support to the assumption that the causative mechanism for them indeed
included insertions into ancestral introns. However,
these likely examples for domain insertions into introns
cover less than 10% of all gain events, which does not
support the expectation that this was the major mechanism for domain gains in the evolution of metazoa
[25,26]. This is even more pronounced if we take into
account the fact that when ancestral proteins are
encoded by more than two exons, the possible number
of insertions into the middle is higher than the possible
number of insertions at the end of the protein [31]. It is
also worth noting that most (82% or 40 of 49 intronic
gains) domains inserted into ancestral introns were
coded by multiple exons, which implies that intronic
recombination, rather than retroposition, would be the
more likely causative mechanism for the majority of
intronic gains.
Gains in the representative human proteins illustrate
the characteristics of domains that were gained during
evolution of the human lineage. However, it is important to note that at different stages of evolution, different mechanisms could have predominated. The same is
true for domain gains in different species after species
divergence. That is why we looked at the characteristics
of gained domains in representative proteins of each
species separately. We found that gain of multiple terminal novel exons is a dominant mechanism for domain
gains in human, mouse and frog (these gains accounted
for 34, 50 and 56%, respectively, of all gains with representative protein in these species); in fruit fly the dominant category was extension of an exon at the carboxyl
terminus (29% of domain gains); and in zebrafish it was
a mixture of the two (35% of gains were novel terminal
domains and 20% carboxyl terminus exon extensions).
For rat and chicken we had too few domain gains to
draw conclusions.
Recent segmental duplications in the human genome
are a possible source of new genetic material [45] and
their role in the evolution of primate and human specific traits has been debated [46]. Hence, we investigated
whether recent domain gains in the human lineage
could be related to the reported segmental duplications.

Buljan et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R74
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/7/R74

We found two domain gains that were best explained by
recent segmental duplications and subsequent joining of
two genes (Additional file 8c,d). Both of these gains
occurred at the protein termini after divergence of primates. The mechanism of their evolution is the same as
in the case of the UEVLD gene: joining of exons from
adjacent genes after gene duplication. For these two
examples, however, there is also evidence of a likely
connection between recent genomic duplication and
domain gain. However, it is necessary to be cautious
when assessing the possible role of the protein products
of these genes. For both examples, there is only transcript evidence and some of the transcript products of
these genes appear to have a structure that would lead
to them being targeted by nonsense-mediated decay
(NMD) [47]. Sometimes it is possible for a transcript to
avoid an NMD signal and in this case these examples
would be of high interest as possible sources of novel
function. A possible mechanism for the creation of
these proteins is illustrated in Additional file 8c,d. In the
case that these transcripts are silenced by NMD, these
genes are still interesting examples from a theoretical
point of view as they directly illustrate the mechanism
of how gene evolution can work. Initially, part of a gene
sequence is duplicated and recombined with another
gene; if juxtaposed exons are in frame, a joint transcript
can be created and through NMD deleterious variants
can be silenced at the transcript level while allowing at
the same time introduction of novel mutations that can
be tested by natural selection.
The dominant mechanism for domain gains relies on
gene duplications

One advantage of using TreeFam phylogenies is the
ability to distinguish between gene evolution that follows gene duplication and gene evolution that follows
speciation. When comparing the observed versus
expected frequency of duplication and speciation events
after which domain gain occurred, we found that
domains were gained 2.7 times more frequently after
gene duplication compared to after speciation (if calculations were performed using branch lengths) and 4.5
times more frequently when numbers of nodes were
compared (see Additional file 7 for details). This shows
that duplication of not only the ‘donor gene’ but also of
the ‘recipient gene’ assisted domain gains. Taken
together, in 80% of our domain gain events, duplication
of either the ancestral protein or donor protein has
been involved. Moreover, when two genes were fused
together then the assignment of ‘donor’ and ‘recipient’
genes depends solely on whose phylogeny we are looking at.
When it is possible to find the origin of the duplicated
domain, the overall trend is that the younger the gain is,

Page 8 of 15

the more likely it is that the ‘donor gene’ is on the same
chromosome as the ‘recipient gene’ (Figure 5). NAHR
creates duplicates more frequently than IR does [48,49],
creates them preferentially on the same chromosome
[48], and provides ground for gene rearrangements.
Therefore, it is possible that NAHR assisted domain
gains, and in particular preceded joining of exons from
adjacent genes. We do not exclude IR as a possible causative mechanism but NAHR seems more likely given
the bias in chromosome locations of domain duplicates
and the reliance of the gain mechanism on gene duplication (further discussed in Additional file 7).
Functional implications of domain gain events

It has been proposed that the novel combinations of
preexisting domains had a major role in the evolution of
protein networks and more complex cellular activities
[5,50]. In agreement with this, we found that the most
frequently gained protein domains in the human lineage - domains independently gained five or more times
in our set - are all involved in signaling or regulatory
functions; the Ankyrin repeat (gained six times) and
SAM domain (gained five times) are commonly involved
in protein-protein interactions, and the Src homology-3
and PH domain-like superfamily (both gained six times)
frequently have a role in signaling pathways. Furthermore, we used DAVID [51] to investigate if human
representative transcripts (from Additional file 5) were
enriched in any Gene Ontology terms. Significantly
enriched Gene Ontology terms are listed in Additional
file 10 and are, in general, involved in signal transduction; among the significant terms are ‘adherens junction’, ‘protein modification process’ and ‘regulation of
signal transduction’. This further supports the role of
novel domain combinations in the evolution of more
complex regulatory functions.

Discussion
Creation of novel genes is assumed to play a crucial role
in the evolution of complexity. Previous studies have
put considerable effort into identifying gene gain and
loss events during animal evolution, as well as analyzing
functional and expression characteristics of these genes
[52-56]. In this study, our aim was to investigate functionally relevant changes of individual proteins. Implications of observed domain gains on the evolution of
more complex animal traits are highlighted by the frequent regulatory function of the gained domains in the
human lineage. Shuffling of regulatory domains has
already been proposed as an important driving force in
the evolution of animal complexity [5,50], and an
increase in the number of regulatory domains in the
proteome has been directly related to the increase of
organismal complexity [57].

Buljan et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R74
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/7/R74

Page 9 of 15

Figure 5 Chromosomal position of the ‘donor gene’ and the relative age of the gain event. The graph shows the fraction of events for
which the ‘donor gene’ of the gained domain is identified, and is on the same chromosome as the gene with the gained domain, with respect
to the relative age of the gain event. The gain events were divided into five groups according to the expected age of the event as judged by
the TreeFam phylogeny. The x-axis shows the evolutionary group in the human lineage to which descendants of the gain event belong, and
the y-axis shows the percentage of gain events in each evolutionary group for which both of the conditions were valid: we were able to find
the donor gene and the donor gene was on the same chromosome as the gene with the gained domain. This was true for 3 out of 9 gain
events in primates, 2 out of 20 in mammals, 7 out of 121 in vertebrates, 1 out of 27 in Bilateria and 1 out of 55 in all animals. Estimated
divergence times (in millions of years ago (mya), as taken from Ponting [80]) are: 25 mya for primates, 166 mya for mammals, 416 mya for
vertebrates and 700 mya for all animals (we were not able to estimate the divergence time for Coelomata).

The relative frequencies of domain gain and loss
events are not known and most probably are not universal for different domains and organisms. Hence, different approaches have been undertaken to address this
issue. Several previous studies have assumed that the
frequencies of gain and loss events are equal and have
identified domain gains and losses by applying maximum parsimony [58-61]. Other studies have assumed
that domain loss is slightly more likely than domain
gain [62] or that the difference in the frequency of gains
and losses is very significant and hence have suggested
Dollo parsimony - which allows a maximum of one gain
per tree - for identifying domain gains [63,64]. In genomes in which proteins often have several domains, one
can expect that the mechanisms that cause domain loss
are more frequently at play than the mechanisms that
cause domain gain. In particular, exclusion of domains
could be an effective means for subfunctionalization
after gene duplication. For instance, mutations that
introduce a novel stop codon or that cause exon skipping during alternative splicing can easily shorten the
protein. Hence, in the studies of multidomain animal
proteins, one should be careful about applying simple
maximum parsimony since it can happen that the

number of domain gains is falsely overestimated - when
in fact multiple losses have occurred. In particular, in
this study, it was crucial to identify high-confidence
cases of domain gains. Our approach to do this was to
be very strict about calling domain gains: we applied the
weighted parsimony algorithm assuming that it is two
times more likely for a protein to lose a domain than to
gain a new one; additionally, we classified an event as a
domain gain only if a single gain of a particular domain
was reported in a tree, which is the rationale of the
Dollo parsimony. If we had applied Dollo parsimony
only we would not have been able to distinguish
between eventual multiple gains of the same domain,
and this approach excluded such dubious cases. This
strategy appeared to remove a number of possible false
domain gains as judged by inspection of the results.
Present domain combinations are shaped by the
causative molecular mutation mechanisms followed by
natural selection. Here we address the question of what
mechanisms have been, and possibly still are, creating
novel, more complex animal domain architectures and
hence new functional arrangements. Our data suggest
that the dominant mechanism has been gene fusion
through joining of exons from adjacent genes and that

Buljan et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R74
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/7/R74

the process of domain gain has strongly relied on gene
duplication. In this study we find novel examples that
directly illustrate this mechanism; after duplication,
exons that encode one or more domains are joined with
exons from another adjacent gene. The examples are
interesting both from the point of view of the evolution
of protein diversity and as examples for novel gene creation during animal evolution. It is possible that recombination created novel introns and directly joined exons
from two adjacent genes, but it is more likely that
recombination only juxtaposed novel exon combinations, allowing alternative splicing to create novel splice
variants. There are indications that NAHR could have
caused the initial duplications and rearrangements. The
implications for the role of NAHR in animal evolution
in general are particularly interesting since this mechanism is still primarily associated with more recent mutations in the human genome, as well as primate genomes
in general, such as structural variations in the human
population and disease development [46,65,66]. It has
recently been proposed, however, that the fork stalling
and template switching (FoSTeS) mechanism [67] could
have also had a role in genome and single-gene evolution. This is a replicative mechanism that relies on
microhomology regions and seems to provide a better
explanation for complex germline rearrangements - but
also for some tandem duplications in the genome - than
NAHR and IR [68]. Hence, the exact relative contributions of different recombination mechanisms are still to
be determined. However, this might be hampered by
sequence divergence after domain gain events, which
have occurred millions of years ago.
In this work, we also address exonization of previously
non-coding sequences as a mechanism for gain of novel
domains. We observe that domains that are gained as
exon extensions are preferentially disordered (Figure 3).
This suggests that exonization of previously non-coding
sequences could explain some cases of evolution of disordered protein segments in animal proteins. Disordered
segments in higher eukaryotes are linked with important
signaling and regulatory functions [69,70] and inclusion
of these sequences into proteins, together with creation
of novel domain combinations, could have added to the
emergence of complexity in higher eukaryotes. An illustration from the literature for the significance of inclusion of novel disordered segments into proteins is the
evolution of NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartic acid) receptors. These receptors display a vertebrate-specific elongation at the carboxyl terminus. Gained protein regions
are disordered and govern novel protein interactions,
and it is believed that this might have contributed to
evolution and organization of postsynaptic signaling
complexes in vertebrates [71]. Moreover, our data suggest that there is a bias for exon extensions to

Page 10 of 15

preferentially occur at the carboxyl terminus (Figure 2),
which is in agreement with the assumption that some of
these domain gains occurred through exon extension
since extension of exons at the amino terminus or in
the middle of proteins can introduce frame shifts and
hence can be selected against. However, Pfam families
that are classified as exon extensions are also likely to
be shorter, so it is possible that this introduces some
bias because shorter families are less likely to be
domains with defined structures. Moreover, an important caveat is that only a systematic study can confirm
domain gain by this mechanism; apparently non-coding
sequences that are homologous to gained domains
might just lack transcript and protein evidence in the
less studied species, resulting in a domain assignment
being missed.
Finally, it is important to note that even though we
have attempted to draw conclusions about dominant
mechanisms for evolution of animal genes, it is possible
that contributions by different mechanisms will differ
between different species. Percentages of active retrotransposons and rates of chromosomal rearrangements
and intergenic splicing are different in different genomes, as are the selection forces that depend on population size and that decide on how well tolerated
intermediate stages in gene evolution are. Therefore, it
is possible that we will find out that some mechanisms
are more relevant in some species than they are in
others. This is illustrated by differences in characteristics
of gained domains in vertebrates and Drosophila. The
dominant mechanism in Drosophila seems to be extension of exons at the carboxyl terminus. Additionally,
even though the majority of gain events are represented
by human proteins, different mechanisms could have
dominated at different evolutionary time points in the
human lineage. For example, LINE-1 retrotransposons
are abundant in mammals but not in other animals [72],
and whole genome duplication that occurred after the
divergence of vertebrates [73] could have preferred
recombination between gene duplicates at that point in
time.
Retroposition and recombination-assisted intronic
insertions, in contrast to previous expectations, appear
to be minor contributors to domain gains. Therefore, it
is possible that the role of intronic insertions had been
overestimated previously. It will be interesting to see if
the observed excess of symmetrical intron phases
around exons coding for domains [25] is due to exon
shuffling or to some other mechanism, such as selective
pressure from alternative splicing [74]. In conclusion,
our work provides evidence for the importance of gene
duplication followed by adjacent gene joining in creating
genes with novel domain combinations. The role of
duplicated genes in donating domains to adjacent

Buljan et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R74
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/7/R74

proteins is a potentially important, and powerful,
mechanism for neofunctionalization of genes.

Conclusions
We report here a large-scale analysis of the mechanisms
that have caused domain gains in animals and describe
several novel examples that illustrate gene evolution in
the human lineage. Our study suggests that joining of
exons from adjacent genes has played a crucial role in
the evolution of novel human genes. Moreover, it indicates a strong link between gene duplication and the
invention of novel domain combinations, thus implying
a powerful means for the fast evolution of novel function after gene duplication.
Materials and methods
Here we describe the procedures used to identify a set
of high confidence protein domain gains and the subsequent analyses of this set. This flow is illustrated in
Additional file 2a,b.
Assignment of domains to proteins with refinement

We assigned Pfam domains (release 23.0) to all protein
products of genes in the TreeFam database (release 6.0)
using the Pfam_scan.pl software. Since domains in the
same Pfam clan are evolutionarily related, we replaced
domain identifiers with clan identifiers where applicable.
Domain prediction methods can both fail to predict
bona fide domains as well as make false predictions,
which look like domain losses and gains, respectively.
We applied a refinement process to address this issue.
We firstly removed the likely false positive fragmentary
domain assignments (that is, domains that were called
on only a single sequence in the family, with an E-value
> 10-6 and only 30% or less of the domain’s Pfam model
covered). Additionally, when some sequences lacked a
domain that other family members had, we used Wublastp to search that sequence against the domain
sequences found in other members of the family. When
a significant match was found (E-value < 10 -4 and at
least 60% of a domain sequence present, or alternatively
an E-value < 10 -7 and 40% or more of a domain
sequence present, or only E-value < 10-10 and any length
of the matched sequences) we added domain assignments to those sequences.
Exclusion of possible false domain gain calls

Domain refinements added Pfam domains to proteins
that shared significant similarity with domain sequence
but were not recognized by searching with the Pfam
hidden Markov model library. However, apart from
these clear cases of a lack of domain annotation, there
are also cases where proteins share only moderate similarity with domain sequence and it is difficult to say

Page 11 of 15

whether a domain should be annotated to these proteins
as well. To avoid false calls of domain gains, we
excluded domain gain events where sequences in the
same gene family shared a similarity with the gained
domain but were not annotated with that domain. We
chose a strict threshold and excluded all gain events
where a domain sequence had 16% or more identical
amino acids aligned to any sequence in the same TreeFam family that lacked the gained domain. This further
reduces the chances of erroneously calling domain gains
due to a lack of sensitivity of some Pfam hidden Markov
models.
Parsing trees

To identify the branch points in the phylogenetic trees
at which new domains were gained, we used the TreeFam API [28]. In TreeFam families each gene is represented with a single transcript. However, to be able to
claim that a gene has gained a domain it was necessary
to take into account protein domains present in all
splice variants of the genes in the TreeFam families. We
applied the weighted parsimony algorithm [75] on the
TreeFam phylogenies, with the cost for a domain gain
of 2 and the cost for a domain loss of 1. Because gains
are more costly, the ones we see are more likely to be
correct. We then took into account those reported gain
events that occurred only once in a tree - which is the
rationale of the Dollo parsimony [76]. We applied this
method to the 17,050 TreeFam clean trees, that is, trees
containing genes from completely sequenced animal
genomes. We considered the gained events to be the
ones that were in concordance with both algorithms 4,362 gained domains. We then excluded from the analysis those gains that appeared only on the leaf nodes of
the trees - that is, that had only one sequence with the
gained domain - and were left with 1,372 domains
gained on internal nodes of the tree. Next, we aimed to
chose a representative transcript for each gain event,
and the conditions for that were the following: the transcript had to be present in the TreeFam tree (the gains
were also reported when the gene gained another alternative transcript, not only when the TreeFam transcript
was extended with a new sequence); the transcript had
to have a gained domain on the encoded protein predicted by the Pfam software; and the representative
transcript had to belong to one of the species D. melanogaster (fruit fly), Xenopus tropicalis (frog), Danio rerio
(zebrafish), Gallus gallus (chicken), Mus musculus
(mouse), Rattus norvegicus (rat) or Homo sapiens
(human) - that is, to a species whose genome is of a
good quality. This left us with 653 gained domains that
had representative transcripts that fulfilled all conditions. Since each representative sequence was chosen
from the descendant with the genome of best quality for

Buljan et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R74
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/7/R74

all gains in the human lineage, we chose representative
human transcripts (proteins). Exclusion of leaf gains and
selection of representative transcripts from better quality
genomes were necessary to ensure that our gain events
were not due to gene annotation errors. We then
excluded all instances where the sequences from the
same family that lacked the gained domain were found
to have diagnostic motifs for that domain, as recognized
by profile comparer [77], or to have an amino acid
stretch similar to one in the gained domain (16% or
more identical amino acids). This left us with 378
gained domains. Some of these domains appeared to be
gained together so the total number of domain gain
events was 349. Finally, we excluded from the analysis
the gain events for which a representative transcript was
no longer in the Ensembl database, release 50 (3 cases)
or for which protein sequence alignment downloaded
from the TreeFam database did not clearly support
domain gain (13 cases) and those cases that we believed
were the consequence of inconsistencies in gene annotation (3 cases; Additional file 7). This left us with a final
total of 330 high-confidence domain gain events for
further analysis (Additional file 5). In addition, we created a medium-confidence set of domain gain events.
For this, we only asked the gain to occur in at least one
genome of better quality. However, this also increased
the rate of false calls of domain gains. This left us with
849 gained domains. The flow to obtain this set of gains
is shown in Additional file 2a.

Page 12 of 15

that a gained domain is coded by an extended ancestral
exon, the number of extended exons is likely to be an
overestimate.
Positions of gained domains

When a new domain was encoded by a first or last
coding exon, the gain was called as an amino- or carboxy-terminal gain, respectively. In addition, when an
inserted domain was not coded by the terminal exons,
we checked whether additional exons towards the termini were gained together with the ones coding for
the gained domain. If there was no significant similarity between these exons and the ones in the sequences
without the gained domain, the exons were called
novel and the gain still called terminal. Conditions for
calling an exon as novel were: 85% or more novel
amino acids in an exon (that is, residues unaligned
with amino acids in the sequences without the
domain); or less then 10% identity with any of the
sequences without the domain. For short exons coding
for 20 amino acids or less, we changed this requirement to less than 40% identity. All other domain gains
were classified as middle.
It is important to note that examining the sequences
that surround the gained domains, when classifying the
gains according to their relative position and as exonic
or intronic, also helps to overcome the issue of imperfect domain boundary assignments, which could bias
classification of gained domains.

Intron-exon structures of genes

Genomic origin of the inserted domain

We used the TreeFam table map with gene structures to
project the intron-exon boundaries and intron phases on
the representative protein sequences for each domain
gain event. In order to establish whether the gained protein domains were part of completely new exons or
extensions of already pre-existing exons, we downloaded
protein sequence alignments for each TreeFam family
with a gained domain from the TreeFam website. Since
it is unlikely that the gained sequence would exactly
correlate with domain boundaries, we examined the
similarity in regions close to exon boundaries. We considered that a domain was inserted into an existing exon
if the region in the same exon close to the exon border
shared partial similarity with an exon from those
sequences in the same family that lacked the domain.
We considered that the domain was gained within an
existing exon when the boundary region of the exon first or last third of the sequence outside of the domain had 30% or more identical residues to one of the
sequences without the inserted domain. We required
that this ‘boundary’ region was at least seven amino
acids long. However, because of this criterion that only
a short stretch of sequence similarity is enough to claim

For all domain gain events that have a human descendant, the gained domain sequence from a representative
protein was searched against the rest of the human proteome. For this we used Wu-blastp. The best significant
hit that was not in one of the gene’s paralogues was
considered to be a potential donor of the gained
domain. A set of paralogues for each gene was composed of other human genes from the same TreeFam
family and Ensembl paralogues for that gene. The condition for a significant hit was an E-value < 10 -4 with
60% or more of the domain sequence aligned. We
visually examined the structures of the genes with
gained domains and of their best hits using Ensembl
(release 50) and the Belvu viewer [78].
We used the segmental duplication coordinates from
the Segmental Duplication Database [79]. We investigated whether any segment from the database overlapped with any of the representative genes with a
domain gain, and if so, whether the other copy of that
segmental duplication was placed on the gene that was
a potential donor of that domain. We also checked
whether the other copy overlapped with any of the paralogs of the representative gene.

Buljan et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R74
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/7/R74

Additional material
Additional file 1: Further discussion of different types of domain
gain events as classified in Figure 2.
Additional file 2: Flowchart of (a) methods and (b) analysis for the
set of high-confidence domain gain events and for the set of
medium-confidence domain gains. The numbers of gained domains
we were left with after each filtering step are noted in (a). In some cases
more domains were gained at the same time; hence, the number of
gain events that we looked at for the high-confidence domain gains
differs from the number of gained domains.
Additional file 3: Distribution of domain gain events according to
the position of the domain insertion and the number of exons
gained in the set of high-confidence domain gains and the set of
medium-confidence domain gains. (a) The distribution of
characteristics of domains from the high-confidence set of domain gains
is identical to that in Figure 2. (b) The distribution of characteristics of
domains from the set of medium-confidence domain gains. There are in
total 330 high-confidence domain gain events and 849 mediumconfidence domain gains (of which 19 gains have ambiguous position
and are not shown in the graph). The flowchart in Additional file 2a
shows the procedure for creation of these two sets of domain gains. The
distribution of domain gains in the medium-confidence set (b) is similar
to that in the set of high-confidence domain gains; the main difference
is that the number of middle domain gains is increased. We believe that
this is largely due to false domain gain calls caused by some proteins in
the TreeFam families missing the Pfam annotations for domains that are
actually present in these proteins.
Additional file 4: Analysis of supporting evidence for the
representative transcripts for domain gain events.
Additional file 5: A table listing high-confidence domain gain
events.
Additional file 6: Analysis of evidence for retroposition and middle
insertions by intronic recombination as mechanisms for domain
gain.
Additional file 7: Fusion of adjacent genes and NAHR as a
mechanism that preceded gene fusions. Discussion of evidence for
NAHR as a mechanism that frequently assisted domain gains.
Additional file 8: Examples of domain gains by joining of exons
from adjacent genes. (a) TreeFam family TF323983 contains Cadherin
EGF LAG seven-pass G-type receptor (CESLR) precursor genes. One
branch of the family, containing vertebrate genes, has gained the Sulfate
transport and STAS domains in addition to the ancestral cadherin, EGF
and other extracellular domains. The gain occurred after the other
vertebrates diverged from fish and homologues without the gained
domains are present in all animals. A representative for the gain is the
transcript CELSR3-207 (ENST00000383733) and its 3’ end is shown on the
left-hand side (the whole transcript is too long to be clearly presented).
On the right-hand side is shown a gene that is the plausible donor of
these domains. Namely, the gene SLC26A4 (ENSG00000091137) contains
both domains, and its STAS domain is 31% identical to that in the
CELSR3 gene. In addition, the alignment with the zebrafish genome is
shown below the CELSR3-207 transcript. The yellow arrows represent the
alignment with chromosome 8 in zebrafish, and pink arrows that with
chromosome 6 (information taken from the USCS browser). The
alignment with the fish genome shows that the synteny is broken
exactly in the region where the new domain is gained. Therefore, the
plausible scenario for domain gain involves gene duplication,
recombination and joining of newly adjacent exons. (b) Another
example of a domain gain after gene duplication and exon joining.
Family TF334740 in the TreeFam database contains genes that code for
the Rho-guanine nucleotide exchange factor (RhoGEF). However, the
RhoGEF domain was not present in the ancestral protein but was
inserted later on together with the C1_1 domain when mammals
diverged from other vertebrates (TreeFam release 6.0 that we used in the
analysis had chicken, fish and frog genes without the gained domains).
The representative transcript for the gain event is AC093283.3-201

Page 13 of 15

(ENST00000296794). The gene ARHGEF18 (ENSG00000104880) has both of
these domains, and the two RhoGEF domains between the genes are
52% identical. Hence, ARHGEF18 is a plausible donor for this gain event.
Again, the mechanism for the gain of these domains most likely involves
gene duplication and exon joining. (c) An example of a domain gain
after segmental duplication and exon joining. TreeFam family TF351422
contains only primate genes, and after a gene duplication event one
branch of the family has gained the PTEN_C2 domain. A representative
transcript for this gain is AL354798.13-202 (ENST00000381866). A few
segmental duplications span across the gene AL354798.13 and one of
them covers only the ancestral portion of the gene - without the gained
domain. The pair of that segmental duplication is on the gene’s
paralogue that has not gained the domain, the gene AP000365.1
(ENSG00000206249). Hence, a possible scenario is that a recent
duplication of a paralog gene has changed its genetic environment and
brought it into proximity of the PTEN_C2 domain, which subsequently
became part of the gene. (d) Another example of a gain of a domaincoding region by segmental duplication followed by exon joining. A
branch with primate genes in the TF340491 family of vertebrate proteins
that contain the KRAB domain has gained the additional HATPase_c
domain. The representative transcript is the human PMS2L3-202
(ENST00000275580). The HATPase_c domain exists in the gene PMS2
(ENSG00000122512) and on the protein level the gained domain is 98%
identical to the sequence in the protein product of PMS2’s transcript,
PMS2-001. A segmental duplication spans across the gained sequence in
the transcript PMS2L3-202 and is a pair of the segmental duplication that
covers the same domain in the gene PMS2. The pair of segmental
duplication regions are presented as grey boxes and are connected with
arrows. Therefore, the mechanism underlying this gain appears to be a
segmental duplication of the sequence belonging to PMS2 after which
the copy next to PMS2L3-202’s ancestor was joined with it. An important
caveat is that PMS2L3-202 has a structure that can be targeted by NMD.
Additional file 9: A table that lists domains that are classified as
being gained by insertion of new exons(s) into the introns of
ancestral genes.
Additional file 10: A table listing significant Gene Ontology terms
for human genes that have been extended with a new protein
domain during evolution.

Abbreviations
IR: illegitimate recombination; NAHR: non-allelic homologous recombination;
NMD: nonsense mediated decay.
Acknowledgements
We are very grateful to A Coghlan, M Babu and R Durbin for helpful
discussions on the presented work, to R Finn, B Schuster-Böckler, P Gardner
and L Parts for advice on the performed experiments, to M Babu, L Parts, M
Taylor, S Pettit, A Elofsson and E Bornberg-Bauer for critical reading and
comments on the manuscript and to P Coggill for proofreading of the
manuscript.
Authors’ contributions
MB participated in design of the study, carried out analyses and drafted the
manuscript. AF analyzed gene structures of selected examples. AB conceived
of the study and participated in design of the study and writing of the
manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Received: 23 April 2010 Revised: 4 June 2010 Accepted: 15 July 2010
Published: 15 July 2010
References
1. Marsden RL, McGuffin LJ, Jones DT: Rapid protein domain assignment
from amino acid sequence using predicted secondary structure. Protein
Sci 2002, 11:2814-2824.
2. Chothia C, Gough J, Vogel C, Teichmann SA: Evolution of the protein
repertoire. Science 2003, 300:1701-1703.

Buljan et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R74
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/7/R74

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.
9.
10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.
17.

18.
19.

20.

21.

22.
23.

24.
25.

Babushok DV, Ostertag EM, Kazazian HH Jr: Current topics in genome
evolution: molecular mechanisms of new gene formation. Cell Mol Life Sci
2007, 64:542-554.
Rubin GM, Yandell MD, Wortman JR, Gabor Miklos GL, Nelson CR,
Hariharan IK, Fortini ME, Li PW, Apweiler R, Fleischmann W, Cherry JM,
Henikoff S, Skupski MP, Misra S, Ashburner M, Birney E, Boguski MS, Brody T,
Brokstein P, Celniker SE, Chervitz SA, Coates D, Cravchik A, Gabrielian A,
Galle RF, Gelbart WM, George RA, Goldstein LS, Gong F, Guan P, et al:
Comparative genomics of the eukaryotes. Science 2000, 287:2204-2215.
Peisajovich SG, Garbarino JE, Wei P, Lim AW: Rapid diversification of cell
signaling phenotypes by modular domain recombination. Science 2010,
328:368-372.
Pasek S, Risler JL, Brezellec P: Gene fusion/fission is a major contributor to
evolution of multi-domain bacterial proteins. Bioinformatics 2006,
22:1418-1423.
Enright AJ, Iliopoulos I, Kyrpides NC, Ouzounis CA: Protein interaction
maps for complete genomes based on gene fusion events. Nature 1999,
402:86-90.
Arguello JR, Fan C, Wang W, Long M: Origination of chimeric genes
through DNA-level recombination. Genome Dyn 2007, 3:131-146.
Long M, Betran E, Thornton K, Wang W: The origin of new genes:
glimpses from the young and old. Nat Rev Genet 2003, 4:865-875.
Babushok DV, Ohshima K, Ostertag EM, Chen X, Wang Y, Mandal PK,
Okada N, Abrams CS, Kazazian HH Jr: A novel testis ubiquitin-binding
protein gene arose by exon shuffling in hominoids. Genome Res 2007,
17:1129-1138.
Zhou Q, Zhang G, Zhang Y, Xu S, Zhao R, Zhan Z, Li X, Ding Y, Yang S,
Wang W: On the origin of new genes in Drosophila. Genome Res 2008,
18:1446-1455.
Magrangeas F, Pitiot G, Dubois S, Bragado-Nilsson E, Cherel M, Jobert S,
Lebeau B, Boisteau O, Lethe B, Mallet J, Jacques Y, Minvielle S:
Cotranscription and intergenic splicing of human galactose-1-phosphate
uridylyltransferase and interleukin-11 receptor alpha-chain genes
generate a fusion mRNA in normal cells. J Biol Chem 1998,
273:16005-16010.
Akiva P, Toporik A, Edelheit S, Peretz Y, Diber A, Shemesh R, Novik A,
Sorek R: Transcription-mediated gene fusion in the human genome.
Genome Res 2006, 16:30-36.
Parra G, Reymond A, Dabbouseh N, Dermitzakis ET, Castelo R, Thomson TM,
Antonarakis SE, Guigo R: Tandem chimerism as a means to increase
protein complexity in the human genome. Genome Res 2006, 16:37-44.
Thomson TM, Lozano JJ, Loukili N, Carrio R, Serras F, Cormand B, Valeri M,
Diaz VM, Abril J, Burset M, Merino J, Macaya A, Corominas M, Guigo R:
Fusion of the human gene for the polyubiquitination coeffector UEV1
with Kua, a newly identified gene. Genome Res 2000, 10:1743-1756.
Patthy L: Exons and protein modules. Encyclopedia of Life Sciences John
Wiley & Sons, Ltd 2008.
Turner DJ, Miretti M, Rajan D, Fiegler H, Carter NP, Blayney ML, Beck S,
Hurles ME: Germline rates of de novo meiotic deletions and duplications
causing several genomic disorders. Nat Genet 2008, 40:90-95.
van Rijk A, Bloemendal H: Molecular mechanisms of exon shuffling:
illegitimate recombination. Genetica 2003, 118:245-249.
Nurminsky DI, Nurminskaya MV, De Aguiar D, Hartl DL: Selective sweep of
a newly evolved sperm-specific gene in Drosophila. Nature 1998,
396:572-575.
Zhang XH, Chasin LA: Comparison of multiple vertebrate genomes
reveals the birth and evolution of human exons. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2006, 103:13427-13432.
Cordaux R, Udit S, Batzer MA, Feschotte C: Birth of a chimeric primate
gene by capture of the transposase gene from a mobile element. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 2006, 103:8101-8106.
Copley RR, Letunic I, Bork P: Genome and protein evolution in eukaryotes.
Curr Opin Chem Biol 2002, 6:39-45.
Moore AD, Bjorklund AK, Ekman D, Bornberg-Bauer E, Elofsson A:
Arrangements in the modular evolution of proteins. Trends Biochem Sci
2008, 33:444-451.
Patthy L: Exon shuffling and other ways of module exchange. Matrix Biol
1996, 15:301-310.
Kaessmann H, Zollner S, Nekrutenko A, Li WH: Signatures of domain
shuffling in the human genome. Genome Res 2002, 12:1642-1650.

Page 14 of 15

26. Liu M, Grigoriev A: Protein domains correlate strongly with exons in
multiple eukaryotic genomes - evidence of exon shuffling? Trends Genet
2004, 20:399-403.
27. Long M, Rosenberg C, Gilbert W: Intron phase correlations and the
evolution of the intron/exon structure of genes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
1995, 92:12495-12499.
28. Ruan J, Li H, Chen Z, Coghlan A, Coin LJ, Guo Y, Heriche JK, Hu Y,
Kristiansen K, Li R, Liu T, Moses A, Qin J, Vang S, Vilella AJ, Ureta-Vidal A,
Bolund L, Wang J, Durbin R: TreeFam: 2008 update. Nucleic Acids Res 2008,
36:D735-740.
29. Finn RD, Mistry J, Tate J, Coggill P, Heger A, Pollington JE, Gavin OL,
Gunasekaran P, Ceric G, Forslund K, Holm L, Sonnhammer EL, Eddy SR,
Bateman A: The Pfam protein families database. Nucleic Acids Res 2010,
38:D211-222.
30. Bjorklund AK, Ekman D, Light S, Frey-Skott J, Elofsson A: Domain
rearrangements in protein evolution. J Mol Biol 2005, 353:911-923.
31. Weiner J, Beaussart F, Bornberg-Bauer E: Domain deletions and
substitutions in the modular protein evolution. FEBS J 2006,
273:2037-2047.
32. Kent WJ, Sugnet CW, Furey TS, Roskin KM, Pringle TH, Zahler AM,
Haussler D: The human genome browser at UCSC. Genome Res 2002,
12:996-1006.
33. Altschul SF, Gish W, Miller W, Myers EW, Lipman DJ: Basic local alignment
search tool. J Mol Biol 1990, 215:403-410.
34. Wright PE, Dyson HJ: Intrinsically unstructured proteins: re-assessing the
protein structure-function paradigm. J Mol Biol 1999, 293:321-331.
35. Gsponer J, Futschik ME, Teichmann SA, Babu MM: Tight regulation of
unstructured proteins: from transcript synthesis to protein degradation.
Science 2008, 322:1365-1368.
36. Gsponer J, Babu MM: The rules of disorder or why disorder rules. Prog
Biophys Mol Biol 2009, 99:94-103.
37. Dosztanyi Z, Csizmok V, Tompa P, Simon I: The pairwise energy content
estimated from amino acid composition discriminates between folded
and intrinsically unstructured proteins. J Mol Biol 2005, 347:827-839.
38. Wu-blastp. [http://blast.wustl.edu].
39. Knowles DG, McLysaght A: Recent de novo origin of human proteincoding genes. Genome Res 2009, 19:1752-1759.
40. Patthy L: Genome evolution and the evolution of exon-shuffling - a
review. Gene 1999, 238:103-114.
41. Liu M, Walch H, Wu S, Grigoriev A: Significant expansion of exonbordering protein domains during animal proteome evolution. Nucleic
Acids Res 2005, 33:95-105.
42. Ekman D, Bjorklund AK, Elofsson A: Quantification of the elevated
rate of domain rearrangements in metazoa. J Mol Biol 2007,
372:1337-1348.
43. Yang S, Arguello JR, Li X, Ding Y, Zhou Q, Chen Y, Zhang Y, Zhao R,
Brunet F, Peng L, Long M, Wang W: Repetitive element-mediated
recombination as a mechanism for new gene origination in Drosophila.
PLoS Genet 2008, 4:e3.
44. Kim PM, Lam HY, Urban AE, Korbel JO, Affourtit J, Grubert F, Chen X,
Weissman S, Snyder M, Gerstein MB: Analysis of copy number variants
and segmental duplications in the human genome: Evidence for a
change in the process of formation in recent evolutionary history.
Genome Res 2008, 18:1865-1874.
45. Bailey JA, Gu Z, Clark RA, Reinert K, Samonte RV, Schwartz S, Adams MD,
Myers EW, Li PW, Eichler EE: Recent segmental duplications in the human
genome. Science 2002, 297:1003-1007.
46. Bailey JA, Eichler EE: Primate segmental duplications: crucibles of
evolution, diversity and disease. Nat Rev Genet 2006, 7:552-564.
47. Wilming LG, Gilbert JG, Howe K, Trevanion S, Hubbard T, Harrow JL: The
vertebrate genome annotation (Vega) database. Nucleic Acids Res 2008,
36:D753-760.
48. Freeman JL, Perry GH, Feuk L, Redon R, McCarroll SA, Altshuler DM,
Aburatani H, Jones KW, Tyler-Smith C, Hurles ME, Carter NP, Scherer SW,
Lee C: Copy number variation: new insights in genome diversity.
Genome Res 2006, 16:949-961.
49. Roth DB, Porter TN, Wilson JH: Mechanisms of nonhomologous
recombination in mammalian cells. Mol Cell Biol 1985, 5:2599-2607.
50. Pawson T, Nash P: Assembly of cell regulatory systems through protein
interaction domains. Science 2003, 300:445-452.

Buljan et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R74
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/7/R74

51. Dennis G Jr, Sherman BT, Hosack DA, Yang J, Gao W, Lane HC, Lempicki RA:
DAVID: Database for Annotation, Visualization, and Integrated Discovery.
Genome Biol 2003, 4:P3.
52. Hahn MW, Demuth JP, Han SG: Accelerated rate of gene gain and loss in
primates. Genetics 2007, 177:1941-1949.
53. Blomme T, Vandepoele K, De Bodt S, Simillion C, Maere S, Van de Peer Y:
The gain and loss of genes during 600 million years of vertebrate
evolution. Genome Biol 2006, 7:R43.
54. Tzika AC, Helaers R, Van de Peer Y, Milinkovitch MC: MANTIS: a
phylogenetic framework for multi-species genome comparisons.
Bioinformatics 2008, 24:151-157.
55. Milinkovitch MC, Helaers R, Tzika AC: Historical constraints on vertebrate
genome evolution. Genome Biol Evol 2009, 2:13-18.
56. Milinkovitch MC, Helaers R, Depiereux E, Tzika AC, Gabaldón T: 2 ×
genomes - depth does matter. Genome Biol 2010, 11:R16.
57. Vogel C, Chothia C: Protein family expansions and biological complexity.
PLoS Comput Biol 2006, 2:e48.
58. Kummerfeld SK, Teichmann SA: Relative rates of gene fusion and fission
in multi-domain proteins. Trends Genet 2005, 21:25-30.
59. Fong JH, Geer LY, Panchenko AR, Bryant SH: Modeling the evolution of
protein domain architectures using maximum parsimony. J Mol Biol 2007,
366:307-315.
60. Forslund K, Henricson A, Hollich V, Sonnhammer EL: Domain tree-based
analysis of protein architecture evolution. Mol Biol Evol 2008, 25:254-264.
61. Buljan M, Bateman A: The evolution of protein domain families. Biochem
Soc Trans 2009, 37:751-755.
62. Itoh M, Nacher JC, Kuma K, Goto S, Kanehisa M: Evolutionary history and
functional implications of protein domains and their combinations in
eukaryotes. Genome Biol 2007, 8:R121.
63. Basu MK, Carmel L, Rogozin IB, Koonin EV: Evolution of protein domain
promiscuity in eukaryotes. Genome Res 2008, 18:449-461.
64. Przytycka T, Davis G, Song N, Durand D: Graph theoretical insights into
evolution of multidomain proteins. J Comput Biol 2006, 13:351-363.
65. Stankiewicz P, Lupski JR: Genome architecture, rearrangements and
genomic disorders. Trends Genet 2002, 18:74-82.
66. Conrad DF, Hurles ME: The population genetics of structural variation.
Nat Genet 2007, 39:S30-36.
67. Zhang F, Khajavi M, Connolly AM, Towne CF, Batish SD, Lupski JR: The DNA
replication FoSTeS/MMBIR mechanism can generate genomic, genic and
exonic complex rearrangements in humans. Nat Genet 2009, 41:849-853.
68. Gu W, Zhang F, Lupski JR: Mechanisms for human genomic
rearrangements. Pathogenetics 2008, 1:4.
69. Dosztanyi Z, Chen J, Dunker AK, Simon I, Tompa P: Disorder and sequence
repeats in hub proteins and their implications for network evolution. J
Proteome Res 2006, 5:2985-2995.
70. Dunker AK, Obradovic Z: The protein trinity - linking function and
disorder. Nat Biotechnol 2001, 19:805-806.
71. Ryan TJ, Emes RD, Grant SGN, Komiyama NH: Evolution of NMDA receptor
cytoplasmic interaction domains: implications for organisation of
synaptic signalling complexes. BMC Neurosci 2008, 9:6.
72. Han JS, Boeke JD: LINE-1 retrotransposons: modulators of quantity and
quality of mammalian gene expression? Bioessays 2005, 27:775-784.
73. Dehal P, Boore JL: Two rounds of whole genome duplication in the
ancestral vertebrate. PLoS Biol 2005, 3:e314.
74. Lynch M: Intron evolution as a population-genetic process. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2002, 99:6118-6123.
75. Sankoff D, Cedergren RJ, McKay W: A strategy for sequence phylogeny
research. Nucleic Acids Res 1982, 10:421-431.
76. Farris JS: Phylogenetic analysis under Dollo’s Law. Systematic Zool 1977,
26:77-88.
77. Madera M: Profile Comparer: a program for scoring and aligning profile
hidden Markov models. Bioinformatics 2008, 24:2630-2631.
78. Belvu Viewer. [http://sonnhammer.sbc.su.se/Belvu.html].
79. Segmental Duplication Database. [http://humanparalogy.gs.washington.
edu/].
80. Ponting CP: The functional repertoires of metazoan genomes. Nat Rev
Genet 2008, 9:689-698.
doi:10.1186/gb-2010-11-7-r74
Cite this article as: Buljan et al.: Quantifying the mechanisms of domain
gain in animal proteins. Genome Biology 2010 11:R74.

Page 15 of 15

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
