<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>1471-2180-2-27.fm</title>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 7.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 5.0.5 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
BMC Microbiology
BMC Microbiology
2002,
2

Methodology article

BioMed Central

Open Access

x

Bacterial discrimination by means of a universal array approach
mediated by LDR (ligase detection reaction)
Elena Busti1,3, Roberta Bordoni2, Bianca Castiglioni2, Paolo Monciardini3,
Margherita Sosio3, Stefano Donadio3, Clarissa Consolandi1, Luigi Rossi
Bernardi1, Cristina Battaglia1 and Gianluca De Bellis*2
Address: 1Dipartimento di Scienze e Tecnologie Biomediche, Universita' di Milano, via F.lli Cervi, 93 20090 Segrate (MI), Italy, 2Istituto di
Tecnologie Biomediche CNR, via F.lli Cervi, 93 20090 Segrate (MI), Italy and 3Biosearch Italia, via R. Lepetit, 34 21040 Gerenzano (VA), Italy
E-mail: Elena Busti - ebusti@biosearch.it; Roberta Bordoni - roberta.bordoni@unimi.it; Bianca Castiglioni - casti@itba.mi.cnr.it;
Paolo Monciardini - pmonciardini@biosearch.it; Margherita Sosio - msosio@biosearch.it; Stefano Donadio - sdonadio@biosearch.it;
Clarissa Consolandi - consolan@mailserver.unimi.it; Luigi Rossi Bernardi - luigi.rossibernardi@unimi.it;
Cristina Battaglia - cristina.battaglia@unimi.it; Gianluca De Bellis* - debellis@itba.mi.cnr.it
*Corresponding author

Published: 20 September 2002
BMC Microbiology 2002, 2:27

Received: 24 June 2002
Accepted: 20 September 2002

This article is available from: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/2/27
© 2002 Busti et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This article is published in Open Access: verbatim copying and redistribution of this article are permitted
in all media for any purpose, provided this notice is preserved along with the article's original URL.

Abstract
Background: PCR amplification of bacterial 16S rRNA genes provides the most comprehensive
and flexible means of sampling bacterial communities. Sequence analysis of these cloned fragments
can provide a qualitative and quantitative insight of the microbial population under scrutiny
although this approach is not suited to large-scale screenings. Other methods, such as denaturing
gradient gel electrophoresis, heteroduplex or terminal restriction fragment analysis are rapid and
therefore amenable to field-scale experiments. A very recent addition to these analytical tools is
represented by microarray technology.
Results: Here we present our results using a Universal DNA Microarray approach as an analytical
tool for bacterial discrimination. The proposed procedure is based on the properties of the DNA
ligation reaction and requires the design of two probes specific for each target sequence. One oligo
carries a fluorescent label and the other a unique sequence (cZipCode or complementary
ZipCode) which identifies a ligation product. Ligated fragments, obtained in presence of a proper
template (a PCR amplified fragment of the 16s rRNA gene) contain either the fluorescent label or
the unique sequence and therefore are addressed to the location on the microarray where the
ZipCode sequence has been spotted. Such an array is therefore "Universal" being unrelated to a
specific molecular analysis. Here we present the design of probes specific for some groups of
bacteria and their application to bacterial diagnostics.
Conclusions: The combined use of selective probes, ligation reaction and the Universal Array
approach yielded an analytical procedure with a good power of discrimination among bacteria.

Page 1 of 12
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Microbiology 2002, 2

Background
The detection, identification, and characterization of bacterial populations is an important goal in analytical
microbiology. Culture-independent techniques represent
a rapid and flexible mean to study bacterial communities;
in fact, the use of 16S rRNAs as molecular marker has became routine for microbial ecologists. The most comprehensive strategy to characterize bacterial populations
probably consists in 16S rDNA clones sequencing and
phylogenetic reconstruction [1]. However, analysis of individual clones in multiple libraries is expensive and time
consuming and therefore not suited to large-scale screenings. Other methods to assess the molecular composition
of an environmental DNA sample, such as thermal or denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) [2], single
stranded conformational polymorphism (SSCP) [3] heteroduplex analysis [4,5], or terminal restriction fragment
(T-RFLP or TRF) analysis [6–9], are more rapid and therefore amenable to large-scale experiments.
Moreover, the employment of group-specific DNA probes
complementary to 16S rRNA has provided a framework to
study microbial populations in complex systems. The recent development of the DNA microarray technology has
added a high throughput experimental format, potentially
with great sensitivity [10–12].
In the microarray format, the most commonly used procedure is the differential hybridization of a fluorescently
labelled target, often a PCR product, with microarray-immobilized oligonucleotide probes. This method, in order
to gain good probe specificity, requires very careful probe
design and optimized experimental set up.
Here we present our results using a different approach,
that combines polymerase chain reaction and a cycled
ligase detection reaction with hybridization on a Universal DNA chip [13,14]. As described by Barany and coworkers, this procedure, based on the discriminative
properties of the DNA ligation reaction, requires the design of two adjacent probes specific for each target sequence. One oligo brings a 5' fluorescent label and the
other a 3' unique sequence named cZipCode. Ligated fragments, obtained in presence of a perfectly matching template by the action of a DNA ligase, are addressed to the
location on the microarray where the ZipCode sequence
has been spotted. These fragments carry either the fluorescent label and their unique cZipcode sequence and therefore can be detected by laser scanning of the array and
idenfied by their location within the array (Fig. 1A,1B).
This approach presents some advantages. Ligase detection
reaction had been shown to be a sensitive assay for detecting Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms [14], therefore a
difference in a single nucleotide along the 16S rRNA can

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/2/27

be employed to distinguish between sequences of different microorganisms. Moreover the system maintain the
positive characteristics of the microarray format without
requiring the optimization of the hybridization conditions for each probe set. Using such an approach we targeted the 16S rRNA genomic region using 223 sequences
of cyanobacteria, 987 of actinomycetes, 284 of clostridia,
281 of bacilli, 69 of myxobacteria and 270 of pseudomonads, selected from the Ribosomal Database Project to
identify consensus sequences for each group. Group-specific consensi were used to design selective molecular
probes. These probes in a LDR on DNA from pure bacterial cultures, gave excellent selectivity for the target group
and sensitivity down to 10 fmol of amplified 16S DNA.

Results
Sequence analysis of 16S rDNA and ligation probes design
We used the ARB software [www.arb-home.de] to perform the sequence alignment of 16S rDNA. The ARB database we used contains 223 sequences of cyanobacteria,
987 of actinomycetes, 284 of clostridia, 281 of bacilli, 69
of myxobacteria and 270 of pseudomonads. These sequences were aligned and clustered according to their
phylogenetic lineages yielding 6 "group-specific" consensus sequences. Then, the 6 group consensi were imported
in GCG Omiga 2.0 (Oxford Molecular Ltd.). The Omiga
software is a graphically oriented package that permits the
identification of "group-specific" nucleotide polymorphisms. Thus, the probes were designed complementary
to polymorphic regions on the basis of a final alignment
among group-specific consensi. The selection process was
conducted in several steps. Firstly, we considered the
ligase reaction features. As shown in Fig. 1A, after hybridization of a common probe and a discriminating oligo to
the target sequence, ligation occurs only if there is perfect
complementarity at the junction between the two oligos.
For this reason, to obtain ligase discrimination, we selected discriminating oligos with 3' position unique to each
group. Common probes were designed immediately 3' to
the discriminating oligo from the group-specific consensus. However, if the common probe fell in a region of
poor sequence conservation within the consensus, the
common probe, and consequently the discriminating oligo, were discarded. Examples of oligo pairs are illustrated
in Fig. 2 (for bacilli and pseudomonads). The number of
potential pairs identified at this stage is reported in Table
1, column A.

Secondly, among this set of probes, we selected only those
pairs differing from all representatives of the other five
groups at least for the 3' terminal position of the discriminating oligos, but invariant in all members of their group.
This second criterion significantly reduced the number of
actinomycete, clostridium and cyanobacteria-specific
probe pairs, as shown in Table 1, column B.

Page 2 of 12
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Microbiology 2002, 2

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/2/27

Ligation Detection Reaction
Ligation Detection Reaction
Pfu DNA Ligase
Discriminating
oligo
Cy3

Common Probe
OH P

CGCIIATTTACG

cZip code

GCAATTACGGATT

16S
amplicon
GCGIITAAATGCCGTTAATGCCTAA

Perfect match
Cy3

cZip code
CGCIIATTTACGGCAATTACGGATT
A

A

Ligation
product

16S
amplicon

GCGIITAAATGCCGTTAATGCCTAA

Detection on chip
Detection on chip

Ligation MIX
DNA
‘universal’chip’

Zip 1

Cy3
cZip 3
CGCIIATTTACGGCAATTACGGATT

Ligation product

B

Spacer
(polyA)

Spacer
(polyA)

Zip 3

Spacer
(polyA)

Zip 4

Spacer
(polyA)

Figure 1
Schematic representation of LDR applied to microbial diversity. A) Each microbial group of interest is identified by a Common
Probe and a Discriminating Oligo. The common probe is phosphorylated on its 5' end and contains a unique cZip Code affixed
to its 3' end. The discriminating oligo carries a fluorescent label (Cy3) on its 5' end, and a discriminating base at its 3' terminal
position. The two probes hybridize adjacently to each other on the template DNA (PCR-amplified rDNA) and the nick
between the two oligos is sealed by the ligase only if there is perfect complementarity at the junction. The reaction can be
thermally cycled B) The presence of a microbial group is determined by hybridizing the content of a LDR to an addressable
DNA Universal Array, where unique Zip Code sequences have been spotted.

Page 3 of 12
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Microbiology 2002, 2

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/2/27

Table 1: Probe Design

Sub groupsa

Sequencesb

Ac

Bc

Cc

9
7
2
9
2
9

Group Name

987
281
284
223
69
270

9
4
2
10
9
20

5
3
1
6
9
17

2
1
0
3
1
4

actinomycetes
bacilli.
clostridia
cyanobacteria
myxobacteria
pseudomonads

a Number of subgroups alignments performed before generating a group-specific consensus b Number of sequences considered for generating the
combined subgroups alignments c Number of valid probe pairs after the first (column A), second (B) or third (C) selection step. See text for details

actinomycetes
bacilli
cyanobacteria

. . . . . . . . . 370 . . . . . . . . . 380 . . . . . . . . . 390 . . . . . . . . . 400
C C T A C GG G A G
G C A G C A G T G G
G G A A T A T T G C
R C A A T G G G C G
C C T A C G G G A G
G C A G C A G T A G
G G A A T C T T C C
R C A A T G G A C G
C C T A C G G G A G

G C A G C A G T G G

C C T A C G G G A G
C C T A C G G G A G

G C A G C A G T GG
G C A G C A G T G G

G G A A T T T T C C
G G A A T A T T G C
G G A A T Y T T G C

G C A A T G G G C G

clostridia.
myxobacteria
pseudomonads

C C T A C G G G A G

G C A G C A G T G G

G G A A T A T T G G

A C A A T G G G C G

R C A A T G G G G G
G C A A T G G G C G

A
actinomycetes
bacilli.
clostridia
cyanobacteria
myxobacteria
pseudomonads

. . . . . . . . . 1330 . . . . . . . . . 1340
C C C WW A A A G C
C G G T C T C A G T
C C CWK A A A R C
Y G N T C T C A G T
C T CWN N A A A V
Y N G T C Y C A G T
C Y CWY A A A C C
C B C A WA A A A C
C C C A Y A A A A C

S K D G C T C A G T
C G G T C T C A G T
C G A T C G T A G T

. . . . . . . . . 1350
T C G G A T Y G G G
T C G G A T T G Y A
T C G G A T T G T A
T C A G A T T G C A
T C R G A T T G G A
C C G G A T C G C A

. . . . . . . . . 1360
G T C T G C A A C T
G G C T G C A A C T
G G C T G C A A C T
G G C T G C A A C T
G T C T G C A A C T
G T C T G C A A C T

B
DISCRIMINATING OLIGO

COMMON PROBE

Figure 2
Examples of probe design Final alignment between group-specific consensi that shows selected probes for bacilli (A) and pseudomonads (B).

Page 4 of 12
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Microbiology 2002, 2

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/2/27

Table 2: Selected group-specific probes

DISCRIMINATING OLIGO (5'–3')

COMMON PROBE (5'–3')a cZIP
code

actinomycetes

TTGTACACACCGCCCGTCACGT

bacilli

ACTCCTACGGGAGGCAGCAGTA

cyanobacteria

ACGAAAGCTAGGGGAGCGAAAG

myxobacteria

GCGGAATTCCCIIIGTAGAGGTGAAATT

pseudomonads

GAGCTAATCCCAIAAAACCGATCGT

UNIVERSAL

GCATGGITGTCGTCAGCTCGT

CAIGAAAGTCGGIAACACCCGAAGGGTCAGGTTACCGCTGCGATCGCA
GGGAATCTTCCICAATGGACGAAAGGCTGCGATCGATGGTCAGGTGCTG
GGATTAGATACCCCTGTAGTCCTAGCCCGCAAGGTAGGTGCTGTACCCGCA
CGTAGATATIGGGAGGAACACCGGTGCTGTACCCGATCGCAAGGTGGTC
AGTCCGGATCGCAGTCTGCACGCATACCAGGTCGCATACCGGTC
GTCGTGAGATGTTGGGTTAAGTCCCCGCACGATAGGTGGTCTACCGCTG

GROUP

a

ZIP number

21

3

11

5

15

13

cZip codes are indicated in bold type.

Finally, in order to discard potentially aspecific probe
pairs, we analyzed each common probe and discriminating oligo using the Probe Match tool on RDPII database,
which permits to verify probes against all the bacteria sequences not considered in our alignments [15]. This analysis significantly reduced the number of pseudomonads
and myxobacteria-specific probe pairs. Furthermore, the
identification of a clostridium-specific probe was not possible, while more than one was found for some of the other groups (Table 1, column C).
For the subsequent experimental work, we decided to select just one probe pair for each group of interest (Tab.2).
When more than one base was present in the same position of the consensus, we included inosine, during oligo
synthesis, at these degenerate positions.
In order to have a positive control for the Ligation Detection Reaction, a universal probe pair, matching all the
studied groups, was designed according to the process described above, and the corresponding Zip code was included in the Universal Array.
Zip Codes assignment and quality control of the universal
microarray
We randomly selected six Zip code sequences from those
described by Barany [14]. Each Zip code was randomly assigned to a single bacterial group. Each common probe
was synthesized in such a way to have the corresponding
Zip code complement (cZip code) affixed to its 3' end (Ta-

ble 2). The corresponding sequences (cZipcode + common probe) were checked against the RDPII database in
order to avoid problems arising from false hybridisation
(although specificity is granted by the ligation reaction).
No significant self-annealing of the six common probecZip sequences was detected by computer analysis (data
not shown).
In order to verify the quality of deposition of the Zip Code
oligos to the slides, we performed hybridizations with
Cy5 labeled poly(dT) which is complementary to the poly(dA)10 sequence present in each Zip Code.
Ligation reaction detection set up
Using purified, PCR amplified 16S segment from Pseudomonas putida DNA as substrate, the Ligation Detection
Reaction was set up changing probe concentration (100–
400 fmol/ml), temperature (60–65°C) and number of cycles (20–60) (data not shown). Optimized working conditions are those described in Material and Methods. For
each of the six groups, we amplified 16S rDNA according
to the following scheme. When the group included a single genus, the template for the PCR amplification consisted of purified DNA from a single strain (Bacillus subtilis,
Pseudomonas putida, Clostridium perfringens). When more
than one genus was included within a group, PCR amplifications were conducted on a mixture consisting of DNA
prepared from two (bacteria belonging to the genus
Myxococcus), three (S. cinnabarinum, D. matsuzakiense, A.
teichomyceticus) or four (Anabena, Nostoc, Microystis, Syne-

Page 5 of 12
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Microbiology 2002, 2

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/2/27

bacilli

1

myxobacteria

2

cyanobacteria

3

universal

4

pseudomonads

5

actinomycetes

6

A

C

F

B

D

E

G

H

Figure 3
LDR detection on the Universal Microarray with defined templates. Each row of the array corresponds to a group and contains
ten-spot replicates. Deposition scheme: 1, Zip 3 (bacilli,) 2, Zip 5 (myxobacteria); 3, Zip 11 (cyanobacteria); 4, Zip 13 (universal); 5, Zip 15 (pseudomonads); 6, Zip 21 (actinomycetes). Zip sequences are from Barany et al (6). Panel A shows the results
obtained after hybridization to Cy5 poly(dT)10. Panel B through H show the results of hybridization after LDR on 16S rDNA
templates from bacilli (panel B), myxobacteria (panel C), cyanobacteria (panel D), pseudomonads (panel E), actinomycetes
(panel F), C. perfringens (panel G) and E. coli (panel H). All the images were acquired setting both the Laser power and PMT
gain to 85%

Page 6 of 12
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Microbiology 2002, 2

A

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/2/27

B

C

Figure 4
Sensitivity of LDR The reaction was performed using 100 fmol (panel A), 10 fmol (panel B), 1 fmol (panel C) of purified PCR
product from P. putida DNA. All images were acquired setting both PMT gain and laser power to 85%.

chocystis) strains belonging to selected genera within
mixobacteria, actinomycetes or cyanobacteria, respectively. LDRs were conducted in the presence of each groupspecific PCR product as template and of all the probes (6
discriminating oligos and 6 common probes).
In the presence of the proper DNA template, the Universal
Chip behaved as expected: only group specific spots and
universal spots showed positive signal (Fig. 3, panels B
through F). In addition, LDR assays were conducted on
amplicons obtained from E. coli or C. perfringens genomic
DNA: no other spots were detected besides for the strong
universal signal (Fig. 3, panels G and H). LDR was tested
without template yielding no signals as expected.
This result indicated that, in the absence of the perfectly
matching PCR product, the probes present in the LDR mix
do not generate false signals. Thus, the LDR reaction proceed in a template-specific manner.

In order to establish the detection limit of the technique
we performed LDRs starting from three different amounts
of the same substrate. After purification and quantification of the PCR product, we performed Ligation Detection
Reaction starting from 100, 10 and 1 fmol of substrate.
The detected signal progressively decreases: a barely visible signal was detected even using 1 fmol substrate (fig. 4)
corresponding to 1 ng of a 1500 bp product (600 million
copies of target molecules).
Use of complex molecular targets
In order to determine the efficiency of the LDR technique,
we carried out different assays varying the complexity of
the molecular target. In details, we used artificial mixes of
genomic DNA samples or mixes of PCR products.

In a first assay configuration, we mixed equimolar
amounts of amplicons derived from the DNA of the five
groups of interest, obtained from separate PCR reactions.

Page 7 of 12
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Microbiology 2002, 2

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/2/27

1
2
3

4
5
6

AA

B

Figure 5
LDR in presence of multiple DNA templates A) LDR on a mix of PCR products B) LDR on a PCR product obtained from
amplification of a mix of genomic DNAs. For deposition scheme, refer to fig. 3. (Laser power and PMT gain were set to 80%).

As shown in Fig. 5A, in presence of mixed PCR products
all the expected signals are detected. In a second configuration, we mixed equal quantities of genomic DNA belonging to the five groups of interest, and then performed
a single PCR amplification. As shown in Fig. 5B, we were
able to detect all the molecular targets.
Similar experiments were performed with balanced (1:1)
and unbalanced (1:10) mixes of two out of five groups
yielding the expected results (data not shown).
Finally, we considered DNA extracted from environmental water samples (two European lakes which have been
fully characterized by TGGE for their content in cyanobacteria (S. Ventura, personal communication)) dividing it
into two aliquots: one was amplified using the Universal
primers, the other using cyanobacteria-specific primers.
The PCR products were used in LDR assays. When a selective amplification of the cyanobacteria 16S rDNA was per-

formed, positive signals were obtained only from the rows
corresponding to Universal and cyanobacteria positions
(Fig. 6, panels A and C). On the contrary, when we employed amplicons obtained with the Universal primers,
also some of the other rows showed a positive signal (Fig.
6, panels B and D), suggesting the presence of bacteria belonging to the groups under scrutiny in one or both environmental samples.

Discussion
The main goal of this work was the development of a flexible method to detect bacterial groups. Ligation Detection
Reaction, combined with a Universal Microarray, appeared an interesting approach suited for this application
[13,14]. It requires PCR amplification of a target region, in
this case the bacterial 16S rDNA, which is then subjected
to a multiplex cycled LDR. The LDR is achieved using Pfu
DNA ligase, a thermostable enzyme which seals the nick
between two adjacent oligonucleotides (the common

Page 8 of 12
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Microbiology 2002, 2

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/2/27

Figure 6
LDR on environmental DNA Panels A and B refer to environmental sample 23; panels C and D to sample No. 46. (provided by
Dr. Ventura) The templates used for LDR derived from cyanobacteria-specific amplification of 16S rDNA (panels A and C) or
from amplification with universal primers (panels B and D).

Page 9 of 12
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Microbiology 2002, 2

probe and the discriminating oligo), annealed to a complementary target, only if the oligonucleotides are perfectly base-paired, in particular at the junction site (Fig. 1A).
Therefore a single mismatch in 3' terminal position of the
discriminating oligo is able to prevent ligation, thus conferring total selectivity [14]. This feature confers an high
resolution power to hybridisation, decreasing the effort
for the search for stringency conditions. As shown in Fig.
1B, the presence of a specific target is determined by hybridizing the content of a LDR to an addressable DNA
universal array, on which every single spot contains oligos
with a unique Zip Code. A complementary cZip code is affixed to the 3' end of each common probe. During hybridization, the cZip Code drives the LDR product to the
corresponding Zip Code on the chip surface. As every discriminating oligo carries a Cy3 molecule on its 5' end, detection of hybridized LDR products can be accomplished
by laser scanning.
Probe design can be considered a crucial point: during the
definition of subgroup and group-specific consensi, a cut
off of 75% allowed preserving as much sequence information as possible, but required the inclusion of some degenerated positions in the probe sequences. Probes
containing too many ambiguous residues were discarded,
while a limited number of inosine residues was included
in the oligos. Furthermore, we adopted a three-step selection process to ensure as much specificity as possible and
this involved the rejection of about 80% of the probes
identified after the first step. Due to these stringent criteria
and ligation assay requirements, a low number of suitable
group-specific probes was identified.
In fact, at this level of phylogenetic resolution, it was very
difficult finding unique positions, with the ability to discriminate between groups, that fell in conserved region inside the group itself. In our experience, if the target groups
are phylogenetically less distant, like members of the
same order, probe design can be much more fruitful. In
this case, in fact, a relevant part of diversity can be eliminated by the use of more specific PCR primer, instead of
the "universal" primers F27-R1492. Moreover, in a more
related subgroup we found that the 16S sequences are
more similar thus simplifying probe construction (Castiglioni et al. unpublished results). This suggests that this
approach seems particularly appealing for "fishing out"
certain bacterial species within a complex microbial community
The combined use of selective probes and LDR gave satisfactory results. LDR combines the specificity of the hybridization base pairing with the selectivity introduced by the
enzymatic reaction [14], resulting in good power of discrimination as demonstrated by the presented results. It
should be emphasized that perfect pairing in the 3' termi-

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/2/27

nus of the discriminating oligos and the 5' terminus of the
common probe is crucial for ligation. On the contrary
mismatches placed along the remaining part of the two sequences are easily tolerated by ligase, conferring a certain
flexibility in probe design for test on complex samples.
As described we were able to detect the presence of different groups in balanced and unbalanced mixes (1:1 and
1:10 molar ratio respectively).
The optimized LDR method can be performed starting
from low amounts of substrate. As little as 1 fmol of PCRamplified material can be observed in our conditions. Below this limit not enough signal can be observed even increasing the amount of probes and the number of cycles
(data not shown). Apart from any consideration regarding
overall sensitivity and the feasibility of our procedure for
quantitation, these results (sensitivity down to 1 fmol and
proper results with unbalanced mixes) suggest the possibility of detecting a low amount of a specific 16S molecular fragment within complex 16S molecular mixtures.

Conclusions
We think this approach is particularly appealing for different reasons. First of all, since the ZipCodes sequences are
not related with a specific molecular analysis, they remain
constant and their complements can be appended to any
set of LDR primers. In this sense, the array can be defined
Universal. Moreover, the optimization of hybridization
conditions for each probe set is not required, therefore the
Universal chip become a versatile tool as new probe pairs
can be added to the system without further optimization,
thus reducing costs and set up time. Presented results suggest that a combination of careful probe design, PCR and
LDR can be a valuable tool for the detection of bacterial
groups in the environment although an intensive validation is required in order to ascertain potential interferences in complex natural samples.

Methods
All chemicals and solvents were purchased from SigmaAldrich (Italy) and used without further purification. Oligonucleotides were purchased from Interactiva Biotechnologie GmbH (Germany).
Genomic DNA from E. coli (ATCC 10536), Bacillus subtilis
(ATCC 8185), Pseudomonas putida (ATCC 11250), Streptosporangium "cinnabarinum" (DSM 44094), Dactylosporangium matsuzakiense (ATCC 31570), Actinoplanes
teichomyiceticus (ATCC 31121) and two myxobacteria belonging to genus Myxococcus (F. Gaspari, personal communication), was extracted using PUREGENE™ DNA
isolation kit (Gentra Systems, Minneapolis, MN) according to manufacturers instructions. Clostridium perfringens
DNA was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (Italy). Genomic

Page 10 of 12
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Microbiology 2002, 2

DNA from bacteria belonging to the generaAnabena, Nostoc, Microcystis and Synechocystis, and DNA extracted from
water samples coming from European lakes were kindly
supplied by Dr. Stefano Ventura (CNR-CSMA, Firenze, Italy).
Ligation probe design
The probes for Ligation Detection Reaction were designed
to be specific to the rDNA 16S sequences of six different
bacterial groups: actinomycetes, bacilli, clostridia, cyanobacteria, myxobacteria, and pseudomonads.

For each of these groups, a substantial number of 16S
rRNA sequences (see Table 1), chosen among those available in the Ribosomal Database Project II, release 8.0 [http://rdp.cme.msu.edu/html/], were imported in GCG
Omiga 2.0 (Oxford Molecular Ltd.). In every group,
adopting the RDP taxonomic classification, the sequences
were assembled in sub-groups and aligned using the Clustal W algorithm, yielding a consensus sequence with a cut
off of 75% (meaning that 3 out of 4 sequences determined
the consensus at a given position). Then, sub-group consensi were aligned within each group to extract a "groupspecific" consensus, adopting the same cut off of 75%.
Group-specific probe design was carried out on these
"group-specific" consensi. The specificity of each probe
pair (common probe and discriminating oligo) was controlled on the RDP II database, using the Probe Match
tool. All oligos were designed to have melting temperature
(Tm values between 64 and 70°C. Discriminating oligos
were purchased with a Cy3 molecule at their 5' terminal
position, while common probes with a phosphate in the
same position.
Universal microarray preparation
Each of our universal arrays consists of six rows, each corresponding to a group and containing ten replicas. Microarrays were prepared using Code-Link™ activated slides
(Motorola Life Sciences), designed to covalently immobilize NH2-modified oligonucleotides. 5' amino-modified
Zip Code oligonucleotides, carrying an additional poly(dA)10 tail at their 5'end, were diluted to 25 mM in Printing Buffer (pH 8.5). Spotting was performed using a noncontact piezo-driven dispensing system (Nanoplotter, GeSim, Germany). Printed slides were left overnight in a saturated NaCl chamber with a relative humidity of 75%
(this was obtained adding as much solid NaCl to water as
needed to form a 1 cm deep slurry in the bottom of a plastic container with an airtight lid). Slide were subsequently
placed 20 minutes in a pre-warmed solution (50°C) containing 50 mM ethanolamine, 0,1 M Tris pH 9, 0,1% SDS.
They were rinsed twice with water and washed on a shaker
for 40 min in 4X SSC/0.1% SDS at 50°C. Finally they were
rinsed twice in distilled water and centrifuged at 800 rpm
using microplate carriers.

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/2/27

Quality control of printed surfaces was performed by sampling one slide for each deposition batch. The printed
slide was hybridized with 1 mM 5' Cy5 labeled poly(dT)10
in a solution containing 5X SSC and 0.1 mg/ml salmon
sperm DNA at RT for 3 h, then washed for 15 min in 1X
SSC. The fluorescent signal was controlled by laser scanning following procedures described in "Array hybridization and detection".
PCR amplifications
The DNA region coding for 16S ribosomal RNA was amplified by using universal primers F27 (5'AGAGTTTGATCMTGGCTCAG
3')
and
R1492
(5'TACGGYTACCTTGTTACGACTT3') which are targeted
to universally conserved regions [16] and permit the amplification of a 1500 bp fragment. For cyanobacteria-specific amplifications, we employed primer 23S30R
(5'cctcgcctctgtgtgcctaggt3') [17] instead of R1492.

PCRs were performed in a PCR Express thermal cycler (Hybaid, England). The reaction mixtures include 500 nM
each primer, 200 mM each dNTP, 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH
8.8), 1.5 mM MgCl2, 50 mM KCl, 0.1% (wt/vol) Triton X100, 1 U of DynaZyme DNA polymerase (Finnzymes OY,
Espoo, Finland) and 5–8 ng of genomic DNA, in a final
volume of 50 ml. Prior to amplification, DNA was denatured for 5 min at 95°C. Amplification consisted of 30 cycles of 94°C for 45 s, 61°C for 45 s and 72°C for 2 min.
After the cycles, an extension step (10 min at 72°C) was
performed.
After thermal cycling was complete, 1 ml of proteinase K (1
mg/ml) was added, and the reaction heated at 70°C for 10
min and then quenched at 94°C for 15 min. After this,
PCR products were purified by GFX PCR DNA purification
kit (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech Inc, Piscataway-NJ),
eluted in 50 ml of autoclaved water and quantified by a
spectrophotometer.
Ligation detection reaction
Ligation Reaction was carried out in a final volume of 20
ml containing 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 20 mM KCl, 10
mM MgCl2, 0.1% NP40, 0.01 mM ATP, 1 mM DTT, 2
pmol of each discriminating oligo, 2 pmol of each common probe and 1–500 fmol of purified PCR products. The
reaction mixture was preheated for 2 min at 94°C and centrifuged in a microcentrifuge for 1 min; then 1 ml of 4 U/
ml Pfu DNA ligase (Stratagene, La Jolla, California) was
added. The LDR was cycled for 40 rounds of 94°C for 30
sec and 64°C for 4 min in a PCR Express thermal cycler
(Hybaid, England).
Array hybridization and detection
In a 0.5-ml microcentrifuge tube, the LDR mix (20 m) was
diluted to obtain 65 ml of hybridization mixture contain-

Page 11 of 12
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Microbiology 2002, 2

ing 5X SSC and 0.1 mg/ml salmon sperm DNA. The mix,
after heating at 94°C for 2 min and chilling on ice, was applied onto the slide under an EasiSeal encase of 2.4 cm2
(Hybaid, England). Hybridization was carried out in the
dark at 65°C for one hour and a half, in a temperaturecontrolled water bath. After removal of the chamber, the
microarray was washed for 15 min in pre-warmed (65°C)
1X SSC, 0.1% SDS. Finally, the slide was spinned at 800
rpm for 3 min.
The fluorescent signal was detected at 5 um resolution using a ScanArray® 4000 laser scanning system (Packard GSI
Lumonics, Billerica, MA) with green laser for Cy3 dye (lex
543 nm/lem 570 nm). Both the laser and the photomultiplier (PMT) tube power were set at 70–95%.
To quantify the fluorescent intensity of spots the QuantArray® quantitative microarray analysis software was employed (Packard GSI Lumonics).

Authors' contributions

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/2/27

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.
13.

Elena Busti performed most of the experimental work for
setting up the LDR system Clarissa Consolandi further refined the Universal array approach, Roberta Bordoni and
Bianca Castiglioni performed most of the alignments

15.

Paolo Monciardini purified all microbiological samples

16.

Stefano Donadio Margherita Sosio and Gianluca De Bellis
conceived this study, Luigi Rossi Bernardi, Cristina Battaglia and Gianluca De Bellis coordinated the work

14.

17.

small subunit rRNA sequences. Appl Environ Microbiol 1996,
62:872-879
Clement BG, Kehl LE, DeBord KL, Kitts CL: Terminal Restriction
Fragment Patterns (TRFPs), a rapid, PCR-based method for
the comparison of complex bacterial communities. J Microbiol
Methods 1998, 31:135-142
Liu W, Marsh LT, Cheng H, Forney LJ: Characterization of microbial diversity by determining terminal restriction fragment
length polymorphisms of genes encoding 16S rRNA. Appl Environ Microbiol 1997, 63:4516-4522
Moeseneder MM, Arrieta JM, Muyzer G, Winter C, Herndl GJ: Optimization of terminal-restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis for complex marine bacterioplankton
communities and comparison with denaturing gradient gel
electrophoresis. Appl Environ Microbiol 1999, 65:3518-3525
Guschin DY, Mobarry BK, Proudnikov D, Stahl DA, Rittmann BE,
Mirzabekov AD: Oligonucleotide microchips as genosensors
for determinative and environmental studies in microbiology. Appl Environ Microbiol 1997, 63:2397-2402
Rudi K, Skulberg OM, Skulberg R, Jakobsen KS: Application of Sequence-Specific Labeled 16S rRNA Gene Oligonucleotide
Probes for Genetic Profiling of Cyanobacterial Abundance
and Diversity by Array Hybridization. Appl Environ Microbiol
2000, 66:4004-4011
Small J, Call DR, Brockman FJ, Straub TM, Chandler DP: Direct Detection of 16S rRNA in Soil Extracts by Using Oligonucleotide Microarrays. Appl Environ Microbiol 2001, 67:4708-4716
Gerry NP, Witowsky NE, Day J, Hammer RP, Barany G, Barany F:
Universal DNA microarray method for multiplex detection
of low abundance point mutations. J Mol Biol 1999, 292:251-262
Favis R, Day J, Gerry NP, Phelan C, Narod SA, Barany F: Universal
DNA array detection of small insertion and deletions in
BRCA1 and BRCA2. Nature Biotechnology 2000, 18:561-564
Maidak BL, Cole JR, Lilburn TG, Parker CT Jr, Saxman PR, Farris RJ,
Garrity GM, Olsen GJ, Schmidt TM, Tiedje JM: The RDP-II (Ribosomal Database Project). Nucleic Acids Res 2001, 29(1):173-174
Wilmotte A, Van der Auwera G, De Wachter R: Structure of the
16 S ribosomal RNA of the thermophilic cyanobacterium
Chlorogloeopsis HTF ('Mastigocladus laminosus HTF')
strain PCC7518, and phylogenetic analysis. FEBS Lett 1993,
317(1–2):96-100
Lepere C, Wilmotte A, Meyer B: Molecular diversity of Microcystis strains (Cyanophyceae, Chroococcales) based on 16S
rDNA sequences. Syst Geogr Pl 2000, 70:275-283

All authors contributed to the writing of the paper and approved the final manuscript.

Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge CNR Target Project Biotecnologie and
Biosearch Italia for financially sustaining this work. Elena Busti and Roberta
Bordoni were recipient of a fellowship granted by Italian MURST and Biosearch Italia.

References
1.
2.
3.

4.

5.

6.

Weissburg WG, Barns SM, Pelletier DA, Lane DJ: 16S ribosomal
DNA amplification for phylogenetic study. J Bacteriol 1991,
173:697-703
Muyzer GG: DGGE/TGGE a method for identifying genes
from natural ecosystems. Curr Opin Microbiol 1999, 2:317-322
Schwieger F, Tebbe CC: A new approach to utilize PCR-singlestrand-conformation polymorphism for 16S rRNA genebased microbial community analysis. Appl Environ Microbiol 1998,
64:4870-4876
Espejo RT, Feijoo CG, Romero J, Vasquez M: PAGE analysis of the
heteroduplexes formed between PCR-amplified 16S rRNA
genes: estimation of sequence similarity and rDNA complexity. Microbiology 1998, 144:1611-1617
Delwart EL, Shpaer EG, Louwagie J, McCutcham FE, Grez M, Rubsamen-Waigmann H, Mullins JI: Genetic relationships determined
by a DNA heteroduplex mobility assay analysis of HIV-1 env
genes. Science 1993, 262:1257-1261
Brunk CF, Avaniss-Aghajani E, Brunk CA: A computer analysis of
primer and probe hybridization potential with bacterial

Publish with BioMed Central and every
scientist can read your work free of charge
"BioMedcentral will be the most significant development for
disseminating the results of biomedical research in our lifetime."
Paul Nurse, Director-General, Imperial Cancer Research Fund

Publish with BMC and your research papers will be:
available free of charge to the entire biomedical community
peer reviewed and published immediately upon acceptance
cited in PubMed and archived on PubMed Central
yours - you keep the copyright
Submit your manuscript here:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/manuscript/

BioMedcentral.com
editorial@biomedcentral.com

Page 12 of 12
(page number not for citation purposes)

</pre>
</body>
</html>
