<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Novel genes exhibit distinct patterns of function acquisition and network integration</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Genome Biology 2010, 11:R127. doi:10.1186/gb-2010-11-12-r127"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="John A Capra"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Capra et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R127
http://genomebiology.com/content/11/12/R127

RESEARCH

Open Access

Novel genes exhibit distinct patterns of function
acquisition and network integration
John A Capra1,2, Katherine S Pollard1*, Mona Singh2*

Abstract
Background: Genes are created by a variety of evolutionary processes, some of which generate duplicate copies
of an entire gene, while others rearrange pre-existing genetic elements or co-opt previously non-coding sequence
to create genes with ‘novel’ sequences. These novel genes are thought to contribute to distinct phenotypes that
distinguish organisms. The creation, evolution, and function of duplicated genes are well-studied; however, the
genesis and early evolution of novel genes are not well-characterized. We developed a computational approach to
investigate these issues by integrating genome-wide comparative phylogenetic analysis with functional and
interaction data derived from small-scale and high-throughput experiments.
Results: We examine the function and evolution of new genes in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. We observed
significant differences in the functional attributes and interactions of genes created at different times and by
different mechanisms. Novel genes are initially less integrated into cellular networks than duplicate genes, but they
appear to gain functions and interactions more quickly than duplicates. Recently created duplicated genes show
evidence of adapting existing functions to environmental changes, while young novel genes do not exhibit
enrichment for any particular functions. Finally, we found a significant preference for genes to interact with other
genes of similar age and origin.
Conclusions: Our results suggest a strong relationship between how and when genes are created and the roles
they play in the cell. Overall, genes tend to become more integrated into the functional networks of the cell with
time, but the dynamics of this process differ significantly between duplicate and novel genes.

Background
Large-scale genome sequencing efforts have made it
increasingly possible to study the genetics of species
divergence on a genome-wide scale. Comparing the
complete genomes of many closely related species in the
context of well-resolved phylogenetic trees provides
clues about the genomic events and evolutionary processes that generate functionally-relevant differences
between species. Several studies have identified lineagespecific differences in the gene sets of recently diverged
species in many clades [1-4], and these observed differences often contribute to functional divergence between
species [5-7]. Understanding the origin and function of
* Correspondence: katherine.pollard@gladstone.ucsf.edu; mona@cs.princeton.
edu
1
Gladstone Institutes, University of California, San Francisco, 1650 Owens St,
San Francisco, CA 94158, USA
2
Department of Computer Science and Lewis-Sigler Institute for Integrative
Genomics, Princeton University, 35 Olden St, Princeton, NJ 08544, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

new genes is critically important to deciphering the evolution of cellular networks and genomes; however, previous analyses have not taken into account the different
evolutionary mechanisms that can produce new genes.
New genes are created by a variety of processes, including gene duplication, domain shuffling, incorporation of
mobile elements, gene fission and fusion, and de novo
acquisition (reviewed in [8]). Gene duplication has long
been appreciated as an essential source of new genes and
genetic novelty [9]. Whereas duplicate genes typically
retain significant homology to their parent genes, evolutionary mechanisms like domain shuffling and gene fission
and fusion can generate genes with new combinations of
pre-existing functional elements [8,10]. Moreover, de novo
gene creation from non-coding sequence is increasingly
recognized as an important source of new genes. Examples
of recent de novo gene creation have been found in fungi
[11,12], flies [13-15], and mammals [6,16,17] - with estimates that as many as 12% of new genes in fly and 6% in

© 2010 Capra et al.; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Capra et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R127
http://genomebiology.com/content/11/12/R127

human were created from non-coding sequence. Surprisingly, as more genomes have been sequenced, the prevalence of ‘orphan’ genes, with little to no similarity to other
known genes, has not decreased; they still represent
around 10-20% of all known genes [18-21].
The diversification of gene function after duplication
and its role in the creation of lineage-specific phenotypic
differences has been given substantial attention in genome-wide studies [3,7,21-27]. Duplication can occur at
dramatically different scales, from the duplication of a
relatively short segment of the genome to whole-genome
duplication (WGD). Recently, several studies have
demonstrated the relevance of the scale of a duplication
that copies a gene to its functional consequences [28-30].
For example, the Baker’s yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae,
underwent an ancient genome duplication [31], and it
has been proposed that the WGD was instrumental in
enabling the highly fermentative lifestyle that characterizes S. cerevisiae and its close relatives [32,33]. Paralogs in S. cerevisiae generated by the WGD are also more
likely to share interaction partners and have similar biological functions than duplicates created by small-scale
events [34]. It has been argued that duplication of a single gene that takes part in a functional complex may create a stoichiometric imbalance [35]. This imbalance
could increase the pressure for this duplicated gene to
diverge in function and interactions, especially as compared to genes duplicated in a large-scale event such as a
WGD that potentially maintains the balance within the
complex [36].
Genes created by means other than duplication of a
complete gene - which we refer to as novel genes - are
likely to be under different evolutionary pressures than
those created by either small-scale or large-scale duplication. Novel genes’ sequences may not initially be functional or structurally well-formed. In contrast, duplicate
genes are typically born with the ability to fold into stable
structures with established functions and the potential to
interact with their ancestor’s interaction partners. The
fate and function over time of novel and duplicate genes
may reflect and reveal the effects of these differences.
However, the functional evolution of novel genes soon
after creation has not been broadly characterized.
To explore how these different evolutionary processes
shape functional innovation in a lineage, we developed a
computational approach that integrates various functional attributes of genes, including length, annotated
functions, essentiality, and physical interactions, with a
classification of genes into groups reflecting their
mechanism of origin and time of creation. Because of the
challenges associated with accurately inferring a gene’s
mechanism of origin and age [37,38], we considered several complementary computational approaches for categorizing the genes, and focused on broad statistical

Page 2 of 16

trends. Applying our analysis pipeline to S. cerevisiae, we
performed a systematic, genome-wide comparison of the
dynamics of function acquisition and interaction network
integration between novel and duplicate genes. We found
evidence of a strong relationship between the context of
a gene’s origin and its integration into the functional networks of the cell. Both novel and duplicate genes, on
average, appear to gain interactions and functions over
time, but the rate of this gain is more rapid for novel
genes. A dramatic gain in gene length was observed with
age for novel genes; this suggests that the integration of
additional sequence elements over time may contribute
to this increase in function. Overall, our findings argue
that both the time and mechanism of creation are relevant to understanding how genes’ functions evolve, and
that differences in gene creation mechanisms are
reflected in the fate and function of the genes they create.

Results
The classification of genes by age and origin

We predicted the time of creation and mechanism of
origin for each gene in S. cerevisiae (see Methods for
details). Briefly, we classified all genes in S. cerevisiae
into one of three ‘age’ categories: pre-WGD genes that
were present before the WGD event approximately 100150 million years ago; WGD genes that were duplicated
by the WGD and maintained; and post-WGD genes
that have appeared since the WGD. Genes present
before the WGD (pre-WGD) will also be referred to as
‘old’, while those created since the WGD (post-WGD)
will, in comparison, be referred to as ‘young’ or ‘recently
created’ (even though they may be 100 million years
old). The classification of each gene was based on its
presence or absence in a curated reconstruction of a
pre-WGD yeast ancestor from Gordon et al. [39]. In
that work, sequence similarity and synteny were used to
trace by hand the evolutionary history of each gene in
11 fully sequenced yeast species (Figure 1) and reconstruct the gene content and order of the S. cerevisiae
ancestor immediately before the WGD.
Next, we assigned S. cerevisiae genes to origin categories, duplicate or novel. Since predicting the
mechanism of origin for a gene is a challenging task, we
used several approaches. The first is a family-based
approach that considers the presence or absence of
paralogous genes in the genome. Genes with at least
one paralog in S. cerevisiae were assigned to the
duplicate category. Genes with no paralogs were
assigned to the novel category. The evolutionary
families of homologous genes used in this classification
were predicted using the Jaccard Clustering algorithm
from the Princeton Protein Orthology Database (PPOD)
[40,41]. As an alternative origin classification, we considered gene trees and orthogroups predicted by Synergy

Capra et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R127
http://genomebiology.com/content/11/12/R127

Saccharomyces cerevisiae
Saccharomyces bayanus
Whole Genome
Duplication
(100-150 mya)

Candida glabrata
Naumovia castelli
Vanderwaltozyma polyspora
Whole Genome Duplication
Reconstructed pre-WGD ancestor
Zygosaccharomyces rouxii
Kluyveromyces lactis
Eremothecium gossypii
Lachancea waltii
Lachancea thermotolerans
Lachancea kluyveri

(branches not to scale)

Schizosaccharomyces pombe

Figure 1 Yeast species tree. We analyzed functional attributes and
interactions of genes gained since the whole-genome duplication
(red circle) along the path leading to S. cerevisiae. We assigned
genes in S. cerevisiae to one of three age groups, pre-WGD, WGD,
or post-WGD. The assignment was based on the recent
reconstruction of the gene content of an ancestral pre-WGD yeast,
which was derived from an analysis of the sequence similarity and
synteny of genes in the listed species [39]. An analysis using
additional, more specific age groups is presented in Section S2.2 in
Additional file 1.

[42], a computational method that uses gene sequence
similarity and synteny to reconstruct genome-wide evolutionary histories of gene families. While gene loss and
rapid evolution can confound both methods of classification (see Discussion), in each case, the duplicate
category contains genes likely to have been created by a
duplication of a complete gene, and the novel group
contains genes likely created by one of the non-duplicate mechanisms that yield genes of novel sequence and
structure. For ease of exposition, we report results from
the evolutionary family-based classification in the main
text. In Additional file 1, we show that our main conclusions hold based on the Synergy-based origin classification scheme, and include several additional controls,
including the exclusion of harder to classify genes in the
dynamic subtelomeric regions. A fuller description of
the classification process is included in the Methods.
Considering the age and family-based origin categories
together, we predicted 1,434 pre-WGD/duplicate,
2,696 pre-WGD/novel, 1,087 WGD/duplicate, 314
post-WGD/duplicate and 239 post-WGD/novel
genes. No novel genes were created by the WGD, so the

Page 3 of 16

empty WGD/novel group is ignored. Only non-dubious
genes, as annotated by the Saccharomyces Genome
Database (SGD) [43], were considered, so as to eliminate
sequence regions that resemble genes, but that are not
actually translated and transcribed (for example, pseudogenes and spurious predictions from gene finding programs). This classification of genes in provided in
Additional file 2 [44].
Functional properties of young novel and duplicate genes

As a first step in the investigation of the influence of
gene age and origin on function, we analyzed the age/
origin gene groups with respect to four attributes that
reflect different aspects of gene function. First, we considered the length of the protein encoded by a gene.
Protein length imposes physical constraints on the number of functional domains it can contain. Second, we
measured the fraction of each protein’s amino acids that
are predicted to take part in a Pfam domain. Protein
domains are the fundamental units of protein structure
and function, and protein domain families from Pfam
[45] provide a view of the units that enable proteins to
function. Third, we report the fraction of genes in each
age/origin group that are known to be essential. Essentiality, as determined by the viability of a deletion mutant
[46,47], gives an indication of the importance of the
gene to the species. Fourth, we calculated the fraction of
genes that have been annotated with terms from each of
the Gene Ontology (GO) functional hierarchies [48].
GO annotations reflect what is currently known about a
gene’s function.
Using these four functionally relevant gene properties,
we compared genes across both time of creation and
mechanism of origin (Table 1, Figure 2). The significance of differences in these functional attributes
between the age/origin groups was assessed by a MannWhitney U test, and all differences discussed in this section are significant at the 0.05 level.
Genes in each age/origin group differ in their properties

Comparing the properties of proteins corresponding to
the genes across age and origin groups revealed several
general trends (Table 1, Figure 2). Young proteins are
shorter, have fewer known functions, and are less essential than their older counterparts. This difference
between young and old proteins holds when considering
both novel and duplicate genes separately. However, the
differences between old and young duplicate genes in
each of the functional properties, except for essentiality,
are much less dramatic than among novel genes of different ages. Within proteins of similar age, there are
also marked differences. For nearly all properties considered, the novel proteins have less evidence of function
than duplicate proteins from the same age group; they
have a lower fraction of coverage by Pfam domains, are

Capra et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R127
http://genomebiology.com/content/11/12/R127

Page 4 of 16

Table 1 The coverage of gene groups by different sources of functional information
Origin
Novel

Age

Number of genes

Pfam coveragea

Fraction essentialb

GO MF coveragec

Fraction with interactionsd

2696

0.36

0.30

0.67

0.77

239

0.12

0.00

0.22

0.25

Old

1434

0.57

0.30

0.88

0.81

WGD

1087

0.45

0.08

0.76

0.72

Young

Duplicate

Old
Young

314

0.53

0.02

0.60

0.55

a

b

Pfam coverage: average fraction of protein length covered by Pfam domains; fraction essential: fraction of genes in each group that are essential; cGO MF
coverage: fraction of genes with Gene Ontology (GO) Molecular Function (MF) annotations; dfraction with interactions: fraction of genes with interactions in the
protein physical interaction network. Each statistic is calculated over those genes whose proteins have known physical interactions.

less likely to have known annotations from GO, and
have fewer proteins with known physical interactions.
The one exception to this pattern is essentiality among
the old genes; the old novel genes are as likely to be
essential as the old duplicate genes. However, the young
novel genes are less essential than the young duplicate
genes. In general, the differences between the older
genes of different origin are less dramatic than those
between the young novel and duplicate genes.
Young novel genes are particularly short, non-essential,
and minimally annotated

Young novel genes are by far the most distinct group
with respect to the properties analyzed in the previous
section (Table 1, Figure 2). They are significantly shorter
than young duplicate proteins; the proteins in these
groups have median length of 180 amino acids (aa) and
400 aa, respectively. Young novel proteins are also less
covered by Pfam domains (12% vs. 53%); this suggests
that many young novel proteins are not simply rearrangements of pre-existing functional domains, but rather
that they often consist of novel functional units. In

addition, young novel genes are essential less frequently
than young duplicates (0% vs. 2%), and are much less
likely to have GO Molecular Function annotations (22%
vs. 60%). As suggested by these results, young novel
genes are also significantly different from older novel
genes. The median length of their corresponding proteins is less than half as long (180 aa vs. 398 aa); their
amino acids are on average three times less likely to
participate in known Pfam domains; they are not essential (0% vs. 30%); and a smaller fraction have annotations as compared to old novel genes (22% vs. 67%).
Thus, four largely independent lines of evidence suggest
that novel and duplicate genes have distinct functional
properties and that young novel genes have fewer functional abilities than old.
We note that differences in the number of annotations, according to GO, between the gene groups could
be the result of a bias in the amount of study genes of
different groups have received, rather than differences in
the number and character of the functions actually performed by the genes in the group. The three additional
functional attributes we considered are less subject this
potential bias. Sequence-derived properties such as
length and coverage by Pfam domains (we include Pfam
sequence motifs corresponding to ‘domains of unknown
function’), as well as the fraction of tested genes found
to be essential, do not depend on the number of experiments carried out on a gene.
The physical interactions of novel and duplicate proteins

Figure 2 Protein length distribution by age and origin. The box
plots summarize the distribution of sequence lengths (in amino
acids) of the proteins with interactions found in each age/origin
group. Young proteins are shorter than older proteins, and young
novel proteins are significantly shorter than all other groups,
including young proteins created by duplication.

Proteins function by interacting with one another and
with other molecules in the cell. Thus, a protein’s physical interactions and its integration into the topology of
the interaction network provide additional evidence
about its functions, how they are accomplished, and
their overall importance to cellular functioning [49-56].
We explored whether the proteins corresponding to
genes in each of the age/origin groups differ with
respect to their frequency of physical interactions, their
relative location within the yeast protein interaction network, and the identity of their interaction partners.
We constructed a protein-protein physical interaction
(PPI) network for S. cerevisiae using interaction data

Capra et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R127
http://genomebiology.com/content/11/12/R127

from small-scale experiments and high-throughput studies as defined by the Database of Interacting Proteins
(DIP) [57]. For each protein with known interactions,
we quantified its integration into the yeast proteinprotein interaction network by two graph-theoretic measures of the importance of a node within a network. The
degree (or degree centrality) of a protein in the physical
interaction network is the number of known interaction
partners, and is a local measure of the topological centrality of the protein in the network. The betweenness
centrality of a protein is the fraction of all shortest
paths in the network that contain it, and is a global
measure of the importance of a node within a network.
Young proteins are less integrated into the physical
interaction network than older proteins

Both young novel and young duplicate proteins have fewer
interactions than their older counterparts (Figure 3a).
There is a clear increase in degree with age, and in general,
proteins created by the WGD are found to have degree
between the older and younger groups. A similar increase
with age is observed among the groups when considering
betweenness centrality (Figure 3b). Only proteins with
known interactions are considered in this analysis, but we
also note that a considerably smaller fraction of young
proteins have known interactions than the old proteins
(Table 1). The differences in the network integration of
young and old proteins would be even more extreme if all
proteins were included.
We considered three additional related tests that also
support the finding that young proteins are less integrated within cellular networks. First, since a protein’s
size places physical limits on the number of interactions
it can simultaneously maintain with other proteins and
molecules [58], we also normalized the degree and
betweenness of each protein by its length (Figure 3c, d).
The increase in interactions with protein age is still present after this normalization, though it is somewhat
reduced. Second, since essential proteins have been
found to participate in more interactions than nonessential proteins [59,60] and older proteins are more
frequently essential (Table 1), we repeated the analysis
excluding essential proteins and find the same relationship between the age of a protein and its network context (Section S1.1.3 in Additional file 1). Third, since the
presence of interactions in the network derived from
small-scale studies could introduce a bias toward interactions involving well-studied proteins, we repeated the
analysis including only interactions determined by highthroughput studies, and found that young proteins are
also less integrated than older proteins in the network
resulting from only high-throughput experiments (Section S1.2 in Additional file 1).

Page 5 of 16

Novel proteins are less central in the network than
duplicate proteins of the same age

Comparing the distributions of degree and betweenness
centrality between groups of proteins based on origin
reveals that duplicate proteins are more centrally located
in the network than novel proteins of the same age
(Figure 3). The novel proteins have on average both
lower degree and lower betweenness centrality than their
duplicate counterparts. Because young novel proteins are
significantly shorter than all other types (Figure 2), the
large difference in raw degree between the young novel
proteins and young duplicate proteins is reduced when
normalized by protein length (Figure 3c, d). Nonetheless,
the young novel group is still more peripheral than any
other group, even after length normalization.
Proteins preferentially interact with proteins of
same age and origin

The analysis of the previous sections considered the
number of interactions for proteins in the physical interaction network. The identity of a protein’s interaction
partners also gives information about how it functions.
Each interaction in the network can be classified based
on the group membership of the interacting proteins.
Figure 4 shows a schematic view of the yeast proteinprotein interaction network that gives the number of
interactions between different age/origin groups.
To investigate whether proteins demonstrate preferences in their interaction partners, we compared the
number of each type of interaction observed in the
actual network to the number expected to occur by
chance in a random network that preserves the degree
distribution of each protein group (Methods). The heat
map in Figure 5 summarizes these results across pairs of
age/origin groups with interactions between proteins in
the same group listed along the diagonal. Proteins from
all age/origin groups are significantly more likely to
interact with proteins from their own group than
expected by chance (P < 0.05 for each group). That is,
proteins created by similar mechanisms at similar times
preferentially interact with one another.
Interactions between proteins in different groups (that
is, between proteins gained at different times or created
by different mechanisms or both) generally occur significantly less often than expected (Figure 5 off-diagonal
entries). For example, old novel proteins are significantly
depleted for interactions with any group of duplicate
proteins. The single instance of significant over-enrichment for interaction between different groups is among
young proteins: young novel proteins interact more
often than expected by chance with young duplicate
proteins. We note that the significant preference to
interact with proteins of the same group does not imply

Capra et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R127
http://genomebiology.com/content/11/12/R127

Page 6 of 16

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 3 The integration of proteins into the yeast protein-protein interaction network by age and origin. Each pane gives the average
(with standard errors) of a statistic that reflects the integration of proteins in each age/origin group into the yeast physical interaction network:
(a) degree, (b) betweenness centrality, (c) degree divided by protein length, and (d) betweenness divided by protein length. Similar trends are
seen in each plot. Young proteins are less integrated than older proteins, and duplicate proteins are more connected than novel proteins.
Overall, the young novel proteins are significantly less integrated than all other groups.

that proteins interact only with their group members.
For example, the majority of interactions for both
groups of young proteins are with proteins from other
age/origin groups (Figure 4); however, the number of
interactions observed within the groups is significantly
greater than expected.
The functions of young genes

We have shown that genes of different ages and origins
differ with respect to their functional attributes and
their context in the interaction networks of the cell.
Since the creation of new genes may play a role in speciation and the development of novel phenotypes, the
functions of young genes are particularly interesting. In
this section, we investigate whether the differences in
how novel and duplicate young genes are integrated
into functional networks are reflected in their specific

functions, and whether these gene gains can be tied to
phenotypic differences in the corresponding species.
Young duplicate genes facilitate the processing and
transport of sugars, while young novel genes do not
exhibit enrichment for particular functions

Functional annotations from the GO hierarchies represent the current state of our knowledge of the functions
of genes. Comparing the GO annotations observed in a
subset of genes to the genome wide distribution of
annotations can identify enriched functions that occur
in the subset more than expected by chance [61].
The young duplicate set is enriched for genes that
interact with the environment and that are involved in
the processing and transport of sugars (P < 0.01 for all
enrichments mentioned, see Tables S12-S14 in Additional file 1). For example, the enriched terms include
carbohydrate transport, response to toxin, glucose

Capra et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R127
http://genomebiology.com/content/11/12/R127

Page 7 of 16

Duplicate

491
WGD
duplicate
(1087)
1331

1550

123
30
194

old
duplicate
(1443)

young
duplicate
(314)

1814

3904

247

18

7

30

Novel

49
1
3194

young novel
(239)

old novel
(2696)

Figure 4 Schematic view of the interactions between different age/origin groups in the yeast protein physical interaction network.
The age/origin groups are represented by nodes, with node size illustrating the group size, and the number of genes in each group in
parentheses. The number of interactions between proteins of each group are given on the edges between group nodes, and are reflected in
the edge width. The color of an edge indicates whether significantly more (red), fewer (blue), or an expected number (black) of interactions are
observed in the network (see Figure 5).

transmembrane transporter activity, aryl-alcohol dehydrogenase activity and cell wall. This enrichment is
notable given the distinctive fermentative abilities of
S. cerevisiae and its close relatives (see Discussion). The
innovation in functions related to carbohydrate processing appears to be focused in subtelomeric regions.
When subtelomeric genes were removed from the
enrichment analysis of young duplicate genes, these
terms were no longer significantly enriched. However,
the enrichment for many of the terms related to environmental response was maintained. The full list of
enriched terms when excluding subtelomeric genes is
given in Table S6 in Additional file 1.
In contrast, no significant enrichment for these or any
other functions was found among the young novel

genes with annotations. However, very few of these
genes have GO functional annotations (Table 1). The
terms observed among the young novel genes with
annotations exhibit a wide variety of functions from
transcription factor activity to flocculation.
Young novel proteins in their network context

In order to better characterize the functions of young
novel genes in the absence of direct experimental data,
we took a detailed look at the context of the corresponding proteins in the yeast protein physical interaction network. Figure 6 shows the subgraph of the PPI
network induced by the young novel proteins and their
neighbors. Of the 239 young novel proteins only 59
have known physical interactions. These 59 proteins
interact with a total of 89 proteins from other groups.

Capra et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R127
http://genomebiology.com/content/11/12/R127

Page 8 of 16

Color Key

old
novel

3194 / 3004.8
4.41
P < 0.001

underenriched

overenriched

49 / 58.3
1.59
P = 0.047

1 / 0.3
1.45
P = 0.028

old
duplicate

3904 / 4163.2
4.56
P < 0.001

30 / 40.2
1.87
P = 0.023

1550 / 1440.1
3.24
P < 0.001

WGD
duplicate

1814 / 2099.0
7.64
P < 0.001

18 / 20.2
0.539
P = 0.265

1331 / 1453.8
3.81
P < 0.001

491 / 364.3
7.79
P < 0.001

247 / 342.4
7
P < 0.001

7 / 3.2
2.16
P = 0.013

194 / 237.8
3.3
P < 0.001

123 / 119.6
0.336
P = 0.344

30 / 9.6
6.91
P < 0.001

old
novel

young
novel

old
duplicate

WGD
duplicate

young
duplicate

young
novel

young
duplicate

Obs / Exp
Effect Size
P-value

Figure 5 Significance of interaction preferences by protein age and origin. Proteins preferentially interact with other proteins of the same
age and origin. The top line in each box gives the number of observed interactions of each type and the number expected based on 1,000
random networks. The middle line gives the effect size (Glass’s Δ), and the bottom line gives an empirical p-value for the difference between the
observed and expected (Methods). Squares in red indicate significantly more interactions than expected; blue indicates significantly fewer than
expected; and black indicates no significant difference. The red trend across the diagonal reflects the significant preference for proteins to
interact within their age/origin group. Nearly all of the off-diagonal interactions are significantly depleted. The only significant enrichment for
interactions between proteins of different age or origin is among young proteins.

GO terms observed among the protein physical interaction network neighbors of each young novel gene
revealed a range of general functions, but again we did
not observe significant patterns of enrichment as seen
for young duplicate genes.
Remarkably, more than 40% of all young novel proteins
with interactions (25 out of 59) are found in a single, relatively small connected component of 81 proteins. Within

this connected component, there is a nearly complete subgraph which includes the young novel protein Hua2p (Figure 6). The proteins that make up this highly connected
module are enriched for functions involved in aspects of
actin assembly and regulation. These interactions led to
the previous annotation of Hua2p with a possible role in
actin patch assembly [62]. Hua2p has the most interactions of any young novel protein. In contrast, the young

Capra et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R127
http://genomebiology.com/content/11/12/R127

Page 9 of 16

PAU16

RAD3
HSP150
YNR040W

CRS5

YNL046W

QNS1

TCP1

SPG3
YLR030W

YBR184W

YIL092W

YCL049C

YBL044W

YEL057C
CPR8

CAT2

NAB2

YGR035C

NIP1
UBP15

YER121W

CNM67

EAF6

YLL023C
YPS5

ADY3

GCN3

LSB3

MUK1

YPR096C

PFA3

YJL070C

ERD1
YLL056C

DID4

NDC1

YHL042W
HUA2

YER186C

CDC36

GCD7

MCM21

DDR48

SBE2
SLA2

TMA17

YLR125W

YDL118W

GTS1

ALD5
YPL257W

ABP1

YGL010W

RSF1

YSC84

PAM18

SLA1
BSP1

THP2

IRC10

TMN2

MET30
SWP1

YAL064W

YKR011C

YGR054W

YDR366C

YER071C

EDC3

MRPL6

HMRA2

SRL2

HMRA1
RAD1

RRT13

RIM13

PRE10

MCM1

GPI18

ULI1

RNA14

NUP84

SRB2

} x 22
}x

YOL014W

CDC7

DAL3

YJL107C
ALY1

3

YCR050C

TPS1

TIF1

YER152C

RPP2A

Figure 6 Subnetwork of the yeast protein physical interaction network consisting of young novel proteins and their first-degree
neighbors. Young novel proteins are shown in red; young duplicate proteins are colored blue; and all others are gray. Nearly half of all young
novel proteins are found in a single connected component (top of figure). The network module highlighted by the orange box consists of two
young novel proteins interacting with a number of proteins involved in actin formation and processing. The protein highlighted in green is
notable because it interacts or is within one neighbor of seven young novel proteins. Its function and those of nearby proteins suggest a role in
membrane trafficking for several of the young novel proteins. Note that interacting protein pairs with no other interactions in this subnetwork
are not listed. This visualization is based on the circular layout in CytoScape [99].

novel protein Irc10p has only three known interactions,
and no known function. It is directly connected to the
module that contains Hua2p, and two of its interaction
partners have functions that suggest a potential connection to actin: Bsp1p links proteins to the cortical actin
cytoskeleton [63] and Tmn2p is a transmembrane protein
involved in filamentous growth [64]. Both Hua2p and
Irc10p are present in only S. cerevisiae and its closest relative considered, S. bayanus. This suggests recent changes
to processes involving actin due to the creation and integration of these young proteins.
Another notable feature in this ‘young novel’ subgraph is
the old duplicate protein Did4p. It interacts with a large
number of young novel proteins; seven of the young novel

proteins are either adjacent to or one protein removed
from it. Did4p is involved in the sorting of integral membrane proteins into lumenal vesicles of multivesicular
bodies, and the delivery of newly synthesized vacuolar
enzymes to the vacuole. It also plays a role in endocytosis
[65-67]. Several of the proteins near Did4p in the network
also have functions related to membrane trafficking and
the endoplasmic reticulum. For example, Erd1p is a predicted membrane protein required for the retention of
lumenal endoplasmic reticulum proteins [68], and the
young duplicate protein YHL042Wp is a member of the
DUP380 family thought to be involved in membrane trafficking [69]. This suggests that the nearby young novel
proteins, such as Yps5p, which has similarity to cell

Capra et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R127
http://genomebiology.com/content/11/12/R127

membrane GPI-anchored aspartic proteases [70], and
YCL049Cp, which localizes to the membrane [71], are
likely involved in similar processes.

Discussion
We introduced a computational approach for investigating the origin, function, and evolution of new genes by
considering a phylogenetic classification of each gene in
an organism within the context of its cellular interaction
network. Applying this approach to S. cerevisiae, we have
shown that there are significant differences between the
lengths, interactions, and functional properties of groups
of genes classified according to their ages (pre-WGD,
WGD, or post-WGD) and their origins (duplicate or
novel). Most notably, young novel genes are shorter,
less annotated by a range of sources of functional information, and less integrated into experimentally determined physical interaction networks than other genes.
Interpretations

Assuming that the early evolutionary history of older
genes is reflected in modern young genes, our findings
suggest that on average both novel and duplicate new
genes tend to gain interactions over time. However, the
dynamics of this gain appear to differ between genes
based on their mechanisms of origin and context. In
particular, novel genes start with far fewer annotated
functions and interactions than duplicates. This is not
surprising as duplicate genes often arise with the ability
to interact with their ancestors’ interaction partners, and
their structures already have established functions in the
cell. On the other hand, non-duplicate genes are likely
created by evolutionary processes that generate novel
sequences that initially may not be fully functional. The
differences in length, interactions, and functions we
identified between old and young novel genes are more
pronounced than those uncovered between old and
young duplicated genes. This suggests that novel genes
may experience a more rapid gain in function over time.
The increase in novel gene length with age provides
one possible explanation for the gain in interactions and
functional capabilities: the incorporation of additional
sequence elements. The integration of mobile genetic elements and surrounding sequence via mutation of start
and stop codons could be responsible for this lengthening. These phenomena have been documented in detailed
analyses of the evolutionary histories of several recently
created genes [8] and regulatory elements [72]. However,
the increase in interactions with age is maintained when
gene length is taken into account (Figure 3). This argues
that the addition of new sequence is not entirely responsible for the gain of interactions.
The differences we have uncovered between genes
grouped together by their predicted age and origin

Page 10 of 16

strongly suggest that both the mechanism and time of
creation influence how newly created genes gain functions. Several previous studies support aspects of this
hypothesis. For example, proteins with similar phylogenetic profiles - patterns of occurrence of homologous
proteins in organisms across the evolutionary spectrum
- have been shown to have similar functions [73], and
the increasing relationship between age and degree has
been observed previously [74]. A very recent sequencebased analysis found that young genes in eukaryotes
experience more variable patterns of selection than
older genes with homologs in bacteria [75]. Our integration of predictions of age, origin, function, and interactions demonstrates that there are further distinct
patterns in the functional evolution of newly created
genes of different origin. The significant preference of
proteins (both young and old) to interact physically with
proteins in the same age/origin group (Figure 5) suggests that genes with similar evolutionary origins and
histories are more likely to gain and participate in similar functions, perhaps reflecting adaptations in those
functions during particular phases of the organism’s
evolution. The enrichment for a small number of specific functions in young duplicates and the presence of
many young novel proteins in a single, small, connected
subgraph of the PPI network are consistent with this
hypothesis of coordinated integration.
The relevance of the context and time of creation to
gene function and interactions also suggests a potential
driving force for the modularity observed in protein
interaction networks (see, for example, [76,77]). While
several theoretical network evolution models that incorporate gene duplication and the subsequent gain and
loss of interactions yield networks with similar properties to observed networks [55,78,79], recent work has
identified subtle attributes of protein-protein interaction
networks that cannot be explained by gene duplication
and divergence alone [54,56]. The distinct patterns we
identified in the interactions of genes created by
mechanisms other than duplication suggest that modeling other types of gene creation will also be important
in understanding the evolution of cellular networks.
New genes and novel phenotypes

The creation of genes may allow a species to adapt to
new environments. One of the major distinguishing
characteristics of S. cerevisiae and its close relatives
from other yeasts is the tendency to ferment glucose
and accumulate ethanol even in the presence of oxygen.
It has been proposed that the development of this preference was enabled by the WGD [32,80]. The enrichment for functions related to carbohydrate transport
among the young duplicate group suggests that as many
as 40 of the genes gained after the WGD may also be

Capra et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R127
http://genomebiology.com/content/11/12/R127

involved in generating and refining this novel trait in
Saccharomyces yeasts. For example, ADH2 (YMR303C),
an alcohol-dehydrogenase known to be central to this
ability [81], was created by a duplication after the WGD.
In stark contrast, the young novel genes are not found
to be associated with these processes or with adapting
to any other changes in the environment, further highlighting the importance of origin to the acquisition of
function.
A large number of young genes in S. cerevisiae lack
any information about their function. In addition, there
is evidence that many open reading frames (ORFs) currently classified as dubious may actually encode functional proteins [82]. The recent discovery that MDF1 is
a de novo protein-coding gene likely involved in mating
type adaptation provides a striking example of this
potential [12]. This gene was not included in our analysis, because it was classified as a dubious ORF at the
start of our study. It will be exciting to continue exploring the existence and function of newly created genes
and their involvement in lineage specific traits. Our analysis of the protein interaction network context of young
novel genes in S. cerevisiae provides a step in this direction by suggesting roles in actin processing and membrane trafficking for several uncharacterized genes.
Controls and robustness

We have described a procedure for categorizing genes
with respect to age and origin, and relating them to cellular function. Our overall conclusions in S. cerevisiae
are robust to a number of modifications in our analysis
pipeline.
Inferring the evolutionary history and origin of a gene
is an area of active research. Genes with fully traced evolutionary histories reveal complex series of events that
can dramatically alter a gene’s sequence and context in
the genome over time [8]. Current methods for ancestral
reconstruction cannot always accurately perform the
basic inferences involved in these analyses, such as crossspecies ortholog prediction [37] and the determination of
the original copy after a duplication [38], much less trace
more complex evolutionary events that may fuse, rearrange, and remove parts of genes. To account for these
challenges, we considered different methods for predicting the origin of a gene. Though they did not always
agree on specific predictions (Figure S1 in Additional file
1), they produced categorizations that are enriched with
genes of the appropriate origin and amenable to statistical analysis. Indeed, our main conclusions hold across
several different prediction methods (Section S1.1 in
Additional file 1).
Bias toward the study of older, evolutionarily conserved genes could magnify the patterns of difference
we observed between young genes and old genes. We

Page 11 of 16

accounted for this possible bias by confirming our conclusions on data from sources that are not based on
small-scale experimental analyses. For example, as noted
earlier, the significant increase in interactions with age
also holds when considering interaction networks built
from only high-throughput studies. Similarly, the small
number of GO annotations for young and novel genes is
supported by similar patterns in length, coverage by
Pfam domains, and essentiality, each of which is less
subject to bias. Pseudogenes and other spurious predicted genes also have the potential to confound our
analysis. To limit their effect on our conclusions, we left
all dubious ORFs (as defined by SGD) out of the analysis, and confirmed our results on the set of genes for
which the corresponding proteins are known to participate in protein-protein interactions. This provides
strong evidence that the genes considered are transcribed and translated.
Future work

In the future, it should be possible to apply our procedure, with appropriate modifications, to other lineages.
The large number of genomes available for primates
and placental mammals together with a large-scale
human physical interaction network [83] make human a
promising future target.
Another avenue for further research is to consider
more detailed categorizations of gene age and mechanism of origin. In the near future, a more fine-grained
temporal analysis will likely be possible as more genomes are sequenced and computational methods for
reconstructing evolutionary histories improve. As a first
step, we considered a more specific division of gene age
in which we distinguished the old (pre-WGD) genes
into those created prior to the divergence of S. cerevisiae
and Schizosaccharomyces pombe and those created after
this divergence, but before the WGD [84]. Results were
similar on this partition of the genes, and genes in the
temporally intermediate group exhibited patterns that
fell between those of younger and older genes, supporting our conclusion that genes, on average, gain functions and interactions over time (Section S2.2 in
Additional file 1).
The different rates of network integration and functional
gain we observed suggest that a more detailed analysis of
the patterns and functional impact of specific mechanisms
of gene gain and evolution could be fruitful. The novel
gene groups contain genes created by a number of nonduplicate evolutionary mechanisms. Grouping these nonduplicate genes was necessary for our statistical analysis,
because the absolute number of young genes is relatively
small. However, the evolutionary forces acting on genes of
de novo origin are likely to be very different from those
originating from the rearrangement of existing domains,

Capra et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R127
http://genomebiology.com/content/11/12/R127

as the latter are more likely to be immediately associated
with certain cellular functions and to have specific protein
interactions. Depending on the lineages studied, we could
divide this group of genes further. In prokaryotes, for
example, it would be possible to investigate the integration
of genes gained by lateral gene transfer into interaction
networks.

Conclusions
We expect that further characterization of recently created
genes in organisms across the evolutionary spectrum, as
well as a deeper understanding of the evolutionary
mechanisms that generate and shape them, will play a central role in our understanding of the genetic basis of lineage-specific traits and adaptation.

Page 12 of 16

This includes data from a high-throughput screen of
knockout mutants of nearly all ORFs in S. cerevisiae [46]
and many small-scale studies. We considered a gene
essential if it was found to be essential in any of the studies. Knowledge of the function of a protein was taken
from the Gene Ontology database [48] maintained at
SGD. The enrichment for functions among sets of proteins was tested using the GO:TermFinder tool [61]. The
known domains present in each protein were taken from
release 24 of Pfam-A [45]. The significance of observed
differences in these properties between groups of proteins
was assessed by a Mann-Whitney U test. Performing a
two-way ANOVA on the groups also yielded similar
results.
Classification of genes by age and mechanism of origin

Materials and methods
Data

Raw sequence data and annotations for the S. cerevisiae
strain S228C genome were downloaded from the SGD
on October 18, 2009 [85]. The reconstructed evolutionary history between S. cerevisiae and a pre-WGD ancestor derived by Gordon et al. [39] was downloaded from
the Yeast Gene Order Browser (YGOB) Version 3
[86,87]. Predicted gene families and the corresponding
homologous proteins were downloaded from the Princeton Protein Orthology Database [40,41] on October 18,
2009. The PPOD database includes predictions from
OrthoMCL [88], MultiParanoid [89], and a Jaccard clustering-based approach. For the classification of subtelomeric genes not included in YGOB reconstruction,
sequence alignments of S. cerevisiae proteins with predicted orthologs from seven related fungi were downloaded from SGD on November 24, 2009 [85].
Physical interaction data were extracted from the January 26, 2009 release of interactions in the Database of
Interacting Proteins (DIP) [57]. In exploring the robustness of our conclusions, we also considered the physical
interaction networks of Kim and Marcotte [54], which
were extracted from BioGRID [83]. For the DIP network, proteins with more than 50 physical interactions
were iteratively filtered so as to remove experimental
artifacts due to ‘sticky’ proteins. The networks used by
Kim and Marcotte [54] were filtered as described in
Batada et al. [90]; this produced networks that were
easily divided into a literature-curated interaction set
and a set determined by high-throughput experimental
methods. The reported conclusions hold on all of these
networks (Section S1.2 in Additional file 1), suggesting
that bias in the study of certain types of interaction is
not responsible for the patterns observed.
We considered several sources of functional information
about genes and proteins. First, the essentiality of a gene
was taken from the viability data reported in SGD [47,85].

We assigned an age (pre-WGD, WGD, or post-WGD)
and mechanism of origin (duplicate or novel) to
each non-dubious S. cerevisiae ORF in SGD. We first
describe the family-based scheme used in the main body
of the paper, and then briefly describe alternate
approaches that produced similar conclusions.
For each gene, a mechanism of origin was assigned
based on the presence or absence of a paralog in S. cerevisiae. Genes found in a homologous family with more
than one member in S. cerevisiae as defined by the Jaccard clustering method in PPOD [40] were classified as
duplicate, and those without other family members
in S. cerevisiae were classified as novel. Classification
of genes into age groups was greatly facilitated by the
recent reconstruction of the evolutionary history of
S. cerevisiae to just prior to the WGD [39]. This reconstruction was carried out by hand and considered the
sequence similarity and synteny of all genes in the
species listed in Figure 1. If a gene was present in the
predicted pre-WGD ancestor, it was assigned to
the pre-WGD group. Duplicate gene pairs created by
the WGD were assigned to WGD/duplicate. Though
determining the scale of gene duplication is challenging
[91], gene duplicates maintained from the WGD have a
distinct signature when their genomic contexts in the
reconstruction are compared. Only one copy will be
present in the pre-WGD ancestor, and this gene will
map to two distinct regions in S. cerevisiae that both
maintain synteny to the ancestor [31,39]. Homologous
families containing known WGD paralogs were merged.
A gene whose ancestor is not found in the pre-WGD
ancestor was assigned to post-WGD.
The YGOB’s ancestral reconstruction does not include
subtelomeric regions of the yeast genome because synteny breaks down in these highly species-specific
regions. The subtelomeres are of considerable interest in
this study because they contain nearly 300 genes - many
with limited sequence similarity beyond S. cerevisiae. To

Capra et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R127
http://genomebiology.com/content/11/12/R127

extend our analysis to these genes, we considered the
phylogenetic distribution of subtelomeric genes in the
SGD’s alignments of orthologs from seven fully
sequenced species (S. cerevisiae, Saccharomyces paradoxus, Saccharomyces mikatae, Saccharomyces bayanus,
Saccharomyces kudriavzevii, Naumovia castellii, Lachancea kluyveri). These alignments are based on the data
and analysis of Cliften et al. [92] and Kellis et al. [93];
note that they include a different set of species than
those used in the ancestral reconstruction. Genes with
an ortholog in a species that diverged prior to the WGD
were assigned to pre-WGD. All others were assigned to
post-WGD. Since these predictions were obtained using
a different strategy from those in the YGOB, we
repeated our analysis excluding all subtelomeric genes.
Our overall conclusions are maintained (Section S1.1.3
in Additional file 1).
Gordon et al. [39] analyzed 124 genes created since
the WGD. The additional post-WGD genes in our classification come from two sources. As described above,
we assigned nearly 200 subtelomeric genes that were left
out of their reconstruction to the post-WGD group.
The remaining additional genes were included in the
data downloaded from the Yeast Gene Order Browser,
but not considered in Gordon et al. Many of these
genes were not classified as dubious by SGD and had
physical interactions, so we included them in our analysis. Leaving out each of these groups of genes in turn
and rerunning our analyses yielded similar results (Section S1.1.3 in Additional file 1).
The classification of sets of genes into age and origin
groups is a challenging problem. We tested the sensitivity
of our conclusions to several different family and evolutionary history inference methods. In particular, taking
families from MultiParanoid [89] or OrthoMCL [88] (see
Section 1.1.2 in Additional file 1). We also considered an
origin classification based on gene trees and orthologous
groups defined by the Synergy algorithm [25,42,94] for
each gene in S. cerevisiae. If a gene had a predicted duplication at any point on the path to its ancestor in its gene
tree or a homologous orthogroup, it was assigned to
duplicate; otherwise, it was assigned to novel. This
approach and the family-based method agreed on 76% of
their predictions, and our main conclusions were maintained with this definition of origin. This supports our
interpretation that, though gene loss and rapid evolution
may introduce errors in individual classifications, the
mechanism of creation groups are enriched for genes of
the relevant origin. These results are presented in Section
S1.1.1 in Additional file 1.
The classification approaches described above designate all genes in a homologous protein family as duplicate and do not attempt to distinguish a single gene as
the progenitor of the family. We took this approach,

Page 13 of 16

because selecting which gene among a set of duplicates is
the ancestral copy is often very difficult - in particular in
the case of tandem duplicates [38]. In fact, there is no
guarantee that the initial member of the family is still
present in the genome. To explore the effect of this
choice on our results, we tested another strategy in
which we selected the oldest gene from each homologous
family (or randomly among the oldest if more than one
existed) to serve as the progenitor of the family. The oldest gene was defined as the gene in the family with the
most distant ortholog according to the YGOB. For subtelomeric genes, we used the SGD alignments, which each
contain a single S. cerevisiae gene, to determine the most
distant ortholog. This gene was thus assigned to a
novel group. Our conclusions held on this adapted classification (Section S1.1.3 in Additional file 1).

Analysis of interaction network properties

The integration of a protein in the physical interaction
network was quantified by its degree (that is, the number
of interactions in which it participates) and its betweenness centrality (that is, the fraction of all shortest paths
between pairs of other nodes in the network that go
through it) [95,96]. Proteins with no interaction data were
not considered in the calculation of network statistics.
The number of interactions between proteins in all
pairs of age/origin groups was calculated. The significance of the observed number of interactions was quantified by comparing it to the number of interactions
between the same groups in 1,000 randomized networks
that maintain the degree distribution within groups, but
randomize the interactions. An empirical p-value for an
observed number of interactions was estimated by the
proportion of the random networks in which at least as
many interactions were observed [97]. Degree-preserving
randomizations were performed using a stub-rewiring
algorithm [98]. The effect size of the observed difference
was quantified using Glass’s Δ: the difference between
the observed and average number of interactions in the
random networks divided by the standard deviation of
the number seen in the random networks.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Supplementary analysis. This file contains additional
analysis and results in support of the main text.
Additional file 2: Classification of S. cerevisiae genes into age/origin
groups. This tab-delimited text file contains the classification of all S.
cerevisiae genes into age/origin groups.

Abbreviations
AA: amino acid; DIP: database of interacting proteins; GO: gene ontology;
ORF: open reading frame; PPI: protein-protein interaction; PPOD: Princeton

Capra et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R127
http://genomebiology.com/content/11/12/R127

protein orthology database; SGD: Saccharomyces genome database; WGD:
whole-genome duplication; YGOB: yeast gene order browser.
Acknowledgements
We thank Jonathan Gordon for help interpreting data from the Yeast
Genome Order Browser and for sharing his analysis of the evolutionary
histories of subtelomeric proteins. We also thank members of the Singh and
Pollard groups for helpful comments and discussions. KSP thanks the
National Institute of General Medical Sciences (grant GM82901) and is an
Alfred P. Sloan Foundation Fellow. MS thanks the NIH for grant GM076275
and the NSF for grant ABI-0850063. JAC was supported by NIH grant
GM076275, NIGMS grant GM82901, and the Quantitative and Computational
Biology Program NIH grant T32 HG003284.
Author details
1
Gladstone Institutes, University of California, San Francisco, 1650 Owens St,
San Francisco, CA 94158, USA. 2Department of Computer Science and LewisSigler Institute for Integrative Genomics, Princeton University, 35 Olden St,
Princeton, NJ 08544, USA.
Authors’ contributions
JAC conceived the study and carried out the experiments. JAC, KSP, and MS
designed the experiments, interpreted the results, and wrote the paper. All
authors have read and approved the final manuscript.
Received: 8 July 2010 Revised: 18 November 2010
Accepted: 27 December 2010 Published: 27 December 2010
References
1. Jordan IK, Makarova KS, Spouge JL, Wolf YI, Koonin EV: Lineage-specific
gene expansions in bacterial and archaeal genomes. Genome Res 2001,
11:555-565.
2. Blomme T, Vandepoele K, Bodt SD, Simillion C, Maere S, de Peer Y: The
gain and loss of genes during 600 million years of vertebrate evolution.
Genome Biol 2006, 7:R43.
3. Cornell MJ, Alam I, Soanes DM, Wong HM, Hedeler C, Paton NW, Rattray M,
Hubbard SJ, Talbot NJ, Oliver SG: Comparative genome analysis across a
kingdom of eukaryotic organisms: specialization and diversification in
the Fungi. Genome Res 2007, 17:1809-1822.
4. Kasuga T, Mannhaupt G, Glass NL, Aramayo R: Relationship between
phylogenetic distribution and genomic features in Neurospora crassa.
PLoS ONE 2009, 4:e5286.
5. van Passel M, Marri P, Ochman H: The emergence and fate of horizontally
acquired genes in Escherichia coli. PLoS Comput Biol 2008, 4:e1000059.
6. Toll-Riera M, Bosch N, Bellora N, Castelo R, Armengol L, Estivill X, Alba MM:
Origin of primate orphan genes: a comparative genomics approach. Mol
Biol Evol 2009, 26:603-612.
7. Han MV, Demuth JP, McGrath CL, Casola C, Hahn MW: Adaptive evolution
of young gene duplicates in mammals. Genome Res 2009, 19:859-867.
8. Long M, Betran E, Thornton K, Wang W: The origin of new genes:
glimpses from the young and old. Nat Rev Genet 2003, 4:865-875.
9. Ohno S: Evolution by Gene Duplication New York: Springer-Verlag; 1970.
10. Giacomelli MG, Hancock AS, Masel J: The conversion of 3’ UTRs into
coding regions. Mol Biol Evol 2007, 24:457-464.
11. Cai J, Zhao R, Jiang H, Wang W: De novo origination of a new proteincoding gene in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Genetics 2008, 179:487-496.
12. Li D, Dong Y, Jiang Y, Jiang H, Cai J, Wang W: A de novo originated gene
depresses budding yeast mating pathway and is repressed by the
protein encoded by its antisense strand. Cell Research 2010, 20:408-420.
13. Levine M, Jones C, Kern A, Lindfors H, Begun D: Novel genes derived
from non-coding DNA in Drosophila melanogaster are frequently Xlinked and show testis-biased expression. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006,
103:9935-9939.
14. Begun D, Lindfors H, Kern A, Jones C: Evidence for de novo evolution of
testis-expressed genes in the Drosophila yakuba/Drosophila erecta clade.
Genetics 2007, 176:1131-1137.
15. Zhou Q, Zhang G, Zhang Y, Xu S, Zhao R, Zhan Z, Li X, Ding Y, Yang S,
Wang W: On the origin of new genes in Drosophila. Genome Res 2008,
18:1446-1455.
16. Knowles DG, McLysaght A: Recent de novo origin of human proteincoding genes. Genome Res 2009, 19:1752-1759.

Page 14 of 16

17. Li CY, Zhang Y, Wang Z, Zhang Y, Cao C, Zhang PW, Lu SJ, Li XM, Yu Q,
Zheng X, Du Q, Uhl GR, Liu QR, Wei L: A human-specific de novo proteincoding gene associated with human brain functions. PLoS Comput Biol
2010, 6:e1000734.
18. Fischer D, Eisenberg D: Finding families for genomic orfans. Bioinformatics
1999, 15:759-762.
19. Siew N, Fischer D: Analysis of singleton ORFans in fully sequenced
microbial genomes. Proteins 2003, 53:241-251.
20. Siew N, Fischer D: Unraveling the ORFan puzzle. Comp Funct Genom 2003,
4:432-441.
21. Khalturin K, Hemmrich G, Fraune S, Augustin R, Bosch TC: More than just
orphans: are taxonomically-restricted genes important in evolution?
Trends Genet 2009, 25:404-413.
22. Katju V, Lynch M: The structure and early evolution of recently arisen
gene duplicates in the Caenorhabditis elegans genome. Genetics 2003,
165:1793-1803.
23. Zhang J: Evolution by gene duplication: an update. Trends Ecol Evol 2003,
18:292-298.
24. Jordan IK, Wolf Y, Koonin E: Duplicated genes evolve slower than
singletons despite the initial rate increase. BMC Evol Biol 2004, 4:22.
25. Wapinski I, Pfeffer A, Friedman N, Regev A: Natural history and
evolutionary principles of gene duplication in fungi. Nature 2007,
449:54-61.
26. Conant GC, Wolfe KH: Turning a hobby into a job: how duplicated genes
find new functions. Nat Rev Genet 2008, 9:938-950.
27. Katju V, Farslow J, Bergthorsson U: Variation in gene duplicates with low
synonymous divergence in Saccharomyces cerevisiae relative to
Caenorhabditis elegans. Genome Biol 2009, 10:R75.
28. Davis J, Petrov D: Do disparate mechanisms of duplication add similar
genes to the genome? Trends Genet 2005, 21:548-551.
29. Scannell DR, Frank AC, Conant GC, Byrne KP, Woolfit M, Wolfe KH:
Independent sorting-out of thousands of duplicated gene pairs in two
yeast species descended from a whole-genome duplication. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2007, 104:8397-8402.
30. Makino T, Hokamp K, McLysaght A: The complex relationship of gene
duplication and essentiality. Trends Genet 2009, 25:152-155.
31. Kellis M, Birren BW, Lander ES: Proof and evolutionary analysis of ancient
genome duplication in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Nature 2004,
428:617-624.
32. Piskur J: Origin of the duplicated regions in the yeast genomes. Trends
Genet 2001, 17:302-303.
33. Piskur J, Rozpedowska E, Polakova S, Merico A, Compagno C: How did
Saccharomyces evolve to become a good brewer? Trends Genet 2006,
22:183-186.
34. Guan Y, Dunham MJ, Troyanskaya OG: Functional analysis of gene
duplications in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Genetics 2007, 175:933-943.
35. Papp B, Pal C, Hurst LD: Dosage sensitivity and the evolution of gene
families in yeast. Nature 2003, 424:194-197.
36. Beltrao P, Serrano L: Specificity and evolvability in eukaryotic protein
interaction networks. PLoS Comput Biol 2007, 3:e25.
37. Altenho AM, Dessimoz C: Phylogenetic and functional assessment of
orthologs inference projects and methods. PLoS Comput Biol 2009, 5:
e1000262.
38. Han M, Hahn M: Identifying parent-daughter relationships among
duplicated genes. Pac Symp Biocomput 2009, 14:114-125.
39. Gordon JL, Byrne KP, Wolfe KH: Additions, losses, and rearrangements on
the evolutionary route from a reconstructed ancestor to the modern
Saccharomyces cerevisiae genome. PLoS Genetics 2009, 5:e1000485.
40. Heinicke S, Livstone MS, Lu C, Oughtred R, Kang F, Angiuoli SV, White O,
Botstein D, Dolinski K: The Princeton Protein Orthology Database (P-POD):
a comparative genomics analysis tool for biologists. PLoS ONE 2007, 2:
e766.
41. Princeton Protein Orthology Database. [http://ppod.princeton.edu/].
42. Wapinski I, Pfeffer A, Friedman N, Regev A: Automatic genome-wide
reconstruction of phylogenetic gene trees. Bioinformatics 2007, 23:
i549-i558.
43. Cherry J, Adler C, Ball C, Chervitz SA, Dwight S, Hester E, Jia Y, Juvik G,
Roe T, Schroeder M, Weng S, Botstein D: SGD: Saccharomyces Genome
Database. Nucleic Acids Res 1998, 26:73-79.
44. The Functions and Interactions of Novel Genes in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae.. [http://compbio.cs.princeton.edu/novel_genes/].

Capra et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R127
http://genomebiology.com/content/11/12/R127

45. Finn RD, Tate J, Mistry J, Coggill PC, Sammut SJ, Hotz HR, Ceric G,
Forslund K, Eddy SR, Sonnhammer ELL, Bateman A: The Pfam protein
families database. Nucleic Acids Res 2008, 36:D281-D288.
46. Giaever G, Chu AM, Ni L, Connelly C, Riles L, Veronneau S, Dow S, LucauDanila A, Anderson K, Andre B, Arkin AP, Astromoff A, El Bakkoury M,
Bangham R, Benito R, Brachat S, Campanaro S, Curtiss M, Davis K,
Deutschbauer A, Entian KD, Flaherty P, Foury F, Garfinkel DJ, Gerstein M,
Gotte D, Guldener U, Hegemann JH, Hempel S, Herman Z, et al: Functional
profiling of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae genome. Nature 2002,
418:387-391.
47. Engel SR, Balakrishnan R, Binkley G, Christie KR, Costanzo MC, Dwight SS,
Fisk DG, Hirschman JE, Hitz BC, Hong EL, Krieger CJ, Livstone MS,
Miyasato SR, Nash R, Oughtred R, Park J, Skrzypek MS, Weng S, Wong ED,
Dolinski K, Botstein D, Cherry JM: Saccharomyces Genome Database
provides mutant phenotype data. Nucleic Acids Res 2010, 38:D433-D436.
48. Ashburner M, Ball CA, Blake JA, Botstein D, Butler H, Cherry JM, Davis AP,
Dolinski K, Dwight SS, Eppig JT, Harris MA, Hill DP, Issel-Tarver L, Kasarskis A,
Lewis S, Matese JC, Richardson JE, Ringwald M, Rubin GM, Sherlock G: Gene
ontology: tool for the unification of biology. The Gene Ontology
Consortium. Nat Genet 2000, 25:25-29.
49. Wagner A: The yeast protein interaction network evolves rapidly and
contains few redundant duplicate genes. Mol Biol Evol 2001,
18:1283-1292.
50. Qin H, Lu HHS, Wu WB, Li W: Evolution of the yeast protein interaction
network. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2003, 100:12820-12824.
51. Prachumwat A, Li W: Protein function, connectivity, and duplicability in
yeast. Mol Biol Evol 2006, 23:30-39.
52. Kim PM, Korbel JO, Gerstein MB: Positive selection at the protein network
periphery: evaluation in terms of structural constraints and cellular
context. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2007, 104:20274-20279.
53. Kafri R, Dahan O, Levy J, Pilpel Y: Preferential protection of protein
interaction network hubs in yeast: evolved functionality of genetic
redundancy. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008, 105:1243-1248.
54. Kim WK, Marcotte EM: Age-dependent evolution of the yeast protein
interaction network suggests a limited role of gene duplication and
divergence. PLoS Comput Biol 2008, 4:e1000232.
55. Presser A, Elowitz MB, Kellis M, Kishony R: The evolutionary dynamics of
the Saccharomyces cerevisiae protein interaction network after
duplication. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008, 105:950-954.
56. Zhang Q, Zmasek C, Dishaw L, Mueller MG, Ye Y, Litman G, Godzik A: Novel
genes dramatically alter regulatory network topology in amphioxus.
Genome Biol 2008, 9:R123.
57. Salwinski L, Miller CS, Smith AJ, Pettit FK, Bowie JU, Eisenberg D: The
Database of Interacting Proteins: 2004 update. Nucleic Acids Res 2004, 32:
D449-D451.
58. Kim PM, Lu LJ, Xia Y, Gerstein MB: Relating three-dimensional structures
to protein networks provides evolutionary insights. Science 2006,
314:1938-1941.
59. Jeong H, Mason S, Barabasi A, Oltvai N: Lethality and centrality in protein
networks. Nature 2001, 411:41-42.
60. Fraser H, Hirsh A, Steinmetz L, Scharfe C, Feldman M: Evolutionary rate in
the protein interaction network. Science 2002, 296:750-752.
61. Boyle E, Weng S, Gollub J, Jin H, Botstein D, Cherry J, Sherlock G: GO::
TermFinder - open source software for accessing Gene Ontology
information and finding significantly enriched Gene Ontology terms
associated with a list of genes. Bioinformatics 2004, 20:3710-3715.
62. Samanta M, Liang S: Predicting protein functions from redundancies in
large-scale protein interaction networks. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2003,
100:12579-12583.
63. Wicky S, Frischmuth S, Singer-Kruger B: Bsp1p/Ypr171p is an adapter that
directly links some synaptojanin family members to the cortical actin
cytoskeleton in yeast. FEBS Letters 2003, 537:35-41.
64. Froquet R, Cherix N, Birke R, Benghezal M, Cameroni E, Letourneur F,
Mosch H, De Virgilio C, Cosson P: Control of cellular physiology by TM9
proteins in yeast and Dictyostelium. J Biol Chem 2008, 283:6764-6772.
65. Davis NG, Horecka J, Sprague G Jr: Cis- and trans-acting functions
required for endocytosis of the yeast pheromone receptors. J Cell Biol
1993, 122:53-65.
66. Amerik A, Nowak J, Swaminathan S, Hochstrasser M: The Doa4
deubiquitinating enzyme is functionally linked to the vacuolar proteinsorting and endocytic pathways. Mol Biol Cell 2000, 11:3365-3380.

Page 15 of 16

67. Babst M, Katzmann D, Estepa-Sabal E, Meerloo T, Emr S: Escrt-III: an
endosome-associated heterooligomeric protein complex required for
mvb sorting. Dev Cell 2002, 3:271-282.
68. Hardwick K, Lewis M, Semenza J, Dean N, Pelham H: ERD1, a yeast gene
required for the retention of luminal endoplasmic reticulum proteins,
affects glycoprotein processing in the Golgi apparatus. EMBO J 1990,
9:623-630.
69. Despons L, Wirth B, Louis VL, Potier S, Souciet J: An evolutionary scenario
for one of the largest yeast gene families. Trends Genet 2006, 22:10-15.
70. Olsen V, Cawley N, Brandt J, Egel-Mitani M, Loh Y: Identification and
characterization of Saccharomyces cerevisiae yapsin 3, a new member of
the yapsin family of aspartic proteases encoded by the YPS3 gene.
Biochem J 1999, 339:407-411.
71. Terashima H, Fukuchi S, Nakai K, Arisawa M, Hamada K, Yabuki N, Kitada K:
Sequence-based approach for identification of cell wall proteins in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Curr Genet 2002, 40:311-316.
72. Kunarso G, Chia NY, Jeyakani J, Hwang C, Lu X, Chan YS, Ng HH,
Bourque G: Transposable elements have rewired the core regulatory
network of human embryonic stem cells. Nat Genet 2010, 42:631-634.
73. Pellegrini M, Marcotte EM, Thompson MJ, Eisenberg D, Yeates T: Assigning
protein functions by comparative genome analysis: protein phylogenetic
profiles. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1999, 96:4285-4288.
74. Eisenberg E, Levanon EY: Preferential attachment in the protein network
evolution. Phys Rev Lett 2003, 91:138701.
75. Vishnoi A, Kryazhimskiy S, Bazykin GA, Hannenhalli S, Plotkin JB: Young
proteins experience more variable selection pressures than old proteins.
Genome Res 2010, 20:1574-1581.
76. Rives AW, Galitski T: Modular organization of cellular networks. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2003, 100:1128-1133.
77. Spirin V, Mirny L: Protein complexes and functional modules in molecular
networks. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2003, 100:12123-12128.
78. Solé RV, Pastor-Satorras R, Smith E, Kepler TB: A model of large-scale
proteome evolution. Adv Complex Syst 2002, 5:43-54.
79. Vázquez A, Flammini A, Maritan A, Vespignani A: Modeling of protein
interaction networks. Complexus 2003, 1:38-44.
80. Chen H, Xu L, Gu Z: Regulation dynamics of WGD genes during yeast
metabolic oscillation. Mol Biol Evol 2008, 25:2513-2516.
81. Thomson JM, Gaucher EA, Burgan MF, DeKee DW, Li T, Aris JP, Benner SA:
Resurrecting ancestral alcohol dehydrogenases from yeast. Nat Genet
2005, 37:630-635.
82. Li Q, Carvunis A, Yu H, Han JJ, Zhong Q, Simonis N, Tam S, Hao T,
Klitgord NJ, Dupuy D, Mou D, Wapinski I, Regev A, Hill DE, Cusick ME,
Vidal M: Revisiting the Saccharomyces cerevisiae predicted ORFeome.
Genome Res 2008, 18:1294-1303.
83. Breitkreutz BJ, Stark C, Reguly T, Boucher L, Breitkreutz A, Livstone M,
Oughtred R, Lackner DH, Bahler J, Wood V, Dolinski K, Tyers M: The
BioGRID Interaction Database: 2008 update. Nucleic Acids Res 2008, 36:
D637-D640.
84. Wood V: Schizosaccharomyces pombe comparative genomics: from
sequence to systems. In Comparative Genomics Using Fungi as Models.
Edited by: Sunnerhagen P, Piskur J. Berlin: Springer; 2006:233-285, [Topics in
Current Genetics, vol 15.].
85. Saccharomyces Genome Database. [http://www.yeastgenome.org/].
86. Byrne KP, Wolfe KH: The Yeast Gene Order Browser: combining curated
homology and syntenic context reveals gene fate in polyploid species.
Genome Res 2005, 15:1456-1461.
87. Yeast Gene Order Browser. [http://wolfe.gen.tcd.ie/ygob/].
88. Chen F, Mackey A, Stoeckert CJ, Roos DS: OrthoMCL-DB: querying a
comprehensive multi-species collection of ortholog groups. Nucleic Acids
Res 2006, 34:D363-D368.
89. Alexeyenko A, Tamas I, Liu G, Sonnhammer E: Automatic clustering of
orthologs and inparalogs shared by multiple proteomes. Bioinformatics
2006, 22:e9-e15.
90. Batada NN, Reguly T, Breitkreutz A, Boucher L, Breitkreutz BJ, Hurst LD,
Tyers M: Stratus not altocumulus: a new view of the yeast protein
interaction network. PLoS Biol 2006, 4:e317.
91. Durand D, Hoberman R: Diagnosing duplications - can it be done? Trends
Genet 2006, 22:156-164.
92. Cliften P, Sudarsanam P, Desikan A, Fulton L, Fulton B, Majors J,
Waterston R, Cohen BA, Johnston M: Finding functional features in

Capra et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R127
http://genomebiology.com/content/11/12/R127

93.

94.
95.
96.

97.

98.

99.

Page 16 of 16

Saccharomyces genomes by phylogenetic footprinting. Science 2003,
301:71-76.
Kellis M, Patterson N, Endrizzi M, Birren B, Lander ES: Sequencing and
comparison of yeast species to identify genes and regulatory elements.
Nature 2003, 423:241-254.
Fungal Orthogroups. [http://www.broadinstitute.org/regev/orthogroups/].
Brandes U: A faster algorithm for betweenness centrality. J Math Sociol
2001, 25:163-177.
Hagberg AA, Schult DA, Swart PJ: Exploring network structure, dynamics,
and function using NetworkX. In Proceedings of the 7th Python in Science
Conference (SciPy2008): Pasadena, CA, USA Edited by: Varoquaux G, Vaught T,
Millman J 2008, 11-15.
Milo R, Shen-Orr S, Itzkovitz S, Kashtan N, Chklovskii D, Alon U: Network
motifs: simple building blocks of complex networks. Science 2002,
298:824-827.
Banks E, Nabieva E, Chazelle B, Singh M: Organization of physical
interactomes as uncovered by network schemas. PLoS Comput Biol 2008,
4:e1000203.
Shannon P, Markiel A, Ozier O, Baliga N, Wang J, Ramage D, Amin N,
Schwikowski B, Ideker T: Cytoscape: a software environment for
integrated models of biomolecular interaction networks. Genome Res
2003, 13:2498-2504.

doi:10.1186/gb-2010-11-12-r127
Cite this article as: Capra et al.: Novel genes exhibit distinct patterns of
function acquisition and network integration. Genome Biology 2010 11:
R127.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
