<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>A retrosynthetic biology approach to metabolic pathway design for therapeutic production</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Systems Biology 2011, 5:122. doi:10.1186/1752-0509-5-122"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Pablo Carbonell"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Carbonell et al. BMC Systems Biology 2011, 5:122
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/5/122

METHODOLOGY ARTICLE

Open Access

A retrosynthetic biology approach to metabolic
pathway design for therapeutic production
Pablo Carbonell, Anne-Gaëlle Planson, Davide Fichera and Jean-Loup Faulon*

Abstract
Background: Synthetic biology is used to develop cell factories for production of chemicals by constructively
importing heterologous pathways into industrial microorganisms. In this work we present a retrosynthetic
approach to the production of therapeutics with the goal of developing an in situ drug delivery device in host
cells. Retrosynthesis, a concept originally proposed for synthetic chemistry, iteratively applies reversed chemical
transformations (reversed enzyme-catalyzed reactions in the metabolic space) starting from a target product to
reach precursors that are endogenous to the chassis. So far, a wider adoption of retrosynthesis into the
manufacturing pipeline has been hindered by the complexity of enumerating all feasible biosynthetic pathways for
a given compound.
Results: In our method, we efficiently address the complexity problem by coding substrates, products and
reactions into molecular signatures. Metabolic maps are represented using hypergraphs and the complexity is
controlled by varying the specificity of the molecular signature. Furthermore, our method enables candidate
pathways to be ranked to determine which ones are best to engineer. The proposed ranking function can
integrate data from different sources such as host compatibility for inserted genes, the estimation of steady-state
fluxes from the genome-wide reconstruction of the organism’s metabolism, or the estimation of metabolite toxicity
from experimental assays. We use several machine-learning tools in order to estimate enzyme activity and reaction
efficiency at each step of the identified pathways. Examples of production in bacteria and yeast for two antibiotics
and for one antitumor agent, as well as for several essential metabolites are outlined.
Conclusions: We present here a unified framework that integrates diverse techniques involved in the design of
heterologous biosynthetic pathways through a retrosynthetic approach in the reaction signature space. Our
engineering methodology enables the flexible design of industrial microorganisms for the efficient on-demand
production of chemical compounds with therapeutic applications.

Background
Synthetic biology is being used for therapeutic production either to develop cell factories using industrial
microorganisms [1,2] or to synthesize genetic circuits
allowing in situ therapeutic delivery [3]. Recombinant
DNA technology has already provided the ability to
genetically engineer cell strains in order to import pathways from other organisms capable of producing small
molecule chemicals into microbial chassis. Moreover, to
estimate the efficiency of the overall process, metabolic
engineering-based tools consider models of cell metabolism as a whole, allowing the identification and redesign
* Correspondence: jfaulon@gmail.com
iSSB, Institute of Systems and Synthetic Biology, University of Evry, Genopole
Campus 1, Genavenir 6, 5 rue Henri Desbruères, 91030 EVRY Cedex, France

of bottlenecks in the biosynthetic pathways. Therefore,
the next challenge ahead remains the integration of all
these design steps into a flexible and automated biosynthetic manufacturing pipeline of molecules.
In recent years, many successful examples of bioproduction of chemicals with therapeutic interest through
metabolic engineering have been reported. Among
others, plant secondary metabolites that are of medicinal
value, such as the terpenoids artemisinic acid [4] and
paclitaxel (taxol) [5], benzylisoquinoline alkaloids [6],
and flavonoids [7,8] have been successfully produced by
metabolically engineered microorganisms. Similarly, heterologous production of therapeutically important antibiotics such as aminoglycosides derivatives, which
include ribostamycin [9], neomycin, gentamicin and

© 2011 Carbonell et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Carbonell et al. BMC Systems Biology 2011, 5:122
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/5/122

kanamycin, as well as other natural products like polyketides [10,11] and nonribosomal peptides [12] have
been reported. Flexible production of novel antibiotics is
of special interest in order to fight against the increasing
emergence of multidrug-resistant pathogens [13-15].
In an attempt to rationalize the biosynthetic design
process, metabolic engineering models the metabolic
network of the cell as a whole [16,17]. A suitable topological representation of the metabolic network can be
achieved by using directed hypergraphs [18,19] where
catalytic reactions are hyperedges connecting node substrates to products. Moreover, genome-wide reconstructions of an organism’s metabolism with explicit
reference to the stoichiometry of the reactions can be
studied in order to estimate steady-state fluxes [20].
Sensitivity analysis of fluxes provides a systematic way
to determine production bottlenecks, where gene overexpression or repression might enhance production for
the target compound [21,22]. In addition, stochastic and
deterministic system dynamics methods are used to
simulate enzymatic reaction kinetics [23].
Through metabolic modeling, the repertoire of biochemical transformations in de novo biosynthetic pathways are extended beyond what is present in metabolic
databases like KEGG [24] and MetaCyc [25]. In silico
methods for de novo pathway prediction and optimization are mainly based on two approaches: homologies
of chemical structure transformation patterns [26-29],
and knowledge-based expert systems [30,31]. Retrosynthesis algorithms [32] perform a backward search
for biosynthetic routes leading from a target compound to the host metabolites through iterative application of a defined set of biochemical transformation
rules. One approach is BNICE [33], where molecules
and reactions are represented by bond-electron
matrices (BEM) [34]. BEM entries correspond to the
covalent bond order between atoms, whereas the
Dugundji-Ugi model for a metabolic reaction is implemented through the matrix difference between the
BEM of products and substrates. With BNICE, reactions in the KEGG database [24] are represented
through approximately 250 unique elementary transformations, which approximately correspond to the
classification at the 3rd EC digits [35,36]. In the same
fashion, the molecular signature descriptor [37] is an
algorithm that returns for a given target compound
fourth and third EC digits, respectively, of predicted
enzymes capable of producing the structure. Similarly,
other retrosynthetic framework has been proposed
based on 50 reaction rules [38].
A retrosynthetic search in the metabolic hypergraph
might lead to a combinatorial explosion. For instance,
using only 50 reaction rules, 100,000 reaction routes
were predicted for the production of isobutanol [38],

Page 2 of 18

far more than what could be realistically tested in the
laboratory. Thus, in order to find a trade-off between
the inherent complexity of de novo pathway design
and the use of experimental information, we present
here a tool based on the coding of compounds and
reactions through molecular signatures [39]. The
molecular signature is a canonical representation of
the subgraph surrounding a particular atom in a molecular structure up to a predefined diameter or height
h. A metabolic reaction signature is given by the difference between the signatures of products and substrates [40]. As further described in the Methods
section, the signature coding system can be made
more or less specific to compounds and reactions by
selecting the height, low heights are less specific (as
molecular signatures become more and more ambiguous) and high heights are specific (as molecular signatures become more and more precise), thus the
numbers of de novo reactions and consequently de
novo pathways can be controlled.
Once metabolic models for the heterologous biosynthesis of target compounds have been determined,
individual performances for the predicted pathways
need to be characterized in order to prioritize the
engineering of the most promising routes into the
chassis organism. Several computational frameworks
have proposed different factors that might influence
the performance of an engineered strain. PathMiner
introduced a path cost associated with the number of
heterologous enzymes measured through a chemical
distance [41]. BNICE applied the group contribution
method [42] for reactants and products in order to
rank pathways based on the thermodynamic favorability [43]. Other aspects influencing the pathway performance are pathway length, organism specificity [38],
heterologous expression, growth rate, and precursor
supply [44]. In addition, many other factors might be
considered, for instance, PathoLogic defined 123 pathway features that may be relevant to the pathway ranking problem [31]. Therefore, subsequent optimization
of the heterologous engineered strain through genetic,
metabolic and enzyme design approaches would be
usually necessary in order to attain the desired final
yields in the production of the target compound.
Moreover, increasing efficiency levels for rate-limiting
enzymatic reactions involved in the pathway is an
additional strategy for the rational design of industrial
strains [37,45,46]. We present here a unified framework that combines several techniques involved in the
design of heterologous biosynthetic pathways through
a retrosynthetic approach in the reaction signature
space, enabling the flexible design of industrial microorganisms for the efficient on-demand production of
chemical compounds of interest.

Carbonell et al. BMC Systems Biology 2011, 5:122
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/5/122

Results and Discussion
The extended metabolic reaction space (EMRS)

Our method starts by mapping the metabolic network
into the signature space in order to build an extended
representation of the metabolic reaction space (see definitions in Methods). Molecular signatures, which are a
representation of the molecular graph, can be used in
order to code reactions [46]. This process is illustrated
in Figure 1. Canonical molecular signatures identify
unique compounds when they are computed at the
height h of the maximum diameter of the molecular
graph, whereas signatures at lower height h provide a
way to search for and enumerate similar chemical compounds. Likewise, reaction signatures, which are biochemical reactions coded into the molecular signature
representation (Equation 7 in Methods), are used in
order to search for and enumerate similar reactions. We
define the extended metabolic reaction space (EMRS) as
the set of all possible reactions that can be generated
from signatures contained in the metabolic network.
Therefore, the EMRS consists of both reactions in the
metabolic network and additional putative reactions,
which are assumed to be promiscuously catalyzed by
enzymes present in the organism. Given a finite height
h, novel reactions are discovered through this method
by performing a search in the metabolite signature
space of combinations of stoichiometric coefficients of
metabolites having the same signature as either the substrates or the products. Figure 2 shows the metabolic
reaction map of the 966 endogenous metabolites in E.
coli (Figure 2A) and of the additional 2338 compounds
that are reachable from E. coli after the generation of
the EMRS (Figure 2B).
An illustrative example is the metabolite signature
space of height h = 0. In this space, compounds are
represented by their elemental formula. Similarly, the
combination of the substrates and products in the reaction are represented by their total molecular formula.
Thus, any combination of compounds satisfying the elemental formula is considered a putative set of reactants.
In order to compute the EMRS of height h = 0, we need
to solve Diophantine equations in the signature space of
height h = 0 that generally lead to a set of solutions too
large to be of use. In the case of h = 1, the number of
newly created reactions is still significantly large (for a
network like the one shown in Figure 2, it would be
above 106). This number, nevertheless, becomes tractable once we consider heights higher than h = 2, which
corresponds to a 17.72% increase in the number of reactions with respect to nominal reactions, as it is shown in
Table 1. Starting from the list of coded reactions, the
iterative backward application of the biochemical transformations to compounds of interest allows the

Page 3 of 18

identification of enzymatic routes linking the desired
compound to precursors that are endogenous to the
chassis organism. Each of these routes constitutes an
exogenous biosynthetic pathway for that compound. In
the next sections, we present an approach for ranking
the biosynthetic pathways of a given compound in order
to select the best pathways to engineer in the chassis
organism.
Decision flowchart for selecting and ranking best
pathways

The EMRS introduces putative novel reactions that
share the same signature as their parent nominal reactions at the chosen height h of molecular resolution
(Equation 8 in Methods). Those putative reactions generated by our molecular signature-based algorithm need
to be validated and ranked. Figure 3 shows the decision
flowchart used in our approach in order to accept or
reject putative reactions in a pathway as well as to score
its overall performance once inserted into the chassis
organism. Reactions are first tested for their thermodynamic feasibility. Next, if no known enzyme sequences
are available in the database, the enzyme sequence space
is searched in order to find candidate sequences that
might catalyze the given reaction as a promiscuous
activity. Gene compatibility, enzymatic performance,
toxicity of products and steady state fluxes are finally
estimated in order to score the pathway.
We introduce the following function to quantify the
cost of inserting an exogenous enzyme sequence Si processing the reaction r* in the pathway:
W (r∗ , Si ) =
= 1 − ωp promis(Si ) + 1 − ωe perf(r ∗ , Si ) + het(Si )
0 ≤ promis(Si ), perf(r ∗ , Si ), het(Si ) ≤ 1

(1)

0 ≤ ωp , ωe ≤ 1

where promis(Si) is the predicted enzyme promiscuity for the sequence Si, perf(r*, Si) is the estimated catalytic performance of the given sequence Si for reaction
r*, and het(Si) is the gene compatibility of the sequence
S i. ω p , ωe are parameters used in order to weight the
contribution of each term to the cost function. All three
terms are normalized before entering the expression so
that each score is always given by a value in the same
range between 0 and 1. Therefore, the cost function
W (r ∗ , Si )in Equation 1 is always defined positive and
bounded. Promiscuity contributes negatively to the cost
function because enzymes with higher level of promiscuity are considered better candidates for catalyzing the
desired transformation r* as a side reaction. In the same
fashion, enzyme performance contributes negatively
since reactions with higher performance are considered

Carbonell et al. BMC Systems Biology 2011, 5:122
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/5/122

Page 4 of 18

Figure 1 The atomic, molecular and reaction signature coding. A) The process for computing the molecular signature for a compound C is
illustrated for 6-aminohexanate. The process starts by computing the atomic signature for each atom. In the given example, the atomic
signature for the carbon in the carboxylic group is computed up to height h = 2. At height h = 0 (blue), the molecular graph rooted at the
atom is given by the atom itself; at height h = 1 (green) a canonical representation of the root atom and its first atomic neighbors are given;
the process continues similarly for heights h = 2 (orange) and higher until the diameter of the graph is reached. Atomic signatures are collected
for all atoms and sorted in order to provide the molecular signature, for instance the molecular signature 1s(C) of height h = 1 is given at the
left; B) The coding of reactions signatures is illustrated for the 6-aminohexanoate hydrolase (EC 3.5.1.46). The reaction signature contains the net
difference between the products and the substrates. In the figure, the reaction signature 1s(R) was computed for height h = 1; C) Illustration of
how signatures of reactions provide a way to measure their chemical similarity. For example, the previous reaction (EC 3.5.1.46) has the same
signature at height h = 1 than 4-(g-glutamylamino)butanoate amidohydrolase (EC 3.5.1.94). However, both signatures differ at height h = 2,
having in this case a Tanimoto similarity of 2s(R1, R2) = 0.81 (see Equation 14 in Methods).

Carbonell et al. BMC Systems Biology 2011, 5:122
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/5/122

Page 5 of 18

Table 1 Reactions in the EMRS
height h

reactions

% increase from canonical

2

9083

17.72%

3

7882

2.15%

4

7800

1.09%

5

7752

0.47%

6

7725

0.12%

canonical

7716

0%

Number of novel generated putative reactions in the EMRS for different
heights h.

Furthermore, several additional adverse effects may
be hindering the successful expression and performance of inserted enzymes, while the toxicity of intermediate metabolites might impede cell survival and
growth. These effects need to be taken into account in
order to rank the pathways. For instance, an estimate
of toxicity values (IC50 or half minimal inhibitory concentration) for the intermediates p in the chassis
organism, may be obtained either from experimental
databases [47] or from structure-activity relationship
models [48]. In addition, compound yields from
inserted pathways are rarely additive, since other
routes may be competing with the target pathway and
inhibiting the production of the desired compound [5].
Here we use a multi-criteria approach in order to
score the cost of pathway insertion with respect to the
general goal of producing a target molecule c, with a
cost function defined as follows:
W(c, ρ) = − λflux vc (ρ)+
N

+ λpath

W (r∗ , S∗ (r∗ )) + λtox

r∗ ∈ρ

Figure 2 Metabolic networks in the EMRS. A) Metabolic reaction
map of E. coli, where endogenous metabolites are depicted as light
blue nodes connected by edges representing reactions; B)
Retrosynthetic map containing reachable compounds in the E. coli
EMRS through exogenous reactions, where exogenous metabolites
are represented by pink nodes connected through reactions (thin
edges) to the E. coli network. There are 966 endogenous and 2338
exogenous compounds, respectively, that can be reached through
reactions in the EMRS. There are 4,344 edges connecting
endogenous compounds and 8,931 edges leading to exogenous
compounds.

less expensive in terms of the cost of insertion. Once all
terms are defined for each reaction r* in the EMRS, this
strategy enables the determination of those gene
sequences S* that minimize the insertion cost:
S∗ (r ∗ ) = arg min W (r ∗ , Si )
Si

(2)

N

tox(p)
r∗ ∈ρ

(3)

p∈r∗

where W(c, r) considers the following effects: vc(r),
nominal yield of compound c in pathway r;
W (r ∗ , S∗ (r ∗ )), minimum cost of insertion of each
enzyme in the pathway as given by Equation 1; and tox
(p), the inverse of the IC50 value. Parameters (l flux ,
l path , l tox ) need to be adjusted in function of the
desired weight given to the costs of pathway insertion
and metabolite toxicity. In our method, these parameters were optimized so that pathways that are fully
annotated in the reference database, for instance KEGG,
are ranked first with respect to predicted pathways (see
details in Methods).
The minimum of this cost function W(c, r*(c)) at the
optimal pathway:
ρ ∗ (c) = argρ min W(c, ρ)

(4)

provides a trade-off between the simultaneous goals of
obtaining the maximum nominal yield while keeping the

Carbonell et al. BMC Systems Biology 2011, 5:122
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/5/122

Page 6 of 18

Figure 3 Flowchart for ranking pathways. In order to rank pathways, each reaction r = 1 ... N in the enumerated pathways p1 ... pM is first
tested for thermodynamical feasibility; enzyme candidates are subsequently tested for performance and homogeneity so that the one with the
lowest cost is selected; the cost of toxicity of each reaction product is then added; finally, the nominal flux is estimated for the overall pathway.

overall process efficient and side effects attenuated. In
the following sections, we present our approach in order
to quantify each term in the pathway cost function W(c,
r) in Equation 3.
Predicting enzyme activity in promiscuous putative
reactions

Our method provides for each reaction in the EMRS a
ranked list of candidate sequences, as given by the score
in Equation 1, along with their predicted catalytic efficiencies. When there is no sequence information in
databases about enzymes catalyzing the desired reaction
r*, we must rely on the prediction of enzymes as putative candidates to process other substrates (multispecificity) or to catalyze a promiscuous reaction other than

their native ones [49]. Furthermore the thermodynamic
feasibility of that reactions as well as the performance of
the predicted promiscuous enzymes need to be evaluated. These preliminary evaluations, which are described
next, are carried out in order to implement an early
rejection of false hits, as shown in the flowchart of Figure 3.
Thermodynamic feasibility

Putative reactions need to be validated for their directionality or thermodynamic feasibility. We performed
this validation assuming that the metabolites’ concentration are spatially invariant and that temperature and
pressure are constant. Under these assumptions, standard Gibbs free energies of reactions can be estimated
using a group contribution approach [43,50]. Only

Carbonell et al. BMC Systems Biology 2011, 5:122
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/5/122

Page 7 of 18

reactions estimated to be thermodynamically feasible are
added to the EMRS.

Quantifying the compatibility between the host and
heterologous genes

Enzyme promiscuity

Another aspect to be addressed when considering the
overall enzyme cost defined in Equation 1, is the effect
of inserting heterologous genes, since the diversity of
base-pair content is organism-specific. By minimizing
this difference, expression levels can be maximized [55].
In order to quantify the compatibility between the host
and heterologous genes, we have implemented a
machine-learning approach based on several descriptors:
gene sequence descriptors (sequence length, GC content); organism specificity (phylogenetic distance
between source organism and chassis); probability of
protein expression as inclusion bodies; protein descriptors (percentage of hydrophobic and charged amino
acids); and secondary structure distribution. These
descriptors were computed for the entire KEGG database of non-redundant enzyme sequences and then used
in order to train support vector machine-based predictors for the chassis organisms of interest (see Methods).
Furthermore, the successful expression of a heterologous gene depends on several additional sequence-independent factors, such as an adequate selection of
promoters, RBS, and codons [56]. In some cases, we
should also consider the need for some other type of
specific modifications depending strictly on the type of
compound to be synthesized, such as protein engineering of P450s [57] or modular design for the complex
assembly machinery involved in the production of secondary metabolites like polyketides [58] and nonribosomal peptides [59,60], which need to be evaluated on a
case-by-case basis in order to rank and select the best
genes to engineer.

As part of our methodology for biosynthetic pathway
design, candidate enzyme sequences catalyzing feasible
reactions in the EMRS have to be identified from the set
of known enzymes. Namely, our procedure for extending the metabolic network relied on the underlying
assumption that reactions with the same signature are
likely to be processed by similar enzyme sequences [37],
which in turn implies that the ability to catalyze the
putative reaction is already present in the enzyme in the
form of latent promiscuous activity. We have shown in
a previous study [46] that enzyme multispecificity and
promiscuity are properties that can be characterized by
using a molecular signature representation. Thus, those
multiple reactions generated in the EMRS from a nominal parent reaction can be interpreted as promiscuous
activities predicted to be present in the set of known
enzymes. Therefore, as shown in the decision flowchart
in Figure 3, in order to consider a given sequence as a
potential candidate that processes the putative reactions,
a preliminary requirement has been introduced in the
decision chart so that the enzyme should exhibit promiscuous activity based on the estimations performed
by a molecular signature-based predictor (see Methods).
Tensor product

The next step consists of searching for candidate
enzymes to process a given reaction in the EMRS. In
case that no known enzyme sequences were available
for the reaction, candidate enzymes were determined by
a signature-based enzyme-reaction predictor by following the procedure known as the tensor product [51].
We assumed that best candidate enzyme sequences for
a putative reaction were more likely to belong to the list
of sequences known to catalyze reactions that are chemically similar to the given reaction.
Therefore, reactions generated by the enumeration
algorithm in the EMRS were first clustered into groups
of similar reactions by a distance metrics, which was
defined as the Tanimoto similarity of reaction signatures
[52]. The tensor product procedure (see Methods) was
then used in order to locate best enzyme sequence candidates within the reaction cluster.
Enzyme performance

In addition, performance of exogenous enzymes needs
to be evaluated. We have developed a decision tree
learning method to estimate enzyme activity [53] using
kinetics information from the BRENDA database [54]
(turnover rates, Michaelis constant KM , and inhibition
constant K i ). As shown in Figure 3, predictions of
enzyme performance perf(r*, Si) for the list of candidate
enzymes entered into our decision flowchart in order to
score the sequences in Equation 1.

Predicting compound toxicity

Exogenous enzymes inserted in the chassis might catalyze reactions synthesizing new products in the organism. As a side effect, however, intermediate metabolites
involved in the exogenous pathways as well as any other
side product of the new reactions may induce undesired
toxic responses in the cell. Therefore, it is necessary to
consider toxicity effects of the compounds. For this purpose, we have developed a structure-activity relationship
model based on a library of 150 tested compounds covering a wide range of toxicity levels [61]. The model was
built by using several molecular descriptors including
molecular signatures as input descriptors, achieving a
performance of Q2 = 0.68. For any given reaction in the
EMRS, toxicity was given by the sum of the predicted
toxicity for each product, allowing us to identify pathways involving highly toxic metabolites in order to rank
them with lower score.
Special consideration when predicting compound toxicity should be given to those cases when genes encoding

Carbonell et al. BMC Systems Biology 2011, 5:122
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/5/122

for resistance to the compound are going to be engineered as part of the biosynthetic gene cluster. For
instance, when producing an antibiotic in E. coli such as
penicillin, it is necessary to introduce genes that code
for b-lactam resistance in the organism in order to
make bacteria immune to that antibiotic. Therefore, if
resistance to some product is going to be inserted into
the strain, the attenuation effects in toxicity for that
family of compounds has to be updated into the model.
Estimation of nominal fluxes

The insertion of new reactions into the chassis organism
can perturb its metabolic network and therefore the
equilibrium of the steady-state fluxes might be altered
[20]. By using a constraints-based flux analysis on a genome-wide reconstructed metabolic model of the engineered strain, we obtain the solution space within cell’s
capacity. Our objective is to maximize the production of
the desired compound while keeping cell growth. For
each engineered strain, we obtained an estimate of
expected net yield of product, which is not further
metabolized, at the given controlled media conditions.
In addition, flux balance analysis is a flexible analytical
technique that can also be applied in other ways in our
design framework for biosynthetic pathways. For
instance, it can be used in a systematic way in order to
perform a sensitivity analysis to determine production
bottlenecks, where overexpression and gene knockouts
might enhance production for the target compound
[21,22].

Page 8 of 18

two metabolites is approximately the same as the number of possible pathways in metabolic networks of annotated databases such as KEGG [24] or MetaCyc [25],
while lower h values generate more novel reactions and
therefore more possible pathways are formed between
those two metabolites. This result is illustrated for the
case of pathway enumeration between chorismate and
tyrosine in E. coli for different heights h using a reaction
representation at the level of the 3rd digit in the EC
number classification (Figure 4). In general, the possible
number of pathways that can be formed between these
two metabolites increases exponentially with the number
of reaction steps. When values of the molecular signature height are high (h ≥ 6), new reactions are unlikely
to be generated and therefore the number of pathways
becomes the same as the number of pathways available
in KEGG (the reference metabolic database); whereas as
the height h decreases, the number of new reactions
and, thus, the number of pathways starts growing while
getting closer to those results that were obtained in
BNICE by using BEM matrices [33].
In a general setting, the problem of finding the optimal pathway r*(c) in Equation 4 that produces the target compound c is equivalent to finding the shortest
hyperpath in a weighted hypergraph. This problem is
known to be an NP-hard problem [62], although it can
be reduced to a polynomially solvable problem if the
cost function in Equation 3 is reformulated as an additive objective function [62]. In the EMRS approach,

Pathway enumeration and optimal search in the EMRS

Given a biosynthetic pathway r(c) that produces a compound c, we have shown in the previous sections how to
estimate the individual contributions to the cost function (Equation 3). By using the cost function, thus, biosynthetic pathways r(c) can be ranked. However, in
order to rank all viable biosynthetic pathways r(c) for a
compound c of interest, the problem of pathway enumeration needs to be addressed. For this purpose, modeling of the metabolic network in the EMRS was done
by using directed hypergraphs, where reactions are
represented by hyperedges that connect sets of vertices
(the substrates) to disjoint sets of vertices (the products)
[62]. Directed hypergraph formalism, though more complex than simple-graph models, provides a complete
representation of all compounds involved in biochemical
transformations. By using the hypergraph formalism, we
implemented a retrosynthetic algorithm that enumerates
all pathways starting from target compounds of interest.
One main advantage of the pathway enumeration in the
EMRS is that complexity can be controlled by tuning
the atomic height h of the molecular signatures. Higher
values of h imply that the number of pathways between

Figure 4 Controlling the complexity of the pathway
enumeration problem through molecular signatures.
Comparison between pathway length distributions between
tyrosine and chorismate for novel reactions generated by the BEM
representation (BNICE) [33], the EMRS of heights h = 3 to 6, and the
original reactions in the KEGG metabolic database.

Carbonell et al. BMC Systems Biology 2011, 5:122
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/5/122

complexity can be controlled by varying the specificity
of the molecular signature. This flexibility allows us to
follow the strategy of enumerating all biosynthetic pathways r(c) and computing their associated costs W(c, r)
in Equation 3.

Page 9 of 18

Table 2 Native pathway identification in auxotrophic E.
coli
Total

Native
pathways

Alanine

19

7

60.00%

8.59e-08

Arginine

1

1

100.00%

4.65e-02

Validation test for auxotrophic production in E. coli

Asparagine

3

3

100.00%

8.42e-05

A validation test for the ranking score was carried out
by testing its ability to identify native biosynthetic pathways for several essential metabolites (the 20 amino
acids, citrate, ATP, ADP, GTP and GDP) in auxotrophic
strains of E. coli. These strains were rendered unable to
synthesize those essential compounds by inactivation of
the enzymes that natively produce them. We assumed
that native pathways, which have been selectively conserved under evolutionary pressure, are efficient ways to
produce the compounds while keeping cell growth. The
validation, thus, consisted of checking if the pathways
that were ranked at the top of the list correspond to
native pathways. In order to find all possible ways to
synthesize the amino acids, we ran the retrosynthetic
search in these auxotrophic strains. The output results
of the search, which are given in Table 2, provided both
native and alternative pathways connecting the auxotroph to the compounds. The results of this test showed
that in 98% of the cases native pathways were found
within the top 10 ranked pathways for each amino acid.
An additional validation test was performed in order to
evaluate the accuracy of the gene compatibility predictor.
The result of this test, summarized in Table 2, showed
that genes from the full list in the database that were predicted to be the best candidates to be inserted in the auxotroph strains corresponded significantly (p-value <0.05)
to native genes of E. coli. These results are significant
since the sequences under test were not part of the training set used for building the gene compatibility predictor.
In summary, this test showed that the proposed ranking
function can potentially identify heterologous biosynthetic pathways to insert in an organism to produce a
desired compound while selecting the ones that are close
to native pathways in the chassis.

Aspartic acid

7

7

100.00%

6.91e-09

Cysteine

11

5

100.00%

1.32e-07

Glutamic acid

74

53

100.00%

6.41e-52

Glutamine

7

5

100.00%

1.41e-05

Glycine

31

16

80.00%

3.16e-08

The RetroPath webserver

As shown in previous sections, the procedure of pathway selection by retrosynthesis is a complex task that
implies the adoption of several design decisions, some of
them on a case-by-case basis. In order to help on the
decision-making process, we have developed an online
tool: the RetroPath webserver that guides the designer
through the retrosynthesis process. The design starts by
choosing the target compound, which can be given as
an SDF molecular file. Additionally, the user decides the
level of molecular resolution to use in the molecular signature representation. For instance, we have analyzed

Compound

% of natives in best p-value
10

Histidine

4

4

100.00%

4.85e-04

Isoleucine

1

1

100.00%

4.55e-02

Leucine

1

1

100.00%

4.54e-02

Lysine

1

1

100.00%

6.38e-02

107

106

100.00%

1.08e259

4

1

100.00%

6.38e-02

Methionine
Phenylalanine
Proline

1

1

100.00%

2.17e-02

Serine

2

2

100.00%

1.11e-03

Threonine

1

1

100.00%

4.35e-02

Tryptophan

2

2

100.00%

1.89e-03

Tyrosine

2

1

100.00%

1.92e-02

Valine

1

1

100.00%

4.55e-02

Citrate

4

3

100.00%

5.71e-05

ATP

12

6

100.00%

6.73e-06

GTP

2

2

100.00%

2.08-03

ADP

316

204

100.00%

2.89e169

GDP

283

171

100.00%

<1.0e324

Biosynthetic pathways for the 20 amino acids, citrate and ATP/ADP and GTP/
GDP enumerated for E. coli strains where enzymes producing the compounds
have been deleted. For each test, columns correspond to: total number of
enumerated pathways; number of native pathways in the wild-type strain;
percentage of native pathways in the top 10 best ranked pathways; and pvalues for the number of genes in E. coli strains top ranked with respect to
the total enzyme genes in the database.

the set of molecular structures in DrugBank [63] as
initial target compounds. For this set, we found that
more than 50% of reactions producing these compounds
belong to the E. coli EMRS of height h = 6. Furthermore, the distribution of the number of alternative biosynthetic pathways in the compound set follows a power
law, as it is shown in Figure 5, which means that in
some cases there might be thousands of alternative
pathways that have to be ranked according to the ranking function in Equation 3 to search for the optimal
pathway.
In order to illustrate the design process, we next present three examples of heterologous pathway design
using the RetroPath webserver, the production of two b-

Carbonell et al. BMC Systems Biology 2011, 5:122
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/5/122

Figure 5 Retrosynthetic pathways for production of DrugBank
compounds in E. coli. Percentage of compounds in the DrugBank
database with alternative biosynthetic pathways in E. coli.

lactams antibiotics in E. coli (penicillin G and cephalosporin), and of one antitumor drug (taxol) in yeast.
Design examples of retrosynthetic pathways
Production of b-lactams in E. coli

The industrial production of penicillin G occurs via fermentation using the filamentous fungus Penicillium
chrysogenum. A recent study has opened up the possibility of producing penicillin G in an organism that is
used as a producer of pharmaceuticals; the yeast Hansenula polymorpha [64]. Interestingly, the biosynthetic
pathways of penicillin G are shared by another b-lactam
antibiotic, cephalosporin, which is produced in the fungus Acremonium chrysogenum and synthetised from isopenicillin N, the penultimate precursor for penicillin
production [65].
Using the retrosynthetic method that we have developed, retrosynthetic graphs were generated for b-lactam
antibiotics, in particular penicillin and cephalosporin
(Figures 6A,B). The chosen chassis organism was E. coli.
Four different pathways were found at a signature reaction height of h = 4 for penicillin N production and in
particular one involving the nonribosomal peptide
synthetase δ-(L-a-aminoadipyl)-L-cysteinyl-D-valine
synthetase (EC 6.3.2.26) and isopenicillin N synthetase
(EC 1.21.3.1). These pathways are the same as those
that were implemented in the aforementioned studies in
yeast and fungi to produce the isopenicillin N. In the
cephalosporin biosynthesis pathway the isopenicillin N
is converted into penicillin N, itself transformed into
deacetoxycephalosporin. The retrosynthetic maps of

Page 10 of 18

height h = 4 for heterologous production of penicillin N
and deacetoxicephalosporin in E. coli are shown in Figure 6. In the retrosynthetic graph, the enzyme deacetoxycephalosporin-C synthase (EC 1.14.20.1) is the one
responsible of the deacetoxycephalosporin formation.
Table 3 ranks the 6 pathways in the map leading to
penicillin N according to the cost function in Equation
3. Toxicity values for intermediates were predicted by
using our model built from an experimental library of
toxicity values in E. coli while fluxes were estimated
from a reconstructed metabolic model of E. coli, as
described in the Methods section. The optimal pathway
involves five exogenous enzymatic steps, while the alternative pathways involves up to seven steps. In Table 3,
the alternative routes for the production of penicillin N
are generated by the synthesis step of the precursor L-2aminoadipate-6-semialdehyde, where the retrosynthetic
search identified several enzymatic routes that can be
connected to precursors in E. coli.
Production of taxol (paclitaxel) in yeast

Taxol (paclitaxel) is an anticancer drug first isolated
from the Pacific yew tree Taxus brevifolia. Today, taxol
derives largely by semisynthesis from the advanced taxoid 10-deacetylbaccatin III obtained from the European
yew tree Taxus baccata [66]. Currently its production
has a limiting rate as it depends on plant cell processes
as well as chemical and biotechnological semisynthesis
processes. For the past few years, a number of studies
have been contributing to the elucidation of the biosynthetic mechanism of taxol and efforts have been made
in order to attain cost-effective production through heterologous biosynthesis of taxol and its analogues [5].
The retrosynthetic graph for yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) which was computed for a signature height h =
4, (Figure 7), goes from the isopentenyl to taxol and
contains 2 different pathways with 8 and 9 steps, respectively, that share most of the intermediates and only differ at two steps:
1. From isopentenyl (IPP) to taxadien-5a-ol: The
isopentenyl, native to yeast, undergoes 3 reaction
steps to form the taxadien-5a-ol. Those are catalyzed by the geranylgeranyl-diphosphate (GGPP)
synthase (EC 2.5.1.29) that forms the GGPP
(C00353) [67], by the taxadiene synthase (EC
4.2.3.17) that forms taxa-4(5),11(12)diene (C11894)
[68] and finally by the taxadiene 5a hydrolase (EC
1.14.99.37) that forms the taxadien-5a-ol [69]. The
first two reactions have been reportedly implemented in E. coli [5,70] and, furthermore, were subject
to engineering in order to optimize the taxadiene
pathway production [5].
2. From the taxadien-5-a-ol to taxol: From the taxa-4
(20),11(12)-dien-5a-ol two pathways are possible,

Carbonell et al. BMC Systems Biology 2011, 5:122
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/5/122

Page 11 of 18

Figure 6 Retrosynthetic maps for the production in E. coli of A) penicillin G and B) cephalosporin. Compounds in gray are endogenous
to the chassis organism (E. coli); enzymatic reactions are represented as circles; branching compounds, which can be produced by more than
one biochemical transformation, are (S)-2,3,4,5-tetrahydropyridine-2-carboxylate, L-2-aminoadipate-6-semialdehyde; the target compound is at the
bottom of the plot.

producing either taxa-4(20),11(12)-dien-5a,13a-diol
by the taxane 13a hydrolase (EC 1.14.13.77) or the
taxa-4(20),11(12)-dien-5a-yl acetate by the taxadien5a-O-acetyl transferase [71]. Taxane 10b hydroxylase
(EC 1.14.13.76) is producing the taxa-4(20),11(12)-dien5a,10b-diol 5 acetate [72]. This part of the pathway
was implemented in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae
[73]. The next steps described successively the

formation of 10-deacetyl-2-debenzoylbaccatin III
(C11899), the 10-deacetylbaccatin III (C11700) catalyzed by taxane 2a-O-benzoyltransferase (EC
2.3.1.166), and the Baccatin III catalyzed by taxane 2aO-benzoyltransferase [74] to finally form the taxol.
Table 4 ranks the 2 retrosynthetic pathways in yeast
leading to taxol production according to the cost

Carbonell et al. BMC Systems Biology 2011, 5:122
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/5/122

Page 12 of 18

Table 3 Ranked pathways for biosynthesis of Penicillin N
in E. coli
EC
number

product

cost
(toxicity)

r1

r2

r3

r4

r5

r6

5.1.1.17

C06564

1.17 (2.63)

X

X

X

X

X

X

1.21.3.1

C05557

0.81 (2.94)

X

X

X

X

X

X

6.3.2.26

C05556

2.05 (0.87)

X

X

X

X

X

X

1.2.1.31

C00956

1.09 (0.13)

X

X

X

X

X

X

2.6.1.36

C04076

0.74 (0.72)

X

-

-

-

-

-

1.4.3.20

C04076

1.13 (0.72)

-

-

-

X

-

-

2.6.1.71

C04076

1.34 (0.72)

-

-

X

-

-

-

1.4.1.18

C04076

1.54 (0.72)

-

X

-

-

X

X
X

1.5.3.7

C00450

4.94 (0.91)

-

-

-

-

-

1.5.99.3

C00450

5.30 (0.91)

-

-

-

-

X

-

1.4.1.18*

C00408

1.43 (0.93)

-

-

-

-

X

X

vc(r)

6.56 6.53 6.55 5.55 5.56

W(r)

9.33 9.67 9.93 9.74 12.52 16.52

5.55

Each row corresponds to the insertion of one enzyme in the pathway in order
to produce the given intermediate product in the second column. The
estimated cost and product toxicity are given in the third column. The last
two rows provide the estimate of maximum flux vc(r) for the pathway, and
the total cost W(r) according to Equation 3. C06564: Penicillin N; C05557:
Isopenicillin; C05556: δ-(L-a-Aminoadipyl)-L-cysteinyl-D-valine; C00956: L-2Aminoadipate; C04076: L-2-Aminoadipate-6-semialdehyde; C00450: (S)-2,3,4,5Tetrahydropyridine-2-carboxylate; C00408: L-Pipecolate. Starred EC numbers
correspond to putative enzymes.

function in Equation 3. In this example, toxicity of intermediates was not considered in the ranking (ltox = 0)
and therefore the optimal weighting terms in Equation 3
were taken accordingly (see details in Methods). The
two alternative routes are given by the way the precursor 10-deacetyl-2-debenzoylbaccatin is produced. The
optimal pathway involves 8 exogenous enzymes, while
the alternative one involves 9 enzymes.

Conclusions
We presented in this work an automated protocol to
assist synthetic biologists and metabolic engineers in the
design and insertion of efficient heterologous biosynthetic metabolic pathways in chassis organisms. Our
method is based on the retrosynthesis algorithm, an idea
borrowed from the allied field of synthetic chemistry. In
order to perform this analysis in metabolic networks, we
used the molecular signature descriptor, a 2D representation of molecular graphs that provides a characterization of compounds and reactions in the network.
Molecular signatures provide a homogeneous way to
represent through hypergraphs the set of chemical species and transformations present in cell’s metabolism.
The representation in the molecular signature space is
also an efficient way to measure chemical similarity

Figure 7 Retrosynthetic map for the production of paclitaxel
(taxol) in yeast. Compounds in gray are endogenous to the chassis
organism (S. cerevisiae); enzymatic reactions are represented as
circles; 10-deactyl-2-debenzoylbaccatin III appears as a branching
compound; the target compound is at the bottom of the plot.

Carbonell et al. BMC Systems Biology 2011, 5:122
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/5/122

Page 13 of 18

Table 4 Ranked pathways for biosynthesis of taxol in S.
cerevisiae
EC number

product

cost

r1

r2

2.3.1.- *

C07394

1.34

X

X

2.3.1.167

C11900

1.17

X

X

2.3.1.166

C11700

1.07

X

X

1.14.14.1*

C11899

1.78

X

X

1.14.13.76

C11898

5.64

-

X

1.14.13.77

C11897

5.62

X

-

2.3.1.162

C11896

1.06

-

X

1.14.99.37

C11895

5.62

X

X

4.2.3.17

C11894

1.28

X

X

2.5.1.29

C00353

0.69

X

X

vc(r)

0.094

0.093

W(r)

18.64

19.72

Each row corresponds to the insertion of one enzyme in the pathway in order
to produce the given intermediate product in the second column. The
estimated cost is given in the third column 3. The last two rows provide the
estimate of maximum flux vc(r) for the pathway, and the total cost W(r)
according to Equation 3. C07394: Paclitaxel; C11900: Baccatin; C11700: 10Deacetylbaccatin; C11899: 10-Deacetyl-2-debenzoylbaccatin; C11898: Taxa-4
(20),11(12)-dien-5a-acetoxy-10b-ol; C11897: Taxa-4(20),11(12)-dien-5a,13a-diol;
C11896: Taxa-4(20),11(12)-dien-5a-yl; C11895: Taxa-4(20),11(12)-dien-5a-ol;
C11894: Taxa-4(5),11(12)-diene; C00353: Geranylgeranyl. Starred EC numbers
correspond to putative enzymes.

between compounds and reactions. We use this framework to develop an algorithm to generate putative novel
reactions between compounds in the network, leading
to the extended metabolic reaction space (EMRS). The
algorithm consists of searching for all combinations of
compounds with the same signature as known metabolic
reactions.
In order to explore new biosynthetic pathways for
compounds, we implemented a retrosynthetic algorithm
in the EMRS to build the map of all reachable compounds from the chassis organism through biochemical
transformations. The complexity of the retrosynthetic
search, a problem that has been limiting so far the
adoption of the retrosynthetic approach into the manufacturing pipeline, has been efficiently addressed in our
method through the atomic height h of the molecular
signature. As h increases, the number of possible pathways converges to the annotated pathways in metabolic
databases. Lowering h, in turn, leads progressively to a
combinatorial explosion with multiple alternative pathways containing putative reactions, as the ones obtained
in the bond-electron and atom tracking models of the
metabolic graph.
The retrosynthetic map contains both annotated and
putative reactions catalyzed by identified exogenous
enzymes, providing several alternative pathways leading
to the target compound. We associated a cost of insertion to each pathway based on several criteria such as
gene insertion cost, expression levels, enzyme efficiency

and nominal fluxes. Furthermore, an algorithm similar
to the shortest pathway search has been implemented in
order to rank all possible pathways. We showed that the
distribution of alternative biosynthetic pathways for E.
coli in the list of compounds of medicinal interest in
DrugBank follows a power law, being in some cases in
the order of thousands. Therefore, it is necessary to
implement an efficient ranking function as the one presented here in order to select the best heterologous
pathways to insert in the chassis organism. For instance,
we applied the retrosynthetic algorithm in order to
search for heterologous biosynthetic pathways for two
compounds in DrugBank: penicillin N and taxol. In
both cases, several alternative pathways for bioproduction were found. The identified pathways contained
both known biochemical transformations previously
reported as well as other alternative pathways. In order
to select the best combinations to engineer, pathways
were ranked according to several cost factors such as
number of inserted enzymes, gene compatibility, toxicity, and nominal fluxes. The individual contribution of
these factors to the ranking function was optimally
adjusted so that native pathways were ranked first with
respect to predicted pathways. Our multi-criteria
approach can be easily tuned depending on the data
available for organisms, as it was illustrated by the optimal adjustment of the weighting parameters for different
combinations of factors. The ability of the ranking function to identify native pathways was tested and validated
in the case of biosynthetic pathways of several essential
metabolites (amino acids, citrate, ATP/ADP, GTP/GDP)
in auxotrophic strains of E. coli. In this test, native
enzymes were correctly ranked by means of our methodology at the top of the enumerated biosynthetic
pathways.
Even though our methodology searches for enzymes
providing the best performance for the overall process,
we might be interested in some cases in increasing the
efficiency levels for some of the promiscuous reactions
involved in the pathway due to their poor performance,
a rate-limiting factor in the production of the target
compound. In that case, it would be necessary to introduce mutations in order to re-engineer enzyme variants
with detectable levels of the desired catalytic activity.
Using protein molecular signatures and kernel methods,
we already proposed a methodology to search for promiscuity hot-spot residues in the enzyme sequence and
outlined a method to find variants with enhanced promiscuity levels [46], which might be applicable in this
case. Therefore, this work provides a full biosynthetic
automated pipeline for the design and production of
therapeutics and other compounds in flexible ondemand cell factories. Going beyond classical metabolic
engineering, our synthetic biology approach meets the

Carbonell et al. BMC Systems Biology 2011, 5:122
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/5/122

Page 14 of 18

expected requirements of reusability and modularity that
will become integral part of next generation biosynthetic
devices.

Methods
Definitions
Atomic signature

Let G = (V, E) be a molecular graph, where vertices V
correspond to atoms, and edges E to bonds. An atomic
signature is a canonical representation of the subgraph
of G surrounding a particular atom x Î V . This subgraph includes all atoms and bonds up to a predefined
distance from the given atom, the signature height h.
Molecular signature

The molecular signature is a vector whose components
are represented in the space defined by a basis formed
by atomic signatures. Initially developed for chemicals
[39], the signature molecular descriptor was later
extended to protein sequences [37,75]. Each component
of a molecular signature counts the number of occurrences of a particular atomic signature in the molecule.
If G = (V, E) is a molecular graph, where vertices V correspond to atoms, and edges E to bonds, then the molecular signature of G is given by:
h

σ (G) =

h

σ (xi )

(5)

x∈V

where h s(x) is the atomic signature of G rooted at
atom xi of height h.
Reaction signature

We assume that enzymatic reactions take the general
form: r : s1S1 + ... + snSn ® p1P1 + ... + pmPm , where si
and pj are the stoichiometric coefficients of substrates Si
and products Pj. The signature of reaction R of height h
is defined by the vector:
⎛
⎞
h

σ (r) = ⎝

si h σ (Si )⎠

pi h σ (Pi ) −
Pi ∈r

(6)

Si ∈r

Metabolic reaction space

In a metabolic network, the reaction space R is formed
by the set of reactions r in the network, which are
defined as ordered pairs of substrates s Î C and products p Î C belonging to the metabolite space C:
r = {s} , p

(7)

Metabolic reaction signature space

The signature reaction space hs(R) of height h is given
by mapping of the set of metabolic reactions r Î R into
signature reactions h s(r) according to Equation 7.
Extended metabolic reaction space (EMRS). The

extended metabolic reaction space generated by signatures of height h, hs -1(R), corresponds to the inverse
mapping from the signature space into the reaction
space. Since the projection of R into the signature space
h
s (R) involves some degeneracy, the regeneration of the
metabolic map creates new putative reactions consisting
of combinations of substrates and products that verify
the reaction signatures in addition to the nominal ones:
R → h σ (R) → h σ −1 (R)

(8)

Reaction chemical similarity

We define a measure of chemical similarity in the signature space between reaction signatures of height h by
using the Tanimoto similarity coefficient:
h

s(ri , rj ) =

|h σ (ri ) · h σ (rj )|
|h σ (ri )|2 + |h σ (rj )|2 − |h σ (ri ) · h σ (rj )|

(9)

where operations are applied into the vector space
determined by the net difference of the signatures of
products and substrates (Equation 7).
This similarity measure focus on the reaction centers
that define the chemical transformation rather than on
the full atomic structure. As the height h is increased
up to the maximum diameter of the graph or canonical
signature, the similarity measure extends further up to
the rest of the molecular structure. By definition, two
reactions r and r* that share the same signature up to
some height h possess identical signatures up to that
molecular resolution h:
h

s(r, r ∗ ) = 1,

h = 1 . . . arg max h σ (r) = h σ (r ∗ )
h

(10)

Exogenous biosynthetic pathway

An exogenous biosynthetic pathway r Î r(c) for a target
compound c Î C is defined as a collection of reactions
{r1, r2, ..., rn} in the EMRS that connects metabolites in
the chassis organism to the product c through biochemical transformations.
Ranking terms

Reaction thermodynamic feasibility was computed
through the estimation of Gibbs energy of the reaction
by using a group contribution approach [43,50]. This
method considers the Gibbs energy of each metabolite
species as the sum of the contributions of their constituents structural subgroups, estimated by linear regression from experimental data. We used the dataset
given in [43] in order to compute metabolite Gibbs
energy, whereas the reaction Gibbs energy is computed
as the energetic balance between its products and substrates:

Carbonell et al. BMC Systems Biology 2011, 5:122
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/5/122

Gr =

ni Gi

Page 15 of 18

(11)

i∈r

where ni is the stoichiometric coefficient of each species, and ΔGi their estimated Gibbs energy.
Enzyme promiscuity was estimated by a support vector machine that was trained from the string or k-mer
spectra [76] of enzyme sequences ks(S) in KEGG [24] as
inputs by defining the following kernel function:
k

K(Si , Sj ) = k σ (Si )k σ (Sj )

(12)

Enzyme promiscuity in the training set was defined by
comparing the chemical similarity of reactions catalyzed
by the enzyme sequence S, as in [46]:
h

s(ri , rj )
h s(r , r )
i j

= 0 non - promiscuous
> 0 promiscuous

i, j ∈ S (13)

Reaction clustering of the reaction signature space
was performed by a hierarchical agglomerative algorithm
using as distance metrics the chemical dissimilarity
between reactions d(ri, rj):
h

d(ri , rj ) = 1 − h s(ri , rj )

(14)

The optimal partition of the reaction signature space
into Ci, i = 1...n clusters was determined by the maximum average silhouette [77].
Enzyme-metabolite interaction prediction was computed within a given signature reaction space cluster by
using a kernel approach known as tensor product [51].
For each reaction cluster, a training set was built consisting of pairs of known enzyme sequences and reactions annotated in KEGG. This dataset was used in
order to train a support vector machine defined by the
following kernel function:
k,h

K((Si , ri ), (Sj , rj )) = k K(Si , Sj ) · h K(ri , rj )

(15)

where kK(Si, Sj) is the sequence string kernel defined
in Equation 12 and h k(r i , r j ) is given by the reaction
similarity matrix computed by using the reaction chemical similarity s(r i, r j) defined in Equation 14. Enzyme
performance was estimated through a decision tree
algorithm implemented for each reaction cluster, as in
[53]. Performance data were based on the experimental
kinetic constants kcat and KM provided by the BRENDA
database [54]. Input features consisted of chemical
descriptors of substrates and products in reactions and
protein sequence descriptors.
Gene compatibility

Sequence descriptors were computed from the EMBOSS
package of sequence analysis [78]. Phylogenetic distance
between the source organism and chassis organism was
computed from KEGG taxonomy. These descriptors

were computed for the entire KEGG database of nonredundant enzyme sequences and then used to train
support vector machine-based predictors for the chassis
organisms of interest (E. coli and yeast). The training set
consisted of a balanced positive set, formed by the list
of sequences in the chassis strains, and a negative set
formed by sequences selected randomly from the list of
organisms other than the chassis. In the model of E.
coli, we found that the average score for positive hits
had a z-score = 6.12 (p-value = 9.56e-10) for a positive
set of 24,894 sequences in E. coli strains among the
total set of 681,518 sequences. We used this predictor
in order to rank the annotated genes for a given enzyme
class, where a p-value was associated to each predicted
gene by computing the probability of ranking that gene
in the given percentile if it were picked at random from
the list of genes.
Compound toxicity in the chassis organism E. coli
was estimated through a partial least squares structureactivity relationship model implemented from an inhouse database for E. coli of 150 compounds with
experimentally determined IC50 (half maximal inhibitory concentration). Input descriptors of the model are
given by the following molecular descriptors: molecular
weight; solubility; average bond length; partition coefficient; molecular surface; and molecular signatures of the
compounds.
Nominal fluxes v were predicted by using a reconstructed metabolic model of E. coli [79] and yeast [80]
in the COBRA toolbox [81]. For a given target compound c Î C and a putative exogenous biosynthetic
pathway r, an augmented model of the metabolic phenotype of the engineered strain was built from the reference model. The nominal flux of the desired compound
vc(r) in the augmented model was obtained through linear programming optimization of the stoichiometric
mass balance subject to the following constraints:
Maximize
Subject to

f (vc (ρ), Z)
S·v= 0
α ≤ vi ≤ β

(16)

where S is the stoichiometric matrix, Z is the objective
function of maximizing the biomass formation (growth)
rate, f (v c (r), Z) is a definite positive function that
monotonically increases with both vc(r) and Z, and a, b
are the model flux constraints [79]. The chosen objective function in Equation 16 was f (vc(r), Z) = vc(r) · Z,
although in general other objectives might be possible
as well (see for instance in [82]).
Parameter optimization

Weighting parameters (lflux, lpath, ltox) in the cost
function given by Equation 3 are adjusted by optimization. The chosen criteria is that pathways that are fully

Carbonell et al. BMC Systems Biology 2011, 5:122
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/5/122

Page 16 of 18

annotated in KEGG should be ranked first with respect
to other pathways based solely on predictions. Our
approach is similar to the one proposed in [38],
although the main difference here is that we optimize
the three parameters simultaneously for all metabolites
in KEGG by using an estimate of ranking accuracy for
each pathway within the full set of enumerated pathways
in the EMRS. For a pathway r Î r (c) producing a given
compound c, we define its ranking accuracy as:
yρ =

nTP (ρ) + nTN (ρ)
|ρ(c)|

(17)

where n TP are the number of pathways of r (c) in
KEGG that are ranked at the same or higher score than
r, nTN are the number of pathways of r(c) not in KEGG
which are ranked below r, and |r(c)| are the total number of pathways producing c.
The objective is to maximize the overall aggregate
sum of yr extended to the list of enumerated pathways
in the EMRS:
Maximize
λpath , λtox , λflux
Subject to

c∈C

ρ∈ρ(c) yρ

λpath , λtox , λflux

λpath , λtox , λflux > 0

(18)

For the ranking optimization problem, parameters
(lpath, ltox, lflux) are not independent since a simultaneous increase of the same magnitude in the three
parameters would leave the ranking unchanged. Therefore, in order to solve the problem, we need to fix at
least the value of one of the parameters, for instance
taking lpath = 1.0 and ωp = ωe = 1. We give three possible solutions depending whether both toxicity and
fluxes estimates are available or only one of them (see
parameter variations in Additional file 1 Figures S1, S2
and S3): without considering fluxes (lflux = 0.0), the
optimal value for the toxicity parameter was
λ∗ = 0.575; without considering toxicity (λ∗ = 0.0),
tox
tox
the optimal value for the flux parameter was
λ∗
flux = 0.800; finally considering both toxicity and
fluxes, the optimal values were obtained at
λ∗ = 0.398, λ∗ = 0.398.
tox
tox

Additional material
Additional file 1: Pathway ranking accuracies for different values of
parameters (ltox, lflux). Figure S1 plots pathway ranking accuracy for
different values of parameter ltox without considering fluxes (lflux =
0); optimal value is obtained for λ∗
tox = 0.575. Figure S2 plots
pathway ranking accuracy for different values of parameter lflux
without considering toxicity (ltox = 0); optimal value is obtained for
λ∗
flux = 0.800. Figure S3 plots pathway ranking accuracy for
different values of parameters (ltox, lflux); optimal values are
∗
(λ∗
flux = 0.025, λtox = 0.398).

Acknowledgements
The authors want to acknowledge the assistance of Fred Green in the
computation of the flux balance analysis for the given examples and proofreading the manuscript. The authors want to thank Ioana Grigoras who
reviewed an early version of the manuscript. Funding: Genopole® through
an ATIGE grant; ANR chair of excellence. Conflict of Interest: none declared.
Authors’ contributions
JLF designed the retrosynthesis overall process. PC designed the
experiments and pathway ranking strategy, collected the results, and wrote
parts of the software. AGP designed and carried out the toxicity
experiments, participated in the design of the pathway ranking strategy, and
analyzed the retrosynthetic examples. DF developed the algorithms. PC,
AGP, DF, and JLF wrote the manuscript. All authors read and approved the
final manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 18 April 2011 Accepted: 5 August 2011
Published: 5 August 2011
References
1. Elowitz M, Lim WA: Build life to understand it. Nature 2010,
468(7326):889-890.
2. Keasling JD: Manufacturing Molecules Through Metabolic Engineering.
Science 2010, 330(6009):1355-1358.
3. Khalil AS, Collins JJ: Synthetic biology: applications come of age. Nat Rev
Genet 2010, 11(5):367-379.
4. Ro DK, Paradise EM, Ouellet M, Fisher KJ, Newman KL, Ndungu JM, Ho KA,
Eachus RA, Ham TS, Kirby J, Chang MCY, Withers ST, Shiba Y, Sarpong R,
Keasling JD: Production of the antimalarial drug precursor artemisinic
acid in engineered yeast. Nature 2006, 440(7086):940-943.
5. Ajikumar PK, Xiao WH, Tyo KEJ, Wang Y, Simeon F, Leonard E, Mucha O,
Phon TH, Pfeifer B, Stephanopoulos G: Isoprenoid Pathway Optimization
for Taxol Precursor Overproduction in Escherichia coli. Science 2010,
330(6000):70-74.
6. Minami H, Kim JS, Ikezawa N, Takemura T, Katayama T, Kumagai H, Sato F:
Microbial production of plant benzylisoquinoline alkaloids. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2008, 105(21):7393-7398.
7. Fowler ZL, Gikandi WW, Koffas MAG: Increased Malonyl Coenzyme A
Biosynthesis by Tuning the Escherichia coli Metabolic Network and Its
Application to Flavanone Production. Appl Environ Microbiol 2009,
75(18):5831-5839.
8. Hwang EI, Kaneko M, Ohnishi Y, Horinouchi S: Production of Plant-Specific
Flavanones by Escherichia coli Containing an Artificial Gene Cluster. Appl
Environ Microbiol 2003, 69(5):2699-2706.
9. Kurumbang NP, Park JW, Yoon YJ, Liou K, Sohng JK: Heterologous
production of ribostamycin derivatives in engineered Escherichia coli.
Res Microbiol 2010, 161(7):526-533.
10. Watanabe K, Rude MA, Walsh CT, Khosla C: Engineered biosynthesis of an
ansamycin polyketide precursor in Escherichia coli. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 2003, 100(17):9774-9778.
11. Peiru S, Menzella HG, Rodriguez E, Carney J, Gramajo H: Production of the
Potent Antibacterial Polyketide Erythromycin C in Escherichia coli. Appl
Environ Microbiol 2005, 71(5):2539-2547.
12. Watanabe K, Oguri H, Oikawa H: Diversification of echinomycin molecular
structure by way of chemoenzymatic synthesis and heterologous
expression of the engineered echinomycin biosynthetic pathway. Curr
Opin Chem Biol 2009, 13(2):189-196.
13. Soo VWC, Hanson-Manful P, Patrick WM: Artificial gene amplification
reveals an abundance of promiscuous resistance determinants in
Escherichia coli. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2011, 108(4):1484-1489.
14. Menzella H, Reeves C: Combinatorial biosynthesis for drug development.
Curr Opin Microbiol 2007, 10(3):238-245.
15. Menzella HG, Reid R, Carney JR, Chandran SS, Reisinger SJ, Patel KG,
Hopwood DA, Santi DV: Combinatorial polyketide biosynthesis by de
novo design and rearrangement of modular polyketide synthase genes.
Nat Biotechnol 2005, 23(9):1171-1176.

Carbonell et al. BMC Systems Biology 2011, 5:122
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/5/122

16. Kim HU, Kim TY, Lee SY: Metabolic flux analysis and metabolic
engineering of microorganisms. Mol BioSyst 2008, 4(2):113-120.
17. Lacroix V, Cottret L, Thébault P, Sagot MFF: An introduction to metabolic
networks and their structural analysis. IEEE/ACM Trans Comp Biol Bioinfo
2008, 5(4):594-617.
18. Cottret L, Vieira Milreu P, Acuña V, Marchetti-Spaccamela A, Viduani
Martinez F, Sagot MF, Stougie L: Enumerating Precursor Sets of Target
Metabolites in a Metabolic Network. In Algorithms in Bioinformatics,
Volume 5251 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Edited by: Crandall K,
Lagergren J. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin/Heidelberg; 2008:233-244.
19. Mithani A, Preston GM, Hein J: Rahnuma: hypergraph-based tool for
metabolic pathway prediction and network comparison. Bioinformatics
2009, 25(14):1831-1832.
20. Oberhardt MA, Palsson BO, Papin JA: Applications of genome-scale
metabolic reconstructions. Mol Syst Biol 2009, 5.
21. Segrè D, Vitkup D, Church GM: Analysis of optimality in natural and
perturbed metabolic networks. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2002,
99(23):15112-15117.
22. Burgard AP, Pharkya P, Maranas CD: Optknock: A bilevel programming
framework for identifying gene knockout strategies for microbial strain
optimization. Biotechnol Bioeng 2003, 84(6):647-657.
23. Hoops S, Sahle S, Gauges R, Lee C, Pahle J, Simus N, Singhal M, Xu L,
Mendes P, Kummer U: COPASI-a COmplex PAthway SImulator.
Bioinformatics 2006, 22(24):3067-3074.
24. Kanehisa M, Araki M, Goto S, Hattori M, Hirakawa M, Itoh M, Katayama T,
Kawashima S, Okuda S, Tokimatsu T, Yamanishi Y: KEGG for linking
genomes to life and the environment. Nucleic Acids Res 2008, , 36
Database: D480-484.
25. Caspi R, Altman T, Dale JM, Dreher K, Fulcher CA, Gilham F, Kaipa P,
Karthikeyan AS, Kothari A, Krummenacker M, Latendresse M, Mueller LA,
Paley S, Popescu L, Pujar A, Shearer AG, Zhang P, Karp PD: The MetaCyc
database of metabolic pathways and enzymes and the BioCyc collection
of pathway/genome databases. Nucleic Acids Res 2010, 38(suppl 1):
D473-D479.
26. Arita M: Metabolic reconstruction using shortest paths. Simulation Practice
and Theory 2000, 8(1-2):109-125.
27. Rahman SA, Advani P, Schunk R, Schrader R, Schomburg D: Metabolic
pathway analysis web service (Pathway Hunter Tool at CUBIC).
Bioinformatics 2005, 21(7):1189-1193.
28. Blum T, Kohlbacher O: MetaRoute: fast search for relevant metabolic
routes for interactive network navigation and visualization. Bioinformatics
2008, 24(18):2108-2109.
29. Heath AP, Bennett GN, Kavraki LE: Finding metabolic pathways using
atom tracking. Bioinformatics 2010, 26(12):1548-1555.
30. Paley SM, Karp PD: Evaluation of computational metabolic-pathway
predictions for Helicobacter pylori. Bioinformatics 2002, 18(5):715-724.
31. Dale J, Popescu L, Karp P: Machine learning methods for metabolic
pathway prediction. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:15+.
32. Law J, Zsoldos Z, Simon A, Reid D, Liu Y, Khew SY, Johnson AP, Major S,
Wade RA, Ando HY: Route Designer: A Retrosynthetic Analysis Tool
Utilizing Automated Retrosynthetic Rule Generation. J Chem Inf Model
2009, 49(3):593-602.
33. Hatzimanikatis V, Li C, Ionita JA, Henry CS, Jankowski MD, Broadbelt LJ:
Exploring the diversity of complex metabolic networks. Bioinformatics
2005, 21(8):1603-1609.
34. Ugi I, Bauer J, Brandt J, Friederich J, Gasteiger J, Jochum C, Schubert W:
New applications of computers in chemistry. Angewandte Chemie 1979,
18(2):111-123.
35. Tipton K, Boyce S: History of the enzyme nomenclature system.
Bioinformatics 2000, 16:34-40.
36. Leber M, Egelhofer V, Schomburg I, Schomburg D: Automatic assignment
of reaction operators to enzymatic reactions. Bioinformatics 2009,
25(23):3135-3142.
37. Faulon JL, Misra M, Martin S, Sale K, Sapra R: Genome scale enzymemetabolite and drug-target interaction predictions using the signature
molecular descriptor. Bioinformatics 2008, 24(2):225-233.
38. Cho A, Yun H, Park J, Lee S, Park S: Prediction of novel synthetic
pathways for the production of desired chemicals. BMC Syst Biol 2010,
4:35+.

Page 17 of 18

39. Faulon JLL, Collins MJ, Carr RD: The signature molecular descriptor. 4.
Canonizing molecules using extended valence sequences. J Chem Infor
Comp Sci 2004, 44(2):427-436.
40. Faulon JL, Carbonell P: Reaction Network Generation. In Handbook of
Chemoinformatics Algorithms.. 1 edition. Edited by: Faulon JL, Bender A.
Boca Raton, FL, USA: Chapman and Hall/CRC; 2010:317-342.
41. McShan D, Shah I: Heurstic search for metabolic engineering: de novo
synthesis of vanillin. Comp & Chem Eng 2005, 29(3):499-507.
42. Mavrovouniotis ML: Estimation of standard Gibbs energy changes of
biotransformations. J Biol Chem 1991, 266(22):14440-14445.
43. Jankowski MD, Henry CS, Broadbelt LJ, Hatzimanikatis V: Group
Contribution Method for Thermodynamic Analysis of Complex Metabolic
Networks. Biophys J 2008, 95(3):1487-1499.
44. Rodrigo G, Carrera J, Prather KJ, Jaramillo A: DESHARKY: automatic design
of metabolic pathways for optimal cell growth. Bioinformatics 2008,
24(21):2554-2556.
45. Chen Z, Wilmanns M, Zeng AP: Structural synthetic biotechnology: from
molecular structure to predictable design for industrial strain
development. Trends Biotechnol 2010, 28(10):534-542.
46. Carbonell P, Faulon JLL: Molecular signatures-based prediction of enzyme
promiscuity. Bioinformatics 2010, 26(16):2012-2019.
47. Wexler P: The U.S. National Library of Medicine’s Toxicology and
Environmental Health Information Program. Toxicology 2004, 198(13):161-168.
48. Harder A, Escher BI, Schwarzenbach RP: Applicability and Limitation of
QSARs for the Toxicity of Electrophilic Chemicals. Environ SciTech 2003,
37(21):4955-4961.
49. Khersonsky O, Tawfik DS: Enzyme Promiscuity: A Mechanistic and
Evolutionary Perspective. Annu Rev Biochem 2010, 79:471-505.
50. Fleming RMT, Thiele I, Nasheuer HP: Quantitative assignment of reaction
directionality in constraint-based models of metabolism: Application to
Escherichia coli. Biophys Chem 2009, 145(2-3):47-56.
51. Martin S, Brown MM, Faulon JLL: Using product kernels to predict protein
interactions. Adv Biochem Eng Biotechnol 2008, 110:215-245.
52. Gasteiger J, Engel T, (Eds): Chemoinformatics: A Textbook. 1 edition. WileyVCH; 2003.
53. Sarnowski C, Carbonell P, Elati M, Faulon JL: Prediction of catalytic
efficiency to discover new enzymatic activities. Proc. of the Fourth
International Workshop on Machine Learning in Systems Biology 2010,
153-156.
54. Chang A, Scheer M, Grote A, Schomburg I, Schomburg D: BRENDA,
AMENDA and FRENDA the enzyme information system: new content
and tools in 2009. Nucleic Acids Res 2009, , 37 Database: gkn820+.
55. Welch M, Villalobos A, Gustafsson C, Minshull J: Designing genes for
successful protein expression. Methods Enzymol 2011, 498:43-66.
56. Alper H, Fischer C, Nevoigt E, Stephanopoulos G: Tuning genetic control
through promoter engineering. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005,
102(36):12678-12683.
57. Chemler J, Koffas M: Metabolic engineering for plant natural product
biosynthesis in microbes. Curr Opin Biotechnol 2008, 19(6):597-605.
58. Boghigian B, Pfeifer B: Current status, strategies, and potential for the
metabolic engineering of heterologous polyketides in Escherichia coli.
Biotechnology Letters 2008, 30(8):1323-1330.
59. Watanabe K, Hotta K, Praseuth AP, Koketsu K, Migita A, Boddy CN,
Wang CCC, Oguri H, Oikawa H: Total biosynthesis of antitumor
nonribosomal peptides in Escherichia coli. Nat Chem Biol 2006,
2(8):423-428.
60. Nguyen KT, Ritz D, Gu JQQ, Alexander D, Chu M, Miao V, Brian P, Baltz RH:
Combinatorial biosynthesis of novel antibiotics related to daptomycin.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006, 103(46):17462-17467.
61. Planson AG, Carbonell P, Paillard E, Pollet N, Faulon JL: Compound toxicity
screening and structure-activity relationship modeling in Escherichia
coli. 2011.
62. Klamt S, Haus UU, Theis F: Hypergraphs and Cellular Networks. PLoS
Comput Biol 2009, 5(5):e1000385+.
63. Knox C, Law V, Jewison T, Liu P, Ly S, Frolkis A, Pon A, Banco K, Mak C,
Neveu V, Djoumbou Y, Eisner R, Guo ACC, Wishart DS: DrugBank 3.0: a
comprehensive resource for ‘omics’ research on drugs. Nucleic Acids Res
2011, , 39 Database: D1035-D1041.

Carbonell et al. BMC Systems Biology 2011, 5:122
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/5/122

Page 18 of 18

64. Gidijala L, Kiel JAKW, Douma RD, Seifar RM, van Gulik WM, Bovenberg RAL,
Veenhuis M, van der Klei IJ: An Engineered Yeast Efficiently Secreting
Penicillin. PLoS ONE 2009, 4(12):e8317+.
65. Ullán RV, Casqueiro J, Bañuelos O, Fernández FJ, Gutiérrez S, Martin JF: A
Novel Epimerization System in Fungal Secondary Metabolism Involved
in the Conversion of Isopenicillin N into Penicillin N inAcremonium
chrysogenum. J Biol Chem 2002, 277(48):46216-46225.
66. Frense D: Taxanes: perspectives for biotechnological production. Appl
Microbiol Biotechnol 2007, 73(6):1233-1240.
67. Hefner J, Ketchum RE, Croteau R: Cloning and functional expression of a
cDNA encoding geranylgeranyl diphosphate synthase from Taxus
canadensis and assessment of the role of this prenyltransferase in cells
induced for taxol production. Arch Biochem Biophys 1998, 360:62-74.
68. Wildung MR, Croteau R: A cDNA Clone for Taxadiene Synthase, the
Diterpene Cyclase That Catalyzes the Committed Step of Taxol
Biosynthesis. J Biol Chem 1996, 271(16):9201-9204.
69. Hefner J, Rubenstein SM, Ketchum RE, Gibson DM, Williams RM, Croteau R:
Cytochrome P450-catalyzed hydroxylation of taxa-4(5),11(12)-diene to
taxa-4(20),11(12)-dien-5alpha-ol: the first oxygenation step in taxol
biosynthesis. Chem Biol 1996, 3(6):479-489.
70. Huang KX, Huang QL, Wildung MR, Croteau R, Scott AI: Overproduction, in
Escherichia coli, of soluble taxadiene synthase, a key enzyme in the
Taxol biosynthetic pathway. Protein Expression and Purification 1998,
13:90-96.
71. Jennewein S, Rithner CD, Williams RM, Croteau RB: Taxol biosynthesis:
taxane 13 alpha-hydroxylase is a cytochrome P450-dependent
monooxygenase. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2001, 98(24):13595-13600.
72. Schoendorf A, Rithner CD, Williams RM, Croteau RB: Molecular cloning of a
cytochrome P450 taxane 10 beta-hydroxylase cDNA from Taxus and
functional expression in yeast. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2001,
98(4):1501-1506.
73. Dejong JM, Liu Y, Bollon AP, Long RM, Jennewein S, Williams D, Croteau RB:
Genetic engineering of taxol biosynthetic genes in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. Biotechnol Bioeng 2006, 93(2):212-224.
74. Walker K, Croteau R: Molecular cloning of a 10-deacetylbaccatin III-10-Oacetyl transferase cDNA from Taxus and functional expression in
Escherichia coli. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2000, 97(2):583-587.
75. Martin S, Roe D, Faulon JL: Predicting protein-protein interactions using
signature products. Bioinformatics 2005, 21(2):218-226.
76. Leslie CS, Eskin E, Cohen A, Weston J, Noble WS: Mismatch string kernels
for discriminative protein classification. Bioinformatics 2004, 20(4):467-476.
77. Rousseeuw P: Silhouettes: A graphical aid to the interpretation and
validation of cluster analysis. J Comput Appl Math 1987, 20:53-65.
78. Rice P, Longden I, Bleasby A: EMBOSS: the European Molecular Biology
Open Software Suite. Trends Genet 2000, 16(6):276-277.
79. Feist AM, Henry CS, Reed JL, Krummenacker M, Joyce AR, Karp PD,
Broadbelt LJ, Hatzimanikatis V, Bernhard : A genome-scale metabolic
reconstruction for Escherichia coli K-12 MG1655 that accounts for 1260
ORFs and thermodynamic information. Mol Syst Biol 2007, 3.
80. Duarte NC, Herrgård MJ, Palsson B: Reconstruction and Validation of
Saccharomyces cerevisiae iND750, a Fully Compartmentalized GenomeScale Metabolic Model. Genome Res 2004, 14(7):1298-1309.
81. Becker SA, Feist AM, Mo ML, Hannum G, Palsson BO, Herrgard MJ:
Quantitative prediction of cellular metabolism with constraint-based
models: the COBRA Toolbox. Nat Protoc 2007, 2(3):727-738.
82. Yousofshahi M, Lee K, Hassoun S: Probabilistic pathway construction.
Metab Eng 2011, 13(4):435-444.
doi:10.1186/1752-0509-5-122
Cite this article as: Carbonell et al.: A retrosynthetic biology approach to
metabolic pathway design for therapeutic production. BMC Systems
Biology 2011 5:122.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
