<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Molecular musings in microbial ecology and evolution</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Biology Direct 2011, 6:58. doi:10.1186/1745-6150-6-58"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Rebecca J Case"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Case and Boucher Biology Direct 2011, 6:58
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/58

REVIEW

Open Access

Molecular musings in microbial ecology and
evolution
Rebecca J Case* and Yan Boucher*

Abstract: A few major discoveries have influenced how ecologists and evolutionists study microbes. Here, in the
format of an interview, we answer questions that directly relate to how these discoveries are perceived in these
two branches of microbiology, and how they have impacted on both scientific thinking and methodology.
The first question is “What has been the influence of the ‘Universal Tree of Life’ based on molecular markers?” For
evolutionists, the tree was a tool to understand the past of known (cultured) organisms, mapping the invention of
various physiologies on the evolutionary history of microbes. For ecologists the tree was a guide to discover the
current diversity of unknown (uncultured) organisms, without much knowledge of their physiology.
The second question we ask is “What was the impact of discovering frequent lateral gene transfer among microbes?”
In evolutionary microbiology, frequent lateral gene transfer (LGT) made a simple description of relationships
between organisms impossible, and for microbial ecologists, functions could not be easily linked to specific
genotypes. Both fields initially resisted LGT, but methods or topics of inquiry were eventually changed in one to
incorporate LGT in its theoretical models (evolution) and in the other to achieve its goals despite that
phenomenon (ecology).
The third and last question we ask is “What are the implications of the unexpected extent of diversity?” The variation
in the extent of diversity between organisms invalidated the universality of species definitions based on molecular
criteria, a major obstacle to the adaptation of models developed for the study of macroscopic eukaryotes to
evolutionary microbiology. This issue has not overtly affected microbial ecology, as it had already abandoned
species in favor of the more flexible operational taxonomic units. This field is nonetheless moving away from
traditional methods to measure diversity, as they do not provide enough resolution to uncover what lies below
the species level.
The answers of the evolutionary microbiologist and microbial ecologist to these three questions illustrate
differences in their theoretical frameworks. These differences mean that both fields can react quite distinctly to the
same discovery, incorporating it with more or less difficulty in their scientific practice.
Reviewers: This article was reviewed by W. Ford Doolittle, Eugene V. Koonin and Maureen A. O’Malley.
Keywords: Ribosomal RNA genes, diversity, lateral gene transfer, microbial ecology, microbial evolution, evolutionary microbiology, ecological microbiology, Tree of Life

Background
We often think of how certain major scientific discoveries have affected our own scientific field. What we
more rarely think about is that such discoveries might
have impacted other fields in completely different ways.
Here, we have identified three discoveries we think have
had critical impacts on microbiology during the past
two decades. Interestingly, two branches of microbiology
* Correspondence: rcase@ualberta.ca; yboucher@ualberta.ca
Department of Biological Sciences, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, T6G
2E9, Canada

have been impacted very differently by these discoveries.
Although the fields of evolutionary microbiology (the
study of microbial evolution) and ecological microbiology (known by its practitioners as microbial ecology)
somewhat overlap each other in their subject of inquiry,
they have very distinct views on several biological processes occurring in microbes.
Evolutionary microbiology can be defined as the study
of the patterns (relationships between genes and organisms) and processes (mechanisms generating diversity
and the selection operating on it) of evolution in

© 2011 Case and Boucher; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Case and Boucher Biology Direct 2011, 6:58
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/58

microbes. Its main tools are reconstruction of relationships (using phylogenies and networks), population
genetics, and comparative gene and genome analyses.
Microbial ecology is the study of microbes’ relationship
with their environment and other organisms. Microbial
ecology has historically focused on the relationship
microbes have in host systems as they form beneficial
liaisons (e.g. nitrogen fixing rhizobia in plant root
nodules) and pathogenic relationships (e.g. Pseudomonas
aeruginosa in the lungs of people with cystic fibrosis)
with their hosts. The other focus has been the ways in
which microbes drive the nutrient cycles that make
earth habitable for humans. More recently, microbial
ecology has borrowed theoretical ecology from macroecology and adapted it to microbial systems (e.g. landscape ecology, keystone species, biogeography) [1-3].
The first of three major discoveries we will discuss as
having had an impact on these two branches of microbiology is that molecular markers can be used to reconstruct a phylogeny of all organisms (a ‘Universal Tree of
Life’). This tree, regardless of its theoretical validity, has
served as a framework to scientific inquiry in microbiology for decades. The second discovery is that lateral
gene transfer (LGT), the acquisition of genetic material
by means other than inheritance from a progenitor, is
frequent among bacteria and archaea. By disconnecting
the history of genes from that of the organisms carrying
them, LGT fundamentally affected how we can describe
bacterial and archaeal evolution and ecology [4]. The
third discovery is that the extent of genetic diversity in
microbes is much greater than expected and can vary
between species [5,6], which brings into question the
universality of species as a unit of diversity or evolution.
These discoveries have all been examined to some
extent previously. Here however, we look at how two
different fields, those of evolutionary microbiology and
microbial ecology, interpret these discoveries, and assess
how they have affected their methodology and subjects
of inquiry. To do so, we ask a question pertaining to
each discovery in an interview format and present the
answer from both evolutionary and ecological
perspectives.

Discussion
What has been the influence of the ‘Universal Tree of
Life’ based on molecular markers?”

Carl Woese’s work established ribosomal RNA (rRNA)
as the reference molecular marker by cataloguing and
comparing rRNA molecules in order to determine evolutionary relationships between organisms, even before
the widespread use of DNA sequencing [7]. This led to
the discovery of a completely new domain of life, the
Archaea [8]. When it became possible to sequence
DNA, small ribosomal subunit gene (16S rRNA gene)

Page 2 of 11

sequences were used by Woese to reconstruct the ‘Universal Phylogenetic Tree’, now more commonly known
as the ‘Tree of Life’ [9]. The idea that there was a
unique tree describing the relationship between all
organisms quickly took hold in microbiology. However,
it influenced evolutionary and ecological branches of
microbiology in different ways.
Evolutionist

For evolutionists, knowing when and where major evolutionary inventions occurred has always been of great
interest. Even in the 1980s, it had been known for decades that microbes tolerated extreme environmental
conditions (temperature, salinity, radiation, etc) and performed a variety of metabolic reactions (photosynthesis,
sulfur oxidation, methanogenesis, etc) [10]. However,
when they had evolved could only be extrapolated from
the geological record for some of these physiological
characteristics, and the groups of organisms in which
they evolved mostly remained a mystery. The ‘Universal
Phylogenetic Tree’ proposed by Woese would allow
evolutionary microbiologists to find where these inventions belonged in the history of life. Woese and others
continued to use gene sequences as tools to gather
information about when and in which group key evolutionary events or inventions happened. For example, we
realized that photosynthetic bacteria were not monophyletic [7] and that methanogenesis is an ancient
invention in the Euryarchaeota phylum of the Archaea
[9]. The relationships between groups of microbes previously thought of as unrelated could also be established, such as the monophyly of Flavobacteria and
Bacteroides [11] or of Deinococcus and Thermus [12].
Very importantly, rRNA gene sequences were key data
in identifying the bacterial origins of mitochondria and
chloroplast [13,14]. Although this is widely contested,
the 16S rRNA gene tree has also been used to infer
characteristics of the common ancestor(s) of bacteria,
such as thermophily, based on the deep branching of
the thermophilic Thermotoga and Aquifex [15]. Woese’s
construction of the ‘Tree of Life’ established the
groundwork for a molecular revolution in evolutionary
microbiology, giving us the phylogenetic backbone that
allowed specific lineages to be linked to given physiologies. The meaning of an rRNA-based ‘Tree of Life’ has
been seriously questioned, as it depicts the evolution of
a single gene, not the whole genomes of organisms [16].
Regardless of its meaning, however, such a tree focused
the attention of evolutionary microbiologists to the phylogenetic mapping of physiological innovations in Bacteria and Archaea. This was mostly done using
molecular data from known organisms found in culture
collections, without much consideration for their ecology: where they are found in nature and how they
made a living.

Case and Boucher Biology Direct 2011, 6:58
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/58

Ecologist

In microbial ecology, a ‘Phylogenetic Tree of Life’ based
on 16S rRNA genes inspired a taxonomic tool for the
identification of microbes in order to infer physiologies
from a gene sequence, rather than one for mapping the
invention of physiologies. In 1990, two teams of microbial ecologists published the first 16S rRNA gene clone
libraries from the Sargasso Sea and hot springs in Yellowstone National Park in the same issue of Nature
[17,18]. This method was revolutionary, as clone
libraries allowed sequencing of 16S rRNA genes amplified directly from environmental DNA, thereby avoiding
the requirement for cultivation of their host. The Sargasso Sea study depicted its sequence data in a phylogenetic tree, including sequences from cultured organisms,
allowing researchers to identify previously uncultured
bacteria from the environment. Their depiction of
sequence data in a phylogenetic tree was reminiscent of
Woese’s ‘Universal Phylogenetic Tree’ [9], as was their
choice of molecular marker, which was guided by his
previous work. As trees allow microbial ecologists to
assign 16S rRNA gene sequences to phyla, genera and
occasionally species, and reveal previously unknown
groups, diversity became a central theme in microbial
ecology. Novel groups with no cultured representatives
were the most intriguing result from early diversity studies, as these groups outnumbered those which were
known from cultured isolates [19]. Even today, most of
these novel groups, usually called candidate phyla or
divisions, still have no cultured representative. This is
the case for many of the thermophilic candidate divisions discovered in Obsidian Pool in Yellowstone
National Park [20]. However, due in large part to the
efforts of Giovanonni and his team, there are now cultured representatives for some of these elusive ‘unculturable’ organisms (e.g. SAR11) [21]. For most microbial
ecologists however, these initial studies did not lead to
further culturing efforts, but to a quest to fill in the
missing branches of the ‘Tree of Life’ [19]. This quest is
reflected in the fact that over 2000 references have been
made to the software package, ARB, which allowed
researchers to add their sequences to a curated ‘Tree of
Life’ [22]. This extensive sequencing effort by microbial
ecologists maintained diversity as a key theme in microbial ecology into the 21st century, as environmental gene
clone libraries are constructed for every model system
that could be sampled, in fields ranging from biological
oceanography [23] to art preservation [24]. Consequently, the 16S rRNA gene is the most sequenced of
all genes. Previously unknown groups of organisms can
now be studied directly in the environment using molecular techniques and often prove to be abundant, confirming what microbiologists had long suspected;
Prokaryotes are the unseen majority [25]. However, our

Page 3 of 11

physiological and genetic understanding of bacteria and
archaea is based on domesticated strains that are unlikely to tell us much about the untamed majority driving
earth’s biogeochemical systems. This realization in part
drives the larger metagenomic, metaproteomic and
metatranscriptomic efforts in microbial systems. The
preoccupation with measuring the diversity of microbes
has also been at the expense of understanding the theoretical forces that shape microbial communities,
although some theoretical ecology studies are now being
applied to microbial systems.
What was the impact of discovering frequent lateral gene
transfer among microbes?

Although it has been clear that genes could be
exchanged between bacteria through LGT as early as
the 1950’s [26], it took a long time for this phenomenon
to be recognized as important in their evolution and
ecology. This is likely related to how useful the ‘Tree of
Life’ had been in identifying Bacteria and Archaea,
describing their diversity, and linking groups of
microbes to specific physiological functions. With the
advent of genomics however, it became increasingly
clear that a large portion of genes in many bacterial and
archaeal lineages had been acquired through LGT,
sometimes consisting in 20-30% of their genome [27,28].
Evolutionist

The fact that LGT had contributed so much to the genomes of some bacteria and archaea was a turning point
for evolutionary microbiologists, who started (slowly)
changing their practice, both in what they study (level of
biological organization) and how they study it (methodologies). The high frequency of LGT among microbes
certainly brought many doubts to the practice of
increasing phylogenetic signal by using multiple genes
(sometimes hundreds) to construct a tree [29]. If these
various genes display conflicting phylogenetic signals,
the result is a tree that does not represent the real history of cells, but rather some average of their components various histories. This is progressively leading to
the use of alternative methods for depicting the evolution of microbial cells, such as genetic networks, a
graph-theoretical representation that can include nonvertical histories [30]. The complexity of constructing
and interpreting such networks has led to a persistent
(although more careful) use of trees, but also to the
adoption of more simple measures of similarity, such as
average nucleotide identity, average amino acid identity
or gene content similarity, often illustrated as simple
graphs [31,32]. Besides an impact on the methodology
used to infer the evolutionary relationship of organisms,
there has been a movement towards looking at the evolutionary history at different levels of biological complexity besides organisms. Evolutionists are now

Case and Boucher Biology Direct 2011, 6:58
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/58

interested in looking at the history of elements found at
lower levels of complexity, such as genes, pathways or
genomic islands, learning about their origins, dissemination patterns and rates of change [33]. Evolutionary
microbiologists are also directing their attention to
higher levels of biological complexity, such as that of
populations (through multi-locus sequence analyses
(MLSA) or whole genome sequencing of hundreds of
strains from a given population), at which recombination or LGT are relatively easily illustrated using networks or statistical analyses [34].
Ecologist

For microbial ecologists, it was the realization that they
could not accurately predict the ecological function of a
microbe from its 16S rRNA gene sequence that led to
the recognition of the importance of LGT [35]. However, very few microbial ecologists changed their practice, and most increased their focus on questions in
which the effects of LGT was not clear (i.e. diversity
estimates based on a single marker gene) or set limits
on the interpretations of results they obtained. The
importance of this phenomenon was also initially
resisted [36,37] and its impact was often marginalized as
only pertaining to a unique minority of organisms, possibly in part because of the extensive use of 16S rRNA
gene-based methodologies (clone libraries, denaturing
gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE), restriction fragment length polymorphism (T-RFLP), fluorescent in-situ
hybridization (FISH)). These methodologies require a
stable association of 16S rRNA genes with specific metabolic traits or behavior to make the crucial link between
the composition and function of microbial communities.
It became clear that with the presence of LGT, functional genes were not necessarily associated with specific
16S rRNA gene sequences. This link between the composition of a community (form) and its function was a
promise derived from macroecology. In that discipline,
based on our understanding of the vertical inheritance
of traits, we can confidently predict that a Coniferales is
photosynthetic; however the same cannot be said of the
Roseobacterclade, where some species of the genus are
photosynthetic and others are not [38]. This idea was
central to the initial interest of molecular microbial
ecology to many other fields (e.g. earth sciences, oceanography, agricultural sciences and medicine). It also
offered a 16S rRNA gene-based molecular toolbox that
would allow the identification of the microbes responsible for the processes studied, from carbon remineralization to polymicrobial diseases. In this vision, once an
organism’s 16S rRNA gene sequence was obtained, its
traits could be inferred from a tree generated using the
software ARB (from arbor) [22] and it could be tracked
in the environment using the polymerase chain reaction
or FISH [39]. As the association between specific

Page 4 of 11

functions and branches of the ‘Tree of Life’ was continually put into doubt by LGT, many scientists were
inadvertently forced to question whether 16S rRNA
gene-based molecular tools could answer their questions. The sentence should read: “Researchers started
applying methodologies developed using the 16S rRNA
gene, such as clone libraries [40] DGGE banding patterns [41], or FISH on the genes encoding the function
they wanted to study. This approach has had mixed success due to the inherent bias of primer design for protein-encoding genes [42]. Yet, the scientific focus of
microbial ecology remains on community function and
diversity, so all-encompassing methodologies that
embraced the metagenome, the genetic potential of a
community, were rapidly adopted. Although it could be
viewed as looking for a needle in a haystack, metagenomics promised to both identify organisms within a
community and their functional potential. However,
only low diversity systems in which genomes can be
reconstructed [43] and large insert libraries [44] have
actually managed to link form to function. Metagenomics has since moved into metatranscriptomics and
metaproteomics, methodologies that identify the
expressed or functioning part of the metagenome
[45,46]. The fact that these new methods are not susceptible to LGT (as they analyze data at the level of the
gene, not the organisms) might have played a role in
how rapidly they were adopted at the expense of traditional 16S rRNA gene based methodologies.
What are the implications of the unexpected extent of
diversity?

Through the combination of comparative genomic studies [3], MLSA (multi-locus sequence analysis) of bacterial populations [47] and 16S rRNA gene tag
sequencing with high-throughput technologies [48], it
has now become evident that microbial populations are
much more diverse than previously thought. Furthermore, the extent of diversity varies significantly between
species defined using traditional criteria [49]. This has
important implications for both evolutionary and ecological microbiology.
Evolutionist

Two key pieces of research clearly demonstrated that
genetic diversity could be far larger than we had ever
imagined in bacteria and archaea. The first evidence for
such diversity came out of one of the earliest comparative genomics study, in which the gene content of three
Escherichia coli genomes was compared, showing that
any two strains shared only about 40% of their genes
[50]. This was later confirmed on a much larger scale in
the marine heterotroph Vibrio splendidus [51]. It was
shown that a few dozen milliliters of seawater could
contain hundreds of genotypes of that species that

Case and Boucher Biology Direct 2011, 6:58
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/58

differed by up to 20% in genome size. Although the biological implications of this diversity are still unclear, its
extent is strongly suggestive that the species, as defined
today, is not a finely resolved unit of diversity, because
it can encompass a range of organisms that are genetically distinct [3].
This unexpectedly high diversity at the species level or
below forced evolutionary microbiologists to abandon
the use of low-resolution molecular markers such as the
16S rRNA gene in favor of others methodologies to
describe relationships between isolates. The most popular of these has been MLSA. The amplification and
sequencing of multiple housekeeping protein-coding
genes (usually six to eight) to identify bacterial isolates
is now widespread in microbiology [52]. The larger
number of markers used, as well as the higher sequence
variability of protein-coding genes, provided evolutionary microbiologists with a high-resolution method to
identify relationships between isolates below the species
level. This technique also allowed us to measure which
part of the observed genetic diversity in a population of
isolates was caused by point mutation and which part
was caused by recombination. A wide variation in the
importance of these two sources of genetic diversity was
observed between different species, and even within species [53]. This was the first evidence that the unexpected
extent of genetic diversity could be partially explained
by the fact that it originated from multiple processes. It
rapidly became obvious that not only the processes giving rise to nucleotide substitutions (mutation and
recombination) contributed to the extensive genetic
diversity observed in microbes, but also those altering
their gene content. For example, the main source of
genetic diversity in the causative agents of scrub typhus,
Orienta tsutsugamuchi, are integrative conjugative elements and transposable elements [54]. The most variable region of Vibrio cholerae genomes are integrons
[55], and the aphid symbiont Buchnera aphidicola
mostly evolves through nucleotide substitutions as well
as small insertions and deletions [56]. Therefore, not
only is genetic diversity much more extensive than
expected, but its extent varies from one species to
another. For evolutionary microbiologists, a variation in
the extent of diversity across organisms made a universal definition of species based on molecular criteria
impossible. The lack of such a definition makes the
development of population genetics for bacteria and
archaea very challenging, as most of the theory behind
this branch of biology is based on having a species definition [47]. Without a species definition, there cannot
be a single mathematical model to determine what composes a separate population or what form of selection is
operating on a population. This also has far reaching
consequences for taxonomy, because even though

Page 5 of 11

organisms can be classified in species using any ad hoc
molecular criteria (i.e. 95% average nucleotide identity
for protein encoding genes or 98% 16S rRNA gene
sequence identity), it does not mean these species will
have any biological meaning.
Ecologist

To officially describe a novel bacterial or archaeal species, a representative must be available in pure culture,
so that biochemical tests and DNA-DNA hybridization
can be performed to compare it to known species
(although this can now be done indirectly by sequencing
its genome). This has long been problematic for microbial ecology, as most microbes are not in culture and
many of our methodologies require a measurable unit of
diversity to be calculated. For this reason, units other
than species have frequently been used. It should be
noted that there has been one remarkable study which
used the traditional species definition to determine the
number of bacterial genomes in a soil sample by making
a melting curve of DNA extracted directly from the
environment [57], demonstrating the immensity of bacterial diversity. However, this methodology was too
technically challenging to be broadly adopted. To circumvent problems associated with using species as units
of diversity, the concept of Operational Taxonomic Unit
(OTU) is employed. An OTU is an arbitrary unit commonly used in microbial ecology as its definition can be
specific to a method, such as a unique chromatogram
peak for T-RFLP, a band within a DGGE pattern, or
what was most commonly used for isolates or in clone
libraries, 97% or greater sequence identity between 16S
rRNA gene sequences. These practical definitions
allowed ecological parameters such as evenness and species richness to be calculated and microbial communities from different samples to be compared. The
drawback is that the OTUs are so method-dependent
that comparisons between studies are problematic. Also,
a growing number of examples of speciation within the
97% cut off were being identified [31], revising up the
value to ≥ 98% sequence identity [58]. Acinas and Klepac-Ceraj et al. [59] later demonstrated that every
nucleotide substitution in the 16S rRNA gene could
represent significant diversity. The extent of diversity
below the species level was therefore enormous and the
dropping cost of sequencing allowed researchers to
adapt by simply sequencing more, such that lineages
representing individual sequences began to be commonly replaced by wedges in the tree [19] and communities (groups of sequences) were now condensed into a
matrix and compared as groups [60]. The biggest
increase in the number of 16S rRNA gene sequences
came with the advent of next-generation sequencing, as
tens of thousands instead of hundreds of sequences
could now be generated at a comparable cost. The irony

Case and Boucher Biology Direct 2011, 6:58
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/58

is that these sequences are shorter and of poorer quality
than those that can be obtained through traditional Sanger sequencing. This makes sequence identification possible only at the genus level or above and what may be
newly discovered diversity is often discarded as we are
unable to confidently place sequences in the ‘Tree of
Life’ [61].
The extensive diversity at or below the species level, as
we have just seen, is not yet well captured by the main
methods used by microbial ecologists. The proportion of
such diversity that is linked with ecological function is
not known, but there is strong evidence for phenotypic
differentiation occurring below the species level. Such
differences can be observed in E. coli, whose various
subspecies cause different diseases or occupying different niches [62]. The genus Shigella, for example, are in
fact a polyphyletic group entirely found within the E.
coli species. It is defined based on the fact that it can
cause shigellosis, and whose pathology is due to a set of
virulence factors found on a plasmid [63]. This diversity
within a species is also found in environmental
microbes, for example the cyanobacterium Prochlorococcus, which is a genetically coherent group which roughly
corresponds to a traditional species, in which all members share > 97% 16S rRNA gene sequence identity. It is
one of the most abundant photosynthetic organisms in
the ocean, containing various ecotypes specialized to live
at different light intensities, which correspond to different depths in the ocean [64].
Although microbial ecology has yet to find a way to
deal with the extensive diversity below the species level,
it has not been concerned by the fact that the extent of
diversity varies widely between taxonomic groups. This
is mostly because microbial ecologists have long abandoned the dream of a universal molecular species definition in favor of a more practical one, the OTU. Since
the definition of an OTU can vary between datasets, it
can be adjusted to match the level of diversity or marker
employed. However, if most diversity is generated
through LGT, a single molecular marker such as 16S
rRNA gene, no matter how stringent the OTU definition, will not necessarily capture it. The hope of microbial ecologists is that this diversity can be captured
using metagenomics and the functions associated with
this diversity through metatranscriptomics and
metaproteomics.

Conclusion
Both evolutionary and ecological microbiology were
using the ‘Tree of Life’ as a tool to guide their scientific
inquiry, creating a common focus within these branches
of microbiology. However, the tree was placed inside
different theoretical frameworks for these two fields.
The tree was a tool for the evolutionists to understand

Page 6 of 11

the past (history of evolutionary inventions), while it
was one to understand the present for ecologists (current diversity). Evolutionists focused on understanding
how the physiology of known groups of cultured organisms came to be, while ecologists looked at where
unknown organisms existed with little understanding of
their physiology.
Both evolutionary microbiology and microbial ecology
initially resisted the discovery that LGT is frequent in
microbes, as it made their respective ‘holy grails’ inaccessible. For evolutionary microbiology, there would
never be a simple and unique depiction of relationships
between organisms, and for microbial ecologists, functions could not be easily linked to specific genotypes.
After initial resistance to the importance of the phenomenon [65], evolutionary microbiology actively changed its practices, developing methodologies and models
that made lateral links between organisms possible and
focusing investigation at levels of biological organization
below or above the organism (gene or population),
which are methodologically more amenable to the existence of LGT. Ecological microbiology developed novel
methodologies that allow links to be established between
community structure and function (such a metagenomics), even if LGT is rampant between organisms, as
they examine molecular data at the gene or population
level.
The unexpected extent of diversity forced evolutionary
microbiology to adopt new approaches providing higher
resolution to define relationships between organisms.
The use of these techniques, such as MLSA, uncovered
the fact that the level of genetic diversity varies between
species. This directly affected evolutionary microbiology,
invalidating the universality of species definitions based
on molecular criteria. Microbial ecology, on the other
hand, relied heavily on technology to deal with the
extent of diversity, hoping that more data would resolve
this issue. However, the main molecular marker used
(16S rRNA gene) lacks resolving power at or below the
species level, missing where most of the unexpected
diversity lies. Furthermore, the high error rate of
sequences obtained with new technologies prevents
accurate estimates of diversity [66]. The hope is that
combining these new technologies with new approaches
that do not rely on a specific marker (such as metagenomics) will allow more accurate estimates of diversity.
The discovery that levels of genetic diversity vary across
taxa did not affect microbial ecology as it did evolutionary microbiology, as this field has widely given up the
usage of species as biological units in favor of OTUs,
which can be defined based on the dataset being analyzed and are by definition not universal.
Overall, we can note that although they share
microbes as their subject of inquiry, the theoretical

Case and Boucher Biology Direct 2011, 6:58
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/58

frameworks of evolutionary microbiology and microbial
ecology are quite different (one being inherited from
evolutionary biology and the other from macroecology).
Consequently, the same discovery is not always integrated as easily into both fields. When a discovery is not
easily accommodated in the existing framework, there
seems to have been three strategies: change the methods, change the questions, or ‘wait and see’. It seems
that with enough work, most important discoveries can
been integrated through a change in methods or questions, but that a ‘wait and see’ period is sometimes
necessary before arriving there.

Reviewers Comments
Reviewer 1: W. Ford Doolittle (Dalhousie University,
Halifax, Canada)
This is a nice breezy review of the current state of
microbial ecology and evolution. I very much like the Q
and A approach, since it highlights disciplinary differences. It would be nice to see someone (not necessarily
these authors, and of course not right now) rewrite the
history of the last 50 years of molecular phylogeny (its
whole history) in terms of the biases imposed on its
leading practitioners by their scientific training. Would
we have 16S rRNA as the hegemonic “molecular chronometer” had Woese not spent much of his early career
studying the code, translation and the ribosome? Had
that not happened, and had our thoughts about species
and their relationships been guided more by developments in genetics and epidemiology than in phylogenetics and origins-of-life chemistry, would we be so
keen to see meaning in any universal “Tree of Life"?
Had microbiologists paid more attention to philosophers, and indeed to Darwin, would we still be asking
ourselves what microbial species are? I like to imagine
that we could somehow disentangle all the “facts” we
know about microbes from the theories (including biological evolution) by which we understand such facts
and the histories (of our science) that we use in presenting and arguing these theories. We would then lay just
the facts out before someone entirely ignorant of and
maybe even hostile to all the rest - a Martian perhaps,
or some Republican presidential candidate - and ask
them to come up with some useful generalities. It’s fun
(and good science) to try to figure out what these generalities might be.
Author’s response: We thank the reviewer for this
interesting insight on how our fields would be different
if some of the key players had different training or interests or if we had adopted different perspectives. This
could be very illuminating, as it would likely highlight
certain factors that play a role in directing the questions
we ask and the ideas that are retained by the scientific
community.

Page 7 of 11

Reviewer 2: Eugene V. Koonin (NCBI, NLM, NIH,
United States)
In this essay, written in the unusual format of an
interview with fictional, generic ‘Evolutionist’ and ‘Ecologist’, Case and Boucher discuss the concepts of Tree of
Life and species in the light of extensive HGT that is
now universally recognized as a major modality of evolution in the prokaryote world. The article is indeed
written in the ‘musing’ style so that no particularly
strong or unusual statements are offered. That being
said, it took me by surprise that Case and Boucher consider the main impact of the discovery of massive HGT
to be on the species concept that they contend to be
rendered irrelevant for prokaryotes. I tend to disagree
with this view on more than one account. First, I do not
think that the species concept is of such overarching
importance. Surely, it has been used over many decades
to describe relationships between sexually reproducing
organisms in a convenient, straightforward way. However, as Darwin was the first to presciently note in the
Origin, species is only a convention not really an object,
and in that sense, although the species concept has been
operationally enormously useful throughout the history
of biology, it hardly is ‘fundamental’. Second, be as it
may, it is rather disingenuous to claim that the species
concept is irrelevant for prokaryotes. The most useful
definition, pioneered by Mayr, describes species as a
group of populations that intermix with each other but
are genetically isolated from other populations. From
that perspective, prokaryotes are quite diverse: studies
on population structure and dynamics show that some
are nearly clonal and hence form reasonably good species whereas others constantly exchange genes with
diverse partners and so do not fit the species definition
(this complexity is well captured in the article of Doolittle and Zhaxybayeva).
Author’s response: We agree with two of the
reviewers that the issue concerning species definitions
(the operational criteria for defining a species, such as
98% sequence identity in the 16S rRNA gene) or concepts (theory-based description of species) is not that
they are not valid, but rather that they are not universal.
We have clarified the text concerning this issue. We
now explain that this lack of universality is in part due
to the fact that even when using a simple species definition based on a identity cutoff for a marker gene or an
average of the genes in the genome, the diversity found
in each species can vary extensively, as can their ecological characteristics, meaning that they do not necessarily have any biological meaning. It is the species
category, not definitions or concepts, which is not
applicable to prokaryotes, as the latter corresponds to a
universal species concept is based on biological
characteristics.

Case and Boucher Biology Direct 2011, 6:58
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/58

Reviewer 3: Maureen A. O’Malley (University of
Sydney)
It is a useful and potentially illuminating exercise to
compare how evolutionary and ecological microbiology
have taken up molecular phylogenetic approaches under
the banner of the Tree of Life. The authors are to be
commended for their efforts to think about these issues
in an innovative format. However, for this essay, more
work has to be done to bring out a clearer and more
sophisticated picture of the differences in these fields,
and what the implications are for future research.
I will suggest below some elaboration and rethinking
for the main body of the text, all of which will require
less vague wording in the opening ‘Discussion’ outline.
In particular (in the Discussion outline), it is not clear
what is meant by a ‘reductionist’ approach to defining
species, and there is an implication that a focus on the
species or genera level is itself reductionist. Wherever
‘microbial evolution’ is used throughout the text, the
authors mostly mean ‘evolutionary microbiology’ (the
field, not the phenomenon) and should revise accordingly. I suggest the same for ‘microbial ecology’: ecological microbiology. The ‘Conclusion’ both in the opening
outline and the final conclusion to the main text should
be elaborated. They need stronger analysis and summing
up to make the paper conclude with bolder statements.
Overall, this is what needs to be worked out in the
paper: the differences between evolutionary and ecological microbiology should be clearly established if there
are any. They should be assessed for their importance
and used to draw some kind of ‘moral’ for these fields
and perhaps microbiology (or even biology) as a whole.
Otherwise, the paper seems to repeat fairly well known
facts without taking them further - certainly not ‘beyond
the tree of life’.
Background section. It does not seem to me that three
‘concepts’ have been identified. The first, ‘Woese’s work
to construct a TOL’ is discussed as a method. How has
it ‘had more impact on the scientific method than any
other discovery in microbial ecology and evolution’?
What is meant to ‘the scientific method’ here anyway?
Why is LGT a concept when it is described as a natural
phenomenon? And likewise, ‘intraspecies diversity’? I
suggest that more work is done here to sort out what
the relevant concepts are, if they are concepts, followed
by a straightforward outline of exactly their importance
for microbiology without presupposing your subsequent
analysis. Simply state why your three factors have implications both for understandings of evolution and
ecology.
Question One: What do you see as the impact of
Woese’s work on the Tree of Life? I think this question is
not phrased correctly. It should probably be discussed
as what some of the perceived shortcomings are of

Page 8 of 11

trying to reconstruct the universal tree of life on the
basis of molecular markers when these are conceived of
as telling a unitary story. While Woese can be ‘blamed’
or praised for getting this effort going, and for trying to
re-conceptualize the field out of its problems, it is
almost like saying ‘imagine a revolution’ without the
revolution if the question is asked in this way. Again, it
is not at all clear to me why efforts to use molecular
markers are ‘concepts’ and not methods, so clarification
is needed at the end of the evolutionist’s response to
this question. For the ecologist’s answer, wasn’t diversity
always the central theme in ecological microbiology? Is
there evidence to support the claim that only with molecules did diversity become an issue for ecological microbiology? I found the concluding sentences of the
ecologist’s response very hard to follow. It would be
good to spell out what is being said here, and to try to
come up with a statement about ecological microbiology
that connects logically with the discussion about molecular techniques, shows what the problems are, and
then how the issues are different from the evolutionist’s
(if they are). I don’t understand what is being implied by
‘rethinking microbiology textbooks’ so this needs
clarification.
Question 2: Did the discovery of LGT influence thinking in your fields? I fear this is a rather obviously
answered question (and almost banal in that everyone
knows what the answer will be). What you need to sort
out here is a more multidimensional query about problem: how has LGT been a problem for evolutionary
microbiology, and is it a different problem for ecological
microbiology? For the sake of this style of paper, you
probably need to emphasize the differences, or the innovative split format (evolutionist versus ecologist) is not
going to be worth it. The evolutionist argues that ‘the
recognition of LGT as a major evolutionary force’ (this
is the concept, rather than the phenomenon - see
above) had its most fundamental impact on the species
concept. This is probably a mistake. There are massive
problems with species concepts that are independent of
LGT, and placing the problem simply as the species
issue does not bring out the conceptual and methodological issues of LGT in anywhere near enough a forceful
manner. It is also worth being careful about just where
in the biological world LGT is a major evolutionary
force. The key problem in this section is going to be
saying anything that hasn’t been said thousands of times
before, so it is imperative to try and do something a bit
less run-of-the-mill in the evolutionist’s section.
For the ecologist’s response, it would be good to have
some examples of ecological microbiologists ‘resisting’
LGT. The examples from plants and animals about vertical inheritance of traits are not helpful for allowing the
reader to understand the issues in microbial ecology.

Case and Boucher Biology Direct 2011, 6:58
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/58

Remember, the very issues that made it difficult for
microbiology to be regarded as a science in the 19th
century revolved around whether microorganisms had
specificity (specific effects that were predictably heritable). How and when does it come about in ecological
microbiology that it has ‘allure’ for ‘many other fields’
because of cast-iron relationships between microbial
form and function? Clarification is needed here. The
shift into metagenomics also needs to be done more
carefully, especially to demonstrate the communities are
the level on which all ecological microbiology focuses
(not population, for example). How are metatranscriptomics and metaproteomics ‘revealing a Tree’? And why
is it ‘more intricate and beautiful, beyond anything we
imagined’? Because it is not a Tree? It would be worth
adding references and discussing some of the issues that
arise when metatranscriptome and metaproteome data
are used for tree-building purposes. I think the concluding sentence of this response has to be rethought
entirely, and a tighter, more contrastive ending found
for this section.
Question 3: Has the extent of intraspecies diversity
made species an inadequate unit of diversity? This question should also be rephrased. Putting it in Y/N form
makes it seem oversimplified and question-begging (presupposing the conclusion). Perhaps setting up a question
that asks ‘how’ would help, but I worry that it might be
the wrong question altogether. At least justify somewhere why intraspecies diversity is your final theme,
rather than the dozens of other phenomena that could
have been discussed. When the evolutionist answers, he
says that MLSA shows the inadequacy of the species
concept, but it seems that the method is the problem.
The different causal processes are really important, and
quite probably of major importance to evolutionary and
ecological understanding, so it may be worth putting
them as the object of the question rather than ‘intraspecies diversity’. The issue is not that it is impossible to
‘define species based on molecular criteria’: it clearly is
and has been possible. The issue is universality. Some
more reflection on the evolutionary processes, patterns
and theoretical consequences would be useful for this
question.
In the ecologist’s response, there is a reiteration of
‘more diversity than expected’, but not much is done
with this. Is the problem really that there is so much
diversity it cannot be ‘confidently placed in the TOL’ or
is there a more fundamental problem? It is probably a
bit simplistic to conclude with the statement that ‘this
issue will be resolved by the incredible improvements in
sequencing technology’, when it has just been stated
that the vast amounts of sequence are part of the problem. I suggest thinking this section through again with
an eye to what is going on at deeper theoretical levels

Page 9 of 11

and in contrast (if possible) to what’s going on in evolutionary microbiology. Avoiding the ‘dewy mist’ metaphor might be a good idea too.
Conclusion. As it stands, I think the concluding paragraph - which is just a repetition of ‘there are problems
but finding the natural unit of diversity is still the quest’
- is a symptom of a general problem with the paper.
The structure should lead to new insights for evolution
and ecology (and beyond), not repetitions of what even
newcomers to the field(s) know already. The point of
comparing evolutionary microbiology and ecological
microbiology should surely be to contrast more sharply
their different approaches, show the major developments
and problems, and to have some clear pointers of what
might be needed to go beyond these respective problems. While contrasting them very strongly might be a
bit artificial, it needs to be done for this paper otherwise
it’s déjà vu for the readers of Biology Direct.
Author’s response: We thank the reviewer for her
extensive comments and suggestions, which have greatly
improved the manuscript. As a result, we have changed
all three questions, altering them so they are more open
ended. We have also corrected the use of “concepts” to
that of “discoveries”, as it is true that the topics discussed by the three questions are not concepts but
rather major knowledge breakthroughs in microbiology.
The importance of these discoveries is also explained
after each question.
We acknowledge that the terms “Microbial Evolution”
and “Microbial Ecology” linguistically refer to phenomena. However, the field decided to call itself “Microbial
Ecology” (i.e. International Society for Microbial Ecology) and this is why we chose to use this term, and to
be consistent, the term Microbial Evolution. We have
changed the text to use the more accurate terms “evolutionary microbiology” and “ecological microbiology”
wherever possible, while keeping the use of “Microbial
Evolution” and “Microbial Ecology” when referring to
those fields of science specifically.
The abstract and the conclusion have been completely
re-written to emphasize the differences in the responses
of evolutionary and ecological microbiology to major
discoveries. This has also been done throughout the
text.
We have changed the discussion about the validity of
species definitions to one about their universality. We
agree with the reviewer that the variation in causes of
diversity has more relevance to questioning the universality of species definitions than its simple extent. However, we kept the third question about the extent of
diversity (although in a format that more open ended
and less presupposing of the conclusion), because we
have as of yet no idea about how a variation in causes
of diversity affects microbial ecology. Changing the

Case and Boucher Biology Direct 2011, 6:58
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/58

question to be about causes rather than extent of diversity would have prevented a contrast to be drawn
between the two branches of microbiology that are
being discussed.
Acknowledgements and Funding
The manuscript publication costs were covered by the Leverhume Trust.
Authors’ contributions
Both authors contributed equally to the planning and writing of this Review.
The authors have also both read and approved the manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 6 September 2011 Accepted: 10 November 2011
Published: 10 November 2011
References
1. Taylor MW, Schupp PJ, de Nys R, Kjelleberg S, Steinberg PD: Biogeography
of bacteria associated with the marine sponge Cymbastela concentrica.
Environ Microbiol 2005, 7(3):419-433.
2. Peterson CN, Day S, Wolfe BE, Ellison AM, Kolter R, Pringle A: A keystone
predator controls bacterial diversity in the pitcher-plant (Sarracenia
purpurea) microecosystem. Environ Microbiol 2008, 10(9):2257-2266.
3. Keymer JE, Galajda P, Muldoon C, Park S, Austin RH: Bacterial
metapopulations in nanofabricated landscapes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2006, 103(46):17290-17295.
4. Burke C, Steinberg P, Rusch D, Kjelleberg S, Thomas T: Bacterial community
assembly based on functional genes rather than species. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 2011, 108(34):14288-14293.
5. Reno ML, Held NL, Fields CJ, Burke PV, Whitaker RJ: Biogeography of the
Sulfolobus islandicus pan-genome. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2009,
106(21):8605-8610.
6. Thompson JR, Pacocha S, Pharino C, Klepac-Ceraj V, Hunt DE, Benoit J,
Sarma-Rupavtarm R, Distel DL, Polz MF: Genotypic diversity within a
natural coastal bacterioplankton population. Science 2005,
307(5713):1311-1313.
7. Woese CR: The Phylogeny of Prokaryotes. Science 1980, 209:457.
8. Woese CR, Magrum LJ, Fox GE: Archaebacteria. J Mol Evol 1978,
11(3):245-251.
9. Woese CR: Bacterial evolution. Microbiol Rev 1987, 51(2):221-271.
10. Stanier RY, Van Niel CB: The Main Outlines of Bacterial Classification. J
Bacteriol 1941, 42(4):437-466.
11. Weisburg WG, Oyaizu Y, Oyaizu H, Woese CR: Natural relationship
between bacteroides and flavobacteria. J Bacteriol 1985,
164(1):230-236.
12. Weisburg WG, Giovannoni SJ, Woese CR: The Deinococcus-Thermus
phylum and the effect of rRNA composition on phylogenetic tree
construction. Syst Appl Microbiol 1989, 11:128-134.
13. Bonen L, Doolittle WF: On the prokaryotic nature of red algal
chloroplasts. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1975, 72(6):2310-2314.
14. Yang D, Oyaizu Y, Oyaizu H, Olsen GJ, Woese CR: Mitochondrial origins.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1985, 82(13):4443-4447.
15. Achenbach-Richter L, Gupta R, Stetter KO, Woese CR: Were the original
eubacteria thermophiles? Syst Appl Microbiol 1987, 9:34-39.
16. Dagan T, Martin W: The tree of one percent. Genome Biol 2006, 7(10):118.
17. Giovannoni SJ, Britschgi TB, Moyer CL, Field KG: Genetic diversity in
Sargasso Sea bacterioplankton. Nature 1990, 345(6270):60-63.
18. Ward DM, Weller R, Bateson MM: 16S rRNA sequences reveal numerous
uncultured microorganisms in a natural community. Nature 1990,
345(6270):63-65.
19. Hugenholtz P, Goebel BM, Pace NR: Impact of culture-independent
studies on the emerging phylogenetic view of bacterial diversity. J
Bacteriol 1998, 180(18):4765-4774.
20. Hugenholtz P, Pitulle C, Hershberger KL, Pace NR: Novel division level
bacterial diversity in a Yellowstone hot spring. J Bacteriol 1998,
180(2):366-376.

Page 10 of 11

21. Rappe MS, Connon SA, Vergin KL, Giovannoni SJ: Cultivation of the
ubiquitous SAR11 marine bacterioplankton clade. Nature 2002,
418(6898):630-633.
22. Ludwig W, Strunk O, Westram R, Richter L, Meier H, Yadhukumar ,
Buchner A, Lai T, Steppi S, Jobb G, Forster W, Brettske I, Gerber S,
Ginhart AW, Gross O, Grumann S, Hermann S, Jost R, Konig A, Liss T,
Lussmann R, May M, Nonhoff B, Reichel B, Strehlow R, Stamatakis A,
Stuckmann N, Vilbig A, Lenke M, Ludwig T, Bode A, Schleifer KH: ARB: a
software environment for sequence data. Nucleic Acids Res 2004,
32(4):1363-1371.
23. Schmidt TM, DeLong EF, Pace NR: Analysis of a marine picoplankton
community by 16S rRNA gene cloning and sequencing. J Bacteriol 1991,
173(14):4371-4378.
24. Rolleke S, Muyzer G, Wawer C, Wanner G, Lubitz W: Identification of
bacteria in a biodegraded wall painting by denaturing gradient gel
electrophoresis of PCR-amplified gene fragments coding for 16S rRNA.
Appl Environ Microbiol 1996, 62(6):2059-2065.
25. Whitman WB, Coleman DC, Wiebe WJ: Prokaryotes: the unseen majority.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1998, 95(12):6578-6583.
26. Watanabe T: Infective heredity of multiple drug resistance in bacteria.
Bacteriol Rev 1963, 27:87-115.
27. Deppenmeier U, Johann A, Hartsch T, Merkl R, Schmitz RA, Martinez-Arias R,
Henne A, Wiezer A, Baumer S, Jacobi C, Bruggemann H, Lienard T,
Christmann A, Bomeke M, Steckel S, Bhattacharyya A, Lykidis A, Overbeek R,
Klenk HP, Gunsalus RP, Fritz HJ, Gottschalk G: The genome of
Methanosarcina mazei: evidence for lateral gene transfer between
bacteria and archaea. J Mol Microbiol Biotechnol 2002, 4(4):453-461.
28. Nelson KE, Clayton RA, Gill SR, Gwinn ML, Dodson RJ, Haft DH, Hickey EK,
Peterson JD, Nelson WC, Ketchum KA, McDonald L, Utterback TR, Malek JA,
Linher KD, Garrett MM, Stewart AM, Cotton MD, Pratt MS, Phillips CA,
Richardson D, Heidelberg J, Sutton GG, Fleischmann RD, Eisen JA, White O,
Salzberg SL, Smith HO, Venter JC, Fraser CM: Evidence for lateral gene
transfer between Archaea and Bacteria from genome sequence of
Thermotoga maritima. Nature 1999, 399(6734):323-329.
29. Bapteste E, Boucher Y: Lateral gene transfer challenges principles of
microbial systematics. Trends Microbiol 2008, 16(5):200-207.
30. Beauregard-Racine J, Bicep C, Schliep K, Lopez P, Lapointe FJ, Bapteste E: Of
woods and webs: possible alternatives to the tree of life for studying
genomic fluidity in E. coli. Biol Direct 2011, 6(1):39.
31. Konstantinidis KT, Tiedje JM: Genomic insights that advance the species
definition for prokaryotes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005, 102(7):2567-2572.
32. Konstantinidis KT, Tiedje JM: Towards a genome-based taxonomy for
prokaryotes. J Bacteriol 2005, 187(18):6258-6264.
33. Bapteste E, Boucher Y: Lateral gene transfer challenges principles of
microbial systematics. Trends Microbiol 2008, 16(5):200-207.
34. Feil EJ: Small change: keeping pace with microevolution. Nat Rev
Microbiol 2004, 2(6):483-495.
35. Fox GE, Wisotzkey JD, Jurtshuk P: How close is close - 16S ribosomal-RNA
sequence identity may not be sufficient to guarantee species identity.
Int J Syst Bact 1992, 42(1):166-170.
36. Kurland CG: What tangled web: barriers to rampant horizontal gene
transfer. Bioessays 2005, 27(7):741-747.
37. Rossello-Mora R, Amann R: The species concept for prokaryotes. FEMS
Microbiol Rev 2001, 25(1):39-67.
38. Allgaier M, Uphoff H, Felske A, Wagner-Dobler I: Aerobic anoxygenic
photosynthesis in Roseobacter clade bacteria from diverse marine
habitats. Appl Environ Microbiol 2003, 69(9):5051-5059.
39. Amann RI, Ludwig W, Schleifer KH: Phylogenetic identification and in situ
detection of individual microbial cells without cultivation. Microbiol Rev
1995, 59(1):143-169.
40. Balskus EP, Case RJ, Walsh CT: The biosynthesis of cyanobacterial
sunscreen scytonemin in intertidal microbial mat communities. FEMS
Microbiol Ecol 2011, 77(2):322-332.
41. Hendrickx B, Dejonghe W, Faber F, Boenne W, Bastiaens L, Verstraete W,
Top EM, Springael D: PCR-DGGE method to assess the diversity of BTEX
mono-oxygenase genes at contaminated sites. FEMS Microbiol Ecol 2006,
55(2):262-273.
42. Jabado OJ, Palacios G, Kapoor V, Hui J, Renwick N, Zhai J, Briese T,
Lipkin WI: Greene SCPrimer: a rapid comprehensive tool for designing
degenerate primers from multiple sequence alignments. Nucleic Acids Res
2006, 34(22):6605-6611.

Case and Boucher Biology Direct 2011, 6:58
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/58

43. Tyson GW, Chapman J, Hugenholtz P, Allen EE, Ram RJ, Richardson PM,
Solovyev VV, Rubin EM, Rokhsar DS, Banfield JF: Community structure and
metabolism through reconstruction of microbial genomes from the
environment. Nature 2004, 428(6978):37-43.
44. Beja O, Aravind L, Koonin EV, Suzuki MT, Hadd A, Nguyen LP,
Jovanovich SB, Gates CM, Feldman RA, Spudich JL, Spudich EN, DeLong EF:
Bacterial rhodopsin: evidence for a new type of phototrophy in the sea.
Science 2000, 289(5486):1902-1906.
45. Frias-Lopez J, Shi Y, Tyson GW, Coleman ML, Schuster SC, Chisholm SW,
Delong EF: Microbial community gene expression in ocean surface
waters. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008, 105(10):3805-3810.
46. VerBerkmoes NC, Denef VJ, Hettich RL, Banfield JF: Systems biology:
Functional analysis of natural microbial consortia using community
proteomics. Nat Rev Microbiol 2009, 7(3):196-205.
47. Fraser C, Alm EJ, Polz MF, Spratt BG, Hanage WP: The bacterial species
challenge: making sense of genetic and ecological diversity. Science
2009, 323(5915):741-746.
48. Huse SM, Dethlefsen L, Huber JA, Mark Welch D, Relman DA, Sogin ML:
Exploring microbial diversity and taxonomy using SSU rRNA
hypervariable tag sequencing. PLoS Genet 2008, 4(11):e1000255.
49. Konstantinidis KT, Ramette A, Tiedje JM: The bacterial species definition in
the genomic era. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 2006,
361(1475):1929-1940.
50. Welch RA, Burland V, Plunkett G, Redford P, Roesch P, Rasko D, Buckles EL,
Liou SR, Boutin A, Hackett J, Stroud D, Mayhew GF, Rose DJ, Zhou S,
Schwartz DC, Perna NT, Mobley HL, Donnenberg MS, Blattner FR: Extensive
mosaic structure revealed by the complete genome sequence of
uropathogenic Escherichia coli. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2002,
99(26):17020-17024.
51. Thompson JR, Pacocha S, Pharino C, Klepac-Ceraj V, Hunt DE, Benoit J,
Sarma-Rupavtarm R, Distel DL, Polz MF: Genotypic diversity within a
natural coastal bacterioplankton population. Science 2005,
307(5713):1311-1313.
52. Gevers D, Cohan FM, Lawrence JG, Spratt BG, Coenye T, Feil EJ,
Stackebrandt E, Van de Peer Y, Vandamme P, Thompson FL, Swings J:
Opinion: Re-evaluating prokaryotic species. Nat Rev Microbiol 2005,
3(9):733-739.
53. Spratt BG, Hanage WP, Feil EJ: The relative contributions of recombination
and point mutation to the diversification of bacterial clones. Curr Opin
Microbiol 2001, 4(5):602-606.
54. Nakayama K, Yamashita A, Kurokawa K, Morimoto T, Ogawa M, Fukuhara M,
Urakami H, Ohnishi M, Uchiyama I, Ogura Y, Ooka T, Oshima K, Tamura A,
Hattori M, Hayashi T: The Whole-genome sequencing of the obligate
intracellular bacterium Orientia tsutsugamushi revealed massive gene
amplification during reductive genome evolution. DNA Res 2008,
15(4):185-199.
55. Chun J, Grim CJ, Hasan NA, Lee JH, Choi SY, Haley BJ, Taviani E, Jeon YS,
Kim DW, Lee JH, Brettin TS, Bruce DC, Challacombe JF, Detter JC, Han CS,
Munk AC, Chertkov O, Meincke L, Saunders E, Walters RA, Huq A, Nair GB,
Colwell RR: Comparative genomics reveals mechanism for short-term
and long-term clonal transitions in pandemic Vibrio cholerae. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2009, 106(36):15442-15447.
56. Moran NA, McLaughlin HJ, Sorek R: The dynamics and time scale of
ongoing genomic erosion in symbiotic bacteria. Science 2009,
323(5912):379-382.
57. Torsvik V, Goksoyr J, Daae FL: High diversity in DNA of soil bacteria. Appl
Environ Microbiol 1990, 56(3):782-787.
58. Gevers D, Cohan FM, Lawrence JG, Spratt BG, Coenye T, Feil EJ,
Stackebrandt E, Van de Peer Y, Vandamme P, Thompson FL, Swings J:
Opinion: Re-evaluating prokaryotic species. Nat Rev Microbiol 2005,
3(9):733-739.
59. Acinas SG, Klepac-Ceraj V, Hunt DE, Pharino C, Ceraj I, Distel DL, Polz MF:
Fine-scale phylogenetic architecture of a complex bacterial community.
Nature 2004, 430(6999):551-554.
60. Schloss PD, Westcott SL, Ryabin T, Hall JR, Hartmann M, Hollister EB,
Lesniewski RA, Oakley BB, Parks DH, Robinson CJ, Sahl JW, Stres B,
Thallinger GG, Van Horn DJ, Weber CF: Introducing mothur: open-source,
platform-independent, community-supported software for describing
and comparing microbial communities. Appl Environ Microbiol 2009,
75(23):7537-7541.

Page 11 of 11

61. Huse SM, Dethlefsen L, Huber JA, Mark Welch D, Relman DA, Sogin ML:
Exploring microbial diversity and taxonomy using SSU rRNA
hypervariable tag sequencing. PLoS Genet 2008, 4(11):e1000255.
62. Touchon M, Hoede C, Tenaillon O, Barbe V, Baeriswyl S, Bidet P, Bingen E,
Bonacorsi S, Bouchier C, Bouvet O, Calteau A, Chiapello H, Clermont O,
Cruveiller S, Danchin A, Diard M, Dossat C, Karoui ME, Frapy E, Garry L,
Ghigo JM, Gilles AM, Johnson J, Le Bouguenec C, Lescat M, Mangenot S,
Martinez-Jehanne V, Matic I, Nassif X, Oztas S, Petit MA, Pichon C, Rouy Z,
Ruf CS, Schneider D, Tourret J, Vacherie B, Vallenet D, Medigue C, Rocha EP,
Denamur E: Organised genome dynamics in the Escherichia coli species
results in highly diverse adaptive paths. PLoS Genet 2009, 5(1):e1000344.
63. Pupo GM, Lan R, Reeves PR: Multiple independent origins of Shigella
clones of Escherichia coli and convergent evolution of many of their
characteristics. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2000, 97(19):10567-10572.
64. Kettler GC, Martiny AC, Huang K, Zucker J, Coleman ML, Rodrigue S, Chen F,
Lapidus A, Ferriera S, Johnson J, Steglich C, Church GM, Richardson P,
Chisholm SW: Patterns and implications of gene gain and loss in the
evolution of Prochlorococcus. PLoS Genet 2007, 3(12):e231.
65. O’Malley MA, Boucher Y: Paradigm change in evolutionary microbiology.
Stud Hist Philos Biol Biomed Sci 2005, 36(1):183-208.
66. Huse SM, Huber JA, Morrison HG, Sogin ML, Welch DM: Accuracy and
quality of massively parallel DNA pyrosequencing. Genome Biol 2007,
8(7):R143.
doi:10.1186/1745-6150-6-58
Cite this article as: Case and Boucher: Molecular musings in microbial
ecology and evolution. Biology Direct 2011 6:58.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
