<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title></title>
<meta name="Creator" content="Adobe InDesign CS4 (6.0.6)"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Adobe PDF Library 9.0"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Castoe et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:406
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/7/406

OPEN LETTER	

Open Access

Sequencing the genome of the Burmese python
(Python molurus bivittatus) as a model for studying
extreme adaptations in snakes
Todd A Castoe1, AP Jason de Koning1, Kathryn T Hall1, Ken D Yokoyama1, Wanjun Gu2, Eric N Smith3, Cédric Feschotte3,
Peter Uetz4, David A Ray5, Jason Dobry6, Robert Bogden6, Stephen P Mackessy7, Anne M Bronikowski8,
Wesley C Warren9, Stephen M Secor10 and David D Pollock1*
Abstract
The Consortium for Snake Genomics is in the process
of sequencing the genome and creating transcriptomic
resources for the Burmese python. Here, we describe
how this will be done, what analyses this work will
include, and provide a timeline.
The importance of snakes, and the Burmese
python, as model organisms
The evolutionary origin of snakes involved extensive
morphological and physiological adaptations that included
the loss of limbs, lung reduction, and trunk and organ
elongation. Most snakes also evolved a suite of radical
adaptations to consume large prey relative to their body
size, including the ability to endure extreme physiological
and metabolic fluctuations [1,2] and produce diverse
venom proteins [3,4]. These radical adaptations, centered
around consuming large prey whole, have made snakes
an interesting model for studying metabolic flux and
organ physiology, regeneration, and regulation, with the
most important example being the Burmese python.
Within 2 to 3 days after feeding, the Burmese python
(Python molurus bivittatus) can experience tremendous
physiological changes, including: a 44-fold increase in
metabolic rate (the highest among tetrapods); 35 to 100%
increases in the mass of the heart, liver, pancreas, small
intestine, and kidneys; 160-fold increase in plasma fatty
acid and triglyceride content; and 5-fold increase in
intestinal microvillus length [1,5]. After the completion
of digestion, each of these phenotypes is reversed as
digestive functions are downregulated and tissues
*Correspondence: David.Pollock@ucdenver.edu
1
Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Genetics, University of Colorado School
of Medicine, 12801 17th Ave, Aurora, CO 80045, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

undergo atrophy [6]. This extreme modulation of tissue
morphology and function facilitates investigation into
the signaling and cellular mechanisms that underlie regu­
lation of organ performance and regeneration. These
animals are also readily obtained from commercial
breeders, non-aggressive, and easier and cheaper to care
for than laboratory rats. The scientific potential of this
system to reveal molecular mechanisms associated with
these extreme reactions (and their reversal) is tremen­ ous,
d
and can provide novel insight into vertebrate gene and
systems function, novel strategies and drug targets for
treating human diseases, and alternative disease models.
Snakes have also been used as model species for highprofile discoveries pertaining to vertebrate development,
including the findings that vertebrate metamerism
(somito­ enesis) can be controlled by changing the rate of
g
somitogenesis [7], that the loss of limbs correlates with
changes in expression of some regulatory genes [8] as
well as Hox gene expression and gene structure [9], that
particular developmental pathways are associated with
tooth and fang development [10], and that limblessness
in snakes may result from failure to activate core
vertebrate signaling pathways during development and
from changes in Hox gene expression [8,11]. Snakes are
also important models for high-performance muscle
physiology [12], genetic sex determination [13], evolu­
tion­ ry ecology [14,15], and molecular evolution and
a
adaptation [16-18]. Enhanced snake genomic resources
(eventually including comparative genomic data from
multiple species) are expected to provide additional
insight into how the unique structures and developmental
processes of snakes evolved.
In addition to the python (which is non-venomous),
venomous snake species are also important for bio­
medical research, as is developing a greater under­ tand­
s
ing of the genomic and adaptive contexts leading to the
origin of venom genes. Worldwide, the World Health

© 2011 Castoe et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any
medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Castoe et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:406
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/7/406

Organization estimates that there are about 2.5 million
venomous snake bites per year (about 1,400 in the US),
resulting in about 125,000 deaths [19]. As a consequence,
the health relevance of snake venom research is extensive.
Genes identified in snake venoms are related to genes
used in normal housekeeping and digestive roles in other
vertebrates [3,4], but the details of how these have been
modified by evolution to become functionally diverse
toxic venoms cannot readily be determined without good
comparative information from the full complement of
genes from both venomous and non-venomous snakes.

Phylogenetic position of snakes and the python
Among vertebrates, the snake lineage represents a
speciose (about 3,100 species) and phenotypically diverse
radiation. Because snakes represent such an ancient
(about 150 million years old) lineage on the branch of the
vertebrate tree of life (Figure 1; squamate reptile diver­
gence estimates based on [20]), understanding the content
of snake genomes will contribute broadly to an under­ tand­
s
ing of vertebrate genomics. Together with the genome of
the Anolis lizard, the availability of a snake genome (and
eventually, multiple snake genomes) will contribute to
better rooting of mammalian gene trees, and to more
accurate reconstructions of amniote ances­ ral genome
t
attributes. Below, we outline that in addition to the python
genome, the genomes of the venomous king cobra and
the non-venomous garter snake are also currently being
sequenced. In the phylogenetic tree in Figure 1, we
highlight that in addition to the major lineages being
targeted by these three confirmed genome projects, there
are two other major groups, blindsnakes and venomous
vipers (for example, rattlesnakes), that are not yet explicitly
targeted by ongoing genome sequencing projects (although
multiple groups have cited these as potential targets). One
purpose of the website that we have established [21] is to
provide the community with updated information on
targeting of species for genome sequencing.
Python genome project overview
A main goal of the python genome project is to provide
key genomic resources to facilitate studies of how its
extreme phenotypes are regulated and accomplished at
the molecular level. Thus, a central component of the
python genome project is to produce a draft python
genome that contains genic and near-genic regions that
are assembled and annotated. To provide a service to the
broader research community, we have released a prepublication preliminary draft assembly of the python
genome for conditional use. We are working under the
Toronto Statement for prepublication release [22], and
this letter provides the details of our plans and
responsibilities, as outlined in the original paper describ­
ing this statement [22].

Page 2 of 8

Properties of the python genome, and genomic
resources currently available
Snake genomes are often smaller than mammalian
genomes, ranging from about 1.3 Gbp to 3.8 Gbp, with an
average of 2.08 Gbp [23]. There is no existing estimate for
the genome of Python molurus, but the most recent
estimate for the related species Python reticulatus is 1.44
Gbp; this suggests that the Burmese python genome is
relatively small compared with most snakes. The karyo­
type of the Burmese python is known, and comprises 36
chromosomes (2n = 36), with 16 macrochromosomes
and 20 microchromosomes [24]. All snakes are thought
to have ZW genetic sex determination, with males being
the homogametic sex (ZZ) and females heterogametic
(ZW).
Since the early work of Olmo and colleagues [25,26]
using DNA reassociation kinetics, it has been known that
the genome of P. molurus had particularly low amounts
of repetitive DNA compared with other snakes. This was
recently confirmed with sequence-based evidence [27],
using 454 sequencing of genomic shotgun libraries to
randomly sample fractions of snake genomes, and using
these fractions to estimate genomic repetitive element
content and diversity (Figure 2; data based on [27]). From
these data, the python genome was estimated to be made
up of 21% readily identifiable repetitive element sequence
(Figure 2), compared with more than double that (45%) in
the venomous copperhead (a relative of the rattlesnake)
with a similarly sized genome [27]. Despite the contrast
in repetitive element abundance, both snakes contained a
similarly broad diversity of transposable element types,
which seems to be an emerging hallmark of squamate
reptile (lizards and snakes) genomes [27-29]. Bov-B and
CR1 LINE retroelements were among the most
prominent transposable element types in the python
genome (Figure 2) [27], a characteristic in common with
other snake genomes [27,29].
Burmese python genome draft version 1.0

We completed and publicly released an initial draft
assem­ ly of the Burmese python genome (v1.0). This
b
sequence was obtained from a single individual pur­
chased from a commercial breeder, and did not originate
from an inbred line (per se), and thus we expect moderate
levels of heterozygosity.
This genome draft was built primarily from Illumina
GAIIx sequencing of a short insert (325  bp) paired-end
shotgun genomic library. Various amounts of sequence
data were collected from this library using paired reads of
three different lengths (114 bp: 15.1 Gbp, 76 bp: 5.6 Gbp,
and 36 bp: 2.9 Gbp), with the addition of a small amount
(30  Mbp) of 454 shotgun library sequences. The v1.0
draft Burmese python genome, based on 23.7  Gbp of
DNA sequence data, is equivalent to approximately

Castoe et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:406
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/7/406

Page 3 of 8

Figure 1. Phylogenetic tree of major amniote vertebrate lineages. Approximate divergence times are indicated. The turtle lineage is not
included, and the placement of that lineage on this tree is controversial.

Castoe et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:406
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/7/406

Page 4 of 8

B

Figure 2. Repetitive elements in the Burmese python genome. The estimated proportion of the Burmese python genome sequence occupied
by different repetitive elements (including the largest category, ‘unannotated’) is indicated. Results are based on genomic sample-sequencing using
454 genomic shotgun libraries, and identification of known and de novo repeat elements within these data was performed as reported in [27]. LINE,
long interspersed element; LTR, long terminal repeat; SINE, short interspersed element.

17-fold coverage of the estimated 1.4 Gbp python
genome, and is available from the NCBI accession
AEQU000000000.1. This coverage is equivalent to about
35X ‘virtual’ or ‘structural’ coverage of the genome, which
includes the gaps in the paired-end sequences.
Computational genome assembly was conducted using
SOAP de novo v.1.04, with a k-mer size of 31. This
assembly yielded 1.128 million contigs, with a mean
length of 944 bp and an N50 length of 1,355 bp. Using
paired-end sequence reads, contigs were assembled into
324,418 scaffolds that had a mean length of 1,397 bp and
an N50 length of 2,186 bp. The total length of the
scaffolded assembly was 1,177 Mbp. We note that the
average contig and scaffold sizes in this draft are relatively
small, in part because there are no sequences from longer

mate-pair libraries or BAC references to increase
structural coverage and improve assembly; such coverage
will be added in future drafts.
Python BAC library resources

There is a high-quality high-density (about 5X coverage)
BAC library available for the Burmese python, con­ tructed
s
using DNA from the same individual from which the draft
genome was sequenced. This BAC library, along with
mapping and sequencing services, is currently available
commercially to the public from Amplicon Express [30].
Other resources

Limited transcriptomic resources have already been
made available at the snake genomics website [21], and a

Castoe et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:406
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/7/406

larger suite of transcriptomic resources will be made
available with the release of the second assembly of the
python genome (v2.0). There is also a preliminary set of
repeat element consensus sequences, estimated from
genomic sample sequencing of 454 genomic shotgun
libraries [21,27].

Strategy for sequencing the python genome
Our strategy for improving the existing python genome is
to add substantial additional sequence coverage from
slightly longer insert (600 bp) paired-end Illumina
sequen­ ing, together with 3-kb mate-pair paired-end
c
sequence. We plan to have a total of 50X coverage of
these mixed read types, predominantly from long (114 to
150 bp) Illumina GAIIx paired-end reads.
The second draft assembly will be updated with the
new short and long insert paired-end sequence data.
Genome assembly will involve four principal steps that
progress from forming contigs from raw quality-filtered
sequence reads, to connecting contigs into scaffolds
using paired-end sequence data, to gap filling (using all
reads) and error correction. The set of smaller contigs
will serve as anchors for addition of longer range insert
sizes to increase scaffold length.
We therefore expect that contig lengths will be
sufficient for most gene predictions and post-assembly
alignment-based analysis. We also expect that the attri­
butes of the python genome, being smaller and also lower
in repetitive content than mammalian genomes (or other
snakes), for example [27], together with our use of
relatively long sequence reads, will produce a reasonably
good quality assembly with moderately long contigs and
scaffolds.
We will assess the accuracy of the assembled python
genome using several methods, including read chaff rate
(proportion of reads not incorporated into the assembly),
read depth of coverage, average quality values per contig,
discordant read pairs, gene footprint coverage (as
assessed by cDNA contigs) and comparative alignments
to the most closely related species with a complete
genome - the Anolis lizard (and eventually, other snake
genome assemblies). We will also take advantage of
mapped cDNA contigs from various python tissues to
improve assembly contiguity and accuracy, further
strengthen­ ng the genic component of this assembly.
i
Our internally contamination-screened genome assem­
bly will be submitted to the whole genome shotgun
division of GenBank for independent contamination
analysis. The final assembly will be posted on the
Ensembl [31], University of California Santa Cruz [32]
and NCBI [33] genome browsers for public queries as
soon as it is available and passes contamination analyses,
and relevant announcements and links will be posted on
the snake genomics website [21].

Page 5 of 8

Description of sequencing project with anticipated
milestones and timeline
We recently released a preliminary draft assembly of the
python genome (v1.0) to the public, together with limited
transcriptome data. This assembly includes primarily
about 17X coverage from Illumina short-insert pairedend sequencing and is therefore expected to be relatively
fragmentary. Our anticipated timeline includes the com­
ple­ ion of data collection required for the updated
t
assembly (v2.0) based on extended genome coverage
(about 50X) from short and longer insert paired-end
Illumina sequencing by the end of the summer of 2011.
This will be accompanied by an extensive set of trans­ rip­
c
tome data, from multiple organs, that will be incor­
porated into gene prediction annotations. Attainment of
50X genome coverage and completion of long mate-pair
library sequencing will mark the end of the data
collection phase and the start of assembly and analysis.
The end of this phase will be marked clearly on the snake
genomics website [21], as will milestones of data analysis
and release. The maximum time between the end of data
collection and submission of the genome paper will be
1  year. The Toronto Statement suggests that there be a
1-year period, after which global analyses and publication
by the community would be unimpeded. We recognize
the start of this 1-year period at approximately the time
that this manuscript will be published, July 2011, and
therefore this embargo period would end July 2012.
Biological questions and types of analyses to be
addressed by the python genome project
Here we outline the major questions, types of analyses,
and analytical goals that will be included in the core
python genome marker paper. The Toronto Statement
suggests this be done to identify these topics as being
somewhat embargoed, and we also see this as providing
expectations for the community regarding the types of
analyses planned. Although vignettes of the topics below
will, in most cases, appear in some form in the core
python genome paper, a majority of these will also
involve longer-term research (including other publica­
tions) by members of the working group. Ultimately, the
goal of the Consortium for Snake Genomics is to make
certain that research efforts are not duplicated, and also
to put together clusters of researchers interested in
similar questions. Thus, we continue to welcome addi­
tional members to join the Consortium for Snake
Genomics, and because of this, the research scope of the
group may continue to expand beyond even what we
outline here because of the interests of new members.
The analytical goals of the python genome project focus
on aspects of the extreme physiology and metabolism of
pythons, and on making links between the extreme
phenotypes and genotypes of the python and snakes in

Castoe et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:406
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/7/406

general. A main focus of analysis will include trans­ rip­
c
tome data that describes the dynamics of gene expression
that accompanies major physiological transitions brought
about by feeding in the python. We will also be
conducting genome-wide analysis of protein evolution to
detect patterns of molecular evolution indicating positive
selection that may relate to key adaptations of snakes,
and the python specifically. In addition to focusing on all
proteins in the genome, we intend to include detailed
analysis of sets of genes involved in physiology, metabo­
lism, heat sensing, vision, body elongation, limb loss, and
the evolution of snake venoms. We anticipate analyzing
how the protein families of interest identified above have
differentially expanded or contracted in the snake and
mammalian lineages.
We are also interested in analyses that focus on areas of
the genome outside of the protein-coding regions.
Complementing our analysis of protein-coding genes, we
plan to use the python genome to investigate, essentially
for the first time, unique properties of snake and reptilian
gene and promoter architecture, and to make a first
attempt to identify snake cis-regulatory elements and
compare these to other species. Specifically, this analysis
will include comparisons of nucleotide content and overrepresented motifs that occur in core upstream promo­
ters of genes with well-predicted transcription starts.
Our comparisons would highlight cis-regulatory struc­
ture in the python and anole lizard in relation to patterns
in other vertebrates. We also are interested in studying
the repetitive element landscape of the python genome,
including identification of which types of transposable
elements occur in the python genome and how these
elements have expanded over evolutionary time, and how
horizontal transfer may explain their origins in the
python genome. Our genome analyses will additionally
include identification of single nucleotide polymorphisms
from genomic and transcriptomic data collected, and an
effort to make available sets of sequences for use as
molecular markers for snakes (for example, microsatellite
primers and orthologous loci for use in phylogenetics
and other applications). Lastly, we will be conducting a
detailed analysis to identify genomic sequences that
represent python sex chromosomes by using genomic
sequences collected from multiple individuals from both
sexes.
There are a number of potential research areas that
would probably be productive to pursue but are outside
of the scope of the current plans of the project - these
topics are therefore potential research avenues that we
encourage others to pursue. Because the python
represents a relatively deep evolutionary lineage on the
amniote vertebrate tree of life, using the python data
together with other comparative data to estimate
genomic characteristics of the ancestral amniote genome

Page 6 of 8

(or the ancestral squamate genome) would be fascinating,
including estimation of ancestral gene family copy
numbers, instances of differential expansion/contraction
of gene families in mammals and squamate reptiles,
evolution of long conserved non-coding sequences, and
genomic features such as isochore structure. Analysis of
genes and gene families involved in vertebrate hearing,
locomotion, behavior, and coloration are other examples
of projects outside of the scope of the current project.

Justification and strategies for expansion of snake
genomics
Research incorporating snakes as model systems is
becoming increasingly popular and diverse in its breadth
of topics. The availability of the python genome and
associated resources will provide a much-needed genetic
and genomic reference infrastructure for further facili­ at­
t
ing such research. In addition to the importance of the
python as a model for research, different snake species
have been used as model systems for different types of
research. For example, research focusing on behavior,
development, and evolutionary ecology has focused on
smaller non-venomous species such as garter and corn
snakes in the family Colubridae, whereas research related
to snake venom and envenomation have centered on
venomous species typically in the families Viperidae (for
example, rattlesnakes, and adders) and Elapidae (for
example, coral snakes, cobras, and mambas). In addition
to these lineages that contain commonly used model
research species, blindsnakes represent a lineage that
diverged long ago from the rest of the snakes, and as such
would be a major contribution for comparative and
evolutionary analyses. In addition to the python, we are
aware of two additional confirmed snake genome sequen­
cing projects targeting the non-venomous garter snake
[29], and the venomous king cobra (F Vonk, personal
communication; Figure 1). We therefore expect that
multiple snake genomes will be available to support
diverse research projects in the near future, and the
incorporation of additional lineages of snakes would
further support their utility as research models.
Formation of the Consortium for Snake Genomics
and a portal for snake genomic resources
To foster the growth of a productive and interactive
community of researchers interested in snake genomics,
and to also encourage the growth of snake genomic
resources, we have established the Consortium for Snake
Genomics (CSG) and a website to house related content
[21]. A core concept guiding the establishment of the CSG
is that through shared interest in developing resources for
snake-related research, individual researchers would be
able to benefit from the pooling of resources, research
motivations, and expertise, while also avoiding redundant

Castoe et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:406
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/7/406

effort. Therefore, an integral part of this vision includes
the recruitment of, and interaction among, a diverse
working group of researchers interested in using snake
genomic resources.
The CSG is also directly involved with the reptilian
subset of the Genome10K project [34], with the intention
of making certain that efforts to build resources for
particular species are not duplicated, and that scientific
arguments for the need for genomic resources of parti­ u­
c
lar types, or for particular snake lineages, get translated
into priorities for future sequencing initiatives, and that
all this gets translated to the community through the
snake genomics website [21]. At the website we have
created pages with links to available snake genomic
resources, and posted updates (news) on major projects,
such as the status of various snake genomics sequencing
projects and data releases; RSS feeds have been set up so
that changes to the various pages can be updated through
RSS readers automatically once subscribed to the feed.
We have also set up an email list system so that interested
researchers can request to receive occasional email
updates related to snake genomics. Lastly, for researchers
interested in becoming directly integrated into ongoing
or future CSG projects, email contacts for the lead author
are provided on the site.
Author details
1
Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Genetics, University of Colorado
School of Medicine, 12801 17th Ave, Aurora, CO 80045, USA. 2Key Laboratory
of Child Development and Learning Science, Southeast University, Si Pai Lou
2, Ministry of Education, Nanjing, 210096, China. 3Department of Biology,
University of Texas, 501 S. Nedderman Dr., Arlington, TX 76019, USA. 4Center for
Bioinformatics & Computational Biology, University of Delaware, 15 Innovation
Way, Newark, DE 19711, USA. 5Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, Mississippi State University, 101 College Road, Mississippi State,
MS 39762, USA. 6Amplicon Express, 2345 NE Hopkins Ct., Pullman, WA 99163,
USA. 7School of Biological Sciences, 501 20th Street, University of Northern
Colorado, Greeley, CO 80631, USA. 8Department of Ecology, Evolution, and
Organismal Biology, Iowa State University, 253 Bessey Hall, Ames, IA 50011,
USA. 9Genome Sequencing Center, Washington University School of Medicine,
4444 Forest Park Ave, St Louis, MO 63108, USA. 10Department of Biological
Sciences, University of Alabama, 300 Hackberry Lane, Tuscaloosa, AL 35487,
USA.

Page 7 of 8

7.	
8.	
9.	
10.	

11.	
12.	
13.	

14.	
15.	
16.	

17.	
18.	

19.	
20.	

21.	
22.	

23.	

Published: 28 July 2011
References
1.	 Secor SM, Diamond J: Adaptive responses to feeding in Burmese pythons:
pay before pumping. J Exp Biol 1995, 198:1313-1325.
2.	 Secor SM, Diamond J: A vertebrate model of extreme physiological
regulation. Nature 1998, 395:659-662.
3.	 Fry BG, Vidal N, Norman JA, Vonk FJ, Scheib H, Ramjan SF, Kuruppu S, Fung K,
Hedges SB, Richardson MK, Hodgson WC, Ignjatovic V, Summerhayes R,
Kochva E: Early evolution of the venom system in lizards and snakes.
Nature 2006, 439:584-588.
4.	 Ikeda N, Chijiwa T, Matsubara K, Oda-Ueda N, Hattori S, Matsuda Y, Ohno M:
Unique structural characteristics and evolution of a cluster of venom
phospholipase A: isozyme genes of Protobothrops flavoviridis snake. Gene
2010, 461:15-25.
5.	 Cox CL, Secor SM: Matched regulation of gastrointestinal performance in
the Burmese python, Python molurus. J Exp Biol 2008, 211:1131-1140.
6.	 Secor SM: Digestive physiology of the Burmese python: broad regulation
of integrated performance. J Exp Biol 2008, 211:3767-3774.

24.	
25.	
26.	
27.	

28.	
29.	
30. 	

Gomez C, Ozbudak EM, Wunderlich J, Baumann D, Lewis J, Pourquie O:
Control of segment number in vertebrate embryos. Nature 2008,
454:335-339.
Cohn MJ, Tickle C: Developmental basis of limblessness and axial
patterning in snakes. Nature 1999, 399:474-479.
Kohlsdorf T, Cummings MP, Lynch VJ, Stopper GF, Takahashi K, Wagner GP:
A molecular footprint of limb loss: sequence variation of the autopodial
identity gene Hoxa-13. J Mol Evol 2008, 67:581-593.
Vonk FJ, Admiraal JF, Jackson K, Reshef R, de Bakker MA, Vanderschoot K, van
den Berge I, van Atten M, Burgerhout E, Beck A, Mirtschin PJ, Kochva E, Witte
F, Fry BG, Woods AE, Richardson MK: Evolutionary origin and development
of snake fangs. Nature 2008, 454:630-633.
Di-Poi N, Montoya-Burgos JI, Miller H, Pourquie O, Milinkovitch MC, Duboule
D: Changes in Hox genes’ structure and function during the evolution of
the squamate body plan. Nature 2010, 464:99-103.
Moon BR, Tullis A: The ontogeny of contractile performance and metabolic
capacity in a high-frequency muscle. Physiol Biochem Zool 2006, 79:20-30.
Matsubara K, Tarui H, Toriba M, Yamada K, Nishida-Umehara C, Agata K,
Matsuda Y: Evidence for different origin of sex chromosomes in snakes,
birds, and mammals and step-wise differentiation of snake sex
chromosomes. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2006, 103:18190-18195.
Sparkman AM, Arnold SJ, Bronikowski AM: An empirical test of evolutionary
theories for reproductive senescence and reproductive effort in the garter
snake Thamnophis elegans. Proc Roy Soc B Biol Sci 2007, 274:943-950.
Geffeney S, Ruben PC, Brodie ED Jr, Brodie ED III: Mechanisms of adaptation
in a predator-prey arms race: TTX resistant sodium channels. Science 2002,
297:1336-1339.
Castoe TA, de Koning APJ, Kim HM, Gu W, Noonan BP, Naylor G, Jiang ZJ,
Parkinson CL, Pollock DD: Evidence for an ancient adaptive episode of
convergent molecular evolution. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2009,
106:8986-8991.
Castoe TA, Jiang ZJ, Gu W, Wang ZO, Pollock DD: Adaptive evolution and
functional redesign of core metabolic proteins in snakes. PLoS ONE 2008,
3:e2201.
Fry BG, Vidal N, Norman JA, Vonk FJ, Scheib H, Ramjan SF, Kuruppu S, Fung K,
Hedges SB, Richardson MK, Hodgson WC, Ignjatovic V, Summerhayes R,
Kochva E: Early evolution of the venom system in lizards and snakes.
Nature 2006, 439:584-588.
Cruz LS, Vargas R, Lopes AA: Snakebite envenomation and death in the
developing world. Ethn Dis 2009, 19(1 Suppl 1):S1-42-46.
Castoe TA, Gu W, de Koning AP, Daza JM, Jiang ZJ, Parkinson CL, Pollock DD:
Dynamic nucleotide mutation gradients and control region usage in
squamate reptile mitochondrial genomes. Cytogenet Genome Res 2009,
127:112-127.
Snake Genomics [http://www.snakegenomics.org]
Birney E, Hudson TJ, Green ED, Gunter C, Eddy S, Rogers J, Harris JR, Ehrlich
SD, Apweiler R, Austin CP, Berglund L, Bobrow M, Bountra C, Brookes AJ,
Cambon-Thomsen A, Carter NP, Chisholm RL, Contreras JL, Cooke RM, Crosby
WL, Dewar K, Durbin R, Dyke SO, Ecker JR, El Emam K, Feuk L, Gabriel SB,
Gallacher J, Gelbart WM, et al.: Prepublication data sharing. Nature 2009,
461:168-170.
Gregory TR, Nicol JA, Tamm H, Kullman B, Kullman K, Leitch IJ, Murray BG,
Kapraun DF, Greilhuber J, Bennett MD: Eukaryotic genome size databases.
Nucleic Acids Res 2007, 35:D332-D338.
Singh L, Sharma T, Ray-Chaudhuri SP: Chromosomes and the classification
of the snakes of the family Boidae. Cytogenetics 1968, 7:161-168.
Olmo E, Stingo V, Odierna G, Cobror O: Variations in the repetitive DNA and
evolution in reptiles. Comp Biochem Physiol 1981, 69:687-691.
Olmo E: Genomic composition of reptiles: evolutionary perspectives.
J Herpetol 1984, 18:20-32.
Castoe TA, Hall K, Guibotsy Mboulas ML, Gu W, de Koning AP, Poole AW,
Vemulapalli V, Daza JM, Feschotte C, Pollock DD: Discovery of highly
divergent repeat landscapes in snake genomes using high throughput
sequencing. Genome Biol Evol 2011, doi:10.1093/gbe/evr043.
Shedlock AM, Botka CW, Zhao S, Shetty J, Zhang T, Liu JS, Deschavanne PJ,
Edwards SV: Phylogenomics of nonavian reptiles and the structure of the
ancestral amniote genome. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2007, 104:2767-2772.
Castoe TA, Bronikowski AM, Brodie ED 3rd, Edwards SV, Pfrender ME, Shapiro
MD, Pollock DD, Warren WC: A proposal to sequence the genome of a
garter snake (Thamnophis sirtalis). Stand Genomic Sci 2011, 4:257-270.
Amplicon Express [http://www.genomex.com/]

Castoe et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:406
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/7/406

31. 	
32.	
33.	
34.	

Ensembl [http://www.ensembl.org]
UCSC genome browser [http://genome.ucsc.edu]
NCBI Genomes & Maps [http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/guide/genomes]
Genome 10K Community of Scientists: Genome 10K: a proposal to obtain
whole-genome sequence for 10,000 vertebrate species. J Hered 2009,
100:659-674.

Page 8 of 8

doi:10.1186/gb-2011-12-7-406
Cite this article as: Castoe TA, et al.: Sequencing the genome of the
Burmese python (Python molurus bivittatus) as a model for studying
extreme adaptations in snakes. Genome Biology 2011, 12:406.

</pre>
</body>
</html>
