<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Vertebrates used for medicinal purposes by members of the Nyishi and Galo tribes in Arunachal Pradesh (North-East India)</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Journal of Ethnobiology and Ethnomedicine 2011, 7:13. doi:10.1186/1746-4269-7-13"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Jharna Chakravorty"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Chakravorty et al. Journal of Ethnobiology and Ethnomedicine 2011, 7:13
http://www.ethnobiomed.com/content/7/1/13

JOURNAL OF ETHNOBIOLOGY
AND ETHNOMEDICINE

RESEARCH

Open Access

Vertebrates used for medicinal purposes by
members of the Nyishi and Galo tribes in
Arunachal Pradesh (North-East India)
Jharna Chakravorty1,2, V Benno Meyer-Rochow2* and Sampat Ghosh1

Abstract
Arunachal Pradesh, the easternmost part of India, is endowed with diverse natural resources and inhabited by a
variety of ethnic groups that have developed skills to exploit the biotic resources of the region for food and
medicines. Information on animals and animal parts as components of folk remedies used by local healers and
village headmen of the Nyishi and Galo tribes in their respective West Siang and Subansiri districts were obtained
through interviews and structured questionnaires. Of a total of 36 vertebrate species used in treatments of ailments
and diseases, mammals comprised 50%; they were followed by birds (22%), fishes (17%), reptiles (8%) and
amphibians (3%). Approximately 20 common complaints of humans as well as foot and mouth disease of cattle
were targets of zootherapies. Most commonly treated were fevers, body aches and pains, tuberculosis, malaria,
wounds and burns, typhoid, smallpox, dysentery and diarrhoea, jaundice, and early pregnancy pains. Very few
domestic animal species (e.g., goat and cattle) were used zootherapeutically. More frequently it was wild animals,
including endangered or protective species like hornbill, pangolin, clouded leopard, tiger, bear, and wolf, whose
various parts were either used in folk remedies or as food. Some of the animal-based traditional medicines or
animal parts were sold at local markets, where they had to compete with modern, western pharmaceuticals. To
record, document, analyze and test the animal-derived local medicines before they become replaced by western
products is one challenge; to protect the already dwindling populations of certain wild animal species used as a
resource for the traditional animal-derived remedies, is another.
Introduction
Scientific research is revealing an ever increasing number of links between biodiversity and human health, not
only in terms of food resources or food security, but
also with regard to materials to treat and cure diseases.
Since ancient time plants and animals, or parts of them,
have been used therapeutically and even today animal
and plant-based medicines continue to play an essential
role in world health care [1]. Although plant and plantderived materials have received considerably more attention from scientists and are more commonly used in
traditional medical systems than animal-derived products, the latter also constitute an important element in
the materialia medica. In fact, the use of animals for
medicinal purposes is part of a body of traditional
* Correspondence: b.meyer-rochow@jacobs-university.de
2
School of Engineering and Science, Jacobs University, Research II (Rm. 37)
D-28759 Bremen, Germany
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

knowledge, which is becoming more and more relevant
to discussions on mammalian relationships and phylogeny [2], conservation biology, biological prospecting,
and patenting [3-6]. It has been reported that more than
half of the world’s modern drugs are of biological
sources [7,8] and that of the 252 chemicals that have
been selected by the WHO as essential to human health,
8.7% come from animal sources [7].
It is fair to say that animals have been playing a significant role in healing processes, folk rituals, and religious
practices of peoples from all five continents [6,9-12]. In
traditional Chinese Medicine more than 1500 animal
species have been recorded to be of some medicinal use
[13,14]. A list of 60 different species of insects used to
treat a wide range of disabilities and illnesses in Japan
has been published [15] and 24 animal species were
identified, whose by-products were used therapeutically
by the Tamang people of Nepal [16]. In Pakistan, 31
animal-derived substances were said to constitute 9% of

© 2011 Chakravorty et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Chakravorty et al. Journal of Ethnobiology and Ethnomedicine 2011, 7:13
http://www.ethnobiomed.com/content/7/1/13

the total of the medicinal substances in the inventory of
traditional healers [17]. Alves [18] conducted a study to
review traditional treatments of a variety of ailments in
North-East Brazil and recorded 250 animal species used
in this context and Alves et. al. [19] reported that at
least 165 reptile species were used in traditional folk
medicines around the world.
In India, since times immemorial, investigations
focused on various zootherapies and traditional medicines, documented in the ancient texts of the Ayurveda
and Charaka Samhita. Because of its variety in geographic and climatic conditions, India is blessed with
diverse flora and fauna, different tribal and ethnic communities, a multitude of cultural complexities. This rich
diversity of traditional life styles and biological resources
in the different states has permitted gathering together a
wealth of ethnozoological knowledge. Yet, the documents containing these diverse pieces of ethnozoological
information have been very fragmentary, so that Mahawar and Jaroli [20] conducted a review in which they
documented approximately 109 animal species used in
the treatment of different kinds of ailments in the whole
of India. In another study, but restricted to the adjoining
areas of the wild life sanctuary of Mount Abu, 24 animal
species were reported to be of medicinal use [21]. Their
investigation highlighted the variety of zootherapeutic
uses among the tribes of India, especially those of
Rajasthan, Maharashtra, Kerala, Andhra Pradesh, parts
of Assam and Nagaland. Local uses of amphibians by
inhabitants of the Arun Basin [22] and traditional
zootherapeutic treatments among the tribal population
of Tamil Nadu [23] were reported and ethnomedicinal
uses of fish and other aquatic animals are known from
Bangladesh [24]. Mishra et al [25] very recently
described zoomedicinal uses from Orissa locals that
involved animal parts of 7 species of vertebrates to treat
12 different illnesses. Work on the ethnic people of Arunachal Pradesh, however, has till now received only very
scant attention (e.g., [26,27] and is in dire need of supplementary information.
Although traditional treatments, making use of animals or animal parts, have often been considered mere
superstition, their persistence over hundreds or even
thousands of years ought to be sufficient incentive to
probe whether or not they are effective. And sure
enough, the potency of at least some traditional medicines based on animals cannot be denied, since numerous such medicines have been methodically tested by
pharmaceutical companies and turned into sources of
drugs, which are now part of the armament of the modern healer [28]. For instance, peptides extracted from
scraped secretions of Phyllomedusa bicolor (Amphibians), are used in the treatment of depression, stroke,
seizures and cognitive loss in ailments such as

Page 2 of 14

Alzheimer’s disease [29]. Early muscle relaxants were
obtained from so-called poison arrow frogs, containing
curare, a compound also used in psychiatric treatments
[30]. The deer velvet extract pantocrin is nowadays marketed as a powerful antioxidant with anti-stress and
immunomodulatory activity for use with humans [31]
and animals, e.g. dogs [32].
Actually, while some uses of animals and their products as components of traditional medicines still
remain unrecorded, the list of animals that can be used
to obtain therapeutically important compounds from
grows. Thus, we have a problem: the scholarly investigation of studies on the medicinal uses of animals and
their products should not be neglected and ought to be
considered a legitimate and important quest to complement the existing body of knowledge. On the other
hand, species deemed most useful in this regard can
easily be overexploited and become threatened by
extinction [33].
The increasing relevance of ethnobiological knowledge
across the globe and, on the other hand, the danger of
losing this information before it can be properly documented, prompted us to embark on this study to record
to what extent members of the Nyishi and Galo tribes
of Arunachal Pradesh in the northeastern part of India
make use of animals and their products in treatments of
common ailments and diseases.
Study Area and Methodology

Arunachal Pradesh (Figure 1) lies in the north-easternmost part of India and shares a major portion of the
biological hot spot region of the Eastern Himalaya
owing to its range of vegetation from tropical to alpine.
The state is not only rich in floral and faunal diversity,
but with 26 major tribes and 110 sub-tribes also in ethnic communities. Forests cover 60% of the total area of
Arunachal Pradesh and the range of geographic, climatic, and cultural diversity has provided the backdrop
for the wealth of traditional knowledge in this region of
India. Traditional healing practices are one of the treasures of this resource-privileged region. The Nyishi and
Galo tribes of Arunachal inhabit mainly the East
Kameng (Nyishi) (Figure 2) and West Siang (Galo) (Figure 3) regions of Arunachal Pradesh, where literacy rate
is relatively low, but life expectancy is high. Due to limited access to proper medical care and transportation,
most of these people hold a traditional knowledge pertaining to the use of natural resources as medicines for
community welfare. For their livelihood these tribal people are totally dependent on the forest and its resources.
As with our earlier study [34] data were obtained during visits to ten villages in each of the tribal areas,
selected at random. The number of households per village was 12 - 20 (one village had 30). Frequently at least

Chakravorty et al. Journal of Ethnobiology and Ethnomedicine 2011, 7:13
http://www.ethnobiomed.com/content/7/1/13

Page 3 of 14

Figure 1 Map of Arunachal Pradesh, showing study sites (for information on latitudes and longitudes, see Figs 1b,c).

2 houses were unoccupied, because the families had
moved into the towns in search of work. At least two
households per village, inhabited by village elders and
their families, were visited. Recommendations by the
headman or village elders to visit certain knowledgeable
persons in another village were sometimes followed.
The interviewed people (20 persons aged between 45
and 70 years of age from each tribe) were asked simple
questions like “how do you know when you are sick?
What tells you that you are sick?”. After having obtained
a list of the major illnesses that the local people

recognize and distinguish, we asked how they treated a
person that suffered from such illnesses. When animals
or parts of animals were involved, we requested that
these animals be shown to us. In most cases the locals
complied and with the help of illustrated identification
guides [35-39] it was usually possible to identify the species in question. Where this was not possible, photographs of an animal in question were taken and later
shown to an expert or compared with specimens in the
university collection. To take voucher specimens back to
the university was not possible for three reasons: firstly,
many of the species involved are too large to be

Figure 2 Map showing East Kameng study site. Adopted from:
www.mapsofindia.com/maps/arunachalpradesh/districts/eastkameng.
htm

Figure 3 Map showing West Siang study site. Adopted from:
www.mapsofindia.com/maps/arunachalpradesh/districts/westsiang.
htm

Chakravorty et al. Journal of Ethnobiology and Ethnomedicine 2011, 7:13
http://www.ethnobiomed.com/content/7/1/13

transported (e.g., goats, bulls, bears, porcupines etc); secondly, the locals would not let us take some of the specimens, fearing they could get into trouble; thirdly,
many villages visited are so remote that no roads lead to
them and one had to walk there, making transport of
any material a very difficult undertaking. The vernacular
names of the zootherapeutically (or otherwise important) vertebrates were written down phonetically, and
notes were taken on the ailments treated with these animals, modes of preparation, assumed therapeutic value,
related folklore and anything else considered worthwhile
in connection with the species in question. As the
knowledge of Hindi or English of the locals was often
not great, our questions had to be simple and to the
point. Further information was obtained from about 15
persons of Nyishi or Galo origin, regarded as knowledgeable, but living in the urban areas. Their selection
as informants was based on the input provided by the
villagers. According to the locals, their own knowledge
of medicinal animals was acquired through parental
heritage, or because they had experienced folk medicine
healing their kin and/or themselves. Most people interviewed could come up with at least 8 different zootherapies. However, in order to obtain an idea on how
widespread and common the particular zootherapeutic
knowledge was, we decided, as with our earlier study
[34] to only accept into our list animals and their products when at least 40% of the respondents answered in
the same way.

Results and Discussion
We examined the traditional zootherapeutic uses that
Nyishi and Galo people have for vertebrates and their
parts in treating various kinds of diseases of humans and
livestock. Table 1 summarizes the scientific names of the
medicinally used vertebrates, their vernacular names, the
part(s) of the animal used, the diseases or ailments the animal-derived medicines are thought to be effective for, and
the ways the treatments are carried out. Table 2 summarizes the present conservation status of the vertebrates
mentioned in Table 1 as zootherapeutically important.
Altogether 36 species of vertebrates were identified to play
a role in the treating humans and animals suffering from a
variety of ailments and ills. Out of these 36 species, the
use of mammals and their parts was highest, constituting
about 50% (n = 18); next came birds (n = 8; 22.22%), fish
(n = 6; 16.67%), and reptiles (n = 3; 8.33%). Amphibians
were used least (n = 1, 2.78%) (Figure 4). In similar studies
carried out around the world, mammals and birds also
recorded the highest use as part of local folk medicines
[19,20,40-47]. Surveys other than our own research from
north-eastern India indicate the same [48,49]. However,
for the tribal populations of the Garo hills in Meghalaya
(NE India) Sharma and Khan [43] observed that drugs of

Page 4 of 14

insect origin were more common than those derived from
vertebrates.
Of the zootherapeutic species recorded in the present
study either whole animal bodies, body parts, or the animals’ products were used. Zootherapeutic animal body
parts or their products were assigned to one the following 16 categories of raw materials that formed the basis
of medicines and were prescribed for treating locally
diagnosed ailments. The 16 categories were: 1. claws and
nails, 2. skin, 3. feathers, 4. mucus, fins, 6. fat, 7. flesh, 8.
bone, 9. bone marrow, 10. stomach, 11. intestine, 12.
testes, 13. gall bladder, 14. umbilical cord, 15. blood, 16.
horns and antlers. Frequently the sought-after body parts
did not always have to come from the same species. For
example gall bladders from seven different species were
assumed to be of therapeutic value (Figure 5). Some of
the animal-derived medicines and preserved animal body
parts are sold at the local traditional tribal markets. Collecting the raw materials involves manual gathering,
slaughtering of livestock, or hunting and killing of wild
species. Modes of preparation and administration of the
animal-based medicines are presented in Table 1.
Types of diseases

About 20 types of common human ailments/diseases
(and foot and mouth disease of cattle) were said to be
curable by using some of the aforementioned animal
materials (Figure 6). Conditions most widely subjected
to animal-derived treatments were fevers, body pains
and pains of the joints, diarrhoea, tuberculosis, stomach
disorders, constipation, malaria, burns, coughs, wounds,
typhoid, smallpox, dysentery, jaundice, stomach ache.
The two ethnic groups under study seemed to know
only the most common ailments encountered in day-today life. It was also observed by the locals that the treatment of one disease could have an effect, either positive
or negative, on other diseases and that body parts of different animals could exert similar effects. To be specific,
treatment of tuberculosis, for instance, could involve
body parts of any one of these animals: porcupine, deer,
fox, or mole. Using a variety of remedies for one and
the same ailment and then finding that one of them
turns out more potent than the others is a popular
strategy [50]. It can lead to the adoption of a particular
animal or animal part (depending on availability or
accessibility) [51] in connection wit a specific condition.
Given the fact that hundreds of plants assumed to possess medicinal effects have been identified from NorthEast India [52,53], one can assume that treatments solely
based on animals or animal products are rare and that
treatments involving animal material will frequently
contain a plant component as well. The role of plants,
however, has not been a topic of this study and therefore remains uninvestigated.

Chakravorty et al. Journal of Ethnobiology and Ethnomedicine 2011, 7:13
http://www.ethnobiomed.com/content/7/1/13

Page 5 of 14

Table 1 Inventory of vertebrate species used for medicinal purposes by members of Nyishi (N) and Galo (G) tribes in
Arunachal Pradesh (N E India)
Common
names

Vernacular
name

Scientific
name

Used
by N
or G

Parts
used

N & G Body
mucus

Indication

Prescription

Uses elsewhere in India

Burns

Body mucus to be applied on Fresh blood is drunk to treat
burn areas of the body
asthma and general weakness
by Ao tribe of Nagaland [49].

Fish
1

Eel

Ngub (G,N)

Anguilla sp.

2

Fresh
water
fishes

Ngui (N)

Semiplotus sp., N
Labeo rohita

Stomach
& gut

Stomach ache & Intestines & stomach are
digestive
smoked in fire, mixed with
problems
salt and taken with rice 2-3
times a day. Also taken as a
preventive measure.

Cervical vertebra of L. rohita
are used in urine blockage
problem by the Saharia of
Rajasthan [67].

3

Gangetic
goonch

Nguri (G)

Bagarius
bagarius

G

Fins,
bones

Body burns,
Stomach pain

Smoked dried bones/fins are
burnt to ash and applied on
burnt portion twice a day. A
pinch of ash is taken along
with water.

—

4

Catfish

Ngui (G)

Amblyceps sp.

G

Bones

Body burns.

The cooked fish bones are
—
burnt to ash and applied to
the burn or wound until
healing is observed. The ashes
can be preserved for further
use.

5

Ballitora
minnow

Ngoka ngui
(N) Nyoka
pagra (G)

Psilorhynchus
ballitora

N & G Whole
body

Diarrhoea

Smoked, dried fish is eaten

—

6

Kingfish + Ngui +
earthworm tadar (N)

Semiplotus sp. N
+ Pheretima
sp.

Whole
body

Smallpox

Cooked with fish and fed to
the children suffering from
smallpox

—

Rana sp.

Whole
body

Wound healing

Live crushed frog is applied to
wounds from insect bites
(must be carried out near fire
place) twice a day.

Skin is used for wound
healing by Ao tribe of
Nagaland [49].
Flesh is used for wound
healing by Irular, Mudugar,
Kurumber of Western Ghat
Kerala [60].

Amphibia
7

Frog

Taker (N)

N

Reptiles
8

Python

Burum (G,N) Python
molurus

N & G Body fats

Massage for
joint pain

Fats are stored in bamboo
containers and used in body
massage to cure joint pain.

Similar fat used for treatment
of rheumatic pain, toothache
by Irular, Mudugar, Kurumber
tribes of Western Ghat Kerala
[60]. But, fried meat is used to
improve eyesight while
snake’s slough is used for
cattle by Garasiya people of
Rajasthan [21]. Fat is reported
in treatments of leprosy by
tribal populations of Tamil
Nadu [61].

9

Cobra

Tabih (G)

G

1. Preventive
2. Foot and
mouth disease
of cattle
3. Magical

1. Cooked meat is taken as
preventive measure for
common diseases like colds,
flues and epidemics.
2. Raw meat is crushed with
little salt and fed to cattle
suffering from foot and
mouth disease.
3. Taking snake meet keeps
away from evil spirits.

Meat is believed to improve
eye sight & facilitates
urination. Similar use in foot
and mouth disease of cattle
but tribes like Koya,
Guthikoya, Lambada, Mala of
Andhra Pradesh use skin
unlike raw meat in [59].
Slough is used to decorate
the home and as well in
worship by Garasiya people of
Rajasthan [21].

Naja sp.

Flesh

Chakravorty et al. Journal of Ethnobiology and Ethnomedicine 2011, 7:13
http://www.ethnobiomed.com/content/7/1/13

Page 6 of 14

Table 1 Inventory of vertebrate species used for medicinal purposes by members of Nyishi (N) and Galo (G) tribes in
Arunachal Pradesh (N E India) (Continued)
10 Monitor
lizard

Horkek(G)
Baminsopin
(N)

Varanus
bengalensis

N & G Flesh

Cough, fever

Flesh boiled and taken
whenever available as a
preventive measure for
coughs and fevers.

Meat promotes strength and
vitality and fat used for joint
pain by Koya, Guthikoya,
Lambada, Mala tribes of
Andhra Pradesh [59]. Skin and
fat used for treating piles,
rheumatism, body pain by Ao
tribe of Nagaland [49]. Fat is
used for massage to treat
arthritis by Irular, Mudugar,
Kurumber tribes of Western
Ghat Kerala [60]. Cooked flesh
is eaten by Garasiya people of
Rajasthan to promote body
stamina [21]. Oil is used for
back pain [68]. Flesh is used
to treat arthritis by tribals of
Tamil Nadu [61].

11 Hornbills: Poe, Paga
1. Necked (N,G)
2.
Weathered
3. Great
4. Pied

1. Aceros
nipalensis,
2. A.
undulatus
3. Buceros
bicornis,
4.
Anthracoceros
albirostris

N & G Fats, .

Body massage
to ease body
pains

Stored fats are commonly
used for massaging aching
body parts.

Cooked flesh is used for the
treatment of rheumatic pain
by Irular, Mudugar, Kurumber
tribes of Western Ghat Kerala
[60].

12 Crow

Pa (N) Pak
(G)

Corvus
splendens

N & G Flesh

Stomach
disorder

Dried meat is taken to
minimize stomach upsets.
Meat fed to children improves
their intelligence.

Flesh is used for treatment of
rheumatism, paralysis, earache
by Ao tribe of Nagaland [49].
Fat is used to treat smallpox &
malaria by Mompa tribe of
Arunachal Pradesh [27]. Meat
cooked in mustered oil is
used for leucoderma by Irular,
Mudugar, Kurumber tribes of
Western Ghat Kerla [60].
Excreta are topically applied
to cure blisters by Garasiya
people of Rajasthan [21]. Flesh
is traditional medicine for
whooping cough by Kachch
of Gujrat [69] and anaemia in
tribals of Tamil Nadu [61].

13 Eagle

Kyokam (N)

Spilornis
cheela

N

Fat and
feathers

Burns, wounds
body sprains

Oil applied locally and
wounds covered by feathers.

Fat is used to treat sprains &
burns by Ao Nagas [49], but
malaria & typhoid by
Arunachal Pradesh’s Mompas
[27].

14 Owl

Puptal (G)

Bubo
nipalensis B.
bubo

G

Flesh

Maleness
(malevolency)

Smoked flesh is taken

Owls are of importance in the
zootherapeutic treatments,
but the species differ in
different parts of the country.
Similar use: Meat of Strixaluca
nivicola (owl) promotes
strength & vitality as used by
Koya, Guthikoya, Lambada,
Mala tribes of Andhra Pradesh
[59] and Shoka people of
Uttaranchal [70], but wings of
Otus bakkamoena burnt and
inhaled in order to reduce
stomachache by Garasiya of
Rajasthan [21].

Birds

Chakravorty et al. Journal of Ethnobiology and Ethnomedicine 2011, 7:13
http://www.ethnobiomed.com/content/7/1/13

Page 7 of 14

Table 1 Inventory of vertebrate species used for medicinal purposes by members of Nyishi (N) and Galo (G) tribes in
Arunachal Pradesh (N E India) (Continued)
Mammals
15 Mithun

Sobo (G)
Sebe (N)

Bos frontalis

N & G Gall
bladder,
testicles.

1. Dysentery,
Coughs & fever
2. Lactation of
mother

1. Gall bladder is filled with
rice powder and tied properly
and smoked dry. A pinch of it
is cooked with rice and taken
until disease is cured.
2. A pinch of smoked, dry
testes is cooked and fed twice
a day to a mother who is
secreting less milk than
expected after delivery.

Penis is used to treat skin
disease, breast pain of
lactating mother by Ao tribe
of Nagaland [49]; also
reported from Arunachal
Pradesh [26].

16 Goat

Sabing (N)

Capra hircus

N

Gall
bladder &
frontal
bone.

Fever & early
pregnancy pain,
stomach ache

The frontal bone is burnt and
taken in pinches mixed with
boiled water 2-3 times a day
to minimize fever and early
pregnancy pain. Gall bladder
is cooked with rice and taken
for stomach ache.

Meat is reported to stimulate
digestion among tribes like
Koya, Guthikoya, Lambada,
Mala of Andhra Pradesh [59].
Soup of leg bone is used to
cure weakness; urine is used
for tuberculosis by Saharia
tribe of Rajasthan [67]. Urine
of Capra sibirica is used to
treat asthma by Ao tribe of
Nagaland [49].

17 Rat

Kojak (N)

Rattus sp.

N

Whole
body

To minimize
pain after
conception

Whole body is burnt and
crushed or powdered, taken
with rice as a painkiller after
conception (early pregnancy).

—

18 Mole

Kor tab (N)

Talpa sp.

N

Flesh

Tuberculosis

Flesh/Meat is cooked and
eaten in order to cure
tuberculosis.

Flesh is used for asthma by
Ao tribe of Nagaland [49].

19 Fox

Siyali (N)

Vulpes
bengalensis,
Canis aureus

N

Flesh

Tuberculosis

Meat is boiled or roasted and
taken.

Fat is used for rheumatism,
skin disease by Irular,
Mudugar, Kurumber tribes of
Western Ghat Kerala [60].

20 Wolf

Sarchi (N)

Canis lupus

N

Skin

Coughs & fevers, Skin (whenever available) is
Meat is used to cure asthma,
epidemics
burnt and taken in pinches as paralysis & arthritis by Koya,
a preventive measure.
Guthikoya, Lambada, Mala of
Andhra Pradesh [59].

21 Porcupine

Sihi (N) Hoi
(G)

Hystrix sp.

N & G Gall
bladder,
stomach
&
intestines,
flesh

Diarrhoea,
gastritis,
tuberculosis

1. Gall bladder, stomach and
intestines (whenever available)
are boiled and taken with rice
as a preventive measure for
diarrhoea and gastritis. 2. The
meat and stomach portions
are cooked and fed to a
person suffering from
tuberculosis.

Similar use: Dried stomach &
intestine used for digestive
disorders by Koya, Guthikoya,
Lambada, Mala of Andhra
Pradesh [59]; bile for
dysentery by Ao tribe of
Nagaland [49]; boiled flesh for
stomachache, piles, breathing
trouble by Irular, Mudugar,
Kurumber of Western Ghat
Kerala [60]; boiled gut content
is used to treat stomachache,
indigestion and coughs and
colds by tribals in Arunachal
Pradesh [26].

22 Pangolin

Hosik(G)

Manis
pentadactyla

G

Nails

Boils

For piercing the boils
(assumed antiseptic property)

—

Herpestes
javanicus

N

Whole
body

Preventive
measure for any
disease

Roasted or boiled and taken
as a preventive measure to
avoid diseases.

Properly cooked penis is used
to treat impotence by males
of Ao tribe in Nagaland [49].

23 Mongoose Sanf sakyo
(N)

Chakravorty et al. Journal of Ethnobiology and Ethnomedicine 2011, 7:13
http://www.ethnobiomed.com/content/7/1/13

Page 8 of 14

Table 1 Inventory of vertebrate species used for medicinal purposes by members of Nyishi (N) and Galo (G) tribes in
Arunachal Pradesh (N E India) (Continued)
24 Deer

Hudum,
hocher (G)
Sudum (N)

Moschus
N & G Gall
chrysogaster,
bladder,
M. moschiferus
fresh
blood
umbilicus

Malaria,
diarrhoea,
Fevers, stomach
upset, body
immunity,
tuberculosis

Rice is cooked with fresh gall
bladder and 100-200 g are
taken once a day till some
improvement is seen. A pinch
of smoke dried umbilicus is
mixed in 1/2 litre boiled water
and fed to the patient till
disease is cured (same
prescription for all indications).
Boiled blood is taken as food
and considered to improve
body immunity.

Similar: Musk is used to cure
malaria, heart ailments and to
promote immunity to
lactating mothers by Koya,
Guthikoya, Lambada, Mala of
Andhra Pradesh [59]; malaria,
diarrhoea by Mompa of
Arunachal Pradesh [27].

25 Sambar
deer

Hudum (G)

Cervus
unicolor

G

Bursting open
boils

Crushed horn particles added
with very little salt and are
used for bursting off boils.

Fat: massaged in cases of
asthma & rheumatism by
Irular, Mudugar, Kurumber
tribes of Western Ghat Kerala
[60]. Paste of antler to treat
herpes by Saharia tribe of
Rajasthan [67], the same
prescription applied directly
on the stomach by Garasiya
people of Rajasthan for
treatment of stomach ache
[21]. Penis is used to treat
hydroceles by tribal
population of Tamil Nadu [61].

26 Moon
bear Black
bear

Hutum (G)
Sutum (N)

Ursus
thibetanus,
Selenarctos
thibetanus

N & G Gall
bladder

Malaria,
diarrhoea, fever,
stomach upsets,
other common
diseases, body
immunity.

The bladder is filled with rice
powder and smoke dried; a
pinch is either mixed with rice
or taken directly once a day,
till the disease gets
minimized. Dosage is same
for all.

Similarly: Gall bladder of
Selenarctos thibetanus is used
for treatment of malaria,
typhoid and other serious
fevers by Mompa of
Arunachal Pradesh [27]; same
prescription to treat stomach
ache and diarrhoea, in
Arunachal Pradesh [26] and
bile of Selenarctos is used to
cure malaria by Ao Nagas [49].

27 Tiger

Pate (N)

Panthera tigris N

Bone and
marrow

Jaundice

Cooked into soup and fed to
the patient.

Dried bones are used for
treating rheumatic and other
body pain by Mompa of
Arunachal Pradesh [27]. Flesh
and fat are used for treatment
of leprosy by tribal population
of Tamil Nadu [61].

28 Clouded
leopard
Common
leopard

Hogya (N)

Neofelis
nebulosa,
Panthera
pardus

Bone
marrow

Body pains

Bone marrows are preserved
Fat is used as massage for
in bamboo cups and used for body pain by Koya, Guthikoya,
body massaging
Lambada, Mala tribes of
Andhra Pradesh [59] instead
of bone marrow. Flesh is used
for treating typhoid, malaria,
rheumatic pain by Mompa of
Arunachal Pradesh [27].

N

Horn

Preparation and administration

Although distinct preparation and administration
methods of the zootherapeutic resources existed (Table
1), some generalities were also noticed. For example,
the fats of very different animal species like python,
hornbill and eagle, to name but a few, is always heated
up and then externally applied to relieve pain. Body
parts of most species are either cooked, crushed into
powder or boiled and then eaten. The use of flesh is

common and usually taken in cooked or smoked form.
Gall bladders and their contents seem another important raw material for members of both tribes. Beyond
the uses for treating human diseases, zootherapeutic
resources are also employed in ethno-veterinary medicines, e.g., for the treatment of foot and mouth disease
in cattle. Barboza et. al. [54] even described zootherapeutic uses in connection with treatments of wild
animals.

Chakravorty et al. Journal of Ethnobiology and Ethnomedicine 2011, 7:13
http://www.ethnobiomed.com/content/7/1/13

The relatively large number of medicinally important
vertebrate species catalogued, demonstrates the importance of zootherapeutic practices as an alternative to
newly introduced western medicines amongst the Nyishi
and Galo tribes. Of the 36 identified medicinal animal
species, many are also, at least occasionally, used as
food. This high percentage of animal species with such
twin function as food and medicine is not surprising,
given the important role that wildlife as a source of protein plays for the local inhabitants. Similar cases, in
which food animals were also used in remedies, were
reported from other parts of the world [18]. Our knowledge of the criteria used by the tribals to decide whether
a species is primarily to be used as food or as part of
therapies, however, is limited as a variety of tribal dietary taboos can obscure the information volunteered by
an informant [55-57].
The use of animals for therapeutic purposes not only in
remote but certain urban areas as well (often those occupied by the economically disadvantaged), suggests that
zootherapeutic practices may function as a social conduit,
aiding ethnic identity and cohesion amongst members of
the Nyishi and Galo tribes. However, as elsewhere
observed with regard to indigenous peoples and their traditional food systems [58], we also noticed that younger
members of both tribes were more and more inclined to
accept modern over traditional medicines.
Inter-tribal comparisons

Our study revealed a difference between Nyishi and
Galo people in the use of vertebrates for medicinal purposes (Figure 7). Nyishis use more often mammalian
species than Galo do. Generally speaking, selectivity is a
very complex issue, which brings several aspects into
consideration when one compares the two tribes, e.g.,
differences in the availability of the animal-derived product(s), differences in motivation to go and obtain the
product(s) in question, environmental factors like climatic and geographic differences, different agricultural
practices and traditions, and differences in the prevalent
disease spectrum. For the moment, therefore, we are
unable to state anything more other than that differences between neighbouring tribes regarding species
considered therapeutically valuable, would spread the
pressure on the resource across several species, rather
than focusing it on one alone. The same conclusion was
reached by Meyer-Rochow [57] for situations, in which
one species, but not another, was considered taboo by
one tribe, but the same species, but not the other, was
considered perfectly acceptable by a neighbouring tribe.
Some of the animal species used therapeutically by
Nyishis and Galos are also used in very similar ways by
a number of other ethnic groups in India. The porcupine, for example, supplies Nyishis and Galos with flesh

Page 9 of 14

that is used to treat individuals suffering from tuberculosis. The porcupine is also used by tribes of Andhra
Pradesh, Kerala, and Nagaland to remedy upsets of the
digestive system, but the specific raw materials from this
very same animal differ: in Andhra Pradesh one uses the
dried stomach [59], Kerala tribes boil the flesh and consume it [60] and Ao Nagas use the intestine, gallbladder
and bile [49]. Members of the Ao Naga and the Mompa
of Arunachal Pradesh also use the bile and gallbladder
of a bear, but not just for digestive disorders, but also
for fighting malaria attacks [27,49].
Musk deer flesh is used for enhancing body immunity
and resistance to malaria by the Koya and Lambada
tribes of Andhra Pradesh, the Ao Naga of Nagaland,
and the Mompa of Arunachal Pradesh [27,59]. Amongst
the tribes of Kerala hornbill fat is used to relieve body
pain, but Nyishis and Galos use the bird’s cooked flesh
specifically to ease rheumatic pain [60]. Frogs (Rana
spp.) are used by members of Nagaland and Kerala
tribes to speed up wound healing, either through the
consumption of whole frog bodies, the amphibian’s
flesh, or its skin alone [49,60]. The fat of the python
also plays a role in the treatment of body pains or rheumatism amongst the tribes of Kerala [60], but peoples of
Andhra Pradesh and members of the Nyishi and Galo
use snakes in treating cattle that suffer from foot and
mouth disease [59].
Depending on the region of India, some animals and
their products can be put to very different uses. For
example, the flesh of various species of monitor lizard is
in use for treating humans suffering from coughs and
fever by the Nyishi and Galo, but tribes of Andhra Pradesh, Kerala, and the Ao Naga of Nagaland use the
same material to improve the overall vitality of a person
and the fat of this reptile to treat rheumatism and pains
of the joints [49,59,60]. The flesh of the crow is used in
connection with stomach disorders by the Nyishi and
Galo, but the same material is used in connection with
rheumatism and paralysis by the Ao Naga [49] and with
leucoderma by the tribes of Kerala [60].
The Mompa of Arunachal use the fat of the crow in
cases of smallpox and malaria [27]. Members of the
Nyishi and Galo tribes use the gall bladder of the
mithun (Bos frontalis) in potions to stop dysentery,
cough, and fever and prescribe the bull’s testes to ease
lactation problems of young mothers. Amongst the Ao
Naga of Nagaland it is the bull’s penis that is used for
skin disorders and chest pain of lactating mothers [49].
The flesh of the fox, given to Nyishi and Galo children,
is supposed to turn the children into cunning adults,
but the flesh is also used as a tuberculosis remedy
amongst the Nyishi. Tribes of Kerala employ the fox’ fat
in treatments of rheumatism and skin diseases [60].
Rather similarly, a wolf’s burnt skin is taken to avoid

Chakravorty et al. Journal of Ethnobiology and Ethnomedicine 2011, 7:13
http://www.ethnobiomed.com/content/7/1/13

Page 10 of 14

Table 2 Present conservation status of animals mentioned in Table 1 and the paper (according to IUCN 2010 Red list
of Threatened Species Version 2010.4)
Species

Status

Pisces:

Least Concern Ver 3.1

Remarks

Anguilla bengalensis (Gray, 1831)[Synonym:
Muraena bengalensis Gray, 1831]
Semiplotus sp.

Data Deficient Ver 3.1

Labeo rohita (Hamilton, 1822)

Least Concern Ver 3.1

Bagarius bagarius (Hamilton. 1822)

The specimen was not identified up to species level. In the place four
species has been recorded Semiplotus cirrhosus, S. manipurensis, S.
modestus (Burmese Kingfish) and Cyprinion semiplotum (Assamese Kingfish)
[Synonym: Cyprinus semiplotus]. The present status for all except C.
semiplotum is data deficient, Ver 3.1; for C. semiplotum Vulnerable, Ver 3.1

Near Threatened Ver
3.1

Amblyceps sp.

–

Psilorhynchus balitora Hamilton 1822

–

Amphibia:
Hoplobatrachus tigrinus (Daudin, 1802)
[Synonym: Rana tigrina Daudin, 1802]

Least Concern Ver 3.1

Reptilia:
Python molurus (Linnaeus, 1758)

Lower Risk/Near
Threatened Ver 3.2

Naja sp.

–

Varanus bengalensis (Daudin, 1802)

The specimen was not identified to species level. However two species of
Naja have been reported, Naja kaouthia (Monocled cobra) and Naja
oxiana (Central Asian Cobra). For N. kaouthia the present status is Least
Concern Ver 3.1 and for N. oxiana it is Data Deficient Ver 3.1

Least Concern Ver 3.1

Aves:
Aceros nipalensis (Hodsgon, 1829)

The specimen could not be identified to species level

Vulnerable A2cd+ 3cd
+ 4cd Ver 3.1

Aceros undulatus (Shaw, 1811)

Least Concern Ver 3.1

Buceros bicornis (Linnaeus, 1758)

Near Threatened Ver
3.1

Anthracoceros albirostris (Shaw & Nodder, 1807)

Least Concern Ver 3.1

Corvus splendens (Vieillot, 1817)

Least Concern Ver 3.1

Spilornis cheela (Latham, 1790)

Least Concern Ver 3.1

Bubo nipalensis (Hodgson, 1836)

Least Concern Ver 3.1

Bubo bubo (Linnaeus, 1758)

Least concern Ver 3.1

Mammalia:
Bos frontalis
Capra hircus (Linnaeus, 1758)

–

Rattus rattus (Linnaeus, 1758)

Least Concern Ver 3.1

Talpa sp

Least Concern Ver 3.1

Vulpes bengalensis (Shaw, 1800)

Least Concern Ver 3.1

Canis aureus (Linnaeus, 1758)

Least Concern Ver 3.1

Canis lupus (Linnaeus, 1758)

Least Concern Ver 3.1

Hystrix sp

–

Manis pentadactyla (Linnaeus, 1758)

Endangered A2d+ 3d
+ 4d Ver 3.1

Herpestes javanicus (E. Geoffroy Saint- Hilaire,
1818) [Synonym: Herpestes palustris Ghose,
1965]

Least Concern Ver 3.1

Moschus chrysogaster (Hodgson, 1839)
[Synonym: Moschus sifanicus Buchner, 1891]

Endangered A2cd Ver
3.1

Moschus moschiferus (Linnaeus, 1758)
[Synonym: Moschus sibiricus Pallas, 1779]

Vulnerable A2d + 3d+
4d Ver 3.1

The specimen was not identified to species level.

Chakravorty et al. Journal of Ethnobiology and Ethnomedicine 2011, 7:13
http://www.ethnobiomed.com/content/7/1/13

Page 11 of 14

Table 2 Present conservation status of animals mentioned in Table 1 and the paper (according to IUCN 2010 Red list
of Threatened Species Version 2010.4) (Continued)
Rusa unicolor (Kerr, 1792) [Synonym: Cervus
unicolor Kerr, 1792]

Vulnerable A2cd+ 3cd
+ 4cd Ver 3.1

Ursus thibetanus (G. [Baron] Cuvier, 1823)
[Synonym: Selenarctos thibetanus]

Vulnerable A2cd+ 3d+
4d Ver 3.1

Selenarctos thibetanus
Panthera tigris (Linnaeus, 1758)

Endangered A2bcd+
4bcd+ C1+ 2a(i)Ver
3.1

Neofelis nebulosa (Griffith, 1821)

Vulnerable C1+ 2a(i)
Ver 3.1

Panthera pardus (Linnaeus, 1758)

Near Threatened Ver
3.1

attacks of cough or fever by the Nyishi, but the wolf’s
meat is used for alleviating asthma attacks, paralysis,
and arthritis by the tribes of Andhra Pradesh [59]. An
entire mongoose, eaten roasted or boiled, is said by Arunachal tribes to serve as a preventive measure of any
disease, but its penis alone is used to treat impotence
amongst the Ao Naga [49]. Crushed antlers of the sambar deer are used by the Galo for bursting open boils
and the deer’s fat is used as an asthma and rheumatism
remedy by Kerala tribes [60]. Tiger bone is used for
jaundice by the Nyishi, but according to members of the
Mompa tribe dried tiger bone powder is said to ease
rheumatic pains [27], while tiger flesh and fats are used
for treatments of leprosy by tribal people of Tamil Nadu
[61].
The use of hornbill species, thought by members of
the Nyishi and Galo tribes to speed up healing processes, has not been reported earlier in India, although
hornbills are regarded as medicinal by members of the
Irular, Mudugar and Kurumbar tribes of the Western
Ghats of Kerala [60]. Except for the Ao Naga of Nagaland [49] and the Nyishi and Galo of Arunachal Pradesh
the use of the mithun (Bos frontalis) in traditional remedies has also not been reported from any other tribe in
India as were the therapeutic uses of some freshwater
fishes like, Bagarius bagarius and Amblyceps sp., the
rodent Rattus sp., and the pangolin Manis pentadactyla.
One reason could be the unavailability of certain species
in a particular region; another would be lack of appropriate ethnobiological and ethnomedical field data.
Zootherapies: impacts on society and environment

It is widely accepted that the use of certain plants and
animals and their products in folk or traditional medicines indicates the presence of biologically active constituents in them. Although considerable information is
available on phytochemistry and/or phytopharmacology
of many traditional medicinal plants, bio-scientific evaluations of animal remedies are still quite rare [62]. Yet,

some of the animals that are therapeutically used by traditional healers have been methodically tested by pharmaceutical companies and were, indeed, found to
contain substances useful for the manufacture of drugs
used in modern medicine [63].
The zoo-therapeutic knowledge, especially that of the
Nyishi and Galo, was found to be based on few domestic and several wild animals, but some of the latter, serving as important folk medicinal resources like the
hornbill, pangolin, clouded leopard, tiger, bear etc, are
rare and protected species - a fact that is of considerable
concern. Since Nyishis and Galos as well as other tribes
have been using these animals for a long time, suppression to use them is not likely to save them from extinction. Rather it will be better to develop a conservation
strategy, which is applicable to a particular locality giving the utmost respect to the ethnic sentiment and
social structure of the locals. In accordance with Kunin
and Lawton [63], those species directly involved in traditional medicines should be amongst those of the highest
priority for conservation. According to Costa-Neto [33]
research on zootherapies should be compatible with the
welfare of the medicinal animal species, and the use of
their by-products should be done in a sustainable manner. The species could be conserved through the integrated approach of in-situ and ex-situ conservation.
The establishment of a “Village Traditional Knowledge
Bank” could be one of the significant approaches to not
only conserve the diversity and related knowledge, but
also to contribute in assuring quality of the livelihood of
the ethnic people of Arunachal Pradesh in a broader
sense and that of the Galo and Nyishi tribes in particular. The traditional medicines and the animal products
used in the therapies should be tested for their effectiveness and chemical components; local folk should be
made aware of the protected and endangered animal
species and their importance as a resource for traditional medicines as well as for the region’s tourist
potential and biodiversity. Searching out or identifying

Chakravorty et al. Journal of Ethnobiology and Ethnomedicine 2011, 7:13
http://www.ethnobiomed.com/content/7/1/13

Page 12 of 14

Fishes, 16.67%

9

8

Amphibians, 2.78%

Reptiles, 8.33%

Mammals, 50%

No. of animal sources used

8

7

7

7

6

6

5

5
4

4
3

4

4

3

3

2

2

1

2

2

1

2

2
1

1

1

1

St
om
ac

h

B
d i u rn
so s
D rd er
ia
rrh s
Sm oe
al a
lp
A
sp
W ox
re
v e Jo o un
n t in ds
iv t p
e m ai
ea ns
su
re
s
Co
ug
h
Bo Fev
dy er
pa
Im in
Pa
po s
in
te
du
n
rin Lac ce
t
g
pr at io
eg n
T u n an
b e cy
rc
ul
o
G s is
as
tri
tis
Fo
Bo
rb
od M ils
al
y
im ari
m a
un
ity
Co Jau
ns nd i
tip ce
at
io
n

0

Birds, 22.22%

Figure 4 Percentages of species in different vertebrate classes
reported for medicinal use by Nyishi and Galo tribes of
Arunachal Pradesh.

substitutes for the medicinally used animal species
should accompany the efforts of conservations. As has
been suggested earlier [64,65] botanical alternatives to
the use of the threatened animals should be considered.
Moreover, it might be possible to replace the currently
medicinally-used wild species with domesticated animals
and their products, provided one can demonstrate similar therapeutic effects of the latter to the former. Thus,
economic as well as ecological aspects need to be
addressed [66].

Conclusion
The main reasons for the popularity of zootherapies
seem to be: a) economic and geographic accessibilities
of animals assumed to possess therapeutic properties; b)
the treatment’s perceived efficacy; and c) socio-cultural
factors like traditions, peer-pressure, cost of treatment,
etc. Because Arunachal Pradesh is highly heterogeneous
socially and profoundly unequal in the distribution of
wealth and education, socioeconomic aspects clearly
play a role in the persistence of zootherapeutic practices.
Yet, the inclination of the younger generation towards

Figure 6 Number of medicinal uses reported in connection
with different indications amongst members of the Nyishi and
Galo tribes of Arunachal Pradesh.

welcoming and accepting modern medicine, while
neglecting their own traditional body of knowledge with
regard to the multitude of zootherapeutic uses, has cast
considerable concerns on cleanliness, appropriateness,
and effectiveness of the zootherapeutic products.
Hygienic conditions of zootherapeutically employed
products are, indeed, generally poor and there is a need
for sanitary testing and monitoring of animal-derived
medicinal products. Additionally, chemical and pharmacological and perhaps epidemiological studies are necessary to clarify the eventual therapeutic usefulness of this
class of biological remedies. Investigations of this kind
would facilitate decisions on whether or not certain
zootherapies could be accepted into public health programs. Finally, research into the abundance and availability of those particular animal species that are
primarily used in the local therapies would be important
in safeguarding them as a resource and, at the same
time, in assuring their continued presence within the
biodiversity of the region.

18
16
16

10

No.of species used

14

9

9

No. of sources

8

7

7

6

6
5
4

3

3

3

3

3
2

2

2

1

1

1

1

Nyishi

12

Galo

10
8
8
6
4

2
1

1

4

4

3
2

1

2
or
n
H

sti
ne

Bl
oo
d

In
te

de
r

co
rd
al

al
lb
la
d

bi
lic

m
U

h

sti
s
Te

G

ow

m
ac
St
o

Bo
ne

ar
r
m

Bo
ne

Fa
t

Fl
es
h

s

Fi
n

th
er

uc
u
M

Sk
in

Fe
a

N

ai
l

0

Figure 5 Raw materials derived from animals used as
therapeutic agents by members of the Nyishi and Galo tribes
of Arunachal Pradesh.

6

6

1
0

0
Fishes

Amphibians

Reptiles

Birds

Mammals

Figure 7 Numbers of species in different vertebrate classes
used for medicinal purposes by Nyishi and Galo tribes of
Arunachal Pradesh.

Chakravorty et al. Journal of Ethnobiology and Ethnomedicine 2011, 7:13
http://www.ethnobiomed.com/content/7/1/13

Acknowledgements
The authors are thankful to the University Grants Commission, New Delhi for
the financial support through a DBT, New Delhi, Associateship to Dr
Chakravorty. Thanks are also due to Rajiv Gandhi University, Arunachal
Pradesh, India, and Jacobs University Bremen, Germany, for providing
facilities. The authors are also grateful to all the respondents, who shared
their traditional zootherapeutic knowledge with us. Without their
contribution this study would have been impossible.
Author details
1
Biochemical Nutrition Laboratory, Dept. of Zoology, Rajiv Gandhi University,
Arunachal Pradesh 791112, India. 2School of Engineering and Science, Jacobs
University, Research II (Rm. 37) D-28759 Bremen, Germany.
Authors’ contributions
JC carried out the field work and supervised SG’s research. SG participated in
the field work and identification of the insects. VBM-R began his
ethnobiological studies in North-East India in 1991 and participated in the
design, coordination, and draughting of the final manuscript. All authors
read and approved the final manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 24 January 2011 Accepted: 31 March 2011
Published: 31 March 2011
References
1. Chivian E: Global environmental degradation and biodiversity loss:
Implications for human health. In Biodiversity and human health.. 1 edition.
Edited by: Grifo F, Rosenthal J. Washington DC, Island Press; 1997:7-38.
2. Springer MS, Murphy WJ: Mammalian evolution and biomedicine: new
views from phylogeny. Biol Rev 2007, 82:375-392.
3. Rolston H: The land ethics at the turn of the millennium. Biodiversity and
Conservation 2000, 9:1045-1058.
4. Chardonnet P, Des Clers B, Fischer J, Gerhold R, Jori F, Lamarque F: The
value of wildlife. Revue Scientifique 2002, 21:15-51.
5. Saito Y: Ecological designs: promises and challenges. Environmental Ethics
2002, 24:243-261.
6. Alves RRN, Rosa IL: Why study the use of animal products in traditional
medicine? J Ethnobiol Ethnomed 2005, 1:5.
7. Marques JGW: Fauna medicinal: Recurso do ambiente ou ameaca a
biodiversidade? Mutum 1997, 1:4.
8. WEHAB: A frame work for action on biodiversity and ecosystem
Management. The WEHAB working group; 2002 [http://www.iisd.ca/wssd/
download%20files/wehab_biodiversity.pdf].
9. Phillipson JD, Anderson LA: Ethnopharmacology and western medicine. J
Ethnopharmacol 1989, 25(1):61-72.
10. WHO/IUCN/WWF: Guidelines on conservation of medicinal plants Gland,
Switzerland, Castle Cary Press; 1993.
11. Lev E: Traditional healing with animals (zootherapy): medieval to present
day Leventine practice. J Ethnopharmacol 2003, 86:107-118.
12. Costa-Neto EM, Marques JGW: Faunistic resources used as medicines by
artisanal fishermen from Siribinha Beach, State of Bahia. Brazil J Ethnobiol
2000, 20:93-109.
13. China National Corporation of Traditional and Herbal Medicine: Materia
medica commonly used in China Beijing, Science Press; 1995.
14. Reid BE: Chinese materia medica: insect drugs, dragon and snake drugs.
In Chinese Medicine Series. Volume 2. Taipei, Materials Center Inc; 1982.
15. Schimitschek E: Insekten als Nahrung, in Brauchtum, Kult und Kultur. In
Handbuch der Zoologie - eine Naturgeschichte der Stämme des Tierreichs,
Band Vier. Edited by: Helmcke J-G, Stark D, Wermuth H. Berlin, Akademie
Verlag; 1968:1-62.
16. Lohani U: Man-animal relationships in central Nepal. J Ethnobiol Ethnomed
2010, 6:31.
17. Ali SAM, Mahdihassan S: Bazaar medicines of Karachi: The drugs of
animal origin. In Bazaar Drugs and Folk Medicine in Pakistan. Edited by:
Mahdihassan, S. Karachi, Hamdard Publ; 1984:69-73.
18. Alves RRN: Fauna used in popular medicine in Northeast Brazil. J
Ethnobiol Ethnomed 2009, 5:1.

Page 13 of 14

19. Alves RRN, Vieira WLS, Santana GG: Reptiles used in traditional folk
medicine: conservation implications. Biodiversity and Conservation 2008,
17(1):2037-2049.
20. Mahawar MM, Jaroli DP: Traditional zootherapeutic studies in India: A
review. J Ethnobiol Ethnomed 2008, 4:17.
21. Jaroli DP, Mahawar MM, Vyas N: An ethnozoological study in the
adjoining areas of Mount Abu wildlife sanctuary, India. J Ethnobiol
Ethnomed 2010, 6:6.
22. Shah KB, Gire MK: Some amphibians and their local uses in Arun Basin. J
Nat Hist Museum 1992, 13:9-17.
23. Solavan A, Paulmurunguan R, Wilsanand V, Ranjith Sing AJA: Traditional
therapeutic uses of animals among tribal population of Tamil Nadu. Ind
J Trad Knowledge 2004, 3(2):198-204.
24. Deb AK, Haque CE: Every mother is a mini-doctor: Ethnomedicinal uses
of fish, shellfish and some other aquatic animals in Bangladesh. J
Ethnopharmacol 2011, 134(2):259-267.
25. Mishra N, Rout SD, Panda T: Ethno-zoological studies and medicinal value
of Similipal Biosphere, Orissa, India. Afr J Pharmacy Pharmacol 2011,
5(1):6-11.
26. Borang A: Use of certain animals and animal products in indigenous
system of treatment in Arunachal Pradesh. In Ethonomedicine of tribes of
Arunachal Pradesh. Edited by: Mibang T, Choudhury SK. New Delhi,
Himalayan Publisher; 2003:18-23.
27. Solanki GS, Chutia P: Ethnozoological and socio- cultural aspects of
Mompas of Arunachal Pradesh. J Human Ecol 2004, 15(4):251-254.
28. Launet E: Dans les forêts, à la recherche des médicaments de demain.
Science et Vie 1993, 904:86-91.
29. Amato I: From ‘hunter magic’ a pharmacopeia? Science 1992, 258:1306.
30. Fink M: Convulsive therapy: a review of the first 55 years. J Affective
Disorders 2001, 63:1-15.
31. Kang SK, Kim KS, Kim SI, Chung KH, Lee IS, Kim CH: Immunosuppressive
activity of deer antler extracts of Cervus korea Temminck, var.
mantchuricus Swinhoe, on type II collagen-induced arthritis. In-vitro
Cellular and Developmental Biology (Animal) 2006, 42:100-107.
32. Moreau M, Dupuis J, Bonneau NH, Lécuyer M: Clinical evaluation of a
powder of quality elk velvet antler for the treatment of osteoarthrosis in
dogs. Can Vet J 2004, 45:133-139.
33. Costa-Neto EM: Animal based medicines: biological prospection and the
sustainable use of zootherapeutic resources. Annals Brazil Acad Sci 2005,
77(1):33-43.
34. Chakravorty J, Ghosh S, Meyer-Rochow VB: Practices of entomophagy and
entomotherapy by members of the Nyishi and Galo tribes of the state
of Arunachal Pradesh (North-East India). J Ethnobiol Ethnomed 2011, 7:5.
35. The Director: Fauna of Arunachal Pradesh, Part 1-State fauna series 13
Kolkata, Zoological Survey of India; 2006.
36. Grewal B, Pfister O: A photographic guide to birds of the Himalayas London,
New Holland Publ Ltd; 2004.
37. Alfred JRB, Sinha NK, Chakravorty S: Checklist of mammals of India
(Occasional paper No. 199) Kolkata, Zoological Survey of India; 2002.
38. Ahmed MF, Das A, Dutta SK: Amphibians and reptiles of Northeast India
Guwahati, Aranyak; 2009.
39. Mathew R, Sen N: Pictorial guide of amphibians of North East India Kolkata,
Zoological Survey of India; 2010.
40. Sharma VP: The relevance of traditional animal drugs of bird origin used
by Bhil tribal of Rajasthan state, India. Geobios News Reports 1987,
6:129-132.
41. Rosner F: Pigeon as a remedy (segulah) for jaundice. N Y State J Med
1992, 92(5):189-192.
42. Marques JGW: A fauna medicinal dos indios Kuna de San Blas (Panama)
e a hipotese da universaliodae zooterapica. Proc. 46th Annual Meet Brazil
Soc Progr Sci Victoria, Brazil, Espirito Santo Federal University; 1994.
43. Sharma VP, Khan AU: Drugs of mammals origin used by aborigines of
Garo hills of Meghalaya State, India. Bionature 1995, 15(1):1-55.
44. Sodeinde OA, Soewu DA: Pilot study of the traditional medicine trade in
Nigeria. Traffic Bull 1999, 18(1):35-40.
45. El-Kamali HH: Folk medicinal use of some animal products in Central
Sudan. J Ethnopharmacol 2000, 72:279-282.
46. Aldasoro EM, Heliot Z: Animals with magical and medicinal uses in
markets of the state of Mexico. Proc 25th Annual Conference of the Society
of Ethnobiology, Art and Soul: Celebrating Indigenous Artisans Storrs,
Connecticut University of Connecticut; 2002.

Chakravorty et al. Journal of Ethnobiology and Ethnomedicine 2011, 7:13
http://www.ethnobiomed.com/content/7/1/13

47. Vazquez PE, Mendez RM, Guiascon OGR, Pinera EJN: Uso medicinal de la
fauna silvestre en los Altos de Chiapas, Mexico. Interciencia 2006,
31(7):491-499.
48. Kakati LN, Doulo V: Indigenous knowledge system of zootherapeutic use
by Chakhesang tribe of Nagaland, India. J Human Ecol 2002,
13(6):419-423.
49. Kakati LN, Ao B, Doulo V: Indigenous knowledge of zootherapeutic use of
vertebrate origin by the Ao Tribe of Nagaland. J Human Ecol 2006,
19(3):163-167.
50. Camargo M: Garrafada Rio de Janeiro, Ministerio da Educacao e Cultura;
1975.
51. Alves RRN, Rosa IL, Santana GG: The role of animal-derived remedies as
complementary medicine in Brazil. BioScience 2007, 57(11):949-955.
52. Changkija S, Ajungla L, Rongsensashi , Renchumi-Mozhwui : Medicinal and
aromatic flora of Nagaland Kohima, Nagaland Government Publ; 2010.
53. Ahmed M, Dutta DN, Borthakur SK, Gogoi P: National seminar on
commercial cultivation of medicinal plants in Northeat India Guwahati, NE
Development Finance Corp Ltd; 2010, 1-219.
54. Barboza RRD, Souto Wde MS, Mourão J, da S: The use of zootherapeutics
in folk veterinary medicine in the district of Cubati, Paraiba State, Brazil.
J Ethnobiol Ethnomed 2007, 3:32.
55. Begossi A: Food taboos - a scientific reason? In Plants for food and
medicine. Edited by: Pendergast HDV, Etkin N, Harris DR, Houghton PJ. Kew,
UK, Royal Botanic Gardens; 1998:41-461.
56. Trigo M, Roncada MJ, Stewien GT, Pereira IM: Food taboos in northern
Brazil. Revista de Saude Publica 1989, 6:455-464.
57. Meyer-Rochow VB: Food taboos: their origins and purposes. J Ethnobiol
Ethnomed 2009, 5:18.
58. Kuhnlein HV, Receveur : Dietary change and traditional food systems of
indigenous peoples. Ann Rev Nutrition 1996, 16:417-442.
59. Benarjee G, Srikanth K, Ramu G, Ramulua KN: Ethnozoological study in a
tropical wildlife sanctuary of Eturunagaram in the Warangal district,
Andhra Pradesh. Ind J Trad Knowledge 2010, 9:701-704.
60. Padmanabham P, Sujana KA: Animal products in traditional medicine
from Attappady Hills of Western Ghats. Ind J Trad Knowledge 2008,
7:326-329.
61. Slovan A, Paulmurugan R, Wilsand V, Ranjith Sing AJA: Traditional
therapeutic uses of animals among tribal population of Tamil Nadu. Ind
J Trad Knowledge 2004, 3:206-207.
62. Pieroni A, Grazzani A, Giusti ME: Animal remedies in the folk medical
practices of the upper part of the Lucca and Pistoia provinces, Central
Italy. Proceedings of the 4th European colloquium of Ethnopharmacology
Paris, France; 2002, 371-375.
63. Kunin WE, Lawton JH: Does biodiversity matter? Evaluating the case of
conserving species. In Biodiversity: a biology of numbers and differences.
Edited by: Gaston KJ. Oxford, Blackwell Sci Publ; 1996:283-308.
64. Cavaliere C: Medicinal use of threatened animal species and the search
for botanical alternatives. Herbal Gram 2010, 86:34-49.
65. Labadie RP: Problems and possibilities in the use of traditional drugs. J
Ethnopharmacol 1986, 15:221-230.
66. Meyer-Rochow VB: Entomophagy and its impact on world cultures: the
need for a multidisciplinary approach. In Edible Forest Insects. Edited by:
Durst PB, Johnson DV, Leslie RN, Shono K. Bangkok, FAO Publ; 2010:23-36.
67. Mahawar MM, Jaroli DP: Traditional knowledge on zootherapeutic uses of
Saharia tribe of Rajasthan, India. J Ethnobiol Ethnomed 2007, 3:25.
68. Patil SH: Ethno-medico-zoological studies on Nadurbar district of
Maharashtra. Ind J Trad Knowledge 2003, 2:297-299.
69. Gupta L, Siroli CS, Mistry N, Dixit AM: Use of animals and animal products
in traditional health care systems in District Kachch, Gujarat. Ind J Trad
Knowledge 2003, 2:346-356.
70. Negi CS, Palyal VS: Traditional uses of animal and animal products in
medicine and rituals by the Shoka tribes of District Pithoragarh,
Uttaranchal, India. Ethnomed 2007, 1:47-54.

Page 14 of 14

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review

doi:10.1186/1746-4269-7-13
Cite this article as: Chakravorty et al.: Vertebrates used for medicinal
purposes by members of the Nyishi and Galo tribes in Arunachal
Pradesh (North-East India). Journal of Ethnobiology and Ethnomedicine
2011 7:13.

• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
