<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>SIGNATURE: A workbench for gene expression signature analysis</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:443. doi:10.1186/1471-2105-12-443"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Jeffrey T Chang"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Chang et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:443
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/443

SOFTWARE

Open Access

SIGNATURE: A workbench for gene expression
signature analysis
Jeffrey T Chang1*, Michael L Gatza2, Joseph E Lucas2, William T Barry2,3, Peyton Vaughn2 and Joseph R Nevins2,4

Abstract
Background: The biological phenotype of a cell, such as a characteristic visual image or behavior, reflects activities
derived from the expression of collections of genes. As such, an ability to measure the expression of these genes
provides an opportunity to develop more precise and varied sets of phenotypes. However, to use this approach
requires computational methods that are difficult to implement and apply, and thus there is a critical need for
intelligent software tools that can reduce the technical burden of the analysis. Tools for gene expression analyses
are unusually difficult to implement in a user-friendly way because their application requires a combination of
biological data curation, statistical computational methods, and database expertise.
Results: We have developed SIGNATURE, a web-based resource that simplifies gene expression signature analysis
by providing software, data, and protocols to perform the analysis successfully. This resource uses Bayesian
methods for processing gene expression data coupled with a curated database of gene expression signatures, all
carried out within a GenePattern web interface for easy use and access.
Conclusions: SIGNATURE is available for public use at http://genepattern.genome.duke.edu/signature/.

Background
Gene expression signatures are powerful tools that can
reveal a range of biologically and clinically important
characteristics of biological samples. In recent years, signatures have been developed that can differentiate distinct subtypes of tumors, identify important cellular
responses to their environment (hypoxia), predict clinical outcomes in cancer, and model the activation of signaling pathways [1]. The power of gene expression
signatures derives from their ability to connect an in
vitro experimental state with an in vivo one in a quantitative manner. Commonly, the term gene expression signature has been used in two ways. In one, the signature
is comprised of a set of genes that share a common pattern of expression. Sometimes this can be reported as
genes that increase or decrease in expression, but the
basic characteristic of the signature is the identity of the
genes. Because of this, these signatures are often called
gene sets. Gene sets have been curated from the literature and collected into databases such as MSigDB and
* Correspondence: jeffrey.t.chang@uth.tmc.edu
1
Department of Integrative Biology and Pharmacology University of Texas
Health Science Center at Houston, Houston TX, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

GeneSigDB [2,3]. Tools have been developed that can
analyze gene sets by looking for shared function or
characteristics such as Gene Ontology terms [4] or drug
sensitivity [5]. Another tool, single-sample GSEA has
been previously applied to predict the co-regulation of
gene sets from MSigDB on gene expression samples [6].
Evidence of co-regulation is then used to infer the activation of the phenotype embodied by the gene set.
The second type of signature relates the magnitude of
increase or decrease in gene expression, in the form of
weighted values, to a biological phenotype using a quantitative predictive model [6-16]. These signatures are
often developed from experimental conditions that precisely control the phenotype of interest - for instance,
the activation of a cell signaling pathway or the response
of cells to a defined stimulus. Since the signature is
comprised of a quantitative measure of the expression
levels of genes that define the phenotype, it allows a
direct measurement of the phenotype, rather than an
indirect inference through co-regulation of genes in a
gene set. A limitation of this approach, however, is the
complexity of the methods used to derive and analyze
the signatures, making it difficult to apply without significant multidisciplinary expertise [17].

© 2011 Chang et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Chang et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:443
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/443

Three major obstacles hinder the broad use of signatures. First, gene expression signature analysis requires
the rigorous application of complex statistical methodologies on gene expression data. Second, it requires
the acquisition and validation of data that properly
capture the biological state of interest. Third, it
requires a computational infrastructure that makes
available the statistical software and data in an easy to
use interface. In sum, gene expression signature analysis requires a confluence of expertise across a range of
disciplines, including statistics, biology, and computer
science.
While others have previously made use of our
approach [16], it does require a level of expertise and
computational infrastructure not always available in
biological laboratories. This bioinformatic investigation,
requiring the proper selection and application of statistical algorithms, as well as biological curation and validation of the signatures, can be daunting. Therefore, a
challenge is how to develop software tools that enable
such analyses for the general user. While it has long
been recognized that software can target different
types of users, a set of principles for software that is
biologist-friendly was recently described [18]. In short,
the recommendations are that the software 1) requires
no knowledge of programming, 2) allows application of
advanced methods, 3) can be used on different operating systems, and 4) provides a natural language
description of the results. While such software has
been developed for biological sequence alignment [19],
sequence annotation [20], phylogenetic analysis [21],
and comparison of prokaryotic genomes [22], no such
platform exists for gene expression signature analysis.
Because of this, and also because of the technical difficulty in performing gene expression analysis, we
believe there is a need for a platform that captures a
carefully refined analysis workflow, coupling algorithms
and data, and enables a researcher to predict gene
expression signatures on their samples.

Implementation
To address the critical need for a platform for gene
expression signature analysis, we have developed a collection of tools over the course of several years. First,
we have developed BinReg, a statistical algorithm to predict the activation of a gene expression signature on a
data set [23,24]. Second, we have curated a database of
signatures that predict the activation of oncogenic pathways [25]. Now, we report on the development of a
computational platform that combines these in a biologist-friendly interface, using the principles previously
established. Here we describe the three components of a
novel gene expression signature analysis platform, which
we collectively call SIGNATURE.

Page 2 of 8

Component 1: The BinReg algorithm

The first component of SIGNATURE is the statistical
analysis methodology. We frame gene expression signature analysis as a supervised machine learning problem.
At its heart, a signature is a gene expression pattern
that distinguishes two biological states (Figure 1). This
might be the activation of a cell signaling pathway, the
response of cells to various environmental inputs, or the
intrinsic sensitivity or resistance of cells to a drug.
To create a signature for a given biological process, we
first identify an appropriate training set consisting of

Figure 1 Gene expression signatures. Activation of biological
processes, such as cell signaling pathways, results in a cascade of
activities that ultimately lead to changes in the expression levels of
genes downstream, the gene expression signature of that process.
To measure that signature, we create experimental conditions that
generate differential activation of the process in in vitro cell cultures.
We then extract RNA from those samples for microarray analysis,
which produces gene expression measurements from which we can
score the signature. We show the gene expression signature in a
heatmap where the rows are the genes that are differentially
expressed in the process, and the columns are the samples that
represent the two cellular states. Typically, multiple replicates are
done. The colors indicate the expression levels of the genes, where
the warm colors signify high expression and cool, low expression.
This heatmap shows that the two states exhibit profoundly different
gene expression patterns, allowing us to recognize the activation
state of the pathway in a gene expression profile using a supervised
machine learning algorithm.

Chang et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:443
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/443

gene expression data from samples that clearly distinguish the two desired characteristics (for instance, pathway on versus pathway off), called the train1 (on) and
train0 (off) samples. To obtain the best distinction,
these signatures are typically based on data collected
from well-defined experimental perturbations. Using
examples of cells in these two states, we select the genes
whose expression levels best differentiate them based on
a Pearson correlation. We then apply a Bayesian probit
regression model to fit the genes in the training set to
the two states. Because there are typically more genes
than samples, we perform these computations in a
reduced subspace. That is, we start with a gene expression data set X where X is a p × n matrix of signal
values for p genes and n samples. We then factor X
using a singular value decomposition such that X =
ADF’, where A is p × k, D is k × k, and F is n × k. k is
the desired dimensionality of the subspace, which we
call the number of metagenes. We create a model:
Y=

((A X) γ )

where Ф is the cumulative density function of a normal distribution, Y is a vector of the posterior probabilities that the signature is active in each sample, and g,
the parameter to be sampled, is a k -dimensional vector
of the contribution of each metagene. For the development of gene expression signatures, the number of
metagenes chosen is a configurable parameter, where
higher numbers of metagenes increase the complexity of
the model, at the risk of potentially overfitting the training data.
The model is sampled using a standard Markov chain
Monte Carlo algorithm. It produces the posterior probabilities Y as well as a 95% credible interval. Y should be
interpreted as the probability that the pathway is active
in each sample. The credible interval for Y indicates the
upper and lower bound that can be set for the predictions, with 95% probability. Tighter bounds indicate
higher confidence in the posterior probability Y, and
wider ones indicate lower confidence. This statistical
model has previously been described in detail [24].
Once a signature for a phenotype is developed, it can
be used to score the phenotype in a new collection of
samples. In all, a gene expression signature analysis
requires seven parameters: 1 and 2) the train0 and
train1 data, 3) the number of genes in the model, 4) the
number of metagenes, 5) the algorithm used to preprocess the data set, 6) whether to apply quantile normalization, and 7) whether to apply shift-scale
normalization. The first two parameters are the gene
expression data that define the two cellular states. The
next parameter specifies the number of genes to include
in the statistical model. Then, the number of metagenes

Page 3 of 8

controls the complexity of the model [24]. For parameter five, we support two methods of preprocessing,
RMA and MAS5 [26]. Parameters six and seven concern
methods for normalizing the data to account for technical variation between the training and test sets. Quantile
normalization has been described extensively in the literature. However, we use a variation of the algorithm
whereby the quantiles are computed entirely from the
training set to preserve independence between the training and test data. Finally, shift-scale normalization is an
additional normalization method that, in short, adjusts
the centroid and variance of the test set to match the
training set.
Component 2: A Database of Gene Expression Signatures

Over the past five years, we have developed and curated
a collection of gene expression signatures that predict
the activation of a large number of important cell signaling pathways, such as Ras, Myc, p53, and others [25].
Although this work has focused on developing signatures for pathways relevant to the study of cancer biology, the conceptual framework for this signature
development is applicable across a wide range of other
contexts. We envision that the current database would
be most directly applicable to cancer studies, but there
are also clear applications to other diseases with functional aberrations in these common pathways.
To simplify the analyses for general users, we determine empirically the best values for the seven parameters described above. Using a leave-one-out cross
validation approach, we classify the samples in the training set. To ensure that the model is not over fit to artifacts or confounding factors in the original data, we
then validate the selected parameters using an independent biochemical and/or genetic marker of pathway
activity. The type of indicator used is specific to a pathway and depends on how it works. For example, to validate the PI3K signature, we compared against relative
phosphorylated (active) p110 protein levels, and for the
Estrogen Receptor (ER) pathway signature, the ER status
in human breast tumors as determined by immuno-histochemistry [25].
Our signature database currently consists of 18 validated signatures, and we are actively developing and
curating additional ones.
Component 3A: Software tools for signature analysis

For gene expression signature analysis, we have developed software tools to cover two major use cases.
Use case 1: Predicting the activity of validated signatures

Commonly, a user that has generated gene expression
data from a set of experimental samples, such as a collection of human tumors, would wish to predict the
activation of pathways in those samples. This user may

Chang et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:443
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/443

not be familiar with the methodology to create signatures, or the computational algorithms to build a model
of pathway activation. To address this case, we have
developed a software application called Score Signatures
that can apply the signatures from our curated signature
database to a gene expression data set (Figure 2).
To use Score Signatures, one submits a gene expression data set of interest, such as that from a collection
of tumor samples. The application will then apply our
Bayesian algorithm to predict the activation of the signatures in the database. The output is a series of probability scores for each signature, reflecting the extent to
which the signature is represented in each sample from
the test data set. These probability scores are depicted
in a heatmap that shows the pattern of activation of the
pathways across the data set as determined by hierarchical clustering. Furthermore, Score Signatures also provides raw data as tab-delimited text files that can be
accessed with standard tools such as Microsoft Excel
and used to develop additional plots. These results are
summarized in a human-readable report with a detailed
description of the analysis as well as guidelines for interpreting the results.
Each Score Signatures analysis is comprised of Bayesian regression calculations that predict the activation of
each signature from the signature database. A full analysis is described using a large number of parameters,

Page 4 of 8

seven for each pathway in the database. The challenge
here is how to provide the analyses so that it is accessible for users that are not familiar with the technical
details of gene expression analysis. We solve this issue
by storing the validated parameters in the database. As a
default, the values are retrieved from the signature database, ensuring that the signature runs in precisely the
manner originally defined. However, for expert users, we
make it possible to refine each parameter, and if changed, the system will document the deviation from the
default. In this way, the needs of both general and
expert users can be met.
Use case 2: Developing a novel signature

Score Signatures provides a convenient way to apply the
signatures from our signature database on a data set.
However, it does not have an ability to generate a new
signature. To address this, we have produced a second
application, Create Signature, to develop novel gene
expression signatures.
While Score Signatures can be used by investigators
with little or no knowledge of the details of the underlying methodology, Create Signature requires an understanding of the machine learning framework and the
parameters used to create the signatures. The user specifies the values for a total of 15 parameters. In addition
to the seven parameters for the signatures as described
above, it also includes parameters that govern the

Figure 2 The Score Signatures module. This figure shows the workflow for the Score Signatures module. The user supplies a gene expression
data set to study (shown on left). Then, this tool will retrieve a list of (currently 18) curated signatures from the signature database, and predict
their activity in each of the samples in the data set (shown on right). The software also applies hierarchical clustering, showing the patterns of
pathway activation. Here, Score Signatures was applied to a panel of 19 breast cancer cell lines. The clusters show that the signatures clearly
distinguish two subtypes of breast cancer. In the left cluster are the cell lines of luminal origin. The right cluster consists of all basal cell lines,
with two exceptions (SKBR3 and HCC1428). The module provides a biologist-friendly interface to a complex analysis that involves statistical
algorithms and curated gene expression signatures.

Chang et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:443
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/443

MCMC simulation of the Bayesian model, and others
(such as other normalization methods) that we have not
used in our signatures.
Once the parameters are specified, Create Signature
generates a statistical model from the training set and
predicts signature activity in both the training set (using
leave-one-out cross validation) and the test set (after
building a model from the entire training set). Similar to
Score Signatures, Create Signatures also provides publication-ready plots, raw data, and a human-readable
report of the key results, fulfilling a critical requirement
of user-friendly software described above.
Component 3B: A web interface for gene expression
signature analysis

Our analysis tools are delivered through GenePattern
[27]. The GenePattern platform provides a web-based
interface for external programs (or modules in GenePattern terminology) via a plug-in architecture. However,
one limitation with GenePattern is that it does not have
the means to provide a context-dependent interface that
Score Signatures requires. That is, the interface for Score
Signatures depends on the current state of the signature
database, as well as the requirements of the user. Score

Page 5 of 8

Signatures requires (currently) a total of 74 parameters,
but only two are likely to be changed by the vast majority of users. In this situation, the system needs the facility to hide rarely used parameters for novice users, but
allow advanced users to tune them. This is not currently
possible in GenePattern.
To address the limitations of GenePattern, we have
extended GenePattern with an interface generator layer.
An interface generator is an optional component of a
module that is responsible for defining its interface, that
is, the parameters that are provided for the user. This is
implemented by modifying the GenePattern source code
so that when a user accesses a module, GenePattern can
retrieve the interface from the interface generator
instead of its own default mechanism. Technically, interface generators are CGI scripts, which provide them the
ability to access external resources, such as the signature
database.
The interface generator for the Score Signatures module, by default, creates an interface with only three parameters: the RMA-formatted gene expression file, the
MAS5-formatted gene expression file, and a checkbox
to show advanced options (Figure 3). If the user chooses
to activate the advanced interface, GenePattern makes

Figure 3 The SIGNATURE interface in GenePattern is context-sensitive. To develop interfaces that can be sensitive to context, such as the
state of a database or expertise of the user, we have extended GenePattern to support Interface Generators. These are add-ons to standard
GenePattern modules that are responsible for producing the interface for the module at run time. Interface Generators can serve as brokers
between GenePattern and other databases across the network. An Interface Generator is used for the Score Signatures module. In the simplest
form of a Score Signatures analysis, the only parameters necessary are the RMA and MAS5 normalized versions of the data set, and an option for
which signatures to include in the analysis (left). However, experienced users may wish to tune the analysis, and in response, the interface
presents the user with an advanced interface that allows tuning of every parameter. On the right, a user has chosen to tune the parameters for
the AKT signature.

Chang et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:443
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/443

another request to the Score Signatures interface generator, which then produces an interface that includes
parameters that are retrieved in real time from the Signature Database (Figure 4). In this way, GenePattern
can provide an interface that is responsive to the needs
of the user as well as the current status of other data
resources. By having such an ability, we can deploy context-sensitive interfaces whose complexity matches the
needs of the user.

Results
We have developed a public software platform SIGNATURE that simplifies gene expression signature analysis
by providing an easy to use GenePattern interface on
top of a complex infrastructure of analysis software and
a signature database. Specifically, we have developed
BinReg, a Bayesian probit regression algorithm that has
been supplemented with metagenes and normalization
functions to handle the idiosyncrasies of gene expression
data. Also, we have curated and validated a database of
18 gene expression signatures for activated oncogenes.
And finally, we have significantly extended GenePattern
by developing an interface generator layer that can

Page 6 of 8

produce context-sensitive interfaces to fit the needs of
the user.
One limitation of SIGNATURE is that the predictions
are dependent upon the quality of the data. One potential factor that can confound the interpretation of the
results is the presence of batch effects or other technical
variation after the applied normalization [28]. In our
experience, we have observed that technical artifacts
lead to broad changes in the expression profiles that
lead to homogeneous predictions. That is, the predicted
scores tend to cluster around the same probability, typically around 0% or 100%. This issue highlights the fact
that these predictions should be confirmed with alternate assays. Currently, the tools available within SIGNATURE require expression profiles to be annotated with
probe sets from Affymetrix U133 microarrays. To apply
them to microarrays from other platforms, the probes
would need to be converted to these U133 probe sets.
Internally, we have successfully applied SIGNATURE to
gene expression data from Illumina BeadArrays (data
not shown), suggesting a high degree of reproducibility
in the gene expression levels between these two platforms, consistent with prior reports [29,30]. However,

Figure 4 Implementation of an Interface Generator. The GenePattern server provides a web-based interface for modules that perform
bioinformatics analyses. Because the parameters for a Score Signatures analysis change frequently with updates to the Signature Database, the
interface for Score Signatures cannot be defined until run-time. To address this, we have extended GenePattern so that it can create the interface
for modules dynamically by querying an interface generator. The interface generator for Score Signatures queries the signature database at runtime to produce an up-to-date interface for GenePattern. Once the user has specified their values for the parameters, GenePattern invokes the
Score Signatures module to perform the analysis. This is a general mechanism that can be applied to other complex analyses.

Chang et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:443
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/443

Page 7 of 8

Table 1 Modules available in SIGNATURES
Module

Use Case

ScoreSignatures

To predict activation of pathways in gene expression data.

Publication

CreateSignature

To create a new gene expression signature using a training set.

1

BFRMNormalize

To remove technical variation across one or more gene expression data sets.

2

FindSubtypes

To find subtypes within a gene expression data set.

3

PredictSubtypes

To assign a subtype to gene expression data using a previously developed model.

3

BFRMFactor

To dissect a gene expression data set into modules.

4

BFRMProject

To score the modules in gene expression data using a previously developed model.

5

SIGNATURE includes modules that perform a range of analyses on gene expression data 1[24]2[31]3[25]4[32]5[33].

we have had more limited success in converting signals
from cDNA arrays, and have not tried applying these
analyses to expression data from sequencing platforms.
We believe the ability to apply these methods depends
on the reproducibility of the expression signals across
platforms.

Conclusions
In conclusion, the SIGNATURE platform comprises two
modules, Score Signatures and Create Signature, that are
most widely useful in interpreting gene expression data.
However, we have also created modules for more specialized analyses that we have previously described
(Table 1). SIGNATURE provides a general framework
that can be used to deliver complex algorithms in a
user-friendly manner, putting sophisticated bioinformatic analyses, such as gene expression signature analysis, within reach of a larger audience.
Availability and requirements
SIGNATURE is available for public use, without need
for a material transfer agreement, at http://genepattern.
genome.duke.edu/signature/. This page includes a link
to the modules available on GenePattern, as well as
sample data for testing purposes. The source code and
gene expression signature database are also available
from this page.
Project name: SIGNATURE
Project home page: http://genepattern.genome.duke.
edu/signature/
Operating system: platform independent
Programming language: Python, C, R, Matlab
Other requirements: web browser
License: MIT
Any restrictions to use by non-academics: none
Acknowledgements and Funding
We thank the members and collaborators of the Nevins lab for helping to
test and refine the software, in particular Jenny Freedman, Ashley Chi, Jeff
VanDeusen, Daphne Friedman, Eran Andrechek, Holly Dressman, and Andrea
Bild. We also thank anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments. JTC is
supported by NIH R00LM009837 and grant R1006 from the Cancer

Prevention Research Institute of Texas. JRN is supported by NIH
5R01CA106520 and NIH U54CA112952.
Author details
Department of Integrative Biology and Pharmacology University of Texas
Health Science Center at Houston, Houston TX, USA. 2Institute for Genome
Sciences and Policy Duke University and Duke University Medical Center,
Durham NC, USA. 3Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics Duke
University Medical Center, Durham NC, USA. 4Department of Molecular
Genetics and Microbiology Duke University Medical Center, Durham NC,
USA.
1

Authors’ contributions
JTC and JRN conceived of the project. MLG developed the gene expression
signatures. JTC, JEL, WTB, and PV developed the software. JTC and JRN
wrote the manuscript. All authors have read and approved the final
manuscript.
Received: 7 September 2011 Accepted: 14 November 2011
Published: 14 November 2011
References
1. West M, Ginsburg GS, Huang AT, Nevins JR: Embracing the complexity of
genomic data for personalized medicine. Genome Res 2006, 16(5):559-566.
2. Subramanian A, Tamayo P, Mootha VK, Mukherjee S, Ebert BL, Gillette MA,
Paulovich A, Pomeroy SL, Golub TR, Lander ES, Mesirov JP: Gene set
enrichment analysis: a knowledge-based approach for interpreting
genome-wide expression profiles. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005,
102(43):15545-15550.
3. Culhane AC, Schwarzl T, Sultana R, Picard KC, Picard SC, Lu TH, Franklin KR,
French SJ, Papenhausen G, Correll M, Quackenbush J: GeneSigDB–a
curated database of gene expression signatures. Nucleic Acids Res 2010,
38(Database issue):D716-725.
4. Chang JT, Nevins JR: GATHER: a systems approach to interpreting
genomic signatures. Bioinformatics 2006, 22(23):2926-2933.
5. Lamb J, Crawford ED, Peck D, Modell JW, Blat IC, Wrobel MJ, Lerner J,
Brunet JP, Subramanian A, Ross KN, Reich M, Hieronymus H, Wei G,
Armstrong SA, Haggarty SJ, Clemons PA, Wei R, Carr SA, Lander ES,
Golub TR: The Connectivity Map: using gene-expression signatures to
connect small molecules, genes, and disease. Science 2006,
313(5795):1929-1935.
6. Barbie DA, Tamayo P, Boehm JS, Kim SY, Moody SE, Dunn IF, Schinzel AC,
Sandy P, Meylan E, Scholl C, Frohling S, Chan EM, Sos ML, Michel K,
Mermel C, Silver SJ, Weir BA, Reiling JH, Sheng Q, Gupta PB, Wadlow RC,
Le H, Hoersch S, Wittner BS, Ramaswamy S, Livingston DM, Sabatini DM,
Meyerson M, Thomas RK, Lander ES, et al: Systematic RNA interference
reveals that oncogenic KRAS-driven cancers require TBK1. Nature 2009,
462(7269):108-112.
7. Furge KA, Chen J, Koeman J, Swiatek P, Dykema K, Lucin K, Kahnoski R,
Yang XJ, Teh BT: Detection of DNA copy number changes and oncogenic
signaling abnormalities from gene expression data reveals MYC
activation in high-grade papillary renal cell carcinoma. Cancer Res 2007,
67(7):3171-3176.
8. Huang F, Reeves K, Han X, Fairchild C, Platero S, Wong TW, Lee F, Shaw P,
Clark E: Identification of candidate molecular markers predicting

Chang et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:443
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/443

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.
19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

sensitivity in solid tumors to dasatinib: rationale for patient selection.
Cancer Res 2007, 67(5):2226-2238.
Langenau DM, Keefe MD, Storer NY, Guyon JR, Kutok JL, Le X, Goessling W,
Neuberg DS, Kunkel LM, Zon LI: Effects of RAS on the genesis of
embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma. Genes Dev 2007, 21(11):1382-1395.
Loboda A, Nebozhyn M, Klinghoffer R, Frazier J, Chastain M, Arthur W,
Roberts B, Zhang T, Chenard M, Haines B, Andersen J, Nagashima K,
Paweletz C, Lynch B, Feldman I, Dai H, Huang P, Watters J: A gene
expression signature of RAS pathway dependence predicts response to
PI3K and RAS pathway inhibitors and expands the population of RAS
pathway activated tumors. BMC Med Genomics 2010, 3:26.
Ooi CH, Ivanova T, Wu J, Lee M, Tan IB, Tao J, Ward L, Koo JH,
Gopalakrishnan V, Zhu Y, Cheng LL, Lee J, Rha SY, Chung HC, Ganesan K,
So J, Soo KC, Lim D, Chan WH, Wong WK, Bowtell D, Yeoh KG, Grabsch H,
Boussioutas A, Tan P: Oncogenic pathway combinations predict clinical
prognosis in gastric cancer. PLoS Genet 2009, 5(10):e1000676.
Rhodes DR, Kalyana-Sundaram S, Tomlins SA, Mahavisno V, Kasper N,
Varambally R, Barrette TR, Ghosh D, Varambally S, Chinnaiyan AM:
Molecular concepts analysis links tumors, pathways, mechanisms, and
drugs. Neoplasia 2007, 9(5):443-454.
Singh A, Greninger P, Rhodes D, Koopman L, Violette S, Bardeesy N,
Settleman J: A gene expression signature associated with “K-Ras
addiction” reveals regulators of EMT and tumor cell survival. Cancer Cell
2009, 15(6):489-500.
Wong DJ, Liu H, Ridky TW, Cassarino D, Segal E, Chang HY: Module map of
stem cell genes guides creation of epithelial cancer stem cells. Cell Stem
Cell 2008, 2(4):333-344.
Zhang XH, Wang Q, Gerald W, Hudis CA, Norton L, Smid M, Foekens JA,
Massague J: Latent bone metastasis in breast cancer tied to Srcdependent survival signals. Cancer Cell 2009, 16(1):67-78.
Liu Z, Wang M, Alvarez JV, Bonney ME, Chen CC, D’Cruz C, Pan TC,
Tadesse MG, Chodosh LA: Singular value decomposition-based regression
identifies activation of endogenous signaling pathways in vivo. Genome
Biol 2008, 9(12):R180.
Shi L, Campbell G, Jones WD, Campagne F, Wen Z, Walker SJ, Su Z,
Chu TM, Goodsaid FM, Pusztai L, Shaughnessy JD Jr, Oberthuer A,
Thomas RS, Paules RS, Fielden M, Barlogie B, Chen W, Du P, Fischer M,
Furlanello C, Gallas BD, Ge X, Megherbi DB, Symmans WF, Wang MD,
Zhang J, Bitter H, Brors B, Bushel PR, Bylesjo M, et al: The MicroArray
Quality Control (MAQC)-II study of common practices for the
development and validation of microarray-based predictive models. Nat
Biotechnol 2010, 28(8):827-838.
Kumar S, Dudley J: Bioinformatics software for biologists in the genomics
era. Bioinformatics 2007, 23(14):1713-1717.
Hall TA: BioEdit: a user-friendly biological sequence alignment editor and
analysis program for Windows 95/98/NT. Nucleic Acids Symposium Series
1999, 41:95-98.
Gotz S, Garcia-Gomez JM, Terol J, Williams TD, Nagaraj SH, Nueda MJ,
Robles M, Talon M, Dopazo J, Conesa A: High-throughput functional
annotation and data mining with the Blast2GO suite. Nucleic Acids Res
2008, 36(10):3420-3435.
Kumar S, Nei M, Dudley J, Tamura K: MEGA: a biologist-centric software
for evolutionary analysis of DNA and protein sequences. Brief Bioinform
2008, 9(4):299-306.
Richter M, Lombardot T, Kostadinov I, Kottmann R, Duhaime MB, Peplies J,
Glockner FO: JCoast - a biologist-centric software tool for data mining
and comparison of prokaryotic (meta)genomes. BMC Bioinformatics 2008,
9:177.
West M, Blanchette C, Dressman H, Huang E, Ishida S, Spang R, Zuzan H,
Olson JA Jr, Marks JR, Nevins JR: Predicting the clinical status of human
breast cancer by using gene expression profiles. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2001, 98(20):11462-11467.
Spang R, Zuzan H, West M, Nevins J, Blanchette C, Marks JR: Prediction and
uncertainty in the analysis of gene expression profiles. In Silico Biol 2002,
2(3):369-381.
Gatza ML, Lucas JE, Barry WT, Kim JW, Wang Q, Crawford MD, Datto MB,
Kelley M, Mathey-Prevot B, Potti A, Nevins JR: A pathway-based
classification of human breast cancer. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2010,
107(15):6994-6999.

Page 8 of 8

26. Irizarry RA, Bolstad BM, Collin F, Cope LM, Hobbs B, Speed TP: Summaries
of Affymetrix GeneChip probe level data. Nucleic Acids Res 2003, 31(4):
e15.
27. Reich M, Liefeld T, Gould J, Lerner J, Tamayo P, Mesirov JP: GenePattern
2.0. Nat Genet 2006, 38(5):500-501.
28. Leek JT, Scharpf RB, Bravo HC, Simcha D, Langmead B, Johnson WE,
Geman D, Baggerly K, Irizarry RA: Tackling the widespread and critical
impact of batch effects in high-throughput data. Nat Rev Genet 2010,
11(10):733-739.
29. Barnes M, Freudenberg J, Thompson S, Aronow B, Pavlidis P: Experimental
comparison and cross-validation of the Affymetrix and Illumina gene
expression analysis platforms. Nucleic Acids Res 2005, 33(18):5914-5923.
30. Maouche S, Poirier O, Godefroy T, Olaso R, Gut I, Collet JP, Montalescot G,
Cambien F: Performance comparison of two microarray platforms to
assess differential gene expression in human monocyte and
macrophage cells. BMC Genomics 2008, 9:302.
31. Lucas J, Carvalho C, Wang Q, Bild A, Nevins JR, West M: Sparse statistical
modelling in gene expression genomics. In Bayesian Inference for Gene
Expression and Proteomics.. 1 edition. Edited by: Do KA, Muller P. Cambridge
University Press; 2006:155-176.
32. Chang JT, Carvalho C, Mori S, Bild AH, Gatza ML, Wang Q, Lucas JE, Potti A,
Febbo PG, West M, Nevins JR: A genomic strategy to elucidate modules
of oncogenic pathway signaling networks. Mol Cell 2009, 34(1):104-114.
33. Lucas JE, Carvalho CM, Chen JL, Chi JT, West M: Cross-study projections of
genomic biomarkers: an evaluation in cancer genomics. PLoS One 2009,
4(2):e4523.
doi:10.1186/1471-2105-12-443
Cite this article as: Chang et al.: SIGNATURE: A workbench for gene
expression signature analysis. BMC Bioinformatics 2011 12:443.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
