<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title></title>
<meta name="Creator" content="Adobe InDesign CS4 (6.0.3)"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Adobe PDF Library 9.0"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Chase et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:45
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/45

CO M M E N TA R Y 	

Open Access

Hybridization and speciation in angiosperms:
a role for pollinator shifts?
Mark W Chase*, Ovidiu Paun and Michael F Fay
See research article http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/103

Abstract
The majority of convincingly documented cases of
hybridization in angiosperms has involved genetic
introgression between the parental species or
formation of a hybrid species with increased ploidy;
however, homoploid (diploid) hybridization may be
just as common. Recent studies, including one in BMC
Evolutionary Biology, show that pollinator shifts can play
a role in both mechanisms of hybrid speciation.

Hybridization as a mechanism of speciation in
angiosperms
Species dynamics are often molded by gene flow between
existing species due to interbreeding. Occasional inter­
breeding between species may have three main longterm outcomes: 1, genetic introgression into one or both
of the hybridizing species, in some cases leading to
assimilation of one species by the other; 2, formation of a
new species without a change in ploidy (homoploid
hybrid speciation); or 3, formation of a new species with
a shift in ploidy (allopolyploidy). However, gene flow will
most often have no long-term result, due to various
isolation mechanisms that act to keep parental species
apart either at the stage of hybrid formation or, later, at
establishment of new hybrid derivatives [1]. Hybridiza­
tion involving a change in ploidy has long been known to
play a role in angiosperm evolution [2]. Successful estab­
lish­ ent as independent species of such hybrid polyploid
m
progeny easily succeeds because allopolyploids are
immediately isolated from further interactions with
parental taxa due to high levels of sterility in their
progeny (due to uneven numbers of chromosome comple­
ments). Recently in an assessment of genetic distances
between parents of hybrid species, it was shown that
parental species of allopolyploids are significantly more
*Correspondence: m.chase@kew.org
Jodrell Laboratory, Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, Richmond, Surrey TW9 3DS, UK
© 2010 BioMed Central Ltd

genetically divergent than those of homoploid hybrid
species [1]. Such a relationship seems mainly reinforced
by fertility selection, resulting from the inability of
homoploid hybrids to undergo normal meiosis if the
parental chromosome complements have experienced
too many rearrangements since they last shared a
common ancestor. There appear to be genetic limits
having to do with physical rearrangements of parental
chromosomes (presumably caused by non-disjunction at
meiosis) that make polyploidy more likely when the
parental species are distantly related. Of course, docu­
menting allopolyploidy is relatively easy and involves
demonstrating that the hybrids have twice as many
chromosomes (or more) as the parental species and that
they retain fixed polymorphisms at protein-coding loci as
documented by either protein studies, which were
common in the 1980 and 1990s, or DNA sequencing/
fingerprinting, which are the current methods of choice.

Documenting homoploid speciation is difficult
without large data sets
In contrast to allopolypoidy, documenting homoploid
hybrid speciation is notoriously difficult. We wish to
make clear that we are referring here to established
hybrids that have become genetically isolated from their
parents and are functioning as distinct evolutionary
units, as bona fide species. Hybrid individuals form often
[3], but in general are ephemeral, either dying off or being
reabsorbed into one of their parental taxa, which leads to
introgression between the parents but not increased
species diversity. Introgression occurs frequently when
the parental taxa have ‘porous genomes’, that is, genomes
that are still arranged similarly enough for there to be few
if any barriers to hybridization [4].
There are two principal ways to detect the presence of
homoploid hybrid species: 1, looking for incongruence
(genes that give different information about species
relationships, that is, reveal different signals or evolu­ ion­
t
ary histories; shown by methods such as split decom­
position [5]) in phylogenetic studies involving multiple

© 2010 Chase et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any
medium, provided the original work is properly cited.Central Ltd

Chase et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:45
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/45

Page 2 of 3

X
N. sylvestris 2n=24

N. obtusifolia 2n=24
2n=4x=48

N. nudicaulis

N. repanda

N. nesophila

N. stocktonii

Figure 1. Allopolyploid species of Nicotiana (Solanaceae) and their parental diploid species. Note that the floral morphology of three of the
polyploids, N. repanda, N. nesophila and N. stocktonii (allotetraploids, 2n = 48), is like that of N. sylvestris (a diploid, 2n = 24), adapted for nocturnal
hawk-moth pollination, and the fourth, N. nudicaulis, is like that of the other parent, N. obtusifolia (2n = 24), adapted for bee pollination during the
day. Photographs taken by Kar Yoong Lim.

independent loci; and 2, documenting linkage disequili­
brium, markers closely linked being more likely to
originate from the same parent and give the same ideas
about relatedness than those further separated on the
chromosome or on different chromosomes. The second
method, which relies upon the assumption that hybrid
speciation involves recombination [6] and homogeniza­
tion of parental homologues, is by far the most powerful,
but it also requires DNA sequences from a large number
of loci and knowledge of their chromosome positions.
The first method can often lead to confusing interpre­
tations caused by other populational and stochastic
processes (mainly persistent ancestral polymorphisms or
gene duplications), and thus it too requires data from a
large number of loci, becoming more powerful as the
number of loci analyzed increases [7]. Therefore, for the
great majority of plant groups, proving that a species has
had a homoploid hybrid origin is difficult.
Thus far, fewer than 50 cases of homoploid hybridiza­
tion have been documented in the angiosperms [1,8], but
as more plant genomes are sequenced we are sure that
this number will increase dramatically. Cases in which
homoploid hybrid species have been documented thus
far have often involved analyses of morphometric data or
data that document the mixed morphological traits of the
hybrids, with relatively small amounts of genetic data
that fortuitously demonstrate the incongruence expected
when loci have been derived from different parents.
Congruence of morphological and genetic data com­ atible
p

with homoploid hybridization is powerful enough to
make convincing arguments, whereas evidence from
either data type alone can easily be attributed to other
populational and stochastic phenomena [7].

Hybridization does not guarantee reproductive
isolation
Once formed, hybrids, both allopolyploid and homoploid,
face similar ecological challenges. As mentioned above,
allopolyploids benefit from immediate genetic barriers to
backcrossing onto their parents that do not exist for
homoploid hybrids, facilitating their genetic isolation
from the parental taxa. Homoploid hybrids, in contrast,
must face further genetic interactions with their parents,
which often result in their reabsorption into a parental
gene pool and introgression in that parent. When they do
become established, there are several potential reasons
why they succeed: 1, they exhibit transgressive traits
(novel mixtures of those exhibited by their parents [9])
that facilitate their existence in habitats in which neither
of their parents can grow, conferring the isolation needed
to prevent their reabsorption into the gene pool of one of
their parents; or 2, their intermediacy in some
morphological traits or ecological preferences enables
them to exploit a novel niche, again delivering a degree of
genetic isolation from both of their parents. The degree
to which the latter mechanism is feasible has been widely
debated. Often such hybrids can only exploit the
ecological transition zone between those of their parents,

Chase et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:45
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/45

which places them near one or both parents and which
may be so limited in area that they cannot form viable
populations. Such intermediates are unlikely to form
viable species in their own right.

Pollinator shifts as a mechanism of reproductive
isolation hybrids
Hybridization leads to rapid genomic alterations, includ­
ing chromosomal rearrangements and gene expression
changes, some of which are mediated by transposable
elements [10,11]. These genomic changes often result in
novel phenotypes, some that are intermediate between
parentals, some that represent novel combinations of
parental features, and, finally, others that are extreme or
transgressive compared to those of the parental species.
Homoploids with flowers intermediate between their
parents in morphology or that produce a complex
mixture of floral fragrances from both parents are likely
to be ineffective in attracting the pollinator of either
parent, so there is likely to be strong selection to conform
to the morphology of one or the other parent. This affects
both homoploids and allopolyploids equally.
In Nicotiana, for example, the four species in the
allopolyploid N. section Repanda have flowers that
attract long-tongued night-flying moths (three species)
like N. sylvestris (the female parent) or short-tongued
bees (one species) like N. obtusifolia (Figure 1). Although
flowers of intermediate morphology and fragrance may
not be well adapted to any existing pollinator, it is not
always the case, particularly if there are highly specific
interactions between plant and pollinator. Examples of
this include when nectar spur length is highly correlated
to tongue length of a particular pollinator [12] or sexual
deception is operating as a pollinator attractant, as in the
case of the orchid genus Ophrys. As shown in a recent
paper in BMC Evolutionary Biology [13], pollinators of
O. arachnitiformis and O. lupercalis are attracted by
complex blends of fragrance compounds, and their
hybrids produce a complete admixture of these, attract­
ing a different species of bee (or other hymenopteran)
than either of those pollinating the parental species.
Thus, the hybrid is immediately reproductively isolated
from its parents and, provided that it is fertile and has a
suitable habitat, can become established as a species in
its own right. This sort of circumstance is rare and would
not be likely to occur in hybrids (regardless of ploidy)
with less specific types of pollination syndromes because
it is highly dependent on the well coordinated aspects of
this relationship. Any shift in the fragrance bouquet can
potentially mimic, by chance, the pheromones of another

Page 3 of 3

species of pollinating insect. Such a mechanism is not
likely to occur in species in which nectar or pollen are
attractants because then it is floral morphology alone
that determines the sort of vector that can pollinate the
flower.
Hybrid invasion of an alternative niche is likely to be
successful if it parallels the reproductive isolation of its
parents and thus subjects the hybrids to different
selection pressures. Penstemon clevelandii, a homoploid
hybrid of P. centranthifolius (red-flowered, hummingbirdpollinated) and P. spectabilis (lavender-flowered, wasppollinated) has established reproductive isolation by
selection for a divergent pollination syndrome (magentaflowered, bee- and hummingbird-pollinated) [14].
Overall, recent evidence has demonstrated the power
of hybridization in creating new combinations of traits
and genes responsible for niche divergence, both
ecological and reproductive. As more examples of
homoploid hybridization are identified, we predict that
the frequency of successful niche novelties will also
increase.
Published: 21 April 2010
References
1.	 Paun O, Forest F, Fay MF, Chase MW: Hybrid speciation in angiosperms:
parental divergence drives ploidy. New Phytol 2009, 182:507-518.
2.	 Stebbins GL: Variation and Evolution in Plants. New York, NY: Columbia
University Press; 1950.
3.	 Stace CA: Hybridization and the flora of the British Isles. Academic Press; 1975.
4.	 Lexer C, Joseph J, van Loo M, Prenner G, Heinze B, Chase MW, Kirkup D: The
use of digital image-based morphometrics to study the phenotypic in
taxa with porous genomes. Taxon 2009, 58:349-354.
5.	 Bandelt HJ, Dress AW: Split decomposition: a new and useful approach to
phylogenetic analysis of distance data. Mol Phylogenet Evol 1992, 1:242-252
6.	 Muntzing A: Outlines to a genetic monograph of the genus Galeopsis.
Herditas 1930, 13:185-341.
7.	 Linder CR, Rieseberg LH: Reconstructing patterns of reticulate evolution in
plants. Am J Bot 2004, 91:1700-1708.
8.	 Rieseberg LH, Soltis DE: Phylogenetic consequences of cytoplasmic gene
flow in plants. Evol Trends Plants 1991, 5:65-83.
9.	 Rieseberg LH, Sinervo B, Linder CR, Ungerer MC, Arias DM: Role of gene
interactions in hybrid speciation: evidence from ancient and experimental
hybrids. Science 1996, 272:741-745.
10.	 Baack EJ, Rieseberg LH: A genomic view of introgression and hybrid
speciation. Curr Opin Genet Dev 2007, 17:513-518.
11.	 Paun O, Fay MF, Soltis DE, Chase MW: Genetic and epigenetic alterations
after hybridization and genome doubling. Taxon 2007, 56:649-656.
12.	 Whittall JB, Hodges SA: Pollinator shifts drive increasingly long nectar spurs
in columbine flowers. Nature 2007, 447:706-709.
13.	 Vereecken NJ, Cozzolino S, Schiestl FP: Hybrid floral novelty drives pollinator
shift in sexually deceptive orchids. BMC Evol Biol, 10: 103.
14.	 Wolfe AD, Xiang Q-Y, Kephart SK. Diploid hybrid speciation in Penstemon
(Scrophulariaceae). Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1998, 95:5112-5115.
doi:10.1186/1741-7007-8-45
Cite this article as: Chase MW, et al.: Hybridization and speciation in
angiosperms: a role for pollinator shifts? BMC Biology 2010, 8:45.

</pre>
</body>
</html>
