<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Commensal microflora induce host defense and decrease bacterial translocation in burn mice through toll-like receptor 4</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Journal of Biomedical Science 2010, 17:48. doi: 10.1186/1423-0127-17-48"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Lee-Wei Chen, Wei-Jung Chang, Pei-Hsuan Chen, Ching-Mei Hsu"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 8.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 7.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Chen et al. Journal of Biomedical Science 2010, 17:48
http://www.jbiomedsci.com/content/17/1/48

Open Access

RESEARCH

Commensal microflora induce host defense and
decrease bacterial translocation in burn mice
through toll-like receptor 4
Research

Lee-Wei Chen*†1,2, Wei-Jung Chang2, Pei-Hsuan Chen2 and Ching-Mei Hsu*†3

Abstract
Background: Major burn is associated with decreased gut barrier function and increased bacterial translocation (BT).
This study is to investigate whether commensal microflora induce host defense and decrease BT in burn mice.
Methods: First, we treated Wild type (WT) mice with antibiotics in drinking water for 4 weeks to deplete gut
commensal microflora. At week 3, drinking water was supplemented with lipopolysaccharide (LPS); a ligand for TLR4,
to trigger TLRs in gut. The intestinal permeability, glutathione level, NF-κB DNA-binding activity, TLR4 expression of
intestinal mucosa, BT to mesenteric lymph nodes (MLNs), and bacterial killing activity of peritoneal cells were
measured after thermal injury. Second, lung of animals were harvested for MPO activity and TNFα mRNA expression
assay. Third, WT animals were treated with oral antibiotics with or without LPS supplement after burn. At 48 hr after
burn, TLR4 expression of intestinal mucosa and bacterial killing activity of cells were examined. Finally, bacterial killing
activity and BT to MLNs after thermal injury in C3H/HeJ (TLR4 mutant) mice were measured.
Results: Burn induced BT to MLNs in WT mice. Commensal depletion decreased TLR4 expression as well as NF-κB
activation of intestine, myeloperoxidase (MPO) activity as well as TNFα expression of lung, and bacterial killing activity
of peritoneal cells. Oral LPS supplement markedly reduced 81% of burn-induced BT and increased TLR4 expression,
MPO activity of lung, as well as bacterial killing activity of peritoneal cells. LPS supplement did not change BT or
bacterial killing activity in C3H/HeJ mice.
Conclusions: Collectively, commensal microflora induce TLR4 expression of intestine and bacterial killing activity of
inflammatory cells in burn. TLR4 ligand increases bacterial killing activity and decreases burn-induced BT. Taken
together with the abolition of LPS effect in TLR4 mutant mice, we conclude that commensal microflora induce host
defense and decrease bacterial translocation in burn mice through toll-like receptor 4.
Background
The human intestines are colonized by trillions of microorganisms, including hundreds of different species of
bacteria and viruses [1]. These microbes, collectively
referred to as the commensal microflora, have an important role in human nutrition and health, by promoting
nutrient supply, preventing pathogen colonization and
shaping and maintaining normal mucosal immunity [2].
Major burn in humans and experimental animals is asso* Correspondence: chenlw2001@yahoo.com.tw, chingmei@mail.nsysu.edu.tw
1

Institute of Emergency and Critical Care Medicine, National Yang-Ming
University, Taipei, Taiwan
3 Department of Biological Sciences, National Sun Yat-Sen University, 70 Lien-Hai
Road, Kaohsiung 804, Taiwan
† Contributed equally

ciated with a decrease in immune functions dependent
upon T cells, the principal cells involved in initiating
adaptive immune responses [3]. It is well accepted that
clinical or experimental burn injury disrupts gut barrier
function, allows dissemination of bacteria from the intestinal tract and facilitates the bacterial translocation (BT)
to MLN, liver, and spleen [4,5]. The magnitude of BT is
proportional to the severity of the burn injury [6]. Previously, burn surgeons believed that feeding should not be
started during the first 48 to 72 hours after burn or after
injury because of theory that there was an obligatory panintestinal ileus. Today, there is overwhelming evidence
that provision of enteral nutrients shortly after injury

Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
© 2010 Chen et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Chen et al. Journal of Biomedical Science 2010, 17:48
http://www.jbiomedsci.com/content/17/1/48

alters gut flora and protects the immuno-compromise,
stressed, or thermally injured patients through unknown
mechanism [7,8]. Defining the relationship between commensal microflora and gut barrier function is warranted
to characterize the beneficial effect of early enteral feeding in burn patients.
The innate immune system detects the invasion of
microorganism through toll-like receptors (TLRs), which
recognize microbial components and trigger inflammatory responses. TLRs comprise a family of pattern-recognition receptors that detect conserved molecular
products of microorganisms [9,10]. TLRs function as sensors of microbial infection and are critical for the initiation of inflammatory and immune defense responses.
TLR2 and TLR4, have been shown to be essential for the
recognition of distinct bacterial cell wall components.
TLR2 discriminates peptidoglycan (PGN), lipoprotein,
lipoarabinomannan (LAM) and zymosan, whereas TLR4
recognizes lipopolysaccharide (LPS), lipoteichoic acid
(LTA) and Taxol [11]. A major downstream effect of TLR
signaling is the activation of the transcription factor NFκB, which is required for expression of many genes
related to innate immunity and inflammation [12]. Previous paper indicated that toll-like receptors played crucial
roles in the maintenance of intestinal epithelial homeostasis [13]. The bacterial ligands recognized by TLRs are
not unique to pathogens, but rather are shared by entire
classes of bacteria, and are produced therefore by commensal microorganisms as well [13]. However, it is still
not decided whether oral supplement TLR4 ligand could
enhance host defense in burn or not.
The role of commensal microflora in maintaining
innate immunity after thermal injury has not been well
characterized. Also, effect of TLR4 ligand on the bacterial
killing activity of inflammatory cells after burn has not
been examined. We hypothesized that commensal microflora in gut maintained host defense against bacterial
challenge and TLR4 ligand decreased burn-induced BT
in burn. Using a commensal depletion model in wild-type
and TLR4 mutant mice, we demonstrated that both commensal microflora and oral TLR4 ligand enhanced the
gut barrier function in burn through the increase of tolllike receptor 4 expression. In the future, enteral feeding of
TLRs ligand could be a feasible way to increase host
defense and gut barrier function in burn or major trauma
patients.

Methods

Page 2 of 15

were purchased from The Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, ME). C3H/HeJ mice have been demonstrated to have
a missense mutation in the third exon of TLR4, yielding a
nonfunctional TLR4 [14]. All animal procedures were in
compliance with regulations on animal used for experimental and other scientific purposes approved by the
National Sun Yat-Sen University Animal Experiments
Committee.
Experimental design
Experiment 1

To evaluate the role of commensal microflora on thermal
injury-induced intestinal barrier dysfunction, WT mice
were fed with vehicle or oral antibiotics for 4 wks to
deplete the intestinal commensals with or without LPS
supplements in drinking water (10 μg/μl) at week 3. Wild
type (WT) mice were randomly divided into four sham
groups (control, LPS, antibiotics, antibiotics + LPS) (n =
6) and four burn groups (control, LPS, antibiotics, antibiotics + LPS) (n = 6 in each). The sham group was subjected to sham treatment and the burn groups were
subjected to a 30 - 35% total body surface area (TBSA)
burn injury. All animals received sterile saline (50 ml/kg
i.p.) for fluid resuscitation right after burn or sham treatment. At 24 hr after burn, mesenteric lymph nodes were
harvested for bacterial translocation assay. Also, the distribution of fluorescein isothiocyanate-dextran (FITCdextran) across the lumen of small intestine in animals
under anesthesia (ketamine and xylazine) was measured
at 24 hr after injury to assess the intestinal permeability.
In another experiment, the GSH level of the intestinal
mucosa in animals with the same quantity and treatment
was measured to assess the peroxidation produced after
injury. Mid-ileum tissues were harvested for TLR4 immunohistochemical studies. In another experiment, the
intestinal mucosa was harvested for NF-κB DNA-binding
activity, TLR4 mRNA and protein expression assay at 8 hr
after burn injury.
Experiment 2

To evaluate the role of commensal microflora on thermal
injury-induced neutrophil deposition and cytokines
expression in lung, WT mice were randomly divided into
four sham groups (n = 6) and four burn groups (n = 6 in
each) as experiment 1. The animals were sacrificed at 8 hr
after burn, and lung tissue was harvested for MPO activity. In another experiment, the lung tissue was harvested
for the assay of TLR2, TLR4, and TNFα mRNA expression at 8 hr after injury.

Animals

Experiment 3

Specific pathogen-free male C3H/HeN (wild-type, WT),
weighing between 20 and 25 g were obtained from the
National Laboratory Breeding and Research Center
(NLBRC, Taipei, Taiwan). C3H/HeJ (TLR4 mutant) mice

Most major burn patients suffered from ileus and
received combined antibiotics treatment to prevent sepsis [15,16]. To evaluate the effect of antibiotics treatment
with or without LPS supplement in the thermal injury-

Chen et al. Journal of Biomedical Science 2010, 17:48
http://www.jbiomedsci.com/content/17/1/48

induced bacterial translocation, WT mice were randomly
divided into one sham burn groups (n = 6) and three burn
groups (burn, antibiotics, antibiotics + LPS) (n = 6 in
each). The sham group was subjected to sham treatment
and oral saline feeding. The burn group was subjected to
burn treatment and oral saline feeding. The antibiotics
group was subjected to oral antibiotics administration
after burn. The antibiotics + LPS group was subjected to
LPS supplements (10 μg/μl) in oral antibiotics administration after burn. At 48 hr after burn or sham burn, peritoneal cells as well as bone marrow cells were harvested
for bacterial killing activity, mesenteric lymph nodes were
harvested for bacterial translocation, and intestinal
mucosa was harvested for TLR4 mRNA assay.
Experiment 4

C3H/HeJ mice were randomly divided into three sham
groups (n = 6) and three burn groups (n = 6 in each) as
experiment 1. At 8 hr after thermal injury, lung was harvested for TLR4 mRNA assay, intestinal mucosa was harvested for TLR4 mRNA assay, and peritoneal cells were
harvested from the abdominal cavity for bacterial killing
activity and TLR4 as well as TNFα mRNA expression
assay.
Thermal Injury

The thermal injury procedures were modified from those
described by Walker et al [14]. Briefly, animals were anesthetized intraperitoneally with ketamine (80 mg/kg) and
xylazine (10 mg/kg), and a marked area of the shaved dorsal skin was exposed from a wooden template and
immersed in 95°C water for 10 sec. This procedure produced a 30 - 35% TBSA burn of the mice. Total body surface area was calculated using murine-specific data [17]
and average 40 to 48 cm2 for mice of the weight used. The
burn injury caused 8% mortality within the first 4 hrs
after burn. Nonsurviving animals were excluded from the
subsequent study. The sham control animals were anesthetized, shaved and maintained in identical settings
except that room temperature water was used for immersion.
Depletion of gut commensal microflora and reconstitution
of commensal-depleted animals with TLR ligands

Commensal bacterial products have been known to
engage TLRs and confer protection against dextran sulfate sodium (DSS)-induced intestinal epithelial injury
[13]. Animals were provided ampicillin (A; 1 g/L; Sigma),
vancomycin (V; 500 mg/L; Abott Labs), neomycin sulfate
(N: 1 g/L; Pharmacia/Upjohn), and metronidazole (M; 1
g/L; Sidmack Labs) in drinking water for four weeks. Previously, a four-week oral administration of vancomycin,
neomycin, metronidazole, and ampicillin with the same
dose described above in mice has been proved to deplete
all detectable commensals [13]. Previously, this oral anti-

Page 3 of 15

biotics protocol has no significant effect on nutrition and
systemic effect [13,18]. To those animals receiving LPS,
drinking water was supplemented with 10 μg/μl of purified E. coli 026:B6 LPS (Sigma) at week 3 and continued
in drinking water for the duration of sham treatment or
thermal injury. LPS, a membrane constituent of gramnegative bacteria, was the best-studied TLR ligand and
was recognized by TLR4 and MD-2, a molecule associated with the extracellular domain of TLR4 [19].
Quantification of intestinal permeability

The assay of intestinal permeability was modified from
the method described by Otamiri et al. [20]. A 5-cm segment of the jejunum and proximal ileum was dissected
with the beginning at 5 cm distal to the ligament of Treitz
with well protected superior mesenteric vessels. The
bilateral end of the isolated intestine was clamped with
rubber bands to prevent the leakage of FITC-dextran. 200
μl of 0.1 M phosphate buffer saline (pH 7.2) containing 25
mg of FITC-dextran (MW 4,400, Sigma) was injected into
the lumen. After 30 min, blood sample (100 μl) was taken
by a puncture of the portal vein and immediately diluted
with 1.9 ml of 50 mM Tris (pH 10.3) containing 150 mM
NaCl. The diluted plasma was centrifuged at 4°C, 3,000 g
for 7 min and the supernatant was analyzed for FITCdextran concentration with a fluorescence spectrophotometer (Hitachi, F-2000) at the excitation wavelength of
480 nm and the emission wavelength of 520 nm. Standard
curves for calculating the FITC-dextran concentration in
the samples were obtained by diluting various amounts of
FITC-dextran in a pool of mice plasma, then diluted and
centrifuged in the same manner as the samples before
measurement.
Determination of glutathione (GSH) level

The intestinal mucosa glutathione level was quantitated
by the fluorescence probe o-phthalaldeyde (sigma) which
can react with GSH and has high quantum yield. Mix
1.89ml of 50 mM potassium phosphate buffer (pH8.0)
with 10ul of supernatant obtained and add 100 μl of 1mg/
ml o-phthalaldeyhyde (freshly prepared in absolute methanol). The samples were incubated at room temperature
for 15 min and fluorescence was measured at an excitation wavelength of 350 nm and an emission wavelength of
420 nm. The data was expressed as GSH content (mM).
Bacterial translocation to MLN

The collected mesenteric lymph nodes were weighed and
homogenized in 500 μl of sterile saline. Aliquots of the
homogenate from each tissue were plated onto TSB
(Tryptic Soy Broth) agar plates (DIFCO, Detroit, Michigan, USA). The plates were examined after aerobic incubation at 37°C for 24 hr to determine whether commensal
depletion with or without LPS altered burn-induced

Chen et al. Journal of Biomedical Science 2010, 17:48
http://www.jbiomedsci.com/content/17/1/48

translocation. Representative colonies were expressed as
colony forming unit per gram of organ tissue (CFU/g tissue).
Determination of lung myeloperoxidase activity

Lung content of myeloperoxidase (MPO) was determined
to assess the degree of pulmonary neutrophil infiltration
[21]. Mice were anesthetized and the thorax was opened
with median sternotomy. The bilateral lungs and heart
were harvested together and the pulmonary vasculature
was cleared of blood by gentle injection of 10 ml sterile
saline into the right ventricle. The lungs were then blotted dry of surface blood and weighed.
Lung tissues was placed in 50 mM potassium phosphate buffer (pH 6.0) with 0.5% hexadecyltrimethylammonium bromide and homogenized. The homogenate
was sonicated on ice and centrifuged for 30 min at 3,000
g, 4°C. An aliquot (0.1 ml) of supernatant was added to
2.9 ml of 50 mM potassium phosphate buffer (pH 6.0)
containing 0.167 mg/ml of O-dianisidine and 0.0005%
hydrogen peroxide [22]. The rate of change in absorbance
at 460 nm was measured over 3 min. One unit of MPO
activity was defined as the amount of enzyme that
reduces 1 μmole of peroxide per min and the data were
expressed as units per gram of lung tissue (Units/g tissue).
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and quantification of PCR
products

Total RNA was isolated from cells using TRIZOL reagent
(Invitrogen, Life Technologies) as described previously
[23]. Reverse transcription-generated cDNA encoding
TLR2, TLR4, and TNFα genes were amplified using PCR.
Sets of primers were designed according to those genes
documented in GenBank. The sequences are 5'-AGTGGGTCAAGGAACAGAAGCA-3' (sense) and 5'-CTTTACCAGCTCATTTCTCACC-3' (antisense) for TLR4,
5'-TCTGGGCAGTCTTGAACATTT-3' (sense) and 5'AGAGTCAGGTGATGGATGTCG-3' (antisense) for
TLR2,
5'-CAGCCTCTTCTCATTCCTGCTTGTG-3'
(sense) and 5'-CTGGAAGACTCCTCCCAGGTATAT-3'
(antisense) for TNFα, and 5' GTGGGCCGCTCTAG
GCACCA3' (sense) and 5' CGGTTGGCCTTAGGG
TTCAG3' (antisense) for β-actin gene as a control.
Bacterial killing activity of peritoneal cells and bone
marrow cells

The peritoneal cavity was washed with 5 ml PBS containing 0.1% BSA and 10 mM EDTA. The peritoneal cells
were collected and resuspended in HBSS as 106 cells/ml.
Bone marrow cells were harvested from bilateral femoral
and tibial bone marrow. Red cells depletion was performed using erythrolysis. After 5 min of preincubation,

Page 4 of 15

the cell suspension was incubated with E. coli (108/ml) at
37°C for 1 h with shaking. The cells were removed as the
pellet after centrifugation at 200 × g for 10 min, and E.
coli number in the supernatant was counted [24,25].
Western immunoblots

Protein levels of TLR4 of intestinal mucosa were measured by Western immunoblotting. Homogenized samples (50 μg of protein each) were subjected to 12.5% SDSPAGE under reducing conditions. Proteins were transferred onto PVDF membranes (Millipore) by using a
Semi-Dry Electrophoretic system (Bio-Rad). The TLR4
was identified by rabbit monoclonal antibody (Cell Signaling Technology, Inc.). The membranes were incubated
with the secondary antibody (Biotinylated anti-rabbit
IgG) (Perkin-Elmer Life Science, Boston, USA) for 1 hr at
room temperature. Blots were developed by the ECL
Western blotting detection reagents (Perkin-Elmer).
TLR4 immunohistochemistry

The following antibodies were used for immunohistochemical stains: Rabbit monoclonal immunoglobulin G
to TLR4 (Cell Signaling Technology, Inc.), biotinylated
secondary antibodies and peroxidase-conjugated streptavidin (Dako). The TLR4 antibody with a 1:300 dilution
was used. Sections of the paraffin fixed mice lung (4 μm
thickness) were deparaffinized with xylene and graded
ethanol. For antigen retrieval in the TLR4 staining, sections were soaked in a citrate buffer containing NP-40
(pH 6.0, Sigma) and heated in a microwave oven (600W)
for 10 min. Endogenous peroxidase was blocked with 2%
hydrogen peroxide in 70% methanol for 10 min at room
temperature. Sections were incubated with primary antibodies for 2 hr, biotinylated secondary antibodies for 20
min at room temperature, and then subsequently processed by the avidin-biotin peroxidase complex method
with 3-amino-9-ethylcarbazole (AEC) as the chromogen.
Sections were lightly counterstained with Mayer's hematoxylin and viewed under a light microscope. Negative
control sections were also incubated, but without primary antibody.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assay for NF-κB and AP-1

Nuclear extracts were prepared as described [26]. Intestinal mucosa were harvested in hypotonic buffer and pelleted by centrifugation. The pellets were suspended in
nuclear extract buffer. After 15 min on ice the suspensions were centrifuged and the supernatants were transferred to new tubes. The Bandshift kit (Promega Corp.
Madison, WI) was used according to the manufacturer's
instructions. Consensus and control oligonucleotides
(Santa Cruz Biotechnology Inc.) were labeled by polynucleotides sequences included the AP-1 consensus (5' to 3')

Chen et al. Journal of Biomedical Science 2010, 17:48
http://www.jbiomedsci.com/content/17/1/48

Page 5 of 15

(CGCTTGATGACTTGGCCGGAA) or the NF-κB consensus(5' to 3') (AGTTGAGGGGAC-TTTCCCAGGC)
(1.75pmol/μl). After the oligonucleotide was radiolabeled, 5 μg of nuclear protein was incubated with 2 μg of
poly(dI-dC) and 5,000-10,000 cpm of γ[32P]-ATP-labeled
oligonucleotides. After 30 min at room temperature, the
samples were analyzed on a 4% polyacrylamide gel. The
gel was dried and visualized by autoradiography.

mensal depletion group (from 120 to 495 CFU/g tissue,
about 8 fold increase). However, statistic analysis showed
no significant difference of BT between commensal
depletion group and burn group (495 ± 95 vs. 620 ± 172
CFU/g tissue). Most interestingly, LPS supplement in
commensal depletion group significantly decreased 81%
of thermal injury-induced BT when compared with that
of commensal depletion + burn group (Figure 2A).

Statistical analysis

TLR4 ligand increased thermal injury-induced neutrophil
accumulation in lung

Values are expressed as means SEs. Intergroup comparisons were made using one-way ANOVA followed by Bonferroni correction. Statistical analysis was performed on
Prism software (GraphPad). Data were expressed as mean
± standard deviation of the mean in all figures, and p <
0.05 is considered to be statistical significance. The bacterial count, MPO activity, FITC, glutathione level, and
bacterial translocation between groups were assessed
with one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA), followed by
Scheffe's F test.

Results
Thermal injury induced intestinal permeability

To study the role of commensal microflora on thermal
injury-induced intestinal dysfunction, we assessed the
intestinal permeability of mice after oral antibiotics treatment with or without thermal injury. Thermal injury significantly increased intestinal permeability up to 356% of
that of sham group at 24 hr after thermal injury (24.86 ±
3.56 vs. 8.56 ± 0.75 μg/ml). There was no significant difference of intestinal permeability between oral antibiotics
group and control group. LPS supplement did not change
intestinal permeability in mice after thermal injury compared with antibiotics + burn group or burn group (Figure 1A).
Thermal injury decreased glutathione level of intestinal
mucosa

Several reports indicated that GSH levels of various tissues including lungs, liver, kidney, and intestine were significantly decreased after thermal injury [27]. Thermal
injury resulted in a significant decrease, by 26%, in glutathione level of intestinal mucosa compared with that of
sham group (1307 ± 230 vs. 1777 ± 311 mM). Oral antibiotics treatment with or without LPS supplement did not
change GSH level of intestinal mucosa compared with
that of control group in burned animals (Figure 1B).
TLR4 ligand decreased thermal injury-induced bacterial
translocation

Four-week broad-spectrum antibiotics depleted bacteria
in colonic fecal matter of mice as previously described
[28]. Thermal injury significantly increased BT to MLNs
in both control mice (from 8 to 620 CFU/g) and com-

Lung MPO activity has been used as an index for pulmonary neutrophil accumulation [29]. Thermal injury
induced a marked 11-fold increase of MPO activity in
lung compared with control group (87 ± 8.17 vs. 6.73 ±
0.8 Units/g tissue) (Figure 2B). Oral antibiotics treatment
with thermal injury induced a significant increase of
MPO activity compared with commensal depletion group
(28.09 ± 2.01 vs. 17.1 ± 4.2 Units/g tissue). However, Oral
antibiotics treatment led to a significant 68% decrease
(28.09 ± 4.97 vs. 87 ± 8.17 Units/g tissue) of thermal
injury-induced lung MPO activity in comparison with
that of burn group (Figure 2B). LPS supplement significantly increased 139% of MPO activity in lung compared
with that of antibiotics + burn group. This demonstrates
that commensal depletion decreases thermal injuryinduced neutrophil deposition in lung and LPS supplement reverses it.
TLR4 ligand increased TLR4 and TNFα expression in lung
after burn

To study the change of cytokines in lung in response to
commensal depletion in mice, we examined TLR2, TLR4,
and TNFα mRNA expression of lung in different groups.
Oral antibiotics significantly decreased TLR4 and TNFα
mRNA of lung in burn mice compared with those of burn
group (Figure 3A). LPS supplement significantly
increased TLR4 and TNFα mRNA expression of lung
compared with those of antibiotics + burn group.
TLR4 ligand increased bacterial killing activity of peritoneal
cells in burn group

To define the effect of TLR4 ligand on the host defense to
bacteria challenge, we harvested peritoneal cells from
mice after oral antibiotics and examined the bacterial killing activity of cells. Peritoneal cells were cultured with
E.coli and bacterial killing activity was determined by
counting the E. coli remained. There was no significant
difference in bacterial killing activity of peritoneal cells
among control group, oral antibiotics group, and antibiotics + LPS group in sham burn animals (Figure 3B).
However, antibiotics with burn treatment induced a significant 10-fold increase of bacterial retention compared
with that of burn group (1732 ± 410, vs. 290 ± 65 CFU).

Chen et al. Journal of Biomedical Science 2010, 17:48
http://www.jbiomedsci.com/content/17/1/48

Page 6 of 15

Figure 1 Thermal injury induced permeability and decreased glutathione (GSH) level of intestinal mucosa. (A) Thermal injury induced intestinal permeability and commensal depletion with or without LPS supplement did not change it. ! p < 0.05, vs. sham group. (B) Thermal injury decreased
GSH level of intestinal mucosa and commensal depletion with or without LPS supplement did not change it. ! p < 0.05, vs. sham group.

LPS supplement significantly decreased 55% of bacterial
retention compared with that of antibiotics + burn group.
These results indicate that commensal depletion
decreases the bacterial killing activity of peritoneal cells
in burn and LPS supplement reverses it.
TLR4 ligand increased TLR4 expression of intestinal mucosa

Oral antibiotics treatment significantly decreased TLR4
protein (Figure 4A) and mRNA (Figure 4B) expression of
intestinal mucosa in burn mice compared with burn only
group. LPS supplement significantly increased TLR4 protein and mRNA expression of intestinal mucosa in thermal injured mice in comparison with commensal
depletion + burn group.

TLR4 ligand increased TLR4 expression of intestinal
epithelial cells

To examine which cells in intestine expressed toll-like
receptors after oral LPS supplement, we evaluated the
TLR4 protein expression in intestine with immunohistochemical staining. We found that LPS supplement in
oral antibiotics significantly increased the TLR4 expression of intestinal epithelial cells in burn group when compared with antibiotics + burn group (Figure 4C).
TLR4 ligand increased NF-κB but decreases AP-1 activity of
intestinal mucosa after thermal injury

NF-κB is an integrator of different signals involved in
inflammatory responses in the gut [30]. Commensal

Chen et al. Journal of Biomedical Science 2010, 17:48
http://www.jbiomedsci.com/content/17/1/48

Page 7 of 15

Figure 2 TLR4 ligand decreased thermal injury-induced bacterial translocation and increased neutrophil accumulation in lung. (A) LPS supplement in oral antibiotics decreased thermal injury-induced bacterial translocation in comparison with commensal depletion + burn group. ! p <
0.05, vs. sham group. # p < 0.05, vs. commensal depletion + burn group. (B) Commensal depletion significantly decreased thermal injury-induced lung
myeloperoxidase (MPO) activity and LPS supplement reversed it. ! p < 0.05, vs. sham group. * p < 0.05, vs. burn group. # p < 0.05, vs. commensal depletion + burn group.

Chen et al. Journal of Biomedical Science 2010, 17:48
http://www.jbiomedsci.com/content/17/1/48

Page 8 of 15

Figure 3 TLR4 ligand increased TNFα expression in lung and the bacterial killing activity of peritoneal cells. (A) Commensal depletion decreased TLR4 as well as TNFα mRNA expression in lung and LPS supplement reversed them. The values represent the average fold increase (± s.d.) in
mRNA expression in 3 different mice of each group. ! p < 0.05, vs. sham group. * p < 0.05, vs. burn group. # p < 0.05, vs. commensal depletion + burn
group. (B) Commensal depletion induced a significant increase of bacterial retention of peritoneal cells in burn mice compared with that of burn
group. LPS supplement significantly decreased 55% of bacterial retention compared with that of antibiotics + burn group. * p < 0.05, vs. burn group.
# p < 0.05, vs. commensal depletion + burn group.

Chen et al. Journal of Biomedical Science 2010, 17:48
http://www.jbiomedsci.com/content/17/1/48

depletion decreased NF-κB but increased AP-1 DNAbinding activity of intestinal mucosa in thermal injured
mice compared with those of burn group. LPS supplement increased NF-κB but decreased AP-1 DNA-binding
activity of intestinal mucosa in burn mice compared with
those of commensal depletion + burn group (Figure 4D).
Oral TLR4 ligand supplement after burn decreased
bacterial translocation

Thermal injury induced an increase of BT to MLNs at 48
hr after thermal injury (70 ± 35 CFU/g tissue). Oral antibiotics feeding after burn significantly increased BT to
MLN in comparison with burn group (489 ± 61 CFU/g
tissue, about 6 fold increase). Whereas, LPS supplement
in drinking water markedly decreased 75% of BT in comparison with that of burn + antibiotics group (Figure 5A).
Oral TLR4 ligand supplement after burn increased bacterial
killing activity of peritoneal cells and bone marrow cells

To simulate the clinical burn condition, we gave WT mice
oral antibiotics with or without LPS supplement after
burn and examined the bacterial killing activity of peritoneal cells and bone marrow cells at 48 hr after thermal
injury. Thermal injury with saline feeding did not change
the bacterial killing activity of peritoneal macrophages or
bone marrow cells in comparison with control group
(Figure 5B). However, oral antibiotics administration
after burn significantly increased 116% and 221% of bacterial retention in peritoneal macrophages and bone marrow cells, respectively, in comparison with that of burn
group. LPS supplement significantly decreased 61% and
41% of bacterial retention in peritoneal macrophages and
bone marrow cells, respectively, in comparison with that
of antibiotics + burn group.
Oral TLR4 ligand supplement after burn increased TLR4
mRNA expression of intestinal mucosa

We examined the TLR4 mRNA expression of intestinal
mucosa in different groups. Oral antibiotics feeding after
burn significantly decreased TLR4 mRNA expression of
intestinal mucosa compared with that of burn group (Figure 5C). LPS supplement significantly increased TLR4
mRNA expression of intestinal mucosa compared with
that of antibiotics + burn group.
TLR4 ligand did not change bacterial translocation in C3H/
HeJ mice

To further define the involvement of TLR4 on the change
of bacterial translocation to MLNs after thermal injury,
we examined BT to MLNs in C3H/HeJ mice after thermal
injury with oral antibiotics treatment. Thermal injury did
not induce bacterial translocation to MLNs in control
group and commensal depleted group in C3H/HeJ mice.
Commensal depletion with burn did on change BT to
MLNs in C3H/HeJ mice when compared with burn

Page 9 of 15

group. Furthermore, LPS supplement did not change BT
when compared with commensal depletion group in
C3H/HeJ mice (Figure 6A).
TLR4 ligand did not change the bacterial killing activity of
peritoneal cells in C3H/HeJ mice

To further define the role of TLR4 on host defense against
bacterial challenge after commensal depletion, we examined the bacterial killing activity of peritoneal cells in
C3H/HeJ mice after different treatments. Commensal
depletion did not change the bacterial killing activity of
peritoneal cells in C3H/HeJ mice when compared with
burn group (Figure 6B). Furthermore, LPS supplement
did not change bacterial killing activity of peritoneal cells
in C3H/HeJ mice. There is no significant difference of
peritoneal cell count between WT mice and C3H/HeJ
mice (Table 1).
TLR4 ligand did not change TLR4 and TNFα expression in
C3H/HEJ mice

To further evaluate the involvement of TLR4 in the
cytokine change of different tissues after commensal
depletion, we examined TLR4 mRNA expression of gut,
lung, and peritoneal cells in C3H/HeJ mice. Thermal
injury induced TNFα mRNA expression of peritoneal
cells in C3H/HeJ mice when compared with that of sham
burn group. Commensal depletion with or without LPS
supplement did not change TLR4 mRNA expression of
gut, lung, and peritoneal cells in C3H/HeJ mice when
compared with control group. Also, commensal depletion
with or without LPS supplement did not change TNFα
mRNA expression of peritoneal cells in C3H/HeJ mice
when compared with burn group (Figure 6C).

Discussion
Major burn in humans and experimental animals is associated with compromised immune functions and
increased acute gastrointestinal derangement that disrupts gastrointestinal mucosa integrity and facilitates the
bacterial translocation. Our data demonstrate that commensal microflora are critical in maintaining innate
immunity in burn through TLR4 signaling and oral TLR4
ligand supplement reverses the commensal depletion
effect in burn through the decrease of BT and the
increase of bacterial killing activity.
Provision of enteral nutrients shortly after injury alters
gut flora and protects the immuno-compromised,
stressed, or thermally injured patients through unknown
mechanism [8]. The cross talk between commensal
microflora in intestinal tract and systemic innate immunity is still undefined. Previous paper demonstrated that
recognition of commensal microflora by toll-like receptors was required for intestinal homeostasis [13]. Here,
our results show that commensal microflora in intestinal

Chen et al. Journal of Biomedical Science 2010, 17:48
http://www.jbiomedsci.com/content/17/1/48

Page 10 of 15

Figure 4 TLR4 ligand increased TLR4 expression and NF-κB DNA binding activity of intestinal mucosa after thermal injury. (A) LPS supplement increased TLR4 protein expression of intestinal mucosa in commensal depleted mice. * p < 0.05, vs. burn group. # p < 0.05, vs. commensal depletion + burn group. (B) LPS supplement increased TLR4 mRNA expression of intestinal mucosa in commensal depleted mice. The values represent
the average fold increase (± s.d.) in 3 different mice of each group. * p < 0.05, vs. burn group. # p < 0.05, vs. commensal depletion + burn group. (C) LPS
supplement increased TLR4 immunostaining of intestinal epithelial cells. (D) Commensal depletion decreased the NF-κB DNA-binding activity of intestinal mucosa and LPS supplement increased it. (n = 4). *p < 0.05, vs. burn group. * p < 0.05, vs. commensal depletion + burn group. NS = non-specific
binding.

Chen et al. Journal of Biomedical Science 2010, 17:48
http://www.jbiomedsci.com/content/17/1/48

Page 11 of 15

Figure 5 Oral TLR4 ligand supplement after burn decreased bacterial translocation (BT) and increased bacterial killing activity of macrophages as well as TLR4 expression of intestinal mucosa. (A) Oral antibiotics feeding after burn (Burn+Anti) increased BT to MLN in comparison
to burn group and LPS supplement reversed it. * p < 0.05, vs. burn group. # p < 0.05, vs. burn + antibiotics group. (B) Oral antibiotics feeding after burn
induced a significant increase of bacterial retention in both peritoneal macrophages and bone marrow cells. LPS supplement (Burn+Anti+LPS) decreased bacterial retention of peritoneal macrophages and bone marrow cells in comparison with antibiotics + burn group (Burn + Anti). * p < 0.05,
vs. burn group. # p < 0.05, vs. antibiotics + burn group. (C) Oral antibiotics feeding after burn decreased TLR4 mRNA expression of intestinal mucosa in
comparison with burn group and LPS supplement increased it. * p < 0.05, vs. burn group. # p < 0.05, vs. burn + antibiotics group

Chen et al. Journal of Biomedical Science 2010, 17:48
http://www.jbiomedsci.com/content/17/1/48

Page 12 of 15

Figure 6 TLR4 ligand did not change bacterial translocation (BT), bacterial killing activity of peritoneal cells, and TNFα mRNA expression
in C3H/HeJ mice. (A) Commensal depletion with or without LPS supplement did not change BT in C3H/HeJ mice. (B) Commensal depletion with or
without LPS supplement did not change bacterial retention of peritoneal cells in C3H/HeJ mice. (C) Commensal depletion with or without LPS supplement did not change TNFα mRNA expression of peritoneal cells in C3H/HeJ mice. The values represent the average fold increase (± s.d.) in mRNA
expression in 3 different mice of each group. ! p < 0.05, vs. sham group.

Chen et al. Journal of Biomedical Science 2010, 17:48
http://www.jbiomedsci.com/content/17/1/48

Page 13 of 15

Table 1: Components of peritoneal cells of C3H/HeJ and wild-type (WT) mice.
Group

Monos (%)

Lymphos (%)

PMN (%)

Macrophages (%)

Mast cells (%)

WT

51.7 ± 7.3

42.6 ± 4.1

2.9 ± 0.5

1.9 ± 0.3

0.9 ± 0.1

C3H/HeJ

54 ± 8

39.6 ± 5.1

3.2 ± 0.9

2.1 ± 0.5

1.1 ± 0.3

tract induce TLR4 expression of intestinal epithelial cells
and enhance the bacterial killing activity of inflammatory
cells in burn. Previously, macrophage of TLR4-deficient
mice demonstrated impaired bacterial recognition and
phagocytosis compared with wild-type mice [31]. Our
present data show that commensal depletion does not
change the bacterial killing activity and TLRα mRNA
expression of peritoneal cells in C3H/HeJ mice. Altogether, our data suggest that TLR4 signaling in intestinal
tract is important in inducing bacterial killing activity of
inflammatory cells after thermal injury and commensal
microflora are critical in maintaining innate immunity in
burn through TLR4 signaling. Previous paper has proved
that enteral nutrients shortly after injury could alter
intestinal flora [8]. Accordingly, the beneficiary effect of
early enteral nutrients on systemic immunity in burn
could be through the reestablishment of gut flora in intestinal tract. In a recent prospective randomized controlled
trial of using probiotics in pancreatitis patients, patients
who received the probiotics had a surprisingly high rate
of nonocclusive bowel necrosis [32]. This paper used 10
billion probiotic bacteria per day on top of enteral nutrition. This might have even further increased local oxygen
demand, with a combined deleterious effect on an already
critically reduced blood flow. On the contrary, we provide
animals combined antibiotics to deplete commensal
microflora and stimulate the TLR4 expression in intestinal mucosa with oral LPS supplement. All in all, our data
imply that oral supplement of certain flora to activate
TLR4 in intestinal mucosa but not overload the intestinal
flora could be a new therapeutic strategy to enhance systemic innate immunity in major burn patients.
The second important conclusion to be derived from
the present results is that TLR4 ligand supplement
decreases burn-induced BT and reverses commensal
depletion-induced reduction of bacterial killing activity
in burn. First, we demonstrate that thermal injury
induces a significant increase of bacterial translocation to
mesenteric lymph nodes. LPS supplement stimulates the
TLR4 expression of intestinal mucosa and significantly
decreases thermal injury-induced bacterial translocation.
Thermal injury is associated with mesenteric vasoconstriction that lead to damage of the gut mucosa and dysfunction of the gut barrier, resulting in an increased gut
permeability, and absorption of bacteria and bacterial
toxins [33]. Burn-induced gut injury results in the pro-

duction of biologically active factors that are carried in
the mesenteric lymph, but not the portal plasma, which
injure endothelial cells and activate neutrophil and contribute to distant organ injury [15]. The potential cause of
sepsis and subsequent multiple organ failure following
thermal injury could be the failure of intestinal mucosa to
act as barrier against BT [34]. BT is a phenomenon in
which live bacteria or its products cross the intestinal
barrier. The function of the gut barrier depends on
mucous epithelia (mechanical barrier) and secreting IgA
and immune cells (immune barrier) [35]. Gut translocation of bacteria has been shown in both animal and
human studies. BT and its complications have been
shown clearly to occur in animal models, but its existence
and importance in humans has been difficult to ascertain
[35]. Our results demonstrate that TLR4 ligand significantly increases the bacterial killing activity of inflammatory cells and decreases thermal injury-induced bacterial
translocation but has no effect on intestinal permeability
or glutathione level. These results suggest that TLR4
ligand improves the thermal injury-induced gut barrier
function through the enhancement of the intestinal
innate immunity (immune barrier) rather than the
decrease of intestinal permeability (mechanical barrier).
Second, LPS supplement reverses commensal depletioninduced reduction of bacterial killing activity of peritoneal cells after burn. Previously, TLRs of those macrophages which were resident in the lamina propria of the
intestine has been implicated closely related to the potent
inflammatory response, intestinal inflammation, and corresponding injury [36]. On the contrary, our data demonstrate that LPS supplement reverses commensal
depletion-induced reduction of bacterial killing activity
of peritoneal cells in WT mice but not in C3H/HeJ mice.
This indicates that LPS supplement induces host defense
to bacterial challenge in burn through the TLR4 signaling. Recent research indicates that there is significant
phylogenetic and diversity in TLR4-mediated responses
[37]. A new TLR4 ligand that is originated from LPS
structures but without its toxicity could be developed in
the future to enhance host defense in major burn
patients.
Infection is a common source of morbidity and mortality in critically burned patients. Burn injury produces a
complex interaction of gut-derived inflammatory reaction paralleled by systemic inflammatory responses. The

Chen et al. Journal of Biomedical Science 2010, 17:48
http://www.jbiomedsci.com/content/17/1/48

use of selective decontamination of the digestive tract
(SDD) is of particular interest for application in patients
with major burn injury where the need for intubation and
mechanical ventilation likely contributes to oropharyngeal and intestinal colonization with pathogenic microorganisms. Recently, SDD treatment of experimental burn
in adult rats resulted in attenuated septic challengerelated inflammatory responses and improved myocardial contractile response [5]. However, our data demonstrate that oral antibiotics treatment after burn is not
without a cost: decreasing bacterial killing activity of
inflammatory cells. Also, our results suggest that oral
TLR4 ligand supplement could reverse the unfavorable
effect of oral antibiotics treatment in burn through the
increase of gut barrier function and bacterial killing activity of inflammatory cells.
TLRs are membrane signaling receptors that play
essential roles in innate defense against microbes. TLRs
are type I integral membrane glycoproteins that contain
leucine-rich repeats glanced by characteristic cysteinerich motifs in their extracellular regions and a cytoplasmic TIR homology domain. Ligand-induced TLR
dimerization permits the binding of cytoplasmic adapter
proteins, MyD88, to the TLR cytoplasmic tails [38]. A
major downstream effect of TLR signaling is the activation of the transcription factor NF-κB, which is required
for expression of many genes related to innate immunity
and inflammation [12]. Studies have proved that TLR4
stimulation maintained intestinal hemostasis through the
NF-κB activation of the intestinal mucosa [13]. The stimulatory effect of LPS supplement on NF-κB activation of
intestinal mucosa further corroborates that LPS supplement enhances host defense in burn through the increase
of TLR4 signaling. Activation of the NF-κB transcription
factor pathways is an essential immediate early step of
immune activation [39]. Altogether, our data suggest that
TLR4 ligand activates the NF-κB activation in intestinal
mucosa and enhances the gut barrier function after thermal injury.
Septic shock has been reported to be the most common
cause of death in the noncoronary intensive care unit
[40]. Pulmonary sepsis is the septic complication most
frequently encountered in severely burn patients [41].
MPO system plays an important role in the microbicidal
activity of phagocytes and neutrophil play an essential
role in the Human's innate immune response to infection
[42]. MPO, released by neutrophil, may attack normal tissue and thus contribute to the pathogenesis disease. Our
data demonstrate that commensal depletion significantly
decreases TLR4 as well as TNFα expression in lung and
LPS supplement increases TLR4 as well as TNFα expression in lung after burn. NF-κB family members control
transcriptional activity of various promoters of proinflammatory cytokines, cell surface receptors, transcrip-

Page 14 of 15

tion factors, and adhesion molecules that are involved in
intestinal inflammation such as TNFα[12]. Our data suggest that TLR4 ligand stimulation in the gut enhances
TLR4 expression and neutrophil deposition in lung. The
stimulatory effect of LPS supplement on TNFα expression as well as MPO activity of lung could be through the
induction of NF-κB activation.

Conclusions
In summary, commensal microflora induce gut barrier
function and the bacterial killing activity of peritoneal
cells in burn through the increase of toll-like receptor 4.
TLR4 ligand reverses oral antibiotics effect in burn
through the decrease of BT and the increase of bacterial
killing activity.
Abbreviations
TLRs: toll-like receptors; MLNs: mesenteric lymph nodes; LPS: lipopolysaccharide; BT: bacterial translocation; LTA: lipoteichoic acid; TBSA: total body surface
area; FITC: fluorescein isothiocyanate; MPO: myeloperoxidase; WT: Wild type;
GSH: glutathione
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors' contributions
LWC and CMH designed research; WJC and PHC performed research; LWC and
CMH analyzed data; LWC and CMH wrote the paper. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by grants from National Science Council, Taipei
(NSC972314B010030MY3), Kaohsiung Veterans General Hospital, Kaohsiung
(VGHNSU97-050, VGHKS98-052) to CLW, and National Sun Yat-Sen UniversityKaohsiung Medical University Joint Research Center.
Author Details
1Institute of Emergency and Critical Care Medicine, National Yang-Ming
University, Taipei, Taiwan, 2Department of Surgery, Kaohsiung Veterans General
Hospital, 386, Ta-chung 1st Road, Kaohsiung, Taiwan and 3Department of
Biological Sciences, National Sun Yat-Sen University, 70 Lien-Hai Road,
Kaohsiung 804, Taiwan
Received: 15 February 2010 Accepted: 12 June 2010
Published: 12 June 2010
Journal Chen available from: http://www.jbiomedsci.com/content/17/1/48
© 2010 of Biomedical Science distributed Ltd.
This is an Open Access article2010, 17:48 under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
article is et al; licensee BioMed Central

References
1. Sonnenburg JL, Angenent LT, Gordon JI: Getting a grip on things: how
do communities of bacterial symbionts become established in our
intestine? Nat Immunol 2004, 5:569-573.
2. Kelly D, Conway S, Aminov R: Commensal gut bacteria: mechanisms of
immune modulation. Trends Immunol 2005, 26:326-333.
3. Lederer JA, Rodrick ML, Mannick JA: The effects of injury on the adaptive
immune response. Shock (Augusta, Ga) 1999, 11:153-159.
4. Chung DH, Herndon DN: Multiple converging mechanisms for postburn
intestinal barrier dysfunction. Crit Care Med 2004, 32:1803-1804.
5. Horton JW, Maass DL, White J, Minei JP: Reducing susceptibility to
bacteremia after experimental burn injury: a role for selective
decontamination of the digestive tract. J Appl Physiol 2007,
102:2207-2216.
6. Gianotti L, Alexander JW, Pyles T, James L, Babcock GF: Relationship
between extent of burn injury and magnitude of microbial
translocation from the intestine. J Burn Care Rehabil 1993, 14:336-342.
7. Fukatsu K, Zarzaur BL, Johnson CD, Lundberg AH, Wilcox HG, Kudsk KA:
Enteral nutrition prevents remote organ injury and death after a gut
ischemic insult. Ann Surg 2001, 233:660-668.

Chen et al. Journal of Biomedical Science 2010, 17:48
http://www.jbiomedsci.com/content/17/1/48

8.
9.

10.
11.
12.
13.

14.
15.

16.
17.

18.

19.

20.
21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

Magnotti LJ, Deitch EA: Burns, bacterial translocation, gut barrier
function, and failure. J Burn Care Rehabil 2005, 26:383-391.
Mollen KP, Anand RJ, Tsung A, Prince JM, Levy RM, Billiar TR: Emerging
paradigm: toll-like receptor 4-sentinel for the detection of tissue
damage. Shock (Augusta, Ga) 2006, 26:430-437.
Takeda K, Kaisho T, Akira S: Toll-like receptors. Annu Rev Immunol 2003,
21:335-376.
Takeuchi O, Akira S: Toll-like receptors; their physiological role and
signal transduction system. Int Immunopharmacol 2001, 1:625-635.
Neurath MF, Becker C, Barbulescu K: Role of NF-kappaB in immune and
inflammatory responses in the gut. Gut 1998, 43:856-860.
Rakoff-Nahoum S, Paglino J, Eslami-Varzaneh F, Edberg S, Medzhitov R:
Recognition of commensal microflora by toll-like receptors is required
for intestinal homeostasis. Cell 2004, 118:229-241.
Walker HL MJA: A standard animal burn. J Trauma 1964, 8:1049-1051.
Deitch EA, Shi HP, Lu Q, Feketeova E, Skurnick J, Xu DZ: Mesenteric lymph
from burned rats induces endothelial cell injury and activates
neutrophils. Crit Care Med 2004, 32:533-538.
Roberts JA, Kruger P, Paterson DL, Lipman J: Antibiotic resistance--what's
dosing got to do with it? Crit Care Med 2008, 36:2433-2440.
Barber RC, Maass DL, White DJ, Chang LY, Horton JW: Molecular or
pharmacologic inhibition of the CD14 signaling pathway protects
against burn-related myocardial inflammation and dysfunction. Shock
(Augusta, Ga) 2008, 30:705-713.
Fagarasan S, Muramatsu M, Suzuki K, Nagaoka H, Hiai H, Honjo T: Critical
roles of activation-induced cytidine deaminase in the homeostasis of
gut flora. Science 2002, 298:1424-1427.
Akashi S, Saitoh S, Wakabayashi Y, Kikuchi T, Takamura N, Nagai Y,
Kusumoto Y, Fukase K, Kusumoto S, Adachi Y, Kosugi A, Miyake K:
Lipopolysaccharide interaction with cell surface Toll-like receptor 4MD-2: higher affinity than that with MD-2 or CD14. J Exp Med 2003,
198:1035-1042.
Otamiri T, Sjodahl R, Tagesson C: An experimental model for studying
reversible intestinal ischemia. Acta Chir Scand 1987, 153:51-56.
Giese MJ, Rayner SA, Fardin B, Sumner HL, Rozengurt N, Mondino BJ,
Gordon LK: Mitigation of neutrophil infiltration in a rat model of early
Staphylococcus aureus endophthalmitis. Investigative ophthalmology &
visual science 2003, 44:3077-3082.
Magnotti LJ, Upperman JS, Xu DZ, Lu Q, Deitch EA: Gut-derived
mesenteric lymph but not portal blood increases endothelial cell
permeability and promotes lung injury after hemorrhagic shock. Ann
Surg 1998, 228:518-527.
Chen LW, Wang JS, Chen HL, Chen JS, Hsu CM: Peroxynitrite is an
important mediator in thermal injury-induced lung damage. Crit Care
Med 2003, 31:2170-2177.
Hruz P, Zinkernagel AS, Jenikova G, Botwin GJ, Hugot JP, Karin M, Nizet V,
Eckmann L: NOD2 contributes to cutaneous defense against
Staphylococcus aureus through alpha-toxin-dependent innate
immune activation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2009, 106:12873-12878.
van Westerloo DJ, Weijer S, Bruno MJ, de Vos AF, Van't Veer C, van der Poll
T: Toll-like receptor 4 deficiency and acute pancreatitis act similarly in
reducing host defense during murine Escherichia coli peritonitis. Crit
Care Med 2005, 33:1036-1043.
Li N, Karin M: Ionizing radiation and short wavelength UV activate NFkappaB through two distinct mechanisms. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1998,
95:13012-13017.
Ocal K, Avlan D, Cinel I, Unlu A, Ozturk C, Yaylak F, Dirlik M, Camdeviren H,
Aydin S: The effect of N-acetylcysteine on oxidative stress in intestine
and bacterial translocation after thermal injury. Burns 2004, 30:778-784.
Chen LW, Chang WJ, Chen PH, Liu WC, Hsu CM: TLR ligand decreases
mesenteric ischemia and reperfusion injury-induced gut damage
through TNF-alpha signaling. Shock (Augusta, Ga) 2008, 30:563-570.
Huang PP, Stucky FS, Dimick AR, Treat RC, Bessey PQ, Rue LW: Hypertonic
sodium resuscitation is associated with renal failure and death. Ann
Surg 1995, 221:543-554; discussion 554-547.
Jones WK, Brown M, Ren X, He S, McGuinness M: NF-kappaB as an
integrator of diverse signaling pathways: the heart of myocardial
signaling? Cardiovasc Toxicol 2003, 3:229-254.
O'Brien GC, Wang JH, Redmond HP: Bacterial lipoprotein induces
resistance to Gram-negative sepsis in TLR4-deficient mice via
enhanced bacterial clearance. J Immunol 2005, 174:1020-1026.

Page 15 of 15

32. Besselink MG, van Santvoort HC, Buskens E, Boermeester MA, van Goor H,
Timmerman HM, Nieuwenhuijs VB, Bollen TL, van Ramshorst B, Witteman
BJ, Rosman C, Ploeg RJ, Brink MA, Schaapherder AF, Dejong CH, Wahab PJ,
van Laarhoven CJ, van der Harst E, van Eijck CH, Cuesta MA, Akkermans
LM, Gooszen HG, Dutch Acute Pancreatitis Study Group: Probiotic
prophylaxis in predicted severe acute pancreatitis: a randomised,
double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet 2008, 371:651-659.
33. Tokyay R, Zeigler ST, Traber DL, Stothert JC Jr, Loick HM, Heggers JP,
Herndon DN: Postburn gastrointestinal vasoconstriction increases
bacterial and endotoxin translocation. J Appl Physiol 1993,
74:1521-1527.
34. Baron P, Traber LD, Traber DL, Nguyen T, Hollyoak M, Heggers JP, Herndon
DN: Gut failure and translocation following burn and sepsis. J Surg Res
1994, 57:197-204.
35. Balzan S, de Almeida Quadros C, de Cleva R, Zilberstein B, Cecconello I:
Bacterial translocation: overview of mechanisms and clinical impact. J
Gastroenterol Hepatol 2007, 22:464-471.
36. Hausmann M, Kiessling S, Mestermann S, Webb G, Spottl T, Andus T,
Scholmerich J, Herfarth H, Ray K, Falk W, Rogler G: Toll-like receptors 2
and 4 are up-regulated during intestinal inflammation.
Gastroenterology 2002, 122:1987-2000.
37. Miller SI, Ernst RK, Bader MW: LPS, TLR4 and infectious disease diversity.
Nat Rev Microbiol 2005, 3:36-46.
38. Palsson-McDermott EM, O'Neill LA: Signal transduction by the
lipopolysaccharide receptor, Toll-like receptor-4. Immunology 2004,
113:153-162.
39. Hiscott J, Nguyen TL, Arguello M, Nakhaei P, Paz S: Manipulation of the
nuclear factor-kappaB pathway and the innate immune response by
viruses. Oncogene 2006, 25:6844-6867.
40. Balk RA: Pathogenesis and management of multiple organ dysfunction
or failure in severe sepsis and septic shock. Crit Care Clin 2000,
16:337-352. vii.
41. Ramzy PI, Herndon DN, Wolf SE, Irtun O, Barret JP, Ramirez RJ, Heggers JP:
Comparison of wound culture and bronchial lavage in the severely
burned child: implications for antimicrobial therapy. Arch Surg 1998,
133:1275-1280.
42. Tsukahara Y, Lian Z, Zhang X, Whitney C, Kluger Y, Tuck D, Yamaga S,
Nakayama Y, Weissman SM, Newburger PE: Gene expression in human
neutrophils during activation and priming by bacterial
lipopolysaccharide. J Cell Biochem 2003, 89:848-861.
doi: 10.1186/1423-0127-17-48
Cite this article as: Chen et al., Commensal microflora induce host defense
and decrease bacterial translocation in burn mice through toll-like receptor 4
Journal of Biomedical Science 2010, 17:48

</pre>
</body>
</html>
