<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>DODO: an efficient orthologous genes assignment tool based on domain architectures. Domain based ortholog detection</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Bioinformatics 2010 11:S6. doi:10.1186/1471-2105-11-S7-S6"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Ting-wen Chen"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Chen et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11(Suppl 7):S6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/S7/S6

PROCEEDINGS

Open Access

DODO: an efficient orthologous genes
assignment tool based on domain architectures.
Domain based ortholog detection
Ting-wen Chen1,2, Timothy H Wu1, Wailap V Ng1, Wen-chang Lin1,2*
From Asia Pacific Bioinformatics Network (APBioNet) Ninth International Conference on Bioinformatics
(InCoB2010)
Tokyo, Japan. 26-28 September 2010

Abstract
Background: Orthologs are genes derived from the same ancestor gene loci after speciation events. Orthologous
proteins usually have similar sequences and perform comparable biological functions. Therefore, ortholog
identification is useful in annotations of newly sequenced genomes. With rapidly increasing number of sequenced
genomes, constructing or updating ortholog relationship between all genomes requires lots of effort and
computation time. In addition, elucidating ortholog relationships between distantly related genomes is challenging
because of the lower sequence similarity. Therefore, an efficient ortholog detection method that can deal with
large number of distantly related genomes is desired.
Results: An efficient ortholog detection pipeline DODO (DOmain based Detection of Orthologs) is created on the
basis of domain architectures in this study. Supported by domain composition, which usually directly related with
protein function, DODO could facilitate orthologs detection across distantly related genomes. DODO works in two
main steps. Starting from domain information, it first assigns protein groups according to their domain
architectures and further identifies orthologs within those groups with much reduced complexity. Here DODO is
shown to detect orthologs between two genomes in considerably shorter period of time than traditional methods
of reciprocal best hits and it is more significant when analyzed a large number of genomes. The output results of
DODO are highly comparable with other known ortholog databases.
Conclusions: DODO provides a new efficient pipeline for detection of orthologs in a large number of genomes.
In addition, a database established with DODO is also easier to maintain and could be updated relatively
effortlessly. The pipeline of DODO could be downloaded from http://140.109.42.19:16080/dodo_web/home.htm

Background
Orthologous gene identification is an important step in
comparative genomics. The word orthologs originally
refer to genes in different species derived from the same
locus in their last common ancestor. Since orthologs are
genes derived from the same ancestor gene, orthologs
often have similar amino acid sequences and expected
to perform the same or similar cellular function [1,2].
* Correspondence: wenlin@ibms.sinica.edu.tw
1
Institute of Biomedical Informatics, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei,
Taiwan
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

These properties make orthologs useful in functional
genomics analysis. In addition to reconstructing the
phylogeny and revealing the evolution history of species,
orthologs could also be applied to genome annotation
and protein-protein interaction prediction [3,4]. The
orthologs can be treated as corresponding genes in different species after species evolved and consequently it
is an important issue to detect this kind of ortholog
relationship between species.
A number of methods have been developed for orthologs detection[5]. In practice, orthologs are defined
through reciprocal best hits (RBH) from primary protein

© 2010 Chen et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Chen et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11(Suppl 7):S6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/S7/S6

sequences between two species by various algorithms.
For instance, the COG, InParanoid, and orthDB are
built based on such RBH approach [6-8]. Beside RBH,
tree-based methods such as those for reconstructing the
LOFT, COCO-CL and HOPS database have also been
developed [9-11], where trees are established via heuristic calculations of sequence similarity and the orthologous relationships are inferred from the tree structures.
Some databases such as the Ensembl Compara and
HomoloGene are constructed with both RBH and phylogenetic tree information [12,13]. In addition, some
methods identify orthologs by reconstructing genome
rearrangement events in closely related genomes such as
MSOAR and MultiMSOAR [14,15].
With the advance of high throughput sequencing
technologies, it is anticipated a dramatic increase in the
number of completed genomes. Two challenges are
posed to ortholog identification. The first issue is the
speed of analyzing a large number of proteins. Increasing number of genomes necessitate faster method for
data analysis and processing. Another issue is the ability
to identify orthologs in distantly related species where
sequence similarity might be low. However, the complexity and computation time of the RBH methods
increase considerably as mutual comparisons are needed
between each pair of species. For example, it needs
4,950 times of mutual comparisons between pair of
genomes to identify ortholog relationships among
100 genomes and for 1000 genomes it would need
499,500 times of sequence comparison and alignments.
Thus, new methods that can identify orthologous relationships among a large number of genomes, some of
which are distantly related, in a reasonable time are beneficial. Here we propose an efficient and function-based
new ortholog detection method called DODO (DOmain
based Detection of Orthologs) to overcome the hurdles
in ortholog identification from a large number of
genomes.
DODO pipeline is designed for efficient discovery of
the orthologous relationship between an anchor genome
of interest (or well studied) and other genome(s).
DODO detects homolog groups aided by protein
domain information. In the beginning, DODO classifies
proteins into groups based on both their domain composition and architecture. Domains are the functional
units of proteins. Proteins having the same domain
architecture likely have the same cellular function which
implies homology in structures and functions. While the
similarity between primary sequence of orthologs may
decrease dramatically in distantly related species, the
domain composition is more likely to be conserved
through evolution due to the functional constraint
[16,17]. The domain architecture based method could
be applied to detect homologous relationships between

Page 2 of 10

distantly related species. After proteins of the same
domain architecture are grouped together, DODO
further refines the orthologous relationship within each
homolog group by identifying RBH among the smaller
protein set. This strategy of ortholog searching in smaller groups instead of the whole genome makes DODO
an efficient pipeline.
In addition to efficiency, database established by
DODO could also be easily updated and practically the
DODO results are comparable to those predicted by the
traditional RBH methods. Adding new species into the
database does not require reprocessing of he previously
analyzed species which already existed in the database a procedure necessitated by the traditional RBH methods. For traditional RBH methods, to update a database
consisted of n existed old species, the newly added m
species will cost n*m times of mutual comparisons
between each pair of existed old genomes and newly
added genomes. Instead, to update a database constructed by DODO only needs m times of domain identification for those newly input genomes no matter how
many species already included in the database. It is
easier to maintain and update an ortholog database efficiently in this schema.

Implementation
The DODO pipeline, which can be freely download and
executed locally, is written in Python. Given input the
protein sequences in FASTA format, the pipeline will run
RBS-BLAST, cluster the proteins with the same domains,
and finally output a report the ortholog groups automatically. DODO requires BLAST for domain identification
and similarity search. The ortholog group assignment is
done in two steps. Proteins are assigned into homolog
groups based on their domain information and then
further classified by RBH within homolog groups.
Grouping of proteins according to domain architecture

Domain assignment is performed with RPS-BLAST for
each protein sequence using Pfam v23 [18] as the source
database. Default parameters are used except the expected
value which is set to below 0.01. Domain hit(s) information is then extracted from hits in the RPS-BLAST result
files. Proteins having the same domain composition and
order are grouped together into one group. Proteins without Pfam domain information are all grouped into an
uncharacterized group for further analysis.
Assigning the ortholog group

For some of the proteins, the information of protein
domain alone may not be sufficient to determine the
orthologous relationship. These groups may contain the
same protein architecture, but some of them may nevertheless be very different at the sequence level and thus

Chen et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11(Suppl 7):S6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/S7/S6

their ortholog relationship could be resolved. This is
especially evident on expended paralogous gene families.
Therefore, proteins within the same domain architectural group are further sub-classified with the RBH
method. Choosing one species as anchor, BLASTP is
performed to identify RBH between the anchor species
and all the other species. These final sets of groups are
then reported as the ortholog groups.
DODO Output

The output of DODO pipeline is a text file containing
the ortholog information. Orthologs identified based on
both domain information and RBH have IDs starting
with ‘PfamArcNu’ while orthologs identified based
purely on RBH have IDs starting with ‘NoDomainInfo’.
The domain architecture for orthologs could be found
in the file PfamArcMap.txt under the project folder.

Results
DODO first clustered proteins into groups based on
their domain architectures and then found orthologous
relationship within each group. This strategy speeds up
the ortholog identification procedure and facilitates the
maintenance of ortholog database. Here we investigate
the efficiency of DODO and compare the performance
of DODO against published databases.
Computation time comparison

A dataset of 21,673 human and 23,497 mouse protein
sequences used in InParanoid [7] is utilized to demonstrate the relative short processing time of DODO. The
comparison was done on a Linux server with 16GB RAM
and 4*AMD Operon CPU. The total computation time of
DODO was 21,263 seconds (5.91 hours) while the InParanoid pipeline took 135,585 seconds (37.66 hours). This
result shows that, even considering only two species,
DODO can identify the orthologous relationships within
these species in about 15.7% of the time that the conventional RBH takes. This difference in computation time
will become larger as more species are analyzed. The
computation time of the conventional RBH method
grows roughly proportionally to the square of the number of species. On the other hand, DODO compares each
species to the same domain database only once, regardless of how many species were in comparison. Therefore
DODO has significant advantage over conventional RBH
in terms of the process time. This is increasingly important as more and more genomes are being sequenced and
analyzed today than ever before.
Comparison of DODO ortholog groups with the
HomoloGene release 64

HomoloGene [13] is a homolog sequence database
which was constructed based on both sequence

Page 3 of 10

information and phylogeny information. It records the
homolog relationship between 20 completely sequenced
eukaryotic genomes. We extracted the 300,701 protein
sequences that are used in HomoloGene release 64 from
RefSeq and those sequences are a subset of a total of
330,610 protein sequences originally used in HomoloGene release 64 reconstruction. Using human as the
anchor species, DODO identified 18,202 ortholog
groups. These cover 92.7% of homolog groups containing human proteins in the HomoloGene dataset. We
investigated whether those ortholog groups identified
with DODO was a subset of groups reported in HomoloGene. Since HomoloGene is a database of homologs,
each group in HomoloGene is likely to be a superset of
orthologs. We found that 46.7% of ortholog groups
identified with DODO have exactly the same classification as HomoloGene and 89.5% of them have more than
half of the proteins present in the corresponding ortholog groups in HomoloGene 64.
Since previous domain rearrangement study showed
that most domain fusion events happened once in the protein evolution history [19], orthologs sharing the same
domain architecture identified with DODO but not in
HomoloGene database may be putative orthologs. We
speculated the reason of why these putative orthologs cannot be detected solely by primary sequences is possibly
due to short sequence length or low sequence similarities
which may be rescued by considering domain information.
Further statistical analysis indicated that those ortholog
groups were composed of significantly shorter sequences
and distantly related species as shown in Figure 1. Those
orthologs may be rescued when considering their domain
information. This fits in with DODO’s assumption that
domain should be more conservative than primary
sequences, and taking those into consideration may
increase the sensitivity in ortholog detection.
Comparison of DODO ortholog groups with InParanoid

InParanoid [7] is a well known database established based
on primary sequence comparison and including in-paralogs into ortholog clusters. Among the 21,673 human and
23,497 mouse protein sequences downloaded from the
InParanoid website [7]. DODO identified 14,128 ortholog
groups and 95.8% of them have the same classifications as
the InParanoid. Approximately 16.6% of the orthologs
recorded in InParanoid were not found in our results.
Of these, most of them (98%) were composed of proteins
having different domain architectures identified with RPSBLAST. Those orthologs with apparently different domain
architecture may be generated through domain rearrangement events in the protein evolution history or one or
more of its domains were below the RPS-BLAST e-values
cutoff. Our method is able to identify 244 ortholog groups
not reported in InParanoid. Most of them are members of

Chen et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11(Suppl 7):S6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/S7/S6

Page 4 of 10

Figure 1 Species closeness and gene length of the ortholog groups identified with DODO. There are two set of ortholog groups
identified with DODO, when compare to HomoloGene database. One set of them (n = 8507) has same classification as HomoloGene and the
other set of them (n = 9695) has different classification from HomoloGene. (A) The closeness of each ortholog group in these two sets was
calculated according to the similarity of taxonomy as described in NCBI. The set of same classification was significantly higher than the different
set (wilcoxon test, p-value < 2.2e-16). This result shows that part of ortholog groups identified with DODO contains putative orthodox from
distantly related species. (B) The average gene length was calculated for each ortholog group in either the same classification or different
classification set. The set of same classification had significantly longer average gene length than different classification set (wilcoxon test,
p-value = 8.93e- 10). This implied that DODO did find some ortholog groups composed of shorter sequences. Those shorter sequences may
contain insufficient information; therefore, their orthologous relationship could not be found by conventional RBH ortholog detection method.

large protein families or proteins with short-sequences
(47% of them have sequences shorter than 300 amino
acids). Ortholog discovery among big family proteins can
introduce complication that obscure true orthology, since
true orthologs may not be reciprocally most similar in
their primary sequences. One such example is shown in
Figure 2A. Here, we have two putative orthologs containing the same four-domain architecture. The BLASTP procedure used in InParanoid did not find them in the RBH
when searching through the entire genomes since their
primary sequence similarity is relatively low when compared to some other proteins. As a result, both proteins
are omitted in the In Paranoid data. However, given that
they both contain the same four domains it is likely that
they were functionally closely related. When domainarchitecture clustering is applied prior to the RBH procedure as we did, the orthologous relationship between
them could be recovered. In addition, other ortholog pairs

we discovered are short sequences. The pair of ortholog
sequences shown in Figure 2B is putative orthologs having
difference in their protein lengths. These two sequences
both contain the Nop16 domain. The Nop16 containing
protein is only identified exactly once in human and
mouse genomes; therefore, the two sequences are very
likely to be orthologs. We checked the BLASTP results
from InParanoid and found these two genes are RBH.
However, InParanoid requires the matched region to be
longer than 50% of the sequences in order to avoid matching at domain-level instead of finding real ortholog pair
[7,20]. This might be the reason for these orthologs missed
in InParanoid and we were able to discover them here.
Orthologs detection in 100 genomes in InParanoid

The species distribution of ortholog groups from DODO
was compared to those from InParanoid and the distribution patterns are highly alike. Orthologous relationships

Chen et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11(Suppl 7):S6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/S7/S6

Page 5 of 10

Figure 2 examples of putative ortholog group found by DODO. Two examples of ortholog groups found with DODO which are not
recorded in InParanoid. The alignments were generated by CLC free Workbench version 4.0.2. Consensus residues are shown in black and
dissimilar residues are shown in blue. (A) These two sequences are clustered together with DODO and both are reported to have four different
domains: Transketolase_N/E1_dh/Transket_pyr/Transketolase_C. (B) These two sequences are the only protein containing the Nop16 domain in
human and mouse genomes.

between human and the other 99 genomes including fungus, plant and animal genomes are downloaded together
with their protein sequences from the InParanoid website. Genes from different genomes were grouped
together if they have the same ortholog gene in human
genome. After this grouping step, there are a total of
20,572 ortholog groups in the InParanoid dataset. From
the same dataset, DODO identified 20,461 ortholog
groups by using human as anchor genome at its second
RBH step. These ortholog groups contain at least 2 species and up to 100 species in a single group. The distribution of number of species in each ortholog group is show
in Figure 3. The distribution of DODO and InParanoid
are highly similar. There are lots of ortholog groups containing only 2 species, most of which are ortholog pairs
between human and chimp. The count of ortholog
groups containing 19 species is relatively abundant. This
is explainable since there are a total of 19 vertebrates
(including human) in the dataset. The count of ortholog
groups containing more than 80 species decreases
dramatically.
To evaluate the validity of those novel distantly-related
orthologs found in this study, we assess the similarity of
the Gene Ontology (GO) annotations between orthologs
discovered via DODO and those found in the InParanoid database. Our discovery of orthologs should be
meaningful when similarity of GO exists in contrast to
the background set of human proteins. Since we were
interested in the performance of DODO on ortholog

detection in distantly related genomes, we focused on
orthologs that were found in many species. Among the
ortholog groups, there are 955 and 739 ortholog groups
containing orthologs from more than 80 genomes - the
“80+ ortholog groups” - in the InParanoid database and
the DODO output, respectively. This means 955 (or
739) proteins in human have orthologs in more than 80
species out of the 100 species according to InParanoid
(or DODO output result). These proteins are thought to
participate in certain biological processes that could be
very important in many different organisms; therefore,
they are conserved in most of the genomes ranging
from fungi to animals. Using the gene ontology (GO) of
human proteins [21], we cluster the ortholog groups
into different GO cellular component categories. The
top 9 cellular component annotations of the 80+ ortholog groups are shown in Figure 4. The relative abundance of the 80+ orthologs groups obtained by DODO
and InParanoid are similar but both are different from
the background of all genes. Comparing the 80+ groups
to the background set of proteins, there is enrichment
for ribonucleoprotein complex, which have 6.0% and
4.5% in DODO and InParanoid, respectively. Meanwhile,
there is less 80+ groups participate in membrane and
intracellular categories comparing to the background.
Furthermore, due to the conservation of functions
among orthologs, we expect that the domain-based strategy can expand the set of orthologs found in distantly
related genomes. Upon the comparison of the human

Chen et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11(Suppl 7):S6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/S7/S6

Page 6 of 10

Figure 3 Distribution of the number of species in ortholog groups identified with DODO and InParanoid. Ortholog relationship between
human proteins and proteins in the other 99 species (including 1 prokaryote, 17 protists, 21 fungi, 7 plants, 35 invertebrates and 18 vertebrates)
were identified with DODO or downloaded from InParanoid. The horizontal axis represents the number of species in one ortholog group, and its
maximum number is 100, which mean this ortholog group containing orthologous genes in all 100 species. The vertical axis represents the
counts of ortholog groups in logarithmic scale. The distribution patterns are similar between DODO and InParanoid.

genes in the 955 and 739 80+ ortholog groups identified
from InParanoid and DODO, we found 446 overlapping
genes and some extra ortholog relationships which were
only detected by DODO. For those 239 extra ortholog
groups, about one fourth (24.9%) have the same domain
architecture as those found in the 446 overlapped genes.
Some (13.7%) of those have comparable 80+ ortholog
groups in InParanoid but do not contain the same
human genes. Lots of them (41.1%) have comparable
ortholog groups from 70 to 80 species in InParanoid.
Those ortholog groups could be viewed as expansion of
existing ortholog groups in InParanoid after the incorporation of domain information. DODO did report some
short sequence orthologs which have comparable ortholog groups covering less than 60 species in InParanoid
(Table 1).

Discussion
DODO detects ortholog based on domain compositions
instead of primary protein sequences and has brought
up several advantages in the aspect of biology. As
shown in the results above, DODO was able to detect
most orthologs in several published databases. In addition, it can detect orthologs having short sequences and
lower sequence similarity if information of the domain
architecture is evident. This strategy finds orthologs
based more directly on functional constraints. As a
result, ortholog groups detected with DODO are
thought to have similar if not the same biological functions in organisms. Ortholog detected by this strategy

will be helpful in the annotations of newly sequenced
genomes of which the functions of genes are interested.
The domain compositions of proteins should be more
conserved than primary sequence since the sequence of
proteins are susceptible to mutation while the function
of proteins are under greater constraints. The protein
domain composition is responsible for protein function
and is thus more likely to be conserved than primary
sequences in distantly related genomes.
In addition to the relative high efficiency of DODO,
an orthologous database built with DODO is less costly
to maintain comparing to other methods. When a new
genome is added to the database, sequences of this genome could be assigned into their homolog groups based
purely on their domain architecture without searching
through existing genomes. Further ortholog assignment
could be simply achieved through the sequence comparison between the sequence(s) from the newly input genome and the sequence from anchor genome within each
homolog groups. The two-step approach of DODO will
largely reduce the computation complexity when an
established database is updated.
The results also show that DODO is useful in ortholog detection between distantly related genomes. For a
database having multiple genomes, specifically multiple
distantly related genomes, it is conceivable that detection of ortholog groups may not be sufficient by a single
anchor genome. There are some clade-specific genes
which essentially do not have ortholog relationship to
genomes in other clades. A clade-specific ortholog

Chen et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11(Suppl 7):S6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/S7/S6

Page 7 of 10

Figure 4 Distribution of GO annotation (cellular component). Distribution of the GO annotation (cellular component) of all genes and genes
having ortholog groups exist in more than 80 species in DODO output or InParanoid. Only the top 9 categories are retained and all others are
merged into the category “others”.

Table 1 Examples of DODO identified ortholog groups that were not identified in InParanoid
Ensembl human gene id

number of species

Average a.a. length

ENSP00000375160

96

199.7

Ribosomal_L22

domain

ENSP00000348580

94

118.8

Ribosomal_S26e

ENSP00000307786

91

110.7

Cytochrom_C

ENSP00000236900
ENSP00000337019

91
90

122.6
99.9

Ribosomal_S25
Ribosomal_S21e

ENSP00000316649

89

477.6

Oxysterol_BP

ENSP00000158771

87

242.2

DER1

ENSP00000280665

87

413.9

DCP1

ENSP00000360803

86

164.5

zf-DNL

ENSP00000352137

86

298.6

Fcf2

ENSP00000359368

83

461.7

RPAP2_Rtr1

ENSP00000254101
ENSP00000253719

81
81

314.4
399.1

AMPKBI
Asp

ENSP00000380214

80

507.4

Sugar_tr

Examples of the 80+ ortholog groups found by DODO but not in InParanoid. Their average amino acid length and domain composition are shown.

Chen et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11(Suppl 7):S6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/S7/S6

group can only be detected when choosing a genome
within that clade as an anchor genome. For those genes,
the ortholog relationship can be rescued by setting more
than one anchor genome. As an example shown in
Figure 5, the clade 2 specific ortholog group - group 2,
could be rescued if choose genome in clade 2 (genome
C or genome D) as extra anchor genome. As show in
Figure 5, this strategy could also be useful in the event
of gene loss in the anchor genome.
A few limitations do exist with our method. Since
DODO detects ortholog based on the domain architecture, the accuracy and sensitivity of domain identification directly affect the performance of DODO. DODO
cannot detect orthologs having different reported
domain architecture. Indeed, these phenomena can
explain most ortholog groups reported by InParanoid
but cannot be found with DODO as shown in the
results. There are also sequences having domain(s) on
only a small part of the sequence, which may lead to a
wrong homolog group classification and end in no
orthologous relationship identified. This limitation of
protein domain information is inherent in the method
thus cannot be avoided. However, this limitation will be
improved as new domains are identified, less characterized domains, such as PfamB are used or domain

Page 8 of 10

detection method is improved in the future. As we can
expect, removing the redundancy in domain database or
considering the domain match length may improve the
domain identification on proteins [22].
In summary, DODO could efficiently detect orthologs
having the same domain architecture even when these
orthologs have short sequences or low sequence similarity. Those same domain architecture orthologs are likely
to perform the same biological function and could be
beneficial in annotation of newly sequenced genome. An
ortholog database built by DODO is easy to update.
However, the performance of DODO is highly dependent on the domain detection step.
Several protein evolution events increase the difficulty
of ortholog detection, such as gene loss, gene duplication and domain rearrangement [5]. Gene loss events
are known to hinder detection of ortholog in many RBH
based methods. For DODO, if it occurs in genomes
other than the anchor genome, this will not have significant influence on the prediction results. However, if
gene loss occurs in the anchor genome, DODO could
not detect ortholog relationships since there is no corresponding gene to start with in the anchor genome. This
kind of missing ortholog group can be completely
avoided by taking multiple genomes as the anchor

Figure 5 Choosing more than one anchor genomes can rescue missing ortholog groups. This cartoon figure illustrated examples of three
different ortholog group distributions in four species A, B, C and D. Four rectangles in gray line stand for four different genomes. Protein
sequences and domain are shown as line and rectangles. As shown in the figure, there are total three different ortholog groups in which group
1 exist in all genomes, group 2 is a clade 2 specific ortholog group and group 3 had a gene miss event in genome A. When choose species A
in clade 1 as the anchor genome, DODO will only report group 1 and both group 2 and group 3 will be missed. Those missing ortholog groups
could be identified if choose multiple genomes as anchor genomes in DODO pipeline.

Chen et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11(Suppl 7):S6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/S7/S6

genomes as shown in Figure 5. Even though there was a
gene lost event in genome A, the ortholog group 3
could be identified while take other genome as the
anchor genome. In the case of gene duplication, there
are two different kinds of duplication. One is in-paralog,
where duplication happened after the separation from
the common ancestor and the other is out-paralog,
where duplication happened before the speciation. For
out-paralogs, DODO can detect them as separate different ortholog groups only if there was no gene loss or
domain changing event. However, in the in-paralog
DODO can lose one (or several) of the in-paralog(s),
since DODO only keeps the RBH in the final report.
That is, only the most similar in-paralog will be
included in the ortholog group. Still the in-paralogs will
be classified into the same domain architecture group.
For the domain rearrangement events, there are treebased methods RIO and Orthostrapper which already
have been used to build ortholog relationships at the
domain level [23,24]. These two methods generate confidence values from ortholog bootstrap support. Orthostrapper is used to build the HOPS database[10], which
is a orthologous protein domain database. RIO and
HOPS built ortholog relationships at the domain level
instead of the protein level and need taxonomic information in advance while DODO built ortholog relationship between proteins and does not require the
taxonomy information. Indeed, our ortholog detection is
heavily based on domain architecture; hence it is
affected by evolutionary events such as domain rearrangement, domain deletion or domain insertion event.
DODO cannot detect orthologous relationships if there
are those domain changing events in the evolution histories of the proteins.

Conclusions
An efficient and sensitive ortholog detection method
DODO is proposed. DODO could be useful in ortholog
relationship construction or update of ortholog relationships especially when taking lots of organisms into consideration. In addition, most orthologous relationships
detected with DODO are composed of the proteins having the same domain composition. Ortholog detection
based on domain information may disclose the more
biologically meaningful ortholog groups. This ortholog
identification tool will be useful for those newly
sequenced genome annotations using well studied genome as anchor. Indeed, DODO was able to detect most
ortholog groups recorded in the known orthologous
databases as well as discover new ortholog groups having relative short or dissimilar sequences but the same
domain architecture. Given the high efficiency and sensitivity, DODO could be a useful method to analyze
sequences produced from many genome projects.

Page 9 of 10

Availability and requirements
Project name: DODO
Project home page: http://140.109.42.19:16080/dodo_
web/home.htm.
Operating system: Linux, Mac OS X
Programming language: Python
Software requirements: installation of BLAST
Restriction: none
Acknowledgements
This work is supported in part by grant from Academia Sinica and National
Science Council. InParanoid code was kindly given by Stockholm
Bioinformatics Centre.
This article has been published as part of BMC Bioinformatics Volume 11
Supplement 7, 2010: Ninth International Conference on Bioinformatics
(InCoB2010): Bioinformatics. The full contents of the supplement are
available online at http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11?issue=S7.
Author details
1
Institute of Biomedical Informatics, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei,
Taiwan. 2Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.
Authors’ contributions
TC implemented, tested DODO and wrote the manuscript. TW run the GO
analysis. WN and WL supervised and revised the manuscript. All authors had
read and approved the manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Published: 15 October 2010
References
1. Fitch WM: Distinguishing homologous from analogous proteins. Syst Zool
1970, 19(2):99-13.
2. Fitch WM: Homology a personal view on some of the problems. Trends
Genet 2000, 16(5):227-231.
3. Delsuc F, Brinkmann H, Philippe H: Phylogenomics and the reconstruction
of the tree of life. Nat Rev Genet 2005, 6(5):361-375.
4. Pellegrini M, Marcotte EM, Thompson MJ, Eisenberg D, Yeates TO:
Assigning protein functions by comparative genome analysis: protein
phylogenetic profiles. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1999, 96(8):4285-4288.
5. Kuzniar A, van Ham RC, Pongor S, Leunissen JA: The quest for orthologs:
finding the corresponding gene across genomes. Trends Genet 2008,
24(11):539-551.
6. Kriventseva EV, Rahman N, Espinosa O, Zdobnov EM: OrthoDB: the
hierarchical catalog of eukaryotic orthologs. Nucleic Acids Res 2008,
36 Database: D271-275.
7. Ostlund G, Schmitt T, Forslund K, Kostler T, Messina DN, Roopra S, Frings O,
Sonnhammer EL: InParanoid 7: new algorithms and tools for eukaryotic
orthology analysis. Nucleic Acids Res 2010, 38 Database: D196-203.
8. Tatusov RL, Galperin MY, Natale DA, Koonin EV: The COG database: a tool
for genome-scale analysis of protein functions and evolution. Nucleic
Acids Res 2000, 28(1):33-36.
9. Jothi R, Zotenko E, Tasneem A, Przytycka TM: COCO-CL: hierarchical
clustering of homology relations based on evolutionary correlations.
Bioinformatics 2006, 22(7):779-788.
10. Storm CE, Sonnhammer EL: Comprehensive analysis of orthologous
protein domains using the HOPS database. Genome Res 2003,
13(10):2353-2362.
11. van der Heijden RT, Snel B, van Noort V, Huynen MA: Orthology prediction
at scalable resolution by phylogenetic tree analysis. BMC Bioinformatics
2007, 8:83.
12. Hubbard TJ, Aken BL, Beal K, Ballester B, Caccamo M, Chen Y, Clarke L,
Coates G, Cunningham F, Cutts T, et al: Ensembl 2007. Nucleic Acids Res
2007, 35 Database: D610-617.

Chen et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11(Suppl 7):S6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/S7/S6

Page 10 of 10

13. Sayers EW, Barrett T, Benson DA, Bryant SH, Canese K, Chetvernin V,
Church DM, DiCuccio M, Edgar R, Federhen S, et al: Database resources of
the National Center for Biotechnology Information. Nucleic Acids Res 2009,
37(Database issue):D5-15.
14. Fu Z, Chen X, Vacic V, Nan P, Zhong Y, Jiang T: MSOAR: a high-throughput
ortholog assignment system based on genome rearrangement.
J Comput Biol 2007, 14(9):1160-1175.
15. Fu Z, Jiang T: Clustering of main orthologs for multiple genomes.
J Bioinform Comput Biol 2008, 6(3):573-584.
16. Finn RD, Mistry J, Schuster-Bockler B, Griffiths-Jones S, Hollich V,
Lassmann T, Moxon S, Marshall M, Khanna A, Durbin R, et al: Pfam: clans,
web tools and services. Nucleic Acids Res 2006, 34 Database: D247-251.
17. Vogel C, Bashton M, Kerrison ND, Chothia C, Teichmann SA: Structure,
function and evolution of multidomain proteins. Current opinion in
structural biology 2004, 14(2):208-216.
18. Finn RD, Tate J, Mistry J, Coggill PC, Sammut SJ, Hotz HR, Ceric G,
Forslund K, Eddy SR, Sonnhammer EL, et al: The Pfam protein families
database. Nucleic Acids Res 2008, 36 Database: D281-288.
19. Bashton M, Chothia C: The geometry of domain combination in proteins.
Journal of molecular biology 2002, 315(4):927-939.
20. Remm M, Storm CE, Sonnhammer EL: Automatic clustering of orthologs
and in-paralogs from pairwise species comparisons. Journal of molecular
biology 2001, 314(5):1041-1052.
21. Ashburner M, Ball CA, Blake JA, Botstein D, Butler H, Cherry JM, Davis AP,
Dolinski K, Dwight SS, Eppig JT, et al: Gene ontology: tool for the
unification of biology. The Gene Ontology Consortium. Nat Genet 2000,
25(1):25-29.
22. Levitt M: Nature of the protein universe. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2009,
106(27):11079-11084.
23. Storm CE, Sonnhammer EL: Automated ortholog inference from
phylogenetic trees and calculation of orthology reliability. Bioinformatics
2002, 18(1):92-99.
24. Zmasek CM, Eddy SR: RIO: analyzing proteomes by automated
phylogenomics using resampled inference of orthologs. BMC
Bioinformatics 2002, 3:14.
doi:10.1186/1471-2105-11-S7-S6
Cite this article as: Chen et al.: DODO: an efficient orthologous genes
assignment tool based on domain architectures. Domain based
ortholog detection. BMC Bioinformatics 2010 11(Suppl 7):S6.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
