<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>T4 genes in the marine ecosystem: studies of the T4-like cyanophages and their role in marine ecology</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Virology Journal 2010, 7:291. doi:10.1186/1743-422X-7-291"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Martha RJ Clokie"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Clokie et al. Virology Journal 2010, 7:291
http://www.virologyj.com/content/7/1/291

REVIEW

Open Access

T4 genes in the marine ecosystem: studies
of the T4-like cyanophages and their role in
marine ecology
Martha RJ Clokie1, Andrew D Millard2*, Nicholas H Mann2

Abstract
From genomic sequencing it has become apparent that the marine cyanomyoviruses capable of infecting strains
of unicellular cyanobacteria assigned to the genera Synechococcus and Prochlorococcus are not only
morphologically similar to T4, but are also genetically related, typically sharing some 40-48 genes. The large
majority of these common genes are the same in all marine cyanomyoviruses so far characterized. Given the
fundamental physiological differences between marine unicellular cyanobacteria and heterotrophic hosts of T4-like
phages it is not surprising that the study of cyanomyoviruses has revealed novel and fascinating facets of the
phage-host relationship. One of the most interesting features of the marine cyanomyoviruses is their possession of
a number of genes that are clearly of host origin such as those involved in photosynthesis, like the psbA gene that
encodes a core component of the photosystem II reaction centre. Other host-derived genes encode enzymes
involved in carbon metabolism, phosphate acquisition and ppGpp metabolism. The impact of these host-derived
genes on phage fitness has still largely to be assessed and represents one of the most important topics in the
study of this group of T4-like phages in the laboratory. However, these phages are also of considerable
environmental significance by virtue of their impact on key contributors to oceanic primary production and the
true extent and nature of this impact has still to be accurately assessed.
Background
The cyanomyoviruses and their hosts

In their review on the interplay between bacterial host and
T4 phage physiology, Kutter et al [1] stated that “efforts to
understand the infection process and evolutionary pressures in the natural habitat(s) of T-even phages need to
take into account bacterial metabolism and intracellular
environments under such conditions”. This statement was
made around the time that the first cyanophages infecting
marine cyanobacteria were being isolated and characterized and the majority of which exhibited a T4-like morphology (Figure 1) and [2-4]. Obviously, the metabolic
properties and intracellular environments of obligately
photoautotrophic marine cyanobacteria are very different
to those of the heterotrophic bacteria that had been
studied as the experimental hosts of T4-like phages
and no less significant are the differences between the
* Correspondence: a.d.millard@warwick.ac.uk
2
Department of Biological Sciences, University of Warwick, Gibbet Hill Road,
Coventry, CV4 7AL, UK
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

environments in which they are naturally found. It is not
surprising, therefore, that the study of these phages has led
to the recognition of remarkable new features of the
phage-host relationship and this is reflected by the fact
that they have been referred to as “photosynthetic phages”
[5,6]. These T4-like phages of cyanobacteria have extensively been referred to as cyanomyoviruses and this is the
term we have used throughout this review. Without doubt
the most exciting advances have been associated with an
analysis of their ecological significance, particularly with
respect to their role in determining the structure of marine
cyanobacterial populations and diverting fixed carbon
away from higher trophic levels and into the microbial
loop. Associated with this have been the extraordinary
developments in our understanding of marine viral communities obtained through metagenomic approaches e.g.
[7-9] and these are inextricably linked to the revelations
from genomic analyses that these phages carry a significant number of genes of clearly host origin such as those
involved in photosynthesis, which raises important questions regarding the metabolic function of these genes and

© 2010 J Clokie et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Clokie et al. Virology Journal 2010, 7:291
http://www.virologyj.com/content/7/1/291

Page 2 of 19

Figure 1 Cryoelectron micrographs of purified S-PM2 phage particles. (A) Showing one phage particle in the extended form and one in
the contracted form both still have DNA in their heads and (B) Two phage particles with contracted tail sheaths, the particle on the left has
ejected its DNA. The lack of collar structure is particularly visible in (B). The diameter of the head is 65 nm. Pictures were taken at the University
of Warwick with the kind assistance of Dr Svetla Stoilova-McPhie.

their contribution to phage fitness. Obviously, this has
major implications for horizontal gene transfer between
phages, but also between hosts. Finally, from genomic
sequencing it has also become apparent that the cyanomyoviruses are not only morphologically similar to T4,
but are also genetically interrelated. It is still too early for
these key areas, which form the major substance of this
review, to have been extensively reviewed, but aspects of
these topics have been covered [10-12].
Central to discussing these key aspects of cyanomyoviruses is a consideration of their hosts and the environment in which they exist. Our knowledge of marine
cyanomyovirus hosts is almost exclusively confined to
unicellular cyanobacteria of the genera Synechococcus
and Prochlorococcus. These organisms are highly abundant in the world’s oceans, and together they are thought
to be responsible for 32-89% of the total primary production in oligotrophic regions of the oceans [13-15].
Although members of the two genera are very closely
related to each other they exhibit major differences in
their light-harvesting apparatus. Typically cyanobacteria
possess macromolecular structures, phycobilisomes, that
act as light-harvesting antennae composed of phycobilinbearing phycobiliproteins (PBPs) and non-pigmented linker polypeptides. They are responsible for absorbing and
transferring excitation energy to the protein-chlorophyll
reaction centre complexes of PSII and PSI. Cyanobacterial PBSs are generally organised as a hemidiscoidal

complex with a core structure, composed of a PBP allophycocyanin (APC), surrounded by six peripheral rods,
each composed of the PBP phycocyanin (PC) closest to
the core and phycoerythrin (PE) distal to the core. These
PBPs, together with Chl a, give cyanobacteria their characteristic colouration; the blue-green colour occurs when
PC is the major PBP. In marine Synechococcus strains,
classified as sub-cluster 5.1 (previously known as marine
cluster A) [16], the major light-harvesting PCB is phycoerythrin giving them a characteristic orange-red colouration. Other marine Synechococcus strains, more
commonly isolated from coastal or estuarine waters, have
phycocyanin as their major PCB and classified as subcluster 5.2 (previously known as marine cluster B) [16].
In contrast marine Prochlorococcus strains do not possess phycobilisomes and instead utilize a chlorophyll a2/b2
light-harvesting antenna complex [17]. The genetic diversity within each genus represented by a wide variety of
ecotypes is thought to be an important reason for their
successful colonization of the world’s oceans and there is
now clear evidence of spatial partitioning of individual cyanobacterial lineages at the basin and global scales [18,19].
There is also a clear partitioning of ecotypes on a vertical
basis within the water column, particularly when stratification is strong e.g. [20], which at least in part may be attributable to differences in their ability to repair damage to
PSII [21]. This diversity of ecotypes obviously raises questions regarding the host ranges of the cyanomyoviruses.

Clokie et al. Virology Journal 2010, 7:291
http://www.virologyj.com/content/7/1/291

Diversity

The T4-like phages are a diverse group, but are unified
by their genetic and morphological similarities to T4.
The cyanomyoviruses are currently the most divergent
members of this group and despite clear genetic relatedness exhibit only a modest morphological similarity to
the T-evens, with smaller isometric heads and tails of
up to ~180 nm in length Figure 1 and [22-24], and so
have been termed the ExoT-evens [22]. It has been suggested that the isometric icosahedral capsid structures
of the cyanomyoviruses may reflect the fact that they
only possess two (gp23 and gp20) of the five T4 capsid
shell proteins with consequent effects on the lattice
composition. Despite forming a discrete sub-group of
the T4-like phages they exhibit considerable diversity.
One study on phages isolated from the Red Sea using a
Synechococcus host revealed a genome size range of
151-204 kb. However, the Prochlorococcus phage
P-SSM2 is larger at 252 kb [25] and a study of uncultured viruses from Norwegian coastal waters revealed
the presence of phages as large as 380 kb that could be
assumed to be cyanoviruses, by virtue of their possession of the psbA and psbD genes [26].
Attempts to investigate the diversity of cyanomyoviruses began with the development of primers to detect
the conserved g20 encoding the portal vertex protein [27]
and other primer sets based on g20 were subsequently
developed [28,29]. Diversity was found to vary both temporally and spatially in a variety of marine and freshwater
environments, was as great within a sample as between
oceans and was related to Synechococcus abundance
[30-34]. With the accumulation of g20 sequence information from both cultured isolates and natural populations
phylogenetic analysis became possible and it became
apparent that were nine distinct marine clades with
freshwater sequences defining a tenth [28,29,32,34-36].
Only three of the nine marine clades contained cultured
representatives. Most recently a large scale survey confirmed the three marine clades with cultured representatives, but cast doubt on the other six marine clades, while
at the same time identifying two novel clades [37]. The
key observation from this study was that g20 sequences
are not good predictors of a phage’s host or the habitat.
A substantial caveat that must be applied to these molecular diversity studies is that although the primers were
designed to be specific for cyanomyoviruses there is no
way of knowing whether they also target other groups of
myoviruses e.g. [29].
A study employing degenerate primers against g23,
which encodes the major capsid protein in the T4-type
phages, to amplify g23-related sequences from a diverse
range of marine environments revealed a remarkable
degree of molecular variation [38]. However, sequences
clearly derived from cyanomyoviruses of the Exo-Teven

Page 3 of 19

subgroup were only found in significant numbers from
surface waters. Most recently Comeau and Krisch [39]
examined g23 sequences obtained by PCR of marine
samples coupled with those in the Global Ocean Sampling (GOS) data set. One of their key findings was that
the GOS metagenome is dominated by cyanophage-like
T4 phages. It is also clear from phylogenetic analysis
that there is an extremely high micro-diversity of cyanomyoviruses with many closely related sequence subgroups with short branch lengths.
Host ranges

Studies on the host range of marine cyanomyoviruses
have shown wide variations. Waterbury and Valois [3]
found that some of their isolates would infect as many
as 10 of their 13 Synechococcus strains, whereas one
would infect only the strain used for isolation. One
myovirus isolated on a phycocyanin-rich Synechococcus
strain, would also infect phycoerythrin-rich strains.
None of the phages would infect the freshwater strain
tested. Similar observations were made by Suttle and
Chan [4]. A study by Millard et al., which investigated
host ranges of 82 cyanomyovirus isolates showed that
the host ranges were strongly influenced by the host
used in the isolation process [40]. 65% of phages isolates
on Synechococcus sp. WH7803 could infect Synechococcus sp. WH8103, whereas of the phages isolated on
WH8103 ~91% could also infect WH7803. This may
reflect a restriction-modification phenomenon. The ability to infect multiple hosts was widespread with ~77%
of isolates infecting at least two distinct host strains.
Another large scale study using 33 myoviruses and 25
Synechococcus hosts revealed a wide spread of host
ranges from infection only of the host used for isolation
to 17/25 hosts [41]. There was also a statistical correlation of host range with depth of isolation; cyanophage
from surface stations tended to exhibited broader host
ranges. A study on the host ranges of cyanophages
infecting Prochlorococcus strains found similar wide variations in the host ranges of cyanomyoviruses, but also
identified myoviruses that were capable of infecting both
Prochlorococcus and Synechococcus hosts [42].
Genetic commonalities and differences between T4-like
phages from different environmental niches

The first reported genetic similarity between a cyanomyovirus and T4 was by Fuller et al ,1998 who discovered a
gene homologous to g20 in the cyanomyovirus S-PM2
[27]. In 2001 Hambly et al, then reported that it was not a
single gene that was shared between S-PM2 and T4, but
remarkably a 10 Kb fragment of S-PM2 contained the
genes g18-g23, in a similar order to those found in T4
[22]. With the subsequent sequencing of the complete
genomes of the cyanomyoviruses S-PM2 [5], P-SSM4 [25],

Clokie et al. Virology Journal 2010, 7:291
http://www.virologyj.com/content/7/1/291

Page 4 of 19

P-SSM2 [25], Syn9 [23] and S-RSM4 [43], it has become
apparent that cyanomyoviruses share a significant number
of genes that are found in other T4-like phages.
General properties of cyanophage genomes

The genomes of all sequenced cyanomyovirus are all at
least 10 Kb larger than the 168 Kb of T4, with P-SMM2
the largest at 252 Kb. Genomes of cyanomyovirus have
some of the largest genomes of the T4-like phages with
only Aeh1 and KVP40 [44] of other T4-like phage having genomes of comparable size. The general properties
of cyanophage genomes such as mol G+C content and
% of genome that is coding are all very similar to that of
T4 (Table 1). The number of tRNAs found within is
variable, with the 2 cyanomyoviruses P-SMM2 and
P-SMM4 isolated on Prochlorococcus having none and
one respectively. In contrast the two cyanophages
S-PM2 and S-RSM4 that to date are only known to
infect Synechococcus have 12 and 25 tRNAs respectively.
Previously it has been suggested a large number of
tRNAs in a T4-like phage may be an adaptation to
infect multiple hosts [44], this does not seem fit with
the known data for cyanomyoviruses with Syn9 which is
known to infect cyanobacteria from two different genera
has 9 tRNAs, significantly fewer than the 25 found in
S-PM2 that only infects cyanobacteria of the genus
Synechococcus.
Common T4-like genes

A core genome of 75 genes has previously been identified
from the available T4-like genomes, excluding the cyanomyovirus genomes [25]. The cyanomyoviruses S-PM2,
P-SSM4, P-SSM2 and Syn9 have been found to share 40,
45, 48 and 43, genes with T4 [5,23,25]. The majority of
these genes that are common to a cyanophage and T4 are
the same in all cyanomyoviruses (Figure 2).

Table 1 General properties of cyanomyoviruses genomes
in comparison to T4 and KVP40
Phage

No of
Genes

tRNAs

%
Genome Size
Coding
(Kb)

% mol G+C

T4

288

10

93

168.9

35

KVP40
S-PM2

386
236

30
25

92
92

244.8
196.2

42
37

P-SSM4

198

0

92

178.2

36

P-SSM2

330

1

94

252.4

35

Syn9

232

6

97

177.3

40

S-RSM4

238

12

94

194.4

41

Data was extracted from the genbadnk submission of each genome sequence
in May 2009. T4 (accession NC_000866), KVP40 (accession number
NC_005083), S-PM2 (accession number NC_006820), P-SSM4 (accession
number NC006884), P-SSM2 (accession number NC006883), Syn9 (accession
number NC_005083), S-RSM4 (accession number FM207411).

Transcription

Only four genes involved in transcription have been
identified as core gene in T4-like phages [25]. The cyanomyoviruses are found to have three of these genes
g33, g55 and regA. A trait common to all cyanomyoviruses is the lack of homologues to alt, modA and
modB, that are essential in moderating the specificity of
the host RNA polymerase in T4 to recognize early T4
promoters [45]. As cyanomyoviruses do not contain
these genes it is thought that the expression of early
phage genes may be driven by an unmodified host RNA
polymerase that recognizes a s-70 factor [5]. In S-PM2
and Syn9 homologues of early T4 genes have an
upstream motif that is similar to that of the s-70 promoter recognition sequence [5,23], however these have not
been found in S-RSM4 (this lab, unpublished data). Cyanomyoviruses are similar to the T4-like phage RB49 in
that they do not contain homologues of motA and asi
which are responsible for production of a transcription
factor that replaces the host s-70 factor that has been
deactivated by Asi. In RB49 the middle mode of transcription is thought to be controlled by overlapping
both early and late promoters [46], this is thought to be
the case in S-PM2 with all homologues of T4 genes that
are controlled by MotA in T4 having both an early and
late promoter [5]. This also seems to be the case in
Syn9 which has a number of genes that contain a number of both early and late promoters upstream [23].
However, Q-PCR was used to demonstrate that a small
number of genes from S-PM2 that had middle transcription in T4, did not have a middle transcription profile in
S-PM2 [46]. Subsequent global transcript profiling of
S-PM2 using microarrays has suggested a pattern of
transcription that is clearly different to the identified
early and late patterns [Millard et al unpublished data].
Whether this pattern of transcription is comparable to
the middle mode of transcription in T4 is still unknown.
Furthermore, a putative promoter of middle transcription has been identified upstream of T4 middle homologues in the phage P-SMM4 and Syn9, but not in
P-SSM2, S-PM2 [23] or S-RSM4 (this lab, unpublished
data). Therefore, the exact mechanism of how early and
middle transcription may occur in cyanomyoviruses and
if there is variation in the control mechanism between
cyanophage as well as difference compared to other
T4-like phages is still unclear.
The control of late transcription in cyanomyoviruses
and other T4 like phages seems to be far more conserved
than early or middle transcription with all cyanophages
sequenced to date having a homologue of g55, which
encodes for an alternative transcription factor in T4 and
is involved in the transcription of structural proteins [45].
Homologues of the T4-genes g33 and g45 which are also
involved in late transcription in T4 are all found in

Clokie et al. Virology Journal 2010, 7:291
http://www.virologyj.com/content/7/1/291

Page 5 of 19

Figure 2 Genome comparison of S-PM2, P-SSM2, P-SSM4, Syn9 and T4 to cyanophage S-RSM4. The outer circle represents the genome of
cyanophage S-RSM4. Genes are shaded in blue, with stop and start codon marked by black lines, tRNAs are coloured green. The inner five rings
represent the genomes of S-PM2, P-SSM2, P-SSM4, Syn9 and T4 respectively. For each genome all annotated genes were compared to all genes
in S-RSM4 using BLASTp and orthologues identified. The nucleotide sequence of identified orthologues were aligned and the percentage
sequence identity calculated. The shading of orthologues is proportional to sequence identity, with the darker the shading proportional to
higher sequence identity.

cyanomyoviruses, but no homologues of dsbA (RNA
polymerase binding protein) have been found. A late promoter sequence of NATAAATA has been identified in
S-PM2 [5], which is very similar to the late promoter of
TATAAATA that is found in T4 and KVP40 [44,45]. The
motif was found upstream of a number of homologues of
known T4 late genes in S-PM2 [5] and Syn9 [23]. It has

since been found upstream of a number of genes in all
cyanophage genomes in positions consistent of a promoter sequence [43].
Nucleotide metabolism

Six genes involved in nucleotide metabolism are found
in all cyanomyoviruses and also in the core of 75 genes

Clokie et al. Virology Journal 2010, 7:291
http://www.virologyj.com/content/7/1/291

found in T4-like phages [25]. The genes lacking in cyanomyoviruses from this identified core of T4-like genes
are nrdD, nrdG and nrdH, which are involved in anaerobic nucleotide biosynthesis [45]. This is presumably as a
reflection of the marine environment that cyanomyoviruses are found in, the oxygenated ocean open, where
anaerobic nucleotide synthesis will not be needed.
A further group of genes that are noticeable by their
absence is denA, ndd and denB, the products of these
genes are all involved in the degradation of host DNA
at the start of infection [45]. The lack of homologues of
these genes is not limited to cyanomyoviruses, with the
marine phage KVP40 also lacking these genes [45], thus
suggesting cyanomyoviruses either are less efficient at
host DNA degradation [23] or that they utilise another
as yet un-described method of DNA degradation.
Replication and Repair

The replisome complex of T4 consists of the genes: g43,
g44, g62, g45, g41, g61 and g32 are found within all cyanomyovirus genomes [5,23,25], suggesting that this part
of the replisome complex is conserved between cyanomyoviruses and T4. Additionally, in T4 the genes rnh
(RNase H) and g30 (DNA ligase) are also associated
with the replisome complex and are involved in sealing
Ozaki fragments [45] However, homologues of these
genes are not found in cyanomyoviruses, with the
exception of an RNase H that has been identified in
S-PM2. Therefore, either the other cyanomyoviruses
have distant homologues of these proteins that have not
yet been identified or they do not contain them. The
latter is more probable as it is known for T4 and E. coli
that host DNA I polymerase and host ligase can substitute for RNase H and DNA ligase activity [45].
The core proteins involved in join-copy recombination
in T4 are gp32, UvsX, UvsY, gp46 and gp47 [45], homologues of all of these proteins have been identified in all
cyanomyovirus genomes [5,23,25], suggesting the
method of replication is conserved between cyanomyoviruses and other T4-like phages. In the cyanomyovirus
Syn9 a single theta origin of replication has been predicted [23], thus contrasting with the multiple origins of
replication found in T4 [45]. The theta replication in
Syn9 has been suggested to be as result of the less complex environment it inhabits compared to T4 [23]. However, as already stated it does contain all the necessary
genes for recombination-dependent replication, and it is
not known if other sequenced cyanomyoviruses have
single theta predicted method of replication.
With cyanomyoviruses inhabiting a environment that is
exposed to high-light conditions it could be assumed that
the damage to DNA caused by UV would have to be continuously repaired, in T4 denV encodes for endonuclease
V that repairs pyrimidine dimers [45], a homologue of

Page 6 of 19

this gene is found in the marine phage KVP40 [44], but
not in any of the cyanophage genomes [5,23,25]. Given
the environment in which cyanomyoviruses are found in
it is likely that there is an alternative mechanism of
repair, and a possible alternative has been identified in
Syn9 [23]. Three genes were identified that have a conserved prolyl 4-hyroxylase domain that is a feature of the
super family of 2-oxoglutarate-dependent dioxygenases,
with the E. coli DNA repair protein AlkB part of this
2-oxoglutarate-dependent dioxygenase superfamily [23].
In Syn9 the genes 141, and 176 which contain the conserved domain were found to be located next adjacent to
other repair enzymes UvsY and UvsX [23], this localization of these genes with other repair enzymes is not limited to Syn9 with putative homologues of these genes
found adjacent to the same genes in P-SSM4. Interestingly, although putative homologues to these genes can
be identified in the other cyanomyoviruses genomes they
do not show the same conserved gene order.
Unlike other T4-like phages there is no evidence that
any cyanomyoviruses utilize modified nucleotides such
as hyroxymethyl cytosine or that they glycosylate their
DNA. In addition all of the r genes in T4 that are
known to be involved in superinfection and lysis inhibition [45] are missing in cyanophage genomes, as is the
case in KVP40 [45].
Structural Proteins

Fifteen genes have previously been identified to be conserved among T4-like phages, excluding the cyanomyoviruses, that are associated with the capsid [25] Only 9
of these genes are present within all cyanomyoviruses
and other T4-like phages, whilst some of them can be
found in 1 or more cyanomyoviruses. The portal vertex
protein (g24) is absent from all cyanomyoviruses, it has
been suggest that cyanomyoviruses may have an analog
of the vertex protein that provides a similar function
[23]. Alternatively it has been proposed that cyanomyoviruses have done away with the need for gp24 due to
the slight structural alteration in gp23 subunits [39].
The proteins gp67 and gp68 are also missing from all
cyanophage genomes [5,23,25], it is possible that analogs
of these proteins do not occur in cyanomyoviruses as
mutations in these genes in T4 have been shown to
alter the structure of the T4 head from a prolate structure to that of isometric head [47,48], which is the
observed morphology of cyanomyovirus heads [5,23,25].
The protein gp2, has been identified in S-PM2 [5] and
S-RSM4 [43], but not any other cyanophage genomes,
similarly the hoc gene is present only in P-SSM2,
whether the other cyanomyoviruses have homologues of
these genes remains unknown.
In keeping with the conservation of capsid proteins in
T4-like phages, 19 proteins associated with the tail have

Clokie et al. Virology Journal 2010, 7:291
http://www.virologyj.com/content/7/1/291

previously been identified in T4-like phages [25], again
not all these genes are present in cyanomyoviruses, those
that are not include wac, g10, g11, g12, g35, g34 and g37.
It would seem unlikely that cyanomyoviruses do not have
proteins that will provide an analogous function to some
of these proteins, indeed proteomic studies of S-PM2
[24] and Syn9 [23] has revealed structural proteins that
have no known function yet have homologues in other
cyanomyovirus genomes and therefore may account for
some of these “missing” tail fiber proteins. Furthermore
as new cyanomyoviruses are being isolated and characterised some of these genes may change category, for
example a cyanomyovirus recently isolated from St. Kilda
was shown to have distinct whiskers which we would
anticipate would be encoded by a wac gene (Clokie
unpublished observation).

Page 7 of 19

phages the position of this hyperplastic region is unique
to cyanophages.
Finally, recent work has identified CfrI, an ~225 nt
antisense RNA that is expressed by S-PM2 during its
infection of Synechococcus [51]. CfrI runs antisense to
an homing endonuclease encoding gene and psbA, connecting these two distinct genetic elements. The function of CfrI is still unknown, however it is co-expressed
with psbA and the homing endonuclease encoding gene
and therefore thought to be involved in regulation of
their expression [51]. This is the first report of an antisense RNA in T4-like phages, which is surprising given
antisense transcription is well documented in eukaryotic
and increasingly so in prokaryotic organisms. Although
an antisense RNA has only been experimentally confirmed in S-PM2, bioinformatic predictions suggest they
are present in other cyanomyovirus genomes [51].

Unique cyanomyovirus genome features

The sequence of the first cyanomyovirus S-PM2 revealed
an “ORFanage” region that runs from ORF 002 to ORF
078 where nearly all ORFs are all database orphans [5].
Despite the massive increase in sequence data since the
publication of the genome, this observation still holds
true with the vast majority of these sequences still having
no similarity to sequences in the nr database. Sequences
similar to some of these unique S-PM2 genes can now be
found in the GOS environmental data set. The large
region of database orphans in S-PM2 is similar to a large
region in KVP40 that also contains its own set of ORFs
that encode database orphans [44].
All cyanomyovirus genomes contain genes that are
unique, with at least 65 genes identified in each cyanomyovirus that are not present in other cyanomyoviruses
[43]. However, it does not appear to be a general feature
of cyanomyoviruses genomes to have an “ORFanage”
region as found in S-PM2. Another feature unique to
one cyanomyovirus genome is the presence of 24 genes
thought to be involved in LPS biosynthesis split into
two clusters in the genome of P-SSM2 [49].
It has been observed for T4-like phages that there is
conservation in both the content and synteny of a core
T4-like genome; conserved modules such as that for the
structural genes g1-g24 are separated by hyperplastic
regions which are thought to allow phage to adapt to
their host [50]. Recent analysis of the structural module
in cyanomyoviruses has identified a specific region
between g15 and g18 that is hyper-variable with the
insertion of between 4 and 14 genes [43]. The genes
within this region may allow cyanomyoviruses to adapt
to their host as predicted function of these genes
includes alternative plastoquinones and enzymes that
may alter carbon metabolism such glucose 6-phosphate
dehydrogenase and 6-phosphoglunate dehydrogenase.
Whilst hyperplastic regions are found within T4-like

Signature cyanomyovirus genes

Whilst there are a large number of similarities between
cyanomyoviruses and other T4-like phages as described
above, and some features unique to each cyanomyovirus
genome, there still remains a third category of genes
that are common to cyanomyovirus but not other T4like phages. These have previously been described as
“signature cyanomyovirus genes” [25]. What constitutes
a signature cyanomyovirus gene will constantly be redefined as the number of complete cyanomyovirus genomes sequenced increases. There are a number of genes
common to cyanomyoviruses but not widespread or present in the T4-like super group (Table 2). Although the
function of most signature cyanomyovirus genes is not
known, some can be predicted as they are homologues
of host genes.
The most obvious of these is the collection of genes
that are involved in altering or maintaining photosynthetic function of the host. The most well studied and
first discovered gene is the photosynthetic gene psbA
which was found in S-PM2 [52], since then this gene
has be found in all complete cyanomyovirus genomes
[5,23,25]. The closely associated gene psbD, is found in
all completely sequenced cyanomyovirus genomes with
the exception of P-SSM2 [25]. However this is not a
universal signature as although one study using PCR has
found psbA to present in all cyanomyovirus isolates
tested [49] or a different study showed that it was only
present in 54% cyanomyoviruses [53]. The presence of
psbD in cyanomyoviruses appears to be linked to the
host of the cyanomyovirus with 25% of 12 phage isolated on Prochlorococcus and 85% of 20 phage isolated
on Synechococcus having psbD [53]. With the most
recent study using a microarray for comparative genomic hybridisations, found 14 cyanomyoviruses, known
to infect only Synechococcus, contained both psbA and

Clokie et al. Virology Journal 2010, 7:291
http://www.virologyj.com/content/7/1/291

Page 8 of 19

Table 2 Shared genes in cyanomyoviruses
Functional Category

S-PM2

P-SSM2

P-SSM4

denV

✗

✗

✗

✓

✗

Pryrimidine dimer repair

59$

✗

✗

✓

✓

✓

ssDNA binding protein

rnh$

✗

✓

✗

✗

✗

RNaseH

49$

✗

✓

✓

✗

✗

Recombination endonuclease VII

2$

✗

✓

✗

✗

✗

Protein protecting DNA ends

hoc

✗

✗

✓

✗

✗

Capsid protein

9$

✗

✗

✓

✓

✓

Baseplate socket

S-PM2_043
S-PM2_163

✓
✓

✓
✓

✓
✓

✓
✓

✓
✓

structural*
structural*

S-PM2_165

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

structural*

S-PM2_251

Structural Proteins

Gene S-RSM4

Syn9 Product/Function

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

structural*

psbA

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

D2: core PSII protein

psbD

✓

✓

✗

✓

✓

D1: core PSII protein

petE

✓

✗

✓

✗

✓

Plastocyanin

petF

✓

✗

✓

✗

✗

Ferredoxin

cepT
ptoX

Photosynthesis

✓
✓

✓
✗

✗
✗

✗
✓

✓
✓

PE regulatory protein
Plastoquinol terminal oxidase

✓

✓

✗

✓

✗

✓x2

✓x2

✓x6

✓x4

✓x2

gnd

✓

✗

✗

✗

✓

zwf

✓

✗

✗

✗

✓

Glucose 6-phoshate dehydrogenase

talC

✓

✗

✓

✓

✓

Transaldolase

speD
hli
Carbon/phosphate metabolism

Polyamine biosynthesis
High light inducible protein
6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase

trx

✗

✗

✗

✓

Thioredoxin

✓
✗

✓
✗

✓
✓

✓
✓

✓
✗

Phosphate -induced stress protein
Phosphate -induced stress protein

mazG

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

Nucleoside triphosphate pyrophosphohydrolase

cobS

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

Cobalamin biosynthesis

prnA

✓

✓

✓

✗

✓x2

Trpytophan halogenase

S-PM2_225

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

Oxygenase superfamily-like protein

S-PM2_232

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

Putative Helicase

S-PM2_113
S-PM2_117

✓
✓

✓
✓

✓
✓

✓
✓

✓
✓

Unknown
Unknown

S-PM2_119

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

Unknown

S-PM2_138

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

Unknown

S-PM2_141

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

Unknown

S-PM2_164

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

Unknown

S-PM2_056

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

Unknown

S-PM2_186

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

Unknown

S-PM2_187
S-PM2_194

✓
✓

✓
✓

✓
✓

✓
✓

✓
✓

Unknown
Unknown

S-PM2_198

Conserved Cyanophages genes

✓

phoH
pstS

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

Unknown

The table was modified from [25,45]. Genes were called present (#10003;) or absent (#10007) using previous annotations [5,23,25] and BLASTp with a cut off
value of <10-5.
*Genes previously identified as structural proteins by mass spectrometry [23,24].
$
Genes previously identified as core to T4-like phages [25].

psbD [43]. psbA and psbD have also been detected in a
large number of environmental samples from subtropical gyres to Norwegian coastal waters [26,54,55]. With
cyanomyovirus derived psbA transcripts being detected

during infection in both culture [56] and in the environment [57].
In summary, both psbA and psbD are widespread in
cyanomyovirus isolates and that psbD is only present if

Clokie et al. Virology Journal 2010, 7:291
http://www.virologyj.com/content/7/1/291

psbA is also present [49,53] and cyanomyovirus are
thought to have gained these genes on multiple occasions independently of each other [46,49,53].
In addition to psbA and psbD, other genes not normally found in phage genomes have been identified,
these include hli, cobS, hsp that are found in all complete cyanomyovirus genomes. Additionally the genes
petE, petF, pebA, speD, pcyA, prnA, talC, mazG, pstS,
ptoX, cepT, and phoH have all been found in at least
one or more cyanomyovirus genomes. In addition to
being found in complete phage genomes these accessory
genes have been identified in metagenomic libraries
[54,55]. Not only are these genes present in the metagenomic libraries they are extremely abundant; e.g. there
were 600 sequences homologous to talC in the GOS
data set, in comparison there were 2172 sequences
homologous to a major capsid protein [55]. The metabolic implications of these genes are discussed in the
next section.
Cyanomyovirus-like sequences in metagenomes

In the last few years there has been a massive increase
in the sequence data from metagenomic studies. The
Sorcerer II Global Ocean Expedition (GOS) alone has
produced 6.3 billion bp of metagenomic data from various Ocean sites [58], with the viral fraction of the
metagenome dominated by phage like sequences [55].
Subsequent analysis by comparison of these single reads
against complete genomes allows, recruitment analysis,
allows identification of genomes that are common in the
environment. In the GOS data set, only the reference
genome of P-SSM4 was dominant [55].
A further study that examined 68 sampling sites,
representative of the four major marine regions,
showed the wide spread distribution of T4-like cyanomyovirus sequences in all four major biomes [7]. With
increased cyanomyovirus sequences in the Sargasso
Sea biome compared to the other regions examined
[7]. In a metagenomic study of the viral population in
the Chesapeake Bay the viral population was dominated by the Caudovirales, with 92% of the sequences
that could be classified falling within this broad group
[8]. A finer examination of this huge data set revealed
that 13.6% and 11.2% of all homologues identified
were against genes in the cyanomyovirus P-SSM2 and
P-SSM4 respectively [8].
Even in metagenomic studies that have not specifically
focused on viruses, cyanomyovirus sequences have been
found. For example, in a metagenomic study of a subtropical gyre in the Pacific, up to 10% of fosmid clones
contained cyanophages-like sequences, with a peak in
cyanophages-like sequences at a depth of 70 m, which
correlated with the maximal virus:host ratio [54]. All of
the metagenomic studies to date have demonstrated the

Page 9 of 19

widespread distribution of cyanomyovirus like sequences
in the ocean and provided a huge reservoir of sequence
from the putative cyanomyovirus pan-genome. However,
with only five sequenced cyanomyovirus it is not known
how large the pan-genome of cyanomyoviruses really is.
With every newly sequenced cyanomyovirus genome
there has been ~25% of total genes in an individual
phage that are not found in other cyanomyoviruses.
Even for core T4-like genes their full diversity has probably not been discovered. By examining the diversity of
~1,400 gp23 sequences from the GOS data set it was
observed that the cyanomyovirus-like sequences are
extremely divergent and deep branching [39]. It was
further concluded that diversity of T4-like phages in the
world’s Oceans is still to be fully delimited [39].
Metabolic Implications of unique cyanomyovirus genes
Cyanomyoviruses and Photosynthesis

Cyanomyoviruses are unique among T4-like phages in
that their hosts utilize light as their primary energy
source; therefore it is not to surprising cyanomyoviruses
carry genes that may alter the photosynthetic capability
of their hosts. The most well studied of the photosynthetic phage genes are psbA and psbD, which encode for
the proteins D1 and D2 respectively. The D1 and D2
proteins form a hetero-dimer at the core of photosystem
II (PSII) where they bind pigments and other cofactors
that ultimately result in the production of an oxidant
that is strong enough to remove electrons from water.
As an unavoidable consequence of photosynthesis there
is photo-damage to D1 and to a lesser extent the D2
protein, therefore all oxygenic photosynthetic organisms
have evolved a repair cycle for PSII [59]. The repair
cycle involves the degradation and removal of damage
D1 peptides, and replacement with newly synthesized
D1 peptides [59]. If the rate of removal and repair is
exceeded by the rate of damage then photoinhibiton
occurs with a loss of photochemical efficiency in PSII
[60]. A common strategy of T4-like phages is to shutdown the expression of host genes after infection, but if
this was to occur in cyanomyoviruses then there would
be a reduction in the reduction efficiency of the PSII
repair cycle and thus reduced photosynthetic efficiency
of the host. This would be detrimental to the replication
of phage and it has therefore been proposed that cyanomyoviruses carry their own copies of psbA to maintain
the D1 repair cycle [52]. There is strong evidence to
suggest that this is the case with Q-PCR data proving
the psbA gene is expressed during the infection cycle for
the phage S-PM2 and that there is no loss in photosynthetic efficiency during the infection cycle [56]. Further
evidence for the function of these genes can be gained
from P-SSP7 a podovirus that also express psbA during
infection with phage derived D1 peptides also being

Clokie et al. Virology Journal 2010, 7:291
http://www.virologyj.com/content/7/1/291

detected in infected cells [61]. Although as yet phage
mutants lacking these genes have yet to be constructed
the results of modelling with in silico mutants suggests
that psbA is a non essential gene [62] and that its
fitness advantage is greater under higher irradiance
levels [62,63].
The carriage of psbD is assumed to be for the same
reason in the maintenance of photosynthetic efficiency
during infection, indeed it has been shown that psbD is
also expressed during the infection cycle [Millard et al
unpublished data]. However, not all phage are known to
carry both psbD and psbA, in general that the broader
the host range of the phage the more likely it is to carry
both genes [40,49]. It has therefore been suggested that
by carrying both of these genes that phage can ensure
the formation of a fully functional phage D1:D2 heterodimer [49].
Cyanomyoviruses may maintain the reaction centres of
their host in additional and/or alternative ways to the
replacement of D1 and D2 peptides. The reaction centre
of PSII may also be stabilized by speD a gene that has
been found in S-PM2, P-SSM4 and S-RMS4. speD
encodes S-adenosylmethionine decarboxylase a key
enzyme in the synthesis of the polyamines spermidine
and spermine. With polyamines implicated in the stabilising the psbA mRNA in the cyanobacterium Synechocystis [64], altering structure of PSII [65] and restoring
photosynthetic efficiency [66], it has been proposed they
also act to maintain the function of the host photosystem during infection [11].
Whilst psbA and psbD are the most studied genes that
may alter photosynthetic ability, they are certainly not
the only genes. The carriage of hli genes that encode
high light inducible proteins (HLIP) are also thought to
allow the phages host to maintain photosynthetic efficiency under different environmental conditions. HLIP
proteins are related to the chlorophyll a/b-binding proteins of plants and are known to be critical for allowing
a freshwater cyanobacteria Synechocystis to adapt to
high-light conditions [67]. The exact function in cyanomyoviruses is still unknown, they probably provide the
same function of as HLIPs in their hosts, although this
function is still to be fully determined. It is apparent
that the number of hli genes in phage genome is linked
to the host of the cyanomyovirus with phage that were
isolated on Prochlorococcus (P-SSM2 & P-SSM4) having
double the number of hli genes found on the those
phage isolated on Synechococcus (S-RSM4, Syn9,
S-PM2) (Table 2). The phylogeny of these genes suggest
that some of these hli genes are Prochlorococcus specific
[68], probably allowing adaptation to a specific host.
A further photosynthetic gene that may be advantageous to infection of a specific host is cepT. S-PM2 was
the first phage found to carry a cepT gene [5], it is also

Page 10 of 19

now found in Syn9 [23], S-RSM4 and 10 other phages
infecting Synechococcus [43], but is not found in the
phage P-SSM2 and P-SSM4 which were isolated on Prochlorococcus [49]. cepT is thought to be involved in regulating the expression of phycoerythrin (PE) biosynthesis
[69], PE is a phycobiliprotein that forms part of the phycobilisome that is responsible for light-harvesting in cyanobacteria [70], the phycobilisome complex allows
adaptation to variable light conditions such as increased
UV stress [70]. Recently it has been shown that amount
of PE and chlorophyll increases per cell when the phage
S-PM2 infects its host Synechococcus WH7803, with this
increases in light harvesting capacity thought to be driven by the phage to provide enough energy for replication [6] with phage cpeT gene responsible for regulation
of this increase [71]. As Prochlorococcus do not contain
a phycobilisome complex that contains PE, which the
cpeT regulates expression of, it is possibly a gene advantageous to cyanomyoviruses infecting Synechococcus.
Phage genes involved in bilin synthesis are not limited
to cepT, within P-SSM2 the bilin reductase genes pebA
and pcyA have been found and are expressed during
infection [72]. The pebA gene is functional in vitro and
catalyses a reaction that normally requires two host
genes (pebA &pebB) and has since being renamed pebS,
this single gene has been suggested to provide the phage
with short tern efficiency over long term flexibility of
the two host genes [72]. Despite evidence of expression
and that the products are functional it is unclear how
these genes are advantageous to cyanomyoviruses infecting Prochlorococcus which do not contain standard phycobilisome complexes.
Alteration of host photosynthetic machinery appears
to be of prime importance to cyanomyoviruses with a
number of genes that may alter photosynthetic function.
In addition to maintaining PSII centres and altering
bilin synthesis, a further mechanism for diverting the
flow of electrons during photosynthesis may occur.
A plastoquinol terminal oxidase (PTOX)-encoding gene
was first discovered in P-SMM4 [25] and then in Syn9
[23] and more recently has been found to be widespread
in cyanomyoviruses infecting Synechococcus. The role of
PTOX in cyanobacteria, let alone cyanomyoviruses, is
not completely understood, but it is thought to play a
role in photo-protection. In Synechococcus it has been
found that under iron-limited conditions CO2 fixation is
saturated at low light intensities, yet the reaction centres
of PSII remain open at far higher light intensities. This
suggests an alternative flow of electrons to receptors
other than CO2 and the most likely candidate acceptor
is PTOX [73]. The alternative electron flow eases the
excitation pressure on PSII by the reduction of oxygen
and thus prevents damage by allowing an alternative
flow of electrons from PSII [73]. Further intrigue to this

Clokie et al. Virology Journal 2010, 7:291
http://www.virologyj.com/content/7/1/291

story in that PTOX encoding genes are not present in
all cyanobacterial genomes and are far more common in
Prochlorococcus genomes than in Synechococcus genomes. Therefore, phage may not only maintain the current status quo of the cell as in the same manner psbA
is thought to, but may offer an alternative pathway of
electron flow if its host does not carry its own PTOX
genes. Although this is speculative it is already known
that cyanomyoviruses that carry PTOX genes can infect
and replicate in Synechococcus WH7803 that does not
have PTOX-encoding gene of its own.
Carbon Metabolism

All sequenced cyanomyoviruses have genes that may
alter carbon metabolism in their hosts, although not all
cyanomyoviruses have the same complement of genes
[5,23,25]. Syn9 [23] and S-RSM4 have zwf and gnd
genes encoding the enzymes glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) and 6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase which are enzymes utilised in the oxidative stage of
the pentose phosphate pathway (PPP). The rate-limiting
step in the PPP is the conversion of glucose-6-phosphate, which is catalysed by G6PD. It could be advantageous for a phage to remove this rate-limiting step in
order to increase the amount of NADPH or ribulose
5-phosphate it requires for replication. Whether the
phage removes this rate limitation by encoding a G6PD
that is more efficient than the host G6PD or simply producing more, is not known. Without experimental data
the proposed advantages of these genes are speculative.
There are at least 5 modes in which the PPP can
operate depending on the requirements of the cell [74].
It might be assumed that for a phage the priority might
be to produce enough DNA and protein for replication,
thus use the mode of PPP that produces more ribulose
5- phosphate at the expense of NAPH. The production
of ribulose 5-phosphate could then be used as the precursors for nucleotide synthesis. This mode of flux
would result in the majority of glucose-6-phosphate
being converted to fructose-6-phosphate and glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate. These molecules could then be converted to ribulose 5-phosphate by a transaldolase and
transketolase.
Therefore, it is not surprising that talC has been
detected in four of the five sequenced cyanomyovirus
genomes, in viral metagenomic libraries [54], and in
fragments of cyanomyovirus genomes S-BM4 [53] and
SWHM1 (this lab unpublished data). talC encodes a
transaldolase, an important enzyme in linking PPP and
glycolysis, that if functional would catalyze the transfer
of dihydroxyacetone from fructose 6-phospate to erythrose 4-phosphate, giving sedoheptulose 7-phosphate
and glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate. However, currently this
alteration of the PPP is speculation as other modes of
flux are just as possible depending on the circumstances

Page 11 of 19

the phage find it self within its host with alternative
modes leading to an increase in the production ATP
and NADPH [23].
It does appear that maintaining or altering carbon
metabolism is important to cyanomyoviruses as the
genes trx is also found Syn9 and S-RSM4. The product
of trx is thioredoxin, an important regulatory protein
that is essential in the co-ordination of the light-dark
reactions of photosynthesis by the activation of a number of enzymes, one of the few enzymes that it suppresses is glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase [75]. The
reduced form of thioredoxin controls enzyme activity,
with thioredoxin itself reduced by ferredoxin in a process catalysed by ferredoxin-thioredoxin reductase [76].
Whilst no cyanomyovirus have been found to have ferredoxin-thioredoxin reductase, the cyanomyovirus
S-RSM4 and P-SSM4 do have petF, that encodes ferredoxin,. Ferredoxin acts as an electron transporter which
is associated with PSI, whether the phage petF replaces
host petF function is not known.
The function of another electron transporter is also
unclear, some cyanophages (S-RSM4, Syn9, P-SSM2)
have a homologue of petE. Host petE encodes plastocyanin, which transfers electrons from the cytochrome b6f
complex of photosystem II to P700+ of photosystem I. It
is known cyanobacterial petE mutants show both a
reduced photosynthetic capacity for electron transport
and slower growth rate [77]. Thus, it is possible that the
phage petE is beneficial by means of maintaining photosynthetic function.
Whilst there are a number of genes, trx, zwf, gnd,
petE, petF that may alter host carbon metabolism, unravelling their function is not a trivial task, this is exemplified genes such as trx that can regulate enzymes in the
Calvin cycle, PPP, and gluconeogenesis. This is further
complicated by the fact that to date no two cyanomyovirus to date have exactly the same complement of
genes that may alter carbon metabolism, with S-PM2
having none of the above mentioned and at the opposite
end of the spectrum S-RSM4 has the full complement.
However, the widespread distribution of these genes in
cyanomyoviruses suggests their presence is not coincidental and they may be advantageous to cyanomyovirus
under certain environmental conditions.
Phosphate Metabolism

The gene phoH has been found in all sequenced cyanomyovirus genomes, and in KVP40 [44]. The function of
the gene in cyanomyovirus is not known; in E. coli it is
known that phoH forms part of the pho regulon, with
phoH regulated by phoB with increased expression
under phosphate-limited conditions [78]. A further protein implicated in adaptation to phosphate limitation is
PstS that shows increased expression in Synechococcus
under phosphate limitation [79]. Both P-SSM2 and

Clokie et al. Virology Journal 2010, 7:291
http://www.virologyj.com/content/7/1/291

P-SSM4 have the gene pstS [25]. It is thought that cyanomyoviruses maintain phoH and pstS to allow their
host to allow increased phosphate uptake during infection, although the mechanism of how this occurs is
unknown.
Non-cyanobacterial genes with unknown function in
cyanomyoviruses

There are many genes in cyanomyovirus genomes that
are similar to hypothetical genes in their hosts, where
the host function is not known. Additionally all phage
contain bacterial genes that are not found in their cyanobacterial hosts, but appear to have been acquired
from other bacterial hosts, this includes the genes prnA
and cobS which encode tryptophan halogenase and an
enzyme that catalyses the final step in cobalamin synthesis respectively. Tryptophan halogenase is not found in
any known host of cyanomyoviruses, however it is
known to catalyse the first step in the biosynthesis of
the fungicide pyrrolnitrin in Pseudomonas fluorescens
[80]. It has been suggested that it may function to provide antibiotic protection to its host, however as stated
by the authors this idea is speculative [23]. It has been
suggested that cobS may boost the production of cobalamin during phage infection [25], the resulting effect of
increased cobalamin levels is not known. Potentially it
may increase the activity of ribonucleotide reductases,
although if it did the process would be unique to cyanophages [25].
Metabolic coup d’etat

Cyanomyoviruses may also affect host metabolism on a
far grander scale than simply expressing genes to replace
the function of host genes such as psbA or talC. The
gene mazG has been found in all cyanomyovirus genomes sequenced to data and has also been found to be
widespread in cyanomyovirus isolates [81]. MazG has
recently been shown to hydrolyse ppGpp in E. coli [82].
ppGpp is known as a global regulator of gene expression
in bacteria, it also shows increased expression in cyanobacteria under high-light conditions [83]. It has been
proposed that the phage fools its host cell into believing
it is in nutrient replete conditions, rather than the nutrient deplete conditions of an oligotrophic environment
where Synechococcus and Prochlorococcus dominate [11].
It is thought to do this by the reducing the pool of
ppGpp in the host which regulates global gene expression causing the host to modify its physiological state
for optimal macromolecular synthesis thus most favourable conditions for production of progeny phage [84].
Gene transfer between the T4-likes and their hosts (impact
on host genome evolution in the microbial world)

As discussed in the preceding sections there is clear evidence that cyanophages have acquired a plethora of
genes from their bacterial hosts. These are recognisable
either by being highly conserved such as psbA which is

Page 12 of 19

conserved the amino acid level, or by the presence of a
shared conserved domain with a known gene. Phages
potentially have two methods of donating phage genes
back to their hosts; through generalised or specialised
transduction. Generalised transduction results from
non-productive infections where phages accidently package a head full of host DNA during the stage when their
heads are being packaged and they inject this into a second host cell during a non-fatal infection. Specialised
transduction in comparison results from the accidental
acquisition of a host gene resulting from imprecise excision from a host which would occur during lysogenic
induction. Although this area has been poorly studied
there is some evidence for both generalised and specialised transduction in cyanophages [85].
Despite little direct evidence of lysogeny in marine
cyanophages the relationship between host and phage
genes can be established from phylogenetic analyses.
When host genes are acquired by phages, they generally
drift from having the GC composition of their hosts to
that of the phage genome. This difference is much
clearer in Synechococcus-phage relationships because
Synechococcus genomes have a GC % of around 60%
compared to the phages which have a GC% of around
40%. The GC of psbA in Synechococcus phages has
drifted to a value between the average host and phage
GC% so is around 50%. These differences are less clear
in Prochlorococcus as it tends to have a similar CG% to
the phages which infect it and thus phylogenetic analysis
can be dominated by homoplasies (the same mutation
happening independently).
All of the robust phylogenetic analyses that have been
performed on metabolic phage genes that are shared
between hosts and phages suggest that phages have generally picked up host genes on limited occasions and
this has been followed by radiation has within the phage
populations for example see Millard et al. 2005 [53].
There is nothing known about the biology and molecular basis of lysogeny or pseudolysogeny in T4 type
cyanomyoviruses. Indirect evidence for the abundance
of lysogens was obtained from studies on inducing wild
populations of cyanobacteria and quantifying the number of potential phages using epifluorescence. This work
demonstrated that more temperate phages could be
induced in winter when the number of cyanobacterial
hosts was low and so conditions were hostile for phages
in the lytic part of their life cycle. Other studies have
suggested that the apparent resistance Synechococcus
shows to viral infection may be due to lysogenic infection [3]. It is also clear that the phosphate status of cyanobacteria influences the dynamics of integration [86].
During nutrient starvation cyanoviruses enter their hosts
but do not lyse the cells, their genes are expressed during this period (Clokie et al., unpublished). The cells are

Clokie et al. Virology Journal 2010, 7:291
http://www.virologyj.com/content/7/1/291

lysed when phosphate is added back into the media. It is
not known exactly how cyanophage DNA is integrated
into the cell during this psuedolysogenic period but this
may be a time in which genes may be donated and integrated from the phage genome to that of the host.
Despite a lack direct evidence for phage-mediated
gene transfer, it is likely that transduction is a major driver in cyanobacterial evolution as the other methods of
evolution are not available to them. In the open oceans
DNA is present at such low levels (0.6 - 88 μg liter-1)
that it is probably too dilute for frequent transformation
[87]. Also both Synechococcus and Prochlorococcus
appear to lack plasmids and transposons rendering conjugation an unlikely method for the acquisition of new
genes. The large number of bacteriophages present in
the oceans as well as the observation that phage-like
particles appear to be induced from marine cyanobacteria, along with phage-like genes found in cyanobacterial genomes suggests that transduction is evident as a
mechanism of evolution.
The genetic advantages that the T4-like cyanomyoviruses may confer to their hosts were listed in a recent
review, but in brief they are: (1) prophages may function
as transposons, essentially acting as foci for gene rearrangements, (2) they may interrupt genes through silencing non-essential gene functions, (3) they may confer
resistance to infection from other phages, (4) they may
excise and kill closely related strains, (5) they may cause
increased fitness by the presence of physiologically
important genes or (6) the phages may silence host
genes.
In summary, it is difficult to pin down the exact contribution that T4-like cyanoviruses play in microbial
evolution but their abundance, modes of infection and
genetic content imply that they may be extremely
important for cyanobacterial evolution. Their contribution will become clearer as more genomes are
sequenced and as genetic systems are developed to
experiment with model systems.
The impact of cyanomyoviruses on host populations

The two major biotic causes of bacterial mortality in the
marine environment are phage-induced lysis and protistan grazing, currently efforts are being made to assess
the relative impacts of these two processes on marine
cyanobacterial communities. Accurate information is
difficult to obtain for the oligotrophic oceans because of
intrinsically slow rate processes [88]. It must also be
borne in mind that there are likely to be extensive interactions between the two processes e.g. phage-infected
cells might less or more attractive to grazers, phageinfected cells might be less or more resistant to digestion in the food vacuole and phages themselves might
be subject to grazing. Estimates of the relative effects of
phage-induced lysis and grazing on marine cyanobacterial

Page 13 of 19

assemblages vary widely e.g. [89-91] and this probably
reflects the fact the two processes do vary widely on both
temporal and spatial scales.
A number of methods have been developed to assess
viral activity in aquatic systems, but all suffer from a
variety of limitations such as extensive sample manipulation or poorly constrained assumptions [92,93]. The
application of these approaches to studying cyanomyovirus impact on Synechococcus populations has produced
widely varying results. Waterbury and Valois [3] calculated that between 0.005% (at the end of the spring
bloom) and 3.2% (during a Synechococcus peak in July)
of the Synechococcus population was infected on a daily
basis. Another study [94] indicated that as many as 33%
of the Synechococcus population would have to have
been lysed daily at one of the sampling stations. A subsequent study using the same approach [95] yielded figures for the proportion of the Synechococcus community
infected ranging from 1 - 8% for offshore waters, but in
nearshore waters only 0.01 - 0.02% were lysed on a daily
basis. Proctor and Fuhrman [96] found that, depending
on the sampling station, between 0.8% and 2.8% of cyanobacterial cells contained mature phage virions and
making the questionable assumption that phage particles
were only visible for 10% of the infection cycle, it was
calculated that percentage of infected cells was actually
ten-fold greater than the observed frequency.
An important consideration in attempting to establish the impact of cyanomyoviruses on their host populations is to ask at what point the infection rate
becomes a significant selection pressure on a population, leading either to the succession of intrinsically
resistant strains, or the appearance of resistant
mutants. It has been calculated that the threshold
would occur between 102 and 104 cells ml-1 [10] and
this is in agreement with data from natural Synechococcus populations that suggest that a genetically
homogeneous population would start to experience
significant selection pressure when it reached a density
of between 103 and 104 cells ml-1 [97].
The community ecology of cyanomyovirus-host interactions is complicated by a number of factors including
the genetic diversity of phages and hosts, protistan grazing and variations in abiotic factors (e.g. light, nutrients,
temperature). Thus simple modelling of predator-prey
dynamics is not possible. However, a “kill the winner”
model [92,98] in which the best competitor will become
subject to infection has gained widespread acceptance.
Recently, marine phage metagenomic data have been
used to test theoretical models of phage communities
[99] and the rank-abundance curve for marine phage
communities is consistent with a power law distribution
in which the dominant phage keeps changing and in
which host ecotypes at very low numbers evade phage

Clokie et al. Virology Journal 2010, 7:291
http://www.virologyj.com/content/7/1/291

predation. A variety of studies have looked at spatiotemporal variations in cyanomyovirus populations. The
earliest studies showed that cyanomyovirus abundance
changed through an annual cycle [3] and with distance
from shore, season and depth [94]. The ability to look at
the diversity of cyanomyovirus population using g20 primers revealed that maximum diversity in a stratified
water column was correlated with maximum Synechococcus population density [30] and changes in phage clonal diversity were observed from the surface water down
to the deep chlorophyll maximum in the open ocean
[28]. Marston and Sallee [35] found temporal changes in
both the abundance, overall composition of the cyanophage community and the relative abundance of specific g20 genotypes In Rhode Island’s coastal waters.
Sandaa and Larsen [34] also observed seasonal variations
in the abundance of cyanophages and in cyanomyovirus
community composition in Norwegian coastal waters.
Cyanomyovirus abundance and depth distribution was
monitored over an annual cycle in the Gulf of Aqaba
[40]. Cyanophages were found throughout the water column to a depth of 150 m, with a discrete maximum in
the summer months and at a depth of 30 m. Whilst it is
clear from all these studies that cyanomyovirus abundance and community composition changes on both a
seasonal and spatial basis, little is know about short
term variations. However, one study in the Indian
Ocean showed that phage abundance peaked at around
0100 at a depth of 10 m, but the temporal variation was
not as strong at greater depths [84]. It may well be the
case that infection by cyanomyoviruses is a diel phenomenon as phage adsorption to host is light-dependent
for several marine cyanomyoviruses studied [100].
A similar observation for the freshwater cyanomyovirus
AS-1 [101]. There is currently only one published study
that describes attempts to look at the co-variation in the
composition of Synechococcus and cyanomyovirus communities to establish whether they were co-dependent
[102]. In the Gulf of Aqaba, Red Sea, a succession of
Synechococcus genotypes was observed over an annual
cycle. There were large changes in the genetic diversity
of Synechococcus , as determined by RFLP analysis of a
403 bp rpoC1 gene fragment, which was reduced to one
dominant genotype in July. The abundance of cooccurring cyanophages capable of infecting marine
Synechococcus was determined by plaque assays and
their genetic diversity was determined by denaturing
gradient gel electrophoresis analysis of a 118 bp g20
gene fragment. The results indicate that both abundance
and genetic diversity of cyanophage covaried with that
of Synechococcus. Multivariate statistical analyses show a
significant relationship between cyanophage assemblage
structure and that of Synechococcus. All these observations are consistent with cyanophage infection being a

Page 14 of 19

major controlling factor in cyanobacterial diversity and
succession.
Analysis of the impact of cyanomyoviruses on host
populations has been based on the assumption that they
follow the conventional infection, replication and cell
lysis life cycle, but there is some evidence to suggest
that this may not always be the case. There is one particularly controversial area of phage biology and that is
the topic of pseudolysogeny. There are in fact a variety
of definitions of pseudolysogeny in the literature reflecting some quite different aspects of phage life history,
but the one adopted here is “the presence of a temporarily non-replicating phage genome (a preprophage)
within a poorly replicating bacterium” (S. Abedon - personal communication). The cyanobacterial hosts exist in
an extremely oligotrophic environment posing constant
nutritional stress and are exposed to additional environmental challenges such as light stress that may lead to
rates of growth and replication that are far from maximal. There is evidence that obligately lytic Synechococcus phages can enter such a pseudolysogenic state.
When phage S-PM2 (a myovirus) was used to infect
Synechococcus sp. WH7803 cells grown in phosphatereplete or phosphate-deplete media there was no change
in the adsorption rate constant, but there was an apparent 80% reduction in the burst size under phosphatedeplete conditions and similar observations were made
with two other obligately lytic Synechococcus myoviruses, S-WHM1 and S-BM1 [86]. However, a more
detailed analysis revealed this was due to a reduction in
the proportion of cells lysing. 100% of the phosphatereplete cells lysed, compared to only 9% of the phosphatedeplete cells, suggesting that the majority of phosphate
deplete cells were pseudolysogens.
From very early on in the study of marine cyanomyoviruses it was recognized that phage-resistance was likely
to be an important feature of the dynamics of phage-host
interactions. Waterbury and Valois [3] found that coastal
Synechococcus strains were resistant to their co-occurring
phages and suggested that the phage population was
maintained by a small proportion of cells sensitive to
infection. For well studied phage-host systems resistance
is most commonly achieved by mutational loss of phage
receptor on the surface of the cell, though there are other
mechanisms of resistance to phage infection e.g. [103].
Stoddard et al. [104] used a combination of 32 genetically
distinct cyanomyoviruses and four host strains to isolate
phage-resistant mutants. Characterization of the mutants
indicated that resistance was most likely due to loss or
modification of receptor structures. Frequently, acquisition of resistance to one phage led to cross-resistance to
one or more other phages. It is thought that mutation to
phage resistance may frequently involve a fitness cost
and this trade-off allows the coexistence of more

Clokie et al. Virology Journal 2010, 7:291
http://www.virologyj.com/content/7/1/291

competitive phage-sensitive and less competitive phageresistant strains (for review see [105]). The cost of phage
resistance in marine cyanobacteria has been investigated
by Lennon et al. [106] using phylogenetically distinct
Synechococcus strains and phage-resistant mutants
derived from them. Two approaches were used to assess
the cost of resistance (COR); measurement of alterations
in maximum growth rate and competition experiments.
A COR was found in roughly 50% of cases and when
detected resulted in a ~20% reduction in relative fitness.
Competition experiments suggested that fitness costs
were associated with the acquisition of resistance to particular phages. A COR might be expected to be more
clearly observed when strains are growing in their natural
oligotrophic environment. The acquisition of resistance
to one particular cyanophage, S-PM2, is associated with a
change in the structure of the lipopolysaccharide (LPS)
(E. Spence - personal communication).
A variety of observations arising from genomic sequencing have emphasized the role of alterations in the cell
envelope in the speciation Prochlorococcus and Synechococcus strains, presumably as a result of selection pressures arising from phage infection or protistan grazing.
An analysis of 12 Prochlorococcus genomes [107] revealed
a number of highly variable genomic islands containing
many of the strain-specific genes. Amongst these genes
the greatest differentiator between the most closely
related isolates were genes related to outer membrane
synthesis such as acyltransferases. Similar genomic
islands, containing the majority of strain-specific genes,
were identified through an analysis of the genomes of 11
Synechococcus strains [108]. Among the island genes with
known function the predominant group were those
encoding glycosyl transferases and glycoside hydrolases
potentially involved in outer membrane/cell wall biogenesis. The cyanomyovirus P-SSM2 was found to contain
24 LPS genes that form two major clusters [25]. It was
suggested that these LPS genes might be involved in
altering the cell surface composition of the infected host
during pseudolysogeny to prevent infection by other
phages. The same idea could apply to a normal lytic
infection and could be extended to protection against
protistan grazing. Similarly, cyanomyovirus S-PM2
encodes a protein with an S-layer homology domain. Slayers are quasi-crystalline layers on the bacterial cell surface and so this protein, known to be expressed in the
infected cell as one of the earliest and most abundantly
transcribed genes [56], may have a protective function
against infection or grazing.
The potential value of continuing research on the
“eco-genomics” of cyanophages

Eco-genomics is defined as the application of molecular
techniques to ecology whereby biodiversity is considered
at the DNA level and this knowledge is then used to

Page 15 of 19

understand the ecology and evolutionary processes of
ecosystems. Cyanophage genomes encode a huge body
of unexplored biodiversity which needs to be understood to further extend our knowledge of cyanophagecyanobacteria interactions and thus to fully appreciate
the multiple roles that cyanophages play in influencing
bacterial evolution, physiology and biogeochemical
cycling.
As cyanophage genomes are stripped down versions of
essential gene combinations an understanding of their
genomics will assist in defining key host genes that are
essential for phage reproduction. As many of the host
genes encoded in phage genomes have an unknown
function in their hosts, the study of phage genomes will
impinge positively on our understanding of cyanobacterial genomes. The other major spin-off from researching
the products encoded by phage genomes is the discovery
of novel enzymes or alternative versions existing
enzymes with novel substrate specificities. This is likely
to be of major importance to the biotechnology and
pharmaceutical industries.
As more phage genomes and metagenomes are
sequenced, the core set of phage genes will be refined
and the extent of phage encoded host metabolic and
other accessory genes will be revealed. We would expect
to find specific environments selecting particular types of
genes. This research area is often referred to as ‘fishing
expeditions’ especially by grant panels. However it is analogous to the great collections of plants and animals that
occurred during the 19th Century. These data were collected over a long period of time and it was only subsequently that scientists understood patterns of evolution,
biogeography, variance and dispersal. This is an exciting
time to be mining cyanophage genomes as metagenomic
analysis of the viral fraction from marine ecosystems has
suggested that there is little restriction to the types of
genes that bacteriophages can carry [109]. These data
will likely provide the bedrock on which generations of
scientists can interpret and make sense of.
To drive our understanding of cyanophage genomes forward however there needs to a concerted effort to capitalise on the sequence libraries that are being collected from
both phage metagenomes and phage genomes. Sequencing
even large data-sets is now comparatively easy and
sequence information should be seen as the exciting starting point rather than the endpoint. To determine the
function of the reservoir of genes will require extensive
biochemical, chemical and molecular biological investigations as well as physiological experimentation.
Currently when new T4-like cyanophage genes are
identified using bioinformatic approaches, they are compared to T4 and their function is deduced on the basis
of known genes in the T4 genome. In order to really
progress with understanding the role of the genes which

Clokie et al. Virology Journal 2010, 7:291
http://www.virologyj.com/content/7/1/291

have no homology (and to confirm the homology in
genes where an identity can be hypothesised) a genetic
system needs to be developed where cyanophages can
be mutated. This will take extensive research effort and
hopefully international research groups will come
together in the way that researchers on the T phages in
the 1960 s did to gradually piece together to determine
the function of the genes that constitute largest reservoir
of genetic diversity on earth.

Conclusions
The study of the “photosynthetic” cyanomyoviruses has
revealed novel and important facets of the phage-host
relationship that were not apparent from previous studies with heterotrophic systems. However, in common
with all the T4-like phages there is much work to do in
ascribing functions to the many genes lacking known
homologues. It is probable that many of these genes are
involved in the subtle manipulation of the physiology of
the infected cell and are likely to be of potential importance in biotechnology as well as being intrinsically
interesting. However, there are three main features specific to marine cyanomyovirus biology that require
further substantial attention. At present there has been
little more than speculation and theoretical modelling
on the contribution of host-derived genes to cyanomyovirus fitness and it is important to develop experimental
approaches that will enable us to assess the contribution
the genes make to the infection process. There is also
the related topic of evaluating the role of these phages
as agents of horizontal gene transfer and assessing their
contribution to cyanobacterial adaptation and evolution.
Furthermore, from the ecological perspective we are still
a long way from being able to assess the true impact of
these cyanomyoviruses on natural populations of their
hosts. It is likely that these cyanomyoviruses will remain
an important feature of research in both phage biology
and marine ecology for a considerable while to come.
Abbreviations
PBPs: phycobilin-bearing phycobiliproteins; APC: allophycocyanin; PC:
phycocyanin; PE: phycoerytherin; Chl a: chlorophyll a; nm: nanometer; GOS:
global ocean sampling; Q-PCR: quantitative polymerase chain reaction; nr:
non redundant; ORF(s): open reading frame(s); LPS: lipopolyscacchride; PSII:
photosystem II.
Author details
1
Department of Infection, Immunity and Inflammation, Maurice Shock
Medical Sciences Building, University of Leicester, PO Box 138, Leicester, LE1
9HN, UK. 2Department of Biological Sciences, University of Warwick, Gibbet
Hill Road, Coventry, CV4 7AL, UK.
Authors’ contributions
ADM, MRJC & NHM contributed to the original drafts of the manuscript and
approved the final version.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Page 16 of 19

Received: 22 June 2010 Accepted: 28 October 2010
Published: 28 October 2010
References
1. Kutter E, Kellenberger E, Carlson K, Eddy S, Neitzel J, Messinger L, North J,
Guttman B: Effects of bacterial growth conditions and physiology on T4
infection. In Molecular biology of bacteriophage T4. Edited by: Karam JD.
Washington D.C.: American Society for Microbiology; 1994:406-418.
2. Wilson WH, Joint IR, Carr NG, Mann NH: Isolation and molecular
characterization of 5 marine cyanophages propagated on Synechococcus
sp. strain WH7803. Appl Enviro Microbiol 1993, 59:3736-3743.
3. Waterbury JB, Valois FW: Resistance to co-occurring phages enables
marine Synechococcus communities to coexist with cyanophages
abundant in seawater. Appl Enviro Microbiol 1993, 59:3393-3399.
4. Suttle CA, Chan AM: Marine cyanophages infecting oceanic and coastal
strains of Synechococcus - abundance, morphology, cross-infectivity and
growth-characteristics. Mar Ecol Progr 1993, 92:99-109.
5. Mann NH, Clokie MRJ, Millard A, Cook A, Wilson WH, Wheatley PJ,
Letarov A, Krisch HM: The genome of S-PM2, a “photosynthetic” T4-type
bacteriophage that infects marine Synechococcus strains. J Bacteriol 2005,
187:3188-3200.
6. Shan J, Jia Y, Clokie MRJ, Mann NH: Infection by the ‘photosynthetic’
phage S-PM2 induces increased synthesis of phycoerythrin in
Synechococcus sp WH7803. FEMS Microbiology Letters 2008, 283:154-161.
7. Angly FE, Felts B, Breitbart M, Salamon P, Edwards RA, Carlson C, Chan AM,
Haynes M, Kelley S, Liu H, et al: The marine viromes of four oceanic
regions. PLoS Biology 2006, 4:2121-2131.
8. Bench SR, Hanson TE, Williamson KE, Ghosh D, Radosovich M, Wang K,
Wommack KE: Metagenomic characterization of Chesapeake bay
virioplankton. Appl Enviro Microbiol 2007, 73:7629-7641.
9. Edwards RA, Rohwer F: Viral metagenomics. Nature Reviews Microbiology
2005, 3:504-510.
10. Mann NH: Phages of the marine cyanobacterial picophytoplankton. FEMS
Microbiology Reviews 2003, 27:17-34.
11. Clokie MRJ, Mann NH: Marine cyanophages and light. Environ Microbiol
2006, 8:2074-2082.
12. Mann NH: Phages of cyanobacteria. In The bacteriophages.. 2 edition.
Edited by: Calendar R. Oxford: Oxford University Press; 2006:517-533.
13. Goericke R, Welschmeyer NA: The marine prochlorophyte Prochlorococcus
contributes significantly to phytoplankton biomass and primary
production in the Sargasso Sea. Deep Sea Res Part I-Oceanographic
Research Papers 1993, 40:2283-2294.
14. Liu HB, Nolla HA, Campbell L: Prochlorococcus growth rate and
contribution to primary production in the equatorial and subtropical
North Pacific Ocean. Aquat Microb Ecol 1997, 12:39-47.
15. Veldhuis MJW, Kraay GW, VanBleijswijk JDL, Baars MA: Seasonal and spatial
variability in phytoplankton biomass, productivity and growth in the
northwestern Indian Ocean: The southwest and northeast monsoon,
1992-1993. Deep Sea Res Part I-Oceanographic Research Papers 1997,
44:425-449.
16. Herdman M, Castenholz RW, Iteman I, Waterbury JB, Rippka R: Subsection I.
(Formerly Chroococcales Wettstein 1924, emend. Rippka, Deruelles,
Waterbury, Herdman and Stanier 1979). In Bergey’s Manual of Systematic
Bacteriology. Volume 1.. 2 edition. Edited by: Boone DR, Castenmholz RW,
Garrity GM. New York, Berlin, Heidelberg.: Springer Publishers; 2001:493-514.
17. Chisholm SW, Frankel SL, Goericke R, Olson RJ, Palenik B, Waterbury JB,
Westjohnsrud L, Zettler ER: Prochlorococcus marinus nov. gen. nov. sp.: an
oxyphototrophic marine prokaryote containing divinyl chlorophyll a and
chlorophyll b. Arch Microbiol 1992, 157:297-300.
18. Zwirglmaier K, Heywood JL, Chamberlain K, Woodward EMS, Zubkov MV,
Scanlan DJ: Basin-scale distribution patterns lineages in the Atlantic
Ocean. Environ Microbiol 2007, 9:1278-1290.
19. Zwirglmaier K, Jardillier L, Ostrowski M, Mazard S, Garczarek L, Vaulot D,
Not F, Massana R, Ulloa O, Scanlan DJ: Global phylogeography of marine
Synechococcus and Prochlorococcus reveals a distinct partitioning of
lineages among oceanic biomes. Environ Microbiol 2008, 10:147-161.
20. Garczarek L, Dufresne A, Rousvoal S, West NJ, Mazard S, Marie D, Claustre H,
Raimbault P, Post AF, Scanlan DJ, Partensky F: High vertical and low

Clokie et al. Virology Journal 2010, 7:291
http://www.virologyj.com/content/7/1/291

21.
22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

41.

horizontal diversity of Prochlorococcus ecotypes in the Mediterranean
Sea in summer. FEMS Microbiol Ecol 2007, 60:189-206.
Six C, Finkel ZV, Irwin AJ, Campbell DA: Light variability illuminates nichepartitioning among marine picocyanobacteria. PLoS ONE 2007, 2:e1341.
Hambly E, Tetart F, Desplats C, Wilson WH, Krisch HM, Mann NH: A
conserved genetic module that encodes the major virion components
in both the coliphage T4 and the marine cyanophage S-PM2. Proc Natl
Acad Sci 2001, 98:11411-11416.
Weigele PR, Pope WH, Pedulla ML, Houtz JM, Smith AL, Conway JF, King J,
Hatfull GF, Lawrence JG, Hendrix RW: Genomic and structural analysis of
Syn9, a cyanophage infecting marine Prochlorococcus and
Synechococcus. Environ Microbiol 2007, 9:1675-1695.
Clokie MRJ, Thalassinos K, Boulanger P, Slade SE, Stoilova-McPhie S, Cane M,
Scrivens JH, Mann NH: A proteomic approach to the identification of the
major virion structural proteins of the marine cyanomyovirus S-PM2.
Microbiology 2008, 154:1775-1782.
Sullivan MB, Coleman ML, Weigele P, Rohwer F, Chisholm SW: Three
Prochlorococcus cyanophage genomes: Signature features and ecological
interpretations. PLoS Biology 2005, 3:790-806.
Sandaa RA, Clokie M, Mann NH: Photosynthetic genes in viral populations
with a large genomic size range from Norwegian coastal waters. FEMS
Microbiology Ecology 2008, 63:2-11.
Fuller NJ, Wilson WH, Joint IR, Mann NH: Occurrence of a sequence in
marine cyanophages similar to that of T4 g20 and its application to
PCR-based detection and quantification techniques. Appl Enviro Microbiol
1998, 64:2051-2060.
Zhong Y, Chen F, Wilhelm SW, Poorvin L, Hodson RE: Phylogenetic
diversity of marine cyanophage isolates and natural virus communities
as revealed by sequences of viral capsid assembly protein gene g20.
Appl Enviro Microbiol 2002, 68:1576-1584.
Short CM, Suttle CA: Nearly identical bacteriophage structural gene
sequences are widely distributed in both marine and freshwater
environments. Appl Enviro Microbiol 2005, 71:480-486.
Wilson WH, Fuller NJ, Joint IR, Mann NH: Analysis of cyanophage diversity
and population structure in a south-north transect of the Atlantic ocean.
Bulletin de l’Institut océanographique, Monaco 1999, 19:209-216.
Frederickson CM, Short SM, Suttle CA: The physical environment affects
cyanophage communities in British Columbia inlets. Microb Ecol 2003,
46:348-357.
Dorigo U, Jacquet S, Humbert JF: Cyanophage diversity, inferred from g20
gene analyses, in the largest natural lake in France, Lake Bourget. Appl
Enviro Microbiol 2004, 70:1017-1022.
Wang K, Chen F: Genetic diversity and population dynamics of
cyanophage communities in the Chesapeake Bay. Aquat Microb Ecol
2004, 34:105-116.
Sandaa RA, Larsen A: Seasonal variations in virus-host populations in
Norwegian coastal waters: Focusing on the cyanophage community
infecting marine Synechococcus spp. Appl Enviro Microbiol 2006,
72:4610-4618.
Marston MF, Sallee JL: Genetic diversity and temporal variation in the
cyanophage community infecting marine Synechococcus species in
Rhode Island’s coastal waters. Appl Enviro Microbiol 2003, 69:4639-4647.
Wilhelm SW, Carberry MJ, Eldridge ML, Poorvin L, Saxton MA, Doblin MA:
Marine and freshwater cyanophages in a Laurentian Great Lake:
Evidence from infectivity assays and molecular analyses of g20 genes.
Appl Enviro Microbiol 2006, 72:4957-4963.
Sullivan MB, Coleman ML, Quinlivan V, Rosenkrantz JE, Defrancesco AS,
Tan G, Fu R, Lee JA, Waterbury JB, Bielawski JP, Chisholm SW: Portal
protein diversity and phage ecology. Environ Microbiol 2008, 10:2810-23.
Filee J, Tetart F, Suttle CA, Krisch HM: Marine T4-type bacteriophages, a
ubiquitous component of the dark matter of the biosphere. Proc Natl
Acad Sci 2005, 102:12471-12476.
Comeau AM, Krisch HM: The capsid of the T4 phage superfamily: The
evolution, diversity, and structure of some of the most prevalent
proteins in the biosphere. Mol Biol Evo 2008, 25:1321-1332.
Millard AD, Mann NH: A temporal and spatial investigation of
cyanophage abundance in the Gulf of Aqaba, Red Sea. Journal of the
Marine Biological Association of the United Kingdom 2006, 86:507-515.
McDaniel LD, delaRosa M, Paul JH: Temperate and lytic cyanophages from
the Gulf of Mexico. Journal of the Marine Biological Association of the
United Kingdom 2006, 86:517-527.

Page 17 of 19

42. Sullivan MB, Waterbury JB, Chisholm SW: Cyanophages infecting the
oceanic cyanobacterium Prochlorococcus. Nature 2003, 424:1047-1051.
43. Millard AD, Zwirglmaier K, Downey MJ, Mann NH, Scanlan DJ: Comparative
genomics of marine cyanomyoviruses reveals the widespread
occurrence of Synechococcus host genes localized to a hyperplastic
region: implications for mechanisms of cyanophage evolution. Environ
Microbiol 2009, 11:2370-2387.
44. Miller ES, Heidelberg JF, Eisen JA, Nelson WC, Durkin AS, Ciecko A,
Feldblyum TV, White O, Paulsen IT, Nierman WC, et al: Complete genome
sequence of the broad-host-range vibriophage KVP40: comparative
genomics of a T4-related bacteriophage. J Bacteriol 2003, 185:5220-5233.
45. Miller ES, Kutter E, Mosig G, Arisaka F, Kunisawa T, Ruger W: Bacteriophage
T4 genome. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 2003, 67:86-156.
46. Desplats C, Dez C, Tetart F, Eleaume H, Krisch HM: Snapshot of the
genome of the pseudo-T-even bacteriophage RB49. J Bacteriol 2002,
184:2789-2804.
47. Keller B, Dubochet J, Adrian M, Maeder M, Wurtz M, Kellenberger E: Length
and shape variants of the bacteriophage T4 head: mutations in the
scaffolding core genes 68 and 22. J Virol 1988, 62:2960-2969.
48. Keller B, Maeder M, Becker-Laburte C, Kellenberger E, Bickle TA: Amber
mutants in gene 67 of phage T4. Effects on formation and shape
determination of the head. J Mol Biol 1986, 190:83-95.
49. Sullivan MB, Lindell D, Lee JA, Thompson LR, Bielawski JP, Chisholm SW:
Prevalence and evolution of core photosystem II genes in marine
cyanobacterial viruses and their hosts. PLoS Biology 2006, 4:1344-1357.
50. Comeau AM, Bertrand C, Letarov A, Tetart F, Krisch HM: Modular
architecture of the T4 phage superfamily: A conserved core genome
and a plastic periphery. Virology 2007, 362:384-396.
51. Millard AD, Gierga G, Clokie MRJ, Evans DJ, Hess WR, Scanlan DJ: An
antisense RNA in a lytic cyanophage links psbA to a gene encoding a
homing endonuclease. ISME J 2010, 4:1121-1135.
52. Mann NH, Cook A, Millard A, Bailey S, Clokie M: Marine ecosystems:
Bacterial photosynthesis genes in a virus. Nature 2003, 424:741-741.
53. Millard A, Clokie MRJ, Shub DA, Mann NH: Genetic organization of the
psbAD region in phages infecting marine Synechococcus strains. Proc Natl
Acad Sci 2004, 101:11007-11012.
54. DeLong EF, Preston CM, Mincer T, Rich V, Hallam SJ, Frigaard NU,
Martinez A, Sullivan MB, Edwards R, Brito BR, et al: Community genomics
among stratified microbial assemblages in the ocean’s interior. Science
2006, 311:496-503.
55. Williamson SJ, Rusch DB, Yooseph S, Halpern AL, Heidelberg KB, Glass JI,
Andrews-Pfannkoch C, Fadrosh D, Miller CS, Sutton G, et al: The Sorcerer II
Global Ocean Sampling Expedition: metagenomic characterization of
viruses within aquatic microbial samples. PLoS ONE 2008, 3:e1456.
56. Clokie MR, Shan J, Bailey S, Jia Y, Krisch HM, West S, Mann NH:
Transcription of a ‘photosynthetic’ T4-type phage during infection of a
marine cyanobacterium. Environ Microbiol 2006, 8:827-835.
57. Sharon I, Tzahor S, Williamson S, Shmoish M, Man-Aharonovich D,
Rusch DB, Yooseph S, Zeidner G, Golden SS, Mackey SR, et al: Viral
photosynthetic reaction center genes and transcripts in the marine
environment. ISME Journal 2007, 1:492-501.
58. Rusch DB, Halpern AL, Sutton G, Heidelberg KB, Williamson S, Yooseph S,
Wu D, Eisen JA, Hoffman JM, Remington K, et al: The Sorcerer II Global
Ocean Sampling expedition: northwest Atlantic through eastern tropical
Pacific. PLoS Biol 2007, 5:e77.
59. Melis A: Photosystem-II damage and repair cycle in chloroplasts: what
modulates the rate of photodamage? Trends Plant Sci 1999, 4:130-135.
60. Bailey S, Clokie MRJ, Millard A, Mann NH: Cyanophage infection and
photoinhibition in marine cyanobacteria. Research in Microbiology 2004,
155:720-725.
61. Lindell D, Jaffe JD, Johnson ZI, Church GM, Chisholm SW: Photosynthesis
genes in marine viruses yield proteins during host infection. Nature 2005,
438:86-89.
62. Hellweger FL: Carrying photosynthesis genes increases ecological fitness
of cyanophage in silico. Environ Microbiol 2009, 11(6):1386-1394.
63. Bragg JG, Chisholm SW: Modeling the fitness consequences of a
cyanophage-encoded photosynthesis gene. PLoS ONE 2008, 3:e3550.
64. Mulo P, Eloranta T, Aro EM, Maenpaa P: Disruption of a spe-like open
reading frame alters polyamine content and psbA-2 mRNA stability in
the cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803. Bot Acta 1998,
111:71-76.

Clokie et al. Virology Journal 2010, 7:291
http://www.virologyj.com/content/7/1/291

65. Bograh A, Gingras Y, Tajmir-Riahi HA, Carpentier R: The effects of spermine
and spermidine on the structure of photosystem II proteins in relation
to inhibition of electron transport. FEBS Lett 1997, 402:41-44.
66. Ioannidis NE, Kotzabasis K: Effects of polyamines on the functionality of
photosynthetic membrane in vivo and in vitro. Biochim Biophys Acta
2007, 1767:1372-1382.
67. He Q, Dolganov N, Bjorkman O, Grossman AR: The high light-inducible
polypeptides in Synechocystis PCC6803. Expression and function in high
light. J Biol Chem 2001, 276:306-314.
68. Lindell D, Sullivan MB, Johnson ZI, Tolonen AC, Rohwer F, Chisholm SW:
Transfer of photosynthesis genes to and from Prochlorococcus viruses.
Proc Natl Acad Sci 2004, 101:11013-11018.
69. Cobley JG, Clark AC, Weerasurya S, Queseda FA, Xiao JY, Bandrapali N,
D’Silva I, Thounaojam M, Oda JF, Sumiyoshi T, Chu MH: CpeR is an
activator required for expression of the phycoerythrin operon (cpeBA) in
the cyanobacterium Fremyella diplosiphon and is encoded in the
phycoerythrin linker-polypeptide operon (cpeCDESTR). Molecular
Microbiology 2002, 44:1517-1531.
70. Grossman AR, Schaefer MR, Chiang GG, Collier JL: The phycobilisome, a
light-harvesting complex responsive to environmental conditions.
Microbiol Rev 1993, 57:725-749.
71. Shan J: An investigation into the effect of cyanophage infection on
photosynthetic antenna. PhD thesis University of Warwick, Dept Biological
Sciences; 2008.
72. Dammeyer T, Bagby SC, Sullivan MB, Chisholm SW, Frankenberg-Dinkel N:
Efficient phage-mediated pigment biosynthesis in oceanic
cyanabacteria. Curr Biol 2008, 18:442-448.
73. Bailey S, Melis A, Mackey KR, Cardol P, Finazzi G, van Dijken G, Berg GM,
Arrigo K, Shrager J, Grossman A: Alternative photosynthetic electron flow
to oxygen in marine Synechococcus. Biochim Biophys Acta 2008,
1777:269-276.
74. Kruger NJ, von Schaewen A: The oxidative pentose phosphate pathway:
structure and organisation. Curr Opin Plant Biol 2003, 6:236-246.
75. Udvardy J, Borbely G, Juhasz A, Farkas GL: Thioredoxins and the redox
modulation of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase in Anabaena sp. strain
PCC 7120 vegetative cells and heterocysts. J Bacteriol 1984, 157:681-683.
76. Dai S, Schwendtmayer C, Schurmann P, Ramaswamy S, Eklund H: Redox
signaling in chloroplasts: cleavage of disulfides by an iron-sulfur cluster.
Science 2000, 287:655-658.
77. Clarke AK, Campbell D: Inactivation of the petE gene for plastocyanin
lowers photosynthetic capacity and exacerbates chilling-induced
photoinhibition in the cyanobacterium Synechococcus. Plant Physiol 1996,
112:1551-1561.
78. Kim SK, Makino K, Amemura M, Shinagawa H, Nakata A: Molecular analysis
of the phoH gene, belonging to the phosphate regulon in Escherichia
coli. J Bacteriol 1993, 175:1316-1324.
79. Scanlan DJ, Mann NH, Carr NG: The response of the picoplanktonic
marine cyanobacterium Synechococcus species WH7803 to phosphate
starvation involves a protein homologous to the periplasmic phosphatebinding protein of Escherichia coli. Mol Microbiol 1993, 10:181-191.
80. Keller S, Wage T, Hohaus K, Holzer M, Eichhorn E, van Pee KH: Purification
and Partial Characterization of Tryptophan 7-Halogenase (PrnA) from
Pseudomonas fluorescens. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl 2000, 39:2300-2302.
81. Bryan MJ, Burroughs NJ, Spence EM, Clokie MR, Mann NH, Bryan SJ:
Evidence for the intense exchange of MazG in marine cyanophages by
horizontal gene transfer. PLoS ONE 2008, 3:e2048.
82. Gross M, Marianovsky I, Glaser G: MazG – a regulator of programmed cell
death in Escherichia coli. Mol Microbiol 2006, 59:590-601.
83. Mann N, Carr NG, Midgley JEM: RNA-Synthesis and Accumulation of
Guanine Nucleotides During Growth Shift Down in Blue-Green-Alga
Anacystis-Nidulans. Biochimica Et Biophysica Acta 1975, 402:41-50.
84. Clokie MRJ, Millard AD, Mehta JY, Mann NH: Virus isolation studies suggest
short-term variations in abundance in natural cyanophage populations
of the Indian Ocean. Journal of the Marine Biological Association of the
United Kingdom 2006, 86:499-505.
85. Clokie MR, Millard AD, Wilson WH, Mann NH: Encapsidation of host DNA
by bacteriophages infecting marine Synechococcus strains. FEMS Microbiol
Ecol 2003, 46:349-352.

Page 18 of 19

86. Wilson WH, Carr NG, Mann NH: The effect of phosphate status on the
kinetics of cyanophage infection in the oceanic cyanobacterium
Synechococcus sp WH7803. Journal of Phycology 1996, 32:506-516.
87. Karl DM, Bailiff MD: The measurement and distribution of dissolved
nucleic acids in aquaitc environments. Limnology and Oceanography 1989,
34:543-558.
88. Suttle CA: Viruses in the sea. Nature 2005, 437:356-361.
89. Kimmance SA, Wilson WH, Archer SD: Modified dilution technique to
estimate viral versus grazing mortality of phytoplankton: limitations
associated with method sensitivity in natural waters. Aquat Microb Ecol
2007, 49:207-222.
90. Baudoux AC, Veldhuis MJW, Noordeloos AAM, van Noort G, Brussaard CPD:
Estimates of virus- vs. grazing induced mortality of picophytoplankton
in the North Sea during summer. Aquat Microb Ecol 2008, 52:69-82.
91. Baudoux AC, Veldhuis MJW, Witte HJ, Brussaard CPD: Viruses as mortality
agents of picophytoplankton in the deep chlorophyll maximum layer
during IRONAGES III. Limnol Oceanogr 2007, 52:2519-2529.
92. Thingstad TF, Bratbak G, Heldal M: Aquatic phage ecology. In
Bacteriophage ecology. Edited by: Abedon ST. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press; 2008:251-280.
93. Weinbauer MG: Ecology of prokaryotic viruses. FEMS Microbiol Rev 2004,
28:127-181.
94. Suttle CA, Chan AM: Dynamics and distribution of cyanophages and their
effect on marine Synechococcus spp. Appl Enviro Microbiol 1994,
60:3167-3174.
95. Garza DR, Suttle CA: The effect of cyanophages on the mortality of
Synechococcus spp. and selection for UV resistant viral communities.
Microbiol Ecol 1998, 36:281-292.
96. Proctor LM, Fuhrman JA: Viral mortality of marine bacteria and
cyanobacteria. Nature 1990, 343:60-62.
97. Suttle CA: Cyanophages and their role in the ecology of cyanobacteria.
In The Ecology of Cyanobacteria. Edited by: Whitton BA, Potts M. Dordrecht:
Kluwer Academic Publishers; 2000:563-589.
98. Thingstad TF, Lignell R: Theoretical models for the control of bacterial
growth rate, abundance, diversity and carbon demand. Aquat Microb Ecol
1997, 13:19-27.
99. Hoffmann KH, Rodriguez-Brito B, Breitbart M, Bangor D, Angly F, Felts B,
Nulton J, Rohwer F, Salamon P: Power law rank-abundance models for
marine phage communities. FEMS Microbiology Letters 2007, 273:224-228.
100. Jia Y: An investigation into the adsorption of cyanophages to their
cyanobacterial hosts. PhD University of Warwick, Biological Sciences; 2008.
101. Kao CC, Green S, Stein B, Golden SS: Diel infection of a cyanobacterium
by a contractile bacteriophage. Appl Enviro Microbiol 2005, 71:4276-4279.
102. Mühling M, Fuller NJ, Millard A, Somerfield PJ, Marie D, Wilson WH,
Scanlan DJ, Post AF, Joint I, Mann NH: Genetic diversity of marine
Synechococcus and co-occurring cyanophage communities: evidence for
viral control of phytoplankton. Environ Microbiol 2005, 7:499-508.
103. Hoskisson PA, Smith MCM: Hypervariation and phase variation in the
bacteriophage ‘resistome’. Curr Biol 2007, 10:396-400.
104. Stoddard LI, Martiny JBH, Marston MF: Selection and characterization of
cyanophage resistance in marine Synechococcus strains. Appl Enviro
Microbiol 2007, 73:5516-5522.
105. Kerr B, West J, Bohannan BJ: Bacteriophages: models for exploring basic
principles of ecology. In Bacteriophage ecology. Edited by: Abedon ST.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press; 2008:31-63.
106. Lennon JT, Khatana SAM, Marston MF, Martiny JBH: Is there a cost of virus
resistance in marine cyanobacteria? ISME Journal 2007, 1:300-312.
107. Kettler GC, Martiny AC, Huang K, Zucker J, Coleman ML, Rodrigue S, Chen F,
Lapidus A, Ferriera S, Johnson J, et al: Patterns and implications of gene
gain and loss in the evolution of Prochlorococcus. PLoS Genetics 2007,
3:2515-2528.
108. Dufresne A, Ostrowski M, Scanlan D, Garczarek L, Mazard S, Palenik B,
Paulsen I, de Marsac N, Wincker P, Dossat C, et al: Unraveling the genomic
mosaic of a ubiquitous genus of marine cyanobacteria. Genome Biol
2008, 9:R90.
109. Dinsdale EA, Edwards RA, Hall D, Angly F, Breitbart M, Brulc JM, Furlan M,
Desnues C, Haynes M, Li L, et al: Functional metagenomic profiling of
nine biomes. Nature 2008, 455:830-830.

Clokie et al. Virology Journal 2010, 7:291
http://www.virologyj.com/content/7/1/291

Page 19 of 19

doi:10.1186/1743-422X-7-291
Cite this article as: Clokie et al.: T4 genes in the marine ecosystem:
studies of the T4-like cyanophages and their role in marine ecology.
Virology Journal 2010 7:291.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
