<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Francisella infections in farmed and wild aquatic organisms</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Veterinary Research 2011, 42:47. doi:10.1186/1297-9716-42-47"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Duncan J Colquhoun"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Colquhoun and Duodu Veterinary Research 2011, 42:47
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/47

VETERINARY RESEARCH

REVIEW

Open Access

Francisella infections in farmed and wild
aquatic organisms
Duncan J Colquhoun* and Samuel Duodu

Abstract
Over the last 10 years or so, infections caused by bacteria belonging to a particular branch of the genus Francisella
have become increasingly recognised in farmed fish and molluscs worldwide. While the increasing incidence of
diagnoses may in part be due to the development and widespread availability of molecular detection techniques,
the domestication of new organisms has undoubtedly instigated emergence of clinical disease in some species.
Francisellosis in fish develops in a similar fashion independent of host species and is commonly characterised by
the presence of multi-organ granuloma and high morbidity, with varying associated mortality levels. A number of
fish species are affected including Atlantic cod, Gadus morhua; tilapia, Oreochromis sp.; Atlantic salmon, Salmo salar;
hybrid striped bass, Morone chrysops × M. saxatilis and three-lined grunt, Parapristipoma trilinineatum. The disease is
highly infectious and often prevalent in affected stocks. Most, if not all strains isolated from teleost fish belong to
either F. noatunensis subsp. orientalis in warm water fish species or Francisella noatunensis subsp. noatunensis in
coldwater fish species. The disease is quite readily diagnosed following histological examination and identification
of the aetiological bacterium by culture on cysteine rich media or PCR. The available evidence may indicate a
degree of host specificity for the various Francisella strains, although this area requires further study. No effective
vaccine is currently available. Investigation of the virulence mechanisms and host response shows similarity to
those known from Francisella tularensis infection in mammals. However, no evidence exists for zoonotic potential
amongst the fish pathogenic Francisella.
Table of contents
1. Introduction
2. Francisella taxonomy and nomenclature
2.1. The fish pathogenic Francisella
2.2. The diversity of as yet undescribed Francisella
3. The disease/s
3.1.
3.2.
3.3.
3.4.

Differential diagnoses
Farmed vs. wild fish
Host specificity
Zoonotic potential

4. Transmission and environmental survival
5. Diagnosis and detection of Francisella infections
5.1. Macroscopic examination

5.2. Histological examination
5.3. Culture
5.3.1. Selective agar media
5.3.2. Culture temperature for primary isolation
5.4. Cell-culture
5.5. Differential phenotypical identification
5.6. Molecular identification
5.6.1. Universal PCR combined with DNA
sequencing
5.6.2. Specific PCR and LAMP
5.6.3. In situ hybridization
6. Control/treatment
7. Bacterial pathogenesis and host response
8. Vaccination
9. Concluding remarks
10. Competing interests
11. Authors' contributions
12. References

* Correspondence: duncan.colquhoun@vetinst.no
Section for Fish health, National Veterinary Institute, Postbox 750 sentrum,
0106 Oslo, Norway
© 2011 Colquhoun and Duodu; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Colquhoun and Duodu Veterinary Research 2011, 42:47
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/47

1. Introduction
As the aquaculture industry worldwide intensifies and
diversifies, it is natural that domestication of new aquaculture species results in recognition of “new” infectious
agents and diseases. This has been demonstrated repeatedly over the years. In recent years bacteria belonging to
the genus Francisella have “emerged” as serious pathogens of various fish species, both farmed and wild, from
various geographical regions worldwide [1-7]. The most
recent addition to the list represents the first isolation
of a molluscan pathogenic Francisella sp. [8]. Francisellosis associated with aquatic organisms is probably not
truly novel. The recent spate of diagnoses may be partially related to the increased awareness of such infections combined with adoption of suitable culture media
and the widespread availability of non-culture based
molecular detection techniques. However, and for whatever reason, it is clear that Francisella infections in fish
are serious and more widely distributed than previously
thought just a few years ago. Given the relative recent
nature of the discovery of these diseases, much scientific
work is currently in progress and many research results
remain as yet unpublished. While the present review
will restrict reporting of research results in the main to
published work, as a measure of necessity, references to
unpublished work, manuscripts in preparation and personal communications are occasionally made.
2. Francisella taxonomy and nomenclature
The genus Francisella consists of non-motile, Gramnegative, strictly aerobic, facultatively intracellular coccobacilli and currently includes four validly published species.
The type species of the genus is the agent of tularemia,
F. tularensis [9], a highly infectious bacterium causing
disease in mammals including humans and a potential
bio-terror weapon. Although until very recently the validly
published members of the genus Francisella could be
divided into two major lineages on the basis of phylogenetic analysis of the 16S rRNA gene (Figure 1), i.e. the
F. tularensis lineage and the F. philomiragia lineage, a third
lineage, comprising F. hispaniensis as the sole member has,
been recently described [10]. Molecular studies of environmental samples have also demonstrated the existence of as
yet undescribed members of this genus [11,12]. The taxonomic situation within the genus Francisella is complex
and currently relatively dynamic. While F. novicida has
been very recently reclassified as a subspecies of F. tularensis [10] i.e. F. tularensis subsp. novicida, prior to description of the first fish pathogenic species[13], the genus
contained three species i.e. F. tularensis [14], F. philomiragia [15] and F. novicida [16]. The situation became less
clear as the description of various isolates from various fish
species began.

Page 2 of 15

2.1. The fish pathogenic Francisella: nomenclature

Molecular characterization of the 16S rRNA gene has
demonstrated the existence of two different genetic
lineages among the fish pathogenic Francisella isolates,
with a single mollusc pathogenic strain belonging to a
separate (with a long branch length indicating a considerable time since they shared a common ancestor)
branch of the same clade (Figure 2). All three lineages
are closely related to the opportunistic human pathogen
F. philomiragia [2,13]. Of the two fish pathogenic
lineages, Mikalsen et al. [13] proposed the seven isolates
examined from diseased Atlantic cod from Norway to
represent a subspecies of F. philomiragia i.e. F. philomiragia subsp. noatunensis. Shortly after, Ottem et al. [17]
proposed establishment of a new species, F. piscicida,
based on examination of a single isolate from diseased
Atlantic cod. As 16S rDNA sequences for F. philomiragia subsp. noatunensis and F. piscicida were 100% similar it was considered that they may represent
heterotypic synonyms [18]. Following comparison of the
two type strains this was subsequently proven to be the
case [19,20], with both [19] and [20] proposing elevation
of F. philomiragia subsp. noatunensis to F. noatunensis.
In separate studies, Francisella strains (including a strain
common to both studies) isolated from tilapia and
three-lined grunt were proposed to represent 1) a subspecies of F. noatunensis (subsp. orientalis) [20] and 2)
an independent species, F. asiatica [19]. The latter proposal, published online by The International Journal of
Systemic and Evolutionary Microbiology, cannot however, according to the International Code of Nomenclature of Prokaryotes (due to the rule on prior publication
[20]) be considered validly published and should therefore not be used. The single Francisella isolate examined
by Mikalsen et al. [19] from diseased salmon farmed in
fresh water in Chile [1] should therefore be considered a
strain of F. noatunensis subsp. noatunensis. While Kay
et al. [21] referred to a Francisella isolated from tilapia
as “F. victoria”, this name has not been validly published
and cannot be correctly used. The current validly published members of the genus Francisella are listed in
Table 1.
2.2. The diversity of as yet undescribed Francisella

Although culture of Francisella from the environment is
possible [12,22], it is notoriously difficult. Recent studies
of fish microbiota [23] and environmental samples
[11,12] utilising non-culture based methodology have,
however, clearly revealed the existence of significant
numbers of as-yet undescribed Francisella and Francisella-related species associated with fish and the environment. A number of gene sequences retrieved from
these samples belong to the F. philomiragia lineage and

Colquhoun and Duodu Veterinary Research 2011, 42:47
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/47

Page 3 of 15

F. tularensis subsp. tularensis FSC 054
F. tularensis subsp. tularensis Schu S4 (type strain)
F. tularensis subsp. holarctica FSC 022
F. tularensis subsp. mediasiatica FSC147
F. tularensis subsp. novicida ATCC 15482

034.1 (7)
039.1 (38)
039.2 (3)
039.3 (3)
78

96

90

87
83

Insect
Symbionts

B

005.1 (42)
015.1 (37)
015.2 (2)
005.2 (2)
013.1 (33)
92
015.3 (1)
005.3 (3)
100
015.4 (2)
013.2 (1)
039.4 (2)
77

F. tularensis
strains

F. tularensis strain FTMC1 (AF143093)
F. tularensis subsp. holarctica ATCC 29684 (LVS)
F. tularensis subsp. holarctica UT01-1901
98 F. tularensis ATCC 6223 (Z21931)
F. tularensis FSC 043 (Z21932)
F. tularensis subsp. novicida FSC 156
F. tularensis strain 3523 (AY243028)
Dermacentor variabilis symbiont (AY375405)
99
99
Francisella sp. DAS (AF001077)
Ornithodorus porcinus symbiont (AF166257)
Wolbachia persica (M21292)

027.1 (2)
027.2 (39)
027.3 (2)
027.4 (3)

100

A

C

F. philomiragia ATCC 25015

034.4 (39)
034.5 (1)

D

F. philomiragia strain 2669 (AY243027)
F. philomiragia ATCC 25017 (Z21933)
cf. Francisella sp. CYH-2002 (AF385857)
100

045.1 (34)
045.2 (8)
045.3 (1)

F. philomiragia
strains

E

Figure 1 Phylogenetic tree showing the two major lineages of Francisella inferred from the 16S rDNA sequences of reference strains
and environmental samples. Taken from Barns et al. [11].

are therefore closely related to currently known fish
pathogenic species. An as yet un-cultured endosymbiont
of the ciliate Euplotes raikovi has been proposed as a
novel subspecies of F. noatunensis i.e. Candidatus F.
noatunensis subsp. endociliophora [24], but this name
has not yet been validly published according to the
International Code of Nomenclature of Prokaryotes. As
nearly all such environmental detections to date have
been restricted to aquatic environments, these studies

may give some indication of the battery of possible
“pathogens” awaiting new aquaculture species.

3. The disease/s
Systemic infections in fish caused by Gram-negative
intracellular bacteria refractive to culture on standard
laboratory media have been recognized for many years.
Such infections have been commonly referred to as
either Rickettsia-like (RLO) due to morphological

Colquhoun and Duodu Veterinary Research 2011, 42:47
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/47

Page 4 of 15

98 Francisella philomiragia subsp. noatunensis 2005/50/F292-6C (DQ295795)
58

Francisella piscicida GM2212-2005 (DQ309246)
Francisella sp. AF-01-2 (AY928388)

73
99

Francisella sp. Ehime-1 (AB194068)
Francisella sp. Shimane-1

93

(AB449247)
(The bacterium from giant abalone)

Francisella philomiragia ATCC 25015T (AY928394)
61

Francisella philomiragia ATCC 25017 (AY928395)

55

Francisella philomiragia ATCC 25017, FSC 153 (Z21933)

Francisella tularensis subsp. novicida FSC 156 (AY968238)
Francisella tularensis subsp. novicida CIP 56.12 (AY928396)
94

Francisella tularensis subsp. tularensis FSC 199 (AY968225)

56

Francisella tularensis subsp. mediasiatica FSC 149 (AY968236)
Francisella tularensis subsp. holarctica FSC 025 (AY968229)

59

Francisella tularensis subsp. novicida ATCC 15482 (L26084)
82

Francisella tularensis subsp. tularensis FSC 043 (Z21932)
Ornithodoros moubata symbiote B (AB001522)

98

Wolbachia persica ATCC VR 331 (M21292)

5

Figure 2 Phylogenetic relationship of the Francisella sp. bacterium isolated from a diseased giant abalone Haliotis gigantea, inferred
from the 16S rDNA sequences. Taken from Kamaishi et al. [3].

similarities with the true Rickettsia or Piscirickettsia-like
organisms (PLO) following the description of Piscirickettsia salmonis [25]. The genus Francisella is in fact
relatively closely related and similar both morphologically and in terms of pathogenesis, to Piscrickettsia salmonis. However, as the latter organism and its diseases
have been extensively reviewed [26,27], this genus will
not be covered in the present review beyond mention
here of two recent and significant developments in Piscirickettsia research i.e. the discovery that this bacterium
has a facultatively (not obligatory, as previously
Table 1 Validly published species of the Francisella
genus
Francisella tularensis lineage

Francisella philomiragia lineage

Francisella tularensis subsp.
tularensis

Francisella philomiragia

Francisella tularensis subsp.
holarctica

Francisella noatunensis subsp.
noatunensis

Francisella tularensis subsp.
mediasiatica

Francisella noatunensis subsp.
orientalis

Francisella tularensis subsp.
novicida
Lineage “3”
Francisella hispaniensis

considered) intracellular nature and may in fact be cultured on cysteine enriched agar media [28,29], along
with the apparent emergence of a novel Piscirickettsia
species causing disease in muskellunge, Esox masquinongy and yellow perch, Perca flavescens [30]. Despite
morphological similarities, the genera Francisella and
Piscirickettsia belong to the g-proteobacteria and are
therefore only distantly related to the true Rickettsia (aproteobacteria).
While the “agent of tularemia” presumably F. tularensis, was related to infections in fish as early as 1970, this
bacterium has not been associated with fish disease in
later years [31]. In light of the recent description of the
fish pathogenic species, which share a number of phenotypic traits with F. tularensis, it might be speculated that
these early detections may have been a case of misidentification. An outbreak of water borne tularemia associated with crayfish fishing in Spain could not be
attributed to the crayfish themselves [32]. The “modern”
emergence of francisellosis probably started with the
identification of a Rickettsia-like organism (RLO) in
diseased tilapia farmed in both fresh and saltwater in
Taiwan [33], which is probably the Francisella-like
organism described in Taiwanese tilapia by Hsieh et al.
[2]. Francisellosis was subsequently identified in farmed

Colquhoun and Duodu Veterinary Research 2011, 42:47
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/47

tilapia in Latin America [5], more specifically Costa Rica
[19,34] and several states in mainland USA [4], while a
similar disease associated with a PLO in farmed tilapia
in Hawaii [35], is as yet unconfirmed as francisellosis.
The bacterium has additionally been isolated from tilapia in Indonesia [20] and recently confirmed in tilapia
farmed in recirculated systems in England [36]. Other
species affected include hybrid striped bass, Morone
chrysops x M. saxatilis in california [37] and three-lined
grunt, Parapristipoma trilinineatum in Japan (imported
from China) [38]. Other RLO infections which could
conceivably be related to Francisella spp. include the
RLOs reported from ornamental blue-eyed plecostamus,
Panaque suttoni [39] and dragonet, Callionymus lyra
[40]. However, it should not be assumed that all RLO/
PLO are in fact Francisella spp. The Piscirickettsia salmonis-like organism reported from cultured grouper,
Epinephelus melanostigma in Taiwan [41], in contrast to
the confirmed Francisella infecting tilapia [5] reacted
positively with polyclonal anti-P. salmonis sera and may
therefore be more related to Piscirickettsia than
Francisella.
All described incidences of francisellosis in fish manifest in a similar fashion which can be summarised as
systemic, chronic, granulomatous infections resulting in
varying degrees of mortality. Common observations in
Atlantic cod, three-lined grunt, tilapia, hybrid striped
bass and ornamental cichlids include the extensive
occurrence of white, partly protruding nodules (granuloma) of various size in the spleen (Figure 3), kidney
and liver [2,3,7,37,42]. Other organs which may be
affected include virtually any tissue type, as associated
pathological changes have also been described in the gill
(Figure 3) heart, testes, musculature, brain and eye. In
Atlantic cod, the spleen is generally enlarged and serohaemorrhagic ascites and thickened intestinal mucosa
may be observed. Extensive chronic granulomatous
inflammation with multiple granuloma in all organs is
the main histopathological finding with few to numerous, small Gram-negative bacteria, sometimes observed
within granuloma [7]. A granulomatous condition is
also reported in association with Francisella infections
in Atlantic salmon [1,43]. No granuloma were observed
in association with the first report of Francisellosis in a
non-vertebrate i.e. abalone [8]. Although the strain of
bacterium involved in the abalone disease clusters phylogenetically with the fish pathogenic clade, it is the
most phylogenetically distant member of that clade. The
lack of granuloma formation in abalone may be more
related to the molluscan immunological repertoire,
rather than differences in the infecting bacterium.
Reported mortalities associated with natural infections
range from low level in striped bass [37], 5-20% in
Atlantic salmon [43] to 95% in tilapia [33]. Francisellosis

Page 5 of 15

in cod is associated with varying mortality levels. While
mortalities of up to 40% have been described [7], such
levels of relatively acute mortality are rarely experienced
in the field. Environmental conditions, in particular temperature, appear to play a significant role in the rate of
mortality. On examination of the literature it is important to note that temperatures considered low for tilapia
culture, exceed the maximum temperature at which
coldwater species such as cod, may be cultured. Generally, the higher the temperature, the more acute the disease is likely to be, with mortality levels increasing with
temperature until a maximum pathogenic temperature
is reached [8,37]. The presence of mixed infections with
other fish pathogenic bacteria may also significantly
affect mortality rates.
3.1. Differential diagnoses

Several bacterial diseases may present in a similar manner to francisellosis. Piscine mycobacteriosis, commonly
characterised by macroscopically visible multi-organ
granuloma caused by a diverse range of different Mycobacterium spp. has been identified in a large number of
cultured and wild fish species around the world [44].
Mycobacteria can be refractive to culture and are not
always readily observable in histological preparations
even when Ziehl-Neelson stained. Nocardia spp. infections may also present in a granulomatous form [45].
Piscirickettsia salmonis infections, which may also present in a similar fashion to francisellosis is most commonly associated with salmonid fish species, yet has
been identified in an increasingly diverse range of fish
species e.g. European seabass, Dicentrachus labrax [46]
and white seabass, Atractoscion nobilis [47]. One of the
most common systemic bacterial infections affecting
populations of farmed cod in Norway is atypical furunculosis [48], caused by atypical isolates of Aeromonas
salmonicida. This type of infection can result in a disease presenting macroscopically very similar to francisellosis. Although both diseases result in extensive
granuloma development, they are quite readily differentiated by histological examination. Mixed infections with
F. noatunensis and atypical A. salmonicida and/or Vibrio
anguillarum are also relatively common [49].
3.2. Farmed vs. wild fish

Many systemic bacterial diseases result in relatively
rapid death of the affected fish, which disappear from
the population and are therefore difficult to detect at
low prevalence in wild fish populations. The chronic
nature and lengthy course of francisellosis, particularly
in cold water marine species such as cod, probably
mean that the likelihood of detection of francisellosis in
wild fish is more likely than with other Gram-negative
infections. Francisellosis is, however, a relatively recently

Colquhoun and Duodu Veterinary Research 2011, 42:47
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/47

Page 6 of 15

Figure 3 South Carolina tilapia with the gross signs of the severe, chronic stage of the PLO disease. Granulomas in the gills A, and in
the spleen B. Taken from Mauel et al. [4].

recognised disease, and reports from wild fish are as yet
relatively rare. A prevalence of approximately 20%,
based on macroscopic observations, was identified in a
single year class of wild cod captured off the Swedish
west coast in 2004 [50]. Farmed Atlantic cod in Norway
are held in net cages in close contact with wild fish
(including wild Atlantic cod) which congregate around

these structures. A recent screening [51] of farmed and
wild cod as well as other species of fish caught around
the Norwegian coastline using Real Time PCR, reported
the relatively widespread presence of F. piscicida (a.k.a.
F. noatunensis) in wild cod (prevalence 7-11%), from
both areas with and without cod farms, although fish
exhibiting clinical signs of disease were rare.

Colquhoun and Duodu Veterinary Research 2011, 42:47
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/47

Unfortunately the disease/infection status in wild fish
prior to recent outbreaks in farmed cod is not known
and little is understood of the effect of infection pressure from farmed fish to wild fish in these areas. Low
levels of infection were also identified in several marine
fish species i.e. coalfish, Pollachius virens, pollock, Pollachius pollachius, mackerel, Scomber scombrus, European
plaice, Pleuronectes platessa and megrim, Lepidorhombus whiffiagonis and other aquatic organisms such as
blue mussels, Mytilus edulis and edible crab, Cancer
pagurus. However, the significance of these low level
detections is difficult to estimate, considering the
extreme sensitivity of the assay and that samples were
collected mainly in the proximity of affected cod farms.
A low prevalence of PCR positive fish in populations of
migratory cod (spawning migration from the Barents
Sea) caught off the Lofoten archipeligo in Northern
Norway has also been reported [52]. That clinical francisellosis is a disease of long standing in nature has been
established in a retrospective study utilising paraffinembedded samples performed in our own laboratory,
which confirmed the existence of francisellosis in wild
cod in the North Sea during the 1980s [53]. There are
no published reports of francisellosis caused by F. noatunensis subsp. orientalis in wild fish.
3.3. Host specificity

Little information is available relating to specificity of
the various Francisella species for the various species of
fish from which they are most commonly isolated. F.
noatunensis subsp. orientalis (or very closely related bacteria), most commonly isolated from tilapia does, however, cause disease in a number of other fish species
including three-line grunt [38] and a variety of ornamental cichlids [42], while experimental infections following intraperitoneal injection of F. noatunensis subsp.
orientalis have been established in red sea bream, Pagrus
major [8] and zebrafish, Danio rerio [54]. That a dose
equivalent to 23 cfu was capable of causing mortality in
tilapia [55] while a much higher dose of 3.45 × 105 cfu
was required to cause very low mortality in zebrafish
[54] indicates a degree of host specificity at least under
the experimental conditions. The virulence of F. noatunensis subsp. noatunensis isolated from Atlantic salmon
[1] and cod for other species of fish is as yet untested or
at least undescribed in the literature. Although the total
numbers of wild fish other than cod studied by Ottem
et al. [51], were low, generally higher numbers of F. noatunensis were identified in wild cod than non-cod species. Ottem et al. [51] also reported finding significant
levels of F. noatunensis subsp. noatunensis in one
farmed Atlantic salmon by quantitative PCR, yet no
clinical sign of disease in salmon has been identified in
Norway, despite regular surveillance in large, dense

Page 7 of 15

populations of salmon farmed in the immediate vicinity
of infected cod populations. This, together with the fact
that only cod were identified displaying clinical signs of
disease in the Swedish epizootic [50], may indicate that
the north Atlantic strain of F. noatunenis subsp. noatunensis has an affinity for Atlantic cod greater than for
other species of fish. The Francisella sp. pathogenic for
giant abalone, Haliotis gigantea described by Kamaishi
et al. [8] while also virulent in the Japanese black abalone, Haliotis discus discus and identified as the presumptive agent of disease in Yezo abolone, Haliotis
discuss hannai, is apparently unable to cause disease in
the teleost red seabream.
3.4. Zoonotic potential

While there is some strain dependent variation, F. tularensis is widely recognised as a highly virulent zoonotic
agent. F. philomiragia, with which the fish pathogenic
species are relatively closely related, also poses a slight,
but real zoonotic potential, particularly in individuals
with suppressed immunity [56-58]. While both F. tularensis and F. philomiragia are capable of laboratory
growth at 37°C, none of the fish pathogenic species are
capable of growth at this temperature. Mikalsen et al.
[59] tested pathogenicity of F. noatunensis subsp. noatunensis and F. noatunensis subsp. orientalis in mice by
intraperitoneal injection of relatively high doses of bacteria (5-7 × 107 cfu), without any adverse reaction, disease or subsequent re-isolation of bacteria from internal
organs. Thus, laboratory-based evidence would suggest
that it is highly unlikely that fish pathogenic Francisella
pose a risk of zoonotic infection. It is probably relevant
in this context to consider F. noatunensis subsp. orientalis more closely. Of the fish pathogenic Francisella species described to date, this bacterium has the highest
optimal and maximum growth temperature and has
most commonly been identified in tilapia around the
world. Tilapia possess fin spikes which often cause skin
injury during handling and/or preparation and such skin
injuries may be associated with transmission of zoonotic
infections e.g. Streptococcus iniae [60]. That many hundreds of thousands of tilapia infected with F. noatunensis subsp. orientalis must have been handled, processed,
prepared and eaten during the last decade/s, without a
single case of associated disease being reported, probably
constitutes the most compelling “evidence” for lack of
zoonotic capability in this group of bacteria.

4. Transmission and environmental survival
Members of the Francisella genus are non-motile and
are “transmitted by direct contact with infected animals,
through contaminated water or food, or by vectors such
as biting insects” [9]. Transmission of francisellosis in
fish has an obvious connection with the aquatic

Colquhoun and Duodu Veterinary Research 2011, 42:47
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/47

environment, and the disease has been identified in both
fresh and marine waters [1,3,7,13,38]. It would appear
that francisellosis is highly transmissible under optimal
environmental conditions as prevalence of infection
within affected stocks of farmed Atlantic cod and tilapia
can be extremely high [7,33] although there is some evidence (Colquhoun, unpublished results) that francisellosis transmission in cod may be reduced at lower
temperatures. Tularemia i.e. F. tularensis is known to
have a very small least infectious dose of 10 bacterial
cells or less [61]. This trait appears to be shared with
fish and mollusc pathogenic Francisella, as few as 1 - 23
cfu F. noatunensis subsp. orientalis injected intraperitoneally were capable of causing disease in tilapia while 32
cfu of the abalone pathogenic Francisella sp. described
by Kamaishi et al. [8] killed 100% of intramuscularly
injected abolone within 16 days of infection. While the
minimum infectious dose for F. noatunensis subsp. noatunensis in cod has not been established, laboratory
trials have confirmed the rapid transmission and chronic
course of disease in cod [6,59]. Fish to fish contact is
unnecessary and cod may be directly infected via effluent water from tanks containing infected fish (M.
Schrøder, pers. comm.). In a cohabitant challenge performed at 12°C, all cohabitant Atlantic cod sampled
after 38 days were infected [59] and by the end of the
five month cohabitation period, 100% of cohabitant fish
displayed severe macroscopic signs of disease and were
culture positive. Interestingly few fish died during this
period. Not surprisingly, water temperature appears to
play a significant role in development of francisellosis.
Progression of infection, transmission and mortality
associated with F. noatunensis subsp. noatunensis in cod
is low at the lower end of water temperature at which
cod may be farmed (< 4°C), although bacteria may also
be readily cultured from infected fish during the winter
months (Colquhoun, pers. obsv.). The course of disease
increases with water temperature up to the maximum
temperature at which cod may survive (approaching
20°C). Infection and transmission of F. noatunensis
subsp. orientalis appears restricted to 20-28°C in hybrid
striped bass [37] and greater mortality was identified at
15°C than at 30°C in tilapia [33]. Salinity does not seem
to have a significant role in disease development as F.
noatunensis subsp. noatunensis has been identified in
marine farmed Atlantic cod [7] and in Atlantic salmon
farmed in freshwater [1], while F. noatunensis subsp.
orientalis has been isolated from hybrid striped bass and
tilapia in fresh water [37,62] and three-lined grunt in
seawater [3,38]. In the previously mentioned laboratory
trial, F. noatunensis subsp. noatunensis could be cultured from the gut of 50% of cohabitant Atlantic cod at
termination of the trial [59], which may indicate the
fecal-oral route as an important route of transmission.

Page 8 of 15

Identification of F. noatunensis subsp. noatunensis in
Atlantic cod eggs may also indicate that the disease can
be transmitted vertically, although, this needs to further
examined [63]. There is evidence that F. tularensis persist in a viable but non-cultivable (VBNC) state in cold
water [64]. Duodu and Colquhoun [65] found F. noatunensis to enter the same state after 30 and 16 days at
8°C and 12°C, respectively. Although metabolically active,
the VBNC fish pathogenic Francisella (in common with
F. tularensis) were non-virulent, at least under the experimental conditions tested. It may be that the conditions
for revival of virulence were simply not met. A reservoir
in aquatic protozoans has been proposed [66].

5. Diagnosis and detection of Francisella
infections
5.1. Macroscopic examination

While severely affected populations often show a high rate
of morbidity, from field experiences in Norway it is clear
that the disease may become highly prevalent prior to
noticeable change in fish appearance or behaviour. Initial
clinical signs (in severely affected fish) include emaciation,
dark colouration and raised haemorrhagic nodules [6,7] or
skin ulceration [5] may be observed. Internal macroscopically visible changes are dominated by the multi-organ
granuloma development described previously.
5.2. Histological examination

Histological examination of formalin-fixed paraffin
embedded tissues (FFPE) is one of the most commonly
used diagnostic procedures in fish disease investigation.
The histological picture, at least for those species of
affected fish for which histological investigations are
described, appear to be similar [2,4,5,7,34,38,55]. They
show extensive granulomatous inflammation with multiple
granulomas [7], many of which may be liquid-filled [6].
Cells within the granuloma are dominated by hypertrophied foamy macrophages [5,7], fibroblasts and leukocytes
[6]. Granulomas may display a necrotic core [5,6]. Focal to
diffuse necrosis and necrotising vasculitis in affected
organs, accompanied by infiltration of mononuclear cells
and granuloma formation were described by Mauel et al.
[5]. Few or no bacteria may be observable particularly in
cases of advanced disease with extensive mature granuloma [6]. Such lesions may be observed in almost any
organ or tissue type including the meninges in severe
infections [5].
5.3. Culture

The gold standard for diagnosis of francisellosis, in common with any other systemic bacterial disease in fish, is
culture of the bacterium in question combined with
macroscopic and histological observations consistent
with the disease. Members of the genus Francisella are

Colquhoun and Duodu Veterinary Research 2011, 42:47
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/47

generally fastidious in their requirements for growth on
laboratory media and most, including all fish pathogenic
strains isolated to date, have a common requirement for
the amino acid cysteine. Various media types have been
used for primary isolation of Francisella spp. from fish
(Table 2) all of which include elevated levels of cysteine
(or cystine) and glucose. It is pertinent to point out that
these bacteria cannot be cultured on the routine, general
purpose agar types normally used in general fish diagnostic bacteriology e.g. tryptone soya agar, heart infusion agar or blood agar without additional cysteine. For
long term storage of fish pathogenic Francisella, lyophilisation is probably the best option, although reports
from culture collections indicate that successful lyophilisation is not without challenge. In our laboratory we
have successfully maintained Francisella (both F. noatunensis subsp. noatunensis and subsp. orientalis) stock
cultures over several years at -80°C in a general purpose
broth medium (without additional cysteine) containing
15-20% glycerol.
5.3.1. Selective agar media

Experiences in our own laboratory confirm that isolation
of F. noatunensis subsp. noatunensis from Atlantic cod
is readily inhibited by growth of a wide range of bacteria, both fish pathogenic and environmental (Figure 4).
This is a particularly relevant problem in diagnostic
work, due to the common presence of mixed infections/
infiltration of environmental bacteria. Such mixed infections are most probably due to the chronic nature of
francisellosis and consequential weakening of the
immune system in affected fish. Several agars selective
for Francisella species have been published, including a
cysteine heart agar containing colistin, amphotericin,
lincomycin, trimethoprim and ampicillin for selective
culture of Francisella tularensis [22,67]. The same agar,
but excluding amphotericin was successfully used to isolate F. philomiragia from environmental material by

Page 9 of 15

Berrada and Telford [12]. While we have not been able
to culture either Francisella noatunensis- subsp. noatunensis or- subsp. orientalis on the selective agar
described by Petersen et al. [22] in our own laboratory,
selective agars containing polymixin B with- and without- ampicillin were used successfully for isolation of
Francisella noatunensis subsp. orientalis (putatively) by
Soto et al. [34].
5.3.2. Culture temperature for primary isolation

Optimal culture temperature differences exist between
F. noatunensis subsp. noatunsis, F. noatunensis subsp.
orientalis and the molluscan pathogenic strain, which
probably reflect evolutionary differences related to host
species and environment. Soto et al. [34] described optimal growth of F. noatunensis subsp. orientalis (putative)
at 28°C, while Mikalsen et al. [13] described optimal
growth of F. noatunensis subsp. noatunensis at 22°C.
While both types of bacteria are capable of growth at
30°C, F. noatunensis subsp. noatunensis grows poorly at
this temperature [19]. That F. noatunensis subsp. noatunensis was also reported as having an optimum temperature of 15-19°C and was unable to grow at 30°C [6],
suggests that agar composition may be important in
relation to growth at various temperatures. Kamaishi
et al. [8] reported optimal growth of Francisella sp.
from abalone at temperatures between 17 and 22°C.
Suitable culture temperatures for isolation of fish and
mollusc pathogenic Francisella would therefore generally appear to be in the range of 22°C-25°C.
5.4. Cell-culture

As Francisella spp. may be cultured on cell-free laboratory media, the benefits of culture in cell-culture may be
dubious given its’ technically demanding and laborious
nature. However, successful cell-culture of Francisella
noatunensis subsp. noatunensis has been reported in salmon head kidney (SKK-1) and Atlantic salmon kidney

Table 2 Media used for isolation of Francisella spp. from fish
Bacterium

Fish species

Media type

Reference

Francisella noatunensis
subsp. noatunensis

Atlantic cod Salmo salar

cysteine heart agar + 5% ovine blood

Olsen et al. [7]

Francisella noatunensis
subsp. noatunensis

Atlantic salmon Salmo
salar

cysteine heart agar + 5% ovine blood

Birkbeck et al. [1]

Francisella noatunensis
subsp. orientalis

Tilapia Oreochromis sp.

cysteine heart agar + 5% ovine blood

Mikalsen et al. [19]#

Francisella noatunensis
subsp. orientalis

Three-lined grunt
Parapristipoma
trilinineatum

cysteine heart agar + 1% haemoglobin

Kamaishi et al. [3]

Francisella sp.¤

Tilapia Oreochromis sp.

Thayer-Martin agar

Hsieh et al. [2]

Francisella sp.¤

Tilapia Oreochromis sp.

modified Thayer-Martin agar, selective cysteine heart agar + bovine
haemoglobin, selective cystein heart agar + rabbit blood

Soto et al. [34]

#although not specifically stated as primary isolation medium, this is documented.
¤100%16S rRNA gene sequence identity with Francisella noatunensis subsp. orientalis.

Colquhoun and Duodu Veterinary Research 2011, 42:47
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/47

Page 10 of 15

Figure 4 Inhibition of Francisella noatunensis subsp. noatunensis by contaminating bacteria in spleen homogenate; a) 10-1 dilution; b)
10-2 dilution; c) 10-3 dilution thin arrow = contaminants thick arrow = F. noatunensis bacteria.

(ASK) cells with best growth in SHK-1 cells [6] and
Francisella sp. (most probably F. noatunensis subsp.
orientalis) isolated from tilapia was successfully cultured
in chinook salmon embryo (CHSE-214) cells [2].
5.5. Differential phenotypical identification

Francisella spp. are generally rather biochemically
unreactive and the number of phenotypical tests useful
for differentiation of the various member species are
few. Fish pathogenic Francisella species and F. tularensis
share a requirement for cysteine in culture media, and
the fish pathogens may thus be initially more easily confused with this species than with their phylogenetically
closer relative F. philomiragia which grows quite happily
on blood agar. While several commercial kits have been
used for phenotypical profiling of fish pathogenic species, reactions may be weak and difficult to interpret
[19], and published comparisons have not included F.
tularensis or F. novicida. Fish pathogenic isolates may,
however, be fairly rapidly differentiated from F. tularensis and F. novicida by their lack of growth on suitable
media at 37°C [19,20]. Further the fish pathogenic Francisella may be readily distinguished from F. philomiragia
(environmental and mammalian isolates) by their
requirement for cysteine in culture media and their

inability to grow at temperatures of 35°C or above and
lack of production of cytochrome oxidase [13].
5.6. Molecular identification
5.6.1. Universal PCR combined with DNA sequencing

A common theme to most, if not all initial confirmations of francisellosis, is utilisation of the polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) in association with “universal” primers directed at the bacterial 16S rRNA gene. Following
amplification and DNA sequencing, identification of
Francisella-related 16S rRNA gene sequences within tissue samples allows directed culture with appropriate
media. Such a strategy was used in identification of the
aetiological agent of francisellosis in Atlantic cod [6,7]
Atlantic salmon [1] tilapia [2,5], hybrid striped bass [37],
three-lined grunt [3] and abolone [8]. Isolation and culture of the bacterium has then allowed phenotypical and
genetic characterisation, which has in turn provided a
basis for both phenotypical based identification and
development of specific molecular assays for detection
of the respective bacteria within fish tissues.
5.6.2. Specific PCR and LAMP

The close relationship between the fish pathogenic
Francisella spp. and the relatively heterogeneic F. philomiragia has made development of specific assays

Colquhoun and Duodu Veterinary Research 2011, 42:47
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/47

Page 11 of 15

challenging. However, several more or less specific PCR
assays now exist for detection of individual members of
the genus Francisella in fish. Ottem et al. [51] described
a combination of two real-time PCR assays targeting the
16S rRNA gene (detecting F. noatunensis subsp. noatunensis and orientalis) and the outer membrane protein
FopA (detecting F. noatunensis subsp. noatunensis and
F. philomiragia) for specific detection of either fish
pathogen when used together (Table 3). More recently,
a real-time PCR for specific detection of F. noatunensis
subsp. orientalis with a lower detection level of approximately 25 genome equivalents has been developed [68].
Alternatives to PCR detection include the loop-mediated
isothermal amplification (LAMP) reaction targeting the
groEL gene of F. noatunensis subsp. noatunensis, as
described by Caipang et al. [69], which has the advantage of not requiring a thermal cycler and may therefore

prove suitable for use in the field. The specificity of this
assay against other Francisella spp. was not, however,
tested. The presence of an unknown number of as yet
undescribed environmental Francisella species, including
isolates apparently closely related to fish pathogenic species [12], discussed elsewhere in this review, should be
borne in mind, particularly on identification of infection
in novel species of fish.
5.6.3. In situ hybridisation

Splettstoesser et al. [70] described fluorescent in situ
hybridisation (FISH) identification and differentiation of
various Francisella infections using probes based on the
23S rRNA molecule. This study, despite extensive comparison of non-Francisella strains, was limited to F.
tularensis, F. novicida and F. philomiragia and did not,
unfortunately, utilise any of the fish pathogenic species.
In situ hybridisation using dioxigenin (DIG) probes

Table 3 PCR/Real time PCR/LAMP primers (and probes) used for detection/characterisation of Francisella spp
Specific for

Target gene or Amplicon
region
size

Primer sequence (5’ - 3’)

Probe sequence
(Real time PCR)

Reference

F. noatunensis subsp. noatunensis
+ subsp. orientalis

16S rRNA

FcF50
aac-gac-tgt-taa-tac-cgc-ata-ata-tct-g

Fc50-probe
gtg-gcc-ttt-gtg-ctg-c

Ottem et al.
[51]

FopA-probe
ttt-gca-gtt-cag-tat-aac

Ottem et al.
[51]

iglC probe
atc-tat-tga-tgg-gctcac-aac-ttc-aca-a

Soto et al.
[68]

n.a.

Hsieh et al.
[42]

n.a.

Forsmann
et al. [64]

n.a.

Barns et al.
[11]

n.a.

Caipang
et al. [69]

101 bp

FcR50
cct-tac-cct-acc-aac-tag-cta-atc-ca
F. noatunensis subsp. noatunensis
+ F. philomiragia

FopA

85 bp

FopAF
ggt-gcg-aac-atg-act-att-ggt-tat
FopAR
aac-ctg-caa-ata-ctc-tac-cca-cta-act

F. noatunensis subsp. orientalis

iglC

88 bp

iglC forward
ggg-cgt-atc-taa-gga-tgg-tat-gag
iglC reverse
agc-aca-gca-tac-agg-caa-gct-a

Francisella-like

16S rRNA

286 bp

FLB16S180f
gcg-gat-taa-agg-tgg-cct-ttg-c
FLB16S465r
cct-gca-agc-tat-taa-ctc-aca-gg

Francisella spp.

16S rRNA

1113 bp

F5
cct-ttt-tga-gtt-tcg-ctc-c
F11
tac-cag-ttg-gaa-acg-act-gt

Francisella spp.

16S rRNA

~1170 bp

Fr153F0.1
gcc-cat-ttg-agg-ggg-ata-cc
Fr1281R0.1
gga-cta-aga-gta-cct-ttt-tga-gt

F. noatunensis subsp. noatunensis

groEL

Multiple
bands

Primer set 4 (LAMP) F3
ggt-gct-caa-ata-gtt-aaa-gaa-gt
B3
gta-ccc-act-tgc-tcg-ata-g
FIP
ttc-tgt-aag-taa-cgc-ttg-agc-taa-ttt-ttc-tgctga-tgt-agc-agg-tg
BIP
aac-agg-tat-tga-taa-ggc-tgc-tgt-ttt-tctgaa-caa-ggc-tta-gaa-agt

n.a.: not applicable.
b
: used in combination with sequencing.

Colquhoun and Duodu Veterinary Research 2011, 42:47
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/47

directed at the 16S rRNA molecule successfully identified Francisella cells within many different tissue types
in three-lined grunt [3] tilapia [2] and diseased cichlids
[42] and most recently in farmed abalone [8] (Table 4).

Page 12 of 15

Table 5 Minimal Inhibition Concentrations

7. Bacterial pathogenesis and host response
F. tularensis, as a serious zoonotic agent and candidate
for biological warfare/terrorism is by far the most significant member of the genus in terms of human impact.
While a considerable body of information relating to
pathogenesis, virulence and host response (reviewed by
Pechous et al. [71] is available for this bacterium, much
relating to the mode of action and genetic basis for

Francisella “philomiragia“
a.k.a. F. noatunensis subsp.
noatunensis

RLO*

Florfenicol

6. Control/treatment
Due to the intracellular location of the infecting bacteria, the normally high prevalence of infected fish, the
high transmissibility and low infective dose, high morbidity and inappetance in severely infected fish, there is
reason to believe that antibiotic therapy is unlikely to
provide good and lasting effect on an infected population. However, Chern and Chao [33] considered a 10-14
day treatment with 30-50 mg/kg oxytetracycline as a
probable effective treatment for francisellosis in tilapia,
while Mauel et al. [4] and Ostland et al. [37] also
reported successful treatment with tetracycline in tilapia
and hybrid striped bass respectively. Minimum inhibitory concentrations (MIC) for F. noatunensis subsp.
noatunensis [43] and the RLO from Taiwanese tilapia
[33] are shown in Table 5.

Antibiotic (μgmL-1)

1.0

n.d.

Flumequine

0.25

n.d.

Oxolinic acid

0.25

n.d.

Oxytet/tetracycline

0.5

1

Amoxicillin

> 64

n.d.

Chloramphenicol

n.d.

4

Erythromycin

n.d.

10

Pencillin G

n.d.

>1000#

*(Chern and Chao [33] possibly the Francisella-like organism described by
Hsieh et al. [2]).
#units per mL.

virulence remains poorly understood. Although similar
work on the fish pathogenic Francisella species is limited, the results generated so far are generally consistent
with those from studies focusing on mammalian pathogenic Francisella spp. Homologs of genes associated
with virulence in F. tularensis have been identified in F.
noatunensis subsp. orientalis [55], including genes (iglA
- D) associated with the type 6 secretion system present
on the F. tularensis pathogenicity island. Soto et al. [55]
found that while iglC played no role in protection from
serum killing, a functional iglC gene is necessary for
intra-macrophage survival. Serum complement and host
cell mannose receptors were also identified as important
for macrophage internalisation of F. noatunensis subsp.

Table 4 In situ probes used for visualisation of Francisella spp. in aquatic animals
Fish type

Bacterial species

Probe type¤

Primers or probes (5’ - 3’)

Reference

Cichlids

Francisella spp.

PCR product (286bp)

FLB16S180f
gcg-gat-taa-agg-tgg-cct-ttg-c

Hsieh et al. [42]

FLB16S465r
cct-gca-agc-tat-taa-ctc-aca-gg
Tilapia

Francisella sp.*

PCR product (1113bp)

F5
cct-ttt-tga-gtt-tcg-ctc-c

Hsieh et al. [2]#

F11
tac-cag-ttg-gaa-acg-act-gt
Three-lined grunt

Francisella noatunensis
subsp. orientalis

Antisense oligo-

Isaki-DIG-80r
ctc-gtc-agc-atc-cga-aga-cct-gtt-a

Kamaishi et al. [3]

Isaki-DIG-200r
ggc-agc-gca-aag-gcc-acc-ttt-aat-ccg-cag-ata-t
Abalone

Francisella sp.

Antisense oligo-

Megai-110r
ccg-cca-ctc-gtc-agc-aag-aag-caa-gct-tct-cct-gttacc-gtt-cga-ctt-gc
Megai-230r
cta-acg-cag-gct-cat-cca-tct-gcg-gca-gca-caa-aggcca-cct-tta-atc-ctc-aga-tag-tat
Megai-870r
gag-tac-tta-acg-cgt-tag-cta-cgc-cac-tag-atc-ctt-tacacc-gaa-tcc-aac-agc-tag-tac

¤all Dioxigenin marked; *Presumptively F. noatunensis subsp. orientalis.
#primers originally published by Forsman et al. [64].

Kamaishi et al. [8]

Colquhoun and Duodu Veterinary Research 2011, 42:47
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/47

orientalis cells. Zebrafish infected intraperitoneally with
F. noatunensis subsp. orientalis displayed a tissue-specific proinflammatory response [54], with upregulation of
inter-leukin-1b (highly specific to viable bacteria),
gamma interferon and tumour necrosis factor alpha, 6 h
post infection and lasting for up to 7 days.

8. Vaccination
No commercial vaccine is currently available against
Francisella infections in fish, although several vaccine
companies are involved in development work in relation
to francisellosis in tilapia and cod. Development of a
vaccine providing satisfactory protection toward fish
pathogenic Francisella spp. may be challenging as
observed with other intracellular bacterial pathogens
such as Renibacterium salmoninarum and Piscirickettsia
salmonis. Several trial vaccines against francisellosis in
cod, based on simple whole-cell based preparations
(bacterins) have been tested both in experimental challenges and in the field in Norway. None have yet
awarded a significant or satisfactory degree of protection. Work contributing to a better understanding of
immunological activity and bacterial factors involved in
the disease is as yet limited, but includes characterisation of the lipopolysaccharide and b-glucan of Francisella “victoria” (isolated from tilapia, almost certainly F.
noatunensis subsp. orientalis) [21] and identification of a
strong, specific antibody response to a 20-KDa nonprotein constituent (probably LPS) of F. noatunensis
subsp. noatunensis in cod [72]. While a recombinant
approach may, as in P. salmonis [73], offer the promise
of increased protection, it may be worth considering the
fact that no vaccine against F. tularensis infection in
humans is as yet available [74], despite the greater
knowledge of pathogen-host interactions for this disease.
Rohmer et al. [75] proposed that due to the intracellular
nature of these bacteria, a live (attenuated) vaccine
instead of a component vaccine may be the best
approach for successful vaccination. Identification of
complete attenuation of F. noatunensis subsp. orientalis
by mutation of the iglC* gene as described by Soto et al.
[55], should provide an interesting foundation for
further vaccine development.
Infection models, including intraperitoneal-, bath- and
cohabitant- challenges exist for F. noatunensis subsp.
orientalis [54,55] and F. noatunensis subsp. noatunensis
[6,59]. Such models are an essential part in vaccine
developmental work and batch testing. However, current standards for evaluation of effectiveness of fish vaccines rely on differences between relative percentage
survival (RPS) in vaccinated and unvaccinated fish. This
may be an effective method of evaluation of protection
awarded against systemic bacterial infections normally
causing acute mortality episodes e.g. various Vibrio

Page 13 of 15

infections, but may be questionable as a means of evaluating a disease like francisellosis which is normally associated (particularly in coldwater species) with a chronic
infection. There is a risk that while vaccinated fish may
survive the initial exposure and observation period, they
may remain infected and the onset of disease merely
delayed.

9. Concluding remarks
Despite previous recognition of the disease, the aetiological agents of francisellosis were not identified until
recently. As these bacteria are not always readily
observed histologically and cannot be cultured in the
laboratory media used in routine fish disease investigations, it is likely that diseases caused by this group of
bacteria remain under-diagnosed. Improved molecular/
genetic tools for specific detection and diagnosis of francisellosis have been developed by a number of groups,
but these studies are by no means complete since there
remain major gaps in our understanding of the epidemiology and pathogenesis of the bacteria. We are not
sure of their life cycle and the mechanisms by which
they might spread in the environment. Evidence also
exists for the existence of a large number of related bacteria in the environment. There is no doubt that as wild
fisheries decline and our dependence on aquaculture
products expands, domestication of new species will
most probably result in identification of new species and
strains of Francisella pathogenic for these species.
Development of effective generic vaccines against francisellosis in fish should therefore be a research priority.

Authors’ contributions
DJC and SD both contributed to the literature review and drafting of the
manuscript. Both authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 15 July 2010 Accepted: 8 March 2011
Published: 8 March 2011
References
1. Birkbeck TH, Bordevik M, Froystad MK, Baklien A: Identification of
Francisella sp. from Atlantic salmon, Salmo salar L., in Chile. J Fish Dis
2007, 30:505-507.
2. Hsieh CY, Tung MC, Tu C, Chang CD, Tsai SS: Enzootics of visceral
granulomas associated with Francisella-like organism infection in tilapia
(Oreochromis spp.). Aquaculture 2006, 254:129-138.
3. Kamaishi T, Fukuda Y, Nishiyama M, Kawakami H, Matsuyama T,
Yoshinaga T, Oseko N: Identification and pathogenicity of intracellular
Francisella bacterium in three-line grunt Parapristipoma trilineatum. Fish
Pathol 2005, 40:67-71.
4. Mauel MJ, Miller DL, Styer E, Pouder DB, Yanong RP, Goodwin AE,
Schwedler TE: Occurrence of Piscirickettsiosis-like syndrome in tilapia in
the continental United States. J Vet Diagn Invest 2005, 17:601-605.
5. Mauel MJ, Soto E, Moralis JA, Hawke J: A piscirickettsiosis-like syndrome in
cultured Nile tilapia in Latin America with Francisella spp. as the
pathogenic agent. J Aqua Anim Health 2007, 9:27-34.

Colquhoun and Duodu Veterinary Research 2011, 42:47
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/47

6.

7.

8.

9.
10.

11.

12.

13.

14.
15.

16.
17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.
27.

Nylund A, Ottem KF, Watanabe K, Karlsbakk E, Krossoy B: Francisella sp.
(Family Francisellaceae) causing mortality in Norwegian cod (Gadus
morhua) farming. Arch Microbiol 2006, 185:383-392.
Olsen AB, Mikalsen J, Rode M, Alfjorden A, Hoel E, Straum-Lie K, Haldorsen R,
Colquhoun DJ: A novel systemic granulomatous inflammatory disease in
farmed Atlantic cod, Gadus morhua L., associated with a bacterium
belonging to the genus Francisella. J Fish Dis 2006, 29:307-311.
Kamaishi T, Miwa S, Goto E, Matsuyama T: Mass mortality of giant abalone
Haliotis gigantea caused by a Francisella sp. bacterium. Dis Aquat Organ
2010, 89:145-154.
Sjösted A: Genus I Francisella Dorofe’ev 1947, 176al. Bergey’s Manual of
Systematic Bacteriology, The Proteobacteria 2005, 2:200-210.
Huber B, Escudero R, Busse HJ, Seibold E, Scholz HC, Anda P, Kämpfer P,
Splettstoesser WD: Description of Francisella hispaniensis sp. nov., isolated
from human blood, reclassification of Francisella novicida (Larson et al.
1995) Olsufiev et al. 1959 as Francisella tularensis subsp. novicida comb.
nov. and emended description of the genus Francisella. Int J Syst Evol
Microbiol 2010, 60:1887-1896.
Barns SM, Grow CC, Okinaka RT, Keim P, Kuske CR: Detection of diverse
new Francisella-like bacteria in environmental samples. Appl Environ
Microbiol 2005, 71:5494-5500.
Berrada ZL, Telford SR III: Diversity of Francisella Species in Environmental
Samples from Martha’s Vineyard, Massachusetts. Microb Ecol 2010,
59:277-283.
Mikalsen J, Olsen AB, Tengs T, Colquhoun DJ: Francisella philomiragia
subsp. noatunensis subsp. nov., isolated from farmed Atlantic cod
(Gadus morhua L.). Int J Syst Evol Microbiol 2007, 57:1960-1965.
McCoy GW, Chapin CW: Bacterium tularense, the cause of a plague-like
disease of rodents. Public Health Bull 1912, 53:17-23.
Jensen WI, Owen CR, Jellison WL: Yersinia philomiragia sp. n., a new
member of the Pasteurella group of bacteria, naturally pathogenic for
the muskrat (Ondatra zibethica). J Bacteriol 1969, 100:1237-1241.
Larson CL, Wicht W, Jellison WL: An organism resembling P. tularensis
from water. Public Health Rep 1955, 70:253-258.
Ottem KF, Nylund A, Karlsbakk E, Friis-Moller A, Krossoy B, Knappskog D:
New species in the genus Francisella (Gammaproteobacteria;
Francisellaceae); Francisella piscicida sp. nov. isolated from cod (Gadus
morhua). Arch Microbiol 2007, 188:547-550.
IJSEM: VALIDATION LIST N° 119, List of new names and new
combinations previously effectively, but not validly published. Int J Syst
Evol Microbiol 2008, 58:1-2.
Mikalsen J, Colquhoun DJ: Francisella asiatica sp. Nov. isolatated from
farmed tilapia (Oreochromis sp.) and elevation of Francisella philomiragia
subsp. noatunensis to species rank as Francisella noatunensis comb. nov.
sp. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol 2009.
Ottem KF, Nylund A, Karlsbakk E, Friis-Møller A, Kamaishi T: Elevation of
Francisella philomiragia subsp. noatunensis Mikalsen et al. (2007) to
Francisella noatunensis comb. nov. [syn. Francisella piscicida Ottem et al.
(2008) syn. nov.] and characterization of Francisella noatunensis subsp.
orientalis subsp. nov., two important fish pathogens. J Appl Microbiol
2009, 106:1231-1243.
Kay W, Petersen BO, Duus JO, Perry MB, Vinogradov E: Characterization of
the lipopolysaccharide and beta-glucan of the fish pathogen Francisella
victoria. FEBS J 2006, 273:3002-3013.
Petersen JM, Carlson J, Yockey B, Pillai S, Kuske C, Garbalena G,
Pottumarthy S, Chalcraft L: Direct isolation of Francisella spp. from
environmental samples. Lett Appl Microbiol 2009, 48:663-667.
Steinum T, Sjåstad K, Falk K, Kvellestad A, Colquhoun DJ: An RT PCR-DGGE
survey of gill-associated bacteria in Norwegian seawater reared Atlantic
salmon suffering proliferative gill inflammation. Aquaculture 2009, 293:3-4.
Schrallhammer M, Schweikert M, Vallesi A, Verni F, Petroni G: Detection of a
Novel Subspecies of Francisella noatunensis as Endosymbiont of the
Ciliate Euplotes raikovi. Microb Ecol 2011, 61:455-464.
Fryer JL, Lannan CN, Giavanonni SJ, Wood ND: Piscirickettsia salmonis gen.
nov. sp. nov. the causative agent of an epizootic disease in salmonid
fishes. Int J Syst Bacteriol 1992, 42:120-126.
Fryer JL, Hedrick RP: Piscirickettsia salmonis: a Gram-negative intracellular
bacterial pathogen of fish. J Fish Dis 2003, 26:251-262.
Yuksel SA, Thompson KD, Adams A: Rickettsial infections of fish. Turk J Fish
Aquat Sci 2006, 6:63-78.

Page 14 of 15

28. Mauel MJ, Ware C, Smith PA: Culture of Piscrickettsia salmonis on enriched
blood agar. J Vet Diag Invest 2008, 20:213-214.
29. Mikalsen J, Skjærvik O, Wiik-Nielsen J, Wasmuth M, Colquhoun DJ: Agar
culture of Piscirickettsia salmonis, a serious pathogen of farmed salmonid
and marine fish. FEMS Microbiol Lett 2009, 278:43-47.
30. Thomas MV, Faisal M: Piscirickettsia infection in the muskellunge population
of Lake St. Clair. Michigan Department of Natural Resources.; 2009 [http://
www.michigandnr.com/PUBLICATIONS/PDFS/ifr/ifrlibra/Research/reports/
2092/RR2092.pdf], Fisheries Research Report 2092, Ann Arbor.
31. Olsuf’ev NG: Tularemia. WHO travelling seminar on plague control World
Health Organisation, Geneva; 1970, 12.
32. Anda P, Segura del Pozo J, Diaz Garcia JM, Escudero R, Garcia Peña FJ,
Lopez-Velasco MC, Sellek RE, Jiménez Chillarón MR, Sánchez Serrano LP,
Martínez Navarro JF: Waterborne outbreak of tularemia associated with
crayfish fishing. Emerg Infect Dis 2001, 7:575-582.
33. Chern RS, Chao CB: Outbreaks of a disease caused by rickettsia-like
organism in cultured tilapias in Taiwan. Fish Pathol 1994, 29:61-71.
34. Soto E, Hawke JP, Fernandez D, Morales JA: Francisella sp., an emerging
pathogen of tilapia, Oreochromis niloticus (L.), in Costa Rica. J Fish Dis
2009, 32:713-722.
35. Mauel MJ, Miller DL, Frazier K, Liggett AD, Styer L, Montgomery-Brock D,
Brock J: Characterisation of a piscirickettsiosis-like disease in Hawaiian
tilapia. Dis Aquat Organ 2003, 53:249-255.
36. Jeffrey KR, Stone D, Feist SW, Verner-Jeffreys DW: An outbreak of disease
caused by Francisella sp. in Nile tilapia Oreochromis niloticus at a
recirculation fish farm in the UK. Dis Aquat Organ 2010, 91:161-165.
37. Ostland VE, Stannard JA, Creek JJ, Hedrick RP, Ferguson HW, Carlberg JM,
Westerman ME: Aquatic Francisella-like bacterium associated with
mortality of intensively cultured hybrid striped bass Morone chrysops x
M. saxatilis. Dis Aquat Organ 2006, 72:135-145.
38. Fukuda Y, Okamura A, Nishiyama M, Kawakami H, Kamaishi T, Yoshinga T:
Granulomatosis of cultured three-line grunt Parapristipoma trilineatum
caused by an intracellular bacterium. Fish Pathol 2002, 37:119-124.
39. Khoo L, Dennis PM, Lewbart GA: Rickettsia-like Organisms in the BlueEyed Plecostomus, Panaque Suttoni (Eigenmann and Eigenmann). J Fish
Dis 1995, 18:157-163.
40. Davies AJ: A Rickettsia-like organism from Dragonets, Callionymus lyra L.
(Teleostei: Callionymidae) in Wales. Bull Eur Assoc Fish Pathol 1986,
6:103-104.
41. Chen SC, Wang PC, Tung MC, Thompson KD, Adams A: A Piscirickettsia
salmonis-like organism in grouper, Epinephelus melanostigma, in Taiwan.
J Fish Dis 2000, 23:415-418.
42. Hsieh C, Wu ZB, Tung MC, Tsai SS: PCR and in situ hybridization for the
detection and localization of a new pathogen Francisella-like bacterium
(FLB) in ornamental cichlids. Dis Aquat Organ 2007, 75:29-36.
43. Bohle H, Tapia E, Martínez A, Rozas M, Figueroa A, Bustos P: Francisella
philomiragia, a bacteria associated with high mortalities in Atlantic
salmon (Salmo salar) cage-farmed in Llanquihue lake. Arch Med Vet 2009,
41:237-244.
44. Chinabut S: Mycobacteriosis and nocardiosis. New York: CAB International;
1999.
45. Chen SC, Lee JL, Lai CC, Gu YW, Wang CT, Chang HY, Tsai KH: Nocardiosis
in seabass Lateolabrax japonicus, in Taiwan. J Fish Dis 2001, 23:299-307.
46. McCarthy U, Steiropoulos NA, Thompson KD, Adams A, Ellis AE,
Ferguson HW: Confirmation of Piscirickettsia salmonis as a pathogen in
European sea bass Dicentrarchus labrax and phylogenetic comparison
with salmonid strains. Dis Aquat Organ 2005, 64:107-119.
47. Arkush KD, McBride AM, Mendonca HL, Okihiro MS, Andree KB, Marshall S,
Henriquez V, Hedrick RP: Genetic characterization and experimental
pathogenesis of Piscirickettsia salmonis isolated from white seabass
Atractoscion nobilis. Dis Aquat Organ 2005, 63:139-149.
48. Holm JA: Cod with francisellosis and/or atypical furunculosis. Norsk
fiskeoppdrett 2009, 3:68-70, (In Norwegian).
49. Hellberg H, Mikalsen J, Colquhoun D, Hansen H, Bornø G, Nilsen A: The
health situation in farmed marine fish. Report available from the Natl Vet
Inst, Norway; 2008.
50. Alfjorden A, Jansson E, Johansson KE: A systemic granulomatous
inflammatory disease in wild Atlantic cod, Gadus morhua associated
with a bacterium of the genus Francisella. Disease Interactions and
Pathogen exchange between farmed and wild aquatic animal populations - a
European network (DIPnet) 2006.

Colquhoun and Duodu Veterinary Research 2011, 42:47
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/47

51. Ottem KF, Nylund A, Isaksen TE, Karlsbakk E, Bergh O: Occurrence of
Francisella piscicida in farmed and wild Atlantic cod, Gadus morhua L., in
Norway. J Fish Dis 2008, 31:525-534.
52. Isaksen TE, Ottem KF, Karlsbakk E, Andersen L, Nylund A: Distribution of
Francisella infection in wild cod in Norway. Francisellosis in cod farming
status Report: A summary of research activity related to Francisella in
Norwegian cod aquaculture “Go for cod” report 2009, (in Norwegian).
53. Zerihun MA, Feist SW, Bucke D, Olsen AB, Tandstad NM, Colquhoun DJ:
Identification of Francisella noatunensis subsp. noatunensis as the
aetiological agent of “visceral granulomatosis” in Atlantic cod Gadus
morhua, sampled from the southern North sea during the 1980s. Dis
Aquat Organ .
54. Vojtech LN, Sanders GE, Conway C, Ostland V, Hansen JD: Host immune
response and acute disease in a zebrafish model of Francisella
pathogenesis. Infect Immun 2009, 77:914-925.
55. Soto E, Fernandez D, Hawke JP: Attenuation of the Fish Pathogen Francisella
sp. by Mutation of the iglC* Gene. J Aqua Anim Health 2009, 21:140-149.
56. Friis-Moller AL, Lemming E, Valerius NH, Bruun B: Problems in identification
of Francisella philomiragia associated with fatal bacteremia in a patient
with chronic granulomatous disease. J Clin Microbiol 2004, 42:1840-1842.
57. Hollis DG, Weaver RE, Steigerwalt AG, Wenger JD, Moss CW, Brenner DJ:
Francisella philomiragia comb. nov. (formerly Yersinia philomiragia) and
Francisella tularensis biogroup novicida (formerly Francisella novicida)
associated with human disease. J Clin Microbiol 1989, 27:601-1608.
58. Wenger JD, Hollis DG, Weaver RE, Baker CN, Brown G, Brenner DJ,
Broome CV: Infection caused by Francisella philomiragia (formerly
Yersinia philomiragia). A newly recognised human pathogen. Ann Intern
Med 1989, 100:888-892.
59. Mikalsen J, Olsen AB, Rudra H, Moldal T, Lund H, Djonne B, Bergh Ø,
Colquhoun DJ: Virulence and pathogenicity of Francisella philomiragia
subsp noatunensis for Atlantic cod, Gadus morhua L., and laboratory
mice. J Fish Dis 2009, 32:377-381.
60. Weinstein MR, Litt M, Kertesz DA, Wyper P, Rose D, Coulter M, McGeer A,
Facklam R, Ostach C, Willey BM, Borczyk A, Low DE: Invasive infections due
to a fish pathogen, Streptococcus iniae. N England J Med 1997,
337:589-594.
61. Jones RM, Nicas M, Hubbard A, Sylvester MD, Reingold A: The infectious
dose of Francisella tularensis (tularemia). Appl Biosafety 2005, 10:227-239.
62. Soto E, Fernandez D, Thune R, Hawke JP: Interaction of Francisella asiatica
with Tilapia nilotica (Oreochromis niloticus) innate immunity. Infect Immun
2010, 78:2070-2078.
63. Karlsbakk E, Isaksen T, Ottem KF, Nylund A, Korsnes K, Nerland AH, Patel S,
Bergh Ø: Pathogens in the Coastal zone. The coast and aquaculture.
Institute of marine research Norway; 2008, (in Norwegian).
64. Forsman M, Henningson EW, Larsson E, Johansson T, Sandstrom G:
Francisella tularensis does not manifest virulence in viable but nonculturable state. FEMS Microbiol Ecol 2000, 31:217-224.
65. Duodu S, Colquhoun D: Monitoring the survival of fish-pathogenic
Francisella in water microcosms. FEMS Microbiol Ecol 2010, 74:534-541.
66. Abd H, Johansson T, Golovliov I, Sandstrom G, Forsman M: Survival and
growth of Francisella tularensis in Acanthamoeba castellanii. Appl Environ
Microbiol 2003, 69:600-606.
67. Petersen JM, Schriefer ME, Gage KL, Montenieri JA, Carter LG, Stanley MMC,
Chu MC: Methods for enhanced culture recovery of Francisella tularensis.
Appl Environ Microbiol 2004, 70:3733-3735.
68. Soto E, Bowles D, Fernandez D, Haw ke JP: Development of a real-time
PCR assay for identification and quantification of the fish pathogen
Francisella noatunensis subsp. orientalis. Dis Aquat Organ 2010, 89:199-207.
69. Caipang CMA, Kulkarni A, Brinchmann MF, Korsnes K, Kiron K: Detection of
Francisella piscicida in Atlantic cod (Gadus morhua L) by the loopmediated isothermal amplification (LAMP) reaction. Vet J 2010,
184:357-336.
70. Splettstoesser WD, Seibold E, Zeman E, Trebesius K, Podbielski A: Rapid
differentiation of Francisella species and subspecies by fluorescent in
situ hybridization targeting the 23S rRNA. BMC Microbiol 2010, 10:72.
71. Pechous RD, McCarthy TR, Zahrt TC: Working toward the future: Insights
into Francisella tularensis pathogenesis and vaccine development.
Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 2009, 73:684-711.
72. Schrøder MB, Ellingsen T, Mikkelsen H, Norderhus EA, Lund V: Comparison
of antibody responses in Atlantic cod (Gadus morhua L.) to Vibrio

Page 15 of 15

anguillarum, Aeromonas salmonicida and Francisella sp. Fish Shellfish
Immunol 2009, 27:112-119.
73. Wilhelm V, Miquel A, Burzio LO, Rosemblatt M, Valenzuela S, Parada G,
Valanzuela PD: A vaccine against the salmonid pathogen Piscirickettsia
salmonis based on recombinant proteins. Vaccine 2006, 24:5083-5091.
74. Oyston PC, Griffiths R: Francisella virulence: significant advances, ongoing
challenges and unmet needs. Expert Rev Vaccines 2009, 8:1575-1585.
75. Rohmer L, Brittnacher M, Svensson K, Buckley D, Haugen E, Zhou Y,
Chang J, Levy R, Hayden H, Forsman M, Olsen M, Johansson A, Kaul R,
Miller SI: Potential source of Francisella tularensis live vaccine strain
attenuation determined by genome comparison. Infect Immun 2006,
74:6895-6906.
doi:10.1186/1297-9716-42-47
Cite this article as: Colquhoun and Duodu: Francisella infections in
farmed and wild aquatic organisms. Veterinary Research 2011 42:47.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
