<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Cyto-, myelo- and chemoarchitecture of the prefrontal cortex of the Cebus monkey</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Neuroscience 2011, 12:6. doi:10.1186/1471-2202-12-6"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Roelf J Cruz-Rizzolo"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Cruz-Rizzolo et al. BMC Neuroscience 2011, 12:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/12/6

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Cyto-, myelo- and chemoarchitecture of the
prefrontal cortex of the Cebus monkey
Roelf J Cruz-Rizzolo*, Miguel AX De Lima, Edilson Ervolino, José A de Oliveira, Claudio A Casatti

Abstract
Background: According to several lines of evidence, the great expansion observed in the primate prefrontal cortex
(PfC) was accompanied by the emergence of new cortical areas during phylogenetic development. As a
consequence, the structural heterogeneity noted in this region of the primate frontal lobe has been associated
with diverse behavioral and cognitive functions described in human and non-human primates. A substantial part of
this evidence was obtained using Old World monkeys as experimental model; while the PfC of New World
monkeys has been poorly studied.
In this study, the architecture of the PfC in five capuchin monkeys (Cebus apella) was analyzed based on four
different architectonic tools, Nissl and myelin staining, histochemistry using the lectin Wisteria floribunda agglutinin
and immunohistochemistry using SMI-32 antibody.
Results: Twenty-two architectonic areas in the Cebus PfC were distinguished: areas 8v, 8d, 9d, 12l, 45, 46v, 46d,
46vr and 46dr in the lateral PfC; areas 11l, 11m, 12o, 13l, 13m, 13i, 14r and 14c in the orbitofrontal cortex, with
areas 14r and 14c occupying the ventromedial corner; areas 32r, 32c, 25 and 9m in the medial PfC, and area 10 in
the frontal pole. This number is significantly higher than the four cytoarchitectonic areas previously recognized in
the same species. However, the number and distribution of these areas in Cebus were to a large extent similar to
those described in Old World monkeys PfC in more recent studies.
Conclusions: The present parcellation of the Cebus PfC considerably modifies the scheme initially proposed for this
species but is in line with previous studies on Old World monkeys. Thus, it was observed that the remarkable
anatomical similarity between the brains of genera Macaca and Cebus may extend to architectonic aspects. Since
monkeys of both genera evolved independently over a long period of time facing different environmental
pressures, the similarities in the architectonic maps of PfC in both genera are issues of interest. However, additional
data about the connectivity and function of the Cebus PfC are necessary to evaluate the possibility of potential
homologies or parallelisms.

Background
Several studies carried out in different contexts and
based on different theoretical premises indicate that the
great expansion observed in the primate prefrontal cortex (PfC) was accompanied by the emergence of new
cortical areas during phylogenetic development [1-5]. As
a consequence of this process, this region of the primate
frontal lobe was converted into a structurally and functionally heterogeneous area. The primate PfC can be
initially divided into lateral, medial and orbital surfaces
and further subdivided into areas with distinct
* Correspondence: roelf@foa.unesp.br
1
Campus de Araçatuba, UNESP - Univ Estadual Paulista, Departamento de
Ciências Básicas, São Paulo, Brazil

architectonic and connectional characteristics. This heterogeneity may explain the variety of behavioral alterations and the diversity and specificity of cognitive
deficits observed in human and non-human primates
after lesions or reversible suppression of restricted areas
of the PfC [6-18].
Architectonic studies of primate PfC confirm this heterogeneity. In Old World monkeys, Brodmann [1]
divided the PfC into six different areas. Subsequently,
Vogt and Vogt [19] differentiated nine areas in the Cercopithecus dorsolateral PfC (DlPfC). In 1940, Walker [20]
carried out a specific study on the rhesus PfC (Macaca
mulatta), in an attempt to adapt his observations to the
patterns noted by Brodmann [21] in the human brain.

© 2011 Cruz-Rizzolo et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Cruz-Rizzolo et al. BMC Neuroscience 2011, 12:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/12/6

Page 2 of 26

Figure 1 Architectonic maps of monkey PfC, taken from four different studies. A, the widely cited cytoarchitectonic map of Macaca PfC by
Walker (1940). In B and C maps from more recent studies of Macaca PfC by Carmichael and Price (1994) and Preuss and Goldman-Rakic (1991),
respectively. D, from von Bonin (1938). In this parcellation the Cebus PfC was subdivided into three areas, FGP, frontalis granularis posterior; FGA,
frontalis granularis anterior; FO, frontal orbital area and limbic anterior area, LA, in medial surface.

Walker [20] defined nine cytoarchitectonic areas in the
rhesus PfC (Figure 1A) which would be comparable to
areas of similar nomenclature in the human brain. This
cytoarchitectonic division proposed by Walker is the
most universally accepted. However, subsequent studies

carried out in different contexts and using connectional,
cyto-, myelo- and chemoarchitectonic techniques
(Figure 1B,C) have modified this initial parcellation of
the monkey PfC either by the subdivision of pre-existing
areas or by the modification of their limits [5,22-29].

Cruz-Rizzolo et al. BMC Neuroscience 2011, 12:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/12/6

All of these studies were carried out in Old World
monkeys, whereas the PfC of New World monkeys has
been poorly studied. The evolutionary history of this
group of primates is still unclear and subject to disagreement [30] but it is accepted that they have evolved independently from Old World monkeys over a period of
35 million years. The effect of this parallel evolution on
the organization of phylogenetically recent cortical areas
such as those of the PfC still needs to be elucidated.
The capuchin monkey (Cebus apella) was chosen for
this study due to its similarity with the most intensively
studied Macaca monkey. Cebus exhibits brain and body
sizes comparable with those of several species of macaque monkeys, reducing possible allometric differences.
In addition, the pattern of cortical fissuration is virtually
identical in Cebus and Macaca, facilitating anatomical
comparison. Unlike other New World monkeys commonly used in brain research, such as squirrel monkeys
and marmosets, the Cebus PfC is the only one that consistently exhibits a well-defined arcuate sulcus in the
frontal lobe separated from and arching around the caudal end of the principal sulcus (prs; Figure 2), an anatomical configuration that some authors consider as one
criterion that distinguishes cercopithecoids from ceboids
[31]. Although this anatomical similarity raises the possibility of potential homologies or parallelisms, the
remarkable lack of more consistent data about the architecture, connectivity and function of the Cebus PfC prevents any progress in this issue.
The only study on the architecture of the Cebus PfC,
carried out in the context of an overall analysis of the
entire cerebral cortex, distinguished it in four different
areas (Figure 1D). The Cebus PfC parcellation proposed

Page 3 of 26

by von Bonin [32] differs considerably from the macaque parcellation proposed by Walker [20] (Figure 1A), a
fact that may indicate great architectonic differences in
the PfC of these two species.
In view of the limitation of von Bonin’s study, such as
the use of a single animal and only Nissl staining, a
more comprehensive architectonic study of the Cebus
PfC is necessary to evaluate possible architectonic similarities and differences between Cebus and Macaca. In
the present study, we used the traditional Nissl and
myelin staining methods besides histochemistry to lectin
Wisteria floribunda agglutinin and immunohistochemistry to SMI-32 antibody, two architectonic tools widely
employed in the demarcation of cortical and subcortical
morphofunctional areas of several species.

Results
In this study, twenty-two areas were differentiated in the
Cebus PfC (Figures 3; 4). Considering the cortical similarity observed between Macaca and Cebus, each area
was designated by the same numeric terminology
adopted in previous studies carried out in Old World
monkeys, which follow the architectonic scheme used
by Walker [20] (Figure 1B). This terminology was
adopted not to establish homologies but rather to permit a rapid topographic comparison due to the widespread acceptance of the division proposed by Walker
for the primate PfC.
External morphology of the PfC in Cebus monkeys

The pattern of cortical fissuration of the Cebus brain
has been addressed by several authors emphasizing its
great similarity with the macaque brain [33,34]. The

Figure 2 Surface view of the lateral, medial and orbital prefrontal cortex of Cebus apella, showing the anatomical division adopted in
this study. Dotted lines define approximate borders between gyris and solid lines indicate the sulci.

Cruz-Rizzolo et al. BMC Neuroscience 2011, 12:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/12/6

Page 4 of 26

Figure 3 Surface view of the lateral, medial and orbital prefrontal cortex of Cebus apella, with the architectonic parcellation based on
results of the present study. Dotted lines define approximate architectonic borders; solid lines indicate fundus of sulci, and dashed lines
define lip or angulus of sulcus. In orbital view, temporal pole has been cut off to expose posterior orbital surface.

external anatomical aspect of the Cebus PfC is illustrated in Figure 2.
Following the criteria adopted in previous studies
carried out in monkeys, the Cebus PfC was divided
into three regions: lateral, medial (MPfC) and orbital
(orbitofrontal cortex, OfC). The lateral region extends
from the frontal pole to the arcuate sulcus, including
the dorsolateral PfC and part of the ventrolateral convexity. Although in the initial description of von Bonin
[32] the caudal limit of “area frontalis granularis” of
Cebus extends caudally in relation to the arcuate sulcus (Figure 1D), it was observed that this sulcus established a limit between the agranular-dysgranular cortex
of the precentral gyrus (PrG) and the granular cortex
of the prefrontal area.
The MPfC occupies the medial surface of the PfC
from the frontal pole to the anterior extremity of the
cingulate sulcus (cgs). However, since architectonic studies of PfC in macaques include the precallosal extension of the anterior cingulate gyrus (ACgG), this area
was also included in the present study. Finally, the OfC
occupies the ventral surface of the PfC extending from
the frontal pole rostrally to the anterior perforated
substance.
Overview of staining patterns
Nissl

The cytoarchitecture of the Cebus PfC (and the frontal
lobe as a whole) revealed a granular - dysgranular agranular rostrocaudal gradation. An example of this

transition could be observed in the superior frontal
gyrus (SFG), occupied by areas 10 and 9d. Caudally,
layer IV gradually narrowed, disappearing in the precentral gyrus (PrG). This type of cortex, bordering the agranular cortex, characterized by a rudimentary layer IV
with no clear laminar demarcation is designated dysgranular, and represents a transition between the granular
and agranular isocortex. In the lateral surface of the
PfC, areas 10, 12l, 46v, 46d, 46vr, 46dr, 8v, 8d, and 45
had granular characteristics, with well developed layers
II and IV, clearly demarcated from adjacent laminae.
Although a few subtle cytoarchitectonic differences had
been observed in these areas, the border between them
was not always noted using this staining method. A
similar transition was observed in the medial and orbital
surfaces of the Cebus PfC (Figure 5A,B).
WFA

The plant lectin Wisteria floribunda agglutinin (WFA)
labels N-acetylgalactosamine residues of the extracellular
matrix. Areas with intense WFA staining differed from
faintly stained areas by the density and intensity of perineuronal nets (PNs) and by the different intensity of the
neuropil. The cortical labeling was arranged in bands
that could occupy one or more layers. Generally, infragranular layers showed the densest staining in each area,
with the labeling occasionally reaching the white matter.
In some areas, layers II and III were also labelled,
although less intensely than infragranular layers. Nets
were observed surrounding the soma and proximal segment of the axon and dendrites of non-pyramidal and

Cruz-Rizzolo et al. BMC Neuroscience 2011, 12:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/12/6

Page 5 of 26

Figure 4 Coronal sections showing areal borders. Drawings of coronal sections through five different rostrocaudal levels of Cebus left
hemisphere, showing areal borders.

some pyramidal neurons mostly distributed in layers V
and VI (Figure 5E,F). An overall rostral to caudal labeling gradient was observed, with the agranular and dysgranular regions of the caudal PfC showing the densest
WFA labeling.

SMI-32

SMI-32 exhibited a heterogeneous labeling pattern
across the Cebus PfC. Two bands with varying levels of
SMI-32 immunoreactivity were usually observed over
layers III and V. These bands which were designated

Cruz-Rizzolo et al. BMC Neuroscience 2011, 12:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/12/6

Page 6 of 26

Figure 5 High magnification photomicrographs showing cellular details of techniques used in this study. In A and B, photomicrographs
taken from layer V of Nissl stained sections. Small, medium, and large-sized pyramidal neurons can be observed. In C and D, cell bodies and
dendrites of pyramidal cells showing SMI-32 immunoreactivity in cortical layers III (C) and V (D). Note intense staining in cell bodies, apical
(arrows) and basal (arrowheads) dendrites. In E perineuronal nets (PNs) stained with WFA ensheath layer III non-pyramidal neurons in area 45,
and in F PNs surrounding layer V pyramidal neurons in area 32. In all cell types, staining intensity decreases from perikaryon to distal portions of
dendrites. In G, myelin staining of area 9m. Note thick vertical fascicles and outer band of Baillarger (asterisk). Calibration bar in F applies to all
figures except G

Cruz-Rizzolo et al. BMC Neuroscience 2011, 12:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/12/6

Page 7 of 26

Nissl The frontopolar region had a well developed layer II.
Layer III contained small-sized cells with weak stain,
except in IIIc, where they were more stained and larger.
Layer IV was well developed. Cells in Va were more densely packed than in IIIc, and Vb almost blended with layer
VI where small-sized neurons predominated (Figure 6E).
WFA This area was not sharply demarcated in relation to
the adjoining caudal areas using this technique (Figure 6G).
It exhibited a weaker WFA staining pattern than that
observed in area 9. Supragranular layers exhibited discrete
pale nets, and the neuropil was weakly stained. The labeling
was somewhat more intense in layers V-VI.
SMI-32 The supragranular band consisted of weak neuropil labeling, profiles of apical dendrites and soma of
sparsely distributed pyramidal neurons. The neuropil in
the infragranular band was more densely labeled, exhibiting few immunoreactive neurons in layer Va (Figure 6H).
Myelin The frontal pole revealed poor to moderate
myelination, basically concentrated in infragranular
layers, where thin vertical fibers extended from the
white matter (Figure 6F). The SFG had moderate myelination, becoming more intense caudalwards.

Nissl In this area, layer II was not well developed. Layer
IIIa contained small-sized cells, sparsely scattered with
weak to moderate stain. Layers IIIb and IIIc had small
and medium-sized cells, respectively. Cells of IIIc were
slightly more stained and separated from layer Va by a
poorly developed layer IV. Layer Va exhibited well pigmented medium-sized cells and layers Vb and VI had
small-sized cells and no clear limits (Figure 7A,I). Radial
striations were observed in the infragranular layers
reaching layer III. This architectonic pattern can also be
observed in 9 m (Figure 6A).
WFA In 9d, the most intensely stained band coincided
with layer VI, reaching the white matter (Figure 7C,K).
This band exhibited numerous nets surrounding nonpyramidal and a few pyramidal neurons, besides the neuropil being densely stained, decreasing in layer V. Layer
V showed nets involving small- and medium-sized cells
and the staining could also be observed surrounding vertical fibers that occasionally reached layer III. In IIIc the
neuropil is faintly stained, but some nets could still be
observed. In the medial extension of this area (9m), the
staining intensity in layer VI increased although the labeling in supragranular layers was weaker. In addition, the
labeling of vertical fibers was denser than that observed
in the dorsal surface (Figure 6C).
SMI-32 Caudally, area 9d exhibited denser immunoreactivity than area 10. The bilaminar pattern was less
evident; and there was an intense labeling of neuropil
and processes. Several small- to medium-sized dense
immunoreactive pyramidal neurons were observed in
layers IIIc, IIIb and IV. In the infragranular layers, the
number of immunoreactive neurons was small and
the labeling was restricted mainly to neuropil and
fragments of apical dendrites (Figure 7D,L). The
labeling of 9m was similar to 9d, although less intense
(Figures 6D; 8C).
Myelin In 9d, infragranular layers were heavily myelinated, with prominent vertically oriented fiber bundles
extending from the white matter to layer III. The obB
was easily discernible and supragranular layers exhibited
a sparse plexus of fine myelinated fibers (Figure 7B,J).
The medial extension of the SFG (area 9m) showed
similar staining pattern, but supragranular layers
were more myelinated and obB more evident than in 9d
(Figures 6B; 8B).

Area 9

Periprincipalis areas (46d, 46dr, 46vr and 46v)

This area occupied part of the lateral (area 9d) and
medial (area 9m) surfaces of the superior frontal gyrus
(SFG). On the DlPfC, 9d ventrally reached the border
between the SFG and the medial frontal gyrus (MFG);
and on the medial surface area 9m extended up to the
cingulate sulcus (Figures 3; 4). It was limited caudally by
the cortex of the PrG but this transition could not be
sharply demarcated.

Following the nomenclature adopted by Walker [20], the
periprincipalis region was designated area 46. However,
in the present study this region was subdivided into four
different architectonic sectors: 46d and 46v in the dorsal
and ventral walls of the prs respectively, and areas 46dr
and 46vr in the dorsal and ventral crowns.
Nissl In the banks of prs, area 46d exhibited a well
developed and densely packed layer II, showing clear

supra and infragranular bands showed immunoreactivity
present in small to large pyramidal neurons, including
their proximal processes and fragments of apical dendrites (Figure 5C,D).
In the brain sections examined in this study, the greatest density of SMI-32 positive neuronal soma was noted
in supragranular layers, mainly in layer IIIc, and some in
layer IV. Comparatively, few immunoreactive neuronal
soma were observed in infragranular layers. In addition,
a variable level of neuropil immunoreactivity both in the
supra- and infragranular bands was observed.
Myelin

The black-gold staining pattern distinguished densely
myelinated areas in the lateral PfC from less stained
areas in the medial and orbital surfaces. In addition to
this basic characteristic, in some areas the visualization
of vertical fascicles or the inner and outer bands of Baillarger, (ibB and obB) allowed to establish areal boundaries (Figure 5G).
Architectonic parcellation
Lateral PfC (Table 1,)
Area 10

Cruz-Rizzolo et al. BMC Neuroscience 2011, 12:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/12/6

Page 8 of 26

Table 1 Architectonic characteristics of the lateral PfC
Nissl

WFA

SMI-32

10

Well developed granular layers.
Small-sized cells in layer III and
more densely packed cells in Va.
Vb almost blended with layer VI
where small-sized neurons
predominated.

Very lightly stained. Labeling
concentrates in V-VI.

Moderate immunostaining. SG
Poor to moderate myelination,
band with weak neuropil labeling, with thin vertical fibers in IG
some fragments of apical
layers.
dendrites and somas sparsely
distributed. Neuropil in IG band is
more densely stained and a few
somas in Va.

Myelin

9d

Cells in IIIc more stained and
separated from layer Va by a
poorly developed layer IV. Layers
Vb and VI have small-sized cells
and no clear limits. Vertical
striations in V and IIIc.

Intensely stained band in VI and a Intensely stained. Many cells and
fainter band in Va with some
processes deeply stained in SG
vertical fibers. A few nets in IIIc
band and a few in IG band.

Moderate to intense myelination.
IG layers with vertical fibers.
Evident oBb. Sparse fine fibers
plexus in SG layers

46dr Granular. Cells are more densely
packed in layer V than in III.
Cellular density in layers II and IV
decreases dorsally.

Moderately stained. A few small
nets with poorly stained neuropil
in SG layers. Staining in IG layers
similar to 9d, but less intense.

Moderately stained. Clear-cut
boundaries with 9d. Bilaminar
aspect. Small- to medium-sized
pyramidal neurons intensely
stained in IIIc, and very few in V.

Lighter myelination than 9d. oBb
is narrower and less stained, and
vertical fibers are more sparse
and thinner.

46d

Granular. Well developed and
densely packed layer II. Mediumsized cells intensely stained in Va.
SG layers more prominent than IG
layers.

Very lightly stained. Faintly stained
band of neuropil with some dark
nets in IG layers. Very few nets in
III and IV.

Lightly stained. Clear limits with
46dr. Very weak neuropil staining
and a few clusters of cellular
bodies in III. Neuropil and
dendrite fragments in IG band

Moderate myelination. Faint iBe
and sparse thin vertical fibers in
IG layers. Sparse plexus and
horizontal fibers in SG layers.

46v

Similar to 46d. No limits between
layers V and VI.

Similar to 46d, but weaker.

Weaker than in 46d. almost no
immunoreactive somas can be
observed

Similar to 46d

46vr Granular. Layer IV more developed
and densely packed than in 46v.
Clear lamination in III. SG and IG
layers equally prominent. Radial
striations in V.

Moderately stained. Good neuropil
labeling in Vb, with high
concentration of nets. Labeling
weaker in VI. SG layers poorly
stained, with some sparse nets.

Moderately stained. Clear-cut
Moderate myelination. IG layers
boundaries with 46v.
more heavily myelinated than
Immunoreactive cells in IIIb-IIIc. IG 46v, with well-stained vertical
band with diffuse neuropil,
fibers. oBb less evident. SG layers
neuronal processes and a few
poorly myelinated.
stained cells.

12l

Granular. Layer IV narrower than
in 46vr, and lamination in III less
evident. No obvious
predominance between SG and
IG layers. Caudally, darkly-stained
cells in IIIc and Va.

Intensely stained. Denser band in
VI, with neuropil and many nets
reaching layer VI. Paler band in IVIII with nets and poorly stained
neuropil.

Intensely stained. Many stained
Moderate to intense myelination.
neurons in V-VI, but a higher
Evident oBb and heavy staining
number in the SG band. Bilaminar in IG layers.
pattern.

8d

Granular. In IIIc and Va cells are of
medium size and darkly stained.
Layers Vb and VI have cells of
small size and are less stained.

Lightly stained, with a band of
neuropil in IV and a few
moderately stained nets in IV and
III.

Moderately stained, with medium Distinct oBb and thin vertical
to small stained cells in IIIc, and in fibers. SG layers poorly
a lesser degree in IV, IIIa and V.
myelinated.

8v

Similar to 8d, but cells in layer IV
more densely packed.

Similar to 8d, but with darker
neuropil staining in IV.

Similar to 8d but with a denser
staining of neuropil.

Similar to 8d

45

Granular. Large-sized and darkly
stained pyramidal cells In IIIc and
Va.

Moderately stained. Band with
dense nets in IV, reaching III and
Va. Moderately stained neuropil in
VI. Faint band in Vb.

Moderately stained. Bilaminar
aspect. Cell body fragments and
intense neuropil in SG band. Pale
neuropil in IV. Moderate labeling
(neuropil and fragments) in
IG band.

Moderate myelination (heavy
myelination in IG layers). SG
layers poorly myelinated.

limits with layer III. Layer IIIa had small-sized neurons,
moderately stained. Neurons in IIIc layer were small- to
medium-sized and intensely stained. Layer IV was well
developed and in Va neurons were intensely stained.
The limit between layers Vb and VI was not clear,
because both had medium-sized cells and moderate pigmentation (Figure 9A,G). In 46v, the architectonic characteristics were similar, but pyramidal neurons in layer

III were less densely packed than in 46d. In these areas
(46d and 46v) supragranular layers (II and III) were
more developed than infragranular layers (Figures 9A;
10A).
In the dorsal crown of prs, area 46dr exhibited transitional characteristics between areas 46d and 9d. The
most distinctive aspect was the density decrease in
layers II and IV dorsalwards. Va exhibited medium-sized

Cruz-Rizzolo et al. BMC Neuroscience 2011, 12:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/12/6

Page 9 of 26

Figure 6 Semi-adjacent sections showing laminar organization and staining pattern of areas 9 m and 10. In A and E, Nissl; B and F,
myelin-staining; C and G, WFA labeling; and D and H, SMI-32 immunostaining. Roman numerals in Nissl stained sections indicate cortical layers.
Calibration bar in A applies to all figures.

cells slightly more stained than in IIIc. Layers Vb and VI
had pale stained small-sized cells, with no clear definition between both layers (Figure 9A,D).
In the ventral crown of prs, area 46vr exhibited similar
characteristics to 46v but with layer IV somewhat more

developed, showing densely packed cells. Layer III presented clear lamination and the supra- and infragranular
compartments were equally prominent. Radial striations
could be noted in the infragranular layers, mainly in
layer V (Figures 9A; 10E).

Cruz-Rizzolo et al. BMC Neuroscience 2011, 12:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/12/6

Page 10 of 26

Figure 7 Architectonic transition in SFG of Cebus monkey. On the left column, low-power photomicrograph of semi-adjacent coronal
sections comparing Nissl (A), myelin staining (B), WFA-labeling (C) and SMI-32 immunostaining (D), showing transition (arrowhead) between
areas 9d-8d in DlPfC. Boxes on photomicrographs indicate the location of higher magnication views of these areas (E to L). Schematic drawing
of Cebus brain in upper right side of picture shows level and location of sections A, B, C and D.

WFA The staining in 46dr was weaker than in area 9d.
Discrete nets surrounding small cells with the neuropil
weakly stained were observed in supragranular layers.
Deep layers had a staining pattern similar to 9d, but somewhat less intense. In the caudal half of the prs, the labeling

was more intense, but rostrally it was weak, with no clear
demarcation with the adjacent area 10.
The walls of the prs exhibited lower levels of WFA
reactivity. In the dorsal bank (46d), a small number of
nets involved non-pyramidal neurons in layers III and

Cruz-Rizzolo et al. BMC Neuroscience 2011, 12:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/12/6

Page 11 of 26

Figure 8 Architectonic parcellation of medial PfC cortex in Cebus monkeys. A, B and C shown low-power photomicrograph of semiadjacent coronal sections comparing WFA-labeling (A), myelin-staining (B) and SMI-32 immunostaining (C), indicating approximate boundaries
between architectonic areas in medial PfC (arrowheads). D, E, F and G shown high-power photomicrographs of area 32c stained by Nissl, myelin,
WFA and SMI-32 methods. Schematic drawing of Cebus brain in upper left side of picture shows level and location of sections A, B and C.

IV, and a faintly stained band of neuropil with some
darkly stained nets were present in deeper layers. In the
ventral bank (46v) the WFA staining was still weaker
(Figure 10C).
WFA staining increased in the ventral crown of the
prs (46vr; Figure 10G). The most intensely stained band

coincided with layer V, with moderately labeled neuropil
and a high concentration of nets mainly encircling nonpyramidal neurons. In layer VI the labeling was a bit
weaker. Superficial layers had poorly stained neuropil,
with nets surrounding small and medium-sized nonpyramidal cells.

Cruz-Rizzolo et al. BMC Neuroscience 2011, 12:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/12/6

Page 12 of 26

Figure 9 Architectonic parcellation of periprincipalis region in Cebus monkeys. On left column, low-power photomicrograph of semiadjacent coronal sections comparing Nissl (A), myelin-staining (B) and SMI-32 immunostaining (C), showing approximate boundaries between
architectonic areas (dashed lines) in dorsolateral PfC. Boxes on photomicrographs indicate location of high-power photomicrographs of areas
46dr and 46d shown on right. Schematic drawing of Cebus brain in upper right side of picture shows level and location of A, B and C sections.

SMI-32 Dorsally, the immunoreactivity in area 46dr pattern was less intense and showed clear-cut limits with
area 9d (Figure 9C,F). Small- to medium-sized dense
immunoreactive pyramidal neurons were observed in
the supragranular band, especially in layer IIIc and

sparsely in layer V. The lips of the principal sulcus were
slightly immunoreactive, clearly distinguishing this
region (areas 46d and 46v) from neighboring areas 46dr
and 46vr (Figure 9C). In the upper lip (area 46d), immunoreactive neuronal structures were discrete in relation

Cruz-Rizzolo et al. BMC Neuroscience 2011, 12:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/12/6

Page 13 of 26

Figure 10 Semi-adjacent sections showing laminar organization and staining pattern of areas 46v and 46vr. In A and E, Nissl; B and F,
myelin-staining; C and G, WFA labeling; and D and H, SMI-32 immunostaining. Roman numerals in Nissl stained sections indicate cortical layers.
Calibration bar in A applies to all figures.

to area 46dr, occupying only layer III and forming occasional clusters (Figure 9I). The infragranular band contained only neuropil and apical dendrite profiles.
Immunoreactivity was less pronounced in area 46v than
in area 46d, exhibiting discrete soma immunoreactivity
(Figures 9C,I; 10D).

Area 46vr showed a significant increase in the SMI-32
immunoreactivity, permitting a clear distinction with area
46v (Figure 9C). Layers IIIb-IIIc had many small- to medium-sized pyramidal neurons. The infragranular band consisted essentially of neuropil, neuronal processes and some
pyramidal cells.

Cruz-Rizzolo et al. BMC Neuroscience 2011, 12:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/12/6

Myelin Area 46dr exhibited lighter myelination than 9d.
The obB was narrower and less stained, and vertical
fibers were more sparse and thinner (Figure 9B,E). Myelination increased in area 46d. The supragranular layers
displayed delicate oBe, constituted by thin horizontal
fibers. These characteristics were also observed in 46v,
but here the supragranular layers showed lower levels of
myelin staining (Figures 9B,H; 10B).
In 46vr, infragranular layers were more heavily myelinated than in area 46v with evident vertical fiber fascicles,
however the obB was not clearly discernible. The supragranular layers were poorly myelinated (Figures 9B; 10F).
Area 12

This area occupied part of the ventrolateral convexity of
the lateral PfC (area 12l), reaching the orbital surface of
the fronto-orbital gyrus (FOG; area 12o).
Nissl In the ventrolateral convexity, layer IV seemed
narrower in 12l than in 46vr, and the lamination in
layer III was less evident. There was no obvious predominance between supra- and infragranular layers. Caudally, some darkly stained cells could be distinguished
in layers IIIc and Va, similar to the adjoining area 45
(Figure 11A). In 12o, layer IV was narrower than in 12l
and cells in IIIc were somewhat larger and more stained.
Supragranular layers were more prominent than the
infragranular ones.
WFA The cortex in area 12 was more intensely stained
than the adjacent cortical areas 45 and 46vr. In 12l, the
most intensely labeled band coincided with layer V,
reaching layer VI. The neuropil was intensely labeled
and a high concentration of nets could be observed (Figure 11C). Layers III and IV exhibited a band of WFA
staining with nets surrounding medium-sized neurons
and weakly stained neuropil. On the orbital surface, the
staining pattern of 12o was similar, but the labelling of
layers III-IV was discrete. Caudally, the emergence of
the precentral opercular cortex (PrCO) in the ventral
PrG caused a variation in the WFA staining. WFA labeling was more intense than that observed in area 12,
concentrating on layers V-VI and reaching the white
matter.
SMI-32 Ventrally, the labeling pattern in area 12l was
denser than in area 46vr, increasing the number of
immunoreactive neurons in the supra and infragranular
bands (Figure 11D). Area 12o had immunoreactive
characteristics similar to 12l but somewhat less intense.
The bilamination was clear, with numerous pyramidal
neurons both in the supragranular and infragranular
bands, although with the greatest number in layer III
(Figure 12A).
Myelin Area 12l exhibited stronger myelination than
area 46vr, with evident obB and heavy staining in the
infragranular layers (Figure 11B). Area 12o showed similar staining pattern but somewhat less intense than 12l.

Page 14 of 26

Prearcuate areas (45, 8d and 8v)

Technical artifacts due to sulcus presence and plane-ofsection problems impaired a clear analysis of the prearcuate region, near the caudal end of the prs. Area 45
occupied the anterior bank of the inferior arm of the
arcuate sulcus, extending anteriorly to the caudal third
of the inferior frontal gyrus (IFG; Figures 3; 4). Dorsally,
still in the anterior bank of the arcuate sulcus areas 8d
and 8v were distinguished.
Nissl area 45 exhibited granular layers II and IV very
well developed and clear limit between layers II and III.
In IIIc, large-sized and darkly-stained pyramidal cells
gave this area a peculiar characteristic. These large and
well-stained cells were also observed in Va. Vb and VI
showed small-sized cells.
In 8v granular layers II and IV were well developed. In
IIIa and IIIb cells were small, sparsely packed and with
low staining. In contrast to area 45, IIIc and Va displayed
medium-sized cells, somewhat more stained in Va. Layers
Vb and VI had poorly stained small-sized cells. The
cytoarchitectonic pattern in 8d was similar, but cells in
layer IV were somewhat more sparsely distributed. Radial
striations were observed both in 8d and 8v (Figure 7A,E).
WFA Area 45 demonstrated a large number of strongly
stained nets and moderately stained neuropil in layer
IV, reaching layers III and Va, besides a less stained
band in layer VI. Between these two bands there were a
few nets and the neuropil was discretely stained. Dorsally, the labeling in 8d was weaker than that observed
in area 45, with only one band of neuropil being visible
in layer V and a few nets moderately stained in layers V
and III (Figure 7G). In 8v, the neuropil in layer IV was
somewhat more intense than in 8d.
SMI-32 Area 45 had moderate labeling level. The supragranular band contained soma profiles surrounded by
intense neuropil. There was also an increase of neuropil
labeling in layer IV, but the bilaminar aspect remained.
The infragranular band exhibited a moderate neuropil
labeling and scarce dendritic profiles. Dorsally, area 8d
had a moderate level of immunoreactivity, with medium- to small-sized pyramidal cells in layer IIIc, and in
a lesser degree in layers IV, IIIa and V (Figure 7H). Ventrally, in 8V the labeling was similar, but with a somewhat denser neuropil.
Myelin Myelination increased ventrally in the anterior
bank of the as. Area 8 was not clearly subdivided and
exhibited well myelinated obB with thin vertical fibers
extending from the white matter (Figure 7F). Superficial
layers were poorly myelinated with a fine fiber plexus.
Area 45 revealed a heavy myelination pattern in deep
cortical layers although without clear organization of
vertical fibers. Superficial layers were moderately myelinated in this area, with a fine plexus of sparsely distributed fibers.

Cruz-Rizzolo et al. BMC Neuroscience 2011, 12:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/12/6

Page 15 of 26

Figure 11 Semi-adjacent sections showing laminar organization and staining pattern of areas 12l and 14r. In A and E, Nissl; B and F,
myelin-staining; C and G, WFA labeling; and D and H, SMI-32 immunostaining. Roman numerals in Nissl stained sections indicate cortical layers.
Calibration bar in A applies to all figures.

OfC and gyrus rectus (Table 2)
Area 11

Nissl On the orbital surface, area 11 m exhibited a thin
and sparse layer II. Layer III was also sparse and contains small- to medium-sized pyramidal neurons with

some densely stained neurons in IIIc. The limit between
layers IIIc and IV was well-defined. Neurons in Va were
somewhat more densely packed. Layers Vb and VI had
small-sized neurons and the limits between layers were
not visible. In 11l, layer IV was narrow and Va showed

Cruz-Rizzolo et al. BMC Neuroscience 2011, 12:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/12/6

Page 16 of 26

Figure 12 Architectonic parcellation of rostral orbitofrontal cortex in Cebus monkeys. A, B and C shown low-power photomicrograph of
semi-adjacent coronal sections comparing SMI-32 immunostaining (A), WFA-labeling (B) and myelin-staining (C), indicating approximate
boundaries between architectonic areas in orbital anterior PfC (arrowheads). Schematic drawing of Cebus brain in upper right side of picture
shows level and location of sections A, B and C.

well stained medium-sized cells, a characteristic that differentiates this area from the adjoining 12o.
WFA Area 11l (Figure 12B) exhibited a band in layer V,
reaching layer VI and the white matter. In this band,
darkly stained nets were observed surrounding neuronal
soma and horizontal fibers, and the neuropil labeling

was moderately stained. In IV we observed small nets
and weakly stained neuropil, besides pale nets in layer
III. In the mos, this arrangement gradually disappeared,
and labeling was almost absent in the parafundic cortex.
Medially, 11 m showed a compact band in layer VI,
with moderately stained neuropil and darkly stained

Cruz-Rizzolo et al. BMC Neuroscience 2011, 12:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/12/6

Page 17 of 26

Table 2 Architectonic characteristics of orbital PfC
Nissl

WFA

SMI-32

Myelin

12o

Granular. Layer IV narrower than in Intensely stained. Similar to 12l
12l. Well stained cells in IIIc. SG
but band in III-IV not discernible.
layers more prominent than IG.

Intensely stained. Clear
Well myelinated. Similar but less
bilamination. Many cells in SG and intense than 12l.
IG bands, with greatest number
in III.

11l

Granular. Limit between II and IIIa
is less evident than in 11m, and
layer IV is somewhat narrow. Well
stained medium-sized cells in Va.

Moderately stained. Clear-cut
Sparse myelination. OBb and IG
boundaries with area 12o.
layers less stained than 12o
Moderate labeling of neuropil and
dendritic fragments in SG and IG
bands. Small densely stained cell
bodies in III and some in IV.

Moderately stained. Band with
moderate neuropil and deeply
stained PNs in V reaching layer VI
and white matter. In IV small PNs.
Very pale PNs in III.

11m Granular. Thin and sparse layer II.
Medium-sized cells with intense
pigmentation in IIIc. Densely
packed neurons in Va. No clear
limits between V and VI.

Lightly stained. Compact and
Discernible bilamination. SG band
dense band in VI, with moderately more stained than in 11l, with
stained neuropil and dense PNs.
cells and processes in III. IG band
has moderate staining of neuropil
and fragments, but no somas.

Sparse myelination. OBb is
faintly stained. Fascicles of
vertical fibers in IG layers.

13i

Granular - dysgranular rostrocaudal
transition. Layers Vb and VI have
moderately stained small-sized
neurons.

Moderately stained, increasing
caudally. SG band weakly stained,
with sparse neuropil and pale PNs.
Well stained band in V, reaching
VI and white matter.

Moderately stained, decreasing
caudally. Bilaminar pattern. IG
band with neuropil and fragments.
Moderate immunoreactivity in SG
band with very few somas and
processes in III.

Light to moderate myelination,
although stronger than in 13l
and 13m. Evident OBb. Fine
plexus in SG layers. Moderate
staining in IG layers.

13l

Similar to 13i but cells somewhat
bigger in Va.

Slightly stained, increasing
caudally. No visible superficial
band. Narrow band in layer VI.

Moderately stained. IG band
similar to 13i. Much lower level of
staining in SG layers. No visible
bilaminar pattern.

Staining is lighter and more
diffuse than in 13i.

13m Granular - dysgranular rostrocaudal Poorly stained, increasing caudally. Similar to 13l.
transition. Well developed layer IIIb
with sparsely packed small-sized
neurons. Cells more stained in IIIc
and Va. Vb blends with layer VI.

Similar to 13l but with short
vertical fibers in IG layers.

14r

In IIIc and Va cells are larger and
more stained than in IIIa-b. No
clear limit between Vb and VI.

Poorly stained. No clear-cut limits
with areas 11 and 10. Narrow
band over layer VI, with pale nets
and moderately stained neuropil.

Faintly stained band in IG layers,
with neuropil and fragments, and
a few somas.

Poorly myelinated. No obvious
horizontal bands. Some short
and thin vertical fibers in IG
layers.

14c

Similar to 14r, but with very faint
layers II and IV. Radial striations in
IG layers.

Poorly stained. Thin vertical fibers
in deep layers.

Similar to 14r, but lighter.

Poorly myelinated.

nets involving medium-sized cells. In the remaining
layers, the labeling was almost absent.
SMI-32 There was a clear decrease in the density of
SMI-32 staining on the orbital surface. 11l had clear-cut
limits with its neighbouring area 12o (Figure 12A). This
area exhibited a faint labeling of neuropil in the supra
and infragranular bands. Small densely stained pyramidal neurons could be observed in layer III, and rarely in
infragranular layers. Medially, 11 m still preserved bilaminar characteristics. Layer III contained immunoreactive neurons and moderate immunoreactive neuropil
with a broader infragranular band (Figure 12A).
Myelin Area 11l had sparse myelination, with obB and
infragranular layers less stained than area 12o. In 11m,
the obB was faintly stained and ibB was not discernible.
Vertical fiber fascicles were observed in infragranular
layers in this area, resembling the aspect observed in
46vr (Figure 12C).

Area 13

Nissl Following Walker’s parcellation of Macaca PfC
[20], the present study designated the central orbital
region of Cebus monkey as area 13. However, due to
the architectonic heterogeneity, it was further subdivided into lateral (13l), intermediary (13i) and medial
(13m) areas. In 13m, layer II was thin and compact,
without clear limits with IIIa. Layer IIIb was welldeveloped, constituted by a discrete cluster of smallsized neurons; while IIIc exhibited moderately stained
small- to medium-sized neurons. In Va, neurons had
medium-sized and were more stained than in IIIc, and
Vb blended with layer VI.
Comparatively with 13m, 13i exhibited less developed
layers II and IV. Layers Vb and VI had moderately
stained small-sized neurons. These cytoarchitectonic
characteristics could also be observed in 13l, however,
this area contained larger cells in Va.

Cruz-Rizzolo et al. BMC Neuroscience 2011, 12:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/12/6

WFA Staining becomes more intense caudally in the central orbital region. The 13i was the most intensely
stained, showing a bilaminar aspect. The superficial band
was weakly stained, with sparse labeling of neuropil and
pale nets involving small non-pyramidal neurons. This
superficial band was almost indiscernible in the adjoining
areas 13l and 13 m (Figure 13B). The deep band occupied
the lower part of layer V, with a well-stained neuropil
and larger and more abundant nets than observed in the
superficial band. This deep band reached layer VI and
the white matter, extending over the orbital extension of
the claustrum. WFA staining decreased medially. In 13 m
the WFA labeling pattern was narrow, being mainly
observed in layer VI (Figure 13B,E).
SMI-32 Among the subdivisions of area 13, only 13i had
a bilaminar pattern (Figure 13C,F). The staining intensity
in the infragranular band was similar in the three subdivisions, with neuropil and fragments of cellular bodies
without clear pyramidal shape. The supragranular band
exhibited moderate immunoreactivity only in 13i with
discrete neurons and processes distributed in layer III.
Myelin In the central orbital region, area 13i had light
to moderate myelination, but stronger than the adjoining cortical areas 13l and 13m. The obB was clearly discernible in 13i and a fine fiber plexus could be observed
in supragranular layers. Deep layers had moderate staining. In 13l and 13 m the staining was lighter and more
diffuse, with short vertical fiber bundles extending from
the white matter to 13 m (Figure 13A,D).
Area 14

Nissl In the anterior part of the gyrus rectus (GRe), area
14r had layer II poorly developed with no clear limits
with layer III. Layers IIIa and IIIb had sparse small-sized
cells with moderate staining. In IIIc, cells were slightly
more stained and larger than IIIb. Layer IV was not
well-developed and small-sized neurons predominate in
infragranular layers. The limit between layers Vb and VI
was not clear (Figure 11E). Caudally, 14c exhibited
cytoarchitecture similar to area 14r, although decreasing
the cellular density in granular layers II and IV and
radial striations in infragranular layers.
WFA The WFA staining considerably decreased in the
GRe. At the anterior level, area 14r was not sharply
labeled from the adjacent areas 11l and 10 (Figures 8A;
11G). The most important characteristic that differentiates area 14 from the laterally located area 11 was
absence of labeling in supragranular layers and the less
stained white matter. The labeling concentrated in a
narrow band over layer VI, with pale nets and moderately stained neuropil. Caudally (14c), the labeling was
weaker and WFA involved thin vertical fibers in deeper
layers (Figure 13B).
SMI-32 In the GRe, the staining intensity was extremely
weak. Rostrally (14r) the infragranular band had modest

Page 18 of 26

immunostaining, corresponding primarily to the neuropil and a few perikarya, and very few immunoreactive
somas in layer IIIc. Caudally, 14c exhibited very light
immunostaining, limited to neuropil in the infragranular
band (Figures 8C; 11H; 12A; 13C).
Myelin The GRe (area 14r) had lower levels of myelin
staining than neighbouring areas. Only some short and thin
vertical fibers emerging from the white matter were present
but did not reach supragranular layers (Figure 12C). Caudally, 14c was still less myelinated (Figures 8B; 11F; 13A).
Medial PfC (Table 3)

As the dorsal, anterior and ventral borders of this surface represent medial extensions of areas already
described, we will describe its central portion.
Areas 32 and 25

NIssl In the medial surface, area 32 occupied most part
of the ACgG. Area 32c was situated anteriorly to the
corpus callosum and circumscribed dorsally and ventrally by the cgs and rostral sulcus, respectively. Infragranular layers were more developed in relation to the
supragranular compartment. Layer II was poorly developed and had no clear limits with the densely packed
layer III. There was no obvious lamination in layer III,
while layer IV was absent. Layer V had radial striations
and small- to medium-sized cells, which were somewhat
larger and more stained than in layer III. There was no
clear limit between layers V and VI (Figure 8D). Rostrally, area 32r showed an overall larger cortical thickness than 32c. A thin and cell-sparse layer IV could be
visualized. Layer Va contained well-stained mediumsized cells, contrasting with small-sized cells observed in
layer VI (Figure 14A).
Ventrally to the rostrum of the corpus callosum, area
25 showed supragranular layers more developed than
area 32c, and there was an evident subdivision between
layers II and III. Layer III had sparse clusters of smallsized neurons with moderate staining, no clear lamination and scarcely discernible layer IV. In layer V, almost
blending with layer VI, cells were slightly larger and
more densely packed than in layer III (Figure 14E).
WFA Areas in the medial surface were sharply labeled
with WFA (Figure 8A). Area 32c exhibited a narrow but
very intense WFA band in layer VI, reaching layer V.
Patches of deeply stained neuropil nearly prevented the
visualization of nets that, when visible, revealed strong
labeling pattern (Figures 8A,F; 13B). Rostrally, 32r had
similar labeling pattern, however the band over infragranular layers was wider, exhibiting some very pale nets
reaching layer III (Figure 14C).
Area 25 could be differentiated from the adjacent dorsal
area 32c and ventral area 14c by clear-cut boundaries (Figures 13B; 14G). The labeling was weak and only a narrow
band over layer VI reaching layer V could be observed.

Cruz-Rizzolo et al. BMC Neuroscience 2011, 12:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/12/6

Page 19 of 26

Figure 13 Architectonic parcellation of the caudal orbitofrontal cortex in Cebus monkeys. On left column, low-power photomicrograph of
semi-adjacent coronal sections comparing myelin-staining (A), WFA-labeling (B) and SMI-32 immunostaining (C), showing approximate boundaries
between architectonic areas in caudal OfC (arrowheads). Boxes on photomicrographs indicate location of higher magnication views of area 13i
showed in D, E and F. Schematic drawing of Cebus brain in upper right side of picture shows level and location of sections A, B and C.

SMI-32 Area 32c had discrete immunoreactivity. It was
observed only a sparse immunoreactive band of neuropil
in infragranular layers with very few pyramidal neurons
and dendrites concentrated in layer V. Rostrally, the
labeling in 32r was somewhat more intense and some

pyramidal neurons could also be seen in layer IIIc. The
labeling in 25 was similar to that observed in area 32c,
but still lighter (Figures 8G; 14D,H).
Myelin On the medial surface, myelination considerably
decreased caudalwards. Area 32c exhibited moderate to

Cruz-Rizzolo et al. BMC Neuroscience 2011, 12:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/12/6

Page 20 of 26

Table 3 Architectonic characteristics of medial PfC
WFA

SMI-32

Myelin

32c Agranular. IG predominates over SG
compartment. Medium-sized cells in Va
and smaller in III. Layer V blends with VI.

Nissl

Narrow but very intense band in layer VI,
reaching layer V, with patches of strongly
labeled PNs.

Weak immunoreactivity.
Band in IG layers with
sparse neuropil and very
few somas and dendrites.

Lightly myelinated. No
obvious horizontal
bands.

32r A thin and cell-sparse layer IV can be
visualized.

Similar to 32c, but the labeled band over
IG layers is wider, with some pale nets
reaching layer III.

Immunoreactivity
somewhat more intense
than 32c, with some
pyramidal neurons in layer
IIIc.

Moderate myelination.
Discernible oBb and iBb.
Thin and short vertical
fibers in IG layers.

25

Poorly stained. Clear-cut limits with the
adjacent dorsal 32c and ventral 14c.
Narrow band over layer VI reaching layer
V, with a few nets and dense neuropil
near white matter.

Similar to 32c, but still
lighter.

Poorly myelinated, but
somewhat more stained
than 32c.

Layer IV scarcely discernible. SG layers
somewhat more developed than in 32c.
Clear limits between II and III. Small-sized
cells sparsely packed with no clear
lamination in III. Layer V almost blends
with layer VI.

poor staining pattern (Figure 8B,E). Thin and short vertical fibers extending from the white matter were
observed, but rarely targeted superficial layers. The
labeling in 32r was also weak, but obB and ibB were still
discernible (Figure 14B). Ventrally, area 25 was poorly
myelinated, but somewhat more stained than area 32c
(Figures 13A; 14F).

Discussion
The parcellation of the Cebus PfC adopted in this study
considerably modified the scheme initially proposed by
von Bonin [32] for this species (Figure 1D) but is in line
with previous studies on Old World monkeys
[5,20,24-29]. Thus, the remarkable anatomical similarity
observed between the brains of genera Macaca and
Cebus may extend to architectonic aspects.
Comparison with previous architectonic maps of the
monkey PfC

In this study, twenty-two different areas were differentiated in the Cebus PfC (Figures 3; 4). This number is
greater than that previously recognized by von Bonin
[32] in the same species using cytoarchitectonic criteria
(Figure 1D). Due to the different approaches used in the
two studies, it is difficult to compare the current results
with those obtained by von Bonin and even by other
authors who have used only cytoarchitectonic techniques. In fact, the inherent subjectivity related with
cytoarchitectonic observations has led to different interpretations concerning the limits between areas and the
criteria defining them. To avoid this ambiguity, the
combination of several architectonic tools allowed more
direct and reproducible denition of the extent and
boundaries of areas in the PfC.
Two other factors should be mentioned when analyzing the differences between the present findings and
those reported by von Bonin. First, von Bonin’s observations were based on a single animal. Second, the criteria

used by von Bonin and his collaborators to divide
cytoarchitectonic areas were more restricted than those
used by others, justifying their criticism of the division
proposed by Walker [20] for the Macaca PfC [22].
More recent studies, however, using different architectonic methods, connectional and physiological data have
confirmed the existence of a larger number of areas in
the primate PfC, corroborating Walker’s initial observations [5,23-29,35-39].
In the lateral surface of the Cebus PfC, while von Bonin
[32] (Figure 1D) differentiated only two areas, the posterior and anterior “area frontalis granularis”, eleven areas
were differentiated in the current study: 9d, 8(d and v),
45, 46 (d, dr, v, vr), 12l, and 10, topographically comparable with the homonymous areas described for Macaca
by Walker [20]. There are, however, some differences
between the present observations and those of Walker.
In the Macaca genus, there is disagreement on the
description of the prearcuate region. Walker [20] recognized area 8A in the anterior bank of the superior ramus
of the arcuate sulcus (sras), area 8B extending dorsally in
the SFG, and area 45 occupying part of the inferior
ramus of the arcuate sulcus (iras), extending rostrally.
While more recent studies confirm these findings [5,28],
others confined area 8 to the prearcuate region [25].
Recent analysis of area 45 also differed from the division
initially proposed by Walker. Using architectonic and
connectional criteria, Petrides and Pandya [29] designated the area which lies in the ventral part of the rostral
bank of the lower limb of the arcuate sulcus as 45B, and
its rostral extension as 45A. This division was also used
by Gerbella et al. [39], who provided a detailed description of the architectonic organization of the caudal ventrolateral PfC of the macaque monkey, including part of
the prearcuate region, by using a combination of cyto-,
myelo-, and chemoarchitectonic criteria. They identied
two areas that are almost completely limited to the anterior bank of the ias, 8/FEF dorsally, and 45B ventrally,

Cruz-Rizzolo et al. BMC Neuroscience 2011, 12:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/12/6

Page 21 of 26

Figure 14 Semi-adjacent sections showing laminar organization and staining pattern of areas 32r and 25. In A and E, Nissl; B and F,
myelin-staining; C and G, WFA labeling; and D and H, SMI-32 immunostaining. Roman numerals in Nissl stained sections indicate cortical layers.
Calibration bar in A applies to all figures.

and two other areas occupying the ventral prearcuate
convexity, area 8r, rostral to area 8/FEF, and area 45A,
rostral to 45B.
In this study, based on coronal sections, the prearcuate region was subdivided into three areas, 8d dorsally,

45 ventrally, and 8v between them. Dorsally, a transitional region between areas 9d and the agranular cortex
of the PcG was observed; however, this region was not
consistently characterized as an architectonically independent area. Functional studies indicate that, in Cebus

Cruz-Rizzolo et al. BMC Neuroscience 2011, 12:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/12/6

as well as in Macaca, the region designated as area 8d
coincided with the frontal eye field [40-46].
The map presented in this study also differed from
Walker’s descriptions [20] regarding the precise localization of area 46 and its borders with areas 9 and 12. This
region has been thoroughly studied in primates because
of its main role in complex cognitive processes related
to the working memory [6-10,47,48] and also because of
its possible recent phylogenetic origin [5]. In his study,
Walker [20] describes area 46 as extending dorsally and
ventrally in relation to the prs, occupying part of the
MFG and IFG. More recent studies on Macaca diverged
in defining this area. While Barbas and Pandya’s [25]
findings are in general agreement with Walker’s map,
Preuss and Goldman-Rakic [5] (Figure 1D) recognized
areas 46d and 46v in the walls of the prs and areas 46dr
and 46vr in the dorsal and ventral rims of the prs
respectively, a division compatible with our observations
in Cebus. Likewise, Petrides and Pandya [28,37] confined
area 46 to the lips of the rostral extent of the prs, while
they designate the cortex on the lips of the caudal portion of the prs and the immediately adjacent cortex as
area 9/46, indicating that this area had been included as
part of area 9 in the classic maps of the human cortex.
Cytoarchitectonically, the Cebus OfC presented a progressive differentiation from a homotypical granular cortex
near the frontal pole to an agranular pattern in the caudal
region, a characteristic also observed in Macaca [13,26].
Some of the architectonic tools used in this study show a
similar transition from rostral to caudal. Rostral areas for
example, have an extremely weak WFA staining near the
frontal pole becoming more intensely stained caudally.
In Cebus, von Bonin [32] recognized only two areas in
the OfC, the orbital extension of the “frontal granular
anterior area” and the “frontal orbital area”, both having
several common architectonic characteristics. In the present parcellation, the OfC was divided into five different
areas. Although the same designation used by Walker
[20] was adopted, some areas of the Cebus OfC were subdivided and the limits changed due to their heterogeneity.
These findings are in accordance with recent studies on
Macaca. According to Carmichael and Price [27], in
Macaca the medial orbital sulcus (mos) also divides area
13 into medial (areas 13b and 13a) and lateral (area 13m)
areas (Figure 1C). In Cebus, the medial sector of area 13
(13m), lateral to area 14, seems to partly correspond to
area 13a described by Amaral and Price in Macaca [24],
areas 13a and b described by Carmichael and Price [27]
(Figure 1C), and was probably included in area 14 (14L,
14VL) by Preuss and Goldman-Rakic [5] (Figure 1D).
The present division of area 12 into two areas (12o
and 12l) is in line with the cyto- and myeloarchitectonic
divisions proposed by Barbas and Pandya [25] and Preuss and Goldman-Rakic [5] in Macaca. Petrides and

Page 22 of 26

Pandya [29] designated this area as 12/47, in order to
standardize the human and monkey architectonic characteristics. Thus, indicating that the previously labeled
area 47 in the human brain is similar in architecture to
Walker’s area 12.
In Cebus, area 14 broadly coincided with the GRe, and
consisted of rostral (14r) and caudal (14c) areas. This
basic parcellation is largely in agreement with previous
studies on the Macaca PfC that described the GRe as
consisting of at least one rostral and one caudal sector,
such as areas 14 and 25 of Barbas and Pandya [25]; 14r
and 14c of Carmichael and Price [27], and areas 14a, 14l,
14vl, 14v, and 14 m of Preuss and Goldman-Rakic [5].
Caudally, in the immediate vicinity of the anterior
olfactory nucleus and the prepiriform cortex, the OfC
assumed a clear agranular aspect. In macaque monkeys,
these agranular-periallocortical areas (Oa-p and O-Ins,
Figure 3) that correspond to the caudal continuation of
areas 12 and 13, had received different designations.
Many authors have associated this region of the primate
cortex with the insula and the claustrum [49].
In the medial region of the PfC, the present parcellation was consistent with previous studies on Macaca,
especially with the maps from Vogt et al. [36] and Carmichael and Price [27], which recognized the medial
projections of areas 9, 10, 14 and the limbic areas 32, 25
and 24 in the medial wall of the frontal lobe. In Cebus,
the “limbic anterior area” described by von Bonin [32]
was subdivided into areas 32r, 32c and 25. Area 32c,
rostral to the corpus callosum, partly corresponds to the
macaque area 32 of Barbas and Pandya [25], Vogt et al.
[39] and Carmichael and Price [27] (Figure 1C), and
area PL of Preuss and Goldman-Rakic [5]. Dorsal and
ventrally, this area was separated from superior and
inferior adjacent cortical regions by clear-cut boundaries
of WGA and SMI-32 staining intensity. Rostrally,
Cebus’s area 32r seemed to correspond with area MF of
Preuss and Goldman-Rakic [5].
Area 25, ventral to area 32c, resembled the one of
equal designation described by Vogt et al. [36], Carmichael and Price [27] and Barbas and Pandya [25] in
Macaca, as well as area IL of Preuss and GoldmanRakic [5].
Validity of areas and functional implications

Due to the lack of more detailed information about the
connectivity and function of the Cebus PfC, it is difficult
to know if the areas revealed in this study correspond to
functional cortical areas. Several studies, however, indicate that some of the architectonic tools used in this
investigation are in fact able to accurately identify brain
morphofunctional areas and their boundaries.
WFA staining, for example, has been successfully used
to define functional cortical areas in marsupials [50],

Cruz-Rizzolo et al. BMC Neuroscience 2011, 12:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/12/6

rats [51,52], mice [53] and Mongolian gerbils [54].
Furthermore, WFA staining also has an area-specific
distribution pattern within the human visual, motor and
somatosensory cortices [55-57], and thalamus [58].
Similarly, SMI-32 has been used as a powerful tool to
reliably define architectonic limits between functional
cortical areas in rodents [59], cats [60] and primates
[27,61-69]. In addition, SMI-32 has been able to successfully distinguish the primary and middle temporal
cortical visual areas of Cebus monkey [70].
The functional significance of the heterogeneous distribution of some of the probes used in this study
throughout the Cebus PfC is not completely known.
SMI-32 labels a subpopulation of pyramidal neurons in
the primate cerebral cortex [71], and other neuronal
types in the thalamus and cerebellum [70]. Based on
these results, it is possible to conclude that SMI-32 can
identify neurofilament components in neuronal populations with different morphological, functional and connectional characteristics [60].
In the cerebral cortex, SMI-32 positive neurons are
mainly located in layers III and V, but depending on the
cortical area, the proportion of these cells in each layer
may vary. It is known that layer III is the main source
of ipsi- and contralateral corticocortical projections and
layers V and VI are preferentially associated with subcortical targets [72]. The larger number of positive SMI32 neurons in layer III, observed in the present study,
seems to indicate that this probe preferentially labels
corticocortical projection cells in Cebus PfC.
Regarding WFA, the extracellular matrix (EM) and
PNs have been associated with stabilization and formation of synapses, guiding of axons to their targets, maintenance of the composition of the extracellular
compartment, formation of a link with the intracellular
cytoskeleton, and concentration of growth factors surrounding certain neurons [73]. These functions attributed to EM and PNs might potentially modify local
neuronal activity and thus contribute to the functioning
of neuronal networks. Additionally, the fact that PNs
were initially observed surrounding GABAergic, fastspiking non-pyramidal neurons has led some authors to
suggest that PNs are mainly involved in local inhibitory
circuits [74,75]. However, the present results and those
obtained in other studies analyzing different species and
cortical areas [76] indicate that a significant amount of
pyramidal neurons, mainly in infragranular layers, have
a dense covering of PNs (Figure 5E,F). This fact might
indicate a relationship between PNs and corticofugal
excitatory circuits.

Conclusions
This study indicated the existence of structural similarities between the Cebus and Macaca PfC. Cortical areas,

Page 23 of 26

such as area 46 on the DlPfC [5,9], considered evolutionary specializations of anthropoid primates were
identified in the Cebus PfC, based on their topographical
and architectonic characteristics. Additional information
on the connectivity, chemical structure (in progress at
our laboratory), and function of the Cebus PfC could
clarify how these phylogenetically recent cortical areas
have responded, from an evolutionary and adaptative
perspective, to the different environmental pressures
faced by New and Old World monkeys during the
35 millions of years of parallel evolution.

Methods
For this study, five young adult male Cebus apella monkeys obtained from the Primate Center at the School of
Dentistry of Araçatuba (UNESP - Univ Estadual Paulista,
São Paulo, Brazil) were used. Experimental procedures
were conducted according to the Guidelines for the care
and use of mammals in neuroscience and behavioral
research [77] and were approved by the local laboratory
animal care and use committee (Comissão de Ética na
Experimentação Animal - CEEA-FOA/UNESP # 2007002476). All efforts were made to reduce the number of
animals and to minimize suffering.
Animals were anesthetized with sodium pentobarbital
(30 mg/kg, i.p.) and transcardially perfused with 0.9% saline (800 ml) followed by 1500 ml of 4% paraformaldehyde
in 0.1 M acetate buffer, pH 6.5, and subsequently by 1500
ml of 4% paraformaldehyde in 0.1 M borate buffer, pH 9.0.
Brains were exposed and blocked with the aid of a stereotaxic device. Blocks were then removed from the skull and
placed in a cryoprotective solution containing 10% glycerol
and 2% dimethyl sulfoxide in 0.1 M borate buffer, pH 9.0,
at 4°C. Three days later, blocks were transferred to a similar solution but with increased concentration of glycerol
(20%) for four additional days according to previously
described methods [78]. To avoid formation of crystals
that may occur during the freezing of large brain pieces,
the blocks were immersed in isopentane at -80ºC for one
hour to allow quick freezing and then sectioned at 40 μm
on the coronal plane using a freezing microtome (SMR
2000, Leica Instruments, GMbH, Germany) and dry ice.
Sections were collected in ten different series in a solution
of 0.1 M phosphate buffer, pH 7.3.
Staining methods
WFA histochemistry

Free-floating sections were treated with 1% H2O2 in 0.1
M Tris-buffered saline (TBS) for 30 min, washed and
subsequently incubated with 2% bovine serum albumin
(BSA) in TBS for 1 h. Following three rinses in TBS, sections were incubated with biotinylated WFA (Sigma, L1766)
at a concentration of 3 µg/ml TBS-BSA for 16 h, gently shaken at 4°C. The sections were then rinsed in TBS and

Cruz-Rizzolo et al. BMC Neuroscience 2011, 12:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/12/6

incubated for 1 h in Extravidin-Peroxidase (Sigma, E2886).
Lectin-binding sites were visualized with the chromogen
VIP (Vector, SK4600) which yielded a red-purple reaction
product. Sections were then mounted on gelatinized slides,
dehydrated through a graded alcohol series (70-90-100100%, 1 min each), cleared in xylene (three changes, 5, 10,
and 30 min each) and coverslipped with DPX. In control
experiments, biotinylated WFA was omitted and no specific
staining was observed in these sections.
Black Gold II staining

Sections were previously mounted on 1% gelatin-coated
slides and air dried, rehydrated in distilled water for 2
min and transferred to a 0,2% Black-Gold solution at 60°
C, for 12-18 min. This solution was made by adding 100
mg of Black-Gold II (Histo-Chem Inc. # 1BGII) to 50 ml
of 0.9% NaCl. Incubation was interrupted when the horizontal parallel fibers of layer I were visible. Sections were
rinsed for 2 min in distilled water, fixed for 3 min in a
sodium thiosulfate solution, rinsed in tap water for 10
min (two 5 min changes), dehydrated through a graded
alcohol series (70-90-100-100%, 1 min each), cleared in
xylene (5, 10, and 30 min) and coverslipped with DPX.
SMI-32 immunohistochemistry

Free-floating sections were treated with 0.6% H2O2 and
60% methanol in TBS 0.1 M for 30 min, washed and
subsequently incubated with 3% fetal calf serum (FCS)
in TBS for 1 h. Following three rinses in TBS, sections
were incubated in a solution of mouse monoclonal SMI32 antibody (Sternberger Monoclonals, Inc., dilution
1:4000) in TBS-TX 0.05M, for 48 h, gently shaken at 4°
C. The sections were then rinsed with TBS-TX for 30
min and incubated for 2 h at 4°C in biotinylated secondary goat anti-mouse antibody (1:200, Vector Laboratories), rinsed again (3 × 10 min TBS-TX) and reacted
for 90 min in the Vectastain ABC Elite system (1:100,
Vector Laboratories) at room temperature. Antigenic
sites were visualized with 0.02-0.05% 3,3’-diaminobenzidine tetrahydrochloride (DAB) and 0.1% nickel ammonium sulfate. Sections were then mounted on
gelatinized slides, dehydrated through a graded alcohol
series (70-90-100-100%, 1 min each), cleared in xylene
(5, 10, and 30 min) and coverslipped with DPX. In control experiments, the SMI-32 antibody was omitted and
no specific staining was observed.
Nissl stain

The conventional thionin staining method was used to
establish the general cytoarchitectonic characteristics
and to aid the localization of the laminar distribution of
the other stains.
Analysis

Sections were examined by brightfield microscopy.
Selected images were digitalized at high and low magnifications using a Leitz Aristoplan microscope or a Carl

Page 24 of 26

Zeiss stereomicroscope (STEMI 2000-c) respectively,
both coupled with a Carl Zeiss Axiocam MRc5 digital
camera. To eliminate the background originated by digitalization, color balances, brightness, contrast and sharpness were corrected in each preparation.
Because the distinction of limits between areas may
vary among observers, the sections were independently
examined by three of the researchers of this study and,
when necessary, a consensual border was adopted. As
defined in previous studies using similar multiarchitectonic approaches, the areas were defined only if they
showed differential staining patterns in at least two morphological methods and if they could be consistently
found in all animals studied [35].
Two-dimensional schematic representations of the lateral, orbital and medial surfaces of the Cebus PfC were
designed (Figure 4), showing the approximate location
of areal boundaries, as presented in previous studies
(Figure 1).
The designation terms of sulcus and gyrus for Cebus
monkeys used by von Bonin [32], the Template Atlas of
the Primate Brain [79], and A stereotaxic atlas of the
brain of the Cebus monkey (Cebus apella) [80] were
adopted in this study.

List of abbreviations
ACgG: anterior cingulate gyrus; as: arcuate sulcus; cgs: cingulate sulcus;
DlPfC: dorsolateral PfC; FOG: fronto-orbital gyrus; Gre: gyrus rectus; IFG:
inferior frontal gyrus; IG: indisium griseum; iras: inferior ramus of arcuate
sulcus; los: lateral orbital sulcus; LorG: lateral orbital gyrus; MFG: medial
frontal gyrus; MOrG: medial orbital gyrus; mos: medial orbital sulcus;
MPfC: medial prefrontal cortex; Oa-p: periallocortical division of the
agranular orbital cortex; OfC: orbitofrontal cortex; O-Ins: orbito-insular
cortex; PfC: prefrontal cortex; PrCO: precentral opercular cortex; PrG:
precentral gyrus; prs: principal sulcus; ros: rostral sulcus; SFG: superior
frontal gyrus; sras: superior ramus of arcuate sulcus; WFA: Wisteria
floribunda agglutinin
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by grants from FAPESP (2005/02106-4; 2006/065018; 2008/10282-5). The authors are grateful to José Ari Gualberto Junqueira
and Arnaldo César dos Santos for technical assistance.
Authors’ contributions
RJC-R designed the study and drafted the manuscript. RJC-R and MAXL
carried out the histological processing, microscopic analysis, data collection
and preparation of figures. CAC, JAO e EE contributed to microscopic
analysis and additional experimental procedures.
All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Received: 20 April 2010 Accepted: 13 January 2011
Published: 13 January 2011
References
1. Brodmann K: Vergleichende Lokalisationslehre der Grosshirnrhinde Leipzig:
Barth; 1909.
2. Brodmann K: Neue Ergebnisse über die vergleichende histologische.
Lokalisationslehre der Grosshirnrinde mit besonderer Berücksichtigung
der Stirnhirns. Anat Anz 1912, 41(Suppl):157-216.
3. Sanides F: The cyto-myeloarchitecture of the human frontal lobe and its
relation to phylogenetic differentiation of the cerebral cortex. J
Hirnforsch 1964, 47:269-282.

Cruz-Rizzolo et al. BMC Neuroscience 2011, 12:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/12/6

4.

5.

6.
7.

8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.

14.

15.

16.
17.

18.

19.
20.
21.

22.
23.

24.
25.
26.

27.

28.

29.

30.
31.

Pandya DN, Seltzer B, Barbas H: Input-ouput organization of the primate
cerebral cortex. In Comparative Primate Biology. Volume 4. Edited by: Steklis
HD, Erwin J. New York: Alan R Liss Inc; 1988:39-80.
Preuss TM, Goldman-Rakic PS: Myelo- and cytoarchitecture of the granular
frontal cortex and surrounding regions in the strepsirhine primate Galago
and the anthropoid primate Macaca. J Comp Neurol 1991, 310:429-474.
Rosenkilde CE: Functional heterogeneity of the prefrontal cortex in the
monkey: a review. Behav Neural Biol 1979, 25:301-345.
Goldman-Rakic PS: Circuitry of primate prefrontal cortex and the
regulation of behavior by representational memory. In Handbook of
Physiology - The Nervous System. Volume 5. Edited by: Mountcastle VB, Plum
F, Geiger SR. Bethesda: American Physiological Society; 1987:373-417.
Milner B, Petrides M: Behavioural effects of frontal-lobe lesions in man.
Trends Neurosci 1984, 7:403-407.
Fuster JM: Frontal lobe and cognitive development. J Neurocytol 2002,
31:373-385.
Fuster JM: The Prefrontal Cortex London: Academic Press; 2008.
Dias R, Robbins TW, Roberts AC: Dissociation in prefrontal cortex of
affective and attentional shifts. Nature 1996, 380:69-72.
Tremblay L, Schultz W: Relative reward preference in primate
orbitofrontal cortex. Nature 1999, 398:704-708.
Cavada C, Compañy T, Tejedor J, Cruz-Rizzolo RJ, Reinoso-Suárez F: The
anatomical connections of the macaque monkey orbitofrontal cortex. A
review. Cereb Cortex 2000, 10:220-242.
Davidson RJ, Putnam KM, Larson CL: Dysfunction in the neural circuitry of
emotion regulation - a possible prelude to violence. Science 2000,
289:591-594.
Roberts AC, Wallis JD: Inhibitory control and affective processing in the
prefrontal cortex: neuropsychological studies in the common marmoset.
Cereb Cortex 2000, 10:252-262.
Rolls ET: The orbitofrontal cortex and reward. Cereb Cortex 2000, 10:284-294.
Barbas H, Saha S, Rempel-Clower N, Ghashghaei T: Serial pathways from
primate prefrontal cortex to autonomic areas may influence emotional
expression. BMC Neurosci 2003, 4:25.
Barbas H, Hilgetag CC, Saha S, Dermon CR, Suski JL: Parallel organization
of contralateral and ipsilateral prefrontal cortical projections in the
rhesus monkey. BMC Neurosci 2005, 6:32.
Vogt C, Vogt O: Allgemeine Ergebnisse unserer Hirnforschung. J Psychol
Neurol 1919, 25:221-473.
Walker AE: A cytoarchitectural study of the prefrontal area of the
macaque monkey. J Comp Neurol 1940, 73:59-86.
Brodmann K: Beiträege zur histologischen Lokalisation der
Grosshirnrinde. VII. Mitteilung: Die cytoarchitektonisch Cortexgliederung
der Halbaffen (Lemuriden). J Psychol Neurol 1908, 10:287-363.
von Bonin G, Bailey P: The Neocortex of Macaca mulatta Urbana: University
of Illinois Press; 1947.
Mesulam MM, Mufson EJ: Insula of the Old World monkey. I.
Architectonics in the insulo-orbito-temporal component of the
paralimbic brain. J Comp Neurol 1982, 212:1.
Amaral DG, Price JL: Amygdalo-cortical projections in the monkey
(Macaca fascicularis). J Comp Neurol 1984, 230:465-496.
Barbas H, Pandya DN: Architecture and intrinsic connections of the
prefrontal cortex in the rhesus monkey. J Comp Neurol 1989, 286:353-375.
Morecraft RJ, Geula C, Mesulam MM: Cytoarchitecture and neural afferents
of orbitofrontal cortex in the brain of the monkey. J Comp Neurol 1992,
323:341-358.
Carmichael ST, Price JL: Architectonic subdivision of the orbital and
medial prefrontal cortex in the macaque monkey. J Comp Neurol 1994,
346:366-402.
Petrides M, Pandya DN: Dorsolateral prefrontal cortex: comparative
cytoarchitectonic analysis in the human and the macaque brain and
corticocortical connection patterns. Eur J Neurosci 1999, 11:1011-1036.
Petrides M, Pandya DN: Comparative cytoarchitectonic analysis of the
human and the macaque ventrolateral prefrontal cortex and
corticocortical connection patterns in the monkey. Eur J Neurosci 2002,
16:291-310.
Ciochon RL, Chiarelli AB: Evolutionary Biology of the New World Monkeys and
Continental Drift New York: Plenum Press; 1980.
Falk D: Mapping fossil endocasts. In Primate Brain Evolution: Methodes and
Concepts. Edited by: Armstrong E, Falk D. New York: Plenum Press;
1982:217-226.

Page 25 of 26

32. von Bonin G: The cerebral cortex of the Cebus monkey. J Comp Neurol
1938, 69:181-227.
33. LeGross Clark WE: The Antecedents of Man New York: Harper and Row
Publishers; 1959.
34. Falk D: Comparative study of the endocranial casts of New and Old
World monkeys. In Evolutionary Biology of the New World Monkeys and
Continental Drift. Edited by: Ciochon RL, Chiarelli AB. New York: Plenum
Press; 1980:275-292.
35. Ongür D, Ferry AT, Price JL: Architectonic subdivision of the human
orbital and medial prefrontal cortex. J Comp Neurol 2003, 460:425-449.
36. Vogt BA, Pandya DN, Rosene DL: Cingulate cortex of the rhesus monkey:
I. Cytoarchitecture and thalamic afferents. J Comp Neurol 1987,
262:256-270.
37. Petrides M: Lateral prefrontal cortex: architectonic and functional
organization. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 2005, 360:781-795.
38. Belmalih A, Borra E, Contini M, Gerbella M, Rozzi S, Luppino G: A
multiarchitectonic approach for the definition of functionally distinct
areas and domains in the monkey frontal lobe. J Anat 2007, 211:199-211.
39. Gerbella M, Belmalih A, Borra E, Rozzi S, Luppino G: Multimodal
architectonic subdivision of the caudal ventrolateral prefrontal cortex of
the macaque monkey. Brain Struct Funct 2007, 212:269-301.
40. Bruce CJ, Goldberg ME: Primate frontal eye fields. I. Single neurons
discharging before saccades. J Neurophysiol 1985, 53:603-635.
41. Bruce CJ, Goldberg ME, Bushnell MC, Stanton GB: Primate frontal eye
fields. II. Physiological and anatomical correlates of electrically evoked
eye movements. J Neurophysiol 1985, 54:714-734.
42. Lynch JC: Frontal eye field lesions in monkey disrupt visual pursuit. Exp
Brain Res 1987, 68:437-441.
43. Rosa MG, Soares JG, Fiorani M, Gattass R: Cortical afferents of visual area
MT in Cebus monkey: possible homologies between New and Old World
monkeys. Vis Neurosci 1993, 10:827-855.
44. Leichnetz GR, Gonzalo-Ruiz A: Prearcuate cortex in the Cebus monkey has
cortical and subcortical connections like the macaque frontal eye field
and projects to fastigial-recipient oculomotor-related brainstem nuclei.
Brain Res Bull 1996, 41:1-29.
45. Leichnetz GR: Connections of the medial posterior parietal cortex (Area 7
m) in the monkey. Anat Rec 2001, 263:215-236.
46. Wardak C, Ibos G, Duhamel JR, Olivier E: Contribution of the monkey
frontal eye field to covert visual attention. J Neurosci 2006, 26:4228-4235.
47. Petrides M: Monitoring of selections of visual stimuli and the primate
frontal cortex. Proc Biol Sci 1991, 246:293-298.
48. Petrides M: Frontal lobes and working memory: evidence from
investigations of the effects of cortical excisions in nonhuman primates.
In Handbook of Neuropsychology. Volume 9. Edited by: Boller F, Grafman J.
Amsterdam: Elsevier; 1994:59-82.
49. Zilles K, Rehkämper G, Stepham H, Schleicher A: A quantitative approach
to cytoarchitectonics. IV. The areal pattern of the cortex of Galago
demidovii (e. Geoffroy, 1796), (lorisidae, primates). Anat Embryol (Berl)
1979, 157:81-103.
50. Brückner G, Härtig W, Seeger K, Rübsamen R, Reimer K, Brauer K: Cortical
perineuronal nets in the gray short-tailed opossum (Monodelphis
domestica): a distribution pattern contrasting with that shown in
placental mammals. Anat Embryol (Berl) 1998, 197:249-262.
51. Seeger G, Brauer K, Härtig W, Brückner G: Mapping of perineuronal nets in
the rat brain stained by colloidal iron hydroxide histochemistry and
lectin cytochemistry. Neuroscience 1994, 58:371-388.
52. Bidmon HJ, Wu J, Gödecke A, Schleicher A, Mayer B, Zilles K: Nitric oxide
synthase-expressing neurons are area-specifically distributed within the
cerebral cortex of the rat. Neuroscience 1997, 81:321-330.
53. Oermann E, Bidmon HJ, Mayer B, Zilles K: Differential maturational
patterns of nitric oxide synthase-I and NADPH-diaphorase in functionally
distinct cortical areas of the mouse cerebral cortex. Anat Embryol (Berl)
1999, 200:27-41.
54. Brückner G, Seeger G, Brauer K, Härtig W, Kacza J, Bigl V: Cortical areas are
revealed by distribution patterns of proteoglycan components and
parvalbumin in the Mongolian gerbil and rat. Brain Res 1994, 658:67-86.
55. Murakami T, Ohtsuka A, Taguchi T: Neurons with intensely negatively
charged extracellular matrix in the human visual cortex. Arch Histol Cytol
1994, 57:509-522.
56. Seeger G, Lüth HJ, Winkelmann E, Brauer K: Distribution patterns of
Wisteria floribunda agglutinin binding sites and parvalbumin-

Cruz-Rizzolo et al. BMC Neuroscience 2011, 12:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/12/6

57.

58.

59.

60.

61.

62.

63.

64.

65.

66.

67.

68.

69.

70.

71.

72.

73.
74.
75.

76.

immunoreactive neurons in the human visual cortex: a double labelling
study. J Hirnforsch 1996, 37:351-366.
Hilbig H, Bidmon HJ, Blohm U, Zilles K: Wisteria floribunda agglutinin
labeling patterns in the human cortex: a tool for revealing areal borders
and subdivisions in parallel with immunocytochemistry. Anat Embryol
(Berl) 2001, 203:45-52.
Preuss TM, Gray D, Cusick CG: Subdivisions of the motor and
somatosensory thalamus of primates revealed with Wisteria floribunda
agglutinin histochemistry. Somatosens Mot Res 1998, 15:211-219.
Boire D, Desgent S, Matteau I, Ptito M: Regional analysis of neurolament
protein immunoreactivity in the hamster’s cortex. J Chem Neuroanat
2005, 29:193-208.
van der Gucht E, Vandesande F, Arckens L: Neurolament protein: a
selective marker for the architectonic parcellation of the visual cortex in
adult cat brain. J Comp Neurol 2001, 441:345-368.
Hof PR, Morrison JH: Neurofilament protein defines regional patterns of
cortical organization in the macaque monkey visual system: a
quantitative immunohistochemical analysis. J Comp Neurol 1995,
352:161-186.
Gregoriou GG, Borra E, Matelli M, Luppino G: Architectonic organization of
the inferior parietal convexity of the macaque monkey. J Comp Neurol
2006, 496:422-451.
Del Río MR, DeFelipe J: A study of SMI 32-stained pyramidal cells,
parvalbumin-immunoreactive chandelier cells, and presumptive
thalamocortical axons in the human temporal neocortex. J Comp Neurol
1994, 342:389-408.
Hof PR, Mufson EJ, Morrison JH: Human orbitofrontal cortex:
cytoarchitecture and quantitative immunohistochemical parcellation. J
Comp Neurol 1995, 359:48-68.
Cusick CG, Seltzer B, Cola M, Griggs E: Chemoarchitectonics and
corticocortical terminations within the superior temporal sulcus of the
rhesus monkey: evidence for subdivisions of superior temporal
polysensory cortex. J Comp Neurol 1995, 360:513-535.
Gabernet L, Meskenaïte V, Hepp-Reymond MC: Parcellation of the lateral
premotor cortex of the macaque monkey based on staining with the
neurofilament antibody SMI-32. Exp Brain Res 1999, 128:188-193.
Geyer S, Zilles K, Luppino G, Matelli M: Neurofilament protein distribution
in the macaque monkey dorsolateral premotor cortex. Eur J Neurosci
2000, 12:1554-1566.
Nimchinsky EA, Hof PR, Young WG, Morrison JH: Neurochemical,
morphologic, and laminar characterization of cortical projection neurons
in the cingulate motor areas of the macaque monkey. J Comp Neurol
1996, 374:136-160.
Sherwood CC, Broadfield DC, Holloway RL, Gannon PJ, Hof PR: Variability
of Broca’s area homologue in African great apes: implications for
language evolution. Anat Rec A Discov Mol Cell Evo Biol 2003, 271:276-285.
Soares JG, Rosado De Castro PH, Fiorani M, Nascimento-Silva S, Gattass R:
Distribution of neurofilament proteins in the lateral geniculate nucleus,
primary visual cortex, and area MT of adult Cebus monkeys. J Comp
Neurol 2008, 508:605-614.
Campbell MJ, Morrison JH: Monoclonal antibody to neurolament protein
(SMI-32) labels a subpopulation of pyramidal neurons in the human and
monkey neocortex. J Comp Neurol 1989, 282:191-205.
Jones EG: Laminar distribution of cortical efferent cells. In Cerebral cortex:
cellular components of the cerebral cortex. Volume 1. Edited by: Peters A,
Jones EG. New York: Plenum Press; 1984:521-553.
Celio M, Spreafico R, De Biasi S, Vitellaro-Zuccarello L: Perineuronal nets:
past and present. Trends Neurosci 1998, 21:510-515.
Naegele JR, Barnstable CJ: Molecular determinants of GABAergic localcircuit neurons in the visual cortex. Trends Neurosci 1989, 12:28-34.
Brückner G, Hausen D, Härtig W, Drlicek M, Arendt T, Brauer K: Cortical
areas abundant in extracellular matrix chondroitin sulphate
proteoglycans are less affected by cytoskeletal changes in Alzheimer’s
disease. Neuroscience 1999, 92:791-805.
Härtig W, Derouiche A, Welt K, Brauer K, Grosche J, Mäder M,
Reichenbach A, Bruckner G: Cortical neurons immunoreactive for the
potassium channel Kv3.1b subunit are predominantly surrounded by
perineuronal nets presumed as a buffering system for cations. Brain Res
1999, 842:15-29.

Page 26 of 26

77. National Research Council: Guidelines for the care and use of mammals in
neuroscience and behavioral research Washington, D.C. National Academies
Press; 2003.
78. Rosene DL, Roy NJ, Dawis BJ: A cryoprotection method that facilitates
cutting frozen sections of whole monkey brains for histological and
histochemical processing without freezing artifact. J Histochem Cytochem
1986, 34:1301-1315.
79. Martin RF, Bowden DM: Template Atlas of the Primate Brain Seattle: Primate
Information Center University of Washington; 1997.
80. Manocha SL, Shantha TR, Bourne GH: A stereotaxic atlas of the brain of the
Cebus monkey (Cebus apella) London: Oxford University Press; 1968.
doi:10.1186/1471-2202-12-6
Cite this article as: Cruz-Rizzolo et al.: Cyto-, myelo- and
chemoarchitecture of the prefrontal cortex of the Cebus monkey. BMC
Neuroscience 2011 12:6.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
