<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Evolutionary plasticity determination by orthologous groups distribution</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Biology Direct 2011, 6:22. doi:10.1186/1745-6150-6-22"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Rodrigo JS Dalmolin"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Dalmolin et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:22
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/22

RESEARCH

Open Access

Evolutionary plasticity determination by
orthologous groups distribution
Rodrigo JS Dalmolin1*, Mauro AA Castro1, José L Rybarczyk Filho1, Luis HT Souza1, Rita MC de Almeida2 and
José CF Moreira1

Abstract
Background: Genetic plasticity may be understood as the ability of a functional gene network to tolerate
alterations in its components or structure. Usually, the studies involving gene modifications in the course of the
evolution are concerned to nucleotide sequence alterations in closely related species. However, the analysis of
large scale data about the distribution of gene families in non-exclusively closely related species can provide
insights on how plastic or how conserved a given gene family is. Here, we analyze the abundance and diversity of
all Eukaryotic Clusters of Orthologous Groups (KOG) present in STRING database, resulting in a total of 4,850 KOGs.
This dataset comprises 481,421 proteins distributed among 55 eukaryotes.
Results: We propose an index to evaluate the evolutionary plasticity and conservation of an orthologous group
based on its abundance and diversity across eukaryotes. To further KOG plasticity analysis, we estimate the
evolutionary distance average among all proteins which take part in the same orthologous group. As a result, we
found a strong correlation between the evolutionary distance average and the proposed evolutionary plasticity
index. Additionally, we found low evolutionary plasticity in Saccharomyces cerevisiae genes associated with
inviability and Mus musculus genes associated with early lethality. At last, we plot the evolutionary plasticity value
in different gene networks from yeast and humans. As a result, it was possible to discriminate among higher and
lower plastic areas of the gene networks analyzed.
Conclusions: The distribution of gene families brings valuable information on evolutionary plasticity which might
be related with genetic plasticity. Accordingly, it is possible to discriminate among conserved and plastic
orthologous groups by evaluating their abundance and diversity across eukaryotes.
Reviewers: This article was reviewed by Prof Manyuan Long, Hiroyuki Toh, and Sebastien Halary.

Background
Biological systems are constantly changing at different
hierarchical levels, such as genome sequences, gene/protein networks and organismal phenotypes. However,
evolutionary constraints selectively act on all levels of
organization allowing some changes and constraining
others. Regarding specifically genomes, constraints do
not act equally among all genetic sequences. Different
classes of organisms (e.g. prokaryotes, unicellular eukaryotes, and multicellular eukaryotes) as well as different
genomes structures (e.g. codifying sequences, introns,
and “junk” sequences) can present huge differences in
* Correspondence: rodrigo.dalmolin@ufrgs.br
1
Department of Biochemistry, Institute of Basic Health Sciences, Federal
University of Rio Grande do Sul, Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

constraints. Even among codifying sequences, constraints act differently depending on the effect a possible
mutation will generate on gene product. Synonymous
mutations, for instance, are less constrained comparing
to non-synonymous mutations. In addition, mutations
in gene regions responsible for crucial sites, such as
folding sites or enzymatic active sites, can be more constrained than disordered segments of proteins [1]. Considering genes as units, there are variable degrees of
constraints leading to different evolutionary rates acting
on different genes. Evolutionary rate of genes has been
extensively studied, being related to several factors - not
necessarily concurrent - such as gene expression level
[2], gene essentiality [3], gene duplication [4], connectivity of the gene products [5], and gene age [6,7].

© 2011 Dalmolin et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Dalmolin et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:22
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/22

It is possible to describe the cellular metabolism by a
graph or network, where gene or gene products are
represented by nodes and their associations, by links.
From the point of view of gene networks, genetic modifications might affect both links (interactions among
gene products) and nodes (gene products). Modifications on genes structure, such as single mutation, deletions, or insertions can modify the interactions between
the mutated gene product and its network partners (e.g.
proteins participating in the same pathway), altering
links of their network. Events as gene duplication and
horizontal gene transfer modify the gene network by
inserting nodes. In addition, network nodes can be
deleted by gene loss events [8]. Similarly to genes, different gene networks might be subject to different constraints being more or less tolerant to changes and
likewise presenting different levels of genetic plasticity the ability of a functional gene or gene network to tolerate alterations in its components or structure [9].
Plasticity is an elusive property, in the sense it cannot
be directly measured and it is always required a subjacent model to design a proper measure. Different artificial model networks have been proposed to define
plasticity measures, bringing interesting conclusions on
the possible functioning of biological networks [10,11].
In addition, in silico techniques have shown good power
of prediction for metabolic networks in unicellular
organisms [12,13]. In complex multicellular organisms,
however, there is paucity of data. In effect, determining
the plasticity of a given gene network is far from a
straightforward task also due to the incomplete knowledge about the relationships among gene-products as
well as about their behavior in different environmental
conditions [14]. Regarding genes, a possible manner to
experimentally investigate genetic plasticity is by using
deletion analysis and different projects have developed
and organized gene deletion information for different
model organisms [15,16]. In this case, robustness against
gene deletion may be interpreted as a tolerance against
alterations on the network (node deletion), implying a
correlation with plasticity. Deletion information is relatively well established for unicellular organisms such as
yeast; for mammals, however, it involves more complicated and expensive techniques and the information is
somewhat incomplete, even for model organisms.
A relevant problem one faces when defining a plasticity measure has to do with time scales. Here we consider time scales long enough to allow for speciation.
For these time scales there is consensus that, for example, the nucleotide excision repair (NER) system is
highly conserved: both the set of genes and the biochemical reactions they participate in are fairly similar
in every extant eukaryote on Earth. Although this set of
genes appeared very early in evolution, they have not

Page 2 of 18

been often deleted in descendent species and they have
not suffered many duplications. Accordingly, each DNA
repair genes has an ortholog in almost all species, without many paralogs [9]. Following this reasoning, we can
infer that conserved, non-plastic genes belong to
families spread over all eukaryotes with few paralogs.
On the other hand, one could expect that ancient, plastic genes would have suffered deletions, and duplications
in some species, but not in others, throughout evolutionary times. The consequence for their ortholog
groups would be i) not having orthologs in many species, and ii) when a given species has a gene in those
groups, they will also present many paralogous genes.
The crescent sea of data generated by genome sequencing projects has provided raw material to investigate
the evolutionary relationships among genes from different species. The analysis of large scale data about the
distribution of gene families (i.e. genes possessing the
same common ancestor gene - an orthologous group
[17]) across non-exclusively closely related species can
provide insights about how plastic or how conserved a
given orthologous group has been throughout its evolutionary history. In some extent, this evolutionary plasticity of an orthologous group might bring a perspective
on the genetic plasticity of their orthologous genes. The
idea is to estimate for each group of orthologs in eukaryotes the number of genes and how they are distributed
among the species. From this information, properly processed, one can characterize their evolutionary history.
For this measure to yield information, it must discriminate different orthologous groups. As shown in what
follows, this is possible, since a considerable number of
gene families has components spread in virtually all
eukaryotes, whereas a great number of orthologous
groups is restricted to some specific lineages [6].
Accordingly, the distribution analysis of a gene family in
a species group brings valuable information about how
conserved and how old that gene family is [7]. A common way to evaluate the breadth and the depth of a
gene family distribution is based in looking for gene presence and absence in an evolutionary tree [18-20]. An
alternative way to evaluate the distribution of an orthologous group consists in using the Shannon information
theory [21] to determine the diversity (Ha) of its distribution in a species group [9]. This methodology is able
to discriminate orthologous groups presenting patchy
phylogenetic distributions - including lineage specific
gene families - from broad distributed orthologous
groups.
Molecular mechanisms such as gene duplication, exon
shuffling, transposable elements, gene fusion and fission,
and horizontal gene transfer have been related to development of new genes [22]. Among them, gene duplication has been discussed to be one of the most important

Dalmolin et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:22
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/22

events in genome evolution by providing the prime
source of genetic material in which evolutionary forces
can act generating novelty [23,24]. Duplication events
occur randomly and duplicated genes can address different fates: (i) they can be selectively preserved, mainly by
bringing an adaptive advantage; (ii) they can be selectively eliminated by bringing an adaptive disadvantage;
and (iii) they can remain unoccupied, drifting in evolutionary process, eventually being eliminated or, more
rarely, evolving to develop another biological function
[25]. It is noticeable some orthologous groups possess
one-to-one relationships, while there are gene families
composed by a great number of paralogs [26]. The reason why some duplicated genes are fixed while others
are eliminated has been extensively discussed; however,
the mechanisms driving the destiny of the new-born
duplicated genes remain controversial [25,27-29]. The
Neo-Functionalization (NEO-F) and the Escape from
Adaptive Conflict (EAC) are among of the most important theories about the fixation of duplicated genes.
NEO-F represents the first idea of evolution by gene
duplication and suggests that once duplicated, one of
the gene copies turns free to acquire a new function in
the course of the accumulation of neutral mutations,
while another copy preserves the original biological function. EAC suggests that a pleiotropic gene performing
more than one function - where each function could not
be independently improved - will be beneficed by a duplication event where each gene copy is then free to specialize in each different function former performed by a
single gene. A third theory is represented by sub-functionalization, where degenerating mutations happens in
both duplicated copies that subdivides gene function
between the duplicated genes. Consequently, both altered
copies are preserved by selection since any individual former gene is able to entirely perform their biological function (for review, see [29]). A useful method to identify
the importance of duplication events in the evolutionary
history of an orthologous group is given by the ratio
between the number of components present in the orthologous group and the number of organisms containing
items from this orthologous group.
In a previous paper, we analyzed the distribution and
the duplicability of a set of 142 orthologous groups
extracted from STRING database http://string.embl.de/
to investigate the evolutionary origin of human apoptosis and genome stability gene network [9]. Here, we
extended the analysis to all Eukaryotic Clusters of
Orthologous Groups (KOG) available in STRING. Our
goal here is to evaluate the evolutionary plasticity and
conservation of an orthologous group according to the
distribution of their components (i.e. orthologous and
paralogous proteins). For each KOG present in STRING
database, we calculate the diversity and abundance of

Page 3 of 18

their components across 55 fully sequenced eukaryotic
genomes and suggest an equation to determine the evolutionary plasticity taking into account both diversity
and abundance. To further KOG plasticity analysis, we
estimate the evolutionary distance average among all
proteins which take part in the same orthologous group
from a sample of the KOGs present in STRING database. As a result, we found a strong correlation between
the evolutionary distance average and the evolutionary
plasticity index proposed. Additionally, we evaluate the
evolutionary plasticity of mouse and yeast genes associated with lethality when knocked-out. We found low
evolutionary plasticity in Saccharomyces cerevisiae genes
associated with inviability and Mus musculus genes
associated with early lethality. At the end, we plot the
evolutionary plasticity value in different gene networks
from yeast and human to identify their more and less
evolutionary plastic areas as well as their more and less
evolutionary conserved areas.

Results
Genes distribution within Orthologous Groups

To assess the distribution of genes within each KOG we
evaluated their diversity (H a ) and abundance (D a ) as
described in Methods section. Ha provides the distribution of a given orthologous group across a species
group. High diversity indicates an equalized distribution
of KOG components (i.e. orthologous and paralogous
proteins) among the species evaluated. On the contrary,
low diversity suggests a non-homogenous distribution.
For a KOG to present maximal diversity their components are present in all species, meaning that this KOG
ancestral gene arrived early in evolution, in the last
common ancestor of all considered organisms - in our
case, in the origin of eukaryotes or before. Furthermore,
besides this ancestral appearing early in evolution, for
its descendants to be found in all assessed genomes,
deletion episodes cannot have happened very often. Da
is defined as the average of number of proteins belonging to the same KOG, present in each organism. In general, high abundance denotes many duplication episodes
in the evolutionary history of an orthologous group.
Figure 1 shows the distribution according to Ha and Da
of all KOGs (4850 KOGs in total) present in STRING.
Note that there is a range of distribution, where Ha of
the majority of the KOGs is around 0.8 to 1, while Da is
concentrated from 1 to 10. However, there are KOGs
that show H a values lower than 0.8 as well as KOGs
that present Da values higher than 10.
Evolutionary Plasticity Index

Low values of D a combined with high values for H a
indicates low plastic orthologous group, since it is present in many species, with few components, indicating it

Dalmolin et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:22
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/22

Page 4 of 18

proteins, strongly indicating a negative correlation
between EPI and number of components (for further
discussions, see Additional file 1, section 1.2).

.

Evolutionary Distance versus EPI

.

.

.

.

Figure 1 Diversity (Ha) and abundance (Da) distribution. Each
KOG present in STRING database was plot according to Ha(y axis)
and Da(x axis) values.

suffered few modifications (i.e. few duplication and deletion episodes) during eukaryotic evolution. Based on
this, we have defined the evolutionary plastic index, EPI,
to define how plastic a given orthologous group is, as
follows:
Hα
EPI = 1 − √
.
Dα

(1)

Note that 0≤ Ha≤1 and Da≥1. As a result, 0≤ EPI ≤1.
Figure 2A shows the distribution of all KOGs present in
STRING organized in 100 groups according to EPI.
Once identified the EPI of a given orthologous group,
this information can be transferred to the proteins that
compose this orthologous group (Figure 2B). The distribution of KOGs has its maximum displaced to low plasticity (Figure 2A); however, the distribution of proteins
is roughly uniform (Figure 2B). This means that those
KOGS with low plasticity present a lower number of

A

Genes can differ in their evolutionary rates. Genes under
purifying selection evolve slower compared to genes
under Darwinian selection [30]. In this sense, analyzing
the amino acid differences among gene products from
the same orthologous group might give us an alternative
plasticity evaluation of a gene family. We compared the
amino acid sequences, all against all, for a sample of
KOGs present in STRING using Poisson correction
method [31,32] as described in Methods section. This
method analyzes the differences in amino acid sequences
and provides an evolutionary distance between two
proteins. We used the average of all distances among
proteins of the same KOG to take the evolutionary distance average of each KOG evaluated. Note that we did
not evaluate synonymous substitution since the analysis
was performed utilizing amino acid sequences. Therefore,
every observed difference corresponds to non-synonymous substitutions.
Figure 3A shows a strong correlation (Pearson correction 0.68621, two-tailed test p < 0.0001) between EPI
and evolutionary distance of the evaluated KOGs. KOGs
that possess high EPI present high evolutionary distance
among their gene products as well as KOGs identified
as having low EPI possess proteins more similar to each
other. According to Figure 3A, the components of a
KOG presenting low EPI are more similar among each
other, comparing to components of a KOG presenting
high EPI. No correlation was identified when plotting evolutionary distance versus Da (Figure 2B), Ha (Figure 2C),
number of species, and number of proteins (see Additional
file 1, Supplementary Figure S6).

B

.

.

.
EPI

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

EPI

Figure 2 Evolutionary Plasticity Index (EPI) distribution. All KOGs present in STRING database were grouped in 100 categories according to
EPI (A). All proteins present in KOG dataset were grouped in 100 categories according EPI (B).

Dalmolin et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:22
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/22

A

Page 5 of 18

B

.

.

.
.

C

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.
.
.
.
.

.

.
.

.
.

.

.
.

.

.

.
.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

Figure 3 Evolutionary distance average versus EPI. 5% of the KOGs present in STRING database were sorted. The evolutionary distance
among all proteins of each KOG evaluated was calculated and the evolutionary distance average (Poisson Distance) was obtained. Poisson
Distance was plotted against EPI (A), abundance (B) and diversity (C) of each KOG evaluated. Red line indicates the linear regression fitting curve
and the box shows the curve proprieties.

Functional Plasticity Analysis

To verify correlation of EPI with previous estimates of
genetic plasticity, we assessed knock-out data from Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Mus musculus, and looked for
genes related with lethality. We considered two criteria
to identify genes involved with lethality: (i) S. cerevisiae
genes which confer inviability when knocked-out and
(ii) M. musculus target genes which cause early lethality
(i.e. lethality before placentation). Additionally, we considered as viable S. cerevisiae genes annotated as “viable”
in SGD as well as M. musculus genes annotated as “no
abnormal phenotype detected” without any phenotype
annotation associated with lethality in MGI (to further
discussion, please see Supplementary material, section
1.3). Figure 4 shows the distribution of proteins from
S. cerevisiae (Figure 4A) and M. musculus (Figure 4B)
according to EPI. The grey landscape represents the EPI
distribution of all proteins of S. cerevisiae (Figure 4A)
and M. musculus (Figure 4B) present in KOG dataset.
Yeast proteins present a distribution concentrated in
low EPI, while mouse proteins present a more uniform
EPI distribution (to further discussion, please see
Supplementary material, section 1.4). The EPI distribution of proteins codified by genes involved with lethality
when knocked-out have their maxima displaced to low
EPI in both yeast and mouse (blue lines in Figures 4A
and 4B, respectively). The opposite can be observed

when considering proteins codified by genes associated
to viable phenotype when knocked-out (red lines in
Figures 4A and 4B). Figure 4C shows that mean EPI of
inviable group is significantly lower comparing to mean
EPI from all S. cerevisiae proteins present in KOG dataset. In the same way, the early lethality group has mean
EPI significantly lower as compared to the totality of
M. musculus proteins found in KOG dataset (Figure 4D).
Additionally, mean EPI of viable groups are significantly
higher when compared to respective total groups in
both S. cerevisiae and M. musculus (Figure 4C and 4D,
respectively).
Evolutionary Plasticity Index of biological networks

Cell functions are performed by functional modules
[10,33] and gene network co-evolution has been proposed as an important evolutionary driving force agent
[34]. In the same way, a network composed by proteins
that take part in ancient and conserved KOGs can be
regarded as conserved. To analyze the evolutionary plasticity of functional biological networks, we constructed
the network of different pathways present in KEGG
database http://www.genome.jp/kegg/ using protein
interaction information from STRING (to further information, see Methods section). After network construction, we plotted the plasticity information of the
network components (i.e. the EPI of the orthologous

Dalmolin et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:22
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/22

Page 6 of 18

S. cerevisiae

A

M. musculus

B

Early Lethality

Proteins (%)

Total

Inviable

Proteins (%)

Total
Viable

.

.

.

.

Viable

.

.

.

EPI
.

.

.

.

.

S. cerevisiae

C

.

EPI
.

M. musculus

D

.

*

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

*
*

EPI

EPI

.

*

.

.

.

Total

Inviable

Viable

.

Total

Early
Lethality

Viable

Figure 4 EPI distribution of target genes related with lethality when knocked-out. The percentage of S. cerevisiae (A) and M. musculus (B)
genes presenting different EPI values is show. The grey landscape represents the EPI distribution of all genes from each species. Blue lines
represent the EPI distribution of S. cerevisiae genes associated with inviable phenotype when knocked-out (A) and M. musculus target genes
associated with early lethality (B). Red lines represent the EPI distribution of target genes associated with viable phenotypes (A and B). Boxes
represent EPI distribution of the different gene categories (total, inviable, and viable) from S. cerevisiae (C) and (total, early lethality, and viable)
from M. musculus (D). The edges of the boxes indicate the upper and lower quartiles. The line at the center of each box indicates the median,
and the whiskers represent the standard deviation. * indicates different from total group (p < 0.0001).

group of each gene from the network) onto network
topology. Figure 5 shows a graph representation of
ribosome network from human (Figure 5A) and yeast
(Figure 5C). Ribosome network is formed by a single
highly connected module in both, human and yeast, and
both networks present low evolutionary plasticity in
their components (Figures 5B and 5D). Figures 5E and
5G show a graph representation for networks from several energetic pathways from human and yeast. Each
network comprises components from glycolysis/gluconeogenesis metabolism, fatty acid metabolism, tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle, and oxidative phosphorylation.
Differently from ribosome network, which is composed
by one module, energetic metabolism network possesses
several interconnected modules. As we can see in
Figures 5F and 5H, the region comprising TCA cycle

presents the lowest evolutionary plasticity in both
human and yeast. Oxidative phosphorylation presents
low, even though not the lowest, evolutionary plasticity
and both, glycolysis/gluconeogenesis metabolism and
fatty acid metabolism, present the highest evolutionary
plasticity of human and yeast energetic metabolism network. Complete graph representation of the networks
with gene symbols are available in Additional file 1
(Supplementary Figures S7, S8, and S9).

Discussion
Genetic plasticity estimative can be useful to different
fields such as genetic diseases and evolution. For example,
plasticity of a gene or a gene network can help finding
components involved in pathology development as well as
indicating possible therapeutical targets. Also, evolutionary

Dalmolin et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:22
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/22

Page 7 of 18

B

A

H. sapiens

H. sapiens

C

D

S. cerevisiae

S. cerevisiae

E

F

H. sapiens

H. sapiens

H

G

S. cerevisiae

S. cerevisiae
Ribossome
Glycolysis/Gluconeogenesis
Fatty acid metabolism
TCA cycle
Oxidative phosphorylation

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

EPI

Figure 5 Gene networks EPI. EPI projection onto different graph
representation of gene networks from S. cerevisiae and H. sapiens
are shown, with the respective network topologies. The nodes
represent genes and the links represent protein-protein interaction
of gene products (A, C, E and F). The color landscape indicates the
EPI (B, D, F, and H). The nodes were colored according to the
pathways they belong (A, C, E and F). Nodes with more than one
color belong to more than one pathway evaluated (E and G). To
complete list of genes, please see Additional file 1 (Supplementary
Figures S7, S8, and S9), Additional file 5 (H. sapiens genes) and
Additional file 6 (S. cerevisiae genes).

novelty will probably appear on genome change-tolerant
portions. The tolerance to modifications can be measured
by directly modifying a gene structure or by estimating the
gene variation in a population. Besides gene deletion
experiments (a possible way of changing gene network
structure), the presence of single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) (a way of estimating gene variation in a population) would be possible alternatives to evaluate genetic
plasticity. However, a single nucleotide mutation may or
not lead to a functional modification, depending on the
site it occurs, leading to misevaluation of genetic plasticity.
Copy number polymorphism (CNP) might work better in
plasticity evaluation, mainly regarding entire deletions and
duplication. In Drosophila melanogaster, for instance,
around 8% of genes are at least partially duplicated and 2%
are at least partially deleted, showing CNP as a common
phenomenon and, consequently, an interesting target for
genetic plasticity evaluation [35]. Genomic information
has been largely used to predict biological function, from
gene/protein function to entire gene/protein network
architecture [14]. Co-inherence has been used to predict
functional interaction between proteins [36] and computational techniques such as network alignment has been
used to identify conserved pathways, manly in closely
related organisms [37]. However, the evolutionary plasticity of orthologous groups has never been systematically
analyzed.
Here, we have presented a large scale data analysis
concerning the distribution of gene families across
eukaryotes to identify conserved and plastic orthologous
groups. It is noticeable the differences in orthologous
groups distribution among eukaryotic genomes and
those differences certainly hold biological information.
The presence of a KOG component restricted to few
eukaryotes indicate at least two possibilities: (i) the
ancestral gene of this orthologous group arrived late in
evolution and its orthologs are only observed in more
recent taxa or (ii) the ancestral gene of this orthologous
group arrived early, but its orthologs were lost in some
of the taxa. Independently of the reason why a given
orthologous group shows a patchy distribution among
eukaryotes, it is clear that these orthologs are not
required by all organisms. Conversely, a gene family
widely found in eukaryotes plays an important role in
virtually all organisms of this domain. Widely distributed genes have been described as being subject to stronger purifying selection as compared to young and less
broadly distributed genes [6,7,18]. One hypothesis to
explain these observations suggests that novel genes present an initial high evolutionary rate phase. At the end
of this phase, there is a decrease in evolutionary rate

Dalmolin et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:22
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/22

due to an increased functional constraint [6]. Recent
works in D. melanogaster have shown an adaptive evolution of young genes and an increased purifying selection
as genes become older, corroborating that hypothesis
[38,39]. Therefore, genes belonging to essential ancient
gene networks, which optimized their roles early in evolution, are expected to present high conserved components across a species tree as well as few drastic
modifications in the course of their evolution. On the
contrary, genes which arrived late in evolution - or even
in ancient non-essential gene networks - might present
a patchy distribution among eukaryotes.
Other important feature concerning orthologous
groups is represented by gene duplication. Why some
genes possess several paralogs whereas other genes
maintain one-to-one orthology relationships? Despite
gene duplication occurring randomly, some genes are
prone to fix a duplication event while other genes avoid
duplication. The fixation of a duplication event is commonly associated with function improvement in newborn duplicated copies. A very good example is given by
Jones and Begun in their study involving three independent events of evolution of chimeric fusion genes in D.
melanogaster. All three studied genes are derived Adh
and all three genes experienced a rapid evolution on the
beginning of their history, followed by a slower adaptive
evolution. Additionally, the authors have observed an
intriguing similarity in the pattern of evolution including
temporal, spatial, and types of amino acid changes in
these proteins [39]. Those data strongly suggest that the
parent-protein characteristics might determine the path
a possible copy will experience, including whether or
not it will be fixed or eliminated. According to EAC theory, genes exercising more than one function (i.e. genes
presenting functional plasticity) are prone to fix a possible duplication event [28,40].
EPI is based on drastic changes in the history of orthologous groups such as gene duplication and gene deletion. However, a gene may experience different degrees
of changes. A gene highly tolerant to mutations will accumulate alterations in its nucleotide sequence on the
course of its history. On the contrary, a gene lowly tolerant to mutations will present few nucleotide alterations
in its evolutionary history. A complementary, independent measure of the plasticity of an orthologous group is
then given by the similarity among the sequences of their
proteins. Low evolutionary distances indicate that the
proteins present very similar amino acid sequences. Consequently, they suffered few modifications as compared
to those proteins presenting high evolutionary distance.
According to our results, EPI is correlated to the evolutionary distance measure, suggesting that genes widely
distributed among eukaryotes and possessing few paralogs are subject to purifying selection, reinforcing the

Page 8 of 18

idea that they are conserved, low plastic genes. A recent
work involving gene families in primates has shown an
interesting relationship among family size conservation,
evolutionary rates and gene essentiality. According to the
authors, genes within size conserved families present
lower evolutionary rate and a higher proportion of essential genes compared to genes within non size conserved
families from human, chimpanzee and rhesus [41]. Those
results suggest that our observation concerning duplicability, diminished evolutionary rate, and increased essentiality can also be observed by analyzing gene families in
closely related organisms.
The idea is not new that essential genes are subjected
to stronger selective constraints and, consequently,
evolve slower than nonessential genes [42]. In this
sense, evolutionary plasticity could be the reflex of
genetic plasticity. According to our results, genes associated with lethality are significantly more related to low
plastic orthologous groups than genes associated with
no abnormal phenotype in both S. cerevisiae and
M. musculus. Therefore, the evolutionary history of a
gene, i.e. the distribution of their orthologs among different organisms, might bring information about the
relevance of their role. However, some less common
exceptions may occur. It may happen that some new
duplicated genes evolve to perform essential functions,
as represented by essential genes with high EPI. Chen
and collaborators have shown new genes that rapidly
became essential in D. melanogaster, exercising crucial
roles mainly in intermediary or late stages of development [38]. However, a wide distributed gene without
duplication and deletion episodes probably exercise
important biological role, suggesting that EPI may have
more acuity to determine low plastic genes than to high
plastic genes.
Our hypothesis that the evolutionary plasticity of an
orthologous group can be an indicative of genetic plasticity of genes within that orthologous group has been
applied to ribosome and energetic metabolism gene networks, showing interesting results. Ribosomes are
known as ancient molecular fossils that have arrived
before the LCA of all living organisms [43]. As it has
been shown here, ribosome gene networks of both
S. cerevisiae and H. sapiens present very low EPI. The
entangled network topology indicates an intricate relationship among the partners of this very ancient low
plastic gene network. On the other hand, central metabolism has been described as highly variable among different prokaryotes [44,45]. Here, we have found fatty
acid metabolism and glycolysis/gluconeogenesis as the
highest plastic portion in central metabolism. Despite
glycolytic pathway might have arrived early in evolution,
its components are not conserved across the species and
glycolysis has been described as a high plastic and

Dalmolin et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:22
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/22

versatile pathway [46]. Contrasting to glycolysis, TCA
cycle represents the lowest EPI portion of the energetic
metabolism network. Among the few works that have
investigated the evolution of TCA cycle in eukaryotes, a
recent paper has shown evolutionary similarity between
mitochondria from S. cerevisiae and Rickettsia prowazekii in topological analyses based on network alignment
and motif identification [47]. In the same work, the
authors have described the mitochondria network as
highly clustered around the TCA cycle. R. prowazekii is
a mitochondria-related alpha-proteobacteria [48] and
TCA cycle pathway seems to be closely related among
eukaryotes and its ancestor prokaryote. Those assumptions agree with the results shown here, suggesting TCA
cycle as low plastic and highly conserved among the
eukaryotes. Despite the results shown here cannot be
generalized to all biological networks, it opens a perspective on developing an extensive research concerning
EPI and networks properties, such as node connectivity
and clustering coefficient, as well as network centrality.
In the last decades, the advances in modern genomics
have provided a powerful framework in the evolutionary
research field. The availability of an enormous amount
of completely sequenced genomes, including a great
range of organisms, has provided new insights in evolutionary relationships involving genes, pathways, and species. EPI consists in a simple useful method that brings
valuable complement in evolutionary studies and provides insights in other research fields such as pathology
research and drug design. Clearly, the species set utilized in the orthologous group formation is essential to
its diversity, abundance, and consequently to EPI determination. We avoid using the entire COG database due
to its unequal distribution concerning the three domain
of life (i.e. 532 bacteria, 43 archaea and 55 eukarya).
EPI can be applied to any species group to identify the
evolutionary plasticity of gene families in related species.
However, the researcher must take care with the evolutionary relationship among the species used in EPI
determination to avoid biased results. Many evolutionary
questions, such as the exact factors determining gene
and gene networks evolvability, are still unsolved.
Despite our work does not clarify how and why the
modifications of some gene networks are constrict on
the course of evolution, EPI represents one step in evolutionary relationship understanding by identifying
which gene families have been more or less stable on
the course of evolution.

Conclusions
Our results suggest that the distribution of gene families
brings valuable information on how plastic and how
conserved a gene family is. It is possible to discriminate
among conserved and plastic orthologous groups by

Page 9 of 18

evaluating their abundance and diversity. In addition,
the evolutionary plasticity, measured according to orthologous group distribution as shown here, is coherent
with other plasticity measures such as constriction in
amino acid sequence modifications throughout evolution
and essentiality in mouse and yeast. Finally, the evolutionary plasticity index measured according to abundance and diversity of gene families is consistent with
the knowledge about the evolutionary conservation of
ribosome gene network as well as the evolutionary plasticity of energetic metabolism gene network.

Methods
Data selection

Several databases offer tools in order to identify gene
families. Each database utilizes its specific algorithm to
find homology relationships according to specific purposes, such as to search orthologous genes/proteins
along species or to search groups of genes/proteins
which present the same last common ancestor (i.e. orthologous groups). However, the general strategy used by
almost all database is to compare nucleotide sequences
among different species [49-51] (to further discussion see
Additional file 1, section 1.1). COG (Cluster of Orthologous Groups) database http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
COG presents a useful approach to identify orthologous
groups. In COGs construction algorithm, all proteins
encoded by the complete genomes analyzed are compared and for each protein, the best hit (BeT) in each different genome is detected. To name it as a cluster, it is
necessary to form a triangle including BeT in at least
three different organisms. Each COG represents a gene/
protein family, including both orthologs and paralogs
from different genomes, which have evolved from the
same ancestral gene through a series of speciation and
duplication events [52]. Besides COGs, which include
eukaryotic and prokaryotic proteins, the database provides a tool involving only eukaryotic proteins. KOG
(Eukaryotic Clusters of Orthologous Group) utilizes the
same algorithm to find orthologous groups; however, it
only works with eukaryotic genomes [53]. STRING database string-db.org has amplified the COG orthology
information by creating more groups and adding extra
species, totalizing 630 fully sequenced organisms with 55
eukaryotes among them [49]. Here, orthologous groups
were accessed through STRING database version 8.2
stringdb.org [49], in download section. Only eukaryotic
orthologous groups (KOG) were evaluated, resulting in a
total of 4,850 KOGs. This dataset comprises 481,421 proteins distributed among 55 eukaryotes.
Distribution of orthologous groups

An orthologous group corresponds to a set of genes
belonging to different species, which have a common

Dalmolin et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:22
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/22

Page 10 of 18

gene ancestor. To obtain a quantitative expression of the
proteins distribution for each KOG (i.e. distribution of
the items of a given KOG), we used Shannon Information Theory [9,21] defined as follows. Consider n as the
number of selected KOGs, each one representing an
orthologous group. Each KOG is labeled by a (a = 1,...,
n) and has N a items (orthologous and paralogous
genes), distributed among M possible organisms. Consequently, for a given KOG we can define s(i,a) as the
number of items of a given organism i, (i = 1,..., M a),
whose sum for a given a adds up to Na. The probability
p(i,a) that, among the Na items of the a-KOG, a KOG
randomly chosen, belongs to the organism i is written as
s(i, α)
Nα

p(i, α) =

such that

i

(1a)

p(i, α) = 1. The normalized Shannon

information function Ha is defined as
Hα = −

1
ln M

p(i, α) ln p(i, α)

(2)

i

where we have divided by ln(M) in order to normalize
the quantities, guaranteeing that 0≤ Ha≤1. Observe that
if there is one gene per organism, Na = M, p(i,a) = 1/
M, and Ha = 1. In fact, Ha reflects the spread of the distribution s(i,a), i.e., it measures the diversity that exists
in the a-th KOG. H a near 0 indicates poor diversity,
while a Ha close to 1 suggests high diversity. The abundance Da of a given KOG was measured by obtaining
the ratio between the number of items (orthologous and
paralogous proteins) present in the KOG and the number of organisms containing items from this KOG. Da
vary from 1 to virtually infinite (despite the higher
abundance found here was around 260) and represents
the average of orthologous and paralogs per species for
a given KOG. The diversity and abundance was conducted using the software GenPlast. GenPlast have been
designed by our research group to perform the plasticity
analysis presented in this paper. The software has been
developed in the java platform, is under an open source
license, and is freely available at http://lief.if.ufrgs.br/
pub/biosoftwares/genplast.
Molecular evolutionary analysis

Molecular evolutionary analysis was conducted using
MEGA version 4 [31]. 5% of the KOGs present in
STRING (243 KOGs) was sorted according to the EPI
and aligned amino acid sequences of all proteins comprising each KOG was obtained from STRING database
string-db.org [49]. FASTA sequences were converted in
MEGA format by the software. The number of amino
acid substitutions per site between sequences was analyzed by the software set in “protein sequences”. All

results were based on the pairwise analysis sequences.
Analyses were conducted using the Poisson correction
method in MEGA4 [31,32]. All positions containing
alignment gaps and missing data were eliminated only
in pairwise sequence comparisons (Pairwise deletion
option). The Poisson Distance average of all proteins
contained in each KOG evaluated was also obtained
using MEGA4. To complete list of sorted KOGs, please
see Additional file 2 (Supplementary Table S4).
Lethality Evaluation

Saccharomyces cerevisiae data was obtained from Saccharomyces Genome Database http://www.yeastgenome.
org[16]. Genes associated to inviability when knocked-out
was obtained using the SGD advanced search with step 1
(select chromosomal feature) set in “ORF” and step 2 (narrow results), box phenotype properties, set in “Inviable”.
Genes associated to viable phenotype when knocked-out
was obtained following the same procedure, except by
shift “inviable” by “viable” in phenotype properties box.
The complete list of S. cerevisiae genes with phenotype
annotations used here is available in Additional file 3
(Supplementary Table S5). Mus musculus data was
obtained from Mouse Genome Informatics http://www.
informatics.jax.org[54] in download area, file “Genotypes
and Mammalian Phenotype Annotations (tab-delimited)”.
The following phenotype annotations were considered
together to form the group “early lethality": embryonic
lethality before implantation [MP:0006204], embryonic
lethality at implantation [MP:0008527], embryonic lethality
between implantation and placentation [MP:0009850],
embryonic lethality before somite formation [MP:0006205],
and embryonic lethality before turning of embryo
[MP:0006206]. Genotypes with more than one target allele
were discarded. Genes possessing the phenotype annotation “no abnormal phenotype detected [MP:0002169]”
were considered to form the “viable” group. MGI BioMart version 0.7 http://biomart.informatics.jax.org was
utilizing to find knock-out target genes. Genes combining
MP:0002169 and any other phenotype annotation
associated with lethality (MP:0005374, MP:0002081,
MP:0002058, MP:0002080, MP:0008762, MP:0008527,
MP:0006204, MP:0009850, MP:0006205, MP:0006206,
MP:0006207, MP:0006208, MP:0005373, MP:0008569,
and MP:0002082) were discarded. After that, all resultant
genes codifying proteins preset in KOG dataset was utilized. The complete list of M. musculus genes with phenotype annotations used here is available in Additional
file 4 (Supplementary Table S6).
Network Plasticity

The protein-protein interaction networks were generated using information from KEGG http://www.genome.
jp/kegg/[51] and STRING string-db.org [49] databases

Dalmolin et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:22
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/22

in two steps. First, the gene set of human and yeast
pathways evaluated was obtained from KEGG. Only
human genes identified in HUGO Gene Nomenclature
Committee http://www.genenames.org/[55] and yeast
genes identified in Saccharomyces Genome Database
http://www.yeastgenome.org[56] were used. Second,
protein interaction was obtained using STRING database with input options “databases”, “experiments”, and
0.700 confidence level. STRING integrates different
curated public databases containing information on
direct and indirect functional protein-protein associations. Network was constructed including only interacting genes/proteins and results from the search were
saved and further handled in Medusa software [57]. Evolutionary plasticity of each network was determined in
two steps. First, the EPI of each protein from the network was determined according to the EPI of the KOG
to which the protein takes part. Second, the evolutionary
plasticity data was plot onto the network using the software ViaComplex [58] to construct a landscape representation. The complete list of H. sapiens genes used to
construct the networks is available in Additional file 5
(Supplementary Tables S7) and the complete list of
S. cerevisiae genes used to construct the networks is
available in Additional file 6 (Supplementary table 8).

Reviewers’ comments
Reviewer 1

Professor Manyuan Long, Department of Ecology and
Evolution The University of Chicago.
This reviewer provided no comments for publication.
Reviewer 2

Hiroyuki Toh,
The authors evaluated the evolutionary plasticity based
on the diversity and the abundance of the orthlogous
genes. The authors found that the plasticity is associated
with the inviability of yeast and the early lethality of
mouse. The approach is interesting. However, I found
several problems in the manuscript. Following is the list
for possible amendment.
Major: problems

(1) The authors defined “genetic plasticity” as the ability
of a functional gene network to tolerate the alterations
in its components or structures (p. 3 line 7 Background). In page 7 (Results, Evolutionary Plasticity
Index), the authors defined “evolutionary plasticity” as
formula (1), which is calculated with the diversity and
the abundance of orthologous genes.
(1-1) Is the term “genetic plasticity” equivalent with
the term “evolutionary plasticity"?
Authors’ response: Actually, these two concepts are
different. Genetic plasticity is a gene property, while evolutionary plasticity is an orthologous group property.

Page 11 of 18

Genetic plasticity, as described on the manuscript, corresponds to the gene (or gene network) capacity to tolerate
changes and the evolutionary plasticity, defined by Eq.1,
is the record of changes a given gene family have experienced through its evolutionary history. We rewrite a substantial part of the introduction to clear both concepts.
We also added additional discussion to elucidate the differences, as well as the relationships, between both.
(1-2) If the two terms are used to indicate the same
thing, it is not clear why the value calculated with the
diversity and the abundance of the orthologous genes
can indicate the ability of a gene network, since the formula (1) is given for a component of a gene network.
Authors’ response: As mentioned above, genetic plasticity and evolutionary plasticity are not the same thing.
However, we propose a relationship between both. Starting to the point that genes do not work alone in an
organism, the capacity of a gene to tolerate changes will
certainly be influenced by their gene network. Additional
discussions were added to the manuscript involving the
relationship among the gene plasticity and the gene network plasticity.
(2) about the term “paralog” used in the manuscript.
The authors used the eukaryotic clusters of orthologous group (KOG) in this study. To define the diversity
and the abundance in p. 17 - 18 (Methods, Distribution
of orthologous groups), the authors used not only orthologs but also paralogs. The description iseems to be
confusing for the readers who are not so familiar with
the genome science, since the term paralog” used in the
manuscript is not the general one, I think that the
authors wanted to indicate “co-ortholog” by “paralog”.
So, I think that a KOG does not include the distant
paralogs. I recommend the authors to check the usage
of the terms. Unless only close paralogs or co-orthologs
are considered for the calculation of formula (1) in
p. 18, the diversity loses the meanings. If the authors
wanted to include the distant paralogs for the calculation,
the consideration of the taxonomic bias may be required.
Likewise, the definition of the abundance may be too
naïve. Let’s consider two cases with two species. In the
first case, only one species has 99 paralogs, whereas the
other has one orthologs. Da is calculated as (1+99)/2 = 50
in this case. In the other case, the first species has 50 paralogs and the other has remaining 50 copies. In this case,
Da is calculated as (50 + 50)/2 = 50. That is the same
values are obtained for the two cases. The first case may
reflect a trend for the species specific gene amplification,
whereas the second case may suggest the duplicability of
the orthoologs. I think that the taxonomic bias should be
taken into account for the calculation of Da.
Authors’ response: In fact, there are some controversies involving the terms ortholog and paralog. Other
terms such as co-ortholog, inparalog, outparalog,

Dalmolin et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:22
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/22

pseudoortholog, pseudoparalog, etc, can be added to the
debate. The strict description of each of those terms is
not the point here. Our point is to discriminate among
orthologous groups possessing one ortholog per species
analyzed and orthologous groups possessing many orthologs (or co-orthologs) per species analyzed. Additionally,
we analyze the distribution of ortholog among species to
discriminate broadly distributed orthologous groups from
poorly distributed orthologous group. As we do not
include taxonomic relationships in the analysis, we analyze the set of species as a whole, independently of the
distance among them. A fungi-specific orthologous group,
for instance, will present low diversity. In the same way,
a primate specific orthologous group also will present
low diversity. In contrast, an orthologous group that has
components equally present in all species evaluated will
have high diversity. In what concerns KOG database, it
intends to identify all eukaryotic genes which evolve from
the same ancestral gene.
We agree with the reviewer in their comment relative
to abundance. Abundance cannot be used without diversity to evolutionary plasticity inference, as shown in
Figure 3B. This is the reason why we use the abundance
combined to diversity. Examining the suggested example:
Case 1: one species has 99 paralogs, whereas the other
has one ortholog. In this case, the abundance is 50 and
the diversity is 0.080793136. Accordingly, EPI is
0.988574125.
Case 2: one species has 50 paralogs, whereas the other
has 50 copies. The abundance is 50, exactly equal the
case 1. The diversity, however, is 1. In this second case,
EPI is 0.858578644. As shown, different orthologous
groups presenting equal abundance but different diversity
will have different EPI.
Minor problems

(1) The authors pointed out the importance of neofunctionalization after gene duplication. However, the
authors did not mention sub-functionalization. I think
that the dubfunctionalization is also related to the evolutionary plasticity. Why did the authors neglect the
subfunctionalization.
Authors’ response: The theories discussed on the
manuscript (i.e. neo-functionalization and EAC) are two
important examples among many others about gene
duplication theory. Since the reviewer judged important
to mention sub-functionalization, a comment about that
theory has been added on the manuscript.
(2) The authors used “aminoacid” instead of amino
acid in the manuscript. I think that “amino acid” is ordinarily used.
Authors’ response: It has been modified.
(3) p. 19 -20 (Methods, Fitness Evaluation
The term “fitness” is used for different meanings from
that in the evolutionary biology and the population

Page 12 of 18

genetics. I recommend the authors to use different term
to express “fitness” in their manuscript.
Authors’ response: We have replaced “fitness” by
“genes involved with lethality when knocked-out”
(4) p.10 (Results, Functional Plasticity Analysis) naïve
idea on evolution
It may be my misunderstanding, but some descriptions in p.10 seem to be naïve as an evolutionary
statement.
(4-1),p. 10 line 1 “increase in complexity is a hallmark
of evolution.
Evolutionary biologists do not consider so. Degeneration and neural change are also important to consider
the evolution.
Authors’ response: We agree with the reviewer. In fact,
there are examples of evolution by diminishing the complexity. The meaning intended with the sentence is
related to life as a whole. Since first life forms have
arrived, crescent levels of complexity can be observed in
life organization. Despite simple organisms still represent
the majority of the life forms, the complex relationships
between different organisms and the environment is
noticeable. To avoid misunderstanding we have changed
“evolution” by “life” on the manuscript.
(4-2) p. 10 lines 2 - 4
However, impairment in biological networks whose
have arrived early in evolution (i.e. before multicellularity) might lead to early developmental lethality.
(5-1) whose ——➩ which
Authors’ response: Alteration has been done.
(5-2) There is no rationale or citation for this statement, but the authors seemed to follow the recaptulation theory by Heckel, which is still in debate. The
authors should provide the rationale of this statement.
Authors’ response: We agree with the reviewer and
removed the sentence from the main manuscript. We
added an extra section in the Supplementary Material,
discussing lethality in multicellular organism. We provide the rationale of that statement on this new section.
Reviewer 3

Sebastien Halary,
Referee 3 - S. Halary

This study proposes an index called Evolutionary Plasticity Index (EPI) to assess the “genetic plasticity” of
genes. This index is defined as a function of the abundance (number of genes) and distribution (diversity of
organisms having these genes) within the homologous
genes family a gene belongs to. EPI was calculated for
4850 KOGs and compared for 243 of them with their
Poisson distance average of all proteins they contain.
Then, EPI utility was illustrated by comparing the ‘plasticity’ of lethal against non-lethal genes of S. cerevisiae

Dalmolin et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:22
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/22

and M. musculus, and the plasticity of genes involved in
interactions/metabolic networks. EPI seems to be a simple tool to assess the diversity of a gene in eukaryotes,
and then to be useful to characterize the paralogs richness of a homologous genes family. Nevertheless, this
paper does not provide satisfactory arguments to justify
the use of EPI rather than the other existing tools used
up till now to estimate the diversity within a homologous family. This is mainly because the results are not
discussed in sufficient depth. The authors propose to
investigate relationships between EPI and lethality or
topological position of the protein in a network, but did
not compare their results with previous studies on the
same subjects, whereas it could be useful to assess the
power of their approach. To improve the manuscript, I
would recommend that the authors provide concrete
examples for which their index outperforms existing
indices, or for which the tool is more straightforward.
Also, the discussion can be improved by being more
specific about optimal condition for this tool and/or by
specifying novel applications.
From an editorial point of view, this paper is very
long, mainly because of repetitions (without taking
account of the 6 supplementary files). Many paragraphs
are not placed in the suitable chapter. The quality of
language could sometimes be improved upon as well.
Overall, this results in a confusing article.
Authors’ response: We thank the reviewer for the
extensive revision he had provided. We followed his suggestions as possible, improving substantially the paper.
We also identify some misunderstanding and have
worked on improve the clearness of the discussions.
We agree with the reviewer and made efforts to make
the paper as short as possible. We removed some peripheral discussions from the main manuscript to the supplementary files. We also have replaced many paragraphs
in order to clear the reading. Language has been revised.
In my opinion, this article cannot be published before
major editing and some revisions. I have some questions
about the methods and the results, which I hope could
be useful to improve the manuscript:
-How were the 5% of KOGs chosen for the comparison EPI/evolutionary distance? Why 5%?
Authors’ response: Data analyzed here involves a total
of 481,421 proteins distributed among 4850 KOGs. It is a
large, however finite, population. To better estimate the
relationship among EPI and evolutionary distance, we
take a large sample (i.e. n/N>0.05. In our case N =
4850. Accordingly, n would be > 242.5). A sample larger
than 5% would be unnecessary and would substantially
delay the paper.
-There is a correlation between EPI and ‘evolutionary
distance’, but it would be quite dangerous to resume the
second by the first. These values provides more

Page 13 of 18

complementary than comparable information. You can
find 2 KOGs with the same EPI, and very different
means of distance (Figure 3A). Anyway, the authors discuss neither, nor do they comment on the relevance of
their index. Which methods already exist to assess
diversity of genes within a homologous family? Why is
your index better than others or what kind of supplementary information can it provide?
Authors’ response: We completely agree with the
reviewer. Evolutionary distance is complementary to EPI
since both evaluate different classes of changes. While
EPI identify entire gene alterations (i.e. duplication and
deletion episodes), evolutionary plasticity evaluate the
amino acid variation among the proteins. Since each
measure evaluates different things, one cannot be
explained exactly by a function of the other. Our results
show that wide-distributed orthologous groups that have
experienced few duplications and deletions episodes tend
to have proteins more similar among each other (according to amino acid sequence), i.e. we found a coherent
relationship between EPI and evolutionary distance, as
shown by Figure 3A. We have amplified the discussion
about EPI and evolutionary distance relationship to
clear it and to avoid misunderstanding.
Our analysis does not attempt to replace any existing
method and the point here is the possibility to evaluate
a great amount of data and extract information from it.
The relationship among orthologs distribution and the
orthologous group plasticity cannot be neglected and the
present manuscript is the first work concerned in systematizing this relationship. We also have improved the discussion on other works concerning in evaluate gene
networks plasticity to clear the usefulness of our research.
-The list of genomes in STRING DB (as I can read in
the legend of Figure S5) is composed by 34 genomes
from animals, 14 from fungi, 1 from plant and 6 from
“protists” (belonging to 3 different kingdoms). First, for
the figure S5A, if you choose to make the distinction
between animals and fungi which are phylogenetically
quite close. It could make sense to also make the distinction between the “protists” (mycetozoa, euglenozoa,
alveolata and diplomonads) which are very distant from
each other. Second, since there is just one plant in the
dataset, you are not able to see the plant-specific KOGs
and thus, you could underestimate the number of plantspecific paralogs and EPIs. Following the same reasoning, this study cannot be adapted to non-fungal unicellular organisms of the dataset. Actually, the dataset
seems to be only suitable to assess animal and fungal
protein diversity. What do you think about the possibility to adapt the set of genomes per study, to the organism of interest?
Authors’ response: The figure S5 attempts to show the
EPI differences comparing complex multicellular and

Dalmolin et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:22
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/22

unicellular/simple multicellular organisms. Our intention
is to discuss the relationship among the organism complexity (i.e. multicellular, unicellular) and EPI. The phylogenetic relationship among the groups is not the point
here. We removed the figure S5A since we judge figure
S5B as sufficient to discussion. Additionally, we add a
new section on supplementary material to better discuss
the results concerning EPI in different organisms. Regarding the second point, we agree with the reviewer. Species
set is not appropriated to obtain conclusions on specific
taxonomic groups such as plants. This is the reason way
we do not infer any conclusion based on specific taxonomic groups. On the contrary, we just evaluated if an
orthologous group is wide-distributed or narrowly-distributed among the 55 eukaryotes analyzed. We think is a
good idea to use EPI to evaluate subsets of organisms
and thank the referee for the suggestions. We add on the
manuscript a discussion about this possibility.
-There are some “lethal proteins” with high EPI.
Could you present one of these cases and discuss that?
Authors’ response: We have added an example of
lethality in novel proteins of D. melanogaster. Additionally, we extend the discussion (supplemental material)
regarding EPI and lethality.
-You present lethal/non-lethal proteins study and network plasticity as two different cases of application, but
it is probable, at least for some proteins, that their “lethality status” is related to their centrality and/or connectivity in the interactions network.
Authors’ response: We agree with and thank the
reviewer for the suggestion. Indeed, many works have
suggested an association among lethality and different
networks properties, such as centrality and connectivity.
Here, we found a connection between lethality and evolutionary plasticity, and a possible relationship among
evolutionary plasticity, lethality, and networks properties
may exist. One of ours perspectives is to perform a
research involving evolutionary plasticity and networks
properties.
-You cite Li et al. 2006, which present the study of
duplicability of genes in yeast. You could have cited also
Chen et al 2010 (MBE) article which present a close
investigation in humans. More precisely, I think you
could have compared their results to yours to assess the
efficiency and usefulness of your index before applying
it to another question, even a simple one, to improve
the quality of your discussion. You have focused your
discussion exclusively on the importance of duplication
in evolution, but you did not provide new evidence or
hypotheses.
Authors’ response: We thank the reviewer to suggest
the very good paper of Chen and collaborators. We have
used their results in our discussion about duplicability
and evolutionary rate.

Page 14 of 18

- It is a good idea to use your index to study diversity
within metabolic/interaction networks. However, even if
the 4 shown examples are interesting, they can not constitute any evidence about the importance of low EPI
proteins within networks in general. A more convincing
approach would have been to make an exhaustive study
of protein’s EPIs in function of their network’s node
properties. Centrality and connectivity measures should
be useful to identify the proteins that you need to investigate in the aim to discuss about EAC theory, for
instance.
Authors’ response: We completely agree with the
reviewer. Our results must be evaluated as an example
of EPI utilization. We have added a comment on discussion section to make it clear. As mentioned before, we
plan to perform an extensive research involving evolutionary plasticity in a networks perspective.
-The Figure 5 is very pretty, but it needs to be modified to improve the clarity of the results. First, (and at
least) you must invert the both columns, since even in
the text you began by describing the right one. Second,
the resolution of the coloration in the left column is too
low and it is often difficult to make the correlation
between a node and its EPI. I propose to remove this
column and to plot coloration directly on the network’s
nodes. For instance, Cytoscape allows to colorize a node
and its outline in different colors. Furthermore, you
don’t provide a simple description of these networks in
the legend and/or in Results: what are nodes, what are
edges and what do the edges length mean?
Authors’ response:
First: the columns have been inverted.
Second: we think may be a good strategy coloring the
nodes to identify EPI values of the genes. However, it is
not our objective here. The software ViaComplex, used to
produce the figure, work by projecting a landscape onto
a network to identify the area of influence of a given
property, such as transcription level, lethality, or evolutionary plasticity. The software takes in consideration the
nodes and the links between nodes to project the information (here, to project EPI information). To access EPI
of a specific gene of the presented networks the reader
can check supplementary tables S7 and S8.
Third: the figure brings a graph representation of different networks and the information regarding nodes and
edges are presented on the figure legend. Additional
figures with gene symbols are shown on supplementary
material.
Please consider these detailed suggestions:
p.1: 2 semi-colons in the authors list.
Authors’ response: The commas have been substituted
by semicolons in the author list.
p. 2: in the Background section of the Abstract:
“duplicability (abundance) and distribution (diversity)”.

Dalmolin et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:22
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/22

Is the abundance of genes in a COG (breadth of the
COG) only a function of their duplicability? Can these 2
words be used as strictly synonyms.
Authors’ response: Every molecular mechanism
involved with the development of new genes might be
related to the abundance of an orthologous group. Horizontal gene transfer, for instance, can increase the abundance of an orthologous group by adding extra gene
copies in a given genome, increasing the orthologous group
abundance as a whole. Nevertheless, such episodes are far
from greatly relevant in abundance constitution, mainly
in eukaryotic organisms, whereas gene duplication is
admittedly the most important mechanism. In addition,
the exact molecular mechanism involved in abundance
(i.e. gene duplication, reverse transcription, etc.) is not the
point here. To avoid misunderstanding, however, we
changed the referred sentence on the abstract.
p. 3: “Genetic plasticity may be understood...”. Exact
repetition of the first sentence of the abstract.
Authors’ response: We have changed the sentence on
the background section.
p.3: «The analysis of a large scale data about the distribution of genes families (i.e orthologous group)». You
did not survey families of orthologous genes stricto
sensu, otherwise you should not have observed duplication events. Ortholog being a confusing term, especially
when you use COGs from eggNOG database (which
provides the db of STRING I think), it would be helpful
to fix the definitions of homo/ortho/para-logous gene.
Authors’ response: We agree with the reviewer in their
concernment about orthologs. It has been extensively discussed and there is no consensus about the nomenclature.
The evolutionary relationships among genes involve several possible mechanisms that turn difficult to determine
if a couple of genes in different species (or sometimes in
the same species) are orthologs, coorthologs, paralogs,
inparalogs, outparalogs, pseudoorthologs, or pseudoparalogs among each other. Despite such different relationships
indeed exist, in practice, however, the identification and
classification of homology relationships remains very difficult, mainly to entire genomes comparisons involving several species. The concept of orthologous group is exactly
projected to characterize a group of genes with a same
common ancestor, which is the meaning intended here. To
make it clear, we have added this concept on the manuscript as well as the citation of a very explicative review
wrote by Professor Koonin. Regarding the origin of the
dataset, eggNOG and KOG represent distinct projects.
KOG is based on a robust manual expert annotation
whereas eggNOG is automatically and computationally
constructed. For reference, please check Muller et al Nucl
Acids Res 2010, 38: D190-D195.
Then, the sentence p.4 « It is noticeable some
orthologous groups possess one-to-one relationships,

Page 15 of 18

while there are gene families composed by a great
number of paralogs» could be replaced by «Then,
some homologous gene families are only composed by
orthologs, while others possess a great number of
paralogs too.»
Authors’ response: We think that to consider as orthologs all one-to-one relationship could be a mistake in
some cases, according to discussed above. Let’s examine
the following example: There are two out-paralogs (gene
A and gene A’) in two related species (species x and species y). In this example, the gene Ax (i.e. the gene A from
the species x) is ortholog of Ay (i.e. the gene A from the
species y) and the gene A’x is ortholog of A’y. However,
during the speciation process, the ortholog A has been
deleted in a new species w (which possess only the gene
A’ w ) and the ortholog A’ has been deleted in another
new species k (which possesses only the gene Ak). Analyzing the species w and k, the genes A’ w and A k are not
orthologs among each other in spite of a one-to-one relationship involving the referred genes. Again, is very difficult to determine the exactly evolutionary relationship
among genes. This is the reason way we prefer to use the
orthologous group concept in our analysis.
p.3: «from broad orthologous group» groups.
Authors’ response: The alteration has been done.
p. 3 to p. 4: «In a previous paper, we analysed [...] to
the genes which codifying such proteins. » These lines
must be displaced in the last paragraph of the introduction. Furthermore, the syntax is not correct in « the
genes which codifying such proteins ».
Authors’ response: The lines have been replaced and
the last sentence has been removed.
p. 6: «To assess the distribution of each KOGs», I
would prefer «To assess the distribution of genes within
each KOGs». In the same way, maybe you can change
the title to make it more precise.
Authors’ response: The alterations have been done.
p. 7: «As mentioned above, a KOG presenting Ha and
Da [...] few duplications episodes.» This sentence can be
removed.
Authors’ response: The sentence has been removed.
p. 7: «It is reasonable to think that a KOG with those
[...] Ha indicates a high plastic orthologous group.»
More Discussion or Introduction than Results.
Authors’ response: The sentence has been modified.
p. 7: «The distribution of KOGs is dislocated». Is “dislocated” the best term ?
Authors’ response: The term has been replaced.
p. 8: «Accordingly, a randomly chosen protein has [...]
characteristic of an index (to further discussion, see
Additional file 1, section 1.2).» Discussion
Authors’ response: The sentence has been modified.
p. 8: « Genes can differ according to evolutionary rates
[...] plasticity evaluation of a gene family.» Discussion

Dalmolin et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:22
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/22

Authors’ response: I agree with the reviewer that the
discussion section would be a good place to the pointed
sentence. However, we prefer provide a short introduction
to situate the reader on the issue that will be presented.
Additionally, the maintenance of the sentence will not
disturb the objective of the section.
p. 8: «We compared the aminoacid sequences [...]
those proteins presenting high evolutionary distance.»
Methods
Authors’ response: To the same reasons discussed
above, we prefer to maintain a substantial part of the
paragraph. The end of the paragraph, however, has been
placed in the discussion section.
p.8 to p. 9: «A gene highly tolerant to mutations [...]
few nucleotide alterations in its evolutionary history.»
Not Results.
Authors’ response: The sentence has been placed in
the discussion section.
p. 9: «That result suggests that genes widely distributed [...] they are conserved low plastic genes.» «Those
results reinforce [...] than Da or Ha individually.» Discussion. Furthermore, EPI better than Da or Ha, but is
EPI better than ‘evolutionnary distance’ ???
Authors’ response: First, the sentences have been
placed in the discussion section. Second, we did not
make that statement regarding EPI better than evolutionary distance. Evolutionary distance is a measure of
the divergence of amino acid sequence among proteins, i.
e. it evaluates changes in protein’s structures. EPI works
with other kind of changes: gene duplications and gene
deletions. So, they are complementary measures.
p. 9: « Starting to the point that low [...] fitness impact
when knocked-out...» to simplify.
Authors’ response: The paragraph has been rewritten.
p.9: «S. cerevisiae information was obtained [...]Genome Informatics (MGI) [21].» Methods
Authors’ response: The sentence has been removed.
p. 9: « Is not new the idea that [...] annotation associated with lethality in MGI.» Introduction/Discussion/
Methods...not Results.
Authors’ response: A substantial part of the paragraph has been placed on discussion section.
p.11: « To analyze the evolutionary plasticity [...] (i.e.
the EPI of the orthologous group of each gene from the
network) onto network topology. » Methods
Authors’ response: We believe that a brief introduction is important for a better presentation of the results
of Figure 5.
p. 12: «The evaluation of the history of a gene or a
gene network is fundamental to understand its evolutionary behavior.» Do you mean that we need to know
the evolution of a gene to understand its evolution? I
think this sentence is not useful. Discussion must be

Page 16 of 18

revised. To improve the clarity of the discussion, you
can follow the same structure than the Results chapter.
Authors’ response: The sentence has been removed.
We substantially changed introduction and discussion
sections.
Methods must be simplified.
Authors’ response: Methods section has been simplified as possible.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Supplementary Material. Document containing
supplementary results and discussion, including 23 figures and 3 tables.
Additional file 2: Supplementary table S4. Table containing the
orthologous groups sorted to evaluate the evolutionary distance among
their proteins.
Additional file 3: Supplementary table S5. Table containing
Saccharomyces cerevisiae genes possessing phenotype annotations
involved with inviability or viability when knocked-out.
Additional file 4: Supplementary table S6. Table containing Mus
musculus genes possessing phenotype annotations involved with “early
lethality” or “no abnormal phenotype” when knocked-out.
Additional file 5: Supplementary table S7. Table containing Homo
sapiens genes used to construct the networks to illustrate different
biochemical pathways.
Additional file 6: Supplementary table S8. Table containing
Saccharomyces cerevisiae genes used to construct the networks to
illustrate different biochemical pathways.

Acknowledgements and Funding
We acknowledge STRING, KEGG, MGI, and SGD databases for providing
public access to their data. This work was supported by PNPD SUS/CAPES.
Author details
Department of Biochemistry, Institute of Basic Health Sciences, Federal
University of Rio Grande do Sul, Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil. 2Department of
Physics, Institute of Physics, Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul, Rio
Grande do Sul, Brazil.
1

Authors’ contributions
RJSD designed the study, performed the analysis, discussed the results, and
write the manuscript. MAAC designed the study and discussed the results.
JLRF performed the analysis and discussed the results. LHTS performed the
analysis. RMCA designed the study and critically reviewed the manuscript.
JCFM designed the study and critically reviewed the manuscript. All authors
have read and approved the final manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 19 January 2011 Accepted: 17 May 2011
Published: 17 May 2011
References
1. Koonin EV, Wolf YI: Constraints and plasticity in genome and molecularphenome evolution. Nat Rev Genet 2010, 11:487-498.
2. Pal C, Papp B, Hurst LD: Highly expressed genes in yeast evolve slowly.
Genetics 2001, 158:927-931.
3. Wall DP, Hirsh AE, Fraser HB, Kumm J, Giaever G, Eisen MB, Feldman MW:
Functional genomic analysis of the rates of protein evolution.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America 2005, 102:5483-5488.

Dalmolin et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:22
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/22

4.
5.
6.
7.

8.
9.

10.
11.
12.

13.
14.
15.

16.

17.
18.

19.
20.

21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.

27.
28.
29.
30.

Yang J, Gu Z, Li WH: Rate of protein evolution versus fitness effect of
gene deletion. Mol Biol Evol 2003, 20:772-774.
Makino T, Gojobori T: The evolutionary rate of a protein is influenced by
features of the interacting partners. Mol Biol Evol 2006, 23:784-789.
Alba MM, Castresana J: Inverse relationship between evolutionary rate
and age of mammalian genes. Mol Biol Evol 2005, 22:598-606.
Cai JJ, Woo PC, Lau SK, Smith DK, Yuen KY: Accelerated evolutionary rate
may be responsible for the emergence of lineage-specific genes in
ascomycota. J Mol Evol 2006, 63:1-11.
Yamada T, Bork P: Evolution of biomolecular networks: lessons from
metabolic and protein interactions. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2009, 10:791-803.
Castro MA, Dalmolin RJ, Moreira JC, Mombach JC, de Almeida RM:
Evolutionary origins of human apoptosis and genome-stability gene
networks. Nucleic Acids Res 2008, 36:6269-6283.
Barabasi AL, Oltvai ZN: Network biology: Understanding the cell’s
functional organization. Nat Rev Genet 2004, 5:101-U15.
Holme P: Metabolic robustness and network modularity: a model study.
Plos One 2011, 6.
Edwards JS, Ibarra RU, Palsson BO: In silico predictions of Escherichia coli
metabolic capabilities are consistent with experimental data. Nat Biotech
2001, 19:125-130.
Harrison R, Papp B, Pál C, Oliver SG, Delneri D: Plasticity of genetic
interactions in metabolic networks of yeast. PNAS 2007, 104:2307-2312.
Harrington ED, Jensen LJ, Bork P: Predicting biological networks from
genomic data. FEBS Lett 2008, 582:1251-1258.
Bult CJ, Blake JA, Richardson JE, Kadin JA, Eppig JT, Baldarelli RM, Barsanti K,
Baya M, Beal JS, Boddy WJ, Bradt DW, Burkart DL, Butler NE, Campbell J,
Corey R, Corbani LE, Cousins S, Dene H, Drabkin HJ, Frazer K, Garippa DM,
Glass LH, Goldsmith CW, Grant PL, King BL, Lennon-Pierce M, Lewis J, Lu I,
Lutz CM, et al: The Mouse Genome Database (MGD): integrating biology
with the genome. Nucleic Acids Res 2004, 32:D476-D481.
Hirschman JE, Balakrishnan R, Christie KR, Costanzo MC, Dwight SS,
Engel SR, Hong EL, Livstone MS, Nash R, Park J, Oughtred R, Skrzypek M,
Starr B, Theesfeld CL, Williams J, Andrada R, Binkley G, Dong Q, Lane C,
Miyasato S, Sethuraman A, Schroeder M, Thanawala MK, Weng S, Dolinski K,
Botstein D, Cherry JM: Genome Snapshot: a new resource at the
Saccharomyces Genome Database (SGD) presenting an overview of the
Saccharomyces cerevisiae genome. Nucl Acids Res 2006, 34:D442-D445.
Koonin EV: Orthologs, paralogs, and evolutionary genomics. Annual
Review of Genetics 2005, 39:309-338.
Cai JJ, Petrov DA: Relaxed purifying selection and possibly Hhigh rate of
adaptation in primate lineage-specific genes. Genome Biol Evol 2010,
2:393-409.
Vibranovski MD, Zhang Y, Long M: General gene movement off the X
chromosome in the Drosophila genus. Genome Res 2009, 19:897-903.
Zhang YE, Vibranovski MD, Landback P, Marais GAB, Long M: Chromosomal
redistribution of male-biased genes in mammalian evolution with two
bursts of gene gain on the X chromosome. PLoS Biol 2010, 8:e1000494.
Shannon CE: A Mathematical theory of communication. Bell System
Technical Journal 1948, 27:379-423.
Long M, Betran E, Thornton K, Wang W: The origin of new genes:
glimpses from the young and old. Nat Rev Genet 2003, 4:865-875.
Lynch M: Genomics Gene duplication and evolution. Science 2002,
297:945-947.
Zhang JZ: Evolution by gene duplication: an update. Trends in Ecology &
Evolution 2003, 18:292-298.
Conant GC, Wolfe KH: Turning a hobby into a job: How duplicated genes
find new functions. Nat Rev Genet 2008, 9:938-950.
Koonin EV, Fedorova ND, Jackson JD, Jacobs AR, Krylov DM, Makarova KS,
Mazumder R, Mekhedov SL, Nikolskaya AN, Rao BS, Rogozin IB, Smirnov S,
Sorokin AV, Sverdlov AV, Vasudevan S, Wolf YI, Yin JJ, Natale DA: A
comprehensive evolutionary classification of proteins encoded in
complete eukaryotic genomes. Genome Biol 2004, 5:R7.
Barkman T, Zhang J: Evidence for escape from adaptive conflict? Nature
2009, 462:E1-E3.
Des Marais DL, Rausher MD: Escape from adaptive conflict after
duplication in an anthocyanin pathway gene. Nature 2008, 454:762-765.
Innan H, Kondrashov F: The evolution of gene duplications: classifying
and distinguishing between models. Nat Rev Genet 2010, 11:97-108.
Miller W, Makova KD, Nekrutenko A, Hardison RC: Comparative genomics.
Annu Rev Genomics Hum Genet 2004, 5:15-56.

Page 17 of 18

31. Tamura K, Dudley J, Nei M, Kumar S: MEGA4: Molecular Evolutionary
Genetics Analysis (MEGA) software version 4.0. Mol Biol Evol 2007,
24:1596-1599.
32. Zuckerkandl E, Pauling L: Evolutionary divergence and convergence in
proteins. In Evolving genes and proteins. Edited by: Bryson V, Vogel HJ. New
York, Academic Press; 1965:97-166.
33. Hartwell LH, Hopfield JJ, Leibler S, Murray AW: From molecular to modular
cell biology. Nature .
34. Zhao J, Ding GH, Tao L, Yu H, Yu ZH, Luo JH, Cao ZW, Li YX: Modular coevolution of metabolic networks. BMC Bioinformatics 2007, 8.
35. Emerson JJ, Cardoso-Moreira M, Borevitz JO, Long M: Natural selection
shapes genome-wide patterns of copy-number polymorphism in
drosophila melanogaster. Science 2008, 320:1629-1631.
36. Glazko G, Mushegian A: Detection of evolutionarily stable fragments of
cellular pathways by hierarchical clustering of phyletic patterns. Genome
Biology 2004, 5:R32.
37. Qian X, Yoon BJ: Effective identification of conserved pathways in
biological networks using hidden Markov models. PLoS One 2009, 4:
e8070.
38. Chen S, Zhang YE, Long M: New genes in Drosophila quickly become
essential. Science 2010, 330:1682-1685.
39. Jones CD, Begun DJ: Parallel evolution of chimeric fusion genes.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America 2005, 102:11373-11378.
40. Piatigorsky J, Wistow G: The recruitment of crystallins: new functions
precede gene duplication. Science 1991, 252:1078-1079.
41. Chen FC, Chen CJ, Li WH, Chuang TJ: Gene family size conservationis a
good indicator of evolutionary rates. Mol Biol Evol 2010, 27:1750-1758.
42. Wilson AC, Carlson SS, White TJ: Biochemical evolution. Annual Review of
Biochemistry 1977, 46:573-639.
43. Hsiao C, Mohan S, Kalahar BK, Williams LD: Peeling the onion: ribosomes
are ancient molecular fossils. Mol Biol Evol 2009, 26:2415-2425.
44. Caetano-Anollqs G, Yafremava LS, Gee H, Caetano-Anollqs D, Kim HS,
Mittenthal JE: The origin and evolution of modern metabolism. The
International Journal of Biochemistry & Cell Biology 2009, 41:285-297.
45. Matias Rodrigues JF, Wagner A: Evolutionary plasticity and innovations
in complex metabolic reaction networks. PLoS Comput Biol 2009, 5:
e1000613.
46. Dandekar T, Schuster S, Snel B, Huynen M, Bork P: Pathway alignment:
application to the comparative analysis of glycolytic enzymes. Biochem J
1999, 343:115-124.
47. Chang X, Wang Z, Hao P, Li YY, Li YX: Exploring mitochondrial evolution
and metabolism organization principles by comparative analysis of
metabolic networks. Genomics 2010, 95:339-344.
48. Andersson SGE, Zomorodipour A, Andersson JO, Sicheritz-Ponten T,
Alsmark UC, Podowski RM, Naslund AK, Eriksson AS, Winkler HH,
Kurland CG: The genome sequence of Rickettsia prowazekii and the
origin of mitochondria. Nature 1998, 133-140.
49. Jensen LJ, Kuhn M, Stark M, Chaffron S, Creevey C, Muller J, Doerks T,
Julien P, Roth A, Simonovic M, Bork P, von Mering C: STRING 8–a global
view on proteins and their functional interactions in 630 organisms. Nucl
Acids Res 2009, 37:D412-D416.
50. O’Brien KP, Remm M, Sonnhammer ELL: Inparanoid: a comprehensive
database of eukaryotic orthologs. Nucl Acids Res 2005, 33:D476-D480.
51. Ogata H, Goto S, Sato K, Fujibuchi W, Bono H, Kanehisa M: KEGG: Kyoto
Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes. Nucl Acids Res 1999, 27:29-34.
52. Tatusov RL, Koonin EV, Lipman DJ: A genomic perspective on protein
families. Science 1997, 278:631-637.
53. Tatusov R, Fedorova N, Jackson J, Jacobs A, Kiryutin B, Koonin E, Krylov D,
Mazumder R, Mekhedov S, Nikolskaya A, Rao BS, Smirnov S, Sverdlov A,
Vasudevan S, Wolf Y, Yin J, Natale D: The COG database: an updated
version includes eukaryotes. BMC Bioinformatics 2003, 4:41.
54. Bult CJ, Eppig JT, Kadin JA, Richardson JE, Blake JA: The Mouse Genome
Database (MGD): mouse biology and model systems. Nucleic Acids Res
2008, 36:D724-D728.
55. Wain HM, Lush MJ, Ducluzeau F, Khodiyar VK, Povey S: Genew: the Human
Gene Nomenclature Database, 2004 updates. Nucl Acids Res 2004, 32:
D255-D257.
56. Cherry JM, Adler C, Ball C, Chervitz SA, Dwight SS, Hester ET, Jia Y, Juvik G,
Roe T, Schroeder M, Weng S, Botstein D: SGD: Saccharomyces Genome
Database. Nucleic Acids Res 1998, 26:73-79.

Dalmolin et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:22
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/22

Page 18 of 18

57. Hooper SD, Bork P: Medusa: a simple tool for interaction graph analysis.
Bioinformatics 2005, 21:4432-4433.
58. Castro MAA, Filho JLR, Dalmolin RJS, Sinigaglia M, Moreira JCF,
Mombach JCM, Almeida RMC: ViaComplex: software for landscape
analysis of gene expression networks in genomic context. Bioinformatics
2009, 25:1468-1469.
doi:10.1186/1745-6150-6-22
Cite this article as: Dalmolin et al.: Evolutionary plasticity determination
by orthologous groups distribution. Biology Direct 2011 6:22.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
