<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title> </title>
<meta name="Subject" content=" "/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content=" "/>
<meta name="Creator" content=" "/>
<meta name="Producer" content=" "/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Davis et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:252
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/252

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Fossil gaps inferred from phylogenies alter the
apparent nature of diversification in dragonflies
and their relatives
Robert B Davis1,2*, David B Nicholson1,3,4, Emily LR Saunders1 and Peter J Mayhew1

Abstract
Background: The fossil record has suggested that clade growth may differ in marine and terrestrial taxa,
supporting equilibrial models in the former and expansionist models in the latter. However, incomplete sampling
may bias findings based on fossil data alone. To attempt to correct for such bias, we assemble phylogenetic
supertrees on one of the oldest clades of insects, the Odonatoidea (dragonflies, damselflies and their extinct
relatives), using MRP and MRC. We use the trees to determine when, and in what clades, changes in taxonomic
richness have occurred. We then test whether equilibrial or expansionist models are supported by fossil data alone,
and whether findings differ when phylogenetic information is used to infer gaps in the fossil record.
Results: There is broad agreement in family-level relationships between both supertrees, though with some
uncertainty along the backbone of the tree regarding dragonflies (Anisoptera). “Anisozygoptera” are shown to be
paraphyletic when fossil information is taken into account. In both trees, decreases in net diversification are
associated with species-poor extant families (Neopetaliidae, Hemiphlebiidae), and an upshift is associated with
Calopterygidae + Polythoridae. When ghost ranges are inferred from the fossil record, many families are shown to
have much earlier origination dates. In a phylogenetic context, the number of family-level lineages is shown to be
up to twice as high as the fossil record alone suggests through the Cretaceous and Cenozoic, and a logistic
increase in richness is detected in contrast to an exponential increase indicated by fossils alone.
Conclusions: Our analysis supports the notion that taxa, which appear to have diversified exponentially using fossil
data, may in fact have diversified more logistically. This in turn suggests that one of the major apparent differences
between the marine and terrestrial fossil record may simply be an artifact of incomplete sampling. Our results also
support previous notions that adult colouration plays an important role in odonate radiation, and that
Anisozygoptera should be grouped in a single inclusive taxon with Anisoptera, separate from Zygoptera.

Background
Understanding past changes in biodiversity is a fundamental part of predicting the future of the Earth’s ecosystems [1,2]. Phylogenies and the fossil record provide
two complementary windows on temporal variation in
biodiversity. The most traditional, palaeontological
approach is to document the gain and loss of taxa in
the fossil record without recourse to phylogenetic information [3-6]. Although the fossil record provides a
direct timescale for observations and contains explicit
information about extinction, it is incomplete, and more
* Correspondence: davis@ut.ee
1
Department of Biology, University of York, York, YO10 5YW, UK
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

robust at higher taxonomic levels. A more recent, neontological approach is to analyse the shape of phylogenetic trees of extant taxa, revealing heterogeneity in the
net rate of cladogenesis across taxa or through time
[7,8]. This allows researchers to compare like with like
through identifying sister taxa, but relies on the fossil
record to provide a direct timescale, and does not contain explicit information about extinction. Combining
fossil with phylogenetic information provides the potential therefore to combine the advantages of both to
make more robust inferences about macroevolution
[9,10]. In this paper we first summarise phylogenetic
information for a long-lived clade of insects, the Odonatoidea (dragonflies and their relatives) and then combine

© 2011 Davis et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Davis et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:252
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/252

it with fossil information to infer temporal changes in
their diversification.
Identifying changes in the rate of diversification is
central to understanding macroevolutionary processes.
The simplest model of clade growth is an exponential
one, where the rate of increase of taxa is constant
through time [11,12]. The next simplest alternative is
logistic growth, an equilibrium model with the growth
of the clade declining as richness rises, through competition. Establishing whether or not clade growth follows
expansionist or equilibrial models can therefore contribute towards establishing whether biotic interactions are
important in macroevolution, as implied by the Red
Queen paradigm [1,13]. Rates of speciation and extinction are also commonly variable across clades [7]. Identifying which evolutionary branches have experienced
shifts in their macroevolutionary rates is therefore a first
step towards establishing which evolutionary or ecological events might be responsible.
The insects comprise the majority of extant described
species. Previous work on insect macroevolution [14]
began with the traditional taxic approach from palaeontology [4,15], to which was added the neontological phylogenetic approach [16-19] which has identified a
number of evolutionary and ecological processes that
have shaped insect diversity [14]. Data have suggested
that overall rise in taxonomic richness may be declining
modestly towards the present [4], although not strongly
so [15], and not in many recent radiations [14]. This is
consistent with the generally exponential increase in
taxa in the terrestrial fossil record [5,11,12,15] in comparison to the marine record [6]. However the relative
incompleteness of the insect record may provide a
source of bias, because the true originations of clades
likely occurred prior to their first appearance in the fossil record. Using phylogenies to infer ghost ranges,
Davis et al. [19] showed that a number of insect orders
likely originated prior to their first fossil appearance,
making the increase in orders through time look more
logistic. The analysis of order-level trends however
raises problems; there is a greater risk of paraphyly,
complicating the estimation of ghost ranges, and
changes in order richness do not necessarily reflect
changes at lower taxonomic levels [20]. It would therefore be useful to examine patterns of diversification at a
lower taxonomic level, in a clade of insects of equivalent
age to the whole class, which previous studies have only
achieved using the traditional taxic palaeontological
approach.
Despite being less speciose than many other insect
orders, the Odonatoidea (Odonata plus the extinct Protodonata) (= Holodonata [21], = Neodonatoptera [22])
are among the most ancient of all living continental
fauna, with a fossil record extending back 320 million

Page 2 of 10

years, surviving several mass-extinction events [21].
Their accessibility as study systems has informed on
many questions in ecology, evolution, and conservation
biology [23]. This study aims to summarise existing phylogenetic information on the Odonatoidea by constructing a supertree at the family level. We first apply a
neontological approach to the tree to detect where shifts
in the net rate of diversification have occurred, and then
combine the phylogenetic information with fossil record
data to observe patterns of family-lineage richness over
time.

Methods
Taxonomy

While previous family-level supertree studies of insects
[18,24] have used the taxonomic nomenclature of
Gordh & Headrick [25] for extant families and Ross &
Jarzembowski [26] and the EDNA fossil insect database
[http://edna.palass-hosting.org] for extinct families studies, it is evident from examining more recent literature
that views of odonate taxonomy have since altered, particularly with respect to fossil families [21]. Using the
above references as our starting point, we thoroughly
scoured recent literature to build up a taxonomy which
represents more recent views, including new families
and addressing synonymy. This is provided with references in additional file 1. Any synonyms used in input
trees were corrected accordingly to ensure that only one
name was used per taxon, preventing the same taxon
appearing in the tree in two different positions. The
family Eugeropteridae represents the separate order Geroptera and has been used as the supertree outgroup, in
line with previous work [19,21,27].
Input trees

Papers containing Odonata phylogenies were searched
for online using Google Scholar, Web of Knowledge and
Science Direct databases. References cited in the studies
found were used to find additional papers. As input tree
searches were carried out until February 2010, no papers
published after that time are here considered. Only
papers post-1969 were used, being published after the
groundbreaking study by Hennig [28] on insect classification and cladistic methodology.
Family-level Odonata phylogenies, constructed from
either molecular or morphological data, were collected.
In genus- and species-level phylogenies, taxa from the
same family were reduced into a single leaf. In the case
of a valid family (using our taxonomy) emerging as
paraphyletic in a species level tree, all lineages were condensed into a single branch as this has no bearing on
relationships with other families, and any valid families
that were shown as polyphyletic were removed on
grounds of uncertain placement following Davis et al.

Davis et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:252
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/252

[18]. Trees where families were grouped together as
higher taxa (e.g. into superfamilies) were not used. In
total, 32 phylogenies from 23 papers were collected (see
additional file 2).
Supertree methods

Two matrix-based methods were initially used for supertree construction: Standard Matrix Representation with
Parsimony (MRP [29,30]), and Matrix Representation
with Compatibility (MRC [31]). These methods have
been shown to perform well compared to other methods
in empirical studies [19] and cope with data sets containing high amounts of conflict [24]. MRP has been
shown to perform well in simulation [32], and MRC has
been shown to perform similarly well [33]. For each
method, a majority rule tree with minority components
was constructed from all equally optimal trees returned.
Where there is less than a 50% majority for a relationship between particular taxa in equally optimal trees,
the relationship appearing more times than any other is
taken in the consensus. Fully bifurcating trees were
required for diversification analyses (see below). For
software and settings see additional file 3. Distance
supertree methods were not considered as these have
performed poorly compared to matrix-based methods in
similar empirical studies [18,19,24]. Methods such as
matrix representation with flipping (MRF) and quartet
fit (QFIT) were not possible to use as our dataset
proved too computationally demanding to run using
available software [34,35] without compartmentalising
the data set multiple times. Furthermore, we also avoid
using strict supertree methods [see 36] which identify
only relationships common to all input trees. There is
unavoidably conflict between relationships in input trees
collected from the literature and the aim of our work is
to find an optimum solution rather than only summarise
the areas of greatest certainty regarding phylogenetic
relationships.
The dataset was then refined to account for data nonindependence, following the protocol outlined in Davis
et al. [24]. Thirty input trees were used in the final
supertree analyses. The refined dataset was then used to
construct phylogenies using both the standard MRP and
MRC methods.
We use the V index [37] to measure support as used
in previous supertree studies [18,19,24,38]. This considers the number of input trees in agreement and in conflict with relationships in the supertree on a scale
running from -1 (all conflicting) to +1 (all supporting).
An input tree and supertree are in agreement when the
relationship in the input tree directly matches that in
the supertree (accounting for missing taxa in input
trees). Conversely, where there is direct disagreement in
a relationship between supertree and input tree, this is

Page 3 of 10

conflict. Input trees not relevant to the supertree node
in question are not considered. For each supertree node,
a score is given (either -1 or +1) for each input tree in
the data set. For example, in a supertree study with 10
input trees, the supertree node would receive 10 individual scores which are averaged to give the overall nodal
support value. The average score of all nodes gives a
total V score for each supertree. Rather than V scores
alone, V+ scores were also considered, because as well
as relationships found directly in the dataset, they also
consider as supporting relationships those that could be
permitted by the dataset and do not directly conflict (e.
g. polytomies). For a detailed discussion of the V index
and supertree support see Wilkinson et al. [37].
Diversification analysis and taxon age

Significant upshifts and downshifts in the rate of diversification throughout the MRP and MRC majority rule
trees were detected using the Slowinski-Guyer measure
of imbalance, which compares the species richness of all
extant sister clades [39-41]. The number of species in
each family was obtained from the World Odonata List
[http://www.pugetsound.edu/academics/academicresources/slater-museum/biodiversity-resources/dragonflies/world-odonata-list]. Any differences between this
list and our taxonomy were accounted for (e.g. the
inclusion of families we recognise as valid grouped
under another family name were separated). Species
numbers are shown in Table 1. This measure uses the
assumption that, although diversification rates were not
constant, at any point in time the diversification
between two clades occurred at the same rate. Under
Table 1 Species richnesses of extant families
Family

Species
described

Family

Species
described

Aeshnidae

441

Isostictidae

45

Amphipterygidae
Austropetaliidae

12
12

Lestidae
Lestoideidae

152
14

Calopterygidae

176

Libellulidae

986

Chlorocyphidae

151

Lindeniidae

32

Chlorogomphidae

45

Macromiidae

123

35

Megapodagrionidae

193

Chlorolestidae
Coenagrionidae

1121

Neopetaliidae

Cordulegastridae

1

51

Perilestidae

19

Cordulephyidae
Corduliidae

5
244

Petaluridae
Platycnemididae

12
227
214

Dicteriadidae

2

Platystictidae

Epallagidae

69

Polythoridae

59

Epiophlebiidae

2

Protoneuridae

259

923

Pseudolestidae

1

Pseudostigmatidae

19

Synthemistdae

43

Gomphidae
Hemiphlebiidae
Hypolestidae

1
116

Davis et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:252
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/252

this null model, the probability of observing an equal or
greater difference in species richness between sister
groups is given by 2[Nsmall/(Nlarge+Nsmall-1)]. This calculation is carried out through all extant sister clades in
the phylogeny. Assuming that sister groups originated at
the same time, effects of the ages of clades on diversification between sister groups can be accounted for.
However, with this approach, there is the possibility that
significant shifts at nodes will have an effect on those
nodes further down the tree, known as the ‘trickle-down
effect’. The method used by Davies et al. [41] of adjusting the species richness in significant clades was used to
eliminate this effect [see [18,19,24,42]]. Alternative
methods are available for detecting the location of shifts
in diversification across a phylogeny, but are not suitable
for our data. For example the SymmeTREE approach
[43] employs likelihood-based shift statistics but requires
a resolved or nearly-resolved phylogeny at species level.
Medusa [44] can be applied to an incompletely-resolved
phylogeny but requires a fully dated tree.
Family-level richness over time was also documented.
Families which could not be included in the phylogeny,
because phylogenetic information is unavailable, were
however included when looking at family-level richness
over time, to provide as complete a picture as possible.
Using literature published up to the end of 2009, the
origination dates of known families were taken from
their first appearance in the fossil record and extinction
dates of extinct taxa from their last appearance. Dates
are in line with a recent geological timescale [45,46] (see
additional file 4). Using this information, the number of
family lineages present in each stage through geological
time can be plotted. For a discussion on the use of the
term “lineages” here, rather than families sensu stricto
see Davis et al. [19]. This richness was then corrected
according to information in both the MRP and MRC
phylogenies, by adjusting family lineage origination
dates based on ghost ranges. Assuming that sister taxon
lineages must have both been present when the divergence between them occurred, and that differences
between the fossil record and phylogenies were caused
by an incomplete fossil record and not an incorrect phylogeny, sister lineage origination dates were altered to
equal that of the earlier sister group. The effect of both
the standard MRP and MRC phylogenies was examined.

Page 4 of 10

exponential growth is that the logarithm of number of
taxa will increase linearly over time. Logistic growth,
where the rate of increase in taxon richness declines at
high richness, can therefore be inferred from significant
non-linearity (i.e. a deceleration of log richness nearer
the present), which can be established by comparing the
fit of linear and quadratic regressions of log(richness +1)
against time. We tested for temporal autocorrelation in
the linear regression by the Durbin-Watson test. All
residual series showed significant positive autocorrelation at lag 1, and in all cases examination of the autocorrelation and partial autocorrelation functions
indicated that the residuals were well described by an
autoregression model of order 1 (AR(1)). We therefore
accounted for this by using generalized least squares to
model the data with an AR(1) residual correlation structure [48], and compared the linear and quadratic models. Modeling was performed in R [49] using the gls
function from the nlme library.

Results
Phylogeny

Both the MRP and the MRC phylogenies (see Figure 1)
show the divergence of the Zygoptera (damselflies) and
Anisoptera (true dragonflies) + “Anisozygoptera” into
two robustly supported monophyletic groups (V scores:
Zygoptera, +0.280; Anisoptera + “Anisozygoptera”,
+0.714). The Anisoptera are nested within a paraphyletic
assemblage of “anisozygopteran” families, comprising five
main lineages, including the extant family Epiophlebiidae
belonging to its own exclusive lineage. The whole crown
group of extant odonate families nests within a paraphyletic assemblage of fossil protodonate and odonate
families. The backbone of the tree as a whole in both
MRP and MRC analyses is robustly supported with primarily positive V scores for clades. The only clade receiving a negative V score is crown group Odonata (V =
-0.111), though there is some uncertainty regarding the
backbone in Anisoptera, where some clades are not
found in all equally optimal trees and there are differences in the most commonly found relationships between
MRP and MRC analyses. However, the MRP and MRC
trees are largely similar at lower levels (Figure 1). For V
and V+ scores of individual clades see additional file 5.
Diversification

Tests for exponential or logistic increase in family-lineage
richness

To conduct time series analysis it is generally preferable
to have equally-spaced sampling intervals. This was
achieved by generating from the original data, new
interpolated time-series of the same length, but equally
spaced, using akima splines [47], using the aspline function in the Akima package in R. The expectation from

Both the MRP and MRC majority rule supertrees show
significant shifts in net rates of diversification (Figure 1).
Both show downshifts in the single family lineages
Hemiphlebiidae (Zygoptera) and Neopetaliidae (Anisoptera), and a downshift in the lineage leading to Pseudolestidae + Dicteriadidae + Polythoridae + Calopterygidae
(Zygoptera), before a subsequent positive shift in the
lineage leading to Polythoridae + Calopterygidae. All

Davis et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:252
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/252

Page 5 of 10

Strict Consensus combining MRC and MRP trees

Zygoptera

Crown
Odonata

Anisoptera +
"Anisozygoptera"

Anisoptera

V and V+ positive values (including 0)
V negative value but V+ positive value (including 0)
V and V+ negative values
Relationship not in all equally optimal trees
(for consensus tree relationships = all equally optimal trees
from both MRC and MRP analyses)

Eugeropteridae*
Erasipteridae*
Namurotypidae*
Meganeuridae*
Paralogidae*
Permaeschnidae*
Polytaxineuridae*
Callimokaltaniidae*
Ditaxineuridae*
Hemizygopteridae*
Piroutetiidae*
Triadotypidae*
Zygophlebiidae*
Xamenophlebiidae*
Mitophlebiidae*
Paurophlebiidae*
Triadophlebiidae*
Permolestidae*
Permagrionidae*
Permepallagidae*
Kennedyidae*
Protomyrmeleontidae*
Batkeniidae*
Tarsophlebiidae*
Steleopteridae*
Hemiphlebiidae
Cretacoenagrionidae*
Chlorolestidae
Perilestidae
Lestidae
Platystictidae
Megapodagrionidae
Hypolestidae
Pseudostigmatidae
Coenagrionidae
Protoneuridae
Isostictidae
Platycnemididae
Sieblosiidae*
Pseudolestidae
Dicteriadidae
Polythoridae
Calopterygidae
Epallagidae
Zacallitidae*
Lestoideidae
Amphipterygidae
Chlorocyphidae
Turanothemistidae*
Campterophlebiidae*
Archithemistidae*
Isophlebiidae*
Sphenophlebiidae*
Asiopteridae*
Cyclothemistidae*
Triassolestidae*
Epiophlebiidae
Erichschmidtiidae*
Myopophlebiidae*
Liassophlebiidae*
Juraheterophlebiidae*
Heterophlebiidae*
Liassostenophlebiidae*
Gondvanogomphidae*
Prostenophlebiidae*
Stenophlebiidae*
Henrotayiidae*
Liassogomphidae*
Aeschnidiidae*
Protolindeniidae*
Cretapetaluridae*
Petaluridae
Aktassiidae*
Araripegomphidae*
Lindeniidae
Gomphidae
Proterogomphidae*
Austropetaliidae
Liupanshaniidae*
Mesuropetalidae*
Progobiaeshnidae*
Cymatophlebiidae*
Rudiaeschnidae*
Paracymatophlebiidae*
Aeshnidae
Eumorbaeschnidae*
Neopetaliidae
Cordulegastridae
Nannogomphidae*
Hemeroscopidae*
Chlorogomphidae
Araripechlorogomphidae*
Juracorduliidae*
Araripephlebiidae*
Valdicorduliidae*
Eocorduliidae*
Araripelibellulidae*
Synthemistidae
Macromiidae
Cordulephyidae
Corduliidae
Libellulidae

Significant upshift detected in both trees
Significant downshift detected in both trees
Significant upshift detected in MRC tree
Significant downshift detected in MRC tree
Significant upshift detected in MRP tree
Significant downshift detected in MRP tree

MRC

MRP

Chlorolestidae
Lestidae
Perilestidae

Perilestidae
Lestidae
Chlorolestidae

Isostictidae
Protoneuridae
Platycnemididae

Protoneuridae
Isostictidae
Platycnemididae

Amphipterygidae
Chlorocyphidae
Lestoideidae
Zacallitidae*
Epallagidae
Archithemistidae*
Campterophlebiidae*
Isophlebiidae*

Protolindeniidae*
Cretapetaluridae*
Aktassiidae*
Petaluridae
Araripegomphidae*
Lindeniidae
Proterogomphidae*
Gomphidae
Austropetaliidae
Liupanshaniidae*
Mesuropetalidae*
Progobiaeshnidae*
Rudiaeschnidae*
Cymatophlebiidae*
Paracymatophlebiidae*
Aeshnidae
Eumorbaeschnidae*
Neopetaliidae
Cordulegastridae
Nannogomphidae*
Hemeroscopidae*
Araripechlorogomphidae*
Chlorogomphidae
Juracorduliidae*
Araripephlebiidae*
Valdicorduliidae*
Eocorduliidae*
Araripelibellulidae*
Synthemistidae
Macromiidae
Cordulephyidae
Corduliidae
Libellulidae

Zacallitidae*
Amphipterygidae
Chlorocyphidae
Lestoideidae
Epallagidae
Isophlebiidae*
Campterophlebiidae*
Archithemistidae*

Protolindeniidae*
Cretapetaluridae*
Aktassiidae*
Petaluridae
Araripegomphidae*
Lindeniidae
Proterogomphidae*
Gomphidae
Liupanshaniidae*
Mesuropetalidae*
Austropetaliidae
Progobiaeshnidae*
Rudiaeschnidae*
Cymatophlebiidae*
Paracymatophlebiidae*
Aeshnidae
Eumorbaeschnidae*
Cordulegastridae
Neopetaliidae
Nannogomphidae*
Chlorogomphidae
Araripechlorogomphidae*
Hemeroscopidae*
Juracorduliidae*
Araripephlebiidae*
Valdicorduliidae*
Eocorduliidae*
Araripelibellulidae*
Synthemistidae
Macromiidae
Cordulephyidae
Corduliidae
Libellulidae

Figure 1 Supertree phylogeny of Odonatoidea based on MRC and MRP analyses of 30 input trees. The strict consensus between MRC
and MRP supertrees is supplemented where MRC and MRP topologies differ. Taxa in grey marked with * are extinct. Taxa in black are extant.

shifts except that involving Neopetaliidae occur at the
base of clades obtaining positive V scores, and in the
case of Neopetaliidae, a significant downshift is detected
despite differing placement in the two trees. Other

upshifts and downshifts detected are shown in just one
tree or the other. These shifts are detected in the region
of uncertainty regarding the backbone of the Anisoptera
clade - a downshift in the Petaluridae lineage (MRP), or

Davis et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:252
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/252

a downshift in a clade comprising Epiophlebiidae +
Petaluridae + Lindeniidae + Gomphidae + Austropetaliidae + Aeshnidae + Neopetaliidae + Cordulegastridae +
Synthemistidae + Macromiidae + Libellulidae + Corduliidae, then a subsequent upshift in this clade to the
exclusion of Epiophlebiidae and Petaluridae (MRC). See
additional file 6 for sister group species richness comparisons in full.
Family richness, originations and extinctions

Aside from family extinctions at the end of the Permian
and Triassic, a lineage through time plot based on fossil
information only (Figure 2) shows an increase in the
number of family-level lineages leading up to the Jurassic-Cretaceous boundary. The increase in richness is
interrupted by extinctions and origination events
throughout the Cretaceous, including a significant
extinction at the Lower-Upper Cretaceous boundary,
before a sharp rise in richness to the present.
The inclusion of ghost range information shows a
slightly different scenario. Both MRP and MRC-based
analyses give similar pictures. As expected with ghost
ranges inferred, earlier originations occur in the phylogeny-adjusted models, and richness is higher (see Figure
2). With ghost ranges inferred, between 46 (MRC) and
50 (MRP) families have their fossil ranges extended (see
additional file 4 for details), with the most dramatic
extension for Epiophlebiidae (0 to 196.5 my). Although
the same extinction events are apparent, the rise in
family-level lineages is slightly sharper in the Triassic
and rises dramatically during the Jurassic. The ultimate
impact of this is that richness calculated using fossil
information alone is only 57-64% of that calculated
using phylogenetic information by the end of the Jurassic. Patterns of origination and extinction are similar in
all scenarios through the Cretaceous, and while higher
richness is evident in the Cenozoic with ghost ranges
inferred, the level of richness is stable, compared to the
rapid rise in richness found based only on fossil data.
Generalized least squares, accounting for temporal
autocorrelation in the residuals, supports the inclusion
of a quadratic (i.e. curvilinear) temporal component to
log richness for both the MRC supertree (t = -2.65, df =
43, p = 0.011) and the MRP supertree (t = -3.12, df =
43, p = 0.0032). However, for the fossil data alone inclusion of the quadratic term is not well-supported (including extant richness t = -1.49, df = 43, p = 0.144; not
including extant richness t = -1.93, df = 42, p = 0.06).

Page 6 of 10

positive support, indicating general agreement between
input trees regarding many relationships within the tree
(Figure 1). Therefore based on primary studies from
which input trees have been acquired, we can summarise
the following consensus regarding relationships within
Odonatoidea, following supertree analysis. Importantly,
Zygoptera are a monophyletic suborder, separate to Anisoptera (+ “Anisozygoptera”), which refutes previous
hypotheses suggesting Zygoptera could be a paraphyletic
grade towards Anisoptera [50,51]. “Anisozygoptera”,
although considered a modern suborder, and regarded as
such in recent phylogenetic analyses [e.g. [52]] based on
the single extant family Epiophlebiidae, should not be
given official taxonomic status. As can be seen, with
inclusion of fossil taxa, “Anisozygoptera” is a paraphyletic
assemblage with Anisoptera nested within.
It is important that the backbone of the tree receives
mostly positive V support, and provides a solid framework to analyse evolutionary questions at a high level in
Odonatoidea, though there are some areas of the tree
which do remain problematic. The negative support
(representing much conflict in the constituent input
trees) at the node representing crown Odonata is initially
concerning. However, there is much agreement for
monophyletic Zygoptera and Anisoptera + “Anisozygoptera” and the negative support for the crown group as a
whole represents uncertainty relating to the placement of
the fossil family Tarsophlebiidae (i.e. is it included in the
crown group or not?). In both supertrees Tarsophlebiidae
sits outside the crown group, yet it is represented both
within [53,54] and outside [55] of the crown group in
input trees, and Bybee et al. [56] show these alternative
scenarios in different analyses. Input trees do not concur
well over the position of this taxon, and though the
debate rolls on, recent fossil evidence supports the more
basal position for Tarsophlebiidae that we find here [57].
The most important phylogenetic uncertainty to target
in future work must be along the backbone of the Anisoptera clade with most topological differences between
the two supertree methods occurring here, and this does
affect the result of diversification analyses (see below).
However, below the suborder level there is much agreement in relationships. The supertree presented here
should be regarded as a work in progress since taxonomic revisions, discovery of new fossil forms, and new
molecular data for the order are now commonly
reported. Furthermore, the inclusion of more fossil
families may help resolve the tree further, but many are
yet to be included in phylogenetic analyses.

Discussion
Odonata phylogeny

Two alternative supertree analyses, representing the largest family-level phylogenetic analysis of Odonatoidea to
date, converge on a very similar topology, with overall

Significant shifts in diversification and potential
morphological innovations

Previous work by Misof [58] identified two major characteristics within Anisoptera families that are positively

Davis et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:252
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/252

MRC
MRP

10

20

30

Fossils only

15
10
5
0
15
10
5
0
20
15
10
5
10
5
0

Extinctions

15

0

Originations (MRP)

Originations (MRC)

Originations (Fossils)

0

Number of Lineages Leading to Families

40

Page 7 of 10

350

300

250

200

150

100

50

0

Time (Ma)
C

P

Tr

J

K

Pg

Ng Q

Figure 2 A lineage through time plot showing family-level richness, origination and extinction events over a geological timescale
based on fossil information either alone, or in combination with either MRC or MRP phylogenetic information. For the geological
timescale, C = Carboniferous, P = Permian, Tr = Triassic, J = Jurassic, K = Cretaceous, Pg = Palaeogene, Ng = Neogene, Q = Quaternary. Different
coloured bands represent lower, middle (if applicable) and upper stages of each geological period [45,46].

Davis et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:252
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/252

correlated with species richness: the evolution of elaborate colour patterns and the evolution of sexual
dimorphism in colouration (sexual dimorphism in body
size is common in all Anisoptera [59]), features often
linked to the process of sexual selection and its role in
speciation.
Downshifts in net diversification are inferred from the
low extant richness of Hemiphlebiidae, Neopetaliidae
(both significant downshifts in both trees), Epiophlebiidae, Petaluridae (both significant downshifts in the MRP
tree) and a clade containing Pseudolestidae (significant
in both trees, preceding a later upshift in Polythoridae
and Calopterygidae). All these families have simple body
colouration patterns [60], consistent with Misof [58]. In
addition the families Polythoridae and Calopterygidae
both show dramatic bright and sexually dimorphic colouration and are associated with a robust diversification
upshift in both trees. Our results therefore combine well
with Misof’s findings by demonstrating where identifiable radiations and restrictions have likely occurred. In
addition to these features, Epiophlebiidae also has long
larval stages (5-6 y), which could feasibly increase
extinction risk or hinder speciation [14]. The Neopetaliidae has extremely specialised niches (riverside caves)
possibly restricting its diversification. In the latter two
cases though, such characteristics might just be those of
surviving species rather than the families as a whole, so
caution is required. A fuller determination of the causes
of any shifts would benefit from an analysis at finer
taxonomic resolutions. The use of simple topologybased statistics in the absence of fossil data and extinct
taxa likely limits the inferences that can be made on
diversification shifts, and may induce biases [see
[61,62]]. Hence the findings presented here should be
revisited as the opportunity to incorporate new data and
more complex, and potentially realistic, diversification
models presents itself.
Family richness through time

Fossil record-only analysis follows some similar short
term variation to the phylogeny-based analyses, but phylogeny-based analyses show some noticeably higher
increases in family-level lineage richness through the
Triassic and Jurassic, and we show that richness was
likely much higher through the Cretaceous and then
consequently the Cenozoic than can be shown by using
the fossil record alone (Figure 2). It is most probable
that the extensions of fossil ranges we infer are quite
conservative [63], but the impact of including such
information is evident in our analyses. The divergence
between the fossil and phylogenetic richness curves (Figure 2) accumulates gradually throughout the timeline,
and is notable towards the end of the Jurassic, suggesting that many lineages with much later first fossils are

Page 8 of 10

rather first found here. This may of course partly represent an abundance of suitable fossil-bearing strata
instead of, or as well as, a genuine set of first originations. It therefore remains possible that the taxa
involved actually have still earlier origination dates. If
true however, this would only strengthen our findings
by making the true richness curve appear even more
logistic. Using fossil data alone there is a suggestion of a
slow-down in the net rate of origination that is not significant, mirroring the insect fossil record as a whole
[4]. Both the phylogenetic analyses however alter the
fossil-based curve to a more logistic model, with a sudden increase in family richness through the Jurassic
being the most noticeable difference. There has been
debate in the past over whether the fossil record for all
organisms exhibits logistic growth, or whether it has
been exponential but punctuated with mass extinctions
that limit the level of taxonomic diversity [64]. However,
given that an approximately exponential increase in
richness can turn to a logistic one after accounting for
gaps in the fossil record, our results suggest that caution
should be applied to other such cases, particularly in the
terrestrial record where the evidence for logistic growth
has so far been thinner [11,12,15].
After accounting for the general trend in taxonomic
richness, variation around this trend remains. Some of
this coincides with well-documented mass-extinctions
and recoveries, including here the end-Permian, but in
other cases, such as the end-Cretaceous, no effect is
seen [see also 65]. In the fossil record as a whole, fluctuations are known to correlate with a number of environmental and geophysical variables [66,67]. The sudden
increase in richness in the Jurassic coincides with an
icehouse climate mode [68], as is the case for the initial
radiation of Odonatoidea in the Carboniferous, consistent with the findings of Mayhew et al. [66]. Also, notable changes to freshwater ecosystems occurred in the
Jurassic with the radiation of aquatic Diptera and other
animal taxa that are today important food sources for
Odonata [69]. Though the environmental correlates of
Odonata richness through time requires a fuller study,
our results suggest that such studies could benefit from
incorporation of phylogenetic information.

Conclusions
Phylogenetic information provides one way to adjust for
the imperfections and biases inherent in analyses of fossil data. When such information is used to address
family-level richness in an ancient clade of insects, different models of macroevolution are supported. The
more logistic pattern of diversification we observe when
phylogenetic information is included in such a study is
in contrast to the exponential pattern of increases in
odonate richness suggested by the fossil record alone,

Davis et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:252
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/252

and the terrestrial record more generally. These results
therefore imply that some of the major differences
between the marine and terrestrial records are artifacts
of incomplete sampling. Our supertrees provide a baseline for further macroevolutionary, comparative and
phylogenetic studies of Odonata and Protodonata.

Additional material

Page 9 of 10

6.

7.
8.
9.

Additional file 1: Valid taxonomy. A list of Odonata and Protodonata
family names which are considered valid for the purposes of this study.
Additional file 2: Input trees. Input trees from primary literature used
in supertree analysis.
Additional file 3: Software & settings. Software used and settings
applied for both MRP and MRC supertree analysis.
Additional file 4: Origination & extinction dates. Fossil first
appearance dates and extinction dates for all Odonata and Protodonata
families, and modified origination dates when ghost ranges are taken
into account.
Additional file 5: V and V+ scores. V and V+ support scores for MRP
and MRC supertree nodes.
Additional file 6: Sister group species richness comparisons. Sister
group species richness comparisons for both MRP and MRC supertrees
indicating where significant upshifts and downshifts in species richness
have occurred.

10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.

19.
Acknowledgements
RBD was supported by a BBSRC studentship. RBD was also supported by
targeted financing project SF0180122s08 and by the European Union
through the European Regional Development Fund (Center of Excellence
FIBIR).
Author details
1
Department of Biology, University of York, York, YO10 5YW, UK.
2
Department of Zoology, University of Tartu, Vanemuise 46, EE-51014 Tartu,
Estonia. 3Department of Palaeontology, The Natural History Museum,
Cromwell Road, London, SW7 5BD, UK. 4National Museums of Scotland,
Department of Natural Sciences, Edinburgh, Midlothian, EH1 1JF, UK.
Authors’ contributions
All authors contributed to manuscript writing and have read and approved
the final manuscript. RBD and ELRS collected input trees and conducted
supertree analyses. RBD and DBN drew up a valid taxonomy and DBN
collected all the information regarding origination and extinctions of
lineages. RBD conducted sister group species richness analyses and
constructed the lineage through time plots. PJM tested for logistic/
exponential clade growth and coordinated the study as a whole.
Received: 8 April 2011 Accepted: 14 September 2011
Published: 14 September 2011
References
1. Alroy J: Dynamics of origination and extinction in the marine fossil
record. PNAS 2008, 105(Supplement 1):11536-11542.
2. Mayhew PJ: Global climate and extinction: evidence from the fossil
record. In Climate Change, Ecology and Systematics. Edited by: Hodkinson
TR, Jones MB, Waldren S, Parnell JAN. Cambridge: Systematics Association
Special Series, Cambridge University Press; 2011:99-121.
3. Sepkoski JJ, Bambach RK, Raup DM, Valentine JW: Phanerozoic marine
diversity and the fossil record. Nature 1981, 293:435-437.
4. Labandeira CC, Sepkoski JJ: Insect diversity in the fossil record. Science
1993, 261:310-315.
5. Benton MJ: Diversification and extinction in the history of life. Science
1995, 268:52-58.

20.
21.
22.

23.
24.

25.
26.
27.

28.
29.

30.
31.
32.

33.

Alroy J, Aberhan M, Bottjer DJ, Foote M, Fürsich FT, Harries PJ, Hendy AJW,
Holland SM, Ivany LC, Kiessling W, Kosnik MA, Marshall CR, McGowan AJ,
Miller AI, Oiszewski TD, Patzkowsky ME, Peters SE, Viller L, Wagner PJ,
Bonuso N, Borkow PS, Brenneis B, Clapham ME, Fall LM, Ferguson CA,
Hanson VL, Krug AZ, Layou KM, Leckey EH, Nürnberg S, et al: Phanerozoic
trends in the global diversity of marine invertebrates. Science 2008,
321:97-100.
Mooers AO, Heard SB: Inferring evolutionary process from phylogenetic
tree shape. Q Rev Biol 1997, 72:31-54.
Ricklefs RE: Estimating diversification rates from phylogenetic
information. Trends Ecol Evol 2007, 22:601-610.
Lloyd GT, Davis KE, Pisani D, Tarver JE, Ruta M, Sakamoto M, Hone DWE,
Benton MJ: Dinosaurs and the Cretaceous Terrestrial Revolution. Proc R
Soc B Biol Sci 2008, 275:2483-2490.
Quental TB, Marshall CR: Diversity dynamics: molecular phylogenies need
the fossil record. Trends Ecol Evol 2010, 25:434-441.
Benton MJ: Models for the diversification of life. Trends Ecol Evol 1997,
12:490-495.
Kalmar A, Currie DJ: The completeness of the continental fossil record
and its impact on patterns of diversification. Paleobiology 2010, 36:51-60.
Benton MJ: New take on the Red Queen. Nature 2010, 463:306-307.
Mayhew PJ: Why are there so many insect species? Perspectives from
fossils and phylogenies. Biol Rev Camb Philos Soc 2007, 82:425-454.
Eble GJ: Decline in extinction rates and scale invariance in the fossil
record. Paleobiology 1999, 25:434-439.
Mayhew PJ: Shifts in hexapod diversification and what Haldane could
have said. Proc R Soc B Biol Sci 2002, 269:969-974.
Mayhew PJ: A tale of two analyses: estimating the consequences of
shifts in hexapod diversification. Biol J Linn Soc 2003, 80:23-36.
Davis RB, Baldauf SL, Mayhew PJ: Eusociality and the success of the
termites: insights from a supertree of dictyopteran families. J Evol Biol
2009, 22:1750-1761.
Davis RB, Baldauf SL, Mayhew PJ: Many hexapod groups originated earlier
and withstood extinction events better than previously realized:
inferences from supertrees. Proc R Soc B Biol Sci 2010, 277:1597-1606.
Lane A, Benton MJ: Taxonomic level as a determinant of the shape of
the Phanerozoic marine biodiversity curve. Am Nat 2003, 162:265-276.
Grimaldi D, Engel MS: Evolution of the Insects Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press; 2005.
Bechly G: Morphologische Untersuchungen am Flügelgeäder der
rezenten Libellen und deren Stammgruppenvertreter (Insecta; Pterygota;
Odonata) unter besonderer Berücksichtigung der Phylogenetischen
Systematik und der Gundplanes der Odonata. Petalura 1996, 2:1-402.
Córdoba-Aguilar AE: Dragonflies and Damselflies: Model Organisms for
Ecological and Evolutionary Research Oxford: Oxford University Press; 2008.
Davis RB, Baldauf SL, Mayhew PJ: The origins of species richness in the
Hymenoptera: insights from a family-level supertree. BMC Evol Biol 2010,
10:109.
Gordh G, Headrick DH: A Dictionary of Entomology Wallingford: CABI
Publishers; 2000.
Ross AJ, Jarzembowski EA: Arthropoda (Hexapoda: Insecta). In The Fossil
Record 2. Edited by: Benton MJ. London: Chapman 1993:363-426.
Bechly G, Brauckmann C, Zessin W, Groning E: New results concerning the
morphology of the most ancient dragonflies (Insecta: Odonatoptera)
from the Namurian of Hagen-Vorhalle (Germany). J Zool Syst Evol Res
2001, 39:209-226.
Hennig W: Die Stammesgeschichte der Insekten Frankfurt am Main:
Waldemar Kramer; 1969.
Baum BR: Combining trees as a way of combining data sets for
phylogenetic inference, and the desirability of combining gene trees.
Taxon 1992, 41:3-10.
Ragan MA: Phylogenetic inference based on matrix representation of
trees. Mol Phylog and Evol 1992, 1:53-58.
Rodrigo AG: On combining cladograms. Taxon 1996, 45:267-274.
Bininda-Emonds ORP, Sanderson MJ: Assessment of the accuracy of
matrix representation with parsimony analysis of supertree construction.
Syst Biol 2001, 50:565-579.
Ross HA, Rodrigo AG: An assessment of matrix representation with
compatibility in supertree construction. In Phylogenetic Supertrees:
Combining Information to Reveal the Tree of Life. Edited by: Bininda-Emonds
ORP. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers; 2004:35-63.

Davis et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:252
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/252

34. Creavey CJ, McInerney JO: Clann: investigating phylogenetic information
through supertree analyses. Bioinformatics 2005, 21:390-392.
35. Chen D, Eulenstein O, Fernández-Baca D, Burleigh JG: Improved heuristics
for minimum-flip supertree construction. Evol Bioinfomat 2:347-356.
36. Bininda-Emonds ORP: New uses for old phylogenies. In Phylogenetic
Supertrees: Combining Information to Reveal the Tree of Life. Edited by:
Bininda-Emonds ORP. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers; 2004:3-14.
37. Wilkinson M, Pisani D, Cotton JA, Corfe I: Measuring support and finding
unsupported relationships in supertrtees. Syst Biol 2005, 54:823-831.
38. Ruta M, Pisani D, Lloyd GT, Benton MJ: A supertree of Temnospondyli:
cladogenetic patterns in the most species-rich group of early tetrapods.
Proc R Soc B Biol Sci 2007, 274:3087-3095.
39. Slowinski JB, Guyer C: Testing the stochasticity of patterns of organismal
diversity: an improved null model. Am Nat 1989, 134:907-921.
40. Sanderson MJ, Donoghue MJ: Shifts in diversification rate with the origin
of angiosperms. Science 1994, 264:1590-1593.
41. Davies TJ, Barraclough TG, Chase MW, Soltis PS, Soltis DE, Savolainen :
Darwins abominable mystery: insights from a supertree of the
angiosperms. PNAS 2004, 101:1904-1909.
42. Hunt T, Bergsten J, Levkanicova Z, Papadopoulou A, John OS, Wild R,
Hammond PM, Ahrens D, Balke M, Caterino MS, Gómez-Zurita J, Ribera I,
Barraclough TG, Bocakova M, Bocak L, Vogler AP: A comprehensive
phylogeny of beetles reveals the evolutionary origins of a
superradiation. Science 2007, 318:1913-1916.
43. Chan K, Moore BR: SYMMETREE: whole-tree analysis of differential
diversification rates. Bioinformatics 2005, 21:1709-1710.
44. Alfaro ME, Santini F, Brock C, Alamillo H, Dornburg A, Rabosky DL,
Carnevale G, Harmon LJ: Nine exceptional radiations plus high turnover
explain species diversity in jawed vertebrates. Proc R Soc B Biol Sci 2009,
106:13410-13414.
45. Gradstein FM, Ogg JG, Smith AG: A Geologic Time Scale 2004 Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press; 2004.
46. Ogg JG, Ogg G, Gradstein FM: The Concise Geologic Time Scale Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press; 2008.
47. Akima H: A New Method of Interpolation and Smooth Curve Fitting
Based on Local Procedures. JACM 1970, 17:589-602.
48. Fox J: An R and S-PLUS companion to applied regression Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage; 2002.
49. R Development Core Team: R: A language and environment for statistical
computing. R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria 2005, ISBN
3-900051-07-0, URL http://www.R-project.org.
50. Saux C, Simon C, Spicer GS: Phylogeny of the Dragonfly and Damselfly
Order Odonata as Inferred by Mitochondrial 12S Ribosomal RNA
Sequences. Ann Entomol Soc Am 2003, 96:693-699.
51. Trueman J: A preliminary cladistic analysis of odonate wing venation.
Odonatologica 25:59-72.
52. Dumont HJ, Vierstraete A, Vanfleteren JR: A molecular phylogeny of the
Odonata (Insecta). Syst Entomol 2010, 35:6-18.
53. Fleck G, Bechly G, Martinez-Delclos X, Jarzembowski E, Coram R, Nel A:
Phylogeny and classification of the Stenophlebioptera (Odonata:
Epiproctophora). Ann Soc Entomol France 2003, 39:55-94.
54. Carle FL: The wing vein homologies and phylogeny of Odonata: A
continuing debate. Soc Int Odonatol Rapid Comm 1982, 4:1-66.
55. Rehn AC: Phylogenetic analysis of higher-level relationships of Odonata.
Syst Entomol 2003, 28:181-240.
56. Bybee SM, Ogden TH, Branham MA, Whiting MF: Molecules, morphology
and fossils: a comprehensive approach to odonate phylogeny and the
evolution of the odonate wing. Cladistics 2008, 24:477-514.
57. Huang D-Y, Nel A: The first Chinese Tarsophlebiidae from the Lower
Cretaceous Yixian Formation, with morphological and phylogenetic
implications (Odonatoptera: Panodonata). Cretac Res 2009, 30:429-433.
58. Misof B: Diversity of Anisoptera (Odonata): infering speciation processes
from patterns of morphological diversity. Zoology 2002, 105:355-65.
59. Corbet PS: Dragonflies: behavior and Ecology of Odonata Ithaca: Cornell
University Press; 1999.
60. Silsby J: Dragonflies of the World Washington DC: Smithsonian Institution
Press; 2001.
61. McInnes L, Orme CDL, Purvis A: Detecting shifts in diversity limits from
molecular phylogenies: what can we know? Proc R Soc B Biol Sci .

Page 10 of 10

62. Tarver JE, Donoghue PCJ: The trouble with topology: phylogenies
without fossils provide a revisionist perspective of evolutionary history
in topological analyses of diversity. Syst Biol .
63. Signor PW, Lipps J: Sampling bias, gradual extinction patterns and
catastrophes in the fossil record. Geol Soc Am Spec Pap 1982, 190:291-296.
64. Purvis A, Hector A: Getting the measure of biodiversity. Nature 2000,
405:212-219.
65. Labandeira CC: The fossil record of insect extinction: new approaches
and future directions. Am Entomol 2005, 51:14-29.
66. Mayhew PJ, Jenkins GB, Benton TG: A long-term association between
global temperature and biodiversity, origination and extinction in the
fossil record. Proc R Soc B Biol Sci 2008, 275:47-53.
67. Cárdenas AL, Harries PJ: Effect of nutrient availability on marine
origination rates throughout the Phanerozoic eon. Nature Geosci 2010,
3:430-434.
68. Frakes LA, Francis JE, Syktus JI: Climate Modes of the Phanerozoic Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press; 1992.
69. Wootton RJ: The historical ecology of aquatic insects: An overview.
Palaeogeogr, Palaeoclimateol, Palaeoecol 1988, 62:477-492.
doi:10.1186/1471-2148-11-252
Cite this article as: Davis et al.: Fossil gaps inferred from phylogenies
alter the apparent nature of diversification in dragonflies and their
relatives. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011 11:252.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
