<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Evolution of the MAGUK protein gene family in premetazoan lineages</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010 10:93. doi:10.1186/1471-2148-10-93"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Alex de Mendoza"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
de Mendoza et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:93
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/93

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Evolution of the MAGUK protein gene family in
premetazoan lineages
Alex de Mendoza1, Hiroshi Suga1, Iñaki Ruiz-Trillo1,2*

Abstract
Background: Cell-to-cell communication is a key process in multicellular organisms. In multicellular animals,
scaffolding proteins belonging to the family of membrane-associated guanylate kinases (MAGUK) are involved in
the regulation and formation of cell junctions. These MAGUK proteins were believed to be exclusive to Metazoa.
However, a MAGUK gene was recently identified in an EST survey of Capsaspora owczarzaki, an unicellular
organism that branches off near the metazoan clade. To further investigate the evolutionary history of MAGUK, we
have undertook a broader search for this gene family using available genomic sequences of different opisthokont
taxa.
Results: Our survey and phylogenetic analyses show that MAGUK proteins are present not only in Metazoa, but
also in the choanoflagellate Monosiga brevicollis and in the protist Capsaspora owczarzaki. However, MAGUKs are
absent from fungi, amoebozoans or any other eukaryote. The repertoire of MAGUKs in Placozoa and eumetazoan
taxa (Cnidaria + Bilateria) is quite similar, except for one class that is missing in Trichoplax, while Porifera have a
simpler MAGUK repertoire. However, Vertebrata have undergone several independent duplications and exhibit two
exclusive MAGUK classes. Three different MAGUK types are found in both M. brevicollis and C. owczarzaki: DLG, MPP
and MAGI. Furthermore, M. brevicollis has suffered a lineage-specific diversification.
Conclusions: The diversification of the MAGUK protein gene family occurred, most probably, prior to the
divergence between Metazoa+choanoflagellates and the Capsaspora+Ministeria clade. A MAGI-like, a DLG-like, and
a MPP-like ancestral genes were already present in the unicellular ancestor of Metazoa, and new gene members
have been incorporated through metazoan evolution within two major periods, one before the spongeeumetazoan split and another within the vertebrate lineage. Moreover, choanoflagellates have suffered an
independent MAGUK diversification. This study highlights the importance of generating enough genome data from
the broadest possible taxonomic sampling, in order to fully understand the evolutionary history of major protein
gene families.

Background
The emergence of multicellular animals from their protist ancestors brought evolutionary novelties together
with some significant genetic challenges. For example, it
is believed that the genes involved in cell-cell communication, cell adhesion and cell differentiation probably
arose before or concomitantly with the origins of multicellularity [1]. One of the protein families involved in
cell-to-cell communication in Metazoa is the family of
scaffolding proteins known as membrane-associated
guanylate kinases (MAGUKs), which organize protein
* Correspondence: inaki.ruiz@icrea.es
1
Departament de Genètica & Institut de Recerca en Biodiversitat (Irbio),
Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain

complexes at cell or synaptic junctions (for a review see
[2]). The MAGUKs have a wide variety of biological
roles, such as regulating cell polarity [3], connecting
transmembrane proteins (or actin filaments) with the
cytoskeleton in tight junctions [4-6], and regulating
synapse formation and plasticity [7-9]. Therefore,
MAGUKs are of critical importance to the development
of multicellular animals.
The MAGUK family have been divided into different
classes or groups, according to phylogenetic position and
protein domain architecture (see for example [2] and
[10], and Figure 1 for our own MAGUK classification).
These MAGUKs classes are known as calcium/calmodulin-dependent proteins kinase (CASK), palmitoylated

© 2010 de Mendoza et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

de Mendoza et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:93
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/93

Page 2 of 10

Figure 1 Domain architectures of the different MAGUK classes. Domain architectures of the different MAGUK classes. Only the canonical
form is shown for each class.

membrane protein (MPP), zona occludens (ZO), caspase
recruitment domain family (CARMA), Disc Large Homolog (DLG), Calcium channel b subunit (CACNB), and
membrane-associated guanylate kinase with an inverted
repeat (MAGI). All classes contain the following: one or
several PDZ domains (except CACNB), a catalytically
inactive guanylate kinase (GUK) domain with homology
to yeast guanylate kinase and a Src Homology 3 (SH3)
domain (except for MAGI) (Figure 1). Members of the

MAGI class, on the other hand, have two WW (conserved Trp residue) domains instead of the SH3 domain.
These WW domains are situated downstream of the
GUK domain (unlike all other MAGUKs). All of these
modular motifs in MAGUK mediate protein-protein
interactions.
The MAGUK protein gene family had been considered to be exclusive to Metazoa [10,11] and, hence, a
key gene family for determining metazoan origins.

de Mendoza et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:93
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/93

However, a recent EST survey showed that an homolog
of MAGI is present in the protist C. owczarzaki [12],
which seems to be the sister-group to the Choanoflagellata+Metazoa clade. This finding led to new questions,
such as whether other MAGUKs were already present
in the ancestor of Metazoa, the time of divergence of
this gene family, and whether choanoflagellates also had
MAGUK homologs. To answer these questions we have
undertaken a taxon-wide search of the MAGUK family
in eukaryotes. Our search included the complete genome sequence of the choanoflagellate M. brevicollis and
the genome trace sequence data of C. owczarzaki, from
which we have completed the full gene annotation by
RACE PCR. Our data reveals that the MAGUK protein
gene family already diverged in premetazoan lineages.

Results
Types of MAGUKs

Previous genomic comparisons have used different
names to classify the distinct MAGUK classes [2,10]. Our
data reveals that there are at least ten different types of
MAGUKs. In the interest of clarity we have classified the
MAGUK into 10 classes: MAGI, CACNB, ZO, CARMA,

Page 3 of 10

DLG5, DLG1-4, MPP1, MPP2-7, MPP5, and CASK.
Those MAGUK classes with their corresponding protein
domain architecture are shown in Figure 1. Although the
protein domain architectures of MAGUKs are well conserved among the taxa within each class, some proteins
have lost some of their domains, or their sequences are
highly divergent. Figure 1 shows the canonical protein
domain architecture; additional details and particularities
are shown in Additional file 1.
Phylogenetic analyses of the Guanylate Kinase domain

Broad phylogenetic sampling of the guanylate kinase
(GUK) domain was performed in order to check the
monophyly of MAGUK within the larger GUK superfamily. Although MAGI and CACNB homologs are considered to be members of MAGUK, their GUK domains
are very divergent and the alignment quality decreases
considerably when both of them are included. Thus,
phylogenetic trees have been inferred either with MAGI
or with CACNB representatives. The Maximum Likelihood (ML) phylogenetic tree that includes CACNB
homologs is shown in Figure 2 (see Additional file 2 for
the complete tree), while the analysis including MAGI is

Figure 2 Unrooted phylogenetic tree of GUK domain sequences. The topology and branch lengths were obtained by maximum likelihood
analysis performed in raxml. The schematic triangles length has been calculated to represent the average branch length of the tree. Statistical
support obtained by 500-bootstrap raxml replicates, and bayesian posterior probability is shown for the main clades. The tree with all the taxa is
shown in the Additional file 2.

de Mendoza et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:93
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/93

shown in Additional file 3. Statistical support for this
last tree is very low, as it has a truncated GUK domain
that leaves very few amino acid positions left for phylogenetic analysis. In any case, both topologies suggest
that the “core MAGUKs” group (which comprises all
MAGUK classes except for the MAGI and the CACNB
classes) is monophyletic (75% ML bootstrap support).
The trees also suggest that either the CACNB or the
MAGI group is the sister-group of the “core MAGUKs”.
Which of those classes, MAGI or CACNB, is more closely related to the “core MAGUK” group remains elusive. In fact, whether any of them should really be
considered MAGUKs is unclear even though MAGI and
CACNB share the PDZ domain and the SH3 domain
with the rest of MAGUKs respectively (see Figure 1).
Their domain architecture may as well be a product of
convergence.
Survey of MAGUKs and phylogenetic analyses

Our survey and protein domain analysis of MAGUKs
show that they are only present in Metazoa, choanoflagellates and the protist C. owczarzaki. We did not find
any MAGUKs in any of the available fungi, amoebozoan,
and other eukaryotic genomes. Eumetazoan (i.e. Cnidaria and Bilateria) taxa have at least one homolog
representative of seven of the ten main classes of
MAGUK, namely MAGI, CACNB, DLG 1-4, ZO,
MPP2-7, MPP5, and CASK (see Figure 3). CARMA and
MPP1 groups appear to be exclusive to Vertebrata. The
placozoan Trichoplax adhaerens has a similar MAGUK
repertoire as Cnidaria, as it only lacks the MPP5 class
and it has instead a DLG5 homolog, which is actually
missing in Cnidaria. However, the poriferan Amphimedon queenslandica, lacks homologs for MPP5, ZO, and
CASK and some of its proteins branch in unclear positions within the tree.
An ML tree was inferred from the SH3 + GUK
domains of the “core MAGUK” proteins. The MAGI
and the CACNB classes were not included in the analysis. MAGI were excluded as they do not have the SH3
domain and their GUK domain is truncated. Similarly,
although CACNB have SH3 and GUK, their sequences
are very divergent and leave few amino acid left for phylogenetic analyses. We searched, among other eukaryotes, the genome sequences of M. brevicollis, C.
owczarzaki, the cnidarian Nematostella vectensis, the
poriferan A. queenslandica, the placozoan T. adhaerens,
plus a few representative bilaterians. When homologs
from taxa with a relevant phylogenetic position, such as
Hydra magnipapillata, were found, they were also
included in the phylogenetic analysis.
The topology of the ML tree shows two statistically
supported main clades (see Figure 3). One clade, which
we name as the “DLG super class”, consists of all DLGs

Page 4 of 10

plus ZO and CARMA. The other, which we name as
the “MPP super class”, comprises all MPPs and CASK.
The different MAGUK classes are supported in our phylogenetic tree. Thus, ZO, CARMA, DLG5, DLG1-4,
MPP5, MPP1, and CASK all appear as monophyletic
groups, with varying bootstrap support. MPP 2-7 is the
only group that appears as a paraphyletic group.
Within the DLG super class, ZO and CARMA group
together and they branch as a sister-group to DLG5. An
A. queenslandica protein with a domain architecture
that is typical of DLG5 (it has the CARD domain, see
Additional file 1) appears as the sister-group to the
DLG5+ZO+CARMA clade. The DLGs of both C. owczarzaki and M. brevicollis group together as the sistergroup to the whole DLG super class. Within the MPP
super class, MPP1 groups within CASK, MPP5 forms a
clear clade, while the remaining MPP genes do not
appear to be monophyletic. Capsaspora-MPP branches
as the sister-group of the entire MPP super class,
whereas Monosiga-MPP appears within the metazoan
MPP group.
Finally, three putative MAGUK-like genes from M.
brevicollis branch in an intermediate position between
the DLG and the MPP super classes.
To check the possibility than one or several lateral
gene transfer (LGT) events may have occurred from
metazoans to choanoflagellates and C. owczarzaki, we
performed a neighbour-net analysis to see whether alternative trees may hint to a potential LGT event. The analysis clearly shows that the homologs of C. owczarzaki
and M. brevicollis do not come from LGT from metazoans since they clearly group outside the major metazoan
MAGUK types, as we would expect if LGT between
metazoans and those protists had taken place (Additional file 4). Instead their homologs branch deep into
the root of the tree.
Protein domain architecture of MAGUKs in
premetazoan taxa

Several MAGUKs are present in some non-metazoan
taxa. Both the protist C. owczarzaki and the choanoflagellate M. brevicollis present putative MAGI, DLG and
MPP homologs. The DLG and MPP proteins of C.
oczarzaki and M. brevicollis cluster basal to the DLG
and MPP super classes respectively (except for the
Monosiga-MPP, see Figure 3; Additional File 5 contains
the taxa data). M. brevicollis has three additional
MAGUK-like proteins, which branch in intermediate
positions between the DLG and MPP super classes. The
protein domain organization of M. brevicollis and C.
owczarzaki MAGUKs are shown in Figure 4. The putative Monosiga-DLG, which branches as a sister-group to
the Capsaspora-DLG, has the canonical DLG protein
domain architecture, with an L27 domain, the three

de Mendoza et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:93
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/93

Page 5 of 10

Figure 3 Phylogeny of SH3+GUK domain sequences. The topology and branch lengths were obtained by maximum likelihood analysis
performed in raxml. The tree is rooted in the branch between the MPP and the DLG+DLG-like clades. Statistical support obtained by 100bootstrap raxml replicates, 100-bootstrap phyml replicates, and bayesian posterior probability is shown for the main clades. The canonical
domain architecture is shown for each MAGUK class.

PDZ domains and an SH3 and a GUK domain. On the
other hand Capsaspora-DLG lacks the N-terminal L27
domain and the first two PDZ domains (Figure 4). With
regard to the MPP homologs, both M. brevicollis and C.
owczarzaki present the standard MPP protein domain
architecture: two L27 domains, one PDZ, and the SH3
and GUK domains. We found that the Monosiga-MPP

has an additional C4 Zinc Finger domain (C3HC4) in
the C-terminal end. The C3HC4 domain is a ring finger
that plays a key role in the ubiquitination pathway of
Metazoa. Interestingly, the DLG1 of vertebrates, which
are also known as PSD-95 [2], also has an N-terminal
PEST domain between L27 and the first PDZ domain,
which is also involved in polyubiquitination [13].

de Mendoza et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:93
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/93

Page 6 of 10

Figure 4 Protein domain architectures for the Capsaspora and Monosiga MAGUK and MAGUK-like homologs, except for MAGI.
E-values as retrieved on PFAM are shown below for canonic MAGUK homologs protein domains.

The Capsaspora-MAGI has the canonical protein
domain architecture of the MAGI class at the N-terminal end, with the PDZ, the GUK and the two WW
domains. However, it lacks the PDZ domains at the Cterminal end as previously shown in [12]. Two putative
MAGI homologs from M. brevicollis (Monosiga-MAGIlike) were identified in the GUK phylogenetic analysis
(Additional file 3). They present diverging protein
domain architectures, lacking the two WW domains
seen in the typical MAGI proteins. Moreover, we have
also identified three MAGUK-like proteins in M. brevicollis with unique protein domain architectures, in
which the core SH3 and GUK domains are wrapped
around several consecutive PDZ domains both at the Nand C-terminal ends (see Figure 4).

Discussion
Reconstruction of MAGUK diversity in the metazoan
ancestor

Our survey of MAGUK proteins shows that three canonical MAGUKs are present in both the protist C. owczarzaki and the choanoflagellate M. brevicollis (Figure
5). Both organisms have homologs of the metazoan
DLG and MPP super classes. Additionally, C. owczarzaki
has a MAGI homolog as previously stated [12], whereas
M. brevicollis has two putative MAGI-like homologs,
although with divergent and unique protein domain
architecture (Additional file 1). Since C. owczarzaki
is most likely the sister-group of choanoflagellates
and Metazoa [12,14-16], our results suggest that
the common ancestor of Metazoa, C. owczarzaki, and

de Mendoza et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:93
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/93

choanoflagellates already had three types of MAGUK: a
DLG-like, an MPP-like and a MAGI-like protein (Figure
5). A canonical MAGI was, thus, either lost or drastically diverged in the choanoflagellate lineage. Alternatively, the Capsaspora-MAGI may represent an
independent acquisition of the PDZ-GUK-WW-WW
domain architecture. Additional genomic data from
other choanoflagellates will be needed to draw definitive
conclusions. Although in theory one can not rule out
the possibility than one or several lateral gene transfer
(LGT) events may have occurred from metazoans to
choanoflagellates and C. owczarzaki, we favour the
hypothesis that the MAGUK protein family appeared
prior to the divergence between C. owczarzaki and
choanoflagellates. In fact, the neighbour-net analysis
shows that the homologs of C. owczarzaki and M. brevicollis do not have a clear relationship with any of the
metazoan MAGUK types, as we would expect if LGT
between metazoans and those protists had taken place
(see Additional file 4).
Interestingly, we have also identified three unique
MAGUK-like proteins in M. brevicollis. Two of them
present the canonical PDZ-SH3-GUK domains of
MAGUK, but with several consecutive PDZ domains at
both the N-terminal and C-terminal ends. One of those
M. brevicollis MAGUK proteins homolog has several
GUK duplications, and the third one has an additional
protein domain: a phosphatase kinase (see Figure 4). All
these MAGUK-like proteins constitute novel domain
architectures that had not been found in any other
organism up to now. Novel protein domain arrangements that include several consecutive copies of a
domain have already been found in M. brevicollis [17].

Page 7 of 10

Whether these MAGUK-like protein domain arrangements are also present in other choanoflagellates or in
other opisthokont protists remains unclear. In any case,
our data shows that choanoflagellates, or at least M. brevicollis, underwent an independent lineage-specific
diversification of the MAGUK protein gene family.
Functional analysis on these genes may clarify what
roles the different genes are playing in M. brevicollis.
In fact, the role of MAGUK proteins in these premetazoan taxa remains an open question. In the sponge A.
queenslandica both the DLG and MAGI homologs are
specifically expressed only in epithelia-like tissue [18].
Moreover, it has been shown that A. queenslandica has
and expresses several other components of the synaptic
junction [18]. Interestingly, those components are
expressed in the flask cells and the epidermis. It is
therefore possible that the interaction between
MAGUKs and the complex protein scaffolds found in
eumetazoan post-synaptic scaffolds or in tight-junctions,
was already present in sponge. To which components
M. brevicollis or C. owczarzaki MAGUKs interact is
unknown. Answering this is beyond the scope of this
manuscript. Such information, however, may be crucial
to decipher the role of MAGUKs in unicellular taxa.
Moreover, additional data from colonial choanoflagellates or ichthyosporeans should yield important insights
into this question, since they may harbor some scaffolding assemblages that enable the different cells in the colony to communicate.
Evolutionary history of MAGUK

Our data show that although the MAGUK family most
probably originated within choanozoans (i.e. unicellular

Figure 5 Distribution of MAGUKs in opisthokonts. Black circles means presence, whereas white circles means the homology assignment is
not clear. The DLG and MPP columns indicate presence within that major clade (the super class) but without clear assignment to any of the
inclusive classes (see text for further explanations).

de Mendoza et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:93
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/93

lineages that are most closely related to Metazoa), it
clearly expanded within metazoans. In fact, it seems that
the expansion of MAGUKs in metazoans occurred at
least in two distinctive periods in the course of evolution, as observed in many other protein families [19].
The first expansion occurred at the very early metazoan
evolution before the divergence between sponges (or
placozoans) and the rest of metazoans. The second
expansion is likely to have happened at the early evolution of vertebrates. Accordingly, both Porifera and Placozoa have several extra MAGUKs classes, and
Vertebrata has two exclusive classes, CARMA and
MPP1, that were most probably generated by independent duplications in the vertebrate lineage.
The analysis of the protein domain organization
mapped onto our phylogenetic analysis sheds some light
on the evolutionary history of MAGUKs. For example, a
duplication of a protein kinase domain followed by its
recruitment in the N-terminal site of one MPP protein
brought about a new type of MAGUK, the CASK class.
This event probably took place either in the common
ancestor of Placozoa and Eumetazoa, or at the origin of
Metazoa followed by the loss of this MAGUK type in
Porifera (Figure 5). Moreover, the vertebrate-specific
MPP1 class seems to have derived from CASK, most
probably by an additional duplication of the CASK
homolog in vertebrates followed by the loss of the protein kinase domain and the two L27 domains. Vertebrates have the largest repertoire of MAGUKs. Not only
do they have the vertebrate-specific MAGUK classes
such as CARMA and MPP1, but they also have several
genes that appear to have diverged in the early vertebrate
evolution (e.g. in the DLG1-4, MAGI and ZO classes,
vertebrates have three or four such genes). Although the
sponge A. queenslandica has a MAGUK with the typical
CARMA domain architecture (a CARD domain, a PDZ
domain, an SH3 domain and a GUK domain), it branches
as the sister-group to the entire DLG5, CARMA and ZO
group. We hypothesize this A. queenslandica gene represents the ancestral form of this whole group. In fact,
DLG5 and ZO are already present both in the placozoan
T. adhaerens and in all other eumetazoans, except for the
cnidarian N. vectensis which does not have a DLG5
homolog. The class CASK is also present both in T.
adhaerens and in other eumetazoans. This indicates that
CASK, DLG5 and ZO arose prior to the divergence
between placozoans and the rest of eumetazoans.
It is worth mentioning that the interpretation of these
results needs additional data, since the phylogenetic
position of the basal metazoans is still under debate (see
[20-24]). If the placozoan T. adhaerens is indeed the sister-group of cnidarians and Bilateria [20,24], then
CASK, DLG5, and ZO appeared in the common ancestor of both placozoans and eumetazoans; and the DLG5

Page 8 of 10

homolog was lost in the cnidarian lineage. However, if
placozoans are indeed the most basal metazoans or sister-group to sponges [21,22], then the lineage leading to
sponges (or A. queenslandica) did lose their ZO, CASK
and DLG5 representatives. Finally, and even though the
topology of the MAGUK tree remain the same with
whatever method used, some of the nodes of our tree
do not have high bootstrap values. Thus, some of the
implications regarding the evolutionary history of
MAGUK within metazoans may need to be revisited
with additional data.

Conclusions
In this study we have identified several MAGUK and
MAGUK-like homologs in premetazoan taxa. Overall,
our data show that the MAGUK protein gene family is
not exclusive to Metazoa. This gene family most probably diversified within the opisthokonts before the divergence between Capsaspora and the Choanoflagellata +
Metazoa clade. Thus, DLG, MPP and MAGI were
already present in the last common ancestor of the
Metazoa, choanoflagellates and Capsaspora+Ministeria
(Filasterea) clade. The family further diversified within
metazoans, most probably in two major episodes (early
metazoan and early vertebrate evolution) and up to ten
different MAGUK types evolved with different roles.
The choanoflagellate M. brevicollis has, independently
of Metazoa, undergone a lineage-specific diversification
of MAGUK-like proteins that have unique domain
architectures. This represents a diversification independent from the one occurred in Metazoa. Additional
genomic data from other choanoflagellate taxa will help
elucidate whether this diversification is specific to choanoflagellates or just to the M. brevicollis species. Moreover, M. brevicollis has different and unique MAGI-like
homologs, not found in Metazoa. Functional analyses
will be needed to better understand the roles of
MAGUKs in the unicellular relatives of Metazoa.
Methods
Database searching

All potential MAGUK sequences were obtained by performing blast searches (blastp, tblastn and psi-blast)
against the Protein, Genome, and EST databases at the
NCBI (National Center for Biotechnology Information)
and against completed or on-going genome projects
database at the JGI (Joint Genome Institute) and the
Broad Institute. The amino acid sequences of the Homo
sapiens orthologs were used as a query. The sequences
retrieved that were not annotated as MAGUK were then
blasted against NCBI CDD (Conserved Domain Database). Only those that retrieved a MAGUK protein
domain architecture (a PDZ, SH3, GUK) were considered positives. Complete protein domain architectures

de Mendoza et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:93
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/93

were inferred by searching the PFAM and SMART databases with the complete sequences. Moreover, the putative positives were individually incorporated into a basic
alignment of annotated sequences. Only those sequences
that could unambiguously be aligned were used in the
phylogenetic analysis.
In order to study the early evolution of the guanylate
kinase domain, we performed additional phylogenetic
analyses using sequences from a broad range of taxa
including the Eubacteria. The same databases as above,
together with the Genbank amino acid database, were
searched with the HMMER3.0a2 program. In this case,
the genes that did not show the typical MAGUK
domain architecture were also included in the analyses.
As the analyses were focused on the divergence between
distinct subfamilies of the guanylate kinase family, the
genes comprising each subfamily were properly removed
in order to reduce the complexity of the tree.
Phylogenetic analyses

Alignments of the SH3 + GUK domains were constructed using the Muscle [25] plug-in of the Geneious
software (Biomatters Ltd, Auckland, New Zealand),
before they were manually inspected and edited. Only
those positions that were unambiguously aligned were
included in the final analysis, which resulted in a total
of 272 amino acid positions respectively. The final protein alignments can be downloaded from the webpage
http://www.multicellgenome.com.
Maximum likelihood phylogenetic trees were estimated by RAxML [26] using a PROTGAMMAWAG
model of evolution and with a gamma distribution (8
categories) (WAG+Γ). Statistical support was obtained
from 100 bootstrap replicates using the Phyml program
[27] following a LG+Γ+I model of evolution [28] with 4
rate categories, and from 100-bootstrap replicates in
RAxML, using the PROTGAMMAWAG model of evolution and with a gamma distribution (4 categories).
Bayesian trees were estimated on the MrBayes plug-in
available on Geneious software. We ran four different
Monte Carlo Markov chains using a WAG+Γ model of
evolution with 4 rate categories. A total of 1,1 million
generations were calculated with trees sampled every
200 generations and with a burn-in of 110,000.
The alignment of the sole guanylate kinase domain
sequences from diverse taxa, including the Eubacteria,
was generated manually as the sequences are divergent.
The phylogenetic tree was inferred by RAxML with 500
bootstrap replicates. We inferred two phylogenetic trees
with different repertoires of subfamilies, as the inclusion
of both the MAGI and CACNB subfamilies in a single
dataset results in a short alignment, that is insufficient
for reliable tree inference. Both alignments can be
downloaded from our webpage.

Page 9 of 10

Amplification of Capsaspora MAGUKs and annotation of
Monosiga MAGUKs

Capsaspora owczarzaki data were obtained from genome sequence scaffolds from NCBI and the proteins
were predicted both with AUGUSTUS [29] and GENSCAN [30]. Incomplete predictions were checked by
rapid amplification of cDNA ends (RACE). Purified
polyA+ messenger RNA and cDNA from C. owczarzaki
were obtained as in [31]. The full sequence of the 5’ and
3’ ends of C. owczarzaki DLG and MPP were obtained
by RACE, using a nested PCR and with primers
designed from the original genome trace data. Primers
used were as follows: CaDLG-3’RACE-1: 5’ GACATG
AAGGAGGAAAAGTTTATGG 3’; CaDLG-3’RACE-2:
5’ ACAAAGGTGTTTGACACTGCAC 3’; CaDLG-5’RA
CE-1: 5’ GTCGTTGACCTTCAAAATTTCATC 3’; CaD
LG-5’RACE-2: 5’ GAATCTTTGACACGTAAATGTT
GG 3’; CaMPP-3’RACE-1: 5’ AAGCTCCAAGAAGT
CGTCAAGG 3’; CaMPP-3’RACE-2: 5’ CAACGTT
GGCTTCTTCTTTGAC 3’; CaMPP-5’RACE-1: 5’ GTCT
CGGTCAAAAAGTCCTTGAC 3’; CaMPP-5’RACE-2: 5’
GTAAAGTCCTTGTTGGCGATCTT 3’. Sequences
were obtained and analyzed as in [31]. These two
sequences have been deposited at GenBank under the
accession numbers GQ290472-GQ290473.
Monosiga brevicollis data were obtained from the predicted protein database. They were also confirmed by
the AUGUSTUS and GENSCAN predictions from genome sequence scaffolds downloaded from JGI.
Checking the network-like structure of MAGUK protein
gene family

In order to check whether the ML tree follows a network-like or a tree-like structure, SplitsTree4 [32] was
run to construct a neigbor-net using the alignment that
includes the SH3 + GUK domains.
Additional file 1: Schematic MAGUK domain organization among
Holozoa. Domain structures of the key taxa are shown here to reveal
the differential conservation in this gene family.
Additional file 2: Unrooted phylogenetic tree of the GUK domain
sequences, including the Calcium channel B subunit. The topology
and branch lengths were obtained by maximum likelihood analysis
performed in raxml. Statistical support was obtained by 500-bootstrap
raxml replicates.
Additional file 3: Unrooted phylogenetic tree of the GUK domain
sequences, including MAGI. The topology and branch lengths were
obtained by maximum likelihood analysis performed in raxml. Statistical
support was obtained by 500-bootstrap raxml replicates.
Additional file 4: A neigbor-net of MAGUKs. A neigbor-net
constructed from the MAGUK alignment that includes the SH3 + GUK
domains. Major groupings and the homologs of C. owczarzaki and M.
brevicollis are indicated.
Additional file 5: Taxa used in the phylogenetic analysis of Figure 3.

de Mendoza et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:93
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/93

Acknowledgements
Preliminary sequence data were obtained from the Department of Energy Joint
Genome Institute, the Broad Institute, and NCBI websites. Genome sequencing
of Capsaspora owczarzaki is being undertaken at the Broad Institute under the
auspices of the National Human Genome Research Institute (NHGRI) and within
the UNICORN initiative. We thank both the JGI and the Broad Institute for
making data publicly available. We thank Bernard Degnan for accession to the
Amphimedon proteome data. We also thank Andrew J. Roger, Arnau Sebé,
Jordi Paps, and Romain Derelle for helpful insights. This work was supported by
an ICREA contract, an ERC Starting Grant (206883), and a grant (BFU2008-02839/
BMC) from MICINN to IR-T. AdM’s salary was supported by a pre-graduate grant
from MICINN, and HS’s salary by an ERC Starting Grant to IR-T and by a Marie
Curie Intra European Fellowship to HS.
Author details
1
Departament de Genètica & Institut de Recerca en Biodiversitat (Irbio),
Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. 2Institució Catalana per a la
Recerca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA); Parc Científic de Barcelona, Baldiri Reixach
15, 08028 Barcelona, Spain.
Authors’ contributions
AdM led on data collection, analysis, and data interpretation, contributed to
writing. HS oversaw data collection, contributed to analysis and the writing.
IR-T designed the experiments, oversaw the project and led on much of the
writing. All authors read and approved the manuscript.
Received: 24 August 2009 Accepted: 1 April 2010
Published: 1 April 2010
References
1. Ruiz-Trillo I, Burger G, Holland PW, King N, Lang BF, Roger AJ, Gray MW:
The origins of multicellularity: a multi-taxon genome initiative. Trends
Genet 2007, 23:113-118.
2. Funke L, Dakoji S, Bredt DS: Membrane-associated guanylate kinases
regulate adhesion and plasticity at cell junctions. Annual Review of
Biochemistry 2005, 74:219-245.
3. Tanentzapf G, Tepass U: Interactions between the crumbs, lethal giant
larvae and bazooka pathways in epithelial polarization. Nat Cell Biol 2003,
5:46-52.
4. Fanning AS, Jameson BJ, Jesaitis LA, Anderson JM: The tight junction
protein ZO-1 establishes a link between the transmembrane protein
occludin and the actin cytoskeleton. J Biol Chem 1998, 273:29745-29753.
5. Wittchen ES, Haskins J, Stevenson BR: NZO-3 expression causes global
changes to actin cytoskeleton in Madin-Darby canine kidney cells:
linking a tight junction protein to Rho GTPases. Mol Biol Cell 2003,
14:1757-1768.
6. Patrie KM, Drescher AJ, Goyal M, Wiggins RC, Margolis B: The membraneassociated guanylate kinase protein MAGI-1 binds megalin and is
present in glomerular podocytes. J Am Soc Nephrol 2001, 12:667-677.
7. Lahey T, Gorczyca M, Jia XX, Budnik V: The Drosophila tumor suppressor
gene dlg is required for normal synaptic bouton structure. Neuron 1994,
13:823-835.
8. Aoki C, Miko I, Oviedo H, Mikeladze-Dvali T, Alexandre L, Sweeney N,
Bredt DS: Electron microscopic immunocytochemical detection of PSD95, PSD-93, SAP-102, and SAP-97 at postsynaptic, presynaptic, and
nonsynaptic sites of adult and neonatal rat visual cortex. Synapse 2001,
40:239-257.
9. Schnell E, Sizemore M, Karimzadegan S, Chen L, Bredt DS, Nicoll RA: Direct
interactions between PSD-95 and stargazin control synaptic AMPA
receptor number. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2002, 99:13902-13907.
10. Te Velthuis AJ, Admiraal JF, Bagowski CP: Molecular Evolution of the
MAGUK Family in Metazoan Genomes. BMC Evol Biol 2007, 7:129.
11. Adell T, Gamulin V, Perovic-Ottstadt S, Wiens M, Korzhev M, Muller IM,
Muller WE: Evolution of metazoan cell junction proteins: the scaffold
protein MAGI and the transmembrane receptor tetraspanin in the
demosponge Suberites domuncula. J Mol Evol 2004, 59:41-50.
12. Ruiz-Trillo I, Roger AJ, Burger G, Gray MW, Lang BF: A phylogenomic
investigation into the origin of metazoa. Mol Biol Evol 2008, 25:664-672.
13. Xu W, Schluter OM, Steiner P, Czervionke BL, Sabatini B, Malenka RC:
Molecular dissociation of the role of PSD-95 in regulating synaptic
strength and LTD. Neuron 2008, 57:248-262.

Page 10 of 10

14. Ruiz-Trillo I, Inagaki Y, Davis LA, Sperstad S, Landfald B, Roger AJ:
Capsaspora owczarzaki is an independent opisthokont lineage. Curr Biol
2004, 14(22):R946-947.
15. Steenkamp ET, Wright J, Baldauf SL: The protistan origins of animals and
fungi. Mol Biol Evol 2006, 23:93-106.
16. Shalchian-Tabrizi K, Minge MA, Espelund M, Orr R, Ruden T, Jakobsen KS,
Cavalier-Smith T: Multigene phylogeny of choanozoa and the origin of
animals. PLoS ONE 2008, 3:e2098.
17. Abedin M, King N: The premetazoan ancestry of cadherins. Science 2008,
319:946-948.
18. Sakarya O, Armstrong KA, Adamska M, Adamski M, Wang IF, Tidor B,
Degnan BM, Oakley TH, Kosik KS: A post-synaptic scaffold at the origin of
the animal kingdom. PLoS ONE 2007, 2:e506.
19. Miyata T, Suga H: Divergence pattern of animal gene families and
relationship with the Cambrian explosion. Bioessays 2001, 23:1018-1027.
20. Srivastava M, Begovic E, Chapman J, Putnam NH, Hellsten U, Kawashima T,
Kuo A, Mitros T, Salamov A, Carpenter ML, Signorovitch AY, Moreno MA,
Kamm K, Grimwood J, Schmutz J, Shapiro H, Grigoriev IV, Buss LW,
Schierwater B, Dellaporta SL, Rokhsar DS: The Trichoplax genome and the
nature of placozoans. Nature 2008, 454:955-960.
21. Schierwater B, Eitel M, Jakob W, Osigus HJ, Hadrys H, Dellaporta SL,
Kolokotronis SO, Desalle R: Concatenated analysis sheds light on early
metazoan evolution and fuels a modern “urmetazoon” hypothesis. PLoS
Biol 2009, 7:e20.
22. Dellaporta SL, Xu A, Sagasser S, Jakob W, Moreno MA, Buss LW,
Schierwater B: Mitochondrial genome of Trichoplax adhaerens supports
Placozoa as the basal lower metazoan phylum. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2006, 103:8751-8756.
23. Miller DJ, Ball EE: Animal evolution: trichoplax, trees, and taxonomic
turmoil. Curr Biol 2008, 18:R1003-5.
24. Philippe H, Derelle R, Lopez P, Pick K, Borchiellini C, Boury-Esnault N,
Vacelet J, Renard E, Houliston E, Queinnec E, Da Silva C, Wincker P, Le
Guyader H, Leys S, Jackson DJ, Schreiber F, Erpenbeck D, Morgenstern B,
Worheide G, Manuel M: Phylogenomics Revives Traditional Views on
Deep Animal Relationships. Curr Biol 2009, 19(8):706-12.
25. Edgar RC: MUSCLE: a multiple sequence alignment method with reduced
time and space complexity. BMC Bioinformatics 2004, 5:113.
26. Stamatakis A: RAxML-VI-HPC: maximum likelihood-based phylogenetic
analyses with thousands of taxa and mixed models. Bioinformatics 2006,
22:2688-2690.
27. Guindon S, Gascuel O: A simple, fast, and accurate algorithm to estimate
large phylogenies by maximum likelihood. Systematic Biology 2003,
52:696-704.
28. Le SQ, Gascuel O: An improved general amino acid replacement matrix.
Mol Biol Evol 2008, 25:1307-1320.
29. Stanke M, Morgenstern B: AUGUSTUS: a web server for gene prediction
in eukaryotes that allows user-defined constraints. Nucleic Acids Res 2005,
33:W465-7.
30. Burge C, Karlin S: Prediction of complete gene structures in human
genomic DNA. J Mol Biol 1997, 268:78-94.
31. Ruiz-Trillo I, Lane CE, Archibald JM, Roger AJ: Insights into the evolutionary
origin and genome architecture of the unicellular opisthokonts
Capsaspora owczarzaki and Sphaeroforma arctica. Journal of Eukaryotic
Microbiology 2006, 53:1-6.
32. Huson DH, Bryant D: Application of phylogenetic networks in
evolutionary studies. Mol Biol Evol 2006, 23:254-267.
doi:10.1186/1471-2148-10-93
Cite this article as: de Mendoza et al.: Evolution of the MAGUK protein
gene family in premetazoan lineages. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010
10:93.

</pre>
</body>
</html>
