<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Identification of transcriptional regulatory networks specific to pilocytic astrocytoma</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Medical Genomics 2011, 4:57. doi:10.1186/1755-8794-4-57"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Hrishikesh Deshmukh"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Deshmukh et al. BMC Medical Genomics 2011, 4:57
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1755-8794/4/57

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Identification of transcriptional regulatory
networks specific to pilocytic astrocytoma
Hrishikesh Deshmukh1, Jinsheng Yu1, Jahangheer Shaik1, Tobey J MacDonald2, Arie Perry1, Jacqueline E Payton1,
David H Gutmann3, Mark A Watson1 and Rakesh Nagarajan1*

Abstract
Background: Pilocytic Astrocytomas (PAs) are common low-grade central nervous system malignancies for which
few recurrent and specific genetic alterations have been identified. In an effort to better understand the molecular
biology underlying the pathogenesis of these pediatric brain tumors, we performed higher-order transcriptional
network analysis of a large gene expression dataset to identify gene regulatory pathways that are specific to this
tumor type, relative to other, more aggressive glial or histologically distinct brain tumours.
Methods: RNA derived from frozen human PA tumours was subjected to microarray-based gene expression
profiling, using Affymetrix U133Plus2 GeneChip microarrays. This data set was compared to similar data sets
previously generated from non-malignant human brain tissue and other brain tumour types, after appropriate
normalization.
Results: In this study, we examined gene expression in 66 PA tumors compared to 15 non-malignant cortical brain
tissues, and identified 792 genes that demonstrated consistent differential expression between independent sets of
PA and non-malignant specimens. From this entire 792 gene set, we used the previously described PAP tool to
assemble a core transcriptional regulatory network composed of 6 transcription factor genes (TFs) and 24 target
genes, for a total of 55 interactions. A similar analysis of oligodendroglioma and glioblastoma multiforme (GBM)
gene expression data sets identified distinct, but overlapping, networks. Most importantly, comparison of each of
the brain tumor type-specific networks revealed a network unique to PA that included repressed expression of
ONECUT2, a gene frequently methylated in other tumor types, and 13 other uniquely predicted TF-gene
interactions.
Conclusions: These results suggest specific transcriptional pathways that may operate to create the unique
molecular phenotype of PA and thus opportunities for corresponding targeted therapeutic intervention. Moreover,
this study also demonstrates how integration of gene expression data with TF-gene and TF-TF interaction data is a
powerful approach to generating testable hypotheses to better understand cell-type specific genetic programs
relevant to cancer.

Background
Novel, albeit limited, insights into the molecular basis of
human disease have resulted from the use of high-resolution, microarray-based platforms to comprehensively
study complex diseases at multiple levels of the genetic
program. For example, in central nervous system (CNS)
tumors, array-based comparative genomic hybridization
(aCGH) and DNA sequencing have led to the
* Correspondence: rakesh@wustl.edu
1
Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School
of Medicine, 660. S. Euclid Ave. St. Louis, MO, 63110, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

identification of tumor-associated chromosomal gains
and losses and the corresponding specific gene mutations within these altered loci [1-3]. Gene expressionbased studies have also profiled thousands of individual
transcriptional units to uncover novel genes whose
expression is de-regulated, concordant with other clinical features of these tumors, such as histological grade
and patient survival [4-6]. The combined use of both
technologies has identified individual genetic biomarkers
associated with CNS tumorigenesis and tumor behavior,
although few have yet resulted in specific strategies for
targeted drug therapy [7].

© 2011 Deshmukh et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Deshmukh et al. BMC Medical Genomics 2011, 4:57
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1755-8794/4/57

The accumulation of ‘genome-wide’ data sets from
CNS tumors is demonstrating that the processes of
tumorigenesis and tumor progression likely involve the
coordinated de-regulation of entire molecular networks,
rather than single genes. Therefore, mutation, altered
copy number, and abnormal expression of single genes
observed to vary across individual tumors may be better
viewed collectively to identify underlying commonalities
at the level of molecular programs, based on known
protein-protein interactions, canonical cell signaling
pathways, and in silico transcriptional regulatory control
predictions. As opposed to identifying single gene/protein targets for anti-cancer drug design, these networks
establish broader, multi-target pathways for therapeutic
intervention. The combination of higher-order DNAand RNA-based microarray meta-analyses offers the
potential to discover these therapeutically-relevant networks [8].
Pilocytic Astrocytomas (PAs) are World Health Organization (WHO) grade I glial CNS tumors, accounting
for one-fifth of all central nervous system tumors. However, in young children and adolescents, PAs are the
most common brain tumor. Compared to other highgrade CNS gliomas, such as Glioblastoma Multiforme
(GBM), PAs are characterized by low cell proliferative
indices, a biphasic histologic appearances, and microglial
infiltration. PAs also lack the genetic alterations
observed in high-grade glioma, and in general exhibit
few molecular alterations at the DNA level. Previous
studies have demonstrated occasional copy number
changes involving chromosomes 6, 7, 8, and 11 [9,10].
In a recent study [1], we identified genome copy number alterations occurring in cerebellar PA using aCGH
on patient-matched tumor and normal samples. However, as in other reported studies, only a limited number
of consistent genetic alterations were identified.
Current treatments for these pediatric brain tumors
include surgical resection, radiation, and chemotherapy.
However, in young children, these treatments are associated with secondary damage to the developing brain,
and result in long term neuropsychological and neuroendocrine dysfunction. In addition, since children
with PA have good overall survival, it is imperative to
identify the key genetic and growth control pathways
de-regulated in the tumor and not the normal brain for
future therapeutic drug design. Given this clinical
imperative and the limited success in identifying therapeutic targets by conventional genomic analyses, we
employed a higher-order, network-based analytical
approach to discover subtle alterations in genetic pathways operative specifically in PA.
In the present study, we first identified PA-specific
gene expression signatures in a meta-analysis of 74 PA
microarray datasets. We then utilized the identity of

Page 2 of 9

these genes to construct a PA-specific gene network
based on transcription factor gene regulatory interactions. Moreover, we identified relationships that are
both common and specific to PAs compared to other
cell lineage-related glial tumor types by creating similar
gene regulatory networks from GBM and oligodendroglioma microarray datasets. Our approach has identified
a unique genetic network in PA which may account for
the novel phenotype of this brain tumor, and also
demonstrates the general utility of using network-based
approaches to analyze complex molecular profiling data
from other tumor types.

Methods
Sample and Affymetrix GeneChip processing

All studies of de-identified, previously collected (existing) frozen human tumor tissue specimens were performed under an institutional reviewed and approved
human studies protocol (WU HRPO #99-0573 and
#04-0980). Frozen tumor tissues were sectioned and
histologically reviewed to confirm pathological diagnosis and neoplastic cellularity (AP). Serial tissue sections
was used to isolated tumor RNA using Trizol reagent
(Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) and following the manufacturer’s standard protocol. Resulting RNA was quantified by A260 and A280 readings using a Nanodrop
spectrophotometer (Nanodrop Technologies, Wilmington DE) and qualitatively assessed using a BioAnalyzer
2100 and RNANanoChip assay (Agilent Technologies,
Palo Alto, CA). All histology and nucleic acid extraction procedures were performed by the Siteman Cancer Center Tissue Procurement Core. Microarray data
for 74 PA samples was generated with Affymetrix
U133 Plus 2.0 arrays containing 54,675 probesets in
the Siteman Cancer Center Molecular and Genomic
Analysis Core (Washington University School of Medicine) starting with 1 μg of quality controlled total cellular RNA and using standard laboratory and
manufacturer protocols.
Data normalization and quality review

To facilitate comparison between multiple different
datasets, meta-analysis was limited to the use of data
generated using the Affymetrix GeneChip™ expression
array platform. Data from 15 non-malignant frontal and
prefrontal cortex brain tissue samples, hereafter referred
to as non-malignant brain tissue samples, were obtained
from ArrayExpress (E-TABM-20, E-TABM-84) [11,12].
Tumor datasets for GBM and oligodendroglioma were
downloaded from GEO (GSE4412, GSE9385 and
GSE4271 (GBM and oligodendroglioma) [5,6,13]) and
The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) [3]. For the
GSE9385 dataset, which used Affymetrix GeneChip
Exon arrays, non-malignant brain tissue samples that

Deshmukh et al. BMC Medical Genomics 2011, 4:57
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1755-8794/4/57

were also included in the dataset were used as the control set.
To perform inter-array comparisons and quality control, the raw data (i.e. CEL files) from each microarray
were scaled to a target intensity of 1500 using the Affymetrix Expression Console (EC) version 1.1 (MAS 5.0
algorithm). Quality control review for all microarray
data included percent present calls, RawQ, background,
scaling factor, and 3’-5’ ratios for GAPDH and betaactin. Affymetrix control probes and probesets that were
called “Absent” across all samples were removed. The
MAS 5.0 data were z-normalized using the mean and
standard deviation for each probe. Hierarchical agglomerative clustering was performed using both Spotfire’s
DecisionSite and Bioconductor software Unweighted
pair-group method with arithmetic mean (UPGMA) was
used as the clustering method, and Euclidian distance
was used to calculate similarity.
Unsupervised hierarchical clustering was first performed on the entire 74 PA sample set. Clustering outliers and data sets which failed array quality control
parameters were removed. The 15 non-malignant brain
sample data sets were next added to the entire dataset,
and z-normalization and hierarchical clustering was
repeated. Tumor samples which segregated with nonmalignant samples were also removed from further analysis. The final dataset consisted of 66 PA tumors and
15 non-malignant brain tissue samples. On retrospective
review, the 8 PA tumor data sets excluded from analysis
were confirmed to be initially misclassified based upon
histological re-review of WHO grade I criteria for PA.
Identification of gene expression signatures

A gene expression signature that delineated PA from
non-malignant brain tissue was identified using iterative
and independent parallel data sets framework (Figure 1),
based on the Significance Analysis of Microarrays
(SAM) algorithm [14]. SAM was performed using Bioconductor with log2 transformed MAS 5.0 data filtered
as described above. The 66 tumor samples were randomly divided into two groups of 33 samples. For the
training arm of the protocol, the first 33 samples were
randomly divided into two groups of 22 and 11. SAM
analysis was conducted for each of these groups against
the 15 non-malignant brain tissue samples. The minimum fold change threshold was defined as two-fold.
Multiple testing correction was employed by setting the
delta value to the highest value for which the 90th percentile of the FDR distribution remained equal to zero.
Genes that were significant in both training samples
groups were recorded and the samples were then randomized into two new training groups of 22 and 11 samples. This processed was repeated for 10 iterations. An
output table was generated that consisted of genes that

Page 3 of 9

demonstrated consistent difference in expression in
common between the two parallel training groups, in all
10 iterations of the training loop. The testing arm of the
protocol then consisted of a single SAM analysis on the
remaining 33 tumor samples of the entire 66 sample
cohort. While it is possible that this approach may
introduce bias and has the potential for false positives in
the gene set because the test set was not resampled, the
likelihood of this is low given that ALL genes identified
in the training set were recapitulated in the test set,
thus validating the robustness of the training loop.
Furthermore, identified genes were further filtered
through network construction as described in the next
section.
To identify differentially expressed genes in other glial
tumor histological types (GBM and oligodendroglioma),
we employed the same 15 non-malignant brain tissue
sample set (except for GSE9385 where the non-malignant
controls provided in the data set were used), and a single
SAM analysis on each of the GBM and oligodendroglioma
datasets described above. Multiple datasets for GBM were
available, and each dataset was analyzed separately using
SAM to identify differentially-expressed genes.
Network analysis to create a minimal gene regulatory
network

The probe identifiers for the differentially expressed
genes (DEGs) were mapped to Entrez Gene IDs using
Affymetrix-provided Accession Numbers and annotations available from NCBI’s Entrez Gene database, and
Entrez Gene IDs were used to identify transcription factors (TFs) from TRANSFAC 11.4 and JASPAR databases. The Promoter Analysis Pipeline (PAP) [15] was
next employed to construct the TF-TF network (Figure
2-step 2) and the TF-target network (Figure 2-step 3). A
p-value cutoff of 0.005 was used to select TF-target
interactions from PAP. A regulatory network was
defined as a cumulative representation of all interactions
between TFs and their known target genes, one or both
of which was represented in the DEG list. In this
arrangement, therefore, a regulatory network may
encompass many branching sub-networks, even if only
one major network is of interest based upon gene
expression data. Multiple studies have found that TFs
work in conjunction with each other to regulate genes;
thus, this information was incorporated into the regulatory network by finding targets that are commonly regulated by more than one TF (Figure 2-step 4). This
network is called a minimal network (i.e. the resulting
network where each target gene is regulated by at least
two TFs). The differential expression analysis provided
quantitative data on over-expression or under-expression of a gene in PA samples when compared to nonmalignant brain tissue samples. When overlaid on the

Deshmukh et al. BMC Medical Genomics 2011, 4:57
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1755-8794/4/57

Page 4 of 9

66 Grade I
15 normal brain
Random Sampling
TRAINING

TESTING

33 Grade I
15 Normal brain

Loop 10 times

33 Grade I
15 Normal brain

Random Sampling
22 Grade I
15 Normal brain

11 Grade I
15 Normal brain

SAM

SAM

SAM

Differentially
Expressed
Genes

Differentially
Expressed
Genes

1865
Differentially
Expressed
Genes

Intersect

Common Differentially Expressed Genes

792 genes present
in all 10 output tables
Extent of Overlap

792 genes present
in both analyses
Figure 1 SAM-based gene selection framework employed to identify differentially expressed genes in independent sets of pilocytic
astrocytoma gene expression data.

regulatory network, this information provided the difference in expression of a gene in response to difference in
expression of another gene. Finally, the hypergeometric
distribution test was used to identify overrepresented
transcriptional regulatory pathways predicted by the
minimal network gene list [16].

The same approach was used to create a minimal network for the oligodendroglioma dataset. Multiple GBM
datasets were used to identify differentially expressed
genes, and minimal networks were created as described
above. These individual GBM networks were pooled
together by taking the union of all relationships for each

Deshmukh et al. BMC Medical Genomics 2011, 4:57
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1755-8794/4/57

Step 1
DEGs
g1
g2
g3
g4
g5
g6
g7
g8
g9
g10

Page 5 of 9

Step 2

Step 3
TFs

TFs

g1
g5

g5

g5

g3

g3

g2 g4 g6

TFs

g1

g1

g9

Step 4

g7
g8 g10

g3

g9
g2 g4 g6

Target genes

g7
g8 g10

Target genes

g7

g9
g2

g6

g10

Target genes

Figure 2 Creation of a minimal transcriptional regulatory network. Step 1: Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) are identified using SAM
based selection. Step 2: Transcription Factors (TFs) and regulatory relationships (i.e. TF - TF) are identified among DEGs by using PAP. Step 3: A
regulatory network is drawn by finding target genes regulated by TFs (i.e. TF - Target) from the DEG set using PAP. Step 4: A minimal network is
generated by identifying targets regulated by more than one transcription factor.

GBM dataset and this consolidated set was used to create the composite GBM minimal network. Finally, while
this approach is limited to constructing a network using
only those TFs that have demonstrable differential
expression and may thus not identify all TFs and TFtarget interactions, we chose to employ the above algorithm given the experimental data sets that were
employed for network construction and the desire to
construct a more robust, though perhaps incomplete,
network.
Identification of relationships in common with tumor
types and specific to PA

The pair-wise relationships generated as a result of network analysis of PA and other glial tumor types allowed
the identification of relationships common across tumor
types as well as those specific to PA. A relationship was
defined as common when a relationship between two
genes that was identified in PA (based upon the DEG
list) was also present in one or more other tumor types
(GBM or oligodendroglioma). A relationship was
defined as specific to PA when the relationship was present between two genes in PA but was not present in
any of the other glial tumor types.

Results and Discussion
Identification of PA-specific gene expression patterns

We used a relatively large sample set, divided into two
independent sets for SAM analysis (Figure 1) to identify
differentially-expressed gene transcripts which were

recurrently represented in PA samples compared to
non-malignant cortical brain tissue samples. Using this
framework, we were able to identify genes scored as ‘significant’ (FDR = 0% by SAM) across multiple iterative
analyses using random sampling of the first PA expression dataset, and then confirm that the signature identified was also represented in a second, independent set
of tumor samples. This method was modeled on existing
supervised methods, including Support Vector Machines
and Artificial Neural Networks [17,18], and facilitated
the reliable identification of differentially-expressed
genes in the absence of large independent datasets not
currently available for PA. One recognized limitation of
this approach is that the same reference set of 15 nonmalignant brain tissue samples was used in all of the
SAM analyses. Ideally, if such material or data were
available, it would have been desirable to perform comparative analysis using an independent set of non-malignant tissue samples, as was done for the PA samples
themselves. Second, although PAs, GBMs, and oligodendrogliomas could have been directly compared against
each other, differentially expressed genes may represent
differences in cells of origin of each tumor type rather
than be important for initiation, maintenance, and/or
growth/metastasis of that tumor type. Because cell of
origin is not known for these tumor types, we could not
use in vivo or in vitro derived normal cells as a comparison. Therefore, non-malignant brain tissue, which is a
mix of cells of origin, was utilized to compare against
each tumor type. This approach identified 792 genes

Deshmukh et al. BMC Medical Genomics 2011, 4:57
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1755-8794/4/57

that showed consistent differential expression between
the reference tissue data and multiple sets of PA tumors
in the training data set, and these 792 genes were also
differentially expressed in the test data set.
Use of network analyses to create a minimal gene
regulatory network

Multiple studies have identified individual gene transcripts that are differentially expressed in PA relative to
other malignant and non-malignant cell populations [4].
In the current study, we identified 792 genes using this
larger sample set. However, to impart higher-order biological significance to the list of genes we identified and
to select groups of genes from this list that may, as a
network, provide additional insights into the unique
clinical or molecular features of PA, we sought to identify gene regulatory relationships that comprise networks
unique to this common pediatric astrocytoma histologic
subtype. This approach is distinct from other
approaches that define molecular networks based on
direct or indirect gene-gene interactions [19,20]. Many
previous approaches use existing literature annotation at
the gene and cell biology level, including canonical pathways, and heavily depend on human curation of the biological knowledge in the published literature [21]. A
recent study used the Algorithm for the Reconstruction
of Accurate Cellular Networks (ARACNe), an information-theoretic approach, to infer transcriptional networks underlying mesenchymal transformation of high
grade gliomas [22-24]. While ARACNe calculates
mutual information between each pair of genes using
expression information and identifies TF-target interactions using annotations from TRANSFAC and Gene
Ontology, it does not employ statistical approaches to
predict TF-target interactions using TF position weight
matrices and phylogenetic footprinting. Therefore, in
the current analysis, we have implemented a novel analytical method previously developed and described, Promoter Analysis Pipeline (PAP) [25,26]. PAP exhaustively
searches for TF binding sites in the promoter regions of
genes, identifies over-represented binding sites, and predicts genes in the genome that are most likely regulated
by a set of TFs. PAP is available to the community
through our website (http://bioinformatics.wustl.edu/
webTools/PromoterAnalysis.do).
We melded in silico genome-wide PAP-derived predictions together with an empirically-determined list of differentially-expressed gene sets identified by microarray
expression analysis to identify transcription factors (TFs)
that regulate other transcription factors (Figure 2, step
2). Subsequently, the network was expanded to include
TF-target gene relationships (Figure 2, step 3), and was
then pruned to include only those genes regulated by
more than one TF (Figure 2, step 4). This output,

Page 6 of 9

termed the minimal network, represents both the TF
cascade and core TF-target gene relationships that are
predicted to operate in the disease under study.
From the 792 ‘significant genes’ first identified by SAM
analysis of which 197 genes were up-regulated and 595
genes down-regulated (Additional file 1 STable 2), the
minimal PA network is composed of a set of six core TFs
(STAT4, RUNX1, ELK3, LMO2, THRB, and ONECUT2),
twenty-four corresponding target genes, and a total of
fifty-five relationships between them (Figure 3A; the
complete PA network predicted is available as Additional
file 2, SFig 1). Although the way in which these predicted
gene interactions influence PA pathogenesis is not immediately obvious, it is worth noting that the functions of
proteins encoded by several of these individual transcripts have been implicated in a variety of other tumor
types, while RUNX1 and SMOC1 may be more specifically related to astrocytoma biology [27,28].
Identification of PA-specific and common glial
transcriptional networks

To better understand whether the PA transcriptional
network was specific to this glial tumor type, we generated analogous networks for oligodendroglioma and
glioblastoma multiforme tumors, and these were compared to the PA minimal network. The comprehensive
oligodendroglioma network that was created through a
similar analysis of oligodendroglioma gene expression
data sets and PAP-generated interactions (step 3 in Figure 2) is shown in Figure 3B. There are sixteen gene
regulatory interactions among the three TFs (STAT4,
TCF12, and SOX4) and fifteen targets. Compared to the
assembled PA minimal network, the oligodendroglioma
network is less elaborate, probably due to the more limited gene expression data set available for its generation.
Importantly, there were no genes or relationships shared
between the PA and oligodendroglioma networks. The
lack of overlap between PA and oligodendroglioma networks contrasts to other data that suggests the presence
of oligodendroglial-like features in PA tumors [29] and
the expression of oligodendroglial-specific transcription
factors, like SOX10, in astrocytic tumors [30]. However,
common pathological features between PA and oligodendroglioma do not necessarily imply a common histogenesis, nor do they preclude the notion that these two
glial tumor types are distinct pathological and genetic
entities.
By comparison, the minimal network assembled for
glioblastoma multiforme included 2,933 total genes,
194 TFs, and 25,038 gene regulatory interactions. This
result no doubt reflects the complexity and heterogeneity of the GBM genome [3] and is consistent with
the network generated by ARACNe using high grade
glioma expression data sets [24]. All relationships

Deshmukh et al. BMC Medical Genomics 2011, 4:57
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1755-8794/4/57

a)

Page 7 of 9

b)

c)

Figure 3 Minimal transcriptional regulatory networks in gliomas. (A) Minimal network for pilocytic astrocytoma. Transcription factors (TF) are
shown by large solid circles, target genes are shown by small solid circles. Interactions between TF-TF and TF-target are shown by directed
edges. Genes overexpressed in PA relative to non-malignant brain tissue are shown in red, while genes whose expression is lower in PA are
shown in green. (B) Similar relationships depicted in the minimal network assembled from the oligodendroglioma gene expression data set. (C)
Relationships that are unique to PA as compared to the minimal network assembled for GBM.

identified in the oligodendroglioma network (Figure
3B) were also represented in the GBM network, suggesting greater similarity between these two tumor
types. Of note, master regulators (C/EBP beta and
delta, STAT3, FOSL2, RUNX1, and bHLH-B2) with
the exception or bHLH-B2 operating in high grade
gliomas that were identified by Carro, et al [24], were
all found in our GBM network as well (Additional file
3, STable 1). In contrast, among the fifty-five relationships in the PA minimal network, forty-one were
shared between PA and glioblastoma multiforme, but
13 were specific to PA (Figure 3C). There were five
individual transcription factor interactions (RUNX1,
STAT4, THRB, LMO2, and ELK3) shared between PA
and GBM, but only one TF interaction, ONECUT2,
was specific to PA. ONECUT2 is a bipartite DNAbinding domain-containing homeobox gene highly
expressed in the developing mouse nervous system
during embryogenesis, and has been shown to be
important for regulating neural differentiation in Drosophila [25]. Furthermore, ONECUT2 is often methylated or silenced in human cancer, and may be
amenable to methylation-directed therapies [26].

Conclusions
In the current study, we employed only TF-gene interactions to assemble predicted regulatory networks. The
use of this methodological approach illustrates how traditional, microarray-based gene expression data can be
integrated with a novel TF-gene interaction database
generated from primary genome sequence analysis to
reveal higher-order, cell-specific transcriptional regulatory networks. The approach detailed in this report has
significant advantages over conventional microarray
methods aimed at identifying ‘significant’ differential
gene expression. First, many low-grade tumors, like PAs,
harbor few obvious genetic alterations (e.g., oncogenic
mutations, translocations), and the critical changes that
facilitate tumorigenesis and continued growth may
reflect de-regulated gene expression patterns. These latter alterations may result from “genetic re-programming” due to changes in TF expression, and would only
be uncovered by examining the impact of these changes
in the context of coordinated gene expression patterns.
Second, the ability to extract gene expression patterns is
often limited by the depth of the current scientific literature knowledgebase, and can be arduous and

Deshmukh et al. BMC Medical Genomics 2011, 4:57
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1755-8794/4/57

unenlightening, particularly when candidate gene lists
are large (e.g., 792 genes in this study). The use of the
PAP method represents a more robust approach for
identifying coordinated patterns of gene transcription by
coupling downstream TF target expression levels with a
corresponding TF-gene interaction network based on
sequence-predicted interactions. Lastly, direct measurements of differential TF gene expression are difficult,
particularly by relatively insensitive microarray-based
methods, owning to the inherent low levels of TF gene
expression and the effect that even small changes in TF
levels may have on downstream targets and cell phenotype. Further application of the approach presented here
could involve the use of additional genome annotation
derived from TF protein interaction databases, literature-based gene-gene interaction data, and miRNA-gene
target data. For example, patterns of coordinated gene
expression derived from experimental microarray-based
data could be superimposed upon gene expression regulation modeled as a linear combination of probabilistic
contributions from individual TFs and miRNAs using
multiple regression methods.

Additional material
Additional file 1: The 792 gene set that is differentially expressed in
PAs along with each gene’s expression differences when compared
to the control are shown.
Additional file 2: PA network obtained as a result of step 3 in
Figure 2. Transcription factors (TF) are shown by large solid circles,
target genes are shown by small solid circles. Interactions between TF-TF
and TF-target are shown by directed edges. Genes overexpressed in PA
relative to non-malignant brain tissue are shown in red while genes
whose expression is lower in PA are shown in green.
Additional file 3: Gene regulatory relationships in glioblastoma
multiforme minimal network. The Transcription Factors (TFs) and
respective relationships between their targets are shown.

Abbreviations
aCGH: array-based Comparative Genomic Hybridization; PA: Pilocytic
Astrocytoma; WHO: World Health Organization; GBM: Glioblastoma
Multiforme; TCGA: The Cancer Genome Atlas; UPGMA: Unweighted pairgroup method with arithmetic mean; SAM: Significance Analysis of
Microarrays; DEGs: Differentially Expressed Genes; TFs: Transcription Factors;
PAP: Promoter Analysis Pipeline.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by generous funding from the Brain Tumor Society
(to DHG and TJM), Alvin J. Siteman Cancer Center (Grant # P30CA091842),
Institute of Clinical and Translational Sciences (Grant # UL1RR024992), and
NIH Neuroscience Blueprint Interdisciplinary Center Core Grant P30
(NS057105) to Washington University. HD thanks Dr. Leslie McIntosh for
teaching him NetDraw program for drawing networks.
Author details
Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School
of Medicine, 660. S. Euclid Ave. St. Louis, MO, 63110, USA. 2Department of
Pediatrics, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, 30322, USA. 3Department of
Neurology, Washington University School of Medicine, 660. S. Euclid Ave. St.
Louis, MO, 63110, USA.
1

Page 8 of 9

Authors’ contributions
HD conducted the network analyses described in this manuscript and
assisted with manuscript preparation. JY, JS, and JP provided additional
input on analyses and assisted with manuscript preparation. TM, AP, and DG
provided tissue samples, pathological review, and input into manuscript
preparation. MW supervised conduct of microarray studies and data
generation, and assisted with manuscript authoring. RN provided study
design, project oversight, and final manuscript review. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 25 August 2010 Accepted: 11 July 2011
Published: 11 July 2011
References
1. Deshmukh H, Yeh TH, Yu J, Sharma MK, Perry A, Leonard JR, Watson MA,
Gutmann DH, Nagarajan R: High-resolution, dual-platform aCGH analysis
reveals frequent HIPK2 amplification and increased expression in
pilocytic astrocytomas. Oncogene 2008, 27(34):4745-4751.
2. Idbaih A, Carvalho Silva R, Crinière E, Marie Y, Carpentier C, Boisselier B,
Taillibert S, Rousseau A, Mokhtari K, Ducray F, Thillet J, Sanson M, HoangXuan K, Delattre JY: Genomic changes in progression of low-grade
gliomas. J Neurooncol 2008, 90(2):133-140.
3. Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network: Comprehensive genomic
characterization defines human glioblastoma genes and core pathways.
Nature 2008, 455(7216):1061-1068.
4. Sharma MK, Mansur DB, Reifenberger G, Perry A, Leonard JR, Aldape KD,
Albin MG, Emnett RJ, Loeser S, Watson MA, Nagarajan R, Gutmann DH:
Distinct genetic signatures among pilocytic astrocytomas relate to their
brain region origin. Cancer Research 2007, 67(3):890-900.
5. Freije WA, Castro-Vargas FE, Fang Z, Horvath S, Cloughesy T, Liau LM,
Mischel PS, Nelson SF: Gene expression profiling of gliomas strongly
predicts survival. Cancer Research 2004, 64(18):6503-6510.
6. French PJ, Peeters J, Horsman S, Duijm E, Siccama I, van den Bent MJ,
Luider TM, Kros JM, van der Spek P, Sillevis Smitt PA: Identification of
differentially regulated splice variants and novel exons in glial brain
tumors using exon expression arrays. Cancer Research 2007,
67(12):5635-5642.
7. Yamanaka R, Saya H: Molecularly targeted therapies for glioma. Ann
Neurol 2009, 66(6):717-729.
8. Dry JR, Pavey S, Pratilas CA, Harbron C, Runswick S, Hodgson D, Chresta C,
McCormack R, Byrne N, Cockerill M, Graham A, Beran G, Cassidy A,
Haggerty C, Brown H, Ellison G, Dering J, Taylor BS, Stark M, Bonazzi V,
Ravishankar S, Packer L, Xing F, Solit DB, Finn RS, Rosen N, Hayward NK,
French T, Smith PD: Transcriptional pathway signatures predict MEK
addiction and response to selumetinib (AZD6244). Cancer Research 2010,
70(6):2264-2273.
9. Jacob K, Albrecht S, Sollier C, Faury D, Sader E, Montpetit A, Serre D,
Hauser P, Garami M, Bognar L, Hanzely Z, Montes JL, Atkinson J, Farmer JP,
Bouffet E, Hawkins C, Tabori U, Jabado N: Duplication of 7q34 is specific
to juvenile pilocytic astrocytomas and a hallmark of cerebellar and optic
pathway tumors. Br J Cancer 2009, 101(4):722-733.
10. Sievert AJ, Jackson EM, Gai X, Hakonarson H, Judkins AR, Resnick AC,
Sutton LN, Storm PB, Shaikh TH, Biegel JA: Duplication of 7q34 in pediatric
low-grade astrocytomas detected by high-density single-nucleotide
polymorphism-based genotype arrays results in a novel BRAF fusion
gene. Brain Pathol 2009, 19(3):449-458.
11. Franz H, Ullmann C, Becker A, Ryan M, Bahn S, Arendt T, Simon M, Paabo S,
Khaitovich P: Systematic analysis of gene expression in human brains
before and after death. Genome biology 2005, 6(13):R112.
12. Khaitovich P, Tang K, Franz H, Kelso J, Hellmann I, Enard W, Lachmann M,
Paabo S: Positive selection on gene expression in the human brain. Curr
Biol 2006, 16(10):R356-358.
13. Phillips HS, Kharbanda S, Chen R, Forrest WF, Soriano RH, Wu TD, Misra A,
Nigro JM, Colman H, Soroceanu L, Williams PM, Modrusan Z, Feuerstein BG,
Aldape K: Molecular subclasses of high-grade glioma predict prognosis,
delineate a pattern of disease progression, and resemble stages in
neurogenesis. Cancer cell 2006, 9(3):157-173.

Deshmukh et al. BMC Medical Genomics 2011, 4:57
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1755-8794/4/57

Page 9 of 9

14. Tusher VG, Tibshirani R, Chu G: Significance analysis of microarrays
applied to the ionizing radiation response. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2001,
98:5116-5121.
15. Chang LW, Fontaine BR, Stormo GD, Nagarajan R: PAP: a comprehensive
workbench for mammalian transcriptional regulatory sequence analysis.
Nucleic acids research 2007, 35(Web Server):W238-244.
16. Werner T: Bioinformatics applications for pathway analysis of microarray
data. Current opinion in biotechnology 2008, 19(1):50-54.
17. Shen L, Tan EC: Reducing multiclass cancer classification to binary by
output coding and SVM. Computational biology and chemistry 2006,
30(1):63-71.
18. Zhu Y, Shen X, Pan W: Network-based support vector machine for
classification of microarray samples. BMC bioinformatics 2009, 10(Suppl 1):
S21.
19. Wu CC, Huang HC, Juan HF, Chen ST: GeneNetwork: an interactive tool
for reconstruction of genetic networks using microarray data.
Bioinformatics (Oxford, England) 2004, 20(18):3691-3693.
20. Demir E, Babur O, Dogrusoz U, Gursoy A, Nisanci G, Cetin-Atalay R,
Ozturk M: PATIKA: an integrated visual environment for collaborative
construction and analysis of cellular pathways. Bioinformatics (Oxford,
England) 2002, 18(7):996-1003.
21. Werner T: Bioinformatics applications for pathway analysis of microarray
data. Current opinion in biotechnology 2008, 19(1):50-54.
22. Basso K, Margolin AA, Stolovitzky G, Klein U, Dalla-Favera R, Califano A:
Reverse engineering of regulatory networks in human B cells. Nat Genet
2005, 37(4):382-90.
23. Margolin AA, Nemenman I, Basso K, Wiggins C, Stolovitzky G, Dalla
Favera R, Califano A: ARACNE: an algorithm for the reconstruction of
gene regulatory networks in a mammalian cellular context. BMC
Bioinformatics 2006, 7(Suppl 1):S7.
24. Carro MS, Lim WK, Alvarez MJ, Bollo RJ, Zhao X, Snyder EY, Sulman EP,
Anne SL, Doetsch F, Colman H, Lasorella A, Aldape K, Califano A,
Iavarone A: The transcriptional network for mesenchymal transformation
of brain tumours. Nature 2010, 463(7279):318-25.
25. Chang LW, Fontaine BR, Stormo GD, Nagarajan R: PAP: a comprehensive
workbench for mammalian transcriptional regulatory sequence analysis.
Nucleic acids research 2007, 35(Web Server):W238-244.
26. Chang LW, Nagarajan R, Magee JA, Milbrandt J, Stormo GD: A systematic
model to predict transcriptional regulatory mechanisms based on
overrepresentation of transcription factor binding profiles. Genome
research 2006, 16(3):405-413.
27. Perry C, Sklan EH, Birikh K, Shapira M, Trejo L, Eldor A, Soreq H: Complex
regulation of acetylcholinesterase gene expression in human brain
tumors. Oncogene 2002, 21(55):8428-8441.
28. Boon K, Edwards JB, Eberhart CG, Riggins GJ: Identification of astrocytoma
associated genes including cell surface markers. BMC cancer 2004, 4:39.
29. Louis DN, Ohgaki H, Wiestler OD, Cavenee WK: WHO Classification of
Tumors of the Nervous System. IARC: Lyon; 2007.
30. Bannykh SI, Stolt CC, Kim J, Perry A, Wegner M: Oligodendroglial-specific
transcriptional factor SOX10 is ubiquitously expressed in human
gliomas. J Neurooncol 2006, 76(2):115-127.
Pre-publication history
The pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed here:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1755-8794/4/57/prepub
doi:10.1186/1755-8794-4-57
Cite this article as: Deshmukh et al.: Identification of transcriptional
regulatory networks specific to pilocytic astrocytoma. BMC Medical
Genomics 2011 4:57.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
