<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Genome-wide computational prediction of tandem gene arrays: application in yeasts</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Genomics 2010 11:56. doi:10.1186/1471-2164-11-56"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Laurence Despons"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Despons et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:56
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/56

METHODOLOGY ARTICLE

Open Access

Genome-wide computational prediction of
tandem gene arrays: application in yeasts
Laurence Despons1*, Philippe V Baret2, Lionel Frangeul3, Véronique Leh Louis1, Pascal Durrens4, Jean-Luc Souciet1

Abstract
Background: This paper describes an efficient in silico method for detecting tandem gene arrays (TGAs) in fully
sequenced and compact genomes such as those of prokaryotes or unicellular eukaryotes. The originality of this
method lies in the search of protein sequence similarities in the vicinity of each coding sequence, which allows
the prediction of tandem duplicated gene copies independently of their functionality.
Results: Applied to nine hemiascomycete yeast genomes, this method predicts that 2% of the genes are involved
in TGAs and gene relics are present in 11% of TGAs. The frequency of TGAs with degenerated gene copies means
that a significant fraction of tandem duplicated genes follows the birth-and-death model of evolution. A
comparison of sequence identity distributions between sets of homologous gene pairs shows that the different
copies of tandem arrayed paralogs are less divergent than copies of dispersed paralogs in yeast genomes. It
suggests that paralogs included in tandem structures are more recent or more subject to the gene conversion
mechanism than other paralogs.
Conclusion: The method reported here is a useful computational tool to provide a database of TGAs composed of
functional or nonfunctional gene copies. Such a database has obvious applications in the fields of structural and
comparative genomics. Notably, a detailed study of the TGA catalog will make it possible to tackle the
fundamental questions of the origin and evolution of tandem gene clusters.

Background
All genomes sequenced so far feature clusters of contiguous repeated genes (or tandem gene arrays, TGAs)
that must derive from a common ancestral gene after
successive duplication events. Different methods were
used to achieve a systematic characterization of TGAs
in eukaryotic genomes. All these methods derive from
those primarily used to identify any duplicate genes in
complete genomes [1-3] and take into account supplementary data concerning the chromosomal location of
the detected duplicate genes. For the genome of Arabidopsis thaliana, the BLASTP program [4] of sequence
similarity search was performed on each chromosome
against itself. Then, the BLASTP results were indexed
by their chromosomal physical locations to screen
TGAs, allowing from 0 to 10 spacers, i.e. unrelated
genes that separate two tandem duplicated copies [5].
For several genomes of vertebrates, a three-step method
was applied [6,7]. An all-against-all BLASTP sequence
* Correspondence: laurence.despons@gem.u-strasbg.fr
1
Université de Strasbourg, CNRS UMR7156, F-67083 Strasbourg, France

comparison was first carried out on all protein predictions of all studied species with a view to establishing
similarities. On the basis of protein similarity matrices,
genes were assigned to families using Markov clustering
algorithms. Genes were defined as TGAs if they
belonged to the same family and were either physically
adjacent or separated by a maximum number of ten
intervening spacer genes. Alternative versions of this
method using either BLAST and Smith-Waterman algorithms or another clustering method based on the single-linkage criterion were applied to yeast [8] and plant
[9] genomes.
Here, we developed an original in silico method to
identify in a compact genome the complete set of
TGAs, including those that contain degenerated paralogous copies. These nonfunctional copies of functional
genes are called pseudogenes or gene relics. The term of
pseudogene designates usually a DNA segment that
shows high similarity to a functional gene, but is inactive due to premature stop codons, indels or the loss of
regulatory sequences. Since nonfunctionality of

© 2010 Despons et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Despons et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:56
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/56

pseudogenes is sometimes difficult to define, Zheng and
Gerstein [10] proposed a classification system of genes
and pseudogenes. A “gene relic” is distinguished from a
“pseudogene” by their degree of degeneration. Gene
relics have gone through so many mutations of type
missense, nonsense or frameshift that do not constitute
an open reading frame (ORF). Pseudogenes are more
similar to an ORF. They are obviously easier to detect
than gene relics. As the distinction is not easy and
doesn’t affect the results of our method, in this paper,
we will use the term “gene relic” to refer to all nonfunctional gene copies present in TGAs including pseudogenes. Though TGAs have been systematically analyzed
in some genomes, the frequency of TGAs containing
gene relics remains unknown. Identification of these
residual duplicated copies is required in order to correctly delimit the tandem repeated unit and retrace the
evolutionary history of TGAs. Whereas other existing
methods used to detect TGAs take 0-10 spacers into
account, our method is aimed at TGAs without spacer
genes. In few cases, one spacer is authorized within a
TGA. From an evolutionary point of view, the structures
without intervening genes between successive paralogs
should be the most recent, since they display no chromosomal rearrangement such as insertion of genes.
Another distinctive feature of our method, as compared
with other methods, is the incorporation of a final step
of manual data curation minimizing the number of false
positive TGAs.
We applied our method of analysis to the complete,
assembled genome sequences of nine hemiascomycete
yeasts in order to obtain a catalog of TGAs covering a
large phylum of phylogenetically related species. This
set of data proved useful in retracing genome evolution
and notably in determining whether TGAs constitute
chromosomal rearrangement hotspots for expansion and
contraction of gene families. The detailed sequence analysis of the TGA flanking regions could provide better
knowledge of the mechanisms at work in the apparition
of these particular tandem structures. Furthermore, our
TGA detection method is a helpful tool for the genome
annotation. In fact, it highlights sequence similarity
information between some genes and their neighbors
when they are included in a TGA and helps to homogenize the annotation of these contiguous gene copies.

Results
Algorithm
1. Score calculation

The flowchart given in figure 1 describes the score calculation process that can be divided into three principal
steps.
Step1 - From each coding sequence (CDS) of a complete assembled genome, the corresponding protein

Page 2 of 13

sequence was compared with its upstream and downstream chromosomal regions using a TBLASTN search
(expectation value threshold = 1.0). The length of the
surrounding DNA sequences was three times longer
than that of the CDS considered (see the Methods section). If the calculated length was below the minimal
length (Lmin) of 1500 bp, the length retained was equal
to Lmin. The bit score was retained for each TBLASTN
sequence alignment. These initial scores, four per CDS
considering its two flanking sequences and both DNA
strands, were called TB (Tblastn Bit) scores. When several high-scoring segment pairs (HSPs) were obtained
between a given CDS protein sequence and one of its
flanking region, the total TB score was calculated as the
sum of bit scores of all HSPs that correspond to the
same strand (plus or minus) and do not overlap by
more than 20%.
Step2 - Four final scores, called FTB (Final Tblastn
Bit) scores, were calculated for each CDS from the TB
scores of both strands of its two surrounding sequences
(Figure 2). Each TB score was first divided by a TB selfscore to express it in percentage. This TB self-score was
the TBLASTN bit score obtained when the protein
sequence of the considered CDS was compared with its
own genomic sequence. Its calculation also depended on
the number and overlapping of HSPs generated by the
BLAST program. The FTB scores were then obtained by
subtracting two TB scores expressed as a percentage
corresponding to both complementary strands of the
same surrounding region.
Step3 - A filter was necessary to reduce the high background score generated by the small proteins or low
sequence complexity proteins. If TB self-score < 250
and 0 < FTB score < 50, this filter was applied: filtered
FTB score = FTB score - ((250 - TB self-score)/4).
2. TGA extraction

All CDSs of a genome were examined, in the ascending
order of their chromosomal coordinates, to select the
CDSs that have at least one FTB score equal to or
greater than the threshold value of 10 (for the determination of the threshold see the Methods section). To
decide if a selected CDS (position n) belongs to a TGA,
its own FTB scores were compared with those of its two
adjacent CDSs (positions n-1 and n+1) (Figure 3). The
algorithm of score comparison determines the position
of each CDS within the TGA. A TGA is created when a
selected CDS occupies the “first position”. As long as
the CDSs located downstream from this “first CDS”
occupy a “middle position”, the TGA is extended. But as
soon as a next CDS occupies the “last position”, TGA
elongation comes to an end. When no directly adjacent
CDS fits exactly the criteria of a tandem arrayed gene, a
“relic” tag was first attributed to the CDS at position n.
Then, the n-2 and n+2 CDSs were analyzed, permitting

Despons et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:56
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/56

Page 3 of 13

Figure 1 Flowchart of the score calculation process.

the presence of one intervening spacer gene within a
TGA. The direct or opposite relative orientation of gene
pairs in TGAs was determined by comparing their corresponding FTB scores (Figure 3).
3. Minisatellite detection

Richard and Dujon [11] found, in the S. cerevisiae genome, 49 protein-coding genes containing consecutive
sequence repetitions, called minisatellites, whose repeat
unit size ranges from 10 bp to 192 bp. These internal
tandem repeats can cause problems during TGA extraction, since some of them persist outside the coding
sequence and can contribute to a FTB score ≥ 10.
Moreover, in some cases, the chromosomal distance
between two non-homologous genes containing minisatellites is so small that they can be related to the same
TGA. Therefore, all CDSs involved in a TGA were submitted to the equicktandem (maxrepeat = 600, threshold
= 20) and etandem (minrepeat = 10, maxrepeat = 300)
programs of the EMBOSS package [12] to find tandem
repeats in their DNA sequences. Equicktandem rapidly
identifies potential repeat sizes whereas etandem

searches genuine tandem repeats, calculates a consensus
for the repeat block and takes gaps into account.
The research of minisatellites and the “relic” tagging
in the step of TGA extraction are useful when performing the manual curation of TGAs (described in the
Methods section). This enables the researcher to eliminate false positive TGAs due to short tandem repeats in
gene sequences and to identify the TGAs containing
gene relics, respectively.
Implementation

Score calculation, TGA extraction and minisatellite
detection are the three automated steps of our algorithm
and have been implemented in Python version 2.4
http://www.python.org/. The output file of the first step
is a table of the FTB scores calculated for each CDS of
a given genome. From this table, another script extracts
CDSs organized in tandem arrays and then identifies
among these CDSs those containing minisatellites. Data
of this second script can be manually analyzed to eliminate the false positive TGAs (step of manual curation).
Scripts are freely available from the corresponding

Despons et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:56
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/56

Page 4 of 13

Figure 2 Calculation of FTB scores. For each CDS and its upstream and downstream surrounding regions, the X (plus strand) and Y (minus
strand) values were TBLASTN bit scores expressed as a percentage of the TBLASTN bit self-score: X or Y = (bit score/bit self-score) × 100. The
difference between X and Y and between Y and X were calculated to minimize the background noise that could be due to the low complexity
of some DNA regions. The result is four FTB scores per CDS, two per surrounding region one of which has a value ≥ 0 and the other has the
same value but ≤ 0.

author who will make recommendations to users and
inform them on improvements added to the computational program.
Application: identification of TGAs in hemiascomycete
yeast genomes
Databases

We applied our method to nine completely sequenced
genomes of hemiascomycete yeasts. The Saccharomyces
cerevisiae chromosome sequences and information on
annotated genes were downloaded from Saccharomyces
Genome Database (SGD) http://www.yeastgenome.org/
[13]. The Eremothecium (Ashbya) gossypii genome
sequence and its corresponding annotations were taken
from Ashbya Genome Database (AGD) http://agd.vitalit.ch/Ashbya_gossypii/index.html/[14]. Génolevures website http://cbi.labri.fr/Genolevures/[15] provided all the
data relative to complete genome sequences of the species Candida glabrata, Debaryomyces hansenii, Kluyveromyces lactis, Kluyveromyces thermotolerans,
Saccharomyces kluyveri (genome sequenced in collaboration with Mark Johnston, Washington University
Department of Genetics), Yarrowia lipolytica and Zygosaccharomyces rouxii.
Computation of all TGAs in the nine yeast genomes

We define a TGA as a structure of contiguous paralogous gene copies, which are either functional or degenerated copies (gene relics), allowing for the presence of
one heterologous gene inserted between the two homologous copies. In accordance with this definition, we

developed an in silico method to detect such TGAs in
complete eukaryotic genomes. This method was applied
to nine hemiascomycete yeast genomes. 469 TGAs comprising 999 CDSs were identified in this set of genomic
data, which represents 2% of CDSs involved in TGAs in
relation to the total number of CDSs present in these
nine genomes (Figure 4 and Additional file 1). This proportion is independent of the phylogenetic position of
species and is not higher in the post-WGD (whole genome duplication) species S. cerevisiae and C. glabrata.
Interestingly, the D. hansenii genome shows a percentage of CDSs in TGAs twice higher than the other species. Another remarkable result is the percentage of
TGAs that include a duplicated gene relic (11%).
On an average 6% of yeast genes contain intron
sequences, generally only one intron per gene. Among
all CDSs that belong to TGAs, 2.5% (25 CDSs in 16
TGAs) have an intron. In half of the 16 TGAs concerned, an intron was not present in all the duplicated
copies. The physical distribution of TGAs is relatively
homogeneous along the different chromosomes of each
species (data not shown).
A first assessment of functional bias for genes in tandem arrays was based on Gene Ontology (GO) term
annotation information [16]. Functions such as cellular
homeostasis, cell wall organization and biogenesis, conjugation and response to stress, are overrepresented in
TGAs. The proportion of genes involved in TGAs is
very low in the following functional classes:

Despons et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:56
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/56

Page 5 of 13

Figure 3 TGA extraction. From each CDS with at least one FTB score ≥ 10 (CDS n represented by a black box), its FTB scores and those of its
two adjacent CDSs (CDSs n-1 and n+1 represented by grey boxes) are compared to decide if it belongs to a TGA and to determine its position
within the TGA. CDSs constitute a TGA if their profile of FTB scores corresponds to one of those shown in the Table. The symbol + indicates an
FTB score ≥ 10 and the symbol - signifies an FTB score < 10. Letters as subscript of an FTB score refer to the target sequence flanking the
analyzed CDS (downstream or upstream and the plus or minus strand). Three positions within a TGA are considered for a CDS: either the CDS
begins the TGA or occupies a central position or ends the TGA. The four possible orientations of two CDSs in a TGA are described when the
CDS analyzed occupies the last position of the TGA. A TGA containing at least one CDS and one gene relic (represented by a grey striped box)
fulfils the conditions indicated in the last two lines of the table.

transcription, translation, RNA metabolic process and
ribosome biogenesis and assembly (data not shown).
Distributions of TGA sizes and CDS orientations in TGAs

TGAs were classified according to the number of CDSs
they contain. Among the nine yeast genomes, the size of
TGAs ranged from one CDS to 16 CDSs (Figure 5).
TGAs belonging to the 1CDS-relic class consist of one
CDS and one gene relic and represents ~10% of the
total number of TGAs, a proportion equivalent to that
of the 3CDSs-TGA class. The majority of TGAs (76.5%)
comprise two CDS copies and the percentage in four

copies falls to 1.5. Large TGAs of six and eight CDSs
(one and two arrays, respectively) are concentrated in C.
glabrata, but the largest one containing 16 CDSs is in
D. hansenii. The latter (TGA n°234), located on the
chromosome E of D. hansenii, has been manually reconstructed since it was disrupted 3 times by heterologous
genes. In the sequenced strain of S. cerevisiae, S288C,
the TGA size does not exceed five CDSs and the 1CDSrelic class of TGAs is absent. Nevertheless, three TGAs
made up of more than one CDS plus one relic (nCDSsrelic class) are present in this reference strain.

Despons et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:56
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/56

Page 6 of 13

Figure 4 Identification of TGAs in hemiascomycete yeast genomes. The phylogram of the nine species considered is adapted from
reference [41]. The whole genome duplication (WGD) event occurred before the divergence of S. cerevisiae and C. glabrata. The number of CDSs
refers to the total number of annotated coding sequences taken into account when searching TGAs in each genome. All tandem arrays
consisting of at least one CDS and one gene relic are counted as “TGAs with relic”.

CDSs in TGAs are principally in a direct orientation
(78.9%) with approximately the same proportion of
sense and antisense orientations (Figure 5). In C. glabrata TGAs, the antisense orientation is represented 2.4
times more than the sense orientation, although the
number of CDSs on the minus strand (2649 CDSs) and
on the plus strand (2551 CDSs) is identical. TGAs consisting of two CDSs oppositely oriented represent 19.0%
of total TGAs. The low frequency of mixed TGAs
(2.1%) is in correlation with the low percentage of
TGAs containing at least 3 CDSs (13.9%) and of which
at least two copies have a convergent or divergent orientation, this being the less frequent orientation of a CDS
pair (expected frequency = 0.190 × 0.139 = 0.026).
Data curation

The originality of our method of TGAs detection lies in
the possibility to identify TGAs containing degenerated
gene copies. From the nine yeast genomes analyzed, two
different sets of CDSs, possibly close to a gene relic,
appeared during the TGA extraction step and received a
relic tag: (i) 360 isolated CDSs with at least one FTB
score ≥ 10 and (ii) 23 CDSs, located on one extremity of
a TGA comprising at least two CDS, with two FTB
scores ≥ 10 (see Additional file 2). 15% (53 CDSs) and
22% (5 CDSs) of these two respective sets of tagged
CDSs were first retrieved by an automated curation step
to create new TGAs. After this procedure, a manual
data curation produced supplementary TGAs or some
TGAs recomposed from 24% (85 CDSs) and 48% (11
CDSs) of the two respective sets of tagged CDSs. No
false positive CDS was found among the 23 tagged

CDSs included in a TGA, whereas approximately half
the isolated CDSs (177 false positives) were eliminated.
Finally, 52 CDSs were located near a homologous gene
relic: 45 constitute the class of TGAs that contain just
one CDS (1CDS-relic) and 7 belong to larger TGAs
(nCDSs-relic).
A possible source of false positive TGAs is the presence of minisatellites in the coding sequences. Among
the 999 CDSs implicated in a TGA, 199 (20%) have
internal tandem repeats (see Additional file 2). The
manual examination of these suspicious CDSs revealed
that 6.6% of the total number of TGAs before curation
(33/502) were false positives. Nevertheless, it was difficult in some cases to decide whether the similarity
between contiguous CDSs is partially or totally due to
minisatellites. This problem occurred when long
stretches of tandem repeats covered a large part of the
CDSs. Therefore, the percentage of false positives is
probably slightly underestimated.
Distributions of FTB scores

The degree of gene conservation in a TGA can be estimated by comparing BLAST bit scores between two
genes. FTB scores were calculated from the result of
TBLASTN sequence alignments. Two FTB scores ≥ 10
(S2 and S3) were obtained per gene pairs in a TGA.
Two additional FTB scores (S1 and S4) characterize
both chromosomal regions surrounding each TGA. The
TGA flanking regions can contain CDSs, but these coding sequences have no homology with members of the
TGA (Figure 6A). For each pair of tandem repeated
CDSs (TGP for tandem gene pair), except those

Despons et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:56
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/56

Page 7 of 13

Figure 5 Distribution of TGAs according to the number and orientation of their constituent CDSs. The 469 TGAs are distributed among
the nine yeast species studied. The direct orientation refers to TGAs in which all CDSs share the same orientation (sense => => or antisense <=
<=). When TGAs are composed of two CDSs located on different DNA strands (convergent => <= or divergent <= =>), their orientation is
called “opposite”. Mixed TGAs contain at least one CDS pair in direct orientation and one CDS pair in opposite orientation. Sace: S. cerevisiae,
Cagl: C. glabrata, Zyro: Z. rouxii, Klth: K. thermotolerans, Sakl: S. kluyveri, Klla: K. lactis, Asgo: A. gossypii, Deha: D. hansenii and Yali: Y. lipolytica.

manually recomposed, the FTB score S2 was compared
with the FTB score S3 (Figure 6B). These two scores are
mostly equal or equivalent. In 6.2% of cases, the difference between both scores is > 20 and is due principally
(60% of cases) to the size difference between both genes
of a TGP. The comparison between the FTB scores S1
and S4 shows that in 93% of cases (323 TGAs) at least
one of these two scores is equal to 0 (Figure 6C). Few
TGAs (6 in total) have one score, S1 or S4, greater than

10. They correspond to TGAs that start or end with a
homologous gene relic. Therefore, they belong to the
nCDSs-relic class of TGAs. One of the seven TGAs in
this class is not represented here because it was corrected manually.
Evolution of TGAs in comparison with the one of the other
duplicated genes

Distribution of amino acid sequence identities between
pairs of homologous proteins was computed to evaluate

Despons et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:56
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/56

Page 8 of 13

the divergence between paralogous (tandem arrayed and
dispersed) and orthologous gene copies (Figure 7).
Orthologous proteins show monomodal distributions
and average identities comprised between 48-58%. They
represent the most sequence-conserved homologous
proteins. The distribution of tandem paralogs is intermediate between the distribution of other paralogs and
the distribution of orthologs. Thus, paralogs in TGAs
are less divergent than dispersed paralogs. Although the
global distributions of these two sets of paralogs are not
bimodal, the protein identities do not follow a normal
distribution since the paralogs exhibiting high sequence
conservation are found more frequently than their
poorly conserved counterparts. This feature is amplified
in the case of tandem duplicated genes.

Discussion
The sequence homology between tandem duplicated
genes favors recombination events, followed by the deletion or deletion-fusion of some copies. Mutational
events can also cause the disappearance of genes in
TGAs but more progressively. This death of genes is
compensated by the maintenance of some other copies
and/or the creation of new gene copies to ensure the
original gene function [1] (for review, see [17]). Therefore, a certain number of TGAs must conserve the trace
of these phantom gene copies called pseudogenes or
gene relics depending on their degree of degeneration
[18-20]. All the methods used so far to detect TGAs in
complete genomes were based on the search of intact
gene copies that are homologous by sequence similarity
and are organized in tandem repeats [5-9]. Therefore,
the proportion of TGAs containing degenerated gene
copies was still unknown. We developed a novel computational method to predict all TGAs, including the ones
with gene relics, in eukaryotic genomes. This methodological approach is relevant when we know that human
and other eukaryotic genomes contain thousands of
pseudogenes [21]. In the Saccharomyces cerevisiae genome, the pseudogene number was reported by different
sources and a compilation of these data, giving 278
pseudogenes, was presented by Lafontaine et al. [22].
Then, the pseudogene frequency in the yeast genome is
approximately of one pseudogene/21 CDSs (in reference
to 5823 annotated CDSs in total). Our method does not
perform pairwise BLASTP comparisons of gene
sequences to detect similarities, but compares each coding sequence with the DNA sequences of its two surrounding chromosomal regions using the TBLASTN
program. The detection of sequence similarity between
a CDS and an adjacent non-coding region reveals the
putative presence of a CDS-relic tandem repeat. In
order to verify the existence of a relic in such repeats, a
manual curation was performed after TGA extraction.

Figure 6 Comparisons of FTB score pairs. (A) The pairs of FTB
scores considered per TGA. Only TGAs not manually corrected with
more than one CDS (349 TGAs in total for the 9 genomes) were
retained for the analysis. For each of these TGAs, S2 and S3
correspond to FTB scores ≥ 10 associated with each pair of
duplicated CDSs. Whereas S1 and S4 are FTB scores ≥ 0 of CDSs
located at the extremities of the TGA. S1 concerns the region
upstream from the TGA and S4 the region downstream. (B)
Comparison of S2/S3 score pairs. (C) Comparison of S1/S4 score
pairs.

Our method is efficient for species that have a compact genome such as prokaryotes and unicellular eukaryotes. Its adaptation to multicellular eukaryotic species
should take into account the physical characteristics of
their genomes. In fact, the identification of tandem
repeated gene copies using TBLASTN could be difficult
with large genomes that feature much longer intergenic
regions and coding sequences with frequent and long
introns especially if they are subjected to alternative
splicing. Moreover, short DNA repeats and notably minisatellites are more frequent in complex genomes especially in intergenic sequences (for review, see [23]). But,
these repeated sequences are mainly located in intergenic regions and will not represent an issue as our
method detects minisatellites only within the DNA
sequence of tandem repeated genes. Despite these limitations, we proceeded with a first evaluation of the proposed method on the chromosome 4 of the plant
Arabidopsis thaliana. 223 TGAs and 145 isolated CDSs

Despons et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:56
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/56

Figure 7 Distribution of protein identities between pairs of
homologous genes. Protein identity distribution was computed for
pairs of homologs from BLASTP comparisons (see Methods) and
plotted as a kernel density estimation plot. Average distributions for
the nine yeast species analyzed were calculated in both cases of
TGA members and other paralogous genes. All pairwise alignments
between two species were performed for orthologs, but only the
distributions calculated from three species were plotted as examples
(the other ones showing a similar profile). KLTH: K. thermotolerans,
ZYRO: Z. rouxii and SAKL: S. kluyveri.

potentially in tandem with a gene relic were detected by
using the same parameters than those used for yeast
genomes. Although no manual curation was performed
on these data, they agree with the results previously
obtained predicting 196 TGAs (no spacer) or 250 TGAs
(one spacer authorized) on the A. thaliana chromosome
4 [5]. If confirmed after manual curation (please note
that for yeast application, the manual curation reduced
by half the number of “one CDS - one gene relic”
TGAs), these first results illustrate the interest of the
method for the identification of TGAs including the
“one gene and one gene relic” arrays.
We applied our method to nine annotated complete
genomes of hemiascomycete yeasts. Results show that,
on an average, 2% of CDSs are included in TGAs and
11% of these TGAs contain a gene relic. The percentage
of tandem arrayed genes in the yeast genomes is lower
than the one calculated for other eukaryotic species. For
two plant genomes, 9.3% and 13.4% of genes belong to
TGAs having 0 or 1 spacer gene and this value rises to
15.5% if 10 spacers are allowed [9]. Variation from 9.0%
to 21.4% (0 or 1 spacer per TGA) was reported in the
case of 11 vertebrate species [7]. The total number of
TGAs had already been estimated for five yeast genomes
by another method based on protein families and
authorizing 0-10 spacers [8]. Among these five genomes,
only those of S. cerevisiae, C. glabrata, K. lactis and Y.

Page 9 of 13

lipolytica are exploitable for a comparative analysis of
TGA data since Dujon et al. [8] used another version of
the D. hansenii genome. Since 2004, this genome was
reassembled and its re-annotation showed that the new
sequence is quite different compared to the preceding
version, notably with regard to the repeated regions (B.
Dujon, unpublished data). On the 501 genes constituting
tandem arrays (229 TGAs) in the four yeast species, 47%
(109 TGAs) were detected by both methods, 28% (66
TGAs) were specifically identified by our method and
25% (54 TGAs) were found only by the Dujon et al. [8]
method. The detailed analysis of the non-common
genes highlights the specificities of the two methodological approaches. Some TGAs are not found by our
method for two main raisons: (i) more than one spacer
gene is present between two tandem duplicated genes
(80% of cases), and (ii) the distance between two tandem
genes is longer than the average (20%). Concerning the
method used by Dujon et al. [8], three points explain
the absence of a certain number of TGAs: (i) the presence of gene relics in tandem repeats (5% of cases), (ii)
the presence of minisatellites in protein sequences
(43%), and (iii) genes of the same TGA belonging to different protein families (52% of cases, points (ii) and (iii)
are sometimes associated). In conclusion, each method
has its weaknesses and strengths. The main advantages
of the method we propose are that we have no requirement in terms of protein assignment to families and our
ability to detect dead gene copies and minisatellites in
TGAs.
D. hansenii features the highest proportion (4.4%) of
tandem repeated genes among the nine yeasts analyzed.
The mechanism of tandem gene duplication must be
particularly efficient in this cryo- and osmotolerant marine species, probably in response to environmental constraints. The majority of TGAs in yeast genomes
(76.5%) are the size of two CDSs and CDS orientation is
mainly direct (~80% of TGAs have CDSs on the same
strand). These characteristics are also observed in other
species. The largest TGAs are found in C. glabrata (two
arrays of 8 CDSs encoding proteins similar to aspartic
proteases and mannosyltransferases, respectively) and in
D. hansenii (one array of 16 CDSs without similarity).
Strong selective pressure may have intervened to maintain the size of these large TGAs, despite the fact that
they represent selected targets for chromosomal rearrangements via recombination events.
TGAs comprising gene relics were identified in the
nine yeast genomes, either as 1CDS-relic (most cases) or
nCDSs-relic TGAs. Their frequency, equal to 11.1%, is
approximately identical to that of 3CDSs-TGAs (10.4%).
This significant figure confirms that an important fraction of TGAs have genes that have not evolved in a concerted fashion but comply with the birth-and-death

Despons et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:56
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/56

mechanism of evolution. In fact, TGAs are thought to
evolve according to two major models [24]. Concerted
evolution homogenizes the duplicated gene sequences to
preserve the gene function and serves to increase gene
dosage. In contrast, in the birth-and-death evolutionary
model, sequence divergence within a TGA favors the
emergence of new functions but also gene inactivation
or disappearance. This second model is consistent with
the role of TGA formation in rapid adaptation to environmental necessities. Interestingly and similarly, the
results of our functional analysis (based on comparison
of GO term annotations) show that biological processes
related to cell-environment relationships (such as cell
wall biogenesis and response to stress) are overrepresented for genes in TGAs as compared with other genes.
The step of manual curation was pertinent since it
enabled the authors to: (i) eliminate 49% of false positive
CDSs displaying a “relic” tag (tagged CDSs), (ii) retrieve
25% of tagged CDSs to create new TGAs or complete
pre-existent TGAs and (iii) eliminate 6.6% of false positive TGAs containing CDSs with internal minisatellites.
Applied to genomes having a total number of genes
higher than the yeast genomes, our method would probably produce a number of tagged CDSs so great that
their manual verification would become unachievable. In
this case, a modification of the threshold value of FTB
score used to extract TGAs could be envisaged to
reduce the number of false positive CDSs. For the global
analysis of all nine yeast genomes, an increase of this
parameter from 10 to 15 drastically decreased the background noise (61% diminution in the number of tagged
CDSs, from 307 to 120), without greatly modifying the
number of detected TGAs (8.1% loss, from 356 TGAs
to 327). The length of the sequences flanking a CDS,
determined as a number of times the length of the CDS
(n × LCDS) and used as a target for the similarity search,
is another variable parameter. But its modification must
be limited in a given species since it depends on the size
of the coding genes and on overall gene density.
The analysis of the FTB score distribution in TGPs
was performed to evaluate more precisely the general
evolutionary process of TGAs. A bimodal repartition is
expected as one part of TGAs is supposed to have
undergone neofunctionalization or pseudogenization,
the other part representing sequence-conserved TGAs.
The scatter plot given in the results (Figure 6B) does
not show a profile characteristic of a bimodal distribution. This observation could mean that TGAs follow a
continuous process of degeneration.
On the other hand, we compared protein identity distributions between different sets of homologous gene
pairs. Results show that paralogs in TGAs have, on an
average, amino acid sequences better conserved than
dispersed paralogs, but are more divergent than

Page 10 of 13

orthologs. Gene conversion is a plausible mechanism for
sequence homogenization among many tandem gene
repeats and it is reported that its frequency is lower
between separated gene copies [25-27]. Another alternative is that tandem duplicate genes supposedly arise
from more recent events of gene duplication than dispersed duplicate genes. The mechanism of tandem gene
duplication usually tends to respond more rapidly to
environmental stimuli. It has recently been reported that
this mechanism has generated ~80% of the new genes
specific to Drosophila species [28]. For nascent gene
copies shared by multiple Drosophila species, 44% and
34% are dispersed and tandem repeated duplicates,
respectively. Moreover, Zhou et al. [28] have found that
tandem duplicate genes have on an average younger
ages but lower survivorships as against dispersed genes.
Along the same lines, Leh-Louis et al. [29] observed
that the largest TGA (five CDSs) in S. cerevisiae ends
with a relic and its size varies extensively among different strains of the same species.

Conclusions
In many comparative genomics studies, large-scale
detection of tandem duplicated genes is a necessary step
to tackle basic questions about gene duplication, notably
the mechanisms of TGA formation and evolution. First,
the extension of TGAs, such as ribosomal DNA gene
repeats, is mainly explained by mitotic or meiotic events
of unequal sister-chromatid crossover [30,31]. But there
is no convincing mechanism to explain the transition
from one original copy to two tandem repeated copies.
Second, chimeric or truncated genes are often observed
at the edges of segmental duplications [32-34] and retroposition-mediated single gene duplications [35-37],
although their presence at the borders of TGAs is not
reported. Gene limits could be recognized by the
mechanism of tandem gene duplication. Third, sequence
divergence frequently observed between genes sharing
the same tandem array suggests that selective pressures
are applied to such areas, favoring the emergence of
new functions. TGAs would be breeding grounds for
new genes. We will address these interesting questions
with a detailed analysis of the TGA catalog produced by
our computational prediction method from hemiascomycete yeast genomes. Different methods were used to
predict in a genome the complete set of TGAs. Nevertheless, the novelty and advantage of our method compared with existing methods lies in its detection of
additional TGAs containing degenerated paralogous
gene copies. Identification of these nonfunctional copies
of functional genes is a crucial stage to determine the
borders of the repeated unit and retrace the evolutionary history of tandem arrayed paralogs. Therefore, the
size of tandem repeated units in all yeast genomes

Despons et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:56
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/56

analyzed will be correctly determined and chimeric or
truncated genes will be searched at the extremities of
these units. We will also identify the possible presence
of pertinent sequence elements flanking TGAs (such as
transposon sequences, replication origins and small conserved DNA motifs) in order to define mechanism(s) of
TGA formation. Finally, multiple sequence alignments
will be used to establish phylogenies and calculate
nucleotide substitution rates in both silent and nonsilent positions in order to date the successive events
that have occurred at tandem repeated loci and identify
the evolutionary forces (mutation/selection).

Methods
Manual curation

To obtain high quality data, we performed a manual
curation of the results produced by the TGA extraction
method. All CDSs showing a “relic” tag, i.e. with FTB
score(s) ≥ 10 but no neighboring CDS (at positions n
+/- 1 and n +/- 2) with a correct profile of FTB scores
(Figure 3), were submitted to a dotplot analysis. Their
genomic sequences were compared pairwise with their
surrounding region where a significant FTB score was
found, using the DNA Strider™ 1.4 dot matrix (stringency = 15, window = 23) [38]. This approach allowed
us to detect sequence similarity in intergenic regions
through the visual perception of diagonal lines. When a
significant diagonal stood out against the background
noise, we considered that the intergenic region analyzed
contained a gene relic tandem arrayed with the tagged
CDS. The same dotplot approach was performed with
all CDSs that gave a score > 0 with the equicktandem
or etandem program. The presence of minisatellites in
these coding sequences was confirmed by protein selfmatrices (stringency = 5, window = 23). CDSs with confirmed internal repeats were aligned with the other
CDSs that belong to the same TGA using proteinagainst-protein matrices, in order to verify if the high
FTB scores related to these TGAs were not only due to
minisatellites.
Impact of two parameters on the amounts of TGAs and
tagged CDSs detected

Two parameters mainly influence the results of our
TGA detection method: (i) the length of the DNA
sequences surrounding each CDS of a given genome
and in which BLAST will look for an homology and (ii)
the threshold of FTB score used to extract TGAs. The
first parameter is a multiple of the length of the CDS
considered (n × L CDS ; most cases) or is equal to the
minimal length of 1500 bp. In view of the size of protein
coding genes (1.38 kb) and the overall gene density (one
gene per 2 kb) in the yeast genomes [8], a length of
genomic sequences of 2-3 times the CDS size seems to
be an interval of correct values to find the tandem

Page 11 of 13

duplicated copies. Preliminary tests performed on the
yeast genome of D. hansenii allowed us to define the
limiting values of the FTB score threshold (10 ≤ threshold ≤ 15) and thus obtain a good compromise between
a high number of detected TGAs and a low background
noise which basically is assessed as the number of CDSs
with a relic tag. We measured the real impact of the
modification of these two parameters on the counts of
TGAs extracted and tagged CDSs (see Additional file 3).
The number of tagged CDSs, obtained before manual
curation, is mostly influenced by the threshold parameter. Modification of only this parameter, from 10 to
15 or inversely, induces a variation of 59% or 61% in the
number of the tagged CDSs, whereas a constant threshold and a variable length result in a smaller variation of
13% or 18%. The number of TGAs is less influenced
(7.9-10.7% variation) than the number of tagged CDSs
(13-61% variation). Modification of only one parameter
(n × LCDS or threshold) leads to a variation percentage
of the TGA number that does not exceed 10.7%. Therefore, both parameters must be modified simultaneously
to obtain the highest variation of the TGA number
(18%). We chose to use the combination threshold = 10
and length = 3 × LCDS in order to identify the maximum
number of TGAs, although the background noise was
also maximum and then required a more important
manual verification of tagged CDSs. Under these parameter conditions, the false negative TGA rate was estimated to be less than 8%.
Evolutionary analysis of TGAs, other paralogs and
orthologs

The paralogous gene copies of the nine yeast genomes
analyzed were defined from the protein families clustered by the Nikolski and Sherman [39] method. In a
given species, all paralogous genes were identified. The
members of different TGAs are subsets of these paralogous genes. The orthologous gene pairs between these
same species were determined from SONS (Subset of
Orthologs defined by Neighborhood and Similarity).
Two genes of different species belong to the same
SONS if their products are members of the same protein family and if they share at least one pair of homologous neighboring genes, i.e. if synteny is conserved [40].
Amino acid identities between the products of two
homologous genes (paralogs or orthologs) were calculated from BLASTP alignments without low complexity
filter. For paralogs of a given family in a given species,
the identity score was calculated on a single pairwise
comparison randomly sampled among all possible pairwise comparisons between paralogs. Indeed, if all pairwise comparisons had been achieved, it would have
biased the distribution in favor of the largest family of
paralogs. In the case of tandem arrayed paralogs, each
TGA member (except gene relics without corresponding

Despons et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:56
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/56

protein) was aligned against all other members. For
orthologs, protein identity distribution was computed
from all pairwise alignments of SONS orthologs determined between two species.
Additional file 1: Tabular data S1 - List of CDSs that constitute
TGAs in the nine hemiascomycete yeast genomes. Additional data
file 1 is a Microsoft Excel spreadsheet (.xls) containing all the identified
tandemly arrayed genes in the nine yeast genomes analyzed. All genetic
elements were designated using a systematic nomenclature system
adopted in the “Génolevures” projects [42], except for YAR062W which is
a pseudogene (TGA n°49). Chromosomal coordinates are indicated for
each gene locus.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-1156-S1.XLS ]
Additional file 2: Table S1 - Impact of the data curation steps on
the count of TGAs. Three steps of data curation were performed to
distinguish between CDSs belonging to a TGA and false positive CDSs:
first, an automated curation of tagged CDSs (with a “relic” tag) analyzing
the FTB score value of CDSs at positions n+2 and n-2, second, a manual
curation of the remaining tagged CDSs and finally, a manual curation of
CDSs in which minisatellites were detected by the equicktandem or
etandem EMBOSS program.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-1156-S2.PDF ]
Additional file 3: Table S2 - Parameters influencing the results of
the in silico TGA detection method. We measured the influence of
two parameters on the number of TGAs and tagged CDSs identified
before the step of manual data curation. The first parameter intervening
in the score calculation step is the length of the chromosomal regions
located upstream and downstream from each CDS (n times as long as
the CDS length). The threshold value of FTB score is the second
parameter used to select CDSs belonging to a TGA during the TGA
extraction step.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-1156-S3.PDF ]

Abbreviations
CDSs: coding sequences; TGAs: tandem gene arrays; TGPs: tandem gene
pairs.
Acknowledgements
We thank Nicolas Jauniaux for help in the manual curation of data. We are
grateful to Claude Coulomb for the language corrections of the manuscript.
This work was supported in part by the Génolevures-3 sequencing
consortium GDR 2354 from CNRS and by ANR-05-BLAN-0331 (GENARISE).
Author details
1
Université de Strasbourg, CNRS UMR7156, F-67083 Strasbourg, France.
2
Université Catholique de Louvain, B-1348, Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium.
3
Institut Pasteur, Plate-forme Intégration et analyse génomique, F-75015
Paris, France. 4Université Bordeaux 1, CNRS UMR5800, LaBRI INRIA Bordeaux
Sud-Ouest (MAGNOME), F-33405 Talence, France.
Authors’ contributions
JLS, LF and LD conceived of the project. VLL and LF performed preliminary
tests on yeast genomes to determine parameters of the TGA detection
method. LD developed the Python computer program that predicts TGAs,
performed the genome-wide analysis and wrote the manuscript. PVB
assisted in analyzing the data and preparing the paper. PD contributed
comments and suggestions. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript.

Page 12 of 13

Received: 29 July 2009
Accepted: 21 January 2010 Published: 21 January 2010
References
1. Lynch M, Conery JS: The evolutionary fate and consequences of
duplicate genes. Science 2000, 290(5494):1151-1155.
2. Enright AJ, Van Dongen S, Ouzounis CA: An efficient algorithm for largescale detection of protein families. Nucleic Acids Res 2002, 30(7):1575-1584.
3. Li WH, Gu Z, Cavalcanti AR, Nekrutenko A: Detection of gene duplications
and block duplications in eukaryotic genomes. J Struct Funct Genomics
2003, 3(1-4):27-34.
4. Altschul SF, Madden TL, Schaffer AA, Zhang J, Zhang Z, Miller W,
Lipman DJ: Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new generation of protein
database search programs. Nucleic Acids Res 1997, 25(17):3389-3402.
5. Zhang L, Gaut BS: Does recombination shape the distribution and
evolution of tandemly arrayed genes (TAGs) in the Arabidopsis thaliana
genome?. Genome Res 2003, 13(12):2533-2540.
6. Shoja V, Zhang L: A roadmap of tandemly arrayed genes in the genomes
of human, mouse, and rat. Mol Biol Evol 2006, 23(11):2134-2141.
7. Pan D, Zhang L: Tandemly arrayed genes in vertebrate genomes. Comp
Funct Genomics 2008, 545269:545269.
8. Dujon B, Sherman D, Fischer G, Durrens P, Casaregola S, Lafontaine I, De
Montigny J, Marck C, Neuveglise C, Talla E, et al: Genome evolution in
yeasts. Nature 2004, 430(6995):35-44.
9. Rizzon C, Ponger L, Gaut BS: Striking similarities in the genomic
distribution of tandemly arrayed genes in Arabidopsis and rice. PLoS
Comput Biol 2006, 2(9):e115.
10. Zheng D, Gerstein MB: The ambiguous boundary between genes and
pseudogenes: the dead rise up, or do they?. Trends Genet 2007,
23(5):219-224.
11. Richard GF, Dujon B: Molecular evolution of minisatellites in
hemiascomycetous yeasts. Mol Biol Evol 2006, 23(1):189-202.
12. Rice P, Longden I, Bleasby A: EMBOSS: the European Molecular Biology
Open Software Suite. Trends Genet 2000, 16(6):276-277.
13. Cherry JM, Adler C, Ball C, Chervitz SA, Dwight SS, Hester ET, Jia Y, Juvik G,
Roe T, Schroeder M, et al: SGD: Saccharomyces Genome Database. Nucleic
Acids Res 1998, 26(1):73-79.
14. Hermida L, Brachat S, Voegeli S, Philippsen P, Primig M: The Ashbya
Genome Database (AGD)–a tool for the yeast community and genome
biologists. Nucleic Acids Res 2005, , 33 Database: D348-352.
15. Sherman D, Durrens P, Iragne F, Beyne E, Nikolski M, Souciet JL:
Genolevures complete genomes provide data and tools for comparative
genomics of hemiascomycetous yeasts. Nucleic Acids Res 2006, , 34
Database: D432-435.
16. Ashburner M, Ball CA, Blake JA, Botstein D, Butler H, Cherry JM, Davis AP,
Dolinski K, Dwight SS, Eppig JT, et al: Gene ontology: tool for the
unification of biology. The Gene Ontology Consortium. Nat Genet 2000,
25(1):25-29.
17. Otto SP, Yong P: The evolution of gene duplicates. Adv Genet 2002,
46:451-483.
18. Wirth B, Louis VL, Potier S, Souciet JL, Despons L: Paleogenomics or the
search for remnant duplicated copies of the yeast DUP240 gene family
in intergenic areas. Mol Biol Evol 2005, 22(9):1764-1771.
19. Guo S, Kim J: Molecular evolution of Drosophila odorant receptor genes.
Mol Biol Evol 2007, 24(5):1198-1207.
20. Horne I, Haritos VS: Multiple tandem gene duplications in a neutral lipase
gene cluster in Drosophila. Gene 2008, 411(1):27-37.
21. Zhang Z, Gerstein M: Large-scale analysis of pseudogenes in the human
genome. Curr Opin Genet Dev 2004, 14(4):328-335.
22. Lafontaine I, Fischer G, Talla E, Dujon B: Gene relics in the genome of the
yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Gene 2004, 335:1-17.
23. Richard GF, Kerrest A, Dujon B: Comparative genomics and molecular
dynamics of DNA repeats in eukaryotes. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 2008,
72(4):686-727.
24. Nei M, Rooney AP: Concerted and birth-and-death evolution of
multigene families. Annu Rev Genet 2005, 39:121-152.
25. Semple C, Wolfe KH: Gene duplication and gene conversion in the
Caenorhabditis elegans genome. J Mol Evol 1999, 48(5):555-564.
26. Drouin G: Characterization of the gene conversions between the
multigene family members of the yeast genome. J Mol Evol 2002,
55(1):14-23.

Despons et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:56
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/56

Page 13 of 13

27. Jackson AP: Tandem gene arrays in Trypanosoma brucei: comparative
phylogenomic analysis of duplicate sequence variation. BMC Evol Biol
2007, 7:54.
28. Zhou Q, Zhang G, Zhang Y, Xu S, Zhao R, Zhan Z, Li X, Ding Y, Yang S,
Wang W: On the origin of new genes in Drosophila. Genome Res 2008,
18(9):1446-1455.
29. Leh-Louis V, Wirth B, Potier S, Souciet JL, Despons L: Expansion and
contraction of the DUP240 multigene family in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae populations. Genetics 2004, 167(4):1611-1619.
30. Petes TD: Unequal meiotic recombination within tandem arrays of yeast
ribosomal DNA genes. Cell 1980, 19(3):765-774.
31. Szostak JW, Wu R: Unequal crossing over in the ribosomal DNA of
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Nature 1980, 284(5755):426-430.
32. Eichler EE: Recent duplication, domain accretion and the dynamic
mutation of the human genome. Trends Genet 2001, 17(11):661-669.
33. Koszul R, Caburet S, Dujon B, Fischer G: Eucaryotic genome evolution
through the spontaneous duplication of large chromosomal segments.
Embo J 2004, 23(1):234-243.
34. Schacherer J, de Montigny J, Welcker A, Souciet JL, Potier S: Duplication
processes in Saccharomyces cerevisiae haploid strains. Nucleic Acids Res
2005, 33(19):6319-6326.
35. Maestre J, Tchenio T, Dhellin O, Heidmann T: mRNA retroposition in
human cells: processed pseudogene formation. Embo J 1995,
14(24):6333-6338.
36. Schacherer J, Tourrette Y, Souciet JL, Potier S, De Montigny J: Recovery of a
function involving gene duplication by retroposition in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. Genome Res 2004, 14(7):1291-1297.
37. Wang W, Zheng H, Fan C, Li J, Shi J, Cai Z, Zhang G, Liu D, Zhang J,
Vang S, et al: High rate of chimeric gene origination by retroposition in
plant genomes. Plant Cell 2006, 18(8):1791-1802.
38. Marck C: ’DNA Strider’: a ‘C’ program for the fast analysis of DNA and
protein sequences on the Apple Macintosh family of computers. Nucleic
Acids Res 1988, 16(5):1829-1836.
39. Nikolski M, Sherman DJ: Family relationships: should consensus reign?–
consensus clustering for protein families. Bioinformatics 2007, 23(2):
e71-76.
40. Seret ML, Diffels JF, Goffeau A, Baret PV: Combined phylogeny and
neighborhood analysis of the evolution of the ABC transporters
conferring multiple drug resistance in hemiascomycete yeasts. BMC
Genomics 2009, 10:459.
41. Souciet JL, Dujon B, Gaillardin C, Johnston M, Baret PV, Cliften P,
Sherman DJ, Weissenbach J, Westhof E, Wincker P, et al: Comparative
genomics of protoploid Saccharomycetaceae. Genome Res 2009, 12:12.
42. Durrens P, Sherman DJ: A systematic nomenclature of chromosomal
elements for hemiascomycete yeasts. Yeast 2005, 22(5):337-342.
doi:10.1186/1471-2164-11-56
Cite this article as: Despons et al.: Genome-wide computational
prediction of tandem gene arrays: application in yeasts. BMC Genomics
2010 11:56.

Publish with Bio Med Central and every
scientist can read your work free of charge
"BioMed Central will be the most significant development for
disseminating the results of biomedical researc h in our lifetime."
Sir Paul Nurse, Cancer Research UK

Your research papers will be:
available free of charge to the entire biomedical community
peer reviewed and published immediately upon acceptance
cited in PubMed and archived on PubMed Central
yours — you keep the copyright
Submit your manuscript here:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/info/publishing_adv.asp

BioMedcentral

</pre>
</body>
</html>
