<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Aerobic biogenesis of selenium nanospheres by Bacillus cereus isolated from coalmine soil</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Microbial Cell Factories 2010 9:52. doi:10.1186/1475-2859-9-52"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Soniya Dhanjal"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Dhanjal and Cameotra Microbial Cell Factories 2010, 9:52
http://www.microbialcellfactories.com/content/9/1/52

RESEARCH

Open Access

Aerobic biogenesis of selenium nanospheres by
Bacillus cereus isolated from coalmine soil
Soniya Dhanjal, Swaranjit Singh Cameotra*

Abstract
Background: Microorganisms that are exposed to pollutants in the environment, such as metals/metalloids, have a
remarkable ability to fight the metal stress by various mechanisms. These metal-microbe interactions have already
found an important role in biotechnological applications. It is only recently that microorganisms have been
explored as potential biofactories for synthesis of metal/metalloid nanoparticles. Biosynthesis of selenium (Se0)
nanospheres in aerobic conditions by a bacterial strain isolated from the coalmine soil is reported in the present
study.
Results: The strain CM100B, identified as Bacillus cereus by morphological, biochemical and 16S rRNA gene
sequencing [GenBank:GU551935.1] was studied for its ability to generate selenium nanoparticles (SNs) by
transformation of toxic selenite (SeO32-) anions into red elemental selenium (Se0) under aerobic conditions. Also,
the ability of the strain to tolerate high levels of toxic selenite ions was studied by challenging the microbe with
different concentrations of sodium selenite (0.5 mM-10 mM). ESEM, AFM and SEM studies revealed the spherical
Se0 nanospheres adhering to bacterial biomass as well as present as free particles. The TEM microscopy showed
the accumulation of spherical nanostructures as intracellular and extracellular deposits. The deposits were identified
as element selenium by EDX analysis. This is also indicated by the red coloration of the culture broth that starts
within 2-3 h of exposure to selenite oxyions. Selenium nanoparticles (SNs) were further characterized by UV-Visible
spectroscopy, TEM and zeta potential measurement. The size of nanospheres was in the range of 150-200 nm with
high negative charge of -46.86 mV.
Conclusions: This bacterial isolate has the potential to be used as a bionanofactory for the synthesis of stable,
nearly monodisperse Se0 nanoparticles as well as for detoxification of the toxic selenite anions in the environment.
A hypothetical mechanism for the biogenesis of selenium nanoparticles (SNs) involving membrane associated
reductase enzyme(s) that reduces selenite (SeO32-) to Se0 through electron shuttle enzymatic metal reduction
process has been proposed.

Background
Selenium (Se), belonging to group 16 of the periodic
table is well known for its photoelectric and semiconductor properties. It is used in solar cells, rectifiers,
photographic exposure meters and xerography [1].
Amorphous selenium nanoparticles (SNs) possess
unique photoelectric, semiconducting and X-ray-sensing
properties. These nanoparticles also show biological
activity and good adsorptive ability due to interaction
between the nanoparticles and NH, C = O, COO_ and
C-N groups of proteins [2]. Selenium nanoparticles have
also been developed for applications in medical
* Correspondence: ssc@imtech.res.in
Institute of Microbial Technology, Sector 39-A, Chandigarh 160036, India

diagnostics [3]. Studies on the biological toxicity of selenium and its nanoforms revealed that nano-selenium
showed equal efficiency in increasing the activities of
glutathione peroxidase and thioredoxin reductase [4].
Gao et al. [5] demonstrated the antioxidant properties
of hollow spherical nanoparticles of selenium. Similar
observations that nano-Se can serve as an antioxidant
with reduced risk of selenium toxicity was reported by
Wang et al. [6]. The size of nanoparticles play an important role in their biological activity as 5-200 nm nano-Se
can directly scavenge free radicals in vitro in a sizedependent fashion [7]. Several methods including g-irradiation and laser ablation have been applied to synthesize selenium nanoparticles but most widely used

© 2010 Dhanjal and Cameotra; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Dhanjal and Cameotra Microbial Cell Factories 2010, 9:52
http://www.microbialcellfactories.com/content/9/1/52

synthetic approach for preparing selenium nanoparticles
is chemical reduction [8].
Recently, there has been increasing interest in synthesis of nanoparticles using biological systems leading to
the development of various biomimetic approaches.
Microorganisms, such as bacteria, yeast and fungi play
an important role in recycling of minerals in the environment. Some of these microorganisms can survive and
grow even at high metal ion concentrations. The toxicity
of metal ions is reduced or eliminated by changing the
redox state of the metal ions and in the process leading
to the formation of well-defined nanoscale particles in
some cases [9].
Selenium occurs in variety of oxidation states like selenate (SeO42-)/selenite (SeO32-) oxyions, wherein the oxidation states are + 6 and + 4; elemental selenium (Se0)
and selenide (Se2-). The toxicity of these states is related
to their degrees of solubility in water and hence their
bioavailability. Elemental selenium can exist in forms
other than red amorphous selenium (Se0 ) as selenate
(SeO42-)/selenite (SeO32-) which are highly water soluble
and as selenide (Se 2- ) which is gaseous in nature.
Among the various selenium species, selenite (SeO32-)
reduction has attracted a great deal of attention as
potential compound for microbial reduction due to its
high toxicity. Se-reducing bacteria are ubiquitous and
occur in diverse terrestrial and aquatic environments
[10]. A few microorganisms have been well characterized for their ability to reduce toxic selenate and selenite
oxyions into non-toxic elemental form Se0 under aerobic and anaerobic conditions [10-13].
The biogenesis of selenium nanostructures during the
dissimilatory respiration was reported by Oremland et
al. [14] during the dissimilatory respiration. Se0 particles
formed by the Se-respiring bacteria Sulfurospirillum
barnesii, Bacillus selenitireducens and Selenihalanaerobacter shriftii are structurally unique compared to elemental selenium formed by chemical synthesis. The
three anaerobes used toxic selenium oxyions as the electron acceptors during anaerobic respiration which
resulted in the formation of stable, uniform nanospheres
of selenium (diameter ~ 300 nm). The majority of studies on the biogenesis of selenium nanoparticles have
focused on anaerobic systems. However, anaerobic conditions have limitations, such as culture conditions and
isolate characteristics that make optimization and scaleup in bio-manufacturing processes tedious and challenging [15]. Selenium-tolerant aerobic microorganisms
may provide an opportunity to overcome these limitations in the biosynthetic processes. Very few studies
have reported the aerobic formation of selenium nanoparticles by microorganisms. The generation of selenium
nanospheres by soil bacteria Pseudomonas aeruginosa
and Bacillus sp. under aerobic conditions has recently

Page 2 of 11

been reported [15,16]. These studies include the partial
characterization of selenium nanospheres formed by the
two isolates. The aim of the present investigation was to
study the possible formation of selenium (Se 0 ) nanospheres in aerobic conditions by a Se-reducing bacterial
strain (CM100B) isolated from a coalmine soil of West
Bengal, India.

Methods
Microorganism and Growth Conditions

The strain CM100B was isolated from coalmine soil
(coal mines located in Asansol, Latitude: 23°41′ N and
Longitude: 86°59′E, West Bengal, India) by enrichment
of the soil sample for one week with sodium selenite
(0.5 mM) followed by standard method of dilution plating on tryptic soy agar (TSA) medium supplemented
with 0.5 mM sodium selenite. The pure isolate was routinely cultured on TSA plates containing 2 mM selenite
at 37°C.
Morphological, Biochemical and Physiological
characterization of the isolate CM100B

Biochemical characterization of the strain CM100B was
performed following standard methods as described in
Bergy’s Manual of Systemic Bacteriology, Vol. 1, and
Manual for the Identification of Medical Bacteria by
Cowan & Steel (Second edition, Cambridge University
press).
16s rRNA gene sequencing and phylogenetic analysis

For the 16S rRNA gene analysis the genomic DNA was
extracted by the CTAB method followed by PCR amplification with universal primers 27F and 1492R. Sequencing of the amplified product was done by dideoxy
chain terminator method using the Big Dye terminator
kit followed by capillary electrophoresis on an ABI 310
genetic analyzer (Applied Biosystems, USA). The
sequence obtained was BLAST searched and compared
with sequences of other closely related species retrieved
from the GenBank database http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/BLAST/ followed by alignment using the MEGA
software version 4 [17]. A phylogenetic tree was constructed using the neighbor-joining algorithm. Bootstrap
analysis was performed to assess the confidence limits
of the branching.
Bacterial growth under selenite stress

The effect of selenite on the growth of the bacterial isolate was determined in the presence of 0.5 mM, 1 mM,
2 mM, 5 mM and 10 mM of sodium selenite. Sodium
selenite was prepared as 1 M stock solution and sterilized by filtration. 250 ml Erlenmeyer flasks containing
100 ml of Tryptic Soya Broth (TSB) supplemented with
respective concentrations of selenite were inoculated

Dhanjal and Cameotra Microbial Cell Factories 2010, 9:52
http://www.microbialcellfactories.com/content/9/1/52

with overnight grown bacterial culture and incubated at
37°C at 200 rpm. Bacterial growth was measured by the
quantification of total protein content of microbial biomass. Protein concentration in bacterial cell extracts was
determined by using the Bicinchoninic acid (BCA)
method with Bovine Serum Albumin (BSA) as standard.
A 1 ml aliquot of bacterial culture was collected at different time intervals of bacterial growth and was centrifuged at 4722 × g (Sigma 1-14) for 10 min. The pellet
was resuspended in 100 μl of extraction buffer (50 mM
Na 2 HPO 4 , pH 7; 10 mM b-mercaptoethanol; 10 mM
Na2- EDTA; 0.1% Sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS); 0.1%
Triton X-100). The resulting suspension was sonicated
for 5 min and centrifuged at 10625 × g for 15 min at
4°C. The supernatant was collected and measured for
protein content. Flask with inoculum without the addition of selenite served as control.
Reduction of selenite by strain CM100B

To determine the reduction of selenite by the bacterial
isolate, the organism was exposed to 2 mM selenite.
Samples were collected at 2 h intervals and centrifuged
at 1844 × g to separate the bacterial biomass and the
supernatant. Se content in the supernatants was determined by Atomic absorption spectrophotometer (AA6800, Shimadzu) in Hydride Vapor Generation mode,
with a selenium cathode lamp. An air-acetylene (oxidizing) flame was used and a wavelength of 196 nm was
chosen for the purpose of absorption of incident light.
Flow Cytometry

The relative decrease in the size of the cell population
under selenite stress was determined by Forward Scatter
using FACS Calibur (Becton-Dickinson). The strain
CM100B was grown in the presence of 5 mM sodium
selenite. An aliquot of 1 ml bacterial culture was collected at regular time intervals of bacterial growth to
determine the cell size. The samples were centrifuged at
1180 × g for 10 min. The cell pellet was gently washed
twice with phosphate buffered saline (PBS) pH 7.2 and
re-suspended in it for analysis. Culture without addition
of selenite oxyions served as control.
Microscopic studies
Environmental Scanning Electron Microscopy (ESEM)

ESEM examination of the culture was done by growing
the cells in the presence of 2 mM selenite for 24 h. The
sample was applied directly on the stub and scanned
with a Hitachi Scanning Electron Microscope under
variable pressure in ESEM mode.
Scanning Electron Microscopy

Strain CM100B was grown in TSB supplemented with 2
mM sodium selenite at 37°C. After 24 h of incubation,
cells were centrifuged at 1844 × g at 4°C for 10 min and

Page 3 of 11

scanning electron microscopic studies were performed
on the processed samples. Sample processing involves
washing, fixing and drying of cells. Harvested cells were
washed thrice with phosphate buffer saline (PBS, pH
7.4) and layered onto polylysine coated cover slips. Fixation was done with modified Karnovsky’s fixative (2%
paraformaldehyde and 2.5% glutaraldehyde in 0.1 M
sodium phosphate buffer, pH 7.4). Cells were again
washed with PBS and distilled water. Fixed cells were
dehydrated through a series of alcohol dehydration steps
(30%, 50%, 70%, 90% and 100%) and finally layered with
t-butyl alcohol for freeze drying and sputter coated. The
samples were then viewed under Scanning Electron
Microscope (Carl Zeiss NTS, GmbH, Germany).
Atomic Force Microscopy

The samples were centrifuged at 4722 × g for 10 min.
The acquired cell pellet was gently washed twice with
deionized-distilled water and re-suspended in it. 5 μl
cell suspension was put on the freshly cleaved mica surface and then immediately dried with nitrogen gas. All
AFM experiments were carried out by NTMDT Solver
pro 7 Atomic Force Microscope using a Si tip. AFM
imaging was done in tapping mode.
Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM)

For ultrastructural studies, 24 h old culture grown in the
presence of 2 mM sodium selenite was centrifuged at
1844 × g for 15 min, washed thrice with 10 mM phosphate buffer, pH 7.4 and fixed for 10-12 h at 4°C in
modified karnovsky’s fixative. After successive washings
in 10 mM sodium phosphate buffer pH 7.4 cells were
post fixed in 1% osmium tetroxide in the same buffer.
After several washes in the same buffer, cells were dehydrated in graded acetone solutions (30%, 50%, 70%, 90%
and 100% for 15 min each) and embedded in CY 212
araldite (10 ml), along with Dodecenyl Succinic Anhydride (DDSA) as hardner (10 ml), and tri(dimethylaminomethyl) phenol (DMP-30) as catalyst (0.4 ml).
Ultrathin sections of 60-80 nm thickness were cut using
an ultracut E (Reichert Jung) ultra-microtome and the
sections stained with alcoholic uranyl acetate (saturated
solution in ethanol) for 2 min and subsequently in lead
citrate for 2 min before examining the grids in HRTEM
Technai G20-stwin (200 kV) Transmission Electron
Microscope. Cells grown for the same time period without the addition of the selenite were taken as control
and processed similarly.
Elemental composition analysis with energy dispersive X-ray
(EDX)

To ascertain the reduction of Se4 + to elemental selenium (Se 0 ) the samples were processed by a method
similar to that used for TEM studies. The selected areas
within TEM sections were subjected to elemental composition analysis using an EDX (Bruker AXS Inc. USA,
Quantax-200) micro-analysis system coupled to a

Dhanjal and Cameotra Microbial Cell Factories 2010, 9:52
http://www.microbialcellfactories.com/content/9/1/52

Transmission Electron Microscope. Sample collected
from the culture without addition of selenite (SeO32-)
was taken as control.
Recovery of selenium nanoparticles from the culture broth

Bacterial strain inoculated in 300 ml TSB amended with
2 mM sodium selenite and incubated at 37°C at 200
rpm for 48 h. The culture broth was centrifuged
at 10020 × g (Hermle centrifuge, Z36HK) at 4°C for
10 min. The pellet was discarded and the cell-free medium was centrifuged at 41410 × g at 4°C for 30 min.
The supernatant was discarded and the pellet with the
selenium-containing particles was re-suspended in
water. The suspension was washed twice by repeating
the two centrifugation steps.
Characterization of reduced selenite

The absorption spectra of the red elemental selenium
particles suspended in aqueous solution was recorded
using a Hitachi U2800 spectrophotometer by wavelength
scan from 300-1100 nm setting the baseline with water.
TEM studies were carried out using JEM 2100 (JEOL)
microscope operating at 120 kV accelerating voltage.
Samples were prepared by placing a drop of selenium
particles suspended in water on carbon-coated TEM
grids. The film on the TEM grids was allowed to dry for
5 min at room temperature before analysis. Charge distribution (zeta potential) was analyzed using dynamic
light scattering system (Beckman Coulter, USA) by illuminating the solution of selenium particles with He-Ne
Laser (633 nm) in a sample cell.
Determining the membrane-associated reductase activity

The culture was grown to log phase and centrifuged at
3910 × g (Hermle centrifuge, Z36HK) for 10 min at 4°C
to obtain the cell pellet. Pellet was washed with 10 mM
Tris-Cl (pH 7.5) twice and re-suspended in the same
buffer for sonication. After sonication, the cell lysate
was centrifuged at 22540 × g for 40 min to separate the
soluble and membrane fractions. The total protein content was estimated by Bradford method using BSA as
standard. Selenite reductase activity was determined
using the following reaction mixture: 5 ml TSB, 100 μg
of protein, 5 mM sodium selenite. The reaction mixture
was incubated at 37°C for 3-4 h. Reaction mixture without addition of membrane or soluble fractions served as
controls.

Results and Discussion
Characterization of selenite tolerant bacterium isolated
from coalmine soil

Selenium is a very coalphile element, having strong affinity to organic and inorganic matter present in coals.
The average selenium content in hard coals and brown
coals is estimated to be 1.6 ± 0.1 and 1.0 ± 0.15 ppm,
respectively [18]. Therefore, there was high probability
of finding an efficient selenium transforming microbe

Page 4 of 11

from the collected coalmine soil. The enrichment of
coalmine soil with selenite oxyions for over a period of
7 days resulted in isolation of selenite tolerant bacterial
strain CM100B. The bacterial isolate was subjected to
characterization by morphological, biochemical and
molecular methods. It is a Gram-positive, facultative
anaerobic, spore-forming, rod shaped, flagellated bacterium. Temperature for growth ranged from 15°C-42°C
(optimum 37°C), pH values 5-11 (optimum pH 7.5), salt
concentration (NaCl %) up to 7.5%. Biochemical analysis
shows that it is positive for catalase, oxidase, hydrolysis
of gelatin, starch, casein and negative for citrate, methyl
red, Voges-Proskauer, nitrate, urea hydrolysis and oxidation/fermentation tests. Acid is produced from carbohydrates namely dextrose, fructose, maltose, mannose,
sucrose and trehalose. The results of 16S rRNA (1439
bp) gene sequence analysis of the strain suggested that
it belongs to the genus Bacillus sp. [GenBank:
GU551935.1]. In the phylogenetic tree the strain
CM100B formed a coherent branch with Bacillus cereus
(Fig. 1)The isolate CM100B also showed high sequence
similarity of 99% to Bacillus cereus. Therefore, on the
basis of the above results the strain CM100B was characterized as Bacillus cereus.
Growth on selenite (SeO32-) oxyion and evaluation of
selenite (SeO32-) reducing ability

In order to determine the toxicity of selenite (SeO32-) to
the microorganism, the growth profile of the bacteria was
studied by addition of different concentrations of sodium
selenite (0.5 mM, 1 mM, 2 mM, 5 mM and 10 mM) in the
growth medium under aerobic conditions. The strain
CM100B formed reddish cell suspension which indicated
its ability to reduce the toxic, colorless, soluble selenite
(SeO32-) ions to nontoxic, red elemental insoluble form of
selenium (Se0). It is worth noting that the formation of red
precipitate of elemental selenium started after 2 h of exposure to selenite oxyions which made it difficult to study
the growth profile of the strain under selenite stress by
spectroscopy due to optical interference from Se0 particles
in spectrophotometric measurements. Therefore, the total
protein content was estimated at regular time intervals
and correlated with the increase in the growth of the
microorganism. The growth profile of the strain in the
presence of selenite (0.5mM-10mM) was comparable to
that of control without addition of selenite (Fig. 2A, Graphically growth is shown in the presence of 5 mM and 10
mM selenite for clarity, however growth studies were done
in the presence of selenite concentrations ranging from
0.5-10 mM as mentioned above). Simultaneous protein
estimation by BCA method indicated that very short lag
period occurred during the growth of the microbe either
in the presence or absence of selenite. Apparently, selenite
was observed to be non-toxic to the strain at the above

Dhanjal and Cameotra Microbial Cell Factories 2010, 9:52
http://www.microbialcellfactories.com/content/9/1/52

Figure 1 The Neighbor-Joining (NJ) tree, inferred using MEGA
software version 4 (Tamura et al. 2007). Bootstrap values
expressed as percentage of 1000 replications are given at the
nodes. Bar equals 0.05% sequence variation.

Figure 2 Growth of strain CM100B under selenite stress and
selenite reduction. (A) Growth profile of strain CM100B in the
presence of high concentrations of sodium selenite. (B) Time course
of microbial growth and selenite (SeO32- ) reduction by the strain
CM100B.

Page 5 of 11

mentioned concentrations. As evident from the Fig. 2B,
there was rapid decrease of selenite oxyions in the culture
broth within a period of 24 h. Viable cultures challenged
with toxic selenite oxyions begin to turn red within 2-3 h
of bacterial growth. A marginal decrease in selenite
(SeO32-) concentrations as a result of abiotic reduction by
the TSB media was also observed in the uninoculated
flasks (data not shown). There was a gradual decrease in
average bacterial cell size which was grown in the presence
of selenite oxyions as compared to the control cells which
were grown without the addition of selenite oxyions. After
12 h and 24 h of bacterial growth, the size of the test and
the control population was equivalent (Fig. 3A and 3B). A
gradual decrease in cell size was observed after 36 h of cell
growth in the presence of selenite oxyions (Fig. 3C). At 48
h of bacterial growth the test cell population under selenite stress was comparatively smaller in size than the control cells which were grown without the addition of
selenite as determined by Forward Scatter in flow cytometric analysis (Fig. 3D)Under the stressful condition of
toxic selenite ions the morphology of the cells is altered
resulting in decrease in cell size. Possibly, the changes in
cell morphology could be explained by the surface/volume
ratio. The organisms reduce their cell size and increase
their relative surface area for better uptake of the nutrients

Figure 3 Gradual decrease in average bacterial cell size which
was grown in the presence of selenite oxyions as measured by
flow cytometry. X axis is log scale and Y axis indicates the number
of bacterial cells (counts in 100). Shift towards left/right on the X
axis indicates decrease/increase in cell size in Forward Scattering
analysis. Test population (blue) and control population (red). (A)
After 12 h of bacterial growth. (B) After 24 h of bacterial growth. (C)
After 36 h of bacterial growth and (D) After 48 h, the test
population shifts towards left indicating the decrease in cell size of
test population which was exposed to selenite stress.

Dhanjal and Cameotra Microbial Cell Factories 2010, 9:52
http://www.microbialcellfactories.com/content/9/1/52

for survival under environmental stress conditions. The
purpose of the growth profile studies was to understand
the response of the test organism to high concentrations
of selenite which are several orders of magnitude higher
than usual levels present in the environment [19].
The above results indicate that reduction of selenite
(SeO32-) by the microbe occurred more rapidly than was
observed in earlier reports [11,16]. Dungan et al. [19]
reported formation of Se0 after 28 h during studies with
Stenotrophomonas maltophilia in the presence of selenite.
Therefore, the capability of strain CM100B to rapidly
reduce soluble and toxic selenite (SeO32-) to insoluble and
unavailable Se0 highlights it as a promising exploitable
option for the setup of low-cost biological treatment unit
for bioremediating selenium laden effluents. Although the
red precipitate indicates the formation of elemental selenium (Se0), this fact does not exclude the possibility that
there may be additional products, such as selenoamino
acids and/or methylated selenides (gaseous products)
formed during the selenite transformation process.
Localization of reduced selenite (SeO32-) in the bacterial
cells

Environmental Scanning Electron Microscopic (ESEM)
study of bacterial culture obtained from the selenite-supplemented medium inoculated with strain CM100B revealed
spherical structures associated with the cellular biomass
(Fig. 4A and 4B). In Atomic Force Microscopic (AFM) imaging nanospheres of diameter ranging from 150-200 nm
were observed in the extracellular medium (Fig. 5). Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) also showed spherical
nanospheres of size ranging from 150-200 nm scattered
around the cells as free deposits and also present as aggregates attached to bacterial cell mass (Fig. 6 A, B, C and 6D).
Thus, the unique nature of this isolate is the potential to
reduce the toxic selenite ions aerobically with concomitant
generation of selenium nanospheres in the culture medium.
Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) of the cultures grown in the presence of selenite further

Page 6 of 11

Figure 5 Atomic Force Micrographs of Selenium nanospheres.
The bigger yellow structure is the single bacterial cell surround by
Selenium nanospheres of size 150-200 nm dispersed in the culture
medium.

confirmed the spherical intracellular and extracellular
deposits of selenium nanospheres. (Fig. 7A).Studies
have shown that active efflux of the metal is a frequently utilized strategy to produce tolerance by lowering the intracellular concentration to subtoxic levels
[20]. However, our data showing intracellular nanometer-sized particles of elemental selenium (Se0) suggest that efflux pumps probably do not mediate the
metalloid tolerance mechanism in strain CM100B since
selenite tolerance is associated to an intracellular
reduction of these oxyanions and then by their accumulation inside the cytoplasm or periplasmic space of
the bacterial cell and subsequent exudation by the bacterial cell. The chemical microanalysis (TEM-EDX) of
reddish colonies of strain CM100B grown in the presence of selenite revealed cytoplasmic and surface
attached electron-dense Se0 granules. In EDX analysis,
the electron dense Se0 particles produced specific selenium absorption peaks at 1.37 keV (peak SeLa), 11.22
keV (peak SeKa) and 12.49 keV (peak SeKb) Fig. 7B.
The uptake and transformations of selenite can be correlated to precipitation of selenium intra and extra-cellularly as observed by Lortie et al. (1992) [11]. The
results are significantly similar to the observations by
Kessi et al. [21] and Roux et al. [22], which indicated
intense Electron Dispersion Spectroscopy (EDS) spectral peaks for SeKa at 11.22 KeV.
Characterization of selenium nanoparticles (SNs)
produced by strain CM100B

Figure 4 (A) and (B) Environmental Scanning Electron
Micrographs show the adherence of Selenium nanospheres to
bacterial cell surface.

Elemental selenium (Se 0 ) in the recent past has been
envisaged to have immense medical (free radical scavenging, anti-cancer and anti-oxidative drug applications in

Dhanjal and Cameotra Microbial Cell Factories 2010, 9:52
http://www.microbialcellfactories.com/content/9/1/52

Page 7 of 11

Figure 6 Scanning Electron Micrographs of strain CM100B grown in the presence of 5 mM selenite. (A) Selenium nanospheres adhering
to the bacterial cells. (B) Bacterial cells surrounded by selenium nanospheres. (C) Free selenium nanospheres. (D) Control cells grown in TSB
without addition of selenite.

medicine) and industrial (glass and optical lens coatings)
applications. The growing importance of nano-selenium
in diverse variety of applications has lured the researchers to study the biosynthesis of selenium nanoparticles.
Therefore, further characterization of the selenium
nanospheres produced by the strain CM100B was carried out. The UV-Visible absorption spectra of selenium
nanospheres recovered from the culture broth gave
characteristic peak at 590 nm which corresponds to particle size of 182.8 ± 33.2 nm [23] (Fig. 8). The size of
SNs was further confirmed by TEM imaging which
demonstrate that Se0 particles possess an average diameter of 150-200 nm as depicted in Fig. 9A The zeta

potential measurements indicate high negative charge
(-46.86 mV) on the selenium nanoparticles (Fig. 9B)If all
the particles in suspension have a large negative or positive zeta potential then they will tend to repel each
other and there is little tendency for the particles to
come together. However, if the particles have low zeta
potential values then there is propensity of the particles
to come together and form aggregates. The high negative charge on Se0 particles is probably resulting in the
high stability of the selenium nanospheres without forming aggregates and these particles do not transform to
black amorphous form when kept for prolonged period
of time of more than a month. The greater stability of

Dhanjal and Cameotra Microbial Cell Factories 2010, 9:52
http://www.microbialcellfactories.com/content/9/1/52

Page 8 of 11

Figure 8 Absorption spectra of selenium nanospheres isolated
from Bacillus cereus strain CM100B.

Figure 7 TEM images of localization of selenium nanospheres
(indicated by arrows). (A) Intracellular and surface localization of
selenium nanospheres in strain CM100B under aerobic condition.
(B) EDX spectrum of electron dense particles in the bacterial cells
indicating the presence of selenium.

allotropic form of Se0 produced by bacteria or precipitated into cell-free medium obtained from the stationary
phase culture implies that Se0 is tightly bound to some
substances produced by cells and is protected from
further transformation to black form [21].
Pioneering study in characterizing the nano-hollow
Se0 spheres was carried out by Oremland et al. [14] who
proposed that nanospheres are composed of interconnected three-dimensional nets of selenium in which
both the chain and ring structural aspects are maintained, factors that resulted in the spherical shape of the
nanospheres. Furthermore, the Se0 particles precipitated
by the three anaerobic bacteria (Sulfurospirillum barnesii, Bacillus selenitireducens and Selenihalanaerobacter
shriftii) exhibited large variations in UV-visible and
Raman spectral features, suggesting different species of
Se-reducing bacteria produce Se0 biominerals with different atomic structures. These structural variations
were attributed to the diversity of enzymes that catalyze
the reduction of selenium oxyanions. However, in
another study under aerobic conditions, Bacillus sp. was
reported to produce nano-structures showing hexagonal

facet development and platy nanostructures. Se nanorods were also observed forming rosettes from Se nanospheres associated with the bacterial biomass [15].
Selenium biotransformation in the culture medium by
Enterobacter cloacae cells resulted in formation of elemental Se0 of size < 0.1 μm in diameter either free in
the solution or protruding from the outer surface of the
cells [24]. Kessi et al. [21] suggested that the presence of
selenium particles on surface and in solution is an indication of vesicular mechanism to expel the bio-transformed selenium. Switzer-Blum et al. [25] examined the
formation of small spheres of Se0 on the cell surface of
a gram-positive rod, Bacillus selenireducens strain
MLS10, after respiratory growth on selenite. Reports of
such formations are noted from Stenotrophomonas maltophilia [19], Enterobacter cloacae [24] and Wollinella
succinogenes [26].
Proposed mechanism of selenite (SeO32-) detoxification
and formation of selenium (Se0) nanospheres

The detoxification mechanism of selenite (SeO32-) reduction in aerobic condition by microorganisms is not yet
fully elucidated. More information is however available on
the dissimilatory reduction pathways of selenite/selenate
in anoxic environments. Microbial transformations of
selenium oxyions (selenite/selenate) to insoluble forms
such as elemental Se0 may not be the only end product in
transformation process as assimilation of organic forms
such as selenoamino acids and reduction and methylation
of selenium oxyions which yields volatile products, primarily dimethyl selenide has also been observed in some

Dhanjal and Cameotra Microbial Cell Factories 2010, 9:52
http://www.microbialcellfactories.com/content/9/1/52

Figure 9 (A) Transmission electron micrograph of Se
nanospheres isolated from the culture broth. (B) Zeta potential
measurement of the selenium nanoparticles.

bacterial species [27,28]. Other organometallic forms of
selenium like dimethylselenide and dimethyldiselenide are
produced by Rhodospirillum rubrum and Rhodocyclus
tenuis while growing phototrophically in the presence of
selenate [29]. Pseudomonas fluorescens K27- a gram negative denitrifying facultative anaerobe isolated from the
Kesterson Reservior, California has been reported to
detoxify metalloids: Se, Te, Sb which are reduced to the
elemental form and further to some extent to -2 oxidation
state along with biomethylation. The presence of volatile
compounds of Se: dimethyl selenide (DMSe, CH3SeCH3),
dimethyl diselenide (DMDSe, CH 3 SeSeCH3), dimethyl
selenenyl sulfide (DMSeS, CH 3 SeSCH 3 ) have been
reported in the headspace of the cultures amended with
soluble selenium salts [30].
Majority of metal transformations in anaerobic and
aerobic environments are the result of the direct

Page 9 of 11

enzymatic activity of bacteria [31]. The bacterial reduction of selenate (SeO42-) to selenite (SeO32-) is known to
occur through dissimilatory pathways [12,24,32], the
reduction of selenite (SeO32-) to Se0, which is a common
feature of many diverse microorganisms, is also not well
understood. In the present study selenite reduction
activity was observed mainly in the membrane fraction
when it was incubated in the presence of selenite as a
substrate [Fig. 10B]. However, there was nominal activity
in the soluble fraction after prolonged period (12 h) of
incubation at 37°C [Fig. 10C]. This may be attributed to
some non-specific reduction of selenite or by the diffusible nature of the membrane associated reductase protein
(s) which resulted in selenite reducing activity in the
soluble fraction. Previously, it has been reported that
SeO 3 2- reduction may be catalysed by a periplasmic
nitrite reductase [13,33], hydrogenase I [34] or through
non-enzymatic reactions [26]. Lortie et al. [11] reported
that the aerobic reduction of selenate (SeO42-) and selenite (SeO32-) to Se0 by a Pseudomonas stutzeri isolate
functioned as a detoxification mechanism as there was
no evidence of dissimilatory Se reduction by this
microbe. Recent studies have indicated that NADPH/
NADH dependent selenate reductase enzymes bring
about the reduction of selenium (selenite/selenate) oxyions [35,36]. In the medium where tellurite or selenate
was absent no growth was observed but growth
occurred in the presence of tellurite or selenate indicating that these reductases are probably respiratory
enzymes. The reduction seems to be initiated by electron transfer from the NADPH/NADH by NADPH/
NADH-dependent reductase as electron carrier. In some
bacterial species selenite reduction may serve functions
of detoxification and maintenance of redox component
of the electron transport system by cytoplasmic reductase enzymes [10,37,38]. Evidence of selenite/selenate

Figure 10 Schematic representation of proposed mechanism of
biogenesis of Selenium (Se0) nanospheres. (A) Selenite reduction
at 0 h. (B) Formation of red elemental selenium in membrane
fraction after 3-4 h of incubation. (C) Prolonged incubation of 12 h
resulted in formation of red elemental selenium in soluble fraction
also.

Dhanjal and Cameotra Microbial Cell Factories 2010, 9:52
http://www.microbialcellfactories.com/content/9/1/52

reduction via membrane-associated reductase(s) followed by rapid expulsion of selenium particles was
reported by Losi and Frankenberger [10]. On the basis
of experimental observations and the available literature
the possible mechanism of formation of selenium nanospheres by the strain CM100B is proposed in Fig. 10.
The toxic selenite anions are probably being reduced by
membrane associated reductase(s). The transformation
process is carried out via reaction intermediates which
are still uncharacterized. The end product of the transformation process results in volatile methylated forms of
selenium and formation of selenium nanostructures
which are being expelled out in the culture broth by the
bacterial cells. However, the exact mechanism of the
reduction of selenite oxyions is yet to be deciphered
completely. Clearly, additional work is needed to elucidate the enzymology involved in the reduction processes
of selenium oxyions in aerobic conditions.

Conclusions
Several potential advantages revolve around the
microbe’s ability to grow in aerobic conditions which
include rapid ability to generate more number of bacterial cells within a short time period and less stringent
culture conditions. The aerobically produced nanoparticles by the microbe Bacillus cereus (strain CM100B)
have been characterized in this study. Biosynthesis of
amorphous Se0 nanospheres under aerobic conditions
offers advantages over chemical processes, in which
amorphous Se 0 is produced under environmentally
harmful conditions. The strain tolerates high levels of
selenium oxyions and generates extracellular nanospheres of selenium (~ 150-200 nm in diameter) which
can be easily separated from the bacterial biomass by a
simple centrifugation step without any post preparative
treatment. The amorphous selenium nanospheres
formed during the aerobic detoxtification of selenite by
the strain CM100B were observed to be highly stable
due to the presence of high negative charge. This
green route of biosynthesis of selenium nanospheres is
a simple, economically viable and an eco-friendly process resulting in nearly monodispersed highly stable
selenium nanospheres. Further studies would determine if the diverse properties of the biologically based
selenium nanospheres are comparable to chemically
synthesized selenium nanoparticles and whether biologically synthesized selenium nanoparticles have practical applications in the field of nanotechnology and
biotechnology.
Acknowledgements
We thank the Director, IMTECH Chandigarh for providing the facilities for
this work. The authors duly acknowledge the financial support from Council
for Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR), Government of India.

Page 10 of 11

Authors’ contributions
SD planned and performed the experiments. SSC supervised the work. SD
and SSC wrote the final version of the manuscript. The authors approved
the final version of the manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 15 May 2010 Accepted: 5 July 2010 Published: 5 July 2010
References
1. Zhang J, Zhang SY, Xu JJ, Chen HY: A New Method for the Synthesis of
Selenium Nanoparticles and the Application to Construction of H2O2
Biosensor. Chinese Chem Lett 2004, 15:1345-1348.
2. Zhang Y, Zhang J, Wang HY, Chen HY: Synthesis of selenium
nanoparticles in the presence of polysaccharides. Mater Lett 2004,
58:2590-2594.
3. Yost DA, Russel JC, Yang H: Non-metal colloidal particle immunoassay.
1990, U.S. Patent 4954452.
4. Ip C: Selenium and ER stress response: Implication and exploitation for
cancer therapy. Abstr Proc Int Conference on selenium in Biology and
Medicine, Univ. Wisconsin, Madison 2006, 63.
5. Gao X, Zhang J, Zhang L: Hollow sphere selenium nanoparticles. Their
in-vitro anti-hydroxyl radical effect. Adv Mater 2002, 14:290-293.
6. Wang H, Zhang J, Yu H: Elemental selenium at nano size possesses lower
toxicity without compromising the fundamental effect on
selenoenzymes: Comparison with selenomethionine in mice. Free Radic
Biol Med 2007, 42:1524-1533.
7. Peng D, Zhang J, Liu Q, Taylor EW: Size effect of elemental selenium
nanoparticles (Nano-Se) at supranutritional levels on selenium
accumulation and glutathione S-transferase activity. J Inorg Biochem
2007, 101:1457-63.
8. Shin Y, Blackwood JM, Bae I-T, Arey BW, Exarhos GJ: Synthesis and
stabilization of selenium nanoparticles on cellulose nanocrystal. Mater
Lett 2007, 61:4297-4300.
9. Thakkar KN, Mhatre SS, Parikh RY: Biological synthesis of metallic
nanoparticles. Nanomedicine: NBM 2009, 6:257-262.
10. Narasingarao P, Haggblom MM: Identification of anaerobic selenaterespiring bacteria from aquatic sediments. Appl Environ Microbiol 2007,
73:3519-3527.
11. Lortie L, Gould WD, Rajan S, Meeready RGL, Cheng KJ: Reduction of
elemental selenium by a Pseudomonas stutzeri isolate. Appl Environ
Microbiol 1992, 58:4042-4044.
12. Oremland RS, Blum JS, Culbertson CW, Visscher PT, Miller LG, Dowdle P,
Strohmaier FE: Isolation, Growth and Metabolism of an Obligately
Anaerobic, Selenate-Respiring Bacterium, Strain SES-3. Appl Environ
Microbiol 1994, 60:3011-3019.
13. Sabaty M, Avazeri C, Pignol D, Vermeglio A: Characterization of the
reduction of selenate and tellurite by nitrate reductases. Appl Environ
Microbiol 2001, 67:5122-5126.
14. Oremland RS, Herbel MJ, Blum JS, Langley S, Beveridge TJ, Ajayan PM,
Sutto T, Ellis AV, Curran S: Structural and spectral features of selenium
nanospheres produced by Se-respiring bacteria. Appl Environ Microbiol
2004, 70:52-60.
15. Tejo Prakash N, Sharma N, Prakash R, Raina KK, Fellowes J, Pearce CI,
Lloyd JR, Pattrick RAD: Aerobic microbial manufacture of nanoscale
selenium: exploiting nature’s bio-nanomineralization potential. Biotechnol
Lett 2009, 31:1857-1862.
16. Yadav V, Sharma N, Prakash R, Raina KK, Bharadwaj LM, Tejo Prakash N:
Generation of Selenium containing Nano-structures by soil bacterium,
Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Biotechnol 2008, 7:299-304.
17. Tamura K, Dudley J, Nei M, Kumar S: Molecular Evolutionary Genetics
Analysis (MEGA) software version 4.0. Mol Biol Evol 2007, 24:1596-1599.
18. Yudovich Ya E, Ketris MP: Selenium in coal: A review. Int J Coal Geol 2006,
67:112-126.
19. Dungan RS, Yates SR, Frankenberger WT: Transformations of selenate and
selenite by Stenotrophomonas maltophilia isolated from a seleniferous
agricultural drainage pond sediment. Environ Microbiol 2003, 5:287-295.
20. Pages D, Rose J, Conrod S, Cuine S, Carrier P, Heulin T, Achouak W: Heavy
Metal Tolerance in Stenotrophomonas maltophilia. Plos One 2008, e1539,
doi: 10.1371/journal. pone. 0001539.

Dhanjal and Cameotra Microbial Cell Factories 2010, 9:52
http://www.microbialcellfactories.com/content/9/1/52

Page 11 of 11

21. Kessi J, Ramuz M, Wehrli E, Spycher M, Bachofen R: Reduction of selenite
and detoxifixation of elemental selenium by the phototrophic bacterium
Rhodospirillum rubrum. Appl Environ Microbiol 1999, 65:4734-4740.
22. Roux M, Sarret G, Paintrand IP, Fontecave M, Coves J: Mobilization of
selenite by Ralstonia metallidurans CH34. Appl Environ Microbiol 2001,
67:769-773.
23. Lin ZH, Wang CRC: Evidence on the size-dependent absorption spectral
evolution of selenium nanoparticles. Mater Chem Phy 2005, 92:591-594.
24. Losi M, Frankenberger WT Jr: Reduction of selenium by Enterobacter
cloacae SLD1a-1: isolation and growth of bacteria and its expulsion of
selenium particles. Appl Environ Microbiol 1997, 63:3079-3084.
25. Switzer-Blum J, Bindi AB, Buzzelli J, Stolz JF, Oremland RS: Bacillus
arsenicoselenatis sp. nov. and Bacillus selenitireducens sp. nov.: two
haloalkaliphiles from Mono Lake California that respire oxyions of
selenium and arsenic. Arch Microbiol 1998, 171:19-30.
26. Tomei FA, Barton LL, Lemanski CL, Zocco TG: Reduction of selenate and
selenite to elemental selenium by Wolinella succinogenes. Can J
Microbiol 1992, 38:1328-1333.
27. Chasteen TG: Confusion between dimethyl selenenyl sulfide and
dimethyl selenone released by bacteria. Appl Organomet Chem 1993,
7:335-342.
28. Swearingen JW Jr, Fuentes DE, Araya MA, Plishker MF, Saavedra CP,
Chasteen TG, Va´squez CC: Expression of the ubiE Gene of Geobacillus
stearothermophilus V in Escherichia coli K-12 Mediates the Evolution of
Selenium Compounds into the Headspace of Selenite- and SelenateAmended Cultures. Appl Environ Microbiol 2006, 72:963-967.
29. Zehr JP, Oremland RS: Reduction of selenate to selenide by sulfate
respiring bacteria: experiments with cell suspensions and estuarine
sediments. Appl Environ Microbiol 1987, 53:1365-1369.
30. Ranjard L, Prigent-Combaret C, Nazaret S, Cournoyer B: Methylation of
Inorganic and Organic Selenium by the Bacterial Thiopurine
Methyltransferase. J Bacteriol 2002, 184:3146-3149.
31. Yurkov VV, Beatty JT: Aerobic anoxygenic phototrophic bacteria. Microbiol
Mol Biol Rev 1998, 62:695-724.
32. Macy JM: Biochemistry of selenium metabolism by Thauera selenatis gen.
nov. sp. nov. and uses of the organism for bioremediation of selenium
oxyanions in San Joaquin Valley drainage water. Selenium in the
environment. Marcel Dekker, Inc., New York N.YFrankenberger WT Jr,
Benson S 1994, 421-444.
33. DeMoll-Decker H, Macy JM: The periplasmic nitrite reductase of Thauera
selenatis may catalyze the reduction of selenite to elemental selenium.
Arch Microbiol 1993, 160:241-247.
34. Yanke LJ, Bryant RD, Laishley EJ: Hydrogenase (I) of Clostridrium
pasteurianum functions a novel selenite reductase. Anaerobe 1995,
1:61-67.
35. Etezad SM, Khajeh K, Soudi M, Ghazvini PTM, Dabirmanesh B: Evidence on
the presence of two distinct enzymes responsible for the reduction of
selenate and tellurite in Bacillus sp. STG-83. Enzyme Microb Tech 2009,
45:1-6.
36. Hunter WJ, Manter DK: Reduction of selenite to elemental red selenium
by Pseudomonas sp. strain CA5. Curr Microbiol 2009, 58:493-498.
37. Belzile N, Wu GJ, Chen YW, Appanna VD: Detoxification of selenite and
mercury by reduction and mutual protection in the assimilation of both
elements by Pseudomonas fluorescens. Sci Total Environ 2006, 367:704-714.
38. Yamada A, Miyashita M, Inoue K, Matsunaga T: Extracellular reduction of
selenite by a novel marine photosynthetic bacterium. Appl Microbiol
Biotechnol 1997, 48:367-372.
doi:10.1186/1475-2859-9-52
Cite this article as: Dhanjal and Cameotra: Aerobic biogenesis of
selenium nanospheres by Bacillus cereus isolated from coalmine soil.
Microbial Cell Factories 2010 9:52.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
