<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Phylostratigraphic tracking of cancer genes suggests a link to the emergence of multicellularity in metazoa</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Biology 2010, 8:66. doi: 10.1186/1741-7007-8-66"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Tomislav Domazet-Lo_o, Diethard Tautz"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 8.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 7.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Domazet-Lošo and Tautz BMC Biology 2010, 8:66
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/66

Open Access

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Phylostratigraphic tracking of cancer genes
suggests a link to the emergence of multicellularity
in metazoa
Research article

Tomislav Domazet-Lošo1,2 and Diethard Tautz*1

Abstract
Background: Phylostratigraphy is a method used to correlate the evolutionary origin of founder genes (that is,
functional founder protein domains) of gene families with particular macroevolutionary transitions. It is based on a
model of genome evolution that suggests that the origin of complex phenotypic innovations will be accompanied by
the emergence of such founder genes, the descendants of which can still be traced in extant organisms. The origin of
multicellularity can be considered to be a macroevolutionary transition, for which new gene functions would have
been required. Cancer should be tightly connected to multicellular life since it can be viewed as a malfunction of
interaction between cells in a multicellular organism. A phylostratigraphic tracking of the origin of cancer genes
should, therefore, also provide insights into the origin of multicellularity.
Results: We find two strong peaks of the emergence of cancer related protein domains, one at the time of the origin of
the first cell and the other around the time of the evolution of the multicellular metazoan organisms. These peaks
correlate with two major classes of cancer genes, the 'caretakers', which are involved in general functions that support
genome stability and the 'gatekeepers', which are involved in cellular signalling and growth processes. Interestingly,
this phylogenetic succession mirrors the ontogenetic succession of tumour progression, where mutations in caretakers
are thought to precede mutations in gatekeepers.
Conclusions: A link between multicellularity and formation of cancer has often been predicted. However, this has not
so far been explicitly tested. Although we find that a significant number of protein domains involved in cancer predate
the origin of multicellularity, the second peak of cancer protein domain emergence is, indeed, connected to a
phylogenetic level where multicellular animals have emerged. The fact that we can find a strong and consistent signal
for this second peak in the phylostratigraphic map implies that a complex multi-level selection process has driven the
transition to multicellularity.
Background
Genomic phylostratigraphy is an analysis method based
on a model of punctuated evolution of protein families,
which assumes that protein families are initiated by
founder genes in a scattered manner throughout evolutionary time [1,2]. Founder genes in this sense are genes
that represent evolutionary novelties in protein sequence
space [1,3,4] - that is, are not simply duplications of existing genes or genes with re-shuffled functional domains.
Rather, they represent new functional proteins or protein
* Correspondence: tautz@evolbio.mpg.de
1

Max-Planck Institut für Evolutionsbiologie, August-Thienemannstrasse
2, 24306 Plön, Germany
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

domains that were previously not present in the genome,
at least not in the new functional form. Once such a new
functional domain has emerged, it would be expected
that it would retain its primary protein sequence to an
extent where it would still be traceable by sequence similarity searches [3].
Major evolutionary innovations are expected to be
accompanied and, at least partly, caused by the emergence of founder genes. Indeed, we were, for example,
able to track the macroevolutionary origin of the nervous
system and the germ layers based on expression data and
the phylogenetic classification of Drosophila genes [1].
Evidently, the genetic architecture of any complex phenotype will also include co-opted genes that have arisen

© 2010 Domazet-Lošo and Tautz; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative

BioMed Central Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Domazet-Lošo and Tautz BMC Biology 2010, 8:66
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/66

before or after the respective phenotypic innovation
occurred. However, they are expected to be co-opted at
lower rates and different times and, thus, contribute to
the phylostratigraphic signal to a lesser extent. This
allows the origin of a phenotypic innovation to be discerned on the phylostratigraphic maps [1] (see Methods
for a more detailed description of the procedure).
Multicellularity is a complex phenotype and considered
to be one of the major evolutionary transitions [5]. It
seems that multicellularity evolved independently dozens
of times in different lineages [5,6], whereby the multicellular lineage leading to animals (metazoa) is thought to
have emerged from a unicellular Choanoflagellate-like
ancestor [7].
Cancer is thought to be a probabilistic event determined by a series of mutations occurring in cancer-associated genes and it seems that a few thousand genes could
contribute to tumour development [8,9]. However, mechanistically these genes do not all contribute in the same
way to cancer progression. On a broad scale, two major
groups were proposed: caretakers and gatekeepers
[10,11]. Mutations in caretakers promote tumour progression in an indirect way by increasing mutation rates
and genome instability, which increases the chances that
mutations will hit some genes within the gatekeepers.
Mutations in gatekeepers promote tumour progression
directly by changing cell differentiation, growth and
death rates. Gatekeepers can be further classified into
oncogenes and tumour suppressor genes. It is often
assumed that cancer in animals is a legacy of the evolution of a multicellular life style [12] but it is fairly unexplored whether tumours could also be found in early
branching metazoans [13,14]. Moreover, a possible direct
link between the macroevolutionary origin of multicellularity and cancer is not necessarily predicted, since the
genes involved in causing cancer could have emerged
independently at any time during evolution.
We have tested here whether the emergence of founder
genes related to cancer has a correspondence to the evolutionary origin of multicellularity. We find a surprisingly
clear signal of gene emergence that corresponds well with
the major classification of cancer genes. This gives both
credence to the classification and the notion that cancer
is an ancient phenomenon with a direct correspondence
to basic cell function and the interaction of cells.

Results
Phylostratigraphy of cancer genes

Based on our previously described phylostratigraphic
procedure [1,2], we generated a database of genome
sequences divided into 19 phylostrata corresponding to
the evolutionary relationships of the major taxa supported by phylogenomic analyses (Figure 1) [15-19]. This
was then used to trace the evolutionary origin of cancer

Page 2 of 10

genes identified in humans. If the origin of human cancer
genes carries a phylostratigraphic signal related to the
macroevoutionary origin of cancer, this should be apparent on the phylostratigraphic map as a distinct and significant overrepresentation of such genes in a particular
evolutionary period [1,2].
A substantial number of genes associated with cancer
have been reported in public databases and these databases vary in scope, level of curation and inherent biases
[20-23]. Still, surprisingly similar phylostratigraphic patterns were obtained for all of them. In order to illustrate
this robustness, we show the phylostratigraphic profiles
derived from four compilations of cancer associated
genes that represent a spectrum of stringency levels for
inclusion of genes (Figure 2). The first dataset contains
genes found to be mutated in human tumours (Sanger
Cosmic) and the second one includes human genes with
cancer related annotation in the National Center of Biotechnology Information databases (Entrez section in
CancerGenes). The third most inclusive dataset includes
the previous two datasets plus genes involved in cancer
biochemical pathways and cancer associated biochemical
functions (CancerGenes). The fourth one represents an
intensively curated dataset that also includes system
properties of cancer genes (Network of Cancer Genes).
The phylostratigraphic profiles of all four are highly
congruent and show two strong over-representation
peaks - one at the origin of the first cells (phylostratum 1
= ps1) and the other at the origin of the metazoa (ps5). A
significant over-representation is also seen at the level of
the emergence of eukaryota (ps2) but it is not as strong as
that at ps1. No further over-representation occurs after
ps5. On the contrary, the origination of founder genes
related to cancer is significantly lowered at the emergence
of the eumetazoa and bilateria (ps 6 and 7) and at all levels beyond the emergence of vertebrates (ps11 onwards)
(Figure 2).
Origin of metazoa and cancer

The above result suggests that the two fundamental
events for the emergence of cancer-related genes were the
origin of the first cell and the origin of the stable form of
multicellularity in metazoans. Although multiple transitions to multicellularity may have occurred before the
emergence of the metazoa [fungi (ps3) and Chanoflagellata (ps4)], it seems likely that these were independent
and reversible events [5-7]. The metazoan form of multicellularity, on the other hand, has apparently been stable
throughout evolution and, thus, may have been a key
innovation, including many adaptive changes that
required the recruitment of new genes [5,6]. This would
explain the strong peak of cancer gene emergence seen at
ps5.

Domazet-Lošo and Tautz BMC Biology 2010, 8:66
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/66

Page 3 of 10

Figure 1 Phylogeny used in the search for the evolutionary origin of human genes. Taxa represented in the databases with complete genomes
or a substantial amount of TRACE and expressed sequence tag data are in bold. Taxa in italics are represented in the databases only with small numbers of highly conserved genes: their exclusion from the analysis does not influence the results. The phylogeny is based on the results of the most
recent phylogenomic analyses [15-19].

An unexpected peak with respect to cancer genes is the
one in ps1, the origin of the first cells. Genes that have
emerged at this time would not usually be considered to
have a role in regulating multicellularity. However, this
peak could make sense in the light of the classification of
cancer genes into caretakers and gatekeepers [10,11].
Caretakers could have evolved earlier, since their genome
stability functions are of general importance for a cell,
probably independent whether or not it is part of a multicellular organism. Gatekeepers, on the other hand, fulfil
functions that are related to influencing cooperation
among cells (oncogenes) or to prevent the expansion of
cheater cells (tumour suppressor genes). One could predict that both of these gatekeeper functions would be
necessary for stable multicellularity [24-26] and should,
therefore, have predominantly arisen at the time of emergence of metazoa.
In order to test these predictions, we analysed the different categories of cancer genes separately. We find that
the origin of gatekeeper functionality does, indeed, correspond to the origin of metazoa (ps5), with no other significant peak (Figure 3). The further subdivision of this class
into oncogenes and tumour-suppressor genes confirms
this picture (Figure 3). Both display a peak in their emergence only at ps5, in line with the notion that they are
both required together. Caretaker functionality, on the
other hand, is predominantly associated with the emergence of the first cellular organisms (ps1) with no further
significant peak (Figure 3). This suggests that the cellular
machinery that secures the stability of the genome in the
context of cancer development was, indeed, in place a

long time before multicellularity in animals and gatekeeper functionality evolved.

Discussion
The systematic compilation of genes involved in cancer
has used very different criteria for inclusion of genes,
which are reflected in an almost fivefold difference in
gene numbers between the two most extreme sets. In
spite of these differences, we note that all currently available systematic lists provide very congruent patterns in
the phylostratigraphic analysis. This suggests that there is
an underlying robust pattern, both in our analysis, as well
as in the compilations. This was also found in other
recent studies to uncover common properties of cancer
genes [27,28]. Still, there are several inherent assumptions in the phylostratigraphic approach that require consideration.
Technical considerations

One assumption concerns the validity of the phylogeny.
For the results we presented here, the early cladogenesis
around the Metazoa is particularly critical. In our analysis
we took the classical view, where Porifera are a basal
metazoan clade, whereas Cnidaria and Bilateria are
branching off later. However, some recent studies found a
limited support for an alternative hypothesis, namely that
Porifera together with Cnidaria are the earliest branching
clade, while Bilateria is a sister group to these diploblastic
animals [29,30]. Although general phylogenomic analyses
do not support this view [15,16,19], we tested also this
alternative hypothesis. We find that our phylostrati-

Domazet-Lošo and Tautz BMC Biology 2010, 8:66
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/66

Page 4 of 10

Figure 2 Statistical analysis of the cancer datasets on the phylostratigraphic map. Phylostratigraphic representation of log-odds statistics of human cancer genes, based on four different compilations (see inset on top right). Arrows designate the strongest significant over-representations. Statistical significance of the deviations were tested by a two-tailed hypergeometric test corrected for multiple comparison by a false discovery rate at
0.05 level (* P < 0.05; ** P < 0.01; *** P < 0.001). Significant over-representations and under-representations are shaded in red and blue, respectively.

Domazet-Lošo and Tautz BMC Biology 2010, 8:66
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/66

Page 5 of 10

Figure 3 Statistical analysis of caretakers and gatekeepers on the phylostratigraphic map. Phylostratigraphic representation of log-odds statistics of human caretaker and gatekeeper cancer genes following the annotations in Entrez are shown. Arrows designate the strongest significant
over-representation. Squares denote the caretaker dataset (green line, N = 224) and circles denote the gatekeeper dataset (red line, N = 900). The gatekeeper dataset is further subdivided into tumour suppressor genes (solid black line, N = 601) and oncogenes (dashed line, N = 380). Statistical significances of the deviations were tested as described in the legend of Figure 2.

Domazet-Lošo and Tautz BMC Biology 2010, 8:66
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/66

graphic pattern is not much affected by this different
topology: gatekeeper genes are still significantly over-represented at ps5 and not in other phylostrata (data not
shown).
Since a comprehensive cancer gene catalogue is currently only available for humans, our phylogeny is necessarily focused towards humans and presented in a way
that tries to depict the major transitions from unicellularity to humans. Once similar comprehensive cancer gene
datasets become available for other species - for example,
a plant species - one would evidently build a different
phylogeny to capture the major transitions towards this
species. Another constraint is the availability of fully
sequenced genomes. As long as a phylostratum is covered
by a single genome only, there is always the chance that
this particular species has lost a gene, which would otherwise be present in its lineage. The classification of the
respective gene would therefore fall into the next phylostratum and it would seem to be younger than it is. In
order to tackle this problem, at least partly, we have also
included expressed sequence tag (EST) databases of additional species from a given phlyostratum, if genomic coverage was low.
Another major concern is whether the BLASTP analysis does, indeed, capture the most remote homologues.
Although we used a rather permissive cut-off, there are
more refined iterative programmes, such as PSI-BLAST,
which use profile information from aligned sequences to
find remote homologues. However, the increased sensitivity results at the same time in a higher false positive
rate [31]. However, there is also a conceptual reason why
we prefer BLASTP. We have previously argued that novel
gene functions should be associated with novel lineagespecific processes and that the proteins involved in them
should have gone through a rapid phase of evolutionary
optimization, even if they were initially created by a
duplication [1,3]. Algorithms that are designed to detect
distant relationship between proteins, like PSI-BLAST,
would be the choice if one would be interested in the
ancestral gene duplication that preceded the formation of
a founder domain. However, we are interested in the
event of founder domain formation per se, which we
expect to be characterized by a shift in sequence space,
where a substantial proportion of amino acid sites has
changed. Once a founder domain has emerged through a
duplication event and fast divergence [3] or through de
novo formation [32-34] one would expect normal clocklike divergence, with a constraint on the functional
domain and this is indeed the evolutionary pattern that is
readily detected by BLASTP searches [35]. However,
there is also an inherent weakness of our approach. If a
novel gene function is created by the recombination of
different functional domains, we would place the origin
of this gene into the phylostratum where the domains

Page 6 of 10

have originated. Thus, these genes would not be correctly
placed in the context of the biological process within
which they have emerged. However, this effect, as well
the genomic under-representation effect discussed above,
is not expected to create a particular bias towards certain
phylostrata and would thus only contribute noise to the
analysis.
A further source of uncertainty is the correct classification of genes into a given process. In our case, we have to
expect that there is an overlap within the classification of
gatekeepers and caretakers. For example, for one of the
best studied cancer genes, p53, it is becoming clear that it
has a multitude of functions [36], which makes a simple
classification into one of the above categories difficult. It
is to be expected that this will also be the case for other
genes, once their full functional spectrum is understood.
However, the over-representation analysis at the functional level that we applied here allows multiple annotations for a single gene and, therefore, inherently
overcomes this type of problems.
Given that all these factors should blur our analysis, it is
even more surprising that we still find significant associations between gene emergence and biological processes,
such as evolution of multicellularity. This suggests that
there is indeed a strong underlying signal and that the
inevitable noise in the analysis does not override it.
Emergence of multicellularity

From the theoretical point of view, transition to multicellularity represents an increase in hierarchical complexity
of an organism, where cells become cooperatively organized in collectives [24-26]. This transition inherently
faces cross level conflicts stemming from dependencies
between individual cells and collective fitness. At final
stages of the transition process, where collectives are fully
emerged entities with their own life cycles, single cell and
collective fitness are largely decoupled. However, to reach
this final stage of transition to multicellularity both cooperation promoting and conflict reducing adaptations are
needed [24-26]. In this context, it has been speculated
that the emergence of multicellular life should also have
brought about genes that control cheater cells [24]. The
function of gatekeepers could be directly associated with
the control of cheater cells and it is, therefore, of special
interest that we can indeed trace the peak of their appearance to the emergence of metazoan life. In fact, although
it seems intuitively clear that cancer genes and multicellularity should somehow be connected, this intuition
makes no specific prediction at which time point during
the evolution of multicellular lineages one would have
expected cancer genes to emerge. Our analysis shows that
there is indeed only a subset of cancer genes that are
directly connected to the emergence of multicellularity.
However, the functional categories associated with this

Domazet-Lošo and Tautz BMC Biology 2010, 8:66
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/66

subset imply that there must have been a multi-level
selection process [24-26] that was active at the basis of
the metazoan lineages, involving the evolution of a multitude of new genetic processes and gene functions connected to the interactions between the cells.
Macroevolutionary considerations

It has been noted that there is a developmental timeline
of mutations in caretaker and gatekeeper pathways during tumour progression [37-39]. Caretaker mutations
tend to precede gatekeeper mutations and may in fact
facilitate these, although this notion has also been disputed [38]. In the context of the macroevolutionary origin of these functionalities, an intriguing parallel between
this assumed cellular progression and the phylogeny of
these processes is apparent (Figure 4), supporting the
notion that there is indeed a successive role for these
groups of genes in carcinogenesis.
We have previously performed a similar phylostratigraphic study on the emergence of genes involved in
genetic diseases [2], with the major finding being that
they have arisen very early in evolution, with peaks in ps1
and ps 4/5. Almost no new disease associated genes
emerged after the evolution of mammals (ps15). This is a
similar finding to that reported here, although the overlap
between the disease gene list and the cancer gene lists is
only 10%-15%. Hence, cancer genes and disease genes
constitute different classes of genes but have similar macroevolutionary histories.
It has been proposed that cancer can be seen as an evolutionary and ecological process within an individual [40]
and typical methods of evolutionary analysis have been

Figure 4 Colinearity between evolutionary age of cancer genes
and their role in tumour progression. Parallels between the macroevolutionary origin of the global pathways leading to neoplasia and
the developmental timing of mutations in these pathways are shown.
The upper part of the figure is adapted from reference [11].

Page 7 of 10

applied in order to understand its progression [12,41,42].
Our analysis provides a link to the evolution of the gene
functions that were required to assemble the first metazoan organism and, thus, adds a macroevolutionary perspective for the emergence of evolutionary dynamic
processes controlling complex life forms.

Conclusions
Phylostratigraphic analysis is a potentially powerful tool
to better understand the genetic basis of evolutionary
transitions, although it focuses only on one aspect of
novel gene emergence, namely the appearance of founder
protein domains. It will further increase its utility when
more fully sequenced genomes are available throughout
the tree of life. However, the above described pattern for
the emergence of founder genes involved in cancer is
already now very robust and confirms the ancient origin
of gene functions involved in cancer.
Methods
The phylostratigraphic procedure

Phylostratigraphic analysis was basically done according
to the procedures described in our previous studies [1,2].
In short, the procedure and its theoretical underpinnings
are as follows. The procedure is essentially done in two
steps. The first step involves the creation of a consensus
phylogeny, where each node is represented by one or
more fully sequenced genomes (supplemented with EST
data, where necessary). The origin of all genes from an
extant genome which is the focus of the analysis (in our
case humans) are then mapped to a particular node in
this phylogeny (called phylostratum), based on BLASTP
analysis. This creates a null distribution of founder protein domain emergence. In the second step, one recovers
a distribution of genes that are connected to a certain
phenotype (in our case cancer) and uses a statistical test
to assess for every phylostratum the way in which this
distribution deviates from the null distribution.
Although this seems like a straight forward procedure,
it requires various considerations and assumptions to be
workable, in particular with respect to the question of
how to assign the true evolutionary origin of a given gene.
In principle, the mapping of genes onto the phylogeny
could be performed in different ways depending on
which criteria of evolutionary relatedness are used to
define homology groups. For example, very distantly
related proteins could be assigned to a protein family
based on the similarity of their structural properties even
if their primary sequences diverged below similarity
detection level. On the other side of the spectrum of possibilities would be the quest to identify truly orthologous
proteins with matching domain architectures. The criteria for grouping will largely depend on the evolutionary
question one is interested in. In the phylostratigraphic

Domazet-Lošo and Tautz BMC Biology 2010, 8:66
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/66

approach, where the statistical signature of macroevolutionary adaptations is the focus, we are applying a procedure somewhere in between these extremes. We group
proteins according to any detectable homology between
sequences - that is, according to the uniqueness of their
sequence in the protein sequence space. This threshold is
in protein science sometimes called the 'twilight zone'' of
sequence similarity [43,44]. It implies, for example, that
for a multi-domain protein its origin is mapped to the age
of its oldest domain and we are interested in the emergence of this very first function.
Our focus on such founder protein domains is a central
tenet of the model of punctuated evolution of protein
families [1]. The underpinning idea of this model is that
new genes with completely novel sequences are continuously added in a genome throughout evolutionary time
[45,46]. This could occur due to gene duplication with a
subsequent fast divergence of one of the duplicated copies in the context of a new adaptation [3,4], or even due to
the conversion of intergenic sequences into functional
ones [32-34]. Once such a new gene with a novel
sequence (or domain) is stably incorporated into a functional circuit it is considered to be a founder gene and can
eventually contribute to the formation of paralogs or
rearrangements with other genes. As a founder acts as a
seed for the later proliferation of similar descendant
genes, any future protein that contains it, or part of it,
belongs to its family. Thus, in the phylostratigraphic
approach, we intentionally do not distinguish between
orthologs and paralogs, but are specifically interested in
the emergence of the founder gene itself, since it is to be
expected that its appearance is tightly associated with the
appearance of an evolutionary innovation. An additional
support for this view comes from the recent work that
suggests that there is generally no clear cut between paralogs and orthologs in their divergence patterns and functional change [47].
Phylostratigraphic analysis

In order to be on the more conservative side of the
human genome annotation errors, we retrieved from
public databases the same compilation of human protein
sequences (20,259 unique proteins) that were used in the
recent cancer genome sequencing projects [48]. The
BLASTP algorithm (0.001 E-value cut-off ) was used to
compare human proteins against the NCBI NR database
(see [1,2] for the choice of BLASTP and the cut-off value).
This database represents the most exhaustive set of
known proteins across all organisms and is, therefore, the
most suitable for phylostratigraphic analysis. Before the
sequence similarity search was done, the NR database
was cleaned up with respect to sequences with uncertain
taxonomic status (for example, those annotated as
'incerteae sedis', 'environmental samples' or 'unclassified')

Page 8 of 10

or where the taxonomy ID is not included in the cellular
organisms section of the NCBI taxonomy database. Additionally, we removed from the database sequences of
metazoan taxa with currently unreliable phylogenetic
position (Mesozoa, Myxozoa, Chaetognatha and Placozoa). After this clean up procedure we filled up the NR
database with complete genomes which were absent in
the database but were otherwise publically available [2].
The curated NR database finally contained 4,749,457 protein sequences.
In addition, the TBLASTN searches (10-15 E-value cutoff ) were done against substantial trace and EST archives
of Porifera, Cyclostomata and Chondrichtyes (phylostrata
6 and 11, Figure 1) as complete annotated genomes are
still lacking for these internodes. The higher threshold for
the trace and EST archives was necessary because of the
different data structure.
Using the obtained BLAST output and the MS SQL
database management system in a series of queries we
mapped human genes according to the evolutionary origin of their founder genes on the currently best supported phylogeny (Figure 1) [15-19]. Taken together, our
choice of internodes depended on the availability of complete annotated genomes, reliability of phylogenetic relationships and on the importance of evolutionary
transitions.
Retrieval of cancer associated genes

We retrieved cancer associated genes from several public
resources [20-23]. The full list of genes and datasets used
in the analysis is listed in Additional File 1: Table S1. We
performed a series of overrepresentation analyses for various combinations of these datasets, in a way that the frequency of cancer associated genes in every phylostratum
was compared to the frequency of cancer associated
genes in the complete genome (expected frequency) [1,2].
Obtained deviations are shown by calculating log-odds
ratios and their significance were tested by two-tailed
hypergeometric tests [49] corrected for multiple comparisons via a false discovery rate at the 0.05 level [50]. The
caretaker and gatekeeper classifications were taken from
the Entrez section in the CancerGenes database [20] as
this was currently the only large scale annotated dataset
that allowed this type of grouping in a straightforward
way. Note that the distinction between caretakers and
gatekeepers is not definitive; some genes were listed in
both of these categories as they act as both caretakers and
gatekeepers. However, all of this information is taken into
account and does not pose a problem for the statistical
treatment in the overrepresentation analysis. For the
analysis of caretakers and gatekeepers we used a more
stringent subset of Entrez CancerGenes by taking into
account only those that have definitive evidence that they
are mutated in human tumours (Sanger Cosmic list [22]).

Domazet-Lošo and Tautz BMC Biology 2010, 8:66
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/66

However, similar results are also obtained when the other
databases were used (data not shown).

Additional material
Additional file 1 Table S1. The file lists all the human genes that were
considered in this analysis and associates them with their respective phylostratum. It further contains the lists of genes from all four databases used
and the assignments to categories.
Abbreviations
EST: expressed sequence tag; NCBI: National Center for Biotechnology Information.
Authors' contributions
TDL initiated the study and carried out all the bioinformatic analysis. DT contributed to the data interpretation and further development of the study. TDL
and DT wrote the manuscript.
Acknowledgements
TDL was supported by a Research Fund of Republic of Croatia (Grant 0980982913-2832 to Ð Ugarkovic), Zaklada Adris, Unity through knowledge Fund
(Grant No. 49), as well as a postdoctoral fellowship of the MPG. Computational
resources were provided by CSTMB and RBI Zagreb. We thank Robert Bakarić,
Vedran Dunjko and Martin Sebastian Šestak for their technical support and
John F Baines and Alexander Pozhitkov for their discussion and comments on
the manuscript.
Author Details
1Max-Planck Institut für Evolutionsbiologie, August-Thienemannstrasse 2,
24306 Plön, Germany and 2Laboratory of Evolutionary Genetics, Division of
Molecular Biology, Ru er Bošković Institute, Bijenička cesta 54, PP 180, 10002
Zagreb, Croatia
Received: 11 December 2009 Accepted: 21 May 2010
Published: 21 May 2010
© 2010 Domazet-Lošo and Tautz; licensee BioMed Centralof the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
This is an Open Access from: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/66
BMC article is2010, 8:66article distributed under the terms Ltd.
Biology available

References
1. Domazet-Lošo T, Brajković J, Tautz D: A phylostratigraphy approach to
uncover the genomic history of major adaptations in metazoan
lineages. Trends Genet 2007, 23:533-539.
2. Domazet-Lošo T, Tautz D: An ancient evolutionary origin of genes
associated with human genetic diseases. Mol Biol Evol 2008,
25:2699-2707.
3. Domazet-Lošo T, Tautz D: An evolutionary analysis of orphan genes in
Drosophila. Genome Res 2003, 13:2213-2219.
4. Khalturin K, Hemmrich G, Fraune S, Augustin R, Bosch TC: More than just
orphans: are taxonomically-restricted genes important in evolution?
Trends Genet 2009, 25:404-413.
5. Grosberg RK, Strathmann RR: The evolution of multicellularity: a minor
major transition. Annu Rev Ecol Syst 2007, 38:621-654.
6. Rokas A: The origins of multicellularity and the early history of the
genetic toolkit for animal development. Annu Rev Genet 2008,
42:235-51.
7. King N, Westbrook MJ, Young SL, Kuo A, Abedin M, Chapman J, Fairclough
S, Hellsten U, Isogai Y, Letunic I, et al.: The genome of the
choanoflagellate Monosiga brevicollis and the origin of metazoans.
Nature 2008, 451:783-788.
8. Stratton MR, Campbell PJ, Futreal PA: The cancer genome. Nature 2009,
458:719-724.
9. Touw IP, Erkeland SJ: Retroviral insertion mutagenesis in mice as a
comparative oncogenomics tool to identify disease genes in human
leukemia. Mol Ther 2009, 15:13-9.
10. Kinzler KW, Vogelstein B: Gatekeepers and caretakers. Nature 1997,
386:761-763.
11. Michor F, Iwasa Y, Nowak MA: Dynamics of cancer progression. Nat Rev
Cancer 2004, 3:197-205.
12. Weinberg RA: The Biology of Cancer. Oxford: Garland Science; 2008.

Page 9 of 10

13. Leroi AM, Koufopanou V, Burt A: Cancer Selection. Nat Rev Cancer 2003,
3:226-231.
14. Squires DF: Neoplasia in a coral. Science 1965, 148:503-505.
15. Philippe H, Derelle R, Lopez P, Pick K, Borchiellini C, Boury-Esnault N,
Vacelet J, Renard E, Houliston E, Quéinnec E, et al.: Phylogenomics revives
traditional views on deep animal relationships. Curr Biol 2009,
19:706-712.
16. Telford MJ: Animal evolution: once upon a time. Curr Biol 2009,
19:R339-R341.
17. Delsuc F, Brinkmann H, Chourrout D, Philippe H: Tunicates and not
cephalochordates are the closest living relatives of vertebrates. Nature
2006, 439:965-968.
18. Delsuc F, Tsagkogeorga G, Lartillot N, Philippe H: Additional molecular
support for the new chordate phylogeny. Genesis 2008, 46:592-604.
19. Sperling EA, Peterson KJ, Pisani D: Phylogenetic-signal dissection of
nuclear housekeeping genes supports the paraphyly of sponges and
the monophyly of Eumetazoa. Mol Biol Evol 2009, 26:2261-2274.
20. Higgins ME, Claremont M, Major JE, Sander C, Lash AE: CancerGenes: a
gene selection resource for cancer genome projects. Nucleic Acids Res
2007:D721-726.
21. Futreal PA, Coin L, Marshall M, Down T, Hubbard T, Wooster R, Rahman N,
Stratton MR: A census of human cancer genes. Nat Rev Cancer 2004,
4:177-183.
22. Bamford S, Dawson E, Forbes S, Clements J, Pettett R, Dogan A, Flanagan
A, Teague J, Futreal PA, Stratton MR, Wooster R: The COSMIC (Catalogue
of Somatic Mutations in Cancer) database and website. Br J Cancer
2004, 91:355-358.
23. Syed AS, D'Antonio M, Ciccarelli FD: Network of Cancer Genes: a web
resource to analyze duplicability, orthology and network properties of
cancer genes. Nucleic Acids Research 2009:D670-5.
24. Rainey PB: Unity from conflict. Nature 2007, 446:616.
25. Herron MD, Michod RE: Evolution of complexity in the volvocine algae:
transitions in individuality through Darwin's eye. Evolution 2008,
62:436-451.
26. Okasha S: Evolution and the Levels of Selection. Oxford: Oxford
University Press; 2007.
27. Jonsson PF, Bates PA: Global topological features of cancer proteins in
the human interactome. Bioinformatics 2006, 22:2291-2297.
28. Rambaldi D, Giorgi FM, Capuani F, Ciliberto A, Ciccarelli FD: Low
duplicability and network fragility of cancer genes. Trends Genet 2008,
24:427-430.
29. Dunn CW, Hejnol A, Matus DQ, Pang K, Browne WE, Smith SA, Seaver E,
Rouse GW, Obst M, Edgecombe GD, et al.: Broad phylogenomic
sampling improves resolution of the animal tree of life. Nature 2008,
452:745-749.
30. Schierwater B, Eitel M, Jakob W, Osigus HJ, Hadrys H, Dellaporta SL,
Kolokotronis SO, Desalle R: Concatenated analysis sheds light on early
metazoan evolution and fuels a modern 'urmetazoon' hypothesis.
PLoS Biol 2009, 7:e20.
31. Schäffer AA, Aravind L, Madden TL, Shavirin S, Spouge JL, Wolf YI, Koonin
EV, Altschul SF: Improving the accuracy of PSI-BLAST protein database
searches with composition-based statistics and other refinements.
Nucleic Acids Res 2001, 29:2994-3005.
32. Toll-Riera M, Bosch N, Bellora N, Castelo R, Armengol L, Estivill X, Albà MM:
Origin of primate orphan genes: a comparative genomics approach.
Mol Biol Evol 2009, 26:603-612.
33. Heinen T, Staubach F, Häming D, Tautz D: Emergence of a new gene
from an intergenic region. Curr Biol 19:1527-1531.
34. Knowles DG, McLysaght A: Recent de novo origin of human proteincoding genes. Genome Res 2009, 19:1752-1759.
35. Albà MM, Castresana J: On homology searches by protein Blast and the
characterization of the age of genes. BMC Evol Biol 2007, 7:53.
36. Jänicke RU, Sohn D, Schulze-Osthoff K: The dark side of a tumor
suppressor: anti-apoptotic p53. Cell Death Differ 2008, 15:959-76.
37. Rajagopalan H, Nowak MA, Vogelstein B, Lengauer C: The significance of
unstable chromosomes in colorectal cancer. Nat Rev Cancer 2003,
3:695-701.
38. Sieber OM, Heinimann K, Tomlinson IP: Genomic instability - the engine
of tumorigenesis? Nat Rev Cancer 2003, 3:701-708.
39. Abdel-Rahman WM: Genomic instability and carcinogenesis: an
update. Curr Genomics 2008, 9:535-541.

Domazet-Lošo and Tautz BMC Biology 2010, 8:66
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/66

40. Merlo LM, Pepper JW, Reid BJ, Maley CC: Cancer as an evolutionary and
ecological process. Nat Rev Cancer 2006, 6:924-935.
41. Nowak MA: Evolutionary Dynamics: Exploring the Equations of Life.
Massachusetts: Belknap Press; 2006.
42. Traulsen A, Pacheco JM, Dingli D: Reproductive fitness advantage of
BCR-ABL expressing leukemia cells. Cancer Lett 2010 in press.
43. Chang GS, Hong Y, Ko KD, Bhardwaj G, Holmes EC, Patterson RL, van
Rossum DB: Phylogenetic profiles reveal evolutionary relationships
within the 'twilight zone' of sequence similarity. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2008, 105:13474-13479.
44. Caetano-Anollés G, Wang M, Caetano-Anollés D, Mittenthal JE: The origin,
evolution and structure of the protein world. Biochem J 2009,
417:621-637.
45. Altenberg L: Genome growth and the evolution of the genotypephenotype map. In Evolution and Biocomputation: Computational Models
of Evolution. Vol LectureNotes in Computer Science 899 Edited by: Banzhaf W,
Eeckman FH. Berlin: Springer-Verlag; 1995:205-259.
46. Choi IG, Kim SH: Evolution of protein structural classes and protein
sequence families. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006, 103:14056-1406.
47. Studer RA, Robinson-Rechavi M: How confident can we be that
orthologs are similar, but paralogs differ? Trends Genet 2009,
25:210-216.
48. Jones S, Zhang X, Parsons DW, Lin JC, Leary RJ, Angenendt P, Mankoo P,
Carter H, Kamiyama H, Jimeno A, Hong SM, Fu B, Lin MT, Calhoun ES,
Kamiyama M, et al.: Core signaling pathways in human pancreatic
cancers revealed by global genomic analyses. Science 2008,
321:1801-1806.
49. Rivals Personnaz L, Taing L, Potier MC: Enrichment or depletion of a GO
category within a class of genes: which test? Bioinformatics 2007,
15:401-407.
50. Benjamini Y, Hochberg Y: Controlling the false discovery rate: a practical
and powerful approach to multiple testing. J R Statist Soc B 1995,
57:289-300.
doi: 10.1186/1741-7007-8-66
Cite this article as: Domazet-Lošo and Tautz, Phylostratigraphic tracking of
cancer genes suggests a link to the emergence of multicellularity in metazoa
BMC Biology 2010, 8:66

Page 10 of 10

</pre>
</body>
</html>
