<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title> </title>
<meta name="Subject" content=" "/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content=" "/>
<meta name="Creator" content=" "/>
<meta name="Producer" content=" "/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Donadieu et al. Orphanet Journal of Rare Diseases 2011, 6:26
http://www.ojrd.com/content/6/1/26

REVIEW

Open Access

Congenital neutropenia: diagnosis, molecular
bases and patient management
Jean Donadieu1*, Odile Fenneteau2, Blandine Beaupain1, Nizar Mahlaoui3 and Christine Bellanné Chantelot4

Abstract
The term congenital neutropenia encompasses a family of neutropenic disorders, both permanent and
intermittent, severe (<0.5 G/l) or mild (between 0.5-1.5 G/l), which may also affect other organ systems such as the
pancreas, central nervous system, heart, muscle and skin. Neutropenia can lead to life-threatening pyogenic
infections, acute gingivostomatitis and chronic parodontal disease, and each successive infection may leave
permanent sequelae. The risk of infection is roughly inversely proportional to the circulating polymorphonuclear
neutrophil count and is particularly high at counts below 0.2 G/l.
When neutropenia is detected, an attempt should be made to establish the etiology, distinguishing between
acquired forms (the most frequent, including post viral neutropenia and auto immune neutropenia) and congenital
forms that may either be isolated or part of a complex genetic disease.
Except for ethnic neutropenia, which is a frequent but mild congenital form, probably with polygenic inheritance,
all other forms of congenital neutropenia are extremely rare and have monogenic inheritance, which may be Xlinked or autosomal, recessive or dominant.
About half the forms of congenital neutropenia with no extra-hematopoetic manifestations and normal adaptive
immunity are due to neutrophil elastase (ELANE) mutations. Some patients have severe permanent neutropenia
and frequent infections early in life, while others have mild intermittent neutropenia.
Congenital neutropenia may also be associated with a wide range of organ dysfunctions, as for example in
Shwachman-Diamond syndrome (associated with pancreatic insufficiency) and glycogen storage disease type Ib
(associated with a glycogen storage syndrome). So far, the molecular bases of 12 neutropenic disorders have been
identified.
Treatment of severe chronic neutropenia should focus on prevention of infections. It includes antimicrobial
prophylaxis, generally with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, and also granulocyte-colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF).
G-CSF has considerably improved these patients’ outlook. It is usually well tolerated, but potential adverse effects
include thrombocytopenia, glomerulonephritis, vasculitis and osteoporosis. Long-term treatment with G-CSF,
especially at high doses, augments the spontaneous risk of leukemia in patients with congenital neutropenia.
Keywords: Neutropenia, Childhood, G-CSF, Severe congenital neutropenia, Adverse effects, ELANE, G6PC3, Shwachman Diamond Syndrome, Review

Background
Congenital neutropenia is characterized by chronic neutropenia due to a constitutional genetic defect. Since the
early 1990s, and particularly during the last decade, the
molecular bases of several entities have been discovered,
leading to changes in the disease classification.
* Correspondence: jean.donadieu@trs.aphp.fr
1
Service d’Hémato Oncologie Pédiatrique Registre des neutropénies
congénitales AP-HP Hopital Trousseau 26 avenue du Dr Netter F 75012 Paris,
France
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

Kostmann’s syndrome is often considered as the paradigm of congenital neutropenia. This disorder, first
described in a Swedish publication in 1950 [1], and subsequently in English in 1956 [2], has three main characteristics: profound neutropenia (<0.2 G/l) occurring
during the first weeks of life, maturation arrest of granulopoiesis at the promyelocyte stage, and death due to
bacterial infections (11 of the 14 initially reported
patients died in their first year of life from bacterial
infections). Nearly 50 years later, these patients’ life

© 2011 Donadieu et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Donadieu et al. Orphanet Journal of Rare Diseases 2011, 6:26
http://www.ojrd.com/content/6/1/26

expectancy routinely exceeds 20 years and the molecular
basis of this entity has been identified [3]. It is now
agreed that Kostmann’s syndrome is accompanied, at
least in forms due to mutations of one the two isoforms
of HAX1 protein, those observed in the ‘kostmann’s
pedigree’, by neurological involvement (mental retardation and epilepsy) [4]. Thus, the “paradigm” of congenital neutropenia is a condition with early hematologic
expression and later neurological involvement.
Knowledge of the molecular bases of other forms of
congenital neutropenia has also modified the disease
classification. Until the late 1990s, the literature distinguished cyclic neutropenia, associated with a regular
pattern of change in the neutrophil count, typically
every 21 days and showing autosomal dominant transmission [5], from permanent neutropenia (severe congenital neutropenia or Kostmann’s syndrome). This
distinction was made in publications based on the international registry of chronic neutropenia in the late
1990s [6,7], in which cyclic neutropenia was not
included among the congenital neutropenias. In 1999,
M. Horwitz, analyzing 13 pedigrees of patients with cyclic neutropenia, identified mutations in the neutrophil
elastase (ELANE) gene [8]. Shortly afterwards the same
team found that many patients with severe congenital
neutropenia also had mutations of the ELANE gene [9]
This pointed to a continuum between severe congenital
neutropenia and cyclic neutropenia, and showed that
both could be considered “congenital”.
Another example of nosologic reclassification concerns the gluco-6-phosphatase molecular complex,
which is defective in glycogen storage disease Ib and
also in an entity associated with cutaneous involvement,
cardiac arrhythmias and malformative uropathy but not
with metabolic disorders [10]

Definition: neutropenia and congenital
neutropenia
General definition

Neutropenia is defined as a reduction in the absolute
number of neutrophils in the blood circulation. The standard hematologic examination is microscopic cell counting, which is necessary to confirm disorders identified by
automated cell counters and especially to examine the
cell morphology. Neutropenia is defined by a neutrophil
count below 1.5 G/l in children over 1 year, and below 2
G/l in children aged between 2 and 12 months [11-13].
The number of neutrophils is elevated during the first
two months of life. The count increases during the first
72 hours, followed by a gradual decrease until the age of
two months. In term neonates the neutrophil count is
reported to range from 12 G/l to 15 G/l, depending on
the study. Labor lasting more than 12 hours is associated with higher counts, while prematurity (<32

Page 2 of 28

weeks) is associated with lower counts. Neutropenia in
newborns is therefore defined by a threshold higher as
in adult at least 2.5 G/l neutrophils.
Neutropenia is said to be severe when below 0.5 G/l
and chronic if it lasts more than 3 months, whether it is
intermittent or permanent.
It is important to stress that the neutrophil count
shows physiological fluctuations [14], in a chaotic and
non random manner [15]. There are also nycthemeral
and seasonal variations [16-18], which persist in pathologic situations. Thus, neutropenia should ideally be confirmed on three samples per week over a 6-week period.
Neutropenia is said to be permanent when present in
all samples, intermittent if there are periods of spontaneous normalization, and cyclic if episodes occur about
every 21 days (perfectly sinusoidal neutropenia with a
21-day cycle is almost never seen in practice).
Only one study has focused on the periodicity in
patients with a diagnosis of “cyclic” neutropenia, based
on serial counts [19]. Among 10 such patients, regular
periods, of 18, 20 and 30 days, were found in only three
cases. The same study also showed regular variations in
patients with permanent neutropenia (severe congenital
and idiopathic neutropenia). Thus, it is better to use the
terms “permanent neutropenia” and “intermittent neutropenia”, while bearing in mind that there is a continuum between the two extremes, as the pathological
processes that lead to neutropenia affect both the period
of variation and the depth of the nadir.
Neutropenia is said to be “central” when the bone
marrow compartment is depleted, as shown by a deficiency in late maturation stages (especially <10% of
mature neutrophils) and “peripheral” if bone marrow
neutrophil maturation is normal (Figure 1).
Monocytosis, hypereosinophilia and polyclonal hypergammaglobulinemia are associated with neutropenia and
are inversely proportional to its severity. A compensatory role of monocytes may explain the good clinical
tolerance of some forms of profound constitutional neutropenia [20]
Congenital neutropenia: an evolving definition

Close examination of the literature shows that the term
“congenital neutropenia” is not used homogeneously
[6,21-23]. One very restrictive definition reserves the
term “congenital neutropenia” for severe forms not associated with immunological or extra-hematopoeitic
abnormalities, while a broader definition includes all
situations that comprise chronic neutropenia, with or
without immunological or extra-hematopoeitic abnormalities. Thus, some authors but not others include glycogen storage disease Ib, Shwachman-Diamond syndrome,
the WHIM syndrome, and Barth’s disease in the definition of congenital neutropenia.

Donadieu et al. Orphanet Journal of Rare Diseases 2011, 6:26
http://www.ojrd.com/content/6/1/26

Page 3 of 28

a)

b)

15

10

%

20

15

%

20

10

5

5

0

0

Figure 1 Bone marrow smear differential count including % of the different granulocyte precursors. a) normal bone marrow - a regular
pyramid. b) patients with severe congenital neutropenia and ELANE mutation: bone marrow myeloid arrest at promyelocyte stage with eosinophilia

In this review, the term “congenital neutropenia” is
not restricted to disorders in which neutropenia is the
only phenotypic manifestation, but encompasses all
‘congenital’ disorders comprising neutropenia. We also
consider “neutropenia” as a continuum, ranging from
intermittent forms with various periods to permanent
circulating neutrophil deficiency.

Epidemiology
The data are currently limited, owing to confusion and
overlapping case definitions. Exhaustive studies are rare,
and few patient registries are available[24]. General epidemiological surveys of primary immune deficiencies do
not take congenital neutropenia into account [25-27],
with the exception of the Iranian study [28] and a recent
French study [29]. In the Iranian study, 53 cases were
recorded, for a prevalence of 0.77/10 6 . In the French
registry-based study of a population of comparable size,
374 cases had been recorded in December 2006, giving
a prevalence nearly 10 times higher ≈ 6.2/106. Neither
study included patients with idiopathic neutropenia.
In 2003, the International Neutropenia Registry [6]
reported 731 cases, of which 238 were idiopathic,
recruited in a far larger geographic area than in previous
studies, including the USA, Canada, Australia and Europe (excluding France), for a population close to 700

million. The prevalence was 0.7 per million inhabitants
or 1 per million inhabitants when idiopathic neutropenia
was included.
There are probably no major differences across countries, and the minimal prevalence of congenital neutropenia appears to be 6 cases per million inhabitants, if
we take into consideration the results from the French
survey - the highest rate so far described. In the French
registry, 30% of patients had ELANE neutropenia (20%
severe congenital neutropenia and 10% cyclic neutropenia), 30% had Shwachman-Diamond syndrome, 5% had
glycogen storage disease Ib, and 35% had other disorders
(1 or 2% each). However, the distribution of the different forms was influenced by the patients’ geographic
origin (e.g. immigrants to western countries). Some
mutations are also linked to the geographic origin
(HAX1 in Kurdistan and Sweden, G6PC3 in Arameans,
AP14 in Mennonites), while ELANE, SBDS, SLC37A4
(previously named G6PT1) and CXCR4 mutations
appear to be universally distributed.

Clinical description
The consequences of neutropenia: infections

In vitro, the antibacterial activity of neutrophils can be
represented by a simple dilution curve [30]. The risk of
bacterial infection is more difficult to appreciate in vivo.

Donadieu et al. Orphanet Journal of Rare Diseases 2011, 6:26
http://www.ojrd.com/content/6/1/26

Central neutropenia carries a far higher risk of bacterial
and fungal infections than peripheral neutropenia. In
central neutropenia the risk is low at counts above 1 G/
l, increases moderately between 1 and 0.2 G/l and is
very high below 0.2 G/l. The risk of infection also
depends on the duration of neutropenia, with the risk of
fungal infections increasing after several weeks. These
data were obtained some 30 years ago in leukemic
patients [31] and more recently in bone marrow graft
recipients [32]. They correspond to the natural history
of some constitutional forms of central neutropenia,
especially that described by Kostmann [2,33], although
this has not been confirmed by other authors [34]. The
preferential sites of infection are highly variable. The
most frequent are the skin and mucosae, the ENT
region, and the lungs. Stomatologic disorders are almost
always present after age two years in patients with profound central neutropenia, and are characterized by erosive, hemorrhagic and painful gingivitis associated with
papules (aphthae-like oral furuncles) of the tongue and
the cheek mucosa (Additional file 1, Figure S1 Plates #1
and #2) [35]. Diffuse gastrointestinal lesions are sometimes present, leading to abdominal pain and diarrhea,
and sometimes mimicking Crohn’s disease on radiological studies [36]. These lesions may also be related to
bacterial enteritis. It should be remembered that the
symptoms of such infections may be atypical in patients
with profound neutropenia, with local inflammation, the
absence of pus and a necrotic tendency. One particular
aspect is ecthyma gangrenosum (infectious perianal
ulceration). Bacterial infections are most frequent, and
generally involve Staphylococcus aureus and epidermidis, streptococci, enterococci, pneumococci, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and Gram-negative bacilli. Most fungal
infections involve Candida or Aspergillus species.
Extra-hematopoietic involvement

A variety of extra-hematopoietic involvement may be
observed, contributing to the definition of several diseases or syndromes that will be examined in the Classification section, tables 1 and 2, and the Etiology/
Classification section.

Physiology of myeloid differentiation
Granulopoiesis is the physiological process by which circulating neutrophils are produced and regulated. Polymorphonuclear neutrophils or granulocytes (referred to
below simply as ‘neutrophils’) are responsible, along
with monocytic cells, for innate (naïve) immunity to
bacteria and fungi, based on phagocytosis and the
release of proteases, antimicrobial peptides and reactive
oxygen species [37]. Neutrophils also play a role in
inflammation and healing. This cellular system cannot
be “educated”, contrary to the lymphocytic system, and

Page 4 of 28

emerged early in phylogenesis, being identified in mollusks, for example, as early as 1891[38].
In vitro, antibacterial activity is tightly linked to the
number of neutrophils, and is absent below a critical
threshold [39].
The overall dynamics of the neutrophil system and tissular neutrophil distribution were investigated with radiolabeling methods in the 1960-1970s. These studies
show that granulopoiesis takes between 7 and 13 days,
and that neutrophils have a half-life, measured after 32P
labeling, of about 5.4 to 6.7 hours in peripheral blood
[40,41]. Circulating neutrophils represent only 3% to 5%
of all neutrophils cells, and their total number is about
35 × 10 7 per kilogram. It is important to stress the
highly dynamic nature of this system. In basal conditions, about 6 × 107/neutrophils/kg are replaced every
hour. Thus, circulating neutrophil analyses provide only
a simple “snapshot” of the situation at a given moment.
The soluble mediators (cytokines) that control this process started to be identified in the 1980s and late 1990s,
along with their mechanisms of action and their interactions. These discoveries led to therapeutic development
of G-CSF (Granulocyte Colony-Stimulating Factor) [42],
which has vastly improved the management of patients
with malignancies and hematologic disorders, including
congenital neutropenia.

Congenital neutropenia - classification and
etiology
There is no simple consensus classification of congenital
neutropenia. The genotype is the most important information for distinguishing one form of neutropenia from
another, but it is not available during the initial workup. The phenotype represents a continuum, with overlapping clinical manifestations: some important forms of
organ involvement may not be present on initial examination. Table 1 shows associated disorders and likely
diagnoses, while Table 2 lists the main diagnoses and
affected organ systems.
Neutropenia with no extra-hematopoietic manifestations
and with normal adaptive immunity
ELANE (ELA2): Permanent and cyclic neutropenia

ELANE (neutrophil Elastase) mutations are the most frequent known cause of congenital neutropenia and are
observed in two subtypes: congenital or permanent
severe neutropenia, and cyclic neutropenia. They are
found in about 40% to 55% of patients with congenital
neutropenia [43,44].
Permanent neutropenia, usually called severe congenital neutropenia, is associated with deep-seated bacterial
and fungal infections, stomatologic disorders, neutropenia usually below 0.2 G/l, monocytosis, hypereosinophilia and hypergammaglobulinemia, and sometimes with

Donadieu et al. Orphanet Journal of Rare Diseases 2011, 6:26
http://www.ojrd.com/content/6/1/26

Page 5 of 28

Table 1 Monogenic congenital neutropenia: Review of the known genes (2010)
Sub group of
neutropenia

Disease
name/ref

OMIM
code

Congenital
Neutropenia
without extra
hematopoeitic
manifestations

Severe
congenital
neutropenia/
Cyclic
neutropenia
[8,43]

Extrahematopoeitic
features

Inheritance Gene
Gene
localisation (alias)

Normal
function of the
gene

202700 Severe and
162800 permanent
Maturation arrest
Intermittent/cyclic
with variable bone
marrow features

No

Dominant

19q13.3

ELANE

Protease activity
Antagonism with
alpha 1
antitrypsin

Severe
congenital
neutropenia
Somatic
mutation of
CSF3R

202700 Permanent
Maturation arrest
Unresponsive to
GCSF

No

No genetic
inheritence

1p35-p34.3

CSF3R

transmembrane
GCSF receptor/
intracellular
signalling

Severe
congenital
neutropenia
[88]

202700 Permanent/severe or Internal ear (in
mild
mouse model)
Lymphopenia
Sometimes
maturation arrest

Dominant

1p22

GFI1

Transcription
factor
Regulation of
oncoprotein

Severe
congenital
neutropenia
[89,92]

301000 Severe permanent
Maturation arrest

X Linked

Xp11.4p11.21

WAS

Cytoskeleton
homeostasis

WHIM [99]

Congenital
Neutropenia with
innate or adaptive
deficiency but no
extrahematopoietic
features

Main
hematological
features

193670 Severe permanent
Lymphopenia
No maturation arrest Thrombocytopenia
Myelokathexis

Dominant

2q21

CXCR4

Chemokine
receptor
(CXCL12)

Central nervous
system: mental
retardation/seizures

Recessive

1q21.3

HAX1

Anti-apoptotic
protein located
in mitochondria
and in the
cytosol

Congenital
Kostmann’
202700 Maturation arrest
neutropenia with
disease
extra hematopoietic [3,4,53,232,233]
manifestations

Monocytopenia

ShwachmanBodianDiamond
disease [65]

260400 Mild neutropenia
Dysgranulopeosis
mild
dysmegacacyopoeisis

Exocrine Pancreas
deficiency
Bone: metaphyseal
dysplasia
Central nervous
system: mental
retardation Heart:
cardiomyopathy

Recessive

7q11.22

SDBS

Ribosomal
protein
Regulation of
RNA expression

Severe
congenital
neutropenia
[10]

202700 Maturation arrest

Skin -prominent
superficial venous
network
Heart: atrial defect
Uropathy

Recessive

17q21

G6PC3

Glucose 6
-phosphatase
complex:
Catalytic unit

Barth disease
[77]

302060 No maturation arrest Hypertrophy
cardiomyopathy

X Linked

Xq28

TAZ
(G4.5)

Tafazzin:
Phospholipid
membrane
homeostasis

HermanskyPudlak
syndrome
type 2 [80]

608233 No maturation arrest Albinism

Recessive

5q14.1

AP3B1

Cargo protein/ER
traficking with
ELANE interaction

No maturation arrest Albinism

Recessive

1q21

AP14

Lysosome
packaging

Recessive

16q13

16ORF57 Not known

Neutropenia
with AP14
mutation[78]

Poikilodermia 604173 No maturation arrest Skin: poikilodermia
type clericuzio
Minor
dysgranulopoetic
[75,76]
features

Donadieu et al. Orphanet Journal of Rare Diseases 2011, 6:26
http://www.ojrd.com/content/6/1/26

Page 6 of 28

Table 1 Monogenic congenital neutropenia: Review of the known genes (2010) (Continued)
Glycogen
storage type
Ib [234]

232220 No maturation arrest hypoglycemia,
fasting
hyperlactacidemia,
and glycogen
overload of the liver

Recessive

11q23.3

SLC37A4 Glucose 6
-phosphatase
complex: Trans
ER Transporter

Cohen
syndrome[74]

216550 No maturation arrest psychomotor
retardation,
clumsiness,
microcephaly,
characteristic facial
features, hypotonia
and joint laxity,
progressive
retinochoroidal
dystrophy, myopia

Recessive

8q22-q23

VPS13B

Sorting and
transporting
proteins in the
ER

Recessive

12q12

IRAK4

Mediators of Tolllike receptor
signal
transduction

Diseases not usually IRAK 4
606883 Permanent mild but No
assimilated to
deficiency [95]
severe infection
congenital
No maturation arrest
neutropenia but
including chronic
neutropenia
Dominant
Charot Marie
Tooth disease
[137,138]

602378 No maturation arrest Axonal neuropathy
type Charcot Marie
Tooth
Eyes: congenital
cataract

Dominant

19p13.2p12

DNM2

GTPases
Regulation of the
actin
cytoskeleton

Cartilage-hair
hypoplasia
[125]

250250 No maturation arrest Dwarfism
metaphyseal
dysplasia
Abnormal hair
Lymphopenia
aganglionic
megacolon

Recessive

9p21-p12

RMRP

Endoribonuclease

inflammatory anemia and maturation arrest of granulocytic cells at the promyelocyte stage (Additional file 1,
Figure S1 Plate #3). These patients require large doses
of G-CSF, both for the management of active infections
and as long-term therapy. There is a high risk of leukemic transformation in this setting. Severe congenital
neutropenia is usually diagnosed before age 6 months.
Cyclic neutropenia is less severe. The diagnosis is generally raised during the second year of life, or later, and the
main clinical manifestation is recurrent acute stomatologic
disorders (especially aphthae). The bone marrow aspect is
variable over time (especially the granulocytic cell maturation pyramid), and is sometimes strictly normal.
Cyclic neutropenia nevertheless carries a risk of serious infections: the cumulative risk of experiencing at
least one serious (potentially life-threatening) infection
by age 20 years is similar in patients with permanent
and cyclic neutropenia, although the former patients
tend to have earlier manifestations.
No recurrent extra-hematopoietic disorders have been
described in ELANE neutropenia.
By comparison with other forms of congenital neutropenia, neutropenia due to ELANE mutations is associated
with the most severe infectious complications [43].

As the same mutations can be responsible for both
types [43], and taking into account serial blood cell
counts in patients with apparently cyclic or permanent
neutropenia, the two subtypes can be considered as part
of a continuum of the same disease. In addition, a given
family may include members with very severe permanent neutropenia or more cyclic forms.
ELANE mutations were identified in 1999 by linkage
analysis and positional cloning in 13 families with a long
history of cyclic neutropenia with autosomal dominant
transmission [8]. ELANE is a serine protease that cleaves
elastin, among other proteins and its physiological inhibitor is a1-antitrypsin. ELANE is homologous to two
other proteases produced by polymorphonuclear cells:
proteinase 3 (the target of anti-neutrophil cytoplasm
antibodies present in Wegener’s disease) and azurocidin
[45]. These three proteins, whose genes lie next to one
another in chromosome region 19p13.3, are jointly regulated. ELANE is selectively stored in neutrophil azurophil granules, starting at the promyelocyte stage, but
may also be found at the cell surface or within the
cytoplasm.
Soon after the discovery of their involvement in cyclic
neutropenia, ELANE mutations (about 50 listed to date)

Donadieu et al. Orphanet Journal of Rare Diseases 2011, 6:26
http://www.ojrd.com/content/6/1/26

Page 7 of 28

Table 2 Main features and genetic subtypes of congenital neutropenia
System

Hematological or associated
features

Disease

Gene

Blood/bone marrow
maturation

Maturation arrest

ELANE
HAX 1
WASP
Neutropenia G6PC3
GCSF receptor

ELANE
HAX1
WASP
G6PC3
Extra cellular domain of
CSF3R

No maturation arrest

GSDIB
WHIM
Shwachman Diamond disease
Cohen disease
Hermansky Pudlak type 2

G6PC T
CXCR4
SBDS
VPS13B
AP3B1

Myelokathexis

WHIM

CXCR4

Pancreas

External pancreatic insufficiency

Shwachman Diamond disease

SBDS

Eyes

Congenital cataract

Charcot Marie Tooth

Dynamin 2

retinochoroidal dystrophy

Cohen disease

VPS13B

Heart: arrythmias

Neutropenia G6PC3

G6PC3

Dilated Cardiomyopathy

Barth’ diseases

Tafazin

Cardiomyopathy

Shwachman Diamond disease

SBDS

Various cardiac abnormalities

Shwachman Diamond disease WHIM Neutropenia
G6PC3

SBDS
CXCR4
G6PC3

Skin xerosis eczema

Shwachman Diamond disease

SBDS

Skin: prominent superficial veins

Neutropenia G6PC3

G6PC3

Skin poikilodermia

SCN with poiikiloderma Type cleruzio

16ORF57

Skin: Partial or complete albinism

Hermansky Pudlak type 2
AP14 defect
Chediak Higashi disease
Griscelli disease

AP3B1
AP14
LYST
RAB27A

Heart

Skin

Hair: fine, sparse and light-colored

Cartilage Hair hypoplasia

RMRP

Bone

Metaphyseal dysplasia

Shwachman Diamond disease
Cartilage-hair hypoplasia

SBDS
RMRP

Facial Dysmorphia

Cohen disease

VPS13B

Central nervous system

Mental retardation

Kostmann’s disease
Shwachman Diamond disease
Cohen disease

Hax 1
SBDS
VPS13B

Muscle

Weakness

Neutropenia G6PC3
Axonal Charcot Marie Tooth disease

G6PC3
Dynamin 2

Metabolic pathway

Fasting intolerance and
glycogenosis

Glycogen storage disease type Ib

SLC37A4

Inner ear

Inner ear defect

GFI 1/severe chronic neutropenia
Reticular dysgenesia

GFI1
AK2

Urogenital tract

Uropathy

Neutropenia G6PC3

G6PC3

Cryptorchidism

Cohen disease
Neutropenia G6PC3

VPS13B
G6PC3

were also identified in patients with severe congenital
neutropenia [9].
Some mutations creating a premature stop codon and
leading to the synthesis of a truncated protein (lacking
the last exon) are observed only in severe permanent
congenital neutropenia. The G185R mutation is responsible for very severe phenotypes [43,46].

The effects of these mutations on the protein are
poorly documented. Mice with no ELANE gene expression or carrying mutations associated with severe congenital neutropenia in humans are not neutropenic [47].
Similarly, no correlation has been found between specific mutations and the protein’s enzyme activity. In contrast, abnormal protein folding and cytoplasmic protein

Donadieu et al. Orphanet Journal of Rare Diseases 2011, 6:26
http://www.ojrd.com/content/6/1/26

Page 8 of 28

accumulation have been described [47-51]. Our understanding of the impact of ELANE mutations on intracellular protein trafficking, and particularly on granule
packaging, has benefited from investigations of a genetic
disease with very similar features and involving the gene
coding for AP3 protein. This “cargo” protein is responsible for intraluminal trafficking of proteins from the
Golgi apparatus to lysosomes, including neutrophil granules. Mutations of the AP3 tetramer subunit in humans
are responsible for the Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome
type 2, associated with partial albinism, and for cyclic
neutropenia in Grey Collie dogs, considered the best
animal model of cyclic neutropenia. ELANE mutations
inhibit AP3 protein binding, thereby hindering its packaging [49]. This phenomenon contributes to endoplasmic
reticulum stress through the unfolded protein response
[48,51]

The molecular bases of this entity were discovered by
classical genetic linkage analysis of three Kurdish
families (two of which were consanguineous), followed
by fine mapping of the region of interest on chromosome arm 1q, leading to the identification of HAX1
(HS1-associated protein X1) as the gene responsible for
the disease. The mutations were different in the Kurdish
families and the patients from the family described by R.
Kostmann in 1956. HAX1 (35 kDa) is a ubiquitous mitochondrial protein with multiple partners. It has antiapoptotic properties, due to mitochondrial membrane
potential stabilization. These patients’ neutrophils, and
also their fibroblasts, are very sensitive to apoptotic stimuli, and this anomaly can be corrected in vitro by
restoring a normal HAX1 protein level in CD34+ bone
marrow myeloid progenitors, and in vivo through the
anti-apoptotic function of G-CSF.

Extracellular G-CSF receptor defects

Shwachman-Diamond syndrome

No more than 5 cases have been reported to date. Here
the clinical picture [52] is very similar to that of severe
congenital neutropenia due to ELANE mutations, but
this disorder is entirely unresponsive to G-CSF, even at
doses up to 100 μg/kg per day. No constitutional anomaly common to all cells has so far been identified and
this entity can be considered as a somatic mutant.

This is quite a frequent form of congenital neutropenia,
representing one-quarter of all cases of congenital neutropenia recorded in the French Congenital Neutropenia
Registry.
First described by Nezelof in 1961 [55] and then by
Shwachman and Diamond in 1964 [56], ShwachmanDiamond syndrome associates hematologic disorders
with a malformative syndrome, the most consistent feature of which is external pancreatic insufficiency due to
fatty involution, yielding a characteristic pancreatic
aspect on magnetic resonance imaging [57], as well as
chronic diarrhea with fat stools and low fecal elastase.
Other features include cutaneous involvement (usually
eczema, but sometimes icthyosis), bone involvement
with metaphyseal dysplasia and narrow thorax [58], and
psychomotor retardation [59]. Neutropenia is usually
intermittent and moderate, with a decline in chemotactism associated with mild to moderate thrombocytopenia,
moderate anemia, and a rise in fetal hemoglobin. The
hematologic disorders can be complicated by bone marrow aplasia or leukemic transformation, mainly consisting of acute myeloid leukemia (FAB type 5 or 6), or a
myelodysplastic syndrome with cytologic abnormalities
(usually clonal), frequently affecting chromosome 7
(Additional file 1, Figure S1 Plates #4, #5, #6) [21,60].
The predominant clinical manifestations are highly
variable. Neonatal forms have been described, with
respiratory distress, narrow thorax, pancytopenia [61,62],
and especially neurological involvement (mental retardation) [63], predominant gastrointestinal disorders (gluten
intolerance), growth retardation in the second year of
life, and predominant bone involvement suggestive of a
constitutional bone disorder [64]. Depending on the presenting manifestations, differential diagnoses include
Cystic fibrosis, Pearson’s syndrome (characterized by
cytologic abnormalities and especially mitochondrial

Congenital neutropenia with extra-hematopoietic
manifestations
Kostmann’s syndrome and HAX1 mutations

The disorder, described by Rolf Kostmann in 1950 and
1956 [1,2], remains a paradigm in the field of congenital
neutropenia. The term Kostmann’s syndrome is sometimes used, inappropriately, for neutropenia with
ELANE mutations.
The exact frequency of this entity is not precisely
known but appears to be far lower than ELANE neutropenia, except in some geographic areas such as Sweden
and Kurdistan.
The main clinical features are severe neutropenia with
monocytosis and reactive eosinophilia and strong susceptibility to bacterial infections (11 deaths occurred
before age 1 year among the 14 patients initially
described). The pedigree lived in an isolated geographic
area (northern Sweden) and involved consanguineous
families, pointing to monogenic autosomal recessive
transmission. A later publication by Kostmann, in 1975
[33], focusing on the same pedigree, showed improved
survival thanks to the use of antibiotics, but also the
onset of neurological disorders in the second decade,
with both mental retardation and seizures. This syndrome is better described in a more recent study of the
same pedigree, in which 5 of the 6 patients had neurological disorders [53]. Neurological involvement may
depend on the mutation [54].

Donadieu et al. Orphanet Journal of Rare Diseases 2011, 6:26
http://www.ojrd.com/content/6/1/26

respiratory chain defects), Fanconi anemia (distinguished
by the constitutional karyotype) and gluten intolerance.
The genetic defect underlying the Shwachman Diamond syndrome has now been identified [65]. It
involves the SDBS gene located on chromosome 7. This
ubiquitously expressed gene encodes a ribosomal protein involved in the traduction process [66]. Nearly 98%
of patients with this syndrome have mutations of the
SBDS gene. Despite marked clinical polymorphism, the
mutations are limited in number (practically always double heterozygous mutations) and the p.Lys62X/p.Cys84fs
mutation is present in two-thirds of patients.
Glucose-6-phosphatase complex disorders: glycogen storage
disease type Ib and G6PC3

Genetic studies show that the two entities are closely
related, despite very different clinical phenotypes. Both
feature neutropenia. Glycogen is stored in the liver and,
after glycogenolysis, can yield glucose-6-phosphate,
which can be used directly for energy production (glycolysis) or be dephosphorylated (by glucose 6 phosphatase)
to yield glucose, which can be transported throughout
the body to meet cellular energy needs.
Glucose 6 phosphatase is a complex of three proteins
bound to the endoplasmic reticulum. Two of these three
proteins are involved in congenital neutropenia: the
translocase (SLC37A4), previously named G6PT1, transports glucose 6 phosphate between the cytoplasm and
the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum, while G6PC3
is a catalytic protein.
The most remarkable feature of the association
between these molecular abnormalities and neutropenia
is the fact that the glycogenolysis pathway and, more
generally, the glucose 6 phosphatase metabolic pathway,
is not the usual energy source in neutrophils, which
mainly use the pentose pathway.
Neutropenia associated with glycogen storage disease
Ib Glycogen storage disease type Ib is characterized by
metabolic disorders common to all forms of glycogen
storage disease type I (hepatic glycogen accumulation,
intolerance of fasting, hypoglycemic events, and hyperlactacidemia), as well as susceptibility to infections [67],
and colitis resembling Crohn’s disease both clinically
and radiologically [36].
This susceptibility to infections is due to neutropenia
and, sometimes, to neutrophil dysfunction (mainly
defective chemotactism). Bone marrow smears show
hyperplasia of the granulocytic lineage, without maturation arrest (Additional file 1, Figure S1 Plate #7). The
origin of the neutropenia and neutrophil dysfunction is
not known. It is not related to nutritional status and is
not corrected by liver transplantation [68]. This, and the
lack of any known role of the Gluco 6 Phosphate translocase (gene SLC37A4, previously named G6PT1), in
neutrophil energy metabolism, raises the possibility that

Page 9 of 28

this protein has another function in neutrophils. Gene
therapy in a mouse model has corrected both the metabolic and myeloid disorders [69].
Neutropenia associated with G6PC3 mutations This
entity associates severe permanent neutropenia with
granulocyte maturation arrest, susceptibility to infections, and several other clinical manifestations, including
thin skin with a highly visible veins, urogenital malformations, and cardiac disorders (especially arrhythmia
due to defective atrioseptal conduction); some patients
have a myopathic syndrome (despite a normal histologic
and microscopic aspect of muscle) or perception deafness. Mutations of the G6PC3 gene are generally homozygous, but a double heterozygote has been described
[10] and corresponds to an animal model [70]. Homozygous mutations have been shown to affect the endoplasmic reticulum [71].
Cohen’s syndrome

A very rare form of congenital neutropenia, this autosomal recessive syndrome associates mental retardation
with a dysmorphic syndrome that includes microcephaly, facial abnormalities (moon face), myopia, pigmentary retinitis, trunk obesity, and ligament hyperlaxity
[72]. Neutropenia is present in over 90% of cases and is
responsible for chronic infections with gingivostomatitis.
The marrow is rich, with no maturation arrest [73].
Cohen’s syndrome has been linked to mutations of the
VPS13B gene, located on chromosome 8 and coding for
an endoplasmic reticulum protein [74].
Neutropenia associated with poikilodermia, Clericuzio type

The poikilodermia includes skin atrophy and a papular
erythematous rash. Several subtypes of this genodermatosis have been described.
The Clericuzio type was first described in Navajo
Indians. Onset occurs in the first year of life. The rash
gradually propagates centripetally from the limbs and
comprises a papular rash, followed by plaques of hypoand hyperpigmentation and telangiectasies. The nails are
affected too (pachyonychia), but no hair loss or leukoplasia is observed. Recurrent infections occur, and especially pneumonia.
The neutropenia is often severe. Granulocyte maturation arrest at the promyelocyte stage is rarely observed,
but dysgranulopoiesis with late arrest is often seen [75].
An Italian linkage study [76] revealed composite mutations of the C16ORF57 gene, whose function is
unknown.
Barth’s disease

This X-linked syndrome combines dilated cardiomyopathy with endomyocardial fibrosis (sometimes leading to
early death), myopathy and moderate or profound neutropenia, sometimes responsible for severe infections.
There is also an acidopathy involving several organic
acids, including 3-methylglutaconic acid. This condition

Donadieu et al. Orphanet Journal of Rare Diseases 2011, 6:26
http://www.ojrd.com/content/6/1/26

is due to mutations in the G4-5 gene, which encodes
tafazzin, a protein involved in phospholipid membrane
homeostasis [77].
Neutropenia and albinism: AP14 deficiency

Several children of a consanguineous Mennomite family
presented with partial albinism, severe neutropenia and
susceptibility to pneumococcal infection. Bone marrow
studies showed no maturation arrest and there were no
shared morphological features with Griscelli or Chediak
Higashi disease. This syndrome, which has so far been
detected in only one family, is due to deficiency of a
protein (AP14) involved in intracellular endosome trafficking [78].
Neutropenia and albinism: Hermansky Pudlak syndrome
type 2

Hermansky Pudlak syndrome was first described in
1959, in patients with partial albinism, hemorrhagic
complications and platelet granulations. In 1994, a similar syndrome associated with neutropenia was described
[79]. This entity, known as Hermansky Pudlak syndrome
type 2, is due to mutations in the AP3 cargo protein
[80]. It is the canine equivalent of Grey Collie cyclic
neutropenia [81]. To understand the packaging function
of AP3, it was first necessary to elucidate the effects of
neutrophil elastase mutations, as the two proteins interact during granule packaging [49,82].
Miscellaneous malformative syndromes

Several distinct phenotypic entities combine neutropenia
and a variety of other conditions, including trichothiodystrophy [83], cuti laxa, uropathy, cardiopathy [84], and
Klippel Trenaumay syndrome [21]. No noteworthy genetic
mutations have been found in these isolated cases.
Chronic neutropenia with defective naive/adaptive
immunity, considered as congenital neutropenia

Multiple interactions take place between the innate and
adaptive immune systems. Toll receptors are shared by
the two systems, while some proteins expressed by the
phagocyte lineage are involved in the lymphocyte lineage
[85]. Some metabolic pathways and multiple effectors
(e.g. interleukins) are also shared. This explains why
many “lymphocyte disorders” can also be associated with
neutropenia. Indeed, these associations are so frequent
[86] that both adaptive immunity and other functions of
the innate immune system must be investigated when
chronic neutropenia is diagnosed. These morbid associations, often attributed to viral infections or autoimmunity, also involve common pathophysiologic mechanisms,
as shown by studies of some extremely rare disorders like
Bruton’s disease [87].
Neutropenia associated with GFI1 mutations

This is an extremely rare cause of congenital neutropenia,
so far described in only four patients [44,88]. The clinical
phenotype does not seem to be very homogeneous, as one

Page 10 of 28

patient was diagnosed with severe neutropenia at 4
months of age, together with marked monocytosis, while
the father, who had the same mutation, had moderate,
asymptomatic neutropenia, and the second patient, diagnosed at age 56 years with idiopathic neutropenia, had no
clear susceptibility to infections. These patients all have
moderate lymphopenia (CD3 cells between 1 and 1.4 G/l)
with normal memory cells and humoral immunity.
GFI1, a nuclear protein, is a transcriptional repressive
factor involved in T lymphomatogenesis and in the
development of T cell progenitors. Its involvement in
granulopoiesis and in macrophage activity has been
demonstrated in knock-out mice, which also exhibit an
inner-ear defect. Heterozygous GFI1 mutations, which
are dominant mutations, lead to an increase in ELANE
expression, in the same way as ELANE mutations.
Permanent congenital neutropenia due to Wiskott-Aldrich
syndrome (WAS) gene mutation

This is also a very rare entity observed to date in 5
families. Its hematologic and infectious features resemble those of ELANE neutropenia, but with no monocytosis despite profound neutropenia [89-93]. Some cases
are only diagnosed in adulthood, implying that some
patients have limited infectious complications. This is
an X-linked disorder. A genetic linkage study of a pedigree with suspected sex-linked genetic transmission
revealed mutations in the WAS gene (encoding WiskottAldrich syndrome protein) in a family with severe congenital neutropenia [92], and more recently in four
other families [44,89-91,94].
These patients’ phenotype is completely distinct from
that of patients with the classical form of WiskottAldrich syndrome, which comprises eczema, thrombocytopenia with small platelets, and immune deficiency.
This phenotypic difference, despite the shared involvement of the WAS gene, is due to functional differences
in the respective mutations (WAS protein activation in
congenital neutropenia and defective WAS protein activity in the classical syndrome).
As WAS protein is involved in intracytoplasmic actin
polymerization, mutations observed in patients with
neutropenia lead to an increase in actin polymerization,
accompanied by an increase in the podosome level and
in apoptosis.
Neutropenia associated with IRAK 4 mutations

A deficiency in interleukin 1 receptor-associated kinase
4 leads to a functional defect of innate immunity [95]. It
includes marked susceptibility to pyogenic infections
(especially staphylococci and pneumococci), but no
other extra-hematologic or infectious manifestations.
These patients have only moderate neutropenia, which
tends to normalize during infections. However, functional tests, and especially the monocyte response to
various stimuli, such as LPS, show defective neutrophil

Donadieu et al. Orphanet Journal of Rare Diseases 2011, 6:26
http://www.ojrd.com/content/6/1/26

and monocyte mobilization [96], whereas standard
immunological findings can be normal.
NK cell deficiency and neutropenia

NK cell deficiency and dysfunction have been described
in four patients with chronic neutropenia and maturation arrest at the promyelocyte stage in the only relevant
study. These findings were made before the main molecular abnormalities were identified [97]. It is impossible
to know whether this feature is common to several
forms of congenital neutropenia or whether it represents
an original entity.
Wart hypogammaglobulinemia immunodeficiency
myelokathexis (WHIM) syndrome

This form of constitutional neutropenia is characterized
by morphological abnormalities of the rare circulating
neutrophils, which are hypersegmented and contain
cytoplasmic vacuoles; bone marrow cells show similar
anomalies (Additional file 1, Figure S1 Plate #8). This
unusual morphological aspect (kathexia meaning neutrophil retention in the bone marrow) justified the use of
the initial term [98]. Later, immunological abnormalities
were also reported, including lymphopenia and moderate hypogammaglobulinemia [99]. Severe papillomavirus
warts are almost always present, leading to the adoption
of the term “wart hypogammaglobulinemia immunodeficiency myelokathexis”. Subsequent identification of the
role of a chemokine receptor gene (CXCR4)[100] led to
a better understanding of this disease and showed that
this syndrome corresponds to the same entity, although
warts may not initially be present. CXCR4 is a chemokine receptor known for its role as an HIV coreceptor
[101]. This receptor and its ligand SDF1 (CXCL12) are
involved in organogenesis, B lymphocyte ontogenesis,
and myelopoiesis, and are required for CD34+ cell
migration from bone marrow. Mutations of the CXCR4
chemokine are dominant mutations, leading to receptor
hyperactivity and defective mobilization of bone marrow
neutrophils (myelokathexis) and lymphocytes.
Neutropenia associated with miscellaneous constitutional
disorders NOT considered as congenital neutropenia

Neutropenia is not a major clinical or biological feature
of these disorders. They are not usually considered to
be forms of congenital neutropenia, because the neutropenia is transient (for example in Bruton’s agammaglobulinemia), or tends to occur late, or is only moderate
and does not require any particular management (for
example Charcot and Tooth disease with dynamin 2
mutation).
Chronic neutropenia, with defective innate/adaptive
immunity NOT considered as congenital neutropenia

Humoral immune deficiencies Bruton’s agammaglobulinemia (~30% of cases), CD40 ligand deficiency
(immune deficiency with IgM hypergammaglobulinemia,

Page 11 of 28

50% of cases), variable hypogammaglobulinemia and
unclassified hypogammaglobulinemia can be accompanied by neuropenia [86,97,102-105]. The neutropenia is
usually detected before immunoglobulin replacement
therapy and responds to immunoglobulin therapy [106].
In Bruton’s agammaglobulinemia, due to BTK gene
mutations, the neutropenia can be very profound at
onset, with maturation arrest at the promyelocyte stage.
Humoral immunity should be thoroughly investigated in
patients with neutropenia.
Severe combined immune deficiency and immune
deficiency syndromes Severe combined immune deficiencies (like those associated with IL-2 receptor gamma
mutation) can also include neutropenia. The lymphocyte
deficit, mainly affecting T cells [107], frequently includes
neutropenia, which can be severe. Other immune deficiencies that are not as severe at onset, such as defective
HLA class II expression and ataxia-telangiectasia, can
also include neutropenia. In Wiskott-Aldrich disease,
neutropenia usually accompanies the frequent autoimmune disorders [108], through a mechanism different
from that underlying X-linked neutropenia and activating WASP mutations.
Reticular dysgenesis and AK2 gene mutation Reticular
dysgenesis is an autosomal recessive form of the severe
combined immune deficiency syndrome (SCID) affecting
hematopoietic lineages of both the innate and adaptive
immune systems. At birth, this condition is characterized by a total absence of neutrophils, T cells and NK
cells, sometimes associated with anemia, thrombocytopenia and low B cell counts, while monocyte counts
remain normal. This disorder also affects the inner ear,
leading to profound perception deafness. Recently, the
gene responsible for this form of SCID was identified by
two independent teams [109,110]. It codes for adenylate
kinase 2 (AK2), a ubiquitous enzyme involved in energy
metabolism and whose known function is reverse transphosphorylation of AMP and ATP into ADP.
22q11 syndrome This is a complex malformative syndrome due to interstitial deletion of chromosome 22 at
the q11 locus. Few children present all the characteristic
features of this syndrome simultaneously. ENT disorders
comprise velar insufficiency, facial malformation (especially of the lower face), sometimes accompanied by
marked retrognatism. Other disorders include parathyroid deficiency with hypocalcemia, cardiac abnormalities
(especially tetralogy of Fallot) and immunologic abnormalities, including, in the most severe cases, Di George
syndrome with thymic agenesis, and T lymphocyte deficiency. Platelet disorders have been described [111,112]
and also neutropenia, sometimes of an autoimmune nature [113].
Exocytosis disorders Neutropenia is found in several cellular exocytosis disorders [114], leading to hemophagocytic

Donadieu et al. Orphanet Journal of Rare Diseases 2011, 6:26
http://www.ojrd.com/content/6/1/26

lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) but also sometimes inaugural
neutropenia, as in AP14 mutation disorders and
Hermansky Pudllak disease type 2. Most genetic defects
associated with these disorders have now been identified,
and we will only recall the main phenotypes, of which the
principal extra-hematopoeitic manifestation is complete or
partial albinism [115-117].
Chediak Higashi syndrome (CHS) CHS is characterized
by partial oculo-cutaneous albinism, abnormal melanosome hair repartition, giant granules in all neutrophils
and in bone marrow granulocytic precursors (Additional
file 1, Figure S1 Plate #9), bright red inclusions in some
lymphocytes, defective bactericidal activity, and NK dysfunction. Neutropenia due to bone marrow destruction
occurs early in this disorder, prior to HLH.
Griscelli syndrome type 2 (GS2) The clinical manifestations of this disorder share many features of ChediakHigashi syndrome, especially albinism and immune deficiency, and sometimes HLH in GS2, and not in GS1
and GS3 (Additional file 1, Figure S1 Plate #10). It differs by the absence of giant granulations in blood cells,
and the microscopic aspect of the hair. Neutropenia can
be present, either in isolation or during the course of a
macrophage activation syndrome.
Familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (FHLH)
These inherited immune dysregulation syndromes are
related to mutations in perforin, Munc13.4, Munc18.2 or
Syntaxin11 encoding genes and are defined by early
onset of severe HLH. Neutropenia is one of the diagnostic criteria of HLH, though not a major feature. Morphological anomalies are rare.
Other syndromes associated with neutropenia

Blackfan-Diamond anemia Several years after onset,
neutropenia can occur in patients with Blackfan-Diamond anemia.
Fanconi anemia and dyskeratosis congenita Neutropenia is an integral feature of these constitutional forms
of bone marrow aplasia, which are associated with complex malformations. Anemia and thrombocytopenia, but
rarely neutropenia, are present at diagnosis.
Constitutional monosomy 7 Constitutional monosomy
7 has been found in several patients with sporadic or
familial neutropenia. Secondary malignant transformation is the rule [118-120].
Aminoacidopathies Neutropenia is a secondary feature
of several aminoacidopathies, including hyperglycinemia,
and isovaleric, propionic and methylmalonic acidemia
[121]. Chronic fluctuating neutropenia is a feature of
dibasic protein intolerance (also called lysinuric protein
intolerance) and there is a typical cytologic aspect (Additional file 1, Figure S1 Plate #11). Other features of the
macrophage activation syndrome are also present [122].
Pearson’s syndrome Pearson’s syndrome associates
external pancreatic insufficiency with pancytopenia.

Page 12 of 28

Neutropenia can be present, together with anemia and
thrombocytopenia. This syndrome is due to a mitochondrial respiratory chain disorder and to mitochondrial
DNA deletion [123]. The neutropenia is usually less
severe than the anemia. The diagnosis is raised by sideroblastic anemia, with evocative cytologic abnormalities
(Additional file 1, Figure S1 Plate #11) and unexplained
acidosis.
Cartilage-hair hypoplasia This syndrome combines
dwarfism, metaphysal chondrodysplasia, sparse hair, and
sometimes an immune deficiency, with lymphopenia,
hypogammaglobulinemia and neutropenia [124]. This
autosomal recessive disease, mainly affecting the Amish
(USA) and Finnish populations, is due to mutations of
the RMRP gene, coding for a ribonuclease [125].
Chronic neutropenia, recurrent fever, Behçet’s disease
and amyloidosis Recurrent fevers are a set of disorders
comprising recurrent fever, various inflammatory manifestations (serous and articular) and sometimes recurrent aphthosis.
Amyloidosis is a common complication of these disorders, and especially of familial mediterranean fever
(FMF) [126]. Hyperleukocytososis is usually present
[127], but an authentic case of FMF with neutropenia
has been described [128].
Congenital neutropenia is often associated with hypergammaglobulinemia and a chronic inflammatory syndrome, but secondary amylosis (AA type) is very rare
[129-131]. The particularities of these patients suggest
that this is an independent entity.
Behçet’s disease is distinct from recurrent fever, but
the two disorders share the same geographic predominance (Mediterranean basin) and certain traits such as
recurrent aphthae, as in neutropenic disorders. Polynucleosis is common, but cases with associated neutropenia have been reported [132].
Finnish nephrotic syndrome The “Finnish” nephrotic
syndrome is an autosomal recessive disorder defined by
structural modification of nephrin, leading to massive
renal protein leakage. An extremely severe nephrotic
syndrome (albuminemia < 10 g/l) and massive proteinuria are present from birth.
Neutropenia can also occur in this setting [133,134]. It
is due to leakage of proteins, and especially ceruloplasmin (the protein responsible for copper transport), leading to very low circulating copper levels.
As shown in an animal model [135], copper deficiency
can lead to severe neutropenia, with maturation arrest
of granulopoeisis at the promyelocyte stage, as in typical
congenital neutropenia. Copper administration suffices
to correct the deficiency and to restore a normal neutrophil count [136].
Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease and dynamin 2 mutations Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease comprises a variety

Donadieu et al. Orphanet Journal of Rare Diseases 2011, 6:26
http://www.ojrd.com/content/6/1/26

of neurological disorders with hereditary sensory-motor
neuropathy. Life expectancy is unaffected and there is
no mental retardation.
Schematically, CMT is due to damage to the peripheral nerves connecting the spinal cord to the muscles,
affecting nerve conduction. This leads to gait disorders,
cramps and frequent foot deformation. CMT can occur
during childhood but sometimes also in adulthood. In
general, CMT deteriorates slowly, but it can also progress by exacerbations. There are several types, currently
classified according to the affected part of the nerve
(myelin or axon) and the mode of transmission (dominant or recessive). Type II is characterized by axonal
involvement. In this form, with dominant transmission
related to the mutation in the dynamin 2 gene, neurological signs are sometimes discreet and are accompanied
by congenital cataract and fluctuating neutropenia; the
neutropenia is usually mildly symptomatic but it may be
severe and is sometimes the initial manifestation
[137,138].

Diagnosis of congenital neutropenia
Neutropenia is a relatively frequent finding, while congenital neutropenia is quite rare. Neutropenia is often
well tolerated and normalizes rapidly, in which case specialized investigations are not necessary. Neutropenia is
sometimes a secondary finding in a patient with far
more significant disorders, who may thus be at risk of
infectious complications. More rarely, neutropenia persists and/or emerges as the sole cause of a child’s symptoms, in which case thorough investigations are
necessary.
The interview and physical examination may reveal a
particular etiology, such as a viral infection or malignant
hemopathy, an iatrogenic cause, or an immune deficiency, warranting further specific investigations.
In non urgent settings, the permanent, intermittent or
regressive nature of the neutropenia should be established during an observation period of a few weeks, in
which the number of infections and any changes in buccal disorders (ulceration, gingivitis, etc.) should be
noted, as they can help guide patient management.
Bone marrow examination is often necessary to rule
out malignant hemopathies, determine cellularity, assess
myeloid maturation, and detect signs of a precise etiology. Figure 1 shows a) the normal pyramid of granulocyte precursor maturation and b) early arrest at the
promyelocytic stage (in a patient with ELANE mutation).
Maturation arrest at the promyelocyte stage is often
associated with bone marrow hypereosinophilia and
monocytosis. Morphologically, few aspects are truly typical of a particular etiology. Specific hemophagocytosis of
neutrophils is a sign of autoimmune neutropenia in
young children (Additional file 1, Figure S1 Plate #13)

Page 13 of 28

[139-141], while cytoplasmic granulations are suggestive
of Chediak Higashi disease (Additional file 1, Figure S1
Plate #9), hemophagocytosis points to dibasic protein
intolerance(Additional file 1, Figure S1 Plate #11) and
myelokathexis, defined by an increase in the granulocyte
pool with hypermature and dystrophic features (Additional file 1, Figure S1 Plate #8) point to WHIM syndrome. Finally, precursor vacuolization is a sign of
Pearson’s syndrome (Additional file 1, Figure S1 Plate
#12). The marrow smear may reveal non specific dysgranulopoeisis or be totally normal, but this does not rule
out a diagnosis of congenital neutropenia. Cytogenetic
bone marrow studies are now crucial when investigating
isolated neutropenia that is suspected of being
congenital.
Several other investigations are of interest, especially
antineutrophil antibody assay, immunoglobulin assay (Ig
GAM), lymphocyte immunophenotyping, pancreatic
markers (serum trypsinogen and fecal elastase) and liposoluble vitamin levels (vitamins A, E and D).
The glucagon challenge test and studies of neutrophil
demargination are rarely used now, as they are complex
and provide little information of practical use.
The recommended diagnostic work-up for neutropenia is shown in Figure 2, while table 3 lists the main
forms of acquired neutropenia.

Differential diagnosis and some frequent causes
of chronic neutropenia
Allo-immune neutropenia

This form of neutropenia is present from birth and can
be considered congenital.
It may be suspected following a maternofetal infection
or a routine blood cell count. Initially severe (<0.1 G/l),
it usually normalizes after 3-6 months. Available bone
marrow studies show no maturation arrest. Neonatal
allo-immune neutropenia is due to fetomaternal incompatibility for a paternally derived neutrophil antigen. By
crossing the placental, these fetal neutrophils can elicit
IgG antibodies in the mother, which then enter the fetal
circulation. Based on fine characterization of neutrophil
antigens, a new nomenclature (HNA, Human Neutrophil Antigens) has been proposed, with 5 systems. The
first system, HNA1, codes for RFcgIIIb (CD16), a lowaffinity IgG receptor, is polymorphous and includes
three antigens: HNA1a, 1b and 1c. The genetic CD16
deficit on neutrophils and in its soluble form can lead
to iso-immunization of the mother and neutropenia in
the newborn. The second system, HNA-2, includes only
one serologically defined antigen, HNA-2A, present on
neutrophil subpopulations. The alloantibodies most frequently responsible for neonatal neutropenia are directed against the antigens of the HNA-1 system and, to a
lesser extent, HNA-2. In rare cases, neonatal immune

Donadieu et al. Orphanet Journal of Rare Diseases 2011, 6:26
http://www.ojrd.com/content/6/1/26

Page 14 of 28

Neutropenia observed on Complete blood count (CBC)
Severe if Absolute neutrophil count (ANC) < 0.5 G/l
Mild if ANC between 0.5 and 1.5 G/l
Frequent etiology: Bacterial infections like strept B, gravidic toxemia and prematurity
Rare etiology
Maternofetal alloimmunisation - Neutrophil antigens and allo-antibodies
Severe combined immunodeficiency
immunophenotype lymphocytes
Viral fetopathy
cytomegalovirus…
Congenital neutropenia with early expression

Situation 1
New Born

Situation 2
Mild neutropenia
« Incidental » neutropenia
No other blood abnormalities
No infection – No recurrent aphthosis No gingivitis
No associated pathology

Situation 3
Severe neutropenia
or mild with severe infection or stomatologic infections
or with other blood count anomalies
or hepatomegaly/splenomegaly

Monthly clinical follow-up for as long as the neutropenia persists (except ethnic)
No work up
CBC monthly (max) for a year and then according to outcome
Emergency consultation if fever
Ethnic neutropenia: to be considered if black skin

Bone marrow cytology : without delay if other blood anomalies
Or organomegaly: malignant hemopathy has to be ruled out

Immune deficiency like agammaglobulinemia
Immunoglobulin assay (Ig GAM)
Lymphocyte immunophenotyping
Antibodies against neutrophil membrane antigen

Autoimmune neutropenia

Initial Work up: no etiology: Clinical and hematological follow up

Recovery from neutropenia : probable post viral neutropenia

Neutropenia persists or is recurrent
Probable congenital neutropenia

Bone marrow cytology and cytogenetics
Situation 4
Neutropenia in multisystemic disease or
dysmorphic syndrome

Genetic study depending on context (see table 2)

Figure 2 Neutropenia: diagnostic tree.

neutropenia can be due to a maternal IgG autoantibody.
Diagnosis is based on the identification of a maternal
antibody reacting selectively with neutrophils belonging
to the panel expressing the antigen and\or with paternal
neutrophils.
Autoimmune primitive neutropenia

This is the most frequent cause of chronic neutropenia in
children, and is better known under the term “benign
chronic neutropenia” [142-144]. This form of isolated
neutropenia is usually discovered after a moderately
severe infectious episode in a small child (median age 8
months). Monocytosis, eosinophilia and/or moderate
splenomegaly can be found. This neutropenia is permanent, at least for several months, ordinarily very profound, but it is usually well tolerated. The marrow smear
shows hyperplasia of the granulocyte lineage, sometimes
with late arrest. Macrophagia of intramedullary polymorphonuclear cells is a diagnostic sign [139-141]. The
detection of anti-polymorphonuclear cell antibodies
necessitates repeated examinations (only about 75% of
cases are positive on the first examination). Several

techniques can be used (detection of circulating antibodies or antibodies adherent to polymorphonuclear cells).
The autoimmune process targets the same membrane
glycoproteins on polymorphonuclear cells as those
involved in autoimmune neutropenia. The most frequently involved is the receptor for the gammaglobulin
invariable fragment (FcRgIIIb) or CD16, that is encoded
by two co-dominant alleles (HNA-1A and HNA-1B, formerly NA 1 and NA 2). The infectious consequences are
limited, probably because bone marrow reserves are
unaffected by the autoimmune process. The neutropenia
resolves spontaneously after 12 to 24 months (36 months
in a few cases). It is rarely associated with another autoimmune disease or with an immune deficiency. It can be
secondary to a viral infection. The adult form differs
from the childhood form by its greater severity. Cytologic
studies sometimes show early maturation arrest of the
granulocyte lineage. In particular, the frontiers between
autoimmune neutropenia, idiopathic neutropenia, and
neutropenia associated with proliferation of large granular lymphocytes (LGL) are still rather vague in adults
[145-147].

Donadieu et al. Orphanet Journal of Rare Diseases 2011, 6:26
http://www.ojrd.com/content/6/1/26

Page 15 of 28

Table 3 Acquired neutropenia - main causes and method of the diagnosis
Main category

How to made the diagnosis

Causes in detail (not exhaustive...)

Drug related
neutropenia

questioning
Safety data

Cytostatic drugs - almost all except asparaginase
Anti-infectives penicillins cephalopsorins sulfamids zidovudine acyclovir
lévamisole pyrimethamine tranquilisants chlorpromazine
phenothiazines anti seizure phenytoin arbamazepine antithyroid
drugs propylthiouracil Cardio vascular drug procainamide quinidine
Anti rheumatic drugs Gold salts Non steroid ant inflammatory
drug colchicine aminopyrine D penicillamine

Toxic

Context/questioning

Benzene Ionizing radiation

Infection

Germ isolation or serology or any other probes

Typhoid Brucellae gram negative septicemia
Mycobacterium Tuberculosis
HIV EBV CMV Parvovirus varicela/Zoster A
B C hepatitis,. almost all virus
Leishmaniasis paludism

Acquired malignant
or benign
hemopathy

Bone marrow smear
Bone marrow trephine
Bone marrow cytogenetic

Acute leukemia
Bone marrow metastases
Aplastic idiopathic anemia
Myelodysplasia
Macrophage activation syndrome/hemophagocytic
lymphohistiocytosis

auto-immunity

Auto Antibodies/Bone marrow smear - almost
normal but sometimes Neutrophil
Hemophagocytosis

Primitive or secondary to rhumatoid disease like in Felty syndrome

Large granular
lymphocytosis

Blood cytology (> 0.4 G/l LGL)
Immunophenotype Lymphoid clonality

Large Lymphocyte Hyperlymphocytosis

Endocrinopathy

Hormonal dosage

Hyper/Hypothyroidy
Surrénal deficiency
Pan hypopitutarism

Nutrition deficiency

Clinical examination
Body mass index
Vitamin and oligo element dosage

Anorexia nervosia, Marasmus, Copper insufisiency..

Idiopathic

No others cause

Secondary autoimmune neutropenia

Ethnic neutropenia

This form is rare in children, contrary to adults. The
causes are numerous, but immune deficiencies are at
the forefront. Neutropenia is generally a secondary feature, as for example in acute disseminated lupus erythematosus, and rheumatoid arthritis (especially Felty
syndrome) [146,147]. Finally, autoimmune neutropenia
associated with autoimmune involvement of another
blood lineage corresponds to the definition of Evans
syndrome [148].

Ethnic neutropenia is the most frequent form of chronic
neutropenia. It is generally isolated and moderate, and
has no direct health repercussions. The mode of genetic
transmission is not yet known and may be multifactorial. First described in 1941 [152], it appears to be particularly frequent in black-skinned individuals.
Epidemiological studies show that the prevalence of
neutropenia (<1.5 G/l) is about 4.5% in black people and
0.8% in Causasians [153]. Few data are available on
other populations, but a high frequency has been noted
in the Arabian peninsula [154], and the frequent mild
neutropenia reported in Crete likely corresponds to the
same entity [155].
Ethnic neutropenia is not associated with increased
susceptibility to infections, and no symptoms have ever
been reported.
Four simple but poorly specific features are classically
present: moderate neutropenia (0.5 to 1.5 G/l), no infections attributable to neutropenia, no identifiable cause,
and African ethnicity.
The few available studies of ethnic neutropenia have
yielded strictly normal findings. In particular, the bone
marrow is qualitatively and quantitatively normal. No

Idiopathic neutropenia

This diagnosis is generally made in adulthood [146].
Etiologic investigations are negative. The presence of
anti-polymorphonuclear cell autoantibodies must be
eliminated by repeated testing at intervals of several
weeks, along with rare causes such as the association
with a thymoma [149]. It seems that some of these
neutropenias are associated restriction of T lymphocyte
clonality, thus resembling hyperlymphocytosis with
large granular lymphocytes [150]. Several pediatric
cases of large granular lymphocytes associated neutropenia have been described, including a familial form
[151].

Donadieu et al. Orphanet Journal of Rare Diseases 2011, 6:26
http://www.ojrd.com/content/6/1/26

difference in neutrophil mobilization after brief or more
strenuous exercise (such as marathon running) has been
observed, and this form of neutropenia does not appear
to be due to excessive neutrophil margination [156]. A
particular polymorphism of the Duffy antigen receptor
for cytokines (DARC) [157] is associated with ethnic
neutropenia in black people.

Antenatal diagnosis
Monogenic congenital neutropenias are severe diseases
with a sometimes major impact on the patient’s daily
life; antenatal diagnosis is therefore warranted, taking
into account the mode of transmission [158].
Antenatal diagnosis has already been performed for
the following disorders: severe congenital neutropenia
with pathogenic ELANE mutations, Shwachman-Diamond syndrome, WHIM syndrome and glycogen storage disease type Ib and may be offered for many other
entities, such as HAX1 and G6PC3.
Antenatal diagnosis must be preceded by a familial
survey. Neutropenia due to mutation of the ELANE
gene, which shows autosomal dominant transmission,
can exist in the mosaic state in one of the parents, with
a unusually high frequency compared with other genetic
abnormalities [159].
The decision to implement antenatal diagnosis and,
possibly, pregnancy termination, must be taken within a
precise ethical framework, after providing the family
with thorough information and obtaining medical expert
opinion in each individual case.
Treatment and Patient Management

Page 16 of 28

with bacterial infections can be gleaned from experience
in cancer chemotherapy, which shows the importance of
body temperature (>39°C) and the decline in the monocyte count (<0.1 G/l) as gravity factors [162,163].
In moderate neutropenia complicated by superficial or
ENT infections, oral antibiotic therapy is adequate, with
close ambulatory monitoring, if inflammatory markers
are absent (e.g. CRP < 15 mg/L).
In contrast, patients with severe neutropenia and sepsis require immediate hospitalization [164]. After bacteriological examinations (blood culture, urinalysis, local
samples, etc.) and chest radiography, parenteral antibiotic therapy should be started rapidly, with a combination
of a third-generation cephalosporin and an aminoside by
IV route. The place of glycopeptides (vancomycin and
teicoplanin) in first-line therapy is controversial. In fever
persists beyond 48 hours, antifungal treatment should
be added.
If the child’s condition is worrisome from the outset,
G-CSF administration should be started, either at a dose
to which the patient is known to respond, or at the
standard dose of 5 μg/kg/d. The dose should be
increased if no improvement is observed. This is justified even when the precise etiology of the neutropenia is
not known. There is no reason to suspect that temporary G-CSF administration would hinder subsequent
investigations.
The utility of leukocyte concentrates should be underlined, even if their use is now generally limited to cellulitis and documented bacterial or fungal infections
showing no clinical response to appropriate antibiotic
therapy.

Historical perspective

Until the 1960s, children with severe congenital neutropenia had a grim prognosis [2,30]. Survival started to
improve markedly in the 1970s, thanks to progress in
curative parenteral antimicrobial chemotherapy and to
more general use of antibiotic prophylaxis. However,
quality of life remained mediocre because of recurrent
infections and permanent stomatitis.
With the exception of bone marrow transplantation
[160], no other treatment (steroids, levamisole, lithium,
etc.) was able to correct the neutropenia. Hematopoietic
growth factors (G-CSF and GM-CSF) started to be used
in 1988 [161], and immediately proved capable of correcting both the neutropenia and susceptibility to infections. The arrival of these drugs also kindled interest in
these disorders, leading to the creation of registries in
several western countries.
Management of acute infectious episodes

It is important to assess the potential gravity of each
infectious episode by means of a thorough physical
examination. Precious information on the risk associated

Prevention of infections

It is crucial to prevent recurrent infections. The use of
antimicrobial prophylaxis depends on the individual
risk, history, and severity of neutropenia.
Antimicrobial prophylaxis

The principal measure is antimicrobial chemoprophylaxis. The ideal antimicrobial chemotherapy regimen
will be effective against the pathogens most frequently
encountered in this setting, well tolerated, and not select
resistant strains. On this basis the best antibiotic is the
oral sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim combination (Bactrim®), at a daily dose of 50 mg/kg per day. Its value in
constitutional neutropenia has not been studied, but it
is reasonable to extrapolate data from patients with leukemia [165] and chronic granulomatous disease (CGD)
[166]. The use of this drug in chronic neutropenia
sometimes appears paradoxical, because it can occasionally cause neutropenia [167]. However, the risk-benefit
ratio remains favorable. Sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim
only partially prevents these patients’ gingivostomatitis,
and concurrent therapy with an agent active on the oral

Donadieu et al. Orphanet Journal of Rare Diseases 2011, 6:26
http://www.ojrd.com/content/6/1/26

saprophytic flora, and especially anaerobes (metronidazole), is therefore warranted.
Use of cytokines in constitutional neutropenia

The second possibility is to correct the neutropenia by
using hematopoietic growth factors (G-CSF and GMCSF) produced by genetic engineering.
In practice, only G-CSF is used in this indication [42].
Indeed, GM-CSF has several disadvantages, with lesser
efficacy in these indications and poorer immediate tolerability (’flu-like syndrome, marked eosinophilia)
[168-170]. G-CSF is currently available in two forms: filgrastim (Neupogen, in vials containing 480 μg or 330
μg) and lenograstim (Granocyte, in vials containing 340
μg or 130 μg). These two molecules are nearly identical,
lenograstim being the glycosylated form of G-CSF. Their
biological effects are also practically the same, but one
study suggests that filgrastim yields a slightly larger
increase in the neutrophil count compared with the
same dose of lenograstim [171]. It is important to
underline that the pegylated form of G-CSF (PegFilgrastim Neulasta®) is not registered for patients with congenital neutropenia. Pegfilgrastim – a combination of
filgrastim and polyethylene glycol – has a half-life of 15
to 80 hours, reducing the required number of injections
[172]. However, pending specific pharmacokinetic data
in congenital neutropenia, its use carries a risk of overdose and potentially severe adverse effects [173], or, on
the contrary, a lack of efficacy [174].
Treatment schedule In severe congenital neutropenia,
the time and the dose required to increase the neutrophil
count cannot be predicted. In other indications the schedule is generally simpler. Long-term treatment takes place
in two phases [175]: an induction phase and a maintenance phase. The aim of the induction phase is to characterize the individual response to G-CSF. The response is
evaluated in terms of the increase in the neutrophil count
(> 1.5 G/l) and the clinical improvement, after 10 to 15
days. Serial blood cell counts are useful for following
changes in the neutrophil count during this period.
The recommended initial daily dose is 5 μg/kg subcutaneously, with no particular constraints regarding the
timing of injections during the day. If no response is
seen after 15 days, the daily dose is increased in steps of
5 μg/kg. On the contrary, if the response is rapid or
even excessive (PN > 5 G/l), the dose should be halved.
Short-term tolerability is also assessed during the induction phase, including dose-dependent adverse effects
that will have to be taken into account during long-term
treatment. Once the minimal daily dose has been determined, the maintenance phase can begin, which aims to
determine the minimal dose and rhythm of injection to
sustain a clinical response. In the maintenance phase it
is of course possible to modulate the dose and sometimes to attempt a dose reduction or a longer dosing

Page 17 of 28

interval. But it may be necessary to increase the daily
dose, especially for a growing child. Unnecessary blood
counts should be avoided during this period: unless clinical problems arise, a monitoring interval of 4 to 6
months is acceptable.
Efficacy
Severe congenital neutropenia Between 1988 and 2010,
the international and French registries collated data on
G-CSF therapy in no more than 500 patients with severe
congenital neutropenia [6,21]. Long-term follow-up confirms the results of short phase I/II trials in small
groups of patients [175,176]. The efficacy of G-CSF is
based first on the neutrophil count. It is now clear that
the response does not wane with time. However, the
most important criterion for efficacy is the reduction in
infectious complications, including stomatologic status,
although there are no well-established criteria for this
endpoint. During G-CSF development only one randomized study, involving 36 patients, focused on infections
[176]. In this study, some patients received G-CSF routinely and others only after a 4-month observation period.
This study demonstrated a benefit in terms of both
infections and quality of life. No long-term randomized
trials have been published. The dose required to obtain
a response varies widely from one patient to another.
Almost two-thirds of patients respond to a daily dose of
between 2 and 10 μg/kg, while nearly 20% respond to
10-20 μg/kg. A small number of patients require even
higher doses of up to 100 μg/kg. Only 13 cases of complete G-CSF treatment failure have been reported [6,21]
The neutrophil count increment is dose-dependent
beyond a minimum threshold, but it fluctuates over
time on a stable dose, with no identifiable pattern.
There are no clinical or biological features predictive
of the dose to which a given patient will respond.
Cyclic neutropenia G-CSF is always effective in this
setting, avoiding the neutrophil nadir. In contrast, it
does not abolish the cyclic nature of granulopoeisis, and
the oscillations tend to be more unstable, with peak
counts sometimes exceed 30 G/l. Despite several
attempts, no cyclic schedule of G-CSF administration,
such as once every third week, has proven effective. In
contrast, the dose required to correct the nadir is generally below 5 μg/kg/d and the injections can be given
intermittently, for example once every three days.
Tolerability of G-CSF
Short-term adverse effects G-CSF has been used briefly
(<15 days), at a dose of 1 to 5 μg/kg/d, in more than a
million cancer patients (children and adults) receiving
chemotherapy. Tolerability during such short-term use
is good or excellent. Both intravenous and subcutaneous
injections provoke only occasional immediate (<1 per
100) and local reactions. ‘Flu-like reactions, as observed
with other cytokines, are also infrequent.

Donadieu et al. Orphanet Journal of Rare Diseases 2011, 6:26
http://www.ojrd.com/content/6/1/26

Bone pain is more frequent, affecting 2 to 5% of subjects. It rapidly subsides on treatment cessation (within
less than 24 hours) and generally does not recur when a
lower dose is adopted.
Long-term tolerability Few situations necessitate longterm G-CSF therapy. In addition to chronic neutropenia,
G-CSF is sometimes administered in the long term for
aplastic anemia. Published reports of long-term G-CSF
safety concern fewer than 1500 patients, with variable
levels of drug exposure [6,21,177]. Although the action
of G-CSF is, in principle, limited to the granulocyte lineage, various hematologic abnormalities can be present or
occur transiently during treatment. Monocytosis beyond
1.5 G/l is frequent. Eosinophilia, frequent at diagnosis,
can be amplified by G-CSF. Lymphocytosis is unaffected,
as is the hemoglobin level in most patients. However,
reticulocytosis occasionally increases, along with the
hemoglobin level, especially if inflammatory anemia is
present at the outset of treatment. Thrombocytopenia
seems to be the most common hematologic adverse
effect. However, it is generally moderate and regresses
when the G-CSF dose is reduced. Thrombocytopenia
can also be due to hypersplenism [177]. The spleen
almost always enlarges (on imaging studies) at the outset of treatment. Clinical confirmation of this splenomegaly is rarely obtained, except in glycogen storage
disease Ib, in which this complication is very frequent.
Spleen rupture necessitating splenectomy can occasionally occur [177]. The uricemia rises during long-term
treatment but this has no clinical consequences. Exacerbation of long-standing gout has been observed during
short-course therapy [178]. The first cases of leukocytoclasic vascularitis, corresponding to Sweet’s syndrome,
were observed after short-term treatment (<1 month)
[179]. The G-CSF-induced increase in neutrophil adhesion molecule expression seems to be responsible. These
cutaneous manifestations always regress after a dose
reduction or treatment cessation. Two cases of mesangioproliferative glomerulonephritis have been reported
during long-term treatment, both resolving after a dose
reduction or treatment cessation. Osteoporosis occurs in
nearly one-quarter of patients with severe congenital
neutropenia who receive chronic G-CSF therapy [180].
Two cases of pathological fracture have been reported.
But, severe congenital neutropenia itself seems to be
associated with osteopenia, which is often present before
treatment begins. Somatic development is unaffected by
G-CSF and so is puberty.
Multidisciplinary management of multisystem
disorders
Glycogen storage disease Ib Glycogen storage disease Ib
patients must be managed by a multidisciplinary team
including experienced specialists in pediatric nutrition
and hematology. The carbohydrate balance is very

Page 18 of 28

fragile in these patients, who must be fed day and night.
Severe carbohydrate instability may necessitate liver
transplantation [68]. Low doses of G-CSF (< 5 μg/kg/d)
are usually necessary both to correct the neutropenia
and to obtain a clinical improvement [21,181]. The
response is obtained within 48 hours, which is compatible with neutrophil release from the bone marrow compartment and with the absence of maturation arrest in
these patients. Tolerability is generally good, although
G-CSF-induced thrombocytopenia and splenomegalia
are relatively frequent.
Shwachman-Diamond syndrome These patients too
must be managed by a multidisciplinary team. Their
external pancreatic insufficiency leads to nutritional
deficiency, which may be severe or simply consist of
liposoluble vitamin deficiencies, requiring supplementation. Attention must be paid to the accompanying bone
disorders, and counseling is needed because of these
patients’ frequently abnormal mental development. The
use of G-CSF is far less frequent in patients with permanent ELANE neutropenia.
Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT)

HSCT can permanently correct the neutropenia in these
patients, and is the only option for patients who continue
to experience severe infections despite G-CSF therapy.
Validated indications of bone marrow grafting include
G-CSF resistance (> 50 μg/kg/day) and myelodysplasia/
leukemic transformation, in which case it is the only
therapeutic option [182-184].
Patients with malignant transformation (with the
exception of frank leukemia) should not receive chemotherapy before the bone marrow graft.
In patients with neutropenia dependent on chronically
high doses of G-CSF (at least 20 μg/kg per injection at
least three months a year), given the high risk of leukemic transformation, bone marrow grafting should be
considered on a case by case basis, taking into account
the possibility of finding a related donor.
Standard HSCT procedures can be used, with myeloablative conditioning. Even in patients with malignant
transformation survival now exceeds 70%, with the
exception of patients with Schwachman’s syndrome.
The second disease in which HSCT may be indicated
is Shwachman-Diamond syndrome. Schematically, there
are two distinct indications for HSCT in this setting:
pancytopenia with no detectable malignant clone, and
myelodysplasia/leukemic transformation [185]. The
results are very different in the two indications but tend
to be good (favorable outcome in >80% of cases) in the
absence of a malignant clone, while they are very mediocre in case of leukemic transformation (<35% survival).
In the absence of clonal progression, the so-called
‘reduced intensity’ conditioning regimen (especially fludarabine and Campath) appears promising [186,187].

Donadieu et al. Orphanet Journal of Rare Diseases 2011, 6:26
http://www.ojrd.com/content/6/1/26

Daily life

It should be remembered that intramuscular injections
and rectal temperature measurement may be harmful.
Most vaccines can be administered, including live viral
vaccines. However, BCG vaccine should be avoided.
Pneumococcal and influenza vaccination is recommended. No dietary restrictions are necessary in neutropenic children. They are not unusually susceptible to
viral epidemics and there is therefore no reason to
deprive them of opportunities for social interaction.

Prognosis and Outcome
Several complications can occur in patients with congenital neutropenia, including infectious complications,
complications related to extra-hematological involvement, and the risk of leukemia related both to the disease and its treatment.

Page 19 of 28

compliance. However, chronic stomatologic infection
remains very difficult to manage, even with G-CSF and
neutrophil recovery, leading to tooth loss [190]. Finally,
the infections risk may not be related only to the neutropenia: the best example is the WHIM syndrome,
which combines lymphopenia, hypogammaglobulinemia
and very high susceptibility to human papillovirus infections [191].
Outcome: morbidity related to extra-hematopoietic
involvement

Extra-hematopoetic involvement may have a very strong
impact on these patients’ lives, such as the neurodevelopmental disorders observed in Kostmann’s disease,
Shwachman Diamond syndrome, and Cohen’s disease.
Cardiac dysfunction may be very severe in Shwachman
Diamond syndrome and is almost always observed in
Barth’s syndrome.

Outcome - the infectious risk

Bacterial infections represent the main risk. Infections
can be life-threatening or otherwise impair quality of
life. This is particularly the case of chronic oral infections, leading to recurrent aphthosis, paradontopathy
and tooth loss.
The natural risk of life-threatening invasive infections
is very high. In the 1950s, almost all patients with the
most severe form of the disease, with permanent and
profound neutropenia, died in the first 2 years of life
from sepsis, cellulitis or pneumonia; this was the case of
11 of the 14 patients in Kostmann’s pedigree [2]. Two
deaths from pneumonia were reported among 16
patients with cyclic neutropenia [188], while no deaths
were reported among patients with chronic benign neutropenia [34,142].
In the sixties and seventies, with more extensive used
of antibiotic therapy, lethal sepsis became less frequent
even in the most severe forms of congenital neutropenia. The report of Kostmann’s pedigree in 1975 showed
long-term survival [33] and prior the G-CSF period
(since the ninety’s) death from infections is already
exceptional in such category of patients but occasionally
is described even cyclic neutropenia [5].
Chronic infections remain very frequent, and especially stomatologic infections with painful gingivitis
associated with papules (aphthae-like oral furuncles) of
the tongue, and parodontopathies [35]. Diffuse gastrointestinal lesions are sometimes present, leading to
abdominal pain and diarrhea, and sometimes mimicking
Crohn’s disease on radiological studies [36]. This complication is frequent in glycogen storage disease type Ib.
The availability of G-CSF since 1988 dramatically
changed these patients’ medical management, but lethal
bacterial infections are still reported [21,189], especially
in patients with a poor response to G-CSF, or with poor

Malignant transformation: Risk factors and possible role
of G-CSF

First introduced in the late 1980s [42], growth factors
have vastly improved the management of chronic neutropenia. Once their efficacy on the neutropenia associated
with cancer chemotherapy had been demonstrated [161]
and the need for long-term administration in some cases
had emerged [176], questions of safety were raised, especially regarding the risk of malignant transformation.
Although congenital neutropenias are preleukemic
states, the risk of malignant transformation is difficult to
evaluate in isolation, as the spontaneous risk and the
potential role of G-CSF must both be taken into
account.
The main question is the risk-benefit ratio, as mentioned in the very first article reporting the effect of GCSF in this setting [161], particularly as leukemias had
been observed in the rare patients with congenital neutropenia who survived beyond their first decade of life
[192-194].
In 1993 international teams opted to create a patient
registry to examine this issue. The data confirmed the
marked increase in the risk of leukemia in these
patients. The cumulative incidence of leukemia among
patients with severe congenital neutropenia is about
15% at age 20 years [21].
Leukemic transformation has been observed in
patients with mutations in ELANE [21,195], HAX1
[196], WASP [91], SBDS [21,197] and G6PC3 or
SLC37A4 [198,199].
These leukemias have a number of particularities.
They usually involve proliferation of poorly differentiated cells, and the most consistent cytogenetic anomaly
is monosomy 7. They are often preceded by the emergence of an acquired somatic anomaly of the

Donadieu et al. Orphanet Journal of Rare Diseases 2011, 6:26
http://www.ojrd.com/content/6/1/26

intracytoplasmic part of the G-CSF receptor CSF3R
[200]. These mutations are not found in de novo acute
myeloblastic or lymphoblastic leukemia [201] and have
never been found in Shwachman Diamond disease, even
though this entity is associated with a high risk of leukemic transformation.
Studies of patients with ELANE mutations show that
the main risk factor for leukemic onset is the severity of
neutropenia and not the nature of the ELANE mutation.
Thus, the leukemic risk is very low or inexistent in cyclic neutropenia, while it is maximal in patients with permanent neutropenia below 0.1 G/l. However, several
other factors are associated with severe neutropenia,
such as infections and the use of G-CSF, especially at
high doses (> 15 μg/kg/day) and for long periods[21].
The link between intracytoplasmic G-CSF receptor
defects, often observed in these patients before and during malignant transformation[202,203], and monosomy
7 is not known. In contrast, blast cell lineages harboring
monosomy 7 are particularly sensitive to G-CSF, which
selects cells carrying this anomaly [204]. The absence of
any direct oncogenic effect of ELANE mutations and the
impact of both the severity of neutropenia (that strongly
modifies bone marrow homeostasis and leads to compensatory hyperstimulation of the monocyte lineage)
and high doses of G-CSF suggests that long-term bone
marrow stimulation can be responsible for leukemic
transformation. The leukemic risk in patients receiving
the highest doses of G-CSF may warrant HSCT
[21,182,189].
Evaluation of the risk factors of secondary leukemia with
patient registries

The number of reported cases of leukemia and myelodysplasia in patients with severe congenital neutropenia
has increased markedly in recent years, since the advent
of G-CSF [6,7,205-210] relative to the pre-G-CSF era
[192-194]. Numerous cases have been described in
patients with Shwachman-Diamond syndrome, both
before the advent of G-CSF and also in patients not
receiving this drug [60,211-213], whereas few have been
reported in patients receiving G-CSF. However, this syndrome is rarely treated with G-CSF.
Reviews of the literature provide less reliable information on this adverse effect than patient registries, which
can be used to calculate and to compare the risk.
The risk of leukemia and myelodysplasia has been studied in the French registry [21]. Factors favoring malignant transformation included disease-related factors and
G-CSF exposure. Disease-related factors comprise the
type of neutropenia as myelodysplasia and leukemia are
observed only in patients with severe congenital neutropenia or Shwachman Diamond syndrome, the severity of
neutropenia (i.e. the number and severity of infections),
the degree of neutropenia, and the level of bone marrow

Page 20 of 28

myeloid arrest. Two characteristics of G-CSF exposure
are significantly linked to the risk of leukemic transformation: the cumulative dose and the mean dose per
injection. The cumulative duration of G-CSF exposure
and the length of post-treatment follow-up are not associated with an increased risk. No threshold of exposure
below which G-CSF does not increase the leukemic risk
has been identified. In addition, the small size of this
sample rules out firm conclusions, but patients requiring
more than 10 μg/kg per injection and who receive a
cumulative dose of more than 10 000 μg/kg, clearly
have an increased risk of malignant transformation.
Initial publications from the international registry did
not examine the link between the intensity of G-CSF
exposure and the leukemic risk [6,7], but more recent
analyses have shown an increase in the risk of leukemia
among patients receiving the highest doses [189,214].
A relation between G-CSF exposure and secondary
myelodysplasia and leukemia have been obtained in
cohort studies of patients with bone marrow aplasia
[215,216] and breast cancer [217-219], showing that GCSF has a leukemogenic effect in situations clearly distinct from congenital neutropenia.
Monitoring of the leukemic risk

This leukemic risk warrants close patient monitoring,
especially when high doses of G-CSF are used. Repeated
blood cell counts are required to detect anemia or
thrombocytopenia, which may necessitate bone marrow
sampling.
The place of routine bone marrow sampling is more
controversial. Intracytoplasmic G-CSF- receptor mutations correlate with the appearance of leukemic clones,
which can also be detected by cytogenetic examination
with the FISH technique.
Conclusion on the leukemic risk of G-CSF therapy

Although the data are somewhat fragmentary and heterogeneous, several clinical studies suggest that G-CSF
exposure beyond a certain threshold can be leukemogenic in patents with disorders known to favor leukemic
transformation. The precise threshold dose at which this
effect emerges cannot be determined, as it is not mentioned in most studies.

Lessons from congenital neutropenia and
perspectives
Knowledge of the molecular bases of congenital neutropenia provides important information on two aspects of
myeloid differentiation.
How congenital neutropenia contribute to understand
dynamics of granulopoeisis?

The link between permanent neutropenia and defective
neutrophil production or excessive apoptosis of neutrophil precursors is clear: a decrease in the production of

Donadieu et al. Orphanet Journal of Rare Diseases 2011, 6:26
http://www.ojrd.com/content/6/1/26

cells or shorter half-life results in a lower number in the
periphery. The cyclic aspect of the peripheral neutrophil
count is more difficult to analyze and suggests the existence of a cryptic biological clock that regulates granulopoiesis. This putative clock might be revealed by
particular mutations. To unify cyclic and permanent
neutropenia, older notions on the dynamics of granulopoiesis can be helpful. First, the neutrophil count in
healthy subjects varies markedly (between 1.8 and 4.5
G/l), in an unpredictable and chaotic manner [220]. In
addition, ‘extrinsic’ factors that affect the neutrophil
count also modify the cyclic variations in circulating
neutrophil numbers relative to healthy subjects. Thus,
G-CSF not only increases the number of circulating
neutrophils but also leads to pseudo-cyclic irregularities
[161]. In contrast, a cytostatic drug such as cyclophosphamide, administered at low doses, transforms chaotic
variations in the neutrophil count into pseudo-cyclic
changes[221], while high doses cause profound permanent neutropenia. These phenomena correspond to a
non linear mathematical model [222]. Such models can
describe temporal variations in the size of a population
as a chaotic variation, with no precise cycle but between
permanent extremes, up to total abolition of the population, via quasi-sinusoidal variations, from variations in a
single coefficient corresponding to the reproductive rate
of the population, i.e. the relationship between the production and death of individuals composing the population. In the case of the neutrophil population, excessive
apoptosis, that cannot be precisely quantified and that
can be influenced by precise mutations and the epigenetic context [223], contributes to excessive cell death
[224]. This model remains theoretical but can be used
to integrate physiological and pathological situations
affecting granulopoiesis and is the only way to unify the
different situations observed in congenital neutropenia
[19].
The fate of stem cells from immature myeloid cells to
mature polymorphonuclear neutrophils. lessons from
congenital neutropenia

Congenital neutropenia represents a physiological model
for studying granulopoeisis. In the past 10 years, 12
genes responsible for congenital neutropenia have been
identified. Each mutation is responsible for a very peculiar molecular defect. Surprisingly, most known molecular abnormalities responsible for neutropenia do not
involve genes with a transcriptional role in granulopoeisis, but rather genes involved in endoplasmic reticulum
functions, like granule stability or intracytoplasmic granule trafficking or protein packaging.
Defective packaging of cellular enzymes in granules (due
to ELANE mutations) or cytoskeleton changes (WASP and
dynamin 2 mutations) modify intracytoplasmic trafficking

Page 21 of 28

and result in neutropenia, possibly through an excess of
apoptosis or defective maturation. This is similar to the
situation in several clinical disorders comprising albinism
and neutropenia and characteristic of the HermanskyPudlak syndrome type 2 (AP3 defect), AP14 deficiency
[78] (AP14 is a protein with similar functions to AP3),
Chediak-Higashi syndrome and Griscelli’s syndrome (the
latter two entities also involve a macrophage activation
syndrome in addition to neutropenia) [114]. A transmembrane protein of the Golgi apparatus is also involved in
other disorders comprising neutropenia, such as glycogen
storage disease Ib (SLC37A4), G6PC3 and Cohen’s disease,
but whose phenotypic expression also involves other
systems.
The involvement of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) proteins or ER packaging processes in these forms of neutropenia shows the importance of ER stress. Increased
ER stress elicits a cellular response known as the
unfolded protein response (UPR). The UPR is activated
in response to an accumulation of unfolded or misfolded proteins in the lumen of the ER. In this scenario,
the UPR has two primary aims: to restore normal cell
function by halting protein translation and to activate
the signaling pathways that lead to increased production
of molecular chaperones involved in protein folding. If
these objectives are not achieved within a certain time
lapse or if the disruption is prolonged, the UPR initiates
programmed cell death (apoptosis). Three ER-localized
protein sensors are known: IRE1alpha (inositol-requiring
1alpha), PERK (Protein kinase (PKR)-like ER kinase),
and activating transcription factor 6 (ATF6). In cases of
ER stress, these sensors are activated and trigger a complex series of events designed to maintain ER homeostasis and to promote protein folding, maturation,
secretion, and ER-associated protein degradation.
Changes in the shape of the protein, or a change in its
function - such as a gain of function - may be one trigger of ER stress as shown for ELANE mutations [48,51].
No comprehensive mechanism has been proposed for
the impact of several different mutations, such as SBDS
[225]. Indeed, mutation of the only transcription factor
(GFI1) known to be involved in congenital neutropenia
may not directly affect the transcription process but
interfere with interaction with ELANE protein [88,226].
Lymphoid enhancer factor 1 (LEF1) is a 48-kD nuclear
protein expressed in pre-B and T cells and in myeloid
cells. A low level of this factor has been observed in the
myeloid cells of patients with congenital neutropenia
with maturation arrest at the promyelocyte level [227].
The decrease in transcription factor expression is difficult to interpret both because LEF1 gene is normal and
because LEF1 expression is depending of type of congenital neutropenia. This suggests that the decreased
expression of LEF1 is more a proteic consequence to

Donadieu et al. Orphanet Journal of Rare Diseases 2011, 6:26
http://www.ojrd.com/content/6/1/26

some mutations causing congenital neutropenia. Indeed
Horwicz’s team, who initially showed the involvement of
LEF1 in this pathway, have shown that LEF-1 cooperates
with Core-binding Factor a to activate ELANE in vivo
[228]. They also raised the possibility that up regulating
promoter mutations may contribute to SCN.
Pro LL37 is a antibacterial peptide usually packaged in
neutrophil granules and its level is low, whatever the
genetic backgrounds of the congenital neutropenia
[229]. Low pro LL37 level may be responsible for the
persistence of parondothopathy in patients with CN
treated with G-CSF. Interestingly, vitamin D is able to
correct the pro LL37 level [230].
Vitamin B3 (nicotamide) participates in a regulatory
loop controlling the transcriptional expression of GCSF. Vitamin B3 induces a peripheral increase in neutrophils [231].

Additional material
Additional file 1: Plate #1: Large aphthae on inner lip of a patient
with severe congenital neutropenia. Plate #2: Inflammatory gum lesion
in a 12-y-old body with severe congenital neutropenia. Note the enamel
damage and loss of parodontal tissue. Plate #3: Aspects of maturation
arrest at the promyelocytic stage associated with hypereosinophilia and
monocytosis in a patient with ELANE severe congenital neutropenia. Plate
#4: Marrow smear in a patients with Shwachman-Diamond syndrome
complicated by bone marrow aplasia: Poor cellularity, fat cells and mast
cells. Plate #5: Marrow smear in a patient with Shwachman-Diamond
syndrome complicated by acute erytrhoid leukemia. Plate #6: Marrow
smear in a patient with Shwachman-Diamond syndrome complicated by
cytopenia and monosomy 7. Left: monolobated micromegacaryocyte
(arrow) Right: double nucleus of the granulocyte lineage (arrow). Plate
#7: Marrow smear in a patient with glycogen storage disease 1b:
Hyperplasia of the granulocyte lineage with no maturation arrest. Plate
#8: Marrow smear of a patient with WHIM syndrome: The PN nuclear
lobes are separated by long, thin filaments; the cytoplasm is occasionally
vacuolated. Plate #9: Blood smear of a patient with Chediak-Higashi
Syndrome: Left: lymphocyte with a voluminous bright red inclusion
(MGG staining) Middle: PN with large sparse granulation, Right Marrow
smear of a patient with Chediak Higashi Syndrome: Voluminous
inclusions in the cytoplasm of myeloid precursors. Plate #10: Marrow
smear of a patient with Griscelli Syndrome: Numerous histiocytes
reflecting a histiocyte activation syndrome. Plate #11: Marrow smear of a
patient with dibasic protein intolerance: Left: PN with picnotic nuclei
phagocyted, by immatures myeloid cells (centre) and by histiocytes
(right). Plate #12: Marrow smear of a patient with Pearson’s syndrome:
Vacuolization of precursors (left) associated with dyserythropoiesis with
acidophilic cells with laminated cytoplasm (centre) and ring sideroblasts
(Perls stain) (right). Plate #13: Marrow smear in a young patient with
autoimmune neutropenia Left: Phagocytosis of a neutrophil by a
histiocyte. Right: Two histiocytes having engulfed several neutrophils that
are at various stages of breakdown

Acknowledgements
We are indebted to David Young for his editorial assistance. Our work was
supported by a grant from Inserm Invs (registre des neutropénies) and by the
e Rare funds (NEUTRO NET) Agence Nationale de la Recherche 09-RARE-010-02
Author details
Service d’Hémato Oncologie Pédiatrique Registre des neutropénies
congénitales AP-HP Hopital Trousseau 26 avenue du Dr Netter F 75012 Paris,

1

Page 22 of 28

France. 2Laboratoire d’hématologie AP-HP Hôpital R Debré Boulevard
Sérurier Paris, 75019, France. 3Unité d’Immuno-Hématologie et Rhumatologie
pédiatriques, et Centre de référence des déficits Immunitaires Héréditaires
(CEREDIH), Groupe Hospitalier Necker-Enfants Malades, Assistance PubliqueHôpitaux de Paris, Paris 75015, France. 4Département de Génétique, AP-HP
Groupe Hospitalier Pitié- Salpêtrière, Université Pierre et Marie Curie, 47/83
Bd de l’Hôpital Bâtiment 10 Lapeyronie 75651 Paris Cedex 13, France.
Authors’ contributions
JD conceived the design and the first draft of the manuscript. OF collect the
cytological iconography, all authors critically review the initial draft and
participate to the final version of the manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 29 September 2010 Accepted: 19 May 2011
Published: 19 May 2011
References
1. Kostmann R: Hereditär reticulos - en ny systemsjukdom. Svenska
Läkartideningen 1950, 47:2861-2868.
2. Kostmann R: Infantile genetic agranulocytosis; agranulocytosis infantilis
hereditaria. Acta Paediatr Suppl 1956, 45:1-78.
3. Klein C, Grudzien M, Appaswamy G, Germeshausen M, Sandrock I,
Schaffer AA, Rathinam C, Boztug K, Schwinzer B, Rezaei N, et al: HAX1
deficiency causes autosomal recessive severe congenital neutropenia
(Kostmann disease). Nat Genet 2007, 39:86-92.
4. Carlsson G, van’t HI, Melin M, Entesarian M, Laurencikas E, Nennesmo I,
Trebinska A, Grzybowska E, Palmblad J, Dahl N, et al: Central nervous
system involvement in severe congenital neutropenia: neurological and
neuropsychological abnormalities associated with specific HAX1
mutations. J Intern Med 2008, 264:388-400.
5. Palmer SE, Stephens K, Dale DC: Genetics, phenotype, and natural history
of autosomal dominant cyclic hematopoiesis. American Journal of Medical
Genetics 1996, 66:413-22.
6. Dale DC, Cottle TE, Fier CJ, Bolyard AA, Bonilla MA, Boxer LA, Cham B,
Freedman MH, Kannourakis G, Kinsey SE, et al: Severe chronic neutropenia:
Treatment and follow-up of patients in the Severe Chronic Neutropenia
International Registry. Am J Hematol 2003, 72:82-93.
7. Freedman MH, Bonilla MA, Fier C, Bolyard AA, Scarlata D, Boxer LA,
Brown S, Cham B, Kannourakis G, Kinsey SE, et al: Myelodysplasia
syndrome and acute myeloid leukemia in patients with congenital
neutropenia receiving G-CSF therapy. Blood 2000, 96:429-436.
8. Horwitz M, Benson KF, Person RE, Aprikyan AG, Dale DC: Mutations in
ELA2, encoding neutrophil elastase, define a 21-day biological clock in
cyclic haematopoiesis. Nat Genet 1999, 23:433-436.
9. Dale DC, Person RE, Bolyard AA, Aprikyan AG, Bos C, Bonilla MA, Boxer LA,
Kannourakis G, Zeidler C, Welte K, et al: Mutations in the gene encoding
neutrophil elastase in congenital and cyclic neutropenia. Blood 2000,
96:2317-2322.
10. Boztug K, Appaswamy G, Ashikov A, Schaffer AA, Salzer U, Diestelhorst J,
Germeshausen M, Brandes G, Lee-Gossler J, Noyan F, et al: A syndrome
with congenital neutropenia and mutations in G6PC3. N Engl J Med 2009,
360:32-43.
11. Manroe BL, Weinberg AG, Rosenfeld CR, Browne R: The neonatal blood
count in health and disease. I. Reference values for neutrophilic cells.
J Pediatr 1979, 95:89-98.
12. Schelonka RL, Yoder BA, desJardins SE, Hall RB, Butler J: Peripheral
leukocyte count and leukocyte indexes in healthy newborn term infants.
J Pediatr 1994, 125:603-606.
13. Schelonka RL, Yoder BA, Hall RB, Trippett TM, Louder DS, Hickman JR,
Guerra CG: Differentiation of segmented and band neutrophils during
the early newborn period. J Pediatr 1995, 127:298-300.
14. Maughan WZ, Bishop CR, Pryor TA, Athens JW: The question of cycling of
the blood neutrophil concentrations and pitfalls in the statistical
analysis of sampled data. Blood 1973, 41:85-91.
15. Mackey MC: Cell kinetic status of haematopoietic stem cells. Cell Prolif
2001, 34:71-83.
16. Sletvold O, Smaaland R, Laerum OD: Cytometry and time-dependent
variations in peripheral blood and bone marrow cells: a literature review

Donadieu et al. Orphanet Journal of Rare Diseases 2011, 6:26
http://www.ojrd.com/content/6/1/26

17.

18.
19.

20.
21.

22.

23.

24.
25.

26.

27.

28.

29.
30.

31.

32.
33.
34.

35.
36.

37.
38.
39.

40.

and relevance to the chronotherapy of cancer. Chronobiol Int 1991,
8:235-250.
Smaaland R, Sothern RB, Lote K, Sandberg S, Aakvaag A, Laerum OD:
Circadian phase relationships between peripheral blood variables and
bone marrow proliferative activity in clinical health. In Vivo 1995,
9:379-389.
Smaaland R, Sothern RB, Laerum OD, Abrahamsen JF: Rhythms in human
bone marrow and blood cells. Chronobiol Int 2002, 19:101-127.
Haurie C, Dale DC, Mackey MC: Occurrence of periodic oscillations in the
differential blood counts of congenital, idiopathic, and cyclical
neutropenic patients before and during treatment with G-CSF.
Experimental Hematology 1999, 27:401-9.
Baehner RL, Johnston RB Jr: Monocyte function in children with
neutropenia and chronic infections. Blood 1972, 40:31-41.
Donadieu J, Leblanc T, Bader MB, Barkaoui M, Fenneteau O, Bertrand Y,
Maier-Redelsperger M, Micheau M, Stephan JL, Phillipe N, et al: Analysis of
risk factors for myelodysplasias, leukemias and death from infection
among patients with congenital neutropenia. Experience of the French
Severe Chronic Neutropenia Study Group. Haematologica 2005, 90:45-53.
Notarangelo LD, Fischer A, Geha RS, Casanova JL, Chapel H, Conley ME,
Cunningham-Rundles C, Etzioni A, Hammartrom L, Nonoyama S, et al:
Primary immunodeficiencies: 2009 update. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2009,
124:1161-1178.
Zeidler C, Germeshausen M, Klein C, Welte K: Clinical implications of
ELA2-, HAX1-, and G-CSF-receptor (CSF3R) mutations in severe
congenital neutropenia. Br J Haematol 2009, 144:459-467.
Dreyer NA, Garner S: Registries for robust evidence. Jama 2009,
302:790-791.
Abuzakouk M, Feighery C: Primary immunodeficiency disorders in the
Republic of Ireland: first report of the national registry in children and
adults. J Clin Immunol 2005, 25:73-77.
Golan H, Dalal I, Garty BZ, Schlesinger M, Levy J, Handzel Z, Wolach B,
Rottem M, Goldberg A, Tamir R, et al: The incidence of primary
immunodeficiency syndromes in Israel. Isr Med Assoc J 2002, 4:868-871.
Matamoros FN, Mila LJ, Espanol BT, Raga BS, Fontan CG: Primary
immunodeficiency syndrome in Spain: first report of the National
Registry in Children and Adults. J Clin Immunol 1997, 17:333-339.
Rezaei N, Aghamohammadi A, Moin M, Pourpak Z, Movahedi M,
Gharagozlou M, Atarod L, Ghazi BM, Isaeian A, Mahmoudi M, et al:
Frequency and clinical manifestations of patients with primary
immunodeficiency disorders in Iran: update from the Iranian Primary
Immunodeficiency Registry. J Clin Immunol 2006, 26:519-532.
The French national registry of primary immunodeficiency diseases.
Clin Immunol 2010, 135:264-272.
Li Y, Karlin A, Loike JD, Silverstein SC: A critical concentration of
neutrophils is required for effective bacterial killing in suspension.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2002, 99:8289-8294.
Bodey GP, Buckley M, Sathe YS, Freireich EJ: Quantitative relationships
between circulating leukocytes and infection in patients with acute
leukemia. Ann Intern Med 1966, 64:328-340.
Meyers JD, Atkinson K: Infection in bone marrow transplantation.
Clin Haematol 1983, 12:791-811.
Kostmann R: Infantile genetic agranulocytosis. Acta Paediatrica
Scandinavica 1975, 64:362-368.
Pincus SH, Boxer LA, Stossel TP: Chronic neutropenia in childhood.
Analysis of 16 cases and a review of the literature. American Journal of
Medicine 1976, 61:849-61.
Kalkwarf KL, Gutz DP: Periodontal changes associated with chronic
idiopathic neutropenia. Pediatr Dent 1981, 3:189-195.
Roe TF, Coates TD, Thomas DW, Miller JH, Gilsanz V: Brief report: treatment
of chronic inflammatory bowel disease in glycogen storage disease type
Ib with colony-stimulating factors. N Engl J Med 1992, 326:1666-1669.
Borregaard N, Sorensen OE, Theilgaard-Monch K: Neutrophil granules:
a library of innate immunity proteins. Trends Immunol 2007, 28:340-345.
metchnikof E: Leçons sur la pathologie comparée de l’inflammation,
faites à l’Institut Pasteur en avril et mai 1891. Masson 1892.
Li Y, Karlin A, Loike JD, Silverstein SC: Determination of the critical
concentration of neutrophils required to block bacterial growth in
tissues. J Exp Med 2004, 200:613-622.
Cartwright GE, Athens JW, Wintrobe MM: The kinetics of granulopoiesis in
normal man. Blood 1964, 24:780-803.

Page 23 of 28

41. Dresch C, Najean Y, Bauchet J: Kinetic studies of 51Cr and DF32P labelled
granulocytes. Br J Haematol 1975, 29:67-80.
42. Dale DC: The discovery, development and clinical applications of
granulocyte colony-stimulating factor. Transactions of the American Clinical
& Climatological Association 1998, 109:27-36.
43. Bellanne-Chantelot C, Clauin S, Leblanc T, Cassinat B, Rodrigues-Lima F,
Beaufils S, Vaury C, Barkaoui M, Fenneteau O, Maier-Redelsperger M, et al:
Mutations in the ELA2 gene correlate with more severe expression of
neutropenia: a study of 81 patients from the French Neutropenia
Register. Blood 2004, 103:4119-4125.
44. Xia J, Bolyard AA, Rodger E, Stein S, Aprikyan AA, Dale DC, Link DC:
Prevalence of mutations in ELANE, GFI1, HAX1, SBDS, WAS and G6PC3
in patients with severe congenital neutropenia. Br J Haematol 2009,
147:535-542.
45. Korkmaz B, Horwitz MS, Jenne DE, Gauthier F: Neutrophil elastase,
proteinase 3, and cathepsin G as therapeutic targets in human diseases
2. Pharmacol Rev 2010, 62:726-759.
46. Massullo P, Druhan LJ, Bunnell BA, Hunter MG, Robinson JM, Marsh CB,
Avalos BR: Aberrant subcellular targeting of the G185R neutrophil
elastase mutant associated with severe congenital neutropenia induces
premature apoptosis of differentiating promyelocytes. Blood 2005,
105:3397-3404.
47. Grenda DS, Johnson SE, Mayer JR, McLemore ML, Benson KF, Horwitz M,
Link DC: Mice expressing a neutrophil elastase mutation derived from
patients with severe congenital neutropenia have normal
granulopoiesis. Blood 2002, 100:3221-3228.
48. Grenda DS, Murakami M, Ghatak J, Xia J, Boxer LA, Dale D, Dinauer MC,
Link DC: Mutations of the ELA2 gene found in patients with severe
congenital neutropenia induce the unfolded protein response and
cellular apoptosis. Blood 2007, 110:4179-4187.
49. Horwitz M, Benson KF, Duan Z, Li FQ, Person RE: Hereditary neutropenia:
dogs explain human neutrophil elastase mutations. Trends Mol Med 2004,
10:163-170.
50. Horwitz MS, Duan Z, Korkmaz B, Lee HH, Mealiffe ME, Salipante SJ:
Neutrophil elastase in cyclic and severe congenital neutropenia. Blood
2007, 109:1817-1824.
51. Kollner I, Sodeik B, Schreek S, Heyn H, von NN, Germeshausen M, Zeidler C,
Kruger M, Schlegelberger B, Welte K, et al: Mutations in neutrophil
elastase causing congenital neutropenia lead to cytoplasmic protein
accumulation and induction of the unfolded protein response. Blood
2006, 108:493-500.
52. Druhan LJ, Ai J, Massullo P, Kindwall-Keller T, Ranalli MA, Avalos BR: Novel
mechanism of G-CSF refractoriness in patients with severe congenital
neutropenia. Blood 2005, 105:584-591.
53. Carlsson G, Fasth A: Infantile genetic agranulocytosis, morbus Kostmann:
presentation of six cases from the original “Kostmann family” and a
review. Acta Paediatr 2001, 90:757-764.
54. Germeshausen M, Grudzien M, Zeidler C, Abdollahpour H, Yetgin S,
Rezaei N, Ballmaier M, Grimbacher B, Welte K, Klein C: Novel HAX1
mutations in patients with severe congenital neutropenia reveal
isoform-dependent genotype-phenotype associations. Blood 2008,
111:4954-4957.
55. Nezelof C, Watchi M: L’hypoplasie congénitale lipomateuse du pancréas
du pancréas exocrine chez l’enfant (2 observations et revue de la
littérature). Arch Fr Pediatr 1961, 18:1135-1172.
56. Shwachman H, Diamond LK, Oski FA, Khaw KT: The syndrome of
pancreatic insufficiency and bone marrow dysfunction. J Pediatr 1964,
65:645-663.
57. Lacaille F, Mani TM, Brunelle F, Lallemand D, Schmitz J: Magnetic
resonance imaging for diagnosis of Shwachman’s syndrome. Journal of
Pediatric Gastroenterology & Nutrition 1996, 23:599-603.
58. Dror Y, Freedman MH: Shwachman-diamond syndrome. Br J Haematol
2002, 118:701-713.
59. Kerr EN, Ellis L, Dupuis A, Rommens JM, Durie PR: The behavioral
phenotype of school-age children with shwachman diamond syndrome
indicates neurocognitive dysfunction with loss of Shwachman-BodianDiamond syndrome gene function. J Pediatr 2010, 156:433-438.
60. Dror Y, Freedman MH: Shwachman-Diamond syndrome: An inherited
preleukemic bone marrow failure disorder with aberrant hematopoietic
progenitors and faulty marrow microenvironment. Blood 1999,
94:3048-3054.

Donadieu et al. Orphanet Journal of Rare Diseases 2011, 6:26
http://www.ojrd.com/content/6/1/26

61. Black LV, Soltau T, Kelly DR, Berkow RL: Shwachman-Diamond syndrome
presenting in a premature infant as pancytopenia. Pediatr Blood Cancer
2008, 51:123-124.
62. Kuijpers TW, Nannenberg E, Alders M, Bredius R, Hennekam RC: Congenital
aplastic anemia caused by mutations in the SBDS gene: a rare
presentation of Shwachman-Diamond syndrome. Pediatrics 2004, 114:
e387-e391.
63. Toiviainen-Salo S, Makitie O, Mannerkoski M, Hamalainen J, Valanne L,
Autti T: Shwachman-Diamond syndrome is associated with structural
brain alterations on MRI. Am J Med Genet A 2008, 146A:1558-1564.
64. Nishimura G, Nakashima E, Hirose Y, Cole T, Cox P, Cohn DH, Rimoin DL,
Lachman RS, Miyamoto Y, Kerr B, et al: The Shwachman-Bodian-Diamond
syndrome gene mutations cause a neonatal form of
spondylometaphysial dysplasia (SMD) resembling SMD Sedaghatian
type. J Med Genet 2007, 44:e73.
65. Boocock GR, Morrison JA, Popovic M, Richards N, Ellis L, Durie PR,
Rommens JM: Mutations in SBDS are associated with ShwachmanDiamond syndrome. Nat Genet 2003, 33:97-101.
66. Finch AJ, Hilcenko C, Basse N, Drynan LF, Goyenechea B, Menne TF,
Gonzalez FA, Simpson P, D’Santos CS, Arends MJ, et al: Uncoupling of GTP
hydrolysis from eIF6 release on the ribosome causes ShwachmanDiamond syndrome. Genes Dev 2011, 25:917-929.
67. Ambruso DR, McCabe ER, Anderson DC, Beaudet A, Ballas LM, Brandt IK:
Infectious and bleeding complications in patients with glycogen Ib. Am J
Dis Child 2003, 139:691-697.
68. Lachaux A, Boillot O, Stamm D, Canterino I, Dumontet C, Regnier F,
Floret D, Hermier M: Treatment with lenograstim (glycosylated
recombinant human granulocyte colony-stimulating factor) and
orthotopic liver transplantation for glycogen storage disease type Ib.
J Pediatr 1993, 123:1005-1008.
69. Yiu WH, Pan CJ, Allamarvdasht M, Kim SY, Chou JY: Glucose-6-phosphate
transporter gene therapy corrects metabolic and myeloid abnormalities
in glycogen storage disease type Ib mice. Gene Ther 2007, 14:219-226.
70. Cheung YY, Kim SY, Yiu WH, Pan CJ, Jun HS, Ruef RA, Lee EJ, Westphal H,
Mansfield BC, Chou JY: Impaired neutrophil activity and increased
susceptibility to bacterial infection in mice lacking glucose-6phosphatase-beta. J Clin Invest 2007, 117:784-793.
71. Jun HS, Lee YM, Cheung YY, McDermott DH, Murphy PM, De Ravin SS,
Mansfield BC, Chou JY: Lack of glucose recycling between endoplasmic
reticulum and cytoplasm underlies cellular dysfunction in glucose-6phosphatase-beta-deficient neutrophils in a congenital neutropenia
syndrome. Blood 2010, 116:2783-2792.
72. Chandler KE, Kidd A, Al-Gazali L, Kolehmainen J, Lehesjoki AE, Black GC,
Clayton-Smith J: Diagnostic criteria, clinical characteristics, and natural
history of Cohen syndrome. J Med Genet 2003, 40:233-241.
73. Kivitie-Kallio S, Rajantie J, Juvonen E, Norio R: Granulocytopenia in Cohen
syndrome. Br J Haematol 1997, 98:308-311.
74. Kolehmainen J, Black GC, Saarinen A, Chandler K, Clayton-Smith J,
Traskelin AL, Perveen R, Kivitie-Kallio S, Norio R, Warburg M, et al: Cohen
syndrome is caused by mutations in a novel gene, COH1, encoding a
transmembrane protein with a presumed role in vesicle-mediated
sorting and intracellular protein transport. Am J Hum Genet 2003,
72:1359-1369.
75. Mostefai R, Morice-Picard F, Boralevi F, Sautarel M, Lacombe D, Stasia MJ,
McGrath J, Taieb A: Poikiloderma with neutropenia, Clericuzio type, in a
family from Morocco. Am J Med Genet A 2008, 146A:2762-2769.
76. Volpi L, Roversi G, Colombo EA, Leijsten N, Concolino D, Calabria A,
Mencarelli MA, Fimiani M, Macciardi F, Pfundt R, et al: Targeted nextgeneration sequencing appoints c16orf57 as clericuzio-type
poikiloderma with neutropenia gene. Am J Hum Genet 2010, 86:72-76.
77. Barth PG, Wanders RJ, Vreken P, Janssen EA, Lam J, Baas F: X-linked
cardioskeletal myopathy and neutropenia (Barth syndrome) (MIM
302060). Journal of Inherited Metabolic Disease 1999, 22:555-67.
78. Bohn G, Allroth A, Brandes G, Thiel J, Glocker E, Schaffer AA, Rathinam C,
Taub N, Teis D, Zeidler C, et al: A novel human primary
immunodeficiency syndrome caused by deficiency of the endosomal
adaptor protein p14. Nat Med 2007, 13:38-45.
79. Kotzot D, Richter K, Gierth-Fiebig K: Oculocutaneous albinism,
immunodeficiency, hematological disorders, and minor anomalies: a
new autosomal recessive syndrome? Am J Med Genet 1994, 50:224-227.

Page 24 of 28

80. Huizing M, Scher CD, Strovel E, Fitzpatrick DL, Hartnell LM, Anikster Y,
Gahl WA: Nonsense mutations in ADTB3A cause complete deficiency of
the beta3A subunit of adaptor complex-3 and severe Hermansky-Pudlak
syndrome type 2. Pediatr Res 2002, 51:150-158.
81. Dale DC, Rodger E, Cebon J, Ramesh N, Hammond WP, Zsebo KM: Longterm treatment of canine cyclic hematopoiesis with recombinant canine
stem cell factor. Blood 1995, 85:74-9.
82. Meng R, Bridgman R, Toivio-Kinnucan M, Niemeyer GP, Vernau W, Hock T,
Lothrop CD Jr: Neutrophil elastase-processing defect in cyclic
hematopoietic dogs. Exp Hematol 2010, 38:104-115.
83. Itin PH, Pittelkow MR: Trichothiodystrophy with chronic neutropenia and
mild mental retardation. J Am Acad Dermatol 1991, 24:356-358.
84. Stoll C, Alembik Y, Lutz P: A syndrome of facial dysmorphia, birth defects,
myelodysplasia and immunodeficiency in three sibs of consanguineous
parents. Genetic Counseling 1994, 5:161-5.
85. Manicassamy S, Pulendran B: Modulation of adaptive immunity with
Toll-like receptors. Semin Immunol 2009, 21:185-193.
86. Cham B, Bonilla MA, Winkelstein J: Neutropenia associated with primary
immunodeficiency syndromes. Semin Hematol 2002, 39:107-112.
87. Fiedler K, Sindrilaru A, Terszowski G, Kokai E, Feyerabend TB, Bullinger L,
Rodewald HR, Brunner C: Neutrophil development and function critically
depend on Bruton tyrosine kinase in a mouse model of X-linked
agammaglobulinemia. Blood 2011, 117:1329-1339.
88. Person RE, Li FQ, Duan Z, Benson KF, Wechsler J, Papadaki HA, Eliopoulos G,
Kaufman C, Bertolone SJ, Nakamoto B, et al: Mutations in proto-oncogene
GFI1 cause human neutropenia and target ELA2. Nat Genet 2003,
34:308-312.
89. Ancliff PJ, Blundell MP, Cory GO, Calle Y, Worth A, Kempski H, Burns S,
Jones GE, Sinclair J, Kinnon C, et al: Two novel activating mutations in the
Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein result in congenital neutropenia. Blood
2006, 108:2182-2189.
90. Beel K, Cotter MM, Blatny J, Bond J, Lucas G, Green F, Vanduppen V,
Leung DW, Rooney S, Smith OP, et al: A large kindred with X-linked
neutropenia with an I294T mutation of the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome
gene 3. Br J Haematol 2009, 144:120-126.
91. Beel K, Vandenberghe P: G-CSF receptor (CSF3R) mutations in X-linked
neutropenia evolving to acute myeloid leukemia or myelodysplasia.
Haematologica 2009, 94:1449-1452.
92. Devriendt K, Kim AS, Mathijs G, Frints SG, Schwartz M, Van Den Oord JJ,
Verhoef GE, Boogaerts MA, Fryns JP, You D, et al: Constitutively activating
mutation in WASP causes X-linked severe congenital neutropenia.
Nat Genet 2001, 27:313-317.
93. Moulding DA, Blundell MP, Spiller DG, White MR, Cory GO, Calle Y,
Kempski H, Sinclair J, Ancliff PJ, Kinnon C, et al: Unregulated actin
polymerization by WASp causes defects of mitosis and cytokinesis in
X-linked neutropenia. J Exp Med 2007, 204:2213-2224.
94. Marmier-Savet C, Larosa F, Legrand F, Witz B, Michallet M, Ranta D,
Louvat P, Puyraveau M, Raus N, Tavernier M, et al: G-CSF-induced
aneuploidy does not affect CD34+ cells and does not require cell
division. Blood 2010, 115:910-911.
95. Picard C, Puel A, Bonnet M, Ku CL, Bustamante J, Yang K, Soudais C,
Dupuis S, Feinberg J, Fieschi C, et al: Pyogenic bacterial infections in
humans with IRAK-4 deficiency. Science 2003, 299:2076-2079.
96. Bouma G, Doffinger R, Patel SY, Peskett E, Sinclair JC, Barcenas-Morales G,
Cerron-Gutierrez L, Kumararatne DS, Davies EG, Thrasher AJ, et al: Impaired
neutrophil migration and phagocytosis in IRAK-4 deficiency. Br J
Haematol 2009, 147:153-156.
97. Komiyama A, Kawai H, Yamada S, Aoyama K, Yamazaki M, Saitoh H,
Miyagawa Y, Akabane T, Uehara Y: Impaired natural killer cell recycling in
childhood chronic neutropenia with morphological abnormalities and
defective chemotaxis of neutrophils. Blood 1985, 66:99-105.
98. Zuelwer WW: Myelokathexis - a new form of chronic granulocytopenia.
Report of case. N Engl J Med 1964, 270:699-704.
99. Gorlin RJ, Gelb B, Diaz GA, Lofsness KG, Pittelkow MR, Fenyk JR Jr: WHIM
syndrome, an autosomal dominant disorder: clinical, hematological, and
molecular studies. Am J Med Genet 2000, 91:368-376.
100. Hernandez PA, Gorlin RJ, Lukens JN, Taniuchi S, Bohinjec J, Francois F,
Klotman ME, Diaz GA: Mutations in the chemokine receptor gene CXCR4
are associated with WHIM syndrome, a combined immunodeficiency
disease. Nat Genet 2003, 34:70-74.

Donadieu et al. Orphanet Journal of Rare Diseases 2011, 6:26
http://www.ojrd.com/content/6/1/26

101. Arenzana-Seisdedos F, Virelizier JL, Rousset D, Clark-Lewis I, Loetscher P,
Moser B, Baggiolini M: HIV blocked by chemokine antagonist. Nature
1996, 383:400.
102. Aghamohammadi A, Cheraghi T, Rezaei N, Kanegane H, Abdollahzede S,
Talaei-Khoei M, Heidari G, Zandieh F, Moin M, Miyawaki T: Neutropenia
associated with X-linked Agammaglobulinemia in an Iranian referral
center. Iran J Allergy Asthma Immunol 2009, 8:43-47.
103. Andrews FJ, Katz F, Jones A, Smith S, Finn A: CD40 ligand deficiency
presenting as unresponsive neutropenia. Archives of Disease in Childhood
1996, 74:458-9.
104. Jacobs ZD, Guajardo JR, Anderson KM: XLA-associated neutropenia
treatment: a case report and review of the literature. J Pediatr Hematol
Oncol 2008, 30:631-634.
105. Kozlowski C, Evans DI: Neutropenia associated with X-linked
agammaglobulinaemia. J Clin Pathol 1991, 44:388-390.
106. Agarwal BR, Currimbhoy Z: Resolution of cyclic neutropenia by
intramuscular gamma globulin in a case of common variable
immunodeficiency with predominantly antibody deficiency [see
comments]. Indian Pediatrics 1994, 31:320-2.
107. Buckley RH: Molecular defects in human severe combined
immunodeficiency and approaches to immune reconstitution. Annu Rev
Immunol 2004, 22:625-655.
108. Dupuis-Girod S, Medioni J, Haddad E, Quartier P, Cavazzana-Calvo M, Le
Deist F, de Saint BG, Delaunay J, Schwarz K, Casanova JL, et al:
Autoimmunity in Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome: risk factors, clinical features,
and outcome in a single-center cohort of 55 patients. Pediatrics 2003,
111:e622-e627.
109. Lagresle-Peyrou C, Six EM, Picard C, Rieux-Laucat F, Michel V, Ditadi A,
merens-de CC, Morillon E, Valensi F, Simon-Stoos KL, et al: Human
adenylate kinase 2 deficiency causes a profound hematopoietic defect
associated with sensorineural deafness. Nat Genet 2009, 41:106-111.
110. Pannicke U, Honig M, Hess I, Friesen C, Holzmann K, Rump EM, Barth TF,
Rojewski MT, Schulz A, Boehm T, et al: Reticular dysgenesis (aleukocytosis)
is caused by mutations in the gene encoding mitochondrial adenylate
kinase 2. Nat Genet 2009, 41:101-105.
111. Ozbek N, Derbent M, Olcay L, Yilmaz Z, Tokel K: Dysplastic changes in the
peripheral blood of children with microdeletion 22q11.2. Am J Hematol
2004, 77:126-131.
112. Latger-Cannard V, Bensoussan D, Gregoire MJ, Marcon F, Cloez JL,
Leheup B, Jonveaux P, Lecompte T, Bordigoni P: Frequency of
thrombocytopenia and large platelets correlates neither with
conotruncal cardiac anomalies nor immunological features in the
chromosome 22q11.2 deletion syndrome. Eur J Pediatr 2004, 163:327-328.
113. Kratz CP, Niehues T, Lyding S, Heusch A, Janssen G, Gobel U: Evans
syndrome in a patient with chromosome 22q11.2 deletion syndrome: a
case report. Pediatr Hematol Oncol 2003, 20:167-172.
114. de Saint BG, Fischer A: Defective cytotoxic granule-mediated cell death
pathway impairs T lymphocyte homeostasis. Curr Opin Rheumatol 2003,
15:436-445.
115. Ward DM, Shiflett SL, Kaplan J: Chediak-Higashi syndrome: a clinical and
molecular view of a rare lysosomal storage disorder. Curr Mol Med 2002,
2:469-477.
116. Feldmann J, Callebaut I, Raposo G, Certain S, Bacq D, Dumont C,
Lambert N, Ouachee-Chardin M, Chedeville G, Tamary H, et al: Munc13-4 is
essential for cytolytic granules fusion and is mutated in a form of
familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (FHL3). Cell 2003,
115:461-473.
117. Menasche G, Ho CH, Sanal O, Feldmann J, Tezcan I, Ersoy F, Houdusse A,
Fischer A, de Saint BG: Griscelli syndrome restricted to hypopigmentation
results from a melanophilin defect (GS3) or a MYO5A F-exon deletion
(GS1). J Clin Invest 2003, 112:450-456.
118. Kwong YL, Ng MH, Ma SK: Familial acute myeloid leukemia with
monosomy 7: late onset and involvement of a multipotential progenitor
cell. Cancer Genet Cytogenet 2000, 116:170-173.
119. Maserati E, Minelli A, Menna G, Cecchini MP, Bernardo ME, Rossi G, De FP,
Lo CF, Danesino C, Locatelli F, et al: Familial myelodysplastic syndromes,
monosomy 7/trisomy 8, and mutator effects. Cancer Genet Cytogenet
2004, 148:155-158.
120. Minelli A, Maserati E, Giudici G, Tosi S, Olivieri C, Bonvini L, De FP, Biondi A,
Lo CF, Pasquali F, et al: Familial partial monosomy 7 and myelodysplasia:

Page 25 of 28

121.

122.

123.

124.
125.

126.
127.

128.

129.
130.

131.

132.
133.

134.

135.
136.

137.

138.

139.

140.

141.

142.

different parental origin of the monosomy 7 suggests action of a
mutator gene. Cancer Genet Cytogenet 2001, 124:147-151.
Soriano JR, Taitz LS, Finberg L, Edelmann CM Jr: Hyperglycinemia with
ketoacidosis and leukopenia. Metabolic studies on the nature of the
defect. Pediatrics 1967, 39:818-828.
Duval M, Fenneteau O, Doireau V, Faye A, Emilie D, Yotnda P, Drapier JC,
Schlegel N, Sterkers G, de Baulny HO, et al: Intermittent hemophagocytic
lymphohistiocytosis is a regular feature of lysinuric protein intolerance.
J Pediatr 1999, 134:236-239.
Lacbawan F, Tifft CJ, Luban NL, Schmandt SM, Guerrera M, Weinstein S,
Pennybacker M, Wong LJ: Clinical heterogeneity in mitochondrial DNA
deletion disorders: a diagnostic challenge of Pearson syndrome. Am J
Med Genet 2000, 95:266-268.
Makitie O, Pukkala E, Kaitila I: Increased mortality in cartilage-hair
hypoplasia. Arch Dis Child 2001, 84:65-67.
Ridanpaa M, Sistonen P, Rockas S, Rimoin DL, Makitie O, Kaitila I: Worldwide
mutation spectrum in cartilage-hair hypoplasia: ancient founder origin
of the major70A–>G mutation of the untranslated RMRP. Eur J Hum
Genet 2002, 10:439-447.
van der Hilst JC, Simon A, Drenth JP: Hereditary periodic fever and
reactive amyloidosis. Clin Exp Med 2005, 5:87-98.
Samuels J, Aksentijevich I, Torosyan Y, Centola M, Deng Z, Sood R,
Kastner DL: Familial Mediterranean fever at the millennium. Clinical
spectrum, ancient mutations, and a survey of 100 American referrals to
the National Institutes of Health. Medicine (Baltimore) 1998, 77:268-297.
Ganiou TK, Ailal F, Najib J, Bellanne-Chantelot C, Donadieu J, Bousfiha AA:
Intermittent chronic neutropenia in a patient with familial
Mediterranean fever. Pediatr Blood Cancer 2008, 51:701-703.
Jennings GH, Levi AJ, Reeve J: A case of chronic granulocytopenia
associated with vasculitis and amyloidosis. J Clin Pathol 1973, 26:592-595.
Metin A, Ersoy F, Tinaztepe K, Besbas N, Tezcan I, Sanal O: Cyclic
neutropenia complicated by renal AA amyloidosis. Turk J Pediatr 2000,
42:61-64.
Shiomura T, Ishida Y, Matsumoto N, Sasaki K, Ishihara T, Miwa S: A case of
generalized amyloidosis associated with cyclic neutropenia. Blood 1979,
54:628-635.
Demiroglu H, Dundar S: Behcet’s disease and chronic neutropenia.
Scandinavian Journal of Rheumatology 1997, 26:130-2.
Becton DL, Schultz WH, Kinney TR: Severe neutropenia caused by copper
deficiency in a child receiving continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis.
J Pediatr 1986, 108:735-737.
Halfdanarson TR, Kumar N, Li CY, Phyliky RL, Hogan WJ: Hematological
manifestations of copper deficiency: a retrospective review. Eur J
Haematol 2008, 80:523-531.
Karimbakas J, Langkamp-Henken B, Percival SS: Arrested maturation of
granulocytes in copper deficient mice. J Nutr 1998, 128:1855-1860.
Ulinski T, Aoun B, Toubiana J, Vitkevic R, Bensman A, Donadieu J:
Neutropenia in congenital nephrotic syndrome of the Finnish type: role
of urinary ceruloplasmin loss. Blood 2009, 113:4820-4821.
Bitoun M, Stojkovic T, Prudhon B, Maurage CA, Latour P, Vermersch P,
Guicheney P: A novel mutation in the dynamin 2 gene in a CharcotMarie-Tooth type 2 patient: clinical and pathological findings.
Neuromuscul Disord 2008, 18:334-338.
Claeys KG, Zuchner S, Kennerson M, Berciano J, Garcia A, Verhoeven K,
Storey E, Merory JR, Bienfait HM, Lammens M, et al: Phenotypic spectrum
of dynamin 2 mutations in Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy. Brain 2009,
132:1741-1752.
Gbadoe AD, Fenneteau O, Duval M, Rohrlich P, Cartron J, Vilmer E:
Phagocytose élective des polynucléaires neutrophiles par les
macrophages médullaires et neutropénie auto immune de l’enfant.
Arch Pediatr 1997, 4:398-405.
Dresch C, Flandrin G, Breton-Gorius J: Phagocytosis of neutrophil
polymorphonuclears by macrophages in human bone marrow:
importance in granulopoiesis. J Clin Pathol 1980, 33:1110-1113.
Parmley RT, Crist WM, Ragab AH, Boxer LA, Malluh A, Findley H:
Phagocytosis of neutrophils by marrow macrophages in childhood
chronic benign neutropenia. Journal of Pediatrics 1981, 98:207-12.
Stahlie TD: Chronic benign neutropenia in infancy and early childhood;
report of a case with a review of the literature. J Pediatr 1956,
48:710-721.

Donadieu et al. Orphanet Journal of Rare Diseases 2011, 6:26
http://www.ojrd.com/content/6/1/26

143. Bux J, Behrens G, Jaeger G, Welte K: Diagnosis and clinical course of
autoimmune neutropenia in infancy: analysis of 240 cases. Blood 1998,
91:181-186.
144. Lalezari P, Khorshidi M, Petrosova M: Autoimmune neutropenia of infancy.
Journal of Pediatrics 1986, 109:764-9.
145. Bareau B, Rey J, Hamidou M, Donadieu J, Morcet J, Reman O, Schleinitz N,
Tournilhac O, Roussel M, Fest T, et al: Analysis of a French cohort of
patients with large granular lymphocyte leukemia: a report on 229
cases. Haematologica 2010, 95:1534-1541.
146. Palmblad JE, dem Borne AE: Idiopathic, immune, infectious, and
idiosyncratic neutropenias. Semin Hematol 2002, 39:113-120.
147. Starkebaum G: Chronic neutropenia associated with autoimmune
disease. Semin Hematol 2002, 39:121-127.
148. Mathew P, Chen G, Wang W: Evans syndrome: results of a national
survey. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol 1997, 19:433-437.
149. Yip D, Rasko JE, Lee C, Kronenberg H, O’Neill B: Thymoma and
agranulocytosis: two case reports and literature review. Br J Haematol
1996, 95:52-56.
150. Lamy T, Hamidou M, Loughran TP Jr: Spectre des proliférations LGL et
nouveaux concepts physiopathogéniques. Hematologie 1999, 300-308.
151. Le Deist F, de Saint BG, Coulombel L, Breton-Gorius J, MaierRedelsperger M, Beljorde K, Bremard C, Griscelli C: A familial occurrence of
natural killer cell–T-lymphocyte proliferation disease in two children.
Cancer 1991, 67:2610-2617.
152. Forbes WH, Johnson RECF: Leukopenia in negro workmen. Am J Med Sci
1941, 201:407-412.
153. Hsieh MM, Everhart JE, Byrd-Holt DD, Tisdale JF, Rodgers GP: Prevalence of
neutropenia in the U.S. population: age, sex, smoking status, and ethnic
differences. Ann Intern Med 2007, 146:486-492.
154. Denic S, Showqi S, Klein C, Takala M, Nagelkerke N, Agarwal MM:
Prevalence, phenotype and inheritance of benign neutropenia in Arabs.
BMC Blood Disord 2009, 9:3.
155. Papadaki HA, Xylouri I, Coulocheri S, Kalmanti M, Kafatos A, Eliopoulos GD:
Prevalence of chronic idiopathic neutropenia of adults among an
apparently healthy population living on the island of Crete. Annals of
Hematology 1999, 78:293-7.
156. Bain BJ, Phillips D, Thomson K, Richardson D, Gabriel I: Investigation of the
effect of marathon running on leucocyte counts of subjects of different
ethnic origins: relevance to the aetiology of ethnic neutropenia. Br J
Haematol 2000, 108:483-487.
157. Grann VR, Ziv E, Joseph CK, Neugut AI, Wei Y, Jacobson JS, Horwitz MS,
Bowman N, Beckmann K, Hershman DL: Duffy (Fy), DARC, and
neutropenia among women from the United States, Europe and the
Caribbean. Br J Haematol 2008, 143:288-293.
158. Malcov M, Reches A, Ben-Yosef D, Cohen T, Amit A, Dgany O, Tamary H,
Yaron Y: Resolving a genetic paradox throughout preimplantation
genetic diagnosis for autosomal dominant severe congenital
neutropenia. Prenat Diagn 2010, 30:207-211.
159. Benson KF, Horwitz M: Possibility of somatic mosaicism of ELA2 mutation
overlooked in an asymptomatic father transmitting severe congenital
neutropenia to two offspring. Br J Haematol 2002, 118:923-924.
160. Rappeport JM, Parkman R, Newburger P, Camitta BM, Chusid MJ:
Correction of infantile agranulocytosis (Kostmann’s syndrome) by
allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. Am J Med 1980, 68:605-609.
161. Bonilla MA, Gillio AP, Ruggeiro M, Kernan NA, Brochstein JA, Abboud M,
Fumagalli L, Vincent M, Gabrilove JL, Welte K, et al: Effects of recombinant
human granulocyte colony-stimulating factor on neutropenia in patients
with congenital agranulocytosis. N Engl J Med 1989, 320:1574-1580.
162. Lucas KG, Brown AE, Armstrong D, Chapman D, Heller G: The identification
of febrile, neutropenic children with neoplastic disease at low risk for
bacteremia and complications of sepsis. Cancer 1996, 77:791-798.
163. Rackoff WR, Gonin R, Robinson C, Kreissman SG, Breitfeld PB: Predicting the
risk of bacteremia in childen with fever and neutropenia. Journal of
Clinical Oncology 1996, 14:919-24.
164. Cordonnier C, Leverger G, Schlemmer B, Andremont A, Boasson M,
Herbrecht R, Kazmierczak A, Marie JP, Marit G, Miclea JM, et al: Stratégie
antibiotique dans les épisodes fébriles au cours des neutropénies
profondes (inférieures à 500 PNN) et prolongées (supérieures ou égales
à 7 jours). Recommandations du College Francais des Hematologistes.
Nouv Rev Fr Hematol 1994, 36:289-291.

Page 26 of 28

165. Gurwith MJ, Brunton JL, Lank BA, Harding GK, Ronald AR: A prospective
controlled investigation of prophylactic trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole
in hospitalized granulocytopenic patients. Am J Med 1979, 66:248-256.
166. Margolis DM, Melnick DA, Alling DW, Gallin JI: Trimethoprimsulfamethoxazole prophylaxis in the management of chronic
granulomatous disease. J Infect Dis 1990, 162:723-726.
167. Keisu M, Wiholm BE, Palmblad J: Trimethoprim-sulphamethoxazoleassociated blood dyscrasias. Ten years’ experience of the Swedish
spontaneous reporting system. J Intern Med 1990, 228:353-360.
168. Freund MR, Luft S, Schober C, Heussner P, Schrezenmaier H, Porzsolt F,
Welte K: Differential effect of GM-CSF and G-CSF in cyclic neutropenia
[letter]. Lancet 1990, 336:313.
169. Schroten H, Roesler J, Breidenbach T, Wendel U, Elsner J, Schweitzer S, Zeidler C,
Burdach S, Lohmann-Matthes ML, Wahn V, et al: Granulocyte and granulocytemacrophage colony-stimulating factors for treatment of neutropenia in
glycogen storage disease type Ib. Journal of Pediatrics 1991, 119:748-54.
170. Welte K, Zeidler C, Reiter A, Muller W, Odenwald E, Souza L, Riehm H:
Differential effects of granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor
and granulocyte colony-stimulating factor in children with severe
congenital neutropenia. Blood 1990, 75:1056-63.
171. Carlsson G, Ahlin A, Dahllof G, Elinder G, Henter JI, Palmblad J: Efficacy and
safety of two different rG-CSF preparations in the treatment of patients
with severe congenital neutropenia. Br J Haematol 2004, 126:127-132.
172. Fioredda F, Calvillo M, Lanciotti M, Lanza T, Giunti L, Castagnola E, Lorenzi I,
Tonelli R, Ghezzi P, Dufour C: Pegfilgrastim in children with severe
congenital neutropenia. Pediatr Blood Cancer 2010, 54:465-467.
173. Donadieu J, Beaupain B, Rety-Jacob F, Nove-Josserand R: Respiratory
distress and sudden death of a patient with GSDIb chronic neutropenia:
possible role of pegfilgrastim. Haematologica 2009, 94:1175-1177.
174. Beaupain B, Leblanc T, Reman O, Hermine O, Vannier JP, Suarez F, Lutz P,
Bordigoni P, Jourdain A, Schoenvald M, et al: Is pegfilgrastim safe and
effective in congenital neutropenia? An analysis of the French Severe
Chronic Neutropenia registry. Pediatr Blood Cancer 2009, 53:1068-1073.
175. Donadieu J, Boutard P, Bernatowska E, Tchernia G, Couillaud G, Philippe N,
Le Gall E: A European phase II study of recombinant human granulocyte
colony-stimulating factor (lenograstim) in the treatment of severe
chronic neutropenia in children. Lenograstim Study Group. Eur J Pediatr
1997, 156:693-700.
176. Dale DC, Bonilla MA, Davis MW, Nakanishi AM, Hammond WP, Kurtzberg J,
Wang W, Jakubowski A, Winton E, Lalezari P, et al: A randomized
controlled phase III trial of recombinant human granulocyte colonystimulating factor (filgrastim) for treatment of severe chronic
neutropenia. Blood 1993, 81:2496-502.
177. Cottle TE, Fier CJ, Donadieu J, Kinsey SE: Risk and benefit of treatment of
severe chronic neutropenia with granulocyte colony-stimulating factor.
Semin Hematol 2002, 39:134-140.
178. Sandor V, Hassan R, Kohn E: Exacerbation of pseudogout by granulocyte
colony-stimulating factor. Ann Intern Med 1996, 125:781.
179. Park JW, Mehrotra B, Barnett BO, Baron AD, Venook AP: The Sweet
syndrome during therapy with granulocyte colony-stimulating factor.
Ann Intern Med 1992, 116:996-998.
180. Yakisan E, Schirg E, Zeidler C, Bishop NJ, Reiter A, Hirt A, Riehm H, Welte K:
High incidence of significant bone loss in patients with severe
congenital neutropenia (Kostmann’s syndrome). Journal of Pediatrics 1997,
131:592-7.
181. Kannourakis G: Glycogen storage disease. Semin Hematol 2002, 39:103-106.
182. Ferry C, Ouachee M, Leblanc T, Michel G, Notz-Carrere A, Tabrizi R, Flood T,
Lutz P, Fischer A, Gluckman E, et al: Hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation in severe congenital neutropenia: experience of the
French SCN register. Bone Marrow Transplant 2005, 35:45-50.
183. Oshima K, Hanada R, Kobayashi R, Kato K, Nagatoshi Y, Tabuchi K, Kato S:
Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation in patients with severe
congenital neutropenia: An analysis of 18 Japanese cases. Pediatr
Transplant 2010, 14(5):657-63.
184. Zeidler C, Welte K, Barak Y, Barriga F, Bolyard AA, Boxer L, Cornu G,
Cowan MJ, Dale DC, Flood T, et al: Stem cell transplantation in patients
with severe congenital neutropenia without evidence of leukemic
transformation. Blood 2000, 95:1195-1198.
185. Donadieu J, Michel G, Merlin E, Bordigoni P, Monteux B, Beaupain B,
Leverger G, Laporte JP, Hermine O, Buzyn A, et al: Hematopoietic stem cell

Donadieu et al. Orphanet Journal of Rare Diseases 2011, 6:26
http://www.ojrd.com/content/6/1/26

186.

187.

188.
189.

190.

191.

192.

193.
194.
195.

196.

197.
198.

199.

200.

201.

202.

203.

204.

transplantation for Shwachman-Diamond syndrome: experience of the
French neutropenia registry. Bone Marrow Transplant 2005, 36:787-792.
Bhatla D, Davies SM, Shenoy S, Harris RE, Crockett M, Shoultz L, Smolarek T,
Bleesing J, Hansen M, Jodele S, et al: Reduced-intensity conditioning is
effective and safe for transplantation of patients with ShwachmanDiamond syndrome. Bone Marrow Transplant 2008, 42:159-165.
Sauer M, Zeidler C, Meissner B, Rehe K, Hanke A, Welte K, Lohse P,
Sykora KW: Substitution of cyclophosphamide and busulfan by
fludarabine, treosulfan and melphalan in a preparative regimen for
children and adolescents with Shwachman-Diamond syndrome. Bone
Marrow Transplant 2007, 39:143-147.
Reimann HA, DeBERARDINIS CT: Periodic (cyclic) neutropenia, an entity; a
collection of 16 cases. Blood 1949, 4:1109-1116.
Rosenberg PS, Alter BP, Bolyard AA, Bonilla MA, Boxer LA, Cham B, Fier C,
Freedman M, Kannourakis G, Kinsey S, et al: The incidence of leukemia
and mortality from sepsis in patients with severe congenital
neutropenia receiving long-term G-CSF therapy. Blood 2006,
107:4628-4635.
Carlsson G, Wahlin YB, Johansson A, Olsson A, Eriksson T, Claesson R,
Hanstrom L, Henter JI: Periodontal disease in patients from the original
Kostmann family with severe congenital neutropenia. J Periodontol 2006,
77:744-751.
Tassone L, Notarangelo LD, Bonomi V, Savoldi G, Sensi A, Soresina A,
Smith CI, Porta F, Plebani A, Notarangelo LD, et al: Clinical and genetic
diagnosis of warts, hypogammaglobulinemia, infections, and
myelokathexis syndrome in 10 patients. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2009,
123(5):1170-3, 1173.e1-3.
De Vries A, Peketh L, Joshua H: Leukaemia and agranulocytosis in a
member of a family with hereditary leukopenia. Acta Med Orient 1958,
17:26-32.
Gilman PA, Jackson DP, Guild HG: Congenital agranulocytosis: prolonged
survival and terminal acute leukemia. Blood 1970, 36:576-585.
Rosen R, Kang S: Congenital agranulocytosis terminating in acute
myelomonocytic leukemia. J Pediatr 1979, 94:406-408.
Rosenberg PS, Alter BP, Link DC, Stein S, Rodger E, Bolyard AA, Aprikyan AA,
Bonilla MA, Dror Y, Kannourakis G, et al: Neutrophil elastase mutations
and risk of leukaemia in severe congenital neutropenia. Br J Haematol
2008, 140:210-213.
Yetgin S, Olcay L, Koc A, Germeshausen M: Transformation of severe
congenital neutropenia to early acute lymphoblastic leukemia in a
patient with HAX1 mutation and without G-CSF administration or
receptor mutation. Leukemia 2008, 22:1797.
Dror Y: Shwachman-Diamond syndrome. Pediatr Blood Cancer 2005,
45:892-901.
Schroeder T, Hildebrandt B, Mayatepek E, Germing U, Haas R: A patient
with glycogen storage disease type Ib presenting with acute myeloid
leukemia (AML) bearing monosomy 7 and translocation t(3;8)(q26;q24)
after 14 years of treatment with granulocyte colony-stimulating factor
(G-CSF): a case report. J Med Case Reports 2008, 2:319.
Pinsk M, Burzynski J, Yhap M, Fraser RB, Cummings B, Ste-Marie M: Acute
myelogenous leukemia and glycogen storage disease 1b. J Pediatr
Hematol Oncol 2002, 24:756-758.
Germeshausen M, Ballmaier M, Welte K: Incidence of CSF3R mutations in
severe congenital neutropenia and relevance for leukemogenesis:
Results of a long-term survey. Blood 2007, 109:93-99.
Link DC, Kunter G, Kasai Y, Zhao Y, Miner T, McLellan MD, Ries RE, Kapur D,
Nagarajan R, Dale DC, et al: Distinct patterns of mutations occurring in de
novo AML versus AML arising in the setting of severe congenital
neutropenia. Blood 2007, 110:1648-1655.
Touw IP, Bontenbal M: Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor: key (f)actor
or innocent bystander in the development of secondary myeloid
malignancy? J Natl Cancer Inst 2007, 99:183-186.
Ward AC, Gits J, Majeed F, Aprikyan AA, Lewis RS, O’Sullivan LA,
Freedman M, Shigdar S, Touw IP, Dale DC, et al: Functional interaction
between mutations in the granulocyte colony-stimulating factor
receptor in severe congenital neutropenia. Br J Haematol 2008,
142:653-656.
Sloand EM, Yong AS, Ramkissoon S, Solomou E, Bruno TC, Kim S, Fuhrer M,
Kajigaya S, Barrett AJ, Young NS: Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor
preferentially stimulates proliferation of monosomy 7 cells bearing the
isoform IV receptor. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006, 103:14483-14488.

Page 27 of 28

205. Germeshausen M, Ballmaier M, Schulze H, Welte K, Flohr T, Beiske K,
Storm-Mathisen I, Abrahamsen TG: Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor
receptor mutations in a patient with acute lymphoblastic leukemia
secondary to severe congenital neutropenia. Blood 2001, 97:829-830.
206. Jeha S, Chan KW, Aprikyan AG, Hoots WK, Culbert S, Zietz H, Dale DC,
Albitar M: Spontaneous remission of granulocyte colony-stimulating
factor-associated leukemia in a child with severe congenital
neutropenia. Blood 2000, 96:3647-3649.
207. Nibu K, Yanai F, Hirota O, Hatazoe M, Yamaguchi S, Akamatsu M, Kikuchi M,
Morimoto Y, Kuwano A: Acute monocytic leukemia in a patient with
severe congenital neutropenia after treatment with recombinant human
granulocyte colony-stimulating factor. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol 1996,
18:422-424.
208. Smith OP, Reeves BR, Kempski HM, Evans JP: Kostmann’s disease,
recombinant HuG-CSF, monosomy 7 and MDS/AML. Br J Haematol 1995,
91:150-153.
209. Weinblatt ME, Scimeca P, James-Herry A, Sahdev I, Kochen J:
Transformation of congenital neutropenia into monosomy 7 and acute
nonlymphoblastic leukemia in a child treated with granulocyte colonystimulating factor. Journal of Pediatrics 1995, 126:263-5.
210. Wong WY, Williams D, Slovak ML, Charak B, Mazumder A, Snyder D,
Powars DR, Brynes RK: Terminal acute myelogenous leukemia in a patient
with congenital agranulocytosis. Am J Hematol 1993, 43:133-138.
211. Dror Y, Durie P, Ginzberg H, Herman R, Banerjee A, Champagne M,
Shannon K, Malkin D, Freedman MH: Clonal evolution in marrows of
patients with Shwachman-Diamond syndrome: a prospective 5-year
follow-up study. Exp Hematol 2002, 30:659-669.
212. Huijgens PC, van der Veen EA, Meijer S, Muntinghe OG: Syndrome of
Shwachman and leukaemia. Scandinavian Journal of Haematology 1977,
18:20-4.
213. Raj AB, Bertolone SJ, Barch MJ, Hersh JH: Chromosome 20q deletion and
progression to monosomy 7 in a patient with Shwachman-Diamond
syndrome without MDS/AML. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol 2003, 25:508-509.
214. Rosenberg PS, Zeidler C, Bolyard AA, Alter BP, Bonilla MA, Boxer LA, Dror Y,
Kinsey S, Link DC, Newburger PE, et al: Stable long-term risk of leukaemia
in patients with severe congenital neutropenia maintained on G-CSF
therapy. Br J Haematol 2010, 150(2):196-9.
215. Kojima S, Ohara A, Tsuchida M, Kudoh T, Hanada R, Okimoto Y, Kaneko T,
Takano T, Ikuta K, Tsukimoto I: Risk factors for evolution of acquired
aplastic anemia into myelodysplastic syndrome and acute myeloid
leukemia after immunosuppressive therapy in children. Blood 2002,
100:786-790.
216. Socie G, Mary JY, Schrezenmeier H, Marsh J, Bacigalupo A, Locasciulli A,
Fuehrer M, Bekassy A, Tichelli A, Passweg J: Granulocyte-stimulating factor
and severe aplastic anemia: a survey by the European Group for Blood
and Marrow Transplantation (EBMT). Blood 2007, 109:2794-2796.
217. Hershman D, Neugut AI, Jacobson JS, Wang J, Tsai WY, McBride R,
Bennett CL, Grann VR: Acute myeloid leukemia or myelodysplastic
syndrome following use of granulocyte colony-stimulating factors
during breast cancer adjuvant chemotherapy. J Natl Cancer Inst 2007,
99:196-205.
218. Le Deley MC, Leblanc T, Shamsaldin A, Raquin MA, Lacour B, Sommelet D,
Chompret A, Cayuela JM, Bayle C, Bernheim A, et al: Risk of secondary
leukemia after a solid tumor in childhood according to the dose of
epipodophyllotoxins and anthracyclines: a case-control study by the
Societe Francaise d’Oncologie Pediatrique. J Clin Oncol 2003,
21:1074-1081.
219. Smith RE, Bryant J, DeCillis A, Anderson S: Acute myeloid leukemia and
myelodysplastic syndrome after doxorubicin-cyclophosphamide
adjuvant therapy for operable breast cancer: the National Surgical
Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project Experience. J Clin Oncol 2003,
21:1195-1204.
220. Morley AA: A neutrophil cycle in healthy individuals. Lancet 1966,
2:1220-1222.
221. Morley A, Stohlman F Jr: Cyclophosphamide-induced cyclical neutropenia.
An animal model of a human periodic disease. N Engl J Med 1970,
282:643-646.
222. May RM: Simple mathematical models with very complicated dynamics.
Nature 1976, 261:459-467.
223. Duan Z, Person RE, Lee HH, Huang S, Donadieu J, Badolato R, Grimes HL,
Papayannopoulou T, Horwitz MS: Epigenetic Regulation of Protein-Coding

Donadieu et al. Orphanet Journal of Rare Diseases 2011, 6:26
http://www.ojrd.com/content/6/1/26

224.

225.

226.

227.

228.

229.

230.

231.

232.

233.

234.

Page 28 of 28

and MicroRNA Genes by the Gfi1-Interacting, Tumor Suppressor PRDM5.
Mol Cell Biol 2007, 27(19):6889-902.
Mackey MC, Aprikyan AA, Dale DC: The rate of apoptosis in post mitotic
neutrophil precursors of normal and neutropenic humans. Cell Prolif
2003, 36:27-34.
Ganapathi KA, Austin KM, Lee CS, Dias A, Malsch MM, Reed R,
Shimamura A: The human Shwachman-Diamond syndrome protein,
SBDS, associates with ribosomal RNA. Blood 2007, 110:1458-1465.
Salipante SJ, Rojas ME, Korkmaz B, Duan Z, Wechsler J, Benson KF,
Person RE, Grimes HL, Horwitz MS: Contributions to neutropenia from
PFAAP5 (N4BP2L2), a novel protein mediating transcriptional repressor
cooperation between Gfi1 and neutrophil elastase. Mol Cell Biol 2009,
29:4394-4405.
Skokowa J, Cario G, Uenalan M, Schambach A, Germeshausen M, Battmer K,
Zeidler C, Lehmann U, Eder M, Baum C, et al: LEF-1 is crucial for
neutrophil granulocytopoiesis and its expression is severely reduced in
congenital neutropenia. Nat Med 2006, 12:1191-1197.
Li FQ, Person RE, Takemaru K, Williams K, Meade-White K, Ozsahin AH,
Gungor T, Moon RT, Horwitz M: Lymphoid enhancer factor-1 links two
hereditary leukemia syndromes through core-binding factor alpha
regulation of ELA2. J Biol Chem 2004, 279:2873-2884.
Karlsson J, Carlsson G, Ramme KG, Hagglund H, Fadeel B, Nordenskjold M,
Henter JI, Palmblad J, Putsep K, Andersson M: Low plasma levels of the
protein pro-LL-37 as an early indication of severe disease in patients
with chronic neutropenia. Br J Haematol 2007, 137:166-169.
Karlsson J, Carlsson G, Larne O, Andersson M, Putsep K: Vitamin D3 induces
pro-LL-37 expression in myeloid precursors from patients with severe
congenital neutropenia. J Leukoc Biol 2008, 84:1279-1286.
Skokowa J, Lan D, Thakur BK, Wang F, Gupta K, Cario G, Brechlin AM,
Schambach A, Hinrichsen L, Meyer G, et al: NAMPT is essential for the
G-CSF-induced myeloid differentiation via a NAD(+)-sirtuin-1-dependent
pathway. Nat Med 2009, 15:151-158.
Faiyaz-Ul-Haque M, Al-Jefri A, Al-Dayel F, Bhuiyan JA, Abalkhail HA,
Al-Nounou R, Al-Abdullatif A, Pulicat MS, Gaafar A, Alaiya AA, et al: A novel
HAX1 gene mutation in severe congenital neutropenia (SCN) associated
with neurological manifestations. Eur J Pediatr 2010, 169(6):661-6.
Ishikawa N, Okada S, Miki M, Shirao K, Kihara H, Tsumura M, Nakamura K,
Kawaguchi H, Ohtsubo M, Yasunaga S, et al: Neurodevelopmental
abnormalities associated with severe congenital neutropenia due to the
R86X mutation in the HAX1 gene. J Med Genet 2008, 45:802-807.
Veiga-da-Cunha M, Gerin I, Chen YT, Lee PJ, Leonard JV, Maire I, Wendel U,
Vikkula M, Van Schaftingen E: The putative glucose 6-phosphate
translocase gene is mutated in essentially all cases of glycogen storage
disease type I non-a. Eur J Hum Genet 1999, 7:717-723.

doi:10.1186/1750-1172-6-26
Cite this article as: Donadieu et al.: Congenital neutropenia: diagnosis,
molecular bases and patient management. Orphanet Journal of Rare
Diseases 2011 6:26.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
