<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title> </title>
<meta name="Subject" content=" "/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content=" "/>
<meta name="Creator" content=" "/>
<meta name="Producer" content=" "/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Drago et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:19
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/19

RESEARCH

Open Access

Structural aspects of leg-to-gonopod
metamorphosis in male helminthomorph
millipedes (Diplopoda)
Leandro Drago, Giuseppe Fusco*, Elena Garollo and Alessandro Minelli

Abstract
Background: In the adult males of helminthomorph millipedes, one or two pairs of legs in the anterior part of the
trunk are strongly modified into sexual appendages (gonopods) used for sperm transfer during the copula.
Gonopods differentiate in an advanced phase of post-embryonic development, in most cases as replacement for
the walking legs of the seventh trunk ring, as these first regress to tiny primordia, to eventually develop into
gonopods at a subsequent stadium. These extremely localized but dramatic changes have been described as a
non-systemic metamorphosis. In the present study we describe morphological and anatomical changes of trunk
ring VII associated with non-systemic metamorphosis in four helminthomorph species.
Results: As documented here for the first time by means of traditional histology methods and new techniques
based on confocal laser scanning microscopy, the external modifications caused by non-systemic metamorphosis
are associated to a huge rearrangement of internal anatomy, mostly due to the development of gonopod
apodemes and extrinsic muscles.
Conclusions: Internal changes in the seventh trunk ring, locally leading to the dorsal displacement of the ventral
nerve cord and the digestive tract, are modulated in a taxon-specific manner, and are very conspicuous in the
blaniulids Nopoiulus kochii and Blaniulus guttulatus, with likely major functional consequences.
Keywords: post-embryonic development, segment differentiation, sexual appendages

Background
The trunk of millipedes (Diplopoda, Figure 1) articulates
into a series of segmental units to most of which (diplosegments) correspond two pairs of walking legs, while
the first four or five post-cephalic units exhibit a different correspondence between dorsal and ventral structures, the most common arrangement being a legless
collum, followed by three haplosegments with one leg
pair each. Because of the independent segmentation of
dorsal and ventral structures during millipede embryogenesis [1], segmental units we will refer to here are
exclusively intended as descriptive modules, thus disregarding problems of homology stemming from their
developmental origin [2,3].
The tiny pin-cushion millipedes, the Penicillata (=
Polyxenida), have no specialized sexual appendages,
* Correspondence: giuseppe.fusco@unipd.it
Department of Biology, University of Padova, I 35131 Padova, Italy

while in the sister clade, the Chilognatha, specialized
sexual appendages are found in adult males. The Chilognatha include two major clades, the Pentazonia, i.e. the
pill millipedes (Glomerida) with their closest relatives
(Glomeridesmida and Sphaerotheriida), and the Helminthomorpha, which includes the vast majority of the
Diplopoda, e.g. the widespread juloid and polydesmoid
forms. In the adult males of Pentazonia the last pair of
appendages are replaced by a pair of articulated pincers
(the telopods). In the adult males of the Helminthomorpha, one or two pairs of legs in the anterior part of the
trunk are replaced by sexual appendages called gonopods
[4]. These are used as claspers or to transfer sperm during copula [5].
In most Helminthomorpha, dorsal, pleural, and ventral
sclerites of each segmental unit of the trunk are fused to
form an exoskeletal ring. In the vast majority of helminthomorph millipedes the gonopods correspond to

© 2011 Drago et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Drago et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:19
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/19

Figure 1 Phylogenetic relationships among the millipede taxa
cited in the text. Colob., Colobognatha; Pen., Penicillata; Pentaz.,
Pentazonia. After [10,59,60].

the anterior pair, or to both pairs of appendages of
trunk ring VII. These differentiate in an advanced phase
of post-embryonic development, first developing as normal walking legs, to change later into extremely reduced
primordia, and eventually into gonopods, at subsequent
post-embryonic stages. These transformations are basically limited to the appendages of the seventh trunk
ring, while leaving unaffected the other rings, including
those contiguous to it, in a process we have characterized as a form of non-systemic metamorphosis [6]. In the
present study we describe some aspects of these dramatic changes affecting ring VII and its appendages in
four helminthomorph species, with emphasis on the
changes accompanying the development of internal
structures.
In different major clades of helminthomorph millipedes, the changes in the appendages of male ring VII
(leg pairs 8 and 9 in females) are quite diverse. In the
Polydesmida and Callipodida, only legs 8 are replaced by
gonopods, whereas legs 9 maintain their original structure and function. Similarly, in most Spirostreptida only
legs 8 are replaced by gonopods, while legs 9 are completely or extensively atrophied [7]. In the remaining clades,
both appendage pairs of ring VII are transformed in adult
males. In many Chordeumatida, less dramatic modifications may in addition affect legs 7 and 10 (more rarely,
11 too) [8]. Finally, in Colobognatha the appendages
modified into gonopods are those of pairs 9 and 10 [9].
In millipedes, the genital opening is not located on
the same ring as the gonopods, but on the third trunk
unit, four rings anterior to the gonopods in the

Page 2 of 16

Helminthomorpha. Before copulation, helminthomorph
males must thus transfer sperm to gonopods, a duty
generally accomplished by bending the trunk so as to
bring the ventral surfaces of the third and the seventh
ring closer.
Gonopod differentiation needs to be set in the context
of the post-embryonic changes in trunk segmentation.
The post-embryonic development of millipedes is by
anamorphosis, i.e., the young hatch with fewer segments
than the adult, and usually have three pairs of legs only.
Through a series of moults, the numbers of segments
and leg pairs progressively increase by the addition of
new segments at the posterior end of the body. In millipedes, newly added segments generally first appear as
apodous, to differentiate their legs at a following stadium [8]. Three different types of anamorphosis are distinguished in the Diplopoda [10,11]. In euanamorphosis,
typical of the Julida and Colobognatha, moulting and
the addition of new segments at each moult continue
throughout the life of the animal. In hemianamorphosis,
the post-embryonic developmental mode of Penicillata
and Pentazonia, moulting continues throughout the life
of the millipede, but the addition of segments stops
when a final, fixed number of segments is reached.
Finally, in teloanamorphosis, typical of Chordeumatida
and Polydesmida, both moulting and segments addition
stop when a fixed number of segments is reached with
the moult to the final and single adult stadium.
Early descriptions of the replacement of ordinary legs
by gonopods in male millipedes are, with a few others,
found in Fabre [12], Brölemann [13], Verhoeff [14],
Miley [15] and Davenport et al. [16]; more recent and
detailed accounts have been provided by Demange [7]
for some spirostreptids, Berns [17] and Dhaenens and
VandenSpiegel [18] for two spirobolid millipedes, and
Petit [19,20], and Filka and Shelley [21] for some
polydesmidans.
Morphological changes in the external shape of gonopod primordia are often abrupt, as in the species
described in the present paper, where only minor
changes in size and shape of the primordia, and the surrounding area, are noticeable before the final dramatic
structural leap from the most advanced anlagen to the
fully differentiated gonopods. However, in other millipedes, the change from the initially tiny gonopod primordia to the definitive functional gonopods is
gradually accomplished across several stadia, as in the
case of the spirobolidan Pelmatojulus insignis (de Saussure, 1860) ([22,23] sub Pachybolus ligulatus). Interestingly, in some species of julidan millipedes, the
differentiation of male gonopods is to some extent
reversible; that is, a mature male may undergo a moult
to an ‘intercalary’ stadium with dedifferentiated gonopods, eventually followed by another moult leading it to

Drago et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:19
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/19

a second reproductive stadium with newly differentiated
gonopods. This developmental mode is called periodomorphosis [24-28], but this morphological alternation
has not been investigated in the present study.
In addition to a series of scattered accounts restricted
to individual species (the polydesmid Scytonotus virginicus (Loomis, 1943) [29], the spirobolidan Atopetholus
angelus Chamberlin, 1920 [30] and the spirostreptidan
Phyllogonostreptus nigrolabiatus (Newport, 1844) [31])
the musculature of the gonopods has been described in
representatives of several major groups of helminthomorph millipedes by Demange [7]. However, we know
nothing of the internal changes accompanying the transformation of ordinary legs into gonopods. The only
experimental studies hitherto conducted on this developmental system are the ablation/regeneration experiments carried out by Petit [19] on leg pair 8 of
Polydesmus angustus Latzel, 1884 at stadium III. The
highest degree of completeness of the regenerated
appendage was obtained when the leg was cut at least
30 days before the moult to stadium IV. The regenerated appendage was gonopod-like if the level of cut was
equal or distal to the apical end of the prefemur, but
intermediate or definitely leg-like if more proximal.
In the present paper we describe the morphological
and anatomical changes in the structures of ring VII in
the males of four millipede species: two blaniulid julidans Nopoiulus kochii (Gervais, 1847) and Blaniulus guttulatus (Bosc, 1792), the nemasomatid julidan
Nemasoma varicorne C.L. Koch, 1847, and the paradoxosomatid polydesmidan Oxidus gracilis (C.L. Koch,
1847). Descriptions begin with the last (in two species,
the only) stadium where the appendages subsequently
modified into gonopods are still represented by walking
legs, to end with the first (in one species, the only) adult
stadium with fully differentiated gonopods. Description
of the external morphology and the internal anatomy
are intended as the necessary prerequisite for more
detailed investigations at the level of cell dynamics
(apoptosis, proliferation) and differentiation and eventually to the level of developmental gene expression.
The three julidan species have euanamorphic development, as is typical of the clade, and both pairs of appendages of the seventh ring of adult males are modified
into gonopods (Figure 2A-C). The number of stadia
prior to the achievement of sexual maturity varies with
species (see Kheirallah et al. [32] for N. kochii, Brookes
and Willoughby [33] for B. guttulatus, and Brölemann
[34] for N. varicorne). For these species, a description of
the external morphology of gonopod primordia and

Page 3 of 16

Figure 2 Anamorphic development of the millipede species
studied in the present paper. The post-embryonic developmental
stadia are numbered progressively. Walking legs are depicted as
short lines, ventrally attached to the corresponding trunk ring,
gonopod primordia as small ventral blobs on trunk ring VII,
gonopods (two pairs in A-C, one pair in D) as complex structures
also attached to trunk ring VII. (A) Nopoiulus kochii. (B) Blaniulus
guttulatus. (C) Nemasoma varicorne. (D) Oxidus gracilis. From stadium
VI on, in B. guttulatus only the anterior trunk is shown; in N
varicorne, gonopods are sometimes formed at stadium VI.

Drago et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:19
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/19

fully formed gonopods can be found in Brölemann [34]
and Enghoff [35,36]. The morphological nomenclature
adopted in the present paper is in agreement with modern descriptions of fully developed gonopods in Julida
(e.g., [35,37]).
Oxidus gracilis has teloanamorphic development (Figure 2D): juveniles hatch with six trunk rings and three
leg pairs, and adulthood is obtained after seven moults.
Each stadium is characterized by a defined number of
leg-bearing rings and terminal apodous rings [38, sub
Orthomorpha gracilis]. In the adult stadium, the trunk is
formed by nineteen rings, with 31 pairs of appendages
in the female. As is typical of Polydesmida, only the first
pair of appendages of the seventh ring of adult males is
modified into gonopods, while the second pair does not
undergo any transformation. For this species, only morphological descriptions of fully formed gonopods are
available [38,39]. In the present paper, we follow the
morphological nomenclature in use for taxonomic
descriptions of fully developed gonopods in Polydesmida
(e.g., [39-41]).
The problem of tracing homologies between the articles (podomeres) of the walking legs and the different
and often inarticulated parts of the gonopods has not
been resolved generally [7]. Petit [20] used setae on
gonopod primordia as a set of positional markers to
bridge the morphological gap between walking legs and
gonopods in Polydesmus angustus and Brachydesmus
superus, but this approach is not applicable to other
taxa, e.g. to the julidans described in the present paper,
or to the spirobolidans, as noted by Berns [17].
As documented here for the first time, the external
modifications caused by the non-systemic metamorphosis of diplopods are associated with a huge rearrangement of internal anatomy.

Results
For each stadium, specimens of different age were studied: no age-related differences were found within each
stadium, apart from the last days before ecdysis, when,
as the animal enters the moult period, the new cuticle
becomes visible under the old one (pharate phase).
Nopoiulus kochii

During stadia III and IV, the two leg pairs of the
seventh trunk ring are identical to the ordinary leg pairs
of the other trunk rings. These legs are replaced by two
pairs of gonopod primordia at stadium V, and are then
changed into two pairs of bulky complex gonopods following the further moult to stadium VI (Figures 2A,
3A-C, 4A-C, 5, 6A-B, 7, 8A-D, 9A-C; cf. [6]).
Non-systemic metamorphosis is not so strictly fixed in
time with respect to the animal’s post-embryonic developmental schedule, as in some individuals the process

Page 4 of 16

actually starts one stadium later [32]. In the studied
population, we recorded this exception in two cases
only (< 4%, N = 53), and these males are not considered
further in the present work.
In this species, males with completely formed gonopods at stadium VI are in some cases not fully reproductive [32], because the first pair of legs have not yet
acquired the functional hooked shape. These stadium VI
males with ordinary (non-hooked) first legs are not able
to copulate, despite the presence of fully developed
gonopods. In the only case of non-reproductive stadium
VI males we could examine, no difference between this
male and its mature companion was recorded in gonopod morphology and anatomy at the level of the seventh
ring.
The gonopod primordia of N. kochii are two pairs of
tiny laminar structures that extend in the anteroposterior direction along the ventral side of the seventh ring
(Figures 3B, 9A-C). In the anterior pair of gonopod primordia the conspicuous coxal article elongates in the
posterior direction, while the smaller telopodite emerges
laterally. At the same time, the posterior pair of gonopod primordia, with evident telopodites, are borne on
the sternite area covered by the anterior gonopod primordia. Inside each gonopod primordium, a cluster of
tightly packed cells is present, possibly representing
undifferentiated tissue (Figure 4B). No muscles are
found in association with these appendages. There is
some degree of individual variation in the detailed shape
of primordia, and sizable left-right asymmetry between
the two primordia was recorded in all cases examined
(N = 6, Figure 9A-C).
During stadium VI, the exoskeleton area surrounding
the base of the gonopods is replaced by a thin layer of
cuticle which delimits the gonopodal sac, an exoskeletal
medio-ventral invagination that shelters the basal part of
gonopods (Figures 4C, 7). This dramatic change is associated with an impressive reduction of the internal ring
lumen: when the gonopods are in resting position, the
gonopodal sac occupies more than half of the ring
volume (Figures 4C, 5A, 6A-B, 8B-C).
The anterior gonopods are composed of a long, clavate coxal process, accompanied laterally by a short telopodite devoid of setae (Figure 3C). The coxal process is
almost totally exposed on the ventral side of the ring,
and cannot be retracted into the gonopodal sac. The
single U-shaped apodeme of the anterior gonopods is
found at the base of the coxal processes. This huge apodeme is a prominent element in the lumen of ring VII
(Figures 5, 6A-B), its anterior part also invading the posterior volume of ring VI. Two bulky muscles (anterior
gonopod protractor and anterior gonopod retractor)
insert on each arm of the apodeme, close to its dorsal
end. The protractor muscle, which inserts on the ventral

Drago et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:19
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/19

Page 5 of 16

Figure 3 Main stages of non-systemic metamorphosis in three millipede species of the order Julida. (A-C) N. kochii; (D-F) B. guttulatus;
(G-I) N. varicorne. A, D and G, last stadium with walking legs on ring VII (asterisk); SEM, latero-ventral view. B, E and H, gonopod primordia; SEM,
ventral view. C, F and I, gonopods; SEM, ventral view. Yellow, coxal process; Green, anterior gonopod telopodite; Blue, posterior gonopod
telopodite. Anterior to the left, scale bars 200 μm.

side of the anterior gonopod apodeme, is attached on
the apodeme of the posterior tracheal pouch of the sixth
ring. The retractor muscle, which inserts on the dorsal
side of the anterior gonopod apodeme, is attached in a
dorso-lateral position to the margin of the prophragma
(anterior apodemal rim) of the seventh ring (Figure 7).
A third, large, unpaired muscle (anterior gonopod
abductor) connects the bases of the coxal processes of
the two sides (Figures 4D, 8B) and is responsible for
their abduction.
The posterior gonopods are composed of two articles,
a gonocoxa and a telopodite (Figures 3C, 7). Some
authors (e.g., [35]) use the word ‘sternum’ to indicate
the gonopod article called here a gonocoxa. We prefer
not to use the term sternum, to avoid confusion with

the area possibly homologous to the sternite area which
might be a part of the wall of the gonopodal sac. The
telopodite forms proximally a knee joint with the gonocoxa and possesses two characteristic lamellae in the
apical part: the lateral lamella and the mesal lamella.
The lateral lamella is bordered by spines, while the
mesal lamella seems to protect the other. A third and
smaller internal lamella emerges on the mesal side of
the article, mid-way of its length. Two extrinsic muscles
(posterior gonopod protractor and posterior gonopod
retractor) move the gonopod with respect to the trunk.
The posterior gonopod retractor muscle is inserted at
the base of the gonocoxa, and is attached in a dorso-lateral position to the anterior side of the prophragma
(Figures 4E, 7) of the eighth ring. The posterior

Drago et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:19
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/19

Figure 4 Julida ring VII sections. (A-E) N. kochii male, paramidsagittal (A-C) and frontal (D-E) paraffin sections of rings VI-VIII
during post-embryonic stadia IV-VI. Mallory’s triple stain. A, last
stadium with walking legs on ring VII. B, stadium with gonopod
primordia. C-E, adults with gonopods. (F-G) N. varicorne male, frontal
paraffin sections of rings VI-VIII during post-embryonic stadium V.
Mallory’s triple stain. Labels a-d in panel C mark the levels of
sections in Figure 9. agA, anterior gonopod apodeme; aga, anterior
gonopod abductor muscle; agr, anterior gonopod retractor muscle;
gt, gut; nc, nerve cord; pgr, posterior gonopod retractor muscle; ph,
prophragma; arrows, possibly undifferentiated tissue. Asterisks, ring
VII legs. Anterior to the left, scale bars 100 μm.

Figure 5 N. kochii, adult male. Fused EDF-stack. (A) Seventh trunk
ring, after digestion of internal soft tissues. Posterior view. (B)
Dissected anterior gonopods after digestion of soft tissues. Chlorazol
black stain. Asterisks, anterior gonopod apodemes. Ventral view,
anterior to the top, scale bars 200 μm.

Page 6 of 16

Figure 6 Adult males of julidan millipedes. (A-B) N. kochii, (C-D)
B. guttulatus. (E-F) N. varicorne. A, C and E, seventh trunk ring, SEM
after the digestion of the internal soft tissue; posterior view. B, D,
and F, CLSM after digestion of the internal soft tissue. Projection at
maximum intensity of serial pictures. ag, anterior gonopod; pg,
posterior gonopod. Arrowhead, posterior gonopod apodeme.
Asterisk, anterior gonopod apodeme. Para-midsagittal view, anterior
to the left, scale bars 200 μm.

gonopod protractor muscle is inserted on a long gonopod apodeme that extends posteriorly from the base of
the gonocoxa, and is attached on the apodeme of the
anterior tracheal pouch of the eighth ring. The contraction of the protractor muscle causes the eversion of the
posterior gonopod from the gonopodal sac.
The presence of voluminous anterior and posterior gonopod apodemes and of their bulky muscles causes a further
reduction in the volume available for the other trunk
organs. The ventral nerve cord and the digestive tract are
the most influenced by these changes as they are displaced
dorsally, compared with other rings in the adult and even
with the same ring in immature stadia, with a consequent
reduction in the gut lumen (Figures 4A-C, 8A-D).

Drago et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:19
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/19

Page 7 of 16

Figure 7 Schematic representation of the extrinsic musculature of the left gonopods of N. kochii. agA, anterior gonopod apodeme; agp,
anterior gonopod protractor muscle; agr, anterior gonopod retractor muscle; gs, gonopodal sac; pgA, posterior gonopod apodeme; pgp, posterior
gonopod protractor muscle; pgr, posterior gonopod retractor muscle; ph, prophragma; tA, tracheal pouch apodeme. Anterior to the left.

Blaniulus guttulatus

The development of the seventh ring in B. guttulatus
(Figure 3D-F) is similar to the corresponding process in
N. kochii, but shifted to later stadia: in this species, the
gonopod primordia only appear at stadium VIII.
Gonopod primordia (Figures 3E, 9D-F) are similar to
those of N. kochii, except for the presence of a seta at
the apex of the primordium of the anterior gonopod telopodite. Also similarly to N. kochii, we found significant
shape variation in gonopod primordia, both between
individuals and between left and right primordia in the
same animal, in particular at the level of the anterior
gonopod telopodite. Histological investigation did not
reveal differences in the internal anatomy associated
with this external variation. The internal anatomy is
very similar to that of N. kochii, with a cluster of tightly
packed cells inside each gonopod primordium.
In adult males (stadium IX) the general architecture of
the seventh ring is the same as in N. kochii, with a
gonopodal sac that occupies more than a half of the
ring volume. The two coxal processes of the anterior
gonopod are fused into a single element, which continues distally into the two short telopodites, each with
a few apical setae (Figure 3F).
Adult anterior gonopods are associated with a U-shaped
apodeme (Figure 6C-D) which offers insertion points for a
pair of antagonistic muscles (protractor and retractor) on
each arm (Figure 8F). At variance with N. kochii, no
abductor muscle is found at the base of coxal processes,
because in this species, due to the fusion of the anterior
gonopod coxal processes, abduction movement is no
longer possible. The apodemes are less voluminous than
in N. kochii and the two arms are less divergent.
The posterior gonopods are composed of a telopodite
connected to the gonocoxa. Both articles are thinner

than in N. kochii. The terminal part of the telopodite is
characterized by the presence of two small lamellae, one
with long spines at the distal end, the other with a few
short spines only (Figure 3F). The trunk muscles inserting on the gonopods are organized in the same way as
in N. kochii.
The non-systemic metamorphosis from juvenile to
adult causes considerable reduction in the internal
volume of the seventh ring, with respect to both the
same ring in immature stadia and other adult rings. The
ventral nerve cord and the digestive tract are displaced
dorsally and the lumen of the gut is reduced (Figure 8E,
H), but these changes are less conspicuous than in N.
kochii.
Nemasoma varicorne

In the males of this species, leg-pairs 8 and 9 are present at stadium III. In this stadium, trunk ring VII is
identical to the other leg-bearing rings (Figure 3G). At
stadium IV, these legs are replaced by gonopod primordia (see below), although in some specimens this transformation can be slightly delayed [42]. Gonopod
primordia (Figure 3H) possess well-developed anterior
gonopod telopodites, each with a single seta in a medial
position. Posterior gonopod primordia are characterized
by a transversal fold with a few short setae emerging
from the proximal margin. Histological sections reveal
the presence of a cluster of cells in the proximal part of
each primordium. These cells seem to be less tightly
packed than those observed in the corresponding appendages of the two blaniulid species.
Anterior gonopods of adult males are similar to
those of the Blaniulidae (Figure 3I). The anterior gonopod is formed by one long coxal process with a hookshaped distal end, and one long telopodite with a few

Drago et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:19
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/19

Page 8 of 16

Figure 8 Transverse trunk sections of adult julidan millipedes. Mallory’s triple stain. (A-D) N. kochii. (E-H) B. guttulatus. (I-L) N. varicorne.
Sections A, E and I are at the level marked as a in Figure 8C; sections B, F and J are at level b, sections C, G and K are at level c, and sections D,
H and L are at level d of the same figure. agA, anterior gonopod apodeme; aga, anterior gonopod abductor muscle; agp, anterior gonopod
protractor muscle; agr, anterior gonopod retractor muscle; gt, gut; nc, nerve cord. Scale bars 100 μm.

setae. The telopodite is wider than the coxal process. A
very elongate branch of the anterior gonopod (flagellum) originates from the proximo/mesal region of the
anterior gonopod and extends its distal end into a
groove on the distal part of the posterior gonopod of
the same side (Figure 10A). A protractor muscle
inserts on the extremity of a slender anterior gonopod
apodeme (Figures 6E-F, 10A) and attaches to the apodeme of the posterior tracheal pouch of ring VI. The
anterior gonopod retractor muscle inserts on the anterior gonopod apodeme and is attached to the lateral
side of the same ring, slightly posterior to the apodeme
(Figures 4F, 6E-F, 10B). A third unpaired muscle (anterior gonopod abductor) connects the bases of the coxal
processes of the two sides and is responsible for their
abduction.

The posterior gonopods are formed by a large basal
structure that ends with a thin telopodite, almost completely hidden behind the anterior gonopods when in
resting position (Figure 3I). A protractor muscle inserts
on the extremity of a gonopod apodeme (Figure 10A)
and attaches to the tracheal pouch apodeme of the leg
pair 10 of the same side in the following ring. The
gonopod retractor muscle is inserted at the base of the
same posterior apodeme, and is attached to the anterior
side of the prophragma of ring VIII (Figures 4G, 10A).
A third muscle (gonopod adductor) inserts on the same
side of the protractor muscle, to attach to the lateral
side of the same ring, slightly anterior to the apodeme
(Figure 10B).
The gonopodal sac is smaller than in the two Blaniulidae, and also the gonopod apodemes are less developed.

Drago et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:19
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/19

Page 9 of 16

Figure 9 Individual variation and left-right asymmetry in the shape of gonopod primordia. (A-C) N. kochii. (D-F) B. guttulatus. Ventral view,
anterior to the left, scale bars 50 μm.

As a result, the impact of gonopod development on the
ring volume is less conspicuous than in the two previous
species (Figure 8I-L).
Oxidus gracilis

At the second post-embryonic stadium, trunk ring VII is
already distinct, but bears no appendages (Figure 2D).
These appear with the following moult as leg pairs 8
and 9. During stadium III, the trunk is composed of eleven rings, with eleven pairs of legs in both sexes. Until
the following moult, males and females are

indistinguishable in external morphology. Trunk ring
VII is identical to the other rings (Figure 11A), with two
pairs of conventional locomotory appendages. The two
pairs of spiracles open on each ring’s ventral plate (or
diplosternite), slightly anterior and lateral to the coxae.
From stadium IV on, it is possible to distinguish males
from females because of their very different eighth
appendages, which in the male are a pair of tiny
rounded appendages, the gonopod primordia, which
occupy the same position as the coxae of the female
legs (Figure 11B). At this stadium, gonopod primordia

Figure 10 N. varicorne adult male. Schematic reconstruction of the extrinsic musculature of the left anterior and posterior gonopods. (A)
Lateral view, anterior to the left. (B) Posterior view. agA, anterior gonopod apodeme; agp, anterior gonopod protractor muscle; agr, anterior
gonopod retractor muscle; f, flagellum; gs, gonopodal sac; pgA, posterior gonopod apodeme; pgad, posterior gonopod adductor muscle; pgp,
posterior gonopod protractor muscle; pgr, posterior gonopod retractor muscle; ph, prophragma; tA, tracheal pouch apodeme.

Drago et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:19
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/19

Figure 11 Trunk rings VI-VIII of O. gracilis during
developmental stadia III-VIII. All male specimens except for the
one in A, whose sex is undetermined because of the lack of sexual
dimorphism at the corresponding developmental stadium. Ventral
views, SEM. (A) Stadium III. (B) Stadium IV. (C) Stadium V. (D)
Stadium VI. (E) Stadium VII. (F) Stadium VIII. Asterisk, trunk ring VII; s,
spiracles associated with the eighth pair of appendages;
arrowheads, gonopod primordia at their first appearance; arrows,
gonopods. Anterior to the left, scale bars 200 μm.

are medially separated by a large gap. The anterior pair
of spiracles in this ring are now slightly deformed,
showing an oval rather than circular shape.
From stadium V to VII, the sternal surface between
the gonopod primordia is progressively reduced (Figure
11C-E). After each moult, these structures appear bigger, closer, and more distinctly sunk into the sternite
than in the previous stadia. The anterior pair of spiracles has disappeared since stadium V.
With the seventh and last moult, males achieve the
adult condition (stadium VIII). Gonopods are finally
formed (Figures 11F, 12). These appendages consist of
the basal gonocoxa, followed by the prefemur and the distal acropodite, prefemur and acropodite together forming
the telopodite. The gonocoxa has a cylindrical shape and
is basally articulated to the sternite; distally it bears a
large prefemur and an elongated solenomerite. The solenomerite fits into a small depression at the base of the
prefemur, the proximal end of the spermatic groove. The
prefemur is entirely covered by setae. The acropodite is
composed of a basal subconical part articulated to the

Page 10 of 16

prefemur and a complex distal part, with elongated elements: the tibiotarsus, the femoral process and the solenophore that surrounds the distal part of the solenomerite.
The femoral process and solenophore have similar
lengths; the first has a flattened end, the other ends with
two branches. The medial branch is apically covered by
small spines. The solenomerite is the most complex element: only the distal part is visible as a flagellar structure,
partially inserted into the medial branch of the solenophore (Figure 12B). The hook-shaped tibiotarsus is situated opposite to the solenomerite.
At stadium III, no differences are found in the internal
anatomy between the seventh ring and the others. The
extrinsic muscles of the eighth pair of legs are in the typical arrangement described by Silvestri [43] and Manton
[44] for Polydesmida. Each spiracle leads to a spacious
atrium or tracheal pouch: its wall provides an apodeme
for the attachment of the extrinsic muscles of the coxa.
At stadium IV, the extrinsic muscles of the eighth pair
of legs have disappeared, in particular the coxal (protractor and retractor) muscles that in the previous stadium attach to the tracheal pouch. The gonopod
primordia contain a mass of tightly packed, not
obviously differentiated cells (Figure 13A).
At stadium V, the internal structure of ring VII is
similar to stadium IV (Figure 13B). However, in the following stadia VI and VII, tiny muscles appear proximally (Figure 13C-D), while a mass of tightly packed
cells persists in the distal portion of the primordia.
Behaviours associated with the moult from stadium VII
to VIII (from building a molting chamber, to post-ecdysial recovery) last 12-29 days (N = 19), with an average
of about 20 days, in agreement with Causey [38]. Morphologically, three steps can be distinguished on the
basis of in vivo observations:
a) gonopod primordia are elongated in the proximodistal direction and formed of three parts, separated by
two constrictions; no structure is clearly identifiable
inside the primordium (Figure 14A).
b) a small increase in the length of the primordium is
accompanied by the differentiation of a recognizable
appendage inside the primordium (Figure 14B).
c) the distal processes of the gonopod telopodite are
recognizable under the stretched cuticle of the gonopod
primordia (Figure 14C).
Histological observations confirm those made in vivo.
At the first step, only an epidermal layer is identifiable
(Figure 14D). At the second step, the entire appendage
contains a mass of tightly packed cells (probably undifferentiated tissue), which appears compact in the basal
part, but branches distally (Figure 14E). Finally, this tissue starts to form the gonopods and in the distal part
branching ends, probably corresponding to the distal
parts of the telopodite, are recognizable (Figure 14F).

Drago et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:19
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/19

Page 11 of 16

Figure 12 Left male gonopod of O. gracilis. (A) Mesal view, anterior to the left. (B) Solenomerite and medial branch of the solenophore of
the telopodite, lateral view, anterior to the right. False colour SEM. Pale green, gonocoxa; Green, solenomerite; Yellow, prefemur; Pale blue, base
of the telopodite; Red, tibiotarsus; Blue, femoral process; Violet, solenophore. Scale bars: A, 200 μm; B, 20 μm.

At stadium VIII (adult) the internal anatomy of the
seventh trunk ring is quite different because of the
changes associated with fully-developed gonopods. Each
gonopod possesses an apodeme (Figure 15) that offers
insertion points to a pair of antagonistic muscles, a protractor and a retractor (Figure 13E). The protractor
muscles attach to the apodeme of the tracheal pouch
near leg pair 9, while the retractor muscles attach on
the ventro-lateral side of the same ring, slightly anterior
to the apodeme. A transverse abductor muscle connects
the right with the left gonocoxa (Figure 13F). The
arrangement of these extrinsic muscles is summarized
in Figure 15. Each gonocoxa possesses three muscles:
the extensor (Figure 13G) and the flexor of the prefemur and the abductor (Figure 13H) of the solenomerite.
No musculature is found inside the prefemur and acropodite (Figure 13H).

Discussion
In many arthropods, the moult to the adult stadium is
associated with major and pervasive morphological
changes. These events are thus temporally restricted, but
spatially unrestricted. Much less common, if not even
unparalleled, is the nature of the changes which turn
walking legs into gonopods in male helminthomorph
millipedes. Here, indeed, the change is distributed along
two to several post-embryonic stadia, but is spatially
restricted to a very short, nonterminal part of the trunk.
It is generally limited to one pair of appendages (leg pair
8), as in the Polydesmida, or to two pairs of appendages
(usually, 8 and 9), as in the Julida, while the appendages
both in front and behind those eventually turning into
gonopods are totally unaffected by the event. This segmental localization of the metamorphic event is almost

invariant across the Helminthomorpha, irrespective of
the kind of post-embryonic development (either hemi-,
telo- or euanamorphosis) and of the total number of segments in the adult millipede. Also in those few species
which possess many leg pairs at hatching (e.g., more than
twenty pairs in Pachyiulus flavipes (C.L. Koch, 1847);
[10]), gonopods retain the same segmental position. This
is why we described the process as a non-systemic metamorphosis [6]. The only exception to the strict localization of gonopods at trunk ring VII is the Colobognatha,
where the legs modified into sexual appendages are those
of pairs 9 and 10 which belong to segments VII and VIII
respectively [9]. This supports the view of an independent genetic control of development between dorsal and
ventral segmental units. Thus non-systemic metamorphosis should not be understood as the transformation of
a ‘segmental module’.
On the other hand, the reduction of the relevant
ordinary legs to gonopod primordia and the change of
the latter into gonopods have no universally fixed position in the millipede’s post-embryonic developmental
schedule. The number of stadia with gonopod primordia
varies among helminthomorph millipedes, sometimes
also between quite closely related taxa. For example,
among the polydesmids, Petit [20] contrasted Polydesmus angustus, with four stadia (IV to VII) with gonopod
primordia, with Brachydesmus superus Latzel, 1884,
where these stadia are reduced to three (IV to VI).
However, even more deviant schedules are possible. In
Pelmatojulus insignis, gonopod primordia differentiate
progressively from stadium IV to IX, eventually
approaching the final condition in the subadult stadium
X, followed at last by the functional adult as stadium XI
[23].

Drago et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:19
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/19

Page 12 of 16

Hox gene expression are available [45]. To date, millipedes have proved to be difficult subjects for the
study of embryonic and, still more, post-embryonic
development: post-embryonic stages are difficult to
handle experimentally, because of the heavily calcified
exoskeleton and also because of the disturbance to
histochemical procedures caused by the diversity of
repugnatory substances they produce. A comprehensive study of embryonic gene expression has been
only conducted on the pill millipede Glomeris
[1,46,47], which lacks gonopods.
Functional aspects of leg-to-gonopod transformation
have not been experimentally investigated, but there are
hints suggesting possible connections with the feeding
capacity of sexually mature males. Specifically, sub-optimal energy intake during the stadium/stadia with gonopods (and during the pharate phase of the preceding
stadium) offers a possible functional explanation for the
existence of intercalary males in the species with periodomorphosis. The same hindrance to feeding, caused by
displacement and reduction in the lumen of the gut in
many adult julidan males, has also a possible connection
with the little known observation that acquisition of sexual maturity appears to be accompanied by a ‘slimming’
of the body of those males, with respect to trunk diameter in pre-adult stadia [48,49].

Figure 13 O. gracilis male sections. Para-midsagittal (A-D, G-H),
frontal (E) and transverse (F) paraffin sections of ring VII during
stadia IV-VIII. Mallory’s triple stain. (A) Stadium IV. (B) Stadium V. (C)
Stadium VI. (D) Stadium VII. (E-H) Stadium VIII. gA, gonopod
apodeme; ga, gonopod abductor muscle; gp, gonopod protractor
muscle; gr, gonopod retractor muscle; gt, gut; mf, muscle fiber; nc,
nerve cord; pe, prefemur extensor muscle; sa, solenomerite
abductor muscle; tA, tracheal pouch apodeme; arrowheads, possibly
undifferentiated tissue. Anterior to the left, scale bars 200 μm.

The precise spatial localization of gonopods has suggested the involvement of a positional marker set at a
quite early embryonic stage, when the general organization of the body is the same in all millipedes [6].
This hypothesis implies the presence of a ‘dormant’
developmental module which is activated months, or
years, after it has been set up during embryogenesis.
The same module would be used repeatedly in the
species with periodomorphosis. The nature of the
organs involved in the metamorphosis and the posterior position of the seventh diplosegment in the
embryo has suggested the Hox gene Abd-B as a candidate marker [6]. Unfortunately the expression pattern
of Abd-B has not been studied in the only helminthomorph millipede, Oxidus gracilis, for which data on

Conclusions
The evidence provided in this paper shows that the
non-systemic metamorphosis [6] that gives rise to
millipede male gonopods, while dramatically modifying
the external shape of the eighth and ninth pairs of
appendages, is accompanied, in some taxa, by very
extensive changes in the internal anatomy of trunk
ring VII. Both blaniulid species examined here show a
major remodelling of the architecture of this ring, as a
consequence of the reduction of the volume available
to structures other than gonopods. This effect is probably amplified in these species by their overall reduced
size and very small body diameter. Indeed, the remodeling of ring VII architecture is less conspicuous in
the other two species, both of them of larger size.
Comparative evidence from a larger sample of millipede species is obviously needed.
Our descriptions of the external and internal changes
eventually replacing ordinary locomotory legs with specialized sexual appendages can be a starting point for
the study of the cellular dynamics - apoptosis and proliferation processes - involved in gonopod formation.
Moreover, the morpho-anatomical information that
emerges from these data provide an important basis for
the study of post-embryonic expression patterns of
genes putatively involved this kind of metamorphosis, as
suggested by Drago et al. [6].

Drago et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:19
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/19

Page 13 of 16

Figure 14 O. gracilis male late stadium VII (pharate phase). Three sub-phases are distinguishable. (A-C) Fused EDF-stacks; lateral view. (D-F)
Para-midsagittal paraffin sections; Mallory’s triple stain. A and D, first step of the pharate phase: the gonopod primordium is formed by three
parts, separated by two constrictions; in section only the epidermis is visible (arrowhead). B and E, second step of the pharate phase: an
elongated structure is visible inside the detached cuticle of the gonopod primordium; the gonopod primordium contains a mass of tightly
packaged cells, distally branched (arrow). C and F, third step of the pharate phase (see text): the distal processes of the gonopod telopodite are
recognizable under the transparent old cuticle; branching of distal telopodite parts is very advanced (arrows). Anterior to the left, scale bars 100
μm.

Materials and methods
Animal collection

Cultures of two millipede species, known to be easily
kept in captivity, were established in our lab. Adult specimens of Nopoiulus kochii were collected in litter and
in decaying wood in Sorio di Gambellara (NE Italy), and
adult specimens of Oxidus gracilis were collected in

litter in Marcon di Venezia (NE Italy). Breeding cultures
were kept at 20°C in plastic Petri dishes, with ca 5 mm
of 2% agar on the bottom [42,50]. Original litter material, pieces of potatoes and decaying wood (Populus,
Salix) were used as food. Males were reared until the
selected developmental stage, when they were euthanized using ethyl acetate vapour at 4°C, to prevent the

Drago et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:19
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/19

Page 14 of 16

fixed or digested specimens were dissected using microscissors, micro-pins, scalpel and tweezers.
Morphology

Figure 15 O. gracilis adult male. Cuticle structure of trunk ring VII
(front view) with a scheme of extrinsic musculature of left gonopod.
SEM after the digestion of the internal soft tissues. gA, gonopod
apodeme; ga, gonopod abductor muscle; gp, gonopod protractor
muscle; gr, gonopod retractor muscle; tA, tracheal pouch apodeme.
Scale bar 200 μm.

body from coiling, and immediately fixed in a mixture of
2.5% glutaraldehyde and 2% formaldehyde in PBS. For
optimal fixation, the millipedes were cut in two or more
pieces before immersion into the fixative, where they
remained for at least 48 h at 4°C. In some cases, stereomicroscope observations on living specimens were carried out before euthanization.
Individuals of different stadia of the other two species,
Blaniulus guttulatus and Nemasoma varicorne, were collected directly in the field, immediately assigned to their
developmental stadium by counting the number of legbearing and apodous rings, then euthanized and fixed as
described above. Specimens of B. guttulatus were collected in a garden in Hellerup (Copenhagen, Denmark),
those of N. varicorne were collected under tree bark in
Gentofte, Ermelunden (Copenhagen, Denmark) and in
Jægersborg Hegn (Copenhagen, Denmark).
In addition, several specimens of the three julidan species from the collections of the Zoological Museum in
Copenhagen, preserved in 70% ethanol, were studied to
increase sample size in SEM investigations.
Digestion and dissection

To examine the exoskeleton and its internal projections
(apodemes), internal soft tissues of selected specimens
were digested: fixed animals were washed from the fixative
in PBS+0.1% Triton®X 100, cut in pieces and immersed in
5% KOH at 50°C for at least 48 h. The cuticle thus
obtained was rinsed with distilled water and dehydrated,
for SEM observations, or bleached and stained, for CLSM
observations (see below). When required, gonopods of

Living animals were observed using a Leica MZ125
stereomicroscope fitted with a Leica DFC 420 camera.
Digested preparations destined to bright field light
microscopy were stained with Chlorazol black and
examined with a Leica DM5000B microscope. Images
were acquired with a Leica DFC 300 FX camera using
the software Leica Application Suite (ver. 2.6) and
focus-stacked using the CombineZP Image Stacking
Software (developed by Alan Hadley).
Fixed specimens destined for SEM were washed from
the fixative in PBS+0.1% Triton®X 100 then dehydrated
through a graded ethanol series. For a complete dehydration the samples were immersed in hexamethyldisilazane [51], air dried at room temperature, and finally
mounted on aluminium stubs. When necessary, to
remove soil particles, samples were briefly sonicated,
before being finally coated with gold or platinum-palladium. Three scanning electron microscopes were used: a
Cambridge Stereoscan 260, a Jeol JSM-6490, and a Jeol
JSM-6335-F.
In order to reconstruct the morphology of the less
accessible parts of the gonopods and their associated
structures (apodemes), a modern technique based on
confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM) was
adopted. This technique (see [52-55]) takes advantage of
the autofluorescence of the cuticle, and allows detection
without dissections of structures that are extremely difficult to handle in specimens of small size, for which dissection can easily cause damage to the parts of interest.
Specimens destined for CLSM were washed in PBS
+0.1% Triton®X 100 to remove the fixative. Internal soft
tissues were digested with 5% KOH at 50°C for at least
48 h. The remaining cuticle was bleached with acetic
acid and washed with distilled water. Evans Blue staining (0.005% in water) was used to increase the fluorescence of the cuticle, improving resolution beyond the
effect of autofluorescence. Specimens were washed several times to remove excess stain. Samples were
mounted in PBS-buffered glycerol with anti-fade agent
(90% glycerol, 0.5% n-propyl gallate in PBS). Because
increasing specimen thickness exacerbates aberrations in
the optical setup [56,57], care was taken to use just the
amount of medium necessary to cover the specimens.
Slides were studied using a Nikon Eclipse E600 microscope equipped with a Bio-Rad MRC 1024ES confocal
laser scanning unit using a 543 nm helium/neon laser
and a 570 nm long pass emission filter. CLSM data
were analyzed with the software ImageJ (ver. 1.37).

Drago et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:19
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/19

Anatomy

Soft parts anatomy was studied through serial paraffin
sections. Fixed specimens were washed in PBS+0.1%
Triton®X 100 at least six times, each time for 20 min,
and treated overnight with chitinase from Streptomyces
griseus (0.7 u/ml at 37°C in HEPES buffer) to soften the
exoskeleton; samples were then washed in PBS+0.1%
Triton®X 100 and decalcified overnight in EDTA 0.5 M
pH 8 at 4°C. After washing in PBS+0.1% Triton®X 100,
the specimens were dehydrated through a graded ethanol series, then immersed in xylene and finally
embedded in paraffin. Sagittal, frontal and transversal
sections were made at a thickness from 7 to 12 μm
(always 7 μm in the case of julidans) and stained with
Mallory’s triple stain [58]. Slides were observed with a
Leica DM5000B microscope, fitted with a Leica DFC
300 FX camera.

Page 15 of 16

7.

8.
9.
10.

11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.

17.

Image processing

Digital images were processed with the software CorelPHOTO-PAINT, CorelDRAW (ver. 14) and Adobe
Photoshop (ver. 12).

18.

19.
Acknowledgements
We thank T. Zuccon for assistance in an early phase of the experimental
work and H. Enghoff for help in animal field collection and identification,
and for his comments on a preliminary version of this article. W. Arthur and
two anonymous referees provided useful suggestions that improved the ms.
This research has been partly supported by a grant from the Italian Ministry
of University and Research to A.M. L.D.’s work in Copenhagen was
supported by a grant from the European Commission’s (FP6) Integrated
Infrastructure Initiative programme SYNTHESYS (DK-TAF).
Authors’ contributions
LD carried out the morphological investigations on non-systemic
metamorphosis in the four millipede species, assisted by EG. LD, GF and AM
implemented data analysis and interpretation, and drafted the article. All
authors participated in the design of the study, and read and approved the
final manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 9 June 2011 Accepted: 22 August 2011
Published: 22 August 2011
References
1. Janssen R, Prpic NM, Damen WGM: Gene expression suggests decoupled
dorsal and ventral segmentation in the millipede Glomeris marginata
(Myriapoda: Diplopoda). Dev Biol 2004, 268:89-104.
2. Janssen R, Prpic NM, Damen WGM: A review of the correlation of tergites,
sternites, and leg pairs in diplopods. Front Zool 2006, 3:2.
3. Fusco G: Morphological nomenclature, between patterns and processes:
segments and segmentation as a paradigmatic case. Zootaxa 2008,
1950:96-102.
4. Rothenbühler H: Zweiter Beitrag zur Kenntnis der Diplopodenfauna der
Schweiz. Rev Suiss Zool 1900, 8:167-192.
5. Hopkin SP, Read HJ: The biology of millipedes. Oxford: Oxford University
Press; 1992.
6. Drago L, Fusco G, Minelli A: Non-systemic metamorphosis in male
millipede appendages: long delayed, reversible effect of an early
localized positional marker? Front Zool 2008, 5:5.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.
25.

26.
27.

28.

29.
30.
31.

32.

Demange JM: Recherches sur la segmentation du tronc des Chilopodes
et des Diplopodes Chilognathes (Myriapodes). Mém Mus nat hist nat Paris
(NS) 1967, A44:1-188.
Blower JG: Millipedes. Synopses of the British fauna (NS) No. 35 London: EJ
Brill/Dr W Backhuys; 1985.
Hoffman RL: Diplopoda. In Synopsis and classification of living organisms.
Edited by: Parker SP. New York: McGraw-Hill; 1982:, 2: 689-724.
Enghoff H, Dohle W, Blower JG: Anamorphosis in millipedes (Diplopoda) the present state of knowledge with some developmental and
phylogenetic considerations. Zool J Linn Soc 1993, 109:103-234.
Fusco G: Trunk segment numbers and sequential segmentation in
myriapods. Evol Dev 2005, 7:608-617.
Fabre JH: Recherches sur l’anatomie des organes reproducteurs et sur le
développement des Myriapodes. Ann Sci nat (4) Zool 1855, 3:257-316.
Brölemann HW: Diplopoda. Voyage de Ch. Alluaud et R. Jeannel en Afrique
Orientale (1911-1912). Resultats scientifiques. Myriapodes 1920, 49-298.
Verhoeff KW: Diplopoda. Bronn’s Klassen und Ordnungen des Tier-Reichs, 5:2.
Leipzig: Akademische Verlagsgesellschaft 5(2):1-1071, 1926-32.
Miley HH: Development of the male gonopods and life history of a
polydesmid millipede. Ohio J Sci 1927, 27:25-43.
Davenport D, Wooton DM, Cushing JE: The biology of the Sierra luminous
millipede, Luminodesmus sequoiae Loomis and Davenport. Biol Bull 1952,
102:100-110.
Berns MW: The development of the copulatory organs (gonopods) of a
spiroboloid milliped. J Morphol 1968, 126:447-461.
Dhaenens M, VandenSpiegel D: Contribution to the study of the postembryonic development and reproduction of the African millipede
Epibolus pulchripes (Gerstäcker, 1873) (Diplopoda, Pachybolidae). Belgian
J Zool 2006, 136:43-51.
Petit G: Étude morphologique et expérimentale de la métamorphose
d’un appendice ambulatoire en gonopode chez le diplopode
Polydesmus angustus Latz. Ann Embryol Morphogen 1973, 6:137-149.
Petit G: Développements comparés des appendices copulateurs
(gonopodes) chez Polydesmus angustus Latzel et Brachydesmus superus
Latzel (Diplopodes: Polydesmidae). Int J Insect Morphol Embryol 1976,
5:261-272.
Filka ME, Shelley RM: Structure of the gonopod primordia of the milliped
Sigmoria latior (Brölemann) (Polydesmida: Xystodesmidae). Trans Amer
Micr Soc 1980, 99:173-179.
Brölemann HW: Myriapodes recueillis en Afrique occidentale française
par M. l’Administrateur en chef L. Duboscq. Arch Zool exp gén 1926,
65:1-159.
Demange JM: Contribution à la connaissance du développement
postembryonnaire de Pachybolus ligulatus (Voges) (développement
segmentaire, croissance ocellaire, croissance des organes copulateurs,
notion de lignées larvaires, zone de croissance). Biol Gabon 1972, 8:127-161.
Verhoeff KW: Periodomorphose. Zool Anz 1923, 56:233-238, 241-254.
Sahli F: Influence de facteurs externes sur la periodomorphose chez le
Diplopode Cylindroiulus nitidus (Verh.). Premiers resultats expérimentaux.
C r Acad Sci 1983, 296(3):89-91.
Sahli F: Périodomorphose et mâles intercalaires des Diplopodes Julidae:
une nouvelle terminologie. Bull sci Bourgogne 1985, 38:23-31.
Sahli F: On post-adult moults in Julida (Myriapoda, Diplopoda). Why
periodomorphosis and intercalaries occur in males? In Proceedings of the
7th International Congress of Myriapodology. Edited by: Minelli A. Leiden:
Brill; 1990:135-156.
Sahli F: Recherches sur le cycle des mâles et la fréquence des
intercalaires d’Ommatoiulus sabulosus (Myriapoda, Diplopoda, Julidae) en
Bourgogne. Inversion expérimentale du nombre des intercalaires et des
adultes en automne. Bull sci Bourgogne 1990, 43:51-59.
West WRJ: An anatomical study of the male reproductive system of a
Virginia millipede. J Morphol 1953, 93:123-175.
Hoffman RL, Orcutt BS: A synopsis of the Atopetholidae, a family of
spiroboloid millipeds. Proc US Nat Mus 1960, 111:95-166.
Wilson HM: Muscular anatomy of the millipede Phyllogonostreptus
nigrolabiatus (Diplopoda: Spirostreptida) and its bearing on the
millipede “thorax”. J Morphol 2002, 251:256-275.
Kheirallah A-M, Aly A-NH, Abdel-Wahed NY: Anamorphosis and life-history
of the millipede Nopoiulus kochii (Gervais, 1847), new for Egypt. Zool
Middle East 2000, 21:159-168.

Drago et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:19
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/19

33. Brookes CH, Willoughby J: An investigation of the ecology and life history
of the millipede Blaniulus guttulatus (Bosc) in a British woodland. Abh
Verh Naturwiss Ver Hamburg 1978, 21/22:105-114.
34. Brölemann HW: Blaniulidae. Myriapodes. Biospeologica. Arch zool exp gén
1923, 61:99-453.
35. Enghoff H: A revision of the Nopoiulinae, with notes on the classification
of blaniulid millipedes (Diplopoda, Julida: Blaniulidae). Senckenberg biol
1984, 64:393-427.
36. Enghoff H: The millipede family Nemasomatidae. With the description of
a new genus, and a revision of Orinisobates (Diplopoda: Julida). Ent
Scand 1985, 16:27-67.
37. Enghoff H: A revised cladistic analysis and classification of the millipede
order Julida with establishment of four new families and description of
a new nemasomatoid genus from Japan. Ztschr Zool Syst Evol Forsch
1991, 29:241-263.
38. Causey NB: Studies on the life history and the ecology of the hothouse
millipede, Orthomorpha gracilis (C.L. Koch 1847). Amer Midl Nat 1943,
29:670-682.
39. Golovatch SI, Enghoff H: Review of the millipede genus Tylopus, with
descriptions of new species from Thailand (Diplopoda, Polydesmida,
Paradoxosomatidae). Steenstrupia 1993, 19:85-125.
40. Jeekel CAW: Millipedes from Australia, 1: Antichiropodini from South
Australia (Diplopoda, Polydesmida, Paradoxosomatidae). Bull Zool Mus
Amsterdam 1982, 8:121-132.
41. Mesibov R: A new genus of millipede (Diplopoda: Polydesmida:
Dalodesmidae) from Tasmania with a pseudo-articulated gonopod
telopodite. Zootaxa 2005, 1064:39-49.
42. Enghoff H: Parthenogenesis and bisexuality in the millipede, Nemasoma
varicorne C. L. Koch, 1847 (Diplopoda: Blaniulidae). Morphological,
ecological, and biogeographical aspects. Vidensk Med Dansk Naturhist For
1976, 139:21-59.
43. Silvestri F: Classis Diplopoda. Vol 1. Anatome: Pars I. Segmenta, tegumentum,
musculi. Acari, Myriapoda et Scorpiones huscque in Italia reperta 1903, Portici.
44. Manton SM: The Arthropoda: habits, functional morphology and evolution
London: Clarendon Press; 1977.
45. Abzhanov A, Popadic A, Kaufman TC: Chelicerate Hox genes and the
homology of arthropod segments. Evol Dev 1999, 1:77-89.
46. Damen WGM, Tautz D: Abdominal-B expression in a spider suggests a
general role for Abdominal-B in specifying the genital structures. J exptl
Zool 1999, 285:85-91.
47. Janssen R, Budd GE, Damen WGM, Prpic NM: Evidence for Wgindependent tergite border formation in the millipede Glomeris
marginata. Dev Genes Evol 2008, 218:361-370.
48. Enghoff H: Macaronesian millipedes (Diplopoda) with emphasis on
endemic species swarms on Madeira and the Canary Islands. Biol J Linn
Soc 1982, 46:153-161.
49. Akkari N, Enghoff H: Copulatory-copulatory male succession and male
slenderness in Ommatoiulus sempervirilis n. sp., a new insular millipede
from Tunisia (Diplopoda: Julida: Julidae). J zool Syst Evol Res 2011.
50. Blower JG: Food consumption and growth in a laboratory population of
Ophyiulus pilosus (Newport). Symp Zool Soc London 1974, 32:527-551.
51. Nation JL: A new method using hexamethyldisilazane for preparation of
soft insect tissue for scanning electron microscopy. Stain Technol 1983,
58:347-351.
52. Zill S, Frazier SF, Neff D, Quimby L, Carney M, Dicaprio R, Thuma J,
Norton M: Three-dimensional graphic reconstruction of the insect
exoskeleton through confocal imagining of endogenous fluorescence.
Micr Res Tech 2000, 48:367-384.
53. Klaus AV, Kulasekera VL, Schawaroch V: Three-dimensional visualization of
insect morphology using confocal laser scanning microscopy. J Microsc
2003, 212:107-121.
54. Klaus AV, Schawaroch V: Novel methodology utilizing confocal laser
scanning microscopy for systematic analysis in arthropods (Insecta).
Integr Comp Biol 2006, 46:207-214.
55. Michels J: Confocal laser scanning microscopy: using cuticular
autofluorescence for high resolution morphological imaging in small
crustaceans. J Microsc 2007, 227:1-7.
56. de Grauw CJ, Frederix PLTM, Gerritsen HC: Aberrations and penetration in
in-depth confocal and two-photon microscopy. In Confocal and twophoton microscopy: foundations, applications, and advances. Edited by:
Diaspro A. New York: Wiley-Liss; 2002:153-169.

Page 16 of 16

57. Diaspro A, Federici F, Robello M: Influence of refractive index mismatch in
high-resolution three-dimensional confocal microscopy. Appl Optics 2002,
41:685-690.
58. Pantin CFA: Notes on microscopical technique for zoologists Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press; 1964.
59. Enghoff H: Phylogeny of millipedes - a cladistic analysis. Z zool Syst
EvolForsch 1984, 22:8-26.
60. Enghoff H: A cladistic analysis and classification of the millipede order
Julida. Z Zool Syst Evolutionsforsch 1993, 19:285-319.
doi:10.1186/1742-9994-8-19
Cite this article as: Drago et al.: Structural aspects of leg-to-gonopod
metamorphosis in male helminthomorph millipedes (Diplopoda).
Frontiers in Zoology 2011 8:19.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
