<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Analysis of an ankyrin-like region in Epstein Barr Virus encoded (EBV) BZLF-1 (ZEBRA) protein: implications for interactions with NF-κB and p53</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Virology Journal 2011, 8:422. doi:10.1186/1743-422X-8-422"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="David H Dreyfus"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Dreyfus et al. Virology Journal 2011, 8:422
http://www.virologyj.com/content/8/1/422

RESEARCH

Open Access

Analysis of an ankyrin-like region in Epstein Barr
Virus encoded (EBV) BZLF-1 (ZEBRA) protein:
implications for interactions with NF-B and p53
David H Dreyfus1*, Yang Liu2, Lucy Y Ghoda3 and Joseph T Chang2

Abstract
Background: The carboxyl terminal of Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) ZEBRA protein (also termed BZLF-1 encoded
replication protein Zta or ZEBRA) binds to both NF-B and p53. The authors have previously suggested that this
interaction results from an ankyrin-like region of the ZEBRA protein since ankyrin proteins such as IB interact with
NF-B and p53 proteins. These interactions may play a role in immunopathology and viral carcinogenesis in B
lymphocytes as well as other cell types transiently infected by EBV such as T lymphocytes, macrophages and
epithelial cells.
Methods: Randomization of the ZEBRA terminal amino acid sequence followed by statistical analysis suggest that
the ZEBRA carboxyl terminus is most closely related to ankyrins of the invertebrate cactus IB-like protein. This
observation is consistent with an ancient origin of ZEBRA resulting from a recombination event between an
ankyrin regulatory protein and a fos/jun DNA binding factor. In silico modeling of the partially solved ZEBRA
carboxyl terminus structure using PyMOL software demonstrate that the carboxyl terminus region of ZEBRA can
form a polymorphic structure termed ZANK (ZEBRA ANKyrin-like region) similar to two adjacent IB ankyrin
domains.
Conclusions: Viral capture of an ankyrin-like domain provides a mechanism for ZEBRA binding to proteins in the
NF-B and p53 transcription factor families, and also provides support for a process termed “Ping-Pong Evolution”
in which DNA viruses such as EBV are formed by exchange of information with the host genome. An amino acid
polymorphism in the ZANK region is identified in ZEBRA from tumor cell lines including Akata that could alter
binding of Akata ZEBRA to the p53 tumor suppressor and other ankyrin binding protein, and a novel model of
antagonistic binding interactions between ZANK and the DNA binding regions of ZEBRA is suggested that may be
explored in further biochemical and molecular biological models of viral replication.
Keywords: p53, NF-κB, transcription, ankyrin, phylogeny, oncogenes, viral carcinogenesis, viral conditioning, epigenomics, ping-pong evolution, ASPP2, ASPP1, iASPP

Background
Analysis of viruses, mobile DNA sequences and host
genomes reveals evidence that genetic information can
be shared resulting in generation of novel hybrid
genetic elements. For example, the ubiquitous human
pathogen Epstein Barr Virus (EBV), genome structure
contains a region co-linear with the vertebrate variable
* Correspondence: dhdreyfus@pol.net
1
Department of Pediatrics, Yale SOM, 488 Norton Parkway, New Haven CT
06511, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

immunoglobulin gene segments including regulatory
regions for the myc oncogene, signals for immunoglobulin switch recombination, somatic mutation and
coding regions[1,2]. Similarly, the EBV viral termini
contain sequences similar to somatic V(D)J immunoglobulin and T cell receptor recombination sites and
the virus encodes a recombinase co-regulated with the
host RAG V(D)J recombinase [3-5].
These observations suggest that EBV and other DNA
viruses evolve through sharing of genetic information
with the host genome termed “Ping Pong Evolution”

© 2011 Dreyfus et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Dreyfus et al. Virology Journal 2011, 8:422
http://www.virologyj.com/content/8/1/422

[1,2]. In this work, a remarkable example of Ping Pong
Evolution between EBV and the host immune system is
characterized. The EBV viral protein ZEBRA, Zta
encoded by BZLF-1is proposed to result from capture
and fusion of exons from two different host immune
response genes, the fos/jun transcription factor and IB
immune regulatory proteins. Analysis of host IB proteins is utilized to present an empirically testable model
of ZEBRA binding to NF-B immune response proteins
in which the unstructured carboxyl region of ZEBRA
can assume two different structural conformations when
bound to NF-B. In addition, an amino acid polymorphism in this region of ZEBRA is identified that could
potentially alter the functional properties of the ZEBRA
protein interactions with both NF-B and the distantly
related tumor suppressor p53[6].
Studies of ZEBRA, the lytic switch protein, have
demonstrated that the two amino terminal exons of
ZEBRA are structurally related to the fos/jun transcription factors and that ZEBRA binding to DNA sites,
known as ZRE, is sufficient to activate the viral lytic
cycle[7,8]. The carboxyl region of ZEBRA protein can
bind to components of the NF-B transcription family
in vitro and alter NF-B transcription in vivo[9,10].
Inactivation of NF-B transcription is apparently independent of ZEBRA’s ability to function as a transcription factor [11-13]. It is not currently known which of
these multiple effects of ZEBRA contribute to viral carcinogenesis in a humanized mouse model [14].
One potential outcome of these interactions is that
inactivation of NF-B transcription during viral lytic
replication confers a selective advantage upon the virus
[15,16]. NF-B transcription factors and regulatory IB
proteins are central mediators of both the innate and
acquired immune responses [17,18]. Inactivation of NFB could block the innate immune response in B lymphocytes which are the viral host cell. Interaction
between ZEBRA and NF-B can trigger apoptosis of
cells expressing ZEBRA [19-21]. Inactivation NF-B
transcription by ZEBRA in host B lymphocytes may also
oppose the effects of latency proteins that activate NFB transcription, delaying apoptosis and contributing to
viral maturation and release from pre-apoptotic host
cells.
Other bystander cells such as T-lymphocytes, epithelial cells and macrophages may also be transiently
infected with EBV. T lymphocytes in particular express
both the EBV CD21 receptor as well as other EBV
receptors and express ZEBRA protein [3,21,22]. Studies
of the effects of transient and stable expression of
ZEBRA in T-lymphoblastoid cell lines have confirmed
an IB-like inactivation NF-B signaling by ZEBRA and
increased T lymphocyte apoptosis [21]. Thus, an additional selective advantage of interactions between

Page 2 of 17

ZEBRA and NF-B may be destruction of immune
responder cells through transient infection and
apoptosis.
Another human gamma herpesvirus, human herpesvirus-8, first identified as the cause of Kaposi’s sarcoma,
encodes a lytic replication protein which lacks DNA
binding but has extensive amino acid similarity to
ZEBRA including the carboxyl region of ZEBRA [23-25].
This region of ZEBRA is highly conserved between different viral strains [26]. EBV infected lymphocytes also
express a trans-spliced ZEBRA like protein termed RAZ
sharing the carboxyl terminal NF-B binding region of
the ZEBRA protein, but lacking the ability to bind DNA
or ZRE[15,27]. RAZ is also expressed in EBV infected T
lymphocytes[3,22].
Remarkably, the carboxyl region of ZEBRA required
for interactions with NF-B transcription and ZEBRA
dimerization also binds to p53 tumor suppressor in vitro
and alters p53 transcription in vitro[28-30]. The effects
of ZEBRA on p53 transcription are stimulatory in some
cases such as T-lymphocytes and epithelial cells, but
inhibitory in B-lymphocytes[29,30]. Interactions between
ZEBRA and p53 also involve other p53 binding proteins
and are more complex than interactions in vivo between
ZEBRA and NF-B [31]. The ability of ZEBRA to interact with both NF-B and p53 has previously been suggested to result from a cryptic IB-like region in the
carboxyl terminus of the ZEBRA protein[6,21]. NF-B
and p53 proteins share a common IB binding region
because they are descendents of a common ancestral
transcription factor previously termed “proto p53/NFB[6]“. Since this hypothesis was proposed, the crystal
structure of ZEBRA protein has been partially solved
including a portion of the carboxyl terminus of the protein interacting with NF-B and p53[8,32]. In addition,
the interactions between p53 binding ankyrin proteins
and NF-B proteins have been characterized providing
additional evidence that regulatory proteins in the
ankyrin family, including NF-B inhibitor proteins
related to IB, bind to both NF-B and p53 proteins
[33].
The recently available partial structure of the ZEBRA
carboxyl terminus, and the structures of IBa and apoptosis-stimulating protein of p53 (ASPP2, previously
known as p53BP2) ankyrin proteins are analyzed in this
work, building on previous similarities noted between
these regulatory proteins[6]. First, it is demonstrated
that primary amino acid similarities between the alpha
helix regions of ZEBRA and various other ankyrin proteins are unlikely to have arisen by chance or independent parallel evolution but instead appear to represent
capture and homologous descent of a terminal exon
encoding an IB domain by ZEBRA. Second, it is shown
that the partial crystal structure of ZEBRA is consistent

Dreyfus et al. Virology Journal 2011, 8:422
http://www.virologyj.com/content/8/1/422

Page 3 of 17

Methods

The ZANK region of ZEBRA was noted to be encoded
by a single exon in all examined EBV strains coinciding
exactly with the exon-intron junction of the ZEBRA
protein third exon (Figure 2, 3). Thus, the p53 and NFB binding regions of ZEBRA, termed ZANK, were
found to be separate both structurally and genetically
from the DNA binding and trans-activation regions of
ZEBRA (Figure 4).

Definition of the ankyrin-like region of ZEBRA protein
termed “ZANK”

Alignment of ZANK with defined ankyrin proteins

We previously noted that a region of ZEBRA (Figures 1,
2) has primary amino sequence similarity to IB prior
to the determination of the crystal structure of ZEBRA
[6]. We first used the program PyMOL (Delano Scientific Inc., CA) to define and visualize a region of ZEBRA
whose primary amino acid sequence is similar to
ankyrin proteins [6]. ZEBRA structure was partially
solved by x-ray crystallography in 2006 and structural
coordinates are available as a protein data-base in the
public domain (2C9N.pdb). This region of ZEBRA,
termed in this work ZANK “ZEBRA ANKryn-like
region” has an alpha-helical stem and carboxyl unstructured region (Figure 1). In the course of this analysis,

ZEBRA protein and nucleotide sequences are as determined previously[26]. Individual ankyrin domains from
published IB and related sequences obtained from genbank were identified using PyMOL and first aligned
with ZANK and with each other using standard algorithms such as BLAST as illustrated in the text (Figure
5) Color scheme for Figure 5 can be found at http://
ekhidna.biocenter.helsinki.fi/pfam2/clustal_colours). Previously, some primary amino acid similarity between
p53 binding ankyrins, IB ankyrins, invertebrate ankyrins and the ZEBRA carboxyl terminus have been illustrated and suggested to provide a basis for interactions
between ZEBRA and ankyrin binding proteins[6,21].

with dimerization of the terminal region of the protein
to form an IB-like stem and loop structure. Finally,
individual ankyrin domains of IBa are shown to have
structural similarities to the ankyrins of ASPP2, and
thus able to bind to the same region targeted by ZEBRA
[6].

Figure 1 Structure of ZEBRA protein. The carboxyl terminus of dimeric ZEBRA protein bound to a ZRE oligonucleotide (orange) is shown. This
image was generated from previously determined ZEBRA molecular coordinates using PyMOL. The ZANK (ZEBRA ANKyrin-like region) carboxyl
terminus of ZEBRA is highlighted in blue. ZANK is composed of two regions, a highly structured alpha helix stem highlighted in darker blue (the
ZANK stem region) and a partially solved unstructured region continuing to the end of the protein highlighted in light blue (the ZANK loop
region).

Dreyfus et al. Virology Journal 2011, 8:422
http://www.virologyj.com/content/8/1/422

Page 4 of 17

Figure 2 Sequence and Structure of ZANK. The amino acid sequence of the unstructured loop region of ZANK (shown in light blue in Figure
1) is shown in more detail including the addition of terminal amino acids 237-245 not present in the solved structure. This region was deleted
in order to permit crystallization of the ZEBRA protein. A region with secondary structure denoted “ZANK structure” is evident in the carboxyl
terminus of ZEBRA as discussed in more detail in the text. ZANK is encoded by a discrete exon corresponding precisely with the stem and loop
regions shown in blue in Figure 1.

Individual ankyrin domains in ASPP2 are denoted in this
work based on previously reported optimized alignments
between the p53BP2 fragment of ASPP2 and IB. Thus,
ank3 of p53BP2 corresponds to IB ankyrin 3, p53BP2
ank4 corresponds to IB ankyrin 4, and p53BP2 ank5
corresponds to IB ankyrin 5 proceeding from the amino
to carboxyl termini of both proteins respectively[6]. In a
more recent naming convention, p53BP2 which was
found to be a fragment of a larger protein known as
ASPP2 (ankyrin repeat, SH3, and proline rich domaincontaining protein number 2 also previously called apoptosis stimulating p53 binding protein 2) to indicate that it
is a member of a multi-protein family. Using this nomenclature, p53BP2 ank3 corresponds to ASPP2 ankyrin 1,
p53BP2 ank4 corresponds to ASPP2 ankyrin 2, and
p53BP2 ank5 corresponds to ASPP2 ankyrin 3 [34].
Randomization analysis of ZANK and other defined
ankyrin domains

A randomization shuffling strategy was developed to
estimate the probability that observed amino acid similarities between ZANK, IB and other related ankyrins

such as invertebrate cactus and unc-22 were not
explained by the non-random amino acid composition
of ankyrin proteins. The amino acid sequence of each
ankyrin was randomized or shuffled and compared to
every other possible sequence with the number of equal
or better scores to non shuffled sequence shown.
Repeated IB and p53BP2 units of ankyrin are composed of a rigid alpha-helical stem and a less structured
more variable loop region that may be under different
evolutionary constraints. The borders of each ankyrin
stem and loop were identified using PyMOL (Figure 5).
Because of this bi-partite structure, analysis of the stem
and loop regions was conducted both together and independently (Figure 6). Randomization of 10,000 of each
stem and loop region was used in this analysis with correction for multiple comparisons. In this analysis, alignment of less than 500/10,000 randomized sequences is
comparable to a P value of .05, shown in yellow. Alignment of less than 10/10,000 sequences comparable to a
P value of .001 is shown in red.
Based on these studies the similarity between putative
ZEBRA ankyrin stem and the cactus ankyrin stems 4 is

Dreyfus et al. Virology Journal 2011, 8:422
http://www.virologyj.com/content/8/1/422

Page 5 of 17

Figure 3 ZANK region amino acids correspond precisely with exon 3 of BZLF-1 gene encoding ZEBRA. DNA encoding the ZANK region
and mRNA splice sites are shown. Using the same color scheme as in Figure 1, amino acids corresponding to the ZANK stem are shown in dark
blue and those corresponding to the loop region are shown in light blue. DNA sequence is derived from the B-958 strain of EBV. A single amino
acid polymorphism at aa 205 in this region has been identified resulting in a Ser substitution in certain strains of EBV such as Akata. Underlined
sequences indicate regions of the putative ZANK loop present in the crystal structure. The splice points of ZEBRA exon 3 encoding ZANK is
shown as “^” starting at the ZEBRA amino acid sequence “Val-Ala-Ala-Ala...” continuing to the end of the protein. The structured region of ZANK
loop (Figure 1, 2) corresponds to ZANK sequences 227-230 Val-Asp-Ser-Ile. Residues His239 and Phe245 in the terminus of ZANK correspond to
functionally conserved residues in the loops of other ankyrin proteins as discussed in more detail in the text.

Figure 4 A schematic diagram of the ZEBRA protein illustrating the 3 functional domains of ZEBRA. ZEBRA domains 1 and 2 contain the
transcriptional activation and DNA binding regions of the protein, respectively, and are similar to Fos/Jun transcription factors. Domain 3, the
carboxyl region of ZEBRA denoted ZANK in this work, is required for both dimerization of the ZEBRA protein as well as interactions with NF-B
and p53 transcription factors.

Dreyfus et al. Virology Journal 2011, 8:422
http://www.virologyj.com/content/8/1/422

Page 6 of 17

pattern where alternating ankyrin loops are similar
between odd and even numbered repeats, for example
ankyrin 3 and 5 loops have more similarity in both
amino acid composition and length than to ankyrins 2
and 4 loops from both IB and cactus. Relationships
between individual ankyrin stems and loops thus appear
to represent a complicated mixture of functional constraints operating independently of evolutionary descent
and shared sequences conserved through descent from a
common precursor as will be analyzed in more detail
elsewhere.
In silico modeling of structural similarities between ZANK
and other defined ankyrin domains
Figure 5 Alignment of ZANK amino acid sequence with
vertebrate and invertebrate anykrins. ZANK amino acids present
in the solved ZEBRA structure are shown aligned with
corresponding regions of non-viral ankyrins. Alignments were
performed using clustalx, and individual vertebrate ankyrin stem
loop domains from IB, p53BP2/ASPP2, BCL3, and invertebrate
ankyrins Unc-22 and Cactus. Approximate borders of stems (s) and
loops (l) derived from PyMOL generated structures are shown at the
top of the figure. Colored regions indicate highly conserved or
identical amino acids according to the color scheme described at
http://ekhidna.biocenter.helsinki.fi/pfam2/clustal_colours.

one order of magnitude greater than other ankyrin
stems, and this relationship was maintained over a variety of Price Waterman gap values. Also highly unlikely
to occur by chance are the alignments between the
putative ZEBRA ankyrin stem and the cactus stem 2
and Bcl3 ankyrin 4 stem. In many cases individual
ankyrin stems from different ankyrin proteins such as
invertebrate cactus, IB and p53 binding protein were
more closely related than adjacent ankyrins from a single protein, for example cactus ankyrin stem 4 and bcl3
ankyrin stem 4 are more similar than cactus ankyrin
stem 4 and other cactus ankyrins (BCL3 data not
shown). Based upon randomized sequence comparisons
shown in the ZEBRA stem-like region is most similar to
the stem region 4 of a Cactus ankyrin from the Drosophila fruit fly. Interestingly, the loop region of ZEBRA is
most similar to a different loop region from the cactus
protein, ankyrin 5 of cactus. However, because of the
short length o the ZEBRA stem region and other confounding factors such as apparent functional constraints
on stem sequence evolution it was not possible to construct a unique rooted phylogeny of individual ankyrin
stems using currently available alignment software (data
not shown).
Visual inspection of individual ankyrin stem and loop
regions (Figure 5) also suggests that the loop regions of
all of the cellular ankyrins were less significantly related
either to ZEBRA or to each other except in the stem
regions. In addition, IB and cactus ankyrins follow a

Protein data based files of ZEBRA (2C9N.pdb), IB
bound to NF-B protein p65 (1lKN.pdb), and the
p53BP2 fragment of ASPP2 (1YCS.pdb) were used to
generate PyMOL based alignments. Experimentally
determined structures were aligned using the “align” feature of PyMOL without any operator adjustments and
using molecular coordinates as deposited in respective
pdb files without alteration of molecular coordinates.
ZANK was superimposed upon adjacent ankyrin
domains of the IBa protein initially solved as a complex with NF-B p65 and the p53BP2 fragment of
ASPP2 p53 binding protein solved as a complex with
p53 (p53 structure not shown). A mechanism is proposed consistent with the partial structure of ZANK
suggesting that the observed structure of ZANK could
act as a dimorphic dimer and interact with adjacent
dimorphic regions of NF-B, and also related ankyrin
binding regions of p53. IBa and IBa and p53 binding
ankyrin proteins, although not identical in primary
amino acid sequence, have remarkably similar interactions with NF-B protein. This analysis is also used to
suggest a testable hypothesis where an amino acid polymorphism previously identified between ZEBRA protein
from Akata tumor cells and the ZEBRA protein from
non-tumorigenic B-958 could modulate the binding
interactions between ZEBRA and p53 leading to a more
cancer-promoting viral phenotype in the case of the
Akata derived ZEBRA.

Results
Identification of a structural and functional divergence
between ZEBRA carboxyl terminus and fos/jun
transcription factors

Epstein Barr Virus (EBV) encoded ZEBRA protein is
capable of switching the viral state from latency to lytic
growth through its effects on specific DNA binding sites
termed ZRE (ZEBRA Response Elements)[7]. The crystal
structure of the protein bound to a ZRE oligonucleotide
reveals similarity to Fos/Jun and other DNA binding
proteins of the BZIP transcription family as expected

Dreyfus et al. Virology Journal 2011, 8:422
http://www.virologyj.com/content/8/1/422

Page 7 of 17

Figure 6 Statistical analysis of ZANK amino acid sequence similarity to other ankyrins. Representative results of shuffling experiments for
ZANK, vertebrate ankyrins, IBa, p53BP2/ASPP2 ankyrins, and invertebrate ankyrins Cactus and Unc-22 are shown. Top: Randomizations of whole
ankyrin repeats. Middle: ankyrin stem regions only. Bottom: ankyrin loop regions only. 10,000 randomly shuffled sequences of identical amino
acid composition were generated in each cell. Shuffled sequences were aligned with indicated non-shuffled sequence and the number of scores
greater than or equal to that of the non-shuffled input sequence is shown.. Significant alignments (p < 0.05) are shown highlighted in yellow
while highly significant alignments (p < 0.001) are shown highlighted in red.

from similarities between ZRE and AP-1 binding sites
[8]. The structure of the carboxyl terminal region of the
ZEBRA protein has not been determined in the published crystal structure as inclusion of this region prevented protein crystallization suggesting a disordered
structure (Figure 1) [32]. This region of ZEBRA is also
dispensable for DNA binding[11].
Efforts to discover a specific mechanism for proteinprotein interactions of the carboxyl terminus region of
ZEBRA based upon the partially solved structure have
been unsuccessful, although some similarities are evident between this region and C/EBP-a, a CAAT-binding
transcription factor whose dysregulation is implicated in
acute myeloid leukemia [13]. Notably, the conserved
carboxyl terminus of ZEBRA (Figure 2) diverges from
DNA binding proteins of the BZIP family precisely at
the intron border of exon 3 (Figure 3). Like the ZEBRA
terminal exon, IB binds to both p53 and NF-B [6,21].
Exon 1 and 2 of ZEBRA thus encode a Fos/Jun homologue that activates DNA transcription to initiate the viral
lytic program, while exon 3 (shared with trans-spliced

RAZ protein) provides both protein self-dimerization
and binding to other master regulatory transcription factors such as p53 and NF-B. These observations are
analyzed in more detail in the remainder of this work.
ZANK, the carboxyl terminal Zebra ANKyrin-like region

Interactions between ZEBRA and NF-B, p53 as well as
other proteins can occur independently of ZEBRA DNA
binding, since experiments in vivo have shown that in
T-lymphocytes ZEBRA is not bound to DNA but localized to the cytoplasm where it blocks NF-B translocation to the nucleus [6,21]. The full sequence of the
carboxyl terminus exon (exon 3) of ZEBRA is shown in
Figure 2, including both regions of the protein present
in the crystal structure (blue highlights in Figure 1) and
extreme carboxyl residues not present in the crystal
structure [26]. We previously suggested that the carboxyl terminus of ZEBRA encodes an ankyrin-like structure responsible for the ability of ZEBRA to bind
ankyrin binding proteins NF-B and p53 [6,21]. For
purposes of discussion, the carboxyl terminus of ZEBRA

Dreyfus et al. Virology Journal 2011, 8:422
http://www.virologyj.com/content/8/1/422

encoded by exon 3 is termed ZANK (for ZEBRA
ANKyrin-like region) in the remainder of this work.
Remarkably, the crystal structure of ZEBRA protein
(Figure 1) shows divergence from BZIP Fos/Jun DNA
binding proteins precisely at the intron/exon borders of
ZEBRA exon 3 (Figure 2, 3).
Comparison of ZANK with defined vertebrate and
invertebrate ankyrin domains

ZANK spans part of the alpha helix of ZEBRA and
unstructured regions at the carboxyl terminus of the
protein (Figure 3, 4). The alpha-helical stem-like regions
contribute most of the similarity between ZANK and
individual ankyrins (Figure 5). This is evident in Figure
5 because most of the colored coded similar regions
occur to the left of the figure in the stem regions
(denoted s) rather than the loop regions (denoted l).
This was confirmed by a randomization analysis (Figure
6). Randomizations demonstrate that the full ZANK
sequence or loop region results in less significant alignments or no significant alignments for both ZANK and
other ankyrins compared to randomization of the stem
regions (Figure 6). The alpha helical regions of ankyrin
binding proteins are highly structured to provide a rigid
framework, while the loop regions are less structured
allowing for binding to different substrates. Results are
consistent with the hypothesis that ZANK encodes
amino acids derived from a common ancestral ankyrin
domain shared with IB and p53 binding ankyrins and
are most closely related to the invertebrate Drosophila
ankyrin regulatory protein Cactus, rather than vertebrate
ankyrins.
Statistical significance as highlighted in yellow in Figure 6 is defined as a given alignment found in less than
5% of shuffled sequences (less than 500 out of 10,000),
corresponding to P < 0.05 that the alignment would
occur by chance. A more stringent definition of a nonrandom alignment (highlighted in red in Figure 6) is
defined as a given alignment found in less than 0.1% of
shuffled sequences (less than 10 out of 10,000). In all
cases analyzed, including ZANK, the stem or alpha helix
regions of ankyrins are more conserved across ankyrin
protein families than the loop regions. For example, not
all IBa loops in host proteins are similar to each other,
but all the IBa stem regions are similar based upon
10,000 random shuffling of the respective sequences.
The diagonal of each randomization experiment
shown is the identity of the sequence with itself shown
in red, which as expected, occurs once per 10,000 shuffling experiments. Because each cell represents a characterization of an independent shuffling “experiment” the
number of aligned sequences are slightly different even
for identical comparisons as can be seen by comparing
identical comparisons on either side of the diagonal

Page 8 of 17

identity but because of the large number of shuffling per
“experiment” results are usually similar for a given cell
on either side of the diagonal.
ZANK is more similar to an invertebrate ankyrin domain
from Cactus than vertebrate ankyrins

As shown in Figure 6, the ZANK stem was most similar
to the ankyrin 4 stem region of invertebrate Drosophila
Cactus regulatory protein at the highest level of significance (less than 10/10,000 of shuffled sequences).
ZANK loop was most similar to invertebrate Drosophila
Cactus regulatory protein ankyrin 5 loop region at the
highest level of significance (less than 10/10,000 of
shuffled sequences). Similarity was also evident between
ZANK and the Cactus regulatory protein ankyrin 2 stem
region and the IBa ankyrin 3 and 5 stems as well as
the whole protein. Similarity to both stem and loop
regions of Cactus in addition to elements of IBa is a
surprising result since EBV is a vertebrate pathogen,
while Cactus is an invertebrate host gene, suggesting
that the divergence of ZANK from other ankyrins was
ancient, possibly preceding divergence of p53 and NFB ankyrin binding proteins such as IBa. Alternatively,
a vertebrate virus encoding ZANK could have resulted
from recombination with an invertebrate Drosophila
virus since in some cases insect viruses can infect vertebrate cells. Existing phylogeny programs do not appear
able to resolve these two possibilities as will be discussed in more detail elsewhere.
In silico Modeling of ZANK

In the remainder of this work we used PyMOL generated structures to model experimentally observed binding between ZEBRA protein and both NF-B and p53
in vitro and in vivo. A limitation of this analysis is that
the existing structure of ZANK is both partial and also
solved in the absence of the partner ligands p53 or NFB. However, even with those limitations this analysis is
sufficient to suggest a model of ZANK interactions with
its partner ligands in which the ZANK loop adopts two
different conformations. We have previously suggested
that binding between ZEBRA carboxyl terminus and
other proteins can be explained by the common descent
of both NF-B and p53 from an ancestral protein
termed proto-p53/NF-B. If this hypothesis is correct
then it should be possible to identify a common structural signature or code between ZANK, NF-B binding
ankyrins and p53 binding ankyrins that ZANK has
evolved to fit into. To use an analogy, if ankyrins resemble a key that can bind to their substrates resembling a
lock, then the ZANK key should fit into both the NFB and p53 locks[6,21].
To explore the possibility of this “lock and key”
mechanism, IBa ankyrin structures were extracted and

Dreyfus et al. Virology Journal 2011, 8:422
http://www.virologyj.com/content/8/1/422

superimposed as shown, without any other alterations in
the solved crystal structure coordinates. Since ZEBRA
protein exists as a dimer of identical subunits (Figure 1),
two adjacent ZANK loop domains in the dimerized
ZEBRA protein could interact with adjacent IBa
ankyrin binding regions of NF-B. As shown, Ank 3
and 4 of IBa play a critical role in IBa interactions
with NF-B (Figure 7). In support of this hypothesis,
residues such as Histamine 239 in ZANK (Figure 3), not
present in the crystal structure of ZEBRA due to
instability in the absence of either co-ligand NF-B and
tumor suppressor p53, could align with a corresponding
conserved stem histidine in IBa Ank 3 and related
ankyrin proteins (Figure 5). Binding to proteins such as
NF-B and p53 could stabilize ZANK and permit a
crystal or structure to confirm this model.
NF-B binding ankyrins have an alternating key or code
of short and long ankyrin loops suggesting a
polymorphic ZANK loop domain

Ankyrin loop regions are variable in length while the
stems are conserved in length (Figure 5). There is an

Page 9 of 17

alternating pattern of short loops (approximately 15
amino acids between adjacent stems) and long loops
(approximately 20 amino acids between adjacent stems)
in all of the NF-B binding ankyrins including vertebrate IBa and invertebrate cactus. Thus both IBa and
cactus ankyrin loops 2, 4, and 6 are short and loops 1,
3, and 5 are long. To permit binding interactions with
NF-B, the ZANK loop region of ZANK would need to
be dimorphic or sufficiently unstructured or flexible to
conform to adjacent non-identical short and long
ankyrin binding pockets in NF-B, for example the
regions of NF-B binding to Ankyrins 3 and 4 of IBa
as shown (Figure 7, 8, 9). Because the ankyrin loops of
IBa ank5 are very similar in both primary and secondary structure to IBa ank3, IBa has an alternating pattern of Ank3 and Ank4-like subunits, and this
alternating structure could permit multiple ZANK binding sites in a single NF-kb ligand (Figure 10).
Also resulting from this alternating short loop/long
loop pattern, using PyMOL generated structures it is
evident that IBa ankyrin 3 has additional amino acids
in its loop region forming a bulge not present in ankyrin

Figure 7 Illustration of the Interaction of IBa ankyrins with NF-B. NF-B p65/p50 dimer subunits (red shadings) are shown bound to
ankyrin repressor IBa. IBa ankyrin domains 3 (green) and 4 (yellow) are shown in color while other regions of the IBa protein are shown in
grey. Each ankyrin unit is composed of a structurally conserved alpha helix dimer backbone, and a less structurally conserved loop region
inserting into the NF-B p65/p50 groove.

Dreyfus et al. Virology Journal 2011, 8:422
http://www.virologyj.com/content/8/1/422

Page 10 of 17

Figure 8 Alignment of IBa Ank3 and Ank4 Helices. IBa Ank3 (green) and Ank4 (yellow) domains are extracted from the NF-B p65/p50
dimer bound structure and are shown superimposed to illustrate the highly conserved structure of the stem and the less conserved loop region.
Ank3 loop has a bulge not present in Ank4. Ank3 also has more bulky hydrophobic residues than Ank4 in the region of the loop extending most
deeply into the NF-B p65/p50 structure. Arrows illustrate key features of Ank3 and Ank4 including a highly conserved His residue shared by most
ankyrin stems (Ank3, His 149; Ank4, His 188). Also shown are bulky residues in Ank3 (Tyr 181 and His184) present in Ank4.

Figure 9 Alignment of ZANK Loop with IBa Ank3 and Ank4.
The structure of ZANK loop (light blue) is superimposed on IBa
Ank3 (green) and Ank4 (yellow) structures. The structured region
present in ZANK loop overlaps the bulge of Ank3, not present in
Ank4. Like Ank4, ZANK has no significant hydrophobic regions in
the solved structure, but ZANK extends further due to unstructured
residues not present in the solved structure (Figure 2).

4, and also has hydrophobic amino acids in its loop not
present in ankyrin 4 (Figure 9). If ZEBRA were to bind
to both IBa ankyrin 3 and 4 binding regions in NF-B,
ZANK would need to adapt 2 different conformations
to fit into the two different sites, for example by having
free amino acids outside of the binding region at the
Ankyrin 4 site, while utilizing additional amino acids in
the extreme carboxyl region of the ZEBRA protein in
the deeper Ankyrin 3 site. The bulge region present
both ankyrin 3 and 5 loops is not present in ankyrin 4
loop (Figure 10), but corresponds to a structured region
of the ZANK loop (Figure 9). In the IBa structure,
these structured regions of are proposed to form a a
helix like region stabilizing the IBa loops.
Shared structural elements between p53 and NF-kB
binding ankyrins identified as a potential binding
mechanism of ZANK

We suggested previously that that the ability of ZEBRA
to bind both NF-B and p53 results from an

Dreyfus et al. Virology Journal 2011, 8:422
http://www.virologyj.com/content/8/1/422

Page 11 of 17

Figure 10 Structurally similar large ankyrin loops alternate with small ankyrin loops in IBa. IBa Ank3 (green) is shown superimposed
on IBa Ank5 (light green) to illustrate corresponding structural features. Alternating small and large ankyrin loops seem to be a conserved
feature of vertebrate and invertebrate NF-B binding ankyrins, suggesting a “lock and key” mechanism. ZEBRA is proposed to mimic both large
ankyrin loop structures and small ankyrin loop structures in order to fit into the NF-B binding code. The bulge region of Ank3 and Ank5,
although encoded by different primary amino acids both can form a structure corresponding to the helix structure found in ZANK (Figure 9).
IBa Ank3, Ank5, and potentially ZANK, also share conserved orientation of aromatic and bulky amino acids in the loop regions not present in
IBa Ank4.

evolutionarily conserved binding pocket shared between
the two proteins[6,21]. The solved structure of p53bp2
(more recently denoted ASPP2 (1YCS.pdb)) bound to
p53 demonstrates that p53bp2/ASPP2 contacts p53 in
only the extreme carboxyl terminus, ankyrins 4 and 5,
of its ankyrin regions, although other binding modes
could exist in vivo. Pymol generated alignment between
IBa ankyrin 3 and p53bp2/ASPP2 ankyrin 5 is shown
(Figure 11). p53bp2/ASPP2 ankyrin 5 has a structure
with features similar to IBa ankyrin 3 – a highly conserved tyrosine is shared between ankyrin 3 and ASPP2
ankyrin 5, and this residue in IBa is known to form a
specific contact with a tyrosine in NF-B p50/p65
dimer. Interestingly, the p53bp2/ASPP2 ankyrin loops

do not have a short long loop pattern (Figure 5) but
instead have a length corresponding to the short IBa
ankyrin loops (approximately 15 aa), and a conserved
tyrosine typical of the long loops. These observations
are consistent with a shared binding signature between
some NF-B and p53 binding proteins that could be targeted by a polymorphic ZANK loop as a master key.
Identification of a cancer associated sequence variant in
ZANK potentially altering p53binding interactions

An advantage of PyMOL generated in silico structural
analysis of ankyrin domains in NF-B proteins and p53
binding proteins is that it may now possible to predict
the behavior of polymorphisms in ZEBRA that increase

Dreyfus et al. Virology Journal 2011, 8:422
http://www.virologyj.com/content/8/1/422

Page 12 of 17

Figure 11 Alignment of IBa Ank3 and p53BP2/ASPP2 Ank5 structures are consistent with a shared binding mechanism between NFB binding ankyrins and p53 binding ankyrins that could be targeted by ZANK. IBa Ank3 (green) is shown superimposed on p53bp2/
ASPP2 Ank5 (Salmon). P53bp2/ASPP2 Ank5 is similar in length to NF-B binding short ankyrin loops but also shares structural features spatially
conserved in location and orientation to long ankyrin loops such as IBa Ank3. p53BP2/ASPP2 Ank5 aa Tyr 424 aligns structurally a with IBa
Ank3Tyr 181 (filled blue arrow). The terminal residue of ZANK (Tyr 245) could substitute for highly conserved aromatic tyrosine binding
interaction between IBa Ank3 tyr 181 and NF-B, as well as coordinating corresponding interactions between ZANK and p53. Both short and
long ankyrins and P53bp2/ASPP2 Ank5 share a highly conserved histidine corresponding to IBa Ank3 aa His 149 (dark blue arrow). A
corresponding residue is present in ZANK (Val 203). P53bp2/ASPP2 Ank5 lacks a residue corresponding to IBa Ank3 aa His 184 (narrow stem
blue arrow), but a corresponding residue (His 239) is present in ZANK.

or decrease the relative strength of binding to NF-B
versus p53 proteins (Figure 12). Alterations in ZANK
amino sequences could alter the ability of ZEBRA to
transiently block p53 function during viral replication
and thus alter viral growth properties, accounting in
part for the recently described association of ZEBRA
with increased mutagenic and carcinogenic properties in
a murine model[14]. For example, the limited sequence
polymorphism data available for the ZANK region of
ZEBRA currently suggests that a mutation in tumor
associated ZEBRA from Akata cells is different from
canonical B-958 ZEBRA at a single amino acid in the

ZANK region (ZEBRA exon 3). Remarkably, primary
sequence comparison between ZANK, IB and related
proteins and ASPP2 ankyrins reveals that the substitution of a serine for an alanine at amino acid 205 (Figure
3) is not random but rather converts ZANK from an
IB-like AAA motif to a p53BP2/ASPP2-like ASA motif,
also shared with a Cactus ankyrin (Figure 5). Unlike alanine, a serine residue may be covalently modified in vivo
by phosphorylation, further extending the possible functional consequences of this polymorphism[35]. These
observations suggest further study of ZANK polymorphisms in vivo and their effects on NF-B and p53 binding

Dreyfus et al. Virology Journal 2011, 8:422
http://www.virologyj.com/content/8/1/422

Page 13 of 17

Figure 12 ZANK Structure with S205A polymorphism illustrated. A functionally conserved polymorphism in ZANK, A205 is altered to Ser is
present in some EBV positive lymphoma cell lines such as Akata. A similar serine rather than alanine residue is present in some p53 binding
protein ankyrin domains but not in NF-B binding ankyrin domains. Changes in the stem or loop regions of ZANK could alter ZANK loop
interactions with p53 and NF-B particularly if covalently modified by serine phosphorylation. The circled region indicates a potential interaction
between ZANK stem and loop amino acids.

in vitro could identify associations between certain EBV
strain polymorphisms and cancer phenotypes.
A model of antagonistic interactions between ZANK NFB and p53 protein binding and ZEBRA fos/jun DNA
binding

As outlined in this manuscript, the extreme carboxyl
terminal exon of ZEBRA encodes an amino acid
sequence termed ZANK that is functionally and evolutionarily distinct from DNA binding regions of ZEBRA
protein. The distinct origin and structure of ZANK suggest that ZANK domain could have a regulatory role on
the DNA binding regions of the ZEBRA protein in addition to cytoplasmic effects on NF-B and p53 proteins
(Figure 1). In particular, ZANK could modulate ZEBRA
DNA binding through conformational changes in the
Fos/Jun like region of ZEBRA (Figure 4) triggered by
binding between ZANK and proteins of the NF-B and
p53 family and vice versa, modulating the transcriptional
activity of the cellular transcription machinery (Figure
13).
Binding of ZANK to proteins of the NF-B and p53
families could stimulate, inhibit or have no effect of
ZEBRA binding to DNA. As shown in Figure 13, structural considerations based on the partial structure of
ZEBRA and ZANK support an antagonistic role between

ZEBRA DNA binding and ZANK interactions with NFB and p53 proteins. Based upon the crystal structure
of ZEBRA bound to a ZRE/AP1 DNA binding oligonucleotide (Figure 1), it is apparent that DNA bound to
ZEBRA causes the two DNA binding alpha helices to
move away from each other. The movement of the
ZANK regions at the termini of the helices in a region
not bound to DNA is analogous to the blades of a scissor in the open position. A parallel orientation of the
ZANK stems, similar to the closed blades of a scissor is
required to form an ankyrin-like dimer capable of binding adjacent regions of NF-B and p53 proteins (Figure
7).
Thus, ZANK could function as a NF-B and p53 protein dependent switch in the nucleus of EBV infected Blymphocytes, turning ZEBRA DNA binding off in the
presence of high levels of nuclear NF-B and p53, and
conversely activating ZEBRA DNA binding in the
absence of nuclear NF-B and p53 protein (Figure 13).
In physiologic terms, these observations are consistent
with high levels of active NF-B and p53 proteins present in the nucleus of latent B-lymphocytes during viral
latency, which during viral latency would tend to block
ZEBRA DNA binding and prevent activation of viral
lytic growth. Conversely, transiently decreased levels of
nuclear NF-B proteins in latently infected B-

Dreyfus et al. Virology Journal 2011, 8:422
http://www.virologyj.com/content/8/1/422

Page 14 of 17

with NF-B and p53 protein identified with the structural models and analysis presented in this work.

Figure 13 ZANK Ankyrin Switch Model. ZEBRA is proposed to
have two distinct conformations depending on subcellular
localization and DNA-binding. Left: When ZEBRA is bound to ZRE or
AP-1 sites on DNA the two alpha helix strands are forced apart
similar to the blades of an open scissors, preventing alignment of
ZANK domains. Right: When ZEBRA is not bound to DNA either
because of its cytoplasmic location or due to its binding to NF-B
and/or p53 proteins, the two alpha helices of the ZEBRA dimer can
adopt a parallel or closed conformation similar to the parallel
helices of ankyrin bound to NF-B and/or p53 protein.

lymphocytes, due for example to cell stress or starvation
could permit increased ZEBRA DNA binding and activation of viral lytic growth, coupling levels of cytoplasmic growth signals mediated by NF-B and p53
proteins to the viral life cycle.
Later in the viral lytic replication cycle, the NF-B and
p53 protein binding function of ZANK could further
trigger cellular apoptosis and facilitate infectious viral
release directly through cytoplasmic effects on NF-B
and p53 protein. In T lymphocytes and possibly other
non B-lymphocyte cells infected by EBV but incapable
of supporting stable viral latency, ZEBRA is almost
entirely present in the cell cytoplasm. In these cells,
ZEBRA could initially inhibit NF-B and cause activation of p53 protein and cellular apoptosis as a mechanism of viral immunosuppression.
Transpliced RAZ, containing ZANK but not capable
of ZEBRA DNA binding would then serve as an amplifier of the NF-B and p53 protein functions of ZEBRA,
and a corresponding RAZ-like function might explain
the non-DNA binding functions of a ZEBRA homologue
in HSV-8, the etiologic agent of Kaposi’s sarcoma and
other human cancers. These possibilities could in principle be tested in vitro and in vivo through ZEBRA with
ZANK domains engineered for either increased or
reduced effects on NF-B and/or p53 protein through
mutation of conserved ZANK amino acids interacting

Conclusions
Characterization of B cell lympho-proliferative disorders
haa demonstrated that EBV viral latency proteins can
transform and immortalize B-lymphocytes in vitro and
in vivo. A causal role of the virus in carcinogenesis is
suggested in some tumors because the viral genome
sometimes remains in the malignant cell. However, the
mechanism of viral carcinogenesis cannot simply be a
function of cellular immortalization by the virus since
although the vast majority of humans harbor EBV
immortalized B lymphocytes, EBV-genome associated
cancers are rare [36]. EBV infection may thus also be
associated with carcinogenesis not only through cellular
immortalization but also through transient mechanisms
including destabilization of host genomes[37-40].
A novel role of ZEBRA and ZANK in viral carcinogenesis is suggested in this work. ZEBRA plays a critical
role in the viral latent to lytic switch, possibly in part
through response to NF-B and p53 activities by ZANK
(Figure 13). Alternating cycles of partial lytic growth
triggered by ZEBRA activation and ZEBRA DNA binding followed by ZANK interactions with NF-B and p53
could synergize with genomic instability contributed by
cellular or viral recombinase activation in EBV infected
cells. Partial cycles of viral activation and inactivation
without completion of the viral life cycle could be particularly relevant in the “hit and run” scenario, proposed
for viral carcinogenesis and immune dysregulation as
proposed in epithelial breast cancers [41-47].
Notably, it is possible that viral inactivation of p53 originates indirectly or as an evolutionary “spandrel.” A
spandrel refers to a new phenotype generated by alteration of a related developmental pathway. Because of the
evolutionary relationship between NF-B and p53
through descent from a common ancestral transcription
factor, an unavoidable consequence of the inactivation
of NF-B by an ankyrin-like region of ZEBRA is a spandrel-like transient inactivation of p53. Restated, the
common origins of NF-B and p53 conserve a similar
ankyrin binding region in both proteins, so any viral
protein that targets this site on NF-B proteins could,
in parallel, affect p53 generating new p53 dependent
phenotypes. This may in part contribute to the selective
loss of the IBa locus in tumors, a conserved feature of
several EBV associated tumors[48,49]. The ZANK spandrel effects on p53 are maintained because of a selective
benefit to the virus from related transient inactivation of
the NF-B transcription family and the innate immune
system, as well as effects of ZANK on regulation of
ZEBRA DNA binding.

Dreyfus et al. Virology Journal 2011, 8:422
http://www.virologyj.com/content/8/1/422

Mutant p53 proteins were first characterized as oncogenes because their presence was associated with tumor
phenotypes including tumor growth and resistance to
apoptosis[50-52]. Surprisingly, wild type p53 was later
shown to be a tumor suppressor through the effects of
the protein as a DNA-binding transcription factor,
rather than a tumor promoter. These contradictory
effects could result from opposing tumor promoting
spandrel effects between numerous viral proteins such
as ZEBRA and mutant p53 proteins, versus tumor suppressing DNA binding gene activation by wild type p53
protein. Thus ZANK might augment the effects of
mutant p53, not directly related to p53 DNA binding,
but rather due to effects on structurally similar regions
of NF-B proteins required for cellular proliferation.
From an evolutionary perspective, it is likely that EBV
encoded ZEBRA protein and a related protein in
Human Herpes Virus 8 diverged from other BZIP DNA
binding proteins such as Fos/Jun through viral capture
of a terminal exon encoding a single ankyrin-like stem
and loop. This domain was capable of dimerization into
a structure resembling adjacent IB ankyrins, and was
subject to positive selection through interactions with
NF-B proteins. However, because of the shared ankyrin
binding domain between NF-B and p53 proteins an
unfortunate consequence of NF-B inhibition by ZANK
would also unavoidably be inactivation of p53. This
could be particularly important as a pathogenic mechanism of EBV-related genomic instability in epithelial cells
and T lymphocytes that do not support the establishment of viral latency or replication but can sustain a
limited form a viral lytic growth that includes high levels
of expression of a trans-spliced protein “RAZ” containing ZANK, but without the DNA-binding transcriptional
activity on ZRE. In this context, these cells are “dead
end hosts” in their inability to support viral replication
but can nevertheless suffer the pathophysiological and
molecular consequences of viral infection.
Viral pre-conditioning by common viral pathogens has
been indirectly implicated in the clustering of human
cancers both geographically and temporally based upon
indirect evidence in human cancers that defective or
abortive replication of common viral pathogens can
account for clustering of cancers[53]. In the “viral conditioning” scenario, abortive cycles of viral replication can
promote genomic instability. A model is presented here
for the specific case of EBV. In the case of EBV and,
potentially, other common viruses that interact with
both NF-B and p53, transient lytic gene expression in
both B lymphocytes and non-B cells could provide a
mechanism for this viral pre-conditioning where defective or aborted viral replication contributes to malignancy as supported by indirect epidemiologic evidence
[54-56]. These effects of ZANK could be of particular

Page 15 of 17

importance not only in B lymphocytes but in epithelial
and T cell infection in which the virus expresses lytic
gene products but in most cases does not establish
latency[57]. In these cell types transient inactivation of
the tumor suppressor p53 would occur in the context of
activation of endogenous somatic recombination pathways, potentially resulting in re-arrangement, instability
and mutation of endogenous oncogenes.
In summary, we have demonstrated that ZEBRA is a
hybrid protein resulting from viral capture of both a
Fos/Jun like transcription factor and a polymorphic IBlike ankyrin carboxyl terminus. Primary sequence and
structural similarities are evident between the carboxyl
terminus of ZEBRA protein and the conserved stem
regions of IBa and p53BP2/ASPP2 ankyrins. It is suggested that a shared binding pocket in NF-B is in turn
bound by all of these ankyrin proteins and that ZANK
is analogous to a “master key” capable of fitting into
both NF-B and p53 protein “locks”. In the case of
ZEBRA, protein binding to NF-B provides a selective
advantage to the virus through inactivation of the
immune response against the virus during viral lytic
replication, simultaneously and unavoidably altering the
activation of p53.
Acknowledgements
LYG would like to thank Dr. Leslie Krueger for helpful discussions regarding
EBV “hit-and-run” hypothesis and Dr. David H. Wagner for conversations and
ideas regarding NF-kappa B and other topics including autoimmunity. Dr.
Dreyfus (DHD) has been supported in the past by NIH training grants T32GM07288 and T32-AI07365. DHD acknowledges helpful discussions with Dr.
Hans Helmut Niller, University of Regensburg, Germany, Jill Countryman, Yale
School of Medicine, New Haven CT, and Dr. Cedric Feschote, University of
Texas, Austin as well as members of the Weizmann Institute in Israel (in
alphabetical order) Drs. Boris Brumshtein, Moshe Oren, Zippi Shakked and
Joel Sussman. DHD and LYG are co-founders of a Keren Pharmaceutical Inc.,
San Mateo, CA. DHD is Assistant Clinical Professor, Department of Pediatrics,
Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT and a member of the Center for
Allergy, Asthma, and Clinical Immunology (CAAI), Waterbury, CT. and JC and
YL are associated with Yale University, however none of the observations,
proposals and/or conclusions of this work are related to the operations of
Keren, Yale, or CAAI.
Author details
Department of Pediatrics, Yale SOM, 488 Norton Parkway, New Haven CT
06511, USA. 2Department of Statistics, Yale University, P.O. Box 208290, New
Haven CT 06520-8290, USA. 3Keren Pharmaceutical, 63 Bovet Rd #143, San
Mateo, CA 94402-3104, USA.
1

Authors’ contributions
DHD designed and executed experiments confirming interactions between
ZEBRA, p53, and NF-κB, identified similarities between ZEBRA and ankyrin
amino acids, conceived and executed Pymol models and other artwork,
drafted manuscript, and paid costs of manuscript processing. YL, JTC
conceived and executed statistical analysis and alignments of ZANK and
related ankyrins, and edited the manuscript.
LYG provided historical background and terminology of previous research in
viral carcinogenesis, p53, and NF-κB, and ankyrin proteins, designed and
executed experiments confirming interactions between ZEBRA, p53, and NFκB, identified similarities between ZEBRA and ankyrin amino acids, and
edited the manuscript and artwork. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript.

Dreyfus et al. Virology Journal 2011, 8:422
http://www.virologyj.com/content/8/1/422

Page 16 of 17

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
20.
Received: 3 March 2011 Accepted: 5 September 2011
Published: 5 September 2011
References
1. Niller HH, Salamon D, Ilg K, Koroknai A, Banati F, Schwarzmann F, Wolf H,
Minarovits J: EBV-associated neoplasms: alternative pathogenetic
pathways. Med Hypotheses 2004, 62:387-391.
2. Niller HH, Salamon D, Rahmann S, Ilg K, Koroknai A, Banati F,
Schwarzmann F, Wolf H, Minarovits J: A 30 kb region of the Epstein-Barr
virus genome is colinear with the rearranged human immunoglobulin
gene loci: implications for a “ping-pong evolution” model for persisting
viruses and their hosts. A review. Acta Microbiol Immunol Hung 2004,
51:469-484.
3. Dreyfus DH, Kelleher CA, Jones JF, Gelfand EW: Epstein-Barr virus infection
of T cells: implications for altered T-lymphocyte activation, repertoire
development and autoimmunity. Immunol Rev 1996, 152:89-110.
4. Dreyfus DH: Immune system: success owed to a virus? Science 2009,
325:392-393.
5. Dreyfus DH: Paleo-immunology: evidence consistent with insertion of a
primordial herpes virus-like element in the origins of acquired
immunity. PLoS One 2009, 4:e5778.
6. Dreyfus DH, Nagasawa M, Gelfand EW, Ghoda LY: Modulation of p53
activity by IkappaBalpha: evidence suggesting a common phylogeny
between NF-kappaB and p53 transcription factors. BMC Immunol 2005,
6:12.
7. Miller G, El-Guindy A, Countryman J, Ye J, Gradoville L: Lytic cycle switches
of oncogenic human gammaherpesviruses. Adv Cancer Res 2007,
97:81-109.
8. Petosa C, Morand P, Baudin F, Moulin M, Artero JB, Muller CW: Structural
basis of lytic cycle activation by the Epstein-Barr virus ZEBRA protein.
Mol Cell 2006, 21:565-572.
9. Gutsch DE, Holley-Guthrie EA, Zhang Q, Stein B, Blanar MA, Baldwin AS,
Kenney SC: The bZIP transactivator of Epstein-Barr virus, BZLF1,
functionally and physically interacts with the p65 subunit of NF-kappa B.
Mol Cell Biol 1994, 14:1939-1948.
10. Morrison TE, Kenney SC: BZLF1, an Epstein-Barr virus immediate-early
protein, induces p65 nuclear translocation while inhibiting p65
transcriptional function. Virology 2004, 328:219-232.
11. Schelcher C, Al Mehairi S, Verrall E, Hope Q, Flower K, Bromley B,
Woolfson DN, West MJ, Sinclair AJ: Atypical bZIP domain of viral
transcription factor contributes to stability of dimer formation and
transcriptional function. J Virol 2007, 81:7149-7155.
12. Schelcher C, Valencia S, Delecluse HJ, Hicks M, Sinclair AJ: Mutation of a
single amino acid residue in the basic region of the Epstein-Barr virus
(EBV) lytic cycle switch protein Zta (BZLF1) prevents reactivation of EBV
from latency. J Virol 2005, 79:13822-13828.
13. McDonald CM, Petosa C, Farrell PJ: Interaction of Epstein-Barr virus BZLF1
C-terminal tail structure and core zipper is required for DNA replication
but not for promoter transactivation. J Virol 2009, 83:3397-3401.
14. Ma SD, Hegde S, Young KH, Sullivan R, Rajesh D, Zhou Y, Jankowska-Gan E,
Burlingham WJ, Sun X, Gulley ML, et al: A new model of Epstein-Barr virus
infection reveals an important role for early lytic viral protein expression
in the development of lymphomas. J Virol 2011, 85:165-177.
15. Morrison TE, Mauser A, Wong A, Ting JP, Kenney SC: Inhibition of IFNgamma signaling by an Epstein-Barr virus immediate-early protein.
Immunity 2001, 15:787-799.
16. Morrison TE, Mauser A, Klingelhutz A, Kenney SC: Epstein-Barr virus
immediate-early protein BZLF1 inhibits tumor necrosis factor alphainduced signaling and apoptosis by downregulating tumor necrosis
factor receptor 1. J Virol 2004, 78:544-549.
17. Huxford T, Huang DB, Malek S, Ghosh G: The crystal structure of the
IkappaBalpha/NF-kappaB complex reveals mechanisms of NF-kappaB
inactivation. Cell 1998, 95:759-770.
18. Jacobs MD, Harrison SC: Structure of an IkappaBalpha/NF-kappaB
complex. Cell 1998, 95:749-758.
19. Kenney JL, Guinness ME, Curiel T, Lacy J: Antisense to the epstein-barr
virus (EBV)-encoded latent membrane protein 1 (LMP-1) suppresses

21.

22.

23.
24.
25.

26.
27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.
37.

38.

39.

40.

41.

LMP-1 and bcl-2 expression and promotes apoptosis in EBVimmortalized B cells. Blood 1998, 92:1721-1727.
Feng WH, Westphal E, Mauser A, Raab-Traub N, Gulley ML, Busson P,
Kenney SC: Use of adenovirus vectors expressing Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)
immediate-early protein BZLF1 or BRLF1 to treat EBV-positive tumors. J
Virol 2002, 76:10951-10959.
Dreyfus DH, Nagasawa M, Pratt JC, Kelleher CA, Gelfand EW: Inactivation of
NF-kappaB by EBV BZLF-1-encoded ZEBRA protein in human T cells. J
Immunol 1999, 163:6261-6268.
Kelleher CA, Paterson RK, Dreyfus DH, Streib JE, Xu JW, Takase K, Jones JF,
Gelfand EW: Epstein-Barr virus replicative gene transcription during de
novo infection of human thymocytes: simultaneous early expression of
BZLF-1 and its repressor RAZ. Virology 1995, 208:685-695.
Sinclair AJ: bZIP proteins of human gammaherpesviruses. J Gen Virol
2003, 84:1941-1949.
Sinclair AJ: Unexpected structure of Epstein-Barr virus lytic cycle activator
Zta. Trends Microbiol 2006, 14:289-291.
Al Mehairi S, Cerasoli E, Sinclair AJ: Investigation of the multimerization
region of the Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (human
herpesvirus 8) protein K-bZIP: the proposed leucine zipper region
encodes a multimerization domain with an unusual structure. J Virol
2005, 79:7905-7910.
Packham G, Brimmell M, Cook D, Sinclair AJ, Farrell PJ: Strain variation in
Epstein-Barr virus immediate early genes. Virology 1993, 192:541-550.
Furnari FB, Zacny V, Quinlivan EB, Kenney S, Pagano JS: RAZ, an EpsteinBarr virus transdominant repressor that modulates the viral reactivation
mechanism. J Virol 1994, 68:1827-1836.
Zhang Q, Gutsch D, Kenney S: Functional and physical interaction
between p53 and BZLF1: implications for Epstein-Barr virus latency. Mol
Cell Biol 1994, 14:1929-1938.
Mauser A, Saito S, Appella E, Anderson CW, Seaman WT, Kenney S: The
Epstein-Barr virus immediate-early protein BZLF1 regulates p53 function
through multiple mechanisms. J Virol 2002, 76:12503-12512.
Dreyfus DH, Nagasawa M, Kelleher CA, Gelfand EW: Stable expression of
Epstein-Barr virus BZLF-1-encoded ZEBRA protein activates p53dependent transcription in human Jurkat T-lymphoblastoid cells. Blood
2000, 96:625-634.
Bailey SG, Verrall E, Schelcher C, Rhie A, Doherty AJ, Sinclair AJ: Functional
interaction between Epstein-Barr virus replication protein Zta and host
DNA damage response protein 53BP1. J Virol 2009, 83:11116-11122.
Hicks MR, Balesaria S, Medina-Palazon C, Pandya MJ, Woolfson DN,
Sinclair AJ: Biophysical analysis of natural variants of the multimerization
region of Epstein-Barr virus lytic-switch protein BZLF1. J Virol 2001,
75:5381-5384.
Benyamini H, Leonov H, Rotem S, Katz C, Arkin IT, Friedler A: A model for
the interaction between NF-kappa-B and ASPP2 suggests an I-kappa-Blike binding mechanism. Proteins 2009, 77:602-611.
Ahn J, Byeon IJ, Byeon CH, Gronenborn AM: Insight into the structural
basis of pro- and antiapoptotic p53 modulation by ASPP proteins. J Biol
Chem 2009, 284:13812-13822.
El-Guindy AS, Paek SY, Countryman J, Miller G: Identification of
constitutive phosphorylation sites on the Epstein-Barr virus ZEBRA
protein. J Biol Chem 2006, 281:3085-3095.
Thorley-Lawson DA: EBV the prototypical human tumor virus–just how
bad is it? J Allergy Clin Immunol 2005, 116:251-261, quiz 262.
Niller HH, Salamon D, Uhlig J, Ranf S, Granz M, Schwarzmann F, Wolf H,
Minarovits J: Nucleoprotein structure of immediate-early promoters Zp
and Rp and of oriLyt of latent Epstein-Barr virus genomes. J Virol 2002,
76:4113-4118.
Niller HH, Wolf H, Minarovits J: Epigenetic dysregulation of the host cell
genome in Epstein-Barr virus-associated neoplasia. Semin Cancer Biol
2009, 19:158-164.
Takacs M, Banati F, Koroknai A, Segesdi J, Salamon D, Wolf H, Niller HH,
Minarovits J: Epigenetic regulation of latent Epstein-Barr virus promoters.
Biochim Biophys Acta 2010, 1799:228-235.
Li MJ, Maizels N: Activation and targeting of immunoglobulin switch
recombination by activities induced by EBV infection. J Immunol 1999,
163:6659-6664.
Perkins RS, Sahm K, Marando C, Dickson-Witmer D, Pahnke GR, Mitchell M,
Petrelli NJ, Berkowitz IM, Soteropoulos P, Aris VM, et al: Analysis of Epstein-

Dreyfus et al. Virology Journal 2011, 8:422
http://www.virologyj.com/content/8/1/422

42.

43.

44.

45.

46.
47.

48.

49.

50.
51.
52.
53.

54.

55.

56.

57.

Page 17 of 17

Barr virus reservoirs in paired blood and breast cancer primary biopsy
specimens by real time PCR. Breast Cancer Res 2006, 8:R70.
Yasui Y, Potter JD, Stanford JL, Rossing MA, Winget MD, Bronner M,
Daling J: Breast cancer risk and “delayed” primary Epstein-Barr virus
infection. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 2001, 10:9-16.
Arbach H, Viglasky V, Lefeu F, Guinebretiere JM, Ramirez V, Bride N,
Boualaga N, Bauchet T, Peyrat JP, Mathieu MC, et al: Epstein-Barr virus
(EBV) genome and expression in breast cancer tissue: effect of EBV
infection of breast cancer cells on resistance to paclitaxel (Taxol). J Virol
2006, 80:845-853.
Huang J, Chen H, Hutt-Fletcher L, Ambinder RF, Hayward SD: Lytic viral
replication as a contributor to the detection of Epstein-Barr virus in
breast cancer. J Virol 2003, 77:13267-13274.
Joshi D, Quadri M, Gangane N, Joshi R: Association of Epstein Barr virus
infection (EBV) with breast cancer in rural Indian women. PLoS One 2009,
4:e8180.
Labrecque LG, Barnes DM, Fentiman IS, Griffin BE: Epstein-Barr virus in
epithelial cell tumors: a breast cancer study. Cancer Res 1995, 55:39-45.
Xue SA, Lampert IA, Haldane JS, Bridger JE, Griffin BE: Epstein-Barr virus
gene expression in human breast cancer: protagonist or passenger? Br J
Cancer 2003, 89:113-119.
Lake A, Shield LA, Cordano P, Chui DT, Osborne J, Crae S, Wilson KS, Tosi S,
Knight SJ, Gesk S, et al: Mutations of NFKBIA, encoding IkappaB alpha,
are a recurrent finding in classical Hodgkin lymphoma but are not a
unifying feature of non-EBV-associated cases. Int J Cancer 2009,
125:1334-1342.
Osborne J, Lake A, Alexander FE, Taylor GM, Jarrett RF: Germline mutations
and polymorphisms in the NFKBIA gene in Hodgkin lymphoma. Int J
Cancer 2005, 116:646-651.
Levine AJ, Oren M: The first 30 years of p53: growing ever more
complex. Nat Rev Cancer 2009, 9:749-758.
Oren M, Cooks T: NFkappaB and p53: A life and death affair. Cell Cycle
2010, 9.
Oren M, Rotter V: Mutant p53 gain-of-function in cancer. Cold Spring Harb
Perspect Biol 2010, 2:a001107.
zur Hausen H, de Villiers EM: Virus target cell conditioning model to
explain some epidemiologic characteristics of childhood leukemias and
lymphomas. Int J Cancer 2005, 115:1-5.
Hjalgrim H, Rostgaard K, Johnson PC, Lake A, Shield L, Little AM, EkstromSmedby K, Adami HO, Glimelius B, Hamilton-Dutoit S, et al: HLA-A alleles
and infectious mononucleosis suggest a critical role for cytotoxic T-cell
response in EBV-related Hodgkin lymphoma. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2010,
107:6400-6405.
Tedeschi R, Bloigu A, Ogmundsdottir HM, Marus A, Dillner J, dePaoli P,
Gudnadottir M, Koskela P, Pukkala E, Lehtinen T, Lehtinen M: Activation of
maternal Epstein-Barr virus infection and risk of acute leukemia in the
offspring. Am J Epidemiol 2007, 165:134-137.
Tedeschi R, Pin E, Martorelli D, Bidoli E, Marus A, Pratesi C, Bortolin MT,
Zanussi S, Vaccher E, Dolcetti R, De Paoli P: Serum antibody response to
lytic and latent Epstein-Barr virus antigens in undifferentiated
nasopharyngeal carcinoma patients from an area of nonendemicity. Clin
Vaccine Immunol 2007, 14:435-441.
Hadinoto V, Shapiro M, Sun CC, Thorley-Lawson DA: The dynamics of EBV
shedding implicate a central role for epithelial cells in amplifying viral
output. PLoS Pathog 2009, 5:e1000496.

doi:10.1186/1743-422X-8-422
Cite this article as: Dreyfus et al.: Analysis of an ankyrin-like region in
Epstein Barr Virus encoded (EBV) BZLF-1 (ZEBRA) protein: implications
for interactions with NF-B and p53. Virology Journal 2011 8:422.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
