<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Modulation of HIV-1-host interaction: role of the Vpu accessory protein</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Retrovirology 2010, 7:114. doi:10.1186/1742-4690-7-114"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Mathieu Dubé"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Dubé et al. Retrovirology 2010, 7:114
http://www.retrovirology.com/content/7/1/114

REVIEW

Open Access

Modulation of HIV-1-host interaction: role of the
Vpu accessory protein
Mathieu Dubé1†, Mariana G Bego1†, Catherine Paquay1†, Éric A Cohen1,2*

Abstract
Viral protein U (Vpu) is a type 1 membrane-associated accessory protein that is unique to human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) and a subset of related simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV). The Vpu
protein encoded by HIV-1 is associated with two primary functions during the viral life cycle. First, it contributes to
HIV-1-induced CD4 receptor downregulation by mediating the proteasomal degradation of newly synthesized CD4
molecules in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). Second, it enhances the release of progeny virions from infected cells
by antagonizing Tetherin, an interferon (IFN)-regulated host restriction factor that directly cross-links virions on host
cell-surface. This review will mostly focus on recent advances on the role of Vpu in CD4 downregulation and
Tetherin antagonism and will discuss how these two functions may have impacted primate immunodeficiency
virus cross-species transmission and the emergence of pandemic strain of HIV-1.
Introduction
HIV-1 interaction with host target cells is complex with
nearly every step of the virus infection cycle relying on
the recruitment of cellular proteins and basic machineries by viral proteins [1]. For instance, the Tat regulatory protein recruits the pTEFb complex during viral
transcription to enhance host RNA polymerase II processivity and promote efficient elongation of viral transcripts
(reviewed in [2]). Similarly, the p6 domain of the Gag
structural protein interacts with the ESCRT complex
during viral assembly to direct the budding of progeny
virions (reviewed in [3]). Recent discoveries have shed
light on an additional level of complexity involving host
proteins that provide considerable resistance to infection
by HIV-1 and other viruses via cell-autonomous mechanisms that are likely part of the antiviral innate immune
response. As a virus which induces a persistent infection,
HIV-1 has evolved countermeasures to overcome the
antiviral activity of these host factors, also called restriction factors, mainly through the activities of a set of viral
accessory proteins that include the Vif, Vpr, Vpu and Nef
proteins. These accessory proteins, which have been
* Correspondence: eric.cohen@ircm.qc.ca
† Contributed equally
1
Laboratory of Human Retrovirology, Institut de Recherches Cliniques de
Montréal (IRCM), 110, Avenue des Pins Ouest, Montreal, Quebec, Canada
H2W 1R7
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

recently the subject of intense research and progress,
represent one of the defining features of primate immunodeficiency viruses. They are not commonly found in
other retroviruses and as such are likely to play a key role
in HIV-1 pathogenesis. Overall, it is becoming increasingly clear that the function of these non-enzymatic viral
proteins is to modulate the cellular environment within
infected cells to promote efficient viral replication, transmission and evasion from innate and acquired immunity
(for recent reviews [4,5]). In this review, we will focus on
the recent progress in our understanding of the functions
and mode of action of the HIV-1 Vpu accessory protein
and relate these to the pathogenesis of the virus as well
as the emergence of pandemic HIV-1 strains. Furthermore, we will highlight some important questions for the
future.

The vpu gene product
Vpu was initially identified as the product of an open
reading frame (ORF), referred as the U ORF (initially all
HIV-1 ORFs were designated by alphabetical letters)
located between the first exon of the tat and env genes
of HIV-1 [6,7]. The vpu gene is present in the genome
of HIV-1 but is absent from HIV-2 and other related
SIVs, such as SIV from sooty mangabey (SIVsmm) and
SIV from rhesus macaques (SIVmac) [6,7]. Structural
homologues have been detected in SIV from chimpanzee (SIVcpz), the precursor of HIV-1, and in SIVs from

© 2010 Dubé et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Dubé et al. Retrovirology 2010, 7:114
http://www.retrovirology.com/content/7/1/114

the mona monkey (Cervicopithecus mona; SIVmon), the
greater spot-nosed monkey (Cercopithecus nictitans;
SIVgsn), the mustached monkey (Cercopithecus cephus;
SIVmus) and more recently in Dent’s mona monkey
(Cercopitheus mona denti; SIVden) and gorilla (Gorilla
gorilla; SIVgor) [8-13].
The Vpu protein encoded by HIV-1 is a 77-86
amino-acids membrane-associated protein capable of
homo-oligomerization [14]. The protein is translated
from a Rev-dependent bicistronic mRNA, which also
encodes the viral envelope glycoprotein (Env), suggesting that expression of Vpu and Env are coordinated
during HIV-1 infection [15]. The protein is predicted
to have a short luminal N-terminal domain (3-12
amino acids), a single transmembrane (TM) spanning
domain that also serves as an uncleaved signal peptide
(23 amino acids) and a charged C-terminal hydrophilic
domain of 47-59 residues that extends into the cytoplasm [14,16] (Figure 1A). While the crystal structure

Figure 1 Schematic representations of Vpu. (A) Predicted
secondary and tertiary structure of Vpu showing the N-terminal
transmembrane domain (TM) and the two a-helices of the
cytoplasmic (CYTO) domain. The numbers indicate amino acid
positions of the NL4.3 prototypical Vpu allele. In both panels, yellow
circles represent phosphorylated serine residues (S52 and S56) sites.
The 13° tilt angle of the TM domain is indicated. (B) Vpu topology
with the corresponding HIV-1/SIVcpz Ptt Vpu consensus sequences
(HIV sequence database, http://www.hiv.lanl.gov). Question marks
indicate residues with no consensus available. The red box indicates
the conserved sequences recognized by b-TrCP. The blue boxes
highlight areas containing putative trafficking signals shown below.
X and F correspond to variable and hydrophobic amino-acid
residues, respectively. aH: a-helix.

Page 2 of 19

of the entire Vpu protein has yet to be solved, the
molecular structure of the N-terminal domain (residues 2-30) has been determined by nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR) and found to contain a TM a-helix
spanning residues 8 to 25 with an average tilt angle of
13 degrees [17,18]. Interestingly, modeling as well as
biochemical and genetic evidence have suggested that
the TM domain is critical for Vpu oligomerization and
that a pentameric structure for the TM domain would
be optimal for the formation of an ion channel [19,20].
In that regard, several studies have suggested that Vpu,
like the M2 protein of influenza, may have an ion
channel activity (for a recent review [21]). However,
whether the ion channel activity of Vpu is required for
Vpu function is still controversial. NMR analysis of the
cytosolic domain, on the other hand, revealed that this
part of the protein comprises two a-helical regions
interconnected by a flexible loop containing a highly
conserved sequence (DSGNES) [16,22,23], which
includes a pair of serine residues (S52 and S56)
that are phosphorylated by casein kinase II [24-27]
(Figure 1).
HIV-1 Vpu proteins encoded by subtype B strains
appear to be largely expressed on intracellular membranes, which correspond to the ER, the trans Golgi
network (TGN) as well as endosomal compartments,
but no accumulation of the protein is readily detected at
the cell surface [28-30]. Unlike the better-studied HIV-1
subtype B Vpu proteins, subtype C and SIVcpz Vpu
alleles fused to EGFP were reported to be transported to
the plasma membrane [31-33]. Interestingly, as depicted
in Figure 1B, amino acid sequence analysis of the cytosolic domain of HIV-1 Vpu reveals the presence of putative trafficking signals that harbor a degree of amino
acid variation among Vpu alleles from different subtypes
[34]. These trafficking signals include: 1) an overlapping
tyrosine (YXXF where F designs a hydrophobic residue) and an acidic/dileucine based ([D/E]XXXL[L/I/V])
sorting motifs in the hinge region between the TM
anchor and the cytosolic domain, normally implicated in
endocytosis as well as in the targeting of TM proteins to
lysosomes and lysosome-related organelles [35]; 2)
another acidic/dileucine sorting signal, [D/E]XXXL[L/I/
V], in the second a-helix of the Vpu cytoplasmic tail
[32] (Figure 1B). The fact that several laboratoryadapted strains and primary isolates of HIV-1 harbor
vpu genes with polymorphism at the level of these putative trafficking signals [29,34] raises the possibility that
regulation of Vpu subcellular localization and perhaps
biological activities may indeed confer the virus a selective advantage in some physiological conditions.
Studies mostly performed with Vpu originating from
subgroup B laboratory-adapted strains (NL4-3, BH10)
have established two main functions during infection of

Dubé et al. Retrovirology 2010, 7:114
http://www.retrovirology.com/content/7/1/114

HIV-1 target cells in tissue culture systems. First, Vpu
induces a rapid degradation of newly synthesized CD4
receptor molecules in the ER via the ubiquitin-proteasome
system [36,37]. In addition to its effect on CD4 catabolism,
Vpu promotes the release of progeny virions from HIV-1infected human cells [7,26,28,38-40] by counteracting
Tetherin (also designated BST2, CD317 and HM1.24), a
host restriction factor that strongly inhibits the release of
virions from the host cell surface [41,42].

Role of Vpu in HIV-1-induced CD4 receptor
downregulation
Expression of CD4 molecules at the surface of HIV-1
infected cells is detrimental to efficient viral replication
and spread

The process of HIV-1 entry into target cells begins with
the binding of the viral envelope glycoprotein gp120 to
both the CD4 receptor and one of the chemokine coreceptors, CXCR4 or CCR5 [43]. Despite the critical
role played by the CD4 receptor during viral entry, it is
well established that an early and lasting effect of infection is the downregulation of the CD4 receptor from
the host cell surface. In fact, it appears that once viral
entry has occurred, continuous expression of the CD4
receptor may be detrimental to efficient viral replication
and spread. Early work on this issue has shown that
newly synthesized CD4 molecules are capable of retaining the Env precursor proteins in the ER through their
high Env binding affinity, therefore preventing transport
and processing of mature Env products, gp120 and
gp41, to the site of virus assembly [44-47]. Additionally,
expression of CD4 at the cell surface promotes superinfection of cells by cell-free and cell-associated viruses
[48] and can interfere with the efficient release of infectious progeny virions from the cell surface [49-54].
While the disadvantageous effect of CD4 on the release
and infectivity of cell-free virus is well established, it is
unclear whether the expression of CD4 at the cell surface of infected cells also impedes cell-to-cell viral transmission through virological synapses, a mode of
propagation that is believed to promote efficient viral
dissemination [55,56]. Despite its compact genome,
HIV-1 devotes two accessory proteins, Nef and Vpu, to
the task of suppressing expression of its primary receptor. Early in infection, Nef removes mature CD4 molecules that are already present at the cell surface by
enhancing their endocytosis by a pathway involving clathrin and AP2 [57-59] followed by delivery of internalized CD4 to the multivesicular body pathway for
eventual degradation in the lysosomes [60,61]. In contrast, Vpu, which is expressed late during the virus life
cycle, acts on newly synthesized CD4 molecules in the
ER and as such counteracts their effects in the early biosynthetic pathway [62]. This functional convergence,

Page 3 of 19

involving two viral proteins acting on CD4 molecules
located in different cellular compartments and operating
by distinct mechanisms, implies that cell surface CD4
downregulation must play an important role for HIV-1
replication and propagation.
Vpu hijacks the host ubiquitin machinery to target CD4
for proteasomal degradation

The degradation of CD4 mediated by Vpu involves multiple steps that are thought to be initiated by the physical binding of Vpu to the cytoplasmic tail of CD4 in the
ER. Mutational and deletion analyses of CD4 have delineated a domain of the molecule, encompassing residues
414 and 419 (LSEKKT) as well as an a-helix located in
the membrane proximal region of the viral receptor
cytosolic region, that are required for Vpu binding and
CD4 degradation [63-67] (Figure 2). The domain of Vpu
that is interacting with the cytosolic region of CD4 is
still not precisely defined but previous studies have
shown that these binding determinants are likely to be
present in the cytoplasmic region of the protein [68]. In
support of this finding, a mutant of Vpu that harbored a

Step1: ER retention

Step2: ERAD-dependent dislocation
and degradation

Anterograde
trafficking

Proteasomal
degradation
ADP
ATP
Ub

F
box

Ub(n)

WD

KKT

LSE

?

WD

P

boF
x

LSEK

WD
WD

P

P

KT

P

?

?

CD4
dislocation
Cytosol
ER lumen

Cul1
Skp1
E2

Envelope

CD4

Vpu

SCF

β−
TrCP

β-TrCP

p97

NPL4

UFD1L Proteasome

Figure 2 Model of Vpu-mediated CD4 degradation. First, Vpu
retains CD4 in the ER through TM domains interactions; formation
of Env/CD4 complexes could contribute to this retention. In
addition, CD4 and Vpu also interact through their cytosolic domains.
The minimal region of the CD4 cytoplasmic tail conferring Vpu
sensitivity was mapped to the region 414-LSEKKT-419. Recruitment
of the SCFb-TrCP E3 ubiquitin ligase complex by Vpu is mediated by
interactions of phosphoserines in Vpu and the WD boxes of b-TrCP.
Interactions between Vpu and CD4 result in the trans-ubiquination
of the cytosolic tail of CD4 on lysine, serine and threonine residues.
These ubiquitination events might further contribute to CD4
retention in the ER but, importantly, target CD4 for degradation by
the cytosolic proteasome. This targeting involves a dislocation step
mediated by the p97-UFD1L-NPL4 complex, a critical component of
ERAD. This complex recognizes K48-linked polyubiquitinated chains
on the cytosolic tail of CD4 through the UFD1L co-factor. The p97
protein via its ATPase activity subsequently directs the dislocation of
CD4 across the ER membrane where the receptor becomes readily
accessible for proteasomal degradation.

Dubé et al. Retrovirology 2010, 7:114
http://www.retrovirology.com/content/7/1/114

TM domain with a randomized primary sequence was
still able to bind CD4 and mediate its degradation as
well as its wild-type (WT) counterpart [69]. Furthermore, mutational analysis of the Vpu cytoplasmic
domain revealed that the first a-helix was structurally
important for CD4 binding and degradation [70,71].
Although the binding of Vpu to CD4 is necessary to
induce CD4 degradation, it is not sufficient. Phosphorylation-deficient mutants of Vpu were shown to be
unable to induce CD4 degradation while interacting
with CD4 as efficiently as their WT counterpart
[26,63,68,72,73]. A major finding in the mechanism
underlying Vpu-mediated CD4 degradation was the discovery that phosphorylated Vpu proteins interacted with
b-TrCP-1 [73] and b-TrCP-2 [74], two paralogous F-box
adaptor proteins that are part of the cytosolic Skp1-Cullin1-F-Box (SCF) E3 ubiquitin (Ub) ligase complex [73].
b-TrCP functions as a substrate specificity receptor for
the SCFb-TrCP E3 Ub ligase and recognizes substrates,
such as Vpu, upon phosphorylation of the two serine
residues present within a conserved DSPGFXSP b-TrCP
recognition motif [75] (Figure 1B). By directly interacting with the WD-repeat b-propeller of b-TrCP, Vpu is
able to form a CD4-Vpu-b-TrCP ternary complex and
as such brings CD4 and the other components of the E3
Ub ligase in close proximity so that trans-ubiquitination
of CD4 could occur (Figure 2). In fact, biochemical
and functional evidence in human cells as well as in
yeast S. cerevisiae expressing Vpu and CD4 revealed
that SCFb-TrCP recruitment by Vpu results in polyubiquitination of the cytosolic tail of CD4 [76,77], thus
marking the viral receptor for degradation by the cytosolic proteasome [37,78]. The function of Vpu in CD4
degradation is therefore very similar to that of E3 Ub
ligase adaptors which link substrates to Ub ligases. Both
b-TrCP1 and b-TrCP2 appear to be involved in the formation of a functional Vpu-SCF b-TrCP E3 Ub ligase
complex since small interfering (si) RNA silencing of
both genes simultaneously was required to fully reverse
Vpu-mediated CD4 degradation [74].
While the first helix of Vpu appears important for
CD4 binding, the role of the second helix remains
unclear. Deletion of the C-terminal 23 amino-acid residues or substitution of residues Val 64 to Met 70 abrogated Vpu-mediated CD4 degradation without, however,
affecting CD4 binding [31,71]. A more recent study analyzed systematically the importance of each amino-acid
within this region by alanine scan mutagenesis and identified Leu 63 and Val 68 as residues required for CD4
downregulation. Interestingly, in the case of Leu 63,
substitution of this residue with Ala or Val, which maintain the predicted secondary structure of the helix, did
not affect binding to CD4 or b-TrCP, but did abolish
CD4 downregulation [70], suggesting that binding of

Page 4 of 19

Vpu to CD4 and recruitment of b-TrCP might not be
sufficient to induce CD4 degradation and consequently
that other process and/or interactions might be involved
in this mechanism. It is interesting to note that the conserved Leu 63 and Val 68 are part of a conserved acidic/
dileucine sorting signal, [D/E]XXXL[L/I/V] (Figure 1B),
usually involved in the trafficking of membrane proteins
between the endosomes and the TGN. The role of this
sorting motif on Vpu exit from the ER as well as on its
trafficking in general still remains undefined.
ERAD-ication of CD4 by Vpu

The process of Vpu-mediated CD4 degradation is reminiscent of a cellular quality control process called ERassociated protein degradation (ERAD) that eliminates
misfolded or unassembled proteins from the ER [79,80].
Abnormal proteins targeted by the ERAD pathway are
usually recognized by a quality control system within the
ER lumen and ultimately degraded by the cytoplasmic ubiquitin-proteasome system following transport across the
ER membrane by a process called dislocation. However,
unlike typical ERAD, which uses several membrane-bound
E3 Ub ligases, including the HRD1-SEL1L complex [81],
TEB4/MARCH-VI [82], and the GP78-RMA1 complex
[83], Vpu-mediated CD4 degradation relies on the cytosolic SCFb-TrCP E3 Ub ligase complex that is responsible for
ubiquitination and degradation of non-ERAD substrates
such as IB [84] and b-catenin [85]. Consistent with these
findings, genetic evidence in S. cerevisiae yeast expressing
human CD4 and HIV-1 Vpu revealed that CD4 degradation induced by Vpu did not require HRD1 (E3), SEL1L
and the E2 Ub conjugating enzyme UBC7, which are key
components of the machinery responsible for ubiquitination of most ERAD substrates [76].
Recent studies have dissected in molecular terms the
process of CD4 degradation mediated by Vpu and
found that although the mechanism is distinct from
typical ERAD it still shares similar features and, importantly, involves late stages components of the ERAD
pathway. As a first step, Vpu was found to target CD4
for degradation by a process involving polyubiquitination of the CD4 cytosolic tail by SCF b-TrCP [76,77]
(Figure 2). Interestingly, replacement of cytosolic Ub
acceptor lysine residues reduced but did not abolish
Vpu-mediated CD4 ubiquitination and degradation, raising the possibility that the CD4 degradation induced by
Vpu is not entirely dependent on the ubiquitination of
cytosolic lysines [77]. Indeed, recent evidence revealed
that more profound inhibition of degradation could be
achieved by mutation of all lysine, serine and threonine
residues in the CD4 cytosolic tail ([86] and our unpublished results). The ubiquitination process involved in
Vpu-mediated CD4 degradation, therefore, resembles
that involved in MHC-I downregulation induced by the

Dubé et al. Retrovirology 2010, 7:114
http://www.retrovirology.com/content/7/1/114

mouse gamma herpesvirus (Gamma-HSV) mK3 E3 Ub
ligase, which mediates ubiquitination of nascent MHC-I
heavy chain (HC) cytosolic tail via serine, threonine or
lysine residues to target MHC-I heavy chain for degradation by ERAD [87]. As a second step, although Vpu
uses a non-ERAD E3 Ub ligase to induce CD4 degradation, it is co-opting downstream components of
the ERAD pathway. In fact, the VCP-UFD1L-NPL4
complex, a key component of the ERAD dislocation
machinery [88,89], was shown to be involved in CD4
degradation by Vpu (Figure 2). Using siRNA, a recent
study reported a requirement of the valosin-containing
protein (VCP) AAA ATPase p97 and its associated cofactors UFD1L and NPL4 in Vpu-mediated CD4 degradation [86]. Furthermore, the fact that mutants of p97
that are unable to bind ATP or to catalyze ATP hydrolysis exerted a potent dominant negative (DN) effect on
Vpu-mediated CD4 degradation indicated that the
ATPase activity of p97 was required for this process
[77,86]. Further dissection of the role of the UFD1L and
NPL4 cofactors in Vpu-mediated CD4 degradation
revealed that while p97 appears to energize the dislocation process through ATP binding and hydolysis,
UFD1L binds ubiquitinated CD4 through recognition of
K-48 chains and NPL4 stabilizes the complex [86].
A role of the VCP-UFD1L-NPL4 complex in mediating
the extraction of CD4 from the ER membrane, as
observed for ERAD substrates [76] is consistent with
data showing that Vpu was promoting the dislocation of
ubiquitinated CD4 intermediates across the ER membrane [76,77]. Vpu, therefore, appears to bypass the
early stages of ERAD including substrate recognition
and ubiquitination by ERAD machinery components,
but joins in the later stages beginning with dislocation
by the VCP-UFD1L-NPL4 complex (Figure 2).
Retention of CD4 molecules in the ER by Vpu?

Besides its role in CD4 ubiquitination and dislocation
across the ER membrane so that receptor molecules be
accessible to the cytosolic proteasome, a recent study
provided evidence that Vpu plays also a role in the
retention of CD4 in the ER [86]. It was initially found
that Vpu was targeting CD4 molecules that were
retained in the ER through formation of a complex with
Env [62]. However, Magadan and colleagues found that
even in absence of Env, large amounts of CD4 are
retained in the ER in the presence of Vpu when ERAD
is blocked [86]. Unexpectedly, these authors further
showed that this retention was independent of the only
interaction of Vpu and CD4 reported to date, which
involves the cytosolic domain of both proteins. Rather,
CD4 ER retention appeared primarily dependent on
direct or indirect interactions involving the TM domains
of both CD4 and Vpu. Indeed, a Vpu mutant containing

Page 5 of 19

a heterologous TM domain from the G glycoprotein of
vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) failed to retain CD4 in
the ER. Although these results support a role of TM
domain interactions in the retention of CD4 in the ER
by Vpu, this interaction does not appear to rely on Vpu
TM primary sequences since a Vpu mutant containing a
scrambled TM domain was still competent at binding
CD4 and at mediating CD4 degradation [69]. Vpumediated ubiquitination appears also to contribute to
CD4 retention in the ER, but the mechanism remains
unclear. Therefore, it appears that Vpu retains CD4 in
the ER by the additive effects of two distinct mechanisms: assignment of ER residency through the TM
domain and ubiquitination of the cytosolic tail. The
findings of Magadan and colleagues supporting a role of
Vpu in the retention of CD4 in the ER are not entirely
consistent with those of a previous report, which
showed that CD4 can efficiently traffic to the Golgi
complex in presence of Vpu when CD4 is not retained
in the ER by Env [36]. Indeed, using a subviral construct
expressing Vpu and a mutant of gp160 defective for
CD4 binding, Willey and colleagues found that despite
the presence of Vpu the majority of CD4 acquired Endo
H-resistant complex carbohydrates in the Golgi apparatus within 60 minutes after synthesis. Whether this discrepancy results from a difference in Vpu expression
levels (Willey et al. expressed Vpu from a subviral vector while Magadan et al. used a codon-optimized Vpu
construct that expresses much higher levels of the protein) or from differences in the assays used (prevention
of CD4 degradation by blocking ERAD vs. allowing trafficking of CD4 by not blocking the receptor exit from
the ER with Env) remains unclear. Clearly, more studies
will be required to fully understand the mechanism
through which Vpu confers on CD4 an intrinsic propensity to reside in the ER. Importantly, it will be critical to
assess its relevance and contribution in the context of
HIV infection where large amounts of CD4 are already
complexed to Env gp160 in the ER.
Overall, based on previous findings and more recent
evidence, a model of Vpu-mediated CD4 degradation
emerges whereby Vpu might exert two distinct separable
activities in the process of downregulating CD4: retention in the ER followed by targeting to a variant ERAD
pathway (Figure 2).

Role of Vpu in HIV-1 release and transmission
Vpu promotes efficient release of HIV-1 particles in a celltype specific manner

In addition to its effect on CD4 catabolism, Vpu was
reported to promote the efficient release of virus particles from HIV-1-infected cells [7,38]. This finding was
supported by electron microscopy (EM) studies, which
revealed an accumulation of mature virions still tethered

Dubé et al. Retrovirology 2010, 7:114
http://www.retrovirology.com/content/7/1/114

to the plasma membrane of infected T cells in the
absence of Vpu [28,90]. Early studies demonstrated that
the need of Vpu for efficient HIV-1 particle release was
only observed in certain cell types. Notably, while Vpudeficient HIV-1 release was drastically reduced in HeLa
cells, monocyte-derived macrophages, and to a smaller
extent in primary CD4+ T cells, normal viral particle
release was observed in HEK293T, COS, CV-1, and
Vero cells [39,91,92]. Importantly, the fact that Vpu
could significantly enhance viral particle production by
Gag proteins from HIV-2 or retroviruses distantly
related to HIV-1, such as Visna and murine leukemia
virus (MLV), suggested that the effect of Vpu was unlikely to require highly specific interactions with Gag proteins, but rather was more consistent with a model
where Vpu enhanced retroviral release indirectly
through modification of the cellular environment [40].
Tetherin, the last obstacle to enveloped virus release

The notion that a cellular inhibitor of HIV-1 particle
release antagonized by Vpu could be responsible for the
inefficient release of Vpu-deficient HIV-1 in restrictive
cells was suggested by the observation that heterokaryons between restrictive HeLa and permissive COS cells
exhibited a restrictive phenotype similar to that displayed by HeLa cells [93]. Importantly, the fact that virions retained at the cell surface could be released by
protease treatment suggested that a protein expressed at
the cell surface was involved in the “tethering” of virions
to the cell surface as opposed to a budding defect that
prevented membrane separation [94]. Interestingly, cell
types that allowed efficient release of Vpu-deficient
HIV-1 viruses could become restrictive for viral release
after type 1 IFN treatment, thus suggesting that the
putative cellular protein that efficiently tethered virions
on host cell surface was induced by type I IFN [95].
Almost simultaneously, the Bieniasz and Guatelli
groups identified Tetherin as the cellular factor responsible for the inhibition of HIV-1 particle release and counteracted by the Vpu accessory protein [41,42]. Both
groups found Tetherin to be constitutively expressed in
cell lines that required Vpu for efficient particle release,
like HeLa cells, but not in permissive HEK293T and
HT1080 cells. Likewise, expression of Tetherin and its
associated restrictive phenotype could be induced by
IFN-a in permissive HEK293T and HT1080 cells and
enhanced in Jurkat and primary CD4+ T cells. Furthermore, while introduction of Tetherin into HEK293T and
HT1080 cells inhibited HIV-1 particle release in absence
of Vpu, siRNA-directed depletion of Tetherin in HeLa
cells led to efficient release of Vpu-deficient HIV-1 particles [41,42]. In addition to HIV-1, Tetherin has been
shown to exert its antiviral activity against a broad range
of enveloped viruses, including many retroviruses

Page 6 of 19

(alpharetrovirus, betaretrovirus, deltaretrovirus, lentivirus, and spumaretrovirus), filoviruses (Ebola and
Marburg viruses), arenaviruses (Lassa virus), paramyxoviruses (Nipah virus) as well as Kaposi Sarcoma Herpes
Virus (KSHV) [41,42,94,96-99], thus indicating that the
process of restriction is unlikely to involve specific interactions with virion protein components.
Tetherin: expression, structure and trafficking

Tetherin is a protein highly expressed in plasmacytoid
dendritic cells (pDCs), the major producers of type I
IFN, and in some cancer cells, while lower basal levels
of expression are detected in bone marrow stromal cells,
terminally differentiated B cells, macrophages, and T
cells [100-104]. Its expression is strongly induced by
type I IFNs in virtually all cell types [99,101,105-107],
indicating that it is likely part of the innate defense
response to virus infections.
Tetherin is a glycosylated type II integral membrane
protein of between 28 and 36 kDa with an unusual
topology in that it harbors two completely different
types of membrane anchor at the N- and C-terminus. It
is composed of a short N-terminal cytoplasmic tail
linked to a TM anchor that is predicted to be a single
a-helix, a central extracellular domain predicted to form
a coiled-coil structural motif, and a putative C-terminal
glycophosphatidyl-inositol (GPI)-linked lipid anchor
[105,108,109] (Figure 3A). This rather atypical topology
is only observed in one isoform of the prion protein
[110]. As a GPI-anchored protein, Tetherin is found
within the cholesterol-enriched lipid domains from
which HIV-1 and other enveloped viruses preferentially
assemble and bud [108,111-113]. The protein is localized not only at the plasma membrane but also within
several endosomal membrane compartments, including
the TGN as well as early and recycling endosomes
[29,108,112,114]. Clathrin-mediated internalization of
human Tetherin is dependent upon a non-canonical tyrosine-based motif present in the cytoplasmic tail of the
protein (Figure 3B), which appears recognized by
a-adaptin but not the μ2-subunit of the AP-2 complex
as it was initially reported for the rat Tetherin [109,112].
Moreover, after endocytosis, Tetherin delivered to early
endosomes is subsequently transported to the TGN
through recognition of the cytoplasmic domain by the
μ1-subunit of the AP-1 complex [109], suggesting the
involvement of the sequential action of AP-2 and AP-1
complexes in internalization and delivery back of
Tetherin to the TGN. Although the current data is consistent with a model whereby Tetherin continually cycles
between the plasma membrane and the TGN with a
fraction targeted for degradation, it still remains to be
determined whether the protein is indeed recycling from
the TGN to the cell surface. Interestingly, recent

Dubé et al. Retrovirology 2010, 7:114
http://www.retrovirology.com/content/7/1/114

Page 7 of 19

cysteine residues to alanine abrogated the antiviral activity without affecting Tetherin’s expression at the cell
surface [115,116]. In that regard, it has been proposed
that Tetherin forms a parallel dimeric coiled-coil that is
stabilized by C53-C53, C63-C63 and C91-C91 disulfide
bonds. Interactions within the coiled-coil domain and at
least one disulfide bond formation are required for
dimer stability and antiviral function [115,116]. Recently,
a partial structure of the extracellular domain of
Tetherin has been solved by X-ray crystallography by
three different groups [117-119]. All these studies support a model in which the primary functional state of
Tetherin is a parallel dimeric disulfide-bound coiled-coil
that displays flexibility at the N-terminus.
Tetherin directly cross-links HIV-1 virions on infected cell
surface

Figure 3 Schematic representations of Tetherin. Secondary and
tertiary model of human Tetherin. Glycosylation sites at position 65
and 92 are shown as well as the GPI-anchor and the cytoplasmic,
transmembrane (TM) and extracellular coiled-coil domains. The
functional parallel dimeric state is shown here. (B) Tetherin
topology. An amino-acid sequence alignment of human,
chimpanzee, rhesus and African green monkey (agm) Tetherin
alleles is shown below. Hyphens and bold letters represent
respectively deletions and residues in human Tetherin under
positive selection. Putative Ub-acceptor residues, cysteine residues
involved in dimerization as well as N-glycosylation sites are labelled
in orange, pink and red, respectively. Putative trafficking signals, the
predicted transmembrane domain and the coiled-coil domain are
highlighted in blue, green and yellow. The sites of interaction
mapped for SIV Nef and HIV-1 Vpu are boxed in dark blue and dark
green, respectively. Note that the SIV Nef-interacting region is
deleted in human Tetherin. The site of cleavage prior to addition of
the GPI lipid anchor is represented by the dashed line.

findings from Rollason and colleagues revealed that
Tetherin localizes at the apical surface of polarized
epithelial cells, where it interacts indirectly with the
underlying actin cytoskeleton, thus providing a physical
link between lipid rafts and the apical actin network in
these cells [111]. Whether this property of Tetherin
relates to its activity as an inhibitor of HIV-1 release
remains unknown.
The Tetherin ectodomain contains two N-linked glycosylation sites, three cysteine residues and a coiled-coil
motif that mediates homodimerization (Figure 3B).
Tetherin glycosylation was shown to be important for
proper transport and perhaps folding of the protein
[115]; but, however, appeared to be dispensable for its
activity as a restriction factor [97,115,116]. In contrast,
the presence of cysteine residues in the extracellular
domain of Tetherin was found required for the antiHIV-1 function of the protein, as mutation of all three

Accumulating evidence suggest that Tetherin prevents
viral release by directly cross-linking virions to host cell
membranes. Additionally, restricted mature virus particles can also be found within intracellular endosomal
structures [94], suggesting that following retention at
the plasma membrane, tethered particles could be internalized and perhaps targeted for degradation in late
endosomal compartments [120]. Consistent with a direct
tethering mechanism, immuno-EM studies revealed that
Tetherin is detected in the physical bridge between nascent virions and the plasma membrane as well as
between virions tethered to each other [121,122]. In
fact, both biochemical and immuno-EM evidence indicate that Tetherin is incorporated into virions
[114,115,121,122]. Importantly, the view that Tetherin
itself, without the need of any specific cellular cofactor,
is responsible for tethering virions on host cell surface,
is supported by evidence from the Bieniasz group. They
elegantly showed that protein configuration rather than
primary sequences is critical for the tethering phenotype. Indeed, an entirely artificial Tetherin-like protein
consisting of structurally similar domains from three
unrelated proteins (TM from transferrin receptor,
coiled-coil from distrophia myotonica protein kinase
and GPI anchor from urokinase plasminogen activator
receptor), inhibited the release of HIV-1 and Ebola
virus-like-particles in a manner strikingly similar to
Tetherin [115].
Although strong evidence for a direct tethering
mechanism exists, the precise topology of the Tetherin
dimers and the definition of the molecular interfaces
retaining nascent virions at the cell surface remain open
questions. For instance, it is not clear whether both
membrane anchors remain in a single membrane surface
and virions are retained by interaction between two
Tetherin ectodomains (Figure 4A) or, if both Tetherin
anchors can be incorporated in different membrane

Dubé et al. Retrovirology 2010, 7:114
http://www.retrovirology.com/content/7/1/114

A

Each monomer is
anchored in a
different membrane

B

Page 8 of 19

C

Parallel

anti-Parallel

Monomers are anchored in both membranes

Figure 4 Schematic representations of possible direct tethering
modes. (A) Tethering by interaction via the ectodomains of Tetherin
dimers. One Tetherin molecule is inserted into the virus while the
other is anchored into the cellular membrane. (B) Tethering by
incorporation of one of the molecule anchors in the virus and the
other in the cellular membrane. Different options are shown,
including GPI anchors or transmembrane domains of parallel
Tetherin homodimers incorporated into a virion and (C) both type
of anchors from an antiparallel tetherin homodimer incorporated
into virion. The fact that deleting either the GPI anchor or the TM
domain prevents the restriction suggests that either configuration A
and C are not important contributors of the tethering process or
that a single tethering domain is not sufficient to retain virions at
the cell surface. Indeed, it is also conceivable that all these potential
configurations may contribute to the restrictive activity albeit to
different extent.

surfaces (Figure 4B). The fact that removal of either the
cytoplasmic tail or the GPI anchor abrogates the antiviral activity of Tetherin [41,115] supports a model
whereby Tetherin is a parallel homodimer with one set
of anchors in the host membrane and the other in the
virion membrane (Figure 4B). This data also suggest
that anti-parallel dimers with monomeric links to membranes (Figure 4C) do not exist or cannot effectively
tether. It remains unclear whether the parallel dimers of
Tetherin that span the plasma and viral membranes
have a preference for which membrane anchor ends up
in the cell membrane or in the virion although there is
some evidence that the TM anchor is favored in the
virus membrane and the TM anchor in the cell [115].
While this membrane spanning model is consistent with
the structural properties of Tetherin, there are, however,
two caveats to this model. First, treatment of tethered
virions with the GPI anchor-cleaving enzyme, phosphatidyl inositol-specific phospholipase C (Pi-PLC), did not
effectively release virions from the cell surface [122].
Second, based on the structural data, the maximum distance that can be bridged by Tetherin in the configuration outlined in Figure 4 is about 17 nm [117-119].
However, the distance between the plasma membrane
and tethered viral membranes observed in EM studies is
frequently significantly larger than that distance
[121,122]. One alternative model to the membrane
spanning domain model is that. individual Tetherin
monomers are anchored at both end to the viral or
plasma membranes but associates with each other

through dimers or higher order structures (Figure 4A).
Although this model explains a requirement for dimerization, it does not explain why Tetherin requires both
of its membrane anchor domains for its antiviral activity
[41,115]. Moreover, in this model, Tetherin would tether
virus particles quite close to the plasma membrane
(3-5 nm), a distance not supported by EM analysis
[41,115,121,122]. Clearly more studies are required to
fully understand how Tetherin dimers tether newly
formed virions to host cell surface.
Effect of Tetherin on HIV-1 cell-to-cell transmission

Increasing evidence suggests that HIV-1 can spread
directly between T cells by forming a polarized supramolecular structure termed a virological synapse,
whereby nascent virions are recruited to intimate adhesive contacts between infected and uninfected cells
[55,56]. Since Vpu-deficient HIV-1 particles accumulate
at the cell surface as a result of Tetherin-mediated
restriction, it is unclear whether these restricted virions
can undergo cell-to-cell transfer or whether Tetherin
restricts spread via virological synapses in addition to
inhibiting the release of cell-free virions. Tetherin was
recently reported to inhibit productive cell-to-cell transmission from Tetherin-positive donor cells (HEK 293T,
HeLa and T-cells) to target lymphocytes without preventing the formation of virological synapses [123].
Interestingly, in the presence of Tetherin, Vpu-deficient
viruses accumulated at the synapses and were essentially
transferred to target cells as large abnormal aggregates.
These viral aggregates were found to be impaired in
their ability to fuse to target cells and as such did not
efficiently promote productive infection after transfer.
These findings contrast with results recently reported by
Jolly and colleagues which showed that Tetherin does
not restrict virological synapse-mediated T-cell to T-cell
transfer of Vpu-deficient HIV-1 [124]. In fact, this study
showed that in some circumstances Tetherin might promote cell-to-cell transfer either by mediating the accumulation of virions at the cell surface or by regulating
the integrity of the virological synapse. These latter findings are consistent with a previous study that reported
that in vitro selection of HIV-1 to spread via cell-to-cell
contact in T-cell lines led to the emergence of viral variants with mutations in both the Env and the Vpu proteins [125]. Likewise, earlier observations showed that
WT and Vpu-deficient HIV-1 production usually peak
at the same time during a spreading infection even
though less Vpu-deficient virus is released in the extracellular milieu [28,38]. The contrasting results obtained
by Jolly and colleagues [124] and Casartelli and colleagues [123] might reflect cell type dependent variations
in the levels of Tetherin expression since the two studies
used distinct Tetherin-expressing cell donor systems.

Dubé et al. Retrovirology 2010, 7:114
http://www.retrovirology.com/content/7/1/114

It is indeed possible that under high Tetherin expression
conditions such as those prevailing in macrophages and
dendritic cells (DCs), HIV-1 cell-to-cell transmission
might be impaired, whereas at lower levels, such as in
T-lymphocytes, Tetherin may not restrict or may even
contribute to cell-to-cell transmission. In that regard,
Schindler and colleagues recently showed that a Vpu
mutant (S52A) that displayed an impaired Tetherin
antagonism was unable to replicate efficiently in macrophages, while it spread as well as the wild type virus in
ex vivo lymphoid tissue (HLT) or peripheral blood lymphocytes [103]. Therefore, one role of Vpu would be to
maintain a balance between cell-free and cell-to-cell
HIV-1 spread in the face of antiviral immune responses.
Potential roles of Tetherin in innate immunity

HIV-1 infection induces pDCs to produce a broad range
of type I IFN through the activation of Toll-like receptors 7 and 9 (TLR7 and TLR9) [126,127]. Type I IFN
activates natural killer (NK) cells, myeloid DCs, T cells,
B cells, and macrophages and induces expression of several hundreds of different IFN-stimulated genes, including Tetherin. In turn, it was recently reported that
human Tetherin is the natural ligand for ILT7, a protein
that is expressed exclusively on pDCs [107]. Binding of
Tetherin to ILT7 was found to trigger a signaling pathway that negatively modulates TLR7- or TLR9-mediated
type I IFN and proinflammatory cytokine secretion, thus
establishing a negative feedback loop in which IFNinduced Tetherin binding to the ILT7-FcεRIg complex
signals the inhibition of additional IFN production
[107]. Therefore, in addition to its anti-viral function,
Tetherin might also have a role in modulating pDC’s
IFN responses as well as inflammatory responses to
virus infection. Whether or not Vpu interferes with this
Tetherin immunomodulatory function during HIV-1
infection remains an open question.
HIV-1 riposte to Tetherin-mediated restriction

How Vpu counteracts the antiviral activity of Tetherin
has attracted considerable attention since the discovery
of the restriction factor. A key observation made early
on was that Vpu downregulated Tetherin from the cellsurface [42]. This reduction of Tetherin levels at the
cell surface correlated with the enhancement of HIV-1
particle release observed upon Vpu expression. Since
Tetherin restricts HIV-1 virus particle release at the
plasma membrane, removal of Tetherin from its site of
tethering action represents an intuitive model through
which Vpu could counteract this cellular restriction,
although this model has been challenged [102]. Reduction of Tetherin at the cell-surface is likely to prevent
cross-linking of cellular and viral membranes, which
implies that virions released from Vpu-expressing cells

Page 9 of 19

would be devoid of Tetherin molecules. Although this
notion is supported by the decreased co-localization
between Tetherin and Gag in presence of Vpu
[41,96,128], biochemical analyses revealed that Vpu
expression decreases only partially Tetherin accumulation in released virus particles [115,121,122]. Furthermore, immuno-EM studies showed that virions
produced from Vpu-expressing cells still incorporate
Tetherin albeit at a lower density [114,122]. These
results suggest that either a threshold level of virionassociated Tetherin is required to mediate the restriction
or alternatively removal of Tetherin from specific
plasma membrane microdomains could underlie the
mechanism by which Vpu antagonizes Tetherin. In that
regard, Habermann and colleagues reported that Vpu
would be more efficient at downregulating Tetherin outside HIV-1 assembly sites [114], thus reducing the ability of the plasma membrane to retain fully released
Tetherin-containing virions. Interestingly, a recent study
provided evidence that partitioning of Vpu in lipid rafts
would be required to promote virus particle release
[129]. It will be important to determine whether Vpu
targets a pool of Tetherin located in specific microdomains of the plasma membrane or whether the viral
antagonist targets the restriction factor independently of
its distribution at the plasma membrane.
Vpu, a versatile Tetherin antagonist

Several mechanisms have been proposed to explain how
Vpu can downregulate Tetherin from the cell surface
and as a result antagonize its antiviral activity on HIV-1
release. These include proteasomal or endo-lysosomal
degradation of the restriction factor and/or alteration of
its trafficking toward the cell surface, resulting in intracellular sequestration. Although mechanistically distinct,
these modes of antagonism all rely on the ability of Vpu
to bind Tetherin since the restriction imposed by
Tetherin on viral particle release can be restored by
mutations disrupting their mutual association [130-134].
Such mutations have been all mapped so far to either
Vpu or Tetherin TM domains, thus strongly suggesting
that the two proteins associate through their respective
TM regions [131,132,135-137]. Evidence for each of the
proposed Vpu anti-Tetherin mechanisms are reviewed
and discussed below.
i) Vpu-mediated degradation of Tetherin

Vpu expression was found to decrease the total steadystate levels of Tetherin [128,130,134,138,139]. This
depletion occurs at a post-transcriptional step since
levels of Tetherin transcript are not affected by Vpu
[130,134]. Importantly, pulse-chase experiments revealed
that Vpu accelerates the turnover of endogenous
Tetherin [130,131,139]. As observed with Vpu-mediated
CD4 degradation, recruitment of b-TrCP was found to

Dubé et al. Retrovirology 2010, 7:114
http://www.retrovirology.com/content/7/1/114

be required for Vpu-mediated Tetherin degradation
since phosphorylation-deficient Vpu mutants did not
alter Tetherin turnover [130,131]. Likewise, siRNAmediated depletion of b-TrCP or inactivation of the
SCF b-TrCP E3 Ub ligase by overexpression of a DN
mutant of b-TrCP, b-TrCPΔF, which binds Vpu but is
unable to link it to the SCF b-TrCP E3 ligase complex,
abolished Vpu-mediated Tetherin degradation, indicating that recruitment of the SCFb-TrCP complex is critical
for Vpu-mediated Tetherin degradation [128,130,
133,134]. In that regard, siRNA depletion experiments
revealed that Vpu takes specifically advantage of the cytoplasmic b-TrCP-2 isoform, but not the nuclear b-TrCP-1,
to achieve Tetherin degradation [128,130,133]. Finally,
complementing this set of functional evidence, b-TrCP
was found in a ternary complex together with Vpu and
Tetherin [133,134], but was not critical for the association of Vpu to Tetherin [130].
This degradative process was initially thought to be
proteasomal in nature since long treatment with proteasomal inhibitors prevented exogenously-expressed
Tetherin degradation in presence of Vpu in HEK 293T
cells [134,138-140]. Furthermore, overexpression of Ub
K48R, a DN mutant of Ub, which interferes with polyubiquitination, prevented Tetherin degradation [134].
Consistently, Vpu was found to promote the b-TrCPmediated ubiquitination of Tetherin cytoplasmic tail on
serine, threonine, lysine and cysteine residues at least in
HEK293T [141] (Figure 3B). Interestingly, depletion of
the ERAD component, AAA ATPase p97, affected Vpumediated Tetherin degradation [134], suggesting that
Vpu could mediate Tetherin proteasomal degradation in
the ER through an ERAD-like process. However, there
are several caveats with the data supporting proteosomal
degradation. First, the results were often obtained by
overexpression of epitope tagged-Tetherin in non
restrictive HEK 293T cells, an experimental setting
which results in the accumulation of immature Tetherin
molecule within the endoplasmic reticulum [116]. Second, long exposure with proteasome inhibitors or Ub
K48R overexpression are not always an unambiguous
evidence of ubiquitin-proteasome degradation since
these processes can deplete free Ub, thus affecting indirectly Ub-dependent trafficking and/or lysosomal degradation [142,143]. Accordingly, inhibitors of lysosomal
sorting and acidification, such as bafilomycin A and
concanamycin were found to inhibit Vpu-mediated
Tetherin degradation and could interfere with Tetherin
downregulation from the cell-surface [128,130]. This
type of degradation is indeed consistent with the recent
observation that Tetherin undergoes monoubiquitination on cytoplasmic lysines 18 and/or 21 in presence of
Vpu [144]. Taken together, these findings support a
model whereby Tetherin undergoes degradation in

Page 10 of 19

lysosomes in presence of Vpu. However, proteasomal
degradation cannot be completely excluded, at this
point.
ii) Vpu-mediated intracellular sequestration of Tetherin

Although Vpu expression induces Tetherin degradation in
most cellular systems studied to date, several lines of evidence suggest that degradation of Tetherin per se cannot
entirely account for Vpu-mediated Tetherin antagonism.
For instance, Vpu was found to decrease total cellular
Tetherin to a lesser extent than cell-surface Tetherin in
HeLa cells [128]. Furthermore, Vpu mutants that contain
mutations in the DSPGFXSP b-TrCP recognition motif
that render them deficient for directing b-TrCP-dependent degradation of Tetherin are still able to partially
[39,42,128,130,134] or in some instances to totally
[24,102,103] overcome the Tetherin-mediated particle
release restriction. Moreover, Vpu-mediated Tetherin
degradation is a relatively slow process [130,131] (half-life
of ~8 h is decreased by ~2-fold in presence of Vpu) as
compared to the efficient CD4 receptor degradation
induced by Vpu (half-life of ~6 h is decreased by ~25-fold
in presence of Vpu [36]). There is now increasing evidence
for the existence of an anti-Tetherin mechanism that is
distinct from degradation of the restriction factor. In that
regard, recent evidence showed that Vpu did not promote
Tetherin endocytosis [128,131], but rather induced a re-localization of the antiviral factor to a perinuclear compartment that extensively overlapped with the TGN marker,
TGN46, and Vpu itself, thus leading to a specific removal
of cell-surface Tetherin [131,144,145]. These findings are
indeed consistent with previous data showing that proper
distribution of Vpu in the TGN is critical to overcome
Tetherin restriction on HIV-1 release [29]. Overall, it
appears that Vpu may antagonize Tetherin, at least in
part, by sequestering the protein intracellularly through
alteration of its normal anterograde trafficking. Importantly, mutations of the putative Ub-acceptor lysine
residues, K18 and K21, in the cytosolic tail of Tetherin
(Figure 3B), completely abolished Vpu-mediated monoubiquitination [144] and degradation [140] of the restriction
factor without, however, affecting its antagonism by Vpu.
These findings provide genetic evidence that Tetherin ubiquitination/degradation and Tetherin antagonism may be
two separable Vpu activities. Moreover, since the lysineless Tetherin mutant was still found to be downregulated
at the cell surface in presence of Vpu, it appears that
Tetherin downregulation and ubiquitination/degradation
may not be as strictly linked during Vpu-mediated antagonism [140,144]. These unexpected results contrast, however, with previous data showing that Vpu mutants that
are unable to recruit b-TrCP (and as such are predicted to
be unable to mediate Tetherin ubiquitination/degradation), such as phosphorylation-deficient Vpu mutants, display an attenuated Tetherin antagonism (~50% of WT

Dubé et al. Retrovirology 2010, 7:114
http://www.retrovirology.com/content/7/1/114

Vpu) [128,131,134,146]. Likewise, depletion of b-TrCP-2
or expression of a DN mutant of b-TrCP, b-TrCPΔF,
could partially inhibit Vpu-mediated Tetherin antagonism
[128,130,134]. The recent results of Tokarev and colleagues indicating that b-TrCP-mediated polyubiquitination
of the Tetherin cytoplasmic tail specifically on serine and
threonine residues is critical for Vpu-mediated Tetherin
antagonism, while having little effect on the stability of the
restriction factor in presence of Vpu, might provide some
clues on the role b-TrCP on Tetherin antagonism. Based
on these results, it is indeed possible that Vpu-mediated
polyubiquitination of Tetherin via b-TrCP, might enhance
the sequestration of the restriction factor without necessarily leading to Tetherin degradation [141]. Taken together,
these recent findings suggest that Tetherin antagonism by
Vpu precedes and may not be dependent on degradation
of the restriction factor, but rather results in the sequestration of Tetherin away from budding virions (Figure 5).
Clearly more studies are needed to evaluate the contribution of Tetherin ubiquitination and degradation in the
mechanism through which Vpu antagonizes the restriction
on HIV-1 particle release especially in cells that are natural
target for infection.
Although current evidence is consistent with a model
whereby antagonism of Tetherin by Vpu involves
sequestration of the restriction factor in a perinuclear

Page 11 of 19

compartment, it is unclear whether Vpu subverts recycling and/or other intracellular sorting steps of Tetherin.
Mutation of the overlapping Tyrosine (Tyr6 and Tyr8)
trafficking signals in the Tetherin cytoplasmic tail
(Figure 3B), which blocks the protein natural pathway of
endocytosis, did not abolish the sensitivity to Vpu in
non-restrictive cells (HEK 293T, HT1080) transiently
[131,133,145] or stably expressing the Tetherin mutant
[140]. Thus, it appears that Tetherin intracellular
sequestration may occur before endocytosis of the
restriction factor from the cell surface and as such
involve newly synthesized Tetherin en route to the PM
[131,133]. However, it cannot be ruled-out completely
that Vpu could interact with endocytosed Tetherin and
prevent its recycling back to the cell surface since previous data demonstrated a requirement for the recycling
endosomes in Vpu function [30], and recent studies
reported that AP2 depletion [128] or over-expression of
dominant DN mutant of Dynamin [133] could partially
interfere with Vpu-mediated downregulation of Tetherin
from the cell surface. Moreover, Tetherin is accumulated in the presence of Vpu in structures just beneath
the plasma membrane that could correspond to early
and/or recycling endosomes [114]. Indeed, since Vpu is
produced from a Rev-regulated gene expressed late during the virus life cycle, the direct removal of Tetherin
from the plasma membrane via endosomal trafficking
may be critical to ensure a rapid and efficient neutralization of Tetherin’s antiviral activity.
Tetherin, a common enemy

Figure 5 Unified model of Vpu-mediated cell-surface Tetherin
downregulation. Tetherin traffics along the anterograde trafficking
pathway and reaches the plasma membrane. The protein is
endocytosed in clathrin-coated pits, transported to the TGN and
most probably recycles back to the cell surface. Upon expression of
Vpu, Tetherin is forming complexes with the viral protein, thus
trapping the restriction factor in the TGN, away from sites of viral
assembly at the plasma membrane where Tetherin is cross-linking
progeny virions. Vpu could intercept endocytosed Tetherin as well
as Tetherin arriving from the ER although this remains to be
determined. Subsequently, Vpu could induce Tetherin ubiquitination
through recruitment of b-TrCP-2, leading to a stronger retention in
the TGN. Sequestered ubiquitinated Tetherin conjugates could
ultimately be targeted for proteosomal and/or lysosomal
degradation. As such, Vpu-mediated Tetherin degradation may
represent a complementary mechanism that Vpu could exploit to
reach optimal Tetherin antagonism, perhaps, in specific cellular
environments.

While HIV-1 Vpu was the first anti-Tetherin factor discovered, there is now a growing list of virus-encoded proteins harboring anti-Tetherin activities. Namely, KSHV
K5, HIV-2 Env, and Ebola gp were found to overcome
human Tetherin antiviral activity apparently through distinct mechanisms [98,99,144,147-149] (Table 1). Nef from
SIVcpz, SIVgor, SIVagm and SIVsmm, Env from SIVtan
(SIV from Tantalus monkey) and Vpu from SIVgsn, SIVmon and SIVmus were also reported to antagonize
Tetherin from their corresponding hosts [150-153]. Their
strategies differ, though. The KSHV K5 protein, which is a
membrane associated Ring-CH (MARCH) Ub ligase,
induces a species-specific downregulation of human
Tetherin from the cell surface by inducing ubiquitination
of Tetherin cytoplasmic lysines and targeting the restriction factor to lysosomes for degradation [99,144]. In contrast, HIV-2 Env or SIVtan Env do not display any ability
to induce Tetherin degradation [145,147-149]. Instead,
these envelope proteins redistribute Tetherin from the
plasma membrane to a perinuclear compartment that
appears to correspond to the TGN most probably by a
sequestration mechanism [145,148,149]. However, in
contrast to Vpu, the determinants controlling Tetherin

Dubé et al. Retrovirology 2010, 7:114
http://www.retrovirology.com/content/7/1/114

Page 12 of 19

Table 1 Anti-Tetherin mechanisms reported for the known Tetherin antagonists
Tetherin antagonists

Binding

HIV-1 Vpu

Yes

Mechanisms

References

Proteosomal degradation

[134,138,139]

Lysosomal degradation
HIV-2 Env

Yes

[128,130]

Sequestration in TGN and/or endosomes

[131,145]

Intracellular sequestration

[145,148]
[150-152]

SIV Nef

?

Increased internalization from the cell-surface?

SIVtan Env

?

Intracellular sequestration

KSHV K5

?

Lysosomal degradation

Ebola gp

Yes

sensitivity to HIV-2 and SIVtan Env proteins are located
in the restriction factor ectodomain [148,149]. Studies on
HIV-2, SIVtan Env and KSHV K5 indicate that both
sequestration and degradation represent potent mechanisms by which Tetherin antiviral activity can be overcomed. The fact that HIV-1 Vpu can exploit both
mechanisms confirms its great versatility and might perhaps explain the efficient counteraction that it displays
against human Tetherin. Although the precise mechanism
underlying Tetherin antagonism by Nef remains to be
determined, it was found that SIVmac Nef downregulates
rhesus Tetherin from the cell surface and as shown for
Vpu-mediated Tetherin antagonism, this downregulation
correlated with enhanced SIVmac particle release
[150,152]. Finally, the antagonism of human Tetherin by
Ebola gp is still not entirely understood. The case of Ebola
gp is particularly interesting since it is the only known
anti-Tetherin factor that does not appear to downregulate
Tetherin from the cell surface to promote the release of
Ebola virus-like particle [147]. Even more surprising, interaction between Tetherin and Ebola gp would not require
any specific sequence, a feature that is unique among
Tetherin antagonists identified to date [147]. Therefore, it
appears that Ebola virus gp might use a novel mechanism
to neutralize Tetherin restriction. Clearly, comparative
studies of these anti-Tetherin viral factors will not only
further our understanding of their mechanisms of action
but will also provide key information on host cell processes involved in Tetherin antagonism.

Role of Vpu in primate lentivirus cross-species
transmission and the emergence of pandemic
HIV-1 strains
Genes encoding for restriction factor, such as TRIM5-a,
APOBEC3G and Tetherin undergo rapid evolution, a process also known as positive selection, most likely as the
result of the selective pressure imposed by new emerging
viral pathogens or to escape from viral antagonists during
the millions of years of virus-host co-evolution [154-156].
Consequently, these restriction factors display a high
degree of sequence divergence and constitute potent

[149]
[99,144]
?

[98,147]

limiting barriers to virus cross-species transmission
because viral antagonists usually function in a speciesspecific manner. In fact, sequence alignment of Tetherin
from different primate species reveals important selective
genetic changes that lead to amino-acid substitution or
deletion primarily in the cytoplasmic and TM domains of
the protein, regions that are now known to be targeted by
Tetherin antagonists [138,156,157] (Figure 3B).
These genetic changes in Tetherin sequence have
shaped the evolution of primate lentiviruses and influenced at least in part their ability to transmit across species. There is evidence suggesting that SIVcpz, the
precursor of HIV-1, results from recombination events
between the precursors of the SIVgsn/mon/mus and the
SIV from red capped mangabeys (SIVrcm) lineages
[158] (Figure 6). The precursor of SIVgsn/mon/mus that
contributed to the 3’-half of the SIVcpz/HIV-1 genome,
most likely harbored a vpu gene product able to both
induce CD4 degradation and antagonize Tetherin since
all descendants do. Since it is believed that the ancestor
of the SIVrcm lineage used Nef to antagonize Tetherin,
given that this lineage does not encode a vpu gene, the
chimeric virus that gave rise to SIVcpz contained two
potential Tetherin antagonists. However, the SIVcpz
Vpu protein inherited from the SIVgsn/mon/mus lineage is devoid of any activity against the chimpanzee and
human Tetherin [151,153,157].
The resistance displayed by the chimpanzee Tetherin
to the Vpu protein originating from the SIVgsn/mon/
mus lineage results from the high sequence variability in
the TM domain of Tetherin reported between nonhominoid primates (monkeys such as rhesus or African
green monkey) and hominoid primates (such as chimpanzees, gorillas and humans) [151,156,157] (Figure 1B).
Indeed, this TM domain was demonstrated to be the
site conferring Vpu susceptibility and binding
[131,132,136,138,156]. As a result Nef, and not Vpu,
evolved to become an effective Tetherin antagonist in
SIVcpz-infected chimpanzee, most likely because the
cytoplasmic domain sequence DDIWK targeted by Nef
is somewhat less divergent between chimpanzee and

Dubé et al. Retrovirology 2010, 7:114
http://www.retrovirology.com/content/7/1/114

Figure 6 Adaptations of primate lentiviruses during crossspecies transmission and the emergence of pandemic HIV-1
strains. The SIV from chimpanzee is believed to result from
recombination events through successive cross-species transmission
between the precursors of the SIVgsn/mon/mus and the SIVrcm
lineages. The transmembrane domain of Tetherin evolved primarily
during transition from the non hominoïd lineage to the hominoïd
lineage, explaining why the Vpu protein inherited from the SIVgsn/
mon/mus lineage does not exhibit any activity against chimpanzee
Tetherin. After transmission from chimpanzees to humans, SIVcpz
was unable anymore to use Nef to counteract Tetherin due to a
deletion of five amino acids in the cytoplasmic domain of human
Tetherin, which usually confers responsiveness to Nef. During
evolution/adaptation from SIVcpz to HIV-1, modifications mapped to
two regions of the Vpu transmembrane domain have conferred
human Tetherin a susceptibility to Vpu, except in the case of the
HIV-1 group O. Furthermore, the HIV-1 group N Vpu somehow has
lost its ability to mediate CD4 degradation in the process. Only the
pandemic HIV-1 group M harbors the two primary Vpu functions.
Susceptibility of the transmembrane domain of Tetherin to Vpu is
represented by similar colour pairing. The deletion of the five amino
acids in human Tetherin cytoplamic tail is represented by the
absence of the D/GDIWK sequence. The color gradient indicates coevolution between SIV/HIV and host.

monkey than the TM domain targeted by Vpu
[150-153,157]. The deletion of sequences, highly subjected to adaptation and recognized by Nef, in human
Tetherin is hypothesized to be the result of a previous
encounter with a viral pathogen during human evolution
that used a Nef-like protein, if not Nef itself, to antagonize Tetherin [157]. Conversely, few differences were
observed in the TM domain of Tetherin between chimpanzee and human Tetherin, suggesting that Vpu has
not driven Tetherin adaptation for a long period in primate evolution and accounting for the ability of the

Page 13 of 19

HIV-1 Vpu to counteract the chimpanzee Tetherin
[157] (Figure 3B).
The inability to use Nef as a human Tetherin antagonist following SIVcpz cross-species transmission to
human has likely led SIVcpz to proceed to a ‘’neofunctionalization’’ of its initially incompetent Vpu protein in
order to efficiently overcome the restriction imposed by
human Tetherin (Figure 6). In support of this adaptation
mechanism, it was recently reported that the differential
ability of HIV-1 and SIVcpz Vpu to antagonize human
Tetherin could be mapped to two regions of the TM
domain of Vpu (amino-acid residues 1-8 and 14-22).
Importantly, SIVcpz Vpu was completely able to overcome the human Tetherin restriction when these two
regions were substituted for those from HIV-1 Vpu
[157]. Furthermore, analysis of a SIVcpz strain (LB7)
that represents the closest relative to HIV-1 group M
revealed that the LB7 Vpu allele is predicted to need 7
minimal adaptations within these two critical regions of
the TM domain to gain the ability to antagonize human
Tetherin [157]. Consistent with these findings, mutagenesis of the prototypical NL4.3 Vpu TM domain identified three amino acid positions A14, W22 and, to a
lesser extent A18, as Vpu residues critical for Tetherin
binding and antagonism [135] (Figure 1B). Interestingly,
these residues are predicted to align on the same face of
the Vpu TM a-helix and as such might potentially be
part of the interface that directly or indirectly interacts
with the TM domain of human Tetherin.
The adaptation towards Vpu specifically shaped to
counteract the hominoid Tetherin is at the center of the
lineage-specific anti-Tetherin activity harbored by HIV-1
Vpu [138,151,156]. In line with this observation, substituting the TM domain of the human Tetherin with that
from African green monkey or rhesus monkey Tetherin
abrogated the chimeric protein sensitivity and binding
to HIV-1 Vpu [131,132,156]. Indeed, analysis of the residues within the TM domain of human Tetherin, which
determines the susceptibility to HIV-1 Vpu-mediated
antagonism, revealed that one single substitution mutation for a residue found in the monkey Tetherin (T45I)
combined to a deletion of two amino acids (G25, I26),
absent from agm Tetherin, resulted in an efficient
restriction of wild-type HIV-1 [156]. More recently,
using a live cell based assay to monitor interaction,
Kobayashi and colleagues performed a detailed analysis
of the amino-acid residues within the TM domain of
human Tetherin that are involved in Vpu binding [136].
This study identified three amino acid residues (I34, L37
and L41) as critical determinants for Vpu interaction
and susceptibility [136] (Figure 3B). Furthermore, consistent with previous studies [132,138,156,159], they
found that the integrity of the 22L-L-L-G-I26 amino acid

Dubé et al. Retrovirology 2010, 7:114
http://www.retrovirology.com/content/7/1/114

sequence, which is indeed altered by a deletion of two
amino acids in agm/rhesus Tetherins (deletion of L22,
L23 or L24, G25 or G25, I26, depending on the alignment), and/or conservation of a threonine at position 45
is required for the antagonism by Vpu (Figure 3B). On
the basis of computer-assisted structural modeling and
mutagenesis data, this study proposes that alignment of
amino-acids of I34, I37, L41 and T45 on the same helical face in the TM domain, a positioning apparently
governed by the presence of L22 and L23 (or perhaps
the integrity of the 22L-L-L-G-I26 amino-acid sequence),
is crucial for human Tetherin antagonism by Vpu. Intriguingly, while mutation at position T45 affected the
sensitivity of human Tetherin to Vpu, it did not significantly affect the formation of a Tetherin-Vpu complex,
suggesting that interaction of Vpu to Tetherin alone is
not sufficient to mediate Tetherin antagonism. Further
studies will be necessary to address this potentially
important issue.
Phylogenetic analyses indicate that at least three independent cross-species transmissions of SIVcpz gave rise
to HIV-1 group M (main), N (non-M, non-O) and O
(outlier) [160]. The functional properties acquired by
Vpu proteins during these three independent transmissions of SIVcpz to humans have been recently analyzed
and shown to have perhaps determined the propensity of
these different groups to spread efficiently [151]. The
Vpu protein of the HIV-1 M group responsible for the
global HIV-1 pandemic was found to efficiently antagonize human Tetherin and to induce CD4 degradation. In
contrast, the non-pandemic HIV-1 group O Vpu was
found to have preserved its ability to mediate CD4 degradation but displayed a very weak activity against human
Tetherin, while the rare HIV-1 group N gained some
anti-human Tetherin activity, but lost its ability to
degrade CD4 (Figure 6). These observations have led
Kirchhoff and colleagues to propose that the acquisition
of a fully competent Vpu protein able to antagonize
Tetherin and mediate CD4 degradation may have facilitated the global spread of the HIV-1 M group, as
opposed to the N and O groups whose distribution has
remained very limited and focused to West Africa [151].
Nevertheless, the fact that HIV-1 from the N and O
groups are still able to cause AIDS in infected individuals
suggests that Vpu-mediated CD4 degradation and
Tetherin antagonism may not be biological activities
required for HIV-1 dissemination within an infected individual but rather functions that are critical for efficient
transmission between individuals. A similar parallel can
also be established with HIV-2, whose geographical distribution has been limited in comparison to HIV-1 [161].
As discussed previously, HIV-2 antagonizes human
Tetherin using its Env glycoprotein since its genome
does not encode a Vpu protein and its Nef protein

Page 14 of 19

cannot counteract human Tetherin [145,148]. Interestingly, HIV-2 Env was found to antagonize Tetherin less
efficiently than HIV-1 Vpu, perhaps, because its mode of
action solely involves a trapping of the restriction factor
in the TGN [148]. However, the fact that this virus uses a
structural protein to both downregulate CD4 (through
complex formation in the ER) and Tetherin, could have
also entailed a greater fitness cost to the virus than the
use of accessory proteins such as Vpu or Nef, thus
explaining in part its attenuated virulence in comparison
to HIV-1 [161]. Therefore, it will be interesting to assess
in the future whether Tetherin antagonism and/or CD4
degradation promote human-to-human HIV-1 transmission, perhaps by increasing the secretion of infectious
virions into the genital fluids.

Conclusions and perspectives
As molecular and cellular details about the mechanisms
through which Vpu mediates CD4 degradation and
antagonizes Tetherin emerge, it is becoming increasingly
clear that the acquisition of a multifunctional Vpu protein by HIV-1 has played a crucial role in the virulence of
this virus. Although the role of Vpu as an antagonist of
Tetherin has obvious implications on virus secretion and
potentially on the transmission efficiency from human to
human, its effect on the dissemination of HIV-1 following establishment of infection is less clear, especially
since the potential restricting effect of Tetherin imposed
on cell-to-cell viral transmission does not appear to significantly interfere with viral spread at least in T lymphocytes [124]. It is possible that once infection is
established in lymphoid tissue, such as the gut-associated
lymphoid tissue (GALT), a major site of HIV-1 replication, cell-to-cell transfer may be an important mode of
HIV-1 dissemination as opposed to a transmission via
cell-free virus. One might speculate that Tetherin antagonism by Vpu may be less critical at this point. More studies will be required in the future to address this issue
and to assess whether enhanced cell-to-cell transmission
might not be a way for HIV-1 to escape or even tolerate
Tetherin restriction. The contribution of Vpu-mediated
CD4 degradation to HIV-1 spread remains unclear and
will need to be further addressed. As discussed above,
previous studies have suggested that this function would
facilitate virion assembly by releasing Env precursor
gp160 trapped with newly synthesized CD4 in the ER and
maintain the release of fully infectious virions (reviewed
in [21]). In that regard, experiments using the simianhuman immunodeficiency virus (SHIV) model in pigtail
macaques, a host that does not express a Tetherin protein susceptible to HIV-1 Vpu, suggested that the ability
of Vpu to downregulation CD4 expression directly correlated with the progression of disease in this animal model
[162,163]. Macaques inoculated with SHIV expressing a

Dubé et al. Retrovirology 2010, 7:114
http://www.retrovirology.com/content/7/1/114

Vpu protein with mutations of the two phosphoserines
involved in the recruitment of b-TrCP did not show any
evidence of CD4+ T cell depletion and maintained significantly lower viral loads than macaques inoculated with
parental SHIV. These findings obtained in vivo suggest
that Vpu-mediated CD4 degradation may have an important role in disease progression. However, we cannot
rule-out that Vpu may have additional functions that are
important for viral pathogenesis. In that regard, it is
interesting to note that a recent study reported a novel
activity of Vpu, that is the downregulation of CD1d at
the cell surface of infected DCs and the impairment of
CD1d-mediated natural killer T (NKT) cell activation
[164]. CD1d is a membrane-associated protein that is
expressed at the cell surface of antigen presenting cells
(APCs), such as monocytes, macrophages and DCs. This
protein is responsible for the presentation of exogenous
pathogen-induced lipid antigens to NKT cells expressing
an invariant abT cell receptor and in doing so triggers
the mutual activation of both APCs and NKT cells and
the subsequent induction of cellular immune responses.
Analysis of the mechanism of Vpu-mediated CD1d
downregulation revealed that Vpu does not enhance constitutive endocytosis of CD1d nor induces its degradation. Rather, Vpu was found to interact with CD1d and
inhibit its recycling from endosomal compartments to
the plasma membrane by sequestering CD1d in an intracellular compartment. Targeting of membrane-associated
surface proteins by Vpu does not appear to be limited to
CD4, Tetherin and CD1d since recent evidence indicates
that Vpu can also downregulate the NK-T and B cell
antigen (NTB-A) co-activator at the surface of infected
cells and as a result interferes with the degranulation of
NK cells [165]. NTB-A is type 1 membrane-associated
protein that belongs to the signaling lymphocytic activation molecules (SLAM) family of receptors that functions
as a homotypic ligand-activation NK receptor pair in the
induction of NK cell responses. Interestingly, NTB-A
downregulation by Vpu was found to be distinct from
CD4 and Tetherin downregulation since Vpu did not
alter the steady-state levels of NTB-A and did not rely on
the recruitment of b-TrCP to reduce cell surface NTB-A.
Like with CD1d and Tetherin, Vpu did not enhance
NTB-A endocytosis but rather appeared to interact with
co-activator molecules through its TM domain. These
findings suggest that Vpu might also downregulate NTBA through alteration of the protein trafficking and/or
recycling, which would lead to the sequestration of the
molecule in an intracellular compartment. Importantly,
Vpu-mediated downregulation of NTB-A was found to
interfere specifically with NK cell degranulation, thus
ultimately protecting infected cells from NK cellmediated lysis.

Page 15 of 19

The fact that Vpu is now reported to target, in addition to CD4, three membrane-associated cell surface
proteins involved in various aspects of the innate
immune response raises the possibility that Vpu may be
a key factor used by HIV-1 to evade innate immunity.
While it may be too soon to call Vpu a virulence factor,
the recent discoveries presented in this review tend to
suggest that this accessory protein provides HIV-1 with
unique properties at the level of virus transmission and
escape from host defenses. Further research in these
areas will not only provide exciting new insight into the
role of Vpu in HIV-1 pathogenesis but may also lead to
new therapeutic interventions for treating HIV-1
infection.
Acknowledgements
We apologize to the authors of many interesting studies that could not be
cited due to space limitations. EAC is recipient of the Canada Research Chair
in Human Retrovirology and is supported by grants from the Canadian
Institute of Health Research (CIHR) and the Fonds de Recherches en Santé
du Québec (FRSQ).
Author details
1
Laboratory of Human Retrovirology, Institut de Recherches Cliniques de
Montréal (IRCM), 110, Avenue des Pins Ouest, Montreal, Quebec, Canada
H2W 1R7. 2Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Université de
Montréal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
Authors’ contributions
MD, MB, CP, EAC drafted sections of the text, edited each other’s
contributions, read and approved the final manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 12 November 2010 Accepted: 22 December 2010
Published: 22 December 2010
References
1. Goff SP: Host factors exploited by retroviruses. Nat Rev Microbiol 2007,
5:253-263.
2. Peterlin BM, Price DH: Controlling the elongation phase of transcription
with P-TEFb. Mol Cell 2006, 23:297-305.
3. Morita E, Sundquist WI: Retrovirus budding. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 2004,
20:395-425.
4. Kirchhoff F: Immune evasion and counteraction of restriction factors by
HIV-1 and other primate lentiviruses. Cell Host Microbe 2010, 8:55-67.
5. Malim MH, Emerman M: HIV-1 accessory proteins–ensuring viral survival
in a hostile environment. Cell Host Microbe 2008, 3:388-398.
6. Cohen EA, Terwilliger EF, Sodroski JG, Haseltine WA: Identification of a
protein encoded by the vpu gene of HIV-1. Nature 1988, 334:532-534.
7. Strebel K, Klimkait T, Martin MA: A novel gene of HIV-1, vpu, and its
16-kilodalton product. Science 1988, 241:1221-1223.
8. Barlow KL, Ajao AO, Clewley JP: Characterization of a novel simian
immunodeficiency virus (SIVmonNG1) genome sequence from a mona
monkey (Cercopithecus mona). J Virol 2003, 77:6879-6888.
9. Courgnaud V, Salemi M, Pourrut X, Mpoudi-Ngole E, Abela B, Auzel P,
Bibollet-Ruche F, Hahn B, Vandamme AM, Delaporte E, Peeters M:
Characterization of a novel simian immunodeficiency virus with a vpu
gene from greater spot-nosed monkeys (Cercopithecus nictitans)
provides new insights into simian/human immunodeficiency virus
phylogeny. J Virol 2002, 76:8298-8309.
10. Courgnaud V, Abela B, Pourrut X, Mpoudi-Ngole E, Loul S, Delaporte E,
Peeters M: Identification of a new simian immunodeficiency virus lineage
with a vpu gene present among different cercopithecus monkeys

Dubé et al. Retrovirology 2010, 7:114
http://www.retrovirology.com/content/7/1/114

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.
18.

19.

20.

21.
22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

(C. mona, C. cephus, and C. nictitans) from Cameroon. J Virol 2003,
77:12523-12534.
Dazza MC, Ekwalanga M, Nende M, Shamamba KB, Bitshi P, Paraskevis D,
Saragosti S: Characterization of a novel vpu-harboring simian
immunodeficiency virus from a Dent’s Mona monkey (Cercopithecus
mona denti). J Virol 2005, 79:8560-8571.
Takehisa J, Kraus MH, Ayouba A, Bailes E, Van Heuverswyn F, Decker JM,
Li Y, Rudicell RS, Learn GH, Neel C, et al: Origin and biology of simian
immunodeficiency virus in wild-living western gorillas. J Virol 2009,
83:1635-1648.
Huet T, Cheynier R, Meyerhans A, Roelants G, Wain-Hobson S: Genetic
organization of a chimpanzee lentivirus related to HIV-1. Nature 1990,
345:356-359.
Maldarelli F, Chen MY, Willey RL, Strebel K: Human immunodeficiency
virus type 1 Vpu protein is an oligomeric type I integral membrane
protein. J Virol 1993, 67:5056-5061.
Schwartz S, Felber BK, Fenyo EM, Pavlakis GN: Env and Vpu proteins of
human immunodeficiency virus type 1 are produced from multiple
bicistronic mRNAs. J Virol 1990, 64:5448-5456.
Wray V, Federau T, Henklein P, Klabunde S, Kunert O, Schomburg D,
Schubert U: Solution structure of the hydrophilic region of HIV-1
encoded virus protein U (Vpu) by CD and 1 H NMR spectroscopy. Int J
Pept Protein Res 1995, 45:35-43.
Park SH, Opella SJ: Tilt angle of a trans-membrane helix is determined by
hydrophobic mismatch. J Mol Biol 2005, 350:310-318.
Park SH, Mrse AA, Nevzorov AA, Mesleh MF, Oblatt-Montal M, Montal M,
Opella SJ: Three-dimensional structure of the channel-forming transmembrane domain of virus protein “u” (Vpu) from HIV-1. J Mol Biol 2003,
333:409-424.
Hussain A, Das SR, Tanwar C, Jameel S: Oligomerization of the human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) Vpu protein–a genetic,
biochemical and biophysical analysis. Virol J 2007, 4:81.
Lopez CF, Montal M, Blasie JK, Klein ML, Moore PB: Molecular dynamics
investigation of membrane-bound bundles of the channel-forming
transmembrane domain of viral protein U from the human
immunodeficiency virus HIV-1. Biophys J 2002, 83:1259-1267.
Ruiz A, Guatelli JC, Stephens EB: The Vpu protein: new concepts in virus
release and CD4 down-modulation. Curr HIV Res 2010, 8:240-252.
Federau T, Schubert U, Flossdorf J, Henklein P, Schomburg D, Wray V:
Solution structure of the cytoplasmic domain of the human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 encoded virus protein U (Vpu). Int J Pept
Protein Res 1996, 47:297-310.
Henklein P, Schubert U, Kunert O, Klabunde S, Wray V, Kloppel KD, Kiess M,
Portsmann T, Schomburg D: Synthesis and characterization of the
hydrophilic C-terminal domain of the human immunodeficiency virus
type 1-encoded virus protein U (Vpu). Pept Res 1993, 6:79-87.
Friborg J, Ladha A, Gottlinger H, Haseltine WA, Cohen EA: Functional
analysis of the phosphorylation sites on the human immunodeficiency
virus type 1 Vpu protein. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr Hum Retrovirol 1995,
8:10-22.
Schubert U, Schneider T, Henklein P, Hoffmann K, Berthold E, Hauser H,
Pauli G, Porstmann T: Human-immunodeficiency-virus-type-1-encoded
Vpu protein is phosphorylated by casein kinase II. Eur J Biochem 1992,
204:875-883.
Schubert U, Strebel K: Differential activities of the human
immunodeficiency virus type 1-encoded Vpu protein are regulated by
phosphorylation and occur in different cellular compartments. J Virol
1994, 68:2260-2271.
Schubert U, Henklein P, Boldyreff B, Wingender E, Strebel K, Porstmann T:
The human immunodeficiency virus type 1 encoded Vpu protein is
phosphorylated by casein kinase-2 (CK-2) at positions Ser52 and Ser56
within a predicted alpha-helix-turn-alpha-helix-motif. J Mol Biol 1994,
236:16-25.
Klimkait T, Strebel K, Hoggan MD, Martin MA, Orenstein JM: The human
immunodeficiency virus type 1-specific protein vpu is required for
efficient virus maturation and release. J Virol 1990, 64:621-629.
Dube M, Roy BB, Guiot-Guillain P, Mercier J, Binette J, Leung G, Cohen EA:
Suppression of Tetherin-restricting activity upon human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 particle release correlates with
localization of Vpu in the trans-Golgi network. J Virol 2009, 83:4574-4590.

Page 16 of 19

30. Varthakavi V, Smith RM, Martin KL, Derdowski A, Lapierre LA, Goldenring JR,
Spearman P: The pericentriolar recycling endosome plays a key role in
Vpu-mediated enhancement of HIV-1 particle release. Traffic 2006,
7:298-307.
31. Pacyniak E, Gomez ML, Gomez LM, Mulcahy ER, Jackson M, Hout DR,
Wisdom BJ, Stephens EB: Identification of a region within the cytoplasmic
domain of the subtype B Vpu protein of human immunodeficiency virus
type 1 (HIV-1) that is responsible for retention in the golgi complex and
its absence in the Vpu protein from a subtype C HIV-1. AIDS Res Hum
Retroviruses 2005, 21:379-394.
32. Ruiz A, Hill MS, Schmitt K, Guatelli J, Stephens EB: Requirements of the
membrane proximal tyrosine and dileucine-based sorting signals for
efficient transport of the subtype C Vpu protein to the plasma
membrane and in virus release. Virology 2008, 378:58-68.
33. Gomez LM, Pacyniak E, Flick M, Hout DR, Gomez ML, Nerrienet E, Ayouba A,
Santiago ML, Hahn BH, Stephens EB: Vpu-mediated CD4 down-regulation
and degradation is conserved among highly divergent SIV(cpz) strains.
Virology 2005, 335:46-60.
34. McCormick-Davis C, Dalton SB, Singh DK, Stephens EB: Comparison of Vpu
sequences from diverse geographical isolates of HIV type 1 identifies
the presence of highly variable domains, additional invariant amino
acids, and a signature sequence motif common to subtype C isolates.
AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses 2000, 16:1089-1095.
35. Bonifacino JS, Traub LM: Signals for sorting of transmembrane proteins to
endosomes and lysosomes. Annu Rev Biochem 2003, 72:395-447.
36. Willey RL, Maldarelli F, Martin MA, Strebel K: Human immunodeficiency
virus type 1 Vpu protein induces rapid degradation of CD4. J Virol 1992,
66:7193-7200.
37. Schubert U, Anton LC, Bacik I, Cox JH, Bour S, Bennink JR, Orlowski M,
Strebel K, Yewdell JW: CD4 glycoprotein degradation induced by human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 Vpu protein requires the function of
proteasomes and the ubiquitin-conjugating pathway. J Virol 1998,
72:2280-2288.
38. Terwilliger EF, Cohen EA, Lu YC, Sodroski JG, Haseltine WA: Functional role
of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 vpu. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
1989, 86:5163-5167.
39. Schubert U, Clouse KA, Strebel K: Augmentation of virus secretion by the
human immunodeficiency virus type 1 Vpu protein is cell type
independent and occurs in cultured human primary macrophages and
lymphocytes. J Virol 1995, 69:7699-7711.
40. Gottlinger HG, Dorfman T, Cohen EA, Haseltine WA: Vpu protein of human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 enhances the release of capsids
produced by gag gene constructs of widely divergent retroviruses. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 1993, 90:7381-7385.
41. Neil SJ, Zang T, Bieniasz PD: Tetherin inhibits retrovirus release and is
antagonized by HIV-1 Vpu. Nature 2008, 451:425-430.
42. Van Damme N, Goff D, Katsura C, Jorgenson RL, Mitchell R, Johnson MC,
Stephens EB, Guatelli J: The interferon-induced protein BST-2 restricts
HIV-1 release and is downregulated from the cell surface by the viral
Vpu protein. Cell Host Microbe 2008, 3:245-252.
43. Ray N, Doms RW: HIV-1 coreceptors and their inhibitors. Curr Top
Microbiol Immunol 2006, 303:97-120.
44. Buonocore L, Rose JK: Blockade of human immunodeficiency virus type 1
production in CD4+ T cells by an intracellular CD4 expressed under
control of the viral long terminal repeat. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1993,
90:2695-2699.
45. Crise B, Buonocore L, Rose JK: CD4 is retained in the endoplasmic
reticulum by the human immunodeficiency virus type 1 glycoprotein
precursor. J Virol 1990, 64:5585-5593.
46. Jabbar MA, Nayak DP: Intracellular interaction of human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 (ARV-2) envelope glycoprotein gp160
with CD4 blocks the movement and maturation of CD4 to the plasma
membrane. J Virol 1990, 64:6297-6304.
47. Stevenson M, Meier C, Mann AM, Chapman N, Wasiak A: Envelope
glycoprotein of HIV induces interference and cytolysis resistance in CD4
+ cells: mechanism for persistence in AIDS. Cell 1988, 53:483-496.
48. Wildum S, Schindler M, Munch J, Kirchhoff F: Contribution of Vpu, Env,
and Nef to CD4 down-modulation and resistance of human
immunodeficiency virus type 1-infected T cells to superinfection. J Virol
2006, 80:8047-8059.

Dubé et al. Retrovirology 2010, 7:114
http://www.retrovirology.com/content/7/1/114

49. Lama J, Mangasarian A, Trono D: Cell-surface expression of CD4 reduces
HIV-1 infectivity by blocking Env incorporation in a Nef- and Vpuinhibitable manner. Curr Biol 1999, 9:622-631.
50. Ross TM, Oran AE, Cullen BR: Inhibition of HIV-1 progeny virion release by
cell-surface CD4 is relieved by expression of the viral Nef protein. Curr
Biol 1999, 9:613-621.
51. Cortes MJ, Wong-Staal F, Lama J: Cell surface CD4 interferes with the
infectivity of HIV-1 particles released from T cells. J Biol Chem 2002,
277:1770-1779.
52. Levesque K, Zhao YS, Cohen EA: Vpu exerts a positive effect on HIV-1
infectivity by down-modulating CD4 receptor molecules at the surface
of HIV-1-producing cells. J Biol Chem 2003, 278:28346-28353.
53. Tanaka M, Ueno T, Nakahara T, Sasaki K, Ishimoto A, Sakai H:
Downregulation of CD4 is required for maintenance of viral infectivity of
HIV-1. Virology 2003, 311:316-325.
54. Bour S, Perrin C, Strebel K: Cell surface CD4 inhibits HIV-1 particle release
by interfering with Vpu activity. J Biol Chem 1999, 274:33800-33806.
55. Jolly C, Sattentau QJ: Retroviral spread by induction of virological
synapses. Traffic 2004, 5:643-650.
56. Mothes W, Sherer NM, Jin J, Zhong P: Virus cell-to-cell transmission. J Virol
2010, 84:8360-8368.
57. Aiken C, Konner J, Landau NR, Lenburg ME, Trono D: Nef induces CD4
endocytosis: requirement for a critical dileucine motif in the membraneproximal CD4 cytoplasmic domain. Cell 1994, 76:853-864.
58. Rhee SS, Marsh JW: Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 Nef-induced
down-modulation of CD4 is due to rapid internalization and
degradation of surface CD4. J Virol 1994, 68:5156-5163.
59. Chaudhuri R, Lindwasser OW, Smith WJ, Hurley JH, Bonifacino JS:
Downregulation of CD4 by human immunodeficiency virus type 1 Nef is
dependent on clathrin and involves direct interaction of Nef with the
AP2 clathrin adaptor. J Virol 2007, 81:3877-3890.
60. daSilva LL, Sougrat R, Burgos PV, Janvier K, Mattera R, Bonifacino JS: Human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 Nef protein targets CD4 to the
multivesicular body pathway. J Virol 2009, 83:6578-6590.
61. Lindwasser OW, Chaudhuri R, Bonifacino JS: Mechanisms of CD4
downregulation by the Nef and Vpu proteins of primate
immunodeficiency viruses. Curr Mol Med 2007, 7:171-184.
62. Willey RL, Maldarelli F, Martin MA, Strebel K: Human immunodeficiency
virus type 1 Vpu protein regulates the formation of intracellular gp160CD4 complexes. J Virol 1992, 66:226-234.
63. Bour S, Schubert U, Strebel K: The human immunodeficiency virus type 1
Vpu protein specifically binds to the cytoplasmic domain of CD4:
implications for the mechanism of degradation. J Virol 1995, 69:1510-1520.
64. Lenburg ME, Landau NR: Vpu-induced degradation of CD4: requirement
for specific amino acid residues in the cytoplasmic domain of CD4.
J Virol 1993, 67:7238-7245.
65. Vincent MJ, Raja NU, Jabbar MA: Human immunodeficiency virus type 1
Vpu protein induces degradation of chimeric envelope glycoproteins
bearing the cytoplasmic and anchor domains of CD4: role of the
cytoplasmic domain in Vpu-induced degradation in the endoplasmic
reticulum. J Virol 1993, 67:5538-5549.
66. Willey RL, Buckler-White A, Strebel K: Sequences present in the
cytoplasmic domain of CD4 are necessary and sufficient to confer
sensitivity to the human immunodeficiency virus type 1 Vpu protein.
J Virol 1994, 68:1207-1212.
67. Yao XJ, Friborg J, Checroune F, Gratton S, Boisvert F, Sekaly RP, Cohen EA:
Degradation of CD4 induced by human immunodeficiency virus type 1
Vpu protein: a predicted alpha-helix structure in the proximal cytoplasmic
region of CD4 contributes to Vpu sensitivity. Virology 1995, 209:615-623.
68. Margottin F, Benichou S, Durand H, Richard V, Liu LX, Gomas E, Benarous R:
Interaction between the cytoplasmic domains of HIV-1 Vpu and CD4:
role of Vpu residues involved in CD4 interaction and in vitro CD4
degradation. Virology 1996, 223:381-386.
69. Schubert U, Bour S, Ferrer-Montiel AV, Montal M, Maldarell F, Strebel K: The
two biological activities of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 Vpu
protein involve two separable structural domains. J Virol 1996,
70:809-819.
70. Hill MS, Ruiz A, Schmitt K, Stephens EB: Identification of amino acids
within the second alpha helical domain of the human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 Vpu that are critical for preventing CD4
cell surface expression. Virology 2010, 397:104-112.

Page 17 of 19

71. Tiganos E, Yao XJ, Friborg J, Daniel N, Cohen EA: Putative alpha-helical
structures in the human immunodeficiency virus type 1 Vpu protein and
CD4 are involved in binding and degradation of the CD4 molecule.
J Virol 1997, 71:4452-4460.
72. Paul M, Jabbar MA: Phosphorylation of both phosphoacceptor sites in
the HIV-1 Vpu cytoplasmic domain is essential for Vpu-mediated ER
degradation of CD4. Virology 1997, 232:207-216.
73. Margottin F, Bour SP, Durand H, Selig L, Benichou S, Richard V, Thomas D,
Strebel K, Benarous R: A novel human WD protein, h-beta TrCp, that
interacts with HIV-1 Vpu connects CD4 to the ER degradation pathway
through an F-box motif. Mol Cell 1998, 1:565-574.
74. Butticaz C, Michielin O, Wyniger J, Telenti A, Rothenberger S: Silencing of
both beta-TrCP1 and HOS (beta-TrCP2) is required to suppress human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 Vpu-mediated CD4 down-modulation.
J Virol 2007, 81:1502-1505.
75. Nakayama KI, Nakayama K: Ubiquitin ligases: cell-cycle control and cancer.
Nat Rev Cancer 2006, 6:369-381.
76. Meusser B, Sommer T: Vpu-mediated degradation of CD4 reconstituted in
yeast reveals mechanistic differences to cellular ER-associated protein
degradation. Mol Cell 2004, 14:247-258.
77. Binette J, Dube M, Mercier J, Cohen EA: Requirements for the selective
degradation of CD4 receptor molecules by the human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 Vpu protein in the endoplasmic
reticulum. Retrovirology 2007, 4:75.
78. Fujita K, Omura S, Silver J: Rapid degradation of CD4 in cells expressing
human immunodeficiency virus type 1 Env and Vpu is blocked by
proteasome inhibitors. J Gen Virol 1997, 78(Pt 3):619-625.
79. Meusser B, Hirsch C, Jarosch E, Sommer T: ERAD: the long road to
destruction. Nat Cell Biol 2005, 7:766-772.
80. Vembar SS, Brodsky JL: One step at a time: endoplasmic reticulumassociated degradation. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2008, 9:944-957.
81. Kikkert M, Doolman R, Dai M, Avner R, Hassink G, van Voorden S,
Thanedar S, Roitelman J, Chau V, Wiertz E: Human HRD1 is an E3 ubiquitin
ligase involved in degradation of proteins from the endoplasmic
reticulum. J Biol Chem 2004, 279:3525-3534.
82. Hassink G, Kikkert M, van Voorden S, Lee SJ, Spaapen R, van Laar T,
Coleman CS, Bartee E, Fruh K, Chau V, Wiertz E: TEB4 is a C4HC3 RING
finger-containing ubiquitin ligase of the endoplasmic reticulum. Biochem
J 2005, 388:647-655.
83. Fang S, Ferrone M, Yang C, Jensen JP, Tiwari S, Weissman AM: The tumor
autocrine motility factor receptor, gp78, is a ubiquitin protein ligase
implicated in degradation from the endoplasmic reticulum. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2001, 98:14422-14427.
84. Spencer E, Jiang J, Chen ZJ: Signal-induced ubiquitination of IkappaBalpha
by the F-box protein Slimb/beta-TrCP. Genes Dev 1999, 13:284-294.
85. Latres E, Chiaur DS, Pagano M: The human F box protein beta-Trcp
associates with the Cul1/Skp1 complex and regulates the stability of
beta-catenin. Oncogene 1999, 18:849-854.
86. Magadan JG, Perez-Victoria FJ, Sougrat R, Ye Y, Strebel K, Bonifacino JS:
Multilayered mechanism of CD4 downregulation by HIV-1 Vpu involving
distinct ER retention and ERAD targeting steps. PLoS Pathog 2010, 6:
e1000869.
87. Wang X, Herr RA, Chua WJ, Lybarger L, Wiertz EJ, Hansen TH:
Ubiquitination of serine, threonine, or lysine residues on the cytoplasmic
tail can induce ERAD of MHC-I by viral E3 ligase mK3. J Cell Biol 2007,
177:613-624.
88. Ye Y, Meyer HH, Rapoport TA: The AAA ATPase Cdc48/p97 and its
partners transport proteins from the ER into the cytosol. Nature 2001,
414:652-656.
89. Ye Y, Meyer HH, Rapoport TA: Function of the p97-Ufd1-Npl4 complex in
retrotranslocation from the ER to the cytosol: dual recognition of
nonubiquitinated polypeptide segments and polyubiquitin chains. J Cell
Biol 2003, 162:71-84.
90. Yao XJ, Garzon S, Boisvert F, Haseltine WA, Cohen EA: The effect of vpu on
HIV-1-induced syncytia formation. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr 1993,
6:135-141.
91. Sakai H, Tokunaga K, Kawamura M, Adachi A: Function of human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 Vpu protein in various cell types. J Gen
Virol 1995, 76(Pt 11):2717-2722.
92. Geraghty RJ, Talbot KJ, Callahan M, Harper W, Panganiban AT: Cell typedependence for Vpu function. J Med Primatol 1994, 23:146-150.

Dubé et al. Retrovirology 2010, 7:114
http://www.retrovirology.com/content/7/1/114

93. Varthakavi V, Smith RM, Bour SP, Strebel K, Spearman P: Viral protein U
counteracts a human host cell restriction that inhibits HIV-1 particle
production. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2003, 100:15154-15159.
94. Neil SJ, Eastman SW, Jouvenet N, Bieniasz PD: HIV-1 Vpu promotes release
and prevents endocytosis of nascent retrovirus particles from the
plasma membrane. PLoS Pathog 2006, 2:e39.
95. Neil SJ, Sandrin V, Sundquist WI, Bieniasz PD: An interferon-alpha-induced
tethering mechanism inhibits HIV-1 and Ebola virus particle release but
is counteracted by the HIV-1 Vpu protein. Cell Host Microbe 2007,
2:193-203.
96. Jouvenet N, Neil SJ, Zhadina M, Zang T, Kratovac Z, Lee Y, McNatt M,
Hatziioannou T, Bieniasz PD: Broad-spectrum inhibition of retroviral and
filoviral particle release by tetherin. J Virol 2009, 83:1837-1844.
97. Sakuma T, Noda T, Urata S, Kawaoka Y, Yasuda J: Inhibition of Lassa and
Marburg virus production by tetherin. J Virol 2009, 83:2382-2385.
98. Kaletsky RL, Francica JR, Agrawal-Gamse C, Bates P: Tetherin-mediated
restriction of filovirus budding is antagonized by the Ebola glycoprotein.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2009, 106:2886-2891.
99. Mansouri M, Viswanathan K, Douglas JL, Hines J, Gustin J, Moses AV, Fruh K:
Molecular mechanism of BST2/tetherin downregulation by K5/MIR2 of
Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated herpesvirus. J Virol 2009, 83:9672-9681.
100. Goto T, Nakano T, Kohno T, Morimatsu S, Morita C, Hong W, Kiso Y,
Nakai M, Sano K: Targets of a protease inhibitor, KNI-272, in HIV-1infected cells. J Med Virol 2001, 63:203-209.
101. Blasius AL, Giurisato E, Cella M, Schreiber RD, Shaw AS, Colonna M: Bone
marrow stromal cell antigen 2 is a specific marker of type I IFNproducing cells in the naive mouse, but a promiscuous cell surface
antigen following IFN stimulation. J Immunol 2006, 177:3260-3265.
102. Miyagi E, Andrew AJ, Kao S, Strebel K: Vpu enhances HIV-1 virus release in
the absence of Bst-2 cell surface down-modulation and intracellular
depletion. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2009, 106:2868-2873.
103. Schindler M, Rajan D, Banning C, Wimmer P, Koppensteiner H, Iwanski A,
Specht A, Sauter D, Dobner T, Kirchhoff F: Vpu serine 52 dependent
counteraction of tetherin is required for HIV-1 replication in
macrophages, but not in ex vivo human lymphoid tissue. Retrovirology
2010, 7:1.
104. Sato K, Yamamoto SP, Misawa N, Yoshida T, Miyazawa T, Koyanagi Y:
Comparative study on the effect of human BST-2/Tetherin on HIV-1
release in cells of various species. Retrovirology 2009, 6:53.
105. Ishikawa J, Kaisho T, Tomizawa H, Lee BO, Kobune Y, Inazawa J, Oritani K,
Itoh M, Ochi T, Ishihara K, et al: Molecular cloning and chromosomal
mapping of a bone marrow stromal cell surface gene, BST2, that may
be involved in pre-B-cell growth. Genomics 1995, 26:527-534.
106. Tsukamoto N, Okada S, Onami Y, Sasaki Y, Umezawa K, Kawakami Y:
Impairment of plasmacytoid dendritic cells for IFN production by the
ligand for immunoglobulin-like transcript 7 expressed on human cancer
cells. Clin Cancer Res 2009, 15:5733-5743.
107. Cao W, Bover L, Cho M, Wen X, Hanabuchi S, Bao M, Rosen DB, Wang YH,
Shaw JL, Du Q, et al: Regulation of TLR7/9 responses in plasmacytoid
dendritic cells by BST2 and ILT7 receptor interaction. J Exp Med 2009,
206:1603-1614.
108. Kupzig S, Korolchuk V, Rollason R, Sugden A, Wilde A, Banting G: Bst-2/
HM1.24 is a raft-associated apical membrane protein with an unusual
topology. Traffic 2003, 4:694-709.
109. Rollason R, Korolchuk V, Hamilton C, Schu P, Banting G: Clathrin-mediated
endocytosis of a lipid-raft-associated protein is mediated through a dual
tyrosine motif. J Cell Sci 2007, 120:3850-3858.
110. Moore RC, Lee IY, Silverman GL, Harrison PM, Strome R, Heinrich C,
Karunaratne A, Pasternak SH, Chishti MA, Liang Y, et al: Ataxia in prion
protein (PrP)-deficient mice is associated with upregulation of the novel
PrP-like protein doppel. J Mol Biol 1999, 292:797-817.
111. Rollason R, Korolchuk V, Hamilton C, Jepson M, Banting G: A CD317/
tetherin-RICH2 complex plays a critical role in the organization of the
subapical actin cytoskeleton in polarized epithelial cells. J Cell Biol 2009,
184:721-736.
112. Masuyama N, Kuronita T, Tanaka R, Muto T, Hirota Y, Takigawa A, Fujita H,
Aso Y, Amano J, Tanaka Y: HM1.24 is internalized from lipid rafts by
clathrin-mediated endocytosis through interaction with alpha-adaptin. J
Biol Chem 2009, 284:15927-15941.
113. Waheed AA, Freed EO: Lipids and membrane microdomains in HIV-1
replication. Virus Res 2009, 143:162-176.

Page 18 of 19

114. Habermann A, Krijnse-Locker J, Oberwinkler H, Eckhardt M, Homann S,
Andrew A, Strebel K, Krausslich HG: CD317/tetherin is enriched in the HIV1 envelope and downregulated from the plasma membrane upon virus
infection. J Virol 2010, 84:4646-4658.
115. Perez-Caballero D, Zang T, Ebrahimi A, McNatt MW, Gregory DA,
Johnson MC, Bieniasz PD: Tetherin inhibits HIV-1 release by directly
tethering virions to cells. Cell 2009, 139:499-511.
116. Andrew AJ, Miyagi E, Kao S, Strebel K: The formation of cysteine-linked
dimers of BST-2/tetherin is important for inhibition of HIV-1 virus release
but not for sensitivity to Vpu. Retrovirology 2009, 6:80.
117. Hinz A, Miguet N, Natrajan G, Usami Y, Yamanaka H, Renesto P, Hartlieb B,
McCarthy AA, Simorre JP, Gottlinger H, Weissenhorn W: Structural basis of
HIV-1 tethering to membranes by the BST-2/tetherin ectodomain. Cell
Host Microbe 2010, 7:314-323.
118. Schubert HL, Zhai Q, Sandrin V, Eckert DM, Garcia-Maya M, Saul L,
Sundquist WI, Steiner RA, Hill CP: Structural and functional studies on the
extracellular domain of BST2/tetherin in reduced and oxidized
conformations. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2010, 107:17951-17956.
119. Yang H, Wang J, Jia X, McNatt MW, Zang T, Pan B, Meng W, Wang HW,
Bieniasz PD, Xiong Y: Structural insight into the mechanisms of
enveloped virus tethering by tetherin. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2010,
107:18428-18432.
120. Miyakawa K, Ryo A, Murakami T, Ohba K, Yamaoka S, Fukuda M, Guatelli J,
Yamamoto N: BCA2/Rabring7 promotes tetherin-dependent HIV-1
restriction. PLoS Pathog 2009, 5:e1000700.
121. Hammonds J, Wang JJ, Yi H, Spearman P: Immunoelectron microscopic
evidence for Tetherin/BST2 as the physical bridge between HIV-1 virions
and the plasma membrane. PLoS Pathog 2010, 6:e1000749.
122. Fitzpatrick K, Skasko M, Deerinck TJ, Crum J, Ellisman MH, Guatelli J: Direct
restriction of virus release and incorporation of the interferon-induced
protein BST-2 into HIV-1 particles. PLoS Pathog 2010, 6:e1000701.
123. Casartelli N, Sourisseau M, Feldmann J, Guivel-Benhassine F, Mallet A,
Marcelin AG, Guatelli J, Schwartz O: Tetherin restricts productive HIV-1
cell-to-cell transmission. PLoS Pathog 2010, 6:e1000955.
124. Jolly C, Booth NJ, Neil SJ: Cell-Cell Spread of Human Immunodeficiency
Virus Type 1 Overcomes Tetherin/BST-2-Mediated Restriction in T cells.
J Virol 2010, 84:12185-12199.
125. Gummuluru S, Kinsey CM, Emerman M: An in vitro rapid-turnover assay
for human immunodeficiency virus type 1 replication selects for cell-tocell spread of virus. J Virol 2000, 74:10882-10891.
126. Fitzgerald-Bocarsly P, Jacobs ES: Plasmacytoid dendritic cells in HIV
infection: striking a delicate balance. J Leukoc Biol 2010, 87:609-620.
127. Beignon AS, McKenna K, Skoberne M, Manches O, DaSilva I, Kavanagh DG,
Larsson M, Gorelick RJ, Lifson JD, Bhardwaj N: Endocytosis of HIV-1
activates plasmacytoid dendritic cells via Toll-like receptor-viral RNA
interactions. J Clin Invest 2005, 115:3265-3275.
128. Mitchell RS, Katsura C, Skasko MA, Fitzpatrick K, Lau D, Ruiz A, Stephens EB,
Margottin-Goguet F, Benarous R, Guatelli JC: Vpu antagonizes BST-2mediated restriction of HIV-1 release via beta-TrCP and endo-lysosomal
trafficking. PLoS Pathog 2009, 5:e1000450.
129. Ruiz A, Hill MS, Schmitt K, Stephens EB: Membrane raft association of the
Vpu protein of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 correlates with
enhanced virus release. Virology 2010, 408:89-102.
130. Douglas JL, Viswanathan K, McCarroll MN, Gustin JK, Fruh K, Moses AV: Vpu
directs the degradation of the human immunodeficiency virus
restriction factor BST-2/Tetherin via a {beta}TrCP-dependent mechanism.
J Virol 2009, 83:7931-7947.
131. Dube M, Roy BB, Guiot-Guillain P, Binette J, Mercier J, Chiasson A,
Cohen EA: Antagonism of tetherin restriction of HIV-1 release by Vpu
involves binding and sequestration of the restriction factor in a
perinuclear compartment. PLoS Pathog 2010, 6:e1000856.
132. Rong L, Zhang J, Lu J, Pan Q, Lorgeoux RP, Aloysius C, Guo F, Liu SL,
Wainberg MA, Liang C: The transmembrane domain of BST-2 determines
its sensitivity to down-modulation by human immunodeficiency virus
type 1 Vpu. J Virol 2009, 83:7536-7546.
133. Iwabu Y, Fujita H, Kinomoto M, Kaneko K, Ishizaka Y, Tanaka Y, Sata T,
Tokunaga K: HIV-1 accessory protein Vpu internalizes cell-surface BST-2/
tetherin through transmembrane interactions leading to lysosomes. J
Biol Chem 2009, 284:35060-35072.
134. Mangeat B, Gers-Huber G, Lehmann M, Zufferey M, Luban J, Piguet V: HIV-1
Vpu neutralizes the antiviral factor Tetherin/BST-2 by binding it and

Dubé et al. Retrovirology 2010, 7:114
http://www.retrovirology.com/content/7/1/114

135.

136.

137.

138.

139.

140.

141.

142.

143.

144.

145.

146.

147.

148.

149.

150.

151.

152.

153.

directing its beta-TrCP2-dependent degradation. PLoS Pathog 2009, 5:
e1000574.
Vigan R, Neil SJ: Determinants of tetherin antagonism in the
transmembrane domain of the human immunodeficiency virus type 1
vpu protein. J Virol 2010, 84:12958-12970.
Kobayashi T, Ode H, Yoshida T, Sato K, Gee P, Yanamato S, Ebina H,
Strebel K, Sato H, Koyanagi Y: Identification of amino acids in the human
tetherin transmembrane domain responsible for HIV-1 Vpu interaction
and susceptibility. J Virol 2010, Published online Nov 10, 2010.
Banning C, Votteler J, Hoffmann D, Koppensteiner H, Warmer M, Reimer R,
Kirchhoff F, Schubert U, Hauber J, Schindler M: A flow cytometry-based
FRET assay to identify and analyse protein-protein interactions in living
cells. PLoS One 2010, 5:e9344.
Gupta RK, Hue S, Schaller T, Verschoor E, Pillay D, Towers GJ: Mutation of a
single residue renders human tetherin resistant to HIV-1 Vpu-mediated
depletion. PLoS Pathog 2009, 5:e1000443.
Goffinet C, Allespach I, Homann S, Tervo HM, Habermann A, Rupp D,
Oberbremer L, Kern C, Tibroni N, Welsch S, et al: HIV-1 antagonism of
CD317 is species specific and involves Vpu-mediated proteasomal
degradation of the restriction factor. Cell Host Microbe 2009, 5:285-297.
Goffinet C, Homann S, Ambiel I, Tibroni N, Rupp D, Keppler OT, Fackler OT:
Antagonism of CD317 restriction of HIV-1 particle release and depletion
of CD317 are separable activities of HIV-1 Vpu. J Virol 2010, 84:4089-4094.
Tokarev AA, Munguia J, Guatelli JC: Serine-threonine ubiquitination
mediates downregulation of BST-2/tetherin and relief of restricted virion
release by HIV-1 Vpu. J Virol 2010.
Douglas JL, Gustin JK, Viswanathan K, Mansouri M, Moses AV, Fruh K: The
great escape: viral strategies to counter BST-2/tetherin. PLoS Pathog
2010, 6:e1000913.
Melikova MS, Kondratov KA, Kornilova ES: Two different stages of
epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor endocytosis are sensitive to free
ubiquitin depletion produced by proteasome inhibitor MG132. Cell Biol
Int 2006, 30:31-43.
Pardieu C, Vigan R, Wilson SJ, Calvi A, Zang T, Bieniasz P, Kellam P,
Towers GJ, Neil SJ: The RING-CH ligase K5 antagonizes restriction of
KSHV and HIV-1 particle release by mediating ubiquitin-dependent
endosomal degradation of tetherin. PLoS Pathog 2010, 6:e1000843.
Hauser H, Lopez LA, Yang SJ, Oldenburg JE, Exline CM, Guatelli JC,
Cannon PM: HIV-1 Vpu and HIV-2 Env counteract BST-2/tetherin by
sequestration in a perinuclear compartment. Retrovirology 2010, 7:51.
Douglas CC, Thomas D, Lanman J, Prevelige PE Jr: Investigation of Nterminal domain charged residues on the assembly and stability of HIV1 CA. Biochemistry 2004, 43:10435-10441.
Lopez LA, Yang SJ, Hauser H, Exline CM, Haworth KG, Oldenburg J,
Cannon PM: Ebola virus glycoprotein counteracts BST-2/Tetherin
restriction in a sequence-independent manner that does not require
tetherin surface removal. J Virol 2010, 84:7243-7255.
Le Tortorec A, Neil SJ: Antagonism to and intracellular sequestration of
human tetherin by the human immunodeficiency virus type 2 envelope
glycoprotein. J Virol 2009, 83:11966-11978.
Gupta RK, Mlcochova P, Pelchen-Matthews A, Petit SJ, Mattiuzzo G, Pillay D,
Takeuchi Y, Marsh M, Towers GJ: Simian immunodeficiency virus envelope
glycoprotein counteracts tetherin/BST-2/CD317 by intracellular
sequestration. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2009, 106:20889-20894.
Zhang F, Wilson SJ, Landford WC, Virgen B, Gregory D, Johnson MC,
Munch J, Kirchhoff F, Bieniasz PD, Hatziioannou T: Nef proteins from
simian immunodeficiency viruses are tetherin antagonists. Cell Host
Microbe 2009, 6:54-67.
Sauter D, Schindler M, Specht A, Landford WN, Munch J, Kim KA, Votteler J,
Schubert U, Bibollet-Ruche F, Keele BF, et al: Tetherin-driven adaptation of
Vpu and Nef function and the evolution of pandemic and nonpandemic
HIV-1 strains. Cell Host Microbe 2009, 6:409-421.
Jia B, Serra-Moreno R, Neidermyer W, Rahmberg A, Mackey J, Fofana IB,
Johnson WE, Westmoreland S, Evans DT: Species-specific activity of SIV
Nef and HIV-1 Vpu in overcoming restriction by tetherin/BST2. PLoS
Pathog 2009, 5:e1000429.
Yang SJ, Lopez LA, Hauser H, Exline CM, Haworth KG, Cannon PM: Antitetherin activities in Vpu-expressing primate lentiviruses. Retrovirology
2010, 7:13.

Page 19 of 19

154. Sawyer SL, Wu LI, Emerman M, Malik HS: Positive selection of primate
TRIM5alpha identifies a critical species-specific retroviral restriction
domain. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005, 102:2832-2837.
155. Sawyer SL, Emerman M, Malik HS: Ancient adaptive evolution of the
primate antiviral DNA-editing enzyme APOBEC3G. PLoS Biol 2004, 2:E275.
156. McNatt MW, Zang T, Hatziioannou T, Bartlett M, Fofana IB, Johnson WE,
Neil SJ, Bieniasz PD: Species-specific activity of HIV-1 Vpu and positive
selection of tetherin transmembrane domain variants. PLoS Pathog 2009,
5:e1000300.
157. Lim ES, Malik HS, Emerman M: Ancient adaptive evolution of tetherin
shaped the functions of Vpu and Nef in human immunodeficiency virus
and primate lentiviruses. J Virol 2010, 84:7124-7134.
158. Bailes E, Gao F, Bibollet-Ruche F, Courgnaud V, Peeters M, Marx PA,
Hahn BH, Sharp PM: Hybrid origin of SIV in chimpanzees. Science 2003,
300:1713.
159. Ruiz A, Lau D, Mitchell RS, Hill MS, Schmitt K, Guatelli JC, Stephens EB: BST2 mediated restriction of simian-human immunodeficiency virus. Virology
2010, 406:312-321.
160. Hahn BH, Shaw GM, De Cock KM, Sharp PM: AIDS as a zoonosis: scientific
and public health implications. Science 2000, 287:607-614.
161. de Silva TI, Cotten M, Rowland-Jones SL: HIV-2: the forgotten AIDS virus.
Trends Microbiol 2008, 16:588-595.
162. Singh DK, McCormick C, Pacyniak E, Lawrence K, Dalton SB, Pinson DM,
Sun F, Berman NE, Calvert M, Gunderson RS, et al: A simian human
immunodeficiency virus with a nonfunctional Vpu (deltavpuSHIV(KU1bMC33)) isolated from a macaque with neuroAIDS has selected for
mutations in env and nef that contributed to its pathogenic phenotype.
Virology 2001, 282:123-140.
163. Singh DK, Griffin DM, Pacyniak E, Jackson M, Werle MJ, Wisdom B, Sun F,
Hout DR, Pinson DM, Gunderson RS, et al: The presence of the casein
kinase II phosphorylation sites of Vpu enhances the CD4(+) T cell loss
caused by the simian-human immunodeficiency virus SHIV(KU-lbMC33)
in pig-tailed macaques. Virology 2003, 313:435-451.
164. Moll M, Andersson SK, Smed-Sorensen A, Sandberg JK: Inhibition of lipid
antigen presentation in dendritic cells by HIV-1 Vpu interference with
CD1d recycling from endosomal compartments. Blood 2010,
116:1876-1884.
165. Shah AH, Sowrirajan B, Davis ZB, Ward JP, Campbell EM, Planelles V,
Barker E: Degranulation of natural killer cells following interaction with
HIV-1-infected cells is hindered by downmodulation of NTB-A by Vpu.
Cell Host Microbe 2010, 8:397-409.
doi:10.1186/1742-4690-7-114
Cite this article as: Dubé et al.: Modulation of HIV-1-host interaction:
role of the Vpu accessory protein. Retrovirology 2010 7:114.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
