<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Issues and special features of animal health research</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Veterinary Research 2011, 42:96. doi:10.1186/1297-9716-42-96"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Christian Ducrot"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Ducrot et al. Veterinary Research 2011, 42:96
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/96

OPINION

VETERINARY RESEARCH

Open Access

Issues and special features of animal health
research
Christian Ducrot1*, Bertrand Bed’Hom2, Vincent Béringue3, Jean-Baptiste Coulon4, Christine Fourichon5,
Jean-Luc Guérin6, Stéphane Krebs5, Pascal Rainard7, Isabelle Schwartz-Cornil3, Didier Torny8,
Muriel Vayssier-Taussat9, Stephan Zientara10, Etienne Zundel11 and Thierry Pineau12

Abstract
In the rapidly changing context of research on animal health, INRA launched a collective discussion on the
challenges facing the field, its distinguishing features, and synergies with biomedical research. As has been
declared forcibly by the heads of WHO, FAO and OIE, the challenges facing animal health, beyond diseases
transmissible to humans, are critically important and involve food security, agriculture economics, and the
ensemble of economic activities associated with agriculture. There are in addition issues related to public health
(zoonoses, xenobiotics, antimicrobial resistance), the environment, and animal welfare.
Animal health research is distinguished by particular methodologies and scientific questions that stem from the
specific biological features of domestic species and from animal husbandry practices. It generally does not explore
the same scientific questions as research on human biology, even when the same pathogens are being studied,
and the discipline is rooted in a very specific agricultural and economic context.
Generic and methodological synergies nevertheless exist with biomedical research, particularly with regard to tools
and biological models. Certain domestic species furthermore present more functional similarities with humans than
laboratory rodents.
The singularity of animal health research in relation to biomedical research should be taken into account in the
organization, evaluation, and funding of the field through a policy that clearly recognizes the specific issues at
stake. At the same time, the One Health approach should facilitate closer collaboration between biomedical and
animal health research at the level of research teams and programmes.
Table of contents
1. Introduction
2. Issues and special features of animal health
research
2.1. Animal health and veterinary public health
2.2. Issues at stake in animal health
2.3. Importance of diseases, prioritization of issues at
stake
2.3.1. Special features of diseases according to the types
of animals
2.3.2. Prioritization of issues at stake
2.3.3. Issues at stake in animal health research
3. Special features of animal health research
* Correspondence: Ducrot@clermont.inra.fr
1
INRA, UR346 Epidémiologie animale, 63122 Saint Genès Champanelle,
France
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

3.1. Distinguishing features of the objectives, methods,
and biological models
3.2. Special features of scientific questioning
3.3. Generic and methodological areas of convergence
with human health
4. Relationships between animal health and human
health research
4.1. Domestic animal models for human targeted
research
4.2. Funding and evaluation of research
4.3. Parallels between research, surveillance of diseases
and the pharmaceutical industry
4.3.1. Surveillance and control of diseases
4.3.2. Pharmaceutical industry
4.4. The “One world, One Health” approach
5. Conclusion
Competing interests

© 2011 Ducrot et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Ducrot et al. Veterinary Research 2011, 42:96
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/96

Authors’ contributions
Acknowledgements
References

1. Introduction
Understanding of animal health research, and the expectations of donors and research organizations, is changing.
A growing number of actors consider such research from
the limited perspective of the dangers and risks directly
posed to human health by traditional and emerging animal
diseases. Some furthermore consider health as an asset
shared by all species, animal and human, that would be
guaranteed by a single medicine guided by biomedical
research. In this evolving context, a collective discussion
on the special features of animal health research, the issues
at stake and the specific contributions such research can
provide to generic health research was deemed necessary.
This article summarizes the results of this discussion,
addressing the issues at stake at the global level. Presented
in three sections, the first describes the challenges facing
animal health and research on animal health, the majority
of which are not related to zoonotic diseases. The second
section describes the distinguishing features of animal
health research that are related to scientific constraints,
the manner by which the discipline is grounded in an agricultural and economic context, and the perspectives from
which scientific questions are posed. The third section
addresses the relationships between animal health and
biomedical research. The conclusion proposes changes
that would permit research to be adapted to the special
features of the field while at the same time favouring partnerships with research on human health. This discussion
deliberately was limited to livestock; pets and wild animals
only are mentioned for purposes of comparison.
2. Issues and special features of animal health
research
2.1. Animal health and veterinary public health

In animals, health may be defined as the absence of disease
or the normal functioning of an organism and normal
behaviour based on the observation of a certain number of
individuals that determine the standard and thus health
[1]. In production sectors, health also may be defined as
the state allowing the highest productivity. However, this
narrow definition often is enriched by the concept of a
balance between the animal and its environment, and of
the animal’s physical welfare. This broader definition
undoubtedly is linked to changes observed in the field of
veterinary medicine, which is focussing increasingly on
prevention rather than cure, and which takes the animal’s
environment into fuller account [2].
Animal diseases may be organized schematically into
three categories. Multifactorial diseases are provoked
by a set of risk factors linked in particular to livestock

Page 2 of 10

management, with at times the participation of pathogens widespread in livestock. Known as “production
diseases”, multifactorial diseases are present on a large
majority of livestock farms with highly variable frequencies. The major epidemic diseases are highly contagious
and impact livestock heavily (for example, foot-andmouth disease, swine fever, highly pathogenic avian
influenza); the challenge is to eradicate such diseases
from a territory when possible, and their appearence in
a totally susceptible population can have extensive
health and economic consequences. Other transmissible infectious diseases are less contagious or have
slighter impacts, and frequently are present in populations in an endemic manner. Among transmissible diseases are zoonotic diseases, which are those that can be
transmitted to humans. Animals also may be healthy
carriers of agents that are pathogenic for humans but
which do not affect the health of the animal (for example, Salmonella and Campylobacter).
In response to these challenges, and picking up on a
framework produced by international bodies (World
Health Organization (WHO), Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations (FAO), World organization for Animal Health (OIE)), WHO [3] currently
defines veterinary public health as “the sum of all contributions to the physical, mental and social well-being of
humans through an understanding and application of
veterinary science“. In an editorial of the OIE bulletin
[4], The Veterinary Services are stated as the “key
players in the prevention and control of animal diseases
and in the improvement of food security, nutrition, food
safety, veterinary public health and market access for
animals and products“. Veterinary public health activities thus include the control of animal diseases that
have a direct impact on human health due their zoonotic character, as well as the control of all non-transmissible animal diseases capable of causing important
production losses (safety of animal product supply) and
disrupting markets (animal and products of animal
origin).
2.2. Issues at stake in animal health

There are four types of issues at stake in the field of animal
health:
1/ Economic issues for a range of diseases that impact
the economic viability of livestock farms (notably livestock
diseases and endemic diseases that lead to production
losses, prevention or treatment costs, disruption of the
farm or the work of the livestock farmer) and animal production sectors (notably epidemic diseases due to their
effect on production, the impact of health regulations on
markets, and impediments to trade). In industrialized
countries, these diseases weigh heavily on the overall economic competiveness of livestock farms, businesses, and

Ducrot et al. Veterinary Research 2011, 42:96
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/96

animal production sectors. In developing countries, there
are the added risks of food scarcity, capital dilution (insofar as cattle constitute standing capital, the only form of
savings and social security for many people), and the loss
of draught and labor power (leading to a reduction in
overall agricultural efficiency).
2/ Public health issues, which concern three domains:
zoonoses, infectious or parasitic diseases transmissible
from animals to humans, whether contagious (for example, tuberculosis, brucellosis, certain influenza viruses),
vectorial (West Nile disease, Rift Valley fever, Lyme disease), or food-borne (BSE, toxic food poisoning); resistance to antibiotics; and traces of medicine in animal
products.
3/ Environmental issues related to the impact of agriculture; this involves the dumping of xenobiotics into the
environment (medicine residues), the spread of resistance
to antibiotics, and infectious diseases that can be transmitted between domestic and wild animals (such as bovine
tuberculosis detected in wildlife).
4/ Animal welfare issues, which are related closely to
changes of regulations in this domain. Diseases induce suffering and pain, the absence of which is one of the criteria
chosen for recently proposed animal welfare evaluation
tools [5].
In a recent report on the state of food and agriculture in
the world focusing on livestock, the FAO [6] summarizes
these different issues at stake as: “Animal diseases, and a
lack of adequate food hygiene resulting in foodborne illnesses, are a problem for everyone because they can threaten human health, disrupt markets and trade, reduce
productivity and deepen poverty. Improving the management of livestock with a view to preventing and controlling
disease can provide significant economic, social, and
human health benefits for the poor and for society at
large”. Among the report’s four key messages, it is noted
that, “Livestock diseases pose systemic risks that must be
addressed.”
For all of these diseases, while the issues at stake primarily concern agricultural farms, associated economic sectors
also are involved: live animals, products of animal origin,
agricultural inputs and services. Consumers and citizens
are all concerned, as much by quantitative and qualitative
food security as by public health. Livestock and agro-food
sectors play a central role in industrialized countries,
reaching 53% of the gross domestic product [7] (food
safety, extensive economic activities linked to supplying
the livestock sector which include the pharmaceutical
industry, and the valorization and trade of agricultural
products and food that often are very technologically
advanced), as in developing countries (subsistence agriculture, food security, intake of quality protein). The economic issues involved in animal health, without even
mentioning the risks of bioterrorism, therefore represent

Page 3 of 10

critical strategic challenges, even if they receive less
media coverage than public health issues.
Furthermore, these different types of issues are not
independent of each other. For example, the risk of the
presence of medicine residues in animal products, as well
as the risk of antibiotic resistance coming from the animal world, are both public health issues, and are both
directly correlated to the frequency of enzootic diseases
impacting the economic equilibrium of animal production chains; they thus pertain above all to the economic
stakes involved in ensuring animal health.
2.3. Importance of diseases, prioritization of issues at
stake
2.3.1. Special features of diseases according to the types of
animals

For production animals, infectious and parasitic diseases
predominate, even if metabolic and degenerative disorders naturally exist that most frequently are related to an
insufficient control of production systems. In contrast,
household pets and sports animals present a pathological
profile very similar to humans (endocrinian disorders,
cancers, degenerative neuro and osteoarticular diseases,
obesity, aging). This leads to a more reduced presence of
infectious and parasitic pathologies in favour of internal
medicine, cancerology, and endocrinology, although antibiotic and anti-parasite medicines and vaccines together
account for 75% of the consumption of medicine by pets.
Lastly, non-captive wildlife constitutes a relatively new
subject of animal health research, principally concerning
major epidemiological reservoirs of potentially zoonotic
agents (for example, bat lyssavirus and avian influenza)
and sentinels of contamination and toxicologic pollution
of the environment.
2.3.2. Prioritization of issues at stake

It is difficult to arrange the different challenges presented
by animal diseases and their control into an order of priority. There are several ways to assess the importance of animal diseases. The first is to estimate their impact on
zootechnical and economic performance. The average
mortality rates of animals in Western European livestock
systems can be significant for certain age groups, and may
reach high levels in herds when pathology is poorly controlled. For example, the mortality of calves before weaning is on average 12%, that of dairy cows 3%, that of
piglets before weaning 20% (including stillborns), with
another 7% loss between the weaning and slaughter of
pigs. The various costs of controlling disease are added to
those of mortality. The current economic impact of mastitis in dairy cows in France may be assessed at 350 million
€/year, principally due to reductions in productivity and
longevity, reduced sale prices of milk and the costs of prevention measures and treatment. In poultry, coccidioses
have a major impact; based on a British model [8], their

Ducrot et al. Veterinary Research 2011, 42:96
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/96

global economic impact is estimated at over two billion
dollars, principally due to their impact on production and
feed efficiency. In the case of endemic diseases, economic
losses remain usually limited in each farm, but the global
economic impact is high due to the large number of farms
affected [9]. The probability of epidemic diseases is lower
but when present, they may induce very severe losses [10],
even beyond the agronomic and agri food sectors.
OIE’s list of notifiable diseases [11] includes infectious
transmissible diseases deemed to be most damaging at
the international level from an economic and public
health point of view; among the 119 diseases listed, only
31 are zoonotic to one degree or another [12]. The
declared priorities of international bodies (WHO, FAO,
OIE) federated under the GLEWS [13] programme (Global Early Warning and Response System for Major Animal Diseases, including Zoonoses) for the surveillance
and monitoring of animal diseases nevertheless derive
from an approach first initiated by WHO that gave priority to zoonotic diseases. This is why the GLEWS list
includes 6 non-zoonotic and 19 zoonotic diseases.
On the basis of vaccine production, it should be noted
that almost all those used in the field of animal health protect against strictly animal pathogens. The rabies vaccine is
one of the rare veterinary vaccines meant to protect
humans. Certain other veterinary vaccines, such as for leptospira, target a zoonotic agent but are used mainly to protect pets, the exception being the New Zealand cattle
vaccination programme that also aims to protect farmers;
vaccines against zoonotic agents generally are not meant
to protect animals in the name of public health.
2.3.3. Issues at stake in animal health research

Precise light was thrown on the subject by a bibliometric
study covering the 2006-2009 period conducted under

a. Species

Page 4 of 10

the European Era-Net EMIDA programme (Emerging
Infectious Diseases of Animals) [14] which focused on
infectious and parasitic diseases of production animals.
The map generated by the study shows that animal health
is situated at the intersection of other disciplinary fields
such as human health, but also the health of wild animals
and ecosystems, animal nutrition, animal genetics, and
animal welfare. The study also demonstrates that barely
20% of the 12 000 publications on infectious diseases surveyed address zoonoses and food safety, and thus have a
direct link to public health issues. This means that, in contrast, 80% of the publications address exclusively animal
diseases presenting primarily economic, environmental,
and animal welfare challenges. The distribution of research
work on infectious and parasitic diseases at the international scale [15] according to the production animal species and pathogens involved is presented in Figure 1.
At the European level, it should be noted that an effort
to prioritize issues at stake and research involving over
50 infectious and parasitic animal diseases is led by a
group of experts under the aegis of Discontools (Disease
Control Tools) working with the European ETPGAH
platform (European Technology Platform for Global Animal Health). The first outputs may be accessed online on
the Discontools web site [16].
Given the breadth of the challenges related to animal
health, numerous research questions need to be explored
that touch upon different domains of biology and social
sciences to broaden existing knowledge, with a continuum
from basic to applied research. The questions involve
knowledge of pathogens, the relationship between a host
(infected animal) and a pathogenic agent, as well as the
interaction of pathogens and hosts at the scale of animal
populations. The research to be carried out thus aims to

b. Pathogens

Figure 1 Distribution of publications on infectious and parasitic diseases in animal health according to the livestock species (a) and
pathogens (b) involved. Analysis in the framework of the European Star-Idaz project [15] of 28 750 international scientific articles published on
the subject from 2006 to June 2010.

Ducrot et al. Veterinary Research 2011, 42:96
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/96

propose tools to control the exposure of domestic animals
to pathogens, reinforce the resistance of hosts to pathogenic agents (notably through vaccination), and to treat
sick animals. The containment and control of diseases
through control and prevention programmes also requires
assessments of economic and social impacts of health
management plans.
In addition to such targetted research, there is a need
for fundamental research geared to producing generic
knowledge on animal models. The research undertaken
in this field is enriching understanding of biology thanks
to comparative biology. The diversity of the model species studied, the availability of experimental mechanisms
and of biological material, as well as the mastery of particular infectious models, are all important assets for this
research, which produces knowledge on living organisms
that does not necessarily have an immediate application,
but which may prove to be very useful in the future
(example of innate immunity molecules-defensins, Toll
receptors-identified in invertebrates that have vaccinal
and immunomodulatory applications in humans and
domestic animals).

3. Special features of animal health research
Animal health research is distinguished by particular
objectives, methods, biological models and scientific questions. However, there nevertheless are areas of generic and
methodological convergence with biomedical research.
3.1. Distinguishing features of the objectives, methods,
and biological models

First of all, livestock farming is an economic activity whose
end goal is to generate revenue. In this context, animal
health is one of several factors that farmers must manage;
they do so by minimizing their herds’ exposure to health
risks and by finding the least expensive way to limit the
impact of disease [17]. In a given livestock system, diseases
are closely linked to the way livestock are managed, notably to parameters related to the quality of housing, nutrition, hygiene, and to animal production levels. The
intensification of livestock systems that has taken place in
agriculture over the past fifty years has accentuated the
tension between limiting inputs, increasing production,
and the risk of disease.
Over time, questions regarding livestock health have
moved beyond a sole objective of achieving economic
gains by reducing disease frequency to addressing the
sanitary quality of products of animal origin, reducing
the use of xenobiotics, and animal welfare in the interest
of public health and sustainable development. The multiplicity of the challenges leads to the question of how the
best balance may be achieved between these different
parameters. To continue working in this direction, animal health stakeholders, whether from the perspective of

Page 5 of 10

research or development, need to establish close ties with
livestock sciences and agricultural professionals.
To take into account these elements, population medicine on farms will be needed, as well as research on diseases that specifically recognizes the close connections
between health and animal production science. This
implies in-depth collaboration with other animal science
disciplines on one hand, and with the various stakeholders
in the livestock world on the other. The only pertinent
research is that carried out in close contact with the actual
practices of farmers and animal sectors. For example,
within an integrated agriculture framework, integrated
research on livestock health management implies solid
understanding of the livestock world, requires close collaboration between animal production, genetics, livestock
economics, sociology and animal health disciplines, and
relies on a partnership with livestock health stakeholders.
A second distinguishing feature of animal health
research is the overwhelming predominance of infectious
and parasitic diseases, at least for livestock, with a very
large diversity of pathologies and a very large repertoire
of pathogens involved [18]. Animal health research teams
consequently are obliged to study a wide variety of pathogen families, developing in the process a pool of rare and
precious skills in virology, bacteriology, parasitology, and
medical entomology.
A third distinguishing feature of animal health research
is related to the special genetic features of livestock animals. The evolution of animal species, which results in
the diversity of species, takes much longer time than
phases of domestication, which result in the diversity of
breeds. The intensive selection practices implemented
over the past fifty years has improved production considerably, but the cost has been a sharp drop in genetic
diversity among livestock [19,20]. A distinguishing feature of livestock systems effectively is the possibility of
human intervention to select animals for particular
genetic traits, most often production (for example, quantity of milk) but also resistance to disease (for example,
against scrapie). To understand the genetic foundations
of susceptibility to infectious diseases, the duration of coevolution, genetic diversity, and the respective evolutionary dynamics of hosts and pathogens therefore must be
taken into account. The genetic improvement of the
immune response is a complex selection objective. It generally either is directed against a single target (pathogen)
that is constantly evolving (due to its rapid evolutionary
dynamic), or seeks a better overall immunocompetence;
in either case, there tends to a negative correlation with
the selection of production traits.
Animals of economic importance include species that
belong to very distinct animal clades such as fish, bees,
chicken, pigs, goats, sheep and cattle. These clades
diverged from each other hundreds of millions of years

Ducrot et al. Veterinary Research 2011, 42:96
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/96

ago. Even within mammals, the Laurasiatheria superorder, which includes ruminants and pigs, and the Euarchontoglires superorder, which includes humans and mice,
diverged from each other around 100 million years ago,
rendering mice and human phylogenetically closer to
each other (so called supra-primates) than they are to
ruminants and pigs [21]. These millions of years of separated evolution generated specific anatomical, metabolic
and physiological traits, as well as specific commensalhost and pathogen-host relationships. For example, fish
show particularities linked to their aquatic environment
with some pathogens entering via fins [22]; they present
a more primitive immune system and their cells are
highly permissive to DNA transfer, allowing highly efficient DNA vaccination [23].
Whereas the basic structures and the generation
mechanisms of the T cell receptors and immunoglobulins
are similar from teleost fish to higher mammals, each species presents particularities, such as specific isotypes
(unlike humans, mice do not secrete IgD or IgG4) and
specific mechanisms of antibody diversity generation (gene
conversion in chicken, hyper somatic mutations in human
and mice). Notably, cytokines are specific to some species;
for example, those controlling the production of type I
IFN in humans and probably pigs does not exist in mice.
Across species, mother to offspring transmission of pathogens and of immunity is strongly dependent on developmental characteristics related to oviparity and variations in
placentation modalities. Thus whereas baby mice acquire
their immunoglobulin pool during pregnancy by translocation through the placenta, ruminants acquire their immunoglobulin pool at birth via the colostrum due to the
relative impermeability of their placenta.
Most basic and applied research is conducted on laboratory mice, in which some human and domestic animal diseases have been experimentally adapted. In many instances,
therapeutic and prophylactic treatments that are effective
in laboratory mice do no work when transposed to human
and veterinary species. This lack of transposition can be
explained by the specific physiological traits mentioned
above and by the artificial pathological mouse models used
in the laboratories. It is very important for pathogen-host
interactions and novel therapeutic and prophylactic treatments to be evaluated on the targeted veterinary species,
thereby studying the effect in the actual host and consequently limiting a “mouse” bias as much as possible.
Research and experiments on “target” species (fish, chicken,
pigs, ruminants) therefore often is necessary, and presents
an advantage because the research findings may be applied
directly to the species without the extra step of validating
an extrapolation based on an animal model, in contrast to
research undertaken for biomedical applications.
Lastly, there are special features related to the types of
actions taken for animal disease control and health

Page 6 of 10

management. Beyond vaccination and the protection of
livestock, animal health rules covering contagious diseases include a range of control methods, including at
times the slaughter of animals to eliminate those posing
a risk for unaffected animals and humans. These practices lead to specific research questions regarding intervention mechanisms. At the top of this list is the need to
update serological tools so that vaccinated animals may
be distinguished from infected animals because disease
control measures are different for these two categories of
animals. Another priority is the set of questions regarding
the comparative economic advantage of different control
methods and the conditions by which they are appropriated by livestock farmers and public officials.
While the livestock world has many other distinguishing
characteristics, these do not seem to have a notable impact
on the manner by which animal health research is
conducted.
3.2. Special features of scientific questioning

In addition to the aspects discussed in the preceding sections, one of the main distinguishing features of animal
health research are the scientific questions pursued, which
are posed from the perspective of animal, and not human,
health. Consequently, even in the case of zoonotic agents,
the questions asked by animal health teams are not the
same as those asked by biomedical teams. In the case of
zoonotic vector agents, for example, Bartonella or Borrelia
agents of Lyme disease, animal health research would
focus on the role of animals as reservoirs of agents potentially pathogenic for humans, and on the elements that
allow the development of an infectious agent in its host
reservoir versus a human. Biomedical research, on the
other hand, would focus on the development of an infectious agent in a human. For prion diseases, an animal
health perspective leads to studying the diversity of strains
found in the animal and to an attempt to decipher the
interactions between the infectious strain and the host
species. More broadly, studies of pathogenic agent/host
interactions that are pursued from an animal health angle
often prove to be fruitful from both a pure and applied
perspective. This is due in particular to the genetic knowledge generated on the infected host and the possibility of
implementing protocols with an experimental cohort with
a defined genetic status. This is, for example, the case with
the demonstration in sheep of the modulation of susceptibility to scrapie in connection with the polymorphism of
the protein prion coding gene [24].
It thus would appear that, while working on the same
agents and with the same tools, the questions pursued in
animal health may be different from, and complementary
to, those in human biology, and lead to the production of
complementary knowledge. It follows that opportunities
for collaboration between animal health and biomedical

Ducrot et al. Veterinary Research 2011, 42:96
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/96

teams should be pursued, each having, through the questions they pursue and their “natural” partnership networks (hospitals versus farms or the environment),
access to different and complementary types of samples.
For example, collaboration could focus on comparing,
with an epidemiological objective, Bartonella strains
sampled from humans and different animal species.
3.3. Generic and methodological areas of convergence
with human health

In certain fields, research carried out in human biology
and animal health use similar tools, and even the same
models, to address research questions. When this is the
case, notably in the framework of the study of zoonotic
pathogens, the only difference lies in the nature of the
questions explored.
In certain circumstances, the convergence continues up
to point where the biomedical and animal health teams
share the same questions, and then no evident distinguishing feature remains. The development of projects initially
focused on animal health progressively may lead the teams
involved to pose questions that are increasingly focussed
on models shared with human biology. As an illustration,
we may cite fundamental research approaches to the
molecular mechanisms of the invasion of cells targeted by
the influenza virus, or the biological origin of prions and
the determinants of the species barrier modulating their
transmission capacity. In such cases, it is easy to imagine
that the same research could be conducted in research
laboratories unrelated to animal health. However, an animal health perspective offers certain advantages, notably
expertise for extensive experimental research in a confinement area, and special links maintained through collaborations with other scientists working notably in the fields of
pathogenesis and animal genetics.
The discussion presented here was conducted in relation
to human biology research work. A parallel approach
could be envisioned in relation to work carried out on
plant health. Such an analysis may elicit a certain community of tools and methods with animal health, an advantage of comparative biology, but apparently few shared
issues at stake for the pathogens of interest.

4. Relationships between animal health and
human health research
4.1. Domestic animal models for human targeted research

Mice often prove to be an inadequate model in physiopathological, prophylactic, and therapeutic studies for
humans. This is due to the reduced size of the species,
physiological considerations, and the absence of a natural
corresponding pathology. With regard to the latter point,
it often is necessary to infect a mouse with the human
pathogen agent, and thereby create an artificial model
without pertinent symptoms. In certain situations,

Page 7 of 10

domestic species prove to be better study models for
human-oriented research. Domestic species can be
infected by viruses that have co-evolved with their host.
These diseases present similarities in molecular and physiopathologic mechanisms to human disorders without
being zoonotic. Pigs infected by an influenza virus that has
adapted to pigs thus suffer an influenza syndrome resembling that found in humans infected with a human influenza virus. Young calves infected by a respiratory syncytial
virus distinct from the human virus develop a bronchopulmonary pathology close to that of a child. These animal
disorders thus allow the development of therapeutic, vaccination, and diagnostic strategies that can be adapted or
extrapolated to humans.
Furthermore, through evolutionary convergence, certain
domestic species present more functional similarities to
humans than mice: for example, sheep for respiratory
pathology (immunologic study of asthma treatment), and
pigs for skin structure (study of transcutaneous therapy or
vaccination), cardio-vascular diseases, and the development of spontaneous melanoma where the progression of
tumors resembles that observed in humans.
Lastly, domestic animals, due to their large size, allow
immune functions to be studied in an original manner
that would not be possible with mice. It thus is possible to
catheterize lymphatic vessels in pigs, cows, and sheep to
study baseline migrant leukocyte populations directly in
the lymph during an infection or vaccination, enabling
certain immune response features to be monitored in real
time.
For these different reasons, in-depth knowledge of
domestic animal physiopathologies and the existence of
high performance animal experimentation platforms are
useful for biomedical research. Overall, the diversity of
models (animal species) studied, the foundation of comparative biology, is important to produce general knowledge that can have diverse applications, notably in human
biology.
4.2. Funding and evaluation of research

Compared to research on pathogens affecting public
health, it is notoriously difficult to find funding for
research dedicated to animal health that is focussed on
non-zoonotic pathogens or to publish the results in high
quality scientific journals. These difficulties seem to be
inversely proportional to the genericity of the knowledge
produced and to its potential biomedical contribution. For
example, in a call for proposals on infectious disease
research, an excellent project on a non-zoonotic pathogen
will systematically be eclipsed by a project addressing a
topic such as hemorrhagic fevers due to the evaluators’
perception of the stakes involved. Similarily, numerous
human health and scientific journals that have a high
impact factor due to the larger size of the scientific

Ducrot et al. Veterinary Research 2011, 42:96
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/96

community involved in human biology compared to animal health, rarely accept an article on non-zoonotic agents
that effectively fall outside their domain.
This state of affairs is extremely important to take into
consideration given the current imperative to obtain credit
to finance research and the use of the “impact factor” criteria in the scientific evaluation of research teams. This
point is even more critical as the apparent proximity of
animal health and human biology sectors nevertheless
does not render their objectives equivalent. An overly
hasty approach to the question by evaluators who are illinformed or insufficiently aware of the issues involved will
lead them to apply criteria and indicators to animal health
research that are appropriated from human biology and
which are completely unsuitable, and indeed unfair, in the
field of animal health. Research units that address both
zoonotic and non-zoonotic pathogens face a delicate situation. Teams within the same unit are not in the same boat
with regard to seeking funding and publication levels.
What emerges from this analysis is that, when research
of equivalent scientific quality are considered together,
work on non-zoonotic diseases are financed less easily,
and are published in journals with a lower impact factor,
than work on zoonotic animal diseases. In a similar fashion, research on animal diseases are financed and published less easily than human biomedical research. In the
absence of specific corrective action, the existence of a
“species barrier” in terms of funding and publication is
endangering 80% of animal health research. It thus is absolutely necessary to act far upstream of national and international research programmes by ensuring that calls for
research proposals specifically mention the issues at stake
in animal health on one hand, and that research organizations for their part officially adopt a policy to recognize
the stakes and scientific outputs that are specifically linked
to animal health.
4.3. Parallels between research, surveillance of diseases
and the pharmaceutical industry
4.3.1. Surveillance and control of diseases

A parallel may be drawn between the domain of research
and that of disease surveillance and control. OIE officials
call attention to a school of thought circulating at the
international level that suggests economies of scale would
be possible if veterinary medicine services were regrouped
with human health facilities in each country. Along the
same lines, public services such as disease surveillance are
perceived to be expendable variables that may be played
with to cut costs in debt-ridden countries. In the same
spirit, this school of thought also advocates that only animal diseases posing risks to humans should be considered
important due to their zoonotic character. In such a logic
of cost-cutting and the regrouping of animal and human
health spheres, financial trade-offs naturally would favour

Page 8 of 10

human health priorities at the expense of veterinary
services.
The OIE’s strategy is to take the opposing view which
holds that prevention costs less than resolving crises, and
that quality prevention is based on national animal health
systems that can ensure appropriate surveillance, early
detection, transparency, and rapid response to animal disease outbreaks and on a durable network of veterinary services endowed with a specific budget. Thus in 2006, the
OIE reiterated its affirmation that veterinary services were
a global public good [25]. The disastrous consequences of
cutbacks in public services, and the efficacy of the preventative and global approach taken by the OIE, is leading
progressively to a swing of opinion in favour of this
approach. This change is visible, for example, in the international documents debated during successive forums on
the control of avian influenza [26].
4.3.2. Pharmaceutic industry

Most pharmaceutical companies have subsidiaries dedicated to animal health, which is related to the fact that
economic scales between animal and human health cannot
be compared; as an example, sales of a human vaccine
may be 20 to 50 times higher than those of a veterinary
vaccine. If a choice must be made between two very different vaccine projects, even if each is a priori profitable, the
human vaccine automatically will be chosen over the
veterinary vaccine. In the same manner, shared services
will be put at the disposal of the human vaccine project
given the higher economic stakes involved. Lastly, it also is
more difficult to find public funding, and thus complementary private funding, for the development of vaccines
against non-zoonotic pathogens than for human vaccines.
A fusion between human and animal activities would
translate into the disappearance of the animal sector, or
into animal models being developed only when they have
a direct interest for humans. In contrast, what is shared by
animal and human vaccines is an ensemble of vaccine production technology, innovations in this field and preceding
research on pathogen families, cytology, certain features
of immunology, all knowledge that deserves to be shared
between human and animal health in the form of
cooperation.
4.4. The “One World, One Health” approach

As mentioned by the Director of the OIE in an editorial
[27], the “One World, One Health” approach is indispensable in the sense that “the only way to prevent all these
new hazards (zoonotics) is to adapt the existing systems of
health governance at world, regional and national levels in
a harmonised and coordinated manner“, but “the concept
“One World, One Health” should not serve as a pretext for
dangerous initiatives like trying to achieve economies of
scale based on purely theoretical notions worthy of a sorcerer’s apprentice, such as trying to merge the Veterinary

Ducrot et al. Veterinary Research 2011, 42:96
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/96

Services and the Public Health Services“. Taking this perspective, it effectively is out of the question to merge services because each must assume its functions with the
resources dedicated to it and the approaches suited to its
particular mission; however, it is necessary to develop collaboration, cooperation, and synergies [28]. For the past
few years, there has been a concensus on this issue among
the OIE, FAO, and WHO. Different discussions are underway to define ways to implement this cooperation between
organisations.

5. Conclusion
The present discussion, the opinion of experts, and a
critical reading of the literature has led to the following
observations.
International bodies (WHO, FAO, OIE) affirm that, over
and above the threat of diseases that can be transmitted to
humans (zoonotic diseases), the challenges facing the
field of animal health are considerable. They concern
food security, economics, agriculture and associated economic activities in both industrialized and developing
countries. The challenges facing animal health, beyond
those posed by zoonotic diseases, overlap with those of
public health and the environment, notably regarding the
use of xenobiotics and the development of antibiotic
resistance.
The distinguishing features of animal health research
are methodological and scientific in nature. They notably
pertain to special biological features of domestic species
and to the interaction between humans in their practice of
livestock husbandry and animals in their biology and evolution. Animal biology generally does not pursue the same
scientific questions as human biology, even when the same
pathogens are being studied, and the discipline is rooted in
a very specific agricultural and economic context. For animal health stakeholders, whether from the perspective of
research or development, finding an optimal balance
between the economic profitability of a farm, animal welfare, the maintenance of animal health and the quality of
products of animal origin involves close collaboration
between animal husbandry sciences and the agricultural
profession.
Knowledge produced by comparative biology is fed
by research conducted on animal species. For example,
animal models are a source of generic knowledge due to
their special evolutionary features and, in certain cases,
their functional similarities with humans. The diversity of
the model species studied and the control of particular
infectious diseases contribute greatly to the production of
knowledge about living organisms.
These observations present a strong case in favor of
taking into account the uniqueness of animal health
research, in terms of its organization, evaluation, and
funding, compared to biomedical research. If this is not

Page 9 of 10

done, strictly biomedical priorities will lead to the elimination, sooner or later, of quality research on non-zoonotic animal diseases. A special “treatment” of this
research thus is necessary with regard to the issues at
stake; specially designed calls for proposals should be
dedicated to the field, the field’s journal corpus should
be recognized as being different from that of biomedical
research, and the research should be evaluated in the
light of this specific corpus.
The “One Health” approach is important insofar as it
argues that the management of health requires reinforced
coordination between human and animal components
and, in the same manner, in-depth collaboration between
biomedical and animal health research. The organization
of such collaboration can only reinforce the capacity of
both groups to produce relevant science, and to realize
the potential of research efforts and more global
approaches integrating human and animal components
in federated projects.
In terms of research, this collaboration may assume different forms and take place at different levels, ranging
from cooperation between teams up to the organization of
research and its funding. The questions explored in animal
health and human biology regarding the same zoonotic
pathogen frequently are complementary. They allow scientific collaborations to be built that can respond to more
general questions, and notably to address the complexity
of the biological systems of certain diseases. Another form
of collaboration is the establishment of calls for joint public health and animal health proposals for research on
pathogens whose study and control require combined
research approaches. This has been the case for research
on transmissible spongiform encephalopathies, with joint
animal-human calls for projects and pluridisciplinary projects in the United Kingdom, Netherlands, Germany,
France and the European Union. At a more general level,
comparative biology represents a precious source of
knowledge.
Acknowledgements
The authors are deeply grateful to Claude Leclerc (Institut Pasteur), Alain
Dehove, Elisabeth Erlacher-Vindel, Kasuaki Miyagishima (OIE), Jean-Christophe
Audonnet, Michel Bublot, Catherine Charreyre, François Xavier Le Gros,
Pascal Hudelet (Société Merial), for their contributions to this collective
discussion, as well as Bernard Charley, Jean De Rycke, Michel Fougereau,
Pierre Lekeux, Henri Salmon, Henri Seegers and Etienne Thiry for their critical
reading of the initial report.
Author details
1
INRA, UR346 Epidémiologie animale, 63122 Saint Genès Champanelle,
France. 2INRA, UMR1313 Génétique Animale et Biologie Intégrative, 78352
Jouy-en-Josas Cedex, France. 3INRA, UR892 Virologie et Immunologie
Moléculaires, 78352 Jouy-en-Josas, France. 4INRA, Département PHASE, 63122
Saint Genès Champanelle, France. 5ONIRIS-INRA, UMR1300 Bioagression,
Épidémiologie et Analyse de risque, Atlanpole La Chantrerie, BP 40706,
44307 Nantes Cedex 3, France. 6ENVT-INRA, UMR1225 IHAP Interactions
hôtes-agents pathogènes, 23 chemin des Capelles, 31076 Toulouse Cedex,
France. 7INRA, UR1282 IASP Infectiologie animale et santé publique, 37380

Ducrot et al. Veterinary Research 2011, 42:96
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/96

Nouzilly, France. 8INRA, UMR1323 RiTME, 65 Boulevard de Brandebourg,
94205 Ivry-sur-Seine, France. 9INRA, USC Bartonella et Tiques, ANSES, 23
Avenue du Général de Gaulle, F-94700 Maisons-Alfort, France. 10ENVAANSES-INRA, UMR1161 Virologie, 7 avenue du Général de Gaulle, 94704
Maisons Alfort Cedex, France. 11INRA, Département de santé animale, 37380
Nouzilly, France. 12INRA, Département de santé animale, BP 93173, 31027
Toulouse Cedex 3, France.
Authors’ contributions
All authors participated in the collective discussion on the special issues of
animal health research, search for bibliography and participated in the
writing of the paper in their field of competence; more precisely, VB, JLG,
PR, ISC, MVT, SZ and EZ were involved in the field of microbiology, ISC in
immunology, CF and CD in epidemiology, BB in genetics, JBC and EZ in
animal sciences, SK in economics, DT in sociology. CD, CF and SK were
involved in the discussion with scientists from OIE, CD, CF and SZ with
Société Merial, ISC, SZ and MVT with Institut Pasteur. TP and CD designed
the work and defined the working group. CD chaired the discussions and
coordinated the paper. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 8 June 2011 Accepted: 24 August 2011
Published: 24 August 2011
References
1. Baker JK, Greer WJ: Animal health: a layman’s guide to disease control IPP
the Interstates Printers and publishers, Danville, Illinois; 1980.
2. Gunnarson S: Definition of health and disease in textbooks of
veterinarian medicine. Animal production in Europe: The way forward in a
changing world. Proc. 13th International Society of Animal Hygien, Saint-Malo,
France 2004, 105-109.
3. Future trends in veterinary public health. Report of a WHO Study Group.
907 WHO Technical Reports Series, World Health Organization, Geneva, 96
pp (2002); [http://whqlibdoc.who.int/trs/WHO_TRS_907.pdf], [Consulted 17
November 2010].
4. Editorial: Veterinary legislation is the foundation of any efficient animal
health Policy. Bulletin n 4 OIE 77th General Session (2009) [http://www.oie.
int/en/publications-and-documentation/bulletins-online/], (consulted 31
May 2011).
5. Botreau R, Veissier I, Butterworth A, Bracke MBM, Keeling LJ: Definition of
criteria for overall assessment of animal welfare. Anim Welf 2007,
16:225-228.
6. FAO-The State of Food and Agriculture 2009-Livestock in the Balance,
166pp. [http://www.fao.org/docrep/012/i0680e/i0680e00.htm], (consulted 9
June 2011).
7. Thornton PK: Livestock production: recent trends, future prospects. Philos
Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 2010, 365:2853-2867.
8. Williams RB: A compartmentalised model for the estimation of the cost
of coccidiosis to the world’s chicken production industry. Int J Parasitol
1999, 29:1209-1229.
9. Seegers H, Fourichon C, Beaudeau F: Production effects related to mastitis
and mastitis economics in dairy cattle herds. Vet Res 2003, 34:475-491.
10. Thompson D, Muriel P, Russell D, Osborne P, Bromley A, Rowland M,
Creigh-Tyte S, Brown C: Economic costs of the foot and mouth disease
outbreak in the United Kingdom in 2001. Rev Sci Tech 2002,
21(3):675-687.
11. OIE listed diseases 2011. [http://www.oie.int/eng/maladies/
en_classification2010.htm], (consulted 31 May 2011).
12. Ganière JP: Importance et hiérarchisation des zoonoses en France: le
point de vue vétérinaire. Epidémiol et santé anim 2004, 46:27-32, (in
French).
13. Global Early Warning and Response System for Major Animal Diseases
including Zoonoses. [http://www.glews.net/], (consulted 31 May 2011).
14. de Rycke J: World Research Landscape Mapping of European Research
Organisations. A bibliometrical analysis of research output (2004-2008).
EMIDA ERA-NET-Report of Wordpackage 2; 60 pp (2009) [http://www.emidaera.net/upload/pdf/Final%20WP2%20report%20090407.pdf], (Consulted 31
May 2011).

Page 10 of 10

15. de Rycke J: World mapping of research institutions, topics and
collaboration in the field of infectious diseases of animals; a bibliometric
analysis using publication records extracted from the Web of Science
(2006-2010). Report, 47 pp, 2010 .
16. Discontools: Disease Control Tools. [http://www.discontools.eu/home/
index], (consulted 31 May 2011).
17. Ganière J-P, André-Fontaine G, Drouin P, Faye B, Madec F, Rosner G,
Fourichon C, Wang B, Tillon J-P: L’écopathologie: une méthode
d’approche de la santé en élevage. INRA Prod Anim 1991, 4(3):247-256.
18. Timoney JF, Gillespie JH, Scott FW, Barlough JE: Microbiology and infectious
diseases of domestic animals. 8 edition. Cornell University Press, New York;
1988.
19. Muir WM, Wong GK, Zhang Y, Wang J, Groenen MA, Crooijmans RP,
Megens HJ, Zhang H, Okimoto R, Vereijken A, Jungerius A, Albers GA,
Lawley CT, Delany ME, MacEachern S, Cheng HH: Genome-wide
assessment of worldwide chicken SNP genetic diversity indicates
significant absence of rare alleles in commercial breeds. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 2008, 105:17312-17317.
20. Taberlet P, Coissac E, Pansu J, Pompanon F: Conservation genetics of
cattle, sheep, and goats. C R Biol 2011, 334:247-254.
21. Nishihara H, Hasegawa M, Okada N: Pegasoferae, an unexpected
mammalian clade revealed by tracking ancient retroposon insertions.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006, 103:9929-9934.
22. Harmache A, Leberre M, Droineau S, Giovannini M, Brémont M:
Bioluminescence imaging of live infected salmonids reveals that the fin
bases are the major portal of entry for Novirhabdovirus. J Virol 2006,
80(7):3655-3659.
23. Boudinot P, Blanco M, de Kinkelin P, Benmansour A: Combined DNA
immunization with the glycoprotein gene of viral hemorrhagic
septicemia virus and infectious hematopoietic necrosis virus induces
double-specific protective immunity and nonspecific response in
rainbow trout. Virology 1998, 249(2):297-306.
24. Goldmann W: PrP genetics in ruminant transmissible spongiform
encephalopathies. Vet Res 2008, 39(4):30.
25. Editorial: Prevention, detection and monitoring of animal diseases,
including those harmful to humans: veterinary services are the keystone
of the global system. Bulletin n°3 Evaluation and support of Veterinary
Services (2006) [http://www.oie.int/en/publications-and-documentation/
bulletins-online/], (consulted 31 May 2011).
26. The FAO-OIE-WHO Collaboration sharing responsibilities and
coordinating global activities to address health risks at the animalhuman-ecosystems interfaces. FAO-OIE-WHO Collaboration Concept Note
on health risks at the human-animal interface (2010) [http://www.oie.int/en/
for-the-media/press-releases/detail/article/fao-oie-who-collaborationconcept-note-on-health-risks-at-the-human-animal-interface-is-available-on/],
(consulted 31 May 2011).
27. Editorial: One World, One Health. OIE Bulletin n° 2 One World, One Health
(2009) [http://www.oie.int/en/publications-and-documentation/bulletinsonline/], (Consulted 1 May 2011).
28. Coker R, Rushton J, Mounier-Jack S, Karimuribo E, Lutumba P, Kambarage D,
Pfeiffer DU, Stärk K, Rweyemamu M: Towards a conceptual framework to
support one-health research for policy on emerging zoonoses. Lancet
Infect Dis 2011, 11:326-331.
doi:10.1186/1297-9716-42-96
Cite this article as: Ducrot et al.: Issues and special features of animal
health research. Veterinary Research 2011 42:96.

</pre>
</body>
</html>
