<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>DraGnET: Software for storing, managing and analyzing annotated draft genome sequence data</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Bioinformatics 2010 11:100. doi:10.1186/1471-2105-11-100"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Stacy Duncan"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Duncan et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:100
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/100

SOFTWARE

Open Access

DraGnET: Software for storing, managing and
analyzing annotated draft genome sequence data
Stacy Duncan1,3, Ruchita Sirkanungo2, Leslie Miller2,3, Gregory J Phillips1,3*

Abstract
Background: New “next generation” DNA sequencing technologies offer individual researchers the ability to
rapidly generate large amounts of genome sequence data at dramatically reduced costs. As a result, a need has
arisen for new software tools for storage, management and analysis of genome sequence data. Although
bioinformatic tools are available for the analysis and management of genome sequences, limitations still remain.
For example, restrictions on the submission of data and use of these tools may be imposed, thereby making them
unsuitable for sequencing projects that need to remain in-house or proprietary during their initial stages.
Furthermore, the availability and use of next generation sequencing in industrial, governmental and academic
environments requires biologist to have access to computational support for the curation and analysis of the data
generated; however, this type of support is not always immediately available.
Results: To address these limitations, we have developed DraGnET (Draft Genome Evaluation Tool). DraGnET is an
open source web application which allows researchers, with no experience in programming and database
management, to setup their own in-house projects for storing, retrieving, organizing and managing annotated
draft and complete genome sequence data. The software provides a web interface for the use of BLAST, allowing
users to perform preliminary comparative analysis among multiple genomes. We demonstrate the utility of
DraGnET for performing comparative genomics on closely related bacterial strains. Furthermore, DraGnET can be
further developed to incorporate additional tools for more sophisticated analyses.
Conclusions: DraGnET is designed for use either by individual researchers or as a collaborative tool available
through Internet (or Intranet) deployment. For genome projects that require genome sequencing data to initially
remain proprietary, DraGnET provides the means for researchers to keep their data in-house for analysis using local
programs or until it is made publicly available, at which point it may be uploaded to additional analysis software
applications. The DraGnET home page is available at http://www.dragnet.cvm.iastate.edu and includes example files
for examining the functionalities, a link for downloading the DraGnET setup package and a link to the DraGnET
source code hosted with full documentation on SourceForge.

Background
DNA sequencing technology using chain-terminating
dideoxy nucleoside triphosphates, first developed by Frederick Sanger [1,2], has remained the mainstay of genome sequencing efforts for more than thirty years.
However, recently developed, new massively parallel
DNA sequencing platforms are now extensively used to
generate sequence data at a fraction of the cost and
labor required by Sanger technology. Three “next generation” sequencing systems that are currently
* Correspondence: gregory@iastate.edu
1
Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Preventive Medicine, Iowa State
University, Ames, Iowa, USA

commercially available include the Roche/454 Genome
Sequencer [3], Illumina/Solexa Genome Analyzer II [4,5]
and Applied Biosystems SOLiD System [6]. In addition,
commercial release of two additional platforms, including the Helicos Heliscope and the Pacific Biosmart
SMRT, are planned for 2010 [7].
Collectively, these systems, with their high depth of
coverage and relatively low costs, have allowed individual researchers to initiate genome sequencing projects
that were previously available to only large genome centers [8-10]. The enhanced sequencing capability afforded
by next-generation sequencing has had an especially significant impact on bacterial genomics. By facilitating

© 2010 Duncan et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Duncan et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:100
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/100

genome sequencing of multiple isolates of the same bacterial species, several examples of extensive intraspecies
genotypic heterogeneity have been revealed, leading to a
revision of many long-standing views of microbial speciation [11-14]. One of the first such studies revealed
significant genetic variability among eight different
strains of Streptococcus agalactiae, group B Streptococcus (GBS) [14]. After performing cross strain comparisons Tettelin et al. found a considerable number of
genes not shared among the strains. Their discovery led
to the proposal of the bacterial “pan-genome”, defined
as the global gene repertoire of a bacterial species comprised of the core genome (the set of genes shared by
all the strains of the same bacterial species), the dispensable genome (the set of genes present in some but not
all of the strains) and the strain specific genes (the set
of genes found only in a single strain) [14]. Genome
heterogeneity has also been noted for species of Helicobacter pylori, Staphylococcus aureus, and Escherichia
coli [13,15,16]. As noted by Muzzi et al., comparative
genomics of bacterial species has important implications
for vaccine development and discovery of novel antimicrobials [17]. Other novel applications for next generation sequencing technologies have also been developed,
including bacterial metagenomics [18-20], and transcriptome mapping [21-24].
Despite the potential for new insights into bacterial
diversity and function, important challenges continue to
include the organization, management and analysis of
genome sequencing data. To address the need for tools
for querying, analyzing and comparing multiple genomes of related species, several databases and software
tools have been developed [25], including the Integrated
Microbial Genomes (IMG) system [26,27], Integrated
Microbial Genomes-Expert Review (IMG ER) system
[28], GenColors [29,30], the Microbial Genome Database (MBGD) [31,32], the Comprehensive Microbial
Resource (CMR) [33] and the EDGAR software [34].
The IMG system contains complete and draft microbial genome sequence data generated by the Joint Genomes Institute (JGI) as well as other publicly available
genome data not limited to microorganisms. Tools provided through IMG allow users to query, view and perform comparative analysis of genomes, genes and
functions. Recently, a new version of IMG called IMG
ER has been added to the IMG system. Tools available
through IMG ER allow users to analyze and curate
annotated microbial genome data whether it is unpublished or published. Although IMG ER allows users to
upload their genome sequencing data for curation and
analysis, it is not available for download and in-house
use. The GenColors software allows users to browse,
analyze and compare genome information from complete and ongoing genome projects related to

Page 2 of 13

prokaryotic or eukaryotic genomes. Additionally, GenColors may be used for the purpose of annotation in the
case of incomplete projects. The CMR software contains
sequence and annotation data for all of the current publicly available completed microbial genomes and provides a variety of comparison tools for the analysis of
the multiple genomes including cross-genome analysis
capabilities. Currently, however, there is no functionality
that allows users to submit genome data for use with
CMR. Similar to CMR, MBGD provides users with several tools for the comparison and analysis of complete
bacterial genomes. Unlike CMR, MBGD contains a
newly added feature called MyMBGD that allows users
to add their own genome data to MBGD. The EDGAR
software has recently been released and includes comparative analysis tools for the comparison of multiple
strains of a given species. EDGAR offers similar capabilities to those found in CMR and MBGD, in addition to
features such as phylogenetic analyses and visualization
capabilities including Venn diagrams and synteny plots.
While the aforementioned systems include data management and analysis functionalities there are limitations. For example, genome projects that include
proprietary data may be restricted in the submission of
the data to third party software. Many of the current
data management software tools are not available for
download and in-house use, a requirement when access
to next generation sequencing instruments can outstrip
the availability of experienced bioinformaticians to assist
with data management and analysis.
In addition to the already mentioned software applications, there are other tools that are designed for genome
annotation or re-annotation of unpublished or published
genomes [25,35,36]. Several of these tools provide data
curation capabilities for the purpose of correcting annotation errors and improving annotated data but are
restricted to use with the annotated data generated
through specified software packages. Additionally, as
with many software applications, they require the
researcher to develop a working knowledge of the analysis capabilities of the software as well as provide “expert”
curation of the data. With the increased use of nextgeneration sequencing in academic, industrial and government settings, however, biologists do not always have
immediate access to computational support needed to
easily manage the data and to initiate comparative
analysis.
To overcome some of these limitations, DraGnET was
developed specifically to provide biologists with their
own web based tool that is both convenient and easy to
use. DraGnET allows researchers to independently store,
retrieve and curate their own data generated from any
annotation engine and to perform genome comparisons
during the beginning phase of a sequencing project.

Duncan et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:100
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/100

Additionally, publicly available genome data can be
stored for the purpose of comparing draft genome data
with reference genomes. DraGnET includes provisions
for data access, searching, and modification as well as
access to basic local alignment search tool (BLAST)
functionalities [37] for amino acid sequence similarity
searches and cross strain comparisons. As a consequence, DraGnET allows investigators to immediately
begin testing of biologically relevant hypotheses without
having to devote time to learning sophisticated analysis
programs or to depend on computational support from
designated personnel. Additionally, the DraGnET source
code has been made available, allowing researchers to
further customize and develop the software to meet the
needs of specific sequencing projects.
To demonstrate the utility of DraGnET, we have successfully established a DraGnET project, deployed for
Internet access, and performed preliminary cross strain
comparisons to identify potential vaccine targets against
the animal pathogen Haemophilus parasuis. Microbial
genome sequencing has proven to be a powerful
approach to identify new, protective vaccines via reverse
vaccinology, i.e., discovery of vaccine targets by scanning
sequence data for potential surface-exposed antigens
[38]. Moreover, broadly protective antigens may be
identified by comparison of genomes from multiple
strains of a single species [17,39,40]. Reverse vaccinology
has led to the development of new vaccines for several
human and animal pathogens where previously vaccines
were not available [41-44]. DraGnET enables facile preliminary comparisons of multiple draft or complete genome sequences of any number of organisms, including
identification of protein encoding genes shared by multiple strains, making DraGnET a useful bioinformatic
tool.

Implementation
The DraGnET web application was developed in Java
[see Additional file 1]. DraGnET provides user interfaces
for storing information related to strains and their associated annotated gene set in a database. Gene and strain
information are stored as objects defined by two Java
classes, Gene and Strain (Figure 1). The Gene class
stores nine gene attributes most of which can be
obtained from gene annotation data. The choice of gene
attributes was based upon gene information available in
public sequence databases such as GenBank and
includes additional attributes relevant for vaccine target
identification. The Strain class contains information
such as the strain name and description. Two additional
Java classes, Logininformation class and the Blastdbupdate class are used to define objects related to administrator/curator user information and the date of the last
modification made to the data, respectively (Figure 1).

Page 3 of 13

Hibernate (version 3.1 core and advanced libraries) is
used to map the Java objects, representing the Gene,
Strain, Logininformation and Blastdbupdate classes, to
relational tables in a MySQL (version 5.0) database. By
using Hibernate in the software architecture, DraGnET
works with an object database supported by Hibernate.
The servlet engine used to support the web interface is
Apache-Tomcat version 6. The web application uses
Struts (version 1.2) to implement the Model-View-Controller (MVC) architecture. The MVC architecture provides a way to separate the web interface (view) from
the business logic (model) making it easier to implement
and modify either component independent of the other.
The web interface (view) is implemented through Java
Server Pages (JSP). BLAST functionalities are provided
by stand-alone executable BLAST software connected to
the business logic and web pages are provided for users
to interact with BLAST. The BLAST program is configured to run the blastp (protein blast) algorithm and
applies the blastall program available from NCBI [45].
The general layout for the architecture of the DraGnET
software is provided in Figure 2. The web application
was built using MyEclipse version 6.0 and has been successfully tested on Microsoft Windows 2003 and Windows XP operating systems.
DraGnET project setup

A DraGnET project can be installed on a personal
computer or it can be setup for Internet (or Intranet)
deployment making it a tool that is available for collaborative projects. The initial setup of a DraGnET project requires installation of Java (version 1.6), MySQL
(version 5.0) including the MySQL 5.0 GUI Tools,
Apache Tomcat 6, and Blast 2.2.18. Executable files for
installing all of the aforementioned software are provided in a comprehensive setup package provided
through the “DraGnET Application Setup Package”
link located on the application’s home page (Figure 3).
After installing the required software packages the
database structure used by Hibernate to map the Java
objects to relational tables in the MySQL database is
automatically generated by the MySQL 5.0 GUI Tool
and a file included in the setup package [see Additional file 2]. This automated process alleviates the
requirement of the user to have the knowledge necessary for setting up the database schema used to store
the genome data. After the DraGnET project is set up
and genome sequence data has been uploaded into the
database, local BLAST databases for each genome need
to be formatted for use with the BLAST functionalities
provided with the application. Information on all of
these steps, as well as additional usage information, is
available in the DraGnET_setup.doc provided in the
setup package.

Duncan et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:100
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/100

Page 4 of 13

Figure 1 Java classes. Four Java classes are used to define the Gene, Strain, Logininformation and Blastdbupdate objects. The Gene class
defines variables for the following annotated gene information: gene identification (gid and geneId), gene function (function), the protein
sequence (proteinSequence), a description of the gene (geneDescription), the name of the gene (geneName), the size of the protein
(proteinSize), the subcellular localization (localization), if the protein is predicted to be a lipoprotein (lipoprotein), if the protein is predicted to
have a signal sequence (signalSequence) and the set of strains that contain the genes (Set<Strain> strains). The Strain class defines variables for
strain information such as a strain identifier (sid and strainId), the strain name (strainName), a description of the strain (strainDescription), and the
set of genes contained in the strain (Set<Gene> genes). The Logininformation class defines variables for the user login identifier
(LogininformationId id), the usertype and the time the user logged in (lastlogon). The Blastdbupdate class defines variables for the date the last
update was made to the data (dateId and updatedDate).

Results
DraGnET is an open source web application designed to
provide researchers with a tool for storing their own
unpublished annotated draft and complete genome data
from multiple strains of a species in a database; allowing
gene and strain information to be available for retrieving, searching, modifying and downloading. The application also provides a web interface for the use of BLAST,
allowing for protein sequence similarity searches and
cross strain comparisons of strains stored in the database. In addition, DraGnET provides a link for the automatic generation of FASTA files for each genome stored
in the database. The files are available for download and
can be used with other software and tools for further
analysis. The details of the functionalities of DraGnET
are provided in the following section.

Data Management

DraGnET is set up to allow any user to search, view and
compare genome sequence data stored in the database;
however, only curators may insert and modify the data
by signing in to the application. This was designed to
prevent inconsistencies in the data and to protect the
application when it is being accessed by multiple users
from different locations.
Data insertion

Two web pages are provided for the insertion of strain
and gene information. The data entry tables for these
pages are shown in Figure 4. In the first table the curator enters the strain information (Figure 4A) and in the
second table the curator is directed to upload a file containing gene information for genes contained in the
strain (Figure 4B). The application accepts a semicolon-

Duncan et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:100
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/100

Page 5 of 13

Figure 2 DraGnET software architecture. The DraGnET web application uses Struts to implement the Model-View-Controller (MVC)
architecture. The view represents the presentation of the application and is implemented through Java Server Pages (JSP). The Controller is
responsible for intercepting and translating user input into actions to be performed by the Model. The Controller receives the request from the
browser, invokes a business operation and coordinates the view to be returned to the browser. The Struts Action servlet populates information
from the JSP to the appropriate Struts Action Form then throws control to the Struts Action. The Struts Action gets data from the appropriate
Struts Action Form and sends the information to the Model where certain actions like retrievals and updates will be performed. The Model is
where communication with the database takes place through Hibernate. Hibernate is used to map Model Classes (Java objects) to tables in the
database. Model Classes are also used to execute BLAST functionalities provided through the application’s web interface. The Model represents
enterprise data and the business rules that govern access to and updates of this data.

separated plain text file, containing values for the nine
gene attributes defined in the Gene class, for batch
insertion of gene information into the database. The
software then stores the data in the database allowing
for subsequent retrievals and updates to be performed.
Data modification

The DraGnET application provides web pages for
assigned curators to modify genome data as well as
administrator/curator user information. As shown in
Figure 5, modifications that can be made to gene and
strain data include adding, deleting and updating gene
or strain information. The addition and deletion of single or multiple genes to strain(s) already stored in the
database follows the same procedure as the addition of
a strain and its associated gene set. To delete a single
strain the user selects the strain to be deleted and once
submitted, the strain information and all of the genes
not associated with any other strain are deleted. An
important part of data management is the ability to
update or modify the information stored in the database,
as is the case for draft genome sequences as progress is
made toward gap closure and genome completion. To
update gene information, the curator enters the gene Id
of the gene to be updated (Figure 6A). Subsequently,
the gene attributes that need to be modified are selected
(Figure 6B). Once the selections are submitted the gene
information currently stored in the database is displayed

as “old” information and the “new” information may be
entered (Figure 6C). A similar procedure is provided for
updating strain information.
Formatting BLAST database files

BLAST functionalities for sequence similarity searches
and cross strain comparisons are provided through
DraGnET web-interfaces. To use these functionalities,
BLAST database files for each strain stored in the database must be created through command line arguments.
The command used to format BLAST database files is
the similar for each strain stored in the database, having
to change only the FASTA file used for BLAST database
file generation. Details of this process are included in
the DraGnET setup package. Once the BLAST databases
are created, all BLAST functionalities offered with
DraGnET are available for use.
Data Exploration

The following functionalities are implemented through
the web interface and are available for all users.
Quick and Advanced Search

The “Quick Search” option provides users with four different search options for retrieving gene and strain
information stored in the database. Searches can be performed by selecting and entering a gene Id, gene name,
protein sequence, or strain Id (Figure 7A-B). When a
search is performed using a gene Id, gene name or

Duncan et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:100
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/100

Page 6 of 13

Figure 3 Web interface- DraGnET Home Page. Listed on the DraGnET home page are links for downloading the DraGnET setup package
("DraGnET Application Setup Package”), testing search and BLAST capabilities ("Example Files”), generating FASTA formatted files ("Generate
FASTA files”) and all “Search” functionalities.

protein sequence the results are displayed in a table
containing information for the chosen gene, including
the strain that contains the gene (Figure 7C). Searches
based upon a strain Id provide the user with strain
information as well as the option to download a text file
containing gene information for all of the genes contained in the chosen strain. The “Advanced Search”
option allows users to search for gene information using
more stringent parameters. Users can specify single or
multiple gene attributes to use in the advanced search
(Figure 8A). Once the attribute(s) are chosen, the user

enters search criteria for each attribute chosen and
selects the strain(s) they want to search (Figure 8B). If
more than one strain is chosen, then the program
searches for genes having the same gene identifier and
chosen attributes in common with the set of strains.
Search results are written to a text file that can be
opened for immediate viewing or saved for future
inspection.
BLAST Search

“BLAST Search” provides users with an interface for
using the protein BLAST (blastp) program for

Duncan et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:100
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/100

Page 7 of 13

Figure 4 Adding a new strain. The data entry tables displayed on the web pages for inserting a new strain. In the first table (A) the curator
enters the strain Id, strain name and strain description of the new strain. In the second table (B) the curator is directed to upload a file
containing gene information for genes contained in the strain. The strain and gene information is then stored in the database.

Figure 5 Data Modification. The table displayed on the web page for modifying gene and strain data. As shown in the table, modifications
that can be made by the curator to gene and strain data include adding, deleting and updating gene or strain information.

Duncan et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:100
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/100

Page 8 of 13

Figure 6 Updating gene information. The data entry tables displayed on the web pages for updating gene information. In the top left table
(A) the gene Id of the gene whose information needs modification is entered and submitted. The table on the bottom left (B) allows the
curator to select gene attributes that need to be modified. Subsequently, as shown in table (C), for each attribute selected, the gene information
currently stored in the database is displayed on the left side of the table as “Old” information and on the right side of the table changes to the
gene information may be entered under “New”.

Figure 7 Quick Search. The data entry tables and results table displayed on the web pages for “Quick Search”. In the top left table (A) the user
selects a gene or strain search attribute. In the bottom left table (B) the user enters information for the chosen search criteria. Subsequently, the
results table (C) displays information for the chosen gene or strain.

Duncan et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:100
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/100

Page 9 of 13

Figure 8 Advanced Search. The data entry tables displayed on the web pages for “Advanced Search”. Using the table on the left (A) users may
customize their search for gene information by selecting single or multiple search attributes. The table on the right (B) allows users to enter and
select values for the chosen search criteria. Subsequently, a text file containing search results is available for download.

comparing protein sequences against protein sequence
BLAST databases. Each strain stored in the database is
used to format BLAST protein databases during the
initial setup of a DraGnET project. Subsequently, the
strains appear on the BLAST Search page listed under
“Search Databases Containing Strains” where users have
the option to select single or multiple strain databases
to search against (Figure 9A). All parameters are set to
NCBI defined default values; however users have the
option to refine their search by changing the expectation
value (E-value). Users can then input their FASTA formatted query sequence by pasting it into the query box.

The output generated will include the input query
sequence, the user chosen BLAST database(s) and a list
of alignments between the input query sequence and
the database hits. The output file is available for
immediate viewing and downloading (Figure 9B).
Batch BLAST Search

“Batch BLAST Search” is an extension of “BLAST Search”
that allows text files containing multiple FASTA formatted
protein sequences (including entire strains) to be uploaded
for comparison against a single strain BLAST database
(Figure 10). Similar to “BLAST Search”, the results are
written to a text file available for viewing and downloading.

Figure 9 BLAST Search. The data entry table and results displayed on the web pages for “BLAST Search”. As shown in table (A), users have the
option to select a single or multiple search database(s). In this example we have three BLAST databases available for searching that represent
strains SH0165, 29755 and 12939. To refine their search, users have the option to change the E-value with the default being .01. A text box is
provided for users to enter a FASTA formatted protein query sequence. The results (B) are displayed to the user and are available for download.

Duncan et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:100
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/100

Page 10 of 13

Figure 10 Batch BLAST Search. The data entry table displayed on the web page for “Batch BLAST Search”. Users select a single search
database from a drop down menu. In this example, the BLAST database representing strain 29755 was chosen. To refine their search, users have
the option to change the E-value with the default being .01. Users then upload a text file containing FASTA formatted protein sequences which
will be used as the set of query sequences. The results format is the same as “BLAST Search”.

Batch BLAST Dissimilarity Search

“Batch BLAST Dissimilarity Search” takes as input the
results of “Batch BLAST Search” and extracts the gene
identifiers associated with protein sequences that produced a “no hits found” result. The resulting set of genes
identifiers represents genes that have no protein
sequence homology to any sequences found in the
selected search database. Results are written to a text file.
Generate FASTA Files

The “Generate FASTA Files” option automatically generates FASTA files for each strain stored in the database. When users click on the “Generate FASTA Files”
button a set of files in FASTA format, one for each
strain, will be available to download. Subsequently, the
files can be used with other publicly available comparative analysis software tools or they can be saved as text
files for use with “Batch BLAST Search”.
Case study: Haemophilus parasuis genome data

To demonstrate the functionalities of DraGnET we used
the web application to store genomic data from three
strains of Haemophilus parasuis, two draft genomes
(strains 29755 and 12939) and a complete reference
genome (strain SH0165) [46], and to perform preliminary cross strain comparisons to identify protein products
common to each strain. H. parasuis is a bacterial pathogen that causes severe respiratory disease in swine and
vaccines effective against multiple isolates are lacking
[47]. Since outer membrane proteins, including

lipoproteins, that are shared among the H. parasuis
strains represent potential broadly protective antigens,
identifying common genes is a first step toward vaccine
development. Draft genome sequence data for strains
29755 and 12939 were generated using the Illumina/
Solexa Genome Analyzer II platform (G. Phillips, D.
Dyer, and K. Register, unpublished data). The genomes
were assembled using SH0165 as a reference genome
using NextGene software (State College, PA). Annotation was performed through the Institute for Genome
Sciences (IGS) Annotation Engine offered by the University of Maryland, School of Medicine.
Initially, annotated genome sequence data representing
the three strains were formatted for use with DraGnET by
conversion to semicolon-separated files. Subsequently,
information for each strain was entered and the corresponding file was uploaded and populated in the database
using the application’s web interface (Figure 4). Once in
the database, the annotated data was available for searching and modifying. As shown in Figure 7, “Quick Search”
was used to search for information related to the gene
identifier “hph_875"; which returned a table with the
annotated gene information. Data modification is an
important functionality provided through DraGnET, especially in the case of draft genome data. To demonstrate
this capability, gene information related to gene identifier
“hph_1391” was selected for updating. As shown in Figure
6, the following gene attributes were selected and modified: gene description, localization, and signal sequence.

Duncan et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:100
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/100

Page 11 of 13

Once submitted, all modifications to the data were confirmed using “Quick Search”. DraGnET provides additional functionalities for preliminary analysis of draft and
complete genome data. To identify protein products common to all three of the H. parasuis strains, “Advanced
Search” and BLAST functionalities provided through the
DraGnET interface were used to perform preliminary
cross strain comparisons. This demonstrates the DraGnET
application is ideally suited for smaller companies or academic labs that are just beginning to use next-generation
sequencing for vaccine development.

Currently gene attributes selected for storage and use
with DraGnET are fixed. Further development of DraGnET will include the storage of more comprehensive
annotation data as well as more advanced functionalities
for comparative analysis.
DraGnET currently contains draft and complete genome data from three strains of H. parasuis made available for collaborative research efforts. Readers are
encouraged to visit the DraGnET website located at
http://www.dragnet.cvm.iastate.edu and examine the
functionalities of the software.

Discussion
While data from genome sequencing projects typically
become publicly available through sequence repositories,
the rate at which large-scale sequences information is
being generated and subsequent analysis will, in many
cases, delay public availability of the data. In addition,
sequencing projects where proprietary data are generated are limited as to how the information can be managed and analyzed until it is ready for public reposition.
This limitation emphasizes the need for software applications that provide researchers with in-house data
management and analysis capabilities. While some of
the features of DraGnET are provided with other applications, our software provides a user friendly in-house
web application that enables researchers to manage
their own unpublished or proprietary annotated draft
genome data at the initial stage of development without
having prior knowledge of query languages necessary for
data storage, retrieval and update.
Additional features of the application include BLAST
capabilities and the automatic generation of FASTA files
from protein sequence data stored in the database. A
web interface is provided for use of stand-alone BLAST
alleviating the requirement to perform searches through
command line and allowing users to search against a
single strain or multiple strains as well as perform cross
strain comparisons once the BLAST database files are
created. DraGnET was designed to store and compare
different strains from the same species; however the
web interface design is generic enough to accommodate
multiple organisms and their related strains. Additionally, the DraGnET software can be further developed to
customize the program for specific needs.
As demonstrated in the case study, DraGnET provides
researchers with an application that can be used as a
first step toward data curation and analysis. Subsequently, after the data are made publicly available, more
comprehensive analysis may be performed, for example
by any of the aforementioned analysis software. Alternatively, the sequence data can continue to be analyzed
using in-house programs, including annotation and
BLAST comparisons [37,48].

Conclusions
New genome sequencing methods now allow multiple
draft genomes to be generated, assembled, and annotated at an unprecedented rate at modest expense. Following sequencing, assembly and annotation, there is an
immediate need for the data to be organized, stored,
curated and formatted for comparative analysis. The
DraGnET software is an ideal in-house tool that allows
i.) storage and integration of annotated data generated
from different annotation platforms in a database, ii.)
retrieval of gene and strain information based upon
basic or advanced search parameters, iii.) management
of gene and strain information, iv.) generation of
FASTA formatted files for all strains stored in the database, v.) sequence similarity searches using BLAST, vi.)
Batch BLAST searches for cross strain comparisons and
vii.) retrieval of strain specific genes based upon Batch
BLAST results. The application allows for the setup of
individual projects used on local machines or may be
deployed through Internet (or Intranet) access for use
by other researchers across different locations. To
demonstrate this, we setup a DraGnET project, deployed
it for Internet access, and identified potential vaccine
targets in multiple strains of H. parasuis using preliminary cross strain comparisons.
Availability and Requirements
• Project name: Draft Genome Evaluation Tool
(DraGnET)
• Project home page: http://www.dragnet.cvm.iastate.edu
• Operating system(s): Microsoft Windows 2003 and
Windows XP
• Programming language: Java
• Other requirements: JRE 1.6.0, MySQL 5.0, MySQL
5.0GUI Tools, Apache Tomcat 6.0 and Blast 2.2.18
• License: GNU GPL
Additional file 1: Source code for the DraGnET software. This folder
contains the source code for the DraGnET software.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2105-11100-S1.ZIP ]

Duncan et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:100
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/100

Additional file 2: MySQL Database Schema. This file contains a
diagram of the MySQL database tables that are automatically created
when setting up a DraGnET project.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2105-11100-S2.DOCX ]

Acknowledgements
The authors thank Fadi Towfic for helpful suggestions and Josh Mack for
technical support. The authors also thank Dr. Michelle Giglio for support
during the annotation process performed through the Institute for Genome
Sciences (IGS) Annotation Engine offered by the University of Maryland,
School of Medicine http://ae.igs.umaryland.edu/cgi/index.cgi. This work was
funded in part by the Iowa Healthy Lifestock Initiative and the National Pork
Board.
Author details
1
Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Preventive Medicine, Iowa State
University, Ames, Iowa, USA. 2Department of Computer Science, Iowa State
University, Ames, Iowa, USA. 3Interdepartmental Bioinformatics and
Computational Biology, Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa, USA.
Authors’ contributions
SD and RS planned wrote and tested the software. SD and GP wrote and
revised the manuscript. LM assisted with the initial software design and with
manuscript revisions. All authors have read and approved the manuscript.

Page 12 of 13

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.
Received: 8 October 2009
Accepted: 22 February 2010 Published: 22 February 2010
References
1. Sanger F, Coulson AR: A rapid method for determining sequences in
DNA by primed synthesis with DNA polymerase. J Mol Biol 1975,
94:441-448.
2. Sanger F, Nicklen S, Coulson AR: DNA sequencing with chain-terminating
inhibitors. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1977, 74:5463-5467.
3. Margulies M, Egholm M, Altman WE, Attiya S, Bader JS, Bemben LA, Berka J,
Braverman MS, Chen YJ, Chen Z, et al: Genome sequencing in
microfabricated high-density picolitre reactors. Nature 2005, 437:376-380.
4. Fedurco M, Romieu A, Williams S, Lawrence I, Turcatti G: BTA, a novel
reagent for DNA attachment on glass and efficient generation of solidphase amplified DNA colonies. Nucleic Acids Res 2006, 34:e22.
5. Turcatti G, Romieu A, Fedurco M, Tairi AP: A new class of cleavable
fluorescent nucleotides: synthesis and optimization as reversible
terminators for DNA sequencing by synthesis. Nucleic Acids Res 2008, 36:
e25.
6. Shendure J, Porreca GJ, Reppas NB, Lin X, McCutcheon JP, Rosenbaum AM,
Wang MD, Zhang K, Mitra RD, Church GM: Accurate multiplex polony
sequencing of an evolved bacterial genome. Science 2005, 309:1728-1732.
7. Mardis ER: Next-generation DNA sequencing methods. Annu Rev
Genomics Hum Genet 2008, 9:387-402.
8. Marguerat S, Wilhelm BT, Bahler J: Next-generation sequencing:
applications beyond genomes. Biochem Soc Trans 2008, 36:1091-1096.
9. Schuster SC: Next-generation sequencing transforms today’s biology. Nat
Methods 2008, 5:16-18.
10. Shendure J, Ji H: Next-generation DNA sequencing. Nat Biotechnol 2008,
26:1135-1145.
11. Medini D, Donati C, Tettelin H, Masignani V, Rappuoli R: The microbial pangenome. Curr Opin Genet Dev 2005, 15:589-594.
12. Field D, Wilson G, Gast van der C: How do we compare hundreds of
bacterial genomes?. Curr Opin Microbiol 2006, 9:499-504.
13. Fukiya S, Mizoguchi H, Tobe T, Mori H: Extensive genomic diversity in
pathogenic Escherichia coli and Shigella Strains revealed by
comparative genomic hybridization microarray. J Bacteriol 2004,
186:3911-3921.
14. Tettelin H, Masignani V, Cieslewicz MJ, Donati C, Medini D, Ward NL,
Angiuoli SV, Crabtree J, Jones AL, Durkin AS, et al: Genome analysis of
multiple pathogenic isolates of Streptococcus agalactiae: implications

24.

25.
26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.
32.

33.
34.

35.

36.

37.

for the microbial “pan-genome”. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005,
102:13950-13955.
Bjorkholm B, Lundin A, Sillen A, Guillemin K, Salama N, Rubio C, Gordon JI,
Falk P, Engstrand L: Comparison of genetic divergence and fitness
between two subclones of Helicobacter pylori. Infect Immun 2001,
69:7832-7838.
Fitzgerald JR, Sturdevant DE, Mackie SM, Gill SR, Musser JM: Evolutionary
genomics of Staphylococcus aureus: insights into the origin of
methicillin-resistant strains and the toxic shock syndrome epidemic. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 2001, 98:8821-8826.
Muzzi A, Masignani V, Rappuoli R: The pan-genome: towards a
knowledge-based discovery of novel targets for vaccines and
antibacterials. Drug Discov Today 2007, 12:429-439.
Gill SR, Pop M, Deboy RT, Eckburg PB, Turnbaugh PJ, Samuel BS, Gordon JI,
Relman DA, Fraser-Liggett CM, Nelson KE: Metagenomic analysis of the
human distal gut microbiome. Science 2006, 312:1355-1359.
Leininger S, Urich T, Schloter M, Schwark L, Qi J, Nicol GW, Prosser JI,
Schuster SC, Schleper C: Archaea predominate among ammonia-oxidizing
prokaryotes in soils. Nature 2006, 442:806-809.
Wegley L, Edwards R, Rodriguez-Brito B, Liu H, Rohwer F: Metagenomic
analysis of the microbial community associated with the coral Porites
astreoides. Environ Microbiol 2007, 9:2707-2719.
Bainbridge MN, Warren RL, Hirst M, Romanuik T, Zeng T, Go A, Delaney A,
Griffith M, Hickenbotham M, Magrini V, et al: Analysis of the prostate
cancer cell line LNCaP transcriptome using a sequencing-by-synthesis
approach. BMC Genomics 2006, 7:246.
Cheung F, Haas BJ, Goldberg SM, May GD, Xiao Y, Town CD: Sequencing
Medicago truncatula expressed sequenced tags using 454 Life Sciences
technology. BMC Genomics 2006, 7:272.
Torres TT, Metta M, Ottenwalder B, Schlotterer C: Gene expression profiling
by massively parallel sequencing. Genome Res 2008, 18:172-177.
Weber AP, Weber KL, Carr K, Wilkerson C, Ohlrogge JB: Sampling the
Arabidopsis transcriptome with massively parallel pyrosequencing. Plant
Physiol 2007, 144:32-42.
Medigue C, Moszer I: Annotation, comparison and databases for
hundreds of bacterial genomes. Res Microbiol 2007, 158:724-736.
Markowitz VM, Korzeniewski F, Palaniappan K, Szeto E, Werner G, Padki A,
Zhao X, Dubchak I, Hugenholtz P, Anderson I, et al: The integrated
microbial genomes (IMG) system. Nucleic Acids Res 2006, 34:D344-348.
Markowitz VM, Szeto E, Palaniappan K, Grechkin Y, Chu K, Chen IM,
Dubchak I, Anderson I, Lykidis A, Mavromatis K, et al: The integrated
microbial genomes (IMG) system in 2007: data content and analysis tool
extensions. Nucleic Acids Res 2008, 36:D528-533.
Markowitz VM, Mavromatis K, Ivanova NN, Chen IM, Chu K, Kyrpides NC:
IMG ER: a system for microbial genome annotation expert review and
curation. Bioinformatics 2009, 25:2271-2278.
Romualdi A, Felder M, Rose D, Gausmann U, Schilhabel M, Glockner G,
Platzer M, Suhnel J: GenColors: annotation and comparative genomics of
prokaryotes made easy. Methods Mol Biol 2007, 395:75-96.
Romualdi A, Siddiqui R, Glockner G, Lehmann R, Suhnel J: GenColors:
accelerated comparative analysis and annotation of prokaryotic
genomes at various stages of completeness. Bioinformatics 2005,
21:3669-3671.
Uchiyama I: MBGD: microbial genome database for comparative analysis.
Nucleic Acids Res 2003, 31:58-62.
Uchiyama I: MBGD: a platform for microbial comparative genomics
based on the automated construction of orthologous groups. Nucleic
Acids Res 2007, 35:D343-346.
Peterson JD, Umayam LA, Dickinson T, Hickey EK, White O: The
Comprehensive Microbial Resource. Nucleic Acids Res 2001, 29:123-125.
Blom J, Albaum SP, Doppmeier D, Puhler A, Vorholter FJ, Zakrzewski M,
Goesmann A: EDGAR: a software framework for the comparative analysis
of prokaryotic genomes. BMC Bioinformatics 2009, 10:154.
Vallenet D, Labarre L, Rouy Z, Barbe V, Bocs S, Cruveiller S, Lajus A, Pascal G,
Scarpelli C, Medigue C: MaGe: a microbial genome annotation system
supported by synteny results. Nucleic Acids Res 2006, 34:53-65.
Aziz RK, Bartels D, Best AA, DeJongh M, Disz T, Edwards RA, Formsma K,
Gerdes S, Glass EM, Kubal M, et al: The RAST Server: rapid annotations
using subsystems technology. BMC Genomics 2008, 9:75.
Altschul SF, Gish W, Miller W, Myers EW, Lipman DJ: Basic local alignment
search tool. J Mol Biol 1990, 215:403-410.

Duncan et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:100
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/100

Page 13 of 13

38. Rappuoli R: Reverse vaccinology, a genome-based approach to vaccine
development. Vaccine 2001, 19:2688-2691.
39. Serruto D, Serino L, Masignani V, Pizza M: Genome-based approaches to
develop vaccines against bacterial pathogens. Vaccine 2009,
27:3245-3250.
40. Bambini S, Rappuoli R: The use of genomics in microbial vaccine
development. Drug Discov Today 2009, 14:252-260.
41. Maione D, Margarit I, Rinaudo CD, Masignani V, Mora M, Scarselli M,
Tettelin H, Brettoni C, Iacobini ET, Rosini R, et al: Identification of a
universal Group B streptococcus vaccine by multiple genome screen.
Science 2005, 309:148-150.
42. Myers GS, Parker D, Al-Hasani K, Kennan RM, Seemann T, Ren Q, Badger JH,
Selengut JD, Deboy RT, Tettelin H, et al: Genome sequence and
identification of candidate vaccine antigens from the animal pathogen
Dichelobacter nodosus. Nat Biotechnol 2007, 25:569-575.
43. Pizza M, Scarlato V, Masignani V, Giuliani MM, Arico B, Comanducci M,
Jennings GT, Baldi L, Bartolini E, Capecchi B, et al: Identification of vaccine
candidates against serogroup B meningococcus by whole-genome
sequencing. Science 2000, 287:1816-1820.
44. Al-Hasani K, Boyce J, McCarl VP, Bottomley S, Wilkie I, Adler B: Identification
of novel immunogens in Pasteurella multocida. Microb Cell Fact 2007, 6:3.
45. Altschul SF, Madden TL, Schaffer AA, Zhang J, Zhang Z, Miller W,
Lipman DJ: Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new generation of protein
database search programs. Nucleic Acids Res 1997, 25:3389-3402.
46. Yue M, Yang F, Yang J, Bei W, Cai X, Chen L, Dong J, Zhou R, Jin M, Jin Q,
Chen H: Complete genome sequence of Haemophilus parasuis SH0165. J
Bacteriol 2009, 191:1359-1360.
47. Rapp-Gabrielson VJ, Oliveira SR, Pijoan C: Haemophilus parasuis. Diseases of
Swine Ames, I.A.: Blackwell PublishingStraw BEJJZ, D’Allaire S, Taylor DJ , 8
2006, 475-481.
48. Berriman M, Rutherford K: Viewing and annotating sequence data with
Artemis. Brief Bioinform 2003, 4:124-132.
doi:10.1186/1471-2105-11-100
Cite this article as: Duncan et al.: DraGnET: Software for storing,
managing and analyzing annotated draft genome sequence data. BMC
Bioinformatics 2010 11:100.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
