<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>1475-2883-2-S1-S8.fm</title>
<meta name="Author" content="csproduction"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 7.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 5.0.5 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Filaria Journal

BioMed Central

Open Access

Review

Ivermectin: does P-glycoprotein play a role in neurotoxicity?
Geoffrey Edwards*1,2
Address: 1Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, The University of Liverpool, Sherrington Buildings, Ashton Street, Liverpool, UK and
2Division of Molecular and Biochemical Parasitology, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Pembroke Place, Liverpool, UK
Email: Geoffrey Edwards* - ge1000@liverpool.ac.uk
* Corresponding author

from Report of a Scientific Working Group on Serious Adverse Events following Mectizan® treatment of onchocerciasis in Loa loa endemic areas
Shrigley Hall Hotel, Manchester, UK, 28 – 30 May 2002
Published: 24 October 2003
Filaria Journal 2003, 2(Suppl 1):S8
This article is available from: http://filariajournal.com/content/2/S1/S8

Abstract
The macrocyclic lactone ivermectin (Mectizan®) is widely used for the control of human filarial
infections, particularly as a donated product for onchocerciasis and lymphatic filariasis. In the case
of control of lymphatic filariasis in Africa, it is used in combination with donated albendazole. In
areas co-endemic for Onchocerciasis and Loa loa, serious adverse reactions have been observed in
patients with apparently high microfilaria counts of Loa loa. Recent findings suggest that the severe
central nervous system side effects seen in various vertebrates following ivermectin treatment may
be due to an absence of, or functional deficiency in P-glycoprotein. P-glycoprotein is expressed in
the apical membrane of brain capillary epithelial cells and is responsible for limiting the brain
penetration of a range of compounds. Toxicity of ivermectin in some collie dogs may be explained
by a 4-bp deletion mutation of the mdr1 gene resulting in a frame shift, generating stop codons that
prematurely terminate synthesis of P-glycoprotein. Additionally, sub-populations of CF-1 identified
as expressing reduced levels of P-glycoprotein exhibit increased toxicity to substrates of this
transporter. Furthermore, while the traditional view of drug-drug interactions is alteration in drug
clearance mediated through a change in hepatic drug metabolism, some of these changes may arise
through competition for binding sites on P-glycoprotein in the blood-brain barrier, resulting in
reduced extracellular efflux and enhanced CNS toxicity. In conclusion, P-glycoprotein is an integral
component of the human blood brain barrier and plays a central role in limiting drug uptake into
the brain. Altered expression or function of p-glycoprotein could conceivably allow elevation of
brain concentrations of ivermectin and produce severe neurotoxicity. This might arise through a
genetic polymorphism in p-glycoprotein or co-administration of ivermectin with a drug or foodstuff
that might inhibit this efflux transporter.

Background
Although clinical and veterinary usage of the broad-spectrum anthelmintic agent ivermectin has generally been
free of serious adverse events since 1991, a number of
clinical cases with and without neurological manifestations, including coma lasting 2–3 days, have been
reported after ivermectin treatment of individuals infected

with Onchocerca volvulus who also had concomitant Loa
loa infection with a high levels of microfilariae, typically >
30,000 microfilariae /ml of blood [1,2]. Although a cause
and effect relationship has yet to be established, it is
advised that individuals who warrant treatment with ivermectin for any reason and have had significant exposure
to Loa loa-endemic areas of West and Central Africa, pre-

Page 1 of 6
(page number not for citation purposes)

Filaria Journal 2003, 2(Suppl 1)

http://filariajournal.com/content/2/S1/S8

Figure 1
Chemical structure of ivermectin
Chemical structure of ivermectin. Ivermectin contains not less than 93.0% of 22,23 dihydroavermectin B1a (R = CH3) and the
sum of B1a and B1b (R = C2H5) is not less than 97.0%. B1a, and not less than 97.0% of 22,23-dihydroavermectin B1 (B1a + B1b).

treatment assessment for loaiasis and careful post-treatment follow-up should be implemented. The aim of this
brief review is to assess whether any of these events could
be attributed to the pharmacology of ivermectin, notably
its affinity for the P-glycoprotein drug transporter, which
might serve to reduce oral bioavailability of ivermectin
and prevent its uptake into the brain, thereby preventing
potentially fatal neurotoxicity.
Chemistry and Pharmacology of the Macrocyclic Lactones
The macrocyclic lactones comprise the avermectins (e.g.
doramectin and ivermectin; [Figure 1]) and the milbemycins (e.g. moxidectin). They are natural fermentation
products of Streptomycetes bacteria. Many have potent
anthelmintic and insecticidal properties [3,4] and are
drugs of choice for nematode infections in animals. Ivermectin is the preferred treatment for onchocerciasis and
other human filarial infections, such as Wuchereria bancrofti. Macrocyclic lactones produce a flaccid paralysis of
the somatic worm musculature and inhibit feeding of the
parasite through blockade of pharyngeal pumping [5–7],
suggesting that a disruption of ingestion is the primary
action of these agents [8] However, the somatic musculature is also understood to be a target and may explain the

reduction in release of uterine microfilariae seen after
exposure to ivermectin. Molecular genetics with C elegans
and expressed receptors has shown that macrocyclic lactones act as agonists of a family of invertebrate-specific
inhibitory chloride channels that are activated by
glutamic acid [8–11] and related phylogenetically to vertebrate GABAA gated chloride channels [12]. While the
selective effect of ivermectin can be explained by its action
on the glutamate-gated chloride channels unique to invertebrates, at higher concentrations ivermectin can also
potentiate vertebrate GABAA gated chloride channels. This
has led to suggestions that ivermectin and related drugs
may be toxic in vertebrates having a deficiency in their
blood brain barrier [13]. Recent findings suggest that the
severe central nervous system side effects seen in various
vertebrates following ivermectin treatment may be due to
an absence of, or functional deficiency of P-glycoprotein
[14].
The Blood Brain Barrier and p-glycoprotein
The blood brain barrier is comprised of brain capillary
endothelial cells linked by tight junctions that form a
lipophilic physical barrier that limits the passive transport
of substances into the brain. While the permeability of the

Page 2 of 6
(page number not for citation purposes)

Filaria Journal 2003, 2(Suppl 1)

http://filariajournal.com/content/2/S1/S8

Simplifiedcontact not P-glycoprotein structure and also the insideP-glycoprotein molecule spans the cell membrane and in this
way is in2 cartoon of only with the membrane but function: The and the outside of the cell
Figure
Simplified cartoon of P-glycoprotein structure and function: The P-glycoprotein molecule spans the cell membrane and in this
way is in contact not only with the membrane but also the inside and the outside of the cell. The central portion of the molecule is a channel or pore through which toxic chemicals are pumped back out into the environment. The toxic chemicals can
enter the transport pore either from the interior of the cell or from its membrane as shown. Molecules of ATP power the
pumping action.

blood brain barrier increases with increasing lipophilicity,
several transport proteins have been identified that regulate the penetration of many poorly lipophilic
compounds. Conversely, many highly lipophilic substances such as cyclosporin and ivermectin show unexpectedly poor penetration of the blood brain barrier. It is
now believed that this phenomenon is a result of the
actions of drug efflux transporters [15,16]. Although
molecular characterisation of those transport proteins
present in the apical and basolateral membrane of brain
capillary epithelial cells has identified a range of drug
transporters such as MDR, MRP and OATP [17–20], it is

p-glycoprotein that has been most widely studied. P-glycoprotein is expressed in the apical membrane of brain
capillary epithelial cells and is orientated to pump noxious substrates from inside cells and back into the blood
(Figure 2). P-glycoprotein is responsible for limiting the
brain penetration of a range of compounds of different
therapeutic classes and in some cases may influence decisions regarding the clinical usage of such agents. For
example, the anti-diarrhoeal opiate loperamide is safe and
effective peripherally but does not act centrally since brain
penetration is minimised through the actions of p-glycoprotein. However, it must be conceded that an accurate

Page 3 of 6
(page number not for citation purposes)

Filaria Journal 2003, 2(Suppl 1)

assessment of the role of p-glycoprotein in the function of
the human blood brain barrier is limited by our inability
to measure readily drug concentrations in the brain. Furthermore, altered distribution within the brain may not
always show itself as a change in circulating plasma concentrations. [16]. A pharmacodynamic indicator would be
necessary to determine whether there was any exacerbation of centrally mediated effects brought about through
genetic polymorphism in mdr1 [21,22] or inhibition of pglycoprotein function.
Neurotoxicology of Ivermectin
The principal toxicological effects of ivermectin seen in
rats are ataxia, ptosis and decreased activity, and in dogs
are mydriasis, tremors, ataxia and anorexia [23] with
enhanced sensitivity in infant rats that have a poorly
developed blood brain barrier (with regard to their deficiency in p-glycoprotein), and show higher brain plasma
drug concentration ratios than adult rats. During the
development of Mectizan® two reports, one from the veterinary use of ivermectin and another from a pre-clinical
toxicology study, influenced the clinical development of
Mectizan® such that a more conservative approach was
taken [24]. First, it was noticed that a sub-population of
collie dogs was remarkably sensitive to ivermectininduced neurotoxicity [25]. This occurs at doses that are 1/
200th of the dose required to cause toxicity in other dogs.
Neurological manifestations of ivermectin in susceptible
dogs include, hypersalivation, ataxia, blindness, coma,
respiratory compromise, and death. It is now known that
such ivermectin-sensitive collies exhibit a 4-bp deletion
mutation of the mdr1 gene that results in a frame shift,
generating several stop codons that prematurely terminate
synthesis of P-glycoprotein. Dogs that are homozygous
for the mutation display the ivermectin sensitive phenotype, whereas those homozygous normal or heterozygous
show no increased sensitivity to ivermectin [26]. Second,
sub populations of CF-1 mice were identified as expressing reduced levels of P-glycoprotein, including a population that does not produce P-glycoprotein, identified as (/-) [27]. Animals with the wild type (+/+) or deficient genotypes differ markedly in their sensitivity to ivermectin
neurotoxicity and teratology, attributable to differential
accumulation of ivermectin in brain and foetus. CF1 pglycoprotein deficient mice are phenoptypically identical
to mdr1a and mdr1b knockout strains established in the
laboratory [28]. Using such strains, differences in pharmacokinetics and tissue distribution, particularly accumulation in the brain, of several substances can be
demonstrated when compared with p-glycoprotein wild
type mice [29,30]. These authors clearly established the
mdr1a transporter as central to limiting the oral bioavailability and brain uptake of these agents. Studies with ivermectin and the p-glycoprotein substrate cyclosporin A in
CF-1 mice demonstrated enhanced absorption of iver-

http://filariajournal.com/content/2/S1/S8

mectin and cyclosporin A in the (-/-) strain although there
were no differences in the intravenous pharmacokinetics
of either drug. Hepatic drug metabolising capacity of (-/-)
and (+/+) animals was similar. Concentrations of [3H]ivermectin and [3H]-cyclosporin A were always higher in
the brains of (-/-) mice after oral or intravenous administration but liver concentrations were identical to wild-type
mice. These findings clearly demonstrate that changes in
ivermectin disposition observed in the (-/-) mice arise
through a deficiency in p-glycoprotein rather than any
alteration in drug metabolism [14].
Drug-drug Interactions and Neurotoxicity of Ivermectin
Drug-drug interactions of clinical importance can occur
when the pharmacology of a drug is altered by co-administration of another agent. The question of drug-drug
interactions among anthelmintics is yet to be answered
satisfactorily. This is an important issue, since combination chemotherapy is becoming more widespread as
resistance to antiparasitic agents increases. For example
albendazole and ivermectin are co-administered in programmes to eliminate lymphatic filariasis [31]. Experiments in human liver microsomes and recombinant
enzyme systems have shown that ivermectin and albendazole are both substrates of cytochrome P450 (CYP) 3A4,
the most widely distributed human P-450, which is
expressed both in the liver and small intestine [32,33]. We
have shown that albendazole is converted to albendazole
sulphoxide, the major plasma metabolite in man, by
microsomes prepared from human intestinal tissue [34].
There is, therefore, the potential for drug-drug interactions
at each of these sites through competition for drug metabolising enzymes. The traditional view is that drug-drug
interactions are a result of alterations in drug clearance
mediated through a change in hepatic drug metabolism.
However, it is becoming clear that some of these changes
may arise through competition for binding sites on
transport proteins. Fluorescent-labelled ivermectin (BODIPY-ivermectin) is extruded out of brain capillaries by a
concentrative mechanism and this export process is
reduced by substrates of p-glycoprotein without any
change in drug uptake [35]. Moreover, transport of BODIPY-ivermectin is restricted to p-glycoprotein, as it is unaffected by specific inhibitors of related transport proteins
and it interacts specifically with p-glycoprotein in functional kidney tubules [36]. These findings suggest that
other P-glycoprotein substrates could compete with ivermectin at this site, resulting in reduced extracellular efflux
and enhanced CNS toxicity. Such compounds include
cyclosporin and HIV protease inhibitors [37,38].
Increased ivermectin concentrations accompanied by
enhanced neurotoxicity of ivermectin in mice has already
been demonstrated in the presence of cyclosporin [39].
While an interaction between ivermectin and albendazole
could be postulated on the basis of these drugs being co

Page 4 of 6
(page number not for citation purposes)

Filaria Journal 2003, 2(Suppl 1)

substrates of CY3A4, it is not established that there could
be an interaction at the level of p-glycoprotein. Although
ivermectin is undeniably a substrate for P-glycoprotein,
there is conflicting evidence for albendazole. Intestinal
metabolism and secretion of albendazole sulphoxide into
the intestinal lumen has been demonstrated and p-glycoprotein is reported to be involved in modulating resistance to albendazole in helminths [40,41]. However,
experiments in Caco-2 cells failed to identify albendazole
as a p-glycoprotein substrate or an inhibitor of p-glycoprotein mediated transport of digoxin [42], suggesting
that a combination of the two drugs would not produce
an adverse drug reaction based upon an interaction with
p-glycoprotein. Albendazole sulphoxide or sulphone were
not investigated.

http://filariajournal.com/content/2/S1/S8

Competing Interests
None declared

Author's Contribution
Geoffrey Edwards was sole author.

Acknowledgements
Original work referred to by the author (references 32 and 34) was supported by a postgraduate studentship from GlaxoSmithKline Pharmaceuticals to Dr Helen Rawden.

References
1.

2.

Conclusions
P-glycoprotein is an integral component of the human
blood brain barrier and plays a central role in limiting
drug uptake into the brain. Altered expression or function
of p-glycoprotein could conceivably allow elevation of
brain concentrations of ivermectin and produce severe
neurotoxicity. This might arise through a genetic polymorphism in p-glycoprotein or co-administration of ivermectin with a drug or foodstuff that might inhibit this
efflux transporter. There are relatively few examples of
clinically important drug-drug interactions at the bloodbrain barrier that involve increased drug exposure within
the brain. As mentioned previously, alterations in uptake
into the brain may not be manifest as a change in systemic
pharmacokinetics and may only become apparent when a
pharmacodynamic assessment is made [16]. Furthermore,
it may not be possible, with therapeutic doses, to achieve
sufficiently high concentrations of a co-substrate to allow
a drug-drug interaction to take place. For example, a range
of antipsychotic, antiemetic and Ca2+ blocking agents
failed to produce effective inhibition of p-glycoprotein
despite the achievement of suitable concentrations within
the systemic circulation [43]. Perhaps more importantly,
it should be remembered that clinical and laboratory findings suggest that Mectizan®-associated L. loa encephalopathy is consistent with an embolic process triggered by
massive microfilarial death. It may also involve circulating
immune complexes or polymorphic inflammatory
responses. Moreover, serious or even fatal encephalopathy may develop spontaneously, or following treatment
with other microfilaricides such as diethylcarbamazine
[44]. It is therefore questionable whether any of the neurological sequelae associated with administration of ivermectin are directly related to the drug and therefore it
seems unlikely that any alterations in the pharmacokinetics of ivermectin for whatever reason would result in a
more severe adverse reaction.

3.

4.
5.

6.

7.
8.
9.
10.

11.

12.
13.

14.

15.
16.
17.

Gardon J, Gardon-Wendel N, Demanga-Ngangue , Kamgno J, Chippaux JP and Boussinesq M: Serious reactions after mass treatment of onchocerciasis with ivermectin in an area endemic
for Loa loa infection. Lancet 1997, 350:18-22.
Boussinesq M, Gardon J, Gardon-Wendel N, Kamgno J, Ngoumou P
and Chippaux JP: Three probable cases of Loa loa encephalopathy following ivermectin treatment for onchocerciasis. Am J
Trop Med Hyg 1998, 58:461-469.
Burg RW and Stapley EO: Isolation and characterisation of the
producing organism. In: Ivermectin and Ababmectin Edited by: William C Campbell. New York, Berlin, Heidelberg, London, Paris, Tokyo,
Springer-Verlag; 1989:24-32.
Fisher MH and Mrozik H: Chemistry. In: Ivermectin and Ababmectin
Edited by: William C Campbell. New York, Berlin, Heidelberg, London,
Paris, Tokyo, Springer-Verlag; 1989:1-23.
Geary TG, Sims SM, Thomas EM, Vanover L, Davis JP, Winterrowd
CA, Klein RD, Ho NF and Thompson DP: Haemonchus contortus: ivermectin-induced paralysis of the pharynx. Exp Parasitol
1993, 77:88-96.
Martin RJ: An electrophysiological preparation of pharyngeal
muscle reveals a glutamate-gated chloride channel sensitive
to the avermectin analogue milbemycin D. Parasitology 1996,
120:587-594.
Kotze AC: ffects of macrocyclic lactones on ingestion in susceptible and resistant Haemonchus contortus larvae. J
Parasitol 1998, 84:E631-635.
Sangster NC and Gill J: Pharmacology of anthelmintic
resistance. Parasitol Today 1999, 15:141-146.
Cully DF, Wilkinson H, Vassilatis DK, Etter A and Arena JP: Molecular biology and electrophysiology of glutamate-gated chloride channels of invertebrates. Parasitology 1996, 113:191-200.
Dent JA, Davis MW and Avery L: avr-15 encodes a chloride channel subunit that mediates inhibitory glutaminergic neurotransmission and ivermectin sensitivity in Caenorhabditis
elegans. EMBO J 1997, 16:5867-5879.
Vassilatis DK, Arena JP, Plasterk RHA, Wilkinson HA, Schaeffer JM,
Cully DF and Van der Ploeg LHT: Genetic and biochemical evidence for a novel avermectin sensitive chloride channel in
Caenorhabditis elegans. J Biol Chem 1997, 272:33167-33174.
Kohler P: The biochemical basis of anthelmintics resistance.
Int J Parasitol 2001, 31:336-345.
Etter A, Cully DF, Liu KK, Reiss B, Vassilatis DK, Schaeffer JM and
Arena JP: Picrotoxin blockade of invertebrate glutamate
gated chloride channels: subunit dependence and evidence
for binding within the pore. J Neurochem 1999, 72:318-326.
Kwei GY, Alvaro RF, Chen Q, Jenkins HJ, Hop CEAC, Keohane CA,
Ly VT, Strauss JR, Wang RW and Wang Z et al.: Disposition of ivermectin and cyclosporin A in CF-1 mice deficient in MDR1A
p-glycoprotein. Drug Metab Dispos 1999, 27:581-587.
Tamai I and Atsuji A: Transporter-mediated permeation of
drugs across the blood brain barrier. J Pharm Sci 2000,
89:1371-1388.
Ayrton A and Morgan P: Role of transport proteins in drug
absorption, distribution and excretion. Xenobiotica 2001,
31:469-497.
Cordon-Cardo C, O'Brien JP, Casals D, Rittman Graver L, Beidler JL,
Melamed MR and Bertino JR: Multidrug resistance gene P-glycoprotein is expressed by endothelial cells at blood-brain barrier sites. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1989, 86:695-698.

Page 5 of 6
(page number not for citation purposes)

Filaria Journal 2003, 2(Suppl 1)

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.
24.
25.
26.
27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.
36.

Huai-Yun H, Secrest DT, Mark KS, Carney D, Brandquist C, Elmquist
WF and Miller DW: Expression of multidrug resistance-assocaited protein (MRP) in brain microvessel endothelial cells.
Biochem Biophys Res Comm 1998, 243:816-820.
Kusuhara H, Suzuki H, Naito M, Tsuro T and Sugiyama Y: Characterisation of efflux transport of organic anions in a mouse
brain capillary endothelial cell line. J Pharm Exp Ther 1998,
285:1260-1265.
Gao B, Steiger B, Noe B, Fritschy JM and Meier PJ: Localisation of
the organic anion transporting polypeptide 2 (Oatp 2) in capillary endothelium and choroids plexus epithelium of rat
brain. J Histochem Cytochem 1999, 47:1255-1263.
Hoffmeyer S, Burk O, von Richter O, Arnold HP, Brockmoller J,
Johne A, Cascorbi L, Gerlo T, Roots I, Eichelbaum M and Brinkmann
U: Functional polymorphisms of the human multidrug-resistance gene: multiple sequence variations and correlation of
one allele with P-glycoprotein expression and activity in vivo.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2000, 97:3473-3478.
Kim RB, Leake B, Choo E, Dresser GK, Kubra SV, Schwarz UL, Taylor
A, Xie HG, Stein CM and Wood AJJ et al.: Identification of functionally important MDR1 variant alleles among AfricanAmerican and Caucasian subjects. Drug Metab Rev 2000,
32(suppl 2):199.
Lankas GR and Gordon LR: Toxicology. In: Ivermectin and Ababmectin Edited by: William C Campbell. New York, Berlin, Heidelberg, London,
Paris, Tokyo, Springer-Verlag; 1989:89-112.
Brown KR: Changes in the use profile of Mectizan®: 1987–
1997. Ann Trop Med Parasitol 1998, 92:S61-S64.
Paul AJ, Tranquilli WJ, Seward RL, Todd KS Jr and DiPietro JA: Clinical observations in collies given ivermectin orally. Am J Vet Res
1987, 48:684-685.
Mealey KL, Bentjen SA, Gay JM and Cantor GH: Ivermectin sensitivity in collies is associated with a deletion mutation of the
mdr1 gene. Pharmacogenetics 2001, 11:727-733.
Umbenhauer DR, Lankas GR, Pippert TR, Wise LD, Cartwright ME,
Hall SJ and Beare CM: Identification of a P-glycoprotein-deficient subpopulation in the CF-1 mouse strain using a restriction fragment length polymorphism. Toxicol Applied Pharmacol
1997, 146:88-94.
Schinkel AH, Smit JJ, van Tellingen O, Beijen JH, Wagenaar E, van
Deemter L, Mol CAAM, van der Valk MA, Robanus Maandag EC and
Borst F: Disruption of the mouse mdr1a P-glycoprotein gene
leads to a deficiency in the blood-brain barrier and to
increased sensitivity to drugs. Cell 1994, 77:491-502.
Schinkel AH, Wagenaar E, van Deemter L, Mol CAAM and Borst F:
Absence of the mdr1a P-glycoprotein in mice affects tissue
distribution and pharmacokinetics of dexamethasone, digoxin and cyclosporin A. J Clin Invest 1995, 96:1698-1705.
Sparreboom A, van Asperen J, Mayer U, Schinkel AH, Smit JW, Meier
DKF, Borst P, Nooijen WJ, Beinen JH and van Tellingen O: Limited
oral bioavailability and active epithelial secretion of paclitaxel (taxol) caused by P-glycoprotein in the intestine. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 1997, 94:2013-2035.
Horton J, Witt C, Ottesen EA, Lazdins JK, Addiss DG, Awadzi K,
Beach MJ, Belizario VY, Dunyo SK and Espinel M et al.: An analysis
of the safety of the single dose, two drug regimens used in
programmes to eliminate lymphatic filariasis. Parasitology
2000, 121: Suppl:S147-160.
Rawden HC, Kokwaro GO, Ward SA and Edwards G: Relative contribution of cytochromes P-450 and flavin-containing monoxygenases to the metabolism of albendazole by human liver
microsomes. Br J Clin Pharmacol 2000, 49:313-322.
Zeng , Andrew NW, Arison BH, Luffer-Atlas D and Wang RW: Identification of P4503A4 as the major enzyme responsible for
the metabolism of ivermectin by human liver microsomes.
Xenobiotica 1998, 28:313-321.
Rawden HC: Ph.D. thesis. "An investigation of potential
chemotherapeutic drug combinations with Albendazole for
the treatment of Echinococcus infection". The University of
Liverpool 1999.
Nobmann S, Bauer B and Fricker G: Ivermectin excretion by isolated functionally intact brain endothelial capillaries. Br J
Pharmacol 2001, 132:722-728.
Fricker G, Gutmann H, Droulle A, Drewe J and Miller DS: Epithelial
transport of anthelmintic ivermectin in a novel model of isolated proximal kidney tubules. Pharm Res 1999, 16:1570-1575.

http://filariajournal.com/content/2/S1/S8

37.

38.
39.

40.

41.

42.
43.

44.

Drewe J, Gutmann H, Fricker G, Torok M, Beglinger C and Huwyler
J: HIV protease inhibitor ritonavir: a more potent inhibitor of
P-glycoprotein than the cyclosporine analog SDZ PSC 833.
Biochem Pharmacol 1999, 15:1147-1152.
Gutmann H, Fricker G, Drewe J, Toeroek M and Miller DS: Interactions of HIV protease inhibitors with ATP-dependent drug
export proteins. Mol Pharm 1999, 56:383-389.
Marques-Santos LF, Bernardo RR, de Paula EF and Rumjanek VM:
Cyclosporin A and trifluperazine, two resistance modulating
agents, increase ivermectin neurotoxicity in mice. Pharmacol
Toxicol 1999, 84:125-129.
Nare B, Liu Z, Prichard RK and Georges EE: Benzimidazoles,
potent anti-mitotic drugs: substrates for the P-glycoprotein
transporter in multidrug-resistant cells. Biochem Pharmacol
1994, 48:2215-2222.
Redondo PA, Alvarez AI, Garcia JL, Larrode OM, Merino G and Prieto
JG: Presystemic metabolism of albendazole: experimental
evidence of an efflux process of albendazole sulphoxide to
intestinal lumen. Drug Metab Dispos 1999, 27:736-740.
Merino G, Alvarez AJ, Prieto JG and Kim RB: The anthelmintic
agent albendazole does not interact with p-glycoprotein.
Drug Metab Dispos 2002, 30:365-369.
Ibrahim S, Peggins J, Knapton A, Licht T and Aszalos A: Influence of
antipsychotic, antiemetic and Ca2+ channel blocker drugs on
the cellular accumulation of the anticancer drug daunorubicin: P-glycoprotein modulation. J Pharm Exp Ther 2000,
295:1276-1283.
Carme B, Boulesteix J, Boutes H and Puruehnce MF: Five cases of
encephalitis
during
treatment
of
loaiasis
with
diethylcarbamazine. Am J Trop Med Hyg 1991, 44:684-690.

Publish with Bio Med Central and every
scientist can read your work free of charge
"BioMed Central will be the most significant development for
disseminating the results of biomedical researc h in our lifetime."
Sir Paul Nurse, Cancer Research UK

Your research papers will be:
available free of charge to the entire biomedical community
peer reviewed and published immediately upon acceptance
cited in PubMed and archived on PubMed Central
yours — you keep the copyright

BioMedcentral

Submit your manuscript here:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/info/publishing_adv.asp

Page 6 of 6
(page number not for citation purposes)

</pre>
</body>
</html>
