<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Rapid sympatric ecological differentiation of crater lake cichlid fishes within historic times</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Biology 2010, 8:60. doi: 10.1186/1741-7007-8-60"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Kathryn R Elmer, Topi K Lehtonen, Andreas F Kautt, Chris Harrod, Axel Meyer"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 8.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 7.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Elmer et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:60
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/60

Open Access

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Rapid sympatric ecological differentiation of crater
lake cichlid fishes within historic times
Research article

Kathryn R Elmer1, Topi K Lehtonen1,2, Andreas F Kautt1, Chris Harrod3,4 and Axel Meyer*1

Abstract
Background: After a volcano erupts, a lake may form in the cooled crater and become an isolated aquatic ecosystem.
This makes fishes in crater lakes informative for understanding sympatric evolution and ecological diversification in
barren environments. From a geological and limnological perspective, such research offers insight about the process of
crater lake ecosystem establishment and speciation. In the present study we use genetic and coalescence approaches
to infer the colonization history of Midas cichlid fishes (Amphilophus cf. citrinellus) that inhabit a very young crater lake
in Nicaragua-the ca. 1800 year-old Lake Apoyeque. This lake holds two sympatric, endemic morphs of Midas cichlid:
one with large, hypertrophied lips (~20% of the total population) and another with thin lips. Here we test the
associated ecological, morphological and genetic diversification of these two morphs and their potential to represent
incipient speciation.
Results: Gene coalescence analyses [11 microsatellite loci and mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) sequences] suggest that
crater lake Apoyeque was colonized in a single event from the large neighbouring great lake Managua only about 100
years ago. This founding in historic times is also reflected in the extremely low nuclear and mitochondrial genetic
diversity in Apoyeque. We found that sympatric adult thin- and thick-lipped fishes occupy distinct ecological trophic
niches. Diet, body shape, head width, pharyngeal jaw size and shape and stable isotope values all differ significantly
between the two lip-morphs. The eco-morphological features pharyngeal jaw shape, body shape, stomach contents
and stable isotopes (δ15N) all show a bimodal distribution of traits, which is compatible with the expectations of an
initial stage of ecological speciation under disruptive selection. Genetic differentiation between the thin- and thicklipped population is weak at mtDNA sequence (FST = 0.018) and absent at nuclear microsatellite loci (FST < 0.001).
Conclusions: This study provides empirical evidence of eco-morphological differentiation occurring very quickly after
the colonization of a new and vacant habitat. Exceptionally low levels of neutral genetic diversity and inference from
coalescence indicates that the Midas cichlid population in Apoyeque is much younger (ca. 100 years or generations
old) than the crater itself (ca. 1 800 years old). This suggests either that the crater remained empty for many hundreds
of years after its formation or that remnant volcanic activity prevented the establishment of a stable fish population
during the early life of the crater lake. Based on our findings of eco-morphological variation in the Apoyeque Midas
cichlids, and known patterns of adaptation in Midas cichlids in general, we suggest that this population may be in a
very early stage of speciation (incipient species), promoted by disruptive selection and ecological diversification.

Background
Since Darwin and Wallace, the study of island inhabitants
has greatly influenced evolutionary and ecological
research [1]. In many respects, crater lakes are the aquatic
equivalent to islands. Like islands, the small size, distinct
boundaries, simplified biota, young age, geographical iso* Correspondence: axel.meyer@uni-konstanz.de
1

Lehrstuhl für Zoologie und Evolutionsbiologie, Department of Biology,
University of Konstanz, Universitätstrasse 10, 78457 Konstanz, Germany

Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

lation and frequently well-known geological history of
crater lakes makes them well-suited to study the diversification of sister taxa [1-3]. The physical isolation of crater
lakes means that after the first seeding by a colonizing
lineage evolution may proceed rapidly in situ. Indeed,
crater lakes have provided the most compelling examples
of sympatric ecological speciation of fishes, particularly
cichlid fishes [4-7]. Intralacustrine speciation in depauperate habitats (for example, postglacial lakes and crater
lakes) typically proceeds due to disruptive ecological

© 2010 Elmer et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons

BioMed Central Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Elmer et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:60
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/60

selection [8], though the rapidity, strength and completeness of this process depends on a number of population
and environmental factors [5,9-11]. Well-known examples of this phenomenon include the benthic and planktivorous populations of sticklebacks [12,13], introduced
salmon populations [14] and whitefish [15,16] in isolated
lakes.
Cichlid fishes are pre-eminent non-model organisms
for the study of ecological speciation because of their
trophic polymorphism and rapid evolution [17,18].
Mesoamerican fishes of the Midas cichlid species complex (the Amphilophus citrinellus species group) are particularly variable in trophic characteristics such as body
shape and pharyngeal jaw morphology, as well as maintaining a striking colour polymorphism [19-21] (for a
review of the crater lakes and species complex see [22]).
One of the most renowned examples of ecological differentiation in the species complex is the elongate, openwater species Amphilophus zaliosus, which evolved from
a high-bodied benthic ancestor by sympatric speciation
within Nicaragua's oldest crater lake, Lake Apoyo [4,20].
A similarly elongate but evolutionarily independent
endemic species is also found in crater lake Xiloá [22-25].
An additional trophic polymorphism of Midas cichlids is
fleshy, hypertrophied lips, which is believed to be
involved in harvesting invertebrates from between cracks
and recesses [20]. This character is absent from most crater lake Midas cichlid populations [20,22,26] and is best
known from Amphilophus labiatus, a species that occurs
in the two largest and shallowest lakes in the region, the
great lakes Managua and Nicaragua [20]. Apoyeque is the
only crater lake that harbours a sizeable population of
Midas cichlids with hypertrophied lips; the origin and
diversity of this population is the focus of our current
study.
Western Nicaragua is underlain by an extremely active
volcanism that has resulted in at least eight crater lakes
that exist today (reviewed in [22]). One of the youngest of
these is Apoyeque (Figure 1). The volcano last erupted
only about 1800 years ago [27] and then filled with
ground- and rainwater to become a crater lake. The lake
is small (2.5 km2) yet deep (110 m) [28,29] and, because of
its steep cone shape, has a fairly small littoral zone (0.9
km2) [30]. 'Apoyeque' means 'salty water' in the regional
Náhuatl language and the lake is so-named because of its
high mineral content [31]. Located on the Chiltepe Peninsula, Apoyeque lies next to crater lake Xiloá and great
lake Managua and yet its high crater walls (400 m) and
lack of water connection make it completely aquatically
isolated.
Despite the crater lake Apoyeque's young age and isolation, it is home to an abundant population of Midas
cichlids (Amphilophus cf. citrinellus). There are two phenotypes living in the lake: one with normal citrinellus thin

Page 2 of 15

Figure 1 Relief map of Nicaragua showing the relevant lakes. Crater lake Apoyeque is located beside the great Lake Managua and the
crater Lake Xiloá, in western Nicaragua, Central America. Two morphs
of Midas cichlid are found in Apoyeque: one with fleshy lips (upper individual; 'thick-lipped') and the other with thin, normal A. citrinellus lips
(lower individual; 'thin-lipped').

lips ('thin-lipped') and one with pronounced fleshy, or
hypertrophied, lips ('thick-lipped'; Figure 1). The lake is
otherwise depauperate in species, only housing some
small live-bearing fishes (Family Poeciliidae) and, less
abundantly, the predatory cichlid Parachromis
managuense [30].
In the present study, we test whether the two phenotypes (morphs) of Midas cichlid in Apoyeque originated
by sympatric differentiation promoted by ecological
divergence. Given the intralacustrine diversification of
Midas cichlids in other crater lakes, we hypothesize that
this trait of thin- or thick- lips may be a novel or alternative axis of ecological differentiation exploited by crater
lake cichlids. First, we infer the colonization history of

Elmer et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:60
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/60

Page 3 of 15

crater lake Apoyeque using population genetic and
coalescent approaches, in the context of neighbouring
lakes Managua and Xiloá. We specifically assess evidence
for a single or multiple colonization events and see
whether the age of the population corresponds to the
geological age of the lake. Second, we compare ecological
(diet, trophic level and pharyngeal jaw shape) and morphological (body shape, head and body size) variation
between thin- and thick-lipped fishes to see whether this
character is associated with distinct niches, sex or maturity, or morphological difference. Third, we assess the
role of disruptive natural selection in driving incipient
speciation by comparing the distribution of phenotypes
and genetic differentiation in Apoyeque's Midas cichlid
population, with the expectation that ecological diversification should result in a bimodal distribution of ecologically relevant traits.

Results
Colonization and population genetics of Apoyeque and
neighbouring lakes
Genetic diversity and differentiation

Using multiple approaches to assess genetic diversity
with 11 nuclear microsatellite loci and mitochondrial
DNA sequences, the Midas cichlid population in lake
Apoyeque is the least genetically diverse relative to the
Midas cichlid populations from nearby lakes (Table 1,
Additional File 1, Additional File 2). Only four mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) haplotypes were found among the
290 individuals sequenced from crater lake Apoyeque
(Figure 2). The most abundant haplotype in Apoyeque is
also found in Xiloá and in the great lakes Managua and
Nicaragua (and was also the most common haplotype in
previous Midas cichlid studies [4,24]). Three haplotypes
unique to Apoyeque are much rarer (n = 14 individuals,
all thin-lipped; n = 5 individuals, all thin-lipped; and n = 1
thick-lipped individual: see Genetic differentiation for
further intralacustrine mtDNA analysis). Each of these
Apoyeque-specific haplotypes is one-step apart from
another Apoyeque haplotype and, to date, all are unique
in the entire Midas cichlids species complex of Nicaragua
(searched against 799 homologous Midas sequences,

50
25
2

L. Apoyeque

L. Xiloá

Great Lakes

Figure 2 A haplotype network of mtDNA sequences show that
the most common haplotype in Midas cichlids is also the most
common haplotype in Apoyeque. Apoyeque has three haplotypes
that are not shared with any other locality. Singleton haplotypes were
included in the analysis but are not shown, except for one singleton
from Apoyeque. Open circles represent missing or inferred haplotypes.

Genbank database accessed 27 April 2009), suggesting
that they evolved in situ within the crater lake.
The pronounced lack of microsatellite genetic variation
within the Apoyeque Midas cichlid population, and its
genetic distinctiveness from neighbouring lakes, can be
visualized in the separation along axis 1 and the tight
clustering of Apoyeque individuals in the Factorial Correspondence Analysis (Additional File 2). Midas cichlid fish
populations in lakes Apoyeque, Xiloá and Managua are
all significantly genetically differentiated from each other
at mtDNA (FST = 0.072 - 0.262) and microsatellite loci
(FST = 0.053 - 0.146; Additional File 3).

Table 1: Genetic diversity for Midas cichlid populations in three lakes: haplotype richness for mtDNA; observed
heterozygosity, allelic richness, and private alleles for microsatellite markers (means ± standard deviations).
Crater Lake Apoyeque

Crater Lake Xiloá

Great Lake Managua

0.131

0.574

0.851

Heterozygosity

0.632 ± 0.176

0.727 ± 0.214

0.785 ± 0.151

Allelic richness

5.97 ± 2.97

8.55 ± 3.71

11.24 ± 4.70

0.540 ± 0.532

1.14 ± 0.785

3.37 ± 1.83

Haplotype richness

Private allelic richness

Elmer et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:60
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/60

Page 4 of 15

Coalescence inference of origin and time of colonization

Apoyeque could only have reasonably been colonized
from either of its neighbouring lakes, Managua or Xiloá:
all other lakes are geographically much more distant (Figure 1). Inferred from gene flow analyses in
MIGRATE[32,33] (here a proxy for likely colonization),
Lake Managua is the primary ancestral population of
Apoyeque: migration from Managua to Apoyeque was
estimated to be two to four times higher than the rate of
migration from Xiloá to Apoyeque. Based on isolationwith-migration coalescence analyses (IMA), the divergence time between the populations of Apoyeque and its
founding population from lake Managua (approximately
equivalent to the time since colonization) was estimated
to be about 100 years ago (89 years, 63 years and 132
years in three independent iterations; see Additional File
4 for likelihood values of all parameters). The effective
population size of Apoyeque was estimated to be approximately 1000 times smaller than that of the ancestral population in great lake Managua (Additional File 4).
Apoyeque's extant Midas cichlid population probably
originated from a single founding event. Historical
migration (coalescence of genes from Managua to
Apoyeque) was estimated to be negligible (~10 migrations/thousand generations) and there was a single probability peak for population divergence in the IMA analysis
(Additional File 4).
Eco-morphological variation within Apoyeque
Frequency of thin- and thick-lipped individuals

We collected exemplars of thin-and thick-lipped mature
adults and juvenile fishes in Apoyeque. Twenty percent of
the adult individuals were thick-lipped (42 of 214 sexed
adults) and 24% of the juveniles were thick-lipped (19 of
80 specimens classified by dissection as juvenile). Additionally, 15 thick-lipped and 86 thin-lipped specimens
were not classified to age or sex (see Methods and Additional File 5). There is no difference in the number of
thick-lipped fishes in any of the four groupings (female,
male, juvenile and not noted; G2 = 5.15, df = 3, P = 0.161).
Thus, from our total collection 19% of fishes were thicklipped and 81% were thin-lipped.
Body shape and size

Body shape of adult thin- and thick-lipped fishes differed
significantly (Procrustes distance = 0.017, P = 0.001).
Thick-lipped fish had narrower, longer mouths, were
slightly deeper bodied and their body mass was shifted to
the anterior relative to thin-lipped fishes (Figure 3).
Shape was sufficiently different between the two lip
morphs that most individuals could be correctly classified
based on body shape alone (87% of thin-lipped fishes,
72% of thick-lipped fishes). Body shape remained significantly different when the lip landmarks (landmarks 1 and
2) were excluded (Procrustes distance = 0.013, P = 0.033).

7

11 12

4 5

1
3
2

6

10
8

13

9

Figure 3 Body shape variation between thin-lipped and thicklipped Apoyeque Midas cichlids. (a) The location of 13 landmarks to
describe body shape. (b) Body shape differs significantly between thinand thick-lipped fishes (P = 0.001). Here this is visualized (scale factor 4)
as landmarks compared between the mean thick-lipped (circle; n = 36)
and mean thin-lipped (arrow; n = 135) fishes. Body shapes remain different if the two landmarks describing lip thickness are excluded (P =
0.033) Body length does not differ between morphs (P = 0.34; see text
for details).

The body size (standard length) of adult thin- and
thick-lipped Midas cichlid fishes did not differ (two factor
ANOVA, morph effect, F1,202 = 0.652, P = 0.42; Additional
File 6).
Specifically focusing on head morphology, head width
at the eyes was different for thin- and thick-lipped fishes
(ANCOVA on log-transformed head width with logtransformed standard length as a covariate, morph effect,
F1,166 = 7.09, P = 0.008; sex effect, F1,166 = 0.144, P = 0.71;
morph × sex interaction, F1,166 = 0.857, P = 0.36). The two
morphs had similar head widths at the snout (posterior
point of the mouth: ANCOVA, morph effect, F1,166 =
0.051, P = 0.82; sex effect, F1,166 = 0.557, P = 0.46; morph ×
sex interaction, F1,166 = 1.62, P = 0.21; the nostrils:
ANCOVA, morph effect, F1,166 = 0.006, P = 0.94; sex
effect, F1,166 = 0.377, P = 0.54; morph × sex interaction,
F1,166 = 0.275, P = 0.60). In other words, the snout width
of thin- and thick-lipped fish does not differ but the head
is thinner and more tapered in the thick-lipped fishes.
Lip size

Lip size did not differ between sexes (ANCOVA on logtransformed lip size with log-transformed standard
length as a covariate, F1,203 = 0.158, P = 0.69). Thus, the

Elmer et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:60
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/60

extent of lip hypertrophy is not related to sex. However,
adults (sexed males and females) had larger lips relative to
their body size than juveniles (ANCOVA, F1,280 = 4.91, P
= 0.028). Indeed, lip size clearly increased with body size
(ANCOVA F1,280 = 179, P < 0.001). A plot of lip size by
body length (including adult, juvenile and not noted
specimens) demonstrates how the increase of lip size differs between the two morphs (Additional File 7; there is
considerable overlap between thin- and thick-lipped
fishes because we measured total lip area, not exclusively
the protruding lip). The quadratic lines of best-fit differ
markedly between thin- and thick-lipped fishes: the yintercept is higher and the slope steeper in thick-lipped
fishes. Thus lips get proportionally larger with maturity,
age or size.

Page 5 of 15

(a)

fish
60%

snails

40%

insect
pieces &
larvae

Disruptive selection and phenotypic differentiation

Quantitative eco-morphological traits are expected to
have a bimodal distribution under disruptive selection. In

brown algae

20%

white algae
0%

thick-lipped

thin-lipped

(b)

Dimension 2

Dimension 1

Thick-lipped
Thin-lipped
(c)

12

11

∂15N (‰)

Lower pharyngeal jaws

As the absolute pharyngeal jaw size significantly influenced its shape (thick-lipped P = 0.004, thin-lipped P <
0.001), we corrected for allometric effects using regression (see Methods). Pharyngeal jaw shape (including the
two rear teeth; see Figure 5a for landmarks) differed significantly between thin- and thick-lipped fishes (Procrustes distance = 0.034, P < 0.001; Figure 5b). Thicklipped fish have a narrower horn, longer jaw and two
smaller rear teeth. Principal coordinates analysis corroborate these regions as having the most variation (Figure
5c). Thin-lipped fishes can be generally characterized as
more molariform and thick-lipped fishes as more papilliform (an example of each pharyngeal jaw type is shown in
Figure 5d).

plants
(with seeds)

80%

Diet

The gut contents of adult thin- and thick-lipped fishes
were markedly different, as implied by a significant interaction between the volume of prey type and morph (G2 =
35.5, P < 0.001), a Schoener's niche overlap index of 0.59
[34] and assortative clustering of the two morphs in
multi-dimensional diet space (Figure 4a and 4b). The guts
of thick-lipped fishes tended to contain more benthic
crustacea, insect fragments and larvae while the guts of
thin-lipped fishes contained more white algae (Oomycota), fish and snails (presumably the mollusc Pyrgophorus coronatus [35]).
Muscle tissue of adult thin- and thick-lipped fishes had
different carbon (∂13C) and nitrogen (∂15N) signatures
(non-parametric MANOVA: F = 13.0, P < 0.001) (Figure
4c). Thin-lipped fishes were typically slightly 13C depleted
(median ± IQR = -7.4 ± 0.85 ‰) compared to thick-lipped
fishes (-7.1 ± 0.95 ‰) and had higher ∂15N values (10.2 ±
0.7 ‰ versus 9.4 ± 0.7 ‰), suggesting that, on average,
thin-lipped fishes fed at a slightly higher trophic level.

benthic
crustacea

100%

10

9

8
-12

-11

-10

-9

-8

-7

-6

-5

-4

∂13C(‰)

Figure 4 Thick-lipped and thin-lipped Midas cichlids in
Apoyeque differ quantitatively in diet and trophic niche. (a) The
proportion of gut contents per food category differs between thick- (n
= 19) and thin-lipped (n = 22) fishes. (b) Multi-dimensional gut contents by morph displayed along the two primary axes. (c) Individuallevel stable isotope values of δ13C and δ15N from thick-lipped (n = 29)
and thin-lipped (n = 31) Apoyeque cichlids, with 95% confidence ellipses around the centroids.

Elmer et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:60
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/60

Thin-lipped

(b)

(a)

Page 6 of 15

Thick-lipped

Mean

distribution (P < 0.001; Table 2). Stable isotope values of
δ15N showed poor fit to a normal distribution (P < 0.06)
and were included in further testing. For the traits of lip
size, body shape, lower pharyngeal jaw shape and diet
(gut contents), a bimodal distribution (equivalent to two
normal distributions; see Methods) was strongly supported over a unimodal distribution by the corrected
Akaike Information Criterion (AICc) values (Table 2,
Additional File 8). Stable isotope values were less clearly
bimodal: values of δ 15N moderately supported better fit
to a bimodal distribution while values of δ13C equally
supported either a uni- or bimodal distribution.
Genetic differentiation within Apoyeque

There was no genetic differentiation at microsatellite loci
between the population of thin- and thick-lipped fishes in
Apoyeque (FST < 0.001, P = 0.360). There was genetic differentiation in mtDNA haplotypes between the population of thin- and thick lipped fishes (FST = 0.018, P =
0.064), though it is not strongly statistically significant.

(c)

Discussion
Rapid intralacustrine eco-morphological differentiation
PC1

PC2

(d)

molariform

papilliform

Figure 5 Thick-lipped and thin-lipped Midas cichlids in
Apoyeque differ in the shape of their pharyngeal jaws. (a) Ten homologous landmarks describe jaw shape using one side. (b) Discriminant function analysis of mean shape of thick-lipped (black; n = 36) and
thin-lipped (grey; n = 135) pharyngeal jaws (scale factor = 4). (c) The
morphological variation associated with the first two principal component axes (scale factor = 4), responsible for most of the shape variation.
(d) Exemplars of a molariform and papilliform pharyngeal jaws from
Apoyeque Midas cichlids. Note the squatter, broader teeth and thicker
horns in the more molariform jaw.

order to test this, we first assessed whether the distribution of adult phenotypes for each eco-morphological trait
fits a normal distribution (Additional File 8). Lip size
(standardized to body length), body shape, lower pharyngeal jaw shape, stable isotope values of δ13C and gut contents significantly deviated from a single normal

Analyses of ecologically relevant traits indicate that thickand thin-lipped fishes occupy two distinct niches in sympatry within the small and extremely young crater lake
Apoyeque. The two morphs have a different diet, as
reflected by Schoener's index (0.59) and a clustering into
separate multi-dimensional diet space (Figure 4b). Thicklipped fishes tend to have a diet richer in benthic crustacea and insect prey (Figure 4a). They are also enriched in
δ13C and depleted in δ15N stable isotope values compared
to thin-lipped fishes (Figure 4c), which may suggest a
greater use of littoral prey [36]. The pharyngeal jaws of
thick-lipped fishes are significantly thinner in shape, i.e.
characteristically more papilliform (Figure 5). Papilliform-jawed Midas cichlids in other crater lakes are more
insectivorous [4,37,38], as they also tend to be in
Apoyeque, reflecting the established correlation between
diet and jaw in cichlids. In contrast, thin-lipped fishes
tend to be more molariform, with thicker jaws and
broader teeth (Figure 5). Molariform jaw morphology is
associated with more efficient snail crushing and a benthic diet in Midas cichlids [38,39] and cichlids generally
[40], and also here in Apoyeque. We found that the shape
of pharyngeal jaws was significantly affected by jaw size,
which may support the hypothesis that pharyngeal jaws
change shape over time depending on diet [39].
Lip hypertrophy is found in males and females at similar frequencies and the relative size of the lips does not
differ between the sexes. Hence, lip hypertrophy is not a
sex-linked character. Nor is lip hypertrophy a character
that develops only after maturity: it was found at similar
frequencies in adults and juveniles. However, lip size

Elmer et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:60
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/60

Page 7 of 15

Table 2: Statistical support for whether the distribution of phenotypes for eco-morphological traits is composed of one or
two normal distributions.
Character

Data

Goodness-of-fit

AICc for
unimodal

AICc for
bimodal

ΔAICc

Supported
distribution

Lip size

Standardized
area

P < 0.0001

-139.83

-448.46

308.64

Bimodal
(strong
support)

Body shape

PC1

P < 0.0001

-486.00

-1037.57

551.57

Bimodal
(strong
support)

Pharyngeal
jaw

PC1

P < 0.0002

-411.53

-868.68

457.15

Bimodal
(strong
support)

Diet

MDS 1

P < 0.0001

83.53

64.05

19.48

Bimodal
(strong
support)

Stable isotope
(13C)

13C defatted

P < 0.0008

139.41

134.52

4.89

Unimodal =
bimodal

Stable isotope
(15N)

15N

P < 0.0556

71.65

64.50

7.16

Bimodal
(moderate
support)

Data are composed of raw or multivariate data. Low P values for goodness-of-fit suggest poor fit of the data to a single normal distribution.
ΔAICc is the difference in model AICc for a single- compared to a two-component model. Levels of support for one model over the other are
described in the Methods. Frequency histograms and normality plots can be found in Additional File 7.
AICc, Akaike Information Criterion; MDS, multidimensional scaling.

increases with body length, indicating that the hypertrophy may get more pronounced with age. The relationship
of increasing lip size with body size is not the same for
thin- and thick-lipped fishes. Instead, thick-lipped fishes
show a much more dramatic increase of lip size with body
size (Additional File 7). Therefore, it would be interesting
to build upon our research by studying trophic variation
at across life history stages, a possible role of plasticity or
feedback between ecological niche and lip hypertrophy,
and genetic influences on lip hypertrophy.
Although ecological differentiation between lip morphs
is clear, overall body shape (Figure 3) and head widths differ between lip morphs only subtly, albeit significantly.
Indeed, the body shape difference between other Midas
cichlid species, such as syntopic thin-lipped A. citrinellus
and thick-lipped A. labiatus in the great lakes Managua
and Nicaragua, is much more pronounced [22,41] than
what we found between the orthologous thin- and thicklipped morphs in Apoyeque. In this regard, it is important to note that the thin- and thick-lipped Midas cichlids
in Apoyeque are morphologically, genetically and geographically distinct from the Midas cichlids in lakes
Managua and Nicaragua (this study and [22]), indicating
that they are not simply allotopic populations of A. citrinellus and A. labiatus.
Disruptive selection in sympatry is expected to result in
a bimodal distribution of quantitative eco-morphological

traits. This is because intraspecific competition and negative frequency dependent selection result in higher fitness of extreme over intermediate phenotypes (reviewed
in [42]). Such a pattern has been demonstrated under
ecological speciation in nature but is notoriously difficult
to quantitate (for example [43-46]). In Apoyeque Midas
cichlids, lip size and a variety of eco-morphological traits
that are reflective of trophic niche-body shape, pharyngeal jaw shape, stomach contents and δ15N-are all found
at frequencies predicted under frequency-dependent fitness and disruptive selection. Specifically, these traits
better fit a bimodal rather than unimodal distribution
(Table 2, Additional File 8). Secondary contact could also
result in a bimodal distribution of phenotype, but cichlid
ecology, a single colonization event and no genetic evidence for secondary admixture (discussed below), suggests this is not the case in Apoyeque. Extensive empirical
and theoretical research suggests that disruptive selection
can drive multimodal eco-morphological differentiation
and, with even partial non-random mating, result in
incipient adaptive speciation [42,47,48].
Despite the bimodality of phenotype, we find no equivalent differentiation in nuclear genetic markers between
thin- and thick-lipped Midas cichlids in Apoyeque (microsatellite FST < 0.001, P = 0.360). This absence of differentiation may be due to very low population genetic
polymorphism, a young population with younger diver-

Elmer et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:60
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/60

gence, or weak or absent assortative mating; field observations will be necessary. However, we do find population
differentiation in the mtDNA haplotypes (FST = 0.018, P =
0.064). While marginally statistically non-significant, this
represents a substantial sympatric genetic differentiation
within Apoyeque based on eco-morphology. To put it in
context, this is one-third of the differentiation found
among allopatric Midas cichlid populations of lakes
Managua vs. Xiloá (FST = 0.053, P < 0.001, Additional File
3). More striking is that the mtDNA divergence between
morphs within Apoyeque exceeds that of the different
thin- and thick-lipped species, A. citrinellus and A. labiatus, in the great lake Nicaragua (FST = 0.004, P = non-significant [24] also based on mtDNA control region). It is
presently unclear what processes are at work that would
result in panmixia at nuclear loci and differentiation at
mtDNA in this young, sympatric, genetically depauperate
Midas cichlid population and this should be the focus of
future research.
Our finding of eco-morphological differentiation with
low genetic differentiation could suggest that lip morph is
plasticity, polymorphism or incipient speciation. We discuss these alternatives below.
Midas cichlid species and ecological traits

Hypertrophied lips are an overt species-specific character related to ecology in cichlids [49]. It has evolved independently in different environments and species
complexes of various New World (for example [50]) and
Old World cichlids ([51] and references therein;
[17,52,53]). It is considered to be a diagnostic trait:
among the scores of described cichlid species (1611
Cichlidae in FishBase.org, 5 November 2009), we know of
none for which the character of hypertrophied lips is a
described intraspecific polymorphism (though there is
debate about Crenicichla iguassuensis, see [54,55]).
For example, the Nicaraguan great lake Midas cichlid
species A. citrinellus and A. labiatus are discerned primarily by lip morphology, although they also differ in
head shape, snout angle, feeding behaviour, anterior
teeth, fin position and length [20,56], pharyngeal jaws
[24,41] and body shape [22,41]-much like the two morphs
of Midas cichlid in Apoyeque. In contrast to these differences, some meristic values overlap between A. citrinellus and A. labiatus and the extent of lip hypertrophy
varies within populations [56]. Further, neutral genetic
differentiation between those two species is low or absent
[24]. This is a conundrum because young eco-morphological variants (for example, benthic or limnetic species)
in various crater lakes can be discerned genetically (for
example [4,25,57]). Thus, early researchers of Nicaragua's
cichlids vacillated on the issue of polymorphism versus
speciation but concluded that the weigh of evidence

Page 8 of 15

argued for two Midas cichlid species in the great lakes, A.
citrinellus and A. labiatus [20,56] and all currently published research proceeds under the assumption that they
are different species. In the laboratory, A. labiatus mate
assortatively and resultant offspring have thick lips (KRE
and AM unpublished data), suggesting that this trait is
involved in sexual isolation by assortative mating and has
a strong genetic component. Mate choice experiments
between A. citrinellus and A. labiatus have, to our knowledge, never been published. Certainly, further research is
needed on 'lippiness' and this is a research topic that we
are currently undertaking from ecological, behavioural
and genetic perspectives.
Therefore, although at present we cannot completely
rule out that being thin- or thick-lipped is an intrapopulation polymorphism or plasticity in Apoyeque, we consider it quite unlikely. Instead, we suggest that the
ecological differentiation between thick- and thin-lipped
eco-morphs in Apoyeque represents a case of ecologically
distinct, sympatric incipient sister species. Moreover, lips
may be one of the very few examples for a 'magic trait'
[58]-a trait that combines disruptive natural selection and
assortative mating and that also (sensu [59]) might lead to
speciation in sympatry. Low or absent genetic differentiation between morphs does not contradict incipient ecological speciation because it is an overly conservative
estimator [60] and neither microsatellites nor mtDNA
sequences robustly differentiate other species of Midas
cichlid that differ in lip character [24]. It may be that the
same ecological, genetic or behavioural factors responsible for low meristic and genetic divergence between A.
citrinellus and A. labiatus in Nicaragua's great lakes are
also at play in Apoyeque. Further research on the association of eco-morphological divergence, such as lip hypertrophy, with reproductive isolation is needed in all Midas
cichlids.
In other Nicaraguan crater lakes, intralacustrine divergence of Midas cichlids has occurred with a different set
of ecological traits-primarily body elongation [22]. In
some cases this progressed to full species status with phenotypic, meristic and molecular divergence, such as in
lakes Apoyo [4,57] and Xiloá [25,61]. Though thicklipped Midas cichlids are rather common in Apoyeque
(~20% of the population), they are found only sporadically in crater lake Masaya (personal observation, KRE,
AM and [19]) and extremely rarely in crater lake Xiloá
(personal observation, KRE, TKL and AM and [20,26]),
and are believed to be completely absent in many crater
lakes (for example, Apoyo, Asososca Managua and Asososca León). This suggests that hypertrophied lips is not
the ancestral state in this species complex and instead
may only arise under particular ecological conditions and
genetic backgrounds.

Elmer et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:60
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/60

Crater lake colonization

The dearth of genetic variability sampled in Apoyeque
Midas cichlids is consistent with coalescence analyses
that indicated a very recent founding of Apoyeque
(approximately 100 years or generations ago) by a single
colonization event. The coalescent methods we employed
here have been used to infer the age of African cichlid
species because the recent speciation in many cichlid
species hinders lineage-based phylogenetic methods
[62,63]. Even if this method underestimates the colonization time, all geological and genetic evidence indicate that
the Apoyeque population is extremely young (that is,
maximally 1800 years old) and the most genetically depauperate of all the crater lake Midas cichlid populations
[22].
How a high walled crater lake could be colonized by
fishes is a tantalizing question for history. Some possibilities include being transported by birds (for example,
ospreys, which fly moderate distances with fish in their
talons), momentary subterranean aquatic connections
caused by volcanic and tectonic movements or being
flung in by hurricanes or funnel winds with water transfer
between neighbouring lakes; spectacular though these
phenomena seem, they have been reported scientifically
for many years (reviewed in [64,65]). It is also possible
that the population of fish in Apoyeque was seeded by
humans, as is proposed for other lakes [66], but this
seems less plausible because the lake is quite difficult to
access and is not located next to any human settlement.
The presence of a large population of small poeciliid fish
in Apoyeque, which would not likely be purposely introduced for food or sport, argues that natural colonizations
may be more likely than human introductions. Regardless
of the historical mode of arrival, our data suggest that the
extant population of Midas cichlid fishes colonized
Apoyeque only once and very recently.
Is crater lake colonization rare? If crater lake Apoyeque
is about 1800 years old, but the Midas cichlid population
within is only about 100 years old, did the lake stand
devoid of fish all the time in between? One possibility is
that cycles of extinction and re-colonization may be relatively frequent in the early life of a crater lake. Occurrences such as remnant volcanic activity, fumerole
activity [67] or periodic gas releases and rising of toxic
waters [68,69] may exterminate a crater lake's fish fauna.
For example, locals of the area report that Apoyeque
occasionally 'boils' and 'all' of the fish die (personal communication to KRE). Such a fish kill was observed in January 2008 in Lake Masaya, though clearly not all fish died
(personal observation, TKL). In that case, Apoyeque may
have been colonized previously, followed by an extinction
event, and the extant population only arrived within the
past 100 years. Additional comparative phylogeographic
investigations across lakes and species will help in

Page 9 of 15

addressing these questions, but ultimately a crater lake's
colonization history may remain speculative.
Founder events, novel habitats and speciation

Nicaraguan crater lake environments, being small, deep,
clear, mineral-rich isolated waters, are very different from
the large, shallow, turbid waters of the ancestral great
lakes. This represents a major shift in ecological niche for
Midas cichlids and may allow for the rapid evolution of
new phenotypes [70,71]. To date, we have largely relied
on models to suggest how long phenotypic divergence
and speciation may take after colonisation of a new environment. Those estimates vary greatly: some model suggest 10 000 generations may be sufficient for the
emergence of ecologically differentiated species under
favourable conditions [5,72], or possibly much faster
[60,73]. Based on field collected data, especially for fish,
other authors [14-16,74-76] argue that ecological speciation or morphological diversification can occur on timescales of only tens to hundreds of generations. Here, we
have demonstrated that ecological divergence can begin
in sympatry on historic time scales of a minimum of 100
years.

Conclusions
The results of our study suggest: (i) a case of ecological
and morphological differentiation of sympatric Midas
cichlids to exploit divergent niches, with associated weak
population divergence at mtDNA; and (ii) that this ecomorphological divergence occurred very quickly after
colonization of a crater lake habitat. Midas cichlids in
Apoyeque are geographically and genetically isolated
from neighbouring populations, and morphologically distinctive [22] and, thus, evolutionarily independent from
other populations. Whether thin- and thick-lipped Midas
cichlids in crater lake Apoyeque are a single polymorphic
species or two incipient species cannot yet be determined
with certainty but, based on cichlid biology in general and
patterns of genetic and eco-morphological variation in
Apoyeque in particular, we suggest that thin- and thicklipped fishes may be sympatric incipient species.
Methods
Specimen collection

Specimens were collected in November and December
2007 using gill nets in lakes Apoyeque (12.15°N, 86.20°W)
and Xiloá (12.13°N, 86.19°W) (Figure 1). Specimens from
Managua were collected previously by AM and M Barluenga. Fish were digitally photographed in a standardized position. Maturity and sex were determined by
dissection for a subset of specimens (see Additional File
5). Tissue and voucher specimens (whole fish or head)
were collected for every specimen and stored in ethanol.
Stomachs that held contents were collected and stored in

Elmer et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:60
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/60

ethanol. Apoyeque fishes were classified as having normal lips ('thin-lipped') or hypertrophied lips (if the upper
lip protruded forward beyond the snout profile; 'thicklipped') based on standardized photos (Figure 1).
Although there is variation in the extent of hypertrophy
of the 'thick-lipped' lips (within Apoyeque and across the
Midas species complex [20,66]), the great majority of
individuals were readily assignable.
A subset of adult specimens from Apoyeque was used
to assess variation in pharyngeal jaw shape, body size,
head width, and body shape (thick-lipped Ǩ n = 23, thicklipped ǩ n = 13, thin-lipped Ǩ = 66, thin-lipped ǩ n =
69; Additional File 5). A more extensive group of specimens was used for lip size covariate analysis (pooled for
the two morphs: Ǩ n = 106, ǩ n = 100, juveniles n = 77)
and the plot of lip size by body size (thin-lipped n = 309,
thick-lipped n = 71; Additional File 5, Additional File 6,
Additional File 7). The final microsatellite data set comprised: Apoyeque thin-lipped n = 317, Apoyeque thicklipped n = 76, Xiloá n = 50, Managua n = 185 (Additional
File 5). The mtDNA data set comprised: Apoyeque thinlipped n = 232, Apoyeque thick-lipped n = 58, Xiloá n =
29, Managua n = 70 new or resequenced (Additional File
5). Juvenile and 'not noted' fishes were included in genetic
analyses and the lip size plot but were not analysed for
eco-morphological variation in order to avoid confounding effects of developmental stage on niche and body
shape.
Body size and shape variation

A single observer measured head width from voucher
specimens using digital callipers at: (1) posterior point of
mouth; (2) nostrils; and (3) posterior point of eye. Standard body length and the volume of the lower and upper
lip (lip size) were measured in IMAGEJ v 1.41o [77]. In
order to test the influence of sex or maturity on lip size,
the effect of body size was standardized by including
standard length as a covariate in the lip size analyses. Initially, we included the full model using log-transformed
body size and lip size values. After the interaction term
was found to be non-significant, it was removed and we
proceeded testing for the main effects.
Thirteen landmarks to describe body shape were digitized from standardized photographs in TPSDIG version
2.12 [78] (Figure 2) and analysed with classifier variables
(sex, lip morph) in MORPHOJ version 1.00j [79] using leastsquares Procrustes superimposition [80] and geometric
morphometric methods. Body shape analyses have been
described elsewhere [22]. There was no significant influence of body size on body shape in any group (thicklipped Ǩ P = 0.76, thick-lipped ǩ P = 1.0, thin-lipped Ǩ
P = 0.62, thin-lipped ǩ P = 0.19; 10 000 permutations) so

Page 10 of 15

no allometric correction was applied. Body shapes of
males and females do not differ (Procrustes distance =
0.008, P = 0.12) so sexes were subsequently combined.
Ecological niche assessment

Lower pharyngeal jaws were extracted and cleaned in a
solution of 10% trypsin for 17 h before being imaged
using a desktop scanner. Jaws are an approximately symmetrical structure [81] so only one side was used to infer
shape. Ten landmarks (approximately following [81])
were digitally assigned using TPSDIG (Figure 5a). Jaw
shape was analyzed in MORPHOJ by the same approaches
used for body shape. Male and female jaws do not differ
in shape (Procrustes = 0.006, P = 0.79: allometry corrected) so sexes were subsequently combined.
Gut contents were categorized under a stereoscope
(observer blind to fish's morph) for groupings benthic
crustacea, plants and seeds, fish and fish parts, snail
shells, insect pieces and larvae, brown algae, white algae
[determined by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) to be
Oomycota]. Volume of each category was determined by
comparing it to a microlitre standard after 30 s centrifugation [82]. In order to test whether the two morphs differed in diet, we applied a generalized linear mixed
model. Volume was used as a response variable with food
category and morph as fixed effects. Identity code of each
individual was entered as a random effect. The model was
fitted using maximum likelihood and a likelihood ratio
(G2) test was used to calculate the P-value for the interaction term between food category and morph. In order to
improve the normality of the residual errors, the food volume values were log + 1 transformed prior to the analysis.
In addition, we calculated Schoener's index of diet difference [83] and used monotonic multidimensional scaling
(MDS) with Guttman loss function to scale pair-wise proportional similarities in gut content into a two-dimensional plot. Digested, unrecognizable material in the guts
was excluded from all diet analyses.
Carbon (∂13C) and nitrogen (∂15N) stable isotope values
were determined following [84]. Values of ∂13C were normalized for lipid content [85]. Non-parametric
MANOVA in PAST[86] was used to compare groups statistically.
Normality of each eco-morphological trait was assessed
by plotting and observing a frequency histogram of values and normal probability plots (using raw data, PC1 or
MDS1; Additional File 8) and the statistical test of goodness-of-fit to a normal distribution was calculated by
Shapiro-Wilk W in JMP version 7 [87]. For all non-normally distributed traits, we tested whether the plots are
best fit by a single normal distribution or a bimodal distribution using a two-component normal mixture model

Elmer et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:60
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/60

in DISCMIXTUREPROGS version 0.5 mix2 http://
www.bioss.ac.uk/~markb/mixtures/[88]. This method
uses numerical integration to calculate mean, variance
and proportion for each distribution by integration over a
posterior density [88]. Bayesian mixture models were run
for 500 iterations (bins) and convergence assessed by stabilized trace plots and a posterior distribution of theda
and sigma values that started at, and returned to, zero or
near-zero (not shown). The fit of a single-component
model and a two-component model to our data was calculated with AICs (second-order, or corrected for sample
size). The difference between models (ΔAICc) was calculated from the AICc for a single unimodal distribution
minus the AICc for a two-component distribution
(reviewed in [88,89]). We interpreted ΔAICc values following established guidelines: 0-5 are equivalent support
for either model, 5-8 is moderate support for one model
over the other, >8 is strong support for one model over
the other. A negative ΔAICc value supports a single normal distribution and positive ΔAICc value supports a
two-component distribution over a single-component
[44,89].
Mitochondrial DNA sequencing and analysis

Samples were sequenced for mtDNA using standard
methods described elsewhere [22]. Diversities were calculated in CONTRIB version 1.02 [90] rarefied to the smallest sample size (Xiloá, n = 29). Sequences were collapsed
into haplotypes ignoring missing data in DNASP version 4
[91]. FST estimates were calculated in ARLEQUIN version
3.11 [92] using a Tamura [93] + gamma (unequal base frequencies, unequal substitution rates, alpha = 0.74) corrected distance matrix to approximate the best model of
evolution that was inferred to be HKY [94] + I + G from
MODELTEST version 3.7 [95] in PAUP* version 4 [96]. Statistical power was determined by a 10 000 step Markov
Chain method. Sequences from Apoyeque were searched
in
on-line
nucleotide
BLAST
http://
blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ for identical sequences (Identity =
100%) in the nr/nt database.
Using all newly determined sequences and all Midas
cichlid complete control region sequences from nearby
lakes Xiloá, Nicaragua, Managua, and Tisma Pond available in Genbank (n = 459; as of 19 Jan. 2009), a medianjoining haplotype network [97] was calculated in NETversion 4.5.1.0 http://www.fluxus-engineerWORK
ing.com. Transversions tend to be rarer in mitochondrial
DNA and were, therefore, weighted three-times transitions. The MJ network was maximum parsimony postprocessed to display the shortest tree compatible with the
predictions of coalescence [98]. In order to simplify visualization, singleton haplotypes are not drawn in the network, except from Apoyeque.

Page 11 of 15

Microsatellite genotyping and analyses

Eleven microsatellite loci were amplified using standard
PCR conditions: Abur151, Abur82 [99], M1M(=Acit1),
M2(=Acit2), M7(=Acit3), M12(=Acit4) [100], Unh002
[101], Unh012, Unh013 [26], Burtkit F 474/R672 [102]
and TmoM7 [103]. Fluorescently labelled fragments were
analysed on an ABI3130XL (Applied Biosystems, CA,
USA) and sized according to Rox 500 internal standard in
GENEMAPPER version 4.0 (Applied Biosystems).
Genotyping quality for each population was assured by
testing in MICRO-CHECKER[104] with 5 000 randomizations and a 95% confidence interval. Any influence of null
alleles was always low (Brookfield 1 [105] < 0.06), suspected in only two or fewer loci and with no consistent
deviation across loci or populations, so all loci were
retained. Expected heterozygosity, inbreeding coefficient
FIS and inter-population FST were calculated in MICROSATELLITE ANALYZER[106]. Rarefied allelic richness and private allelic richness (standardized to the lowest number
of alleles) [107] were calculated in HP-RARE version 1.0
[108]. Hardy Weinberg exact tests and linkage disequilibrium were calculated in GENEPOP '007 [109,110]. Multiple
tests were Bonferroni corrected. Genetic variation was
analysed in a two-dimensional individual-based factorial
correspondence analysis in GENETIX[111].
Coalescence analyses

The population (Managua or Xiloá) that founded
Apoyeque was estimated from the microsatellite dataset
using MIGRATE version 2.4.3 [32,33]. We applied the
Bayesian inference [112] and restricted Apoyeque gene
flow to immigration. Apoyeque was reduced to n = 200 to
decrease disparity between population sample sizes, as
such disparity can cause problems for parameter convergence. We applied a static heating scheme of four chains
with the temperatures 10 000.00, 3.00, 1.50 and 1.00.
Mutation rates varied between loci and were estimated
from the data. Three independent runs were conducted,
each consisting of 4 000 000 MCMC steps and a burn-in
period of 100 000 steps. Albeit absolute posterior parameter estimates deviated slightly due to the stochastic
nature of the coalescence analyses, all runs resulted in
similar estimates. This suggests adequate convergence
and a good match between the data and the models.
Divergence time between the founding population,
Managua, and Apoyeque was calculated in IMA[113,114]
using all mtDNA and microsatellite data combined. We
used a geographic heating scheme with 60 concurrent
chains and applied values of 0.9 and 0.95 for the heating
parameters g1 and g2 to achieve adequate swapping
among chains (> 0.4 even for low numbered chains). Each
run began with a different random number seed and ran
for 1 000 000 steps following a burn-in period of 250 000
steps. Mutation rate is estimated at 5 × 10-4 per locus per

Elmer et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:60
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/60

year [115]. Migration rates and population sizes were
restricted based on priors that generated generally wellbehaved posterior distributions in optimizing runs (q1 1,
q2 10, qA 200, m1 100, m2 5). We initially restricted
divergence time to 2 000 year (t 1) to match Apoyeque's
geological age but this resulted in an unstable peak at the
maximal divergence, probably due to ancestral polymorphism. A peak at about 100 years was resilient to varying
maximal divergence values. Three runs with maximal
divergence 10 000 years (t 5) were iterated with different
starting seeds to confirm consistency of the results and
they all converged on similar values with the highest posterior density between 60 and 150 years.

Additional material
Additional file 1 Microsatellite DNA summary statistics. Microsatellite
heterozygosity, the number of alleles and the inbreeding coefficient by
locus and lake.
Additional file 2 Factorial correspondence analysis of microsatellite
alleles. Crater lake Apoyeque has extremely reduced genetic variability
compared to and is significantly differentiated from, the neighbouring crater lake Xiloá and great lake Managua. Apoyeque (rust; n = 386), Xiloá (tan; n
= 50) and Managua (green; n = 185).
Additional file 3 Pairwise population genetic differentiation between
lakes. Matrix of FST-values between each population pair: microsatellite differentiation is on the upper right and mitochondrial DNA differentiation is
in the lower left of the matrix. Each lake is significantly genetically differentiated from the other.
Additional file 4 Maximal posterior probabilities for three independent iterations of isolation-with-migration coalescence analysis (IMA).
Maximal posterior probability peaks (HiPt) for three independent runs of
IMA. Parameter q is the estimated effective population size of (1) Apoyeque,
(2) Managua and (a) the ancestral population, in numbers of individuals; m
is the rate of migration from (1) Managua to Apoyeque and (2) Apoyeque
to Managua in average number of migrations per 1 000 generations per
gene copy; t is the years since divergence between Apoyeque and Managua.
Additional file 5 Specimen list. Specimens included in the analyses by
lake of origin, species, specimen number, lip morph (L = thick-lipped, N =
thin-lipped; only relevant for Apoyeque) and sex/maturity (F = adult female,
M = adult male, J = juvenile, not noted = not noted or unassignable; only
relevant for Apoyeque). Ecological and morphological analyses include: stable isotope analyses (SIA), diet or gut contents (gut), absolute size (body
length, head width), and geometric morphometric analyses of body shape
and pharyngeal jaw shape. Genetic data include mitochondrial DNA Genbank accession numbers and whether the specimen was genotyped for
microsatellite loci (x = genotyped).
Additional file 6 Standard body length of Midas cichlids in Apoyeque
by lip morphology and sex. Body size, measured as standard length, did
not differ between thin- and thick-lipped individuals (Two factor ANOVA,
morph effect, F1,202 = 0.652, P = 0.42). Males were significantly larger than
females (sex effect, F1,202 = 19.9, P < 0.001) for both morphs (morph × sex
interaction, F1,202 = 0.082, P = 0.78).
Additional file 7 Bivariate analysis of lip size by body length (mm), fitted with quadratic line for thin- and thick-lipped fishes. A plot of lip size
(total lip area, mm2) by body length (standard length, mm) with quadratic
lines of best-fit shows the different relationship of lip and body size in each
of the morphs (n = 309 thin-lipped, n = 71 thick-lipped). A quadratic (df = 2)
had improved goodness-of-fit to the data over a linear (df = 1) regression
(thin-lipped: adjusted R2 = 0.705 vs. 0.672, thick-lipped: adjusted R2 0.506 vs.
0.461; non-transformed data).

Page 12 of 15

Additional file 8 Frequency distributions of eco-morphological phenotypes and the deviations from normality. Frequency histograms (left)
and normal probability plots (compared to expected proportions under a
single normal distribution) (right) for (A) absolute lip size standardized by
body length, (B) PC1 of body shape, (B) PC1 of pharyngeal jaw shape, (C)
MDS1 for diet inferred from stomach contents and stable isotope values of
(D) 13C and (E) 15N indicative of trophic niche. See Table 2 and text for further information.
Abbreviations
AICc: Akaike Information Criterion; IMA: isolation-with-migration coalescence
analysis; MDS: multidimensional scaling; mtDNA: mitochondrial DNA; PC: principal components; PCR: polymerase chain reaction.
Authors' contributions
KRE designed the research, collected samples, analysed molecular, morphological and ecological data and wrote the manuscript. TKL designed the research,
collected samples, conducted most of the analyses for diet and size data and
edited the manuscript. AK collected molecular data, analysed molecular data
and ran coalescence analyses. CH collected and analysed the stable isotope
data and edited the manuscript. AM designed the research, collected samples
and helped draft the manuscript.
Acknowledgements
Research was conducted with collection permits and approval of MARENA,
Nicaragua. We thank: H Recknagel, C Rudolf-Chang and M von Ludner for assistance in the laboratory; N Probst and M Muschick for advice about fish stomachs; M Barluenga and W Salzburger for samples from Lake Managua; P Beerli
for assistance with MIGRATE; PA Svensson for help with diet data analyses; C Bogs
for algae identification by PCR; A Freundt and S Kutterolf for helpful geological
information; M Brewer for an update to the mix2 software; Konstanz Ecology
and Evolution journal club; and five anonymous reviewers for comments that
improved the manuscript. CH thanks the Max Planck Gesellschaft (MPG) and D
Tautz for support and H Buhtz for isotope analyses. This research was funded
by: the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation (KRE, TKL); NSERC (KRE); Academy
of Finland (TKL); Finnish Cultural Foundation (TKL); MPG (CH); University of Konstanz (AM); and the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (AM).
Author Details
1Lehrstuhl für Zoologie und Evolutionsbiologie, Department of Biology,
University of Konstanz, Universitätstrasse 10, 78457 Konstanz, Germany,
2School of Biological Sciences, Monash University, Victoria 3800, Australia,
3Department of Evolutionary Genetics, Max Planck Institute for Limnology,
Postfach 165, 24302 Plön, Germany and 4Current Address: School of Biological
Sciences, Queen's University Belfast, Medical Biology Centre, 97 Lisburn Road,
Belfast BT9 7BL, UK
Received: 15 December 2009 Accepted: 12 May 2010
Published: 12 May 2010
© 2010 Elmeravailable article distributed under
This is an Open Access from:BioMed Central Ltd. the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
BMC article is2010, 8:60
Biology et al; licensee http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/60

References
1. Losos JB, Ricklefs RE: Adaptation and diversification on islands. Nature
2009, 457:830-836.
2. Grant PR, Grant BR: Adaptive radiation of Darwin's finches: Recent data
help explain how this famous group of Galapagos birds evolved,
although gaps in our understanding remain. Am Sci 2002, 90:130-141.
3. Savolainen V, Anstett MC, Lexer C, Hutton I, Clarkson JJ, Norup VV, Powell
MP, Springate D, Salamin N, Baker WJ: Sympatric speciation in palms on
an oceanic island. Nature 2006, 441:210-213.
4. Barluenga M, Stölting KN, Salzburger W, Muschick M, Meyer A: Sympatric
speciation in Nicaraguan crater lake cichlid fish. Nature 2006,
439:719-723.
5. Gavrilets S, Vose A, Barluenga M, Salzburger W, Meyer A: Case studies and
mathematical models of ecological speciation. 1. Cichlids in a crater
lake. Mol Ecol 2007, 16:2893-2909.
6. Schliewen U, Rassmann K, Markmann M, Markert J, Kocher TD, Tautz D:
Genetic and ecological divergence of a monophyletic cichlid species
pair under fully sympatric conditions. Mol Ecol 2001, 10:1471-1488.

Elmer et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:60
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/60

7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.

15.

16.

17.
18.
19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.
29.
30.
31.

Schliewen UK, Tautz D, Paabo S: Sympatric speciation suggested by
monophyly of crater lake cichlids. Nature 1994, 368:629-632.
Schluter D: The Ecology of Adaptive Radiations. New York: Oxford
University Press; 2000.
Nosil P, Harmon LJ, Seehausen O: Ecological explanations for
(incomplete) speciation. Trends Ecol Evol 2009, 24:145-156.
Waxman D, Gavrilets S: 20 questions on adaptive dynamics. J Evol Biol
2005, 18:1139-1154.
Orr MR, Smith D: Ecology and speciation. Trends Ecol Evol 1998,
13:502-506.
Schluter D: Ecological speciation in postglacial fishes. Phil Trans R Soc B
1996, 351:807-814.
McKinnon JS, Rundle H: Speciation in nature: the threespine stickleback
model system. Trends Ecol Evol 2002, 17:480-488.
Hendry AP, Wenburg JK, Bentzen P, Volk EC, Quinn TP: Rapid evolution of
reproductive isolation in the wild: Evidence from introduced salmon.
Science 2000, 290:516-518.
Lu G, Bernatchez L: Correlated trophic specialization and genetic
divergence in sympatric lake whitefish ecotypes (Coregonus
clupeaformis): support for the ecological speciation hypothesis.
Evolution 1999, 59:1491-1505.
Østbye K, Amundsen PA, Bernatchez L, Klemetsen A, Knudsen R,
Kristoffersen R, TF N, Hindar K: Parallel evolution of ecomorphological
traits in the European whitefish Coregonus lavaretus (L.) species
complex during postglacial times. Mol Ecol 2006, 15:3983-4001.
Meyer A: Phylogenetic relationships and evolutionary processes in East
African cichlid fishes. Trends Ecol Evol 1993, 8:279-285.
Salzburger W: The interaction of sexually and naturally selected traits in
the adaptive radiations of cichlid fishes. Mol Ecol 2009, 18:169-185.
Barlow GW: The Midas cichlid in Nicaragua. In Investigations of the
Ichthyology of Nicaraguan Lakes Edited by: Thorson TB. Lincoln: University
of Nebraska Press; 1976:333-358.
Barlow GW, Munsey JW: The red devil-Midas-arrow cichlid species
complex in Nicaragua. In Investigations of the Ichthyology of Nicaraguan
Lakes Edited by: Thorson TB. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press;
1976:359-369.
Meyer A: Morphometrics and allometry in the trophically polymorphic
cichlid fish, Cichlasoma citrinellum: alternative adaptations and
ontogenetic changes in shape. J Zool 1990, 221:237-260.
Elmer KR, Kusche H, Lehtonen TK, Meyer A: Local variation and parallel
evolution: morphological and genetic diversity across a species
complex of Neotropical crater lake cichlid fishes. Phil Trans R Soc B 2010,
365:1769-1782.
Bunje PME, Barluenga M, Meyer A: Sampling genetic diversity in the
sympatrically and allopatrically speciating Midas cichlid species
complex over a 16 year time series. BMC Evol Biol 2007, 7:25.
Barluenga M, Meyer A: The Midas cichlid species complex: incipient
sympatric speciation in Nicaraguan cichlid fishes? Mol Ecol 2004,
13:2061-2076.
Elmer KR, Lehtonen TK, Meyer A: Color assortative mating contributes to
sympatric divergence of neotropical crater lake cichlid fish. Evolution
2009, 63:2750-2757.
McKaye KR, Stauffer JR Jr, Berghe EP van den, Vivas R, Perez LJL, McCrary
JK, Waid R, Konings A, Lee WJ, Kocher TD: Behavioral, morphological and
genetic evidence of divergence of the Midas cichlid species complex in
two Nicaraguan crater lakes. Cuadernos Investigación UCA 2002,
12:19-47.
Kutterolf K, Freundt A, Pérez W, Wehrmann H, Schmincke HU: Late
Pleistocene to Holocene temporal succession and magnitudes of
highly-explosive volcanic eruptions in west-central Nicaragua. J
Volcanol Geotherm Res 2007, 163:55-82.
Volcan Apoyeque [http://www.ineter.gob.ni/geofisica/vol/apoyeque/
index.html]
Laguna Apoyeque [http://www.ineter.gob.ni/Direcciones/
Recursos%20Hidricos/HIDROGRAFIA%20WEB/Lagunas/Apoyeque.htm]
Waid RM, Raesly RL, McKaye KR, McCrary JK: Zoogeografía íctica de
lagunas cratéricas de Nicaragua. Encuentro 1999, 51:65-80.
Barlow GW, Baylis JR, Roberts D: Chemical analyses of some crater lakes
in relation to adjacent Lake Nicaragua. In Investigations of the
Ichthyology of Nicaraguan Lakes Edited by: Thorson TB. Lincoln: University
of Nebraska Press; 1976:17-20.

Page 13 of 15

32. Beerli P, Felsenstein J: Maximum-likelihood estimation of migration
rates and effective population numbers in two populations using a
coalescent approach. Genetics 1999, 152:763-773.
33. Beerli P, Felsenstein J: Maximum likelihood estimation of a migration
matrix and effective population sizes in n subpopulations by using a
coalescent approach. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2001, 98:4563-4568.
34. Wallace RK: An assessment of diet-overlap indexes. Trans Am Fish Soc
1981, 110:72-76.
35. McCrary JK, Madsen H, Gonzáles L, Luna I, López LJ: Comparison of
gastropod mollusc (Apogastropoda: Hydrobiidae) habitats in two
crater lakes in Nicaragua. Rev Biol Trop 2008, 56:113-120.
36. Post DM: Using stable isotopes to estimate trophic position: models,
methods, and assumptions. Ecology 2002, 83:703-718.
37. Vivas R, McKaye KR: Habitat selection, feeding ecology, and fry
survivorship in the Amphilophus citrinellus species complex in Lake
Xiloá. J Aquacult Aq Sci 2001, IX:32-48.
38. Meyer A: Costs and benefits of morphological specialization: feeding
performance in the trophically polymorphic neotropical cichlid fish,
Cichlasoma citrinellum. Oecologia 1989, 80:431-436.
39. Meyer A: Ecological and evolutionary consequences of the trophic
polymorphism in Cichlasoma citrinellum (Pisces: Cichlidae). Biol J Linn
Soc 1990, 39:279-299.
40. Greenwood PH: Environmental effects on the pharyngeal mill of a
cichild fish, Astatoreochromis alluaudi and their taxonomic
implications. Proc Linn Soc Lond 1965, 176:1-10.
41. Klingenberg CP, Barluenga M, Meyer A: Body shape variation in cichlid
fishes of the Amphilophus citrinellus species complex. Biol J Linn Soc
2003, 80:397-408.
42. Rueffler C, Van Dooren TJM, Leimar O, Abrams PA: Disruptive selection
and then what? Trends Ecol Evol 2006, 21:238-245.
43. Martin RA, Pfennig DW: Disruptive selection in natural populations: the
roles of ecological specialization and resource competition. Am Nat
2009, 174:268-281.
44. Hendry AP, Grant PR, Grant BR, Ford HA, Brewer MJ, Podos J: Possible
human impacts on adaptive radiation: beak size bimodality in Darwin's
finches. Proc R Soc Lond B 2006, 273:1887-1894.
45. Schluter D, McPhail JD: Ecological character displacement and
speciation in sticklebacks. Am Nat 1992, 140:85.
46. Bolnick DI: Can intraspecific competition drive disruptive selection? An
experimental test in natural populations of sticklebacks. Evolution
2004, 58:608-618.
47. Udovic D: Frequency-dependent selection, disruptive selection, and
the evolution of reproductive isolation. Am Nat 1980, 116:621-641.
48. Pennings PS, Kopp M, Meszéna G, Dieckmann U, Hermisson J: An
analytically tractable model for competitive speciation. Am Nat 2008,
171:E44-E71.
49. Keenleyside MHA: Cichlid Fishes: Behaviour, Ecology and Evolution.
London: Chapman and Hall; 1991.
50. de Lucena CAS, Kullander SO: The Crenicichla (Teleostei: Cichlidae)
species of the Uruguai River drainage in Brazil. Ichthyol Explor Fres 1992,
3:97-192.
51. Arnegard ME, Snoeks J: New three-spotted cichlid species with
hypertrophied lips (Teleostei: Cichlidae) from the deep waters of Lake
Malawi/Nyasa, Africa. Copeia 2001, 2001:705-717.
52. Kocher TD, Conroy JA, McKaye KR, Stauffer JR: Similar morphologies of
cichlid fish in Lakes Tanganyika and Malawi are due to convergence.
Mol Phylogen Evol 1993, 2:158-165.
53. Genner MJ, Seehausen O, Lunt DH, Joyce DA, Shaw PW, Carvalho GR,
Turner GF: Age of cichlids: new dates for ancient lake fish radiations.
Mol Biol Evol 2007, 24:1269-1282.
54. Renesto E, Zawadzki CH, Revaldaves E: Biochemical taxonomy of
Crenicichla (Pisces: Perciformes: Cichlidae) of the Iguaçu River, Brazil.
Braz Arch Biol Techn 2001, 44:15-22.
55. Kullander SO, Norén M, Frioriksson GB, de Lucena CAS: Phylogenetic
relationships of species of Crenicichla (Teleostei: Cichlidae) in southern
South America based on the mitochondrial cytochrome b gene. J Zool
Syst Evol Res in press. [doi: 10.1111/j.1439-0469.2009.00557.x]
56. Villa J: Systematic status of the cichlid fishes Cichlasoma dorsatum, C.
granadense and C. nigritum Meek. In Investigations of the Ichthyology of
Nicaraguan Lakes Edited by: Thorson TB. Lincoln: University of Nebraska
Press; 1976:101-113.

Elmer et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:60
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/60

57. Elmer KR, Fan S, Gunter HM, Jones JC, Boekhoff S, Kuraku S, Meyer A: Rapid
evolution and selection inferred from the transcriptomes of sympatric
crater lake cichlid fishes. Mol Ecol 2010, 19(Suppl 1):197-211.
58. Gavrilets S: Fitness Landscapes and the Origin of Species. Princeton:
Princeton University Press; 2004.
59. Maynard Smith J: Sympatric speciation. Am Nat 1966, 100:637-650.
60. Thibert-Plante X, Hendry AP: Five questions on ecological speciation
addressed with individual-based simulations. J Evol Biol 2009,
88:109-123.
61. Stauffer JR Jr, McKaye KR: Descriptions of three new species of cichlid
fishes (Teleostei: Cichlidae) from Lake Xiloá, Nicaragua. Cuadernos
Investigación UCA 2002, 12:1-18.
62. Hey J, Won YJ, Sivasundar A, Nielsen R, Markert J: Using nuclear
haplotypes with microsatellites to study gene flow between recently
separated Cichlid species. Mol Ecol 2004, 13:909-919.
63. Won YJ, Sivasundar A, Wang Y, Hey J: On the origin of Lake Malawi
cichlid species: A population genetic analysis of divergence. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2005, 102:6581-6586.
64. Thomson DP: Introduction to Meterology. London: William Blackwood
and Sons; 1849.
65. Hora SL: Catching fishes with the hand in India. Science 1950,
11:263-264.
66. Villa J: Ichthyology of the Lakes of Nicaragua: historical perspective. In
Investigations of the Ichthyology of Nicaraguan Lakes Edited by: Thorson TB.
Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press; 1976:101-113.
67. Brinton DG: On an ancient human footprint from Nicaragua. Proc Am
Phil Soc 1887, 24:437-444.
68. Caliro S, Chiodini G, Izzo G, Minopli C, Signorini A, Avino R, Granieri D:
Geochemical and biochemical evidence of lake overturn and fish kill at
Lake Averno, Italy. J Volcanol Geotherm Res 2008, 178:305-316.
69. Tassi F, Vaselli O, Fernandez E, Duarte E, Martinez M, Delgado Huertas A,
Bergamaschi F: Morphological and geochemical features of crater lakes
in Costa Rica: an overview. J Limnol 2009, 68:193-205.
70. Mayr E: Change of genetic environment and evolution. In Evolution as a
Process Edited by: Huxley J, Hardy AC, Ford EB. New York: Collier Books;
1954:157-180.
71. Barrett RDH, Schluter D: Adaptation from standing genetic variation.
Trends Ecol Evol 2007, 23:38-44.
72. Gavrilets S, Vose A: Dynamic patterns of adaptive radiation. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2005, 102:18040.
73. Doebeli M: A quantitative genetic competition model for sympatric
speciation. J Evol Biol 1996, 9:893-909.
74. Pearse DE, Hayes SA, Bond MH, Hanson CV, Anderson EC, Macfarlane RB,
Garza JC: Over the falls? Rapid evolution of ecotypic differentiation in
steelhead/rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss). J Hered 2009,
100:515-525.
75. Hart JJ, Gross MR, Heino M, Hilborn R, Kope RG, Law R, Reynolds JD:
Evolutionary consequences of fishing and their implications for
salmon. Evol Appl 2008, 1:388-408.
76. Hendry AP, Nosil P, Rieseberg LH: The speed of ecological speciation.
Funct Ecol 2007, 21:455-464.
77. Rasband WS: ImageJ. 1997 [http://rsb.info.nih.gov/ij/]. Bethesda: US
National Institutes of Health
78. Rohlf FJ: TPSDig2: a program for landmark development and analysis.
2007 [http://life.bio.sunysb.edu/morph/]. New York: Department of
Ecology and Evolution, State University of New York, Stony Brook
79. Klingenberg CP: MorphoJ. 2008 [http://www.flywings.org.uk/
MorphoJ_page.htm]. Manchester: Faculty of Life Sciences, Univ. of
Manchester
80. Dryden IL, Mardia KV: Statistical Shape Analysis Chichester: Wiley; 1998.
81. Klingenberg CP, Barluenga M, Meyer A: Shape analysis of symmetric
structures: quantifying variation among individuals and asymmetry.
Evolution 2002, 56:1909-1920.
82. Hyslop EJ: Stomach contents analysis-a review of methods and their
application. J Fish Biol 1980, 17:411-429.
83. Schoener TW: Nonsynchronous spatial overlap of lizards in patchy
habitats. Ecology 1970, 51:408-418.
84. Harrod C, Grey J: Isotopic variation complicates analysis of trophic
relations within the fish community of Plußsee: a small, deep,
stratifying lake. Arch Hydrobiol 2006, 167:281-299.

Page 14 of 15

85. Kiljunen M, Grey J, Sinisalo T, Harrod C, Immonen H, Jones RI: A revised
model for lipid-normalising d13C values from aquatic organisms, with
implications for isotope mixing models. J Appl Ecol 2006, 43:1213-1222.
86. Hammer Ø, Harper DAT, Ryan PD: PAST: Paleontological statistics
software package for education and data analysis. Palaeontol Electron
2001, 41:9.
87. SAS: JMP Statistical Discovery version 7 NC, USA: SAS Institute Inc; 2007.
88. Brewer MJ: Discretisation for inference on normal mixture models. Stat
Comput 2003, 13:209-219.
89. Burnham KP, Anderson DR: Model Selection and Multimodel Inference:
a Practical Information-Theoretic Approach. New York: Springer-Verlag,
Inc; 2002.
90. Petit RJ, El Mousadik A, Pons O: Identifying populations for conservation
on the basis of genetic markers. Conserv Biol 1998, 12:844-855.
91. Rozas J, Sánchez-DelBarrio JC, Messeguer X, Rozas R: DnaSP, DNA
polymorphism analyses by the coalescent and other methods.
Bioinformatics 2003, 19:2496-2497.
92. Excoffier L, Laval LG, Schneider S: Arlequin ver. 3.0: An integrated
software package for population genetics data analysis. Evol Bioinform
2005, 1:47-50.
93. Tamura K: Estimation of the number of nucleotide substitutions when
there are strong transition-transversion and G+C content biases. Mol
Biol Evol 1992, 9:678-687.
94. Hasewaga M, Kishino H, Yano T: Dating of the human-ape splitting by a
molecular clock of mitochondrial DNA. J Mol Evol 1985, 22:160-174.
95. Posada D, Crandall K: MODELTEST: testing the model of DNA
substitution. Bioinformatics 1998, 14:817-818.
96. Swofford DL: PAUP*. Phylogenetic Analysis Using Parsimony (*and
Other Methods), version 4. Sunderland: Sinauer Associates; 2003.
97. Bandelt HJ, Forester P, Röhl A: Median-joining networks for inferring
intraspecific phylogenies. Mol Biol Evol 1999, 16:37-48.
98. Posada D, Crandall KA: Intraspecific gene genealogies: trees grafting
into networks. Trends Ecol Evol 2001, 16:37-45.
99. Sanetra M, Henning F, Fukamachi S, Meyer A: A microsatellite-based
genetic linkage map of the cichlid fish, Astatotilapia burtoni (Teleostei):
A comparison of genomic architectures among rapidly speciating
cichlids. Genetics 2009, 182:387-397.
100. Noack K, Wilson AB, Meyer A: Broad taxonomic applicability of
microsatellites developed for the highly polymorphic neotropical
cichlid, Amphilophus citrinellum. Anim Genet 2000, 31:151-152.
101. Kellogg KA, Markert JA, Stauffer JR Jr, Kocher TD: Microsatellite variation
demonstrates multiple paternity in lekking cichlid fishes from Lake
Malawi, Africa. Proc R Soc Lond B 1995, 260:79-84.
102. Salzburger W, Braasch I, Meyer A: Adaptive sequence evolution in a color
gene involved in the formation of the characteristic egg-dummies of
male haplochromine cichlid fishes. BMC Biol 2007, 5:51.
103. Zardoya R, Vollmer DM, Craddock C, Streelman JT, Karl S, Meyer A:
Evolutionary conservation of microsatellite flanking regions and their
use in resolving the phylogeny of cichlid fishes (Pisces: Perciformes).
Proc R Soc Lond B 1996, 263:1589-1598.
104. van Oosterhout C, Hutchison WF, Wills DPM, Shipley P: Micro-checker:
software for identifying and correcting genotyping errors in
microsatellite data. Mol Ecol Notes 2004, 4:535-538.
105. Brookfield JFY: A simple new method for estimating null allele
frequency from heterozygote deficiency. Mol Ecol 1996, 5:453-455.
106. Dieringer D, Schlötter C: Microsatellite Analyser (MSA): a platform
independent analysis tool for large microsatellite data sets. Mol Ecol
Notes 2003, 3:167-169.
107. Kalinowski ST: Counting alleles with rarefaction: Private alleles and
hierarchical sampling designs. Conserv Genet 2004, 5:539-543.
108. Kalinowski ST: HP-Rare 1.0: a computer program for performing
rarefaction on measures of allelic richness. Mol Ecol Notes 2005,
5:187-189.
109. Raymond M, Rousset F: An exact test for population differentiation.
Evolution 1995, 49:1280-1283.
110. Rousset F: Genepop'007: a complete re-implementation of the
genepop software for Windows and Linux. Mol Ecol Resour 2008,
8:103-106.
111. Belkhir K, Borsa P, Chikhi L, Raufaste N, Bonhomme F: GENETIX 4.05,
Logiciel Sous Windows TM Pour Al Génétique De Populations.
Montpellier: Laboratoire Génome, Populations, Interactions; 1996.

Elmer et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:60
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/60

112. Beerli P: Comparison of bayesian and maximum-likelihood inference of
population genetic parameters. Bioinformatics 2006, 22:341-345.
113. Hey J, Nielsen R: Multilocus methods for estimating population sizes,
migration rates and divergence time, with applications to the
divergence of Drosophila pseudoobscura and D. persimilis. Genetics
2004, 167:747-760.
114. Hey J, Nielsen R: Integration within the Felsenstein equation for
improved Markov Chain Monte Carlo methods in population genetics.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2007, 104:2785-2790.
115. Wirth T, Bernatchez L: Decline of North Atlantic eels: a fatal synergy?
Proc R Soc Lond B 2003, 270:681-688.
doi: 10.1186/1741-7007-8-60
Cite this article as: Elmer et al., Rapid sympatric ecological differentiation of
crater lake cichlid fishes within historic times BMC Biology 2010, 8:60

Page 15 of 15

</pre>
</body>
</html>
