<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Taxonomic distribution and origins of the extended LHC (light-harvesting complex) antenna protein superfamily</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010 10:233. doi:10.1186/1471-2148-10-233"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Johannes Engelken"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Engelken et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:233
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/233

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Taxonomic distribution and origins of the
extended LHC (light-harvesting complex)
antenna protein superfamily
Johannes Engelken1,2, Henner Brinkmann3, Iwona Adamska1*

Abstract
Background: The extended light-harvesting complex (LHC) protein superfamily is a centerpiece of eukaryotic
photosynthesis, comprising the LHC family and several families involved in photoprotection, like the LHC-like and
the photosystem II subunit S (PSBS). The evolution of this complex superfamily has long remained elusive, partially
due to previously missing families.
Results: In this study we present a meticulous search for LHC-like sequences in public genome and expressed
sequence tag databases covering twelve representative photosynthetic eukaryotes from the three primary lineages
of plants (Plantae): glaucophytes, red algae and green plants (Viridiplantae). By introducing a coherent classification
of the different protein families based on both, hidden Markov model analyses and structural predictions,
numerous new LHC-like sequences were identified and several new families were described, including the red
lineage chlorophyll a/b-binding-like protein (RedCAP) family from red algae and diatoms. The test of alternative
topologies of sequences of the highly conserved chlorophyll-binding core structure of LHC and PSBS proteins
significantly supports the independent origins of LHC and PSBS families via two unrelated internal gene duplication
events. This result was confirmed by the application of cluster likelihood mapping.
Conclusions: The independent evolution of LHC and PSBS families is supported by strong phylogenetic evidence.
In addition, a possible origin of LHC and PSBS families from different homologous members of the stress-enhanced
protein subfamily, a diverse and anciently paralogous group of two-helix proteins, seems likely. The new hypothesis
for the evolution of the extended LHC protein superfamily proposed here is in agreement with the character
evolution analysis that incorporates the distribution of families and subfamilies across taxonomic lineages.
Intriguingly, stress-enhanced proteins, which are universally found in the genomes of green plants, red algae,
glaucophytes and in diatoms with complex plastids, could represent an important and previously missing link
in the evolution of the extended LHC protein superfamily.

Background
The evolution of algae and land plants and their photosynthetic machineries is intimately linked to the
extended light-harvesting complex (LHC) protein superfamily. A chlorophyll-binding (CB) motif that is part of
a transmembrane (TM) alpha-helix located in the thylakoid membrane is the homologous core structure of this
protein superfamily. Several families belong to the
extended LHC protein superfamily [1-5], including the
* Correspondence: iwona.adamska@uni-konstanz.de
1
Department of Biology, University of Konstanz, Universitätsstrasse 10,
DE-78457 Konstanz, Germany
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

LHC proteins, the LHC-like proteins, the subunit S of
photosystem II (PSBS), the ferrochelatase II and a new
family described in this work, the red lineage chlorophyll a/b-binding (CAB)-like proteins (RedCAP). Ferrochelatases are enzymes that catalyze the terminal step in
the heme biosynthesis. Two different ferrochelatases
exist in plants [6], but since only one of them possesses
a CB motif and is imported into chloroplasts [7] we
included only ferrochelatase II into our study. Nonhomologous pigment-binding proteins, such as the prochlorophyte CB protein family [8], are not considered
here. While the PSBS family consists of four-helix proteins [9], the LHC-like protein family is divided into

© 2010 Engelken et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Engelken et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:233
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/233

three-helix early light-induced proteins (ELIPs) [2,3],
two-helix stress-enhanced proteins (SEPs) [10] and onehelix proteins (OHPs) [11,12], which in cyanobacteria
are also called high light-induced proteins (HLIPs) or
small CB-like proteins [13,14]. In contrast to LHC proteins, whose primary function is the absorption of light
through chlorophyll excitation and transfer of absorbed
energy to photochemical reaction centers, members of
LHC-like and PSBS families are likely involved in stress
protection [2,3,14,15].
Many different models have been proposed for the
evolution of the extended LHC protein superfamily
[1,2,5,16-19]. Most of them postulate a four-helix intermediate, similar to PSBS, as the ancestor of the LHC,
LHC-like and PSBS families, or alternatively, a direct
origin from HLIPs [4]. Currently, the interpretation of
the function and taxonomic distribution of these proteins is hampered by the absence of clearly defined
families and a consistent framework of their evolution.
In the attempt to solve this problem, we systematically
searched representative genomic and expressed
sequence tag (EST) databases for members of the
extended LHC protein superfamily with a focus on
LHC-like sequences. Systematic analysis of their taxonomic distribution together with their primary and predicted secondary structures allowed us to provide a
coherent classification and to propose an improved
hypothesis for the evolution of this superfamily.

Results and Discussion
Classification of the extended LHC protein superfamily

We developed a classification scheme for all major
families of the extended LHC protein superfamily, based
on (i) sequence similarity (hidden Markov model, HMM
analysis and BLAST search against a local collection of
LHC-like sequences), (ii) secondary structure prediction,
and (iii) sequence motifs, like the CB- and carotenoidbinding motifs ([20], see also Methods). Especially the
HMM analyses were very powerful in assigning meaningful families. In this way we were able to assign all
identified sequences to families and subfamilies (Additional file 1, Table S1). In contrast to HMM analysis,
BLAST searches against public databases were not very
useful for the purpose of classification due to the often
poor or even misleading annotations of the deposited
sequences. In order to visualize the HMM analysis as
one of several classification criteria, we prepared
sequence logos for the common protein families based
on the alignments used for the HMM profiles (Figure 1).
In order to allow comparison across one-, two-, threeand four-helix protein architectures, these alignments
included the conserved CB motifs from the first
TM helices.

Page 2 of 15

For each protein family, the HMM profiles captured
unique similarity patterns. Interestingly, the sequence
logo-plots showed specific and highly conserved amino
acid positions for given LHC, PSBS, RedCAP protein
families and LHC-like protein subfamilies (marked by
orange arrows in Figure 1), in addition to the ubiquitously conserved positions, like glutamate E-0 and arginine R-5. Due to their conservation pattern, these
family-specific amino acid residues are expected to be
functionally relevant and are likely correlated to specific
molecular and physiological functions of the respective
protein families. For example, several proline (P) residues are conserved at different positions in OHP1 and
the RedCAP family (see orange arrows). Likewise,
OHP2, ELIP, LHC and PSBS proteins all possess several
specific and highly conserved residues of currently
unknown function. In contrast to this, the sequence
logos of the LHC-like protein subfamilies, such as HLIP
and SEP, do not reveal uniquely conserved amino acid
positions, they can, however, be found in subsets of
HLIPs and SEPs (data not shown). The most likely
explanation is that these two subfamilies are anciently
paralogous, in addition, they are the oldest subfamilies.
Another set of amino acid positions of potential functional interest are residues that are conserved across a
distinct subset of protein families, like several amino
acids within the first TM helix and one (glutamine
Q-28) at the C-terminal end of the first TM helix in
SEPs, OHP2, ELIPs and PSBS (blue arrows in Figure 1).
In order to further visualize the classification scheme,
we show a sequence as an example for each of these
families (Additional file 1, Figure S1). An example for the
classification process can be found in Additional file 1,
Table S2 based on the sequences identified in Cyanophora paradoxa, a well-studied glaucophyte. The Additional file 1, Table S2 includes assigned accession
numbers from the GenBank database, the predicted
number of TM helices, the best p-values and scores
from the HMM analysis, as well as from the local
BLASTP analysis and a suggestion for their classification. An overview of the basic structural elements of
members of the extended LHC protein superfamily is
shown in Figure 2A.
Taxonomic distribution

A diverse set of sequences with the characteristic CB
sequence motif was found in systematic database
searches. The 15 organisms under study represent the
three major lineages of Plantae (Archaeplastida),
including two glaucophytes, two red algae, two green
algae and four divergent land plants (a moss, a conifer,
a monocot and a dicot), as well as two diatoms (stramenopiles) and three divergent cyanobacteria.

Engelken et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:233
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/233

A

HLIP

B

OHP1

C

OHP2

D

SEP

E

ELIP

F

RedCAP

G

LHC

H

Page 3 of 15

PSBS

Figure 1 Sequence logos of representative members of the extended LHC protein superfamily. (A-H) Sequence logos based on 54 amino
acid positions surrounding the CB motif in the first helix were prepared from the same alignments that were used to build the HMM profiles.
HMM analysis served as one of several criteria in the classification of unknown sequences (see Methods). The center of the x-axis corresponds to
the highly conserved glutamate (E-0). For clarity, the sequence logo associated with the HMM profile of HLIPa is shown for HLIP and for the
different SEP HMM profiles, the sequence logo of the combined SEP sequences is shown. An orange arrow marks amino acid residues that are
specific to a particular family. Note that threonine (T-21), glycine (G-22) and glutamine (Q-28) are conserved in most SEPs, OHP2, ELIPs and PSBS
(marked by a blue arrow). The new RedCAP family is described in more detail in the main text.

OHP1
OHP2
SEP
ELIP

Oryza

n

Arabidopsis

n

* Pinus

p

Physcomitrella

Thalassiosira

p+n

Ostreococcus

Phaeodactylum

* Glaucocystis

Cyanidioschyzon

p+n

Galdieria

also called LHC-like family

HLIP/OHP1-like

* Cyanophora

second transmembrane helices
carotenoid-binding motif

Synechocystis

first and third transmembrane (TM)
helices with chlorophyll-binding motif

Anabena

B

transit peptide

Gloeobacter

A

Page 4 of 15

Chlamydomonas

Engelken et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:233
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/233

(with putative
membrane anchor)

RedCAP
LHC

(CAB, FCP,
Li818 etc.)

PSBS

C

cyanobacteria

glaucophytes red algae and diatoms

green algae

RedCAP
LHC

and

plants

ELIP
PSBS

SEP
HLIP/ OHP1-like/ OHP1
Figure 2 Schematic overview, taxonomic distribution and ancestral character analysis of the extended LHC protein superfamily. (A)
Schematic overview of the major protein families. The drawing shows the approximate position and relative length of conserved regions and
sequence motifs including the CB motif-containing first and third TM alpha helices. Details for each of the identified sequences are given in
Additional file 1, Table S1. The classification into a limited set of families and subfamilies was based on three main criteria: (i) sequence similarity
to members of already described or newly defined families or subfamilies (like OHP2 and RedCAP) using HMM and local BLAST analysis against
our own database, (ii) the predicted secondary structures with the number and order of predicted TM helices, and (iii) predicted sequence
motifs, like the CB motifs and carotenoid-binding motifs. One-helix sequences are divided into the well conserved, nuclear-encoded OHP1
limited to the green lineage and the more diverse, plastid-encoded or cyanobacterial HLIPs. Nuclear one-helix sequences with no pronounced
similarity to OHP1 are referred to as OHP1-like. (B) Presence (black circle) and absence (white circle) of the LHC superfamily sequences in
genomic and EST (indicated by a star*) databases of twelve photosynthetic eukaryotes representing all major lineages of Plantae and three
divergent cyanobacteria (both unicellular, and filamentous with heterocysts). Genus names are used (for species names refer to Additional file 1,
Table S1). The locations of the genes are marked with “p” for plastid-encoded or with “n” for nuclear-encoded. (C) Ancestral character evolution
analysis for plastid-related genes of cyanobacterial origin (see also Methods). The distribution of distinct families of the extended LHC protein
superfamily is indicated on a given species tree corresponding to a consensus plastid phylogeny. Gloeobacter violaceus was used to root the
tree. This analysis suggests an evolutionary origin for the different families, which is indicated on the tree by a colored circle followed by their
names.

Individual sequences are listed in Additional file 1,
Table S1. The sensitivity of our search approach was
demonstrated by the identification of numerous previously unreported sequences that belong to the
extended LHC protein superfamily, including three
sequences from the well-annotated genome of Arabidopsis thaliana. Homologous sequences were exclusively found in photosynthetic organisms and were

neither present in the ciliates Tetrahymena thermophila and Paramecium tetraurelia nor in the oomycete
stramenopile Phytophtora ramorum (related to diatoms) [21], which were recently suggested to have had
a photosynthetic ancestry [22]. The only exceptions to
this rule are transducing cyanophages (bacteriophages
that infect cyanobacteria) that contained several HLIP
sequences in their genomes [23].

Engelken et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:233
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/233

The identified sequences of the extended LHC protein
superfamily show a unique distribution across the taxonomic lineages. The presence/absence of LHC, RedCAP
and PSBS families and several LHC-like subfamilies is
presented in Figure 2B. An ancestral character analysis
within the framework of an established consensus plastid phylogeny suggests the likely order of emergence of
the different protein families (Figure 2C, see also Methods). Since the HLIP/OHP1 are ubiquitously distributed
among eukaryotes and represent the only group (except
for the fusion protein ferrochelatase II) that is also present in cyanobacteria, the cyanobacterial HLIPs are generally assumed the origin of the eukaryotic LHC protein
superfamily. They are still plastid-encoded in glaucophytes and red algae. The plastid-encoded eukaryotic
HLIPs are orthologs of the nuclear-encoded OHP1
sequences in the green lineage (Viridiplantae), which
were transferred to the nucleus via endosymbiotic gene
transfer [11], and apparently plastid-encoded HLIPs
were lost in the green lineage. Some nuclear-encoded
one-helix sequences from the red lineage and glaucophytes were named OHP1-like, but they showed no specific sequence similarity to OHP1. OHP2 are distributed
ubiquitously across photosynthetic eukaryotes and
are different from HLIP/OHP1 by possessing a short
C-terminal hydrophobic element, which is possibly
embedded in the thylakoid membrane [12]. In addition,
their significantly different primary sequence structure
(Figure 1) makes them a unique group within the LHClike family.
At least some LHC subfamilies, like CAB, fucoxanthin
chlorophyll a/c-binding proteins (FCPs) and LI818, are
present in all major red and green lineages, but apparently not in glaucophytes (Figure 2B). It seems highly
unlikely that these abundant proteins would remain
undetected in all EST approaches and thus would
escape detection in the current study. This absence of
molecular data is supported by immunological methods
[24]. A 28 kDa protein cross-reacting with an antibody
raised against FCP of a marine raphidophyte was
reported in glaucophytes [25]. Unfortunately, the question whether this 28 kDa protein belongs to the LHC
family remained unresolved since it cannot be excluded
that it only shares epitopes with LHC proteins but is
structurally different [25]. Based on these studies Koziol
and colleagues [19] proposed an origin of LHC proteins
at the basis of the green and red algal lineage that is in
agreement with our conclusions.
RedCAPs and other new sequences

While most families of the extended LHC protein superfamily had been described earlier, the nuclear-encoded
RedCAPs from the red lineage (Sturm S, Engelken J,
Gruber A, Vugrines S, Adamska I, Kroth P, Lavaud J,

Page 5 of 15

unpublished) have not been defined yet. The RedCAP
family and the OHP2 subfamily can be reliably assigned
based on HMM and BLASTP analyses (Additional file 1,
Table S1). RedCAP sequences form a well-conserved
family, and in contrast to ELIP or LHC proteins also
their second helix is conserved. In public databases,
RedCAP sequences sometimes are erroneously described
as HV60 (based on the name of an ELIP sequence from
Hordeum vulgare). However, based on primary sequence
similarity, sequence length, conservation patterns, HMM
analyses and phylogenetic analyses there is no indication
that RedCAPs were specifically related to any other
group of the extended LHC protein superfamily (Sturm
S, Engelken J, Gruber A, Vugrines S, Adamska I, Kroth
P, Lavaud J, unpublished). In contrast to the almost ubiquitous OHP2 and SEPs, the RedCAPs are clearly
restricted to the red lineage, whereas PSBS and ELIPs
are limited to the green lineage without any overlap
(Figure 2B and 2C).
In addition to two copies of the already described
PSBS in the green alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii
[JGI_Chlre4: 196341 and 171516], we identified a third,
rather divergent PSBS sequence, which we named PSBSlike [JGI_Chlre4: 175221]. Based on HMM analysis,
BLASTP, phylogenetic analysis (data not shown) and the
number of TM helices it can be clearly classified as a
PSBS (or a PSBS-like) sequence (Additional file 1, Table
S1). This new sequence encodes a 311 amino acid long
protein that has a highly similar counterpart in Volvox
carteri with a length of 316 amino acid [JGI_Volca1:
94261]. Both PSB-like sequences are likely functional,
based on the highly conserved exonic sequences in the
C. reinhardtii - V. carteri comparison, although no EST
is available. As a side-note, it has recently been shown
that in C. reinhardtii, the common PSBS protein may
not be translated under many growth conditions [26].
Notably, a high number of LHC-like sequences were
identified in the genome of Physcomitrella patens that
had partially been described in the general genome analysis [27] and in a second analysis with a special focus
on the antenna gene supplement [28].
Broad taxonomic distribution of the two-helix SEP
subfamily

SEPs were defined as a LHC-like subfamily with one
characteristic CB motif and a conserved secondary
structure with two TM helices. SEPs are absent in cyanobacteria, but they seem ubiquitously distributed in
photosynthetic eukaryotes. A total of 40 SEP sequences
were identified in 15 organisms. In the glaucophytes we
found six sequences in Glaucocystis nostochinearum and
two in C. paradoxa and in streptophytes, six sequences
in A. thaliana and with nine the largest number in the
moss P. patens (Additional file 1, Table S1). Among the

Engelken et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:233
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/233

Cyanidiales, the red alga Galdieria sulphuraria has one
SEP, whereas the completely sequenced thermo- and
extremophile red alga Cyanidioschyzon merolae has
none. In algae with complex plastids, we have detected a
single rather divergent SEP in each of the two diatoms
Phaeodactylum tricornutum and Thalassiosira pseudonana and in the pelagophyte Aureococcus anophagefferens. The presence of only one SEP in these taxa could
be due to a streamlining process of the genome size of
these particular taxa. Therefore, SEPs do not appear to
be essential in the red lineage and seem to have been
secondarily lost from several taxa.
Phylogenetic analysis of the SEP sequences shown in
Figure 3A suggests the presence of several ancient paralogous groups, with the highest diversity found in land
plants containing five SEP1-5 groups. Notably, two previously not described orphan SEP groups, SEP4 and
SEP5, were found in land plants. SEP groups other than
SEP1-5, despite some affinities based on HMM and phylogenetic analysis, were preliminarily named SEPx.
SEPx.1 and SEPx.2 form two of several ancient SEP
lineages in glaucophytes and both orthologs are present
in two rather distantly related species, C. paradoxa and
G. nostochinearum. Diatoms have similar to red alga a
low number of SEP sequences. The phylogenetic tree is
compatible with the assumption of several ancient paralogous groups within the SEP subfamily. However, the
question whether all SEPs are monophyletic or if certain
groups, like the highly conserved SEP3 (Lil3), emerged
later independently, remains an open question. Also the
ultimate number of groups within the SEP subfamily is
not known and an answer will surely have to await at
least until many more completely sequenced and taxonomic diverse genomes are available. Although, there is
currently no solid support, neither for nor against the
monophyly of SEPs, a single origin seems the most parsimonious scenario. We note that divergent groups, like
SEP3 (Lil3), branch more solidly with other SEPs within
the subfamily, when more (and previously missing) SEP
groups are being added to the phylogenetic analysis
(Figure 3A).
The similarity in predicted secondary structure of
SEPs is shown for selected SEP sequences from the
three major lineages of Plantae, i.e. glaucophytes
(C. paradoxa), red lineage (G. sulphuraria) and green
lineage (A. thaliana) in Figure 3B, using the Dense Surface Alignment (DAS) algorithm [29]. The high similarity of their predicted primary structure is displayed in
Figure 3C. In cyanobacteria and cyanophages, no SEPlike sequences have been found, which is consistent
with the idea of a eukaryotic origin of SEPs. The recent
finding of a fusion protein with two predicted TM
helices in a Synechococcus strain, termed hli5OS-B’
(similar to YP_478210) [30], is not relevant for our

Page 6 of 15

study, since the order of the two TM helices ("coh1”
precedes the CB motif), is inverted compared to twohelix SEPs.
The identification of SEPs, as well as OHP2, in the red
lineage and in glaucophytes (Figure 2B and 2C and
Additional file 1, Table S1) is a notable extension of
their previously known distribution within chlorophytes
and streptophytes (Viridaeplantae). This distribution
argues strongly in favor of an early origin of SEPs and
OHP2 in the common eukaryotic ancestor of Plantae
that predates the origin of all three- and four-helix proteins (Figure 2C).
Independent origins of LHC and PSBS families in
discrete duplication events

The PSBS proteins are predicted to form four-helix
structures that were proposed to have originated in
internal gene duplication [31,32]. It was also noted, that
the two halves of PSBS are more related to each other
than the comparable parts of the LHC protein [16]. In
contrast to PSBS, the origin of LHC proteins is less
clear. Among other scenarios [4], it was suggested [16]
that LHC and PSBS proteins evolved from a common
four-helix ancestor (Additional file 1, Figure S2).
However, our phylogenetic analyses (Figure 4 and
Additional file 1, Figure S3) do not support this scenario
but strongly favor two independent duplication events.
In order to evaluate the evidence for or against a common origin of LHC and PSBS families, a phylogenetic
analysis of individual CB-TM helices from a representative and large number of different LHC and PSBS
sequences was performed. Therefore, 10,000 random
puzzle quartets created out of the 120 individual helices
of 32 amino acid length (originally extracted out of 60
protein sequences with 64 aligned amino acid positions),
corresponding to the first and third helices of both,
LHC and PSBS proteins, were mapped on three possible
topologies (Figure 4A, top triangle) in a four-cluster
likelihood mapping analysis ([33], see also Methods).
In the tri-partite diagram, 94.1% of the quartets support the respective sister-group relationship of helices I
and III between both, LHC and PSBS proteins, versus
2.5% support the topology expected under the scenario
of a common origin. In the more stringent diagram (Figure 4A, right bottom triangle divided into seven areas),
the result was 84.2% versus 0.2% and 0.5%, with 10.9%
that are not in favor of any of the three alternative
topologies (unresolved quartets). This result strongly
contradicts the often favored, long-standing evolutionary
scenario of a common origin shown in Additional file 1,
Figure S2A [16]. In this case the first and the third
helices of both, LHC and PSBS proteins, would most
resemble each other and therefore cluster together in a
phylogenetic tree. This tree topology is displayed at the

Engelken et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:233
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/233

Page 7 of 15

Figure 3 Phylogeny, predicted primary and secondary structures of two-helix SEPs. (A) Phylogenetic analysis including all 39 identified SEP
sequences (except the partial SEP3/Lil3 from Pinus taeda) from twelve photosynthetic eukaryotes. The maximum likelihood tree was inferred
from 32 amino acid positions, only bootstrap values at nodes supported by a posterior probability of ≥0.50 are given. 10,000 bootstrap replicates
using the Dayhoff+Γ4 model to estimate the pairwise distances in the neighbor-joining analysis with MEGA4; 100 replicates in the maximum
likelihood analysis with PhyML, 3 million generations with 1/3 discarded (burn-in) in the Bayesian analysis to estimate the posterior probability
with MrBayes. The probabilistic methods were using the WAG+Γ4 model with four discrete gamma rate categories. This tree gives an overview
of the diversity of the SEP sequences within all major lineages of Plantae. Blue, red and green colors indicate glaucophytes, red algae and algae
with complex plastids, as well as green algae and land plants, respectively. This analysis is compatible with the assumption of several ancient,
paralogous groups within the SEP subfamily. SEPs from red algae and SEP4 and SEP5 from land plants are reported for the first time. (B)
Prediction of TM alpha helices in SEP sequences from a glaucophyte, a land plant and a red alga. The first of the two predicted TM helices
comprises the CB motif. (C) Alignment of typical SEP sequences from all three major lineages of Plantae. The approximate positions of the
predicted first and second TM helices are underlined with a green and a grey bar, respectively. Identical and similar amino acids are shown in
white on black and grey backgrounds, respectively.

Engelken et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:233
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/233

Page 8 of 15

Figure 4 Phylogenetic analysis and the independent origins of PSBS and LHC families. (A) Four-cluster likelihood mapping analysis [33] of
individual CB motifs in LHC and PSBS proteins showing the likelihood support for three alternative topologies. 64 amino acid positions (32 per
CB motif) from 60 protein sequences including all known LHC subfamilies [19] and the complete PSBS diversity were analyzed. The topology
with LHC helix I as sister group to LHC helix III is strongly supported with 94.1% over the one expected under a common origin with 2.5% in
the three-partite diagram (or 84.2% over 0.2% in the seven-partite diagram). (B) Schematic diagram of a phylogenetic analysis based on the
conserved sequence motifs of the first and third TM helices of PSBS and LHC proteins. A selection of 22 diverse SEP sequences from
glaucophytes, red algae and the green lineage was included. The alignment contained 31 unambiguously aligned amino acid positions. The
distinct clustering of the different LHC and PSBS helices provides corroborating evidence that LHC sequences do not share a common four-helix
ancestor with PSBS sequences. The shown topology was significantly (p = 0.0001) supported over the alternative topology (Additional file 1,
Figure S1B), analyses were done in TreePuzzle. The true tree is presented in Additional file 1, Figure S2. (C) Hypothesis for the independent origin
of LHC and PSBS proteins from distinct SEP ancestors according to the present study. LHC proteins likely evolved from a SEP with a putative
carotenoid-binding motif (orange box), which was duplicated together with the CB motif in an internal gene duplication/unequal crossing-over
of tandem genes. PSBS protein evolved from a different ancestor from an ancient pool of paralogous SEP members. PSBS protein has highly
conserved second and fourth helices (dark grey boxes). Note that following this hypothesis, helices I and III of the resulting LHC and PSBS
proteins must be most similar within the same proteins, which is in agreement with (A) and (B) but in conflict with a previously suggested
scenario (Additional file 1, Figure S1).

Engelken et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:233
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/233

bottom right corner of the PUZZLE triangle diagram of
Figure 4A and should be the only one supported. However, this alternative is supported by only 2.5% and
0.2%, respectively. The support for the common origin
is therefore even lower than the support for the biologically unrealistic solution of a hybrid LHC/PSBS protein
that is nevertheless supported by 3.4% and 0.5%, respectively (Figure 4A, left bottom triangle).
We accounted for the high degree of sequence diversity in the complex LHC protein family by incorporating
all five LHC subfamilies (CAB, Li818 and Li818-like, the
red algae/cryptomonad LHC and FCP), as well as a
newly described clade LHCz [19]. PSBS likewise were
chosen from taxonomically distant green algae and land
plants. When the dataset was reduced by removing the
fast-evolving (long-branch) Ostreococcus tauri PSBS and
the PSBS-like sequences from V. carteri and C. reinhardtii, as well as the divergent LHCz and FCP
sequences, the percentage of unresolved quartets
strongly decreased and the support for the clustering of
helices I and III was further improved (99.8% versus
0.2%, Additional file 1, Figure S4A). However, to include
the maximal sequence diversity we show the more conservative result of the larger dataset with 120 sequences
(Figure 4A). The presence of a great number of phylogenetic diverse sequences resulted in a highly informative
alignment, despite its short length of 32 amino acid
positions. Sequences could be readily aligned due to the
virtual absence of both gaps and insertions within and
surrounding the CB-TM helices. We chose to limit the
analysis to a short but accurate alignment and avoided
the potentially dangerous inclusion of many unreliably
aligned positions. Nevertheless, the result is quite robust
to the inclusion of more noisy positions (data not
shown), but note the major difference observed after the
removal of fast evolving and divergent sequences (84.2%
versus 99.8%). The surprisingly strong phylogenetic signal is also reflected in a low percentage of partially
(4.2%) and completely (10.9%) unresolved quartets in
this analysis (Figure 4A), which are essentially due to
the inclusion of divergent primary sequences.
In the attempt to further validate our finding we
inferred a maximum likelihood tree using a representative set of CB-TM sequences from LHC and PSBS
families and the SEP subfamily (shown schematically in
Figure 4B and entirely in Additional file 1, Figure S3).
The results revealed that helices I and III of PSBS protein formed a monophyletic group (bootstrap value 85/
83, with and without gamma correction) and the same
situation was encountered for the LHC helices, albeit
with weaker support (bootstrap value 51/41). To test if
this topology (Figure 4B) was significantly better than
the one expected under the old scenario (Additional file
1, Figure S2B), the expected likelihood weight and the

Page 9 of 15

Shimodaira-Hasegawa topology tests were performed in
Tree-Puzzle. The scenario of Figure 4B is supported at a
very high significance level (p = 0.0001) by both tests. In
agreement with this result, we note that the duplicated
area within both LHC and PSBS sequences extends substantially beyond the shared CB-TM helices and is not
homologous between the two groups.
Functional constraints acting on CB motifs could
hypothetically interfere with the genuine phylogenetic
signal analyzed. However, this should affect functional
sites and these sites (like glutamate E+0, histidine/asparagines H/N+3 or arginine R+5 in LHCII from spinach
Spinacia oleracea, [34]) are conserved to such a high
degree that they essentially do not contribute to the
phylogenetic signal. This was confirmed in an additional
likelihood mapping analysis, where these three functional sites were omitted (89.3% versus 5.0%, Additional
file 1, Figure S4B). Furthermore, the CB motifs are generally under purifying selection maintaining structure
and function. This selective force results in divergent
rather than convergent evolution. Therefore, we
conclude that potential functional constraints do not
substantially interfere with the phylogenetic signal.
Character evolution and the possible origins of LHC
and PSBS families from distinct SEPs

Since all LHC subfamilies share a common origin [35]
and are absent in glaucophytes, the first LHC proteins
did most likely evolve in a common ancestor of the red
and green lineages ([19] and Figure 2C). The presence
of two-helix SEPs in all three lineages of plants and
deduced from this distribution their existence in the
common ancestor, potentially already in form of paralogous copies (Figure 2C), make them prime candidates
for the origin of LHC proteins. The internal gene duplication of a two-helix sequence would provide a simple
and parsimonious explanation for the origin of the second, less-conserved CB-TM helix in LHC proteins. This
makes SEPs a better candidate for the origin of LHC
proteins than the previously proposed HLIPs [4,19].
Furthermore, in eukaryotes HLIPs tend to occur as single copy genes and are plastid-encoded, whereas the
internal gene duplication/unequal crossing-over event of
tandem genes from which the first LHC protein evolved,
is very likely to have taken place in the nuclear genome.
There are several different processes, which may result
in an internal gene duplication: (i) a slippage of the
replication apparatus may lead either to a duplicated or
to a deleted region, this process is happening rather frequently and is leading to duplicated areas (genes)
arranged in tandem, and/or (ii) if there are already at
least two closely related copies of a gene arranged in
tandem, an unequal crossing-over between different
copies on the two sister-chromosomes may lead to a

Engelken et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:233
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/233

fusion of parts of two genes (resulting in an internal
duplication) on one chromosome and to a truncated
copy on the other.
In light of these mechanistic considerations it seems
that genes, which (i) occur in tandem repeat units, and
(ii) are nuclear-encoded did most likely provide the
genomic context for the proposed internal gene duplication. In addition, even a nuclear copy of a HLIP/OHP
arranged in tandem would not be sufficient to generate
a LHC protein, since there are no second transmembrane helices, which would need to be newly created.
Again, all these characteristics favor SEPs over HLIPs as
candidates for the origin of LHC proteins.
Most members of the LHC family contain the wellconserved carotenoid-binding motif [20] consisting of
the amino acid residues FDPLGL (or similar) found
approximately 15 amino acid positions in front of the
CB motif in both, the first and third TM helices. However, neither RedCAP and ELIP nor PSPS family members harbor this specific carotenoid-binding motif in
any of the two possible locations. This would make a
two-helix protein that already contained the carotenoid-binding motif the most likely source for the origin of LHC proteins. Intriguingly, we found a SEP
sequence (named here SEPx.4) in the glaucophyte
G. nostochinearum that contains the three core amino
acid residues FDP of the carotenoid-binding motif in
the expected distance from the CB motif (Additional
file 1, Figure S5).
Taken together, analyses of the individual helices
including additional and independently conserved elements in LHC and PSBS sequences provide direct evidence for their origins by distinct internal gene
duplication events. Likely, from a pool of paralogous
two-helix SEPs, one SEP subfamily member gave rise to
the LHC protein family by internal gene duplication.
Likewise, the PSBS protein family evolved from a distinct SEP (Figure 4C). This view is corroborated both by
extensive database searches and a recent study [19]
showing that PSBS is widespread within, but restricted

Page 10 of 15

to the green lineage. Interestingly, a cluster of newly
identified SEP sequences in mosses, e.g. the slowly evolving SEPx from P. patens (recently described as Lil7 in
[28]), shows rather high sequence similarity to PSBS
helices I and III from both A. thaliana and C. reinhardtii (Figure 5) and thus, could represent the ancestral
SEP subfamily from which PSBS originated.
Evaluation of alternative scenarios

Many attempts have been made to solve the question of
the order in which the different families and subfamilies
of the extended LHC protein superfamily have originated [5,16,19,35,36]. The existence of a LHC-like protein with only two TM helices as the ancestor of threeand four-helix proteins was already predicted more than
one decade ago [16,37], but the first experimental proof
was only presented many years later in A. thaliana [10].
While the number and diversity of identified sequences
and families progressively increased, the order of their
emergence remained enigmatic. The reason for this
major limitation lies in the small size of their defining
element, the CB helix, and the considerable age of the
families under study, which renders it impossible to simply deduce the order of their emergence from a phylogenetic analysis of the primary sequences. In order to
overcome this limitation, we took advantage of (i) the
new wealth of sequence data with special emphasis on
completely sequenced genomes, (ii) recent multi-gene
phylogenies that established a solidly supported phylogenomic tree of plastids, as well as the basal position of
glaucophytes [38], and (iii) an independent phylogenetic
approach in which we test the hypothesis of independent origins of the LHC and PSBS families.
An initial hypothesis for the order of emergence of the
different family members was deduced from their taxonomic distribution using the ancestral character evolution analysis (Figure 2C). Although the “tree of
eukaryotes” is still far from being resolved [39], the
topology of the underlying (plastid) tree of photosynthetic eukaryotes used in this study is supported by

Figure 5 Alignment of PSBS and a group of selected SEP sequences from early land plants. Two representative PSBS sequences including
only the first (I) and third (III) helices show high similarity to four SEPx sequences from S. moellendorffii, Selaginella lepidophylla and P. patens.
Identical amino acids shown in white are surrounded by a black and similar amino acids by a grey box. Note the conserved valine (V) in both
groups (position V-3), a potential CB position at which most other protein families carry an asparagine (N-3) or histidine (H-3).

Engelken et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:233
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/233

several publications [40-43]. By relying on established
group/species relationships, character evolution is independent of the potential pitfalls of phylogenies based on
a single or a few genes.
The establishment of a rigorous classification scheme
for the various families of the extended LHC protein
superfamily was based on primary and secondary
sequence information from a comprehensive database
search. The fact that independent approaches (BLAST,
HMM, different phylogenetic methods, TM helix analysis) led to mutually compatible results make us confident that the proposed relationships reflect to some
detail biological realities.
A possible alternative for the origin of certain families
could be to assume their origin at an earlier stage, e.g.
the PSBS in the common ancestor of red/green lineages.
However, apart from requiring a complete secondary
loss in several lineages, this scenario would not provide
more plausible explanations for the origin of the
remaining families. Individual families, nevertheless, may
have experienced isolated losses in certain taxonomic
groups, like the SEPs that were lost in the extremophile
red alga C. merolae and in certain algae with complex
plastids, e.g. Emiliania huxleyi, but not in G. sulphuraria, in diatoms or in the pelagophyte A. anophagefferens. A broad taxonomic distribution, the presence of
CB motifs and a conserved secondary structure would
support a role of SEPs as recurrent building blocks of
three-helix proteins, like LHC and four-helix proteins,
like PSBS.
Based only on EST databases we cannot rule out the
presence of additional relevant protein families of the
extended LHC protein superfamily, for example in the
two glaucophytes. However, we note that the chosen
databases present very substantial numbers of unique
ESTs. For C. paradoxa 9,867 unique EST clusters are
available at TBestDB [44], which were derived from
two different EST libraries, one based on mRNAs from
“high light” and the other from “low light regular” conditions. TBEST contains also 4,673 EST clusters
derived from C. paradoxa grown under different CO2
environments, as well as 8,745 unique EST clusters
from G. nostochinearum. Additional glaucophyte ESTs
are available from NCBI. Hence, the risk of overlooking important relevant protein families is substantially
reduced due to the availability of different environmental conditions, with the ultimate proof being the
genome sequences of these two distantly related glaucophytes. Based on available resources we currently
assume that ELIP, RedCAP, LHC and PSBS proteins
do not exist in glaucophytes. In addition, even if new
LHC-like families were found in glaucophytes, this
would not affect the independent origin of LHC and
PSBS families.

Page 11 of 15

Hypothesis for the evolution of the extended LHC
protein superfamily

Similar to previous models, we assume a stepwise evolution from the cyanobacterial HLIPs to the central group
of SEPs (Figure 6). However, a crucial novelty of our
model is the independent origins of PSBS and LHC
families, and possibly also the other three-helix protein
families. Based on character evolution analysis (Figure
2C), sequence motifs and the evidence for the independent origins of the PSBS and LHC families (Figure 4)
we propose that (i) early LHC proteins originated in the
red/green ancestor, likely from a SEP, and subsequently
diversified into different antenna proteins in the red and
green lineages, and (ii) PSBS arose early in the evolution
of the green lineage from a distinct SEP. With less certainty, as mainly based on the taxonomic approaches,
we further propose that (iii) ELIPs are neither ancestral
to PSBS nor to LHC proteins, but possibly evolved independently in the green lineage, and (iv) RedCAP
sequences are limited to the red algal lineage.
The proposed model (Figure 6) can explain the diversity of the extended LHC protein superfamily in cyanobacteria and photosynthetic eukaryotes. Notably,
paralogs of the identified two-helix SEPs likely represent
an important missing link in the evolution from the
ancestral HLIPs to their three- and four-helix descendants in eukaryotes. Furthermore, this model does
neither invoke events of horizontal gene transfer nor
massive secondary losses, although it requires an additional internal gene duplication event. The discovery of
many new and sometimes distantly related sequences (e.
g. three in the well-annotated A. thaliana genome) suggests that our search has identified all available canonical LHC-like sequences in the surveyed genomes.
Additional database searches (see Methods) were in
agreement with these results and conclusions.

Conclusions
Using sequence data from a wide diversity of photosynthetic eukaryotes, cyanobacteria and non-photosynthetic
organisms we identified many new members of the
extended LHC protein superfamily. We propose a simple and powerful classification scheme based on predicted primary and secondary structures. A new and
coherent hypothesis of the evolution of the extended
LHC protein superfamily was inferred (Figure 6), supported by comparative genomics and molecular phylogenetic approaches. Importantly, the present study sheds
light on the significance of two-helix SEPs and other
LHC-like proteins with the discovery of their unexpected diversity and characteristic distribution across
photosynthetic eukaryotes. From these evolutionary patterns we expect that proteins of the LHC-like family

Engelken et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:233
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/233

Page 12 of 15

Figure 6 Proposed scenario for the evolution of the extended LHC protein superfamily. Originating from a cyanobacterial HLIP after the
primary endosymbiosis, an endosymbiotic gene transfer resulted in a nuclear-encoded OHP1-like sequence in the common ancestor of Plantae.
Such a sequence was likely at the origin of the nuclear-encoded two-helix SEPs that are ubiquitously distributed among photosynthetic
eukaryotes. In Viridiplantae and several algae with complex plastids, the plastid-encoded HLIP was transferred to the nuclear genome and
subsequently lost in the plastid. The ancestor of the LHC proteins and later of PSBS evolved by independent, internal gene duplication events
(indicated by a star*), likely from different SEP groups. The resulting LHC proteins subsequently either lost their fourth TM helix or alternatively
they ancestrally never had one. Both, the ELIPs and the RedCAP family are restricted to the green and to the red lineages, respectively. The
positioning of the different family names and the background color indicate their taxonomic distribution.

perform important, yet largely unknown, functions in
photoprotection and regulation of photosynthesis.

Methods
Sequence search and annotation

Initially, fully sequenced genomes and large EST databases (Additional file 1, Table S1) representing twelve
photosynthetic eukaryotes (Plantae) and three cyanobacteria were searched for sequences belonging to the
extended LHC protein superfamily. Subsequently,
sequence data from additional genomes were collected
from public databases including TBestDB [44], NCBI
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov, TIGR http://www.jcvi.org,
Kazusa http://bacteria.kazusa.or.jp/cyanobase and UniProt http://www.uniprot.org. We excluded some available genomes from the ancestral character evolution
analysis either because of their unclear taxonomic position (E. huxleyi), their preliminary nature (Fragilariopsis
cylindrus, A. anophagefferens, V. carteri, Chlorella sp.,
Micromonas sp. and Selaginella moellendorffii), or their
highly similar content of LHC-like sequences to
A. thaliana (Populus trichocarpa, Arabidopsis lyrata,
Vitis vinifera), Oryza sativa (Sorghum bicolor) or Ostreococcus lucimarinus (other Ostreococcus spp.) genomes.

Database searches were done with the TBLASTN and
BLASTP algorithms using consensus sequences for individual subgroups and non-stringent e-values (e = 0.1).
When public annotations were unclear or missing, the
genes were annotated manually with the helpτmes.
Database searches were done with the TBLASTN and
BLASTP algorithms using consensus sequences for individual subgroups and non-stringent e-values (e = 0.1).
When public annotations were unclear or missing, the
genes were annotated manually with the help of the
GeneWise algorithm [45] and the tools at the genome
browser of the Joint Genome Institute http://genome.
jgi-psf.org. EST sequences were translated and manually
controlled for frame-shifts that might have created artifacts and gene models were submitted to TPA_inf at
NCBI http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Genbank/TPA-Inf.
For transit peptide prediction the predictor ChloroP was
used http://www.expasy.org/tools. In diatoms, the presence/absence of a characteristic N-terminal signal
sequence [46] and in red algae the twin-arginine motif
[47] were used for signal peptide prediction. All identified LHC-like sequences from 15 organisms are given in
Additional file 1, Table S1. Genes with identical deduced
amino acid sequence, but different genomic location, as

Engelken et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:233
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/233

well as closely related ELIPs arranged in tandem (especially in P. patens), were listed under a single accession
number. In general, annotation was straightforward due
to the shortness and intron-scarcity of most LHC-like
sequences, as well as due to the presence of transit peptides and signal sequences.
Classification of sequences

For the HMM analysis [48] we prepared seed alignments containing the first CB motif for each known or
newly found protein family. For HLIPs and SEPs, several
starting sequences were chosen in order to adequately
cover their entire sequence diversity. The length of all
alignments was limited to 54 amino acid positions in
order to allow the comparison across all families. The
seed alignments were augmented in a step-wise manner
with the best hits from a sequence search in our local
dataset consisting of all identified sequences from 15
organisms and used to create sequence logos (http://
weblogo.berkeley.edu, Figure 1). From the same alignments we built a conservative HMM database containing 18 profiles (Additional file 1, Table S1). After
calibration we searched the entire local collection of
LHC-like sequences from 15 organisms against this
HMM database. The three best hits to the local HMM
profile database are given in Additional file 1, Table S1.
Starting from full-length sequences, we used BLASTP
[49] version 2.2.10 to search all sequences against the
same local collection of sequences. P. patens ELIPs were
not numbered due to the number of ELIPs in tandem
and therefore, they were not part of the Local Reference
Set used for BLASTP. The four best local BLASTP hits
against the local collection of LHC-like sequences are
given in Additional file 1, Table S1. HMM profiles were
the most sensitive tool for classification of LHC-like
sequences and this classification was complemented by
local BLASTP analysis that have the advantage of using
the entire sequence. Prediction of prokaryotic TM
alpha-helices was done with the DAS program [29,50]
(all proteins were treated as prokaryotic, since they are
most likely of cyanobacterial origin and are active in the
chloroplast). CB motifs were automatically designated as
TM helices due to their experimentally derived helix
structure in a LHC protein from photosystem II [34,51].
The most efficient criteria for classification differed
slightly among the protein families and depended on
their degree of conservation and on the length of conserved sequence domains. The HLIPs are clearly defined
by their one-helix structure, together with being plastidencoded in eukaryotes. HMM analysis, together with the
predicted one-helix structure, is sufficient to define the
OHP1 subfamily, which is nuclear-encoded after endosymbiotic gene transfer of the HLIPs in green plants.

Page 13 of 15

OHP2 are best classified by HMM and local BLASTP
analysis due to their well-conserved primary protein
structure. SEPs were classified based on the order of
their two TM helices (CB motif containing helix precedes a second TM helix) and sequence similarity to
other SEPs, as evident from HMM and BLASTP analyses. Subdivision into SEP1-5 was based on HMM,
BLASTP and phylogenetic analysis. ELIP sequences
were classified based on HMM, BLASTP and their
three-helix structure. Accordingly, RedCAP and LHC
sequences, including LHC proteins associated with
photosystem I (LHCa) and photosystem II (LHCb), FCP,
Li818 and LHCz, and the four-helix PSBS were unequivocally classified based on HMM, BLASTP and their
predicted number of helices. The two fusion proteins,
ferrochelatase II and Rieske-like CAB protein, possess a
less-conserved CB motif (which can be missing in some
cases) and therefore, the most efficient classification criterion for these two groups was full-length sequence
similarity based on BLASTP.
Character evolution and phylogenetic analysis

Character evolution based on parsimony (unordered
model) was used as implemented in Mesquite [52] for
the reconstruction of ancestral states. The analyzed taxa
were chosen to obtain a good representation of all
photosynthetic organisms that possess members of the
extended LHC protein superfamily. Amino acid
sequence alignments were done with M-Coffee [53] and
manually refined in Bioedit [54]. Informative sites for
phylogenetic analyses were chosen using G-blocks [55]
with manual refinement. Amino acid substitution
matrices for the SEP analysis (Figure 3A) were chosen
with ProtTest [56]. Neighbor-joining bootstrap values
(10,000 replicates) were obtained in MEGA4 [57]. Maximum likelihood bootstrap analyses with 100 replicates
were performed using PhyML [58], posterior probabilities were calculated using MrBayes (3 million generations, the first 1 million trees were discarded as “burnin”) [59], the latter two using a WAG+Γ4 model (Figures 3C and Additional file 1, Figure S2). Consensus
trees were created with the Consense option of the
PHYLIP package [60]. The significance of alternative
topologies (Figure 3) was tested in Tree-Puzzle [61]
using the Shimodaira-Hasegawa [62] and the expected
likelihood weight [63] tests.
The four-cluster likelihood mapping analysis was performed with Tree-Puzzle [61] using the Dayhoff substitution matrix with four discrete gamma distributed
categories. An approximate parameter estimation with
quartet sampling for the substitution process and rate
variation based on a neighbor-joining tree and 10,000
randomly chosen quartets were used. The dataset

Engelken et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:233
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/233

included a total of 120 sequences, with 41 pairs of LHC
and 19 pairs of PSBS (helices I and III) sequences,
respectively.
Accession numbers

Sequence data of newly identified sequences from C.
paradoxa and G. nostochinearum are available in the
Third Party Annotation Section of the DDBJ/EMBL/
GenBank databases under the accession numbers TPA:
BK006744-BK006754. Gene models of all identified
sequences from 15 organisms are listed in Additional
file 1, Table S1.

Page 14 of 15

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

Additional material
11.
Additional file 1: a PDF containing Figures S1-S5 and Table S1 and
S2 (Additional file 1).

Acknowledgements
Helpful suggestions from Cédric Notredame and an initial discussion with
Tal Dagan are kindly acknowledged. We thank Verena Vogler for help with
graphics and two anonymous reviewers for helpful comments. We
acknowledge all public databases used in this study, especially the TBestDB
[44]http://tbestdb.bcm.umontreal.ca/searches/login.php in Montreal, Canada,
as well as the U.S. Department of Energy Joint Genome Institute (JGI, http://
www.jgi.doe.gov) at Walnut Creek California for pre-publication access to the
Physcomitrella genome. The work conducted by the JGI is supported by the
Office of Science of the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract No. DEAC02-05CH11231. This work was supported by grants from the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft (AD-92/7-2) and the Konstanz University to IA, JE
was supported by a grant (I/82 750) from the Volkswagenstiftung,
“Förderungsinitiative Evolutionsbiologie”.
Author details
Department of Biology, University of Konstanz, Universitätsstrasse 10,
DE-78457 Konstanz, Germany. 2Institute of Evolutionary Biology (CSIC-UPF),
Pompeu Fabra University, Dr. Aiguader 88, 08003 Barcelona, Spain. 3Centre
Robert Cedergren, Département de Biochimie, Université de Montréal, 2900
Boulevard Edouard-Montpetit, Montréal, Québec, H3T1J4, Canada.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

1

Authors’ contributions
JE carried out the database search, JE and HB designed and carried out the
analysis of data and drafted the manuscript. IA supervised the project, all
authors read and approved the final manuscript.

19.

20.

21.

Received: 23 April 2010 Accepted: 30 July 2010 Published: 30 July 2010
References
1. Durnford DG, Deane JA, Tan S, McFadden GI, Gantt E, Green BR: A
phylogenetic assessment of the eukaryotic light-harvesting antenna
proteins, with implications for plastid evolution. J Mol Evol 1999, 48:59-68.
2. Montané MH, Kloppstech K: The family of light-harvesting-related
proteins (LHCs, ELIPs, HLIPs): was the harvesting of light their primary
function? Gene 2000, 258:1-8.
3. Adamska I: The Elip family of stress proteins in the thylakoid membranes
of pro- and eukaryota. Regulation of Photosynthesis Kluwer Academic
PublishersAro EM, Andersson B 2001, 487-505.
4. Green BR: The evolution of light-harvesting antennas. Light-harvesting
Antennas in Photosynthesis Kluwer Academic PublishersGreen BR, Parson
WW 2003, 129-168.
5. Jansson S: A protein family saga: From photoprotection to lightharvesting (and back?). Photoprotection, Photoinhibition, Gene Regulation,

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

and Environment Mattoo AK. SpringerDemmig-Adams B, Adams WW 2006,
145-153.
Chow KS, Singh DP, Walker AR, Smith AG: Two different genes encode
ferrochelatase in Arabidopsis: mapping, expression and subcellular
targeting of the precursor proteins. Plant J 1998, 15:531-541.
Suzuki T, Masuda T, Singh DP, Tan FC, Tsuchiya T, Shimada H, Ohta H,
Smith AG, Takamiya K: Two types of ferrochelatase in photosynthetic and
nonphotosynthetic tissues of cucumber: their difference in phylogeny,
gene expression, and localisation. J Biol Chem 2002, 277:4731-4737.
La Roche J, van der Staay GW, Partensky F, Ducret A, Aebersold R, Li R,
Golden SS, Hiller RG, Wrench PM, Larkum AW, et al: Independent evolution
of the prochlorophyte and green plant chlorophyll a/b light-harvesting
proteins. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1996, 93:15244-15248.
Funk C: The PsbS protein: A Cab-protein with a function of its own.
Regulation of Photosynthesis Kluwer Academic PublishersAro EM, Andersson
B 2001, 453-467.
Heddad M, Adamska I: Light stress-regulated two-helix proteins in
Arabidopsis thaliana related to the chlorophyll a/b-binding gene family.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2000, 97:3741-3746.
Jansson S, Andersson J, Kim SJ, Jackowski G: An Arabidopsis thaliana
protein homologous to cyanobacterial high-light-inducible proteins.
Plant Mol Biol 2000, 42:345-351.
Andersson U, Heddad M, Adamska I: Light stress-induced one-helix
protein of the chlorophyll a/b-binding family associated with
photosystem I. Plant Physiol 2003, 132:811-820.
Funk C, Vermaas W: A cyanobacterial gene family coding for single-helix
proteins resembling part of the light-harvesting proteins from higher
plants. Biochemistry 1999, 38:9397-9404.
Dolganov NA, Bhaya D, Grossman AR: Cyanobacterial protein with
similarity to the chlorophyll a/b binding proteins of higher plants:
evolution and regulation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1995, 92:636-640.
Li XP, Björkman O, Shih C, Grossman AR, Rosenquist M, Jansson S,
Niyogi KK: A pigment-binding protein essential for regulation of
photosynthetic light harvesting. Nature 2000, 403:391-395.
Green BR, Pichersky E: Hypothesis for the evolution of three-helix chl a/b
and chl a/c light-harvesting antenna proteins from two-helix and fourhelix ancestors. Photosynth Res 1994, 39:149-162.
Green BR: Was “molecular opportunism” a factor in the evolution of
different photosynthetic light-harvesting pigment systems? Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2001, 98:2119-2121.
Garczarek L, Poupon A, Partensky F: Origin and evolution of
transmembrane chl-binding proteins: hydrophobic cluster analysis
suggests a common one-helix ancestor for prokaryotic (Pcb) and
eukaryotic (LHC) antenna protein superfamilies. FEMS Microbiol Lett 2003,
222:59-68.
Koziol AG, Borza T, Ishida K, Keeling P, Lee RW, Durnford DG: Tracing the
evolution of the light-harvesting antennae in chlorophyll a/b-containing
organisms. Plant Physiol 2007, 143:1802-1816.
Bassi R, Croce R, Cugini D, Sandona D: Mutational analysis of a higher
plant antenna protein provides identification of chromophores bound
into multiple sites. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1999, 96:10056-10061.
Tyler BM, Tripathy S, Zhang X, Dehal P, Jiang RH, Aerts A, Arredondo FD,
Baxter L, Bensasson D, Beynon JL, et al: Phytophthora genome sequences
uncover evolutionary origins and mechanisms of pathogenesis. Science
2006, 313:1261-1266.
Reyes-Prieto A, Moustafa A, Bhattacharya D: Multiple genes of apparent
algal origin suggest ciliates may once have been photosynthetic. Curr
Biol 2008, 18:956-962.
Lindell D, Sullivan MB, Johnson ZI, Tolonen AC, Rohwer F, Chisholm SW:
Transfer of photosynthesis genes to and from Prochlorococcus viruses.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005, 101:11013-11018.
Koike H, Shibata M, Yasutomi K, Kashino Y, Satoh K: Identification of
photosystem I components from a glaucocystophyte, Cyanophora
paradoxa: The PsaD protein has an N-terminal stretch homologous to
higher plants. Photosynth Res 2000, 65:207-217.
Rissler HM, Durnford DG: Isolation of a novel carotenoid-rich protein in
Cyanophora paradoxa that is immunologically related to the lightharvesting complexes of photosynthetic eukaryotes. Plant Cell Physiol
2005, 46:416-424.
Bonente G, Passarini F, Cazzaniga S, Mancone C, Buia MC, Tripodi M, Bassi R,
Caffarri S: The occurrence of the psbS gene product in Chlamydomonas

Engelken et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:233
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/233

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.
37.

38.

39.

40.

41.
42.

43.

44.

45.
46.

47.
48.
49.

50.

reinhardtii and in other photosynthetic organisms and its correlation
with energy quenching. Photochem Photobiol 2008, 84:1359-1370.
Rensing SA, Lang D, Zimmer AD, Terry A, Salamov A, Shapiro H,
Nishiyama T, Perroud PF, Lindquist EA, Kamisugi Y, et al: The Physcomitrella
genome reveals evolutionary insights into the conquest of land by
plants. Science 2008, 319:64-69.
Alboresi AS, Caffarri S, Nogue F, Bassi R, Morosinotto T: In silico and
biochemical analysis of Physcomitrella patens photosynthetic antenna:
identification of subunits which evolved upon land adaptation. PLoS ONE
2008, 3:e2033.
Cserzo M, Wallin E, Simon I, von Heijne G, Elofsson A: Prediction of
transmembrane alpha-helices in prokaryotic membrane proteins: the
dense alignment surface method. Protein Eng 1997, 10:673-676.
Kilian O, Soisig Steunou A, Grossman AR, Bhaya D: A novel two-domain
fusion protein in cyanobacteria with similarity to the CAB/ELIP/HLIP
superfamily: Evolutionary implications and regulation. Mol Plant 2008,
1:155-166.
Kim S, Sandusky P, Bowlby NR, Aebersold R, Green BR, Vlahakis S,
Yocum CF, Pichersky E: Characterization of a spinach psbS cDNA
encoding the 22 kDa protein of photosystem II. FEBS Lett 1992, 314:67-71.
Wedel N, Klein R, Ljungberg U, Andersson B, Herrmann RG: The singlecopy gene psbS codes for a phylogenetically intriguing 22 kDa
polypeptide of photosystem II. FEBS Lett 1992, 314:61-66.
Strimmer K, von Haeseler A: Likelihood-mapping: a simple method to
visualize phylogenetic content of a sequence alignment. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 1997, 94:6815-6819.
Kühlbrandt W, Wang DN, Fujiyoshi Y: Atomic model of plant lightharvesting complex by electron crystallography. Nature 1994,
367:614-621.
Wolfe GR, Cunningham FX, Durnford D, Green BR, Gantt E: Evidence for a
common origin of chloroplasts with light-harvesting complexes of
different pigmentation. Nature 1994, 367:566-568.
Heddad M, Adamska I: The evolution of light stress proteins in
photosynthetic organisms. Comp Funct Genom 2002, 3:504-510.
Green BR, Kühlbrandt W: Sequence conservation of light-harvesting and
stress-response proteins in relation to the three-dimensional molecular
structure of LHCII. Photosynth Res 1995, 44:139-148.
Reyes-Prieto A, Bhattacharya D: Phylogeny of nuclear-encoded plastidtargeted proteins supports an early divergence of glaucophytes within
Plantae. Mol Biol Evol 2007, 24:2358-2361.
Keeling PJ, Burger G, Durnford DG, Lang BF, Lee RW, Pearlman RE,
Roger AJ, Gray MW: The tree of eukaryotes. Trends Ecol Evol 2005,
20:670-676.
Martin W, Stoebe B, Goremykin V, Hapsmann S, Hasegawa M, Kowallik KV:
Gene transfer to the nucleus and the evolution of chloroplasts. Nature
1998, 393:162-165.
Moreira D, Le Guyader H, Philippe H: The origin of red algae and the
evolution of chloroplasts. Nature 2000, 405:69-72.
Yoon HS, Hackett JD, Ciniglia C, Pinto G, Bhattacharya D: A molecular
timeline for the origin of photosynthetic eukaryotes. Mol Biol Evol 204
2004, 21:809-818.
Rodriguez-Ezpeleta N, Brinkmann H, Burey SC, Roure B, Burger G,
Löffelhardt W, Bohnert HJ, Philippe H, Lang BF: Monophyly of primary
photosynthetic eukaryotes: green plants, red algae, and glaucophytes.
Curr Biol 2005, 15:1325-1330.
O’Brien EA, Koski LB, Zhang Y, Yang L, Wang E, Gray MW, Burger G,
Lang BF: TBestDB: a taxonomically broad database of expressed
sequence tags (ESTs). Nucleic Acids Res 2007, 35:D445-451.
Birney E, Clamp M, Durbin R: GeneWise and Genomewise. Genome Res
2004, 14:988-995.
Kilian O, Kroth PG: Identification and characterization of a new conserved
motif within the presequence of proteins targeted into complex diatom
plastids. Plant J 2005, 41:175-183.
Bendtsen JD, Nielsen H, Widdick D, Palmer T, Brunak S: Prediction of twinarginine signal peptides. BMC Bioinformatics 2005, 6:1802-1816.
Eddy SR: Profile hidden Markov models. Bioinformatics 1998, 14:755-763.
Altschul SF, Madden TL, Schäffer AA, Zhang J, Zhang Z, Miller W,
Lipman DJ: Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new generation of protein
database search programs. Nucleic Acids Res 1997, 25:3389-3402.
Cserzo M, Eisenhaber F, Eisenhaber B, Simon I: On filtering false positive
transmembrane protein predictions. Protein Eng 2002, 15:745-752.

Page 15 of 15

51. Liu Z, Yan H, Wang K, Kuang T, Zhang J, Gui L, An X, Chang W: Crystal
structure of spinach major light-harvesting complex at 2.72 Å resolution.
Nature 2004, 428:287-292.
52. Maddison WP, Maddison DR: Mesquite: A modular system for
evolutionary analysis. Version 2.5. 2008 [http://mesquiteproject.org].
53. Wallace IM, O’Sullivan O, Higgins DG, Notredame C: M-Coffee: combining
multiple sequence alignment methods with T-Coffee. Nucleic Acids Res
2006, 34:1692-1699.
54. Hall TA: BioEdit: A user-friendly biological sequence alignment editor
and analysis program for Windows 95/98. Nucleic Acids Symp 1999, Ser
41:95-98.
55. Castresana J: Selection of conserved blocks from multiple alignments for
their use in phylogenetic analysis. Mol Biol Evol 2000, 17:540-552.
56. Abascal F, Zardoya R, Posada D: ProtTest: selection of best-fit models of
protein evolution. Bioinformatics 2005, 21:2104-2105.
57. Tamura K, Dudley J, Nei M, Kumar S: MEGA4: Molecular Evolutionary
Genetics Analysis (MEGA) software version 4.0. Mol Biol Evol 2007,
24:1596-1599.
58. Guindon S, Gascuel O: A simple, fast, and accurate algorithm to estimate
large phylogenies by maximum likelihood. Syst Biol 2003, 52:696-704.
59. Huelsenbeck JP, Ronquist F: MRBAYES: Bayesian inference of phylogenetic
trees. Bioinformatics 2001, 17:754-755.
60. Felsenstein J: PHYLIP-Phylogeny Inference Package. Department of
Genetics, University of Washington, Seattle 1993, Distributed by the author.
61. Schmidt HA, Strimmer K, Vingron M, von Haeseler A: TREE-PUZZLE:
maximum likelihood phylogenetic analysis using quartets and parallel
computing. Bioinformatics 2002, 18:502-504.
62. Shimodaira H, Hasegawa M: Multiple comparisons of log-likelihoods with
applications to phylogenetic inference. Mol Biol Evol 1999, 16:1114-1116.
63. Strimmer K, Rambaut A: Inferring confidence sets of possibly misspecified
gene trees. Proc Biol Sci 2002, 269:137-142.
doi:10.1186/1471-2148-10-233
Cite this article as: Engelken et al.: Taxonomic distribution and origins
of the extended LHC (light-harvesting complex) antenna protein
superfamily. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010 10:233.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
