<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Novel transposable elements from Anopheles gambiae</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Genomics 2011, 12:260. doi:10.1186/1471-2164-12-260"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Rita D Fernández-Medina"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Fernández-Medina et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:260
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/260

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Novel transposable elements from Anopheles
gambiae
Rita D Fernández-Medina1*, Cláudio J Struchiner1,2 and José MC Ribeiro3

Abstract
Background: Transposable elements (TEs) are DNA sequences, present in the genome of most eukaryotic
organisms that hold the key characteristic of being able to mobilize and increase their copy number within
chromosomes. These elements are important for eukaryotic genome structure and evolution and lately have been
considered as potential drivers for introducing transgenes into pathogen-transmitting insects as a means to control
vector-borne diseases. The aim of this work was to catalog the diversity and abundance of TEs within the
Anopheles gambiae genome using the PILER tool and to consolidate a database in the form of a hyperlinked
spreadsheet containing detailed and readily available information about the TEs present in the genome of An.
gambiae.
Results: Here we present the spreadsheet named AnoTExcel that constitutes a database with detailed information
on most of the repetitive elements present in the genome of the mosquito. Despite previous work on this topic,
our approach permitted the identification and characterization both of previously described and novel TEs that are
further described in detailed.
Conclusions: Identification and characterization of TEs in a given genome is important as a way to understand the
diversity and evolution of the whole set of TEs present in a given species. This work contributes to a better
understanding of the landscape of TEs present in the mosquito genome. It also presents a novel platform for the
identification, analysis, and characterization of TEs on sequenced genomes.

Background
Transposable elements (TEs) are DNA sequences that
can move within a cell’s genome from one chromosomal
location to another by a reaction called transposition,
augmenting in this way their own representation within
genomes. Once having infected the germline of an
organism, they can also spread through populations.
These elements are ubiquitous in eukaryotes, accounting
in certain species for a high proportion of their genomic
DNA; for instance, approximately 50% of the human
genome [1] and up to 80% of the maize genome [2] are
composed of TEs. In Anopheles gambiae, the transmitting vector of the malaria parasite, these elements constitute 16% of the euchromatin and up to 60% of the
heterochromatin of the genome [3]. These elements
have quite simple genetic structures, basically containing
* Correspondence: dfernandezmedina@gmail.com
1
Fundação Oswaldo Cruz, Escola Nacional de Saúde Pública Sergio Arouca,
Av. Brasil, 4365. 21040 360. Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

genes involved in their transposition–which is generally
independent from the cellular replicative machinery–
and their flanking recognition sites. They can be seen as
genomic infectious agents and due to this characteristic
were originally considered as selfish DNA [4]; however,
as more information was gathered about TE biology,
their relevance as important players in evolution and
maintenance of eukaryotic genomes has been emphasized [5,6].
TEs can replicate via an RNA or a DNA intermediate
and have been traditionally classified accordingly into
two classes (I and II) [7-9]. Class I elements, also known
as retrotransposons, depend on a reverse transcription
step. They are nearly identical to retroviruses in structure and are related phylogenetically [10]. They contain
a gag-like gene, a pol-gene (which generally contains
domains for reverse transcriptase, RnaseH, integrase,
protease, and endonuclease) and in certain cases a third
open reading frame (ORF) coding for an env-like protein [8]. Class I is subsequently classified into five orders

© 2011 Fernández-Medina et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Fernández-Medina et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:260
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/260

based on major differences in their insertion mechanism
as well as overall genetic organization [11]. Class II elements are genetically and structurally more homogenous
and simple. Their basic genetic structure consists of a
transposase gene flanked by terminal inverted repeats
(TIRs), which are fundamental for their recognition by
transposases and further mobilization. This class has
been classified into two subclasses, which are subsequently grouped into different orders [11]. The classification of Class II TEs based in their genetic differences
permitted a further classification in superfamilies and
families.
The proportion of the different classes, orders, and
superfamilies of TEs in a given genome varies in different species; some harbor very abundant but few families
of TEs as mammals, where Class I non-long terminal
repeats (NLTRs) predominate [12,13], while others contain many different yet less abundant families. These differences have been related to the C-value paradox [14],
which refers to the huge variations in genome size of
eukaryotic organisms despite similar levels of organism
complexity [15]. For instance, the large differences
observed in genome size between An. gambiae (286 Mb)
and Aedes aegypti (1.3 Gb) is determined by their differential content of TEs.
On the other hand, TEs can be classified as autonomous and non-autonomous based on their ability to
perform their own transposition. Moreover, within these
two categories, TEs can be also classified as active or
inactive based in their actual mobility, which depends
on several factors, among which the presence of an
active, autonomous element of the same family–or close
enough to be able to mobilize it–is fundamental.
An important aspect of the study of TEs in a given
genome is the understanding of their abundance and
diversity as well as the classification and organization of
the elements. Currently, Repbase is the reference collection of repetitive elements from most eukaryotic genomes that can be consulted online [16]. This database is
being used in genome sequencing projects as a collection for masking and annotation of repetitive DNA,
because it contains a picture of the TE landscape in several genomes. However, most TE sequences from
Repbase are prototypic consensus sequences of families
and subfamilies of repeats. On the other hand, a specific
TE database called Tefam presents TE sequences from
three mosquito genomes: An. gambiae, A. aegypti, and
Culex quinquefasciatus [17]. TEfam contains a more
restricted number of TE families in the mosquito
genomes.
Previous analyses of TEs in An. gambiae have identified several element families [3,18-24]; however, the data
are often scattered in the databases or clearly
unavailable.

Page 2 of 18

The aim of this work was to describe the diversity of
TEs within the An. gambiae genome following the use
of the PILER tool, which identifies repetitive elements in
whole genomes [25]–with a particular interest in the
detection of new, active elements–as well as to consolidate a database in the form of a hyperlinked spreadsheet
containing detailed and readily available information
about the TE diversity and other repetitive elements
found in the genome of An. gambiae. The purpose was
to present the platform used in the identification and
characterization of TEs in the genome of An. gambiae,
which, in turn, can be used to screen other sequenced
genomes.

Results and Discussion
An important aspect in the study of the TEs in a genome is knowledge of their abundance and diversity, as
well as classification and further organization of this
information in a clear and comprehensive manner. Aiming at the discovery of unknown, active elements, we
performed a search and characterization of TEs in the
sequenced genome of An. gambiae. We used a combined strategy (Figure 1) to identify and characterize
repetitive elements present in the genome of the primary vector of malaria, An. gambiae. Our strategy combines an extensive search of repetitive elements within
this genome utilizing the PILER-DF algorithm as a first
screening method, together with a detailed characterization of each of the retrieved sequences by analyzing signature characteristics of TEs as well as performing
homology-based analysis of the obtained sequences to
several databases. This automated pipeline includes the
different steps suggested recently by Wicker, et al., [11]
for classifying eukaryotic TEs. The results are compiled
in a database of repetitive elements in the mosquito
genome, called AnoTExcel (Additional Files 1 and 2)
that provides information for all the TE families identified, along with offering the individual sequences found
in each family.
Database description

AnoTExcel is organized as an Excel spreadsheet with
cells containing, in a hyperlinked format, the results
obtained after the various analyses performed in the
characterization of each family. Each line of the spreadsheet represents a cluster containing a variable number
of sequences with a high degree of identity among
them, constituting–in most of the cases–TE families.
The spreadsheet columns contain the several analyses
performed on the sequences and were grouped into four
types, colored for easier viewing as follows: blue columns represent the classification of the families; green
columns present the general characteristics of the
sequences in clusters, such as presence of TIRs and

Fernández-Medina et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:260
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/260

Page 3 of 18

Figure 1 Pipeline for the identification and characterization of transposable elements in the Anopheles gambiae genome. Flow chart
indicating the steps followed for the characterization of repeats in An. gambiae.

their sequences, direct repeats (LTRs), consensus and
centroid sequences, ORF sequences, etc. In orange columns are presented all the results of the blasts performed on several databases (see Methodology section),
and in yellow columns (FZ-GQ) are results of new

clustering performed by tblastx considering different
degrees of identity over at least 50% of the length of the
alignments (from 35% to 95% of identity on 50% of the
length). This was performed to identify shorter fragments of sequences belonging to the same family that

Fernández-Medina et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:260
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/260

were included in different clusters when more stringent
conditions were applied. Clusters that share some degree
of identity are colored in column A in AnoTExcel.
This is not an exhaustive database, as some of the element families already known to be present in An. gambiae have not been identified by our algorithm; however,
it has the important and distinctive characteristic of presenting all the individual sequences within each family
(including fragments or short sequences belonging to
TE families) as well as their global alignments in fastA
format, the consensus and centroid sequences, and
detailed information on their structural characteristics.
In addition, it presents the results obtained after several
blasts performed on different databases and includes in
hyperlinked format the file with the significant matches
to the given database.
This constitutes a rich resource that includes important
information on the different families of TEs present in the
genome of An. gambiae besides serving as a platform for
the analysis of TEs present in other sequenced genomes.
AnoTExcel contains 3826 repetitive sequences larger
than 400 nts in length that were grouped into 245 clusters (see Methodology section). The repetitive sequences
are considered “intact” because they are globally alignable and “isolated” because they are surrounded by
unique sequences; therefore, they correspond to insertional events of different repetitive sequences, mainly
TEs [25]. Our strategy in generation of the clusters permitted the grouping of sequences belonging to the same
TE family with different sizes or corresponding to different regions of the same element. Considering that the
sequences identified by PILER-DF are isolated and
unique, it is possible to state that those sequences represent different transposition states of the same TE family,
allowing for evolutionary or dynamical analysis. The
spreadsheet containing AnoTExcel can be found at
http://exon.niaid.nih.gov/transcriptome/TE/A_gambiae/
AnoTExcel-WEB.zip and the standalone data can be
downloaded from http://exon.niaid.nih.gov/transcriptome/TE/A_gambiae/AnoTExcel-SA.zip
The latter file should be decompressed to the user’s
computer, and the Excel file should be opened from
within Excel. AnoTExcel can be downloaded and stored
in a personal computer; it occupies approximately 178
Mb and can be modified by adding or deleting columns
according to the user’s needs.
We were able to assign most of the retrieved
sequences (75%) to a given TE class (I or II); the rest
were classified as rRNA (1%), or repetitive sequences
with no TE signatures (24%) and possibly expressed
pseudogenes (Figure 2).
In order to assess the efficiency of our approach in
identifying and characterizing TEs from the genome of
A. gambiae we compared the number of sequences in

Page 4 of 18

AnoTExcel with those deposited in Repbase and TEfam.
The results are shown in Figure 3. It should be noted
that these figures are not 100% comparable since many
elements are deposited in Repbase and TEfam under
different names (overlapping). Also, Repbase and AnoTExcel present data on subfamilies (that might correspond to different transposition events in time but not
to different families) that were included in Figure 3. In
addition, some but not all of the elements present in
TEfam are also deposited in Repbase (redundancy). We
identified approximately half of the LTR elements that
have been described so far in the genome of An. gambiae, few of the NLTRs and almost all the known Class
II elements. Moreover, we were able to identify and
characterize several families of elements (both Class I
and II) that have not been reported previously, even
using similar approaches for identifying TEs in the mosquito genome [20,24]. Further characterization of the
TE families is given below.
TE characterization

The TE families identified in AnoTExcel were classified
according to their class, subclass, order, superfamily, and
family, following the Wicker criteria for TE classification.
We also classified the families according to the length of
sequences in each cluster, i.e., according to the percentage
of the cluster consensus sequence representing the fulllength canonical element as: full-length (100% match),
fragments or remnants (less than 10% of match) and,
depending on the case, as Solo LTR (for solitaire LTRs
resulting from the homologous recombination occurring in
LTR elements), MITEs (miniature inverted terminal repeat
elements), or Class II-NA (non-autonomous elements,
already described as such in Repbase). The methodology
used here permitted identification of families presenting
both full-length elements and degenerate copies of the
same family (mainly for Class I-NLTR elements). The LTR
elements contain several full-length putative active
sequences, while NLTRs and Class II elements are mainly
constituted by fragments or remnant sequences. For the
NLTR elements, the percentage of clusters considered as
“full” in AnoTExcel is notably higher than the percentage
of full-length sequences that in fact exists, indicating that
many of the NLTR clusters constitute a mixture of both
full-length and fragmented sequences.
Notably, although the An. gambiae genome has been
scrutinized in search of TEs before using several methodologies [22-24,26], we have been able to identify novel
TE families that have not been previously identified, as
detailed further below.
Elements Class I, order LTR

The LTR elements in the genome of An. gambiae constitute a numerous order, although there are only three

Fernández-Medina et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:260
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/260

Page 5 of 18

Figure 2 Distribution of repeats in AnoTExcel. (a) Distribution of clusters. (b) Distribution of long terminal repeat (LTR) superfamilies. (c)
Distribution of non-LTR (NLTR) superfamilies. (d) Distribution of Class II superfamilies.

superfamilies: Ty1-Copia, Pao-Bel, and T3-Gyspsy, the
last being the most diverse LTR superfamily within the
mosquito genome.
The LTR elements identified in AnoTExcel were characterized based on the presence of flanking LTRs and/or
based on positive matches to Peptidase_A17, RVT_1 or
2 or RVE in Pfam or directly due to their significant
matches to known LTR elements already deposited in
the TE databases (TEfam and Repbase) or in the GenBank non-redundant database.

In AnoTExcel, they correspond to 19% of all the
families identified (Figure 2), and 26,4% of the total TEs
identified, totalizing 46 different clusters, and are represented by members of the main three superfamilies.
Novel elements corresponding to the Copia and Pao-Bel
superfamilies were also identified and will be described
later.
Full-length and fragmented elements are not equally
represented in the different LTR superfamilies. While
the majority of the Pao-Bel elements are represented by

Fernández-Medina et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:260
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/260

Page 6 of 18

Figure 3 TE distribution in Repbase, TEfam and AnoTExcel. Number of LTR, NLTR and Class II families present in three databases: TEfam.
Repbase and AnoTExcel. The numbers in the bars indicate the number of families in each category.

full-length copies (68%), the Gypsys are represented by
Solo-LTRs (50%), and the few Copia families identified
correspond to full-length elements.
The predicted activity of the full-length sequences was
also studied (Additional File 3). Based on i) the degree
of nucleotide identity among the sequences belonging to
the same families; ii) the degree of identity among the
LTRs of individual elements (identical LTRs in all of
them); iii) the indication of expression based on positive
matches to EST databases in AnoTExcel; and iv) the
presence of full-length ORFs containing conserved
domains for the proteins involved in transposition, we
concluded that a substantial fraction of the LTRs
described here corresponds to putatively active elements, as indicated by their presence within cDNA
libraries (clusters 45, 115, 238, 140, 130, 191, 110, 199,
101, 98, 131, 182, 104, 119, 171) (Additional File 3). The
LTR families contain elements presenting an average
nucleotide identity higher than 99.5%, and comparison
of the LTRs among all the sequences in each of the
clusters showed a high degree of identity for the three
superfamilies (average of 99.13% for Pao-Bel, 99.04% for
Copia, and 99.11% for Gypsy). In addition, the identity
between the two LTRs present in the individual
sequences was calculated and appeared to be very high
for some of the LTR members (averages of 99.81; 99.64,
and 99.83% for Pao-Bel, Copia, and Gypsy, respectively)
(Additional File 3). The presence of full-length ORFs in
the sequences reinforces the idea that these families are
active or have been very recently inactivated [19].

Copia elements

The Copia superfamily in the mosquito genome is
represented by five different families: Copia1-5_AG
[27-29] and the Mtanga family [30]. These families have
been reported to Repbase, and none of them is present
in TEfam. In AnoTExcel, elements belonging to two
families, Copia3_AG (cluster 172) and Copia5_AG (cluster 150) were identified. The consensus sequence of
these two families is identical to the corresponding consensus sequences deposited in Repbase. Element
Copia3_AG is apparently a truncated element with no
conserved protein domains. The Copia5_AG sequences
present some characteristics of activity, such as the presence of conserved protein domains for RT and RVE
and identical within sequence LTRs, even if they presented no positive matches to the mRNA and the EST
databases (Additional File 3).
Novel Copia elements

Two clusters (numbers 134 and 149 of AnoTExcel) were
characterized as elements belonging to the Copia superfamily, although it was not possible to assign them to
any of the already described families within this superfamily since they present high nucleotide distances
against all the previous characterized Copia elements
(Additional File 4). The consensus sequences of these
clusters showed significant matches by tblastx with the
Copia5_AG consensus sequence and Copia_DM from
Drosophila melanogaster [31], respectively (see AnoTExcel). A phylogenetic analysis including all Copia

Fernández-Medina et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:260
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/260

elements previously identified in An. gambiae and a
Copia element from D. melanogaster showed no clear
clustering of any of these sequences with the previously
described Copia elements (Figure 4).
Additional File 5 presents the main characteristics of the
sequences belonging to the novel LTR elements
described in AnoTExcel. The four sequences within
cluster 134 are 4399 long with a p-distance at the
nucleotide level, considering the full-length alignment of
0.0009 (standard deviation [sd] = 0.0003). The LTRs are
149 nts long and present a very high degree of identity
(p-dist = 0.0033; ds = 0.0038). In two of these
sequences, the 3’ and 5’ LTRs are identical (Additional
File 5), indicating that they have inserted recently and
have not had time to accumulate mutations between the
LTRs. The consensus sequence presents an ORF of
1350 aa containing conserved regions for integrase
(RVE), reverse transcriptase (RVT_2), and RnaseH, a
primer-binding site (PBS) for proline, and a polypurine
signal at position 4234, information that reinforces the
idea of activity of this family.
The mean aa distance of the consensus sequence of
clusters 134 to each of the consensus of the already
described Copia elements shown in Figure 4 is 0.6520,
indicating that they do not correspond to any of the
already described Copia families (Additional File 4). The
consensus sequence of cluster 134 shows two regions
spanning 2008 and 1560 nts with 65% and 69% identity,

Page 7 of 18

respectively, with element Copia-5_AG. The unique
ORF of cluster 134 presents 56% identity along the
whole sequence with Copia5_AG. Still, the 149-nts-long
LTRs of cluster 134 do not show any identity with the
108-nts-long LTRs from Copia-5_AG, indicating that
they are not members of the same TE family.
The synonymous substitutions among the sequences
in cluster 134 were more than six times more frequent
than the substitutions at non-synonymous sites, which
indicate the presence of purifying selection operating on
them. Tajima’s test, on the other hand, was not significant for these sequences, although the fact of being four
sequences with few segregating sites along the alignment
might influence the ability of the test to detect selective
pressures operating on them (Additional File 5).
The consensus of the sequences in this cluster has
been deposited in Repbase under the denomination
Copia-6_AG.
The four sequences in cluster 149 are 2245 nts long
with a mean p-distance of 0.0083 and sd = 0.0014, considering the whole alignment. The LTRs are 168 nts
long and are identical in all the sequences, suggesting a
recent transposition event.
The consensus sequence has an ORF of 615 aa that contains no conserved regions. The sequences present two
PBSs, three sequences for valine, and one for methionine.
The consensus sequence for this cluster shows no regions
of identity with previously identified elements. In the

Figure 4 Maximum likelihood phylogenetic tree of the pol region of Copia elements from the genome of Anopheles gambiae. The final
alignment encompasses a region of 1928 aa positions. The tree was generated using default settings for MUSCLE 3.7 (as alignment tool), Gblocks
0.91 b for alignment refinement, PhyML for tree generation, and TreeDyn for tree drawing as implemented in [69]. Red numbers above the
branches indicate a confidence index based on the approximate likelihood-ratio test (aLRT) for branches [72]. An * indicates sequences identified
in AnoTExcel. Three sequences belonging to the Pao-Bel superfamily were used as outliers for tree construction.

Fernández-Medina et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:260
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/260

phylogenetic analysis shown in Figure 4, the cluster 149
sequence groups with a Copia element from D. melanogaster, although with a non-significant bootstrap value.
The mean aa distance of the consensus sequence of
cluster 149 to each consensus of the already described
Copia elements shown in Figure 4 was 0.7645.
The blasts performed on an EST library as well as on
a predicted expressed mRNA, both from An. gambiae,
gave positive matches (Additional File 5). So, even if this
sequence apparently corresponds to an inactive element,
it is being expressed, as demonstrated by its positive
match both to the mRNA and the EST databases, which
indicates the activity of this family. The consensus of
the sequences in this cluster has been deposited in
Repbase under the denomination Copia-7_AG.
Superfamily Pao-Bel

According to Repbase, there are 20 families of Pao-Bel
elements in the mosquito genome (AGM1 and Bel119_AG). AnoTExcel presents sequences of 15 of them
plus 2 novel families. Eleven of these clusters contain
full-length sequences that were further analyzed. They
all contain ORFs with protein domains for RVT, Pep17,
and RVE (with the exception of cluster 110, belonging
to the family Bel16_AG, which does not present RVE
domain), contain very high sequence identity within
each cluster and, in all the cases, the within-element
LTRs are identical, indicating that they are active at present or were so very recently. In addition, ten of these
families are being expressed, as indicated by their positive matches to the EST database (Additional File 3). A
phylogenetic analysis of the RT-PeptA17 conserved
domains of the Pao-Bel elements confirmed the classification of the clusters based on the information present
in AnoTExcel. In this phylogeny, only those sequences
containing conserved domains for the RT were included.
Novel Pao-Bel elements description

Two families of elements characterized as Pao-Bel due
to their matches to Pao-Bel elements deposited in
Repbase by tblastx (clusters 174 and 185, respectively)
were further characterized.
Cluster 174 is composed of three sequences presenting
a high degree of identity among them (p-dist = 0.0068;
SD = 0.0010) (Additional File 5) and a total length of
5769 nts; two of them contain 213-nts-long identical
LTRs, indicating that these sequences might have transposed very recently. The consensus sequence presents
an ORF of 1758 aa with conserved domains for RT,
PeptA17, and RVE, also indicating that sequences might
belong to an active or recently active family. The blastn
performed on TEfam and Repbase showed that this
family has not been reported before; still, the tblastx on
Repbase gave positive matches to several Pao-Bel

Page 8 of 18

families, indicating that this family belongs to the PaoBel superfamily.
The consensus sequence of this cluster has three
regions (nucleotide positions 700-1132, 2538-3907, and
4440-5357) with 63% identity with element Bel16-I_AG.
Phylogenetic analysis performed with already characterized Pao-Bel elements showed that the consensus
sequence of cluster 174 grouped together with the
representative sequence of BEL16_AG with a significant
likelihood branch support value (Figure 5). Nonetheless,
the LTRs of both families show no identities and present different sizes, indicating that they do not correspond to the same family.
The sequences in cluster 174 present 100% identity
with two cDNA spanning 786 nts from a cDNA library,
indicating that this elements is being expressed.
On the other hand, we identified more substitutions in
synonymous than in non-synonymous positions, with a
dN/dS value of 0.2093, indicating a selection pressure
on the ORF of these sequence. Tajima’s test was not
executed due the small number of sequences.
The consensus of the sequences in this cluster has
been deposited in Repbase under the denomination
Bel20_AG.
The three sequences in cluster 185 are 3803 nts long,
with a p-distance of 0.0033 and sd = 0.00077, presenting
LTRs of 227 nts that are identical within each element.
The consensus sequence presents an ORF of 927 aa that
has no conserved domains for known proteins. The LTR
finder program detected a PBS for asparagine and a PPT
signal.
The results obtained after blastn in the TE databases,
TEfam and Repbase, indicate no identity with known
elements; nevertheless, the tblastx against Repbase
shows significant e-values with several Pao-Bel elements,
mainly with families Bel-18_AG [32] and Bel-3_AG [33].
The LTRs of these families are not, however, similar in
length or nucleotide composition to the LTRs of cluster
185.
The blasts performed on an EST library as well as on
a predicted expressed mRNA, both from An. gambiae,
gave positive matches (Additional File 5). Nevertheless,
the absence of conserved domains in the ORF present
in this sequence made it impossible to compare it phylogenetically with other Pao-Bel sequences.
Analysis of dS vs. dN showed no differences in the
proportion of substitutions in synonymous vs. nonsynonymous positions, indicating a neutral evolution
(Additional File 5). The general characteristics of the
sequences in this family suggest that it corresponds to a
non-autonomous family composed of few elements. The
consensus of the sequences in this cluster has been
deposited in Repbase under the denomination Bel21_AG.

Fernández-Medina et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:260
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/260

Page 9 of 18

Figure 5 Maximum likelihood phylogenetic tree of the pol region of Bel elements from the genome of Anopheles gambiae. The final
alignment encompasses a region of 423 aa positions. Refer to legend of Figure 3 for detailed information. Two sequences belonging to the
Gypsy superfamily were used as outliers for tree construction.

Superfamily Gypsy

The Gypsy superfamily is the most diverse LTR superfamily in terms of the number of different families that
have been previously identified [16,34]. Traditionally,
this superfamily had been classified into nine different
lineages based on phylogenetic analysis of the RT, RnaseH, and INT domains [35]. Six of these lineages have
been previously reported in insects and five of them
(Gypsy, Mag, Mdg1, CsRn1, and Mdg3) were described
in An. gambiae. Tubio, et al., reported the identification

of a huge variety of families within each of these
lineages.
In AnoTExcel, we identified families with full-length
sequences belonging to each of the so-called lineages,
but we failed to identify the majority of the individual
families.
AnoTExcel presents six clusters with full-length
sequences in addition to other clusters presenting fragmented elements or solo LTRs. The six full-length clusters have signs of activity (Additional File 3), presenting

Fernández-Medina et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:260
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/260

functional ORFs, and five of them have positive matches
to the EST library.
Most of the Gypsys that we identified correspond to
Solo elements. In An. gambiae, Tubio et al. found a
high proportion of solo LTRs belonging to this superfamily [19] and interpreted this fact as a slow turnover
of LTR elements from the genome of An. gambiae. This
would mean that each individual copy remains for a
longer time in the genome, enhancing the chance of
homologous recombination to occur, which is the proposed mechanism to generate this type of deteriorated
LTR [36-38]. The lower proportion of Solo LTR elements in the other LTR families might suggest that they
are not equally present in all LTR elements.
Elements Class I, order non-LTR

The non-LTR elements identified previously in the Anopheles genome and deposited in TEfam and/or Repbase
constitute a very diverse order of elements composed of
22 different superfamilies, 7 of which were identified in
AnoTExcel, belonging to the superfamilies RTE, Outcast, Jockey, I, and the majority of them to the CR1
superfamily. Some families were considered as remnants
of NLTR elements for presenting little identity with
NLTR elements from TEfam and/or Repbase by tblastx.
The NLTRs are usually between 3 and 8 Kb long, and
they usually contain two genes: the pol gene, fundamental for their replication, and the gag gene, which it is
also present in the LTR retrotransposons and
retroviruses.
In AnoTExcel, the NLTR elements were classified
based on their positive matches to RVT_1 in Pfam and/
or their positive matches to polyprotein in the TE databases, as well as positive matches to sequences present
in the specific TE databases or GenBank NR database.
In total, 32 clusters were classified as NLTRs (Figure
2), corresponding to 13% of all the families identified
and 18,4% of the total TE families. The families of
NLTR elements contain, overall, more numerous
sequences than the LTRs (20.6 versus. 5.1 sequences per
family); this is to say, each family is more abundant and
more heterogeneous, because most of the clusters are
composed of both full-length and fragmented sequences.
Most of the full-length sequences present conserved
protein domains for exo-endo phosphatase and RT
(Additional File 6). Nine of these clusters present a second ORF but no apparent conserved domains. The pdistances among all the sequences within each cluster
are small and, together with the significant results of
Tajima’s test as well as the significant matches to the
EST library (Additional File 6), indicate that some of
these clusters are transcribed.
The majority of the NLTR families present in AnoTExcel correspond to the CR1 superfamily. Most

Page 10 of 18

correspond to fragmented sequences, and the full-length
sequences keep a high nucleotide identity.
AnoTExcel also presents one cluster with signs of
expression belonging to the I superfamily. Both the
Jockey and Outcast superfamilies seem to have active
members that have already been reported [18]. Three
clusters belong to the RTE superfamily, two of them
present full-length ORFs and positive matches to the
EST library, and one has a positive match to the predicted expressed mRNA.
Class II

The actual transposons or Class II elements are characterized by the presence of a gene coding for a transposase enzyme flanked by TIRs and have been recently
classified into two subclasses (1 and 2) according to the
number of DNA strands that are cut during the transposition event [11]. Elements of class II belonging to
subclass 1 and presenting TIRs have been subsequently
classified into nine superfamilies, six of which have been
previously identified in the Anopheles genome. Members
belonging to all these superfamilies are present in AnoTExcel, where class II elements have been classified
based according to the presence of TIRs and on the
positive matches to already characterized elements
deposited in any of the databases analyzed.
The majority of all the TE families identified in AnoTExcel belong to this class (43%), (Figure 2a), which
corresponds to 55.2% of all the TE sequences retrieved
by PILER. Elements belonging to six different superfamilies (P, Tc1-Mariner, Transib, PIF-Harbinger, piggyBac,
and hAT) were identified, as well as Helitrons that
belong to subclass 2. Tc1-Mariner constitutes the most
numerous superfamily, with 39 different families, representing 35% of the class II families (Figure 2d).
We were not able to identify copies of full-length piggyBac families [39] or the Herves element, which correspond to a class II active element [40]. This element
belongs to the hAT superfamily, and although we identified other hAT elements in the genome, all of them
constitute truncated copies [40]. On the other hand, 32
clusters with a variable number of sequences harboring
TIRs with no relationship to previously known elements
were also identified. These elements have been classified
as novel Class II MITE-like elements and will be later
characterized.
The great majority of the class II elements identified
here correspond to highly deteriorated sequences, represented by elements with different degrees of deterioration, including several families already characterized of
MITEs, NA (non-autonomous families already identified
in Repbase), fragments, and a few remnant clusters.
Only four clusters harbor full-length sequences, belonging to superfamilies Tc1-Mariner (clusters 41, 114 and

Fernández-Medina et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:260
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/260

133) and P (cluster 161) (Additional File 7). All contain
full-length TIRs and, except for cluster 114, they contain
conserved domains for transposase and positive matches
to the EST library, so they probably constitute active or
recently active elements (Additional File 7).
MITEs

These elements were originally described in plants
[41-43] and have been found in other eukaryotic organisms, including mosquitoes [44-46]. They are small,
non-autonomous elements (~100-500 bp) that contain
TIRs but do not codify for any protein. They are
believed to originate from full-length active elements
that lose their coding capacity but maintain the TIRs,
which allow their mobilization, in a parasitic manner,
by active transposases. There is ample evidence indicating a relationship between active elements and MITEs,
although there is no clear mechanism that explains
their generation [47-52]. They are normally present in
high copy number. In AnoTExcel, 18 clusters were classified as MITEs of previously characterized families.
Some of them had been identified as MITEs before,
belonging to the superfamilies Tc1-Mariner, P, and Harbinger, while others have not been reported as such
until now (e.g., the MITEs from the Gambol elements).
The Gambol elements belong to the Tc1-Mariner
superfamily; they contain the characteristic DD34E
motif [53] and are represented by 13 different families
that are deposited in TEfam. Here we identified ten
families related to Gambol elements, six of which have
TIRs with high identity with the TIRs of the original
elements but smaller size (Figure 6a-e). This might indicate that just a part of the TIR is necessary for element
mobilization. In the six examples shown here, the
extreme outer region of the TIRs is maintained while
the inner region of the TIRs is not present. Also, the
internal region of all the Gambol MITE-like elements
presented in Figure 6 have no significant nucleotide
similarity with any internal region of the Gambol counterpart elements. They all have quite small sizes, and in
the case of the MITE-like elements of Gambol_Ele1,
cluster 100 and 112, they constitute two subfamilies
with almost identical TIRs but with different sizes and
different internal regions in nucleotide composition,
indicating that they probably originated in different
events (Figure 6e).
It is possible that more than one family of MITEs
evolved from a unique master copy, generating diverse
families that keep on transposing and evolving depending on the presence of an active element in the genome,
as has been demonstrated for P elements in the An.
gambiae genome [51]. The origin of the internal region
of MITEs is controversial: it might derive from internal
regions of the respective master TEs followed by

Page 11 of 18

nucleotide degeneration or, alternatively, it might originate from an ectopic site [51].
MITE-like novel elements

32 clusters presenting TIRs or palindromic flanking ends,
but with no identity to known TEs, either in the TIR or in
the internal region, were identified. TIR lengths vary from
18 to 204 nts and their total length from 430 to 1678 nts,
and six of them are, in fact, palindromic repeats. Palindromic TEs have been previously identified in Caenorhabditis
elegans [54] and D. melanogaster and also in Mariner elements identified in An. gambiae [55]. Palindromes are predicted to form secondary structures; in bacteria, repetitive
extragenic palindromic elements (REP) have been
described as hotspots for transposition, indicating a relationship between REPs and TEs [56]. Little is known about
the role of these sequences within genomes, however.
Nine of these clusters constitute sequences longer
than 1000 nts, and 17 are longer than 800 nts (Additional File 8). Some of these families present more than
60 individual copies, but none showed signs of autonomous activity, as they only present small ORFs and no
signs of conserved motifs. A significant proportion presents matches to EST databases, suggesting that they are
being expressed, and five of them present significant
matches to the mRNA databases.
Tajima’s test for the group of sequences within these
clusters showed significant values in 14 of them. Tajima’s D is normally used as a selective neutrality test statistic; however, it has been suggested that sudden
population expansions can lead to negative D values,
moving the observed D value outside the 95% confidence interval derived for a neutral locus and stationary
population [57]. Considering this, it is possible that the
significantly negative D values obtained for the clusters
analyzed here correspond to TE families that are in a
process of expansion–indeed, they all constitute quite
numerous families within the Anopheles genome.
We believe that these sequences are MITE-like elements, although we cannot rule out the putative master
TE due to the lack of identity with known elements.
MITEs are known to be present in several genomes,
and they have been associated with master TEs [51].
They share their TIRs with active elements, and it
appears that they manage to survive and spread within
genomes by borrowing the transposase from active elements. What is not known is whether their internal
regions derive from internal regions of the master elements or if they are copied from an ectopic site by a
conversion process after a double-strand break. The
clustering with less stringent conditions performed by
tblastx, shown in the last columns of AnoTExcel, permitted the identification of sequences with a high degree
of identity only among the TIR regions, i.e., different

Fernández-Medina et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:260
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/260

Page 12 of 18

Figure 6 Structure of MITE-like elements belonging to the Gambol superfamily. (i) The diagram represents the Gambol element as
described in Tefam [17]; striped arrows represent the terminal inverted repeats (TIRs). (ii) Representation of the structure of the MITE-like
elements. Black arrows represent TIRs with the number of mismatches with the TIRs from the complete elements in white. The numbers above
the diagrams are the nucleotide positions where the TIRs begin and end in each case. In each box, a-e. represent the original Gambol element
(above) and the MITE-like element from AnoTExcel.

subfamilies of MITE-like elements. Three groups of
clusters among the novel MITE-like (clusters 121-87;
137-144; and 43-197) were identified by the less stringent clustering. In all cases, they share high identity in
TIR regions but low identity in internal regions (Figure
7). It is possible that the diverging time between these
elements is so long that it is impossible to find any
detectable similarity.
It is interesting to note that many known MITEs, such
as the Stowaway family in rice, have no homologies with

other TEs, leaving an open question regarding the origin
and means of replication of these small, non-autonomous elements [58]. This appears to be the case for the
orphan MITE-like sequences presented here.
It is apparent that the Class II elements present in the
genome of An. gambiae are composed of a variety of
different structurally degenerated sequences that might
represent different stages in the process of deterioration
of these elements, which in turn might be differentially
involved in the regulation of Class II families [59].

Fernández-Medina et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:260
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/260

Page 13 of 18

Figure 7 Structure of three MITE-like families belonging to unknown transposable elements. (a) Family of MITE-like elements including
clusters 121 and 87 from AnoTExcel. (b) Clusters 144 and 137; and (c) clusters 197 and 43. Black squares represent the terminal inverted repeats,
and the numbers above them are the lengths of the identity region. The internal regions are represented by striped rectangles. The numbers at
the end of the diagrams show the length of the elements in nucleotides. The numbers behind these squares represent the p-distance and the
standard deviations for the homology regions of the sequences in the alignments.

Conclusions
Two basic approaches for the task of repetitive sequence
identification at the genome scale are commonly used;
they are based either on the similarities of a query
sequence to already described elements (homology strategies) or on recognition of TEs’ intrinsic characteristics,
such as their repetitive nature within the genome or the
presence of structural motifs such as LTRs, TIRs, or
specific target site duplications (TSD) in a query
sequence (homology-independent methods) that are specific of certain families of TEs.
Here, we used a combined strategy to identify and
characterize the repetitive elements present in the genome of the primary vector of malaria, An. gambiae, and
to present all the gathered information in an easy and
accessible manner. We described several families of elements present in the mosquito genome, as well as novel
elements that have not been described before.
Previous works [24,60] have shown that use of multiple softwares increases the detection of TEs and that the
use of PILER alone has a low performance for the detection of TEs in a genome. It is worth noting that
although our approach missed the detection of some TE
families, it permitted the identification of novel TE
families as well as MITE-like elements from previously
described Class II families that had not been described
before. This is related with a unique feature of the
PILER program in that it finds and distinguishes different classes of repeats by their characteristic features,
implementing different search methods for dispersed
families (PILER-DF), tandem arrays (PILER-TA),

pseudo-satellites (PILER-PS) and terminal repeats
(PILER-TR). The ability of PILER to incorporate biologically informed constraints into the repeat discovery process allows the identification of repeats that are more
likely to be TEs and, in many cases, of unknown TE
families or subfamilies. Also, it facilitates the identification of fragmented or deteriorated sequences of a given
family, which in turn gives a broader idea of the structural diversity within the TE landscape of the genome. It
has also been shown previously (72) that the consensus
sequences constructed by PILER are longer than those
produced by other similar methods, such as RepeatScout
or RepeatFinder and the composition of the repeat
libraries generated are similar than the ones obtained by
these other programs (72). On the other hand, PILER
suffers from certain limitations including the inability to
recognize TE families with few members and a relatively
low representation of NLTRs in its output file which
has been previously recognized (72) with a concomitant
higher representation of Class II and LTRs. This fact
has been related to the higher identities that LTR and
Class II elements show in their flanking sequences.
AnoTExcel is a platform for analysis of the repetitive
elements present in An. gambiae that contain TEs
families with different degrees of deterioration and
which include the results of several analyses, allowing its
use by researchers interested in several areas of TE biology such as variability of terminal regions (TIRs or
LTRs) and deterioration processes. This compiled information can serve as a starting point for future investigations of TE families in Anopheles or in different species.

Fernández-Medina et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:260
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/260

The platform used to identify and characterize TEs in
the mosquito genome can be easily used to generate
analogue databases in other sequenced genomes, which
can be useful for understanding the dynamics of TE
families evolving in different genomic contexts.
This platform can also serve for analysis of TEs in
sequenced genomes of other Anophelines, allowing for
comparative purposes. This could permit the study of
the dynamics of TEs in different genomic environments,
including the understanding of the process of deterioration of certain TE families.

Methods

Page 14 of 18

aligns the sequences progressively using MUSCLE [61].
Briefly, the two longest sequences are first aligned, and
shorter sequences are progressively added onto the previous alignment. This approach was utilized because the
alignment of sequences of very different lengths and
belonging to different regions of the same gene that were
present in certain clusters in the dataset was quite complicated with programs such as CLUSTAL [62] or MUSCLE
alone. The program MUSCLER calls MUSCLE to run the
alignments using the following parameters: center = -1;
gapopen = -500; and gapextend = -50. Visual inspection of
the alignments using the program MEGA1.4 [63] helped
in refinement of the final alignments.

Pipeline description

The program PILER-DF [25] was used to identify repetitive sequences within the genome of An. gambiae
(release 37, February/2006). PILER is designed for identification of repeats in an assembled genomic region.
This program searches for all the repetitive sequences in
a given genome. For doing so, it uses the PALS algorithm (Pairwise Aligner for Long Sequences) that generates an alignment of the genome to itself in order to
find local alignments. PALS records the coordinates (i.e.
start and end points) of each substring that shares significant sequence similarity (>94%) with at least one
other substring. Overlapping substrings are condensed
into ‘piles’ (_elements) and piles sharing significant
sequence similarity are grouped into families and further
into superfamilies, which contain sequences that are
locally alignable (this corresponds eventually to different
fragmented elements belonging to the same family). A
consensus sequence is generated for each family. The
program was run under the default settings; consequently, intact, isolated copies of repeats that appear
three or more times in the genome and are larger than
400 bp were obtained. We were interested in the analysis of abundance and diversity of repetitive elements as
well as in TE dynamics; we therefore analyzed and
incorporated into the database all the hits obtained by
the PILER algorithm.
Subsequently, all the sequences were clustered into
groups of elements sharing more than 90% identity over
more than 90% of the length of the sequence. TEs
belonging to the same family are expected to be present
within these clusters. To discover identities among the
already grouped clusters, all the obtained repeats were
clustered considering different degrees of identity (35,
50, 75, and 90%) over more than 50% of the sequences
length (See columns FY to GP of AnoTExcel).

Consensus and centroid sequences

Consensus sequences were obtained from the multiple
alignments for each of the clusters. For drawing the
consensus sequence, we retained in each position of the
sequences the nucleotide that was present in more than
50% of the sequences, independently of the number of
sequences spanning that position. In this way, we were
assured of having the longest possible consensus
sequence. Those positions represented by less than 50%
of the sequences in the whole alignment are indicated in
small letters in the consensus sequence.
We also calculated the centroid sequence for each
cluster and compared it to the consensus. The centroid
sequences were obtained by choosing the sequence
within each cluster that obtained the highest sum of
scored value when summing all the scores of all-to-all
blasts performed among all the sequences within each
cluster.
As a means of corroborating how representative the
consensus sequence was, the centroid and consensus
sequences were blasted against each other, and the
length of the consensus/centroid sequences were compared (results presented in Column J in AnoTExcel).
Even if–in a substantial number of clusters–the difference between the largest and the shortest sequences was
important, we were still assured that the size of the consensus sequence was the largest possible for each cluster.
Detection of ORFs

The presence of ORFs was deduced from the six frames
of the nucleotide sequences belonging to the consensus
sequence for each cluster (Columns BA, BB, and BC of
AnoTExcel). Consensus sequences were also blasted
against a bank of TEs or ORFs of repeats that was compiled based on the TE-specific databases available,
Repbase [16] and TEfam [17].

Multiple alignments

All the sequences within each cluster were subsequently
aligned using MUSCLER (see column AL in AnoTExcel),
an algorithm developed by Dr. J. M. C. Ribeiro, which

Detection of protein conserved domains

The software “Conserved Domains” from the National
Center of Biological Information (NCBI) [64] http://

Fernández-Medina et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:260
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/260

www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Structure/cdd/wrpsb.cgi was used
for detection of conserved domains in the predicted
ORFs of the TEs.

Page 15 of 18

classified by class, subclass, order, superfamily, family, and
element type for each cluster.
Database construction

TE signatures: inverted repeats (IR), direct repeats (LTR),
and palindromic sequences

A blast of each sequence against i) itself and ii) its complementary reverse using the program Blast 2 Sequences
[65] was used to detect inverted repeats (IRs), direct
repeats (LTRs), and palindromes within the sequences.
IRs were further classified as terminal (TIR) if they were
present in the first 10% and in the last 90% nucleotides
of each sequence; otherwise they were considered subterminal. The program LTR-finder [66] was used to
help in the identification of novel LTR elements in the
genome.
Blast

Blastn was used to compare each of the repetitive element consensus sequences to the following databases: i)
TEfam; ii) Repbase; iii) the collection of repetitive elements from the genome of An. gambiae described by
Smith, et al., in 2007 [20,24]; iv) the annotated Gene
Ontology (GO) databases [67]; v) the non-redundant
(nr) protein database from GenBank; vi) the nr nucleotide database from NCBI; vii) an assembled set of
180,000 ESTs from An. gambiae; viii) an individual EST
database; ix) pfam [68]; x) a gag protein database; xi) a
transposase database; and xii) a fragmented An. gambiae
genome database. A tblastx search was performed
against the TEfam and Repbase databases to facilitate
detection of highly divergent or deteriorated elements.
Hits with e-values smaller than 10-15 were considered
positive for annotation purposes.
Phylogenetic analysis

To characterize the novel TE elements here described,
we performed phylogenetic analysis with previously
described elements belonging to the same TE order,
obtained from Repbase. We used a pipeline for phylogenetic analysis based on the MUSCLE algorithm for
sequence alignment, a maximum likelihood algorithm
PhyML for tree building, and TreeDyn for tree rendering with default settings [61,69-73].
Annotation of sequences

Clusters were manually annotated based on the similarities
of the consensus sequences to repetitive elements from
curated libraries specific for TEs (TEfam and Repbase) as
well as on the presence of specific TE signatures (i.e., presence of LTRs, IRs, or matches to proteins of retroviral or
TE origin). Their matches to the other databases also
helped in the annotation process. Repetitive elements were

A database (AnoTExcel) with the information collected
for each of the repetitive element families is presented
in the form of an Excel spreadsheet containing hyperlinked cells to the different results obtained after the
analysis performed on the sequences. The different rows
in the spreadsheet (a total of 245) represent each of the
clusters, which are composed of a variable number of
sequences (ranging from 3 to 250). The columns present
both structural (headings in green in AnoTExcel) as well
as homology-based (headings in red) information as follows: the first column contains the cluster identification
number hyperlinked to the consensus sequence obtained
for that cluster (Column A); the next six columns (headings in blue) contain information regarding identification of the TEs. Structural analyses of the consensus
sequences include analysis of the presence of ORFs
(three columns including the size of the larger ORF in
nucleotides, the amino acid (aa) sequence of the ORF,
and the frame where it was found) and of the length of
sequences within each cluster (four columns show the
nucleotide [nt] length of the longest, shortest, and consensus sequences as well as the longest/shortest
sequence ratio for each cluster.
An analysis to determine whether there is a pattern to
the terminal deletions in sequences of certain families
was also performed. Analysis of the 5’ or 3’ truncation
was performed, and the number of gaps “-” at the 5’ and
3’ of each sequence within the alignments were counted.
In this way, the 3’ or 5’ deletions were calculated and a
graphical description based on these results created. The
results, hyperlinked in the column named “Mean average length of sequence with gaps and link to truncation
analysis” shows a representation of the alignment, as a .
txt file, that indicates the deletions present at the
extremes of the sequences within a given cluster. The
fraction of sequences with IRs belonging to terminal,
palindromic, direct, or other IR is also presented in different columns of the spreadsheet as well as the presence of LTRs. All the IRs present in the sequences of
the same cluster were aligned, and a consensus
sequence of the repeats was drawn. Alignments of the
repeats found within the sequences are presented as an .
aln file and are hyperlinked to their respective cell.
Finally, the multiple alignments of the sequences performed with Clustal and MUSCLER are hyperlinked to
the respective columns (in fastA and html formats). The
spreadsheet also contains homology-based results to
curated databases. Blast matches were considered significant when their e-value was lower than 10-15. The best

Fernández-Medina et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:260
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/260

matches to PFAM and to custom-made TE-specific
databases (columns BF to BR), including gag-specific
and transposases subsets that are hyperlinked, were also
considered.
For each blast search performed, the characteristics of
the matches are presented as different columns in the
spreadsheet: 1) e-value, 2) best match, 3) score, 4) extent
of the match, 5) length of best match, 6) % identity of
the match, 7) % match length, 8) first residue of match,
9) first residue of sequence, 10) number of segments,
and 11) orientation of output.

Additional material
Additional file 1: AnoTExcel database in standalone format. It
includes the links that need to be extracted to the user’s computer
http://exon.niaid.nih.gov/transcriptome/TE/A_gambiae/AnoTExcel-SA.zip.
Additional file 2: Web-based links of AnoTExcel. http://exon.niaid.nih.
gov/transcriptome/TE/A_gambiae/AnoTExcel-WEB.zip.
Additional file 3: Full-length LTR elements described in AnoTExcel.
Main structural and evolutionary characteristics of the Full-length LTR
elements present in AnoTExcel.
Additional file 4: Nucleotide distances (p-distances) among Copia
elements from Anopheles gambiae. Matrix with the p-distances among
all the Copia elements previously described in Repbase (Copia1-5 +
Mtanga) plus the Novel Copia elements described here (clu134 and 149
from AnoTExcel).
Additional file 5: Novel LTR elements described in AnoTExcel. Main
structural and evolutionary characteristics of four novel LTR elements in
AnoTExcel.
Additional file 6: Full-length NLTR elements described in AnoTExcel.
Main structural and evolutionary characteristics of NLTR elements in
AnoTExcel.
Additional file 7: Full-length Class II elements described in
AnoTExcel. Main structural and evolutionary characteristics of the Fulllength Class II elements in AnoTExcel.
Additional file 8: MITE-like Novel elements related to unknown TEs
described in AnoTExcel. Main structural and evolutionary characteristics
of MITE-like elements described in AnoTExcel.

Abbreviations
aa: amino acids; an. Gambiae: Anopheles gambiae; EST: Expression Sequence
Tags; Gb: giga bases; GO: Gene Ontology; IR: Inverted Repeats; LTR: Long
Terminal Repeat; mb: mega base; MITE: Miniature Inverted Terminal Element;
NCBI: National Center for Biological Information; NLTR: Non-LTR; nr: nonredundant; nts: nucleotides; ORF: Open Reading Frame; PBS: Primer Binding
Site; Pep17: Peptidase-A17; REP: Repetitive extragenic palindromic element;
rRNA: ribosomal RNA; RT: Reverse Transciption; RVE: Integrase; RVT: Reverse
Transcriptase; TE: Transposable Elements; TIR: Terminal Inverted Repeats; TSD:
Terminal Site Duplication.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Intramural Research Program of the
Division of Intramural Research, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health. We thank NIAID intramural editor
Brenda Rae Marshall for assistance. RDFM and CJS were funded by FAPERJ
(Fundação de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado de Rio de Janeiro) and CNPQ
(Conselho Nacional de Pesquisa).
Because J M C Ribeiro is a government employee and this is a government
work, the work is in the public domain in the United States.
Notwithstanding any other agreements, the NIH reserves the right to
provide the work to PubMedCentral for display and use by the public, and

Page 16 of 18

PubMedCentral may tag or modify the work consistent with its customary
practices. You can establish rights outside of the U.S. subject to a
government use license.
Author details
1
Fundação Oswaldo Cruz, Escola Nacional de Saúde Pública Sergio Arouca,
Av. Brasil, 4365. 21040 360. Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. 2Instituto de Medicina
Social, Universidade do Estado de Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
3
Section of Vector Biology, Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research,
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of
Health, Rockville, MD 20852, USA.
Authors’ contributions
RDFM, CJS, and JMCR helped analyze the data; CJS assembled the PILER
pipeline; JMCR assembled the PILER results into spreadsheets; RDFM analyze
the data and wrote the bulk of the manuscript; CJS and JMCR helped write
the manuscript. All authors have read and approved the final manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 21 December 2010 Accepted: 23 May 2011
Published: 23 May 2011
References
1. Lander ES, Linton LM, Birren B, Nusbaum C, Zody MC, Baldwin J, Devon K,
Dewar K, Doyle M, FitzHugh W, et al: Initial sequencing and analysis of
the human genome. Nature 2001, 409(6822):860-921.
2. SanMiguel P, Tikhonov A, Jin YK, Motchoulskaia N, Zakharov D, MelakeBerhan A, Springer PS, Edwards KJ, Lee M, Avramova Z, et al: Nested
retrotransposons in the intergenic regions of the maize genome. Science
1996, 274(5288):765-768.
3. Holt RA, Subramanian GM, Halpern A, Sutton GG, Charlab R, Nusskern DR,
Wincker P, Clark AG, Ribeiro JM, Wides R, et al: The genome sequence of
the malaria mosquito Anopheles gambiae. Science 2002,
298(5591):129-149.
4. Doolittle WF, Sapienza C: Selfish genes, the phenotype paradigm and
genome evolution. Nature 1980, 284(5757):601-603.
5. Feschotte C, Pritham EJ: DNA transposons and the evolution of
eukaryotic genomes. Annu Rev Genet 2007, 41:331-368.
6. Jurka J, Kapitonov VV, Kohany O, Jurka MV: Repetitive sequences in
complex genomes: structure and evolution. Annu Rev Genomics Hum
Genet 2007, 8:241-259.
7. Finnegan DJ: Eukaryotic transposable elements and genome evolution.
Trends Genet 1989, 5(4):103-107.
8. Capy P: Classification and nomenclature of retrotransposable elements.
Cytogenet Genome Res 2005, 110(1-4):457-461.
9. Hua-Van A, Le Rouzic A, Maisonhaute C, Capy P: Abundance, distribution
and dynamics of retrotransposable elements and transposons:
similarities and differences. Cytogenet Genome Res 2005, 110(14):426-440.
10. Bowen NJ, McDonald JF: Genomic analysis of Caenorhabditis elegans
reveals ancient families of retroviral-like elements. Genome Res 1999,
9(10):924-935.
11. Wicker T, Sabot F, Hua-Van A, Bennetzen JL, Capy P, Chalhoub B, Flavell A,
Leroy P, Morgante M, Panaud O, et al: A unified classification system for
eukaryotic transposable elements. Nat Rev Genet 2007, 8(12):973-982.
12. Wessler SR: Transposable elements and the evolution of eukaryotic
genomes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006, 103(47):17600-17601.
13. Kidwell MG: Transposable elements and the evolution of genome size in
eukaryotes. Genetica 2002, 115(1):49-63.
14. Thomas CA Jr: The genetic organization of chromosomes. Annu Rev Genet
1971, 5:237-256.
15. Hartl DL: Molecular melodies in high and low C. Nat Rev Genet 2000,
1(2):145-149.
16. Jurka J: Repbase update: a database and an electronic journal of
repetitive elements. Trends Genet 2000, 16(9):418-420.
17. Tu Z: TEfam.[http://tefam.biochem.vt.edu/tefam/].
18. Biedler J, Tu Z: Non-LTR retrotransposons in the African malaria
mosquito, Anopheles gambiae: unprecedented diversity and evidence of
recent activity. Mol Biol Evol 2003, 20(11):1811-1825.

Fernández-Medina et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:260
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/260

19. Tubio JM, Naveira H, Costas J: Structural and evolutionary analyses of the
Ty3/gypsy group of LTR retrotransposons in the genome of Anopheles
gambiae. Mol Biol Evol 2005, 22(1):29-39.
20. Smith CD, Edgar RC, Yandell MD, Smith DR, Celniker SE, Myers EW,
Karpen GH: Improved repeat identification and masking in Dipterans.
Gene 2007, 389(1):1-9.
21. Sarkar A, Sengupta R, Krzywinski J, Wang X, Roth C, Collins FH: P elements
are found in the genomes of nematoceran insects of the genus
Anopheles. Insect Biochem Mol Biol 2003, 33(4):381-387.
22. Andrieu O, Fiston AS, Anxolabehere D, Quesneville H: Detection of
transposable elements by their compositional bias. BMC Bioinformatics
2004, 5:94.
23. Quesneville H, Nouaud D, Anxolabehere D: Detection of new transposable
element families in Drosophila melanogaster and Anopheles gambiae
genomes. J Mol Evol 2003, 57(Suppl 1):S50-59.
24. Bergman CM, Quesneville H: Discovering and detecting transposable
elements in genome sequences. Brief Bioinform 2007, 8(6):382-392.
25. Edgar RC, Myers EW: PILER: identification and classification of genomic
repeats. Bioinformatics 2005, 21(Suppl 1):i152-158.
26. Buisine N, Quesneville H, Colot V: Improved detection and annotation of
transposable elements in sequenced genomes using multiple reference
sequence sets. Genomics 2008, 91(5):467-475.
27. Kapitonov VV, Pavlicek A, Jurka J: COPIA1_AG, a family of copia-like LTR
retrotransposons from RT African malaria mosquito. Repbase Reports
2003, 3(3):49-49.
28. Pavlicek A, Kapitonov D, Jurka J: COPIA2_AG, a family of copia-like LTR
retrotransposons from RT African malaria mosquito. Repbase Reports
2003, 3(3).
29. Pavlicek A, Kapitonov D, Jurka J: COPIA3_AG, a family of nonautonomous,
copia-like LTR RT retrotransposons from African malaria mosquito.
Repbase Reports 2003, 3(3):51-51.
30. Rohr CJ, Ranson H, Besansky NJ: Structure and evolution of mtanga, a
retrotransposon actively RT expressed on the Y chromosome of the
African malaria vector RT Anopheles gambiae. Mol Biol Evol 2002,
19(2):149-162.
31. Emori Y, Shiba T, Kanaya S, Inouye S, Yuki S, Saigo K: The nucleotide
sequences of copia and copia-related RNA in Drosophila virus-like
particles. Nature 1985, 315(6022):773-776.
32. Kapitonov VV, Jurka J: BEL18_AG, a family of Bel/Pao-like LTR
retrotransposons from RT African malaria mosquito. Repbase Reports
2003, 3(4):67-67.
33. Kapitonov VV, Jurka J: BEL3_AG, a family of Bel/Pao-like LTR
retrotransposons from RT African malaria mosquito. Repbase Reports
2003, 3(2):12-12.
34. Tubio JM, Costas JC, Naveira HF: Evolution of the mdg1 lineage of the
Ty3/gypsy group of LTR retrotransposons in Anopheles gambiae. Gene
2004, 330:123-131.
35. Malik HS, Burke WD, Eickbush TH: The age and evolution of non-LTR
retrotransposable elements. Mol Biol Evol 1999, 16(6):793-805.
36. Shirasu K, Schulman AH, Lahaye T, Schulze-Lefert P: A contiguous 66-kb
barley DNA sequence provides evidence for reversible genome
expansion. Genome Res 2000, 10(7):908-915.
37. Devos KM, Brown JK, Bennetzen JL: Genome size reduction through
illegitimate recombination counteracts genome expansion in
Arabidopsis. Genome Res 2002, 12(7):1075-1079.
38. Vitte C, Panaud O: Formation of solo-LTRs through unequal homologous
recombination counterbalances amplifications of LTR retrotransposons
in rice Oryza sativa L. Mol Biol Evol 2003, 20(4):528-540.
39. Kapitonov VV, Jurka J: piggyBac1_AG: a family of autonomous piggyBaclike DNA RT transposons from African malaria mosquito. Repbase Reports
2003, 3(3):65-65.
40. Arensburger P, Kim YJ, Orsetti J, Aluvihare C, O’Brochta DA, Atkinson PW:
An active transposable element, Herves, from the African malaria
mosquito Anopheles gambiae. Genetics 2005, 169(2):697-708.
41. Bureau TE, Wessler SR: Tourist: a large family of small inverted repeat
elements frequently associated with maize genes. Plant Cell 1992,
4(10):1283-1294.
42. Bureau TE, Wessler SR: Mobile inverted-repeat elements of the Tourist
family are associated with the genes of many cereal grasses. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 1994, 91(4):1411-1415.

Page 17 of 18

43. Bureau TE, Ronald PC, Wessler SR: A computer-based systematic
survey reveals the predominance of small inverted-repeat
elements in wild-type rice genes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1996,
93(16):8524-8529.
44. Tu Z: Three novel families of miniature inverted-repeat transposable
elements are associated with genes of the yellow fever mosquito, Aedes
aegypti. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1997, 94(14):7475-7480.
45. Tu Z: Maque, a family of extremely short interspersed repetitive
elements: characterization, possible mechanism of transposition, and
evolutionary implications. Gene 2001, 263(1-2):247-253.
46. Tu Z: Eight novel families of miniature inverted repeat transposable
elements in the African malaria mosquito, Anopheles gambiae. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2001, 98(4):1699-1704.
47. Feschotte C, Mouches C: Evidence that a family of miniature invertedrepeat transposable elements (MITEs) from the Arabidopsis thaliana
genome has arisen from a pogo-like DNA transposon. Mol Biol Evol 2000,
17(5):730-737.
48. Zhang X, Jiang N, Feschotte C, Wessler SR: PIF- and Pong-like transposable
elements: distribution, evolution and relationship with Tourist-like
miniature inverted-repeat transposable elements. Genetics 2004,
166(2):971-986.
49. Holyoake AJ, Kidwell MG: Vege and Mar: two novel hAT MITE families
from Drosophila willistoni. Mol Biol Evol 2003, 20(2):163-167.
50. Remigereau MS, Robin O, Siljak-Yakovlev S, Sarr A, Robert T, Langin T:
Tuareg, a novel miniature-inverted repeat family of pearl millet
(Pennisetum glaucum) related to the PIF superfamily of maize. Genetica
2006, 128(1-3):205-216.
51. Quesneville H, Nouaud D, Anxolabehere D: P elements and MITE relatives
in the whole genome sequence of Anopheles gambiae. BMC Genomics
2006, 7:214.
52. Macas J, Koblizkova A, Neumann P: Characterization of Stowaway MITEs in
pea (Pisum sativum L.) and identification of their potential master
elements. Genome 2005, 48(5):831-839.
53. Coy MR, Tu Z: Gambol and Tc1 are two distinct families of DD34E
transposons: analysis of the Anopheles gambiae genome expands the
diversity of the IS630-Tc1-mariner superfamily. Insect Mol Biol 2005,
14(5):537-546.
54. Dreyfus DH, Emmons SW: A transposon-related palindromic repetitive
sequence from C. elegans. Nucleic Acids Res 1991, 19(8):1871-1877.
55. Bigot Y, Brillet B, Auge-Gouillou C: Conservation of Palindromic and Mirror
Motifs within Inverted Terminal Repeats of mariner-like Elements. J Mol
Biol 2005, 351(1):108-116.
56. Tobes R, Pareja E: Bacterial repetitive extragenic palindromic sequences
are DNA targets for Insertion Sequence elements. BMC Genomics 2006,
7:62.
57. Aris-Brosou S, Excoffier L: The impact of population expansion and
mutation rate heterogeneity on DNA sequence polymorphism. Mol Biol
Evol 1996, 13(3):494-504.
58. Gonzalez J, Petrov D: Genetics. MITEs–the ultimate parasites. Science 2009,
325(5946):1352-1353.
59. Struchiner CJ, Massad E, Tu Z, Ribeiro JM: The tempo and mode of
evolution of transposable elements as revealed by molecular
phylogenies reconstructed from mosquito genomes. Evolution 2009,
63(12):3136-3146.
60. Saha S, Bridges S, Magbanua ZV, Peterson DG: Empirical comparison of ab
initio repeat finding programs. Nucleic Acids Res 2008, 36(7):2284-2294.
61. Edgar RC: MUSCLE: multiple sequence alignment with high accuracy and
high throughput. Nucleic Acids Res 2004, 32(5):1792-1797.
62. Higgins DG, Sharp PM: CLUSTAL: a package for performing multiple
sequence alignment on a microcomputer. Gene 1988, 73(1):237-244.
63. Kumar S, Tamura K, Nei M: MEGA3: Integrated software for Molecular
Evolutionary Genetics Analysis and sequence alignment. Brief Bioinform
2004, 5(2):150-163.
64. Marchler-Bauer A, Anderson JB, Chitsaz F, Derbyshire MK, DeWeese-Scott C,
Fong JH, Geer LY, Geer RC, Gonzales NR, Gwadz M, et al: CDD: specific
functional annotation with the Conserved Domain Database. Nucleic
Acids Res 2009, , 37 Database: D205-210.
65. Tatusova TA, Madden TL: BLAST 2 Sequences, a new tool for comparing
protein and nucleotide sequences. FEMS Microbiol Lett 1999,
174(2):247-250.

Fernández-Medina et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:260
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/260

Page 18 of 18

66. McCarthy EM, McDonald JF: LTR_STRUC: a novel search and identification
program for LTR retrotransposons. Bioinformatics 2003, 19(3):362-367.
67. Ashburner M, Ball CA, Blake JA, Botstein D, Butler H, Cherry JM, Davis AP,
Dolinski K, Dwight SS, Eppig JT, et al: Gene ontology: tool for the
unification of biology. The Gene Ontology Consortium. Nat Genet 2000,
25(1):25-29.
68. Finn RD, Mistry J, Schuster-Bockler B, Griffiths-Jones S, Hollich V,
Lassmann T, Moxon S, Marshall M, Khanna A, Durbin R, et al: Pfam: clans,
web tools and services. Nucleic Acids Res 2006, , 34 Database: D247-251.
69. Dereeper A, Guignon V, Blanc G, Audic S, Buffet S, Chevenet F, Dufayard JF,
Guindon S, Lefort V, Lescot M, et al: Phylogeny.fr: robust phylogenetic
analysis for the non-specialist. Nucleic Acids Res 2008, , 36 Web Server:
W465-469.
70. Castresana J: Selection of conserved blocks from multiple alignments for
their use in phylogenetic analysis. Mol Biol Evol 2000, 17(4):540-552.
71. Guindon S, Gascuel O: A simple, fast, and accurate algorithm to estimate
large phylogenies by maximum likelihood. Syst Biol 2003, 52(5):696-704.
72. Anisimova M, Gascuel O: Approximate likelihood-ratio test for branches:
A fast, accurate, and powerful alternative. Syst Biol 2006, 55(4):539-552.
73. Chevenet F, Brun C, Banuls AL, Jacq B, Christen R: TreeDyn: towards
dynamic graphics and annotations for analyses of trees. BMC
Bioinformatics 2006, 7:439.
doi:10.1186/1471-2164-12-260
Cite this article as: Fernández-Medina et al.: Novel transposable
elements from Anopheles gambiae. BMC Genomics 2011 12:260.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
