<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title></title>
<meta name="Creator" content="Adobe InDesign CS4 (6.0.3)"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Adobe PDF Library 9.0"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Fiedler BMC Biology 2010, 8:122
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/122

CO M M E N TA R Y 	

Open Access

The coming and going of Batesian mimicry in a
Holarctic butterfly clade
Konrad Fiedler*
See research article http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/239

Abstract
A study using phylogenetic hypothesis testing,
published in BMC Evolutionary Biology, suggests that
non-mimetic forms of the North American white
admiral butterfly evolved from a mimetic ancestor. This
case might provide one of the first examples in which
mimicry was gained and then lost again, emphasizing
the evolutionary lability of Batesian mimicry.

Comparative studies of butterfly wing patterns by
naturalists such as Henry Bates, Roland Trimen and Fritz
Müller marked the birth of the scientific concept of
mimicry right at the onset of the Darwinian age. Even
today, the factors governing the origin, maintenance and
dynamics of mimicry systems remain a challenge for
evolutionary biologists, and butterfly wing patterns
continue to provide prime models for developing and
testing new ideas concerning the mechanisms governing
how mimetic phenotypes arise and what factors may
regulate their maintenance [1]. The emergence and
maintenance of Batesian mimicry, in which palatable
mimics share conspicuous warning color patterns with
unpalatable models that are protected from predation by
their aposematic pattern, is particularly intriguing in
evolutionary terms. Here, fitness benefits will accrue to
the non-toxic mimic only as long as the toxic model
remains present, and in large enough numbers, to ensure
that predators are familiar with it and are thus warned off
by its characteristic appearance. Otherwise, selection
should favor the disappearance of palatable mimics,
which suffer from higher predation risk than incon­
spicuous phenotypes. [2].
White admirals, that is, the Holarctic butterfly genus
Limenitis (Nymphalidae), have been the target of
*Correspondence: konrad.fiedler@univie.ac.at
Department of Animal Biodiversity, University of Vienna, Rennweg 14, 1030 Vienna,
Austria

research into the function and evolution of mimicry for
more than 40 years. The genus comprises about 25
species in Asia, Europe and North America. Most of
them show disruptive wing coloration [3]: dark brown
with white bands stretching across fore and hind wings,
and undersides similar. Within the four North American
species, sometimes referred to as subgenus Basilarchia,
two radically different phenotypes occur that exemplify
two different mimicry syndromes. On the one hand,
Limenitis archippus, the viceroy, is orange colored and
forms a Müllerian mimicry ring with toxic Danaus
plexippus (the monarch) and D. gilippus [4]. In a
Müllerian mimicry ring, all species share a common
warning color pattern, and since they are all unpalatable
to predators, they collectively benefit from this common
signaling. On the other hand, L. arthemis (the white
admiral) comprises an experimentally proven example of
Batesian mimicry [5]. Its northern two subspecies,
arthemis and rubrofasciata, show the disruptive colora­
tion usual for the genus and are non-mimetic. However,
the southwestern (arizonensis) and southeastern
(astyanax) subspecies are bluish without white bands,
and with conspicuous red dots ventrally. They are mimics
of the toxic pipevine swallowtail Battus philenor. The
four forms of Limenitis arthemis freely interbreed in
nature as well as in captivity and thus belong to the same
species under the biological species concept.
The past 5 years have seen an interesting controversy as
to whether mimetic forms in the L. arthemis complex
have evolved once (monophyletic mimicry hypothesis
(MMH); Figure 1b), or whether the non-mimetic
arthemis phenotype might constitute an example of the
reversion to an ancestral phenotype from a mimetic one
(reversion hypothesis (RH); Figure 1a). A first sequencebased phylogenetic analysis [6] did not support the
MMH, but soon after, Savage and Mullen [7] concluded
the MMH to be more appropriate on the grounds of
amplified fragment length polymorphism (AFLP) data,
disputing support for the RH obtained from mito­ hon­
c
drial sequence data [8]. This controversy might appear of

© 2010 Fiedler; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any
medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Fiedler BMC Biology 2010, 8:122
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/122

(b)

(a)

L. a. arthemis

Page 2 of 3

L. a. astyanax

L. a. arizonensis

Reversion hypothesis

L. a. arthemis

L. a. astyanax

L. a. arizonensis

Monophyletic mimic hypothesis

Figure 1. Two contrasting hypotheses of mimicry evolution in the Limenitis arthemis species complex. (a) According to the reversion
hypothesis, mimetic L. a. astyanax is sister to non-mimetic L. a. arthemis. Under this hypothesis, the mimetic phenotype arose in the common
ancestor to all L. arthemis and was subsequently lost in the L. a. arthemis lineage. (b) In contrast, the monophyletic mimic hypothesis predicts that
the mimetic lineages L. a. astyanax and L. a. arizonensis are most closely related to each other and Batesian mimicry evolved only in the stem group
of these two subspecies. Recent phylogenetic hypothesis testing [9] provided evidence in favor of the reversion hypothesis. Figure modified from [9].

little general significance, were it not for the fact that
evidence for a reversion from a mimetic to an ancestral
phenotype is extremely rare so far [2].

Phylogenetic hypothesis testing allows for new
insights
In a study recently published in BMC Evolutionary
Biology, Oliver and Prudic [9] now revisit the case. They
use sequence information from eight nuclear loci com­
bined with coalescent simulation of gene trees to evaluate
a range of models of population structure and evolu­
tionary history. By using multiple loci they compensate,
at least partially, for the problem of gene-tree/speciestree discrepancies. The main difference from earlier
approaches, however, is that Oliver and Prudic use
sophisticated statistical models to measure how well their
simulations fit the empirical data. Parameters for these
15 models were estimated divergence times (for species
evolution) and migration rates (for population structure),
taken from earlier studies of the same species. The
advantage of this approach is that explicit models for
contrasting evolutionary scenarios are compared with
each other. Hence, inference is based on rigorous
statistical tests of explicitly formulated alternatives.
Oliver and Prudic found that the MMH had to be
rejected: the only model that fitted the data in all aspects
was a scenario that assumes moderate migration rate of
the butterflies plus divergence times of about 655,000
years for the split of arthemis from astyanax, and

1,075,000 years for the split of the western arizonensis
from the eastern (arthemis + astyanax) clade.
Is this the end of the story? Certainly not. First, even if
monophyly of the two mimetic forms now seems to be
rejected with good support, this is not yet firm evidence
for a reversion of the ancestral phenotype from the
mimetic one. Two independent gains of Batesian mimicry
in astyanax and arizonensis could still have occurred,
while arthemis just retained the plesiomorphic character
state. This scenario would require two steps in character
evolution - exactly the same number as one gain of
mimicry at the base of the arthemis complex, and one loss
subsequently at the split between arthemis and astyanax.
To decide conclusively between these compet­ng scenarios
i
a better understanding of the genetic basis and physio­
logical processes that determine the two different pheno­
types in the L. arthemis group will be required. While
prima facie butterfly wing patterns might be seen as
complex characters, with a low likelihood of convergent
evolution, in fact most cases of butterfly mimicry are based
on increased melanism. Major ‘macro-evolutionary’
changes in wing color patterns could thus be controlled by
very few genes, or even one single major developmental
gene [10,11]. In that case, convergent evo­ution of similar
l
melanic (and at the same time mimetic) phenotypes
remains a plausible alternative. One obvious approach to a
better understanding is therefore to unravel the develop­
mental pathways that lead to mimetic phenotypes and
their genetic basis, by genomic analysis, for example [11].

Fiedler BMC Biology 2010, 8:122
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/122

Second, the phylogenetic and statistical analyses of
Oliver and Prudic are not immune to criticism. The
sample sizes for some genes were very small. To obtain a
more comprehensive picture of the history of Limenitis
phenotypes in North America, including possibly
complex patterns of gene flow, a thorough phylogeo­
graphic study would be required, using a larger number
of populations from the entire range of the complex, a
larger number of genetic markers, and incorporating the
allied species L. weidemeyerii and lorquini with a larger
number of samples. That last requirement seems impor­
tant, as hybrids between arthemis and these two relatives
do occur. If introgression between species and subspecies
has been a significant phenomenon in the phylogeo­
graphic history of North American white admirals, it will
have left traces in the genetic architecture as well as in
the phenotypes of L. arthemis - which would be likely to
go unnoticed in too small samples.
This new study on the evolution of mimicry in butter­
flies exemplifies the fact that, even in putatively wellstudied cases, many questions about evolutionary
processes remain to be settled. The application of phylo­
genetic hypothesis testing allows a great step forward as
it provides measures of support that can be compared
across competing scenarios. As with all statistical models,
the problem of parameterization remains. Even for
parameters such as divergence times and migration rates,
empirical estimates are often unrealistic - for example, in
the absence of fossil evidence for calibration or when
information on a species’ population biology is scant.
Nevertheless, with increasing availability of computing
facilities and pertinent software the lesson to be learned
is that explicit comparison across competing phylo­
genetic hypotheses is now one, among many, approaches
to unraveling the evolution and function of the
fascinating diversity of butterfly wing patterns.
Acknowledgements
I thank Birgit Schlick-Steiner, Florian Steiner, Florian Bodner, Martin Wiemers
and Patrick Strutzenberger for their thoughtful comments on the manuscript.

Page 3 of 3

Published: 15 September 2010
References
1.	 Mallet J, Joron M: Evolution of diversity in warning color and mimicry:
polymorphisms, shifting balance, and speciation. Annu Rev Ecol Syst 1999,
30:201-233.
2.	 Harper GR, Pfennig DW: Selection overrides gene flow to break down
maladaptive mimicry. Nature 2008, 451:1103-1106.
3.	 Ruxton GD, Sherratt TN, Speed MP: Avoiding Attack: The Evolutionary Ecology
of Crypsis, Warning Signals and Mimicry. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press;
2004.
4.	 Ritland DB: Comparative unpalatability of mimetic viceroy butterflies
(Limenitis archippus) from four south-eastern United States populations.
Oecologia 1995, 103:327-336.
5.	 Platt AP, Coppinger RP, Brower LP: Demonstration of the selective
advantage of mimetic Limenitis butterflies presented to caged avian
predators. Evolution 1971, 25:692-701.
6.	 Mullen SP: Wing pattern evolution and the origins of mimicry among
North American admiral butterflies (Nymphalidae: Limenitis).
Mol Phylogenet Evol 2006, 39:747-758.
7.	 Savage WK, Mullen SP: A single origin of Batesian mimicry among
hybridizing populations of admiral butterflies (Limenitis arthemis) rejects
an evolutionary reversion to the ancestral phenotype. Proc Biol Sci 2009,
276:2557-2565.
8.	 Prudic KL, Oliver JC: Once a Batesian mimic, not always a Batesian mimic:
mimic reverts back to ancestral phenotype when model is absent. Proc Biol
Sci 2008, 275:1125-1132.
9.	 Oliver JC, Prudic KL: Are mimics monophyletic? The necessity of
phylogenetic hypothesis tests in character evolution. BMC Evol Biol 2010,
10:239.
10.	 ffrench-Constant R, Koch PB: Mimicry and melanism in swallowtail
butterflies: toward a molecular understanding. In Butterflies: Ecology And
Evolution Taking Flight. Edited by Boggs CL, Watt WB, Ehrlich PR. Chicago:
Chicago University Press; 2003: 259-279.
11.	 Ferguson L, Lee SF, Chamberlain N, Nadeau N, Joron M, Baxter S, Wilkinson P,
Papanicolaou A, Kumar , Kee T-J, Clark R, Davidson C, Glithero R, Beasley H,
Vogel H, ffrench-Constant R, Jiggins C: Characterization of a hotspot for
mimicry: assembly of a butterfly wing transcriptome to genomic
sequence at the HmYb/Sb locus. Mol Ecol 2010, 19 (Suppl 1):240-254.

doi:10.1186/1741-7007-8-122
Cite this article as: Fiedler K: The coming and going of Batesian mimicry in
a Holarctic butterfly clade. BMC Biology 2010, 8:122.

</pre>
</body>
</html>
