<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Permian ginkgophyte fossils from the Dolomites resemble extant O-ha-tsuki aberrant leaf-like fructifications of Ginkgo biloba L</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:337. doi:10.1186/1471-2148-10-337"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Thilo C Fischer"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Permian ginkgophyte fossils from the Dolomites
resemble extant O-ha-tsuki aberrant leaf-like
fructifications of Ginkgo biloba L
Fischer et al.
Fischer et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:337
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/337 (3 November 2010)

Fischer et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:337
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/337

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Permian ginkgophyte fossils from the Dolomites
resemble extant O-ha-tsuki aberrant leaf-like
fructifications of Ginkgo biloba L
Thilo C Fischer1*, Barbara Meller2, Evelyn Kustatscher3, Rainer Butzmann4*

Abstract
Background: Structural elucidation and analysis of fructifications of plants is fundamental for understanding their
evolution. In case of Ginkgo biloba, attention was drawn by Fujii in 1896 to aberrant fructifications of Ginkgo biloba
whose seeds are attached to leaves, called O-ha-tsuki in Japan. This well-known phenomenon was now interpreted
by Fujii as being homologous to ancestral sporophylls. The common fructification of Ginkgo biloba consists of 1-2
(rarely more) ovules on a dichotomously divided stalk, the ovules on top of short stalklets, with collars supporting
the ovules. There is essentially no disagreement that either the whole stalk with its stalklets, collars and ovules is
homologous to a sporophyll, or, alternatively, just one stalklet, collar and ovule each correspond to a sporophyll.
For the transition of an ancestral sporophyll resembling extant O-ha-tsuki aberrant leaves into the common
fructification with stalklet/collar/ovule, evolutionary reduction of the leaf lamina of such ancestral sporophylls has to
be assumed. Furthermore, such ancestral sporophylls would be expected in the fossil record of ginkgophytes.
Results: From the Upper Permian of the Bletterbach gorge (Dolomites, South Tyrol, Italy) ginkgophyte leaves of
the genus Sphenobaiera were discovered. Among several specimens, one shows putatively attached seeds, while
other specimens, depending on their state of preservation, show seeds in positions strongly suggesting such
attachment. Morphology and results of a cuticular analysis are in agreement with an affiliation of the fossil to the
ginkgophytes and the cuticle of the seed is comparable to that of Triassic and Jurassic ones and to those of extant
Ginkgo biloba. The Sphenobaiera leaves with putatively attached seeds closely resemble seed-bearing O-ha-tsuki
leaves of extant Ginkgo biloba. This leads to the hypothesis that, at least for some groups of ginkgophytes
represented by extant Ginkgo biloba, such sporophylls represent the ancestral state of fructifications.
Conclusions: Some evidence is provided for the existence of ancestral laminar ginkgophyte sporophylls.
Homology of the newly found fossil ginkgophyte fructifications with the aberrant O-ha-tsuki fructifications of
Ginkgo biloba is proposed. This would support the interpretation of the apical part of the common Ginkgo biloba
fructification (stalklet/collar/ovule) as a sporophyll with reduced leaf lamina.

Background
In 1869 Van Tieghem [1] provided a first interpretation
of the female organs of Ginkgo biloba (figure 1) in his
work on comparative anatomy of fructifications. In his
view the whole stalk, cupule and ovule are homologous
to a sporophyll. Later (1896), Fujii [2] provided a
* Correspondence: thilo.fischer@biologie.uni-muenchen.de; rbutzmann@tonline.de
1
Department Biology I, Biocenter Botany, Ludwig-Maximilians-University
Munich, Großhadernerstrasse 2-4, D-82152 Planegg-Martinsried, Germany
4
Fuggerstrasse 8, D-81373 München, Germany
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

scientific description of the long-known Ginkgo biloba
O-ha-tsuki leaves with seeds (figure 2-1, 2-2: female, 24: male counterpart). Based on the rare presence of an
axillary bud in multi-ovulate forms of the fructification
(figure 2-3), the basal part of the stalk was interpreted
by him as being shoot-derived. The stalklet, collar and
ovule would correspond to petiole, reduced lamina and
ovule of a sporophyll. Other opinions, mainly the interpretation as a two-flowered inflorescence (Strasburger),
are also summarized and cited in Fujii [2]. Wettstein
[3], Sakisaka [4] and others (cited therein) essentially
agreed with Fujii’s view and extended the argumentation

© 2010 Fischer et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Fischer et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:337
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/337

Figure 1 Fertile shoot of female Ginkgo biloba. The common
female fructification of Ginkgo biloba is a brachyblast (spur shoot)
with sterile leaves (trophophylls) and ovules on stalks, the latter
either being interpreted as structures derived from sporophylls, or
as shoots, or as organs composed of both.

by considering also the vascularisation of the organs.
Vegetative leaves of Ginkgo biloba have two vascular
bundles at the petiole base, whereas the stalk of the
common fructification with two ovules has four (or correspondingly more in the rare forms with multiple
ovules). O-ha-tsuki leaves possess two bundles, like
vegetative leaves. This provides further evidence to
homologise them only with the stalklet/collar/ovule distal part of the common Ginkgo biloba fructification.
Van Tieghem’s view, in contrast, that the whole female
organs are homologous to a sporophyll could be supported by interpreting the rare axillary bud as an ectopic
development of a meristem, but the vascular system of
the stalk with four bundles could hardly be explained.
However, the O-ha-tsuki form was also interpreted only
as a case of retroconvergent morphology, arguing with
the absence of fossil occurrences of “leafy ovuliphores”
in the Mesozoic [5].
Fossil ginkgophyte fructifications are rare in the fossil
record [6]. Most closely related to Ginkgo biloba are
ovulate structures attached to brachyblasts (spur shoots)
carrying also Ginkgo-like vegetative leaves (or associations of both in the fossiliferous sediments) from the
Mesozoic and Cenozoic: Ginkgo yimaensis (Jurassic) [7],
Ginkgo apodes (Late Jurassic to Early Cretaceous) [8],
and Ginkgo adiantoides leaves/Ginkgo geissertii ovule
(Cenozoic) [9,10]. Nehvizdyella bipartita (Late Cretaceous) [11] has similar fructifications, but non-divided
leaves. The fossil taxa affiliated to Ginkgo can be
ordered in an evolutionary series with successive reduction of individual stalks, number of ovules and accompanying increase in the size of ovules and in the width of

Page 3 of 17

the leaf segments, reflecting also ontogenetic sequences
in Ginkgo biloba [12]. Palaeozoic fructifications of ginkgophytes are also known, but much more difficult to
interpret. Trichopitys heteromorpha from the Lower Permian [13] is the oldest generally accepted ginkgophyte
[[14], and other authors]. It consists of axes carrying
dichotomous, non-laminar leaves with zones of dividing
stalks with terminal ovules which are possibly recurved.
Karkenia is a genus with multi-ovulate axes or multiovulate globular fructifications; the first species (associated with Ginkgoites tigrensis leaves) was described by
Archangelsky from the Lower Cretaceous of Patagonia
[15]. Another well known member is the Liassic Karkenia hauptmannii, represented by brachyblasts with globular fructifications and Sphenobaiera leaves [16]. Avatia
bifurcata and Hamshawvia longipedunculata from the
Triassic of South Africa [17] also possess globular
multi-ovulate fructifications (on dichotomous stalks).
Hamshawvia fructifications are found attached to brachyblasts with Sphenobaiera vegetative leaves.
Recently, Naugolnykh [18] has reviewed “foliar” seedbearing organs of Paleozoic ginkgophytes. Some of the
taxa he included in the ginkgophytes, e.g., Arberia, have
been interpreted differently i.e. as glossopterid [14].
Taxa that can be accepted as ginkgophyte seed-bearing
organs clearly have a dichotomous structure like Trichopitys, Karkenia, Toretzia, and Grenana. These genera
show stalks carrying ovules. If accepted as being homologous to leaves (sporophylls), these either would represent non-laminar leaves, or, alternatively, the laminar
part would have been already reduced. The latter possibility led Naugolnykh to suppose “pre-karkeniaceous”
ancestors of ginkgophytes.
Here we report on Permian laminar ginkgophyte
leaves with putatively attached seeds.

Results
Description of the fossils from the Upper Permian of the
Dolomites and comparison with ginkgophyte characters
Morphology

Numerous specimens of vegetative Sphenobaiera leaves
(wedge-shaped, without petiole) were discovered from a
lens of fossiliferous argillaceous siltstone to fine-grained
sandstone at the Upper Permian Bletterbach locality
[19]. Among these, some specimens were identified
where also seeds are preserved (the described specimens
are called “seeds”, even if “ovules” is often used for ginkgophyte seeds). Figure 3 and 4 illustrate a specimen of a
wedge-shaped, dichotomously divided leaf with all characteristics of the genus Sphenobaiera, but with two seemingly attached seeds. Especially in the case of the
larger seed, which is in a lateral position at the leaf margin, the organic connection to the leaf segment is
assumed. There is no basal collar-like structure in the

Fischer et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:337
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/337

Page 4 of 17

Figure 2 Historical figure by Fujii (1896) on the O-ha-tsuki phenomenon of Ginkgo biloba. Plate from Fujii (1896) demonstrating rare female
O-ha-tsuki ("seed at leaf”) type aberration of Ginkgo biloba fructifications (1-1: whole fertile brachyblast, 1-2: single ovule at leaf, its male analogue
(1-4), and a rare multi-ovulate fructification with a bud (1-3)).

Fischer et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:337
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/337

Page 5 of 17

Figure 3 Ginkgophyte leaf with putatively attached seeds from the Upper Permian of the Bletterbach (Dolomites). Morphology of the
specimen (inventory number PAL-1368), drawing of it performed with binocular control. Evident structures drawn as lines, supposed structural
outline as dotted lines. Scale bar 10 mm.

Fischer et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:337
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/337

Figure 4 Ginkgophyte leaf with putatively attached seeds from
the Upper Permian of the Bletterbach (Dolomites), detail. Detail
of PAL-1368 at the assumed attachment site of the seed. Scale bar
10 mm.

fossil like at extant Ginkgo biloba ovules or like the irregular basal swellings in the O-ha-tsuki form. This type
of fossil seeds occurred only on some of the approximately one hundred blocks of sediments from the Bletterbach collection with Sphenobaiera leaves, in close
association in each case to such leaves, and not randomly on other blocks of sediment with various plant
fossils. None of this type of seed showed a stalk or
remains of such.
Cuticular structures

Cuticles were prepared from the leaf lamina region of
the counterpart of the first specimen (figure 3).
The abaxial cuticle of the leaf (figure 5) is formed by
cells of different shapes and sizes: polygonal, rectangular, isodiametric and elongated ((15-)25-75(-100 μm))
which are partly arranged in irregular rows. One longitudinal band with two rows of elongated cells is visible
in the middle of the figure, probably representing the
costal area of a vein; the cells bear small papillae. Two
other bands at the right and left margin are less distinct
but may represent additional costal areas. Anticlinal
walls (this is the cell outline on the prepared cuticles)
are straight, sometimes slightly curved. Stomatal complexes are not all well preserved. They are arranged in
bands (putative intercostal regions) and are surrounded
by more polygonal-isodiametric cells. The stomatal complexes are about 50-60 μm in diameter, rarely up to 90
μm. The 4-6 subsidiary cells (figure 5, 6a) have small
marginal papillae almost covering the stomatal pit.
Guard cells are rarely recognizable. Similar cuticle characteristics have been found for other fossil ginkgophytes
[7,9,20] - [23]. Under the scanning electron microscope
(SEM), the outside of the abaxial cuticle appears to be
nearly smooth (figure 6c). The papillae are visible as flat

Page 6 of 17

bulges. The inner side not always distinctly displays the
anticlinal walls, but stomata are clearly recognizable (figure 6b, d). The adaxial cuticle of the leaf shows only few
preserved rectangular anticlinal walls with the light
microscope (LM) (not figured) and indistinct anticlinal
walls with the SEM. Also one stomatal complex is visible with the SEM (figure 7a, b).
The cuticle of the seed (figure 8a-f) shows small cells
with mainly straight, rarely slightly curved anticlinal
walls. They are of polygonal shape, irregularly arranged
and without papillae. The cell diameter varies from
(14-)25 to 55 μm, rarely up to 70 μm. The stomatal
complexes with the subsidiary cells are 60 to 95 μm in
diameter. The 5-6 subsidiary cells of mainly trapezoid
shape (diameters about 14-39 μm) are distinctly thickened at the inner margin reducing, thus, the stomatal
pit (figure 8a, b). Details of the guard-cells are rarely
visible (figure 8b). Other circular to elliptical pits, about
30-35 μm in diameter, which are also enclosed by six
cells but are not thickened, are idioblasts (figure 8d).
The shown outside surface of the seed cuticle (figure 8f)
is almost smooth with at least one stomatal complex
with weakly developed papillae and two tubes, which
might derive from the wax layer.
Comparison to cuticles of other ginkgophytes

Cuticles of extant Ginkgo biloba (O-ha-tsuki form)
The abaxial cuticle of the extant O-ha-tsuki leaf of
Ginkgo biloba (figure 9a-d) shows the distinct pattern
typical of Ginkgo leaves: narrow costal rows without stomata and broader areas in between (intercostal fields)
with numerous stomata. The narrow costal fields are
100-125 μm wide and consist of three to five rows of
longitudinal, mostly rectangular cells. The anticlinal
walls are indistinct but seem to be straight to very
slightly undulating. Papillae occur not on every cell, but
often. The intercostal areas are much broader than the
costal areas, at least 200 μm or more. Numerous stomata are randomly oriented and are irregularly distributed as well as the papillae. The anticlinal walls between
the stomata are indistinct, but mainly straight or curved.
The stomata are enclosed by 5-6 (-7) subsidiary cells
with prominent marginal papillae; sometimes the papillae are less strong or not observable. The stomata are
elongated, their pores do not exceed 40 μm in length,
and the inner walls of the guard-cells are slightly thickened in the middle part. The aperture is about 20-25
μm. The outside surface of the whole abaxial cuticle
shows a fine granulated structure.
The adaxial cuticle of the leaf (figure 10a, b) is very
thin and without or almost devoid of stomata and papillae. The cuticle consists of narrow rows of mainly rectangular to narrow elongated cells (about 90 μm long
and 35 mm wide) (costal areas) and broader areas
(intercostal areas) with wider cells of rectangle elongated

Fischer et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:337
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/337

Page 7 of 17

Figure 5 Abaxial cuticle prepared from the leaf lamina region of ginkgophyte leaf with putatively attached seeds. Abaxial cuticle
prepared from the leaf lamina region of the specimen PAL-1368. The arrows point to stomatal complexes. Scale bar 100 μm.

shape (about 70 μm long and 35 μm wide). The anticlinal walls are mainly undulating.
The cuticle of the O-ha-tsuki ovule epidermis (figure
11a-f) consists of isodiametric and polygonal to rectangular cells, which are irregularly arranged. The anticlinal
walls are straight to curved. Papillae have not been
observed with the LM. The cell diameter varies from 25
to 45 μm. The stomatal complex is built by 5-6 subsidiary cells and two small guard cells. The subsidiary cells
are partly irregular in shape and up to 60 μm in diameter; their periclinal walls sometimes seem striate
(LM), the inner anticlinal walls are distinctly thickened.
The stomata are about 20-25 μm long. Idioblasts are

also regularly observable. The outside surface of the
ovule cuticle is mainly smooth, but some papillae surrounding a putative stomatal pore are observable (figure
11 f: SEM).
Further specimens of Sphenobaiera leaves associated with
seeds from the Bletterbach

A second specimen of a Sphenobaiera leaf which shows
putatively attached seeds is shown in figure 12. This leaf
has multiple segments and three seeds are preserved in
positions apical to the respective leaf segments. In total,
seven specimens of Sphenobaiera leaves with putatively
attached or associated seeds have been found at the
Bletterbach locality (others not shown) where at least

Fischer et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:337
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/337

Page 8 of 17

Figure 6 Details of abaxial cuticles prepared from the leaf lamina region of ginkgophyte leaf with putatively attached seeds. a:
Stomatal complexes of figure 5in detail. Scale bar 100 μm. b: Inner side of the abaxial cuticle of the lamina; at the right margin the surface of
the outside is also visible (detail in figure 6 c) (SEM). Scale bar 100 μm. c: The nearly smooth outside of the abaxial leaf cuticle with papillae,
indicating a stoma slit. The whitish spots on the surface probably derive from the wax layer (SEM). Scale bar 50 μm. d: Inner side of the abaxial
leaf cuticle with two stomata (SEM). Scale bar 50 μm.

the position of the seeds suggests the attachment to the
leaves, but the individual preservation does not allow
proving organic connection in these cases.

Discussion
The systematic position of the leaves with putatively
attached seeds from the Bletterbach could principally be
supposed among the cycads, the pteridosperms, or the
ginkgophytes. Cycadophytes, however, are characterized
by pinnately (or rarely bipinnately) compound leaves,
most unlike the Bletterbach fossils. Among pteridosperms the character of interest “leaf-borne seeds” is

found, but leaflets are mostly not dichotomous. There
are Y-shaped fronds which, in case of forms with entire
margin (non-pinnate) like the Triassic Dicoidium dutoitii, show similarity in gross morphology ([14], figure
15.20) to once-dichotomous leaves like PAL-1368, but
not to the multiple-dichotomous forms of Sphenobaiera
from the Bletterbach (figure 12). Most importantly,
these leaves possess central veins (the rachis). In contrast,
in well preserved Sphenobaiera specimens from the Bletterbach dichotomous/parallel venation can be observed;
and a prominent midvein should be observable in
PAL-1368 but is absent. The Permian pteridosperm

Fischer et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:337
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/337

Page 9 of 17

Figure 7 Details of adaxial cuticles prepared from the leaf lamina region of ginkgophyte leaf with putatively attached seeds. a: Inner
side of adaxial cuticle of the lamina (SEM). Scale bar 50 μm. b: Outside of the adaxial cuticle of the lamina with one stoma, surrounded by
papillae (SEM). Scale bar 20 μm.

Dichophyllum flabellifera ([14], figure 15.57) possesses
divided pinnules similar to Sphenobaiera leaves, but pinnules are tongue-shaped and have midveins. Based on
the described morphology an affiliation of PAL-1368 to
the pteridosperms can be excluded. The leaves with putatively attached seeds can be identified as belonging to the
ginkgophyte genus Sphenobaiera.

The results of the cuticle studies on PAL-1368 also
support the ginkgophyte origin of the fossil leaf and
seed. The differences of leaf and seed cuticles are comparable to these differences in modern Ginkgo biloba or
its O-ha-tsuki form. The cuticle structures of the fossil
seed and those of extant O-ha-tsuki ovules show similar
isodiametric to rectangular cell shapes and idioblasts in

Fischer et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:337
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/337

Page 10 of 17

Figure 8 Details of cuticle prepared from the seed of ginkgophyte leaf with putatively attached seeds. a: Cuticle prepared from the seed
of the specimen with several stomatal complexes and idioblasts. Scale bar 100 μm. b: Seed cuticle with stomatal complexes in detail; the lower
one shows also the guard-cells. In the upper part of the picture two idioblasts are shown in detail. Scale bar 100 μm. c: Inner side of the seed
cuticle (SEM). Scale bar 100 μm. d: Detail of figure 8 c showing an idioblast (SEM). Scale bar 50 μm. e: Detail of figure 8 c showing one stomatal
complex. Scale bar 50 μm. f: Outside of the cuticle with two tubes (arrows) and at least one stomatal complex with very weakly developed
papillae. Scale bar 100 μm.

Fischer et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:337
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/337

Page 11 of 17

Figure 9 Abaxial cuticles of the O-ha-tsuki leaf of Ginkgo biloba. a: Abaxial cuticle of the lamina with two costal rows without stomata and
two intercostal areas with numerous stomatal complexes (inventory number Herbarium BOZ PVASC15174). Scale bar 100 μm. b: Detail of the
abaxial cuticle of the lamina. Note the variable thickening and cutinization of the papillae of the subsidiary cells. Scale bar 100 μm. c: Outside of
the abaxial cuticle of the lamina with numerous stomatal complexes, which are variable in the numbers and shape of the papillae (SEM). Scale
bar 100 μm. d: Inner side of the abaxial cuticle of the lamina with several stomatal complexes (SEM). Scale bar 100 μm.

both cases, which may represent aborted stomata, trichome bases or glands. For Ginkgo biloba leaves Florin
[24] mentions the rare occurrence of trichomes. With
the SEM it is visible, that the cuticle is covered with
wax. The indistinct parts of the LM pictures are caused
by that. Two tubular structures (SEM) assumed to consist of wax were observed, this has also been described
for Ginkgo biloba and other gymnosperms [25]. In

contrast to the impression from the LM picture, the stomata are also surrounded by papillae on the surface.
The fossil seed cuticle differs from the extant one only
by the distinctly thicker anticlinal walls and the thickened subsidiary cells.
Cuticle structures especially of Permian Sphenobaiera
leaves have only been described by Florin [24] from the
Lower Permian of France (Sphenobaiera raymondi) and

Fischer et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:337
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/337

Figure 10 Adaxial cuticles of the O-ha-tsuki leaf of Ginkgo
biloba. a: The adaxial thin cuticle of the lamina. Scale bar 100 μm.
b: Outside of the adaxial cuticle of the lamina with one costal area
and two intercostal areas. The pit in the centre of the picture might
indicate a stoma (SEM). Scale bar 100 μm.

by Schweitzer [26] from the Upper Permian of Germany
(Sphenobaiera digitata). The cuticle of the Sphenobaiera
raymondi specimen is not well preserved. It seems to be
composed mainly of isodiametric cells instead of longitudinal ones, possesses straight cell walls, and stomatal
complexes are specified as haplocheilic with narrowing
of the stomatal pore. Sphenobaiera digitata cuticles are
described as amphistomatic, with a cuticle showing
longitudinally oriented cells, rows of stomata towards
the center of the lamina and less regular cells and stomata distribution towards the margin. Papillae are present only on subsidiary cells. Stomatal complexes are
described as dicyclic, but seem to be mainly monocyclic
as is shown in the drawing given in [26].
Fossil ginkgophyte leaves are often amphistomatic
with rare stomata in the adaxial cuticle, but hypostomatic leaves have also been described [24] and have
been found also among common Ginkgo biloba leaves

Page 12 of 17

as well as varying stomata abundances in apical and
basal leaf parts. Furthermore, stomata index for Ginkgo
biloba was reported to be inversely correlated with CO2
concentration [27]. Varying stomata abundance is also
described for a fossil ginkgophyte [28]. Hypostomatic
ginkgophyte leaves are represented by a Sphenobaiera
species from the Triassic Molteno Formation in South
Africa [[23], p. 133] and by Baiera cf. furcata from the
Middle Jurassic of China [29]. From the Jurassic Yorkshire Flora [21]Sphenobaiera ophioglossum shows similar
cuticle structures (cell types of costal and intercostal
fields, stomatal complexes, presence of papillae) [[21],
figure 17 D], but is designated as the adaxial cuticle.
The abaxial cuticle of Sphenobaiera schenckii from the
Triassic of South Africa [23] is seemingly identical, but
its adaxial cuticle shows abundant stomatal complexes
(not present in the adaxial cuticle of the Bletterbach
specimen). Several Sphenobaiera leaves from the Bletterbach have to be studied in future for detailed taxonomic
comparisons and specific identification of these leaves.
With respect to the cuticle of the fossil seed depicted
here, the cells of the outer cuticle of the integument of
Ginkgo yimaensis ovules [7, plate 3, figure four] are very
similar and the description also concurs. One distinct
difference is the size of the stomatal complex, which is
much larger (150-175 × 7.5-17.5 (-35) μm) and less circular than in the specimen from Bletterbach. The cuticle
of the outer integument of the ovules, described for
Yimaia recurva (associated with leaves of Baiera hallei)
[30] differs by the rounded corners of the cells, the larger stomatal complexes and the unspecialized subsidiary
cells. The cuticle of the Jurassic ovule Yimaia qinghaiensis [31] closely resembles that of the seed from the Bletterbach with respect to its general reticulate structure
formed by irregular-polygonal and irregularly arranged
cells, the absence of papillae on these cells, and its scattered stomatal complexes; even if any of these characters
is not uncommon among gymnosperms. The Cretaceous
ovuliferous organ Nehvizdyella bipartita [11] possesses
the same cuticular characteristics as the Jurassic
ovule Yimaia qinghaiensis and as the cuticle of the
Sphenobaiera seed from Bletterbach. Ginkgo ginkgoidea
(Tralau) Yang, Friis et Zhou [31] from the Jurassic of
Sweden shows also alike cuticle structures.
Ontogenetic developmental aberrations can resemble
primitive phylogenetic states of organs, commonly called
“atavisms”. Ideally, the aberrant character closely resembles the primitive character, which can either be known by
the fossil record of the group, or by identification of the
primitive state of the character by comparison with living
representatives of sister groups and outgroups for the
clade. For the aberrant O-ha-tsuki leaves of Ginkgo biloba
the underlying genetics is completely unknown. An alternative interpretation of the phenomenon to atavism would

Fischer et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:337
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/337

Page 13 of 17

Figure 11 Cuticles of the O-ha-tsuki ovule of Ginkgo biloba. a: Overview of the ovule cuticle with some stomatal complexes. Scale bar 100
μm. b: Two stomatal complexes next to each other in detail and one star-like idioblast above the scale bar. Scale bar 100 μm. c: Inner side of
the ovule cuticle with some idioblasts and stomatal complexes (SEM). Scale bar 100 μm. d: An idioblast in detail (SEM). Scale bar 50 μm. e: One
stomatal complex (SEM). Scale bar 100 μm. f: Outside of the ovule cuticle with papillae. Some are arranged around pits, indicating stomata
(SEM). Scale bar 100 μm.

Fischer et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:337
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/337

Page 14 of 17

Figure 12 Second specimen of a ginkgophyte leaf with putatively attached ovules from the Upper Permian of the Bletterbach.
Morphology of the specimen and drawing (inventory number PAL-1369). The specimen is preserved within a sediment layer with several plant
remains. Scale bar 10 mm.

be its description as a case of ectopic organ development,
which offers no mechanistic explanation. Rothwell
expected fossil occurrence of ginkgophyte brachyblasts
(spur shoots) with sporophylls like the O-ha-tsuki leaves
[[32], p.101]. Anderson and Anderson [17] also led attention to such “anomalous strobili with leafy expansions” (=
O-ha-tsuki form) of Ginkgo biloba comparing them with

their Triassic Avatia bifurcata fructification, even without
a distinct laminar structure of the considered fossil. However, it can not be excluded that these Triassic fructifications represent rare aberrant forms.
Sphenobaiera represents a heterogeneous group of leaf
fossils with wide stratigraphical distribution. The leaf
morphogenus comprises dichotomous and wedge-shaped

Fischer et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:337
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/337

Page 15 of 17

Zhou and Zheng [12] suggested an evolutionary
scheme starting with Jurassic Ginkgo yimaensis with
multiple small ovules and multiple divided vegetative
leaves, subsequent reduction of ovule number and number of leaf segments in Cretaceous Ginkgo apodes and
Cainozoic Ginkgo adiantoides, ending with Ginkgo
biloba with predominantly only one ovule per stalk and
bilobate to undivided vegetative leaves (“reduction
hypothesis”, “peramorphosis”). Given that the interpretation of the presented Permian fossils from Bletterbach
as sporophylls is correct; these would represent an
ancestral state of female ginkgophyte sporophylls before
reduction of the sporophyll lamina had taken place, predating the reconstructed evolutionary series.

Conclusions
The Sphenobaiera fossils with seemingly attached seeds
from the Upper Permian of the Bletterbach are hypothetically interpreted as ancestral ginkgophyte sporophylls
with laminar structure, as would be expected from aberrant O-ha-tsuki leaves with seeds of extant Ginkgo
biloba. A formal description or affiliation of the fossils
at the species level will be provided together with the
one for the numerous vegetative Sphenobaiera leaves
and with the other floral elements. Ongoing excavations
at the Bletterbach locality, at other Permian localities,
but also screening of museum collections could provide
more and possibly better preserved ginkgophyte leaves
with ovules/seeds. Especially specimens with completely
preserved vascular systems would be highly desirable for
comparison with vegetative and fertile organs of extant
Ginkgo biloba.
Methods
Figure 13 O-ha-tsuki leaf of Ginkgo biloba with well developed
ovule. Courtesy H Okada (inventory number Herbarium BOZ
PVASC15174).

leaves, which do not possess a petiole like extant Ginkgo
and the fossil leaf morphogenera Ginkgo, Baiera and
Ginkgoites. Most species of Sphenobaiera are thought to
represent ginkgophytes [14].
The Sphenobaiera leaves with putatively attached
seeds described here from the Bletterbach locality could
possibly represent cases of ectopic organ development,
present for an unknown reason. However, this seems
unlikely since rare aberrations would not be expected in
smaller collections of fossils. The specimen PAL-1368
reveals striking similarity especially with O-ha-tsuki
leaves with few or only one well developed ovule (figure
13). O-ha-tsuki leaves with multiple ovule formation
often only show malformed ovules.

Excavation of the fossils and deposition

The fossils were recovered during excavations in the
years 2003-2009. The figured specimens are kept in the
palaeontological collection of the Museum of Nature
South Tyrol (Bozen/Bolzano, figure three: no. PAL1368, figure twelve: no. PAL-1369).
Cuticular analysis

Small pieces of organic material were removed from the
fossil with a scalpel, rinsed in water and treated with a
drop of 10% HF until all sediment particles were dissolved. The material was rinsed in water and incubated
in conc. HNO3 with KClO3 (Schulze’s Reagent) until the
organic material became transparent. The material was
rinsed with water, briefly treated with 5% KOH, rinsed
with water, and transferred into glycerol for study and
storage. The samples of the O-ha-tsuki leaf and seed
were taken from one specimen, from the middle part of
the lower and upper half of the leaf and seed and
directly put into Schulze’s Reagent. One piece was

Fischer et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:337
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/337

studied with the LM, the other with the SEM. The Oha-tsuki leaf sample for the LM has been stained with
safranin. The cuticles were studied with a Nikon eclipse
80i light microscope (LM), the pictures had been taken
with a Samsung digimax V70. For the scanning electron
microscope FEI (SEM), the macerated wet cuticles were
transferred to the SEM-stub with a carbon adhesive
tape, where they dried. One piece of the fossil leaf cuticle (slide one) was removed from the glycerol, washed
with water and ethanol and then picked onto carbon
tape on the SEM-stub. During the drying process a
rather distinct shrinkage of the cuticles has been
observed, which results in partly smaller cell sizes of the
SEM cuticles. Both, fossil and extant leaf cuticles are
very thin and fragile; the cuticles of the seeds are thick.
These thick cuticles tended to roll in and a strong
mechanical pressure was necessary to get a nearly flat
cuticle. The pictures were slightly adjusted with Adobe
Photoshop 7.0 in brightness, contrast and frame.
Drawing of fossils

Drawings of fossils were performed using a binocular to
discriminate biological structures from those produced
by local destruction.
O-ha-tsuki specimens

The specimens have been conserved in aqueous formaldehyde solution and are kept in the Herbarium of the
Museum of Nature South Tyrol BOZ (PVASC15174).
Acknowledgements
The country South Tyrol is acknowledged for financial support for the
excavations, the staff of the GeoCenter Aldein (Maria Pichler, Herta
Obertegger, Christian Weber) for organizational support, and family Kalser
(Aldein, South Tyrol) for their kind hospitality during our visits. Hiroshi Okada
(Botanical Gardens, Osaka City University), the temple Mito Hachimanguu
and Yoshiko Mashiko (Ibaraki-ken, Japan), Wolfgang Schwarz (Technische
Universität München) and Josef Bogner (Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität
München) are acknowledged for providing samples of O-ha-tsuki plant
material or for their help to do so. We are grateful to Michael Krings
(Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München), Han van Konijnenburg-Van Cittert
(Utrecht University) and Hans Kerp (Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität
Münster) for critical discussion. Georg Janssen (Bayerische Staatssammlung
für Paläontologie und Geologie) kindly provided photographies of the fossils.
Stephan Schultka, Manfred Barthel (both Museum für Naturkunde, LeibnizInstitut für Evolutions- und Biodiversitätsforschung an der HumboldtUniversität zu Berlin) and Ralf Werneburg (Naturhistorisches Museum Schloss
Bertholdsburg Schleusingen) are acknowledged for making fossils from the
Lower Permian of Thuringia (not mentioned in the text) available to us for
comparison. We acknowledge the proof-reading by Elizabeth SchroederReiter (Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München) as a native speaker and the
efforts of two reviewers to improve our manuscript.
Author details
1
Department Biology I, Biocenter Botany, Ludwig-Maximilians-University
Munich, Großhadernerstrasse 2-4, D-82152 Planegg-Martinsried, Germany.
2
Institute of Palaeontology, Geocenter, University Vienna, Althanstrasse 14, A1090 Wien, Austria. 3Museum of Nature South Tyrol, I-39100 Bozen/Bolzano,
Bindergasse 1, Italy. 4Fuggerstrasse 8, D-81373 München, Germany.

Page 16 of 17

Authors’ contributions
BM and TF discovered the new site with plant macroremains in the
Bletterbach gorge. RB, BM, EK and TF excavated the macroremains from the
site, prepared and studied the material. EK organized the excavations and
took care for the museum collection of the Bletterbach material. BM
performed the cuticular analyses. RB, BM, and TF studied literature on other
ginkgophytes. TF and BM wrote the manuscript. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript.
Received: 11 May 2010 Accepted: 3 November 2010
Published: 3 November 2010
References
1. Van Tieghem Ph: Anatomie comparée de la fleur femelle et du fruit des
Cycadées, des Conifères, et des Gnetacées. Ann Sci Nat Bot 1869,
V(10):269-304.
2. Fujii K: On the different views hitherto proposed regarding the
morphology of the flowers of Ginkgo biloba. Bot Mag Tokyo 1896,
10(108):7-8, 13-15, 104-110.
3. Wettstein Rv: Die weibliche Blüte von Ginkgo. Oesterr botan Zeitschrift
1899, XLIX(12):417-425.
4. Sakisaka M: On the seed-bearing leaves of Ginkgo. Jap J Bot 1929,
4:219-235.
5. Krassilov VA: Macroevolutionary events and the evolution of higher taxa.
In Evolutionary Theory and Processes, Modern Horizons, Papers in honour of
EVIATAR NEVO. Edited by: Wasser SP. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic
Publishers; 2004:265-289.
6. Zhou ZY: An overview of fossil Ginkgoales. Palaeoworld 2009, 18:1-22.
7. Zhou ZY, Zhang B: A Middle Jurassic Ginkgo with ovule-bearing organs
from Henan, China. Palaeontographica 1989, B 211(4-6):113-133.
8. Zheng S, Zhou ZY: A new Mesozoic Ginkgo from western Liaoning, China
and its evolutionary significance. Rev Palaeobot Palynol 2004, 131:91-103.
9. Denk T, Velitzelos D: First evidence of epidermal structures of Ginkgo
from the Mediterranean Tertiary. Rev Palaeobot Palynol 2002, 120:1-15.
10. Gregor HJ: Ginkgo geissertii nov. spec. aus dem Pliozän des Elsaß, der
Erstnachweis von Ginkgo-Samen im mitteleuropäischen Neogen. Doc nat
1992, 74:26-31.
11. Kvaček J, Falcon-Lang HJ, Dašková J: A new Late Cretaceous Ginkgolean
reproductive structure Nehvizdyella gen. nov. from the Czech Republic
and its whole-plant reconstruction. Am J Bot 2005, 92(12):1958-1969.
12. Zhou ZY, Zheng S: The missing link in Ginkgo evolution. Nature 2003,
423:821-822.
13. Florin R: The morphology of Trichopitys heteromorpha Saporta, a seedplant of Palaeozoic age, and the evolution of the female flowers in
Ginkgoinae. Acta Horti Bergiani 1949, 15:79-109.
14. Taylor TN, Taylor EL, Krings M: Paleobotany - The biology and evolution of
fossil plants Amsterdam, Boston, Elsevier: Academic Press; 2009.
15. Archangelsky S: Fossil Ginkgoales from the Ticó flora, Santa Cruz
Province, Argentina. Bull Br Mus nat Hist 1965, 10:119-137, Geology.
16. Kirchner M, van Konijnenburg-van Cittert JHA: Schmeissneria microstachys
(Presl, 1833) Kirchner et Van Konijnenburg-Van Cittert, comb. nov. and
Karkenia hauptmannii Kirchner et Van Konijnenburg-Van Cittert, sp. nov.,
plants with ginkgoalean affinities from the Liassic of Germany. Rev
Palaeobot Palynol 1994, 83:199-215.
17. Anderson JM, Anderson H: Heyday of the gymnosperms: systematics and
biodiversity of the Late Triassic Molteno fructifications. Strelitzia 2003,
15:1-398.
18. Naugolnykh SV: Foliar seed-bearing organs of Paleozoic Ginkgophytes
and the early evolution of the Ginkgoales. Paleontol J 2007, 41(8):815-859.
19. Virgili C, Cassinis G, Broutin J: Permian to Triassic sequences from selected
continental areas of southwestern Europe. In Non-Marine Permian
Biostratigraphy and Biochronology. Volume 265. London: Geological Society
Special Publication; 2006:231-259.
20. Tralau H: Evolutionary trends in the genus Ginkgo. Lethaia 1968, 1:63-101.
21. Harris TM, Millington W, Miller J: Ginkgoales and Czekanowskiales. The
Yorkshire Jurassic Flora IV London: Trustees of The British Museum (Natural
History); 1974, 1-78.
22. Wang Y, Guignard G, Thévenard F, Dilcher D, Barale G, Mosbrugger V,
Yang X, Mei S: Cuticular anatomy of Sphenobaiera huangii (Ginkgoales)
from the Lower Jurassic of Hubei, China. Am J Bot 2005, 92(4):709-721.

Fischer et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:337
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/337

Page 17 of 17

23. Anderson JM, Anderson HM: Palaeoflora of Southern Africa.
MoltenoFormation (Triassic). Vol. 2: Gymnosperms (excluding Dicroidium)
Rotterdam: Balkema; 1989.
24. Florin R: Die fossilen Ginkgophyten von Franz-Joseph-Land nebst
Erörterungen über vermeintliche Cordaitales mesozoischen Alters. II.
Allgemeiner Teil. Palaeontographica 1936, 82(B):1-72.
25. Barthlott W, Wollenweber E: Zur Feinstruktur, Chemie und taxonomischen
Signifikanz epicuticularer Wachse und ähnlicher Sekrete. Trop subtrop
Pflanzenwelt 1981, 32:1-67.
26. Schweitzer HJ: Die Makroflora des niederrheinischen Zechsteins. Fortschr
Geol Rheinld Westf 1962, 6:331-376.
27. Beerling DJ, McElwain JC, Osborne CP: Stomatal responses of the ‘living
fossil’ Ginkgo biloba L. to changes in atmospheric CO2 concentrations. J
Exp Bot 1998, 49(326):1603-1607.
28. Schweitzer H-J, Kirchner M: Die rhäto-jurassischen Floren des Iran und
Afghanistans. 8. Ginkgophyten. Palaeontographica 1995, 237(B):1-58.
29. Wu X, Yang X, Zhou Z: Ginkgoalean ovulate organs and seeds associated
with Baiera furcata-type leaves from the Middle Jurassic of Qinghai
Province, China. Rev Palaeobot Palynol 2006, 138:209-225.
30. Zhou Z, Zhang B: Baiera hallei and associated ovule-bearing organs from
the Middle Jurassic of Henan, China. Palaeontogr B 1992, B(224):151-169.
31. Yang XJ, Friis EM, Zhou ZY: Ovule-bearing organs of Ginkgo ginkgoidea
(Tralau) comb. nov., and associated leaves from the Middle Jurassic of
Scania, South Sweden. Rev Palaeobot Palynol 2008, 149:1-17.
32. Rothwell GW: The role of development in plant phylogeny: a
paleobotanical perspective. Rev Palaeobot Palynol 1987, 50:97-114.
doi:10.1186/1471-2148-10-337
Cite this article as: Fischer et al.: Permian ginkgophyte fossils from the
Dolomites resemble extant O-ha-tsuki aberrant leaf-like fructifications of
Ginkgo biloba L. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010 10:337.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
