<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Elastic, not plastic species: Frozen plasticity theory and the origin of adaptive evolution in sexually reproducing organisms</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Biology Direct 2010 5:2. doi:10.1186/1745-6150-5-2"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Jaroslav Flegr"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Flegr Biology Direct 2010, 5:2
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/2

RESEARCH

Open Access

Elastic, not plastic species: Frozen plasticity
theory and the origin of adaptive evolution in
sexually reproducing organisms
Jaroslav Flegr*

Abstract
Background: Darwin’s evolutionary theory could easily explain the evolution of adaptive traits (organs and
behavioral patterns) in asexual but not in sexual organisms. Two models, the selfish gene theory and frozen
plasticity theory were suggested to explain evolution of adaptive traits in sexual organisms in past 30 years.
Results: The frozen plasticity theory suggests that sexual species can evolve new adaptations only when their
members are genetically uniform, i.e. only after a portion of the population of the original species had split off,
balanced on the edge of extinction for several generations, and then undergone rapid expansion. After a short
period of time, estimated on the basis of paleontological data to correspond to 1-2% of the duration of the
species, polymorphism accumulates in the gene pool due to frequency-dependent selection; and thus, in each
generation, new mutations occur in the presence of different alleles and therefore change their selection
coefficients from generation to generation. The species ceases to behave in an evolutionarily plastic manner and
becomes evolutionarily elastic on a microevolutionary time-scale and evolutionarily frozen on a macroevolutionary
time-scale. It then exists in this state until such changes accumulate in the environment that the species becomes
extinct.
Conclusion: Frozen plasticity theory, which includes the Darwinian model of evolution as a special case - the
evolution of species in a plastic state, not only offers plenty of new predictions to be tested, but also provides
explanations for a much broader spectrum of known biological phenomena than classic evolutionary theories.
Reviewers: This article was reviewed by Rob Knight, Fyodor Kondrashov and Massimo Di Giulio (nominated by
David H. Ardell).

Background
Problems of Current Models of Adaptive Evolution in
Sexual Species

Darwin’s evolutionary theory[1] could easily explain the
evolution of adaptive traits (organs and behavioral patterns) in asexual organisms. However, its capacity to
explain the origin of such traits in sexual organisms, i.e.
in most eukaryotic species on Earth, was already widely
discussed by Darwin’s critics in the 19th century[2]. The
most frequent objection was that in sexual organisms
phenotypes, as well as forms of particular traits, have a
continuous tendency to return to original state, as the
* Correspondence: flegr@cesnet.cz
Department of Philosophy and History of Science, Charles University, Viničná
7, CZ-128 44 Praha 2, Czech Republic

carriers of a new phenotype (a new trait) mate with
more numerous carriers of the old phenotype. It is possible to show that such “averaging” of phenotypes by
sexual reproduction would result in the loss of one half
of the contemporary phenotypic variability in each generation[3]. This objection died away after the rediscovery of Mendel’s genetic laws. The corpuscular nature of
the gene was generally considered to be an adequate
solution to the problem of the blending inheritance of
biological traits[4]. Mendelian genetics showed that
despite a, sometimes intermediate, phenotype of crossings, the genes responsible for a particular form of trait
from two parents do not interact in any way in bodies
of crossings and are transmitted to the next generations
in their original form. If a new form of a gene originated
by a random mutation event encodes a useful character,

© 2010 Flegr; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Flegr Biology Direct 2010, 5:2
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/2

it improves the viability or fertility of the organism and
is therefore transmitted to the next generations in more
copies than the original form of the gene. As late as the
mid 1970s, Richard Dawkins clearly and loudly enough
claimed that the solution provided by Mendelian genetic
is just illusory[5]. It could solve the problem of vanishing genetic variability; however, it could not solve the
problem of vanishing inheritability of large parts of phenotypic traits and therefore vanishing inheritance of fitness. Darwin’s model of evolution of adaptive traits
based on intra-population competition of individuals for
highest fitness expects that fitness is inherited from parents to offspring. If an individual has an allele that gives
it an extraordinary fitness (above-average viability or fertility), it not only transmits more copies of this allele to
the next generation, but also its offspring have aboveaverage fitness and transfer this allele to the next generations in an above average number of copies. Due to
this mechanism, the number of alleles coding for useful
(adaptive) traits should continuously grow from generation to generation. The problem is that in sexually
reproducing organisms neither genotype nor phenotype
is inherited from parents to offspring, and even less is
fitness. The genotype of any offspring is always unique
as it is always generated de novo by random combinations of genes from the two parents. This phenomenon
has a very important effect, namely, even an excellent
individual showing extremely high fitness may have offspring whose fitness is average or even subnormal.
Usually, within a few generations the unique combination of genes of an excellent individual will be diluted
and its relatives will in no way differ from relatives of
any other individual.
Dawkins not only identified a weakness of the traditional individual competition-based evolutionary model,
but also suggested a new model of the evolution of
adaptive traits based on intralocus competition of alleles
for the highest number of copies transferred to the next
generation - the selfish gene theory[5]. Dawkins argued
that in contrast to genotype, which is not inherited but
originates de novo in each generation by mixing alleles
from two parents, an allele is nearly always transmitted
to offspring in an unchanged form. Therefore, when a
new allele increases the efficiency of transfer to the next
generation by, for example, increasing the viability of its
carrier, it will spread in the gene pool of a population
by intralocus competition. The theory of intralocus
competition (or selfish gene), which was implicitly used
before Dawkins by G.C. Williams[6] and W.D. Hamilton
[7,8], is better than the original theory of intrapopulation individual selection as it offers a unified theoretical
framework for explaining a broader spectrum of evolutionary phenomena. It explains not only the evolution of
adaptive traits but also the evolution and spread of

Page 2 of 16

certain alleles which decrease the fitness of their carrier
(outlaw genes in Dawkins’s terminology) as well as the
spread of a category of altruistic genes, i.e. alleles for
behavior that decrease the direct fitness of their carrier
while increasing its inclusive fitness by increasing the
direct fitness of its relatives. The selfish gene theory is
now mainstream evolutionary theory. When a classical
evolutionary biologist looked for the purpose of a trait,
his/her question was how does this trait enhance an
individual’s fitness. When a current evolutionary biologist is looking for the purpose of such a trait, his/her
question is how does this trait increase the number of
copies of the gene variant involved in the formation of
this trait.
Dawkins supposed that the model of intralocus selection is also a solution to the problem of vanishing
inheritance of fitness in sexual organisms. However, this
opinion is most probably wrong. It is true that, in contrast to genotype, an allele is nearly always transmitted
from parents to offspring in an unchanged form. Three
important reasons exist why the same allele has a different influence on fitness in parents and in offspring. These
are: (1) dependence of the fitness of carriers of a particular allele on the frequency of this allele in the population
(2) dependence of the phenotypic expression of an allele
on the genotype of the individual (3) dependence of
the effect of a trait on fitness on the phenotype of the
individual.
Population genetics models usually suggest that each
allele can be characterized by a constant, a value that
describes the average relative fitness of the carriers of a
particular allele. This common approach, however, oversimplifies the situation in real systems. In such systems,
some decreasing or increasing function of the frequency
of an allele, rather than a constant, usually describes the
influence of an allele on the fitness of its carriers[9,10],
i.e. the so called frequency dependent selection is operative, rather than regular directive selection [9,10]. For
example, when the frequency of the s allele for sickle
cell disease is low in a population living in an endemic
malaria area, the allele has a highly positive value for its
carriers[11]. Sexual partners of carriers of this allele are
homozygotes with two normal alleles; and therefore,
only heterozygotes with higher tolerance to malaria, and
not homozygotes with two s alleles and therefore with
the fatal form of sickle cells disease, will occur among
their offspring. When the frequency of the s allele
increases, it losses its positive value for carriers as many
homozygotes, with the fatal form of sickle cell disease,
will spring out among the offspring of a heterozygote.
Similarly, an allele for the exploitation of an alternative resource is very useful when rare; however, it can
be much less useful or can even be harmful when it
turns common, because too many carriers of this allele

Flegr Biology Direct 2010, 5:2
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/2

can use up the resource. As shown by Price and Maynard Smith[12,13], in the case that a biological value of
the strategy (the trait) depends on the frequency of this,
and of other strategies in the population, the evolutionarily stable strategy wins the competition in the long run.
In the case of genetically coded strategies, the winners
of the evolutionary game would be such alleles that,
when they prevail in the population, cannot be invaded
by any alternative strategy that is initially rare. It is clear
now that this kind of stability, rather than traditional fitness, is the most important criterion of evolutionary
success in the competition between gene variants.
Price and Maynard Smith described the competition
of strategies using the hawk and dove model. We have a
population of hawks and doves that represent two distinct behavioral strategies in combat. When two doves
find a piece of food, they peacefully share it and each of
them receives, on average, one half the benefit. When a
dove and a hawk find a piece of food, the hawk drives
away the dove to get all the benefit for itself. When two
hawks find a piece of food, they fight for it; and each of
them receives, on average, one half the benefit and pays
one half the cost - the cost here means time lost as well
as possible injuries sustained. It is a major asset to be a
hawk in a population of doves because such a hawk will
prevail in all combat without cost. At the same time, it
is an asset to be a dove in a population of hawks, especially when the cost of combat is very high, because the
dove never pays the cost of combat while hawks have to
pay this cost in nearly all combat. From this it follows
that neither the dove nor the hawk strategy can win the
competition and some equilibrium frequency of the strategies will be established. When mixed strategies are
allowed, then the so-called evolutionarily stable strategy
wins. Here the evolutionarily stable strategy means
“behave with frequency benefit/cost as a hawk and with
frequency 1 - benefit/cost as a dove”.
Because of the nature of the original model of Price
and Maynard Smith, and also because most people conceive of strategy only in the context of intentional behavior, the area of evolutionarily stable strategies is mostly
perceived as part of behavioral biology. However, in fact,
the same laws rule the evolution of any trait whose biological value (selection coefficient) depends on its frequency in the population[14], including evolution of
many ontogenetical traits[15]. It is highly probable that
this is true of many traits in asexual organisms and of
most traits in sexual organisms. It is beneficial to be a
carrier of a rare strategy in an asexual organism, as this
enables the carrier to exploit underexploited resources
as well as to avoid enemies whose combat strategies are
specialized to exploit a feature of the common form of
the organism. In sexually reproducing organisms, the
competition between strategies for this kind of stability

Page 3 of 16

probably controls the evolution of all polymorphic
genes, i.e. of most of genes[16]. In the previous model,
the hawks and doves meet each other over a piece of
food. In sexual species, pairs of alleles of different genes
meet after male and female sex cells combine in newly
formed zygotes. The competition between alleles therefore corresponds to that between hawks and doves
shown in the model. For each allele, an equilibrium frequency exists that can be shifted, for example by selection; however, it will be restored after the end of the
selection.
At face value, there is an important difference between
the situation in the hawk and dove game and the sperm
and oocyte game. If a dove and a hawk meet over a
piece of food, each takes away a different reward from
the conflict. On the other hand, if an individual is a heterozygote, i.e. if normal alleles and s alleles meet in his
cells, it might seem that both alleles take the same
reward from the meeting, as his fitness affects the evolutionary fate of both alleles to the same degree. In actual
fact, this need not be true. Imagine, for example, that a
large percentage of the zygotes carrying two s alleles do
not settle in the sex organs of the woman and die without substantially utilizing the resources of the maternal
organism (if we neglect the fact that the woman does
not become pregnant in that month). If embryos with
two s alleles are rarely implanted in the uterus or
embryos with two s alleles are frequently aborted, then
the consequences to each of the two alleles in the meeting of normal and s alleles in the genome of a heterozygote woman, will differ. If the partner of the woman is
also a heterozygote, then the number of descendants
carrying a copy of the normal maternal alleles will be
greater than that of descendants carrying copies of her s
alleles. This is because the embryos with the maternal s
alleles, which also carry the paternal s alleles, will most
probably be aborted. However, if the partner is a homozygote with two normal alleles, the mother will transfer
to her descendants the same number of copies of both
her alleles. On the other hand, such descendants carrying copies of normal alleles will frequently die of malaria
in childhood, while the descendants carrying copies of
the s alleles will be far more likely to live to a reproductive age. The rules of the relevant evolutionary game are
thus, in actual fact, far more complicated than in the
dove and hawk model. Additionally, we are, for the present, completely ignoring the fact that both the alleles of
a single gene as well as the alleles of various genes can
interact in their effects. Thus, the fitness of the carriers
of certain alleles very frequently depends on which
alleles are present in the other parts of the genome.
Because of pleiotropy, the effects of a gene on many different traits, it is highly probable that the frequencies of
most alleles in sexual species are kept at a certain value

Flegr Biology Direct 2010, 5:2
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/2

by a complex network of competing or supporting strategies. If a new mutation with a frequency-independent
effect on fitness occurs in a population, it is either eliminated or fixed by selection or by drift. If a new mutation
with frequency-dependent effect occurs in a population,
it most probably snarls up in the existing network of
frequency-dependent strategies. In large populations,
where selection rather than drift governs the destiny of
most alleles, this mechanism could be responsible for
the maintenance of most alleles in a polymorphic state.
The effect of a frequency-dependent selection on the
response of a population to selection can be observed in
usual selection experiments[17] (Fig. 1). In such experiments we can, for example, select large drosophilas by
killing all small flies. This is analogical to shooting the
hawks in Price-Maynard Smith’s model population. The
pay-off matrix in the game is consequently changed; to
be a hawk, as well as to be an allele for small body size,
will become less advantageous than it was during the
equilibrium that existed before the selection started.
The frequency of such allele and therefore also the average body size of our drosophilas decreases. However, as
the frequency of this allele goes down, the advantage of
being such allele (of being a hawk) goes up. Therefore,
our selection is decreasingly less effective and, at one
point, our population stops responding to the selection.
When we terminate the experiment, when we stop

Page 4 of 16

killing small drosophilas or stop shooting hawks, the frequency of the given allele (of hawks) will return to the
equilibrium value. This means that the population of
sexual organisms under artificial or natural selection
mostly behaves elastically rather than plastically. The
existence of a so-called genetic homeostasis, as well as a
post selection return to the original state, was described
in the middle of the last century[18]; likewise, the resistivity of many populations (with polymorphism in a
selected trait and high heritability of the trait) to artificial or natural selection is a common problem of current evolutionary biology, for review see[19] and
breeding practice [20-22].
Frequency-dependent selection is just one of three
complications of the solution to the problem of the vanishing inheritance of fitness suggested by the selfish gene
theory. Another complication, widely discussed by evolutionary and theoretical biologists for the past 50 years, is
gene interactions. The relationship between genes and
traits is not as straightforward as is supposed by most
evolutionary models, including the selfish gene theory
(see also [23,24]). Due to pleiotropy, one gene usually
influences a number, sometimes even a large number, of
traits and due to epistasis, one trait is usually influenced
by multiple genes. Moreover, the influences of particular
genes on a trait are often not additive. The same allele in
the context of one combination of alleles (of the same or

Figure 1 Elastic response of laboratory populations on artificial selection for positive and negative phototaxis. A population of
Drosophila pseudoobscura was divided into two parts, one of which was subjected to long-term selection for positive phototaxis - movement
towards light in a Y-maze (broken line) and the second to negative phototaxis - movement into darkness (solid line). During twenty generations,
the population diverged substantially in this trait. After termination of selection, the average phenotypes in both populations returned to the
original value during the subsequent twenty generations. Data from Dobzhansky and Spassky[17].

Flegr Biology Direct 2010, 5:2
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/2

of other genes) influences a given trait, for example body
size, positively; while in the context of another combination of alleles it may influence the same trait negatively
[25]. Consequently, there is no such thing as an allele, or
a mutation, for large body size. The phenotypic expression of most alleles is in fact genotype-conditioned. In
the normal natural population in which a great quantity
of genetic polymorphism is sustained by means of different forms of frequency-dependent selection, the same
allele probably changes not only the value but also often
the sign of its effect on the corresponding trait from generation to generation as it “travels” from genotype to
genotype.
Last, but possibly not least, the effect of the same trait
on the fitness of an individual is usually dependent on
combination of other traits borne by the same individual[26]. In the context of certain combination of traits
(for example in the context of high physical strength) a
particular trait (for example aggressiveness) is useful
while in the context of other traits (in a weak individual)
the same trait (aggressiveness) could dramatically
decrease fitness of an individual. Dawkins was right in
his claim that in contrast to genotype, an allele is transmitted from parents to offspring unchanged even in sexual organisms. However, in genetically polymorphic
species, i.e. in normal sexually reproducing species, the
effect of the same allele on phenotype, or at least on fitness, varies from generation to generation. This makes
the gradual evolution of adaptive traits by means of natural selection in sexual species difficult or even
impossible.
The relative importance of these three obstacles to the
evolution of adaptive traits in response to selection is
not clear. Many evolutionists suggest that epistatic interactions are the most important problem of adaptive evolution. Several distinct hypotheses suggest that the
conversion of nonadditive to additive genetic variability,
for example due to a radical reduction of population
size, could result in an increased capacity of a population to respond to selection (Table 1); for a current
review see[27] as well as comprehensive Introduction
and Discussion of van Heerwaarden et al[28]. Testing
such hypotheses is rather difficult. It is possible to measure the main effects of individual loci, which are
responsible for the additive part of genetic variability
(narrow sense heritability, h2 ); however, large experimental populations are necessary for obtaining reasonably narrow confidence intervals for the estimation of
h2. In fact, 95% confidence intervals for the estimation
of h 2 in most published studies include zero[29]. To
measure the effects of epistatic interactions and to estimate their contribution to variability in phenotypic
traits, is a much more difficult task as an unrealistically
large experimental set is necessary to prove a statistically

Page 5 of 16

significant interaction of just two genes[30]. Statistical
proof of the existence of an interaction of three or more
genes is most probably beyond the capability of any
experimenter. Moreover, in nearly all studies, only the
epistatic effects of genes with previously proven and significant main effects were studied; consequently, the
number of existing interactions must have been underestimated[31]. Because of these technical reasons, the
relative importance of main effects and epistatic interactions in genetic architecture is a traditional subject of
theoretical constructions[32] rather than of experimental
tests[33].
Based on the results of selection experiments, it can
be argued that frequency-dependent selection rather
than epistasis is the most serious barrier to adaptive
evolution either by means of natural selection or by
interallelic competition in sexual organisms (and possibly in asexual organism as well, see below). In most
experiments, the selected traits with starting intrapopulation variability respond to selection pressure and start
changing in the early stage of the experiment. However
with increasing generations, or with increasing departure
of the trait from its original value, the response to selection decreases and at some point, i.e. at the selection
plateau, the trait stops responding at all[18]. When the
selection stops, the trait returns to its original form during several generations (which, by the way, shows that
the genetic variability for the given trait is still present
and that the evolutionary response to selection was not
stopped by an exhaustion of genetic variability). The
genetic homeostasis causing the return to the original
form is caused by decreased viability or fertility of individuals with the most extreme form of the selected trait.
It is not the extreme form of the selected trait itself but
the accompanying phenotypic changes, products of
pleiotropy or compensatory changes allowing greater
viability for individuals with the extreme form of the
trait, what are probably responsible for decreased fitness
of these individuals. For example, some breeds of dogs
selected for large size suffer high rates of cancer because
of the increased frequency of alleles that promote both
large size and cancer[34]. When the selection for an
extreme form of a trait stops, the carries of this trait are
penalized by natural selection and are eliminated from
the population over the course of several generations.
The return to the original form (and original fitness) is
not perfect in small populations because some alleles,
those which became rare due to selection, are already
eliminated from the gene pool of the population by
drift, and cannot return to the closed population after
the selection has ended. The most important message of
these experiments is that the resistance of a population
to selection is not present from the very beginning of an
experiment but appears only after the frequency of

Flegr Biology Direct 2010, 5:2
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/2

Page 6 of 16

Table 1 Differences between various theories and models related to Frozen plasticity theory.
Theory and
its author

The aim

Suggested mechanism

Shifting
balance
theory
Wright S.
1932

to explain the ability of species with large subdivided populations 1. fragmentation of population to small subpopulations where an
cross valleys in adaptive landscape
efficiency of selection is low 2. spreading and fixation of a new
allele (that is detrimental when rare) in a subpopulation by drift 3.
“Infection” of other subpopulations with individuals with new
genotype originated from a successful population and the
origination of new populations by these individuals

Genetic
to explain the role of founder events in speciation
revolution
Mayr E. 1954

1. change of balanced frequency of alleles in a split-off
subpopulation due to sampling effect 2. selection for alleles with
best effect on fitness instead of best-cooperator alleles

Founderflush model
Carson H.L.
1968

to explain the role of founder events in speciation

1. sampling effect due to rapid one-step reduction of a
population size, 2. expansion of the population in an open
uninhibited ecological niche, which relaxes all forms of selection
allowing for surviving recombinants and mutants with suboptimal
phenotypes (crossing valleys in the adaptive landscape) 3.
reaching (or overshooting) the carrying capacity of a locality and
the restoration of selection

Genetic
transilience
model
Templeton
A.R. 1980

to explain the role of founder events in speciation

1. sampling effect due to rapid one-step reduction of a
population or to hybridization, 2. an increase of the amount of
selectable genetic variability due to transformation of nonadditive
(and therefore nonselectable) genetic variability to additive
genetic variability and by higher survival probability for carriers of
new mutations in the expanding population, which increases
responsiveness of the population to selection 3. restoration of the
population size and selection

Punctuated
equilibrium
Eldredge
1971

to explain the discontinuous nature of evolution and coincidence various mechanisms suggested by Eldredge and Gold, including
of anagenetic and cladogenetic events
peripatric speciation and strong selection in unusual conditions
on the periphery of the species’ range, peripatric speciation
accompanied by genetic revolution, sorting (without speciation,
any evolutionary novelty is reversible due to gene flow), etc.

Frozen
plasticity
theory
Flegr 1998

to explain why old species are microevolutionarily elastic and
macroevolutionarily frozen, how frozen species can turn plastic,
and the continuously decreasing rate of macroevolution

1. most polymorphism existing in an old species is sustained in
it’s gene pool by frequency dependent selection creating
interconnected network resistant to changes of allele frequencies
2. most new (potentially useful) alleles are captured in this elastic
network of alleles due to pleiotropy and its effect on (stabilized)
frequencies of old alleles
3. in small splitted-off populations balancing on the edge of
extinction for several generations, a decrease in strength of
selection, including frequency dependent selection, will occur,
and most genetic polymorphism will disappear due to drift 4.
after expansion of population size, now large genetically uniform
population turns evolutionary plastic - new advantageous
mutations can spread in the network-free population by selection
5. traits resistant to thawing accumulate in the gene pool by
sorting on the basis of stability

In fact, the Punctuated equilibrium theory in its current form was published in 1972 by Eldredge and Gould and the Frozen plasticity theory in 2008 by Flegr.

alleles in the population has been changed by the selection. If epistasis were the major obstacle to adaptive
evolution, the selection would be ineffective from the
very beginning of the experiment. If the major obstacle
were the dependence of a trait’s influence on fitness on
the presence of a particular combination of other traits
in an individual, then such effect could not be observed
in artificial selection experiments. Here, the experimenter, instead of the fertility or viability of an individual,
decides what influence a particular trait will have on the
reproduction success of an individual. Most probably,
epistasis and context dependence of the influence of a
trait on fitness, which critics of the Darwinian/Fisherian
model of evolution (including Dawkins - compare his

rowing team analogy argument presented in Selfish
Gene) consider to be the main constraints to evolutionary response to selection, just slow down the adaptive
evolution in sexual organisms. Frequency-dependent
selection, the role of which has been highly neglected in
this context, is most probably responsible for the final
loss of the capacity of a population and a species to
respond to artificial and natural selection. The major
role of epistasis, together with pleiotropy, is that they
interconnect the fates of different alleles of various loci
in a single elastic network. If each gene coded just a single trait and each trait were coded by just one gene, the
phenomenon of frequency dependence of the influence
of the trait on fitness would concern a relatively low

Flegr Biology Direct 2010, 5:2
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/2

number of traits. These traits would be kept stable in
the population; however, other traits would easily
respond to selection. In real organisms, wherein the
influences of particular genes are interconnected with
those of many other genes in all regions of the genome,
the phenomenon of frequency dependence concerns
much more, possibly even all, genes. For example, an
increase in body size could increase the chances of an
individual in intrasexual combat and could therefore be
the subject of sexual selection. In large males, the alleles
with positive influence on heat removal are automatically advantaged and their frequency increases in the
population. Let us imagine that some of these alleles
have lethal or sublethal influence on their carrier in the
homozygotic state. With an increasing mean body size
of males in the population, the frequency of the allele
for efficient heat removal increases. The frequency of
subvital homozygotes with two copies of the allele
increases with the square of the frequency of the allele;
if an interaction of alleles of several loci were in play,
the steepness of decrease of average fitness of the organisms in the population could be even higher, possibly
stepwise. This or similar phenomenon could slow down
and finally stop the response of a population to selection
of any intensity.
The hypothesis known as the streetcar evolution model
[35,36] suggests that this kind of genetic constraints can
only temporarily stop the evolution of a population or a
species; the phenotypically maladaptive equilibriums are
just transient stops of the “streetcar”. Sooner or later, a
new mutation enables the population to circumvent a
particular constraint, and adaptive evolution resumes. In
the previous hypothetical example, a new allele could
arise by mutation capable of increased heat removal without negative effect on the viability of the organism. The
problem is that “blind and opportunistic” evolution cannot stop increasing the frequency of other heat removalassociated alleles when a new allele without any side
effects appears. The new side-effect-free allele helps the
population increase body size in response to sexual selection, i.e. to reach a further streetcar stop; still the changed average body size results in an increased frequency
of side-effect-associated alleles and therefore decreased
average viability of the population. More importantly, the
rate of accumulation of constraint-building alleles could
be higher than that of the accumulation of constraintremoving alleles in a polymorphic population. It is not
clear which rate is higher in real systems; however, the
paleontological records vital to 30 years worth of discussions of the punctuated equilibrium model of evolution
suggest that, without a speciation event, the streetcar
usually stays in the stop permanently[19].
As has already been mentioned, the phenomenon of
frequency-dependent selection plays a very important

Page 7 of 16

role in sexual organisms where in every generation the
alleles of two parents meet each other in new zygotes.
The selective value of an allele depends, for example, on
the probability that the same allele is present in chromosomes of both paternal and maternal origin, which
depends on the frequency of the allele in the population.
This source of frequency dependence of the selective
value of alleles does not exist in asexual organisms;
however, some sources of frequency dependence are
present even here. For example, the hawk and dove
model discussed above, is in principle a model of interaction of two asexual species or strains. Frequency
dependence could take part in ecological interactions
between host and parasite. The parasite is often specialized for exploitation of the most common form of its
host[37], for example a host with the most common
MHC alleles. Similarly, the immune system of a host is
usually adapted to the most common strain of the parasite. An asexual species can be a mixture of phenotypically and genetically different strains with differing
strategies to exploit resources from their environment.
The frequencies of particular strains could change in
response to changes in the environment (to changes in
the intensity of shooting hawks); they will probably
express a tendency to return to some equilibrium state.
The long-term competition of strains (strategies) with
selective values dependent on their frequency in the
population could be an important source of species
cohesion even in asexual species.

Results
Mechanism of Adaptive Evolution in Sexual Organisms

It was argued above that adaptive evolution by means of
Darwinian selection of individuals in a population, as
well as by means of Dawkinsian competition between
alleles in individual loci, is very difficult, if not impossible,
in populations of sexual organisms. It is evident, however,
that adaptive evolution operates on Earth and that this
evolution is especially and extremely efficient in sexual
organisms. It follows that a situation must occur, in
which all three barriers to adaptive evolution are lifted,
or at least temporarily operate with decreased efficiency.
It is highly probable that peripatric speciation plays the
key role in adaptive evolution in sexual organisms[38]. In
this form of allopatric speciation, a small population
splits from a large one via an invasion of a small number
of individuals into an isolated locality beyond the geographic range of the mother species (Fig. 2). Removed
from any genetic and ecological contact with the mother
species, this split-off population subsequently evolves
into a new species with a different phenotype. During the
isolation, many alleles incompatible with those in the
mother population accumulate in the new species[39,40],
which creates a sufficiently strong reproductive barrier.

Flegr Biology Direct 2010, 5:2
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/2

Page 8 of 16

Figure 2 Role of peripatric speciation in adaptive evolution of sexually reproducing organisms. It must be emphasized that extinction is
a more probable fate for a small population than expansion. However, unsuccessful speciation events are not interesting from the perspective
of evolution.

With such barriers intact, the new species could subsequently expand into the area of the mother species.
When the ecology of the new and old species differs,
both species can coexist in the same area, otherwise
either the new species or the old one is eliminated. From
the point of view of the capacity for adaptive evolution,
the most important fact is that the founders of a new species only bring a small part of genetic variability from the
original to the new population. It is evident that common
alleles, which are usually sustained in the population by
some form of frequency-dependent selection, are preferentially transferred to the new population. During a
population bottleneck, i.e. in the first stage of peripatric
speciation, the population rids itself of most of the originally present rare alleles; however, it retains most of the
common alleles that are responsible for genetic homeostasis [41-44]. In the second stage of peripatric speciation,
the new population of organisms (still adapted to the
conditions of their original geographic range) survives in
the different conditions of their new area. Expectedly, the
size of such a population remains low for many generations, and extinction is their most probable destiny,
either because of bad luck or inbreeding depression (or

both). In small populations, chance rules the destiny of
particular organisms as well as particular alleles, rather
than any form of selection. (No matter whether you are a
dove or a hawk, your biological success is just a question
of chance.) Therefore, in the second stage of peripatric
speciation, the genetic variability that had been sustained
by frequency-dependent selection in the original large
population disappears due to drift. If the colonization is
successful, the population must, at some point, expand.
(Unsuccessful colonizations are not interesting from the
perspective of evolution, and evolution has time enough
to repeat each unsuccessful experiment thousands of
times.) At that very moment, conditions optimal for
adaptations to evolve by means of selection are present.
The population is large; therefore selection rather than
chance rules the destiny of an individual. Still, the population is genetically uniform; thus a new mutation meets
the same combination of alleles in each generation and
has the same influence on the phenotype of the organism
and its fitness. The alleles sustained in the population by
means of frequency-dependent selection are either not
present, or rather rare in the gene pool of the population.
In such a population, both Darwinian selection of

Flegr Biology Direct 2010, 5:2
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/2

individuals for best fitness and Dawkinsian selection of
most efficiently replicating alleles could work to produce
new adaptive traits. Through time, more and more mutations with frequency-dependent influence on fitness are
captured in the population. And hence, the genetic variability of the population increases and an originally plastic
species builds up an interconnected network of cooperating and competing strategies, thereby becoming elastic.
The return to the elastic state is probably not a yes/no
process. Some properties of organisms develop elasticity
rather quickly; other properties (different in different
taxa) could stay plastic for longer time. However, the
loss of plasticity is probably an autocatalytic process. As
the amount of genetic polymorphism (as well as the
number of already frozen properties) increases, the
probability that the biological value of a new mutation
will be dependent on its own frequency and will therefore be captured in an interconnected network of polymorphic genes, will also increase. Therefore, the
conversion of a species from plastic to elastic states
could in fact be rather abrupt, and the difference
between plastic and elastic species could in fact be
rather sharp. Before such conversion, a species can
respond to environmental change by radical change in
its phenotype. In the frozen stage, a species is not able
to respond to the same environmental change through a
corresponding change of its phenotype[45].
This model of adaptive evolution, called the theory of
frozen plasticity[14,46], is, in a certain sense, a return
from the Dawkinsian to the original Darwinian model of
evolution. The main difference is that according to this
new theory, all of the processes described by Darwin
and Dawkins do operate just after the birth of a species
by peripatric speciation - while it is still plastic. However
most of the time, i.e. 98-99% of a species duration (as
estimated by Gould on the basis of paleontological data
[47]), sexual species are evolutionarily frozen and can
only passively wait for such changes in their environment that cause either their extinction, or for the highly
improbable event of a return of a part of the population
to the plastic state due to peripatric speciation.
Decreasing rate of macroevolution

Paleontological data suggest that the rate of evolution
and amount of interspecies and intraspecies variability
decreases with the age of the phylogenetic line. Several
independent studies have shown that maximum biodiversity, and disparity of a clade in particular, is achieved
rather early after the origin of the phylogenetic line
(clade) [22,48,49]. For example, Webster [50] has
reported that the frequency and extent of morphological
variation in 982 trilobite species are greatest early in the
evolution of the group. He has shown that “the proportion of species with at least one polymorphism drops
sharply between the Middle Cambrian (75%) and Late

Page 9 of 16

Cambrian (8%), then rises to 40% in the Early Ordovician (coincident with the first sampling of the diverse
phacopid and proetid orders), after which there is a progressive decline through the Middle Devonian (1%),
interrupted only by a particularly low value (0%) in the
Late Silurian. No polymorphism was recorded in character-state coding among the 23 post-Devonian species.
Genera originating in the Cambrian had shorter average
durations than genera originating in the post-Cambrian
[51], resulting in accrual of lower species-level diversity
per genus.”
These phenomena, which have no support in current
evolutionary theory, could have a common cause,
namely the continuous irreversible freezing of more and
more traits during the evolution of a clade. It is sure
that traits differ in resistance to transition from frozen
to plastic in response to a reduction of genetic polymorphism. For some traits, this process is likely to happen readily and can be achieved by a relatively small
reduction in genetic polymorphism. For other traits, the
transition from frozen to plastic is difficult or even
impossible, as it needs an unrealistically small founding
population and an unrealistically long period of persistence of such a small population in an extinction-prone
state. On a macroevolutionary time scale, more and
more traits pass into the permanently frozen state due
to a universal process of sorting on the basis of stability
[47]. The stable traits (and systems and anything) persist
while the unstable traits (and systems and anything)
pass away. An example of a stable trait is a trait that is
coded by many genes that are substitutable in their
effect. The mutation of an allele in one locus (or several
loci) does not result in the change of such a trait. At the
same time, the mutation in all loci is highly improbable
especially if, due to pleiotropy, the genes in particular
loci also influence other traits. Another source of the
evolutionary stability of a trait is frequency-dependent
selection, particularly the steep dependence of fitness on
the frequency of a particular allele. When the fitness of
an individual sharply decreases with an increased frequency of an allele (of a particular trait, strategy), even a
drastic reduction in population size cannot lead to total
loss of polymorphism in a particular locus and corresponding trait. Due to dominance and especially due to
epistatic interactions of more than two genes, the slope
of the fitness function can be very steep. In the former
case, the fitness of homozygotes with genotype aa could
decrease at a rate proportional to the second power of
the trait frequency. In the latter case, the rate could
even be proportional to a higher power of the trait frequency. This kind of trait probably survives peripatric
speciation in a polymorphic state, or polymorphism in
such a trait is restored very quickly in the originating
new species due to mutations.

Flegr Biology Direct 2010, 5:2
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/2

In a new clade, a high proportion of species contain
many traits that could melt during standard peripatric
speciation or that are relatively plastic even on the level
of a species (or even of a local population). Through
time, more and more traits in more and more species
turn to a semipermanently or even permanently frozen
state. The representatives of a particular clade are not
only less and less variable (more and more elastic - resistant to selection pressure) but also exhibit elasticity that
is less and less affected by peripatric speciation. Originally, many representatives of a clade had the capacity to
evolve new body plans after peripatric speciation. In the
end, only some species retain this capacity and even in
these species some traits had a highly limited capacity to
respond to selection after peripatric speciation.

Conclusions
The frozen plasticity theory[14,46] is a complex theory,
based on many particular hypotheses concerning the
mechanisms of evolutionary stasis and evolutionary
change - most of which were suggested in some form
by different students of evolution during the 20th century. It is possible that some of these mechanisms may
be wrong, or at least may not play as important a role
in the discussed phenomena as the frozen plasticity theory would suggest. The existence of the plastic and frozen phases in the life of a species resulting in a
punctuated equilibrium pattern of evolution[52,53] is
now a widely accepted (most probably prevailing) model
of the evolution of multicellular life on Earth. The frozen plasticity theory suggests that certain rather probable hypothesis on the nature of evolutionary stasis
(frequency-dependent selection and pleiotropy-based
elasticity of genetically polymorphic species) and evolutionary plasticity (loss of genetic polymorphism due to
the founder effect during peripatric speciation, and drift
following it) could have a very important impact, not
only on macroevolutionary but also microevolutionary
and ecological processes[14,46].
It must be emphasized that the frozen plasticity theory
has a much broader spectrum of evolutionary and ecological implications than has been suggested and discussed
by students of particular hypotheses. In fact, the picture
of evolutionary and ecological processes presented by
the frozen plasticity theory differs in many respects
from that provided by the current textbook theory of
evolution; see Table 2, [54] and (Flegr J.: Microevolutionary a macroevolutionary implication of Frozen plasticity theory of adaptive evolution, submitted). Most of
these predictions could be tested empirically and should
be analyzed in greater depth theoretically. In my (very
subjective) opinion, the frozen plasticity theory, which
includes the Darwinian model of evolution as a special
case - the evolution of species in a plastic state, not only

Page 10 of 16

offers plenty of new predictions to be tested, but also
provides explanations for a much broader spectrum of
known biological phenomena than classic evolutionary
theories.

Reviewers’ comments
Reviewer’s report 1

Rob Knight, University of Colorado, Boulder, United
States
The problem of where adaptation occurs has attracted
much interest over the decades, dating back at least as
far as the debates between Fisher, who envisioned a single panmictic population evolving towards an optimal
‘peak’ in a static genetic landscape, and Wright, who
envisioned an ever-shifting alliance of small populations
where changes in genetic backgrounds allowed new
combinations of alleles to survive and, occasionally, to
flourish and sweep over the population. In this manuscript, the author provides an outline of organism- and
gene-level selection processes, focusing on the observation that laboratory populations tend to revert to wild
type once selection pressure is relaxed (the idea of an
“elastic” population that snaps back to its initial state).
The argument is that populations spend most of their
time in this elastic state, and it is only under unusual
circumstances, such as very small populations where
many alleles are lost, that this elasticity disappears and
rapid change is possible. The main supporting lines of
evidence are that frequency-dependent selection (e.g. an
allele conferring resistance against a specific parasite
might be beneficial only when rare as when common
the parasite might evolve to counter it), epistasis (i.e.
whether the gene is expressed might depend on the
states of other genes), and phenotype-dependent fitness
effects (e.g. a gene implicated in production of the same
phenotype, such as a luxuriant mustache, might contribute to differential reproductive success in males vs.
females, or in 1910 vs. 2010), and therefore the same
allele cannot be said to have the same consistent effect
(although it should be noted that this issue has been
examined fairly thoroughly in the literature, and the
usual response, used e.g. by Dawkins, is that the models
are a useful guide when average effect sizes are used –
however, this view has been criticized and counterexamples can be constructed where average fitness effects
give misleading results). The author argues that, of these
effects, frequency-dependent selection is most important, and draws on Mayr’s theory of peripatric speciation
to argue that small peripheral populations are able to
escape frequency-dependent selection, find new optima,
and outcompete the rest of the population with rapid
adaptive change.
The main issues I see with the manuscript are (i) the
need to distinguish the “frozen plasticity” theory

Flegr Biology Direct 2010, 5:2
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/2

Page 11 of 16

Table 2 Differences between predictions of the classical theories of evolution and frozen plasticity theory of
evolution.
clasical theory
anagenesis and cladogenesis **1,

2

frozen plasticity theory

are independent

are coupled

divergence of species1

does not correlate with taxon richness

correlates with taxon richness

genetic polymorphism **3

accelerates evolution

decelerates evolution

species respond to selection *4

plastically (as plasticine)

elastically (as ruber)

species are adapted to *5

current environment

original environment

local and global abundance **6

correlate for any species

do not correlate for old species

abundance of species

is independent of species age

decreases with species age

ability of species to respond to environmental changes **7

is independent of species age

decreases with species age

species on islands are derived *1

as much as those on continents

more than those on continents

asexual species are*8

less adapted to their environment

more adapted to their environment

9

cross-pollinating species *

as stable as self-pollinating species

more stable than self-pollinating species

invasive species **10

express average heritability

express higher heritability

domesticated species

express average heritability

express higher heritability

domesticated species

express average age

are evolutionarily younger

successful selection*11

has no influence on fitness

decreases fitness

rate of anagenesis in a clade*

is (on average) constant

usually decreases

two species in the same niche*

usually cannot coexist

frequently can coexist

slow long-term trends*

are hardly possible

are quite possible

Two asterisks denote the predictions that have already been tested and support the frozen plasticity model. One asterisk denotes the predictions that have not
been intentionally tested but are supported by published data. 1[57], 2[58], 3[5960], 4[17], 5[61], 6[62], 7[45], 8[6364], 9[65], 10[666768], 11[6970]. For explanation see
[46] and (Flegr J.: Microevolutionary a macroevolutionary implication of Frozen plasticity theory of adaptive evolution, submitted).

carefully from Wright’s shifting balance model, and in
particular to ascertain whether the evidence for and
against that model also applies to this model, and (ii)
the great benefits that could be introduced through a
quantitative modeling approach rather than a qualitative
discussion based on general principles. It might also be
interesting to include a discussion of recent evidence
from Peter and Rosemary Grant and others that strong
directional selection operates in opposite directions
from year to year, and thus what we see in natural
populations may be average responses over a longer
timescale. It could reasonably be argued that quantitative modeling is outside the scope of the present work
and that not every evolutionary mechanism need be
taken into account, but the omission of Wright from
both the present manuscript and the accompanying one
provided for the referees’ information really needs to be
corrected.
A few additional comments:
- The history of and relationship between organismlevel and gene-level selection will likely be familiar to
many readers and can be condensed substantially (while
leading to the same italicized punchline).
- Dawkins explicitly addresses the issue of the same
allele having different effects in different bodies with the
rowing team analogy in chapter 5 of The Selfish Gene:
although different individuals will perform better or
worse in different crews, individuals who on average

find themselves in fast boats are more successful, and
this is due to intrinsic differences in ability (in the context of the kinds of crews one is likely to find). Although
this analogy has been criticized by some authors as
overly simplistic, the point that what matters are longrun averages rather than individual outcomes is
important.
- Frequency-dependent selection on genes has
received a great deal of attention in the literature and
the reader might be misled by the discussion on p 6
that the concept is being introduced for the first time in
the present work – it would be useful to delineate more
clearly what the present work is adding to existing
treatments.
- Similarly, the effects of pleiotropy and epistasis have
received extensive treatments from modelers that it
would be useful to mention in the discussion on pp. 7-8.
In particular, the effects of frequency-dependent selection
can be modeled directly using simple population genetics
simulations. The concern about the cited lab experiments
is that the reversion may or may not be due to frequencydependent selection: in some cases, we may be seeing
loss of alleles that are deleterious under most conditions
but not under the artificial selection conditions (e.g.
genes for stress tolerance that slow growth under normal
conditions, of which there are many), in some cases we
may be seeing multiple mutually exclusive combinations
of alleles that “solve” the same problem, which recombine

Flegr Biology Direct 2010, 5:2
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/2

to give more typical phenotypes, etc. In general, the ideas
in this manuscript would benefit from a mathematical or
simulation treatment, which would allow direct evaluation of the conditions under which central or peripheral
populations would be likely to adapt the fastest.
- The discussion about how “there is no such thing as
an allele, or a mutation, for large body size” would benefit greatly from a discussion of some of the literature on
“genes for” in the philosophy of biology over the past 20
years, especially the work of Susan Oyama, Paul Griffiths, Eva Neumann-Held, Karola Stotz, Kim Sterelny,
and others. Considerable conceptual work has been
done on what biologists mean when they talk about a
“gene for” something, especially in the context of
debates about genes as context-sensitive difference
makers and genes as developmental resources. Fred
Nijhout’s pioneering work on biochemical models of
butterfly eyespots is especially relevant here. See also
Brandon & Nijhout’s more recent work on gene vs. genotype level selection, e.g. [55].
- The description of plastic evolution on p 14 reads as
very similar to Wright’s shifting balance model and elaborations on this model by later population geneticists.
It would be useful for this work to more clearly delineate the similarities and differences between the two theories. For a good review of Wrightian vs. Fisherian
evolution see [56].
Author’s response

I would like to thank to Dr. Knight for very nice introductory paragraph of his review, which, in fact, can serve
a second, pregnant summary of my paper. In accord with
his suggestions, I have made more explicit what conceptions are new and what old. The mechanism responsible
for evolutionary elasticity of frozen sexual species, the
most important part of the frozen plasticity theory, represents a new combination of mostly very old mechanisms.
Possibly, the most important new idea is that of the ubiquity of frequency dependent selection in sexual species
due to omnipresent encounters and conflicts of paternal
and maternal copies of genes in zygotes in each generation (the analogy of hawks and doves). Therefore, the
mechanism of evolutionary elasticity suggested by frozen
plasticity theory is first of all the result of a synthesis of
Ernest Mayr’s genetic revolution model with John Maynard Smith’s theory of evolutionarily stable strategies.
The mechanism of transfer of a species from elastic to
plastic state is most related to that postulated by Sewall
Wright as the first stage of his shifting balance model of
adaptive evolution in subdivided populations. In his
model, the small size of local populations enables new
genotypes to cross valleys in the adaptive landscape due
to the released strength of negative selection against
suboptimal phenotypes. In my model, the small size of
split off populations balancing on the edge of extinction

Page 12 of 16

releases the strength of frequency dependent selection,
which enables genetic drift to prune away most of the
polymorphism responsible for evolutionary elasticity
within a species. The search for a mechanism of decreasing rate of macroevolution and decreasing variability of
species in macroevolutionary time-scale, i.e. the third
part of frozen plasticity theory, was inspired by the existence of phenomena described by Stephen J. Gould,
Mark Webster and John A. Davison. And last, but definitely not least, I must acknowledge that my whole
search for a new theory of adaptive evolution in sexual
species was mainly inspired by reading the ingenious critique of the old Fisherian theory in Richard Dawkins’
Selfish Gene.
I added a new Table 1, which summarizes differences
between frozen plasticity theory and several related
models, including Wright’s shifting balance model. I
believe that this is the most important (and most useful)
change performed in the corrected version of the
manuscript.
I decided not to discuss present conceptions of a gene
(but I added recent references) because it can divert the
attention of readers from the main subject of the paper.
By my opinion, the most important mechanism responsible for evolutionary elasticity of sexual species is a frequency dependent selection. I believe that the evolutionary
plasticity of sexual species would disappear even in systems with frequency dependent selection and without any
epistasis (but probably not in systems without pleiotropy).
Reviewer’s report 2

Fyodor Kondrashov, Centre for Genomic Regulation, Barcelona, Spain
Throughout reading this manuscript I found myself
disagreeing with the author on several different levels.
First and foremost, I disagree with the main premise of
this manuscript. Second, the manuscript is fraught with
misleading statements pertaining to the current state of
population genetics and evolutionary theory, omissions
of previous theoretical work and inaccurate usage of
uncommon terminology. Finally, while this paper from
the title appears to be about theory, not a single definition or equation is provided that could have somehow
helped my understanding of the essence of the “frozen
plasticity theory” that the author wanted co convey to
the reader.
The manuscript starts with several verbal arguments
that lead the author to conclude that “adaptive evolution
by means of Darwinian selection ... is very difficult, if
not impossible, in populations of sexual organisms.”
I could not disagree more, and the literature that, in my
opinion, demonstrates the action of positive selection in
sexual organisms is too large to make a meaningful
review here, and includes both theoretical treatments of
this subject (such as the advantage of sex due to

Flegr Biology Direct 2010, 5:2
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/2

recombining of beneficial alleles or the theoretical work
on sympatric speciation) and numerous papers reporting
the action of positive selection in natural populations.
The author presents four verbal arguments that in his
opinion rejects the possibility of Darwinian evolution in
natural populations. 1) frequency-dependent selection 2)
epistatic interactions 3) genotype-environment interactions and 4), which the authors does not articulate
directly, but it seems that he believes that the stochastic
nature of recombination implies that “the unique combination of genes of an excellent individual will be diluted
and its relatives will in no way differ from the relatives
of any other individual” and that “in sexually reproducing organisms neither genotype nor phenotype is inherited from parents to offspring”.
To formally refute all four statements would require
several courses in Biology. Briefly, neither of the four
issues raised present an issue for possibility of adaptive
evolution in sexually reproducing organisms. 1) It is
unlikely that every trait, gene or DNA site is subject to
very strong frequency-dependent selection and, therefore, the first barrier is unlikely to be substantial in nature. 2) Although strong epistasis can limit the rate of
adaptive evolution more profoundly in sexual than asexual populations, any epistatic fitness ridge that prohibits
evolution completely in a sexual population would also
do so in an asexual population. 3) Genotype-environment (which the author calls genotype-phenotype) interactions are also not a complete barrier to adaptive
evolution as long as an allele has any measurable level
of heritability and is not completely overwhelmed by a
changing environment. 4) Finally, with regard to transmission of alleles between generations in a sexual population it should be recognized that while the offspring
get an intermediate genotype of the parents this in no
way prohibits positive selection for a specific allele and
does not imply that “genotype is not inherited”.
In addition to these general misconceptions the manuscript is also littered with wrong and otherwise problematic statements some of which are neither right or
wrong but just inappropriate.
Thus, while I am in agreement that frequency-dependent selection, epsitatic interactions and environmental
effects pose interesting evolutionary questions, the
authors does not do justice to these issues in modern
evolutionary biology in the current manuscript. I cannot
suggest specific ways to improve this manuscript as I
believe it to be beyond salvation.
Author’s response

In the paper, I try to convince readers that (due to the
effect of pleiotropy) sexual reproduction, namely processes of segregation and recombination of genetic
material, makes frequency dependent selection so ubiquitous that Fisherian evolution of adaptive traits by

Page 13 of 16

individual selection (or Dawkinsian evolution by intralocus competition of alleles) is practically impossible in a
normal genetically polymorphic population. Evidently,
I did not succeeded in convincing Fyodor Kondrashov.
It would be rather unproductive to try to repeat or elaborate my arguments here in more details. If the reader
(or the referee) would like to hear the arguments in a
less condensed form, he or she can read the book Frozen Evolution.
I would just like to correct here one misunderstanding
of Dr. F. Kondrashov. The third barrier to adaptive evolution in sexual organisms is neither genotype-phenotype interaction nor genotype-environment interaction
but the trait-trait interaction, the fact is that “the effect
of the same trait on the fitness of an individual is
usually dependent on combination of other traits carried
by the same individual”. The trait (e.g. aggression) that
increases fitness of an individual carrying certain combination of traits (e.g. the physically strong individual) can
decrease fitness of another individual carrying another
combination of traits (e.g. in weak individuals). Due to
such trait-trait interaction the spreading of many (large
majority?) of traits in sexual species should be studied
using game theory, rather than classical population
genetics theories.
Fyodor Kondrashov misses equations in the paper
describing my theory. By my opinion, however, equations are very useful for describing or even refuting particular models (see K.R. Popper), however, they are
much less useful for describing and more or less useless
for refuting complex theories (see T.S. Kuhn). The frozen plasticity theory of adaptive evolution in sexual
organisms aims to substitute the previous selfish gene
theory, which itself substituted the previous theory of
individual selection thirty years ago. Let us recall that
neither Selfish Gene, nor Origin of Species contains any
equations.
Finally, I would like to thank Dr. Fyodor Kondrashov,
who is not only a referee but also a coeditor of this
paper for Biology Direct, for his fairness in handling a
manuscript with which he does not agree, and for his
courage to write an open review for a work most probably strange - but with a certain non-negligible potentiality of importance. I suppose that most colleagues in
his position would somehow flinch from writing the
review.
Reviewer’s report 3

Massimo Di Giulio CNR, Lab Mol Evolut, Inst Genet &
Biophys, Naples, Italy (nominated by David H. Ardell,
University of California, Merced, California, United
States)
The paper “Elastic, not plastic species: Frozen plasticity theory and the origin of adaptive evolution in sexually reproducing organisms” presents and discusses the

Flegr Biology Direct 2010, 5:2
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/2

author’s theory of frozen plasticity that should provide
an alternative explanation of the evolution of adaptive
traits in sexual organisms. After reading its extended,
elaborated discussion, I am more or less convinced that
the theory is original and correct; however, I am not
convinced that the correct parts of the theory are new
and that the new parts are correct.
The suggested mechanisms of the transition between
the elastic and plastic states of a species remind me of
Ernest Mayr’s theory of genetic revolution. The author
should clearly state what the differences are between his
theory and fifty-year-old Mayr’s model.
The author supports his theory with the results of
selection experiments showing that the evolution of
populations by directional selection ends by reaching a
selection plateau. It is not clear, however, whether this
is a regular or rather exceptional result of such experiments. The efficiency of practical breeding programs
suggests that the populations of the bred animals and
plants evolve towards higher productivity even after tens
of years of artificial selection.
The author claims that the punctuated pattern of evolution is now a widely accepted model of the evolution
of multicellular life on the Earth. However, it is not clear
what he means by “widely accepted”. Does he mean “ the
prevailing model” or just “a widespread model"?
Table 1 (which is not referred to in the manuscript
and this should be corrected) says that the aim of the
frozen plasticity theory is to explain not only why old
species are elastic and how an elastic species turns plastic during peripatric speciation but also the “decreasing
rate of macroevolution”. However, the third mechanism
is discussed in the accompanying manuscript, but is not
mentioned in the reviewed manuscript. Moreover, I am
not sure whether the phenomenon of the decreasing
rate of macroevolution really exists (at least I do not
think that it is widely accepted in the standard evolutionary theories) and therefore whether the explanation
for this phenomenon is really needed.
In the Summary and Conclusions, the author says that
the evolutionary and ecological implications of the theory
are discussed in the accompanying manuscript. However,
this aforementioned manuscript (available to me as a
referee) is not to be published in the Biology Direct.
Therefore, it should not be referred to as the accompanying manuscript in the reviewed paper. Generally, the
reviewed paper should be a stand-alone paper. The differences in predictions between the classical evolutionary
theories of adaptive evolution and frozen plasticity theory
of adaptive evolution should be briefly recapitulated.
The results of famous Van Valen’s Red Queen hypothesis have shown that species do not age (the probability
of extinction of a species during a certain constant time
interval does not correlate with length of its existence).

Page 14 of 16

However, according to the frozen plasticity theory the
old frozen species should have higher probability of
extinction than young plastic species. How to explain
this contradiction?
In conclusion, I am convinced that the author is absolutely right when saying that many of the mechanisms
postulated by the frozen plasticity theory as playing a key
role in the evolution “may be wrong or at lest may not
play as important a role in the discussed phenomena as
the frozen plasticity theory suggests”. Still, I also believe
that this paper is worthy of publishing, as it may inspire
biologists and paleontologists to study systematically some
potentially important but rather neglected phenomena.
Author’s response

The differences between frozen plasticity theory and
related models are listed anew in Table 1. I agree with
Dr. Di Giulio - Mayr’s genetic revolution model most
closely resembles the mechanism of the transition of a
species from elastic to plastic state suggested by frozen
plasticity theory. I believe that if Mayr would know the
theory of evolutionarily stable strategies and the paleontological evidence for a punctuated character of evolution in the 50ies, he would probably have suggested the
frozen plasticity theory many decades before me. His
model of the transition of species to a plastic state is
based on the drastic change of frequency of alleles due
to sampling effect during a bottleneck event. My model
of transition is based on elimination of genetic polymorphism (stabilized in large populations by frequency
dependent selection) by genetic drift during generations
after the bottleneck event, the mechanism similar but
not identical with that operating during the first stage of
Sewall Wright’s shifting balance model.
Surprisingly, results of laboratory selection experiments performed on sexual organisms are rather sparse.
Therefore, I am not able to say how common the phenomenon of the genetic homeostasis is. The usual targets of breeding programs are domesticated species that
have been exposed to drastic bottleneck effect during
domestication (probably even before domestication, see
[46]) and can therefore be evolutionarily plastic.
I explicitly state that the punctuated equilibrium model
is probably the prevailing model of evolution of multicellular species in the corrected version of the manuscript. I
hope that paleontologists would appreciate that the frozen plasticity theory provides a theoretical background
for their current prevailing model of evolution.
I would like to thank to Dr. Di Giulio for reminding
me of the omission of the third aim of frozen plasticity
theory, namely explaining the decreasing rate of macroevolution. A new chapter has been added to the corrected version of the manuscript and several references
supporting the existence of this important but so far
unexplained phenomenon have been added.

Flegr Biology Direct 2010, 5:2
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/2

Table 2 lists important evolutionary and ecological
implications of frozen plasticity theory; also, references
to papers dealing with this subject have been added to
the corrected version of the paper.
I believe that there is no contradiction between frozen
plasticity theory and Van Valen’s data. The famous Van
Valen study was focused on probabilities of extinctions
of mammal genera, not mammal species. Moreover,
there was only a small probability that young and therefore still plastic species, which represent about 1-2% of
all species in any time, was included in original set of
studied species. Of course, even among the frozen species, the older species are probably more obsolete then
younger species and therefore have a higher probability
of extinction. However, in randomly fluctuating environmental conditions the correlation between the age of
frozen species and their probability of extinction is
probably rather loose.
Acknowledgements
The author thanks especially P. Baum, F. Cvrčková, D. Frynta, S. Komarek, A.
Markoš, D. S. and J. Zrzavý for their suggestions and inspiring discussion.
This work was supported by grant No. 0021620828 of the Czech Ministry of
Education, Youth and Sports.
Competing interests
The author declares that he has no competing interests.
Received: 8 December 2009
Accepted: 13 January 2010 Published: 13 January 2010
References
1. Darwin C: On the origin of species by means of natural selection or the
preservation of favoured races in the struggle for life London: Murray, 5 1860.
2. Hull DL: Darwin and his critics. The reception of Darwin’s theory of evolution
by the scientific community Chicago: The University of Chicago Press 1983.
3. Fisher RA: The genetical theory of natural selection New York: Dover
Publications, 2 1958.
4. Mayr E: The growth of biological thought Cambridge: The Belknap Press of
Harvard University Press 1982.
5. Dawkins R: The selfish gene Oxford: Oxford University Press 1976.
6. Williams GC: Adaptation and natural selection Princeton: Princeton University
Press 1966.
7. Hamilton WD: The genetical evolution of social behaviour. I. J Theor Biol
1964, 7:1-16.
8. Hamilton WD: The genetical evolution of social behaviour. II. J Theor Biol
1964, 7:17-52.
9. Ayala FJ, Campbell CA: Frequency-dependent selection. Ann Rev Ecol Syst
1974, 5:115-138.
10. Heino M, Metz JJ, Kaitala V: The enigma of frequency-dependent
selection. TREE 1998, 13:367-370.
11. Allison AC: The distribution of the sickle-cell trait in East Africa and
elsewhere, and its apparent relationship to the incidence of subtertian
malaria. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 1954, 48:312-318.
12. Maynard Smith J, Price GR: The logic of animal conflicts. Nature 1973,
246:15-18.
13. Maynard Smith J: Evolution and the theory of games Cambridge University
Press 1982.
14. Flegr J: On the “origin” of natural selection by means of speciation. Riv
Biol-Biol Forum 1998, 91:291-304.
15. Laubichler MD, Hagen EH, Hammerstein P: The strategy concept and John
Maynard Smith’s influence on theoretical biology. Biol Philos 2005,
20:1041-1050.

Page 15 of 16

16. Dobzhansky T, Ayala FJ, Stebbins GL, Valentine JW: Evolution San Francisco:
W.H. Freeman and Company 1977.
17. Dobzhansky T, Spassky B: Artifitial and natural selection for two
behavioral traits in Drosophila pseudoobscura. PNAS USA 1969, 62:75-80.
18. Lerner IM: The genetic basis of selection New York: Willey 1958.
19. Eldredge N, Thompson JN, Brakefield PM, Gavrilets S, Jablonski D,
Jackson JBC, et al: The dynamics of evolutionary stasis. Paleobiology 2005,
31:133-145.
20. Wilson AJ, Pemberton JM, Pilkington JG, Clutton-Brock TH, Coltman DW,
Kruuk LEB: Quantitative genetics of growth and cryptic evolution of body
size in an island population. Evol Ecol 2007, 21:337-356.
21. Hansen TF, Houle D: Evolvability, stabilizing selection, and the problem
of stasis. Phenotypic Integracion Oxford: Oxford University Press 2004,
130-153.
22. Rasnicyn AP: Collected works in evolutionary biology (Izbrannye trudy po
evolucionnoj biologii) Moskva: Tovarisevstvo naucnych izdanii KMK 2005.
23. Griffiths PE, Neumann-Held EM: The many faces of the gene. BioScience
1999, 49:656-662.
24. Stotz K, Griffiths PE, Knight R: How biologists conceptualize genes: an
empirical study. Stud Hist Phil Biol & Biomed Sci 2004, 35:647-673.
25. Silander OK, Tenaillon O, Chao L: Understanding the evolutionary fate of
finite populations: The dynamics of mutational effects. Plos Biology 2007,
5:922-931.
26. Wainscoat JS, Kanavakis E, Wood WG, Letsky EA, Huehns ER, Marsh GW,
et al: Thalassaemia intermedia in Cypress: The interaction of alpha and
betha thalassaemia. Br J Haematol 1983, 53:411-416.
27. Templeton AR: The reality and importance of founder speciation in
evolution. BioEssays 2008, 30:470-479.
28. van Heerwaarden B, Willi Y, Kristensen TN, Hoffmann AA: Population
bottlenecks increase additive genetic variance but do not break a
selection limit in rain forest Drosophila. Genetics 2008, 179:2135-2146.
29. Fabbro T, Davison AC, Steinger T: Reliable confidence intervals in
quantitative genetics: narrow-sense heritability. Theor Appl Genet 2007,
115:933-944.
30. Roff DA: A centennial celebration for quantitative genetics. Evolution
2007, 61:1017-1032.
31. Xu SZ, Jia ZY: Genomewide analysis of epistatic effects for quantitative
traits in barley. Genetics 2007, 175:1955-1963.
32. Liberman U, Feldman MW: On the evolution of epistasis I: diploids under
selection. Theor Popul Biol 2005, 67:141-160.
33. Malmberg RL, Mauricio R: QTL-based evidence for the role of epistasis in
evolution. Genet Res 2005, 86:89-95.
34. Leroi A, Koufopanou V, Burt A: Cancer selection. Nature Reviews Cancer
2003, 3:226-231.
35. Hammerstein P: Streetcar theory and long-term evolution. Sci 1996,
273:1032.
36. Hammerstein P: Strategic analysis in evolutionary genetics and the
theory of games. J Genet 2005, 84:7-12.
37. Lively CM, Dybdahl MF: Parasite adaptation to locally common host
genotypes. Nature 2000, 405:679-681.
38. Mayr E: Animal species and evolution Cambridge: Harvard University Press
1963.
39. Dobzhansky T: Genetics and the origin of species New York: Columbia
University Press 1937.
40. Muller HJ: Reversibility in evolution considered from the standpoint of
genetics. Biol Rev 1939, 14:261-280.
41. Nei M: Molecular population genetics and evolution Amsterdam: NorthHoland Pub. Comp., 1 1975.
42. Nei M, Maruyama T, Chakraborty R: The bottleneck effect and genetic
variability in populations. Evolution 1975, 29:1-10.
43. Campbell MC, Tishkoff SA: African genetic diversity: Implications for
human demographic history, modern human origins, and complex
disease mapping. Annual Review of Genomics and Human Genetics 2008,
9:403-433.
44. Booy G, Hendriks RJJ, Smulders MJM, Van Groenendael JM, Vosman B:
Genetic diversity and the survival of populations. Plant Biology 2000,
2:379-395.
45. Mikulas R: The principle of “Frozen Evolution” and its manifestation in
the fossil record: the brachiopod genus Aegiromena Havlicek. Proceedings
of Paleontological Workshop Held in Honour of Doc.RNDr. Jaroslav Kraft, CSc.
Plzen 2008.

Flegr Biology Direct 2010, 5:2
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/2

46. Flegr J: Frozen evolution or, that’s not the way it is, Mr. Darwin A farewell to
selfish gene Praque: Charles University in Praque Press 2008.
47. Gould SJ: The structure of evolutionary theory Camridge: The Belknap Press
of Harvard University Press 2002.
48. Hughes NC: Strength in numbers: high phenotypic variance in early
Cambrian trilobites and its evolutionary implications. BioEssays 2007,
29:1081-1084.
49. Erwin DH: Disparity: Morphological pattern and developmental context.
Palaeontology 2007, 50:57-73.
50. Webster M: A Cambrian peak in morphological variation within trilobite
species. Sci 2007, 317:499-502.
51. Foote M: Survivorship analysis of Cambrian and Ordovician trilobites.
Paleobiology 1988, 14:258-271.
52. Eldredge N: Allopatric model and phylogeny in paleozoic invertebrates.
Evolution 1971, 25:156-167.
53. Eldredge N, Gould SJ: Punctuated equilibria: an alternative to phyletic
gradualism. Models in Paleontology San FranciscoSchopf TJM 1972, 82-83.
54. Flegr J: A possible role of intracellular isoelectric focusing in the
evolution of eukaryotic cells and multicellular organisms. . J Mol Evol
2009, 69:445-451.
55. Brandon RN, Nijhout NH: The empirical nonequivalence of genic and
genotypic models of selection: A (decisive) refutation of genic
selectionism and pluralistic genic selectionism. Phil Sci 2006, 73:277-297.
56. Wade MJ, Goodnight GC: Perspective The theories of Fisher and Wright
in the context of metapopulations: When nature does many small
experiments. Evolution 1998, 52:1537-1553.
57. Ricklefs RE: Cladogenesis and morphological diversification in passerine
birds. Nature 2004, 430:338-341.
58. Pagel M, Venditti C, Meade A: Large punctuational contribution of
speciation to evolutionary divergence at the molecular level. Sci 2006,
314:119-121.
59. Bryant EHS, McCommas A, Combs LM: Morphometric differentiation
among experimental lines of the housefly in relation to a bottleneck.
Genetics 1986, 114:1213-1223.
60. Mezhzherin SV: Genetic differentiation and phylogenetic relationships
among Palearctic mice (Rodentia, Muridae). Genetika (Moscow) 1997,
33:78-86.
61. Costas E, Gonzalez-Gil S, Lopez-Rodas V, Aguilera A: The influence of the
slowing of Earth’s rotation: A hypothesis to explain cell division
synchrony under different day duration in earlier and later evolved
unicellular algae. Helgolander Meeresuntersuchungen 1996, 50:117-130.
62. Prinzing A, Ozinga WA, Durka W: The relationship between global and
regional distribution diminishes among phylogenetically basal species.
Evolution 2004, 58:2622-2633.
63. Peck JR, Yearsley JM, Waxman D: Explaining the geographic distributions
of sexual and asexual population. Nature 1998, 391:889-892.
64. Haag CR, Ebert D: A new hypothesis to explain geographic
parthenogenesis. Ann Zool Fennici 2004, 41:539-544.
65. Flegr J: Was Lysenko (partly) right? Michurinist biology in the view of
modern plant physiology and genetics. Riv Biol-Biol Forum 2002,
95:259-271.
66. Yonekura R, Kawamura K, Uchii K: A peculiar relationship between genetic
diversity and adaptability in invasive exotic species: Bluegill sunfish as a
model species. Ecological Research 2007, 22:911-919.
67. Prentis PJ, Wilson JRU, Dormontt EE, Richardson DM, Lowe AJ: Adaptive
evolution in invasive species. Trends Plant Sci 2008, 13:288-294.
68. Novak SJ: The role of evolution in the invasion process. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 2007, 104:3671-3672.
69. Bradshaw WE, Holzapfel CM: Climate change. Evolutionary response to
rapid climate change. Science 2006, 312:1477-1478.
70. Nussey DH, Postma E, Gienapp P, Visser ME: Selection on heritable
phenotypic plasticity in a wild bird population. Sci 2005, 310:304-306.
doi:10.1186/1745-6150-5-2
Cite this article as: Flegr: Elastic, not plastic species: Frozen plasticity
theory and the origin of adaptive evolution in sexually reproducing
organisms. Biology Direct 2010 5:2.

Page 16 of 16

Publish with Bio Med Central and every
scientist can read your work free of charge
"BioMed Central will be the most significant development for
disseminating the results of biomedical researc h in our lifetime."
Sir Paul Nurse, Cancer Research UK

Your research papers will be:
available free of charge to the entire biomedical community
peer reviewed and published immediately upon acceptance
cited in PubMed and archived on PubMed Central
yours — you keep the copyright
Submit your manuscript here:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/info/publishing_adv.asp

BioMedcentral

</pre>
</body>
</html>
