<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Dynamics of digestive proteolytic system during blood feeding of the hard tick Ixodes ricinus</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Parasites & Vectors 2010, 3:119. doi:10.1186/1756-3305-3-119"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Zdeněk Franta"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Franta et al. Parasites & Vectors 2010, 3:119
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/3/1/119

RESEARCH

Open Access

Dynamics of digestive proteolytic system during
blood feeding of the hard tick Ixodes ricinus
Zdeněk Franta1,2, Helena Frantová1,2, Jitka Konvičková2, Martin Horn3, Daniel Sojka1, Michael Mareš3,
Petr Kopáček1*

Abstract
Background: Ticks are vectors of a wide variety of pathogens causing severe diseases in humans and domestic
animals. Intestinal digestion of the host blood is an essential process of tick physiology and also a limiting factor
for pathogen transmission since the tick gut represents the primary site for pathogen infection and proliferation.
Using the model tick Ixodes ricinus, the European Lyme disease vector, we have previously demonstrated by
genetic and biochemical analyses that host blood is degraded in the tick gut by a network of acidic peptidases of
the aspartic and cysteine classes.
Results: This study reveals the digestive machinery of the I. ricinus during the course of blood-feeding on the host.
The dynamic profiling of concentrations, activities and mRNA expressions of the major digestive enzymes
demonstrates that the de novo synthesis of peptidases triggers the dramatic increase of the hemoglobinolytic
activity along the feeding period. Overall hemoglobinolysis, as well as the activity of digestive peptidases are
negligible at the early stage of feeding, but increase dramatically towards the end of the slow feeding period,
reaching maxima in fully fed ticks. This finding contradicts the established opinion that blood digestion is reduced
at the end of engorgement. Furthermore, we show that the digestive proteolysis is localized intracellularly
throughout the whole duration of feeding.
Conclusions: Results suggest that the egressing proteolytic system in the early stage of feeding and digestion is a
potential target for efficient impairment, most likely by blocking its components via antibodies present in the host
blood. Therefore, digestive enzymes are promising candidates for development of novel ‘anti-tick’ vaccines capable
of tick control and even transmission of tick-borne pathogens.

Background
Ticks are blood-sucking ectoparasites that may do harm
to their host by severe blood loss, but the main danger
of ticks remain their capability to transmit a wide variety
of pathogens comprising viruses, bacteria and protozoa
[1], causing diseases in humans and animals [2]. The
miscellaneous vectorial capacity of ixodid ticks is due to
their long-term co-evolution with the pathogens that
they transmit, extended lifespan (up to years), the longlasting blood feeding of all parasitic stages on different
hosts and other aspects of tick biology [3]. Moreover,
the transmission of pathogens is facilitated by the modulation of host haemostatic, inflammatory and immune
* Correspondence: kopajz@paru.cas.cz
1
Institute of Parasitology, Biology Centre, Academy of Sciences of the Czech
Republic, Branišovská 31, České Budějovice, CZ-370 05, Czech Republic
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

responses, mediated by the inexhaustible pharmacology
of the molecules present in tick saliva [4]. The castor
bean tick, Ixodes ricinus is the most important arthropod disease vector in Europe, notorious for transmitting
the tick-borne encephalitis virus and the Lyme disease
spirochetes of the genus Borrelia [5], supporting the
importance of genome sequencing of the closely related
American deer tick, Ixodes scapularis [6]. During blood
feeding, Borrelia sp. spirochetes multiply in the tick gut
lumen and change the expression pattern of their outer
surface proteins, allowing them to exit the gut and
migrate to salivary glands, which they enter to ultimately
infect the mammalian host [7]. These data suggest that
transmission of Borrelia sp. and other tick borne pathogens can be potentially controlled via an efficient
impairment of blood feeding and digestion. In our previous work, we have demonstrated in semi-engorged

© 2010 Franta et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Franta et al. Parasites & Vectors 2010, 3:119
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/3/1/119

I. ricinus females that intestinal digestion is based on an
evolutionarily conserved multienzyme complex of
cysteine and aspartic peptidases [8], orthologous to
those characterized in other parasites, including platyhelminthes [9,10] and nematodes [11]. We have also
mapped the hemoglobinolytic cascade revealing the successive involvement of individual enzymes [12]. Hemoglobin digestion in the I. ricinus gut is initiated by
generation of large fragments by aspartic peptidase of
the cathepsin D-type (IrCD), supported by the cysteine
class peptidase of the papain-type cathepsin L (IrCL)
and legumain-type asparaginyl endopeptidase (IrAE).
The cleavage of large hemoglobin fragments is further
mediated by another papain-type cysteine endopeptidase
cathepsin B (IrCB) and completed by the amino- and
carboxydipeptidase activity of cathepsin C (IrCC) and
IrCB, respectively [12]. Since the genetic screening [8]
as well as the proteomic characterization of the I. ricinus
digestive pathway [12] was performed for a single-time
point towards the end of the slow feeding period (the
sixth day post-attachment), several principle questions
concerning the roles of the individual peptidases during
tick feeding remain to be answered: (i) what is the
dynamic course of overall hemoglobinolysis and the
activity of component peptidases in relation to the feeding phases? (ii) is the hemoglobinolytic pathway (network) preserved during the entire blood feeding? (iii) is
the digestion regulated at the transcriptional, translational or pro-enzyme activation level? (iv) is the site of
action of hemoglobinolytic enzymes spatially restricted
to the gut digestive cells throughout the whole feeding
period? In order to shed more light into the process of
blood uptake and digestion during tick feeding on the
host, we performed complex dynamic analysis of the
gene expression, activity and molar concentrations of
the major digestive peptidases. In addition, indirect
immunofluorescent localization of the major peptidase
of the hemoglobinolytic pathway, IrCB, made it possible
to follow the development of the digestive machinery in
the gut cells from unfed to fully engorged females. This
work provides a first, comprehensive insight into the
dynamics of the digestive apparatus in an important tick
model indicating the potential of blood feeding impairment as an efficient tick control point.

Results
Morphological changes in the Ixodes ricinus gut during
feeding correlate with overall hemoglobinolytic capacity

Feeding of adult I. ricinus females on guinea pigs takes
7 to 8 days under in-house laboratory conditions. The
feeding phases as known for the ixodid ticks [3,13] are
schematically depicted and aligned with the corresponding
observed gut morphological changes and overall hemoglobinolytic activities (Figure 1). During attachment, narrow

Page 2 of 11

gut lumen of unfed ticks is surrounded by the midgut
epithelium formed by undifferentiated reserve cells (also
referred to as replacement cells [13] or stem cells [14])
and digestive cells preserved from the preceding nymphal stage. On the second day post attachment (p.a.), the
midgut lumen slowly expands with the uptake of the
first portion of host blood and the reserve cells start to
grow and differentiate into the initial digestive cells, also
named prodigest cells [15]. The hemoglobinolytic activity in gut tissue extracts (GEs) of unfed as well as 2-dayfed ticks is barely detectable. On the fourth day of feeding, the digestive cells further enlarge and display signs
of hemoglobin uptake and digestion. The first residual
bodies containing waste aggregated heme products,
formed in organelles called hemosomes [16], as well as
large endosomes and lipid vacuoles, start to appear at
this time point (Figure 1). During this phase of slow
feeding, it is already possible to observe the detachment
of the first digestive cells from the midgut epithelium
and the initial increase in overall hemoglobinolytic activity. The most dramatic changes in the midgut morphology is evident towards the end of the slow feeding
period, about the six days p.a.. At this stage, the digestive
cells are fully extended, filled with residual bodies, large
endosomes and lipid inclusions. The detached digestive
cells are liberated into the lumen without any sign of
lysis and most likely removed by defecation. The hemoglobinolytic activity in the gut tissue extract in semiengorged ticks (six days p.a.) reaches about 65% of the
maximum. The rapid-engorgement phase occurs during
the last 24-48 hours prior to detachment. It has been
referred to as the ‘big-sip’ [3] because mated females
imbibe about two-thirds of the entire blood-meal within
this phase. The appearance of the midgut in fully fed
females differs from that observed during the slow feeding period. The midgut epithelium is overlaid with flattened sessile digestive cells that remain associated with
the epithelium; reserve or initial digestive cells are not
detected anymore. Noticeably, the overall hemoglobinolytic activity reaches its maximum in gut extracts of fully
engorged ticks that just dropped off the host.
The amount of component digestive peptidases markedly
increases towards the end of slow feeding

Two approaches were employed to quantify the component digestive peptidases in GEs: (i) the molar content
of peptidases was determined by active-site titration
with selective irreversible inhibitors; (ii) the enzymatic
activity of peptidases was measured in a kinetic assay
with specific fluorogenic substrates.
The active-site titration was performed for all enzymes
except for IrCL, due to the lack of an appropriate irreversible inhibitor as a titrant (Table 1). The concentrations of digestive peptidases proportionally increase in

Franta et al. Parasites & Vectors 2010, 3:119
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/3/1/119

Page 3 of 11

Figure 1 Overview of the feeding phases, midgut morphology and overall hemoglobinolysis in the gut of a Ixodes ricinus female
during feeding on the host. An adult Ixodes ricinus female feeds for about 7 to 8 days. The slow feeding period starts one day postattachment, during which the female ingests about one third of the total blood meal. The major portion of the host blood (about two thirds) is
ingested by the mated female during the rapid engorgement phase, taking place during the last 24-48 hours before the engorged tick drops off
the host. Light microscope panel: The semi-thin sections were stained with toulidine blue; scale bar = 20 μm. UF - unfed ticks; 2d, 4d, 6d - 2, 4,
6 days of feeding, respectively; FF - fully fed (engorged) ticks. Midgut epithelium scheme panel: RC - reserve cells (stem cells); DCN - digestive
cells persisting from the nymphal stage; DCI - initial digestive cells (prodigest cells); DC - digestive cells; DDC - detached digestive cells; RB residual bodies (hemosomes); E - endosomes; blue circles - cell nuclei; yellow circles - lipid vacuoles. Relative hemoglobinolysis panel:
Quantification of relative hemoglobinolysis in gut tissue extracts was measured using the fluorescamine derivatization assay at pH 4.2 and
normalized to one tick gut according to the method described in reference [12].

Franta et al. Parasites & Vectors 2010, 3:119
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/3/1/119

Page 4 of 11

Table 1 Assay conditions for the fluorimetric measurements of digestive peptidases activities and stoichiometric
active-site titration
Enzyme

pH

Substrate
(final concentration)

Shielding inhibitor
(final concentration)

Excitation/Emission [nm]

Active-site titration inhibitor

IrCB

5.5

Z-Arg-Arg-AMCa
(5 μM)

-

360/465

CA-074c

IrCL

4.0

Z- Phe-Arg-AMCa
(5 μM)

CA-074c (2.5 μM)

360/465

n.d.e

IrCC

5.5

Gly-Arg-AMCa
(40 μM)

-

360/465

Ala-Hph-VS-Phf

IrAE

5.5

Z-Ala-Ala-Asn-AMCa
(10 μM)

CA-074c (2.5 μM)

360/465

Aza-N-11ag

IrCD

4.0

Abz-Lys-Pro-Ala-Glu-Phe-Nph-Ala-Leub
(32 μM)

E-64d (5 μM)

330/425

pepstatinh

a

The fluorogenic AMC-substrates (AMC, 7-amino-4-methylcoumarin) were from Bachem
Fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) substrate [38]
c
Epoxysuccinyl-based inhibitor of cathepsin B [39]
d
Epoxysuccinyl-based inhibitor of papain-type cysteine peptidases (cathepsins C, B and L) [34]
e
n.d. - not determined due to a lack of an appropriate titrant
f
Vinyl sulfone-based inhibitor of cathepsin C [40]
g
Aza-peptide Michael acceptor-based inhibitor of asparaginyl endopeptidases [41]
h
Statine-based inhibitor of aspartic peptidases [35].
b

time and reach their maximum levels in fully fed ticks
(Figure 2). IrCB is the dominant enzyme throughout the
whole feeding period and it is the only enzyme which
can be detected in the GE of unfed ticks. The second
most abundant enzyme is the dipeptidyl peptidase IrCC.

Figure 2 Active-site titration of digestive peptidases in the
Ixodes ricinus gut tissue extracts during feeding on the host. The
groups of 15-20 females were forcibly removed and collected from
four guinea pigs at the indicated feeding time points. The guts from
individual ticks were subsequently dissected and the gut tissue
extracts were prepared from the pool of longitudinally cut midgut
halves. The absolute molarities of the individual peptidases in gut
homogenates were determined by stoichiometric titration with the
appropriate active-site inhibitors (Table 1). Bars represent the average
value from a triplicate measurement. Standard deviations were ≤10%
of the average value and are not shown. The molarity of cathepsin L
(IrCL) was not determined because an appropriate inhibitor was
lacking. For details, see Material and Methods section.

The amounts of IrCB and IrCC exceed the concentrations of the other peptidases in the network by more
than one order of magnitude.
The activity measurements of individual enzymes in the
GEs were performed at their pH optima with specific
fluorogenic substrates, preventing the confounding hydrolysis activities of other peptidases with the aid of shielding
inhibitors (Table 1). In accordance with the active-site
titration results, IrCB was the only enzyme giving measurable activities in the gut extracts from unfed ticks. As
shown in the Figure 3 the activities of IrCD, IrAE, IrCB
and IrCC, respectively, begin to increase after the second
day of feeding, followed by an exponential increase
between days 4 and 6 and finally reaching their maxima in
fully fed ticks. The only enzymatic activity that proved to
be an exception to this trend was that of IrCL, which
peaks by the fifth day of feeding and then steeply declines
in fully fed ticks (Figure 3).
Digestive peptidases are regulated at the transcriptional
level

Determination of molar concentrations of individual
digestive peptidases as well as their activity profiles during blood feeding prompted further studies to assess
whether de-novo protein synthesis and/or activation of
existing pro-enzymes is the mode of action underlying
their increase. The determination of digestive peptidase
mRNA levels by semi-quantitative real-time PCR (qRTPCR) analysis demonstrated that the dynamic profiles of
mRNA expression clearly precede the activities of their
respective peptidases (Figure 3; bar graphs) implying
that the major components of the digestive system are

Franta et al. Parasites & Vectors 2010, 3:119
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/3/1/119

Page 5 of 11

Figure 3 Dynamic profiles of mRNA expression and enzyme activities of individual peptidases during the feeding of Ixodes ricinus
females. For each time point, the guts were dissected from 15-20 females removed from four guinea pigs. Half of the guts were processed
either for total RNA isolation or gut tissue extraction as described above. Gene expression profiles of the indicated enzymes were determined by
qRT-PCR, using elongation factor 1 as a reference gene. The expressions were related to the maximum mRNA level set as 100%. Columns
correspond to the average value of triplicate technical determinations, while error bars indicate the corresponding standard deviations. The
enzyme activity curves of indicated peptidases were determined using specific fluorogenic substrates and shielding inhibitors to mask possible
interference from other peptidases (see Table 1). Enzymatic activities in the homogenates were normalized per one gut tissue. The circles display
the average activities obtained from triplicate measurements. The standard deviations were ≤5% of the average value and are not shown.

transcriptionally regulated. The mRNA levels of IrCB
and IrCC reach their maxima already five days p.a.,
IrCD and IrAE mRNA levels peak six days p.a. and IrCL
mRNA displays two expression maxima the fourth and
the sixth day p.a.. For all enzymes, the mRNA expression drops dramatically in fully fed ticks, indicating that
the further continual digestive phase in engorged ticks
following their detachment from the host relies mainly
on the enzymes synthesized during the slow feeding
period.
The digestive apparatus is localized intracellularly during
the whole feeding period

To demonstrate whether the hemoglobinolytic machinery
remains intracellular during the whole blood feeding,
immunolocalization of IrCB, the most abundant peptidase
of the network, was performed. The separation of gut tissue extracts by SDS-PAGE followed by immunoblot analysis using the antibody prepared against the recombinant
IrCB labeled a faint band of about 38 kDa and an intense
double band of 33 and 31 kDa (Figure 4A). The former
band likely corresponds to the IrCB pro-enzyme having a
theoretical mass (without glycosylation) of 35,725 Da [8],
whereas the double band may correspond to the intermediate and fully activated form of IrCB, as has been previously described for schistosmal cathepsin B [17] or to a

possible presence of another closely related isoform of
IrCB that cross-reacts with the antibody [12]. Activated
IrCB protein starts to appear at the second day of feeding
and becomes quite intense from the fourth day on to the
fully fed stage (Figure 4A). This result is consistent with
the quantitative results obtained by active-site titration
and activity measurements.
In order to minimize the background fluorescence of
the gut tissues and to obtain a clear immunostaining
signal, affinity purified anti-IrCB antibodies from the
rabbit serum were used. Immunolocalization of IrCB in
tick guts corresponding to specified feeding periods
clearly demonstrates that IrCB gradually accumulates
and remains restricted within the digestive cells during
the entire duration of the tick feeding on the host (Figure 4B). Traces of IrCB were observed already in the
gut sections of unfed ticks, possibly as a remnant of the
enzyme from the preceding nymphal stage. The increase
of IrCB in the digestive cells becomes clearly evident by
the fourth day of feeding. Towards the end of the slow
feeding period (day six p.a.), most of the digestive cells
are fully loaded with the enzyme and detached from the
epithelium. No evidence of disintegration of the digestive cells and release of the free enzyme into the lumen
was observed. This finding was further corroborated by
the control measurement of activity of digestive enzymes

Franta et al. Parasites & Vectors 2010, 3:119
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/3/1/119

Page 6 of 11

Figure 4 Immunolocalization of cathepsin B (IrCB) in the gut of an Ixodes ricinus female during feeding. Panel A: Western blot analysis of
authentic IrCB in gut homogenates electro-transferred onto a PVDF membrane. LMW - protein markers; UF - unfed ticks; 2 d - 2 days fed ticks
(0.2 gut/lane); 4 d, 5 d, 6 d - 4, 5, 6 days fed ticks, respectively (0.1 gut/lane); FF - fully fed ticks (0.08 gut/lane). CBB - Coomassie stained
membrane; Ab@IrCB - rabbit antibody against recombinant IrCB (Ra×IrCBIg, dilution 1:100). Secondary antibody - Swine anti-rabbit-peroxidase
conjugate (1:1000). Panel B: Immunolocalization of IrCB in the gut of I. ricinus on semi-thin sections using affinity purified rabbit antibody
Ra×IrCBACP (30 μg/ml). Secondary antibody - Goat anti-rabbit with conjugated Alexa Fluor® 488 (1:200). Merged images with DAPI nuclei staining;
scale bars = 20 μm. Panel C: Control images without primary antibodies.

in the gut lumen, which did not exceed 10% of the
activities determined in GE (data not shown). In fully
fed ticks, the last generation of digestive cells containing
the IrCB remains associated within the midgut epithelium. Although the intensity of the IrCB signal within
the sessile digestive cells in fully fed ticks seems to be
lower compared to the day six p.a. (Figure 4B, panels FF
vs. 6d), the remarkable enlargement of the gut tissue
epithelium apparently accounts for the apparent maximal hemoglobinolytic capacity of the whole gut tissue
extract in fully fed ticks.

Discussion
During previous studies we have described the major
constituents of the digestive machinery of the hard tick
I. ricinus and deciphered how they are organized into a
hemoglobinolytic pathway [8,12]. Herein, we have
focused on the dynamic profiling of the components of
the tick digestive apparatus during the course of tick
feeding. This information is particularly relevant since

the feeding phase is decisive for pathogen transmission.
We have provided a comprehensive insight into the
gene transcription, activity and molar concentration of
five digestive enzymes during blood feeding, as well as
the localization of the IrCB, as the most abundant peptidase of the pathway. Placing these molecular data into
the context of previous ultrastructural and histochemical
studies on tick gut development performed in 1970’s
and 80’s [3,13,18] improves significantly our understanding of the entire process of intracellular blood digestion.
Morphological changes of the midgut epithelium
observed during blood feeding of I. ricinus by light
microscopy (Figure 1) basically correspond to the
numerous previous reports published on gut morphology in other ixodid tick species [14,15,19,20]. In these
studies, a variety of cells within the gut epithelium have
been described and named according to their structure
and/or putative functions, resulting in a rather disperse
nomenclature in different tick species. Based on our
observations (Figure 1), we tend to support the

Franta et al. Parasites & Vectors 2010, 3:119
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/3/1/119

hypothesis of some authors [13,15] that various cell
types represent digestive cells at different stages of
development, reflecting their growth, differentiation and
gradually changing function in endocytosis, lysosomal
digestion, secretion and handling of waste products via
hemosome formation [16]. This study also supports the
recognition of distinct digestive phases previously based
on the structural changes of the tick gut [18]. The initial
continual digestive phase takes place during the slow
feeding period starting one to two days p.a. to the host
and is characterized by the gradual maturation and
detachment of digestive cells from the gut epithelium
[13]. During the rapid engorgement phase, when the
mated female ingests about two thirds of the total blood
meal, no more reserve cells or initial digestive cells are
observed and the mature digestive cells remain associated with the epithelium.
We have previously characterized the hemoglobinolytic pathway in semi-engorged I. ricinus females that
were fed for six days, comprising of a cascade of enzymatic activities of aspartic peptidase IrCD, cysteine peptidase IrCL, asparaginyl endopeptidase IrAE, the major
endo/exopeptidase IrCB and dipeptidyl peptidase IrCC
[12]. The determination of the molar concentrations as
well as activity measurements of the component peptidases presented in this work support that the hemoglobinolytic pathway described for the sixth day p.a. is
preserved throughout the entire blood feeding period.
The quantitative determination of the overall hemoglobinolytic activity indicates that digestion is almost
negligible for the first two days after tick attachment on
the host and dramatically increases between days four
and six, progressing towards the end of the slow feeding
period (Figure 1). The maximum level of hemoglobinolytic capacity (activity normalized to the entire tick gut)
was recorded in the guts of fully fed ticks that just
dropped off the host. The trend of an increase in total
hemoglobinolysis matches with the concomitant activity
profiles of the majority digestive enzymes, namely IrCB,
IrCC, IrAE and IrCD. The significant up-regulation of
their respective mRNA levels could be monitored
already at the second day of feeding, peaking towards
the end of the slow feeding period between days four
and six and then steeply declining during the rapid
engorgement phase. This result is consistent with an
earlier histological observation demonstrating that RNA
is mainly accumulated in the stem and prodigest cells
(herein referred to as reserve and initial digestive cells,
respectively), that disappear during the rapid engorgement stage [15]. The contrast of the significant
down-regulation of mRNA expression to the peaking
hemoglobinolysis and enzyme activities (except for
IrCL) during the rapid engorgement suggests that the
following second continuous digestive phase, i.e. blood

Page 7 of 11

digestion in fully fed ticks detached from the host, relies
mainly on the enzymes synthesized and accumulated
during the slow feeding period. Our results contradict
the prevailing opinion that the rapid engorgement stage
is associated with reduced hemoglobinolysis, which has
been accordingly designated the reduced-digestion phase
in the literature [18,20,21]. To our knowledge, the general recognition of the term ‘reduced-digestion phase’
originates from a 1973 report on the total proteolytic
activity in gut homogenates of the hard tick Hyalomma
excavatum [22]. The authors reported a low activity in
both the initial stage of feeding as well as in fully
engorged females. However, it is important to take into
consideration that they related the proteolytic activity
to the total protein concentration in the gut extracts
without any compensation for the proteins of the host
origin. To our experience, it is impossible to free
mechanically the dissected gut tissues of significant host
blood contamination, since substantial portion of the
host proteins is already present inside the digestive
vacuoles. Moreover, a gentle washing has to be applied
to prevent an undesired detachment of digestive cells
from the epithelium. Therefore, the host proteins inevitably remain the most abundant components in the gut
homogenates from the later feeding stages. Despite its
simplicity, normalization of hemoglobinolytic and
enzyme activities to one tick gut is more reliable than
relation to the total protein or host hemoglobin concentrations (based on absorbance at 415 nm) and reflects
better the real total proteolytic potential of the gut. In
conclusion, this approach leads to a novel interpretation
of the blood digestion capacity during the ‘big-sip’
which disproves the earlier opinions.
The only enzyme activity that drops significantly during the fast engorgement phase is that of IrCL. This
finding was also supported by the Western blot analysis
showing a substantial reduction of IrCL amount in fully
engorged ticks (unpublished results). The reason for the
decrease of IrCL activity in fully fed ticks remains still
obscure. One possible explanation to this effect is a
simultaneous increase of cathepsin L-specific inhibitors,
such as cystatins found to be expressed in the midgut of
the soft tick Ornithodoros moubata [23] or the hard tick
Haemaphysalis longicornis [24]. Our results strongly
imply that de novo protein synthesis of the digestive
enzymes rather than activation of existing pro-enzymes
underlies the overall increase of hemoglobinolytic activity in the gut of I. ricinus. The main evidence for this
interpretation was provided by Western blot analysis of
IrCB from gut homogenates dissected during the course
of blood feeding (Figure 4A). At all time points, IrCB
was mainly detected as an activated mature enzyme and
the proportion of the IrCB pro-enzyme and mature
active enzyme did not seem to be altered significantly in

Franta et al. Parasites & Vectors 2010, 3:119
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/3/1/119

time (Figure 4A). The affinity purified antibodies made
it possible to perform a clear immunolocalization of
IrCB in I. ricinus midgut sections prepared at different
time points of feeding (Figure 4B). Similar results were
obtained for IrCL and IrCD (data not shown), indicating
that the entire digestive apparatus remains localized
intracellularly in the digestive cells during the feeding.
This is in accordance with our previous single time
point localization of IrAE in the midgut of semiengorged I. ricinus [25] and digestive enzymes localized
in the digestive cells of other tick species [24,26,27]. On
the other hand, it remains to be rigorously investigated
whether or not intracellular digestion is preserved also
in the guts of fully engorged ticks during the second
digestive phase, following tick detachment and preceding oviposition.
Based on the results given herein we can conclude
that all the major constituents of the tick digestive pathway are regulated at the transcriptional level. Certainly,
the mechanisms triggering and regulating the expression
of digestive enzymes remain to be explored. The negligible gene expression and enzyme activity at the early
stage of tick feeding make the digestive system extremely vulnerable target for efficient impairment, for
example via antibodies presents in vaccinated animals.
Therefore, digestive enzymes as well as yet unknown
regulating factors are promising candidates as concealed
antigens for the development of efficient ‘anti-tick’ vaccines capable to control ticks and associated transmission of tick-borne pathogens [28,29].

Conclusions
Ticks are obligate blood-feeders capable of ingesting a
blood-meal exceeding more than one-hundred times
their own body weight. Efficient interference of the
blood feeding and digestion processes may be a key to
tick control and transmission of tick-borne pathogens.
Despite its importance, our knowledge of the molecular
mechanisms involved in blood digestion has been rather
limited and dispersed across various ixodid tick species.
In order to obtain a comprehensive view of blood digestion in a single tick species, Ixodes ricinus, we combined
genetic and biochemical analyses to unravel the complex
suite of gut-associated cysteine and aspartic peptidases
[8]. We have demonstrated that the key components of
the tick digestive apparatus, namely the cathepsins D, B,
L, C and the asparaginyl endopeptidase, are remarkably
similar to those found in phylogenetically distant parasites such as nematodes [11], platyhelminthes [9] and
even protozoa such as malaria Plasmodium [30]. Moreover, we have deconvoluted how I. ricinus gut-specific
peptidases function to mediate the gradual hydrolysis of
hemoglobin [12]. The present study accomplishes our
focus on this multi-enzyme network, as it provides a

Page 8 of 11

complex dynamic view of gene expression and enzyme
concentration and activities during the course of tick
feeding on the host. We have demonstrated that expression and protein synthesis of the component peptidases
increase most dramatically towards the end of the slowfeeding period. Overall hemoglobinolysis as well as
activities of most peptidases (except cathepsin L) reach
their maxima during the rapid engorgement phase,
which contradicts the established opinion that blood
digestion is reduced during this phase. On the other
hand, hemoglobinolysis as well as the activities of individual peptidases are negligible during the first two days
after attachment to the host. This feature makes the
digestive peptidases, and yet unknown molecules
involved in their regulation, promising targets for tick
control possibly leading to the rational development of
efficient ‘anti-tick’ vaccines. The applied aspect of this
work will be the subject of future reports.

Methods
Ticks, feeding and tissue dissection

Ixodes ricinus ticks were collected by flagging in localities
around Ceske Budejovice, Czech Republic. One hundred
I. ricinus females were allowed to feed naturally on four
laboratory guinea pigs (25 females each) in the presence
of the same number of males. At a specific time of feeding, namely 2, 4, 5 and 6 days post-attachment (p.a.),
groups of 15 to 20 females were forcibly removed from
each guinea pig in a proportional manner using forceps.
The last group was allowed to accomplish feeding and
drop off the host (7 to 8 days p.a.). Gut tissue from individual time points, including 25 of unfed females (day 0)
were dissected under a binocular microscope taking care
not to disrupt the epithelium. Gut tissue was subsequently washed from the excess host blood in phosphate
buffered saline (PBS). Cleaned gut tissues were subsequently longitudinally divided into two halves and pooled
for either RNA isolation or tissue extraction. A smaller
number (3 - 4) of dissected tick gut tissues was processed
independently for microscopy observations (see below).
Laboratory animals were treated in accordance with the
Animal Protection Law of the Czech Republic no. 246/
1992 Sb, ethics approval number 137/2008.
Isolation of total RNA and analysis of peptidases
expression by quantitative real-time polymerase chain
reaction

For isolation of total RNA, the NucleoSpin® RNA II kit
(Macherey-Nagel) was used. Pooled gut tissue was
placed into RA1 buffer, homogenized with a plastic pestle and further processed according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Integrity of the resulted total RNA
was analysed using agarose gel electrophoresis according

Franta et al. Parasites & Vectors 2010, 3:119
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/3/1/119

to [31] and stored at -80°C until use. Single stranded
cDNA was reversibly transcribed from 0.5 μg of total
RNA using the Transcriptor High Fidelity cDNA Synthesis Kit (Roche). Resulting cDNA was diluted 20 times
and 2 μl were used as a template for semi-quantitative
real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) performed in a final volume of 25 μl using Dual labeled
UPL probes (Roche) and specific primers designed
online http://www.universalprobelibrary.com (Table 2).
The reaction was carried out using the Rotor-Gene
RG3000 PCR cycler (Corbett Research) and the amplification conditions were 95°C - 10 min followed by 40
cycles of 95°C - 15 sec and 60°C - 60 sec. All reactions
were carried out in triplicates. Data were analyzed and
quantified with the Rotor-Gene6 analysis software. Relative values were standardized to the gene for elongation
factor 1a (ELF1A) [32] and normalized to the sample
with the highest level of expression.
Gut tissue extraction

The second half of pooled gut tissues were dispersed in
300 μl of ice-cold 0.1 M sodium acetate buffer pH 5.0
in a 1.5 ml Eppendorf tube and homogenized by three
times repetition of freezing in liquid nitrogen, thawing
and grinding with a plastic pestle. An aliquot of the
homogenate was boiled with reducing SDS-PAGE buffer
for Western blot analysis [33]. The remaining homogenate was supplemented with CHAPS to a final concentration of 1%, incubated on ice for 30 minutes under
agitation and then cleared by centrifugation (20,000× g,
4°C, 10 min). The supernatant aliquots (referred to as
gut tissue extracts, GE) were stored at -80°C until use
for activity measurements and active-site titration.
Determination of the overall hemoglobinolysis and
individual peptidase activities

Overall hemoglobinolytic activity in gut tissue extracts
was determined using the hemoglobinolytic fluorescamine assay as described previously [12]. The hydrolytic
activity of IrCB, IrCC, IrAE, IrCL and IrCD was measured with the Infinite 200 M (Tecan) microplate fluorimeter using fluorogenic substrates and the shielding
inhibitors presented in the Table 1. The activity

Page 9 of 11

measurements were performed at 25°C in 0.1 M sodium
citrate-phosphate (SCP) including 2.5 mM DTT (for
cysteine peptidases) and 25 mM NaCl (for IrCC) at the
respective pH optimum (Table 1). Gut extracts were
appropriately diluted in the assay buffers to achieve
roughly 1,500 RFU/min. Enzyme activity was measured
for at least 10 minutes and calculated from the linear
portion of the kinetic curve. All measurements were
performed in triplicates. The measured activity was normalized per one tick gut using the formula: RFU/min/
gut = (measured RFU/min × dilution factor)/(number of
tick guts × 0.5).
Determination of the peptidase molar concentrations by
active-site titration

The absolute molarity of individual peptidases in the gut
tissue extract was determined by the stoichiometric
titration method according to Barrett and Kirschke [34]
and Knight and Barret [35]. The following inhibitors
were applied as active-site titrants: CA-074 for IrCB,
Ala-Hph-VS-Ph for cathepsin C, Aza-N-11a for IrAE
and pepstatin for IrCD (Table 1), as described previously
[12]. An aliquot of the GE was incubated with various
amounts of the titrant for 30 min at 35°C in above mentioned SCP buffers at the respective pH optima (Table
1). Residual peptidase activities were measured using the
assay systems as described in the previous paragraph,
and plotted into the titration curves.
Expression of recombinant IrCB and preparation of
antibody for Western blot analysis and indirect
immunofluorescence

To recombinantly express IrCB proenzyme (GenBank
ABO26563), the E. coli bacterial expression system and
Champion™ pET Directional TOPO® Expression kit (Invitrogen) was used. The N-terminal (His)6-tagged fusion of
IrCB was prepared using the pET100/D-TOPO® expression vector and the following primers: forward, 5’CACCCGTGAGATTCATCC-3’; reverse, 5’-AGCTATTCGTCCTTGGGG-3’. The resulting expression
constructs were transformed into TOP10 cells (Invitrogen) and sequenced using the T7 forward and T7 reverse

Table 2 Primers, probes and conditions used for semi-quantitative real-time PCR
Product

Forward primer 5’-3’

Reverse primer 5’-3’

Annealing Temp. (°C)

Probe No.a

ELF1A

acgaggctctgacggaag

cacgacgcaactccttcac

60

165

81

IrCL

aaccacctggggtgatga

caagaggtatgctagcactgga

60

15

89

IrCD

gacagaaggcggacagtacc

cggaaattgtgaaggtgacat

60

78

74

IrAE

cgaaaccgtgctttcctg

tcagtcttctcagcgtcacc

60

22

77

IrCB

tcaacaagatcaacacaacttgg

tcatggagatggatttgtcg

60

4

60

IrCC

caccaagaacagggtgaagaa

ctcgcaaccctgagagtagg

60

15

76

a

For the Roche Universal ProbeLibrary Nos. see: https://www.roche-applied-science.com/sis/rtpcr/upl/index.jsp

Amplicon size (bp)

Franta et al. Parasites & Vectors 2010, 3:119
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/3/1/119

sequencing primers. The correct constructs were transformed into BL21 Star™ (DE3) E. coli. Expression was
induced with 1 mM IPTG in LB medium. Isolated inclusion bodies were dissolved in a buffer containing 6 M guanidium hydrochloride and the fusion (His)6-tagged IrCB
was purified using Ni2+-chelating chromatography in the
presence of 8 M urea. The purified protein was renatured
by dialysis against 0.4 M L-arginine, 0.15 M NaCl, 1 mM
mercapthoethanol and gradually decreasing the concentration of urea (from 8 to 0 M) with final dialysis against 25
mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5. Rabbits were immunized with purified soluble recombinant IrCB (recIrCB) using a standard
immunization protocol [36]. The immunoglobulin fraction
was enriched by serum precipitation with caprylic acid
[37] and the resulting antibody (about 0.5 mg protein/ml)
referred to as Ra×IrCBIg were used for Western blot analysis following reducing SDS-PAGE [33]. For the purpose of
indirect immunofluorescence, the IrCB-specific antibodies
were further purified by affinity chromatography using a
column of 1 mg recIrCB coupled to 1.5 ml of CNBr-activated Sepharose™ 4B (GE-Healthcare) according to the
protocol provided by the manufacturer. Sixty milliliters of
Ra×IrCBIg diluted in PBS to 0.15 mg/ml were loaded onto
the column, washed with 50 ml of PBS and eluted with 0.2
M L-glycine, 0.15 M NaCl, pH 2.2. The fractions within
the eluted peak were immediately neutralized with 1 M
Tris-base and pooled. The aliquots of the resulting purified antibodies (150 μg protein/ml) referred to as Ra×IrCBACP (for affinity chromatography purified) were stored at
-20°C until use.

Page 10 of 11

temperature. For negative control experiments, the primary antibody incubation was omitted. Sections were
washed with PBS-Tween (four times 5 min) and then
incubated in a Alexa Fluor® 488 dye-conjugated goat
anti-rabbit antibody (Invitrogen/Molecular Probes)
diluted to 1:500 in PBS-Tween for 1 h at room temperature. After washing with PBS-Tween, the slides were
counterstained with DAPI (4’,6’-diamidino-2-phenylindole; 2.5 μg/ml; Sigma). Finally, sections were mounted
in 2.5% DABCO (1,4-diazabicyclo[2.2.2]octane; Sigma)
dissolved in glycerol and examined using the Olympus
FW1000 confocal microscope and consequently processed with the Fluoview (FV10-ASW, Version 1.7)
software.
Abbreviations
GE: gut tissue extract; IrCB: Ixodes ricinus cathepsin B; IrCL: I. ricinus cathepsin
L; IrCC: I. ricinus cathepsin C; IrCD: I. ricinus cathepsin D; IrAE: I. ricinus
asparaginyl endopeptidase (legumain); p.a.: post-attachment; qRT-PCR: semiquantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction; RFU: relative fluorescence
units.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by grants from the Grant Agency ASCR Nos. IAA
600960910 to P.K. and M.M. and KJB 600960911 to D.S., Grant Agency CR No.
206/09/H026 to H.F. and by Research Center LC06009 (MSMT CR). Research
at the Institute of Parasitology BC ASCR, Institute of Organic Chemistry and
Biochemistry ASCR and Faculty of Sciences USB is covered by Research plans
from MSMT CR, Nos. Z602205728, Z40550506 and MSM6007665801,
respectively. We thank Jan Kopecky for tick photographs and Alena
Kopackova for graphical editing. We thank J. C. Powers (Georgia Institute of
Technology, Atlanta) for providing selected peptidase inhibitors.
Author details
Institute of Parasitology, Biology Centre, Academy of Sciences of the Czech
Republic, Branišovská 31, České Budějovice, CZ-370 05, Czech Republic.
2
Faculty of Science, University of South Bohemia, Branišovská 31, České
Budějovice, CZ-370 05, Czech Republic. 3Institute of Organic Chemistry and
Biochemistry, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, Flemingovo nám.
2, Prague 6, CZ-166 10, Czech Republic.
1

Indirect immunofluorescent localization of IrCB in gut
tissues by microscopy

Dissected tissue was fixed overnight in a solution of 4%
formaldehyde and 0.1% glutaraldehyde, in 0.1 M sodium
phosphate buffer pH 7.3 at 4°C. Samples were subsequently agitated three times for 10 min in washing buffer (4% glucose in 0.1 M sodium phosphate buffer, pH
7.3). Microwave incubations in a water bath were carried out three times for 30 s each in a microwave oven
set at the lowest power (80W). Samples were subsequently dehydrated under the microwave radiation using
ascending ethanol dilutions, then infiltrated in LR White
resin (London Resin Company, Ltd.) in ratios of resin :
95% ethanol 2:1, 1:1, 1:2 (1.5 h each, 4°C) and finally
kept in pure LR White resin overnight at 4°C. Samples
were then transferred to gelatin capsules (Polysciences,
Inc.) and filled with resin, which was allowed to polymerize for 24 h at 50°C. Semi-thin sections (0.5 μm)
were prepared, transferred onto glass slides and blocked
with 1% BSA and 10% low fat dry milk in PBS-Tween
(0.3% Tween-20) for 10 min. Incubation with the primary Ra×IrCBACP antibodies (30 μg/ml) in PBS was
performed in a humid chamber for 3.5 h at room

Authors’ contributions
ZF, PK, MM and DS designed the study and PK and MM were responsible
for its coordination. ZF and DS expressed, purified and refolded the
recombinant IrCB and prepared the antibodies. ZF performed and analyzed
mRNA expression profiles by qRT-PCR. HF performed tissue dissections,
microscope observations, and immunolocalization of IrCB. JK and PK
measured and evaluated the enzyme activities and performed the Western
blot analysis. MH determined the enzyme concentration by active-site
titration and analyzed the data. PK and ZF wrote the paper with the critical
input of MM, DS and MH. All authors have read and approved the final
version of this manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 18 October 2010 Accepted: 14 December 2010
Published: 14 December 2010
References
1. Jongejan F, Uilenberg G: The global importance of ticks. Parasitology 2004,
129(Suppl):S3-14.
2. de la Fuente J, Estrada-Pena A, Venzal JM, Kocan KM, Sonenshine DE:
Overview: Ticks as vectors of pathogens that cause disease in humans
and animals. Front Biosci 2008, 13:6938-6946.

Franta et al. Parasites & Vectors 2010, 3:119
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/3/1/119

3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

9.
10.

11.
12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.
22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

Sonenshine DE: Biology of ticks New York: Oxford University Press; 1991.
Francischetti IM, Sa-Nunes A, Mans BJ, Santos IM, Ribeiro JM: The role of
saliva in tick feeding. Front Biosci 2009, 14:2051-2088.
Nuttall PA: Pathogen-tick-host interactions: Borrelia burgdorferi and TBE
virus. Zentralbl Bakteriol 1999, 289:492-505.
Nene V: Tick genomics–coming of age. Front Biosci 2009, 14:2666-2673.
Hovius JW, van Dam AP, Fikrig E: Tick-host-pathogen interactions in Lyme
borreliosis. Trends Parasitol 2007, 23:434-438.
Sojka D, Franta Z, Horn M, Hajdusek O, Caffrey CR, Mares M, Kopacek P:
Profiling of proteolytic enzymes in the gut of the tick Ixodes ricinus
reveals an evolutionarily conserved network of aspartic and cysteine
peptidases. Parasit Vectors 2008, 1:7.
Caffrey CR, McKerrow JH, Salter JP, Sajid M: Blood ‘n’ guts: an update on
schistosome digestive peptidases. Trends Parasitol 2004, 20:241-248.
Delcroix M, Sajid M, Caffrey CR, Lim KC, Dvorak J, Hsieh I, Bahgat M,
Dissous C, McKerrow JH: A multienzyme network functions in intestinal
protein digestion by a platyhelminth parasite. J Biol Chem 2006,
281:39316-39329.
Williamson AL, Brindley PJ, Knox DP, Hotez PJ, Loukas A: Digestive
proteases of blood-feeding nematodes. Trends Parasitol 2003, 19:417-423.
Horn M, Nussbaumerova M, Sanda M, Kovarova Z, Srba J, Franta Z, Sojka D,
Bogyo M, Caffrey CR, Kopacek P, Mares M: Hemoglobin digestion in
blood-feeding ticks: mapping a multipeptidase pathway by functional
proteomics. Chem Biol 2009, 16:1053-1063.
Coons LB, Rosell-Davis R, Tarnowski BI: Blood meal digestion in ticks. In
Morphology, Physiology, and Behavioural Biology of Ticks. Edited by: Sauer JR,
Hair JA. New York: Ellis Horwood Ltd., John Wiley 1986:248-279.
Agbede RI, Kemp DH: Digestion in the cattle-tick Boophilus microplus:
light microscope study of the gut cells in nymphs and females. Int J
Parasitol 1985, 15:147-157.
Agyei AD, Runham NW: Studies on the morphological changes in the
midguts of two ixodid tick species Boophilus microplus and Rhipicephalus
appendiculatus during digestion of the blood meal. Int J Parasitol 1995,
25:55-62.
Lara FA, Lins U, Paiva-Silva G, Almeida IC, Braga CM, Miguens FC,
Oliveira PL, Dansa-Petretski M: A new intracellular pathway of haem
detoxification in the midgut of the cattle tick Boophilus microplus:
aggregation inside a specialized organelle, the hemosome. J Exp Biol
2003, 206:1707-1715.
Sajid M, McKerrow JH, Hansell E, Mathieu MA, Lucas KD, Hsieh I,
Greenbaum D, Bogyo M, Salter JP, Lim KC, et al: Functional expression and
characterization of Schistosoma mansoni cathepsin B and its transactivation by an endogenous asparaginyl endopeptidase. Mol Biochem
Parasitol 2003, 131:65-75.
Coons LB, Alberti G: The Acari-Ticks. In Microscopic Anatomy of
Invertebrates. volume 8B, Chelicerate Arthropoda. Edited by: Harrison FW,
Foelix R. New York: Wiley-Liss; 1999:267-514.
Balashov YS, Grigoryeva LA: Cytological changes in the midgut of tick
females of the genus Ixodes during and after feeding. Dokl Biol Sci 2003,
393:527-530.
Tarnowski BI, Coons LB: Ultrastructure of the midgut and blood meal
digestion in the adult tick Dermacentor variabilis. Exp Appl Acarol 1989,
6:263-289.
Sonenshine DE: Biology of ticks New York: Oxford University Press; 1991.
Bogin E, Hadani A: Digestive Enzymes in “Hard Ticks” (Ixodoidea,
Ixodidae) I. Proteolytic Enzyme in the Gut of Hyalomma excavatum
Female Ticks. Z Parasitenk 1973, 41:139-146.
Grunclova L, Horn M, Vancova M, Sojka D, Franta Z, Mares M, Kopacek P:
Two secreted cystatins of the soft tick Ornithodoros moubata:
differential expression pattern and inhibitory specificity. Biol Chem 2006,
387:1635-1644.
Yamaji K, Tsuji N, Miyoshi T, Hatta T, Alim MA, Kushibiki S, Fujisaki K: Hlcyst1 and Hlcyst-2 are potential inhibitors of HlCPL-A in the midgut of the
ixodid tick haemaphysalis longicornis. J Vet Med Sci 2010, 72:599-604.
Sojka D, Hajdusek O, Dvorak J, Sajid M, Franta Z, Schneider EL, Craik CS,
Vancova M, Buresova V, Bogyo M, et al: IrAE: an asparaginyl
endopeptidase (legumain) in the gut of the hard tick Ixodes ricinus. Int J
Parasitol 2007, 37:713-724.
Renard G, Lara FA, de Cardoso FC, Miguens FC, Dansa-Petretski M,
Termignoni C, Masuda A: Expression and immunolocalization of a

Page 11 of 11

27.

28.
29.
30.

31.

32.

33.

34.
35.
36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

41.

Boophilus microplus cathepsin L-like enzyme. Insect Mol Biol 2002,
11:325-328.
Tsuji N, Miyoshi T, Battsetseg B, Matsuo T, Xuan X, Fujisaki K: A cysteine
protease is critical for Babesia spp. transmission in Haemaphysalis ticks.
PLoS Pathog 2008, 4:e1000062.
Willadsen P: Anti-tick vaccines. Parasitology 2004, 129(Suppl):S367-387.
de la Fuente J, Kocan KM: Strategies for development of vaccines for
control of ixodid tick species. Parasite Immunol 2006, 28:275-283.
Liu J, Istvan ES, Gluzman IY, Gross J, Goldberg DE: Plasmodium falciparum
ensures its amino acid supply with multiple acquisition pathways and
redundant proteolytic enzyme systems. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006,
103:8840-8845.
Kevil CG, Walsh L, Laroux FS, Kalogeris T, Grisham MB, Alexander JS: An
improved, rapid Northern protocol. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1997,
238:277-279.
Nijhof AM, Balk JA, Postigo M, Jongejan F: Selection of reference genes for
quantitative RT-PCR studies in Rhipicephalus (Boophilus) microplus and
Rhipicephalus appendiculatus ticks and determination of the expression
profile of Bm86. BMC Mol Biol 2009, 10:112.
Kopacek P, Weise C, Gotz P: The prophenoloxidase from the wax moth
Galleria mellonella: purification and characterization of the proenzyme.
Insect Biochem Mol Biol 1995, 25:1081-1091.
Barrett AJ, Kirschke H: Cathepsin B, Cathepsin H, and cathepsin L. Methods
Enzymol 1981, 80 Pt C:535-561.
Knight CG, Barrett AJ: Interaction of human cathepsin D with the
inhibitor pepstatin. Biochem J 1976, 155:117-125.
Kopacek P, Zdychova J, Yoshiga T, Weise C, Rudenko N, Law JH: Molecular
cloning, expression and isolation of ferritins from two tick species–
Ornithodoros moubata and Ixodes ricinus. Insect Biochem Mol Biol 2003,
33:103-113.
Russo C, Callegaro L, Lanza E, Ferrone S: Purification of IgG monoclonal
antibody by caprylic acid precipitation. J Immunol Methods 1983,
65:269-271.
Masa M, Maresova L, Vondrasek J, Horn M, Jezek J, Mares M: Cathepsin D
propeptide: mechanism and regulation of its interaction with the
catalytic core. Biochemistry 2006, 45:15474-15482.
Murata M, Miyashita S, Yokoo C, Tamai M, Hanada K, Hatayama K,
Towatari T, Nikawa T, Katunuma N: Novel epoxysuccinyl peptides.
Selective inhibitors of cathepsin B, in vitro. FEBS Lett 1991, 280:307-310.
Kam CM, Gotz MG, Koot G, McGuire M, Thiele D, Hudig D, Powers JC:
Design and evaluation of inhibitors for dipeptidyl peptidase I (Cathepsin
C). Arch Biochem Biophys 2004, 427:123-134.
Ekici OD, Gotz MG, James KE, Li ZZ, Rukamp BJ, Asgian JL, Caffrey CR,
Hansell E, Dvorak J, McKerrow JH, et al: Aza-peptide Michael acceptors: a
new class of inhibitors specific for caspases and other clan CD cysteine
proteases. J Med Chem 2004, 47:1889-1892.

doi:10.1186/1756-3305-3-119
Cite this article as: Franta et al.: Dynamics of digestive proteolytic
system during blood feeding of the hard tick Ixodes ricinus. Parasites &
Vectors 2010 3:119.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
