<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Molecular identification and transmission studies of X-cell parasites from Atlantic cod Gadus morhua (Gadiformes: Gadidae) and the northern black flounder Pseudopleuronectes obscurus (Pleuronectiformes: Pleuronectidae)</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Parasites & Vectors 2011, 4:15. doi:10.1186/1756-3305-4-15"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="MA Freeman"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Freeman et al. Parasites & Vectors 2011, 4:15
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/4/1/15

RESEARCH

Open Access

Molecular identification and transmission studies
of X-cell parasites from Atlantic cod Gadus
morhua (Gadiformes: Gadidae) and the northern
black flounder Pseudopleuronectes obscurus
(Pleuronectiformes: Pleuronectidae)
MA Freeman1,2*†, M Eydal3†, M Yoshimizu5, K Watanabe6, AP Shinn2, K Miura7, K Ogawa4†

Abstract
Background: Epidermal pseudotumours from Hippoglossoides dubius and Acanthogobius flavimanus in Japan and gill
lesions in Limanda limanda from the UK have been shown to be caused by phylogenetically related protozoan
parasites, known collectively as X-cells. However, the phylogenetic position of the X-cell group is not well supported
within any of the existing protozoan phyla and they are currently thought to be members of the Alveolata.
Ultrastructural features of X-cells in fish pseudotumours are somewhat limited and no typical environmental stages,
such as spores or flagellated cells, have been observed. The life cycles for these parasites have not been
demonstrated and it remains unknown how transmission to a new host occurs.
In the present study, pseudobranchial pseudotumours from Atlantic cod, Gadus morhua, in Iceland and epidermal
pseudotumours from the northern black flounder, Pseudopleuronectes obscurus, in Japan were used in experimental
transmission studies to establish whether direct transmission of the parasite is achievable. In addition, X-cells from
Atlantic cod were sequenced to confirm whether they are phylogenetically related to other X-cells and epidermal
pseudotumours from the northern black flounder were analysed to establish whether the same parasite is
responsible for infecting different flatfish species in Japan.
Results: Phylogenetic analyses of small subunit ribosomal DNA (SSU rDNA) sequence data from Atlantic cod X-cells
show that they are a related parasite that occupies a basal position to the clade containing other X-cell parasites.
The X-cell parasite causing epidermal pseudotumours in P. obscurus is the same parasite that causes
pseudotumours in H. dubius. Direct, fish to fish, transmission of the X-cell parasites used in this study, via oral
feeding or injection, was not achieved. Non-amoeboid X-cells are contained within discrete sac-like structures that
are loosely attached to epidermal pseudotumours in flatfish; these X-cells are able to tolerate exposure to seawater.
A sensitive nested PCR assay was developed for the sub clinical detection of both parasites and to assist in future
life cycle studies. PCR revealed that the parasite in P. obscurus was detectable in non-pseudotumourous areas of
fish that had pseudotumours present in other areas of the body.
Conclusions: The inability to successfully transmit both parasites in this study suggests that either host detachment
combined with a period of independent development or an alternate host is required to complete the life cycle for
X-cell parasites. Phylogenetic analyses of SSU rDNA confirm a monophyletic grouping for all sequenced X-cell parasites,
but do not robustly support their placement within any established protist phylum. Analysis of SSU rDNA from X-cells in
Japanese flatfish reveals that the same parasite can infect more than one species of fish.
* Correspondence: mark@um.edu.my
† Contributed equally
1
Institute of Ocean and Earth Sciences & Institute of Biological Sciences,
University of Malaya, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
© 2011 Freeman et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Freeman et al. Parasites & Vectors 2011, 4:15
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/4/1/15

Background
X-cell disease in fish typically develops either as epidermal pseudotumours, gill filament lesions or pseudobranchial swellings in various marine species [1]. X-cells
associated with epidermal pseudotumours in the flathead flounder, Hippoglossoides dubius Schmidt, 1904
and the yellowfin goby Acanthogobius flavimanus (Temminck et Schlegel, 1845) from northern Japan, have
been shown, using small subunit ribosomal DNA (SSU
rDNA) sequence data, to be related protozoan parasites
that have an unresolved taxonomic identity [2]. Freeman
[1] further demonstrated that the X-cell parasite causing
gill filament lesions in the European dab, Limanda
limanda (L., 1758), is related to the two Japanese X-cell
parasites, and suggested they belong in the alveolate
group and that they are basal members of the Myzozoa.
Pseudobranchial X-cell pseudotumours occur in gadoid
fish from the Pacific and Atlantic Oceans [3], but thus
far have not been studied phylogenetically.
In the coastal waters of Hokkaido, seven species of
pleuronectid flatfish have been reported to have epidermal pseudotumours containing X-cells [4]. Of these
seven species, only X-cells from H. dubius have been
characterised using SSU rDNA analyses [5], and it is not
known how host specific X-cell parasites are, and
whether the same X-cell parasite is responsible for causing epidermal pseudotumours in more than one flatfish
species.
Experimental transmission of X-cell disease between
fish has been attempted, but has never convincingly
been achieved. However, most transmission studies were
based on the assumption, at the time, that the X-cell
condition had a viral aetiology and some studies may
not have been suitable for the successful experimental
transmission of protozoan parasites. A cell-free homogenate of epidermal pseudotumour tissue from the yellowfin goby, A. flavimanus, was subcutaneously inoculated
into uninfected individuals, but no pseudotumour
growth was observed during the trial [6]. Gill lesion
regression was observed in European dab, L. limanda,
that were being maintained in the laboratory, and subsequent attempts to transmit the X-cell condition to uninfected fish using an inoculum derived from X-cell
material were not successful [7]. Cohabitation experiments with Atlantic cod, Gadus morhua L. 1758, were
conducted by Morrison et al. [3], but were inconclusive
due to the high mortalities of wild-caught X-cell
infected fish under experimental conditions and the
uncertainty that visibly uninfected wild-caught cod were
truly naïve at the start of the experiment. However, a
single uninfected fish did develop a large unilateral
lesion after two months cohabitation with an X-cell
infected cod.

Page 2 of 13

In the present study we sampled pseudobranchial
pseudotumours from Atlantic cod, G. morhua, from
Iceland and epidermal pseudotumours from the northern black flounder, Pseudopleuronectes obscurus, (Herzenstein, 1890) from northern Japan. Experimental
transmissions of X-cell parasites from Atlantic cod and
northern black flounder to naïve fish were attempted
and a sensitive PCR assay was developed for their subclinical detection. In addition, SSU rDNA analyses
were utilised in order to confirm whether the same
parasite is responsible for infecting different flatfish
species in northern Japan, and whether the X-cell
parasite causing pseudobranchial pseudotumours in
Atlantic cod is phylogenetically related to those causing epidermal tumours and gill filament lesions in flatfish and gobies.

Methods
Sampling and transmission studies of X-cell parasites
from cod in Iceland

Pseudobranchial pseudotumours were excised from
naturally infected young Atlantic cod selected from a
land based cod farm in North West Iceland that is
stocked with a local population of wild juvenile cod
caught in an adjacent fjord for on-rearing. A sub-sample
of pseudotumour tissue from each fish was fixed in 10%
buffered formalin and 95% ethanol for histology and
DNA analyses respectively; the remainder was briefly
stored at 4°C until required. Pseudobranchial tissues
from cod with no pseudobranchial swellings were fixed
in 95% ethanol for use as negative control tissue in the
DNA study. The pseudotumour tissue was gently homogenised in PBS with a sterile pestle and mortar and
diluted with PBS to allow sufficient homogenate for the
experiment. The homogenate was viewed under a compound microscope to ensure that intact X-cells were
present. Disease free hatchery-reared juvenile cod, used
in the experiment, came from the hatchery station of
the Marine Research Institute in Iceland at Staður, Grindavík and the trial was conducted at the Sandgerði Marine Centre, Iceland. Fish were maintained in 1.5 m
diameter rearing tanks and supplied with clean borehole sea water at a constant temperature of 9°C.
Experimental fish were split into three groups and
kept in separate tanks. One group was orally intubated
(oral group, n = 13) with 1 ml of pseudotumour homogenate using a flexible 3 ml plastic pipette; a second
group was given an intracoelomic (IC) injection (IC
group, n = 15) of 100 μl of pseudotumour homogenate;
and a control group (n = 10) received no treatment.
The fish were observed and fed daily and the trial ran
for 17 weeks. At the start of trial fish had a mean weight
of 65 g and a mean length of 19 cm.

Freeman et al. Parasites & Vectors 2011, 4:15
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/4/1/15

Three fish from each group were sacrificed and examined for signs of pseudotumour development nine weeks
into the trial, and the remaining fish were examined on
week 17 at the end of the trial (oral group, n = 10; IC
group, n = 4; control group, n = 6). All pseudobranchial
tissues were removed, longitudinally bisected and fixed
in either 95% ethanol for DNA analyses or 10% buffered
formalin for histology. Nine fish that died during the
trial (weeks 1-9) were frozen until week 17 and examined with those that survived the duration of the
experiment.
Sampling and transmission studies of X-cell parasites
from flatfish in Japan

Pseudopleuronectes obscurus with typical X-cell epidermal pseudotumours were taken as a by-catch by shrimp
fishermen during the summer shrimp fishing season in
Notsuke bay in Eastern Hokkaido, Japan. Infected fish
were maintained in tanks until required for the experimental infections. Pseudotumours were dissected from
the underlying tissues in recently culled fish. Some
pseudotumour tissue was fixed in 10% buffered formalin
and 95% ethanol for histology and DNA analyses respectively, the remainder was minced with scissors, half
being set aside for the feeding experiment and the rest
gently homogenised in physiological saline using a pestle
and mortar and a ground-glass tissue homogeniser. The
resulting homogenate was passed through a fine gauze
cloth to remove large pieces of connective tissue and
centrifuged at 1800 g for 5 min. The pellet was resuspended in 3 ml of saline, examined microscopically for
the presence of intact X-cells and used immediately as
an inoculum in the fin base injection experiment. Negative control skin samples, for the DNA study, were also
taken from uninfected areas of X-cell infected fish and
from fish with no visible signs of pseudotumours.
X-cells from discrete sac-like structures, found at the
extremities of epidermal pseudotumours, were also
examined microscopically and placed in seawater in 24well tissue culture plates and maintained at 15°C to
observe any amoeboid forms and monitor their ability
to adhere to plastic over a 24 hour period.
Fish used in the transmission experiments were hatchery reared and assumed to be free from disease. Two
species of flatfish were used in the experimental infections: barfin flounder, Verasper moseri (Jordan et
Gilbert, 1898), family Pleuronectidae (righteye flounders);
and Japanese flounder, Paralichthys olivaceus (Temminck
et Schlegel, 1846), a lefteye flounder, family Paralichthyidae (Large-tooth flounders). In total, 150 fish of each species were used; fifty as control fish, fifty for the feeding of
infected material and fifty for the fin base injection
experiment.

Page 3 of 13

For the feeding experiment, small pieces of pseudotumour tissue approximately 1 mm 3 in size were fed
directly to fish that had been starved for two days and
their feeding behaviour was observed to ensure that fish
fed uniformly. For the subcutaneous fin base injection
experiment, fish were anaesthetised and 25 μl of inoculum injected with a fine needle at the base of the dorsal
fin rays. 25 μl was considered the largest volume to
safely inject into fish smaller than 50 mm total length.
Control fish received no treatment. Experimental fish
were kept in six separate tanks in a flow-through system
at 15°C in full strength seawater, and observed for three
months. Total length measurements of fish at the beginning of the experiment were: barfin flounder 35-49 mm
(mean 41.9 mm; n = 20) and Japanese flounder
23-37 mm (mean 30.8 mm; n = 20). At the end of the
experiment, fish were examined using a dissecting microscope for the presence of epithelial pseudotumours on
the skin and fins. PCR was not performed on tissue samples from the fin base injection sites for the flatfish group.
Histological examination of pseudotumours

Fresh pseudotumours were fixed in 10% buffered formalin for 48 h and transferred to 70% ethanol for processing in an automatic tissue processor. After embedding
in wax, blocks were trimmed and sections of 5 μm were
cut on a Reichert-Jung Biocut microtome before being
stretched on a water-bath at 45°C and floated on to
slides. Slides were dried overnight in an oven at 60°C
prior to staining with haematoxylin and eosin. The saclike structures from P. obscurus were carefully removed,
from live fish, using forceps, and fixed in 2.5% glutaraldehyde in 0.1 M Sorensen’s phosphate buffer (pH 7.4)
at 4°C for 4 h. Fixed tissues were then rinsed in 0.1 M
Sorensen’s phosphate buffer (pH 7.4) at 4°C overnight
before being post-fixed in 1% osmium tetroxide for 1 h,
dehydrated through an ethanol series, embedded in
Spurr’s resin and polymerised at 60°C for 48 h. Semithin sections of 0.5 μm thickness were cut using a glass
knife on a Reichert Ultracut E ultramicrotome and
stained with 1% Azur II followed by 1% methylene blue
in 1% borax (50:50).
DNA extraction, PCR amplification and SSU rDNA
sequencing of X-cell parasites

Ethanol fixed pseudotumour material and negative control tissues were homogenised with a sterile Eppendorf
pestle and digested overnight at 56°C in 0.4 ml high
concentration urea buffer containing 100 μg/ml proteinase K. DNA was extracted using a QIAamp DNA Mini
Kit (QIAGEN Inc.) following the manufacturer’s tissue
protocol and used as template DNA for subsequent
PCR reactions.

Freeman et al. Parasites & Vectors 2011, 4:15
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/4/1/15

Page 4 of 13

Partial SSU rDNA for both X-cell parasites was first
amplified using the primer pair: H-F1 M 5’ gttctttcttgattctatrag 3’ and H-R3 M 5’ taggaattcctcgttcaagacg 3’ that
were modified from degenerate haplosporidian primers
[8], and require a 48°C annealing temperature. Universal
primers 18e [9] and 606f/r and 18gM [10] were used in
combination with the above primers and with more specific X-cell primers designed from initial sequence reads
(Table 1). All PCRs were performed in 20 μl volumes containing ~10 ng of genomic DNA, 15 pmol of each primer,
0.25 mM of dNTP, PCR buffer with a final MgCl2 concentration of 2 mM and 0.5 units of Taq DNA polymerase.
After an initial denaturation at 95°C for 5 min, samples
were subjected to 35 cycles of amplification (denaturation
at 95°C for 30 s, primer annealing at 55°C for 30 s (unless
otherwise stated), and extension at 72°C for 1 min), followed by a 7 min terminal extension at 72°C. PCR amplicons were purified using a PCR purification kit (QIAGEN
Inc) and used directly in sequencing reactions. The
sequencing reactions were performed using BigDye® Terminator Cycle Sequencing chemistry utilising the same
oligonucleotide primers that were used for the PCRs.
DNA sequencing was completed on amplicons from four
infected fish for each species. Sense and anti-sense strands
were sequenced for all PCR products and contiguous
sequences constructed manually using CLUSTAL_X [11]
and BioEdit [12]. CLUSTAL_X was used for the sequence
alignments with the settings for gap opening/extension
penalties being adjusted manually to achieve optimum
alignments. Regions of ambiguous sequence alignments
were manually edited using the BioEdit sequence alignment editor and final alignments of specific taxa were generated using CLUSTAL_X.
Appropriate taxa were chosen for the phylogenetic
analyses by performing nucleotide BLAST searches with
the X-cell sequences [13] and reviewing previous phylogenetic analyses that included X-cell sequence data
[1,2,5]. Additional taxa were chosen to further represent
the major protist phyla (see Additional file 1).
Phylogenetic analyses were conducted using maximum
parsimony (MP) methodologies in PAUP*4.0 beta10
[14]. MP analysis was done using a heuristic search with

tree bisection-reconnection (TBR) branch swapping, 10
random taxon addition replicates, using the accelerated
transformation (ACCTRAN) option. Gaps were treated
as missing data and clade support was assessed using
bootstrapping with 1000 replicates. Bayesian inference
(BI) analyses were conducted using MrBayes v. 3.0 [15].
Models of nucleotide substitution were evaluated for the
data using MrModeltest v. 2.2 [16]. The most parameter-rich evolutionary model based on the AIC was
the general time-reversible, GTR+I+G model of evolution. Therefore, the settings used for the analysis were
nst = 6, with the gamma-distributed rate variation
across sites and a proportion of invariable sites (rates =
invgamma). The priors on state frequency were left at
the default setting (Prset statefreqpr = dirichlet
(1,1,1,1)). Posterior probability distributions were generated using the Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
method with four chains being run simultaneously for
1,000,000 generations. Burn in was set at 2500 and trees
were sampled every 100 generations making a total of
7500 trees used to compile the consensus trees.
Specific nested PCR detection system

A highly sensitive and specific nested PCR detection
assay was developed for the X-cell parasites from Atlantic cod and the northern black flounder, using the newly
acquired SSU rDNA sequence data. Oligonucleotide primers were designed that were universal for all currently
known X-cell sequences and specific primers were also
designed for each new X-cell parasite sequence. These
primers were then used in the (universal/specific) combinations described in Table 1. Nested PCR reactions
were conducted using the same PCR conditions
described above, but with adjusted annealing temperatures (Table 1), the products of the first round reaction
were used as template DNA for the second reaction.
In accordance with section 8.6 of the ICZN’s International Code of Zoological Nomenclature, copies of this
article are deposited at the following five publicly accessible libraries: Natural History Museum, London, UK;
American Museum of Natural History, New York, USA;
Museum National d’Histoire Naturelle, Paris,

Table 1 PCR primers used for the nested amplification of X-cell SSU rDNA
nested
primer pairs

fwd primer (5’-3’)

rev primer (5’-3’)

annealing temp °C

size
(bp)

i) 305fs/H-R3Mx

tgacctatcatgctgtgatgg

taggaattcctcgttcaagacg

54

1350

ii) 390Xfx/1400rs

agagggagcctgagagacg

agcaagcccgtatggagaagacg

52

1000

i) 280fs/H-R3Mx

atccatcagccatcgacgc

taggaattcctcgttcaagacg

55

1290

ii) 390Xfx/1000rs

agagggagcctgagagacg

tcgtccgatcctcagtcgg

55

645

cod

flounder

s
x

X-cell species-specific primer.
X-cell universal primer.

Freeman et al. Parasites & Vectors 2011, 4:15
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/4/1/15

France; Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russia;
Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.

Results
Atlantic cod with pseudobranchial pseudotumours were
hand-selected from schooling juvenile fish in large
indoor tanks. Infected cod appeared to be darker in colour and generally smaller than uninfected ones from the
same year class (Figure 1a). Infected pseudobranchs
were significantly enlarged and had a creamy-whitish
appearance, whereas uninfected pseudobranchs had a
normal gill-red colour (Figure 1b &1c). The excised
pseudobranchial pseudotumours were approximately
0.8 cm in length from fish that measured 10-12 cm in
total length. The pseudobranchial pseudotumours from
six bilaterally infected fish were used in the transmission
experiment.
Pseudopleuronectes obscurus with epithelial pseudotumours caused by X-cell infection were caught in
Notsuke Bay, Hokkaido (Figure 2a-d). Epithelial pseudotumours were typical of those described from numerous
flatfish species from Hokkaido and were often large and
significantly raised from the body surface, but did not
penetrate the underlying musculature (Figure 2a &2b),
making them easy to remove from the fish to prepare
the homogenate for the transmission experiment. Pseudotumours were always pigmented on the ocular (eyed)
side, but could be either pigmented or non-pigmented
on the abocular (non-eyed) side (Figure 2c &2d) and

a

Page 5 of 13

when sampled, juvenile fish were also sometimes
infected (Figure 2d). Pseudotumours often extended to
the edge of the fins (Figure 2c & Figure 3a). Here, and
at other margins of the pseudotumour, sac-like structures were observed that could be detached, intact, with
mild pressure (Figure 3b). The sacs were relatively fragile, easy to rupture and contained X-cells and other
cellular debris (Figure 3c). X-cells from ruptured sacs
that had been maintained in seawater for 24 hrs showed
no signs of adhering to the plastic tissue culture plates,
had no pseudopodia and were not amoeboid in form.
After 24 hrs in seawater they appeared similar to ones
that were freshly removed from sacs and had not suffered any noticeable shrinkage (Figure 3d).
Histological analyses of the pseudotumours of cod and
northern black flounder revealed that X-cells were present in large numbers in both pseudotumour types (Figure 4a-d). In P. obscurus, the X-cells were limited to the
epidermal skin layer and were arranged in a regular pattern of folded tissues that contained numerous melanomacrophages and other unidentifiable host cells (Figure
4a &4b). In cod the X-cells appeared to be adjacent to,
but not intermingled with, pseudobranchial tissue (Figure 4c). However, pseudobranchial cartilages were also
seen surrounded by X-cells deeper into the pseudotumour lesions (Figure 4d).
Semi-thin sections of the sac-like structures show that
in the central region of the sac, X-cells are found to be
mostly restricted to large masses within the host

b

c

Figure 1 Pseudobranchial pseudotumours in Atlantic cod Gadus morhua from Iceland. a) Five cod from the same year-class; two
uninfected fish (top) and three infected fish (bottom). b) Pseudobranchs have a gill-red colour in healthy fish and are enlarged and have a
creamy-whitish appearance when infected (c) (black arrows). Scale bars a = 4 cm, b & c visible.

Freeman et al. Parasites & Vectors 2011, 4:15
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/4/1/15

Page 6 of 13

Figure 2 Epidermal X-cell pseudotumours on formalin-fixed Pseudopleuronectes obscurus from Hokkaido, Japan. a) A large central dorsal
pseudotumour, seen in cross section (b). c) Pseudotumours can extend from the dorsal surface to the ventral surface and remain pigmented.
d) Juvenile fish are also infected and ventral pseudotumours can also be unpigmented. Scale bars a, c & d = 3 cm, b = 10 mm.

epidermal tissue contained by a thick basal lamina-like
membrane with underlying connective tissues. Some
X-cells inside these large masses appear to be degenerate, whilst others were observed amongst the connective
tissues outside of the membrane that contains the
majority of the parasites (Figure 5a). At the border of
the sac there is a less organised tissue structure
observed. Aggregations of X-cells are no longer contained within membranous structures and they are less
densely packed together with numerous X-cells being
present at the peripheral margin of the sac and some
appearing to be external to the sac (Figure 5b).
Visual inspection of cod pseudobranchial tissues and
microscopic inspection of both flatfish species at the
end of the transmission experiments failed to detect the
presence of abnormal tissue growth or signs of pseudotumours developing. Furthermore, PCR analyses of
pseudobranchial DNA from experimental cod did not
detect the presence of cod X-cell parasite DNA. PCR
was not performed for the infection trials of the flatfish
group.
Nested PCRs were successfully developed for both Xcell parasite species (Table 1), and no cross reactivity
occurred between the two types of X-cells during PCR
analyses. During the development of the nested PCR

assay, negative control tissue from infected P. obscurus
(skin samples taken >2 cm from pseudotumour sites),
were sometimes found to be positive for the presence of
X-cell DNA in the second round of the PCR; whereas
skin samples from uninfected P. obscurus remained
negative during both rounds of the PCR. Negative control tissues from visibly uninfected cod were not found
to contain X-cell DNA with the nested PCR.
Partial SSU rDNA sequence data from the X-cell parasites infecting cod, G. morhua, and the northern black
flounder, P. obscurus, were successfully obtained and
have been deposited in GenBank (G. morhua X-cell,
1728 bp GU296508; P. obscurus X-cell, 1712 bp
GU296509). A BLAST search with the contiguous X-cell
sequence from P. obscurus showed a very high homology (> 99%) with the X-cell sequence reported from
H. dubius [5]. A more detailed comparison with the
X-cell sequence from H. dubius revealed a 99.76% similarity over 1692 bases of comparable data, confirming
that the two isolates from different flatfish hosts should
be considered conspecific.
Maximum parsimony and Bayesian phylogenetic analyses produced trees with a similar topology. The Bayesian inference tree (Figure 6) shows that all known X-cell
sequences group together to form a monophyletic clade

Freeman et al. Parasites & Vectors 2011, 4:15
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/4/1/15

a

c

Page 7 of 13

b

d

Figure 3 Sac-like structures at the extremities of an epidermal pseudotumour on a live specimen of Pseudopleuronectes obscurus and
X-cells released from the sacs in tissue culture plates. a & b) Appearance of a fresh epidermal pseudotumour showing sac-like structures that
can be separated from the main part of the pseudotumour intact, black arrows indicate the same sac attached and detached in a & b respectively.
c) X-cells and host tissue debris immediately after being released from a sac-like structure. d) X-cells maintained in plastic tissue culture plates
containing seawater, 24 hrs after being released from a sac-like structure. Scale bars a = 10 mm, b = 2 mm, c = 20 μm, d = 10 μm.

that is within the alveolates and is basal to the majority of
the myzozoan taxa. The sequence from P. obscurus
groups with the sequence from H. dubius and collectively
they form a clade with the species infecting the yellowfin
goby from Japan. More basal to the Japanese/Pacific
grouping is the X-cell parasite from European dab and
basal to this main X-cell group is the sequence for the
Atlantic cod pseudobranchial parasite. This monophyletic grouping for the X-cell parasites was robustly supported with internal probabilities of 1.0 at all nodes
within the group. However, it was less well supported
from the main spine of the tree with a probability of 0.54
and did not group with other protist phyla.

Discussion
The inability to successfully transmit both X-cell parasites in this study indicates that either the experimental
design or conditions were not suitable for transmission

to take place or that the X-cell stages seen in fish pseudotumours are not infective to new fish hosts. As comprehensive precautions, described in the methods, were
taken in preparation for and throughout the transmission trials, we conclude that fish to fish transmission of
X-cells is not readily achievable using feeding of infected
tissues or by injection of an X-cell inoculum. Ideally we
would have been able to use more fish and run the
experiments for a longer period. However, the availability of infected tissues for feeding and homogenate preparations was limited.
We have shown that non-flagellate and non-amoeboid
X-cells are easily shed from mature epidermal pseudotumours in discrete sac-like structures. These X-cells
appear to lack a suitable apparatus with which to successfully infect a new fish host, unless direct transmission is via ingestion of the sacs. However, if simple
ingestion of sloughed off sacs were sufficient then

Freeman et al. Parasites & Vectors 2011, 4:15
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/4/1/15

Page 8 of 13

a

b
x

x
d
m
c

ch

ch

d

x
x

ps
ps
Figure 4 Haematoxylin and eosin stained histological sections of X-cell pseudotumours. a) Low magnification of a section through an
epidermal pseudotumour in P. obscurus. Large numbers of X-cells (x) are in folds of infected host tissues. The dermis (d) and the underlying
muscle (m) remain uninfected. b) High power magnification of X-cells in P. obscurus have a characteristic polygonal appearance with a lightly
staining large nucleus (black arrows), melanomacrophages are present in high numbers (white arrows). c) Low magnification of a section
through a pseudobranchial pseudotumour in juvenile Icelandic cod. X-cell masses (x) form adjacent to pseudobranchial tissues (ps) but are also
found surrounding pseudobranchial cartilage containing chondrocytes (ch) deeper into the pseudotumour. d) High power magnification of the
boxed section in Figure 3c; numerous X-cells (black arrows) form a distinctive mass that forms the bulk of the pseudotumour, pseudobranchial
cartilage containing chondrocytes (ch) is enclosed by X-cells. Scale bars a & c = 400 μm, b & d = 20 μm.

feeding of freshly minced tumour tissue should have
resulted in transmission of the parasite. Therefore, we
believe that it is more likely that the X-cells undergo
further development in the environment or in an intermediate host before reinfection of the fish host can
occur. The continued support for X-cells being phylogenetically related to the Myzozoa would also indicate
that a flagellated life stage is present at some point in
the life cycle which would be more capable of finding
and infecting a new host fish.
Amoeboid X-cell forms

As no environmental spore-like or flagellated stages
have been described from X-cell pseudotumours in fish,
in spite of numerous thorough histopathological and
ultastructural studies [1], it is not immediately obvious
how transmission to a new host might take place

naturally. However, there have been several descriptions
of amoeboid-like forms in advanced and ruptured X-cell
pseudotumours which may represent the infective agent
for a new host or a free-living stage leaving the fish
host. Small amoeboid forms of X-cells have been
described at the boundaries of epidermal pseudotumours in flatfish from Japan [17], free-floating amoeboid
X-cells have been observed in advanced pseudobranchial
pseudotumours in Atlantic cod [18] and free X-cells
seen in the interlamellar spaces of ruptured gill lesions
in the American plaice H. platessoides [19]. Freeman [1]
recently suggested that transmission of X-cells from the
fish host could be via these amoeboid stages and that
this amoeboid phase to their life cycle would most likely
be present in marine sediments and indeed most fish
species known to become infected with X-cells are closely associated with the benthic environment [1].

Freeman et al. Parasites & Vectors 2011, 4:15
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/4/1/15

a

Page 9 of 13

b

x
x
x
Figure 5 Semi-thin sections of the sac-like structures from Pseudopleuronectes obscurus. a) In the central region of the sac, X-cells (x) are
found to be mostly restricted to large masses within the host epidermal tissue contained by a thick basal lamina-like membrane (black
arrowheads), under which lies connective tissue. Some X-cells inside the large aggregations appear to be degenerate (black arrows), whilst
others can be found amongst the connective tissues (white arrows) outside of the membrane that contains the majority of the X-cells. b) At the
border of the sac there is a less organised tissue structure observed. Aggregations of X-cells (x) are no longer contained within membranous
structures and numerous X-cells are present at the peripheral margin of the sac (black arrowheads) and some appear to be independent from
the sac (white arrows). Scale bars 20 μm.

However, recent molecular phylogenetic studies [[1,2,5],
present study] do not support the hypothesis that
X-cells are amphizoic amoebae having a free-living stage
in coastal marine sediments. Furthermore, in the present
study we have clearly demonstrated that the X-cells contained in sac-like structures are not amoeboid in form,
do not adhere to plastic culture plates and do not form
pseudopodia. We consider this sac stage to be the most
likely form to naturally detach from the host fish as they
are delicately attached to the main pseudotumour and
they are seemingly a discrete unit. During the histological analysis of these structures, the margins of the sacs
were not found to contain X-cells in the typical organised pattern that is observed in other parts of the pseudotumour. Rather, these X-cells are less densely packed
together and some appear outside the sac membrane.
This could signify that the sacs ultimately degenerate
and release the X-cells into the environment. In addition, X-cells from the sacs appear to be able to withstand full salinity seawater, indicating that they are
capable of surviving in the marine environment.
During the development of the diagnostic PCR, visibly
uninfected areas of skin from infected P. obscurus were
found to contain X-cell DNA. This supports the findings
by Yamazaki et al. [17] who described the presence of
very small amoeboid-like ‘wandering’ X-cells, only
3-4 μm in diameter, at the boundaries of epidermal
pseudotumours in flatfish from northern Japan. These
data suggest that amoeboid forms of X-cells do exist in
fish tissues and are probably responsible for autoinfection within the host, causing new pseudotumour growth

once host invasion and initial development has
occurred.
Experimental design

It is possible that the methods used in the present study
were not suitable for parasite transmission to occur
between fish. Nevertheless, the transmission of fish parasites with monoxenous life cycles between fish using
similar methods to the ones used in this study has been
achieved for various fish parasites [20,21]. However, successful parasite transmission can also be affected by
environmental conditions such as salinity and temperature. Therefore, in order to reduce the likelihood of this
occurring, in our experiments we endeavoured to use
seawater whose temperature and salinity were the same
as those of the seawater of the natural environment
from where infected fish were taken.
If the release of X-cells from mature or ruptured
pseudotumours is required for transmission to a new
host, and transmission between fish is possible without
an alternate host, then long-term cohabitation experiments in tanks with suitable substrate cover, allowing
time for the development of an environmental stage,
could prove to be more successful in future X-cell transmission studies. Furthermore, using fish with advanced
pseudotumours, close to rupture, could be important for
successful transmission to occur between experimental
fish. However, both gadoid and pleuronectid fish with
X-cell pseudotumours have very poor survival rates after
capture [3,22] which may hinder such long-term cohabitation experiments. In addition, lesion regression has

Freeman et al. Parasites & Vectors 2011, 4:15
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/4/1/15

0.58

0.51

0.56

0.54

0.72

Cercomonas sp.
Heteromita globosa
Euglypha acanthophora
Massisteria marina
Bonamia ostreae
Minchinia teredinis
Haplsporidium nelsoni
0.72
Urosporidium crescens
Ichthyophonus hoferi
Psorospermium haeckelii
Dermocystidium sp.
Hartmannella abertawensis
Glaeseria mira
Saccharomyces cerevisiae
Cyclonexis annularis
Lagynion scherffelii
Blastocystis hominis
Paramecium tetraurelia
Colpoda inflata
Oxytricha nova
Pfiesteria sp.
0.83
Paulsenella vonstoschii
Cochlodinium fulvescens
Dinophyceae sp.
Hematodinium sp.
Perkinsus marinus
Perkinsus mediterraneus
Babesia sp.
0.67
Theileria sp.
Toxoplasma gondii
Eimeria tenella
Adelina grylli
Cryptosporidium parvum
Cryptosporidium wrairi
Ascogregarina taiwanensis
Parvilucifera sinerae
Parvilucifera infectans
P. obscurus Japan
H. dubius Japan
Goby Japan
Dab Scotland
Cod Iceland
Gregarina polymorpha
Gregarina niphandrodes
Leidyana migrator
Naegleria gruberi
Vahlkampfia lobospinosa
Tritrichomonas foetus
Pentatrichomonas hominis

Page 10 of 13

Cercozoa
Haplosporidia
Ascetosporea

Cercozoa

Ichthyosporea

Opisthokont

Lobosea
Fungi

Amoebozoa

Stramenopiles

Heterokont

Ciliophora
Dinoflagellates
Perkinsea
Apicomplexa

Alveolata
Cryptosporidium

Myzozoa

Parvilucifera
X-cell
Eugregarine
Apicomplexa
Heterolobosea
Parabasalids

Excavata

0.1

Figure 6 Bayesian Inference phylogenetic tree. Phylogenetic tree constructed using Bayesian Inference analyses using the general timereversible (GTR+I+G) model of evolution. The numbers at the nodes represent the clade posterior probability, indicating the proportion of
sampled trees that contained that branch. A solid circle at the node indicates a posterior probability of 0.9 and above. To the right of the tree
are the currently accepted taxonomic rankings (order, class, phylum), at the far right are the higher scientific classifications (super-phylum).

also been observed in captive X-cell infected dab [22],
suggesting that environmental conditions, such as temperature, may also be critical for the experimental transmission of X-cell parasites to take place and for
pseudotumours to develop.
Geographical and environmental niches

X-cell pseudotumours in numerous wild fish populations have been reported to occur within extremely narrow geographic locations [4,23], being found in high
numbers at one location and almost absent in adjacent
localities or bays. This irregular distribution pattern originally led to suggestions that the X-cell condition was
caused by localised coastal pollution [24,25]. A comprehensive study by Katsura et al. [4] of the distribution of
X-cell infected fish in Hokkaido, however, revealed that

the presence of X-cell pseudotumours was not related
to coastal pollution, but had a strong correlation to the
substrate type and amount of tidal water exchange.
They found a very low frequency of infected fish (0.020.27%) on the north side of the Notsuke peninsula
where a strong tide flows from north to south, but
south of the peninsula, where the bay is protected from
the strong current and the waters are ‘stagnated and the
bottom quite muddy’, fish had a 12.3% prevalence of
X-cell pseudotumours. Similar findings for the distribution patterns of populations of X-cell infected fish in
Europe [23] suggest that certain environmental conditions such as substrate type and tidal flow potentially
favour the survival and development of a free-living
X-cell stage or can maintain an obligate alternate host
that has a restricted zone for habitation.

Freeman et al. Parasites & Vectors 2011, 4:15
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/4/1/15

Species specificity

Katsura et al. [4] suggested that species specificity was
present among X-cell infections in flatfish from Hokkaido, as some pleuronectid fish (Liopsetta pinnifasciata
and Limanda punctatissimus) were collected in large
numbers from numerous sites with muddy substrates
with other X-cell infected pleuronectid fish being present, but they were never found to be infected with
X-cells themselves. During this study we have shown
that the same parasite causes X-cell pseudotumours in
both H. dubius and P. obscurus from geographically
distant locations in northern Japan, demonstrating that
X-cell parasites are not species specific in some pleuronectid fish. It would be interesting to expand on this
study and investigate whether the same parasite infects
all seven pleuronectid fish known to be susceptible to
epidermal X-cells infections in northern Japan. In our
experimental transmission study, we used two fish species due to their availability from hatcheries; Verasper
moseri (family Pleuronectidae) and Paralichthys olivaceus (family Paralichthyidae). Verasper moseri, sampled
from the same location we sampled P. obscurus for this
study, have been shown to be susceptible to infection
with X-cell parasites causing characteristic epidermal
pseudotumours [4], however it remains possible that the
X-cells from P. obscurus are a different species to those
in V. moseri. The Japanese flounder, P. olivaceus, has
not previously been reported to be susceptible to infection with X-cell parasites and was included in this study
due to its availability from hatcheries and its economic
importance. We believe that P. olivaceus is probably not
susceptible to the X-cell parasite infecting other flatfish
species in northern Japan, as no reports are found in the
literature and they are not pleuronectid fish. Its inclusion in this experiment could also have been valuable as
a negative control had transmission been successful for
V. moseri. In the gadoid transmission experiment we
were able to use the same species for both donor and
experimental fish, hence eliminating any species specificity concerns for the experiment.
Phylogenetic relationships

Using SSU rDNA alone, Miwa et al. [2,5] were able to
demonstrate that X-cell parasites infecting different fish
hosts (goby and flathead flounder) were clearly related,
but were not able to demonstrate a stable phylogenetic
relationship between the X-cell group and the other
taxa used in their analyses. In a more comprehensive
phylogenetic analysis, again limited to SSU rDNA, Freeman [1] confirmed monophyly for the X-cell group, but
could only place the X-cell clade within the superphylum Alveolata and suggested that they were possibly
related to both apicomplexans and dinoflagellates, and
referred to them as basal myzozoans. The present study

Page 11 of 13

is the first to include a SSU rDNA sequence for the cod
X-cell parasite, and our phylogenetic analyses confirm
monophyly for the X-cell group, but again fail to locate
the X-cell clade convincingly within any of the recognised alveolate groupings. However, the inclusion of the
sequence from cod X-cells has altered the expected
topology of the tree for the alveolate group. Parvilucifera
spp. that normally group with other perkinsids at the
base of the dinoflagellates clade now occupy an unresolved branch in the tree. It is evident from recent molecular studies [[1,2,5], present study] that SSU rDNA
sequence data alone is not sufficiently informative to
robustly place the X-cell group in phylogenetic studies
and that additional more conserved gene regions should
be studied to clarify their phylogenetic relationship with
other alveolate taxa.
Suggested life cycle for X-cell parasites

To date, numerous histopathological and ultrastructural
studies of X-cell parasites in fish have failed to reveal a
developmental stage beyond the familiar X-cell, either
locked in host tissue or as a free form in advanced pseudotumours. Here, we demonstrate that non-amoeboid
X-cells are contained within discrete sac-like structures
that are loosely attached to the fish host and that the
X-cells from these sacs are able to tolerate seawater
conditions. We believe that this represents good evidence that detachment from fish occurs naturally. Saclike structures have not been observed or reported from
pseudobranchial pseudotumours in gadoids or in X-cell
gill lesions. However, free-floating X-cells have been
observed in advanced pseudobranchial pseudotumours
in Atlantic cod [18] and ruptured pseudotumours
have been reported from X-cell gill lesions [19], which
may serve as alternative release mechanisms for nonepidermal X-cells.
We do not believe that fish represent a dead-end or
incidental host for X-cells. X-cells have evolved very
specific tissue tropisms in the fish species they infect
and have been reported from 5 teleost orders globally
[1], suggesting a long-term and well-established host
parasite relationship. Therefore, we can conclude that
X-cell development in the fish host is purely a proliferative phase that leads to further development either outside of the fish host or in an alternate host. The lack of
direct transmission for the X-cell parasites in this study
supports this theory. Figure 7 shows four proposed
stages in the life cycle for the X-cell parasite infecting
flatfish in northern Japan.
I. The infective stage to new fish hosts is either flagellated or equipped with suitable apparatus for host
penetration and is released into the environment
either from an alternate host or from a stage that

Freeman et al. Parasites & Vectors 2011, 4:15
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/4/1/15

Page 12 of 13

proliferative cycle

Infectious
stage

I

suitable temperature, salinity
and tidal flow
muddy substrate

Advanced lesions,
loss of pseudotumour
extremities

II

III

IV
unknown developmental cycle
Figure 7 Proposed life cycle for the X-cell parasite from flatfish
in northern Japan. The proposed life cycle consists of four stages.
(I) An infective stage, either flagellated or equipped with suitable
apparatus for host penetration/infection, which is released into the
environment to infect a fish host. (II) A proliferative cycle starts in the
fish which develops into large epidermal pseudotumours. (III) As the
pseudotumours mature, sac-like extremities are lost from the host fish
and fall to the seabed where the X-cells are released into the substrate.
(IV) In the substrate, either a free-living development occurs or the
X-cells find an alternate host where development proceeds.

developed during a free-living environmental phase
in the life cycle.
II. A proliferative cycle starts in the fish which develops into large epidermal pseudotumours, each containing large quantities of X-cells.
III. As the pseudotumours mature, discrete sac-like
structures are lost from the host fish and fall to the
seabed where the X-cells are released into the
substrate.
IV. If the substrate type is suitable, either free-living
environmental development occurs or the X-cells
infect and develop within an alternate host to produce infective stages for new fish hosts.
Understanding the life cycle of parasites that can infect
commercially valuable fish species is important. In Europe,
cod farming is an emerging industry and is still in the relatively early stages of development. However, pseudobranchial X-cell infections in Atlantic cod have already been
shown to cause serious pathology and mortalities in
farmed fish [26]. Identifying farm-sites that might favour
the propagation of or allow X-cells parasites to become
established in surrounding sediments will assist future
aquaculture endeavours, such as gadoid farming.

Conclusions
The presence of discrete sac-like structures, filled with
non-amoeboid X-cells, which are readily detached from
the host fish and the lack of fish to fish transmission for

both parasites in this study, suggests that other stages
exist in the X-cell life cycle. This type of developmental
cycle for X-cells may explain the lack of typical alveolate
features seen in fish X-cells, which may be present in
other stages of the life cycle. We suggest that X-cells
have a second development phase either as free-living
environmental organisms in the marine sediments or in
an alternate host.
Analysis of SSU rDNA from X-cells infecting flatfish
in Japan confirmed that the same X-cell parasite can
infect more than one species of fish. Phylogenetic analyses of X-cell SSU rDNA places them as a monophyletic group in the alveolates. PCR analysis of infected
flatfish showed that X-cell DNA is detectable in nonpseudotumour tissues, suggesting that some X-cells are
motile in fish and may be responsible for autoinfection
in the fish host.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Supplementary data. Additional small subunit
ribosomal DNA sequences used in the phylogenetic analyses.

Acknowledgements
The Royal Society of Edinburgh (2× RSE International Exchange Programme:
IEP Open - Outgoing Fellowships), The Sasakawa Foundation (grant No:
3034) and The Daiwa Foundation (grant No: 6211/6466) all provided initial
funding for international travel with associated costs from the UK to Japan
and Iceland and funding for work conducted at the University of Stirling.
The University of Tokyo funded a visiting Associate Professorship for MAF to
finalise the research in Japan during 2010.
Author details
Institute of Ocean and Earth Sciences & Institute of Biological Sciences,
University of Malaya, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. 2Institute of Aquaculture,
University of Stirling, FK9 4LA, Scotland, UK. 3Institute for Experimental
Pathology, University of Iceland, Keldur, Reykjavík, Iceland. 4Laboratory of Fish
Diseases, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo 113-8657 Japan. 5Laboratory of
Microbiology, Hokkaido University, Hakodate 041-8611, Japan. 6Department
of Aquatic Bioscience and Industry Faculty of Bio-Industry, Tokyo University
of Agriculture, Abashiri, Hokkaido 099-2493, Japan. 7Hokkaido Central
Fisheries Experiment Station, Yoichi 046-8555, Japan.
1

Authors’ contributions
ME and MAF collected material in Iceland and set up the transmission
experiment, ME maintained the experiment for the duration. MY and KW
organised sample collection in Japan, KO and MF set up the transmission
experiment and KM maintained the experiment for the duration. MAF
performed wax histology and DNA analyses, developed the nested PCR and
drafted the manuscript. APS cut and viewed semi-thin plastic sections of the
sac-like structures.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 2 December 2010 Accepted: 8 February 2011
Published: 8 February 2011
References
1. Freeman MA: X-cell parasites in the European dab Limanda limanda are
related to other X-cell organisms: a discussion on the potential identity
of this new group of parasites. Parasitology 2009, 10:151-170.

Freeman et al. Parasites & Vectors 2011, 4:15
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/4/1/15

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.
10.

11.

12.

13.
14.
15.
16.
17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.
23.

24.
25.

Miwa S, Kamaishi T: Protistan X-cells in pseudotumors of yellowfin goby
Acanthogobius flavimanus are a distinct organism from those in flathead
flounder Hippoglossoides dubius. Dis Aquat Org 2009, 85:53-57.
Morrison CM, Shum G, Appy RG, Odense P, Annand C: Histology and
prevalence of X-cells lesions in Atlantic cod (Gadus morhua). Can J Fish
Aquat Sci 1982, 39:1519-1530.
Katsura K, Yamazaki F, Hamada K, Oishi K, Harada T, Shinkawa T:
Geographic distribution and frequency of pseudotumourous fishes
collected from the coastal waters of Hokkaido, Japan. B Jpn Soc Sci Fish
1984, 50:979-984.
Miwa S, Nakayasu C, Kamaishi T, Yoshiura Y: X-cells in fish
pseudopseudotumours are parasitic protozoans. Dis Aquat Org 2004,
58:165-170.
Ito Y, Kimura I, Miyake T: Histopathological and virological investigations
of papillomas in soles and gobies in coastal waters of Japan. Prog Exp
Pseudotumour Res 1976, 20:86-93.
Diamant A, Smail DA, McFarlane L, Thomson AM: An infectious pancreatic
necrosis virus isolated from common dab Limanda limanda previously
affected with X-cell disease, a disease apparently unrelated to the
presence of the virus. Dis Aquat Org 1988, 4:223-227.
Renault T, Stokes NA, Chollet B, Cochennec N, Berthe F, Gerard A,
Burreso EM: Haplosporidiosis in the Pacific oyster Crassostrea gigas from
the French Atlantic coast. Dis Aquat Org 2000, 42:207-214.
Hillis DM, Dixon MT: Ribosomal DNA: molecular evolution and
phylogenetic inference. Quart Rev Biol 1991, 66:411-453.
Freeman MA, Yokoyama H, Ogawa K: Description and phylogeny of
Ceratomyxa anko sp. n. and Zschokkella lophii sp. n. from the Japanese
anglerfish, Lophius litulon (Jordan). J Fish Dis 2008, 31:921-930.
Thompson JD, Gibson TJ, Plewniak F, Jeanmougin F, Higgins DG: The
CLUSTAL-X windows interface: flexible strategies for multiple sequence
alignment aided by quality analysis tools. Nucl Acids Res 1997,
24:4876-4882.
Hall TA: BioEdit: a user-friendly biological sequence alignment editor and
analysis program for Windows 95/98/NT. Nucleic Acids Symp Ser 1999,
41:95-98.
Altschul SF, Gish W, Miller W, Myers EW, Lipman DJ: Basic local alignment
search tool. J Mol Biol 1990, 215:403-410.
Swofford DL: PAUP* Phylogenetic analysis using parsimony (*and other
methods), v. 4.0 beta10. Sinauer Associates, Sunderland, MA, USA; 2002.
Ronquist F, Huelsenbeck JP: MrBayes 3 Bayesian phylogenetic inference
under mixed models. Bioinformatics 2003, 19:1572-1574.
Nylander JAA, Ronquist F, Huelsenbeck JP, Nieves-Aldrey JL: Bayesian
phylogenetic analysis of combined data. Syst Biol 2004, 53:47-67.
Yamazaki F, Hibino T, Oishi K, Harada T, Stich HF, Acton AB: X-cell
morphology in the epidermal papillomas of flatfish collected from
coastal waters of Hokkaido, Japan. B Jpn Soc Sci Fish 1978, 44:407-413.
Watermann B, Dethlefsen V: Histology of pseudobranchial
pseudotumours in Atlantic cod (Gadus morhua) from the North Sea and
the Baltic Sea. Helgolander Meeresun 1982, 35:231-242.
Maclean SA, Despres-Patanjo LI: Gill X-cell lesion in American plaice
(Hippoglossoides platessoides) concurrent with lymphocystis infection. J
Fish Biol 1993, 43:947-950.
Redondo MJ, Palenzuela O, Riaza A, Ángeles A, Álvarez-Pellitero P:
Experimental transmission of Enteromyxum scophthalmi (Myxozoa) an
enteric parasite of turbot Scophthalmus maximus. J Parasitol 2002,
88:482-488.
Lee SJ, Yokoyama H, Ogawa K: Modes of transmission of Glugea
plecoglossi (Microspora) via the skin and digestive tract in an
experimental infection model using rainbow trout, Oncorhynchus mykiss
(Walbaum). J Fish Dis 2004, 27:435-444.
Diamant A, McVicar AH: The effect of internal and external X-cell lesions
on common dab, Limanda limanda L. Aquaculture 1987, 67:127-133.
Diamant A, McVicar AH: Distribution of X-cell disease in common dab,
Limanda limanda L., in the North Sea, and ultrastructural observations of
previously undescribed developmental stages. J Fish Dis 1989, 12:25-37.
Stich HF, Acton AB, Forrester CR: Fish tumors and sub-lethal effects of
pollutants. J Fish Res Board Can 1976, 33:1993-2001.
Wellings SR, McCain BB, Miller BS: Epidermal papillomas in Pleuronectidae
of Puget Sound, Washington. Prog Exp Tumor Res 1976, 20:55-74.

Page 13 of 13

26. Eydal M, Kristmundsson A, Bambir SH: Pseudobranchial X-cell
pseudotumors in young wild and farmed Atlantic cod Gadus morhua in
Iceland. Dis Aquat Org 2010, 91:83-88.
doi:10.1186/1756-3305-4-15
Cite this article as: Freeman et al.: Molecular identification and
transmission studies of X-cell parasites from Atlantic cod Gadus morhua
(Gadiformes: Gadidae) and the northern black flounder
Pseudopleuronectes obscurus (Pleuronectiformes: Pleuronectidae).
Parasites & Vectors 2011 4:15.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
