<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>High-throughput microarray technology in diagnostics of enterobacteria based on genome-wide probe selection and regression analysis</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Genomics 2010, 11:591. doi:10.1186/1471-2164-11-591"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Torben Friedrich"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Friedrich et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:591
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/591

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

High-throughput microarray technology in
diagnostics of enterobacteria based on genomewide probe selection and regression analysis
Torben Friedrich1,2, Sven Rahmann3, Wilfried Weigel4, Wolfgang Rabsch5, Angelika Fruth5, Eliora Ron6,
Florian Gunzer7, Thomas Dandekar2, Jörg Hacker8, Tobias Müller2*, Ulrich Dobrindt1,9*

Abstract
Background: The Enterobacteriaceae comprise a large number of clinically relevant species with several individual
subspecies. Overlapping virulence-associated gene pools and the high overall genome plasticity often interferes
with correct enterobacterial strain typing and risk assessment. Array technology offers a fast, reproducible and
standardisable means for bacterial typing and thus provides many advantages for bacterial diagnostics, risk
assessment and surveillance. The development of highly discriminative broad-range microbial diagnostic
microarrays remains a challenge, because of marked genome plasticity of many bacterial pathogens.
Results: We developed a DNA microarray for strain typing and detection of major antimicrobial resistance genes
of clinically relevant enterobacteria. For this purpose, we applied a global genome-wide probe selection strategy
on 32 available complete enterobacterial genomes combined with a regression model for pathogen classification.
The discriminative power of the probe set was further tested in silico on 15 additional complete enterobacterial
genome sequences. DNA microarrays based on the selected probes were used to type 92 clinical enterobacterial
isolates. Phenotypic tests confirmed the array-based typing results and corroborate that the selected probes
allowed correct typing and prediction of major antibiotic resistances of clinically relevant Enterobacteriaceae,
including the subspecies level, e.g. the reliable distinction of different E. coli pathotypes.
Conclusions: Our results demonstrate that the global probe selection approach based on longest common factor
statistics as well as the design of a DNA microarray with a restricted set of discriminative probes enables robust
discrimination of different enterobacterial variants and represents a proof of concept that can be adopted for
diagnostics of a wide range of microbial pathogens. Our approach circumvents misclassifications arising from the
application of virulence markers, which are highly affected by horizontal gene transfer. Moreover, a broad range of
pathogens have been covered by an efficient probe set size enabling the design of high-throughput diagnostics.

Background
Enterobacteriaceae are frequent causes of human infectious diseases. Nevertheless, this family also comprises a
broad variety of non-pathogenic and commensal variants. Furthermore, E. coli K-12 strains such as strain
MG1655 are well-known model organisms in genetics
* Correspondence: tobias.mueller@biozentrum.uni-wuerzburg.de; ulrich.
dobrindt@ukmuenster.de
1
University of Würzburg, Institute for Molecular Infection Biology, JosefSchneider-Str. 2/Bau D15, 97080 Würzburg, Germany
2
Department of Bioinformatics, University of Würzburg, Am Hubland, 97074
Würzburg, Germany
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

and molecular biology. The family of Enterobacteriaceae
comprises a multitude of pathogenic strains from the
genera Salmonella, Yersinia, Klebsiella and Escherichia.
The diversity in pathogenicity and related clinical symptoms has lead to the definition of a variety of intestinal
and extraintestinal E. coli pathotypes [1]. The group of
intestinal pathogenic E. coli (IPEC) includes five pathotypes causing diarrheal diseases with distinct features in
pathogenesis: Enterohaemorrhagic E. coli (EHEC) cause
diarrhoea and haemolytic uremic syndrome. Enteropathogenic E. coli (EPEC) are known for ‘attaching and
effacing’ virulence causing diarrhoea predominantly in
children. Enterotoxigenic E. coli (ETEC) cause watery

© 2010 Friedrich et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Friedrich et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:591
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/591

diarrhoea with high incidence in developing countries.
Enteroaggregative E. coli (EAEC) have been frequently
isolated from children and adults showing persistent
diarrhoea. Host cell invasion characterises enteroinvasive
E. coli (EIEC) which cause watery diarrhoea. EIEC are
highly similar to Shigella isolates, which are clinically
associated with varying degrees of dysentery. Furthermore various types of so-called extraintestinal pathogenic E. coli (ExPEC) have been described to cause
infections outside of the gastrointestinal tract, i.e. urinary tract infection, newborn meningitis or sepsis. Generally, uropathogenic E. coli (UPEC), newborn meningitisassociated E. coli (MNEC) as well as sepsis-associated
E. coli (SEPEC) differ in their repertoire of virulenceassociated genes from IPEC [1].
Salmonella enterica infections can result in enteric
fever caused by typhoid serovars (Typhi and Paratyphi)
or gastroenteritis due to infection with the non-typhoid
serovars (Typhimurium and Enteriditis) [2]. The genus
Yersinia harbours three pathogenic species associated
with plague (Y. pestis) and yersiniosis (Y. enterocolitica
and Y. pseudotuberculosis) [3]. K. pneumoniae is predominantly isolated from patients with pneumonia or urinary tract infection and is, together with E. coli variants,
frequently isolated from patients suffering from nosocomial infections [4]. Several characteristic virulenceassociated determinants have been described for different enterobacterial pathogens [4-6].
Many enterobacterial sequencing projects have been
finished so far and even more are in progress as part of
comparative studies. The availability of increasing numbers of genomic sequences enables the development of
new diagnostic strategies and further sequencing projects
will improve and robustify these diagnostics. In the past,
many studies have focused on the development of diagnostics mainly for single enterobacterial clades. Conventionally, such tests were based on PCR or multiplex PCR
to detect variation in partial sequences of marker gene
loci like 16S rRNA [7,8]. The development of the microarray technology enabled parallel investigation of multiple determinants while ensuring high reproducibility,
thus facilitating high-throughput diagnostics [9].
Microbial diagnostic microarrays for the detection of
pathogenic E. coli were designed based on polymorphisms in single genes [10,11] or on libraries of virulence
determinants [12-14]. Moreover, the application of
microarrays in antimicrobial resistance (AMR) screening
[14-16] has implications on medical therapy and epidemiological studies [17,18]. However, a diagnostic microarray that allows rapid discrimination between different
genera, species and even subspecies of clinically relevant
enterobacteria has not yet been reported.
Here, the development of a microarray for highthroughput diagnostics of enterobacteria is described,

Page 2 of 22

which targets the identification of clinically relevant
pathogroups from genus to even subspecies level. In
contrast to previous work, we unravelled new
pathogroup-specific capture probes by probe selection
across whole groups of genomes. Our results reveal that
multi-genomic probe selection also indicates the integrity of considered bacterial groupings. Diagnostic classification as well as the quantification of pathogens in a
sample is provided by the application of a new regression model. The classifier features the adaptation of
hybridisation data and thus constantly improves its
classification.

Results
Concept of microarray design

Our strategy to design a diagnostic microarray based on
a new set of pathogroup-specific determinants is structured according to clinically distinct enterobacterial
pathogroups. Figure 1 depicts these subdivisions
assigned to the Enterobacteriaceae and illustrates the
nested relations associated with the versatile group of
Shigella and E. coli strains. The hierarchical dendrogram
is further denoted as the pathogroup tree.
The subdivisions applied in this case were guided by
clinical relevance. The comparisons were split into three
main levels of organisation within the pathogroup tree:
(I) the genus level, (II) the distinction between Shigella,
pathogenic and non-pathogenic E. coli as well as (III)
the diversity among intestinal and extraintestinal E. coli
pathotypes. The groups of Shigella and non-pathogenic
E. coli were also contrasted to the pathotype level - a
clinically reasonable differentiation. These splits have
been included to avoid nested relations of pathogroups,
which can lead to inaccuracies in classifications by
regression analysis.
Probe selection

The sequences of complete enterobacterial genomes,
including plasmids, of reference strains (see part A of
Table 1) were subjected to a probe selection procedure
to find capture probes that provide a high discrimination capacity between the different levels of the
pathogroup tree. The strategy of probe selection was
based on a global extraction of group-specific 70-mer
oligonucleotides by the application of longest common
factor statistics [19]. Long probes as chosen here provide the advantages of reduced cross-hybridisation
events and less chemical influence of the microarray
surface on the hybridisation. Moreover, the outcome of
provisional probes in the probe selection process (see
below) provides a good coverage of all diagnostic
groups. The string matching algorithm yielded sets of
fully conserved oligonucleotides, which meet the criteria
of valid capture probes as stated in the methods section,

Friedrich et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:591
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/591

Page 3 of 22

Figure 1 Overview of assigned clinically relevant Enterobacteriaceae. Each node corresponds to a pathogroup entity and the respective box
comprises information about the number of probes designed for the respective group as well as the number of strains assigned to the group
according to prior knowledge. The colours refer to the genus level (red), the intermediate E. coli level (blue) and the E. coli pathotype level
(green). Gray colour refers to pathogroups for which no probes could be found and the white box titled ‘Enterobacteriaceae’ summarises the
assignment.

within a primarily unrestricted composition of genomic
groups. Manual selection of probes from the provisional
probe set (~18,000 oligonucleotides) was guided by clinical importance of enterobacterial subgroups (see Figure
1). The yield of provisional probes could be vastly
enlarged by slight relaxation of selection criteria to
~360,000 probes (see methods section for details), but
the large ‘stringent set’ put the need for additional
probes aside. The set of candidate probes was carefully
selected from the pool of provisionals according to

cross-matching behaviour to human DNA and conventional hybridisation parameters (GC-content, melting
temperature, change in Gibb’s free energy, complexity in
base composition).
The chosen probe length has been described before as
an optimal compromise between sensitivity and specificity [20]. Due to the objective to construct a slim and
cost efficient diagnostic tool we restricted the size of the
probe set to a maximum of 20 capture probes per
pathogroup. Despite the large size of the provisional

Friedrich et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:591
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/591

Page 4 of 22

Table 1 Enterobacterial Genome Sequences
Genus

Species

Isolate

Patho-/Serotype

Genbank-ID

Reference

Part A - Reference genomes
Escherichia

coli

K-12 MG1655

non-pathogenic

U00096.2

[70]

K-12 W3110

non-pathogenic

AP009048.1

[71]

Nissle 1917

commensal

–

–

O9 HS

commensal

CP000802.1

[35]

536

[72]

CP000243.1

[73]

UPEC
EHEC

AE014075.1
AE005174.2

[74]
[75]

O157:H7 Sakai

EHEC

BA000007.2

[76]

O42

EAEC

N554766

[77]

E2348-69

EPEC

FM180568

[78]

APEC O1

APEC

CP000468.1

[79]

789
flexneri

CP000247.1

UPEC

CFTO73
O157:H7 EDL933

Shigella

UPEC

UTI89

APEC

–

–

2a 301
5b 8401

2a
5b

AE005674.1
CP000266.1

[80]
[81]

2a 2457T

2a

AE014073.1

[82]

dysenteriae

Sd197

1

CP000034.1

[83]

sonnei

Ss046

1

CP000038.1

[83]

boydii

Sb227

4

CP000036.1

[83]

Klebsiella

pneumoniae

MGH78578

CP000647.1

[84]

Salmonella

enterica

Paratyphi ATCC9150
Choleraesuis SC-B57

CP000026.1
AE017220.1

[85]
[86]

A
C1

Typhi Ty2

AE014613.1

[87]

D1

AL513382.1

[88]

typhimurium

LT2

B

AE006468.1

[89]

bongori

12419

–

–

Sanger Institute

pestis

CO92

Orientalis

AL590842.1

[90]

KIM

Medievalis

AE009952.1

[91]

91001
Antiqua

Yersinia

D1

Typhi CT18

Microtus
Antiqua

AE017042.1
CP000308.1

[92]
[93]
[93]

Nepal516

–

CP000305.1

pseudotuberculosis

IP32953

–

CP000720.1

[33]

enterocolitica

8081

–

AM286415.1

[94]

DH10B

non-pathogenic

CP000948.1

[95]

ED1a
SE11

non-pathogenic
non-pathogenic

CU928162.2
AP009240.1

Genoscope C.E.A.
[96]

ATCC8739

non-pathogenic

CP000946.1

Joint Genome Institute

IAI1

non-pathogenic

CU928160.2

Genoscope C.E.A.

IAI39

UPEC

CU928164.2

Genoscope C.E.A.

UMN026

UPEC

CU928163.2

Genoscope C.E.A.

SMS-3-5

non-pathogenic

CP000970.1

[35]

O157:H7 EC4115

EHEC

CP001164.1

J. Craig Venter Institute

O157:H7 EC4115
55989

EHEC
EAEC

CP001164.1
CU928145.2

J. Craig Venter Institute
Genoscope C.E.A.

E24377A

ETEC

CP000800.1

The Institute for Genomic Research

S88

MNEC

CU928161.2

Genoscope C.E.A.

Part B - Recently published genomes
Escherichia

coli

Shigella

boydii

CDC 3083-94

18

CP001063.1

J. Craig Venter Institute

Salmonella

enterica

Enteritidis P125109

PT4

AM933172.1

[97]

Klebsiella

pneumoniae

342

CP000964.1

[31]

Friedrich et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:591
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/591

probe set, no pathogroup determinant could be defined
for the generic entities ‘E. coli’ and ‘pathogenic E. coli’
implicating the absence of concise genotypes across the
respective strains. Similarly, the selection of probes
mainly for the discrimination at the E. coli pathotype
level did not always utilise the maximum number of
capture probe, which was limited to 20 probes per
pathogroup to guarantee a cost-efficient microarray
architecture. Figure 1 details the number of capture
probes assigned to each pathogroup. The topmost node
entitled ‘Enterobacteriaceae’ does not characterise a
pathogroup but provides a summary of probe selection,
which resulted in a probe set of 157 capture probes
derived from 32 reference genomes. The probe set has
been made publicly available [NCBI Probe Database
puids: 10316816 to 10317025]. A detailed mapping of
NCBI Probe Database Ids to the probes is given in additional file 1.
Due to the limited availability of bacterial genome
sequence data, certain assigned pathogroups like EAEC
or EPEC were underrepresented at the time of chip
design (06/2006). Moreover, no genome sequences were
publicly available at that time for the E. coli pathotypes
ETEC, EIEC, SEPEC and MNEC. To compensate for
individual unavailability of genomic data, comprehensive
test hybridisations with bacterial DNA from a broad
variety of strains were conducted to verify the discriminative power of the chosen capture probes.
By means of initially unrestricted group-wise probe
selection we could specify probes separating S. flexneri
as a Shigella subgroup (dashed box in Figure 1), though
no special emphasis was put on such a subdivision.
Since S. flexneri causes basically the same clinical symptoms as other Shigella species, the subgroup was not
separately analysed.
Characterisation of capture probes

Selected oligonucleotide probes were mapped to the
genomes of respective groups by a BLAST search to
find general annotations of corresponding group-specific, genomic regions. The annotations were summarised
to the categories listed in Table 2 as column labels. In
accordance to the applied generalised probe selection
strategy, nearly 13% of probes originated from intergenic
regions. Capture probes that could be associated to
known genes cover a wide range of functional groups.
Interestingly, the majority of selected probes refers to
genes with poor or missing annotation (Table 2).
Assessment of single probe performance

Comprehensive test hybridisations gave insights into the
reliability of single group-specific capture probes in the
classification of respective pathogroups. The significance
of probe-specific contribution in group separation was

Page 5 of 22

determined by an analysis of variance (ANOVA) on
signal intensities in conjunction with the method of
simultaneous inference for parametric models [21] as
post-hoc test. While the ANOVA yields the probability
that the distributions of signal intensities do not exhibit
any difference in mean, the method of Hothorn et al.
determines adjusted p-values of individual differences in
the mean concerning all pairwise one-sided comparisons
between pathogroups in reference to a pre-specified
maximum significance level. Resulting p-values for specific probes (represented as red circles in the plots) of
each pathogroup against all others were averaged in log
space to obtain capture probe-specific single indicators
of pathogroup support. The averaged p-values of probes
in respective groups are contrasted in Figures 2 to 3
against p-value distributions (not averaged) of differences in the mean signal intensity over all pairwise tests
of a respective pathogroup and any capture probe. The
p-value distributions are visualised as arbitrarily scaled
densities of so-called violin plots on a log-scaled p-value
axis (x-axis), which is cut at a p-value of 10 -11 . Low
averaged p-values reflect a significantly higher mean signal intensity of a capture probe in its target pathogroup
than in other pathogroups. Group specific probes that
form the body of overall lowest p-values therefore highlight a success of probe selection.
As revealed by Figure 2, p-values of probes specific to
genus-level pathogroups generally indicate high significance in the ability to classify respective strains. In comparison, the genera exhibit differences in the overall
performance of corresponding probes. Best overall support was obtained for the ‘Salmonella’ and ‘E. coli’
pathogroups while lower but still clearly significant
p-values were assigned to probes selected from Klebsiella and Yersinia genomes. These results seem to arise
from quite different influences. The probes of the ‘E.
coli’ group were selected against the background of
numerous genomic sequences which confer probe
robustness. In contrast, the observed larger variability in
‘Klebsiella’ probe performance reflects limited genomic
data available in this group. ‘Salmonella’ constitutes a
pathogroup with a largely homogenous genotype [22].
‘Yersinia’ probe variability seems to mirror the genotypic
diversity among Yersinia ssp. strains [23].
Figure 3 reflects averaged p-values of single capture
probe performance in terminal pathogroups of the
‘E. coli’ group. Group-specific capture probes again constitute the lowest fraction of the overall p-value distribution. The evaluation of ‘Shigella’-specific determinants
resulted in four capture probes classifying all Shigella
strains as well as those specific only for S. flexneri. The
corresponding plot reveals significant support by the
capture probes representing the whole group. The three
top-performing ‘Shigella’-specific probes originate from

Friedrich et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:591
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/591

Page 6 of 22

Table 2 Overview of oligonucleotide markers for pathotyping and their categorisation
Group

Intergenic Virulence Uncharacterised Transcription Adhesion Extracellular Metabolism Transport Miscellaneous Probeset

Yersinia

4

0

11

0

0

0

4

0

1

20

Klebsiella

7

0

5

1

1

0

4

2

0

20

Salmonella

1

0

6

0

2

0

4

3

3

19

Shigella/E.
coli

1

0

3

4

0

1

7

0

0

16

Shigella

1

4

0

0

1

0

0

0

4

10

Nonpathogenic

1

0

0

0

0

0

1

1

0

3

ExPEC

0

0

4

0

0

2

2

0

0

8

UPEC

0

0

2

0

1

0

0

0

0

3

IPEC

0

1

1

0

0

0

0

0

0

2

EHEC

4

0

10

0

1

1

0

0

0

16

EPEC
EAEC

0
1

0
0

16
17

1
0

1
1

0
0

1
0

0
0

1
1

20
20

In total

20

5

75

6

7

5

23

6

10

157

The term “Probe set” refers to the contribution of genomic groups to the final set of probes. Beside several probes in categories like virulence, extracellular
(secreted proteins) or transcription, the probe set comprises a relatively large fraction of probes originating from intergenic regions.

the locus of the invasion plasmid antigen H gene (ipaH).
The identification of the EAEC pathotype is strongly
supported by two probes. One of these high-performing
probes with the ID 6806_1 is located in the plasmidencoded aatD gene locus.
Further information on the assessment of probe performance in the intermediate pathogroup level is given
in additional file 2.
Classification of hybridisation patterns

The global aim of any diagnostic means is the distinction between and the detection of targets, here clinically
relevant enterobacterial pathogroups and antimicrobial
resistance determinants, respectively. In the following,
the ability of the developed microarray to come to such
classifications is described. Comprehensive test hybridisations provide the basis for these investigations.
Regression analysis

In order to predict the allocation to a diagnostically
relevant enterobacterial pathogroup (see Figure 1), a
regression model was trained with the results from test
hybridisations analogous to recently described methods
[24,25]. The regression model treats intensities of single
probes independently from one another because of
probe specific hybridisation behaviour. The target affinity to perfect match probes is dependent on the probespecific sequence composition and does not allow for
direct comparison of intensities from hybridisations to
different probes. Given the intensity matrix of hybridisations Y with probes as rows and samples as columns as
well as a master table X containing hybridised amounts
of DNA of the same size, the linear regression model
equates to

Y = AX

The affinity matrix is estimated by solving the equation
ˆ
A = YX T ( XX T ) −1

The prediction performance of the regression model
was determined by leave-one-out cross-validation: in a
recurrent sampling procedure the regression model was
trained in each run by all but a single hybridisation pattern, which further on served as test pattern. Based on
the test pattern the amount of corresponding genomic
DNA (gDNA) xk was predicted to
ˆ
ˆ
x k = A −1y k

with yk being the intensity vector of test sample k and
ˆ
x k representing a vector of predicted gDNA ratios of
capture probes representing all incorporated
pathogroups. Based on prior knowledge on the true nature of test strains a master table X was generated, which
refers to the hybridised amount of DNA in each
pathogroup. All capture probes characterising a certain
pathogroup or its parent group of a test strain were set
to an appropriate factor of hybridised DNA (for pure
cultures 1.0 = 2 μg), while 0.0 was assigned to all other
probes. The factor corresponds to the proportion of the
sample DNA coming from a certain pathogroup and
drops only below one in mixed culture hybridisations.
Predicted amounts of hybridised DNA for single probes
are mapped back to the pathogroup by taking the median of all pathogroup-specific probes. Each pathogroup
was evaluated by samples from different strains. Groups

Friedrich et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:591
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/591

Page 7 of 22

Figure 2 Probe-specific contribution to the detection of diagnostic groups in the genus level of the pathogroup tree. The performance
of single group-specific probes in the detection of pathogroups was determined by a combination of an ANOVA and simultaneous inference of
one-sided multiple comparisons. The resulting adjusted p-values communicate the robustness of intensity difference between pairs of
pathogroups. The p-values from single comparisons were averaged for each pathogroup in log space. Violin plots indicate the overall
distribution of non-averaged p-values on a log-scaled x-axis as relative densities (density values are not reflected by the y-axis). The y-axis follows
arbitrary units in order to improve readability of single points.

with no explicit representations in the probe set
(pathogroups without available reference genomes like
ETEC, EIEC and SEPEC) were treated separately. In
these cases, the amount of hybridised DNA was determined by a regression model estimated on all reference
E. coli pathotypes.
Pure cultures

The regression model-based cross-validation has been
determined in the context of the previously denoted
intrinsic levels of the pathogroup tree. At the genus
level (see Figure 4), all samples were classified correctly
during cross-validation. Moreover, the regression model
exhibited the ability to accurately predict DNA amounts
used for hybridisation. The tests furthermore suggested

an influence of sample coverage in the accuracy of
quantitative predictions.
E. coli pathotypes exhibited a close phylogenetic relationship with largely collinear genotypes and high frequency of genetic interchange. For these low level
pathogroups only few reference genomes were generally
available per group. Therefore, the classification of
E. coli pathotypes depicted in Figure 5 constituted the
most difficult classification scenario within the presented setting. In the context of clinical relevance, Shigella and non-pathogenic E. coli pathogroups were
included into this classification setting. In all classifications, the prediction level of the true class can be
robustly separated from prediction levels of respective
negative classes.

Friedrich et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:591
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/591

Page 8 of 22

Figure 3 Discriminative power of group-specific probes among E. coli pathotypes. The ability of probe-wise discrimination derived from
ANOVA-based simultaneous inference of one-sided multiple comparisons further decreases in the E. coli pathotype level of the pathogroup tree.
Single red dots mark averaged adjusted p-values of group-specific probes. The overall distribution of p-values as indicated by violin plots exhibits
a general increase of p-values. The increase is influenced by a larger number of comparisons and by the close relation of the target groups.

Moreover, we conducted test hybridisations with genomic DNA from different E. coli pathotypes (ETEC, EIEC,
and SEPEC) without specific representation on the microarray. Thus, the tests could be considered as a kind of
negative test with respect to the pathotypes in focus. With
respect to level equivalence, patterns of these pathogroups
were set in contrast to other E. coli pathotypes. The predictions graphically displayed in Figure 6 did not reveal a
clear tendency to any of the main pathotypes. Only the
hybridisation patterns of EIEC isolates indicated some
hybridisation to probes of intestinal pathotypes and Shigella isolates. The observed interrelation between Shigella
and EIEC classes coincides with the high similarity of
enteroinvasive E. coli and Shigella isolates concerning
pathogenicity and genotype. ETEC and SEPEC hybridisation patterns did not fit to any core pathotypes, a result
that correlates well with prior expectation.

Classification of mixed bacterial cultures

Furthermore, the regression model was trained by specifically designed spike-in experiments to detect different
pathotypes within mixed bacterial cultures. To maintain
generality, hybridisation patterns of mixed culture samples
did not serve as training data for the regression model.
However, the predictions shown in Figure 7 did not only
correlate with the true nature of test strains but also correctly quantified the underlying proportions. Especially the
spike-in series with counter-rotated proportions of a nonpathogenic E. coli and an EHEC strain (Plots M01-M05)
demonstrated the sensitivity of the regression model in
estimations of quantities of bacterial DNA and its mixtures. Mixed culture test hybridisations did not reveal any
limit of detectable rates of pathogens though it definitely
exists. If such a limit is under-run - a possible scenario for
faecal sample diagnostics - appropriate measures have to

Friedrich et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:591
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/591

Page 9 of 22

Figure 4 Evaluation of the prediction performance on the genus level of the decision tree. The four plots summarise the classifications on
the genus level of enterobacteria subdivided into prediction outcomes of the pathogroups ‘Shigella/E. coli’ (top left), ‘Yersinia’ (top right),
‘Klebsiella’ (bottom left) and ‘Salmonella’ (bottom right). The headline of each plot refers to the true nature of the respective test samples and the
x-axis represents the pathogroups, which are contrasted in regression model analysis. In this case the linear regression model was trained on
signal intensities of probes representing the main genera of considered Enterobacteriaceae (Salmonella, Shigella/E. coli, Klebsiella or Yersinia, the
x-axis). The model was trained with all hybridisation patterns. The medians with standard error of predicted DNA amounts were obtained by
leaf-one-out cross-validation.

be taken to scale up group-specific DNA ratios in
question.
Antimicrobial resistance screening

The developed diagnostic microarray comprised features to screen for basic antimicrobial resistance
(AMR) patterns in enterobacterial samples and communities. A set of 30 previously published AMR markers [14] was extended by 12 newly designed probes in
order to extend the marker spectrum by probes for
important AMR-classes like macrolides, but also by
new variants of resistance genes of tetracyclines and
b-lactams. The AMR probe set comprised genes coding for resistance-mediating enzymes and efflux pumps
against aminoglycosides, b-lactams, sulfonamides, tetracyclines, dihydrofolate reductase (Dhfr) inhibitors,
amphenicols and macrolides.
AMR relevant, log normalised signal intensities of hybridisation patterns from all test strains were classified into a
signal and a noise fraction by fitting a Gaussian mixture
model composed of two normal distributions on all data

points. Figure 8A summarises single posterior signal probabilities of AMR probe intensities obtained from numerous test hybridisations (levels in respective colour
gradients). For about one fourth of hybridisation profiles,
mainly originating from E. coli and Shigella isolates, no
resistance markers could be detected. All tested Salmonella strains exhibited hybridisation signals indicative of
resistance to trimethoprime (genes dhfrXIII and dhfrXV,
exception S. Manhattan), whereas the hybridisation patterns of none of these isolates revealed any indication of
resistance to sulfonamides. These two therapeutics are frequently applied in combination. A third fraction of strains
was predicted to exhibit multiple antibiotic resistances.
Genes coding for SHV-type (sulfhydryl variable) b-lactamases were in correspondence with a previous report only
detected in Klebsiella isolates [26].
Microarray results were validated by susceptibility
tests based on the disc diffusion method. Randomly verified negative results (no detected AMR) especially in
the laboratory K-12 strain MG1655 completed the evaluation. Figure 8A reflects the mapping of results from

Friedrich et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:591
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/591

Page 10 of 22

Figure 5 The prediction of hybridised DNA of the groups beneath the node of E. coli and Shigella isolates. The plot shows crossvalidation results obtained by a regression model, which was trained only on signal intensities of probes associated to contrasted groups
(x-axis). Filled circles indicate the predicted ratios of DNA in test samples of respective groups and the error bar indicates the cross-validation
error of each prediction. The contrasted pathogroups comprise all integrated E. coli pathotypes as well as Shigella and non-pathogenic E. coli.

disc diffusion assays to posterior signal probabilities of
microarray hybridisations. The red colour scale reports
agreement of microarrays and disc diffusion results,
while the blue colour scale indicates the detection of
resistance only by the microarray. Yellow bars indicate
detected resistance by disc diffusion though the hybridisation pattern did not reveal any signal in the respective
AMR class.
In almost all tests, the disc diffusion method confirmed the antibiotic resistances predicted by the microarray analysis. The laboratory E. coli K-12 strain
MG1655 served as a control in AMR experiments. The
E. coli K-12 genome contains the AMR genes ampC,
macAB, emrAB and acrAB. AmpC functions as a penicillinase which especially affects ampicillin and other
penicillins and therefore mediates resistance to oxacillin
and amoxicillin. MacAB, EmrAB and AcrAB form efflux
proteins in the extracellular matrix, which are specialised transporters of macrolides and provide erythromycin resistance [27,28]. As these protein complexes
constitute common chromosomally encoded AMR

structures, the respective genes were not considered in
the described design of an AMR diagnostic. The disc
diffusion experiments further revealed widespread susceptibilities to ceftriaxone. Resistance to third-generation cephalosporines mainly arises from the CTX-class
(cefotaxime) of b-lactamases, and the hybridisation
experiments did not exhibit any positive signals for the
corresponding probe. Sporadic ceftriaxone resistances
can be traced back to certain oxacillinases (blaOXA) or
to PER-type (Pseudomonas extended resistance)
extended-spectrum b-lactamases (ESBLs) [29].
Designed probes and recently published enterobacterial
genomes

Since the start of the probe selection, several new enterobacterial genomes have been published. They contain
novel sequence information, a knowledge that impacts
strain typing and diagnostics in general. This knowledge,
especially of strains from new pathotypes, could, however, not be integrated in the developed microarray.
Nevertheless, the microarray’s diagnostic accuracy on

Friedrich et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:591
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/591

Page 11 of 22

Figure 6 Regression model behaviour on the categorical prediction of hybridisation patterns from new pathotypes that are not
represented by specifically designed oligonucleotides. The model training was based on the core pathotypes. The unspecific representation
resulted in diffuse prediction outcome, where only the group of enteroinvasive E. coli shows cross-reactions to probes of Shigella and intestinal
pathogens.

Friedrich et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:591
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/591

Page 12 of 22

Figure 7 Regression model behaviour on the categorical prediction of various mixed hybridisations. The regression model was trained
with pure sample and the mixed-culture hybridisation patterns (excluding new pathotypes like ETEC, EIEC and SEPEC).

these strains was assessed by Smith-Waterman alignments of all probe sequences against the genome
sequences specified in part B of Table 1.
Typing of pathogroups

The updated data regarding recently published enterobacterial genome sequences mainly comprised nonpathogenic E. coli strains as well as UPEC, MNEC,
EHEC, ETEC, EAEC and Shigella pathogroups but also
S. Enteritidis and K. pneumoniae strains (Table 1).
Among these, the MNEC, and ETEC pathogroups are
not represented by specific capture probes (except for
probes of the umbrella groups ‘Shigella E. coli’, ‘ExPEC’
and ‘IPEC’). The alignment results were summarised in
Figure 9 as an image plot of strains against pathogroups.
The plot indicates a correspondence of matching category and true pathogroup (green scale), no matching
though it was expected (grey colour) or cross-matching
(red scale). Colour intensities refer to the length of the
respective longest consecutive stretch of matches.
The ability of genus level capture probes to discriminate between ‘Shigella/E. coli’ and ‘Salmonella’ isolates
was confirmed by the alignments. The K. pneumoniae
342 genome shows sequence similarity to almost all
‘Klebsiella’-specific capture probes. Moreover, the
strain’s unambiguous detection was further supported
by the absence of sequences with similarity to probes

from other pathogroups. According to the alignments,
Salmonella and non-pathogenic E. coli strains could be
clearly typed based on the probes included on the
microarray although their genome sequences did not
cover the full set of capture probes designed for these
groups. Representatives of E. coli pathogroups which
have not been included into the initial genome-wide
probe selection (ETEC: E. coli strain E24377A; MNEC:
E. coli strain S88) could be correctly classified as E. coli
isolates and their genome sequences did not reveal a
substantial risk of cross-hybridisation. Additionally, the
genomes of UPEC strains IAI30 and UMN026 exhibited
theoretical hybridisation patterns characteristic for the
ExPEC pathogroup. Single cross-matching behaviour
could be balanced by subsequent regression on the full
set of group-specific capture probes.
Assessment of AMR detection

In addition, the AMR-associated probe set was evaluated
by screening for sequence similarities in recently published complete genome sequences of phenotypically
characterised strains. Figure 8B provides lengths of the
longest consecutive matches encoded in a green colour
gradient. The SECEC strain SMS-3-5 was reported to be
resistant against multiple antibiotics [30]. This finding
could be confirmed by our sequence alignments which
uncovered resistance loci coding for a TEM-type

Friedrich et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:591
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/591

Page 13 of 22

Figure 8 Experimental antimicrobial resistance (AMR) screening among test isolates (A) and theoretical assessment of AMR in isolates
with recently published genome (B). Colours in the left plot indicate posterior probabilities of membership to the signal fraction of the
overall distribution of AMR-related hybridisation intensities. Additionally, the validation of disc diffusion tests is mapped on the microarray results.
In case of consistency between microarray and disc diffusion results, the red colour scale is used, while the blue scale indicates no consistency.
Yellow bars signify resistance in disc diffusion which was not detected by microarray analysis. Test hybridisations of pure culture DNA are plotted
against AMR probes (right axis labels) while the type of AMR is provided as axis labels on the right. Colours of matrix B indicate the length of
longest consecutive matches obtained by Smith-Waterman alignments of AMR probes against genome sequences.

b-lactamase (blaTEM), a chloramphenicol acetyltransferase II (catII), an aminoglycoside 3’-phosphotransferase (aph(3)-Ia aphA1), a tetracycline efflux protein
(tetA) and a type II sulfonamide resistant dihydropteroate synthase (sulII). Genome sequence analysis indicated
a second multiple resistant strain, i.e. UPEC isolate
UMN026. The strain’s genome encodes in correspondence to probe alignments for the TEM-type b-lactamase, the aminoglycoside/multi-drug efflux protein
AcrD, the dihydropteroate synthase type-1 and several
efflux pumps. Resistances to single antibiotics were also
indicated by sequence alignment of the AMR-related
probe set to the genomes. E. coli strains 55989 and
SE11 were predicted to be tetracycline-resistant whereas
strain E24377A was shown to carry determinants for
resistance against sulfonamides. Although our AMRrelated probes did only reveal moderate similarity to
three different regions in the K. pneumoniae isolate 342,

the strain was described to be highly resistant. The
resistance mechanisms in K. pneumoniae 342 rely on
b-lactamases and on the existence of many efflux
pumps [31]. The b-lactam resistance was detected via
sequence alignment of the K. pneumoniae 342 genome
with the designed probes.
Overview of classification results

In summary, the classification of DNA hybridisation
based on signal intensities of specifically designed markers of enterobacterial pathogroups yielded accurate
results throughout all levels of hierarchical diagnostic
decisions. The prediction outcome was stable regarding
different compositions in training sets of the regression
model and regarding contrasts between groups from different pathogroup levels. Overall, the regression model
exhibited low levels of prediction noise in non-target
classes. Accuracies in predictions of the amount of

Friedrich et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:591
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/591

Page 14 of 22

Figure 9 Theoretical assessment of diagnostic probe performance based on alignments of probe sequences to recently published
enterobacterial genomes. The image plot summarises lengths of longest stretches of consecutive matching (green scale) and cross-matches
(red scale) of probes to new genomes. Grey colour indicates an expectation of matching without the observation of matches. Fields coloured in
light red represent weak similarities that will not lead to cross-hybridisation. The genus level categories show high similarity to corresponding
probes, in downstream levels few cross-matching was observed between E. coli pathotypes. The cross-matching goes back to only few probes.

Friedrich et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:591
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/591

hybridised DNA depended on the number of biological
repeats, the distinction power and amount of groupspecific probes and the homogeneity of the pathogroup
in focus. Spike-in experiments of mixed cultures underlined the ability of the diagnostic microarray in conjunction with regression analysis to decode the proportions
of bacteria in clinical specimens. The microarray proved
to detect major AMR conferred by degrading enzymes
or efflux proteins and the established signal analysis
provided information on the reliability of resistance prediction as posterior probabilities. Further screening of
newly published enterobacterial genomes regarding the
occurrence of the designed capture probes confirmed
their basic validity.

Discussion
We present a novel, complete strategy concerning
design and analysis of a diagnostic microarray for the
distinction of subgroups within the versatile family of
Enterobacteriaceae. Members of this family are known
as commensals but also as versatile pathogens. The multiplicity in clinical symptoms implies a large gene pool,
genetic exchange and the requirement of complex diagnostic tests [1,3,5,32,33].
The DNA microarray platform provides a suitable
high-throughput environment to determine a large
number of traits within a single diagnostic test. The
diagnostic strategy applied here was based on an initial
categorisation of the target group of bacteria. The subsequent probe selection was geared to the prior categorisation and its quality and discrimination power
certainly depends on a proper choice of meaningful
sub-entities in the reference set of target genomes. As
an example, non-pathogenic E. coli strains form an
inhomogeneous and insufficiently characterised subgroup. Beside commensal intestinal isolates, the subgroup was composed of e.g. laboratory strains like the
K-12 isolates but also included the strain Nissle 1917,
which genotypically resembles ExPEC strains without
expressing ExPEC-specific virulence factors [34] and the
commensal isolate HS [35]. E. coli K-12 derivatives are
in use as laboratory strains for nearly 90 years and were
frequently passaged and genetically manipulated. Therefore the K-12 lineage does not represent ‘typical’ commensals. Though this heterogeneous subgroup could be
characterised by oligonucleotide determinants, it would
be advantageous in a diagnostic context to focus on
many ‘true’ commensals that were isolated from the
intestinal tract, given the respective genomic data.
These examples underline the importance of well
defined bacterial subgroups in order to enhance the
performance of any microbial diagnostic device.
The initial search algorithm of probe selection, longest common factor statistics, explicitly scans the whole

Page 15 of 22

genomes with coding and non-coding regions. The
consideration of non-coding areas as robust markers
with respect to specify a group of bacteria is not
straight-forward. Non-coding regions are expected to
be largely less conserved. Nevertheless, highly conserved intergenic motifs like repetitive sequences
termed ERIC (enterobacterial repetitive intergenic consensus) [36] or conserved transcriptional regulatory
elements [37] were described for enterobacteria previously. Our study confirms by the high number of
selected intergenic probes, which are distributed to
nearly all levels of considered clinically relevant subgroups, the existence of characteristic traits outside of
coding regions. The fact that non-coding regions could
have regulatory functions is well known and DNA
sequence alterations in such regions may thus affect a
broad variety of bacterial traits including physiology,
but the knowledge of the concrete DNA regions and
their functionality is still poor. The detected conserved
diagnostic markers will provide a starting point for
further research on the impact of these DNA regions.
Microarray-based diagnostics in comparison

The microarray technology is well suited for diagnostic
applications due to its highly parallel architecture. In
the past few years many workgroups studied the
applicability of microarrays to microbial ecology and
phylogenetics [38,39], comparative genomics [40-42]
and clinical diagnostics [15,43]. Microbial diagnostic
microarrays (MDM) are generally characterised by a
low number of probes, which either target sequence
differences in single diagnostic markers or represent a
library of virulence-associated genes. MDM from the
first category rely on probes designed from sequence
differences in single markers like 16S rRNA [44] and
gyrB [11]. Though these single marker diagnostics perform well in the distinction between distantly related
organisms, its distinction performance on subspecies
level was found to be limited [45]. Other MDM were
based on libraries of determinants for known virulence-associated genes [13,14,46,47]. The extension of
such probe sets by so far uncharacterised genomic
regions has been shown to improve the discrimination
of closely related bacterial variants [48]. However, high
rates of horizontal gene transfer and recombination,
which frequently occur especially among E. coli and
other enterobacteria [49], can also affect virulenceassociated genes due to selection pressure in the host.
Furthermore, virulence determinants are often associated with pathogenicity islands, and are subjected to
frequent alterations due to genome plasticity [32,50].
Extraintestinal pathogenic E. coli isolated from different human and animal hosts have largely congruent
virulence-associated genome contents and the overall

Friedrich et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:591
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/591

genome content of many non-pathogenic E. coli
isolates resembles that of extraintestinal pathogenic
isolates. Thus, the detection of known virulence-associated genes does not allow proper strain typing and
risk assessment [34,51-54]. Consequently, the proposed
strategy in the development of a MDM benefits from
the determination of the genome-wide most stable
subgroup-specific traits among available non-redundant genomic information of the target group of
bacteria.
AMR screening

An important part in clinical treatment of bacterial
infections is the choice of an appropriate drug therapy.
In this context, the integration of a screening for important determinants of antimicrobial resistances was mandatory in the development of a diagnostic tool. The
AMR screening feature does not only provide an assessment of appropriate antimicrobial resistance determinants, but also enables the tracking of AMR
progression. Our developed screening based on probes
for the major classes of AMR mediated by enzymes or
efflux proteins extends previous studies [14] in complexity and analysis methodology. By fitting a Gaussian mixture model to AMR-related signal intensities, we
provide an indication of the reliability of microarray signals. Hybridisation with a large number of test strains
and in vitro verification of resistances by the disc diffusion method largely correlated in our study. Exhaustive
AMR analysis would require a wealth of capture probes
to track all potentially occurring single nucleotide polymorphisms and is out-of-scope for high-throughput
pathogen diagnostics.
The challenge to establish microarray-based diagnostics of AMR with differences between microarray detection and conventional testing was already stated in
previous studies [16]. As E. coli strains possess a high
number of drug efflux systems and an even higher number of other membrane transporters [55], a functional
shift mediated by mutations could be the cause for such
observed differences. Nevertheless, microarray-based
detection of AMR has been described previously as a
support of conventional susceptibility testing [14,16].
Here, microarrays were successfully applied to survey
the occurrence of different classes of AMR in a wide
range of enterobacterial isolates.
Diagnostics of enterobacteria

The microarray design strategy was optimised for the
classification of clinically relevant enterobacteria. Probe
selection was based on a previously published longest
common factor approach and on subsequent filtering of
candidate capture probes according to strict match and
mismatch limits, which conferred robust signalling with

Page 16 of 22

low cross-hybridisation. By ‘unsupervised’ evaluation of
all possible subgroupings with distinct oligonucleotide
patterns, the ability to distinguish S. flexneri from other
Shigella species underlines the high sensitivity in strain
typing mediated by the applied probe selection strategy.
Extensive test hybridisations were conducted in order to
assess the quality of the selected probe set and to obtain
training data for the calibration of the regression model.
Probe-wise performance evaluations based on these
tests legitimate the separation of sense and antisense
capture probes, which exhibited divergence of support
quality e. g. in classifications of Yersinia spp. test isolates. Detailed investigation concerning the nature of the
selected probes revealed single markers, which were previously described as group specific. As an example two
capture probes of the EAEC pathogroup indicating
strong group-specific support are derived from the aat
gene locus. The whole aat and aap loci were previously
reported to be specific for EAEC strains and suggested
for diagnostic purposes [56]. The classification of Shigella isolates is mainly conferred by capture probes
derived from the ipaH gene. Venkatesan and co-workers
[57] already described motifs of this gene locus to be
effective markers of Shigella and EIEC virulence. Future
availability of EIEC genomes will enable robust design
of joint capture probes for the invasive pathotype. The
function of nearly half of the capture probes is still
uncharacterised and to our knowledge these markers
were not applied in enterobacterial diagnostics before.
The finding underlines the importance of an unsupervised probe selection mechanism considering both coding and non-coding genomic regions.
Test strains were classified to enterobacterial subgroups by a regression model. The model was able to
provide clear separation of the considered subgroups
while the prediction accuracy of nature and amount of
hybridised DNA increased with the size of the training
set and the distance between the groups. Spike-in
experiments with mixed culture hybridisations containing isolates from two groups in various proportions
were intended to evaluate the power of classification for
bacterial communities. The tendencies of predictions
based on these mixed culture hybridisations were mainly
correct. The regression model is generally able to determine the composition of bacterial communities. By conducting comprehensive tests with biological repeats, the
prediction performance of the regression model can certainly be further improved as shown for pure culture
predictions. In extremely unbalanced mixtures, especially if single strains are highly underrepresented, the
implementation of an amplification technology may circumvent the existence of detection limits [58].
In a separate in silico analysis we matched the probe
set to recently published enterobacterial genomes. The

Friedrich et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:591
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/591

assessment of probe validity on yet unconsidered
sequence information confirmed the appropriateness of
selected probes. Major AMR patterns reported for these
strains could be recognised by the corresponding capture probes of the developed microarray thus recommending it for AMR diagnostics.
Regarding the numerous existing approaches to construct a diagnostic tool for Enterobacteriaceae or its
subgroup E. coli, our design strategy differs because of
its genome-wide probe selection, the broad range of targets and an intuitive but powerful regression model for
the analysis of hybridisation patterns. As a proof-ofprinciple, the probe selection was based on genomic
data of published strains that represent clinically relevant phenotypes. With an increase in genomic data, the
method of probe selection will even gain in accuracy of
detecting stable traits of the bacterial groups in focus.
The chosen microarray platform with twelve separate
spotting areas provides a tool for highly parallel diagnostics to reduce analysis time and costs. The trade-off is a
limited number of probes, but the obtained test results
proved the suitability of the probe set selected for the
distinction of the assigned clinical phenotypes. Further
efforts should be focused on the reduction of costs for a
single hybridisation. A recently developed label-free system might be a step in the right direction as it reduces
the preparation and hybridisation time of samples and
in parallel increases the sensitivity [59].

Conclusions
The basic concept and analytical elements of the
described microarray development can be easily transferred to other bacterial taxa and even beyond. Although
the microarray design was focused on clinical diagnostics, its application to further fields like quality control
of food or water as well as veterinary medicine is imaginable. In summary, a novel, complete developmental
process of a diagnostic microarray, which enhances the
diagnostic reliability, especially on subspecies levels, is
described. The specifically adapted regression model
further improves the diagnostic performance via continuous learning abilities in the process of its application.
Methods
Probe selection, sequence alignments and functional
annotation

Rahmann [60] proposed an algorithm based on
enhanced suffix arrays to identify all common, contiguous subsequences, termed factors, in a subset of reference genomes (see part A of Table 1). The method is
based on the definition of appropriate matching (here l
= 70 bases) and cross-hybridisation (c ≤14 bases) thresholds to ensure a safe matching to all target sequences
within genomes of a group and to prevent for undesired

Page 17 of 22

matches to any areas in other genomes. Briefly summarised, the algorithm decomposes the target genomes
into all possible factors and selects those subsequences
of the chosen length l = 70 bases that uniquely occur in
each genome. To deal with multiple genomes, a joint
suffix array of multiple genomes was generated, which
enables the efficient extraction of common subsequences. Potential diagnostic groups are defined in an
unsupervised manner by the existence of a set of common factors with a minimum length l and maximum
common length c to any factors of other genomes.
Matching statistics and longest common factors were
obtained according to the algorithm described by Rahmann [61].
The set of probe candidates was further investigated
according to compositional complexity, GC-content,
change in Gibb’s free energy upon hybridisation, melting
temperature and cross-hybridisation to human DNA.
Reverse complementary oligonucleotides were considered as autonomous candidate probes even if they fully
overlap, as the difference in base composition may have
an influence in hybridisation properties. All alignments
of selected probes to recently published genome
sequences or the human genome were carried out using
the software PARALIGN [62] in Smith-Waterman
mode. PARALIGN was also applied to align candidate
probes with the human genome to evaluate cross-hybridisation risk in clinical specimens. Similarly, the performance of the probe set was assessed on recently
published enterobacterial genomes.
All oligonucleotides related to pathogroup typing were
functionally annotated by homology-based knowledge
transfer using the NCBI-BLAST search and the enterobacterial sequence database. Annotations were obtained
manually from the most abundant function assigned to
respective genomic regions. New AMR-specific capture
probes were designed by the programme OligoPicker
[63]. Probe uniqueness was validated against the gDNA
of reference strains with BLAST [64].
Test hybridisations

Samples of gDNA extracted from representative strains
of various enterobacterial pathogroups were hybridised
to the microarray in order to determine its classification performance. The test set is composed of 40 E.
coli isolates subdivided to two MNEC, two SEPEC,
three UPEC, five EHEC, four EAEC, 4 EIEC, six nonpathogenic E. coli, three APEC (avian pathogenic E.
coli), five EPEC and six ETEC. Furthermore the set
contains 17 Shigella from species S. dysenteriae (two),
S. sonnei (two), S. flexneri (eight) and S. boydii (four),
16 Salmonella with seven S. Typhimurium and several
other serovars therein, 13 Klebsiella consisting of 11 K.
pneumoniae and the species K. ozeanae and K.

Friedrich et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:591
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/591

edwardsii as well as six Yersinia spp. strains representing two Y. pestis, Y. pseutotuberculosis and Y. enterocolitica isolates. Further details on the identity of
selected isolates are given in Table S3.3 of additional
file 3.
Faecal samples as well as many clinical specimens are
composed of mixed bacterial communities comprising
pathogens and non-pathogens. The evaluation of the
microarray accounts for these types of clinical diagnostics by specifically designed spike-in experiments. The
experiments target evaluations with respect to the contrasting ability of the microarray in the background of
multiple bacteria and the sensitivity in determining proportions of their occurrence in clinical samples.
Preparation of genomic DNA

Cultures were grown overnight at 37°C in LB (Luria
broth). Genomic DNA was isolated following standard
protocols [65].
Microarray technology and hybridisation scheme

The HTA Slide12™ from Greiner Bio-One provides 12
separate wells for independent parallel hybridisation.
They are composed of polymer and coated with a 3Depoxy surface. Each well provides a printable area of 12
× 36 mm² bordered by a rim of 0.5 mm in height. The
70-mer oligonucleotides were synthesised by metabion
international AG (Martinsried, Germany) and spotting
of microarrays was conducted with a spot distance of
225 μm by Scienion AG (Berlin, Germany) using a sciFLEXARRAYER S11 piezo dispenser.
Test hybridisations with different combinations and
ratios of mixed culture samples were set up in addition
to pure culture tests in order to evaluate the performance of the microarray on community samples (see
also Additional file 3, Table S3.1). The experiments
comprised a dilution series of a mixture of non-pathogenic E. coli K-12 strain MG1655 and the EHEC O157:
H7 isolate EDL933 (Figure 8, M01-M05). The spike-in
experiments were intended to evaluate the accuracy to
predict simultaneously the DNA content and therefore
the amount of two or more bacterial groups in a test
sample. For the spike-in mixtures of the K-12 and the
EHEC strain, the pathogroup-specific rates varied in a
range between 0.8 and 0.2 of overall hybridised DNA in
a counter-rotated mode starting with an amount of 1.6
g (ratio 0.8) K-12 DNA in plot M01. The applied regression model was trained with all hybridisation patterns of
groups indicated as annotation of the x-axis in the plots.
To calibrate the coefficient matrix for the prediction of
mixed cultures, the training was extended by the mixedculture patterns. All mixed culture experiments were
conducted with a technical repeat. In these cases no
cross-validation was performed.

Page 18 of 22

Probe labelling and array hybridisation

Genomic DNA was labelled with the DecaLabel DNA
Labeling Kit from Fermentas (St. Leon-Rot, Germany)
and 1 mM Cy5-dUTP dye (Enzo Life Sciences, USA).
The MinElute PCR purification kit from Qiagen (Hilden,
Germany) was used for gDNA purification. All solutions
applied in processing and washing procedures of the
slides were demineralised and filtrated with 0.22 μm
pore filters. Slides were treated for 5 min under agitation with 0.1% Triton X-100. Afterwards, they were
transferred twice to a processing chamber filled with 6
mM HCl and agitated for 2 min. After that, they were
placed under agitation in 100 mM KCl solution for 10
min and then in water for 2 min. Then, slides were
transferred to a chamber filled with pre-warmed (50°C)
50 mM ethanolamine, 0.1% sodium dodecyl sulfate
(SDS) in 0.1 M Tris (pH 9.0) for 15 min. Processing was
completed by two washing steps with ultra-pure water
for 2 min under agitation, rinsing in cold ethanol and
drying for 3 min under centrifugation at 1,000 g.
Prior to hybridisation, 2 μg of labelled and purified
samples were dried in a speedvac and resuspended in 15
μl hybridisation buffer (Scienion SciHyb, prewarmed for
10 min to 42°C). The cavities of the hybridisation chamber were loaded with 20 μl H2O, samples were dropped
contactless on the spotted areas of the slides and the
slides were hybridised overnight (about 15 h) in a 42°C
water basin.
After removal of hybridisation fluid, the arrays were
washed three times with 30 μl washing solution 1 (5%
20 × sodium chloride-sodium citrate (SSC), 0.033%
SDS). The slides were then consecutively transferred to
chambers with washing solution 1, 2 (1% 20 × SSC) and
3 (0.25% 20 × SSC) and agitated for 5 min each. Finally,
the slides were dried by centrifugation at 1,000 g for 3
min.
The slides were scanned in 5 μm resolution with an
Axon GenePix 4000B microarray scanner (MDS Analytical Technologies, Ismaning, Germany). Scan images
were processed by applying the GenePix 6.0 software to
obtain raw intensities.
Disc diffusion test

Strains with predicted antibiotic resistances based on the
microarray hybridisation were cultivated overnight at 37°
C in Mueller-Hinton (MH) medium. 100 μl of the overnight culture were transferred to 4 ml MH medium and
cultivated for 4 h under constant shaking at 37°C. These
cultures were diluted to a final cell count of 1 × 106 - 5
× 106 colony forming units/ml. 100 μl of each dilution
were plated on a MH-agar plate. Discs containing the
antibiotics listed in Additional file 3, Table S3.2 were
placed on the agar plates which were then incubated
overnight at 37°C. The assignment of susceptibility,

Friedrich et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:591
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/591

intermediate behaviour or resistance was subsequently
determined by measuring the diameter of the growth
inhibition zone around the susceptibility discs (see
Additional file 3, Table S3.2 for reference values).
According to the large spectrum of different antimicrobial agents [29], the class of b-lactamases was represented in the experiments by aminopenicillin,
isoxazolylpenicillin and cephalosporin subclasses.
Evaluation of hybridisation patterns

Subsequent microarray analyses were performed using
the statistical programming software R [66].
Normalisation and processing of AMR signal intensities

Raw intensities were normalised by the algorithm for
variance stabilisation between arrays [67]. The method
homogenises the variance of hybridisation intensities
from a set of samples by transformation of the data with
the model h(x) = arcsinh (a + bx). This transformation,
applied as R implementation vsn, corrects for an underweighting of differences in lower intensities.
Microarray experiments yield two kinds of outcomes:
the signal intensities upon binding of complementary
DNA and an unspecific fluorescence of the microarray
surface or dye remnants. For log normalised hybridisation patterns each type of intensity values follows a normal distribution. The classification accuracy of
microarray intensities in either one of these classes is
strongly dependent on the degree of overlap of the two
distributions. In experimentally generated hybridisation
patterns the bimodal Gaussian mixture model is able to
fit the two intrinsic normal distributions. Parameter estimation of the Gaussian mixture and calculation of posterior probabilities of the classification was achieved by
using the R-package Mclust [68].
Analysis of variance and simultaneous inference of
multiple comparisons

An ANOVA was applied to determine the general potential of capture probes concerning the identification of differences in signal intensities across contrasted bacterial
groups. By fitting an aov model, the R implementation of
ANOVA in the stats-package, the probe-wise occurrence
of distributional differences of signal intensities in any
bacterial group and for all capture probes was tested.
In case of a detected difference in mean signal intensities of a capture probe between the target and non-target pathogroups, additional tests like the Tukey honestly
significant difference are often applied in such a context.
In the described analysis we applied the simultaneous
inference of one-sided multiple comparisons [21]. The
algorithm evaluates individual test hypothesis derived
from an ANOVA model as max-t type test statistics. In

Page 19 of 22

terms of microarray intensity data the method was
applied to compare individual differences based on
ANOVA model parameters between all pairs of bacterial
groups under a global error model. The method is
implemented in the R-package multcomp [69] and yields
adjusted p-values.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Supplement1.txt. Additional file 1 contains a list that
maps internally used probe identifiers with identifiers used in the NCBI
probe database.
Additional file 2: Supplement2.doc. Additional file 2 contains
information to probe performance and classification of the intermediate
pathogroup level.
Additional file 3: Supplement3.doc. Additional file 3 contains
supplementary information of the composition of mixed culture test
samples and the standards of susceptibility assignments for the tested
antimicrobial agents.

Abbreviations
IPEC: intestinal pathogenic E. coli; EHEC: enterohaemorrhagic E. coli; EPEC:
enteropathogenic E. coli; ETEC: enterotoxigenic E. coli; EAEC:
enteroaggregative E. coli; EIEC: enteroinvasive E. coli; ExPEC: extraintestinal
pathogenic E. coli; UPEC: uropathogenic E. coli; MNEC: Meningitis-associated
E. coli; SEPEC: Sepsis-associated E .coli; AMR: antimicrobial resistance; ANOVA:
analysis of variance; gDNA: genomic DNA; ESBLs: extended-spectrum blactamases; MDM: microbial diagnostic microarray; APEC: avian pathogenic E.
coli.;
Acknowledgements
We gratefully thank Julian Parkhill (Cambridge, UK) for the permission to use
the publicly available complete genome sequence of Salmonella bongori
isolate 12419 for comparative genomics and probe selection. We thank B.
Plaschke (IMIB, Würzburg) and Sabine Fischer (Scienion AG, Berlin) for
excellent technical assistance. T. Friedrich received a Research Fellowship
from the Bavarian Research Foundation (FORINGEN TP-A1). This work was
carried out in the frame of the European Virtual Institute for Functional
Genomics of Bacterial Pathogens (CEE LSHB-CT-2005-512061). We further
thank the DFG (Da 208/10-1) for support.
Author details
1
University of Würzburg, Institute for Molecular Infection Biology, JosefSchneider-Str. 2/Bau D15, 97080 Würzburg, Germany. 2Department of
Bioinformatics, University of Würzburg, Am Hubland, 97074 Würzburg,
Germany. 3Bioinformatics for High-Throughput Technologies, Computer
Science 11, TU Dortmund, 44221 Dortmund, Germany. 4Scienion AG,
Volmerstraße 7b, 12489 Berlin, Germany. 5Robert Koch-Institute, Wernigerode
Branch, Burgstrasse 37, 38855 Wernigerode, Germany. 6Department of
Molecular Microbiology and Biotechnology, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv
69978, Israel. 7Faculty of Medicine Carl Gustav Carus, Institute for Medical
Microbiology and Hygiene, Technology University (TU) Dresden, Dresden,
Germany. 8German Academy of Sciences Leopoldina, Emil-Abderhalden-Str.
37, 06108 Halle/Saale, Germany. 9Institute for Hygiene, University of Münster,
Robert-Koch-Str. 41, 48149 Münster, Germany.
Authors’ contributions
UD and TM designed research together with SR, TD and JH. SR developed
and adapted the longest common factor based probe preselection
algorithm. TF performed probe selection, microarray experiments and data
analysis. WW produced the microarray and supported the microarray
experiments. ER, FG, WR and AF provided bacterial strains. TF wrote the
manuscript assisted by UD, TM, SR, TD and JH. All authors have read and
approved the final manuscript.

Friedrich et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:591
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/591

Received: 25 February 2010 Accepted: 21 October 2010
Published: 21 October 2010
References
1. Kaper JB, Nataro JP, Mobley HL: Pathogenic Escherichia coli. Nat Rev
Microbiol 2004, 2:123-140.
2. Haraga A, Ohlson MB, Miller SI: Salmonellae interplay with host cells. Nat
Rev Microbiol 2008, 6:53-66.
3. Wren BW: The yersiniae–a model genus to study the rapid evolution of
bacterial pathogens. Nat Rev Microbiol 2003, 1:55-64.
4. Podschun R, Ullmann U: Klebsiella spp. as nosocomial pathogens:
epidemiology, taxonomy, typing methods, and pathogenicity factors.
Clin Microbiol Rev 1998, 11:589-603.
5. Grassl GA, Finlay BB: Pathogenesis of enteric Salmonella infections. Curr
Opin Gastroenterol 2008, 24:22-26.
6. Schroeder GN, Hilbi H: Molecular pathogenesis of Shigella spp.:
controlling host cell signaling, invasion, and death by type III secretion.
Clin Microbiol Rev 2008, 21:134-156.
7. Clermont O, Bonacorsi S, Bingen E: Rapid and simple determination of
the Escherichia coli phylogenetic group. Appl Environ Microbiol 2000,
66:4555-4558.
8. Sen K, Asher DM: Multiplex PCR for detection of Enterobacteriaceae in
blood. Transfusion 2001, 41:1356-1364.
9. Larkin JE, Frank BC, Gavras H, Sultana R, Quackenbush J: Independence and
reproducibility across microarray platforms. Nat Methods 2005, 2:337-344.
10. Ballmer K, Korczak BM, Kuhnert P, Slickers P, Ehricht R, Hachler H: Fast DNA
serotyping of Escherichia coli by use of an oligonucleotide microarray. J
Clin Microbiol 2007, 45:370-379.
11. Kostic T, Weilharter A, Rubino S, Delogu G, Uzzau S, Rudi K, Sessitsch A,
Bodrossy L: A microbial diagnostic microarray technique for the sensitive
detection and identification of pathogenic bacteria in a background of
nonpathogens. Anal Biochem 2007, 360:244-254.
12. Han W, Liu B, Cao B, Beutin L, Kruger U, Liu H, Li Y, Liu Y, Feng L, Wang L:
DNA microarray-based identification of serogroups and virulence gene
patterns of Escherichia coli isolates associated with porcine postweaning
diarrhea and edema disease. Appl Environ Microbiol 2007, 73:4082-4088.
13. Bekal S, Brousseau R, Masson L, Prefontaine G, Fairbrother J, Harel J: Rapid
identification of Escherichia coli pathotypes by virulence gene detection
with DNA microarrays. J Clin Microbiol 2003, 41:2113-2125.
14. Bruant G, Maynard C, Bekal S, Gaucher I, Masson L, Brousseau R, Harel J:
Development and validation of an oligonucleotide microarray for
detection of multiple virulence and antimicrobial resistance genes in
Escherichia coli. Appl Environ Microbiol 2006, 72:3780-3784.
15. Barl T, Dobrindt U, Yu X, Katcoff DJ, Sompolinsky D, Bonacorsi S, Hacker J,
Bachmann TT: Genotyping DNA chip for the simultaneous assessment of
antibiotic resistance and pathogenic potential of extraintestinal
pathogenic Escherichia coli. Int J Antimicrob Agents 2008, 32:272-277.
16. Frye JG, Jesse T, Long F, Rondeau G, Porwollik S, McClelland M, Jackson CR,
Englen M, Fedorka-Cray PJ: DNA microarray detection of antimicrobial
resistance genes in diverse bacteria. Int J Antimicrob Agents 2006,
27:138-151.
17. McNamara SE, Srinivasan U, Zhang L, Whittam TS, Marrs CF, Foxman B:
Comparison of probe hybridization array typing to multilocus sequence
typing for pathogenic Escherichia coli. J Clin Microbiol 2009, 47:596-602.
18. von Baum H, Marre R: Antimicrobial resistance of Escherichia coli and
therapeutic implications. Int J Med Microbiol 2005, 295:503-511.
19. Rahmann S: The shortest common supersequence problem in a
microarray production setting. Bioinformatics 2003, 19(Suppl 2):ii156-161.
20. Letowski J, Brousseau R, Masson L: Designing better probes: effect of
probe size, mismatch position and number on hybridization in DNA
oligonucleotide microarrays. J Microbiol Methods 2004, 57:269-278.
21. Hothorn T, Bretz F, Westfall P: Simultaneous inference in general
parametric models. Biom J 2008, 50:346-363.
22. Porwollik S, Boyd EF, Choy C, Cheng P, Florea L, Proctor E, McClelland M:
Characterization of Salmonella enterica subspecies I genovars by use of
microarrays. J Bacteriol 2004, 186:5883-5898.
23. Hinchliffe SJ, Isherwood KE, Stabler RA, Prentice MB, Rakin A, Nichols RA,
Oyston PC, Hinds J, Titball RW, Wren BW: Application of DNA microarrays
to study the evolutionary genomics of Yersinia pestis and Yersinia
pseudotuberculosis. Genome Res 2003, 13:2018-2029.

Page 20 of 22

24. Chen W, Seifert KA, Lévesque CA: A high density COX1 barcode
oligonucleotide array for identification and detection of species of
Penicillium subgenus Penicillium. Molec Ecol Res 2009, 9:114-128.
25. Engelmann JC, Rahmann S, Wolf M, Schultz J, Fritzilas E, Kneitz S,
Dandekar T, Müller T: Modelling cross-hybridization on phylogenetic DNA
microarrays increases the detection power of closely related species.
Molec Ecol Res 2009, 9:83-93.
26. Paterson DL, Hujer KM, Hujer AM, Yeiser B, Bonomo MD, Rice LB,
Bonomo RA: Extended-spectrum beta-lactamases in Klebsiella
pneumoniae bloodstream isolates from seven countries: dominance and
widespread prevalence of SHV- and CTX-M-type beta-lactamases.
Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2003, 47:3554-3560.
27. Kobayashi N, Nishino K, Yamaguchi A: Novel macrolide-specific ABC-type
efflux transporter in Escherichia coli. J Bacteriol 2001, 183:5639-5644.
28. Sanchez L, Pan W, Vinas M, Nikaido H: The acrAB homolog of Haemophilus
influenzae codes for a functional multidrug efflux pump. J Bacteriol 1997,
179:6855-6857.
29. Giamarellou H: Multidrug resistance in Gram-negative bacteria that
produce extended-spectrum beta-lactamases (ESBLs). Clin Microbiol Infect
2005, 11(Suppl 4):1-16.
30. Fricke WF, Wright MS, Lindell AH, Harkins DM, Baker-Austin C, Ravel J,
Stepanauskas R: Insights into the environmental resistance gene pool
from the genome sequence of the multidrug-resistant environmental
isolate Escherichia coli SMS-3-5. J Bacteriol 2008, 190:6779-6794.
31. Fouts DE, Tyler HL, DeBoy RT, Daugherty S, Ren Q, Badger JH, Durkin AS,
Huot H, Shrivastava S, Kothari S, et al: Complete genome sequence of the
N2-fixing broad host range endophyte Klebsiella pneumoniae 342 and
virulence predictions verified in mice. PLoS Genet 2008, 4:e1000141.
32. Ahmed N, Dobrindt U, Hacker J, Hasnain SE: Genomic fluidity and
pathogenic bacteria: applications in diagnostics, epidemiology and
intervention. Nat Rev Microbiol 2008, 6:387-394.
33. Chain PS, Carniel E, Larimer FW, Lamerdin J, Stoutland PO, Regala WM,
Georgescu AM, Vergez LM, Land ML, Motin VL, et al: Insights into the
evolution of Yersinia pestis through whole-genome comparison with
Yersinia pseudotuberculosis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2004, 101:13826-13831.
34. Grozdanov L, Raasch C, Schulze J, Sonnenborn U, Gottschalk G, Hacker J,
Dobrindt U: Analysis of the genome structure of the nonpathogenic
probiotic Escherichia coli strain Nissle 1917. J Bacteriol 2004,
186:5432-5441.
35. Rasko DA, Rosovitz MJ, Myers GS, Mongodin EF, Fricke WF, Gajer P,
Crabtree J, Sebaihia M, Thomson NR, Chaudhuri R, et al: The pangenome
structure of Escherichia coli: comparative genomic analysis of E. coli
commensal and pathogenic isolates. J Bacteriol 2008, 190:6881-6893.
36. Wilson LA, Sharp PM: Enterobacterial repetitive intergenic consensus
(ERIC) sequences in Escherichia coli: Evolution and implications for ERICPCR. Mol Biol Evol 2006, 23:1156-1168.
37. Pritsker M, Liu YC, Beer MA, Tavazoie S: Whole-genome discovery of
transcription factor binding sites by network-level conservation. Genome
Res 2004, 14:99-108.
38. Gentry TJ, Wickham GS, Schadt CW, He Z, Zhou J: Microarray applications
in microbial ecology research. Microb Ecol 2006, 52:159-175.
39. Wagner M, Smidt H, Loy A, Zhou J: Unravelling microbial communities
with DNA-microarrays: challenges and future directions. Microb Ecol 2007,
53:498-506.
40. Dorrell N, Hinchliffe SJ, Wren BW: Comparative phylogenomics of
pathogenic bacteria by microarray analysis. Curr Opin Microbiol 2005,
8:620-626.
41. Willenbrock H, Hallin PF, Wassenaar TM, Ussery DW: Characterization of
probiotic Escherichia coli isolates with a novel pan-genome microarray.
Genome Biol 2007, 8:R267.
42. Willenbrock H, Petersen A, Sekse C, Kiil K, Wasteson Y, Ussery DW: Design
of a seven-genome Escherichia coli microarray for comparative genomic
profiling. J Bacteriol 2006, 188:7713-7721.
43. Loy A, Bodrossy L: Highly parallel microbial diagnostics using
oligonucleotide microarrays. Clin Chim Acta 2006, 363:106-119.
44. Lehner A, Loy A, Behr T, Gaenge H, Ludwig W, Wagner M, Schleifer KH:
Oligonucleotide microarray for identification of Enterococcus species.
FEMS Microbiol Lett 2005, 246:133-142.
45. Case RJ, Boucher Y, Dahllof I, Holmstrom C, Doolittle WF, Kjelleberg S: Use
of 16S rRNA and rpoB genes as molecular markers for microbial ecology
studies. Appl Environ Microbiol 2007, 73:278-288.

Friedrich et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:591
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/591

46. Dobrindt U, Agerer F, Michaelis K, Janka A, Buchrieser C, Samuelson M,
Svanborg C, Gottschalk G, Karch H, Hacker J: Analysis of genome plasticity
in pathogenic and commensal Escherichia coli isolates by use of DNA
arrays. J Bacteriol 2003, 185:1831-1840.
47. Korczak B, Frey J, Schrenzel J, Pluschke G, Pfister R, Ehricht R, Kuhnert P: Use
of diagnostic microarrays for determination of virulence gene patterns
of Escherichia coli K1, a major cause of neonatal meningitis. J Clin
Microbiol 2005, 43:1024-1031.
48. Pelludat C, Prager R, Tschape H, Rabsch W, Schuchhardt J, Hardt WD: Pilot
study to evaluate microarray hybridization as a tool for Salmonella
enterica serovar Typhimurium strain differentiation. J Clin Microbiol 2005,
43:4092-4106.
49. Wirth T, Falush D, Lan R, Colles F, Mensa P, Wieler LH, Karch H, Reeves PR,
Maiden MC, Ochman H, Achtman M: Sex and virulence in Escherichia coli:
an evolutionary perspective. Mol Microbiol 2006, 60:1136-1151.
50. Dobrindt U, Hochhut B, Hentschel U, Hacker J: Genomic islands in
pathogenic and environmental microorganisms. Nat Rev Microbiol 2004,
2:414-424.
51. Hejnova J, Dobrindt U, Nemcova R, Rusniok C, Bomba A, Frangeul L,
Hacker J, Glaser P, Sebo P, Buchrieser C: Characterization of the flexible
genome complement of the commensal Escherichia coli strain A0 34/86
(O83:K24:H31). Microbiology 2005, 151:385-398.
52. Kariyawasam S, Scaccianoce JA, Nolan LK: Common and specific genomic
sequences of avian and human extraintestinal pathogenic Escherichia
coli as determined by genomic subtractive hybridization. BMC Microbiol
2007, 7:81.
53. Rodriguez-Siek KE, Giddings CW, Doetkott C, Johnson TJ, Fakhr MK,
Nolan LK: Comparison of Escherichia coli isolates implicated in human
urinary tract infection and avian colibacillosis. Microbiology 2005,
151:2097-2110.
54. Zdziarski J, Svanborg C, Wullt B, Hacker J, Dobrindt U: Molecular basis of
commensalism in the urinary tract: low virulence or virulence
attenuation? Infect Immun 2008, 76:695-703.
55. Paulsen IT, Chen J, Nelson KE, Saier MH Jr: Comparative genomics of
microbial drug efflux systems. J Mol Microbiol Biotechnol 2001, 3:145-150.
56. Jenkins C, Chart H, Willshaw GA, Cheasty T, Smith HR: Genotyping of
enteroaggregative Escherichia coli and identification of target genes for
the detection of both typical and atypical strains. Diagn Microbiol Infect
Dis 2006, 55:13-19.
57. Venkatesan MM, Buysse JM, Kopecko DJ: Use of Shigella flexneri ipaC and
ipaH gene sequences for the general identification of Shigella spp. and
enteroinvasive Escherichia coli. J Clin Microbiol 1989, 27:2687-2691.
58. Park HG, Song JY, K.H P, Kim MH: Fluorescence-based assay formats and
signal amplification strategies for DNA microarray analysis. Chem Engin
Sci 2006, 61:954-965.
59. Wang X, Cooper KL, Wang A, Xu J, Wang Z, Zhang Y, Tu Z: Label-free DNA
sequence detection using oligonucleotide functionalized optical fiber.
Appl Phys Lett 2006, 89:163901.
60. Rahmann S: Fast large scale oligonucleotide selection using the longest
common factor approach. J Bioinform Comput Biol 2003, 1:343-361.
61. Rahmann S: Rapid large-scale oligonucleotide selection for microarrays.
Proc IEEE Comput Soc Bioinform Conf 2002, 1:54-63.
62. Saebo PE, Andersen SM, Myrseth J, Laerdahl JK, Rognes T: PARALIGN: rapid
and sensitive sequence similarity searches powered by parallel
computing technology. Nucleic Acids Res 2005, 33:W535-539.
63. Wang X, Seed B: Selection of oligonucleotide probes for protein coding
sequences. Bioinformatics 2003, 19:796-802.
64. Altschul SF, Gish W, Miller W, Myers EW, Lipman DJ: Basic local alignment
search tool. J Mol Biol 1990, 215:403-410.
65. Sambrook J, Fritsch EF, Maniatis T: Molecular cloning: a laboratory manual.
second edition. Cold Spring Harbor, N. Y.: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory;
1989.
66. Team RDC: R: A language and environment for statistical computing Vienna,
Austria; 2004.
67. Huber W, von Heydebreck A, Sultmann H, Poustka A, Vingron M: Variance
stabilization applied to microarray data calibration and to the
quantification of differential expression. Bioinformatics 2002, 18(Suppl 1):
S96-104.
68. Fraley C, Raftery AE: Model-Based Clustering, Discriminant Analysis and
Density Estimation. J Am Stat Assoc 2002, 97:611-631.

Page 21 of 22

69. Hothorn T, Bretz F, Westfall P, Heiberger RM: multcomp: Simultaneous
Inference for General Linear Hypotheses. R package version 0993-1 2009.
70. Blattner FR, Plunkett G, Bloch CA, Perna NT, Burland V, Riley M, ColladoVides J, Glasner JD, Rode CK, Mayhew GF, et al: The complete genome
sequence of Escherichia coli K-12. Science 1997, 277:1453-1462.
71. Hayashi K, Morooka N, Yamamoto Y, Fujita K, Isono K, Choi S, Ohtsubo E,
Baba T, Wanner BL, Mori H, Horiuchi T: Highly accurate genome
sequences of Escherichia coli K-12 strains MG1655 and W3110. Mol Syst
Biol 2006, 2:2006-0007.
72. Brzuszkiewicz E, Bruggemann H, Liesegang H, Emmerth M, Olschlager T,
Nagy G, Albermann K, Wagner C, Buchrieser C, Emody L, et al: How to
become a uropathogen: comparative genomic analysis of extraintestinal
pathogenic Escherichia coli strains. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006,
103:12879-12884.
73. Chen SL, Hung CS, Xu J, Reigstad CS, Magrini V, Sabo A, Blasiar D, Bieri T,
Meyer RR, Ozersky P, et al: Identification of genes subject to positive
selection in uropathogenic strains of Escherichia coli: a comparative
genomics approach. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006, 103:5977-5982.
74. Welch RA, Burland V, Plunkett G, Redford P, Roesch P, Rasko D, Buckles EL,
Liou SR, Boutin A, Hackett J, et al: Extensive mosaic structure revealed by
the complete genome sequence of uropathogenic Escherichia coli. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 2002, 99:17020-17024.
75. Perna NT, Plunkett G, Burland V, Mau B, Glasner JD, Rose DJ, Mayhew GF,
Evans PS, Gregor J, Kirkpatrick HA, et al: Genome sequence of
enterohaemorrhagic Escherichia coli O157:H7. Nature 2001, 409:529-533.
76. Hayashi T, Makino K, Ohnishi M, Kurokawa K, Ishii K, Yokoyama K, Han CG,
Ohtsubo E, Nakayama K, Murata T, et al: Complete genome sequence of
enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli O157:H7 and genomic comparison
with a laboratory strain K-12. DNA Res 2001, 8:11-22.
77. Chaudhuri RR, Sebaihia M, Hobman JL, Webber MA, Leyton DL,
Goldberg MD, Cunningham AF, Scott-Tucker A, Ferguson PR, Thomas CM,
et al: Complete genome sequence and comparative metabolic profiling
of the prototypical enteroaggregative Escherichia coli strain 042. PLoS
One 5:e8801.
78. Iguchi A, Thomson NR, Ogura Y, Saunders D, Ooka T, Henderson IR,
Harris D, Asadulghani M, Kurokawa K, Dean P, et al: Complete genome
sequence and comparative genome analysis of enteropathogenic
Escherichia coli O127:H6 strain E2348/69. J Bacteriol 2009, 191:347-354.
79. Johnson TJ, Kariyawasam S, Wannemuehler Y, Mangiamele P, Johnson SJ,
Doetkott C, Skyberg JA, Lynne AM, Johnson JR, Nolan LK: The genome
sequence of avian pathogenic Escherichia coli strain O1:K1:H7 shares
strong similarities with human extraintestinal pathogenic E. coli
genomes. J Bacteriol 2007, 189:3228-3236.
80. Jin Q, Yuan Z, Xu J, Wang Y, Shen Y, Lu W, Wang J, Liu H, Yang J, Yang F,
et al: Genome sequence of Shigella flexneri 2a: insights into
pathogenicity through comparison with genomes of Escherichia coli K12
and O157. Nucleic Acids Res 2002, 30:4432-4441.
81. Nie H, Yang F, Zhang X, Yang J, Chen L, Wang J, Xiong Z, Peng J, Sun L,
Dong J, et al: Complete genome sequence of Shigella flexneri 5b and
comparison with Shigella flexneri 2a. BMC Genomics 2006, 7:173.
82. Wei J, Goldberg MB, Burland V, Venkatesan MM, Deng W, Fournier G,
Mayhew GF, Plunkett G, Rose DJ, Darling A, et al: Complete genome
sequence and comparative genomics of Shigella flexneri serotype 2a
strain 2457T. Infect Immun 2003, 71:2775-2786.
83. Yang F, Yang J, Zhang X, Chen L, Jiang Y, Yan Y, Tang X, Wang J, Xiong Z,
Dong J, et al: Genome dynamics and diversity of Shigella species, the
etiologic agents of bacillary dysentery. Nucleic Acids Res 2005,
33:6445-6458.
84. McClelland M, Florea L, Sanderson K, Clifton SW, Parkhill J, Churcher C,
Dougan G, Wilson RK, Miller W: Comparison of the Escherichia coli K-12
genome with sampled genomes of a Klebsiella pneumoniae and three
Salmonella enterica serovars, Typhimurium, Typhi and Paratyphi. Nucleic
Acids Res 2000, 28:4974-4986.
85. McClelland M, Sanderson KE, Clifton SW, Latreille P, Porwollik S, Sabo A,
Meyer R, Bieri T, Ozersky P, McLellan M, et al: Comparison of genome
degradation in Paratyphi A and Typhi, human-restricted serovars of
Salmonella enterica that cause typhoid. Nat Genet 2004, 36:1268-1274.
86. Chiu CH, Tang P, Chu C, Hu S, Bao Q, Yu J, Chou YY, Wang HS, Lee YS: The
genome sequence of Salmonella enterica serovar Choleraesuis, a highly
invasive and resistant zoonotic pathogen. Nucleic Acids Res 2005,
33:1690-1698.

Friedrich et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:591
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/591

Page 22 of 22

87. Deng W, Liou SR, Plunkett G, Mayhew GF, Rose DJ, Burland V, Kodoyianni V,
Schwartz DC, Blattner FR: Comparative genomics of Salmonella enterica
serovar Typhi strains Ty2 and CT18. J Bacteriol 2003, 185:2330-2337.
88. Parkhill J, Dougan G, James KD, Thomson NR, Pickard D, Wain J,
Churcher C, Mungall KL, Bentley SD, Holden MT, et al: Complete genome
sequence of a multiple drug resistant Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi
CT18. Nature 2001, 413:848-852.
89. McClelland M, Sanderson KE, Spieth J, Clifton SW, Latreille P, Courtney L,
Porwollik S, Ali J, Dante M, Du F, et al: Complete genome sequence of
Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium LT2. Nature 2001, 413:852-856.
90. Parkhill J, Wren BW, Thomson NR, Titball RW, Holden MT, Prentice MB,
Sebaihia M, James KD, Churcher C, Mungall KL, et al: Genome sequence of
Yersinia pestis, the causative agent of plague. Nature 2001, 413:523-527.
91. Deng W, Burland V, Plunkett G, Boutin A, Mayhew GF, Liss P, Perna NT,
Rose DJ, Mau B, Zhou S, et al: Genome sequence of Yersinia pestis KIM. J
Bacteriol 2002, 184:4601-4611.
92. Song Y, Tong Z, Wang J, Wang L, Guo Z, Han Y, Zhang J, Pei D, Zhou D,
Qin H, et al: Complete genome sequence of Yersinia pestis strain 91001,
an isolate avirulent to humans. DNA Res 2004, 11:179-197.
93. Chain PS, Hu P, Malfatti SA, Radnedge L, Larimer F, Vergez LM, Worsham P,
Chu MC, Andersen GL: Complete genome sequence of Yersinia pestis
strains Antiqua and Nepal516: evidence of gene reduction in an
emerging pathogen. J Bacteriol 2006, 188:4453-4463.
94. Thomson NR, Howard S, Wren BW, Holden MT, Crossman L, Challis GL,
Churcher C, Mungall K, Brooks K, Chillingworth T, et al: The complete
genome sequence and comparative genome analysis of the high
pathogenicity Yersinia enterocolitica strain 8081. PLoS Genet 2006, 2:e206.
95. Durfee T, Nelson R, Baldwin S, Plunkett G, Burland V, Mau B, Petrosino JF,
Qin X, Muzny DM, Ayele M, et al: The complete genome sequence of
Escherichia coli DH10B: insights into the biology of a laboratory
workhorse. J Bacteriol 2008, 190:2597-2606.
96. Oshima K, Toh H, Ogura Y, Sasamoto H, Morita H, Park SH, Ooka T, Iyoda S,
Taylor TD, Hayashi T, et al: Complete genome sequence and comparative
analysis of the wild-type commensal Escherichia coli strain SE11 isolated
from a healthy adult. DNA Res 2008, 15:375-386.
97. Thomson NR, Clayton DJ, Windhorst D, Vernikos G, Davidson S, Churcher C,
Quail MA, Stevens M, Jones MA, Watson M, et al: Comparative genome
analysis of Salmonella Enteritidis PT4 and Salmonella Gallinarum 287/91
provides insights into evolutionary and host adaptation pathways.
Genome Res 2008, 18:1624-1637.
doi:10.1186/1471-2164-11-591
Cite this article as: Friedrich et al.: High-throughput microarray
technology in diagnostics of enterobacteria based on genome-wide
probe selection and regression analysis. BMC Genomics 2010 11:591.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
