<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Reverse transcription of the pFOXC mitochondrial retroplasmids of Fusarium oxysporum is protein primed</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Mobile DNA 2011, 2:1. doi:10.1186/1759-8753-2-1"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Jeffrey T Galligan"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Galligan et al. Mobile DNA 2011, 2:1
http://www.mobilednajournal.com/content/2/1/1

RESEARCH

Open Access

Reverse transcription of the pFOXC mitochondrial
retroplasmids of Fusarium oxysporum is protein
primed
Jeffrey T Galligan1,2, Sarah E Marchetti1,3, John C Kennell1*

Abstract
Background: The pFOXC retroplasmids are small, autonomously replicating DNA molecules found in mitochondria
of certain strains of the filamentous fungus Fusarium oxysporum and are among the first linear genetic elements
shown to replicate via reverse transcription. The plasmids have a unique clothespin structure that includes a 5’linked protein and telomere-like terminal repeats, with pFOXC2 and pFOXC3 having iterative copies of a 5 bp
sequence. The plasmids contain a single large open reading frame (ORF) encoding an active reverse transcriptase
(RT). The pFOXC-RT is associated with the plasmid transcript in a ribonucleoprotein (RNP) complex and can
synthesize full-length (-) strand cDNA products. In reactions containing partially purified RT preparations with
exogenous RNAs, the pFOXC3-RT has been shown to initiate cDNA synthesis by use of snapped-back RNAs, as well
as loosely associated DNA primers.
Results: The complete sequence of the distantly related pFOXC1 plasmid was determined and found to terminate
in 3-5 copies of a 3 bp sequence. Unexpectedly, the majority of (-) strand cDNA molecules produced from
endogenous pFOXC1 transcripts were attached to protein. In vitro experiments using partially purified pFOXC3-RT
preparations having a single radiolabeled deoxyribonucleotide triphosphate (dNTP) generated a nucleotide-labeled
protein that migrated at the size of the pFOXC-RT. The nucleotide preference of deoxynucleotidylation differed
between pFOXC3 and pFOXC1 and showed complementarity to the respective 3’ terminal repeats. In reactions
that include exogenous RNA templates corresponding to the 3’ end of pFOXC1, a protein-linked cDNA product
was generated following deoxynucleotidylation, suggesting that reverse transcription initiates with a protein
primer.
Conclusions: The finding that reverse transcription is protein primed suggests the pFOXC retroplasmids may have
an evolutionary relationship with hepadnaviruses, the only other retroelement family known to initiate reverse
transcription via a protein primer. Moreover, the similarity to protein-primed linear DNA elements supports models
in which the terminal repeats are generated and maintained by a DNA slideback mechanism. The ability of the
pFOXC-RT to utilize RNA, DNA and protein primers is unique among polymerases and suggests that the pFOXC
plasmids may be evolutionary precursors of a broad range of retroelements, including hepadnaviruses, non-long
terminal repeat (non-LTR) retrotransposons and telomerase.

Background
Retroplasmids are autonomously replicating genetic elements that represent a lineage of mobile elements that
replicate via reverse transcription. Thus far, retroplasmids have only been found in mitochondria of filamentous fungi and, like mitochondrial DNA plasmids, they
* Correspondence: kennellj@slu.edu
1
Department of Biology, Saint Louis University, St Louis, MO, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

exist in both linear and circular forms (reviewed in [1]).
As a group, retroplasmids are relatively small and simple. They range in size from 1.9 to approximately 4.0
kb, and have a single open reading frame (ORF) that
encodes a reverse transcriptase (RT). Retroplasmid RTs
lack domains that are often associated with other RTs,
such as an RNAse H domain, and are thought to be
ancestral to a broad range of retroelements as they are
deeply rooted within the RT phylogenies [2,3]. Their

© 2011 Galligan et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Galligan et al. Mobile DNA 2011, 2:1
http://www.mobilednajournal.com/content/2/1/1

Page 2 of 16

primitive nature is supported by the mechanisms used
to initiate cDNA synthesis; the RT encoded by the circular Mauriceville plasmid of Neurospora crassa has
been shown to initiate cDNA synthesis de novo (that is,
without a primer), suggesting that it is mechanistically
related to RNA-dependent RNA polymerases [4],
whereas the RT encoded by the linear pFOXC3 plasmid
of Fusarium oxysporum can initiate reverse transcription
using RNA or DNA primers having minimal base pairing interactions with templates [5]. The structural and
mechanistic features of the plasmids, together with their
possible evolutionary origin in the precursors of mitochondria, has led to speculation that mitochondrial retroplasmids represent a type of ‘molecular fossil’ which
has been defined as a contemporary genetic element
that is ancient in origin and can reveal information
about the evolutionary past [4,6,7].
The pFOXC retroplasmids are 1.9 kb linear DNA
molecules found in mitochondria of certain forma speciales of the fungal plant pathogen F. oxysporum. Plasmids that have been identified to date fall into two
homology groups, the pFOXC2/pFOXC3 group and the
pFOXC1 group [1,8,9]. The RTs encoded by pFOXC2
and pFOXC3 have 93% amino acid sequence identity
within the highly conserved RT domains yet they each
share less than 40% sequence identity within the conserved domains of the pFOXC1-RT [6], indicating a
relatively high degree of evolutionary divergence
between the two homology groups. The plasmid DNAs
have a ‘clothespin’ structure that includes a hairpin at
one terminus and telomere-like repeats at the other terminus (Figure 1), with plasmids pFOXC2 and pFOXC3
each having 3-5 copies of a 5 bp sequence (5’-ATCTA;
Table 1; [6]). Characterization of in vivo replication
intermediates showed that the pentameric repeats are
transcribed and that reverse transcription begins at or
near the 3’ end of the plasmid transcript. The number
of repeats in (-) strand cDNA intermediates was found
to be slightly greater than the number in the plasmid
transcripts, suggesting that the maintenance and generation of the terminal repeats occurs during the reverse
transcription step of plasmid replication [5]. The

association of linear genetic elements having telomerelike repeats that replicate via reverse transcription suggests that the pFOXC plasmids may be contemporary
descendants of primitive chromosomes and/or have a
direct evolutionary relationship to telomerase. In addition, the 3’ repeats of the pFOXC plasmids bear a striking resemblance to 3’ tails of certain long and short
interspersed elements (LINEs and SINEs, respectively)
that have been shown to generate additional repeats
during retrotransposition [10,11].
The pFOXC plasmids also have a 5’-linked protein,
which is reminiscent of a variety of linear DNA and
RNA genetic elements that replicate by use of a protein
primer. Protein-primed replication has been most thoroughly studied with linear DNA viruses, such as adenovirus and bacteriophage Ф-29 (reviewed in [12,13]).
These linear DNA molecules possess a covalently linked
5’ terminal protein (TP). During initiation of replication,
the TP associates with the viral DNA polymerase and
the TP-polymerase complex binds to the genome terminus that includes one or more iterations of a 1-3
nucleotide sequence. The polymerase catalyzes a phosphodiester bond between the initiating nucleotide and
the hydroxyl group of a serine, threonine or tyrosine
residue of the TP [13]. Linear mitochondrial DNA plasmids also possess covalently bound 5’ terminal proteins
and replication appears to initiate via protein priming
associated with the plasmid encoded DNA polymerase
[14,15]. To date, hepadnaviruses are the only retroelement family shown to employ a protein primer. The
partially double-stranded, circular hepadnaviral genome
encodes an RT that initiates reverse transcription at a
specific site of a structured RNA (ε) by use of a tyrosine
residue located in the TP domain of the RT itself
[16,17]. Similar protein-priming mechanisms have also
been reported with certain RNA viruses (for example,
polio [18]).
Previous studies using isolated mitochondrial ribonucleoprotein (mtRNP) particles from pFOXC plasmidcontaining strains demonstrated that reverse transcription begins opposite the 3’ end of the plasmid RNA and
can generate full length (-) strand cDNA products [6].

RT-ORF
1 2 2a 3

4 567

3’
5’
Figure 1 Schematic diagram of the pFOXC plasmids. The pFOXC retroplasmids are approximately 1.9 kb linear, double-stranded DNA
molecules that have a clothespin structure. They possess a covalently closed hairpin and iterative terminal repeats (black boxes) with a 5’-linked
protein (circle). The plasmids have a single open reading frame (ORF) encoding a reverse transcriptase (RT; open box). The location of conserved
domains characteristic of reverse transcriptases is indicated by shaded regions 1, 2, 2a, 3-7, with domain 2a also being conserved among nonlong terminal repeat (non-LTR) retrotransposons. Details concerning the plasmid ORFs and iterative repeats are given in Table 1.

Galligan et al. Mobile DNA 2011, 2:1
http://www.mobilednajournal.com/content/2/1/1

Page 3 of 16

Table 1 Features of the pFOXC mitochondrial retroplasmids
Plasmid

Lengtha

Accession number

ORF size

Identity to C3-RT (%)b

Terminal repeatc

pFOXC1

1,867

HQ026775

497

39

...CAA CAA CAA CAA-3’

pFOXC2

1,905

AF124843

527

93

...ATCTA ATCTA ATCTA AT-3’

pFOXC3

1,836

AF124844

527

100

...ATCTA ATCTA ATCTA AT-3’

a

Length is an estimate due to the imprecise designation of the 5’-most site and heterogeneity of the 3’ end.
b
Amino acid identity within the region encompassing the highly conserved RT domains 1-7.
c
Indicates the average number of repeat sequences recovered among 15 or more analyzed clones.
ORF = open reading frame; RT = reverse transcriptase.

Studies using an in vitro system to investigate reverse
transcription showed that the pFOXC-RT can initiate
cDNA synthesis by the use of snapped-back RNAs or
DNA primers. The RT showed preference for DNA primers that bound to the 3’-most terminal repeat of in
vitro synthesized RNA templates. The RT was also
found to copy DNA templates and was able to extend
weakly associated primers that had up to three 3’ mismatches with the template [5].
Here, we provide evidence that the pFOXC retroplasmids can use a protein primer to initiate reverse transcription. Analysis of reverse transcription reactions
using pFOXC1-containing mtRNPs demonstrated that a
large portion of the products are associated with protein, and an in vitro system using partially purified
pFOXC1-RT preparations with exogenous RNA templates corresponding to the 3’ end of the pFOXC1 plasmid produced a protein-linked cDNA. Analogous
reactions using pFOXC3-containing mtRNPs revealed a
nucleotide-linked protein that migrated at the size of
the plasmid RT, suggesting that the RT is serving as primer. These findings suggest that the pFOXC plasmids
have an evolutionary relationship with protein-primed
genetic elements, including hepadnaviruses, a finding
that may shed new light on the evolutionary origins of
the telomerase complex.

Results
Prior studies of reverse transcription reactions using
mtRNPs from plasmid-containing strains failed to provide evidence that large RNA or DNA molecules are
associated with nascent cDNA replication intermediates
[6], yet studies of in vitro reactions using exogenous
templates indicated that the pFOXC3-RT could use
snapped-back RNAs or loosely associated DNAs to
prime cDNA synthesis [5]. To investigate whether
snapped-back RNAs (or possibly small DNAs) are used
as a method of initiation in vivo, plasmid replication
products were re-examined by primer extension analysis
in hopes of capturing remnants of nucleic acid primers.
For this analysis, total nucleic acids were isolated from
mitochondria and used in reactions having an endlabeled primer that is complementary to a region

approximately 100 nucleotides downstream of the 5’ end
of (-) strand cDNAs. To extend the primers, Moloney
murine leukemia virus (MMLV)-RT was used as it is
capable of copying both RNA and DNA templates, and
products were separated on a denaturing polyacrylamide
gel. A minor fraction (<5%) of the labeled products
extended beyond the site corresponding to the 3’ end of
the plasmid DNA (data not shown). These products
were isolated, amplified by anchored PCR, cloned and
sequenced. The sequence of several clones indicated
that the primer extension products terminated at the
site corresponding to the 3’ end of the plasmid and had
no additional sequences that might be suggestive of an
attached primer. It is likely that a fraction of the primer
extension products reassociated with DNA or cDNA
templates during electrophoresis or were otherwise held
up during the migration into the polyacrylamide gel.
These findings, coupled with previous analysis of plasmid replication intermediates [5], failed to provide evidence of nucleic acid primers associated with nascent in
vivo (-) strand cDNAs.
Analysis of the distantly related pFOXC1

To gain additional insight into the mechanism of
reverse transcription of the pFOXC retroplasmids,
experiments were carried out with pFOXC1, which is
found in the mitochondria of F. oxysporum f. sp. conglutinans. Previous reports indicated that the sequence
of a 785 bp internal BglII restriction fragment of
pFOXC1 contained a potential open reading frame
that has similarity to the RTs of pFOXC2 and
pFOXC3 [6,19] yet, the percentage amino acid
sequence identity within the highly conserved RT
regions was surprisingly low (<40%), indicating that
pFOXC1 is distantly related. To complete the sequence
of pFOXC1, the terminal regions of the plasmid DNA
were cloned using an anchored PCR approach and the
multiple clones were sequenced. The complete plasmid
DNA was found to be 1,867 bp, which is an approximation as the 3’ end of the plasmid DNA is
heterogeneous in length (GenBank accession no.:
HQ026775; Table 1). The plasmid contains a single,
large open reading frame that is predicted to encode a

Galligan et al. Mobile DNA 2011, 2:1
http://www.mobilednajournal.com/content/2/1/1

polypeptide of 497 amino acids that has highly conserved domains associated with known reverse transcriptases. The predicted pFOXC1-RT is 30 amino
acids shorter than the RTs of pFOXC2 and pFOXC3
and is amongst the shortest functional RTs described
to date. Similar to the other retroplasmids, the 3’ end
of the pFOXC1 plasmid has short repeats but, interestingly, they differ in both length and sequence from the
terminal repeats of pFOXC2 and pFOXC3. The
sequence of clones of the terminus downstream of the
ORF showed that the end terminates with three to five
copies of the three base sequence 5’ CAA (Table 1 and
Additional file 1).
Reverse transcription reactions using mitochondrial
ribonucleoprotein (mtRNP) particles isolated from a
pFOXC1-containing strain (777) were subjected to a
variety of pretreatments and post-treatments as previously described for pFOXC2-containing and pFOXC3-

Page 4 of 16

containing strains [6]. Mitochondrial RNPs isolated
from the pFOXC1-containing strain had reverse transcriptase activity, as measured by the ability to incorporate [ 32 P]-labeled dNTPs into high molecular weight
products. The level of activity was comparable to that
previously reported for pFOXC2-containing and
pFOXC3-containing strains and reverse transcriptase
activity was distinguished from DNA polymerase activity
by its sensitivity to pretreatment with RNase A and
insensitivity to the DNA-dependent DNA polymerase
inhibitor actinomycin D (Additional file 2).
When labeled cDNA products were analyzed on agarose gels, most of the reaction products were unexpectedly retained in the loading well (Figure 2a, lanes 1-3).
To prevent protein aggregation, SDS was included in
the gel (to a concentration of 0.2%), and reactions were
heated in the presence of 0.2% SDS (65°C, 5 min) prior
to electrophoresis. This treatment enabled the majority

Figure 2 A portion of pFOXC1 and pFOXC3 endogenous reverse transcription products is associated with protein. (a) Mitochondrial
ribonucleoproteins (mtRNPs) from pFOXC1-containing strains were untreated (lanes 1 and 4), or pretreated with actinomycin D (A; lanes 2 and
5) or RNAse A (R; lanes 3 and 6) for 5 min prior to reverse transcription reactions. Following precipitation, products were heated and
electrophoresed in 1.2% agarose gels without (lanes 1-3) or with (lanes 4-6) 0.2% SDS in the gel and loading buffer. (b) Products from
endogenous reverse transcription reactions pretreated with actinomycin D and using pFOXC1-containing (lanes 1-6) and pFOXC3-containing
(lanes 7-9) mtRNPs were subjected to the following treatments: lane 1, no treatment; lane 2, incubation with proteinase K (K); lane 3, extraction
with phenol-CIA (); lane 4, incubation with proteinase K followed by extraction with phenol-CIA (K, ). Lanes 5 and 6 contain acetoneprecipitated products recovered from the organic phase of the phenol extractions shown in lanes 3 and 4, respectively. Minus-strand cDNA
products from pFOXC3-containing mtRNPs were subjected to the following treatments: lane 7, no treatment; lane 8, incubation with proteinase
K followed by extraction with phenol-CIA (K, ); lane 9, extraction with phenol-CIA (). Products were heated at 65°C in 0.2% SDS followed by
electrophoresis in a 1.2% agarose gel containing 0.2% SDS. Marker sizes from 5’-end labeled l-PstI restriction fragments are indicated in kb pairs
on the left. The location of the wells is indicated with a gray arrow. The full-length (-) strand cDNA product is indicated on the right with a black
arrow and a high molecular weight band detected in reactions lacking actinomycin D is indicated with an asterisk.

Galligan et al. Mobile DNA 2011, 2:1
http://www.mobilednajournal.com/content/2/1/1

of the labeled products to migrate into agarose gels
(Figure 2a, lanes 4-6). The cDNA products were in the
size range of 0.5 to 2.0 kb, and a larger product (>12
kb) was also found in reactions that were not pretreated
with actinomycin D (Figure 2a, lane 4), which most
likely reflects mitochondrial DNA polymerase activity.
As expected, labeled products were not generated when
the mtRNPs were pretreated with RNase A (Figure 2a,
lane 6).
When products of the endogenous reactions were
further separated by extending the time of electrophoresis, a major cDNA product was observed that migrated
at 1.9 kb, which matches the length of the plasmid
RNA. This is analogous to the major products obtained
with pFOXC2-containing and pFOXC3-containing
mtRNPs that were previously shown to represent (-)
strand cDNA products (Figure 2b; [6]). When products
of the reverse transcription reactions using pFOXC1containing mtRNPs were extracted with phenol-chloroform-isoamyl alcohol (CIA), only a small portion were
recovered by ethanol precipitation of the aqueous phase
and the majority of the cDNA products remained in the
organic phase (Figure 2b, lane 3). Treatment of the reaction products with proteinase K resulted in a slight
increase in migration compared to untreated reactions
(Figure 2b, compare lanes 1 and 2) and prevented
cDNA products from being extracted by phenol-CIA
(Figure 2b, lane 4). To confirm that the untreated
cDNA products extracted with phenol-CIA were
trapped in the organic phase, the phenol-CIA layer was
precipitated with acetone and labeled products were
recovered (Figure 2b, lane 5). In contrast, no labeled
products were recovered in the organic phase of extractions from reactions that were post-treated with proteinase K (Figure 2b, lane 6). These results suggest that
the products of reverse transcription are attached to
protein.
Given the effect that SDS had on the pFOXC1 reaction products, parallel reactions were conducted using
mtRNPs containing pFOXC3 (Figure 2b, lanes 7-9). A
fraction of cDNAs was removed by extraction with phenol-CIA (Figure 2b, lane 9), suggesting that a smaller,
yet significant, portion of pFOXC3 cDNA products is
associated with protein and was previously overlooked.
Taken together, these results indicate that varying portions of the labeled (-) strand cDNA products derived
from endogenous reverse transcription reactions are
attached to protein.
Evidence of protein-primed reverse transcription

Due to the observation that a portion of endogenous (-)
strand cDNA products are attached to protein, coupled
with the previous demonstration that the plasmid DNA
is retained in the organic phase following extraction

Page 5 of 16

with phenol, unless pretreated with protease K, and is
insensitive to digestion with l exonuclease (a 5’ exonuclease; [6,9]), we hypothesized that the pFOXC-RT uses
a protein to prime reverse transcription. To test this
hypothesis, reverse transcription reactions were performed using exogenous RNAs that correspond to the 3’
end of the plasmid transcripts (that is, ‘exogenous’ reactions). As described in a previous study [5], endogenous
nucleic acids associated with mtRNP particles are first
degraded by treatment with micrococcal nuclease (MN)
to liberate the plasmid RT. Following chelation of free
Ca++ with ethyleneglycol tetra-acetic acid (EGTA), MNtreated mtRNPs are used in reactions having in vitro
synthesized RNAs together with a [a- 32 P]-labeled
nucleotide and a full complement of unlabeled nucleotides. However, in contrast to previous studies in which
the labeled products were precipitated with ethanol and
resolved on denaturing urea polyacrlyamide gels, exogenous reactions were instead terminated by boiling in
Laemmli buffer and products were resolved via SDSPAGE to examine possible protein-linked cDNA
products.
In reactions using MN-treated pFOXC1-containing
mtRNPs, cDNA products were not detected in the
absence of an exogenous RNA (Figure 3a, lane 1), yet
when a 92 nucleotide transcript that corresponds to the
3’ end of the pFOXC1 RNA having 4 copies of the 5’
CAA repeat was included, a discrete band was observed
that migrated at approximately 120 kDa, as well as nondiscrete products migrating below 35 kDa (Figure 3a,
lane 2). The omission of thymidine triphosphate (TTP)
or deoxyguanosine triphosphate (dGTP) from the reactions prevented the synthesis of both the approximately
120 kDa product and the majority of the products
under 35 kDa, whereas the omission of deoxycytidine
triphosphate (dCTP) only slightly affected the intensity
of the 120 kDa band. Significantly, when the products of
a reaction having an exogenous RNA and a full complement of nucleotides were post-treated with proteinase
K, the 120 kDa product was eliminated and a prominent
band was observed at approximately 34 kDa. When a
duplicate reverse transcription reaction was extracted
with phenol-CIA, labeled products migrating above
approximately 35 kDa were eliminated (Figure 3a, lane 7).
To demonstrate that the 120 kDa product was retained
in the organic phase following extraction, the phenolCIA layer was precipitated with acetone and products
were resolved on SDS polyacrylamide gels. The 120 kDa
product was recovered from the organic phase (Figure
3a, lane 9), which strongly suggests that the labeled product is covalently attached to protein. In contrast, the
non-discrete reverse transcription products that migrate
below 35 kDa were neither affected by proteinase K
treatment nor removed by extraction with phenol-CIA,

Galligan et al. Mobile DNA 2011, 2:1
http://www.mobilednajournal.com/content/2/1/1

Page 6 of 16

Figure 3 Protein-primed reverse transcription and identification of a nucleotide-linked protein in exogenous reverse transcription
reactions. Mitochondrial ribonucleoprotein (mtRNP) particles were treated with micrococcal nuclease (MN), incubated with actinomycin D, and
used in reactions having [a-32P]dATP with various combinations of deoxyribonucleotide triphosphates (dNTPs), either in the absence or presence
of an exogenous RNA, as indicated. (a) MN-treated pFOXC1-containing mtRNP particles were incubated in the absence (lane 1) or presence of a
92 nucleotide RNA corresponding to the 3’ terminus of the pFOXC1 transcript with a full complement of nucleotides (lane 2). Reactions in lanes
3-5 were performed as in lane 2, but a single unlabeled nucleotide was omitted, as indicated. Products from exogenous reactions having a full
complement of nucleotides and exogenous RNA were post-treated with proteinase K (K; lane 6), or extracted with phenol-CIA (; lane 7), prior
to precipitation with ethanol. Products from a duplicate reaction of that in lane 2 were recovered from the aqueous (lane 8) and organic (lane 9)
phase. (b) MN-treated pFOXC3-containing mtRNPs incubated in the absence (lanes 2-4) or presence (lanes 1, 5 and 6) of a 98 nucleotide RNA
corresponding to the 3’ terminus of the pFOXC3 transcript with [a-32P]dATP and combinations of unlabeled nucleotides, as indicated. Products
from a duplicate reaction of that shown in lane 5 were post-treated with proteinase K (K; lane 6). All reactions were boiled in Laemmli buffer
prior to separation via 4-20% gradient SDS-PAGE. Prestained protein size markers are indicated on the left in kDa. Protein-linked products and (-)
strand cDNA products are indicated on the right.

indicating that they are not associated with a protein and
are likely cDNAs that were initiated from snapped-back
RNAs.
Similar experiments were performed with pFOXC3containing mtRNPs. In exogenous reactions having a 98
nucleotide RNA corresponding to the 3’ end of the
pFOXC3 plasmid having three copies of the 5 bp repeat
and using [a- 32 P]dATP with a full complement of
nucleotides, labeled products were observed in the range
of 20-115 kDa, with the majority of products being
below 35 kDa (Figure 3b, lane 1). As was done in
experiments using MN-treated pFOXC1 mtRNPs, reactions were performed in the presence and absence of an
RNA template and with different combinations of
nucleotides. Interestingly, most of these reactions produced a single radiolabeled band that migrated at
60 kDa (Figure 3b, lanes 2-4). The intensity of the band
varied depending on the specific combination of unlabeled nucleotides used in the reactions and, unlike reactions with pFOXC1-containing mtRNPs, the generation
of this product was not dependent on the presence of
an exogenous RNA template. Post-treatment of

exogenous reactions with proteinase K eliminated the
60 kDa product and had little effect on the RNA-primed
(that is, snapped-back) cDNA products that migrate
below 35 kDa (compare lanes 6 and 5). Experiments
carried out with mtRNPs isolated from a plasmid-free
strain of F. oxysporum failed to produce labeled products (data not shown). Collectively, the results suggest
that reactions using MN-treated pFOXC3-containing
mtRNPs produce a nucleotide-linked protein in the
absence of an exogenous RNA template.
Identification of the nucleotide-linked protein in pFOXC3containing mtRNPs

The predicted size of the pFOXC3-RT polypeptide is
62 kDa, approximately the size of the nucleotide-linked
protein detected in reverse transcription reactions using
MN-treated pFOXC3-containing mtRNPs. To determine
if the labeled protein is the pFOXC3-RT itself, an antibody was generated against a synthetic peptide that corresponds to amino acids 55-68 of the predicted pFOXC3RT polypeptide (C3-RT55-68). This antibody successfully
identifies a protein that migrates at 58-60 kDa in

Galligan et al. Mobile DNA 2011, 2:1
http://www.mobilednajournal.com/content/2/1/1

pFOXC3-containing mtRNPs and is absent in mtRNPs
isolated from a plasmid-free (P-F) strain (Figure 4 and
data not shown). The C3-RT55-68 antibody was then used
to identify the pFOXC3-RT following exogenous reverse
transcription reactions. For this experiment, products
from reverse transcription reactions using MN-treated
pFOXC3-containing mtRNPs were separated by SDSPAGE and transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane,
which was subsequently probed with the C3-RT55-68 antibody. A band corresponding to the pFOXC3-RT was
identified migrating at 60 kDa (Figure 4a) and this band
was absent in mtRNPs from the plasmid-free strain. The
membrane was also exposed to phosphorimager analysis
and a single radiolabeled band representing the nucleotide-linked protein was detected migrating at the same
position as the pFOXC3-RT. These results suggest that

Figure 4 A nucleotide-linked protein comigrates with pFOXC3reverse transcriptase (RT) and is unaffected by strong base
treatment. Products of reverse transcription reactions using
mitochondrial ribonucleoprotein (mtRNP) particles isolated from a
pFOXC3-containing strain or a plasmid-free strain (P-F) having [a32
P]dATP and unlabeled deoxyguanosine triphosphate (dGTP) and
thymidine triphosphate (TTP) were separated via 10% SDS-PAGE and
transferred to nitrocellulose. (a) The two panels on the left are from
a nitrocellulose membrane probed with protein A-purified pFOXC3RT55-68 rabbit antiserum and visualized by chemiluminesence. The
panel on the right is a phosphorimage of radiolabeled protein on
the same nitrocellulose membrane. Prestained protein size markers
are indicated on the left in kDa. The gray arrow indicates nonspecific bands detected in the plasmid-free mtRNP preparation.
(b) Micrococcal nuclease (MN)-treated pFOXC3-containing mtRNPs
were incubated with [a-32P]dATP and unlabeled dGTP and TTP. The
products were separated via 4-20% gradient SDS-PAGE and
radiolabeled products were detected by a phosphorimager. The gel
was rehydrated in 1 M KOH and, following incubation at 55°C, the
gel was neutralized and dried prior to detection by a
phosphorimager.

Page 7 of 16

the protein covalently linked to DNA in exogenous
reverse transcription reactions is the pFOXC3-RT itself.
To provide further evidence that the pFOXC3-RT is
the nucleotide-linked protein, we attempted to use the
pFOXC3-RT 55-68 antibody to immunoprecipitate (IP)
the labeled protein. Despite making modifications to the
buffer, chaotropic agents (both anionic and non-ionic
detergents) and antibody affinity resins, no successful
combination of antibody-buffer-detergent-bead was
found that would selectively capture the nucleotidelinked protein. A separate approach was taken to identify the isolated nucleotide-linked protein via mass spectrometry. Unfortunately, the initial attempt was
inconclusive as none of the reported peptides had significant homology to the RT, or to mitochondrial or fungal
proteins (data not shown). Thus, at this point, we do
not have definitive evidence that the protein labeled in
the RT reactions is the pFOXC3-RT, yet it remains the
leading candidate and alternative approaches are being
explored to identify the labeled protein.
Genetic elements that initiate DNA synthesis via
protein priming use a hydroxyl group present in the
side chain of a serine, threonine, or tyrosine of the primer to initiate synthesis (reviewed in [13]). Phosphoserine and phosphothreonine linkages have been
shown to be labile under strong base treatment,
whereas phosphotyrosine linkages are not [20]. To
assess which type of amino acid residue is involved in
forming the nucleotide linkage, reverse transcription
products from MN-treated pFOXC3-containing
mtRNPs were separated via SDS-PAGE and incubated
under alkaline conditions (1 M KOH, 55°C, 2 h) that
were previously shown to liberate phosphoserine and
phosphothreonine linkages [20]. Following base treatment, the reaction products retained the 32P label, suggesting that the observed linkage occurs through a
tyrosine residue of the protein (Figure 4b).
Nucleotide preference of deoxynucleotidylation

As shown in Figure 3b, the intensity of the 60 kDa
nucleotide-linked protein (nucleotide-protein) varied
depending on the combination of dNTPs used in the
reactions. To investigate the specificity of the deoxynucleotidylation activity that generates the 60 kDa
nucleotide-protein product, a comprehensive set of
experiments was performed using a radiolabeled dNTP
with different combinations of unlabeled dNTPs (summarized in Tables 2 and 3). The 60 kDa nucleotideprotein product was generated using each of the four
radiolabeled deoxynucleotides alone; however, when
additional nucleotides were included in the reactions,
the intensity of the band was markedly higher in reactions having dATP and/or dGTP. In most cases, the
addition of one, two or three unlabeled dNTPs

Galligan et al. Mobile DNA 2011, 2:1
http://www.mobilednajournal.com/content/2/1/1

resulted in increased levels of the 60 kDa nucleotideprotein product over reactions having a single deoxynucleotide (Table 2). In reactions using [a- 32 P]dATP
plus one additional nucleotide, the relative amount of
the 60 kDa nucleotide-protein increased slightly with
dGTP (1.6-fold) and dCTP (1.3-fold) and was unaffected with TTP, while in reactions having [a- 32 P]
dGTP, the addition of dATP led to a threefold increase
in band intensity. A more pronounced effect was
observed in reactions having two additional unlabeled
nucleotides. Figure 5a shows the results of reactions
carried out with [a- 32 P]dATP alone and in the presence of dCTP and dGTP or with dGTP and TTP. The
intensity of the 60 kDa nucleotide-protein increased
more than 10-fold in the presence of two unlabeled
dNTPs compared to [a- 32 P]dATP alone (Table 2).
This increase in labeled nucleotide-protein product
was not as high when dCTP and TTP were used (2.6fold), and similar results were obtained when using [a32
P]dGTP as the label (that is, the highest increase was
observed using dATP with dCTP and dATP with TTP,
but not dCTP with TTP). Experiments with [a- 32 P]
dCTP showed that the addition of dATP with dGTP
was the most effective combination (2.4-fold increase).
In reactions with [a- 32 P]TTP, all three dinucleotide
combinations (that is, dATP with dGTP, dATP with
dCTP, and dCTP with dGTP) were effective (8-11-fold
increase). While differences were detected depending
on the specific nucleotide used as the label, the results
of these experiments indicate that the deoxynucleotidylation associated with pFOXC3-containing mtRNPs
requires two or more additional deoxynucleotides for
maximum labeling and has a strong preference for
dATP and dGTP.
Experiments using MN-treated pFOXC3-containing
mtRNPs with RNAs that correspond to the 3’ end of
pFOXC3 failed to show the production of a discrete
product that represents a protein-linked cDNA like that
observed in reactions with pFOXC1-containing mtRNPs.
However, when MN-treated pFOXC3 mtRNPs were
used in reactions having [a-32P]dATP or [a-32P]dGTP
with a full complement of unlabeled dNTPs in the

Page 8 of 16

absence of an RNA, these reactions unexpectedly yielded
a radiolabeled cDNA product that migrated at approximately 115 kDa (Figure 3b, lane 1; Figure 5b-d). In a
side-to-side comparison in a 10% PAGE gel, this product was found to be smaller than the 120 kDa product
observed in reactions having pFOXC1-containing
mtRNPs with an exogenous RNA. The 115 kDa product
was sensitive to proteinase K treatment and, when analyzed on denaturing 8 M urea polyacrylamide gels, the
cDNAs ranged in length with the majority being smaller
than 50 nucleotides (not shown). The intensity of the
115 kDa band varied depending on the particular
mtRNP preparation, suggesting that it could represent
cDNA products that derive from RNA templates protected from micrococcal nuclease treatment. This was
further substantiated in experiments using dideoxynucleotide triphosphates (ddNTPs). When ddNTPs were
included in place of unlabeled dNTPs, the 115 kDa product was eliminated, whereas the 60 kDa band was
unaffected compared to reactions having only the
labeled deoxynucleotide (Figure 5b; compare lane 3 with
1, and 6 with 4). In reactions having a single dideoxynucleotide, dideoxy-ATP (ddATP) and dideoxythymidine
triphosphate (ddTTP) completely eliminated the 115
kDa product, whereas reactions having dideoxycytidine
triphosphate (ddCTP) resulted in products that migrated
between 60-115 kDa (Figure 5c). Previous studies of
protein-primed reverse transcription of the hepadnaviruses showed that deoxynucleotidylation could be distinguished from DNA synthesis by its insensitivity to the
pyrophosphate analog phosphonoformate (PFA; [21]).
Figure 5d shows that the formation of the 60 kDa
nucleotide-protein product occurs at concentrations of
PFA up to 10 mM, whereas the 115 kDa product is substantially reduced. This demonstrates that the 60 kDa
and 115 kDa products derive from separate reactions
and further suggests that the latter represents a proteinlinked cDNA.
The increase in the intensity of the 60 kDa band when
using [a-32P]dATP or [a-32P]dGTP with two or more
unlabeled dNTPs suggests that multiple nucleotides are
added to a protein in these reactions. A slight increase

Table 2 Relative intensity of the 60 kDa nucleotide-linked protein in reactions having different combinations of
deoxynucleotides
Radiolabeled nucleotidea

Plus one unlabeled dNTP

Plus two unlabeled dNTPs

Plus three dNTPs

A* (1.0)

G (1.6) > C (1.3) > T (1.0)

CG (17.5) > GT (13.4) > CT (2.6)

CGT (6.3)

G* (1.0)

A (3.0) > C (0.9) > T (0.6)

AC (13.9) > AT (7.9) > CT (1.7)

ACT (4.3)

T* (1.0)

A (1.4) > C (1.3) > G (0.2)

AG (10.8) > AC (8.2) = CG (8.2)

ACG (5.7)

A (1.7) > G (1.0) > T (0.6)

AG (2.4) > AT (1.5) > GT (0.7)

AGT (0.7)

b

C* (1.0)
a

Asterisk indicates the radiolabeled nucleotide used in all reactions in the row and numbers in parentheses indicate the intensity of the nucleotide-linked protein
product relative to labeling intensity obtained in reactions having a single [a-32P]dNTP.
b
Experiments using [a-32P]deoxycytidine triphosphate resulted in non-discrete products that complicated accurate quantification.
dNTP = deoxynucleotide triphosphate.

Galligan et al. Mobile DNA 2011, 2:1
http://www.mobilednajournal.com/content/2/1/1

Page 9 of 16

Table 3 Relative intensity of the 60 kDa nucleotide-linked protein in reactions having different combinations of
deoxynucleotides and dideoxynucleotides
Radiolabeled nucleotide plus three dNTPsa

Plus one ddNTP and two dNTPs

Plus three ddNTPs

ddA

ddG

ddT

ddC

A*+CGT (1.0)

-

+CT (0.9)

+CG (1.2)

+GT (1.2)

ddCGT (0.2)

G*+ACT (1.0)

+CT (0.6)

-

+AC (1.6)

+AT (1.5)

ddACT (0.3)

T*+ACG (1.0)

+CG (0.4)

+AC (0.6)

-

+AG (0.9)

ddACG (0.3)

C*+AGT (1.0)b

+GT (0.5)

+AT (1.2)

+AG (3.3)

-

ddAGT (0.3)

a
Asterisk indicates the radiolabeled nucleotide used in all reactions in the row and numbers in parentheses indicate the intensity of the 60 kDa nucleotide-linked
protein relative to labeling intensity obtained in reactions having a single [a-32P]dNTP plus three unlabeled dNTPs.
b
Experiments using [a-32P] deoxycytidine triphosphate resulted in non-discrete products that complicated accurate quantification.
ddNTP = dideoxynucleotide triphosphates; dNTP = deoxynucleotide triphosphate.

in the size of the nucleotide-linked protein was also
observed in reactions having more than one dNTP
(Figure 5b and data not shown). To determine if
there was a preferred order of nucleotides, single
dideoxynucleotides were included in reactions having a
labeled dNTP and two unlabeled dNTPs (Table 3). The

inclusion of ddATP inhibited the synthesis of the 60
kDa nucleotide-protein in all cases and resulted in a
40% reduction in band intensity in a reaction using
[a- 32 P]dGTP, with dCTP and TTP. The inclusion of
dideoxyguanosine triphosphate (ddGTP) inhibited reactions having dATP and dCTP and those with dCTP and

Figure 5 Analysis of the nucleotide-linked protein in the presence of different combinations of deoxynucleotides and
dideoxynucleotides. Micrococcal nuclease (MN)-treated pFOXC3-containing mitochondrial ribonucleoproteins (mtRNPs) were incubated with [a32
P]dATP or [a-32P]deoxyguanosine triphosphate (dGTP), and with unlabeled deoxyribonucleotide triphosphates (dNTPs) or dideoxynucleotide
triphosphates (ddNTPs), as indicated. Reactions were terminated with Laemmli buffer and reaction products were separated via 4% to 20% SDSPAGE. Prestained protein size markers are indicated on the left in kDa. (a) Reactions having [a-32P]dATP or [a-32P]dGTP with one unlabeled
deoxynucleotide. (b) Reactions having [a-32P]dATP or [a-32P]dGTP, with a full complement of deoxynucleotides or dideoxynucleotides. (c)
Reactions having [a-32P]dGTP and a single dideoxynucleotide with a complement of deoxynucleotides, as indicated. (d) Reactions having [a-32P]
dATP and a full complement of deoxynucleotides incubated with or without phosphonoformate (PFA) at the indicated concentrations.
Prestained protein size markers are indicated on the left in kDa and bands showing a slight size difference are indicated by an arrow.

Galligan et al. Mobile DNA 2011, 2:1
http://www.mobilednajournal.com/content/2/1/1

TTP, but not with dATP and TTP. These findings suggest that deoxyadenosine monophosphate (dAMP) is
added prior to deoxyguanosine monophosphate (dGMP)
in the deoxynucleotidylation reactions.
Deoxynucleotidylation precedes cDNA synthesis

The nucleotide preference for the production of the
120 kDa cDNA-protein product associated with
pFOXC1-containing mtRNPs was also examined. In
reactions with [a-32P]dATP and a full complement of
unlabeled dNTPs, a 120 kDa protein-linked cDNA was
produced. However, in experiments using [a-32P]TTP
with a full complement of unlabeled dNTPs, an approximately 60 kDa product was detected (Figure 6). This
product was generated with and without an exogenous
RNA (Figure 6a, lanes 2 and 3), similar to the 60 kDa
nucleotide-product observed in reactions with pFOXC3containing mtRNPs. Since the 3’ end of pFOXC1 plasmid RNA is highly A-rich (ending in 4 repeats of CAA),
the failure to copy the 92 nucleotide in vitro RNA could
be impeded without sufficient concentrations of TTP.
Increasing the concentration of unlabeled TTP led to a

Page 10 of 16

decrease in the intensity of the 60 kDa band due to
competition with the radionucleotide (data not shown),
yet chasing the reaction with 20 μM dNTPs after 1, 3,
and 5 min led to the synthesis of the 120 kDa proteinprimed cDNA product (Figure 6b). This finding suggests
that deoxynucleotidylation of a 60 kDa protein with
TTP precedes the copying of RNA templates and that
higher concentrations of TTP are required for
elongation.

Discussion
The evidence presented here suggests that reverse transcription catalyzed by the RTs encoded by the pFOXC
mitochondrial retroplasmids is protein primed. The
initial observation that the plasmid DNAs have a 5’linked protein led to speculation that a protein is used
to initiate reverse transcription [6] yet protein-linked
cDNAs were not observed in previous studies which
suggested that other mechanisms of initiation were
involved. Prior studies focused on the mechanism of
reverse transcription of the pFOXC3 retroplasmid and
the efficiency by which the pFOXC3-RT was able to use

Figure 6 A nucleotide-linked protein generated with [a-32P]thymidine triphosphate (TTP) in pFOXC1-mitochondrial ribonucleoproteins
(mtRNPs) is chased into a protein-cDNA product. (a) Micrococcal nuclease (MN)-treated pFOXC1-containing mtRNPs incubated with [a-32P]
dATP or [a-32P]TTP and a full complement of deoxynucleotides, with or without a 92 nucleotide RNA template, as indicated. (b) MN-treated
pFOXC1-containing mtRNPs incubated with [a-32P]TTP with or without a 92 nucleotide RNA corresponding to the 3’ end of pFOXC1. All four
unlabeled deoxyribonucleotide triphosphates (dNTPs) were added to reactions to a final concentration of 20 μM at the times indicated. All
reactions were terminated with Laemmli buffer and reaction products were separated via 4-20% gradient SDS-PAGE. Prestained protein size
markers are indicated on the left in kDa.

Galligan et al. Mobile DNA 2011, 2:1
http://www.mobilednajournal.com/content/2/1/1

RNA and DNA primers suggested that nucleic acid primers were employed. In those studies, partially purified
pFOXC3-RT preparations were used in reactions having
exogenous RNAs that corresponded to the 3’ end of the
plasmid RNAs, and it was found that cDNA synthesis
could initiate by use of complementary DNA oligonucleotides or snapped-back RNAs having minimal base
pairing interactions with the template [5]. In this report,
we describe unsuccessful attempts to recover RNA:
cDNA hybrid molecules among in vivo replication intermediates that would represent snapped-back initiation,
and when our studies expanded to include the distantly
related pFOXC1 retroplasmid, it was found that a high
percentage of cDNAs generated from endogenous RNA
templates are associated with protein. In experiments
using nuclease-treated pFOXC1-containing mtRNPs, a
protein-linked cDNA was produced in the presence of
an exogenous RNA that corresponds to the 3’ end of
the plasmid transcript, and in reactions carried out in
the absence of an exogenous RNA with a single radiolabeled deoxynucleotide, a 60 kDa nucleotide-linked protein was generated that appears to serve as the primer
for reverse transcription.
Heating the products of reverse transcription reactions
in the presence of 0.2% SDS prior to separation in SDSagarose or SDS-polyacrylamide gels made it possible to
resolve and analyze protein-linked products. A large
portion of (-) strand cDNA products generated from
endogenous RNAs associated with pFOXC1-containing
mtRNPs was found to be removed by extraction with
phenol-CIA, whereas post-treatment of the reactions
with proteinase K prevented their removal, indicating
that the majority of the labeled cDNAs are associated
with protein. When similar reactions were carried out
with pFOXC3-containing mtRNPs, a smaller but significant portion of products was also found to be associated
with protein. The finding that some of the labeled products were not eliminated by extraction with phenolCIA suggests that a portion of cDNA products is not
attached to protein. This could indicate that nascent
protein-primed cDNAs are subject to a cleavage event
that removes the protein primer or, since the isolated
mtRNPs contain plasmid intermediates at all stages of
replication, a fraction of the replication products likely
represent pre-existing cDNAs that are extended during
the reactions.
Reactions using micrococcal nuclease-treated pFOXC1containing mtRNPs having an exogenous RNA that corresponds to the terminal 92 nucleotides of the plasmid
transcript produced a radiolabeled 120 kDa product when
resolved by SDS-PAGE. This product was only observed
in reactions having exogenous RNA and was found to be
sensitive to post-treatment with proteinase K. The proteinase K-treated reactions contained a new product of

Page 11 of 16

approximately 34 kDa which is approximately the size predicted of a full-length cDNA copy of the RNA template,
although the precise length of nucleic acids is difficult to
determine in these gel systems. The 120 kDa product was
also removed by extraction with phenol-CIA and could be
recovered from the organic phase of the extraction. Taken
together, these results are consistent with those expected
of a protein-primed cDNA product. Interestingly, while
the 120 kDa product was not detected in reactions that
lacked dGTP or TTP, it was synthesized in the absence of
dCTP. The reasons for this are unclear, but could reflect
the propensity of the pFOXC-RT to misincorporate
nucleotides [5].
Reactions carried out with pFOXC3-containing
mtRNPs with a similar sized (98 nucleotides) in vitro
RNA that corresponded to the 3’ end of the pFOXC3
plasmid failed to produce a protein-linked cDNA.
Instead, a 60 kDa band was produced in the absence of
an exogenous RNA. This product was also generated in
reaction mixtures having each of the four deoxynucleotides alone or in combination with other dNTPs. Thus,
the 60 kDa product appears to represent a deoxynucleotide monophosphate-linked protein (that is, [dNMP]nprotein). The 60 kDa product was eliminated by proteinase K treatment and removed by extraction with phenol-CIA (data not shown), confirming its proteinaceous
nature. Significantly, the nucleotide-linked protein was
found to comigrate with the pFOXC3-RT, suggesting
that the RT is self-priming; however, initial efforts to
identify the nucleotide-linked protein by immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry were unsuccessful, thus
it remains possible that another protein is involved. Like
hepadnaviral RTs, the only other family of RTs known
to initiate cDNA synthesis via protein priming, the initiating amino acid appears to be a tyrosine due to the
insensitivity of the labeled 60 kDa nucleotide-protein to
high alkaline treatment.
Reactions with pFOXC3-containing mtRNPs also
generated an approximately 115 kDa product when a
full complement of deoxynucleotides was used in the
reaction mix. This product appears to represent a protein-primed cDNA as it was found to be sensitive to
proteinase K treatment (not shown) as well as to phosphonoformate, which inhibits DNA synthesis without
affecting deoxynucleotidylation of proteins that serve
as a primer [21,22]. Formation of the 115 kDa product
was also strongly suppressed by dideoxynucleotides at
concentrations that had little or no effect on the
60 kDa nucleotide-linked protein product. The intensity of the 115 kDa band was also found to vary
depending on the MN-treated mtRNP preparation
used in the reactions, suggesting that the product
could derive from the copying of endogenous RNAs
that were incompletely digested or protected during

Galligan et al. Mobile DNA 2011, 2:1
http://www.mobilednajournal.com/content/2/1/1

micrococcal nuclease treatment. Similar studies of
reverse transcription using MN-treated mtRNPs isolated
from strains of N. crassa containing the Mauriceville
retroplasmid showed that more than 20 nucleotides of
plasmid nucleic acid remained associated with the plasmid RT following MN digestion [23].
A comprehensive analysis of the synthesis of the
60 kDa product in reactions with MN-treated pFOXC3containing mtRNPs under different nucleotide combinations revealed that deoxynucleodtidylation was greatest
when three dNTPs were used, and reaction mixtures
having dATP and dGTP were the most productive.
Reactions having single dideoxynucleotides (together
with the appropriate complement of dNTPs) showed
that ddATP was the only dideoxynucleotide to inhibit
deoxynucleotidylation in all reactions in which it was
included, indicating that dAMP is the initial nucleotide
incorporated. The next greatest effect was found in reactions that included ddGTP together with [a- 32 P]TTP
plus unlabeled dATP and dCTP, in which case the
synthesis of the 60 kDa nucleotide-protein was inhibited
by more than 40% in this reaction. Taken together,
these findings suggest that the first two nucleotides of
deoxynucleotidylation are 5’-AG. Since the relative
intensity of the nucleotide-labeled product was greatest
with three dNTPs, it follows that a third dNTP is necessary for maximum labeling; however, it is unclear from
the results whether dCTP or TTP is preferred. The total
number of dNMPs incorporated during deoxynucleotidylation also remains to be determined.
When different nucleotide combinations were used in
exogenous reactions having MN-treated pFOXC1-containing mtRNPs, it was discovered that a 60 kDa labeled
protein was produced in reactions having [a-32P]TTP.
Like reactions with MN-treated pFOXC3-containing
mtRNPs, the generation of this product was not dependent on the addition of an exogenous RNA, indicating
that deoxynucleotidylation was not templated by the
added RNA; however, based on analysis of the 115 kDa
product described above, the priming protein may
remain associated with partially digested endogenous
RNAs following MN treatment. Interestingly, even in
reactions having [a-32P]TTP with a full complement of
unlabeled dNTPs together with an exogenous RNA, the
120 kDa product was not observed (Figure 6a, lane 3).
Yet, when reactions having [a- 32 P]TTP as the sole
nucleotide (at a concentration of 0.33 μM) were chased
with all four dNTPs (to a final concentration of 20 μM),
the 120 kDa band was produced. This suggests that concentrations of TTP greater than 0.33 μM are necessary
for the nucleotide-protein complex to engage in cDNA
elongation. This finding is consistent with studies of
adenoviral protein-primed DNA synthesis that showed
that the Km for elongation was significantly greater than

Page 12 of 16

the Km for initiation [24]. Taken together, these experiments suggest that deoxynucleotidylation occurs prior
to reverse transcription.
The finding that cDNA synthesis catalyzed by the
pFOXC-RTs is protein-primed is consistent with earlier
models of repeat addition that were based on a slideback mechanism associated with protein-primed elements. In cases where protein priming occurs at the
termini of these elements (that is, Ф-29 and adenovirus),
the nucleotide that functions as template for the initial
deoxynucleotidylation reaction is located 2-4 nucleotides
upstream of the 3’ terminus. Following the addition of
one or more nucleotides, the nucleotide-protein complex undergoes a slideback of 1-3 nucleotides prior to
elongation (reviewed in [13]). Collectively, our studies
support a model of retroplasmid replication that
involves the use of the plasmid RT as primer for reverse
transcription and, when combined with the slideback
mechanism associated with protein-primed DNA elements, would account for the maintenance and potential
extension of the 3’ terminal repeats (Figure 7). As previously proposed, the plasmid RNA appears to serve as
an mRNA for the synthesis of the RT and as template
for (-) strand cDNA synthesis. The initial step of DNA
synthesis involves the covalent linkage of dNMP to the
protein primer, which is likely to be the pFOXC-RT. In
vitro experiments indicate that deoxynucleotidylation
occurs in the absence of an RNA template (as shown),
yet we cannot discount that the RT remains associated
with remnants of the endogenous RNA that serve as
template for this reaction. Experiments using pFOXC3containing mtRNPs indicate that deoxynucleotidylation
involves the covalent linkage of dAMP to a tyrosine residue of a 60 kDa protein, followed by the incorporation
of dGMP and at least one other dNMP. The resulting
nucleotide-protein complex would have partial complementarity to the 3’ terminal repeat (5’-AUCUA) of the
plasmid transcript. Likewise, in reactions using
pFOXC1-containing mtRNPs, deoxynucleotidylation
leads to the incorporation of one or more thymidine
monophosphate (TMP) molecules attached to a 60 kDa
protein and the resulting [TMP] n -protein complex
would have complementarity to the 3’ terminal repeat
(5’-CAA) of the pFOXC1 plasmid transcript. Based on
analogies to protein-primed linear DNAs, the TMPlabeled protein associates with the A residues of the
penultimate repeat and one or more nucleotides are
added prior to a slideback that would reposition the
nascent cDNA opposite the terminal repeat. It is not
known if a second RT molecule is involved in elongation (as shown) or whether the RNA is spooled through
the active site of the attached RT. The resulting (-)
strand cDNA would maintain the integrity of the terminal repeats and would be protected by a 5’-linked

Galligan et al. Mobile DNA 2011, 2:1
http://www.mobilednajournal.com/content/2/1/1

Page 13 of 16

pFOXC3
AUCUA AUCUA AUCUA AU-3’

pFOXC1
CAA CAA CAA CAA-3’
Translation
RT

RT

Deoxynucleotidylation
NGA

TT

Template binding
CAA CAA CAA CAA-3’
TT

CAA CAA CAA CAA-3’
GTT
Slideback?
CAA CAA CAA CAA-3’
GTT
Elongation
CAA CAA CAA CAA-3’
GTT GTT GTT GTT
Figure 7 Model for protein-primed reverse transcription by the pFOXC-reverse transcriptase (RT). Transcription of the pFOXC plasmid
DNA molecules produces full-length RNAs that appear to function as both mRNAs for the synthesis of the RT and as templates for (-) strand
cDNA synthesis [6]. Transcripts of pFOXC3 terminate in approximately three pentameric repeats, whereas transcripts of pFOXC1 terminate in
approximately four copies of a 3 bp sequence (the 3’ terminus of in vitro RNA used in this study is shown). Following production of the plasmidencoded RT, deoxynucleotidylation occurs with the covalent addition of dAMP to a tyrosine residue of the 60 kDa pFOXC3-RT, followed by
incorporation of deoxyguanosine monophosphate (dGMP) and a third nucleotide. Deoxynucleotidylation of the pFOXC1-RT results in the
addition of thymidine monophosphate (TMP) to the RT, followed by one or more deoxynucleotide monophosphates (dNMPs) (a second TMP is
shown). The resulting RT-(dNMP)n complex would have complementarity to the corresponding terminal repeat. Based on studies of proteinprimed DNA elements, the model predicts that the complex anneals to the penultimate 3’ repeat of the template (shown for pFOXC1 only).
Following the synthesis of a unit-length repeat, the RT-(dNMP)n complex undergoes a slideback and is repositioned opposite the terminal repeat.
The nascent cDNA is elongated via reverse transcription of the template by the 5’-linked RT or by a separate RT recruited to the complex. The
model could also accommodate an increase in the number of repeats, depending on the number of slideback events that occur.

protein. The model could also accommodate more than
one slideback, as has been demonstrated with DNA slidebacks associated with the PRD1 bacteriophage [13].
This would potentially extend the length of the repeated
region and ensure that sequence information is not lost
during replication.
The finding that the pFOXC plasmids replicate via
protein-primed reverse transcription makes them only
the second retroelement family known to use a protein
to initiate cDNA synthesis. Amino acid sequence

comparisons fail to identify regions of the pFOXC-RTs
that show high similarity to the terminal protein domain
of hepadnaviral RTs. The pFOXC-RTs also lack homology to the TPs of protein-primed DNA elements or genome-linked proteins of RNA viruses (VPgs). Yet, despite
the surprisingly high degree of evolutionary divergence
between the pFOXC1-RTs and pFOXC2/pFOXC3-RTs,
it is noteworthy that a 20 amino acid region of high
similarity (greater similarity than that of the conserved
RT domains) is detected near the amino terminus and

Galligan et al. Mobile DNA 2011, 2:1
http://www.mobilednajournal.com/content/2/1/1

contains a tyrosine residue that could potentially serve
as the primer. Efforts are underway to express the RTs
in heterologous hosts to demonstrate the importance of
this region and further characterize the mechanism of
cDNA initiation.

Conclusions
We provide evidence that the pFOXC retroplasmids
initiate reverse transcription by use of a protein primer,
making them only the second retroelement lineage
known to use a protein to prime cDNA synthesis. When
combined with previous studies, the pFOXC-RTs appear
to be unique among polymerases in their ability to use
RNA, DNA or protein to initiate DNA synthesis. This
provides additional support of the hypothesis that mitochondrial retroelements represent a type of ‘molecular
fossil’ that hold clues about the evolutionary past. Our
findings also suggest that the role of protein-primed
replication in maintaining the termini of linear genetic
elements is not restricted to elements that replicate
using DNA-dependent DNA polymerases or RNAdependent RNA polymerases, and can include elements
that replicate via reverse transcription. Whether this is a
case of convergent evolution or represents a primordial
feature conserved among polymerases remains to be
determined. It is intriguing that the 3’ terminal repeats
of the pFOXC1 and pFOXC2/pFOXC3 retroplasmid
families have such marked differences, both in length
and sequence. If, as proposed, a slideback mechanism is
involved in the maintenance of the terminal repeats,
further study of the pFOXC retroplasmids could reveal
mechanistic adaptations of the RT to accommodate the
progressive lengthening of slidebacks. These studies
could also provide insight into the mechanistic ability of
the RTs associated with telomerases (TERTs) to add
short DNA repeats via iterative slidebacks on an RNA
template, as well as the duplication of 3’ repeats during
retrotransposition of certain non-long terminal repeat
(non-LTR) retroelements.
Methods
F. oxysporum strains and growth conditions

Strains used in this study were F. oxysporum 777, f. sp.
conglutinans (pFOXC1-containing strain), F. oxysporum
725, f. sp. matthioli (pFOXC3-containing strain) and
plasmid-free strain F. oxysporum 9129, f. sp. cubense.
These strains are maintained at the US Department of
Agriculture Agricultural Research Service (USDA-ARS)
Cereal Disease Laboratory (St Paul, MN, USA). Strains
were grown on potato dextrose agar plates, and conidia
preserved in 20% glycerol and stored at -80°C. Conidia
were germinated for 3-4 days in 1-2 l of 1 × Vogel’s
medium [25] shaking at 150 rpm at 25°C.

Page 14 of 16

Isolation of mitochondria and mtRNP particles

Mitochondria were prepared from mycelia by the flotation gradient method [26]. Mitochondrial RNP complexes were isolated by resuspending mitochondrial
pellets in 3.5 ml of 25 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 500 mM KCl, 25
mM CaCl2, 20 mM dithiothreitol (HKCT-D) and lysed
by addition of Nonidet P-40 to a final concentration of
1%. Lysates were layered over a 1.85 M sucrose cushion
containing HKCT-D, and centrifuged in a Beckman Ti50
rotor (226,000 g, 17 h, 4°C; [27]). Mitochondrial RNP pellets were stored at -80°C and resuspended in a solution of
50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.2, 0.5 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA), 10 mM KCl, and 5 mM dithiothreitol
(DTT) at concentrations of 1-2 A260 OD units/μl.
Cloning of the termini of pFOXC1 and (-) strand cDNA
products

Plasmid pFOXC1 was isolated from agarose gels and
subjected to digestion with exonuclease III (New
England Biolabs, Beverly, MA, USA) to cleave singlestranded regions in the hairpin or used directly in tailing
reactions using terminal deoxynucleotide transferase
(Promega, Madison, WI, USA) and dGTP. The tailed
products were amplified by anchored PCR using plasmid-specific primers C1 5’ (5’-GCTGGATCCCCGA
CACTGATTCATG) or C1 3’ (5’-GAAGGATCCAG
TATCAAATGGGGACTC), and dCBAM (ATATAG
GAC16). Products were digested with BglII and BamHI,
cloned into the BamHI site of Bluescribe (pBS; Stratagene, La Jolla, CA, USA) and sequenced.
Reverse transcription reactions

Mitochondrial RNP particles were used directly in reactions (that is, endogenous reactions) or were treated
with nuclease to degrade nucleic acids prior to use in
reactions having added RNAs (that is, exogenous reactions). Endogenous reactions included 0.4 A 260 OD
units of mtRNP particles in a solution having 50 mM
Tris-HCl, pH 8.2, 5 mM MgCl2, 50 mM KCl, 20 μCi of
[a- 32 P]dCTP, 125 μM dATP, dGTP and TTP and 5
mM DTT. Unless otherwise indicated, mtRNP particles
were preincubated with actinomycin D (100 μg/ml,
Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA) for 5 min at 4°C
prior to addition to reaction mixtures. Reactions were
incubated at 37°C for 15 min, then chased by the addition of dCTP to 100 μM and incubated for an additional
10 min. Reactions were stopped by the addition of
EDTA to a concentration of 125 mM prior to posttreatment and/or precipitation with ethanol. Post-treatment of endogenous reactions included incubation with
proteinase K at 50°C for 15 min with and without
extraction with equal volume phenol-CIA (25:24:1).
Recovery of products from phenol was carried out by

Galligan et al. Mobile DNA 2011, 2:1
http://www.mobilednajournal.com/content/2/1/1

precipitation with four volumes of 100% acetone. Precipitated products were resuspended in 10 mM TrisHCl, pH 7.0, 1 mM EDTA (TE) and quantified as previously described [6,28]. Endogenous products were
directly separated on 1.0% to 1.2% agarose gels, or
were incubated in a loading dye mixture containing
0.2% SDS and heated for 5 min at 65°C prior to loading on a 1.0% to 1.2% agarose gel containing 0.2%
SDS. For exogenous reactions, the pFOXC-RT was
released from the mtRNP particles by degrading endogenous nucleic acids with MN (Takara Bio USA, Madison, WI, USA). In most cases, 5-10 A 260 OD units
were incubated in a reaction having 50 mM Tris, pH
8.2, 1 mM CaCl2 with 5 IU MN/A260 OD unit for 15 s
at 37°C followed by 10 min at room temperature. To
inhibit the MN activity, EGTA was added to a concentration of 10-20 mM. The MN-treated mtRNPs were
incubated at 4°C with 100 μg/ml actinomycin D prior
to use in reaction mixtures having 1-2 μg of an in
vitro synthesized RNA template. Reverse transcription
reactions were carried out in a reaction buffer having
50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.2, 20 mM MgCl2, and 0.33 μM
[a- 32 P]dNTP and/or 20 μM dNTPs and/or 100 μM
ddNTPs, as indicated. Where indicated, reactions were
post-treated with proteinase K (0.2 mg/ml) at 50°C for
15 min, with or without extraction with equal volume
of phenol-CIA. Reactions were boiled in Laemmli buffer (125 mM Tris-HCl, 2% SDS, 10% glycerol, 5% 2mercaptoethanol) for 5 min, and separated via 7.5%,
10% or 4-20% gradient SDS-PAGE, as indicated. Gels
were electrophoresed for 1-2 h at 120 volts and then
fixed in a solution of 20% ethanol and 10% glycerol for
30-45 min, and dried in a drying apparatus. Dried gels
were exposed to phosphorimager screen overnight and
analyzed by a Storm 860 Phosphorimager and ImageQuant V.5.2 (GE Healthcare Biosystems, Piscataway,
NJ, USA). Where indicated, products in gels were
transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane for detection
by phosphorimager and western blot analysis.
Synthesis of in vitro RNA templates

Templates for RNA synthesis of the pFOXC3 transcript
containing three repeats were generated and transcribed
as previously described [5]. Templates for the synthesis
of the 92 nucleotide pFOXC1 RNA were generated by
amplification of a clone containing the 3’ terminal
region of pFOXC1 with a primer having a T7 promoter
sequence (C192nt+Bam; 5’-CCGGATCCTAATACGACTCACTATAGGCTGAGGAAATTTG) and another
corresponding to the end of the plasmid having 4 copies
of the repeat (C14R+ Eco; 5’-CCGAATTCTTGT
TGTTGTTGTTTCCAACCTC). This fragment was
inserted into the multiple cloning site of pBluescribe.
An amplicon was generated using a pBS forward primer

Page 15 of 16

and C1 92nt 4R (5’-TTGTTGTTGTTGTTTCCAA
CCTC) and used as a template to generate run off transcripts. In vitro transcription was carried out in a 20 μl
reaction volume containing 100 ng of template DNA,
reaction buffer containing 40 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.9,
6 mM MgCl2, 10 mM DTT, 2 mM spermidine, and 50
IU of T7 RNA polymerase (New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA, USA). Reactions were incubated 30-60 min
at 37°C. DNA was digested with 2 IU RQ1 DNase
(Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) in 40
mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 10 mM MgSO 4 , 1 mM CaCl2 ,
for 30 min at 37°C. Transcripts were extracted with
phenol-CIA, precipitated with ethanol, and resuspended in dH2O.
Development of an antibody to pFOXC3-RT and western
blot analyses

A synthetic peptide derived from the predicted
pFOXC3 polypeptide corresponding to positions 55-68
(KEVKRANRYLAFQE) was synthesized and used in
the production of a rabbit polyclonal antibody (Sigma
Genosys, Woodlands, TX, USA). Following electrophoresis, protein samples were electroblotted to nitrocellulose (0.45 μm; MSI Laboratories, Westboro, MA,
USA) in transfer buffer (25 mM Tris, pH 8.5, 200 mM
glycine, 20% methanol). The membrane was washed in
Tris-buffered saline (TBS; 20 mM Tris, pH 7.6, 125
mM NaCl) with 0.1% Tween 20 and incubated for 1 h
in blocking buffer (5% non-fat dry milk, 0.1% Tween
20 in TBS). The membrane was washed again and
incubated with protein-A purified pFOXC3-RT 55-68
antibody in blocking buffer for 2-16 h. Following incubation with primary antibody, the membrane was
washed and incubated with horseradish peroxidase
(HRP)-linked anti-rabbit IgG secondary antibody
(1:2,000; Cell Signaling Technology, Beverly, MA,
USA) in blocking buffer for 1 h. The membrane was
washed and incubated with a chemiluminescent HRP
substrate (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) for 5
min, followed by detection using x-ray film and analysis with a LAS-4000 chemiluminescent imaging reader
(Fujifilm, Tokyo, Japan).
Analysis of nucleotide-amino acid linkage

Exogenous reverse transcription products were separated via 4-20% gradient SDS-PAGE, and the gel was
dried and subjected to phosphorimager analysis. The gel
was then rehydrated in 10 gel volumes of 1 M KOH
and incubated at 55°C for 2 h, then neutralized with
four changes of 10% acetic acid/10% isopropanol. The
gel was dried again and exposed to phosphorimager
analysis.
The sequence of the pFOXC1 plasmid was deposited
in GenBank under the accession ID number HQ026775.

Galligan et al. Mobile DNA 2011, 2:1
http://www.mobilednajournal.com/content/2/1/1

Additional material
Additional file 1: Supplementary Table 1 Sequence of clones of the
terminus of pFOXC1.
Additional file 2: Supplementary Table 2 Reverse transcriptase activity
associated with mitochondrial ribonucleoproteins (mtRNPs) containing
pFOXC1 or pFOXC3.

Acknowledgements
We thank Matthew Althage and Nikola Kellner for assistance in cloning
pFOXC1, Chytra Mandyam for pFOXC1 RT assays and Haedar Abuirqeba for
assistance in the preparation and analysis of mtRNPs. We also thank Dr John
Tavis for advice at various stages of the project. This work was supported by
a grant 1R15GM07605201A1 from the National Institute of Health and
MCB0196483 from the National Science Foundation.
Author details
Department of Biology, Saint Louis University, St Louis, MO, USA.
2
Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
3
Department of Biology, Washington University in St Louis, St Louis, MO,
USA.
1

Authors’ contributions
JG was responsible for the execution and analysis of exogenous reverse
transcription assays and western blots, participated in experimental design,
construction of figures for the manuscript, drafting and editing of the
manuscript. SM was responsible for execution and analysis of endogenous
and exogenous reverse transcription assays and editing of the manuscript.
JK conceived of the study, was responsible for its design and coordination,
and drafted the manuscript. All authors read and approved of the final
manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 6 October 2010 Accepted: 21 January 2011
Published: 21 January 2011
References
1. Galligan J, Kennell J: Retroplasmids: linear and circular plasmids that
replicate via reverse transcription. In Microbial Linear Plasmids. Volume 7.
Edited by: Meinhardt F, Klassen R. Berlin, Germany: Springer; 2007:163-185.
2. Eickbush TH: Origin and evolutionary relationships of retroelements. In
Evolutionary Biology of Viruses. Edited by: Morse SS. New York, USA: Raven
Press; 1994:121-157.
3. Eickbush TH: Telomerase and retrotransposons: which came first? Science
1997, 277:911-912.
4. Wang H, Lambowitz AM: The Mauriceville plasmid reverse transcriptase
can initiate cDNA synthesis de novo and may be related to reverse
transcriptase and DNA polymerase progenitor. Cell 1993, 75:1071-1081.
5. Simpson EB, Ross SL, Marchetti SE, Kennell JC: Relaxed primer specificity
associated with reverse transcriptases encoded by the pFOXC
retroplasmids of Fusarium oxysporum. Eukaryotic Cell 2004, 3:1589-1600.
6. Walther TC, Kennell JC: Linear mitochondrial plasmids of F. oxysporum are
novel, telomere-like retroelements. Mol Cell 1999, 4:229-238.
7. Weiner AM, Maizels N: The genomic tag hypothesis: modern viruses as
molecular fossils of ancient strategies for genomic replication, and clues
regarding the origin of protein synthesis. Biol Bull 1999, 196:327-330.
8. Hirota N, Hashiba T, Yoshida H, Kikumoto T, Yoshio E: Detection and
properties of plasmid-like DNA in isolates from twenty three formae
speciales of Fusarium oxysporum. Ann Phytopath Soc Japan 1992,
58:386-392.
9. Kistler HC, Leong SA: Linear plasmidlike DNA in the plant pathogenic
fungus Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. conglutinans. J Bacteriol 1986,
167:587-593.
10. Kajikawa M, Okada N: LINEs mobilize SINEs in the eel through a shared 3’
sequence. Cell 2002, 111:433-444.

Page 16 of 16

11. Ohshima K, Okada N: SINEs and LINEs: symbionts of eukaryotic genomes
with a common tail. Cytogenet Genome Res 2005, 110:475-490.
12. de Jong RN, van der Vliet PC, Brenkman AB: Adenovirus DNA replication:
protein priming, jumping back and the role of the DNA binding protein
DBP. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol 2003, 272:187-211.
13. Salas M, Miller JT, Leis J, DePamphilis ML: Mechanisms for priming DNA
synthesis. In DNA Replication in Eukaryotic Cells. Edited by: DePamphilis ML.
New York, USA: Cold Spring Harbor; 1996:131-176.
14. Kim EK, Jeong JH, Youn HS, Koo YB, Roe JH: The terminal protein of a
linear mitochondrial plasmid is encoded in the N-terminus of the DNA
polymerase gene in white-rot fungus Pleurotus ostreatus. Curr Gene 2000,
38:283-290.
15. Klassen R, Meinhardt F: Linear protein-primed replicating plasmids in
eukaryotic microbes. In Microbial Linear Plasmids. Volume 7. Edited by:
Meinhardt F, Klassen R. Berlin, Germany: Springer; 2007:187-226.
16. Weber M, Bronsema V, Bartos H, Bosserhoff A, Bartenschlager R, Schaller H:
Hepadnavirus P protein utilizes a tyrosine residue in the TP domain to
prime reverse transcription. J Virol 1994, 68:2994-2999.
17. Zoulim F, Seeger C: Reverse transcription in hepatitis B viruses is primed
by a tyrosine residue of the polymerase. J Virol 1994, 68:6-13.
18. Paul AV, Yin J, Mugavero J, Rieder E, Liu YE, Wimmer E: A “slide-back”
mechanism for the initiation of protein-primed RNA synthesis by the
RNA polymerase of poliovirus. J Biol Chem 2003, 278:43951-43960.
19. Kistler HC, Benny U, Powell WA: Linear mitochondrial plasmids of
Fusarium oxysporum contain genes with sequence similarity to genes
encoding a reverse transcriptase from Neurospora spp. Appl Environ
Microbiol 1997, 63:3311-3313.
20. Cooper JA, Hunter T: Changes in protein phosphorylation in Rous
sarcoma virus-transformed chicken embryo cells. Mol Cell Biol 1981,
1:165-178.
21. Wang GH, Seeger C: The reverse transcriptase of hepatitis B virus acts as
a protein primer for viral DNA synthesis. Cell 1992, 71:663-670.
22. Seifer M, Standring DN: Recombinant human hepatitis B virus reverse
transcriptase is active in the absence of the nucleocapsid or the viral
replication origin, DR1. J Virol 1993, 67:4513-4520.
23. Wang H, Kennell JC, Kuiper MT, Sabourin JR, Saldanha R, Lambowitz AM:
The Mauriceville plasmid of Neurospora crassa: characterization of a
novel reverse transcriptase that begins cDNA synthesis at the 3’ end of
template RNA. Mol Cell Biol 1992, 12:5131-5144.
24. Mul YM, van der Vliet PC: The adenovirus DNA binding protein effects
the kinetics of DNA replication by a mechanism distinct from NFI or
Oct-1. Nucleic Acids Res 1993, 21:641-647.
25. Davis RH, de Serres FJ: Genetic and microbiological research techniques
for Neurospora crassa. Methods Enzymol 1970, 17:79-143.
26. Lambowitz AM: Preparation and analysis of mitochondrial ribosomes.
Methods Enzymol 1979, 59:421-433.
27. Garriga G, Lambowitz AM: Protein-dependent splicing of a group I intron
in ribonucleoprotein particles and soluble fractions. Cell 1986, 46:669-680.
28. Kennell JC, Moran JV, Perlman PS, Butow RA, Lambowitz AM: Reverse
transcriptase activity associated with maturase-encoding group II introns
in yeast mitochondria. Cell 1993, 73:133-146.
doi:10.1186/1759-8753-2-1
Cite this article as: Galligan et al.: Reverse transcription of the pFOXC
mitochondrial retroplasmids of Fusarium oxysporum is protein primed.
Mobile DNA 2011 2:1.

</pre>
</body>
</html>
