<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Vomiting and wasting disease associated with Hemagglutinating Encephalomyelitis viruses infection in piglets in jilin, china</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Virology Journal 2011, 8:130. doi:10.1186/1743-422X-8-130"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Wei Gao"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Gao et al. Virology Journal 2011, 8:130
http://www.virologyj.com/content/8/1/130

CASE REPORT

Open Access

Vomiting and wasting disease associated with
Hemagglutinating Encephalomyelitis Viruses
infection in piglets in Jilin, China
Wei Gao1,2†, Kui Zhao1†, Chuanbo Zhao1, Chongtao Du1, Wenzhi Ren2, Deguang Song1, Huijun Lu3, Keyan Chen1,
Zhiping Li1, Yungang Lan1, Shengnan Xie1, Wenqi He1* and Feng Gao1*

Abstract
One coronavirus strain was isolated from brain tissues of ten piglets with evident clinical manifestations of
vomiting, diarrhea and dyskinesia in Jilin province in China. Antigenic and genomic characterizations of the virus
(isolate PHEV-JLsp09) were based on multiplex PCR and negative staining electron microscopy and sequence
analysis of the Hemagglutinin-esterase (HE) gene. These piglets were diagnosed with Porcine hemagglutinating
encephalomyelitis virus (PHEV).
Necropsy was performed on the piglets. Major pathological changes included meningeal hyperemia, meningeal
hemorrhage and cortical hemorrhage. Minor changes were also observed in other organs. Histopathological
changes included satellitosis and neuronophagia in the cerebral cortex.
Mice were infected with the isolated virus. Their histopathological changes were similar to those symptoms
observed in the piglets, exhibiting typical changes for non-suppurative encephalitis. Thus, Porcine
hemagglutinating encephalomyelitis virus mainly causes damage to the nervous system but also impacts other
organs. This viral strain (isolate PHEV-JLsp09) found in the Siping area of Jilin Province in China is evolutionally
closest to the HEV-67N stain (North American strain), indicating that this viral strain evolved from the PHEV from
North America.
Background
Porcine hemagglutinating encephalomyelitis coronavirus
(PHEV) is a member of the Coronaviridae family, which
causes porcine encephalomyelitis. PHEV predominantly
affects 1-3 week-old piglets [1], with clinical piglets
vomiting, exhaustion and obvious neurological symptoms as the main feature. The mortality rate is up to
20-100% [2]. Since 1958, when the disease broke out in
the Canadian province of Ontario for the first time [3],
many countries have reported about it. Serological test
results proved that it is common for the pigs to be
infected by PHEV [4,5], and the disease may have spread
worldwide. In August 2006, the disease broke out in
part of the pig farms in Argentina, resulting to 1226
* Correspondence: hwq_jldxbl2005@yahoo.com.cn; gf_jldxnxb@yahoo.com.
cn
† Contributed equally
1
College of Animal Science and Veterinary Medicine, Jilin University,
Changchun 130062, P.R. China
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

deaths, with the morbidity rate up to 52.6% [1]. In
China, an PHEV infection has been reported occurring
in a pig farm in Beijing as early as in 1985, followed
with reports from Jilin, Liaoning, Shandong, Taiwan, etc.
The large-scale epidemics of HEV occurred in Taiwan
in 1994 had a fatality rate of almost 100% [6], resulting
to serious economic losses. Serological survey conducted
by foreign scholars revealed that PHEV infection in pigs
is very common, with a worldwide distribution [4,5].
Coronaviruses are usually divided into three groups
based on genetic and serological relationship [7]. HEV,
togather with murine hepatitis virus (MHV), bovine coronavirus (BCoV), human coronavirus OC43 (HcoVOC43), rat coronavirus (RCoV), belongs to group 2 [8].
In this report, the clinical and neuropathologic feathers
of spontaneous PHEV infection had been reported. Microscopically, coronavirus-like particles were detected in the
supernatant of the brain samples by electron microscopy.
One coronavirus strain (isolate PHEV-JLsp09) was isolated

© 2011 Gao et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Gao et al. Virology Journal 2011, 8:130
http://www.virologyj.com/content/8/1/130

from the piglets. The Hemagglutinin- esterase (HE) gene
of PHEV strains was amplified by reverse transcriptionpolymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and sequenced. The
homology and phylogenetic analyses were done between
the group 2 coronaviruses and influenza C virus strains
downloaded from Genbank, based on the sequence of HE
gene.

Methods
Virus samples

Diseased pigs were obtained from a pig farm in Siping
City of Jilin Province in China. Four sows farrowed
thirty-eight piglets. Among these piglets, 28 piglets produced by 3 sows died. 10 surviving piglets that were
produced by one sow were delivered to the laboratory
for examination. The 10 Tu San Yuan piglets were all
20 days old and had not been immunized with any vaccines. Clinical signs were vomiting, diarrhea, convulsions
and obvious neurological signs. They died within three
days of submission. The brain tissues of diseased pigs
were collected under sterile conditions and homogenized before adding 1 mL of 0.01 mol/L PBS. The samples were centrifuged at 4°C at 5,000 × g for 30 min.
The supernatants were then inoculated into PK-15 cells
(ATCC CCL-33) for culture.
Negative staining electron microscopy

Brain tissues from the diseased pigs were homogenized
before adding 1 mL of 0.01 mol/L PBS. The mixtures
were centrifuged at 4°C at 5,000 × g for 30 min. The
supernatants were collected and adjusted to a total
volume of 1 mL with PBS. The samples were then centrifuged at 4°C at 10,000 × g for 15 min. The supernatants were applied to a copper mesh and stained with
2% phosphotungstic acid for 1-2 min before they were
examined under an electron microscope.
Necropsy and histopathological examination

The diseased pigs were dissected and pathological examination was used to assess the lesions. Sectioning of tissues for histopathological examination. Brain, different
segments of spinal cord, heart, lung, liver, kidney and
other tissues were used for paraffin-embedded sectioning
and hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining procedures.
Multiplex RT-PCR

Viral RNA was extracted from cell culture isolates using
a QIAamp Viral RNA Mini kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA).
RT-PCR was performed under standard conditions
using virus-specific primers. Based on the clinical signs
of the diseased pigs, classical swine fever virus (CSFV),
porcine hemagglutinating encephalomyelitis virus
(PHEV), porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome
virus (PRRSV) and pseudorabies virus (PRV) were

Page 2 of 7

selected for further analysis by multiplex PCR. The program used for multiplex PCR was: 95°C denaturation for
5 min; 30 cycles of 94°C denaturation for 50 s, 53°C
annealing for 50 s and 72°C extension for 60 s; 72°C
extension for 10 min and then storage at 4°C.
Primer sequences are as follows:
CSFV (HCV) primers:
P1: 5’- CCATGCCCATAGTAGGACTAGC -3’;
P2: 5’- TGTGATTTCACCCTAGCGACC-3’.
PHEV primers:
P1: 5’- tgaaaatgtttttgcttcct-3’
P2: 5’- ttaagcataatgctgccta-3’
PRRSV primers:
P1: 5’ - CCAACAAAACCAGTCCAGAG - 3’
P2: 5’ - GTGCCATTCACCACACATTC - 3’
PRV primers:
P1: 5’- CGACAACGAGCTCCTCATCT-3’
P2: 5’-TTCTTCTTGCGCGCCTTGTG - 3’

Phylogenetic analysis

Comparisons of the field isolate sequences with those of
PHEV available in the Genbank database were performed
using the online BLAST. The resulting sequences were
aligned by ClustalW http://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/clustalw/index.html. Deduced amino acid sequences were
assembled into a multiple sequence alignment. A phylogenetic tree derived from deduced amino acid sequences
was constructed for the PHEV using the bootstrapped
maximum parsimony method of MEGA version 4.0 [9].
Infection of mice with isolated viral strain

Mice were inoculated with isolated viral strain from PK15 cell culture. Ten mice were randomly divided into
five groups of two mice each; one group was set as the
control group. The experiment groups received intracerebral inoculations of the virus solution. The dosage of
inoculation for each mouse was 2.5 log 10 TCID 50 /0.1
mL (The TCID50 was 10-3.4/0.1 mL). The control group
was inoculated with 0.1 mL PBS. The clinical signs of
the mice were monitored.
The pathomorphology observation of infected mice

Necropsy of mice was performed, and the pathology of
each organ was examined. Brain, spinal cord, lung, liver,
spleen and other organs from diseased mice were fixed
with 10% neutral formalin and embedded in paraffin for
sectioning, H&E staining and microscopic examination.

Case presentation
Clinical signs of piglets

The diseased pig cases came from a pig farm in Siping,
China. The Tu San Yuan pigs were naturally propagated

Gao et al. Virology Journal 2011, 8:130
http://www.virologyj.com/content/8/1/130

and raised. The sows mainly showed elevated body temperature and loss of appetite. Their early clinical manifestations were sneezing, coughing, regurgitating,
vomiting and spitting up milk. Sick piglets often stayed
together, had arched backs and did not like to walk.
During late stages of the disease, they suffered from
physical deterioration. Piglets with poor resistance
would suffer from severe dehydration. Exhibiting difficulty in breathing and cyanosis, they would sink into
comas and die. Piglets with better resistance would lose
their appetite and soon became emaciated and died. In
the current study, 28 piglets died within 20 days of
birth. The only 10 surviving piglets were sent to the animal facility of our lab to be raised separately. Their clinical signs were significant increase of body temperature,
lethargy, crowding together, eyes half-closed or lying on
the ground showing sleepiness and loss of appetite. Nervous system signs of the diseased pigs included nervous
whole body muscle convulsions, taking a dog-sitting
position and weakness/fainting. During the late stage,
diseased pigs wobbled and could not stand, their noses
and feet were cyanotic and they discharged watery feces.
Some of them lost their eyesight or had opisthotonos
and nystagmus. Finally, they experienced breathing problems, lay on their sides exhausted and vomited. The

Page 3 of 7

only 10 surviving pigs sent to our lab for examination
died within 3 days; the death rate of the piglets was
100%.
Morphological features

Negatively stained cell culture supernatant was examined under an electron microscope, and typical coronavirus-like viral particles with a diameter of about
110-130 nm were observed (Figure 1).
Macroscopic lesions

Grossly visible, all diseased pigs showed meningeal
hyperemia, cortical hyperemia and cortical venous congestion (Figure 2A). Brain sections showed many dispersed small hematomas, and these were more evident
in white matter than in grey matter. The spleen was
slightly enlarged (Figure 2B). There were no significant
changes in other organs.
Microscopic lesions

Cortical blood vessels were slightly dilated, there was
neuronal edema in the pyramidal and the polymorphic
cell layers and the peripheral space increased (Figure 3A).
Cell bodies were swollen, and the Nissl bodies were partially dissolved. The neuronal nuclei were concentrated

Figure 1 Typical coronavirus-like viral particles were observed by electron microscopy. When negatively stained cell culture supernatant
was examined under an electron microscope, typical coronavirus-like viral particles with a diameter of about 110-130 nm were observed (bar =
100 nm); these viral-like particles shared similar morphology and size with coronavirus.

Gao et al. Virology Journal 2011, 8:130
http://www.virologyj.com/content/8/1/130

( )
(A)

Page 4 of 7

( )
(B)

Figure 2 Macroscopic lesions. (A) Among the gross defects, all diseased pigs showed meningeal hyperemia, cortical hyperemia and cortical
venous congestion. Brain sections showed many dispersed small hematomas, where these were more evident in white matter than in grey
matter. (B) The spleen was slightly enlarged.

and stained heavily. Mild glial cell proliferation was seen
in the small pyramidal cell layer, and some small glial
cells surrounded neurons, showing neuronophagia and
satellitosis (Figure 3B).
Multiplex RT-PCR assay

Based on the diseased pigs’ clinical signs, multiplex RTPCR was used for the examination. A 1275-bp positive

( )
(A)

fragment was identified. This fragment was inserted into
cloning vector PMD-18T and sent to the invitrogen company for sequencing. Sequencing results showed that the
insert was 99% homologous to the HEV 67N strain nucleotide sequence (Genbank accession number: AY078417.1),
and it contained a T to G replacement at position 1172
and a T to C replacement at position 1271, indicating that
the piglets were infected by a infection of HEV.

( )
(B)

Figure 3 Microscopic lesions. (A) Histopathological examination of diseased pigs showed cortical neuronal edema and increased peripheral
space (H&E, 400×; bar = 100 μm). (B) Small glial cells surrounded neurons and exhibited neuronophagia and satellitosis (H&E, 400×; bar = 100 μm).

Gao et al. Virology Journal 2011, 8:130
http://www.virologyj.com/content/8/1/130

Phylogenetic analysis

The Hemagglutinin-esterase (HE) gene of the isolate
PHEV-JLsp09 strain was sequenced. Sequence alignment
with the HEV strains, the representative strains from the
group 2 coronaviruses and influenza C viruses from Genbank showed that this PHEV-JL09 strain is evolutionally
closest to the HEV-67N strain (North American strain),
followed by the HEV IAF-404 strain (Canadian strain), and
then the HEV (European strain). Furthermore, this strain is
closely related to BCoV and HCoV-OC43 from the group
2 coronaviruses. Influenza C virus is least similar to this
virus (Figure 4). Phylogenetic analysis showed that PHEVJLsp09 strain may originate from the HEV-67N strain.
Clinical signs of infected mice

After inoculation of the viral solutions, all of the mice
started to show distinct nervous signs within 48 h, and
they died within 7-9 days of inoculation. The major clinical manifestations included lethargy, loss of appetite,
taking a dog-sitting position, hair-bristling, arched back,
grasping the mouth or the head with the forelimbs, waving the forelimbs up and down and paralyzed or palsied
hind limbs in some mice. Mice in the control group did
not show any clinical signs.
Histopathological examination of infected mice

Histopathological examination showed typical changes
for non-suppurative encephalitis. The cerebral cortical
neurons were swollen (Figure 5). Neurons were degenerated and necrotic, and there were many proliferated glial
cells, eliciting neuronophagia.

Page 5 of 7

Discussion
Results from the sequence alignment are consistent with
the evolution process of the HE gene. The HE gene of
coronavirus initially evolved from the HEF gene of influenza C virus [10]. During this process, the HE was
transformed from a trimer into a dimer but maintained
its acetylcholine esterase domain [10]. Based on the phylogenetic analysis of genes and antigens, bovine coronavirus (BCoV) from the group 2 coronaviruses, human
coronavirus (HCoV-OC43) and porcine hemagglutinating encephalomyelitis virus (PHEV) are derived from a
common ancestor [8]. Their HE genes continue to
evolve in the three different hosts.
PHEV independently evolved in North American and
European regions. The viral strain found in the Siping
area of Jilin Province in China is evolutionally closest to
the HEV-67N stain (North American strain), indicating
that this viral strain evolved from the PHEV from North
America. In 1984, in a pig farm on the outskirts of Beijing, an HEV infection in the hybrid progenies of
imported Landrace, Duroc, and Hampshire pigs was the
first case reported in mainland China [11]. In 1985, an
HEV infection in the progenies of American Duroc and
Hampshire lean pigs occurred at a pig farm in Jilin Province. The epidemiological and clinical characteristics
reported in that case were very similar to the HEV cases
reported in Canada and United States in the 1980 s
[12]. Therefore, we speculate that the viral strain isolated may be a mutated strain of HEV-67N, which was
brought by the imported pigs and then spread and
mutated in native pigs.

Figure 4 Phylogenetic trees of hemagglutinating encephamylitis virus HE sequences. Phylogenetic trees of PHEV based on the complete
open reading frames. In trees, the results after bootstrap replicates are indicated, Porcine hemagglutinating encephalomyelitis virus (PHEVJLsp09/AY07841/AF481863/DQ011855); Bovine coronavirus (DQ915164/EF424615/AF239308); Human coronavirus OC43 (AY585229/AY391777);
Influenza C virus (D63469/D63472).

Gao et al. Virology Journal 2011, 8:130
http://www.virologyj.com/content/8/1/130

Page 6 of 7

Based on this theory, “sub-infection” may prevent the
disease. In the “sub-infection” method, at least one
month before giving birth, the sows have contact with
diseased pigs or attenuated virus by spray or muscular
injection to immunize the sows; then, the young piglets
can be protected through the antibodies in the colostrum. During the birth period, once the piglets have the
disease, they must be separated and treated, and the diseased must be treated.

Figure 5 Histopathological examination of infected mice
showed typical changes for non-suppurative encephalitis.
Cerebral cortical neurons were swollen (H&E, 400×; bar = 100 μm).

The replication of vomiting and wasting type encephalomyelitis virus initially occurs in nasal mucosa, tonsil,
lung, and in some cases, in small intestine. From these
invasive sites, the virus reaches the medulla oblongata
through the peripheral nervous system, subsequently
extends to the entire brain stem and finally reaches the
cerebrum and cerebellum. Vomiting is caused by viral
replication in the vagal sensory ganglia, whereas wasting
occurs because of the vomiting and the delayed stomach
emptying. The porcine vomiting and wasting type
hemagglutinating encephalomyelitis damages the pig
nervous system, as indicated by non-suppurative encephalitis and edema. The pathological changes appear as
neuron degeneration, nuclear dissolution and perivascular edema; there are also some instances of satellitosis
and neuronophagia.
The mice were inoculated through intracerebral injection using isolated virus, and all of the mice that were
infected shared similar clinical signs observed from clinical cases. The major lesions of the infected mice were
in the central nervous system; these lesions exhibited
typical changes for non-suppurative encephalitis. The
cortical neurons were swollen. Neurons were degenerated and necrotic, there was proliferation of glial cells,
and typical neuronophagia could be seen.
This outbreak of porcine hemagglutinating encephalomyelitis in a pig farm follows a specific pattern, namely
that the disease occurred in the early and middle birth
period of first litter gilts; some piglets born during the
middle and late birth period did not have the disease.
Based on reports from other countries [13], these later
piglets may be healthy because sows in the middle and
late birth period have acquired an immune response due
to earlier infection, and their piglets have obtained passive immunization and are protected through colostrum.

Conclusion
From the results of clinical signs, pathological changes
and laboratory diagnosis, this outbreak of piglet vomiting and wasting disease in a Siping City, Jilin province,
pig farm was caused by hemagglutinating encephalomyelitis virus. With multiplex RT-PCR identification
and sequence alignment, we found that this viral strain
shares 99% nucleotide homology with a PHEV strain
(GenBank accession number: AY078417). In addition,
with electron microscopy, we detected coronavirus particles in the brain tissues of both the diseased piglets
and mice that were inoculated with the isolated virus.
The passaged virus still caused death in the mice, suggesting this pathogen is virulent. Inoculated laboratory
mice showed signs similar to those of naturally diseased
pigs and to the pathlogical changes of non-suppurative
encephalomyelitis.
Acknowledgements
This study was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of
China (NO: 31072134, 30871849, 30671551), the Young Scientist Program of
Science and Technology Development Plan in Jilin Province (NO: 20090154),
the Natural Science Foundation in Jilin Province (NO: 201115040), and the
International Cooperation Program of Science and Technology Development
Plan in Jilin Province (NO: 20080722).
Author details
1
College of Animal Science and Veterinary Medicine, Jilin University,
Changchun 130062, P.R. China. 2Laboratory Animal Center, Jilin University,
Changchun 130062, P.R. China. 3Key Laboratory of Zoonosis, Ministry of
Education, Institute of Zoonosis, Jilin University, Changchun 130062, P.R.
China.
Authors’ contributions
WG and KZ carried out most of the experiments and wrote the manuscript.
WR, DS, KC, YL and SX participated in the planning of the project. CZ and
CD collected the samples. ZL and HL, performed the PCR and phylogenetic
analysis. FG and WH conceived of the study and participated in its design
and coordination. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 21 January 2011 Accepted: 21 March 2011
Published: 21 March 2011
References
1. Maria AQ, Javier C, Pablo P, Walter B, Gaston M, Mariana K, Sergio S,
Jose LC, Sandra A, María EP, et al: Hemagglutinating Encephalomyelitis
Coronavirus Infection in Pigs, Argentina. Emerg Infect Dis 2008, 14:484-486.

Gao et al. Virology Journal 2011, 8:130
http://www.virologyj.com/content/8/1/130

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.
13.

Page 7 of 7

Werdin RE, Sorensen DK, Stewart WC: Porcine encephalomyelitis caused
by hemagglutinating encephalomyelitis virus. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1976,
168:240-6.
Greig AS, Mitchell D, Corner AH, Bannister GL, Meads EB, Julian RJ: A
Hemagglutinating Virus Producing Encephalomyelitis in Baby Pigs. Can J
Comp Med Vet Sci 1962, 26:49-56.
Mengeling WL: Incidence of antibody for hemagglutinating
encephalomyelitis virus in serums from swine in the United States. Am J
Vet Res 1975, 36:821-823.
Straw BL, Zimmerman JJ, Allaire DS, Taylor DJ, editors: Pensaert MB
Hemagglutinating encephalomyelitis virus. Diseases of swine. 9 edition.
Ames (IA): Blackwell Publishers; 2006, 353-358.
Zhu QT: The first finding of hemaglutinating encephalomyelitis virus
infection in Taiwan. Chinese Journal of Animal Husbandry and Veterinary
Medicine 1994, 1:8, (in chinese).
Gonzalez JM, Gomez-Puertas P, Cavanagh D, Gorbalenya AE, Enjuanes L: A
comparative sequence analysis to revise the current taxonomy of the
family Coronaviridae. Arch Virol 2003, 148:2207-2235.
Vijgen L, Keyaerts E, Lemey P, Maes P, Van Reeth K, Nauwynck H,
Pensaert M, Van Ranst M: Evolutionary history of the closely related
group 2 coronaviruses: porcine hemagglutinating encephalomyelitis
virus, bovine coronavirus, and human coronavirus OC43. J Virol 2006,
80:7270-7274.
Tamura K, Dudley J, Nei M, Kumar S: MEGA4: Molecular Evolutionary
Genetics Analysis (MEGA) software version 4.0. Mol Biol Evolut 2007,
24:1596-1599.
Zeng Q, Langereis MA, van Vliet AL, Huizinga EG, de Groot RJ: Structure of
coronavirus hemagglutinin-esterase offers insight into corona and
influenza virus evolution. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008, 105:9065-9069.
Chen FY, Di BX, Zhang ZZ: Suspected of hemagglutinating
encephalomyelitis virus. Chinese Journal of Veterinary Medicine 1986,
11:14-15, (in chinese).
Liu BY, Bao QR: The outbreak of hemagglutinating encephalomyelitis in a
pig farm. Chinese Journal of Veterinary Science 1986, 6:84-87, (in chinese).
Pensaert M: Virus infections of porcines. Veterinary Quarterly 1989,
2:142-148.

doi:10.1186/1743-422X-8-130
Cite this article as: Gao et al.: Vomiting and wasting disease associated
with Hemagglutinating Encephalomyelitis Viruses infection in piglets in
Jilin, China. Virology Journal 2011 8:130.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
