<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>A genome-wide analysis reveals that the Drosophila transcription factor Lola promotes axon growth in part by suppressing expression of the actin nucleation factor Spire</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Neural Development 2011, 6:37. doi:10.1186/1749-8104-6-37"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Michael A Gates"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Gates et al. Neural Development 2011, 6:37
http://www.neuraldevelopment.com/content/6/1/37

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

A genome-wide analysis reveals that the
Drosophila transcription factor, Lola, promotes
axon growth in part by suppressing expression of
the actin nucleation factor, Spire
Michael A Gates1,2,3,4†, Ramakrishnan Kannan1,2† and Edward Giniger1,2,3,4*

Abstract
Background: The phylogenetically conserved transcription factor Lola is essential for many aspects of axon growth
and guidance, synapse formation and neural circuit development in Drosophila. To date it has been difficult,
however, to obtain an overall view of Lola functions and mechanisms.
Results: We use expression microarrays to identify the lola-dependent transcriptome in the Drosophila embryo. We
find that lola regulates the expression of a large selection of genes that are known to affect each of several loladependent developmental processes. Among other loci, we find lola to be a negative regulator of spire, an actin
nucleation factor that has been studied for its essential role in oogenesis. We show that spire is expressed in the
nervous system and is required for a known lola-dependent axon guidance decision, growth of ISNb motor axons.
We further show that reducing spire gene dosage suppresses this aspect of the lola phenotype, verifying that
derepression of spire is an important contributor to the axon stalling phenotype of embryonic motor axons in lola
mutants.
Conclusions: These data shed new light on the molecular mechanisms of many lola-dependent processes, and
also identify several developmental processes not previously linked to lola that are apt to be regulated by this
transcription factor. These data further demonstrate that excessive expression of the actin nucleation factor Spire is
as deleterious for axon growth in vivo as is the loss of Spire, thus highlighting the need for a balance in the
elementary steps of actin dynamics to achieve effective neuronal morphogenesis.

Background
Transcriptional regulation is central to the development
of neural connectivity [1-4]. First, by controlling the
identities and differentiation of individual neurons, and
of the non-neuronal cells that often provide them with
growth and guidance cues, it specifies patterns of axon
growth and dendritic ramification. For example, classic
homeotic selector genes produce segment-specific patterns of axon projection by controlling transcription of
key cell fate and guidance molecules [5,6]. At a higher
level of specificity, the axonal projections of many
* Correspondence: ginigere@ninds.nih.gov
† Contributed equally
1
Basic Neuroscience Program, National Institutes of Neurological Disorders
and Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

individual neurons and classes of neurons are determined by the expression of particular combinations of
transcription factors. Perhaps the best-characterized
example of this is the ‘code’ of LIM domain transcription factors that controls the dorsal versus ventral projection of motoneurons from the central nervous system
(CNS) in both vertebrates and invertebrates [7-9]. Thus,
in Drosophila, for instance, the Lim/Islet/Eve-dependent
pattern of motor axon projection arises in part from
regulated transcription of a critical axon guidance receptor, the Netrin receptor Unc5 [10]. In addition to specifying axon projection by defining cell identity per se,
transcriptional regulation is also key to determining
more local properties of axon patterning. For example,
recent experiments have shown that the attractive midline receptor DCC in addition to controlling cytoplasmic

© 2011 Gates et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Gates et al. Neural Development 2011, 6:37
http://www.neuraldevelopment.com/content/6/1/37

signal transduction and growth cone motility directly,
further contributes to midline axon guidance by inducing expression of commissureless mRNA [11].
Beyond simply expressing the right proteins, however, a
neuron must express these proteins at the proper relative
levels such that it responds appropriately to precise ratios
of specific external and internal cues [12-16]. Again, tight
regulation of gene expression is essential to make this
happen. The Drosophila transcription factor gene lola is
an exemplar of this latter role of transcriptional regulation. Thus, for example, lola orchestrates midline crossing by CNS axons by coordinately regulating the
expression of both the midline repellant Slit and also its
axonal receptor, Robo [17]. The effects of lola on slit and
robo expression individually are modest, but in combination, the cumulative effect is profound, and further
enhanced by lola-dependent regulation of other components of the pathway (robo2 and robo3; HJ Song, BJ Taylor and EG, unpublished observations). Similarly, detailed
analysis of mutant phenotypes suggested that lola is likely
to be a ‘master regulator’ of the patterning of the ISNb
motonerve of Drosophila, coordinately regulating expression of the suite of guidance proteins responsible for
ISNb motoneuron/muscle interaction [18].
In addition to its well-characterized functions during
early embryonic axonogenesis, lola is also involved in
construction or function of neural circuits throughout
the lifespan of the fly. This includes dendritic morphogenesis in embryonic sensory neurons [19] and both
dendritic and axonal development of adult olfactory projection neurons [20]. Moreover, lola has been identified
in a number of genetic and genomic screens for genes
involved in complex behaviors, including locomotion,
alcohol sensitivity, mating and aggression [21-24]. While
the role of lola in these processes is less well understood
than is its well-studied function in axon patterning, the
varied effects of lola underscore its importance for
establishing patterns of gene regulation that produce a
properly functioning nervous system. Beyond its neuronal functions, lola also plays key roles in several nonneuronal tissues. For example, lola is essential for
oogenesis, in part due to its regulation of programmed
cell death at different stages of oogenesis [25].
The lola locus encodes a family of more than 20 transcription factor isoforms by alternative splicing [26-28].
All share a BTB dimerization domain at the amino terminus, allowing co-expressed Lola proteins in a cell to
form a variety of heterodimeric species in vivo. At least
17 lola isoforms encode Zn fingers in their variant 3’
exons. While some isoforms have a single Zn finger, in
most isoforms, the Zn fingers are present as a pair, with
an amino-terminal CCHC Zn finger that is apt to be a
protein interaction domain, followed by a C2H2 Zn finger that is likely to bind nucleic acid [26]. Biochemical

Page 2 of 14

experiments reveal that isoform K binds directly to the
transcriptional enhancer of the copia retrotransposon,
activating its expression in transient transfection assays
[29]. A different isoform, isoform T, has a nearly identical sequence as isoform K in its Zn fingers and binds
the same DNA sequence, but it suppresses copia expression, competing with isoform K in co-transfection
experiments. Consistent with these evidently antagonistic effects of lola isoforms, expression of the endogenous
copia is upregulated in the CNS of lola mutants, but
downregulated in the gonads of the same individuals.
To better understand the regulation of axon growth
and guidance by lola, we performed a microarray study
to identify genes whose transcript level was altered in a
lola mutant. In addition to the sole known direct target
of Lola, the retrotransposon copia, we found changes in
expression level of a substantial number of genes that
have been implicated previously in well characterized
lola-dependent developmental events, including axon
patterning, eye development, Notch signaling and programmed cell death. Among the affected genes was an
unexpected downstream target, the gene encoding the
actin nucleation factor Spire, which was upregulated in
the lola mutant. spire is required for both anteroposterior and dorsoventral patterning of the developing oocyte
[30], but its zygotic functions have never been characterized. We found that mutation of spire by itself caused
defects in a lola-dependent axon patterning event,
extension of the ISNb motonerve, and further that
reduction of spire expression, by introduction of a heterozygous spire mutation, suppressed the axonal defects
of lola in extension of the ISNb motonerve. These data
suggest that overexpression of spire makes a significant
contribution to the ISNb axonal phenotype of lola.

Results
Design of the microarray experiment

We set out to use cDNA microarray analysis to profile
the changes in gene expression in lola mutant embryos
relative to wild type. For detailed protocol see Materials
and methods and [31], but key points are as follows.
Since our primary interest was in axon patterning, we
collected embryos at 10 to 12 hours after egg laying, a
time when many axons are extending along lola-dependent nerve pathways in the embryo. We employed a
molecular-null lola allele, lolaORE76, which introduces a
stop codon early in the common region of lola and does
not accumulate detectable levels of any Lola protein
fragment in vivo. Seven pairs of mutant and control
wild-type RNA samples were collected independently,
with each sample derived from approximately 300
embryos, and each pair collected in parallel on the same
day. Homozygous mutant embryos were positively
selected in the fluorescent microscope using GAL4-

Gates et al. Neural Development 2011, 6:37
http://www.neuraldevelopment.com/content/6/1/37

driven expression of a green fluorescent protein (GFP)
marker in the mutants, and controls were selected in a
parallel cross employing the same GAL4 and GFP markers. Labeled first-strand cDNA programmed from
experimental and control samples were co-hybridized to
spotted cDNA arrays bearing the Drosophila Gene Collection (release 1 and release 2), prepared for the Northwest Drosophila Microarray Consortium (Gene
Expression Omnibus Platform GPL 1908) [32,33]. For
four pairs of samples, the experimental probe was
labeled with Cy-3 and control with Cy-5, while dye
assignments were reversed for the remaining three sample pairs.
Drosophila arrays had 12, 144 features (that is, cDNA
spots), of which 10, 376 were analyzed statistically for
differential expression. Data processing and statistical
analysis were performed using the limma statistical
package [34,35]. Standard errors were modified using an
empirical Bayes method as implemented in limma.
Adjustment for multiple testing was performed by controlling the false discovery rate to 5% [36]. Selection of
features as showing differential expression was based
solely on statistical significance: no a priori assumptions

Page 3 of 14

were made as to minimum expression level or minimum
fold-change in expression. This analysis identified 597
genes that showed differential expression between
mutant and control (displayed graphically in Figure 1;
complete list in Table S1 in Additional file 1), with significant fold changes as low as 1.14-fold.
Expression of copia and other retrotransposons is altered
in lola mutants

Inspection of the features that passed our analysis
revealed that six among those with the largest fold
change (4.2 to 4.6) corresponded to six independent
cDNAs of the retrotransposon copia. copia is the only
verified direct target of Lola, and bears Lola binding
sites in its enhancer. lola isoform K activates copia
expression in cultured cells, and in situ hybridization
reveals that copia RNA levels are altered in lola mutant
embryos [29]. Quantitatively, all six features corresponding to copia showed a similar factor of increase in
expression level in the mutants, and these six cDNAs
were the only features on the array that corresponded to
copia. In addition to copia, we also detected significant
expression changes in features corresponding to several

Figure 1 Distribution of effects on transcript accumulation in lola microarrays. Graphical representation of data from lola microarray
experiment. Each gray dot represents the mean ratio of normalized feature hybridization for lola mutant/wild type from seven experiments,
presented as a scatter plot of log2(adjusted P-value) versus log2(fold change) for each cDNA. Points above the horizontal line (circled in black)
are statistically significant with the false discovery rate controlled to 0.05 (which, for this analysis, roughly corresponded to adjusted P < 0.0028).
The six cDNAs corresponding to the copia retrotransposon are highlighted in brown; other retrotransposon transcripts are in red. Features
corresponding to loci also quantified by quantitative RT-PCR are in blue. Note that different cDNAs corresponding to a single locus are plotted
separately; thus, for example, there is a cluster of six, independent brown spots for copia.

Gates et al. Neural Development 2011, 6:37
http://www.neuraldevelopment.com/content/6/1/37

Page 4 of 14

other retrotransposons, including stalker, stalker2, 297
and roo. Whether these are also direct Lola targets or
indirectly dependent on lola remains to be examined.
Validation of positives from the array analysis

Two lines of evidence support the validity of the positives
from the array analysis. First, we performed quantitative
RT-PCR (qRT-PCR) of ten genes with statistically significant changes in expression level between mutant and
control. To give the best assessment of the overall reliability of the dataset, we selected genes that showed a
range of fold change (1.2 to 2.4), and we excluded retrotransposons, which showed the largest fold changes in
the dataset (Figure 1). Of the ten genes selected, five
were validated in the qRT-PCR as changed in level in
RNA samples from the lola null mutant (P < 0.05; Table
1). We suggest that this provides a minimum estimate of
the reliability of the microarray dataset for two reasons.
First, the cDNA representing a particular gene on the
array and the associated qRT-PCR target in the validation
experiment may not query the same splice variant or set
of splice variants, and thus may be regulated differently.
Second, the RNA for the array analysis was derived, in
aggregate, from 2, 100 embryos per genotype while the
qRT-PCR samples were derived from 150 to 250
embryos. The substantially larger size of the sample contributing to the array analysis, therefore, may have materially reduced its variance compared with the qRT-PCR.
As a second validation, the results of the array analysis
were also supported by an independent microarray
experiment. Expression profiling was performed for a
different kind of lola mutation, the allele lolaORC4 that
inactivates only a single lola isoform, lola K [26,31].

When we examined the expression profile of lolaORC4
mutant embryos versus their matched control samples,
and limited our statistical analysis to the set of 597 features with significantly altered expression in the lola
null mutant, we found that 204 of these features also
showed differential expression in the lolaORC4 dataset
(false discovery rate controlled at 0.01; Figure 2). In contrast, in 500 simulations in which 597 features were
selected at random from the lolaORC4 dataset (out of the
10, 376 features queried in the arrays), the median number that showed an expression change in lolaORC4 was
18 (maximum 38). Thus, the set of features identified as
lola-dependent in the null mutant sample provided a
substantial enrichment of lola-sensitive features compared to the complete gene set, as assayed in an independent microarray experiment. This strongly supports
the validity of the positives called in the original microarray analysis of the null.
Therefore, the combination of qRT-PCR of selected
hits and a global validation by an independent array
experiment provides strong evidence for the reliability
of the identification of lola-sensitive transcripts by the
microarray analysis.
Gene Ontology analysis of transcripts altered in a lola
null mutant

The complete list of expression effects of lola revealed
597 features with altered labeling out of the 10, 376 features that were assayed in the experiment. Of these, 352
were increased in level in the lola mutant, implying
direct or indirect negative regulation, while 245 were
decreased. Consistent with the broad expression of lola
itself, these features represent genes expressed in a wide

Table 1 Quantitative RT-PCR validation of array results
Array fold-change (log2)

qRT-PCR fold-change (log2)

qRT-PCR P-value

GH13327

1.24

1.54

2.5 E-5

SD10157

0.97
9.3 E-5

Gene

Clone ID

spire
neural lazarillo

GH12581

-0.56

-2.40

genderblind/CG6070

GH08870

0.29

0.27

0.016

charybde

LD32080

0.57

0.33

0.036

GH09771

0.59

LD22381

0.67

walrus

GH09945
LD07532

0.46
0.44

0.27

0.039

centaurin gamma 1a

GM01069

-0.95

-0.13

0.25

blistery

SD01953

-0.57

0.22

0.34

bekka

RE14959

-0.47

-0.46

0.61

RE14259

-0.52

Kr target @ 95D

SD03976

-0.76

0.03

0.79

Target of rapamycin

SD02269

-0.33

0.33

0.95

Total RNA was collected from 10 to 12 hour wild type or lola mutant embryos, just as for microarray analysis, and analyzed by Taqman RT-PCR to quantify
expression of ten genes that showed altered transcript level in expression arrays. A positive fold change in the table corresponds to increased accumulation of
that RNA in the mutant.

Gates et al. Neural Development 2011, 6:37
http://www.neuraldevelopment.com/content/6/1/37

Page 5 of 14

Table 2 Selected set of lola-dependent genes from
microarray analysis
Axon patterning
frazzled
DSCAM
neural lazarillo
Fasciclin III
midline fasciclin
prospero
capricious
PVF-1
CBP (sarcoplasmic Ca binding prot)
sugarless
dally-like
Cell and tissue polarity
Figure 2 Validation of lola null data with an independent
microarray experiment. Graphical representation of an experiment
assessing the validity of the lola null mutant results by comparison
to a dataset derived from an independent microarray experiment.
Expression microarrays were performed comparing RNA from
embryos bearing the lola single-isoform mutation lolaORC4 to wildtype controls [31]. The 597 features that were altered in
accumulation in lola null mutant embryos were assessed for altered
expression in lolaORC4: 204 of the 597 were also found to be altered
in the single-isoform mutant (false discovery rate = 0.01; grey star).
In contrast, in 500 trials of a simulation in which 597 features were
selected at random from the lolaORC4 data set (10, 376 features total)
and analyzed for change in mutant versus wild type, the median
number of features with altered expression in the single-isoform
mutant was 18/597 (maximum 38; presented as a histogram of
number of loci with altered expression versus number of
occurrences of that result).

variety of tissues and at all stages of the lifecycle. Gene
Ontology analysis [37], however, identifies a large number of previously characterized genes that are associated
with known lola-dependent processes, including cell and
axon migration and orientation, eye development,
oogenesis and programmed cell death (Table 2). This
analysis also reveals potential effects of lola on a variety
of developmental and physiological processes for which
such a role had not previously been suspected, including
spermatogenesis, epithelial polarity, hormonal regulation
of development, oxidative stress and aging/lifespan
(Table 3).

par-1
par-6
scribble
wnt-4
Signaling proteins
Cask (CaM kinase)
moesin
rhoGAP 5A
Target of Rapamycin
rac2
Microtubules and motors
katanin80
stathmin
KLP-59C
NudC
Eye development
sickle
charlatan
asensea
scabrousa
rap1
roughex
Dap160a
Lobe
twin of eyeless
fat facets
numb-associated kinasea
O-Fut-1a
Cell death
grim

Overexpression of the actin nucleation factor Spire is an
important contributor to the lola ISNb axon stalling
phenotype

Aside from retrotransposon transcripts, one of the
most robust positives in the array analysis was spire.
spire encodes a protein that nucleates assembly of
actin filaments [38], and extensive studies of its role in

scylla
charybde
buncheda
Nedd2-like caspase
Analysis of the list of loci with altered expression in a lola mutant reveals a
substantial number of characterized genes with known or plausible function
in established lola-dependent processes. A selection of such loci is presented
here. aGenes known to be associated with Notch signaling.

Gates et al. Neural Development 2011, 6:37
http://www.neuraldevelopment.com/content/6/1/37

Page 6 of 14

Table 3 Enriched Gene Ontology categories from
functional annotation clustering
Functional annotation

Enrichment factor

PDZ domain-containing proteins

1.7

Aging/lifespan

1.65

Cell migration/motility
Nucleoside/nucleotide metabolism

1.65
1.55

Reactive oxygen response; oxidative stress

1.27

BESS/MADF chromatin modifying factors

1.24

Programmed cell death

1.24

Amino acid metabolism

1.22

LRR-containing proteins

1.2

GST activity

1.18

Cell-cell junctions/apicobasal polarity
Malate metabolism

1.13
1.01

Other notable annotation clusters
Embryonic morphogenesis

0.82

Chemosensory behavior/olfactory learning

0.8

Hemopoiesis/hemocyte migration

0.78

Synaptogenesis/synapse organization

0.77

Post-embryonic development/imaginal disc

0.7

Gametogenesis
Spermatogenesis

0.54
0.3

Oogenesis

0.26

Ig-like domain-containing

0.4

Axonogenesis/neuron morphogenesis

0.28

RNPs

0.27

Gene Ontology analysis with DAVID [37] was used to identify processes and
properties likely to be associated with lola function, based on enrichment in
the collection of lola-sensitive genes. Putatively enriched annotation terms
and their enrichment factors are shown, derived by functional annotation
clustering performed at high stringency setting. Clusters with enrichment
factors ≥1.3 are supported at P < 0.05; lower enrichment scores have
proportionately lower statistical support but nonetheless are enriched in the
dataset relative to background. The background set for calculating enrichment
factors consisted of that subset of features on the microarray that passed the
pre-processing steps and entered our statistical analysis (10, 376 features), and
that could be assigned unambiguously to a single Flybase gene ID (9772
Flybase-defined genes). Retrotransposons were excluded from this analysis.

oogenesis have shown that it plays a central role in
controlling cytoskeletal organization in the developing
oocyte [39,40]. It is clear that spire also has essential
roles during development since most homozygous
spire mutants do not survive to adulthood, but these
developmental functions of spire have never been
reported. Moreover a mouse ortholog of spire is
expressed in the developing CNS [41]. Given the
action of spire in a different lola-regulated process and
our interest in the regulation of neuronal actin organization by lola, we elected to test further the relationship of lola to spire.
We first used in situ hybridization and found that
spire is expressed broadly in the embryonic central and
peripheral nervous system of the fly (Figure 3). In the
CNS, expression included the RP, aCC and VUM

motoneurons, which are easy to identify individually
based on their position and morphology, as well as
many other cells. In the peripheral nervous system
(PNS), expression was detected in all four clusters of
abdominal sense organs, with highest expression in the
neurons and cap cells of the chordotonal organs, and
lowest expression in the v’ cluster.
We next examined neural development in spire zygotic mutants and found that while the CNS axon scaffold
appeared grossly normal, axons of the ISNb motonerve
often failed to fully innervate the ventrolateral musculature (Figure 4). Thus, in stage 17 spir1 mutant embryos
we detected 1.64 ± 0.09 (mean ± standard error of the
mean) neuromuscular synapses to ventral longitudinal
muscles per hemisegment versus 2.73 ± 0.03 in wildtype (P = 3E-4), while in spir2F we detected 1.74 ± 0.03
synapses (P = 2.9E-5).
Since both spire and lola mutants displayed defects in
ISNb, we used this phenotype to test for genetic interaction between these loci. In particular, since the array
and qRT-PCR analyses showed lola to be a negative regulator of spire, we wondered whether reduction of spire
gene dosage would suppress the lola mutant phenotype.
We again quantified the stalling of ISNb by counting
the number of neuromuscular synapses formed on ventral longitudinal muscles in early stage 17 embryos.
Heterozygosity for either of two independent spire
alleles significantly suppressed the lola ISNb phenotype
(Figure 4E). In a heteroallelic combination of two strong
lola mutations (lolaORC46/ORE76) we detected an average
of 0.30 ± 0.06 neuromuscular synapses per hemisegment, compared to 2.73 in wild-type embryos of this
stage. Introduction of spir1/ + increased that to 1.20 ±
0.15 synapses (37% suppression of the phenotype; P =
0.005), while spir2F/+ increased it to 1.27 ± 0.12 synapses
(40% suppression; P = 0.002). This supports the hypothesis that the approximately two-fold overexpression of
spire we observe in lola mutants contributes significantly to its motoneuron stalling phenotype. The lolaspir -/+ embryos sometimes looked a bit disorganized
compared to other genotypes, but the significance of
this is unclear.

Discussion
The transcription factor Lola is required for a variety of
axon growth and guidance events in the developing fly
embryo [42,43]. Expression microarray analysis of lola
mutant embryos now reveals that, rather than producing
large changes in the levels of a restricted number of
major-effect downstream targets, Lola appears to exert
its influence via the cumulative effects of small, quantitative changes in a broad spectrum of downstream loci.
One key Lola target is spire, which encodes an actin
nucleation factor [38] that has been studied intensively

Gates et al. Neural Development 2011, 6:37
http://www.neuraldevelopment.com/content/6/1/37

Page 7 of 14

Figure 3 spire expression in the central nervous system and peripheral nervous system of Drosophila embryos. Wild-type embryos were
collected, fixed, and analyzed by in situ hybridization with a probe that recognizes all spire isoforms, using alkaline phosphatase detection.
Widespread expression of spire was observed in both the peripheral nervous system (PNS) and CNS of wild-type embryos. We did not discern
any difference in the pattern of hybridization in lola mutant embryos. We also did not detect any difference in the strength of the spire signal,
though this is not surprising given the small magnitude of the effect. (A) Filet preparation of entire embryo (stage 14). PNS and CNS are
indicated with brackets. Dorsal, lateral, ventral’ and ventral clusters of peripheral sensory organs are indicated as d, l, v’ and v, respectively.
Anterior is to the left. (B) High magnification view of a lateral sense organ cluster (stage 16) showing preferential expression in the neurons and
cap cells of the chordotonal organs. Soma sheath and scolopale cells did not label detectably. (C) spire RNA was detected in many cells of the
CNS. The motoneurons RP3 and aCC are indicated (arrows). Two segments are shown.

Gates et al. Neural Development 2011, 6:37
http://www.neuraldevelopment.com/content/6/1/37

Page 8 of 14

Figure 4 Genetic interaction of lola and spire mutations. Stage 17 embryos of the indicated genotypes were fixed and stained with antiFasciclin 2 to label ISNb motor axons, and visualized by peroxidase histochemistry. Three representative hemisegments are shown in each panel.
(A) Wild type (WT). ISNb forms three neuromuscular junctions (NMJs) to ventral longitudinal muscles per hemisegment (arrows). (B) spir1
homozygous mutant. NMJs are indicated with arrows, positions where NMJs are missing are highlighted with asterisks. (C) lolae76/lolac46 null
mutant. (D) lolae76spir1/lolac46 embryo. Note partial restoration of NMJs. (E) Quantification of NMJ number in embryos of the indicated
genotypes. Average number of NMJs per hemisegment is plotted as blue bars. Thin lines indicate standard error of the mean of three
experiments (N = approximately 200 hemisegments per dataset).

Gates et al. Neural Development 2011, 6:37
http://www.neuraldevelopment.com/content/6/1/37

for its role in regulating cytoskeletal structure in the
developing fly oocyte [39,40]. spire, like lola, is required
for development of ISNb motor axons, its level goes up
in lola mutants, and reduction of spire dosage suppresses, but does not eliminate, the ISNb mutant phenotype of lola.
Previous analysis of candidate genes implicated in various lola-dependent axon guidance processes identified
several whose expression was subtly affected by lola, but
none that were dramatically altered. This and other
observations led to the proposition that Lola might execute its effects by fine-tuning the expression levels of
genes that contribute quantitatively to various guidance
decisions, and not simply by turning these genes ON
versus OFF [17]. As an unbiased test of this hypothesis,
we used expression microarrays to perform a genomewide comparison of the embryonic transcriptome of
wild-type and lola zygotic mutant embryos. We analyzed
RNA isolated from animals 10 to 12 hours after egg laying, at a time when a large number of lola-dependent
axons are extending. By this analysis, the expression of
no single-copy Drosophila gene was altered more than
four-fold by lola, and few were altered more than 2.5fold. It is possible that this is an underestimate due to
the compression of expression ratios in microarray
experiments, but qRT-PCR results were largely consistent with the array data. It is also possible that expression of some genes may have been altered by a greater
factor in just a small subset of expressing cells, but we
note that most lola isoforms are themselves expressed
very broadly, making this possibility less likely [26].
Finally, we know that some genes can be affected oppositely by different lola isoforms, or in different tissues
[29], so it may be that a small net change in expression
of a lola target gene hides larger but counteracting
changes in different cells. Nonetheless, it remains that a
genome-wide analysis failed to identify any single majoreffect lola target that would account for the lola axonal
phenotypes. It is also true that there is a substantial
maternal contribution of Lola to the embryo [42], and
this may limit the measured effect of the mutation on
downstream targets. We note, however, that it is the
zygotic mutant phenotype of lola that we are seeking to
explain, and it is therefore the quantitative effect of that
zygotic mutant that is the relevant measurement for
investigating the phenotype.
Microarray analysis has been widely used to identify
genes associated with, or responsible for, many developmental and physiological processes. Typical analyses of
expression microarray data emphasize genes whose level
is strongly altered by the biological manipulation, often
setting numerical cutoffs for change in expression level,
together with statistical criteria, to identify true positives. In our experiments, we were compelled to eschew

Page 9 of 14

the use of a quantitative cutoff in fold change; for example, a commonly used criterion of a two-fold minimum
change would have excluded from analysis all but 26
single-copy genes in the genome. Rather, the nature of
the biological process we studied, and the nature of lola,
required that we minimize the biological and technical
variance to achieve exceptionally tight statistics. In the
end, qRT-PCR validation of expression changes from
1.2-fold (genderblind) to 2.5-fold (spire) provided support for 50% of the putative downstream effects of lola.
We note that this is likely to be an underestimate of the
reliability of the array results since at these small folddifferences we were at or beyond the usual sensitivity of
RT-PCR itself, and it is as likely that RT-PCR was
reporting false negatives as the microarrays were reporting false positives. Validity of the results was also supported more globally by independent expression
profiling of another lola allele. Thus, these data underscore the efficacy of microarray analysis for detecting
reliably even quite small changes in expression level.
Known genes whose expression was altered in the lola
mutant shed light on many lola-dependent processes.
Previous experiments had led to the notion that lola
likely co-regulates a suite of interacting genes that are
important for particular axon guidance decisions, and
indeed, we find expression of a number of well-characterized guidance receptors to be altered in lola. frazzled,
which was identified as a downstream target of lola, is
on its own known to be required for three lola-dependent axonal processes: ISNb development in the periphery, and both longitudinal and commissural axon
extension in the CNS [44]. Among other factors downstream of lola are midline fasciclin (longitudinal and
commissural axons) [45], fasciclin 3 and capricious
(ISNb) [46,47] and neural lazarillo (thought to be
involved in both longitudinal and commissural axon guidance) [48]. Also identified were genes for a number of
ligands, receptors and receptor-modifying proteins not
previously associated with lola-dependent processes,
such as sugarless, dallylike, wnt4a and PVF-1. It now
becomes interesting to investigate the potential role of
these genes in axon patterning, and in migration and
orientation of sensory neurons. Aside from cell surface
and extracellular proteins, expression of genes encoding
a number of intracellular signaling proteins was found
to be altered, including prospero (which in hypomorphic
alleles produces a phenotype very similar to that of lola
(EG, unpublished observations)), as well as moesin,
Rac2, and a calmodulin-dependent protein kinase
(CAKI). An unexpected cluster of downstream effects
comprised genes for proteins modulating microtubule
structure and function, including katanin, stathmin,
NudC and KLP-59C. lola also interacts genetically with
the axon patterning function and other activities of the

Gates et al. Neural Development 2011, 6:37
http://www.neuraldevelopment.com/content/6/1/37

receptor Notch [49,50] (EG, unpublished observations),
and we find a cluster of affected genes that modulate
Notch action, including sca, Nak, Dap-160 and O-fut1.
In addition to these known genes, Gene Ontology analysis [37] identifies a large number of lola-dependent loci
that have not yet been characterized in the fly, but
whose annotations cluster with lola-dependent genes of
known function. This provides a substantial list of excellent candidates for additional contributors to loladependent processes. Unfortunately, the large number of
Lola isoforms, and their heteromeric combinations,
makes it impossible for us to extract Lola binding site
consensus sequences from these candidates using standard computational approaches. Extensive molecular
experiments will be necessary in the future to identify
response elements for individual heteromeric forms of
Lola.
lola has several characterized functions outside of
axon patterning. For example, it affects cell fates in the
eye [50], and indeed, there is a substantial group of eye
patterning genes included in the list of lola-affected loci
(sickle, charlatan, asense, rap, roughex, Lobe, target of
eyeless and fat facets). Additionally, consistent with the
role of lola in controlling programmed cell death during
oogenesis [25], we find grim, scylla, charybde, bunched
and Nedd2-like caspase among the downstream effects.
It should be noted that since our microarray analysis
was performed only with mid-stage embryos, we cannot
distinguish whether the effects of lola on these postembryonic processes are mediated by the same downstream
targets that we see affected during embryogenesis. Seeing that these genes can be modulated by lola at one
stage of the lifecycle, however, makes them more attractive candidates for analysis at other stages. Finally, in
addition to genes affecting known lola-dependent processes, the set of genes altered in lola mutants identifies
clusters associated with new processes that would be
worth investigating for a role of lola. These include
aging, oxidative stress, hormonal regulation of development, tracheal development and maintenance, cell polarity and olfactory learning, among others.
One of the most robust putative downstream effects
we identified for lola was downregulation of the actin
nucleation factor Spire. This was immediately striking
since spire is known to be a critical regulator of the
oocyte cytoskeleton during Drosophila oogenesis. spire
is required for both anteroposterior and dorsoventral
patterning of the developing oocyte [30]. By modulating
actin structure, Spire restrains bundling of oocyte
microtubules, thereby blocking cytoplasmic streaming in
the oocyte until critical antero-posterior and dorso-ventral polarity cues become stably bound to cortical
anchoring sites or initiate irreversible signaling cascades
[39,40]. At the biochemical level, Spire nucleates actin

Page 10 of 14

filaments by bringing together actin monomers to
assemble a filament nucleus [38], and it may then transfer this nucleus to the associated formin, Cappuccino,
which stimulates filament growth [51]. While the developmental function of spire has been studied most thoroughly in the oocyte, strong mutations in this gene are
largely lethal, with only small numbers of escapers surviving to adulthood, and this suggested the existence of
as yet uncharacterized zygotic functions of spire. Moreover, a mouse ortholog of spire is expressed in the
developing and adult brain [41]. Here we found that
spire is required for a well-characterized lola-dependent
neuronal process, extension of the ISNb motonerve.
ISNb was an ideal candidate for the sort of function we
had previously hypothesized for lola, since it is known
to depend on the summed, quantitative effects of a large
collection of regulators. We therefore exploited ISNb to
examine more carefully the potential interaction of lola
and spire, and found that genetic reduction of spire suppressed the ISNb mutant phenotype of lola, consistent
with the upregulation of spire in a lola mutant making a
significant contribution to ISNb axon stalling in lola. By
itself, expression analysis cannot distinguish whether
spire is a direct target of Lola or whether the upregulation of spire message is a downstream consequence of
other changes set in motion by lola. Further biochemical
studies of the DNA binding properties of Lola isoforms
will be necessary to assess this. Finally, lola has other
phenotypes that are not suppressed by reduction of
spire. These may reflect, for example, roles of loladependent guidance molecules that are themselves spire
-independent, or the action of Spire-independent aspects
of growth cone signaling.
Efforts to mimic the lola ISNb phenotype by overexpression of spire were not successful. There are several
possible reasons for this. First, there are thought to be
at least eight Spire protein isoforms, based on cDNA
and expressed sequence tag data (Flybase), and it may
be that a particular combination of isoforms, or a specific ratio of expression levels of different isoforms, is
necessary to give the ISNb stalling phenotype. Alternatively, it may be that this phenotype is produced only
when spire upregulation occurs in the context of some
other downstream effect(s) of lola. Additional experiments will be necessary to discriminate among these
models.
Superficially, it seems remarkable that complete loss of
spire causes stalling of ISNb axons, yet the upregulation
of spire that occurs in a lola mutant also contributes to
ISNb stalling. Evidently, excessive nucleation of actin filaments from spire overexpression is as detrimental to
growth cone motility as is the failure of actin nucleation
from absence of the protein. We and others have
observed similar non-linearity in the effects of a number

Gates et al. Neural Development 2011, 6:37
http://www.neuraldevelopment.com/content/6/1/37

of signaling and cytoskeletal regulatory proteins in other
axon guidance paradigms, and it appears to be a common
feature of the relationship of signaling to morphogenesis.
Thus, for example, even though Abl tyrosine kinase pathway signaling appears to be essential for most axon
growth [52], extension of longitudinal pioneer axons of
the fly CNS requires suppression of Abl signaling to
achieve the proper balance in the steps of actin dynamics
[53]. Similarly, for the Rac GTPases, expression of dominant negative and dominant constitutive forms of the
protein are equally effective for inhibiting axon motility,
but in one case from excessive stabilization of actin filaments and in the other from insufficient stabilization
[54]. Spire now provides another example of this generalization, and underscores the need for signaling networks
to evoke a balance in the steps in actin dynamics, thus
optimizing throughput through the mechanical cycle of
growth cone motility [55].
lola mutants have profound effects on axon patterning, even though systematic molecular analysis reveals
only subtle modulation of downstream target gene
expression. This observation highlights the exquisite
sensitivity of motility and guidance to the balance
among cell signaling networks, and thus also to the
gene expression mechanisms that set the boundaries of
that balance.

Conclusions
We have used a genome-wide analysis to identify the
suite of genes whose expression is altered in embryos
lacking the Drosophila transcription factor Lola. Gene
Ontology analysis sheds light on the regulation of several characterized lola functions, including axon guidance, synapse formation, eye development and
oogenesis, by revealing the lola-dependence of genes
known to be involved in those processes, and also by
identifying a large number of previously uncharacterized
lola-dependent genes that are likely to contribute to
these processes. Additionally, these results identify novel
processes that are likely to be regulated by lola. Regarding axon patterning, our analysis reveals that Lola suppresses expression of the actin nucleation factor Spire,
and this is crucial for its ability to promote growth of
motor axons in vivo. These data underscore the critical
importance of ensuring the correct levels of actin regulatory proteins in a cell to promote motility effectively.
Materials and methods
Genetics

Fly genetics and husbandry followed standard methods.
spire mutant alleles were obtained from the Bloomington
Drosophila Stock Center. For RNA extraction, mutant
embryos were w1118; lolaORE76 sca-GAL4/lolaORE76 UAS-τeGFP; controls were w 1118 ; sca-GAL4/UAS-τ-eGFP.

Page 11 of 14

Numbering of lola isoforms follows established nomenclature [26,27]. We note that since the same lola allele was
used to generate both the sca-GAL4 and UAS-τ-GFP
recombinant chromosomes, we cannot exclude the possibility that some of the gene expression effects we observed
are due to modifier loci on the lola chromosome.
Embryo collection and RNA preparation

Embryos were collected for 2 hours at 25°C on grape
juice agar plates and incubated an additional 6 hours at
25°C in a moist chamber. Embryos of the desired genotype were then hand-sorted with a fluorescent dissecting
microscope based on positive GFP expression in the
CNS. Sorted embryos were returned to 25°C and
allowed to develop until 10.0 hours after the end of egg
collection. lola mutant and control embryos were collected concurrently. Seven independent sample pairs
were used for microarray experiments and three to five
for qRT-PCR.
Collected embryos were dechorionated with 50%
bleach, rinsed once with 0.1 M Na phosphate pH 7.2,
0.3% Triton X-100, and rinsed twice with sterile water.
Total RNA was then extracted with Trizol (Invitrogen,
Carlsbad, CA, USA) per the manufacturer’s instructions.
The final RNA pellet was rinsed twice with 75% ethanol,
air-dried for 10 minutes, resuspended in 20 μl RNasefree water at 60°C and stored at -70°C. Each RNA sample for microarrays comprised 20 to 30 μg of total RNA,
derived from approximately 300 embryos; samples for
RT-PCR were derived from 50 embryos.
Array methods

Preparation of spotted cDNA arrays bearing the Drosophila Gene Collection (release 1 and release 2), RNAlabeling, hybridization, scanning and extraction of feature intensities using GenePix were performed by the
Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center (FHCRC)
Genome Analysis Facility as described elsewhere [32].
Of the seven RNA pairs that were analyzed for each
array experiment, in four cases the mutant sample was
labeled with Cy3 and control with Cy5; in the remaining
three cases the labels were reversed. Microarray data
have been deposited to the NCBI GEO database.
Statistical methods for analysis of array data

Array data analysis was performed with limma [34,35]
in the R statistical programming language (R Development Core Team) [56]. Briefly, spot intensity data (from
GenePix) was read-in using the limma function read.
maimages. No background correction was applied,
within-array intensity values were normalized using
print tip loess, and between-array intensity values were
normalized using scale. Gene-wise linear models to the
normalized intensity ratios were fitted using limFit with

Gates et al. Neural Development 2011, 6:37
http://www.neuraldevelopment.com/content/6/1/37

default parameters. Several statistics, including the moderated t-statistic and the log-odds of differential expression, were calculated for each array probe using eBayes.
The moderated t-statistics were classified as significant
using an adjusted P-value of 0.05. Adjustment for multiple testing was done using the Benjamini-Hochberg
method for controlling the false discovery rate (limma
function decideTests, with adjust.method = ‘BH’). Spots
were excluded from analysis if no corresponding
sequence was available from public databases, if FHCRC
production notes indicated spot contamination or if
GenePix data extraction software failed to locate the
probe in any experiment. In total, 10, 376 features were
included in the analysis.

Page 12 of 14

markers. Statistical significance was assessed by t-test; N
= approximately 200 hemisegments per dataset.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Table S1. Complete list of array features reporting
altered RNA level in lolaORE76 mutant embryos. The table lists all
probes from the Drosophila Gene Collection that reported significantly
altered RNA accumulation in lola null mutant embryos versus the
matched wild-type control (ordered by P-value). BLAST analysis was used
to assign each probe to the corresponding Drosophila gene where
possible; these are given by FBgn number and locus name. Fold change
is reported as log2 and statistical support is reported as adjusted P-value
[35]. Note that lolaORE76 is a nonsense mutation, and indeed, features
corresponding to lola isoforms reported only modest changes in
transcript level. Unfortunately, expression of slit, robo and robo3 could
not be assayed in this experiment as they were either absent from this
release of the Drosophila Gene Collection or found to be defective
during chip preparation. robo2 did not show a significant change in RNA
accumulation.

Quantitative real time PCR

Real time PCR was performed on an Applied Biosystems
7300 Real-Time PCR System using Taqman Gene
Expression Assays (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA,
USA). Primer sets were purchased commercially
(Applied Biosystems) as follows: Ribosomal protein L32
(RPL32; Dm02151827_g1); Bekka (Dm02363268_s1);
blistery (Dm02138346_m1); CG6070 (Dm02145281_m1);
charybde (Dm01802349_m1); Kruppel target at 95D
(Dm02150605_m1); Neural Lazarillo (Dm01844577_g1);
spire (Dm01811138_m1); Target of rapamycin
(Dm01843300_g1); and walrus (Dm01792969_g1). Gene
expression levels were normalized to the endogenous
control RpL32 using the standard curve method according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Normalized gene
expression levels of lola null mutant samples were measured relative to wild-type control. Measurements were
repeated with three to five biological replicates, and
each biological replicate was performed with three technical replicates.
Histochemistry and microscopy

Embryos for in situ hybridization and protein immunostaining were prepared and examined by standard methods [26]. Anti-Fasciclin 2 was from the University of
Iowa Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank, the biotin anti-mouse secondary was from Jackson ImmunoResearch (West Grove, PA, USA) and detection was with
Vectastain (Vector Labs, Burlingame, CA, USA {
Reagents for in situ hybridization and alkaline phosphatase detection were from Roche Applied Sciences (Indianapolis, IN, USA).
ISNb phenotype was quantified by labeling stage 17
embryos with anti-Fasciclin 2, using DAB detection, and
counting the number of neuromuscular junctions to
ventral longitudinal muscles (muscles 7, 6, 13 and 12) in
segments A2 to A7 in fillet preparations. Embryo genotypes were determined unambiguously using gratuitous

Abbreviations
CNS: central nervous system; FHCRC: Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research
Center; GFP: green fluorescent protein; PNS: peripheral nervous system; qRTPCR: quantitative RT-PCR.
Acknowledgements
We thank all the members of our lab for their advice and assistance with
these experiments. For much helpful advice we also thank Celeste Berg,
Cecilia Moens, Tom Reh, Kathleen Kerr, Ben Feldman, Chi-Hon Lee and Ward
Odenwald, and for comments on the manuscript we thank Katie Kerr, Don
van Meyel, Akinao Nose and Brian Oliver. We thank the Berkeley Drosophila
Genome Project for the gift of the Drosophila Gene Collection. We are
particularly grateful to Jeff Delrow and the Microarray Facility of the FHCRC
for their assistance in designing, performing and analyzing the microarray
experiments. These experiments were supported in part by NSF grant IBN9904519 to EG, and by funds from the Basic Neuroscience Program of the
Intramural Research Program NINDS, NIH (Z01 NS003013).
Author details
Basic Neuroscience Program, National Institutes of Neurological Disorders
and Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. 2National
Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
MD, 20892 USA. 3Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA,
98109 USA. 4Graduate Program in Molecular and Cellular Biology, University
of Washington and Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA,
98109 USA.
1

Authors’ contributions
MAG performed the microarray analysis and validation, RK performed the
genetic validation and characterization of spire expression, EG was
responsible for overall design and contributed to interpretation of the
results. All three authors contributed to writing of the manuscript and all
read and approved its final form.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 7 September 2011 Accepted: 30 November 2011
Published: 30 November 2011
References
1. Butler SJ, Tear G: Getting axons onto the right path: the role of
transcription factors in axon guidance. Development 2007, 134:439-448.
2. Polleux F, Ince-Dunn G, Ghosh A: Transcriptional regulation of vertebrate
axon guidance and synapse formation. Nat Rev Neurosci 2007, 8:331-340.

Gates et al. Neural Development 2011, 6:37
http://www.neuraldevelopment.com/content/6/1/37

3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

8.
9.

10.

11.
12.

13.
14.

15.

16.
17.
18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.
24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

Simon M: Receptor tyrosine kinases: Specific outcomes from general
signals. Cell 2000, 103:13-15.
Tanabe Y, Jessell TM: Diversity and pattern in the developing spinal cord.
Science 1996, 274:1115-1123.
Ghysen A, Jan LY, Jan YN: Segmental determination in Drosophila central
nervous system. Cell 1985, 40:943-948.
Gould AP, White RA: Connectin, a target of homeotic gene control in
Drosophila. Development 1992, 116:1163-1174.
Thor S, Andersson SG, Tomlinson A, Thomas JB: A LIM-homeodomain
combinatorial code for motor-neuron pathway selection. Nature 1999,
397:76-80.
Thor S, Thomas JB: The Drosophila islet gene governs axon pathfinding
and neurotransmitter identity. Neuron 1997, 18:397-409.
Tsuchida T, Ensini M, Morton SB, Baldassare M, Edlund T, Jessell TM, Pfaff SL:
Topographic organization of embryonic motor neurons defined by
expression of LIM homeobox genes. Cell 1994, 79:957-970.
Labrador JP, O’Keefe D, Yoshikawa S, McKinnon RD, Thomas JB, Bashaw GJ:
The homeobox transcription factor even-skipped regulates netrinreceptor expression to control dorsal motor-axon projections in
Drosophila. Curr Biol 2005, 15:1413-1419.
Yang L, Garbe DS, Bashaw GJ: A frazzled/DCC-dependent transcriptional
switch regulates midline axon guidance. Science 2009, 324:944-947.
Winberg ML, Mitchell KJ, Goodman CS: Genetic analysis of the
mechanisms controlling target selection: complementary and
combinatorial functions of netrins, semaphorins, and IgCAMs. Cell 1998,
93:581-591.
Kaufmann N, Wills ZP, Van Vactor D: Drosophila Rac1 controls motor axon
guidance. Development 1998, 125:453-461.
Wills Z, Bateman J, Korey CA, Comer A, Van Vactor D: The tyrosine kinase
Abl and its substrate enabled collaborate with the receptor phosphatase
Dlar to control motor axon guidance. Neuron 1999, 22:301-312.
Wills Z, Marr L, Zinn K, Goodman CS, Van Vactor D: Profilin and the Abl
tyrosine kinase are required for motor axon outgrowth in the Drosophila
embryo. Neuron 1999, 22:291-299.
Garbe DS, Bashaw GJ: Axon guidance at the midline: from mutants to
mechanisms. Crit Rev Biochem Mol Biol 2004, 39:319-341.
Crowner D, Madden K, Goeke S, Giniger E: Lola regulates midline crossing
of CNS axons in Drosophila. Development 2002, 129:1317-1325.
Madden K, Crowner D, Giniger E: lola has the properties of a master
regulator of axon-target interactions for SNb motor axons of Drosophila.
Dev Biol 1999, 213:301-313.
Brenman JE, Gao FB, Jan LY, Jan YN: Sequoia, a tramtrack-related zinc
finger protein, functions as a pan-neural regulator for dendrite and axon
morphogenesis in Drosophila. Dev Cell 2001, 1:667-677.
Spletter ML, Liu J, Su H, Giniger E, Komiyama T, Quake S, Luo L: Lola
regulates Drosophila olfactory projection neuron identity and targeting
specificity. Neural Dev 2007, 2:14.
Edwards AC, Zwarts L, Yamamoto A, Callaerts P, Mackay TF: Mutations in
many genes affect aggressive behavior in Drosophila melanogaster. BMC
Biol 2009, 7:29.
Mackay TF, Heinsohn SL, Lyman RF, Moehring AJ, Morgan TJ, Rollmann SM:
Genetics and genomics of Drosophila mating behavior. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 2005, 102(Suppl 1):6622-6629.
Morozova TV, Anholt RR, Mackay TF: Transcriptional response to alcohol
exposure in Drosophila melanogaster. Genome Biol 2006, 7:R95.
Yamamoto A, Zwarts L, Callaerts P, Norga K, Mackay TF, Anholt RR:
Neurogenetic networks for startle-induced locomotion in Drosophila
melanogaster. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008, 105:12393-12398.
Bass BP, Cullen K, McCall K: The axon guidance gene lola is required for
programmed cell death in the Drosophila ovary. Dev Biol 2007,
304:771-785.
Goeke S, Greene EA, Grant PK, Gates MA, Crowner D, Aigaki T, Giniger E:
Alternative splicing of lola generates 19 transcription factors controling
axon guidance in Drosophila. Nat Neurosci 2003, 6:917-924.
Ohsako T, Horiuchi T, Matsuo T, Komaya S, Aigaki T: Drosophila lola
encodes a family of BTB-transcription regulators with highly variable Cterminal domains containing zinc finger motifs. Gene 2003, 311:59-69.
Zhang W, Wang Y, Long J, Girton J, Johansen J, Johansen KM: A
developmentally regulated splice variant from the complex lola locus
encoding multiple different zinc finger domain proteins interacts with
the chromosomal kinase JIL-1. J Biol Chem 2003, 278:11696-11704.

Page 13 of 14

29. Cavarec L, Jensen S, Casella JF, Cristescu SA, Heidmann T: Molecular
cloning and characterization of a transcription factor for the copia
retrotransposon with homology to the BTB-containing lola neurogenic
factor. Mol Cell Biol 1997, 17:482-494.
30. Manseau LJ, Schupbach T: cappuccino and spire: two unique maternaleffect loci required for both the anteroposterior and dorsoventral
patterns of the Drosophila embryo. Genes Dev 1989, 3:1437-1452.
31. Gates MA: From transcription to axon guidance: Uncovering downstream
effectors of longitudinals lacking in Drosophila melanogaster. PhD thesis
University of Washington and Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center,
Program in Molecular and Cell Biology; 2008.
32. Pierce SB, Yost C, Anderson SA, Flynn EM, Delrow J, Eisenman RN:
Drosophila growth and development in the absence of dMyc and dMnt.
Dev Biol 2008, 315:303-316.
33. Stapleton M, Liao G, Brokstein P, Hong L, Carninci P, Shiraki T, Hayashizaki Y,
Champe M, Pacleb J, Wan K, Yu C, Carlson J, George R, Celniker S,
Rubin GM: The Drosophila gene collection: identification of putative fulllength cDNAs for 70% of D. melanogaster genes. Genome Res 2002,
12:1294-1300.
34. Smyth GK, Speed T: Normalization of cDNA microarray data. Methods
2003, 31:265-273.
35. Smyth GK: Linear models and empirical Bayes methods for assessing
differential expression in microarray experiments. Stat Appl Genet Mol Biol
2004, 3:Article 3.
36. Benjamini Y, Hochberg Y: Controlling false discovery rate: A practical and
powerful approach to multiple testing. J Royal Statistical Soc B 1995,
57:289-300.
37. Huang DW, Sherman BT, Lempicki RA: Systematic and integrative analysis
of large gene lists using DAVID bioinformatics resources. Nat Protoc
2009, 4:44-57.
38. Quinlan ME, Heuser JE, Kerkhoff E, Mullins RD: Drosophila Spire is an actin
nucleation factor. Nature 2005, 433:382-388.
39. Rosales-Nieves AE, Johndrow JE, Keller LC, Magie CR, Pinto-Santini DM,
Parkhurst SM: Coordination of microtubule and microfilament dynamics
by Drosophila Rho1, Spire and Cappuccino. Nat Cell Biol 2006, 8:367-376.
40. Theurkauf WE: Premature microtubule-dependent cytoplasmic streaming
in cappuccino and spire mutant oocytes. Science 1994, 265:2093-2096.
41. Schumacher N, Borawski JM, Leberfinger CB, Gessler M, Kerkhoff E:
Overlapping expression pattern of the actin organizers Spir-1 and
formin-2 in the developing mouse nervous system and the adult brain.
Gene Expr Patterns 2004, 4:249-255.
42. Giniger E, Tietje K, Jan LY, Jan YN: lola encodes a putative transcription
factor required for axon growth and guidance in Drosophila.
Development 1994, 120:1385-1398.
43. Seeger M, Tear G, Ferres-Marco D, Goodman CS: Mutations affecting
growth cone guidance in Drosophila: Genes necessary for guidance
towards or away from the midline. Neuron 1993, 10:409-426.
44. Kolodziej PA, Timpe LC, Mitchell KJ, Fried SR, Goodman CS, Jan LY, Jan YN:
frazzled encodes a Drosophila member of the DCC immunoglobulin
subfamily and is required for CNS and motor axon guidance. Cell 1996,
87:197-204.
45. Hu S, Sonnenfeld M, Stahl S, Crews ST: Midline Fasciclin: a Drosophila
Fasciclin-I-related membrane protein localized to the CNS midline cells
and trachea. J Neurobiol 1998, 35:77-93.
46. Chiba A, Snow P, Keshishian H, Hotta Y: Fasciclin III as a synaptic target
recognition molecule in Drosophila. Nature 1995, 374:166-168.
47. Shishido E, Takeichi M, Nose A: Drosophila synapse formation: regulation
by transmembrane protein with Leu-rich repeats, CAPRICIOUS. Science
1998, 280:2118-2121.
48. Sanchez D, Ganfornina MD, Torres-Schumann S, Speese SD, Lora JM,
Bastiani MJ: Characterization of two novel lipocalins expressed in the
Drosophila embryonic nervous system. Int J Dev Biol 2000, 44:349-359.
49. Ferres-Marco D, Gutierrez-Garcia I, Vallejo DM, Bolivar J, Gutierrez-Avino FJ,
Dominguez M: Epigenetic silencers and Notch collaborate to promote
malignant tumours by Rb silencing. Nature 2006, 439:430-436.
50. Zheng L, Carthew RW: Lola regulates cell fate by antagonizing Notch
induction in the Drosophila eye. Mech Dev 2008, 125:18-29.
51. Vizcarra CL, Kreutz B, Rodal AA, Toms AV, Lu J, Zheng W, Quinlan ME,
Eck MJ: Structure and function of the interacting domains of Spire and
Fmn-family formins. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2011, 108:11884-11889.

Gates et al. Neural Development 2011, 6:37
http://www.neuraldevelopment.com/content/6/1/37

Page 14 of 14

52. Hoffmann FM: Drosophila abl and genetic redundancy in signal
transduction. TIGS 1991, 7:351-355.
53. Kuzina I, Song JK, Giniger E: How Notch establishes longitudinal axon
connections between successive segments of the Drosophila CNS.
Development 2011, 138:1839-1849.
54. Luo L, Liao J, Jan LY, Jan YN: Distinct morphogenetic functions of similar
small GTPases Drosophila Drac1 is involved in axonal outgrowth and
myoblast fusion. Genes Dev 1994, 8:1787-1802.
55. Giniger E: How do Rho family GTPases direct axon growth and
guidance? A proposal relating signaling pathways to growth cone
mechanics. Differentiation 2002, 70:385-396.
56. The R Project for Statistical Computing. [http://www.R-project.org].
doi:10.1186/1749-8104-6-37
Cite this article as: Gates et al.: A genome-wide analysis reveals that the
Drosophila transcription factor, Lola, promotes axon growth in part by
suppressing expression of the actin nucleation factor, Spire. Neural
Development 2011 6:37.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
