<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Somatic and germline expression of piwi during development and regeneration in the marine polychaete annelid Capitella teleta</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="EvoDevo 2011, 2:10. doi:10.1186/2041-9139-2-10"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Vincent C Giani Jr"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Giani et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:10
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/10

RESEARCH

Open Access

Somatic and germline expression of piwi during
development and regeneration in the marine
polychaete annelid Capitella teleta
Vincent C Giani Jr1, Emi Yamaguchi1, Michael J Boyle2 and Elaine C Seaver1*

Abstract
Background: Stem cells have a critical role during adult growth and regeneration. Germline stem cells are
specialized stem cells that produce gametes during sexual reproduction. Capitella teleta (formerly Capitella sp. I) is a
polychaete annelid that reproduces sexually, exhibits adult growth and regeneration, and thus, is a good model to
study the relationship between somatic and germline stem cells.
Results: We characterize expression of the two C. teleta orthologs of piwi, genes with roles in germline
development in diverse organisms. Ct-piwi1 and Ct-piwi2 are expressed throughout the life cycle in a dynamic
pattern that includes both somatic and germline cells, and show nearly identical expression patterns at all stages
examined. Both genes are broadly expressed during embryonic and larval development, gradually becoming
restricted to putative primordial germ cells (PGCs) and the posterior growth zone. In juveniles, Ct-piwi1 is expressed
in the presumptive gonads, and in reproductive adults, it is detected in gonads and the posterior growth zone. In
addition, Ct-piwi1 is expressed in a population of putative PGCs that persist in sexually mature adults, likely in a
stem cell niche. Ct-piwi1 is expressed in regenerating tissue, and once segments differentiate, it becomes most
prominent in the posterior growth zone and immature oocytes in regenerating ovaries of regenerating segments.
Conclusions: In C. teleta, piwi genes may have retained an ancestral role as genetic regulators of both somatic and
germline stem cells. It is likely that piwi genes, and associated stem cell co-regulators, became restricted to the
germline in some taxa during the course of evolution.

Background
Stem cells are essential for animal development and
adult tissue homeostasis, and they can presumably differentiate into many specialized cell types. Specialized
stem cells called primordial germ cells (PGCs) are populations of undifferentiated stem cells in sexually reproducing animals that will exclusively give rise to the
germ cells, either spermatocytes or oocytes [1]. These
germline stem cells insure that genetic information is
passed to the next generation. In some animals, germline stem cells are segregated from somatic cells during
embryonic development. Two distinct mechanisms of
germline specification have been described: preformation and epigenesis [2]. According to the preformationist
* Correspondence: seaver@hawaii.edu
1
Kewalo Marine Laboratory, PBRC/University of Hawaii, 41 Ahui St., Honolulu,
HI 96813, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

mode, germ cells are specified by maternally inherited
determinants present within the egg. In the case of epigenesis, germ cells are not specified until later in development, and arise as a result of inductive signals from
surrounding tissues. In some basally branching animals,
there is not such a separation between the germline and
the soma in the embryo, and germ cells can be segregated from somatic cells throughout the life cycle. This
raises the question of the relationship between somatic
stem cells and germline stem cells. It has been proposed
that germline stem cells arose from a preexisting multipotent progenitor lineage that later in evolution became
a restricted sublineage [3]. If this is the case, have some
bilaterian animals retained an ancestral association
between germline stem cells and somatic stem cells?
Are core regulatory genes shared between multipotent
stem cells and germline stem cells in some animal
groups?

© 2011 Giani et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Giani et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:10
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/10

Studies in annelids are likely to provide insights into
the relationship between somatic and germline stem
cells. Polychaete annelids are highly variable in their
reproductive patterns and many species can regenerate
their heads, tails or both [4]. The polychaete annelid
Capitella teleta, formerly known as Capitella sp. I [5] is
a simple-bodied, marine polychaete annelid that undergoes sexual reproduction, continuously generates segments during its lifetime, and exhibits robust posterior
regeneration, including regeneration of its ovaries. In C.
teleta, there are males, females and hermaphrodites;
males can transform into hermaphrodites as a result of
changing environmental conditions [6]. Gametogenesis
and the location of the reproductive organs in C. teleta
have previously been described in detail [5,7,8]. The
testes are specialized regions of the lateral peritoneum
in the seventh and eighth segments and lack a well
developed anatomical structure. Several later stages of
spermatogenesis occur within the coelomic cavity, and
in mature males, sperm are stored in paired genital
ducts (coelomoducts) at the boundary between segments
7 and 8. The genital ducts are trumpet-shaped structures that open into the ventro-lateral coelomic cavity
on one end and on the other end have a narrow canal
that terminates in an intersegmental pore, separate from
metanephridia present in the same segment. Females
have well-defined segmentally repeated ovaries present
in 10 to 12 continuous segments beginning with the
first abdominal segment. The ovaries are ventrally positioned, paired structures adjacent to the gut tube. Each
ovary is suspended by mesenteries on the ventral side of
the coelomic cavity and is macroscopically visible. The
sac of the ovary is composed of follicle cells that are
formed by modified coelomic peritoneal cells. Vitellogenesis (and potentially a proliferative phase) occurs
within the ovaries, and each ovary contains 5 to 20
oocytes at multiple stages of oogenesis, including mature
oocytes. Distinct stages are spatially segregated within
the ovary, with proliferative oogonia and pre-vitellogenic
oocytes in the medial region of the ovary and mature
oocytes localized to the lateral region [7]. Individuals of
both sexes can reproduce multiple times. Hermaphroditic animals display both male and female characteristics.
The detailed knowledge of gametogenesis and adult
anatomy, generation of segments as an adult, available
fate map [9], and the ability to regenerate make C. teleta
a good lophotrochozoan model to study the segregation
of the germline and the relationship between somatic
and germline stem cells.
In contrast to the detailed knowledge of gametogenesis for many polychaetes, far less is known about primordial germ cells and the origin of the germline in
polychaetes [10,11]. Along with the vasa and nanos
genes, piwi has essential roles during germline

Page 2 of 18

development. Piwi genes are members of the Argonaute
(Ago) family of proteins, which function through their
interactions with small RNAs (sRNAs). In Drosophila
melanogaster and mammals, piwi proteins bind to special classes of sRNA molecules such as repeat-associated
small interacting RNAs (rasiRNAs), and piwi-interacting
RNAs (piRNAs) [12-14]. PiRNAs are often complementary to transposon sequences and can silence transposable elements in the germline [15]. Piwi genes can thus
affect germline determination, germline maintenance,
gametogenesis, stem cell self-renewal, RNA interference
(RNAi), and transposon silencing [14]. In D. melanogaster, piwi is expressed in embryos as well as adult
gonads [12]. Within ovaries, piwi is expressed in both
somatic and germline cells [16]. Mutations within the
piwi gene of D. melanogaster cause male sterility due to
defects in spermatogenesis, and mutant females are deficient in germline cells [17]. In mice, miwi (mouse
homolog of piwi) is normally expressed during spermatogenesis where it is largely restricted to the testis [14],
and miwi knockout mice exhibit male sterility, characterized by a block at the early spermatid stage [14]. Piwi
family genes are also expressed in germ cells across a
broad range of taxa, including zebrafish [18], sea urchins
[19], ctenophores [20]), and jellyfish [21], although the
function and molecular mechanism of its action is only
known for a few species. There are limited examples of
expression studies for piwi genes in annelids. These
include characterization of a piwi gene ortholog in the
gonads and during regeneration in the oligochaete annelid worm Enchytraeus japonensis [22], and expression in
the PGCs of larvae and juveniles in the polychaete annelid Platynereis dumerilii [23].
In this study, we present a comprehensive expression
analysis for the two piwi paralogs in the genome of the
polychaete annelid C. teleta. Previously, Dill and Seaver
[24] reported that orthologs of vasa and nanos are
expressed in both the germline and somatic cells, primarily
in cells of the posterior growth zone of the adult. If these
germline regulators as well as piwi also function in
somatic stem cells, one might predict they are expressed
in regenerating tissue. We examined piwi expression during embryonic and larval development, and during adult
growth and regeneration. Both Ct-piwi1 and Ct-piwi2 are
expressed throughout the life cycle of C. teleta, from early
cleavage stage embryos to reproductive adult worms and
during gametogenesis. In addition, Ct-piwi1 has a complex
and dynamic expression pattern during posterior regeneration in both somatic and germline precursors.

Results
Phylogenetic analyses of C. teleta Piwi

Searches of the C. teleta genome identified two putative
piwi homologs, which we call Ct-piwi1 and Ct-piwi2.

Giani et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:10
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/10

Both predicted open reading frames contain conserved
PAZ and PIWI domains characteristic of piwi genes.
The PIWI domain in both Ct-Piwi1 and Ct-Piwi2 is
located near the 3’ end of the ORF, which is typical of
piwi genes [25]. Phylogenetic analyses were conducted
by Bayesian and maximum likelihood methods. Both CtPiwi1 and Ct-Piwi2 cluster within the Piwi subfamily of
the Ago family of proteins, separately from the Argonaute subfamily (Figure 1). There is 100% Bayesian posterior probability support for the Piwi subfamily node,
as well as 100% maximum likelihood bootstrap support.
Ct-Piwi1 and Ct-Piwi2 are more closely related to Piwi
paralogs from other animals than to each other; we
infer that these two genes do not represent a recent
gene duplication. Indeed, most of the animals included
in these analyses have at least two paralogs that are
divergent from each other, which suggests a deep root
for this duplication, perhaps in the bilaterian or even
metazoan ancestor. While there is some lack of resolution among the Piwi1, Piwi-like1, Piwi-like3, and Piwilike4 proteins, the Piwi2 and Piwi-like2 sequences group
closely together, with 100% Bayesian posterior probability support and 97% maximum likelihood bootstrap support for this node. Ct-Piwi2 belongs to this Piwi2 subgroup, which includes representatives from a broad
range of metazoan taxa.
Regenerative capabilities of C. teleta

C. teleta has the ability to regenerate lost tissue, and
upon amputation will regenerate posterior segments
[26]. To aid our interpretations of piwi expression, we
characterized posterior regeneration in reproductive
adults (eight weeks post-metamorphosis). In C. teleta,
there are two distinct body regions: segments 1 to 9 are
the thoracic segments, and 40 to 50 abdominal segments
are continuously added posteriorly throughout adult
development. Transverse amputations were made on
adult male and female worms at the segment boundary
between the 11th and 12th segment (Figure 2A, dotted
line). The rate of regeneration varies among individuals;
this variation becomes more pronounced after five days
post-amputation, and is likely due to environmental
conditions. Within four hours of amputation, wound
healing occurs by contraction of the severed edges of
the body wall (Figure 2B). The gut is closed off during
early stages of regeneration by formation of an intact
epithelium covering the wound. At one day post-amputation, the wound has fully healed and a small blastema
(mass of undifferentiated cells) is visible (Figure 2C).
Between one and three days post-amputation, the blastema grows bigger. In addition, the anus has reopened
and the worm can feed and excrete ingested material
(Figure 2D). Between three and seven days post-amputation, the blastema continues to grow and elongates, but

Page 3 of 18

there are no external signs of segmentation (Figure 2EG). At five days post-amputation, axons can be observed
extending from the severed longitudinal nerves into the
blastema, likely invading the regenerating tissue from
cell bodies in the pre-existing tissue (Figure 2F). The
blastema has a smaller diameter relative to the pre-existing tissue, and a distinct pygidium and posterior growth
zone appear between 10 and 14 days post-amputation
(Figure 2J). Typically, several small segments also
become morphologically apparent between 10 and 14
days post-amputation (Figure 2H-J). Nascent segments
are initially visible by the appearance of forming ganglia
and circular peripheral nerves extending from the ventral nerve cord (Figure 2I, I’, arrow, arrowheads); at this
stage there are not yet external signs of segmentation
(Figure 2I’, arrow). The formation of chaetae and intersegmental furrows of the ectoderm occur a few days
later (Figure 2K, arrowheads). When segments form,
multiple small segments appear rather than a single segment at a time. As many as 20 segments have regenerated by 18 days post-amputation (Figure 2K).
Ct-piwi1 and Ct-piwi2 embryonic and larval expression
patterns

We characterized expression of the two C. teleta piwi
genes during embryonic and larval development by
whole mount in situ hybridization. C. teleta development has been previously described and follows an
established staging system (Figure 3, top) [27]. In
uncleaved zygotes, two-cell and four-cell stage embryos,
Ct-piwi1 transcripts can only be detected after an
extended color reaction (Figure 3A-C, arrows). In subsequent cleavage stages, Ct-piwi1 is broadly expressed in
most if not all cells (Figure 3D, arrows). Gastrulation
occurs during stage 3, and at this stage the Ct-piwi1
expression pattern becomes more restricted within the
embryo. Near the end of gastrulation and following closure of the blastopore, Ct-piwi1 is transiently expressed
in the endoderm (Figure 3E). In early stage larvae (stage
4), Ct-piwi1 is expressed in several discrete domains
including the presumptive brain, foregut, and mesodermal bands (Figure 3F). These expression domains persist
into stage 5, and in addition, two small ventro-lateral
clusters of cells appear in the mid-body segments. These
clusters are medial to the mesodermal bands (Figure
3G, arrows), and become more easily detected at later
larval stages. At stage 6, brain expression weakens, while
expression becomes more apparent in the foregut, trunk
mesoderm, and a band of Ct-piwi1-expressing cells
immediately anterior to the telotroch that corresponds
to the posterior growth zone (Figure 3H). In addition,
expression in the two ventro-lateral cell clusters
becomes more prominent; each cluster contains two to
five cells and is positioned within the mesoderm (Figure

Giani et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:10
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/10

Page 4 of 18

Figure 1 Phylogenetic analysis of Ct-Piwi1 and Ct-Piwi2 sequences. The argonaute and piwi subfamilies are indicated by a red and blue line,
respectively. Ct-Piwi1 and Ct-Piwi2 are both members of the Piwi subfamily of Argonaute proteins. Ct-Piwi2 clusters in a sub-group, indicated by a
green line, containing other Piwi2 or Piwi-like proteins from broad metazoan taxa. The tree shown is a Bayesian consensus tree with posterior
probabilities placed above the nodes. Maximum likelihood bootstrap support values are included where the tree topology agreed with the
Bayesian analysis, and are placed below the nodes. Species abbreviations: Amphi, Branchiostoma floridae; Bm, Bombyx mori; Ce, Caenorhabditis
elegans; Ct-, Capitella teleta; Ci-, Ciona intestinalis; Che, Clytia hemisphaerica; Dm, Drosophila melanogaster; Hro-, Helobdella robusta; Hs, Homo
sapiens; Lg, Lottia gigantea; Mm, Mus musculus; Nv, Nematostella vectensis; Pdu-, Platynereis dumerilii; Pc, Podocoryne carnea; Sp, Strongylocentrotus
purpuratus. JGI protein ID number is indicated for C. teleta outgroup and sequences from H. robusta, L. gigantea, and N. vectensis. NCBI accession
number is indicated for C. intestinalis. Gene locus number is indicated for B. floridae.

Giani et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:10
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/10

Page 5 of 18

Figure 2 Time course of posterior regeneration in C. teleta from 4 hours to 18 days post-amputation. Adults were amputated at the 12th
segment. Panels shown are posterior ends of amputated adults. All animals are oriented in a ventral view with anterior to the left. Black and
white dotted lines indicate cut site in all panels. Dark shapes in E, F’, I’, J and K are within the lumen of the gut. Images F and I are Z-stack
projections of confocal micrographs of the posterior end of a regenerate labeled with anti-acyetylated tubulin. Abbreviation: pyg, pygidium. (A)
Schematic of an adult worm indicating the cut site at the 12th segment. (B) Adult worm four hours post-amputation. (C) one day postamputation. (D) three days post-amputation. (E) five days post-amputation. (F) Confocal micrograph of a worm five days post-amputation
showing longitudinal axons extending into the regenerating tissue (white arrow). (F’) Corresponding DIC image of the same worm shown in F.
(G) seven days post-amputation. (H) 10 days post-amputation. (I) Confocal micrograph of a worm 10 days post-amputation showing
longitudinal axons (white arrow) and circular nerves (white arrowheads) in the regenerating tissue. (I’) Corresponding DIC image of the same
adult worm in I; note the lack of external segmentation (black arrow). (J) 14 days post-amputation worm with a distinct pygidium. (K) Adult 18
days post-amputation with numerous differentiated segments in the regenerate. Black arrowheads point to chaetae in two sets of adjacent
segments. Scale bar, 50 μm for all panels.

Giani et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:10
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/10

Page 6 of 18

Figure 3 Ct-piwi1 expression patterns during embryonic and larval development. Except for cleavage stages (A-D), all animals are ventral
views with anterior to the left. N is a lateral view with ventral down and anterior to the left. Stages shown are indicated in the lower-right of
each panel. At the top is a developmental staging chart for C. teleta. Abbreviations: br, brain; end, endoderm; fg, foregut; hg, hindgut; mb,
mesodermal bands; pgz; posterior growth zone; vnc, ventral nerve cord. (A) Expression in the cytoplasm of uncleaved zygote (arrow). (B)
Expression is in both cells of a 2-cell stage embryo (arrows). (C) Animal view of a four-cell stage embryo showing expression in every cell
(arrows). (D) Expression throughout the embryo (arrows). (E) Endodermal expression in a stage 3 larva. (F) Expression in the brain, foregut, and
mesodermal bands. (G) Ct-piwi1 is expressed in two cell clusters on the ventral side of the trunk (black arrows), and in the brain, foregut, and
mesodermal bands. (H) Expression in the brain, foregut, mesodermal bands, posterior growth zone and in two asymmetrically positioned ventrolateral cell clusters (arrows). The left cluster is more anterior. (I) Two asymmetrically positioned ventro-lateral cell clusters with the right cluster
more anterior. (J) Two bilaterally symmetric ventro-lateral cell clusters. (K) The two Ct-piwi-expressing cell clusters are located close to the
midline (arrows). Expression persists in the foregut and posterior growth zone. (L) The two Ct-piwi1-expressing cell clusters are in close proximity
near the ventral midline (arrows). Expression persists in the foregut and posterior growth zone. (M) By stage 9, expression is limited to a single
cluster at the ventral midline (arrow) and posterior growth zone. (N) Lateral view showing expression in a single cluster in between the gut and
ventral nerve cord at the foregut/hindgut boundary. Scale bar, 50 μm for all panels.

3H, arrows). There is variation in the position of the
ventro-lateral cell clusters within segments 4 and 5 in
stage 6 larvae, and three distinct patterns are observed:
(1) asymmetrically positioned clusters with the left cluster more anterior (n = 14/35) (Figure 3H, arrows), (2)
asymmetrically positioned clusters with the right cluster

more anterior (n = 11/35) (Figure 3I, arrows), and (3)
bilaterally symmetric cell clusters (n = 10/35) (Figure 3J,
arrows). By stages 7 and 8, expression is limited to the
foregut, posterior growth zone, and ventro-lateral cell
clusters (Figure 3K and Figure 3L, arrows). At these
stages, the position of the ventro-lateral cell clusters is

Giani et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:10
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/10

closer to the ventral midline relative to their position at
stage 6. The position of the Ct-piwi1 positive ventro-lateral clusters also varies among stage 8 larvae, with the
following observed patterns: (1) bilaterally symmetric
clusters at the midline (n = 15/35), (2) bilaterally symmetric clusters lateral to the midline (n = 11/35), (3)
asymmetrically positioned clusters lateral to the midline,
with one of the clusters more anterior to the other (n =
9/35) (Figure 3L, arrows). By stage 9, only a single cluster at the ventral midline of segment 4 is apparent (Figure 3M, arrows). This cluster is positioned dorsal to the
ventral nerve cord and ventral to the gut tube, at the
boundary between the foregut and midgut (Figure 3N).
From stage 6 to stage 9, the position of these Ct-piwi1expressing cells changes from paired ventro-lateral clusters (n = 35/35) to a single cluster at the ventral midline
(n = 30/32). The observed variation in the position of
the ventro-lateral cell clusters of Ct-piwi1-expressing
cells and their progression to the ventral midline is consistent with migratory behavior of these cells. There is
no obvious increase in the number of cells in these clusters between stage 6 and stage 9. We hypothesize that
these cells are PGCs. By stage 9, Ct-piwi1 expression is
restricted to the posterior growth zone and a single
cluster of putative PGCs at the ventral midline.
The position of Ct-piwi1 expression domains was
characterized in relation to patterns of cell division in
larvae as visualized by EdU incorporation. A comprehensive study of cell division patterns during larval
development of C. teleta has been previously reported
[27]. Ct-piwi1 expression corresponds with regions of
dividing cells in C. teleta larvae, including in the foregut
and posterior growth zone in stage 7 larvae (Figure 4A,
B, D). However, there are also EdU positive cells that
lack Ct-piwi1 expression, and there are Ct-piwi1 positive
cells that do not appear to be EdU positive (Figure 4A,
B, C, arrows). For example, the putative PGCs are not
EdU positive, consistent with our observations that the
number of cells does not appear to increase during larval stages. Therefore, there is only partial overlap of
these two patterns.
Expression of Ct-piwi2 was also characterized during
embryonic and larval development. Ct-piwi2 expression
patterns overlap with those of Ct-piwi1 throughout early
cleavage stage embryos (data not shown), and larval
stages 5 to 7 (Figure 5). At stage 5, Ct-piwi2 is detected
in the brain, presumptive foregut and in the mesodermal
bands (Figure 5A). At stage 6, brain and mesodermal
band expression begins to fade, while foregut and posterior growth zone expression persists (Figure 5B). Ctpiwi2 is also expressed in the PGCs at this stage (Figure
5B, arrows). Expression in the segmental trunk continues to diminish during stage 7; however, expression is
still evident in the foregut, posterior growth zone, and

Page 7 of 18

Figure 4 Pattern of Ct-piwi1 expression and EdU incorporation
in a stage 7 larva. Larva were exposed to EdU for one hour. All
images are from the same animal and same focal plane. All panels
are a ventral view with anterior to the left. Abbreviations: fg,
foregut; pgz, posterior growth zone. (A) DIC image of a stage 7
larva showing Ct-piwi1 expression in the foregut, posterior growth
zone, and two asymmetrically positioned ventro-lateral cell clusters
(black arrows). (B) Fluorescently tagged EdU labeling (green) shows
regions of dividing cells in the foregut, and posterior growth zone.
Note the absence of dividing cells in the Ct-piwi1-expressing
asymmetrically positioned ventro-lateral cell clusters (white arrows).
(C) A close-up view of the Ct-piwi1 positive asymmetrically
positioned ventro-lateral cell clusters (white arrows) from panel (B).
(D) Combined DIC and fluorescent images in the region of the
posterior growth zone showing co-localization of Ct-piwi1
expression with EdU incorporation. Scale bar, 50 μm for all panels.

ventro-lateral cell clusters (Figure 5C, arrows). The
expression of Ct-piwi2 and and Ct-piwi1 in the ventrolateral cell clusters are also similar to each other at late
larval stages when the clusters are localized to the midline (data not shown). Ct-piwi2 expression also overlaps
with that of Ct-piwi1 in adults (see below), and is
observed in the PGCs, genital ducts, immature oocytes,
and posterior growth zone (data not shown). Although
there may be minor differences in expression of Ctpiwi1 and Ct-piwi2, the expression patterns are largely
similar during the stages examined, thus we did not
further characterize expression of Ct-piwi2.
Ct-piwi1 expression in juveniles

Ct-piwi1 expression was observed in distinct domains in
one week post-metamorphic juvenile worms (Figure 6A,
B). Within the thoracic region of both males and
females (segments 1 to 9), there is expression in a discrete structure of approximately 25 cells that is localized

Figure 5 Ct-piwi2 expression during larval development. All
animals are a ventral view with anterior to the left. Abbreviations:
br, brain; fg, foregut; mb, mesodermal bands; pgz, posterior growth
zone. (A) Stage 5 larva showing Ct-piwi2 expression in the brain,
foregut, and mesodermal bands. (B) Stage 6 larva shows expression
in the two asymmetrical ventro-lateral cell clusters (arrows), brain,
foregut, mesodermal bands, and posterior growth zone. (C)
Expression is in the two asymmetrical ventro-lateral cell clusters
(arrows), foregut, and posterior growth zone an early stage 7 larva.
Expression in the brain and mesodermal segments has diminished
at this stage. Scale bar, 50 μm for all panels.

Giani et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:10
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/10

within the coelomic cavity to the ventral midline of segment 5, usually extending into segment 6 (Figure 6C, D,
arrows). We think these cells are PGCs. Males and
females also express Ct-piwi1 in the posterior growth
zone (Figure 6E, F). In addition, males have Ct-piwi1expressing cells in a pair of cell clusters positioned at
the junction between segments 7 and 8 (Figure 6C). In
some animals, a second cluster was also apparent at the
junction between and segments 8 and 9. These clusters
are in a ventro-lateral position in the coelomic cavity,
and based on their location, they are likely to be male
gamete precursors. At this stage, the ovaries of the
female have not yet developed, and there is only expression in the PGCs and posterior growth zone in females
(Figure 6B, D, F).
In two-week post-metamorphic juvenile worms, Ctpiwi1 expression domains are similar to those observed
in one week post-metamorphic juvenile worms. The
appearance of ovaries within the females is the biggest
difference between the two stages. The ovaries appear
as paired ventral structures adjacent to the lateral edges
of the intestine, and at this stage primarily contain previtellogenic oocytes. The most anterior segment that
contains ovaries is the 10th segment (Figure 7B), posterior to the thoracic region, and at this stage the ovaries
span many segments. Ct-piwi1 is expressed in immature
oocytes within the ovaries of females (Figure 7B, D),
and is not detected within mid-body abdominal segments of males (Figure 7C). In males, Ct-piwi1-expressing cells are present in two pairs of ventro-lateral cell

Figure 6 Ct-piwi1 expression patterns in one week postmetamorphic juveniles. All panels are ventral views with anterior
to the left. Abbreviations: mgp, male gamete precursor; pgz,
posterior growth zone. Dotted lines in C and D indicate the
segment boundaries of the 5th and 6th segments. (A) Male juvenile
worm. (B) Female juvenile worm. (C) In a male juvenile, Ct-piwi1
expression is in the PGCs in the fifth and sixth segments (arrow),
and bilaterally symmetrical male gamete precursors at the boundary
of the seventh and eighth segments. (D) In female juveniles,
expression is in the PGCs in the fifth and sixth segments (arrow). (E,
F) A close-up views of expression in the posterior growth zone in a
male (E) and female (F) juvenile. Scale bar, 50 μm for all panels
except A and B, which are 100 μm.

Page 8 of 18

clusters positioned at the boundaries between segments
7 and 8 and segments 8 and 9 (Figure 7A). The structure containing the putative PGCs is larger in area and
more elongated compared to the structure in one-week
post-metamorphic juveniles, and now contains approximately 50 cells, within segments 5 to 6 (Figure 7A, B,
arrows). The posterior growth zone of males and
females maintains strong Ct-piwi1 expression, which is
most prominent in the mesoderm (Figure 7E, F). Anterior to the posterior growth zone in females, there are
segmentally repeated, paired ventral cell clusters
between the ventral nerve cord and gut that express Ctpiwi1 (Figure 7F). These clusters are positioned along
the anterior face of the septa at the segmental boundary. We hypothesize that these cell clusters are female
germline precursors that will colonize the future ovaries
once these segments mature and ovaries form within
them. In approximately one-third to one-half of the
two-week juveniles (n = 13/30), we also observed Ctpiwi1 expression in cells scattered in the trunk within
the coelomic cavity (not shown). These cells have a
large nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio, lack obvious signs of
morphological differentiation, and their position is
highly variable within the coelomic cavity among individuals. We rarely saw these cells in one-week juveniles
and reproductive adults.
Ct-piwi1 adult expression patterns

Expression of Ct-piwi1 was also examined in reproductive adult worms eight weeks post-metamorphosis. The
overall expression pattern in adults is similar to that of
two-week post-metamorphic juvenile worms. Within the
thoracic region (segments 1 to 9) of males and females,
Ct-piwi1 expression persists in the putative PGCs localized to segment 5. This structure has continued to
enlarge and at this stage contains over 75 Ct-piwi1expressing cells, typically extending into segment 6 (Figure 8A, B, E, arrows).
Ct-piwi1 is also expressed in the gonads. Adult
females express Ct-piwi1 in the ovaries in the abdominal
segments (Figure 8B, D, F, G). Each ovary contains
oocytes at different stages of development [28]. Ct-piwi1
is only detected in the medial immature oocytes and not
in the large, laterally-positioned mature oocytes within
each ovary (Figure 8F, G). Immature oocyte expression
is present in many mid-body abdominal segments as
clusters of cells adjacent to the ventral midline (Figure
8D). Males express Ct-piwi1 in the symmetrical ventrolateral genital ducts spanning the boundary between segments 7 and 8 (Figure 8A), but there is no detectable
expression within the mid-body abdominal segments
(Figure 8C). Male and female adults also maintain
strong Ct-piwi1 expression in the posterior growth zone
(data not shown).

Giani et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:10
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/10

Page 9 of 18

Figure 7 Ct-piwi1 expression patterns in two-week post-metamorphic juveniles. All panels are ventral views with anterior to the left.
Abbreviations: mgp, male gamete precursor; io, immature oocytes; pgz, posterior growth zone; fgp, female germline precursors. Dotted lines in
A and B indicate the segment boundaries of the fifth and sixth segments. Black solid lines in A and B indicate the thoracic abdominal
boundary. (A) In a male juvenile, Ct-piwi1 expression is in the PGCs in the fifth and sixth segments (arrow), and in bilaterally symmetrical male
gamete precursors at the boundaries of the seventh and eighth segment and eighth and ninth segment. (B) In a female juvenile, expression is
in the PGCs (arrow) and immature oocytes in the ovaries, which begin at the 10th segment (the first abdominal segment). (C) Male juvenile
displaying lack of expression in abdominal segments. (D) Female juvenile showing Ct-piwi1 expression in immature oocytes in abdominal
segments. (E) Expression in the posterior growth zone of a male juvenile. (F) In a female juvenile, expression is in female germline precursors
and the posterior growth zone. Scale bar, 50 μm for all panels.

Ct-piwi1 expression during regeneration

Amputations were made on adult female worms at the
segment boundary between the 11th and 12th segments,
and Ct-piwi1 expression was monitored at different time
points during the course of regeneration. A schematic
shows the location of the cut site at the 12th segment
(Figure 9A, dotted line). At all stages examined, expression of Ct-piwi1 is maintained in the pre-existing tissue
in the gonads and putative PGCs during regeneration.

Following amputation, wound healing occurs within
four hours post-amputation (Figure 9B). At one day
post-amputation, the wound has fully healed; Ct-piwi1 is
not expressed in the blastema at this point or during
wound healing (Figure 9B, C). The earliest Ct-piwi1
expression is detectable in the regenerating tissue at
three days post-amputation, during growth of the blastema and prior to the appearance of segments (Figure
9D, arrows). Expression is present in both the

Giani et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:10
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/10

Page 10 of 18

Figure 8 Adult expression patterns of Ct-piwi1. All panels are a ventral view with anterior to the left. Abbreviations: gd, genital duct; io,
immature oocytes; mo, mature oocytes. Dotted lines in A and B indicate the segment boundaries of the fifth and sixth segments. Black solid
lines in A and B indicate the boundary between the thorax and abdomen. (A) Ct-piwi1 expression in the PGCs in the fifth and sixth segments of
a male (arrow) and bilaterally symmetrical genital ducts spanning the boundary of the seventh and eighth segment. (B) Adult hermaphrodite
with expression in the PGCs in the fifth and sixth segments (arrow). Oocyte expression is visible in the ovaries in the 10th segment. (C)
Expression is not detected within abdominal segments of adult males. (D) Enlarged view of female showing expression in immature oocytes of
abdominal segments. (E) Close-up view of Ct-piwi1-expressing PGCs (arrows) from panel A. (F) Adult female with Ct-piwi1 expression in immature
oocytes located in the medial region of the ovary. Note the lack of expression in the large mature oocytes. (G) Close-up view of expression in
immature oocytes within a single abdominal segment. Scale bar, 50 μm for all panels.

mesoderm and ectoderm, and is more pronounced on
the ventral side of the blastema. As the blastema continues to grow (four to six days post-amputation), Ctpiwi1 expression persists in the regenerating tissue and
is most prominent in the ventral mesoderm (Figure 9E,
F, G, arrows). At these stages, it becomes clear that Ctpiwi1 is present in the proximal and mid-portion of the
regenerate, but is absent from the most posterior end.
At later stages of regeneration, Ct-piwi1 expression
becomes more restricted. In 10 through 18 days post-

amputation, there is a morphologically distinct pygidium
and posterior growth zone. During these stages, Ctpiwi1 is consistently expressed in the posterior growth
zone of the regenerating tissue (Figure 10A-C), and at
10 days post-amputation, it is the most prominent
expression domain. At 14 days post-amputation, segments become apparent externally and additional
expression domains appear, including in a loosely organized group of cells anterior to the posterior growth
zone in the ventro-lateral region of the coelomic cavity

Giani et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:10
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/10

Page 11 of 18

Figure 9 Ct-piwi1 expression during early stages of adult regeneration. All animals are female and were amputated at the 12th segment. All
panels shown are posterior ends of amputated adults. All panels are oriented in a ventral view with anterior to the left. Dotted lines indicate the
cut site in all panels. Expression in immature oocytes of the pre-existing tissue is abbreviated: io. Dark shapes in C and E are contents within the
lumen of the gut. (A) Schematic of an adult worm indicating the cut site at the 12th segment. (B) Posterior end of an adult four hours postamputation. (C) One day post-amputation showing complete wound healing. (D) Three days post-amputation shows Ct-piwi1 expression in the
regenerating blastema (arrows). (E) Four days post-amputation showing expression in the blastema (arrows). (F) Expression is in the blastema five
days post-amputation (arrows). (G) Six days post-amputation with expression in the anterior and mid-region of the blastema (arrows). Scale bar,
50 μm for all panels.

Giani et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:10
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/10

Page 12 of 18

Figure 10 Expression of Ct-piwi1 in late stage adult regenerates. All animals are female and were amputated at the 12th segment. All
panels shown are posterior ends of amputated adults. All panels are oriented in a ventral view with anterior to the left. Abbreviations: io,
immature oocytes; pgz, posterior growth zone; po, putative oocytes. Dotted lines indicate the cut site in all panels. Dark shapes in A and C are
contents within the lumen of the gut. (A) At 10 days post-amputation, expression is in the posterior growth zone of the regenerating tissue. (B)
14 days post-amputation showing expression in putative oocytes, the posterior growth zone and loosely organized cells within the coelomic
cavity (arrows). (C) Expression in 18 days post-amputation is in immature oocytes in regenerating ovaries, putative oocytes, cells within the
coelomic cavity (arrows), and the posterior growth zone. Scale bar, 50 μm for all panels.

(Figure 10B, arrows). In addition, in the anterior segments of the regenerating animals, there is expression
associated with the ventral face of the gut in the mesoderm; this domain corresponds to the position where
the ovaries will form. We interpret these piwi-expressing
cells to be oogonia. Approximately 20 segments have
regenerated by 18 days post-amputation. At this stage,
ovaries have begun to form in the anterior segments of
the regenerate, and they contain piwi-expressing immature oocytes (Figure 10C). In the middle segments of
the regenerate, Ct-piwi1 is expressed in a pattern very
similar to that observed in anterior regenerating segments of 10-day post-amputation adults, in putative
oogonia. Expression is also evident in loosely organized
cells anterior to the posterior growth zone in the coelomic cavity (Figure 10C, arrows). Similar amputations
were also performed on adult males, and there were no
detectable differences in Ct-piwi1 expression between
males and females within the regenerating tissue from
zero to ten days post-amputation (not shown).

Moreover, between 14 and 18 days post-amputation,
both males and females exhibit similar expression in the
posterior growth zone and in a population of loosely
organized cells anterior of the posterior growth zone. In
summary, there are two distinct phases of Ct-piwi1
expression during regeneration: an early phase in a
broad domain during blastemal growth, and a later
phase of more restricted expression in the posterior
growth zone, regenerating ovaries (of females and hermaphrodites), and in a localized population of loosely
organized cells in the coelomic cavity.

Discussion
Expression of piwi in germline and somatic tissues of C.
teleta

Ct-piwi1 and Ct-piwi2 are expressed throughout the life
history of C. teleta in a dynamic spatial pattern that
includes both somatic and germline cells. The two genes
show very similar expression patterns to each other.
Both genes are broadly expressed during embryonic and

Giani et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:10
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/10

early larval development, and gradually become
restricted to the posterior growth zone, putative PGCs,
and gonads during juvenile and adult stages. In larval
stages, the position of the putative PGCs that express
Ct-piwi1 and Ct-piwi2 closely corresponds with the
position of cell cluster descendants of the blastomere 4d
[9]. Thus, it is likely that the PGCs arise from 4d in C.
teleta. By examining Ct-piwi1 expression at several juvenile stages, we were able to characterize the gradual
expansion of the putative PGCs from a small cluster of
approximately 4 to 10 cells in late stage larvae to a cluster of over 75 cells in the reproductive adult. The localization of a putative PGC population to a structure
located in segment 5 of juveniles may serve as a transient intermediate target for PGCs or a PGC niche prior
to adult gonad formation. In many animals, PGCs form
far from the gonads and migrate to the sites of developing ovaries or testes in the embryo [29]. Migration of
PGCs has also been reported in a few polychaetes
[11,23]. We hypothesize that in older juveniles of C. teleta, some of the PGCs migrate from this niche to the
gonads in segments 7 and 8 of males and to the reproductive abdominal segments in females. Our observation
of scattered Ct-piwi1 expressing cells in the coelomic
cavity of juveniles at a stage when the gonads begin to
form (two weeks post-metamorphosis) is consistent with
this hypothesis.
Localization of putative PGCs in C. teleta adult worms

A surprising result from our characterization of Ct-piwi
gene expression patterns, and also from previous analyses of vasa and nanos gene orthologs in C. teleta [24]
is the identification of a population of putative PGCs
that persist in sexually mature adults, even after the
gonads have formed and contain mature gametes. These
putative PGCs are encased by a thin sheath of cells and
suspended by mesenteries on the ventral side of the coelomic cavity, spanning segment 5 and partially into segment 6. This structure was not previously identified by
TEM/morphological studies. In contrast to many segmentally-repeated features in the mid-body, this cluster
of putative PGCs is present as a single structure. A similar structure called the ‘primary gonad’ has been
described in P. dumerilii [23]; however, because we did
not observe any steps of gametogenesis in this structure,
we do not adopt the term ‘gonad’. Instead, our observations are more consistent with referring to this structure
as a PGC niche. This niche appears to be a permanent
structure that provides a source of new PGCs throughout the animal’s life, and it is located separate from the
gonads. Although the biological significance of maintaining such a population of PGCs in mature adults is
currently unknown, there are several features of the
reproductive biology of C. teleta that may require a

Page 13 of 18

persistent stock of PGCs. Both males and females can
reproduce multiple times and these PGCs may re-populate the gonads to ensure the propagation of multiple
generations. Additionally, since ovaries can reform following amputation of abdominal segments, cells from
this PGC population may colonize the regenerating
ovaries. Furthermore, since sexually mature males can
be environmentally induced to produce oocytes as hermaphrodites [6], maintaining a reservoir of PGCs may
permit such phenotypic plasticity of the sexes and provide a source of germ cells to populate newly forming
ovaries. Thus, this system provides a good opportunity
to study the epigenetic control of gamete determination
and phenotypic differentiation.
Origin of the germline during regeneration in C. teleta

The origin of the oocytes that populate regenerating
ovaries following amputation in C. teleta is currently
unknown. As previously hypothesized, oocyte precursors
may originate from a resident PGC population in segment 5 (pre-existing tissue), and migrate in a posterior
direction through numerous segments to nascent ovaries
within the regenerating tissue [24]. This strategy would
provide a rapid supply of germ cell precursors to the
body of the regenerating worm. However, our examination of Ct-piwi1 expression during regeneration has led
us to consider an alternate explanation, and is based on
the observation that Ct-piwi-positive cells appear de
novo in the coelomic cavity of regenerating segments
when the ovaries begin to form (14 to 18 days postamputation) (Figure 10B, C). In this scenario, oocytes
may originate from multipotent stem cells within the
regenerating tissue that later acquire a germ cell identity. We suggest that these germ cells arise from the lining of the coelomic cavities. Such a scenario is
consistent with an epigenetic mode of PGC specification
in which, following amputation, a signalling event
induces somatic stem cells to produce germ cells that
then differentiate into oocytes. If this were true, it
would indicate that C. teleta has the ability to replace
lost germ cells, and contrasts with the situation in the
model organisms D. melanogaster, Caenorhabitis elegans, Danio rerio, and mice in which ablation of the
germline results in sterile animals [13,14,16].
Since many model systems have a fully segregated
germline and lack regenerative capabilities, detailed studies of these animals may have disproportionately influenced our views concerning the segregation of the
germline from the soma. Multipotent stem cells in some
bilaterian animals retain the ability to generate germline
cells [3]. Under normal circumstances in such animals,
PGCs are segregated from somatic tissues during early
development and are responsible for generating all
gametes. In altered conditions, such as during

Giani et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:10
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/10

regeneration or when PGCs are experimentally removed,
multipotent stem cells in somatic tissue may compensate and produce gametes. For example, during normal
development in the ascidian Ciona intestinalis, germ
cells in the tailbud of the tadpole stage are absorbed
during metamorphosis and persist as PGCs in the young
juvenile. However, upon removal of the larval tail prior
to metamorphosis, PGCs from another source appear in
the gonad rudiment at a later stage [30]. Following
removal of vasa-expressing micromeres in the embryo
of the sea urchin Strongylocentrotus purpuratus, an
accumulation of Vasa protein is induced in other cells
that presumably give rise to functional PGCs [31].
These observations indicate the presence of a compensatory mechanism to produce PGCs from somatic stem
cells in the absence of the original germ cells.
Although piwi is best known for its role in the germline, there are a growing number of cases in which
expression has also been reported outside the gonads
and the germline, often in multipotent stem cells.
Examples include not only early branching metazoans
such as sponges [32,33], hydrozoan cnidarians [21] and
ctenophores [20], but also bilaterians such as acoel flatworms [34], planarians [35,36], tunicates [30], and
another polychaete annelid [23]. Our observations of
Ct-piwi1 and Ct-piwi2 expression in both the germline
and in regions of dividing cells in the posterior growth
zone add another example to this list. Recently, piwi
and vasa genes have been proposed to be ancestrally
associated with stem cell character (’stemness’), rather
than solely with germline stem cells [20]. In animal
lineages such as in the mussel Mytilus galloprovincialis,
in which there is restricted expression vasa in the germline [37], there could have been a partial or complete
loss of expression of this gene from somatic stem cell
lineages. In C. teleta, vasa, nanos and piwi orthologs are
all expressed in very similar patterns to one another in
both the germline and posterior growth zone, likely in
multipotent stem cells.
Comparison of piwi expression patterns and PGC
migration among annelids

The patterns of Ct-piwi1 and Ct-piwi2 expression in C.
teleta show both similarities and differences when compared to piwi expression in the two other annelids that
have been examined. In both C. teleta and the polychaete P. dumerilii, piwi is detected in PGCs and the
posterior growth zone in larval and juvenile stages [23].
In C. teleta larvae, the PGCs intitially appear several
segments anterior to the posterior growth zone, in the
mid-trunk segments. In P. dumerilii, although the PGCs
arise from the mesoderm in the posterior growth zone,
at the end of larval development and in juvenile stages,
the PGCs migrate anteriorly, and following generation

Page 14 of 18

of additional segments, to the primary gonad. It has
been proposed that the primary gonad serves as an
intermediate residence for PGCs in P. dumerilii [23].
Interestingly, juveniles of both polychaetes express piwi
in a population of PGCs in segment 5, the location of
the primary gonad in P. dumerilii. However, there is an
important distinction between these two structures at
this location. The PGC population in C. teleta is positioned on the ventral side of the coelomic cavity,
whereas in P. dumerilii, it is on the dorsal side of the
body in a circumferential band. In contrast to C. teleta,
there are no somatic gonads in P. dumerili. Instead,
oocytes mature within the coelomic cavity, initially as
clusters and later singly as individual oocytes [28,38,39].
As P. dumerili juveniles mature, PGCs migrate from the
primary gonad to the base of the segmentally iterated
parapodia in both males and females, where gonial clusters later appear.
Piwi expression has also been described in the oligochaete E. japonesis. This species normally reproduces
asexually and can be induced to undergo sexual reproduction under starvation conditions. In the asexual
phase, Ej-piwi is expressed in cells distributed throughout the body. During starvation conditions, gonads form
in the seventh and eighth segments and Ej-piwi is
expressed in the developing gonads [22], similar to
gonad expression in reproductive adults of C. teleta.
During regeneration, piwi expression patterns are distinct between E. japonesis and C. teleta. In C. teleta,
piwi is expressed during blastemal growth, and later, in
a more restricted pattern following differentiation in the
regenerating segments. This later phase includes piwiexpressing cells in the nascent ovaries of the regenerated
tissue. In contrast, expression is not detected within the
blastema during early stages of regeneration in E. japonensis. Instead, following amputation, discrete piwiexpressing cells localize to the region of the amputation
site, proximal to the blastema. Later, as regenerating tissues begin to differentiate and segments form in E.
japonesis, piwi-expressing cells appear in the regenerate
and eventually become localized to the sites of the forming gonads. In summary, although there are clear species-specific differences in reproductive anatomy and
morphogenesis, it appears that in annelids there is conservation of piwi expression in the primordial germ
cells, developing gametes, and posterior growth zone.

Conclusions
The expression of Ct-piwi1 and Ct-piwi2 in both the
germline and regions of dividing cells in the posterior
growth zone provides a molecular link between germline
stem cells and pluripotent somatic stem cells in C. teleta. Furthermore, the similarity in expression of Ctpiwi1 to the expression patterns previously observed for

Giani et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:10
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/10

vasa and nanos homologs in C. teleta [24], suggests that
this core set of stem cell regulators has retained an
ancestral role in somatic and germline stem cell production. Such a dual role may reflect an ancestral metazoan
feature in which there was a close link between somatic
and germline stem cells, and contrasts with the segregation of the germline in animals such as D. melanogaster
[40], C. elegans [41] and D. rerio [42].

Materials and methods
Cloning of Capitella teleta piwi1 and piwi2 genes

Several overlapping expressed sequence tag (EST)
sequences representing a single piwi1 homolog (Ctpiwi1) and another set representing a single piwi2
homolog (Ct-piwi2) were identified in BLAST searches
of Capitella EST libraries from the C. teleta 8x genome
sequencing project (Joint Genome Institute, Department
of Energy, Walnut Creek, CA, USA, http://genome.jgipsf.org/Capca1/Capca1.home.html). Each set of
sequences was aligned and compiled into a single predicted transcript for each gene. EST clones containing
both Ct-piwi1 and Ct-piwi2 fragments from a mixed
stage plasmid cDNA library were streaked on LB-ampicillin plates from -80°C glycerol stocks. Both Ct-piwi
clones were checked for correct insert sizes, and
sequenced for verification (Macrogen, Seoul, South
Korea). The predicted transcripts were submitted to the
National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI)
as third-party annotation sequences with the following
accession numbers: Ct-piwi1 (BK007975) and Ct-piwi2
(BK007976). The Ct-piwi1 riboprobe is approximately
1.5 kb and spans nearly the entire conserved PIWI
domain, which consists of about 900 bp. The Ct-piwi2
riboprobe is 920 bp and includes the 3’ end of the PIWI
domain as well as 3’ untranslated region. The two
probes overlap by about 300 bp and have a sequence
similarity in this region of 64%.
Sequence alignments and phylogenetic analysis

tBLASTn searches of the C. teleta genome were conducted to find all homologs of D. melanogaster Piwi
(NCBI accession number NP_476875.1). Two putative
orthologs were found in the C. teleta genome corresponding to JGI protein IDs 154759 and 163584. Two
additional sequence hits were examined and did not
include the PAZ domain characteristic of Piwi proteins
and were not included in further analyses.
Amino acid sequences for related proteins across a
broad diversity of animal taxa were downloaded from
the protein database in GenBank. Additional lophotrochozoan sequences were obtained from the genomes of
Lottia gigantea and Helobdella robusta (Joint Genome
Institute, Department of Energy, Walnut Creek, CA,
USA, http://genome.jgi-psf.org/). The conserved PAZ

Page 15 of 18

(Piwi Argonaut Zwille) and PIWI domains were identified by a Pfam search using default parameters. Only
the PIWI domain was used to create an amino acid
sequence alignment due to the high divergence rates of
the PAZ domain. The 327 amino acid alignment was
created with ClustalX using default parameters in MacVector v11.0 and hand corrected for obvious alignment
errors.
ProtTest v2.4 [43] was used to determine the appropriate model of protein evolution. The RtRev model was
recommended and used for both Bayesian and maximum likelihood analyses. Bayesian analysis was conducted with MrBayes v3.1.2 [44] A total of 3,000,000
generations were run, sampled every 100 generations,
with four independent runs and four chains. Once convergence was reached, a majority rule consensus tree
was generated with burnin of 8,100 trees. Maximum
likelihood analysis was performed with PhyML 3.0 [45]
using the RtRev model with 1,000 bootstrap replicates.
Trees were visualized in FigTree 1.3.1 [46] and drawn
using Adobe Illustrator version CS4. GenBank and
Swiss-Prot accession numbers and protein identification
numbers from JGI are listed (Additional file 1). The
nexus alignment is available upon request.
Animal husbandry

A C. teleta colony was maintained in the laboratory at
19°C according to published culture methods [47]. Juvenile and adult worms were maintained in bowls of 20μm filtered sea water (FSW) and provided with sieved
ocean mud as a food source. Parental brood tubes were
recovered by sifting mud through a fine-mesh sieve.
Embryos and larvae were dissected from brood tubes
and raised to the desired stage.
Amputations

Regeneration experiments were performed on mature
adults at eight weeks post-metamorphosis. Adults are
sexually mature at 8 to 10 weeks when raised at 19°C.
Animals were removed from the mud and placed in a
dish of FSW for two hours to allow them to excrete
ingested material. Animals were then relaxed for 20
minutes in 0.37 M MgCl2. Individual worms were placed
on a strip of dental wax (Electron Microscopy Sciences,
Hatfield, PA, USA) in one to three drops of FSW. With
the aid of a dissecting microscope (Zeiss, Gottingen,
Germany), all amputations were made at the anterior
edge of the 12th segment using a microsurgery scalpel
(#715, Feather Safety Razor Co., Osaka, Japan). Posterior
tissue segments were discarded. Following amputation,
animals were returned to a separate 35 mm or 60 mm
dish with FSW and left overnight. After 24 hours, mud
was added to the dish and animals were maintained at
19°C. Specimens were periodically removed from the

Giani et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:10
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/10

mud to monitor regeneration. Animals were fixed at different time points following amputation in 3.7% formaldehyde in FSW at 4°C for 16 to 24 h and then
processed either for morphological analysis, immunohistochemistry or whole-mount in situ hybridization (see
below).
Whole-mount in situ hybridization

Embryos (stages 1 to 3) were pretreated in a 1:1 mixture
of 1.0 M sucrose and 0.25 M sodium citrate (SigmaAldrich Co., St. Louis, MO, USA) for three minutes,
washed in FSW, and fixed in 3.7% formaldehyde in FSW
overnight at 4°C. Larvae (stages 4 to 9), juveniles (one
and two weeks post-metamorphosis), adults and amputated adults (eight weeks post-metamorphosis) were
relaxed in 1:1 0.37 M MgCl 2:FSW for 10 minutes and
fixed in 3.7% formaldehyde/FSW overnight at 4°C.
Embryos, larvae, juveniles and adults were then washed
in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), dehydrated in
methanol and stored at -20°C. Whole-mount in situ
hybridization followed published protocols [48,49]. Juveniles and adults were treated with the same conditions
as embryos and larvae with the exception that proteinase K treatment was increased from 5 minutes to 10
minutes for juveniles and to 20 minutes for adults and
amputated adults. In addition, for juvenile, adult and
amputated adult stage experiments, the volume of all
washes and hybridizations was increased from 0.5 to 1
ml. Digoxigenin-labeled riboprobes for Ct-piwi1 and Ctpiwi2 were generated with the MEGAscript kit
(Ambion, Inc., Austin, TX, USA). For embryos, larvae,
and one-week post-metamorphic juveniles, the Ct-piwi1
and Ct-piwi2 probe concentration was 1.0 ng/μl. For
two-week post-metamorphic juveniles and adults, Ctpiwi1 and Ct-piwi2 were used at a concentration of 0.5
ng/μl. Following hybridization, probes were detected
using nitroblue tetrazolium chloride/5-bromo-4chloro3indolyphosphate (NBT/BCIP) color substrate. Typically,
the color reaction was allowed to develop between one
hour and three days; however, in uncleaved zygotes,
two-cell and four-cell stage embryos a reaction between
6 and 11 days was necessary to detect transcripts. Specimens were equilibrated in glycerol (80% glycerol/10%
10x PBS/10% diH2O) and mounted on Rainex®-coated
slides.
Microscopy

Microscopic analyses were performed on a Zeiss Axioskop 2 compound light microscope (Zeiss, Gottingen,
Germany). Micrographs were captured with a stemmounted SpotFlex digital camera (Diagnostic Instruments, Inc., Sterling Heights, MI, USA). Multiple DIC
focal planes were merged for some images using Helicon Focus (Helicon Soft Ltd., Kharkov, Ukraine).

Page 16 of 18

Confocal imaging was done using a Zeiss LSM 710 confocal microscope and Z-stack projections were generated
using the ImageJ software (NIH).
EdU labeling

To detect dividing cells, the Click-iT EdU imaging kit
was used to label cells undergoing DNA synthesis (Invitrogen Co., Carlsbad, CA, USA). The kit protocol was
followed except for the following modifications. Stage 5
to 7 larvae were incubated for one hour in 300 μM 5ethynyl-2’-deoxyuridine (EdU) in FSW (10 mM working
stock diluted in PBS), and then fixed overnight at 4°C,
dehydrated in methanol. In situ hybridization experiments were performed according to the methods
described above. Following the NBT/BCIP probe detection step, animals were washed in the following: 2X in
PBS, 1X in PBS + 0.5% Triton for 20 minutes, and 2X
in PBS + 3% BSA for 5 minutes each. Subsequently, the
EdU detection reaction was carried out, but reduced to
a total volume of 200 μl. Animals were rinsed several
times with PBS, equilibrated in 80% glycerol, and analyzed and imaged following the methods for in situ
hybridization described above.
Immunohistochemistry

Following fixation, regenerating adults were rinsed in
PBS + 0.5% Triton, and permealibilized by incubation
with 0.01 mg/ml proteinase K (Invitrogen) for 20 minutes. Specimens were then re-fixed for 20 minutes in 4%
paraformaldehyde in PBS. Following 3X washes in PBS
over 10 minutes and 2X washes in PBS + 0.5% Triton,
animals were blocked for 2 hours at room temperature
in PBS + 0.5% Triton + 10% normal goat serum
(Sigma). Animals were incubated overnight at 4°C in a
1:400 dilution of anti-acetylated tubulin antibody
(Sigma) followed by several washes in PBS + 0.5% Triton, and incubation in a 1:400 dilution of anti-mouse
Alexa Fluor 488 secondary antibody (Invitrogen) overnight at 4°C. After washing out the secondary antibody
for three hours at room temperature in PBS + 0.5% Triton, animals were cleared overnight in 80% glycerol and
analyzed and imaged as described above.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Accessions. This file includes a table of the GenBank
and Swiss-Prot accession numbers used for sequence alignments and
phylogenetic analysis. Also included are Joint Genome Institute protein
identification numbers for sequences from the genomes of C. teleta, L.
gigantea, and H. robusta.

Abbreviations
BCIP: 5-Bromo-4-cloro-3-indolyl phosphate; BLAST: basic local alignment
search tool; BSA: bovine serum albumin; DIC: differential interference

Giani et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:10
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/10

contrast; EST: expressed sequence tag; FSW: filtered sea water; JGI: Joint
Genome Institute; NBT: nitro blue tetrazolium chloride; NCBI: National Center
for Biotechnology Information; PAZ: Piwi Argonaut Zwille; PBS: phosphate
buffered saline
Acknowledgements
We thank Dr. Néva Meyer for confocal imaging and generation of Z-stack
projection, and the following members of the Seaver lab for their continued
support of this project: Dr. Néva Meyer, Dr. Aldine Amiel, and Tyler Smith.
This work was supported by the National Science Foundation (REU
Supplement of 10B05-44869 to E.C.S.).
Author details
1
Kewalo Marine Laboratory, PBRC/University of Hawaii, 41 Ahui St., Honolulu,
HI 96813, USA. 2Smithsonian Marine Station, 701 Seaway Drive, Fort Pierce,
FL 34949, USA.
Authors’ contributions
VCG performed in situ hybridization experiments, EdU experiments,
microscopic analyses and imaging, figure preparation and contributed to
writing of the manuscript. ECS carried out immunohistochemistry,
contributed to imaging, critical analyses of the data, writing of the
manuscript, and designed the study. EY carried out gene orthology analyses,
contributed to generation of the Ct-piwi2 riboprobe and writing of the
manuscript. MJB contributed to synthesis of the Ct-piwi1 riboprobe,
amputation methods, in situ hybridization, gene expression analyses and
imaging. All authors contributed to editing of the manuscript and all
authors read and approved this manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 22 December 2010 Accepted: 5 May 2011
Published: 5 May 2011
References
1. Yuan H, Yamashita YM: Germline stem cells: stems of the next
generation. Curr Opin Cell Biol 2010, 22:730-736.
2. Extavour CG, Akam M: Mechanisms of germ cell specification across the
metazoans: epigenesis and preformation. Development 2003,
130:5869-5884.
3. Extavour C: Evolution of the bilaterian germ line: lineage origin and
modulation of specification mechanisms. Integr Comp Biol 2007,
47:770-785.
4. Bely AE: Distribution of segment regeneration ability in the Annelida.
Integr Comp Biol 2006, 46:508-518.
5. Blake JA, Grassle JP, Eckelbarger KJ: Capitella teleta a new species
designation for the opportunistic and experimental Capitella sp. I with a
review of the literature for confirmed records. Zoosymposia 2009, 2:25-53.
6. Holbrook MJL, Grassle JP: The effect of low density on the development
of simultaneous hermaphroditism in male Capitella species I
(Polychaeta). Biol Bull 1984, 166:103-109.
7. Eckelbarger KJ, Grassle JP: Ultrastructural differences in the eggs and
ovarian follicle cells of the Capitella (Polychaeta) sibling species. Biol Bull
1983, 165:379-393.
8. Eckelbarger KJ, Grassle JP: Spermatogenesis, sperm storage and
comparative sperm morphology in nine species of Capitella,
Capitomastus and Capitellides (Polychaeta: Capitellidae). Mar Biol 1987,
95:415-429.
9. Meyer NP, Boyle MJ, Martindale MQ, Seaver EC: A comprehensive fate
map by intracellular injection of identified blastomeres in the marine
polychaete Capitella teleta. Evo Devo 2010, 1:8.
10. Schroeder PC, Hermans CO: In Annelidia: Polychaeta. Reproduction of Marine
Invertebrates. Volume III. Edited by: Giese AC, Pearce JS. New York: Academic
Press; 1975:1-213.
11. Postwald HE: Abdominal segment formation in Spirorbis moerchi
(Polychaeta). Zoomorphology 1981, 97:225-245.
12. Saito K, Nishida KM, Mori T, Kawamura Y, Miyoshi K, Nagami T, Siomi H,
Siomi MC: Specific association of Piwi with rasiRNAs derived from
retrotransposon and heterochromatic regions in the Drosophila genome.
Genes Dev 2006, 20:2214-2222.

Page 17 of 18

13. Seto AG, Kingston RE, Lau NC: The coming of age for Piwi proteins. Mol
Cell 2007, 26:603-609.
14. Thomson T, Lin H: The biogenesis and function of Piwi proteins and
piRNAs: progress and prospect. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 2009, 25:355-376.
15. Ewen-Campen B, Schwager EE, Extavour CGM: The molecular machinery of
germ line specification. Mol Reprod Dev 2010, 77:3-18.
16. Cox DN, Chao A, Lin H: Piwi encodes a nucleoplasmic factor whose
activity modulates the number and division rate of germline stem cells.
Development 2000, 127:503-514.
17. Lin H, Spradling AC: A novel group of pumilio mutations affects the
asymmetric division of germline stem cells in the Drosophila ovary.
Development 1997, 124:2463-2476.
18. Tan CH, Lee TC, Weeraratne SD, Korzh V, Lim TM, Gong Z: Ziwi, the
zebrafish homologue of the Drosophila piwi: co-localization with vasa at
the embryonic genital ridge and gonad-specific expression in the adults.
Mech Dev 2002, 119:S221-S224.
19. Juliano CE, Voronina E, Stack C, Aldrich M, Cameron AR, Wessel GM: Germ
line determinants are not localized early in sea urchin development, but
do accumulate in the small micromere lineage. Dev Biol 2006,
300:406-415.
20. Alié A, Leclère L, Jager H, Dayraud C, Chang P, Le Guyader H, Quéinnec E,
Manuel M: Somatic stem cells express Piwi and Vasa genes in an adult
ctenophore: ancient association of “germline genes” with stemness. Dev
Biol 2011, 350:183-197.
21. Seipel K, Yanze N, Schmid V: The germ line and somatic stem cell gene
Cniwi in the jellyfish Podocoryne carnea. Int J Dev Biol 2004, 48:1-7.
22. Tadokoro R, Sugio M, Kutsuna J, Tochinai S, Takahashi Y: Early segregation
of germ and somatic lineages during gonadal regeneration in the
annelid Enchytraeus japonensis. Curr Biol 2002, 16:1012-1017.
23. Rebscher N, Zelada-González F, Banisch TU, Raible F, Arendt D: Vasa unveils
a common origin of germ cells and of somatic stem cells from the
posterior growth zone in the polychaete Platynereis dumerilii. Dev Biol
2007, 306:599-611.
24. Dill KK, Seaver EC: Vasa and nanos are coexpressed in somatic and germ
line tissue from early embryonic cleavage stages through adulthood in
the polychaete Capitella sp. I. Dev Genes Evol 2008, 218:453-463.
25. Cerutti L, Mian N, Bateman A: Domains in gene silencing and cell
differentiation proteins: the novel PAZ domain and redefinition of the
Piwi domain. Trends Biochem Sci 2000, 25:481-482.
26. Hill DH, Savage RM: Evolution development and ecology of Capitella sp. I:
a waxing model for polychaete studies. In Annelids in Modern Biology.
Edited by: Shain DH. Hoboken, New Jersey: John Wiley 2009:88-115.
27. Seaver EC, Thamm K, Hill SD: Growth patterns during segmentation in
the two polychaete annelids, Capitella sp. I and Hydroides elegans:
comparisons at distinct life history stages. Evol Dev 2005, 7:312-326.
28. Eckelbarger KJ, Linley PA, Grassle JP: Role of ovarian follicle cells in
vitellogenesis and oocyte resorption in Capitella sp. I (Polychaeta). Mar
Biol 1984, 9:33-144.
29. Molyneaux K, Wylie C: Primordial germ cell migration. Int J Dev Biol 2004,
48:537-544.
30. Takamura K, Fujimara M, Yamagushi Y: Primordial germ cells originate
from the endodermal strand cells in the ascidian Ciona intestinalis. Dev
Genes Evol 2002, 212:11-18.
31. Voronina E, Lopez M, Juliano CE, Gustafson E, Song JL, Extavour C,
George S, Oliveri P, McClay D, Wessel G: Vasa protein expression is
restricted to the small micromeres of the sea urchin but is inducible in
other lineages early in development. Dev Biol 2008, 31:276-286.
32. Funayama N: The stem cell system in demosponges: insights into the
origin of somatic stem cells. Dev Growth Diff 2010, 52:1-14.
33. Funayama N, Nakatsukasa M, Mohri K, Masuda Y, Agata K: Piwi expression
in archeocytes and choanocytes in demosponges: insights into the stem
cell system in demosponges. Evol Dev 2010, 12:275-287.
34. De Mulder K, Kuales G, Pfister D, Willems M, Egger B, Salvenmoser W,
Thaler M, Gorny AK, Hrouda M, Borgonie G, Ladurner P: Characterization of
the stem cell system of the acoel Isodiametra pulchra. BMC Dev Biol 2009,
9:69.
35. Reddien PW, Oviedo NJ, Jennings JR, Jenkin JC, Sánchez-Alvarado A:
SMEDWI-2 is a PIWI-like protein that regulates planarian stem cells.
Science 2005, 310:1327-1330.
36. De Mulder K, Pfister D, Kuales G, Egger B, Salvenmoser W, Willems M,
Steger J, Fauster K, Micura R, Borgonie G, Ladurner P: Stem cells are

Giani et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:10
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/10

37.

38.

39.

40.

41.

42.
43.
44.

45.
46.
47.
48.

49.

Page 18 of 18

differentially regulated during development, regeneration and
homeostasis in flatworms. Dev Biol 2009, 334:198-212.
Obata M, Sano N, Kimata S, Nagasawa K, Yoshizaki G, Komaru A: The
proliferation and migration of immature germ cells in the mussel,
Mytilus galloprovincialis: observation of the expression pattern in the M.
galloprovincialis vasa-like gene (Myvlg) by in situ hybridization. Dev Genes
Evol 2010, 220:139-149.
Fischer A: The structure of symplasmic early oocytes and their
enveloping sheath cells in the polychaete, Platynereis dumerilii. Cell Tissue
Res 1975, 160:327-343.
Fischer A, Dorresteijn A: The polychaete Platynereis dumerilii (Annelida): a
laboratory animal with spiralian cleavage, lifelong segment proliferation
and a mixed benthic/pelagic life cycle. Bioessays 2004, 26:314-325.
Liu N, Han H, Lasko P: Vasa promotes Drosophila germline stem cell
differentiation by activating mei-P26 translation by directly interacting
with a (U)-rich motif in its 3’ UTR. Genes Dev 2009, 23:2742-2752.
Seydoux G, Strome S: Launching the germline in Caenorhabditis elegans:
regulaton of gene expression in early germ cells. Development 1999,
126:3275-3283.
Raz E: Primordial germ-cell development: the zebrafish perspective. Nat
Rev Genet 2003, 4:690-700.
Abascal F, Zardoya R, Posada D: ProtTest: selection of best-fit models of
protein evolution. Bioinformatics 2005, 21:2104-2105.
Huelsenbeck JP, Ronquist F: In Bayesian Analysis of Molecular Evolution Using
MrBayes. Statistical Methods in Molecular Evolution. Edited by: Nielsen R. New
York: Springer; 2005:.
Guindon S, Gascuel O: A simple, fast, and accurate algorithm to estimate
large phylogenies by maximum likelihood. Syst Biol 2003, 52:696-704.
Rambaut A: FigTree v1.3.1.[http://tree.bio.ed.ac.uk/software/figtree/].
Grassle J, Grassle JF: Sibling species in the marine pollution indicator
Capitella (Polychaeta). Science 1976, 192:567-569.
Seaver EC, Paulson DA, Irvine SQ, Martindale MQ: The spatial and temporal
expression of Ch-en, the engrailed gene in the polychaete Chaetopterus,
does not support a role in body axis segmentation. Dev Biol 2001,
236:195-209.
Seaver ED, Kaneshige LM: Expression of ‘segmentation’ genes during
larval and juvenile development in the polychaetes Capitella sp. I and H.
elegans. Dev Biol 2006, 289:179-194.

doi:10.1186/2041-9139-2-10
Cite this article as: Giani et al.: Somatic and germline expression of piwi
during development and regeneration in the marine polychaete
annelid Capitella teleta. EvoDevo 2011 2:10.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
