<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Powdery mildew fungal effector candidates share N-terminal Y/F/WxC-motif</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Genomics 2010, 11:317. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-11-317"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Dale Godfrey, Henrik B_hlenius, Carsten Pedersen, Ziguo Zhang, Jeppe Emmersen, Hans Thordal-Christensen"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 8.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 7.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Godfrey et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:317
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/317

Open Access

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Powdery mildew fungal effector candidates share
N-terminal Y/F/WxC-motif
Research article

Dale Godfrey1, Henrik Böhlenius1, Carsten Pedersen1, Ziguo Zhang1, Jeppe Emmersen2 and Hans ThordalChristensen*1

Abstract
Background: Powdery mildew and rust fungi are widespread, serious pathogens that depend on developing
haustoria in the living plant cells. Haustoria are separated from the host cytoplasm by a plant cell-derived
extrahaustorial membrane. They secrete effector proteins, some of which are subsequently transferred across this
membrane to the plant cell to suppress defense.
Results: In a cDNA library from barley epidermis containing powdery mildew haustoria, two-thirds of the sequenced
ESTs were fungal and represented ~3,000 genes. Many of the most highly expressed genes encoded small proteins
with N-terminal signal peptides. While these proteins are novel and poorly related, they do share a three-amino acid
motif, which we named "Y/F/WxC", in the N-terminal of the mature proteins. The first amino acid of this motif is
aromatic: tyrosine, phenylalanine or tryptophan, and the last is always cysteine. In total, we identified 107 such proteins,
for which the ESTs represent 19% of the fungal clones in our library, suggesting fundamental roles in haustoria
function. While overall sequence similarity between the powdery mildew Y/F/WxC-proteins is low, they do have a
highly similar exon-intron structure, suggesting they have a common origin. Interestingly, searches of public fungal
genome and EST databases revealed that haustoria-producing rust fungi also encode large numbers of novel, short
proteins with signal peptides and the Y/F/WxC-motif. No significant numbers of such proteins were identified from
genome and EST sequences from either fungi which do not produce haustoria or from haustoria-producing
Oomycetes.
Conclusion: In total, we identified 107, 178 and 57 such Y/F/WxC-proteins from the barley powdery mildew, the wheat
stem rust and the wheat leaf rust fungi, respectively. All together, our findings suggest the Y/F/WxC-proteins to be a
new class of effectors from haustoria-producing pathogenic fungi.
Background
Biotrophic plant fungal pathogens cause dramatic yield
losses in many crop species worldwide. Graminaceous
powdery mildew and rust diseases are particularly serious because of the extensive cultivation of their hosts,
wheat, barley and maize. However, sorghum, rye, oat and
a number of forage grasses also commonly suffer from
attack by these pathogens. The importance of powdery
mildew has motivated Pietro Spanu, Imperial College, UK
to release preliminary genome sequence data of the barley powdery mildew fungus (Blumeria graminis f.sp. hordei, Bgh) as model organism for this unique group of
* Correspondence: htc@life.ku.dk
1

Plant and Soil Science Laboratory, Department of Agricultural and Ecology,
Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Denmark
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

pathogens at http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov. In recent
years, major outbreaks of wheat stem rust epidemics,
caused by a new aggressive fungal isolate (Ug99), have led
to very significant losses in Africa [1]. This has spurred
genome sequencing of the wheat stem rust fungus (Puccinia graminis f.sp. tritici, Pgt). See http://
www.broad.mit.edu/annotation/genome/
puccinia_graminis.3/home.html.
Biotrophic plant pathogens live in intimate contact with
their hosts and are dependent on an ability to transfer
effector proteins into cells of the host. We define effectors
as proteins and other compounds that enhance disease
development by targeting host processes, but are otherwise redundant to basal growth processes in the pathogen. A primary role of effectors is to inhibit host defense
mechanisms [2-4]. The filamentous powdery mildew and

© 2010 Godfrey et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons

BioMed Central Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Godfrey et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:317
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/317

rust fungi, as well as many Oomycete pathogens, all
develop haustoria within the lumen of the host cell, where
they serve to take up nutrients. In parallel with the
growth of the haustorium, the host cell generates a membrane of unknown origin, which surrounds the haustorium. Many bacterial pathogens use the "type three
secretion system" (T3SS) to inject effectors into plant
cells [3]. However, it remains unsolved how haustoriaforming fungal pathogens transfer effectors into the host
cell, where some of these proteins confer their function. It
is known that Oomycete effectors are dependent on Nterminal signal peptides for secretion from the haustoria,
via the default secretory pathway. Furthermore, these
effectors carry an amino acid double motif (RxLR-dEER)
required for them to cross the plant-derived extrahaustorial membrane (EHM). This motif is located a few amino
acids downstream of the signal peptide cleavage sites
[5,6]. The RxLR-dEER double motif has been used to
screen genome sequences and allowed identification of
approximately 700 Phytophthora [7,8] and 150 Hyaloperonospora effector candidates [9]. Based on bacterial
genome sequences and the T3SS target signal, inventories
have been obtained each with a few dozen bacterial effector candidates [10]. Effector candidates generally are
small proteins in their mature form, and they rarely have
homologues in more remotely related microbial species
[7,8,11].
Very few effectors and effector candidates have been
identified from haustoria-forming fungal pathogens. Two
effectors have been identified from the barley powdery
mildew fungus, Bgh [2], and a number of effectors and
effector candidates have been identified from rust fungi
[12,13]. Bgh and other powdery mildew fungi are highly
suitable for haustoria EST sequencing, since they only
attack the above ground plant epidermal cell layer, which
allows specific sampling of tissue highly enriched with
haustoria. This led us to conduct EST sequencing in an
attempt to identify new Bgh effectors. In the present
study, we identified more than 100 effector candidate
proteins, all sharing a "Y/F/WxC"-motif in the N-terminal, downstream of signal peptides. Subsequent studies of
other pathogen genomes revealed that the wheat stem
rust and wheat leaf rust fungi also have large sets of genes
encoding proteins of similar structure as the Bgh effector
candidates.

Page 2 of 13

occur unhindered. Secondary haustoria are established
from day 2-3, and by the late stage of infection at day 6-7,
very large numbers of haustoria are present in the host
epidermal cells, as seen in Figure 1. Aiming to obtain
plant tissue with the highest possible content of fungal
haustoria, we chose to collect epidermal material at this
late stage of infection (7 dpi). Surface fungal hyphae and
spores were removed prior to tissue sampling. This material was used to generate a cDNA library, of which 9,928
EST reads were made. Cluster analysis was followed by
BLAST searches against public databases to predict
whether the sequences were of fungal or plant origin.
This revealed that approximately two-thirds of the ESTs,
representing fungal transcripts expressed in the Bgh
haustorium, clustered into approximately 3,200 unigenes.
Approximately 90% of these were present in the preliminary Bgh genome sequence data at http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov. The cluster analysis showed that
the most frequently occurring fungal EST sequence
appeared 110 times. This EST contig encodes a 109amino acid protein, BghEfc1, with a predicted N-terminal
signal peptide. The 88-amino acid mature protein has no
homologues outside B. graminis. We then listed the fungal contigs according to their number of EST sequences.
Interestingly, at the top of the list, where the contigs were
assembled from 110 to 9 ESTs, approximately 40% of
them encoded small, novel proteins with predicted N-terminal signal peptides. Using this approach, we initially
identified 35 contigs with these characteristics, encoding
proteins of 106 to 161 amino acids (Additional file 1:
Table S1). Expression analysis of 23 transcripts from this
group demonstrated that all were expressed predomi-

Results
Highly expressed Bgh haustorial genes encode novel
effector candidates with signal peptides

Bgh establishes the first haustorium in the barley leaf epidermal cells from approximately 15 hours post inoculation (hpi). Conidia that fail to generate haustoria die.
After day 1, colony formation starts, and during the first
week, hyphal growth and formation of new conidia will

Figure 1 Barley epidermal strips containing Bgh haustoria used
to generate cDNA library. At 7 days post inoculation the surface fungal material was removed prior to sampling and the strip was stained
with Coomassie Brilliant Blue to visualize haustoria. mRNA was extracted from comparable tissue and used to generate the described cDNA
library. Size bar, 20 μm.

Godfrey et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:317
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/317

Effector candidates share a Y/F/WxC-motif

Inspired by the RxLR-dEER motif required for EHM
transfer of Oomycete effectors, we searched for a motif
downstream of the predicted signal peptide in the 35 Bgh
effector candidate proteins. An alignment of these
mature proteins revealed a "Y/F/WxC"-amino acid motif
within 17 amino acids of the predicted signal peptide
cleavage sites (Additional file 2: Figure S1). In the majority of the proteins (23), the first amino acid of the motif is
tyrosine (Y), to a lesser extent (10) it is phenylalanine (F)
and in a few cases (2) it is tryptophan (W). These three
amino acids constitute the group of uncharged aromatic
amino acids, which share considerable structural similarity.
We subsequently examined all fungal proteins that
could be identified from the EST library and found in
total 107 EST clusters and singletons that predominantly
encode short (48-228 amino acids), B. graminis-specific
proteins that have a predicted N-terminal signal peptide,
and importantly have the Y/F/WxC-motif within the first
45 amino acids of the N-terminal methionine. In all cases,
the Y/F/WxC-motif is located within 24 amino acids
downstream from the predicted signal peptide cleavage
site. Of these 107 EST clusters and singletons, 42 were
not full-length. For 40 of those, we were able to identify
the complete coding sequences by help of the partial Bgh
genome sequence at http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov. Additional file 1: Table S1 lists all 107 Bgh proteins identified
using this approach. It appears that the Y, F and W at the
first position occurred in 56, 40 and 11 of the proteins,
respectively, that the central amino acid of the Y/F/WxCmotif never is cysteine (C), and that the last amino acid
always is C (Additional file 1: Table S1). Figure 2 illustrates the distribution and nature of the Y/F/WxC-motif
along the N-terminus of the mature effector candidates.
This shows that the motif starts in position 4 in 49 of
these 107 proteins, suggesting this to be the optimal position of the motif relative to a protein N-terminus. In most
cases (93 of 107 sequences) the Bgh effector candidates
only have one Y/F/WxC-motif. However, two and three
copies of the motif are present in 12 and two of the
sequences, respectively (Additional file 1: Table S1). The
total number of ESTs encoding Y/F/WxC-effector candidates sums up to 1,223. This is as much as 19% of all
haustorial ESTs in the library, emphasizing the importance of these proteins for this fungal structure. The 110
ESTs of BghEfc1 alone constitute 1.7%.
Only three of the proteins encoded by these highly
expressed transcripts, BghEfc8, BghEfc13 and BghEfc54,

50

Occurrence of first
Y/F/WxC-motif

nantly in haustoria (see below). The haustoria expression
and the predicted signal peptide allow us to term these 35
proteins that are unique to B. graminis, "effector candidates" or BghEfc's.

Page 3 of 13

40

YxC
WxC
FxC

30
20
10

1

3

5

7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21
Motif position relative to
signal peptide cleavage site

Figure 2 The Y/F/WxC-motif in Bgh effector candidates predominantly starts at amino acid position 4. The cumulative number of
the YxC, WxC and FxC versions of the Y/F/WxC-motif plotted according
to the position of the first amino acid of the motif, relative to the signal
peptide cleavage site. Only the first Y/F/WxC-motif in each protein is
included.

were found among 204 fungal proteins identified in the
haustorial proteome ([14], in which these three proteins
were referred to as CL14C1, CL22C2 and CL134C1,
respectively). This suggests that even though many of the
107 Y/F/WxC-genes are highly expressed, the proteins in
general are secreted from the haustoria (see Additional
file 1: Table S1). Furthermore, five short, unknown proteins with signal peptide, found in a proteome study of
haustoria-containing epidermal tissue [15], are represented within the 107 Y/F/WxC-effector candidates
(Additional file 1: Table S1). In this study a total of 47 Bgh
proteins were identified [15]. The five proteins were not
identified within the haustoria proteome [14], suggesting
they are secreted.
The Bgh Y/F/WxC-effector candidates are highly diverse,
yet they do share a conserved gene structure

BLAST searches against the NCBI nr/nt database could
not identify homologues outside of B. graminis. When
compared to each other, their relationship is also poor. In
a multiple alignment of the 107 mature proteins, the Y/F/
WxC-motif aligns in 104 of the sequences (Additional file
3: Figure S2). No other sequence structure reaches this
level of conservation. However, based on shared sequence
identity, 83 of the 105 full-length Bgh effector candidates
group into 17 clusters. The clusters, ranging in size from
two to 17 proteins, are based on the criteria that all members have at least one BLAST hit (E-value ≤1e-5) to
another member of the cluster (Additional file 1: Table
S1). The remaining 22 are singletons which do not have a
significant BLAST hit (E-value ≤1e-5) (Additional file 1:
Table S1) to any other of the 107 Bgh effector candidates.
An unrooted phylogenetic tree constructed by the neigh-

Godfrey et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:317
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/317

Page 4 of 13

Number of introns

A
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
216

234

252

270

288

306

324

70

75

Intron position (nt)

B
Number of introns

bor-joining method and bootstrap analysis of these 83
protein sequences (Figure 3) supports the existence of
small families of proteins.
In order to further address the relationship of the Y/F/
WxC-genes, we studied their intron structure revealed by
comparison of the EST sequences and the genomic data
available on http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov. Intron position
is an ancient conserved genomic character that is highly
useful for phylogenetic analyses of genes [16,17]. The
study was conducted on the 54 genes in which both a fulllength EST contig and a full-length genomic sequence
could be established for the entire open reading frame
(see Additional file 4: Figure S3). Fifty-one of these had an
intron approximately two-thirds into the coding
sequence. Closer inspection of these 51 Y/F/WxC-genes
demonstrated that the intron is always positioned
between 218 to 329 nt from the translation start codon
(Figure 4A). Since introns in unrelated genes occur randomly, this narrow window suggests that these 51 genes
could be related. Substantial support for this hypothesis
came from the finding that the introns in all 51 genes are
located in phase 1 positions; i.e. between the first and the
second nucleotide of a codon. Generally, introns can
occur in all three phases, but predominantly in phase 0

8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1

Singletons
and others
BghEfc4

45

55

60

65

Intron size (nt)
Figure 4 Shared intron structure in the Bgh Y/F/WxC-effector candidate genes suggests common ancestor. (A) Distribution of intron
positions relative to the first nucleotide of the start codon. (B) Distribution of intron sizes. The figure is based on the 51 intron-containing
genes for which both full-length EST contigs and full-length genomic
sequences exist (see Additional file 4: Figure S3).

66

96
11
1

50

60
52

Figure 3 Phylogenetic analysis supports the existence of small
families of Bgh effector candidates. The unrooted phylogenetic tree
is based on NJ analysis. Confidence of groupings was estimated by using 1,000 bootstrap replicates and the percentage of replicate trees
supporting each branch are shown next to the branching point. Clades
supported by bootstrap value larger than 50 are indicated by black
dots, unless a lower partitioning point with a lower bootstrap value occurs.

[16]. Therefore, this finding of phase 1 positions in 100%
of the genes appears to be highly non-random. Another
character to consider is intron length, which also is highly
variable in unrelated genes. Meanwhile, these 51 introns
had lengths only varying from 45 to 76 nt (Figure 4B).
Forty-five of them occurred in groups, of two or more
sequences, with the exact same length varying from 49 to
60 nt. These results strongly suggest that the genes
encoding the Y/F/WxC-effector candidates originate
from a single ancient gene and that evolution has favored
numerous tri-nucleotide insertions and deletions, while
preserving the Y/F/WxC-coding sequence and the intron.
Expression of Bgh effector candidates is linked to haustoria
formation

The identification of the Y/F/WxC-effector candidates in
our EST library, prompted us to analyze the expression of

Godfrey et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:317
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/317

Page 5 of 13

BghEfc4
BghEfc5

BghEfc27

BghEfc6

BghEfc29

BghEfc7

BghEfc30

BghEfc8

BghEfc35

BghEfc9

BghEfc36

BghEfc10

BghEfc37

Bghβ-tub/
HvGAPDH

0.2
0.1
2

4

6
dpi

4

6
dpi

BghEfc1

since this requires functional haustoria which are established within 1 day post inoculation (dpi). After day 1,
colony formation starts, and within the time-course the
fungus grows unhindered with many haustoria present in
the host epidermal cells by day 6.
To analyze the relative transcript level of the Y/F/WxCeffector candidates, we first established Bghβ-tubulin as
reference gene to monitor the fungal growth in our timeseries. This was done by normalizing the Bghβ-tubulin
transcript levels to the barley HvGAPDH transcript
expressed in the leaf. Within the first day, the Bghβ-tubulin transcript did not increase. From day 2, a linear
increase in transcript level occurred through-out the
time-course (Figure 5B). This Bghβ-tubulin transcript
profile reflects the maturation of the first haustoria
between day 1 and 2, and the subsequent fungal growth.
Thus, the Bghβ-tubulin transcript can be used for normalizing gene expression in the fungus during infection.
We then selected to analyze the transcripts of the three
Y/F/WxC-effector candidates for which the highest number of ESTs occurred. qPCR analysis showed that the
BghEfc1 and BghEfc2 transcript levels gradually increased
relative to the β-tubulin transcript between day 1 and day
4-5 (Figure 5C and D). Thereafter, BghEfc1 and BghEfc2
transcript levels declined. The BghEfc3 transcript showed
a different profile, with a slow but gradually increasing
level through-out the time-course (Figure 5E). All
together, the results indicate that these Y/F/WxC-effector
candidates are expressed in haustoria predominantly during late stages of infection.

BghEfc26

BghEfc12

BghHistone H3

BghEfc15

Bghβ-tubulin

BghEfc16

Total RNA

Fold change

BghEfc21

80
60
40
20
0

D
Fold change

BghEfc19

BghEfc3

0.3

0

BghEfc18

BghEfc2

0.4

C 100

14

2
BghEfc2

10
6
2
0

E
Fold change

BghEfc1

B
Relative acc.

Surface Bgh material
Epidermis with haustoria

A

Surface Bgh material
Epidermis with haustoria

23 of the most abundant Y/F/WxC-effector candidates in
different fungal tissues. In order to execute this experiment, we extracted RNA from the Bgh fungal material at
the leaf surface, and from barley epidermal tissue, containing a high density of haustoria. Y/F/WxC-effector
transcript levels were analyzed in these samples by semiquantitative RT-PCR. As internal controls, we analyzed
the transcript level of BghHistone H3 and Bghβ-tubulin
showing similar expression levels in the two samples. For
all effector candidates analyzed, we detected a significantly higher transcript level in haustoria-containing epidermal tissue than in the surface fungal spores and
hyphae (Figure 5A).
To further characterize Y/F/WxC-effector candidates
during infection, we conducted a time-course experiment
where barley leaves were colonized by Bgh for up to 6
days. Within the first day, limited fungal growth occurs,

8

2

4

6
dpi

4

6
dpi

BghEfc3

6
4
2
0

2

Figure 5 Transcripts encoding the highest expressed Bgh Y/F/
WxC-effector candidates accumulate predominantly in haustoria. (A) Semi-quantitative RT-PCR on total RNA isolated from Bgh spores
and hyphae collected from the leaf surface 7 days post inoculation
(dpi) and from barley epidermal strips containing Bgh haustoria (surface fungal material removed). (B-E) qPCR on RNA form time-course of
barley whole leaf/Bgh material. (B) Transcript accumulation of Bghβ-tubulin relative to the barley HvGAPDH transcript. (C-E) Transcript accumulation of Y/F/WxC-effector candidate transcripts relative to 0 dpi.
Bghβ-tubulin used as internal standard.

Y/F/WxC-proteins in rust fungi

The discovery of Y/F/WxC-effector candidates in Bgh
prompted us to search the genome data of the serious
wheat stem rust pathogen, Pgt, another haustoria-forming biotrophic fungus attacking members of the grass
family, Gramineae. Using the Pgt genome, it was possible
to analyze whether the general occurrence of the Y/F/
WxC-motif is random. In the 20,566 Pgt encoded proteins, Y, F, W and C occur at frequencies of 2.41, 3.62,
1.31 and 1.48%, respectively. In an unbiased distribution,
the Y/F/WxC-motif should occur once every 922 amino
acid. However, the motif occurs on average every 777
amino acids, suggesting positive selection for the Y/F/
WxC-motif in the Pgt proteins. Further analysis revealed
that 2,830 of the 20,566 Pgt encoded proteins have a signal peptide. We then turned to study the N-termini of the
mature forms of these 2,830 proteins (from the signal
peptide cleavage site to amino acid number 45 calculated
from the N-terminal methionine). In these 2,830 N-termini, the Y/F/WxC-motif occurred on average once every
326 amino acids. This led to the identification of 178 Y/F/
WxC-proteins, in all of which the Y/F/WxC-motif occurs

Godfrey et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:317
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/317

within the first 27 amino acids from the signal peptide
cleavage site (Additional file 5: Table S2).
We then analyzed how these 178 Pgt Y/F/WxC-proteins were size-wise distributed relative to all the 2,830
proteins with a signal peptide. As shown in Figure 6A,
there is a striking over-representation of these Y/F/WxCproteins within the smaller proteins. Twenty percent of
the proteins between 90 and 140 amino acids long are Y/
F/WxC-proteins, while this number is 2.6% for the rest of
the proteins.
BLAST searches against the NCBI nr/nt database
revealed that 94% of these 178 Pgt sequences had no
homologues outside of Puccinia. Seventy-eight of these
sequences do not have a significant BLAST hit (E-value ≤
1e-5) to any other of the 178 Pgt Y/F/WxC-protein (Additional file 5: Table S2). However, the remaining 100 Pgt
proteins group into 27 clusters, ranging from two to 14
proteins (at least one BLAST hit, E-value ≤ 1e-5, to
another member of the cluster) (Additional file 5: Table
S2). Accordingly, most of these 178 Pgt Y/F/WxC-proteins have the same sequence characteristics as the 107
Bgh effector candidates, namely that they have signal
peptides, they have the Y/F/WxC-motif, they are short,
and they are found to be unique to Puccinia (Additional
file 5: Table S2).
Compared to three other fungi that do not form haustoria, Ustilago maydis, Podospora anserina and Magnaporthe grisea, and the Oomycete Phytophthora infestans
that does form haustoria, there was an obvious over-representation of genes encoding this effector candidatetype proteins in Pgt. This is clear when plotting the number of all proteins with signal peptide, and a Y/F/WxCmotif within 45 amino acids from the N-terminal methionine, cumulatively against their length (Figure 6B). In
addition, this result demonstrated that the other four
pathogens do not encode high numbers of Y/F/WxC-proteins. The Bgh effector candidates (105 with known
lengths) were also plotted in Figure 6B, and showed a distribution very similar to the signal peptide-Y/F/WxCproteins from Pgt. Furthermore, the other fungi investigated had low numbers of this kind of protein, and in
summary, we suggest that the wheat stem rust fungus has
a collection of proteins with characteristics similar to that
of the powdery mildew Y/F/WxC-effector candidates.
An EST library of P. triticina (Pt), another wheat pathogen that causes leaf rust, was searched for presence of Y/
F/WxC-effector candidate-type proteins. Using the same
criteria as for Bgh and Pgt, we managed to identify 57
such proteins from Pt, ranging from 59-186 amino acids
in length (Additional file 6: Table S3). BLAST searches
against the NCBI nr/nt database identified no homologues (E-value ≤ 1e-5). Using the criteria that all members of a cluster must have at least one BLAST hit (Evalue ≤ 1e-5) to another member, 20 of these proteins

Page 6 of 13

group into 7 clusters, ranging from two to 4 proteins
(Additional file 6: Table S3). The remaining 37 proteins
do not have a significant BLAST hit (E-value ≤ 1e-5) to
any other of the 57 Pt Y/F/WxC-protein (Additional file
6: Table S3). The 57 Pt Y/F/WxC-proteins are also plotted
in Figure 6B, which reveals a length vs. number distribution similar to those from Bgh and Pgt. Like the wheat
stem rust fungus, the wheat leaf rust fungus also appears
to have a collection of proteins with the same characteristics as the powdery mildew Y/F/WxC-effector candidates
(Additional file 6: Table S3).
Figure 7 shows the occurrence of YxC, FxC and WxC
and their position relative to the signal peptide cleavage
site of the 178 Pgt proteins and 57 Pt proteins. Unlike the
Bgh effector candidates, the rust fungal sequences do not
appear to have an optimal location for the Y/F/WxCmotif, and while Y is most common in the motif of the
Bgh effector candidates, F is most common in the Pgt and
Pt sequences. Furthermore, an obvious difference is the
number of copies of the Y/F/WxC-motif in each
sequence. Whereas the Bgh sequences predominantly
(87%) had one copy, this was only the case in a minority
of the Pgt sequences (40%). Two, three and four copies of
the motif were found in 43, 13 and 3.4% of the Pgt
sequences, respectively (Additional file 5: Table S2). In Pt,
68% of the sequences had one Y/F/WxC-motif. Two,
three, four and five copies of the motif were found in 18,
11, 1.8 and 1.8% of the sequences, respectively, in this rust
pathogen (Additional file 6: Table S3).
Y/F/WxC-effector candidates are shared between closely
related pathogens

Effectors proteins are predicted to have evolved in
response to appearance of new defense pathways in the
host plant, and therefore it is interesting to examine how
ancient these effectors are. Whether or not the Y/F/WxCeffector candidate-type proteins are shared between
pathogens might shed some light on this issue. Although
there is no sequence similarity of Y/F/WxC-effector candidates between powdery mildew and rust pathogens
(Additional files 1, 5 and 6: Tables S1 to S3), homologues
within powdery mildew and rust fungi can be identified.
While no genome sequence data can be found for other
B. graminis powdery mildew fungi, there are EST libraries available from leaves that were inoculated with these
pathogens. BLAST searching primarily the "EST_others"
database on http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov revealed that
38 of the 107 Bgh Y/F/WxC-effector candidates shared
homology (E-value ≤ 1e-5) to proteins encoded by EST
sequences generated from powdery mildew-infected
wheat (Additional file 1: Table S1). These BLAST analyses
resulted in 27 B. graminis f.sp. tritici (Bgt) ESTs, and in all
cases, where the sequence was complete at the N-terminal (24 of the 27 sequences), these ESTs encoded unique

Godfrey et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:317
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/317

Page 7 of 13

A
Number of proteins

160
All proteins w. signal peptide

120

All proteins w. signal peptide and Y/F/WxC-motif
80

40

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

800

Sequence length (amino acids)

Number of proteins (cumulative)

B

Puccinia graminis f.sp. tritici (Pgt)
Blumeria graminis f.sp. hordei (Bgh)

160

Puccinia triticina (Pt)
Magnamorthe grisea
Phytophthora infestans

120

Podospora anserina
Ustilago maydis

80

40

10

100
Sequence length (amino acids)

1000

Figure 6 Only powdery mildew (Blumeria) and rust (Puccinia) fungi encode Y/F/WxC-effector candidates. (A) The proteome of Puccinia
graminis f.sp. tritici was screened for proteins with predicted signal peptide, with and without Y/F/WxC-motif, which were plotted against their length.
(B) Proteomes of six fungi and an Oomycete were screened for proteins with a predicted signal peptide as well as a Y/F/WxC-motif, which were plotted
cumulatively against their length. Only the 105 Bgh Y/F/WxC-effector candidates with known lengths are plotted. The proteomes were derived from
publically available genome databases and EST library (Bgh and Pt) databases. Only Y/F/WxC-motifs after the predicted N-terminal signal peptide and
within the first 45 amino acids from the N-terminal methionine were included.

proteins with a predicted N-terminal signal peptide and a
Y/F/WxC-motif. A high level of conservation of the
amino acids in the Y/F/WxC-motif between the Bgh and
Bgt homologues was observed. Ten of the homologous

pairs shared all three amino acids of the motif. Of the
remaining pairs, 12 shared the amino acid at the "Y/F/W"
and "C" position, while two only shared the "C". In those
cases where the Bgt sequences were complete at the N

Godfrey et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:317
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/317

A

25

YxC
WxC
FxC

Occurrence of first
Y/F/WxC-motif

20

15

10

5

1

5

7

9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27

1

B

3

3

5

7

9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27

8

Occurrence of first
Y/F/WxC-motif

7
6
5
4
3
2
1

Motif position relative to
signal peptide cleavage site
Figure 7 The first Y/F/WxC-motif in the rust effector candidates is
evenly distributed across the N-terminal of the proteins. The cumulative number of the YxC, WxC and FxC versions of the Y/F/WxCmotif plotted according to the position of the first amino acid of the
motif, relative to the signal peptide cleavage site in the 178 Pgt (A) and
57 Pt (B) effector candidates. Only the first Y/F/WxC-motif in each protein is included.

and C-terminal, their lengths ranged from 73-148 amino
acids.
Even though Pgt and Pt both are rust pathogens on
wheat, they have rather different life-styles, and they are
predicted to be more distantly related than Bgh and Bgt.
Still, we were able to find conserved Y/F/WxC-proteins
between Pgt and Pt (Additional files 5 and 6: Tables S2
and S3). In fact, there are two groups of conserved proteins between the Pgt and Pt Y/F/WxC-effector candidates. In group 1, consisting of two Pt sequences
(EC415587 and EC415350) and four Pgt sequences
(PGTG_16075, PGTG_10961, PGTG_16073 and
PGTG_10962), the Y/F/WxC-motif "FgC" is completely
conserved. In this group the highest E-value was 7e-42.
However, in group 2 (E-value 9e-46) the three Pt
sequences (EC402064, EC398870 and EC420434) have

Page 8 of 13

"FtC", whereas the Pgt sequence (PGTG_03694) has a
"YtC".
Furthermore, through BLAST searches against EST
sequences in the currently available databases, we have
identified homologues (E-value ≤ 1e-5) of the Pgt and Pt
Y/F/WxC-effector candidates in a third rust species
which infects wheat, the stripe rust fungus, Puccinia striiformis (Ps). Ten of the Pgt Y/F/WxC-effector candidates
shared homologies with seven Y/F/WxC-proteins
encoded by Ps ESTs. One of the Ps Y/F/WxC-proteins
belong the Pgt/Pt group 1 above (Additional files 5 and 6:
Tables S2 and S3).

Discussion
Our discovery of the N-terminal Y/F/WxC-motif within a
specific position of secreted proteins only from haustoria-forming fungi attacking Gramineae represents the
first potential molecular "landmark", specific for this
group of pathogens. We propose that the Y/F/WxC-proteins serve effector functions, essential for haustoriaforming fungi. This is supported by the fact that 19% of
the Bgh haustorial transcriptome encode this type of proteins. Furthermore, the finding of conserved Bgh Y/F/
WxC-gene structure, including intron position and size,
contributes to establishing the Bgh Y/F/WxC-effector
candidates as a protein super-family.
Initially, 107 Bgh Y/F/WxC-proteins were discovered
from our haustoria EST-library. A bioinformatics
approach was subsequently taken to define a further 178
and 57 proteins, with comparable sequence characteristics to the Bgh Y/F/WxC-effector candidates, from Pgt
and Pt, respectively. We have evidence from BLAST
searches of genomic sequence data on http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov that more than the 107 Bgh genes
encoding Y/F/WxC-effector candidate can be found (data
not shown). In comparison, the Pgt Y/F/WxC-proteins
are genome-based, and therefore expected to include all
of the Y/F/WxC-proteins for this pathogen; although it is
important to note that automatic gene annotation is often
less precise for small genes. Meanwhile, the 57 Pt
sequences are from an EST-library of only approximately
29,000 clones. As such, this collection is only expected to
include a subset of the Y/F/WxC-sequences in this rust
pathogen. These numbers of largely dissimilar proteins
are reminiscent of the numbers of RxLR-dEER proteins
identified in Oomycetes [7]. The finding of Y/F/WxCproteins in both powdery mildew and rust fungi raises
the question whether the Y/F/WxC-motif have a common origin. These fungi have specialized within Ascomycota and Basidiomycota, respectively, most likely
reflecting that the Y/F/WxC-motif has evolved convergently in these two fungal phyla. Furthermore, the fact
that the Y/F/WxC-proteins within individual pathogens
are highly diverse could suggest that the motif has

Godfrey et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:317
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/317

evolved multiple times. On the other hand, there is a
striking similarity in the intron positions in most of the
Y/F/WxC-genes in Bgh, despite the sequence dissimilarity, which points towards the existence of a common gene
ancestor. To this end, it is relevant to stress that homologous Y/F/WxC-proteins could be found between different B. graminis powdery mildew pathogens and between
different Puccinia rust pathogens. This provides additional support for the notion that some of the Y/F/WxCproteins are ancient and have evolved before separation
occurred within these two types of pathogens.
Moreover, the highly diverse nature of both the powdery mildew and rust Y/F/WxC-proteins suggests that
many different targets exist in their host plants. This
agrees with the fact that the regulation of defense is controlled by a highly complex signaling network [18,19], in
which a large number of relevant targets can be envisioned. When these signaling elements evolved during
plant evolution, new pathogen effectors may have
coevolved. Similar dramatic impacts are believed to have
driven other gene amplifications and diversifications
resulting in superfamilies with conserved intron-exon
structures, but poor sequence similarities [20]. Generally,
the Y/F/WxC-effector candidates identified are short and
unique to their class of pathogen, suggesting that they are
unlikely to have enzymatic activity, but rather interact
with host defense components to manipulate their activity.
The highly conserved nature of the Bgh Y/F/WxC-motif
leads us to speculate that it is involved in a common
mechanism shared by the Y/F/WxC-effector candidates.
The N-terminal RxLR-dEER double-motif in haustoria
forming Oomycete plant pathogens has been documented to confer transfer across the EHM [5,6], a function required by some haustoria secreted effectors. While
it is tempting to envisage a similar function for the Y/F/
WxC-motif, further studies investigating the Y/F/WxCfunction are required. Bioinformatic analyzes of all the
powdery mildew and rust Y/F/WxC-proteins have not
revealed consistent evidence for other conserved amino
acid sequence patterns surrounding the Y/F/WxC-motif.
The importance of the Y/F/WxC-motif, is supported by
its presence in several powdery mildew and rust fungi. In
Bgh, it most frequently occurs at amino acid 4 of the
mature protein. Such a position is albeit less pronounced
in the rust fungi. On the other hand, the rust Y/F/WxCeffector candidates often have more Y/F/WxC-copies.
The preferred first amino acid of the motif is the aromatic
amino acid tyrosine (Y) in Bgh. Interestingly, the aromatic
phenylalanine (F) is the first amino acid in the motif in
rust fungi. This could indicate that YxC and FxC serve
separate purposes. However, this is most likely not the
case, since there are examples where closely related proteins have YxC and FxC, respectively. This was seen for

Page 9 of 13

seven homologues of Bgh proteins in Bgt (Additional file
1: Table S1) and for homologues of one Pgt proteins in Pt.
Tryptophan (W) occurs rarely as the first amino acid in
all four fungi, suggesting that this aromatic amino acid is
less desirable. It is noteworthy that we do not find that
histidine can take the first position. Histidine is non-aromatic, but space-wise similar to phenylalanine and
tyrosine. At the same time histidine is quite similar to
tryptophan without the aromatic group. This underlines
that the aromatic group appears to be essential the function of the motif.
We predict that some of the Y/F/WxC-proteins suppress defense manifested in the host cell when haustoria
actively mobilize nutrients to the fungal structures outside the host cell. There are evidences in the literature
that the defense mechanisms are suppressed in host cells
containing haustoria. This is obvious from microscopy of
certain types of multicellular hypersensitive response
(HR) lesions in barley attacked by Bgh. While neighboring epidermal and mesophyll cells undergo HR in such
cases, epidermal cells containing haustoria often evade
this defense response [21]. This suppression of defense
has also been visualized in double inoculation experiments. When a spore from a first inoculation with a virulent Bgh genotype establishes a haustorium, then the
epidermal cell that contains it looses its ability to exhibit
penetration resistance and HR in response to later attacks
[22].
The Y/F/WxC-type effector candidates are in several
ways distinct from the previously identified AVRk1 and
the related AVRa10 effectors also expressed by Bgh
[2,23,24]. No sequence similarity could be found between
AVRk1 and any of the Y/F/WxC-type effector candidates.
In addition, there are indications that AVRk1 homologues
and genes for Y/F/WxC-type effector candidates are
expressed dissimilarly. Y/F/WxC-type effector candidate
genes are primarily expressed days after inoculation and
primarily in haustoria (Figure 5). Only a single EST corresponding to a Y/F/WxC-effector candidates could be
identified in publically available Bgh EST libraries of
2,500 clones from germinated and ungerminated conidia
[25] and of ~450 clones from leaf surface hyphae (3 dpi,
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov). On the other hand, no
AVRk1 homologous transcripts were identified among the
more than 6,000 Bgh ESTs in our haustoria library from 7
dpi. Even though AVRk1 and AVRa10 have been demonstrated to confer their function in the host cytoplasm
[2,26] it remains unknown how they are transferred from
the fungus to the plant cells. They do not have classical
signal peptides or other recognizable elements that can
be involved in conferring such a transfer. A possible background for the distinct features of these proteins can be
that the AVRk1 homologues are secreted from the pene-

Godfrey et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:317
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/317

tration hyphae and early haustorial structures in accordance with the observation that they suppress
penetration resistance in barley [2]. Meanwhile, the Y/F/
WxC-type effector candidates appear to be secreted from
mature haustoria.
Our bioinformatics analysis of the Pgt proteome indicated presence of large numbers of small secreted proteins besides those having the Y/F/WxC-motif (Figure
6A). With very few exceptions, these proteins have no
annotated homologues (data not shown). We would
therefore not be surprised if also they will turn out to be
effectors. Rust fungi endure a significant part of their life
in the intercellular space in the host tissue, and it can be
envisioned that they need a much wider palette of effectors. Powdery mildew fungi to a large extent live outside
the leaf with less direct contact to the plant tissue, and
despite our finding of many effector candidates, they
could be few relative to rust effectors.

Conclusion
Our findings suggest the Y/F/WxC-proteins are a new
class of effectors, highly expressed in haustoria of powdery mildew fungi. The Y/F/WxC-motif is predicted to
serve a general and essential function, possibly in transfer
of the effector proteins across the EHM. In addition,
more than 200 small, Y/F/WxC-proteins with signal peptides were identified from rust fungi infecting
Gramineae. Since rust and powdery mildew fungi both
are specialized forms within Basidiomycetes and Ascomycetes, respectively, it is conceivable that the Y/F/WxCmotif has evolved convergently in these two types of
pathogens. Despite poor sequence identity between these
Y/F/WxC-proteins, the encoding genes in Bgh have a
conserved exon-intron structure, pointing towards a single gene-origin within the powdery mildew fungi. This
provides further support for these proteins to have
related and crucial roles for the biotrophic lifestyle.
Methods
Fungal and plant material

The barley powdery mildew fungus (Bgh, isolate A6) was
maintained on susceptible barley (Hordeum vulgare) cv.
Golden Promise. The plants were cultivated on soil in a
growth chamber at 20°C under a 16 h light, 8 h dark cycle.
Leaves of 7-day-old seedlings were inoculated with
conidia from seedlings infected 7 days previously.
EST library

Heavily colonized first leaves (7 dpi) were painted with
10% w/v cellulose acetate in 100% acetone using a fine
paintbrush. Following evaporation of the acetone, the
external fungal material was trapped in the solidified cellulose acetate and removed. Subsequently, abaxial epider-

Page 10 of 13

mal strips containing Bgh haustoria, were peeled, frozen
immediately in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C.
Total RNA was isolated from barley epidermal strips
containing Bgh haustoria using the Fenozol™ total RNA
isolation reagent (Active Motif ) according to the manufacturer's instructions. From total RNA, polyA RNA was
prepared using mTRAP™ kit (Active Motif ) and used for
the construction of a cDNA library. The cDNA library
was generated using the Creator™ SMART™ cDNA library
construction kit (Clontech). Approximately 1 μg of
mRNA was transcribed into cDNA. Following ds cDNA
synthesis by primer extension, the cDNA was purified
using the GFX PCR DNA and gel band purification kit
(Amersham Biosciences). The purified cDNA was
digested with the SfiI restriction enzyme and size-fractionated by electrophoresis. The 0.5-8 kb fraction was
ligated into an SfiI digested, dephosphorylated pDNRLIB vector as supplied with the Creator™ SMART™ cDNA
library construction kit. An aliquot of the ligation products was transformed into Escherichia coli TOP10 chemically competent cells (Invitrogen) and plated on LB
medium containing chloramphenicol. A total of 1.5 × 106
recombinant clones were obtained, with an average insert
size of approximately 750 bp.
Sequence processing and analysis

DNA sequencing was performed from the 5' end using
the M13 universal sequencing primer (5'-GTAAAACGACGGCCAGT-3') at BGI LifeTech Co. (Beijing, China).
Following sequencing, base calling and quality assessment was evaluated by the Phred algorithm [27]. All EST
sequences with a Phred score less than 20 were rejected.
All sequences were manually trimmed for vector. A total
of 11,484 clones were sequenced yielding 9,928 ESTs with
an average sequence length of 360 bp. Cluster analysis,
performed using the TIGR software TGI Clustering tool
(TGICL), revealed 4,327 singletons and 1,196 contigs
resulting in 5,523 unigenes. Sequences were analyzed
using BLAST searches within the databases maintained
by the National Center for Biotechnology Information
(NCBI), the Blumeria graminis EST database in
COGEME http://cogeme.ex.ac.uk/ and the Hordeum vulgare EST database in PlantGDB http://www.plantgdb.org/. Similarities were classified as hits indicating
homology when the expected E-value was ≤ 1e-5. Based
on these BLAST searches, it was decided whether the
ESTs were of plant or fungal origin. According to the best
estimate, there are 3,416 plant and 6,512 fungal ESTs,
making 2,337 plant and 3,186 fungal unigenes. Putative
signal peptides in the deduced amino acid sequences
were predicted according to the hidden Markov models
using the SignalP 3.0 Server http://www.cbs.dtu.dk.
Sequences were aligned using the slow and accurate pairwise alignment in CLUSTALW http://align.genome.jp/

Godfrey et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:317
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/317

with a multiple alignment gap opening penalty of 10 and
a gap extension penalty of 0.05. Alignments were visualized using Genedoc. The Bgh Y/F/WxC-effector candidate proteins were grouped based on BLASTP similarity
using the criteria that all members of a group must have
at least one BLASTP hit (E-value ≤ 1e-5) to another
member of the group. The proteins which clustered into
groups were subjected to phylogenetic analysis. Proteins
for which the full-length sequence is unknown were
omitted. MEGA4 [28] was used for phylogenetic analysis
using the Neighbor-Joining (NJ) method [29]. A bootstrap consensus tree was inferred from 1000 replicates
[30] and branches corresponding to partitions reproduced in less than 50% bootstrap replicates are collapsed.
The Poisson correction method [31] was used to compute
the evolutionary distances which are in the units of the
number of amino acid substitutions per site. Preliminary
Bgh
genome
sequence
data
at
http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov were use to obtain full length coding sequences, when these were not included in the EST
sequences. Genome sequences were used for intron identification based on comparison directly to EST
sequences.
Protein sequences for P. graminis f.sp. tritici (20,566),
U. maydis (6,522), M. grisea (11,109), and P. infestans
(22,562) were downloaded from the Broad Institute http:/
/www.broad.mit.edu and for P. anserina (10,614) from
Université
de
Paris-Sud
XI/CNRS
http://
podospora.igmors.u-psud.fr/. Of these proteins, 2830,
1,184, 2,244, 3,061 and 1,899 where predicted to have an
N-terminal signal peptide (as above) of which, 178, 22, 62,
61 and 65 where found to have a Y/F/WxC-motif within
the first 45 amino acids of the of the N-terminal methionine, respectively. EST sequences for P. triticina (34,273)
were downloaded from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov.
Derived amino acid sequences for 14,843 N-terminal protein sequences greater than 60 amino acids were predicted within all six open reading frames. Of these, 3,444
were predicted to have an N-terminal signal peptide. Further analysis, excluding all but the longest open reading
frame for each EST, identified 57 unique sequences with a
Y/F/WxC-motif within the first 45 amino acids of the of
the N-terminal methionine. The 178 Pgt and 57 Pt Y/F/
WxC-sequences were analyzed using BLAST searches
within the databases maintained by the NCBI, and similarities were classified as hits indicating homology when
the expected E-value was ≤ 1e-5. Both the Pgt and Pt Y/F/
WxC-sequences were grouped based on BLASTP similarity as described above for the Bgh Y/F/WxC-effector
candidate proteins.
Analysis of transcript accumulation

Semi-quantitative RT-PCR was performed using the
Superscript One Step RT-PCR with the Platinum Taq sys-

Page 11 of 13

tem (Invitrogen). Total RNA was isolated from Bgh
spores and hyphae trapped in solidified cellulose acetate
(7 dpi) and from epidermal strips containing haustoria (7
dpi) using the Fenozol™ total RNA isolation reagent
(Active Motif ). To eliminate genomic contamination,
RNA was DNase treated using the RQ1 RNase-free
DNase (Promega). Primer sequences used for this detection are listed in Additional file 7: Table S4. RT-PCR reactions on 80 ng of total RNA and all primer pairs were run
under identical conditions: 30 min at 50°C for first-strand
cDNA synthesis, 94°C for 2 min; followed by 25 cycles of
15 s at 94°C, 30 s at 51°C, and 1 min at 72°C; and a final
extension of 10 min at 72°C (except BghEfc30, BghEfc35
and BghEfc36, 30 cycles; and BghEfc3, BghEfc19, BghEfc21
and BghHistone H3, 35 cycles). RT-PCR products were
visualized on 1% (w/v) agarose gels stained with ethidium
bromide. The RT-PCR data shown is representative of
results obtained over a number of independent experiments. Minus RT control reactions were performed to
confirm the absence of residual DNA.
qPCR transcript analyzes were conducted on total RNA
isolated from intact barley leaves at indicated time-points
after inoculation with Bgh. Total RNA was isolated using
the Aurum™ Total RNA kit (Bio-RAD). cDNA synthesis
was performed using the DyNAmo™ cDNA Synthesis Kit
(FINNZYMES) according to the manufacturers instructions. Quantification was performed on a Stratagene
MX3000P real-time PCR detection system using the
Stratagene Brilliant®R II SYBR Green mastermix. The
assays were performed on three independently isolated
RNA samples, each loaded in duplicates. The Bghβ-tubulin transcript level was normalized to the barley
HvGAPDH transcript level, and the transcripts levels of
BghEfc1, BghEfc2 and BghEfc3 were normalized to the
Bghβ-tubulin transcript level. Primer sequences used for
this detection are listed in Additional file 7: Table S4.
Sequence data

The sequence data from this study have been submitted
to NCBI http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov under accession
nos. GT883214-GT884367, as referred to in Additional
file 1: Table S1.

List of abbreviations
Bgh: Blumeria graminis f.sp. hordei; Efc: effector candidate; EHM: extrahaustorial membrane; HR: hypersentitive response; Pgt: Puccinia graminis f.so. tritici; Ps:
Puccinia striiformis; Pt: Puccinia triticina.
Additional material
Additional file 1 Table S1. Bgh Y/F/WxC-effector candidates. Data
assembly related to the 107 barley powdery mildew fungal Y/F/WxC-proteins.

Godfrey et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:317
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/317

Additional file 2 Figure S1. The Y/F/WxC-motif of the first 35 identified Bgh effector candidates aligns perfectly. Multiple sequence alignment of the derived amino acid sequences of the mature proteins
performed by CLUSTALW and visualized using Genedoc. Shading represents conservation of amino acid similarity at each position: residues conserved between sequences are shaded in black.
Additional file 3 Figure S2. The Y/F/WxC-motif of the 107 Bgh effector
candidates aligns in all but three sequences. Multiple sequence alignment of the derived amino acid sequences of the mature proteins performed by CLUSTALW and visualized using Genedoc. Shading represents
conservation of amino acid similarity at each position.
Additional file 4 Figure S3. Position of introns in the Bgh Y/F/WxCeffector candidates. The open reading frame is indicated in underlining,
Y/F/WxC-coding sequence in bold blue, introns in bold red and untranslated regions in italics. Where sequence has been identified exclusively
from genomic sequence, it is indicated in white with black highlight. Where
sequence has been identified exclusively from EST sequence, it is indicated
in grey highlight.
Additional file 5 Table S2. Pgt Y/F/WxC-effector candidates. Data
assembly related to the 178 wheat stem rust fungal Y/F/WxC-proteins.
Additional file 6 Table S3. Pt Y/F/WxC-effector candidates. Data
assembly related to the 57 wheat leaf rust fungal Y/F/WxC-proteins.
Additional file 7 Table S4. Sequences of primers used for semi-quantitative RT-PCR and qPCR.
Authors' contributions
DG generated the cDNA library. JE assisted on the EST contig assembly, DG
performed all the bioinformatics work, including the discovery of the Y/F/WxCmotif. DG and HB performed the RT-PCR and qPCR analyses, respectively. CP
assisted on the bioinformatics work. ZZ and HTC conceived the study and
obtained the necessary grants. HTC wrote the manuscript that all authors have
contributed to, read and approved.
Acknowledgements
We are grateful to Dr. Mads Eggert Nielsen for valuable discussions. Financial
support has been provided by The Villum Kann Rasmussen Foundation, EUFP6 BioExploit, The Danish Agricultural and Veterinary Research Council and
The Danish Council for Independent Research/Technology and Production Sciences.

Page 12 of 13

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.
14.
15.

16.

17.

18.

19.
Author Details
1Plant and Soil Science Laboratory, Department of Agricultural and Ecology,
Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Denmark and 2Department
of Health Science and Technology, Aalborg University, Denmark

20.

Received: 14 January 2010 Accepted: 20 May 2010
Published: 20 May 2010

21.

© 2010 GodfreyAccess from: distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
This is an Open2010, 11:317 http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/317
BMC article is available article BioMed Central Ltd.
Genomics et al; licensee

References
1. Singh RP, Hodson DP, Huerta-Espino J, Jin Y, Njau P, Wanyera R, HerreraFoessel SA, Ward RW: Will stem rust destroy the world's wheat crop?
Adv Agron 2008, 98:271-309.
2. Ridout CJ, Skamnioti P, Porritt O, Sacristan S, Jones JD, Brown JK: Multiple
avirulence paralogues in cereal powdery mildew fungi may contribute
to parasite fitness and defeat of plant resistance. Plant Cell 2006,
18:2402-2414.
3. Block A, Li G, Fu ZQ, Alfano JR: Phytopathogen type III effector weaponry
and their plant targets. Curr Opin Plant Biol 2008, 11:396-403.
4. Gohre V, Robatzek S: Breaking the barriers: microbial effector molecules
subvert plant immunity. Annu Rev Phytopathol 2008, 46:189-215.
5. Whisson SC, Boevink PC, Moleleki L, Avrova AO, Morales JG, Gilroy EM,
Armstrong MR, Grouffaud S, van West P, Chapman S, Hein I, Toth IK,
Pritchard L, Birch PR: A translocation signal for delivery of oomycete
effector proteins into host plant cells. Nature 2007, 450:115-118.
6. Dou D, Kale SD, Wang X, Jiang RH, Bruce NA, Arredondo FD, Zhang X, Tyler
BM: RXLR-mediated entry of Phytophthora sojae effector Avr1b into
soybean cells does not require pathogen-encoded machinery. Plant
Cell 2008, 20:1930-1947.
7. Jiang RHY, Tripathy S, Govers F, Tyler BM: RXLR effector reservoir in two
Phytophthora species is dominated by a single rapidly evolving

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

superfamily with more than 700 members. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008,
105:4874-4879.
Haas BJ, Kamoun S, Zody MC, Jiang RH, Handsaker RE, Cano LM, Grabherr
M, Kodira CD, Raffaele S, Torto-Alalibo T, Bozkurt TO, Ah-Fong AM,
Alvarado L, Anderson VL, Armstrong MR, Avrova A, Baxter L, Beynon J,
Boevink PC, Bollmann SR, Bos JI, Bulone V, Cai G, Cakir C, Carrington JC,
Chawner M, Conti L, Costanzo S, Ewan R, Fahlgren N, et al.: Genome
sequence and analysis of the Irish potato famine pathogen
Phytophthora infestans. Nature 2009, 461:393-398.
Win J, Morgan W, Bos J, Krasileva KV, Cano LM, Chaparro-Garcia A, Ammar
R, Staskawicz BJ, Kamoun S: Adaptive evolution has targeted the Cterminal domain of the RXLR effectors of plant pathogenic Oomycetes.
Plant Cell 2007, 19:2349-2369.
Lindeberg M, Cartinhour S, Myers CR, Schechter LM, Schneider DJ,
Collmer A: Closing the circle on the discovery of genes encoding Hrp
regulon members and type III secretion system effectors in the
genomes of three model Pseudomonas syringae strains. Mol Plant
Microbe Interact 2006, 19:1151-1158.
Ellis JG, Rafiqi M, Gan P, Chakrabarti A, Dodds PN: Recent progress in
discovery and functional analysis of effector proteins of fungal and
oomycete plant pathogens. Curr Opin Plant Biol 2009, 12:399-405.
Catanzariti AM, Dodds PN, Lawrence GJ, Ayliffe MA, Ellis JG: Haustorially
expressed secreted proteins from flax rust are highly enriched for
avirulence elicitors. Plant Cell 2006, 18:243-256.
Link TI, Voegele RT: Secreted proteins of Uromyces fabae: similarities and
stage specificity. Mol Plant Pathol 2008, 9:59-66.
Godfrey D, Zhang Z, Saalbach G, Thordal-Christensen H: A proteomics
study of barley powdery mildew haustoria. Proteom 2009, 9:3222-3232.
Bindschedler LV, Burgis TA, Mills DJS, Ho JTC, Cramer R, Spanu PD: In
planta proteomics and proteogenomics of the biotrophic barley
fungal pathogen Blumeria graminis f. sp hordei. Mol Cell Proteom 2009,
8:2368-2381.
Rogozin IB, Sverdlov AV, Babenko VN, Koonin EV: Analysis of evolution of
exon-intron structure of eukaryotic genes. Brief Bioinform 2005,
6:118-134.
Zheng J, Rogozin IB, Koonin EV, Przytycka TM: Support for the Coelomata
clade of animals from a rigorous analysis of the pattern of intron
conservation. Mol Biol Evol 2007, 24:2583-2592.
Pieterse CM, Leon-Reyes A, Van der ES, Van Wees SC: Networking by
small-molecule hormones in plant immunity. Nat Chem Biol 2009,
5:308-316.
Zhang Z, Lenk A, Andersson MX, Gjetting T, Pedersen C, Nielsen ME,
Newman MA, Hou BH, Somerville SC, Thordal-Christensen H: A lesionmimic syntaxin double mutant in Arabidopsis reveals novel complexity
of pathogen defense signaling. Mol Plant 2008, 1:510-527.
Betts MJ, Guigó R, Agarwal P, Russell RB: Exon structure conservation
despite low sequence similarity: a relic of dramatic events in
evolution? EMBO J 2001, 20:5354-5360.
Tosa Y, Shishiyama J: Cytological aspects of events occurring after the
formation of primary haustoria in barley leaves infected with powdery
mildew. Can J Bot 1984, 62:795-798.
Lyngkjaer MF, Carver TLW, Zeyen RJ: Virulent Blumeria graminis infection
induces penetration susceptibility and suppresses race-specific
hypersensitive resistance against avirulent attack in Mla1-barley.
Physiol Mol Plant Pathol 2001, 59:243-256.
Skamnioti P, Pedersen C, Al-Chaarani GR, Holefors A, Thordal-Christensen
H, Brown JK, Ridout CJ: Genetics of avirulence genes in Blumeria
graminis f.sp. hordei and physical mapping of AVR(a22) and AVR(a12).
Fungal Gen Biol 2008, 45:243-252.
Sacristan S, Vigouroux M, Pedersen C, Skamnioti P, Thordal-Christensen H,
Micali C, Brown JKM, Ridout CJ: Coevolution between a family of
parasite virulence effectors and a class of LINE-1 retrotransposons.
PLoS ONE 2008, 4:e7463.
Thomas SW, Rasmussen SW, Glaring MA, Rouster JA, Christiansen SK,
Oliver RP: Gene identification in the obligate fungal pathogen Blumeria
graminis by expressed sequence tag analysis. Fungal Gen Biol 2001,
33:195-211.
Shen QH, Saijo Y, Mauch S, Biskup C, Bieri S, Keller B, Seki H, Ulker B,
Somssich IE, Schulze-Lefert P: Nuclear activity of MLA immune receptors
links isolate-specific and basal disease-resistance responses. Science
2007, 315:1098-1103.

Godfrey et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:317
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/317

27. Ewing B, Green P: Base-calling of automated sequencer traces using
phred. II. Error probabilities. Genome Research 1998, 8:186-194.
28. Tamura K, Dudley J, Nei M, Kumar S: MEGA4: Molecular evolutionary
genetics analysis (MEGA) software version 4.0. Mol Biol Evol 2007,
24:1596-1599.
29. Saitou N, Nei M: The neighbor-joining method - a new method for
reconstructing phylogenetic trees. Mol Biol Evol 1987, 4:406-425.
30. Felsenstein J: Confidence-limits on phylogenies - an approach using
the bootstrap. Evol 1985, 39:783-791.
31. Zuckerkandl E, Pauling L: Evolutionary divergence and convergence in
proteins. In Evolving Genes and Proteins Edited by: Bryson V, Vogel HJ.
New York: Academic Press; 1965:97-166.
doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-11-317
Cite this article as: Godfrey et al., Powdery mildew fungal effector candidates share N-terminal Y/F/WxC-motif BMC Genomics 2010, 11:317

Page 13 of 13

</pre>
</body>
</html>
