<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Population distribution models: species distributions are better modeled using biologically relevant data partitions</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Ecology 2011, 11:20. doi:10.1186/1472-6785-11-20"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Sergio C Gonzalez"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Gonzalez et al. BMC Ecology 2011, 11:20
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6785/11/20

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Population distribution models: species
distributions are better modeled using
biologically relevant data partitions
Sergio C Gonzalez1,3†, J Angel Soto-Centeno1,2*† and David L Reed1†

Abstract
Background: Predicting the geographic distribution of widespread species through modeling is problematic for
several reasons including high rates of omission errors. One potential source of error for modeling widespread
species is that subspecies and/or races of species are frequently pooled for analyses, which may mask biologically
relevant spatial variation within the distribution of a single widespread species. We contrast a presence-only
maximum entropy model for the widely distributed oldfield mouse (Peromyscus polionotus) that includes all
available presence locations for this species, with two composite maximum entropy models. The composite
models either subdivided the total species distribution into four geographic quadrants or by fifteen subspecies to
capture spatially relevant variation in P. polionotus distributions.
Results: Despite high Area Under the ROC Curve (AUC) values for all models, the composite species distribution
model of P. polionotus generated from individual subspecies models represented the known distribution of the
species much better than did the models produced by partitioning data into geographic quadrants or modeling
the whole species as a single unit.
Conclusions: Because the AUC values failed to describe the differences in the predictability of the three modeling
strategies, we suggest using omission curves in addition to AUC values to assess model performance. Dividing the
data of a widespread species into biologically relevant partitions greatly increased the performance of our
distribution model; therefore, this approach may prove to be quite practical and informative for a wide range of
modeling applications.

Background
Species distribution modeling (SDM) has become a
common tool for understanding spatial distribution patterns of biodiversity worldwide [1-4]. The goal of SDM
is to build a model predicting the relative probability of
occurrence of a species across geographic space commonly using environmental data (i.e. climate, vegetation,
soil, etc.) and a dataset of known presence or presence/
absence localities. The terms ecological niche model,
environmental niche model, and species distribution
model have all been used to describe this type of modeling in the literature; for the sake of simplicity we will
* Correspondence: sotocenteno@ufl.edu
† Contributed equally
1
Florida Museum of Natural History, Division of Mammals, University of
Florida, Dickinson Hall, Gainesville, FL 32611, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

use species distribution modeling. SDM techniques continue to evolve with an increasingly broad range of
applications from conservation planning [5,6], to predicting species colonization and abundance [4,7,8], predicting disease outbreaks [1], and understanding
phylogeographic patterns [9]. Methods of producing
SDMs vary with the type of data available, purpose, and
software used.
There is a direct link between climate and the distribution of plant species [10]. Because climate is a causal factor in the distribution of plant species (and plant species
assemblages), climatic patterns at various spatial scales
directly affect habitat types and community productivity.
Thus, climate is considered a proxy for a given species’
environmental niche. Because of the variables involved in
building SDMs, it is important to keep in mind that
SDMs are predicting a species’ fundamental niche as

© 2011 Gonzalez et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Gonzalez et al. BMC Ecology 2011, 11:20
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6785/11/20

probability of occurrence [11,12], not the realized distribution, which is affected by many extrinsic factors that
may not be accounted for in the model. The fundamental
niches of species are considered to be conserved over
evolutionary time [11], which has allowed climate-based
SDMs to be successful in predicting the occurrence of
species or closely related species at previously unsampled
localities [13-16].
Modeling species whose distributions span large environmental or habitat variation may be problematic
because distribution models tend to have higher rates of
omission error (i.e. underprediction) in the predicted
species distributions [2,17,18]. In such cases, the models
may indicate regional specialization of periphery or isolated populations. Commission errors (i.e. the overprediction of distributions) may result from a restriction of
the realized distribution due to biotic interactions or
geographic barriers to range expansion. In an attempt to
overcome omission errors in SDMs for widespread species, Osborne & Suarez-Seoane [17] modeled species
distributions by spatially partitioning their data into geographic quadrants and into concentric rings to model

Page 2 of 10

each data partition separately. Hernandez et al. [18] suggested that future research should focus on modeling
broad distributions in subunits that are based on distinct
genetic lineages or recognized subspecies.
Most species in the genus Peromyscus are widespread,
with a positive correlation between species range and
number of recognized subspecies [19], suggesting that
local specialization is common within species of this
genus. With 15 recognized subspecies [20] and genetically structured populations, P. polionotus is an excellent
model species for developing new methods of data partitioning to overcome the problems associated with modeling the geographic distributions of widely distributed
species.
The oldfield mouse (Peromyscus polionotus), also
known regionally as the Florida beach mouse, is widespread throughout the southeastern United States (Figure 1). Morphological and genetic differences have been
documented between subspecies [21-25]. Molecular evidence suggests that little or no gene flow occurs
between the highly structured populations on islands
along Florida’s panhandle [25] or between P. p. rhoadsi,

Figure 1 P. polionotus in southeastern United States. Distribution map of the 15 supspecies of P. polionotus redrawn from Hall (1981).

Gonzalez et al. BMC Ecology 2011, 11:20
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6785/11/20

Page 3 of 10

on Florida’s central ridge, and P. p. niveiventris, on the
Atlantic coast [21]. Highly differentiated populations of
Peromyscus are suggested to be the result of strong local
adaptation [19,23,26]. Coastal dune populations along
the Gulf of Mexico are phenotypically more similar to
populations along the Atlantic Coast (especially in coat
color) than to neighboring populations, suggesting they
are under similar selective pressures in their disjunct
coastal environments [23]. Throughout its range, P.
polionotus is threatened by development and invasive
species exerting competition and predation pressures on
its populations, and the subspecies P. p. decoloratus has
been considered extinct since 1950 [19,26].
Given the evidence for local adaptation in this widespread species, previous research would predict that an
SDM of the entire species would underpredict the geographic distribution of P. polionotus. A more accurate
prediction of the species’ distribution may result from a
biologically informed spatial partitioning of locality data.
To test this hypothesis, we modeled the distribution of
P. polionotus in three ways; we modeled the whole species distribution at once, we partitioned locality data
into four geographic quadrants following Osborne &
Suarez-Seoane [17], and we partitioned locality data by
the 15 recognized subspecies of P. polionotus.

Results
All individual and composite models produced AUC
values above 0.84, which are consistent with AUC values
reported in the literature for other taxa [9,17,18,27].
Despite having a high AUC value (0.899), the model
based on the entire data set failed to predict the occurrence of P. polionnotus in places where it is clearly
known to occur (Figure 2a), most obviously omitting the
distributions of the subspecies P. p. colemani and P. p.
polionotus. Partitioning the data by geographic quadrants (Figure 2b) and by subspecies (Figure 2c) produced models that are progressively better, both in
terms of predicting the known distribution, and in
terms of their AUC scores. The average AUC value of
the individual models used to build the geographic
quadrant composite model was 0.927, whereas the average AUC value of the individual models that were used
to build the subspecies composite model was 0.976.
Partitioning the data into geographic quadrants produced four models with AUC scores of 0.844, 0.968,
0.905, and 0.993 (clockwise from northeast; Figure 3).
The quadrant composite model (Figure 2b) predicted
high probabilities of occurrence in areas that the full
species model (Figure 2a) had omitted. However, the
quadrant composite model (Figure 2b) showed poor
resolution in parts of northern Georgia and peninsular
Florida. When the dataset was partitioned according to
the currently recognized subspecies (Figures 4 and 5),

Figure 2 Maxent distributions for P. polionotus using different
data partitions. Predicted species distributions using presence data
for the entire species at once (A), by dividing the presence data
into quadrants (B), and by subspecies (C).

each subspecies model performed well based on AUC
scores. Twelve out of 15 models had AUC scores
between 0.97 and 1.0; the exceptions being P. p. colemani (0.917), P. p. polionotus (0.851), and P. p. trissyllepsis (0.5). The poor performance of the model for P. p.
trissyllepsis was due to insufficient data (n = 2) for the
population and was omitted from the composite model.

Gonzalez et al. BMC Ecology 2011, 11:20
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6785/11/20

Page 4 of 10

Figure 3 Maxent distribution based on the quadrant method. Predicted species distribution of P. polionotus estimated from presence data
modeled separately in four quadrants (A-D).

Although superficially all models developed from data
partitions seem to perform well based on AUC values,
rates of omission between these methods show a different
perspective. Figure 6 shows three omission curves for the
whole-species model (Figure 6a), the quadrant method
(Figure 6b) and the subspecies model (Figure 6c). The
curves show omission error (Y-axis) as a function of predicted probability of occurrence (X-axis). Better performing
models based on the logistic output of Maxent have fewer
omission errors even as predicted probability of occurrence
reaches maximal values. The whole-species model (Figure
6a) and the quadrant model (Figure 6b) have omission
error rates that increase linearly with increasing probability
of occurrence. In contrast, the subspecies model (Figure
6c) has relatively low omission error rates that only begins
to increase when predicted probability of occurrence
reaches higher values, which is preferable.

Discussion
We suggest that partitioning data in a biologically meaningful way (as opposed to geographically) can help to

overcome high omission rates in distribution models of
widespread species [17,18,28]. Despite having a relatively
high AUC value (0.899), the model built upon the whole
species’ distribution failed to predict known localities of P.
polionotus, which can be observed by comparing Figure 1
to Figure 2a. Spatially partitioning the data into quadrants
produced a much better distribution model after combining four regional models with AUC values ranging from
0.844 to 0.993, which can be seen by comparing Figure 1
to Figure 2b. The 14 AUC scores for the SDMs based on
subspecies partitioning ranged from 0.851 to 1.0, which is
not substantially different from AUC values obtained for
the quadrant models. However, the accuracy and increased
resolution of the composite of the subspecies models can
be seen in comparing the three panels of Figure 2 and by
comparing Figure 1 to Figure 2c.
Limitation of AUC values for assessing predictive
performance

AUC values are commonly used as indicators of model fit
[9,17,18,27], and high values for all three methods in our

Gonzalez et al. BMC Ecology 2011, 11:20
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6785/11/20

Page 5 of 10

Figure 4 Maxent distribution of P. polionotus on peninsular Florida. Predicted species distribution of P. polionotus estimated from presence
data of each mainland and peninsular subspecies (A-G) analyzed separately.

study would suggest that each method produced highly
accurate models. Furthermore, the modest increase in
AUC values with ever greater data partitioning would suggest that each successive partitioning scheme produced, at
best, only slightly better fitting models. However, this finding is misleading when one compares the predicted distributions to the known distribution for the species. The
trend of increasing AUC scores may indicate the direction
of change in accuracy, but it fails to capture the magnitude
of improvement in the predicted distributions of the quadrant composite method and the subspecies composite
method. This failure is, in part, due to the fact that the
AUC scores for the geographic quadrant method and subspecies method are composites of 4 and 14 combined
models (respectively), and the accuracy (or inaccuracy) of
individual models is compounded when they are combined. This fact alone, however, cannot fully explain the
observed discrepancy between the vastly improved model
prediction and the modestly better AUC scores.
AUC values can be misleading when assessing a model’s predictive ability for several reasons. The AUC

measures discrimination and not accuracy per se, thus
ignoring the goodness of fit of a model [29]. The AUC
value also takes into account the performance of the
model at the extreme left (as well as the right) of the
ROC curve (see [29] for a details), a region that is not
operationally meaningful in our case. We are only interested in thresholds of predicted probability of occurrence greater than 0.50 because that would equal the
probability of occurrence of a null model. This inclusion
of the area under the extreme left of the ROC curve can
inflate AUC values, which can be further inflated when
the total geographic extent of the model is considered.
If the ratio between areas of presence and the total
extent is high, true positives are more likely to occur by
chance alone [28]. Because this ratio changes with each
of the individual models built on different data partitions, AUC values may not be useful in accurately comparing relative model performance between or among
our subspecies and regional models.
It is also possible that the inflation of AUC values
observed in the models we present results from the

Gonzalez et al. BMC Ecology 2011, 11:20
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6785/11/20

Page 6 of 10

Figure 5 Maxent distribution of P. polionotus on Florida panhandle. Predicted species distribution of P. polionotus estimated from presence
data of each Florida panhandle subspecies (A-G) analyzed separately.

interaction between geographic and environmental
space. Because of the narrow geographic space at
which most subspecies of P. polionotus occur, locality
information is geographically clustrered; therefore, the
environmental space sampled by the models may show
spatial autocorrelation in some of the environmental
variables used. In SDM, spatial autocorrelation occurs
when the values of the variables sampled at nearby
locations are not independent from each other [30]
and as a result, measures of accuracy (e.g. AUC) can
be inflated [31,32]. In our case, the geographic clustering of narrowly distributed subspecies of P. polionotus
may cause spatial autocorrelation and thus inflate AUC
values (see Figure 4 and 5). Nevertheless, within these
narrow extents, we included samples spanning the
entire geographic space representing a significant portion of the environmental space occupied by each subspecies. The resulting models are accurate to the true
distribution of the subspecies and are able to detect
even subtle local environmental conditions likely
affecting each subspecies differently, despite the seemingly geographic clustering. This further emphasizes
the point that AUC values provide an unreliable way

to accurately compare relative model performance. The
only exceptions to the issue of inflated AUC values in
our dataset are P. p. colemani (AUC = 0.917) and P. p.
polionotus (AUC = 0.851), which are the only two
widely distributed subspecies spanning a more heterogeneous environmental space where locality information for the subspecies is not geographically clustered
(Figure 2). Because of the larger geographic space
occupied by these subspecies, the resulting models
from P. p. colemani and P. p. polionotus are unlikely
affected by spatial autocorrelation and therefore do not
show inflated AUC values.
Finally, the AUC does not provide information as to
the spatial distribution of errors. It also weighs omission
and commission errors equally, both of which vary in
interpretive meaning and importance with the intended
use of the model [29]. Because we do not have true
absence data, we cannot quantify our commission error
rate. However, the omission curve shows how well the
model performs at different thresholds (i.e. the distribution of omission errors). Therefore, the omission curve
can be as important as the AUC value in terms of assessing model performance, if not more-so. A model with

Gonzalez et al. BMC Ecology 2011, 11:20
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6785/11/20

Page 7 of 10

quadrant-based models resulted because pseudoabsences were being generated by Maxent in areas with
true presences for either of the two subspecies just outside of the quadrant being modeled. That is, the arbitrary boundary between the quadrants obfuscates
biologically meaningful boundaries between populations
or subspecies. Thus, in using quadrant-based partitioning, niche information was lost for the two subspecies,
which emphasizes our point that biologically relevant
data partitioning informs species distribution models.
Molecular data and population distribution models

Figure 6 Omission curves as a means of assessing model
performance. Omission curve (thin green line) for the species level
model of P. polionotus (A), the northwest region of the quadrant
method (B), and the single subspecies P. p. phasma of the
subspecies method (C). Mean AUC value for replicate runs was
0.899 (std.dev. = 0.105), 0.905 (std.dev. = 0.119), and 1.0 (std.dev. =
0.001), respectively.

relatively lower omission errors at higher predicted
probabilities of occurrence is preferred.
Quadrant versus subspecies partitioning

Because Maxent draws pseudo-absence data at random
to calculate AUC scores, it is possible that in our quadrant analysis it drew false pseudo-absences from areas
outside the quadrant being tested, especially in the case
of the northwest quadrant. Whether this occurred, and
if it did, whether it contributed to the observed underprediction is debatable. First, there was far less underprediction in the other three quadrants. For example,
the model for the southwest quadrant, which includes
peninsular Florida predicted occurrences in regions
where the species does not occur. Second, the two
northern quadrants cover roughly the same geographic
area as two of the subspecies (P. p. colemani and P. p.
polionotus), yet the two northern quadrants failed to
predict areas of known occurrence that the two subspecies models predicted accurately. It is possible that poor

It is easy to see how molecular data, such as DNA
sequences, can be used to delineate biologically meaningful groups (i.e. clades) within a species, and that
those clades might be partitioned separately for species
distribution modeling, especially if they are geographically discrete. But, just as molecular data can improve
methods of generating SDMs, the findings associated
with SDMs can also inform the work done by molecular
biologists studying population genetics, phylogenetics, or
phylogeography. When SDMs are nonoverlapping for
populations within a species, they may be revealing
cryptic patterns of divergence that would be interesting
to study with molecular data. Conversely, when molecular data uncover population structure or limits to gene
flow, SDMs can be used to test hypothesized mechanisms of divergence such as niche differentiation. Examining both molecular data and SDMs together has been
explored only recently [6,9].
Building SDMs for P. polionotus by partitioning data
into subspecies and building a composite distribution
model mitigated the problem of high omission rates that
usually occurs when modeling the distributions of
widely distributed species. This suggests that the SDM
based on biologically relevant partitions (subspecies in
our case) could accommodate variability in the niches of
subspecies, whereas modeling the whole species distribution together could not. This is supported by the fact
that spatial partitioning of data into quadrants produced
models that had regions of both under- and over-prediction (Figure 3), whereas the models based on partitioning by subspecies showed no signs of underprediction
and only modest overlap in the distributions of adjacent
individual subspecies caused by overprediction (Figure
5). The evidence of high levels of population structure
between locally adapted populations [19,21-23,25,26]
might be driving the improvement we see in the composite model based on subspecies distributions. In our
case, we show that molecular data at the population
level improved model accuracy. Furthermore, in the
absence of detailed molecular information on the populations studied, researchers could generate relevant data
partitions using alternative data sources such as

Gonzalez et al. BMC Ecology 2011, 11:20
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6785/11/20

subspecies delimitations, morophological differences or
other phenotypic traits.
Phylogeographic implications for P. polionotus

Guisan & Zimmermann [28] encourage collaboration
with evolutionary biologists and population geneticists
in cases where widespread species are being modeled.
More recently, Rödder et al. [9] discussed how a variety
of techniques including molecular ecology and environmental niche modeling can be complimentary in
answering phylogeographic questions. The case is such
here, where our method of partitioning data was based
largely on the literature, which includes population
genetic studies that have been conducted on P. polionotus. Conversely, as molecular work helped to inform our
models, our models also shed light on and confirm
results of studies on the species’ genetic structure, and
possibly evolutionary trajectory. For example, the SDMs
for P. p. rhoadsi and P. p. nivieventris do not overlap
and are geographically discrete (Figure 4 and 2c), which
is consistent with the genetic results of Degner et al.
[21] and current taxonomy (Figure 1). The southeastern
quadrant model, however, has very poor resolution of
this finescale distinction (Figure 3c). Similarly, the models for P. p. polionotus and P. p. colemani capture the
known extent of their respective ranges (Figure 5), while
the two northern quadrant models do not (Figure 3, a
and 3b), implying that these two subspecies occupy different climatic niches.
Climate appears to play an important role in defining
inland and inland vs. coastal subspecies (e.g. Figure 4AD). However, despite there being genetic differences in
the beach mouse subspecies located in the Florida panhandle (Figure 5A-F), there was considerable overlap in
their predicted distributions, suggesting that climate
may not be the primary factor defining the range of
these subspecies. Predicted niche overlap usually
occurred between adjacent coastal subspecies (Figure
5A-F) and only once between coastal and inland subspecies (see P. p. albifrons and P. p. sumneri, Figure 5F-G).
Studies have shown that the coastal beach mouse populations reflect patterns of local adaptation and strong
selection favoring cryptic coloration [22-25]. Therefore,
in cases where climatic habitat on adjacent coastal beaches might be similar, vicariance (i.e. coastal inlets) and
strong selection for coat coloration are more likely than
climate to maintain the distinctiveness of coastal beach
mouse subspecies.

Conclusions
Using a biologically meaningful method of partitioning
the data from widely distributed species generated a
composite SDM of P. polionotus that more accurately
reflected the known distribution of the species than the

Page 8 of 10

process of analyzing the whole species at once or partitioning the data into geographic quadrants. Osborne
and Suarez-Seoane [17] note that geographic based data
partitioning (e.g. quadrants) may not have worked well
due to the absence of any biological basis for partitioning. We contend that our study confirms that statement.
We also provide an example of how SDMs can be both
informed by as well as inform phylogeographic studies
at the population and species levels. Modeling a widespread species using biologically meaningful data partitions has the potential to greatly increase the
performance of distribution models while only requiring
basic manipulation in GIS software. Thus, this technique
may prove to be quite practical for a wide range of
modeling applications. Despite the increasing use and
popularity of ENMs, a completely objective, accurate,
and fully accepted measure of performance of predictive
distribution models is still elusive [9,27,29]. We suggest
using both the AUC and omission curve on a contextual
basis to assess model performance.

Methods
We created species distribution models for P. polionotus in
Maxent using the WorldClim climate layers. Maxent uses
the principle of maximum entropy density estimation to
generate a probability distribution based on presence-only
data [33,34]. It has been shown to produce more accurate
models with lower sample sizes than other distribution
modeling software [18,35]. We used the WorldClim Current BioClim climate layers at 30 arc-seconds resolution
(about 1 km2). These layers are based on data from 19502000 and comprise 19 bioclimatic variables representing
annual trends, seasonality, and extremes of precipitation
and temperature [36]. We used the entire set of 19 climatic variables because we did not make any a priori
assumptions of correlation among these variables. We
clipped the WorldClim layers in ESRI ArcGIS 9.3 to
include the extent of the species geographic range in our
models (N35.00, E-77.0, W-92.0, S25.00).
Presence data was obtained from collection localities
of museum specimens of P. polionotus identified to subspecies (Louisiana State Museum of Natural Science,
Michigan State University Museum, National Museum
of Vertebrate Zoology, American Museum of Natural
History, University of Michigan Museum of Zoology,
University of Kansas Biodiversity Institute, Sam Noble
Oklahoma Museum of Natural History), found on the
online data bases Mammal Network Information System
[37] and Global Biodiversity Information Facility [38].
Records lacking GPS coordinates, but with specific written locality information were georeferenced following
MaNIS protocols using Google Earth and the U.S.
Board of Geographic Names’ (BGN) Geographic Names
Information System (GNIS) [39].

Gonzalez et al. BMC Ecology 2011, 11:20
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6785/11/20

To obtain a model of distribution for the entire species, a model representing the mean distribution was
produced in Maxent using a cross-validation approach
of all specimen localities. The cross-validation function
split the data set into n samples. In each of the n replicates, a single specimen was tested sequentially against
all remaining samples (i.e. n - 1), which formed the
training set of localities [40]. This eliminated the need
to partition a dataset into large training and testing sets.
This approach is useful when dealing with especially
small datasets, where splitting the data would result in a
training set of insufficient size.
Similar to Osborne and Suarez-Seoane [17], we spatially partitioned our data into geographic quadrants
(northeast, southeast, northwest, southwest) based on
the unweighted centroid of our dataset. Using the same
methods as described above, we ran models for each of
the four data partitions. We note that we only partitioned our presence data. Therefore, in this case, the
pseudo-absences drawn by Maxent are drawn from our
complete working extent (not merely the quadrant
being examined in isolation). These four models were
then combined to produce a composite model of probability of occurrence for the entire species. This was
done in ESRI ArcGIS using the Spatial Analyst toolbox
to create a new raster based on the four independently
modeled quadrants. When two or more quadrants predicted occurrence at a single point, we used the higher
probability of occurrence value in our composite species
distribution.
We produced a second composite model by partitioning our presence data into the 15 recognized subspecies
of P. polionotus and modeling the distributions of each
subspecies separately. The subspecies P. p. trissyllepsis
lacked sufficient data to build a functioning model, so
that subspecies was omitted. The remaining 14 subspecies models where combined in ArcGIS, as described
above, to produce a composite model of probability of
occurrence for the entire species.
The final logistic outputs of each model were used to
assess our results. The area under the curve (AUC) of
receiver operating characteristic (ROC) plot was used to
evaluate model performance. The AUC is a threshold
independent measure of model performance, where an
AUC value of 1 indicates optimal performance, and
AUC = 0.5 indicates a model performing no better than
a randomly generated one. The mean and range of the
AUC values of each group of models used in the composites were compared in an attempt to give a relative
value of “goodness” for the two composites.
Acknowledgements
We thank R. Fletcher for comments on an early draft of this manuscript. JASC thanks RD Barrilito for support. This work was supported by grants to DLR

Page 9 of 10

from the University of Florida Research Opportunity SEED Fund and the
National Science Foundation (DEB 0717165 and DEB 0845392). Publication of
this article was funded in part by the University of Florida Open-Access
Publishing Fund.
Author details
Florida Museum of Natural History, Division of Mammals, University of
Florida, Dickinson Hall, Gainesville, FL 32611, USA. 2Department of Biology,
University of Florida, Bartram-Carr Hall, Gainesville, FL 32611, USA. 3Fort
Lauderdale Research and Education Center, University of Florida, 3205
College Ave., Davie, FL 33314, USA.
1

Authors’ contributions
SCG, JASC, and DLR conceived and designed the experiment. SCG and JASC
carried out data analysis. SCG, JASC, and DLR designed and wrote the
manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manucript.
Received: 27 January 2011 Accepted: 19 September 2011
Published: 19 September 2011
References
1. Peterson AT, Sánchez-Cordero V, Beard CB, Ramsey JM: Ecologic niche
modeling and potential reservoirs for Chagas disease, Mexico. Emerging
Infectious Diseases 2002, 8:662-667.
2. Guisan A, Thuiller W: Predicting species distribution: offering more than
simple habitat models. Ecology Letters 2005, 8:993-1009.
3. Wiens JJ, Graham CH: Niche conservatism: Integrating evolution, ecology,
and conservation biology. Annual Review of Ecology, Evolution, and
Systematics 2005, 36:519-539.
4. VanDerWal J, Shoo LP, Johnson CN, Williams SE: Abundance and the
environmental niche: environmental suitability estimated from niche
models predicts the upper limit of local abundance. The American
Naturalist 2009, 174:282-291.
5. Allen CR, Pearlstine LG, Kitchens WM: Modeling viable mammal
populations in gap analyses. Biological Conservation 2001, 99:135-144.
6. Scoble J, Lowe AJ: A case for incorporating phylogeography and
landscape genetics into species distribution modelling approaches to
improve climate adaptation and conservation planning. Diversity and
Distributions 2010, 16:343-353.
7. Peterson AT: Predicting the geography of species’ invasions via
ecological niche modeling. The Quarterly Review of Biology 2003,
78:419-433.
8. Peterson AT, Robins CR: Using ecological-niche modeling to predict
barred owl invasions with implications for spotted owl conservation.
Conservation Biology 2003, 17:1161-1165.
9. Rödder D, Weinsheimer F, Lötters S: Molecules meet macroecology:
Combining species distribution models and phylogeographic studies.
Zootaxa 2010, 60:54-60.
10. Rehfeldt GE, Crookston NL, Warwell MV, Evans JS: Empirical analyses of
plant-climate relationships for the western united states. International
Journal of Plant Sciences 2006, 167:1123-1150.
11. Peterson AT: Conservatism of ecological niches in evolutionary time.
Science 1999, 285:1265-1267.
12. Pearson RG, Dawson TP, Liu C: Modelling species distributions in Britain: a
hierarchical integration of climate and land-cover data. Ecography 2004,
27:285-298.
13. Bentlage B, Peterson AT, Cartwright P: Inferring distributions of
chirodropid box-jellyfishes (Cnidaria: Cubozoa) in geographic and
ecological space using ecological niche modeling. Marine Ecology Progress
Series 2009, 384:121-133.
14. Guisan A, Broennimann O, Engler R, Vust M, Yoccoz NG, Lehmann A,
Zimmermann NE: Using niche-based models to improve the sampling of
rare species. Conservation Biology 2006, 20:501-511.
15. Raxworthy CJ, Martinez-Meyer E, Horning N, Nussbaum RA, Schneider GE,
Ortega-Huerta MA, Townsend Peterson A: Predicting distributions of
known and unknown reptile species in Madagascar. Nature 2003,
426:837-841.
16. Rissler LJ, Apodaca JJ: Adding more ecology into species delimitation:
ecological niche models and phylogeography help define cryptic
species in the black salamander (Aneides flavipunctatus). Systematic
Biology 2007, 56:924-942.

Gonzalez et al. BMC Ecology 2011, 11:20
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6785/11/20

17. Osborne P, Suarez-Seoane S: Should data be partitioned spatially before
building large-scale distribution models? Ecological Modelling 2002,
157:249-259.
18. Hernandez PA, Graham CH, Master LL, Albert DL: The effect of sample size
and species characteristics on performance of different species
distribution modeling methods. Ecography 2006, 29:773-785.
19. Blair F: Ecological factors in speciation of peromyscus. Evolution 1950,
4:253-275.
20. Hall ER: The Mammals of North America. 2 edition. John Wiley and Sons;
1981, 980.
21. Degner JF, Stout IJ, Roth JD, Parkinson CL: Population genetics and
conservation of the threatened southeastern beach mouse (Peromyscus
polionotus niveiventris): subspecies and evolutionary units. Conservation
Genetics 2007, 8:1441-1452.
22. Vignieri SN, Larson JG, Hoekstra HE: The selevive advantage of cripsis in
mice. Evolution 2010, 64:2153-2158.
23. Mullen LM, Hoekstra HE: Natural selection along an environmental
gradient: a classic cline in mouse pigmentation. Evolution 2008,
62:1555-1570.
24. Steiner CC, Römpler H, Boettger LM, Schöneberg T, Hoekstra HE: The
genetic basis of phenotypic convergence in beach mice: similar pigment
patterns but different genes. Molecular Biology and Evolution 2009,
26:35-45.
25. Mullen LM, Vignieri SN, Gore JJA, Hoekstra HE: Adaptive basis of
geographic variation: genetic, phenotypic and environmental differences
among beach mouse populations. Proceedings of the Royal Society B 2009,
276:3809-3818.
26. Humphrey SR, Barbour DB: Status and habitat of three subspecies of
peromyscus polionotus in florida. Jounal of Mammalogy 1981, 62:840-844.
27. Fielding AH, Bell JF: A review of methods for the assessment of
prediction errors in conservation presence/absence models.
Environmental Conservation 1997, 24:38-49.
28. Guisan A, Zimmermann NE: Predictive habitat distribution models in
ecology. Ecological Modelling 2000, 135:147-186.
29. Lobo JM, Jiménez-Valverde A, Real R: AUC: A misleading measure of the
performance of predictive distribution models. Global Ecology and
Biogeography 2008, 17:145-151.
30. Elith J, Leathwick JR: Species distribution models: Ecological explanation
and prediction across space and time. Annual Review of Ecology, Evolution,
and Systematics 2009, 40:677-697.
31. Veloz SD: Spatially autocorrelated sampling falsely inflates measures of
accuracy for presence-only niche models. Journal of Biogeography 2009,
36:2290-2299.
32. Segurado P, Araujo MB, Kunin WE: Consequences of spatial
autocorrelation for niche-based models. Journal of Applied Ecology 2006,
43:433-444.
33. Phillips S, Anderson R, Schapire R: Maximum entropy modeling of species
geographic distributions. Ecological Modelling 2006, 190:231-259.
34. Phillips SJ, Dudík M: Modeling of species distributions with Maxent: New
extensions and a comprehensive evaluation. Ecography 2008, 31:161-175.
35. Elith J, Graham CH, Anderson RP, Dudík M, Ferrier S, Guisan A, Hijmans RJ,
Huettmann F, Leathwick JR, Lehmann A, Li J, Lohmann LG, Loiselle BA,
Manion G, Moritz C, Nakamura M, Nakazawa Y, Overton JMcC, Townsend
Peterson A, Phillips SJ, Richardson K, Scachetti-Pereira R, Schapire RE,
Soberón J, Williams S, Wisz MS, Zimmermann NE: Novel methods improve
prediction of species’ distributions from occurrence data. Ecography
2006, 29:129-151.
36. Hijmans RJ, Cameron SE, Parra JL, Jones PG, Jarvis A: Very high resolution
interpolated climate surfaces for global land areas. International Journal
of Climatology 2005, 25:1965-1978.
37. Mammal Network Information System. [http://manisnet.org].
38. Global Biodiversity Information System. [http://www.gbif.org].
39. US Board on Geographic Names: Geographic Names Information
System. [http://geonames.usgs.gov/pls/gnispublic].
40. Araújo MB, Pearson RG, Thuiller W, Erhard M: Validation of species-climate
impact models under climate change. Global Change Biology 2005,
11:1504-1513.
doi:10.1186/1472-6785-11-20
Cite this article as: Gonzalez et al.: Population distribution models:
species distributions are better modeled using biologically relevant
data partitions. BMC Ecology 2011 11:20.

Page 10 of 10

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
