<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Analysis of a new strain of Euphorbia mosaic virus with distinct replication specificity unveils a lineage of begomoviruses with short Rep sequences in the DNA-B intergenic region</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Virology Journal 2010, 7:275. doi:10.1186/1743-422X-7-275"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Josefat Gregorio-Jorge"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Gregorio-Jorge et al. Virology Journal 2010, 7:275
http://www.virologyj.com/content/7/1/275

RESEARCH

Open Access

Analysis of a new strain of Euphorbia mosaic virus
with distinct replication specificity unveils a
lineage of begomoviruses with short Rep
sequences in the DNA-B intergenic region
Josefat Gregorio-Jorge1†, Artemiza Bernal-Alcocer2†, Bernardo Bañuelos-Hernández1, Ángel G Alpuche-Solís1,
Cecilia Hernández-Zepeda3, Oscar Moreno-Valenzuela3, Gustavo Frías-Treviño2, Gerardo R Argüello-Astorga1*

Abstract
Background: Euphorbia mosaic virus (EuMV) is a member of the SLCV clade, a lineage of New World
begomoviruses that display distinctive features in their replication-associated protein (Rep) and virion-strand
replication origin. The first entirely characterized EuMV isolate is native from Yucatan Peninsula, Mexico;
subsequently, EuMV was detected in weeds and pepper plants from another region of Mexico, and partial DNA-A
sequences revealed significant differences in their putative replication specificity determinants with respect to
EuMV-YP. This study was aimed to investigate the replication compatibility between two EuMV isolates from the
same country.
Results: A new isolate of EuMV was obtained from pepper plants collected at Jalisco, Mexico. Full-length clones of
both genomic components of EuMV-Jal were biolistically inoculated into plants of three different species, which
developed symptoms indistinguishable from those induced by EuMV-YP. Pseudorecombination experiments with
EuMV-Jal and EuMV-YP genomic components demonstrated that these viruses do not form infectious reassortants
in Nicotiana benthamiana, presumably because of Rep-iteron incompatibility. Sequence analysis of the EuMV-Jal
DNA-B intergenic region (IR) led to the unexpected discovery of a 35-nt-long sequence that is identical to a
segment of the rep gene in the cognate viral DNA-A. Similar short rep sequences ranging from 35- to 51-nt in
length were identified in all EuMV isolates and in three distinct viruses from South America related to EuMV. These
short rep sequences in the DNA-B IR are positioned downstream to a ~160-nt non-coding domain highly similar to
the CP promoter of begomoviruses belonging to the SLCV clade.
Conclusions: EuMV strains are not compatible in replication, indicating that this begomovirus species probably is
not a replicating lineage in nature. The genomic analysis of EuMV-Jal led to the discovery of a subgroup of SLCV
clade viruses that contain in the non-coding region of their DNA-B component, short rep gene sequences located
downstream to a CP-promoter-like domain. This assemblage of DNA-A-related sequences within the DNA-B IR is
reminiscent of polyomavirus microRNAs and could be involved in the posttranscriptional regulation of the cognate
viral rep gene, an intriguing possibility that should be experimentally explored.

Background
The members of the family Geminiviridae, one of the two
largest natural groups of plant viruses, are characterized
* Correspondence: grarguel@ipicyt.edu.mx
† Contributed equally
1
Instituto Potosino de Investigación Científica y Tecnológica, A.C., Camino a
la Presa San José, 78216 San Luís Potosí, SLP, México
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

by a circular, single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) genome
encapsidated within virions whose morphology is unique
in the known virosphere, consisting of two joined, incomplete T = 1 icosahedra [1,2]. Geminiviruses are classified
into four genera, based on their genome organization,
plant host range, and insect vector. Members of the most
diversified genus, Begomovirus, are transmitted by the
whitefly Bemisia tabaci (Hemiptera; Aleyrodidae), infect

© 2010 Gregorio-Jorge et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Gregorio-Jorge et al. Virology Journal 2010, 7:275
http://www.virologyj.com/content/7/1/275

a wide range of dicotyledonous plant species, and have
either monopartite or bipartite genomes [3]. In recent
decades, these viruses have emerged as major threats
to food and fiber crop production throughout the world,
apparently as a result of a great increase in vector
population densities, expansion of crop monocultures,
transport of plant materials between geographically distant regions, and introduction of foreigner whitefly
biotypes [4,5].
Approximately 200 species of begomoviruses are currently known, grouped into two major lineages based on
their genomic sequences: the Old World (OW; Europe,
Africa, the Indian subcontinent, Asia, and Australasia)
and the New World (NW; the Americas) begomoviruses
[6,7]. The OW begomoviruses have either monopartite
or bipartite genomes, while all NW begomoviruses (for
simplicity, NW-Beg) have two genomic components,
known as DNA-A and DNA-B. The DNA-A component
of NW-Beg has one open reading frame in the virion
sense (AV1 or cp gene) encoding the coat protein, and
four overlapped ORFs in the complementary sense (AC1
or rep gene, AC2 or trap gene, AC3 or ren gene, and
AC4) that encode proteins involved in DNA replication,
regulation of viral gene expression and suppression of
host-defense responses [1,8]. The DNA-B component
contains only two ORFs, one in the virion sense (BV1 or
nsp gene) and other in the complementary sense (BC1
or mp gene), encoding proteins involved in intra- and
intercellular movement of the virus [9,10]. The two
genomic components are very different in overall
nucleotide sequence, with the exception of a ~180-nt
segment of the intergenic region (IR) displaying high
sequence identity, termed the “common region” (CR).
This region includes several repeated sequences (5 to
8-nt in length) called “iterons”, which are closely associated to a ~30-nt conserved element that has the
potential to form a hairpin structure that harbors in its
apex the invariant nonanucleotide 5’-TAATATTAC- 3’
[1]. Both the iterons and the conserved nonanucleotide
in the hairpin element are functional targets for Rep,
the virus-encoded protein that initiates the DNA replication by a rolling-circle (RCR) mechanism. Rep recognizes and binds specifically to the iterons and
subsequently introduces a nick into the invariant nonanucleotide to initiate the RCR process [11,12].
The NW-Beg have radiated to a great extent since its
arrival to the American continent, and several secondary
lineages or “clades” have been identified in phylogenetic
studies [6,13,14]. The most atypical of the NW-Beg
clades is the one named after the Squash leaf curl virus
(SLCV) that encompasses more than 15 viral species
distributed from Southern EUA to Brazil [7,13]. Members of the SLCV clade are differentiated from other
NW-Beg by two main features: 1) the number and

Page 2 of 15

arrangement of the iterons in their replication origin,
that are distinctive, and 2) the N-terminal domain (i.e.,
residues 1 to 150) of their Rep proteins display low aa
sequence identity (< 50%) with proteins encoded by
typical NW-Beg, lacking several amino acid motifs
which are conserved in both NW- and OW- begomovirus Rep proteins [[15-17]; unpublished data].
Among the earliest recorded members of the SLCVclade is Euphorbia mosaic virus (EuMV), which was
associated with symptomatic Euphorbia heterophylla
plants throughout the Caribbean basin and the tropical
Americas since the 1970’s [18,19]. However, its molecular characterization was not carried out until 2007,
when the complete genome sequence of EuMV-YP, the
isolate associated with the former plant host in the
Yucatan Peninsula of Mexico, was reported [20]. Complete DNA-A sequences from two additional EuMV isolates were available at GenBank at that time, one from
Puerto Rico (EuMV-PR) and the isolate whose complete
sequence is now reported here, from Jalisco, Mexico
(EuMV-Jal). According to their full-length DNA-A
sequence identity, the EuMV isolates were classified into
two different strains, simply termed “A” and “B”. The
first strain was represented by EuMV-YP and EuMVPR, while EuMV-Jal was the only member of the
“B-strain” [7]. However, the recently described EuMVJM, from Jamaica [21], displays a very similar sequence
identity to both EuMV-PR (A-strain, 95% identity)
and EuMV-Jal (B-strain, 95.4% identity). Therefore,
the relationship between EuMV isolates belonging to
supposedly distinct strains should be experimentally
addressed.
In this work we report the complete molecular characterization of EuMV-Jal, which was found infecting peppers and weeds in Jalisco, Mexico, and was shown to be
incompatible in replication with EuMV-YP in reassortment experiments. The genomic analysis of this novel
EuMV strain led to the unforeseen discovery of an
assemblage of DNA-A homologous sequences in the
intergenic region of its DNA-B, whose position and
arrangement is conserved in several begomovirus species, hence suggesting the intriguing possibility of a
functional role of those atypical sequences in the infective cycle of EuMV and its relatives.

Results
Isolation of a new strain of Euphorbia mosaic virus

During Autumn 2005, a survey of farming fields infested
with whiteflies in the state of Jalisco, Mexico, was
undertaken. Pepper plants exhibiting a variety of symptoms (including leaf curling and crumpling, yellow
veins, deformed fruits, and stunted growth) were
observed in fields of three Jalisco localities. Leaf samples
from 63 symptomatic weeds and pepper plants were

Gregorio-Jorge et al. Virology Journal 2010, 7:275
http://www.virologyj.com/content/7/1/275

collected, and total DNA extracts were tested for the
presence of begomoviruses using polymerase chain reaction (PCR) with several pairs of degenerated primers
(see Methods). More than 80% of the examined samples
were PCR-positive and sequence analyses of the amplicons revealed that the majority of the symptomatic
plants were infected by begomoviruses belonging to two
different species, Pepper huasteco yellow vein virus
(PHYVV) and Pepper golden mosaic virus (PepGMV),
which commonly infect pepper and tomato crops
throughout the north and central areas of Mexico
[22-24]. Partial DNA-A sequences of a third begomovirus were obtained from two pepper samples from the
Castillo locality (close to the Pacific coast, coordinates
19°45’00’’ N; 104°23’30’’ W), one Nicotiana glauca plant
(“tabaquillo”) collected at Sayula (coordinates 19° 47’55’’
N; 103°46’05’’ W) and one Euphorbia heterophylla plant
collected at Teocuitatlán (coordinates 20°12’30’’ N; 103°
30’00’’ W). In the four cases the plants were co-infected
with either PHYVV or PepGMV. The complete
sequence of the DNA-A and DNA-B genomic components of the unidentified begomovirus was obtained
from overlapped PCR products derived from one pepper
plant co-infected with PHYVV (see Methods). Comparisons with sequences available at the GenBank database
using BlastN showed that the third pepper-infecting
virus was an isolate of Euphorbia mosaic virus, displaying a DNA-A overall sequence identity of 95.4%, 92.8%
and 92.1% with EuMV isolates from Jamaica [GenBank:
DQ395342], Puerto Rico [GenBank: AF068642] and the
Yucatan Peninsula [GenBank: DQ318937], respectively.
Genome organization of EuMV-Jal

The EuMV-Jal genome exhibited a genetic organization
typical of NW-Beg. The DNA-A molecule [GenBank:
DQ520942] was 2609 nt in length, and encoded five
genes (cp, rep, trap, ren and AC4). The DNA-B molecule [GenBank: HQ185235] was 2590 nt in size, and
contained two major ORFs (BV1 and BC1). The common region (CR) of EuMV-Jal DNA-A and DNA-B
encompassed 169 and 170 nt, respectively, with 98%
identity. The CR contained the origin of replication
comprising the conserved hairpin element and five iterons (GGAGTCC) that displayed the characteristic
arrangement of the viruses belonging to the
SLCV-cluster [15,16]. Comparisons of EuMV-Jal CR
with the homologous region of other EuMV isolates
revealed that EuMV-Jal and EuMV-JM have a DNA-A
replication origin with a composition of putative cis-acting elements different to the homologous Ori of EuMVYP and EuMV-PR. Indeed, in addition to harbor iterative elements with a distinct nucleotide sequence, the
EuMV isolates from Jalisco and Jamaica display a G-box
motif in the immediate vicinity of the conserved hairpin

Page 3 of 15

element, which is absent in the DNA-A of EuMV-PR
and EuMV-YP (Figure 1A). The later viruses display
instead a conserved motif (GGGGCAAAA) that is characteristic of most members of the SLCV-clade (our
unpublished data). In contrast with the differences
observed between the DNA-A components, comparisons
of the DNA-B CR revealed a similar modular organization in all EuMV isolates, with a G-box motif adjacent
to the hairpin element (Figure 1B). A similar organization of the DNA-B CR is observed in Euphorbia yellow
mosaic virus (Fernandes et al., unpublished) [GenBank:
FJ619507 and FJ619508], a recently described begomovirus from Brazil, that is a distant relative of EuMV
(Figure 1B).
Phylogenetic relationships

A phylogenetic tree based on the full-length DNA-A of
four EuMV isolates, 20 NW-Beg and several bipartite
and monopartite OW-Beg (Table 1), was generated
using the neighbor-joining method with 1,000 bootstraps replications (Figure 2). The analysis indicated a
close relationship between the EuMV isolates from
Mexico and the Caribbean basin with the following
three begomoviruses from South America: Tomato mild
yellow leaf curl Aragua virus (TMYLCAV) from Venezuela [GenBank: AY927277], Euphorbia mosaic Peru
virus (EuMPV) [25], and Euphorbia yellow mosaic virus
(EuYMV) from Brazil. This grouping was well-supported
by both the phylogenetic analysis (bootstrap value 84)
and the pairwise-identity analyses (Table 2), thus defining a sub-lineage within the SLCV clade that is broadly
distributed in the American continent. A phylogenetic
analysis based on the full-length DNA-B sequences produced similar results for the EuMV subclade and the
group of cucurbit-infecting viruses (data not shown),
but not for other members of the SLCV lineage that
were placed into groups that are not congruent with the
phylogeny derived from their DNA-A sequences. The
incongruent phylogenies of DNA-A and DNA-B components of some begomoviruses is generally indicative of
recombination and/or reassortment events [6,26].
Recombination analysis

The differences between the strains A and B of EuMV
regarding nucleotide sequence and modular organization
of the Ori region could be indicative of either divergent
molecular evolution or intermolecular recombination
between co-infecting begomoviruses [27,28]. To search for
potential recombinant sequences in the genome of EuMV
strains, we analyzed sequence alignments that included
the DNA-A of the four EuMV isolates under exam, as well
as diverse sets of begomoviruses of the SLCV clade, using
the suite of programs for detection of recombinant breakpoints integrated within the RDP package [29]. The

Gregorio-Jorge et al. Virology Journal 2010, 7:275
http://www.virologyj.com/content/7/1/275

Page 4 of 15

Figure 1 Comparison of CR sequences from EuMV and relatives. The alignments of the CR sequences of both (A) DNA-A and (B) DNA-B
components from EuMV isolates and related begomoviruses from South America are shown to highlight similarities and differences in relevant
cis-acting elements. Putative Rep-binding elements (iterons) are shaded in yellow and their relative orientation is depicted by black arrows; the
sequence with the potential to form a stem-loop structure is highlighted in black and underlined. The TATA box of the leftward promoter is
shaded in blue. The G-box element is shown in red letters, and the “GYA box” conserved in members of the SLCV clade is represented in green
letters. (C) Differences in the nucleotide sequence of the iterons and the amino acid sequence of the Rep-IRD of EuMV-Jal and relatives are
highlighted. Virus acronyms and GenBank accession numbers are listed in Table 1.

analysis identified a ~210-nt long EuMV genomic region
(recombinant breakpoints at positions 2432 and 33 of
EuMV-Jal DNA-A) as a fragment of possible recombinant
origin, which includes the entire common region (~ 170nt) as well as the first 44 nucleotides of the rep gene,
encompassing the IRD-coding sequence [17]. The plausible recombinant origin of this DNA fragment is underscore by direct comparisons of the DNA-A components
from EuMV-JM and EuMV-PR, which are members from
different strains exhibiting very high sequence identity
(97.4%) along a segment encompassing ~2,400 out the
2,609-nt of its DNA-A, a fact that is in clear contrast with
the low sequence identity (77.5%) displayed in the 210-nt
genomic region flanked by the recombinant breakpoints
detected by our analysis.
The assembled data suggest that EuMV A-strain viruses
are the product of an intermolecular recombination event
involving an EuMV-JM-related virus (the major parent)
and a virus closely related to Calopogonium golden mosaic

virus (CpGMV) [GenBank: AF439402] which might have
donated the ~210-nt fragment with the viral replication
module. This DNA segment, which is entirely identical in
sequence between EuMV-PR and EuMV-YP, is shared
with CpGMV at 90% of nucleotide identity. Two additional observations support the hypothesis of intermolecular recombination: (1) The absence of a G-box element
within the CR of the DNA-A component of EuMV-YP,
that is nevertheless present in their cognate DNA-B component (see Figure 1); and (2) The lower than expected
sequence identity of the EuMV-YP common region
(i.e., 86%) that is in contrast with the high identity of the
CR of both EuMV-Jal and EuMV-JM (98% and 96%,
respectively) [20,21].
Experimental infection of host plants

EuMV-Jal was identified in four field samples that contained an additional, distinct begomovirus, as mentioned
above. In order to examine experimentally EuMV-Jal in

Gregorio-Jorge et al. Virology Journal 2010, 7:275
http://www.virologyj.com/content/7/1/275

Page 5 of 15

Table 1 Names, acronyms, and GenBank accession
numbers of the geminiviruses used in this study
Name

Acronym

Accession number
DNA-A

DNA-B

Abutilon mosaic virus

AbMV

NC_001928 NC_001929

African cassava mosaic virus
Ageratum yellow vein virus

ACMV
AYVV

NC_001467 NC_001468
NC_004626

Bean calico mosaic virus

BCaMV

NC_003504 NC_003505

Bean dwarf mosaic virus

BDMV

NC_001931 NC_001930

Bean golden yellow mosaic virus

BGYMV

NC_001439 NC_001438

Beet curly top virus

BCTV

NC_001412

Beet mild curly top virus

BMCTV

NC_004753

Cabbage leaf curl virus

CabLCV

NC_003866 NC_003887

Chino del tomate virus
Corchorus golden mosaic virus

CdTV
CoGMV

NC_003830 NC_003831
NC_009644 NC_009646

Corchorus yellow vein virus

CoYVV

NC_006358 NC_006359

Cotton leaf crumple virus

CLCrV

NC_004580 NC_00481

Cotton leaf curl multan virus

CLCuMV

NC_004607

Cucurbit leaf crumple virus

CuLCrV

NC_002984 NC_002985

Desmodium leaf distortion virus

DeLDV

NC_008494 NC_008495

Euphorbia leaf curl virus

EuLCV

NC_005319

Euphorbia leaf curl India virus
Euphorbia mosaic Peru virus

EuLCIV
EuMPV

EU194914
AM886131

Euphorbia mosaic virus-Jalisco

EuMV-Jal

DQ520942

HQ185235

Euphorbia mosaic virus-Jamaica

EuMV-JM

FJ407052

EU740969

Euphorbia mosaic virus-Puerto
Rico

EuMV-PR

AF068642

Euphorbia mosaic virus- Yucatan

EuMV-YP

NC_008304 NC_008305

Euphorbia yellow mosaic virus

EuYMV

NC_012553 NC_012554

four plant species: Datura stramonium, Nicotiana
benthamiana, pepper (Capsicum annum), and zucchini
(Cucurbita pepo). All solanaceous species were susceptible and developed systemic symptoms at 10-12 dpi,
while the zucchini plants did not show symptoms and
no viral DNA was detected by PCR in their tissues at 14
dpi. Symptoms of EuMV-Jal infection varied between
plant species. In N. benthamiana the symptoms
included leaf crumpling, greenish mosaics and shortened
internodes (Figure 3A). In pepper plants the first symptom was the appearance of small green spots that progressed into a pale green mosaic and moderate
downward leaf curling; a few small necrotic spots were
also observed in several plants (Figure 3B). The most
severe symptoms were observed in D. stramonium
plants, whose leaves showed deformation and extensive
green and yellow mottle covering most of the foliar surface, progressing in time to necrotic lesions leading to
the destruction of significant parts of the foliar lamina
(Figure 3C). In all, the symptoms induced by EuMV-Jal
in the examined three plant species were very similar to
those generated by infection of EuMV-YP [20], hence
suggesting that these viruses express equivalent pathogenesis factors, as expected from the high amino acid
sequence identity of their predicted proteins (Table 2).
EuMV-Jal and EuMV-YP are incompatible in replication

Papaya leaf curl virus

PaLCuV

AJ436992

Pepper golden mosaic virus

PepGMV

NC_004101 NC_004096

Pepper huasteco yellow vein
virus

PHYVV

NC_001359 NC_001369

Rhynchosia golden mosaic
Yucatan virus

RhGMYucV NC_012481 NC_012482

Sida golden mosaic virus

SiGMV

NC_002046 NC_002047

Squash leaf curl virus
Squash mild leaf curl virus

SLCV
SMLCV

NC_001936 NC_001937
NC_004645 NC_004646

Squash yellow mild mottle virus

SYMMoV

NC_003865 NC_003860

Tomato common mosaic virusBrazil

ToCoMVBZ

NC_010835 NC_010836

Tomato golden mosaic virus

TGMV

NC_001507 NC_001508

Tomato mild yellow leaf curl
Aragua virus

TMYLCAV

NC_009490 NC_009491

Tomato mottle virus

ToMoV

NC_001938 NC_001939

Tomato severe leaf curl virus

ToSLCV

DQ347947

Tomato yellow leaf curl Thailand
virus

TYLCTHV

X63015

X63016

Tomato yellow leaf curl virus

TYLCV

X15656

Watermelon chlorotic stunt virus

WmCSV

NC_003708 NC_003709

single plant infections, we generated infectious clones of
both DNA-A and DNA-B components (see Methods),
and carried out biolistic inoculation of these clones into

The replication modules of the EuMV strains A and B
exhibit two main differences: 1) their iterons display a
different nucleotide N within the GGNGTCC core, and
2) the iteron-related domain of their Rep proteins have
a different amino acid residue at position X3 of the IRD
core FX 1 L*X 3 [17], that is either FRLA or FRLT in
A-strain viruses, and FRLQ in B-strain members (Figure
1C). These observations suggest the intriguing possibility
that EuMV strains A and B could be incompatible in
replication. To answer this question we carried out reassortment experiments with the EuMV-Jal and EuMV-YP
genomic components. The four possible combinations
A+B of the cloned viral DNAs were biolistically inoculated into N. benthamiana plants, that were subsequently scored for the appearance of disease signs.
Systemic symptoms developed at 10-12 dpi in most
plants inoculated with the homologous mixtures (i.e.,
EuMV-Jal [A+B], and EuMV-YP [A+B]); in contrast, the
plants bombarded with the heterologous combinations
(i.e., EuMV-Jal [A]/-YP [B] and its reciprocal, EuMV-YP
[A]/-Jal [B]) displayed no symptoms at 12 dpi, and
remained symptomless until the end of the experiment,
at 30 dpi (Figure 4A). These experiments were repeated
three times, six plants for each combination, with similar results obtained (data in Figure 4B). All plants inoculated with cognate viral components scored positive for
presence of both EuMV DNA-A and DNA-B, based on

Gregorio-Jorge et al. Virology Journal 2010, 7:275
http://www.virologyj.com/content/7/1/275

Figure 2 Phylogenetic relationships of Euphorbia mosaic virus.
The tree was constructed using Neighbor-joining algorithm
implemented by MEGA4 software (66). Branch strengths were
evaluated by constructing 1000 trees in bootstrap analysis by stepwise addition at random. Bootstrap values are shown above or under
the horizontal line. The vertical distances are arbitrary, whereas the
horizontal distances are drawn to scale with the bar indicating 0.05
nucleotide replacements per site. Curtoviruses (Beet curly top virus
and Beet mild curly top virus) were used as out-groups. Virus
acronyms and GenBank accession numbers are listed in Table 1.

PCR detection of a ~1300-bp fragment encompassing a
part of the rep and cp genes and the entire DNA-A
intergenic region, and a ~1400-bp segment comprising
the DNA-B IR and a part of both BV1 and BC1 genes.
In contrast, none of the newly emerged leaves of plants
bombarded with the heterologous combinations of
EuMV genomic components tested positive for presence
of EuMV DNA-B, although a few plants (5 out 36) were
PCR-positive for DNA-A at 14 dpi, but not at 28 dpi
(data not shown). These results indicate that viral factors required for replication are not exchangeable
between EuMV-Jal and EuMV-YP.
EuMV BV1 promoter contains a short sequence
homologous to Rep gene

In the course of a meticulous scrutiny of the DNA-B
intergenic region of EuMV-Jal to identify potential cis-

Page 6 of 15

regulatory elements involved in the transcriptional control of the BC1 and BV1 genes, we unexpectedly discovered a 35-bp DNA stretch displaying 100% sequence
identity with a segment of the homologous rep gene.
This sequence is located ~150-nt upstream to the BV1
gene (nucleotides 337-372) and contains the coding
information for aa residues 15 to 25 of EuMV-Jal Rep
(i.e., FLTYPQCDVPK) that includes the conserved Motif
I of the RCR initiators [30]. No additional sequences
homologous to the rep gene were found in the BV1 promoter region. The finding of a short sequence apparently derived from the cognate DNA-A within the
noncoding region of EuMV-Jal DNA-B was intriguing
and prompted further scrutiny of other EuMV DNA-B
components. In all the examined cases a short Rep
homologous sequence (sRepHS) was found within the
BV1 promoter region, which in EuMV-JM is similar to
the EuMV-Jal element in both sequence and length
(35-nt), but that is longer in EuMV-YP that displays a
DNA stretch 51-nt in length identical to a segment of
its cognate rep gene (Figure 5). A search for analogous
elements in the DNA-B IR from all members of the
SLCV clade revealed that sRepHS elements are not common, being identified only in two close relatives of
EuMV, namely, TMYLCAV from Venezuela and
EuYMV from Brazil. The TMYLCAV sRepHS element
is similar but not identical in both length (36-nt) and
nucleotide sequence (88% identity) to the equivalent
sequence of EuMV-Jal (Figure 5). In contrast, the
sRepHS identified in EuYMV DNA-B is different in
both length (45-nt) and nucleotide sequence (< 30%
identity) to the analogous elements of EuMV strains.
Indeed, the EuYMV sRepHS element corresponds to a
distinct segment of the cognate rep gene, encoding the
Rep aa residues 40-53 (i.e., VVKPTYIRVARELH) instead
of Rep residues 15-25 encoded by the sRepHS elements
of TMYLCAV and EuMV. Notwithstanding its divergent
nucleotide sequence, the EuYMV sRepHS element is
100% identical in nucleotide sequence to a segment of
its cognate rep gene, like in EuMV and TMYLCAV
(Figure 5) and is located at a position equivalent to the
sRepHS in the latter viruses.
sRepHS upstream sequences are similar to CP promoters

The conservation of sRepHS elements in the DNA-B
intergenic region of EuMV and their relatives suggests
that those atypical sequences might play a defined role
in the infective cycle of these viruses. Since the
sRepHS elements do not contain a start codon and are
not a part of a distinctive ORF, it seems plausible that
its function, if any, involves an intermediary RNA
molecule. This notion naturally led us to suggest the
existence of a functional promoter next to the sRepHS
element.

Gregorio-Jorge et al. Virology Journal 2010, 7:275
http://www.virologyj.com/content/7/1/275

Page 7 of 15

Table 2 Percentages of sequence identities between EuMV-Jal and selected begomoviruses (DNA and predicted
proteins*)
DNA-A

IR-A

CP*

AC1*

AC2*

AC3*

AC4*

DNA-B

IR-B

BV1*

BC1*

ACMV

45

25

66

49

43

42

19

27

22

24

41

BCaMV
BGYMV

76
64

50
37

92
91

86
63

78
70

77
78

64
11

55
48

28
22

73
67

83
80

CdTV

67

43

92

63

67

78

30

51

27

71

78

CoYVV

51

24

87

43

51

43

19

41

22

52

71

CuLCrV

77

46

91

83

71

71

72

51

27

66

76

DesLDV

72

44

91

80

66

73

58

50

23

64

77

EuMPV

77

52

93

86

81

76

58

-

-

-

-

EuYMV

77

51

90

85

80

76

62

52

35

73

82

EuMV-JM
EuMV-PR

95
92

91
82

98
99

97
96

97
93

95
91

88
91

86
-

73
-

96
-

98
-

EuMV-YP

92

80

99

93

93

91

87

85

63

94

98

PepGMV

72

50

90

80

71

75

14

48

25

64

74

PHYVV

59

33

89

49

50

63

12

47

25

66

74

RhGMYV

76

54

94

86

70

70

66

51

31

69

78

SLCV

78

57

94

82

72

80

77

50

30

63

80

ToCoMV-BZ

73

43

90

85

64

72

57

52

31

63

77

TMYLCAV
TYLCTHV

84
48

66
28

95
68

88
48

87
43

80
39

82
22

56
25

43
19

75
21

83
39

Virus

In order to identify potential IR internal promoters,
we analyzed the sequences upstream to sRepHS in all
members of the EuMV lineage using a phylogeneticstructural approach. This methodology entails the
identification of “phylogenetic footprintings” (i.e., putative binding sites for transcription factors) and conserved arrays of them, named “Conserved Modular
Arrangements” (CMAs), in non-coding regions of evolutionarily-related DNA sequences [31,32]. The new
analysis exposed a DNA-B IR domain ~160-bp-long
exhibiting a remarkable similarity both in overall
nucleotide sequence and modular organization, to CP
promoters of viruses that belong to the SLCV clade.
The example showed in Figure 6 illustrates the
remarkable similarity between the CP promoter-like
(CPprom-L) domain of EuMV-Jal IR and a 156-nt segment of the CP promoter of Rhynchosia golden mosaic
Yucatan virus (RhGMYuV), a recently described virus
of the SLCV lineage [33]. The similarity between these
DNA-B and DNA-A sequences, respectively, includes
nine phylogenetic footprintings in a definite order, and
it is extended beyond the start codon of RhGMYuV cp
gene including a block of 8-nt of coding sequence that
is conserved in the non-coding sequence of EuMV-Jal
DNA-B.
The demarcated CPprom-L domain of the DNA-B
IR includes several putative cis-regulatory elements
that were identified by consulting plant transcription
factors databases like PlantCare [34] and PLACE [35].

Among the identified potential cis-acting motifs there
were well-characterized regulatory elements such as
the “Conserved Late Element” (CLE) [36], the
CCAAT box, and several elements that confer responsiveness to a variety of plant hormones (see Figure 6
legend). Among these sequences there is a 12-bp long
element (consensus: CTTTAATTCAAA) which is
identical to a conserved sequence immediately adjacent to the cp gene in more than 75% of the known
begomoviruses from America (Cardenas-Conejo et al.,
unpublished data). The AATTCAAA motif of the former element is both a putative ethylene-responsive
element (ERE) and a binding-site for nuclear factors
of carnation, tomato and Solanum melongena [37-39].
In addition, this motif constitutes the 8-nt long leader
sequence of the CPmRNA of Tomato golden mosaic
virus (TGMV) [40]. The ERE-like motif is located
downstream to the actual TATA-box of NW-Beg CP
promoters, at a similar distance (21-29 bp) to that
observed between the ERE and a putative TATA box
in the CPprom-L domain [Additional file 1: Supplemental Figure S1a]. Taken as a whole, these remarkable similarities between noncoding DNA regions
from two different genome components of separate
begomovirus species, can hardly be explained by random sequence convergence; rather, they strongly suggest that the DNA-B CPprom-L domain of EuMV and
relatives is evolutionarily derived from a begomovirus
CP promoter.

Gregorio-Jorge et al. Virology Journal 2010, 7:275
http://www.virologyj.com/content/7/1/275

Figure 3 Symptoms induced by EuMV-Jal in experimentally
infected plants. (A) Nicotiana benthamiana, (B) Capsicum annum,
and (C) Datura stramonium.

Distantly related begomoviruses contain sRepHS elements

The existence of sRepHS elements in the DNA-B IR of
viruses belonging to a minor lineage of the SLCV clade
is an interesting evolutionary enigma. To determine
whether analogous elements actually exist in other viral
lineages, we searched for rep homologous sequences in
the DNA-B IR of begomoviruses belonging to 12 major
and minor clades, distributed in several continents. The
analysis of ~60 members of those lineages led us to the
identification of only two additional begomoviruses displaying sRepHS in the BV1 upstream region: TGMV
and the recently described Cleome leaf crumple virus
(ClLCrV) [41]. These viruses are native from Brazil, like
EuYMV, but do not belong to the SLCV clade. The
sRepHS element of ClLCrV is 100% identical to a 46-ntlong segment of its cognate rep gene, encoding the aa
residues 97 to 110 (SSSDVKSYVDKDGD), that comprise the conserved RCR Motif 3 (underlined) [30]. On
the other hand, the TGMV sRepHS element is only 88%
identical to a 52-nt-long segment of its cognate rep
gene, encoding the aa residues 255 -271 (NKVEYNVIDDVTPQYLK) of this replication initiator, that
include the Walker B-motif (underlined), a critical aa
sequence of the protein ATPase/helicase domain [42,43].
The upstream sequences of TGMV and ClLCrV
sRepHS elements were examined, but no significant
similarity between them nor with the BV1 promoter
region of EuMV lineage viruses was found. However, a

Page 8 of 15

Figure 4 EuMV-Jal does not form viable reassortants with
EuMV-YP. (A) N. benthamiana plants inoculated with either the two
genomic components of EuMV-Jal (left), or the heterologous
combination EuMV-Jal DNA-A/EuMV-YP DNA-B (right). Plants were
inoculated by microparticle bombardment with 5 μg of each DNA
component, and photographed 26 days after inoculation. (Panel B)
Results of the reassortment experiments between EuMV-YP and
EuMV-Jal. Negative controls (plants inoculated with the empty
vector) were included in the three independent experiments but
the data were omitted for simplicity.

careful re-examination of sequences nearby to the 5’end
of ClLCrV sRepHS revealed a 23-bp sequence with partial dyad symmetry that is well-conserved both in
sequence and in position relative to the sRepHS element
in all viruses of the EuMV cluster [Additional file 1:
Suppl. Figure S1b]. The consensus of this conserved
sequence includes a palindromic core with the repeated
motif TTGTGGTCC, similar to the CLE, a functional
target of plant transcriptional activators [44,45] that has
been involved in TrAP-mediated activation of the CP
promoter in some begomoviruses [36]. No sequence
similar to the latter symmetric element was found in the
BV1 promoter region of TGMV. In fact, the sRepHS of
the latter virus differs from the analogous elements in
ClLCrV and the EuMV subclade viruses in several other
important features: (1) It is not 100% identical to the
corresponding segment of its cognate rep gene; (2) It
has opposite polarity compared to all other known
sRepHS elements; (3) It is closely located downstream to
a putative internal promoter that does not exhibit significant similitude with CP promoters of SLCV clade
viruses (data not shown). It is relevant to point out here

Gregorio-Jorge et al. Virology Journal 2010, 7:275
http://www.virologyj.com/content/7/1/275

that TGMV and ClCrV are grouped, on the basis of
their full-length DNA-A sequences, within the Brazilian
cluster of NW-Beg [41], but they have very divergent
DNA-B components. Thus, our finding of the sRepHSassociated semi-palindromic sequence in ClLCrV DNAB suggests an actual relationship of the latter with the
homologous genomic components of EuMV and relatives, a notion that is supported by a recent study that
groups the ClLCrV DNA-B with viruses of the EuMV
lineage [41].

Discussion
In this study, we described the molecular and biological
characterization of a novel strain of Euphorbia mosaic
virus that was isolated from pepper plants in the state of
Jalisco, Mexico, near to the Pacific shoreline. This virus
displays 92% sequence identity with EuMV-YP, that was
isolated in the same country but in a distant region,
close to the Atlantic coastline [20]. These viruses differ
in two important features of their DNA-A replication
origin region: the nucleotide sequence of their iterons,
and the presence or absence of a G-box element, a cisacting sequence which is critical for Rep promoter activity in some NW-Beg [46]. The differences observed in
the predicted Rep-binding sites of EuMV-Jal and
EuMV-YP prompted us to explore experimentally their
ability to form viable reassortants in pseudorecombination tests. The results of these experiments confirmed
the presumption of replication incompatibility between
EuMV-YP and EuMV-Jal, thus demonstrating that the
latter is a new, biologically-defined strain exhibiting different replication specificity.
The finding of begomovirus strains that are not able
to form viable reassortants is somehow bewildering
because the common definition of a virus species is “A...
class of viruses that constitutes a replicating lineage and
occupies a particular ecological niche.” [47,48]. Accordingly, it is not expected that strains of a virus species
would be incompatible in replication because that
implies that they do not constitute an actual replicating
lineage. Nonetheless, it is generally recognized that several strains of begomoviruses probably are not complementary in replication because they display different
putative cis- and trans-acting replication specificity
determinants [7,17]. There is at least one report of
strains belonging to a bipartite begomovirus that are not
equivalent in replication functions (the “severe” and
“mild” strains of Tomato leaf curl New Delhi virus,
ToLCNDV) [49]. However, that case is different from
the one examined here because the “mild” phenotype of
one ToLCNDV strain seems to be related to an inefficient trans-replication of the “cognate” DNA-B, which
displays Rep binding-sites different to those of the associated DNA-A [49,50].

Page 9 of 15

The case of the EuMV strains is significant because it
is paradigmatic of an apparently common theme in
begomovirus evolution, i.e., the sudden change of virus
replication specificity determinants by intermolecular
recombination between co-infecting viruses [27,51].
Indeed, the recombination analysis of EuMV isolates
indicates that viruses of the EuMV A-strain probably
evolved by an event of DNA intermolecular exchange
involving a member of the EuMV B-strain and a virus
related to CpGMV, which had donated a ~210-bp DNA
segment encompassing the region of the virus replication origin and the first 44 nucleotides of the rep gene.
If this hypothetical scenario is accurate, then the recombination event should have changed simultaneously both
the iterons and the Rep aa residues interacting with
them, thus maintaining the proper matching of cis- and
trans-acting replication determinants in the recombinant
DNA-A component.
Diverse studies have identified the sequences encompassing the viral strand replication origin and the rep
gene segment encoding the Rep N-terminal domain, as
the regions of geminivirus genomes most frequently
exchanged during recombination [28,51-53]. This is
consistent with the known genome localization of the
Rep-binding sites and the coding sequence of the Rep
domain that contains the putative DNA-binding specificity determinants of this protein, which have been theoretically mapped into the first 75 aa residues [17,54].
Consequently, a recombination event involving a genome portion as small as 200 to 360-bp might confers a
completely different replication phenotype to begomoviruses involved in mixed infections, as presumably is
the case for the EuMV strains.
Since that intermolecular recombination is/has been a
major force in the evolution of geminiviruses, the concepts of both “species” and “strains” should be adapted
to the peculiar nature of these entities, that are genetic
mosaics in continual change, different in quality to cellular organisms. In fact, it is altogether possible that a
significant part of the currently recognized begomovirus
species would not constitute “replicating lineages” in a
strict sense, as would be the case of EuMV, according to
our experimental data. For instance, a thorough
sequence analysis entailing the identification of the
putative cis- and trans-acting Replication Specificity
Determinants (RSDs) of the 182 recognized begomovirus species summarized by Fauquet et al. in 2008 [7]
revealed the existence of 34 species that include at least
two groups of viruses exhibiting distinct putative RSDs,
analogous to the strains A and B of EuMV. Furthermore, some ICTV-accepted species as Ageratum yellow
vein Hualian virus, Honeysuckle yellow vein virus,
Tomato leaf curl Bangalore virus, Tomato leaf curl Philippines virus, Tomato leaf curl Taiwan virus, and

Gregorio-Jorge et al. Virology Journal 2010, 7:275
http://www.virologyj.com/content/7/1/275

ToLCNDV, include three classes of viruses differing in
their putative RSDs, and one viral species, Ageratum yellow vein virus, comprises four types of viruses harboring
distinct replication modules, plausibly acquired through
independent episodes of intermolecular recombination
(Arguello-Astorga, unpublished data). In view of the significant number of begomovirus species with variants
that are seemingly analogous to the strains of EuMV, it
would be important to establish a formal distinction
between strains with similar RSDs, that represent actual
replicating lineages, and replication-incompatible strains,
that apparently do not.
What is the function of the DNA-B sRepHS elements?

During the analysis of the intergenic region of EuMV-Jal
DNA-B we discovered a short DNA stretch identical to
a segment of the rep gene coded in the cognate DNA-A.
It was subsequently find out that analogous sRepHS elements exist in the DNA-B IR of at least five begomovirus species, all them from the New World: EuMV
from Mexico and the Caribbean basin, TMYLCAV from

Page 10 of 15

Venezuela, and EuYMV, ClLCrV and TGMV from
Brazil. With the exception of the short rep homologous
sequence in the DNA-B IR of TGMV (that seems to be
evolutionarily unrelated) the sRepHS elements of begomoviruses have in common several characteristics. All
of them: (1) are short sequences, ranging from 35 to 51
nucleotides in length; (2) are 100% identical in nucleotide sequence to a segment of its cognate rep gene; (3)
have opposite polarity than the rep gene; (4) are located
65 to 80-nt downstream to a putative internal promoter
highly similar to CP promoters of viruses of the SLCV
clade (ClLCrV being an exception); (5) are positioned
7-9 nt downstream to a 23-bp partly palindromic element with a repeated motif similar to the CLE; and (6)
are situated 115 to 145-nt upstream to the BV1 gene. In
contrast, the sRepHS elements of viruses that are distantly related, like EuMV, EuYMV and ClLCrV, have
entirely different nucleotide sequences (see Figure 5),
because the coding sequence represented in those elements corresponds to distinct sections of the cognate
rep gene.

Figure 5 Nucleotide sequence of sRepHS elements. The upper sequence correspond to the DNA-B and the lower one to the cognate DNA-A.
Letters in red within the sRepHS elements of EuMV-YP and TMYLCAV denote differences with the homologous sequence of EuMV-Jal.- Virus
acronyms are listed in Table 1.

Gregorio-Jorge et al. Virology Journal 2010, 7:275
http://www.virologyj.com/content/7/1/275

An intriguing observation is that the identified sRepHS
elements reproduce sequences encoding conserved aa
motifs which are critical for Rep functions. For example,
the sRepHS of EuMV strains and TMYLCAV correspond to the coding sequence of RCR Motif 1; the
equivalent element of ClLCrV encodes the RCR Motif 3,
and the analogous sRepHS of TGMV duplicate the rep
sequence encoding the Walker B motif of ATPases/helicases. An apparent exception is the sRepHS of EuYMV,
which displays the coding sequence of a conserved Rep
motif of unknown function. The evolutionary conservation of sRepHS elements and the associated sequence
motifs, suggests that those atypical elements play a definite but hitherto unknown function in the viral infective
cycle. In absence of any factual data it is only feasible to
speculate about the possible function(s) of the sRepHS
on the basis of their common characteristics.
Certainly, the most remarkable feature of the sRepHS
elements is its complete identity in nucleotide sequence
with a specific segment of the rep gene in the cognate
DNA-A component, because the evolutionary preservation of such an absolute matching between specific segments of distinct, physically separated DNA molecules,
should involve very strong selective pressures against
mutations diminishing the identity between the former
DNA sequences. Therefore, the function of the sRepHS
elements is most likely related to a process that requires
a perfect or very high complementarity between DNA
and/or RNA molecules, such as the gene regulation by
microRNAs (miRNAs).
The miRNAs are ~22-nt-long noncoding RNAs that
posttranscriptionally regulate gene expression by binding
to specific mRNAs, thus repressing its translation and/or
inducing its degradation [55]. Several DNA viruses (i.e.,
herpesviruses, adenoviruses, ascoviruses and polyomaviruses) encode miRNAs which participate in the regulation of some processes of the viral infection cycle
[56,57]. For example, the simian virus 40 (SV40)
encodes a single miRNA which lie antisense to the viral
mRNA encoding the T-antigen, a multifunctional protein essential for virus replication. This miRNA is
expressed late in infection, hence promoting the
T-antigen mRNA degradation and downregulating the
synthesis of this protein at late stages of the SV40 replication cycle [58]. In close analogy with SV40 miRNA,
the sRepHS elements of begomoviruses are single, discrete noncoding DNA sequences highly similar to a specific segment of the gene encoding the viral replication
protein. Further analogies between those heterologous
viral sequences are the following: (1) The genomic location of the miRNA, but not its nucleotide sequence, is
conserved among polyomaviruses (i.e., SV40, Merkel cell
virus, human BK virus, JC virus, and mouse polyomavirus) [59-61]; similarly, the location of sRepHS elements

Page 11 of 15

within the DNA-B intergenic region, but not its specific
sequence, is conserved among begomoviruses (data from
this study); (2) The temporal expression of the SV40
miRNA, that is restricted to the late stage of infection,
is similar among all the examined polyomaviruses
[57,59]; likewise, although the temporal expression of
begomovirus transcripts including the sRepHS region (if
any) is unknown, it is plausible than them would be late
expressed, because the hypothetical promoter that lead
its transcription is similar to begomovirus CP promoters, which are typically active at the late phase of the
viral infection cycle [1,36]; (3) Like the polyomavirus
pre-miRNAs, the DNA-B sequences encompassing
sRepHS and the neighboring sequences, have the potential to form extensive hairpin structures susceptible to
cleavage by RNase III enzymes (i.e., Drosha and Dicer)
involved in the processing of pre-miRNAs (data not
shown). Taken together, these lines of indirect evidence
suggest a potential function of the sRepHS elements in
the posttranscriptional regulation of Rep expression, a
hypothesis that must be experimentally examined.

Conclusions
The evidence gathered in this study indicates that
EuMV-YP and EuMV-Jal, which are members from the
strains A and B of Euphorbia mosaic virus respectively,
are actually incompatible in replication, hence implying
that these viruses probably represent distinct replicating
lineages in natural ecosystems. The scenario we propose
for the origin of the EuMV A-strain viruses involves a
recombination event that substituted the DNA-A core
replication module of an EuMV B- strain virus, with the
analogous genomic region of a virus related to CpGMV.
This intermolecular exchange suddenly changed the
replication specificity of the recombinant DNA-A, thus
triggering the process that led to the evolutionary differentiation of EuMV into two distinct strains. The fact
that more than 30 recognized begomovirus species
include two or more classes of viruses with distinct
putative RSDs (i.e., analogous to the EuMV strains) suggests that intermolecular recombination events that
involve the virion-strand origin of replication and the
first part of the rep gene, are quite common in this
group of ssDNA viruses, as has been previously pointed
out (51, 52, 53). Another relevant result from this study
is the discovery of atypical sequences within the intergenic region of the DNA-B component from some NWbegomoviruses, mostly related to EuMV. These
sequences include short fragments of the cognate Rep
gene located downstream from a potential internal promoter very similar in modular organization to CP promoters of viruses of the SLCV clade. Even though we
do not know the actual function of these sRepHS elements, several lines of indirect evidence suggest their

Gregorio-Jorge et al. Virology Journal 2010, 7:275
http://www.virologyj.com/content/7/1/275

Page 12 of 15

Figure 6 Potential internal promoter in the DNA-B intergenic region of EuMV. Alignment of a domain of the DNA-B intergenic region of
EuMV-Jal with the coat protein (CP) gene promoter of Rhynchosia golden mosaic Yucatan virus [GenBank: GQ352453]. The blocks of high
sequence similarity encompassing more than eight nucleotides are “phylogenetic footprintings” (PFp; boxed). Putative cis-acting elements within
the PFp (identified by roman numerals) are as follows: I) Conserved Late Element, CLE (inverted); II) salycilic acid responsive element (inverted,
restricted similarity); III) A pathogen-elicitor responsive element (Box W1) overlapped with a CCAAT box; IV) conserved element with
indeterminated function; V) sequence highly similar to the 3’end of the TGMV CP promoter “region C”, that functions as transcriptional negative
element [67]; VI) potential auxin-responsive element (ARE, at the block 3’end); VII) TATA box; VIII) canonical salycilic acid responsive element; IX)
ethylene-responsive element (ERE)-like motif. The block “X” includes the first segment of the RhGMYuV CP gene. Notice the 8-nt long stretch of
identical sequence between the non-coding sequence of EuMV-Jal DNA-B and the coding sequence of RhGMYuV.

participation in the posttranscriptional regulation of Rep
expression, an intriguing possibility that is currently
being examined in our laboratory.

Methods
Plant samples and DNA extraction

Samples of symptomatic plants exhibiting leaf curling,
yellow or golden mosaic, vein chlorosis and/or stunted
growth were collected in several farm fields in the State
of Jalisco, Mexico, during 2005. Young leaves from
symptomatic pepper plants, as well as a variety of weed
plants found as underbrush within the field were gathered. Total nucleic acids were extracted of field samples
using a modified version of the Dellaporta method [62].
PCR-based detection of begomoviruses

Total DNA extracts from 63 symptomatic plants were
used as templates in PCR reactions with degenerate

primers designed to amplify two overlapping genomic
segments encompassing either the complete DNA-A or
DNA-B of begomoviruses belonging to the SLCV clade
[63]. The primers SL2150-for (GACGGCRTTGGY
GTCTTTGGC) and cpYMAC-rev (TTWGASGCAT
GNGTACATGCCA) were used to amplify a DNA-A
segment encompassing the intergenic region and part of
both Rep and CP genes, whereas the primers CP70-for
(GGTTGTGAAGGNCCNTGTAAGGTYCA) and SL2
150-rev (GCWGCAAAGACACCAAYGCCGT) were utilized to amplify a complementary and partially overlapped DNA-A segment. Amplification of DNA-B
sequences was performed with degenerated primers
BC1-290-for
(GAARTAGTGGAGATCTATGTTR
CAYCT) and BV1- 470-rev (CCATGRCTRTGRA
TYCTWGCRCC), designed to amplify the complete
intergenic region together with a part of both the BC1
and BV1 genes. To amplify the remaining part of DNA-

Gregorio-Jorge et al. Virology Journal 2010, 7:275
http://www.virologyj.com/content/7/1/275

B the degenerate primers BC1- 290-rev (CCSATMAGRTGYAACATAGATCTCC) and BV1-310-for
(AGGWACRGTNAARATYGARCGTGT) were used.
The PCR-products were cloned into the pGEM-T easy
vector (Promega) and subjected to Restriction Fragment
Length Polymorphism (RFLP)-analysis by using EcoR I
in combination with either Hinf I or Msp I. The produced DNA molecules were fractioned in 2.5% agarose
gels, and PCR clones with different restriction patterns
were sequenced.
Generation of infectious EuMV clones

To clone the full-length genomic components A and B
of EuMV-Jal, the DNA extract of one pepper plant
infected with both EuMV-Jal and PHYVV collected at
the Castillo locality (see Results) was subjected to rolling
circle amplification (RCA) using the TempliPhi kit (GE
Healthcare, USA) according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. The full-length EuMV DNA-A was
obtained by cutting the RCA-amplified DNA with Xho I
and subsequent cloning of the 2.6 Kb DNA molecule
into a plasmid vector. The full-length EuMV DNA-B
could not be obtained by a similar procedure after several attempts. Consequently, abutted divergent primers
designed over the unique BamHI site in the DNA-B of
EuMV-Jal were used in a standard PCR procedure, and
the generated 2.6 Kb amplicon was cloned into a
pGEM-Teasy vector (Promega). The infectious clones of
EuMV-Jal A and EuMV-Jal B were generated as follows:
the 0.8-Kb BamHI- XbaI fragment of EuMV-A containing the origin of replication was cloned into the BamHIXbaI sites of a modified pBlueScript plasmid to create
pEu-oriA. Subsequently, a full-length DNA-A of EuMV
digested with XbaI was inserted into the XbaI site of
pEu-oriA to generate the viral replicon pEuMV1.33A.
The infectious clone of EuMV-B was generated by an
analogous procedure: the full-length DNA-B cloned into
pGEM-T easy was digested with NcoI and re-ligated.
This procedure deleted a portion of the viral genome,
leaving intact all elements important for replication (1.3kb), thus generating the pEu-oriB plasmid. Finally, a
full-length DNA-B digested with BamHI was cloned
into the BamH1 site of pEu-oriB, yielding the infectious
clone pEuMV1.5B.
Plant infection assays

Nicotiana benthamiana, Capsicum annuum and Datura
stramonium plants were inoculated using a low-pressure
biolistic method [64]. The target leaves (third- to fourleaf stage) were either directly shot at 100 to 120 psi
helium pressure with tungsten particles (0.7 mm,
BioRad, Hercules, CA) covered with the EuMV-A and
EuMV-B viral DNAs (5 μg), or inoculated mechanically
by using carborundum according to a procedure

Page 13 of 15

recently described [65]. The inoculated plants were
maintained in an insect-free growth chamber (27°C,
daily cycle of 16 h light -8 h dark), and subsequently
scored for the appearance of disease symptoms. The
infection status of the inoculated plants was assessed by
visual inspection of symptoms and by PCR analysis of
all plants at the end of the experiment.
Reassortment experiments

Pseudorecombination experiments were carried out by
biolistically inoculating seedlings of N. benthamiana
plants with all possible pair combinations of A and B
component clones of both EuMV-Jal and EuMV-YP.
Infectious clones of EuMV-Jal were partial tandem
repeats of either DNA-A or DNA-B components, as
mentioned above, whereas in the case of EuMV-YP,
cloned monomeric components were used as previously
described [20]. A total of 18 seedlings (three independent experiments, six plants each replicate) were inoculated with each one of the four possible combinations of
EuMV-Jal and EuMV-YP genomic components. Mockinoculated negative controls were included for each
replicate. The inoculated plants were maintained in a
growth chamber (27°C, daily cycle of 16 h light -8 h
dark) and scored for the appearance and development
of disease symptoms during 4-5 weeks. All plants, both
symptomless and symptomatic, were tested for the presence of viral DNA in newly emerged leaves at 14 dpi
by PCR-based detection, using both DNA-A and DNAB specific primers. Asymptomatic plants were re-examined by PCR at 28 dpi, to detect cases of delayed
infection.
Phylogenetic analysis

Full DNA-A and DNA-B sequences from EuMV-Jal
were compared with other New World and Old World
begomoviruses available at the GenBank-NCBI database,
using BLAST-N. The positions and sizes of EuMV-Jal
open reading frames were predicted using EditSeq
(DNASTAR Inc., Madison, WI). Paired alignments were
obtained by the ClustalV and ClustalW methods in the
MegAlign application of the Lasergene package (DNASTAR), using the default parameters. Neighbour-joining
phylogenetic trees for EuMV DNA-A and DNA-B components were constructed using Mega 4.0 [66] with1,000
bootstrap replicates and pairwise evolutionary distances
calculated with a maximum likelihood nucleotide substitution model. Trees were drawn to scale, with branch
lengths in the same units as those of the evolutionary
distances used to infer the phylogenetic tree.
Recombination analysis

Detection of potential recombination breakpoints and
recombinant sequences was carried out using the suite

Gregorio-Jorge et al. Virology Journal 2010, 7:275
http://www.virologyj.com/content/7/1/275

of recombination detection methods implemented in
RDP software (29). A sequence alignment containing
four EuMV isolates and closely related species (sharing
>76% of nucleotide identity with EuMV-Jal) was used as
input data for RDP. The analysis was performed using
the default settings in all detection methods, with a
Bonferroni corrected P-value cut-off of 0.05.

Page 14 of 15

3.

4.

5.

6.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Supplemental Figure S1: Conserved elements
upstream to sRepHS elements. (A) Comparisons of conserved modular
arrangements (CMAs) composed by two cis-acting elements present in
DNA-A of NW begomoviruses, and DNA-B of EuMV and relatives,
respectively. The CPmRNA transcription start site of TGMV is indicated
above the ERE-like motif. (B) Alignment of partially palindromic elements
which are conserved in position relative to the sRepHS element of ClLCrV
and EuMV subclade members. The consensus of this symmetric element
is indicated. Colors in boxes identify the distinct classes of sRepHS
according to their nucleotide sequence, and numbers indicate the
length (in base pairs) of those elements.

7.

8.
9.
10.

11.

12.
Acknowledgements
We thank Salvador Ambriz-Granados for his technical assistance, and Dr.
Braulio Gutierrez-Medina for critical reading of the manuscript. JGJ, ABA and
BBH were supported by a PhD fellowship from the Consejo Nacional de
Ciencia y Tecnología (CONACYT, Mexico). This research was partially
supported by a CONACYT grant (SEP-84004) to GAA.
Author details
1
Instituto Potosino de Investigación Científica y Tecnológica, A.C., Camino a
la Presa San José, 78216 San Luís Potosí, SLP, México. 2Universidad
Autónoma Agraria Antonio Narro. Departamento de Parasitología Agrícola.
Bellavista, C.P. 25315, Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico. 33Centro de Investigación
Científica de Yucatán, A.C., Mérida, Yucatán, México.
Authors’ contributions
JGJ generated the infectious clones of EuMV-Jal, performed plant infections
tests, carried out the phylogenetic analysis, and helped to prepare the
manuscript. ABA collected isolates, cloned and sequence the viruses,
analyzed the field data, and perform plant infection tests. BBH carried out
the pseudorecombination experiments, and analyzed the experimentally
infected plants. AAS helped in comparative sequence analyses, provided
partial funding for the project’s execution, and offered ideas and comments
during manuscript preparation. CHZ carried out the recombination analysis,
helped in plant infection tests. OMV provided the EuMV-YP clones and
helped in plant infection tests with this virus. GFT collected isolates and
helped to analyze the field data. GAA coordinated the project, carried out
the comparative sequence analyses, secured funding for the project’s
execution, and prepared the manuscript. All authors read and approved the
final manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have not competing interests

13.

14.
15.

16.

17.

18.

19.
20.

21.

22.

Received: 18 August 2010 Accepted: 19 October 2010
Published: 19 October 2010
23.
References
1. Hanley-Bowdoin L, Settlage SB, Orozco BM, Nagar S, Robertson D:
Geminiviruses: models for plant DNA replication, transcription, and cell
cycle regulation. Crit Rev Plant Sci 1999, 18:71-106.
2. Zhang W, Olson NH, Baker TS, Faulkner L, Agbandje-McKenna M,
Boulton MI, Davies JW, McKenna R: Structure of the Maize streak virus
geminate particle. Virology 2001, 279:471-477.

24.

Stanley J, Bisaro DM, Briddon RW, Brown JK, Fauquet CM, Harrison BD,
Rybicki EP, Stenger DC: Geminiviridae. In Virus Taxonomy (VIIIth Report of
the ICTV). Edited by: Fauquet CM, Mayo MA, Maniloff J, Desselberger U, Ball
LA. Elsevier/Academic Press, London; 2005:301-306.
Rojas MR, Hagen C, Lucas WJ, Gilbertson RL: Exploiting chinks in the
plant’s armor: evolution and emergence of geminiviruses. Annu Rev
Phytopathol 2005, 43:361-394.
Seal SE, vandenBosch F, Jeger MJ: Factors influencing begomovirus
evolution and their increasing global significance: implications for
sustainable control. Crit Rev Plant Sci 2006, 25:23-46.
Briddon RW, Patil BL, Bagewadi B, Nawaz-ul-Rehman MS, Fauquet CM:
Distinct evolutionary histories of the DNA-A and DNA-B components of
bipartite begomoviruses. BMC Evol Biol 2010, 10:97.
Fauquet CM, Briddon RW, Brown JK, Moriones E, Stanley J, Zerbini M,
Zhou X: Geminivirus strain demarcation and nomenclature. Arch Virol
2008, 153:783-821.
Bisaro DM: Silencing suppression by geminivirus proteins. Virology 2006,
344:158-68.
Hehnle S, Wege C, Jeske H: Interaction of DNA with the movement
proteins of geminiviruses revisited. J Virol 2004, 78:698-706.
Sanderfoot AA, Lazarowitz SG: Getting it together in plant virus
movement: cooperative interactions between bipartite geminivirus
movement proteins. Trends Cell Biol 1996, 9:353-358.
Fontes EP, Gladfelter HJ, Schaffer RL, Petty IT, Hanley-Bowdoin L:
Geminivirus replication origins have a modular organization. Plant Cell
1994, 6:405-416.
Singh DK, Malik PS, Choudhury NR, Mukherjee SK: MYMIV replication
initiator protein (Rep): roles at the initiation and elongation steps of
MYMIV DNA replication. Virology 2008, 380:75-83.
Rojas A, Kvarnheden A, Marcenaro D, Valkonen JP: Sequence
characterization of tomato leaf curl Sinaloa virus and tomato severe leaf
curl virus: phylogeny of New World begomoviruses and detection of
recombination. Arch Virol 2005, 150:1281-1299.
Rybicki EP: A phylogenetic and evolutionary justification for 3 genera of
Geminiviridae. Arch Virol 1994, 139:49-77.
Argüello-Astorga G, Herrera-Estrella L, Rivera-Bustamante R: Experimental
and theoretical definition of geminivirus origin of replication. Plant Mol
Biol 1994, 26:553-556.
Argüello-Astorga GR, Guevara-González RG, Herrera-Estrella LR, RiveraBustamante RF: Geminivirus replication origins have a group-specific
organization of iterative elements: a model for replication. Virology 1994,
203:90-100.
Argüello-Astorga GR, Ruiz-Medrano R: An iteron-related domain is
associated to motif 1 in the replication proteins of geminiviruses:
identification of potential interacting amino acid-base pairs by a
comparative approach. Arch Virol 1994, 146:1465-1485.
Bird J, Sánchez J, Rodríguez RL, Juliá FJ: Rugaceous (whitefly-transmitted)
viruses in Puerto Rico. In Tropical Diseases of Legumes. Edited by: Bird J,
Maramorosch K. New York, USA: Academic Press; 1975:3-25.
Costa AS: Whitefly-transmitted plant diseases. Annu Rev Phytopathol 1976,
14:429-49.
Hernández-Zepeda C, Idris AM, Carnevali G, Brown JK, MorenoValenzuela OA: Molecular characterization and experimental host range
of Euphorbia mosaic virus-Yucatan Peninsula, a begomovirus species in
the Squash leaf curl virus clade. Plant Pathol 2007, 56:763-770.
Collins AM, Brown JK, Rehman MM, Roye ME: Complete nucleotide
sequence of an isolate of Euphorbia mosaic virus that infects Euphorbia
heterophylla and Wissadula amplissima in Jamaica. Arch Virol 2009,
154:1859-1860.
Méndez-Lozano J, Torres-Pacheco I, Fauquet CM, Rivera-Bustamante RF:
Interactions between geminiviruses in a naturally occurring mixture:
Pepper huasteco virus and Pepper golden mosaic virus. Phytopathology
2003, 93:270-277.
Torres-Pacheco I, Garzón-Tiznado JA, Brown JK, Becerra-Flora A, RiveraBustamante RF: Detection and distribution of Geminiviruses in Mexico
and the Southern United States. Phytopathology 1996, 86:1186-1192.
Torres-Pacheco I, Garzón-Tiznado JA, Herrera-Estrella L, RiveraBustamante RF: Complete nucleotide sequence of pepper huasteco virus:
analysis and comparison with bipartite geminiviruses. J Gen Virol 1993,
74:2225-2231.

Gregorio-Jorge et al. Virology Journal 2010, 7:275
http://www.virologyj.com/content/7/1/275

25. Shepherd DN, Martin DP, Lefeuvre P, Monjane AL, Owor BE, Rybicki EP,
Varsani A: A protocol for the rapid isolation of full geminivirus genomes
from dried plant tissue. J Virol Methods 2008, 149:97-102.
26. Hernández-Zepeda C, Argüello-Astorga G, Idris AM, Carnevali G, Brown JK,
Moreno-Valenzuela OA: Molecular characterization and phylogenetic
relationships of Desmodium leaf distortion virus (DeLDV): a new
begomovirus infecting Desmodium glabrum in Yucatan, Mexico. Virus
Genes 2009, 39:371-374.
27. García-Andrés S, Tomás DM, Sánchez-Campos S, Navas-Castillo J,
Moriones E: Frequent occurrence of recombinants in mixed infections of
tomato yellow leaf curl disease-associated begomoviruses. Virology 2007,
365:210-219.
28. van der Walt E, Rybicki EP, Varsani A, Polston JE, Billharz R, Donaldson L,
Monjane AL, Martin DP: Rapid host adaptation by extensive
recombination. J Gen Virol 2009, 90:734-746.
29. Martin DP, Williamson C, Posada D: RDP2: recombination detection and
analysis from sequence alignments. Bioinformatics 2005, 21:260-262.
30. Ilyina TV, Koonin EV: Conserved sequence motifs in the initiator proteins
for rolling circle DNA replication encoded by diverse replicons from
eubacteria, eucaryotes and archaebacteria. Nucleic Acids Res 1992,
20:3279-3285.
31. Argüello-Astorga G, Herrera-Estrella L: Ancestral multipartite units in lightresponsive plant promoters have structural features correlating with
specific phototransduction pathways. Plant Physiol 1996, 112:1151-1166.
32. Argüello-Astorga G, Herrera-Estrella L: Evolution of light-regulated plant
promoters. Annu Rev Plant Physiol Plant Mol Biol 1998, 49:525-555.
33. Hernandez-Zepeda C, Brown JK, Moreno-Valenzuela OA, Arguello-Astorga G,
Idris AM, Carnevali G, Rivera-Bustamante RF: Characterization of Rhynchosia
yellow mosaic Yucatan virus, a new recombinant begomovirus associated
with two fabaceous weeds in Yucatan, Mexico. Arch Virol 2010,
155:1571-1579.
34. Lescot M, Déhais P, Moreau Y, De Moor B, Rouzé P, Rombauts S:
PlantCARE: a database of plant cis-acting regulatory elements and a
portal to tools for in silico analysis of promoter sequences. Nucleic Acids
Res 2002, 30:325-327.
35. Higo K, Ugawa Y, Iwamoto M, Korenaga T: Plant cis-acting regulatory DNA
elements (PLACE) database:1999. Nucleic Acids Research 1999, 27:297-300.
36. Ruiz-Medrano R, Guevara-Gonzalez RG, Arguello-Astorga GR, MonsalveFonnegra Z, Herrera-Estrella LR, Rivera-Bustamante RF: Identification of a
sequence element involved in AC2-mediated transactivation of the
Pepper huasteco virus coat protein gene. Virology 1999, 253:162-169.
37. Itzhaki H, Maxson JM, Woodson WR: An ethylene-responsive enhancer
element is involved in the senescence-related expression of the
carnation glutathione-S transferase (GST1) gene. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
1994, 91:8925-8929.
38. Montgomery J, Goldman S, Deikman J, Margossian L, Fischer RL:
Identification of an ethylene responsive region in the promoter of a fruit
ripening gene. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1993, 90:5939-5943.
39. Rawat R, Xu Z-F, Yao K-M, Chye ML: Identification of cis-elements for
ethylene and circadian regulation of the Solanum melongena gene
encoding cysteine proteinase. Plant Mol Biol 2005, 57:629-643.
40. Petty ITD, Coutts RHA, Buck KW: Transcriptional mapping of the coat
protein gene of tomato golden mosaic virus. J Gen Virol 1988,
69:1359-1365.
41. Paprotka T, Metzler V, Jeske H: The first DNA 1-like alpha satellites in
association with New World begomoviruses in natural infections. Virology
2010, 404:148-157.
42. Hanson SF, Hoogstraten RA, Ahlquist P, Gilbertson RL, Russell DR,
Maxwell DP: Mutational analysis of a putative NTP-binding domain in
the replication-associated protein (AC1) of Bean golden mosaic
geminivirus. Virology 1995, 211:1-9.
43. Koonin VEugene: A common set of conserved motifs in a vast variety of
putative nucleic acid-dependent ATPases including MCM proteins
involved in the initiation of eukaryotic DNA replication. Nucleic Acids Res
1993, 21:2541-2547.
44. Cazzonelli CI, Burke J, Velten J: Functional characterization of the
geminiviral conserved late element (CLE) in uninfected tobacco. Plant
Mol Biol 2005, 58:465-81.
45. Velten J, Morey KJ, Cazzonelli CI: Plant viral intergenic DNA sequence
repeats with transcription enhancing activity. Virol J 2005, 2:16-24.

Page 15 of 15

46. Eagle PA, Hanley-Bowdoin L: Cis elements that contribute to geminivirus
transcriptional regulation and the efficiency of DNA replication. J Virol
1997, 71:6947-6955.
47. Gibbs AJ, Gibbs MJ: A broader definition of the virus species. Arch Virol
2006, 151:1419-1422.
48. Van Regenmortel MH: Applying the species concept to plant viruses. Arch
Virol 1989, 104:1-17.
49. Chatterji A, Padidam M, Beachy RN, Fauquet CM: Identification of
replication specificity determinance in tomato leaf curl virus from New
Delhi. J Virol 1999, 73:5481-5489.
50. Padidam M, Beachy RN, Fauquet CM: Tomato leaf curl geminivirus from
India has a bipartite genome and coat protein is not essential for
infectivity. J Gen Virol 1995, 76:25-35.
51. Lefeuvre P, Lett JM, Varsani A, Martin DP: Widely conserved recombination
patterns among single-stranded DNA viruses. J Virol 2009, 83:2697-707.
52. Lefeuvre P, Lett JM, Reynaud B, Martin DP: Avoidance of protein fold
disruption in natural virus recombinants. PLoS Pathog 2007, 3:e181.
53. Varsani A, Shepherd DN, Monjane AL, Owor BE, Erdmann JB, Rybicki EP,
Peterschmitt M, Briddon RW, Markham PG, Oluwafemi S, Windram OP,
Lefeuvre P, Lett JM, Martin DP: Recombination, decreased host specificity
and increased mobility may have driven the emergence of maize streak
virus as an agricultural pathogen. J Gen Virol 2008, 89:2063-2074.
54. Londoño A, Riego-Ruiz L, Arguello-Astorga GR: DNA-binding specificity
determinants of replication proteins encoded by eukaryotic ssDNA
viruses are adjacent to widely separated RCR conserved motifs. Arch Virol
2010, 155:1033-1046.
55. Bartel DP: MicroRNAs: genomics, biogenesis, mechanism, and function.
Cell 2004, 116:281-297.
56. Nair V, Zavolan M: Virus-encoded microRNAs: novel regulators of gene
expression. Trends Microbiol 2006, 14:169-175.
57. Skalsky RL, Cullen BR: Viruses, microRNAs, and host interactions. Annu Rev
Microbiol 2010, 64:123-141.
58. Sullivan CS, Grundhoff AT, Tevethia S, Pipas JM, Ganem D: SV40-encoded
microRNAs regulate viral gene expression and reduce susceptibility to
cytotoxic T cells. Nature 2005, 435:682-686.
59. Cullen BR: Five Questions about Viruses and MicroRNAs. PLoS Pathog
2010, 6:e1000787.
60. Seo GJ, Fink LH, O’Hara B, Atwood WJ, Sullivan CS: Evolutionarily
conserved function of a viral microRNA. J Virol 2008, 82:9823-9828.
61. Sullivan CS, Sung CK, Pack CD, Grundhoff A, Lukacher AE: Murine
Polyomavirus encodes a microRNA that cleaves early RNA transcripts
but is not essential for experimental infection. Virology 2009, 387:157-167.
62. Dellaporta SL, Wood J, Hicks JB: A plant DNA minipreparation: version II.
Plant Mol Biol Rep 1983, 1:19-21.
63. Mauricio-Castillo JA, Argüello-Astorga GR, Alpuche-Solís AG, MonrealVargas CT, Díaz-Gómez O, de la Torre-Almaraz R: First Report of Tomato
severe leaf curl virus in México. Plant Dis 2006, 90:1116.
64. Carrillo-Tripp J, Lozoya-Gloria E, Rivera-Bustamante RF: Symptom remission
and specific resistance of pepper plants after infection by Pepper golden
mosaic virus. Phytopathology 2007, 97:51-57.
65. Ascencio-Ibañez JT, Settlage SB: DNA abrasion onto plants is an effective
method for geminivirus infection and virus induced gene silencing. J
Virol Met 2007, 142:198-203.
66. Tamura K, Dudley J, Nei M, Kumar S: MEGA4: Molecular Evolutionary
Genetics Analysis (MEGA) software version 4.0. Mol Biol Evol 2007,
24:1596-1599.
67. Sunter G, Bisaro DM: Identification of a minimal sequence required for
activation of the Tomato golden mosaic virus coat protein promoter in
protoplasts. Virology 2003, 305:452-462.
doi:10.1186/1743-422X-7-275
Cite this article as: Gregorio-Jorge et al.: Analysis of a new strain of
Euphorbia mosaic virus with distinct replication specificity unveils a
lineage of begomoviruses with short Rep sequences in the DNA-B
intergenic region. Virology Journal 2010 7:275.

</pre>
</body>
</html>
