<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Endosymbiont or host: who drove mitochondrial and plastid evolution?</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Biology Direct 2011, 6:12. doi:10.1186/1745-6150-6-12"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Jeferson Gross"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Gross and Bhattacharya Biology Direct 2011, 6:12
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/12

COMMENT

Open Access

Endosymbiont or host: who drove mitochondrial
and plastid evolution?
Jeferson Gross, Debashish Bhattacharya*

Abstract
The recognition that mitochondria and plastids are derived from alphaproteobacterial and cyanobacterial
endosymbionts, respectively, was one of the greatest advances in modern evolutionary biology. Researchers have
yet however to provide detailed cell biological descriptions of how these once free-living prokaryotes were
transformed into intracellular organelles. A key area of study in this realm is elucidating the evolution of the
molecular machines that control organelle protein topogenesis. Alcock et al. (Science 2010, 327 [5966]:649-650)
suggest that evolutionary innovations that established the mitochondrial protein sorting system were driven by the
alphaproteobacterial endosymbiont (an “insiders’ perspective”). In contrast, here we argue that evolution of
mitochondrial and plastid topogenesis may better be understood as an outcome of selective pressures acting on
host cell chromosomes (the “outsiders’ view”).
Reviewers: This manuscript was reviewed by Gáspár Jékely, Martijn Huynen, and Purificación López-García.
Introduction
From inside or outside, how to reconstruct
organellogenesis?

Modern-day plastids and mitochondria are fully integrated into the regulatory networks encoded by the
nuclear genome [1]. Yet these compartments descend
from free-living Gram-negative bacteria that were taken
up by “host” cells as endosymbionts and transformed
into intracellular organelles [1-5]. During this process of
organellogenesis, a nucleus-to-organelle flow of biogenetic information was established through the progressive ability to direct nuclear-encoded proteins
synthesized in the cytosol to specific subcellular locations within the endosymbionts [1,2,5]. Such a regulated
protein topogenesis within the nascent organelles was
made possible by the evolution of specialized molecular
machines that comprise the ancestors of the modernday mitochondrial and plastid protein sorting apparatuses. In mitochondria, these are the translocons of the
outer and inner mitochondrial membrane (Tom and
Tim23, respectively), the Tim22 insertase, the sorting
and assembly machinery (Sam), and the small Tim chaperones [1,5,6]. In plastids, protein sorting is under
* Correspondence: bhattacharya@aesop.rutgers.edu
Department of Ecology, Evolution and Natural Resources, and Institute of
Marine and Coastal Sciences, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey,
Foran Hall 102, New Brunswick, NJ 08901, USA

control of the translocon of the outer and inner membranes of the chloroplast (Toc and Tic, respectively)
[1,3].
In an attempt to advance our understanding of organellogenesis and invigorate discussion on this topic we
recently proposed a new model (termed the “outsiders’
hypothesis”) [1]. This model posits that genetic integration and the establishment of protein sorting systems in
both the plastid and mitochondria occurred in a stepwise evolutionary trajectory, with the host guiding molecular components first to the outer membrane (OM) of
the endosymbiont, and then to the intermembrane
space (IMS), inner membrane (IM), and finally to the
organelle interior. Such an outside-to-inside evolutionary trajectory seems to us to be inherently appealing
because one cannot easily imagine a selective pressure
that would result in the establishment in the nucleus of
a gene encoding a protein that operated in the IM of
the organelle (e.g., a solute carrier) if host-encoded proteins could not first efficiently cross the OM of the
endosymbiont. In addition, our model recognized that
by being held captive inside the host cell the plastid and
mitochondrial forerunners were subject to the typical
genomic “meltdown” universally observed among obligatory prokaryotic endosymbionts (see below) [7-9]. Selection over the maintenance of the consortium led the
host to progressively assume control over decaying

© 2011 Gross and Bhattacharya; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Gross and Bhattacharya Biology Direct 2011, 6:12
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/12

organelle functions [1]. Therefore the outsiders’ view
favors the idea that evolutionary novelties leading to the
establishment of the organelle were mainly selected on
the host chromosome. The outsiders’ hypothesis contrasts with traditional models to explain the evolution of
mitochondria and plastids that are united by the view
that organelle protein sorting systems originated to target nuclear-encoded proteins into the endosymbiont
interior (e.g., in the prokaryotic cytosol [10-14] or in its
IM [15]). These insiders’ models usually entail that
molecular components were established in the endosymbiont chromosome to drive protein import into the nascent organelle [5,10,12-18] (although some descriptions
emphasize the role of genetic innovations occurring on
the host chromosome; e.g., ref. [15]). This insiders’ view
is adopted by Alcock and colleagues [5], who suggest
that components still encoded on the putatively minimally reduced alphaproteobacterial endosymbiont genome were “tinkered” with by evolution to import
nuclear-encoded proteins [5,19,20]. Thereby it is
assumed that the alphaproteobacterium had an important, if not preponderant, role in its conversion into an
organelle. In this opinion piece we discuss these endosymbiont- or host-driven views of organelle evolution in
light of current data from molecular phylogenetics and
genome analyses of eukaryote organelles and endosymbionts to assess which may provide a better platform to
understand the complex process of organellogenesis.

Discussion
Endosymbionts: evolutionary novelties or genome
erosion?

Prokaryote endosymbionts are found in association with
diverse hosts in the eukaryote tree of life [7,21,22].
Given that plastids and mitochondria descend from
endosymbionts, it is logical to pose the following questions: what can we learn from extant prokaryotes that
exist in an intracellular association with eukaryotes, and,
is there evidence for selection resulting in genetic tinkering with their genomes to create new molecular
machines? It is now well established from a plethora of
comparative genome studies that the universal trend
among endosymbiotic bacteria is the steady accumulation of deleterious mutations, high rates of nucleotide
substitutions (reflected by a high AT-content), and progressive genome shrinkage [7,8,21]. These aspects of
genome erosion are explained by a Muller’s ratchet process that affects endosymbionts because of their small
population size and isolation within host cells where
they lose access to external sources of DNA to repair
newly arisen deleterious mutations [9]. Accordingly, the
strength of genetic drift is proportional to the degree of
host-endosymbiont interdependency, with facultative
endosymbionts being less affected than obligatory

Page 2 of 13

endosymbionts. The latter typically have genomes with
high AT-contents and show dramatic size reduction (<
1 Mbp) [7,21]. Such elevated genetic drift is characterized by lower efficacy for selection even with regard to
essential genes [7]. Nonetheless selection exists, however
it is acting primarily to counterbalance genetic drift.
One excellent example is the widespread tendency of
purifying selection over maintenance of protein coding
regions to withstand the ratchet of high nucleotide substitution rates [7,8]. Similarly chaperones tend to be
constitutively over-expressed in endosymbionts to buffer
the overall thermal instability of the proteome due to
high rates of amino acid substitution [7,23]. Only in rare
instances are newly arisen adaptive traits (though not
new molecular machines) observed in the endosymbiont
genome. An example is the duplication of biosynthetic
genes presumably to boost the output of metabolites
essential for the endosymbiotic association [24]. Taken
together the existing data point to a clear trajectory for
endosymbionts: genome decay. This milieu may therefore not provide an ideal test bed for the evolution of
novel molecular machines via tinkering.
The cyanelle of Paulinella chromatophora: a new plastid
tinkered from inside or forged by genetic drift?

The filose amoeba Paulinella chromatophora possesses a
plastid-like photosynthetic compartment (the cyanelle or
chromatophore) that was recently (ca. 60 Mya) derived
from a Synechococcus-like cyanobacterial endosymbiont
[25,26]. Although protein import into the putative chloroplast-type compartment has not yet been demonstrated, several observations indicate the cyanelle of
P. chromatophora has already reached the status of a
bona fide organelle [27-29]. These are: synchronized
division of the cyanelle with the host cell cycle, the paucity of cyanelle-encoded metabolite transporters, and,
more important, the documented evidence of endosymbiotic gene transfer (EGT) (e.g., genes encoding the
subunits of the photosystem I, psaE, psaI, psaK, and
high-light inducible proteins). This putative “retelling
the tale” of plastid evolution in the Plantae (Archaeplastida) provides an excellent case study to determine
whether genetic tinkering played a role in the early
stages of organellogenesis. Consistent with its recent
endosymbiotic past, the genome of the cyanelle bears
the footprints of genetic drift that affects genomes of
intracellular prokaryotes; i.e., accelerated nucleotide
substitution rates, high AT-content, dramatic genome
reduction (about 1/3 of the size of free-living Synechococcus strains), gene inactivations, widespread gene deletions, and purifying selection over protein coding
regions [25,27,29,30]. With the exception of a fusion of
the ftn2 gene with its neighboring open reading frame
(PCC0126), thus far there is no bioinformatic evidence

Gross and Bhattacharya Biology Direct 2011, 6:12
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/12

for the evolution of novel organelle-derived functions in
this genome via for example, gene duplications or horizontal gene transfer [27,30]. In fact, accompanying the
loss of 2/3 of the cyanobacterium-derived genome,
many key genes needed to sustain a free-living life style
have been jettisoned, leaving reduced material to tinker
with. Therefore P. chromatophora once again points to
the prominent role that genetic drift plays in shaping
the evolution of an emerging organelle genome.
Mitochondrial and plastid organellogenesis: an insiders’
or outsiders’ tale?

Given that plastids and mitochondria descend from captive prokaryotes, there is no a priori reason to believe
their evolutionary trajectory would differ markedly from
modern-day endosymbionts and from the cyanelle of
P. chromatophora. In fact, evidence exists that Muller’s
ratchet is counterbalanced in plastid genomes by polyploidy and gene conversion [31] and still influences the
evolution of mitochondrial genomes [32]. Therefore it is
reasonable to assume that the precursors of mitochondria and plastids were similarly affected by genome
degeneracy and loss of fitness due to being held captive
in the host’s cytosol (Figure 1). This led to an evolutionary trajectory marked by genome reduction, suggesting
that endosymbiont-derived genomes have never been an
ideal arena for the evolution of new molecular components through tinkering. The outsiders’ perspective
however acknowledges that evolution of a prokaryoticderived organelle follows the dynamics of the endosymbiotic process (Figure 1). Intracellular resident
prokaryotes often establish an obligatory syntrophic
association with their host cells [7,21,22,33]. It is conceivable that the alphaproteobacterial precursor of mitochondria was exchanging metabolites derived from its
aerobic metabolism (e.g., tricarboxylic acids) with a
putative archaeal host [4]. Similarly, the cyanobacterial
forerunner of plastids probably extruded photosynthates used in the cytosol of the host [34]. Therefore
maintenance of the fitness of the cyanobacterial and
alphaproteobacterial endosymbionts was likely crucial
for survival of the corresponding hosts [1]. What would
result if endosymbiont fitness was progressively compromised by genetic drift? We suggest this resulted in
strong selective pressure on the host chromosomes to
evolve molecular components that assumed control over
decaying prokaryotic biogenesis, setting organellogenesis
in motion (Figure 1) [1]. Porins are beta-barrel proteins
in the OM of Gram-negative prokaryotes that support
the first layer of metabolic flow regulation of cells with
the external milieu [35,36]. Given the importance of
porins and the fact that host-encoded factors only had
access to the OM of the endosymbiont, we previously
proposed that mitochondrial and plastid evolution might

Page 3 of 13

have been initiated by the host exerting control over the
topogenesis of OM proteins (i.e., beta-barrel proteins) of
the captive prokaryotes [1]. This ensured an immediate
regulation over the metabolic flow across the endosymbiont’s OM. We propose that this involved the establishment of OM pores (e.g., Tom40 in the emergent
mitochondrion and Toc75 in the plastid) and the cooption of Omp85 homologs (Sam50 in mitochondria
and putatively one of the Toc75 homologs in plastids)
from the alphaproteobacterial and cyanobacterial endosymbionts, respectively, to drive the catalytic assembly
of beta-barrel proteins. Organellogenesis then progressed by an outside-to-inside establishment of molecular components that led to the evolution of modern
organelle protein sorting systems. How this happened
involved a substantial amount of genetic tinkering (that
arguably could have occurred on the host genome, see
below) as well as the establishment of key new genes.
Tim23: endosymbiont or host origin?

The insiders’ hypothesis makes a straightforward prediction: core molecular components involved in protein
topogenesis are derived from the endosymbiont [5,19].
Important in this respect are the origins of Tim17,
Tim23, and Tim22 that comprise a family of pore subunits in the IM of mitochondria [1,16]. Tim17 and
Tim23 form the protein-conducting channel of the
Tim23 translocon, whereas Tim22 is the pore of the
insertase for mitochondrial carriers. The idea that
Tim17, Tim23, and Tim22 originated via tinkering with
the LivH family of bacterial amino acid transporters has
been used to support the insiders’ perspective for the
evolution of mitochondria [5,10,15,16,19,37]. Similarly, a
purported relationship of Tic20, a subunit of the protein
translocon at the inner membrane of plastids, with LivH
homologs has also been taken as an example of tinkering from “inside” during plastid evolution [17,18,38],
and even during organellogenesis of the P. chromatophora cyanelle [39]. However BLAST searches against
the NCBI protein database reveal that neither Tim17/
23/22 nor Tic20 share any obvious sequence similarity
with LivH homologs [1,3]. The original proposition in
1999 that LivH homologs were progenitors of Tim17,
Tim23, and Tim22 relied on a partial alignment of 52
amino acid residues from 5 proteins and it was unclear
whether this was explained by homology or potential
convergence at the conserved sites (e.g., in the transmembrane regions) [16]. The possibility that endosymbiont-encoded ancestral amino acid transporters were
adapted to transport host proteins is clearly an attractive
idea, however there is currently a lack of unambiguous
evidence that LivH is the candidate protein [1,3]. An
alternative interpretation is that the progenitor of
Tim17, Tim23, and Tim22 might have been established

Gross and Bhattacharya Biology Direct 2011, 6:12
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/12

Page 4 of 13

Figure 1 The outsiders’ model for the conversion of a prokaryotic endosymbiont into an organelle. Schematic figure showing the
process of organellogenesis, whereby a eukaryotic cell (shown in cross-section) harbors an obligatory Gram-negative endosymbiont (left) that is
converted over time into an organelle (right). Obligatory endosymbiosis (right) implies mutualistic benefits that usually include metabolic
interdependency between the host and its endosymbiont. At this point, selection is strong over both the host and the prokaryote to maintain
or improve the benefits of the consortia (see arrow down). Genetic drift however leads to progressive genome degeneracy of the
endosymbiont. This is marked by an increase in AT content, mutational load, losses of genes, and pronounced genome reduction. Strong
selection for the maintenance and increase in fitness of the consortia progressively favors selection on the host chromosome. We suggest that
in some cases this eventually may lead to the process of organellogenesis (right), which presumably initially includes the establishment in the
host chromosome of molecular components to drive the biogenesis of OM proteins of the endosymbiont. Organellogenesis then progresses in
an outside-to-inside trajectory of establishment in the endosymbiontic compartments of host-encoded molecular factors (blue) synthesized in
the cytosol. This process is driven by EGT, HGT, gene duplication, subfunctionalization, and de novo generation of genes. Organellogenesis may
eventually include the establishment of proteins that are tinkered from inside the organelle. The arrow down represents a trend of selection
acting on the consortia, which tentatively can be described as a combination of selection acting on the endosymbiont (which tend to decrease
over time) and of selection on the host chromosome (which tend to predominate during organellogenesis). The arrows indicate that the
process unfolds over time (from left to right) and not to depict an actual relative time scale of the process of organellogenesis. It is possible that
the period of obligatory endosymbiosis could have been relatively short compared to the time frame necessary for full evolution of an organelle
such as the plastids and mitochondria. Note that the figure suggests a model useful to describe the evolution of any eukaryotic organelle
derived from a prokaryotic endosymbiont. However it is not clear whether the host of the mitochondrial forerunner was a bona fide eukaryote
or an Archaea in an ongoing process of evolving a nuclear compartment [1,4].

(either by de novo generation or by HGT/EGT from a
prokaryotic progenitor and since then underwent divergent evolution) in the chromosome of the alphaproteobacterial host, and Tic20 in algae and plants is probably
unrelated to this family of proteins.
Organelle protein topogenesis: tinkering from inside or
outside?

Protein-coding genes that trace their origin to non-coding
DNA (i.e., de novo provenance) are an important source of

genetic novelty in prokaryotes and eukaryotes [40,41].
Apart from Tim17/23 and Tim22, many proteins that lack
homologs in prokaryotes likely arose in eukaryotes to support organelle protein translocation (e.g., Tom20, Tom22,
Mia40, Erv1, Tim54, Tim21, and the small Tims in mitochondria; Toc34, Tic110, Tic40 in plastids) [1,3]. These
may have been generated de novo in the eukaryotic genome or derived from prokaryotic sources by HGT/EGT
and since then diverged beyond recognition of the ancestral form. In fact, phylogenetic studies indicate that a large

Gross and Bhattacharya Biology Direct 2011, 6:12
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/12

fraction of mitochondrial proteins originated after the
acquisition of the alphaproteobacterial endosymbiont
[42,43]. One excellent example of newly evolved proteins
in the host chromosomes are provided by the family of IM
mitochondrial carriers [44]. Similarly, the majority of
solute permeases in the IM of plastids are derived from
the host chromosome, in this case by another pathway:
duplication of genes encoding existing vacuolar or plasma
membrane transporters and the co-option of paralogs for
plastid functions [45]. This suggests a major trend in organellogenesis whereby the host cell assumes control over
the exchange of metabolites in the mitochondrial and plastid IM by reprogramming the permeome of the respective
alphaproteobacterial and cyanobacterial endosymbionts
using host-derived solute transporters [1]. In addition,
phylogenetic studies reveal that a large proportion of both
mitochondrial and plastid proteomes is composed of proteins derived from prokaryotes via HGT [42,43,46].
Because HGTs, de novo generation of ORFs, and gene
duplications are rare in the genomes of obligatory endosymbionts [7], the chimeric nature of the mitochondrial
and plastid proteome is better explained by the hypothesis
that the arena for genetic tinkering was in the genome of
the eukaryotic host and not that of the captured endosymbionts (Figure 1) [1].
In light of this perspective how should we interpret the
fact that protein sorting components in both the mitochondrion (e.g., Sam50, Tim44, Oxa) and the plastid
(e.g., Toc75, Tic20, Hsp93) are derived from the alphaproteobacterial and cyanobacterial endosymbionts,
respectively [1,3,10,18]? As recognized by Jacob [47], the
tinkering process involves duplication of the original
gene followed by subfunctionalization of a paralog [41].
Gene duplications are a predicted intermediate step in
the process of EGT, whereby a copy of the organelle gene
is established in the nucleus prior to its loss from the
endosymbiont genome [2,27,48]. If we assume selective
pressures over the host chromosomes, it follows that
these random duplications of organelle genes in host
genomes provided the raw material for evolution of new
subunits to drive organelle topogenesis. EGT demonstrates that genetic tinkering was an important aspect
driving organellogenesis that can be interpreted as having
occurred outside the organelle (i.e., in the host genome).

Conclusion
A consensus: tinkering inside in an outsiders’ context

The central idea of the insiders’ view that protein
sorting in mitochondria was cobbled together from
pre-existing components in the chromosome of the
alphaproteobacterial endosymbiont [5] raises an interesting question: how can this process be described in a
step-wise manner? For example, which would be the
first endosymbiont-derived component to be recruited

Page 5 of 13

to import host-encoded proteins from the cytosol? A
first approximation would likely lead to the same conclusion as the outsiders’ hypothesis; i.e., the first protein
component to be “tinkered” with probably was the OM
channel Tom40 because protein sorting to inside the
organelle requires that host proteins could first cross an
open gate in the OM. Because host-encoded proteins
need progressively to gain access to the endosymbiont,
it is reasonable to suggest that the proposed endosymbiont-guided tinkering process unfolded in an outsideto-inside trajectory. Nonetheless theses ideas bring to
light yet another basic contradiction. If such strong
selective pressures over the endosymbiont chromosome
efficiently converted endogenous factors into import
machines, then why are these factors no longer encoded
in any of the mitochondrial genomes sequenced to date?
The observation that both the plastid and mitochondrial
protein-sorting components are universally encoded in
the nucleus [1-3,10,15,37] implies that selection to
establish control of organelle topogenesis in the host
chromosome was decisive during organellogenesis. In
conclusion, even a strict endosymbiont-dominated insiders’ view needs to incorporate the premises of the outsider’s hypothesis (i.e., the outside-to-inside trajectory
and host-control over organellogenesis) in order to
interpret the current state of organelle topogenesis.
We suggest that by assuming an outsiders’ perspective
it is possible to gain insights into the contribution of
“tinkering” inside the endosymbiont during organellogenesis (Figure 1). For example, it is conceivable that
the pores Tom40 and Toc75, in the OM of mitochondria and plastids, respectively, could have initially
evolved in the chromosome of the endosymbiont and
facilitated the docking and permeation of the nuclearencoded copies of Tom40 and Toc75 once these components had been established via EGT. The progenitors
of the mitochondrial matrix processing peptidase (MPP)
and the plastid stromal processing peptidase could also
provide examples of adaptations that occurred inside
the endosymbionts in a later stage of organellogenesis to
cleave pre-sequences of import substrates inserted into
the IM from outside. However the more complex process of duplication and subfunctionalization of the
alphaproteobacterial peptidase that produced the modern MPP heterodimeric form [49] most likely occurred
in the nuclear genome of the host. Under this perspective organellogenesis, like any complex evolutionary process, reflects the sum of different relative contributions
made by the participating genomes (Figure 1).
In conclusion, this opinion piece focuses on what we
suggest to be a useful paradigm for understanding organelle evolution. We believe that the main merit of our
model is to overcome several concerns we have about the
insiders’ views and to recognize the importance of

Gross and Bhattacharya Biology Direct 2011, 6:12
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/12

stepwise, gradual evolution. The outsiders’ view, however
like all hypotheses needs testing. An important step
towards this goal will be achieved by proteomic and comparative genomics studies of endosymbiotic bacteria and
the nuclear genomes of their hosts. Of special interest are
the new candidates for organellogenesis such as the cyanobacterial-type resident of Rhopalodia gibba diatom [50],
the psyllid endosymbiont Carsonella ruddii [51], and, in
particular, the nuclear genome of P. chromatophora and
the proteome of its plastid-like cyanelle [25,26,29]. Given
the breadth of genome projects that are currently underway and the rise of single cell genomics [21,52], we anticipate that the next few years will provide unprecedented
opportunities to significantly improve and broaden our
understanding of the host-endosymbiont divide.

Reviewer’s comments
Reviewer’s report 1

Dr. Gáspár Jékely, Max Planck Institute for Developmental Biology, Tübingen, Germany.
In this short paper Gross and Bhattacharya elaborate
on their previous publications about the origin of organellar targeting during early eukaryote evolution.
Although there is not much new information in this
paper, I support publication, because the authors
address specific criticism in a recent Opinion article
appeared in Science about their scenario (ref. [5]). This
is a good opportunity to elaborate these arguments, and
I would like to contribute to it with some comments.
Author’s response

We appreciate the referee’s comments and we opportunity to further illustrate key ideas of our model.
I think that the authors have to be more specific about
the use of the terms ‘outsiders’ and ‘insiders’ hypothesis’.
The problem is that they confound three very different
questions. The first question is whether the components
of the organellar targeting machineries have an origin
from the symbiont’s or the host’s genome.
Author’s response

We think this first question is not a confusion raised by
our analysis, because the origin of the molecular components should ultimately be determined empirically using
phylogenetic analysis. From the perspective of the outsiders’ hypothesis, molecular components can derive from
either the host, the endosymbiont, or from unrelated
taxa by HGT. Important to our argument is selection
acting on the host to establish these components. From
the perspective of some insiders’ views (e.g., ref. [5]) the
core molecular components must derive from the endosymbiont. This is why confusion was generated regarding
the origin of the Tim17/Tim23/Tim22 family. To help
clarify this point, here we bring into question the proposed origin of this family from endosymbiotic (prokaryotic) amino acid transporters.

Page 6 of 13

The second is whether during the conversion of the
symbiont into an organelle the first steps entailed
changes in OM components or the IM/matrix components of the symbiont.
Authors’ response

In this regard, we note a substantial difference between
our model and traditional views of organelle evolution.
The label “outsider” refers to the fundamental idea that
conversion of the endosymbiont into an organelle was
progressively driven from outside-to-inside the endosymbiont. It started in the OM of the captive endosymbiont,
and then to the inner membrane space (IMS), IM, and
finally to the organelle interior. Therefore it is not only
the question of where organellogenesis started, but actually how the process of organellogenesis was organized in
a directional step-wise manner. This idea is in sharp
contrast with all models suggested so far because they
collectively argue that protein sorting systems in both
plastid and mitochondria were somehow adapted to
import proteins to inside the organelle (e.g., the IM or
the organelle interior) [5,10,12-18].
The third question is whether the mutational changes
occurred in the host or mitochondrial genome.
Author’s response

“Outsider” also refers to the idea that most of the evolutionary novelties leading to the establishment of the
organelle arose “outside” the endosymbiont: i.e., in the
genome of the host. We agree that many models also
include this idea (e.g., ref. [15], discussed below), they
however either do not describe the process in question or
tend to resort to the notion of tinkering on the inside.
Our description of the endosymbiont-to-organelle conversion as a coherent step-wise genetic integration of prokaryotic functions into the host chromosome makes a strong
case for a host-guided process and thereby provides a
robust description of organellogenenesis in a way not
seen in previous models.
There are many combinations of the possible answers
to these three questions. Various combinations have
been proposed in various models in the literature. These
distinctions have to be clarified in the text. Once it is
done, it is clear that the differences between the authors’
model and other models are not so clear-cut. Therefore
the authors cannot lump all other models together as
“insiders’ models” and then argue against all of them at
the same time.
Author’s response

We respect the referee’s opinion and we have now
attempted to make a clearer distinction in the introduction about the differences between the outsiders’ versus
the insiders’ perspectives regarding what the reviewer
refers to as the “second and third questions” (although
we don’t feel it is within the scope of our manuscript to
review one-by-one the publications on the topic of

Gross and Bhattacharya Biology Direct 2011, 6:12
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/12

evolution of protein sorting in organelles). We do agree
with the referee that nuances between outsiders’ and
insiders’ positions exist and we acknowledge the possibility of limited tinkering from inside the organelle (now
discussed). However we feel that traditional models collectively fail to recognize a directional outside-to-inside
trajectory for the establishment of molecular factors in
the endosymbiont and that the genetic integration of the
organelle functions in the host chromosomes follows this
pattern. We feel that the scope of the outsiders’ view and
the possibility of a detailed description of organellogenesis that it offers contrasts sufficiently with previous models of organelle evolution that it is fair to distinguish
them as we have done. Once some key differences (discussed below) are understood we hope the contrast
between our model and the traditional views will become
clearer.
(i) To our knowledge, with the notable exception of Cavalier-Smith’s model for the origin of the protein sorting components in mitochondria (criticized below), the insiders’
models fail to provide an account of the order in which the
molecular components forming the protein import
machines were established. In other words, they do not
incorporate a process-like description. Most of the insiders’
models rely on an “adaptive” argument that if molecular
machines were already present in the endosymbiont they
could “somehow” be easily adapted to operate protein
import inside the organelle (i.e., the tinkering argument)
[5,10,12-14,18,20]. Thereby many insiders’ models claim
that evolution could be gradual, however they do not provide an account of the steps involved in such gradual
tinkering.
(iI) The outside-to-inside perspective is supported by current experimental data on mitochondrial protein import
(see ref. [1]and refs. therein). Some examples are worth to
be reinforced. One of them is the well established interplay
between the biogenesis of Sam50 and Tom40, which is
interpreted by the outsiders’ view as an ancestral and
essential system that evolved at the onset of mitochondrial
organellogenesis. The fact that the small Tim chaperones
in the IMS are essential to support the functions of the OM
and IM biogenesis suggests this system served as a key
intermediate development during evolution of host-control
over the endosymbiont membranes. There is a fundamental
connection between protein sorting in the IM and protein
translocation into the matrix that manifests gradual outside-to-inside evolution. This is represented by the common
phylogenetic origin and biogenetic interdependency of
Tim22 and Tim23 machines. In this context, the fact that
Tim23/Tim17 complex is an insertase and only acts as an
translocase by addition of the PAM module at the mitochondrial matrix illustrates the concept of a molecular
machine gradually evolving from outside-to-inside. An
interesting fact is that Tim23 serves as an insertase for

Page 7 of 13

proteins containing a single transmembrane domain
(STMD), which are abundant in the complexes of the
respiratory chain. In addition, in many taxa the subunits
of the matrix processing peptidase that cleaves off presequences of import substrates are components of the
respiratory chain complex III. These correlations highlighted above suggest that protein sorting in mitochondria
evolved to support host-control of organellar oxidative
phosphorylation. Finally, the fact that the hosts of both the
alphaproteobacterial and cyanobacterial endosymbionts
“reprogrammed” the prokaryotic permeome with hostderived solute transporters may be tentatively explained by
at least two outsiders’ interpretations. One is the obvious
host-control over the metabolic flow across the organelle
membranes. The second might be a topological constraint
to insert from outside molecular components derived from
the endosymbionts, since the original prokaryotic transporters were assembled from inside.
(iii) In contrast to previous suggestions that speculate
independently about the evolution of mitochondria or
plastids our hypothesis attempts to understand the evolution of any endosymbiotic-derived organelle of prokaryotic origin. We suggest clear parallels in how the
evolution of the mitochondria and plastids proceeded. In
addition, the outsiders’ hypothesis elaborates on the
notion implied from modern comparative genomic
studies with endosymbiontic bacteria that genetic
drift eroding the prokaryotic genome might have been
an important factor underling the endosymbiont-toorganelle conversion.
(iv) The ultimate root of the insiders’ view is the signal
hypothesis that initially intended to describe how a protein is targeted to the interior of the endoplasmic reticulum [53]. Thereby it was assumed that the inherent
function of a protein sorting system is to direct proteins to
the lumen of an organelle. Traditional models for the evolution of protein topogenesis in mitochondria and plastid
adhered to this idea and aimed at providing an insiders’
description of organelle function and evolution. The outsiders’ hypothesis can bring a fresh perspective to understanding the essential organization of a protein sorting
system. For example, it is by applying a gradual outsideto-inside description of the evolution of protein sorting
components that one can rationalize why precursor of
proteins destined to the OM, IMS, and the mitochondrial
carriers do not have N-terminal extensions (presequences). We suggest that pre-sequences appeared in a
later stage to facilitate the insertion of STMD-containing
proteins into the IM by the Tim23/Tim17 insertase, and
only a posteriori did they acquire the “meaning” of a signal. As a consequence we suggest that pre-sequences are
actually signals for insertion into the IM and that the genuine signal for protein import into the matrix of mitochondria that emerged during evolution was the absence

Gross and Bhattacharya Biology Direct 2011, 6:12
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/12

of an alpha-helical transmembrane domain following the
pre-sequence. Such a hypothesis that topogenic signals
emerged from functional traits of the imported proteins is
to our knowledge novel and merits discussion.
To give an example, the model by Cavalier-Smith [ref.
[15]] agrees in many points with the authors’ model. He
also proposed for example that Tom20, Tom22, Sam37
and mitochondrial carriers originated and evolved in the
host genome.
Author’s response

The referee raises and important example to be contrasted with our outsiders’ hypothesis because CavalierSmith’s model seems to be the only additional attempt
so far made to provide a detailed description for the evolution of a protein sorting system in an organelle.
Although Cavalier-Smith’s model has many merits, in
our opinion it has fundamental problems that stem from
assuming insiders’ premises. For example, while considering that Tom20, Tom22, Sam37 evolved in the genome
of the host, Cavalier-Smith also adheres to the idea that
Tim17/23 and Tim22 evolved from endosymbiotic LivH
homologs. He also proposes that the small Tim chaperones are of prokaryotic origin, and that Tom40 is derived
from the usher-type secretion component of Gram-negative bacteria, even if there is no rigorous phylogenetic
support for such suggestions. In addition he argues that
the YidC homolog of the alphaproteobacterium was
inserting mitochondrial carriers arriving from outside the
cell. To our knowledge, such an inverted topology of
YidC homologs has not yet been observed in prokaryotes
or mitochondria. These examples (and below) illustrate
how insiders’ views can confuse phylogenetic and cell biological phenomena while attempting to explain how the
endosymbiont was importing host proteins.
The major difference between Cavalier-Smith’ model
and the model by Gross and Bhattacharya regards the
first steps in the process (carriers insertion versus
Tom40 and SAM50 self-insertion into the OM). I can
see the merits of the first solution (immediate selective
advantage of ATP/ADP or other exchanges), but I don’t
see the advantage to the host of exchanging the OM
beta-barrel proteins (this was also not discussed in the
authors’ Nat Rev Genet paper ref. [1]). Could it have
been advantageous for the control of transport, or organelle division? I am just guessing, but this point could
be elaborated in this manuscript. I would argue that the
first steps had to involve a mechanism to control or tap
the evolving organelle, and I don’t see the solution from
a pure outsider (OM targeting first) perspective.
Author’s response

In principle the OM of Gram-negative bacteria is not
permeable to external proteins. It is not clear in Cavalier-Smith’s model how a carrier protein translated into

Page 8 of 13

the cytosol of the host could have gained access to the
IM of the alphaproteobacterium. It is suggested that
the Tom40 pore was permeable to the carriers. However
evolution has no foresight, therefore the establishment
of Tom40 must have been selected for other purpose
that preceded the insertion of carriers in the IM. In
addition it is assumed that chaperones in the periplasm of eubacterial origin guided the carriers to the
IM where they were inserted by LivH homolog (the
supposed Tim22 progenitor). Periplasmic membrane
chaperones are directional, in a sense that they take
substrates present by the Sec translocase at the IM and
escort them to the OM [54]. This function may be
accomplished by crossing the peptidoglycan layer.
Finally, as we discussed in the text, the origin of Tim22
from LivH has not yet been proven.
Besides the idea that initially the insertion of an ATP/
ADP translocator was not feasible, the outsiders’ hypothesis
relies on the notion that a metabolic cycling between the
host and the alphaproteobacterial endosymbiont already
existed before organellogenesis. This is a characteristic of
obligatory endosymbiotic relationships of modern prokaryotes residing within host cells (Figure 1) [7,33]. We
assume that the survival of the metabolic association,
whatever it was, was crucial for both the host and the
endosymbiont. As discussed in the text, as a result of a
Muller’s ratchet the endosymbiont’s genome tend to
decay. This is as well expected to compromise the fitness
of the host. In many instances observed in modern hostendosymbiont associations the solution to such a problem
is the acquisition of a new endosymbiont [7]. In rare
cases, the outcome might be the transformation of the
endosymbiont into an organelle [21,51]. We suggest this
happened with the alphaproteobacterial and cyanobacterial forerunners of mitochondria and plastids, respectively [1]. If this was the case, where then molecular
components of the host are expected to access the endosymbiont functions in the first place? Porins in the OM
of Gram-negative bacteria are often regarded as unselective sieves for metabolites. However the expression of porins in the OM of eubacteria is exquisitely regulated and
mutations affecting porin permeability often affect metabolite flow rates [35]. In addition the mitochondrial
VDAC porin is as well subjected to fine regulation [36].
The fact that the OM is the first layer of metabolite
exchange control of Gram-negative bacteria and that it
is the only layer topologically accessible to host cytosolic
components, suggests that establishment of a hostencoded system to control beta-barrel biogenesis in the
alphaproteobacterial OM is the first predictable target
for selection to improve the fitness of the host-endosymbiont association. In the new manuscript we elaborate
the ideas described above with the support of a figure.

Gross and Bhattacharya Biology Direct 2011, 6:12
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/12

In the conclusions the authors state that: “what were
the selective advantages conferred to the endosymbiont
that led it to relinquish autonomy by importing hostproteins to manipulate its biochemistry?” This is not a
valid question in this context. Once the symbiont had
established an obligatory presence in the host, selection
acted at the level of the consortium (host+symbiont) as a
unit. It is therefore conceivable that certain mutations in
the organellar genome were fixed, even if such mutations
would have harmed a free-living cell or a facultative symbiont. If mutations in the organellar genome for example
changed the properties of the OM pores and made it
easier for the host to insert carriers and thereby increase
the fitness of the consortium, such mutations could have
spread. Nevertheless I acknowledge the other valid
arguments on why the symbiont’s genome was likely not
contributing with major innovations during the process.
Author’s response

The selection over the consortia is certainly the dominant
perspective. This idea can also be described as a central
tenet of the outsiders’ hypothesis if we however understand that the concept of selection over the consortia
should be broken and analyzed into its components; i.e.,
a host-level selection and the evolutionary dynamics of
the endosymbiont (see Figure 1). It is clear nowadays
from genomic studies with modern endosymbiotic bacteria that intracellular prokaryotes are under a neutral
process of evolution (i.e., genetic drift). This led, we suggest, to an increased selection over the host to assume
control of the prokaryotic functions. In other words, selection over the host chromosome was the major component
of a selection to maintain or increase the fitness of the
consortia (Figure 1). Despite this trend, the referee clearly
makes an important point, and now we acknowledge
that instances of tinkering from inside could be possible
if understood under the view of progressive control
exerted by the host over endosymbiont functions. This
idea is now discussed in the last section of the revised
manuscript. With regard to the question quoted by the
referee, we agree it is indeed inappropriate and has been
omitted from the manuscript.
In the section “Organellar protein topogenesis” the
authors mention de novo provenance from non-coding
DNA as a potential source of new genes. A cautionary
note here: it is more likely that these proteins evolved
from preexisting proteins and diverged beyond recognition, rather than evolved de novo. It is in general very
difficult to evolve folded proteins from scratch.
Author’s response

We mention now the possibility that certain proteins
lacking prokaryotic similarities could nonetheless be of
prokaryotic origin, but have diverged beyond the point of
recognition of the ancestral form. However cases of new

Page 9 of 13

proteins emerging from non-coding DNA do exist in the
recent literature [41].
Reviewer’s report 2

Prof. Martijn Huynen, Nijmegen Center for Molecular
Life Sciences & Center for Molecular and Biomolecular
Informatics, Nijmegen, Netherlands.
The manuscript by Jeferson Gross and Debashish
Bhattacharya concerns the discussion about whether
endosymbiosis of mitochondria and plastids was driven
by the host or by the endosymbiont. The hope is that if
we can trace the evolutionary events that transformed
the free-living bacteria into organelles we can understand the original rationale for that transformation for
both partners in the endosymbiosis events. What separates organelles from (intracellular) bacteria is the
import and functioning in the organelle of nuclear
encoded proteins, and thus the discussion focuses on
the machinery that imports those proteins and its origin.
Gross and Bhattacharya have recently proposed the outsiders’ hypothesis, which argues that this machinery originated with nuclear encoded proteins (albeit of
potentially endosymbiotic origin), and that these proteins first provided access to the outer membrane, then
the intermembrane space, then the inner membrane and
then the inside of the organelle. This view is in contrast
with one in which the proteins encoded on the endosymbiont would have evolved to import nuclear encoded
proteins, before their genes would have been transferred
to the nucleus. In the latter view, at least in the paper
by Alcock et al (ref. [5]), the first membrane that is
decorated with new proteins during the endosymbiosis
is the inner membrane, to allow the transport of metabolites that presumably would pass through existing
channels in the outer membrane.
This is all a rather academic discussion as we cannot
go back to the past. Furthermore most of the theoretical
arguments have already been spelled out and need not
to be restated by me. Finally I will not comment on the
“logic” of either scenario, as evolutionary Biology to me
often only makes sense in hindsight.
What is left for me to comment on are the new arguments that the authors bring to the table. I do agree that
the homology of LivH with Tim23 is rather contentious,
although the authors might have used a more thorough
analysis than pairwise sequence similarity analysis using
Blast. But, not only using pairwise sequence comparisons,
but also profile-profile analysis (this referees’ analysis) fail
to detect any significant homology, even when the search
is restricted to the putatively homologous region originally identified by Rassow et al (ref. [16]). This putative
homology is often quoted, and I for one never realized
that there was so little supporting evidence.

Gross and Bhattacharya Biology Direct 2011, 6:12
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/12

Author’s response

We thank the referee for this important contribution.
The authors’ examination of the Paulinella chromatophora cyanelle as an example of what happens if the
tape is played twice sounds convincing, but should
include a statement that, despite all the indirect evidence in that direction, there is no documented case of
protein import into P. chromatophora yet.
Author’s response

We note now the absence of direct evidence for protein
import into the cyanelle of Paulinella chromatophora.
Finally, the authors’ argument that among genes
encoded on organellar genomes there are no protein
sorting components is convincing at least in the sense
as it shows that there is no direct evidence for a “tinkering inside” hypothesis with respect to protein transport.
Although there is a clearly observable trend of genome
decay in mitochondrial genomes, I do not think that
that is necessarily all there is. There are examples of
nucleus to mitochondrial genome transfer, and there are
many ORFs in mitochondrial genomes, e.g. in ciliates, of
which the origin and potential function are unknown.
Author’s response

The cases of nucleus-to-mitochondrion gene transfer that
the referee alluded to are likely to concern higher plants
whose mitochondrial genomes have the exceptional ability to take up DNA by HGT [55]. The interesting case of
ORFs of unknown function in ciliates might as well
represent a feature exclusive to a specific taxonomic
group in which the organelle is experiencing high rates of
sequence divergence. In Tetrahymena species 20 out of
44 encoded ORFs are of uncertain provenance [56]. However in other non-ciliate mitochondria the number of
ORFs with undetermined function and origin is much
reduced. For example, the 97 genes encoded in the Reclinomonas americana organelle represent the largest set of
mitochondrial ORFs known thus far. Only 3/97 represent
ORFs of unclear function and provenance [57]. This suggests that many ORFs in the mitochondria of ciliates
and other species may be a result of ancestral proteins
that have diverged beyond recognition. An example is
provided by Ymf66 in Tetrahymena thermophila that
has marginal similarity to the mitochondrial Fo subunit
restricted to very few functionally important amino acids
and the overall polytopic transmembrane structure [58].
Alternatively ORFs of unknown origin may represent
instances of HGT or tinkering inside the organelle exclusive to the ciliate clade.
Could the authors comment on the Buchnera Daphnia symbiosis (or others with obligatory intracellular
endosymbionts). There is evidence there for the sharing
of amino acids. Probably the import/export machinery
of amino acids requires less tinkering of proteins than
the import/export of proteins, and therewith could

Page 10 of 13

reflect “tinkering inside”. I am not suggesting that the
mitochondrial carrier family is of endosymbiotic origin,
but also a protein like ATM1 that is required for cytosolic FeS assembly, that exports a metabolite from the
mitochondrion, and that is clearly of endosymbiotic origin, argues to consider the transport of metabolites
separate from the transport of proteins.
Author’s response

A hallmark of obligatory associations involving eukaryotic host cells and endosymbionts is the cycling of metabolites between the symbiotic partners [7,33]. The amino
acid interdependence cited by the referee is broadly
observed in associations involving aphid hosts (sap-feeding insects) and Buchnera species (gammaproteobacteria). In many instances the endosymbiont provides
essential amino acids absent in the host diet. In addition
genome studies have uncovered that the host-endosymbiont amino acid interdependence tend to be based in
complementary metabolic pathways [7,33]. For example,
whole or partial biosynthetic pathways that are not
encoded in the genome of the prokaryote are provided by
the host or potentially by a second endosymbiont. Knowledge about the molecular components in the membranes
of the endosymbionts involved in the transport of metabolites is still scarce. It is likely that in the majority of
cases the set of transporters encoded on the endosymbiont genome might suffice to regulate cross-flow of metabolites. Alternatively, as suggested by the referee, it is
possible that limited modifications of transporters
encoded on the endosymbiont genome might modify a
pre-existing molecular component to sustain essential
exchange of metabolites. Intriguingly, the paucity of
transporters encoded in some endosymbionts (e.g., Sulcia
muelleri [33]and Carsonella ruddii [51]) already suggests
ongoing processes of organellogenesis in which permeases
controlling host-endosymbiont metabolite exchange might
presumably be encoded on the host genome [51]. These
examples highlight the importance of modern-day intracellular associations of prokaryotes within eukaryotic
host as excellent model systems to investigate to which
degree tinkering from inside and/or host-level selection
contributes to the evolution of the obligatory consortia.
Nuclear-encoded prokaryote-derived components that
exert functions in modern-day organelles, such as the
family of ABC transporters to which ATM1 belongs [59],
are abundant in mitochondria and plastids. These might
represent instances of EGT/HGT potentially followed (or
not) by gene duplications and subfunctionalization and
therefore probably reflect tinkering on the host chromosomes, as discussed in the text.
In line with this I am a bit puzzled about the strong
distinction that is made between the “tinkering from
inside” and “tinkering from outside”. It comes down to
where (in which genome) exactly the mutations

Gross and Bhattacharya Biology Direct 2011, 6:12
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/12

occurred that allowed the transport of cytoplasmic proteins into the mitochondrion (as stated by the authors).
If the endosymbiont and the host became completely
dependent upon each other before the development of a
new protein import machinery, e.g. by export and
import of metabolites as has been proposed for Buchnera, we are already dealing with one species, with very
limited genetic heterogeneity among the endosymbionts
and thus also very little possibility of adaptive evolution
at that level. Thus an argument regarding the selective
advantages of releasing autonomy (page 10) would no
longer be valid.
Author’s response

We provide now a longer discussion and a figure to
highlight the nature of selective pressures that may
have led to the transformation of the aphaproteobacterial and cyanobacterial endosymbionts into the mitochondria and plastids, respectively. In our opinion it is
clear that selection acted on the consortium. However
this general phenomenon, we believe, is dominated
by host-level selection that is crucial to understand
organellogenesis (Figure 1).
Reviewer’s report 2, revised manuscript

The only point I would like to clarify is with respect
to the reaction on my comment about nuclear-tomitochondrial genome gene transfer. The latter has not
only been observed in plant mitochondria, but also in
some corals for MutS (Pont-Kingdon et al. J Mol Evol.
1998 Apr;46(4):419-31), or in some fungal mitochondria
that contain an RNA polymerase containing plasmid,
that at least in one case has been integrated in the
mitochdrial genome (Formighieri EF et al. Mycol Res.
2008 Oct;112(Pt 10):1136-52).
Author’s response

We thank the referee for this comment. We agree that
evolutionary novelties can exist in modern-day organelles
and also occurred in the past. However it seems to us
that the examples cited here represent sporadic phenomena uncovered in specific taxa and do not represent a
general tendency in modern-day mitochondria. Important to our consideration of organelle evolution is the
widely applicable idea that nuclear control over mitochondrial and plastid functions was a key step in the
evolution of these organelles. This idea entails that most
genetic novelties that play a role in organelle evolution
occurred in the nuclear genome.
Reviewer’s report 3

Dr. Purificación López-García, Universite Paris-Sud,
Paris, France.
This manuscript is a reply to the commentary by
Alcock et al. (2010, Science 327:649·650) to a previous
opinion article by J. Gross and Bhattacharya (2009,

Page 11 of 13

Nature Reviews Genetics 10:495·505), where these
authors already exposed the hypothesis that mitochondrial and plastid evolution was driven by the host, which
imposed the protein-sorting machinery in a step-wise
process starting from the outer membrane towards the
interior of the organelle (the “outsider’s” view).
Authors’ response

We wish to make a brief comment about use of the
phrase by this reviewer that the host “imposed” protein
sorting components to the endosymbiont; this may sound
like a “parasitic” interaction. Given the level of genome
degeneracy that affects obligatory endosymbionts, a
description that more properly illustrates our model is
that the host “rescued” endosymbiont topogenesis by
establishing a protein sorting machinery in the nascent
organelle.
Alcock et al. presented an opposed view (the “insider’s” view), implying that mitochondrial and plastid
protein translocation machineries would have been
mostly derived from existing endosymbiont bacterial
transporters. This manuscript is just a prolongation of
that discussion, though it has the merit of raising the
divergences between the two views in a direct way and
highlighting some key unsolved issues. I have two
general comments.
The major problem to test those models lies in the
difficulties to trace the origin of the genes encoding the
different components of the organelles’ protein translocation systems. Gross and Bhattacharya are right in pointing out the problem of establishing a clear homology
between some Tim and Tic components and the LivH
family of bacterial amino acid transporters, since transmembrane domains are often affected by convergence.
However, I do not see why “In the absence of clear support for a prokaryotic origin, the most likely explanation
is that Tim 17/23 and Tim22 were derived from the host
of the mitochondrial forerunner...”. For that, homology
with host genes that predated the mitochondrial/plastid
symbiosis should be established. This might be done in
principle for plastid evolution, but not for mitochondria
(unless primary amitochondriate eukaryotes are found
some day). Actually, it could very well be that bacterial
genes encoding membrane transporters and carriers were
transferred by EGT to the host nucleus and evolved
rapidly while a backup copy was still retained in the organelle. The nuclear-encoded proteins might have retained
their specificity to interact with the former bacterial
membrane while acquiring novel properties selected by
the new needs of the consortium. In a way, the outsideto-inside view, which appears logical when thinking in
terms of gene and genome evolution (it is indeed unlikely
that gene tinkering occurred in the endosymbiont’s genome) and host-endosymbiont interaction, might have
been subsequent (or consequent) to an inside-to-outside

Gross and Bhattacharya Biology Direct 2011, 6:12
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/12

process of EGT. Of course, this is hypothetical, and protein translocation machineries might have evolved from
completely new genes (though, in the case of mitochondria, to what extent the evolution of new genes was not
impacted directly or indirectly by the endosymbiosis?),
but it is not possible to exclude that hypothesis with the
data at hand.
Author’s response

We agree and discuss now in the text that absence of evidence for phylogenetic provenance does not prove that a
gene was generated de novo. Proteins often strongly diverge
from their ancestors, however the evolution of specific proteins in the host genome (whether generated de novo or
diverging from EGT/HGT sources) is a trend that parallels organellogenesis and underlies a selection on the host
chromosome. This is implied by the fact that several, if
not hundreds, of new subunits from the respiratory complexes, ribosomes, and other multi-protein machines are
functional in modern-day mitochondria, but are absent
from the prokaryotic counterparts.
EGT should not generally be described as a form of
inside-to-outside evolution. More likely, genes are established in the nucleus as a result of selective forces in the
host genome, whereas genes are lost from the endosymbiont as a consequence of reduced selection (genetic
drift). However selection on the host chromosome suggests
that EGT represents a form of outside-to-inside evolution
even if the organelle is the source of the nuclear gene
copy. In addition, it should be noted that genes established in the chromosome of the host to maintain organelle functions represent, in a broader sense, the result of
selection to maintain or improve the fitness of the consortia, as discussed in the text and depicted in Figure 1.
My second comments relates to the propensity in the
manuscript to separate host and endosymbiont’s “interests” in an advanced state of symbiogenesis. For
instance, for Gross and Bhattacharya “we come to the
key question implied by the insiders’ view that remains
to be answered: what were the selective advantages conferred to the endosymbiont that led it to relinquish
autonomy by importing host proteins to manipulate its
biochemistry?”. The question is not well formulated
because as soon as an obligatory symbiosis establishes,
which implies EGT of one or several essential genes to
the host with the subsequent loss in the endosymbiont,
selection begins to act at the consortium level. Likely, it
was much more efficient in terms of the consortium
energetic to reduce the bacterial genome to near extinction (or complete extinction, e.g. most mitochondriaderived hydrogenosomes). The question could only be
asked for facultative symbionts, but facultative symbionts do keep, by essence, their autonomy; otherwise,
they could not make a living on their own.

Page 12 of 13

Author’s response

The quoted phrase was in fact a remark in the final section of our manuscript about some implications of
Alcock et al. insiders’ perspective which, by overemphasizing the active role of the endosymbiont, appears to
imply such a “division of interests” [5]. We agree that the
comment does not fit in a proper discussion of organellogenesis. In addition we provide now a longer discussion
and the Figure 1emphasizing that the broader picture of
organellogenesis is a selection over the evolution of the
consortia, which entailed genetic novelties mostly occurring at the host chromosome-level.
Acknowledgements
DB acknowledges generous support from the US National Science
Foundation through grants EF 0827023 and MCB 0946528.
Authors’ contributions
JG and DB conceived the hypothesis and wrote the manuscript. Both
authors read and approved the final manuscript version.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 4 October 2010 Accepted: 19 February 2011
Published: 19 February 2011
References
1. Gross J, Bhattacharya D: Mitochondrial and plastid evolution in
eukaryotes: an outsiders’ perspective. Nat Rev Genet 2009, 10(7):495-505.
2. Reyes-Prieto A, Weber AP, Bhattacharya D: The origin and establishment
of the plastid in algae and plants. Annu Rev Genet 2007, 41:147-168.
3. Gross J, Bhattacharya D: Revaluating the evolution of the Toc and Tic
protein translocons. Trends Plant Sci 2009, 14(1):13-20.
4. Gross J, Bhattacharya D: Uniting sex and eukaryote origins in an
emerging oxygenic world. Biol Direct 5:53.
5. Alcock F, Clements A, Webb C, Lithgow T: Evolution. Tinkering inside the
organelle. Science 2010, 327(5966):649-650.
6. Schmidt O, Pfanner N, Meisinger C: Mitochondrial protein import: from
proteomics to functional mechanisms. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 11(9):655-667.
7. Moran NA, McCutcheon JP, Nakabachi A: Genomics and evolution of
heritable bacterial symbionts. Annu Rev Genet 2008, 42:165-190.
8. Moran NA, McLaughlin HJ, Sorek R: The dynamics and time scale of
ongoing genomic erosion in symbiotic bacteria. Science 2009,
323(5912):379-382.
9. Moran NA: Accelerated evolution and Muller’s rachet in endosymbiotic
bacteria. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1996, 93(7):2873-2878.
10. Dolezal P, Likic V, Tachezy J, Lithgow T: Evolution of the molecular
machines for protein import into mitochondria. Science 2006,
313(5785):314-318.
11. Karlberg EO, Andersson SG: Mitochondrial gene history and mRNA
localization: is there a correlation? Nat Rev Genet 2003, 4(5):391-397.
12. Lucattini R, Likic VA, Lithgow T: Bacterial proteins predisposed for
targeting to mitochondria. Mol Biol Evol 2004, 21(4):652-658.
13. Herrmann JM: Converting bacteria to organelles: evolution of
mitochondrial protein sorting. Trends Microbiol 2003, 11(2):74-79.
14. Hewitt V, Alcock F, Lithgow T: Minor modifications and major
adaptations: The evolution of molecular machines driving mitochondrial
protein import. Biochim Biophys Acta 2010.
15. Cavalier-Smith T: Origin of mitochondria by intracellular enslavement of
a photosynthetic purple bacterium. Proc Biol Sci 2006,
273(1596):1943-1952.
16. Rassow J, Dekker PJ, van Wilpe S, Meijer M, Soll J: The preprotein
translocase of the mitochondrial inner membrane: function and
evolution. J Mol Biol 1999, 286(1):105-120.

Gross and Bhattacharya Biology Direct 2011, 6:12
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/12

17. Reumann S, Inoue K, Keegstra K: Evolution of the general protein import
pathway of plastids (review). Mol Membr Biol 2005, 22(1-2):73-86.
18. Reumann S, Keegstra K: The endosymbiotic origin of the protein import
machinery of chloroplastic envelope membranes. Trends Plant Sci 1999,
4(8):302-307.
19. Hewitt V, Alcock F, Lithgow T: Minor modifications and major
adaptations: The evolution of molecular machines driving mitochondrial
protein import. Biochim Biophys Acta .
20. Clements A, Bursac D, Gatsos X, Perry AJ, Civciristov S, Celik N, Likic VA,
Poggio S, Jacobs-Wagner C, Strugnell RA, et al: The reducible complexity
of a mitochondrial molecular machine. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2009,
106(37):15791-15795.
21. Toft C, Andersson SG: Evolutionary microbial genomics: insights into
bacterial host adaptation. Nat Rev Genet 11(7):465-475.
22. Nowack EC, Melkonian M: Endosymbiotic associations within protists.
Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 365(1541):699-712.
23. Fares MA, Ruiz-Gonzalez MX, Moya A, Elena SF, Barrio E: Endosymbiotic
bacteria: groEL buffers against deleterious mutations. Nature 2002,
417(6887):398.
24. Hongoh Y, Sharma VK, Prakash T, Noda S, Taylor TD, Kudo T, Sakaki Y,
Toyoda A, Hattori M, Ohkuma M: Complete genome of the uncultured
Termite Group 1 bacteria in a single host protist cell. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 2008, 105(14):5555-5560.
25. Yoon HS, Nakayama T, Reyes-Prieto A, Andersen RA, Boo SM, Ishida K,
Bhattacharya D: A single origin of the photosynthetic organelle in
different Paulinella lineages. BMC Evol Biol 2009, 9:98.
26. Yoon HS, Reyes-Prieto A, Melkonian M, Bhattacharya D: Minimal plastid
genome evolution in the Paulinella endosymbiont. Curr Biol 2006, 16(17):
R670-672.
27. Reyes-Prieto A, Yoon HS, Moustafa A, Yang EC, Andersen RA, Boo SM,
Nakayama T, Ishida K, Bhattacharya D: Differential gene retention in
plastids of common recent origin. Mol Biol Evol 27(7):1530-1537.
28. Nakayama T, Ishida K: Another acquisition of a primary photosynthetic
organelle is underway in Paulinella chromatophora. Curr Biol 2009, 19(7):
R284-285.
29. Nowack EC, Vogel H, Groth M, Grossman AR, Melkonian M, Glockner G:
Endosymbiotic Gene Transfer and Transcriptional Regulation of
Transferred Genes in Paulinella chromatophora. Mol Biol Evol 2011,
28(1):407-22.
30. Nowack EC, Melkonian M, Glockner G: Chromatophore genome sequence
of Paulinella sheds light on acquisition of photosynthesis by eukaryotes.
Curr Biol 2008, 18(6):410-418.
31. Khakhlova O, Bock R: Elimination of deleterious mutations in plastid
genomes by gene conversion. Plant J 2006, 46(1):85-94.
32. Neiman M, Taylor DR: The causes of mutation accumulation in
mitochondrial genomes. Proc Biol Sci 2009, 276(1660):1201-1209.
33. McCutcheon JP, Moran NA: Parallel genomic evolution and metabolic
interdependence in an ancient symbiosis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2007,
104(49):19392-19397.
34. Johnson MD: The acquisition of phototrophy: adaptive strategies of
hosting endosymbionts and organelles. Photosynth Res 2010.
35. Nikaido H: Molecular basis of bacterial outer membrane permeability
revisited. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 2003, 67(4):593-656.
36. Abu-Hamad S, Sivan S, Shoshan-Barmatz V: The expression level of the
voltage-dependent anion channel controls life and death of the cell.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006, 103(15):5787-5792.
37. Bohnsack MT, Schleiff E: The evolution of protein targeting and
translocation systems. Biochim Biophys Acta 1803(10):1115-1130.
38. Bodyl A, Mackiewicz P, Stiller JW: Early steps in plastid evolution: current
ideas and controversies. Bioessays 2009, 31(11):1219-1232.
39. Bodyl A, Mackiewicz P, Stiller JW: Comparative genomic studies suggest
that the cyanobacterial endosymbionts of the amoeba Paulinella
chromatophora possess an import apparatus for nuclear-encoded
proteins. Plant Biol (Stuttg) 12(4):639-649.
40. Snel B, Bork P, Huynen MA: Genomes in flux: the evolution of archaeal
and proteobacterial gene content. Genome Res 2002, 12(1):17-25.
41. Kaessmann H: Origins, evolution, and phenotypic impact of new genes.
Genome Res .
42. Kurland CG, Andersson SG: Origin and evolution of the mitochondrial
proteome. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 2000, 64(4):786-820.

Page 13 of 13

43. Gabaldon T, Huynen MA: From endosymbiont to host-controlled
organelle: the hijacking of mitochondrial protein synthesis and
metabolism. PLoS Comput Biol 2007, 3(11):e219.
44. Kunji ER: The role and structure of mitochondrial carriers. FEBS Lett 2004,
564(3):239-244.
45. Tyra HM, Linka M, Weber AP, Bhattacharya D: Host origin of plastid solute
transporters in the first photosynthetic eukaryotes. Genome Biol 2007,
8(10):R212.
46. Suzuki K, Miyagishima SY: Eukaryotic and eubacterial contributions to the
establishment of plastid proteome estimated by large-scale
phylogenetic analyses. Mol Biol Evol 27(3):581-590.
47. Jacob F: Evolution and tinkering. Science 1977, 196(4295):1161-1166.
48. Timmis JN, Ayliffe MA, Huang CY, Martin W: Endosymbiotic gene transfer:
organelle genomes forge eukaryotic chromosomes. Nat Rev Genet 2004,
5(2):123-135.
49. Smid O, Matuskova A, Harris SR, Kucera T, Novotny M, Horvathova L, Hrdy I,
Kutejova E, Hirt RP, Embley TM, et al: Reductive evolution of the
mitochondrial processing peptidases of the unicellular parasites
trichomonas vaginalis and giardia intestinalis. PLoS Pathog 2008, 4(12):
e1000243.
50. Kneip C, Voss C, Lockhart PJ, Maier UG: The cyanobacterial endosymbiont
of the unicellular algae Rhopalodia gibba shows reductive genome
evolution. BMC Evol Biol 2008, 8:30.
51. Tamames J, Gil R, Latorre A, Pereto J, Silva FJ, Moya A: The frontier
between cell and organelle: genome analysis of Candidatus Carsonella
ruddii. BMC Evol Biol 2007, 7:181.
52. Woyke T, Tighe D, Mavromatis K, Clum A, Copeland A, Schackwitz W,
Lapidus A, Wu D, McCutcheon JP, McDonald BR, et al: One bacterial cell,
one complete genome. PLoS One 5(4):e10314.
53. Blobel G: Intracellular protein topogenesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1980,
77(3):1496-1500.
54. Leverrier P, Vertommen D, Collet JF: Contribution of proteomics toward
solving the fascinating mysteries of the biogenesis of the envelope of
Escherichia coli. Proteomics 10(4):771-784.
55. Richardson AO, Palmer JD: Horizontal gene transfer in plants. J Exp Bot
2007, 58(1):1-9.
56. Moradian MM, Beglaryan D, Skozylas JM, Kerikorian V: Complete
mitochondrial genome sequence of three Tetrahymena species reveals
mutation hot spots and accelerated nonsynonymous substitutions in
Ymf genes. PLoS One 2007, 2(7):e650.
57. Lang BF, Burger G, O’Kelly CJ, Cedergren R, Golding GB, Lemieux C,
Sankoff D, Turmel M, Gray MW: An ancestral mitochondrial DNA
resembling a eubacterial genome in miniature. Nature 1997,
387(6632):493-497.
58. Balabaskaran Nina P, Dudkina NV, Kane LA, van Eyk JE, Boekema EJ,
Mather MW, Vaidya AB: Highly divergent mitochondrial ATP synthase
complexes in Tetrahymena thermophila. PLoS Biol 8(7):e1000418.
59. Kovalchuk A, Driessen AJ: Phylogenetic analysis of fungal ABC
transporters. BMC Genomics 11:177.
doi:10.1186/1745-6150-6-12
Cite this article as: Gross and Bhattacharya: Endosymbiont or host: who
drove mitochondrial and plastid evolution? Biology Direct 2011 6:12.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
