<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>AlignMiner: a Web-based tool for detection of divergent regions in multiple sequence alignments of conserved sequences</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Algorithms for Molecular Biology 2010 5:24. doi:10.1186/1748-7188-5-24"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Darío Guerrero"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Guerrero et al. Algorithms for Molecular Biology 2010, 5:24
http://www.almob.org/content/5/1/24

SOFTWARE ARTICLE

Open Access

AlignMiner: a Web-based tool for detection of
divergent regions in multiple sequence
alignments of conserved sequences
Darío Guerrero1, Rocío Bautista1, David P Villalobos2, Francisco R Cantón2, M Gonzalo Claros1,2*

Abstract
Background: Multiple sequence alignments are used to study gene or protein function, phylogenetic relations,
genome evolution hypotheses and even gene polymorphisms. Virtually without exception, all available tools focus
on conserved segments or residues. Small divergent regions, however, are biologically important for specific
quantitative polymerase chain reaction, genotyping, molecular markers and preparation of specific antibodies, and
yet have received little attention. As a consequence, they must be selected empirically by the researcher.
AlignMiner has been developed to fill this gap in bioinformatic analyses.
Results: AlignMiner is a Web-based application for detection of conserved and divergent regions in alignments of
conserved sequences, focusing particularly on divergence. It accepts alignments (protein or nucleic acid) obtained
using any of a variety of algorithms, which does not appear to have a significant impact on the final results.
AlignMiner uses different scoring methods for assessing conserved/divergent regions, Entropy being the method
that provides the highest number of regions with the greatest length, and Weighted being the most restrictive.
Conserved/divergent regions can be generated either with respect to the consensus sequence or to one master
sequence. The resulting data are presented in a graphical interface developed in AJAX, which provides remarkable
user interaction capabilities. Users do not need to wait until execution is complete and can.even inspect their
results on a different computer. Data can be downloaded onto a user disk, in standard formats. In silico and
experimental proof-of-concept cases have shown that AlignMiner can be successfully used to designing specific
polymerase chain reaction primers as well as potential epitopes for antibodies. Primer design is assisted by a
module that deploys several oligonucleotide parameters for designing primers “on the fly”.
Conclusions: AlignMiner can be used to reliably detect divergent regions via several scoring methods that provide
different levels of selectivity. Its predictions have been verified by experimental means. Hence, it is expected that its
usage will save researchers’ time and ensure an objective selection of the best-possible divergent region when
closely related sequences are analysed. AlignMiner is freely available at http://www.scbi.uma.es/alignminer.

Background
Since the early days of bioinformatics, the elucidation of
similarities between sequences has been an attainable
goal to bioinformaticians and other scientists. In fact,
multiple sequence alignments (MSAs) stand at a crossroad between computation and biology and, as a result,
long-standing programs for DNA or protein MSAs are
nowadays widely used, offering high quality MSAs. In
recent years, by means of similarities between sequences
* Correspondence: claros@uma.es
1
Plataforma Andaluza de Bioinformática (Universidad de Málaga), Severo
Ochoa, 34, 29590 Málaga, Spain

and due to the rapid accumulation of gene and genome
sequences, it has been possible to predict the function
and role of a number of genes, discern protein structure
and function [1], perform new phylogenetic tree reconstruction, conduct genome evolution studies [2], and
design primers. Several scores for quantification of residue conservation and even detection of non-strictly-conserved residues have been developed that depend on the
composition of the surrounding residue sequence [3],
and new sequence aligners are able to integrate highly
heterogeneous information and a very large number of
sequences. Without exception, the sequence similarity of

© 2010 Guerrero et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Guerrero et al. Algorithms for Molecular Biology 2010, 5:24
http://www.almob.org/content/5/1/24

MSAs is optimised [4]. Some databases such as Ensembl
and PhIGs can provide information on conserved
regions across different species.
In contrast, meanwhile, detection of divergent regions
in alignments has not received the necessary attention,
with the inevitable consequence of a lack of appropriate
tools to address this subject. Divergent regions are in
fact as biologically interesting as similar regions, since
they are useful in the following aspects: (i) highthroughput expression profiling using quantitative PCR
(qPCR), which is considered to distinguish between closely-related genes [5]; (ii) confirmation of expression
results obtained by microarray technology, as well as
quantification of low-abundance transcripts; (iii) taxonomy and varietal differentiation is based on small differences between organisms: it enables appropriate
categorisation. Since the genetic material of individuals
from the same species is very similar, it is necessary to
detect specific differences to distinguish between them
[6]; (iv) SNP (single nucleotide polymorphism) and diseases: most differences between healthy and unhealthy
organisms are based on single-nucleotide differences [7];
(v) identification of pathological and autopsy specimens
in forensic medicine is based on minimal sequence differences among samples [8]; (vi) primer design for PCRbased molecular markers relies on differences among
DNA sequences [9]; (vii) one way of preparing highlyspecific monoclonal antibodies is by immunisation with
highly-divergent peptides, instead of with the whole protein [10].
Analysis of gene and genomic variation has been revolutionised by the advent of next-generation sequencing
technology, revealing a considerable degree of genomic
polymorphism. This has led to studies focusing on SNP
discovery and genotyping [7,11-18], as well as the design
of properly conserved primer candidates from MSAs
[19,20], for comparative studies of genes and genomes
[21]. Most of these tools are operating system-dependent and only a few are Web-based, in which case they
have a relatively static interface. However, there is
neither adequate software for, nor study on, MSAs for
detection of polymorphic regions and discrepancies
(beyond single nucleotide dissimilarities) that would
provide a numerical score related to divergence significance. In short, researchers find themselves empirically
detecting which sequence fragment, among a series of
paralogs and/or orthologs, can be used to design specific
primers for PCR, or which specific probes or specific
linear epitopes can be synthesised in order to obtain
antibodies. Together, these factors have been the main
motivation for development of AlignMiner: this software
was intended to cover the gap in bioinformatic function
by evaluating divergence, rather than similarity, in alignments that involve closely-related sequences. For any

Page 2 of 16

type of DNA/protein alignment, through its Web interface AlignMiner is able to identify putative SNPs, divergent regions, and conserved segments. The results can
be inspected graphically via an innovative, interactive
graphical interface developed in AJAX, or saved in any
of several formats.

Implementation
Architecture

AlignMiner is a free Web-based application that has
been developed in three layers, each making use of
object-oriented methodologies. The first layer contains
the algorithm core. It is written entirely in Perl and uses
Bioperl [22] libraries for MSA loading and manipulation.
Hence, it can run in any operating system provided that
Perl 5.8, BioPerl 1.5.2, and the Perl modules Log::Log4perl, JSON and Math:FFT are installed. BioPerl has been
chosen because it provides a rich set of functions and
an abstraction layer that handles nearly all MSA formats
currently available. The second layer links the algorithm
with the interface using the necessary CGIs written in
Perl. The third (top) is a front-end layer based on AJAX
[23] techniques to offer an interactive, quick and
friendly interface. Intermediate data and final results are
saved using JSON [24], a data format that competes
with XML for highly human-readable syntax, and for
efficiency in the storage and parsing phases. Firefox or
Safari Web browsers are recommended, since Internet
Explorer does not support some of the advanced features of AJAX. AlignMiner has been tested for correct
operation in a few flavours of Linux and various Mac
OS X machines, to verify full compatibility.
Owing to its layered architecture, AlignMiner can
function in four execution modes: (i) as a command line
for advanced users to retain all Unix capabilities of integration, within any automation process or pipeline; (ii)
as a REST Web service, also for advanced users, which
enables its integration in workflows; (iii) as a single
workstation where jobs are executed on the same computer that has the Web interface – this setting is not
recommended since it is prone to saturation when multiple jobs are sent simultaneously; (iv) as an advanced
Web application (this is the preferred mode), where jobs
are transferred to a queue system which schedules the
execution depending on the resource availability – this
minimises the risk of saturation while maintaining interactivity. Data management remains hidden to users.
Algorithm

The AlignMiner algorithm is outlined in Figure 1A. It
can be divided into the following main steps:
1. Sequence or MSA loading: Since AlignMiner is
not intended to build the best possible MSA, users

Guerrero et al. Algorithms for Molecular Biology 2010, 5:24
http://www.almob.org/content/5/1/24

A

Page 3 of 16

B

start

C

MSA loading
Score
Scoring method
Format uniﬁcation

mad (median)
Data preprocessing

FFT
mad = 0

Consensus call

Cutoffs

YES

mad (mean)

Cutoffs

NO
Frequency table
generation

Scoring method 1

...

Trimming

Trimming
deviation = mad * 1.4826

Scoring method n
Regions

cutoff = median ± deviation

End

Figure 1 The AlignMiner algorithm. (A) Flow diagram of the main components of the algorithm, as explained in the text; the bold boxes are
detalied in B. (B) The details of how a divergent region is obtained using a given scoring method. The “score calculation” renders a single
numeric value for each MSA column. “FFT” is a fast Fourier transform for smoothing the curve of raw scores. The original (left branch) and
Fourier-transformed (right branch) curves are trimmed with their respective “cutoffs” in order to obtain putative SNPs and conserved/divergent
regions, respectively. The bold dashed boxes are detailed in C. (C) Details of the determination of the final cutoffs used for trimming scores and
providing the validated conserved/divergent regions.

are expected to load already-built MSAs obtained
using external programs such as M-Coffee [25,26] or
MultAlin [27] (for a review of MSA tools, see [4]).
However, AlignMiner is also able to align a set of
sequences in FASTA, MSF, CLIJSTALW and other
formats using the fast, accurate and memory-efficient Kalign2 [28]. The alignment file is loaded into
the Bioperl SeqIO abstraction object, which enables
AlignMiner to read nearly all MSA formats. The format is not inferred from the file extension but by
searching the file contents for format-specific patterns. Users are alerted if there are faulty, corrupted
or unknown file formats.
2. Format unification: For efficient data management, all MSA formats are encapsulated into a common JSON representation and saved to disk to make
them accessible to other AlignMiner modules.
3. Data pre-processing: The alignment is examined
to extract basic characteristics that are used in internal decisions, such as the number of sequences,
MSA length, type of aligned sequences (DNA/protein), and MSA format, and an identifier is assigned
to each sequence. These characteristics are also displayed in the ‘Job List’ tab in order to provide some
information regarding the MSA content. Finally,

AlignMiner automatically analyses the MSA to
determine the region where the algorithm is going
to be applicable: there is usually a high proportion
of gaps at each MSA end that would lead to misleading results for frequencies (see below), due to
the small number of sequences and the low alignment reliability at these positions [1]. The MSA
ends are then sliced until at least two contiguous
positions do not include any gap. Slicing limits can
also be set manually if desired.
4. Consensus call: A consensus sequence is assessed
from the whole MSA using BioPerl capabilities to
serve as the weighting reference for calculations.
When a user defines one sequence within the MSA
as the master sequence, scoring calculations (see
below) will now be referred to it instead of to the
consensus.
5. Frequency table: Since the scores implemented in
AlignMiner require knowledge of the number of
nucleotides or amino acids present at each position
of the MSA, these frequencies are stored in temporary tables as a simple caching mechanism to speed up
the algorithm performance, in order to spend nearly
the same time with a few aligned sequences as with a
large number of aligned sequences (see below).

Guerrero et al. Algorithms for Molecular Biology 2010, 5:24
http://www.almob.org/content/5/1/24

6. Scoring: Several scoring methods (see next section for details) are included in AlignMiner in order
to enhance different aspects of each MSA. This is
the slowest portion of the algorithm since each scoring method has to read and process the complete
MSA (further optimisation, including parallelisation,
will be addressed to this step in the near future).
Each scoring method provides a single value for
each alignment column that enables the evaluation
of conservation (positive value) or divergence (negative value) at every column of the MSA (Figure 1B).
Concerning gaps, there is neither consensus interpretation nor an adequate model for handling gaps
in alignments. Therefore, in this work, the presence
of a gap in a column is considered as the lowest
conservative substitution. By default, it is expected
that sequence divergence is spread over the
sequence (as was previously with the case with protein MSAs), such that scores produce clear maximum and minimum peaks reflecting conserved and
divergent positions, respectively. In order to extract
the significant peaks, a robust and consistent measure is calculated based on the median value of the
score and two cutoffs (Figure 1C). Cutoffs rely on
1.4826 times the median absolute deviation (MAD =
median[abs(X – median[X])]) such that they define a
margin equivalent to one standard deviation from
the median. When sequences in the MSA are closely
related (note that DNA sequences are to be closely
related), the median is 0, and the MAD is also 0 or
very close to 0. In such a case, a reliable cutoff was
established using a MAD-like measure based on the
mean (instead of the median) to avoid the overpopulation of zero-valued positions, such as MAD_mean
= mean[abs(X - mean[X])]. This cutoff will only
reveal divergent regions of the MSA.
7. Regions: Nucleotides whose score is below the
low cutoff boundary are reported as a putative SNP
provided that each variation appears in at least two
sequences (as a consequence, alignments of less than
four sequences would lack the capacity for SNP prediction). It should be taken into account that neither
synonymy nor the potential effects on protein structure are checked for these putative SNPs, since
AlignMiner is not designed to predict the significance of SNPs. Obviously, such a calculation is not
performed with protein MSAs. Raw scores are
smoothed by a fast Fourier transform ("FFT” in Figure 1B) such that contiguous sharp peaks become
wide ranges in order to assess changes in regions,
rather than nucleotides. The algorithm reports those
positions of the raw and FFT-transformed values
that have a score higher (conserved) or lower (divergent) than the corresponding cutoffs for conserved/

Page 4 of 16

divergent regions. In the case of DNA alignments,
divergent regions must additionally include at least
two putative SNPs. The arithmetic mean of the
score of every nucleotide/amino acid encompassed
by that region gives the characteristic score for the
region.
Scoring methods

All scoring methods described below are included in the
common base algorithm depicted in Figure 1, since they
are all based on the information contained in each column of MSAs. The only differences between the scoring
methods are in the weight table and formula for each.
All scores are calculated specifically for each type of
sequence (DNA/protein) and for the particular MSA
being processed, so it is up to users to decide which one
best applies in their situation. Common parameters for
all scoring methods are:
• g(i, b) ® Count of nucleotide instances b at position i of the MSA.
• C(i) ® Nucleotide at position i in the consensus or
master sequence.
• M(b1, b2) ® Weighting for nucleotide b2 when its
corresponding C(i) is b1.
• D(i) ® Number of different nucleotides found at
position i of the MSA.
• B ® Set of nucleotides found in the MSA.
• nseq ® Number of sequences in the MSA.
It should be taken into account that each of the following scoring methods will provide a different score
range. However, all of them are intended to produce
positive values for conserved regions and negative values
for divergent regions, and are not zero-centred in any
case.
Weighted The Weighted score is applicable to any
sequence type. For each position iof the alignment, it is
calculated as:
∑ ( (b,i)*M(C(i),b))
b∈B
Weighted(i) =
nseq

(1)

A weight matrix [29,30] is used for promoting identities over similarities, and penalising (giving a negative
value) to the differences depending on the degree of
divergence. Accordingly, the result is not zero-centred
unless aligned sequences were quite different. It is not
expected that changing the weight matrix would produce significant differences. Matrices for DNA alignments are taken from WU-Blast (Warren R. Gish,
unpublished): “Identity” is given for sequences with only
the four usual nucleotides (ACTG), and “Simple” for
sequences including undefined nucleotides (RYMWSK).

Guerrero et al. Algorithms for Molecular Biology 2010, 5:24
http://www.almob.org/content/5/1/24

Page 5 of 16

Protein alignments are weighted using “Blosum62”
[31,32].
DNAW DNAW applies only to DNA sequences containing A, C, T and G, since it is a simplification of the
Weighted score when weights are 1 for identity and 0
for difference. Hence, for each position i of the alignment,
DNAW (i) =

2* (C(i),i)− nseq
nseq

(2)

As a result, and like Weighted, a lower value is
obtained when the difference found between sequences
is higher. Again, it is not zero-centred.
Entropy A parameter frequently used for quantifying
the composition of an individual column i is its entropy
H(i), since it is an ideal representation of disorder at
every MSA position and can be very usefully employed
to assess differences in a MSA. H(i) is defined as follows
(using frequencies instead of probabilities):
H(i) = −

⎡  (b,i)

∑ ⎢⎣⎢ nseq * log
b∈B

2

⎛  (b,i)
⎜
⎝ nseq

⎞⎤
⎟⎥
⎥
⎠⎦

(3)

However, for consistency with the rest of the scoring
results (where divergent regions are represented with
lower values than conserved ones), Entropy scoring is
sign-switched, such that Entropy = –H(i).
Variability Variability represents another way to evaluate changes in an alignment position without taking into
account whether variations are conservative or not. The
rationale is that any position change is valid for marking
a difference between sequences. Negative values indicate
greater variability. It is defined by the equation:
Variability (i ) = −

D(i )*nseq
 (C (i ),i )

(4)

Primer design module

One of the most useful applications derived from retrieval of divergent regions is the design of PCR primers
“on the fly”. A window containing the divergent region
plus five nucleotides on each side defines a primer by
default. Parameters for the displayed nucleotide window
are calculated as in [33], that is: length, GC content,
melting temperature, absence of repeats and absence of
secondary structures. An optimal primer sequence
should contain: (i) two to three G’s or C’s for 3’-end stability; (ii) a GC content of between 40% and 60%; (iii) a
melting temperature above 52°C; and (iv) the absence of
secondary structure formation, that is, the maximum
free energy must be above -4 kcal/mol for dimer formation or -3 kcal/mol for hairpin formation. Every

parameter is printed over a colour that suggests the
value compliance: green indicates that the primer is in
agreement with the above requirements, and orange, red
or blue that the sequence should be optimised. Users
can move the window size in order to obtain optimal
parameters so that the optimal primers are expected to
have “green” properties (Additional file 1 Figure S1).
The primers so designed can be tested in silica by
means of the “PCR amplification” Web tool [34] at
BioPHP [35] against every sequence of the alignment. It
should be noted that primers designed with AlignMiner
are intended to identify a specific sequence; therefore,
degenerate primer design is disabled.
Usage

The AlignMiner Web interface was designed for maximum simplicity and convenience of use. Users must log
on with their e-mail to obtain a confidential space
within the public environment (no registration is
needed). Their data are stored there for at least four
weeks, although old jobs may be deleted by the administrator for space limitation reasons; in fact, users are
recommended to locally save their analysis. A new job
starts when a file containing one MSA (most popular
formats are accepted such as Clustal, NEXUS, MSF,
PHYLIP, FASTA...), or a set of sequences to be aligned
with Kalign2, is uploaded and a name is optionally
given. A small amount of basic information (sequence
count, length, file type, etc) about every job is shown to
the user in order to verify that it has been correctly preprocessed. Users can then decide to mark a specific
sequence as master. In such a case, the algorithm is
directed to look for the most divergent/conserved
regions with respect to the master instead of the consensus sequence. This option enables identification of
overall divergences (by default) or regions that serve to
clearly differentiate the master sequence from the other
sequences. Finally, users can either decide themselves
which portion of the alignment will be analysed, or
allow AlignMiner to decide.
At this moment, the job is already shown in the Job
List with a “waiting” status. Once the “Run” button is
pushed, the batch system takes control, and the status
(pending, queued, running or completed) is displayed in
real time. Afterwards, users can decide to (1) wait until
the most recent job is finished, (2) browse previouslycompleted jobs, (3) launch new jobs, or (4) close the
Web browser and return later (even on a different computer) to perform any of the first three operations. Job
deletion is always enabled.
By clicking on each job, users can select a scoring
method for analysis of their MSA. Changing the scoring
method is always comparatively fast, since calculations
have already been performed. Results are shown in a
dynamic display that enables clicking, scrolling,

Guerrero et al. Algorithms for Molecular Biology 2010, 5:24
http://www.almob.org/content/5/1/24

dragging, zooming, and even “snapshooting” a portion of
the graphical plot. The plot can be saved on the user’s
computer in PNG format; a record of snapshots is additionally maintained on the screen. Results are also
represented in a tabular form linked to the graphical
plot: each table row is linked to its corresponding region
in the plot, and vice-versa. Tables can be ordered by
position or score values, and exported to GFF (general
features format) for external processing.
AlignMiner can also be used as a Web service. The
REST protocol has been used due to is wide interoperability and because it only needs an HTTP stack (either
on the client or the server) that almost every platform
and device has today. The Web service of AlignMiner
can be invoked to send, list, delete, or download jobs.
Job results can be downloaded as a whole, or file by file.
URL, http verb and optional fields are indicated in
Additional file 2 Table S1. The api_login_key field
is compulsory for any REST invocation of AlignMiner
since it serves to allocate the corresponding disk space.
An example of submitting a new job using the curl client is:
curl -X POST
-F http://api_login_key=your@email.
net
-F alignment_file_field=@/tmp/tests/
sequences.fna
-F job_name_field=MyAMtest
-F master_field=NONE
-F align_start_field = 0
-F align_end_field = 0
http://www.scbi.uma.es/ingebiol/commands/am/jobs/0/stage/1.json
Obtaining a job status by means of a browser is performed by:
http://www.scbi.uma.es/ingebiol/commands/am/jobs/20100412.json?api_login_key=your@email.com
Polymerase chain reaction

Each PCR was performed on a T1 Thermocycler (Biometra). The PCR reaction mixture for a 100 μl volume
contained 75.5 μl of distilled water, 10 μl 10 × PCR buffer, 2 μl dNTP mix (12.5 mM each), 2 μl of each primer
(20 μM), 0.5 μl Taq polymerase (5 U/μl), and 5 μl of
template DNA. The PCR commenced with 5 min of
denaturation at 94°C and continued through 35 cycles
consisting of the following steps: 94°C for 1 min, 4°C
over the lowest melting temperature (Tm) of the corresponding primer pair for 1 min, and 72°C for 2 min.
Cycles were followed by a final extension step at 72°C
for 8 min. When the template was cDNA or plasmid
DNA, the 5 μl of template contained 20 ng of DNA,
whereas it contained 1 μg when template was genomic

Page 6 of 16

DNA. The amplification products were analysed using
1.5% (w/v) agarose gel electrophoresis.

Results and Discussion
The vast amount of data involved in MSAs makes it
impossible to manually identify the significantly divergent regions. In order to assess the speed, success rate
and experimental usefulness of AlignMiner with different real and hypothetical MSAs, two algorithms for
MSA were used: one is M-Coffee [25] which generates
high-quality MSAs by combining several alternative
alignment methods into one single MSA, and the other
is MultAlin [27] which is based on a hierarchical clustering algorithm using progressive pairwise alignments.
AlignMiner Performance

The speed and performance of AlignMiner were analysed by increasing the two-dimensional size of the
MSA. A first assay was designed to test AlignMiner performance when increasing the number of aligned
sequences for a fixed length. The second test was
designed to assess AlignMiner behaviour when a fixed
number of sequences (four in this case) contained
longer and longer alignments. Figure 2 clearly shows
that execution time increased with the number of
nucleotides included in the MSA. However, it was not
significantly affected by the number of aligned
sequences (solid line), but by the increase in alignment
length (dashed line). Accordingly, the execution time
would be long only when relatively long genomic
sequences were analysed. This behaviour was expected,
since AlignMiner is optimised to work with an extremely large number of sequences through the use of frequency tables (see the Algorithm section).
These caching techniques allowed the algorithm to
use the same amount of memory and spend a fixed time
in score calculation, independently of the number of
sequences loaded. The subtle increment in time related
to the increment in sequences arises from population of
the frequency table, which was done sequentially for
every aligned sequence.
Computationally, these assays provided further information for AlignMiner, since they were executed on a
multiprocessor computer where the queue system was
to be given some information regarding the estimated
execution time for each job. Obviously, it is impossible
to provide an exact value in every case, but the execution times shown in Figure 2 served to provide an estimated execution-time curve for the queue system.
Scoring method characterisation

Since the rationale of each scoring method is different,
they must be characterised in order to know when each
particular method is more appropriate. Evaluation of

Guerrero et al. Algorithms for Molecular Biology 2010, 5:24
http://www.almob.org/content/5/1/24

Figure 2 Execution time versus number of nucleotides in the
MSA, excluding delays due to the queue system. The upper
panel represents the time taken when MSA length increases for a
given number of sequences. The lower panel (solid line) represents
the time taken when MSA length is kept constant while the
number of sequences is increased. The number of nucleotides in
each case is a simple multiplication of MSA length by the number
of sequences.

scores was performed with the 23 full-length sequences
(nucleotide and amino acid) of genes described in Table
1. They include genes having at least four different paralogs in one organism, and others with several orthologs
in at least four organisms. All of the sequences were
compliant with the maximum MSA size that prevents
overflow of the M-Coffee size limits. As example of closely-related paralogous genes, the five cytosolic glutamine synthetase isoforms of Arabidopsis thaliana
(AtGS1) and the four cytosolic glutamine synthetase isoforms of Oryza sativa (OsGS1) were included. As an
example of orthologous genes, the five genes of mammalian malate dehydrogenase 1 (MDHm), five plant
genes of the mitochondrial NAD-dependent malate
dehydrogenase (MDHp), and four plant genes of S-adenosylmethionine synthetase (SAM) were included.
Sequences were aligned with both MultAlin [27] and
M-Coffee [26] using default parameters. Average nucleotide identity was over 62% and the amino acid similarity
was over 82%. No clear correlation was found among
identity/similarity and orthologs/paralogs in these
MSAs, and so further testing would not be biased. The
terminal portions of the MSAs were automatically
removed by AlignMiner in order to analyse only the
portions where all sequences were aligned, and so

Page 7 of 16

discard the highly “noisy” ends. Hence, uninformative
hyper-variable segments were not included in the analysis. However, it should be noted that these hyper-variable regions in nucleotide MSAs could be considered
for designing specific probes for Northern and Southern
blots.
At first, the proportion of divergent regions was compared between MSAs (Figure 3). A percentage was used
in order to obtain comparable results, since MSAs of
less similar sequences (OsGS1 [paralogs] and SAM
[orthologs]) provided more highly-divergent regions
than MSAs containing closely-related sequences. In
nucleotide MSAs (Figure 3A), Entropy provided the
highest number of divergent regions in the five MSAs,
while the DNAW, Weighted and Variability methods exhibited variable behaviour. Averaging all the
results for a single value with its SEM (standard error of
the mean) confirmed the previous result, i.e. the number
of divergent regions using Entropy was clearly higher
than when using the other methods, among which the
percentage was lower and statistically-similar. For amino
acid MSAs (Figure 3B), the percentages were more variable among the scoring methods, but Entropy again
provided the highest value, while Weighted gave the
lowest value in all instances (clearly, it was the most
restrictive in both nucleotide and amino acid MSAs).
On the other hand, Figure 3B also shows that, when the
sequences aligned are very similar (AtGS1, SAM, and
MDMm), Entropy and Variability behave similarly with regard to the divergent region percentage,
whilst Variability clearly provides a lower number
of divergent regions than Entropy. Therefore,
Entropy was the method that identified the greatest
number of divergent regions for any kind of MSA, while
Weighted was revealed to be the most restrictive.
Scoring methods should also be characterised by the
region length they determine. Divergent regions were
classified by their length in three intervals: less than six
positions, between six and 11 positions, or more than
11 positions. In nucleotide MSAs (Figure 4A), it became
apparent that Entropy also rendered the longest divergent regions, while all the methods were roughly equivalent for regions below 11 nucleotides. In protein MSAs
(Figure 4B), Variability and Entropy behave similarly with respect to identification of divergent regions
longer than either six or 11 amino acids, although
Entropy in both cases identified a slightly larger number of divergent regions than Variability.
Weighted again provided a low number of long divergent regions. However, Entropy provided by far the
highest number of divergent regions below six amino
acids in length. In conclusion, Entropy seemed to provide not only the highest number of divergent regions,
but also the longest ones; in contrast, Weighted was

Guerrero et al. Algorithms for Molecular Biology 2010, 5:24
http://www.almob.org/content/5/1/24

Page 8 of 16

Table 1 Description of sequences used in this work that served to assess the performance of different aspects of
AlignMiner; sequences that have been aligned together have a common average identity and similarity values.
Name

Taxon

Organism

Isoform

AC# (nt)

Average
identity

GS1

Plant

Arabidopsis thaliana

GS1

Plant

Arabidopsis thaliana

AtGS1 isoform 1

AF419608

tity

AtGS1 isoform 2

AY091101

GS1

Plant

GS1
GS1

Plant
Plant

Arabidopsis thaliana

AtGS1 isoform 3

AY088312

Arabidopsis thaliana
Arabidopsis thaliana

AtGS1 isoform 4
AtGS1 isoform 5

AY059932
AK118005

AC# (amino acid)
Q56WN1

Average
similarity
ity

Q8LCE1
70%

Q9LVI8

89%

Q9FMD9
Q86XW5

GS1

Plant

Oryza sativa

OsGS1 isoform 1

AB037664

GS1

Plant

Oryza sativa

OsGS1 isoform 2

AB180688

GS1

Plant

Oryza sativa

OsGS1 isoform 3

AK243037

Q10DZ8

GS1

Plant

Oryza sativa

OsGS1 isoform 4

AB180689

Q10PS4

MDH-1

Mammalian

Mus musculus

MmMDHm

NM_008618

NP_032644

MDH-1

Mammalian

Sus scofra

ScMDHm

MN_213874

MDH-1
MDH-1

Mammalian
Mammalian

Rattus norvegicus
Homo sapiens

RnMDHm
HsMDHm

AF093773
NM_005917

MDH-1

Mammalian

Equs caballus

EcMDHm

XM_001494265

XP_001494315

MDH-1

Plant

Arabidopsis thaliana

AtMDHp

AF339684

AAK00366

MDH-1

Plant

Prunus persica

PpMDHp

AF367442

MDH-1

Plant

Vitis vinifera

VvMDHp

AF195869

MDH-1

Plant

Oryza sativa

OsMDHp

AF444195

MDH-1

Plant

Lycopersicum esculentum

LsMDHp

AY725474

AAV29198

SAM-1

Plant

Arabidopsis thaliana

AtSAM

AF325061

AAG40413

SAM-1

Plant

Triticum aestivum

TaSAM

Plant

Zea mays

ZmSAM

EU960496

SAM-1

Plant

Gossypum hirsutum

GhSAM

EF643509

Q0J9E0

82%

NP_999039
88%

AAC64180
NP_005908

95%

AAL11502
71%

AAF69802

87%

AAM00435

EU399630

SAM-1

Q0DXS9
62%

ABY85789
65%

ACG32614

92%

ABS52575

GDC-H

Plant

Pinus pinaster

Photosynthetic

ongoing

NA

GDC-H

Plant

Pinus pinaster

Non-photosynthetic

ongoing

NA

the most restrictive, providing the lowest number of
divergent regions, which were also slightly shorter. It
could be hypothesised that these differences are due to
the fact that Entropy considers only the frequency of
symbols (and not the features of the represented object)
while Weighted (and DNAW) take into account the
properties of the subject amino acid or nucleotides. This
is in agreement with the fact that the entropy concept
has proven useful in many fields of computational biology, such as sequence logos corresponding to conserved
motifs [36] and the identification of evolutionarilyimportant residues in proteins [3].
Since there seems to be a clear difference in the number and length of divergent regions revealed by the different scoring methods, it could be expected that
divergent regions discovered by Variability and
Weighted would be included among the regions discovered by Entropy. Figure 5 and Additional file 3 Figure S2 show the divergent regions revealed by Entropy
ordered by score for every protein MSA and, superimposed, the scores of the divergent regions revealed by
Variability and Weighted. Clearly, the Entropy
score included the divergent regions revealed by

Variability and Weighted beside other Entropyspecific regions (positions where no column is shown in
Figure 5 and Additional file 3 Figure S2). Moreover, the
divergent regions revealed by Weighted were often the
ones with the highest scores, which is consistent with
the fact that this scoring method was the most restrictive. In conclusion, Entropy should be used if a greater
number of divergent regions are desired, while
Weighted will find use when a small list of only the
most significantly-divergent regions is required, and
Variability behaves like Entropy when the
sequences in the MSA are closely related, but behaves
like Weighted in the remainder of cases.
The Entropy scoring method has previously been
compared with a scoring method based on phylogenetic
theory, such as phastCons [37]. Two different alignments have been used for the comparison. One was a
MSA containing the same 1000 nucleotides of four
genus Canis mitochondrial entries (AC numbers:
NC_009686, NC_008092, NC_002008, NC_008093); this
alignment only contained 18 divergent positions. The
other was the AtGS1 (Table 1) nucleotide MSA. The
profile of both scores for both MSAs is shown in

Guerrero et al. Algorithms for Molecular Biology 2010, 5:24
http://www.almob.org/content/5/1/24

Page 9 of 16

Figure 3 Distribution of the percentage of divergent regions by alignment and as a total average for nucleotide (A) or amino acid (B)
sequences identified with AlignMiner. Names of the MSAs are explained in Table 1. MultAlin and M-Coffee were used to obtain the input
MSAs. SEM, standard error of the mean.

Additional file 4 Figure S3. The minimum peaks in the
Canis MSA analysed with phastCons corresponded to
the divergent positions detected in AlignMiner. While
phastCons provided different scores for the conserved
portions, AlignMiner collapsed them to 0, as described
previously. However, in the case of the AtGS1 MSA,
where more differences can be found, the situation is
the opposite: AlignMiner clearly identified the divergent
regions while phastCons collapsed them to 0; moreover,
the scores of the divergent regions in this MSA are
more highly-negative than in the Canis MSA, reflecting
the fact that there are more variations in the AtGS1
MSA than in the Canis MSA. Therefore, phastCons and
AlignMiner appear to be complementary, since phastCons is devoted to conserved fragments while AlignMiner is specialised for divergent regions of MSAs with
various levels of similarity. Only when the MSAs share
over 99% identity do both algorithms identify the same
divergent nucleotides without hesitation.
Figures 3 and 4, as well as Figure 5 and the Additional
file 3 Figure S2, show that the AlignMiner results seem

to be independent of the alignment algorithm used,
since the histograms of M-Coffee are almost identical to
those of MultAlin in spite of their different rationales.
This is not surprising, because divergent regions are still
found among conserved sequences. Therefore, divergent
regions found by AlignMiner should not be strongly
biased by the alignment algorithm, and this enables
users to seed AlignMiner with a MSA generated using
their preferred algorithm. This finding is in agreement
with other algorithms exploiting the information deposited in each column of a MSA [3]. In accordance with
this robustness, only MSAs obtained with M-Coffee will
be used from now on.
In silico proof-of-concept cases

AlignMiner can be used for selecting specific PCR primers that serve to discriminate among closely-related
sequences. As an example, divergent regions were
obtained for the five A. thaliana GS1 isoforms (AtGS1
in Table 1). Since all the scoring methods produce similar results for these sequences (Figure 3), the MSA was

Guerrero et al. Algorithms for Molecular Biology 2010, 5:24
http://www.almob.org/content/5/1/24

Page 10 of 16

Figure 4 Distribution of the divergent region percentages by length for DNA (A) or protein (B) MSAs identified with AlignMiner.
Names of the MSAs are explained in Table 1. MultAlin and M-Coffee were used to obtain the input MSAs. DR, divergent region; bp, base pairs;
aas, amino acids.

inspected with DNAW. The resulting divergent regions
were sorted by decreasing score and the best regions
(scores 0.223 and 0.024) were selected for primer design
(Figure 6A and Table 2) with the help of the primer
tool. These primers were shown to selectively amplify
each isoform of GS1 in silico (Figure 6B), as revealed by
“PCR amplification” of the BioPHP suite [35].
Identification of divergent regions among proteins can
also be performed. It may be hypothesised that the most
divergent regions could be epitopes for production of
specific, even monoclonal, antibodies that can serve to
distinguish very closely-related protein isoforms. As an
example, the five glutamine synthetase (GS1) enzyme
isoforms of A. thaliana (AtGS1, Table 1) were aligned
with MultAlin using default parameters. The Entropy
scoring method was used since it identified the longest

divergent regions (Figure 4). The resulting divergent
regions were sorted by score and the best ones were
selected (Figure 7B). Each GS1 sequence was additionally inspected for solvent-accessible positions and highly
antigenic regions using the SCRATCH Protein Predictor
Web suite [38]. It appeared that the most highly-divergent Entropy-derived regions corresponded to the
most solvent-accessible and most antigenic portions of
the protein (Figure 7C). These sequences can then be
used to challenge mice or rabbits and obtain specific
antibodies against any one of the aligned sequences.
Experimental case study of divergent regions in a
nucleotide MSA

AlignMiner was tested for its efficacy in the design of
PCR primers in a real laboratory setting. Two isoforms

Guerrero et al. Algorithms for Molecular Biology 2010, 5:24
http://www.almob.org/content/5/1/24

Page 11 of 16

Figure 5 Distribution of score values of the divergent regions using the three scoring methods (Entropy, Variability or
Weighting) in the five protein MSAs, obtained with M-Coffee.

Guerrero et al. Algorithms for Molecular Biology 2010, 5:24
http://www.almob.org/content/5/1/24

Page 12 of 16

Figure 6 Use of AlignMiner for designing several specific primer pairs for PCR amplification of the different isoforms of the AtGS1
nucleotide sequence (A) The 5’ and 3’ divergent regions obtained with Entropy that were selected for primer design including the
characteristic parameters of each region. (B) Results of the in silico “PCR amplification” with BioPHP [34] using the different primer pairs. Note that
the actual 3’ primers are complementary to the sequences shown on the right.

of a Pinus pinaster gene, one from photosynthetic tissue
and one from non-photosynthetic tissue (Table 1) were
analysed. Sequences were aligned with MultAlin using
default settings. The resulting alignment was loaded into
AlignMiner and divergent regions were identified with
the Weighted score in obtain a small list of the most
divergent regions. This enabled the design of specific
primers for the photosynthetic and non-photosynthetic
isoforms (Figure 8A, Table 2). PCR amplification with
these primers using different DNAs as template (Figure
8B) confirmed that each primer pair amplified only the
isoform for which it was designed, without any crossamplification, using as template either total cDNA (Figure 8B, lanes 3) or specific cDNA inserted into a plasmid (Figure 8B, lanes 1 and 2). Since primers pairs are
expected to span exon-exon junctions, no amplification
was observed using genomic DNA (Figure 8B, lanes 4).
These results suggested that the algorithm had correctly

identified a divergent region, and that the primers were
correctly designed and worked as predicted by the
software.

Conclusions
AlignMiner serves to fill the gap in bioinformatic
function for the study of sequence divergence in
MSAs containing closely-related sequences. In contrast to other software [15,18,39], it is not intended
for the design of primers for high-throughput analysis
but for the of study particular cases where very closely-related sequences must be distinguished in order
to avoid cross-reaction. AlignMiner is able to identify
conserved/divergent regions with respect to a consensus sequence or to a “master” sequence. It can even
be used to identify putative DNA probes for blotting
hybridisation that correspond to the hyper-variable
regions at each MSA end. Our tests demonstrate that

Guerrero et al. Algorithms for Molecular Biology 2010, 5:24
http://www.almob.org/content/5/1/24

Page 13 of 16

Table 2 Details of primers designed with AlignMiner to identify specifically by PCR the five A. thaliana GS1 genes as
well as the two primer pairs that identify the photosynthetic and non-photosynthetic isoforms of P. pinaster; note
that the 3’ (reverse) primer is complementary to the sequence appearing in Figures 6 and 8.
Isoform
GS1.1

Primer

Length

%GC

Tm (°C)

Amplicon size (bp)
740

GS1.2

5’-GGTCTTTAGCAACCCTGA-3’

18

50

54.6

5’-ATCATCAAGGATTCCAGA-3’

18

39

48.7

5’-GATCTTTGCTAACCCTGA-3’

18

44

51.3

5’-CTTTCAAGGGTTCCAGAG-3’

18

50

53.6

GS1.3

5’-AATCTTCGATCATCCCAA-3’
5’-AAAGTCTAAAGCTTAGAG-3’

18
18

39
33

50
46

739

GS1.4

5’-GATCTTCAGCCACCCCGA-3’

18

61

59.4

739

5’-AATGTGTCATCAACCGAG-3’

18

44

51.5

5’-GATCTTTGAAGACCCTAG-3’

18

44

48.8

5’-TCTTTCATGGTTTCCAAA-3’

18

33

50.1

5’-AGTGCGCATTAAGGACCCATCA-3’

22

50

61

5’-ACACACTGGCTTCCACAATAGG-3’

22

50

59.4

5’-ACAGATGATCTAGGACATGC-3’

20

45

52

5’-CACTTATTTGCACTTGAAGG-3’

20

40

52.6

GS1.5
Photosyntetic isoform
Non-photosynthetic isoform

739

740
177
169

Figure 7 Correlation between the most divergent amino acid sequences and antigenicity of the AtGS1 protein MSA. (A) Similarity plot
obtained using the Entropy method; the most divergent regions being are highlighted. (B) Aligned sequences for the two divergent regions
together (underlined in black) and their score in relation to other divergent regions. (C) Localisation of each divergent region in the alignment
where: (i) nucleotides in bold are the predicted epitopes for B-cells; (ii) an “e” denotes predicted solvent accessibility for this position; and (iii)
red-boxed amino acids correspond to the sequence of the matching divergent region. It is clearly seen that divergent sequences overlap with
the predicted epitopes and the solvent-accessible amino acids.

Guerrero et al. Algorithms for Molecular Biology 2010, 5:24
http://www.almob.org/content/5/1/24

Page 14 of 16

Figure 8 Analysis of two Pinus pinaster gene isoforms. The specific primer pair for the photosynthetic isoform is identified by a “P”
and for the non-photosynthetic isoform by an “N” (A) Predicted sequence and properties of the two primer pairs designed for specific
identification of each isoform. (B) PCR analysis using the previously-predicted primers. Table 2 includes the expected amplicon size using these
primer pairs. The template in the different lanes is: cDNA for the photosynthetic isoform (lanes 1), cDNA for the non-photosynthetic isoform
(lanes 2), cDNA synthesised from total mRNA extracted from Pinus pinaster (lanes 3), Pinus pinaster genomic DNA (lanes 4), and negative controls
(lines 5), which do not contain any DNA. Lanes M are molecular weight markers (vector pFL61 digested with Hpa II). Arrows indicate the specific
amplification bands. DNA sizes are given in base pairs.

Guerrero et al. Algorithms for Molecular Biology 2010, 5:24
http://www.almob.org/content/5/1/24

the predictions of AlignMiner are not markedly
affected by the mode of MSA generation. This is
mainly attributable to the fact that the MSAs comprised highly similar sequences, and most differences
among MSA algorithms involve divergent regions [40].
In this study, the degree of similarity among
sequences did not appear to qualitatively affect the
results. While Entropy provided the highest number
of divergent regions of the longest size, Weighted
provided only a small set of the most divergent
regions. Additionally, AlignMiner was found to be
complementary to the phastCons algorithm [37], since
the former reinforces the differences and the latter,
the similarities. Wet and dry laboratory experiments
showed that AlignMiner can be used to provide specific primers for PCR amplification of one gene among
a gene family of orthologs and paralogs, as well as to
select protein epitopes for antibody production. Moreover, use of this software confirmed that divergent
regions in protein alignments can be viewed as putative specific antigenic sequences.
The calculations in AlignMiner have been optimised
in order to reduce execution times. In contrast
to other more static Web-based applications
[15-17,19,39], the AlignMiner interface is highly interactive, using emergent Web technologies without third
party solutions in order to resemble a stand-alone
application. This renders the interactivity highly dependent on the computer capabilities and browser implementation. Its implementation as a Web tool enables
users to inspect their results on different computers,
even those with different operating systems. The data
flexibility means that it can handle most MSA formats,
with each MSA obtained from orthologous and/or
paralogous sequences, and can be saved in standard
formats (PNG for images and GFF for data). We hope
that AlignMiner will save researchers time when
designing PCR primers, probes, and linear epitopes.
We are also open to suggestions from the scientific
community towards further development of AlignMiner. Institutions wishing to host mirrors of AlignMiner
are encouraged to contact the authors.

Availability and requirements
Project name AlignMiner. No license or account is
needed.
Operating systems Platform-independent
Programming languages Perl for the algorithm; Ajax
and HTML for the Web interface.
Other requirements A Web browser supporting JavaScript and Ajax (preferably Mozilla Firefox or Safari) is
required to use the public Web server. For installing
AlignMiner, BioPerl, JSON, Log::Log4perl and Math:FFT
Perl modules are required.

Page 15 of 16

Additional material
Additional file 1: Figure S1. Examples of primer design using the
primer tool of AlignMiner. In a good-quality set of oligonucleotides (left),
all properties have a green background. When several primer properties
are not in agreement with the characteristics stated in the text (right),
they are marked in red (very bad), orange (adequate only) or blue
(melting point is too low). In such a case, the sequence window must be
moved around the divergent region (extending or narrowing it) in order
to find a “green” primer; otherwise other divergent/conserved regions
should be considered.
Additional file 2: Table S1. Details of the REST elements available, and
the relevant instructions for invoking AlignMiner as a Web service.
Additional file 3: Figure S2. Distribution of score values of the
divergent regions using the three scoring methods (Entropy,
Variability or Weighting) in the five protein MSAs obtained with
MultAlin.
Additional file 4: Figure S3. Scoring comparison provided by
phastCons and AlignMiner with the MSAs of AtGS1 (left) and a highlyconserved fragment of 1000 nucleotides (right) from four different Canis
mitochondrial DNAs.

List of abbreviations
MSAs: multiple sequence alignments; PCR: polymerase chain reaction; dNTP:
deoxynucleotide triphosphate; SEM: standard error of the mean; FFT: fast
Fourier transform; DR: divergent region; bp: base pairs; aas: amino acids;
AtGS1: cytosolic glutamine synthetase isoforms of Arabidopsis thaliana;
OsGS1: cytosolic glutamine synthetase of Oryza sativa; MDHm: mammalian
malate dehydrogenase 1; MDHp: plant mitochondrial NAD-dependent
malate dehydrogenase; SAM: plant S-adenosylmethionine synthetase.
Acknowledgements
The authors wish to acknowledge F. Lopes Pinto, H. Svensson and P.
Lindblad for sharing with us the WebTag code. This study was supported by
the Spanish MICINN grants AGL2009-12139-C02-02 and BIO2009-07490,
European Union grant PLE2009-0016, and Junta de Andalucía funding to the
research group BIO-114.
Author details
Plataforma Andaluza de Bioinformática (Universidad de Málaga), Severo
Ochoa, 34, 29590 Málaga, Spain. 2Departamento de Biología Molecular y
Bioquímica (Universidad de Málaga), Campus de Teatinos, 29071 Málaga,
Spain.

1

Authors’ contributions
DG designed the interface and implemented the software. RB conducted
the in silico testing. DPV conducted the experimental testing. FRC supervised
the in silica and experimental testing, and helped in the manuscript writing.
MGC conceived the study and wrote the manuscript. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 14 January 2010 Accepted: 2 June 2010
Published: 2 June 2010
References
1. Capra JA, Singh M: Predicting functionally important residues from
sequence conservation. Bioinformatics 2007, 23(15):1875-1882.
2. Kim KM, Sung S, Caetano-Anollés G, Han JY, Kim H: An approach of
orthology detection from homologous sequences under minimum
evolution. Nucleic Acids Res 2008, 36(17):e110.
3. Merkl R, Zwick M: H2r: Identification of evolutionary important residues
by means of an entropy based analysis of multiple sequence
alignments. BMC Bioinformatics 2008, 9:151.

Guerrero et al. Algorithms for Molecular Biology 2010, 5:24
http://www.almob.org/content/5/1/24

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.
9.
10.
11.

12.
13.

14.
15.

16.

17.

18.
19.

20.

21.

22.

23.
24.
25.

26.

27.
28.

Kemena K, Notredame C: Upcoming challenges for multiple sequence
alignment methods in the high-throughput era. Bioinformatics 2009,
25(19):2455-2465.
Czechowski T, Bari RP, Stitt M, Scheible W, Udvardi MK: Real-time RT-PCR
profiling of over 1400 Arabidospis transcription factors: unprecedented
sensity reveals novel root- and shoot-specific genes. Plant J 2004,
38:366-379.
Claros MG, Crespillo R, Aguilar ML, Cánovas FM: DNA Fingerprinting and
classification of geographically related genotypes of olive-tree (Olea
europaea L.). Euphytica 2000, 116:131-142.
Savage D, Batley J, Erwin T, Logan E, Love CG, Lim GAC, Mongin E,
Barker G, Spangenberg GC, Edwards D: SNPServer: a real-time SNP
discovery tool. Nucleic Acids Res 2005, , 33 Web Server: W493-5.
Ferri G, Alù M, Corradini B, Licata M, Beduschi G: Species Identification
Through DNA “Barcodes”. Genet Test Mol Biomarkers 2009, 13:421-426.
Bautista R, Crespillo R, Canovas FM, Claros MG: Identification of olive-tree
cultivars with SCAR markers. Euphytica 2003, 129:33-41.
Geysen HM, Rodda SJ, Mason TJ: The delineation of peptides able to
mimic assembled epitopes. Ciba Found Symp 1986, 119:130-149.
Zhang J, Wheeler DA, Yakub I, Wei S, Sood R, Rowe W, Liu PP, Gibbs RA,
Buetow KH: SNPdetector: a software tool for sensitive and accurate SNP
detection. PLoS Comput Biol 2005, 1(5):e53.
D RP, Del-Favero J: novoSNP3: variant detection and sequence
annotation in resequencing projects. Methods Mol Biol 2007, 396:331-344.
Matukumalli LK, Grefenstette JJ, Hyten DL, Choi IY, Cregan PB, Van
Tassell CP: SNP-PHAGE-High throughput SNP discovery pipeline. BMC
Bioinformatics 2006, 7:468.
Manske HM, Kwiatkowski DP: SNP-o-matic. Bioinformatics 2009,
25(18):2434-2435.
Chang HW, Chuang LY, Cheng YH, Hung YC, Wen CH, Gu DL, Yang CH:
Prim-SNPing: a primer designer for cost-effective SNP genotyping.
Biotechniques 2009, 46(6):421-431.
Tang J, Leunissen JA, Voorrips RE, van der Linden CG, Vosman B:
HaploSNPer: a web-based allele and SNP detection tool. BMC Genetics
2008, 9:23.
Panitz F, Stengaard H, Hornshoj H, Gorodkin J, Hedegaard J, Cirera S,
Thomsen B, Madsen LB, Hoj A, Vingborg RK, Zahn B, Wang X,
Wernersson R, Jorgensen CB, Scheibye-Knudsen K, Arvin T, Lumholdt S,
Sawera M, Green T, Nielsen BJ, Havgaard JH, Brunak S, Fredholm M,
Bendixen C: SNP mining porcine ESTs with MAVIANT, a novel tool for
SNP evaluation and annotation. Bioinformatics 2007, 23(13):i387-i391.
Wegrzyn JL, Lee JM, Liechty J, Neale DB: PineSAP - sequence alignment
and SNP identification pipeline. Bioinformatics 2009, 25(19):2609-2610.
Kim N, Lee G: QPRIMER: a quick web-based application for designing
conserved PCR primers from multigenome alignments. Bioinformatics
2007, 23(17):2331-2333.
Gadberry MD, Malcomber ST, Doust AN, Kellogg EA: Primaclade–a flexible
tool to find conserved PCR primers across multiple species.
Bioinformatics 2005, 21(7):1263-1264.
Rascol VL, Levasseur A, Chabrol O, Grusea S, Gouret P, Danchin EGJ,
Pontarotti P: CASSIOPE: An expert system for conserved regions
searches. BMC Bioinformatics 2009, , 10: 284.
Stajich J, Block D, Boulez K, Brenner S, Chervitz S, Dagdigian C, Fuellen G,
Gilbert J, Korf I, Lapp H, Lehvasläiho H, Matsalla C, Mungall C, Osborne B,
Pocock M, Schattner P, Senger M, Stein L, Stupka E, Wilkinson M, Birney E:
The Bioperl toolkit: Perl modules for the life sciences. Genome Res 2002,
12(10):1611-8.
Garret J: Ajax: A New Approach to Web Applications. Adaptive Path 2005.
Java Script Object Notation. 1999 [http://www.json.org].
Wallace IM, O’Sullivan O, Higgins DG, Notredame C: M-Coffee: combining
multiple sequence alignment methods with T-Coffee. Nucleic Acids Res
2006, 34(6):1692-1699.
Moretti S, Armougom F, Wallace IM, Higgins DG, Jongeneel CV,
Notredame C: The M-Coffee web server: a meta-method for computing
multiple sequence alignments by combining alternative alignment
methods. Nucleic Acids Res 2007, 35:W645-8 [http://www.tcoffee.org].
Corpet F: Multiple sequence alignment with hierarchical clustering.
Nucleic Acids Res 1988, 16(22):10881-90.
Lassmann T, Frings O, Sonnhammer ELL: Kalign2: high-performance
multiple alignment of protein and nucleotide sequences allowing
external features. Nucleic Acids Res 2009, 37(3):858-65.

Page 16 of 16

29. Pearson WR, Lipman DJ: Improved tools for biological sequence
comparison. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1988, 85:2444-48.
30. Needleman SB, Wunsch CD: A general method applicable to the search
for similarities in the amino acid sequence of two proteins. J Mol Biol
1970, 48:443-453.
31. Sean R: Where did the BLOSUM62 alignment score matrix come from?
Nature Biotechnology 2004, 22:1035-1036.
32. Blosum62 matrix. [http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Class/FieldGuide/
BLOSUM62].
33. Pinto FL, Svensson H, Lindblad P: Webtag: a new web tool providing
tags/anchors for RT-PCR experiments with prokaryotes. BMC Biotecnology
2007, 7:73 [http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6750/7/73/].
34. PCR amplification at BioPHP. 2009 [http://biophp.org/minitools/
pcr_amplification/demo.php].
35. Bikandi J, San Millán R, Rementeria A, Garaizar J: In silico analysis of
complete bacterial genomes: PCR, AFLP-PCR, and endonuclease
restriction. Bioinformatics 2004, 20(5):798-799.
36. Schneider TD, Stephens RM: Sequence logos: a new way to display
consensus sequences. Nucleic Acids Res 1990, 18(20):6097-6100.
37. Siepel A, Bejerano G, Pedersen JS, Hinrichs AS, Hou M, Rosenbloom K,
Clawson H, Spieth J, Hillier LW, Richards S, Weinstock GM, Wilson RK,
Gibbs RA, Kent WJ, Miller W, Haussler D: Evolutionarily conserved
elements in vertebrate, insect, worm, and yeast genomes. Genome Res
2005, 15(8):1034-50.
38. SCRATCH Protein Predictor. 2009 [http://scratch.proteomics.ics.uci.edu/].
39. Arvidsson S, Kwasniewski M, Riano-Pachón DM, Mueller-Roeber B:
QuantPrime – a flexible tool for reliable high-throughput primer design
for quantitative PCR. BMC Bioinformatics 2008, 9:465.
40. Lassmann T, Sonnhammer E: Automatic extraction of reliable regions
from multiple sequence alignments. BMC Bioinformatics 2007, 8(Suppl 5):
S9.
doi:10.1186/1748-7188-5-24
Cite this article as: Guerrero et al.: AlignMiner: a Web-based tool for
detection of divergent regions in multiple sequence alignments of
conserved sequences. Algorithms for Molecular Biology 2010 5:24.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
