<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>gb-2004-5-8-r53.fm</title>
<meta name="Author" content="csproduction"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 7.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 5.0.5 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Open Access

Volume 5, Issue 8, Article R53
et al.
Gutiérrez
2004

Research

Rodrigo A Gutiérrez*†§, Pamela J Green‡, Kenneth Keegstra*† and
John B Ohlrogge†

Correspondence: Rodrigo A Gutiérrez. E-mail: rg98@nyu.edu

Published: 15 July 2004

Received: 16 March 2004
Revised: 10 May 2004
Accepted: 7 June 2004

Genome Biology 2004, 5:R53

© 2004 Gutiérrez et al.; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article: verbatim copying and redistribution of this article are permitted in all
media for any purpose, provided this notice is preserved along with the article's original URL
coding genesto decipher the genetic genomethat defineof <it>Arabidopsis thaliana </it>together withother organisms? the three domains
opportunity profiling of complete factors sequence plant form and function. To begin this task, we haveof other organisms provides an
<p>The availability of thethe Arabidopsis </it>on the basis of what proteinsof sequence similarity to organisms across nuclear proteinof life</p> of <it>Arabidopsis thaliana thaliana proteome: their pattern distinguish plants from those classified the
Phylogenetic

Background: The availability of the complete genome sequence of Arabidopsis thaliana together
with those of other organisms provides an opportunity to decipher the genetic factors that define
plant form and function. To begin this task, we have classified the nuclear protein-coding genes of
Arabidopsis thaliana on the basis of their pattern of sequence similarity to organisms across the three
domains of life.

than 99% of the terrestrial biomass and support most of the
biodiversity on Earth), plants are essential for humans as the
main source of food, provide raw materials for many types of
industry and chemicals for medical applications. It is thus

Genome Biology 2004, 5:R53

information

Plants have played a major role in the geochemical and climatic evolution of our planet. Today, in addition to their fundamental ecological importance (plants account for more

interactions

Conclusions: We identified and characterized the Arabidopsis proteins that are most likely to be
plant-specific. Our results provide a genome-wide assessment that supports the hypothesis that
evolution of higher plant complexity and diversity is related to the evolution of regulatory
mechanisms. Because proteins that are unique to the green plant lineage will not be studied in other
model systems, they should be attractive priorities for future studies.

refereed research

Results: We identified 3,848 Arabidopsis proteins that are likely to be found solely within the plant
lineage. More than half of these plant-specific proteins are of unknown function, emphasizing the
general lack of knowledge of processes unique to plants. Plant-specific proteins that are membraneassociated and/or targeted to the mitochondria or chloroplasts are the most poorly characterized.
Analyses of microarray data indicate that genes coding for plant-specific proteins, but not
evolutionarily conserved proteins, are more likely to be expressed in an organ-specific manner. A
large proportion (13%) of plant-specific proteins are transcription factors, whereas other basic
cellular processes are under-represented, suggesting that evolution of plant-specific control of gene
expression contributed to making plants different from other eukaryotes.

deposited research

Abstract

reports

The electronic version of this article is the complete one and can be
found online at http://genomebiology.com/2004/5/8/R53

Background

reviews

Addresses: *Department of Energy Plant Research Laboratory, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824-1312, USA. †Department of
Plant Biology, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824-1312, USA. ‡Delaware Biotechnology Institute, University of Delaware, 15
Innovation Way, Newark, DE 19711, USA. §Current address: Department of Biology, New York University, 100 Washington Square East, New
York, NY 10003, USA.

comment

Phylogenetic profiling of the Arabidopsis thaliana proteome: what
proteins distinguish plants from other organisms?

R53.2 Genome Biology 2004,

Volume 5, Issue 8, Article R53

Gutiérrez et al.

daunting to realize how little we understand about them. For
example, only approximately 10% of the genes of Arabidopsis
thaliana, the best explored model system for plant biologists,
have been characterized experimentally [1].
What makes plants different from other organisms? This is a
central question in plant biology that has a complex, multilayered answer. The genomic sequence of Arabidopsis, published in December 2000, allows us to begin answering this
fundamental question from the perspective of genetic information. By identifying the similarities and the differences in
the gene content of this model plant as compared with organisms in other phylogenetic lineages, one can begin to differentiate ancient processes that are shared by cells in plants and
other organisms, from those that evolved independently in
the plant lineage and contributed to determining plant form
and function.
The vast majority of the genes in Arabidopsis are encoded in
the nuclear genome. Most of the original genetic content of
the cyanobacterial ancestor of the chloroplast and the proteobacterial ancestor of the mitochondrion have been transferred to the plant cell nucleus. The remaining 79 chloroplastencoded proteins are mostly components of the photosystem
and electron-transport chain or are involved in protein synthesis [2]. Most of the 58 genes encoded in the mitochondrial
genome are devoted to components of the respiratory chain
and tRNAs [3].
The initial analysis of the sequenced Arabidopsis genome
suggested that 70% of the Arabidopsis gene products can be
assigned to functional categories on the basis of sequence
similarity to genes of known function in other organisms [1].
However, the proportion of Arabidopsis genes with related
counterparts in other organisms with completed genome
sequences (Escherichia coli, Synechocystis sp. PC6803, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Caenorhabditis elegans, Drosophila
melanogaster and Homo sapiens) vary greatly depending on
the functional category: from 8-23% in transcription to 4860% in protein synthesis when using a stringent BLASTP cutoff value of E < 10-30. These results suggest that plant transcription factors have evolved independently, but that
proteins that participate in other cellular processes are highly
conserved in the plant lineage [1].
Determining the function of proteins deduced from genomic
sequences is a central goal in this post-genomic era. The
importance of this pursuit is emphasized by the observation
that even for some of the most extensively studied organisms,
such as E. coli, a high proportion of the predicted genes are as
yet uncharacterized [4]. How do we prioritize the characterization of thousands of genes with only hints of what their cellular roles might be, based on sequence similarity?
Comparative genomics is a powerful approach that has been
used extensively to predict protein function. This technique
also promises to help us identify lineage-specific functions or

http://genomebiology.com/2004/5/8/R53

processes that can tell us about the unique aspects of plants
and other organisms. One way to promote discoveries that are
of special significance to plants or other lineages is to focus
attention on those genes that are found preferentially in that
lineage. However, few comparative genomic studies have
been carried out that focus on lineage-specific aspects of the
sequenced genomes [5]. The recent availability of several
complete genome sequences from all three domains of life
(Eukarya, Bacteria, Archaea) makes comparative genomic
strategies particularly attractive to tackle this issue.
As a first step towards identifying plant-specific genes, we
classified the nuclear-encoded protein-coding genes of Arabidopsis on the basis of their pattern of sequence similarity to
protein sequences of organisms that belong to Eukarya, Bacteria and Archaea. We then used this initial classification to
identify 3,848 Arabidopsis proteins that are likely to be found
only in green plants. We believe that these plant-specific proteins may play important roles in processes that are unique to
and of significance to green plants. We found that many
plant-specific proteins are known or putative transcription
factors, indicating that evolution of plant-specific mechanisms of regulating gene transcription was important for the
evolution of the plant lineage. However, many plant-specific
proteins have no known function. From our analysis of the
latter proteins, we suggest that plant-specific processes that
occur in chloroplasts or mitochondria, and/or that are associated with membranes, are the most understudied. Interestingly, plant genes encoding plant-specific proteins were often
expressed in an organ-specific manner. To facilitate the functional characterization of plant-specific proteins, we have
compiled and integrated information from multiple public
databases (for example, TIGR, MIPS, TAIR, SIGNAL) and
computer prediction programs into a searchable database
that is accessible from the worldwide web [6].

Results
Arabidopis protein-coding genes exhibit diverse
phylogenetic profiles
To try and understand what makes plants different from
other organisms at the genetic level, we sought to identify and
characterize the Arabidopsis protein-coding genes that are
present in plant species but not in organisms outside the
Plantae. As a first step we investigated the pattern of similarity of Arabidopsis protein sequences among organisms that
belong to the three domains of life (Eukarya, Bacteria and
Archaea). We determined the phylogenetic profile (PP) of
each Arabidopsis protein sequence by recording the presence
or absence of similar sequences in protein sets from other
organisms. This is similar to the "phylogenetic profiles"
defined by Pellegrini et al. [7] to hypothesize protein function
in E. coli; or the "binary vectors" used by Peregrin-Alvarez et
al. [8] to study the phylogenetic distribution of metabolic
enzymes in the same bacterium. In contrast to these studies,
however, we applied a more conservative two-way cutoff to

Genome Biology 2004, 5:R53

http://genomebiology.com/2004/5/8/R53

Genome Biology 2004,

Predominant PP corresponds to putative plant-specific
proteins

interactions
information

Genome Biology 2004, 5:R53

refereed research

Absence of Arabidopsis proteins in all other protein sets
examined could be explained in two major ways: these Arabidopsis proteins are generally present in plants but are absent
in non-plant lineages (plant innovation, divergence, gene
loss); or these Arabidopsis proteins are spurious or incorrect
gene predictions. If these are real plant-specific proteins, we
reasoned that similar proteins should be expressed in other
plant species. Therefore, to distinguish these two possibilities, we compared the 7,868 protein sequences against the
Arabidopsis expressed sequence tag (EST) database and the
EST databases of 13 other vascular plant species, including
both monocotyledonous and dicotyledonous species (see the
list of species in Materials and methods). ESTs comprise the
largest pool of sequence data for many plant species and contain portions of transcripts from many uncharacterized
genes. Because ESTs have no annotated coding sequences, a
TBLASTN search was performed. We considered as plantspecific any of the 7,868 proteins identified previously that
showed significant sequence similarity (E ≤ 10-10) against protein sequences in the Arabidopsis EST database and the databases of at least four other plant species. After manually
excluding proteins encoded in retroelements or transposable
elements, 3,848 Arabidopsis proteins were selected and classified as putative plant-specific proteins (Figure 1b). Because
of the stringency of our criteria, it is likely that we have missed
many true plant-specific genes. In addition, it is clear that
even with a relaxed cutoff, the list of plant-specific proteins
will still not be exhaustive. ESTs are fragments of genes and
EST populations often do not include rarely expressed genes.

deposited research

Notably, the most abundant PP, exhibited by 7,868 protein
sequences, corresponded to Arabidopsis proteins that
showed no detectable similarity to any sequence in the protein sets used in this study (black circle in Figure 1a). This
class contains proteins that are likely to be plant specific.
Characterization of the plant-specific protein functions and
identification of the processes in which they participate
should help us understand the molecular features that distinguish plants from other organisms.

reports

The current Arabidopsis genome is composed of protein-coding genes with different evolutionary histories (see, for example [5,9,10]). Consequently, it is expected that Arabidopsis
protein sequences would have different PPs. Although 512
PPs are combinatorially possible with nine protein sets,
genome-wide differences should be most marked when comparing across kingdoms or domains of life. Indeed, 12,521
(91%) of the Arabidopsis proteins that were assigned PPs
exhibited one of the eight possible PPs defined by the presence or absence in other eukaryal, bacterial or archaeal
genomes (sum of the black circle and the three intersecting
circles in Figure 1a). For example, 2,436 Arabidopsis proteins
were found to have sequence similarity to proteins in all the
protein sets utilized (intersection of the Bacteria, Archaea and
Eukarya circles in the Venn diagram in Figure 1a); 1,152 Arabidopsis proteins were found to have sequence similarities to
proteins in all the eukaryotic sets examined; and 576 proteins
had sequence similarity with proteins in the bacterial domain

exclusively (Figure 1a). In addition, 434 proteins exhibited
PPs suggestive of patterns of conservation across kingdoms
(included in the circle labeled 'Other' in Figure 1a). For example, 163 Arabidopsis proteins were found only in the animal
proteomes, while 27 were found only in the two fungal proteomes. PPs not readily classified accounted for 838 proteins
(also included in the circle labeled 'Other' in Figure 1a). These
numbers are not solely the result of gene-family expansion
(for example, a few Arabidopsis proteins are similar to metazoan proteins but have given rise to large protein families).
The size of gene families is similar in all PP groups and trends
observed in the numbers are maintained even when looking
at proteins that are unique in the Arabidopsis genome (as
determined by BLASTCLUST analysis; see Figure 4 in [6]).

reviews

PPs are not true phylogenies. Nevertheless, we argue that the
PP is a trait of the protein sequence that reflects its evolutionary origin. In this study, we were most interested in identifying the protein sequence innovations of plants. Therefore, we
did not register or consider domain architecture or other
structural features beyond primary structure in the PP definition. As a consequence, proteins that are unique to the plant
lineage because of innovative arrangements of ubiquitous
domains will not be included in our analyses. For example,
proteins with a novel arrangement of kinase domains will be
classified according to the uniqueness of the primary structure alone, and kinase-domain-containing proteins are likely
to have PPs indicative of presence in all organisms. Similarly,
some members of gene families that are mostly plant specific
might be classified in other lists if they have acquired one of
these ubiquitous domains.

Gutiérrez et al. R53.3

comment

generate the PPs of plant proteins. A 'presence of similar
sequence' call was made when the BLASTP E-value of the best
match between a given Arabidopsis protein query and one of
the nine protein sets utilized (below) was 10-10 or less.
'Absence of similar sequence' calls were made when the
BLASTP E-values were greater than 0.01. Protein coding
genes that exhibit BLAST E-values between 0.01 and 10-10
against any of the protein sets were not considered further
(13,469 protein sequences). Although 49% of Arabidopsis
proteins could not be assigned a PP with this conservative criterion, it allowed us to focus on the proteins with the bestdefined pattern of conservation throughout the phylogeny.
This resulted in 13,819 Arabidopsis proteins being associated
to a vector of nine characters that indicated whether similar
sequences were found or not found in the following protein
sets: Homo sapiens, Rattus norvegicus, Drosophila melanogaster, Caenorhabditis elegans, Mus musculus,
Schizosaccharomyces pombe, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, a
combined set of 88 species of Bacteria, and a combined set of
16 species of Archaea.

Volume 5, Issue 8, Article R53

R53.4 Genome Biology 2004,

Volume 5, Issue 8, Article R53

Gutiérrez et al.

In addition, we analyzed only protein-coding genes, and it is
known that many noncoding RNAs are likely to be kingdom
specific ([11], and J. Kastenmayer and P.J.G., unpublished
work). Although non-exhaustive, this approach allowed us to
identify a set of sequences that are strong candidates for
expressed proteins that are plant specific.

(a) Arabidopsis thaliana proteins found in

7,868
not found in
any other
organism

Many plant-specific proteins are of unknown function

Eukarya
1,152
249

141
2,436

Other
1,298

576
Bacteria

89

10
Archaea

Not classified
13,469

(b)
ND

Arabidopsis
and three other
plants

437
892

3,848

http://genomebiology.com/2004/5/8/R53

Plant
specific

2,691
Arabidopsis
only

Figure 1
Identification of plant-specific proteins
Identification of plant-specific proteins. (a) Classification of Arabidopsis
proteins based on their pattern of sequence similarity to other organisms.
The 27,288 Arabidopsis proteins were classified on the basis of their
phylogenetic profiles (PP). Each PP recorded whether similar sequences
were found or not found in the protein sets from the following organisms:
Homo sapiens, Rattus norvegicus, Drosophila melanogaster, Caenorhabditis
elegans, Mus musculus, Schizosaccharomyces pombe, Saccharomyces cerevisiae,
a combined set of 88 species of Bacteria, and a combined set of 16 species
of Archaea. Not drawn to scale. (b) Identification of putative plant-specific
proteins. The Arabidopsis proteins that lack similarity to any other
organism (7,868 proteins represented in the black circle in (a)) were
compared against sequences in the expressed sequence tag (EST) database
of Arabidopsis and 13 other plant species. A total of 3,848 Arabidopsis
proteins were identified as plant specific because they showed sequence
similarity to proteins in the Arabidopsis EST database and to proteins in
EST databases of at least four other plant species (at E-value ≤ 10-10). In
addition, 892 other Arabidopsis proteins show similarity to the Arabidopsis
and one to three other plant EST databases, 2,691 Arabidopsis proteins
exhibit similarity to sequences in the Arabidopsis EST database only, and
437 lack similarity to any sequence in the EST databases used.

To gain insight into the cellular functions of the plant-specific
proteins defined above, we examined their annotation. As
shown in Table 1, approximately 38% of the plant-specific
proteins are annotated only as 'expressed protein' in version
4 of the TIGR Arabidopsis genome (from April 2003). This is
almost twice the proportion of expressed proteins currently
annotated in the whole genome (Table 1). Another 14% of
plant-specific proteins were annotated as 'hypothetical protein', a proportion comparable to that observed in the whole
genome. Together, 2,017 (52%) of plant-specific proteins are
without known cellular function. In stark contrast, only 2.5%
of the proteins that are conserved in all protein sets are annotated as hypothetical or expressed proteins (Table 1). Because
of this, we consider this list of plant-specific proteins a good
starting point for future reverse-genetic strategies. Understanding the function of uncharacterized plant-specific proteins is likely to provide a rich source of novel insights about
plant biology.
In an effort to provide clues about the cellular roles and facilitate prioritization of the study of proteins without known
function, we analyzed their predicted subcellular localization
and some other properties (all predictions and information
gathered are available in our database [6]). Subcellular localization and membrane-spanning predictions were carried out
with TargetP [12] and TMHMM [13], respectively, as
described in Materials and methods. We predict that 614
plant-specific proteins with unknown function are targeted to
chloroplasts or mitochondria (Table 2). This suggests that
many plant-specific proteins of unknown function have roles
in processes that occur in these plant organelles. Interestingly, a statistically significant difference in the predicted
subcellular localization was found for plant-specific proteins
of unknown function compared with those with known functions (p < 0.0001). Plant-specific proteins of unknown function are more likely to be found in organelles (mitochondria
and chloroplasts) and less likely to be in the secretory pathway compared with those with known function. This suggests
that the secretory pathway has been the focus of greater
research attention than have the other two organelles in
plants. While this conclusion is less surprising for chloroplasts, because their metabolism cannot be studied in nonplant systems, it is somewhat surprising for mitochondria,
which have been well studied in yeast and mammalian systems. On the other hand, the high proportion of plant-specific
mitochondrial proteins of unknown function may reflect the
extent to which plant mitochondrial metabolism differs from
that of mitochondria of other organisms [14].

Genome Biology 2004, 5:R53

http://genomebiology.com/2004/5/8/R53

Genome Biology 2004,

Volume 5, Issue 8, Article R53

Gutiérrez et al. R53.5

Table 1
Proteins with poor annotation are abundant among plant-specific proteins

Arabidopsis proteins found in all protein sets

Whole Arabidopsis protein set*

Hypothetical protein

557 (14%)

12 (0.5%)

4,363 (15%)

Unknown proteins

3 (0.1%)

0 (0.0%)

26 (0.1%)

Expressed protein

1,457 (38%)

50 (2.0%)

6,683 (23%)

Total

2,017 (52%)

62 (2.5%)

11,072 (38%)

Total in class

3,848

2,436

comment

Plant-specific proteins

28,581

information

Genome Biology 2004, 5:R53

interactions

In contrast to transcription, other basic cellular processes
were poorly represented in the plant-specific category (Table
3). Only one plant-specific protein was found that could be
related to pre-mRNA processing (At5g19480). In addition, no
known components of the mRNA transport and degradation
machineries could be found, although some plant-specific
proteins contained domains (such as LRP1, RRM) that have
been associated with RNA metabolism in a previous study
[6,20]. A few plant-specific proteins were involved in translation. The two Arabidopsis acidic 60S ribosomal proteins of
the P3 type - Rpp3a (At4g25890) and Rpp3b (At5g57290) were classified as plant-specific. Acidic ribosomal proteins

refereed research

We found 1,831 (45%) plant-specific proteins with annotations suggestive of various functional roles. Conspicuous by
their prevalence, 494 (13%) of the total plant-specific proteins
are known or putative transcription factors. This is more than
twice as many as expected, based on the current estimate of
5% of the total number of plant transcription factors encoded
in the Arabidopsis nuclear genome [15], and is by far the most
prevalent functional group among plant-specific proteins. We
surmise that evolution of proteins specifically involved in the
control of gene transcription was an important factor in the
evolution of vascular plants. This finding further supports the
hypothesis that the evolution of plant form was in large part
determined by the evolution of regulatory mechanisms [16].
As expected, none of the plant-specific proteins is an obvious
component of the conserved basal transcriptional machinery
(RNA polymerase subunits, for example) or general transcription factors (such as the TATA-box binding protein or
subunits of the transcription factors TFIIB, IIE, IIF, IIH and
so on). Instead, most plant-specific proteins related to tran-

The biggest group belongs to the AP2/ERF domain transcription factor family. In fact, 124 of the 142 annotated AP2/ERF
transcription factors are plant-specific on the basis of our criteria. AP2/ERF is one of the largest families of Arabidopsis
transcription factors. Members of this family are involved in
a wide range of processes, in development as well as in
response to biotic or abiotic stress [17]. The second largest
group of plant-specific transcription factors (73 proteins)
given by our analysis belongs to the NAC superfamily. NAC
transcription factors are specific to plants, in which they are
known to play a role in developmental processes [18]. The
third largest group of plant-specific transcription factors
comprised 44 proteins from the WRKY superfamily. This represents about 55% of the total number of WRKY transcription
factors currently annotated in the Arabidopsis genome [19].
WRKY transcription factors are involved in a variety of
processes such as pathogen defense, trichome development
and senescence [19]. Other plant-specific proteins involved in
transcription belong to various families of transcription factors - bHLH (31), GRAS (28), C2C2 family (42), MYB (25),
TCP (21) and others (Table 3) - and to transcriptional regulator families such as the AUX/IAA family (24) and others (10).

deposited research

Plant-specific proteins with annotated function are
often transcription factors, while other basic cellular
processes are underrepresented

scription appear to be proteins that can bind DNA and can
presumably activate or repress transcription in response to
specific developmental, environmental or physiologic cues.

reports

Similarly, a significantly higher proportion of plant-specific
proteins of unknown function were predicted to be membrane associated when compared with the known plant-specific proteins (p < 0.0001) or with the entire proteome of
Arabidopsis (p < 0.0001) (Table 2). This suggests that membrane association also contributes to a poorer understanding
of protein function. Most of the plant-specific proteins of
unknown function were represented by ESTs. In fact, 74
genes that encode plant-specific proteins were represented by
20 or more ESTs, suggesting that at least some of them are
highly or moderately expressed (see [6]). Together, these data
suggest that putative membrane-associated plant-specific
proteins that are predicted to be targeted to the mitochondria
or chloroplasts, and in particular those judged from the EST
frequency to be highly expressed, are attractive candidates for
future studies.

reviews

Comparison of the number of proteins annotated as 'expressed protein', 'hypothetical protein' or 'unknown protein' in the list of plant-specific
proteins, proteins conserved throughout the phylogeny and in the whole Arabidopsis proteome. Total number of protein sequences per category
(percentage relative to the total in the class) are shown. *Although the Arabidopsis TIGR genome release v3.0 (2002) was used to make the
classification (plant-specific or other groups) and for all the other data analysis in this study, the numbers in this table reflect the latest protein
annotation available from TIGR (genome release v4.0, April 2003).

R53.6 Genome Biology 2004,

Volume 5, Issue 8, Article R53

Gutiérrez et al.

http://genomebiology.com/2004/5/8/R53

Table 2
Prediction of subcellular localization and transmembrane helices

Unknown plant-specific proteins

Known plant-specific proteins

Whole Arabidopsis protein set

1,073 (53%)

1,006 (55%)

15,706 (58%)

TargetP predictions
Any other location
Chloroplast

360 (18%)

253 (14%)

3,972 (15%)

Mitochondria

254 (13%)

178 (10%)

2,963 (11%)

Secretory pathway

330 (16%)

394 (22%)

4,647 (17%)

Membrane associated

220 (11%)

89 (5%)

2,075 (8%)

Total

2,017

1,831

27,288

TMHMM predictions

Total number of protein sequences per category (percentage relative to the total in the group).

form a characteristic complex or 'stalk' on the side of the large
subunit of eukaryotic ribosomes [21]. Though the functional
role of this complex is unclear, it is thought to participate in
the elongation phase of translation [21]. Animals, fungi and
protozoans possess three classes of acidic ribosomal P proteins: P0, P1 and P2. However, consistent with our results,
plants are known to possess an extra class of acidic P proteins
termed P3 [22]. The eukaryotic initiation factor 4B
(At3g26400, At4g38710, At1g13020) was also classified as
plant specific. This classification is consistent with previous
studies that indicate that eIF-4B in plants is different from its
counterparts in other organisms [23]. Finally, the ribosomal
L5 protein (At2g07725) and a ribosomal-related protein
(At2g10980) were also classified as plant specific. Further
characterization of the roles of these proteins in translation
may uncover novel plant-specific aspects of protein synthesis.
Proteins involved in protein degradation were also poorly
represented in the plant-specific category, with the exception
of F-box proteins. The F-box is a structural motif about 50
amino acids in length [24]. It is present in F-box proteins and
is involved in protein-protein interaction of the F-box proteins with the other members of the SCF complex [24,25]. The
SCF complexes form one of the largest and best understood
families of E3-ligases present in eukaryotic genomes. The
function of these complexes is to facilitate the formation of a
linkage between the ubiquitin peptide and a protein substrate
[26]. A polyubiquitin chain is formed afterwards, thus targeting the protein for proteasome-mediated degradation. F-box
proteins confer the substrate specificity on the SCF complex,
and in plants have an important role in processes such as cellcycle control, floral development, circadian rhythms and
responses to the hormones auxin and jasmonic acid [27]. Of
the proteins that appear to contain an F-box domain, 115 are
unique to plants (Table 3). F-box proteins, as defined by the
presence of the F-box domain but otherwise unrelated in pri-

mary structure, are found in other organisms [25]. This is also
one of the protein families that shows the biggest expansion
in the plant lineage [5]. Thus, together with transcriptional
regulatory mechanisms, protein degradation may have also
played a role in vascular plant evolution.
Protein phosphorylation/dephosphorylation is a major
mechanism used by both plants and animals to regulate many
cellular processes. It is estimated that about 4% of Arabidopsis genes encode proteins that belong to the eukaryotic kinase
superfamily and 1% encode protein phosphatases (PlantsP
database [28]). We found only one of the protein kinases
annotated in the PlantsP database classified as plant-specific
(At4g00340) and no protein phosphatases. We found that
most protein kinases had PPs indicative of similar sequences
in all the genomes analyzed. In contrast, phosphatases had
PPs indicative of similar sequences in all eukaryote genomes.
Protein phosphatases are highly conserved between plants
and animals [29], but there are known groups of protein
kinases that appear to be unique to plants (see, for example
[30]). This novelty however, is based on plant-specific
domain architecture and not the primary structure. Our study
thus indicates that few signal transduction components
involving phosphate transfer have been evolutionary novelties in plants; we have found that most, if not all, have been
constructed by shuffling, addition or deletion of domains that
are shared by all eukaryote genomes; similarly to other
whole-genome sequences [31].

The role of plant-specific proteins in plant cell
metabolism
Plants have an extraordinarily rich metabolic capacity, producing many thousands of structurally different compounds
[32]. In an effort to understand the significance of plant-specific proteins for plant cell metabolism, we asked what proportion of plant-specific proteins contributed to this

Genome Biology 2004, 5:R53

http://genomebiology.com/2004/5/8/R53

Genome Biology 2004,

Table 3

Gene family

Number of plant-specific proteins

Known or putative
transcription factors
AP2/ERF

124
16

B3

14

bHLH

31

bZIP

12

C2C2

42

C2H2

2

EIN/EIL

5
28

HD

13

Leafy

1

MADS

2

MYB

25

NAC

Consistent with the results obtained with AraCyc, visual
inspection of protein annotations failed to detect obvious primary metabolic functions in the plant-specific category. In
addition to this general observation, we consider in more
detail lipid and carbohydrate metabolism.

73

SBP

11

TCP

21
1

VP1/ABI3

1

WRKY

44

Other

28

Other transcriptional
regulators
24

Other

10

Pre-mRNA processing and
transport

1

Translation

7

Protein degradation
F-box proteins

115

Genome Biology 2004, 5:R53

information

Another area of plant metabolism that may employ many
plant-specific proteins is cell-wall metabolism. Because the
walls surrounding plant cells are different from the cell walls
of bacteria and fungi, it seems likely that many of the enzymes
needed for the synthesis, reorganization and degradation of
cell-wall components might be specific to plants. Although
analysis of the plant-specific genes identified a number of
proteins possibly involved in wall biosynthesis and reorganization (see below), many of the enzymes involved in wall deg-

interactions

metabolic capability, and whether they define metabolic
pathways that are innovations of the plant lineage. As one way
to address these questions, we used the proteins classified in
this study to query the AraCyc database of metabolic pathways [33]. AraCyc currently includes more than 170 metabolic pathways, covering primary and secondary metabolism
as well as several plant-specific metabolic pathways [33]. Of
the Arabidopsis proteins with PPs, 432 were assigned to reactions in one or more of the pathways in AraCyc for a total of
869 references in the metabolic database. Not surprisingly,

refereed research

AUX/IAA

deposited research

Trihelix

A catalog of 600 Arabidopsis genes representing 210 cellular
activities involved in acyl lipid metabolism was recently constructed based on annotations by experts in the field [34].
Because acyl lipid metabolism is a primary metabolic pathway common to all eukaryotic, and most prokaryotic, organisms, it might be expected that relatively few of these proteins
would be classified as plant specific. This was the case.
Although 82 of the 600 Arabidopsis proteins were plant
specific, most of these were members of large gene families.
For example, 52 of the plant-specific proteins are classified as
lipid-transfer proteins, an abundant class of extracellular
proteins possibly involved in defense responses or cuticle
lipid production. Of the 210 enzymes or cellular activities
involved in plant acyl lipid metabolism, only 15 were plant
specific. Within this group of 15, in addition to lipid-transfer
proteins, we found a lysophosphatidate acyltransferase, an
allene oxide synthase (involved in jasmonic acid biosynthesis), oleosin, and several lipases or acyl hydrolases. However,
with the exception of allene oxide synthase, oleosins and lysophosphatidate acyltransferase, the function of most of the
plant-specific proteins that are involved in acyl lipid metabolism has not been confirmed, and they represent attractive
targets for further study.

reports

GRAS

252 of these 432 proteins corresponded to proteins with conserved sequences throughout the phylogeny. These 252 proteins were found to catalyze several steps in catabolic
pathways such as glycolysis, the tricarboxylic acid cycle, and
fatty-acid degradation. Similarly, they also catalyzed reactions in anabolic pathways such as purine and pyrimidine
biosynthesis, and participated in several amino-acid biosynthesis pathways, fatty-acid biosynthesis, gluconeogenesis and
other pathways. In stark contrast, only 19 out of the 3,848
plant-specific proteins, catalyzing 11 different reactions, were
found in AraCyc (Table 4). These results indicate that most
plant-specific proteins do not participate in the metabolic
pathways currently present in AraCyc. Furthermore, the few
plant-specific proteins found catalyzed at most two steps in
the same pathway, suggesting that most of the plant pathways
in this database are not innovations of the plant lineage.

reviews

ARF

Gutiérrez et al. R53.7

comment

Arabidopsis plant-specific proteins with known or hypothetical
function and that are involved in central cellular processes

Volume 5, Issue 8, Article R53

R53.8 Genome Biology 2004,

Volume 5, Issue 8, Article R53

Gutiérrez et al.

http://genomebiology.com/2004/5/8/R53

Table 4
Plant-specific proteins that are found in the AraCyc database

Locus

Protein description

Metabolic pathway

Enzyme name

Reaction*

At1g78240

Similar to early-responsive to dehydration
stress ERD3 protein

Carbon monoxide
dehydrogenase pathway

Methyltransferase

At1g08550

Violaxanthin de-epoxidase precursor, putative

Carotenoid biosynthesis

Violaxanthin de-epoxidase

At1g08550

Violaxanthin de-epoxidase precursor, putative

Carotenoid biosynthesis

Violaxanthin de-epoxidase

At1g78240

Similar to early-responsive to dehydration
stress ERD3 protein

CO2 formation from
methanol

Methyltransferase

At1g53520

Chalcone-flavanone isomerase-related

Flavonoid biosynthesis

Chalcone isomerase

5.5.1.6

At5g05270

Chalcone-flavanone isomerase family

Flavonoid biosynthesis

Chalcone-flavonone isomerase

5.5.1.6

At5g66220

Putative chalcone-flavanone isomerase
(chalcone isomerase) (CHI)

Flavonoid biosynthesis

Chalcone isomerase

5.5.1.6

At1g27690

Lipase -related

Glycerol biosynthesis

Lipase

3.1.1.3

At5g03980

gdsl-motif lipase/hydrolase protein

Glycerol biosynthesis

Lipase

3.1.1.3

At1g13280

Allene oxide cyclase family similar to ERD12

Jasmonic acid
biosynthesis

Allene oxide cyclase

5.3.99.6

At1g19640

S-adenosyl-L-methionine:jasmonic acid
carboxyl methyltransferase (JMT)

Jasmonic acid
biosynthesis

S-adenosyl L-methionine:jasmonic
acid carboxyl methyltransferase

At1g13280

Allene oxide cyclase family similar to ERD12

Lipoxygenase pathway

Allene oxide cyclase

5.3.99.6

At4g21610

Lsd1 like protein

L-serine degradation

LSD1

4.2.1.13

2.1.1.RXN-325
RXN-314
METHTRANSBA
RK-RXN

RXN1F-28

At1g53520

Chalcone-flavanone isomerase-related

Phytoalexin biosynthesis

Chalcone isomerase

5.5.1.6

At5g66220

Putative chalcone-flavanone isomerase
(chalcone isomerase) (CHI)

Phytoalexin biosynthesis

Chalcone isomerase

5.5.1.6

At5g05270

Chalcone-flavanone isomerase family

Phytoalexin biosynthesis

Chalcone-flavonone isomerase

5.5.1.6

At1g03040

bHLH protein component of the pyruvate
dehydrogenase complex E3

Pyruvate dehydrogenase

Pyruvate dehydrogenase (lipoamide)

1.2.4.1

At2g45880

Glycosyl hydrolase family 14 (beta-amylase)

Starch degradation†

Beta-amylase

3.2.1.2

At3g23920

Glycosyl hydrolase family 14 (beta-amylase)

Starch

degradation†

Beta-amylase

3.2.1.2

At4g15210

Glycosyl hydrolase family 14 (beta-amylase)

Starch degradation†

Beta-amylase

3.2.1.2

At4g17090

Glycosyl hydrolase family 14 (beta-amylase)

Starch degradation†

Beta-amylase

3.2.1.2

At5g18670

Glycosyl hydrolase family 14 (beta-amylase)

Starch degradation†

Beta-amylase

3.2.1.2

At5g45300

Glycosyl hydrolase family 14 (beta-amylase)

Starch degradation†

Beta-amylase

3.2.1.2

At5g55700

Glycosyl hydrolase family 14 (beta-amylase)

Starch degradation†

Beta-amylase

3.2.1.2

At2g32290

Glycosyl hydrolase family 14 (beta-amylase)

Starch degradation†

Beta-amylase

3.2.1.2

*EC number is given when available, otherwise the AraCyc [70] frame name for the reaction is given. †AraCyc designation for this metabolic pathway
is 'Starch and cellulose biosynthesis'. However, as far as we know, genes in this family are only involved in starch degradation.

radation are shared with many other organisms, including
bacteria and fungi. This is not surprising; many organisms
use plants as a food source and therefore need the ability to
degrade plant cell-wall components.
In contrast, proteins involved in wall biosynthesis and reorganization are well represented among the plant-specific
genes, at least as far as they can be identified. For example,
the expansins are a group of proteins involved in loosening
the connections between wall components to allow growth
and development [35], and most of them are present in the
list of plant-specific proteins. The proteins involved in cellulose biosynthesis have been identified as plant homologs of
bacterial cellulose synthases [36]. Thus, it is expected that

these proteins would not be plant specific, but rather would
be shared with bacteria. In contrast, some members of a family of proteins related to xyloglucan fucosyltransferase
[37,38] are plant specific. This is somewhat unexpected, in
that many organisms, including bacteria and animals, have
fucosyltransferase enzymes. Although the evolution of this
large family of enzymes is unclear, the genes encoding the
plant enzymes either arose via convergent evolution or have
diverged sufficiently that they no longer have significant
sequence similarity.
Finally, because so few enzymes involved in cell-wall biosynthesis have been identified, it is likely that many of these
enzymes are annotated as expressed proteins or hypothetical

Genome Biology 2004, 5:R53

http://genomebiology.com/2004/5/8/R53

Genome Biology 2004,

6 4 2 0 −2 −4 −6

(a)
Ref/silique
Leaves/flower
Ref/flower
Ref/leaf
Ref/stem
Ref/root
0

100

200
300
400
500
Plant-specific genes with
organ-preferential expression

600

reviews

Many plant-specific genes have organ-specific
expression

Gutiérrez et al. R53.9

comment

proteins. For example, many wall polysaccharides and glycoproteins contain arabinose, a sugar rarely found in the glycoconjugates of other organisms. Thus, the many different
enzymes needed for the addition of arabinose to plant glycoconjugates have few, if any, homologs in better studied organisms. Because none of the plant arabinosyltransferases has
yet been identified, it seems likely that they would be among
the proteins annotated as expressed proteins or hypothetical
proteins. Because they are expected to be integral membrane
proteins and because it is expected that plants should contain
a significant number of different arabinosyltransferases, this
group of proteins would be a good candidate for functional
genomic studies.

Volume 5, Issue 8, Article R53

(b)
χ2 statistic

p

Ref vs leaf

7.01

8.10e-03

Ref vs flower

39.82

2.80e-10

Ref vs root

52.83

3.60e-13

Ref vs silique

23.86

1.00e-06

Ref vs stem

28.29

1.00e-07

Leaves vs flowers

20.03

7.60e-06

information

Genome Biology 2004, 5:R53

interactions

responses with a potentially common evolutionary history. In
addition to the plant-specific proteins, the corresponding
genes for 1,654 other proteins classified in this project (Figure
1a) were also represented on AFGC microarrays. We used
hierarchical clustering analysis to group these 2,725 genes on
the basis of their expression profiles. We only considered
clusters with a 0.5 or higher correlation coefficient in the
expression pattern among cluster members and clusters with
10 or more members. We found 34 such clusters and determined which of these showed 80% or higher enrichment in
any of the PPs defined in this study. Interestingly, only two
clusters were found enriched in any PP and they were
enriched in plant-specific genes (Table 6). From the putative

refereed research

Arabidopsis genes encoding plant-specific proteins exhibit preferential
Figure 2
expression in organs
Arabidopsis genes encoding plant-specific proteins exhibit preferential
expression in organs. (a) Heat map showing the 600 plant-specific genes
that exhibited differential expression in at least one microarray
experiment comparing RNA samples from different plant organs.
Microarray experiments were obtained from the Stanford Microarray
Database. The mean was calculated for the replicates. Organ preferential
expression was defined as a twofold or higher ratio in the comparison.
Gene expression is expressed as the log2(ratio). The bar at the top right
indicates the magnitude of change. Green indicates induction and red
indicates depression of gene expression. Ref, reference sample; see
Materials and methods for details. (b) For all organ comparisons the
number of differentially expressed genes in the plant-specific category was
statistically higher than the number of differentially expressed genes that
are not plant specific. Calculation of the statistical significance was done
using the chi-square test for contingency tables.

deposited research

We next asked whether the plant-specific group or some of
the other groups defined by the PPs correlated with groupings
derived from gene expression alone, thus identifying

Tissue comparison

reports

A phylogenetic mode of gene expression has been proposed
for the development of C. elegans [39]. In this nematode, evolutionarily conserved genes are expressed early during development, whereas worm-specific genes are expressed
preferentially during later developmental stages [39]. We
posit that such a phylogenetic model of gene expression is
also present in plants. A prediction from this model is that
plant-specific genes are likely to show preferential expression
in organs as compared to genes that are evolutionarily conserved. To test this prediction, we analyzed the expression of
genes represented on publicly available microarray experiments. We found 1,071 genes that encode plant-specific proteins represented on glass slide microarrays from the
Arabidopsis Functional Genomics Consortium (AFGC) (see
Materials and methods). Interestingly, a high proportion of
the plant-specific genes (600 of the 1,071) were differentially
expressed in at least one organ comparison experiment
(Figure 2a). Flowers and roots showed the strongest bias in
the number of differentially expressed genes among the
plant-specific group. However, a statistically significant bias
was observed for all comparisons (Figure 2b). This bias suggests that many plant-specific proteins have roles in processes that occur in specific organs, particularly in roots and
flowers. In contrast to plant-specific genes, genes encoding
proteins that are conserved in other lineages show no greater
preferential expression in organs than would a random group
of genes (Table 5). Moreover, plant proteins with similarity to
proteins encoded in other eukaryote genomes were less likely
to be preferentially expressed in organs. Plant genes that code
for proteins with similarity to bacterial proteins were also
biased towards preferential expression in organs. However,
most of the differentially expressed genes in this group
encoded proteins with similarity to proteins in cyanobacteria
and are predicted to function in the chloroplast (data not
shown). Thus, these results are in agreement with a phylogenetic model of expression for plant genes.

R53.10 Genome Biology 2004,

Volume 5, Issue 8, Article R53

Gutiérrez et al.

http://genomebiology.com/2004/5/8/R53

Table 5
Plant-specific genes are preferentially expressed in organs compared with genes that are evolutionarily conserved

Classification

p

Plant specific

600

56%

51.27

8.1e-13

122

67%

32.74

1.1e-08

Eukaryotes and archaea

37

61%

4.82

2.8e-02

370

46%

0.22

6.4e-01

Archaea

3

60%

0.03

8.5e-01

Archaea and bacteria

52

49%

0.01

9.2e-01

Common to all
Statistically significant expression everywhere

χ2

Eukaryotes and bacteria

No statistically significant difference from a
random sample

Percentage of total

Bacteria (includes cyanobacteria)

Statistically significant organ-preferential
expression

Differentially expressed

15

48%

0.00

9.6e-01

Eukaryotes

112

27%

61.75

3.9e-15

The first column indicates the conclusion from the statistical test. The second column indicates the phylogenetic classification of the genes analysed
in each row. The number of genes from each class (for example, plant-specific) that showed organ-preferential expression is indicated in the third
column. The fourth column shows the percentage of genes that showed organ-preferential expression as compared to the total number of genes
represented on Arabidopsis glass-slide microarrays for each class. The χ2 statistic and the p value are presented in the fifth and sixth columns,
respectively.

functions of the genes in the clusters found above, plant-specific processes may be related to defense or stress responses.
These data suggest that these plant responses to biotic or abiotic stress have evolved entirely in the plant lineage.

Discussion

Comparative genome analysis has established that gene
number alone is not sufficient to explain organismal
complexity. Current estimates from the annotation of the
Arabidopsis genome sequence indicate that there are around
27,000 protein-coding genes in this flowering plant [40]. Surprisingly, the sequence of the human genome indicates that
the authors of this manuscript have only about 3,000 more
protein-coding genes than the simple weed. It is clear that
such a small number of genes cannot explain the vast differences in developmental, morphological and behavioral processes that separate the two species.
Several hypotheses have been developed to explain how
organisms can increase greatly in complexity without major
increases in numbers of genes (for example, alternative splicing [41], DNA rearrangement during differentiation [42], and
transcriptional regulation [16,43]). Our data suggest that evolution of lineage-specific mechanisms of transcriptional control is one important factor in the evolution of plants. Among
the 1,831 plant-specific proteins with known or putative function, transcription factors stand out as the most prevalent
functional group. Four hundred and ninety-four transcription factors from various families were identified as plant specific. This result is consistent with the initial characterization
of the Arabidopsis proteome, which indicated that many proteins in the transcription function category (including tran-

scription factors and other aspects of mRNA metabolism) do
not show sequence similarity with proteins in other
sequenced model organisms [1]. This is also consistent with
previous estimates that indicate that approximately half of
Arabidopsis transcription factors are from families unique to
plants [15]. Importantly, the predominance of this functional
category among all plant-specific proteins, defined only on
the basis of primary structure, indicates that the evolution of
plant form was at least partly accomplished by the evolution
of plant-specific mechanisms to control gene expression at
the transcriptional level. This result also prompts us to speculate that the Arabidopsis genome contains an equally rich
diversity of cis-acting regulatory elements. Thus, one could
imagine that the combinations of plant-specific transcription
factors and their cognate cis-acting sequences could provide
a very large source of mechanistic alternatives and could easily bridge the gap in aspects of development, morphology,
behavior, and processes that separate plants from organisms
in other lineages. In fact, candidate plant-specific transcription factors involved in each of these processes can be identified from the list of plant-specific proteins. For example,
members of the GRAS and homeodomain family are involved
in developmental processes, members of the TCP family are
needed for the body plan, and members of the AP2/ERF family are known to mediate responses to environmental stimuli.
The hypothesis that evolution of complexity and diversity is
related to the evolution of regulatory mechanisms over common sets of genes is not a new one [16,44,45]. Nevertheless,
our results provide a quantitative assessment that supports
this hypothesis and identifies the characteristics of the proteins involved.

Genome Biology 2004, 5:R53

http://genomebiology.com/2004/5/8/R53

Genome Biology 2004,

Volume 5, Issue 8, Article R53

Gutiérrez et al. R53.11

Table 6
Two groups of plant-specific genes exhibit common expression profiles

Representative EST clone ID

comment

PP*

Locus

Description

At1g19180

Expressed protein

Cluster 1†
PS

111O21XP
123B21T7

At1g30755

Expressed protein

PS

209F11T7

At1g63090

F-box protein (SKP1 interacting partner 3-related)

PS

181I16T7

At1g72510

Expressed protein

PS

148B19T7

At1g74950

Expressed protein

PS

40F4T7

At2g23320

Identical to WRKY DNA-binding protein 15

EBA

240G12T7

At2g31880

Putative leucine-rich repeat transmembrane protein kinase

EBA

169J16T7

At2g39660

Putative protein kinase

PS

172K21XP

At3g16860

Expressed protein

PS

94C19T7

At3g25870

Expressed protein

PS

114O7T7

At4g12070

Expressed protein

PS

250F15T7

At4g19515

reviews

PS

Similar to disease resistance protein

137B1T7

At4g30390

Expressed protein

PS

122N24T7

At5g13180

NAM-like protein; hypothetical senescence upregulated protein SENU5
GRAM-domain-containing protein similar to ABA-responsive protein

PS

204H15T7

At5g13200

E

195M6T7

At5g22250

CCR4-associated factor-like protein

PS

200J12T7

At5g62520

reports

PS

Expressed protein

169C12T7

At1g05250

Putative peroxidase

PS

113H5XP

At1g52050

Jacalin lectin family similar to myrosinase-binding protein homolog

EBA

121N12T7

At1g61590

Putative serine/threonine protein kinase

PS

40E4T7

At1g74770

Hypothetical protein; predicted by GenemarkHMM

B

34E12T7

At3g24670

Polysaccharide lyase family 1 (pectate lyase)

PS

122J15T7

At4g14060

Major latex protein (MLP)-related

PS

194B13T7

At4g15390

Acyltransferase family

PS

204N5XP

At4g26010

Putative peroxidase

PS

144C19T7

At5g07080

Transferase family similar to 10-deacetylbaccatin III-10-O-acetyl transferase

PS

116F2T7

At5g45070

Putative disease resistance protein (TIR class)

PS

110O2T7

At5g57685

Unknown protein; predicted by GenemarkHMM

Experiments were ranked according to the proportion of genes in the cluster that were differentially expressed. The most important experiments
for each cluster are indicated. *PP, phylogenetic profile. †Low expression in flowers compared to leaves, unstable and moderately unstable
transcripts. ‡High expression in roots as compared to a reference made of the whole plant, repressed during shoot development from root explants.
PS, plant specific; EBA, Arabidopsis protein with similarity to proteins in other eukaryotes, bacteria and archaea; B, Arabidopsis protein with similarity
to proteins in bacteria.

refereed research

PS

deposited research

Cluster 2‡

interactions

interplay between the evolution of protein degradation and
plant-specific mechanisms to activate or repress gene transcription is an important theme in plant biology.
Plants produce an incredible diversity of chemical compounds [32]. In an effort to understand the significance of
plant-specific proteins for plant cell metabolism, we used the
AraCyc database of metabolic pathways [33] to investigate
the metabolic pathways in which they participate. AraCyc
currently includes a total of 170 metabolic pathways, approx-

Genome Biology 2004, 5:R53

information

F-box proteins are one of the most expanded gene families in
plants [5]. Also, the Arabidopsis F-box protein family diversified in such a way that many members show no detectable
sequence similarity to proteins in other organisms. Together,
these observations suggest that regulation of protein turnover
has also had an important role in plant evolution. Significantly, new connections between transcription and protein
degradation [46] and the known importance of protein decay
for the action of phytohormones such as auxin and other
plant-specific processes [47], further suggests that the

R53.12 Genome Biology 2004,

Volume 5, Issue 8, Article R53

Gutiérrez et al.

imately 100 of which have five or more reactions. AraCyc was
constructed computationally and curated manually and is
neither complete nor error-free. Nevertheless, it is one of the
broadest compilations of plant metabolism currently available, covering many primary and secondary metabolic pathways. Only 19 out of the 3,848 plant-specific proteins,
catalyzing 11 reactions, were found in AraCyc. In contrast,
many steps in central pathways were catalyzed by proteins
conserved throughout the phylogeny consistent with the
ancient origin of primary metabolism. Thus, in accord with
previous studies [32], our results suggest that the extremely
rich metabolic capacity of plants has arisen largely from modification of metabolic pathways that were present in the plant
ancestor, rather than by evolution of new pathways.
Interestingly, Arabidopsis genes that code for plant-specific
proteins but not for proteins that are evolutionarily conserved
were often expressed preferentially in plant organs. This
result suggests that plant gene expression follows a phylogenetic model similar to that observed in C. elegans [39]. In this
model, evolutionarily conserved genes that code for functions
essential for all cell types tend to be expressed constitutively
throughout the organism. In contrast, plant-specific genes,
which evolved later to carry out regulatory or specialized
functions, are expressed later during development and preferentially in certain cell types.
Although this study focused primarily on proteins that lack
similar sequences in all other non-plant organisms, the
frequency of occurrence of some other PPs can also inform us
about the evolution of plant form. Arabidopsis proteins with
a PP indicating conservation throughout all forms of life were
the next most abundant group. Such plant sequences that are
conserved in the genomes of Eukarya, Bacteria and Archaea
are likely to belong to ancient protein domains that were created or acquired early in evolution, and are good candidates
for proteins found in the last universal common ancestor
[48]. Thus these proteins are likely to carry out basic cellular
functions that are essential to cellular integrity in all organisms. Indeed, many of the proteins in this category are easily
recognized as components of the translation machinery or
involved in primary metabolic processes [6].
The distribution of PPs also suggests that plants have more in
common with bacteria than with archaea (Figure 1a). This
certainly reflects the rich bacterial heritage in plants. It is now
widely accepted that extensive gene transfer has occurred
from the cyanobacterial ancestor of the chloroplast to the
plant nuclear genome [49]. Consistent with this, many Arabidopsis proteins that show sequence similarity to bacterial
proteins are predicted to contain chloroplast transit peptides,
suggesting plastid localization. In addition, about half of the
Arabidopsis proteins with similarity to bacterial proteins are
present in cyanobacterial proteomes; thus, as much as 55% of
the current plant proteins shared with bacteria may come
from the endosymbiotic event with a cyanobacterium (see

http://genomebiology.com/2004/5/8/R53

supplementary information in [6]). Plants also seem to have
retained metabolic capabilities of bacterial origin that are
absent in other eukaryotic genomes (for example many plant
glycoside hydrolases, pectinesterases and pectate lyases have
similarity to bacterial proteins). In contrast to the commonality between plants and bacteria, only 10 Arabidopsis proteins
were found to have similarity exclusively to archaeal proteins.
This is somewhat surprising because many proteins encoded
in archaeal genomes, such as components of the DNA
replication, transcription and translation machineries, are
more similar to proteins encoded in eukaryote genomes than
to proteins from bacteria (reviewed in [50]). This result could
be biased because of the higher number of bacterial genomes
(88) over archaeal genomes (16) available for this study.
However this bias could not be too significant because there
are 141 plant proteins that are similar both in other eukaryotes and in archaea (Figure 1a). Many of the proteins in this last
group are subunits of the ribosome or components of the
basal transcriptional machinery. Consequently, these data
suggest that the plant proteins shared with archaea have a
deeper evolutionary origin than those shared with bacteria, as
is observed through the analysis of clusters of orthologous
groups [51].
Surprisingly, we found more Arabidopsis proteins in common with the five animal proteomes analyzed than with the
two fungal proteomes (for example, 163 Arabidopsis proteins
were found only in the animal proteomes, while 27 proteins
were found only in the two fungal proteomes). Molecular phylogenetic studies based on multiple protein sequences often
suggest a closer evolutionary relationship between fungi and
animals (for example [52]), albeit the split into plants, animals and fungi is thought to have occurred in a relatively
short period of time. The larger number of proteins in common between plants and animals as compared with fungi
prompt us to speculate that the fungal ancestor might have
diverged earlier than the ancestor that gave rise to plants and
animals.
Although a large majority of PPs observed (more than 97%)
were consistent for eukaryotic organisms (for example, if
present in human, then also present in all other animal protein sets), a few PPs were unexpected. Unexpected patterns
may reveal novel features about the biology of plants, but they
can also point out problems with the genome information
available. The latter was clearly the case for 18 Arabidopsis
proteins, which were found in all eukaryotic proteomes and in
the bacterial and archaeal protein sets but not in the proteome of Rattus norvegicus. These 18 proteins were distributed throughout the Arabidopsis genome, and showed no
obvious relationship in terms of sequence or function. Similarly, 36 other proteins were present in all eukaryote proteomes analyzed except in Rattus norvegicus. Although it is
formally possible that some of these genes are truly absent
from the rat genome, this genome sequence is not complete
and is less well annotated than most others. Therefore, a more

Genome Biology 2004, 5:R53

http://genomebiology.com/2004/5/8/R53

Genome Biology 2004,

central metabolic pathways) it is also likely that these have
received more attention. Nevertheless, this great difference
emphasizes that proteins present only in plant species are
much less studied than proteins that are also found in other
model organisms. Predictions of subcellular localization and
transmembrane helices suggest that plant-specific processes
that occur in chloroplasts and mitochondria and membraneassociated plant-specific proteins are the least understood. In
addition, some genes coding for unknown plant-specific proteins are highly expressed (as judged by high EST counts).
Therefore, the study of proteins with unknown function that
are highly expressed, membrane-associated, and/or that
function in chloroplasts or mitochondria is likely to be a fruitful approach to discover novel aspects of plant processes.

Sequences and generation of phylogenetic profiles

The above procedure identified putative plant-specific genes
by selecting PPs that indicated absence in all protein sets
compared. These protein sequences were then further charac-

Genome Biology 2004, 5:R53

information

The complete set of predicted Arabidopsis proteins was used
in BLASTP comparisons against each of the following protein
sets: Homo sapiens, Rattus norvegicus, Drosophila melanogaster, Caenorhabditis elegans, Mus musculus,
Schizosaccharomyces pombe, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, a
combined set of 88 species of bacteria, and a combined set of
16 species of archaea. We constructed the phylogenetic profile
(PP) of each Arabidopsis protein sequence from the BLASTP
reports by recording the 'presence' or 'absence' in the other
protein sets. A 'presence of similar sequence' call was made
when the BLASTP E-value was 1e-10 or less. 'Absence of similar sequence' calls were made when the BLAST E-value was
0.01 or greater. Proteins that exhibit BLAST E-values
between 0.01 and 1e-10 against any of the genomes were not
considered any further.

interactions

In contrast to evolutionarily conserved proteins, we know little about the function of most plant-specific proteins. The
Arabidopsis genome annotation pipeline relies largely on
sequence similarity to known genes in other species [40].
Thus, it is not surprising that a list of genes that have been
selected on the basis of lack of similarity to other highly studied model systems (such as bacteria, yeast, and fly) have poor
annotations. In addition, it is a common experimental strategy to look for homologs in plants for genes that have already
been characterized in yeast, bacteria or animals. Because
genes that are conserved in all organisms are more likely to
have roles in processes that are fundamental for the function
of all types of cells (such as basal transcription, translation,

Arabidopsis thaliana proteins were obtained from The Institute for Genomics Research (TIGR) [55]. Drosophila melanogaster proteins were obtained from FlyBase [56]. All other
protein sequences were obtained from the Genome section of
the National Center for Biotechnology (NCBI) ftp server [57].
The complete expressed sequence tag (EST) databases utilized were obtained from TIGR [58]. A complete list of the
organisms and EST databases used in this study is available
from the Plant Specific Database website [6].

refereed research

Because of their great economic importance, angiosperms
have received disproportionately more attention than plant
species from other phylogenetic groups. Although this has
greatly advanced plant research, the relatively scarce genomic
data on other green plant lineages (green algae, mosses, ferns,
liverworts, hornworts, lycophytes and gymnosperms) preclude us from knowing the degree of conservation of the
plant-specific proteins identified in this study and the general
nature of our conclusions beyond the vascular plants. It will
be of great interest in the future to extend this analysis to
other phyletic groups inside and outside the Plantae as more
genome sequences become available. A more extensive comparison of the proteins currently encoded in plant genomes
(plant-specific and other) with other species should help us
gain further insight into the evolutionary history of plants.

deposited research

Materials and methods

reports

With the completion of the genome sequence of this model
plant, attention is shifting to functional studies. We believe
plant-specific proteins of unknown function are great candidates for future study. Because these genes will not be studied
in non-plant model systems, they represent attractive priorities for the plant community, especially in the context of the
2010 Project, the aim of which is to understand the function
of every Arabidopsis gene by the end of the year 2010 [54].

reviews

In any study of this type, the ultimate reasons for the
observed plant-specific nature of protein sequences are
unclear and require further detailed analysis. Beyond the
technical issues described in previous sections, plant proteins
without detectable similarity in other genomes can be
explained in at least three ways: first, these proteins may have
been present in the common ancestor but diverged early and/
or rapidly after speciation such that similarity can no longer
be detected; second, they may have been lost in other lineages; and third, they may be true plant innovations occurring
after plants diverged from ancestors of the other organisms.
In some cases, such as the AP2 domain transcription factors,
it is plausible that this protein class evolved after the divergence of the major eukaryotic lineages. In other cases, such as
transcription factors that are members of the GRAS family,
they may be distant relatives of proteins that are present in
other major eukaryotic lineages [53]. Regardless of the reason, it is clear that the presence of these sequences in plants
but not in other forms of life leaves little doubt that they are
important for plant functions and processes.

Gutiérrez et al. R53.13

comment

plausible hypothesis is that similar genes are present in rat
but in genome regions that have not yet been properly
sequenced, assembled or annotated. Accordingly, PPs may be
useful for evaluating and identifying potential problems with
genomic sequences.

Volume 5, Issue 8, Article R53

R53.14 Genome Biology 2004,

Volume 5, Issue 8, Article R53

Gutiérrez et al.

terized by TBLASTN searches against EST databases from 13
species of monocotyledonous and dicotyledonous plants.
Proteins with matches against the Arabidopsis EST database
and EST databases of four other plant species (E-value cutoff
<1e-10) were selected for further analysis. The following EST
databases were utilized for this step: Arabidopsis Gene Index;
Hordeum vulgare Gene Index; Cotton Gene Index; Ice Plant
Gene Index; Maize Gene Index; Medicago truncatula Gene
Index; Pinus Gene Index; Potato Gene Index; Rice Gene
Index; Sorghum bicolor Gene Index; Soy Gene Index; Sunflower Gene Index; Tomato Gene Index; Wheat Gene Index.
At the outset of this study, we evaluated several E-value cutoff
schemes to generate the PPs. We found that the PPs were not
substantially affected by moderate changes to the E-value
cutoff. Although the stringent E-values we chose may lead to
some omissions, the number omitted is small and we felt that
it was important to minimize false positives rather than allow
too many false negatives. In this regard, previous studies have
suggested a much larger number of proteins as plant specific,
up to 10,000. The difference between this number and ours is
due in part to the different E-value cutoff used, but largely
because of the requirement we imposed for plant-specific
genes to be expressed, as documented by their presence in
EST databases. This expression requirement removed many
gene annotations based solely on computational predictions
and that were probably erroneous.
All BLAST report pages were parsed with the Bio::SearchIO
module from the Bioperl project [59]. All other sequence
manipulations and data analyses were done with custommade Perl scripts.

Analysis of the annotation of plant-specific proteins
The following steps were performed to identify known or
putative functions of plant-specific proteins. First, we used
the automatic functional classification scheme developed by
the Munich Information Center for Protein Sequences [60] to
classify plant-specific proteins in functional groups (data not
shown). We have implemented a web server that automates
this analysis (available from the Bio-Webtools Server [61]).
Second, for groups of proteins of interest we manually
inspected the annotations made by TIGR. Known proteins
were not corroborated further (for example, floral homeotic
protein APETALA2 identical to SP:P47927). Proteins with
putative annotations were manually inspected for the presence of corresponding protein domains using the Pfam database [62]. When available, the annotations in lists of proteins
were also corroborated by comparing against expert databases. The transcription factors used in this study were corroborated by AGRIS [63]. Proteins involved in RNA
metabolism were corroborated by a previous study [20]. Protein phosphatases and kinases were corroborated by the
PlantsP database [28]. Metabolic enzymes were corroborated
by AraCyc [33] and the Arabidopsis Lipid Gene Database

http://genomebiology.com/2004/5/8/R53

[34]. Selected gene families were corroborated by the annotation of experts in the field (see 'Search by Gene Family' in [6]).

Prediction of subcellular localization and
transmembrane helices
Subcellular localization predictions were carried out with
TargetP [12] using the web server [64]. TargetP looks for
amino-terminal sorting signals by feeding the outputs from
SignalP, ChloroP and an analogous mitochondrial predictor
into a neural network that makes the final choice between the
different compartments. It provides a score and a reliability
class (a measure of the difference between the winner and
runner-up models) to evaluate the significance of the
prediction. The TargetP web server size cutoff of 4,000 amino
acids precluded analysis of the complete sequences of four
Arabidopsis
protein-coding
genes
(At1g48090.1,
At1g67120.1, At3g02260.1 and At5g23110.1). In these cases,
only the amino-terminal portion of the protein was utilized
for the prediction.
Putative transmembrane helices were predicted using
TMHMM [13] through the web server [65]. TMHMM uses a
hidden Markov model to predict transmembrane helices from
the amino-acid sequence.
The complete output of the TargetP and TMHMM programs
for each protein sequence analyzed is available at [6].

Gene-expression analysis
To analyze the expression of genes in this study, we used a
highly filtered dataset prepared from the publicly available
two-color microarray experiments performed by the Arabidopsis Functional Genomics Consortium (AFGC, described in
detail elsewhere and available upon request). Briefly, all
microarray hybridizations, including a wide variety of experimental treatments available from the Stanford Microarray
Database (SMD) [66] as of January 2002, were initially considered for the analysis. Hybridizations were discarded for
technical reasons (partial microarrays, multiple scans of the
same hybridization, control experiments of the AFGC) or
because they corresponded to experiments done with RNA
samples from other species. Spot quality parameters were
applied to each hybridization to filter out sub-optimal data
points. The parameters were: sum of raw channel intensities
≥ 1,000; channel-intensity values could not be saturated in
more than one channel per hybridization; 50% or more of the
pixels in the spot had to be greater than 1.5 times background
(in at least one channel per hybridization); good values for
qualitative indicators of spot quality (Flag = 0); we included
only spots that were printed with DNA from good PCR reactions (SMD codes 0, 5 and 7). The lowess method by sector
was then used to normalize each hybridization [67]. Slide
quality parameters were then applied to filter out sub-optimal
hybridizations: hybridizations with a strong gradient in the
ratios after normalization were discarded [68]; experiments
or hybridizations with low reproducibility were not consid-

Genome Biology 2004, 5:R53

http://genomebiology.com/2004/5/8/R53

Genome Biology 2004,

11.
12.
13.

14.

15.

16.
17.
18.
19.

Statistical analysis

20.
21.
22.

Acknowledgements

23.

24.
25.

26.

References
1.
2.

4.
5.
6.

8.
9.

28.
29.
30.

31.
32.
33.
34.

35.

Genome Biology 2004, 5:R53

information

7.

27.

interactions

3.

The Arabidopsis Genome Initiative: Analysis of the genome
sequence of the flowering plant Arabidopsis thaliana. Nature
2000, 408:796-815.
Sato S, Nakamura Y, Kaneko T, Asamizu E, Tabata S: Complete
structure of the chloroplast genome of Arabidopsis thaliana.
DNA Res 1999, 6:283-290.
Marienfeld J, Unseld M, Brennicke A: The mitochondrial genome
of Arabidopsis is composed of both native and immigrant
information. Trends Plant Sci 1999, 4:495-502.
Koonin EV: Genome sequences: genome sequence of a model
prokaryote. Curr Biol 1997, 7:R656-R659.
Lespinet O, Wolf YI, Koonin EV, Aravind L: The role of lineagespecific gene family expansion in the evolution of
eukaryotes. Genome Res 2002, 12:1048-1059.
The Plant-Specific Gene Database [http://genomics.msu.edu/
plant_specific]
Pellegrini M, Marcotte EM, Thompson MJ, Eisenberg D, Yeates TO:
Assigning protein functions by comparative genome analysis: protein phylogenetic profiles. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1999,
96:4285-4288.
Peregrin-Alvarez JM, Tsoka S, Ouzounis CA: The phylogenetic
extent of metabolic enzymes and pathways. Genome Res 2003,
13:422-427.
Anantharaman V, Aravind L, Koonin EV: Emergence of diverse

refereed research

We thank Matt Larson for expert technical assistance, Curtis Wilkerson for
useful comments throughout this project, Ralph Taggart and Eric Brenner
for critical reading of this manuscript, and Vivek Anantharaman and Eugene
V. Koonin for providing the list of Arabidopsis proteins involved in RNA
metabolism. We thank Karen Bird for editorial assistance and Lan Xue from
the Michigan State University Statistical Consulting Service for statistical
support. Funded by DOE (DE-FG02-91ER20021) to K.K. and P.G.; NSF
(DBN987638) grant to P.G., K.K. and J.B.O.

deposited research

Calculation of the statistical significance of over- or underrepresentation of categorical properties in the lists generated
in this study was done using the chi-square test for contingency tables [69]. All data analysis and manipulation was
done in S-PLUS.

reports

We used the uncentered correlation similarity metric to perform average linkage clustering. All data analysis and manipulation was done in S-PLUS.

biochemical activities in evolutionarily conserved structural
scaffolds of proteins. Curr Opin Chem Biol 2003, 7:12-20.
Chothia C, Gough J, Vogel C, Teichmann SA: Evolution of the protein repertoire. Science 2003, 300:1701-1703.
MacIntosh GC, Wilkerson C, Green PJ: Identification and analysis
of Arabidopsis expressed sequence tags characteristic of noncoding RNAs. Plant Physiol 2001, 127:765-776.
Emanuelsson O, Nielsen H, Brunak S, von Heijne G: Predicting subcellular localization of proteins based on their N-terminal
amino acid sequence. J Mol Biol 2000, 300:1005-1016.
Krogh A, Larsson B, von Heijne G, Sonnhammer EL: Predicting
transmembrane protein topology with a hidden Markov
model: application to complete genomes. J Mol Biol 2001,
305:567-580.
Siedow JN, Day DA: Respiration and photorespiration. In Biochemistry and Molecular Biology of Plants Edited by: Buchanan B, Gruissem W, Jones R. Rockville, MD: American Society of Plant
Physiologists; 2000:676-728.
Riechmann JL, Heard J, Martin G, Reuber L, Jiang CZ, Keddie J, Adam
L, Pineda O, Ratcliffe OJ, Samaha RR, et al.: Arabidopsis transcription factors: genome-wide comparative analysis among
eukaryotes. Science 2000, 290:2105-2110.
Doebley J, Lukens L: Transcriptional regulators and the
evolution of plant form. Plant Cell 1998, 10:1075-1082.
Riechmann JL, Meyerowitz EM: The AP2/EREBP family of plant
transcription factors. Biol Chem 1998, 379:633-646.
Xie Q, Frugis G, Colgan D, Chua NH: Arabidopsis NAC1 transduces auxin signal downstream of TIR1 to promote lateral
root development. Genes Dev 2000, 14:3024-3036.
Eulgem T, Rushton PJ, Robatzek S, Somssich IE: The WRKY superfamily of plant transcription factors. Trends Plant Sci 2000,
5:199-206.
Anantharaman V, Koonin EV, Aravind L: Comparative genomics
and evolution of proteins involved in RNA metabolism.
Nucleic Acids Res 2002, 30:1427-1464.
Tchorzewski M: The acidic ribosomal P proteins. Int J Biochem
Cell Biol 2002, 34:911-915.
Szick K, Springer M, Bailey-Serres J: Evolutionary analyses of the
12-kDa acidic ribosomal P-proteins reveal a distinct protein
of higher plant ribosomes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1998,
95:2378-2383.
Metz AM, Wong KC, Malmstrom SA, Browning KS: Eukaryotic initiation factor 4B from wheat and Arabidopsis thaliana is a
member of a multigene family. Biochem Biophys Res Commun
1999, 266:314-321.
Kipreos ET, Pagano M: The F-box protein family. Genome Biol
2000, 1:reviews3002.1-3002.7.
Bai C, Sen P, Hofmann K, Ma L, Goebl M, Harper JW, Elledge SJ:
SKP1 connects cell cycle regulators to the ubiquitin proteolysis machinery through a novel motif, the F-box. Cell 1996,
86:263-274.
Weissman AM: Themes and variations on ubiquitylation. Nat
Rev Mol Cell Biol 2001, 2:169-178.
del Pozo JC, Estelle M: F-box proteins and protein degradation:
an emerging theme in cellular regulation. Plant Mol Biol 2000,
44:123-128.
PlantsP: Functional genomics of plant phosphorylation
[http://plantsp.sdsc.edu]
Rodriguez PL: Protein phosphatase 2C (PP2C) function in
higher plants. Plant Mol Biol 1998, 38:919-927.
Hrabak EM, Chan CW, Gribskov M, Harper JF, Choi JH, Halford N,
Kudla J, Luan S, Nimmo HG, Sussman MR, et al.: The Arabidopsis
CDPK-SnRK superfamily of protein kinases. Plant Physiol 2003,
132:666-680.
Lander ES, Linton LM, Birren B, Nusbaum C, Zody MC, Baldwin J,
Devon K, Dewar K, Doyle M, FitzHugh W, et al.: Initial sequencing
and analysis of the human genome. Nature 2001, 409:860-921.
De Luca V, St Pierre B: The cell and developmental biology of
alkaloid biosynthesis. Trends Plant Sci 2000, 5:168-173.
Mueller LA, Zhang P, Rhee SY: AraCyc: a biochemical pathway
database for Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol 2003, 132:453-460.
Beisson F, Koo AJ, Ruuska S, Schwender J, Pollard M, Thelen JJ, Paddock T, Salas JJ, Savage L, Milcamps A, et al.: Arabidopsis genes
involved in acyl lipid metabolism. A 2003 census of the candidates, a study of the distribution of expressed sequence
tags in organs, and a web-based database. Plant Physiol 2003,
132:681-697.
Cosgrove DJ: Loosening of plant cell walls by expansins. Nature

reviews

For the analysis of gene expression in organs, the experiments with the following SMD identifiers were utilized: 7197,
7199, 7200, 7201, 7203, 7205, 21096, 21097, 21098, 21099,
2370, 2371. The mean was calculated for the replicates. Organ
preferential expression was defined as a twofold or higher
ratio between the two samples compared in the microarray
experiments.

10.

Gutiérrez et al. R53.15

comment

ered further. Reproducibility was qualitatively assessed by
scatter plots of the replicates. EST clones that had been
printed several times were averaged and a final data table was
generated by calculating the median of redundant EST clones
(those that represent the same gene). Genes with data in 200
or more experiments were then selected to generate a final
dataset that contained 7,513 rows (genes) × 338 columns
(hybridizations).

Volume 5, Issue 8, Article R53

R53.16 Genome Biology 2004,

36.

37.

38.

39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
47.
48.
49.
50.
51.
52.
53.
54.

55.
56.
57.
58.
59.
60.
61.
62.
63.

64.
65.
66.
67.

Volume 5, Issue 8, Article R53

Gutiérrez et al.

2000, 407:321-326.
Pear JR, Kawagoe Y, Schreckengost WE, Delmer DP, Stalker DM:
Higher plants contain homologs of the bacterial celA genes
encoding the catalytic subunit of cellulose synthase. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 1996, 93:12637-12642.
Perrin RM, DeRocher AE, Bar-Peled M, Zeng W, Norambuena L,
Orellana A, Raikhel NV, Keegstra K: Xyloglucan fucosyltransferase, an enzyme involved in plant cell wall biosynthesis. Science 1999, 284:1976-1979.
Sarria R, Wagner TA, O'Neill MA, Faik A, Wilkerson CG, Keegstra K,
Raikhel NV: Characterization of a family of Arabidopsis genes
related to xyloglucan fucosyltransferase1. Plant Physiol 2001,
127:1595-1606.
Hill AA, Hunter CP, Tsung BT, Tucker-Kellogg G, Brown EL:
Genomic analysis of gene expression in C. elegans. Science
2000, 290:809-812.
Wortman JR, Haas BJ, Hannick LI, Smith RK Jr, Maiti R, Ronning CM,
Chan AP, Yu C, Ayele M, Whitelaw CA, et al.: Annotation of the
Arabidopsis genome. Plant Physiol 2003, 132:461-468.
Graveley BR: Alternative splicing: increasing diversity in the
proteomic world. Trends Genet 2001, 17:100-107.
Agrawal A, Eastman QM, Schatz DG: Transposition mediated by
RAG1 and RAG2 and its implications for the evolution of the
immune system. Nature 1998, 394:744-751.
Levine M, Tjian R: Transcription regulation and animal
diversity. Nature 2003, 424:147-151.
Wilson AC, Maxson LR, Sarich VM: Two types of molecular evolution. Evidence from studies of interspecific hybridization.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1974, 71:2843-2847.
Tautz D: Evolution of transcriptional regulation. Curr Opin Genet
Dev 2000, 10:575-579.
Conaway RC, Brower CS, Conaway JW: Gene expression emerging roles of ubiquitin in transcription regulation. Science 2002, 296:1254-1258.
Hellmann H, Estelle M: Plant development: regulation by protein degradation. Science 2002, 297:793.
Kyrpides N, Overbeek R, Ouzounis C: Universal protein families
and the functional content of the last universal common
ancestor. J Mol Evol 1999, 49:413-423.
Douglas SE: Plastid evolution: origins, diversity, trends. Curr
Opin Genet Dev 1998, 8:655-661.
Brown JR, Doolittle WF: Archaea and the prokaryote-toeukaryote transition. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 1997, 61:456-502.
Koonin EV, Galperin MY: Sequence - Evolution - Function: Computational
Approaches in Comparative Genomics Boston: Kluwer Academic; 2003.
Baldauf SL, Roger AJ, Wenk-Siefert I, Doolittle WF: A kingdomlevel phylogeny of eukaryotes based on combined protein
data. Science 2000, 290:972-977.
Richards DE, Peng J, Harberd NP: Plant GRAS and metazoan
STATs: one family? BioEssays 2000, 22:573-577.
Chory J, Ecker JR, Briggs S, Caboche M, Coruzzi GM, Cook D, Dangl
J, Grant S, Guerinot ML, Henikoff S, et al.: National Science
Foundation-sponsored Workshop Report: 'The 2010
Project' functional genomics and the virtual plant. A blueprint for understanding how plants are built and how to
improve them. Plant Physiol 2000, 123:423-426.
The Institute for Genomic Research [http://www.tigr.org]
FlyBase@flybase.net [http://www.flybase.org]
Genome section of the National Center for Biotechnology
(NCBI) ftp server [ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/genomes]
TIGR gene indexes [http://www.tigr.org/tdb/tgi]
bioperl.org - main page [http://www.bioperl.org]
Frishman D, Mokrejs M, Kosykh D, Kastenmuller G, Kolesov G,
Zubrzycki I, Gruber C, Geier B, Kaps A, Albermann K, et al.: The
PEDANT genome database. Nucleic Acids Res 2003, 31:207-211.
The Bio-Webtools server [http://128.122.133.135]
Pfam: Pfam home page [http://www.sanger.ac.uk/Software/Pfam/
index.shtml]
Davuluri R, Sun H, Palaniswamy S, Matthews N, Molina C, Kurtz M,
Grotewold E: AGRIS: Arabidopsis Gene Regulatory Information Server, an information resource of Arabidopsis cis-regulatory elements and transcription factors. BMC Bioinformatics
2003, 4:25.
TargetP server v1.01 [http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/TargetP]
TMHMM server, v. 2.0 [http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/TMHMM]
SMD: home page [http://genome-www5.stanford.edu]
Yang YH, Dudoit S, Luu P, Lin DM, Peng V, Ngai J, Speed TP: Normalization for cDNA microarray data: a robust composite

http://genomebiology.com/2004/5/8/R53

68.

69.
70.

method addressing single and multiple slide systematic
variation. Nucleic Acids Res 2002, 30:e15.
Gutiérrez RA, Ewing RM, Cherry JM, Green PJ: Identification of
unstable transcripts in Arabidopsis by cDNA microarray analysis: rapid decay is associated with a group of touch- and specific clock-controlled genes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2002,
99:11513-11518.
Samuels ML, Witmer JA: Statistics for Life Science San Francisco: Pearson Education; 2003.
TAIR biochemical pathways [http://www.arabidopsis.org/tools/
aracyc]

Genome Biology 2004, 5:R53

</pre>
</body>
</html>
