<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Transposition of the Tourist-MITE mPing in yeast: an assay that retains key features of catalysis by the class 2 PIF/Harbinger superfamily</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Mobile DNA 2010 1:5. doi:10.1186/1759-8753-1-5"/>
<meta name="Author" content="C Nathan Hancock"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Hancock et al. Mobile DNA 2010, 1:5
http://www.mobilednajournal.com/content/1/1/5

RESEARCH

Open Access

Transposition of the Tourist-MITE mPing in yeast:
an assay that retains key features of catalysis by
the class 2 PIF/Harbinger superfamily
C Nathan Hancock1, Feng Zhang1,2, Susan R Wessler1*

Abstract
Background: PIF/Harbinger is the most recently discovered DNA transposon superfamily and is now known to
populate genomes from fungi to plants to animals. Mobilization of superfamily members requires two separate
element-encoded proteins (ORF1 and TPase). Members of this superfamily also mobilize Tourist-like miniature
inverted repeat transposable elements (MITEs), which are the most abundant transposable elements associated
with the genes of plants, especially the cereal grasses. The phylogenetic analysis of many plant genomes indicates
that MITEs can amplify rapidly from one or a few elements to hundreds or thousands.
The most active DNA transposon identified to date in plants or animals is mPing, a rice Tourist-like MITE that is a
deletion derivative of the autonomous Ping element. Ping and the closely related Pong are the only known naturally active PIF/Harbinger elements. Some rice strains accumulate ~40 new mPing insertions per plant per generation. In this study we report the development of a yeast transposition assay as a first step in deciphering the
mechanism underlying the amplification of Tourist-MITEs.
Results: The ORF1 and TPase proteins encoded by Ping and Pong have been shown to mobilize mPing in rice and
in transgenic Arabidopsis. Initial tests of the native proteins in a yeast assay resulted in very low transposition.
Significantly higher activities were obtained by mutation of a putative nuclear export signal (NES) in the TPase that
increased the amount of TPase in the nucleus. When introduced into Arabidopsis, the NES mutant protein also
catalyzed higher frequencies of mPing excision from the gfp reporter gene. Our yeast assay retains key features of
excision and insertion of mPing including precise excision, extended insertion sequence preference, and a
requirement for two proteins that can come from either Ping or Pong or both elements.
Conclusions: The yeast transposition assay provides a robust platform for analysis of the mechanism underlying
transposition catalyzed by the two proteins of PIF/Harbinger elements. It recapitulates all of the features of excision
and reinsertion of mPing as seen in plant systems. Furthermore, a mutation of a putative NES in the TPase
increased transposition both in yeast and plants.

Background
Class 2 DNA transposons were discovered in maize over
60 years ago with the genetic characterization of the Ac/
Ds family of autonomous and nonautonomous elements
by McClintock [1]. Since then, DNA transposons have
been found in all kingdoms of life and have been characterized into at least 10 superfamilies, based on the
sequence of the element-encoded transposase protein
[2]. The newest superfamily is PIF/Harbinger, whose
* Correspondence: sue@plantbio.uga.edu
1
Plant Biology Department, University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602, USA

existence only came to light in the last decade. PIF/Harbinger derives its name from the two founding elements:
Harbinger from Arabidopsis thaliana and PIF from Zea
mays, discovered by computational and genetic analyses,
respectively [3,4].
Several features of transposition distinguish PIF/Harbinger from the other superfamilies. First, virtually all
coding elements characterized to date contain two
genes, ORF1 and TPase [5,6]. Unlike CACTA elements
where alternative splicing produces multiple proteins
[7,8], the two genes of PIF/Harbinger elements appear
to be independent [5,6]. Both the ORF1 and TPase

© 2010 Hancock et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Hancock et al. Mobile DNA 2010, 1:5
http://www.mobilednajournal.com/content/1/1/5

proteins are required for transposition [9,10]. Second,
where analysed, excision is usually perfect as both the
element and one copy of the 3 bp target site duplication
(TSD) generated upon insertion is excised from the
donor site [9,10]. This differs from all previously characterized plant transposable elements where the majority
of excision events leave a footprint or deletion at the
excision site [11]. Third, PIF/Harbinger elements display
an extended target sequence preference: 9 bp in plants
[4,9,12] and 15 bp in vertebrates [6,10].
Another distinguishing feature of this superfamily is
that PIF/Harbinger elements are responsible for the generation and amplification of Tourist-like miniature
inverted repeat transposable elements (MITEs), one of
the two predominant MITE families (the other being
Stowaway). MITEs are small (100-500 bp) non-coding
elements with the ability to amplify rapidly from one or
a few near-identical elements to hundreds or thousands
of copies [13]. MITEs comprise ~5% of the rice genome
[14] and are abundant in the genomes of some animals
including mosquitoes [15], zebrafish [16] and humans
[17,18]. Where MITEs have been analysed on a genome-wide basis, they appear to play a significant role in
gene evolution as they are abundant and insert preferentially into or near genes [19]. In order to understand the
success of Tourist-MITEs we need to first understand
the transposition mechanism of PIF/Harbinger elements.
With this goal in mind, we focus in this study on the
rice mPing element, which is the only known active
MITE.
Computational analysis of the sequenced genome of
the rice (Oryza sativa, japonica) cultivar Nipponbare led
to the identification of mPing [20]. mPing was independently discovered to be actively transposing in the rice
strain Gimbozu/EG4 [21] and in rice anther culture
[22]. Further analysis revealed that this 431 bp Touristlike MITE is a perfect deletion derivative of the 4.5 kb
Ping element, which is present as a single copy in the
Nipponbare genome and is a member of the PIF/Harbinger superfamily [5]. Thus, it came as a surprise to
find that mPing was actively transposing in an indica
rice cell culture line that lacked the Ping element [20].
The most likely source of TPase was determined to be
the closely related Pong element, which is present in
multiple copies in all tested strains of Oryza sativa. Subsequent studies with transgenic Arabidopsis confirmed
that either Ping or Pong proteins were able to mobilize
mPing and that transposition required functional copies
of ORF1 and TPase [9].
Heterologous assay systems in plants and human cell
culture have provided clues to the function of ORF1
protein and the reason why two proteins are required
for transposition [9,10]. For most class 2 elements, the
TPase contains a conserved catalytic domain (DDE) and

Page 2 of 11

a DNA binding domain that recognizes and binds to the
terminal inverted repeat (TIR) and/or subterminal
regions [23]. In contrast, the TPase of characterized
members of the PIF/Harbinger superfamily lacks an
obvious binding domain. Instead, a conserved Myb-like
domain in ORF1 protein was hypothesized to be
involved in DNA binding [5,6]. This model was supported by studies with Harbinger3N_DR, an artificial
element whose reconstruction was guided by building
consensus sequences from the zebrafish genome [10].
Harbinger3N_DR was mobilized in human cells only
when both the reconstructed Harbinger3_DR TPase and
ORF1 proteins were co-expressed [10]. Furthermore,
ORF1 protein was shown to bind the Harbinger3N_DR
TIRs and interact with TPase. Finally, this study found
that interaction with ORF1 protein was required for
nuclear localization of TPase [10]. These results suggest
that ORF1 protein plays a critical role by positioning the
TPase both in the nucleus and at the TIR where excision occurs.
We were motivated to develop a more facile assay system as a first step in the understanding of the amplification of MITEs and to dissect the complex transposition
mechanism catalyzed by the PIF/Harbinger proteins.
Here we report a yeast assay that recapitulates all of the
features of excision and reinsertion of mPing as seen in
plant systems. Furthermore, we demonstrate the validity
of the yeast model by showing that a mutation of a
putative nuclear export signal (NES) in the TPase
increased transposition both in yeast and plants. These
results provide a platform for further analysis of the regulation of other PIF/Harbinger elements and their relationships to Tourist-like MITEs.

Results
mPing transposition in yeast

In order to establish a transposition assay for mPing in
yeast, we modified successful assays previously used for
the maize Ac/Ds elements (the hAT superfamily) [24,25]
and the rice Osmar elements (the Mariner superfamily)
[9]. The most significant modification involved the construction of separate expression vectors containing
fusions of the inducible yeast GAL1 promoter to either
the Ping ORF1 or the Ping TPase coding regions (Figure
1). The third plasmid vector in this assay was a selectable marker composed of the yeast ADE2 gene with its
coding region interrupted by mPing [including the TSD
(TAA)] (Figure 1). Growth on medium lacking adenine
requires the excision of mPing and the in-frame repair
of ADE2. Expression of the Ping proteins (induced by
galactose) and selection for excision was performed concurrently on solid media lacking adenine. In this assay,
each colony represents a unique excision event, thus
eliminating an artifactually high frequency due to

Hancock et al. Mobile DNA 2010, 1:5
http://www.mobilednajournal.com/content/1/1/5

Page 3 of 11

Figure 1 Constructs used in this study and steps in the yeast assay. Diagram showing the relationship of the native Ping and mPing
elements to the constructs used for the yeast transposition assay (A). ORF1 (green) and TPase (orange) coding regions were placed in galactose
inducible constructs, while mPing (red) was cloned into the ADE2 coding region (yellow). The transposition assay protocol (B) involves growing
transformed yeast in non-inducing liquid media and then plating on inducing (galactose) media under selection for adenine autotrophy. mPing
excision and repair of ADE2 results in colony formation.

founder effects from early transposition events. This
strict selection is sensitive to slight changes in the health
of the culture, due to factors such as age, density and
growth phase. In recognition of this source of variation,
we pooled the excision frequencies from two or more
separate experiments, each with multiple replicates (see
Additional File 1).
Co-expression of Ping TPase and ORF1 proteins in a
single yeast cell resulted in a very low excision frequency of mPing from ADE2 (0.03 ± 0.02) (Figure 2,
Additional File 1). We hypothesized that the low frequency could be due to the activity of a potential NES
located in the C-terminal region of the TPase (Figure 2,

Additional File 2) [26]. In order to determine the impact
of this putative NES on activity, we mutated two leucine
residues that are conserved in most predicted NESs
(L384A, L386A)[26]. Alteration of this sequence resulted
in significantly higher excision frequencies (5.9 ± 3)
(Figure 2A, Additional File 1), suggesting that the NES
was inhibiting TPase function in yeast. No ADE2 revertant colonies were observed when Ping ORF1 or TPase
-NES proteins were expressed in isolation (data not
shown).
The increased activity of the NES mutant provided the
experimental resolution necessary to test the impact of
site-directed mutations in conserved residues of

Hancock et al. Mobile DNA 2010, 1:5
http://www.mobilednajournal.com/content/1/1/5

domains predicted to be necessary for transposition. To
test the suspected DNA binding domain of ORF1 protein, we disrupted the Myb-like sequence with a mutation in the helix-turn-helix fold (L225P). Co-expression
of ORF1 (L225P) and the TPase -NES proteins resulted
in no detectible excision. Similarly, mutation of the catalytic DDE domain of the TPase protein (D295A) led to a
reduction in excision frequency of ~150-fold (0.04 ±
0.02) (Additional File 1). These results are consistent
with the hypothesis that the DNA binding and catalytic
functions are divided between the ORF1 and TPase proteins respectively.
Cross-mobilization mediated by Ping and Pong

In rice and transgenic Arabidopsis, both Ping and Pong
products can mobilize mPing even though their ORF1
and TPase proteins share only 62% and 77% amino acid
identity, respectively [9,20]. To test whether Pong proteins can catalyze mPing transposition in yeast, we
replaced Ping ORF1 and TPase with their Pong counterparts and combined these in yeast strains with the
mPing reporter (see Methods). The results (Figure 2,
Additional File 1) indicate that: (i) Pong proteins catalyze low frequency excision of mPing; (ii) introduction
of the NES mutation (L418A, L420A) into the Pong
TPase significantly increases the excision frequency; and
(iii) Pong ORF1 functions with Ping TPase -NES and
Ping ORF1 functions with Pong TPase -NES to catalyze
mPing excision.
Another way to address the question of cross-mobilization is to ask whether Ping proteins can mobilize a
deletion derivative of Pong. To this end, we generated a
500 bp nonautonomous Pong (mPong) and inserted it
into the exact same position in ADE2 as mPing (see
Methods). As shown in Figure 2B, while mPong is mobilized by the Ping and Pong proteins, the frequency is
much lower than mPing (note the different scales on the
Y axes). The possible reasons underlying this difference
is revisited in the discussion.
Analyses of excision and reinsertion events

The high frequency of transposition catalyzed by the
NES mutation permitted the isolation of many excision
and reinsertion sites. Excision of mPing in both rice and
transgenic Arabidopsis is unusual for a plant element in
that it is usually precise [9,27]. In other words, there is
no alteration (footprint) at the excision site because
mPing and one copy of the 3 bp TSD (usually TAA) are
almost always removed. In our yeast assay, precise excision could be easily detected because it restores the
HpaI restriction site used for cloning mPing into ADE2
(see Methods). We isolated yeast ADE2 revertants
[mPing mobilized by Ping ORF1 and Ping TPase (L384/
386A)] and analysed the excision sites by polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) and HpaI digestion (Figure 3A).
Almost all of the excision events (109/110) were precise.

Page 4 of 11

The one imperfect event was due to a 3 bp deletion that
maintained the reading frame of ADE2 (data not
shown).
Another unusual feature of all characterized members
of the PIF/Harbinger superfamily is an insertion
sequence preference that extends beyond the 3 bp TSD.
This was first observed for the maize PIF element, with
a 9 bp extended insertion site preference (the TSD and
3 bp on each side) [4]. mPing was similarly shown to
have a 9 bp insertion preference both in rice [12] and in
transgenic Arabidopsis [9]. To investigate whether a preference was manifest in the yeast assay, we used inverse
PCR and transposon display to isolate mPing reinsertion
sites in the yeast genome (see Methods). A consensus
sequence generated from the sequences of 22 independent events revealed a 9 bp insertion site preference
that was similar to the mPing insertion preference in
rice and transgenic Arabidopsis (Figure 3B, Additional
File 3). The insertion of mPong elements was also verified by flanking sequence analysis for four events mobilized by Ping proteins and five events catalyzed by Pong
proteins (Additional File 3).
Protein localization

Our finding that the TPase NES had significant effects
on activity in yeast suggested that protein localization is
critical for mPing transposition. Many other TPase proteins harbor nuclear localization signals (NLS) that facilitates their access to the DNA substrate [28,29].
Analysis of Ping proteins with the nuclear prediction
software NucPred indicated that the ORF1 protein has a
potential NLS and, as such, is likely to be nuclear-localized (score = 0.9) [30]. In contrast, the TPase has a
much lower NucPred score (0.37), indicating it may not
utilize a NLS to gain access to the DNA.
We used cerulean florescent protein (CFP) fusions to
test the localization of the Ping proteins in yeast. ORF1
protein was found to be primarily nuclear and co-localized with the nuclear marker protein, NLS-EYFP (Figure 4) [31]. In contrast, wild type TPase showed a
diffuse staining pattern. Figure 4 shows that the TPase
(L384/386A) NES mutant shows increased CFP fluorescence in the nucleus, confirming that the NES plays a
role in nuclear export of the TPase. Co-expression of
the Ping ORF1 and TPase proteins together did not significantly alter the localization pattern of either protein
(data not shown).
Analysis of the NES mutant in transgenic Arabidopsis

Our findings indicate that the NES encoded by wild type
TPase inhibits mPing transposition in yeast and that
mutation of this motif increases nuclear localization and
transposition activity. In order to determine if the NES
also reduced transposition in plants, we modified the
previously developed Arabidopsis transposition assay to
test the effect of the TPase (L384/386) NES mutation.

Hancock et al. Mobile DNA 2010, 1:5
http://www.mobilednajournal.com/content/1/1/5

Page 5 of 11

Figure 2 Excision frequency in yeast catalyzed by wild type and mutant Ping and Pong proteins. Histograms showing average excision
frequencies for mPing (A) and mPong (B) in yeast using different combinations of Ping and Pong proteins. TPase - nuclear export signal (NES)
mutants contain alanine substitutions at the two conserved leucines in the predicted NES (Ping 384+386, Pong 418+420). Error bars represent
the standard error. Sequence of the NES for the Ping and Pong TPase proteins are shown in the top left corner. Residues that match the
consensus NES are in red.

Hancock et al. Mobile DNA 2010, 1:5
http://www.mobilednajournal.com/content/1/1/5

Page 6 of 11

Figure 3 Analysis of excision and insertion events. Analysis of the mPing excision sites from ADE2 revertants by polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) using flanking primers and digestion with HpaI (A). mPing excision results in smaller products that can only be digested with HpaI when
the ADE2 gene is repaired perfectly. Some ADE2 revertant colonies carry both the original and excised versions of the reporter plasmids, resulting
in the two PCR products shown. The HpaI site is underlined, the target site duplication (TTA) is shown in bold, and mPing sequence is italicized.
(Neg = mPing reporter, Pos = ADE2) The mPing insertion preference in yeast is shown as a pictogram (height of letter indicates % at that
position) and the frequencies of preferred nucleotides compared to rice [12] (B).

The reporter construct for this assay was mPing inserted
between the CaMV 35S promoter and a gfp reporter
gene (Figure 5A). We transformed the CaMV 35S:Ping
cDNA with and without the TPase NES mutation
(L384/386A) because the wild type construct was shown
previously to express both ORF1 and TPase proteins
from a single construct in Arabidopsis (see Methods)
[9]. A comparison of the number of transgenic plants
that showed mPing excision (determined by green fluorescent protein (GFP) visualization and PCR analysis)
indicated that the alteration of the NES resulted in significantly higher excision activity (40% versus 15%, P <
0.005). In addition, the NES mutation resulted in more
GFP fluorescence in both the cotyledons and mature
leaves (Figure 5B). Finally, PCR analysis using primers
that flank the mPing insertion site showed an increase

in the amount of the ~400 bp (excision) product in
seedlings containing the mutant TPase.

Discussion
In this study we report the first yeast transposition assay
for the PIF/Harbinger superfamily. The assay retains
many of the unusual features of this superfamily including precise excision, insertion sequence preference and
the requirement for the two element-encoded proteins.
In order to develop this assay we used the related rice
elements Ping and Pong, the only naturally active members of this superfamily, and mPing, the only naturally
active Tourist MITE. Below, we discuss some of the features of this assay and how the wealth of yeast genetics
could be exploited to understand the transposition
mechanism and, perhaps, the success of Tourist MITEs.

Hancock et al. Mobile DNA 2010, 1:5
http://www.mobilednajournal.com/content/1/1/5

Page 7 of 11

Figure 4 Protein localization. Fluorescence microscopy of yeast expressing cerulean fluorescent protein fusions of Ping ORF1, TPase or TPase
(L384/386A) proteins (magenta). The nuclear localization signal-yellow fluorescent protein (green) was co-expressed to provide a nuclear marker.

Excision and insertion

Excision of mPing in both rice and transgenic Arabidopsis is usually perfect as it involves the removal of both
mPing and one copy of the TSD. This stands in marked
contrast to all other plant class 2 elements where one or
more nucleotides usually remain at the excision site as a
so-called transposon footprint [11]. While all but one of
the excision events of mPing in yeast were perfect (109/
110) (Figure 3), one could argue that this result is an
artifact of selection for ADE2 reversion. This would be
the case if only the wild type sequence at this site was
able to restore ADE2 function. However, in a parallel
study of a rice Stowaway element, inserted at exactly
the same site in ADE2 as mPing, all ADE2 revertants
had footprints with insertions of 6, 9 or-12 bp [32].
Thus, excision site repair in yeast is influenced by currently unknown differences in the catalytic properties of
the transposase source. Plant transposable element excision sites are thought to be repaired primarily by the

non-homologous end-joining pathway (NHEJ), which is
well characterized in yeast [33]. In a prior study, Yu et
al. [25] analysed the excision of the maize Ds element
by the Ac transposase (a member of the hAT superfamily) in yeast strains that were mutant for various steps in
the NHEJ pathway. They found that mutations in a subset of the genes tested influenced both the quality and
frequency of excision site repair [25]. In this regard, we
have begun to analyse excision of mPing and the rice
mariner element OsStow35 [32] in the same yeast
mutant backgrounds to address why mPing but not Ds
or OsStow is repaired perfectly.
Another distinguishing feature of the transposition
reaction of characterized PIF/Harbinger elements is an
extended insertion sequence preference of 9-15 bp [4-6].
That the target preference is conserved (to the extent
that our yeast sample size can differentiate, Figure 3)
indicates that one or both of the element-encoded proteins is responsible for this specificity. As such, the yeast

Hancock et al. Mobile DNA 2010, 1:5
http://www.mobilednajournal.com/content/1/1/5

Page 8 of 11

Figure 5 Arabidopsis transposition assay. Comparison of the transposition activity of wild type TPase and the TPase (L384/386A) nuclear
export signal mutant in Arabidopsis containing an mPing gfp reporter construct. ORF1 and TPase proteins were expressed from a cDNA that
contains both genes [TPase is presumably expressed by a native promoter within the intergenic region] (A). The relative frequency of mPing
excision for each construct is shown together with a representative green fluorescent protein (GFP) expressing plant (B). GFP expression
produces green sectors on a red chlorophyll background. Polymerase chain reaction analysis of representative GFP expressing plants from each
treatment using primers (shown in A) that flank the excision site (C).

assay should be a valuable tool that could allow the
rapid analysis of mutant ORF1 and/or TPase proteins in
order to determine if they contribute to insertion
preference.
Requirement for 2 element-encoded proteins

Perhaps the most unusual feature of the PIF/Harbinger
superfamily is that transposition requires two elementencoded proteins, ORF1 and TPase [9,10]. Prior analysis
of the reconstructed Harbinger3N_DR element from
zebrafish suggested that ORF1 protein binds to the TIR
and is required in human cells for nuclear localization
of TPase (which lacks a nuclear localization sequence).
In this study, the use of the wild type ORF1 and TPase

proteins from either Ping or Pong resulted in negligible
excision of mPing (Figure 2). This result was unexpected
as these proteins catalyzed robust excision of mPing
from the gfp reporter in transgenic Arabidopsis [9].
Mutagenesis of a predicted NES in the C-terminal
region of the TPase from both Ping and Pong (Additional File 2) led to significant increases in the excision
frequency of mPing (Figure 2A).
Increased nuclear localization of the mutant versus the
wild type Ping TPase (Figure 4) suggests that the low
excision frequency catalyzed by wild type TPase is a
direct result of its export from the nucleus. However, if
this is the case, why does wild type Ping and Pong

Hancock et al. Mobile DNA 2010, 1:5
http://www.mobilednajournal.com/content/1/1/5

TPase catalyze mPing excision in both rice and Arabidopsis [9,20]? One reason may be that yeast, like other
simple eukaryotes, undergoes a ‘closed’ mitosis where
the nuclear envelope does not break down [34]. Unlike
the situation in plants, TPase exported to the cytoplasm
in yeast cannot get back into the nucleus during mitosis.
Thus, mutation of the NES prevents or slows nuclear
export of TPase and keeps it in the nucleus.
An alternative model to explain the difference in activity of the wild type TPase in yeast and plants is that the
NES may not function in rice and Arabidopsis. To
address this question, we generated transgenic Arabidopsis plants with wild type and mutant TPase (Figure
5A). Although excision frequency is difficult to quantify
precisely, we found that both the percentage of plants
showing excision events and PCR products resulting
from mPing excision were significantly increased in
plants harbouring the TPase with the mutant NES (Figure 5). The identification of a hyperactive mutation in
yeast, and its subsequent validation in plants, indicates
the potential value of the yeast assay as a rapid and
facile screen for ORF1 and TPase mutations that reduce
or increase the frequency of transposition or alter the
quality of excision or insertion events.
Using the yeast assay to dissect the success of mPing

In addition to its potential utility at dissecting the catalytic features of the PIF/Harbinger superfamily, the yeast
assay may be of value in determining the reason why
mPing, and not other nonautonomous elements, become
MITEs. As is true for many relatively recent discoveries,
the definition of just what is a MITE is continuously
being refined as an increasing number of genome
sequences become available. Stated simply, a MITE is a
class 2 nonautonomous element that can attain very
high copy numbers (hundreds or thousands) through
the rapid amplification of one or a few identical or
nearly identical founder elements [35,36]. MITEs are
usually short (~100-500 bp) and are either of unknown
origin or, like mPing, are deletion derivatives of a larger
autonomous element.
One of the outstanding questions about MITEs is
whether their ability to attain high copy numbers is an
inherent feature of the element or a fortuitous circumstance. In other words, is there something special about
the structure of MITEs that, for example, makes them
better substrates for transposase? Alternatively, are
MITEs just average nonautonomous elements that happen to be in the genome when, for example, an unrelated autonomous element is producing transposase?
The results of this study favour the former model where
MITEs, such as mPing, have distinctive structural features (compared to other low copy nonautonomous elements) that facilitate their rapid amplification and
spread in the genome. Although mPing and mPong are

Page 9 of 11

both deletion derivatives of larger autonomous elements,
the excision frequency of the former is much higher
than the latter (Figure 2A, B). In fact, the frequency of
mPing excision is ~40- to 50-fold higher than that of
mPong when either Ping or Pong proteins catalyze
transposition. The relative success of mPing in yeast
mirrors what occurs in rice; there are less than five deletion derivatives of mPong in all of the sequenced rice
genomes, while most characterized strains of japonica
rice have 25-50 mPing copies and a few have over 1000
[12]. As such, the yeast assay can be used to determine
the excision frequencies of a variety of constructs,
including additional deletion derivatives of Pong and
Ping, chimeric elements where regions of mPing and
mPong are swapped and site-directed mutations
throughout mPing. In this way we should be able to
determine the cis-features that distinguish MITEs from
low copy number nonautonomous elements.

Conclusions
This is the first report of the transposition of members
of the PIF/Harbinger superfamily in yeast. This breakthrough facilitated the characterization of the NES
encoded by the Ping and Pong TPase proteins and confirms a role for the control of nuclear access in regulating transposition. The yeast assay also provides a
platform for the analysis of the unique characteristics of
the transposition reaction including precise excision and
insertion sequence preference. Our finding that Ping
and Pong proteins can function in a cooperative manner
suggests that a new layer of cross-mobilization may
have to be considered in future studies of how transposable element families evolve. Finally, the transposition
of mPing in yeast will facilitate investigations into the
features underlying the success of Tourist-like MITEs.
Methods
Yeast strains and construct construction

Saccharomyces cerevisiae strain DG2523 and the
pWL89a vector were described previously [24,37]. The
following primers were used to prepare the elements for
ligation into the HpaI site of ADE2: mPing F 5’AAGGCCAGTCACAATGGGG-3’, mPing R 5’-AGGCCAGTCACAATGGCTAG-3’; mPong F 5’-AAGGCCAGTCACAATGGGG-3’; and mPong R 5’AGGCCATTCACAATGCAGT-3’. The mPong element
was constructed in order to contain 251 bp from the 5’
end of Pong and 245 bp from the 3’ end of Pong
(sequence available upon request). Genes from cDNA
clones [GenBank: AK068363.1, GenBank: AK068654.1]
or genomic DNA were cloned into the Gateway cloning
vectors, pENTR or pDONR Zeo, and then transferred to
destination vectors with LR Clonase reactions (Invitrogen, California, USA). Sequence alterations were made

Hancock et al. Mobile DNA 2010, 1:5
http://www.mobilednajournal.com/content/1/1/5

using the Quikchange II Mutagenesis Kit (Stratagene,
California, USA).

Page 10 of 11

performed as described to confirm transformation and
detect mPing excision [9].

Yeast transposition assay

Ping and Pong ORFs (wild type and mutant) were
cloned into pAG413GAL-ccdb (ORF1) and pAG415GAL-ccdb (TPase) vectors [38]. Transformed yeast were
grown to saturation (36-48 h) in 5 ml of CSM -his-leuura with dextrose, washed with 5 ml sterile water, resuspended in 0.5 ml water and plated onto CSM -ade -his
-leu -ura with galactose as the sole carbon source. Colonies were counted after incubation at 30°C for 15 days.
Viable counts were made by plating 50 μl or 100 μl of a
4 × 10 4 dilution on yeast extract peptone dextrose
plates.

Additional file 1: Table of yeast excision frequency data. Excel file
containing the data set used to produce Figure 2. Frequency = ADE2
revertants/total cells plated.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1759-8753-1-5S1.XLSX ]

Excision and insertion site analysis

Additional file 3: Insertion site sequences. Excel file containing a table
of the mPing and mPong insertions in yeast.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1759-8753-1-5S3.XLS ]

ADE2 revertant yeast was grown in selective media and
genomic DNA isolations were performed using an E.Z.
N.A. Yeast DNA Kit (Omega Bio-tek, Georgia, USA).
PCR [PCR Master Mix (Promega, Wisconsin, USA)]
using primers flanking the mPing excision site were
digested with HpaI (New England Biolabs, Massachusetts, USA) and then analysed by gel electrophoresis.
PCR products were cloned for sequencing using TopopCR2.1 (Invitrogen). Inverse PCR and transposon display was performed as described [9]. The insertion site
analysis figure was made using the program Pictogram
http://genes.mit.edu/pictogram.html.
Microscopy

The yeast nuclear marker vector NLS-EYFP (pPS1888)
was described previously [31]. N-terminal cerulean
fusion protein constructs were constructed using
pAG415GAL-cerulean-ccdb [38]. Yeast were grown on
selective media with galactose, visualized with a Zeiss
Axio Imager M1 microscope equipped with a 63× oil
objective and SlideBook 4.0 software (Intelligent Imaging
Innovations, Denver, USA). GFP expression was
detected in seedlings with a Zeiss Discovery V12 fluorescence stereoscope.
Arabidopsis transposition assay

The coding regions of the Ping cDNA [GenBank:
AK068363.1] were cloned into the pENTR vector for
mutagenesis and sequencing before transfer to the pEarleyGate 204 vector [39]. Wild type and NES mutant versions of TPase were transformed into Arabidopsis
thaliana (Columbia ecotype) containing a previously
transformed single copy of the mPing reporter [9] using
a simple Agrobacterium tumefaciens (GV3103) floral dip
method [40]. Seedlings were germinated on 0.2% phytagel plates (0.5 Murashige and Skoog, 1% sucrose) containing the appropriate selection reagents (7.5 μg/ml
PPT, 50 μg/ml Kan, 150 μg/ml Timentin) in a Percival
growth chamber (12 hrs light, 21°C) and analysed by
fluorescent microscopy. DNA from 2-week-old seedlings
was extracted by the CTAB method with PCR

Additional file 2: NetNES output. PDF file containing the prediction of
the nuclear export signal (NES) signal in the C-terminal region of the
Ping TPase protein. NN indicates the neural network score, HMM
indicates the hidden Markov model score. Scores above the threshold
indicate potential NES signals.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1759-8753-1-5S2.PDF ]

Abbreviations
CFP: cerulean fluorescent protein; GFP: green florescent protein; MITE:
miniature inverted repeat transposable element; NES: nuclear export signal;
NHEJ: non-homologous end joining; NLS: nuclear localization signal; PCR:
polymerase chain reaction; TIR: terminal inverted repeat; TSD: target site
duplication; YFP: yellow fluorescent protein.
Acknowledgements
We thank Guojun Yang, Jim Burnette and Eunyoung Cho for their technical
assistance and advice. Our thanks are also due to the many undergraduates,
including Lee B Sharpe, Lucy Fu, Catherine Bridges and the Spring 09 HHMI
Dynamic Genome class, who helped with aspects of the project. We are
grateful to Clay Isom and Cody Diehl for their critical review of the
manuscript. This research funded by grants from the National Institute of
Health, and Howard Hughes Medical Institute Professor award to SRW.
Author details
1
Plant Biology Department, University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602, USA.
2
Department of Genetics, Cell Biology and Development, University of
Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.
Authors’ contributions
CNH designed and carried out the Arabidopsis transposition assays,
microscopy and coordinated/participated in all of the yeast transposition
assays and the associated sequence analysis. FZ participated in the design of
the study, produced some yeast constructs and performed a portion of the
insertion site analysis. SRW conceived the study, participated in its design
and coordination and helped to draft the manuscript. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 17 August 2009
Accepted: 1 February 2010 Published: 1 February 2010
References
1. McClintock B: The origin and behavior of mutable loci in maize.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America 1950, 36:344-355.
2. Wicker T, Sabot F, Hua-Van A, Bennetzen JL, Capy P, Chalhoub B, Flavell A,
Leroy P, Morgante M, Panaud O, et al: A unified classification system for
eukaryotic transposable elements. Nat Rev Genet 2007, 8:973-982.

Hancock et al. Mobile DNA 2010, 1:5
http://www.mobilednajournal.com/content/1/1/5

3.
4.

5.

6.
7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.
21.

22.
23.
24.
25.

Kapitonov VV, Jurka J: Molecular paleontology of transposable elements
from Arabidopsis thaliana. Genetica 1999, 107:27-37.
Zhang XY, Feschotte C, Zhang Q, Jiang N, Eggleston WB, Wessler SR: P
instability factor: An active maize transposon system associated with the
amplification of Tourist-like MITEs and a new superfamily of
transposases. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America 2001, 98:12572-12577.
Zhang XY, Jiang N, Feschotte C, Wessler SR: PIF- and Pong-like
transposable elements: distribution, evolution and relationship with
Tourist-like miniature inverted-repeat transposable elements. Genetics
2004, 166:971-986.
Kapitonov VV, Jurka J: Harbinger transposons and an ancient HARBI1
gene derived from a transposase. DNA and Cell Biology 2004, 23:311-324.
Pereira A, Cuypers H, Gierl A, Schwarzsommer Z, Saedler H: Molecular
analysis of the En/Spm transposable element system of Zea mays. Embo
Journal 1986, 5:835-841.
Masson P, Rutherford G, Banks JA, Fedoroff N: Essential large transcripts of
the maize Spm transposable element are generated by alternative
splicing. Cell 1989, 58:755-765.
Yang GJ, Zhang F, Hancock CN, Wessler SR: Transposition of the rice
miniature inverted repeat transposable element mPing in Arabidopsis
thaliana. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America 2007, 104:10962-10967.
Sinzelle L, Kapitonov VV, Grzela DP, Jursch T, Jurka J, Izsvak Z, Ivics Z:
Transposition of a reconstructed Harbinger element in human cells and
functional homology with two transposon-derived cellular genes.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America 2008, 105:4715-4720.
Sutton WD, Gerlach WL, Schwartz D, Peacock WJ: Molecular analysis of Ds
controlling element mutations at the Adhl locus of maize. Science 1983,
223:1265-1268.
Naito K, Cho E, Yang GJ, Campbell MA, Yano K, Okumoto Y, Tanisaka T,
Wessler SR: Dramatic amplification of a rice transposable element during
recent domestication. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
the United States of America 2006, 103:17620-17625.
Wessler SR, Bureau TE, White SE: LTR-retrotransposons and MITEs Important players in the evolution of plant genomes. Current Opinion in
Genetics & Development 1995, 5:814-821.
Jiang N, Wessler SR: Insertion preference of maize and rice miniature
inverted repeat transposable elements as revealed by the analysis of
nested elements. Plant Cell 2001, 13:2553-2564.
Tu ZJ: Three novel families of miniature inverted-repeat transposable
elements are associated with genes of the yellow fever mosquito, Aedes
aegypti. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States
of America 1997, 94:7475-7480.
Izsvak Z, Ivics Z, Shimoda N, Mohn D, Okamoto H, Hackett PB: Short
inverted-repeat transposable elements in teleost fish and implications
for a mechanism of their amplification. Journal of Molecular Evolution
1999, 48:13-21.
Pace JK, Feschotte C: The evolutionary history of human DNA
transposons: evidence for intense activity in the primate lineage.
Genome Research 2007, 17:422-432.
Smit AFA, Riggs AD: Tiggers and other DNA transposon fossils in the
human genome. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America 1996, 93:1443-1448.
Kidwell MG, Lisch D: Transposable elements as sources of variation in
animals and plants. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America 1997, 94:7704-7711.
Jiang N, Bao ZR, Zhang XY, Hirochika H, Eddy SR, McCouch SR, Wessler SR:
An active DNA transposon family in rice. Nature 2003, 421:163-167.
Nakazaki T, Okumoto Y, Horibata A, Yamahira S, Teraishi M, Nishida H,
Inoue H, Tanisaka T: Mobilization of a transposon in the rice genome.
Nature 2003, 421:170-172.
Kikuchi K, Terauchi K, Wada M, Hirano HY: The plant MITE mPing is
mobilized in anther culture. Nature 2003, 421:167-170.
Haren L, Ton-Hoang B, Chandler M: Integrating DNA: transposases and
retroviral integrases. Annual Review of Microbiology 1999, 53:245-281.
Weil CF, Kunze R: Transposition of maize Ac/Ds transposable elements in
the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Nature Genetics 2000, 26:187-190.
Yu JH, Marshall K, Yamaguchi M, Haber JE, Weil CF: Microhomologydependent end joining and repair of transposon-induced DNA hairpins

Page 11 of 11

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.
31.

32.

33.
34.
35.
36.

37.
38.

39.

40.

by host factors in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Molecular and Cellular Biology
2004, 24:1351-1364.
la Cour T, Kiemer L, Molgaard A, Gupta R, Skriver K, Brunak S: Analysis and
prediction of leucine-rich nuclear export signals. Protein Engineering
Design & Selection 2004, 17:527-536.
Lin X, Long L, Shan X, Zhang S, Shen S, Liu B: In planta mobilization of
mPing and its putative autonomous element Pong in rice by hydrostatic
pressurization. Journal of Experimental Botany 2006, 57:2313-2323.
Liu D, Crawford NM: Characterization of the putative transposase mRNA
of Tag1, which is ubiquitously expressed in Arabidopsis and can be
induced by Agrobacterium-mediated transformation with dTag1 DNA.
Genetics 1998, 149:693-701.
Ivics Z, Izsvak Z, Minter A, Hackett PB: Identification of functional domains
and evolution of Tc1-like transposable elements. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 1996,
93:5008-5013.
Brameier M, Krings A, MacCallum RM: NucPred - predicting nuclear
localization of proteins. Bioinformatics 2007, 23:1159-1160.
Damelin M, Silver PA: Mapping interactions between nuclear transport
factors in living cells reveals pathways through the nuclear pore
complex. Molecular Cell 2000, 5:133-140.
Yang GJ, Holligan-Nagel D, Feschotte C, Hancock CN, Wessler SR: Tuned for
transposition: molecular determinants underlying the hyperactivity of a
Stowaway MITE. Science 2009, 325:1391-1394.
Daley JM, Palmbos PL, Wu D, Wilson TE: Nonhomologous end joining in
yeast. Annu Rev Genet 2005, 39:431-451.
Gant TM, Wilson KL: Nuclear assembly. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 1997,
13:669-695.
Feschotte C, Jiang N, Wessler SR: Plant transposable elements: where
genetics meets genomics. Nature Reviews Genetics 2002, 3:329-341.
Feschotte C, Zhang XY, Wessler SR: Miniature Inverted-repeat
Transposable Elements (MITEs) and their relationship with established
DNA transposons. Mobile DNA II Washington D.C.: American Society of
Microbiology PressCraig NL, Craige R, Gellert M, Lambowitz A 2002.
Yang GJ, Weil CF, Wessler SR: A rice TC1/mariner-like element transposes
in yeast. Plant Cell 2006, 18:2469-2478.
Alberti S, Gitler AD, Lindquist S: A suite of gateway (R) cloning vectors for
high-throughput genetic analysis in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Yeast 2007,
24:913-919.
Earley KW, Haag JR, Pontes O, Opper K, Juehne T, Song KM, Pikaard CS:
Gateway-compatible vectors for plant functional genomics and
proteomics. Plant Journal 2006, 45:616-629.
Clough SJ, Bent AF: Floral dip: a simplified method for Agrobacteriummediated transformation of Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant Journal 1998,
16:735-743.

doi:10.1186/1759-8753-1-5
Cite this article as: Hancock et al.: Transposition of the Tourist-MITE
mPing in yeast: an assay that retains key features of catalysis by the
class 2 PIF/Harbinger superfamily. Mobile DNA 2010 1:5.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
