<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>A novel mode of chromosomal evolution peculiar to filamentous Ascomycete fungi</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Genome Biology 2011, 12:R45. doi:10.1186/gb-2011-12-5-r45"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="James K Hane"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Hane et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R45
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/5/R45

RESEARCH

Open Access

A novel mode of chromosomal evolution peculiar
to filamentous Ascomycete fungi
James K Hane1,2, Thierry Rouxel3, Barbara J Howlett4, Gert HJ Kema5, Stephen B Goodwin6 and Richard P Oliver7*

Abstract
Background: Gene loss, inversions, translocations, and other chromosomal rearrangements vary among species,
resulting in different rates of structural genome evolution. Major chromosomal rearrangements are rare in most
eukaryotes, giving large regions with the same genes in the same order and orientation across species. These
regions of macrosynteny have been very useful for locating homologous genes in different species and to guide
the assembly of genome sequences. Previous analyses in the fungi have indicated that macrosynteny is rare;
instead, comparisons across species show no synteny or only microsyntenic regions encompassing usually five or
fewer genes. To test the hypothesis that chromosomal evolution is different in the fungi compared to other
eukaryotes, synteny was compared between species of the major fungal taxa.
Results: These analyses identified a novel form of evolution in which genes are conserved within homologous
chromosomes, but with randomized orders and orientations. This mode of evolution is designated mesosynteny, to
differentiate it from micro- and macrosynteny seen in other organisms. Mesosynteny is an alternative evolutionary
pathway very different from macrosyntenic conservation. Surprisingly, mesosynteny was not found in all fungal
groups. Instead, mesosynteny appears to be restricted to filamentous Ascomycetes and was most striking between
species in the Dothideomycetes.
Conclusions: The existence of mesosynteny between relatively distantly related Ascomycetes could be explained
by a high frequency of chromosomal inversions, but translocations must be extremely rare. The mechanism for this
phenomenon is not known, but presumably involves generation of frequent inversions during meiosis.

Background
The evolutionary history of organisms, as revealed by
comparisons of genome sequences, is of the greatest
biological significance and interest. The current explosion in the number of genome assemblies of species
within the same class, order and genus is allowing the
whole-genome interrelationships between organisms to
be examined in ever greater detail. There is a long history of comparisons of individual orthologous gene
sequences and these have revolutionized our understanding of phylogenetic relationships [1]. A more
complete understanding of both the mechanism and
results of evolution can be obtained by comparing
entire genomes [2]. These comparisons have refined
the concept of synteny. This term is used loosely by
* Correspondence: richard.oliver@curtin.edu.au
7
Australian Centre for Necrotrophic Fungal Pathogens, Curtin University,
Perth, 6845, Australia
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

many authors. Originally it was used in cytogenetics to
describe two or more loci that are located on the same
chromosome. As DNA sequencing and comparative
genomics became commonplace, the term synteny
acquired the additional property of co-linearity; i.e. the
conservation of gene order and orientation. In this
study we refer to synteny in the original cytogenetic
sense and describe co-linearity as a sub-category of
synteny. If orthologs of multiple genes that are colocated in the genome of one organism are co-located
in another species, the chromosomes on which the
genes reside are said to be syntenic. Synteny can also
be quantitative; chromosomes that contain all of the
same genes are 100% syntenic.
The process of speciation occurs when two independent populations diverge into reproductively isolated
species. Initially the daughter species would have had
chromosomes that shared both gene content (synteny)
and order (co-linearity). Over evolutionary time, the

© 2011 Hane et al.; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Hane et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R45
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/5/R45

Page 2 of 16

degree of synteny and co-linearity would be degraded
through various processes, including chromosomal
duplications, gene losses/gains and chromosomal rearrangements (Additional file 1), until orthologous genes
in one species occur randomly in the genome of the
other.
The related concepts of synteny and co-linearity have
been refined mostly in plants, animals and bacteria. Synteny has been differentiated qualitatively based on the
length and completeness of co-linear regions. Macrosynteny describes co-linearity observable at a whole-chromosome scale, involving hundreds or thousands of
genes of which a backbone are co-linear. Microsynteny
describes co-linearity spanning a small number (for
example, two to ten) of successive genes. Comparisons
of vertebrate and flowering plant species within taxonomic families often have shown extensive macrosynteny [3-8]. Macrosynteny has been exploited to assist
genetic mapping and gene cloning; examples include the
use of the Arabidopsis genome to find genes in canola
[9], and rice/Brachypodium synteny to locate genes in
wheat and barley [10].

Order
Phaeosphaeria nodorum

Filamentous fungi form an ancient, large and diverse
group of organisms. Until the last decade, the phylogenetics of fungi was problematic but the application of
techniques based on gene sequence variation has created
a stable taxonomy. The ascomycete filamentous fungi
are mostly within the sub-phylum Pezizomycotina (Figure 1) [11]. This sub-phylum contains four major
classes: Dothideomycetes, Eurotiomycetes, Sordariomycetes and Leotiomycetes. The Dothideomycetes contains
more than 20,000 species amongst which are many of
the most important plant pathogens worldwide, including those in the genera Phaeosphaeria, Leptosphaeria
and Mycosphaerella.
Evolutionary diversity within the filamentous ascomycete fungi is much higher than in flowering plants or
vertebrate animals [12]. A number of reasons have been
proposed to account for this. Filamentous fungi reflect
approximately 400 million years of evolutionary history,
comparable to that of the vertebrates but approximately
four times longer than that of the flowering plants [13]
(Figure 1; Table 1). The generation times of fungi are
typically measured in hours or days, whereas plants and

Class

Sub-phylum

Phylum

Pleosporales

Leptosphaeria maculans
Dothideomycetes
Mycosphaerella graminicola
Mycosphaerella fijiensis
Aspergillus fumigatus

Capnodiales

Eurotiales

Penicillium marneffei
Arthroderma gypseum

Eurotiomycetes
Onygenales

Pezizomycotina

Coccidioides immitus
Botryotinia fuckeliana

Helotiales

Leotiomycetes

Sclerotinia sclerotiorum
Ascomycota
Podospora anserina

Sordariales

Neurospora crassa
Magnaporthe oryzae
Fusarium oxysporum
Nectria haematococca

Magnaporthales

Sordariomycetes

Hypocreales

Lachancea kluyveri
Lachancea waltii
Saccharomyces cerevisiae

Saccharomycetales

Saccharomycetes

Saccharomycotina

Candida albicans
Candida tropicalis
Schizosaccharomyces pombe
Schizosaccharomyces cyrophilus

Schizosaccharomycetales

Schizosaccharomycetes

Taphrinomycotina

Schizosaccharomyces japonicus
Puccinia graminis
Malassezia globosa
Coprinosis cinerea

Puccinales

Pucciniomycetes

Pucciniomycotina

Malasezziales

Exobasidiomycetes

Ustilaginomycotina

Agaricales

Agaricomycetes

Agaricomycotina

Blastocladiales

Blastocladiomycetes

Blastocladiomycota

Chytridiales

Chytridiomycetes

Chytridiomycota

Basidiomycota

Laccaria bicolor
Allomyces macrogynus
Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis

Figure 1 Cladogram of species used in whole-genome comparisons in this study. Detailed information on each species is provided in
Additional file 3.

Sub-phylum

Pezizomycotina

Class
Class

Dothideomycetes

Order

Capnodiales Pleosporales

Dothideomycetes Capnodiales

Eurotiomycetes
Eurotiales

Saccharomycotina
Sordariomycetes

Leotiomycetes

Onygenales Hypocreales Magnaporthales Sordariales

Helotiales

Taphrinomycotina

Saccharomycetes

Schizosaccharomycetes

Saccharomycetales Schizosaccharomycetales

Meso

Demeso

Demeso

Demeso

None

Demeso

Demeso

None

None

300

Meso/120

Demeso

Demeso

Demeso

None

Demeso

Demeso

None

None

Eurotiales

370

370

Demacro/<
160

Demacro

None

None

None

Demeso

None

None

Onygenales
Sordariomycetes

Meso/150

Pleosporales
Eurotiomycetes

Hane et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R45
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/5/R45

Table 1 Summary of whole-genome synteny relationships across selected fungal orders

370

370

150

Demacro/<
160

None

None

None

Demeso

None

None

Hypocreales

370

370

370

370

Macro/170

Demeso

Demeso

Demeso

None

None

Magnaporthales

370

370

370

370

240

NA

Demeso

Demeso

None

None
None

Sordariales

370

370

370

370

225

240

Demeso

Demeso

None

Leotiomycetes

Helotiales

370

370

370

370

340

340

340

Macro/250

None

None

Saccharomycetes

Saccharomycetales

500

500

500

500

500

500

500

500

Demacro/none/250

None

Schizosaccharomycetales

650

650

650

650

650

650

650

650

650

Demacro/none/240

Whole-genome synteny, indicated above the diagonal, was classified as either macrosynteny (macro), degraded macrosynteny (demacro), mesosynteny (meso), degraded mesosynteny (demeso) or no synteny
(none). ‘NA’ indicates lack of sufficient data to perform whole-genome comparisons. Time since divergence between orders, previously predicted within the Ascomycetes [38], is indicated below the diagonal
in millions of years.

Page 3 of 16

Hane et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R45
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/5/R45

animals have generation times of many weeks, years or
even decades. Meiosis is a powerful force stabilising
chromosomal structure and may occur less commonly
in some fungi compared to plants and animals; whilst
nearly all filamentous fungi undergo germline asexual
reproduction, only a subset have known sexual phases.
Furthermore, many filamentous fungi can acquire
genetic material by lateral gene transfer, which can
increase their rate of evolution [14-16]. All of these factors would tend to reduce or eliminate the extent of
synteny between species. It was not surprising, therefore,
when initial comparisons between fungal genome
sequences failed to find extensive evidence of interspecific macro- or microsynteny [17-22] and, with the exception of the aspergilli, even between species from the
same genus [23-25].
The number of sequenced fungal genomes has
increased dramatically since 2008. There is now a sufficient number of sequenced species within each fungal
class to begin to assess whole-genome patterns of evolution. In this paper, we have applied a simple dot-plot
approach to fungal genome comparisons and observed a
striking pattern of chromosome-level evolutionary conservation. This pattern is characterized by the conservation of gene content in chromosomes, without
conservation of gene order or orientation; that is, synteny without co-linearity. We propose to call this
sequence conservation ‘mesosynteny’ to distinguish it
from micro- and macrosynteny. Mesosynteny appears to
be peculiar to the filamentous Ascomycetes (syn. Pezizomycotina), particularly in the class Dothideomycetes.
This phenomenon has interesting implications for the
study of genome evolution and may have applications in
the sequencing and assembly of fungal genomes.

Results
Dot plots are a well-established method of representing
sequence comparisons [26]. Comparison of co-linear
genomes (Supplementary Figure S1a in Additional file 1)
gives a series of dots that lie on the diagonal (Supplementary Figure S1b in Additional file 1). Random gene
loss from either chromosome without major rearrangements (Supplementary Figure S1c, d in Additional file 1)
progressively destroys microsynteny but retains macrosynteny. Inversions are visualised on dot plots by diagonal lines with the opposite slope, while translocations
are indicated when the genes on a chromosome of one
species share syntenic blocks with two or more chromosomes. Conservation of short, contiguous runs of genes,
whether on the same or different chromosomes, retains
microsynteny but not macrosynteny.
The fungus Phaeosphaeria (syn. Stagonospora, Septoria) nodorum is a major pathogen of wheat [27]. It is
a member of the class Dothideomycetes (Figure 1), a

Page 4 of 16

taxon that includes more than 20,000 species amongst
which are many dominant crop pathogens [28]. Its
genome, which is believed to comprise 14 to 19 chromosomes [29], was assembled as 107 nuclear scaffolds
[21]. Expressed sequence tag and proteomic data have
refined the annotations to a set of 12,194 genes
[30-32]. Pathogenicity in P. nodorum has been linked
to the expression of a suite of necrotrophic effectors
[33-36] (formerly called host-specific toxins), some of
which appear to have been acquired by lateral gene
transfer [14,16].
The genome sequences of other Dothideomycetes species have become available recently, allowing whole-genome comparisons with relatively closely related taxa. We
used the software tool MUMmer [37] to generate dot
plots that compare the scaffolds of the P. nodorum
assembly with the 21 finished chromosomes of Mycosphaerella graminicola [38,39] (Figure 2a). These species
are classified respectively in the Pleosporales and the
Capnodiales, order-level taxa within the Dothideomycetes (Figure 2), with an estimated divergence time of
(very approximately) 300 million years ago (Mya). The
figure is arranged with the chromosomes or scaffolds of
each species arranged in size order along the axes. Dots
correspond to regions of sequence similarity and are
color-coded to indicate their degree of identity.
Our expectation was that we would see either dispersed diagonal lines or a completely random distribution of very short matches (’dots’). Instead, the dot plot
shows a highly non-random distribution whereby dots
from individual chromosomes of M. graminicola appear
to be strongly associated with one or a few scaffolds of
P. nodorum, indicated by ‘boxes’ within columns and
rows. For example, dots corresponding to P. nodorum
scaffold 7 were almost exclusively found within the box
corresponding to M. graminicola chromosome 12. Reciprocally, dots corresponding to M. graminicola chromosome 12 appeared predominantly within the box
corresponding to P. nodorum scaffold 7. The dots within
this box did not fall on any obvious diagonal lines and
were instead arranged quasi-randomly. When these two
sequences were aligned (Figure 2b), lines joining regions
of significant similarity were distributed quasi-randomly.
The orientation of the genes (color coded as red for parallel and blue for inverted) also appeared to be random.
The dot plots used six-frame back translations of the
genomes. Similar results were obtained with raw nucleotide sequences or when validated genes were used
(Additional file 2). This indicated that the majority of
the dots corresponded to genes.
We call this pattern of dots-within-boxes ‘mesosynteny’. The non-random distribution implies conservation
of the gene content of scaffolds (and by implication,
chromosomes) during evolution; hence, this is a form of

Hane et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R45
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/5/R45

Page 5 of 16

(a)

100
14-21
13
12
80

10
9
8
60

Mycosphaerella graminicola

7
6
5
40

4

Percent similarity of match

(Chromosome)

11

3

2

20

1

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9 10

0
11-15

Stagonospora nodorum SN15

16-20

21-30

31-40

41-107

(Scaffold)

(b)
Mycosphaerella graminicola

Stagonospora nodorum SN15

Chromosome 12

Scaffold 7

Figure 2 Whole-genome dot-plot comparison between the Dothideomycetes species Mycosphaerella graminicola and Phaeosphaeria
nodorum. (a) The six-frame translations of both genomes were compared via MUMmer 3.0. Homologous regions are plotted as dots, which are
color coded for percent similarity as per the color bar (right). Chromosomes 1 to 21 from M. graminicola are displayed by decreasing size along
the y axis and scaffolds 1 to 107 from P. nodorum are displayed along the x axis. Dots represent matching regions between translated scaffold
sequences. Mesosyntenic regions appear as dots within boxes without any obvious diagonal lines. (b) Homology relationships between
chromosome 12 of M. graminicola and scaffold 17 of P. nodorum. Red lines link parallel homologous pairs and blue lines link anti-parallel pairs.

Hane et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R45
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/5/R45

Page 6 of 16

synteny [40] that does not involve the retention of colinearity as found in both macro- and microsynteny.
Taxonomic distribution of mesosynteny across the fungal
kingdom

To test the extent and generality of mesosynteny within
the fungi, the analysis was extended to other species

within the Dothideomycetes, other classes within the Pezizomycotina and other fungal phyla. These comparisons
were tested for chromosomal-scale genome conservation
and were classified as macrosyntenic, mesosyntenic, or
non-syntenic (Figure 3; Additional file 3).
Visual inspection of dot plots distinguished the comparisons neatly into three classes: no synteny,

no

Filter for sequence
lengths >= 500 Kbp

discard

yes
Genome comparison
(MUMmer/promer)

no

Whole-genome
synteny

no synteny

yes

average length of
syntenic diagonals
>= 20 Kbp

<20 Kbp

exclusive relationship
between conserved
sequence pairs

no

degraded
mesosynteny

mesosynteny

degraded
macrosynteny

macrosynteny

Fusarium oxysporum

Aspergillus fumigatus

Sclerotinia sclerotiorum
Botryotinia fuckeliana

Neurospora crassa

Leptosphaeria maculans

Phaeosphaeria nodorum

no

yes

Penicilium marneffei

yes

exclusive relationship
between conserved
sequence pairs

Figure 3 The whole-genome synteny classification process. Genome sequences of fewer than 500 kb were discarded before analysis. The
results of MUMmer comparisons between a pair of genomes were tested for synteny (see Materials and methods). If a genome pair was
determined to be syntenic at a whole-genome level, synteny was classified as ‘mesosyntenic’ or ‘macrosyntenic’ based on the average length of
co-linear diagonals.

Hane et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R45
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/5/R45

macrosynteny or mesosynteny. Quantifying the degree
of synteny between species required the development of
new statistical tests. Significant sequence conservation
was tested between pairs of scaffolds by a one-tailed
cumulative binomial test, requiring a probability of
≥0.99. The whole-genome conservation was defined as
significant when ≥25% of the expected number of scaffold pairs (assuming perfect whole-genome synteny)
were conserved. Species pairs showing synteny were
classified as macro- or mesosynteny based on the average length of co-linear runs of sequence matches
between both genomes; an average co-linear diagonal
length of ≥20 kb was considered macrosyteny and < 20
kb was classified as mesosynteny (Additional file 3).
Mesosynteny and macrosynteny were further categorized
into ‘degraded’ or ‘non-degraded’ (Figure 3). Synteny
was classified as degraded when significant clusters of
‘dots’ or ‘lines’ were found outside of the primary box
(that is, for any given ‘box’, < 75% of the total length of
conserved sequences within its corresponding rows and
columns resided within the dominant box). Scaffolds
shorter than 500 kb were excluded from these analyses.
Dot-plot comparisons between the Dothideomycetes
species P. nodorum, M. graminicola, Mycosphaerella
fijiensis and Leptosphaeria maculans showed significant
mesosynteny (Figure 4). The comparison between P.
nodorum and L. maculans (both in the order Pleosporales) was especially striking (Additional file 2). The dot
plot was dominated by matches of 80 to 100% similarity,
compared to 60 to 80% in the case of P. nodorum versus
the species in the Capnodiales, M. graminicola or M.
fijiensis. The dots in the comparison between P.
nodorum and L. maculans were almost exclusively
restricted to single boxes within both rows and columns.
As before, there was no indication of the diagonal lines
characteristic of macrosynteny. This pattern of nearly
exclusive dots within single boxes was also observed
when comparisons were made between these genomes
and the other released but so far unpublished Dothideomycetes genomes available via the JGI and Broad Institute web sites ([39,41,42] and data not shown).
Dothideomycetes species also showed a discernable
level of mesosynteny-like conservation with species
representing the classes Eurotiomycetes (Aspergillus
fumigatus), and the Leotiomycetes (Sclerotinia sclerotiorum; S. sclerotiorum sequencing project [43]), but not
with the Sordariomycetes (Magnaporthe oryzae) or the
Saccharomycetes (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) (Figure 4;
Additional file 1). Comparisons of P. nodorum and M.
graminicola with A. fumigatus and S. sclerotiorum had a
statistically significant non-random distribution of dots
within boxes. In contrast to intra-Dothideomycetes
comparisons, dots appeared in multiple boxes within a
row and column. This is an example of degraded

Page 7 of 16

mesosynteny. Comparisons between Dothideomycetes
and M. oryzae (Sordariomycetes) and the yeast S. cerevisiae (Saccharomycetes) failed to find a statistically significant degree of synteny, reflected in the apparently
random distribution of dots. These comparisons had an
average of 1 and 0 sequences with binomial probabilities
of significant sequence conservation >0.99. No statistically significant syntenic relationships were found when
either M. oryzae or any yeast was compared with other
filamentous fungal genomes.
A similar series of dot-plot comparisons between the
class Eurotiomycetes and Leotiomycetes and species
from classes of the Ascomycota is shown in Figure 5.
The test species are A. fumigatus and S. sclerotiorum.
The comparisons between S. sclerotiorum and Botryotinia fuckeliana exhibited a highly conserved pattern with
many obvious diagonal lines made up of red and yellow
dots representing highly similar (90 to 100%) sequence
pairs. The average length of co-linear regions was much
greater than 20 kb. This is a classical macrosyntenic pattern reflecting very recent divergence between these closely related genera. A weaker macrosyntenic pattern was
observed between A. fumigatus and Penicillium marneffei, two species in the Eurotiales. Less than 25% of
matches in columns and rows resided within a single
box, characteristic of degraded macrosynteny. Comparisons between A. fumigatus and S. sclerotiorum and the
Dothideomycetes, represented by L. maculans, revealed
degraded mesosynteny. This was also observed between
S. sclerotiorum and the two members of the Eurotiales,
A. fumigatus and P. marneffei.
The Sordariomycetes Fusarium oxysporum exhibited
mixed patterns of synteny in comparisons between species from the related orders Sordariales and Hypocreales
and from other classes in the Pezizomycotina (Figure 6;
Additional file 4). Striking macrosynteny was observed
between chromosomes 1, 2, 4, 5 and 7 to 10 of F. oxysporum and chromosomes 1 to 6 and 7 to 10 of Nectria
haematococca. Parts of chromosomes 3, 6 and 11 to 14
of F. oxysporum exhibited a mesosyntenic pattern with
chromosomes 7 and 11 to 14 of N. haematococca.
Mesosynteny was strongest between N. haematococca
chromosome 14 and parts of F. oxysporum chromosomes 3, 6, 14 and 15. Degraded mesosynteny was
observed between F. oxysporum and Neurospora crassa,
S. sclerotiorum, A. fumigatus and with P. nodorum.
However, in all comparisons (excluding N. haematococca), dots were conspicuously absent from rows corresponding to F. oxysporum chromosomes 3, 6, 14 and 15
(Figure 6).
The comparison between N. crassa and Podospora
anserina (order Sordariales) showed a dominant pattern
of mesosynteny, with some macrosyntenic regions particularly between the largest chromosome of both species

Hane et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R45
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/5/R45

Page 8 of 16

Mycosphaerella
graminicola

Saccharomyces
cerevisiae

Sclerotinia
sclerotiorum

Magnaporthe
oryzae

Aspergillus
fumigatus

Mycosphaerella
fijiensis

Leptosphaeria
maculans

Phaeosphaeria
nodorum

Figure 4 Dot-plot comparisons between the class Dothideomycetes and related classes. Scaffolds greater than 500 kb in length are
ordered in ascending alpha-numeric order upwards along the y-axis and left-to-right along the x-axis. The orders Pleosporales (represented by P.
nodorum and L. maculans) and Capnodiales (Mycosphaerella spp.) of the Dothideomycetes exhibit a tightly clustered pattern of mesosynteny
between and within each order. This degrades into a mesosynteny-like pattern in comparisons between Dothideomycetes and the classes
Eurotiomycetes (A. fumigatus), Sordariomycetes (M. oryzae) and Leotiomycetes (S. sclerotiorum). Clustered blocks can still be observed in these
comparisons. The dot-plots comparing Dothideomycetes and Saccharomycetes (S. cerevisiae) appear to be random - that is, there was no
synteny.

Hane et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R45
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/5/R45

Page 9 of 16

sclerotiorum

Penicillium

marneffei

Leptosphaeria

maculans

Botryotinia

fuckeliana

nidulans

Sclerotinia

fumigatus

Aspergillus

Aspergillus

Figure 5 Dot-plot comparisons between representatives of the classes Eurotiomycetes and Leotiomycetes and related classes. The
orders Eurotiales (Aspergillus spp.) and Onygenales (P. marneffei) of the Eurotiomycetes exhibit degraded macrosynteny between and within each
order. The Leotiomycetes exhibit macrosynteny between species of the order Helotiales. A mesosynteny-like pattern is observed in comparisons
between the Eurotiomycetes, Leotiomycetes and the more distantly related class Dothideomycetes (L. maculans).

Hane et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R45
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/5/R45

Page 10 of 16

anserina

oxysporum

sclerotiorum
fumigatus
nodorum

haematococca

Sclerotinia
Aspergillus
Phaeosphaeria

Nectria

Fusarium

crassa

Podospora

Neurospora

Figure 6 Dot-plot comparisons between two members of the class Sordariomycetes and related classes. The orders Sordariales (N. crassa
and P. anserina) and Hypocreales (F. oxysporum and N. haematococca) of the Sordariomycetes generally exhibit mesosynteny-like conservation.
The closely related pair of Hypocreales species Fusarium oxysporum and Nectria haematococca exhibit mostly macrosynteny with mesosynteny
between a few chromosomes. Comparisons between the Sordariales and Hypocreales with the classes Leotiomycetes, Eurotiomycetes and
Dothideomycetes exhibit degraded mesosynteny. Lack of synteny between the conditionally dispensable chromosomes 3, 6, 14 and 15 of F.
oxysporum (excluding N. haematococca) with chromosomes of any other species is evident by an absence of dots in those comparisons.

Hane et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R45
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/5/R45

[20]. N. crassa exhibited degraded mesosynteny when
compared to S. sclerotiorum, A. fumigatus and P.
nodorum (Figure 6).
We expanded these comparisons beyond the classes
presented above to include additional species of the subphyla Saccharomycotina and Taphrinomycotina within
the phylum Ascomycota and species from the phyla Basidiomycota, Blastocladiomycota and Chytridiomycota
(Table 1; Figure 1). Non-filamentous Ascomycetes
(classes Saccharomycetes and Schizosaccharomycetes)
exhibited either macrosynteny or no synteny within their
respective classes and no synteny with other fungal
classes (Additional file 5). The class Agaricomycetes
exhibited degraded macrosynteny between species within
the class and no synteny with other fungal classes (Additional file 6). No non-Pezizomycotina taxa showed any
level of synteny when compared to species of a different
class (Table 1; Additional file 1).

Discussion
A novel and unexpected mode of chromosome-level
sequence conservation, which we have called mesosynteny, has been detected between species of filamentous
Ascomycetes, and in particular the Dothideomycetes.
Mesosynteny implies the conservation of gene content
within chromosomes but without conservation of gene
order or orientation. It contrasts markedly with the
macrosynteny observed commonly in plants and animals
and the absence of synteny seen in other eukaryotes
such as distantly related yeast species. The cause of
mesosyntenic chromosomal evolution is not known.
However, a mesosyntenic pattern would be expected to
occur if intra-chromosomal recombination (including
inversions) occurred significantly more frequently than
inter-chromosomal recombinational events such as
translocations.
Mesosynteny is distinct from macrosynteny. Macrosynteny would be expected to arise when the predominant modes of chromosomal evolution are interchromosomal recombination and gene loss. These considerations suggest that different patterns of mutagenic
events can lead either to mesosynteny or to macrosynteny as chromosomes evolve following a speciation
event.
Mesosynteny also is distinct from microsynteny, which
is characterized by co-linearity between clusters of two
to about ten genes with both order and orientation conserved. Earlier comparisons of synteny in related filamentous fungi frequently found clusters of genes with
related functions but without retention of gene order or
orientation. An example is the quinate cluster, which is
conserved across species of the Ascomycetes [21,44].
This pattern of shuffled cluster retention is akin to what
we observe at the whole-chromosome level.

Page 11 of 16

Our results suggest that mesosyntenic chromosomal
conservation is restricted to the Pezizomycotina and is
most pronounced in the Dothideomycetes [45]. The
Dothideomycetes are the only group to exhibit nondegraded mesosynteny between species of the different
genera (estimated to have diverged approximately 120
to 150 Mya) and orders (approximately 300 Mya). A
recognizable yet degraded form of mesosynteny was
found between many species of Pezizomycotina outside
the Dothideomycetes. The estimated time of divergence within Dothideomycetes orders are comparable
to other orders within the Pezizomycotina that exhibited either degraded mesosynteny or no detectable synteny (Table 1) [38]. No mesosynteny was observed in
any of the fungal groups outside of the Pezizomycotina
that were surveyed: yeasts, Basidiomycetes, Blastocladiomycetes and Chytridiomycetes. The evolutionary
separation between these groups and the Dothideomycetes (500 to 650 Mya) [38] may be so great that both
mesosynteny and macrosynteny have decayed below
the limit of detection. To our knowledge, mesosynteny
has not been observed in non-fungal eukaryotes.
Superficially similar dot-plots have been occasionally
observed in comparisons of chordate genomes [45] but
appear to be due to the amplification of paralogous
copies of genes within chromosomes. Overall, either
macrosynteny or no synteny has been found outside
the Pezizomycotina.
Chromosomal conservation akin to mesosynteny had
been observed previously in a number of inter-species
comparisons within the Pezizomycotina, but its full
extent was not analyzed. These include comparisons
between the Pezizomycetes Tuber melanosporum and
the Eurotiomycetes Coccidioides immitus [46] and the
Sordariomycetes P. anserina and N. crassa [20]. As N.
crassa and P. anserina are heterothallic, the authors suggested that the observed conservation may be specific to
out-crossing (heterothallic) fungi. However, evidence
from this study suggests otherwise as mesosynteny was
observed between both heterothallic and homothallic
species (Table 1; Additional files 3 and 5). For example,
two homothallic Sordariomycetes species, which
diverged approximately 225 Mya [38], exhibited
degraded mesosynteny (Fusarium graminearum and
Chaetomium globosum; Additional file 7).
Mesosynteny was observed in species both with and
without (F. oxysporum [47] and Penicillium marneffei
[48]) a known sexual stage. It may be that sexual crossing has been lost relatively recently in these species.
Nonetheless, this finding suggests that mesosyntenic
relationships were not quickly lost in the absence of
meiosis. Amongst the mesosyntenic Pezizomycotina,
mesosynteny was weakest in comparisons against the M.
oryzae genome (Figures 5 and 6; Table 1). M. oryzae is

Hane et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R45
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/5/R45

believed to exist in nature in purely asexual lineages.
The sequenced isolate of M. oryzae was a fertile derivative of two asexual lineages [19]. We speculate that a
history of asexual reproduction and/or the process of
laboratory domestication may have destroyed the remnants of mesosynteny in this isolate. This hypothesis
could be tested by comparisons with genome sequences
from additional isolates of M. oryzae or related species
in the Magnaporthales.
In some species there was an uneven distribution of
syntenic relationships between different chromosomes.
The genome of M. graminicola has been finished [39]
and comprises 21 chromosomes, the eight smallest of
which have been shown to be dispensable [49]. These
dispensable chromosomes displayed little sequence conservation with genes from any other species, and therefore no detectable synteny of any type (Figure 4). In
contrast, the M. graminicola core chromosomes exhibited a typical mesosyntenic pattern in most comparisons
with other Pezizomycotina species. Similarly, the conditionally dispensable chromosomes (CDCs) of F. oxysporum (3, 6, 14 and 15) showed no synteny with
almost all species tested. All of these supernumerary
chromosomes are thought to have originated by lateral
transfer from unknown donor species [39,50]. Whether
the lack of synteny of most supernumerary chromosomes is because they come from distantly related species or because they evolve more rapidly than core
chromosomes is not known.
Surprisingly, CDC 14 of N. haematococca was mesosyntenic to F. oxysporum CDCs (chromosome 14 and
the terminal end of chromosomes 3 and 6; Figure 6;
Additional file 4). This is in contrast to the core chromosomes of each species, which exhibited macrosynteny
and to previous comparisons that had indicated that
these CDCs were non-syntenic. A comparison of the F.
oxysporum genome with the closely related Fusarium
verticillioides indicated that the F. oxysporum CDCs
were not syntenic [50]. A possible explanation for this
phenomenon is that mutations and rearrangements in
supernumerary chromosomes accumulate more rapidly
because these chromosomes are rarely required for survival. Faster accumulation of mutations potentially
coupled with origins in distantly related donor species
may allow the sequences of supernumerary chromosomes to diverge to the point where no sequence similarity remains (as in M. graminicola). The occurrence of
mesosyntenic rearrangement in F. oxysporum and N.
haematococca may also be related to the origin of their
CDCs. These may have arisen in their common ancestor
from a single chromosome, which subsequently mutated
and broke into smaller chromosomes. Alternatively, they
may have been recently transferred laterally from a common (or closely related) donor.

Page 12 of 16

Whole-genome shotgun sequencing involves the generation of many short DNA reads that are assembled
into longer segments. Macrosyntenic relationships are
commonly used to assist the assembly and finishing of
fragmented genome sequences, particularly in prokaryotic genomes. Sequences that are macrosyntenic to a long
sequence of a closely related genome can be confidently
hypothesized to be joined physically. Mesosynteny
between a new genome assembly with a reference genome also may be used to suggest which scaffolds are
juxtaposed. This could significantly reduce the cost and
complexity of assembling and finishing genomes. To test
whether mesosynteny could be used to predict scaffold
joins in genomic sequences, early and late assemblies of
the M. graminicola genome were analyzed to determine
whether the joining of contigs or scaffolds in the finished genome could have been predicted by mesosyntenic relationships of the draft genome to P. nodorum
[39]. Mesosynteny was remarkably successful in predicting separate scaffolds that should be joined and for
identifying mis-joins in the initial assembly. This
approach has the potential to assist with assembly and
finishing of other genomes within the Pezizomycotina.

Conclusions
We have unearthed a novel mode of evolution in which
chromosomes retain their content but shuffle the order
and orientation of genes. We propose to call this phenomenon mesosynteny. What is the origin and mechanism of mesosynteny? The phenomenon is observed only
in the Pezizomycotina and especially in the Dothideomycetes. The Dothideomycetes sequenced to date have
several (ten or more) relatively small chromosomes,
hinting at the ubiquity of supernumerary chromosomes
within this taxon. The Pezizomycotina exhibit repeatinduced point mutation and higher frequencies of lateral
gene transfer compared to other fungi [15,51]. Are these
phenomena causally related?
The mechanism for mesosynteny may occur through a
high frequency of inversions during meiosis. Whether
the Dothideomycetes have a higher propensity for inversions is not known but should be the subject of further
investigation. Alternatively, lateral gene transfer may be
the driving force behind mesosynteny. The mechanism
of lateral gene transfer is not well understood, but
recent evidence suggests that the sequence transferred
can be very large, even up to the size of entire chromosomes [49,52]. Fungi are capable of fusing with other
fungal species through either conidial or hyphal anastomosis tubes [53]. Fusion can lead to exchange of nuclei
and the transient formation of heterkaryotic strains. If
the transferred DNA carried a gene that was beneficial
to the recipient species, the chromosome (or a large section) carrying this gene may be retained whilst other

Hane et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R45
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/5/R45

Page 13 of 16

donated chromosomes would be lost. As mesosynteny
tends to retain genes on the same chromosomes, a recipient species may be able to accept a substitute chromosome from a reasonably closely related species without
major disruption of phenotype. Recombination between
the new and old chromosome would shuffle the order
and orientation of genes, with remnant duplicated genes
being removed in further cycles of repeat-induced point
mutation. Recombinants with a complete core gene content plus any advantageous laterally transferred genes
would then be selected, resulting in the mesosyntenic
pattern of chromosomal conservation we see today.
Mesosynteny may, therefore, be an adaptive mechanism
that both allowed and resulted from lateral acquisition
of large chromosomal sections.

Materials and methods
Whole-genome comparisons

The synteny classification method is outlined in Figure
3. Genome sequence assemblies of the species listed in
Figure 1 were obtained from the sources described in
Additional file 1. Phylogenetic data (Figure 1; Table 1)
were inferred from previous publications [1,28,54,55].
Individual sequences (contigs, scaffolds or chromosomes) less than 500 kbp in length were discarded from
the analysis. Whole-genome comparisons were performed using promer (MUMmer 3.0, [37]) with the
‘–mum’ parameter. Promer outputs were filtered for
repetitive matches using the program ‘delta-filter’
(MUMmer 3.0) with the ‘-g’ parameter. Genome dot
plots were generated using ‘mummerplot’ (MUMmer
3.0) and coordinates of promer matches were derived
from filtered promer outputs using the ‘show-coords’
program (MUMmer 3.0).
Determination of significant sequence conservation

For the purposes of this study, only synteny observable
at a whole-genome level was considered. For a given
pair of genomes (genome A and genome B), all combinations of their sequence (contigs, scaffolds or chromosomes) pairs (one sequence from genome A (sequence
A) and one from genome B (sequence B)) were tested
for significant conservation. Lengths of conserved
regions in sequences A and B were derived from MUMmer outputs. The probability of synteny (P syn ) for
sequence pairs was calculated via a one-tailed cumulative binomial test:
x

psyn = F x, p, n =
i=0

n
i

p

i

1−p

n−1

where x = (Length conserved in sequence A × Length
conserved in sequence B)/(Length of sequence A ×
Length of sequence B); n = 100; p = (Total length

conserved in Genome A × Total length conserved in
Genome B)/(Total length genome A × Total length genome B). Psyn was required to be ≥ 0.99 to indicate significant amounts of sequence conservation between a
sequence pair.
Analysis of syntenic regions between conserved
sequences

The lengths of syntenic regions were analyzed for significantly conserved sequence pairs. Extended co-linearity
of sequence matches visible as uninterrupted diagonal
lines on a dot plot was used as an indicator of macrosynteny (Additional file 1). Dot plots between sequence
pairs were considered as individual scatter plots. Promer
matches between a pair of sequences were converted
into a series of points on the scatter plot, with a point
added every 1 kb along each match. R2 values were calculated along the axis of sequence A in 20-kb windows
(incrementing along by 2 kb). A window was considered
to be co-linear if it contained a minimum of 15 data
points with an R2 ≥ 0.9 The end coordinates of co-linear
windows were subsequently modified to exclude the
coordinate range of overlapping non-co-linear windows.
The data points of co-linear windows within 50 kb of
one another were combined (including intermediate
data points if not overlapping) and were merged into
larger co-linear windows if (Slope of window 1/Slope of
window 2) > 0.8 and < 1.2. The start and end points of
co-linear windows with a length of ≥ 5 kb were used as
the coordinates of ‘syntenic regions’. The same process
was repeated along the axis of sequence B.
Classification of synteny type

Whole-genome synteny was identified by the ‘significant
pair ratio’ statistic, which is an indicator of the proportion of conserved sequences relative to the expected
number of conserved sequences. The significant pair
ratio was determined by:
Nscp
signiﬁcant pair ratio = √
Sa × Sb

where Nscp is the number of significantly conserved
pairs between genomes A and B; S a is the number of
sequences in genome A ≥ 500 kb; and Sb is the number
of sequences in genome B ≥ 500 kb.
Whole-genome synteny was identified when the significant pair ratio was ≥ 0.25. Genome pairs failing this criterion were classified as ‘non-syntenic’. Genome pairs
passing the test for whole-genome synteny were subcategorized as either macrosyntenic or mesosyntenic,
defined by an average length of syntenic regions (combined between both compared genomes) of greater than
or less than 20 kb, respectively. Synteny type was further

Hane et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R45
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/5/R45

Page 14 of 16

categorized into ‘degraded’ or ‘non-degraded’ based on
the statistic ‘pair exclusivity’. For a given sequence pair,
consisting of sequence A of genome A and sequence B
of genome B, the ‘pair exclusivity’ was calculated by:
Pair exclusivity =

Cab
CAb + CaB − Cab

where C ab is the total length of conserved matches
between sequences A and B; CAb is the total length of
conserved matches for sequence A and all sequences of
genome B; and C aB is the total length of conserved
matches for sequence B and all sequences of genome A.
Synteny was classified as ‘degraded’ if the maximum
value of all pair exclusivities was less than 0.75.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Supplementary Figure S1. The origins of the
different types of syntenic relationships. Immediately after a speciation
event, equivalent chromosomes in two daughter species retain the gene
content, order and orientation of the parent species. (a) Diagrammatic
representation of a chromosome with sequential elements A to Z. (b) A
dot plot comparing the chromosomes in (a), with letters substituted for
dots. The unbroken series of letters on the diagonal indicates
macrosynteny. (c, d) Loss of sequences from each chromosome (c) will
degrade the diagonal co-linearity when visualized as a dot plot (d).
Additional file 2: Supplementary Figure S2. (a, b) Correspondence
between promer-derived dot plots (a) and blastp-derived protein
comparisons of annotated genes (b) between Phaeosphaeria nodorum
and Leptosphaeria maculans. Sequence pairs (’boxes’) in (a) containing
non-random distributions of ‘dots’ correspond to those in (b), indicating
that the back-translated genome matches in (a) correspond to regions of
conserved gene content.
Additional file 3: Supplementary File 1. Predictions of synteny
between all species involved in this study in an Excel file.
Additional file 4: Supplementary Figure S3. Presence of both
macrosyntenic and mesosyntenic conservation patterns between the
genomes of Fusarium oxysporum and Nectria haematococca. Core
chromosomes (indicated by black bars along the axes) are macrosyntenic
between the two species. Dispensable chromosomes (red bars along the
axes) are either non-syntenic (N. haematococca chromosomes 15 to 17)
or mesosyntenic (N. haematococca chromosomes 7 and 11 to 14, F.
oxysporum chromosome 14). The majority of chromosomes 3 and 6 of F.
oxysporum had no similarity to the chromosomes of N. haematococca
except for regions near their telomeres.
Additional file 5: Supplementary Figure S4. Degradation of wholegenome synteny in the classes Saccharomycetes and
Schizosaccharomyces. Whole-genome dot plots have been limited to
scaffolds or chromosomes greater than 500 kb. Species of the
Saccharomyces and Schizosaccharomyces do not exhibit whole-genome
conservation with each other. Certain species within each class exhibit
macrosynteny whereas others exhibit no synteny.
Additional file 6: Supplementary Figure S5. Degradation of wholegenome synteny between a member of the class Agaricales and related
orders. Whole-genome dot plots have been limited to scaffolds or
chromosomes greater than 500 kb. Species in the Agaricales exhibited
macrosynteny with each other. However, the Agaricales exhibited no
synteny with the closest related classes represented in this study, the
Exobasidiomycetes and Pucciniomycetes.
Additional file 7: Supplementary Figure S6. Evidence of degraded
mesosynteny between the genomes of two homothallic Sordariomycete
species, Fusarium graminearum (order Hypocreales) and Chaetomium
globosum (order Sordariales). These two species are estimated to have

diverged approximately 225 Mya. Sequence matches (dots) are arranged
in blocked clusters typical of mesosynteny. Chromosomes and scaffolds
do not share a one-to-one relationship, with multiple mesosyntenic
clusters appearing in the same row or column.

Abbreviations
CDC: conditionally dispensable chromosome; Mya: million years ago.
Author details
CSIRO Plant Industry, Centre for Environment and Life Sciences, Private Bag
5, Perth, 6193, Australia. 2Faculty of Health Sciences, Murdoch University,
Perth, 6150, Australia. 3INRA-Bioger, Avenue Lucien Brétignières, BP 01,
Thiverval-Grignon, 78850, France. 4School of Botany, The University of
Melbourne, Melbourne, 3010, Australia. 5Wageningen UR, Plant Research
International, Department of Biointeractions and Plant Health, PO Box 69,
Wageningen, 6700 AB, The Netherlands. 6USDA-ARS, Crop Production and
Pest Control Research Unit, Purdue University, 915 West State Street, West
Lafayette, IN 47907-2054, USA. 7Australian Centre for Necrotrophic Fungal
Pathogens, Curtin University, Perth, 6845, Australia.
1

Authors’ contributions
RPO and JKH conceived and designed the study. JKH developed algorithms
and performed mesosynteny analyses. JKH and RPO wrote the manuscript.
TR, BJH, GHJK and SBG contributed data. JKH, RPO, TR, BJH, GHJK and SBG
edited the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Received: 20 February 2011 Revised: 27 April 2011
Accepted: 24 May 2011 Published: 24 May 2011
References
1. Schoch CL, Sung GH, Lopez-Giraldez F, Townsend JP, Miadlikowska J,
Hofstetter V, Robbertse B, Matheny PB, Kauff F, Wang Z, Gueidan C,
Andrie RM, Trippe K, Ciufetti LM, Wynns A, Fraker E, Hodkinson BP,
Bonito G, Groenewald JZ, Arzanlou M, de Hoog GS, Crous PW, Hewitt D,
Pfister DH, Peterson K, Gryzenhout M, Wingfield MJ, Aptroot A, Suh SO,
Blackwell M, et al: The Ascomycota tree of life: a phylum-wide phylogeny
clarifies the origin and evolution of fundamental reproductive and
ecological traits. Syst Biol 2009, 58:224-239.
2. Sims GE, Jun SR, Wu GA, Kim SH: Alignment-free genome comparison
with feature frequency profiles (FFP) and optimal resolutions. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2009, 106:2677-2682.
3. McLysaght A, Enright AJ, Skrabanek L, Wolfe KH: Estimation of synteny
conservation and genome compaction between pufferfish (Fugu) and
human. Yeast 2000, 17:22-36.
4. Pennacchio LA: Insights from human/mouse genome comparisons.
Mamm Genome 2003, 14:429-436.
5. Kohn M, Kehrer-Sawatzki H, Vogel W, Graves JA, Hameister H: Wide
genome comparisons reveal the origins of the human X chromosome.
Trends Genet 2004, 20:598-603.
6. Cannon SB, Sterck L, Rombauts S, Sato S, Cheung F, Gouzy J, Wang X,
Mudge J, Vasdewani J, Schiex T, Spannagl M, Monaghan E, Nicholson C,
Humphray SJ, Schoof H, Mayer KF, Rogers J, Quetier F, Oldroyd GE,
Debelle F, Cook DR, Retzel EF, Roe BA, Town CD, Tabata S, Van de Peer Y,
Young ND: Legume genome evolution viewed through the Medicago
truncatula and Lotus japonicus genomes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006,
103:14959-14964.
7. Phan HT, Ellwood SR, Hane JK, Ford R, Materne M, Oliver RP: Extensive
macrosynteny between Medicago truncatula and Lens culinaris ssp.
culinaris. Theor Appl Genet 2007, 114:549-558.
8. Shultz JL, Ray JD, Lightfoot DA: A sequence based synteny map between
soybean and Arabidopsis thaliana. BMC Genomics 2007, 8:8.
9. Parkin AP, Lydiate DJ, Trick M: Assessing the level of collinearity between
Arabidopsis thaliana and Brassica napus for A. thaliana chromosome 5.
Genome 2002, 45:356-366.
10. Ma B: Synteny between Brachypodium distachyon and Hordeum vulgare
as revealed by FISH. Chromosome Res 2010, 18:841-850.
11. Zhang Y, Schoch CL, Fournier J, Crous PW, de Gruyter J, Woudenberg JH,
Hirayama K, Tanaka K, Pointing SB, Spatafora JW, Hyde KD: Multi-locus

Hane et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R45
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/5/R45

12.

13.

14.

15.
16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

phylogeny of Pleosporales: a taxonomic, ecological and evolutionary reevaluation. Stud Mycol 2009, 64:85-102S5.
Marande W, López-García P, Moreira D: Eukaryotic diversity and
phylogeny using small- and large-subunit ribosomal RNA genes from
environmental samples. Environ Microbiol 2009, 11:3179-3188.
Wang H, Guo S, Huang M, Thorsten LH, Wei J: Ascomycota has a faster
evolutionary rate and higher species diversity than Basidiomycota. Sci
China 2010, 53:1163-1169.
Oliver RP, Solomon PS: Recent fungal diseases of crop plants: is lateral
gene transfer a common theme? Mol Plant Microbe Interact 2008,
21:287-293.
Marcet-Houben M, Gabaldon T: Acquisition of prokaryotic genes by
fungal genomes. Trends Genet 2010, 26:5-8.
Friesen TL, Stukenbrock EH, Liu Z, Meinhardt S, Ling H, Faris JD,
Rasmussen JB, Solomon PS, McDonald BA, Oliver RP: Emergence of a new
disease as a result of interspecific virulence gene transfer. Nat Genet
2006, 38:953-956.
Chibana H, Oka N, Nakayama H, Aoyama T, Magee BB, Magee PT, Mikami Y:
Sequence finishing and gene mapping for Candida albicans
chromosome 7 and syntenic analysis against the Saccharomyces
cerevisiae genome. Genetics 2005, 170:1525-1537.
Borkovich KA, Alex LA, Yarden O, Freitag M, Turner GE, Read ND, Seiler S,
Bell-Pedersen D, Paietta J, Plesofsky N, Plamann M, Goodrich-Tanrikulu M,
Schulte U, Mannhaupt G, Nargang FE, Radford A, Selitrennikoff C,
Galagan JE, Dunlap JC, Loros JJ, Catcheside D, Inoue H, Aramayo R,
Polymenis M, Selker EU, Sachs MS, Marzluf GA, Paulsen I, Davis R, Ebbole DJ,
et al: Lessons from the genome sequence of Neurospora crassa: Tracing
the path from genomic blueprint to multicellular organism. Microbiol Mol
Biol Rev 2004, 68:1-108.
Dean RA, Talbot NJ, Ebbole DJ, Farman ML, Mitchell TK, Orbach MJ,
Thon M, Kulkarni R, Xu JR, Pan H, Read ND, Lee YH, Carbone I, Brown D,
Oh YY, Donofrio N, Jeong JS, Soanes DM, Djonovic S, Kolomiets E,
Rehmeyer C, Li W, Harding M, Kim S, Lebrun MH, Bohnert H, Coughlan S,
Butler J, Calvo S, Ma LJ, et al: The genome sequence of the rice blast
fungus Magnaporthe grisea. Nature 2005, 434:980-986.
Espagne E, Lespinet O, Malagnac F, Da Silva C, Jaillon O, Porcel BM,
Couloux A, Aury JM, Segurens B, Poulain J, Anthouard V, Grossetete S,
Khalili H, Coppin E, Dequard-Chablat M, Picard M, Contamine V, Arnaise S,
Bourdais A, Berteaux-Lecellier V, Gautheret D, de Vries RP, Battaglia E,
Coutinho PM, Danchin EG, Henrissat B, Khoury RE, Sainsard-Chanet A,
Boivin A, Pinan-Lucarre B, et al: The genome sequence of the model
ascomycete fungus Podospora anserina. Genome Biol 2008, 9:R77.
Hane JK, Lowe RG, Solomon PS, Tan KC, Schoch CL, Spatafora JW,
Crous PW, Kodira C, Birren BW, Galagan JE, Torriani SF, McDonald BA,
Oliver RP: Dothideomycete plant interactions illuminated by genome
sequencing and EST analysis of the wheat pathogen Stagonospora
nodorum. Plant Cell 2007, 19:3347-3368.
Nierman WC, Pain A, Anderson MJ, Wortman JR, Kim HS, Arroyo J,
Berriman M, Abe K, Archer DB, Bermejo C, Bennett J, Bowyer P, Chen D,
Collins M, Coulsen R, Davies R, Dyer PS, Farman M, Fedorova N, Fedorova N,
Feldblyum TV, Fischer R, Fosker N, Fraser A, Garcia JL, Garcia MJ, Goble A,
Goldman GH, Gomi K, Griffith-Jones S, et al: Genomic sequence of the
pathogenic and allergenic filamentous fungus Aspergillus fumigatus.
Nature 2005, 438:1151-1156.
Machida M, Terabayashi Y, Sano M, Yamane N, Tamano K, Payne GA, Yu J,
Cleveland TE, Nierman WC: Genomics of industrial Aspergilli and
comparison with toxigenic relatives. Food Addit Contam Part A Chem Anal
Control Expo Risk Assess 2008, 25:1147-1151.
Machida M, Asai K, Sano M, Tanaka T, Kumagai T, Terai G, Kusumoto K,
Arima T, Akita O, Kashiwagi Y, Abe K, Gomi K, Horiuchi H, Kitamoto K,
Kobayashi T, Takeuchi M, Denning DW, Galagan JE, Nierman WC, Yu J,
Archer DB, Bennett JW, Bhatnagar D, Cleveland TE, Fedorova ND, Gotoh O,
Horikawa H, Hosoyama A, Ichinomiya M, Igarashi R, et al: Genome
sequencing and analysis of Aspergillus oryzae. Nature 2005,
438:1157-1161.
Pel HJ, de Winde JH, Archer DB, Dyer PS, Hofmann G, Schaap PJ, Turner G,
de Vries RP, Albang R, Albermann K, Andersen MR, Bendtsen JD, Benen JA,
van den Berg M, Breestraat S, Caddick MX, Contreras R, Cornell M,
Coutinho PM, Danchin EG, Debets AJ, Dekker P, van Dijck PW, van Dijk A,
Dijkhuizen L, Driessen AJ, d’Enfert C, Geysens S, Goosen C, Groot GS, et al:

Page 15 of 16

26.
27.

28.

29.
30.

31.

32.

33.
34.

35.
36.

37.

38.

39.

40.
41.
42.
43.
44.

45.

Genome sequencing and analysis of the versatile cell factory Aspergillus
niger CBS 513.88. Nat Biotechnol 2007, 25:221-231.
Maizel JV Jr, Lenk RP: Enhanced graphic matrix analysis of nucleic acid
and protein sequences. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1981, 78:7665-7669.
Solomon PS, Lowe RGT, Tan KC, Waters ODC, Oliver RP: Stagonospora
nodorum: cause of stagonospora nodorum blotch of wheat. Mol Plant
Pathol 2006, 7:147-156.
Schoch CL, Crous PW, Groenewald JZ, Boehm EW, Burgess TI, de Gruyter J,
de Hoog GS, Dixon LJ, Grube M, Gueidan C, Harada Y, Hatakeyama S,
Hirayama K, Hosoya T, Huhndorf SM, Hyde KD, Jones EB, Kohlmeyer J,
Kruys A, Li YM, Lucking R, Lumbsch HT, Marvanova L, Mbatchou JS,
McVay AH, Miller AN, Mugambi GK, Muggia L, Nelsen MP, Nelson P, et al: A
class-wide phylogenetic assessment of Dothideomycetes. Stud Mycol
2009, 64:1-15S10.
Cooley RN, Caten CE: Variation in electrophoretic karyotype between
strains of Septoria nodorum. Mol Gen Genet 1991, 228:17-23.
Bringans S, Hane JK, Casey T, Tan KC, Lipscombe R, Solomon PS, Oliver RP:
Deep proteogenomics; high throughput gene validation by
multidimensional liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry of
proteins from the fungal wheat pathogen Stagonospora nodorum. BMC
Bioinformatics 2009, 10:301.
Casey T, Solomon PS, Bringans S, Tan KC, Oliver RP, Lipscombe R:
Quantitative proteomic analysis of G-protein signalling in Stagonospora
nodorum using isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification.
Proteomics 2010, 10:38-47.
Tan K-C, Heazlewood JL, Millar AH, Oliver RP, Solomon PS: Proteomic
identification of extracellular proteins regulated by the Gna1 Gα subunit
in Stagonospora nodorum. Mycol Res 2009, 113:523-531.
Oliver RP, Solomon PS: New developments in pathogenicity and
virulence of necrotrophs. Curr Opin Plant Biol 2010, 13:415-419.
Liu Z, Faris JD, Oliver RP, Tan KC, Solomon PS, McDonald MC, McDonald BA,
Nunez A, Lu S, Rasmussen JB, Friesen TL: SnTox3 acts in effector triggered
susceptibility to induce disease on wheat carrying the Snn3 gene. PLoS
Path 2009, 5:e1000581.
Friesen TL, Faris JD, Solomon PS, Oliver RP: Host-specific toxins: Effectors
of necrotrophic pathogenicity. Cell Microbiol 2008, 10:1421-1428.
Friesen TL, Zhang Z, Solomon PS, Oliver RP, Faris JD: Characterization of
the interaction of a novel Stagonospora nodorum host-selective toxin
with a wheat susceptibility gene. Plant Physiol 2008, 146:682-693.
Kurtz S, Phillippy A, Delcher AL, Smoot M, Shumway M, Antonescu C,
Salzberg SL: Versatile and open software for comparing large genomes.
Genome Biol 2004, 5:R12.
Rouxel T, Grandaubert J, Hane J, Hoede C, van de Wouw A, Couloux A,
Dominguez V, Anthouard V, Bally P, Bourras S, Cozijnsen A, Ciuffetti L,
Dimaghani A, Duret L, Fudal I, Goodwin S, Gout L, Glaser N, Kema G,
Lapalu N, Lawrence C, May K, Meyer M, Ollivier B, Poulain J, Turgeon G,
Tyler BM, Vincent D, Weissenbach J, Amselem J, et al: The
compartmentalized genome of Leptosphaeria maculans: diversification
of effectors within genomic regions affected by Repeat Induced Point
mutations. Nat Commun 2011, 2:art.202.
Goodwin SB, Ben M’Barek S, Dhillon B, Wittenberg A, Crane CF, Van der
Lee TAJ, Grimwood J, Aerts A, Antoniw J, Bailey A, Bluhm B, Bowler J,
Bristow J, Brokstein P, Canto-Canche B, Churchill A, Conde-Ferràez L,
Cools H, Coutinho PM, Csukai M, Dehal P, Donzelli B, Foster AJ, HammondKosack K, Hane J, Henrissat B, Kilian A, Koopmann E, Kourmpetis Y, Kuo A,
et al: Finished genome of Mycosphaerella graminicola reveals stealth
pathogenesis and dispensome structure. PLoS Genetics -D-10-00112R2
2011.
Passarge E, Horsthemke B, Farber RA: Incorrect use of the term synteny.
Nat Genet 1999, 23:387.
Broad Institute. [http://www.broadinstitute.org/].
DOE Joint Genome Institute. [http://www.jgi.doe.gov/].
S. sclerotiorum Sequencing Project. [http://www.broadinstitute.org/
annotation/genome/sclerotinia_sclerotiorum/Info.html].
Giles NH, Geever RF, Asch DK, Avalos J, Case ME: Organization and
regulation of the qa (quinic acid) genes in Neurospora crassa and other
fungi. J Hered 1991, 82:1-7.
Putnam NH, Butts T, Ferrier DEK, Furlong RF, Hellsten U, Kawashima T,
Robinson-Rechavi M, Shoguchi E, Terry A, Yu K Jr, Benito-Gutiérrez È,
Dubchak I, Garcia-Fernàndez J, Gibson-Brown JJ, Grigoriev IV, Horton AC, De

Hane et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R45
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/5/R45

46.

47.

48.

49.

50.

51.
52.

53.
54.

55.

Page 16 of 16

Jong PJ, Jurka J, Kapitonov VV, Kohara Y, Kuroki Y, Lindquist E, Lucas S,
Osoegawa K, Pennacchio LA, Salamov AA, Satou Y, Sauka-Spengler T,
Schmutz J, Shin-I T, et al: The amphioxus genome and the evolution of
the chordate karyotype. Nature 2008, 453:1064-1071.
Martin F, Kohler A, Murat C, Balestrini R, Coutinho PM, Jaillon O,
Montanini B, Morin E, Noel B, Percudani R, Porcel B, Rubini A, Amicucci A,
Amselem J, Anthouard V, Arcioni S, Artiguenave F, Aury JM, Ballario P,
Bolchi A, Brenna A, Brun A, Buee M, Cantarel B, Chevalier G, Couloux A, Da
Silva C, Denoeud F, Duplessis S, Ghignone S, et al: Perigord black truffle
genome uncovers evolutionary origins and mechanisms of symbiosis.
Nature 2010, 464:1033-1038.
Yun SH, Arie T, Kaneko I, Yoder OC, Turgeon BG: Molecular organization of
mating type loci in heterothallic, homothallic, and asexual Gibberella/
Fusarium species. Fungal Genet Biol 2000, 31:7-20.
Fisher MC, Hanage WP, De Hoog S, Johnson E, Smith MD, White NJ,
Vanittanakom N: Low effective dispersal of asexual genotypes in
heterogeneous landscapes by the endemic pathogen penicillium
marneffei. PLoS Path 2005, 1:0159-0165.
Wittenberg AH, van der Lee TA, Ben M’barek S, Ware SB, Goodwin SB,
Kilian A, Visser RG, Kema GH, Schouten HJ: Meiosis drives extraordinary
genome plasticity in the haploid fungal plant pathogen Mycosphaerella
graminicola. PLoS One 2009, 4:e5863.
Ma LJ, van der Does HC, Borkovich KA, Coleman JJ, Daboussi MJ, Di
Pietro A, Dufresne M, Freitag M, Grabherr M, Henrissat B, Houterman PM,
Kang S, Shim WB, Woloshuk C, Xie X, Xu JR, Antoniw J, Baker SE, Bluhm BH,
Breakspear A, Brown DW, Butchko RA, Chapman S, Coulson R, Coutinho PM,
Danchin EG, Diener A, Gale LR, Gardiner DM, Goff S, et al: Comparative
genomics reveals mobile pathogenicity chromosomes in Fusarium.
Nature 2010, 464:367-373.
Clutterbuck JA: Genomic evidence of repeat-induced point mutation
(RIP) in filamentous ascomycetes. Fungal Genet Biol 2011, 48:306-326.
Akagi Y, Akamatsu H, Otani H, Kodama M: Horizontal chromosome
transfer, a mechanism for the evolution and differentiation of a plantpathogenic fungus. Eukaryot Cell 2009, 8:1732-1738.
Roca M, Read N, Wheals A: Conidial anastomosis tubes in filamentous
fungi. FEMS Micro Letts 2005, 249:191-198.
Liu Y, Leigh JW, Brinkmann H, Cushion MT, Rodriguez-Ezpeleta N,
Philippe H, Lang BF: Phylogenomic analyses support the monophyly of
Taphrinomycotina, including Schizosaccharomyces fission yeasts. Mol Biol
Evol 2009, 26:27-34.
Shertz CA, Bastidas RJ, Li W, Heitman J, Cardenas ME: Conservation,
duplication, and loss of the Tor signaling pathway in the fungal
kingdom. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:510.

doi:10.1186/gb-2011-12-5-r45
Cite this article as: Hane et al.: A novel mode of chromosomal
evolution peculiar to filamentous Ascomycete fungi. Genome Biology
2011 12:R45.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
