<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>GTPases and the origin of the ribosome</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Biology Direct 2010, 5:36. doi: 10.1186/1745-6150-5-36"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Hyman Hartman, Temple F Smith"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 8.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 7.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Hartman and Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:36
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/36

Open Access

RESEARCH

GTPases and the origin of the ribosome
Research

Hyman Hartman1 and Temple F Smith*2

Abstract
Background: This paper is an attempt to trace the evolution of the ribosome through the evolution of the universal Ploop GTPases that are involved with the ribosome in translation and with the attachment of the ribosome to the
membrane. The GTPases involved in translation in Bacteria/Archaea are the elongation factors EFTu/EF1, the initiation
factors IF2/aeIF5b + aeIF2, and the elongation factors EFG/EF2. All of these GTPases also contain the OB fold also found
in the non GTPase IF1 involved in initiation. The GTPase involved in the signal recognition particle in most Bacteria and
Archaea is SRP54.
Results: 1) The Elongation Factors of the Archaea based on structural considerations of the domains have the
following evolutionary path: EF1T aeIF2 T EF2. The evolution of the aeIF5b was a later event; 2) the Elongation Factors
of the Bacteria based on the topological considerations of the GTPase domain have a similar evolutionary path: EFTuT
IFT2TEFG. These evolutionary sequences reflect the evolution of the LSU followed by the SSU to form the ribosome; 3)
the OB-fold IF1 is a mimic of an ancient tRNA minihelix.
Conclusion: The evolution of translational GTPases of both the Archaea and Bacteria point to the evolution of the
ribosome. The elongation factors, EFTu/EF1, began as a Ras-like GTPase bringing the activated minihelix tRNA to the
Large Subunit Unit. The initiation factors and elongation factor would then have evolved from the EFTu/EF1 as the
small subunit was added to the evolving ribosome. The SRP has an SRP54 GTPase and a specific RNA fold in its RNA
component similar to the PTC. We consider the SRP to be a remnant of an ancient form of an LSU bound to a
membrane.
Reviewers: This article was reviewed by George Fox, Leonid Mirny and Chris Sander.
Background
This study is on the origin and evolution of the ribosome
Large Subunit (LSU) and Small Subunit (SSU) as
reflected in the structure of the universal ribosomal
translational GTPases. This continues an earlier study [1]
on the origin of the ribosome as reflected in the structure
of the ribosomal proteins. That study led to the conclusion that the LSU began as a Peptide Transfer Center
(PTC)-like RNA fold on a peptide membrane. The subsequent evolution of the LSU was only later joined by the
addition of an evolving SSU.
Recent papers by Bokov and Steinberg [2], Hury et al.
[3], and Fox and Naik [4] consider the evolution of the
LSU of the ribosome to start from a PTC-like RNA. It is
becoming clear that the evolution of the ribosome begins
with the evolution of the LSU. This should be reflected in
* Correspondence: tsmith@darwin.bu.edu
2

BioMolecular Engineering Research Center, Boston University, 36
Cummington Street, Boston, MA 02215, USA

the evolution of the GTPases associated with the ribosome, especially those common to both the Archaea and
the Bacteria.
The translational GTPases are the Bacteria elongation
factors, EFTu, EFG, and the initiation factor, IF2, and
their archaeal homologs, the EF1, EF2, aeIF5b and aeIF2.
There are also two additional GTPases associated with
transmission of the translated peptide chain from the
ribosome to the membrane, the Ffh/SRP54 as part of the
signal recognition particle (SRP) and the GTPase, FtsY/
SR-alpha, which is attached to the cell membrane.
The initiation factors are involved with bringing the fMet-charged tRNA to the SSU ribosomal subunit and the
joining of the SSU and LSU ribosomal subunits. The
elongation factors, EFTu/EF1, bring the next charged
tRNA to the ribosome and interact primarily with the
large subunit, while EF2/EFG initiate the elongation cycle
involving the PTC peptide bond formation along with the
allosteric motion of the whole ribosome.

Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
© 2010 Hartman and Smith; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Com-

BioMed Central mons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Hartman and Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:36
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/36

EF1, aeIF5b, aeIF2 and EF2 from Archaea and their
bacterial counterparts, EFTu, IF2 and EFG, are multidomain proteins. They all contain two homologous N-terminal domains: a GTPase or G-domain, followed by an
OB-domain [5]. The peptide backbones of these proteins
are displayed in Figure 1. For ease of comparison, these
proteins' domains are colored consistently in the figure
from their N-terminal to C-terminal. The N-terminal Gdomain is dark blue and thesubsequent domains are: cyan
for the second domain, yellow for the third, red for the
fourth and green for the fifth. The same coloring is also
used for the aeIF2 alpha subunit of the archaeal aeIF2
complex. Here aeIF2 complex refers to the functional
complex formed by aeIF2 gamma and aeIF2 alpha, which
is a second initiation component along with aeIF5b in
Archaea, but is not found in Bacteria.
In addition to the common first two domains, archaeal
EF1and bacterial EFTu have a third C-terminal OBdomain (yellow) in common. IF2 and aeIF5b have two

Page 2 of 10

additional domains linked by long helices. The domain
three of the bacterial IF2 is a simple alpha beta sandwich,
while domain four is another OB beta barrel, similar to
IF1 and to the second domain of EFTu/EF1.
These translational proteins' G-domains are both structurally and functionally related to a larger family of
GTPase G proteins [6]. All contain a common core with a
Walker A motif or P-loop associated with the nucleotide
and phosphate binding. This characteristic motif is
located between the fold's initial beta strand and the
adjoining alpha helix. Following this first helix is the socalled switch region [7], which is imbedded in an overall
central beta alpha/beta fold. An accepted prototypic Gdomain is found in Ras P21 (pdb ID, 5P21[8]). The secondary structure topology of the EFTu G-domain is identical to such a prototypic G protein. The analysis in this
study of the translational GTPases supports the co-evolution of these proteins with that of the ribosome. Beginning from a simple peptidyl transferase center (PTC)

Figure 1 The peptide backbones of the archaeal translational proteins as represented in the protein structure database, PDB, by the following ID codes and displayed in RasMol. These are: 1SKQ (EF1), 1KK3 (IF2 gamma), 2AHO (IF-2 alpha), 1G7S (aIF5b) and 1NOU (EF2) and the bacterial counterparts, 1EFC (EFTu), 1ZO1 (IF2) and 1PN6 (EFG).

Hartman and Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:36
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/36

interacting with a Ras-like G-domain, a small OB-domain
and mini aminoacylated RNA helices, the evolution
would have progressed with the addition to the early
EFTu, of IF2 and EFG as the small ribosomal subunit.

Results
GTPase Domains

Comparison of the other translational protein G-domains
with the structural topology ofRas or EFTu allows the
identification of their non-core differences. For example,
IF2 and EFG contain a number of non-core modifications
(Fig. 2). EFG has a significant structural insertion near the
C-terminal of the G-domain. On the other hand, IF2 has
two structural reductions relative to Rasand EFTu: a
reduced alpha helix two and the replacement of helix four
by a disordered loop.
The structural and functional similarity among these
universal G-domain translation factors reveals their common GTPase ancestry. For example, at the sequence level
the G-domains of the homologs EF1and EFTu can be
aligned, revealing regions of obvious sequence conservation in spite of some structural differences, as seen in Figure 2. However, those same alignments display a set of
phylodomain-specific sequence segments or blocks, similar to those seen in comparisons between bacterial and
archaeal ribosomal proteins [9], see Figure 3. This same
mixture of alignable and nonalignable segments is seen
by Gribaldo and Cammarano [10]in their phylogenetic
analysis of EFG with EF2.
The universal ribosomal protein sequences display phylodomain block structure [9], that is, their amino acid
sequences display three distinct segments or blocks of
amino acids: one, universal sequence blocks common to
both Bacteria and Archaea; two, blocks common and
unique to all Bacteria; and, third those common and
unique to all Archaea. Such sequence block structure has
implied the existence of three last common ancestors: a
common ancestor of both Bacteria and Archaea based on
the universal blocks, and two subsequent last common
ancestors, one for the Bacteria based on the bacterialspecific blocks and a last common ancestor for the
Archaea based on the archaeal-specific blocks.
TheEFTu/EF1 G-domain alignments show a 24-amino
acid archaeal unique block juxtaposed to a short tenamino acid bacterial unique block. The length difference
can be identified with the additional helices seen in Figure 2 in the so-called switch one region. There are two
other archaeal-specific blocks, the second one slightly
longer than its juxtaposed bacterial distinct sequence
block. An examination of the comparative sequence
alignments of the translational proteins EFG with the
archaeal EF2shows similar taxonomic division-specific
blocks within their G-domains. Here the large C-terminal
G-domain insertions are of different lengths and clear

Page 3 of 10

distinct sequences forming their juxtaposed phylodomain-specific block.
In the case of IF2 there are two blocks found in the
archaeal G-domain as inserts. The first of these appears
as an insertion in the highly variable switch II region of
the second and third beta strands. The second archaeal
block is juxtaposed to a shorter bacterial region containing a near complete deletion of the bacterial fourth alpha
helix (Figure 3 and 4).
A comparison across all of these GTPases reveals high
sequence and structural variability in the switch region.
In particular there is a decrease in secondary structural
organization as one moves from EF1 to aeIF5b in
Archaea, and to a lesser extent in Bacteria from EFTu and
EFG to IF2.
The last helix of all of the G-domains is also highly variable in sequence and slightly different in length between
and within the bacterial and archaeal in all three of the
above translational factors. Given the somewhat unconstrained nature of this region as a domain-connecting
substructure, they are not considered a phylodomain specific block of the same character as those above. This
variation is unlikely to have a modulating affect on
GTPase activity.
The Signal Recognition Particle (SRP) GTPases

Approximately one-third of the proteins of a cell are
found in membranes. The ribosome must get to the
membrane as these membrane proteins are synthesized
on the membrane. This process is mediated by the SRP,
which is a complex of a small RNA and a small set of proteins. The SRP attaches to a signalhydrophobic leader
peptide emanating from the large ribosomal subunit.
SRP54 is the universal GTPase on the SRP that binds the
leader sequence and subsequently forms a symmetric
heterodimer with the membrane-bound universal SR
GTPase. This heterodimer, which is attached to the ribosome, then hydrolyses the bound GTP resulting in the
attachment of the ribosome to the membrane.
The GTPase associated with the membrane and that
interacts with the SRP is the FtsY (SR-alpha in Archaea)
protein. This protein has two domains, G domain
(GTPase) and an N-terminal domain, a four-helical bundle. The G-domain belongs to the SIMBI class of the Ploop GTPases [6]. The archaeal SR-alpha has been shown
to be very similar in structure to the bacterial FtsY[11]. In
addition the FtsY is closely related to the Ffh protein of
bacterial SRP and to the Ffh archaeal homolog, SRP54
[12,13]. Gribaldo and Cammarano rooted the cellular tree
on the branch leading to Ffh and SRP54 [10]. The Ffh and
SRP54 have a third three-C-terminal domain, the M
domain. This third domain of Ffh and SRP54 is involved
in binding to the peptide sequence protruding from the
LSU [14]. The high sequence and structural conservation

Hartman and Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:36
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/36

Page 4 of 10

Figure 2 The translational protein G-domain secondary structure topologies. 2a displays the G-domain topologies for the bacterial proteins plus
Ras and SRP54. 2b displays those for the archaeal translational proteins. These are based on the same PDB data represented in Figure 1, with the addition of 5P21 for Ras and 1J8M for SRP54. The topology of SR-alpha, and the bacterial Ffh and FtsY are not shown as they are nearly identical to that
of SRP54. The triangles represent beta strands; the circles represent alpha helices. The region of the P-loop motif adjoining strand and helix are colored
purple for reference. The highly variable switch region beta strands are colored blue. The yellow represents the large insertions in EF2/EFG relative to
Ras. The white circles represent the significant length reduced helices in the bacterial IF2 and the archaeal aeIF2 gamma.

Hartman and Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:36
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/36

Figure 3 Translational G-protein taxonomic division sequence
block alignments. Structure based aligned sequences: Numbering is
over total aligned set of Archaea (S. solfataricus, M. sedula, H. butylicus,
M. jannaschii, and T. thermophilus) and three bacteria (G. stearothermophilus, B. halodurans, E. coli). (A) Displays the alignments for EFTu/EF1,
(B) those of IF2/aeIF5b and (C) those of EFG/EF2. Light blue indicates
sequence segments or universal blocks that can be aligned across
both taxonomic divisions having similar secondary structures and with
statistical significance; Green indicates sequence blocks alignable
among and unique to Archaea, while brown indicates blocks alignable
among and unique to Bacteria. These definitions are consistent with
those used in Smith 2008 [1].

of this SRP GTPase coupled with the conservation of
their RNA binding sites supports an extreme age for these
proteins and the helices of the SRP's RNA [15,16].
OB-Domain

All seven of the translational GTPases displayed in Figure
1 have a small beta barrel OB-domain as their second
domain. In 1993 the OB fold was first characterized by
Murzin analyzing the structure of four proteins (two bacterial toxins, aspartyl tRNA synthetase and a nuclease). It
is a "five-stranded beta sheet coiled to form a closed betabarrel. This barrel is capped by an alpha-helix located
between the third and fourth strands", but "no similarities

Page 5 of 10

can be observed in the corresponding alignment of the
four sequences" [17].
More recently the OB fold has been reviewed by Arcus
describing the structure and function of OB fold domains
[5]. Among the characteristic properties of the OB fold
was its binding to single-stranded nucleic acids. The ribosomal proteins, S1, S12, S17, L2 and IF1, are among those
ribosomal proteins with OB-domains that have been
shown to bind single-stranded RNA [18]. The RNA interaction of the OB-domain is of special interest among the
proteins considered in this paper since a number of them
have an OB-domain that interacts with the RNA. IF1 is
composed only of an OB fold and interacts with the small
ribosomal subunit, especially with the bases A 1492 and
A 1493. EFTu has three domains, the second being an OB
fold that interacts with the CCA of the tRNA [19]. IF2 is a
multiple domain protein having an OB fold as the fourth
domain, which also interacts with the CCA of the tRNA
[20]. We believe that this OB-RNA interaction is a remnant of a very ancient interaction between early peptides
and RNAs.
There is a weak sequence similarity between the OB
folds of EFTu and EF1. However there are no significant
sequence similarities among the other GTPase OB second domains. There is a 14-15 amino acid insert at the
very start of the OB second domain in EFG that has no
equivalent in the archaeal EF2. A pure structural comparison between the bacterial and archaeal homologs of
these OB-domains displays considerable similarity. For
example the structures of the three bacterial translational
GTPase OB second domains show remarkable similarities, see Figure 4.
Interestingly the structure similarity of these proteins'
second domains carries over to the fourth domain of the
IF2's and the entire structure of the IF1's. In the two latter

Figure 4 Structure similarities between the bacterial EFTu, EFG and IF2, OB second domains. Here are displayed three nearly identical substructures within three OB-domains: one in yellow, orange and red and the second in cyan, green and blue. The lack of any significant sequence similarity
among the clear homologues is indicated by the very different amino acids at the marked equivalent labeled positions.

Hartman and Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:36
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/36

cases the OB-domain likely interacts directly with either
the tRNA or the active site of the small ribosomal subunit
mRNA [21]. In the IF2 case it would be with the CCA of
the initiating tRNA. In theIF1 case it binds in the ribosomal A site and binds the bases, A1492 and A1493, from
Helix 44 [22].
As noted above there are very similar OB-domains
found in a wide range of protein families, including the
translation-related ribosomal protein, S1, containing six
such domains. As with EFTu/EF1 and IF2, the second
OB-domain of S1 has been shown to directly bind singlestranded RNA as it delivers transfer-messenger RNA
(tmRNA) to stalled ribosomes [23]. This, combined with
the ideas of the very early role for RNA in the evolution of
the translational apparatus, suggests that such OBdomains may represent one of the oldest such binding
domains.
There are additional small beta barrel OB-like domains
in the EFTu/EF1 and EFG/EF2 homologs as their third
domain. These have less bacterial-to-archaeal sequence
similarity than the second domains, but with evidence of
at least two significant taxonomic domain blocks. A curious fact is that these third domains of EFTu/EF1 and
EFG/EF2 are wound in the reverse direction to their common second domains. The reversed OB fold of this third
domain interacts with the doubled stranded RNA of the
CCA arm of the tRNA [24].
Additional Domains of IF2

Connected to the bacterialIF2'sOB second domain via a
six-turn helix is a small alpha beta domain that appears to
make contact with both the G-domain and the OB second domain. Then there a fourth domain with an OBfold, connected by a long helix. The latter has a set of
loops at the far extremity of the protein that, like other
OB -domains [18], may make RNA connects such as the
CCA of the incoming tRNA. The archaeal IF2is different
in a number of ways. Its OB second domain is connected
to a very different third domain of five beta strands and a
single helix. Then the similarity with the bacterialIF2
resumes with a long connecting six-turn helix with its
fourth domain, which is again an OB-domain, slightly
distorted with two added short alpha helices.
Additional Domains of EFG/EF2

Moving beyond the common G-domains and OB-domain
of the EFG/EF2 proteins, there are three more domains.
In the bacterial case these form a structure spatially similar to a tRNA [19]. The structure of domain four of EFG is
composed of a small alpha beta domain of four beta
strands and two helices followed by an elongated larger
four-stranded alpha beta domain extending away from
the rest of the structure. This is followed by the protein's
fifth domain, a small somewhat disordered alpha beta

Page 6 of 10

domain that packs with the protein's third domain and its
G-domain. While there is no high resolution determined
archaeal EF2 structure, the sequence alignments with
both the Bacteria and yeast EF2s support a rather similar
structure with minor sequence insertions.

Discussion
In an earlier paper [1], a model was proposed for an early
form of a ribosome that began as a self-folding RNA
attached to a membrane formed from short peptides.
This self-folding RNA was the precursor to the modern
peptidyl transferase center (PTC) and was composed of
(three) RNA helices similar to those found at the extant
PTC. This modeled RNA membrane-bound structure
catalyzed the peptidyl transfer reaction from the ancient
charged tRNAs, which were mini RNA helices. This
would mean that the ribosome began as a PTC RNA
membrane-bound structure and evolved into the LSU,
with the evolving SSU added later.
The current analysis of the translational GTPases,
including the SRP and SR GTPases, provides additional
support for such a model. It was noted by Montoya et al.,
"The sequence similarity between Ffh and FtsY and the
high number of known sequences allow us to perform
phylogenetic studies on the SRP-GTPase family. These
suggest that the SRP-GTPases might have evolved earlier
than the small GTPases" [13]. One consequence of this
finding is that the GTPase associated with the 7SL RNA
of the SRP may be considered an earlier evolutionary
form of the GTPases that evolved into the Ras-like
GTPases found among the extant translational proteins.
What may be of further interest is that the two looped
helices of the extant 7SL SRP RNA are similar in structure
to the two side-by-side looped RNA helices found in the
PTC of the LSU and essential to the earlier proposed PTC
model [1]. They were included in our proposed model for
the early PTC. A remnant of the ancient proto ribosome,
we believe, may be found in the SRP.
The translational GTPases

The common ancestor of the translational GTPases
began with a Ras-like GTPase to which an OB fold was
joined. This ancient elongation factor was the precursor
to EFTu/EF1. The ancestor of the EF2/EFG and IF2 would
have come later, evolving from the first two EF1/EFTu
domains as the SSU mRNA complex began to interact
with the LSU peptidyl transfer center. This would have
been coordinated with the evolution of the full tRNA
structure. The evolution of the molecular mimicry by
EFG of the EFTu tRNA complex, as noted earlier by Fox
and Naik [4], reflects this sequence of events in the
archaeal IF2 gamma (Figure 2).
The IF1 as an OB fold is a small protein (70 to 100
amino acids) and binds to a single stranded RNA. This

Hartman and Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:36
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/36

fold is found in a number of ribosomal proteins. The
extant IF1 as a single OB fold appears to block the A-site,
forcing initiation to begin in the P-site. Thus this OB fold
appears capable of mimicking the anticodon stem loop of
an ancient tRNA. An original form of the IF1 OB fold
could have been used to modulate peptide formation at
the proto-PTC site of the evolving large ribosomal subunit. A later fusion with a Ras-like GTPase then led to the
formation of EFTu and the controlled delivery of the activated mini tRNAs to the PTC of the evolving LSU.
One further consequence of this evolution of the ancestor of EFTu/EF1 is that it must have been connected with
the evolution of the transfer RNA itself. In a previous
paper [25] on the evolution of tRNA, the candidate for
the ancient tRNA was proposed to be an oligonucleotide,
21 nucleotides with a seven-nucleotide loop attached to
short double helical ending in a "discriminator" nucleotide and CCA. It was a model of the anti-codon arm to
which a CCA was added, or alternatively that of an acceptor arm [25]. Such a model for the ancient tRNA became
an experimental subject when Schimmel and his students
[26] began a series of studies on the aminoacylation of
RNA minihelices by aminoacyl tRNA synthetases. The
RNA minihelices were a model of the presumed acceptor
stem of an ancient tRNA. They found that the aminoacyl
tRNA synthetases, especially that of the alanine and glycine tRNA synthetases, would activate the amino acid
and then add it to the CCA of these minihelices.
The OB fold may reflect this evolution of the ancient
tRNA as the OB fold can be viewed as a molecular mimic
of the anticodon stem of the ancient tRNA, e.g., IF1. The
OB fold may also have interacted with the CCA end of the
early minihelical tRNAs, as in the extant EFTu. The third
domain of EFTu, the reverse OB fold, would have been
added to interact with the helical portion of the ancient
tRNAs for stabilization purposes. These interactions are
seen in the extant EFTu tRNA complex [27].
The Archaea, as has been noted, have an initiation factor IF2 complex that has two separate protein subunits:
the gamma composed of a G-Domain and two OB folds,
and a second, alpha, subunit composed of a three-domain
subunit similar to those of the three C-terminal domains
of the bacterial EFG (Fig. 1). The Archaea have a second
initiation factor, aIF5b, that is a homolog to the bacterial
initiation factor, IF-2. Since the bacterial initiation system
has only one initiation factor, it is thus a simplification of
the archaeal system of initiation. Furthermore since there
are fewer ribosomal proteins associated with the bacterial
ribosome (57 ribosomal proteins) than the archaeal ribosome (68 ribosomal proteins) and the simpler system of
GTPases associated with the bacterial ribosome, it is reasonable to conclude that the bacterial ribosome is a
streamlined archaeal ribosome.

Page 7 of 10

The universal sequence blocks found in the translational G-domains imply that modern Bacteria and
Archaea (as defined by their translational machinery)
clearly had a common ancestor. Yet the phylodomainspecific blocks imply that the two groups each derive
from single, phylodomain-specific types that came into
existence some point long after that common ancestor
with a fully functional translational system. Why only two
basic types? One simple explanation proposed is a major
evolutionary bottleneck, drastically limiting the progenitors of modern cell domains [9].
Another hypothesis to consider in the evolution of the
translational apparatus is that the earliest translational
protein precursors were conglomerates of peptides that
only later were amalgamated into a single sequence of
amino acids. For example, the universal sequence blocks
of the G-domains may be remnants of an earlier peptide
form of these proteins. The OB-domain is an obvious
example as it can be assembled from multiple copies of
such a short peptide that could form a stable beta hairpin.
The idea of short peptides interacting with RNA at a very
early time is consistent with the proposal that the earliest
form of the proto-ribosomal peptidyl transfer center was
composed of a few RNA helices stabilized on a peptide
membrane [1].

Conclusions
The evolution of the extant ribosome-associated
GTPases would have begun with a fusion of an OB fold to
a Ras-like GTPase whose function was to transport aminoacyl ancestral tRNAs to the membrane-associated selffolding PTC RNA. The initiation and elongation factors
evolved from this EFTu/EF1 by adding modules that
allowed these GTPases to interact with the SSU. This is
consistent with our original hypothesis that the PTC
domain of the ribosomal LSU evolved first.
Methods
The various sequence databases (NCBI, Swiss-Prot, ProDom) and structural databases (RCSB and PDB) were
searched for a wide range of bacterial and archaeal representatives of the translational GTPase and related proteins. These were examined for their range of variation,
and representatives selected. Then using standard
sequence comparison methods [28] and structural alignments [29], initial sequence and structural alignments
were generated. These in turn were carefully refined byhand to ensure that homologous domains and functional
sites were properly aligned and superimposed. This
allowed the identification of taxonomic-specific blocks to
be identified, as in Vishwanath et al. [9]. In addition, the
secondary structural elements displayed in Figure 2 were
extracted from these compared structures. These were
then mapped using the notation from Westhead et al.

Hartman and Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:36
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/36

[30]. The identification of the different protein domains
was largely based on the literature cited from earlier studies of these protein's structures and from the structural
alignments. These allowed the clear identification of
shared substructures that, in turn, implied shared
domains and shared history. All of this used the various
protein structure display tools, RasMol [31] and PyMol
[32], both for the visual analysis and the generation of
Figures 1 and 3.

Reviewers' Comments
George Fox

(1) This manuscript is a significant contribution to
the study of ribosome evolutionary history by providing strong evidence for the relative age of the main Ploop GTPases using comparisons of structures and
sequences of the various molecules under consideration. It is not clear why EF-P whose structure closely
resembles eIF5A (Blaha et al., Science 325:966-970,
2009) is not considered or even mentioned. It is especially interesting to learn that the GTPase Domain
produces recognizable sequence blocks, which suggests largely divergent evolution. With regard to these
blocks, it would be appropriate to add the sequence
alignments underlying Figure 3 as supplementary
material. In contrast it is found that the OB fold that
comprises Domain 2 does not produce recognizable
sequence blocks. This implies that Domain 2 of the
various proteins under consideration had separate
evolutionary origins, e.g. likely recruited from different places, and it will in the future (not required here)
be interesting if these origins can be identified. In
summary this important paper should be published
largely as is, pending possible revisions as detailed
below.
Authors' response: We have focused this paper only on
those ribosomal GTPases that are universal both to Bacteria and Archaea. EF-P and eIF5A do have an OB fold
similar to IF1 and the GTPase second domains, thus we
have added them to the list in our discussion on the OB
folds.
Minor points (suggested but not required revisions):
(1) Suggest rotating aeIF2 alpha image in Figure 1 by
180 degrees so as to more closely resemble views
given for other structures.
Authors' response: This would have required a complete redo. We decided it was only a suggestion.
(2) In Figure 2 the caption should include explanation
of circle and triangle symbols for those readers who
may not be familiar with this notation.
Authors' response: Done
(3) In the third paragraph of Background section initiation factor text is confusing- suggest ".... EF-Tu, EFG,

Page 8 of 10

IF2, and their archaeal homologs EF-1, EF2, aeIF5b
and aeIF2."
Authors' response: Rewritten as suggested.
(4) In the fourth paragraph of Background section the
phrase "while EF2/EFG initiate the elongation cycle
via the PTC peptide bond formation." Is unclear and
should be rephrased.
Authors' response: We rephrased to clarify.
(5) In the sixth paragraph of Background section suggest revised wording "".... similar to the second
domain of EFTu/EF1 and IF1." In addition, the phrase
"not shown" removed because it is not clear what is
not shown.
Authors' response: Done.
(6) In the fifth paragraph of the Results section "with
no equivalent bacterial segments" is not true of the
second block where the bacterial segment although
much smaller than the archaeal segment is nevertheless of similar size as that found in Bacterial EFTU/
EF1 and therefore is probably not appropriately
referred to as "apparently almost complete deletion".
Suggest saying that first has no equivalent and then
discussing second separately.
Authors' response: Rewritten as suggested.
(7) In the first paragraph of the Discussion section the
following language might be better--""This RNA IS
ENVISIONED AS membrane-bound structure catalyzed the peptide transfer reaction from the ancient
charged tRNAs, which were mini RNA helices. This
HYPOTHESIS IMPLIES that"
Authors' response: Done.
(8) In the first paragraph of the subsection entitled
"The translational GTPases" it should be noted that
Fox & Naik have previously pointed out that molecular mimicry suggests that the EF-Tu-tRNA complex
may have preceded EFG.
Authors' response: Reference added.
(9) In the second paragraph of the subsection entitled
"The translational GTPases" the phrase "The IF1 as an
OB fold" is unclear- perhaps what is meant is something like "The OB domain found in IF-1 is effectively
a small protein etc "
Authors' response: As noted below in response to the
second reviewer, the entire OB section has been rewritten, and we have also clarified the single OB domain
nature of IF1.
Leonid Mirny

The manuscript presents a phylogenetic and structural
analysis of bacterial and archaeal translation-associated
GTPases. The authors point at several regions and
domains of bacterial and archaeal GTPases that are structurally similar, while having little similarity in sequence.
Using this analysis authors conclude that the earliest

Hartman and Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:36
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/36

event in the evolution of ribosome-associated proteins
was the fusion of OB-fold domain with Ras-like GTPase
domain. They also suggest that OB-fold mimics ancient
tRNA minihelix. This is a very interesting study with
results shining light on one of the oldest and most fundamental events in the evolution of life on earth.
Results section of the manuscript presents extensive
structural analysis that is very hard to follow. My recommendation is to develop a table that summarizes authors'
observation on domain-by-domain bases. Numerous
three-letter acronyms should also be summarized in a
single place in the manuscript.
My understanding of the main observations is the following: (1) high sequence and structure diversity of the
switch region of all GTPases, (2) high conservation of
SRP GTPases and their RNA-binding site, and (3) presence of OB-fold as a second domain of ribosome-associated GTPases. First, I failed to see OB-fold in some
proteins, like EF2. In fact SCOP OB-fold domain is absent
in all PDB proteins listed in Figure 1, though other betabarrels with 6 strands and a greek-key topology are present in these structures. Authors may want to provide
methods/databases used to derive domain annotation.
Second, it was hard for me to establish connections
between presented results and some of conclusions. For
example, a statement that certain domains of EFG/EF2
and OB-fold domain can potentially mimic the anti
codon tRNA stem is unsupported while it can be easily
tested by structural superposition.
My recommendation to the authors to publish the
manuscript after introducing changes aimed to (i) clarify
and summarize Results section and (ii) establish stronger
connections to conclusions.
Authors' response: The OB fold is defined in "OB-fold
domains: a snapshot of the evolution of sequence, structure and function" by Vickery Arcus (Current Opinion in
Structural Biology Volume 12, Issue 6, 2002, pp 794-801)
and is found as the second domain of all the ribosomal
GTPases in Figure 1. We deleted the speculation as to the
general mimicry of the OB-domain.
The OB domain of IF1 does interact with the mRNA
codon and that of EFTu with the CCA as referenced.
See:Trends in Biochem (2003) v. 28, p 434, Gregers R.
Andersen, Poul Nissen and Jens Nyborg.
Chris Sander: This reviewer provided no comments for
publication.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors' contributions
TFS designed the study, performed the research and helped to draft the manuscript. HH designed the study, performed the research and helped to draft the
manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

Page 9 of 10

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by National Science Foundation Grant DBI-0516000.
Author Details
1Center for Biomedical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA and 2BioMolecular Engineering Research Center,
Boston University, 36 Cummington Street, Boston, MA 02215, USA
Received: 30 April 2010 Accepted: 20 May 2010
Published: 20 May 2010
© 2010 Directavailable article distributed under the terms
This is an Open Access from: licensee BioMed Central Ltd. of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
Biology Hartman and Smith; http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/36
article is 2010, 5:36

References
1. Smith TF, Lee JC, Gutell RR, Hartman H: The origin and evolution of the
ribosome. Biology Direct 2008, 3:.
2. Bokov K, Steinberg SV: A hierarchical model for evolution of 23S
ribosomal RNA. Nature 2009, 457:977-980.
3. Hury J, Nagaswamy U, Larios-Sanz M, Fox GE: Ribosome origins: the
relative age of 23S rRNA domains. In Origins of Life and Evolution of
Biospheres Springer Netherlands; 2006:421-429.
4. Fox G, Naik A: The evolutionary history of the ribosome. In The genetic
code and the origin of life Edited by: Ribas de Poplana L. Georgetown and
New York: Landes Bioscience; 2004:92-105.
5. Arcus V: OB-fold domains: a snapshot of the evolution of sequence,
structure and function. Current Opinion in Structural Biology 2002,
12:794-801.
6. Leipe DD, Wolf YI, Koonin EV, Aravind L: Classification and evolution of Ploop GTPases and related ATPases. Journal of Molecular Biology 2002,
317:41-72.
7. Moore P: The GTPase switch in ribosomal translocation. Journal of
Biology 2005, 4:7-10.
8. Corbett KD, Alber T: The many faces of Ras: recognition of small GTPbinding proteins. Trends in Biochemical Sciences 2001, 26:710-716.
9. Vishwanath P, Favaretto P, Hartman H, Mohr SC, Smith TF: Ribosomal
protein-sequence block structure suggests complex prokaryotic
evolution with implications for the origin of eukaryotes. Molecular
Phylogenetics and Evolution 2004, 33:615-625.
10. Gribaldo S, Cammarano P: The root of the universal tree of life inferred
from anciently duplicated genes encoding components of the proteintargeting machinery. Journal of Molecular Evolution 1998, 47:508-516.
11. Egea P, Tsuruta H, de Leon G, Napetchnig J, Walter P, Stroud R: Structures
of SRP receptor from the Archaeon Pyrococcs furiosus. PLoS ONE 2008,
3:e3619.
12. Buskiewicz IA, Jockel J, Rodnina MV, Wintermeyer W: Conformation of
the signal recognition particle in ribosomal targeting complexes. Rnaa Publication of the Rna Society 2009, 15:44-54.
13. Montoya G, Kaat KT, Moll R, Schafer G, Sinning I: The crystal structure of
the conserved GTPase of SRP54 from the archaeon Acidianus
ambivalens and its comparison with related structures suggests a
model for the SRP-SRP receptor complex. Structure with Folding & Design
2000, 8:515-525.
14. Egea P, Napetchnig J, Walter P, Stroud R: Structures of SRP54 and SRP19,
the two proteins that organize the ribonucleic core of the signal
recognition particle from Pyrococcus furiosus. PLoS ONE 2008,
3:e3528-0.
15. Ferbitz L, Maier T, Patzelt H, Bukau B, Deuerling E, Ban N: Trigger factor in
complex with the ribosome forms a molecular cradle for nascent
proteins. Nature 2004, 431:590-596.
16. Nagai K, Oubridge C, Kuglstatter A, Menichelli E, Isel C, Jovine L: Structure,
function and evolution of the signal recognition particle. Embo Journal
2003, 22:3479-3485.
17. Murzin AG: Ob(Oligonucleotide Oligosaccharide Binding)-Fold Common Structural and Functional Solution for Nonhomologous
Sequences. Embo Journal 1993, 12:861-867.
18. Theobald DL, Mitton-Fry RM, Wuttke DS: Nucleic acid recognition by OBfold proteins. Annual Review of Biophysics and Biomolecular Structure
2003, 32:115-133.
19. Andersen GR, Nissen P, Nyborg J: Elongation factors in protein
biosynthesis. Trends in Biochemical Sciences 2003, 28:434-441.
20. Simonetti A, Marzi S, Myasnikov A, Fabbretti A, Yusupov M, Gualerzi C,
Klaholz B: Structure of the 30S translation initiation complex. Nature
2008, 455:416-420.

Hartman and Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:36
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/36

21. Gribskov M: Translational Initiation Factor-If-1 and Factor-Eif-2-Alpha
Share an Rna-Binding Motif with Prokaryotic Ribosomal Protein-S1 and
Polynucleotide Phosphorylase. Gene 1992, 119:107-111.
22. Carter AP, Clemons WM, Brodersen DE, Morgan-Warren RJ, Hartsch T,
Wimberly BT, Ramakrishnan V: Crystal structure of an initiation factor
bound to the 30S ribosomal subunit. Science 2001, 291:498-501.
23. Valle M, Gillet R, Kaur S, Henne A, Ramakrishnan V, Frank J: Visualizing
tmRNA entry into a stalled ribosome. Science 2003, 300:127-130.
24. Li W, Agirrezabala X, Lei J, Bouakaz L, Brunelle JL, Ortiz-Meoz RF, Green R,
Sanyal S, Ehrenberg M, Frank J: Recognition of aminoacyl-tRNA: a
common molecular mechanism revealed by cryo-EM. EMBO J 2008,
27:3322-3331.
25. Hartman H: Speculations on the evolution of the genetic code III: the
evolution of t-RNA. Origins of Life 1984, 14:643-648.
26. Buechter DD, Schimmel P: Aminoacylation of Rna Minihelices Implications for Transfer-Rna Synthetase Structural Design and
Evolution. Critical Reviews in Biochemistry and Molecular Biology 1993,
28:309-322.
27. Clark BFC, Nyborg J: The ternary complex of EF-Tu and its role in protein
biosynthesis. Current Opinion in Structural Biology 1997, 7:110-116.
28. Altschul SF, Gish W, Miller W, Myers EW, Lipman DJ: Basic local alignment
search tool. J Mol Biol 1990, 215:403-10.
29. Szustakowski JD, Weng Z: Protein structure alignments using a genetic
algorithm. Proteins 2000, 38:428-440.
30. Westhead DR, Slidel TWF, Flores TPJ, Thornton JM: Protein structural
topology: Automated analysis and diagrammatic representation.
Protein Science 1999, 8:897-904.
31. RasMol Molecular Graphics Visualisation Tool [http://rasmol.org/doc/
rasmol.html]
32. PyMOL molecular visualization system [http://www.pymol.org/]
doi: 10.1186/1745-6150-5-36
Cite this article as: Hartman and Smith, GTPases and the origin of the ribosome Biology Direct 2010, 5:36

Page 10 of 10

</pre>
</body>
</html>
