<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Evolution of mantis shrimps (Stomatopoda, Malacostraca) in the light of new Mesozoic fossils</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010 10:290. doi:10.1186/1471-2148-10-290"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Joachim T Haug"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Haug et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:290
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/290

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Evolution of mantis shrimps (Stomatopoda,
Malacostraca) in the light of new Mesozoic fossils
Joachim T Haug*†, Carolin Haug†, Andreas Maas, Verena Kutschera, Dieter Waloszek

Abstract
Background: We describe new specimens of Mesozoic mantis shrimps (Stomatopoda, Malacostraca) that exhibit
morphological and developmental information previously unknown.
Results: Specimens assigned to the taxon Sculda exhibit preserved pleopods, thoracopods including all four
raptorial limbs as well as details of antennae and antennulae. The pleopods and the antennulae resemble those of
the modern mantis shrimps, but the raptorial limbs are not as differentiated as in the modern species. In some
specimens, the first raptorial limb (second thoracopod) is not significantly larger than the similar-sized posterior
three pairs (as in extant species), but instead these appendages become progressively smaller along the series. In
this respect they resemble certain Palaeozoic stomatopods. Another specimen, most likely belonging to another
species, has one pair of large anterior raptorial thoracopods, a median-sized pair and two more pairs of small-sized
raptorial appendages and, thus, shows a new, previously unknown type of morphology. A single specimen of
Pseudosculda laevis also exhibits the size of the raptorial limbs; they are differentiated as in modern species, one
large pair and three small pairs. Furthermore, we report additional larval specimens and show also post-larval
changes, e.g., of the tail fan.
Conclusions: These new data are used to reconsider the phylogeny of Stomatopoda. We still need a strict
taxonomical revision of the Mesozoic mantis shrimps, but this first examination already demonstrates the
importance of these fossils for understanding mantis shrimp evolution and the interpretation of evolutionary
pathways of particular features.

Background
The Stomatopoda or mantis shrimps are impressive
malacostracan crustaceans. They are easily differentiated
from other “shrimps” by a number of eye-catching characters. One of these is the structure of their eyes that
are differentiated into two halves each, which allows
binocular vision with a single eye. The eyes can have up
to 12 different colour receptors and are able to detect
polarised light [1,2]. Another character is the presence
of specific raptorial limbs that can be moved in astonishingly fast and furious strikes [3]. Additionally, stomatopods possess unique designs of their antennulae,
antennae and tail fan.
The large morphological gap of the extant Stomatopoda to the other Eumalacostraca (Caridoida) is bridged
* Correspondence: joachim.haug@uni-ulm.de
† Contributed equally
Biosystematic Documentation, University of Ulm, Helmholtzstr. 20, D-89081
Ulm, Germany

by a number of fossil groups all belonging to the more
comprehensive taxon Hoplocarida, of which the extant
stomatopods are the crown group (Figure 1). The
Hoplocarida consist of the Aeschronectida and the raptorial hoplocaridans (Stomatopoda) [4]. Aeschronectida
comprise species exclusively known from the Carboniferous [5-7]. They possess a tri-flagellate antennula and
a relatively enlarged pleon, as do Stomatopoda, but they
lack other characteristics of this taxon, most obviously
the raptorial appendages.
Stomatopoda comprise the taxa “Palaeostomatopoda”,
“Archaeostomatopoda” and Unipeltata (Figure 1).
Palaeostomatopods have originally been proposed to be
the sister group to the rest of the Stomatopoda [6]. The
group is now recognised as a paraphyletic assemblage
[7,8]. The palaeostomatopods are known from the Carboniferous. They possess sub-chelate raptorial appendages, four sub-equal pairs of more or less the same
size.

© 2010 Haug et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Haug et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:290
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/290

Page 2 of 17

and to present a more precise evolutionary scenario of
Stomatopoda.

Results
Taxonomic remarks

Figure 1 Proposed phylogeny of Hoplocarida based on all data
known before this study. “Palaeo-” and “Archaeostomatopoda” are
written in apostrophes and represented by three parallel branches
each, as they are most likely non-monophyletic.

The archaeostomatopods have been proposed to be the
sister group of the Unipeltata (Sculdidae [Mesozoic] +
Pseudosculdidae [also Mesozoic] + extant stomatopods).
Like the palaeostomatopods they are probably also a
paraphylum [8]. Within archaeostomatopods, certain
species, e.g., those of the taxon Tyrannophontes Schram,
1969, exhibit a differentiation of the raptorial appendages: the posterior three pairs are significantly smaller
than the anterior pair, thus they appear comparable to
the morphology present in extant stomatopods [8].
The Sculdidae and Pseudosculdidae, along with
representatives of a few modern forms, occurred in the
Jurassic and Cretaceous [9]. They are united with the
crown-group stomatopods in the taxon Unipeltata
(Figure 1). Together these species yield significant
information in understanding stomatopod evolution,
but many details, especially those of the species of
Sculda Münster, 1840 remain a problem due to insufficient knowledge. While the first raptorial limb of Pseudosculdidae is relatively well known [8,10,11] and
resembles that of extant stomatopods [8], details of the
raptorial appendages of Sculdidae have not been
described yet [[8,10] but see [9,12].
Herein, we present additional data on Sculdidae from
the Jurassic Solnhofen Lithographic Limestones, especially details of the raptorial appendages. We also present
new details concerning the raptorial appendages of Pseudosculda laevis (Schlüter, 1874) from the Cretaceous fish
beds of Lebanon. We used these new data to amend earlier computer-based phylogenetic analyses of Stomatopoda [8], to demonstrate how these morphologies
“bridge” the gap between Palaeozoic and modern forms,

The distinction between the three described species of
Sculda from the Solnhofen Lithographic Limestones (cf.
Tab. 1) is not clear and the validity of all these species
is at best uncertain, based on our examination of a large
number of specimens (part of them depicted in Figure
2). A large-scale taxonomic revision of the group is
urgently necessary, but still under way. Therefore, all
species names of the taxon Sculda - when referring to
our material - are given with question marks. Sculda
pennata Münster, 1840 and S. spinosa Kunth, 1870 have
been described as differing in regard to rostrum shape
and the number of dorsal teeth on the tergites [12].
Both structures are usually not preserved or at least
hard to identify in ventral and lateral aspects. Differences in gross shape also have been used to distinguish
between the two species, S. spinosa being said to be
broader than S. pennata. Closer investigation of specimens in ventral aspect revealed that these differences
might best be interpreted as the result of different
degrees of telescoping of the body segments. At the
moment we cannot distinguish between the two species,
and we believe they might indeed be synonymous. To
keep an open terminology, we refer to the specimens
that might belong to one of the two species as ?Sculda
pennata/spinosa.
Sculda pusilla Kunth, 1870 is, until now, exclusively
known from a single specimen [12-14] (Fig. 2.15). We
have two more possible conspecific specimens. Sculda
pusilla differs from the other two species in having no
dorsal surface ornamentation, but is rather smooth
[12]. This character causes problems, as all smaller
specimens lack such ornamentation, and if this was
indeed a reliable diagnostic character for S. pusilla,
this species might, in fact, be the most abundant one
in the Solnhofen Lithographic Limestones. Whether
lack of dorsal surface tuberculation is a preservational
or an ontogenetic effect remains unclear to us at the
moment (possibility of an ontogenetic effect was
rejected by Kunth 1870). We refer to the larger specimens (>15 mm) that lack surface ornamentation as
?Sculda pusilla, and to small specimens (<15 mm) as
Sculda sp. (see table 1 for assignment of specimens
to morphotypes or species).
Description of structures
Antennula (Figure 3A, B)

The antennulae are tri-flagellate. The basal part, the
peduncle comprises three tubular articles. These articles
are about twice as long as wide. The proximal flagellum

Haug et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:290
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/290

Page 3 of 17

Table 1 List of all specimens used for this study
No.

Species

Light

Location

Collection

Repository
number

01

Sculda sp.

green

Solnhofen LL, Schernfeld, Lower Tithonian, Hybonotum zone

NW

286

02

Sculda sp.

UV

Solnhofen LL, Blumenberg near Eichstätt, Lower Tithonian,
Hybonotum zone

MF

—

03

?Sculda pusilla

green

Solnhofen LL, Zandt, Lower Tithonian, Hybonotum zone

SMNS, former coll.
Ludwig 1992

SMNS 67505

04

?Sculda pennata/
spinosa

UV

Solnhofen LL, Eichstätt, Lower Tithonian, Hybonotum zone

RF

—

05

?Sculda pennata/
spinosa

normal

Solnhofen LL, Wattendorf, Lower Kimmeridian,
Pseudomutabilis zone

MW

—

06

?Sculda pennata/
spinosa

normal

Solnhofen Lithographic Limestones (no exact location
documented)

SSPHG München

AS I 813

07

Sculda sp.

green

Solnhofen LL, Blumenberg near Eichstätt, Lower Tithonian,
Hybonotum zone

MW

9308

08

Pseudosculda laevis

green

Libanon, Hadjoula, Cenomanian

SSPHG München

1967 I 334

09

?Sculda pusilla

green

Solnhofen LL, Zandt, Lower Tithonian, Hybonotum zone

RF

—

10

Sculda sp.

green

Solnhofen LL, Wegscheid near Schernfeld, Lower Tithonian,
Hybonotum zone

NW

—

11

?Sculda pennata/
spinosa

normal

Solnhofen LL, Breitenhill/Öchselberg, Upper Kimmeridgian,
Beckeri zone

MW

9701

12

?Sculda pennata/
spinosa

normal

Solnhofen LL, Zandt, Lower Tithonian, Hybonotum zone

RF

—

13

Sculda sp.

UV

Solnhofen LL, Blumenberg near Eichstätt, Lower Tithonian,
Hybonotum zone

MF

—

14

Sculda sp.

UV

Solnhofen LL, Breitenhill/Öchselberg, Upper Kimmeridgian,
Beckeri zone

MW

1995

15

Sculda pusilla

green

Solnhofen Lithographic Limestones (no exact location
documented)

SSPHG München

AS I 814

16

Sculda sp.

green,
normal

Solnhofen LL, Zandt, Lower Tithonian, Hybonotum zone

PR

87133

17

Spinosculda ehrlichi

green

Solnhofen LL, Zandt, Lower Tithonian, Hybonotum zone

MW

9203

Each specimen in the table is depicted in Figure 2 in the same numerical order. Collections: MF = Michael Fecke, Langenberg; MW = Matthias Wulf, Rödelsee;
NW = Norbert Winkler, Stahnsdorf; PR = Peter Rüdel, Gröbenzell; RF = Roger Frattigiani, Laichingen; SMNS = Staatliches Museum für Naturkunde Stuttgart; SSPHG
München = Staatliche Sammlung für Paläontologie und Historische Geologie München.

branches off from the second article, the distal two flagella arise form the third article. The highest number of
annuli in a flagellum is 15. Annuli are about as long as
wide.
Antenna (Figure 3B, D)

Proximal parts are unknown, they are usually concealed by the shield ("carapace”). The endopod is flagellate, made up of more than ten annuli, the
maximum number is probably higher. The exopod is
a paddle and appears to have two parts: the proximal
part of the exopod is more or less square in anteroposterior aspect, the distal part of the exopod is paddle-shaped and about three times as long as wide
(Figure 3B). In one specimen of ?Sculda pennata/spinosa the entire margin of the distal part is fringed
with at least 32 small setae. Where the setae are missing, they are still indicated by their small sockets (Figure 3D). Of these 32 setae, about 20 setae are situated
along the medial margin, the remaining twelve are

around the distal aspect. Whether the lateral margin
is also fringed by small setae remains unclear. The
proximal diameter of the setae is about 1/20 of the
maximum width of the exopod paddle. The maximum
preserved length of the setae is about twelve times
the width, but based on their shape, they were probably significantly longer.
Mandible (Figure 3C)

The mandible is preserved in a single specimen of
?Sculda pusilla. Only the coxal body is preserved, no
traces of a palpus are apparent; whether this is due to
preservation or represents the true morphology is not
known (both conditions are present in extant species).
The coxal body is at least three times as long (lateromedian axis) as high (proximo-distal axis) and is drawn
out medially into four stout finger-like spines.
The maxillula, maxilla and first maxilliped (grooming
limb) are not preserved in a single specimen. Therefore,
their morphology remains unknown.

Haug et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:290
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/290

Page 4 of 17

Figure 2 All specimens used in this study. All specimens to the same scale to exhibit the size range. Specimens are either shown as inverted
images under normal light (no. 5, 6, 11, 12), UV-fluorescence images (no. 2, 4, 13, 14), or green-orange fluorescence images (no. 1, 3 [see also
Ref. [17], Figure 3], 7-10, 15-17). Numbers refer to table 1 and to the order, in which the specimens appear on the figures.

Raptorial limbs (Figure 4, 5A, B)

In general, describing raptorial limbs is difficult because
of terminological issues. The raptorial thoracopods, i.e.,
the thoracopods 2-5, have only six articles, while the
thoracopods of other eumalacostracans have seven articles (= podomeres). As Schram [8] has pointed out,
without an exopod as reference point to identify the
basipod the exact identity of the six articles remains
unclear. There is a consensus that the most distal article
is termed dactylus, the next one propodus and the third

one carpus. From here on the terminology is no longer
uniform [8]. We restrict ourselves in the following to
naming only the distal three parts and numbering the
remaining parts consecutively, including the three distal
ones. As in most specimens only the distal parts of the
limbs are preserved, counting starts with the dactylus =
1, propodus = 2, carpus = 3, etc.
This terminology is far from satisfying, but as neutral
as possible, without losing clarity. The homology of the
so-called dactylus to the dactyli of other Malacostraca

Haug et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:290
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/290

Page 5 of 17

Figure 3 Details of anterior appendages of Sculda Münster, 1840. A. Complete antennular flagellum of a specimen of Sculda sp. (no. 1). The
rounded shape of the most distal annulus (arrow) indicates that it is indeed the most terminal one. B. Antennula and antenna of a specimen of
Sculda sp. (no. 2). Note the branching pattern of the antennula and the division of the antennal exopod paddle (arrow). Numbers refer to the
three flagella of the antennula. C. Mandibles of a specimen of ?Sculda pusilla (no. 3). D. Antenna of a specimen of ?Sculda pennata/spinosa (no.
4). Arrows point to insertions of setae. Abbreviations: ant en = antennal endopod, ant ex = antennal exopod, atl = antennula, st = setae.

may be also questioned. Nevertheless, this term is unavoidable here. How to describe a sub-chelate claw of a
stomatopod without referring to dactylus and propodus?
Yet, one has to keep in mind that these terms are used
here in a functional sense and do not necessarily imply
homologies to other malacostracans. The exact identity
of the articles of the raptorial limbs is an important
issue to be solved in the future.
For further distinguishing of the different morphotypes, the size patterns of the four raptorial appendages
along the series are given as ratios of dactylus lengths
(for comparison with other species see Additional file 1).
The dactylus of the second thoracopod is the longest.
The formula for dactyli lengths within one raptorial
apparatus is:
2nd thp : (3rd thp/2nd thp) : (4th thp/2nd thp) : (5th
thp/2nd thp). [thp = thoracopod]
The length of the dactylus of the second thoracopod is
set as 1, consequently all following lengths are 0.xx.
Three different types of raptorial patterns are recognised within the investigated material. The first pattern
is exclusively seen on specimens of ?Sculda pennata/
spinosa (Figure 4A-D). The four pairs of appendages
are, more or less, sub-equal, their sizes decreasing

progressively along the series. The lengths of the dactyli are 1 : 0.87 : 0.47 : 0.40. The dactyli are smooth,
i.e., lacking any teeth and serrations and form subchelae against the disto-median edge of the propodus.
The propodi are sub-oval in antero-posterior outline,
very massive and large, at least twice as long as the
dactyli and wider than the dactyli are long. The carpus
is best known for the fifth thoracopod; it is short and
almost triangular. On the more anterior limbs, the carpus appears to be progressively longer on each further
anterior limb, but it is in fact difficult to judge because
of the preservation. The more proximal parts are
exclusively known for the fifth thoracopod. Article 4 is
relatively long, about four times as long as wide. Article 5 is slimmer than 4, about half the width, and also
about four times as long as wide. Article 6 is rather
small and as long as wide. Massive propodi with bladelike dactyli can also be observed in Sculda sp, i.e., in
small specimens (Figure 4E). The more posterior raptorial appendages are unfortunately not visible in these
specimens.
The second pattern is recognised as different from the
first type based on the lengths of the dactyli. It is exhibited by one specimen of ?Sculda pusilla (Figure 5B).

Haug et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:290
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/290

Page 6 of 17

Figure 4 Details of raptorial appendages. A. Stereo image of the anterior part of a specimen of ?Sculda pennata/spinosa (no. 5) exhibiting
details of the raptorial thoracopods. B. Colour-coded image of the same area as in A. Image recorded under normal light, then inverted. Each
raptorial limb is marked in a different colour. Numbers mark the different articles of the limb. C. UV-composite-fluorescence image of the anterior
region of a smaller specimen of ?Sculda pennata/spinosa (no. 4). Colours as in B. D. Stereo image of an isolated anterior part of a specimen of
?Sculda pennata/spinosa (no. 6). This specimen is one of the original specimens of Kunth (1870) described as belonging to Sculda spinosa Kunth,
1870. Note the preserved raptorial thoracopods. E. Second thoracopod of a specimen of Sculda sp. (no. 7) preserved in lateral aspect.
Abbreviations: dc = dactylus, ppd = propodus.

The dactyli are smooth; they appear blade-like and are
gently curved. The largest pair of dactyli (here interpreted as that of the second thoracopod) is more or less
twice as large as the second largest pair (here interpreted as that of the third thoracopod), while the other
two dactyli (that of the fourth and fifth thoracopods) are
significantly smaller. Therefore, the formula is 1 : 0.5 :
0.29 : 0.24. The shapes of the propodi are mostly
unknown. For the second thoracopods the propodi
appear to be more or less oval-shaped (Figure 2.3). The
more proximal parts are not preserved.
The third type is exhibited by an ill-preserved specimen of Pseudosculda laevis (Figure 5A). Like the second

type it is also exclusively recognised based on the dactyli
lengths. The dactyli are, as for ?Sculda pusilla, long,
curved and blade-like. Unlike ?S. pusilla, at least the largest dactylus appears to have eight small teeth along the
inner side. The first pair of dactyli is more than three
times as long as the sub-equal three pairs of posterior
ones, expressed by 1 : 0.29 : 0.27 : 0.27. All proximal
parts are unknown.
Walking limbs (Figure 5C)

The morphology of the walking limbs (sixth to eighth
thoracopod) can only be observed on a single specimen
of Sculda sp. The whole limb appears to be tubular,
with at least four articles. The distal part is twice as

Haug et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:290
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/290

Page 7 of 17

Figure 5 Details of thoracopods (continued from Figure 4) and pleopods. A. Anterior part of a specimen of Pseudosculda laevis (Schlüter,
1874) (no. 8) in lateral view. Note the teeth on the large dactylus (2) and the size difference to the posterior three dactyli (3-5) of the
thoracopods. B. Dactyli of the thoracopods of a specimen of ?Sculda pusilla (no. 9). Note the size difference between the large-sized second
thoracopod (2), the medium-sized third (3), and the small-sized fourth and fifth ones (4/5). C. Posterior thoracopod, i.e., walking limb of a
specimen of Sculda sp. (no. 1). D. Pleopods of a specimen of Sculda sp. (no. 1) in lateral view. No details apparent. E. UV-composite-fluorescence
image of a specimen of ?Sculda pennata/spinosa (no. 4), details of the pleopods in ventral view. F. UV-composite-fluorescence image of a
specimen of Sculda sp. (no. 10), detail of the single preserved pleopodal exopod in dorsal view. Note the smaller number of setae compared to
E. G. Red-cyan stereo image of a specimen of ?Sculda pennata/spinosa (no. 11), detail of a right pleopod in ventral view. Note how the paddleshaped endopod is smoothly bent.

long as wide and tapers distally. It carries two distally
directed setae, which are about one fourth of the article wide and only slightly shorter than the article in
length. The next proximal article is of the same shape
as the distal one, but slightly larger. It tapers distally.

A small seta arises disto-medially, which seems to be
about half the length of the setae of the distal article.
The next proximal article is stouter, the width about
the same as the penultimate article, but it is significantly shorter, having only about one third of the

Haug et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:290
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/290

length of the penultimate article. The next proximal
article is only poorly known, as it is concealed by the
body. The article appears to be massive, about 1.5
times the width of the next distal article, and at least
as long as wide.
Pleopods (Figure 5D-G)

The detailed morphology of the pleopods can be
observed in specimens of ?Sculda pennata/spinosa (Figure 5E, G) and specimens of Sculda sp. (Figure 5D, F).
The proximal part, the basipod, is difficult to recognise.
Based on the ventral foramen it is at least twice as wide
in latero-median axis than in anterior-posterior axis.
The proximo-distal axis of the basipod can only be
indirectly judged, but appears to be no more than half
of the width. The exopod is paddle-shaped with at least
ten setae along the distal margin and about twelve
tooth-like outgrowths along the lateral margin. The
endopod is also paddle-shaped, its distal margin carries
at least twelve setae. Exopod and endopod are about the
same size. Smaller specimens (Sculda sp.) only exhibit
incomplete pleopods, thus the exact morphology of the
earlier developmental stages remains unclear. There are
fewer setae on the exopod, about seven in a 0.7 mm
large specimen, possibly also on the endopod compared
to later stages.
Uropods (Figure 6A, D, G, H)

Different morphotypes of uropods can be found on several specimens of Sculda. We interpret these as developmental differences, because two are exclusively observed
on very small specimens; another one is present exclusively on larger specimens. The uropods of the largest
morphotype present in specimens of ?Sculda pennata/
spinosa are composed of the basipod ("protopod”), the
exopod and the endopod (Figure 6A). The most proximal aspect of the basipod is not exactly known. The
basipodal process ("protopodal” process) also characteristic for extant stomatopods is long, blade-like, and
forked, but not symmetrical, i.e., there is a large distal
and a small lateral tip. The endopod is long and paddleshaped with ten teeth or strong serrations along the
median margin, one lateral serration and a tooth-like
distal tip. The exopod is also long and paddle-like.
Along the lateral margin there are 14 movable spines
present; additionally, 14 immovable tooth-like serrations
are present dorsal to the movable spines. Two of these,
the ones left and right of the distalmost movable spine,
are enlarged and appear spine-like. A ridge runs from
proximal to distal on the surface of the exopod, dividing
at about one third of the width of the lateral part of the
exopod.
A smaller morphotype of uropod, which we interpret
as an earlier developmental stage in specimens of Sculda
sp. of about 0.5 mm in length, differs in certain aspects
(Figure 6D). The basipodal spine is very small and is not

Page 8 of 17

bifurcate. The endopod is also paddle-shaped, but
instead of having well-developed teeth, there are only
three serrations on its distal end. The exopod has only
nine movable teeth and eight immovable dorsal serrations (including the two spine-like distal ones). Both
teeth and serrations appear stouter than those found in
the larger developmental stage.
A single very small and incompletely preserved specimen may be a larva of Sculda sp. (Figure 6G). Its uropods appear to have elongate lanceolate endopods and
exopods without any teeth or setae, but more than a
vague outline is not identifiable.
A single new specimen of Spinosculda ehrlichi Haug,
Haug & Waloszek, 2009 is very small and shows no
really new details (Figure 6H), but is significantly smaller
than the holotype, a late larval stage. The new specimen
is interpreted as an earlier larval stage, the third known
developmental stage and earliest of this species. Exopod
and endopod are both spine-like without setae or spines;
both rami are sub-similar. The basipodal spine is better
preserved than in the holotype [15]. It is apparently
almost symmetrically forked.
Telson (for a discussion of the difficulties with the term
‘telson’ within Malacostraca see [16]) (Figure 6A, D, G, H)

The morphology of the telson of larger specimens is
very similar to that described in the literature [12]. The
main new details are 19 dorsally drawn out serrations
above the 18 movable teeth, comparable to those on the
exopods of the uropods (Figure 6A).
Smaller specimens exhibit slight differences that are
interpreted as developmentally caused (Figure 6D). A
differentiation of tooth length is already indicated. A
pair of central spines, as well as the sixth ones
(counted from the middle), is slightly larger than the
other spines. In later stages these are at least twice as
long as the others. The possible larval specimen possesses a bifurcate telson without any indications of
teeth (Figure 6G).
The telson of the new specimen of Spinosculda ehrlichi is bifurcate, as for the older known stages, but
not as differentiated as in the later stages (Figure 6H).
It also lacks the initial additional spines present on
the holotype, which represents a later larval stage
[15].
Shield ("carapace”) (Figure 6B, C, E)

The shield of larger specimens in later developmental
stages does not differ from that described in the literature [12] (Figure 6B). Smaller specimens, i.e., earlier
developmental stages, exhibit certain differences that are
interpreted as developmentally caused. The smallest specimens have a shield that is obviously tri-fold with a
central and two lateral areas as in the later stages, but
lacks the prominent ridges that run from anterior to
posterior (Figure 6E). A slightly larger specimen of

Haug et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:290
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/290

Page 9 of 17

Figure 6 Details of uropods, telson and shield. A. Left uropod and left part of telson of a specimen of ?Sculda pennata/spinosa (no. 12) in
dorsal view. B. Head shield of a specimen of ?Sculda pennata/spinosa (no. 12). Note the ridges running antero-posteriorly. C. Head shield of a
specimen of Sculda sp. (no. 10). The division of the shield into three fields is apparent (see arrows), but the ridges are only weakly expressed. D.
Left uropod and left half of the telson of a specimen of Sculda sp. (no. 13). E. Head shield of a specimen of Sculda sp. (no. 14), showing the
tripartite-division (arrows). F. Holotype of Sculda pusilla Kunth, 1870 (no. 15). Not many details preserved. G. Uropods and telson of a specimen of
Sculda sp. (no. 16). The image used here was taken under normal light, whereas the corresponding image in Figure 2 was taken under green
light. H. Part of telson and one uropod of one specimen of Spinosculda ehrlichi Haug, Haug & Waloszek, 2009 (no. 17). Abbreviations: bsp =
basipodal spine, rst = rostrum, tl = telson, ur = uropod, ur en = uropodal endopod, ur ex = uropodal exopod.

Sculda sp. also has the three areas developed. It additionally shows already some anterior-posterior ridges,
but it lacks the grooves running from left to right that
are present on the adult shield (Figure 6C). The triangular shape of the rostrum appears to be unchanged during juvenile development.

Unfortunately, neither the shield morphology nor any
other morphological details can be clearly determined in
the holotype of Sculda pusilla (Figure 6F). Probably during the preparation process about 140 years ago all
details along the margins of the specimen have been
destroyed.

Haug et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:290
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/290

Phylogenetic analysis

The single resulting shortest tree of a total length of 76
steps of the phylogenetic analysis run in ‘PHYLIP pars’
is given in Figure 7.

Discussion
Newly discovered morphological details

A number of morphological details on the species of
Sculda have not been known before. The antennulae
have been supposed to be tri-flagellate because of the
hoplocaridan affinities of Sculda. We can now present
the exact branching pattern and the maximum number
of annuli per flagellum. The branching pattern is similar
to that known from extant stomatopods and the
recently described Spinosculda ehrlichi [15] with two
distal flagella arising from one article, which itself arises
from the same article as the third flagellum.
Kunth [12] depicted the antennae of Sculda spinosa in
his drawings including setae along the outer margin of
the exopod paddle. Whether this was truly visible on his
specimens or adapted from knowledge of extant stomatopods remains unclear. We now see the exact setation
pattern (partially based on insertions) and the setae
themselves. A single specimen also shows the division of

Page 10 of 17

the exopod paddle. The annulation of the endopod is
also evident, although the distal part remains unknown.
The mandible can, despite its concealed position, also
be documented for the first time. In some extant stomatopods the mandible carries the typical tripartite malacostracan palp, in other species it is palpless. Whether
absence of a palp in ?Sculda pusilla is due to preservation or reflects the true morphology remains unclear.
The maxillula, maxilla and the first thoracopod ("maxilliped”) are still unknown. For all three appendages this
is due to their concealed position. The more posterior
thoracopods and the raptorial appendages, are now
known quite well and reveal some unexpected details
(see below). The posterior thoracopods, i.e., walking
limbs, are also presented for the first time, but appear
to be comparable to those of extant stomatopods. The
pleopods have already been depicted by Kunth [12], but
could now be documented with more details, i.e., the
exact number of setae. The uropods of the studied
material yielded little new information, except for certain details of the spine pattern. Especially which spines
are movable and which not is now better understood.
Early developmental changes could also be documented. In particular, the pattern of spines on the uropods

Figure 7 Results of the phylogenetic analysis run in ‘PHYLIP pars’. Single shortest tree.

Haug et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:290
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/290

appears to change during post-larval development.
Other changes could be documented for the shield and
the pleopodal exopods. Such post-larval changes have
not been documented for extant species or other fossils,
but have the potential to yield information of phylogenetic significance as soon as comparable data are
available.
Phylogenetic significance

The significant insights we gained are not only details of
the raptorial appendages of Sculdidae, but also the additional data on the posterior raptorial appendages of
Pseudosculda laevis. Both have been reported as completely unknown for sculdids and partially known for
pseudosculdids [8,10]. Based on these findings, the phylogenetic analysis performed by Schram [8] was
amended and rerun, resulting in a better resolution of
the Mesozoic species and some changes in the branching pattern leading to a different reconstruction of the
evolutionary scenario of stomatopod phylogeny (Figure
8).

Page 11 of 17

Schram [8] has already argued for a close relationship
of Pseudosculdidae to the crown group of Unipeltata,
although in his analysis the Pseudosculdidae, Sculdidae
and crown-group Unipeltata form an unresolved trichotomy, probably a result of the incomplete knowledge of
the morphology of the Sculdidae. Our findings, especially concerning the three pairs of posterior raptorial
appendages of Pseudosculda laevis, support Schram’s
view that P. laevis is the sister species of the crown
group of Unipeltata.
The monophyly of Pseudosculdidae has been questioned [10]. Unfortunately, our knowledge of Archaeosculda phoenicia Ahyong, Garassino & Gironi, 2007, the
second described pseudosculdid species, is not yet
detailed enough to include it into our analysis. The new
methods for investigating fossils from the Cretaceous
fish beds of Lebanon with the aid of orange-green fluorescence [17] (Figure 4A) might also facilitate a re-investigation of the single known specimen of A. phoenicia to
obtain more details. Also a re-investigation of P. laevis
appears to hold promise [8,17].

Figure 8 Proposed phylogeny and evolutionary scenario of an ingroup of Stomatopoda including “Archaeostomatopoda”. Taxa
presented as 3D models based on [[8,20], this paper] besides the representative of Unipeltata sensu stricto, which is a volume rendering of a CT
scan. Autapomorphies at the marked nodes: 1: Size reduction of raptorial limbs two, three and four; 2: (Unipeltata sensu lato) Further size
reduction of raptorial limbs three and four; 3: Shape change of telson from elongate-triangular to rounded with bisymmetrically arranged teeth/
spines; 4: (Unipeltata sensu stricto = Verunipeltata taxon nov. + Pseudosculda laevis) Further size reduction of raptorial limb two to the same size
as three and four.

Haug et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:290
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/290

In addition, four other reports of fossil specimens
from the Mesozoic are assigned to Pseudosculda, all
without further investigations and also without concrete
taxonomical descriptions. Hof [9] mentioned new specimens from the Jurassic of Osteno, Italy, that are most
likely pseudosculdids. Feldmann et al. [18] illustrated
specimens from the Cretaceous of Colombia, which they
interpreted as Sculda sp., but Schram and Müller [14]
re-interpreted the material as Pseudosculda sp. Ahyong
et al. [10] rejected the two interpretations. Further interesting specimens loosely assigned to Pseudosculdidae
are from the Cretaceous of Mexico [11]. Moreover, Förster [19] mentioned a specimen representing Pseudosculda from the Solnhofen Lithographic Limestones
(unfortunately, the specimen has not yet been found
in the Staatliche Sammlung für Paläontologie und Historische Geologie München, into which Förster’s collection were transferred). All these specimens need to be
further investigated before the monophyly of Pseudosculdidae can be verified.
In order to establish a clearer terminology of the taxa
involved, we want to propose some new names. The
crown group containing all living species often referred
to as “extant unipeltatans” [8] should be more exactly
termed Verunipeltata taxon nov. Together with the sister group Pseudosculda laevis (as long as the status of
Pseudosculdidae is unclear) they form a taxon for which
we propose the name Unipeltata sensu stricto.
The Sculdidae appear in our phylogenetic analysis as
sister group to the Unipeltata sensu stricto, as already
supposed by Schram [8], but it remains unclear whether
Sculdidae/Sculda is a monophylum or a paraphylum.
This is caused by the partly incomplete knowledge of
the morphotype here referred to as ?Sculda pusilla. The
Sculdidae are united with Unipeltata sensu stricto by
details of, for example, the telson morphology. In Sculda
specimens the telson is more similar to that of extant
stomatopods, i.e., it appears stouter and with teeth
arranged in bisymmetrical pairs, whereas the shape in
palaeo- and archaeostomatopods is more or less elongate triangular with a median unpaired process. Consequently, a stout telson with teeth arranged in pairs
seems to be a (autapomorphic?) ground-pattern character of the unnamed taxon Unipeltata sensu stricto +
Sculda.
Additionally, the issue of the monophyly of Sculdidae
is complicated by the fact that the taxonomic identity of
the species from Solnhofen (Sculda spinosa and S. pennata) needs still to be clarified. Also the still incomplete
knowledge of S. pusilla (holotype illustrated in Figure
6F) and the species from Lebanon, S. syriaca Dames,
1886, further complicate this issue. Interestingly, all specimens we found in private collections labelled as S. syriaca turned out to be Pseudosculda laevis, the type

Page 12 of 17

material of both species is lost according to Schram and
Müller [14].
The newly described species Spinosculda ehrlichi was
also assigned to Sculdidae [15]. As the morphology of
its raptorial apparatus is almost unknown, it could not
be included into the present analysis. A developmental
character based on the newly presented younger larva of
the species might give a hint for placing this species closer to Unipeltata sensu stricto than the species of
Sculda. In ?Sculda pennata/spinosa the basipodal spine
is still small in early post-larval stages and gains size
during later post-larval development. In extant stomatopods the basipodal spine is already present and relatively
large in larval stages compared to the exopod and endopod [20]. In Sp. ehrlichi a possible basipodal spine was
described in the holotype specimen that represents a
late larval stage [15]. The newly presented earlier larval
stage clearly possesses such a (forked) spine. This character, i.e., the presence of a well developed basipodal
spine already in larval stages, may unite Sp. ehrlichi and
Unipeltata sensu stricto, but this remains an assumption
until the Mesozoic stomatopods have been further
investigated, e.g., the development of Pseudosculdidae.
Our findings demonstrate that there are not only two
major statuses of the raptorial appendage patterns,
namely four rather undifferentiated sub-chelate appendages versus one large followed by three sub-equal small
appendages. Additionally, there are other possible
morphologies as exhibited by the raptorial apparatuses
developed in Sculda. For comparison and coding of the
lengths of the raptorial appendages into the phylogenetic
analysis for the Palaeozoic species we had to rely on
published images and mainly on the propodi lengths
(which appear to be more or less directly correlated to
dactyli lengths, but often they are incomplete, thus
lengths remain estimations). Interestingly, Tyrannophontes theridion Schram, 1969 appears to have a pattern that is similar to that present in ?Sculda pusilla in
having a second raptorial appendage larger than the
third one (cf. [8], his Figure 3). Although this demands
a direct re-investigation of the original material, our
work shows the presence of one large, one mediumsized and two smaller raptorial limbs (although not as
apparent as in our material). We have decided to slightly
alter the reconstruction of T. theridion (Figure 8) to fit
this observation.
For Tyrannophontes gigantion Schram, 2007 this issue
is less clear. The species is obviously very important for
understanding stomatopod evolution based on its
resolved phylogenetic position, but the single existing
specimen is only imperfectly known [8]. Tyrannophontes
appears in our analysis as a paraphyletic assemblage, but
as Schram [8] has pointed out, this may be due to the
lack of knowledge of the pleon of T. gigantion. For the

Haug et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:290
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/290

taxon comprising Unipeltata sensu stricto, Sculdidae and
Tyrannophontes we designate Unipeltata sensu lato. This
taxon is mainly characterized by the degree of differentiation of the raptorial apparatus and also by the jackknifing point and the enlarged 4th part of the raptorial
appendages. Possibly also the presence of paddle-shaped
exopods of the pleopods may characterise this node,
while those known from the other archaeostomatopods
are multi-annulated [21]. Additionally, the number of
annuli in the antennular flagella appears to be lower
than in other archaeostomatopods. The branching pattern of the three flagella of the antennulae may also possibly characterise the node of Unipeltata sensu lato. As
we could demonstrate for ?Sculda pennata/spinosa, the
flagella branch as in modern stomatopods, two distal flagella from one article, which arises from another article
together with a third flagellum. For other archaeostomatopods, the antennula is often reconstructed with all flagella arising from one article [5,21]. Unfortunately, the
morphologies of the critical taxa, namely Gorgonophontes Schram, 1984 and Tyrannophontes are only
incompletely known.
According to our analysis, Gorgonophontes or the
quite recently described Chabardella spinosa Racheboeuf, Schram & Vidal, 2009 from the Carboniferous of
France are the sister group to Unipeltata sensu lato.
This unresolved polytomy is partly explained by the
rather incomplete knowledge of C. spinosa, especially of
the tail fan area [22]. This result contradicts the analysis
of Schram [8], in which Gorgonophontes was sister
group to Daidal Schram, 2007 + Unipeltata sensu lato.
Gorgonophontes already possesses a slight differentiation
of the second thoracopod, which is enlarged compared
to the more posterior ones. This differentiation is missing in Daidal, which turns out to be the sister group of
Gorgonophontes + C. spinosa + Unipeltata sensu lato in
our analysis. Thus, the scenario reconstructed here,
although differing from Schram’s [8], is seen as plausible
as Schram [8] has already indicated. The monophyly of
the taxon Daidal is equivocal, which may be due to the
incomplete knowledge of Daidal pattoni (Peach, 1908).
The branching pattern of some of the palaeostomatopods differs from Schram’s results [8], but Archaeocaris
Meek, 1872 also results in our analysis as the sister
group to all remaining stomatopods. The next basal
branchings in Stomatopoda, i.e., the exact relationships
of the species of Bairdops Schram, 1979 and Perimecturus Peach, 1908, are resolved in a different manner. In
Schram [8], they form a monophylum, in our result they
are a paraphyletic assemblage.
In any case both genera appear as paraphyletic. If the
genera Perimecturus and Bairdops indeed prove to be
non-monophyletic, as not only indicated by our analysis,
but especially by Schram [8], new names for

Page 13 of 17

monophyletic taxa will need to be erected. The same
consequent application of phylogenetic systematics also
means abandoning the taxa “Archaeostomatopoda” and
“Palaeostomatopoda”, as both have appeared as paraphyla in various analyses [[7,8], this analysis].
The significant new systematic findings may be summarised like this (basal branchings and taxonomic issues
of certain groups excluded):
Unipeltata Latreille, 1825 sensu lato
Tyrannophontes theridion Schram, 1969
NN1
Tyrannophontes gigantion Schram, 2007
NN2
Sculdidae Dames, 1886
Unipeltata Latreille, 1825 sensu stricto
Pseudosculdidae Dames, 1886
Verunipeltata taxon nov.

Evolutionary scenario

Based on the resulting phylogeny and the known
morphologies, the following series of evolutionary
changes is proposed (Figure 8). Four sub-similar-sized
sub-chelate thoracopods appear to be apomorphic for
Stomatopoda and are plesiomorphically retained up to
the node of Daidal + (Gorgonophonthes + Unipeltata
sensu lato), as for example exhibited by D. schoellmanni
Schram, 2007 (the incompletely known Chabardella spinosa is excluded here). In a first evolutionary change in
the direct stem lineage of Gorgonophontes + Unipeltata
sensu lato, the first raptorial appendage is slightly
enlarged, but the more posterior ones remain sub-equal.
This morphology is, for example, exhibited by G. fraiponti (van Straelen, 1923). In a next evolutionary change
the first raptorial appendage is enlarged while the second
(remains?) more or less middle-sized and the third and
fourth ones become significantly smaller at the node of
Unipeltata sensu lato. This morphology appears to be
exhibited by Tyrannophontes (especially T. theridion, less
apparent in T. gigantion) and best in ?Sculda pusilla. In a
last step the second raptorial appendage also becomes
significantly smaller than the first pair at the node of
Unipeltata sensu stricto, as for example exhibited by the
extant Neogonodactylus bredini (Manning, 1969) or the
well-known Squilla mantis Fabricius, 1787.
The raptorial apparatus exhibited by ?Sculda pennata/
spinosa appears to be autapomorphic, but derived from
one like that exhibited by ?Sculda pusilla. The exact use
of the characteristic massive propodi with the small, but
sharp-appearing dactyli must remain in question. In
extant stomatopod species such morphology is not
developed. The closest resemblances may be the sub-

Haug et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:290
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/290

chelate gnathopods of amphipods. They also possess
massive propodi, although not as hypertrophied as we
have found them in ?Sculda pennata/spinosa. Furthermore, they are orientated upside-down, therefore do not
facilitate exact comparisons. Similarly orientated raptorial limbs with a large propodus and small dactylus may
be present in Kellibrooksia macrogaster Schram, 1973
(Malacostraca: Phyllocarida: Hoplostraca) (but see [23]).
The large massive propodi of ?Sculda pennata/spinosa
might have been used for smashing, a convergence with
the modern smasher stomatopods. If this is true, they
would not hit with the thickened dactylus basis as in
extant species, but directly with the anterior edge of the
propodus. The sharp-appearing inner edges of the dactylus could then have been used, as in extant smashers,
to cut the prey. Convergent evolution of smashers and
their presence in Mesozoic times is indicated by certain
traces on ammonites [24].
In summary, the species of Sculda appear to possess a
mixture of morphologies. While the raptorial apparatus
is much more similar to that of archaeostomatopods,
other characteristics, especially of the pleopods and telson, are already very similar to those of extant
stomatopods.
The main discussion of the evolution of the raptorial
apparatus is usually based on the second thoracopods.
As we have demonstrated, the more posterior ones can
also be differentiated and, therefore, cannot be discussed
as a series, but must be understood separately. Especially
for the species from Lebanon, Pseudosculda laevis,
Sculda syriaca and Archaeosculda phoenicia, these
appendages still need to be re-investigated. But with the
new methods [17] it should be possible to find more
information on this issue.

Conclusions
Morphological details of fossil stomatopods are incompletely known. The species of Sculda, especially ?Sculda
pennata/spinosa, are among the ones known best. The
chances of adding further developmental information
are regarded as high. Further investigations also on stomatopod specimens from Lebanon have the potential of
adding significant information; for example, the specimen illustrated by Schram [8] (his Figure 20) should be
re-investigated with the new method of orange-green
fluorescence [17].
Compared to the Palaeozoic species, those from the
Mesozoic have obviously been understudied in the past.
Their preservation is much finer than previously
thought and by use of fluorescence technique much
easier to distinguish from the matrix compared to older
methods. Also small specimens can be found with rather
complete preservation of fine details, while for example
the fossils from the Mazon Creek fauna are more

Page 14 of 17

difficult to investigate as studying them “can be compared sometimes to attempting examination of fine
points of anatomy through the bottom of a glass full of
water” [8] (p.895). Additionally, the first documentation
of developmental data opens a complete new range of
possible characters for reconstructing the phylogeny and
understanding the evolution of Stomatopoda.
We are optimistic that some of the still open questions concerning the phylogenetic position of the one or
other taxon can be solved in the future based on reinvestigations of material using new documentary methods. This holds in particular for the phylogenetic status
of Pseudosculdidae.

Methods
Material

We investigated specimens chosen from a larger collection that will be the basis for a taxonomic revision of
the Mesozoic stomatopods. Some specimens are from
museum collections (Museum für Naturkunde Stuttgart
SMNS, Staatliche Sammlung für Paläontologie und Historische Geologie München SSPHG), but the most
impressive specimens are from various private collections (Figure 2, Tab. 1).
Documentation

The specimens were documented with different methods adapted to the special requirements of each specimen (see table 1). Small specimens were documented
using the UV-fluorescence composite imaging method
[25] (wavelength ca. 358 nm) or, depending on the autofluorescence capabilities of the specimens, with orangegreen fluorescence (wavelength ca. 546 nm) [17]. Larger
specimens were documented with composite images
under normal light [17,26]. Specimens exhibiting high
relief were documented with stereo images to provide
spatial information [17]. In some specimens the surrounding matrix was virtually removed using Photoshop
CS3. Reconstructed morphologies are presented as 3D
virtual models assembled in the freely available 3D modelling software Blender (Figure 8) [17,25-27]. The image
of a representative of Unipeltata sensu stricto in Figure
8 is a volume rendering of a CT scan.
Phylogenetic analysis

The matrix from Schram [8] was taken as a basis for the
computer-based phylogenetic analysis. It was altered and
amended in a number of ways (see Additional files 2
and 3):
Firstly, all multi-state characters were transformed
into a series of binary characters, as favoured by several
authors [28,29]. This was done for certain characters
that appeared not to be necessarily coupled. Furthermore, this method is seen as having two direct

Haug et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:290
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/290

advantages for the current analysis. Multi-state characters do not allow one to identify apomorphic character
conditions that are part of a step-wise acquisition. One
example is the number of free thoracic segments, i.e.,
those not hidden under the head shield. Schram [8]
coded the various states as a multi-state character (character 1 of [8]):
-

all segments hidden under the shield,
one segment free,
three segments free, and
four segments free.

When coding the characters as multi-state, potential
apomorphies may be overlooked, as “three segments free”
may in fact be a uniting character for those species with
three segments free AND four segments free. Unfortunately, these characters may indeed not be completely
independent, as for species with the character state “sixth
thoracic segment free” the character state “eighth thoracic
segment free” is automatically also fulfilled. This may lead
to an overestimation of such a character. A similar way of
coding can be found in various analyses (e.g., [30] for maxillipeds) Thus, in contrast to the multi-state character coding, which may underestimate certain characters, binary
coding may overestimate certain characters. We are aware
of this difficulty, but also cannot provide a reliable solution. Hence, our approach was to code binary characters
(following [28]) and code as neutrally as possible. As a test
tool reciprocal illumination may be used, i.e., the resulting
tree can be tested whether the evolutionary scenario arising thereby is plausible or not.
The second advantage is that it becomes possible to
code only imperfectly known morphologies more easily.
For species where the thorax area is imperfectly known,
the multi-state character coding of the free thoracic segments must be coded with a question mark. But with
several multi-state characters it is possible to code the
information of at least one segment, the eighth thoracic
segment (i.e., character 1 as “1” and the others, i.e.,
characters 2 and 3 with question marks).
Secondly, certain characters used by Schram [8] were
excluded from the analysis, because the phrasing of the
character states was not apparent to us, therefore, we
omitted these characters in our analysis. These characters are:
Character 5: “raptorial limbs inflated”. Whether the
raptorial limbs are “inflated” or not appears to be
difficult to judge in flattened fossils.
Character 12: “armature of 2nd thoracic dactylus”. It
was unclear to us what the difference between
“unarmed” and the two different conditions of
“smooth” should be.

Page 15 of 17

Character 13: “pleural spines on pleon”. The exact
nature of pleural edges is often difficult to judge,
especially in flattened fossils. Thus, it is unclear to
us when to truly call a structure as being a spine.
Thirdly, the following characters were amended to the
analysis:
- Telson length to width larger than 1.5 or stouter
(our character 33).
- First raptorial limb differentiated compared to the
fourth (our character 34).
- First raptorial limb at least twice as large as fourth
(dactylus or propodus length) (our character 35).
- First raptorial limb at least three times as long as
fourth (dactylus or propodus length) (our character
36).
The last two characters are again problematic as they
are not truly independent, but both morphologies are
present within the material and both might be an apomorphic character for a certain group, thus need to be
included. Instead of coding extant Unipeltata as showing
variable states for certain characters, we coded instead a
single extant species, Squilla mantis.
Unfortunately, species too imperfectly known,
although possibly being of importance, could not be
included into the analysis. Although including imperfectly known fossils has been shown to significantly contribute to phylogenetic analyses as long as at least 25%
of the characters are known [31], fossils can also destabilise phylogenies when critical characters are missing
[32,33]. In the present case the missing information of
the tail fan region is critical. The tail fan region is a very
important character for stomatopod taxonomy and, as it
appears, also for its phylogeny. The imperfectly known
morphology prohibited the inclusion of the recently
described species Spinosculda ehrlichi [15] as well as the
single known specimen of a larval stomatopod from the
Solnhofen Lithographic Limestones, which also probably
represents a new species [25].
The phylogenetic analysis with 20 taxa and 36 binary
characters was run in ‘PHYLIP pars’ (Settings: Search
for best tree: Yes; Search option: More thorough search;
Number of trees to save: 10,000; Randomize input order
of species: No; Use input order; Outgroup root: Yes, at
species number 1; Use threshold parsimony: No, use
ordinary parsimony; Sites weighted: No; Analyze multiple data sets: No; Input species interleaved: Yes; Terminal type (IBM PC, ANSI, none): ANSI; Print out the
data at start of run: No; Print indications of progress of
run: Yes; Print out tree: Yes; Print out steps in each site:
No; Print character at all nodes of tree: No; Write out

Haug et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:290
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/290

trees onto tree file: Yes). As in Schram [8] a euphausiacean was used as outgroup.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Measured ratios of the raptorial appendages.
Additional file 2: Characters used for phylogenetic analysis. (0) =
absent, (1) = present, (-) = not applicable, if not stated differently.
Additional file 3: Matrix.

Acknowledgements
We thank the many private collectors that have contributed their very
important fossil specimens to this study: Marina and Matthias Wulf, Rödelsee;
Laura, Kirsten and Roger Frattigiani, Laichingen; Michael Fecke, Langenberg;
Annette and Norbert Winkler, Stahnsdorf; Peter Rüdel, Gröbenzell.
Furthermore, we had beautiful specimens from the Staatliche Sammlung für
Paläontologie und Historische Geologie München, for which we thank
Martin Nose, and the Staatliches Museum für Naturkunde Stuttgart, for
which we thank Günter Schweigert. Stefan Liebau from the Institute for
Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Ulm, helped us with the microscopy
on the Axioscope 2. We thank the team of the Klinik für Diagnostische und
Interventionelle Radiologie Ulm for performing a CT scan of a Squilla mantis.
We furthermore want to thank all the people involved in programming the
freely available software programs that were used in this study, CombineZM
and Blender. Two anonymous reviewers kindly improved an earlier version
of this manuscript scientifically and linguistically. Many thanks also to Les
Watling, University of Hawaii, for his careful English check of the manuscript.
JTH is currently funded by the German Science Foundation (DFG) under
WA-754/15-1.
Authors’ contributions
JTH carried out the measurements, image processing and the phylogenetic
analysis. CH took the image stacks of the specimens and was also involved
in image processing. Both JTH and CH drafted the manuscript and
contributed equally to this work. VK worked on eumalacostracan uropods in
general with special respect to those in stomatopods and helped to draft
the manuscript. AM and DW revised the manuscript critically for its scientific
content. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Received: 20 October 2009 Accepted: 21 September 2010
Published: 21 September 2010
References
1. Kleinlogel S, Marshall NJ: Electrophysiological evidence for linear
polarization sensitivity in the compound eyes of the stomatopod
crustacean Gonodactylus chiragra. The Journal of Experimental Biology
2006, 209:4262-4272.
2. Chiou T-H, Kleinlogel S, Cronin T, Caldwell R, Loeffler B, Siddiqi A,
Goldizen A, Marshall J: Circular Polarization Vision in a Stomatopod
Crustacean. Current Biology 2008, 18:429-434.
3. Patek SN, Korff WL, Caldwell RL: Deadly strike mechanism of a mantis
shrimp. Nature 2004, 428:819-820.
4. Schram FR: An adjustment to the higher taxonomy of the fossil
Stomatopoda. Crustaceana 2008, 81:751-754.
5. Schram FR: Some Middle Pennsylvanian Hoplocarida (Crustacea) and
their phylogenetic significance. Fieldiana Geology 1969, 12(14):235-289.
6. Schram FR: British Carboniferous Malacostraca. Fieldiana Geology 1979,
40:1-129.
7. Jenner RA, Hof CHJ, Schram FR: Palaeo- and archaeostomatopods
(Hoplocarida, Crustacea) from the Bear Gulch Limestone, Mississipian
(Namurian), of Central Montana. Contributions to Zoology 1998, 67:155-185
[http://dpc.uba.uva.nl/ctz/vol67/nr03/art01].
8. Schram FR: Paleozoic proto-mantis shrimp revisited. Journal of
Paleontology 2007, 81:895-916.
9. Hof CHJ: Fossil stomatopods (Crustacea: Malacostraca) and their
phylogenetic impact. Journal of Natural History 1998, 32:1567-1576.

Page 16 of 17

10. Ahyong ST, Garassino A, Gironi B: Archaeosculda phoenicia n. gen., n. sp.
(Crustacea, Stomatopoda, Pseudosculdidae) from the Upper Cretaceous
(Cenomanian) of Lebanon. Atti della Società italiana di Scienze naturali e del
Museo civico di Storia naturale in Milano 2007, 148(I):3-15.
11. Vega FJ, Nyborg T, Briceno AR, Patarroyo P, Luque J, Muzquiz HP,
Stinnesbeck W: Upper Cretaceous Crustacea from Mexico and Colombia:
Similar faunas and environments during Turonian times. Revista Mexicana
de Ciencias Geologicas 2007, 24(3):403-422.
12. Kunth A: Ueber wenig bekannte Crustaceen von Solenhofen. Zeitschrift
der Deutschen Geologischen Gesellschaft 1870, 22:771-790.
13. Hof CHJ, Briggs DEG: Decay and Mineralization of Mantis Shrimps
(Stomatopoda: Crustacea) - A Key to Their Fossil Record. Palaios 1997,
12:420-438.
14. Schram FR, Müller HG: Catalog and Bibliography of the Fossil and Recent
Stomatopoda Leiden Backhyus Publishers BV 2004.
15. Haug C, Haug JT, Waloszek D: Morphology and ontogeny of the Upper
Jurassic mantis shrimp Spinosculda ehrlichi n. gen. n. sp. from southern
Germany. Palaeodiversity 2009, 2:111-118 [http://www.palaeodiversity.org/
pdf/02/Pal_2_05_111-118_gu_4c.pdf].
16. Olesen J, Walossek D: Limb ontogeny and trunk segmentation in Nebalia
species (Crustacea, Malacostraca, Leptostraca). Zoomorphology 2000,
120:47-64.
17. Haug C, Haug JT, Waloszek D, Maas A, Frattigiani R, Liebau S: New
methods to document fossils from lithographic limestones of southern
Germany and Lebanon. Palaeontologia Electronica 2009, 12(3):12 [http://
palaeo-electronica.org/2009_3/193/index.html], 6T.
18. Feldmann RM, Villamil T, Kauffman EG: Decapod and stomatopod
crustaceans from mass mortality lagerstatten: Turonian (Cretaceous) of
Colombia. Journal of Paleontology 1999, 73:91-101.
19. Förster R: Heuschreckenkrebse (Crustacea, Stomatopoda) aus dem
Alttertiär von Helmstedt und Handorf (Niedersachsen) und der
Oberkreide von Nigeria. Neues Jahrbuch für Geologie und Paläontologie
Monatshefte 1982, 6:321-335.
20. Morgan SG, Goy JW: Reproduction and larval development of the mantis
shrimp Gonodactylus bredini (Crustacea: Stomatopoda) maintained in the
laboratory. Journal of Crustacean Biology 1987, 7(4):595-618.
21. Schöllmann L: Archaeostomatopodea (Malacostraca, Hoplocarida) from
the Namurian B (Upper Marsdenian, Carboniferous) of Hagen-Vorhalle
(NRW, Germany) and a redescription of some species of the family
Tyrannophontidae. Geologie und Paläontologie in Westfalen 2004,
62:111-141.
22. Racheboeuf PR, Schram FR, Vidal M: New malacostracan Crustacea from
the Carboniferous (Stephanian) lagerstätte of Montceau-Les-Mines,
France. Journal of Paleontology 2009, 83(4):624-629.
23. Schram FR: On Some Pyllocarids and the Origin of the Hoplocarida.
Fieldiana Geology 1973, 26(2):77-94.
24. Keupp H: Sublethal punctures in body chambers of Mesozoic ammonites
(forma aegra fenestra n. f.), a tool to interpret synecological
relationships, particularly predator-prey interactions. Paläontologische
Zeitschrift 2006, 80:112-123.
25. Haug JT, Haug C, Ehrlich M: First fossil stomatopod larva (Arthropoda:
Crustacea) and a new way of documenting Solnhofen fossils (Upper
Jurassic, Southern Germany). Palaeodiversity 2008, 1:103-109 [http://www.
palaeodiversity.org/pdf/01/Palaeodiversity_1_07-103-110.pdf].
26. Haug JT, Haug C, Waloszek D, Maas A, Wulf M, Schweigert G: Development
in Mesozoic scyllarids and implications for the evolution of Achelata
(Reptantia, Decapoda, Crustacea). Palaeodiversity 2009, 2:97-110 [http://
www.palaeodiversity.org/pdf/02/Pal_2_04_097-110_gu_4c.pdf].
27. Haug JT, Haug C, Maas A, Fayers SR, Trewin NH, Waloszek D: Simple 3D
images from fossil and Recent micromaterial using light microscopy.
Journal of Microscopy 2009, 233:93-101.
28. Pleijel F: On character coding for phylogeny reconstruction. Cladistics
1995, 11:309-315.
29. Fitzhugh K: The philosophical basis of character coding for the inference
of phylogenetic hypotheses. Zoologica Scripta 2006, 35:261-286.
30. Richter S, Scholtz G: Phylogenetic analysis of the Malacostraca
(Crustacea). Journal of Zoological Systematics and Evolutionary Research
2001, 39:113-136.
31. Santini F, Tyler JC: The Importance of Even Highly Incomplete Fossil Taxa
in Reconstructing the Phylogenetic Relationships of the

Haug et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:290
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/290

Page 17 of 17

Tetradontiformes (Acanthomorpha: Pisces). Integrative and Comparative
Biology 2004, 44:349-357.
32. Schram FR, Hof CHJ: Fossils and the interrelationships of major
crustacean groups. In Arthropod Fossils and Phylogeny. Edited by:
Edgecombe GD. New York, Columbia University Press; 1998:233-302.
33. Schram FR, Dixon CJ: Decapod phylogeny: addition of fossil evidence to
a robust morphological cladistic data set. Bulletin of the Mizunami Fossil
Museum 2004, 31:1-19.
doi:10.1186/1471-2148-10-290
Cite this article as: Haug et al.: Evolution of mantis shrimps
(Stomatopoda, Malacostraca) in the light of new Mesozoic fossils. BMC
Evolutionary Biology 2010 10:290.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
