<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Mortality affects adaptive allocation to growth and reproduction: field evidence from a guild of body snatchers</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:136. doi: 10.1186/1471-2148-10-136"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Ryan F Hechinger"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 8.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 7.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Hechinger BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:136
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/136

Open Access

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Mortality affects adaptive allocation to growth and
reproduction: field evidence from a guild of body
snatchers
Research article

Ryan F Hechinger

Abstract
Background: The probability of being killed by external factors (extrinsic mortality) should influence how individuals
allocate limited resources to the competing processes of growth and reproduction. Increased extrinsic mortality
should select for decreased allocation to growth and for increased reproductive effort. This study presents perhaps the
first clear cross-species test of this hypothesis, capitalizing on the unique properties offered by a diverse guild of
parasitic castrators (body snatchers). I quantify growth, reproductive effort, and expected extrinsic mortality for several
species that, despite being different species, use the same species' phenotype for growth and survival. These are eight
trematode parasitic castrators—the individuals of which infect and take over the bodies of the same host
species—and their uninfected host, the California horn snail.
Results: As predicted, across species, growth decreased with increased extrinsic mortality, while reproductive effort
increased with increased extrinsic mortality. The trematode parasitic castrator species (operating stolen host bodies)
that were more likely to be killed by dominant species allocated less to growth and relatively more to current
reproduction than did species with greater life expectancies. Both genders of uninfected snails fit into the patterns
observed for the parasitic castrator species, allocating as much to growth and to current reproduction as expected
given their probability of reproductive death (castration by trematode parasites). Additionally, species differences
appeared to represent species-specific adaptations, not general plastic responses to local mortality risk.
Conclusions: Broadly, this research illustrates that parasitic castrator guilds can allow unique comparative tests
discerning the forces promoting adaptive evolution. The specific findings of this study support the hypothesis that
extrinsic mortality influences species differences in growth and reproduction.
Background
How much should any organism grow? How much
should it reproduce? These fundamental questions are
tightly related. Increased growth brings larger size. Larger
size typically brings greater reproductive rates and survivorship [1]. Thus, investment in growth represents
investment in future reproduction [2,3]. However, investment in growth theoretically diverts resources from current reproduction, resulting in an allocation trade-off.
Theory indicates that this trade-off is strongly influenced
by extrinsic mortality (the probability of being killed by
external factors) [e.g., [4-9]]. Here, I perform what I
* Correspondence: hechinger@lifesci.ucsb.edu
1

Marine Science Institute and the Department of Ecology, Evolution & Marine
Biology University of California Santa Barbara, CA 93106-6150, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

believe to be the first clear test of whether extrinsic mortality drives among-species differences in allocation to
growth and reproduction. This was possible by using a
study system recently identified [10] as being particularly
suitable for comparative examination of adaptation: several parasitic castrator species—the individuals of which
infect and take over the bodies of the same host species—and their uninfected host.
Extrinsic mortality should affect the trade-off between
growth and reproduction because increased mortality
means a smaller chance of surviving long enough to experience the reproductive gains of having grown to a larger
size [2]. Thus, greater adult mortality should select for
less growth and a greater reproductive effort (proportional allocation to current reproduction). Conversely,
lower mortality should select for more growth and a

© 2010 Hechinger; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons

BioMed Central Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Hechinger BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:136
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/136

lower reproductive effort. This theory applies to species
that continue to grow after maturation (indeterminant
growers). It also applies to those that cease growth after
maturation (determinant growers), with the emphasis
being on how mortality influences growth before maturation. The few clear empirical examinations of whether
extrinsic mortality influences allocation to growth and
reproduction in nature have been cross-population
intraspecific studies [e.g., see particularly [11,12] and
related work, see also [13,14]]. There is little or no data
available to allow a clear cross-species examination of
this hypothesis, at least partly due to the difficulties of
acquiring the necessary information on extrinsic mortality.
Parasitic castrators may facilitate investigation of such
difficult to test questions. An important feature of parasitic castrators is that a single castrator takes over a host's
body and then uses that body for the castrator's sole benefit. A parasitic castrator infection typically completely
and permanently blocks host reproduction, replacing
host reproductive tissues with parasite tissues [15-19].
Thus, the castrated host is dead concerning its fitness, its
reproductive value reduced to zero [15,16,18,20-23].
However, the castrator can potentially operate the stolen
host body for years [15,16,24]. Further, parasitic castrators manipulate the physiology of stolen host bodies, for
instance by secreting hormones and by modulating gene
expression (e.g., [25] and see reviews in [15,16]). These
factors—particularly the castrated host's zero residual
reproductive value in conjunction with the castrator's
manipulation of the stolen host physiology—lead to the
realization that selection will operate on parasitic castrators, not on reproductively dead hosts, regarding adaptive
resource allocation of the stolen host bodies
[10,16,20,23].
Situations where multiple parasitic castrator species
specialize on the same host species should enable powerful analyses concerning optimal allocation schemes [10].
Such diverse parasitic castrator guilds provide a group of
species lacking many confounds that can characterize
both intraspecific and interspecific comparative studies.
Each species lives in the same environment, at the same
time. Further removing confounds, each species uses the
same physiological machinery (the stolen host species'
body) for growth and survival. Another advantage is that
castrator-infected and uninfected hosts can compete for
the same resources [e.g., [26]]. Thus, the direct effect of
parasitic castrator-driven mortality on optimal allocation
strategies may not be confounded by the indirect effect of
increasing resources, as can occur when predator-driven
mortality reduces prey population density and frees up
resources [e.g., [27,28]]. Importantly, despite being similar in many essential ways, the parasitic castrator species
can differ from each other and from uninfected hosts

Page 2 of 14

regarding factors influencing their reproductive expectations [10]. Therefore, selection may generate allocation
schemes that vary not only between infected and uninfected hosts, but also among different castrator species
parasitizing the same host species. Such interspecific
variation would provide material very useful for comparative analysis.
A parasitic castrator-host system with many species
that differ in important and quantifiable factors influencing extrinsic mortality is the California horn snail, Cerithidea californica, and its suite of parasitic castrator
trematodes. Shortly after infection, a trematode reproductively kills the snail by castrating it. The trematode
stages (parthenitae) clonally replicate and shortly begin
producing free-swimming offspring (cercariae), for many
seasons, over many years [29,30]. Not only do trematodes
reproductively kill hosts, but the trematode species also
kill each other [29,30]. Dominant trematode species kill
subordinate species when they both infect the same horn
snail [29,30]. Interspecific dominance occurs in a predictable, hierarchical way, and is largely determined via interactions between the individual, clonal parthenitae that
compose a single species' infection mass [29-32]. The
trematode species vary in the level of extrinsic mortality
caused by dominant species [29,30,33]. The degree of this
extrinsic mortality is based upon the likelihood of
encountering a dominant species, which is jointly determined by a species' dominance rank and its spatial distribution within estuaries [33,34]. For instance, a
subordinate species could experience low mortality if it
tends to occur in areas lacking dominant species. Despite
varying extrinsic mortality risk from dominant trematodes, the background extrinsic mortality of the different
infected and uninfected snails (e.g., due to predation and
abiotic stress) appears to be relatively constant [35,36].
Because we can estimate the "differential mortality"
caused by castration or death by dominant trematodes
[33], this group of species provides a system very amenable to studying how extrinsic mortality influences optimal
allocation to growth and reproduction.
Here, I present data and analyses examining how
extrinsic mortality influences allocation to growth and
reproduction for eight trematode parasitic castrator species and their uninfected host, the California horn snail.
The backbone of this study is growth and infection information from 1,686 snails, recaptured from a wide range
of field growing conditions. I estimated reproductive
effort for these trematode species using published information on parasite/host tissue ratios (equivalent to a
gonadosomatic index) combined with the new growth
data. I calculated differential extrinsic mortality (proportion of recruits killed by other trematode species) using
information on the trematode species' dominance hierarchy and infection prevalences at the study sites. Recog-

Hechinger BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:136
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/136

Page 3 of 14

nizing that a trematode takes over the host body, I
generally refer to snails castrated by a trematode species
simply as that trematode species. As predicted, across
species, growth allocation decreased with increasing
mortality, while reproductive effort increased. Further,
most parasitic castrator species grew more than did uninfected hosts—reflecting their average longer life expectancies. Thus, these findings support a fundamental
element of life history theory, which itself provides a simple explanation for cases of "gigantism" induced by parasitic castrator infection.

Results
Variation in growth

Growth rates varied among snails infected by different
trematode species and uninfected snails (Figure 1, Table
1). The two most extensively sampled trematode species
(growing stolen host bodies) were also the fastest and
slowest growing trematodes. The fastest growing trematode (smcy) grew up to three times faster than uninfected
snails, while the slowest growing trematode (euha) grew
about the same as uninfected male snails. Overall, most
trematode species grew faster than uninfected snails.
This appears not to be an artifact of trematodes disproportionately infecting faster-growing snails (see Additional file 1, Figure S5). The effects of species on growth
rates appeared to be consistent among wetlands (Additional file 1).
Growth also varied with size and, for small, uninfected
snails, with gender. For all species, the smallest individuals grew fastest (Figure 1; Additional file 1, Figure S2).
Consistent with previous work [37], uninfected females
grew faster than uninfected males at small sizes, after
which they rapidly converged with males (Figures 1;
Additional file 1, Figure S3). Trematodes increased
growth of infected small males far more than they did

females (Additional file 1, Figure S3). Thus, gender differences in growth were generally not detectable for infected
snails (Additional file 1, Figure S3). The effects of gender
on growth rates also appeared to be consistent among
wetlands (Additional file 1).
Variation in extrinsic mortality

The differential mortality also varied across trematode
species and uninfected snails, ranging from -6.7% to
39.6% individuals lost to death by dominant trematodes,
or lost to castration for uninfected snails (Figures 2, 3).
The small negative mortality values represent potential
facilitation, when species occur in mixed-species infections more often than expected by chance [33]. Uninfected males appeared slightly more susceptible to
trematode infection than were females (Figures 2, 3;
logistic regression on entire dataset, controlling for site,
growing time, and size; Χ2 = 4.40, df = 1, P = 0.0359, n =
1,840).
Growth versus extrinsic mortality

Does the quantified differential mortality explain the
observed differences in species' growth? As predicted,
total growth allocation decreased with increasing differential mortality (Figure 2A, B). This negative correlation
occurred across trematode species and both genders of
uninfected snails (Figure 2A; r = -0.86, P = 0.0014, n = 10).
An analysis using phylogenetically independent contrasts
also found a negative association, confirming that taxonomic confounds did not drive the negative relationship
between growth and mortality (Figure 2B; r = -0.81, P =
0.0060, n = 9). Uninfected snails fit into the pattern
observed across trematode species (Figure 2A, B). However, the negative relationship between growth allocation
and mortality did not depend on the inclusion of uninfected snails. The result was also strong and significant

Table 1: Statistics from the generalized linear modela using observed individual growth (mm3) as the response variable.
Explanatory variable or statistic

df

Χ2

P

"species"b

9

68.68

<0.0001

Initial size

1

60.45

<0.0001

"species" × initial size

9

18.87

0.026

Estuary

2

3.79

0.15

habitat [estuary]

1

9.55

0.002

site [estuary, habitat]

13

193.68

<0.0001

growing time [estuary]

2

84.42

<0.0001

whole model
goodness of fit (deviance)
aThe

37

1046.78

<0.0001

1648

6422.59

<0.0001

model used a log-link, a Poisson error distribution, and an overdispersion parameter of 4.53. Brackets indicate nested effects.
indicates species of trematode parasitic castrator and male or female uninfected snail hosts.

b"Species"

Hechinger BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:136
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/136

Page 4 of 14

Figure 1 Variation in growth for eight different species of trematode parasitic castrators (operating stolen host bodies) and for both genders of uninfected horn snails. (A) Curves denote mean size-specific growth rates over the size-range sampled for each species (as estimated from
a generalized linear model, Table 1). Species in legend are in the descending order of the growth curves as encountered at the mean-sized snail (705
mm3, or ~ 25.9 mm length), and sample sizes directly follow the species' names (Additional file 1, Table S1 lists the species' taxonomic families). (B)
Variation in growth at the mean-sized snail. Results of pair-wise comparisons indicted. Bars sharing an equal-height line are not significantly different
at the nominal P = 0.05 level. Asterisks denote additional non-significant differences when controlling for multiple comparisons by holding the False
Discovery Rate to 0.05. Data in (A) and (B) represent 1,686 individuals spread throughout 17 sites in three southern California estuaries. Data standardized to reflect 3.5 months of growth in Carpinteria Salt Marsh channels. Other figures and the text use the species' letter and number codes.

Hechinger BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:136
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/136

Page 5 of 14

Figure 2 Allocation to growth versus differential extrinsic mortality for the eight parasitic castrator trematode species (operating stolen
host bodies) and both genders of uninfected horn snails. (A) The analysis using species as independent data points (r = -0.86, P = 0.0014, n = 10).
(B) The analysis using phylogenetically independent comparisons (r = -0.81, P = 0.0060, n = 9; regression through the origin: t8 = 4.0, P = 0.004). Total
growth allocation is the area underneath the species' growth curves in Figure 1, calculated as the definite integral with limits at the minimum- and
maximum-sized snail averaged across species. Differential mortality is the mean proportion of individuals killed by dominant trematodes, or, for uninfected snails, reproductively killed by trematodes. Symbol numbers indicate species as numbered in Figure 1 and Additional file 1, Table S1. Symbol
letters indicate locations of contrasts in the phylogeny depicted in Figure 4. Open symbols represent uninfected snails or contrasts involving uninfected snails. Fit lines are the standard major axes, reflecting the bivariate nature of the data.

after excluding uninfected males and females from the
analysis using species as data points (r = -0.80, P = 0.018,
n = 8), and from the analysis using phylogenetically independent contrasts (r = -0.77, P = 0.030, n = 7). The case
was similar upon exclusion of the two trematode species,
'stic' and 'renc', least adequately sampled at smaller sizes
(species as data points: r = -0.84, P = 0.010, n = 8; independent contrasts: r = -0.78, P = 0.040, n = 7; regression
through the origin: t6 = 3.1, P = 0.021).
Trematodes and uninfected snails did not appear to
respond plastically to local differential mortality risk.
There was no evidence that mean individual growth systematically varied across sites with mortality risk for any
of the trematodes or both sexes of uninfected snails
(Additional file 1, Figure S6; general linear model: F10,82 =
0.89, P = 0.54). This does not rule out the existence of any
plastic responses, but that any possible responses are not
responsible for the documented association between species-level differences in growth rates and differential
mortality.
Reproductive effort & gonadosomatic indices versus
extrinsic mortality

(Figure 3B; r = 0.87, P = 0.0026, n = 9). Importantly, the
two-step randomization test ensured that this relationship was not a spurious artifact driven by the observed
cross-species growth rate variation (Additional file 1). As
for the relationship between growth and mortality, uninfected snails also fit into the pattern describing the trematode species concerning the relationship between
reproductive allocation and mortality. Here too, these
results were robust to the exclusion of uninfected snails.
The correlation was still strongly significantly positive
when I excluded uninfected snails from the analysis using
species as data points (r = 0.84, P = 0.0083, n = 8) or phylogenetically independent contrasts (r = 0.85, P = 0.019, n
= 7). The positive association was also clear when excluding the two trematode species least adequately sampled at
small sizes, 'renc' and 'stic' (species as data points: r =
0.90, P = 0.0035, n = 8; independent contrasts: r = 0.85, P
= 0.014, n = 7; regression through the origin: t6 = 4.0, P =
0.0074).
The gonadosomatic indices for these species did not
correlate with relative reproductive allocation (r = -0.28,
P = 0.43, n = 10), or with differential mortality (Figure 3C,
D).

Opposite to growth, relative reproductive allocation
strongly increased with increasing differential extrinsic
mortality (Figure 3A, B). This was true using the eight
parasitic castrators and both sexes of uninfected hosts as
independent data (Figure 3A; r = 0.88, P = 0.0008, n = 10),
and when using phylogenetically independent contrasts

Discussion
This study provides perhaps the first direct empirical evidence that varying levels of extrinsic mortality across species drive adaptive interspecific differences in allocation
to growth and reproduction. To my knowledge, all previ-

Hechinger BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:136
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/136

Page 6 of 14

Figure 3 Reproductive effort versus differential extrinsic mortality for the eight parasitic castrator trematode species (operating stolen
host bodies) and both genders of uninfected horn snails. Relative reproductive allocation increases with mortality using (A) raw data (r = 0.88, P
= 0.0008, n = 10) and when using (B) phylogenetically independent contrasts (r = 0.87, P = 0.0026, n = 9; regression through the origin: t8 = 5.0, P =
0.0011). Relative reproductive allocation here is a modified gonadosomatic index that accounts for variation in allocation to growth by using total
mass growth increment in the denominator instead of total mass. (C) and (D) show that there is no association when the raw gonadosomatic index
is used to represent reproductive effort in parallel analyses (r = -0.24, P = 0.49, n = 10 and r = -0.03, P = 0.942, n = 9; regression through the origin: t8 =
0.34, P = 0.74). A two-stage randomization test ensured that these positive relationships were not statistical artifacts driven by the strong negative
correlation of growth with mortality (see Additional file 1). Lines, symbols, and differential mortality are as in Figure 2.

ous, substantial examinations of cross-species relationships between mortality and growth and reproduction
[e.g., [38-41]] were unable to discern whether mortality
was extrinsic or intrinsic. Therefore, it is impossible to
determine directionality in previous studies. Mortality
may have influenced optimal allocation, or it could have
been the outcome of optimal allocation (for instance, if
increased reproductive effort lowered survivorship). The
current study examined allocation for several species,
with estimates of a clear, extrinsic source of mortality.
The trematode parasitic castrator species (operating stolen host bodies) whose individuals were more likely to die
from dominant species allocated less to growth and more
to reproduction than did species with greater life expec-

tancies. Interestingly, both genders of uninfected snails fit
into the patterns observed among the parasitic castrator
species, allocating as much to growth and to reproduction as expected given their probability of reproductive
death (castration by trematode parasites). Because the
data further indicate that the species did not plastically
respond to local levels of risk, the consistent species differences in allocation patterns appear to result from
adaptation to different selective regimes—specifically,
different overall levels of extrinsic mortality.
The findings also buttress the perspective outlined in
the introduction regarding how to consider adaptation of
parasitically castrated and uninfected hosts. Except for
seemingly rare systems where parasitic castrator infec-

Hechinger BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:136
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/136

tions die with appreciable frequency and the host recuperates [e.g., [42,43]], a castrated host's reproductive
value is zero. Therefore, with respect to fitness of castrated host bodies, selection will not act on host populations, but on the parasitic castrator populations (barring
limited circumstances when kin selection might operate).
Hence, parasitic castrators are truly 'body snatchers'. To
understand uninfected host resource allocation, we apply
basic life history principles to uninfected hosts. To understand resource allocation of parasitically castrated hosts,
we apply the same principles to the castrators, not to
their reproductively dead hosts. Supporting this point of
view, in this study, castrated hosts allocated resources in
the direction predicted by applying theory to the parasitic
castrators, not the hosts. This perspective may help clarify future empirical and theoretical work addressing parasitic castration.
A general methodological implication of this study
comes from the surprising finding that the species' gonadosomatic indices did not correlate with their relative
reproductive allocation indices. The relative reproductive
allocation index directly factored in variation in allocation to growth. It should therefore more accurately indicate reproductive effort than should the completely static
gonadosomatic index. Indeed, the relationship between
extrinsic mortality and reproductive effort was only
apparent when using the relative reproductive allocation
index. The apparent inadequacy of the gonadosomatic
index to compare reproductive efforts of these species
may partly explain the inconsistent relationship between
that index and dominance rank documented in Hechinger et al. [10]. More broadly, the incongruence between
the two indices suggests researchers must take extra caution when using the gonadosomatic index in comparative
estimates of reproductive effort for organisms with indeterminate growth, or any species where allocation to
somatic tissues may strongly vary.
An interesting issue arises regarding possible differences in overall productivity between uninfected and
infected snails. Despite having a high relative reproductive allocation (driven by low growth rates), it is striking
that uninfected snails had among the lowest gonadosomatic indices and the lowest growth rates. Thus, compared to the average trematode species operating stolen
host bodies, uninfected snails may allocate absolutely less
to both direct reproductive output and to growth. If so,
this may reflect advantages of trematode clonal reproduction compared to the sexual dioecy of uninfected snails.
Future work should detail the entire energy budgets
(including behavioral expenditures) for parasitic castrator
species and their uninfected hosts to more fully understand absolute and relative species differences in resource
allocation. Such work should also factor in offspring survivorship, for which there is coarse evidence that it influ-

Page 7 of 14

ences optimal allocation schemes of trematode parasitic
castrators [10,44].
The growth findings here also directly bear on an issue
that has long interested students of parasitic castrator
systems. For decades, researchers have noted that parasitic castrators—particularly trematodes in snails—can
cause gigantism, increasing growth of infected hosts relative to uninfected hosts [reviewed in [16-18,37]]. However, gigantism was not detected in the first three studies
that directly quantified growth for long-lived marine
snails infected and uninfected by trematode parasitic castrators [26,37,45]. This lack of detecting gigantism led to
the development of conceptual theory explaining why
gigantism should not occur in long-lived host species
(those living > 1.5 years [37] or 4 years [46]). This theory
relied on postulated differences in the allocation schemes
of host species with different longevities and on parasitic
castrator constraints on energy use. However, the results
presented here, along with those of Miura et al. [47] on a
single trematode species, clearly indicate that trematode
parasitic castrators can cause gigantism in long-lived
marine snails. Some workers have postulated that gigantism might be adaptive for the parasitic castrators, by
increasing
fecundity
or
survivorship
[e.g.,
[15,16,18,23,47,48]]. However, it appears there has never
been an explanation for why uninfected hosts would not
also benefit from growing larger. The perspective and
findings of this paper provide a simple potential answer:
uninfected hosts would not benefit from growing larger
because they will not live as long. Higher extrinsic mortality for uninfected hosts compared to parasitic castrators can select for a lower allocation to growth for
uninfected hosts compared to the amount allocated by
parasitic castrators. Minchella [49] did predict that gigantism would tend to occur for longer-lived host species,
but for a different reason. He hypothesized gigantism was
adaptive for the host, by increasing the probability of outliving the castrator infection. This seems unlikely to provide a general explanation, given that long-lived hosts do
not generally outlive infection [16,29,30,50,51]. If gigantism is comparatively frequent in longer-lived host species, it may be because the longevity of such hosts makes
more possible the differential life expectancies necessary
to select for detectably different allocation schemes
between parasitic castrators and uninfected hosts.
The finding that trematodes generally increased growth
appears to contradict previous work on the same system.
Sousa [37] reported that some trematode species (including several studied here) did not affect growth, and that
some slightly stunted growth. It is possible that growth
was different 25 years ago in the northern part of the California horn snail's range, where and when Sousa's work
was carried out. However, it is also possible that trematodes did increase growth in Sousa's study, but that this

Hechinger BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:136
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/136

went undetected due to methodological artifacts arising
from the overdispersed growth characterizing these species. First, for overdispersed data, lower sample sizes
underestimate the mean [52,53]. Therefore, in Sousa [37],
the relatively low sample sizes for individual trematode
species compared to uninfected snails may have yielded
underestimates of growth for trematode species. Additionally, the application of standard ANCOVA to overdispersed data could have also contributed to misleading
conclusions. Ongoing studies of California horn snail
growth in northern populations will help to clarify these
conflicting results. In another study, Lafferty [26] quantified growth for snails infected by a single trematode species (euha) and for uninfected snails. He reported that
'euha' grew slower than uninfected snails. In the current
study, 'euha' grew more slowly than did uninfected
females, but at a rate similar to uninfected males. Because
Lafferty pooled males and females in his uninfected class,
uninfected snails would have grown faster on average
than did 'euha'-infected snails. Therefore, Lafferty's findings are not contradictory but are expected given the data
presented here.
Instead of using dominance rank as a proxy, this study
directly estimated field rates of differential extrinsic mortality based on the probability of being killed by dominant
species. This turned out to be important because there
was a lack of complete correspondence between dominance rank and extrinsic mortality. Two subordinate
trematode species experienced the lowest levels of extrinsic mortality. One of these species (renc) suffered relatively low differential mortality because it appears to
tolerate co-infection with some low- and mid-ranking
species, consequently occurring relatively frequently in
mixed-species infections. Species such as 'renc' appear to
gain at least a partial refuge from co-infecting trematodes
by using a different tissue site within the infected hosts
than that used by most of the trematode species (using
the mantle, versus the visceral mass) [30,54,55]. The low
differential mortality for the other subordinate species
(smcy) occurred because the bulk of its population
recruited to areas in the estuaries where dominants did
not occur, driving the lack of being killed by dominants.
This is interesting, because the typical situation for guilds
of trematode parasitic castrators is for spatial and temporal covariance in species' distributions to increase overall
levels of competitive loss [56]. Future ecological study will
examine whether certain species typically gain spatial refugia, despite this not being the overriding case in these
guilds. It may also be important to conduct the research
over broader spatial scales to increase the likelihood of
detecting such refugia.
Multiple infections by the same trematode species can
occur naturally in other larval trematode-snail systems
[e.g., [57-60]]. Such multi-clone infections may have

Page 8 of 14

occurred undetected in this study. Theory predicts that
increased frequency of multi-clone infections, and the
resulting increase in intraspecific competition, can select
for greater parasite reproductive effort [e.g., [61-63]]. For
the species in this study, there is no data on the extent of
intraspecific competition. However, one would predict
that the relative importance of intraspecific competition
would be greater for those species with a lower risk of
mortality from dominant species. If increased intraspecific competition selects for increased reproduction at
the expense of growth, it would diminish the effects
observed in the current study. However, the relationships
of growth and reproduction with mortality caused by
interspecific antagonism were all strong (all |r|s between
0.81 and 0.88). Nevertheless, there was some unexplained
variation, part of which might be explained by differences
in the nature of the intraspecific interactions characterizing these parasitic castrators.

Conclusions
Broadly, this study illustrates that speciose guilds of parasitic castrators (body snatchers) may allow uniquely powerful comparative tests concerning the forces promoting
adaptive evolution. Previous work has shown that trematode parasitic castrators can affect the life history of their
uninfected hosts [reviewed in [17]]. For example, crosspopulation work [64-66] has documented that increased
extrinsic mortality (castration by trematodes) may select
for hosts that mature at smaller sizes, a pattern first documented for the California horn snail [64]. Speciose parasitic castrator guilds readily allow us to go further than
single-species studies. Many species (the castrators and
their uninfected hosts) live in the same environment and
use the same physiological machinery for growth and
survival. However, these same species differ in important,
quantifiable elements of life history. Therefore, we may
gain unique insight concerning the evolution of allocation
strategies by examining uninfected and parasitically castrated hosts simultaneously and relative to one another,
particularly when there are several species of parasitic
castrators in the assemblage [10]. The specific findings of
this report support the idea that extrinsic mortality influences allocation to growth and reproduction in a way that
contributes to the diversity of life histories that we see
across species in nature.
Methods
Study system

The California horn snail, Cerithidea californica (Haldeman 1840) [67] (Potamididae: Prosobranchia), lives in
salt-marsh dominated estuaries from central California,
USA to Baja California Sur, Mexico [68,69]. The snails
primarily feed on benthic diatoms [70,71]. Resource
abundance limits both growth and reproduction of the

Hechinger BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:136
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/136

California horn snail [26,72,73], further justifying the
general expectation of resource allocation trade-offs.
Throughout its range in California, these snails grow
and reproduce from spring through fall (March-October)
and cease growth and reproduction during the winter
(November-February) [37,69,74]. Maximum longevity for
these snails is at least 6-10 years [24,37,74], and this
appears to be the case for uninfected as well as infected
snails (R.F. Hechinger and J. Lorda, unpublished analyses).
At least 18 trematode species parasitically castrate California horn snails [75,76]. A trematode infects a snail
with a miracidium larva that either swims to infect the
snail, or hatches after the snail ingests the trematode egg.
After infection, the trematode parthenitae clonally replicate and produce free-swimming offspring (cercariae).
These offspring infect second intermediate hosts (various
invertebrates and fishes) where they form cysts (metacercariae). The trematodes infect bird final hosts when birds
eat second intermediate hosts. The trematodes sexually
produce offspring in the birds. The eggs pass with bird
excreta to subsequently infect snails. Some of these and
similar bird-dispersed trematodes exhibit little to no local
genetic structure, being comprised of more broadly distributed, regionally panmictic populations [e.g., [77-79]].
Mark and recapture

Approximately 20,000 snails were captured, marked, and
released during mid-summer 2005 (the end of July). California horn snail performance varies at the fine scale,
among sites within estuaries [26,37,69,74,80]. Therefore,
to estimate the growth over a wide range of growing conditions, I conducted this study at 18 sites spread throughout three estuaries bracketing southern California: 8 sites
at Carpinteria Salt Marsh (CSM) in the north, 6 sites at
Los Peñasquitos Lagoon (LPL) and 4 at Tijuana Estuary
(TJE) in the south. All sites were in tidal creeks, except for
four sites at CSM that were in pans and "back flats" (bare
mud bordered by Salicornia virginica salt marsh). I
selected the sites for interspersion throughout each estuary and because they have all been used in previous studies [namely, [76,81-83]].
Approximately 1,000-1,300 snails were collected from
less than 100 m2 at each of the 18 study sites and taken to
the laboratory for marking. I obtained a wide range of
sizes: 8-43 mm in shell length. Each shell was processed
by cleaning with a toothbrush, rinsing in fresh water, airdrying, and marking with two coats of enamel-based yellow spray-paint. This marking procedure does not appear
to influence snail growth (see Additional file 1). All snails
were released from 25 July - 1 August 2005.
Snails were recaptured during two time-periods,
reflecting "growing-times" of 13.5 and 22 weeks. 1,277
snails were recaptured from 16 of the 18 sites in all three

Page 9 of 14

estuaries during winter 2005 (i.e., from the end of
November through December), Assuming snails ceased
growth on 1 November (see above), these snails were in
the field for 92-100 growing-days (a mean of 13.5 weeks).
During spring 2006 (26-27 April), an additional 642 snails
were recaptured from 10 sites at LPL and TJE (including
from one of the two sites from which no snails were
recovered during the previous collection). Assuming
growth resumed on 1 March 2006, this batch of snails
grew for 153-156 days (a mean of 22 weeks). Overall,
1,919 snails were recaptured from 17 of the 18 study sites
(snails were not found at one site), with a mean of 114
snails from each recapture site. This is about 10% of the
total initially marked and released.
Quantification of growth and parasitism

Several aspects of shell growth were quantified for each
snail. The marking technique indicated initial size. New
shell growth was evident as the paint free shell deposited
beyond the marked initial shell. Following previous work
[47,84,85], degrees of growth around the columnellar axis
was quantified. The initial and final sizes for length and
width measured to the nearest 0.1 mm. The volume of
growth was the (aperture area) × (degrees of growth/360),
expressed in mm3. To calculate aperture area, I equated it
to a circle with a radius being 1/4 the snail width. I calculated initial volume by approximating shell volume to the
volume of a cone. Across all measured snails, the cube
root of volume linearly scaled with total length as:
volume1/3 = (0.326) × (length) + 0.497 (ordinary least
squares regression: R2 = 0.889, P < 0.00005, n = 1918).
Each snail's gender and trematode infection status was
determined by examining dissected snails and trematode
stages with a stereomicroscope. I identified all trematodes to species following an identification key created
for these trematode species [75] (with minor modification—Hechinger and Huspeni, unpublished work).
Differential extrinsic mortality

For each trematode species, I used the formulas in Lafferty et al. [33] to estimate the proportion of individuals
killed by dominant species. The formulas require information on the species' dominance relationships. I used a
slightly modified version of dominance hierarchies previously published for these species [29,30,79] (Additional
file 1, Figure S1). The formulas simply apply the observed
prevalence of each trematode species in "dominant-free"
snails to the portion of the snail population infected with
dominant trematode species. This number (minus any
observed co-infections with dominants) provides the
estimate of the number of subordinate infections killed by
dominant species. Because the intensity of competition
varies at the fine scale [33], I calculated differential mortality for each site at which a trematode species occurred

Hechinger BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:136
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/136

and then took the average across all sites (weighting by
observed prevalence).
For uninfected snails, to calculate differential "mortality", I simply took the average gender-specific prevalence
of trematode infection across all sites (that is, the average
risk of parasitic castration across all samples). I examined
uninfected males and females separately, because host
genders may have different susceptibilities and, consequently, different allocation patterns. Further, Sousa [37]
documented that small females grew faster than small
males.
Relative reproductive allocation and 'gonadosomatic'
indices

Reproductive effort is the proportional allocation of total
energy to reproduction [1,4,86,87]. The gonadosomatic
index (reproductive tissue mass/total mass) is commonly
used to reflect reproductive effort in animals and plants
[1]. Parasite reproduction is the primary function of
trematode tissue in a castrated host. Therefore, the mass
of pure trematode tissue in a snail divided by the total
infected snail tissue mass is a gonadosomatic index for
these parasitic castrators. Hechinger et al. [10] present
the gonadosomatic indices (as "relative mass") for all but
one of the trematode species of the current study. For the
single species (renc) not included in Hechinger et al. [10],
I used the gonadosomatic index of its close taxonomic
and ecological relative, Renicola buchanani.
A gonadosomatic index has the obvious limitation that
it measures standing-stock rather than actual rates of
energy allocation [1]. In a comparative analysis, the gonadosomatic index could still function as useful index of
reproductive effort if different species had equal rates of
allocation to given masses of somatic and reproductive
tissues. However, the growth differences revealed in this
study indicated that species strongly differ in allocation
rate to somatic tissues. Therefore, to better quantify
reproductive effort, I calculated an index, "relative reproductive allocation," that captured the variation in growth
allocation documented in the current study. To do this for
each species, I used the gonadosomatic indices at the
mean-sized snail [the summer values reported in [10]],
divided by the proportional allocation to growth at the
mean-sized snail. I determined the proportional allocation to growth by running a generalized linear model
(GzLM) on the growth data from the current study. This
GzLM was structured with the same predictor variables
as the one I used to depict absolute growth (see Analysis
and Table 1). The relative reproductive allocation index
simplifies to (reproductive tissue mass)/(new growth
mass). Thus, this index more accurately reflects reproductive effort than would a gonadosomatic index ignoring variation in growth. This index still suffers from using
a static numerator (the mass of reproductive tissues), but

Page 10 of 14

there is limited cross-species evidence that the mass of
trematode tissue in a snail is directly proportional to the
mass of offspring produced (see the analyses of McCarthy
et al.'s [44] data in Hechinger et al.[10]).
Based on gonad size, the gonadosomatic index for
uninfected females (7.7%) is lower than that for uninfected males (14.6%) [10]. However, as Hechinger et al.
[10] pointed out, unlike males, females have other substantial reproductive tissues, including a large pallial
gonoduct and an ovipositor [88]. To provide a more accurate index of female reproductive allocation, I determined
a female gonadosomatic index that included the mass of
these additional tissues. I obtained fresh weights for the
pallial gonoduct, ovipositor, and total soft tissue for 20
uninfected females. The relative mass of these reproductive tissues was 7.2 ± 0.5% (± S.E., standard error). Adding
this to the reported 7.7 ± 0.8% relative mass for ovaries
yields the more accurate female gonadosomatic index of
14.9 ± 0.9% used in this study.
Species differences genetic or plastic?

I sought to determine whether species' differences in
growth rates represent consistent relative differences or
general plastic responses to varying local risk of being
killed by trematodes. If individuals did plastically respond
to local risk, we would predict that, within a species, individuals would decrease allocation to growth at sites with
higher extrinsic mortality. To test this idea, I asked
whether individual growth rates within each species correlated across sample sites with differential mortality risk.
Differential mortality risk for each trematode species at a
site was the local prevalence of dominant trematodes. For
uninfected snails, it was the overall trematode prevalence
(that is, the overall risk of castration).
Analysis

Because snail growth was overdispersed, with many individuals growing little or not at all, and some growing
quite a bit (Additional file 1, Figure S2), I analyzed individual snail absolute and proportional growth using generalized linear models (GzLMs) with a log-link and a
Poisson error distribution with an overdispersion parameter [89,90]. Table 1 lists the predictor variables. Because
I was solely interested in controlling for site variation, I
incorporated site identity as a fixed factor. Because snails
from CSM came only from the first growing period (summer to fall), I also nested the effect of growing-time
within estuary. One advantage of using multiple species
in a single model is that the increased sample size allows
better estimation of, and control for, site growing conditions and growing-time differences. I ensured that the
significance of the "species" effect was not solely due to
differences between infected and uninfected snails. To do
this, in addition to examining the statistical significance

Hechinger BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:136
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/136

of each species' parameter estimate in the GzLM, I performed all 45 of the species' pair-wise comparisons (contrasts). I assessed contrast significance at the nominal P =
0.05 level, and also when holding the family-wide False
Discovery Rate [91] to 0.05. Unless otherwise indicated,
all significance tests from GzLMs used likelihood-ratio X2
statistics (and some of the contrasts used Wald tests,
when likelihood-ratio tests were unavailable).
For correlation significance tests, I used randomization
tests [92,93] with 100,000 iterations each. For other analyses, I employed standard parametric tests, including
general linear models (GLMs, [94]).
For parametric tests, I ensured assumptions were met
regarding distribution of the error terms by inspecting
residual versus predicted plots and normal quantile plots
with Lillifors curves for GLMs, and Studentized deviance
versus predicted plots for GzLMs [89,94]. All P-values are
two-tailed. I used the software JMP ver. 7.0.2 for parametric tests, and Resampling Stats for Excel ver. 3 for randomization tests.
To ensure independence of data and to alleviate potential confounds due to common ancestry, I also performed
analyses using phylogenetically independent contrasts
[95,96]. Following Hechinger et al. [10], I determined the
topology of the phylogenetic tree characterizing the study
species (Figure 4) using the phylogeny of trematode families provided by Olsen et al. [97] and information on
generic or subfamilial relationships [98] to resolve
within-family topography. Because male and female
uninfected snails grew differently, I included the separate
genders in the tree. Although the different genders clearly
do not represent independent evolutionary lineages, this
allowed examination of how the contrasts between uninfected snail genders compared to the contrasts between
species. I used branch lengths of one, because we do not
know how evolution occurs along these lineages. The
software, COMPARE 4.6b (E.P. Martin, 2004, Indiana
University), generated the contrasts. The contrasts
ensure independence of the data points, and I used randomization correlation tests to obviate excessive concern
about potential heteroscedasticity. Regression through
the origin complemented the correlations to confirm
contrast relationships.
Of the 1,919 recaptured snails, I excluded from growth
estimates 60 mixed-species infections, 1 outlier (Additional file 1, Figure S2), and 92 snails with undetermined
initial size, gender, or infection status (including immature infections). Excluding mixed-species and immature
infections removes ensures that most recaptured infections represent the original infection status. If some rare
infections completely changed status during the course of
this investigation, they would tend to obscure patterns,
not create them. Also, because lower sample sizes give
underestimates of means for overdispersed data [52,53], I

Page 11 of 14

Figure 4 The phylogenetic tree, used to generate independent
contrasts, representing the relationships among the trematode
parasitic castrator species and uninfected snail hosts. Trematode
species codes and names are in Figure 1 and Additional file, Table S1.
"Female" and "male" are uninfected California horn snails, Cerithidea
californica. Letters represent the position of contrasts indicated in Figures 3B, 4B, and 4D. Tree composed following Hechinger et al. [10], using information from Olsen et al. [97] and Yamaguti [98].

additionally excluded 80 infections by nine rare trematode species (with n between 2 and 16). For the eight
trematode species with over 20 individuals sampled (Figure 1; Additional file 1, Table S1), there was no evidence
that estimates of growth rates increased with sample size
for either total growth allocation (Additional file 1, Figure
S4A, r = -0.03, P = 0.95, n = 8) or growth at the meansized snail (Additional file 1, Figure S4B, r = 0.18, P =
0.67, n = 8). Thus, data from 1,686 snails (1,043 uninfected snails and 643 infected by one of eight trematode
species) went into the main growth analysis (Table 1) and
into the derivative data. Julio Lorda and I plan to present,
elsewhere, analyses of the ecological relevance of these
data.

Author information
RFH is one of the lead investigators of the Ecological and
Evolutionary Parasitology research group at the University of California, Santa Barbara. Two major intellectual
goals underlie much of his research. One goal is to evalu-

Hechinger BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:136
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/136

ate the importance of parasites and parasitism to various
ecological patterns and processes. The other goal is to
reap the benefits of using parasites and their hosts to
tackle general ecological and evolutionary theory. RFH is
inordinately fond of trematodes, parasitic castration, and
coastal wetlands.

Additional material
Additional file 1 Appendix. PDF file with supplementary experiments,
analyses, tables and figures.
Authors' contributions
RFH conceived the study, acquired the data (with assistance of people in the
acknowledgments), analyzed the data, and wrote the paper.
Acknowledgements
I am grateful to K. Lafferty, A. Kuris, R. Warner, J. Kozlowski, F. Thomas, A. Jaramillo, and several anonymous reviewers for discussion or comments; to J.
Lorda, A. Wood, M. Morrison, and L. Mababa for field and laboratory assistance;
to the University of California Nature Reserve System, CA State Parks, the US
Fish & Wildlife Service, and TJE National Estuarine Research Reserve for access
to field sites; and to a CA Sea Grant (R/OPCENV-01) and an NSF/NIH Ecology of
Infectious Diseases grant (DEB-0224565) for financial support.
Author Details
Marine Science Institute and the Department of Ecology, Evolution & Marine
Biology University of California Santa Barbara, CA 93106-6150, USA
Received: 29 July 2009 Accepted: 7 May 2010
Published: 7 May 2010
© 2010 Hechinger; licensee http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/136
This is an Open Access from:BioMed Central Ltd. the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
BMC article is available article distributed under
Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:136

References
1. Roff DA: The evolution of life histories: theory and analysis New York:
Chapman & Hall; 1992.
2. Kozlowski J: Optimal allocation of resources to growth and
reproduction: implications for age and size at maturity. Trends in
Ecology & Evolution 1992, 7:15-19.
3. Williams GC: Natural selection, costs of reproduction, and a refinement
of Lack's principle. American Naturalist 1966, 100:687-690.
4. Gadgil M, Bossert WH: Life historical consequences of natural selection.
American Naturalist 1970, 104:1-24.
5. Law R: Optimal life histories under age-specific predation. American
Naturalist 1979, 114:399-417.
6. Michod RE: Evolution of life histories in response to age-specific
mortality factors. American Naturalist 1979, 113:531-550.
7. Kozlowski J, Teriokhin AT: Allocation of energy between growth and
reproduction: The Pontryagin Maximum Principle solution for the case
of age- and season-dependent mortality. Evolutionary Ecology Research
1999, 1:423-441.
8. Kozlowski J, Uchmanski J: Optimal individual growth and reproduction
in perennial species with indeterminate growth. Evolutionary Ecology
1987, 1:214-230.
9. Charnov EL: Life history invariants: some explorations of symmetry in
evolutionary ecology Oxford [England]; New York: Oxford University Press;
1993.
10. Hechinger RF, Lafferty KD, Mancini FT III, Warner RR, Kuris AM: How large is
the hand in the puppet? Ecological and evolutionary effects on body
mass of 15 trematode parasitic castrators in their snail host.
Evolutionary Ecology 2009, 23:651-667.
11. Reznick D, Endler JA: The impact of predation on life-history evolution
in Trinidadian guppies (Poecilia reticulata). Evolution 1982, 36:160-177.
12. Reznick DN, Bryga H: Life-history evolution in guppies (Poecilia
reticulata).1. phenotypic and genetic changes in an introduction
experiment. Evolution 1987, 41:1370-1385.
13. Johnson JB, Belk MC: Predation environment predicts divergent lifehistory phenotypes among populations of the livebearing fish
Brachyrhaphis rhabdophora. Oecologia 2001, 126:142-149.

Page 12 of 14

14. Jennions MD, Telford SR: Life-history phenotypes in populations of
Brachyrhaphis episcopi (Poeciliidae) with different predator
communities. Oecologia 2002, 132:44-50.
15. Kuris AM: Trophic interactions - similarity of parasitic castrators to
parasitoids. Quarterly Review of Biology 1974, 49:129-148.
16. Baudoin M: Host castration as a parasitic strategy. Evolution 1975,
29:335-352.
17. Sorensen RE, Minchella DJ: Snail-trematode life history interactions: past
trends and future directions. Parasitology 2001, 123:S3-S18.
18. O'Brien J, Van Wyk P: Effects of crustacean parasitic castrators
(epicaridean isopods and rhizocephalan barnacles) on growth of
crustacean hosts. In Crustacean Issues: factors in adult growth Edited by:
Wenner A. Rotterdam: A.A. Balkema; 1985:191-218.
19. Lafferty KD, Kuris AM: Parasitic castration: the evolution and ecology of
body snatchers. 2009, 25:564-572.
20. Rothschild M, Clay T: Fleas, flukes & cuckoos; a study of bird parasites New
York: Philosophical Library; 1952.
21. Lafferty KD, Kuris AM: Trophic strategies, animal diversity and body size.
Trends in Ecology & Evolution 2002, 17:507-513.
22. Kuris AM, Lafferty KD: Parasite-host modeling meets reality: adaptive
peaks and their ecological attributes. In Evolutionary biology of hostparasite relationships: theory meets reality Volume 32. Edited by: Poulin R,
Morand S, Skorping A. Amsterdam: Elsevier; 2000:9-26. Developments in
Animal and Veterinary Sciences
23. Ebert D, Carius HJ, Little T, Decaestecker E: The evolution of virulence
when parasites cause host castration and gigantism. American
Naturalist 2004, 164:S19-S32.
24. Kuris AM, Lafferty KD: Population and community ecology of larval
trematodes in molluscan first intermediate hosts. In Marine Parasitology
Edited by: Rohde K. Victoria: CSIRO Publications; 2005:321-325. 517-519
25. de Jong-Brink M, Bergamin-Sassen M, Soto MS: Multiple strategies of
schistosomes to meet their requirements in the intermediate snail
host. Parasitology 2001, 123:S129-S141.
26. Lafferty KD: Effects of parasitic castration on growth, reproduction and
population dynamics of the marine snail Cerithidea californica. Marine
Ecology Progress Series 1993, 96:229-237.
27. Abrams PA, Rowe L: The effects of predation on the age and size of
maturity of prey. Evolution 1996, 50:1052-1061.
28. Arendt JD, Reznick DN: Evolution of juvenile growth rates in female
guppies (Poecilia reticulata): predator regime or resource level?
Proceedings of the Royal Society B-Biological Sciences 2005, 272:333-337.
29. Sousa WP: Interspecific antagonism and species coexistence in a
diverse guild of larval trematode parasites. Ecological Monographs
1993, 63:103-128.
30. Kuris AM: Guild structure of larval trematodes in molluscan hosts:
prevalence, dominance and significance of competition. In Parasite
communities: patterns and processes Edited by: Esch GW, Bush AO, Aho JM.
London: Chapman and Hall; 1990:69-100.
31. Lim HK, Heyneman D: Intramolluscan inter-trematode antagonism: a
review of factors influencing the host-parasite system and its possible
role in biological control. Advances in Parasitology 1972, 10:191-268.
32. Lie KJ: Larval trematode antagonism: principles and possible
application as a control method. Experimental Parasitology 1973,
33:343-349.
33. Lafferty KD, Sammond DT, Kuris AM: Analysis of larval trematode
communities. Ecology 1994, 75:2275-2285.
34. Sousa WP: Spatial scale and the processes structuring a guild of larval
trematode parasites. In Parasite communities: patterns and processes
Edited by: Esch GW, Bush AO, Aho JM. New York: Chapman & Hall;
1990:41-67.
35. Sousa WP, Gleason M: Does parasitic infection compromise host
survival under extreme environmental conditions: the case for
Cerithidea californica (Gastropoda: Prosobranchia). Oecologia, Berlin
1989, 80:456-464.
36. Sousa WP: Size-dependent predation on the salt-marsh snail Cerithidea
californica Haldeman. Journal of Experimental Marine Biology & Ecology
1993, 166:19-37.
37. Sousa WP: Host life history and the effect of parasitic castration on
growth a field study of Cerithidea californica (Gastropoda:
Prosobranchia) and its trematode parasites. Journal of Experimental
Marine Biology and Ecology 1983, 73:273-296.

Hechinger BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:136
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/136

38. Beverton RJH: Patterns of reproductive strategy parameters in some
marine teleost fishes. Journal of Fish Biology 1992, 41:137-160.
39. Charnov EL: Natural selection and sex change in pandalid shrimp: test
of a life-history theory. The American Naturalist 1979, 113:715.
40. Shine R, Charnov EL: Patterns of survival, growth, and maturation in
snakes and lizards. The American Naturalist 1992, 139:1257-1269.
41. Ebert TA: Growth and mortality of post-larval echinoids. Amer Zool
1975, 15:755-775.
42. Kuris AM, Poinar GO, Hess RT: Post-larval mortality of the endoparasitic
isopod castrator Portunion conformis (Epicaridea: Entoniscidae) in the
shore crab, Hemigrapsus oregonensis, with a description of the host
response. Parasitology 1980, 80:211-232.
43. Goater TM, Shostak AW, Williams JA, Esch GW: A mark-recapture study of
trematode parasitism in overwintered Helisoma anceps (Pulmonata),
with special reference to Halipegus occidualis (Hemiuridae). The Journal
of Parasitology 1989, 75:553-560.
44. McCarthy HO, Fitzpatrick S, Irwin SWB: Life history and life cycles:
Production and behavior of trematode cercariae in relation to host
exploitation and next-host characteristics. Journal of Parasitology 2002,
88:910-918.
45. Curtis LA: Growth, trematode parasitism, and longevity of a long-lived
marine gastropod (Ilyanassa obsoleta). Journal of the Marine Biological
Association of the United Kingdom 1995, 75:913-925.
46. Gorbushin AM: Field evidence of trematode-induced gigantism in
Hydrobia spp. (Gastropoda: Prosobranchia). Journal of the Marine
Biological Association of the United Kingdom 1997, 77:785-800.
47. Miura O, Kuris AM, Torchin ME, Hechinger RF, Chiba S: Parasites alter host
phenotype and create a new ecological niche for snail hosts.
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London - Series B: Biological Sciences 2006,
273:1323-1328.
48. Rothschild M: Further observations on the effect of trematode parasites
on Peringia ulvae (Pennant, 1777). Novitates Zoologicae 1938, 41:84-102.
49. Minchella DJ: Host life-history variation in response to parasitism.
Parasitology 1985, 90:205-216.
50. Curtis LA: Tenure of individual larval trematode infections in an
estuarine gastropod. Journal of the Marine Biological Association of the
United Kingdom 2003, 83:1047-1051.
51. Rothschild M: A seven-year-old infection of Cryptocotyle lingua Creplin
in the Winkle Littorina littorea L. The Journal of Parasitology 1942, 28:350.
52. Pacala SW, Dobson AP: The relation between the number of parasites/
host and host age: population-dynamic causes and maximumlikelihood estimation. Parasitology 1988, 96:197-210.
53. Gregory RD, Woolhouse MEJ: Quantification of parasite aggregation: a
simulation study. Acta Tropica 1993, 54:131-139.
54. Yoshino TP: A seasonal and histologic study of larval Digenea infecting
C erithidea californica (Gastropoda: Prosobranchia) from Goleta Slough,
Santa Barbara County, California, USA. Veliger 1975, 18:156-161.
55. Hechinger RF, Lafferty KD, Kuris AM: Diversity increases biomass
production for trematode parasites in snails. Proceedings of the Royal
Society of London, Series B: Biological Sciences 2008, 275:2707-2714.
56. Kuris AM, Lafferty KD: Community structure: larval trematodes in snail
hosts. Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics 1994, 25:189-217.
57. Keeney DB, Waters JM, Poulin R: Clonal diversity of the marine
trematode Maritrema novaezealandensis within intermediate hosts: the
molecular ecology of parasite life cycles. Molecular Ecology 2007,
16:431-439.
58. Lagrue C, McEwan J, Poulin R, Keeney DB: Co-occurrences of parasite
clones and altered host phenotype in a snail-trematode system.
International Journal for Parasitology 2007, 37:1459-1467.
59. Minchella DJ, Sollenberger KM, de Souza CP: Distribution of schistosome
genetic diversity within molluscan intermediate hosts. Parasitology
1995, 111:217-220.
60. Rauch G, Kalbe M, Reusch TBH: How a complex life cycle can improve a
parasite's sex life. Journal of Evolutionary Biology 2005, 18:1069-1075.
61. Frank SA: Models of parasite virulence. Quarterly Review of Biology 1996,
71:37-78.
62. van Baalen M, Sabelis MW: The dynamics of multiple infection and the
evolution of virulence. American Naturalist 1995, 146:881-910.
63. May RM, Nowak MA: Coinfection and the evolution of parasite
virulence. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London Series B Biological
Sciences 1995, 261:209-215.

Page 13 of 14

64. Lafferty KD: The marine snail, Cerithidea californica, matures at smaller
sizes where parasitism is high. Oikos 1993, 68:3-11.
65. Jokela J, Lively CM: Parasites, sex, and early reproduction in a mixed
population of freshwater snails. Evolution 1995, 49:1268-1271.
66. Fredensborg BL, Poulin R: Parasitism shaping host life-history evolution:
adaptive responses in a marine gastropod to infection by trematodes.
Journal of Animal Ecology 2006, 75:44-53.
67. Haldeman SS: A monograph of the Limniades and other freshwater univalve
shells of North America Philadelphia: J. Dobson; 1840.
68. Macdonald KB: Quantitative studies of salt marsh mollusc faunas from
the North American Pacific Coast. Ecological Monographs 1969,
39:33-60.
69. Race MS: Field ecology and natural history of Cerithidea californica
(Gastropoda: Prosobranchia) in San Francisco Bay. Veliger 1981,
24:18-27.
70. Driscoll AL: Structure and function of the alimentary tract of Batillaria
zonalis and Cerithidea californica: style-bearing mesogastropods.
Veliger 1972, 14:375-386.
71. Whitlatch RB, Obrebski S: Feeding selectivity and coexistence in two
deposit-feeding gastropods. Marine Biology 1980, 58:219-225.
72. Byers JE: Competition between two estuarine snails: implications for
invasions of exotic species. Ecology 2000, 81:1225-1239.
73. Byers JE, Goldwasser L: Exposing the mechanism and timing of impact
of nonindigenous species on native species. Ecology 2001,
82:1330-1343.
74. McCloy MJ: Population regulation in the deposit feeding
mesogastropod Cerithidea californica as it occurs in a San Diego salt
marsh habitat. MS. University of California, San Diego; 1979.
75. Martin WE: An annotated key to the cercariae that develop in the snail
Cerithidea californica. Bulletin of the Southern California Academy of
Sciences 1972, 71:39-43.
76. Hechinger RF, Lafferty KD, Huspeni TC, Brooks A, Kuris AM: Can parasites
be indicators of free-living diversity? Relationships between the
species richness and abundance of larval trematodes with that of local
fishes and benthos. Oecologia 2007, 151:82-92.
77. Keeney DB, King TM, Rowe DL, Poulin R: Contrasting mtDNA diversity
and population structure in a direct-developing marine gastropod and
its trematode parasites. Molecular Ecology 2009, 18:4591-4603.
78. Miura O, Kuris AM, Torchin ME, Hechinger RF, Dunham EJ, Chiba S:
Molecular-genetic analyses reveal cryptic species of trematodes in the
intertidal gastropod, Batillaria cumingi (Crosse). International Journal for
Parasitology 2005, 35:793-801.
79. Huspeni TC: A molecular genetic analysis of host specificity, continental
geography, and recruitment dynamics of a larval trematode in a salt
marsh snail. PhD. University of California, Santa Barbara; 2000.
80. Armitage AR, Fong P: Upward cascading effects of nutrients: shifts in a
benthic microalgal community and a negative herbivore response.
Oecologia 2004, 139:560-567.
81. Desmond JS, Deutschman DH, Zedler JB: Spatial and temporal variation
in estuarine fish and invertebrate assemblages: Analysis of an 11-year
data set. Estuaries 2002, 25:552-569.
82. Hechinger RF, Lafferty KD: Host diversity begets parasite diversity: bird
final hosts and trematodes in snail intermediate hosts. Proceedings of
the Royal Society of London - Series B: Biological Sciences 2005,
272:1059-1066.
83. Kuris AM, Hechinger RF, Shaw JC, Whitney KL, Aguirre-Macedo ML, Boch
CA, Dobson AP, Dunham EJ, Fredensborg BL, Huspeni TC, et al.:
Ecosystem energetic implications of parasite and free-living biomass
in three estuaries. 0028-0836 2008, 454:515-518.
84. Gorbushin AM, Levakin IA: The effect of trematode parthenitae on the
growth of Onoba aculeus, Littorina saxatilis and L. obtusata
(Gastropoda: Prosobranchia). Journal of the Marine Biological Association
of the United Kingdom 1999, 79:273-279.
85. Mouritsen KN, Gorbushin A, Jensen KT: Influence of trematode
infections on in situ growth rates of Littorina littorea. Journal of the
Marine Biological Association of the United Kingdom 1999, 79:425-430.
86. Hirshfield MF, Tinkle DW: Natural selection and the evolution of
reproductive effort. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America 1975, 72:2227-2231.
87. Stearns SC: The evolution of life histories Oxford; New York: Oxford
University Press; 1992.

Hechinger BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:136
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/136

88. Houbrick RS: Revision of higher taxa in genus Cerithidea
Mesogastropoda Potamidiae based on comparative morphology and
biological data. American Malacological Bulletin 1984, 2:1-20.
89. McCulloch CE, Searle SR: Generalized, linear, and mixed models New York;
Chichester: John Wiley & Sons; 2001.
90. Myers RH, Montgomery DC, Vining GG: Generalized linear models: with
applications in engineering and the sciences New York: Wiley; 2002.
91. Benjamini Y, Hochberg Y: Controlling the false discovery rate: a practical
and powerful approach to multiple testing. Journal of the Royal
Statistical Society Series B-Methodological 1995, 57:289-300.
92. Edgington ES: Randomization tests 3rd edition. New York: Marcel Dekker,
Inc; 1995.
93. Manly BFJ: Randomization, bootstrap and Monte Carlo methods in biology
2nd edition. London: Chapman & Hall; 1997.
94. Kutner MH, Nachtsheim CJ, Neter J, Li W: Applied linear statistical models
5th edition. Boston: McGraw-Hill/Irwin; 2005.
95. Felsenstein J: Phylogenies and the comparative method. American
Naturalist 1985, 125:1-15.
96. Harvey PH, Pagel MD: The comparative method in evolutionary biology
Oxford: Oxford University Press; 1991.
97. Olson PD, Cribb TH, Tkach VV, Bray RA, Littlewood DTJ: Phylogeny and
classification of the Digenea (Platyhelminthes: Trematoda).
International Journal for Parasitology 2003, 33:733-755.
98. Yamaguti S: Synopsis of digenetic trematodes of vertebrates Tokyo: Keigaku
Publishing Co; 1971.
doi: 10.1186/1471-2148-10-136
Cite this article as: Hechinger, Mortality affects adaptive allocation to
growth and reproduction: field evidence from a guild of body snatchers BMC
Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:136

Page 14 of 14

</pre>
</body>
</html>
