<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Rapid isolation of gene homologs across taxa: Efficient identification and isolation of gene orthologs from non-model organism genomes, a technical report</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="EvoDevo 2011, 2:7. doi:10.1186/2041-9139-2-7"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Alison Heffer"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Heffer and Pick EvoDevo 2011, 2:7
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/7

SHORT REPORT

Open Access

Rapid isolation of gene homologs across taxa:
Efficient identification and isolation of gene
orthologs from non-model organism genomes,
a technical report
Alison Heffer, Leslie Pick*

Abstract
Background: Tremendous progress has been made in the field of evo-devo through comparisons of related genes
from diverse taxa. While the vast number of species in nature precludes a complete analysis of the molecular
evolution of even one single gene family, this would not be necessary to understand fundamental mechanisms
underlying gene evolution if experiments could be designed to systematically sample representative points along
the path of established phylogenies to trace changes in regulatory and coding gene sequence. This isolation of
homologous genes from phylogenetically diverse, representative species can be challenging, especially if the gene
is under weak selective pressure and evolving rapidly.
Results: Here we present an approach - Rapid Isolation of Gene Homologs across Taxa (RIGHT) - to efficiently
isolate specific members of gene families. RIGHT is based upon modification and a combination of degenerate
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and gene-specific amplified fragment length polymorphism (AFLP). It allows
targeted isolation of specific gene family members from any organism, only requiring genomic DNA. We describe
this approach and how we used it to isolate members of several different gene families from diverse arthropods
spanning millions of years of evolution.
Conclusions: RIGHT facilitates systematic isolation of one gene from large gene families. It allows for efficient gene
isolation without whole genome sequencing, RNA extraction, or culturing of non-model organisms. RIGHT will be a
generally useful method for isolation of orthologs from both distant and closely related species, increasing sample size
and facilitating the tracking of molecular evolution of gene families and regulatory networks across the tree of life.

Findings
One focus of evolutionary biologists is to understand
how changes in regulatory and coding regions of genes
contribute to species evolution and adaptation [1,2].
This requires sequence comparisons across distantly
related taxa as well as among closely related species.
A major limitation in studying molecular evolution is
the amount of comprehensive sequence data available to
track these changes in genes and their networks. Standard approaches include comparisons across widely
divergent model organisms, comparison of gene
* Correspondence: lpick@umd.edu
Program in Molecular & Cell Biology and Department of Entomology,
University of Maryland, 4112 Plant Sciences Building, College Park, MD
20742, USA

sequences that have been deposited in databases, and
comparisons of whole genome sequences. This can
result in an incomplete matrix of information about the
lineages of particular gene families, making it difficult to
trace steps leading to functional changes in regulatory
and coding sequences. Additionally, the sequence conservation of duplicated and diverged genes within gene
families [3,4] poses a challenge: How can we identify a
particular member of a gene family without isolating
and screening through closely-related homologs? Here
we report a strategy to efficiently isolate genes from
genomic DNA that can be used to obtain sequence
information from un-sequenced genomes and nonmodel organisms not easily reared in the laboratory.
Rapid Isolation of Gene Homologs across Taxa

© 2011 Heffer and Pick; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Heffer and Pick EvoDevo 2011, 2:7
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/7

(RIGHT) is based on the fact that homologous genes
(both paralogs and orthologs) generally show conservation of at least one domain, even if other parts of the
sequence are under weaker selective pressure. For example, the Hox proteins have retained the conserved DNA
binding domain after duplication and divergence [5,6].
While not forging fundamentally new technology, this
approach combines and modifies existing procedures to
facilitate the rapid isolation of genes, allowing sampling
of a large number of taxa.
RIGHT Methodology

RIGHT methodology utilizes degenerate polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) and gene-specific amplified-length
fragment polymorphism (AFLP) to allow for rapid gene
isolation. First, degenerate primers are designed to
amplify a small region of less than 200 bases of the conserved domain characteristic of the gene family (Figure
1, Step 1). One primer is derived from the unique signature motif in the homolog of interest, while the other
can be shared with other family members. A variation of
touchdown PCR is used that is optimized for these

500bp

S te p 1

Page 2 of 5

degenerate primers (see attached protocol, Additional
file 1). Nested PCR is done to ensure that the correct
gene-family member is amplified. The PCR product is
run on an agarose gel, purified and sequenced. The product can be positively identified by characteristic residues in the homolog of interest, along with BLAST
searches against other species. Together, this allows for
increased confidence that the isolated gene product corresponds to the gene of interest. From this short DNA
sequence obtained from degenerate PCR, gene-specific
primers are designed for subsequent reactions.
Sequence up- and downstream of the conserved region
(obtained in Step 1, Figure 1) is next isolated by modifications of AFLP and TE-display techniques [7-12] that
allow selective amplification of only the gene sequence
of interest. Traditional AFLP uses restriction enzymes to
digest genomic DNA followed by ligation of adapters of
known sequence to DNA ends. Adapter-specific primers
are used in subsequent PCRs to amplify DNA fragments, which are then separated on a gel and analyzed.
RIGHT uses the basic idea of AFLP up to the amplification step; however, instead of amplifying DNA

G en o m ic D N A w ith g ene of in terest
th at h as a co n served d o m ain
D eg en erate P C R to iso late seq u en ce
from a co n served d o m ain

D ig est D N A w ith restrictio n
en zym e in th e p resen ce of
ad ap ter

S te p 2
O vern ig ht lig atio n to ad d
ad ap ter to D N A en d s

S te p 3

Nested P C R to am plify g en e o f interest,
u sin g a prim er sp ecific to the gene of
interest an d o n e fo r th e ad ap ter

S te p 4

Isolatio n of en tire co d in g
seq u en ce b y ‘w alkin g ’ alo n g
th e g en e u sin g different D N A
d ig ests as tem p lates

S te p 5

P C R - am p lify en tire co din g regio n fro m
g en o m e an d seq u en ce to verify
read in g fram e

Figure 1 Overview of RIGHT technique used to isolate homologous genes from large gene families. All steps are described in the text.
Oligonucleotides that were annealed to make the adapter destroyed the restriction site. All reverse primers were ordered with the 5’ end
phosphorylated, or were phosphorylated before annealing with an appropriate enzyme. For example, MseI digest/ligation: F-5’
GACGATGAGTCTTGAGTTCAGTCTGTA, R-5’PhosTATACAGACTGAACTCAAGACTCATC; XhoI: F-5’ GACGATGAGTCTTGAGTTCAGTCTGTA, R5’PhosTCGATACAGACTGAACTCAAGACTCATC.

Heffer and Pick EvoDevo 2011, 2:7
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/7

Page 3 of 5

RIGHT isolation of homeobox and nuclear receptor genes

approximately 150 bases downstream (Figure 2A,
arrows). Ftz homologs were positively identified by characteristic residues in the homeodomain. Next, gene-specific AFLP was carried out using a combination of
unique restriction/ligation templates for PCR with one
ftz-specific primer and one adapter-specific primer
(Figure 2B). All products were sequenced and genesequence continuity verified by PCR with genomic DNA
and primers designed to the extreme 5’ and 3’ ends of
sequence that had been isolated. Full-length ftz
sequences, including putative introns, were isolated by
genomic walking until translation initiation and stop
codons were identified. Using RIGHT allowed us to isolate ftz genes from diverse arthropods representing
approximately 550 million years of evolutionary divergence [16], including the dermapteran Forficula auricularia and archaeognathan Pedetontus saltator (Figure
2C). Additionally, genomic DNA of two non-model beetles was used for degenerate PCR to obtain the ftz
homeobox, and in combination with RACE on embryonic
cDNA, full-length ftz sequences were obtained [16]. To
date, we have isolated 2 full-length and 10 partial ftz
genes from a range of non-model organisms using
RIGHT.
In addition to ftz, we isolated other homeobox-containing genes such as extradenticle (exd) and the orphan
nuclear receptor ftz-f1 from multiple species with great
success (unpublished). RIGHT was used to isolate partial
exd sequences from Thermobia domestica (firebrat), Callosobruchus maculatus (beetle), and Folsomia candida (collembolan). In combination with RACE, full-length exd
coding regions were isolated from these species. Several
partial ftz-f1 sequences were isolated, including Artemia
salina (brine shrimp), Folsomia candida (collembolan),
Thermobia domestica (firebrat), Callosobruchus maculatus
(beetle), Dermestes maculatus (beetle) Oncopeltus fasciatus
(milkweed bug), and Acyrthosiphon pisum (aphid). As for
exd, full-length ftz-f1 sequences have been obtained from
many of these organisms in combination with RACE. For
this work, as per experimental design, sequences were
obtained from species representing key points in arthropod phylogeny to allow for systematic analysis of a small
network of functionally related genes from different
families (ftz, ftz-f1, exd). Thus far, every gene that we have
attempted to isolate from any chosen species using
RIGHT has been obtained.

RIGHT has been used successfully in our laboratory to
efficiently isolate specific members of several large gene
families. The technique was first developed to isolate a
rapidly-evolving member of the Hox gene family, fushi
tarazu (ftz) [13-15]. First, degenerate PCR primers were
designed based upon signature residues encoding the
amino-terminal end of the DNA-binding homeodomain
and another highly conserved region with low degeneracy

Conclusions
The ability to isolate homologous genes from diverse
taxa will empower studies of molecular evolution of
genes, families and gene networks. In the past, these
approaches were limited by absence of genomic information. Even though genome sequencing is now practical for a larger number of species, it is unlikely to make

fragments using adapter sequences as both primers
(which generates many fragments), an adapter-specific
primer is used as one primer and a gene-specific primer
(derived from degenerate PCR used in Figure 1, Step 1)
as the other primer. Thus, only a sequence from the
gene of interest is isolated. The digestion of genomic
DNA and ligation of adapters is done in a single step
(Figure 1, Step 2). Adapter sequences are designed to
anneal to, but destroy, restriction sites in order to avoid
re-digestion in this combined restriction/ligation reaction. Several different restriction digests are set up in
parallel to provide different-length PCR templates covering the gene of interest. This is also beneficial because
restriction site locations are not known for genomes
that have not been sequenced. The digestion/ligation is
followed by two rounds of nested PCR (Figure 1, Step
3), which functions to increase specificity of primer
binding and the amount of product. After the PCR product is amplified and sequenced, new gene-specific primers are designed at the sequence ends to repeat PCRs
with a different restriction digest/ligation as template in
order to extend the sequence. By repeating this process,
one can “walk” along the genomic sequence to isolate
the entire coding sequence (Figure 1, Step 4).
In most cases only one clear product was observed
after nested PCR; however, occasionally there were several. In these situations, either all products were
sequenced or products were re-amplified using the same
primers or another nested set to reduce the number of
products. In cases where multiple bands persisted, it
was usually due to restriction sites that were very close
together in the genome and almost all of the sequenced
regions overlapped. After a new sequence has been isolated, its continuity is always checked by PCR with primers at extreme opposite ends of the sequence that has
been obtained to make sure the sequence being isolated
is contiguous with that upstream and/or downstream
(Figure 1, Step 5). This is very important because,
although infrequent, ligation may occur between genomic DNA fragments in Step 2. As demonstrated,
RIGHT provides efficiency and saves time when compared to other protocols. This combination is a powerful
method for obtaining full gene sequence information,
including coding and regulatory regions.

Heffer and Pick EvoDevo 2011, 2:7
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/7

Page 4 of 5

A

HOMEODOMAIN

Dm-Antp
Dm-Scr

RKRGRQTYTRYQTLELEKEFHFNRYLTRRRRIEIAHALCLTERQIKIWFQNRRMKWKKEN
TKRQRTSYTRYQTLELEKEFHFNRYLTRRRRIEIAHALCLTERQIKIWFQDRRMKWKKEH

Dm-Ftz

SKRTRQTYTRYQTLELEKEFHFNRYITRRRRIDIANALSLSERQIKIWFQNRRMKSKKDR

Tc-Ftz
Sg-Ftz

NKRTRQTYTRYQTLELEKEFHFNKYLTRRRRIEIAESLRLTERQIKIWFQNRRMKAKKDT
AKRTRQTYTRFQTLELEKEFHYNRYLTRRRRVEISQALGLTERQIKIWFQNRRMKLKKEN

B
Scr

ftz

homeobox

Antp

homeobox

Scr

ftz

homeobox

P. saltator genomic DNA
with Hox gene family

homeobox

Antp

homeobox

Degenerate PCR with ftz N-terminal
homeobox primer other conserved
region 150 bases downstream

homeobox

EcoRI

MspI

homeobox

homeobox

homeobox

homeobox

homeobox

homeobox

homeo

Digestion of genomic DNA and in the
presence of annealed oligonucleotides
that destroy the restriction site

Overnight ligation to add
adapter to DNA ends

PCR using different digestion/ligation
reactions as templates to isolate the 3’
and 5’ ends of ftz sequence. One ftz-specific
primer and one adapter-specific primer

Sequence products that overlap in
conserved region

meobox

Check for continuous product by PCR with
primers to the ends of ftz sequence

homeobox

C
P. saltator

F. auricularia

EcoRI

MseI

MseI

EcoRI MspI

MspI

EcoRI

XhoI

Figure 2 Isolation of ftz homologs using RIGHT. A) Homolog-specific residues guide degenerate PCR design. Different Hox proteins have
different N-terminal regions (grey shaded region, with differences highlighted in yellow) that can be used for isolation of one family member.
The arrows indicate the regions used for degenerate primer design to isolate ftz. The forward degenerate primer makes use of the signature
motifs in the N-terminal region, allowing for specific amplification of one member of the Hox gene family. (Drosophila melanogaster Antp: DmAntp; D. melanogaster Scr: Dm-Scr; D. melanogaster Ftz: Dm-Ftz; Tribolium castaneum Ftz: Tc-Ftz; Schistocerca gregaria Ftz: Sg-Ftz). B) Isolation of
ftz from genomic DNA of non-model organism. A schematic of one application of our approach to isolate new homologs is shown.
C) Degenerate PCR was used to isolate the ftz homebox of P.salt and F.auri, and full-length ftz sequences were obtained using different
restriction digests/ligations and subsequent PCRs. For P. salt, three fragments were obtained by RIGHT and sequenced after degenerate PCR
identified the ftz homeobox; fragment sizes are (from left to right): MseI-EcoRI 320 bp, EcoRI-MspI 114 bp, MspI-EcoRI 945 bp. For F. auri, three
fragments were also obtained by RIGHT and sequenced after degenerate PCR identified the ftz homeobox; fragment sizes are (from left to right):
EcoRI-MseI 273 bp, MseI-MspI 383 bp, MspI-XhoI 875 bp. Homeobox regions are shown in grey, and other coding regions in blue.

Heffer and Pick EvoDevo 2011, 2:7
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/7

a dent in the millions of species on Earth. Similarly,
investments are being made in developing new model
systems, to expand on the standard fly, mouse and
worm systems. However, the investment to bring a new
model system up to speed is substantial and it is neither
necessary nor practical to fully develop hundreds of
genetic model systems. We suggest that these
approaches, while enormously important for the field of
evo-devo, are not always necessary to answer specific
evolutionary questions. RIGHT provides a fast and efficient way to isolate genes, including coding regions and
candidate cis-regulatory regions, and overcomes many
practical constraints, realistically allowing for the isolation of 10s if not 100s of genes from families or gene
networks to study molecular evolution across divergent
taxa or within specific clades. This approach obviates
common limitations, such as genome sequence availability or rearing species in the lab. It has been used successfully to isolate specific members of several large
gene families, allowing for a comparative analysis over
millions of years of evolutionary time.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Heffer and Pick Supplementary Information
Protocol. A detailed description of protocol for the technique described
in this manuscript.

Abbreviations
AFLP: Amplified Fragment Length Polymorphism; Antp: Antennapedia; exd:
extradenticle; ftz: fushi tarazu; ftz-f1: fushi tarazu factor 1; PCR: Polymerase
Chain Reaction; RACE: Rapid Amplification of cDNA Ends; RIGHT: Rapid
Isolation of Gene Homologs across Taxa; Scr: Sex combs reduced; TE-display:
Transposable Element-display

Page 5 of 5

4.
5.
6.
7.

8.
9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.
15.

16.

Lynch M, Force A: The probability of duplicate gene preservation by
subfunctionalization. Genetics 2000, 154:459-473.
McGinnis W, Krumlauf R: Homeobox genes and axial patterning. Cell 1992,
68:283-302.
Gehring WJ, Kloter U, Suga H: Evolution of the Hox gene complex from
an evolutionary ground state. Curr Top Dev Biol 2009, 88:35-61.
Vos P, Hogers R, Bleeker M, Reijans M, van de Lee T, Hornes M, Frijters A,
Pot J, Peleman J, Kuiper M, et al: AFLP: a new technique for DNA
fingerprinting. Nucleic Acids Res 1995, 23:4407-4414.
Beeman RW, Stauth DM: Rapid cloning of insect transposon insertion
junctions using ‘universal’ PCR. Insect Mol Biol 1997, 6:83-88.
Casa AM, Brouwer C, Nagel A, Wang L, Zhang Q, Kresovich S, Wessler SR:
Inaugural article: the MITE family heartbreaker (Hbr): molecular markers
in maize. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2000, 97:10083-10089.
Biedler J, Qi Y, Holligan D, della Torre A, Wessler S, Tu Z: Transposable
element (TE) display and rapid detection of TE insertion polymorphism
in the Anopheles gambiae species complex. Insect Mol Biol 2003,
12:211-216.
Hawthorne DJ: AFLP-based genetic linkage map of the Colorado potato
beetle Leptinotarsa decemlineata: sex chromosomes and a pyrethroidresistance candidate gene. Genetics 2001, 158:695-700.
Subramanian RA, Arensburger P, Atkinson PW, O’Brochta DA: Transposable
element dynamics of the hAT element Herves in the human malaria
vector Anopheles gambiae s.s. Genetics 2007, 176:247724-87.
Telford MJ: Evidence for the derivation of the Drosophila fushi tarazu
gene from a Hox gene orthologous to lophotrochozoan Lox5. Curr Biol
2000, 10:349-352.
Lohr U, Yussa M, Pick L: Drosophila fushi tarazu: a gene on the border of
homeotic function. Curr Biol 2001, 11:1403-1412.
Lohr U, Pick L: Cofactor-interaction motifs and the cooption of a
homeotic Hox protein into the segmentation pathway of Drosophila
melanogaster. Curr Biol 2005, 15:643-649.
Heffer A, Shultz J, Pick L: Surprising flexibility in a conserved Hox
transcription factor over 550 million years of evolution. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA 2010, 107:18040-18045.

doi:10.1186/2041-9139-2-7
Cite this article as: Heffer and Pick: Rapid isolation of gene homologs
across taxa: Efficient identification and isolation of gene orthologs from
non-model organism genomes, a technical report. EvoDevo 2011 2:7.

Acknowledgements
We thank Arun Subramanian, Jerry Regier, Dave Hawthorne and Jeff Shultz
for helpful suggestions and David O’Brochta for comments on the
manuscript. AH acknowledges support from the University of Maryland’s
Graduate Student Summer Fellowship. This work was supported by NSF
grant IBN0641717 to L.P.
Authors’ contributions
AH participated in experimental design, carried out experiments and
participated in writing the paper. LP participated in experimental design,
analysis of results and writing the paper.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 16 December 2010 Accepted: 1 March 2011
Published: 1 March 2011

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review

References
1. Schlosser G, Wagner GP: Modularity in Development and Evolution Chicago:
University of Chicago Press; 2004.
2. Carroll SB, Grenier JK, Weatherbee SD: From DNA to diversity: molecular
genetics and the evolution of animal design. Second edition. Oxford:
Blackwell Science Ltd; 2005.
3. Ohno S: Evolution by gene duplication Berlin: Springer-Verlag; 1970.

• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
