<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>1471-2105-6-S4-S1.fm</title>
<meta name="Author" content="petere"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 7.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 5.0.5 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
BMC Bioinformatics

BioMed Central

Introduction

Open Access

Overview of BITS2005, the Second Annual Meeting of the Italian
Bioinformatics Society
Manuela Helmer-Citterich*1, Rita Casadio2, Alessandro Guffanti3,
Giancarlo Mauri4, Luciano Milanesi5, Graziano Pesole6, Giorgio Valle7 and
Cecilia Saccone5,8
Address: 1Centre for Molecular Bioinformatics, Dept of Biology, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy, 2Department of Biology, University
of Bologna, Italy, 3FIRC Institute of Molecular Oncology, Milan, Italy, 4Department of Computer Science, Systems and Communication, University
of Milan-Biococca, Milan, Italy, 5Institute for Biomedical Technologies, National Research Council (ITB-CNR), Milan, Italy, 6Dept of Biomolecular
Sciences and Biotechnologies, University of Milan, Milan, Italy, 7Department of Biology and CRIBI Biotechnology Centre, University of Padua,
Padua, Italy and 8University of Bari and ITB - CNR, Bari, Italy
Email: Manuela Helmer-Citterich* - citterich@uniroma2.it; Rita Casadio - citterich@uniroma2.it; Alessandro Guffanti - guffanti@ifom-ieocampus.it; Giancarlo Mauri - citterich@uniroma2.it; Luciano Milanesi - citterich@uniroma2.it; Graziano Pesole - graziano.pesole@unimi.it;
Giorgio Valle - citterich@uniroma2.it; Cecilia Saccone - cecilia.saccone@ba.itb.cnr.it
* Corresponding author

from Italian Society of Bioinformatics (BITS): Annual Meeting 2005
Milan, Italy, 17–19 March 2005
Published: 1 December 2005
</supplement>
<supplement> <title> <p>Italian Society of Bioinformatics (BITS): Annual Meeting 2005</p> </title> <editor>Rita Casadio, Alessandro Guffanti, Manuela Helmer-Citterich, Giancarlo Mauri, Luciano Milanesi, Graziano Pesole, Cecilia Saccone and Giorgio Valle</editor> <note>Research articles</note>

BMC Bioinformatics 2005, 6(Suppl 4):S1

doi:10.1186/1471-2105-6-S4-S1

Abstract
The BITS2005 Conference brought together about 200 Italian scientists working in the field of
Bioinformatics, students in Biology, Computer Science and Bioinformatics on March 17–19 2005,
in Milan. This Editorial provides a brief overview of the Conference topics and introduces the peerreviewed manuscripts accepted for publication in this Supplement.

Introduction
The ITalian Bioinformatics Society (B.IT.S.; http://bioin
formatics.it) aims at bringing together research scientists
interested in Bioinformatics, as a multi-disciplinary science for studying biological systems at the molecular and
cellular level by using informatics and computational
methods and models. The main goals of B.IT.S. are the
study, development and spread of Bioinformatics
throughout the Italian scientific, academic, technological
and industrial community.
The Society was founded in 2003 after 5 years of enjoyable
and fruitful informal meetings. It attracts the interest and
efforts of scientists from different research areas in Italy:
Molecular Biology, Biochemistry, Physics and Computer
Science.

The Second Annual BITS Meeting http://www.itb.cnr.it/
bits2005/ was held at the Leonardo Da Vinci Hotel Congress Center in Milan on March 17–19th, 2005. David
Lipman, Director of NCBI, Shoshana Wodak, from the
Department of Biochemistry, University of Toronto, Canada, and Mikhail Gelfand, from the Institute for Information Transmission Problems, RAS, Russia were the
keynote speakers at the BITS2005 Conference. Dr. Lipman
opened the meeting with the "Giuliano Preparata Lecture", dedicated to a brilliant and innovative Italian physicist who also made important contributions in the field
of Computational Biology, and, unfortunately, passed
away a few years ago. Dr. Lipman's talk was about the
Semantic Shift in Comparative Genomics & Systems Biology and started an interesting discussion about the new
developments and challenges that Bioinformatics will
have to face in the near future. Mikhail Gelfand talked
about the evolution of riboswitches, while Shoshana
Page 1 of 4
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2005, 6:S1

Wodak gave a talk entitled Protein-Protein Interactions:
The challenge of prediction specificity, and spoke from a
historical perspective with interesting comments about
the latest developments in the field.
The conference was organized into thematic sessions:
Comparative Genomics, Database and Data Mining,
Structural Bioinformatics, Algorithms and Applications,
Functional Bioinformatics, Medical Bioinformatics.
Abstracts were collected on the different topics and
selected for oral presentations; some of them were then
submitted as complete research papers for this Supplement. The manuscripts were edited by a committee composed of the Meeting Organizers and the Steering
Committee of the Italian Bioinformatics Society and then
sent for peer review to a panel of non-Italian referees.
The manuscripts cover several topics central to the development of Computational Biology, such as the development and usage of resources for analysing expression data,
tools for the analysis of protein structure, interaction and
networks, and the development of informatics resources
for biological data integration.

Genome analysis
L. Milanesi et al. [1] describe a systematic analysis of the
human genome in the search for proteins containing
kinase catalytic domains. The predicted set of human
kinases, the human kinome, was extended by identifying
both additional genes and potential splice variants. The
results of the research are collected in the KinWeb database, available at the address http://bioinfo.itb.cnr.it/kin
web/.
The ESTree database by Lazzari et al. [2], collecting both in
house prepared cDNA libraries and publicly available Prunus persica expressed sequence tags (ESTs), represents a
useful resource for peach functional genomics. The database contains more than 18,000 sequences, with links to
predicted SNPs, GO terms, the NiceZyme and KEGG pathway databases.

Sequence analysis
A number of papers describe tools designed for sequence
analysis.
ParPEST (Parallel Processing of ESTs) is a pipeline based
on parallel computing for EST analysis [3]. It relies on distributed processes and parallelized software.
The GFINDer resource [4] was presented with new modules for performing phenotype analyses of inherited disorder related genes [5]. New GFINDer modules make it
possible to annotate large numbers of user classified
sequence identifiers with morbidity and clinical informa-

tion, classifying them according to genetic disease phenotypes and their locations of occurrence, and statistically
analyzing the obtained classifications.
Fariselli et al. [6] describe the implementation of the posterior-Viterbi (PV) algorithm for the prediction of the
topology of all-beta membrane proteins. They show that
PV decoding performs better than other algorithms when
tested on the problem of predicting the topology of betabarrel membrane proteins.
A neural network approach is described in Ferraro et al. [7]
for the inference of SH3 domain specificity. The network
performs better than regular expressions and PSSMs in the
detection of SH3 domains interactors. The authors show
that this approach, however, is dependent upon the
number of binding peptides used in the training set.

Phylogenetics
Caenorhabditis elegans and C. briggsae share conserved but
rapidly evolving genomes. Rambaldi et al. [8] developed
NemaFootPrinter (Nematode Transcription Factor Scan
Through Phylogenetic Footprinting), a web-based software for interactive identification of conserved, nonexonic DNA segments in their genomes. This software
relies on the identification of orthologous genes and on
the manual selection of gene boundaries. The resource is
available at the address: http://bio.ifom-firc.it/NTFoot
Printer.

Structural bioinformatics
Secondary structure prediction is considered an interesting topic per se and also as an ancillary method to structure prediction methods. Armano et al. [9] describe a
hybrid technique for secondary structure prediction,
based on a "sequence-to-structure" prediction, enforced
by resorting to a population of hybrid (genetic-neural)
experts, and then on a "structure-to-structure" prediction,
by means of an artificial neural network. This new technique attains 76% accuracy, comparable with other stateof-the-art methods.
Secondary structure assignment also represents a fundamental issue, both for classification purposes and for
improving the potential of prediction methods. Cubellis
et al. [10] developed an accurate method for assigning secondary structure based on main chain geometry. The
SEGNO program is compared with other pre-existing
methods. It defines more types of secondary structure (i.e.
poly-proline and 3–10 helices). Moreover, amino-acid
trends at helix caps are stronger, secondary structural elements are less likely to be concatenated together, and secondary structure guided sequence alignment is improved.

Page 2 of 4
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2005, 6:S1

Ausiello et al. [11] describe the Query 3D program for
local comparison of protein structures. Query 3D is at the
core of the pdbFun server [12] for the identification of
local structural similarities between annotated residues in
proteins.
D'Ursi et al. [13] used a flexible docking approach to characterize the molecular interaction between seven endocrine disrupting chemicals and estrogen, progesterone
and androgen receptors in the ligand-binding domain. All
ligands docked in the buried hydrophobic cavity corresponding to the hormone steroid pocket. The results are
in agreement with known toxicological data and suggest a
hydrophobic cavity is needed to accommodate the analyzed chlorine-carrying compounds.
In [14], Greco et al. analyze the relatively rare double histone fold, which is tightly related to the structure of nucleosomal histones. Through the application of several
secondary structure prediction and fold recognition methods, they showed that the viral protein gi|22788712 is
compatible with the structure of a H3-H4-like histone
pseudodimer and may retain the ability of mediating protein-DNA interactions.

Gene expression
Several papers in this Supplement concentrate on functional genomics and the analysis of expression data, proving the field's vitality and the experimental laboratory's
interest in involving the bioinformatic community in
their research.
Ancona et al. [15] compare the Regularized Least Squares
(RLS) and Support Vector Machines (SVM) approaches in
cancer classification through the analysis of microarray
data. They show that the results of the two methods are
comparable, even if RLS may represent a valuable alternative due to their simplicity and low computational complexity.
Burgarella et al. [16] developed MicroGen, a web system
for managing information and workflow in the production pipeline of spotted microarray experiments. MicroGen is composed of a core multi-database system able to
store all data from different spotted microarray experiments according to the Minimum Information About
Microarray Experiments (MIAME) standard. It offers an
intuitive and user-friendly web interface able to support
collaborative work among the multidisciplinary actors
and roles involved in spotted microarray experiment production.
The analysis of two transcription profiles led Cavallo et al.
[17] to the identification of five Tumor Associated Antigens (TAA), whose expression is linearly related to the

tumor mass increase in BALB-neuT mammary glands.
Normal expression of these proteins is low and compatible with the design of immunopreventive vaccines.
Finocchiaro et al. [18] describe an interesting approach,
based on data extracted from biomedical literature and
the analysis of Gene Ontology categories. Such data can
be used to complement expression data in order to highlight microarray datasets biologically related in gene
expression.
Di Camillo et al. [19] describe and test a quantization
method, based on a model of the experimental error and
on a significance level able to mediate between false positive and false negative classifications in the analysis of
microarray data. The quantization method, evaluated in
comparison with the two standard methods, improves the
ability of Reveal and Dynamic Bayesian Networks to identify relations between genes.

Genetic and population analysis
The Hmt database is presented by Attimonelli et al. [20],
as a well-integrated web-based human mitochondrial bioinformatic resource aimed at supporting population
genetics and mitochondrial disease studies. HmtDB consists of a database of Human Mitochondrial Genomes,
annotated with population data, and a set of bioinformatic tools. It is able to produce site-specific variability
data and to automatically characterize newly-sequenced
human mitochondrial genomes.
The PedNavigator tool [21], specifically designed by Mancosu and co-workers for genetic studies, is a browser for
genealogical databases. It is useful for genealogical
research due to its capacity to represent family relations
between individuals and to make a visual verification of
the links during family history reconstruction. As for
genetic studies, it is helpful to follow propagation of a specific set of genetic markers (haplotype), or to select people
for linkage analysis, showing relations between various
branches of an affected subjects' family tree.

Systems biology
High-throughput approaches have been applied to the
analysis of protein interaction in several model organisms, but have not yet been attempted in humans, where
the unraveling of the interactome is one of the most ambitious tasks facing proteomics. An inferred human protein
interaction network was built by Persico et al. [22], based
on the identification of reliable orthologues of proteins
known to interact in a number of reference sets. The HomoMINT resulting network is stored in the MINT database
[23].

Page 3 of 4
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2005, 6:S1

Data and text mining
A high performance workflow is described by Merelli et al.
[24]. Using grid technology, it correlates different kinds of
bioinformatic data, from the nucleotide sequence to the
exposed residues of the protein surface. The proposed
workflow is implemented to integrate huge amounts of
data. The results must be stored in a relational database.

Databases and ontologies
Romano et al. [25] describe a system that is able to access
and execute predefined workflows. Web Services allow
access to the IARC TP53 Mutation Database [26] (containing all TP53 gene mutations identified in human cancers
and cell lines that have been reported in the peer-reviewed
literature since 1989) and CABRI (Common Access to
Biological Resources and Information) catalogues of biological resources.
An SRS site, with both EMBL and CABRI catalogues, has
been set up by Romano et al. [27]. In the site about 67,500
valid cross-references were identified between the two
databases. Such links were added to the EMBL Data
Library and now make it possible to establish further links
between the CABRI catalogues and other bioinformatic
databases cross-referenced in the EMBL database.

7.
8.

9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.

17.

Future meeting
The next Annual meeting of the Italian Bioinformatics
Society will be held in Bologna in Spring 2006. Further
information about BITS2006 will be available on our web
site at the address http://bioinformatics.it.

18.

19.

Acknowledgements
We thank the Fondazione Giuliano Preparata for supporting this Supplement. We are also grateful to the referees for their dedication and effort in
peer reviewing the abstracts and manuscripts submitted by the attendees.
We also thank the BMC Bioinformatics Editorial Office for their efficient
and kind support.

20.

21.

References
1.

2.
3.
4.

5.

6.

Milanesi L, Petrillo M, Sepe L, Boccia A, D'Agostino N, Passamano M,
Di Nardo S, Tasco G, Casadio R, Paolella G: Systematic analysis of
human kinase genes: a large number of genes and alternative splicing
events result in functional and structural diversity. BMC Bioinformatics
6(Suppl 4):S20.
Lazzari B, Caprera A, Vecchietti A, Stella A, Milanesi L, Pozzi C:
ESTree db: a Tool for Peach Functional Genomics. BMC Bioinformatics 6(Suppl 4):S16.
D'Agostino N, Aversano M, Chiusano ML: ParPEST: a pipeline for
EST data analysis based on parallel computing. BMC Bioinformatics 6(Suppl 4):S9.
Masseroli M, Galati O, Pinciroli F: GFINDer: genetic disease and
phenotype location statistical analysis and mining of dynamically annotated gene lists.
Nucleic Acids Research 2005,
33:W717-W723.
Masseroli M, Galati O, Manzotti M, Gibert K, Pinciroli F: Inherited
disorder phenotypes: controlled annotation and statistical
analysis for knowledge mining from gene lists. BMC Bioinformatics 6(Suppl 4):S18.
Fariselli P, Martelli PL, Casadio R: A new decoding algorithm for
hidden Markov models improves the prediction of the topol-

22.

23.
24.

25.
26.
27.

ogy of all-beta membrane proteins. BMC Bioinformatics 6(Suppl
4):S12.
Ferraro E, Via A, Ausiello G, Helmer-Citterich M: A neural strategy
for the inference of SH3 domain-peptide interaction specificity. BMC Bioinformatics 6(Suppl 4):S13.
Rambaldi D, Guffanti A, Morandi P, Cassata G: NemaFootPrinter:
a web based software for the identification of conserved noncoding genome sequence regions between C. elegans and C.
briggsae. BMC Bioinformatics 6(Suppl 4):S22.
Armano G, Mancosu G, Milanesi L, Orro A, Saba M, Vargiu E: A
Hybrid Genetic-Neural System for Predicting Protein Secondary Structure. BMC Bioinformatics 6(Suppl 4):S3.
Cubellis MV, Cailliez F, Lovell SC: Secondary structure assignment that accurately reflects physical and evolutionary characteristics. BMC Bioinformatics 6(Suppl 4):S8.
Ausiello G, Via A, Helmer-Citterich M: Query 3d: a new method
for high-throughput analysis of functional residues in protein
structures. BMC Bioinformatics 6(Suppl 4):S5.
Ausiello G, Zanzoni A, Peluso D, Via A, Helmer-Citterich M: pdbFun: Mass selection and fast comparison of annotated PDB
residues. Nucl Acids Res 2005, 33:W133-W137.
D'Ursi P, Salvi E, Fossa P, Milanesi L, Rovida E: Modelling the interaction of steroid receptors with endocrine disrupting chemicals. BMC Bioinformatics 6(Suppl 4):S11.
Greco C, Fantucci P, De Gioia L: In silico functional characterization of a double histone fold domain from the Heliothis
zea virus 1. BMC Bioinformatics 6(Suppl 4):S15.
Ancona N, Maglietta R, D'Addabbo A, Liuni S, Pesole G: Regularized
Least Squares Cancer Classifiers from DNA microarray
data. BMC Bioinformatics 6(Suppl 4):S2.
Burgarella B, Cattaneo D, Pinciroli F, Masseroli M: MicroGen: a
MIAME compliant web system for microarray experiment
information and workflow management. BMC Bioinformatics
6(Suppl 4):S6.
Cavallo F, Astolfi A, Iezzi M, Cordero F, Lollini PL, Forni G, Calogero
R: An integrated approach of immunogenomics and bioinformatics to identify new Tumor Associated Antigens (TAA)
for mammary cancer immunological prevention. BMC Bioinformatics 6(Suppl 4):S7.
Finocchiaro G, Mancuso F, Muller H: Mining published lists of cancer related microarray experiments: Identification of a gene
expression signature having a critical role in cell-cycle control. BMC Bioinformatics 6(Suppl 4):S14.
Di Camillo B, Sanchez-Cabo F, Toffolo G, Nair SK, Trajanoski Z,
Cobelli C: A quantization method based on threshold optimization for microarray short time series. BMC Bioinformatics
6(Suppl 4):S10.
Attimonelli M, Accetturo M, Santamaria M, Lascaro D, Scioscia G,
Pappadà G, Russo L, Zanchetta L, Tommaseo-Ponzetta M: HmtDB,
a human mitochondrial genomic resource based on variability studies supporting population genetics and biomedical
research. BMC Bioinformatics 6(Suppl 4):S4.
Mancosu G, Cosso M, Marras F, Cappio Borlino C, Ledda G, Manias
T, Adamo M, Serra D, Melis P, Pirastu M: Browsing Isolated Population Data. BMC Bioinformatics 6(Suppl 4):S17.
Persico M, Ceol A, Gavrila C, Hoffmann R, Florio A, Cesareni G:
HomoMINT: an inferred human network based on orthology mapping of protein interactions discovered in model
organisms. BMC Bioinformatics 6(Suppl 4):S21.
Zanzoni A, Montecchi-Palazzi L, Quondam M, Ausiello G, HelmerCitterich M, Cesareni G: MINT: a Molecular INTeraction database. FEBS Lett 2002, 513:135-140.
Merelli I, Morra G, D'Agostino D, Clematis A, Milanesi L: High performance workflow implementation for protein surface
characterization using grid technology. BMC Bioinformatics
6(Suppl 4):S19.
Romano P, Marra D, Milanesi L: Web services and workflow
management for biological resources. BMC Bioinformatics
6(Suppl 4):S24.
Olivier M, Eeles R, Hollstein M, Khan MA, Harris CC, Hainaut P: The
IARC TP53 Database: new online mutation analysis and recommendations to users. Hum Mutat 2002, 19:607-614.
Romano P, Dawyndt P, Piersigilli F, Swings J: Improving interoperability between microbial information and sequence databases. BMC Bioinformatics 6(Suppl 4):S23.

Page 4 of 4
(page number not for citation purposes)

</pre>
</body>
</html>
