<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Orthology confers intron position conservation</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Genomics 2010, 11:412. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-11-412"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Anna Henricson, Kristoffer Forslund, Erik LL Sonnhammer"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 8.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 7.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Henricson et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:412
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/412

Open Access

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Orthology confers intron position conservation
Research article

Anna Henricson1, Kristoffer Forslund2 and Erik LL Sonnhammer*1,2

Abstract
Background: With the wealth of genomic data available it has become increasingly important to assign putative
protein function through functional transfer between orthologs. Therefore, correct elucidation of the evolutionary
relationships among genes is a critical task, and attempts should be made to further improve the phylogenetic
inference by adding relevant discriminating features. It has been shown that introns can maintain their position over
long evolutionary timescales. For this reason, it could be possible to use conservation of intron positions as a
discriminating factor when assigning orthology. Therefore, we wanted to investigate whether orthologs have a higher
degree of intron position conservation (IPC) compared to non-orthologous sequences that are equally similar in
sequence.
Results: To this end, we developed a new score for IPC and applied it to ortholog groups between human and six
other species. For comparison, we also gathered the closest non-orthologs, meaning sequences close in sequence
space, yet falling just outside the ortholog cluster. We found that ortholog-ortholog gene pairs on average have a
significantly higher degree of IPC compared to ortholog-closest non-ortholog pairs. Also pairs of inparalogs were
found to have a higher IPC score than inparalog-closest non-inparalog pairs. We verified that these differences can not
simply be attributed to the generally higher sequence identity of the ortholog-ortholog and the inparalog-inparalog
pairs.
Furthermore, we analyzed the agreement between IPC score and the ortholog score assigned by the InParanoid
algorithm, and found that it was consistently high for all species comparisons. In a minority of cases, the IPC and
InParanoid score ranked inparalogs differently. These represent cases where sequence and intron position divergence
are discordant. We further analyzed the discordant clusters to identify any possible preference for protein functions by
looking for enriched GO terms and Pfam protein domains. They were enriched for functions important for
multicellularity, which implies a connection between shifts in intronic structure and the origin of multicellularity.
Conclusions: We conclude that orthologous genes tend to have more conserved intron positions compared to nonorthologous genes. As a consequence, our IPC score is useful as an additional discriminating factor when assigning
orthology.

Background
Assigning function to protein coding genes is one of the
most important tasks in the post-genome era. With the
wealth of genomes available, automatic methods for identifying evolutionary relationships between genes
becomes important when transferring functions from
already annotated genes to unannotated. Consequently, it
is of the outermost importance that the evolutionary relationships inferred between genes reflects their true evolutionary history. The term "homology" is simply not
* Correspondence: erik.sonnhammer@sbc.su.se
1 Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Karolinska Institutet, SE-171 77
Stockholm, Sweden

sufficiently well-defined when describing the evolutionary relationship between genes, and therefore previous
publications have established more precise definitions.
Orthologs are genes that derive from a single gene in the
last common ancestor and have been separated by a speciation event [1]. They can typically be considered as
functional counterparts in different species. Paralogs, on
the other hand, are genes that derive from a single gene
that has been duplicated within a genome. When a gene
has been duplicated, one of the copies could potentially
be more free to adapt to new functions, whereas the other
retains the original function. Paralogs can be further separated into two different subgroups, namely inparalogs

Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
© 2010 Henricson et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Henricson et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:412
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/412

and outparalogs, depending on when during evolution
the duplication occurred [2]. If the duplication occurred
after the speciation event, the genes are considered to be
inparalogs, meaning that they are co-orthologs to one or
several genes in another species. Analysis of inparalogs
can be used to detect lineage-specific adaptations. However, if the duplication event happened prior to the speciation event, the sequences are outparalogs and as such
do not form any co-ortholog relationship with genes in
another genome. Hence, outparalogs cannot be used to
transfer functional assignments between species.
Several strategies have been employed for identifying
orthologs, e.g. bidirectional best-hits (BBH) [3], InParanoid [4], OrthoMCL [5], KOG [6], Ensembl Compara [7],
Homologene [8], EggNOG [9], and OMA [10]. These
include both pairwise matching-based methods and treebased methods, and they may also differ regarding
whether they can assign orthology across two or several
species. The performance of these strategies have been
previously compared [11-13]. Although these comparative studies do not fully agree, it was found that InParanoid [4] is one of the most accurate pairwise ortholog
assignment algorithms. Particularly when analyzing evolutionary relationships among eukaryotic genes it
becomes very important to distinguish inparalogs from
outparalogs, which methods based on simple two-way
best matching fail to accomplish. Therefore, the InParanoid algorithm was designed to separate inparalogs, that
are to be included in the cluster, from outparalogs, that
are to be excluded, and also supplies a confidence score
for the inparalogs in the cluster (figure 1). Moreover, the
ortholog assignments are fully automatic and the algorithm is fast, thus enabling re-analysis of data upon new
releases of genomes.
Ever since the discovery of introns their evolution has
been studied. It has been shown that introns often maintain their positions over very long evolutionary timescales [14,15]. At these longer evolutionary distances, the
sequence or length of the introns is never conserved.
However, for very closely related species there might be
selective pressure to maintain some intronic sequences
due to presence of regulatory elements in the introns.
Consequently, the conserved intron positions found
between even distant species might be used to separate
orthologs from other homologs. Indeed, this been done
successfully in specific case studies of gene families, i.e.
chemoreceptors [16,17], heat shock proteins [18], and
homeobox genes [19]. Also, an algorithm called Exalign
has been published where exon-intron gene structures
are used to resolve phylogenetic relationships [20]. This
method relies solely on exon lengths and phase, when
available, to infer gene structural alignments. A drawback
is that genes need to have at least four to five internal

Page 2 of 13

Figure 1 Graphical representation of an InParanoid ortholog
cluster with the outparalogs outside the cluster indicated. The
seed orthologs from the different species are denoted A1 and B1 and
they are the bi-directional best Blast hits. Their similarity score (S) is
shown. Inparalogs with score S or higher to the seed ortholog are inside the circle with radius S and hence, belonging to the cluster. Inparalogs are added to the cluster independently for each species. The
sequences with a lower score than S are outside the cluster and classified as outparalogs. To generate the so-called extended cluster, for
each inparalog in the cluster, the closest outparalog (non-ortholog or
non-inparalog) from each species is added.

exons to produce high scoring alignments with a significant E-value, which limits its applicability.
Intron insertion is not a random process; they preferentially insert into or are fixed at so-called protosplice sites
[21-24]. A study claimed that the majority of introns
shared between distant species were the result of parallel
gain into these sites [25]. These findings were later disputed and it was shown that protosplice sites are no more
conserved during eukaryotic evolution than random sites
[26]. In addition, simulation of intron insertion into protosplice sites with the observed protosplice sites frequencies and intron densities showed that parallel gain could
account for only 5-10% of shared intron positions in distantly related species. Subsequently, this has been verified
in other studies, where on average ~8% of shared intron
positions in distantly related species were found to be due
to parallel gain [27]. However, across the eukaryotic lineages, the distribution of parallel gain was highly heterogeneous with evolutionarily closer species showing
virtually no shared introns due to parallel gain, whereas
evolutionarily more distant species, such as human and
plants, exhibited up to 20% parallel gain. A complicating
factor when analyzing intron position conservation
(IPC), is that different lineages exhibit very divergent
rates and patterns of intron loss or gain [15,28,29]. It
seems that intron loss is generally more prevalent than
gain among orthologous genes [30-32], although there
are studies showing that the opposite can sometimes be
true [33].

Henricson et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:412
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/412

The question still remains whether shared intron positions in different genes could be used on a global scale to
aid the elucidation of evolutionary relationships, even
between distant eukaryotic species. Therefore, in this
study, we have analyzed the full genomes of seven eukaryotic species - human versus six other eukaryotes - to
reveal if IPC can be used to distinguish orthologs from
proteins that merely share amino acid similarity. More
specifically, we examine if ortholog-ortholog (o-o) pairs
have a higher IPC score compared to ortholog-closest
non-ortholog (o-cno) pairs. In analogy, we also investigate whether inparalog-inparalog (i-i) pairs have a higher
IPC score compared to inparalog-closest non-inparalog
(i-cni) pairs. If this is the case, IPC could be used as a discriminatory variable when elucidating evolutionary relationships. Since sequences that are evolutionarily
conserved tend to have a higher sequence identity compared to non-related sequences, we also examined the
possible dependence between IPC and sequence identity.
Finally, if IPC can be a predictor of orthology, it must
agree at least to some extent with existing reliable orthology detection methods. Therefore, we analyzed the
agreement between the InParanoid orthology score and
the IPC score.

Results
A dataset of orthologs with intron positions

When analyzing intron conservation it is not feasible to
take into account the actual intronic sequence or the
intron length, since these features are generally not conserved due to lack of selective pressure. Despite this, an
intron's position can be conserved over very long time
spans. To analyze the conservation of intron positions, we
generated a dataset of orthologs for seven eukaryotic species, where intron positions were indicated. We wanted
to use human as the focal point, and then selected species
on different evolutionary distance away from human. All
of the selected species also have well-annotated genomes
and a relatively high number of introns. The number of
sequences were 26,815 for Arabidopsis thaliana; 20,140
for Caenorhabditis elegans; 14,039 for Drosophila melanogaster; 21,322 for Danio rerio; 16,736 for Gallus gallus;
23,943 for Homo sapiens; and 24,166 for Mus musculus.
We retrieved InParanoid ortholog clusters for human
versus the six other species (table 1). Not surprisingly, the
highest number of clusters were identified between
human and mouse, of which a great majority are one-toone ortholog clusters. Thereafter, human versus chicken
and human versus zebrafish had the highest number of
clusters, also with a great majority of one-to-one
orthologs. Human versus Arabidopsis had the fewest
clusters, although the number of orthologs was comparable to that of human versus Drosophila and human versus
worm. This is mainly due to a greater number of duplica-

Page 3 of 13

tions in Arabidopsis. When analyzing the distribution of
introns in each species, we found that orthologs, regardless of species, are more likely to harbor introns compared to the genome as a whole (figure 2). Also, the
average number of introns in orthologs is higher compared to all sequences in the studied species.
For this comparative study, the InParanoid clusters
were extended by adding the closest non-ortholog (cno)
and closest non-inparalog (cni) for each InParanoid cluster member. For human versus Arabidopsis, worm or
Drosophila, a cno and cni could be found for roughly 43%
of the inparalogs (figure 3), while for around 34% of the
InParanoid cluster members neither a cno nor a cni could
be found. For the remaining inparalogs, either a cno or a
cni could be identified. For human versus chicken,
zebrafish or mouse, there was a higher fraction of inparalogs where both a cno and a cni could be found (approximately 68%), whereas the percentage of inparalogs
missing both cno and cni was lower (approximately 23%).
This implies that for the vertebrate comparisons the
ortholog cluster space is more densely populated and
therefore makes it easier to find other homologs outside
the ortholog group.
Orthology versus intron position conservation

We wanted to examine the conservation of intron positions for orthologs compared to the closest nonorthologs. The idea being that if we can find a difference
in intron position conservation (IPC) between these two
groups, IPC score could be used as an additional feature
for identifying orthologs. We scored the mean IPC for all
pairs of the same type regardless of sequence identity.
Across all species comparisons, the ortholog-ortholog (oo) pairs had approximately twice as high mean IPC score
compared to the ortholog-closest non-ortholog (o-cno)
pairs (figure 4). Also, the the inparalog-inparalog (i-i) versus the inparalog-closest non-inparalog (i-cni) pairs
showed a much higher mean IPC score for the i-i pairs. In
fact, for all species comparisons except human versus
mouse, the difference in mean IPC score was even greater
than for the o-o versus o-cno pairs. We used the MannWhitney-Wilcoxon test to assess whether the IPC values
for the o-o and o-cno pairs, and i-i and i-cni pairs, respectively, came from the same distribution or not. For all
species comparisons, the IPC scores for the o-o pairs did
not have the same distribution as the o-cno pairs (p-value
< 0.05). The same was true for the i-i versus i-cni pairs.
These results show that even when analyzed on a global
scale, orthologs have a statistically significant higher IPC
score than other homologs.
When examining the distribution of the IPC scores further, it becomes clear that it is very skewed (figure 5),
[Additional file 1], [Additional file 2]. For human versus
Arabidopsis, worm and Drosophila, a majority of pairs of

Henricson et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:412
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/412

Page 4 of 13

Table 1: InParanoid clusters and orthologs identified for the different species comparisons.
#InParanoid
ortholog clusters

#One-one Ortholog
clustersa

#Multi Ortholog
clustersb

#Orthologs Hsa

#Orthologs 2nd species

Hsa-Ath

3144

1373

1771

6040

7939

Hsa-Cel

4507

2522

1985

8908

5737

Hsa-Dme

5302

3233

2069

8614

5983

Hsa-Dre

9899

8131

1768

11701

11957

Hsa-Gga

11081

10607

474

11796

11443

Hsa-Mmu

15309

14524

785

16274

16215

a InParanoid

clusters containing only seed orthologs.
b InParanoid clusters containing seed orthologs and inparalogs.

all types, except i-i pairs, have no conserved intron positions. For human versus the vertebrates, approximately
half of the o-o pairs as well as i-i pairs have an IPC score
of zero. However, the number of o-cno and i-cni pairs
with IPC score zero is almost always higher. These results
suggest that even though not all orthologs have conserved intron positions, IPC score could still be used as a
feature to separate orthologs from non-orthologs,
because non-orthologs have an even lower degree of IPC.
As exemplified by Arabidopsis and zebrafish in figure 5,
the species closer to human (zebrafish, chicken and
mouse) have a larger fraction of o-o pairs with high IPC
score compared to the more distant species (Arabidopsis,
worm and Drosophila). The same is true for the i-i pairs.
This can be expected considering that a longer evolutionary time span increases the likelihood of introns being
lost or gained, thereby decreasing the IPC score.
Intron position conservation versus sequence identity

Orthologs tend to have higher sequence similarity compared to non-orthologs. Could this account for their
higher IPC score? In order to eliminate the effect of
sequence similarity, we binned the pairs according to
their sequence identity and then scored the IPC for each
pair type and bin separately. The bin boundaries [Additional file 3], [Additional file 4] were chosen to distribute
the different pair types as equally as possible among the
bins. In a great majority of the bins, the o-o and i-i pairs
have a higher degree of intron position conservation
compared to their non-ortholog counterparts even when
normalizing for sequence identity (figure 6), [Additional
file 5]. This is true for all species comparisons analyzed.
This shows that orthologs, even when adjusting for their
higher sequence identity, have more conserved intron

positions compared to non-orthologs. Several different
number of bins were tested, however, the results were
essentially the same.
To further investigate the possible dependence between
sequence identity and IPC score, we calculated the Spearman correlation coefficient between them for all pair
types and species comparisons. The correlation coefficient between IPC score and sequence identity was generally low (<0.3) (table 2), although in most cases
statistically significant at the 5% level. We note that o-cno
pairs always had a higher correlation than o-o pairs, suggesting that the IPC scores of o-cno pairs are more
explainable by sequence identity. The results from both
the binning of pairs according to their sequence identity
and the Spearman correlation analysis, indicate that the
higher IPC score of orthologs compared to non-orthologs
cannot be explained simply by the higher sequence identity of the former.
Intron position conservation score versus InParanoid
ortholog score

The InParanoid algorithm [4] can find non-overlapping
clusters of orthologs and inparalogs across two species.
The algorithm first finds the bi-directionally best Blast
hits between the two genomes, the so-called seed
orthologs. Around these seed orthologs, inparalogs from
each species are clustered separately (figure 1). Sequences
in the same species that are more similar to the seed
ortholog than to any sequence in the other species will be
classified as an inparalog and added to the cluster. The
inparalogs are ranked by a confidence score that is calculated for each inparalog, reflecting its similarity to the
seed ortholog. In a previous study, the correlation
between protein-protein interaction (PPI) and the InPar-

Henricson et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:412
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/412

Figure 2 Intron densities in the different genomes. (A) Percentage
of sequences harboring introns in the different genomes. (B) Average
number of introns per sequence in the different genomes. All sequences means all protein coding genes in the genomes for each species. Orthologs means the subset of orthologs identified by the
InParanoid algorithm for each species versus human. As a consequence, for human, orthologs refers to an average of the ortholog sets
identified versus each of the other species.

anoid inparalog ranking was assessed [34]. They analyzed
121 cases where the ranking was called "ambiguous",
meaning that the ortholog cluster is not a one-to-one
cluster, but a "multi-cluster". For approximately half of
these, the PPI network suggested a different ranking than
that proposed by InParanoid. In analogy, we wanted to
examine how well InParanoid's ranking of inparalogs in
an ortholog group agrees with their IPC score to the seed
ortholog in the other species. Furthermore, if IPC is to be
used when inferring evolutionary relationships, it must

Page 5 of 13

agree at least to some extent with existing reliable orthology detection methods.
The analyzed clusters were split into "one-to-one",
meaning those that only contain seed orthologs, and
"multi" clusters, meaning those that also contain inparalogs. For the human-vertebrate comparisons, the great
majority of the analyzed clusters are one-to-one clusters,
whereas for the others there is a large fraction of multiclusters (table 1). First, we analyzed the multi-cluster seed
ortholog assignments agreement with IPC score, i.e. does
the seed ortholog pair (or possible spliceforms thereof )
have the highest IPC score of the possible ortholog pairs
in the cluster? We found that for the great majority of
multi-clusters, IPC score supports the seed ortholog
assignments made by the InParanoid algorithm (>70% for
human versus Arabidopsis, worm and Drosophila, and
>80% for human versus vertebrate comparisons).
To further assess the correlation between IPC score and
multi-cluster seed ortholog assignments, we considered
the bootstrap value that InParanoid assigns each seed
ortholog. This indicates the confidence in the "seed"
ranking of the inparalog as the fraction of intracluster
bootstrap runs that placed it as the best match. The
multi-clusters were split according to their seed ortholog
bootstrap support, and the agreement with IPC score was
investigated. For multi-clusters where the seed orthologs
have a bootstrap support of at least 90% there is a higher
agreement with IPC, meaning that the seed ortholog pair
also have the highest IPC score, compared to when the
bootstrap is below 90% (table 3). There is thus a correlation between IPC score and InParanoid seed ortholog
assignments, meaning that a high IPC score generally
implies a highly confident orthology relationship. On the
other hand, as in the study by [34], we found a substantial
number of ortholog groups, ranging from 82 in human
versus chicken to 504 in human versus Arabidopsis,
where the inparalog ranking of external evidence did not
agree with InParanoid. This highlights the importance of
considering all inparalogs when using orthology for
annotation transfer between species.
Function term enrichment analysis and IPC-orthology
disagreement

Is conservation of intron position, or the lack thereof,
associated with some specific classes of proteins, such as
those belonging to certain pathways or cellular roles? To
answer this question, we evaluated whether or not the
distribution of Gene Ontology [35] terms was the same
for proteins where IPC and evolutionary distance were in
agreement and proteins where they disagreed. These
measures are considered to agree for InParanoid clusters
where the seed ortholog pair has the highest IPC of all the
ortholog pairs in the cluster. We say that such clusters are
consistent. Because of this, agreement status is only well-

Henricson et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:412
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/412

Page 6 of 13

Figure 3 Finding closest non-orthologs to add to the ortholog cluster. Percent orthologs where a closest non-ortholog (cno) in either one or
both species could be found, alternatively no cnos were found.

defined for clusters where subsequent gene duplication
has occurred, so called multi-clusters. Two multi-clusters
of olfactory receptors, one between human and worm
and one between human and zebrafish, containing more
than 200 genes each, were rejected on grounds of size as
potential artifacts in the orthology analysis. If included in
the functional enrichment analysis, the associated functions and 7tm_1 domains would appear significantly
enriched.
As the degree and quality of Gene Ontology annotation
varies significantly between species, only the human protein annotations were used in the analysis. Of 11,732
human genes present in multi-clusters in at least one of
the species comparisons, 6,725 were found only in consistent clusters, whereas 2,074 were found only in inconsistent clusters. Only these genes (about 75% of all multicluster proteins) were used for the analysis, as genes
found in both consistent and inconsistent clusters in different species comparisons could not unambiguously be
associated with either cluster category. 30% of these
genes were present in multi-clusters in more than one
species comparison.
As can be seen in [Additional file 6], some trends are
visible. Since many Gene Ontology terms are either associated by parent-child relationships or associated in practice because they generally co-occur, it is possible to
summarize the set of enriched functional terms into
some broad categories. A Gene Ontology term in this
table is considered to derive from another term if exclusion of proteins annotated with the latter term from the

analysis would make the former term no longer significantly enriched. Following a procedure described in
greater detail below, we clustered the enriched terms
based on such associations, and selected the most highly
connected terms in the resulting graph as representatives
for the enriched term set as a whole. Most (43 of 50
terms) of the enriched terms turned out to be associated
with GO:0016020, "membrane", while most of the
remainder (5 of 50 terms) were associated with
GO:0016773, "phosphotransferase activity, alcohol group
as acceptor". In addition, the terms GO:0005581, "collagen", and GO:0001533, "cornified envelope", were individually enriched. Terms associated with GO:0016020
included examples such as GO:0042611, "MHC protein
complex", GO:0022857, "transmembrane receptor protein kinase activity", GO:0019882, "antigen processing
and presentation", and GO:0007155, "cell adhesion",
encoding functions important for multicellularity. The
set of terms associated with GO:0016773 include examples such as GO:0004713, "protein tyrosine kinase activity", which is also a hallmark of complex multicellular
organisms.
Conversely, the representative functions for the set of
depleted Gene Ontology terms were GO:0043231, "intracellular membrane-bounded organelle" (63 of 68 terms),
GO:0003735, "structural constituent of ribosome" (4 of 68
terms) and GO:0009057, "macromolecule catabolic process" (1 of 68 terms). These fundamental and ancient
housekeeping functions, important also for single-cell
organisms, are thus more often found in the consistent

Henricson et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:412
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/412

Page 7 of 13

domains, ion channels and cell adhesion-related domains
such as collagen and cadherin.
Protein properties analysis and IPC-orthology
disagreement

We also analyzed whether proteins in the above subsets
differed with regards to their length, their number of
domains, or their number of introns. The human proteins
found only in inconsistent multi-clusters were on average
~25% longer, had ~37% more Pfam-A domains, and had
~44% more introns than the human proteins found only
in consistent clusters. These differences, while modest in
strength, were highly significant (p < 2.2e-16). Although
it is possible that the number of introns per protein may
affect the a priori probability of a cluster becoming consistent or inconsistent, it is not clear whether this probability would increase or decrease. In any case, as the
distributions of all three properties are highly overlapping
between the two subsets (data not shown), it seems
unlikely that this difference would be a major factor
behind determining whether a cluster exhibits IPCorthology disagreement or not. As the proteins found
only in inconsistent clusters are enriched for functions
associated with multicellularity, it is not unexpected that
they should also be longer and contain more domains and
introns.
Figure 4 Mean intron position conservation score for the different pair types and species comparisons (A) ortholog-ortholog (oo) pairs versus ortholog-closest non-ortholog (o-cno) pairs, and
(B) inparalog-inparalog (i-i) pairs versus inparalog-closest non-inparalog (i-cni) pairs.

multi-clusters. One possible interpretation of these
results is that the creation of multicellularity gave rise to
disagreement between intron position and sequence conservation, perhaps due to rapid adaptation into entirely
new functional niches needed to maintain a multicellular
organism. Possibly this happened by exon shuffling, a
mechanism that would make this process faster and
would frequently result in altered intronic structure.
Protein family enrichment analysis and IPC-orthology
disagreement

We also made Pfam [36] domain assignments for the
same sets of genes as above, and generalized to higherlevel clan assignments where possible. The set of domains
in each protein was considered, and an enrichment/
depletion analysis was performed using the same methods and tools as for the functional class enrichment analysis. There is less of a clear trend visible at the domain
level [Additional file 7] compared to the functional
enrichment analysis; however, the results are broadly
compatible with the general trends we observed: enrichment of MHC-associated domains, protein kinase

Discussion
We have presented a global study which show that
ortholog-ortholog (o-o) and inparalog-inparalog (i-i)
pairs in seven different eukaryotes have a higher degree
of intron position conservation (IPC) compared to their
respective ortholog-closest non-ortholog (o-cno) and
inparalog-closest non-inparalog (i-cni) pairs. We have
also shown that this difference in IPC cannot be
explained merely by the fact that o-o and i-i pairs have a
higher sequence identity. There is a weak correlation
between sequence identity and IPC score, which is to be
expected considering that it has been shown that introns
preferentially insert into or are fixed at so-called protosplice sites [21-24]. Due to the presence of these protosplice sites, it has been suggested that the conservation of
intron positions observed in orthologs is simply due to
independent insertion of introns in the same sites (parallel gain) [25]. However, it has been shown that such parallel gain can only account for on average ~8% of the
conserved intron positions [27]. For certain lineages the
number can be higher, but the great majority of shared
intron positions is due to conservation of ancestral
introns.
We show that all species comparisons have approximately two-fold higher mean IPC score for the o-o pairs
compared to o-cno pairs; however, there is a large difference in mean IPC value for the different species compari-

Henricson et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:412
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/412

Page 8 of 13

Figure 5 Distribution of intron position conservation values for the different pair types. (A) Hsa versus Ath, ortholog-ortholog (o-o) versus ortholog-closest non-ortholog (o-cno), (B) Hsa versus Dre, o-o versus o-cno, (C) Hsa versus Ath, inparalog-inparalog (i-i) versus inparalog-closest noninparalog (i-cni), (D) Hsa versus Dre, i-i versus i-cni.

sons. Human-mouse orthologs had approximately six
times higher mean IPC compared to more evolutionarily
distant species (Arabidopsis, worm and Drosophila).
Human-zebrafish and human-chicken orthologs had four
times higher mean IPC score than the more evolutionarily distant species. This is simply reflecting the difference in evolutionary distance between human and the
various species in the analysis. Orthologs in distantly
related species have been separated a longer time compared to closely related species, and as a consequence
they are more likely to have diverged in sequence and
therefore share less intron positions. On the other hand,
recently duplicated sequences such as inparalogs, are
more likely to have conserved intron positions due to the

shorter evolutionary time since the duplication event.
Indeed, for the i-i pairs across all species comparisons, we
find a much higher IPC score compared to the o-o pairs.
Notably, the difference in IPC score between the i-i and icni pairs is much lower for human versus the evolutionarily closer species (zebrafish, chicken and mouse) compared to human versus the others. This is due to the fact
that cnis are sequences which predate the species split,
and therefore cnis in human versus the evolutionarily
closer species have had less time to diverge compared to
the cnis in the more distant species. This can also be seen
in the distribution of IPC values (figure 5), where the evolutionarily closer species have more o-cno and i-cni pairs
than o-o and i-i pairs, respectively, in the middle range of

Henricson et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:412
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/412

Page 9 of 13

Figure 6 Intron position conservation scores for pairs of the different types binned according to sequence identity. Ortholog-ortholog (o-o)
pairs versus ortholog-closest non-ortholog (o-cno) pairs, and inparalog-inparalog (i-i) pairs versus inparalog-closest non-inparalog (i-cni) pairs for (A)
Hsa versus Ath, and (B) Hsa versus Dre.

IPC values, whereas that is not the case for the more distant species. Also, there is a slight trend that the further
away on the evolutionary timescale compared to human,
the lower the mean IPC score for the i-i pairs. One can
Table 2: Correlation between intron position conservation
score and sequence identity.
o-oa

o-cnob

i-ic

speculate that this happens because inparalogs in the
more distant evolutionary species have arisen earlier during evolution compared to inparalogs in the evolutionarily closer species.
Even though our results show a higher IPC score for oo and i-i pairs, there is still a large fraction of both of
these pair types that have no conservation of intron positions. This could be due to a number of reasons; however,

i-cnid

Hsa-Ath

0.07*

0.12*

0.05*

0.22*

Hsa-Cel

0.01

0.15*

-0.01

0.16*

Hsa-Dme

0.07*

0.15*

0.04

0.16*

Hsa-Dre

0.11*

0.28*

0.21*

Hsa-Gga

0.09*

0.25*

Hsa-Mmu

0.13*

0.21*

Table 3: Agreement between InParanoid seed ortholog
assignment and intron position conservation score.
Seed ortholog
bootstrap >= 90%

Seed ortholog
bootstrap <90%

Hsa-Ath

73%

67%

0.17*

Hsa-Cel

76%

70%

0.09

0.06

Hsa-Dme

81%

78%

0.17*

0.11*

Hsa-Dre

81%

72%

Hsa-Gga

87%

63%

Hsa-Mmu

88%

70%

Spearman correlation coefficient for intron position conservation
score versus sequence identity for the different species
comparisons and pair types.
a ortholog-ortholog pair
b ortholog-closest non-ortholog pair
c inparalog-inparalog pair
d inparalog-closest non-inparalog pair
*P-value < 0.05

Percentage of InParanoid clusters where the assigned seed orthologs
also have the highest intron position conservation score of the
possible ortholog pairs.

Henricson et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:412
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/412

they mainly fall into two categories: limitations in the
dataset and the nature of intron evolution. When it
comes to limitations in the dataset, they are inevitably
numerous since assigning intron positions in the genomic
sequence is not a trivial task. Therefore, introns might
incorrectly be missing, present, or misplaced. With time
the datasets will become more complete and allow for a
more accurate understanding of the conservation of
intron positions. Biological reasons for the lack of IPC
includes great differences in the intron loss/gain patterns
or in rates for different lineages [15,28,29]. Also, "intron
sliding" has been proposed to happen during evolution
[14], although this has been shown to be a rare phenomenon [37,38]. In our study, we considered an intron position as conserved if found within the same codon,
meaning that at most the intron is allowed to slide 2
nucleotides. We also tried allowing a greater slide, however, this resulted in worse separation between the
ortholog and non-ortholog pairs, implying that non conserved intron positions were scored as being conserved.
We find that the inparalog ranking made by InParanoid
is largely corroborated by the IPC score. Especially, in a
great majority of the multi-clusters, IPC score support
the seed ortholog designation made by InParanoid. We
also find that clusters where IPC score suggests a different seed ortholog pair tend to have a lower bootstrap support, meaning that the InParanoid inparalog ranking is
slightly less certain. The fact that IPC to a great extent
agrees with the InParanoid inparalog ranking, shows that
IPC can indeed be used as a additional discriminating
factor for determining evolutionary relationships among
genes. Among those clusters where IPC score is inconsistent with the InParanoid inparalog ranking, we find significant enrichment of certain protein functions.
However, due to the low fraction of genes present in
multi-clusters in more than one species comparison,
which follows from our selection of species, there is a risk
that this result is influenced by lineage-specific conditions, and so caution should be applied when interpreting
its global biological significance. The observed enrichment of certain functional classes might reflect mutational mechanisms and selective pressures operating
before and after the origin of complex, multicellular
organisms. Further studies correlating functions to different gene family evolutionary ages or to lineages should be
undertaken before general conclusions can be drawn.

Conclusions
In summary, we have shown that evolutionarily related
genes have more conserved intron positions compared to
merely similar sequences. However, our observations disclose that a low IPC score does not necessarily mean that
two genes are not orthologs. On the other hand, if two
genes have a high IPC score they are much more likely to

Page 10 of 13

be orthologs. Hence, a high IPC score can be used to further discriminate orthologs from non-orthologs. A possible application would be to take intron positions into
account when performing sequence alignments by giving
a higher score if intron positions are conserved. Consequently, current orthology detection methods could benefit from incorporating information on intron positions.

Methods
Datasets

The EMBL flat files for the full genomes of Caenorhabditis elegans, Drosophila melanogaster, Danio rerio, Gallus
gallus, Homo sapiens, and Mus musculus were downloaded from the Ensembl database [39]. The GenBank
flat files for the full genome of Arabidopsis thaliana was
downloaded from NCBI [40]. All files were downloaded
on November 15th 2007, except for zebrafish and chicken
which were downloaded on 7th February 2008. The files
were processed to extract all genes and their corresponding protein sequences. The genomic positions of introns
were taken from the "join" and "join(complement)" locations given in the CDS feature key in the feature table of
the flat files. The qualifiers for protein_id and translation
were also extracted. For the EMBL flat files, the qualifier
for gene was selected be able to filter for spliceforms. For
the GenBank flat files, the qualifier db_xref:GeneID was
retrieved for the same purpose. The positions of introns
were mapped to the amino acid sequence of each protein,
in such a way that if the intron was just preceding or
interrupting a codon, the equivalent amino acid was set
to a lower case letter in the protein sequence. Potential
redundancy (identical gene copies) was removed and
subsequently the sequences were filtered to keep only the
longest spliceform.
Computing ortholog clusters

The resulting sequence files were Blasted all-against-all
(human versus each of the other species) using blastp [41]
and then the InParanoid algorithm [4] version 3.1 was
used to identify ortholog clusters. The sequence overlap
cutoff was 0.5 and segment coverage cutoff was 0.25.
Each InParanoid ortholog cluster was further extended
by adding the closest non-ortholog (cno) and closest noninparalog (cni) for each cluster member (figure 1). By this,
we mean the best match from each species in the Blast
results that were not already members of the cluster.
These sequences also had to meet the same sequence
overlap cutoff and segment coverage cutoff as the InParanoid cluster members. Clusters for mitochondrial genes
were excluded since all such sequences are intronless.
Finally, for each InParanoid cluster member, any shorter
spliceform was added back to the cluster prior to scoring
the conservation of intron positions in these so-called
extended clusters.

Henricson et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:412
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/412

Scoring intron position conservation

All protein sequences in a so-called extended cluster were
multiply aligned using Kalign 2.0 [42]. For a few of the
extended clusters it was impossible to generate a
sequence alignment and therefore they were excluded.
This occurred when the extended cluster contained
sequences of highly different lengths (several thousand
amino acids), making it impossible for the algorithm to
construct an alignment. The conservation of intron positions was scored pairwise for all orthologs and inparalogs
and their corresponding closest non-orthologs and closest non-inparalogs. Hence, there are four different types
of pairs that are analyzed, namely ortholog-ortholog (oo), inparalog-inparalog (i-i), ortholog-closest nonortholog (o-cno), and finally, inparalog-closest noninparalog (i-cni) pairs. Intron positions were considered
as conserved if present within the same codon, meaning
that the intron position can slide a maximum of 2 nucleotides and still be scored as conserved. We also extracted
the sequence identity given by Kalign. If an ortholog
(inparalog) had several spliceforms, the o-o (i-i) pair with
the highest intron position conservation (IPC) score was
chosen. For each o-o (i-i) pair, there can be two o-cno (icni) pairs. If this was the case, the mean IPC score and
sequence identity of the two pairs was calculated. Finally,
the mean IPC score and sequence identity for each of the
four possible pair types in an extended cluster was calculated separately. The Mann-Whitney-Wilcoxon test was
used to assess whether the different pair types came from
the same distribution or not.
The intron position conservation for a pair of
sequences was calculated in the following way:
IPC = (2 * introns shared ) / (introns seqA + introns seqB )

where IPC is intron position conservation, intronsshared
is the number of introns that share the same position in
the two sequences compared allowing for a slide within
the same codon, intronsseqA is the number of introns in
sequence A, and intronsseqB is the number of introns in
sequence B.
To examine whether sequence similarity alone could
explain a higher IPC score, the pairs were binned on
sequence identity. To achieve a sufficient number of pairs
of each type in all bins, the o-o and o-cno pairs, and i-i
and i-cni pairs, respectively, were binned separately in the
same way, described as follows. First, the two different
pair types were binned separately into ten bins with the
same number of pairs in each bin. From the obtained
sequence identity bin boundaries, new combined bin
boundaries were calculated by taking the average of the
individual bin boundaries for the two pair types.

Page 11 of 13

Subsequently, the data was redistributed according to
these new bin boundaries.
The log2(ratio IPC) was calculated for each bin in the
following way:
log 2(ratio IPC) = log 2(mean IPC o −o(i −i) / mean IPC o −cno(i −cni) )

where mean IPCo-o (i-i) is the mean IPC score for all the
o-o (i-i) pairs in that bin and mean IPCo-cno (i-cni) is the
mean IPC score for all o-cno (i-cni) pairs in the same bin.
Consequently, log2(ratio IPC) = 0 means that the two pair
types compared have the same mean IPC score. To further assess the possible correlation between IPC score
and sequence identity, the Spearman correlation coefficient for each pair type and species comparison was also
calculated using R.
Functional class enrichment analysis

Gene Ontology annotations were downloaded on March
9 2009 from ENSEMBL BioMart [43]. The set of human
genes found only in inconsistent multi-clusters (i.e. where
orthology assignment and IPC did not agree) was contrasted against a background consisting of this set
together with the set of genes found only in consistent
multi-clusters. Two multi-clusters, one between human
and worm (705 genes) and one between human and fish
(398 genes), were removed because of their large size,
which we interpreted as an indication of potentially
incorrect orthology assignments. The genes in both clusters encode olfactory receptors, most of which have no
introns. All Gene Ontology terms assigned to any of the
genes in the set were tested for enrichment or depletion
among the genes belonging only to inconsistent clusters.
We calculated the probability of these observations under
the null hypothesis of no enrichment or depletion using a
hypergeometric distribution [44]. The procedure was
implemented in-house as a simple Perl script. To avoid
drawing erroneous conclusions from multiple testings,
the False Discovery Rate (FDR) was controlled at 1%
using the procedure from [45], meaning the fraction of
false positives among the terms inferred enriched or
depleted is expected to be below 1%.
Gene Ontology terms often have complex interdependencies, e.g. terms that are ancestors or children of each
other, or terms that always or very often co-occur. These
interdependencies must be taken into account when analyzing a set of enriched or depleted terms. We selected
representative terms for major trends within the lists of
significantly enriched or depleted terms as follows. For
each term A in the list, enrichment/depletion was recomputed for the subset of the proteins resulting from exclusion of all proteins annotated with A from the dataset.

Henricson et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:412
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/412

Any term B which is significantly enriched/depleted
using the full set of proteins, but no longer when A-annotated proteins were excluded, was considered to be associated with A. These associations form the links of a
network of Gene Ontology terms. Within this network,
we selected as the first representative term C1 which had
the most links to other terms in the network. C1 and all
its direct neighbors were then removed, and the remaining most highly connected term C2 was selected, and the
procedure repeated, until all terms belonged to a term
subset with an associated most highly connected representative.
Protein family enrichment analysis

We also made Pfam-A [36] domain assignments for the
same sets of genes as above. The set of domains in each
protein was considered, and an enrichment/depletion
analysis was performed using the same methods and
tools as the GO term analysis described in the previous
section. Domains were replaced in this analysis with
Pfam clans where available, to reflect wider categories of
likely homologous domains.
Protein length analysis

We compared the two subsets of proteins tested for functional enrichment above with respect to protein length in
amino acids, number of introns, and number of Pfam-A
domains, where consecutive stretches of the same
Repeat/Motif-type Pfam-A domain were collapsed into a
single pseudo-domain, as repeat differences of this type
are extremely variable. For each length measure, the distribution of lengths across the two subsets were compared, under a null hypothesis of the distributions being
the same, using the Mann-Whitney U test/Wilcoxon rank
sum test [46], as implemented in the R [47] software.

Page 12 of 13

Additional file 3 Bin boundaries and number of pairs in the different
bins. Sequence identity bin boundaries and number of ortholog-ortholog
(o-o) and ortholog-closest non-ortholog (o-cno) pairs in the different bins.
The structure of data in each bin is given above the table.
Additional file 4 Bin boundaries and number of pairs in the different
bins. Sequence identity bin boundaries and number of inparalog-inparalog
(i-i) and inparalog-closest non-inparalog (i-cni) pairs in the different bins.
The structure of data in each bin is given above the table.
Additional file 5 Intron position conservation versus sequence identity. Intron position conservation scores for pairs of the different types
binned according to their sequence identity shown for human versus four
other species. Ortholog-ortholog (o-o) pairs versus ortholog-closest nonortholog (o-cno) pairs, and inparalog-inparalog (i-i) pairs versus inparalogclosest non-inparalog (i-cni) pairs for (A) Hsa versus Cel, (B) Hsa versus Dme,
(C) Hsa versus Gga, and (D) Hsa versus Mmu.
Additional file 6 Enrichment or depletion of GO terms in the inconsistent clusters. GO terms significantly enriched or depleted in the inconsistent clusters, i.e. clusters where the IPC score and the InParanoid inparalog
ranking did not agree. Enriched/depleted GO terms are divided into
uniquely colored groups of associated terms, each with a most highly connected representative listed at the top.
Additional file 7 Enrichment or depletion of Pfam domains in the
inconsistent clusters. Pfam domains significantly enriched or depleted in
the inconsistent clusters, i.e. clusters where the IPC score and the InParanoid inparalog ranking did not agree. Clans are used in place of domains
where available.
Authors' contributions
AH and KF carried out the analysis and wrote the manuscript. ES conceived of
the study, participated in the analysis and helped to draft the manuscript. All
authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Acknowledgements
This work has been supported by grants from the Swedish Research Council,
Pfizer Corporation, and the Swedish Knowledge Foundation through the
Industrial PhD programme in Medical Bioinformatics at the Strategy and Development Office (SDO) at Karolinska Institutet.
Author Details
1Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Karolinska Institutet, SE-171 77
Stockholm, Sweden and 2Stockholm Bioinformatics Centre, Albanova,
Stockholm University, SE-106 91 Stockholm, Sweden
Received: 16 November 2009 Accepted: 2 July 2010
Published: 2 July 2010
© 2010 Henricson et al;article distributedCentralthe terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
This article is available from: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/412
BMC is an Open2010, 11:412
Genomics Access licensee BioMed under Ltd.

List of Abbreviations
cni: closest non-inparalog; cno: closest non-ortholog; icni: inparalog-closest non-inparalog; i-i: inparalog-inparalog; IPC: intron position conservation; o-cno: orthologclosest non-ortholog; o-o: ortholog-ortholog.
Additional material
Additional file 1 Distribution of intron position conservation values.
Distribution of intron position conservation values for the different pair
types in human versus worm and human versus Drosophila. (A) Hsa versus
Cel, ortholog-ortholog (o-o) versus ortholog-closest non-ortholog (o-cno),
(B) Hsa versus Dme, o-o versus o-cno, (C) Hsa versus Cel, inparalog-inparalog (i-i) versus inparalog-closest non-inparalog (i-cni), (D) Hsa versus Dme, ii versus i-cni.
Additional file 2 Distribution of intron position conservation values.
Distribution of intron position conservation values for the different pair
types in human versus chicken and human versus mouse. (A) Hsa versus
Gga, ortholog-ortholog (o-o) versus ortholog-closest non-ortholog (o-cno),
(B) Hsa versus Mmu, o-o versus o-cno, (C) Hsa versus Gga, inparalog-inparalog (i-i) versus inparalog-closest non-inparalog (i-cni), (D) Hsa versus Mmu,
i-i versus i-cni.

References
1. Fitch WM: Distinguishing homologous from analogous proteins. Syst
Zool 1970, 19:99-113.
2. Sonnhammer EL, Koonin E: Orthology, paralogy and proposed
classification for paralog subtypes. Trends Genet 2002, 18:619-620.
3. Overbeek R, Fonstein M, D'Souza M, Pusch GD, Maltsev N: The use of
gene clusters to infer functional coupling. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1999,
96:2896-2901.
4. Remm M, Storm CEV, Sonnhammer ELL: Automatic clustering of
orthologs and in-paralogs from pairwise species comparisons. J Mol
Biol 2001, 314:1041-1052.
5. Li L, Stoeckert CJJ, Roos DS: Orthomcl: identification of ortholog groups
for eukaryotic genomes. Genome Res 2003, 13:2178-2189.
6. Tatusov RL, Fedorova ND, Jackson JD, Jacobs AR, Kiryutin B, Koonin EV,
Krylov DM, Mazumder R, Mekhedov SL, Nikolskaya AN, Rao BS, Smirnov S,
Sverdlov AV, Vasudevan S, Wolf YI, Yin JJ, Natale DA: The cog database: an
updated version includes eukaryotes. BMC Bioinformatics 2003, 4:41.
7. Hubbard TJ, Aken BL, Beal K, Ballester B, Caccamo M, Chen Y, Clarke L,
Coates G, Cunningham F, Cutts T, Down T, Dyer SC, Fitzgerald S,
Fernandez-Banet J, Graf S, Haider S, Hammond M, Herrero J, Holland R,
Howe K, Howe K, Johnson N, Kahari A, Keefe D, Kokocinski F, Kulesha E,
Lawson D, Longden I, Melsopp C, Megy K, Meidl P, Ouverdin B, Parker A,
Prlic A, Rice S, Rios D, Schuster M, Sealy I, Severin J, Slater G, Smedley D,
Spudich G, Trevanion S, Vilella A, Vogel J, White S, Wood M, Cox T, Curwen

Henricson et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:412
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/412

8.

9.

10.
11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.
22.
23.
24.
25.

26.
27.
28.
29.

30.
31.

V, Durbin R, Fernandez-Suarez XM, Flicek P, Kasprzyk A, Proctor G, Searle S,
Smith J, Ureta-Vidal A, Birney E: Ensembl 2007. Nucleic Acids Res 2007,
35:D610-D617.
Wheeler DL, Barrett T, Benson DA, Bryant SH, Canese K, Chetvernin V,
Church DM, DiCuccio M, Edgar R, Federhen S, Geer LY, Kapustin Y,
Khovayko O, Landsman D, Lipman DJ, Madden TL, Maglott DR, Ostell J,
Miller V, Pruitt KD, Schuler GD, Sequeira E, Sherry ST, Sirotkin K, Souvorov
A, Starchenko G, Tatusov RL, Tatusova TA, Wagner L, Yaschenko E:
Database resources of the National Center for Biotechnology
Information. Nucleic Acids Res 2007, 35:D5-D12.
Jensen LJ, Julien P, Kuhn M, von Mering C, Muller J, Doerks T, Bork P:
eggNOG: automated construction and annotation of orthologous
groups of genes. Nucleic Acids Res 2008, 36:D250-D254.
Roth AC, Dessimoz C, Gonnet GH: The algorithm of OMA, large-scale
orthology inference. BMC Bioinformatics 2008, 9:518.
Hulsen T, Huynen MA, de Vlieg J, Groenen PM: Benchmarking ortholog
identification methods using functional genomics data. Genome Biol
2006, 7:R31.
Chen F, Mackey AJ, Vermunt JK, Roos DS: Assessing performance of
orthology detection strategies applied to eukaryotic genomes. PLoS
ONE 2007, 2:e383.
Altenhoff AM, Dessimoz C: Phylogenetic and functional assessment of
orthologs inference projects and methods. PLoS Comput Biol 2009,
5:e1000262.
Fedorov A, Merican AF, Gilbert W: Large-scale comparison of intron
positions among animal, plant, and fungal genes. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 2002, 99:16128-16133.
Rogozin IB, Wolf YI, Sorokin AV, Mirkin BG, Koonin EV: Remarkable
interkingdom conservation of intron positions and massive, lineagespecific intron loss and gain in eukaryotic evolution. Curr Biol 2003,
13:1512-1517.
Robertson HM: Two large families of chemoreceptor genes in the
nematodes Caenorhabditis elegans and Caenorhabditis briggsae reveal
extensive gene duplication, diversification, movement, and intron loss.
Genome Res 1998, 8:449-463.
Robertson HM: The large srh family of chemoreceptor genes in
Caenorhabditis nematodes reveals processes of genome evolution
involving large duplications and deletions and intron gains and losses.
Genome Res 2000, 10:192-203.
Franck E, Madsen O, van Rheede T, Ricard GN, Huynen MA, de Jong WW:
Evolutionary diversity of vertebrate small heat shock proteins. J Mol
Evol 2004, 59:792-805.
Ferrier DEK, Minguillon C, Holland PWH, Garcia-Fernandez J: The
amphioxus Hox cluster: deuterostome posterior flexibility and Hox14.
Evol Dev 2000, 2:284-293.
Pavesi G, Zambelli F, Caggese C, Pesole G: Exalign: a new method for
comparative analysis of exon-intron gene structures. Nucleic Acids Res
2008, 36:e47.
Dibb NJ, Newman AJ: Evidence that introns arose at proto-splice sites.
EMBO J 1989, 8:2015-2021.
Dibb NJ: Proto-splice site model of intron origin. J Theor Biol 1991,
151:405-416.
Sadusky T, Newman AJ, Dibb NJ: Exon junction sequences as cryptic
splice sites: Implications for intron origin. Curr Biol 2004, 14:505-509.
Sverdlov AV, Rogozin IB, Babenko VN, Koonin E: Reconstruction of
ancestral protosplice sites. Curr Biol 2004, 14:1505-1508.
Qiu WG, Schisler N, Stoltzfus A: The evolutionary gain of spliceosomal
introns: Sequence and phase preferences. Mol Biol Evol 2004,
21:1252-1263.
Sverdlov AV, Rogozin IB, Babenko VN, Koonin EV: Conservation versus
parallel gains in intron evolution. Nucleic Acids Res 2005, 33:1741-1748.
Carmel L, Rogozin IB, Wolf YI, Koonin EV: Patterns of intron gain and
conservation in eukaryotic genes. BMC Evol Biol 2007, 7:192.
Roy SW, Gilbert W: Rates of intron loss and gain: Implications for early
eukaryotic evolution. PNAS 2005, 102:5773-5778.
Carmel L, Wolf YI, Rogozin IB, Koonin EV: Three distinct modes of intron
dynamics in the evolution of eukaryotes. Genome Res 2007,
17:1034-1044.
Mourier T, Jeffares DC: Eukaryotic intron loss. Science 2003, 300:1393.
Roy SW, Fedorov A, Gilbert W: Large-scale comparison of intron
positions in mammalian genes shows intron loss but no gain. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2003, 100:7158-7162.

Page 13 of 13

32. Roy SW, Penny D: On the incidence of intron loss and gain in
paralogous gene families. Mol Biol Evol 2007, 24:1579-1581.
33. Babenko V, Rogozin I, Mekhedov S, Koonin E: Prevalence of intron gain
over intron loss in the evolution of paralogous gene families. Nucleic
Acids Res 2004, 32:3724-3733.
34. Bandyopadhyay S, Sharan R, Ideker T: Systematic identification of
functional orthologs based on protein network comparison. Genome
Res 2006, 16:428-435.
35. Ashburner M, Ball CA, Blake JA, Botstein D, Butler H, Cherry JM, Davis AP,
Dolinski K, Dwight SS, Eppig JT, Harris MA, Hill DP, Issel-Tarver L, Kasarskis
A, Lewis S, Matese JC, Richardson JE, Ringwald M, Rubin GM, Sherlock G:
Gene Ontology: tool for the unification of biology. The Gene Ontology
Consortium. Nat Genet 2000, 25:25-29.
36. Finn RD, Mistry J, Tate J, Coggill P, Heger A, Pollington JE, Gavin OL,
Gunasekaran P, Ceric G, Forslund K, Holm L, Sonnhammer EL, Eddy SR,
Bateman A: The Pfam protein families database. Nucleic Acids Res 2010,
38:D211-222.
37. Stoltzfus A, Logsdon JM Jr, Palmer JD, Doolittle WF: Intron "sliding" and
the diversity of intron positions. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1997,
94:10739-10744.
38. Rogozin IB, Lyons-Weiler J, Koonin E: Intron sliding in conserved gene
families. Trends Genet 2000, 16:430-432.
39. Ensembl database [http://www.ensembl.org]
40. National Center for Biotechnology Information [http://www.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov]
41. Altschul SF, Madden TL, Schaffer AA, Zhang J, Zhang Z, Miller W, Lipman
DJ: Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new generation of protein
database search programs. Nucleic Acids Res 1997, 25:3389-3402.
42. Lassmann T, Frings O, Sonnhammer EL: Kalign2: high-performance
multiple alignment of protein and nucleotide sequences allowing
external features. Nucleic Acids Res 2009, 37:858-65.
43. Flicek P, Aken BL, Ballester B, Beal K, Bragin E, Brent S, Chen Y, Clapham P,
Coates G, Fairley S, Fitzgerald S, Fernandez-Banet J, Gordon L, Gräf S,
Haider S, Hammond M, Howe K, Jenkinson A, Johnson N, Kähäri A, Keefe
D, Keenan S, Kinsella R, Kokocinski F, Koscielny G, Kulesha E, Lawson D,
Longden I, Massingham T, McLaren W, Megy K, Overduin B, Pritchard B,
Rios D, Ruffier M, Schuster M, Slater G, Smedley D, Spudich G, Tang YA,
Trevanion S, Vilella A, Vogel J, White S, Wilder SP, Zadissa A, Birney E,
Cunningham F, Dunham I, Durbin R, Fernández-Suarez XM, Herrero J,
Hubbard TJ, Parker A, Proctor G, Smith J, Searle SM: Ensembl's 10th year.
Nucleic Acids Res 2010, 38:D557-562.
44. MathWorld--A Wolfram Web Resource [http://mathworld.wolfram.com/
HypergeometricDistribution.html]
45. Benjamini Y, Hochberg Y: Controlling the false discovery rate: a practical
and powerful approach to multiple testing. Journal of the Royal
Statistical Society, Series B (Methodological) 1995, 57:289-300.
46. Mann HB, Whitney DR: On a Test of Whether one of Two Random
Variables is Stochastically Larger than the Other. Ann Math Statist 1947,
18(1):50-60.
47. R Development Core Team: R: A Language and Environment for
Statistical Computing. R Foundation for Statistical Computing 2010 [http:/
/www.R-project.org].
doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-11-412
Cite this article as: Henricson et al., Orthology confers intron position conservation BMC Genomics 2010, 11:412

</pre>
</body>
</html>
