<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Sexual dimorphism and population divergence in the Lake Tanganyika cichlid fish genus Tropheus</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Frontiers in Zoology 2010 7:4. doi:10.1186/1742-9994-7-4"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Juergen Herler"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Herler et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:4
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/4

RESEARCH

Open Access

Sexual dimorphism and population divergence in
the Lake Tanganyika cichlid fish genus Tropheus
Juergen Herler1,2*, Michaela Kerschbaumer1, Philipp Mitteroecker2, Lisbeth Postl1, Christian Sturmbauer1

Abstract
Background: With about 120 colour morphs currently assigned to six nominal species, the genus Tropheus is an
ideal model to study evolutionary divergence of populations in allopatry. The morphology of Tropheus has been
described as relatively static, but reproductive constraints are sexually dimorphic due to mouthbrooding in females.
We analysed phenotypic variation in six populations of T. moorii and one population of T. polli using geometric
morphometrics to assess morphological differences among sexes in relation to the differentiation of populations
and species.
Results: The mean shapes differed significantly between sexes, populations, and species even though within-sex
variation exceeded the divergence among populations. The first principal component of Procrustes shape
coordinates revealed differences between populations and species in mouth position and ventral head shape. The
second principal component reflected sex-specific shape differences, mainly comprising a relatively larger female
viscerocranium and, in particular, a larger buccal area. While shape variation between populations and between
sexes was primarily located in the cranial region, within-sex variation was relatively uniform across all landmarks.
Conclusions: Deviations of the between-population and between-sex pattern of shape variation from that within
sex indicate that the differences in head shape likely result from both adaptations to female mouthbrooding and
population-specific foraging strategies.

Background
Sexual dimorphism is a ubiquitous phenomenon in animal taxa. Hedrick and Temeles [1] discuss three main
adaptive mechanisms favouring the evolution of sexual
dimorphism: sexual selection, dimorphic niches, and
food competition. Sexual selection typically acts on
males, e.g., when females show assortative mating or
when mate competition enforces selection on certain
male traits. In contrast, the dimorphic niche hypothesis
suggests selection acting mainly on females, due to
reproductive constraints [1]. Alternatively, sexual
dimorphism can evolve by ecological selection acting
differentially on both sexes and thus favouring both
dimorphic niches and, as a consequence, dimorphic
trophic structures [1]. Bolnick and Doebeli [2] found
that sexual dimorphism usually evolves more rapidly
than new species by disruptive ecological selection [3,4].
Intense interspecific competition, in contrast, is likely to
reduce sexual dimorphism because of a restricted
* Correspondence: juergen.herler@univie.ac.at
1
Institute of Zoology, University of Graz, Graz, Austria

ecological niche for both sexes [1,5,6]. For example, Butler et al. [7] found that sexual dimorphism in lizards was
greater in species-poor environments with reduced
interspecific competition as compared to environments
inhabited by more species.
The majority of studies on sexual dimorphism focused
on humans, apes, birds, amphibians and fishes, and
usually dealt with sexual size dimorphism (SSD) as summarized by Blanckenhorn [8]. In particular, many teleost
fishes represent interesting models for studying sexual
dimorphism [9], but few authors have addressed actual
shape dimorphism, especially in relation to reproductive
behaviour [10]. A range of sexually dimorphic reproductive constraints on shape have been reported for the cranial anatomy of mouthbrooding fishes, which incubate
their eggs in the buccal cavity until the larvae hatch [e.
g., [10]]. Oliveira and Almada [11] found that in maternally mouthbrooding cichlids of the Great East African
Lakes, females have wider premaxillae, longer snouts,
and larger preopercular and interopercular bones than
males of these species. Disproportionate investment in

© 2010 Herler et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Herler et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:4
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/4

reproduction by maternal mouthbrooders was suggested
to result in strong sexual selection and thus often drives
sexual dimorphism [12].
Our study populations of the genus Tropheus live in
the East African Lake Tanganyika and are brightly
coloured female mouthbrooders. Unlike most other haplochromine cichlids, they display no sexual dichromatism. The resemblance in colour patterns among sexes
has been attributed to their function in communication
within a territorial social system including males and
females [13,14]. Although the overall morphology of
populations and sister species of the genus Tropheus
was considered as relatively static [15] except for colouration, which is highly polymorphic across geographically isolated populations, more recent investigations
found subtle differences in trophic and head morphology [16,17]. About 120 colour morphs were described
[18]. Most populations live in allopatry but in some
locations two Tropheus populations live in sympatry (e.
g., T. moorii and T. polli occur together on the east
coast of Lake Tanganyika at Kekese; Sturmbauer personal observations). Although Tropheus populations have
been subject to molecular phylogenetic and phylogeographic studies, we still lack comprehensive morphological investigations based on a large number of specimens
and populations to quantify shape variation, population
divergence, and sex-related differences within and
among populations and species. Moreover, the genus is
in need of taxonomic revision, as the six nominal species described so far do not include a sufficient number
of populations and none of the recent molecular genetic
results [19,20].
The present study investigates phenotypic divergence
and sexual dimorphism in seven Tropheus populations
from different regions of Lake Tanganyika. We quantified and visualized mean shape differences between
sexes (sexual dimorphism), and between populations
and species (morphological divergence) using a geometric morphometric approach. Because of the common
mode of reproduction (mouthbrooding) in all populations, we hypothesized a similar pattern of sexual
dimorphism, involving differences in the morphology of
the oral cavity. We further compared the amount of
sexual shape dimorphism among the populations, which
is expected to inversely relate to the degree of interspecific competition. In order to assess whether morphological differences between populations and sexes can be
traced back to selective forces, we visualized and compared the corresponding variance-covariance structures
between populations, between sexes, and within sexes.
Deviations between these matrices may indicate evolutionary scenarios involving directional or stabilizing
selection.

Page 2 of 10

Methods
Study populations

We examined seven populations of Tropheus, yielding a
total sample of 691 specimens. Six populations of Tropheus moorii were sampled (Fig. 1): Kekese (126 males,
125 females), Ikola_1 (29 males, 57 females), Ikola_2 (56
males, 106 females), Katoto (17 males, 22 females),
Mbita (22 males, 25 females) and Nakaku (25 males, 25
females). One population of T. polli (30 males, 26
females) was sampled at Kekese (living in sympatry with
T. moorii). In the following text, the six T. moorii populations are named after their sampling location (Kekese
= Kek, Ik1 = Ikola_1, Ik2 = Ikola_2, Katoto = Kat,
Mbita = Mbi, Nakaku = Nak), whereas Tropheus polli
from Kekese is abbreviated with “Tpo”. Adult fish of all
populations were used in this study to minimise shape
variation due to ontogenetic allometry within each
population. Populations were sampled across different
spatial scales of allopatric distribution and habitats. Tropheus polli was chosen for interspecific comparison
because it is a distinct species, which occurs sympatrically with three different populations of T. moorii at several locations without interbreeding. The two species
also refused to hybridize under experimental conditions
(Sturmbauer, unpublished data). In addition, the potential effect of interspecific competition on trophic divergence was studied by sampling two genetically close
populations of T. moorii, one in sympatry and the second one in allopatry with T. polli.
Data acquisition

Fish were narcotised for 2 to 3 min with a low dose of
clove oil (1-2 drops per liter water) and scanned on a
specifically adapted flatbed scanner following the protocol of Herler et al. [21]. The sequence of digital images
was randomized with TPSUtil 1.33 [22] and 19 landmarks (Table 1, Fig. 2a) were digitized on every specimen using TPSDig 2.10 [23].
Data analysis

The 691 landmark configurations were superimposed by
a Generalized Procrustes Analysis (Fig. 2b) and projected into tangent space [24,25]. The distribution of
sex-specific mean shapes in shape space was evaluated
with Principal Component Analysis (PCA), also called
Relative Warp Analysis when applied to Procrustes
shape coordinates [26]. The shape deformations
depicted by the principal components (relative warps)
are visualized by thin-plate spline (TPS) deformation
grids [26], superimposed on images of a fish deformed
by the same TPS functions (the fish image was selected
to be close to the overall mean shape of all populations).
Differences between mean shapes were tested for statistical significance with Monte-Carlo permutation tests
[27].

Herler et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:4
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/4

Page 3 of 10

Kekese (Kek)/T. polli (Tpo)
Ikola_1 (Ik1)
Ikola_2 (Ik2)

N

100 km

Mbita (Mbi)

Nakaku (Nak)
Katoto (Kat)

Figure 1 Study populations of Tropheus from Lake Tanganyika. The map shows the locations of six study populations of Tropheus moorii
and one of T. polli (including abbreviations) from the eastern and southern part of Lake Tanganyika.

In the style of a two factor nested multivariate analysis
of variance, we decomposed the total variation of Procrustes shape coordinates into three components: (1)
variation among population means, (2) variation among
sex means (within each population), and (3) residual
variation (within each population and sex). We visualized these three components of variance with scatter
plots of the corresponding Procrustes coordinates and
equal frequency ellipses for each landmark. We further
calculated the corresponding sum of squares and variances: sum of squared deviations (SS) of the seven
population means from the grand mean, SS of the 14
sex means from the corresponding population means,

SS of each individual from the corresponding sex mean.
See the Appendix for more details and an alternative
analysis.
According to Lande [28], the genetic between-population covariance matrix (i.e., additive and heritable phenotypic variance and covariance) is expected to be
proportional to the within-population covariance matrix
under pure genetic drift. Deviations from proportionality
may indicate evolutionary scenarios involving directed
or stabilising selective forces. Heritable between-sex variation is additionally constrained by genetic correlations
between homologous characters in males and females
[5]. The ‘graphical decomposition’ of variance as

Herler et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:4
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/4

Page 4 of 10

Figure 2 Landmark dataset. (a) One specimen of Tropheus with the 19 landmarks used for the geometric morphometric analysis (see Table 1
for definitions), b: Scatter plot of all 691 landmark configurations after Procrustes superimposition.

described above allows a visual inspection and localisation of differences in the patterns of phenotypic variance
and covariance. We also performed likelihood ratio tests
of homogeneity and proportionality for the three covariance matrices [29]. All statistical and morphometric
analyses were performed in Mathematica 6 using routines programmed by Philipp Mitteroecker and Philipp
Gunz.

Results
Permutation tests indicated that the mean shapes of each
Tropheus population differed significantly from each
other (P < 0.001 for all 28 tests, 5,000 permutations).
Table 1 Definition of landmarks. Nineteen landmarks
were digitized on 691 specimens of Tropheus (see also
Fig. 2).
Landmark

Definition

1

anterior tip of snout

2
3

anterior insertion of dorsal fin
posterior insertion of dorsal fin

4

upper insertion of caudal fin

5

midpoint of the origin of caudal fin

6

lower insertion of caudal fin

7

posterior insertion of anal fin

8

anterior insertion of anal fin

9

insertion of ventral fin

10
11

13

anteroventral tip of pectoral girdle (cleithrum)
ventral-most point of the border between interopercle
and subopercle
the point where preopercle, interoperculum and
subopercle meet
upper insertion of pelvic fin

14

dorsal origin of operculum

15

dorsal end of preopercular groove

16

anterior rim of orbit along the horizontal body axis

17

centre of orbit

18

posterior rim of orbit along the horizontal body axis

19

posterior-most point of lips

12

Pairwise linear discriminant analyses even demonstrated
that most groups have little or no overlap in shape space
(results not shown). Furthermore, male and female mean
shapes differed significantly within all seven populations
(P < 0.008). Figure 3 shows the first two axes of a principal component analysis (PCA) of the fourteen sex-specific mean shapes (explaining 87% of total variation among
the mean shapes). While the seven populations differed
along both the first and the second PCs, shape differences
between sexes were largely confined to the second
dimension. Population differences along the first PC were
mainly based on the shape (jaw retraction or protrusion)
and the relative position of the mouth (terminal or subterminal), where T. moorii from Nakaku on the one
hand, and T. polli and T. moorii Ikola_1 on the other
hand represent the opposite extremes. The remaining
four populations of T. moorii exhibited less shape variation in this dimension; especially Katoto and Mbita males
were almost indistinguishable. Minor shape differences
associated with PC 1 were also located in the caudal
peduncle.
A common direction of sexual dimorphism was evident
in shape space (predominately along PC 2), although the
exact orientation and degree of sexual dimorphism varied
across the seven surveyed populations (Fig. 3). A permutation test rejected the null hypothesis of equal degrees
of sexual dimorphism (Procrustes distance between male
and female mean shapes) in all populations with P <
0.001. The two populations near Ikola (Ikola_1 and
Ikola_2) exhibited the largest sexual dimorphism in body
shape, whereas especially the southern populations at
Katoto, Mbita and Nakaku were less dimorphic. Females
had a relatively larger head than males, particularly a larger ventral area (buccal region). Especially the area
between the landmarks of the posterior edge of the
mouth gape, opercular series and the anteroventral tip of
the cleithrum (pectoral girdle) - the characters representing the external markers for the buccal cavity - exhibited
strong local shape deformations.

Herler et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:4
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/4

Figure 4 shows the decomposition of the total variation
of Procrustes coordinates (as depicted in Fig. 2b) into
three components: the variation among population mean
shapes, the variation among sex-specific mean shapes
(within populations), and the residual variation within
sex and within population (ignoring variation between
sexes and populations). Likelihood ratio tests yielded significant differences among the three respective covariance matrices: they were neither identical nor
proportional. As visualised by the three separate landmark scatters, there was more shape variance (summed
over all landmarks and multiplied by 104) within one sex
(3.681) than between sexes (0.512) and between populations (2.423). Whereas the amount of within-sex variation was somewhat similar for all landmarks, the cranial
and particularly the oral landmarks exhibited considerably more between-sex as well as between-population
variation than the other landmarks. For the residual
within-sex variation, the average variance per cranial
landmark was approximately 0.84 times the average postcranial variance. For between-population and betweensex variation, this ratio was 1.30 and 1.84, respectively.

Discussion
A wide range of forms and sexual dimorphism patterns
has evolved in teleost fishes when compared to other

Page 5 of 10

vertebrates. In the family Cichlidae most studies focused
on sexual size dimorphism (SSD) [30,31] and only few
authors addressed shape dimorphism with respect to
reproductive behaviour [e.g., [32]]. While SSD can be
quantified by simple measures of overall size, studies of
shape dimorphism require a series of measured characters. Traditional multivariate morphometric approaches
are typically based on measures such as Euclidian distances, areas, or counts. Differences in shape are usually
inferred from disproportional changes of these single
size measures across individuals or group means, but
the actual geometry underlying these changes cannot be
reconstructed from such measurements. Geometric
morphometrics, in contrast, is based on landmark coordinates, allowing statistical results to be represented as
actual shapes or shape deformations. Due to the
increased number of variables in most geometric morphometric studies, shape differences can be assessed in
more detail and exploratory studies can be performed
more successfully [17,26,33-35].
Sexual selection was argued to play a role in the
explosive speciation and adaptive radiation of cichlid
fishes [36-39] although its actual role in the genus Tropheus remains controversial, as the genus does not display sexual dichromatism [40,41]. Danley and Kocher
[42] stated that morphological adaptations to differential

Figure 3 Principal component analysis of shape coordinates. Scatter plot of the first two principal component scores for the 14 sex-specific
mean shapes. The two mean shapes for each population are connected by a grey line to indicate the direction of sexual dimorphism. The
deformation grids on the left and the right side visualize the shape change depicted by PC 1; they are deformations of the mean shape to
shapes corresponding to minus and plus 0.07 units along the PC 1 axis. Similarly, the top and bottom deformation grids visualize shape change
along PC 2. See the Methods section for abbreviations of populations.

Herler et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:4
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/4

food niches occurred at an early stage of the radiation.
A recent study empirically supported the hypothesis
that divergent natural selection has shaped trophic morphology [43]. Due to its old evolutionary age, the cichlid
fish species flock of Lake Tanganyika is at a mature
stage of adaptive radiation, in which species are ecomorphologically highly diverse and live in complex communities so that diversification has slowed down [39].
Stabilizing selection is thought to prevail in such a
mature species community. Remarkably, many littoral

Page 6 of 10

species show considerable geographic variation, mostly
in terms of colour. Populations of the genus Tropheus
were previously thought to be morphologically largely
invariant and differentiated mainly by colour in allopatric populations [15,18,44]. Maderbacher et al. [17] and
Postl et al. [16], however, discovered slight, yet significant, morphological differences among three populations
of Tropheus.
The present study demonstrated considerable morphological variation among the six populations of T.

Figure 4 Decomposition of shape variation. The total variation of Procrustes shape coordinates (Fig. 2b) was decomposed into three
components: the variation between population mean shapes, the variation between sex-specific mean shapes within populations, and the
pooled residual variation within sexes and within populations. The figure shows the landmark scatters with equal frequency ellipses for these
three components along with the corresponding sum of squares. The variances of these components are 2.423, 0.512, and 3.681, respectively
(summed over all landmarks and multiplied by 104).

Herler et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:4
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/4

moorii and one population of T. polli from Lake Tanganyika, even though within-population variation exceeded
the variation among populations. The main differences
between population mean shapes were in overall body
shape and particularly in the landmarks defining the
shape (retracted versus protruded) and position (terminal versus subterminal) of the mouth and the lateral
outline of the buccal cavity. Similarly, Kassam et al. [32]
reported interspecific differences of mouth length in
three congeneric species of the cichlid genus Petrotilapia from Laka Malawi, in which trophic niche partitioning was assumed to be the main driving force for
morphological divergence.
We also found among population variation of landmarks at the dorsal and anal fin origins, which may be
explained by population-specific differences in the number of fin spines. While T. polli usually has four anal
spines, T. moorii populations at Ikola and Kekese have
five and those at Nakaku, Mbita and Katoto have six
[[18,45], personal observations]. In contrast, the number
of dorsal spines is more conserved (fish from Ikola had
20, whereas all other populations had 21). Minor shape
differences were present in the posterior trunk region,
particularly in the caudal peduncle shape; the latter is
assumed to affect swimming type and performance, and
consequently foraging strategy. A longer caudal peduncle often is associated with prolonged swimming while a
deeper peduncle characterizes more powerful sprint
swimming [46]. Male Tropheus had a larger caudal peduncle area than females, and the population from
Nakaku had a larger area than those from Ikola or T.
polli. This may assist in burst swimming for territorial
defence, while the (fin) shape differences between populations potentially indicate different foraging strategies
or predation pressure.
The Nakaku population was most distinct in shape,
whereas the eastern populations of T. moorii were even
more similar to T. polli than to their conspecific populations from the southwest. The Nakaku population
belongs to a different major mtDNA lineage of T.
moorii, the so-called Chaitika lineage, and is also distinct
in colour [20,44]. Interestingly, T. moorii and T. polli
from Kekese live in sympatry and show morphological
differences in the mouth region (see Fig. 3), indicating a
trophic niche segregation. Similarly, Kassam et al. [32]
reported slight differences in mouth morphology of coexisting species of the genus Petrotilapia from Lake
Malawi, suggesting partitioning of food resources. At
Kekese, T. moorii lives in deeper water, probably
because of competition with T. polli, which grows larger
and occupies the most shallow water zone. This zone is
usually also occupied by T. moorii in other locations
throughout the lake (Sturmbauer, personal observations). Slight habitat differences (e.g. in terms of wave

Page 7 of 10

action) and different species and abundances of epilithic
algae - the main food source of Tropheus - exist in deeper water, so that a different position and protrusion of
the mouth might reflect adaptations to these conditions.
The adjacent populations of T. moorii near Ikola
(Ikola_1 and Ikola_2) belong to the same colour morph
as fish from Kekese, but live without T. polli. They also
occupy the uppermost littoral zone. Fish from Ikola_2
were morphologically indistinguishable from those at
Kekese within the first two principal components,
whereas fish from Ikola_1 were more distant from the
other two conspecific populations, but highly similar to
the allopatric T. polli, particularly in the terminal
mouth; the latter may represent a case of convergence.
Thus, among these eastern populations, allopatric populations were more similar to each other than those living
in sympatry. In contrast, the morphological similarity of
the southern populations at Mbita and Katoto might
reflect their close phylogenetic relationship and recent
gene flow. These two populations are also similar in colour and mitochondrial DNA, suggesting a recent admixture of the Katoto population [20].
Our analysis indicates that ecological divergence has
contributed to the diversification of the genus Tropheus.
Stronger evidence, however, requires an eco-morphological study based on a larger number of populations and
more precise ecological data. In addition to ecological
factors, positive assortative female mate preference,
which has led to about 120 different colour morphs, has
probably played a major role in at least an allopatric
diversification process [36,41], whereas some studies
questioned the importance of (colour)assortative mating
for sympatric speciation in Tropheus [[40], Egger et al.
unpublished].
The PCA (Fig. 3) showed a common pattern of sexual
dimorphism in all seven populations along the second
principal component. This component mainly consisted
of a dorso-ventrally expanded head, an extended buccal
region, and a slight contraction in the ventral opercular
region in females. These sex-specific morphological differences relate to the reproductive constraints on the
cranial anatomy of mouthbrooding fishes. Oliveira and
Almada [11] reported sexual dimorphism in jaws and
fins of other maternally mouth-brooding cichlids and
related these differences mainly to sexual selection,
while Kassam et al. [32] did not detect any sexual
dimorphism in rock-dwelling cichlids of the genus Petrotilapia from Lake Malawi. Barnett and Bellwood [10]
reported a significantly larger buccal cavity in males of
the paternally mouthbrooding Apogonidae, where the
degree of dimorphism varies across species. Furthermore, they found that these shape differences were not
only reflected in the osteology, but also in soft tissue
morphology. The landmarks used in the present study

Herler et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:4
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/4

Page 8 of 10

Figure 5 Decomposition of shape variation in the style of a two-way ANOVA. The total variation of Procrustes shape coordinates (Fig. 2b)
was decomposed into four components: variation of population mean shapes, the variation of sex mean shapes, variation due to the interaction
population x sex, and the residual variation.

mainly represent bone morphology, but it is very likely
that soft tissue flexibility contributes to the sexual
dimorphism in Tropheus as well.
Even though the pattern of sexual shape dimorphism
was similar in all seven populations, they differed considerably in the magnitude of sexual dimorphism.
There were less sex-specific shape differences within
the three southern populations as well as in T. polli
than in the more dimorphic eastern populations of T.
moorii near Ikola. In the closely related and morphologically similar populations at Mbita and Katoto, sexual
dimorphism even exceeded the morphological differences at the population level. Interestingly, sexual
dimorphism in these two populations was not only
found along the second principal component, but the
females also differed along the first principal component from the males, indicating that also additional
ecological selective forces may have contributed to sexual dimorphism. Although our study presents only a
single case of interspecific competition in sympatry
(that of T. polli and T. moorii at Kekese), which is
insufficient to infer a general pattern, the finding of
lower sexual dimorphism in T. moorii from Kekese
when compared to Ikola (Fig. 3) is congruent with the
hypothesis of an inverse relationship of sexual
dimorphism and interspecific competition [1,6,7].
Additionally, variation in the magnitude of sexual
dimorphism may relate to population differences in the
size and number of eggs stored by females, but we lack
such data for our populations.

In a decomposition of shape variation (Fig. 4) we found
that between-population and between-sex variation was
mainly located in the cranial region, whereas within-sex
variation was relatively uniform across all parts of the
body. Especially the between-population variation is largely confined to the mouth and viscerocranium. In the
case of pure evolutionary drift, the genetic between-population covariance structure (the additive and heritable part
of phenotypic variation) is expected to be proportional to
the variance and covariance within populations. Deviations
from that pattern are likely due to directional or stabilising
selection [28,47]. Variation between sexes is further determined by genetic correlations between male and female
traits [5]. Of course, our decomposition of phenotypic variance is not a rigorous test of selection; instead, it permits
an exploration of gross differences between patterns of
phenotypic variation. The highly localised variation among
populations and between sexes relative to the uniform
within-sex variation indicates that both sexual dimorphism
and population divergence are due (partly) to selection.
The sexually dimorphic cranial morphology in the mouthbrooding cichlids may be explained as an evolutionary
adaptation to the dimorphic reproductive regimes.
Among-population (and interspecific) variation in cranial
morphology may reflect adaptations to different habitats
and foraging strategies.

Conclusions
By the application of geometric morphometrics, we
demonstrated that populations of T. moorii and T. polli

Herler et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:4
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/4

in Lake Tanganyika have evolved subtle morphological
differences. Sex-related differences are mainly evident in
the larger buccal area of females and can be explained
as adaptation to maternal mouthbrooding. In contrast,
population-specific differences mainly involve the position of the mouth, which may be a result of different
trophic ecological selection regimes in different habitats.
Further sex- and population-specific differences are
located in the caudal peduncle, indicating different locomotion patterns during feeding and territorial behaviour
of males. The observed variation in the magnitude of
sexual dimorphism indicates an inverse relationship of
sexual dimorphism and interspecific competition.

Appendix
In the main text, we decomposed the total variation of
Procrustes shape coordinates into three components:
the variation of population means around the grand
mean, the variation of sex means (within each population) around their corresponding population mean, and
the residual variation of individuals around their corresponding sex mean. This is analogous to a so-called
nested or hierarchical design in an analysis of variance
(ANOVA). An alternative approach would be a two-way
ANOVA leading to four components of variation: two
factors, an interaction term, and the residuals. Two-way
ANOVA is applied when two factors of equal rank have
approximately independent effects on the individuals. A
nested design is typically used when the main group
(main factor) is subdivided into randomly chosen subgroups (the nested factor), which may thus not be the
same for all main groups [48]. As the correct design for
our data is not obvious we discuss our choice here and
present an alternative analysis.
In our case, sex (as the nested factor) apparently has
the same levels (male/female) in each species, which are
not chosen randomly. On the other hand, they represent
all possible levels of the sex factor, and it appears natural to consider sex as nested within population or species rather than of the same rank as population/species.
We thus decided to apply a nested design to visualize
how sexual dimorphism varies across the seven populations/species, relative to the variation within the sexes
and between the populations. In other words, our primary interest in this analysis of variance was not the
average effect of being male or female, but how sexual
dimorphism varies across the seven populations.
Under the (apparently unrealistic) null-hypothesis of
sexual dimorphism due to random drift only, dimorphism would have evolved independently within the populations and would not share a common (selective) factor
across all populations. In fact, we would expect a distribution resembling the within-sex distribution, modified
by genetic correlations between the sexes. We found

Page 9 of 10

that the distribution of sex means clearly differs from
the within-sex variation, which was nearly isotropic.
Instead there was far more variation between sexes in
the head and particularly in the buccal area than a scenario of pure drift would lead us to expect. As mentioned in the main text, this is not a formal test of
selection versus drift, but rather an exploratory
approach to visualize different aspects of phenotypic
shape variation.
In Figure 5, we analyzed the same data with a two-way
ANOVA instead of a nested design. The distribution of
the seven species means (Fig. 5a) is the same as in Figure 4, but sex as the second main factor differs. It has
two levels only, which are visualized in Figure 5b as the
difference between average male and average female
landmark positions. Similar to PC 2 in Figure 3, it
shows that the average effect of sexual dimorphism is
mainly located in the head. A likelihood ratio test indicates that the interaction term differs significantly from
zero (P < 0.001). The interaction term (Fig. 5c) depicts
how the actual 14 sex means deviate from their expectations derived from the average sex and population
effects. In other words, it shows how sexual dimorphism
varies across the populations, independent of the average sexual dimorphism. Again, this variation is largely
constrained to the cranium and the buccal area. The
residual term (Fig. 5d) is the same for both types of
analyses.
The two-way ANOVA leads to the same interpretation of the data as the nested ANOVA, but it is unclear
whether a decomposition of sexual dimorphism into an
average effect and an interaction term is more natural
than a single term for the variation between sex means
as in the nested design. Computationally, both
approaches are feasible, particularly as the sums of
squares and significance levels are of minor interest in
this exploratory attempt. Their usefulness primarily
depends on the scientific context.
Acknowledgements
We thank H Phiri, L Makasa and the entire team at the Mpulungu Station of
the Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives, Republic of Zambia, and T
Veall, Rift Valley Tropicals Inc., for cooperation during fieldwork. We are
grateful to Fred Bookstein, Michael Stachowitsch, and Steven Weiss for
valuable comments on the manuscript and the analysis. This study was
financially supported by the Austrian Academy of Sciences (APARTProgramme) to JH and by the FWF (Austrian Science Fund: grants P17680,
P20994) to CS.
Author details
1
Institute of Zoology, University of Graz, Graz, Austria. 2Department of
Theoretical Biology, Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Vienna, Vienna,
Austria.
Authors’ contributions
JH and CS designed the study. JH took the leading role in working on the
manuscript. MK, LP and CS sampled fish, MK digitized the landmarks, and all
three persons contributed to the manuscript. PM performed the statistical

Herler et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:4
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/4

analysis, designed the figures, and made important contributions to the
manuscript. All authors read and approved the final version of the
manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 16 February 2009
Accepted: 22 January 2010 Published: 22 January 2010
References
1. Hedrick AV, Temeles EJ: The evolution of sexual dimorphism in animals:
hypotheses and tests. Trends Ecol Evol 1989, 4:136-138.
2. Bolnick DI, Doebeli M: Sexual dimorphism and adaptive speciation: two
sides of the same ecological coin. Evolution 2003, 57:2433-2449.
3. McKinnon JS, Mori S, Blackman BK, David L, Kingsley DM, Jamieson L,
Chou J, Schluter D: Evidence for ecology’s role in speciation. Nature 2004,
429:294-298.
4. Schluter D: Ecology and the origin of species. Trends Ecol Evol 2001,
16:372-380.
5. Lande R: Sexual dimorphism, sexual selection, and adaptation in
polygenic characters. Evolution 1980, 34:292-305.
6. Shine R: Ecological causes for the evolution of sexual dimorphism: a
review of the evidence. Q Rev Biol 1989, 64:419-464.
7. Butler MA, Sawyer SA, Losos JB: Sexual dimorphism and adaptive
radiation in Anolis lizards. Nature 2007, 447:202-205.
8. Blanckenhorn WU: Behavioral causes and consequences of sexual size
dimorphism. Ethology 2005, 111:977-1016.
9. Parker GA: The evolution of sexual size dimorphism in fish. J Fish Biol
1992, 41:1-20.
10. Barnett A, Bellwood DR: Sexual dimorphism in the buccal cavity of
paternal mouthbrooding cardinalfishes (Pisces: Apogonidae). Mar Biol
2005, 148:205-212.
11. Oliveira RF, Almada VC: Sexual dimorphism and allometry of external
morphology in Oreochromis mossambius. J Fish Biol 1995, 46:1055-1064.
12. Kocher TD: Adaptive evolution and explosive speciation: the cichlid fish
model. Nat Rev Genet 2004, 5:288-298.
13. Sturmbauer C, Dallinger R: Diurnal variation of spacing and foraging
behaviour in Tropheus moorii (Cichlidae) in Lake Tanganyika. Netherlands
J Zool 1995, 45:386-401.
14. Wickler W: Zur Soziologie des Brabantbuntbarsches, Tropheus moorii
(Pisces, Cichlidae). Z Tierpsychol 1969, 26:967-987.
15. Sturmbauer C, Meyer A: Genetic divergence, speciation and
morphological stasis in a lineage of African cichlid fishes. Nature 1992,
358:578-581.
16. Postl L, Herler J, Bauer C, Maderbacher M, Makasa L, Sturmbauer C:
Geometrics morphometrics applied to viscerocranial bones in three
populations of the Lake Tanganyika cichlid fish Tropheus moorii. J Zool
Syst Evol Res 2008, 46:240-248.
17. Maderbacher M, Bauer C, Herler J, Postl L, Makasa L, Sturmbauer C:
Assessment of traditional versus geometric morphometrics for
discriminating populations of the Tropheus moorii species complex
(Teleostei: Cichlidae), a Lake Tanganyika model for allopatric speciation.
J Zool Syst Evol Res 2008, 46:153-161.
18. Schupke P: African cichlids II: Tanganyika I: Tropheus Rodgau, Aqualog 2003.
19. Egger B, Koblmüller S, Sturmbauer C, Sefc KM: Nuclear and mitochondrial
data reveal different evolutionary processes in the Lake Tanganyika
cichlid genus Tropheus. BMC Evol Biol 2007, 7:137.
20. Sturmbauer C, Koblmueller S, Sefc KM, Duftner N: Phylogeographic history
of the genus Tropheus, a lineage of rock-dwelling cichlid fishes endemic
to Lake Tanganyika. Hydrobiologia 2005, 542:335-366.
21. Herler J, Lipej L, Makovec T: A simple technique for digital imaging of live
and preserved small fish specimens. Cybium 2007, 31:39-44.
22. Rohlf JF: tpsUtil, version 1.33. Department of Ecology and Evolution, State
University of New York at Stony Brook 2004.
23. Rohlf JF: tpsDig, version 2.10. Department of Ecology and Evolution, State
University of New York at Stony Brook 2006.
24. Rohlf JF, Slice DE: Extensions of the Procrustes method for the optimal
superimposition of landmarks. Syst Zool 1990, 39:40-59.
25. Rohlf JF: Shape Statistics: Procrustes Superimpositions and Tangent
Spaces. J Class 1999, 16:197-223.

Page 10 of 10

26. Bookstein F: Morphometric tools for landmark data: geometry and biology
Cambridge (UK); New York, Cambridge University Press 1991.
27. Good P: Permutation tests: a practical guide to resampling methods for
testing hypotheses New York, Springer, 2 2000.
28. Lande R: Quantitative genetic analysis of multivariate evolution, applied
to brain:body size allometry. Evolution 1979, 33:402-416.
29. Mardia KV, Kent JT, Bibby JM: Multivariate Analysis London, Academic Press
1979.
30. Schuetz D, Taborsky M: Giant males or dwarf females: what determines
the extreme sexual size dimorphism in Lamprologus callipterus?. J Fish
Biol 2000, 57:1254-1265.
31. Erlandsson A, Ribbink AJ: Patterns of sexual size dimorphism in African
cichlid fishes. S Afr J Sci 1997, 93:498-508.
32. Kassam D, Mizoiri S, Yamaoka K: Interspecific variation of body shape and
sexual dimorphism in three coexisting species of the genus Petrotilapia
(Teleostei: Cichlidae) from Lake Malawi. Ichthyol Res 2004, 51:195-201.
33. Schaefer K, Mitteroecker P, Gunz P, Bernhard M, Bookstein FL: Craniofacial
dimorphism patterns and allometry among Hominoids. Ann Anat 2004,
186:471-478.
34. Mitteroecker P, Gunz P: Advances in geometric morphometrics. Evol Biol
2009, 36:235-247.
35. Mitteroecker P, Gunz P, Bernhard M, Schaefer K, Bookstein FL: Comparison
of cranial ontogenetic trajectories among great apes and humans. J
Hum Evol 2004, 46:679-697.
36. Salzburger W, Niederstätter H, Brandstätter A, Berger B, Parson W, Snoeks J,
Sturmbauer C: Colour-assortative mating among populations of Tropheus
moorii, a cichlid fish from Lake Tanganyika, East Africa. P Roy Soc Lond B
Bio 2006, 273:257-266.
37. Fryer G, Iles TD: The cichlid fishes of the Great Lakes in Africa: Their ecology
and evolution Edinburgh, UK, Oliver and Boyd 1972.
38. Seehausen O, van Alphen JJM: The effect of male coloration on female
mate choice in closely related Lake Victoria cichlids (Haplochromis
nyererei complex). Behav Ecol Sociobiol 1998, 42:1-8.
39. Sturmbauer C: Explosive speciation in cichlid fishes of the African Great
Lakes: a dynamic model of adaptive radiation. J Fish Biol 1998, 53:18-36.
40. Egger B, Obermüller B, Phiri H, Stumbauer C, Sefc KM: Monogamy in the
maternally mouthbrooding Lake Tanganyika cichlid fish Tropheus moorii.
P Roy Soc Lond B Bio 2006, 273:1797-1802.
41. Egger B, Obermueller B, Eigner E, Sturmbauer C, Sefc KM: Assortative
mating preferences between colour morphs of the endemic Lake
Tanganyika cichlid genus Tropheus. Hydrobiologia 2008, 615:37-48.
42. Danley PD, Kocher TD: Speciation in rapidly diverging systems: lessons
from Lake Malawi. Mol Ecol 2001, 10:1075-1086.
43. Albertson RC, Streelman JT, Kocher TD: Directional selection has shaped
the oral jaws of Lake Malawi cichlid fishes. P Natl Acad Sci USA 2003,
100:5252-5257.
44. Baric S, Salzburger W, Sturmbauer C: Phylogeography and evolution of
the Tanganyikan cichlid genus Tropheus based upon mitochondrial DNA
sequences. J Mol Evol 2003, 56:54-68.
45. Snoeks J: The haplochromines (Teleostei, Cichlidae) of Lake Kivu (East
Africa): a taxonomic revision with notes on their ecology. Ann Mus Roy
Afr Centr Sc Zool 1994, 270:221.
46. Webb PW: Body form, locomotion and foraging in aquatic vertebrates.
Am Zool 1984, 24:107-120.
47. Lynch J, Walsh B: Genetics and analysis of quantitative traits Sunderland, MA,
Sinauer 1998.
48. Sokal R, Rohlf F: Biometry: The Principles and Practices of Statistics in
Biological Research New York, Freeman 1995.
doi:10.1186/1742-9994-7-4
Cite this article as: Herler et al.: Sexual dimorphism and population
divergence in the Lake Tanganyika cichlid fish genus Tropheus. Frontiers
in Zoology 2010 7:4.

</pre>
</body>
</html>
