<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title> </title>
<meta name="Subject" content=" "/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content=" "/>
<meta name="Creator" content=" "/>
<meta name="Producer" content=" "/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Herman et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:363
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/363

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Selection of organisms for the co-evolution-based
study of protein interactions
Dorota Herman1,3, David Ochoa1, David Juan2, Daniel Lopez1, Alfonso Valencia2 and Florencio Pazos1*

Abstract
Background: The prediction and study of protein interactions and functional relationships based on similarity of
phylogenetic trees, exemplified by the mirrortree and related methodologies, is being widely used. Although
dependence between the performance of these methods and the set of organisms used to build the trees was
suspected, so far nobody assessed it in an exhaustive way, and, in general, previous works used as many organisms
as possible. In this work we asses the effect of using different sets of organism (chosen according with various
phylogenetic criteria) on the performance of this methodology in detecting protein interactions of different nature.
Results: We show that the performance of three mirrortree-related methodologies depends on the set of
organisms used for building the trees, and it is not always directly related to the number of organisms in a simple
way. Certain subsets of organisms seem to be more suitable for the predictions of certain types of interactions.
This relationship between type of interaction and optimal set of organism for detecting them makes sense in the
light of the phylogenetic distribution of the organisms and the nature of the interactions.
Conclusions: In order to obtain an optimal performance when predicting protein interactions, it is recommended
to use different sets of organisms depending on the available computational resources and data, as well as the
type of interactions of interest.

Background
There are many computational methods for predicting
protein interactions and functional relationships (see
[1-3] for recent reviews). Among them, two types of
techniques, “phylogenetic profiling” and “similarity of
phylogenetic trees”, are based on the fact that interacting or functionally related proteins are co-evolving at
different levels, defining co-evolution as interdependence
between evolutionary histories [4,5].
Phylogenetic profiling [6] is based on the intuitive idea
that the genes of two functionally related protein
families, which need each other to work, will tend to be
both present in the same set of organisms, and probably
absent together in the complementary set. A “phylogenetic profile” is a vector representing the pattern of presence/absence of a given gene in a set of organisms,
eventually with quantitative information on the
sequence similarity of the genes respect to that in a
* Correspondence: pazos@cnb.csic.es
1
Computational Systems Biology Group, National Centre for Biotechnology
(CNB-CSIC), C/Darwin, 3, Cantoblanco, 28049 Madrid, Spain
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

reference organism [7]. Similarity between two of these
vectors has been shown to be a good indicator of functional relationship between the families they represent.
The similarity of presence/absence patterns between
interacting proteins can be seen as a reflection of an
extreme case of evolutionary dependence (co-evolution)
since the “existence” of the proteins themselves depends
on each other.
Co-evolution between interacting or functionally
related protein families is also reflected in their phylogenetic trees, being these more similar than expected.
Such similarity was first qualitatively evaluated and latter
quantified for large collections of interacting and noninteracting protein pairs in order to statistically assess
its relationship with interaction [8]. Since then, this idea
was applied to study many interacting families, and
many groups developed different implementations and
variations of the methodology (see [2,4,5] for recent
reviews). The basic mirrortree methodology for predicting whether two proteins of a given organism interact
or not starts by looking for orthologs of these two
sequences in a set of genomes. Multiple sequence

© 2011 Herman et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Herman et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:363
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/363

alignments are then generated for these two sets of
orthologs and phylogenetic trees are obtained from
them. Pairwise distances are then calculated for all possible pairs of sequences in both sets. Finally, the similarity between these two sets of distances is evaluated with
a linear correlation coefficient, using only the distances
involving organisms present in both sets. A high correlation coefficient is indicative of similar trees and hence of
possible co-evolution. This co-evolutive trend points to
a possible interaction or functional relationship between
the proteins. This methodology has recently been fully
automated and implemented in a web server which
allows non-expert users to apply it starting with single
sequences [9]. Moreover, this basic methodology has
been improved in many ways by different authors (see
[4,5] for recent reviews). For example, the background
similarity expected between any pair of trees due to the
underlying speciation process has been subtracted in different ways in order to improve the predictions [10-12].
More recently, networks representing the pair-wise tree
similarities for all proteins in a given genome have been
used to improve the prediction of interaction partners
and to get insight into the substructure and functioning
of macromolecular complexes [13]. Part of this last
methodology consist on representing the co-evolutionary context of a given protein by a vector containing its
tree similarities (correlation values) with the rest of the
proteins, and then re-evaluating the eventual co-evolution between two proteins as the correlation between
their corresponding vectors (co-evolutionary profiles). In
the same framework of genome-wide co-evolutions, a
partial correlation study allows to separate specific from
non-specific co-evolutions [13]. It has been shown that
these two variants are better predictors of interaction
than the original tree correlations.
Both mirrortree and “phylogenetic profiling” use a
reference set of organisms for looking for orthologs and
building the phylogenetic trees or presence/absence profiles respectively. The characteristics of this set (number
of organisms, phylogenetic distribution, etc.) are
expected to influence the performance of these methodologies. For phylogenetic profiling, some pioneering
studies addressed this problem by evaluating the effect
of this reference set of genomes on the performance
and range of applicability of the methodology [14,15].
Nevertheless, no equivalent study has been done for
mirrortree and related methodologies. In most studies,
the authors use all genomes available in a given
resource/database (see references in [4,5]) or, in some
cases, they remove redundancy at the strain level [13]. It
is worth studying the effect of the organism set in the
performance of the mirrortree-related methodologies for
three main reasons: i) There could be a subset of organisms yielding better results than the whole set of

Page 2 of 9

available genomes; ii) different types of interactions
(physical, functional, ...) could be better detected using
different subsets of organisms; and iii) with the growing
number of completely-sequenced genomes, there will be
a point in the future were it would not be possible to
use all. In such case, it would be valuable to have
“recipes” on which subset(s) to use, phrased in terms of
number of organisms, phylogenetic distribution, etc.
In this work we explore the effect of using different
reference sets of organisms in the performance of the
original mirrortree algorithm [8] and two of its more
recent variants: profile-correlation and context-mirror
[13]. Starting with the set of 214 genomes used by Juan
et al. [13], we took different subsets sampled according
with different taxonomic criteria, and evaluate the performance of these methodologies using as gold standards sets of interactions of different nature (physical,
functional, ...). Our goal is to get insight on the influence of these factors on the co-evolutionary analyses.
The results obtained allowed us to propose a number of
pragmatic recipes for the use of these methodologies in
terms of which subset is better for detecting each particular type of interactions, and which subset to use when
the number of available sequenced genomes makes it
impossible to use all. Apart from the results obtained
from a large scale evaluation, we also show particular
examples to illustrate how using different sets of organisms can drastically affect the observed co-evolution
between proteins.

Methods
For comparative purposes, we used as initial set of
organisms all the Eubacteria and Archaea that were fully
sequenced and available in the integr8 database [16] at
the time when Juan et al. work was performed: 214 genomes. (In that work, redundancy was removed in order
not to include very similar organisms, ending up in a
final set of 116 organisms.) We then sampled this initial
set according with different taxonomic criteria using E
coli K12 as reference organism, and evaluated the performance of three mirrortree-related methodologies in a
number of sets representing different types of interactions and using these sampled subsets of organisms as
reference sets. Figure 1 illustrates the process.
Selection of different subsets of organisms

We used the NCBI taxonomic tree [17] as framework
for the taxonomy-based selection of organisms. This
tree classifies organisms according with a pre-defined
hierarchy in which the root represents “cellular organisms”, the first level represents the “superkingdoms”
(Archaea and Eubacteria in our dataset, which does not
include eukarya), the next one the “phylums”, and so
on. This tree does not contain quantitative information

Herman et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:363
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/363

sampled subsets of organisms

Page 3 of 9

interaction datasets
“PATHWAYS”

“level”

“nearest”

“COMPLEXES” “BINARY_PHYS”

Figure 1 Schema of the methodology.From an initial set of
organisms with completely sequenced genomes (left), a number of
subsets (red) are constructed according with two taxonomic criteria:
“nearest” (blue) - following the taxonomy of the reference organism
(E coli K12) back to the root of the taxonomic tree, all the genomes
belonging to each node visited (E coli species, Enterobacteriaceae
family, etc.) are taken; “level” (purple) - the tree is successively cut at
each taxonomic level (superkingdom, phylum, ...) and one organism
is taken from each one of the resulting groups (the one with the
largest proteome). On the other hand, a number of “gold standard”
interaction datasets representing physical and functional interactions
of different nature are used (top). For each combination interaction
dataset/organism subset, the performance of the three mirrortreebased methodologies is assessed with a partial-ROC analysis
(colored curves).

on phylogenetic distances between organisms. Two criteria were used for performing the selections:
• “Nearest”. Starting from our reference organism (E
coli K12) we follow its taxonomy back to the root of
the tree and successively take all the organisms
belonging to each node. So “nearest_1” represents
the E coli species (4 organisms -strains-), “nearest_2”
contains the Enterobacteriaceae family (21 organisms), and so on up to “nearest_6” which represents
the Bacteria superkingdom (195 organisms) and
“nearest_7” (whole dataset, bacteria+archaea, 214

organisms). Four organisms are represented in the
trees but not used due to the lack of information on
their proteomes in the NCBI data. This sampling is
designed to evaluate the effect of including close vs.
distant organisms in the performance, as well as the
effect of the redundancy to some extent (Figure 1).
• “Level”. The taxonomic tree is successively cut at
each level of the hierarchical classification starting
from the root (superkingdom, phylum, ...) and one
organism is taken from each resulting group. The
criterion for selecting an organism within a group is
simply to use that with the highest number of proteins in its genome. The rationale for doing this is to
maximize the chances of finding orthologs in that
genome in subsequent steps of the process. So,
“level_1” would contain 2 organisms (one eubacteria
and one archaea), “level_2” contains 16 organisms,
one for each phylum. And so on up to “level_9”
which represents the whole dataset (214 genomes).
This experiment is designed to quantify the effect of
sampling homogeneously the taxonomy at different
levels of granularity (Figure 1).
• For comparative purposes we also included the set
of genomes used in Juan et al [13] (116 genomes).
This set is very similar to our “level_5” (97
organisms).
Due to the requirement of 15 or more organisms in
common between the trees of two protein families (see
next point), some of these subsets are never used in
practice. The lists of organisms in the final 12 subsets
used, as well as representations of their taxonomic distributions, are available in the “Additional file s1“.
Datasets of protein interactions and functional
relationships

We used as gold standards to asses the methods’ performance three datasets representing E. coli protein interactions of different nature and with different
characteristics and peculiarities. “PATHWAYS": Functional interactions inferred as co-presence in metabolic
pathways taken from the EcoCyc resource [18]. This
dataset comprises 4,491 pairs between 719 proteins.
“COMPLEXES": Physical interactions (not necessarily
direct) inferred by co-presence in macromolecular complexes experimentally determined and taken also from
EcoCyc (1,354 pairs between 591 proteins). “BINARY_PHYS": Physical direct binary interactions obtained from
the MPIDB database [19]. These have been manually
curated from the literature or imported from other databases, providing a high-confidence gold standard to
evaluate putative physical direct interactions. The version we used of this database contains 2,103 binary
interactions between 1,538 different E. coli proteins. The

Herman et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:363
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/363

first two datasets were previously used by Juan and coworkers [13], while the last is used here for the first
time.
For each dataset, a set of negative examples (proteins
assumed not to interact physically or functionally) is
constructed by generating all possible pairs between the
proteins involved in the positive (interacting) pairs.
Co-evolution-based prediction of protein interactions

We applied three methods used in Juan et al. [13] to
predict interacting pairs of proteins using the different
sets of reference genomes discussed above for constructing the trees.
The starting point for all methodologies is the generation of phylogenetic trees of orthologs for all E coli proteins using the reference sets of organisms sampled as
described above. For detecting the ortholog of a given E
coli protein in each genome we used the “BLAST best
bi-directional hit” criterion, with an E-value cutoff of
10E-5, and requiring an alignment coverage of 70%. The
orthologs found are aligned with Muscle [20] using the
default parameters of this program. Then, a phylogenetic tree is generated from this alignment using the
neighbor-joining algorithm implemented in ClustalW
[21], excluding the gaps for the distance calculation. A
matrix containing the pair-wise distances between all
orthologs is generated from this tree by summing the
lengths of the branches separating the corresponding
leaves.
The mirrortree method (MT) evaluates the co-evolution between two proteins by calculating the linear correlation coefficient between their corresponding distance
matrices. A minimum of 15 species in common between
their trees is required for evaluating a given pair. Only
correlation values supported by a (tabulated) P-value of
10E-5 or lower are considered.
A matrix containing the significant pair-wise tree correlations (P-value ≤ 10E-5) for all pairs of proteins
within the genome of E coli is used as input for the profile-correlation method (PC). A row (or column) in this
matrix (co-evolutionary profile) contains the correlations
between a given protein and all the others in the genome, and can be considered as a representation of the
co-evolutionary context for that protein. The profile-correlation method re-assesses the co-evolution between
two proteins by calculating the linear correlation
between their respective co-evolutionary profiles. Finally,
the context-mirror method (CM) assesses the influence
of third proteins in a given co-evolutionary signal
observed for two proteins using a partial correlation criterion. This allows separating specific co-evolution (particular to a given pair of proteins) from general coevolutionary trends involving many proteins. So this
method produces results at different “levels” of

Page 4 of 9

specificity. See [13] for a more detailed description of
these methodologies.
Evaluation

For each pair of proteins in the E coli genome fulfilling
the requirements mentioned above, we have the scores
of the three methods (mirrortree, profile correlation and
context-mirror) based on a given sampled subset of
organisms. As commented above, for context-mirror the
results are split in different levels of co-evolutionary
specificity. In addition, we know whether that pair
represents a true interaction or functional relationship
according with the datasets described earlier. So, for
each combination method/dataset/subset of organisms
we have a large list of protein pairs sorted by the score
of the method, being each pair labeled as “positive” (the
two proteins interact according with the dataset) or
“negative” (the two proteins are assumed not to
interact).
We apply “receiver operating characteristic” analysis
(ROC) [22] to these lists to assess the capacity of the
method to separate the positives from the negatives. For
each of these lists, the ROC analysis generates a plot of
“true positives rate” (TPR) against “false positives rate”
(FPR) when varying the classification threshold (score of
the method). Curves above the diagonal in this plot
represent methods with some discriminative power,
being this discriminative capacity better as the curve
gets closer to the top-left corner of the plot. Due to the
requirement of 15 or more organisms in common in
order to evaluate a given pair, the same method applied
to the same interaction dataset can produce lists with
very different number of pairs (both negatives and positives) when based on different subsets of organisms
(trees with different number of leaves). In order to compare the ROC curves in these cases, FPR’s and TPR’s
are calculated respect to the total number of pairs (positives and negatives) in the original dataset, and not
respect to the number of pairs rendered by a given subset of organisms. Moreover, defined in this way, these
ROC curves give an idea not only on the ability of the
method to separate positives and negatives, but also on
its range of applicability and coverage: longer curves
represent methods that can be applied to (can generate
predictions for) a large number of pairs, and the other
way around. So, the ROC curves are generated by cutting the sorted list of scores at different thresholds and
plotting the resulting TPR’s against FPR’s calculated as
TPR = Tp/P = sensitivity
FPR = Fp/N = 1 - speciﬁcity

where Tp, Fp and Tn are the true positives, false positives and true negatives obtained at a given threshold,

Herman et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:363
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/363

and P and N the total number of positive and negative
pairs for that interaction dataset (irrespective of whether
the method could be applied for them with that particular set of organisms or not). Note that these parameters
can also be interpreted in terms of “sensitivity” and
“specificity” as indicated in the formula above.
Additionally, we also evaluated the results in terms of
“precision”, “recall” (see Results).

Results
As discussed in detail in Methods, for each combination
method/interactions-dataset/subset-of-organisms we
obtain a ROC plot which represents the capacity of that
method for discriminating interacting from non-interacting pairs of proteins (according with the dataset)
when using the phylogenetic trees based on that subset
of organisms. Figure 2 shows these ROC plots classified
by interaction dataset and method. The different curves
within each of these plots correspond to the results

Page 5 of 9

obtained with the different organism subsets. For “context-mirror” (CM) we show only the results for level 10,
which was shown to represent a good threshold of coevolutionary specificity for predictive purposes [13].
While the results for other levels vary slightly in terms
of accuracy/coverage, their behavior respect to the sets
of organisms is virtually identical to those of level 10,
and hence they are not included here for the sake of
clarity.
Each plot in this figure has its own scale to facilitate
the comparison between organism sets, which is the
final goal of this work. The same figure with all plots in
the same scale, which facilitates the comparison between
methods, is available as “Additional file 2“. The same
results represented in terms of F-measure vs. score are
available as “Additional file 3“, together with an explanation of these parameters. Finally, to have a single
numerical estimator of the performance of a given
method using the trees derived from a given set of

a

b

c

d

e

f

g

h

i

Figure 2 Matrix of partial ROC curves. The partial ROC curves evaluate the performance of a given methodology for a given set of
interactions using a given set of reference genomes. The rows represent the interaction datasets and the columns the methods. For a given
combination method-dataset, the colored curves represent the organism sets according with the included legend. In the legend, the number of
organisms within each subset is indicated within brackets. The dotted line highlights the diagonal of the ROC plots, which represents the
background performance expected for a random method.

Herman et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:363
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/363

organisms, the maximum F-measure is shown in the
“Additional file 4“.
In the “Conclusions” section, we derive some recipes
for the future use of these methodologies based on the
results shown here.
The most obvious observation is that all these co-evolution based methodologies are able to detect a significant number of interactions of different nature across a
wide range of organism sets. This is in line with the
growing evidence on the relationship between protein
interactions and co-evolution, reported by many groups
using diverse datasets and variations of the methodology. Another evident observation is that results can vary
largely depending on the set of organisms used for
building the trees.
PC is the most stable methodology in the sense that
its results are those with the lowest dependence on the
organism set, as reflected in the highest similarity
between ROC curves (except in extreme cases with few
organisms) (Figures 2b, e and 2h). It consistently renders good predictions with the highest independence on
the organism set. This could be due to the fact that PC
is able to filter artefactual tree-correlations such as
those related to phylogenetic bias. CM is globally the
best methodology and it produces the highest accuracies, but at the expense of requiring a large number of
organisms: its results drastically drop off as we use datasets with low number of organisms (Figures 2c, f and
2h). This effect can be easily explained by the fact that
CM requires a rich network of significant inter-protein
correlations in order to derive partial correlations.
Decreasing the number of organisms reduces the
chances of obtaining correlations for many pairs (due to
the requirement of 15 organisms in common and also
the correlation P-value cutoff), which makes such network sparser and less usable for CM. As previously
reported, MT is the methodology with the worst performance and, moreover, it is severely affected by the phylogenetic redundancy in the organism set (Figures 2a, d
and 2f). In general, the three methods benefit from
using datasets with a large number of organisms. However, for MT, this benefit reaches a point where it enters
into conflict with the redundancy issue discussed above
resulting in “level6” (≈"Juan et al”) being the optimal set.
PC and CM implicitly correct phylogenetic redundancy
and hence they are more benefited when from using
more organisms ("nearest6”, “nearest7 = level9 = All”).
Another global result is that all methods predict better
interactions representing co-presence in macromolecular
complexes, followed by binary physical interactions, and
being co-presence in metabolic pathways the relationships hardest to detect for all (Figure 2). Within this
general trend, each type of interaction seems to be better predicted by a certain set of organisms. In general,

Page 6 of 9

complexes are better predicted with datasets including
phylogenetically distant organisms, while binary interactions and pathways are better predicted with datasets
excluding distant organisms: e.g. follow “nearest5”, “6”
and “7” in Figure 2.
Examples

We include some examples to illustrate this last result:
how using close/distant organisms can drastically affect
the predictions. Table 1 contains examples of interactions extracted from the “BINARY_PHYS” dataset which
probably correspond to “recent” interactions, as well as
others extracted from “COMPLEXES” which probably
are “old”. The “new” interactions include physical interactions between metabolic enzymes and the interaction
between two proteins involved in the division machinery: MinE-MinD [23]. The “old” interactions include
some involved in the translation/transcription machinery
as well as interactions between ABC transporters. ABC
transporters are known to be very ancient systems [24].
The table contains the results that would have been
obtained applying the PC method to these cases using
as reference sets of organisms “level9” (= all) and “nearest2” (enterobacteriaceae). The correlation coefficient of
the PC method indicates the similarity of the co-evolutionary profiles and hence can be seen as a measure of
co-evolution. As a measure of performance in detecting
the right interactor(s), the “area under the ROC curve”
(AUC) [22] is shown. The higher this parameter, the
higher are the right interactors (positives) in the sorted
list of scores (correlation values). The size of the lists of
scores and the number of positives are also indicated.
For simplicity and to facilitate the comparison of AUC
values, ROC curves are generated here for the positives/
negatives which are in the lists, and not taking into
account the total number of positives and negatives (as
previously done for the ROC curves of Figure 2). It can
be seen that “recent” interactions have higher co-evolutionary scores using the “nearest2” dataset than with
“level9”, and so are the respective predictive performances (AUC). Exactly the opposite happens for the
“ancient” interactions: higher co-evolutionary scores and
performances are associated to the “level9” set. We follow in detail one of the examples to better understand
this table: DPO3A_ECOLI (a subunit of DNA polymerase III) has one reported interaction in the COMPLEXES dataset (with DPO3E_ECOLI, the ε subunit).
With the trees constructed based on the “level9” set of
organisms, it was possible to apply the PC method to
306 pairs of proteins involving the a subunit (taking
into account the requirements and cutoffs described in
Methods) one of which is the a-ε pair. Using the “nearest2” set of organisms, it was possible to apply PC to
128 pairs involving DNA pol III a. The co-evolutionary

Herman et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:363
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/363

Page 7 of 9

Table 1 Examples of potentially “new” and “old” interacting pairs of proteins whose co-evolution was evaluated using
two sets of organisms
Protein

Level9(= all)

Nearest2

Tot/ AUC
+

Interactor
(corr)

Tot/ AUC
+

Interactor
(corr)

MINE_ECOLI

MIND_ECOLI
(0.52)

223/ 0.83
1

MIND_ECOLI
(0.60)

PABA_ECOLI

Para-aminobenzoate synthase glutamine
amidotransferase component II

671/ 0.28
1

PABB_ECOLI
(0.49)

106/ 0.96
1

PABB_ECOLI
(0.96)

Aspartate-semialdehyde dehydrogenase

760/ 0.17
1

DNAK_ECOLI
(0.48)

384/ 0.81
1

DNAK_ECOLI
(0.90)

GSHB_ECOLI

Glutathione synthetase

755/ 0.30
1

AMPM_ECOLI
(0.61)

375/ 0.93
1

AMPM_ECOLI
(0.95)

DPO3A_ECOLI

DNA polymerase III subunit alpha

306/ 0.70
1

DPO3E_ECOLI
(0.73)

128/ 0.11
1

DPO3E_ECOLI
(0.57)

DPO3E_ECOLI

DNA polymerase III subunit epsilon

357/ 0.64
1

DPO3A_ECOLI
(0.73)

123/ 0.22
1

(0.57) max

RPOB_ECOLI

DNA-directed RNA polymerase subunit beta

280/ 0.82
7

(0.98) max

126/ 0.48
4

(0.93) max

RPOA_ECOLI

DNA-directed RNA polymerase subunit alpha

258/ 0.81
6

(0.80) max

90/3 0.48

(0.93) max

ZNUB_ECOLI

High-affinity zinc uptake system membrane protein
znuB

370/ 1.00
2

(0.87) max

129/ 0.36
1

ZNUC_ECOLI
(0.74)

ZNUC_ECOLI

Zinc import ATP-binding protein ZnuC

386/ 0.99
2

(0.87) max

123/ 0.41
2

(0.74) max

ZNUA_ECOLI

“old”
(COMPLEXES)

846/ 0.12
1

DHAS_ECOLI

“recent”
(BINARY_PHYS)

Cell division topological specificity factor

High-affinity zinc uptake system protein znuA

395/ 0.98
2

(0.87) max

39/1 0.79

ZNUC_ECOLI
(0.74)

The co-evolution between these proteins was evaluated using the “level9” and “nearest2” sets of organisms. The total number of pairs involving each protein for
which it was possible to make calculations, as well as the number of positives (+) are indicated. The co-evolutionary score with the interactor is also shown (corr).
For the cases for which the list contain more than one positive the score is the highest one (max). Finally, the AUC value for the list of scores is also included.

score for a-ε is 0.73 when using the “level9” set of
organisms, while it drops to 0.57 when based on “nearest2”. As a consequence, there is a much higher proportion of false positives in the sorted list of pairs for
“nearest2” compared to “level9” (AUC of 0.11 vs. 0.72).
The behavior for the “newer” interactions (e.g. interactions between metabolic enzymes) is exactly the
opposite.

Discussion
Our results show that considerable differences in performance are obtained with mirrortree-based methodologies depending on the set of organisms used for
building the trees. They also show that it is not always
better to use as many genomes as available, as previously assumed. Most of these results have plausible
explanations taking into account the type of interaction
and the taxonomic distribution of the organisms.
Although the goal of this work is not to compare
methods, but organism sets, our results on the performance of the different mirrortree variants are in agreement with previous studies [13]. The lower performance
of the baseline MT method compared with PC and CM
had been already reported and is related to the fact that
these two improved methodologies are able to use the

information of genome-wide co-evolutionary networks
to better detect real co-evolutions as well as implicitly
correct phylogenetic biases [13].
The fact that, in general, all methods work better as
more genomes are used is not surprising as more coevolutive information is available for them. Nevertheless,
it is important to take into account the issues related to
phylogenetic distances and redundancy commented
below. PC and CM to some extent correct tree similarities artificially increased by the introduction of redundant genomes (strains, etc.) [13]. That is not the case
for MT and hence this methodology is especially sensible to this and other phylogenetic biases, some of which
can be corrected explicitly [10,11]. The corrections of all
these phylogenetic biases implicit in PC and CM make
them to be consistently benefited from using more
organisms.
The fact that all methodologies render better results
for permanent interactions (macromolecular complexes)
had been already reported [13]. Actually, for MT and
PC, the results for the binary and pathways datasets, in
spite of being clearly significant and different from random, might not be of practical applicability in certain
prediction scenarios (i.e. if a high precision is required).
The explanation for the better predictions of complexes

Herman et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:363
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/363

could be that the evolutionary pressure for co-evolving
is expected to be higher in proteins forced to interact
permanently than in those with occasional associations.
According to these observations macromolecular complexes seem to act as “co-evolutionary units” [13].
Another feature of these macromolecular complexes is
that, in general, they represent ancient interactions,
compared to transient interactions and functional associations. For this reason, the interaction is expected to
occur for all orthologs (interlogs), and hence its associated co-evolutive landmark to be spread through the
whole taxonomy. That would explain the observation
that better results are obtained for this kind of interactions when including distant organisms within the
datasets.
Functional associations and transient interactions are
intuitively less prone to yield strong co-evolutions, what
would explain the globally lower performances associated to them. Another characteristic of these associations is that, in general, they are “newer” than the
macromolecular complexes. It is known that “rewiring”
transient interactions is easy and relatively fast in evolutionary terms [25]. For this reason, it may happen that
the orthologs of two proteins participating in a transient
interaction in a given organism are not interacting in a
relatively distant one (they are not true “interlogs”)
[26,27]. If that is the case, including these “orthologs”,
which are not interacting and hence not subject to coevolution, would “dilute” the co-evolutionary signal.
This would explain the fact that, for these types of interactions and associations, better results are obtained
when using only close organisms, since the interaction
is expected to be conserved on them, while it might be
absent in taxonomically distant organisms. In other
words, many of the E coli pathways and transient interactions we are evaluating might be new and hence specific for this microorganism and its close neighbors, and
hence the eventual co-evolutions associated to them
would be apparent only in these particular genomes.
Interestingly, a similar relationship between the “age” of
the interactions, their conservation across the taxonomy,
and the resulting optimal set of organisms has been
reported for the “phylogenetic profiling” method [15].
In some cases it is difficult to disentangle the factors
contributing to a given result, for example number of
organisms vs. taxonomic criteria used for selecting
them. Moreover, it is difficult to quantify and numerically assess the differences of the ROC curves we are
using for evaluating performances. For that reason,
these curves are evaluated qualitatively and the conclusions presented are based on general trends observed
for many curves, instead of particular cases.
A future study aimed at obtaining more insight into
the relationship between organism sets and performance

Page 8 of 9

should include samplings according with other taxonomic criteria (as well as combinations of them: i.e.
combining “nearest"+"level”), and a detailed study of the
particular interactions detected and not detected in each
experiment (their functional classes, etc).
In the next section, we propose some recipes for the
users of these methodologies derived from these results.
We plan to implement some of the recipes obtained for
the MT method in its recently developed web server [9].

Conclusion
The number of available genomes continues to grow.
And the more we know on protein interactions the
more we realize that it is a very complex phenomenon
with different types of interactions having different characteristics. For these reasons it is increasingly important
to “tune” protein interaction prediction methodologies
adapting them for each specific application, instead of
using the same protocols and data sources in every
situation. Many methods and concepts are being built
around the reported relationship between similarity of
evolutionary histories (co-evolution) and protein interactions. For this reason it is timely to get insight into the
different factors affecting such relationship. Among
these factors, a critical one not explored previously is
the effect of the organism set used to build the trees on
the behavior of these methodologies.
Our results allow us to propose a set of simple and
general “recipes” for users on which set of organisms to
use depending on the type of interactions they want to
predict and the genomic information available.
If phylogenetic trees for the whole genome of interest
can be calculated (or are already available in some database/resource), use PC and CM instead of MT. If MT
has to be used (i.e. trees not available for all the proteins
within a genome, lack of computational resources, etc.)
the set of organisms to use should be filtered by phylogenetic redundancy. Filtering at the strain or species
level seems to be enough.
PC is a sort of “all-road” method since it shows the
lowest dependence on the organism set. It is the best
option for general situations, when we are not sure
which set of organism to use. It is also better than CM
in terms of coverage and hence it is more adequate if
we are interested in retrieving many interactions at the
expenses of bearing more false positives. Moreover, it is
computationally less intensive than CM.
CM should be the chosen option when a lot of genomes (as well as enough computational resources) are
available and we are interested in detecting a small
number of interactions but highly reliable. Not only it
renders the best accuracy but additional information on
the structure of the co-evolutionary network which
offers some clues about the substructure and

Herman et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:363
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/363

functioning of macromolecular complexes is obtained as
well [13]. It has to be taken into account that its performance drops drastically when few organisms are
available.
Apart from that, if possible it is important to include
or exclude distant organisms depending on the type of
interactions we try to detect. I.e. to remove phylogenetically distant organisms if we suspect the interactions are
not conserved on them ("newer” interactions).

Page 9 of 9

5.
6.

7.

8.
9.
10.

Additional material
11.
Additional file 1: List of organisms in the different subsets and
representations of their taxonomic distributions.
Additional file 2: Version of the Figure 2 with all plots in the same
scale.
Additional file 3: Results of Figure 2 given in terms of F-measure
(the harmonic mean between “precision” and “recall”).
Additional file 4: Maximum of the F-measure curves of “Additional
file 3“. This parameter can be regarded as a single numerical estimator
of the performance of a given method/organism set, although it does
not encompass all the information of a ROC curve.

12.

13.

14.

15.
Acknowledgements
We sincerely thank the members of the Computational Systems Biology
Group (CNB-CSIC) and Profs. Victor de Lorenzo and Miguel Vicente (CNBCSIC) for interesting discussions. This work was partially funded by projects
BIO2009-11966 and BIO2010-22109 from the Spanish Ministry for Science
and Innovation, and project KBBE-2007-3-2-08 from the 7FP of the EU. DH
was recipient of a “Leonardo Da Vinci” fellowship from the EU. DO is
recipient a fellowship from the Basque Country.
Author details
1
Computational Systems Biology Group, National Centre for Biotechnology
(CNB-CSIC), C/Darwin, 3, Cantoblanco, 28049 Madrid, Spain. 2Structural
Bioinformatics Group, Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO), C/
Melchor Fernández Almagro 3, 28029 Madrid, Spain. 3Centre for Systems
Biology (CSB), School of Biosciences, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston,
Birmingham, B15 2TT, UK.
Authors’ contributions
FP conceived the original idea. FP, DJ and AV designed the experiments.
DH, DO and DL implemented the idea and carried out the tests. All authors
analyzed the results and contributed writing the manuscript. All authors read
and approved the final manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 11 March 2011 Accepted: 12 September 2011
Published: 12 September 2011
References
1. Shoemaker BA, Panchenko AR: Deciphering protein-protein interactions.
Part II. Computational methods to predict protein and domain
interaction partners. PLoS Comput Biol 2007, 3(4):e43.
2. Valencia A, Pazos F: Computational Methods to predict protein
interaction partners. In Protein-protein interactions and networks. Edited by:
Panchenko AR, Przytycka TM. London: Springer-Verlag; 2008:67-81.
3. Harrington ED, Jensen LJ, Bork P: Predicting biological networks from
genomic data. FEBS Lett 2008, 582(8):1251-1258.
4. Pazos F, Valencia A: Protein co-evolution, co-adaptation and interactions.
EMBO J 2008, 27(20):2648-2655.

16.

17.
18.

19.

20.
21.

22.
23.

24.
25.

26.

27.

Juan D, Pazos F, Valencia A: Co-evolution and co-adaptation in protein
networks. FEBS Lett 2008, 582(8):1225-1230.
Pellegrini M, Marcotte EM, Thompson MJ, Eisenberg D, Yeates TO:
Assigning protein functions by comparative genome analysis: Protein
pylogenetic profiles. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1999, 96:4285-4288.
Date SV, Marcotte EM: Discovery of uncharacterized cellular systems by
genome-wide analysis of functional linkages. Nat Biotechnol 2003,
21(9):1055-1062.
Pazos F, Valencia A: Similarity of phylogenetic trees as indicator of
protein-protein interaction. Protein Eng 2001, 14:609-614.
Ochoa D, Pazos F: Studying the co-evolution of protein families with the
Mirrortree web server. Bioinformatics 2010, 26(10):1370-1371.
Pazos F, Ranea JAG, Juan D, Sternberg MJE: Assessing Protein Coevolution in the Context of the Tree of Life Assists in the Prediction of
the Interactome. J Mol Biol 2005, 352(4):1002-1015.
Sato T, Yamanishi Y, Kanehisa M, Toh H: The inference of protein-protein
interactions by co-evolutionary analysis is improved by excluding the
information about the phylogenetic relationships. Bioinformatics 2005,
21(17):3482-3489.
Kann MG, Jothi R, Cherukuri PF, Przytycka TM: Predicting protein domain
interactions from coevolution of conserved regions. Proteins 2007,
67(4):811-820.
Juan D, Pazos F, Valencia A: High-confidence prediction of global
interactomes based on genome-wide coevolutionary networks. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2008, 105(3):934-939.
Sun J, Xu J, Liu Z, Liu Q, Zhao A, Shi T, Li Y: Refined phylogenetic profiles
method for predicting protein-protein interactions. Bioinformatics 2005,
21(16):3409-3415.
Jothi R, Przytycka TM, Aravind L: Discovering functional linkages and
uncharacterized cellular pathways using phylogenetic profile
comparisons: a comprehensive assessment. BMC Bioinformatics 2007,
8:173.
Kersey P, Bower L, Morris L, Horne A, Petryszak R, Kanz C, Kanapin A, Das U,
Michoud K, Phan I, et al: Integr8 and Genome Reviews: integrated views
of complete genomes and proteomes. Nucl Acids Res 2005, 33:D297-D302.
Benson DA, Karsch-Mizrachi I, Lipman DJ, Ostell J, Sayers EW: GenBank.
Nucleic Acids Res 2009, 37:D26-31.
Keseler IM, Collado-Vides J, Gama-Castro S, Ingraham J, Paley S, Paulsen IT,
Peralta-Gil M, Karp PD: EcoCyc: a comprehensive database resource for
Escherichia coli. Nucleic Acids Res 2005, 33:D334-337.
Goll J, Rajagopala SV, Shiau SC, Wu H, Lamb BT, Uetz P: MPIDB: the
microbial protein interaction database. Bioinformatics 2008,
24(15):1743-1744.
Edgar RC: MUSCLE: multiple sequence alignment with high accuracy and
high throughput. Nucleic Acids Res 2004, 32(5):1792-1797.
Chenna R, Sugawara H, Koike T, Lopez R, Gibson TJ, Higgins DG,
Thompson JD: Multiple sequence alignment with the Clustal series of
programs. Nucleic Acids Res 2003, 31(13):3497-3500.
Wikipedia: ROC analysis [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Receiver_operating_characteristic].
Raskin DM, de Boer PA: MinDE-dependent pole-to-pole oscillation of
division inhibitor MinC in Escherichia coli. J Bacteriol 1999,
181(20):6419-6424.
Wikipedia: ATP-binding cassette transporter [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ATPbinding_cassette_transporter].
Shou C, Bhardwaj N, Lam HY, Yan KK, Kim PM, Snyder M, Gerstein MB:
Measuring the evolutionary rewiring of biological networks. PLoS Comput
Biol 2011, 7(1):e1001050.
Aloy P, Ceulemans H, Stark A, Russell RB: The relationship between
sequence and interaction divergence in proteins. J Mol Biol 2003,
332(5):989-998.
Mika S, Rost B: Protein-protein interactions more conserved within
species than across species. PLoS Comput Biol 2006, 2(7):e79.

doi:10.1186/1471-2105-12-363
Cite this article as: Herman et al.: Selection of organisms for the coevolution-based study of protein interactions. BMC Bioinformatics 2011
12:363.

</pre>
</body>
</html>
