<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>High level transgenic expression of soybean (Glycine max) GmERF and Gmubi gene promoters isolated by a novel promoter analysis pipeline</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:237. doi:10.1186/1471-2229-10-237"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Carlos M Hernandez-Garcia"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Hernandez-Garcia et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:237
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/237

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

High level transgenic expression of soybean
(Glycine max) GmERF and Gmubi gene promoters
isolated by a novel promoter analysis pipeline
Carlos M Hernandez-Garcia1, Robert A Bouchard1, Paul J Rushton2,4, Michelle L Jones1, Xianfeng Chen3,5,
Michael P Timko2, John J Finer1*

Abstract
Background: Although numerous factors can influence gene expression, promoters are perhaps the most
important component of the regulatory control process. Promoter regions are often defined as a region upstream
of the transcriptional start. They contain regulatory elements that interact with regulatory proteins to modulate
gene expression. Most genes possess their own unique promoter and large numbers of promoters are therefore
available for study. Unfortunately, relatively few promoters have been isolated and characterized; particularly from
soybean (Glycine max).
Results: In this research, a bioinformatics approach was first performed to identify members of the Gmubi (G.max
ubiquitin) and the GmERF (G. max Ethylene Response Factor) gene families of soybean. Ten Gmubi and ten GmERF
promoters from selected genes were cloned upstream of the gfp gene and successfully characterized using rapid
validation tools developed for both transient and stable expression. Quantification of promoter strength using
transient expression in lima bean (Phaseolus lunatus) cotyledonary tissue and stable expression in soybean hairy
roots showed that the intensity of gfp gene expression was mostly conserved across the two expression systems.
Seven of the ten Gmubi promoters yielded from 2- to 7-fold higher expression than a standard CaMV35S promoter
while four of the ten GmERF promoters showed from 1.5- to 2.2-times higher GFP levels compared to the
CaMV35S promoter. Quantification of GFP expression in stably-transformed hairy roots of soybean was variable
among roots derived from different transformation events but consistent among secondary roots, derived from the
same primary transformation events. Molecular analysis of hairy root events revealed a direct relationship between
copy number and expression intensity; higher copy number events displayed higher GFP expression.
Conclusion: In this study, we present expression intensity data on 20 novel soybean promoters from two different
gene families, ubiquitin and ERF. We also demonstrate the utility of lima bean cotyledons and soybean hairy roots
for rapid promoter analyses and provide novel insights towards the utilization of these expression systems. The
soybean promoters characterized here will be useful for production of transgenic soybean plants for both basic
research and commercial plant improvement.

Background
With the increasing amount of biological information
derived from genome sequencing projects of several
plant species [1,2], opportunities exist for functional
analysis of those sequences using a combination of computational approaches and various methods of wet
* Correspondence: finer.1@osu.edu
1
Department of Horticulture and Crop Science, OARDC/The Ohio State
University, 1680 Madison Ave., Wooster, OH 44691 USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

laboratory analyses of gene expression. The recent
release of the soybean genome [3] has tremendously
facilitated computational genome-wide analyses of the
soybean genome and identification of specific DNA
sequences, which need to be validated using functional
analysis tools. The availability of the soybean genome
has also provided unprecedented access to sequences for
a wide range of promoters from diverse gene families,
which will lead to a better understanding of the regulation of gene expression and the discovery of novel

© 2010 Hernandez-Garcia et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Hernandez-Garcia et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:237
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/237

soybean promoters for use in basic research and applied
crop biotechnology.
Promoters are the primary regulators of gene expression at the transcriptional level and are key to controlling transgenes in transgenic organisms [4]. The use of
one or only a few different promoters to direct expression of different genes in transgene stacks can lead to
homology-based gene silencing and unpredictable transgene expression in transgenic plants [5]. Consequently,
it is absolutely necessary to increase the availability of
different promoters for plant transformation. Although
the constitutive highly-expressed Cauliflower Mosaic
Virus 35S (CaMV35S) promoter is commonly used for
gene regulation in plants, different plant genomes can
provide additional useful native plant promoters ranging
from highly-expressing constitutive to tissue-specific and
inducible. Likewise, analyses of native promoters will
most likely reveal a large variety of heretofore undiscovered cis-regulatory elements, which will increase our
understanding of gene expression regulation [6].
Although several plant promoters are available as an
alternative to the CaMV35S promoter, very few soybean
promoters have been isolated and extensively characterized in soybean [7-9], in spite of the world-wide economic impact of this crop.
We recently reported the isolation and characterization of a Glycine max polyubiquitin (Gmubi) promoter,
which leads to high constitutive levels of both transient
[10] and stable gene expression in various tissues of
transgenic soybeans [7]. Other plant ubiquitin promoters have also been isolated and characterized in a wide
variety of plant species [4]. Particularly, ubiquitin promoters from rice [11] and maize [12] have been extensively characterized and frequently used in both basic
research and in the production of commercial transgenics. Ubiquitin promoters typically drive strong constitutive gene expression, which is especially high in
young tissues, vascular tissues and pollen [13]. The
enhancement of gene expression from the presence of
the leading intron in the different ubiquitin promoters
has also received considerable attention [14]. In spite of
the emphasis on the use of ubiquitin promoters, most
studies to date have relied on single promoter sequences
isolated from different plant species [15-17]. However,
the ubiquitin gene family is quite large in most plants
and isolation and characterization of different ubiquitin
promoters, from the same plant, could serve as a source
of additional promoters and provide useful information
on how different ubiquitin genes are differentially
regulated.
As ubiquitin promoters tend to drive constitutive gene
expression, additional promoter sequences from inducible genes may also be of interest [18]. The Ethylene
Response Factor (ERF) gene family encodes a large

Page 2 of 16

group of transcription factors characterized by the presence of a single AP2/ERF domain [19]. ERF proteins
play important roles in ethylene-mediated gene transcription [20] and in a wide range of biotic and abiotic
stress responses such as pathogen attack [21], drought
tolerance, salt tolerance and low temperatures [22,23].
The ERF genes therefore could be excellent sources for
inducible promoters, which most likely contain interesting cis-regulatory elements within their sequences.
Promoter characterization typically involves the introduction and analysis of DNA constructs containing
promoters fused to a reporter gene. Temporal and tissue-specific expression of the reporter gene can then be
directly observed and quantified in transgenic plant tissues. Although soybean transformation was first
reported many years ago [24-26], it remains consistent
but inefficient [27] and it may not be entirely suitable
for medium- to high-throughput analysis of soybean
promoters. Due to this limitation, analyses of soybean
promoters and their cis-regulatory elements are often
performed using heterologous plant expression systems
such as Arabidopsis and tobacco [9,28,29]. Analyses
using heterologous systems have value but validation of
soybean promoters in soybean [7,8], or at least in
another member of the Fabaceae family, is preferred as
heterologous systems may not accurately reflect promoter strength and specificity [30-32].
For rapid analysis of promoters, transient gene expression offers many advantages and some disadvantages
compared with the use of stably-transformed tissues.
Transient expression can be detected as early as 2 h
post DNA introduction in soybean tissues [33], which is
quite useful for rapid estimation of promoter activity.
Depending on the method for DNA introduction [34],
different tissue types can be targeted for gene delivery,
allowing increased flexibility in construct evaluations. In
our laboratory, transient expression has been successfully used for evaluation of soybean promoter variants
[10], but these evaluations were performed using lima
bean (Phaseolus lunatus) cotyledons. Transient expression analysis for promoter validation using soybean
cotyledons as an alternate target to lima bean cotyledons
has not been previously reported.
For evaluation of constructs in stably-transformed soybean tissues, the production of hairy roots provides the
most rapid and efficient method for generation of transgenic soybean tissues. Soybean hairy root cultures
induced by Agrobacterium rhizogenes have been successfully used for rapid analysis of soybean cyst nematode
infestation [35], improvement of genetic transformation
efficiencies [36] and analysis of phenolic metabolism
[28,37]. As an alternate approach, composite plants [38]
consisting of hairy roots on non-transgenic shoots are
also useful for rapid evaluation of gene expression in

Hernandez-Garcia et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:237
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/237

stably transformed soybean tissues [39]. Previous molecular analyses conducted on soybean hairy roots have
revealed the presence of high copy number integrations
[35,36,38], although the relationship between high copy
number insertions and gene expression in hairy roots
has not been reported.
With the aim of discovering unique and useful soybean promoters with potential applications in both basic
research and crop improvement, we here identify, clone
and validate 20 novel soybean promoters from the ubiquitin and ERF gene families. We present two different
and complementary promoter validation tools based on
transient expression in lima bean cotyledons and production of stably-transformed soybean hairy roots.
Quantitative gene expression analysis of these 20 new
soybean promoters using 2 different promoter validation
tools allows us to greatly expand the toolbox of available
soybean promoters.

Results
Phylogenetic analysis of the Gmubi and GmERF genes

Phylogenetic analyses of the gene models in the soybean
genome revealed at least 46 genes whose predicted
amino acid sequences contained at least one ubiquitin-

Page 3 of 16

coding unit (Additional file 1). Of these, 25 genes were
similar to the ubiquitin gene family that includes
Gmubi1-10 (Figure 1a). The other 21 genes contained a
lower number of ubiquitin-like coding units more similar to those found in other proteins such as the apoptotic regulator Scythe and the adaptor molecule RAD23
[40,41]. The Gmubi1-9 genes all belong to the same
polyubiquitin-containing family; whereas, the Gmubi10
gene belongs to a different, small monoubiquitin-containing subfamily (Figure 1a).
Phylogenetic analyses of the ERF/AP2 genes from soybean revealed a total of 371 genes, which could be annotated as AP2/ERF genes (Additional file 2). Of these, 12
genes were not incorporated into the phylogenetic tree as
they were either too divergent or incorrectly predicted
(Glyma01g22260.1, Glyma02g11060.1, Glyma05g07840.1,
Glyma08g24110.1, Glyma11g05450.1, Glyma14g00600.1,
Glyma15g25120.1, Glyma17g17010.1, Glyma18g01030.1,
Glyma19g43260.1, Glyma19g43260.2, Glyma19g45390.1).
A total of 359 ERF/AP2 genes were retained, including
the ten chosen for this study. The soybean AP2/ERF
family is broadly similar to that from other higher plant
species and can be subdivided into the ERF and AP2 subfamilies (Figure 1b). Similar to Arabidopsis [19] and

Figure 1 The ubiquitin and ERF gene families in soybean. (a) Phylogenetic tree of soybean ubiquitin genes constructed using the amino acid
sequences of 25 genes containing at least one ubiquitin-coding unit (Additional file 1. (b) Phylogenetic tree of soybean ERF genes constructed
using the predicted amino acid sequences of the AP2/ERF domain of 359 ERF proteins (Additional file 2). Eleven ERF subgroups and the AP2
family genes are shown. Red lines divide the three major subfamilies. The amino acid sequences were aligned by Clustal W and the
phylogenetic trees were constructed using MEGA 4.0 and the Neighbor-Joining method. The genes used for promoter isolation are shown with
red circles.

Hernandez-Garcia et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:237
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/237

tobacco [42], the ERF family could be further subdivided
into the DREB (groups I-V) and the ERF subfamilies
(groups VI-X). One additional subfamily was apparent
and may be related to the members of group VI-L and
Xb-L as these proteins were omitted from both the Arabidopsis and tobacco analyses. This phylogenetic analysis
provides a framework for the study of promoters from
other members of the soybean AP2/ERF multigene family
and illustrates the phylogenetic positions of the 10 group
IX GmERF genes used for promoter isolation in this
study. The GmERF1-10 genes were chosen as they are
likely to be wound- and/or jasmonate-inducible based on
their phylogenetic position [42].
Evaluation of soybean and lima bean cotyledons for
transient expression analysis

Transient gene expression in soybean and lima bean cotyledons was conducted and compared with the initial aim
of developing a soybean-based transient expression system
for validation of soybean promoters. Introduction of the
35S-GFP construct into soybean cotyledons resulted in

Page 4 of 16

relatively high levels of gene expression, followed by a very
rapid decline (Figure 2). In soybean, the GFP appeared to
diffuse from the targeted cells into the surrounding cells a
few hours after bombardment. GFP was minimally
detected using our automated image collection system
~48 h after bombardment (Figure 2a). Time-lapse animations of GFP expression tracked for 100 h in bombarded
soybean cotyledons clearly showed the rapid loss of GFP
in the primary targeted cells and the apparent diffusion to
the surrounding cells (Additional file 3). In contrast, in
lima bean cotyledonary cells, transient GFP expression
modulated by the 35S-GFP construct appeared to remain
localized in single cells (Figure 2b) and time-lapse animations revealed that GFP was visible for over 100 h (Additional file 3). Confocal microscopy of soybean
cotyledonary cells, conducted 10 h after bombardment
with the 35S-GFP plasmid confirmed high levels of GFP in
the cytoplasm and nuclei of the main targeted cells, but
also low levels of GFP in the cytoplasm and nuclei of the
adjacent cotyledonary cells (Figure 3). Confocal microscopy also confirmed restriction of GFP to the main

Figure 2 Transient GFP expression using soybean and lima bean cotyledons. Soybean cotyledons (a) and lima bean cotyledons (b) were
transformed with 35S-GFP [10] and 35S-GFP::Hygromycin [43] plasmids. Numbers on top represent hours (h) after bombardment.

Hernandez-Garcia et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:237
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/237

Figure 3 Confocal microscopy of GFP expression in bombarded
soybean and lima bean cotyledons. The analysis was performed
10 h after DNA introduction. The 35S-GFP and 35S-GFP::Hygromycin
plasmids were previously described by Chiera et al [10] and Chiera et
al [43], respectively. Asterisks mark GFP-expressing cells adjacent to
single transformed cells. Bars are equivalent to 10 μm.

Page 5 of 16

targeted cell in bombarded lima bean cotyledonary tissues
(Figure 3). This analysis also revealed basic differences in
cotyledon cell morphology between lima bean and soybean. For example, soybean cotyledonary cells were considerably smaller and more regularly-shaped than lima
bean cells and contained smaller vacuoles (Figure 3).
To investigate if the apparent GFP diffusion visualized
in soybean cotyledonary cells was related to the small
size of GFP, a translational fusion of GFP::Hygromycin
[43] was introduced into both soybean and lima bean
cotyledons. Although GFP levels and the numbers of
GFP-expressing cells were considerably lower than
obtained earlier with the 35S-GFP introduction, GFP
expression from the translational fusion remained in the
targeted cells longer in both plants and was detected
until over 100 h after transformation (Figure 2a-b and
data not shown). Confocal microscopy of soybean cotyledons, bombarded with the GFP::Hygromycin translational fusion confirmed strong GFP expression in the
cytoplasm and nuclei of targeted cells but a clear reduction of GFP levels in the adjacent cells (Figure 3). Confocal analysis of lima bean cotyledons showed high levels of

Figure 4 Profiles of transient GFP expression driven by the Gmubi and GmERF promoters. Images were collected every hour for 100 h
and GFP quantified using ImageJ. GFP expression levels for each promoter are reported as the percent of peak GFP expression obtained with
the CaMV35S promoter.

Hernandez-Garcia et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:237
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/237

GFP in the cytoplasm and nuclei of targeted cells and no
detectable GFP levels in the adjacent cells (Figure 3).
Transient expression analysis of promoters using lima
bean cotyledons

The upstream regions of gene coding sequences for 10
Gmubi and 10 GmERF genes (Figure 1) were cloned 5’
to the gfp gene and rapidly characterized. Profiles of
transient GFP expression were generated for all 20 soybean promoters, along with the CaMV35S promoter,
using lima bean cotyledons as target tissue (Figure 4).
GFP expression was first detectable in cotyledonary cells
2-3 h after DNA introduction and became almost undetectable with our automated image collection and analysis system [44] ~100 h after DNA delivery.
The transient expression profiles were mostly similar
for all the Gmubi promoters regardless of promoter
strength. However, GFP expression peaks for the strong
Gmubi promoters appeared to be reached later than the
low-expressing promoters or the CaMV35S promoter.
Most of the Gmubi promoters gave rise to exceptionally
high levels of transient GFP expression based on a comparison to the CaMV35S promoter; the y-axis in Figure
4 is the percent of peak CaMV35S expression. The
Gmubi1, Gmubi3, Gmubi4, Gmubi5, Gmubi6, Gmubi7
and Gmubi9 promoters displayed a ~2-7-fold increase
in expression over levels obtained with the CaMV35S
promoter (Figure 4). The Gmubi2 and Gmubi8 promoters showed similar levels of transient GFP expression
compared with the CaMV35S, while use of the
Gmubi10 promoter resulted in very low levels of GFP
expression.
The transient expression profiles generated for the
GmERF promoters also showed a range of promoter
strengths but reasonable consistency in the timing of
peak expression (Figure 4). The times for peak GFP
expression driven by the GmERF promoters were more
variable than those observed for the Gmubi promoters
but were consistently later than CaMV35S-driven GFP
peak (Figure 4). Although many of the GmERF promoters resulted in lower GFP levels than the Gmubi promoters, some gave higher expression than the CaMV35S
promoter. The GmERF3, GmERF5, GmERF6, and
GmERF10 promoters exhibited ~1.5-2.2-times higher
GFP levels compared to the CaMV35S promoter. The
GmERF2, GmERF4 and GmERF7 promoters showed
similar GFP levels to CaMV35S, while GmERF1,
GmERF8 and GmERF9 promoters gave rise to lower
levels of transient GFP expression (Figure 4).
Stable expression analysis using soybean hairy roots

In addition to analysis of promoter activity using transient expression, promoter strength was assessed in stably-transformed soybean hairy roots. One week after A.

Page 6 of 16

rhizogenes-inoculation of soybean cotyledons, numerous
small cell clusters composed of both GFP- and non
GFP-expressing cells were evident in the wounded sites
located on the abaxial side of the inoculated cotyledons.
Approximately two weeks after inoculation, the cotyledons formed numerous roots, which were 72% GFPpositive (Table 1). Although the clear majority of GFPexpressing root events appeared to express GFP homogeneously, formation of chimeric roots was occasionally
observed. Most hairy roots were relatively prolific and
grew quickly following subculture to fresh OMS medium. Secondary roots could be excised and used to generate additional clonal tissues for analysis.
The intensities of GFP expression mediated by the
soybean promoters and a CaMV35S promoter construct
in soybean hairy roots were determined using image
analysis. Many of the Gmubi promoters gave rise to significantly higher levels of GFP expression than the
CaMV35S promoter used as a control (ANOVA, P >
0.0001, Figure 5a). The strongest Gmubi promoters
(Gmubi1, Gmubi2, Gmubi3, Gmubi4, Gmubi7 and
Gmubi9) showed a ~2-4-fold increase in GFP expression
over levels given by the CaMV35S promoter (Figure 5a).
The Gmubi5, Gmubi6 and Gmubi8 promoters gave rise
to similar or slightly higher levels of GFP than the
CaMV35S promoter, while the Gmubi10 promoter
showed the lowest GFP expression among the Gmubi
promoters.
The GmERF promoters displayed somewhat lower
GFP intensities in hairy roots than the Gmubi promoters but some of these promoters displayed higher
expression levels than the CaMV35 promoter (ANOVA,
P > 0.0001, Figure 5b). The GmERF2, GmERF6 and
GmERF10 promoters showed ~1.4-1.7-times higher GFP
than CaMV35S (Figure 5b). The GmERF3, GmERF4 and
GmERF7 promoters exhibited similar GFP compared to
the CaMV35S promoter; whereas the GmERF1,
GmERF5, GmERF8 and GmERF9 promoters directed
lower levels of GFP compared to the CaMV35S
promoter.
Although the average GFP expression levels were
determined based on image analysis of different soybean
hairy root events, an unexpected large variation in GFP
intensities among different root events was observed for
all of the promoters evaluated, including the CaMV35S
promoter. As a result of this large variation, the standard deviations for GFP intensity means were quite
Table 1 Average of primary hairy roots expressing GFP
mediated by promoter constructs
Number of roots analyzed

GFP expression
Positive (+)

195

Negative (-)

140 (72%)

55 (28%)

Hernandez-Garcia et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:237
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/237

large for most of the promoters (Figure 5a-b). Analysis
of GFP expression in numerous secondary roots from
the same primary root event was performed using
events containing the Gmubi3, GmERF3 and GmERF10
promoters. Although a large variation in GFP intensities
was seen among primary roots, the variation in GFP
intensity was much smaller in the secondary roots generated from single primary roots (Figure 6a). A remarkable reduction of the standard deviations for GFP
intensity means in secondary roots was also apparent
(Figure 6b).
Southern hybridization analysis

With the aim of studying the transgene integration patterns present in the soybean transgenic hairy roots and

Figure 5 Analysis of GFP intensity in hairy roots induced with
A. rhizogenes harboring different promoter constructs. (a)
Gmubi promoters. (b) GmERF promoters. GFP intensity is presented
as grayscale values. Values are means ± SD. Letters on top of each
column were generated by the Tukey’s Studentized Range (HSD)
test. Columns followed by the same letter are not statistically
different at P > 0.05.

Page 7 of 16

determining if a relationship existed between GFP intensity and transgene copy number, Southern hybridization
analysis was conducted on genomic DNA isolated from
either GmERF6- or GmERF10-containing hairy roots
using the gfp coding region as the hybridization probe.
Hybridization signals were detected in all the transformed hairy root lines analyzed (Figure 7), confirming
the stable integration of the gfp coding sequence in the
genomes. The lanes containing DNA from hairy roots
induced with A. rhizogenes harboring no binary vector,
showed no hybridization bands (lanes: Williams82, Figure 7). As BsrGI recognizes a single site within the
T-DNA of pCAMBIA-promoter constructs, the presence
of one to seven variable-size bands in the genomic DNA
from either GmERF6- or GmERF10-containing roots
indicates T-DNA integrations ranging from one to
seven copies (Figure 7).

Figure 6 GFP expression variation among independent hairy
root events and within events. (a) Primary roots containing the
GmERF10 promoter and secondary hairy roots generated from a
single GmERF10-containing primary root. (b) GFP intensity
quantification in secondary hairy roots generated from single
primary roots containing either the Gmubi3, GmERF3 or GmERF10
promoter. Values are means ± SD

Hernandez-Garcia et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:237
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/237

Page 8 of 16

well-conserved AP2/ERF DNA-binding domain [19].
The phylogeny of GmERF genes in this study (Figure
1b) was very similar to phylogenies previously reported
for ERFs in rice, Arabidopsis and tobacco [19,42,47],
confirming that this family of transcription factor is
quite conserved among different plants. A previous phylogenetic analysis of GmERF genes revealed the presence
of 98 unigenes containing a complete AP2/ERF domain
in soybean [47]; however, we here report 359 AP2/ERFcontaining GmERF genes using data from the recently
released soybean genome assembly, representing a significant update for this gene family in soybean.
Transient expression assays in soybean and lima bean
cotyledons

Figure 7 Southern blot analysis of genomic DNA from hairy
roots. Images of root tips on top of lanes correspond to
independent root events used for DNA extraction. DNA was
digested with BsrGI and hybridized with a 32P-labeled gfp probe.
“Williams82” is DNA from roots induced with A. rhizogenes harboring
no promoter construct, “Williams82 +” is Williams82 DNA plus 10 pg
of respective plasmid, representing a single transgene copy in the
soybean genome.

Transgene copy number from the southern hybridization analysis was also directly correlated with the GFP
expression intensity displayed in the transgenic hairy
roots that were used for genomic DNA extraction
(Additional file 4). Hairy root events with high transgene
copy number generally displayed high GFP intensities;
whereas, hairy roots events with single or low T-DNA
copy number gave low or moderate GFP intensities.

Discussion
Bioinformatics analysis of the Gmubi and GmERF gene
families of soybean

The polyubiquitin gene family in soybean (Figure 1A) contains three moderately well characterized genes (Gmubi1,
Gmubi2 and Gmubi3); however, other family members
have received little to no attention. The promoters regulating these genes have likewise not been well characterized
but show promise as strong constitutive promoters based
on recently-reported transcriptome data [45,46] and previous characterizations of a soybean polyubiquitin promoter
(Gmubi) [7,10] that was recloned in this current research as
a slightly longer promoter and renamed “Gmubi3”.
The ERF genes were classified based on their coding
sequences, and particularly on the presence of the

Quantitative characterization of soybean promoters was
rapidly assessed using both transient gene expression in
lima bean cotyledons and stable expression in soybean
hairy roots. We have previously reported the use of lima
bean cotyledons for rapid analyses of transient gene
expression [10] and characterization of viral suppressors
of gene silencing [43,48]. In this report, we also evaluate
soybean cotyledons as a potential target tissue for rapid
validation of soybean promoters. In soybean cotyledons,
initial attempts to visualize GFP at the 24 hour time
point, which is the peak expression time for the lima
bean target [10], were unsuccessful as only very low
levels of GFP were observed. However, use of our automated image collection system [44] for semi-continuous
monitoring of GFP expression revealed that the GFP
protein apparently diffused rapidly from the initial target
cell in soybean cotyledons, leading to depletion of scorable GFP levels (Figure 2, Additional file 3). In lima
bean cells, rapid diffusion of GFP was not detected in
the cells surrounding the original targeted cell, although
it may occur at reduced levels. The loss of the GFP protein observed using soybean cotyledons suggests that
there are basic differences in the epidermal cell structures in lima beans and soybeans. Confocal microscopy
indeed confirmed some major differences in the anatomy of epidermal cells (Figure 3).
Retention of GFP in the targeted cells after bombardment is definitely preferable for gene expression analysis.
The rapid loss of GFP in soybean cotyledonary cells
made analysis difficult and this target tissue is completely unsuitable for transient expression analysis using
single time point determinations. The presence of small
amounts of GFP at the 24 h time point could be misinterpreted as the absence of expression, which was not
the case. Since single time point determinations at 24 h
are often used for transient expression analysis using
GFP [33] and GUS [49], loss of transient gene expression as reported here in soybean cotyledonary tissues
should be recognized as a potential problem in

Hernandez-Garcia et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:237
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/237

interpreting results. The use of dynamic semi-continuous monitoring of gene expression using our automated
image collection system facilitated the detection of GFP
loss from targeted cells, and movement into the surrounding cells. Without semi-continuous monitoring,
movement of GFP may not have been perceived.
Transient expression of GFP in cells of lima bean
cotyledons was far more consistent over time compared
to soybean cotyledons (Figure 2). Lima bean cotyledons
therefore offer a more suitable target tissue for quantitative transient GFP expression assays. Loss of GFP from
the targeted soybean cotyledonary cells was somewhat
reduced through the use of a translational fusion of GFP
to the hygromycin resistance gene (Figure 2, 3), resulting in production of a larger fusion protein. However,
use of this translational fusion resulted in much lower
apparent GFP intensities and fewer foci (Figure 2 lower
panels). We have previously reported that translational
fusions containing GFP give rise to considerable reductions of transient GFP intensities in lima bean cotyledonary cells, probably due to either a quenching of
fluorescence by the protein partner or conformational
changes in GFP as a result of an alteration of the chromophore structure [43,48]. Although use of translational
fusions can be used to minimize loss of the small GFP
protein from certain target tissues, the effects of the
fusion partner on GFP detection need to be considered
when this approach is utilized.
Transient expression mediated by Gmubi and GmERF
promoters

In this study, the Gmubi1-9 promoters were isolated
from polyubiquitin genes sharing high homology (Figure
1a) but containing variable numbers of the ubiquitincoding unit [50]. The Gmubi1, Gmubi2, Gmubi3 and
Gmubi8 contained 4 ubiquitin-coding units; the Gmubi4
and Gmubi6 contained 7 ubiquitin-coding units; and the
Gmubi5, Gmubi7 and Gmubi9 contained 6, 5 and 2 ubiquitin-coding units, respectively. The Gmubi10 promoter was isolated from a more distant relative gene
containing a monomeric ubiquitin-coding unit (Figure
1a). Although the Gmubi1-9 promoters gave rise to relatively high levels of gene expression, the Gmubi10 promoter displayed consistently low expression levels in
both transient expression and hairy roots. All of the
reports to date describing ubiquitin promoters in different plants have focused on polyubiquitin gene promoters [10,15,51].
The Gmubi promoters characterized here were either
intron-containing or intron-less promoters. The
Gmubi1-7 gene sequences contained predicted introns
in the 5’-UTR, which were predicted to splice to acceptor sites generated during promoter cloning just prior to
the initiation codon of the gfp coding sequence. The

Page 9 of 16

Gmubi8-10 gene sequences contained no predicted
introns in the 5’-UTR. To our knowledge, no characterization of native intron-less plant ubiquitin promoters
has been previously reported. Although in this study
there were no evident differences between transient GFP
expression levels mediated by the intron-containing or
the intron-less Gmubi promoters, the introns within the
5’UTR of most polyubiquitin promoters quantitatively
enhance transgene expression levels [51,52].
Although most of the Gmubi promoters directed overall high expression levels, the Gmubi3 promoter gave
exceptionally high levels of GFP expression. This high
gene expression driven by the Gmubi3 promoter is not
surprising as the Gmubi3 gene is highly active in different organs of soybean [45,46]. We previously reported
5-fold greater transient GFP expression using a slightly
truncated version of the Gmubi3 promoter (917 bp;
Gmubi) compared to a CaMV35S promoter [10]. In the
present study, the Gmubi3 promoter (1438 bp) gave rise
to 7-fold greater transient GFP expression compared to
the same CaMV35S promoter. We have also reported
that removal of the intron from the 5’UTR of the
Gmubi promoter resulted in much lower levels of both
transient expression in lima bean cotyledons [10] and
stable expression in transgenic soybeans [7]. Although
the intensity of expression was altered by the removal of
the intron from the 5’UTR of the Gmubi promoter, the
pattern of expression remained the same. Collectively,
these results indicate that the intronic and upstream
regions of this promoter may contain important cis-regulatory elements responsible for high levels of expression. An in-depth functional analysis of the Gmubi3
promoter may allow the identification of specific promoter elements that lead to this high gene expression.
The transient expression profiles from the GmERF
promoters (Figure 4) were similar regardless of promoter strength. However, the time of peak GFP expression
for the different GmERF promoters was more inconsistent compared to the expression peaks for the Gmubi
promoters. This variability in expression peaks among
the GmERF promoters may be associated with the transcriptional regulation of ERF genes under conditions of
stress [22,23].
The GmERF promoters characterized in the present
study were isolated from group IX GmERF genes (Figure
1b), which share high homology with group IX tobacco
ERF genes [42]. Transcription of group IX ERF genes in
tobacco and soybean can be induced after wounding or
exogenous application of methyl jasmonate (MeJa)
[42,47]. Particularly, a group IX soybean ERF gene
(GmERF69), with high similarity to the GmERF10 gene
sequence identified here (Table 2), displayed high
expression levels in soybean seedlings after exogenous
application of MeJa, ethylene and salicylic acid, or

Hernandez-Garcia et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:237
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/237

Table 2 Gene IDs for Gmubi and GmERF genes and the
respective sizes of their isolated promoters
Gmubi promoters
Promoter Size
(bp)

Gene ID

GmERF promoters
Promoter Size
(bp)

Gene ID

Gmubi1

1449 Glyma10g39780

GmERF1

1171 Glyma20g16920.1

Gmubi2

1484 Glyma13g17830.1 GmERF2

1243 Glyma20g16910.1

Gmubi3
Gmubi4

1438 Glyma20g27950.1 GmERF3
1430 Glyma13g24470.1 GmERF4

1331 Glyma11g03900.1
1137 Glyma01g41530.1

Gmubi5

1452 Glyma13g24500.1 GmERF5

1166 Glyma05g05180.1

Gmubi6

1409 Glyma07g32020.1 GmERF6

1257 Glyma05g05130.1

Gmubi7

1453 Glyma17g04690.1 GmERF7

1310 Glyma19g43820.1

Gmubi81

892

Gmubi9

1314 Glyma13g20200

Glyma10g05830.1 GmERF8
GmERF9

Gmubi102 1355 Glyma15g13650.1 GmERF10

967

Glyma20g34570.1

1125 Glyma10g33060.1
1196 Glyma17g15460.1

1

The Gmubi8-10 promoters do not contain intron sequences within their
5’UTR.
2
The Gmubi10 promoter was isolated from a monoubiquitin gene containing
a monomeric ubiquitin-coding unit.

growth under cold and salt conditions [47]. As gene
transcription is largely regulated by cis-acting regulatory
elements within the promoter sequences [53], the promoters from the group IX GmERF genes may be good
candidates to direct inducible transgene expression.
Further in-depth functional characterization of the
GmERF promoters validated herein along with their
potential cis-regulatory elements may also be of particular interest to increase the current knowledge of gene
transcription regulation under various stress conditions.
Gene expression mediated by Gmubi and GmERF
promoters in hairy roots

The percentage of GFP-positive hairy roots achieved
here (72%, Table 1) is substantially higher than previously reported for A. rhizogenes-induced hairy roots of
soybean (50%) [38]. The development of the hairy root
phenotype caused by A. rhizogenes is the result of the
integration and expression of T-DNA contained in the
bacterial root inducing (Ri) plasmid in the plant genome
[54]. A. rhizogenes can also transfer the T-DNA from
binary vectors, leading to the formation of hairy roots
with or without the binary vector T-DNA. The ratios of
hairy roots with and without the binary vector T-DNA
can vary tremendously across different plants [38].
GFP detection and analysis in hairy roots was relatively straightforward as hairy roots do not contain
chlorophyll, which can otherwise interfere with GFP
detection [55]. To counteract chlorophyll interference
with GFP detection, different methodologies have been
developed for chlorophyll elimination in photosynthetic
tissues, including exposure to alcohol [56], application
of photobleaching herbicides [57] or use of gene silencing to suppress the Phytoene desaturase (PDS) gene

Page 10 of 16

[58]. However, chlorophyll elimination treatments are
notably harsh and demand additional manipulation of
tissues, which may alter transgene expression, particularly expression of inducible DNA constructs.
GFP expression in soybean hairy roots was quite variable among different events containing the same promoter construct, although some general conclusions could
be made about promoter strength using this validation
tool. Similar to quantitative analysis of transient expression in lima bean cotyledonary tissue, the Gmubi3 and
the Gmubi10 promoters also gave the highest and the
lowest GFP intensity, respectively, in soybean hairy
roots. The Gmubi1, Gmubi4, Gmubi7, Gmubi8 and
Gmubi9 promoters showed quite similar GFP expression
intensities using both validation tools. However, a comparison of transient and stable expression intensities
using the Gmubi2, Gmubi5 and Gmubi6 promoters
showed some inconsistencies in promoter strength using
the two different validation tools (moderate, high and
high transient expression but high, moderate and moderate expression in stably-transformed hairy roots,
respectively;Table 3). The Gmubi2, Gmubi5 and
Gmubi6 promoters may be the most interesting for
further analysis as they show the greatest disparity in
expression using transient and stable expression
analyses.
The GFP intensities determined for GmERF promoters
using hairy roots in general also correlated with the
transient GFP levels determined using lima bean cotyledons. The GmERF2, GmERF3 and GmERF5 promoters
were the most inconsistent expressers in this group
(moderate, high and high transient GFP expression, but
high, moderate and low GFP intensities in hairy roots,
respectively; Table 3). Expression directed by these promoters may be affected by the wounding or other stresses caused by tissue manipulation and particle
bombardment. Further studies on these 3 promoters in
stably-transformed tissues may be of particular interest
to identify regulatory regions within promoters that are
responsive to various stimuli.
The transient expression system reported here differs
considerably from the hairy root expression system,
Table 3 Grouping of the Gmubi and GmERF promoters
based on the CaMV35S-driven GFP expression
Transient GFP expression

GFP expression in hairy
roots

Promoter Low Moderate High

Low

Moderate High

Gmubi #

10

1, 3, 4, 5,
6, 7, 9

10

5, 6, 8

1, 2, 3, 4,
7, 9

GmERF #

1, 8, 2, 4, 7
9

3, 5, 6, 10

1, 5,
8, 9

3, 4, 7

2, 6, 10

2, 8

GFP levels driven by the CaMV35S promoter in both transient and hairy roots
were considered as moderate.

Hernandez-Garcia et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:237
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/237

relative to the fate of the introduced DNA and the nature of the expressing tissue. Any consistency in expression intensity using the two validation tools, suggests a
certain robustness in promoter activity. For transient
expression using particle bombardment, large amounts
of DNA are introduced [59] on each particle and cells
that express the introduced DNA usually contain a particle in, or adjacent to the nucleus [60,61]. Transient
expression results in a rapid increase in gene expression,
followed by a rapid decline (Figure 4), which has been
partly attributed to gene silencing of transient expression [43,48]. Therefore, during transient expression in
lima bean cotyledonary cells, large amounts of plasmid
DNA are delivered to the nucleus, which result in very
high levels of extrachromosomal gene expression. Preintegrative, extrachromosomal DNAs may not be subject
to the same regulatory influences as genomic DNA and
this DNA may have different access to transcription factors. Nevertheless, transient expression might be a good
early indicator of promoter strength in stably-transformed tissues [7].
Stably-expressed promoters that are introduced in soybean hairy roots are integrated into genomic DNA and
expression in this tissue may more accurately reflect promoter activity in its native context. However, gene
expression may also be affected by integration site and
transgene copy number [62], as well as the status of the
transgenic tissues. Although the soybean hairy root system may not be optimal for validation of some tissuespecific promoters, we have successfully used this system
for validation of large number of promoters including
promoters identified as “seed specific” (data not shown).
Consistency in the intensity of gene expression using
these two different validation tools suggests good stability
and accurate prediction of relative promoter strengths.
Southern hybridization analysis and transgene copy
number

GFP intensities were quite variable in independent primary hairy root events (Figure 6). This variation in gene
expression across stably-transformed events has been
often attributed to the site(s) of transgene insertion and
transgene copy number [5,34]. The insertion site, copy
number and structure of integrated DNA differs,
depending on the transformation methods utilized.
Direct transformation methods such as particle bombardment can frequently result in the insertion of large
copy numbers of plasmid DNA at a single-site, leading
to transgene silencing [63,64]. Gene cassettes or minimal constructs can reduce or eliminate this effect
[65,66]. On the other hand, transformation using Agrobacterium typically results in lower copy number gene
introductions, which has been reported to give more
consistent transgene expression [63,64].

Page 11 of 16

Our results suggest that the variability in gfp gene
expression in soybean hairy roots was associated with the
copy number of the introduced T-DNA. The highest
GFP expression levels were associated with roots that
contained the highest copy numbers of introduced
DNAs. Use of Agrobacterium tumefaciens for transformation usually results in the integration of single or low TDNA copies into the plant genome [67,68]. Although use
of A. rhizogenes can lead to high copy T-DNA integration
[35,36,38], the relationship between high copy number
integration and transgene expression has not been previously reported in hairy roots. Using Arabidopsis plants
containing sequentially increasing copy numbers of a
CaMV35S-driven gfp gene, Schubert et al. [62] demonstrated increases in GFP expression levels when up to 4
copies of a CaMV35S-driven gfp gene were present. As
the copy number was increased to 5 and greater, GFP
expression was suppressed. Schubert et al. [62] further
suggested that suppression occurs once a gene expression
threshold is reached and is gene-specific.
In this study, hairy roots containing up to 7 T-DNA
inserts (Figure 7) displayed the highest GFP expression
and did not show gene suppression. A significant correlation of high GFP expression with high copy number
integration was observed with the GmERF6 and
GmERF10 promoters (Additional file 4), both of which
displayed higher expression levels than the CaMV35S
promoter in soybean hairy roots (Figure 5b). If a threshold copy number/expression level is required to silence
the gfp gene, that threshold was not reached in the
transgenic hairy roots.
The use of hairy roots to validate promoter activity is
a simple alternative for gauging promoter strength in
stably-transformed plants, although the influence of
copy number on gene expression should be considered
[69]. The transient expression analysis used in this
research may nevertheless be more reflective of general
promoter strength as each cell receives similar high
copy numbers of each DNA construct, and hundreds to
thousands of cells are collectively analyzed. As transient
expression is analyzed prior to DNA integration, complications from conformational and positional effects in
genomic DNA are avoided.

Conclusions
We report here the isolation and characterization of 20
novel soybean promoters from two different gene
families, ubiquitin and ERF. A rapid quantitative evaluation of promoter strength was consistently performed in
both transiently-expressing cotyledonary tissues of lima
bean and stably-transformed hairy roots of soybean. We
also provide novel insights towards the utilization of
transient and stable expression systems for promoter
validation.

Hernandez-Garcia et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:237
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/237

Methods
Phylogenetic analysis of the Gmubi and GmERF genes

The ubiquitin genes were identified in the soybean genome assembly (accessed in April, 2009; ftp://ftp.jgi-psf.
org/pub/JGI_data/Glycine_max/Glyma1/annotation/)
based on the presence of the highly conserved ubiquitincoding unit. The soybean ERF/AP2 genes were obtained
from SoyDB: A Knowledge Database of Soybean Transcription Factors (http://casp.rnet.missouri.edu/soydb/)
and verified using the Soybean Transcription Factor
Knowledge Base (http://www.igece.org/Soybean_TF/).
The phylogenetic trees for Gmubi and GmERF gene
families were constructed with the aligned amino acid
sequences using MEGA 4.0 [70] and the Neighbor-Joining (NJ) method [71]. For each gene family, the bootstrap consensus tree was inferred from 1000 replicates
[72] and drawn to scale, with branch lengths in the
same units as those of the evolutionary distances used
to infer the phylogenetic tree. The evolutionary distances were computed using the Poisson correction
method [73] and are in the units of the number of
amino acid substitutions per site.
DNA constructs

For rapid direct cloning and subcloning of soybean promoters, a PUC19-derived expression vector (pFLEV;
Finer Laboratory Expression Vector) was generated (Figure 8a). For construction of pFLEV, a synthetic multiple
cloning site (MCS) containing unique restriction sites
and flanked by HindIII and either NcoI or SphI restriction sites was designed and introduced 5’ to a gfp gene
encoding a soluble GFP [74]. The gfp gene was succeeded by a nopaline synthase terminator (NOS)
sequence. Additional restriction sites located at the 3’
end of the gfp sequence (BsrGI, NotI, StuI) and at the 3’

Figure 8 Expression vectors used for promoter cloning and
functional assays. (a) Engineered PUC19-derived expression vector
(pFLEV; Finer Laboratory Expression Vector), containing unique
restriction sites for promoter cloning and manipulation. (b)
pCAMBIA1300 vector used for hairy root production. MCS multiple
cloning site, RB right border, LB left border.

Page 12 of 16

end of NOS (BglII, MfeI, EcoRI) were included in
pFLEV to allow further mobilization of expression cassettes into different expression vectors.
The DNA sequences lying immediately upstream of
the coding regions of 20 selected Gmubi and GmERF
genes (Table 2) were PCR-amplified using specific primers (Additional file 5). Intronic regions (5’ UTR) present in the coding sequences of Gmubi1-7 were also
included in the 3’ end of their respective cloned promoters. PCR-amplifications were conducted on genomic
DNA from soybean (G. max ’Jack’) using the FailSafe™
PCR Kit (EPICENTRE® Biotechnologies, Madison, WI,
USA). PCR products were purified, digested and inserted
into the MCS of pFLEV (Figure 8a). All sequences of
cloned promoters were confirmed by DNA sequencing.
Promoter-containing pFLEV constructs were used for
transient expression analysis in lima bean (P. lunatus
’Henderson-Bush’) cotyledons.
For construction of the binary version of the promoter
constructs, the complete expression cassettes composed
of promoter, gfp coding sequence and NOS terminator
were excised from pFLEV using appropriate restriction
enzymes and cloned into the MCS of appropriately
digested pCAMBIA1300 (CAMBIA, Canberra, Australia;
Figure 8b). For soybean hairy root production, pCAMBIA1300-promoter constructs were introduced into A.
rhizogenes strain K599 (kindly provided by Dr. Harold
Trick, Kansas State University) by the freeze-thaw
method [75].
Transient expression analysis

Soybean (G. max ’Jack’) seeds were harvested from
plants grown in the greenhouse (16/8 h light:dark, 28°C)
with supplemental lighting from high pressure sodium
lamps. Lima bean seeds were harvested from plants
grown in a growth chamber (50% relative humidity, 16/
8 h light:dark, 25/23°C day/night). Both soybean and
lima bean seeds were surface sterilized in a 10% (v/v)
bleach solution with slow agitation for 20 min, rinsed 47 times with sterile water and germinated between
moistened sterile paper towels contained in GA7 culture
vessels.
Transient expression was initially compared in soybean and lima bean cotyledons using a 35S-driven GFP
construct [10] and a 35S-driven GFP::Hygromycin gene
fusion (GFP::Hygromycin) [43]. Soybean and lima bean
cotyledons were excised from 2-d-old and 4-d-old germinating seedlings, respectively. DNA constructs were
precipitated onto tungsten particles and introduced into
the adaxial surface of the cotyledons utilizing a Particle
Inflow Gun [76]. Bombarded cotyledons were placed
adaxial side up on OMS culture medium containing MS
salts [77], B5 vitamins [78], 3% sucrose and 0.2% Gelrite
(pH 5.7) for GFP monitoring. Semi-continuous image

Hernandez-Garcia et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:237
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/237

Page 13 of 16

acquisition was performed using an automated image
collection system [8] composed of a MZFLIII dissecting
microscope (Leica, Heerbrugg, Switzerland) equipped
with a “GFP-2” filter set (Excitation 480 ± 40 nm, Emission 510 nm), a Spot-RT CCD digital camera (Diagnostic Instruments Inc., Sterling Heights, MI, USA) and a
robotics platform (Arrick Robotics Inc., Hurst, TX,
USA). Soybean and lima bean cotyledons showing transient GFP expression were also examined 10 h post
bombardment using a Leica TCS SP5 II confocal laser
microscope (Leica, Heerbrugg, Switzerland). Based on
the more consistent GFP expression patterns obtained
using lima bean cotyledons, transient expression analysis
of all 20 different cloned soybean promoters was conducted using lima bean cotyledons as the target tissue.
Quantitative analysis of transient GFP expression
directed by the 20 novel soybean promoters in lima
bean cotyledons was performed as previously described
[10,44]. GFP expression levels for each promoter were
calculated and presented as the percentage of the peak
GFP expression of the CaMV35S promoter. For each
promoter construct, 5 to 9 cotyledons were bombarded
and monitored for 100 h, over at least two independent
experiments.

individual root tips, ~5 mm in length, were separated
into red, blue and green channels and only the green
channel data was used for quantification of GFP intensity. Due to the reflection of fluorescence through the
culture medium next to GFP-expressing roots, the
background gray value of a 100 × 100 pixel area adjacent to each root was first subtracted from every pixel
present in this channel. The threshold levels were then
adjusted to segment the expressing pixels from root
images and the grayscale mean value of the background-corrected channel was then determined. An
average grayscale mean value from the slight background fluorescence in the green channel from hairy
roots induced with A. rhizogenes without the binary
vector was also determined. GFP intensity for each
root was calculated by subtracting the average grayscale means of roots induced with A. rhizogenes containing no binary vector from the grayscale means of
the transgenic GFP-expressing hairy roots using the
green channel. For each promoter construct, 14 to 32
independent hairy root events were analyzed, over at
least two independent experiments. Statistical analysis
was performed using SAS 9.2 TS (SAS Institute Inc.,
Cary, NC, USA).

Hairy root induction and analysis

Southern hybridization analysis

For induction of soybean hairy roots, cotyledons were
inoculated as previously described [35] with some modifications. A. rhizogenes harboring the pCAMBIA1300promoter constructs was grown overnight in 2 ml liquid
YEP (Yeast Extract Peptone) medium containing 100
mg l-1 kanamycin. A. rhizogenes without the binary vector was grown in YEP medium lacking antibiotics. Soybean (G. max ’Williams82’) seeds were surface-sterilized
and germinated in GA7 containers as described above.
After 5 d, cotyledons were excised and wounded several
times on the abaxial side with a sterile scalpel dipped in
the bacterial cultures. Inoculated cotyledons were cultured abaxial side up on P5 Fisherbrand® (Fisher Scientific, Pittsburgh, PA, USA) filter paper moistened with
sterile distilled water. After 3 d, cotyledons were transferred to OMS medium containing 400 mg l-1 Timentin
for hairy root induction. Cotyledons were incubated at
25°C with a 16:8 h light:dark photoperiod under an illumination of 40 μEm-2s-1.
GFP-expressing hairy roots (~2 cm) were excised
from cotyledons and subcultured for 4 d on OMS
medium containing 400 mg l -1 Timentin. Root tip
regions were imaged utilizing the same microscope
and camera used previously for transient GFP detection but the robotics components were disabled. Image
analysis of roots was performed using ImageJ software
[79]. High-resolution images (1600 × 1200 pixels) of

Southern blot analysis was performed using genomic
DNA isolated from 18 transformed hairy root events
containing the gfp gene regulated by either the GmERF6
or GmERF10 promoter. Genomic DNA was extracted
from lyophilized root tissues according to Murray and
Thompson [80] as modified by Fulton et al. [81]. DNAs
from each independent root event (10 μg) were digested
overnight with BsrGI, which cuts the T-DNA harboring
the GmERF6 or GmERF10 promoter at a single site,
only 10 bp from the 3’ end of the gfp gene. Digested
DNAs were separated on 0.8% (w/v) agarose gels and
then transferred to nylon membranes (Roche Diagnostics GmbH, Indianapolis, IN, USA) as described by Sambrook et al. [82]. The hybridization probe was a 717 bp
fragment of the gfp coding region amplified by PCR
using the primers 5’ATGGTGAGCAAGGGCGAGGAGCTG3’ and 5’TTACTTGTACAGCTCGTCCATG3’.
The probe was labeled with [a- 32 P]-dCTP (PerkinElmer, Boston, MA, USA) using the Prime-It® II Random Labeling Kit (Stratagene, La Jolla, CA, USA)
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The
labeled probe was hybridized to the membranes and
incubated overnight at 60°C. The hybridized membranes
were exposed to a phosphor screen holder for 24 h and
then scanned with a Storm 860 PhosphorImager™ System (Molecular Dynamics, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) for
visualization of hybridization patterns.

Hernandez-Garcia et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:237
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/237

Additional material
Additional file 1: List of predicted amino acid sequences used for
the phylogenetic analysis of the Gmubi genes. The Gmubi genes
were identified in the soybean genome assembly (accessed in April,
2009; ftp://ftp.jgi-psf.org/pub/JGI_data/Glycine_max/Glyma1/annotation/)
based on the presence of the highly conserved ubiquitin-coding unit.
Additional file 2: List of AP2 domains used for the phylogenetic
analysis of the GmERF genes. The soybean GmERF genes were
obtained from SoyDB: A Knowledge Database of Soybean Transcription
Factors (http://casp.rnet.missouri.edu/soydb/) and verified using the
Soybean Transcription Factor Knowledge Base (http://www.igece.org/
Soybean_TF/).
Additional file 3: A time-lapse animation of soybean and lima bean
cotyledons transformed with the 35S-GFP construct. Images were
collected every hour for 100 h using an automated image collection
system and assembled using ImageReady.
Additional file 4: Regression analysis of GFP expression and
transgene copy number scored on the Southern blots. GFP
expression for each hairy root shown on Figure 7 was quantified and
grayscale values correlated with the respective transgene copy number.
The regression analysis showed P-Values of 0.005 and 0.039 for GmERF6and GmERF10-containing hairy roots, respectively.
Additional file 5: List of primer sequences used to PCR-amplify the
soybean promoters. Restriction sites incorporated in the forward and
reverse primers are underlined. F forward primer, R reverse primer.

List of abbreviations
CaMV35S: Cauliflower Mosaic Virus 35S; MS: Murashige and Skoog; OMS: MS
medium containing no plant growth regulators; ERF: Ethylene Response
Factor; Gmubi: Glycine max Ubiquitin; GmERF: Glycine max Ethylene
Response Factor; 5’ UTR: 5’ Untranslated Region; pFLEV: Finer Laboratory
Expression Vector; MCS: Multiple Cloning Site; PCR: Polymerase Chain
Reaction.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Dr. Tea Meulia (MCIC/OARDC/OSU) for the technical
assistance with confocal microscopy. We also thank Drs. Eric Stockinger and
Leah McHale for the critical reading of this manuscript. Salaries and research
support were provided by the United Soybean Board, and by State and
Federal funds appropriated to The Ohio State University/Ohio Agricultural
Research and Development Center. This research was partially supported by
a fellowship from CONACYT, Mexico, to CMHG. Mention of trademark or
proprietary products does not constitute a guarantee or warranty of the
product by OSU/OARDC and also does not imply approval to the exclusion
of other products that may also be suitable. Journal Article No HCS 10-09.
Author details
1
Department of Horticulture and Crop Science, OARDC/The Ohio State
University, 1680 Madison Ave., Wooster, OH 44691 USA. 2Department of
Biology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22904 USA. 3Department of
Microbiology, University of Virginia Health Systems, Charlottesville, VA 22908
USA. 4Department of Biology and Microbiology, South Dakota State
University, Brookings, SD 57007 USA. 5USACE, Environmental Lab, ERDC, 3909
Halls Ferry Road, Vicksburg, MS 39180 USA.
Authors’ contributions
CMHG cloned the GmERF promoters, developed and optimized the transient
expression and hairy root validation tools, designed experiments, collected
and analyzed data for GmERF promoters, and drafted the manuscript. RAB
cloned the Gmubi promoters and collected data for Gmubi-mediated
expression in transient expression and hairy roots. PJR performed the
phylogenetic analysis of Gmubi and GmERF gene families. MLJ contributed
to the interpretation of gene expression analysis in hairy roots and critically
revised the manuscript. XC identified the Gmubi and GmERF gene families in
the soybean genome and transcription factor databases. MPT assisted with

Page 14 of 16

Gmubi promoter identification and critically revised the manuscript. JJF was
the principal investigator, conceived of the experiments and contributed to
project design, isolation of the Gmubi promoters, data analysis, and
manuscript drafting. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Received: 23 June 2010 Accepted: 4 November 2010
Published: 4 November 2010
References
1. Schnable PS, Ware D, Fulton RS, Stein JC, Wei F, Pasternak S, Liang C,
Zhang J, Fulton L, Graves TA, Minx P, Reily AD, Courtney L, Kruchowski SS,
Tomlinson C, Strong C, Delehaunty K, Fronick C, Courtney B, Rock SM,
Belter E, Du F, Kim K, Abbott RM, Cotton M, Levy A, Marchetto P, Ochoa K,
Jackson SM, Gillam B, et al: The B73 maize genome: complexity, diversity,
and dynamics. Science 2009, 326:1112-1115.
2. Paterson AH, Bowers JE, Bruggmann R, Dubchak I, Grimwood J,
Gundlach H, Haberer G, Hellsten U, Mitros T, Poliakov A, Schmutz J,
Spannagl M, Tang H, Wang X, Wicker T, Bharti AK, Chapman J, Feltus FA,
Gowik U, Grigoriev IV, Lyons E, Maher CA, Martis M, Narechania A, Otillar RP,
Penning BW, Salamov AA, Wang Y, Zhang L, Carpita NC, et al: The Sorghum
bicolor genome and the diversification of grasses. Nature 2009,
457:551-556.
3. Schmutz J, Cannon SB, Schlueter J, Ma J, Mitros T, Nelson W, Hyten DL,
Song Q, Thelen JJ, Cheng J, Xu D, Hellsten U, May GD, Yu Y, Sakurai T,
Umezawa T, Bhattacharyya MK, Sandhu D, Valliyodan B, Lindquist E, Peto M,
Grant D, Shu S, Goodstein D, Barry K, Futrell-Griggs M, Abernathy B, Du J,
Tian Z, Zhu L, et al: Genome sequence of the palaeopolyploid soybean.
Nature 2010, 463:178-183.
4. Potenza C, Aleman L, Sengupta-Gopalan C: Targeting transgene
expression in research, agricultural, and environmental applications:
Promoters used in plant transformation. In Vitro Cell Dev Biol Plant 2004,
40:1-22.
5. Butaye KMJ, Cammue BPA, Delauré SL, De Bolle MFC: Approaches to
minimize variation of transgene expression in plants. Mol Breed 2005,
16:79-91.
6. Rushton PJ, Reinstadler A, Lipka V, Lippok B, Somssich IE: Synthetic plant
promoters containing defined regulatory elements provide novel
insights into pathogen- and wound-induced signaling. Plant Cell 2002,
14:749-762.
7. Hernandez-Garcia CM, Martinelli AP, Bouchard RA, Finer JJ: A soybean
(Glycine max) polyubiquitin promoter gives strong constitutive
expression in transgenic soybean. Plant Cell Rep 2009, 28:837-849.
8. Buenrostro-Nava MT, Ling PP, Finer JJ: Comparative analysis of 35S and
lectin promoters in transgenic soybean tissue using an automated
image acquisition system and image analysis. Plant Cell Rep 2006,
25:920-926.
9. Thirkettle-Watts D, McCabe TC, Clifton R, Moore C, Finnegan PM, Day DA,
Whelan J: Analysis of the alternative oxidase promoters from soybean.
Plant Physiol 2003, 133:1158-1169.
10. Chiera JM, Bouchard RA, Dorsey SL, Park E, Buenrostro-Nava MT, Ling PP,
Finer JJ: Isolation of two highly active soybean (Glycine max (L.) Merr.)
promoters and their characterization using a new automated image
collection and analysis system. Plant Cell Rep 2007, 26:1501-1509.
11. Wang J, Oard JH: Rice ubiquitin promoters: deletion analysis and
potential usefulness in plant transformation systems. Plant Cell Rep 2003,
22:129-134.
12. Christensen AH, Quail PH: Ubiquitin promoter-based vectors for highlevel expression of selectable and/or screenable marker genes in
monocotyledonous plants. Transgenic Res 1996, 5:213-218.
13. Plesse B, Criqui M-C, Durr A, Parmentier Y, Fleck J, Genschik P: Effects of
the polyubiquitin gene Ubi.U4 leader intron and first ubiquitin monomer
on reporter gene expression in Nicotiana tabacum. Plant Mol Biol 2001,
45:655-667.
14. Le Hir H, Nott A, Moore MJ: How introns influence and enhance
eukaryotic gene expression. Trends Biochem Sci 2003, 28:215-220.
15. Binet MN, Lepetit M, Weil JH, Tessier LH: Analysis of a sunflower
polyubiquitin promoter by transient expression. Plant Sci 1991, 79:87-94.
16. Garbarino JE, Oosumi T, Belknap WR: Isolation of a polyubiquitin promoter
and its expression in transgenic potato plants. Plant Physiol 1995,
109:1371-1378.

Hernandez-Garcia et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:237
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/237

17. Rollfink IK, Silber MV, Pfitzner UM: Characterization and expression of a
heptaubiquitin gene from tomato. Gene 1998, 211:267-276.
18. Mochida K, Yoshida T, Sakurai T, Yamaguchi-Shinozaki K, Shinozaki K, Tran LSP: In silico analysis of transcription factor repertoire and prediction of
stress responsive transcription factors in soybean. DNA Res 2009,
16:353-369.
19. Nakano T, Suzuki K, Fujimura T, Shinshi H: Genome-wide analysis of the
ERF gene family in Arabidopsis and rice. Plant Physiol 2006, 140:411-432.
20. Ohme-Takagi M, Shinshi H: Ethylene-inducible DNA binding proteins that
interact with an ethylene-responsive element. The Plant Cell 1995,
7:173-182.
21. Onate-Sanchez L, Singh KB: Identification of Arabidopsis ethyleneresponsive element binding factors with distinct induction kinetics after
pathogen infection. Plant Physiol 2002, 128:1313-1322.
22. Stockinger EJ, Gilmour SJ, Thomashow MF: Arabidopsis thaliana CBF1
encodes an AP2 domain-containing transcriptional activator that binds
to the C-repeat/DRE, a cis-acting DNA regulatory element that stimulates
transcription in response to low temperature and water deficit. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 1997, 94:1035-1040.
23. Zhang G, Chen M, Li L, Xu Z, Chen X, Guo J, Ma Y: Overexpression of the
soybean GmERF3 gene, an AP2/ERF type transcription factor for
increased tolerances to salt, drought, and diseases in transgenic
tobacco. J Exp Bot 2009, 60:3781-3796.
24. Hinchee MAW, Connor-Ward DV, Newell CA, McDonnell RE, Sato SJ,
Gasser CS, Fischhoff DA, Re DB, Fraley RT, Horsch RB: Production of
transgenic soybean plants using Agrobacterium-mediated DNA transfer.
Nat Biotech 1988, 6:915-922.
25. McCabe DE, Swain WF, Martinell BJ, Christou P: Stable transformation of
soybean (Glycine max) by particle acceleration. Nat Biotech 1988,
6:923-926.
26. Finer JJ, McMullen MD: Transformation of soybean via particle
bombardment of embryogenic suspension culture tissue. In Vitro Cell Dev
Biol Plant 1991, 27:175-182.
27. Finer JJ, Larkin KM: Genetic transformation of soybean using particle
bombardment and SAAT approaches. In Handbook of new technologies for
genetic improvement of legumes. Edited by: Kirti P. Boca Raton, Florida CRC
Press; 2008:103-125.
28. Mirabella R, Martirani L, Lamberti A, Iaccarino M, Chiurazzi M: The soybean
ENOD40(2) promoter is active in Arabidopsis thaliana and is temporally
and spatially regulated. Plant Mol Biol 1999, 39:177-181.
29. Chamberland S, Daigle N, Bernier F: The legumin boxes and the 3’ part of
a soybean β-conglycinin promoter are involved in seed gene expression
in transgenic tobacco plants. Plant Mol Biol 1992, 19:937-949.
30. Joung YH, Kamo K: Expression of a polyubiquitin promoter isolated from
Gladiolus. Plant Cell Rep 2006, 25:1081-1088.
31. Furtado A, Henry RJ, Takaiwa F: Comparison of promoters in transgenic
rice. Plant Biotech J 2008, 6:679-693.
32. Kamo K, Blowers A, Smith F, Van Eck J, Lawson R: Stable transformation of
Gladiolus using suspension cells and callus. J Am Soc Hortic Sci 1995,
120:347-352.
33. Ponappa T, Brzozowski AE, Finer JJ: Transient expression and stable
transformation of soybean using the jellyfish green fluorescent protein.
Plant Cell Rep 1999, 19:6-12.
34. Finer JJ: Plant nuclear transformation. In Genetic modification of plants,
Biotechnology in Agriculture and Forestry. Edited by: Kempken F, Jung C.
Berlin Heidelberg, vol 64: Springer-Verlag; 2010:3-21.
35. Cho H-J, Farrand SK, Noel GR, Widholm JM: High-efficiency induction of
soybean hairy roots and propagation of the soybean cyst nematode.
Planta 2000, 210:195-204.
36. Cho HJ, Brotherton JE, Widholm JM: Use of the tobacco feedbackinsensitive anthranilate synthase gene (ASA2) as a selectable marker for
legume hairy root transformation. Plant Cell Rep 2004, 23:104-113.
37. Lozovaya VV, Lygin AV, Zernova OV, Ulanov AV, Li S, Hartman GV,
Widholm JM: Modification of phenolic metabolism in soybean hairy
roots through down regulation of chalcone synthase or isoflavone
synthase. Planta 2007, 225:665-679.
38. Collier R, Fuchs B, Walter N, Lutke WK, Taylor CG: Ex vitro composite
plants: an inexpensive, rapid method for root biology. Plant J 2005,
43:449-457.
39. Li J, Todd TC, Trick HN: Rapid in planta evaluation of root expressed
transgenes in chimeric soybean plants. Plant Cell Rep 2010, 29:113-123.

Page 15 of 16

40. Thress K, Henzel W, Shillinglaw W, Kornbluth S: Scythe: a novel reaperbinding apoptotic regulator. EMBO J 1998, 17:6135-6143.
41. Kim I, Mi K, Rao H: Multiple interactions of Rad23 suggest a mechanism
for ubiquitylated substrate delivery important in proteolysis. Mol Biol Cell
2004, 15:3357-3365.
42. Rushton PJ, Bokowiec MT, Han S, Zhang H, Brannock JF, Chen X,
Laudeman TW, Timko MP: Tobacco transcription factors: novel insights
into transcriptional regulation in the solanaceae. Plant Physiol 2008,
147:280-295.
43. Chiera JM, Lindbo JA, Finer JJ: Quantification and extension of transient
GFP expression by the co-introduction of a suppressor of silencing.
Transgenic Res 2008, 17:1143-1154.
44. Hernandez-Garcia CM, Chiera JM, Finer JJ: Robotics and dynamic image
analysis for studies of gene expression in plant tissues. J Vis Exp 2010, 39
[http://www.jove.com/index/details.stp?id=1733].
45. Severin A, Woody J, Bolon Y-T, Joseph B, Diers B, Farmer A, Muehlbauer G,
Nelson R, Grant D, Specht J, Graham M, Cannon S, May G, Vance C,
Shoemaker R: RNA-Seq Atlas of Glycine max: A guide to the soybean
transcriptome. BMC Plant Biol 2010, 10:160.
46. Libault M, Farmer A, Joshi T, Takahashi K, Langley RJ, Franklin LD, He J,
Xu D, May G, Stacey G: An integrated transcriptome atlas of the crop
model (Glycine max) and its use in comparative analyses in plants. Plant
J 2010, 63:86-99.
47. Zhang G, Chen M, Chen X, Xu Z, Guan S, Li L-C, Li A, Guo J, Mao L, Ma Y:
Phylogeny, gene structures, and expression patterns of the ERF gene
family in soybean (Glycine max L.). J Exp Bot 2008, 59:4095-4107.
48. Dhillon T, Chiera JM, Lindbo JA, Finer JJ: Quantitative evaluation of six
different viral suppressors of silencing using image analysis of transient
GFP expression. Plant Cell Rep 2009, 28:639-647.
49. Klein TM, Harper EC, Svab Z, Sanford JC, Fromm ME, Maliga P: Stable
genetic transformation of intact Nicotiana cells by the particle
bombardment process. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1988, 85:8502-8505.
50. Sullivan JA, Shirasu K, Deng XW: The diverse roles of ubiquitin and the
26S proteasome in the life of plants. Nat Rev Genet 2003, 4:948-958.
51. Sivamani E, Qu R: Expression enhancement of a rice polyubiquitin gene
promoter. Plant Mol Biol 2006, 60:225-239.
52. Lu J, Sivamani E, Azhakanandam K, Samadder P, Li X, Qu R: Gene
expression enhancement mediated by the 5’ UTR intron of the rice
rubi3 gene varied remarkably among tissues in transgenic rice plants.
Mol Genet Genomics 2008, 279:563-572.
53. Yamaguchi-Shinozaki K, Shinozaki K: Organization of cis-acting regulatory
elements in osmotic- and cold-stress-responsive promoters. Trends Plant
Sci 2005, 10:88-94.
54. Chilton M-D, Tepfer DA, Petit A, David C, Casse-Delbart F, Tempe J:
Agrobacterium rhizogenes inserts T-DNA into the genomes of the host
plant root cells. Nature 1982, 295:432-434.
55. Billinton N, Knight AW: Seeing the wood through the trees: A review of
techniques for distinguishing Green Fluorescent Protein from
endogenous autofluorescence. Anal Biochem 2001, 291:175-197.
56. Zhou X, Carranco R, Vitha S, Hall TC: The dark side of green fluorescent
protein. New Phytol 2005, 168:313-322.
57. Wu C, Chiera JM, Ling PP, Finer JJ: Isoxaflutole treatment leads to
reversible tissue bleaching and allows for more effective detection of
GFP in transgenic soybean tissues. In Vitro Cell Dev Biol Plant 2008,
44:540-547.
58. Zhang L, Gase K, Baldwin IT, Gális I: Enhanced fluorescence imaging in
chlorophyll-suppressed tobacco tissues using virus-induced gene
silencing of the phytoene desaturase gene. Biotechniques 2010,
48:125-133.
59. Hadi MZ, McMullen MD, Finer JJ: Transformation of 12 different plasmids
into soybean via particle bombardment. Plant Cell Rep 1996, 15:500-505.
60. Yamashita T, Iida A, Morikawa H: Evidence that more than 90% of βGlucuronidase-expressing cells after particle bombardment directly
receive the foreign gene in their nucleus. Plant Physiol 1991, 97:829-831.
61. Hunold R, Bronner R, Hahne G: Early events in microprojectile
bombardment: cell viability and particle location. Plant J 1994, 5:593-604.
62. Schubert D, Lechtenberg B, Forsbach A, Gils M, Bahadur S, Schmidt R:
Silencing in Arabidopsis T-DNA transformants: the predominant role of a
gene-specific RNA sensing mechanism versus position effects. Plant Cell
2004, 16:2561-2572.

Hernandez-Garcia et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:237
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/237

Page 16 of 16

63. Shou H, Frame BR, Whitham SA, Wang K: Assessment of transgenic maize
events produced by particle bombardment or Agrobacterium-mediated
transformation. Mol Breed 2004, 13:201-208.
64. Dai S, Zheng P, Marmey P, Zhang S, Tian W, Chen S, Beachy RN, Fauquet C:
Comparative analysis of transgenic rice plants obtained by
Agrobacterium-mediated transformation and particle bombardment. Mol
Breed 2001, 7:25-33.
65. Fu X, Duc LT, Fontana S, Bong BB, Tinjuangjun P, Sudhakar D, Twyman RM,
Christou P, Kohli A: Linear transgene constructs lacking vector backbone
sequences generate low-copy-number transgenic plants with simple
integration patterns. Transgenic Res 2000, 9:11-19.
66. Agrawal PK, Kohli A, Twyman RM, Christou P: Transformation of plants
with multiple cassettes generates simple transgene integration patterns
and high expression levels. Mol Breed 2005, 16:247-260.
67. Ishida Y, Saito H, Ohta S, Hiei Y, Komari T, Kumashiro T: High efficiency
transformation of maize (Zea mays L.) mediated by Agrobacterium
tumefaciens. Nat Biotech 1996, 14:745-750.
68. Zhao Z-y, Cai T, Tagliani L, Miller M, Wang N, Pang H, Rudert M,
Schroeder S, Hondred D, Seltzer J, Pierce D: Agrobacterium-mediated
sorghum transformation. Plant Mol Biol 2000, 44:789-798.
69. Gupta M, Nirunsuksiri W, Schulenberg G, Hartl T, Novak S, Bryan J,
Vanopdorp N, Bing J, Thompson S: A non-PCR-based Invader® assay
quantitatively detects single-copy genes in complex plant genomes. Mol
Breed 2008, 21:173-181.
70. Tamura K, Dudley J, Nei M, Kumar S: MEGA4: Molecular Evolutionary
Genetics Analysis (MEGA) Software Version 4.0. Mol Biol Evol 2007,
24:1596-1599.
71. Saitou N, Nei M: The neighbor-joining method: a new method for
reconstructing phylogenetic trees. Mol Biol Evol 1987, 4:406-425.
72. Felsenstein J: Confidence limits on phylogenies: an approach using the
bootstrap. Evolution 1985, 39:783-791.
73. Zuckerkandl E, Pauling L, Bryson V, Vogel HJ: Evolutionary divergence and
convergence in proteins. Evolving Genes and Proteins New York: Academic
Press; 1965, 97-166.
74. Chiu W-l, Niwa Y, Zeng W, Hirano T, Kobayashi H, Sheen J: Engineered GFP
as a vital reporter in plants. Curr Biol 1996, 6:325-330.
75. Chen H, Nelson RS, Sherwood JL: Enhanced recovery of transformants of
Agrobacterium tumefaciens after freeze-thaw transformation and drug
selection. Biotechniques 1994, 16:664-670.
76. Finer JJ, Vain P, Jones MW, McMullen MD: Development of the particle
inflow gun for DNA delivery to plant cells. Plant Cell Rep 1992, 11:323-328.
77. Murashige T, Skoog F: A revised medium for rapid growth and bio assays
with tobacco tissue cultures. Physiol Plant 1962, 15:473-497.
78. Gamborg OL, Miller RA, Ojima K: Nutrient requirements of suspension
cultures of soybean root cells. Exp Cell Res 1968, 50:151-158.
79. Rasband W: ImageJ, U. S. National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland, USA. 1997 [http://rsbweb.nih.gov/ij/].
80. Murray MG, Thompson WF: Rapid isolation of high molecular weight
plant DNA. Nucleic Acids Res 1980, 8:4321-4326.
81. Fulton T, Chunwongse J, Tanksley S: Microprep protocol for extraction of
DNA from tomato and other herbaceous plants. Plant Mol Biol Rep 1995,
13:207-209.
82. Sambrook J, Fritsch EF, Maniatis T: Molecular Cloning: A Laboratory
Manual. Cold Spring Harbor, NY: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory;, 2 1989.
doi:10.1186/1471-2229-10-237
Cite this article as: Hernandez-Garcia et al.: High level transgenic
expression of soybean (Glycine max) GmERF and Gmubi gene
promoters isolated by a novel promoter analysis pipeline. BMC Plant
Biology 2010 10:237.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
