<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Comparative neuroanatomy suggests repeated reduction of neuroarchitectural complexity in Annelida</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:13. doi: 10.1186/1742-9994-7-13"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Carsten M Heuer, Carsten HG M_ller, Christiane Todt, Rudi Loesel"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 8.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 7.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Heuer et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:13
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/13

Open Access

RESEARCH

Comparative neuroanatomy suggests repeated
reduction of neuroarchitectural complexity in
Annelida
Research

Carsten M Heuer1, Carsten HG Müller2, Christiane Todt3 and Rudi Loesel*1

Abstract
Background: Paired mushroom bodies, an unpaired central complex, and bilaterally arranged clusters of olfactory
glomeruli are among the most distinctive components of arthropod neuroarchitecture. Mushroom body neuropils,
unpaired midline neuropils, and olfactory glomeruli also occur in the brains of some polychaete annelids, showing
varying degrees of morphological similarity to their arthropod counterparts. Attempts to elucidate the evolutionary
origin of these neuropils and to deduce an ancestral ground pattern of annelid cerebral complexity are impeded by
the incomplete knowledge of annelid phylogeny and by a lack of comparative neuroanatomical data for this group.
The present account aims to provide new morphological data for a broad range of annelid taxa in order to trace the
occurrence and variability of higher brain centers in segmented worms.
Results: Immunohistochemically stained preparations provide comparative neuroanatomical data for representatives
from 22 annelid species. The most prominent neuropil structures to be encountered in the annelid brain are the paired
mushroom bodies that occur in a number of polychaete taxa. Mushroom bodies can in some cases be demonstrated
to be closely associated with clusters of spheroid neuropils reminiscent of arthropod olfactory glomeruli. Less
distinctive subcompartments of the annelid brain are unpaired midline neuropils that bear a remote resemblance to
similar components in the arthropod brain. The occurrence of higher brain centers such as mushroom bodies,
olfactory glomeruli, and unpaired midline neuropils seems to be restricted to errant polychaetes.
Conclusions: The implications of an assumed homology between annelid and arthropod mushroom bodies are
discussed in light of the 'new animal phylogeny'. It is concluded that the apparent homology of mushroom bodies in
distantly related groups has to be interpreted as a plesiomorphy, pointing towards a considerably complex
neuroarchitecture inherited from the last common ancestor, Urbilateria. Within the annelid radiation, the lack of
mushroom bodies in certain groups is explained by widespread secondary reductions owing to selective pressures
unfavorable for the differentiation of elaborate brains. Evolutionary pathways of mushroom body neuropils in errant
polychaetes remain enigmatic.
Background
Annelida is an ancient phylum that comprises over
16,500 described species. Its members inhabit nearly all
biotopes in marine environments, and occupy fresh water
and moist terrestrial habitats [1]. Traditionally, the segmented worms are thought to fall into two major groups:
Polychaeta (bristleworms) and Clitellata (worms with a
specialized reproductive structure, the clitellum). Among
* Correspondence: loesel@bio2.rwth-aachen.de
1

Institute for Biology II, RWTH Aachen, Department of Developmental Biology
and Morphology of Animals, D-52056 Aachen, Germany
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

them, Polychaeta represents the larger and more diverse
taxon, a fact that can be attributed to the high evolutionary plasticity of the polychaete body plan. In different
groups, head appendages (prostomial palps and tentacles,
peristomial cirri) and body appendages (parapodia) have
been modified in numerous ways to suit a wide range of
lifestyles and feeding strategies, including active predation, scavenging, deposit and suspension feeding. Clitellata, in contrast, lack elaborate head and body
appendages and thus show less diverse body forms. While
ectoparasitic members of the Hirudinea (leeches) have a
specialized feeding apparatus that allow them to feed on

© 2010 Heuer et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons

BioMed Central Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Heuer et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:13
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/13

the body fluids of their hosts, other clitellates can be
characterized as predators, detritivors or direct deposit
feeders.
Surprisingly, evolutionary relationships within this ecologically important metazoan phylum are still poorly
understood [2-4]. Clitellatesare g enerally accepted to
form a monophyletic clade, but phylogenetic relationships within the group are still a matter of debate [5].
Polychaete relationships represent one of the most intractable problems of phylogenetic research [6] and the history of polychaete systematics is accordingly long and
convoluted [reviewed in [7]]. The most influential traditional concept divided the group into the orders Sedentaria and Errantia [8]. This division was later recognized
as a rather arbitrary grouping [9], useful for practical purposes but not representing correct phylogenetic relationships. Due to the lack of conclusive evidence, many
authors subsequently refrained from grouping the
approximately 80 well-established polychaete families
into higher-ranking taxa. Analyzing morphological character traits across a broad range of families, Rouse and
Fauchald [10] provided one of the most comprehensive
cladistic studies to date. They proposed the Polychaeta to
form two major clades, Scolecida and Palpata, the latter
comprising the Canalipalpata (containing the remainder
of the Sedentaria) and the Aciculata (containing the
remainder of the Errantia). However, not all of these
groups are strongly supported [10,11] and their monophyly has been questioned by morphological [12,13] as
well as molecular studies [2,4,14]. As yet, a conclusive
phylogeny for the segmented worms is still lacking and
annelid systematics remain "one of the most vexing problems in invertebrate phylogenetics" [[3], page 1462].
Searching for novel characters to advance the reconstruction of annelid relationships, several authors have
looked into the architecture of the central nervous system. The metameric organization of the ventral nerve
cord in developing stages of Bonellia viridisled Hessling
[15] to propose the inclusion of echiurids into the Annelida. Similarly, segmental patterns observed during neurogenesis of Phascolion strombus[16] and Phascolosoma
agassizii [17]indicate a close affinity of Sipuncula and
Annelida. Detailed investigations into the neuroarchitecture and the internal scaffolding of the central nervous
system across a wide range of polychaete species were
provided by Orrhage and Müller [18]. Drawing on innervation patterns, these authors postulated homology
hypotheses for the highly variable head appendages
encountered in different polychaete species. In a similar
approach, Zanol and Fauchald [19] presented in-depth
neuroarchitectural descriptions of eunicid polychaetes to
elucidate evolutionary transformations of the head
appendages in this group.

Page 2 of 21

Little attention, however, has so far been devoted to the
neuroanatomy of higher brain centers in annelids and
their phylogenetic significance. The first accounts to
describe such neuropil structures in a variety of annelid
species were presented by Holmgren [20] and Hanström
[21,22] who reported the occurrence of arthropod-like
neuropils in the brain of certain polychaetes. Arguing
along the lines of an assumed sistergroup relationship of
annelids and arthropods (Articulata), these early authors
interpreted the observed neuropil structures as homologues. However, in light of the recent rearrangement of
metazoan lineages into Ecdysozoa [23] and Lophotrochozoa [24], and considering the occasionally low anatomical resolution presented in the early reports, a
critical re-evaluation of this homology hypothesis
seemed warranted. In a recent account, Heuer and Loesel
[25] provided a detailed analyses of brain centers in the
polychaete Nereis diversicolor, corroborating a high neuroanatomical similarity between the most prominent
brain centers - the so-called mushroom bodies - in annelids and arthropods (Fig. 1). Indicators for homology are a
common neuropil organization comprising distinctive
substructures, a comparable neural connectivity and a
presumably similar function of these brain centers [26].
Recent findings from the field of evolutionary developmental biology have shown the mushroom body anlagen
in larvae of the nereid polychaete Platynereis dumerilii to
express the same combination of genes that is characteristic for the developing mushroom bodies of Drosophila
melanogaster, providing independent support for these
anatomy-derived homology assessments [27].
Continuative investigations into annelid mushroom
body morphology (Fig. 2), utilizing3D reconstructions to
compare the neuropil organization in N. diversicolor and
the polynoid Harmothoe areolata [28], demonstrated
morphological variability of these neuropils in different
taxa and provided evidence for the correlation of anatomical difference with phylogenetic distance. Yet, in comparison to the amount of literature available on arthropod
neuroanatomy, studies on the distribution and differentiation of higher brain centers in annelids are scarce, and
attempts to trace the evolution of cerebral neuropils or to
use neuroarchitectural characters for phylogenetic considerations are hampered by the lack of neuroanatomical
data for a wide range of annelid representatives. The
present study takes a step towards remedying this situation by providing comparative descriptions of higher
brain centers in a broad variety of annelid taxa.

Materials and methods
Polychaete specimens were collected during field trips to
the Isle of Ibiza (Spain), the Isle of Sylt (Germany), and
Bergen (Norway). Clitellate specimens were purchased

Heuer et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:13
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/13

Page 3 of 21

Figure 1 Comparison of arthropod and annelid mushroom bodies. (a) Horseradish peroxidase immunoreactivity and cell nuclei labeling in sagittal sections of the brain of the cockroach Leucophaea maderae reveal the basic neuropil organization. The mushroom body is capped by a dorsal
aggregation of small-diameter Kenyon cells (kc) and comprises a calyx region (ca), a peduncle (pd), and an arrangement of median and vertical lobes
(lo). (b) Synapsin immunoreactivity in cell nuclei labeled horizontal sections of the brain of the polychaete Nereis diversicolor shows a similar organization of the annelid mushroom body neuropil. gc globuli cells. Scale bars: 80 μm.

from commercial providers. A detailed list of the investigated annelid species and respective collection sites is
provided in table 1. Cockroaches of the species Leucophaea maderae FABRICIUS, 1792 were bred in laboratory cultures. The principal neuroarchitecture of the
brain was revealed by a combination of immunohistochemistry and cell nuclei labeling performed on free
floating vibratome sections as described in Heuer and
Loesel [25] (2008).
In short, annelid heads - or, for L. maderae, dissected
brains - were fixed overnight in 4% paraformaldehyde in
0.1 M phosphate buffered saline (PBS) at room temperature. Prior to paraformaldehyde fixation, specimens
intended for anti-histamine immunohistochemistry were
fixed overnight in 4% carbodiimide (1-Ethyl-3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl)-carbodiimide hydrochloride; SigmaAldrich, Steinheim, Germany) in PBS.
For vibratome-sectioning (VT1000S, Leica Microsystems, Wetzlar, Germany), the tissue was rinsed in four
changes of PBS and then embedded in a gelatine/albumin

medium. After hardening for 16-18 h in 15% formalin in
PBS at 8°C, the gelatine/albumin blocks were cut into sections of 80-100 μm thickness. The sections were washed
in six changes of PBS with 0.1% Triton X-100 (TX) and
subsequently pre-incubated overnight in a blocking solution of 500 μl PBS containing 0.5% TX and 5% normal
swine serum (Jackson ImmunoResearch, West Grove,
PA). Primary antibodies were added directly to the blocking solution: anti-FMRF-amide (ImmunoStar, Hudson,
WI) at a dilution of 1:20000, anti-serotonin (SigmaAldrich, Saint Louis, MO) at a dilution of 1:20000 or antihistamine (Progen Biotechnik, Germany) at a dilution of
1:50000. Specificity controls for the antibodies were performed by the suppliers by liquid-phase preabsorption of
the diluted antisera with 100 μg/ml of FMRF-amide, 200
μg/ml serotonin conjugated to bovine serum albumin, or
10-100 μg/ml histamine, respectively. Immunostainings
were completely abolished by these pretreatments. After
26 h of incubation at room temperature, sections were
washed in six changes of PBS with 0.1% TX. They were

Heuer et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:13
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/13

Page 4 of 21

Figure 2 Three-dimensional surface reconstruction of the mushroom body neuropil in the polychaete Lepidonotus clava. (a) Three-dimensional mushroom body model superimposed upon an autofluorescence image of a horizontal section through the head of the animal (anterior is towards the top of the picture). The contour of the prostomium provides a context to which the relative position and size of the clearly demarcated
mushroom bodies (mb) can be related. In the reconstruction, the globuli cell cluster (blue) is colored transparently, allowing for the intricate arborizations of the mushroom body neuropile (red) to be seen. pa palp, ey eye (b, c, d) Anterior (b), median (c), and ventral (d) views of the surface reconstruction show a thick mass of globuli cell bodies surrounding most parts of the neuropil and forming indentations to accommodate the anterior and
posterior eyes (purple). Where it is embedded in globuli cell somata, the neuropil forms protuberances. About the dorso-ventral midline (arrowheads), the neuropil proper splits into an anterior lobe (al) and a posterior part. While the anterior lobe shows a smooth, unbroken surface, the posterior part forms several extensions that establish contact with the central neuropil. Two of these extensions (arrows) connect to a cluster of glomeruli
(yellow) that lies adjacent to the ventro-posterior part of the mushroom bodies. Also shown here is a crescent-shaped neuropil region (green) that
lies between the mushroom bodies and spans the midline of the brain. Scale bar: 200 μm.

then transferred to 500 μl PBS containing 0.5% TX and
1% normal swine serum. Secondary antibodies (Jackson
ImmunoResearch, West Grove, PA) at a dilution of 1:2000
were added directly to this solution and incubated for
approximately 16 h at room temperature. Afterwards, the
secondary antiserum was removed and the sections were
incubated with the nuclear marker DAPI (4',6-Diamidino-phenylindole, dilactate; Sigma-Aldrich, Steinheim,
Germany) at a dilution of 1:1000 in PBS for 12 min. Subsequently, sections were rinsed again in several changes
of PBS containing 0.1% TX and then mounted on chrome
alum/gelatine-coated glass slides under glass coverslips
using Elvanol (mounting medium for fluorescent stainings after Rodriguez and Deinhard [29]).
Preparations were analysed with a confocal laser-scanning microscope (TCS SP2, Leica Microsystems, Wetzlar,
Germany). A helium/neon laser (excitation wavelength
543 nm, detection range 555-700 nm) was used to detect
Cy3 fluorescence, DAPI fluorescence was detected with a
diode-laser (excitation wavelength 405 nm, detection
range 410-550 nm). Autofluorescence of the tissue was
visualized with the argon/krypton laser (excitation wavelength 488 nm, detection range 500-535 nm). Confocal
images were finally processed using global imaging

enhancement procedures (contrast, brightness) and
superposition functions of 'Adobe Photoshop CS'.
Three-dimensional surface reconstruction of cerebral
neuropils in Lepidonotus clava followed the protocol
described in Heuer and Loesel [28] (2009). Using the
Amira graphics software package (Mercury Computer
Systems Inc., Chelmsford, MA) and a graphic tablet
(Intuos3 from Wacom, Krefeld, Germany), neuropil models were rendered from a manually labeled data set of 252
consecutive optical sections in a single, well-preserved
specimen.

Results
Immunohistochemical methods were used to analyze
brain anatomy and reveal neuropil substructures in representatives of 22 annelid species(see Table 1). Additionally, immunostained sections of an arthropod brain
(Leucophaea maderae, Insecta) are presented for comparative purposes (Fig. 1). A 3D rendering of neuropils
encountered in the polychaete Lepidonotus clava is presented in Fig. 2. Figs. 3, 4, 5, and 6 summarize the occurrence and anatomy of distinctive cerebral neuropils
across the range of the investigated species. Results are
shown in exemplary horizontal sections of immunohistochemical preparations, along with schematic drawings

Heuer et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:13
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/13

Page 5 of 21

Table 1: List of investigated annelid species, including collection sites, ecological background information from sampling
localities and literature as well as number of investigated specimens.
Species

Habitat, depth, sampling
locality

Biology
(from Fauchald and Jumars
[62])

Investigated
specimens

Aphrodita aculeata
LINNAEUS, 1761

Underneath rocks, 5 m, Cala
Olivera, Ibiza (2006, 2007)

Slow-moving carnivore,
epibenthic

5

Arenicola marina
(LINNAEUS, 1758)

Infaunal, on tidal flats,
Königshafen, Sylt (2008)

Detritus feeder, burrowing

3

Branchiomma bombyx
(DALYELL, 1853)

On algae-incrusted rocks, 2-10
m, Cala Llenya, Cala Olivera,
Ibiza (2007)

Suspension feeder, tubedwelling

2

Eunice torquata
QUATREFAGES, 1865

In crevices and adjacent
detritus, 1-15 m, Cala Llenya,
Cala
Olivera, Cala Vedella, Penyal
de s'Aguila, Ibiza (2006, 2007)

Predator, free-living

8

Eupolymnia nebulosa
(MONTAGU, 1818)

Attached to bottom side of
rocks, 1-6 m, Cala Llenya, Cala
Olivera, Cala Vedella, Ibiza
(2006, 2007)

Detritus feeder, tube-dwelling

9

Harmothoe areolata
(GRUBE, 1860)

Underneath rocks, 1-6 m, Cala
Olivera, Penyal de s'Aguila,
Ibiza (2006, 2007)

Carnivorous, epibenthic

5

Hesione pantherina
RISSO, 1826

Underneath rocks, 1-10 m,
Cala Llenya, Cala Olivera, Ibiza
(2007)

Carnivorous, free-living

2

Hirudo medicinalis
LINNAEUS, 1758

Purchased at a local
pharmacy, Aachen

Hematophageous, free-living

3

Lepidonotus clava
(MONTAGU, 1808)

On algae-covered rocks, 1-10
m, Cala Olivera, Penyal de
s'Aguila, Ibiza (2006, 2007)

Carnivorous, epibenthic

6

Lumbricus terrestris
LINNAEUS, 1758

Purchased from a local
vendor, Aachen

Detritus feeder, burrowing

12

Lumbrineris cf. fragilis
(MÜLLER, 1776)

Infaunal, 90-200 m,
Raunefjord, Hjeltefjord,
Bergen (2008)

Carnivorous, epibenthic/
burrowing

3

Neoleanira tetragona
(OERSTED, 1845)

in silt, 90-200 m, Raunefjord,
Hjeltefjord, Bergen (2008)

Carnivorous, epibenthic

1

Heuer et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:13
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/13

Page 6 of 21

Table 1: List of investigated annelid species, including collection sites, ecological background information from sampling
localities and literature as well as number of investigated specimens. (Continued)
Nephtys hombergii
SAVIGNY, 1818

Infaunal, on tidal flats,
Königshafen, Sylt (2008);
in silt, 90-200 m, Raunefjord,
Hjeltefjord, Bergen (2008)

Carnivorous, motile burrower

2

Nereis diversicolor
(MÜLLER, 1776)

Infaunal, on tidal flats,
Königshafen, Sylt (2008).
Additional specimens, kindly
provided by J. von Döhren,
were
collected on the isle of
Helgoland (Germany)

Omnivorous, gallery-building

35

Odontosyllis cf. fulgurans
(AUDOUIN & MILNE-EDWARD,
1833)

On algae-incrusted rocks and
in silt samples, 90-200 m,
Raunefjord, Hjeltefjord,
Bergen (2008)

Carnivorous, epibenthic

4

Ophelia limacina
(RATHKE, 1843)

Infaunal, 3-12 m, Cala Llenya,
Ibiza (2006, 2007)

Detritus feeder

4

Phyllodoce maculata
(LINNAEUS, 1767)

Infaunal, on tidal flats,
Königshafen, Sylt 2008

Hunting predator/scavenger,
free-living

3

Pista cristata
(MÜLLER, 1776)

Attached to hard substrates
and in silt, 90-200 m,
Raunefjord, Hjeltefjord,
Bergen (2008)

Detritus feeder, tube-dwelling

2

Sabella penicillus
LINNAEUS, 1767

Clump of tubes recovered
from a silt sample, 90-200 m,
Raunefjord, Hjeltefjord,
Bergen (2008)

Suspension feeder, tubedwelling

4

Scalibregma inflatum
RATHKE, 1843

In silt, 90-200 m, Raunefjord,
Hjeltefjord, Bergen (2008)

Detritus feeder

5

Sthenelais cf. limicola
EHLERS, 1864

Infaunal, 3-12 m, Cala Llenya,
Ibiza (2007)

Predator, epibenthic

3

Thelepus cincinnatus
(FABRICIUS, 1780)

Attached to rocks and in silt,
90-200 m, Raunefjord,
Hjeltefjord, Bergen (2008)

Detritus feeder, tube-dwelling

1

Tomopteris helgolandica
(GREEFF, 1879)

Two specimens recovered
from a dredge sample,
Raunefjord, Hjeltefjord,
Bergen (2008)

Predator, pelagic

2

Heuer et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:13
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/13

Page 7 of 21

Figure 3 Neuroanatomy of annelid representatives as revealed by a combination of immunohistochemistry (red) and cell nuclei labeling
(blue). Schematic drawings depict a dorsal view of the head of the animal, with the brain outlined in red and clusters of small-diameter cells outlined
in blue. Immunostainings were produced by the following antisera: anti-serotonin (a, c, d), anti-FMRFamide (b). Arrowheads indicate a narrow neuropil band connecting both cerebral hemispheres in (a), lateral protuberances of the central neuropil encased in dense assemblies of minute cell somata in (b), and laterally arranged somata showing serotonin-immunoreactivity in (c). ec circumesophageal connective. Scale bars: 100 μm.

depicting characteristic neuroanatomical features for
each of the investigated species. Additional figure plates
present neuroanatomical similarities in closely related
species (Figs. 7, 8) as well as details on neuropil substructures (Figs. 9, 10, 11).

two populations of comparatively small cell bodies are
located bilaterally of the posterior part of the neuropil.
They form a pair of cone-shaped, laterally tapering aggregations that encase small protuberances of the central
neuropil.

Arenicola marina (Arenicolidae, Scolecida, Polychaeta)

Scalibregma inflatum (Scalibregmatidae, Scolecida,
Polychaeta)

The brain of the lugworm A. marina is formed by the
dorsal convergence of the paired circumesophageal connective. It consists of two fiber masses that are clearly
separated from each other and are only posteriorly connected by sparse fibers bundles (Fig. 3a). The brain does
not contain distinct subcompartments. Neuronal somata
reside dorsally and laterally of the fiber masses; conspicuous aggregations of small diameter cells are not apparent.
Ophelia limacina (Opheliidae, Scolecida, Polychaeta)

O. limacina is an infaunal substrate-feeding species with
a small, cone-shaped prostomium. The brain has an oval
to round shape and is situated between two cerebral eyes
(Fig. 3b). It does neither contain lobed neuropils nor any
other distinct subcompartments. Instead, serotonin- and
FMRF-immunoreactivity reveal the brain to consist of an
undifferentiated neuropil tangle that is surrounded by
medium to large-sized neuronal somata. Additionally,

In the sediment-dwelling species S. inflatum, the brain is
located in the middle of the T-shaped prostomium (Fig.
3c). It consists of a central neuropil that is dorsally and
laterally covered by neuronal somata. While numerous of
these somata exhibit FMRF-like immunoreactivity, serotonin immunoreactivity is restricted to a limited number
of cell bodies, most of which are located to both sides of
the brain at its anterior-posterior midline (Fig. 3c). The
central neuropil forms a compact fiber mass anteriorly,
which gradually tapers into two medially separated lobes
posteriorly. Distinct neuropil substructures are not distinguishable within the fibrous meshwork. Laterally of
the posterior lobes, loosely packed aggregations of small
cell bodies occupy the dorsal part of the prostomium. The
border of these cell clusters is diffuse and they are not
invaded by protrusions of the central neuropil, nor do
they surround any neuropil components.

Heuer et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:13
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/13

Page 8 of 21

Figure 4 Neuroanatomy of annelid representatives as revealed by a combination of immunohistochemistry (red) and cell nuclei labeling
(blue). Schematic drawings depict a dorsal view of the head of the animal, with the brain outlined in red and clusters of small-diameter cells outlined
in blue. Immunostainings were produced by the following antisera: anti-FMRFamide (a), anti-serotonin (b, c, d). The arrowhead points at the narrow
neuropil band connecting both hemispheres of the brain in S. penicillus. ey eye. Scale bars: 100 μm.

Eupolymnia nebulosa (Terebellidae, Canalipalpata,
Polychaeta)

The brain of the sedentary polychaete species E. nebulosa
is situated above the pharynx and has a ribbon-like shape
(Fig. 3d). It is confluent with - and hardly distinguishable
from - the circumesophageal connectives, thus forming a
ring-shaped neuronal mass around the pharynx (a similar
condition is observed in Thelepus cincinnatus, see Fig.
7c-h). The brain itself consists of a neuropil band, which
is dorsally and posteriorly covered by neuronal somata.
The neuropil band is formed by a meshwork of tangled
neurites. Immunoreactivity towards different antisera
reveals a distinct stratification within the neuropil band
(Fig. 7a, b), possibly reflecting functional subdivisions of
the brain.
Ribbon-shaped brains with a comparatively simple
architecture have also been observed in the terebelliform
polychaete species Pista cristata and Thelepus cincinnatus (Fig. 7c-h, Fig. 8a).
Sabella penicillus (Sabellidae, Canalipalpata, Polychaeta)

The feather duster worm S. penicillus is a tube-dwelling
filter feeder. The brain of this sedentary polychaete is
located at the base of the tentacle crown. It is composed
of two bilaterally arranged fiber masses that are dorsally
connected by a narrow neuropil band (Fig. 4a). The neuropil appears undifferentiated and contains no distinct

subcompartments. Neuronal somata cover the brain neuropil laterally and dorsally but do not form conspicuous
aggregations.
Similar neuroanatomical conditions are exhibited by
the closely related sabellid species Branchiomma bombyx
(Fig. 8b).
Tomopteris helgolandica (Tomopteridae, Aciculata,
Polychaeta)

In the pelagic predator T. helgolandica, the brain is situated between a pair of simple lens- eyes at a posterior
position in the prostomium (Fig. 4b). The brain has an
oval to rectangular shape and consists of an undifferentiated central neuropil which is covered by medium-sized
neuronal somata on its dorsal side. At the posterior margin of the brain, two roughly hemispherical aggregations
of small-diameter cell somata are discernable. These
globuli cell clusters surround small protrusions of the
central neuropil that are partly invaded by serotoninimmunoreactive fibers (Fig. 10d). There is no evidence
for lobed neuropils associated with the globuli cell aggregations within the central neuropil.
Nereis diversicolor (Nereididae, Aciculata, Polychaeta)

The neuroanatomy of N. diversicolor has already been
described in detail in an earlier account [25]. The brain
has a roughly trapezoid shape and is located between the

Heuer et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:13
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/13

Page 9 of 21

Figure 5 Neuroanatomy of annelid representatives as revealed by a combination of immunohistochemistry (red) and cell nuclei labeling
(blue). Schematic drawings depict a dorsal view of the head of the animal, with the brain outlined in red and clusters of small-diameter cells outlined
in blue. Immunostainings were produced by the following antisera: anti-serotonin (a, d), anti-FMRFamide (b, c). al anterior lobe, ec circumesophageal
connective, ey eye, pl posterior lobe. Scale bars: 100 μm.

two pairs of eyes at a posterior position in the prostomium (Fig. 4c). The most prominent structures in the
brain of N. diversicolor are two aggregations of globuli cell
somata that give rise to clearly demarcated mushroom
body neuropils (Fig. 1). They are situated at the dorsal,
anterior part of the brain and form a larger anterior and a
smaller posterior cluster. They surround the apical parts
of the mushroom body neuropil, which forms finger-like
protrusions within the globuli cell aggregation. Emanating ventrally from the globuli cells, the protrusions merge
into a massive stalk, which bends towards the center of
the brain to form two terminal lobes. Associated with the
mushroom body neuropils are two clusters of poorly distinguishable glomerular neuropils which receive sensory
input from the prostomial palps. The second distinctive
subcompartment in the brain of N. diversicolor is the
optic neuropil. Connecting the four eyes of the animal,
the dense neuropil resembles an 'H' with its vertical lines
bended outwards [compare [25]]. While its middle part is
divided into an anterior and a posterior layer, the optic
neuropil is otherwise devoid of neuroarchitectural substructures. Adjacent to the optic neuropil, histamine
immunoreactivity reveals an additional unpaired midline
neuropil consisting of a crescent-shaped, undifferentiated
fiber tangle (Fig. 11b). However, evidence for a possible
connectivity between this small, crescent-shaped neuropil and the optic neuropil is lacking.

Phyllodoce maculata (Phyllodocidae, Aciculata, Polychaeta)

The brain of the predatory and highly motile paddleworm P. maculata is situated between - and slightly anterior of - the two eyes of the animal (Fig. 4d). The dorsal
part of the brain comprises a dense tangle of neurites that
derive from peripherally arranged neuronal somata. Cell
nuclei labeled sections reveal two aggregations of comparatively small cell bodies anteriorly of the central neuropil. As the cell bodies form only a loose assembly, the
borders of the cell clusters appear rather diffuse. Ventrally, two thick stalk-like fiber-bundles emanate from the
globuli cell clusters and enter the brain (Fig. 10c). They
extend posteriorly and then, at the level of the eyes, bend
inwards. In bending towards the center of the brain, the
stalks appear to split into two parts. Poorly delineated
from the rest of the neuropil, these parts are possibly confluent with their contralateral counterparts.
Nephtys hombergii (Nephtyidae, Aciculata, Polychaeta)

The brain of the free-living, predatory polychaete N.
hombergii is displaced posteriorly and occupies a position
between the prostomium and peristomium. It has a
roughly trapezoid shape and is flanked by a pair of cerebral eyes posteriorly (Fig. 5a). The central part of the
brain comprises a largely undifferentiated neuropil which
gives rise to the circumesophageal connectives anteriolaterally. A pair of poorly delineated neuropil subcom-

Heuer et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:13
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/13

Page 10 of 21

Figure 6 Neuroanatomy of annelid representatives as revealed by a combination of immunohistochemistry (red) and cell nuclei labeling
(blue). Schematic drawings depict a dorsal view of the head of the animal, with the brain outlined in red and clusters of small-diameter cells outlined
in blue. Immunostainings were produced by the following antisera: anti-FMRFamide (a, b, d), anti-histamin (c). Arrowheads point at columnar fiber
elements in the anterior part of the central neuropil in H. medicinalis. ey eye. Scale bars: 100 μm.

partments is situated dorsally of the roots of the circumesophageal connectives (Fig. 10b). Barely discernable,
these two oval-shaped neuropil regions lie adjacent to
aggregations of small diameter cell bodies located at the
anterio-lateral borders of the neuropil. In contrast to the
neuropil regions, the globuli cell clusters are well defined
and exhibit a sharp boundary.
Eunice torquata (Eunicidae, Aciculata, Polychaeta)

In the carnivorous species E. torquata, the brain is
located at an anterior position in the prostomium. The
neuropil consists of a main fiber mass that is situated
between the eyes of the animal and two anterior lobes
lying in front of that fiber mass (Fig. 5b). Immunoreactivity towards FMRF-amide and histamine antisera is largely
restricted to the main part of the brain, with the anterior
lobes exhibiting only a comparatively weak signal. While
neurites in the main fiber mass form a tangled meshwork
for the most part, histamine as well as FMRF-like immunoreactivity reveal individual fibers to form an unpaired
midline neuropil (Fig. 11c). The midline neuropil is
slightly curved posteriorly and comprises distinct columnar components that connect two commissural fiber
bundles.
In E. toquata, a huge mass of densely assembled, minute cell bodies is situated in front of the brain. Dorsally,
these somata form an unpaired aggregation that is

divided into an anterior and a postior part. In contrast to
the anterior part, many cells of the posterior part exhibit
FMRF-like immunoreactivity. Proceeding ventrad, the
posterior part gradually diminishes, and the anterior part
separates to form bilaterally paired clusters that surround
the anterior lobes. Despite the presence of a large aggregation of minute cells, neither the main part of the brain,
nor the anterior lobes contain distinct subcompartments.
Lumbrineris cf.fragilis (Lumbrineridae, Aciculata,
Polychaeta)

The brain of the infaunal selective deposit feeder L. cf.
fragilis is situated at a posterior position in the coneshaped prostomium. It is composed of a main neuropil
and a set of large anterior and small posterior lobes (Fig.
5c). The cerebral neuropil is almost completely enveloped
by a cortex of small-diameter cell bodies. The densely
packed somata form confluent aggregations that surround the anterior lobes, the main neuropil, and the posterior lobes on all sides (Fig. 10f). They do, however, not
give rise to any distinctive neuropil substructures. Individual cell bodies in the surrounding cell cortex show
immunoreactivity withantisera directed against FMRF amide and serotonin. Immunopositive cell bodies were
observed to be associated with all three parts of the brain,
but were most numerous in the posterior lobes. Immunoreactivity within the neuropil was most pronounced in

Heuer et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:13
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/13

Page 11 of 21

Figure 7 Neuroarchitecture in terebellid polychaetes. (a, b) Horizontal sections through the brain of Eupolymnia nebulosa. While the ribbonshaped brain does not contain distinct neuropil compartments, an anterior-posterior stratification is revealed by FMRF-like (a) and histamine (b) immunoreactivity (anterior is towards the top of the picture). (c-h) Consecutive horizontal sections (proceeding ventrad in reading direction) showing
serotonin immunoreactivity in the brain of the terebellid polychaete Thelpus cincinnatus. Similar to the condition in E. nebulosa, the brain in this species
is confluent with the circumesophageal connectives, forming a ring-like band around the esophagus. Neuronal somata are located at the outer perimeter of the brain. Scale bars: 200 μm.

the central part of the brain, where commissural fiber
tracts and large parts of the neuropil were stained (Fig.
10f). Strong immunostaining could also be observed in
the posterior lobes. In contrast, antisera produced only
faint and scattered immunostainings in the anterior
lobes.

Odontosyllis cf. fulgurans (Syllidae, Aciculata, Polychaeta)

The brain of O. cf. fulgurans, a predator with a bioluminescent epitokous form, is situated in the anterior part of
the prostomium and is located between the eyes of the
animal (Fig. 5d). It comprises a triangular to diamondshaped fiber mass that appears largely undifferentiated

Heuer et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:13
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/13

Page 12 of 21

Figure 8 Neuroanatomy in four different polychaete species. (a) Horizontal section through the brain of the terebellid polychaete Pista cristata.
Serotonin immunoreactivity and cell nuclei labelings reveal a close resemblance to the neuroanatomical conditions observed in the terebellid species
E. nebulosa and T. cincinnatus. (b) Neuroanatomy of the brain in the sabellid polychaete Branchiomma bombyx as revealed by FMRF-like immunoreactivity. Similar to the condition in S. penicillus, the neuropil forms two fiber masses that are dorsally connected by a narrow neuropil band. Homogeneously distributed neuronal somata, some showing FMRF-like immunoreactivity, surround the brain. (c) FMRF-like immunoreactivity in horizontal
brain sections of Sthenelais cf. limicola and (d) Aphrodita aculeata. Nuclear markers reveal numerous tightly packed cell bodies (gc) that surround the
dorsal parts of mushroom body neuropils. Arrowheads: clusters of olfactory glomeruli. Scale bars: (a, c, d) 200 μm (b) 80 μm.

and contains no discernable subcompartments, as well as
peripherally arranged neuronal somata. Cell nuclei
labeled sections show two aggregations of minute cells in
each hemisphere. They form a wedge-shaped anterior
cluster between the eyes and the anteriorwall of the prostomium, and a posterior cluster situated laterally behind
the eyes (Fig. 10e). The anterior clusters encase small,
branching protuberances of the neuropil. In a similar
fashion, the neuropil also sends out extensions towards
the posterior clusters.
Hesione pantherina (Hesionidae, Aciculata, Polychaeta)

The brain of the carnivorous H. pantherina is situated
roughly in the middle of the prostomium and is flanked
by two pairs of eyes posteriorly (Fig. 6a, Fig. 9a-d). The

cerebral fiber massis well differentiated. Its dorsal part
contains two elaborate neuropils that are associated with
paired aggregations of minute cell bodies situated in front
of the anterior eyes (Fig. 9a, b). The neuropils have a
stem-like shape, formed by the fusion of several lateral
branches that converge towards the midline of the brain.
The lateral branches of the neuropil exhibit FMRF-like
immunoreactivity. FMRF-amide antiserum also produces
characteristic patterns in the rest of the dorsal fiber mass.
Ventrally, the cerebral fiber mass is divided into almost
completely separated hemispheres (Fig. 9c, d). The hemispheres are laterally and posteriorly surrounded by
densely assembled cell bodies. These aggregations appear
to be confluent with the dorsal globuli cell clusters and
give rise to distinct, converging fiber bundles that merge

Heuer et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:13
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/13

Page 13 of 21

Figure 9 Consecutive horizontal sections through the head of Hesione pantherina (proceeding ventrad from a-d). The overlay images show
FMRFamide-like immunoreactivity (yellow, left half) and autofluorescence images (red, right half) together with DAPI-labeled cell nuclei (blue). Immunostainings reveal intricate patterns in the dorsal part of the fiber mass (a, b). Paired aggregations of small globuli cells (gc) are situated in front of the
anterior eyes (ae) and give rise to stalk-like neuropils converging at the midline of the brain. While the central parts of these neuropils are nearly devoid
of immunostaining, scattered FMRFamide-like immunoreactivity can be observed in the peripheral parts (b). Ventrally, the globuli cell mass extends
posteriorly, surrounding the central fiber mass, which is now clearly separated into two hemispheres. Small spheroid subcompartments, reminiscent
of olfactory glomeruli, can be discerned in the posterior region of each hemisphere (arrowheads). Autofluorescence also reveals a striation of the
nervous tissue in the ventral part of the brain. ec circumesophageal connective, p palps, pa prostomial antennae, pe posterior eyes. Scale bar: 80 μm.

with the main fiber mass. Small clusters of poorly demarcated spheroidal compartments are barely distinguishable
in the posterior region of the fiber mass (Fig. 9c). The
ventral part of the fiber mass also shows a slight striation
(Fig. 9d).

Harmothoe areolata (Polynoidae, Aciculata, Polychaeta)

The brain of the predatory scaleworm H. areolata is
dominated by a pair of huge mushroom bodies (Fig. 6b).
A detailed morphological description of these neuropils
has already been provided elsewhere [see [28]]. Emerging
from two large aggregations of small diameter globuli

Heuer et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:13
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/13

Page 14 of 21

Figure 10 Overlay images combining autofluorescence (red), immunoreactivity (yellow; antiserum directed against FMRFamide in a, b, f,
and against serotonin in c, d, e) and nuclear labeling (blue) to reveal mushroom body neuropils in (a) Harmothoe areolata (b) Nepthys
hombergii (c) Phyllodoce maculata (d) Tomopteris helgolandica and (e) Odontosyllis cf. fulgurans. The cell cortex of the brain of Lumbrineris cf.
fragilis (f) is not considered indicative of mushroom body neuropils due to the homogeneous distribution of somata and the lack of a distinctive associated neuropil compartment. al anterior lobe, ey eye, gc globuli cells, og olfactory glomeruli, pl posterior lobe, Arrowheads mark the poorly delineated neuropil boundary in N. hombergii, dashed lines mark the boundaries of globuli cell aggregations. Arrow root of the circumesophageal
connective. Scale bars: 80 μm.

Heuer et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:13
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/13

Page 15 of 21

Figure 11 Comparison of unpaired midline neuropils in an arthropod and various polychaete worms. (a) Serotonin immunoreactivity in the
brain of the hexapod Leucophaea maderae. The central body of the arthropod brain is a characteristic unpaired midline neuropil comprising columnar
and tangential components. (b) Histamine immunoreactivity reveals a small, crescent-shaped neuropil in the brain of Nereis diversicolor. (c) FMRFamide-like immunoreactivity shows a neuropil composed of tangential and columnar elements in the brain of the polychaete Eunice torquata. Tangential fibers projecting from laterally arranged cell bodies give rise to crescent-shaped fiber tangles in the brain of Harmothoe areolata (d, FMRFamide
immunoreactivity) and Lepidonotus clava (e, serotonin immunoreactivity). Scale bars: 80 μm.

cells located dorsally in the prostomium, each mushroom
body neuropil forms a well-defined lobe anteriorly and
several median extensions posteriorly. The latter establish a close connection not only with the central neuropil
but also with a clearly delineated cluster of glomeruli
lying in the ventro-posterior part of the brain. A second
group of glomeruli is situated within the anterior lobe of
the mushroom bodies where it most likely receives input
from the palpal nerve. The central neuropil itself consists
of a largely undifferentiated meshwork of fibers. How-

ever, FMRF-amide-like immunoreactivity reveals a small,
crescent-shaped neuropil concealed within the meshwork. This unpaired, poorly delineated neuropil is
formed by several neurites that converge at the brain's
midline.
Large and well-defined mushroom bodies showing a
similar organization have also been observed in the
polynoid representatives Lepidonotus clava (Fig. 2) and
Sthenelais cf. limicolaas well as in the aphroditid species
Aphrodita aculeata and Neoleanira tetragona. Further

Heuer et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:13
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/13

neuroarchitectural similarities among scaleworm species
include the presence of glomerular clusters (Fig. 2, Fig.
10a) and aggregations of fibers forming unpaired midline
neuropils (Fig. 2, Fig. 11d, e).
Lumbricus terrestris (Lumbricidae, Oligochaeta, Clitellata)

The brain of the substrate feeding earthworm L. terrestris
is dislocated posteriorly and lies on top of the esophagus
in the third body segment. It is bilobed in shape, with
each of the hemispheres sending out a prostomial nerve
anteriorly (Fig. 6c). The brain is composed of a central
neuropil and a dense cortex of neuronal somata that are
not forming conspicuous clusters. The central fiber mass
does not contain discernable neuropil subcompartments.
Hirudo medicinalis (Hirudinidae, Hirudinea, Clitellata)

The brain of the parasitic leech H. medicinalisis situated
posteriorly to the medi an jaw in the fifth body segment
(Fig. 6d). The brain is comparatively small and of a ribbon-like shape. Its central fiber mass is weakly differentiated into an anterior stratum comprising mostly
columnar fiber elements and a posterior stratum comprising transverse fiber bundles. Neuronal cell somata are
comparatively large and are arranged homogeneously
around the cerebral neuropil. Dense aggregations of
small-diameter neuronal somata are lacking and the central fiber mass is devoid of discernable substructures.
Leucophaea maderae (Blaberidae, Dictyoptera, Insecta)

The neuroanatomy of the cockroach L. maderae largely
corresponds to the ground pattern found in pterygote
insects [for an overview see e.g. [30,31]]. Distinctive neuropils of the brain are the paired mushroom bodies (Fig.
1a) and the unpaired central body (Fig. 9a). Immunoreactivity towards a Horseradish-peroxidase antiserum
reveals the principal organization of the mushroom body
neuropils: Aggregations of tightly assembled globuli cell
somata(i n insects termed Kenyon cells) give rise to a
neuropil that shows a characteristic subdivision into a
dorsal calyx region, embedded within the globuli cell
bodies, a stalk-like peduncle, and an arrangement of terminal lobes.
The central body is an unpaired neuropil that spans the
midline of the brain. It is part of the central complex, an
assembly of interconnected neuropils situated roughly at
the center of the brain. Within the central body, neurites
are arranged in distinctive columnar and tangential fiber
bundles.

Discussion
The current study presents data obtained from immunohistochemically stained preparations of representatives of
more than 20 annelid taxa. Antisera against the nearubiquitous neuroactive substances serotonin, FMRFamide, and histamine were used in combination with a

Page 16 of 21

nuclear marker to label limited subsets of neurons in the
brain. Immunohistochemistry did not aim at identifying
the transmitter composition of the brain but at revealing
the presence and architecture of higher cerebral centers.
The most prominent neuropil structures to be encountered in the annelid brain are the paired mushroom bodies that occur in a number of polychaete representatives.
Mushroom bodies could in some cases be demonstrated
to be closely associated with clusters of spheroid neuropils reminiscent of arthropod olfactory glomeruli. Less
distinctive subcompartments of the annelid brain are
unpaired midline neuropils which have been encountered
in several polychaete representatives and which bear a
remote resemblance to similar components in the arthropod brain.
Mushroom bodies

Mushroom bodies are lobed neuropils that are formed by
the processes of thousands of small-diameter globuli cells
located dorsally in the invertebrate central nervous system [32]. In arthropods, mushroom bodies are usually
easily recognizable not only due to their characteristic
shape [33], but also due to the fact that glial sheaths
clearly delineate the neuropil from the surrounding neuronal tissue [34]. Incontrast to insects, the absence of cell
nuclei dispersed along the borders of polychaete mushroom body neuropils (Figs. 1, 9, 10) indicates a lack of
likewise well-developed glial boundaries in the brain.
Thus, borders of cerebral subcompartments like the
mushroom bodies are often only barely perceptible by
differences in tissue density and structure (Figs. 9, 10).
Among the investigated species, clearly demarcated
mushroom bodies have been observed in Nereis diversicolor and the scale worm species Harmothoe areolata,
Lepidonotus clava, Sthenelais cf. limicola, and Aphrodita
aculeata. In these species, densely assembled globuli cells
form well-defined aggregations in the dorsal part of the
brain, which give rise to lobed neuropils that are clearly
distinguishable within the cerebral fiber mass (Fig. 8c, d,
Fig. 10a).
Elaborate mushroom bodies are also present in the
brain of Hesione pantherina, but show a slightly different
organization. They also originate from dorsal aggregations of globuli cells, but instead of forming an arrangement of terminal lobes, the stem-like neuropils of both
hemispheres appear to be contiguous, forming a continuum across the midline of the brain (Fig. 8b). This condition bears resemblance to the contiguity of mushroom
bodies that is observed in chelicerates and onychophorans [35].
Mushroom body neuropils are less conspicuous in
other polychaete species. The dorsal part of the brain of
Nephtys hombergii contains well-defined globuli cell clusters, but the associated neuropils are only weakly demar-

Heuer et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:13
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/13

cated and barely discernable from the surrounding fiber
mass (Fig. 10b). The borders of the globuli cell clusters in
Phyllodoce maculata appear somewhat diffuse due to the
loose assembly of the cell bodies. The boundaries of the
stalk-like neuropils that emanate from the globuli cell
clusters are also just faintly delineated and become obliterated as the neuropils of both sides converge towards the
midline of the brain (Fig. 10c), so that a contiguous mushroom body organization in this species could not be
ascertained.
In other polychaetes, lobed neuropil subcompartments
are not discernable at all, although conspicuous clusters
of small-diameter cells - usually indicative of mushroom
bodies - are present. Odontosyllis cf. fulgurans, Tomopteris helgolandica, and the scolecid species Ophelia
limacina all exhibit clusters of minute cell bodies but lack
distinctive neuropils associated with them. Instead, the
cell somata assemblies surround protuberances of the
cerebral neuropil that extend into the core of the clusters.
The protuberances can be small and undifferentiated, as
observed in T. helgolandica (Fig. 10d) and O. limacina
(Fig. 3b), or can show minor branching patterns, as evident in the anterior cluster of O. cf. fulgurans(Fig. 10e).
The occurrence of two completely separated cell clusters,
situated anteriorly and posteriorly in each hemisphere, is
an exceptional characteristic of the brain of O. cf. fulgurans. T. helgolandica and O. limacina exhibit only a single
cell clusters per hemisphere, situated at a posterior position in the brain. The posterior location of these presumptive globuli cell clusters, as well as the apparent lack
of associated neuropil subcompartments within the main
fiber mass of the brain must be addressed as a possible
pitfall in the identification of mushroom bodies in these
species. With respect to the lack of a distinct neuropil, the
observed structures might be interpreted as primordial,
poorly differentiated mushroom bodies, similar to the
mushroom body-like structures that have been described
in polyclad platyhelminthes [32,36-38]. However, contrary to the condition in T. helgolandica and O. limacina,
the globuli cells in platyhelminthes are reported to reside
at the anterior-lateral border of the brain. Given the lack
of a general, specific marker for globuli cells [39], tests for
a possible immunoreactivity of the globuli-like cells
against taurine, aspartate, and glutamate might provide a
means to clarify the true identity of these neural structures in the polychaetes. In insects, antibodies directed
against these neuroactive amino acids have been shown
to produce immunostaining in specific subpopulations of
globuli cells [40]. However, preliminary studies employing taurine-antisera on vibratome sections of N. diversicolor generate d only diffuse and probably unspecific
staining in the mushroom bodies (unpublished observation). Thus, evidence for the presence of mushroom bod-

Page 17 of 21

ies in O. cf. fulgurans. T. helgolandica and O. limacina
remains inconclusive so far.
A specific marker for globuli cells would also be beneficial for a closer investigation of the dense cell body
assemblies that have been observed in two more polychaete taxa, Eunice torquata and Lumbrineris cf. fragilis
(Fig 5b, c, Fig. 10f). In these species, minute cells show a
significantly different distribution than in other polychaete representatives. The cell aggregations are not
restricted to comparatively small regions of the brain but
form a single mass that surrounds the anterior part of the
cerebral fiber mass in E. torquata, and in L. cf. fragilis
extends to encase the fiber mass almost completely. Due
to their predominant distribution and the absence of distinctive neuropils within the brain, the cell clusters cannot be regarded as indicative of the presence of
mushroom body-like neuropils in these species at the
present state.
Neuroanatomical analyses provided no evidence for the
occurrence of mushroom body neuropils in Arenicola
marina, the terebellid species Eupolymnia nebulosa,
Pista cristata, and Telephus cincinnatus, the sabellid species Branchiomma bombyx and Sabella penicillus, as well
as in the clitellate representatives Hirudo medicinalis and
Lumbricus terrestris.
Detailed investigations in N. diversicolor, H. areolata,
and L. clava have shown that mushroom bodies in these
species share many neuroarchitectural similarities with
their arthropod namesakes [25,28]. Recently, such anatomy-derived homology assessments have been backed up
by developmental studies investigating gene expression
patterns in larvae of the nereid polychaete Platynereis
dumerilii [27]. The brain of adult P. dumerilii contains
mushroom body neuropils that are strikingly similar to
those of N. diversicolor. During ontogeny, the mushroom
body anlagen of P. dumerilii are observed to express the
same combination of genes that is characteristic for the
developing mushroom bodies of Drosophila melanogaster, namely dachshund (Dach), pax6, brain factor 1
(BF1), and seven up (Svp) in the absence of eyes absent
(Eya) and sine oculis (So). The investigation of additional
genes reported to be expressed in the mushroom bodies
of D. melanogaster reveals further similarities in the
'molecular fingerprint' of the mushroom bodies. In light
of the 'new animal phylogeny' [41], these studies provide
independent and therefore significant support for the
homology of globuli cells that constitute mushroom bodies in annelids and arthropods. If true, and mushroom
bodies in widely separated phyla are indeed homologous
and not the product of a purely convergent evolution [see
[42]], they probably constitute ancient features of the
bilaterian brain.

Heuer et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:13
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/13

Olfactory glomeruli

Olfactory glomeruli are spheroidal neuropils that represent first order integration centres for odour information
[43]. Usually occurring in clusters, such neuropils have
been described in arthropods, molluscs, and vertebrates
[44]. The occurrence of olfactory glomeruli has also been
reported for the polychaete species Arctonoe vittata
GRUBE, 1855 and Nereis vexillosa GRUBE, 1851, where
they relay information to mushroom body neuropils [32].
The observations of the current study are largely in accordance with these descriptions, as olfactory glomeruli
could be identified in nereid Nereis diversicolor and the
scale worm species Harmothoe areolata, Lepidonotus
clava, and Aphrodita aculeata. Furthermore, small globular subcompartments possibly representing olfactory
glomeruli were also discovered in the brain of Hesione
pantherina (Fig. 9c). Considering that in arthropods,
olfactory glomeruli provide the predominant sensory
input to the mushroom bodies [32], it is hardly surprising
that the occurrence of olfactory glomeruli in the polychaete brain coincides with the presence of well-developed mushroom bodies. However, just like the
mushroom body neuropils, olfactory glomeruli were
observed to show varying degrees of differentiation
between different species. The most pronounced glomerular clusters were observed in H. areolata, while the
glomeruli in L. clava and A. aculeata were less clearly
demarcated. In N. diversicolor, the presence of olfactory
glomeruli could only be confirmed by retrograde tracing
experiments (unpublished observation). Thus, the occurrence of poorly differentiated olfactory glomeruli in the
brain of polychaetes that possess equally poorly differentiated mushroom bodies (e.g. Nephtys hombergii) cannot
be ruled out. Moreover, the possibility of a direct innervation of the mushroom bodies, as demonstrated for N.
diversicolor [25], provides an alternative pathway for the
transmission of odor information to the mushroom body
neuropils that might also be utilized in other polychaete
species.
The occurrence of two separate clusters of olfactory
glomeruli in each brain hemisphere of H. areolata [compare [28]] is an exceptional neuroarchitectural condition
not observed in any other of the investigated species. The
discovery of olfactory glomeruli recieveing terminals of
the palpal nerve and residing in close proximity to the
mushroom body peduncle in N. diversicolor (unpublished
observation) are reminiscent of the arrangement of the
anterior glomerular cluster in H. areolata. This gives rise
to speculations about the sensory input to the second,
posteriorly located glomerular cluster in H. areolata. It
seems conceivable that the posterior glomeruli are also
involved in the processing of olfactory cues, possibly
receiving chemosensory input from the nuchal organs situated at the posterior margin of the prostomium [45] and

Page 18 of 21

relaying information to the mushroom bodies. However,
our immunostainings did not provide data to confirm
such a pathway.
Unpaired midline neuropils

In this account, the general term 'unpaired midline neuropil' is applied to hitherto unspecified neuropils that
span the midsagittal plane of the brain; the term does not
imply homology between individual unpaired midline
neuropils encountered in different species.
Unpaired midline neuropils have been observed in only
a limited number of the investigated annelid species (Fig.
11). This might well be due to the fact that these cerebral
substructures - in contrast to arthropod midline neuropils, such as the tetraconate central body or the chelicerate arcuate body - do not show definite boundaries in the
form of glial sheaths. Instead, the midline neuropils were
found to be tightly interwoven with the surrounding fiber
mass and were only distinguishable if the neuropil
showed pronounced immunoreactivity towards the
applied antiserum. Unpaired midline neuropils occurred
only in polychaete representatives and exhibited different
degrees of differentiation. The simplest organization was
encountered in Nereis diversicolor, where the unpaired
midline neuropil consists of a small, crescent-shaped
fiber tangle with no apparent internal differentiation (Fig.
11b). A more complex organization was observed in the
unpaired midline neuropil of Eunice torquata, which
comprises commissural elements that are linked by an
arrangement of discrete fiber bundles (Fig. 11c). The
unpaired midline neuropils in the polynoid species Harmothoe areolata and Lepidonotus clava are situated in the
ventral part of the brain and can be considered homologous due to their architectural commonalities. The neuropils consist of fiber tangles that comprise ramifications
of neurites that extend along the lateral axis of the brain,
forming characteristic intersections (Fig. 11d, e). Their
neuronal somata are located in two groups on both sides
of the brain. In L. clava, additional fibers could be
observed to enter the neuropil perpendicularly (Fig. 11e).
Among the unpaired midline neuropils of the polychaete brain, those observed in L. clava and E. torquata
bear faint resemblance to midline neuropils of the arthropod brain. The perpendicular arrangement of neurite
bundles, particularly in E. torquata, is reminiscent of the
tangential and columnar organization of the central body
in tetraconates (Fig. 11a) or the arcuate body in chelicerates. However, in the polychaetes, the fiber bundles do
not appear to form distinct layers or the chiasmic patterns that are characteristic for unpaired components in
the arthropod central nervous system [35]. Furthermore,
the specific connectivities of these neuropils to other
parts of the polychaete brain still remain inconclusive,

Heuer et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:13
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/13

impeding attempts at homologizing these structures with
unpaired midline neuropils in arthropods.
Evolution of annelid brain complexity

For lack of a well-resolved and robust annelid phylogeny,
genera were grouped according to the cladistic analysis
provided by Rouse and Fauchald [10]. Although recent
molecular studies have demonstrated that the major
clades proposed by Rouse and Fauchald cannot be
regarded as monophyletic groupings [4,14], the provisional classification of the investigated species into Clitellata, Scolecida, Canalipalpata, and Aciculata serves to
show that the occurrence of mushroom bodies is largely
restricted to aciculate representatives. Outside Aciculata,
conspicuous cell clusters possibly indicating the presence
of mushroom body neuropils were only observed in the
scolecid genus Ophelia. However, the similar cell clusters
in the closely related Scalibregma species were not interpreted as mushroom bodies due to the lack of a core neuropil, discouraging the notion that the structures in
Ophelia species indeed represent mushroom body neuropils.
Aciculata retains the highest support among the clades
proposed by Rouse and Fauchald [4,10,14], containing
most of the species that had formerly been united in the
grouping 'Errantia'. The presence of mushroom bodies in
errant polychaetes - characterized by a motile, often
predatory or scavenging lifestyle and equipped with a
variety of well-developed sensory organs - seems understandable in light of the presumptive function of these
brain centers. Among arthropods, mushroom bodies are
best investigated in insects, where they are generally
assumed to act as integrative brain centers that play a cardinal role in olfactory processing and spatial, associative,
and context-dependent learning and memory [42,46].
Commonalities in the neuroarchitectural organization
and integration of annelid and arthropod mushroom
bodies point towards a similar function of these neuropils
in the brain of aciculate polychaetes. It is easily imaginable how such cognitive abilities could translate into an
evolutionary advantage in free-living animals that have to
adapt their behavior to changing environmental
demands. For example, learning, memory formation, and
decision-making have been shown to correlate positively
with fitness by increasing foraging success [47] and
growth rate [48] in insects. In terms of mushroom body
morphology, comparative neuroanatomical studies in
beetles have revealed neuropil structure to be linked with
the evolution of different feeding ecologies, as generalist
feeders usually display larger and more complex mushroom bodies than specialist feeders [33]. In other insects,
mushroom body size has been demonstrated to correlate
positively with learning abilities and to be influenced by
experience [49]. These studies from arthropods indicate

Page 19 of 21

that mushroom bodies could be of a similar adaptive
value in coordinating prey finding, predator avoidance,
mate choice, and other behaviors in errant polychaetes.
However, cognitive abilities come at a price, since information processing and storing, as well as the development and maintenance of neural structures involved in
learning and memory, are energetically costly [50-52].
The evolutionary tradeoff between information processing capacity and other fitness-related traits [51,52] might
provide an explanation for the relatively simple neuroanatomy and the lack of mushroom bodies observed in
other polychaetes, as well as in clitellate representatives.
In taxa living in comparatively consistent environments,
the fitness gain associated with learning and memory
abilities can be expected to become negligible in relation
to the costs involved in building and maintaining a suitably complex nervous system. This notion finds further
support in the apparent dispensability of elaborate sensory structures (e.g. eyes, palps, antennae, cirri, nuchal
organs) in most sedentary and infaunal annelid species.
Thus, the relatively simple neuroarchitecture observed in
infaunal/sedentary annelids with a detritus/suspension
feeding ecology can probably be attributed to selective
pressures that do not favor the evolution of complex
brains.
However, the varying grades of cerebral complexity
observed in different annelids give rise to the question
whether the simple neuroarchitecture and the lack of
mushroom bodies in non-aciculate annelids is to be interpreted as an ancient evolutionary trait, or rather as a
result of a secondary reduction in complexity? In keeping
with the traditional view of animal evolution, as a gradual
progress from simple to ever more complex forms, annelid mushroom bodies could intuitively be interpreted as a
derived, unifying feature of aciculate polychaetes. However, one of the central implications of the 'new animal
phylogeny' is that metazoan evolution can no longer be
regarded as a gradual succession of increasingly complex
forms and that secondary simplifications and reversals
are probably far more wide-spread than formerly
thought.
Regressive changes in neural complexity are commonly
attributed to a narrowing of the ecological niche in a
monotonous and extremely simplified environment and a
cessation of mobile life [53], and can also be observed in
sessile, semi-sessile, and parasitic forms of other taxa
[54]. The nervous system in none-parasitic cirripedes, for
example, is much simpler than that of free-swimming
Crustacea, lacking a distinctive tripartition and comprising only an estimated 200 neurons in Balanus nubilus[55]. However, the presence of a more elaborate
central nervous system in the barnacle cypris larva shows
that the simple nervous system of the adult form results
from a partly neural degeneration after settlement, and

Heuer et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:13
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/13

illustrates the need for coordinating a response to settlement cues in the vagile form [56,57]. Similarly, the nervous system of the highly derived, parasitic rhizocephalic
cirripeds is largely reduced. Comparable trends can also
be observed in bivalve molluscs, in brachiopods, and in
parasitic cestodes, illustrating that comparatively simple
neuroarchitectures do not necessarily reflect ancestral
conditions.
The problem of dealing with secondary character losses
is also reflected in the cladistic analysis of Rouse and Fauchald [10], which placed Clitellata at a basal position in
the annelid radiation - an inference that was brought
about by the extensive lack of morphological structures in
clitellates (e.g. palps, nuchal organs, parapodia, etc.) and
the indiscriminative 'absent/present' coding in the character matrix [11,13]. In contrast, recent molecular studies
[4,14] suggest that clitellates are derived polychaetes,
which would render the Polychaeta paraphyletic. However, these studies have also not been able to provide a
robust and convincing resolution for the root of the annelid radiation, proposing a basal position of chaetopterids,
magelonids, and/or oweniids. A different approach in the
quest to identify the most basal annelid taxa lies in outlining evolutionary scenarios to characterize the ground
pattern of annelids on the basis of morpho-functional
considerations [13,58,59]. Such studies propose that the
annelid stem species was a marine organism [13] with a
homonomously segmented body, biramous parapodia,
pygidial cirri, and a large prostomium with palps and
antennae [59]. Among recent annelids, this organization
largely corresponds to the bauplan of errant polychaetes.
It thus appears reasonable to attribute the simple neuroarchitecture and the prevalent lack of mushroom bodies in non-aciculate annelids to widespread secondary
reductions in cerebral complexity, and to regard aciculate
neuroanatomy as referring to the ancestral annelid condition. The presence of mushroom bodies is therefore
probably an ancestral trait in annelids, which has been
retained in aciculate polychaetes but has been lost in
most other annelid taxa - a notion that is also in agreement with the argument presented in the previous paragraph. In this light, the tightly assembled cell somata
observed in Ophelia might represent vestiges of largely
reduced mushroom bodies. Though no neuroanatomical
evidence for mushroom bodies could be detected in the
investigated sedentary species, reports of mushroom
bodies in Serpula [21] and in another sabellid (Strausfeld,
personal communication) indicate that mushroom bodies
have also been retained in some sedentary polychaete
species.
Within aciculate polychaetes, evolutionary trajectories
of mushroom body neuropils remain enigmatic. Varying
grades of mushroom body differentiation in different species have led early authors to propose that polychaete

Page 20 of 21

mushroom bodies evolved from simple to increasingly
complex structures, culminating in the elaborate neuropils of polynoid polychaetes [21,22]. In the current study,
polynoid polychaetes showed indeed the most complex
neuroanatomy of all species investigated. However, in
light of the arguments presented above, caution seems
warranted in inferring phylogenetic implications from
this observation. The largest and most elaborate mushroom bodies to be found in arthropods occur in the
horseshoe crab Limulus polyphemus [60,61] - commonly
regarded as a living fossil.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors' contributions
CMH and RL conceived this study. CMH took the lead in the immunohistochemical stainings, morphological analysis, and writing. CHGM and CT organized collection trips to Ibiza (Spain) and Bergen (Norway), respectively, and
aided in collecting and determining polychaete specimens. CMH, CHGM, CT,
and RL all contributed to writing the manuscript. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript.
Acknowledgements
C. M. H. and R. L. gratefully acknowledge the German Science Foundation
(DFG) for funding this work as part of the priority program 'SPP 1174 - Deep
Metazoan Phylogeny'. Thanks go to the staff of Espeland Marine Biological Station (Bergen, Norway) and the crew of the R.V. Hans Brattström (University of
Bergen/IMR).
Author Details
1Institute for Biology II, RWTH Aachen, Department of Developmental Biology
and Morphology of Animals, D-52056 Aachen, Germany, 2Ernst -Moritz-ArndtUniversität Greifswald, Zoologisches Institut, Cytologie und Evolutionsbiologie,
Johann-Sebastian-Bach-Straße 11/12, D-17487 Greifswald, Germany and
3University of Bergen, Department of Biolog y, Thormøhlensgate 53b, 5008
Bergen, Norway
Received: 15 February 2010 Accepted: 4 May 2010
Published: 4 May 2010
© 2010 Heuer et al; licensee http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/13
This is anin is available from:BioMed Central Ltd.the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
Frontiers Open Access article distributed under
article Zoology 2010, 7:13

References
1. Brusca RC, Brusca GJ: Invertebrates 2nd edition. Sunderland, MA: Sinauer
Associates, Inc; 2003.
2. McHugh D: Molecular phylogeny of the Annelida. Can J Zool 2000,
78:1873-1884.
3. Rouse GW, Pleijel F, Edgecombe G, Worsaae K, Giribet G: First combined
molecular and morphological phylogenetic analyses of Annelida. J
Morphol 2008, 269(12):1462.
4. Zrzavý J, Říha P, Piálek L, Janouškovec J: Phylogeny of Annelida
(Lophotrochozoa): total-evidence analysis of morphology and six
genes. BMC Evol Biol 2009, 9:189.
5. Martin P: On the origin of the Hirudinea and the demise of the
Oligochaeta. Proc R Soc Lond B 2001, 268:1089-1098.
6. Clark RB: Systematics and phylogeny: Annelida, Echiura, Sipuncula. In
Chemical zoology Annelida, Echiura, Sipuncula Volume 4. Edited by: Florkin
M, Scheer BT. New York: Academic Press; 1969:1-68.
7. Fauchald K, Rouse GW: Polychaete systematics: past and present. Zool
Scripta 1997, 26(2):71-138.
8. de Quatrefages A: Histoire naturelle des Annelés marins et d'eau douce Paris:
Librarie Encyclopédique de Roret; 1866.
9. Day JH: A monograph on the Polychaeta of Southern Africa. In Volume
British Museum (Natural History) Publication 656 London: British Museum
(Natural History); 1967:1-878.
10. Rouse GW, Fauchald K: Cladistics and polychaetes. Zool Scripta 1997,
26(2):139-204.
11. Rouse GW, Fauchald K: Recent views on the status, delineation and
classification of the Annelida. Amer Zool 1998, 38:953-964.

Heuer et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:13
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/13

12. Almeida WO, Christoffersen ML, Amorim DS, Garraffoni ARS, Silva GS:
Polychaeta, Annelida, and Articulata are not monophyletic:
articulating the Metameria (Metazoa, Coelomata). Rev Bras Zool 2003,
20(1):23-57.
13. Bartolomaeus T, Purschke G, Hausen H: Polychaete phylogeny based on
morphological data - a comparison of current attempts. Hydrobiologia
2005, 535/536:341-356.
14. Struck TH, Schult N, Kusen T, Hickman E, Bleidorn C, McHugh D, Halanych
KM: Annelid phylogeny and the status of Sipuncula and Echiura. BMC
Evol Biol 2007, 7:57.
15. Hessling R: Novel aspects of the nervous system of Bonellia viridis
(Echiura) revealed by the combination of immunohistochemistry,
confocal laser-scanning microscopy and three-dimensional
reconstruction. Hydrobiologia 2003, 496:225-239.
16. Wanninger A, Koop D, Bromham L, Noonan E, Degnan BM: Nervous and
muscle system development in Phascolion strombus (Sipuncula). Dev
Genes Evol 2005, 215:509-518.
17. Kristof A, Wollesen T, Wanninger A: Segmental mode of neural
patterning in Sipuncula. Current Biology 2008, 18(15):1129-1132.
18. Orrhage L, Müller MCM: Morphology of the nervous system of
Polychaeta (Annelida). Hydrobiologia 2005, 535/536:79-111.
19. Zanol J, Fauchald K: Integrative approach using cLSM, SEM, and
molecular data to understand the phylogeny of the family Eunicidae
(Bristle Worms, Polychaetes, Annelida). J Morphol 2008, 269(12):1465.
20. Holmgren N: Zur vergleichenden Anatomie des Gehirns von
Polychaeten, Onychophoren, Xiphosuren, Arachniden, Crustaceen,
Myriapoden und Insekten. Kungl Svenska Vetenskaps Handl 1916,
56:1-315.
21. Hanström B: Untersuchungen über die relative Größe der
Gehirnzentren verschiedener Arthropoden unter Berücksichtigung der
Lebensweise. Z Zellforsch Mikrosk Anat 1927, 7:135-190.
22. Hanström B: Vergleichende Anatomie des Nervensystems der wirbellosen
Tiere unter Berücksichtigung seiner Funktion Berlin, Heidelberg, New York:
Julias Springer; 1928.
23. Aguinaldo AM, Turbeville JM, Linford LS, Rivera MC, Garey JR, Raff RA, Lake
JA: Evidence for a clade of nematodes, arthropods and other moulting
animals. Nature 1997, 387:489-493.
24. Halanych KM, Bacheller JD, Aguinaldo AM, Liva SM, Hillis DM, Lake JA:
Evidence from 18S ribosomal DNA that the lophophorates are
protostome animals. Science 1995, 267(5204):1641-1643.
25. Heuer CM, Loesel R: Immunofluorescence analysis of the internal brain
anatomy of Nereis diversicolor (Polychaeta, Annelida). Cell Tissue Res
2008, 331:713-724.
26. Loesel R, Heuer CM: The mushroom bodies - prominent brain centers of
arthropods and annelids with enigmatic evolutionary origin. Acta Zool
2010, 91:29-34.
27. Tomer R: The evolution of mushroom body and telencephalic cell
types, studied by single cell expression profiling of Platynereis dumerilii
larvae. PhD thesis 2009 [http://www.ub.uni-heidelberg.de/archiv/9582].
University of Heidelberg retrieved (02.10.2009)
28. Heuer CM, Loesel R: Three-dimensional reconstruction of mushroom
body neuropils in the polychaete species Nereis diversicolor and
Harmothoe areolata (Phyllodocida, Annelida). Zoomorphology 2009,
128(3):219-226.
29. Rodriguez J, Deinhard F: Preparation of a semipermanent mounting
medium for fluorescent antibody studies. Virology 1960, 12:316-7.
30. Strausfeld NJ: Atlas of an insect brain Heidelberg: Springer; 1976.
31. Homberg U: Distribution of neurotransmitters in the insect brain Stuttgart:
Fischer; 1994.
32. Strausfeld NJ, Hansen L, Li Y, Gomez RS, Ito K: Evolution, discovery, and
interpretation of arthropod mushroom bodies. Learn Mem 1998,
5:11-37.
33. Farris SM, Roberts NS: Coevolution of generalist feeding ecologies and
gyrencephalic mushroom bodies in insects. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005,
102:17394-17399.
34. Hähnlein I, Bicker G: Morphology of neuroglia in the antennal lobe and
mushroom bodies of the brain of the honeybee. J Comp Neurol 1996,
367:235-245.
35. Strausfeld NJ, Strausfeld CM, Loesel R, Rowell D, Stowe S: Arthropod
phylogeny: onychophoran brain organization suggests an archaic
relationship with a chelicerate stem lineage. Proc R Soc Lond B 2006,
273:1857-1866.

Page 21 of 21

36. Hadenfeldt D: Das Nervensystem von Stylochoplana maculata und
Notoplana atomata. Z wiss Zool 1929, 133:586-638.
37. Turner RS: Observations on the central nervous system of Leptoplana
acticola. J Comp Neurol 1946, 85:53-65.
38. Keenan CL, Coss R, Koopowitz H: Cytoarchitecture of primitive brains:
Golgi studies in flatworms. J Comp Neurol 1981, 195:697-716.
39. Johard HAD, Enell LE, Gustafsson E, Trifilieff P, Veenstra JA, Nässel DR:
Intrinsic neurons of Drosophila mushroom bodies express short
neuropeptide F: relations to extrinsic neurons expressing different
neurotransmitters. J Comp Neurol 2008, 507(4):1479-1496.
40. Sinakevitch I, Farris SM, Strausfeld NJ: Taurine-, aspartate- and
glutamate-like immunoreactivity identifies chemically distinct
subdivisions of Kenyon cells in the cockroach mushroom body. J Comp
Neurol 2001, 439:352-367.
41. Adoutte A, Balavoine G, Lartillot N, Lespinet O, Prud'homme B, de Rosa R:
The new animal phylogeny: reliability and implications. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 2000, 97(9):4453-4456.
42. Farris SM: Evolutionary convergence of higher brain centers spanning
the Protostome-Deuterostome boundary. Brain Behav Evol 2008,
72:106-122.
43. Eisthen HL: Why are olfactory systems of different animals so similar?
Brain Behav Evol 2002, 59:273-293.
44. Strausfeld NJ, Hildebrand JG: Olfactory systems: common design,
uncommon origins? Curr Opin Neurobiol 1999, 9(5):634-639.
45. Purschke G: Sense organs in polychaetes (Annelida). Hydrobiologia
2005, 535/536:53-78.
46. Strausfeld NJ, Sinakevitch I, Brown SM, Farris SM: Ground plan of the
insect mushroom body: functional and evolutionary implications. J
Comp Neurol 2009, 513:265-291.
47. Raine NE, Chittka L: The correlation of learning speed and natural
foraging success in bumble-bees. Proc R Soc Lond B 2008, 275:803-808.
48. Dukas R, Bernays EA: Learning improves growth rate in grasshoppers.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2000, 97(6):2637-2640.
49. Snell-Rod EC, Papaj DR, Gronenberg W: Brain size: a global or induced
cost of learning? Brain Behav Evol 2009, 73:111-128.
50. Laughlin SB, Stevenick RR de Ruyter van, Anderson JC: The metabolic cost
of neural information. Nature Neurosci 1998, 1(1):36-41.
51. Dukas R: Costs of memory: ideas and predictions. J Theor Biol 1999,
197:41-50.
52. Mery F, Kawecki TJ: A fitness cost of learning ability in Drosophila
melanogaster. Proc R Soc Lond B 2003, 270:2465-2469.
53. Kaufman ZS: Some problems of regressive evolution. Biol Bull 2008,
35(3):318-326.
54. Bullock TH: Grades in neural complexity: how large is the span? Integr
Comp Biol 2002, 42:757-761.
55. Gwilliam GF: Neurobiology of barnacles. In Barnacle biology Edited by:
Southward AJ. Rotterdam: Balkema; 1987:191-211.
56. Harrison PJH, Sandeman DC: Morphology of the nervous system of the
barnacle cypris larva (Balanus amphitrite Darwin) revealed by light and
electron microscopy. Biol Bull 1999, 197:144-158.
57. Harzsch S: Neurophylogeny: Architecture of the nervous system and a
fresh view on arthropod phylogeny. Integr Comp Biol 2006,
46(2):162-194.
58. Westheide W, McHugh D, Purschke G, Rouse G: Systematization of the
Annelida: different approaches. Hydrobiologia 1999, 402:291-307.
59. Purschke G: On the ground pattern of Annelida. Org Div Evol 2002,
2:181-196.
60. Fahrenbach WH: The brain of the horseshoe crab (Limulus polyphemus)
II. Architecture of the corpora pedunculata. Tissue Cell 1977, 9:157-166.
61. Fahrenbach WH: The brain of the horseshoe crab (Limulus polyphemus)
III. Cellular and synaptic organization of the corpora pedunculata.
Tissue Cell 1979, 11:163-200.
62. Fauchald K, Jumars PA: The diet of worms: A study of polychaete feeding
guilds. Oceanogr Mar Biol 1979, 17:193-284.
doi: 10.1186/1742-9994-7-13
Cite this article as: Heuer et al., Comparative neuroanatomy suggests
repeated reduction of neuroarchitectural complexity in Annelida Frontiers in
Zoology 2010, 7:13

</pre>
</body>
</html>
