<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Evolution of light-harvesting complex proteins from Chl c-containing algae</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:101. doi:10.1186/1471-2148-11-101"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Gabriel E Hoffman"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1221/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Hoffman et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:101
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/101

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Evolution of light-harvesting complex proteins
from Chl c-containing algae
Gabriel E Hoffman1,3, M Virginia Sanchez Puerta1,4 and Charles F Delwiche1,2*

Abstract
Background: Light harvesting complex (LHC) proteins function in photosynthesis by binding chlorophyll (Chl) and
carotenoid molecules that absorb light and transfer the energy to the reaction center Chl of the photosystem.
Most research has focused on LHCs of plants and chlorophytes that bind Chl a and b and extensive work on these
proteins has uncovered a diversity of biochemical functions, expression patterns and amino acid sequences. We
focus here on a less-studied family of LHCs that typically bind Chl a and c, and that are widely distributed in Chl
c-containing and other algae. Previous phylogenetic analyses of these proteins suggested that individual algal
lineages possess proteins from one or two subfamilies, and that most subfamilies are characteristic of a particular
algal lineage, but genome-scale datasets had revealed that some species have multiple different forms of the gene.
Such observations also suggested that there might have been an important influence of endosymbiosis in the
evolution of LHCs.
Results: We reconstruct a phylogeny of LHCs from Chl c-containing algae and related lineages using data from
recent sequencing projects to give ~10-fold larger taxon sampling than previous studies. The phylogeny indicates
that individual taxa possess proteins from multiple LHC subfamilies and that several LHC subfamilies are found in
distantly related algal lineages. This phylogenetic pattern implies functional differentiation of the gene families, a
hypothesis that is consistent with data on gene expression, carotenoid binding and physical associations with
other LHCs. In all probability LHCs have undergone a complex history of evolution of function, gene transfer, and
lineage-specific diversification.
Conclusion: The analysis provides a strikingly different picture of LHC diversity than previous analyses of LHC
evolution. Individual algal lineages possess proteins from multiple LHC subfamilies. Evolutionary relationships
showed support for the hypothesized origin of Chl c plastids. This work also allows recent experimental findings
about molecular function to be understood in a broader phylogenetic context.

Background
Light harvesting complex (LHC) proteins are fundamental to oxygenic photosynthesis, and members of the
LHC family are present in most photosynthetic eukaryotes, although variation in nomenclature sometimes
obscures their widespread occurrence (Table 1). These
transmembrane proteins bind chlorophyll (Chl) and carotenoid pigments which function to absorb light and
transfer energy to the reaction center Chl of photosystems (PS) in the thylakoid membrane [1]. The biochemistry, physical interactions and molecular phylogeny of
* Correspondence: delwiche@umd.edu
1
Department of Cell Biology and Molecular Genetics, University of Maryland,
College Park, MD, 20742, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

multiple types of LHCs have been characterized in
plants and chlorophytes (green algae) [2-4], but less is
known about homologs in Chl c-containing algae. Consequently, to improve our understanding of the evolution of the LHC gene family in Chl c-containing
lineages, we undertook a phylogenetic analysis of
expressed sequence tags (ESTs) and genomic data. Chl
c-containing algae, along with their non-photosynthetic
relatives are also known as “chromalveolates” [5] under
the hypothesis that these lineages descend from a
photosynthetic common ancestor. However, the monophyly of the “chromalveolates” has been questioned and
remains controversial [6,7]. This analysis is intended to
relate the molecular phylogeny of the Chl c-containing
algal LHCs to their function, and provides insight into

© 2011 Hoffman et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Hoffman et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:101
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/101

Page 2 of 11

Table 1 Major clades of the LHC gene superfamily.
Systematic
name

Other names/
subclades

Included in this
analysis

Lineages

Lhca

LHC I

-

plants

Lhcb

LHC II, CP24,CP26,
CP29

-

plants

Lhcc

Cac

+

cryptophytes

Lhcd

Lhcp

+

peridinin-containing dinoflagellates

Lhcf

FCP, cac

+

haptophytes, heterokonts

Lhcr

LhcaR

+

rhodophytes

–

Lhcz

+

cryptophytes, haptophytes, heterokonts

–

LI818, LHCSR

+

chlorarachniophytes, chlorophytes, fucoxanthin-containing dinoflagellates,
haptophytes, heterokonts

The systematic nomenclature was established by Jansson et al. [71]. The clades termed Lhcz and LI818 do not have systematic names and were identified by
Koziol et al. [2] and Gagne and Guertin [72], respectively. None of the other clades in the current analysis have been previously described. The genes in Lhca,
Lhcb and related clades recently identified by Koziol et al. [2] form a monophyletic outgroup to the genes analyzed in the current analysis, but the root of the
phylogeny cannot be confidently inferred.

gene duplication, expression, differential biochemical
activity and evolution of the LHC family, and although
we use the term here, the study is not dependent upon
the validity of the chromalveolate hypothesis.
All eukaryotic lineages that are capable of oxygenic
photosynthesis obtained this ability by (directly or indirectly) engulfing photosynthetic cyanobacteria and incorporating them as plastids [8], which are most familiar as
the chloroplasts of green algae and plants. Chlorophytes,
rhodophytes and glaucocystophytes appear to be the
result of a single primary endosymbiotic event, whereby
a cyanobacterium was incorporated as a plastid [9]. It
should be noted that the ‘event’ in question could have
involved many individual cells in a population, and
might have resulted from processes that took place over
a very long time, but all primary plastids seem to share
a common origin, and hence it is appropriate to think
of it as a single event [10,11]. Chl c-containing plastids
are the result of at least one secondary endosymbiotic
incorporation of a rhodophyte, and tertiary events involving a plastid of rhodophyte origin [5,7,8]. Chl c-containing algae include four major lineages: heterokonts,
haptophytes, dinoflagellates and cryptophytes that are
united (at least) by their use of Chl c as a photopigment.
These lineages have often been treated separately, but
recent evidence suggests that heterokonts and dinoflagellates (together with other alveolates) may form a single clade (possibly also including Rhizaria), and that
cryptophytes and haptophytes are sister lineages [12,13].
The precise origin of the plastids (and number of endosymbiotic events involved) in these lineages is still
unclear, but their ultimate rhodophyte ancestry is
uncontroversial [14-16]. In addition, some dinoflagellates
are thought to have replaced their plastids with new
plastids from other lineages, including an environmentally important group (fucoxanthin-containing

dinoflagellates) that have incorporated a haptophyte as a
plastid in a tertiary endosymbiotic event [17]. Most
recently (and controversially), genome analyses led
Moustafa et al. [18] to hypothesize that the common
ancestor of heterokonts and haptophytes acquired a
transient green algal plastid, subsequently replaced by a
red algal plastid and now only represented by residual
genes of green algal origin.
Members of the LHC gene family are nuclearencoded, and in organisms with secondary or tertiary
plastids the proteins are targeted from the cytosol to the
ER and then to the plastid using a bipartite signal
sequence at the amino terminus. Functional LHCs are
located in the thylakoid membrane of the plastid and
possess three a-helical transmembrane regions (TMR)
that are evolutionarily conserved [19]. The 3-dimensional structure and carotenoid binding sites of Chl a/b
LHCs have been characterized [20,21], but the structural
details and specific binding properties of the Chl a/c
LHCs addressed here are likely different given the
degree of sequence divergence and duration of independent evolution of these two gene subfamilies. Moreover,
even closely related members of the diverse Chl a/c
LHC family exhibit differential carotenoid and Chl binding, and differential associations in trimers or higher oligomers [22,23]. Thus, functional inferences made for
plant LHCs can only tenuously be extended to the Chl
a/c LHCs. However, a first step towards understanding
these LHCs is to unravel evolutionary relationships
within the gene family.
Major groups of algae can be characterized by the
type of Chl associated with their LHCs. Chlorophyte
and charophyte LHCs bind Chls a and b, rhodophyte
LHCs bind Chl a, and Chl c-containing algae have
LHCs that bind Chls a and c. These proteins also bind
carotenoids that expand the absorption spectrum and

Hoffman et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:101
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/101

are especially important in aquatic photosynthesis [24].
A range of carotenoids is present in algal plastids, with
the relative abundance of each carotenoid varying
between species. There is diversity in the most abundant carotenoid among these groups, with chlorophytes having lutein, rhodophytes zeaxanthin, and
lineages of Chl c-containing algae have several distinct
primary carotenoids. More specifically, cryptophytes
have alloxanthin, most heterokonts and haptophytes
have fucoxanthin, dinoflagellates with a plastid of red
algal origin have peridinin (hereafter “peridinin-containing dinoflagellates”), while dinoflagellates with a
plastid of haptophyte origin (hereafter “fucoxanthincontaining dinoflagellates”) have a fucoxanthin derivative found in haptophytes [17,25]. It is generally
thought that the primary carotenoid in each lineage
constitutes the major component of LHC-bound pigments. Thus, LHCs naturally bind the Chl and carotenoid molecules present in their native lineage, but
reconstruction experiments have shown that they are
capable of binding non-native pigments [26]. Differences in primary pigment binding are at least as much
a function of organismal biology as they are the result
of fundamental differences in LHC biochemistry,
although affinities for specific pigments do vary.
Most of the current biochemical, structural and
expression research has focused on chlorophytes or
plants and there are relatively few data on Chl c-containing algal LHCs. Previous biochemical studies of
Chl c-containing algal LHCs have focused on Cyclotella spp., Phaeodactylum tricornutum and Amphidinium carterae [22,27,28]. Molecular sequences from a
significant number of species have been published, but
previous comparative or phylogenetic analyses have
been limited to individual genomic sequences [e.g.
[29]] or have not focused on Chl a/c sequences [e.g.
[2]]. Presumably because of these limitations, some
previous studies suggested that each Chl c-containing
lineage possessed a single unique LHC subfamily [e.g.
[29]]. Other studies identified a subfamily of LHCs
that is highly conserved between chlorophytes and diatoms, and on that basis concluded that a single lineage
possesses multiple subfamilies of LHCs and that the
subfamily was not lineage specific [30,31]. However, no
previous study has undertaken a comprehensive analysis of this complex gene family in Chl c-containing
algae. Consequently, much current research on these
LHCs is based on tenuously supported assumptions
about relationships within the gene family. In addition,
new biochemical [22,23,32] and expression data
[32-36] on LHCs have recently become available that
have not previously been related to the phylogeny of
the protein family.

Page 3 of 11

Results and Discussion
Overview of the Phylogeny

To help ensure that the gene phylogeny was comprehensive, but bounded by objective criteria, sequences
were selected by BLAST analysis with a relatively low
threshold, and then screened for the feasibility of endto-end alignment. Analysis by motif detection programs
indicated that the three TMRs are well conserved compared to the regions exposed to the plastid stroma and
thylakoid lumen. These conserved regions generally
included carotenoid and Chl binding sites. This protein
architecture of three conserved TMRs was used to identify a set of LHCs that were practical for analysis.
Phylogenetic analyses were performed with a variety of
methods and analytical conditions to ensure that the
major features of the tree topology were not methoddependent. Analyses were performed using maximum
likelihood methods implemented in PhyML [37] for an
amino acid alignment and Garli [38] for the corresponding nucleotide alignment. Bayesian methods implemented in MrBayes [39] were used to analyze both
alignments. In general, agreement was good among the
analyses for features with strong bootstrap support
(>80%) or posterior probability (>0.95), but substantial
differences were observed in features with low support.
Among the analyses performed (see Materials and
Methods below), the tree found by PhyML with amino
acid data (PhyML/AA) was a good representation of the
overall analytical findings, and had relatively high support for features also observed in the other analyses
(Figure 1). Particularly among deep branches, the
PhyML/AA tree is well resolved compared to other analyses. The support values from the other analyses are
given in Additional File1, Figure S1. To facilitate discussion of what is potentially a very confusing gene phylogeny, we have established a systematic nomenclature for
well-supported clades (Figure 1). The tree is also labeled
with corresponding protein names that are in most
cases based on biochemical analyses in specific model
systems, but because not all of the clades identified here
have been characterized biochemically (or directly
shown to be functionally distinct), we prefer a nomenclature that reflects the gene phylogeny because we feel
it is likely to be relatively stable.
Our analysis is particularly reliable because we apply
multiple robust statistical methods of tree reconstruction and include roughly 10-fold denser sampling of
LHCs from Chl c-containing taxa and related species.
Simulations have demonstrated that the probabilitybased methods employed here are superior in terms of
reconstruction accuracy [40] compared to the methods
used by Durnford et al. [29]. Moreover, Zwickl and Hillis [41] demonstrate that increased taxon sampling has a

Hoffman et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:101
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/101

*

Page 4 of 11

*

†

*

*

†
§
§

*
**
*
*

†
§

* **
*

**
* *
*

†
§

*

*
* *

*

*

*

†
§

* *
* *
*
*
*
*
*

**
*

§

*

†
§

*

*

*

* *
*
*
**

*

*

*
**

*

†
§
†

*
†
§

*
*

*
*

* *
*
*
*

†

*

*
*
**
**

†

†
§

*
*

*
*

*

§

* *
*

*

*

†
§

*
*
*

†
§
§

*

*

*
*
*
†

*

*
* *
§

*
*

§

*

* *
**

*

* PhyML Bootstrap 80-100%
§ Thalassiosira genome
† Phaeodactylum genome
‡ Detailed study

*
**
*
*
**

†
†
†
†
†
†
§
§

§
§
§

Figure 1 The maximum likelihood tree from PhyML, with 246 taxa based on a 266 aa alignment (PhyML/AA). The individual LHCs are
colored by taxonomic lineage: chlorophytes and chlorarachniophytes (green), cryptophytes (turquoise), fucoxanthin-containing dinoflagellates
(light purple), peridinin-containing dinoflagellates (light blue), haptophytes (dark purple), heterokonts (brown), rhodophytes (red). The taxon
name and sequence identifier are given for each sequence, and gene name is given when available. See Additional File 1, Additional Figure S1
for complete support values from other analyses.

Hoffman et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:101
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/101

marked effect on reconstruction accuracy so that the
phylogeny presented here is expected to be substantially
more reliable for the relevant LHC proteins than that of
Koziol et al. [2]. Distance optimality, neighbor-joining
and parsimony based methods had lower support for
most clades, but were compatible with the maximum
likelihood phylogeny (data not shown).
The inferred phylogeny is unrooted (see below, in
Comparison to LHC superfamily) and resolves the LHCs
into seven major clades (I-VII), several of which are
defined by a long, well-supported branch (Figure 1). The
clades vary substantially in number of members and
representation of algal lineages.
It is clear that most organismal lineages contain LHCs
from multiple subfamilies in addition to duplicates with
very similar sequences. This refutes the still widely
accepted hypothesis that each LHC subfamily is characteristic of a particular group of organisms. Furthermore,
there are many cases where clusters of genes represent
several different organismal lineages, and some such
clusters appear multiple times within the tree. The most
common of these is the association of sequences from
three Chl c-containing lineages (haptophytes, heterokonts and dinoflagellates). There are also some distinctive absences, for example, cryptophyte LHCs are only
present in clades I and III, and rhodophyte LHCs are
present only in clade III, while sequences from chlorophytes are present only in clade V. Taken together,
these observations strongly imply that LHCs subfamilies
are functionally distinct and under differential selection
in many organisms.
The role of endosymbiosis in the phylogeny

There is reason to think that the transfer of LHCs from
endosymbiont to host genome has occurred repeatedly
in the evolution of the gene family. The ancestral rhodophyte and chlorophyte plastid genomes were inherited
from cyanobacterial ancestors, with relatively early and
rapid transfer from the plastid to the host cell nuclear
genome [42]. This transfer presumably occurred subsequent to the permanent incorporation of the plastid in
the host cell, although this is not necessarily the case.
Particularly in the context of kleptoplastidic organisms
that appear to have obtained some genes from their
prey [e.g. [43]], it is reasonable to think that some transfer of genes may have occurred prior to the acquisition
of a plastid per se [10]. This is further complicated by
the transfer of plastids via secondary and tertiary endosymbioses [8], followed by gene transfer from the eukaryotic endosymbiont to the host nuclear genome.
The overall structure of the phylogeny is consistent
with the hypothesis that Chl c-containing algal LHCs
descended from the rhodophyte proteins to create the
diversity of extant sequences, although the high level of

Page 5 of 11

sequence divergence makes it difficult to infer the root.
Related LHCs from chlorophytes (Lhca and Lhcb) constitute an outgroup, but have such low sequence similarity to those studied here that it was not possible to infer
the root with reasonable confidence. Koziol et al. [2]
and Durnford et al. [44] placed representatives of the set
of proteins studied here (specifically clades V and VII)
as sister to the group containing Lhca and Lhcb. Durnford et al. [29] placed the set as sister to Lhcb and some
Lhca proteins with other Lhca proteins as an outgroup,
although this arrangement did not have strong bootstrap
support. The rooting shown here is compatible with
those hypotheses, but several alternate rootings would
be equally plausible.
The position of LHCs from the chlorarachniophyte
Bigelowiella natans deeply nested among chlorophytes is
expected because the B. natans plastid is of chlorophyte
origin. Similarly, LHCs from fucoxanthin-containing
dinoflagellates cluster with haptophytes, the source of
their tertiary plastids [17]. If the diversification of the
Chl c-containing algal LHCs entirely predated the acquisition of plastids from red algae then one would predict
that each major clade in the gene phylogeny would have
red algal sequences at its base. This is not observed, but
it may be an artifact of incomplete data, as the only
complete red algal genome analyzed here was from the
highly reduced picoeukaryote Cyanidioschyzon merolae.
We expect that other red algae will show a more diverse
set of LHC genes.
Diversity within individual lineages

Much of the diversity of LHC proteins - both within
and among organisms - seen here (Figure 1) has not
been previously characterized. Previous phylogenetic
studies have included a relatively small number of LHC
subfamilies, most of which were assumed to be lineage
specific [29,44,45]. In addition, some algal lineages were
thought to have multiple LHCs belonging to a single or
a small number of LHC subfamilies. The current analysis greatly expands the number of putative subfamilies
and indicates that some are lineage specific while others
are not.
Previous studies [29,30,45-47] concluded that dinoflagellates possess only a single LHC subfamily (i.e. VIId),
which was taken to be lineage specific. However, these
analyses included only between 1 and 4 dinoflagellate
sequences, all from Amphidinium carterae. Similarly,
haptophytes were thought to possess LHCs from only a
single subfamily that grouped with diatom and chlorophyte sequences in subfamily Vb [29,30,46]. A haptophyte LHC was later identified in clade VII [47]. A
single large lineage specific gene subfamily was identified in heterokonts in the above analyses, corresponding
to the clade VIIe2 of heterokonts in this study. Eppard

Hoffman et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:101
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/101

et al. [30], Green [47] and Koziol et al. [2] incorporated
more sequence data and identified heterokont sequences
that grouped with rhodophytes in clade III and chlorophytes in clade V.
The incorporation of newly available sequence data
illustrates the diversity and complexity of LHCs. In
clade VII, which constitutes the major Chl c-containing
clade, heterokonts contain a lineage specific LHC subfamily with sequences from diatoms and brown algae
(VIIe2). Similarly, peridinin dinoflagellates possess LHCs
from the lineage specific subfamilies VIIa and VIId. Subfamilies specific to haptophytes are VIIc and VIIe1, but
in other clades sequences from this lineage often have
close homologs in diatoms (e.g. VI and VIIb). Clade V
comprises subfamilies from haptophytes, diatoms, fucoxanthin-containing dinoflagellates, chlorophytes and
chlorarachniophytes. Clade III includes sequences from
many lineages, and has subfamilies that are unresolved
or poorly supported. In this case, cryptophyte and rhodophyte LHCs group together, as do those from diatoms, dinoflagellates and haptophytes.
LHCs from complete genomes and possible biases in the
data

At the time of this study, the only relevant complete
genomes with substantial representation of the LHC
family considered in this analysis were the diatoms (heterokont) Thalassiosira pseudonana [48] and Phaeodactylum tricornutum [49] (Additional File 2, Additional
Table S1). Our analysis of T. pseudonana and P. tricornutum identified members of all seven LHC subfamilies,
representing nearly the full diversity of sequences studied (Figure 1). The LHCs of these species are the only
representatives from diatoms in most subfamilies outside of VIIe2, (with the exception of those from Cy.
cryptica). This is an important indication that other
techniques are likely to miss members of the family.
Indeed, EST and other transcriptomic studies almost
always represent a subset of all of the genes present
within the genome. Furthermore, with the exception of
those from complete genome analyses (Additional File
2, Additional Table S1), the individual genomic
sequences included in the analysis were obtained via
Western blots using an antibody from a similar LHC [e.
g. [50]], Southern blots using a probe from a similar
LHC [e.g. [51]] or PCR using primers based on an LHC
alignment [e.g. [52]]. Because these methods only detect
proteins that are similar to the LHC used to create the
antibody, probe, or primers, the set of sequences identified by these methods is intrinsically limited, and consequently this creates another source of sampling bias.
Taken together, these observations indicated that the
diversity in LHCs reported here is an underestimate. It
is also noteworthy that only a small fraction of the

Page 6 of 11

sequences included in this analysis have been characterized biochemically. Because sequence annotation often
relies on the assumption that homologous sequences
share biochemical function, a complex gene family of
this type is at risk of erroneous inferences due to transitive annotation. Consequently, one important prediction
of this analysis is that there are uncharacterized functional differences among the several subfamilies.
At the same time, it is clearly possible for an organism
to function with a small complement of LHC genes. The
chlorophytes Ostreococcus tauri and O. lucimarinus have
highly reduced genomes, and encode clade V LHCs that
are similar to other proteins from chlorophytes (including Chlamydomonas reinhardtii). The rhodophyte Cyanidioschyzon merolae, which also has a highly reduced
genome [53], possesses only a single family IIIa LHC as
well as two very similar sequences identified by Koziol
et al. [2] and additional homologs that did not have the
conserved domain architecture or degree of sequence
conservation required for inclusion in this study. This is
strikingly different from the diversity of genes already
identified from EST analyses of red algae. C. merolae
has been shown to be unusual in other ways, and this is
not necessarily surprising [54,55].
A single subfamily can comprise LHCs that bind different
Chl and carotenoids

Clade V comprises LHCs from diatoms, chlorophytes,
haptophytes and fucoxanthin-containing dinoflagellates.
Chlorophytes possess Chl a/b and use lutein as the primary LHC carotenoid, while diatoms, haptophytes and
dinoflagellates use Chl a/c and fucoxanthin (or derivatives). The grouping of these sequences into a single
clade implies that similar LHCs can bind a diverse set of
Chls and carotenoids. This observation parallels in vitro
reconstruction experiments performed by Grabowski et
al. [26] where non-native Chl and primary carotenoids
were functionally inserted into LhcaR1 from the rhodophyte P. cruentum in clade III. The reconstructed LHC
was able to functionally bind Chl a, b and c as well as
the carotenoids lutein, fucoxanthin and peridinin in
addition to its native zeaxanthin, albeit with some variation in affinity. Thus, it appears that the binding of primary carotenoids and certain chlorophylls is due to the
nature of the endogenous biosynthesis of Chlorophyll
and carotenoids, and not necessarily because of a profound incongruence in the structure or binding properties of the protein; this inference remains to be tested in
vivo.
Functional specialization

Despite the plasticity of pigment binding, the persistence
of multiple subfamilies of LHC over hundreds of millions of years of evolutionary divergence (Figure 1)

Hoffman et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:101
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/101

suggest that these subfamilies are functionally distinct.
Unfortunately, only a small fraction of the gene products corresponding to the sequences studied here have
been characterized biochemically. Nonetheless, placing
differences in expression patterns, pigment binding, and
differential physical associations among LHCs in a phylogenetic context, it is apparent that individual subfamilies have undergone specialization (See Additional File 3,
Supplementary Information).
Plants and chlorophytes have two major types of
LHCs, namely LHC I and II, which have distinct biochemistries and associate primarily with PS I and II,
respectively. However, the LHCs of rhodophytes and
Chl c-containing algae constitute a sister clade to most
chlorophyte sequences, meaning that they diverged
independently of those in the green lineage. Consequently, the diversity of LHCs in Chl c-containing algae
is generally distinct and independent of that observed in
plants and chlorophytes [29], with the notable exception
of subfamily Vb. Moreover, the rhodophyte LHCs
associate only with PS I, so proteins that associate with
PS II like those of chlorophytes are thought to have
evolved independently in Chl c-containing algae and
chlorophytes and generally do not show PS specificity
[25]. In rhodophytes an unrelated set of phycobiliproteins are associated with PS II [56].
The sequence diversity and biochemical differences
observed in the LHC gene phylogeny suggest that members of the protein family have undergone functional
specialization. This complements the work of Koziol et
al. [2] on chlorophyte LHCs and extends it to the LHCs
of Chl c-containing algae. The conservation of LHCs
from multiple and diverse subfamilies in individual
organisms or closely related lineages suggests that the
subfamilies are functionally distinct and could exhibit
differences in pigment binding, absorption spectrum,
strength of interaction with thylakoid membrane and
differences in expression and associations with other
LHCs. In addition to the advantages of increased gene
dosage, having such a diversity of LHCs may allow an
organism to carry out photosynthesis or photoprotection
under a range of conditions.
The phylogeny of LHCs observed here cannot be
easily reconciled with the currently accepted organismal
phylogeny [13], and the presence of many subfamilies
that contain proteins from diverse algal lineages is problematic. One explanation would be that the complex
phylogeny is the result of extensive horizontal gene
transfer between taxa in distant lineages. However, even
the most parsimonious scenario would require a very
large number of transfer events, and we favor the interpretation that some of the subfamilies are ancestral, and
that there is substantial sequence diversity that reflects
selection on functionally distinct proteins.

Page 7 of 11

This presents a new perspective on LHC diversity, and
illustrates the difficulty inferring functional similarity
from sequence similarity. Although there is no doubt
that the sequences studied here are all homologous (i.e.,
are derived from a single common ancestral sequence),
the sequence diversity and evolutionary complexity of
the gene family are far greater than was appreciated
until recently. Most troubling is the biochemical difference between the Cy. cryptica Fcp1-3 and Fcp5 in subfamily VIIe2.2 because the former is thought to
associate in heterotrimers with Fcp6 and Fcp7 but the
latter in higher oligomers despite high sequence similarity. If the relationships shown here are accurate and the
biochemical data reliable, then one would predict great
potential for functional differences among the many
uncharacterized LHCs.
There can be little doubt that a complex history of
gene duplication, gene loss, and functional specialization
shaped the phylogeny presented here. Closely related
paralogs in the same lineage are likely the result of
recent gene duplication events, while more distantly
related proteins or LHCs that are shared by distant
lineages are likely the result of ancestral duplications, or
perhaps horizontal gene transfer. Following these ancestral events, gene loss led to the phylogeny observed in
this study, with extreme (but not convergent) reduction
having occurred in both Ostreococcus and Cyanidioschyzon. Although much of the apparent gene loss might be
attributed to incomplete sampling, the absence of cryptophyte, rhodophyte and peridinin dinoflagellate LHCs
from clade V is noteworthy. Proteins from this group
are thought to be involved in photoprotection by binding xanthophyll cycle carotenoids and facilitating nonphotochemical quenching [22,57]. The presence of a
xanthophyll cycle has been demonstrated in all of the
lineages with clade V proteins, but to our knowledge
has not been demonstrated in cryptophytes or peridinin-containing dinoflagellates. One hypothesis would be
that proteins from clade V are involved in the xanthophyll cycle. Brown algae have a xanthophyll cycle, but a
brown algal homolog in clade V had not been characterized at the time that the analysis was performed. We
speculated that this was a result of the sampling bias
described above, and indeed, two very recent studies of
brown algae (Fucus spp. and Ectocarpus siliculosus)
found sequences that belong to the clade V LHCs
[58,59].
This study characterized the large diversity of LHC
sequences and demonstrated that individual species
have LHCs from multiple subfamilies, and that subfamilies are not lineage specific. Relating the molecular phylogeny to the biochemistry of the protein has the
potential to add substantial insight into the evolution
and functional divergence of LHCs. It also tells a

Hoffman et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:101
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/101

cautionary tale for the inference of function solely on
the basis of sequence similarity, and suggests the importance of independent lines of evidence in the analysis of
genomic data.

Conclusions
This study provides a comprehensive overview of an
important subfamily of LHC genes. Phylogenetic analysis
of gene family sequences can provide valuable insights
into the diversification of gene families, and a lack of
understanding of relationships among LHC sequences
has very likely led to incorrect inference of function.
Further work will be needed to validate the predictions
made here, but it is very likely that several of the clades
identified here represent functionally distinct entities,
and correctly distinguishing among these sequence variants should help understand their biochemical function.
It is also possible that horizontal gene transfer and gene
duplication without functional differentiation of the
duplicated genes have played a role in the evolution of
LHCs. Taken together, these observations illustrate the
power of comparative sequence analysis for functional
inference, but also demonstrate the potential pitfalls in
overly simplistic analyses.
Methods
Sequence data acquisition

Sequence data from EST surveys of 19 algal species,
individual genomic sequences from 25 species, and complete genomic data from 6 species were screened for
LHC homologs (Additional File 2, Additional Table S1).
Putative LHCs were identified with BLAST [60] using
Chl c-containing algae LHC sequences from Durnford
et al. [29] as queries. The sequences identified by
BLAST were clustered with Sequencher (Gene Codes,
Ann Arbor, MI, USA) to remove duplicate and nearly
identical sequences from the same species. Reads were
clustered if they had > 92% identity for a 40 bp overlapping region.
MEME [61] and MAST [62] were used to further
characterize the conserved domain structure of the
gene family. The Chl c-containing algae sequences
from Durnford et al. [29] were used as a training dataset to create a local motif profile of the gene family
using MEME. MAST was then used to compare the
set of BLAST hits against this profile. The characterization of local motifs in the dataset facilitated the
identification of a subset of sequences that could be
aligned. As expected from previous studies [19,29] the
conserved regions corresponded to the three transmembrane regions plus surrounding sequence including Chl and carotenoid binding sites. BLAST hits
above an e-value of 1e-19 or without the expected

Page 8 of 11

domain structure could not be aligned well with other
LHCs and were not included in subsequent analyses.
In addition, individual LHCs from polycistronic [63] or
polyprotein [64,65] sequences were treated as separate
sequences. Sequence data were organized and manipulated using the BioPerl toolkit [66].
Sequence alignment and phylogenetic analyses

An amino acid alignment of LHC sequences was constructed with ClustalW [67] and was edited manually
using MacClade 4.0 (Sinauer Associates, Sunderland,
MA, USA). Other publicly available alignment programs
were used, but the alignment from ClustalW was deemed
to be the most biologically relevant based on the location
of gaps in relation to the previously reported conserved
regions and the known tertiary structure of the LHC protein. The amino acid alignment was used to create the
nucleotide alignment for further analysis [68]. Poorly
conserved regions of the protein were omitted from the
phylogenetic analysis, so that the alignment consisted
mostly of TMRs and each sequence had an average of
149 amino acids out of 266 positions in the alignment.
Since these regions span the membrane, the amino acid
composition is biased in favor of hydrophobic residues.
Because this bias is not adequately addressed by amino
acid substitution models and due to the short length of
the alignment, both the amino acid and corresponding
nucleotide alignment were used for phylogenetic analysis.
Preliminary datasets consisted of 470 LHC sequences
that fit the criteria above, but individual operational taxonomic units (OTUs) were omitted to reduce the computation time and facilitate the interpretation of the
phylogenetic tree. The OTUs corresponding to very similar orthologs within a single lineage were omitted so that
the final dataset containing 246 OTUs maintained the
same sequence diversity and taxon distribution as the original. Orthologs from complete genomes were not
omitted. Comparisons of the topologies from the two
datasets indicated that they were consistent. The alignment has been deposited in TreeBase under the accession
number 10532.
Phylogenetic analyses based on nucleotides were conducted under the maximum likelihood optimality criterion using the GTR + I + Γ model with 4 rate categories
implemented in MrBayes 3.1.2 [39] and Garli 0.942 [38].
The model was selected using MrModeltest 2.2 [69].
MrBayes was run for 10 000 000 generations, trees were
sampled every 1000 generations and a burnin of 25%
was used to create a consensus tree. Garli was run with
the default parameters for the tree search and 200 bootstrap replicates. The same parameters were used to analyze the nucleotide alignment without third codonposition nucleotides.

Hoffman et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:101
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/101

Phylogenetic analyses of the amino acid alignment
were conducted with MrBayes and PhyML 2.4.5 [37].
MrBayes was run with the mixed fixed-rate model and
the parameters used above. The consensus tree was
used as the starting topology for the PhyML analysis,
which used WAG + I + Γ and 8 rate categories for the
tree search and 100 bootstrap replicates. The model was
selected using ProtTest 1.3 [70]. This tree is presented
in Figure 1. See Additional File 1, Additional Figure S1
for equivalent tree with support values from other
analyses.

Additional material

Page 9 of 11

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.
8.

Additional file 1: List of organisms from which LHC sequence data
was examined in the current analysis. Data sources and citation for
sequence data use in this analysis
Additional File 2: Detailed LHC phylogeny. The maximum likelihood
tree from PhyML, with 246 taxa based on a 266 aa alignment (PhyML/
AA). This tree is equivalent to that in Figure 1, but contains all the
sequence names and support values from additional analyses. The
support values for each branch where obtained as follows: PhyML with
amino acids (top left), MrBayes with amino acids (bottom left), Garli with
nucleotides (top right), MrBayes with nucleotides (bottom right). The
individual LHCs are colored by taxonomic lineage: chlorophytes (green),
cryptophytes (light blue), fucoxanthin-containing dinoflagellates (light
purple), peridinin-containing dinoflagellates (dark blue), haptophytes
(pink), heterokonts (orange), rhodophytes (red).
Additional File 3: Supplementary Information. This file contains
added information detailing the analytical methods used and details on
the interpretation of the tree that are not included in the main
manuscript.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

Acknowledgements
The sequence data from Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, and Ostreococcus tauri,
Ostreococcus lucimarinus, Phaeodactylum tricornutum and Thalassiosira
pseudonana were produced by the US Department of Energy Joint Genome
Institute, http://www.jgi.doe.gov and are provided for use in this publication
only. This project was supported by NSF grant MCB-9984284 and the
Howard Hughes Medical Institute Undergraduate Science Education Program
at the University of Maryland. We would also like to thank John D. Hall for
his help throughout the entire process.

15.
16.

17.

18.
Author details
1
Department of Cell Biology and Molecular Genetics, University of Maryland,
College Park, MD, 20742, USA. 2Maryland Agricultural Experiment Station,
University of Maryland, College Park, MD, 20742, USA. 3Department of
Biological Statistics and Computational Biology, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY,
14853, USA. 4IBAM, Facultad de Ciencias Agrarias, Universidad Nacional de
Cuyo, Chacras de Coria, 5500 Mendoza, Argentina.
Authors’ contributions
GEH carried out the analysis and drafted the manuscript. MVSP and CFD
conceived of the study, and participated in its design and helped to draft
the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

19.

20.

21.

22.

Received: 20 May 2010 Accepted: 15 April 2011 Published: 15 April 2011
References
1. Green BR, Durnford DG: The chlorophyll-carotenoid proteins of oxygenic
photosynthesis. Annu Rev Plant Physiol Plant Mol Biol 1996, 47:685-714.

23.

Koziol A, Borza T, Ishida KI, Keeling P, Lee RW, Durnford DG: Tracing the
evolution of the light-harvesting antennae in chlorophyll a/b-containing
organisms. Plant Physiol 2007, 143:1802-1816.
van Amerongen H, Dekker JP: Light-harvesting in photosystem II. In LightHarvesting Antennas in Photosynthesis. Edited by: Green BR, Parson BR.
Kluwer Academic Publishers; 2003:.
Fromme P, Schlodder E, Jansson S: Structure and function of antenna
system in photosystem I. In Light-Harvesting Antennas in Photosynthesis.
Edited by: Green BR, Parson BR. Kluwer Academic Publishers; 2003:.
Cavalier-Smith T: Principles of protein and lipid targeting in secondary
symbiogenesis: Euglenoid, dinoflagellate, and sporozoan plastid origins
and the eukaryote family tree. J Eukaryot Microbiol 1999, 46(4):347-366.
Baurain D, Brinkmann H, Petersen J, Rodriguez-Ezpeleta N, Stechmann A,
Demoulin V, Roger AJ, Burger G, Lang BF, Philippe H: Phylogenomic
evidence for separate acquisition of plastids in cryptophytes,
haptophytes and stramenopiles. Mol Biol Evol 2010.
Sanchez-Puerta MV, Delwiche CF: A Hypothesis for plastid evolution in
chromalveolates. J Phycol 2008, 44(5):1097-1107.
Delwiche CF: Tracing the thread of plastid diversity through the tapestry
of life. Am Nat 1999, 154:S164-S177.
Rodriguez-Ezpeleta N, Brinkmann H, Burey SC, Roure B, Burger G,
Loffelhardt W, Bohnert HJ, Philippe H, Lang BF: Monophyly of primary
photosynthetic eukaryotes: Green plants, red algae, and glaucophytes.
Curr Biol 2005, 15(14):1325-1330.
Delwiche CF: Algae in the warp and weave of life: bound by plastids. In
Unravelling the algae: the past, present, and future of algal systematics
Systematics Association Special Volume # 75. Edited by: Brodie J, Lewis J.
London: Taylor and Francis; 2007:.
Stiller JW, Reel DC, Johnson JC: A single origin of plastids revisited:
Convergent evolution in organellar genome content. J Phycol 2003,
39(1):95-105.
Patron NJ, Inagaki Y, Keeling PJ: Multiple gene phylogenies support the
monophyly of cryptomonad and haptophyte host lineages. Curr Biol
2007, 17(10):887-891.
Hackett JD, Yoon HS, Li S, Reyes-Prieto A, Rummele SE, Bhattacharya D:
Phylogenomic analysis supports the monophyly of cryptophytes and
haptophytes and the association of Rhizaria with Chromalveolates. Mol
Biol Evol 2007, 24(8):1702-1713.
Sanchez-Puerta MV, Bachvaroff TR, Delwiche CF: Sorting wheat from chaff
in multi-gene analyses of chlorophyll c-containing plastids. Mol Phylogen
Evol 2007, 44(2):885-897.
Yoon HS, Hackett JD, Pinto G, Bhattacharya D: The single, ancient origin of
chromist plastids. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2002, 99(24):15507-15512.
Bachvaroff TR, Puerta MVS, Delwiche CF: Chlorophyll c-containing plastid
relationships based on analyses of a multigene data set with all four
chromalveolate lineages. Mol Biol Evol 2005, 22(9):1772-1782.
Tengs T, Dahlberg OJ, Shalchian-Tabrizi K, Klaveness D, Rudi K, Delwiche CF,
Jakobsen KS: Phylogenetic analyses indicate that the 19 ‘ hexanoyloxyfucoxanthin-containing dinoflagellates have tertiary plastids of
haptophyte origin. Mol Biol Evol 2000, 17(5):718-729.
Moustafa A, Beszteri B, Maier UG, Bowler C, Valentin K, Bhattacharya D:
Genomic Footprints of a Cryptic Plastid Endosymbiosis in Diatoms.
Science 2009, 324(5935):1724-1726.
Green BR, Pichersky E: Hypothesis for the evolution of 3-helix chl a/b and
chl a/c light-harvesting antenna proteins from 2-helix and 4-helix
ancestors. Photosynthesis Res 1994, 39(2):149-162.
Liu ZF, Yan HC, Wang KB, Kuang TY, Zhang JP, Gui LL, An XM, Chang WR:
Crystal structure of spinach major light-harvesting complex at 2.72
angstrom resolution. Nature 2004, 428(6980):287-292.
Standfuss R, van Scheltinga ACT, Lamborghini M, Kuhlbrandt W: Mechanisms
of photoprotection and nonphotochemical quenching in pea lightharvesting complex at 2.5A resolution. EMBO J 2005, 24(5):919-928.
Beer A, Gundermann K, Beckmann J, Buchel C: Subunit composition and
pigmentation of fucoxanthin-chlorophyll proteins in diatoms: Evidence
for a subunit involved in diadinoxanthin and diatoxanthin binding.
Biochemistry 2006, 45(43):13046-13053.
Buchel C: Fucoxanthin-chlorophyll proteins in diatoms: 18 and 19 kDa
subunits assemble into different oligomeric states. Biochemistry 2003,
42(44):13027-13034.

Hoffman et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:101
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/101

24. Mimuro M, Akimoto S: Carotenoids of light harvesting systems: Energy
transfer processes from fucoxantin and peridinin to chlorophyll. In
Photosynthesis in Algae. Edited by: Larkum AWD, Douglas SE. Raven JA:
Kluwer Academic Publishers; 2003:335-349.
25. Macpherson AN, Hiller RG: Light-harvesting systems in chlorophyll ccontaining algae. In Light-Harvesting Antennas in Photosynthesis. Edited by:
Green BR, Parson WW. Kluwer Academic Publishers; 2003:323-352.
26. Grabowski B, Cunningham FX, Gantt E: Chlorophyll and carotenoid
binding in a simple red algal light-harvesting complex crosses
phylogenetic lines. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2001, 98(5):2911-2916.
27. Polivka T, van Stokkum IHM, Zigmantas D, van Grondelle R, Sundstrom V,
Hiller RG: Energy transfer in the major intrinsic light-harvesting complex
from Amphidinium carterae. Biochemistry 2006, 45(28):8516-8526.
28. Lepetit B, Volke D, Szabo M, Hoffmann R, Garab GZ, Wilhelm C, Goss R:
Spectroscopic and molecular characterization of the oligomeric antenna
of the diatom Phaeodactylum tricornutum. Biochemistry 2007,
46(34):9813-9822.
29. Durnford DG, Deane JA, Tan S, McFadden GI, Gantt E, Green BR: A
phylogenetic assessment of the eukaryotic light-harvesting antenna
proteins, with implications for plastid evolution. J Mol Evol 1999,
48(1):59-68.
30. Eppard M, Krumbein WE, von Haeseler A, Rhiel E: Characterization of fcp4
and fcp12, two additional genes encoding light harvesting proteins of
Cyclotella cryptica (Bacillariophyceae) and phylogenetic analysis of this
complex gene family. Plant Biol 2000, 2(3):283-289.
31. Richard C, Ouellet H, Guertin M: Characterization of the LI818 polypeptide
from the green unicellular alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii. Plant Mol Biol
2000, 42(2):303-316.
32. Becker F, Rhiel E: Immuno-electron microscopic quantification of the
fucoxanthin chlorophyll a/c binding polypeptides Fcp2, Fcp4, and Fcp6
of Cyclotella cryptica grown under low- and high-light intensities. Int
Microbiol 2006, 9(1):29-36.
33. Janssen M, Bathke L, Marquardt J, Krumbein WE, Rhiel E: Changes in the
hot apparatus of diatoms in response to low and high light intensities.
Int Microbiol 2001, 4:27-33.
34. Oeltjen A, Krumbein WE, Rhiel E: Investigations on transcript sizes, steady
state mRNA concentrations and diurnal expression of genes encoding
fucoxanthin chlorophyll a/c light harvesting polypeptides in the centric
diatom Cyclotella cryptica. Plant Biol 2002, 4(2):250-257.
35. Oeltjen A, Marquardt J, Rhiel E: Differential circadian expression of genes
fcp2 and fcp6 in Cyclotella cryptica. Int Microbiol 2004, 7(2):127-131.
36. Westermann M, Rhiel E: Localisation of fucoxanthin chlorophyll a/cbinding polypeptides of the centric diatom Cyclotella cryptica by
immuno-electron microscopy. Protoplasma 2005, 225(3-4):217-223.
37. Guindon S, Gascuel O: A simple, fast, and accurate algorithm to estimate
large phylogenies by maximum likelihood. Syst Biol 2003, 52(5):696-704.
38. Zwickl DJ: Genetic algorithm approaches for the phylogenetic analysis of
large biological sequence datasets under the maximum likelihood
criterion. The University of Texas at Austin; 2006, Ph.D. dissertation.
39. Ronquist F, Huelsenbeck JP: MrBayes 3: Bayesian phylogenetic inference
under mixed models. Bioinformatics 2003, 19(12):1572-1574.
40. Huelsenbeck JP: Performance of phylogenetic method in simulation. Syst
Biol 1995, 44(1):17-48.
41. Zwickl DJ, Hillis DM: Increased taxon sampling greatly reduces
phylogenetic error. Syst Biol 2002, 51(4):588.
42. Palmer JD, Delwiche CF: The origin and evolution of plastids and their
genomes. In Molecular Systematics of Plants II. Edited by: Soltis DE, Soltis PS,
Doyle JJ. Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers; 1998:375-409.
43. Johnson MD, Oldach D, Delwiche CF, Stoecker DK: Retention of
transcriptionally active cryptophyte nuclei by the ciliate Myrionecta
rubra. Nature 2007, 445(7126):426-428.
44. Durnford DG, Aebersold R, Green BR: The fucoxanthin-chlorophyll proteins
from a chromophyte alga are part of a large multigene family: Structural
and evolutionary relationships to other light harvesting antennae. Mol
Gen Genet 1996, 253(3):377-386.
45. Caron L, Douady D, Quinetszely M, deGoer S, Berkaloff C: Gene structure of
a chlorophyll a/c-binding protein from a brown alga: Presence of an
intron and phylogenetic implications. J Mol Evol 1996, 43(3):270-280.
46. Deane JA, Fraunholz M, Su V, Maier UG, Martin W, Durnford DG,
McFadden GI: Evidence for nucleomorph to host nucleus gene transfer:

Page 10 of 11

47.

48.

49.

50.

51.

52.

53.

54.

55.

56.

57.
58.

59.

60.

61.

62.
63.

64.

65.

66.

67.

Light-harvesting complex proteins from cryptomonads and
chlorarachniophytes. Protist 2000, 151(3):239-252.
Green BR: The evolution of light-harvesting antennas. In Light-Harvesting
Antennas in Photosynthesis. Edited by: Green BR, Parson BR. Kluwer
Academic Publishers; 2003:.
Armbrust EV, Berges JA, Bowler C, Green BR, Martinez D, Putnam NH,
Zhou SG, Allen AE, Apt KE, Bechner M, et al: The genome of the diatom
Thalassiosira pseudonana: Ecology, evolution, and metabolism. Science
2004, 306(5693):79-86.
Bowler C, Allen AE, Badger JH, Grimwood J, Jabbari K, Kuo A, Maheswari U,
Martens C, Maumus F, Otillar RP: The Phaeodactylum genome reveals the
evolutionary history of diatom genomes. Nature 2008, 456(7219):239-244.
Apt KE, Clendennen SK, Powers DA, Grossman AR: The gene family
encoding the fucoxanthin chlorophyll proteins from the brown alga
Macrocystis pyrifera. Mol Gen Genet 1995, 246(4):455-464.
Kroth-Pancic PG: Nucleotide sequence of 2 cDNAs encoding fucoxanthin
chlorophyll a/c proteins in the diatom Odontella sinensis. Plant Mol Biol
1995, 27(4):825-828.
Smith GJ, Gao Y, Alberte RS: The fucoxanthin-chlorophyll a/c proteins
comprise a large family of coexpressed genes in the marine diatom
Skeletonema costatum (Greve). Plant Physiol 1997, 114:1136.
Matsuzaki M, Misumi O, Shin-I T, Maruyama S, Takahara M, Miyagishima SY,
Mori T, Nishida K, Yagisawa F, Nishida K, et al: Genome sequence of the
ultrasmall unicellular red alga Cyanidioschyzon merolae 10D. Nature 2004,
428(6983):653-657.
Toplin JA, Norris TB, Lehr CR, McDermott TR, Castenholz RW: Biogeographic
and Phylogenetic Diversity of Thermoacidophilic Cyanidiales in
Yellowstone National Park, Japan, and New Zealand. Appl Environ
Microbiol 2008, 74(9):2822-2833.
Claudia C, Hwan Su Y, Antonino P, Gabriele P, Debashish B: Hidden
biodiversity of the extremophilic Cyanidiales red algae. Mol Ecol 2004,
13(7):1827-1838.
Grossman AR, Schaefer MR, Chiang GG, Collier JL: The phycobilisome, a
light-harvesting complex responsive to environmental conditions.
Microbiol Rev 1993, 57(3):725-749.
Muller P, Li XP, Niyogi KK: Non-photochemical quenching. A response to
excess light energy. Plant Physiol 2001, 125(4):1558-1566.
Pearson GA, Hoarau G, Lago-Leston A, Coyer JA, Kube M, Reinhardt R,
Henckel K, Serrao ETA, Corre E, Olsen JL: An Expressed Sequence Tag
Analysis of the Intertidal Brown Seaweeds Fucus serratus (L.) and F.
vesiculosus (L.) (Heterokontophyta, Phaeophyceae) in Response to
Abiotic Stressors. Mar Biotechnol 2010, 12(2):195-213.
Dittami SM, Michel G, Collen J, Boyen C, Tonon T: Chlorophyll-binding
proteins revisited- a multigenic family of light-harvesting and stress
proteins from a brown algal perspective. BMC Evol Biol 2010, 10(1):365.
Altschul SF, Madden TL, Schaffer AA, Zhang JH, Zhang Z, Miller W,
Lipman DJ: Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new generation of protein
database search programs. Nucleic Acids Res 1997, 25(17):3389-3402.
Bailey TL, Elkan C: Fitting a mixture model by expectation maximization
to discover motifs in biopolymers. Proceedings of the Second International
Conference on Intelligent Systems for Molecular Biology: 1994 Menlo Park,
California: AAAI Press; 1994.
Bailey TL, Gribskov M: Combining evidence using p-values: application to
sequence homology searches. Bioinformatics 1998, 14(1):48-54.
de la Espina SMD, Alverca E, Cuadrado A, Franca S: Organization of the
genome and gene expression in a nuclear environment lacking histones
and nucleosomes: the amazing dinoflagellates. Eur J Cell Biol 2005, 84(23):137-149.
Hiller RG, Wrench PM, Sharples FP: The light-harvesting chlorophyll a\cbinding protein of dinoflagellates - a putative polyprotein. FEBS Lett
1995, 363(1-2):175-178.
Koziol AG, Durnford DG: Euglena light-harvesting complexes are encoded
by multifarious polyprotein mRNAs that evolve in concert. Mol Biol Evol
2008, 25(1):92-100.
Stajich JE, Block D, Boulez K, Brenner SE, Chervitz SA, Dagdigian C,
Fuellen G, Gilbert JGR, Korf I, Lapp H, et al: The bioperl toolkit: Perl
modules for the life sciences. Genome Res 2002, 12(10):1611-1618.
Thompson JD, Higgins DG, Gibson TJ: Clustal-W - Improving the
sensitivity of progressive multiple sequence alignment through
sequence weighting, position-specific gap penalties and weight matrix
choice. Nucleic Acids Res 1994, 22(22):4673-4680.

Hoffman et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:101
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/101

Page 11 of 11

68. Bininda-Emonds ORP: transAlign: using amino acids to facilitate the
multiple alignment of protein-coding DNA sequences. BMC Bioinformatics
2005, 22(6):156.
69. Nylander JAA: MrModeltest v2.2. Evolutionary Biology Centre, Uppsala
University 2004 [http://www.abc.se/~nylander/].
70. Abascal F, Zardoya R, Posada D: ProtTest: selection of best-fit models of
protein evolution. Bioinformatics 2005, 21(9):2104-2105.
71. Jansson S, Green B, Grossman AR, Hiller R: A proposal for extending the
nomenclature of light-harvesting proteins of the three transmembrane
helix type. Plant Molecular Biology Reporter 1999, 17(3):221-224.
72. Gagne G, Guertin M: The early genetic response to light in the green
unicellular alga Chlamydomonas eugametos grown under light dark
cycles involves genes that represent direct responses to light and
photosynthesis. Plant Mol Biol 1992, 18(3):429-445.
doi:10.1186/1471-2148-11-101
Cite this article as: Hoffman et al.: Evolution of light-harvesting complex
proteins from Chl c-containing algae. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011
11:101.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
