<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>MochiView: versatile software for genome browsing and DNA motif analysis</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Biology 2010, 8:49. doi: 10.1186/1741-7007-8-49"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Oliver R Homann, Alexander D Johnson"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 8.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 7.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Homann and Johnson BMC Biology 2010, 8:49
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/49

Open Access

SOFTWARE

MochiView: versatile software for genome
browsing and DNA motif analysis
Software

Oliver R Homann*1 and Alexander D Johnson1,2

Abstract
Background: As high-throughput technologies rapidly generate genome-scale data, it becomes increasingly
important to visually integrate these data so that specific hypotheses can be formulated and tested.
Results: We present MochiView, a platform-independent Java software that integrates browsing of genomic
sequences, features, and data with DNA motif visualization and analysis in a visually-appealing and user-friendly
application.
Conclusions: While highly versatile, the software is particularly useful for organizing, exploring, and analyzing large
genomic data sets, such as those from deep RNA sequencing, chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments (ChIP-Seq
and ChIP-Chip), and transcriptional profiling. MochiView provides an extensive suite of utilities to identify and to
explore connections between these data sets and short sequence motifs present in DNA or RNA.
Background
We describe a versatile tool for visualizing and exploring
large genomic data sets, particularly those generated by
chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP). This technique
is often used to identify regions of a genome that are
bound by a specific transcription factor under a given set
of conditions. For those transcription factors that recognize DNA directly, it is often possible, from ChIP data
alone, to deduce the range of DNA sequences (the motif )
that a given transcription factor recognizes. ChIP relies
on cross-linking transcription factors to DNA in living
cells, shearing and isolating the DNA, and recovering the
DNA cross-linked to a specific transcription factor. The
recovered DNA is then analyzed using either tiling
microarrays (ChIP-Chip) or sequencing (ChIP-Seq). Both
approaches generate a nearly continuous profile of binding enrichment across the genome, with high-density tiling for ChIP-Chip currently being feasible only for
smaller genomes, such as those from bacteria or fungi.
Several existing genome browsers aid in the visualization
and analysis of such data, but few contain tools to easily
integrate motif data into the analysis. MochiView (Motif
and ChIP Viewer) is designed to bridge this gap, provid* Correspondence: oliver.homann@ucsf.edu
1

Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of California San
Francisco, San Francisco, California, USA

Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

ing a highly flexible and intuitive interface that allows one
to easily import, visualize, explore, and analyze large sets
of data, such as those generated from ChIP experiments.

Implementation
MochiView is written in Java, and can be used with any
operating system that supports Java version 1.6 or higher.
To facilitate smooth genome browsing (by caching data)
and the import of large files, MochiView requires hardware with a minimum of 1 GB memory. Many genome
browsers introduce an extra layer of complexity by
requiring the user to install an external database or to
store data on a remotely hosted server. MochiView circumvents this problem by transparently incorporating
the Java DB database within the software (specific features of the MochiView software design are described in
the MochiView manual). The database architecture is
designed to scale well even with very large quantities of
data; database size is primarily constrained by available
hard drive space. In practice, database sizes can range
from a few megabytes to many gigabytes in size, depending on genome size and the quantity of data. MochiView
can maintain multiple databases, and contains a database
import/export utility to facilitate sharing of compressed
databases (and plot configurations) between users. Any
database can be populated by the user with one or more
genomes by importing the genome sequence as one or

© 2010 Homann and Johnson; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative

BioMed Central Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Homann and Johnson BMC Biology 2010, 8:49
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/49

more FASTA-format files. Additional genome coordinate-based data can then be uploaded in the commonly
used GFF, BED, or WIG formats or using MochiView's
own custom file formats. Tips for setting up a database
are provided on the MochiView website.

Results and discussion
MochiView serves as both a motif analysis platform and a
feature-rich genome browser, and integrates these features to allow the visualization of motifs across a genome
plot and the refinement of motif analyses using data
imported by the user into the MochiView database (for
example, genome alignments, ChIP data, or expression
data). While many of the tools provided in MochiView
were designed with ChIP-Seq and ChIP-Chip data visualization in mind, the open and flexible data format allows
the import and visualization of any data that have a
genomic context (for example, high-throughput RNA
sequencing data). MochiView is user-friendly, and is
accessible to scientists with no programming knowledge.
MochiView's many features are extensively documented
with a tutorial walkthrough, a detailed manual, and
extensive popup text support within the software. While
many of MochiView's individual features are available in
existing software, no existing software package, to our
knowledge, integrates such a large assortment of motif
and data analysis utilities together with a highly configurable genome browser in a single desktop application.
The most similar existing package, CisGenome [1], provides a greater emphasis on processing of raw ChIP-Chip
and ChIP-Seq data and peak-finding, but is limited with
respect to the scope and ease of use of the motif and data
visualization and analysis options.
Visualizing data across the genome

MochiView uses an integrated local database to manage
all of the data imported by the user, such as genome
sequences and alignments, gene locations, microarray
probe locations, expression data, ChIP data, and motif
libraries. As shown in Figure 1, MochiView allows many
types of data to be displayed along the genome (the x-axis
of the plot) in easily customized plots. Open plot tabs
persist when the software is closed and reopened, and the
display settings can be saved for later use. While the core
design of MochiView's plots was inspired by the UCSC
Genome Browser project [2], MochiView places an added
emphasis on aesthetics, data browsing, and plot interactivity, and provides a rich interface for configuring plot
layout.
Landmarks across a genome (such as the locations of
microarray probes) are displayed by region markers (Figure 1D). Overlapping markers can be displayed as stack
tracks with one region marker positioned above the other.
Numerical data, such as ChIP-Chip enrichment levels,

Page 2 of 8

can be displayed in MochiView using line or bar plots.
These data sets can be plotted on a common y-axis (Figure 1A) or each set can be plotted on its own y-axis (Figure 1C, E, H). Alternatively, numerical data can be
displayed as text on a region marker (Figure 1D), and the
marker can be colored according to the value (a useful
means, for example, of visualizing expression data on
genes; see Figure 1B). Sequences matching DNA motifs
are identified using a user-defined scoring threshold and
are displayed in additional tracks (Figure 1F). Multiple
genome alignments, either genomes from closely related
species or from individuals of the same species, can also
be displayed (Figure 1G), providing the means to quickly
visualize whether a motif match is conserved across
closely related genomes (phylogenetic footprinting; see
Cliften et al. [3] and Kellis et al. [4]), or whether it varies
in interesting ways.
Tools for browsing and interacting with data in a plot

MochiView provides tools for browsing the genome by
sequence or by data set. The sequence browser can be
used to search and highlight specific DNA sequences,
degenerate DNA sequences (using symbols established
by the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry), and direct or inverted repeats, with or without gaps.
The data browser (Figure 1I) allows the user to sort and
search any data set and rapidly jump from location to
location across the genome using hotkeys. For example,
this feature allows the user to quickly browse among
regions of ChIP enrichment above a user-specified
threshold value to rapidly visualize the most significant
binding regions. These can then be searched for matches
to a particular DNA motif.
MochiView plots are interactive and allow smooth panning along chromosomes and smooth zooming in and
out. As one continues to zoom in, the DNA sequence
itself eventually becomes visible. Virtually every element
in a plot provides descriptive popup text, and annotation
can be added to locations within tracks. In addition,
clicking on any item in a plot copies the sequence to the
clipboard, a useful tool for quickly capturing sequences
for use in another application. To aid the user in filtering
large sets of data, an Edit Mode track can be created and
used to toggle a region marker between three states (true/
false/undecided). For example, this feature is useful for
flagging and ignoring likely false positives in a set of ChIP
binding data.
MochiView's motif and multiple genome alignment
tracks (Figures 1F and 1G, respectively) are also interactive. Motif tracks show either the match scores of motif
instances (distant zoom) or the motif logo itself (close
zoom; top of Figure 1J). Double-clicking the motif
instance opens a window juxtaposing the motif logo with
the actual genome sequence. Multiple genome align-

Homann and Johnson BMC Biology 2010, 8:49
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/49

Page 3 of 8

(a)

(b)
(c)
(d)
(i)
(e)
(f)

(g)

(h)

(j)

Figure 1 A sample MochiView screenshot, demonstrating many of the available display formats. A 20 kb span of the Candida albicans genome
is displayed. (a) Two line graphs utilizing the same y-axis and representing experimental (red) and control (blue) ChIP-chip enrichment data for the
Zap1 transcription factor [33]. (b) A gene track, including color-coded data representing log2-transformed expression values from a microarray experiment. This experiment compares a wild-type strain to a Zap1 deletion strain. Note that red indicates the highest expression change; ZRT2 is likely to
be a direct target of Zap1. Gene tracks can also display genes containing multiple isoforms and coding- and non-coding exons (not shown). (c) A bar
graph track, demonstrating an alternate means of displaying the experimental ChIP-chip data represented by the red line graph in (A). (d) A region
marker track, depicting a ChIP binding region and -log10-transformed P-value. (e) An RNA sequencing track, depicting mock data mapped to the plus
strand (blue) and minus strand (orange). (f) A motif track, depicting the motif match scores of instances of four different DNA motifs, each assigned
to a different color. (g) A multiple genome alignment track (several species of yeast), shaded to represent the level of conservation. (h) A line graph
track, representing the GC-content of the DNA. (i) The data browser, which displays the contents of the database in an interactive table. Clicking on
a row in the table centers the plot on the corresponding region. (j) Additional features become evident as the plot is zoomed in. Shown here are closeups of the motif and alignment tracks (F and G, respectively).

ments are displayed as either an overview shaded by conservation level (distant zoom) or as the specific aligned
sequences, including inserts and gaps (close zoom; bottom of Figure 1J). Clicking on the alignments, or on the
carets representing inserts in the alignment, copies the
regional alignment to the clipboard.
ChIP analysis highlights many of MochiView's utilities

MochiView can serve as a central hub for data storage
and visualization, from which data can easily be imported
and exported for manipulation with other applications. In

addition, MochiView contains a number of specific tools
designed to analyze genomic and motif data. While a
description of all of the utilities provided in MochiView is
beyond the scope of this article, we discuss a few of them
in the context of analyzing ChIP data for proteins that
recognize specific DNA sequences. We focus on two
stages of analysis: (1) visualization of the primary ChIP
data and assessment/refinement of the binding region
calls, and (2) identification and characterization of regulatory motifs found within the refined binding regions.
We define a binding region as a set of genomic coordi-

Homann and Johnson BMC Biology 2010, 8:49
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/49

nates that identify the boundaries of a region of ChIP
DNA enrichment, typically associated with some measure of confidence, such as a P-value. Obviously, proper
control experiments are crucial to evaluate the biological
relevance of a binding region, a topic discussed in more
detail below.
Visualizing and refining ChIP data in MochiView

The first step of ChIP data analysis in MochiView is typically the import of raw data (ChIP-Chip enrichment or
ChIP-Seq reads) as well as the binding region calls (peak
calls). MochiView does not supply a comprehensive binding region assignment algorithm (a more limited peak
extraction/refinement utility is provided), as approaches
to calling binding regions are constantly being refined;
moreover, the approaches for calling peaks vary with the
platform used to analyze the precipitated DNA. For
example, Agilent supplies peak-calling software optimized for its array design. It is, however, straightforward
to import peak-calling results from existing software
using MochiView's import utilities, which support several
different file formats. For small genomes, it is also possible to hand-curate ChIP data in MochiView, bypassing
the peak-calling programs entirely.
Once the relevant raw data (ChIP-Chip enrichment or
ChIP-Seq reads) and binding region calls are imported,
MochiView can be used to visualize them in the context
of other genomic information. For example, ChIP data
can be viewed in a plot in conjunction with control ChIP
experiments, gene expression data, sequence GC-enrichment, histone modifications, and motifs. The snapshot
utility allows the user to create individual images (or a
single pdf ) of the plot centered at every binding region in
the data set. This feature is particularly useful for records
in laboratory notebooks or figures for manuscripts.
For those data sets with a manageable number of binding regions, it is possible to visually inspect each binding
region and eliminate clear false positives (and re-evaluate
possible false negatives) that result from the limitations of
binding site detection algorithms. Since MochiView can
display multiple data sets on the same y-axis, the user can
easily overlay multiple replicates of experimental ChIP
data as well as control data sets (for example, ChIP in a
deletion or RNAi-depleted strain or in a strain lacking the
epitope tag targeted for immunoprecipitation). These
data can then be quickly surveyed using the data browser
and an Edit Mode track, and binding regions considered
spurious (for example, those also observed in control
experiments) or unreliable (for example, those observed
in only one experimental replicate) can be flagged and
then filtered using one of MochiView's data refinement
utilities.
MochiView provides numerous additional utilities for
the analysis and manipulation of sets of locations. Set

Page 4 of 8

operation utilities can take the union, intersection, or
subtraction of two location sets, thus providing a simple
mechanism for manipulating positional data. For example, the user can merge the binding region calls of experimental replicates, take the intersection of binding regions
with promoter regions, take the intersection of sets of
ChIP experiments performed with different transcription
factors, or easily eliminate binding region calls that overlap with regions found in a control experiment. Another
utility assigns binding regions to one or more genes
(based on user-defined criteria), and another surveys
whether these genes are enriched for Gene Ontology
(GO) terms (using an approach based on the software
GO TermFinder [5]). Thus, within minutes of importing
ChIP data into MochiView, a user can obtain an overview
of the cellular processes and genes predicted to be regulated by the transcription factor of interest. An important
goal of many ChIP-Chip and ChIP-Seq experiments is the
identification of the DNA motif recognized by the transcription factor of interest, and, as described next,
MochiView provides numerous tools for the discovery,
validation, and comparison of motifs.
Identifying and analyzing motifs in MochiView

We use the term motif to mean a set of short DNA
sequences represented by a position-specific weight
matrix, and define a motif match as a particular DNA
sequence in a genome that is statistically similar to a
motif. Several options are provided for scoring a DNA
sequence for matches to a motif, including logarithm of
odds (LOD) scores (reviewed in [6]), affinity scores (for
affinity motifs generated by MatrixREDUCE [7]), and Pvalues derived from LOD scores (using the compound
importance sampling algorithm of Barash et al. [8]). In
addition to finding particular matches to a motif within a
sequence, MochiView can also generate a cumulative
motif enrichment score for a full sequence using either a
simple cumulative LOD score or a Hidden Markov Model
approach (w-score, as described by Sinha et al. [9]). Figure 2 provides an overview of the many utilities provided
in MochiView for the visualization, management, and
analysis of motifs. (These tools are not specifically tied to
ChIP-Chip and ChIP-Seq analysis; they can be used in
any context.) Motifs in MochiView are visualized as
logos, using a format based on the sequence logo design
originally described by Schneider and Stephens [10]. The
MochiView database provides a convenient means to
maintain and annotate a library of motifs (Figure 2A), and
these motifs can easily be exported as frequency matrices
or logos (Figure 2B). Several motif libraries, derived from
a broad range of organisms including yeast [11-19], nematode [20], human [18,19,21,22], and mouse [18,19,2326], are provided at the MochiView website in a format
this is simple to import into MochiView. This collection

Homann and Johnson BMC Biology 2010, 8:49
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/49

Page 5 of 8

(a) Motif browsing

(b) Motif import/export

(c) Motif detection

(d) Motif comparison

(e) Motif enrichment

(f) Motif distribution

(g) Motif scoring

(h) GO term enrichment

Figure 2 An overview of MochiView's regulatory motif analysis and management tools. (a) MochiView provides a simple interface for browsing
and annotating a motif library. (b) MochiView provides numerous utilities for importing and exporting motif frequency matrices and logos, including
support for motifs based on degenerate DNA sequences, frequency matrices, or affinity matrices (as produced by the program MatrixREDUCE [7]). (c)
MochiView contains a motif detection utility that can identify de novo motifs enriched in user-defined regions. (d) A motif comparison tool identifies
similarities between newly discovered motifs and those in the motif library. (e) Two utilities are provided for analyzing motif enrichment in sets of
user-defined regions. (f) Utilities are provided for detecting non-random distribution of motifs relative to either a set of user-defined locations (for
example, start codons or peaks of ChIP enrichment) or strong instances of another motif (for example, co-occurring motifs that are typically separated
by a 25 bp gap). (g) Several utilities are provided for scoring motifs against user-defined regions. For example, it is relatively simple to output a file
containing the top motif score upstream of each gene for every motif in the library. (h) Enrichment for Gene Ontology terms can be determined for
genes with upstream sequence that contains a strong instance of a motif.

Homann and Johnson BMC Biology 2010, 8:49
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/49

includes one of the largest curated motif libraries, over
1,300 motifs, provided courtesy of the JASPAR database
[18,19]. Additional motifs devised by the user are also
easy to import into MochiView.
MochiView provides a motif detection utility (Figure
2C) that can identify motifs de novo using a Gibbs sampling technique (based on algorithms described by Thijs
et al. [27] and the BioJava [28] online cookbook; implementation details are provided in the manual). The user
can limit a search to specific locations (for example, binding region calls from a ChIP experiment) or search the
upstream regions of a list of specific genes. It is also possible to specify that a motif occurrence must be conserved across closely related genomes. The features of
MochiView also allow the user to rapidly conduct motif
searches based on more complex queries. For example,
the user could chain together utilities to search for motifs
in the portions of binding regions that (1) overlap with
intergenic regions, (2) are within 200 bp of a peak of ChIP
enrichment, (3) do not overlap with areas of enrichment
in the control experiment, and (4) neighbor a gene that
changes expression when the transcription factor of
interest is deleted (or reduced in expression by RNAi) or
overexpressed. As an alternative to the built-in motif
detection utility, the user can also export a set of
sequences of interest (for example, those that lie within
200 bp of a peak of ChIP enrichment), apply a different
motif-finding algorithm, and import the results back into
MochiView. MochiView supports multiple motif file formats, including the output of the commonly used motif
detection applications MEME [29] and Bioprospector
[30].
Often, the first step in the analysis of a newly discovered motif is a determination of whether the motif resembles any known motifs. Motif libraries, such as those
provided at the MochiView website, can be compared
against newly discovered motifs using the motif comparison utility (Figure 2D), which generates a similarity metric based on the algorithm used by the software TomTom
[31]. This utility allows rapid determination of whether a
discovered motif is novel, previously identified, or closely
related to a motif of a different species.
Another common query in motif analysis is the extent
to which a motif is enriched in the DNA precipitated in a
given ChIP experiment (or set of experiments). In other
words, how well can the motif predict the ChIP data? The
motif enrichment utilities (Figure 2E) allow rapid assessment of motif enrichment at incremental score cutoffs for
sets of locations such as binding regions or intergenic
regions. To assess their significance, the levels of enrichment can be compared to those of a set of control locations (for example, comparison of upstream regions that
include ChIP peaks versus those that do not). This analysis can also be conducted on every motif in the library,

Page 6 of 8

allowing the user to identify all known motifs that are
enriched in the locations of interest.
Motif analysis often identifies several candidate DNA
motifs that may be recognized by the transcription factor
of interest. In the simplest cases, where the transcription
factor directly recognizes a motif, the motif is predicted
to lie under the center of the peak of ChIP enrichment. In
other cases, a motif may be significantly enriched in a set
of binding regions, not because it is recognized by the
transcription factor of interest, but rather because it is
bound by a different protein that regulates a similar set of
genes. These alternatives can be tested using MochiView's motif distribution utilities (Figure 2F), which test for
non-random positional distribution using a statistical test
for non-uniform distribution described by Casimiro et al.
[32]. These utilities can also identify non-random spacing
between genomic matches to DNA motifs (for example,
two DNA motifs, either the same or different, with
matches that are typically separated by a 30 to 50 bp gap).
Once a compelling motif has been identified from a set
of ChIP data, the motif can be explored using the
MochiView motif scoring utilities (Figure 2G) and the
plot browser to identify instances of a motif that occur in
intergenic regions but not within the binding regions
called by the ChIP-analysis algorithm. Such analysis can
reveal whether the motif is necessary and sufficient to
describe the binding of the transcription factor of interest. For example, such analysis may identify a set of genes
that is likely to be controlled by the transcription factor
but is not bound by the protein under the conditions or in
the cell types used for the ChIP analysis.
We described above how MochiView's GO term
enrichment utility could connect ChIP data to specific
cellular processes. This same strategy can be used to
search the upstream regions of genes for strong matches
to a motif and associate that motif with one or more GO
terms (Figure 2H). This approach can provide insight into
the biological role of the transcription factor and further
validate the motif's biological relevance.

Conclusions
In summary, MochiView was developed to solve problems we encountered in our basic research efforts, allowing us to integrate different types of genomic data and
analyses in a single format where biological correlations
and insights popped out from the screen. We believe the
software will be useful to members of many other basic
research laboratories who have encountered similar challenges when interpreting and analyzing data on a
genomic scale.
Availability and requirements
Project name: MochiView.
Project home page: http://johnsonlab.ucsf.edu.

Homann and Johnson BMC Biology 2010, 8:49
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/49

Operating system(s): Platform independent.
Programming language: Java.
Other requirements: Java 1.6 or higher, minimum 1GB
memory, 1024 × 768 or higher screen resolution.
License: MochiView is available in source and executable forms, without fee, for academic, non-profit and
commercial users.
Any restrictions to use by non-academics: None
beyond the general restriction against redistribution in
the license.
Abbreviations
BED: Browser Extensible Data; ChIP: chromatin immunoprecipitation; ChIP-Seq:
ChIP analyzed using DNA sequencing; ChIP-Chip: ChIP analyzed using tiling
microarrays; GFF: General Feature Format; GO: Gene Ontology; WIG: Wiggle
format.
Authors' contributions
ORH designed and wrote the software, with support from ADJ. Both authors
contributed to the writing of the manuscript. All authors read and approved
the final manuscript.
Acknowledgements
We thank B. Tuch for developing the initial concept and design for displaying
ChIP and motif data in Java, and David Gilbert for the JFreeChart Java library
utilized by MochiView's plots. We are grateful to the creators of the UCSC
genome browser for database design inspiration. We also thank L. Booth, C.
Cain, S. Cooper, P. Fordyce, S. French, A. Hernday, Q. Mitrovich, C. Nobile, and M.
Voorhies for software testing and helpful suggestions. This work was supported by NIH grant 5R01GM37049-22 to ADJ.
Author Details
of Microbiology and Immunology, University of California San
Francisco, San Francisco, California, USA and 2Department of Biochemistry and
Biophysics, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, California, USA

1Department

Received: 2 March 2010 Accepted: 21 April 2010
Published: 21 April 2010
© 2010 Homann and Johnson; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
This is an Open Access from: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/49
BMC article is2010, 8:49article distributed under the terms of
Biology available

References
1. Ji H, Jiang H, Ma W, Johnson DS, Myers RM, Wong WH: An integrated
software system for analyzing ChIP-chip and ChIP-seq data. Nat
Biotechnol 2008, 26:1293-1300.
2. Kent WJ, Sugnet CW, Furey TS, Roskin KM, Pringle TH, Zahler AM, Haussler
D: The human genome browser at UCSC. Genome Res 2002,
12:996-1006.
3. Cliften P, Sudarsanam P, Desikan A, Fulton L, Fulton B, Majors J, Waterston
R, Cohen BA, Johnston M: Finding functional features in Saccharomyces
genomes by phylogenetic footprinting. Science 2003, 301:71-76.
4. Kellis M, Patterson N, Endrizzi M, Birren B, Lander ES: Sequencing and
comparison of yeast species to identify genes and regulatory
elements. Nature 2003, 423:241-254.
5. Boyle EI, Weng S, Gollub J, Jin H, Botstein D, Cherry JM, Sherlock G:
GO:TermFinder--open source software for accessing Gene Ontology
information and finding significantly enriched Gene Ontology terms
associated with a list of genes. Bioinformatics 2004, 20:3710-3715.
6. D'Haeseleer P: What are DNA sequence motifs? Nat Biotechnol 2006,
24:423-425.
7. Foat BC, Morozov AV, Bussemaker HJ: Statistical mechanical modeling of
genome-wide transcription factor occupancy data by MatrixREDUCE.
Bioinformatics 2006, 22:e141-149.
8. Barash Y, Elidan G, Kaplan T, Friedman N: CIS: compound importance
sampling method for protein-DNA binding site p-value estimation.
Bioinformatics 2005, 21:596-600.
9. Sinha S: On counting position weight matrix matches in a sequence,
with application to discriminative motif finding. Bioinformatics 2006,
22:e454-463.

Page 7 of 8

10. Schneider TD, Stephens RM: Sequence logos: a new way to display
consensus sequences. Nucleic Acids Res 1990, 18:6097-6100.
11. Pachkov M, Erb I, Molina N, van Nimwegen E: SwissRegulon: a database
of genome-wide annotations of regulatory sites. Nucleic Acids Res 2007,
35:D127-131.
12. Gasch AP, Moses AM, Chiang DY, Fraser HB, Berardini M, Eisen MB:
Conservation and evolution of cis-regulatory systems in ascomycete
fungi. PLoS Biol 2004, 2:e398.
13. Badis G, Chan ET, van Bakel H, Pena-Castillo L, Tillo D, Tsui K, Carlson CD,
Gossett AJ, Hasinoff MJ, Warren CL, Gebbia M, Talukder S, Yang A,
Mnaimneh S, Terterov D, Coburn D, Li Yeo A, Yeo ZX, Clarke ND, Lieb JD,
Ansari AZ, Nislow C, Hughes TR: A library of yeast transcription factor
motifs reveals a widespread function for Rsc3 in targeting nucleosome
exclusion at promoters. Mol Cell 2008, 32:878-887.
14. Wijaya E, Yiu SM, Son NT, Kanagasabai R, Sung WK: MotifVoter: a novel
ensemble method for fine-grained integration of generic motif
finders. Bioinformatics 2008, 24:2288-2295.
15. Harbison CT, Gordon DB, Lee TI, Rinaldi NJ, Macisaac KD, Danford TW,
Hannett NM, Tagne JB, Reynolds DB, Yoo J, Jennings EG, Zeitlinger J,
Pokholok DK, Kellis M, Rolfe PA, Takusagawa KT, Lander ES, Gifford DK,
Fraenkel E, Young RA: Transcriptional regulatory code of a eukaryotic
genome. Nature 2004, 431:99-104.
16. MacIsaac KD, Wang T, Gordon DB, Gifford DK, Stormo GD, Fraenkel E: An
improved map of conserved regulatory sites for Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. BMC Bioinformatics 2006, 7:113.
17. Zhu C, Byers KJ, McCord RP, Shi Z, Berger MF, Newburger DE, Saulrieta K,
Smith Z, Shah MV, Radhakrishnan M, Philippakis AA, Hu Y, De Masi F,
Pacek M, Rolfs A, Murthy T, Labaer J, Bulyk ML: High-resolution DNAbinding specificity analysis of yeast transcription factors. Genome Res
2009, 19:556-566.
18. Sandelin A, Alkema W, Engstrom P, Wasserman WW, Lenhard B: JASPAR:
an open-access database for eukaryotic transcription factor binding
profiles. Nucleic Acids Res 2004, 32:D91-94.
19. Bryne JC, Valen E, Tang MH, Marstrand T, Winther O, da Piedade I, Krogh A,
Lenhard B, Sandelin A: JASPAR, the open access database of
transcription factor-binding profiles: new content and tools in the
2008 update. Nucleic Acids Res 2008, 36:D102-106.
20. Grove CA, De Masi F, Barrasa MI, Newburger DE, Alkema MJ, Bulyk ML,
Walhout AJ: A multiparameter network reveals extensive divergence
between C. elegans bHLH transcription factors. Cell 2009, 138:314-327.
21. Xie X, Lu J, Kulbokas EJ, Golub TR, Mootha V, Lindblad-Toh K, Lander ES,
Kellis M: Systematic discovery of regulatory motifs in human promoters
and 3' UTRs by comparison of several mammals. Nature 2005,
434:338-345.
22. Chong A, Zhang G, Bajic VB: Information for the Coordinates of Exons
(ICE): a human splice sites database. Genomics 2004, 84:762-766.
23. Badis G, Berger MF, Philippakis AA, Talukder S, Gehrke AR, Jaeger SA, Chan
ET, Metzler G, Vedenko A, Chen X, Kuznetsov H, Wang CF, Coburn D,
Newburger DE, Morris Q, Hughes TR, Bulyk ML: Diversity and complexity
in DNA recognition by transcription factors. Science 2009,
324:1720-1723.
24. Berger MF, Badis G, Gehrke AR, Talukder S, Philippakis AA, Pena-Castillo L,
Alleyne TM, Mnaimneh S, Botvinnik OB, Chan ET, Khalid F, Zhang W,
Newburger D, Jaeger SA, Morris QD, Bulyk ML, Hughes TR: Variation in
homeodomain DNA binding revealed by high-resolution analysis of
sequence preferences. Cell 2008, 133:1266-1276.
25. Berger MF, Philippakis AA, Qureshi AM, He FS, Estep PW III, Bulyk ML:
Compact, universal DNA microarrays to comprehensively determine
transcription-factor binding site specificities. Nat Biotechnol 2006,
24:1429-1435.
26. Newburger DE, Bulyk ML: UniPROBE: an online database of protein
binding microarray data on protein-DNA interactions. Nucleic Acids Res
2009, 37:D77-82.
27. Thijs G, Lescot M, Marchal K, Rombauts S, De Moor B, Rouze P, Moreau Y: A
higher-order background model improves the detection of promoter
regulatory elements by Gibbs sampling. Bioinformatics 2001,
17:1113-1122.
28. Holland RC, Down TA, Pocock M, Prlic A, Huen D, James K, Foisy S, Drager
A, Yates A, Heuer M, Schreiber MJ: BioJava: an open-source framework
for bioinformatics. Bioinformatics 2008, 24:2096-2097.

Homann and Johnson BMC Biology 2010, 8:49
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/49

29. Bailey TL, Williams N, Misleh C, Li WW: MEME: discovering and analyzing
DNA and protein sequence motifs. Nucleic Acids Res 2006, 34:W369-373.
30. Liu X, Brutlag DL, Liu JS: BioProspector: discovering conserved DNA
motifs in upstream regulatory regions of co-expressed genes. Pac
Symp Biocomput 2001:127-138.
31. Gupta S, Stamatoyannopoulos JA, Bailey TL, Noble WS: Quantifying
similarity between motifs. Genome Biol 2007, 8:R24.
32. Casimiro AC, Vinga S, Freitas AT, Oliveira AL: An analysis of the positional
distribution of DNA motifs in promoter regions and its biological
relevance. BMC Bioinformatics 2008, 9:89.
33. Nobile CJ, Nett JE, Hernday AD, Homann OR, Deneault JS, Nantel A, Andes
DR, Johnson AD, Mitchell AP: Biofilm matrix regulation by Candida
albicans Zap1. PLoS Biol 2009, 7:e1000133.
doi: 10.1186/1741-7007-8-49
Cite this article as: Homann and Johnson, MochiView: versatile software for
genome browsing and DNA motif analysis BMC Biology 2010, 8:49

Page 8 of 8

</pre>
</body>
</html>
