<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>1471-2105-5-17.fm</title>
<meta name="Author" content="csproduction"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 7.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 5.0.5 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
BMC Bioinformatics

BioMed Central

Open Access

Methodology article

VisANT: an online visualization and analysis tool for biological
interaction data
Zhenjun Hu1, Joseph Mellor1, Jie Wu2 and Charles DeLisi*1,2
Address: 1Bioinformatics Program, Boston University, Boston, MA 02215, USA and 2Department of Biomedical Engineering, Boston University,
Boston, MA 02215, USA
Email: Zhenjun Hu - zjhu@bu.edu; Joseph Mellor - mellor@bu.edu; Jie Wu - jiewu@bu.edu; Charles DeLisi* - delisi@bu.edu
* Corresponding author

Published: 19 February 2004
BMC Bioinformatics 2004, 5:17

Received: 11 September 2003
Accepted: 19 February 2004

This article is available from: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/5/17
© 2004 Hu et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article: verbatim copying and redistribution of this article are permitted in all media
for any purpose, provided this notice is preserved along with the article's original URL.

Abstract
Background: New techniques for determining relationships between biomolecules of all types –
genes, proteins, noncoding DNA, metabolites and small molecules – are now making a substantial
contribution to the widely discussed explosion of facts about the cell. The data generated by these
techniques promote a picture of the cell as an interconnected information network, with molecular
components linked with one another in topologies that can encode and represent many features
of cellular function. This networked view of biology brings the potential for systematic
understanding of living molecular systems.
Results: We present VisANT, an application for integrating biomolecular interaction data into a
cohesive, graphical interface. This software features a multi-tiered architecture for data flexibility,
separating back-end modules for data retrieval from a front-end visualization and analysis package.
VisANT is a freely available, open-source tool for researchers, and offers an online interface for a
large range of published data sets on biomolecular interactions, including those entered by users.
This system is integrated with standard databases for organized annotation, including GenBank,
KEGG and SwissProt. VisANT is a Java-based, platform-independent tool suitable for a wide range
of biological applications, including studies of pathways, gene regulation and systems biology.
Conclusion: VisANT has been developed to provide interactive visual mining of biological
interaction data sets. The new software provides a general tool for mining and visualizing such data
in the context of sequence, pathway, structure, and associated annotations. Interaction and
predicted association data can be combined, overlaid, manipulated and analyzed using a variety of
built-in functions. VisANT is available at http://visant.bu.edu.

Background
The growing catalogue of biological data includes information discovered by methods that detect interactions
between different biological molecules. Some of these
techniques are direct and experimental (e.g. yeast twohybrid, chromatin-immunoprecipitation (ChIP)) while
others are indirect, predictive and computational (e.g.,
phylogenetic profiling [1], protein binding prediction[2],

and cis-element detection [3] and gene expression profiling) Instances of such interactions are the observed or predicted relationships between genes and proteins, and for
the purpose of computational storage and analysis they
can be represented as networks of functional association.
Tools are needed which gather, display and facilitate analysis of these large data structures.

Page 1 of 8
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2004, 5

Interaction discovery techniques continue to emerge and
evolve. Although they vary in accuracy, the confidence in
any particular association is highest when made by a combination of measures [4]. What is true for the individual
link in this case is also true for the network; that is, that
the prediction of functional pathways and regulatory subunits in the cell is best accomplished by the combination
of many measures of interaction, be they experimental or
computational, between DNA, proteins, or any molecule
in the cell. The results of Ideker and Thorsson, et al[5],
Jansen, et al[6], and Yanai and DeLisi[7] suggest the
potential value in combining multiple interaction types in
analyzing global systems. In contrast to biological
sequence databases, for which uses and applications are
well established, the development of databases and associated tools for organizing, mining and analyzing molecular systems has begun relatively recently. To date, the
focus in this rapidly evolving field has been mainly on
tools for describing and visualizing experimental interaction networks [8-10], derived from gene expression and
protein interaction data sources. Research on new methods, both computational and experimental, that describe
associations among genes and proteins will continue to
necessitate flexible data models that can grow to fit the
needs of analysis and visualization. The broader problem
of multiple data type integration will largely depend on
the usefulness of these emerging data models.
Published databases such as BIND [11], KEGG [12], Predictome [13] and STRING[14] provide the conceptual
platforms on which software for leveraging the full content of the interactome could operate. Early efforts in this
area, such as the protein-protein binding databases DIP
[15] and PathCalling [16], demonstrated usefulness in
dynamic visualization of interaction networks, by allowing users to navigate among links in those particular data
sets. Recent visualization and analysis tools such as Cytoscape [8], MintViewer [9] and Osprey [10] have expanded
this concept. They include features for viewing and querying larger subsets of the interactome on a more global
scale. The tools typically operate from the viewpoint of
physical associations between proteins, or correlated gene
expression, and include information that summarizes
annotated functions, such as Gene Ontology (GO)[17]
groupings, among subnetworks of linked genes or proteins. Missing from the current bioinformatics palette,
though, is a generic interaction network tool capable of
managing and analyzing the more abstract forms of interaction information that are available and regularly published. The VisANT tool, while not a complete solution in
responding to this need, is nonetheless robust and useful
for many different data types and analyses.
Important features that VisANT offers to the research community are (i) navigation of database-driven interaction

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/5/17

and association networks, (ii) visual comparison, manipulation and storage of known networks and uploaded
user-defined data, (iii) the ability to uncover orthologous
networks, and (iv) the ability to perform exploratory data
mining and basic graph operations on arbitrary networks
and sub-networks, including loop detection, degree distribution (the distribution of edges per node) and shortest
path identification between various component genes or
proteins.

Results
Design
One of the major design goals is flexibility – both with
respect to the assimilation of new types of data, and the
need for evolving a graphical interface that can fit new
techniques for describing biological networks. For example, if new computational methods are published for
identifying cis-regulatory elements upstream of yeast
genes, we want putative interactions derived from these
methods to be easily compared with other interactions,
such as those determined by chromatin immuno-precipitation (ChIP) assays. For some problems, users might be
interested only in those experimentally determined interactions, such as protein-protein or protein-DNA binding
– the physical interactome. Where experimental data is
limited, or biased towards genes with well-understood
function, research of gene networks can benefit from use
of systematically derived interactions produced in silico[2]. The increasingly data-driven state of research biology suggests that analysis of high-throughput data is
necessarily more exploratory than hypothesis-driven.
VisANT is designed to allow a wide range of exploratory
questions. A researcher interested in interaction data for
the uncharacterized gene YLR089C in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, which has uncharacterized function, could explore
the network of known interactions in different species for
conserved features. Investigations of biologically directed
questions, such as finding transcription factors putatively
linked downstream of known receptor proteins, could be
used in generating hypotheses regarding new molecular
functions or modes of gene regulation [8,18,19].

Regardless of the motivating problem, users should be
able to identify potentially meaningful features of networks such as shortest paths, dense nodes (i.e. nodes with
a large number of connected edges), highly-connected
subgraphs, or network motifs such as directed loops or
feedforward loops which appear to be biologically important [20-23].
Implementation
We applied the Model-View-Controller (MVC)[24] design
pattern for the architecture of VisANT. The tiered system
separates the data abstraction (the process by which a particular data type is represented and stored, e.g., a two-

Page 2 of 8
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2004, 5

dimensional adjacency matrix represents interactions
between pairs of proteins) and retrieval layers from the
presentation schema, which improves data integrity and
increases flexibility. In particular, the tiered system allows
us to put data control logic at the middle-tier to protect
the data. Since the presentation of the stored data is separated from the data itself, users can modify the visual data
(such as x, y coordinates, node size and labels) without
modifying the data stored in the database, or make
changes in any tier, without effecting the others, which
makes the system easily maintainable and extensible.
The system is implemented using J2EE™ technology using
a web service layer driven by the freely available Tomcat
server. This data layer technology is both server- and platform-independent. It can be readily adapted to different
computer systems and, with additional effort, other data
sources. This enables other interaction databases to reuse
VisANT as a visual analysis tool by implementing a web
service layer with a database-specific Application Program
Interface, and the VisANT data transportation format.
Technical details of this implementation can be found in
the source code of VisANT, as well as its user manual that
is available at http://visant.bu.edu/vmanual/[25].
VisANT is accessed through its main web page, http://
visant.bu.edu[26] using a compatible web browser and
Java Runtime Engine (JRE). The visual tool has been tested
on Netscape, Mozilla and Internet Explorer browsers, running Java (JRE 1.1 or greater) on Windows 2000/XP, Linux
and Mac OSX. For the most reliable performance of the
software, we recommend using a newer version of Java
(JRE ≥ 1.4), freely available from Sun at http://
java.sun.com[27]. The source code for VisANT is available
on request.
Visual exploration of biological interaction network
The main interface of VisANT, the network visualization
panel (Fig 1), displays a set of connected nodes or vertices
corresponding to user selected gene IDs (the nodes) and
the experimental methods that uncovered the connections (the connecting lines, or edges). Each vertex thus
contains annotation information, and each edge stores
the method used in assigning the link. Different experimental methods are captured on the screen by using edges
of different color; consequently different edges can have
different meanings. Some represent actual physical interactions between proteins (e.g. from yeast two-hybrid.);
some connect a transcription factor to the protein
encoded by the gene downstream of the regulatory
sequence to which it binds (ChIP); others represent correlated functions (e.g. those determined by phylogenetic
profiling[28].) Edges between transcription factors and
the products of the genes they regulate are represented by

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/5/17

arrows, to indicate causal direction. All other edges are
currently undirected.
A network is constructed by entering ORF IDs, GI numbers, or even KEGG pathway IDs for an arbitrary number
of genes, and using data obtained by one or any combination of methods shown in the methods menu. Nodes corresponding to the selected genes will then appear on the
screen, and by left clicking one or more times, they can be
expanded into an increasingly complex set of interactions.
Figure 1 is a screen shot of VisANT showing the connections in a segment of the MAPK regulatory network constructed by data from Lee et. al[29], and correlations in
microarray experiments published by Hughes, et al. [30]
VisANT algorithms find paths between receptors (STE2,
SHO1, and MID2) and transcription factors (STE12,
SWI4) in the MAPK network, revealing complex feedback
relationships that possibly contribute to regulatory control in these pathways.
Additional functionality is supported by the Predictome
database, which maintains look-up tables that store and
associate synonyms and annotations for the same protein/gene, and which also facilitates the integrative analysis of the network with function, structure and sequence
annotation. VisANT also provides functions to load userdefined interaction data with a single mouse-click, enabling easy comparison between different data sets. The
number of viewable genes, proteins and interactions can
range from few (as shown in Fig. 1) to thousands. To simplify and help filter the larger data sets, different layout
algorithms combined with the built-in basic graph operations, such as closed loops, help to isolate network topology features that have potential biological implications.
[20-22,31,32]
The relaxing layout algorithms implemented in VisANT
are all based on a similar core heuristic algorithm
[33]which models a two-dimensional network of physical
objects with mechanical forces operating along the edges.
The source code for these algorithms is based on modifications of a layout program distributed by Sun Corporation [27]. Although the algorithms have no biological
meaning, they successfully separate the graph by the density of the connections between subgroups of nodes, providing a visual method of identifying relatively dense
subgraphs within larger networks. Additional graph operations are generally provided through the various filters
whose functions are detailed in the user manual on the
VisANT website.
Data integration
Our public VisANT implementation currently draws
information from the Predictome database, based on data
from 66 fully sequenced microbial genomes. Higher

Page 3 of 8
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2004, 5

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/5/17

Figure 1
Sample view of a VisAnt application
Sample view of a VisAnt application. Displayed are connections in a segment of the MAPK regulatory network constructed by data from Lee et. al.,[29] (Brown lines with arrows, indicating binding of protein to DNA) and correlations in
microarray experiments published by Hughes, et al[30] (green lines), as well as links established by protein-protein binding etc.
Genes for membrane-bound receptors, and related pathway proteins and transcription factors linked by physical interaction
and gene expression relation are shown. Protein/DNA is represented as the nodes. Red nodes represent proteins that are
annotated in at least one KEGG pathway (the quick-tip of node STE12 indicates that it maps to KEGG pathway 04010). A "-"
indicates that the node is fully expanded (i.e. all connections are shown) while the "+" indicates that some links have not yet
been displayed. Correlations between nodal proteins are indicated by connecting lines (edges), different colors corresponding
to different experimental methods.

eukaryotes, including worm, human and mouse, are not
yet supported, although we do include parsed versions of
their genomes, so that networks orthologous to those in
microbes can be mined. Computational methods in this
database include phylogenetic profiling, gene fusion and
gene proximity data. Experimental data drawn from publicly available data include protein-protein and proteinDNA interactions (S. cerevisiae), as well as gene expression

correlation and association data. VisANT provides a general platform for the integrative research on interaction
networks in the context of pathway, sequence, structure
and associated annotation. Pathway data is provided by
the KEGG database based on the KEGG Markup Language
(KGML)[35] which is currently available only for metabolic pathways. The COG[36] database was used to provide homology information for relationships between

Page 4 of 8
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2004, 5

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/5/17

Figure 2
Illustration of data integration in VisANT
Illustration of data integration in VisANT. (A) The MAPK related network constructed from receptors and transcription
factors in the pheromone-response pathway. Purple rectangles demonstrate the quick-tip obtained by mouse-overs of the
edge between DIG1 and FUS3, and the nodes CHA3 and STE12 respectively. Most integration data are available only after the
node has been queried against the databases, and are available under the "Available Links" submenu of the node. (B) GenBank[37] record of human homology protein for CHA1 based on COG database. The homology information is available after
the corresponding filter has been processed. (C) STE12 is mapped to KEGG pathway 04010 (MAPK Singling Pathway) and the
pathway has been loaded with corresponding nodes highlighted. (D) Functional annotation of STE5 is loaded through the crossreference in SGD[49] database.

species. Annotation information is drawn from KEGG and
the Gene Ontology, and cross-referencing of genes and
proteins to GenBank [37] and SwissProt is provided.
When an interaction/association is discovered by more
than one method, the corresponding edge will be segmented with different colors corresponding to the methods. These colors can be customized using the built-in
method table. An example can be found in Figure 2A,
which shows that the interaction between DIG1 and FUS3
is recovered by three different experimental methods. Red
nodes in Figure 2A indicate that they have been mapped
to KEGG pathways. For example, quick-tips show that
STE12 has been mapped to KEGG pathway 04010, while

CHA1 is mapped to both KEGG pathways 00260 and
00272. KEGG pathways are directly referenced from
within VisANT, with corresponding nodes highlighted as
shown in Figure 2C. For S. cerevisiae proteins, annotation
from SGD has also been referenced, as shown in Figure
2D. GenBank[37] sequence information has been referenced in similar fashion.
Interaction networks of arbitrary genes in microbes can be
projected onto groups of orthologous human genes,
providing hypothetical relationships between human
genes. This projection is based on the COG ortholog database, coupled with filters provided by VisANT. Figure 2A
shows that CHA1 has two ortholog proteins in human

Page 5 of 8
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2004, 5

(19923959 and 5803161, GI number) and Figure 2B displays the GenBank[37] record of human protein
19923959 directly referenced in VisANT.

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/5/17

visual integration and computation. Table 1 summarizes
the differences between the three programs.

Future Directions
Network storage and sharing
Visualization and comparison of different interaction networks (networks obtained with separate methods) is an
important means of validation and understanding the relative contribution of different methods to functional
understanding. VisANT allows users to enter customized
data sets through the control panel as shown in Figure 1,
and to overlay these data sets upon one another, or upon
published datasets. Where multiple data sets based on
similar methods have been published (e.g. yeast 2-hybrid
screening in S. cerevisiae), the reference to each source is
cited. The data format for user-specified data is simple tabdelimited, and can represent either directed or undirected
associations. VisANT also provides password-protected
saving of each customized graphical workspace to allow
further analysis of a particular network at any time from
anywhere on the internet. In addition, these individual
workspaces can be securely shared, to promote collaboration within and among research groups.

Discussion
Although networks and pathways can be visualized and
navigated using clickable images [15], the data mining
process requires more than visualization. Visual data mining is mediated by a collection of interactive methods that
support exploration of data sets by adjusting parameters
to see how they affect the information being presented.
The functionalities provided by VisANT reflect this
approach, especially as it applies to biological networks.
Both genome-wide and conventional interaction data can
be noisy and error prone [38]. The integration of interaction data from various data sources is critical for improving the accuracy of these data [38-42]. Data integration
also requires the unification of heterogeneous data (such
as expression data, sub-cellular localization information,
and functional category etc.) into one general data model
so that different analyses can be carried out easily. Clustering of gene expression, for example, may be guided by
knowledge of protein localization, or participation of
genes in the interaction network [43].
Other visual integration tools, such as Cytoscape [8],
Osprey [10] and GenMAPP[44], are able to display varying aspects of physical interaction and expression data
and relate this to functions and pathway annotation.
VisANT differs conceptually from these tools in the notion
that all such information – interaction, expression, function – can be represented and analyzed as a network. The
dimensions of these networks can be very large, thus presenting a major and still incompletely met challenge for

The goal of the VisANT project is to provide a general platform for visually mining process-level annotation[45].
This annotation, sometimes called functional, relates the
genome to cellular processes: growth, apoptosis, differentiation and so on. Our first step focuses on protein/gene
interaction mining and visualization. As the interaction
network turns to functional modules/pathways and networks, corresponding functions will be implemented to
support further analyses, including simulation of cellular
activities.
Specifically, VisANT enhancements in the near future will
include the following:
1. Visualization and graph manipulation. The data model
will be further generalized to represent different types of
bio-objects and the interactions between them. Visual representation of nodes and edges will be enhanced and
standardized [46,47]. An immediate goal is to produce a
data model and related functionalities that support
abstract groupings and modularity based on function or
experimental evidence, in order to facilitate the full integration with groupings such as KEGG pathways, GO
annotations, and diverse objects such as protein complexes [23]. These groupings enable a more modular analysis of structure within interaction networks.
2. Inclusion of the full complement of KEGG pathways.
3. Support for higher eukaryotes including worm, human
and mouse. Analysis and comparison of interactions
across species will continue to be improved. Specifically,
we are interested in the concept of cross-species mapping
to facilitate direct comparison of the conservation of networks between different organisms.
4. The implementation of additional features for integrating data sources. For example, VisANT will be able to load
microarray data either from standard databases (GEO [48]
etc.), or from a user's local file. Third party open-source
software, such as TM4 [34], will be integrated to enable
direct analysis of expression data in context of mined
networks.
5. VisANT's architecture will be further enhanced to enable pluggable parsers and filters, providing the flexible
interfaces to facilitate the integration of heterogeneous
data sources and third-party's analysis. Correspondingly,
VisANT will be able to run as both a signed on-line java
applet and standalone application.

Page 6 of 8
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2004, 5

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/5/17

Table 1: Comparison of VisANT against Cytoscpe and Osprey

VisANT

Cytoscape

Osprey

Based on yWorks package
Protein/Gene/Compound

Developed in house
Protein/Gene

• Local file with its own format for both
network and expression data.

• Up-to-date Grid database with
experimental data only
• local file with its own format

• Local file
• Image printing
• Search node name on the graph

• Local file
• Image printing
• Vector graph
• Search node name on the graph

• Various layouts

• Various layouts

• Flexible filters with different
attributes of node and edge

• Filtering the data with the different
methods/resources
• Compare different data sets

N/A

Support 4 species

• Go database

• Go database

Run Mode

Developed in house
Node can either be Protein/Gene,
chemical compound, KEGG pathway
• Up-to-date Predictome database,
both experimental/computation data
• On-line network file saved per user
• Tab-delimited user data through
copy/paste
• On line saving of work space per user
• Export as tab-delimited file
• Jpg image
• On-line searching using either name,
GI number, ORF ID, KEGG pathway
ID etc.
• Various layouts
• Network motif detection including
feed-forward, feedback, shortest path,
auto-regulation etc.
• Filtering the data with the different
methods
• Compare different data sets
• Select nodes with certain range of
connections
• Support 66 species
• Enable orthology searching against
Human genome
• KEGG database
• Genbank database
• SGD database
• On-line java applet

• Stand-alone application

Java version
License

1.1 above
Open source

1.4 above
Open source

• On-line java applet
• Stand-alone application
1.4 above
Commercial, free to academy

Graph Manipulation
Data Generalization*
Input

Output

Search

Network Operation

Filtering

Multi-species

Integration

*All three programs can display any string as a node. The components listed in this row are those that have biological annotations

We expect that these and other directions of VisANT will
also be augmented and assisted by feedback from the
research community.

Authors' contributions
JM and ZH contributed to software concept. ZH implemented the system and performed major programming
work. ZH, JM and JW contributed to the underlying Predictome database. This work was directed by CD. All
authors have read and approved the final manuscript.

Acknowledgements

3.
4.
5.

6.
7.
8.

This work was funded by NIH grant 1P20GM066401-01.
9.

References
1.

2.

Pellegrini M, Marcotte EM, Thompson MJ, Eisenberg D, Yeates TO:
Assigning protein functions by comparative genome analysis: protein phylogenetic profiles. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1999,
96:4285-4288.
Jansen R, Yu H, Greenbaum D, Kluger Y, Krogan NJ, Chung S, Emili
A, Snyder M, Greenblatt JF, Gerstein M: A Bayesian networks
approach for predicting protein-protein interactions from
genomic data. Science 2003, 302:449-453.

10.
11.
12.

Frith MC, Hansen U, Weng Z: Detection of cis-element clusters
in higher eukaryotic DNA. Bioinformatics 2001, 17:878-889.
Marcotte EM, Pellegrini M, Ng HL, Rice DW, Yeates TO, Eisenberg
D: Detecting protein function and protein-protein interactions from genome sequences. Science 1999, 285:751-753.
Ideker T, Thorsson V, Ranish JA, Christmas R, Buhler J, Eng JK, Bumgarner R, Goodlett DR, Aebersold R, Hood L: Integrated genomic
and proteomic analyses of a systematically perturbed metabolic network. Science 2001, 292:929-934.
Jansen R, Greenbaum D, Gerstein M: Relating whole-genome
expression data with protein-protein interactions. Genome Res
2002, 12:37-46.
Yanai I, DeLisi C: The society of genes: networks of functional
links between genes from comparative genomics. Genome Biol
2002, 3:research0064.
Ideker T, Ozier O, Schwikowski B, Siegel AF: Discovering regulatory and signalling circuits in molecular interaction
networks. Bioinformatics 2002, 18 Suppl 1:S233-40.
Zanzoni A, Montecchi-Palazzi L, Quondam M, Ausiello G, HelmerCitterich M, Cesareni G: MINT: a Molecular INTeraction
database. FEBS Lett 2002, 513:135-140.
Breitkreutz BJ, Stark C, Tyers M: Osprey: a network visualization
system. Genome Biol 2003, 4:R22.
Bader GD, Betel D, Hogue CW: BIND: the Biomolecular Interaction Network Database. Nucleic Acids Res 2003, 31:248-250.
Kanehisa M, Goto S, Kawashima S, Nakaya A: The KEGG databases at GenomeNet. Nucleic Acids Res 2002, 30:42-46.

Page 7 of 8
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2004, 5

13.
14.
15.
16.
17.

18.

19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.

30.

31.

32.
33.
34.
35.
36.

37.
38.

Mellor JC, Yanai I, Clodfelter KH, Mintseris J, DeLisi C: Predictome:
a database of putative functional links between proteins.
Nucleic Acids Res 2002, 30:306-309.
von Mering C, Huynen M, Jaeggi D, Schmidt S, Bork P, Snel B:
STRING: a database of predicted functional associations
between proteins. Nucleic Acids Res 2003, 31:258-261.
Xenarios I, Fernandez E, Salwinski L, Duan XJ, Thompson MJ, Marcotte EM, Eisenberg D: DIP: The Database of Interacting Proteins: 2001 update. Nucleic Acids Res 2001, 29:239-241.
CuraGen Corporation. http://portal.curagen.com .
Ashburner M, Ball CA, Blake JA, Botstein D, Butler H, Cherry JM,
Davis AP, Dolinski K, Dwight SS, Eppig JT, Harris MA, Hill DP, IsselTarver L, Kasarskis A, Lewis S, Matese JC, Richardson JE, Ringwald M,
Rubin GM, Sherlock G: Gene ontology: tool for the unification
of biology. The Gene Ontology Consortium. Nat Genet 2000,
25:25-29.
Roberts CJ, Nelson B, Marton MJ, Stoughton R, Meyer MR, Bennett
HA, He YD, Dai H, Walker WL, Hughes TR, Tyers M, Boone C,
Friend SH: Signaling and circuitry of multiple MAPK pathways
revealed by a matrix of global gene expression profiles. Science 2000, 287:873-880.
Steffen M, Petti A, Aach J, D'Haeseleer P, Church G: Automated
modelling of signal transduction networks. BMC Bioinformatics
2002, 3:34.
Milo R, Shen-Orr S, Itzkovitz S, Kashtan N, Chklovskii D, Alon U:
Network motifs: simple building blocks of complex
networks. Science 2002, 298:824-827.
Shen-Orr SS, Milo R, Mangan S, Alon U: Network motifs in the
transcriptional regulation network of Escherichia coli. Nat
Genet 2002, 31:64-68.
Ferrell J. E., Jr.: Self-perpetuating states in signal transduction:
positive feedback, double-negative feedback and bistability.
Curr Opin Cell Biol 2002, 14:140-148.
Bader GD, Hogue CW: An automated method for finding
molecular complexes in large protein interaction networks.
BMC Bioinformatics 2003, 4:2.
Buschmann Frank: Pattern-oriented software architecture : a
system of patterns. Chichester ; New York, Wiley; 1996:xvi, 467.
VisANT Manual. http://visant.bu.edu/vmanual/ .
VisANT. Http://visant.bu.edu/ .
Java. http://java.sun.com/ .
Wu J, Kasif S, DeLisi C: Identification of functional links
between genes using phylogenetic profiles. Bioinformatics 2003,
19:1524-1530.
Lee TI, Rinaldi NJ, Robert F, Odom DT, Bar-Joseph Z, Gerber GK,
Hannett NM, Harbison CT, Thompson CM, Simon I, Zeitlinger J, Jennings EG, Murray HL, Gordon DB, Ren B, Wyrick JJ, Tagne JB, Volkert
TL, Fraenkel E, Gifford DK, Young RA: Transcriptional regulatory
networks in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Science 2002,
298:799-804.
Hughes TR, Marton MJ, Jones AR, Roberts CJ, Stoughton R, Armour
CD, Bennett HA, Coffey E, Dai H, He YD, Kidd MJ, King AM, Meyer
MR, Slade D, Lum PY, Stepaniants SB, Shoemaker DD, Gachotte D,
Chakraburtty K, Simon J, Bard M, Friend SH: Functional discovery
via a compendium of expression profiles. Cell 2000,
102:109-126.
Bu D, Zhao Y, Cai L, Xue H, Zhu X, Lu H, Zhang J, Sun S, Ling L,
Zhang N, Li G, Chen R: Topological structure analysis of the
protein-protein interaction network in budding yeast. Nucleic
Acids Res 2003, 31:2443-2450.
Fox JJ, Hill CC: From topology to dynamics in biochemical
networks. Chaos 2001, 11:809-815.
Eades P: A heuristic for graph drawing. Congressus Numerantium
1984, 42:142-160.
TM4. http://www.tigr.org/software/tm4/index.html .
KGML. http://www.genome.ad.jp/kegg/xml/ .
Tatusov RL, Natale DA, Garkavtsev IV, Tatusova TA, Shankavaram
UT, Rao BS, Kiryutin B, Galperin MY, Fedorova ND, Koonin EV: The
COG database: new developments in phylogenetic classification of proteins from complete genomes. Nucleic Acids Res
2001, 29:22-28.
Benson DA, Karsch-Mizrachi I, Lipman DJ, Ostell J, Wheeler DL:
GenBank. Nucleic Acids Res 2003, 31:23-27.
Edwards AM, Kus B, Jansen R, Greenbaum D, Greenblatt J, Gerstein
M: Bridging structural biology and genomics: assessing pro-

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/5/17

39.
40.
41.
42.

43.

44.
45.
46.
47.
48.
49.

tein interaction data with known complexes. Trends Genet
2002, 18:529-536.
Bader GD, Hogue CW: Analyzing yeast protein-protein interaction data obtained from different sources. Nat Biotechnol
2002, 20:991-997.
Gerstein M, Lan N, Jansen R: Proteomics. Integrating
interactomes. Science 2002, 295:284-287.
Sprinzak E, Sattath S, Margalit H: How reliable are experimental
protein-protein interaction data? J Mol Biol 2003, 327:919-923.
Tong AH, Drees B, Nardelli G, Bader GD, Brannetti B, Castagnoli L,
Evangelista M, Ferracuti S, Nelson B, Paoluzi S, Quondam M, Zucconi
A, Hogue CW, Fields S, Boone C, Cesareni G: A combined experimental and computational strategy to define protein interaction networks for peptide recognition modules. Science
2002, 295:321-324.
Brown MP, Grundy WN, Lin D, Cristianini N, Sugnet CW, Furey TS,
Ares M., Jr., Haussler D: Knowledge-based analysis of microarray gene expression data by using support vector machines.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2000, 97:262-267.
Dahlquist KD, Salomonis N, Vranizan K, Lawlor SC, Conklin BR:
GenMAPP, a new tool for viewing and analyzing microarray
data on biological pathways. Nat Genet 2002, 31:19-20.
Stein L: Genome annotation: from sequence to biology. Nat
Rev Genet 2001, 2:493-503.
Kohn KW: Molecular interaction map of the mammalian cell
cycle control and DNA repair systems. Mol Biol Cell 1999,
10:2703-2734.
Pirson I, Fortemaison N, Jacobs C, Dremier S, Dumont JE, Maenhaut
C: The visual display of regulatory information and networks.
Trends Cell Biol 2000, 10:404-408.
GEO Database. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/ .
SGD Database. http://www.yeastgenome.org/ .

Publish with Bio Med Central and every
scientist can read your work free of charge
"BioMed Central will be the most significant development for
disseminating the results of biomedical researc h in our lifetime."
Sir Paul Nurse, Cancer Research UK

Your research papers will be:
available free of charge to the entire biomedical community
peer reviewed and published immediately upon acceptance
cited in PubMed and archived on PubMed Central
yours — you keep the copyright

BioMedcentral

Submit your manuscript here:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/info/publishing_adv.asp

Page 8 of 8
(page number not for citation purposes)

</pre>
</body>
</html>
