<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>The struggle for life of the genome's selfish architects</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Biology Direct 2011, 6:19. doi:10.1186/1745-6150-6-19"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Aurélie Hua-Van"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Hua-Van et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:19
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/19

REVIEW

Open Access

The struggle for life of the genome’s selfish
architects
Aurélie Hua-Van*, Arnaud Le Rouzic, Thibaud S Boutin, Jonathan Filée and Pierre Capy

Abstract
Transposable elements (TEs) were first discovered more than 50 years ago, but were totally ignored for a long
time. Over the last few decades they have gradually attracted increasing interest from research scientists. Initially
they were viewed as totally marginal and anecdotic, but TEs have been revealed as potentially harmful parasitic
entities, ubiquitous in genomes, and finally as unavoidable actors in the diversity, structure, and evolution of the
genome. Since Darwin’s theory of evolution, and the progress of molecular biology, transposable elements may be
the discovery that has most influenced our vision of (genome) evolution. In this review, we provide a synopsis of
what is known about the complex interactions that exist between transposable elements and the host genome.
Numerous examples of these interactions are provided, first from the standpoint of the genome, and then from
that of the transposable elements. We also explore the evolutionary aspects of TEs in the light of post-Darwinian
theories of evolution.
Reviewers: This article was reviewed by Jerzy Jurka, Jürgen Brosius and I. King Jordan. For complete reports, see
the Reviewers’ reports section.
Background
For a century and half, from the publication of “On the
Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection, or
the Preservation of Favoured Races in the Struggle for
Life“ by Darwin [1] to the present day, thinking about
evolution has not drastically changed, but it has itself
“evolved” by taking on board new insights, and all the
fresh data arising from the last 30 years of molecular
biology [2]. This review focuses on the changes that
have resulted from advances in our knowledge about
the biology of transposable elements.
At the time Darwin published his Origin of Species,
chromosomes, DNA, genes, and heredity mechanisms
were all totally unknown. There was considerable
progress in all these domains during the 20th century,
which corresponds to the golden age of genetics.
From Mendel to Watson and Crick, via Morgan
and Weismann, Darwinian theory has evolved and
successively integrated the laws of inheritance (neoDarwinism), and then biometric, populational, ecological
concepts (the modern synthesis, established between the
* Correspondence: aurelie.hua-van@legs.cnrs-gif.fr
Laboratoire Evolution, Génomes, Spéciation. CNRS UPR9034/Université ParisSud, Gif-sur-Yvette, France

1930s and 1940s by Fisher, Wright, Haldane, Dobzhansky, Mayr, and Simpson among others), and finally
the molecular dimension (Kimura’s neutral evolution
theory, Pauling and Zuckerkandl’s molecular clock concept). However, the core of Darwin’s theory has never
really been successfully challenged.
The second part of the 20th century was dominated by
a fresh and powerful discipline, molecular biology,
which claimed to explain the nature of life. This was
dominated by a central dogma, which was rooted in the
chromosomal theory of heredity, and the deciphering of
the structure of DNA. The genome was envisaged as a
stable structure consisting of DNA, from which switchable genes would transfer the genetic information necessary for the development or the survival of the organism
to the relevant proteins. This idea held sway for many
years, before it too was revealed to be an oversimplification of how genetic information is transferred [3].
At the onset of this exciting period, around 1944 at
Cold Spring Harbor, the brilliant maize geneticist
Barbara McClintock was using cytogenetic tools borrowed from Drosophila techniques, and was patiently
investigating an odd phenomenon of chromosome
breakage and fusion. Her painstaking observations and
rigorous experiments led her to postulate the existence

© 2011 Hua-Van et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Hua-Van et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:19
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/19

of a locus with a controlling element that was able to
modify the expression of a gene at another locus. Subsequently she found that there were in fact several of these
controlling loci, which were normally in a silent state,
but which could occasionally be activated following genomic stress, such as a double-strand break. Moreover, the
controlling locus was able to change its chromosomal
location. She called this system Ac/Ds (for Activator/Dissociation), and designated the associated phenomenon of
relocation “transposition”. The first transposable element
(TE) had been discovered, thus providing both the very
first evidence of the impact of TEs on gene regulation,
and the first indication of TE regulation by the genome.
From incredulity to inescapability

The history of TEs is much shorter than the history of
the theory of evolution: it is less than 70 years since
Barbara McClintock first reported the existence of controlling elements. However, even though her discoveries
were rigorously supported by experimental data it took
much longer for McClintock’s findings to gain acceptance than it had for Darwin’s theory. Basics of Darwin’s
theory relied on common sense, and it was clearly its
implications for evolution and the origin of the human
species that aroused his virulent detractors. McClintock
discovered transposable elements at a time dominated
by the idea of genetic stability, which appeared to be
essential for transmission to descendants, and for the
conservation of species characteristics. The concept of
genetic stability had emerged after Mendel’s laws, and
was later reinforced by discoveries such as the structure
of DNA, and the regulation of bacterial genes. The
established view of a static genome seemed to be
unquestionable. Her work aroused a reception that may
have been less hostile than that of Darwin’s detractors,
but her work was not understood, and gave rise to
incredulity, rejection and sarcasm [4]. This lasted for
several years and indeed decades, until the identification
of similar elements in other genomes [5] began to win
round the wider scientific community. Eventually the
transposition of DNA fragments was demonstrated
using the tools of molecular biology. In 1983 Barbara
McClintock was finally awarded with the Nobel Prize
for her discovery of transposable elements.
It is now no longer possible to ignore TEs. The impact
of TE-derived sequences in regulating genes needs no
further proof. Everyone accepts that genomes are quite
flexible or plastic entities, that they are riddled with
TEs, and that TEs affect both gene regulation and the
composition and structure of the genome. The depiction
of the genome as a linear succession of genes and the
dogma of its stability have been replaced by a dominant
view of a functional genome as a complex network of
genetics, epigenetics, and cell interactions, in which TEs

Page 2 of 29

and other structural or functional elements are involved.
25 years after McClintock’s Nobel Prize, have we fully
embraced the full extent and diversity of the influence
of TEs, notably in genome evolution?
The astonishing properties of jumping genes

TEs possess two main characteristics that distinguish
them from other genomic components. They are mobile,
so able to change their genetic environment, and by
doing this they also change the genetic environment of
the locus into which they insert. Since they have the
intrinsic ability to multiply during the transposition process, they are almost inevitably repeated, with a virtually
unlimited copy number, restricted only by the carrying
capacity of their environment i.e. the genome. Hence
they are simultaneously part of the genome and independent entities living their own life within the genome,
in a way that reminds Dawkins’ selfish gene [6].
How can TEs be integrated as a major evolutionary
factor in Darwinian theory? How do TEs influence genome evolution, and how does genome evolution influence TEs? Do they exploit the genome? Are they
exploited by the genome? Are they parasites of the genome or part of it? What would evolution and life have
been like without them? The answers are complex,
because the interactions between TEs and their host
genomes are complex. In this review we attempt to propose some clues to the answers to these questions.
Some of the properties described below show how TEs
fit in with the most recent developments in evolutionary
theory.
1 - TEs are a major factor in evolution because they are an
important source of variability

Mutations caused by TEs are diverse, ranging from
small-scale nucleotide changes (i.e. excision footprint) to
large chromosome rearrangements, including epigenetic
modifications. Although TEs are mobile, the nucleotide
(or epigenetic) changes resulting from their transposition can persist, being transmitted through generations
and through populations.
2 - TE insertions are subject to natural selection

In a population, deleterious insertions (i.e. ones that
reduce the host’s fitness) will tend to be eliminated,
whereas neutral and advantageous effects may be maintained, as are some other polymorphisms/mutations.
This selection process occurs in the context of competition between individuals (genomes), but of course
TE-associated genetic variation is also subject to other
evolutionary forces, such as genetic drift or migration.
3 - TEs multiply independently within the genome and
consequently evolve more or less independently of the
genome

In addition to this competition between individuals or
genomes harboring TEs, competition also exists between

Hua-Van et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:19
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/19

TE copies that inhabit the same genome. TEs that are
able to produce more copies have better chance of
invading the genome and the population than those that
rarely duplicate. Hence the dynamics of TEs includes
two levels: an intra-genomic level, and an intra-population one. Furthermore, TEs frequently generate defective
copies that behave like parasites towards the autonomous copies. Hence population genetics and ecological
principles can be applied to a TE population within a
genome. From this point of view, TE copies can be
viewed as analagous to individuals, TE families to species, and genomes to ecological niches. Non-autonomous elements are assimilated to parasites. TEs can also
occasionally transfer horizontally from one species to
another. From the ecological point of view, horizontal
transfer (HT) corresponds to the colonization of a new
ecological niche. For the TEs, it constitutes another way
to ensure survival.
4 - TEs are involved in close interactions with the genome

Numerous long-standing and complex interactions have
developed between TEs and host genomes, as a result of
an arms race or of molecular domestication. Epigenetic
phenomena may have evolved from ancient defense
mechanisms set up by the genome to defend itself
against foreign DNA (viruses or TEs). TEs may have
evolved auto-regulation processes in order to limit the
deleterious effects of uncontrolled transposition bursts.
Genomes may have recurrently recruited TEs, parts of
TEs, or TE-derived enzymatic or structural functions for
its own purposes, drawing primary materials and readyto-use tools from the numerous sequences comprising
the TE.
The original vision of TEs as genome parasites was
rather simplistic. In fact, TEs participate in the construction and evolution of the genome to an extent that
would have seemed unbelievable until recently. TEs survive in the genome, feed on the genome, and feed the
genome. TEs are probable an essential, long-standing
part of the genome. This may contribute to their virtual
ubiquity (with very few exceptions) among living beings.

The TE landscape
Structure and classification

Transposable elements exist in every known eukaryotic,
bacterial or archaeal genome. They are defined as DNA
sequences that are able to move from one chromosomal
position to another within the same genome (i.e. within
a single cell), which distinguishes them from phages and
viruses, which move from cell to cell.
TEs usually encode the genes that promote their own
transposition, but many non-autonomous elements use
the transposition machinery of close relatives or unrelated elements instead. TEs are divided into two classes
depending on their transposition mechanism, each class

Page 3 of 29

is further divided into subclasses, orders and superfamilies [7].
Class I elements transpose through an RNA intermediate, transcribed from DNA then reverse transcribed
into double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) before or during
their integration into a new position. They are replicative by nature. The key enzyme is a reverse transcriptase
(RT), which is present in the telomerases of eukaryotes,
but which is also an overall characteristic of mobile
RNA entities (retroviruses, group II introns, and
retrotransposons). RT is also present in bacteria, in elements such as retrons, group II introns and diversitygenerating retroelements, although their mobility has
been proven only for group II introns [8]. In Eukaryotes,
four orders of autonomous retroelements are recognized
[7], (i) Long Terminal Repeats (LTR) retroelements,
similar in structure to retroviruses, (ii) Long INterspersed repeated Elements (LINEs), elements which
have no LTRs but do have a polyA tail, (iii) DIRS (from
DIRS-1, the first element identified in Dictyostelium)
and (iv) PLEs (Penelope-like elements), these two last
groups having somewhat unusual structures. In eukaryotes, several Class I non-autonomous elements have
been identified. Short INterspersed repeated Elements
(SINEs) are usually derived from tRNA and use LINEs
to transpose. They may contain the 3’ part of LINEs,
probably fused to the tRNA at the time of retrotransposition [9]. All other non-autonomous retroelements possess typical structural features or are deletion derivatives
of one of the four orders of autonomous retroelements
(LTR, LINE, DIRS, PLE).
The diversity of retroelements reflects their complex
origin. Indeed, phylogenies based on RT suggest that
LINEs are related to group II introns, and that most retroviruses belong to one superfamily within the LTR
order, despite several independent examples of infectious retroviruses originating from LTR-retroelements
[10]. However, phylogenies based on other protein
domains (endonuclease or RNAseH) display different
topologies, suggesting that the various retroelements originated from independent fusions of different modules
[10,11].
Class II elements transpose directly with no RNA copy
intermediate. They can excise from the donor site (they
are known as cut-and-paste transposons, and the transposition is described as conservative) although this is
not always the case, since several Class II elements are
replicative (i.e. their transposition is coupled with replication). Hence, Class II has been divided into two subclasses depending on the number of DNA strand cuts at
the donor site, which reflects these different transposition mechanisms. In the subclass I, the two strands are
cut at both sites, and the element is fully excised [7].
This subclass comprises mainly those elements that are

Hua-Van et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:19
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/19

characterized by having two terminal inverted repeats
(TIR) and at least one gene encoding the transposase (TIR
elements Order). They are especially abundant in prokaryotes, where they are known as insertion sequences (IS),
and are also widespread and diversified in eukaryotes. On
the basis of transposase similarities, TIR elements can be
divided into 12 to 17 superfamilies in eukaryotes [7,12,13],
and more than 20 in prokaryotes [14,15]. However, a
number of prokaryotic and eukaryotic superfamilies are
related and thus form trans-domain superfamilies, which
suggests that these superfamilies are either old enough to
have preceded the split into the three domains of life, or
that horizontal transfers occurred in the distant past [16].
Subclass I also includes elements that do not possess a
transposase, but instead have a recombinase that is able to
recombine two DNAs without generating free ends.
Recombinase-containing Class II elements are frequent in
prokaryotes [14], and have also been found in eukaryotes,
although so far only in some opisthokonts (crypton elements) [[17], and see RepBase http://www.girinst.org].
When only one strand is cut on each side, the transposition is said to be replicative. In eukaryotes, two recently
discovered types of Class II elements (Polintons/Mavericks
and Helitrons) are thought to transpose in such a way.
Polintons are very large elements, bordered by TIRs and
containing several genes, including an integrase (related to
retroviral integrases and Class II transposases) and a polymerase [18]. Helitrons are moderately large, possess hairpin structures at the ends, and contain a helicase [19].
These characteristics are reminiscent of a rolling-circle
mechanism, such as that involved in IS91. In bacteria,
another recently identified family (IS608) is characterized
by having a transposase related to the RCR protein of
IS91, which recognizes specific secondary structures, such
as hairpins, at the tips of the elements. However, the transposition mechanism seems to be different [20]. Finally,
prokaryotes also carry more complex TEs-based structures
that trap a large range of mobile genes, such as in composite transposons (Tn) or in Integrative and Conjugative
Elements (ICEs) [21], illustrating that evolution can also
occur by modularity [22].
Prokaryotic and eukaryotic TIR elements frequently
generate considerably reduced non-autonomous elements known as Miniature Inverted repeat Transposable
Elements (MITEs) that use a transposase encoded
in trans to transpose. MITEs are either deletion derivatives of full-length elements, or only share TIRs with
their autonomous partner. Helitrons are also often
found as non-autonomous copies (derived from an
internal deletion).
Abundance and distribution

The abundance of TEs in each eukaryotic and prokaryotic
lineage is highly variable (Figure 1 and Additional file 1).

Page 4 of 29

TEs are more ubiquitous in eukaryotes (most genomes
contain TEs) than in prokaryotes, in which more that 20%
of the genomes so far sequenced lack both remnants and
complete TEs [23]. Furthermore, TEs are far more abundant in eukaryotic genomes (comprising up to 80% of the
genome) than in prokaryotes (up to 10% of the genome,
averaging only 1-5%). However, in both prokaryotes and
eukaryotes, there seems to be a positive correlation
between genome size and TE abundance [23,24]. Retroelements (that have intrinsic replicative properties and may
be large in size) are often the main provider of TE DNA in
eukaryotes, such as several mammals, yeasts, Drosophila,
and plants with large genomes [25-27]. In some cases,
however, (e.g. Trichomonas vaginalis, Caenorhabditis elegans), Class II elements dominate, at least in terms of copy
number [16]. In contrast, small eukaryotic genomes (parasitic apicomplexa for example) are usually devoid of TEs,
perhaps because of a general tendency towards genome
size reduction.
In many genomes, a few elements dominate, but this
does not preclude an extraordinary diversity, which is
usually in the range of hundreds of element families.
For example, LINEs of the L1 type and SINEs Alu are
predominant in the human genome, and diversified as a
few subfamilies of different ages. In contrast, LTR retroelements (endogenous retroviruses) are found in relatively low copy numbers, and belong to a few dozen
different families [26]. So TE diversity and abundance is
highly variable from one species to another, and reflects
their specific genome-TE history. In addition, TE distribution within a genome is usually neither random nor
uniform. First some (rare) elements are site-specific,
such as LINE R2 elements, which exclusively insert into
a single site in the rDNA, or some IS elements in prokaryotes. Secondly, TEs are frequently found in chromosomal regions where their potentially deleterious impact
is reduced. Thus, TEs are common in the heterochromatin and in pericentromeric or telomeric regions, in
low gene density regions, or within other elements.
However, they can also be found in open chromatin
regions, near tRNA genes, and near promoters and
genes. Hence, in some plants DNA transposons are preferentially found around genes.
This non-random distribution, including an apparent
preference either to insert near to genes or to avoid
them, may result either from a true insertion preference
or just from selection. The study of recent insertions
obtained in the lab or in the wild may help distinguish
between these two hypotheses [28].
Our view of TE landscape is biased, because genome
sequencing efforts have mainly focused on bacterial genomes or on the “higher eukaryotes”, and so are not representative of the full diversity of life. Moreover, TE contents
can differ greatly between closely related species. For

Hua-Van et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:19
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/19

Chlamydomonas reinhardtii
Arabidopsis thaliana
Oryza sativa
Vitis vinifera
Populus trichocarpa
Sorghum bicolor
Zea mays

Page 5 of 29

120
125
450
500
500
720
2900

(9%)
(10%)
(35%)
(42 %)
(12-40%)
(62%)
(85%)

Archaeplastidae
Entamoeba histolytica

Homo sapiens
Mus musculus
Gallus gallus
Fugu rubripes
Branchiostoma floridae
Drosophila melanogaster
Drosophila ananassae
Anopheles gambiae
Caenorhabditis elegans

3000
2900
1000
330
520
140
176
278
97

20

(45%)
(37%)
( 9%)
( 2.7%)
(30%)
(15%)
(25%)
(?)
( 3%)

Plasmodium falciparum
Theilera
Phytophtora infestans

Rhizaria

22
8
240

(0%)
( 0%)
(48%)

Chromalveolates

(19.7%)

Amoebozoa
Bikonts

Metazoans
Unikonts
O
Opisthokonts

Excavates

Trypanosoma cruzii
Trichomonas vaginalis

40
160

(>17 %)
(65%)

Fungi
Saccharomyces cerevisiae
Nectria haematococca
Fusarium graminearum
Tuber melanosporum

12
37
34
140

Firmicutes

(3%)
(5%)
(0.1%)
(58%)

Clostridium difficile
Streptococcus uberis
Streptococ

4.3
1.8

(11%)
(1.7%)

Spirochaetes
Treponem pallidum 1.14

Sulfolobus solfataricus
Sulfolobus acidocaldarius

3
2.2

Actinobacteria

Proteobacteria

Crenarchaea
(10%)
( 0.34%)

Methanothermobacter thermautotrophicus
Halobacterium salinarium
Pyrococcus fusriosus

Euryarchaea
1.7
2
1.9

Bordetella bronchiseptica
Bordetella pertussis
Gluconacetobacter diazotrophicus

(0%)
(1.64%)
(1.65 %)

(0%)

5.34
5.34
34
4.1
.1
3.9
.9

Frankia sp. EAN

(0%)
(4%)
(6%)

9

(3%)

Cyanobacteria
Prochlorococcus

1.6

(0%)

Figure 1 TE contents in various different sequenced species: genome size are in Mb. TE percentages are shown within parentheses.
References can be found in Additional File 1.

example, the Archaea Sulfolobus solfataricus carries at least
130 full IS copies and at least 200 partial IS copies, whereas
the related species Sulfolobus acidocaldarius carries only a
few partial IS copies [14,15]. Furthermore, differences are
often observed between strains of the same species in
terms of copy number [28,29]. As the number of genome
research projects increases and technology progresses, we
can hope that the representations of the tree of life and of
intra-species diversity will improve. This may well reveal
that TE history has as many versions as there are populations bearing them.
Consequences of TEs at the DNA level

The presence of TEs (as dispersed, mobile, and repeated
elements) has two major mutational consequences at
the DNA level: insertion within a locus, and ectopic
recombination leading to different types of rearrangements. First, TEs can insert near or within genes, and
by doing so alter or destroy the activity of the gene in a
variety of ways, ranging from total inactivation to spatio-temporal changes in expression, alternative splicing,
or changes in expression level or protein activity. Modifications of gene expression can be a direct consequence
of adding extra nucleotides to the original sequence or

an indirect consequence of the epigenetic marks on the
element. Furthermore, in addition to promoter and terminator sequences, TEs sometimes carry silencers or
insulators that are able to modify expression over distances of several kb, or binding sites for different proteins (i.e. heterochromatin protein) [30-32]. Second, the
possibility of recombination between two copies at different loci can also have a more or less dramatic effect,
ranging from small-scale inversions to major chromosomal rearrangements, including deletions, translocation
or duplications [33,34].
Although TEs are defined as intracellular parasites/
entities, they are prone to being transferred from cell to
cell, notably in prokaryotes through conjugation of the
element or of the plasmids carrying it. A major consequence is lateral gene transfer (LGT), also known as
horizontal transfer (HT), which is quite common in bacteria. In eukaryotes, numerous cases of TE HT have
been reported, although the vector involved remains elusive. Interestingly, several TEs have been found in
eukaryotic viruses, such as TED, piggyBac, or Tc1-like in
baculoviruses [35], DIRS elements in a Polydnavirus
genome [36] or TEs related to the IS605/IS607 family in
Phycodnavirus and Mimivirus genomes [37]. Thus, these

Hua-Van et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:19
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/19

viruses could be used by TEs as a potential source of
horizontal dissemination in eukaryotes.

Page 6 of 29

was studying, which clearly defied the Mendelian laws,
would later turn out to be such a key element in genome evolution.

TEs and the genome: an evolutionary point of view

The way we imagine genome evolution today has not
departed from the Darwinian theory. Any new gene, or
new function, which confers advantages in the host in a
given environment, will be selected as long as the host
is in this environment. This is true for the selfish genes
of Dawkins: any gene that is able to propagate successfully (by vertical transmission) in a given environment
(the genome, including other genes) will successfully
disseminate in this environment [6]. This also holds on
for TEs, which can be viewed as selfish DNA: the ultimate parasite [38], which is able to propagate itself
through vertical transmission, through intra-genomic
transposition, and through horizontal transfer.
TEs are able to replicate more rapidly than the genome, and so constitute a kind of genomic cancer. They
are basically parasitic, i.e. selfish, and deleterious entities,
conferring no benefits on the genomes they inhabit. For
these reasons, they were long considered to be “junk
DNA”, part of the genome that by definition it would be
better to get rid of, because it has no role, no function,
and is just a kind of genetic burden for the host genome. This simplistic view must now be tempered. First
of all, TEs and the rest of the genome have lived side by
side for a very long time and such prolonged cohabitation almost inevitably leads to various kinds of
interaction. Second, having no known role does not
necessarily imply having no impact: day after day, portions of the genome that were previously thought to be
useless have been shown to have important regulatory
or structural roles. The same could be true for TEs.
Hence, when considering genome evolution, TEs are far
from being just parasitic sequences [39]. Starting from
the simple assumption that DNA is separated into two
compartments, the genome, and the TEs, we review
below the relationships between them in all their diversity. We will focus first on how the genome deals with
the sea of TEs that surrounds it, and then on how TEs
deal with the host genome in which they are embedded.

Evolution of the genome in a sea of TEs
Although Darwin had no idea about what constituted
the support of heredity, he fully recognized the importance of variability as the raw material of natural selection. It was a long time before connections could be
established between continuous variation in a population, the discrete characters Mendel used to demonstrate the laws of heredity, and mutations (as defined by
de Vries) as progenitors of new varieties. After these
solid bases had been established, even McClintock could
probably not imagine that the complex phenomena she

For the genome, TEs are a major source of genetic
variation

From mutations to polymorphism, genetic variants
reflect the diversity within a population, and DNA
alterations or changes constitute the basis of evolution.
At the DNA level, two molecular mechanisms are
responsible for generating diversity: mutation and
recombination. Classically, mutations (changes in
nucleotide sequences) arise either through uncorrected
replication errors or after DNA lesions; whereas recombination is a normal process during the meiotic phase.
However, both processes can also result from the activity or mere presence of a transposable element. Transposition does not result from fortuitous errors during
replication or lesion repair, but can be considered to be
an active mutagenic process, resulting in mutations that
are different from SNPs (Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms). In contrast, TE-induced ectopic recombination
can be viewed as an erroneous (albeit easy-to-produce)
process in contrast to normal meiotic crossing-over.
Such DNA alterations may affect the function (of
genes) and the structure (of genomes), the worst outcome being the immediate death of the cell, or its
inability to complete meiosis. However, mildly detrimental or neutral effects are also to be expected, and insertions that produce such effects may survive and
contribute to the genetic variation of the host genome.
There are many diverse ways in which TEs can alter the
genome, ranging from small sequence modifications to
gross rearrangements. Finally, the frequency of such
events is not negligible, which means that TEs are major
actors in diversity [40,41].
1 - Genomes use TE sequences and TE-induced sequence
changes to increase their functional variability

From a functional perspective, genetic variations imply
changes in gene regulation (through sequence changes
in a regulatory region, or epigenetic changes), changes
in coding sequence, or a change in splicing. Any such
genetic variations can be the result of TE activity, involving insertion, excision, or ectopic recombination
[42,43]. Genetic variations in the genes can result in
phenotypic changes, which are easy to detect and investigate. Hence genetics has tended to focus on transmissible, visible, and discrete variations between lineages.
One of the characters used by Mendel to establish the
transmission laws was the stable phenotype of wrinkled
peas (versus smooth peas). For Mendel, the stability of
the phenotype was a prerequisite he had carefully
checked before selecting his experimental characters.
Amazingly, this stable character ultimately turned out to

Hua-Van et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:19
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/19

be the result of the insertion of a (non-autonomous) TE
within the s gene [44]. Even before their discovery, TEs
were under the spotlight! Class I elements, as well as
on-autonomous elements without their autonomous
partners, will not usually excise from their position,
which means that the altered phenotype is stable (however, see below). In contrast, autonomous class II elements are recognized as triggering phenotype instability.
Moreover, phenotype reversibility has proved to be an
effective criterion for identifying active DNA transposons [45]. Unstable mutations (resulting in variegation
or mosaicism) were already known when McClintock
started working on the chromosome-breaking cycle, and
some of these cycles were associated with this lack of
stability. What she found was that this instability was
controlled, since the mutation rate was constant within
a given plant [46].
In Eukaryotes, visible polymorphism often results from
the action of TEs. Numerous examples involve color
polymorphism, and TEs. In morning glory (Ipomoea
spp.), the petal color polymorphism is caused by various
transposable elements that have been inserted into
genes involved in pigment biosynthesis [47,48]. Alternatively, somatic TE excision (usually imprecise) can also
result in phenotypic changes, responsible for variegation,
spots or sectors. Hence in snapdragon (Antirrhinum
majus) the imprecise excision of Tam3 from the pallida
gene results in diverse spatial color patterns [49], as in
Medaka fish, in which the excision of Tol2 inserted in
the promoter of a pigment gene generates numerous
phenotypes distinct from original mutant or wild-type
[50]. Phenotypic variations due to TEs can also affect
other traits, as exemplified by the recent identification
of a TE-induced duplication, which is responsible for
the elongated shape of a tomato [51], or the impact of
TE insertions on Drosophila bristle numbers [52].
Finally, a epigenetic component may be involved in
many TE-mediated phenotypic variations [41].
In prokaryotes, there are fewer examples of changes in
gene regulation associated with TEs, but some IS elements have been shown to be involved in the versatility
of some systems. A striking example is the Staphylococcus aureus IS256-mediated switch between the ability
and inability to form a biofilm [53,54]. This IS is
involved in about 30% of the cases, but nevertheless,
insertions appear to occur as random, uncontrolled
events. In the much-studied Mycobacterium tuberculosis,
the highly mobile element IS6110 seems to be a major
factor in strain diversity, phenotypic alterations, and
thus in evolution [55].
2 - TEs as genome architects

In addition to their influence on the functional compartment of the genome, TEs are also involved at the structural level, and are an important factor in the genomic

Page 7 of 29

peculiarities of species. However, modifying the genome
structure will inevitably lead to functional changes.
From this point of view, TEs are a key that links the
structure and function of the genome.
Beside polyploidization, TEs are the major factor of
genome expansion. Intensive TE transposition provides
an explanation for the “C-value paradox”, i.e. the fact
that in eukaryotes, genome size is not correlated to the
complexity of the organism, or to the gene number [24].
In plants, bursts of transposition of retroelements have
been shown to be responsible for the genome size
expansion [56,57], and every large genome is expected
to harbor a huge number of TE sequences. On the
other hand, by promoting gene inactivation and recombination-mediated chromosomal deletion, TEs can also
be involved in genome simplification. In prokaryotes,
TEs seem to be associated with the drastic reduction in
genome size observed in some Bordetella and Yersinia
species [58,59].
In eukaryotes, transposable elements are not distributed randomly along chromosomes. They are particularly
abundant in constitutive heterochromatin, notably in
centromeres and telomeres. Centromeric TEs either constitute the core sequences of centromeres or are merely
centromere-specific [60-62], and may be found as intact
or fragment tandem repeats [63]. This suggests a direct
role in centromere function, and in the generation of
satellite sequences. They are also frequently found in
pericentromeric regions [64,65], and in heterochromatin
[66], and so they could also be involved in heterochromatinization [67], which links them to epigenetic regulation
[68]. In numerous species, a similar pattern is observed
near telomeres. TEs enrichment in telomeric and subtelomeric regions has been found in diverse species of
fungi, vertebrates, insects, protozoa, or plants [69-73].
Telomeric TE accumulation may result from relaxed
conditions in those regions, as TEs have no known function, with the exception of the LINE elements in Drosophila, which replace telomerase (see below) [74].
The role of TEs in genome compartmentalization was
suggested after the discovery of TEs in scaffold/matrix
attachment regions (S/MARs) that determine chromatin
loops [75,76]. In plants, this mainly involves MITEs,
which are AT-rich like S/MARs [77], but Jordan et al.
[76] also found that LINEs were overrepresented in
human S/MARs. In Drosophila, the insulator (aka su
(Hw)) of the gypsy retroelement (mdg4), has been extensively studied for its role as an enhancer blocker, and
may function as an S/MAR [see [76]]. This constitutes
the best-documented example of a TE that lies at the
junction between structural and functional roles.
Although TEs are usually silent, bursts of activity and
high TE copy number can lead to rapid genome diversification between close species, as a result of lineage

Hua-Van et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:19
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/19

specific amplification or recombination [78]. Some
authors have even suggested that TE-mediated gross
rearrangements may be involved in speciation. The first
person to do so was Barbara McClintock herself [79-81].
However, this still remains speculative, and we have no
evidence of a direct cause-effect relationship between
TE transposition or recombination and speciation. In
Drosophila, the phenomenon of hybrid dysgenesis is
directly related to the activity of particular TEs (P, hobo
or I), and results in cross incompatibilities between
some strains, a potential first step towards reproductive
isolation [82].
When an increasing proportion of the DNA consists
of TEs, new insertions, even if they occur randomly, will
be more and more likely to occur within another transposable element, thus creating and expanding TE clusters. Moreover, as insertions within other TEs are
usually selectively neutral, they have less impact on host
fitness, and so no selection is exerted against them, leaving them free to accumulate in clusters. Although TEs
are thought to accumulate in low recombination regions
[83], regions rich in TEs are usually more unstable, and
more prone to illegitimate recombination [84].
Genomic variability at the location of mobile DNA is
also observed in prokaryotes, in which composite transposons (Tns) and Integrative and Conjugative Elements
(ICEs) occur, and appear to be prone to exchange, gain
or lose gene modules, probably through nested insertions and rearrangements [21]. This is illustrated by the
recent finding that in Helicobacter pylori, plasticity
zones, containing strain-specific genes, actually consist
of a mosaic of several ICE, Tn and IS elements [85].
Prokaryotic elements that are able to gain or lose gene
modules are a good example of how mobile elements
contribute to the genome content, but ICEs are usually
site-specific, and so do not amplify within a single genome, but are transferred from cell to cell by conjugation
[86]. However, in some cases, ICEs have undergone massive expansion, such as the 185 ICE elements in Orientia
tsutsugamushi that occupy 35% of the genome [87].
In eukaryotes, host gene sequences have been found in
some TEs, notably Pack-MULEs and Helitrons in plants
[88]. By amplifying, these elements spread these genes or
gene fragments throughout the genome (sometimes as
chimeric variants), which results in opportunities for
gene duplication and exon shuffling. Both can be promoted through TE-mediated (illegitimate) recombination
[88], or by class II elements engaging in a complex transposition process, known as aberrant transposition [89].
Aberrant transposition, which uses several transposons
and results in various orientations, was the kind of transposition event observed by McClintock in the maize
chromosome break-fusion-bridge fusion. Although illegitimate recombination and aberrant transposition are

Page 8 of 29

“abnormal” processes, their consequences may have an
important impact, since gene duplication and exon shuffling are major processes in gene evolution [90].
3 - From mutations and (epi)-genetic variation to genetic
novelty and adaptation

In the past, it has often been suggested that TEs have
detrimental effects, as TEs were often viewed as deleterious parasitic entities [6,38,91]. In fly, it was estimated
that 80% of spontaneous mutations resulted from transposable elements [92]. In other species, the estimate is
considerably lower: 15% in mouse [78], whereas in
human only 0.5% of genetic diseases are caused by TEs
[93], and most human TEs are currently inactive.
However, population and polymorphism studies suggest that TEs activity often has a neutral or near-neutral
effect. TE insertion polymorphism is common enough
to provide an efficient tool for strain typing, population
studies and phylogeny [94,95], and far more representative of the genetic diversity than phenotypic polymorphism. In human, a recent study intended to quantify such
polymorphism detected at least 600 Alu polymorphisms,
and suggested that human populations may bear up to
2000 TE polymorphisms [96] - far fewer than SNPs, but
still a significant number. In cultivated rice, more than
50% of large insertion/deletion events involve TEs, and
TEs account for 14% of the genetic difference between
strains [97]. If an insertion is neutral, its persistence in
the population relies on genetic drift and demographic
parameters or occasionally on hitchhiking from a close
locus under positive selection, and is thus perfectly compatible with Kimura’s neutral evolution theory.
TE insertions can sometimes have beneficial effects.
Several putative cases of adaptive insertion have been
detected by population and site occupancy frequency
studies [98]. However, the reason why insertions are
beneficial remain unknown [99,100]. In some other
cases, the effect of the insertion is more obvious, such
as the increased resistance to insecticide of Drosophila
strains with a Doc element within a P450 gene [101].
Finally, TEs may sometimes be involved in important
processes, such as those suspected for L1 elements in X
inactivation [102]. Such cases may ultimately lead to
molecular domestication processes, which will be
described in more detail in the third part of this review.
Genetic variation is the playground in which natural
selection plays. Hence, TEs, by increasing their variability, increase the adaptability and evolvability of genomes
and species. Divergence studies suggest that TEs proceed by successive amplification bursts [[103,104] for
examples]. By analogy with radiation bursts observed in
paleontology, they have been linked to evolution
through the theory of punctuated equilibrium developed
by Eldredge and Gould [105]. Hence, in certain well-studied vertebrate groups, TE activity has been detected at

Hua-Van et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:19
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/19

different times, which correspond roughly to periods of
species diversification (notably in primates and bats).
The direct role of TE activity in species radiation,
defended by Oliver & Greene, and Zeh et al. [106,107],
takes into account the fact that TEs are controlled in a
reversible way by epigenetics (see below), are induced by
stress, and that TE activity increases the genomic variation, thus resulting in better adaptability when conditions change.
For the genome, TEs are disturbing invaders but can also
be useful helpers

Epigenetic control is widely used by multicellular organisms, such as higher metazoans or plants, to implement
cell lineage-specific gene regulation, and more generally
for any developmental process, including X inactivation,
parental imprinting, cell cycle, germ line development,
and early embryogenesis [108-112]. Epigenetic mechanisms are also used to silence transposable elements, thus
avoiding the detrimental effects of transposition. The
present-day view is that epigenetics was first used to
defend the genome against invading DNA (including
TEs) before being exploited at a larger scale for gene
regulation. The relationship between TEs, epigenetics,
and gene regulation is in fact far more complex than
this. TEs may have acted primarily as evolution drivers
that led the genome to evolve defense mechanisms, and
then gene expression control systems. Although present-day epigenetic gene regulation appears at first sight
to be free of TE intervention, silenced TEs can nevertheless directly interfere with the expression of adjacent
genes [68]. Furthermore, it has recently been proposed
that TEs could ultimately have been exapted for regulation purposes [113]. Finally, occasional disruption of
epigenetic control may offer an opportunity to enhance
the evolvability.
1 - The various epigenetic processes

Basically, epigenetic marks refer to DNA methylation
of cytosine, to histone modifications at their N-terminal region via methylation, acetylation or phosphorylation, or to RNA interference through small RNAs
(RNAi). Those modifications silence TEs either transcriptionally (TGS) by DNA methylation or as a result
of changes in chromatin structure, or post-trancriptionally (PTGS) through small interfering RNAs that
are able to destroy mRNA. In fact all three epigenetic
mechanisms seem to rely (at least in part) on the same
basic RNAi process [68].
DNA methylation is widely used to regulate expression. However, its importance varies considerably
depending on the species, with methylation covering a
large fraction of the large genomes of vertebrates and
plants, whereas it is restricted in other metazoans and
fungi [114,115]. Methylation in plants and fungi mainly

Page 9 of 29

targets TEs (or more generally repeated sequences), pinpointing this epigenetic mechanism as a defense against
transposons. Independently of TEs, genes may also be
methylated, even in the core gene region, thus permitting tissue-specific regulation [116]. However, while TEs
are methylated through de novo methylation, gene
methylation usually corresponds to maintenance methylation, and can be lost from time to time [117]. In vertebrates, TEs are globally methylated, as is the rest of the
genome, which makes it less clear whether TEs are in
fact specifically targeted by methylation [114]. The specificity of TE-targeted DNA methylation depends on the
presence of short RNAs.
The chromatin state plays an important role in gene
activity. In animals, this is particularly prevalent in all
developmentally-controlled regulations [118]. The chromatin state is mainly regulated through histone modifications, such as the methylation or acetylation of
histone’s tail. These modifications can have repressive or
activating effects on gene expression. Histone modifications are mediated by several protein complexes, which
target specific sequences through interactions with gene
promoters and transcription factors [119,120]. However,
compelling evidence shows that RNAi is also an effector
of chromatin modification, and is involved notably in
transcriptional silencing and in heterochromatin formation at transposon sites [121-123]. Furthermore, DNA
methylation and histone modifications are tightly interconnected [124-126].
Co-suppression in plants and quelling in fungi, were
independently uncovered during the 1990s, after observing null phenotypes when transgene overexpression
had been expected [127]. In Caenorhabditis elegans, a
germline-specific process resulting in TE silencing was
discovered in the 1990s and was termed RNA interference (RNAi) [128]. All these phenomena correspond to
a gene-silencing mechanism (Post-Transcriptional Gene
Silencing, or PTGS) that relies on short, non-coding
RNAs (ncRNAs), and are generically known as RNA
interference. RNAi exists in nearly all eukaryotes (with
the notable exception of baker’s yeast Saccharomyces.
cerevisiae), albeit with variations and specificities. Moreover, several systems can be found within a single genome, which reflects evolution towards more specialized
pathways. Different systems use different combinations
of proteins from the same multigenic families (including
the famous Argonaute family).
RNAi is the central key of epigenetic control, as it
confers the necessary sequence specificity, and exists in
different versions within and between species. For example, in Drosophila, three distinct pathways coexist,
and generate siRNAs, microRNAs (miRNAs) and piwiinteraction RNAs (piRNAs - also known as rasiRNAs or
repeat-associated siRNAs), respectively. Plants lack the

Hua-Van et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:19
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/19

piwi pathway, but their epigenetic systems are nevertheless quite diverse. These pathways differ by the origin of
the processed RNA, its final structure, and the proteins
involved in the whole process. However, the short RNAs
produced always guide an Argonaute complex to the
complementary nucleic acid for cleavage, translation
inhibition, or chromatin modification [129].
The siRNA pathway is mainly a defense system against
viruses, as siRNAs are generated from exogenous
dsRNA. This leads to the destruction of transcripts. piRNAs are derived from long transcripts of transposonrich genomic loci. piRNAs are targeted to repeated
sequences, including TEs, and the silencing process
involves an amplification cycle (ping-pong), and acts
through RNA destruction, epigenetic modification of the
homologous DNA locus, and the formation of heterochromatin. The piwi-pathway is germline specific, and
in several species seems to correspond to a genomic
defense against transmissible (germline) TE invasions.
Indeed, in Drosophila and Zebrafish (Danio rerio), most
piRNAs have homologies with TEs. However in mammals, most piRNAs do not correspond to TE sequences
[130]. Finally, miRNAs arise from endogenous RNA
(genomic locus), and are primarily used to regulate gene
expression although some miRNAs are also derived
from TE sequences. Hence, the miRNA system appears
to have evolved from the defense systems to take on a
gene regulation role.
2 - Epigenetics as the genome’s defense mechanisms
against genomic parasites

The presence of invading selfish genes does not lead to
a peaceful situation. Genomes have to fight against invasions that could lead to rapid reductions in fitness. This
can be done in different ways. First, the genome may
get rid of invading TEs by recombination, but this passive process may turn out to be less efficient than transposition. Second, the genome may inactivate TEs
through targeted mutations. Such a process has been
described in Neurospora crassa and other fungi, and is
known as RIP (Repeat-Induced-Point mutations). It is
quite efficient, at least in N. crassa, in the genome of
which no intact TEs or TE activity can be detected
[131]. The drawbacks are that the genome loses the
benefits of TEs as a source of variations, and the benefits of having multigenic families - although in some
conditions RIP may accelerate allele evolution [132].
Third, the genome may silence TEs epigenetically without destroying them. This is an efficient process, and
one that has the advantage of being both transmissible
and reversible. The potential source of variability (TEs)
is still present in an inactivated state, but may occasionally be reactivated. Bursts of amplifications seem to have
repeatedly occurred in the history of some genomes,
and reflect periods when TEs escaped from epigenetic

Page 10 of 29

control [81]. In this system, TEs serve as a potential
reservoir for future variability. TE silencing occurs by
means of epigenetics, which is universally used in eukaryotic genomes, and has been particularly thoroughly
investigated in plants [133]. Hence, present-day epigenetic systems (at least some of them, such as miRNA)
are assumed to have evolved from systems originally set
up to combat and limit the expansion of foreign
sequences. The frontier between systems involved in
gene regulation and those involved in TE silencing is
not clear. Indeed, a number of important cellular processes are regulated through systems that borrow proteins used in the RNAi defense against transposons,
such as PIWI in the germline [130].
3 - The contribution of TEs to genome control

The contribution of transposable elements to the epigenetic phenomenon has recently been unraveled, but had
long been suspected since McClintock proposed the
existence of controlling elements as a response to environmental (or genomic) stresses [79]. From anecdotal
“disturbers”, TEs have now moved centre-stage and
revealed to contribute to genome regulation and genome robustness and/or evolvability [68,134].
Transposable elements seem to occur in regions in
which a concentration of epigenetic landmarks can be
observed, and are often the target of the epigenetic control [68]. This may have two impacts: first, TE silencing;
second, modification of the expression profile of nearby
genes. While TE silencing will avoid amplification
bursts, thus promoting a degree of stability, the silencing
of genes in their vicinity may have an impact on the
host [135]. More intriguingly, there are numerous examples suggesting the implication of TEs in the normal
epigenetic regulation of genes, including genes involved
in various developmental processes [68,109,136]. The
assumption that TEs also contribute to regulation via
intrinsic regulatory properties through nucleosome
binding and phasing, epigenetic enhancers and boundary
elements [137] constitutes a further step. Finally, TEs
may have been exapted for these regulatory properties.
Few studies have focused on histone modifications at
TE sites, and the relationship between them remains
poorly understood. In mammals, different TE classes
seem to be targets for different histone modifications.
However, contradictory findings make it difficult to
work out whether histone modifications at TE sites
result from a genomic defense or from exaptation for
the regulation of adjacent genes [113].
It has long been known that a number of elements
seems to reactivate following various stresses [138-140],
and stress responses of retroelements are well documented in plants [141]. In Capy et al. [142], it was assumed
that environmental changes can directly affect TE activity through the fixation of transcription activators on

Hua-Van et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:19
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/19

the regulatory region of the elements. It is now clear
that TE reactivation by stress or environmental changes
usually involves epigenetic changes [107]. Since the epigenetic state of TEs also influences the expression of
adjacent genes, the reaction of the genome to stress
directly involves TE sequences. In this case, TE-driven
epigenetic control does not require the element to be
active, since non-autonomous, deleted, truncated, and
even dead elements can be subject to epigenetic marks.
Hence, the most important point for the impact of the
“epi-transposon” is the location of the insertions.
The combination of these different points suggests
that we need to revisit the relationship between stress
and TEs. TE reactivation (and the generation of variability) is not the only consequence to be expected after
stress. Changes in the gene expression profile caused by
epigenetic changes in neighboring TEs may also be of
crucial importance. Both active and inactive TEs can
have this effect, and so all types of copies must be considered. Given the existence of transgenerational inheritance, it is urgent to carry out theoretical and
experimental investigations in order to define the impact
of epigenetic phenomena induced by transposable elements at the population level. Very little has so far been
published in this field, but in terms of evolution this is
probably a key point [143,144].
4 - Ancient origin of the components of RNAi

From an evolutionary point of view, the siRNA pathway,
which is directed against both viral and exogenous
RNAs, is the perfect example of a host-parasite arms
race. Indeed, the RNAi defense is sometimes by-passed
by various viral RNAi suppressors (VRS). Moreover,
viruses have evolved ways of interfering with the endogenous miRNA pathways, allowing them to control host
gene expression [145]. The host defense system has
become very efficient by acting at both transcriptional
and post-transcriptional levels, in both exogenous and
endogenous sequences, and through ping-pong mechanisms or systemy (in plants and nematodes) [146]. The
arms race is also illustrated by the rapid evolution of
proteins involved in defenses against viruses and TEs,
which contrasts with the slow evolution of the endogenous miRNA pathway proteins [145].
The RNAi system seem to have arisen in the common
ancestor of all eukaryotes, since homologues of all three
proteins involved in RNAi (the ARG family, DICER and
RdRP) can be found in all the supergroups in which
complete sequences exist (5 out of 6) [147,148]. Such a
hypothesis looks likely when we recall that viruses and
TEs are probably as old as life itself. More interestingly,
homologous proteins also exist beyond the domain of
the eukaryotes, although a prokaryotic origin of the
RNAi system itself seems unlikely. Indeed, the RdRP
and Dicer RNAse III domains may have evolved from

Page 11 of 29

phages, while the Dicer helicase domain and ARG/PIWI
appear to originate from the Archaea. The roles of these
prokaryotic proteins are not clear, but may not have
been to defend the organism against foreign DNA [148],
although alternative explanations have been proposed
recently for the prokaryotic Argonaute proteins [149]. In
any case, prokaryotes have other defense systems, with a
different origin, but with somewhat surprising similarities. Apart from the widespread Restriction/Modification
(R/M) system that specifically methylates endogenous
DNA to protect it from degradation - note that R/M
systems are also viewed as selfish modules [150,151] prokaryotes also have Clustered Regularly Interspaced
Short Palindromic Repeats (CRISPR) elements. These
elements function via small RNA molecules to confer
acquired immunity, in a way that may recall piRNA
clusters. Parts of sequences from foreign mobile genetic
elements, such as phages, or plasmids, are integrated
into CRISPR regions between palindromic repeats. They
are further transcribed and processed as small RNAs.
These small RNAs serve as guides for a protein complex
that targets the invading DNA [152]. Despite their striking functional analogy, eukaryotic RNAi systems and the
CRISPR system are not phylogenetically related [153].
5 - Impact on evolution

During the last decade, there has been an expansion in
investigations of the molecular mechanisms underlying
epigenetic phenomena. It has become clear that epigenetic components exist in all complex biological systems. These systems are involved at different levels,
from cells to populations, and perhaps in species involving both mitotic and meiotic inheritances. At present
most of this work focuses on molecular mechanisms,
and few authors have attempted to investigate their evolutionary impact [143,144,154,155].
Epigenetic marks affect genome expression and genotype-phenotype relationships in general. This was
recently discussed by Johannes et al. [155] in terms of
quantitative genetics. As has been shown in plants
[156], epigenetic modifications can be driven by environmental changes or stress. In general, stress can be
responsible for modifying the epigenome and/or the
selection of epialleles, leading to changes in the expression profile of gene(s). Hence the influence of the environment on the phenotype may be mediated by the
epigenome.
In terms of evolution, the epigenetic status of the cells
is important only if it affects the next generation. Initially most epigenetic modifications were thought to be
only mitotically transmitted, but it is becoming increasingly clear that transgenerational transmission does
occur, as recently reviewed by Jablonka and Raz [157].
Several examples of epigenetic inheritance involve transposable elements [67,124,158,159]. In Drosophila, hybrid

Hua-Van et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:19
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/19

dysgenesis involving P, I, and Penelope elements can be
explained by transmission of small RNAs [121,160,161].
The evolutionary impact of such a feature is obvious,
and several scenarios have been recently proposed and
discussed [143,144,155]. Indeed, the description of epigenetic variation among individuals in population, and
more importantly, the fact that epialleles can be
selected, could become a corner-stone in explaining
many evolutionary phenomena. In such a context, as
Jablonka and Lamb [154] point out, the epigenetic phenomenon can be considered as a transient state before
fixation occurs by genetic mutation(s).
For the genome, TEs carry useful sequences and
functions that can be exploited

Data accumulated over several years have indicated that
the contribution of TEs to the evolution and function of
host genes is far from negligible. The direct participation of TEs in genome functional evolution can occur in
different ways (Figure 2). First they can carry sequences
into regulating, coding, or intronic regions. These
sequences may trigger useful functional changes (expression pattern, alternative splicing, transcription initiation
and termination) as a result of the presence of particular
motifs or their physico-chemical properties [see [162] as
a recent example]. Second, they can provide a function
normally encoded by the element, which is then
recruited to implement a cellular function. In this case,
either an entire domain or the full protein is recruited,
i.e. domesticated by the genome. The molecular domestication of transposable elements has long been known
to occur, even if the role of the domesticated copy in
the cell is not always obvious [163,164]. It concerns
both classes of TEs. The roles assumed by TEs in the
cell are far from anecdotal, and can lead to important
evolutionary innovation.

Page 12 of 29

There are several criteria that may indicate that a
domestication event has occurred: the loss of mobility,
presence at only one locus, fixation in the population,
presence of an intact open reading frame, presence at
orthologous sites in several species, or traces of positive
selection on these orthologous sequences [165].
Obviously, none of these criteria is sufficient in isolation, because each of them occurs in a normal TE life
cycle. For example, traces of selection are visible in
some cases of suspected horizontal transfer [166,167].
Fixation of an immobile copy in one or several species
can be achieved simply as a result of demographic history and genetic drift. When a TE family is on its way
to being eliminated, it loses its members one by one,
until only one copy remains.
1 - Exploiting TE functions

The genome advantageously uses the TE-encoded functions
for its own purposes. Two situations can be distinguished:
the entire protein may be domesticated, or only one
domain. In the latter case, a chimeric gene is often created.
Full domestication is the most extreme case, in which
the entire coding region is used to carry out the new
function. The best known examples include the Drosophila telomeric retroelements HetA and TART, which
function as a telomerase to heal chromosome ends.
Classical telomerase contains a reverse transcriptase
domain, which indicates that retroelements and telomerases may have a common origin, but it is unclear
whether an ancient retroelement gave birth to the telomerase, or on the contrary originated from the telomerase. In the latter case, a “U-turn” of retroelements
reverting to their original telomerase function would
have occurred in Drosophila [168]. The envelope gene
of some endogenous retroviruses is also involved in
domestications, in particular in human and other mammals in which it induces the cell fusion required for

TE regulatory and
coding sequences
TE cis sequences
eq
Gene coding sequences
Gene regulatory regions

Regulatory networks

Exonization

Chimeric

Full Domestication

Figure 2 The different levels of TE utilization by the genome. TE sequences (green and blue) may contribute to gene regulatory regions
(yellow, thin rectangles) or coding sequences (large rectangles). Small portions or almost entire elements can be exapted, which can result in
new regulations or new genes.

Hua-Van et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:19
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/19

syncytiotrophoblast (placenta) formation [169,170].
Among the DNA transposons, the vertebrate V(D)J
recombination is a clear example. In this case, the transposase (from a Transib element) performs the recombinations necessary for setting up the immune system
[171]. RAG1 essentially functions like a transposase, and
the same enzyme activities are recognized (endonuclease
and transferase). CENP-B is a centromere binding protein present in eukaryotes, which is derived from the
Class II family of Tigger-pogo-Fot1 element [172], probably as a result of independent convergent domestication events [173]. Among the increasingly numerous
examples, the best known, reflected by the introduction
of a new function, correspond to evolutionary novelties
with a great impact.
As described in Volff [165], two steps are necessary
for an entire element to be tamed. One of the problems
with TEs is their ability to move, to amplify and to be
lost. Stabilization by immobilization of the copy in the
genome prevents its loss by non-reinsertion (for excising
elements) or recombination (LTR retroelements), as well
as its further amplification by transposition. This is
usually done by loss of the cis-sequences indispensable
for transposition (often element termini, such as LTRs
or TIRs). In practice, element truncation has often
occurred, probably because it is independent of transacting factors [165]. This step is not the most difficult to
achieve because the truncation of TEs occurs rather frequently. Another solution is to lose the transposition
activity completely. This may be regarded as an ineluctable fate of TEs, which are thought not to be subjected
to intense purifying selection for their transposition ability. Stabilization is not enough, since immobilized elements must also provide a function, and this is not
usually transposition. Hence, changes in the coding
sequence must also occur that alter the ability of the
protein to perform (retro)transposition while conferring
a new function on the protein (or maintaining some of
its existing functions in new context, e.g. a DNA binding
domain).
In many other cases, the domestication involves only
part of the TE protein. TE proteins usually encode a
limited number of functions. Transposases are characterized by a DNA binding domain, and a domain with
endonuclease, and by strand transfer activities. Retroelements usually encode gag proteins (with DNA Binding
domain, and antigenic properties), reverse transcriptase,
integrase/endonuclease, and envelope proteins present
in plasma membranes. In some atypical elements, such
as DIRS, Cryptons and some IS elements, the enzyme is
not referred to as an integrase/transposase, but is an (S
or Y)-recombinase, which integrates DNA in a different
way, usually via a circular intermediate [174]. A domain
is often domesticated through its fusion with cellular

Page 13 of 29

protein domains [175-177]. In this case, one of the
activities carried by the TE protein is retained. For
example, DNA binding domains are frequently derived
from class II DNA binding domains [reviewed in [178]].
The proteins containing these domains are involved in a
variety of pathways, and for example, are easily hijacked
for transcription factor functions. The increasing number of examples reveals the wide diversity of functions
in which domesticated domains are involved [reviewed
in [179]]. Hence the genome appears to be rather good
at using a few basic activities to generate numerous
functions, in a variety of pathways.
2 - Exploiting TE sequences

When encoded functions are not required, a genome
can also exploit TEs by using their sequences for other
purposes. TE sequences may have interesting properties,
non-coding sequences containing fortuitous ORFs, binding sites for regulation by proteins, or just useful chemico-physical properties.
The large-scale use of non-coding TE sequences as
coding sequences by genomes was first revealed in the
human genome. Several authors reported a relatively
high proportion of TE sequences in exons, suggesting
the process of exonization is not marginal and that various different kinds of TE are involved [180]. Similarly,
the implication of exonized TE in the generation of
alternative splicing has been recognized [181], sometimes with subtle effects [182]. However, in most cases
alternative splicing is not synonymous with an exaptation event and, in the case of primate Alu elements,
may be subject to loss in some species, suggesting that
the exaptation process takes time to occur [183,184].
More convincing evidence of exaptation comes from the
analysis of the more ancient MIR elements, which are
found in all mammals [184]. Most examples of exonization (TEs in coding regions) are derived from analyses
of mammalian genomes, in which TEs are frequently
found within genes (introns). In other metazoans or
eukaryotes, the phenomenon of exonization and alternative splicing appears to be less prominent. Lipatov et al.
[185] found that chimeric TE-gene RNAs were rather
rare in Drosophila, a fact explained as probably being a
consequence of the deleterious effect of the TE insertions. In plants, alternative splicing and TE-mediated
alternative splicing appears to be less frequent [186], but
there are several examples of expressed chimeric genes
derived from TEs that carry gene host fragments, such
as PACK-MULEs [187]. Exonization has been shown to
be more frequent in duplicated genes, which is consistent with the neofunctionalization theory [188]. It
should be noted that gene duplication could also result
from TE-mediated recombination [189].
TEs are also involved in the evolution of genome
functions through their wide use as regulatory

Hua-Van et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:19
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/19

sequences [178]. Besides the numerous known examples
of gene regulation through TEs sequences [[30,190], see
also [191] for a recent example], a more general role in
gene regulation was suspected after the discovery that
some TEs (notably MITEs) tend to be located in the
vicinity of genes [192,193], and that various regulatory
motifs can be detected in some TEs [[194,195] for
examples]. In the genomic era, comparative transcriptomics have made it possible to demonstrate the involvement of TEs in gene regulation variations, directly or
through epigenetics [137,196]. Moreover, in mammals,
studies of promoter regions, and transcription factor
binding sites (TFBS) have revealed that a large proportion of sites originate from TE sequences [76,197].
Hence, the ability of TEs to amplify provides an easy
way to modulate entire regulatory networks [178]. Such
data supports the old hypothesis that TEs play a major
role in regulation, and thus in evolution [46,198,199].
While the first examples of TE domestication and
cooptation to be discovered appeared to be exceptional
(although of prime importance with regard to function),
more recent findings prove that this is in fact a recurrent phenomenon in genome history. From the beginning, genomes have regularly fed on TEs.
Parasitic TEs and host fitness

At first sight, most of the DNA changes described above
might have some deleterious consequences for the cell
and for the organism. And indeed, in a worst case scenario, inactivating genes or rearranging chromosomes
can have immediately lethal consequences. In other
cases, the alteration of genes or their rearrangement
may be less harmful (only slightly deleterious). However
it looks as if a TE insertion usually has no dramatic
impact if it occurs in dispensable/non-genic DNA for
example (for instance in other TEs), which often corresponds to most of the genome. In rare cases, an insertion can even have beneficial effect, and so will
ultimately become fixed.
However, transposable elements have tended to be
known solely for their harmful mutagenic effects, which
once raised the question of how they manage to survive
despite natural selection. This implied that a genome
with high fitness would be one with few TEs. But in fact
this is rarely the case. First of all, we have to remember
that transposable elements are the archetype of selfishness. Their only raison d’être is to amplify and perpetuate themselves in the genome. Encoding the ability to
self-propagate within the genome is a simple but very
powerful aspect of their selfishness. The “selfish genes”
of Dawkins work in a much more complicated manner
to propagate themselves in the population by exploiting
sophisticated organismal “survival machines”. When
faced by threatening natural selection, it is far easier for

Page 14 of 29

a TE to duplicate itself than for a gene to do so. Second,
when the genetic burden caused by TEs becomes too
great, individuals or an entire population may become
extinct. This may explain why many TEs are only found
in moderate numbers of copies. Third, most TE insertions are in themselves probably neutral, as are most
mutations, with some deleterious insertions that are ultimately eliminated, and occasional beneficial insertions
that are eventually fixed. So, on average, the fitness cost
of carrying TEs may be relatively limited.
So far we have only glimpsed the potential enormous
positive impact of TEs on long-term genome evolution.
However, this long-term benefit cannot be set against
the short-term deleterious effects. Such a consideration
resembles the sex paradox, where the benefits of sex
(which generates genetic diversity) are visible in the
long-term, but cannot offset the short-term, two-fold
cost of sex compared to asexuality [200]. In both cases,
the discrepancy in time scale is reinforced by a difference between the levels at which the effects act, at the
individual level for short-term effect, and at the population or species level for long-term effect.
Genome-TE interactions are often viewed as an arms
race in which each opponent successively devises fresh
tricks to overcome the opponent’s latest displays, resulting in tight co-evolution. TEs are genomic parasites,
subjected to the fire of natural selection that may act
directly on any insertion, or indirectly by favoring on
the one hand a genome with good defenses, and on the
other hand TEs that are able to tame themselves. The
ultimate weapon developed by the genome is the
impressive epigenetic defense system that does not
destroy TEs but efficiently silences them, as can be
observed in Arabidopsis [67]. Arms race is visible in the
rapidity with which proteins involved in the defense system evolve, but in contrast, the rate of evolution of an
element is difficult to infer. However the huge diversity
of TEs suggests that this arms race does indeed exist. Of
course, each time a TE escapes from epigenetic control,
amplification bursts can occur (and indeed do occur
from time to time). TEs can also escape control as a
result from their ability to colonize new hosts after horizontal transfers.

Evolution of the TEs embedded in the genome
While the impact of TEs on the genome has been the
focus of many studies, only a few have looked at the
impact of the genomic environment on TE evolution.
The dynamics of TEs are usually inferred from population genetics, and the use of analytical or simulation
models, and there are few experimental studies or biological data [201]. An emerging approach is exploring this
issue from an ecological point of view, looking at TEs as
individuals living in the genome [202]. Finally,

Hua-Van et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:19
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/19

comparative genomics may also be used to help us to
understand the evolution and dynamics of TEs.
TE dynamics are influenced by several parameters
1 - The accepted hypothesis (transposition is balanced by
selection or self-regulation)

It is widely accepted that the evolution and dynamics of
TEs are governed by a balance between transposition
and selection [203]. It is assumed that transposable elements are slightly deleterious and decrease host fitness,
and so tend to be eliminated, whereas the transposition
process tends to increase the genomic copy number, in
a purely selfish manner. Different models suggest that
TE purifying selection result from deleterious insertions
within genes, from deleterious ectopic exchanges
responsible for genomic rearrangements [204-206], or
from a poisoning effect of TE activity [203,207]. Selfishness derives from the fact that TEs are able to replicate
more rapidly than the host genome [38,91]. Although
both forces clearly do apply, there is no need to reach
this equilibrium to explain the persistence of TE over
very long periods of time [208]. First, sudden changes
disrupting the equilibrium are recurrently observed
(transposition bursts, variable deleterious effects). Secondly, other non-adaptive forces must also be considered (see below). Third, TEs have evolved as thousands
of different families, each with its own history. The
extant TE diversity is probably only a small part of the
total historical diversity, and the persistence of some
TEs and the disappearance of some others are in themselves non-adaptive and rely, at least in part, on stochastic mechanisms. This means that the evolutionary
history of TEs can be explained without necessarily
involving long-term, stable copy number equilibrium.
2 - Effects of population size, host demographic history,
and genetic drift

The effective population size (Ne) is described as having
an important impact on the evolution of genome
architecture [209,210], including TE diversity and polymorphism. According to Lynch and Conery’s hypothesis,
selection is less effective at purging TEs in small populations, because genetic drift is stronger as the effective
population size Ne decreases [210]. Again, the model
assumes that TEs have a slightly deleterious effect,
which is confirmed by several analyses, including that of
Pasyukova et al. [211] estimating that on average a TE
insertion decreases the fitness of an individual by 0.4%.
A recent population genetics study of several TEs in
plant populations of which the demographic history is
known suggested that TEs diversity is influenced by
demographic factors such as bottlenecks and population
size fluctuations [212]. Another example comes from
the invasive Drosophila simulans species, in which the
level of the mariner element activity increased as the

Page 15 of 29

migration distance increased, probably as a result of
repetitive bottlenecks [213]. However, simulation studies
suggest that genetic drift is a significant force in eliminating TEs from small populations [208].
3 - Effects of recombination and of reproductive mode

The invasive properties of TEs include their abilities to
multiply within one genome and to spread within the
population. This is of prime importance for newly
arrived TEs, which are initially present in just a few
copies in a few individuals, and that have to invade both
the genome and the population, but also for TEs that
are already established in a species. Hence the reproductive mode is an important factor influencing TE
dynamics.
TEs have been described as sexually-transmitted parasites [214]. Indeed the model predicts the inability of
TEs to invade species in the absence of sex: an element
arriving in the genome of an asexual individual would
be able to invade this genome, but not to colonize genomes of other lineages during zygote formation. Moreover, the loss of sexuality of a species already containing
TEs may lead to the progressive loss of the TEs, or at
least of TE activity, because TE proliferation would
cause extinction of the lineage due to detrimental effects
[215]. At most, copy-number equilibrium may be
attained under certain specific conditions (infinite population and no excision at all). However, in small populations, the TE load leads to extinction, while in larger
populations genomes could get rid of the TEs [216].
All these predictions appear to be difficult to demonstrate in nature. Among eukaryotes, the bdelloid rotifers
correspond to well-established, ancient, asexual organisms. However, the search for TEs in these species has
led to the discovery of several families of Class-I and -II
elements [217,218]. The hypothesis suggested is that the
presence of TEs results from repeated horizontal transfers [219]. Moreover, TEs appear to be severely confined
to specific chromosomal compartments [218]. Ancient
asexual haploids are probably best represented by prokaryotes. When compared to eukaryotes, overall they
carry a smaller load of mobile elements, which may be
explained by enhanced selection due to haploidy and
small-sized genomes. However, most prokaryotes nevertheless contain IS elements. In addition to any benefits
they may carry (antibiotic resistance, genome plasticity),
their persistence could result from a rapid turnover,
with frequent horizontal transfers offsetting rapid losses
through selection [220].
Asexuality represents the most extreme situation, but
nature is full of species with sexual behavior that is
somewhere between full asexuality and obligate outcrossing sexuality, notably if we consider their recombination ability. Hence, differences in the ability TEs to
invade or to maintain itself in a population are also to

Hua-Van et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:19
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/19

be expected between selfing or out-crossing sexual species [221].
Reduced genetic exchanges (as in selfing populations)
leads to greater variation in TE copy number, and thus
to stronger natural selection forces [214]. When the
effect of selfing was analyzed in different selection models, contrasting results were observed, with negative correlations between the copy number equilibrium and
selfing rate in the transposon insertion model (heterozygous or homozygous) [222], but positive correlations in
the ectopic exchange model [206,223]. Under selffertilization (autogamy), genetic exchange is limited and
ultimately results in a high level of homozygosity. Langley et al [205] suggested that TEs could accumulate in
regions with low levels of recombination. This is
observed for the heterochromatic regions (pericentromeric, telomeric). At the population level, effective
recombination (including deleterious ectopic recombination) is thought to be reduced in highly homozygous
(highly selfing) species. Charlesworth et al. [224,225]
suggest that more abundant TEs may therefore be
allowed in selfing species, a hypothesis that is still controversial [see also [135,226]]. Furthermore, as proposed
by Wright and Schoen [206], recessive mutations caused
by TEs have more impact on homozygous genomes,
leading to stronger selection against TEs. Therefore contradictory findings may be expected, depending on the
relative importance of deleterious effects of insertions or
ectopic exchange on the overall host fitness [223].
Simulations confirm that in the insertion model, the
chance that a TE will invade a genome is drastically
reduced when selfing increases, because of the reduced
genetic exchange and reduced effective population size.
Moreover, under conditions in which molecular domestication events can occur, such events appear to be
delayed. Finally, when the adaptive insertion rate is low,
TE activity displays a cyclical pattern, with a higher periodicity than under out-crossing conditions (TS Boutin,
A Le Rouzic and P Capy, unpublished data). Comparative studies have also been performed in real selfing and
out-crossing species. In nematodes, as in Arabidopsis, it
was found than insertions were less polymorphic and
segregated at higher frequencies in selfing species, which
would be compatible with a relaxed selection in selfing
species, population size reduction or reduced transposition rate [227,228].
The TE lifecycle

The emergence of TEs in a naive genome may have two
origins. The first, and perhaps the most frequent origin,
is the horizontal transmission (HT) of an active copy
into the germ line. This phenomenon is frequent in prokaryotes, and the mechanisms of transfer are known
(conjugation, transformation, and transfection). In

Page 16 of 29

eukaryotes, such transfers seem to occur far less frequently, and their mechanisms remain unknown. It is
quite possible that one or several intermediates, including bacteria, viruses, or parasites, could be required
[229]. However, whatever the mechanism, the TEs must
reach the germline.
Comparisons of HT frequency show clearly that significant differences exist between the main superfamilies. Recently, Loreto et al. [229] estimated that among
the 98 HTs described in Drosophila, 51% involve DNA
transposons, 44% LTR retrotranposons and 5% non-LTR
retrotransposons. Quantitative estimations cannot be
provided for other species, but several cases of HT have
been reported in mammals and tetrapods [230], in bdelloid rotifers [231], and in plants [232].
The alternative hypothesis of TE origin is the de novo
emergence or re-emergence of autonomous sequences
as a result of recombination between inactive copies.
While there is less supporting evidence for this, it has
been demonstrated that ectopic recombination between
different copies of the same family or copies from different subfamilies can occur. For instance, it has been
shown that some of the TEs described in yeast as Ty1/2
elements are in fact hybrids between Ty1 and Ty2 [233].
More recently, Sharma et al. [234] reported new elements resulting from repeated recombinations that may
occur during the hybridization of sympatric species and
polyploidization. Similarly, Marco and Marin [235]
showed the emergence of a new Athila lineage as a
result of recombination between distantly-related copies.
In all these cases, this is not a de novo emergence; it is
rather a re-emergence of autonomous copies from nonautonomous or dead copies.
As soon as a new element appears in a naive genome,
it has to face a new challenge since there is generally a
single copy, in a single individual, in a single population.
To avoid being lost, this copy must invade the population and the genome. The transposition rate estimated
from several natural populations, laboratory strains and
for several types of elements is about 10-4 transpositions/copy/generation. If we apply this rate to a newly
arriving copy, this copy would almost systematically be
lost. Therefore, two scenarios for a successful invasion
have been proposed. First, either a high rate of new elements arriving by HT or recombination, or a high transposition rate of the initial copy i.e. close to 10 -1 or 1,
according to the model prediction [236]. Of course,
such a transposition rate cannot be maintained for long
without risk to the population. Therefore, regulation of
the transposition rate can be expected to occur rapidly.
This could result from self-regulation by the TE or host
regulation [203].
After the successful initial invasion of the genome and
of the population, it becomes difficult to lose an

14
10
8
6
4
0

2

Average number of copies

15
10
5
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

0

2

4

6

Average number of preys

8

4000

6000

8000

Time (generations)

4

6

8

Prey
Predator

2

Average number of individuals
0

2000

0

8
6
4
2

With the exception of a few species, a genome does not
normally contain only one type of TE. For a given
family, several types of copies with differing levels of
activity can be detected, including inactive copies. This
is clearly demonstrated by analyses of a large number of
genomes involved in sequencing projects. Since this
situation is observed for almost all TEs, several questions arise: Is there any competition between different
families, or between different types within the same
family? Can an equilibrium resembling an Evolutionary
Stable Strategy (ESS) be reached by these TEs in a genome? Can we apply models of population biology to the
dynamics of TEs in a genome?
In the last few years, it has been assumed that the
genome can be viewed as an ecosystem in which TE
copies are considered as individual members of a species
[202,237,238]. In such an analogy, autonomous and nonautonomous copies of the same family are competing
entities rather than belonging to the same “species”. In
any case, the resources are produced by autonomous or
truncated copies that have kept an intact ORF. These
resources correspond to the transposition machinery
like the transposase for the Class II elements, and can
be used both by autonomous copies and by transmobilizable non-autonomous ones. Simulations and analytic models both provided TE cyclic dynamics due to
the competition between active and non-autonomous
copies, which are similar to the prey-predator dynamics
described by Lotka and Volterra in population biology
[[238], see Figure 3 and Additional file 1]. In such a
context, non-autonomous copies can be viewed as parasites of autonomous copies, providing a nice illustration
of how a genome can be viewed as an ecosystem. This
cyclical pattern may be disrupted by changing any of the
parameters of the system, leading occasionally to the
loss of one or other of the elements. Hence TE interactions within a family should probably not be considered
to constitute an ESS (Evolutionary Stable Strategy).
Furthermore, it must be stressed that transposition
bursts may occur [239-242], and that these sometimes

Autonomous
Non−autonomous

Average number of autonomous copies

Average number of predators

TE competition and the ecology of the genome

0

0

element. Thus, it is important to follow the TE
dynamics both in the genome and in the species. In
most of the models published in the 1980s and 1990s, it
was assumed that the copy number of an element had
to reach an equilibrium (see [201]). However, most of
these models failed to take the impact of mutation on
TE activity into consideration. When this effect was
included in the model, it could be shown that it is
almost impossible to reach a long-term equilibrium, and
several dynamic outcomes can be observed, including
the loss of the active or trans-mobilizable copies, or the
domestication of a copy.

Page 17 of 29

Average number of non−autonomous copies

Hua-Van et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:19
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/19

0

2000

4000

6000

8000

Time (generations)

Figure 3 Illustration of the similarities between the theoretical
dynamics of autonomous/non-autonomous TE copies (top row)
and prey-predator models (bottom row). The transposition
model is described in Le Rouzic & Capy 2006. See Additional File 1
for more details about equation models.

reflect perturbations that can lead to long-term changes
in TE content.
In addition, several families may coexist in a single
genome. TE interactions have been poorly studied in
cases where trans-family mobilization is not possible.
However, it looks likely that if the genome is considered
as an ecosystem, its “biotic capacity” is probably
restricted. In other words, the expansion of a given
family could have an impact on the dynamics of another
family, reflecting a struggle for survival between TE
families similar to that which occurs between species
sharing the same ecological niche.

Concluding remarks
The genomic and post-genomic eras have unraveled the
importance of TEs in genome evolution. The early suspicions, including McClintock’s predictions, turn out to
be true: TEs do indeed play a significant role in gene
evolution, at least in some species, in gene regulation,
and in the genomic response to stress. A number of isolated examples are now seen to reflect a general rule. At
the time of McClintock’s work, TEs, which she called
controlling elements, were considered to be part of the
genome. Today, they are perceived as being independent
of the host carrying them, although more intricate relationships have been revealed: a large fraction of the genome is now known to be implicated, molecular
domestication has occurred, TEs are directly implicated

Hua-Van et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:19
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/19

in the formation of regulatory and coding sequences,
play direct and indirect roles in key cell processes, and
have responsibility for lateral gene transfers, at least in
prokaryotes.
During the last decade, the numbers of known TE
families has grown, as has the number of examples of
TE domestication, and the rhythm of publications on
TEs has quickened.
Methods for identifying transposons have changed
considerably over this time. Fortuitously discovered to
begin with, TEs were then searched for using various
methods, including transposon trapping, and are now
mainly identified as repeated sequences with particular
features within sequenced genomes, or through protein
homology, with the help of various and numerous programs and databases. Still more recently, new superfamilies, and completely new types of mobile element
have been discovered [18,19]. The explosion of metagenomic and genomic sequences make the identification
of all TEs a costly and challenging task. The use of
bioinformatics, with sophisticated and efficient detection
programs is a crucial element in attempting to provide a
comprehensive survey of TE diversity and evolution.
Technical progress now makes it possible to trace the
history and dynamics of TEs within a genome, and
grasp both the influence of TEs on genome specificity
and the influence of the genome on TE evolution. The
dichotomic view of TEs as either parasites or necessary
beneficial entities is resolving towards a unified view, in
which these are two aspects of the same process, which
merge to form a continuum [39]. TEs and genomes
have probably been in constant contact since life began,
and this cohabitation has had repercussions on the evolution of both partners. Hence it is not surprising to discover that TEs have beneficial effects since parasitic
elements and genome sequences have mixed for so long.
However, some of the old questions remain unanswered, while new questions have arisen: the horizontal
transfer of TEs appears to be a major step in TE evolution and propagation. In eukaryotes, this phenomenon is
rare, and its mechanism (or vector) still unknown. Continued investigations in this field and careful analysis of
the findings must be pursued.
The epigenetic component of genome functionality
has been the focus of intense interest in the biology
community in recent last years, and this has replaced
TEs centre-stage. However, TE-genome relationships
within the epigenetic dimension are far from having
been deciphered, and still require intense research.
TEs are parasitic by definition and like parasites, TE
expansion depends on interactions with the host, i.e. the
genome. This part of the TE biology remains to be
explored, since the vision of TEs as competing individuals, or species, within their ecological niche, the

Page 18 of 29

genome, or struggling with their own parasites (nonautonomous elements) is rather new. Addressing this
poorly investigated aspect will be facilitated by the availability of the genomes of several individuals per species
within few years.

Reviewers’ comments
Reviewer 1

Jerzy Jurka, Genetic Information Research Institute
This reviewer provided no comments for publication
Reviewer 2

Jürgen Brosius, University of Muenster
This is a review on the impact of TEs on the evolution
of genomes and genes including their regulation and
epigenetic phenomena. Unlike many previous reviews,
parts of the present one explore the (potential) significance of TEs from different angles and hence make it a
worthwhile read. At the same time, the manuscript still
carries the burden of past and present misunderstandings or ambiguities concerning TEs.
1) One of the difficulties to write a general review on
all classes of TEs, is the fact that they are very different
from each other, especially when comparing DNA transposons (class II) that usually operate in the cut and
paste mode and class I TEs that operate in a copy and
paste mode via an RNA transcript. Although this is discussed beginning on page 7, perhaps for the reader it
would be easier to mention it at the onset. As an aside,
few class I elements are transposABLE elements as, after
integration into the genome most copies are not able to
produce additional copies because they are dead on arrival. Especially, SINEs are rarely being transcribed
because they lack the necessary flanking regions for
autonomous transcription while LINEs are mostly truncated. An interesting exception is a small nucleolar
RNA (snoRNA)-derived class of SINEs in Platypus that
often maintains the ability to be co-expressed and processed into distinct RNAs when retroposed into introns
of RNA polymerase II genes [1]. Nevertheless, in most
cases a better description would be transposED elements
for class I TEs.
Authors’ response: In this manuscript, we used a classical terminology to describe transposable elements. “Transposable elements” are generally defined as sequences able
to promote their own mobility and/or duplication in genomes, but in practice this definition largely extends to all
TE-derived sequences, even if they have lost this autonomy.
Consequently, non-autonomous copies (such as SINEs or
MITEs) are generally considered as transposable elements
(even if they are phylogenetically unrelated to the corresponding autonomous element), as well as totally inactive
TE-derived pseudogenes, even if these are not actually
“transposable”. On the opposite, retroprocessed sequences

Hua-Van et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:19
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/19

that are not repeated (but just happened to be reversetranscribed accidentally) are not considered as transposable (perhaps “transposed” here would fit). Although
non-homologous, “transposable elements” and their derived
sequences thus constitute an unambiguous group of
sequences, characterized by their distribution in genomes
(they are the middle repetitive fraction of the genome
DNA), their evolutionary properties, and their “ability to
transpose”, where “transpose” stands for both “copy and
paste” and “cut and paste” mechanisms.
Reviewer’s response: Good point! Use “classical” for a
term that is imprecise and not quite correct and you are
off the hook. An admittedly extreme would be the “classical view” of the sun revolving around the earth.
Reviews often address readers outside the field. Imprecise terminology leads to misconceptions that are difficult to purge. Hopefully readers will get as far as this
section. Were I not familiar with this research topic,
I would have been confused about much of the content
concerning class I elements including the following
statement from the background section (despite the
attempt for clarification in the last sentence):
“1 - TEs are a major factor in evolution because
they are an important source of variability. Mutations
caused by TEs are diverse, ranging from small-scale
nucleotide changes to large chromosome rearrangements, including epigenetic modifications. Although TEs
are mobile, the nucleotide (or epigenetic) changes
resulting from their transposition can persist,
being transmitted through generations and through
populations.”
With respect to class I TEs, it is not the DNA that is
moving but the RNA. RNA is transcribed from the
DNA and then reverse transcribed and integrated.
Neither master copy(ies) from which the RNA is originating nor the numerous integrated cDNAs do not
move once integrated into their respective loci (except
by genomic rearrangement as for any piece of DNA). If
these class I TEs weren’t absolutely sedentary, they
could not be used as reliable phylogenetic markers as
mentioned in this review under the heading “From
mutations and (epi)-genetic variation to genetic novelty
and adaptation”. Actually, the first publication on the
phylogenetic potential of retroposed elements (Alus)
came from A. Dugaiczyk’s laboratory: Ryan, S. C., and
A. Dugaiczyk. 1989. Newly arisen DNA repeats in primate phylogeny. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences USA 86:9360-9364. N. Okada’s laboratory
perfected the approach to solve many interesting phylogenetic questions. This effort is summarized in the following review: Shedlock, A., K. Takahashi, and N.
Okada. 2004. SINEs of speciation: tracking lineages with
retroposons. Trends in Ecology and Evolution 19:545553. Perhaps, part of the discrepancy stems from the

Page 19 of 29

DNA-centric majority view versus my RNA- centric
view (see also comments 3 and 11).
Another point: I do not see how TE insertions cause
small-scale nucleotide changes. Those changes are at
least as large as the TE, i.e., at least 70 nt plus direct
repeats.
Authors’ response: If one considers mobility or transposability as the ability to excise, then we agree that
Class I are neither mobile nor transposable. But if one
considers mobility or transposability as the ability for a
DNA segment to be inserted at a new position, then,
Class I element are TEs. It seems that this last definition
is more universally used. On what, in our opinion,
should be considered as TEs, see comment 11.
Small-scale nucleotide changes occur when Class II elements excise. Usually the initial sequence is not exactly
restored after double strand break repair. This is referred
to as the excision footprint (added in the text).
2) The title of the manuscript already contains two
terms that require qualification. First of all, non-autonomous TEs are not necessarily selfish. In theory, any
RNA (including messenger RNAs) can be retroposed
[2]. Some, however, are reverse transcribed and retroposed in a highly efficient manner by the machinery of
autonomous TEs (e.g., LINEs) and hence give rise to
thousands, up to a million copies in a genome. Of
course, one could argue that some of the frequently retroposed RNAs do not have cellular functions any longer,
but evolved structures that tricks the machinery of
autonomous TEs into using them as templates [1]. Even
though the RNAs might have lost (original) function,
genes encoding such RNAs survive, not necessarily at its
original genomic locus, but fortuitously due to the sheer
number of copies generated. As a consequence, a few of
them are bound to integrate into a genomic locus that
permits autonomous transcription [3]. This is probably
the case with Alu elements that survived in some form
or another from the beginning of mammalian radiation
up to now. Such a mode of persistence is documented,
for example, by the presence of Alu subfamilies that
were active at different times in primates. Of course,
one cannot rule out a cellular function of some Alu
RNAs at this juncture. The second problematic term is
“architects” which implies foresight and planning. Perhaps, the term “agents” would be less ambiguous. In a
similar vein, perhaps one should stay clear of the term
“create” or similar (used elsewhere in the text).
Authors’ response: In theory, there is indeed a stage
where a non-selfish sequence (as e.g. the ancestor of Alu
elements) starts, for some reason, to be amplified by an
autonomous copy. However, genome-level selection will
take place very rapidly, and among all amplified copies,
the one that have a slight “superparasitism” advantage
will become more frequent than the others, and the

Hua-Van et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:19
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/19

original ancestors will be outnumbered. Since there is no
reason why the mutations favoring transposition would
maintain the original cellular function, the probability
for a sequence to be both selfish-DNA and “altruistic
DNA” at the same time remains infinitesimal. The same
infinitesimal (at the evolutionary scale) transition period
exists when a functional copy inserts in a site where it
brings some selective advantage, the copy being both
potentially selfish and useful. A similar unstable stage
probably also exists when species evolve from e.g. parasitism to symbiosis, but does not preclude an operational
classification between two non-exclusive categories. As in
remark #1, the issue is probably linked to the fact that
“selfish”, in the same way as “transposable”, generally
also qualifies derived sequences that are not by themselves “selfish” or “transposable”, but exist because their
direct ancestors were selfish and/or transposable.
Although the reviewer’s remark about the use of the
term “architect” is formally exact, we note that similar
stylistic effects are common in the literature (Mattick
(2001) “Non-coding RNAs: the architects of eukaryotic
complexity” EMBO reports 2, 11, 986-991), and our feeling was that our “selfish architects” could not be understood in a different way than e.g. Dawkins’ blind
watchmaker. Potentially misleading occurrences of “create” were removed from the text, and we believe that this
comment published along with the article will prevent
misinterpretation of the title.
Reviewer’s response: Concerning the infinitesimal
probability for a sequence to continue to be both selfish-DNA and “altruistic DNA” at the same time, BC1
RNA is a counter example. It arose in a common ancestor of rodents via retroposition of a tRNA, has a function in the central nervous system and is the master
copy of thousands of ID repetitive elements generated
over long time periods. However, as the authors stated
above, a few rare integrated copies that happened not to
be transcriptionally silent, became master copies of additional sub-families of ID repeats [reviewed in ref. [2],
given at the end of this section]. Once more, for class I
TEs, it would be the RNA that is selfish, not the bookkeeping DNA [7], just as the RNA of an RNA virus
would be selfish and not the integrated genomic DNA
copy. On the other hand, DNA transposons (class II)
might be considered selfish DNA.
Authors’ response: This is indeed a nice counter
example. Retroposition ability and cellular function may
be both present because the gene is in a transitional
stage before retrotransposition ability be lost, or because
both reside on the same sequence in the gene (the nontRNA part).
3) For most investigators, evolutionary considerations
begin with the last common ancestor (LUCA) with
RNA, protein and DNA already in place. A look at the

Page 20 of 29

RNA world and major evolutionary transitions [4], especially those from the RNP world to modern cells with
DNA as bookkeeper, provides some scenarios to questions [5-8] such as: “Are we able to understand why
they [TEs] are here, and why they are still here?”. This
also should qualify the statement, “the Central Dogma
could not be questionable”. See ref. [2], Figure 3.
Authors’ response: the reference to the Central Dogma
was indeed unnecessary here, and we have reformulated
this sentence. In order to address a remark from reviewer
1, most open questions were reformulated, so that we
could not directly refer here to the origin of DNA.
4) “TEs possess two main characteristics that distinguish them from classical genes...”. One should remind
the reader that some TEs are not genes. LINEs and LTR
elements are more like small operons and thus harbour
at least two genes. Furthermore, most SINEs or mRNAderived retrocopies are not true genes but inactive pseudogenes (SINEs with extremely high copy numbers).
Authors’ response: Of course, we wanted to refer to
non-TE sequences. This sentence was changed into “...
from other genomic components”.
5) The sentence “ the core of Darwin’s theory was
never really questioned” needs qualification. Perhaps,
the authors mean that it was never questioned in the
scientific community. Even that would be inaccurate,
see refs. [9-12].
Authors’ response: This sentence was indeed misleading, we meant that it was never successfully challenged.
This was fixed in the revision.
6) There are earlier references (in addition to refs.
[34,35] concerning “TE as major actors of diversity”
[13-15].
Authors’ response: The Kidwell and Lisch (1997)
reference seems well adapted here since they review the
effects of all classes of TEs in both animals and plants.
The second reference illustrates through several examples
the involvement of epigenetics in TE-induced phenotypic
variations.
7) “homologues of the three proteins involved in RNAi
(ARG family, DICER and RdRP) can be found in all
supergroups”
What is meant by “supergroups” major clades
perhaps?
Authors’ response: Eukaryotes are divided in 6 clades
called supergroups (Rhizaria, Chromalveolates, Archaeplastidae, Opisthokonts. Amoebozoa and Excavates. The
very same term is used in the cited reference, and elsewhere to refer to these 6 clades.
8) When discussing the CRISPR elements, it should
be mentioned that the small RNAs were acquired
from invaders, such as phages. The acquisition of
these elements even resembles something akin to
Lamarckism [16].

Hua-Van et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:19
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/19

Authors’ response: We gave a little more details on
these very interesting CRISPR elements. Contrary to Koonin and Wolf 2009, we are however a bit reluctant to
qualify this process as “Lamarckism” (Lamarck’s theory,
which was a general framework to explain evolution,
cannot be validated by rare observations in which Darwinian evolution has led to a system superficially similar
to Lamarck’s wrong model of evolutionary change).
9) “First they [TEs] can bring sequences in regulating,
coding or intronic regions. Those sequences may trigger
useful functional changes (expression pattern, alternative
splicing, transcription initiation and termination), by the
presence of particular motifs or their physico-chemical
properties [see [144] as a recent example]. Second, they
can bring coding sequences, which modify the initial
sequence and create new genes. Concerning “coding
sequences” I do not see much difference between
“first” and “second”, once you bring TEs into coding
sequences, they usually have to be coding or they would
destroy the ORF.
Authors’ response: Indeed, the second point was
already included in the first, and has been removed.
10) “The full domestication is the most extreme case
in which the totality of the coding region is used to
ensure the new function.” True, but one should find
smaller contributions of fragments of TE-derived genes
(this is mentioned only in the legend to Figure 2). For
example as novel (alternative) exons oder contributing
new termini to existing proteins, just as mRNA-derived
retrocopies do [17].
Authors’ response: This is what we meant by
“extreme case”. We refer to the less extreme cases two
paragraphs later, “In numerous other cases, the domestication concerns only a part of the TE protein [...]”. Here,
the domain function is exapted. Smaller contributions
are mentioned in the next part, which depicts exaptation
of TE sequences (and not TE protein function). In some
cases, exapted sequences become part of a coding region.
11) “While first examples of TE domestication and
cooptation appeared as the exception (although of prime
importance in regard to the function), the recent and
numerous data prove that this is actually a recurrent
phenomenon in genome history. Since the beginning,
genomes regularly feed on TEs,” and “TE and genome
have been in constant contact since probably the beginning of life and such promiscuity has had repercussions
on the evolution on both partners.” Genomes ARE
transposed (RNA) elements [5-8,18].
Authors’ response: In this paragraph, we refer to
transposable elements, and not to other sequences retroprocessed accidentally. We think that “transposition” is
too specific to be applied to any kind of reverse-transcription event.

Page 21 of 29

Reviewer’s response: There is not much difference
between class I transposable elements (retroposons) and
other retroprocessed sequences. Once more, the key to
the difference lies in the properties of the RNA: some
are more others less efficient templates for retroposition.
Where do you draw the line: One hundred retrocopies
of a tRNA are retropseudogenes and one thousand
copies of a tRNA or tRNA-like RNA are SINEs?
Authors’ response: The copy number is clearly not the
good criterion to decide whether a sequence is a TE or
not. The property to be efficiently retroposed is crucial,
and must not depend on the environment, meaning that
basically, RNA produced from any intact retroposed copy
must keep the ability to be reinserted.
12) page 25, Exploiting TE sequences
A discussion about the persistence of exapted TEs in
short evolutionary branches (gain and loss of exapted
TEs e.g., in primates) [19] and long evolutionary
branches (e.g., constitutive expression of exapted TEs in
deep mammalian branches) [20] should be added.
Authors’ response: This discussion on the long-term
persistence of domesticated sequences is indeed interesting, and is now mentioned in the manuscript. However,
it is also important to consider that there is no strong
evidence that TE-derived exons behave in a different way
than new coding sequences from different origins, and
that this could simply reflect the “average” fate of genetic
novelties in genomes.
Reviewer’s response: Agreed, there should be no difference between TE-derived novel exons and those from
anonymous genomic sequences [8], because even the
latter are ancient TEs who are not discernible anymore,
due to mutations over long time periods [6,18]. Actually,
most if not all genomic DNA is TE-derived, which
would return us to evolutionary transitions following
the RNA and RNP-worlds [5,6].
13) Page 32, TE competition and ecology of the
genome
For marsupials, Nilsson et al. could show an overlapping
activity of RTE and LINE mobilized SINE elements along
a single phylogenetic marsupial branch. The parallel activity of the two different retropositional systems was further
supported by detecting frequent nested insertions of RTE
in LINE mobilized elements and vice versa [21].
Authors’ response: There is indeed no doubt that several TE families can be active simultaneously in genomes. Reciprocal transpositions in inserted copies is a
strong piece of evidence that this was the case in the
marsupial lineage, and such a coexpression is regularly
observed in modern insect species. The missing information, however, remains the degree of interaction between
these families: do they use the same resources, do they
fight the same regulation mechanisms? So far, it is not

Hua-Van et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:19
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/19

clear whether co-invading TE families are competitors,
commensals, or mutualists.
14) An additional earlier reference for the role of
TE-derived genes in placenta formation should be
cited [22].
Authors’ response: The literature has been updated.
Reference:
[1] Schmitz J, Zemann A, Churakov G, Kuhl H, Grützner F, Reinhardt R, Brosius J Retroposed SNOfall–a
mammalian-wide comparison of platypus snoRNAs.
Genome Res 18:1005-10.
[2] Brosius J (1999) RNAs from all categories generate
retrosequences that may be exapted as novel genes or
regulatory elements. Gene 238:115-34.
[3] Brosius J (2003) The contribution of RNAs and
retroposition to evolutionary novelties. Genetica 118:99116.
[4] Szathmáry E, Smith JM (1995). The major evolutionary transitions. Nature 374: 227-32.
[5] Brosius J (2003) Gene duplication and other evolutionary strategies: from the RNA world to the future.
J Struct Funct Genomics 3:1-17.
[6] Brosius J (1999) Transmutation of tRNA over time.
Nat Genet 22:8-9.
[7] Brosius J (2005) Disparity, adaptation, exaptation,
bookkeeping, and contingency at the genome level.
Paleobiology 31(2 Suppl):1-16.
[8] Brosius J (2005) Echoes from the past–are we still
in an RNP world? Cytogenetic Genome Res. 110: 8-24.
[9] Kellogg, Vernon L. (1907) Darwinism To-Day.
A Discussion of Present-Day Criticism of the Darwinian
Selection Theories, Together with a Brief Account of
the Principal Other Proposed Auxiliary and Alternative
Theories of Species-Forming” Henry Holt and Company,
New York.
[10] Hull, David L. (1983) Darwin and his Critics. The
Reception of Darwin’s Theory of Evolution by the Scientific Community. University of Chicago Press, Chicago,
ISBN 0-226-36046-6
[11] Mayr, Ernst (1991) One Long Argument. Charles
Darwin and the Genesis of Modern Evolutionary
Thought. Harvard Univiversity Press, Cambridge, ISBN
0-674-63905-7
[12] Woese CR (2004) A new biology for a new century. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 68:173-86.
[13] Brosius J (2001) Retroposons–seeds of evolution.
Science 251:753.
[14] Brosius J, Gould SJ (1992) On “genomenclature":
a comprehensive (and respectful) taxonomy for pseudogenes and other “junk DNA”. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
89:10706-10.
[15] Brosius J, Tiedge H (1995) Reverse transcriptase:
mediator of genomic plasticity. Virus Genes 11:163-79.

Page 22 of 29

[16] Koonin EV, Wolf YI (2009) Is evolution Darwinian or/and Lamarckian? Biol Direct 4:42.
[17] Baertsch R, Diekhans M, Kent WJ, Haussler D,
Brosius J (2008) Retrocopy contributions to the evolution of the human genome. BMC Genomics 9:466.
[18] Brosius J (2009) The fragmented gene. Ann NY
Acad Sci 1178:186-93.
[19] Krull M, Brosius J, Schmitz J (2005) Alu-SINE
exonization: en route to protein-coding function. Mol
Biol Evol 22:1702-11.
[20] Krull M, Petrusma M, Makalowski W, Brosius J,
Schmitz J (2007) Functional persistence of exonized
mammalian-wide interspersed repeat elements (MIRs).
Genome Res 17:1139-45.
[21] Nilsson MA, Churakov G, Sommer M, Van Tran
N, Brosius J, Schmitz J (2010) Tracking marsupial evolution using archaic genomic retroposon insertions. PloS
Biol 8:e1000436).
[22] Mi S, Lee X, Li X, Veldman GM, Finnerty H,
Racie L, LaVallie E, Tang XY, Edouard P, Howes S,
Keith JC Jr, McCoy JM. Syncytin is a captive retroviral
envelope protein involved in human placental morphogenesis. Nature. 2000 Feb 17;403(6771):785-9.
Reviewer 3

I. King Jordan, School of Biology, Georgia Institute of
Technology
In this manuscript, Hua-Van et al. present a fairly
extensive review of the interactions between transposable
elements and their host genomes. The review emphasizes
the numerous ways that transposable element derived
sequences have influenced the structure, function and
evolution of genomes and tries to reconcile these influences with classical (neo-)Darwinian evolutionary theory.
The review is distinguished by the fact that it deals with
two perspectives on transposable elements that are
usually treated separately: the impact of the transposable
elements on their host genomes and the function and
evolution of the elements themselves. This paper makes a
nice contribution to the field of transposable element
biology and also fits well with the recent series of papers
that Biology Direct has published dealing with current
perspectives on Darwinian evolutionary theory.
Much of what is covered in this review has been treated elsewhere previously. Nevertheless, it is both timely
and useful to have much of this material presented
together in an evolutionary framework. Some of the
newest and most relevant material is on the relationship
between transposable elements, RNA interference and
epigenetic phenomena. From my admittedly biased perspective, this represents the single most important contribution of this review. But this is an area of
investigation that is changing rapidly, and I would urge

Hua-Van et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:19
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/19

the authors to consult some of the most recent literature on transposable elements and epigenetics to deepen
this part of the manuscript. With all apologies for being
self-serving, our own lab has recently published a couple
of reviews on these topics: (Jordan IK and Miller WJ
2009 Genome defense against transposable elements
and the origins of regulatory RNA in Genome Dynamics
and Stability Lankenau and Volff (Eds) 4: 77-94 and
Huda A and Jordan IK 2009 Epigenetic regulation of
mammalian genomes by transposable elements in Ann
NY Acad Sci 1178: 276-284). In addition, we have also
recently shown that transposable element mediated epigenetic effects on host genomes may not be confined to
repressive epigenetic modifications, as emphasized in
this review, but also by activating modifications that are
recruited to transposable elements in the vicinities of
host genes (Huda A et al 2010 Epigenetic histone modifications of human transposable elements: genome
defense versus exaptation in Mobile DNA 1:2). There
are a couple of other recent papers that are directly
related to this topic - and this list is by no means
exhaustive - that the authors may wish to have a look at
(Rebollo R et al. 2010 Jumping genes and epigenetics:
towards new species in Gene 454: 1-7 and Lisch D 2009
Epigenetic regulation of transposable elements in plants
Annu Rev Plant Biol. 2009;60:43-66).
Authors’ response: This part has been reorganized to
integrate this aspect and update citations.
I agree strongly with the authors’ sentiment that transposable elements play critical roles in genome structure,
function and evolution. However, some caution is warranted in order to avoid overstating the case. For example, the statement in the abstract that “...since Darwin’s
theory, transposable elements are maybe the discovery
that has changed the most our vision of (genome) evolution.” is somewhat overwrought considering that Darwin
lacked even the most basic concept of the molecular
mechanisms of heredity or any notion whatsoever of
what constituted a genome. Indeed, the authors point
this very fact out in several places in the manuscript.
Thus, they may wish to be more circumspect when placing the impact of transposable elements into the context of evolutionary theory and genome evolution as a
whole.
Authors’ response: The concerned sentences have
been reformulated
The statement in the introduction that “the core of
Darwin’s theory was never really questioned.” (page 4) is
factually inaccurate. The core of this theory has been,
and continues to be, continually questioned at a fundamental level. It may be more accurate to state that the
core of theory has never been successfully challenged or
over-turned.

Page 23 of 29

Authors’ response: We agree with this remark and
changed the sentence accordingly.
The authors’ imply that biologists were reluctant to
accept McClintock’s discovery of transposable elements
because it did not fit with the ‘Central Dogma’ (Introduction page 4). But the Central Dogma is a concept from
molecular biology that came later, and while the discovery
of mobile genetic elements made by McClintock clearly
challenged prevailing ideas about how static the genome
was, it did not directly address or contradict the Central
Dogma. Further on in the same section the Central Dogma
is referred to as depicting ‘the genome as a linear succession of genes’. Again, the linear ‘beads-on-a-string’ concept
of a static genome is distinct from the Central Dogma.
Authors’ response: The confusion between the central
dogma and the static genome dogma has been clarified.
The authors point out an important concept that the
evolutionary dynamics of transposable elements occur at
two levels: intra-populational, based on the competition
between individual organisms, as is the case for static
host genes, and intra-genomic based on the competition
between individual element copies. This is indeed a critical aspect of transposable element evolution that
impacts how the elements affect their host genomes.
However, they then go on to posit a third conceptually
distinct level based on horizontal transfer. It is well
known that elements may be particularly prone to horizontal transfer between species, but it is not clear how
and whether this phenomenon entails a third distinct
level of transposable element evolutionary dynamics.
Authors’ response: This third level become apparent
only when an analogy with an ecological concept is considered, which was not clearly stated. The intra-genomic
competition may be compared to competition between
individuals for the same resource in a unique ecological
niche. A TE family in one genome corresponds then to a
population. The intra-populational level represents a
metapopulation in which TE populations mix by a kind
of migration process triggered by sex. By analogy, horizontal escape toward a new genome can be viewed as
new ecological niche colonization and represents the
extreme case of migration with foundation of a new isolated population and ultimately allopatric speciation. (In
comparison a static host gene (allele) will not use the
intra-genomic level to expand). We agree that the ability
to transfer horizontally does not impact the TE dynamics
at the species level, but provides only new seeds for TE
expansion in the living world as a whole. The idea has
been reformulated, hopefully with more clarity.
The authors often refer to the conflicting, and seemingly dichotomous, notions of transposable elements
as genomic parasites versus the creative or adaptive
contributions that the elements make to their host

Hua-Van et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:19
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/19

genomes throughout the manuscript. However, these
two concepts are not mutually exclusive. In a very nice
review on this topic (Kidwell MG and Lisch D 2001 Perspective: transposable elements, parasitic DNA, and genome evolution in Evolution 55:1-24), the authors nicely
lay out the idea that transposable elements do not
exclusively occupy extreme positions on either end of
this dichotomy. They hold, rather, that transposable elements can best be considered as occupying a variety of
positions on a dynamic continuum from extreme parasitism to obligate mutualism. This kind of more
nuanced perspective would add nicely to the evolutionary role of transposable elements presented here.
Authors’ response: We agree with the view of Kidwell
and Lisch. However we cannot deny that TE are intrinsically selfish, which was our starting point to further pinpoint facts that actually support other TE-host
relationships. The concerned parts have been modified to
erase the impression of too clear-cut views.
Apparently the manuscript was written by a nonnative English speaker and it has numerous grammatical
errors. The authors should proof the manuscript closely
for these and other language related issues or enlist a
native English speaking colleague to help with this. For
instance, the last sentence in the abstract that reads
‘The review attaches to explore ...’ does not make sense.
The presence of many errors of this kind has the unfortunate effect of obscuring the important message of the
manuscript as well as the authors’ unique perspective on
transposable elements.
Authors’ response: The revised text was corrected by
a native English speaker.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Supplementary information for Figures 1 and 3.
References for Figure 1, Description of models for Figure 3.

Abbreviations
TE: transposable element; RT: reverse transcriptase; LTR: long terminal repeat;
LINE: long interspersed transposable element; PLE: Penelope-like element;
SINE: short interspersed transposable element; TIR: terminal inverted repeat;
IS: insertion sequence; MITE: miniature inverted transposable element; ICE:
integrative and conjugative element; Tn: composite transposon; LGT: lateral
gene transfer: HT: horizontal transfer/transmission; SNP: single nucleotide
polymorphism; S/MAR: scaffold/matrix attachment region; MULE: Mutator-like
element; RIP: repeat-induced point mutation; RNAi: RNA interference; TGS:
transcriptional gene silencing; PTGS: post-transcriptional gene silencing;
ncRNA: non-coding RNA; siRNA: small interfering RNA; miRNA: microRNA;
piRNA: PIWI-interacting RNA; rasiRNA: repeat-associated small interfering
RNA; dsRNA: double-stranded RNA; VRS: virus RNAi silencing; TFBS:
transcription factor binding site; CRISPR: clustered regularly interspaced short
palindromic repeats; R/M: restriction/modification; RdRP: RNA dependent
RNA polymerase; ESS: Evolutionary Stable Strategy.
Acknowledgements
We thank Monika Ghosh for reviewing the English text.

Page 24 of 29

Authors’ contributions
AHV conceived the paper, coordinated the work and drafted the manuscript,
ALR designed Figure 3, and critically revised the intellectual content of the
whole manuscript, PC helped to draft the last part of the manuscript, TSB
was involved in drafting the proposal and critically revised the intellectual
content of the last part of the manuscript, JF was involved in drafting the
proposal, and helped in critically revising the bacterial data in the
manuscript. All authors have read and approved the final manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 25 August 2010 Accepted: 17 March 2011
Published: 17 March 2011
References
1. Darwin C: On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection, or the
Preservation of Favoured Races in the Struggle for Life London: Murray, J;
1859.
2. Koonin EV: Darwinian evolution in the light of genomics. Nucleic Acids Res
2009, 37:1011-1034.
3. Shapiro JA: Mobile DNA and evolution in the 21st century. Mob DNA
2010, 1:4.
4. Fox Keller E: A feeling for the organism New York: Owl Books; 1983.
5. Hedges RW, Jacob AE: Transposition of ampicillin resistance from RP4 to
other replicons. Mol Gen Genet 1974, 132:31-40.
6. Dawkins R: The selfish gene Oxford: Oxford University Press; 1976.
7. Wicker T, Sabot F, Hua-Van A, Bennetzen JL, Capy P, Chalhoub B, Flavell A,
Leroy P, Morgante M, Panaud O, et al: A unified classification system for
eukaryotic transposable elements. Nat Rev Genet 2007, 8:973-982.
8. Simon DM, Zimmerly S: A diversity of uncharacterized reverse
transcriptases in bacteria. Nucleic Acids Res 2008, 36:7219-7229.
9. Ohshima K, Okada N: SINEs and LINEs: symbionts of eukaryotic genomes
with a common tail. Cytogenet Genome Res 2005, 110:475-490.
10. Eickbush TH, Malik HS: Origin and evolution of retrotransposons. In Mobile
DNA II. Edited by: Craig NL, Craigie R, Gellert M, Lambowitz AM. Washington
D.C.: American Society for Microbiology Press; 2002:1111-1146.
11. Lerat E, Brunet F, Bazin C, Capy P: Is the evolution of transposable
elements modular? Genetica 1999, 107:15-25.
12. Bao W, Jurka MG, Kapitonov VV, Jurka J: New superfamilies of eukaryotic
DNA transposons and their internal divisions. Mol Biol Evol 2009,
26:983-993.
13. Kapitonov VV, Jurka J: A universal classification of eukaryotic transposable
elements implemented in Repbase. Nat Rev Genet 2008, 9:411-412, author
reply 414.
14. Chandler M, Mahillon J: Insertion Sequences revisited. In Mobile DNA II.
Edited by: Craig NL, Craigie R, Gellert M, Lambowitz AM. Washington, D.C.:
ASM Press; 2002:305-360.
15. Filee J, Siguier P, Chandler M: Insertion sequence diversity in archaea.
Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 2007, 71:121-157.
16. Feschotte C, Pritham EJ: DNA transposons and the evolution of
eukaryotic genomes. Annu Rev Genet 2007, 41:331-368.
17. Goodwin TJ, Butler MI, Poulter RT: Cryptons: a group of tyrosinerecombinase-encoding DNA transposons from pathogenic fungi.
Microbiology 2003, 149:3099-3109.
18. Pritham EJ, Putliwala T, Feschotte C: Mavericks, a novel class of giant
transposable elements widespread in eukaryotes and related to DNA
viruses. Gene 2007, 390:3-17.
19. Kapitonov VV, Jurka J: Helitrons on a roll: eukaryotic rolling-circle
transposons. Trends Genet 2007, 23:521-529.
20. Ronning DR, Guynet C, Ton-Hoang B, Perez ZN, Ghirlando R, Chandler M,
Dyda F: Active site sharing and subterminal hairpin recognition in a new
class of DNA transposases. Mol Cell 2005, 20:143-154.
21. Burrus V, Waldor MK: Shaping bacterial genomes with integrative and
conjugative elements. Res Microbiol 2004, 155:376-386.
22. Toussaint A, Merlin C: Mobile elements as a combination of functional
modules. Plasmid 2002, 47:26-35.
23. Touchon M, Rocha EP: Causes of insertion sequences abundance in
prokaryotic genomes. Mol Biol Evol 2007, 24:969-981.
24. Kidwell MG: Transposable elements and the evolution of genome size in
eukaryotes. Genetica 2002, 115:49-63.

Hua-Van et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:19
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/19

25. Haas BJ, Kamoun S, Zody MC, Jiang RH, Handsaker RE, Cano LM,
Grabherr M, Kodira CD, Raffaele S, Torto-Alalibo T, et al: Genome sequence
and analysis of the Irish potato famine pathogen Phytophthora infestans.
Nature 2009, 461:393-398.
26. Lander ES, Linton LM, Birren B, Nusbaum C, Zody MC, Baldwin J, Devon K,
Dewar K, Doyle M, FitzHugh W, et al: Initial sequencing and analysis of
the human genome. Nature 2001, 409:860-921.
27. Piegu B, Guyot R, Picault N, Roulin A, Saniyal A, Kim H, Collura K, Brar DS,
Jackson S, Wing RA, Panaud O: Doubling genome size without
polyploidization: dynamics of retrotransposition-driven genomic
expansions in Oryza australiensis, a wild relative of rice. Genome Res 2006,
16:1262-1269.
28. Naito K, Cho E, Yang G, Campbell MA, Yano K, Okumoto Y, Tanisaka T,
Wessler SR: Dramatic amplification of a rice transposable element during
recent domestication. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006, 103:17620-17625.
29. Vieira C, Lepetit D, Dumont S, Biemont C: Wake up of transposable
elements following Drosophila simulans worldwide colonization. Mol Biol
Evol 1999, 16:1251-1255.
30. Brosius J, Tiedge H: Reverse transcriptase: mediator of genomic plasticity.
Virus Genes 1995, 11:163-179.
31. Gdula DA, Gerasimova TI, Corces VG: Genetic and molecular analysis of
the gypsy chromatin insulator of Drosophila. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1996,
93:9378-9383.
32. Minervini CF, Marsano RM, Casieri P, Fanti L, Caizzi R, Pimpinelli S, Rocchi M,
Viggiano L: Heterochromatin protein 1 interacts with 5’UTR of transposable
element ZAM in a sequence-specific fashion. Gene 2007, 393:1-10.
33. Delprat A, Negre B, Puig M, Ruiz A: The transposon Galileo generates
natural chromosomal inversions in Drosophila by ectopic recombination.
PLoS One 2009, 4:e7883.
34. Zhang J, Yu C, Pulletikurti V, Lamb J, Danilova T, Weber DF, Birchler J,
Peterson T: Alternative Ac/Ds transposition induces major chromosomal
rearrangements in maize. Genes Dev 2009, 23:755-765.
35. Jehle JA, Nickel A, Vlak JM, Backhaus H: Horizontal escape of the novel
Tc1-like lepidopteran transposon TCp3.2 into Cydia pomonella
granulovirus. J Mol Evol 1998, 46:215-224.
36. Drezen JM, Bezier A, Lesobre J, Huguet E, Cattolico L, Periquet G, Dupuy C:
The few virus-like genes of Cotesia congregata bracovirus. Arch Insect
Biochem Physiol 2006, 61:110-122.
37. Filee J, Siguier P, Chandler M: I am what I eat and I eat what I am:
acquisition of bacterial genes by giant viruses. Trends Genet 2007,
23:10-15.
38. Orgel LE, Crick FH: Selfish DNA: the ultimate parasite. Nature 1980,
284:604-607.
39. Kidwell MG, Lisch DR: Perspective: transposable elements, parasitic DNA,
and genome evolution. Evolution 2001, 55:1-24.
40. Kidwell MG, Lisch D: Transposable elements as sources of variation in
animals and plants. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1997, 94:7704-7711.
41. Lukens LN, Zhan S: The plant genome’s methylation status and response
to stress: implications for plant improvement. Curr Opin Plant Biol 2007,
10:317-322.
42. Girard L, Freeling M: Regulatory changes as a consequence of transposon
insertion. Dev Genet 1999, 25:291-296.
43. Morgante M, De Paoli E, Radovic S: Transposable elements and the plant
pan-genomes. Curr Opin Plant Biol 2007, 10:149-155.
44. Bhattacharyya MK, Smith AM, Ellis TH, Hedley C, Martin C: The wrinkledseed character of pea described by Mendel is caused by a transposonlike insertion in a gene encoding starch-branching enzyme. Cell 1990,
60:115-122.
45. Daboussi MJ, Langin T: Transposable elements in the fungal plant
pathogen Fusarium oxysporum. Genetica 1994, 93:49-59.
46. McClintock B: Controlling element and the gene. Cold Spring Harbor Symp
Quant Biol 1956, 31:197-216.
47. Clegg MT, Durbin ML: Flower color variation: a model for the
experimental study of evolution. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2000,
97:7016-7023.
48. Zufall RA, Rausher MD: The genetic basis of a flower color polymorphism
in the common morning glory (Ipomoea purpurea). J Hered 2003,
94:442-448.
49. Almeida J, Carpenter R, Robbins TP, Martin C, Coen ES: Genetic interactions
underlying flower color patterns in Antirrhinum majus. Genes Dev 1989,
3:1758-1767.

Page 25 of 29

50. Koga A, Iida A, Hori H, Shimada A, Shima A: Vertebrate DNA transposon as
a natural mutator: the medaka fish Tol2 element contributes to genetic
variation without recognizable traces. Mol Biol Evol 2006, 23:1414-1419.
51. Xiao H, Jiang N, Schaffner E, Stockinger EJ, van der Knaap E: A
retrotransposon-mediated gene duplication underlies morphological
variation of tomato fruit. Science 2008, 319:1527-1530.
52. Macdonald SJ, Pastinen T, Long AD: The effect of polymorphisms in the
enhancer of split gene complex on bristle number variation in a large
wild-caught cohort of Drosophila melanogaster. Genetics 2005,
171:1741-1756.
53. Valle J, Vergara-Irigaray M, Merino N, Penades JR, Lasa I: sigmaB regulates
IS256-mediated Staphylococcus aureus biofilm phenotypic variation. J
Bacteriol 2007, 189:2886-2896.
54. Ziebuhr W, Krimmer V, Rachid S, Lossner I, Gotz F, Hacker J: A novel
mechanism of phase variation of virulence in Staphylococcus epidermidis:
evidence for control of the polysaccharide intercellular adhesin
synthesis by alternating insertion and excision of the insertion sequence
element IS256. Mol Microbiol 1999, 32:345-356.
55. McEvoy CR, Falmer AA, Gey van Pittius NC, Victor TC, van Helden PD,
Warren RM: The role of IS6110 in the evolution of Mycobacterium
tuberculosis. Tuberculosis (Edinb) 2007, 87:393-404.
56. Vitte C, Panaud O: LTR retrotransposons and flowering plant genome
size: emergence of the increase/decrease model. Cytogenet Genome Res
2005, 110:91-107.
57. SanMiguel P, Gaut BS, Tikhonov A, Nakajima Y, Bennetzen JL: The
paleontology of intergene retrotransposons of maize. Nat Genet 1998,
20:43-45.
58. Parkhill J, Sebaihia M, Preston A, Murphy LD, Thomson N, Harris DE,
Holden MT, Churcher CM, Bentley SD, Mungall KL, et al: Comparative
analysis of the genome sequences of Bordetella pertussis,
Bordetella parapertussis and Bordetella bronchiseptica. Nat Genet
2003, 35:32-40.
59. Chain PS, Carniel E, Larimer FW, Lamerdin J, Stoutland PO, Regala WM,
Georgescu AM, Vergez LM, Land ML, Motin VL, et al: Insights into the
evolution of Yersinia pestis through whole-genome comparison with
Yersinia pseudotuberculosis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2004, 101:13826-13831.
60. Glockner G, Heidel AJ: Centromere sequence and dynamics in
Dictyostelium discoideum. Nucleic Acids Res 2009, 37:1809-1816.
61. Mizuno H, Ito K, Wu J, Tanaka T, Kanamori H, Katayose Y, Sasaki T,
Matsumoto T: Identification and mapping of expressed genes, simple
sequence repeats and transposable elements in centromeric regions of
rice chromosomes. DNA Res 2006, 13:267-274.
62. Obado SO, Bot C, Nilsson D, Andersson B, Kelly JM: Repetitive DNA is
associated with centromeric domains in Trypanosoma brucei but not
Trypanosoma cruzi. Genome Biol 2007, 8:R37.
63. Wong LH, Choo KH: Evolutionary dynamics of transposable elements at
the centromere. Trends Genet 2004, 20:611-616.
64. Bergman CM, Quesneville H, Anxolabehere D, Ashburner M: Recurrent
insertion and duplication generate networks of transposable element
sequences in the Drosophila melanogaster genome. Genome Biol 2006, 7:
R112.
65. The Arabidopsis Genome Initiative: Analysis of the genome sequence of
the flowering plant Arabidopsis thaliana. Nature 2000, 408:796-815.
66. Dimitri P, Junakovic N: Revising the selfish DNA hypothesis: new
evidence on accumulation of transposable elements in heterochromatin.
Trends Genet 1999, 15:123-124.
67. Lippman Z, Gendrel AV, Black M, Vaughn MW, Dedhia N, McCombie WR,
Lavine K, Mittal V, May B, Kasschau KD, et al: Role of transposable
elements in heterochromatin and epigenetic control. Nature 2004,
430:471-476.
68. Slotkin RK, Martienssen R: Transposable elements and the epigenetic
regulation of the genome. Nat Rev Genet 2007, 8:272-285.
69. Arkhipova IR, Morrison HG: Three retrotransposon families in the genome
of Giardia lamblia: two telomeric, one dead. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2001,
98:14497-14502.
70. De Felice B, Wilson RR, Argenziano C, Kafantaris I, Conicella C: A
transcriptionally active copia-like retroelement in Citrus limon. Cell Mol
Biol Lett 2009, 14:289-304.
71. Gentles AJ, Wakefield MJ, Kohany O, Gu W, Batzer MA, Pollock DD, Jurka J:
Evolutionary dynamics of transposable elements in the short-tailed
opossum Monodelphis domestica. Genome Res 2007, 17:992-1004.

Hua-Van et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:19
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/19

72. Zou S, Kim JM, Voytas DF: The Saccharomyces retrotransposon Ty5
influences the organization of chromosome ends. Nucleic Acids Res 1996,
24:4825-4831.
73. Rehmeyer C, Li W, Kusaba M, Kim YS, Brown D, Staben C, Dean R,
Farman M: Organization of chromosome ends in the rice blast fungus,
Magnaporthe oryzae. Nucleic Acids Res 2006, 34:4685-4701.
74. George JA, DeBaryshe PG, Traverse KL, Celniker SE, Pardue ML: Genomic
organization of the Drosophila telomere retrotransposable elements.
Genome Res 2006, 16:1231-1240.
75. Inukai T, Sano Y: Sequence rearrangement in the AT-rich minisatellite of
the novel rice transposable element Basho. Genome 2002, 45:493-502.
76. Jordan IK, Rogozin IB, Glazko GV, Koonin EV: Origin of a substantial
fraction of human regulatory sequences from transposable elements.
Trends Genet 2003, 19:68-72.
77. Tikhonov AP, Bennetzen JL, Avramova ZV: Structural domains and matrix
attachment regions along colinear chromosomal segments of maize and
sorghum. Plant Cell 2000, 12:249-264.
78. Waterston RH, Lindblad-Toh K, Birney E, Rogers J, Abril JF, Agarwal P,
Agarwala R, Ainscough R, Alexandersson M, An P, et al: Initial sequencing
and comparative analysis of the mouse genome. Nature 2002,
420:520-562.
79. McClintock B: The significance of responses of the genome to challenge.
Science 1984, 226:792-801.
80. Raskina O, Barber JC, Nevo E, Belyayev A: Repetitive DNA and
chromosomal rearrangements: speciation-related events in plant
genomes. Cytogenet Genome Res 2008, 120:351-357.
81. Rebollo R, Horard B, Hubert B, Vieira C: Jumping genes and epigenetics:
Towards new species. Gene 2010, 454:1-7.
82. Kidwell MG: Evolution of hybrid dysgenesis determinants in Drosophila
melanogaster. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1983, 80:1655-1659.
83. Charlesworth B, Barton NH: Recombination load associated with selection
for increased recombination. Genet Res 1996, 67:27-41.
84. Caceres M, Puig M, Ruiz A: Molecular characterization of two natural
hotspots in the Drosophila buzzatii genome induced by transposon
insertions. Genome Res 2001, 11:1353-1364.
85. Kersulyte D, Lee W, Subramaniam D, Anant S, Herrera P, Cabrera L, Balqui J,
Barabas O, Kalia A, Gilman RH, Berg DE: Helicobacter Pylori’s plasticity
zones are novel transposable elements. PLoS One 2009, 4:e6859.
86. Burrus V, Pavlovic G, Decaris B, Guedon G: Conjugative transposons: the
tip of the iceberg. Mol Microbiol 2002, 46:601-610.
87. Nakayama K, Yamashita A, Kurokawa K, Morimoto T, Ogawa M, Fukuhara M,
Urakami H, Ohnishi M, Uchiyama I, Ogura Y, et al: The Whole-genome
sequencing of the obligate intracellular bacterium Orientia
tsutsugamushi revealed massive gene amplification during reductive
genome evolution. DNA Res 2008, 15:185-199.
88. Morgante M, Brunner S, Pea G, Fengler K, Zuccolo A, Rafalski A: Gene
duplication and exon shuffling by helitron-like transposons generate
intraspecies diversity in maize. Nat Genet 2005, 37:997-1002.
89. Weil CF: Too many ends: aberrant transposition. Genes Dev 2009,
23:1032-1036.
90. Dooner HK, Weil CF: Give-and-take: interactions between DNA
transposons and their host plant genomes. Curr Opin Genet Dev 2007,
17:486-492.
91. Doolittle WF, Sapienza C: Selfish genes, the phenotype paradigm and
genome evolution. Nature 1980, 284:601-603.
92. Green M: Mobile DNA elements and spontaneous gene mutation. In
Eukaryotic Transposable Elements As Mutagenic Agents. Edited by: Lambert
M, McDonald J, Weinstein I. Cold Spring Harbor: Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory Press; 1988.
93. Callinan PA, Batzer MA: Retrotransposable elements and human disease.
Genome Dyn 2006, 1:104-115.
94. Zampicinini G, Blinov A, Cervella P, Guryev V, Sella G: Insertional
polymorphism of a non-LTR mobile element (NLRCth1) in European
populations of Chironomus riparius (Diptera, Chironomidae) as detected
by transposon insertion display. Genome 2004, 47:1154-1163.
95. Nikaido M, Piskurek O, Okada N: Toothed whale monophyly reassessed by
SINE insertion analysis: the absence of lineage sorting effects suggests a
small population of a common ancestral species. Mol Phylogenet Evol
2007, 43:216-224.

Page 26 of 29

96. Bennett EA, Coleman LE, Tsui C, Pittard WS, Devine SE: Natural genetic
variation caused by transposable elements in humans. Genetics 2004,
168:933-951.
97. Huang X, Lu G, Zhao Q, Liu X, Han B: Genome-wide analysis of
transposon insertion polymorphisms reveals intraspecific variation in
cultivated rice. Plant Physiol 2008, 148:25-40.
98. McCollum AM, Ganko EW, Barrass PA, Rodriguez JM, McDonald JF:
Evidence for the adaptive significance of an LTR retrotransposon
sequence in a Drosophila heterochromatic gene. BMC Evol Biol 2002, 2:5.
99. Gonzalez J, Lenkov K, Lipatov M, Macpherson JM, Petrov DA: High rate of
recent transposable element-induced adaptation in Drosophila
melanogaster. PLoS Biol 2008, 6:e251.
100. Gonzalez J, Macpherson JM, Petrov DA: A recent adaptive transposable
element insertion near highly conserved developmental loci in
Drosophila melanogaster. Mol Biol Evol 2009.
101. Schlenke TA, Begun DJ: Strong selective sweep associated with a
transposon insertion in Drosophila simulans. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2004,
101:1626-1631.
102. Lyon MF: LINE-1 elements and X chromosome inactivation: a function for
“junk” DNA? Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2000, 97:6248-6249.
103. Ray DA, Feschotte C, Pagan HJ, Smith JD, Pritham EJ, Arensburger P,
Atkinson PW, Craig NL: Multiple waves of recent DNA transposon activity
in the bat, Myotis lucifugus. Genome Res 2008, 18:717-728.
104. Volff JN, Korting C, Schartl M: Multiple lineages of the non-LTR
retrotransposon Rex1 with varying success in invading fish genomes.
Mol Biol Evol 2000, 17:1673-1684.
105. Eldredge N, Gould SJ: Punctuated Equilibria: an alternative to phyletic
gradualism. In Models in Paleobiology. Edited by: Schopf TJMr. Cooper
1972:82-115.
106. Oliver KR, Greene WK: Transposable elements: powerful facilitators of
evolution. Bioessays 2009, 31:703-714.
107. Zeh DW, Zeh JA, Ishida Y: Transposable elements and an epigenetic basis
for punctuated equilibria. Bioessays 2009.
108. Koerner MV, Barlow DP: Genomic imprinting-an epigenetic generegulatory model. Curr Opin Genet Dev 2010, 20:164-170.
109. Martin A, Bendahmane A: A blessing in disguise: Transposable elements
are more than parasites. Epigenetics 2010, 5:378-380.
110. Banaszynski LA, Allis CD, Lewis PW: Histone variants in metazoan
development. Dev Cell 19:662-674.
111. Kaufmann K, Pajoro A, Angenent GC: Regulation of transcription in plants:
mechanisms controlling developmental switches. Nat Rev Genet
11:830-842.
112. Kota SK, Feil R: Epigenetic transitions in germ cell development and
meiosis. Dev Cell 19:675-686.
113. Huda A, Marino-Ramirez L, Jordan IK: Epigenetic histone modifications of
human transposable elements: genome defense versus exaptation. Mob
DNA 2010, 1:2.
114. Suzuki MM, Bird A: DNA methylation landscapes: provocative insights
from epigenomics. Nat Rev Genet 2008, 9:465-476.
115. Su Z, Han L, Zhao Z: Conservation and divergence of DNA methylation in
eukaryotes: New insights from single base-resolution DNA methylomes.
Epigenetics 2010, 6.
116. Zilberman D: The evolving functions of DNA methylation. Curr Opin Plant
Biol 2008, 11:554-559.
117. Weil C, Martienssen R: Epigenetic interactions between transposons and
genes: lessons from plants. Curr Opin Genet Dev 2008, 18:188-192.
118. Mattick JS, Amaral PP, Dinger ME, Mercer TR, Mehler MF: RNA regulation of
epigenetic processes. Bioessays 2009, 31:51-59.
119. Berger SL: The complex language of chromatin regulation during
transcription. Nature 2007, 447:407-412.
120. Suganuma T, Workman JL: Crosstalk among histone modifications. Cell
2008, 135:604-607.
121. Josse T, Teysset L, Todeschini AL, Sidor CM, Anxolabehere D, Ronsseray S:
Telomeric trans-silencing: an epigenetic repression combining RNA
silencing and heterochromatin formation. PLoS Genet 2007, 3:1633-1643.
122. Klattenhoff C, Xi H, Li C, Lee S, Xu J, Khurana JS, Zhang F, Schultz N,
Koppetsch BS, Nowosielska A, et al: The Drosophila HP1 homolog Rhino is
required for transposon silencing and piRNA production by dual-strand
clusters. Cell 2009, 138:1137-1149.

Hua-Van et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:19
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/19

123. Volpe TA, Kidner C, Hall IM, Teng G, Grewal SI, Martienssen RA: Regulation
of heterochromatic silencing and histone H3 lysine-9 methylation by
RNAi. Science 2002, 297:1833-1837.
124. Lippman Z, May B, Yordan C, Singer T, Martienssen R: Distinct mechanisms
determine transposon inheritance and methylation via small interfering
RNA and histone modification. PLoS Biol 2003, 1:E67.
125. Gendrel AV, Colot V: Arabidopsis epigenetics: when RNA meets
chromatin. Curr Opin Plant Biol 2005, 8:142-147.
126. Cedar H, Bergman Y: Linking DNA methylation and histone modification:
patterns and paradigms. Nat Rev Genet 2009, 10:295-304.
127. Fulci V, Macino G: Quelling: post-transcriptional gene silencing guided by
small RNAs in Neurospora crassa. Curr Opin Microbiol 2007, 10:199-203.
128. Plasterk RH, Ketting RF: The silence of the genes. Curr Opin Genet Dev
2000, 10:562-567.
129. Girard A, Hannon GJ: Conserved themes in small-RNA-mediated
transposon control. Trends Cell Biol 2008, 18:136-148.
130. Thomson T, Lin H: The biogenesis and function of PIWI proteins and
piRNAs: progress and prospect. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 2009,
25:355-376.
131. Galagan JE, Calvo SE, Borkovich KA, Selker EU, Read ND, Jaffe D,
FitzHugh W, Ma LJ, Smirnov S, Purcell S, et al: The genome sequence of
the filamentous fungus Neurospora crassa. Nature 2003, 422:859-868.
132. Galagan JE, Selker EU: RIP: the evolutionary cost of genome defense.
Trends Genet 2004, 20:417-423.
133. Lisch D: Epigenetic regulation of transposable elements in plants. Annu
Rev Plant Biol 2009, 60:43-66.
134. Michalak P: Epigenetic, transposon and small RNA determinants of
hybrid dysfunctions. Heredity 2009, 102:45-50.
135. Hollister JD, Gaut BS: Epigenetic silencing of transposable elements: A
trade-off between reduced transposition and deleterious effects on
neighboring gene expression. Genome Res 2009.
136. Gehring M, Bubb KL, Henikoff S: Extensive demethylation of repetitive
elements during seed development underlies gene imprinting. Science
2009, 324:1447-1451.
137. Huda A, Marino-Ramirez L, Landsman D, Jordan IK: Repetitive DNA
elements, nucleosome binding and human gene expression. Gene 2009,
436:12-22.
138. Eichenbaum Z, Livneh Z: UV light induces IS10 transposition in
Escherichia coli. Genetics 1998, 149:1173-1181.
139. Ratner VA, Zabanov SA, Kolesnikova OV, Vasilyeva LA: Induction of the
mobile genetic element Dm-412 transpositions in the Drosophila
genome by heat shock treatment. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1992,
89:5650-5654.
140. Walbot V: Reactivation of Mutator transposable elements of maize by
ultraviolet light. Mol Gen Genet 1992, 234:353-360.
141. Grandbastien MA: Activation of plant retrotransposons under stress
conditions. Trends Plant Sci 1998, 3:181-187.
142. Capy P, Gasperi G, Biemont C, Bazin C: Stress and transposable elements:
co-evolution or useful parasites? Heredity 2000, 85(Pt 2):101-106.
143. Bossdorf O, Richards CL, Pigliucci M: Epigenetics for ecologists. Ecol Lett
2008, 11:106-115.
144. Richards EJ: Population epigenetics. Curr Opin Genet Dev 2008, 18:221-226.
145. Obbard DJ, Gordon KH, Buck AH, Jiggins FM: The evolution of RNAi as a
defence against viruses and transposable elements. Philos Trans R Soc
Lond B Biol Sci 2009, 364:99-115.
146. Buchon N, Vaury C: RNAi: a defensive RNA-silencing against viruses and
transposable elements. Heredity 2006, 96:195-202.
147. Cerutti H, Casas-Mollano JA: On the origin and functions of RNAmediated silencing: from protists to man. Curr Genet 2006, 50:81-99.
148. Shabalina SA, Koonin EV: Origins and evolution of eukaryotic RNA
interference. Trends Ecol Evol 2008, 23:578-587.
149. Makarova KS, Wolf YI, van der Oost J, Koonin EV: Prokaryotic homologs of
Argonaute proteins are predicted to function as key components of a
novel system of defense against mobile genetic elements. Biol Direct
2009, 4:29.
150. Furuta Y, Abe K, Kobayashi I: Genome comparison and context analysis
reveals putative mobile forms of restriction-modification systems and
related rearrangements. Nucleic Acids Res 38:2428-2443.
151. Kobayashi I: Behavior of restriction-modification systems as selfish
mobile elements and their impact on genome evolution. Nucleic Acids
Res 2001, 29:3742-3756.

Page 27 of 29

152. Marraffini LA, Sontheimer EJ: CRISPR interference: RNA-directed adaptive
immunity in bacteria and archaea. Nat Rev Genet 2010, 11:181-190.
153. van der Oost J, Jore MM, Westra ER, Lundgren M, Brouns SJ: CRISPR-based
adaptive and heritable immunity in prokaryotes. Trends Biochem Sci 2009,
34:401-407.
154. Jablonka E, Lamb MJ: Evolution in four dimensions Cambridge (MA): MIT
Press; 2005.
155. Johannes F, Colot V, Jansen RC: Epigenome dynamics: a quantitative
genetics perspective. Nat Rev Genet 2008, 9:883-890.
156. Chinnusamy V, Zhu JK: Epigenetic regulation of stress responses in
plants. Curr Opin Plant Biol 2009, 12:133-139.
157. Jablonka E, Raz G: Transgenerational epigenetic inheritance: prevalence,
mechanisms, and implications for the study of heredity and evolution. Q
Rev Biol 2009, 84:131-176.
158. Slotkin RK, Freeling M, Lisch D: Heritable transposon silencing initiated by
a naturally occurring transposon inverted duplication. Nat Genet 2005,
37:641-644.
159. Slotkin RK, Freeling M, Lisch D: Mu killer causes the heritable inactivation
of the Mutator family of transposable elements in Zea mays. Genetics
2003, 165:781-797.
160. Blumenstiel JP, Hartl DL: Evidence for maternally transmitted small
interfering RNA in the repression of transposition in Drosophila virilis.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005, 102:15965-15970.
161. Chambeyron S, Popkova A, Payen-Groschene G, Brun C, Laouini D,
Pelisson A, Bucheton A: piRNA-mediated nuclear accumulation of
retrotransposon transcripts in the Drosophila female germline. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2008, 105:14964-14969.
162. Zhang Z, Saier MH Jr: A novel mechanism of transposon-mediated gene
activation. PLoS Genet 2009, 5:e1000689.
163. McDonald JF: Evolution and consequences of transposable elements.
Curr Opin Genet Dev 1993, 3:855-864.
164. Miller WJ, Hagemann S, Reiter E, Pinsker W: P-element homologous
sequences are tandemly repeated in the genome of Drosophila guanche.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1992, 89:4018-4022.
165.Volff JN: Turning junk into gold: domestictio of transposable elements an the
creation of new genes in eukaryotes. Bioessays 006, 28:913-922.
166. Barry EG, Witherspoon DJ, Lampe DJ: A bacterial genetic screen identifies
functional coding sequences of the insect mariner transposable element
Famar1 amplified from the genome of the earwig, Forficula auricularia.
Genetics 2004, 166:823-833.
167. Silva JC, Kidwell MG: Horizontal transfer and selection in the evolution of
P elements. Mol Biol Evol 2000, 17:1542-1557.
168. Villasante A, Abad JP, Planello R, Mendez-Lago M, Celniker SE, de Pablos B:
Drosophila telomeric retrotransposons derived from an ancestral
element that was recruited to replace telomerase. Genome Res 2007,
17:1909-1918.
169. Mallet F, Bouton O, Prudhomme S, Cheynet V, Oriol G, Bonnaud B,
Lucotte G, Duret L, Mandrand B: The endogenous retroviral locus ERVWE1
is a bona fide gene involved in hominoid placental physiology. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2004, 101:1731-1736.
170. Mi S, Lee X, Li X, Veldman GM, Finnerty H, Racie L, LaVallie E, Tang XY,
Edouard P, Howes S, et al: Syncytin is a captive retroviral envelope
protein involved in human placental morphogenesis. Nature 2000,
403:785-789.
171. Kapitonov VV, Jurka J: RAG1 core and V(D)J recombination signal
sequences were derived from Transib transposons. PLoS Biol 2005, 3:e181.
172. Kipling D, Warburton PE: Centromeres, CENP-B and Tigger too. Trends
Genet 1997, 13:141-145.
173. Casola C, Hucks D, Feschotte C: Convergent domestication of pogo-like
transposases into centromere-binding proteins in fission yeast and
mammals. Mol Biol Evol 2008, 25:29-41.
174. Curcio MJ, Derbyshire KM: The outs and ins of transposition: from mu to
kangaroo. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2003, 4:865-877.
175. Lee SH, Oshige M, Durant ST, Rasila KK, Williamson EA, Ramsey H, Kwan L,
Nickoloff JA, Hromas R: The SET domain protein Metnase mediates
foreign DNA integration and links integration to nonhomologous endjoining repair. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005, 102:18075-18080.
176. Tipney HJ, Hinsley TA, Brass A, Metcalfe K, Donnai D, Tassabehji M: Isolation
and characterisation of GTF2IRD2, a novel fusion gene and member of
the TFII-I family of transcription factors, deleted in Williams-Beuren
syndrome. Eur J Hum Genet 2004, 12:551-560.

Hua-Van et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:19
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/19

177. Quesneville H, Nouaud D, Anxolabehere D: Recurrent recruitment of the
THAP DNA-binding domain and molecular domestication of the Ptransposable element. Mol Biol Evol 2005, 22:741-746.
178. Feschotte C: Transposable elements and the evolution of regulatory
networks. Nat Rev Genet 2008, 9:397-405.
179. Sinzelle L, Izsvak Z, Ivics Z: Molecular domestication of transposable
elements: from detrimental parasites to useful host genes. Cell Mol Life
Sci 2009, 66:1073-1093.
180. Lin L, Jiang P, Shen S, Sato S, Davidson BL, Xing Y: Large-scale analysis of
exonized mammalian-wide interspersed repeats in primate genomes.
Hum Mol Genet 2009, 18:2204-2214.
181. Sorek R, Ast G, Graur D: Alu-containing exons are alternatively spliced.
Genome Res 2002, 12:1060-1067.
182. Concepcion D, Flores-Garcia L, Hamilton BA: Multipotent genetic
suppression of retrotransposon-induced mutations by Nxf1 through finetuning of alternative splicing. PLoS Genet 2009, 5:e1000484.
183. Krull M, Brosius J, Schmitz J: Alu-SINE exonization: en route to proteincoding function. Mol Biol Evol 2005, 22:1702-1711.
184. Krull M, Petrusma M, Makalowski W, Brosius J, Schmitz J: Functional
persistence of exonized mammalian-wide interspersed repeat elements
(MIRs). Genome Res 2007, 17:1139-1145.
185. Lipatov M, Lenkov K, Petrov DA, Bergman CM: Paucity of chimeric genetransposable element transcripts in the Drosophila melanogaster
genome. BMC Biol 2005, 3:24.
186. Barbazuk WB, Fu Y, McGinnis KM: Genome-wide analyses of alternative
splicing in plants: opportunities and challenges. Genome Res 2008,
18:1381-1392.
187. Hanada K, Vallejo V, Nobuta K, Slotkin RK, Lisch D, Meyers BC, Shiu SH,
Jiang N: The functional role of pack-MULEs in rice inferred from purifying
selection and expression profile. Plant Cell 2009, 21:25-38.
188. Amit M, Sela N, Keren H, Melamed Z, Muler I, Shomron N, Izraeli S, Ast G:
Biased exonization of transposed elements in duplicated genes: A
lesson from the TIF-IA gene. BMC Mol Biol 2007, 8:109.
189. Yang S, Arguello JR, Li X, Ding Y, Zhou Q, Chen Y, Zhang Y, Zhao R, Brunet F,
Peng L, et al: Repetitive element-mediated recombination as a
mechanism for new gene origination in Drosophila. PLoS Genet 2008, 4:e3.
190. Britten RJ: Cases of ancient mobile element DNA insertions that now
affect gene regulation. Mol Phylogenet Evol 1996, 5:13-17.
191. Chen B, Walser JC, Rodgers TH, Sobota RS, Burke MK, Rose MR, Feder ME:
Abundant, diverse, and consequential P elements segregate in
promoters of small heat-shock genes in Drosophila populations. J Evol
Biol 2007, 20:2056-2066.
192. Oki N, Yano K, Okumoto Y, Tsukiyama T, Teraishi M, Tanisaka T: A genomewide view of miniature inverted-repeat transposable elements (MITEs) in
rice, Oryza sativa ssp. japonica. Genes Genet Syst 2008, 83:321-329.
193. Wessler SR, Bureau TE, White SE: LTR-retrotransposons and MITEs:
important players in the evolution of plant genomes. Curr Opin Genet
Dev 1995, 5:814-821.
194. Gombart AF, Saito T, Koeffler HP: Exaptation of an ancient Alu short
interspersed element provides a highly conserved vitamin D-mediated
innate immune response in humans and primates. BMC Genomics 2009,
10:321.
195. Xu L, Wang L, Liu T, Qian W, Gao Y, An C: Triton, a novel family of
miniature inverted-repeat transposable elements (MITEs) in
Trichosanthes kirilowii Maximowicz and its effect on gene regulation.
Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2007, 364:668-674.
196. Pereira V, Enard D, Eyre-Walker A: The effect of transposable element
insertions on gene expression evolution in rodents. PLoS ONE 2009, 4:
e4321.
197. Bourque G, Leong B, Vega VB, Chen X, Lee YL, Srinivasan KG, Chew JL,
Ruan Y, Wei CL, Ng HH, Liu ET: Evolution of the mammalian transcription
factor binding repertoire via transposable elements. Genome Res 2008,
18:1752-1762.
198. Britten RJ, Kohne DE: Repeated sequences in DNA. Hundreds of
thousands of copies of DNA sequences have been incorporated into the
genomes of higher organisms. Science 1968, 161:529-540.
199. Grula JW: Gene regulation in evolution: a history. Science 2008, 322:1633.
200. Maynard Smith J: The evolution of sex Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press; 1978.
201. Le Rouzic A, Deceliere G: Models of the population genetics of
transposable elements. Genet Res 2005, 85:171-181.

Page 28 of 29

202. Brookfield JF: The ecology of the genome - mobile DNA elements and
their hosts. Nat Rev Genet 2005, 6:128-136.
203. Nuzhdin SV: Sure facts, speculations, and open questions about the
evolution of transposable element copy number. Genetica 1999,
107:129-137.
204. Charlesworth B, Sniegowski P, Stephan W: The evolutionary dynamics of
repetitive DNA in eukaryotes. Nature 1994, 371:215-220.
205. Langley CH, Montgomery E, Hudson R, Kaplan N, Charlesworth B: On the
role of unequal exchange in the containment of transposable element
copy number. Genet Res 1988, 52:223-235.
206. Wright SI, Schoen DJ: Transposon dynamics and the breeding system.
Genetica 1999, 107:139-148.
207. Quesneville H, Anxolabehere D: Dynamics of transposable elements in
metapopulations: a model of P element invasion in Drosophila. Theor
Popul Biol 1998, 54:175-193.
208. Le Rouzic A, Boutin TS, Capy P: Long-term evolution of transposable
elements. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2007, 104:19375-19380.
209. Flowers JM, Purugganan MD: The evolution of plant genomes: scaling
up from a population perspective. Curr Opin Genet Dev 2008,
18:565-570.
210. Lynch M, Conery JS: The origins of genome complexity. Science 2003,
302:1401-1404.
211. Pasyukova EG, Nuzhdin SV, Morozova TV, Mackay TF: Accumulation of
transposable elements in the genome of Drosophila melanogaster is
associated with a decrease in fitness. J Hered 2004, 95:284-290.
212. Lockton S, Ross-Ibarra J, Gaut BS: Demography and weak selection drive
patterns of transposable element diversity in natural populations of
Arabidopsis lyrata. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008, 105:13965-13970.
213. Picot S, Wallau GL, Loreto EL, Heredia FO, Hua-Van A, Capy P: The mariner
transposable element in natural populations of Drosophila simulans.
Heredity 2008, 101:53-59.
214. Hickey DA: Selfish DNA: a sexually-transmitted nuclear parasite. Genetics
1982, 101:519-531.
215. Arkhipova IR: Mobile genetic elements and sexual reproduction.
Cytogenet Genome Res 2005, 110:372-382.
216. Dolgin ES, Charlesworth B: The fate of transposable elements in asexual
populations. Genetics 2006, 174:817-827.
217. Arkhipova IR, Meselson M: Diverse DNA transposons in rotifers of the
class Bdelloidea. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005, 102:11781-11786.
218. Gladyshev EA, Arkhipova IR: Genome structure of bdelloid rotifers: shaped
by asexuality or desiccation? J Hered 2010, 101(Suppl 1):S85-93.
219. Gladyshev EA, Arkhipova IR: A single-copy IS5-like transposon in the
genome of a bdelloid rotifer. Mol Biol Evol 2009, 26:1921-1929.
220. Wagner A: Periodic extinctions of transposable elements in bacterial
lineages: evidence from intragenomic variation in multiple genomes.
Mol Biol Evol 2006, 23:723-733.
221. Doolittle WF, Kirkwood TB, Dempster MA: Selfish DNAs with self-restraint.
Nature 1984, 307:501-502.
222. Charlesworth B, Charlesworth D: The population dynamics of transposable
elements. Genet Res Camb 1983, 42:1-27.
223. Morgan MT: Transposable element number in mixed mating populations.
Genet Res 2001, 77:261-275.
224. Charlesworth B, Langley CH, Sniegowski PD: Transposable element
distributions in Drosophila. Genetics 1997, 147:1993-1995.
225. Charlesworth D, Charlesworth B: Transposable elements in inbreeding
and outbreeding populations. Genetics 1995, 140:415-417.
226. Biemont C, Tsitrone A, Vieira C, Hoogland C: Transposable element
distribution in Drosophila. Genetics 1997, 147:1997-1999.
227. Dolgin ES, Charlesworth B, Cutter AD: Population frequencies of
transposable elements in selfing and outcrossing Caenorhabditis
nematodes. Genet Res 2008, 90:317-329.
228. Wright SI, Le QH, Schoen DJ, Bureau TE: Population dynamics of an Ac-like
transposable element in self- and cross-pollinating Arabidopsis. Genetics
2001, 158:1279-1288.
229. Loreto EL, Carareto CM, Capy P: Revisiting horizontal transfer of
transposable elements in Drosophila. Heredity 2008, 100:545-554.
230. Pace JK, Gilbert C, Clark MS, Feschotte C: Repeated horizontal transfer of a
DNA transposon in mammals and other tetrapods. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2008, 105:17023-17028.
231. Gladyshev EA, Meselson M, Arkhipova IR: Massive horizontal gene transfer
in bdelloid rotifers. Science 2008, 320:1210-1213.

Hua-Van et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:19
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/19

Page 29 of 29

232. Roulin A, Piegu B, Fortune PM, Sabot F, D’Hont A, Manicacci D, Panaud O:
Whole genome surveys of rice, maize and sorghum reveal multiple
horizontal transfers of the LTR-retrotransposon Route66 in Poaceae. BMC
Evol Biol 2009, 9:58.
233. Jordan IK, McDonald JF: Comparative genomics and evolutionary
dynamics of Saccharomyces cerevisiae Ty elements. Genetica 1999,
107:3-13.
234. Sharma A, Schneider KL, Presting GG: Sustained retrotransposition is
mediated by nucleotide deletions and interelement recombinations.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008, 105:15470-15474.
235. Marco A, Marin I: How Athila retrotransposons survive in the Arabidopsis
genome. BMC Genomics 2008, 9:219.
236. Le Rouzic A, Capy P: The first steps of transposable elements invasion:
parasitic strategy vs. genetic drift. Genetics 2005, 169:1033-1043.
237. Venner S, Feschotte C, Biemont C: Dynamics of transposable elements:
towards a community ecology of the genome. Trends Genet 2009,
25:317-323.
238. Le Rouzic A, Dupas S, Capy P: Genome ecosystem and transposable
elements species. Gene 2007, 390:214-220.
239. Naas T, Blot M, Fitch WM, Arber W: Insertion sequence-related genetic
variation in resting Escherichia coli K-12. Genetics 1994, 136:721-730.
240. Theuri J, Phelps-Durr T, Mathews S, Birchler J: A comparative study of
retrotransposons in the centromeric regions of A and B chromosomes
of maize. Cytogenet Genome Res 2005, 110:203-208.
241. Yang HP, Hung TL, You TL, Yang TH: Genomewide comparative analysis
of the highly abundant transposable element DINE-1 suggests a recent
transpositional burst in Drosophila yakuba. Genetics 2006, 173:189-196.
242. Yang L, Bennetzen JL: Distribution, diversity, evolution, and survival of
Helitrons in the maize genome. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2009,
106:19922-19927.
doi:10.1186/1745-6150-6-19
Cite this article as: Hua-Van et al.: The struggle for life of the genome’s
selfish architects. Biology Direct 2011 6:19.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
