<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>The evolution of vertebrate tetraspanins: gene loss, retention, and massive positive selection after whole genome duplications</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:306. doi:10.1186/1471-2148-10-306"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Shengfeng Huang"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Huang et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:306
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/306

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

The evolution of vertebrate tetraspanins: gene
loss, retention, and massive positive selection
after whole genome duplications
Shengfeng Huang, Haozheng Tian, Zelin Chen, Ting Yu, Anlong Xu*

Abstract
Background: The vertebrate tetraspanin family has many features which make it suitable for preserving the
imprint of ancient sequence evolution and amenable for phylogenomic analysis. So we believe that an in-depth
analysis of the tetraspanin evolution not only provides more complete understanding of tetraspanin biology, but
offers new insights into the influence of the two rounds of whole genome duplication (2R-WGD) at the origin of
vertebrates.
Results: A detailed phylogeny of vertebrate tetraspanins was constructed by using multiple lines of information,
including sequence-based phylogenetics, key structural features, intron configuration and genomic synteny. In
particular, a total of 38 modern tetraspanin ortholog lineages in bony vertebrates have been identified and
subsequently classified into 17 ancestral lineages existing before 2R-WGD. Based on this phylogeny, we found that
the ohnolog retention rate of tetraspanins after 2R-WGD was three times as the average (a rate similar to those of
transcription factors and protein kinases). This high rate didn’t increase the tetrapanin family size, but changed the
family composition, possibly by displacing vertebrate-specific gene lineages with the lineages conserved across
deuterostomes. We also found that the period from 2R-WGD to recent time is controlled by gene losses.
Meanwhile, positive selection has been detected on 80% of the branches right after 2R-WGDs, which declines
significantly on both magnitude and extensity on the following speciation branches. Notably, the loss of
mammalian RDS2 is accompanied by strong positive selection on mammalian ROM1, possibly due to gene lossinduced compensatory evolution.
Conclusions: First, different from transcription factors and kinases, high duplicate retention rate after 2R-WGD
didn’t increase the tetraspanin family size but just reshaped the family composition. Second, the evolution of
tetraspanins right after 2R-WGD had been impacted by a massive wave of gene loss and positive selection on
coding sequences. Third, the lingering effect of 2R-WGD on tetraspanin gene loss and positive selection might last
for 300-400 million years.

1 Background
Tetraspanin genes are virtually expressed on all cell
types in animals [1], and in green plants, fungi and
amoebas [2]. They have roles in the immune system, the
nervous system, tumor, development, infection and fertilization [3-9]. They mediate various biological processes
including cell morphology, adhesion, motility, proliferation, differentiation, fusion, invasion, phagocytosis,
* Correspondence: lssxal@mail.sysu.edu.cn
State Key Laboratory of Biocontrol, Guangdong Key Laboratory of
Pharmaceutical Functional Genes, College of Life Sciences, Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou, 510275, China

exocytosis, receptor signaling, synapse formation, protein trafficking, and more [3-9]. Though other mechanisms do exist, tetraspanins are most found to function
as organizers of various kinds of tetraspanin-enriched
membrane microdomains (TEMs) [10-14]. As organizers, tetraspanins bind with primary partner proteins
and dimerize with each other to form “tetraspanin
webs”, which further recruit a variety of proteins to
form specialized functional complexes (Figure 1A).
Despite the biological importance and many advances
achieved in last two decades, most tetraspanins have not
been functionally explored because of their subtle and

© 2010 Huang et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Huang et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:306
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/306

Page 2 of 17

Figure 1 The functions and structures of vertebrate tetraspanins. (A) Schematic of some tetraspanin functions. (B) The tetraspanin overall
structure. C1~C8 indicate the conserved cysteines; 100% conserved cysteines are labeled; ‘CCG’ is the so-called tetraspanin signature. (C) The LEL
structure of tetraspanins.

overlapping roles [15]. Tetraspanin proteins are
200~350aa long, containing four transmembrance
domains (TM), one small extracellular loop (SEL) and
one large extracellular loop (LEL) (Figure 1B) [16-18].
LEL contains most of the sites for protein interactions
[16-18], and is composed of a constant region and a
variable region. The constant region is formed by three
helices, whereas the variable region contains a CCG
motif, two to four internal disulphide bonds, and some
other motifs (Figure 1C) [16-18]. Because of incremental
analyses from several early reports, the origin and basic
phylogenetic features of tetraspanins are quite clear now
[2,19-23].
Gene duplication is a major force for gene functional
innovation [24]. However, most duplicate genes are
doomed to loss, but gene retention may be facilitated by
expression divergence, neofunctionalization or subfunctionalization [25-27]. Small-scale duplication (SSD) and
whole genome duplication (WGD) differ in their influence on the fate of duplicate genes [28,29]. For example,
in yeasts and plants, duplicate genes from functional
classes like transcription factors and kinases tend to be
preferentially retained after WGD; also in yeasts, duplicate genes retained after WGD tend to diverge more
quickly in expression regulation than in protein function
[reviewed in [30]]. In vertebrates, two rounds of WGD
(2R-WGD) happened at the origin of vertebrates, and a

third round occurred specifically to teleost fishes
(FSGD). Early genome-wide studies suggest that no
increase of positive selection has been detected on coding sequences of retained duplicate genes right after
FSGD [31,32]. The same conclusion is also suggested to
be applicable for 2R-WGD [32]. Consistently, several
studies on individual gene families find little positive
selection right after 2R-WGD, although these studies
are not specifically designed to address this issue
[33-37]. These reports suggest that the rapid increase of
biological complexity and novelties at the origin of vertebrates [38,39], which is believed to be triggered by
2R-WGD, might not be initially attained through positive selection. However, we have reasons to suspect that
2R-WGD’s effect on positive selection could be underestimated. First, the effect has not been carefully evaluated
actually; second, since 2R-WGD is so ancient (450-500
Mya), even a massive positive selection happened, not
every modern genes may still carry the selection imprint
after such a long time.
The vertebrate tetraspanin superfamily has several
advantages which make it suitable for preserving the
imprint of ancient sequence evolution and amenable for
phylogenomic analysis. It is a large family with 38 modern ortholog lineages in bony vertebrates (see Results).
It has a rigid and compartmentalized protein architecture, which makes it free from domain reshuffling and

Huang et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:306
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/306

internal module duplication, or in other words, which
limits its structural evolution to amino acid substitutions, insertions and deletions. It maintains highly conserved coding sequences, structural motifs and intron
configurations within sub-families. It has high gene
retention rate and most of its members preserve traceable genomic syntenic relationships (see Results). Finally,
its molecular function is to act as versatile organizers by
interacting with various proteins at different affinities,
and most of its members serve important but subtle,
overlapping and non-essential functions. These biochemical properties make tetraspanins highly adaptable
for functional changes.
In this study, we first reconstructed a detailed phylogeny for bony vertebrate tetraspanins by integrating multiple lines of information from sequence-based
phylogenetics, key structural features, intron configuration and genomic synteny. Based on this phylogeny, we
evaluated the impact of 2R-WGD on the following gene
loss, retention and natural selection of the major lineages
of vertebrate tetraspanins. In terms of selection tests, we
used a stringent branch-site codon model, and contrasted
duplication branches with speciation branches. Finally,
we concluded that vertebrate tetraspanins had undergone
a massive wave of gene losses and positive selection on
coding sequences right after 2R-WGD.

Page 3 of 17

2.2 Phylogenetics of deuterostome invertebrate
tetraspanins

Assuming that the phylogenetic structure of invertebrate
tetraspanins may be distorted by both the large number
of species-specific genes and the shift of the evolutionary pattern after 2R-WGD, here we first evaluated invertebrate deuterostome tetraspanins. Fifteen ortholog
lineages have been identified from the phylogenetic tree
(Figure 2). Twelve of them have vertebrate orthologs
and hence represent the lineages conserved across deuterostomes; three of them, with less statistic support,
have no vertebrate orthologs (probably lost). Amphioxus
tetraspanins are found on fourteen lineages, whereas
C. intestinalis and S. purpuratus each have tetraspanins
on ten lineages. Remarkably, amphioxus orthologs on
these lineages remain single copy status, suggesting that
their gene duplicability might be suppressed by gene
dosage effect [see review [30] for the theory]. In contrast
to this, amphioxus developed 25 species-specific tetraspanins. Such species-specific gene expansion also occurred
in C. intestinalis and S. purpuratus. So species-specific
SSDs and rapid divergence are major force to shape the
tetraspanin repertoires in deuterostome invertebrates,
which is consistent with the situation in other invertebrates like C. elegans and D. melanogaster [2].
2.3 A large tetraspanin gene cluster in amphioxus

2 Results
2.1 Tetraspanin genes of deuterostomes

To evaluate the 2R-WGD effect on bony vertebrate
genes, we require three aspects of phylogenomic information, including the closest invertebrate (outgroup)
orthologs, ohnolog patterns, and molecular gene trees
with dense taxa. Since we concentrate on bony vertebrates and most tetraspanin lineages are phylum-specific
[2], this study is focused on deuterostome tetraspanins.
To determine the major phylogenetic structure of vertebrate tetraspanins, we curated a reference set of tetraspanins from the genomes of human (33 genes), mouse
(32), zebrafish (50), ascidian C. intestinalis (33),
amphioxus B. floridae (39) and echinoderm S. purpurastus (29) (see Methods). Four molecular protein trees
have been constructed from these reference sequences
using ME, MP and ML methods (Additional file 1, Figure S1-4). To our knowledge, these reference sequences
define the most complete tetraspanin repertoires from
these species thus far (Additional file 2). Since the protein sequences between sub-families are so divergent (pdistance between many sub-families ranging from 0.75
to 0.9), these trees provide little reliable consensus on
the relation between major sub-families. However,
together with the information from previous reports
[2,21,22], these trees clearly define 38 ortholog lineages
for modern bony vertebrates (discussed later).

A large tetraspanin cluster is present in the genome of
D. melanogaster, accounting for half of the 35 D. melanogaster tetraspanin genes [20]. Here we reported a tetraspanin cluster (designated the TSPAN4 cluster) in the
amphioxus genome. It is located on the scaffold_V2_39
and spans 3600 kb, containing 23 tetraspanin genes and
223 non-tetraspanin genes (Figure 2, 3). If the 5-most
member (XP_002225525) is excluded, it still spans 1300
kb and contains 69 non-tetraspanin genes. The TSPAN4
cluster includes TSPAN4, TSPAN18, CD151, seven
TSPAN8-like-A, five TSPAN8-like-B and eight other
tetraspanins. Given the existence of its orthologous
regions in C. intestinalis (data not shown) and in vertebrates (Figure 3), the origin of this cluster should be
dated back to 500~600 Mya. This cluster offers rich
information for tracing the evolutionary history of vertebrate tetraspanins.
2.4 Phylogenomic analysis of vertebrate tetraspanins

We compared different molecular trees of reference tetraspanins, and identified 38 bony vertebrate tetraspanin
ortholog lineages (Additional file 1, Figure S1-4). We
also expanded the analysis to include more than 23 genomes to make sure no more lineages found (see Methods). Notably, here we required an ortholog lineage to
contain representatives from at least two bony vertebrate classes among mammals, reptiles, amphibians and

Huang et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:306
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/306

Page 4 of 17

teleost fishes. Further comparison between this analysis
and that of deuterosome invertebrate tetraspanins
helped to classify 38 ortholog lineages into 17 ancient
super-lineages which were originated before 2R-WGD.
Because sequence divergence within ancient lineages
was sometimes large and the sequence-based inference
of some ancient lineages were statistically less reliable,
we confirmed each of these ancient lineages by examining their critical structural features (Table 1), intron
configurations (like [22]) and genomic synteny. Notably,
these information provided support for some evolutionary relations between ancient lineages with certain reliability (discussed later).
It is worth noting that phylogenetic structures inferred
in this study provides more complete information than
our previous work [2], and can be quite different from
Garcia-Espana et al’s work [21]. For the latter case we
figured out three reasons. First, more genome sequences
and more complete gene data set have been included;
second, multiple tree reconstruction methods including
more reliable methods like maximum-likelihood (ML)
and Bayesian inference were used (see Methods); third,
structural motifs, intron configurations and genomic
synteny were integrated into the analyses in addition to
sequence-based phylogenetics.
2.5 Seventeen ancestral vertebrate tetraspanin lineages

Figure 2 The protein phylogenetic (ME) tree of invertebrate
deuterostome tetraspanins. Proteins marked with a rectangle are
members of the TSPAN4 gene cluster. This tree includes all 39
amphioxus sequences but omitted 9 C. instestinalis sequences and 5
S. purpuratus. Readers interested in the omitted genes are referred
to Figure S1-4.

The above phylogenomic analysis suggests that 17 pre2R-WGD ancestral vertebrate tetraspanin genes survived
until now. One may envisage that through duplications
and speciation, these ancient genes expanded into 17 tetraspanin lineages (subfamilies), which further gave rise to
all 38 modern vertebrate tetraspanin sub-lineages. Twelve
ancient lineages have orthologs in invertebrate deuterostomes, including CD63, CD151, TSPAN3, TSPAN4,
TSPAN6, TSPAN13, RDS/peripherin, TSPAN5,
TSPAN10, TSPAN15, TSPAN18 and TSPAN33. Notably,
three of these twelve lineages have reliable protostome
orthologs, including CD63 (e.g. mosquito XM_311807),
CD151 (e.g. mosquito XM_315290) and TSPAN13 (e.g.
fruit fly NM_079800). The other five lineages, including
CD9, CD37, uroplakins, TSPAN8 and TSPAN12, either
have no invertebrate orthologs at all or have distant
homologs but have been disproved as orthologs. All 17
ancient lineages and 38 sub-lineages are shown in separate distance trees in Figure 4, which is aimed to show
major topologies and the events of long-branch attractions (e.g. the mammalian ROM1). For reliable gene trees
with dense taxa (31 taxa used, see Methods), readers are
referred to the reference trees used for selection tests
(Additional file 1, Figure S5-21), and to the Bayesian protein trees which better contain long-branch effect (Additional file 1, Figure S37-53). Finally, more details on these
lineages are presented in the legend of Figure 4; and the

Huang et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:306
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/306

Page 5 of 17

Figure 3 The chordate TSPAN4 gene clusters in amphioxus and humans. Triangles show the gene direction. Picture is not drawn to scale.
The relationships between four human paralogous region are shown using a tree pattern. An inferred TSPAN4 cluster in the pre-WGD vertebrate
ancestor is also provided.

supporting data for the ancient lineages that are most difficult to be defined are presented in the Supplemental
Text.
2.6 The monophyletic 8-cysteine super-lineage and the
vertebrate TSPAN4 gene cluster

Although the inferred phylogenetic relations between 17
ancient lineages are much less supported, some reliable
parts are nevertheless worth noting. Four 8-Cysteine-

containing ancient lineages (TSPAN5, TSPAN10,
TSPAN15 and TSPAN33), including eight ortholog sublineages, form a monophyletic super-lineage (Figure 4).
This super-lineage has a special LEL structure defined by
eight cysteines capable of forming four disulphite bonds.
In fact, all metaozoan 8-Cys tetraspanins belong to this
super-lineage with the oldest one from cnidarians [2],
reflecting the ancient origin and independent evolution of
this super-lineage. On the other hand, syntenic analysis

Table 1 Classification of all vertebrate tetraspanin LELs
subtype

cysteine pattern of LEL

tetraspanin families

4-cys

CCG–C–C

CD81

6-cys-a

CCG–[DN][WY]–PXXCC–C–GC

CD151, CD63, TSPAN3, TSPAN6, TSPAN12, TSPAN18, RDS, UPK1,
TSPAN4(the member CD53 secondarily lost cysteine No.4&5)

6-cys-b1

CCG–[DN][WY]–[P]XXCXC–C–GC

TSPAN8, some amphioxus and ascidian TSPAN8-like

6-cys-b2

CCG–[DN][WY]–PCXC–C–GC

CD37

6-cys-c

types other than 6a, 6b1, 6b2

TSPAN13, some amphioxus TSPAN8-like

8-cys

CCG–[DN][WY]–C–C–PXXCC–C–GC

TSPAN5, TSPAN10, TSPAN15 and TSPAN33

Huang et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:306
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/306

Page 6 of 17

Figure 4 The protein phylogenetic (ME) trees of all 17 ancestral (pre-WGD) vertebrate tetraspanin lineages. The bony vertebrate
ortholog lineages and the ohnolog patterns are highlighted as shown in panel A. Red-filled rectangles are used to mark each ancestral lineage
in panel J and K. #1, a distant tetraspanin, only found in ray-finned fish otocephala; #2, found in ray-finned fishes, xenopus and reptiles, probably
an independent duplicate of TSPAN4; #3, a tetraspanin pseudogene from mouse; #4, a divergent tetraspanin found in all bony vertebrates,
originated by retrotransposition; #5, mammalian ROM1, the true ortholog of bony vertebrate ROM1, but too divergent to cluster with other
ROM1; #6, mammal TSPAN16, the true ortholog of teleost TSPAN16, but too divergent to cluster with other TSPAN16; #7, a divergent lineage, its
position is not determined; #8 and #9, no synteny shared between TSPAN33 and TSPAN33-like, but since they were separated before the
radiation of bony vertebrates, here we treated them as an ohnolog pair; #10, found in reptiles and mammals, as a result of tandem duplication
of CD81, becoming too divergent to cluster with CD81; #11, only found in ray-finned fish otocephala, as a result of independent duplication of
CD9, becoming too divergent to cluster with CD9; #12, has weak support for its clustering with tetrapod CD37 and sharing no synteny, so its
identity is questionable.

indicated that the TSPAN4 cluster not only exists in
amphioxus and ascidians, but also exists in bony vertebrates, except that in bony vertebrates the cluster has been
quadrupled by 2R-WGD. Figure 3 shows the reconstructed pre-WGD status of the vertebrate TSPAN4 cluster. This gene cluster provides insights into the evolution
of six ancestral lineages. Four lineages (CD151, TSPAN4,
TSPAN18 and TSPAN8-like) should represent the earliest
members of this cluster, whereas two other lineages (CD9
and CD37) should be derived from ancestral TSPAN8-like
genes given structural similarity between them. Besides, the
origin of uroplakin, CD63 and TSPAN13 seem to be
related to this cluster. Lastly, more evidence and discussion

on the evolution of these tetraspanins are presented in the
text of additional file 1.
2.7 The ohnolog duplication patterns produced by
2R-WGD

The 2R-WGD has been confirmed by lines of convincing evidence [40-42]. Apparently due to WGDs, bony
vertebrates have many more genes than invertebrates
[39]. Paralogs arisen from WGD are called “ohnologs”
[43]. Ideally, four ohnologs produced by two consecutive
WGDs manifest a hierarchical pattern like ((A, B),(C,
D)), but the pattern recovered from phylogenetic analysis is often violated by gene losses and unequal

Huang et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:306
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/306

evolutionary pace in different duplicates. Apparently, all
38 tetraspanin lineages of bony vertebrates are paralogs
derived from 17 pre-2R-WGD lineages, but not all paralogs from within an ancient lineage are ohnologs produced by 2R-WGD. In other words, some paralogs
could be paralogs originated through SSDs. Here we
used phylogenetic trees and syntenic data to determine
SSD-derived paralogs, 2R-WGD-derived ohnologs and
the ohnolog duplication patterns (Figure 4) (see Methods). More details on these patterns are presented in the
legend of Figure 4.
2.8 Gene retentions and losses after 2R-WGD

Among 17 ancestral lineages, 13 retain two or more
ohnologs and 6 of 13 retain three ohnologs. These 13
lineages include CD151, TSPAN3, TSPAN4, TSPAN6,
TSPAN13, RDS/peripherin, TSPAN18, TSPAN5,
TSPAN15, TSPAN33, CD9, CD37 and uroplakin,
accounting for 32 of 38 tetrapanin lineages in bony vertebrates (Figure 4). This ohnolog retention rate is quite
high, approximately three times the average rate (average rate is ~25%, see [42]) of all bony vertebrate genes,
which is similar to the retention rate of transcription
factors and protein kinases. In summary, of 21 new tetraspanin lineages in bony vertebrates (38-17 = 21), 19
are contributed by 2R-WGD and only 2 by SSDs (Figure
4). This contrasts the invertebrate situation, where SSDs
control the family size tetraspanins (see Section 2.2).
Remarkably, although the high ohnolog retention rate
greatly increased the family sizes of vertebrate transcription factors and kinases [42,44], it didn’t increase the
family size of bony vertebrate tetraspanins (for comparison: 33 members in human, 32 in mouse, 28 in chicken,
33 in C. intestinalis, 39 in B. floridae, 29 in S. purpurastus, 35 in D. melanogaster and 20 in C. elegans). Taken
together, 2R-WGD and the high ohnolog retention rate
reshape the tetraspanin family composition rather than
increase the tetraspanin family size.
Although 75% (13 of 17) of the ancient tetraspanin
lineages have ohnologous duplicates retained in bony
vertebrates, nearly half (17*4-36 = 32) of the duplicates
produced by 2R-WGD were lost before the radiation of
bony vertebrates, not mentioning some lineages which
might be lost without trace left. In contrast to this,
meanwhile only two new lineages were acquired through
SSDs. Gene losses are also observed to continue prevailing over gene gains in later evolution of bony vertebrates. For example, human lost six of 38 tetraspanin
ortholog lineages and gained only one new gene
(TSPAN32) through SSD; mouse lost eight and gained
one (TSPAN32, excluding the TSPAN7-like pseudogene); chicken gained two new tetraspanins but probably
lost twelve; amphibians probably lost three but gained
one; zebrafish gained two through SSDs (pseudogene

Page 7 of 17

XP_692767 excluded), but even FSGD could not prevent
it from losing four bony vertebrate tetraspanin lineages.
So we concluded that it is gene losses but not gene
gains which prevail in the evolutionary history of bony
vertebrate tetraspanins since 2R-WGD.
2.9 Massive and extensive positive selection right after
WGD

We divided branches following 2R-WGD into two conceptual categories, duplication branches and speciation
branches (Figure 5A). Contrasting duplication branches
with speciation branches permits to detect the changes in
selective regimes on two categories of branches. The
major difference between duplication branches and speciation branches is their divergent time from the first
WGD. Here we used a stringent branch-site test to detect
positive selection (see Methods). Three types of branches
were examined, including duplication branches, speciation branches leading to mammals, and speciation
branches leading to the teleost fishes (Figure 5A).
Several factors that complicate the analysis of deep
evolution of vertebrates need to be assessed before performing selection tests. A large tree with many branches
will improve the power of likelihood tests when
sequence divergence is high [45]. We sampled 24 fullysequenced genomes and many sequences from other
sources. Several mammalian genomes were excluded
due to poor quality. Excessive mammalian species won’t
enhance the power and robustness of our tests because
they don’t break long internal branches and the real bottle neck in our tests is the lack of sequences from reptiles and amphibians. Any way, we compiled at least five
mammal species, four teleost species and as many species as possible for reptiles and amphibians. So, to our
knowledge, in most cases the taxon number used in our
tests has exceeded early studies [31-37]. The structures
of the reference trees used for selection tests have been
justified by comparing information from Bayesian protein trees, Maximum likelihood trees, distance trees, and
syntenic data. So, one may notice that the reference
trees (Additional file 1, Figure S5-21) and the Bayesian
protein trees (Additional file 2, Figure S37-53) have
some discrepancies. In fact, selection tests using both
types of trees delivered consistent results (data not
shown), which is expected because the difference
between two trees is caused by the lack of sufficient
substitution information on the related branches and
the lack of such information is unlikely to produce false
positives. Highly divergent branches were removed
before tests (but will be separately analyzed in the next
section). Since we are testing multiple branches in one
tree, a scheme of multiple-testing correction is required:
first, because the evolution of duplicated genes may
affect with each other right after WGD, all duplication

Huang et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:306
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/306

Page 8 of 17

Figure 5 (A) Schematic representation of the tree topology. Three types of branches (in thick lines) are selected for branch-site model tests
for positive selection. (B) The one-ratio tree of RDS. The branches selected for tests are marked with “#”. (C-F) RDS gene trees inferred using
branch-specific models, with the mammalian ROM1 branch as the foreground branch. (C) Synonymous substitution (dS) tree of transmembrane
region (TM). (D) Nonsynonymous substitution (dN) tree of TMs. (E) dS tree of the non-TM regions. (F) dN tree of the non-TM region.

branches in a tree are treated as one hypothesis; second,
since the branch leading to the mammal class has been
divided into three portions by amphibians and reptiles,
all three portions of the branch are also treated as one
hypothesis; third, as for the branch leading to the teleost
class, it forms one hypothesis alone (Figure 5A). This
scheme is expected to be conservative for duplication
branches and relaxed for mammal branches. Hocheberg’s method is used here (5% and 1%) [46], which is
more stringent than FDR method use in [32] (10% and
1%). As for the distributions of codon usage, GC content and transition-transversion ratio, we analyzed them
in three layers. First, within the vertebrate ortholog
lineages, the difference could be presented between vertebrate classes. but these differences unlikely affect the
accuracy and power of likelihood ratio tests (LRT) on
branches inside the lineage according to the previous
simulations [32]. Second, between ohnolog lineages we
detected no significant difference in most cases, which
was expected because different lineages contained similar composition of species. Third, there was significant
difference between invertebrate and vertebrate genes.
Though we had not to test invertebrate branches, we

performed tests using trees without invertebrates and
confirmed that similar results could be obtained with or
without invertebrate sequences (data not shown). The
last complicating factor we need to consider is the possible dS saturation and model violation on divergent
deep branches (duplication branches). Saturation of dS
may not be a problem for PAML’s likelihood tests
[32,45,47], but which is often accompanied by model
violation and hence may cause false positives [47]. In
the next section, we will show that these problems have
little impact on our conclusions.
We have tested all 17 tetraspanin trees (Test No.1383 in Additional file 3) by using a stringent branchsite model (see Methods), but only 15 were put into
further statistic analysis (Table 2). Two trees
(TSPAN8 and TSPAN12) were excluded from tests
because they lacked proper outgroups and duplication
branches. We detected positive selection on 28 of all
36 duplication branches (P < 0.05), which consisted of
12 of 15 trees. In contrast, we detected positive selection on 16 of 33 mammal branches and 16 of 30 teleost branches. So, the difference between duplication
branches and speciation branches is statistically

Huang et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:306
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/306

Page 9 of 17

Table 2 Statistics on branches under significant positive selection
Branch type

No. of
branches

Proportion of sites under
positive selection average
(median)

Significant LRTa
(P < 0.05)
(proportion)

Fisher’s
exact
testb

Significant LRTa
(P < 0.01)
(proportion)

Fisher’s
exact
testb

* 13 tested trees, CD63, TSPAN8, TSPAN10 and TSPAN12 excluded
A. duplications

34

-

26(76%)

0.0425;A/B

19(56%)

0.0045;A/B

B. mammalsc (portion 1,2,3
as a whole)

31

-

15(48%)

0.7961;B/D

6(19%)

0.7552;B/D

C. mammalsc (portion 1,2,3
as independent branches)

81

-

26(32%)

1.4e-5;A/C

13(16%)

3.0e-5;A/C

-

15(54%)

0.0667;A/D

7(25%)

0.0202;A/D

D. teleosts
28
* 15 tested trees, TSPAN8 and TSPAN12 excluded
E. duplications

36

18.4%(19.0%)

28(78%)

0.0138;E/F

20(56%)

0.0025;E/F

F. mammalsc (portion 1,2,3
as a whole)

33

-

16(48%)

0.8025;F/H

6(18%)

0.7577;F/H

G. mammalsc (portion 1,2,3
as independent branches)

86

7.2%(4.1%)

27(31%)

3.0e-6;E/G

14(16%)

0.0001;E/G

H. teleosts

30

9.6%(8.3%)

16(53%)

0.0652;E/H

7(23%)

0.0118;E/H

* TSPAN8 and TSPAN12
(Though the branch-site model detects no positive selection, the site-specific model detects positive selection on TSPAN8)
I. duplications

0

-

-

-

-

-

J. speciation (as
independent branches)

6

-

0(0%)

-

0(0%)

-

a
Number of branches on which positive selection is detected using branch-site model at given p-value; Hochberg’s method (1988) was used for multiple testing
correction.
b
Fisher’s exact test was used for testing the difference between different types of branches.
c
The bony vertebrate-mammal branch was interrupted by amphibians and reptiles, hence produced portion 1,2,3, see Figure 5A for details.

significant. This difference becomes even more significant if the P-value for likelihood tests was lifted to
0.01, suggesting that positive selection on duplication
branches is not only more prevalent but also stronger
than that of speciation branches. In consistence, positive selection affects 6~36% percent of sites (average
18%) on the duplication branches, contrasting to
0.6~23% (average 7%) on the mammal branches and
0.9~35% (average 9.6%) on the teleost branches. Typically, positive selection on many tested speciation
branches was contributed by only 1-3 sites (Additional
file 3). This result was also confirmed by the proportion of the sites predicted to be under positive selection by the Bayes empirical Bayes (BEB) method
(Additional file 3). Furthermore, if we considered the
post-WGD evolution towards mammal radiation as a
four-staged process (before the bony vertebrate radiation, before the tetrapod radiation, before the reptilemammal radiation and before the mammal radiation,
see Figure 5A), we could observe a gradual decline on
the occurrence of positive selection from 80% to 36%,
to 24% and to 12% (the difference in last three stages
is insignificant due to small sample size). Taken
together, we concluded that for vertebrate tetraspanin
genes, massive and extensive positive selection dominated the early period after 2R-WGD, which gradually
and significantly decreased in both magnitude and
extensity in later bony vertebrate evolution.

2.10 Further confirmation of the massive wave of positive
selection after 2R-WGD

Since the statistic conclusion from last section is so different from those early studies using similar detection
schemes for positive selection on vertebrate gene
lineages [31-37] (also see the Introduction), we decided
to thoroughly evaluate its robustness from multiple
angles. In our tests, we ignored two trees (TSPAN8 and
TSPAN12) due to the lack of proper outgroups and
took into account two trees (CD63 and TSPAN10) that
have fallen back to single gene status, but in fact,
whether to count in these trees or not would not change
our statistic conclusions (Additional file 3). To further
verify the reliability of inference, we performed tests on
twelve arbitrarily selected duplication branches using the
F61 codon model (CodonFreq = 3 in PAML4), which is
expected to contain the bias on GC content, codon
usage and transition-transversion ratio better than the
F3X4 model. Both models produced similar results,
except that the F61 model caused a bit of power loss in
LRT. Notably, the quality of sequences can affect the
parameter estimation, especially when genomes are
sequenced and assembled in varying quality [for example [48]], but after analyzing the branch-site likelihood
tests, we figured out that sequence errors tend to
increase more false positives on the terminal speciation
branches than the deep internal duplication branches. In
fact, since in this study the positive selection on

Huang et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:306
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/306

duplication branches was much stronger and affected
much more sites than on speciation branches, we expect
that no matter what testing schemes or sequence problems are encountered, the duplication branches should
be less affected than speciation branches.
Two factors, the dS saturation and the violation of the
codon model assumption, will inflate false positive rates
of likelihood ratio tests for positive selection [47,49]. In
our tetraspanin dataset, duplication branches produced
by 2R-WGD are so ancient and divergent that they have
much higher chance to suffer from saturation and
model violation than speciation branches. Therefore, we
have designed three schemes to confirm that the excessive positive selection detected on tetraspanins’ duplication branches is evident and trust-worthy.
First, we ran simulations that reproduced the original
dataset under nearly-neutral model to evaluate the false
positive rates of positive selection on duplication
branches (see Methods). We detected no positive selection (P < 0.05) on all 170 tested branches. To correction
for the possible underestimation of dS substitution rate,
we ran another simulation with branch length multiplied
by 1.5. This time we detected positive selection (P <
0.05) on only 2 branches among all 170 tested branches.
So, it is clear that dS saturation-induced false positive
rate is not a big problem, which is consistent with early
simulation analyses [32,45,47].
Second, we especially assessed those divergent
branches in our tetraspanin dataset. There are four
duplication branches with dS > 1.8, two of which are
reported under positive selection (TSPAN14 and
TSPAN15-like). Positive selection on the TSPAN14
branch is highly supported (P < 0.00002) and affects a
large proportion of sites (48%), whereas dS of the
TSPAN15-like branch is merely above 1.8 (≈1.87) and
positive selection on it is also highly supported (P <
0.002). Moreover, after we removed branches with dS >
1.5 (15 branches) or dS > 1.2 (23 branches), our statistic
conclusions still hold, suggesting that in our tetraspanin
dataset, divergent branches did not show any higher
false positive rate than those less divergent.
Third, we employed two protein-based approaches to
detect evolutionary rate shifts on or between tetraspanin
ohnolog lineages (implemented in software DIVERGE2
[50] and RASER2 [51], see Methods for details). It is
suggested that in theory amino acid-based methods for
selection tests may better contain divergent sequences
and dS saturation than codon-based methods [45].
Using DIVERGE2, we detected significant functional
divergence between all pairs of tetraspanin ohnolog
lineages except the pair of TSPAN6/TSPAN7 (Additional file 4). It should be noted that there were also no
positive selection detected on TSPAN6 and TSPAN7
using the branch-site codon model (Additional file 3).

Page 10 of 17

Using RASER2, we detected significant rate shifts on all
tetraspanin ohnolog lineages (Additional file 5). Globally, protein-based methods produced much higher significance on each ohnolog lineages than codon-based
methods (readers can compare Additional files 3-5 to
see this point). Taken together, we concluded that: 1)
protein-based methods seem less stringent than codonbased methods; 2) significant rate shifts did happen on
the protein level on tetraspanin ohnolog lineages (corresponding to duplication branches), which strongly corroborates the results from the branch-site codon model.
2.11 Natural selection on the extremely long branches

The most divergent branches were not analyzed in Section 2.9, which include four branches originated by independent SSD (TSPAN4-like, TSPAN6-like, TSPAN32like, CD9-like), two branches arisen from speciation
(mammalian ROM1 and TSPAN16), and one branch
produced by WGD (TSPAN19). We set up new tests on
these branches by using several different models and phylogenetic contexts, but no positive selection could be
detected on these branches over the full-length sequence.
This outcome is not surprising because codon-based
positive-selection models have been shown to have little
power in dealing with highly divergent sequences [47].
However, we observed that the evolutionary rate, transition-transversion ratio and dN/dS ratio could be different
between the TM and the non-TM regions in some tetraspanin lineages (data not shown), so we redid tests on
these branches with the TM and non-TM regions separated. This time, we detected positive selection in nonTM regions on two branches, the mammalian ROM1
branch (discussed later) and the CD9-like branch. All
these tests are present in Additional file 3 (test No.462671), and their corresponding reference trees are presented on Figure S22-36 (in Additional file 1).
2.12 Possible compensatory evolution of ROM1

The RDS family forks into three ohnolog lineages, RDS,
ROM1 and RDS2. RDS is a major organizer for the
photoreceptor outer segment (OS) architecture [52].
Defects of RDS may cause blindness. ROM1 forms hetero-tetramers and -octamers with RDS in OS [53]. A
study of ROM1 -/- mice indicates that though ROM1
has a role in rod photoreceptor viability and in the regulation of disc morphogenesis, RDS alone is sufficient for
both disc and outer segment morphogenesis [54].
Defects of ROM1 may also cause photoreceptor degeneration but the phenotype is milder than that of RDS.
As for RDS2, the function has not been explored.
The protein structure of RDS family is highly conserved and free of indels, suggesting strong purifying
selection against indels. Positive selection can be
detected on all duplication branches and affects 12~29%

Huang et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:306
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/306

of the sites, whereas positive selection is much less on
speciation branches (Addition file 3). A notable observation
about the RDS family is the accelerated substitution rate of
the mammalian ROM1 (mROM1) branch (Figure 5B),
which is so extreme that it causes aberrant topology in the
distance tree (Figure 4H), but the correct topology can be
recovered by using ML or Bayesian methods (Figure S3 &
S43 in Additional file 1). Analysis of the genes adjacent to
the genomic location of mROM1 showed that the acceleration is restricted to mROM1, suggesting that regional
effects are not responsible for the phenomenon. Since the
high substitution rate of mROM1 produces no indels or
poor alignment portions, we suspected that acceleration is
directional or under certain constraints. The BEB site prediction method reports many sites under positive selection
in non-TM regions on the mROM1 branch without significant LRT support. Prompted by this, we divided the alignment into TM and non-TM regions and re-tested the
branch (Test No.384-461 in Additional file 3). The rationale of this scheme is that to increase the proportion of
positive selection sites will increase the power of LRT [47].
In this time, positive selection has been significantly
detected in non-TM regions, affecting 48% of the sites and
having 42 under-positive-selection sites predicted with >
95% probability. The likelihood test of positive selection
will become much more significant if we reduced the interference from non-ROM1 sequences and model violations
by restricting the tests to the sub-tree of bony vertebrate
ROM1 (Test No.462-479 in Additional file 3).
To further find out the relation between the positive
selection and the substitution acceleration, we applied
the branch-specific model for further tests. These tests
indicate that most synonymous substitutions on the
mROM1 branch are accumulated in TM regions,
whereas the synonymous substitution rate in non-TM
regions has no difference from other branches (Figure
5C-D). In contrast, most nonsynonymous replacements
on the mROM1 branch occur in non-TM regions (Figure 5E-F). These observations not only explain why
positive selection is not significant across the whole
sequence, but suggest that massive and rapid positive
selection in non-TM regions of the mROM1 branch is
driven by the acceleration of global substitution rate.
However, it is still hard to comprehend why rapid and
massive positive selection suddenly acted on the
mROM1 branch. We proposed that it is due to compensatory evolution caused by the loss of mammalian RDS2
(see Discussion).

3 Discussion
3.1 Distinct influence of 2R-WGD on family size and
composition of vertebrate tetraspanins

It is reported that after 2R-WGD, only 25% of the ancestral chordate genes retained more than two ohnologs in

Page 11 of 17

modern vertebrates [42], but retention events are not
random, instead, related to gene functional modes. For
instance, genes with high retention rates are enriched in
development, signal transduction and transcription regulation [42]. The ohnolog retention rate of vertebrate tetraspanins is found to be 75%, three times the average and
similar to that of transcription factors (TFs) and kinases,
suggesting that new tetraspanins tended to be quickly
recruited into novel biological processes after 2R-WGD.
In line with this, in invertebrates, species-specific SSDderived tetraspanins also had high retention rate, hence
accounting for the majority of invertebrate tetraspanins
(see Section 2.2). Why do tetraspanins have high duplicability and retention rate? It is proposed that genes with
biochemical features permitting easy adaptation for new
functions should have higher duplicability [30]. And
genes with secondary functions or properties more likely
retain both duplicates and develop new functions from
secondary properties [30]. These hypotheses may explain
the situation of tetraspanins, because tetraspanins are
involved in various biological processes and interacting
with various proteins at different affinities [13].
Frequent SSDs dominated the tetraspanin family sizes
in invertebrates (see Section 2.2), and 2R-WGD could
increase TFs and kinases by 2~4 folds. In contrast,
neither 2R-WGD nor SSDs significantly increased the
family size of vertebrate tetraspanins. Instead, high
ohnolog retention rate just reshaped the family composition. So in these terms, influence of 2R-WGD on tetraspanins is quite different from those genes (TFs and
kinases) with high retention rates or those genes with
low retention rates. Now the question is: why did this
happen? We find that only 5 of 17 ancient vertebrate
tetraspanin lineages are vertebrate-specific, contrasting
to the invertebrate situation where the majority of tetraspanins are species-specific. If assuming that vertebrate
ancestors before 2R-WGD had roughly the same
amount of tetraspanins as deuterostome invertebrates
had (i.e., 29-39 genes), we may infer that 2R-WGD
didn’t increase the family size of vertebrate tetraspanins
but changed the family composition by displacing those
vertebrate-specific lineages with the lineages conserved
across the deuterostome phylum. If this inference was
true, then how did it happen? It is suggested that conserved genes and essential genes are favorable for duplication if initial gene dosage constraint is not a problem
[55-57]. It is also proposed that WGD but not SSD is
able to lift dosage constraint because dosage balance is
not initially altered by WGD [30]. Based these theories,
we speculate that in invertebrates conserved tetraspanins
are preferable for duplication but constrained by dosage
barrier (which might be especially true in amphioxus,
where frequent SSDs kept happening but all conserved
tetraspanins remain single gene status). However, in

Huang et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:306
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/306

vertebrates, since 2R-WGD lifted the dosage barrier, the
duplicates of conserved tetraspanins might be able to
displace non-conserved genes quickly.
3.2 Post-2R-WGD massive positive selection and its
relation to gene retention and gene loss

In addition to the high ohnolog retention rates, we also
detected a massive wave of positive selection in bony
vertebrate tetraspanins right after 2R-WGD. This wave
of positive selection impacted nearly 80% of the duplication branches and affected 18% of their sites on average.
Rather than classify this selection wave as a peculiar
case on tetraspanins, we argue that it occurred on genome-wide scale but some families like tetraspanins
might preserve the signal of positive selection better
than others. Positive selection were also detected on
later speciation branches, but at much less extensity and
magnitude, with many branches affected by 1~3 sites of
strong signal. We theorize that such a few sites in most
cases may not create entirely new functions, but likely
contribute minor adaptation or optimization for the new
function acquired in early evolution.
Initial retention of new tetraspanin ohnologs permitted subsequent differential changes on their coding
regions. Early studies suggest that initial retention of
duplicates after WGD is likely facilitated by dosage balancing selection, expression divergence and subfunctionalization [review in [30]]. In this course, Darwin’s
natural selection favored those adaptive changes (positive selection) and led to neofunctionalization. Although
initial retention opens a time window for positive selection, it doesn’t directly accelerate positive selection.
Some other events like subfunctionalization and gene
loss may facilitate positive selection. Initial subfunctionalization on duplicate genes may relax original selective
constraints on coding regions and facilitate neofunctionalization (positive selection) in later sequence evolution
[58,59]. As for gene loss, it may also cause positive
selection according to the dosage-compensation model.
This model predicts that after WGD dosage effect
strongly prevent the loss of the duplicated genes encoding interacting proteins in order to maintain the balance
of the interaction network (note that tetrapanins are
known to form huge “tetraspanin webs” with various
proteins), but this model also predicts that once one of
the interacting duplicates is lost, the remaining duplicated gene will be positively selected for [60]. Therefore,
gene loss may facilitate positive selection by triggering
compensatory evolution on the remaining duplicate
gene. The positive selection on mammalian ROM1 is
possibly due to compensatory evolution triggered by the
loss of mammalian RDS2.
Compensatory evolution commonly occurs within a
gene, a protein complex or a network [61]. Within a

Page 12 of 17

gene, deleterious mutations can be rectified or compensated by other mutations; within a complex or a network, defects of a component may be compensated by
changes on other components. However, gene-for-gene
compensation is rare. Here we propose a functional
vacancy hypothesis to explain gene loss-induced positive
selection. This model assumes that close related ohnologs or paralogs have diverged but partially overlapped
function. So once an ohnolog is lost, other ohnolog may
fill the functional vacancy, but since the replacing ohnolog is not as good as the original, directional (or positive) selective pressure may step in and drive further
adaptive changes on the replacing ohnolog. This hypothesis may explain the positive selection on mammalian
ROM1. Functional study demonstrates that RDS
acquired its present function before the radiation of tetrapods [52]. The branch pattern and length of RDS
family suggests that before the mammalian speciation,
RDS2 is more divergent from RDS and ROM1, whereas
ROM1 is more similar to RDS and could be more dispensable or under stronger subfunctionalization. The
dispensability of ROM1 has support from reptiles, where
the loss of reptile ROM1 caused no discernable effects
on the sequence evolution of reptile RDS and RDS2
(Figure 5B). Taken together, we speculate that the loss
of mammalian RDS2 might cause an instant functional
vacancy, which may drive the less important ROM1 to
evolve adaptive changes to fill the vacancy.
Finally, we infer that 2R-WGD associated gene loss
and positive selection could have affected the evolution
of vertebrate tetraspanins for 300-400 million years or
more. First, the early period right after 2R-WGD is
~100 million years, as the divergence of chordates is
520-680 Mya and that of bony vertebrates is ~420 Mya
[62,63]. Second, gene losses continued to prevail over
gene gains in the later evolution of bony vertebrates (see
Section 2.8), and the number of branches under positive
selection declined in a gradual way along the evolutionary path from 2R-WGD to the mammal radiation (see
Section 2.9). Both phenomena suggest that after the
bony vertebrate radiation the influence of 2R-WGD kept
declining but continued to act in later 200~300 million
years. This lingering effect of 2R-WGD is not restricted
to tetraspanins but likely presented on a genome-wide
scale, because early studies indicate that the effect of
2R-WGD on the gene family size distribution is still
detectable after the tetrapod radiation [64,65].
3.3 The possible differences between 2R-WGD and FSGD

An early study shows that duplicate genes retained after
FSGD bias to genes under purifying selection or relaxation of purifying selection [31]. Studer et al’s work
further suggests that FSGD had no effect on the prevalence of positive selection [32]. These conclusions are

Huang et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:306
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/306

quite different from ours on 2R-WGD and tetraspnains
(a massive wave of positive selection right after 2RWGD). However, if disregarding the duplication
branches, Studer et al’s work and our work are more
consistent than different: both studies provide similar
estimation of the occurrence of positive selection on the
mammal branches (12~20%, P < 0.05, portion 3 only,
shown in Figure 5A) and on the bony vertebrate
branches (43-50%, P < 0.05 equivalent to the teleost+tetrapod branches, shown in Figure 5A). This implies that
the difference lies in duplication branches, in other
words, lies between 2R-WGD and FSGD.
One difference between 2R-WGD and FSGD is their
differential roles in the increase of biological complexity.
2R-WGD is believed to greatly increase the morphological complexity (including developmental boundaries and
gene functional modules) in the transition from basal
chordates to vertebrates [38]. However, it appears less
dramatic about the changes on morphological complexity before and after FSGD. In addition, 2R-WGD and
FSGD seem to have different duplicate retention rate,
for example, both tetraspanins and Hox genes had had
75% retention rate after 2R-WGD but 25-30% after
FSGD. So it may not be surprising that 2R-WGD and
FSGD had different effect on the prevalence of positive
selection. One interesting possibility is that the lingering
effect of 2R-WGD lasted 300-400 million years and
hence eclipsing the effect of FSGD. An alternative possibility is that different choices of gene families for tests
may make a different result. Specifically, our work
focused on 38 genes from one family that probably suitable for preserving the imprint of ancient sequence
evolution, whereas Studer et al’s work concerned a set
of 117 FSGD-related genes which are biased to genes of
high sequence conservation and retention rate [32].
Anyway, the final answer requires the analysis of more
genes and gene families.

4 Conclusions
In this study, we demonstrate how the 2R-WGD
affected the gene retention, losses and positive selection
on the bony vertebrate tetraspanin superfamily. Based
on these results, we argue that a gene family which has
high duplicate retention rate after WGD may not lead
to the increase of family size; instead, it may just
reshape the family composition. This is a new finding
about the effect of WGD on the fate of multi-gene
families. We also detect a massive wave of gene losses
and positive selection that struck vertebrate tetraspanins
right after 2R-WGD. To our knowledge, this phenomenon (especially the massive wave of positive selection)
has not been detected in early studies [31-37]. So, we
argue that the effect of WGD on positive selection
should not be underestimated, which could be

Page 13 of 17

significantly more extensive and intensive than that of
speciation. We finally propose that although the influence of WGD are gradually diminished, the influencing
time of WGD could be much longer than we thought
before; in terms of tetraspanins, the lingering influence
of 2R-WGD on gene losses and positive selection might
last for 300-400 million years.

5 Methods
5.1 Identification of tetraspanin sequences

Predicted transcripts of 22 deuterostome genome
sequences were downloaded from the Ensembl FTP site
[66], including Dasypus novemcinctus (Dn), Equus
caballus (Ec), Homo sapiens (Hs), Monodelphis domestica (Md), Mus musculus (Mm), Rattus norvegicus (Rn),
Ornithorhynchus anatinus (Oa), Gallus gallus (Gg), Taeniopygia guttata (Tg), Anolis carolinensis (Ac), Xenopus
tropicalis (Xt), Gasterosteus aculeatus (Gac), Danio rerio
(Dr), Oryzias latipes (Ol), Takifugu rubripes (Tr), Tetraodon nigroviridis (Tn), Branchiostoma floridae (Bf),
Ciona intestinalis (Ci), Ciona savignyi (Cs). Predicted
transcripts of the genome of Strongylocentrotus purpuratus (Sp) were downloaded from the NCBI FTP site.
Unique gene data sets of Xenopus laevis (Xl), Strongylocentrotus purpuratus (Sp), Ciona intestinalis (Ci), Ciona
savignyi (Cs) were downloaded from the NCBI FTP site.
Besides, some sequences from other species were also
used, including Leucoraja erinacea (Le), Squalus
acanthias (Sa), Meleagris gallopavo (Mg), Lachesis muta
(Lm), Cyprinus carpio (Cc), salmo salar (Ss) and Oncorhynchus mykiss (Om). Identification of tetraspanin
sequences from these data was performed by using the
PSSM model pfam00335 and the stand-alone RPSBLAST [67]. In order to build a reference set of tetraspanin, we set out to find all tetraspanin sequences from
human, mouse, zebrafish, C. intestinalis, B. floridae and
S. purpuratus. Therefore, for these species, we also
downloaded and scanned their ab initio predicted transcripts, expressed sequence tags and genomic sequences.
Because of the structure features (see Background),
tetraspanin sequences generally have higher quality than
many other gene families, but manual sequence inspection and correction is still needed. Fortunately, the
sequence, protein architecture and intron positions of
tetraspanins are highly conserved within ortholog
lineages (in practice, we can divide tetraspanins in 4
TM, 2EC, and the large EC can be further divided into
4-6 portions (Figure 1B &1C), so by dividing the
sequence into these short portions it is easy to detect
and correct the sequence problem. Three problems
could be encountered: incorrect splicing sites, fragmented genes and sequencing gaps. Briefly, four procedures
were performed: 1) FGENEH or FGENEH+ with close
homologs were used to re-predict the transcript to fix

Huang et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:306
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/306

incorrect splicing and fragmental genes; 2) mRNA/EST
was used to correct sequences; 3) when multiple different sequences for a same gene were available, high-quality sequence from close species were used as referee to
decide which one and or which portion was more accurate; 4) incomplete genes with sequencing gaps or not
corrected genes were deleted.
5.2 Protein sequence-based phylogenetic reconstruction

Only the sequences of “tetraspanin core” (4TM+SEL
+LEL) were used for alignment and tree reconstruction.
Clustalw 1.83 with all default settings was used to produce multiple alignments. Unlike the previous analysis
[2], in order not to introduce subjective bias, manual
alignment editing was minimized. Minimum-evolution
(ME) trees were built by using Mega v4.1 [68], with
1000 bootstrap tests and pairwise deletion. Both poisson
correction model and p-distance model were used in the
ME method. Maximum-likelihood (ML) method was
conducted by using Phylip v3.65, with 100 bootstrap
tests, Jones-Taylor-Thornton model, no gamma correction, and 2 times of jumble for Figure S3 (but 10 times
for the analyses of 17 individual trees). Maximum parsimony (MP) method was conducted by using Phylip
v3.65, with 100 bootstrap tests and 10 times of jumble.
Bayesian protein trees were carried out using MrBayes
v3.1, with amino acid substitution models recommended
by the program. All other not mentioned parameters
were set as defaults. In this study, ME trees were presented as bootstrapped original trees with branch length,
whereas ML and MP trees were presented as bootstrapped consensus trees without branch length.
5.3 Codon usage, Intron configuration analysis and
syntenic context analysis

Codon bias and GC contents was analyzed using
CodonW program http://mobyle.pasteur.fr/cgi-bin/portal.py?form=codonw. Intron positions for each gene
were identified by using stand-alone SPLIGN program
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sutils/splign/ and marked
on the protein sequences using a home-made Perl
script. Syntenic context analysis was carried out manually on the UCSC gene sorter and genome browser
http://genome.ucsc.edu/ [69].
5.4 Reconstruction of ohnolog lineages and their
duplicating patterns

Paralogs arisen from WGDs are called ohnologs. We
selected all duplicate pairs, triplets or quartets that were
created between the speciation of vertebrates and bony
vertebrates, and then used the UCSC gene sorter and
genome browser http://genome.ucsc.edu/[69] to determine if these duplicates are located on syntenic regions.
Duplicates sharing synteny were considered ohnolog

Page 14 of 17

pairs or triplets (note: no ohnolog quatets found). The
next step is to determine the duplicating patterns by
constructing phylogenetic trees. The theoretical pattern
of four ohnologs arising from 2R-WGD should be (AB)
(CD), but 2R-WGD happened more than 500 Mya ago
and the interval between 2R-WGDs was rather short, so
divergence and gene loss may distorted the ideal pattern.
To reconcile the duplicating patterns, we not only constructed trees from tetraspanin ohnologs, but also constructed trees from those ohnolog genes co-localized
with tetraspanin genes. Likelihood ratio tests were used
to compare the fitness of different phylogenetic topologies using PAML program [70].
5.5 Detection of positive selection and statistic analysis

Based on the phylogeny obtained from reference tetraspanin seqences, we produced extended alignments and
phylogenetic trees for each ancestral vertebrate tetraspanin lineage (seventeen in total) by including more species. For each tetraspanin ortholog lineage, we included
at least (but not limited) five mammal species, four teleost species, and as many species as possible for reptiles
and amphibians. Because of the conserved protein
sequence and architecture, it is easy to produce highquality alignments for each tetraspanin lineages. Protein-based alignments were converted to nucleotide
alignments by using RevTrans [71]. To guarantee reliable likelihood tests, manual sequence correction was
conducted on alignments. Reference sequences were
used as criteria to detect potential problems by eyes,
and the problematic sequences were either deleted or
corrected, depending on their dispensability in an alignment. The alignment browser of Mega 4 was used as
the basic tool for sequence editing [68]. Highly divergent
sequences were also deleted from the alignments.
PAML 4 program was used to detect positive selection
[70]. In a codon model, dN/dS > 1 (ω > 1) is considered
as indicator of positive selection. In this study, the basic
model (one-ratio), two site-specific models (nearly-neutral and positive-selection) and the branch-site model A
were applied on each tree. The branch-site model A has
been reported to be more powerful and sensitive than
the site-specific model and the branch-specific models
[72]. In a test using branch-site model A, the branch
being tested for positive selection is called the foreground branch, and the other branches in the tree are
called the background branches. Likelihood ratio test
(LRT) is used to evaluate whether significant positive
selection happens on the foreground branch. Two LRTs
may be constructed: 1) to compare the model A to the
nearly-neutral model or 2) to compare the model A to
the modified model A with ω = 1 fixed. The first LRT is
known to have high false positive rate because it does
not distinguish between positive selection and relaxed

Huang et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:306
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/306

selective constraints [72], hence the second LRT is preferred. The test is done by comparing 2ΔlnL to c12 or a
1:1 mixture of 0 and c12. To guide against violations of
model assumptions [47], the more conservative test with
c12 was used in this study. To avoid the known convergence problems (for example, sometimes the parameters
may get stuck at a corner of parameter space), we ran
the program twice with two set of parameters, the first
set is the defaults, whereas the second set is the parameters inferred from the one-ratio model. Since multiple branches from the same tree have been tested, we
used the Hochberg multiple testing correction method
[46] to control the family-wise error rate. Except for the
construction of reference trees, other processes were
automated using a home-made Perl script. All statistic
analysis following the evaluation of positive selection
was conducted by using Microsoft Office Excel.
5.6 Simulations

Those deep ancient branches (the duplication branches
right after 2R-WGD) may be suffered from dS saturation, which in return may cause false detection of positive selection on these branches. To gain insight into
the false positive rates on these branches, we used EvolveNSsite from PAML4 to generate alignments under the
nearly-neutral (M1a) model [70], and ran selection tests
on the duplication branches of these alignments using a
stringent branch-site model as described in Section 5.5.
Thirteen tetraspanin families which contain at least two
duplication branches were used for simulation. For each
family five alignments were simulated, using the same
parameters derived from the corresponding family.
These parameters include two categories, one derived
directly from the original alignment (sequence number,
sequence length, tree topology, and codon usage), the
other inferred from the original alignment under the
nearly-neutral (M1a) model using PAML4 (branch
length, dN/dS ratio ω, Ts/Tv ratio, and the proportion
of site with ω = 1). Furthermore, to correct for possible
underestimation of the branch length, we generated and
tested five additional simulated alignments for each
family with all the same parameters except multiplying
the branch length by 1.5.

Page 15 of 17

lose part of the codon substitution information. To provide complement and confirmation to the codon models
used here, we incorporated two protein-based maximum-likelihood approaches to detect the alteration of
selection constraints (or the rate shift) on those tetraspanin ohnolog lineages produced by 2R-WGD. The
first method is Gu’s method (Gu99) that is implemented
in the software DIVERGE2 [50], which detect specific
amino acid sites under functional divergence between
two paralog lineages after gene duplication [73,74]. This
method tests whether the coefficient of functional divergence θ of two selected lineages is significantly larger
than 0. If so, then there is significant functional divergence between two lineages, and the sites contributed to
divergence are also inferred using a probabilistic model.
The second method is based on a covarion model that
is implemented in the software RASER2, which allows
raft shifts to vary among lineages and permits to identify
the rate-shifting sites by empirical Beyesian inference
[51]. Here we used RASER2 to compare the lineage-specific model (invoked by using the parameter file “raser.
stochasticMapping.params”, and specifying a tetraspanin
ohnolog lineage in this file, which thus enables rate
shifts on the specified lineage) with the null model
(invoked by using the parameter file “null.params”,
which does not enable rate shifts). All other parameters
were set to defaults. To avoid the known convergence
problems, we ran the program for at least twice for each
lineage and each model on different platforms. Then
likelihood-ratio tests (LRT) were performed to determine whether the lineage-specific model fit the data significantly better than the null model. If so, rate shifts on
the specified lineage is significant. Protein-based analyses were only conducted on duplication branches (or
ohnolog lineages) from 13 tetraspanin families with at
least two duplication branches. Used alignments and
tree topologies are the same as used in codon-based
analyses.
5.8 Data availability

5.7 Detection of rate shifts among sites using proteinbased methods

The reference set of deuterostome tetraspanins including six genomes (human, mouse, zebrafish, C. intestinalis, B. floridae and S. purpuratus) and some other
selected sequences were presented in Additional file 2.
All alignments used for phylogenetic analyses and positive seletion tests were presented in Additional file 6.

There are higher chance for those deep ancient
branches (the duplication branches right after 2R-WGD)
to suffer from dS saturation and codon model violation.
If so, the power and accuracy of selection tests on these
branches based on codon models may be impaired [47].
Alternatively, maximum-likelihood approaches based on
protein sequences are able to better contain divergent
sequences in theory [45], although as a trade-off, they

6 Authors’ contributions
SH and AX conceited the analysis and drafted the
manuscript. SH prepared all scripts and performed most
of the analyses. HZ carried out the Bayesian tree inference. CZ and YT collected raw data, and provided technical support on computation and statistics. All authors
read and approved the final manuscript.

Huang et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:306
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/306

Additional material

Page 16 of 17

9.
10.

Additional file 1: Supplemental text and figures, including:. Figure
S1. Protein ME tree of reference tetraspanins, using poisson correction
distance.Figure S2. Protein ME tree of reference tetraspanins, using pdistance.Figure S3. Protein ML tree of reference tetraspanins.Figure S4.
Protein MP tree of reference tetraspanins.Figure S5-S21, One-ratio codon
trees of 17 ancestral tetraspanin lineage inferred using PAML4; used for
positive selection tests.Figure S22-S36, One-ratio codon trees of other
tetraspanin lineage used for positive selection tests.Figure S37-S53,
Bayesian inference protein trees of 17 ancestral tetraspanin lineage
inferred using MrBayes.
Additional file 2: Supplemental Table 1. A reference collection of
deuterostome tetraspanin proteins.

11.

12.
13.
14.

15.

Additional file 3: Supplemental Table 2. Results of likelihood ratio
tests for positive selection using PAML 4.

16.

Additional file 4: Supplemental Table 3. Detection for rate shifts
among sites between tetraspanin ohnolog lineages using DIVERGE2.

17.

Additional file 5: Supplemental Table 4. Detection for rate shifts
among sites on tetraspanin ohnolog lineages using RASER2.
Additional file 6: All used alignments (alignment.zip).

18.

19.
Abbreviations
LEL: large extracellular loop; LRT: likelikhood ratio test; SEL: small extracellular
loop; TEM: tetraspanin-enriched microdomain; TM: transmembrane; TSPAN:
tetraspanin; WGD: whole genome duplication; 2R-WGD: two rounds of WGD
at the origin of vertebrates; FSGD: fish-specific WGD.
7 Acknowledgements
We thank two anonymous reviewers for their comments. We thank Jiantao
Huang for exquisite artworks. This work was supported by Projects
2007CB815800 (973), and 2008AA092601(863) from the Ministry of Science
and Technology of China; project 30730089 and 30901103 from National
Natural Science Foundation of China. A. Xu is a recipient of the Outstanding
Young Scientist Award from the National Natural Science Foundation of
China.
Received: 12 May 2010 Accepted: 13 October 2010
Published: 13 October 2010
References
1. Hemler ME: Tetraspanin proteins mediate cellular penetration, invasion,
and fusion events and define a novel type of membrane microdomain.
Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 2003, 19:397-422.
2. Huang S, Yuan S, Dong M, Su J, Yu C, Shen Y, Xie X, Yu Y, Yu X, Chen S,
et al: The phylogenetic analysis of tetraspanins projects the evolution of
cell-cell interactions from unicellular to multicellular organisms. Genomics
2005, 86(6):674-684.
3. Boucheix C, Duc GH, Jasmin C, Rubinstein E: Tetraspanins and malignancy.
Expert Rev Mol Med 2001, 2001:1-17.
4. Gourgues M, Brunet-Simon A, Lebrun MH, Levis C: The tetraspanin BcPls1
is required for appressorium-mediated penetration of Botrytis cinerea
into host plant leaves. Mol Microbiol 2004, 51(3):619-629.
5. Martin F, Roth DM, Jans DA, Pouton CW, Partridge LJ, Monk PN,
Moseley GW: Tetraspanins in viral infections: a fundamental role in viral
biology? J Virol 2005, 79(17):10839-10851.
6. Olmos E, Reiss B, Dekker K: The ekeko mutant demonstrates a role for
tetraspanin-like protein in plant development. Biochem Biophys Res
Commun 2003, 310(4):1054-1061.
7. Adell T, Gamulin V, Perovic-Ottstadt S, Wiens M, Korzhev M, Muller IM,
Muller WE: Evolution of metazoan cell junction proteins: the scaffold
protein MAGI and the transmembrane receptor tetraspanin in the
demosponge Suberites domuncula. J Mol Evol 2004, 59(1):41-50.
8. Wright MD, Moseley GW, van Spriel AB: Tetraspanin microdomains in
immune cell signalling and malignant disease. Tissue Antigens 2004,
64(5):533-542.

20.
21.

22.

23.

24.
25.

26.
27.

28.

29.

30.
31.

32.

33.
34.

35.

Berditchevski F, Odintsova E: Tetraspanins as regulators of protein
trafficking. Traffic 2007, 8(2):89-96.
Maecker HT, Todd SC, Levy S: The tetraspanin superfamily: molecular
facilitators. Faseb J 1997, 11(6):428-442.
Tarrant JM, Robb L, van Spriel AB, Wright MD: Tetraspanins: molecular
organisers of the leukocyte surface. Trends Immunol 2003, 24(11):
610-617.
Yunta M, Lazo PA: Tetraspanin proteins as organisers of membrane
microdomains and signalling complexes. Cell Signal 2003, 15(6):559-564.
Hemler ME: Tetraspanin functions and associated microdomains. Nat Rev
Mol Cell Biol 2005, 6(10):801-811.
Le Naour F, Andre M, Boucheix C, Rubinstein E: Membrane microdomains
and proteomics: lessons from tetraspanin microdomains and
comparison with lipid rafts. Proteomics 2006, 6(24):6447-6454.
Charrin S, le Naour F, Silvie O, Milhiet PE, Boucheix C, Rubinstein E: Lateral
organization of membrane proteins: tetraspanins spin their web.
Biochem J 2009, 420(2):133-154.
Stipp CS, Kolesnikova TV, Hemler ME: Functional domains in tetraspanin
proteins. Trends Biochem Sci 2003, 28(2):106-112.
Seigneuret M, Delaguillaumie A, Lagaudriere-Gesbert C, Conjeaud H:
Structure of the tetraspanin main extracellular domain. A partially
conserved fold with a structurally variable domain insertion. J Biol Chem
2001, 276(43):40055-40064.
Kitadokoro K, Bordo D, Galli G, Petracca R, Falugi F, Abrignani S, Grandi G,
Bolognesi M: CD81 extracellular domain 3D structure: insight into the
tetraspanin superfamily structural motifs. Embo J 2001, 20(1-2):12-18.
Lambou K, Tharreau D, Kohler A, Sirven C, Marguerettaz M, Barbisan C,
Sexton AC, Kellner EM, Martin F, Howlett BJ, et al: Fungi have three
tetraspanin families with distinct functions. BMC Genomics 2008, 9:63.
Todres E, Nardi JB, Robertson HM: The tetraspanin superfamily in insects.
Insect Mol Biol 2000, 9(6):581-590.
Garcia-Espana A, Chung PJ, Sarkar IN, Stiner E, Sun TT, Desalle R:
Appearance of new tetraspanin genes during vertebrate evolution.
Genomics 2008, 91(4):326-334.
Garcia-Espana A, Mares R, Sun TT, Desalle R: Intron evolution: testing
hypotheses of intron evolution using the phylogenomics of
tetraspanins. PLoS One 2009, 4(3):e4680.
DeSalle R, Mares R, Garcia-Espana A: Evolution of cysteine patterns in the
large extracellular loop of tetraspanins from animals, fungi, plants and
single-celled eukaryotes. Mol Phylogenet Evol 56(1):486-491.
Ohno S: Evolution by Gene Duplication. (George Allen and Unwin, London,
1970) .
Force A, Lynch M, Pickett FB, Amores A, Yan YL, Postlethwait J:
Preservation of duplicate genes by complementary, degenerative
mutations. Genetics 1999, 151(4):1531-1545.
Hughes AL: The evolution of functionally novel proteins after gene
duplication. Proc Biol Sci 1994, 256(1346):119-124.
Wapinski I, Pfeffer A, Friedman N, Regev A: Natural history and
evolutionary principles of gene duplication in fungi. Nature 2007,
449(7158):54-61.
Hakes L, Pinney JW, Lovell SC, Oliver SG, Robertson DL: All duplicates are
not equal: the difference between small-scale and genome duplication.
Genome Biol 2007, 8(10):R209.
Maere S, De Bodt S, Raes J, Casneuf T, Van Montagu M, Kuiper M, Van de
Peer Y: Modeling gene and genome duplications in eukaryotes. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2005, 102(15):5454-5459.
Conant GC, Wolfe KH: Turning a hobby into a job: how duplicated genes
find new functions. Nat Rev Genet 2008, 9(12):938-950.
Brunet FG, Crollius HR, Paris M, Aury JM, Gibert P, Jaillon O, Laudet V,
Robinson-Rechavi M: Gene loss and evolutionary rates following wholegenome duplication in teleost fishes. Mol Biol Evol 2006, 23(9):1808-1816.
Studer RA, Penel S, Duret L, Robinson-Rechavi M: Pervasive positive
selection on duplicated and nonduplicated vertebrate protein coding
genes. Genome Res 2008, 18(9):1393-1402.
Wang M, Zhang X, Zhao H, Wang Q, Pan Y: FoxO gene family evolution in
vertebrates. BMC Evol Biol 2009, 9:222.
Fetterman CD, Rannala B, Walter MA: Identification and analysis of
evolutionary selection pressures acting at the molecular level in five
forkhead subfamilies. BMC Evol Biol 2008, 8:261.
Hughes J, Criscuolo F: Evolutionary history of the UCP gene family: gene
duplication and selection. BMC Evol Biol 2008, 8:306.

Huang et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:306
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/306

36. Lynch VJ, Roth JJ, Wagner GP: Adaptive evolution of Hox-gene
homeodomains after cluster duplications. BMC Evol Biol 2006, 6:86.
37. Bos DH: Natural selection during functional divergence to LMP7 and
proteasome subunit X (PSMB5) following gene duplication. J Mol Evol
2005, 60(2):221-228.
38. Freeling M, Thomas BC: Gene-balanced duplications, like tetraploidy,
provide predictable drive to increase morphological complexity. Genome
Res 2006, 16(7):805-814.
39. Ohno S: Gene duplication and the uniqueness of vertebrate genomes
circa 1970-1999. Semin Cell Dev Biol 1999, 10(5):517-522.
40. Abi-Rached L, Gilles A, Shiina T, Pontarotti P, Inoko H: Evidence of en bloc
duplication in vertebrate genomes. Nat Genet 2002, 31(1):100-105.
41. Dehal P, Boore JL: Two rounds of whole genome duplication in the
ancestral vertebrate. PLoS Biol 2005, 3(10):e314.
42. Putnam NH, Butts T, Ferrier DE, Furlong RF, Hellsten U, Kawashima T,
Robinson-Rechavi M, Shoguchi E, Terry A, Yu JK, et al: The amphioxus
genome and the evolution of the chordate karyotype. Nature 2008,
453(7198):1064-1071.
43. Wolfe K: Robustness–it’s not where you think it is. Nat Genet 2000,
25(1):3-4.
44. Prachumwat A, Li WH: Gene number expansion and contraction in
vertebrate genomes with respect to invertebrate genomes. Genome Res
2008, 18(2):221-232.
45. Bielawski JP, Yang Z: Maximum likelihood methods for detecting
adaptive evolution after gene duplication. J Struct Funct Genomics 2003,
3(1-4):201-212.
46. Hochberg Y: A sharper Bonf erroni procedure for multiple tests of
significance. biometrika 1988, 76:383-386.
47. Anisimova M, Yang Z: Multiple hypothesis testing to detect lineages
under positive selection that affects only a few sites. Mol Biol Evol 2007,
24(5):1219-1228.
48. Mallick S, Gnerre S, Muller P, Reich D: The difficulty of avoiding false
positives in genome scans for natural selection. Genome Res 2009,
19(5):922-933.
49. Anisimova M, Bielawski JP, Yang Z: Accuracy and power of bayes
prediction of amino acid sites under positive selection. Mol Biol Evol
2002, 19(6):950-958.
50. Gu X, Vander Velden K: DIVERGE: phylogeny-based analysis for functionalstructural divergence of a protein family. Bioinformatics 2002,
18(3):500-501.
51. Penn O, Stern A, Rubinstein ND, Dutheil J, Bacharach E, Galtier N, Pupko T:
Evolutionary modeling of rate shifts reveals specificity determinants in
HIV-1 subtypes. PLoS Comput Biol 2008, 4(11):e1000214.
52. Goldberg AF: Role of peripherin/rds in vertebrate photoreceptor
architecture and inherited retinal degenerations. Int Rev Cytol 2006,
253:131-175.
53. Goldberg AF, Molday RS: Expression and characterization of peripherin/
rds-rom-1 complexes and mutants implicated in retinal degenerative
diseases. Methods Enzymol 2000, 316:671-687.
54. Clarke G, Goldberg AF, Vidgen D, Collins L, Ploder L, Schwarz L, Molday LL,
Rossant J, Szel A, Molday RS, et al: Rom-1 is required for rod
photoreceptor viability and the regulation of disk morphogenesis. Nat
Genet 2000, 25(1):67-73.
55. Davis JC, Petrov DA: Preferential duplication of conserved proteins in
eukaryotic genomes. PLoS Biol 2004, 2(3):E55.
56. He X, Zhang J: Gene complexity and gene duplicability. Curr Biol 2005,
15(11):1016-1021.
57. Papp B, Pal C, Hurst LD: Dosage sensitivity and the evolution of gene
families in yeast. Nature 2003, 424(6945):194-197.
58. He X, Zhang J: Rapid subfunctionalization accompanied by prolonged
and substantial neofunctionalization in duplicate gene evolution.
Genetics 2005, 169(2):1157-1164.
59. Rastogi S, Liberles DA: Subfunctionalization of duplicated genes as a
transition state to neofunctionalization. BMC Evol Biol 2005, 5(1):28.
60. Hughes T, Ekman D, Ardawatia H, Elofsson A, Liberles DA: Evaluating
dosage compensation as a cause of duplicate gene retention in
Paramecium tetraurelia. Genome Biol 2007, 8(5):213.
61. Pazos F, Valencia A: Protein co-evolution, co-adaptation and interactions.
EMBO J 2008, 27(20):2648-2655.
62. Benton MJ, Donoghue PC: Paleontological evidence to date the tree of
life. Mol Biol Evol 2007, 24(1):26-53.

Page 17 of 17

63. Blair JE, Hedges SB: Molecular phylogeny and divergence times of
deuterostome animals. Mol Biol Evol 2005, 22(11):2275-2284.
64. Hughes T, Liberles DA: Whole-genome duplications in the ancestral
vertebrate are detectable in the distribution of gene family sizes of
tetrapod species. J Mol Evol 2008, 67(4):343-357.
65. Hughes T, Liberles DA: The power-law distribution of gene family size is
driven by the pseudogenisation rate’s heterogeneity between gene
families. Gene 2008, 414(1-2):85-94.
66. Hubbard TJ, Aken BL, Ayling S, Ballester B, Beal K, Bragin E, Brent S, Chen Y,
Clapham P, Clarke L, et al: Ensembl 2009. Nucleic Acids Res 2009, , 37
Database: D690-697.
67. Altschul SF, Madden TL, Schaffer AA, Zhang J, Zhang Z, Miller W,
Lipman DJ: Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new generation of protein
database search programs. Nucleic Acids Res 1997, 25(17):3389-3402.
68. Tamura K, Dudley J, Nei M, Kumar S: MEGA4: Molecular Evolutionary
Genetics Analysis (MEGA) software version 4.0. Mol Biol Evol 2007,
24(8):1596-1599.
69. Rosenbloom K, Taylor J, Schaeffer S, Kent J, Haussler D, Miller W:
Phylogenomic resources at the UCSC Genome Browser. Methods Mol Biol
2008, 422:133-144.
70. Yang Z: PAML 4: phylogenetic analysis by maximum likelihood. Mol Biol
Evol 2007, 24(8):1586-1591.
71. Wernersson R, Pedersen AG: RevTrans: Multiple alignment of coding DNA
from aligned amino acid sequences. Nucleic Acids Res 2003,
31(13):3537-3539.
72. Zhang J, Nielsen R, Yang Z: Evaluation of an improved branch-site
likelihood method for detecting positive selection at the molecular
level. Mol Biol Evol 2005, 22(12):2472-2479.
73. Gu X: Statistical methods for testing functional divergence after gene
duplication. Mol Biol Evol 1999, 16(12):1664-1674.
74. Gu X: Maximum-likelihood approach for gene family evolution under
functional divergence. Mol Biol Evol 2001, 18(4):453-464.
doi:10.1186/1471-2148-10-306
Cite this article as: Huang et al.: The evolution of vertebrate
tetraspanins: gene loss, retention, and massive positive selection after
whole genome duplications. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010 10:306.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
