<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>1471-2148-3-18.fm</title>
<meta name="Author" content="csproduction"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 7.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 5.0.5 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
BMC Evolutionary Biology

BioMed Central

Open Access

Research article

Phylogenetic analysis of bacterial and archaeal arsC gene sequences
suggests an ancient, common origin for arsenate reductase
Colin R Jackson* and Sandra L Dugas
Address: Department of Biological Sciences, SLU 10736, Southeastern Louisiana University, Hammond, LA 70402, USA
Email: Colin R Jackson* - cjackson@selu.edu; Sandra L Dugas - sdugas@selu.edu
* Corresponding author

Published: 23 July 2003
BMC Evolutionary Biology 2003, 3:18

Received: 20 May 2003
Accepted: 23 July 2003

This article is available from: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/3/18
© 2003 Jackson and Dugas; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article: verbatim copying and redistribution of this article are permitted
in all media for any purpose, provided this notice is preserved along with the article's original URL.

Abstract
Background: The ars gene system provides arsenic resistance for a variety of microorganisms and
can be chromosomal or plasmid-borne. The arsC gene, which codes for an arsenate reductase is
essential for arsenate resistance and transforms arsenate into arsenite, which is extruded from the
cell. A survey of GenBank shows that arsC appears to be phylogenetically widespread both in
organisms with known arsenic resistance and those organisms that have been sequenced as part of
whole genome projects.
Results: Phylogenetic analysis of aligned arsC sequences shows broad similarities to the established
16S rRNA phylogeny, with separation of bacterial, archaeal, and subsequently eukaryotic arsC
genes. However, inconsistencies between arsC and 16S rRNA are apparent for some taxa.
Cyanobacteria and some of the γ-Proteobacteria appear to possess arsC genes that are similar to
those of Low GC Gram-positive Bacteria, and other isolated taxa possess arsC genes that would
not be expected based on known evolutionary relationships. There is no clear separation of
plasmid-borne and chromosomal arsC genes, although a number of the Enterobacteriales (γProteobacteria) possess similar plasmid-encoded arsC sequences.
Conclusion: The overall phylogeny of the arsenate reductases suggests a single, early origin of the
arsC gene and subsequent sequence divergence to give the distinct arsC classes that exist today.
Discrepancies between 16S rRNA and arsC phylogenies support the role of horizontal gene
transfer (HGT) in the evolution of arsenate reductases, with a number of instances of HGT early
in bacterial arsC evolution. Plasmid-borne arsC genes are not monophyletic suggesting multiple
cases of chromosomal-plasmid exchange and subsequent HGT. Overall, arsC phylogeny is complex
and is likely the result of a number of evolutionary mechanisms.

Background
Arsenic is a toxic element that is found in both natural
environments such as geothermal springs, and in sites
contaminated by a number of industries. Inorganic
arsenic exists primarily in two valence states: arsenite
(AsIII) and arsenate (AsV, or the arsenate ion AsO43-). Both
forms are toxic to microorganisms, with arsenite disrupt-

ing enzyme function, and arsenate behaving as a phosphate analog and interfering with phosphate uptake and
utilization [1]. Microorganisms have evolved a variety of
mechanisms for coping with arsenic toxicity, including
minimizing the amount of arsenic that enters the cell (e.g.
through increased specificity of phosphate uptake, [2]),
arsenite oxidation through the activity of arsenite oxidase

Page 1 of 10
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Evolutionary Biology 2003, 3

[3,4], or peroxidation reactions with membrane lipids
[5,6]. Other microorganisms utilize arsenic in metabolism, either as a terminal electron acceptor in dissimilatory arsenate respiration [7–10] or as an electron donor in
chemoautotrophic arsenite oxidation [11,12]. However,
the most well-characterized microbial arsenic detoxification pathway involves the ars operon [2,13].
The ars operon consists of a group of genes coding for a
transmembrane pump and an arsenate reductase (arsC).
The operon includes a regulatory gene (arsR) and a gene
coding for an arsenite-specific pump (arsB) as well as arsC
[13]. Arsenite is pumped directly out of the cell by the arsB
protein; however arsenate must first be reduced to arsenite
by the cytoplasmic arsenate reductase coded from arsC.
Some bacteria also possess other ars genes: arsA produces
an arsenite-stimulated ATPase [14] that results in more
efficient arsenite extrusion; arsD encodes for a regulatory
protein that controls the upper level of ars expression [15];
arsH has been identified but has an uncertain function
[16]. The ars operon was initially recognized in plamids of
Staphylococcus aureus and S. xylosus [17,18] but has subsequently been found in other microorganisms (e.g.
Escherichia coli [19,20], Acidiphilum multivorum [21], Bacillus subtilis [22], Pseudomonas aeruginosa [23]). The genes
can be plasmid-borne or chromosomal, and genomesequencing projects have identified putative ars genes in
both Bacteria and Archaea that have not been specifically
characterized in terms of arsenic resistance. An analogous
genetic system (Arr or ACR) has also been described in the
eukaryote Saccharomyces cervisiae [24]. Thus the ars
operon, or similar arsenic resistance systems, appears to
be relatively widespread throughout microorganisms.
The arsC gene is of particular interest in that its product,
the soluble enzyme arsenate reductase, catalyzes the
reduction of arsenate to arsenite. Arsenate is the thermodynamically favorable form of arsenic under aerobic conditions [25,26], so it is likely to be the most common
form of arsenic in many environments. Thus, the presence
and expression of arsC is likely to be required for microorganisms inhabiting such areas. Furthermore, arsenite is
generally more labile and toxic than arsenate [26], so that
expression of arsC, and the ensuing reduction of arsenate
to arsenite, might increase the toxicity of arsenic in the
environment. Despite the potential importance of the
arsC gene at both a physiological and environmental
level, a thorough study of the phylogenetic distribution of
different arsC genes has not been performed.
A simple phylogenetic tree showing the relationships
between the arsenate reductases of seven Bacteria (those
that had been confirmed to possess the gene at that time)
was presented as part of a study that identified the arsenic
resistance genes of Thiobacillus ferrooxidans (now Acidithio-

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/3/18

bacillus ferroxidans) [27]. Saltikov and Olson [28] used
probes/primers based on the E. coli ars operon to detect ars
genes in natural environments, and presented a phylogenetic analysis of these genes, however their analysis was
largely confined to enteric bacteria (those that were similar enough to E. coli to be detected) and they emphasized
the arsB gene rather than arsC. As part of a review of
microbial arsenic transformations, we recently determined a preliminary arsC phylogeny based on 19
sequences [29]. These three studies reported phylogenies
that suggested a common origin for the ars genes examined [27–29]. An alternative view suggested by Mukhopadhyay et al. [30] is that three distinct classes of arsenate
reductases exist, which have developed similar mechanisms and reaction centers through convergent evolution.
Two of these classes are bacterial (one typified by the arsC
found in enteric bacteria such as E. coli; the other typified
by the arsC found in Staphylococcus plasmids and other
Gram-positive Bacteria); the third is the Arr2 gene of S.
cerevisiae. Phylogenies of these gene families based on 18
arsC sequences were recently reported [30]. However, as
well as microorganisms that have been shown to have
demonstrable arsenate resistance, whole genome analyses
of various microorganisms have revealed an increasing
number of open reading frames (ORFs) that have homology to arsC. Inclusion of these putative arsC genes in phylogenetic analyses might resolve the basic question: Did
arsenate resistance systems evolve from a common origin
or develop convergently in multiple taxa? In this study we
attempt to answer this question through a phylogenetic
analysis of both confirmed arsC genes and those inferred
from whole genome analyses. We compare this phylogeny
to one derived from 16S rRNA, and suggest possible
implications for the evolutionary history of arsenic resistance in microorganisms.

Results and Discussion
The 16S rRNA based phylogenetic tree (Figure 1) generally
matched the accepted 16S rRNA model with clear separation of the two prokaryotic domains and the subsequent
divergence of Eukarya (represented by Saccharomyces cerevisiae) from Archaea [31]. Minor inconsistencies such as
Ralstonia solanacearum (β-Proteobacteria) forming a deep
branch within the γ-Proteobacteria, or Fusobacterium
nucleatum (Fusobacteria) and Leptospira interrogans (Spirochetes) grouping loosely with the Gram-positive Bacteria
are likely the result of the limited data set used (they were
the only representatives of their respective phyla that had
listed arsC genes) and do not challenge established relationships. Otherwise the major divisions and subdivisions of the Bacteria (e.g. the various Proteobacteria, Low
GC Gram-positives, Actinobacteria) formed expected patterns. An interesting finding was the grouping (albeit
weak) of Nostoc muscorum and Synechosystis sp. with Deinococcus radiodurans to form a high level clade (Figure 1).

Page 2 of 10
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Evolutionary Biology 2003, 3

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/3/18

Figure 1
Phylogenetic tree based on 16S rRNA gene sequences
Phylogenetic tree based on 16S rRNA gene sequences.The tree was constructed by neighbor joining methods using
1326 informative positions. Numbers represent percentages of 1000 bootstraps and are only shown for bootstrap values
<80%. The names of the major divisions of prokaryotes represented are shown to the right of corresponding clades.

Page 3 of 10
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Evolutionary Biology 2003, 3

This is similar to findings from genome trees that suggest
a close relationship between the Cyanobacteria and Deinococcales [32], although our 16S rRNA tree does not suggest a relationship between these taxa and the
Actinobacteria. However, the Actinobacteria (High GC
Gram-positives) did clearly separate from the Low GC
Gram-positive Bacteria (Figure 1).
The arsC phylogenies obtained by evolutionary distance
(ED) analysis (Figure 2) and maximum parsimony (MP;
Figure 3) showed a number of broad similarities to the
16S rRNA tree. There was clear separation of Archaea and
Bacteria (with the sole eukaryote, S. cerevisiae, grouping
towards Archaea), and also general grouping of the different bacterial divisions; all the archaeal arsC genes were
from the Euryarchaeota so it was not possible to examine
division level phylogeny for Archaea. Both treeing methods support the existence of at least three major classes of
arsC genes, corresponding to the Archaea/Eukarya, the
Enterobacteriales (enteric γ-Proteobacteria) and α-Proteobacteria, and the Low GC Gram-positive Bacteria. At a
basic level, these broad groupings of arsC correspond to
the three distinct classes of arsenate reductases that others
have observed [30], and these three groups had low
sequence similarity to each other (less than 33% similarity between the Bacteria and Archaea/Eukarya, and 48%
similarity between the two major bacterial groups). However, the analysis reported here includes more diverse arsC
sequences and suggests that other deeply branching types
of arsC exist. For example, the arsC sequences from major
divisions of Bacteria such as the Green Sulfur Bacteria
(represented by Chlorobium tepidum) and the Deinococcales (represented by D. radiodurans) are loosely associated
with either the Enterobacteriales/α-Proteobacteria (Figure
2) or Low GC Gram-positive Bacteria (Figure 3) depending upon the analysis used, but in either case diverge to
form their own deep branches, suggesting that they possess distinct arsenate reductases. Thus, the suggestion that
the three previously reported classes of arsenate reductases
developed through convergent evolution [30] seems
flawed: not only does arsC phylogeny show broad parallels to the accepted 16S rRNA phylogeny, but deep bacterial divisions appear to possess the distinct arsenate
reductases that would be expected from divergence from a
common origin. Given the alternate hypotheses of (1)
Common origin followed by sequence divergence, or (2)
Independent origin of multiple arsC sequence types with
broadly similar reaction centers and general mechanisms,
based on the phylogenies observed and the general rarity
of convergent evolution at a sequence level [33,34] we
suggest that the former is more likely.
A number of taxa do show arsC phylogenies that are
inconsistent with the established 16S rRNA evolutionary
tree, perhaps the most dramatic being the separation of

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/3/18

some of the non-enteric γ-Proteobacteria (Pseudomonas
putida, P. aeruginosa, and A. ferrooxidans) from the Enterobacteriales. The non-enteric γ-Proteobacteria actually
appear to be paraphyletic with regards to arsC, in that the
two Xanthomonas species group with the α-Proteobacteria,
whereas the others form a distinct group with the sole representative of the β-Proteobacteria (R. solanacearum). The
phylogenetic affiliation of the latter clade is uncertain: ED
analysis placed it as a deep branch in the Low GC Gram
positive Bacteria group (Figure 2), whereas MP placed it
loosely with the large Enterobacteriales/α-Proteobacteria
group (Figure 3). Either placement had poor bootstrap
support, and given the relatively low sequence homology
of this clade to either of the other major bacterial arsC
groups (50% similarity to the Low GC Gram positives,
40% similarity to the Enterobacteriales/α-Proteobacteria
group) we suspect that this group might represent a fourth
distinct group of arsenate reductases, making its placement in a binary tree difficult. A second distinct difference
between the arsC and 16s rRNA trees is the tight grouping
of the Cyanobacteria with the arsC sequences from Low
GC Gram-positive Bacteria. Other discrepancies are placement of the three Streptococcus sequences (Low GC Grampositive Bacteria) with the Actinobacteria and the placement of Aquifex aeolicus (basal in the 16S rRNA-defined
bacterial clade) and F. nucleatum within the Low GC
Gram-positives (Figures 2 and 3). The latter two sequence
types were the only arsC sequences reported for the
Aquificales and Fusobacteria, respectively, and as with
some of the 16S rRNA tree branches, might represent the
limited data set rather than true evolutionary relationships. However, A. aeolicus is known to have exchanged
numerous genes with other microorganisms [35], and the
phylogeny of its arsenate reductase gene might represent
another example of this.
Regardless of the particular phylogenetic methods used,
the arsC trees clearly show a number of non-orthologous
arsC genes, assuming that the 16S rRNA tree reflects true
phylogeny. One explanation for these inconsistencies
could be the existence of arsC paralogs that have diverged
after arsC gene duplication events. While this might be the
case for those organisms with arsC sequences that were
not closely related to other sequences (e.g. D. radiodurans
or C. tepidum), it is an unreasonable explanation for the
similar arsC sequences (e.g. those of the two Cyanobacteria) that group within unexpected larger clades. Rather
than multiple gene duplication events or convergent evolution, this suggests horizontal gene transfer (HGT) of
arsC genes. Recent studies suggest that HGT events may
have been much more widespread during prokaryotic
evolution than had been previously thought, with genetic
exchange even occurring between Bacteria and Archaea
[35–37]. While we see no evidence of cross-domain transfer of arsC genes, a number of HGT events could explain

Page 4 of 10
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Evolutionary Biology 2003, 3

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/3/18

Figure 2
Evolutionary distance tree based on arsC gene sequences
Evolutionary distance tree based on arsC gene sequences. The tree was constructed by neighbor joining methods
using 408 informative positions. Numbers represent percentages of 1000 bootstraps and are only shown for bootstrap values
<80%. Plasmid-borne arsC genes are indicated by "plasmid" following the organism name. Names in boxes represent branches
that are inconsistent with the 16S rRNA tree.

Page 5 of 10
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Evolutionary Biology 2003, 3

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/3/18

Figure 3
Maximum parsimony tree based on arsC gene sequences
Maximum parsimony tree based on arsC gene sequences.The tree was constructed using the same 408 informative
positions used in the ED analysis. Numbers represent percentages of 1000 bootstraps and are only shown for bootstrap values
<80%. Plasmid-borne arsC genes are indicated by "plasmid" following the organism name. Names in boxes represent branches
that are inconsistent with the 16S rRNA tree.

Page 6 of 10
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Evolutionary Biology 2003, 3

some of the discrepancies between 16S rRNA-based and
arsC-based phylogenies. HGT of arsC from an ancestral
low GC Gram-positive bacterium to an ancestral cyanobacterium seems likely, and a similar HGT event from
ancestral Actinobacteria to the Streptococci would explain
the unexpected phylogeny of the Streptococcus arsC
sequences. Similar gene transfer events from the low GC
Gram-positives to F. nucleatum could also have occurred,
but with an arsC sequence only available from a single
member of the Fusobacteria it is difficult to draw conclusions. The paraphyletic arsC sequences in the non-enteric
γ-Proteobacteria likewise may have arisen from HGT
events, although the difficulty in resolving the affiliation
of some of these sequences makes speculation about their
evolution premature. Indeed, the exact placement of
many of the non-orthologous arsC genes was difficult and
poor bootstrap support for some nodes suggests that
refinement of arsC phylogeny as more sequences become
available should be an ongoing process. Regardless, a
number of bacteria possess arsC genes that are inconsistent with established phylogenies, and HGT events are one
possible explanation. It should also be noted that some of
the non-orthologous sequences represent putative arsC
genes identified from ORF's, rather than confirmed arsenate reductases. These ORF's show homology to identified
arsC genes, but may not necessarily code for a functional
enzyme. Thus, some of the non-orthologous sequences
might represent elevated genotypic variation if the organism has no selective pressure to maintain a functional arsC
gene.
We were hoping that patterns in the phylogeny of plasmid-borne arsC genes might indicate whether HGT of
arsC genes has occurred (or is still occurring) in recent
times. Specifically, if the plasmid-borne arsenate reductases are similar, this would suggest a common origin for
these genes, which must ultimately be chromosomal.
However, the plasmid-borne arsC genes appear to be paraphyletic and clearly separate into very different arsC
types (Figures 2 and 3). The two major groups of plasmidborne genes are those of the Staphylococci (which were
the first arsC genes to be recognized [17,18]) and those of
the Enterobacteriales. Both of these groups of plasmidborne genes are similar to the chromosomal genes found
in related organisms. The only exception is the arsC found
on the pKW301 plasmid of A. multivorum, which shows
high sequence similarity to the plasmid-borne arsC
sequences found in the Enterobacteriales, strongly suggesting relatively recent plasmid transfer between a member of this group and A. multivorum. Indeed, the ars
operon found in A. multivorum is expressed and confers
arsenate resistance when transferred to E. coli [21]. Three
other types of plasmid-borne arsC genes are found in R.
solanacearum, Clostridium acetobutylicum, and Halobacterium halobium, demonstrating that plasmid-borne arsC

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/3/18

genes are phylogenetically widespread and suggesting
multiple incidences of chromosomal-plasmid transfer.
The arsC sequence of C. acetobutylicum is typical of the
clostridial arsC genes, and also shows some similarity to
the arsenate reductase sequence in L. interrogans (a Spirochete). Thus, it is possible that ancestral clostridial plasmids may have transferred ars genes to the Spirochetes. As
well as C. acetobutylicum, two other bacteria were represented by both chromosomal and plasmid-borne arsC
sequences. The two arsC genes of E. coli K12 are similar,
but they are equally similar to the plasmid-borne genes of
other enteric bacteria. The plasmid-borne arsC gene from
Salmonella typhimurium, shows little similarity to it's chromosomal equivalent, and appears to be related to the
other arsC genes found in plasmids in the Enterobacteriales. The high similarity (at least 70%) between all the
enteric plasmids suggests a common source, which from
this analysis appears to be very similar to the E. coli chromosomal arsC gene. However, it is clear that within the
enterics, relationships based on arsC do not parallel relationships based on 16S rRNA, and significant genetic
exchange within this group (possibly inside a host organism) has likely occurred.

Conclusions
Despite the suggestion of HGT and duplication events, the
arsC phylogeny suggests that arsenate reductase is an evolutionarily old enzyme, a hypothesis that was recently
suggested for arsenite oxidase [38]. This is the first phylogenetic analysis of an arsenic redox active gene to include
all three domains and the Archaea and Bacteria were
clearly separated, with S. cerevisiae subsequently branching from Archaea. Thus, the arsC gene, and by extension,
arsenic resistance mechanisms, must have been present in
early organisms, either in the last universal ancestor or
after the divergence of the two prokaryotic domains (i.e.
in an ancestral bacterium or archaean). In the latter case,
early HGT event(s) must have transferred arsenate resistance to the other domain, followed by subsequent
divergence to the phylogeny seen today. Such gene
exchange between Archaea and primitive Bacteria has certainly taken place [36] and makes absolute statements
about the initial origin of genes difficult to make. Regardless, it seems likely that arsenate resistance developed
early in the evolution of microorganisms. Recent ideas on
the origin of life suggest that early cellular structures were
abiotic iron-sulfur formations at submarine hydrothermal
vents in the Hadean ocean, in which basic biochemical
and metabolic processes could have developed before the
formation of cell membranes [39,40]. As well as iron and
sulfur, hydrothermal areas are often are often characterized by high levels of arsenic [41] and may even contain
arsenic redox active microbial communities [42]. Given
the integral role of phosphate in early (and current) cellular metabolism [39], an ability to reduce the levels of arse-

Page 7 of 10
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Evolutionary Biology 2003, 3

nate (a phosphate analog) might have been an essential
biochemical process. There would have been selective
pressure to develop an arsenate reductase that could
change this arsenate to arsenite, and this early evolution
of an arsC-like ancestor coupled with sequence divergence
and HGT would result in the diversity and widespread distribution of arsC genes seen in microorganisms today.

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/3/18

imported into ARB. Because three arsC genes have been
reported for different strains/plasmids of E. coli, and two
arsC genes have been identified for both Salmonella typhimurium and Clostridium acetobutylicum (plasmid and
chromosomal for each; Table 1 [see Additional file 1])
only one 16S rRNA sequence was used for each to avoid
potential biases and inaccurate attractions due to
sequence identity.

Methods
Sequence acquisition and alignment
Sequences of arsC genes were obtained from GenBank
[43] and were characterized into two broad types: confirmed arsC genes (i.e. those sequences that were identified in studies that explicitly tested arsenate reduction
and/or resistance in that given organism), and putative
arsC genes (i.e. open reading frames (ORFs) obtained
from genome projects that showed homology to known
arsC genes). Genes were also noted as being either chromosomal or plasmid-borne. A total of 60 sequences were
analyzed consisting of 54 bacterial, 5 archaeal, and the
Arr2 gene of Saccharomyces cerevisae. Accession numbers
for these sequences are given in Table 1 [see Additional
file 1]. The Arr2 gene (or ACR2 [24]) has been identified
as coding for a protein necessary for arsenate resistance in
yeast, and appears to have some homology to prokaryotic
arsC genes. Sequences were imported into the ARB software package (distributed by W. Ludwig and O. Strunk,
Technical University of Munich, Germany; http://
www.arb-home.de/) running on a SuSE Linux 6.2
platform.

In ARB, amino acid sequences were derived from nucleotide sequences using the Translate DNA to Protein function and the standard genetic code. Because some arsC
genes were incomplete, all three possible reading frames
were examined to ensure correct translation. Amino acid
sequences of the confirmed bacterial arsenate reductases
(12 total) were initially aligned automatically using the
Fast Aligner function of ARB Edit 4.1, and then manually
adjusted to ensure that secondary structure considerations
of the arsenate reductase protein were met. The secondary
structure of E. coli arsenate reductase (17978 in the NCBI
Molecular Modeling Database, [44]) was visualized using
Cn3D 3.0 and One-D Viewer 1.0 (available from http://
www.ncbi.nih.gov) and used as a model for arsenate
reductase secondary structure. Nucleotide sequences of
these confirmed arsC genes were aligned according to the
amino acid alignment, and the putative arsC ORFs subsequently aligned to these confirmed sequences. Multiple
alignments of all arsC genes used in this study are presented as an additional ARB file [see Additional file 2].
Aligned 16S rRNA sequences of all organisms used in the
arsC analysis (with the exception of an arsC sequence
obtained from an unknown Proteobacterium) were
obtained from the Ribosomal Database Project [45] and

Phylogenetic analyses
The aligned 16S rRNA sequences (55) were used to construct a baseline phylogenetic tree to serve as a comparison for arsC sequences. 1326 informative positions
(corresponding to E. coli positions 140–1475) were compared using evolutionary distance (ED) methods. An ED
tree was constructed in ARB for the 56 16S rRNA
sequences using neighbor joining [46] with 1000 bootstraps. Distance and maximum parsimony (MP) methods
were used to construct arsC trees using aligned nucleotide
sequences. Both methods used all 60 aligned arsC nucleotide sequences. The ED tree was constructed in ARB
using neighbor joining following a simple Jukes and Cantor model with the Olsen correction. Because visual examination of the aligned sequences revealed a number of
gaps suggesting insertion/deletion events within different
taxa, gaps were treated as a fifth base for construction.
Thus, ED phylogeny was based on a total of 408 informative positions with 1000 bootstraps performed as part of
the procedure. MP phylogeny used the same informative
positions and number of bootstraps, and was performed
using the PHYLIP package included with ARB.

Authors' contributions
CRJ carried out the phylogenetic analyses, participated in
sequence alignment and drafted the manuscript. SLD
obtained the sequence information and participated in
sequence alignment. Both authors read and approved the
final manuscript.

Page 8 of 10
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Evolutionary Biology 2003, 3

Additional material

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/3/18

14.
15.

Additional File 1
Excel file showing the sources of the sequences used in both arsC and 16S
rRNA phylogenetic analyses. Each arsC sequence was designated as either
plasmid or chromosomal, and as either confirmed (based on known
arsenic resistance) or putative (from whole genome sequencing).
Click here for file
[http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/14712148-3-18-S1.xls]

16.

Additional File 2

19.

ARB data file containing multiple alignments of all arsC and 16S rRNA
sequences used in this manuscript. File requires the ARB package for
Linux or Solaris systems, freely available from http://www.arb-home.de
Click here for file
[http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/14712148-3-18-S2.arb]

17.
18.

20.

21.

22.

Acknowledgements
Funding for this research was provided by award LEQSF(2002-05)-RD-A25 from the Louisiana Board of Regents Support Fund, Research and Development Program, to CRJ. Rick Miller, Evelyn F. Jackson and two anonymous
reviewers provided useful comments on an earlier version of this
manuscript.

References
1.
2.
3.

4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.

13.

Tamaki S and Frankenberger WT Jr: Environmental biochemistry
of arsenic Rev Environ Cont Toxicol 1992, 124:79-110.
Cervantes C, Ji G, Ramirez JL and Silver S: Resistance to arsenic
compounds in microorganisms FEMS Microbiol Rev 1994, 15:355367.
Anderson GL, Williams J and Hille R: The purification and characterization of arsenite oxidase from Alcaligenes faecalis, a
molybdenum-containing hydroxylase J Biol Chem 1992,
267:23674-23682.
Muller D, Lièvremont D, Simeonova DD, Hubert J-C and Lett M-C:
Arsenite oxidase aox genes from a metal-resistant β-Proteobacterium J Bacteriol 2003, 185:135-141.
Abdrashitova SA, Abdullina GG and Ilyaletdinov AN: Role of arsenites in lipid peroxidation in Pseudomonas putida cells oxidizing arsenite Mikrobiologiya 1986, 55:212-216.
Abdrashitova SA, Abdullina GG, Mynbaeva BN and Ilyaletdinov AN:
Oxidation of iron and manganese by arsenic-oxidizing
bacteria Mikrobiologiya 1990, 59:85-89.
Ahmann D, Roberts AL, Krumholz LR and Morel FMM: Microbe
grows by reducing arsenic Nature 1994, 371:750.
Newman DK, Ahmann D and Morel FMM: A brief review of microbial arsenate respiration Geomicrobiol 1998, 15:255-268.
Stolz JF and Oremland RS: Bacterial respiration of arsenic and
selenium FEMS Microbiol Rev 1999, 23:615-627.
Huber R, Sacher M, Vollmann A, Huber H and Rose D: Respiration
of arsenate and selenate by hyperthermophilic archaea System Appl Microbiol 2000, 23:305-314.
Ilyaletdinov AN and Abdrashitova SA: Autotrophic oxidation of
arsenic by a culture of Pseudomonas arsenitoxidans Mikrobiologiya 1981, 50:197-204.
Santini JM, Sly LI, Schnagl RD and Macy JM: A new chemolithoautotrophic arsenite-oxidizing bacterium isolated from a gold
mine: phylogenetic, physiological, and preliminary biochemical studies Appl Environ Microbiol 2000, 66:92-97.
Ji G, Silver S, Garber EAE, Ohtake H, Cervantes C and Corbisier P:
Bacterial molecular genetics and enzymatic transformations
of arsenate, arsenite, and chromate In Biohydrometallurgical Technologies Edited by: Torma AE, Apel ML, Brierly CL. Warrendale, PA: The
Minerals, Metals & Materials Society; 1993:529-539.

23.

24.

25.
26.
27.

28.

29.
30.
31.
32.

33.
34.
35.
36.
37.

Kaur P and Rosen BP: Plasmid-encoded resistance to arsenic
and antimony Plasmid 1992, 27:29-40.
Wu J and Rosen BP: The arsD gene encodes a second trans-acting regulatory protein of the plasmid-encoded arsenical
resistance operon Mol Microbiol 1993, 8:615-623.
Neyt CN, Iriarte M, Thi VH and Cornelis GR: Virulence and
arsenic resistance in Yersiniae J Bacteriol 1997, 179:612-619.
Ji G and Silver S: Regulation and expression of the arsenic
resistance operon from Staphylococcus aureus plasmid pI258
J Bacterio 1992, 174:3684-3694.
Rosenstein R, Peschel A, Wieland B and Gotz F: Expression and
regulation of the antimonite, arsenite, and arsenate resistance operon of the Staphylococcus xylosus plasmid pSX267 J
Bacteriol 1992, 174:3676-3683.
Carlin A, Shi W, Dey S and Rosen BP: The ars operon of
Escherichia coli confers arsenical and antimonial resistance J
Bacteriol 1995, 177:981-986.
Diorio C, Cai J, Marmor J, Shinder R and DuBrow MS: An
Escherichia coli chromosomal ars operon homolog is functional in arsenic detoxification and is conserved in Gramnegative bacteria J Bacteriol 1995, 177:2050-2056.
Suzuki K, Wakao N, Kimura T, Sakka K and Ohmiya K: Expression
and regulation of the arsenic resistance operon of
Acidiphilum multivorum AIU 301 plasmid pKW301 in
Escherichia coli Appl Environ Microbiol 1998, 64:411-418.
Sato T and Kobayashi Y: The ars operon in the skin element of
Bacillus subtilis confers resistance to arsenate and arsenite J
Bacteriol 1998, 180:1655-1661.
Cai J, Salmon K and DuBrow MS: A chromosomal ars operon
homologue of Pseudomonas aeruginosa confers increased
resistance to arsenic and antimony in Escherichia coli Microbiology 1998, 144:2705-2713.
Bobrowicz P, Wysocki R, Owsianik G, Goffeau A and Ulaszewski S:
Isolation of three contiguous genes, ACR1, ACR2 and ACR3,
involved in resistance to arsenic compounds in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae Yeast 1997, 13:819-828.
Cullen WR and Reimer KJ: Arsenic speciation in the
environment Rev 1989, 89:713-764.
Ferguson JF and Gavis J: A review of the arsenic cycle in natural
waters Water Res 1972, 6:1259-1274.
Butcher BG, Deane SM and Rawlings DE: The chromosomal
arsenic resistance genes of Thiobacillus ferrooxidans have an
unusual arrangement and confer increased arsenic and antimony resistance to Escherichia coli Appl Environ Microbiol 2000,
66:1826-1833.
Saltikov CW and Olson BH: Homology of Escherichia coli R773
arsA ,arsB, and arsC genes in arsenic-resistant bacteria isolated from raw sewage and arsenic-enriched creek waters
Appl Environ Microbiol 2002, 68:280-288.
Jackson CR, Jackson EF, Dugas SL, Gamble K and Williams SE: Microbial transformations of arsenite and arsenate in natural
environments Recent Res Devel Microbiol 2003.
Mukhopadhyay R, Rosen BP, Phung LT and Silver S: Microbial
arsenic: from geocycles to genes and enzymes FEMS Microbiol
Rev 2002, 26:311-325.
Woese CR: Bacterial evolution Microbiol Rev 1987, 51:221-271.
Wolf YI, Rogozin IB, Grishin NV, Tatusov RL and Koonin EV:
Genome trees constructed using five different approaches
suggest new major bacterial clades BMC Evolutionary Biology
2001, 1:8.
Doolittle RF: Convergent evolution: The need to be explicit
Trends Biochem Sci 1994, 19:15-18.
Nei M and Kumar S: Molecular Evolution and Phylogenetics
New York: Oxford University Press; 2000.
Aravind L, Tatusov RL, Wolf YI, Walker DR and Koonin EV: Evidence for massive gene exchange between archaeal and bacterial hyperthermophiles Trends Genet 1998, 14:442-444.
Brown JR and Doolittle WF: Archaea and the prokaryote-toeukaryote transition Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 1997, 61:456-502.
Mirkin BG, Fenner TI, Galperin MY and Koonin EV: Algorithms for
computing parsimonious evolutionary scenarios for genome
evolution, the last universal common ancestor and
dominance of horizontal gene transfer in the evolution of
prokaryotes BMC Evolutionary Biology 2003, 3:2.

Page 9 of 10
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Evolutionary Biology 2003, 3

38.
39.
40.

41.
42.

43.
44.

45.

46.

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/3/18

LeBrun E, Brugna M, Baymann F, Muller D, Lièvremont D, Lett M-C
and Nitschke W: Arsenite oxidase, and ancient bioenergetic
enzyme Mol Biol Evol 2003, 20:686-693.
Russell MJ and Hall AJ: The emergence of life from iron monosulphide bubbles at a submarine hydrothermal redox and pH
front J Geol Soc Lond 1997, 154:377-402.
Martin W and Russell MJ: On the origin of cells: a hypothesis for
the evolutionary transitions from abiotic geochemistry to
chemoautotrophic prokaryotes, and from prokaryotes to
nucleated cells Phil Trans R Soc Lond 2003, 358:59-85.
Langner HW, Jackson CR, McDermott TR and Inskeep WP: Rapid
oxidation of arsenite in a hot spring ecosystem in Yellowstone National Park Environ Sci Technol 2001, 35:3302-3309.
Jackson CR, Langner HW, Donahoe-Christiansen J, Inskeep WP and
McDermott TR: Molecular analysis of microbial community
structure in an arsenite-oxidizing acidic thermal spring Environ Microbiol 2001, 3:532-542.
Benson DA, Karsch-Mizrachi I, Lipman DJ, Ostell J, Rapp BA and
Wheeler DL: GenBank Nucleic Acids Res 2000, 28:15-18.
Martin P, DeMel S, Shi J, Gladysheva T, Gatti DL, Rosen BP and
Edwards BF: Insights into the structure, solvation, and mechanism of ArsC arsenate reductase, a novel arsenic detoxification enzyme Structure 2001, 9:1071-1081.
Maidak BL, Cole JR, Lilburn TG, Parker CT Jr, Saxman PR, Stredwick
JM, Garrity GM, Li B, Olsen GJ, Pramanik S, Schmidt TM and Tiedje
JM: The RDP (Ribosomal Database Project) continues Nucleic
Acids Re 2000, 28:173-174.
Saitou N and Nei M: The neighbor-joining method: A new
method for reconstructing phylogenetic trees Mol Biol Evol
1987, 4:406-425.

Publish with Bio Med Central and every
scientist can read your work free of charge
"BioMed Central will be the most significant development for
disseminating the results of biomedical researc h in our lifetime."
Sir Paul Nurse, Cancer Research UK

Your research papers will be:
available free of charge to the entire biomedical community
peer reviewed and published immediately upon acceptance
cited in PubMed and archived on PubMed Central
yours — you keep the copyright

BioMedcentral

Submit your manuscript here:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/info/publishing_adv.asp

Page 10 of 10
(page number not for citation purposes)

</pre>
</body>
</html>
