<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Expression of myriapod pair rule gene orthologs</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="EvoDevo 2011, 2:5. doi:10.1186/2041-9139-2-5"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Ralf Janssen"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Janssen et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:5
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/5

RESEARCH

Open Access

Expression of myriapod pair rule gene orthologs
Ralf Janssen1*, Graham E Budd1, Nikola-Michael Prpic2, Wim GM Damen3

Abstract
Background: Segmentation is a hallmark of the arthropods; most knowledge about the molecular basis of
arthropod segmentation comes from work on the fly Drosophila melanogaster. In this species a hierarchic cascade
of segmentation genes subdivides the blastoderm stepwise into single segment wide regions. However,
segmentation in the fly is a derived feature since all segments form virtually simultaneously. Conversely, in the vast
majority of arthropods the posterior segments form one at a time from a posterior pre-segmental zone. The pair
rule genes (PRGs) comprise an important level of the Drosophila segmentation gene cascade and are indeed the
first genes that are expressed in typical transverse stripes in the early embryo. Information on expression and
function of PRGs outside the insects, however, is scarce.
Results: Here we present the expression of the pair rule gene orthologs in the pill millipede Glomeris marginata
(Myriapoda: Diplopoda). We find evidence that these genes are involved in segmentation and that components of
the hierarchic interaction of the gene network as found in insects may be conserved. We further provide evidence
that segments are formed in a single-segment periodicity rather than in pairs of two like in another myriapod, the
centipede Strigamia maritima. Finally we show that decoupling of dorsal and ventral segmentation in Glomeris
appears already at the level of the PRGs.
Conclusions: Although the pair rule gene network is partially conserved among insects and myriapods, some
aspects of PRG interaction are, as suggested by expression pattern analysis, convergent, even within the Myriapoda.
Conserved expression patterns of PRGs in insects and myriapods, however, may represent ancestral features
involved in segmenting the arthropod ancestor.

Background
The expression of the pair rule genes (PRGs) in seven
transversal stripes is the first sign of metamerization in
Drosophila. Primary PRGs are regulated in a double segmental periodicity by upstream-acting maternal-effect
genes and zygotically-expressed gap genes at the blastoderm stage. The primary PRGs then regulate the expression of the secondary PRGs in a similar double
segmental pattern (reviewed in [1,2]). This expression
pattern in alternating segments is also reflected in the
phenotypes of null mutants of these genes: the loss of
alternating segmental structures (hence, the name “pair
rule”) [3]. Later in the extended germ band stage secondary stripes of many PRGs intercalate between the
primary stripes and the genes function as segment
polarity genes at this time of development [4,5].
* Correspondence: ralf.janssen@geo.uu.se
1
Uppsala University, Department of Earth Sciences, Palaeobiology, Villavägen
16, SE-752 36 Uppsala, Sweden
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

However, this mode of segmentation where all segments are produced simultaneously (the so-called longgerm developmental mode) is derived within the insects
and is apparently correlated with the high speed of Drosophila embryonic development [6,7]. In the majority of
arthropods (including many holometabolous insects)
only the anterior segments form simultaneously, and all
posterior segments are formed sequentially from a posterior segment addition zone (SAZ) [8]. This mode of
segment formation is called the short-germ developmental mode. Theoretically, this mode of sequential segment
formation does not require the pair rule gene mechanisms operating during Drosophila segmentation. However, studies in the beetle Tribolium castaneum have
shown that although the developmental mode is that of
a typical short-germ arthropod, some of the PRG orthologs function as “true” pair rule genes [9,10]. Functional
studies in more basal hemimetabolous insects, such as
Oncopeltus fasciatus or Gryllus bimaculatus, support
the idea that PRGs are involved in segmentation, but

© 2011 Janssen et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Janssen et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:5
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/5

question the existence of a pair rule mechanism [11,12].
Studies on the expression of PRGs in chelicerates [13],
crustaceans [14,15] and myriapods [16] support this thesis. An exception is seen in the centipede Strigamia
maritima, where posterior segments are initially determined in a two-segmental periodicity, revitalizing the
question of whether an ancestral pair rule mechanism
might exist in arthropods [17,18].
Part of the hierarchic interactions of the PRGs as
known from Drosophila is also conserved in the beetle
Tribolium [9,10] and may also be conserved in a spider
[13]. However, some levels of PRG interaction are
obviously divergent and it is, thus, unclear to what
extent the interactions of PRGs are generally conserved
in arthropods.
In this paper we present the expression profiles of
orthologs of most of the known Drosophila PRG orthologs in the pill millipede Glomeris marginata during
trunk segmentation. The data support the idea that PRG
orthologs are generally involved in segmentation, but do
not function as classical pair rule genes like in Drosophila and Tribolium. Our data show that posterior segments are formed one at a time and not in a double
segmental periodicity. The interaction of PRG orthologs
in Glomeris, as inferred from gene expression data, displays more similarities to Tribolium than to Drosophila.
Also some of the PRG orthologs appear to have either
ventral or dorsal specific functions, suggesting that the
earlier reported decoupling of ventral and dorsal segmentation [19,20] is already obvious with the function
of the PRGs. Finally, we discuss our data in the context
of the assumed arthropod segmentation clock acting in
the addition of posterior segments under the control of
Delta-Notch signaling.

Materials and methods
Gene cloning

RNA isolation and cDNA synthesis were carried out as
described previously [19]. Initial fragments of the Glomeris even-skipped, runt and hairy-1 gene orthologs
were amplified using degenerate primer sets directed
against the homeodomain (for even-skipped), the runt
domain (for runt) and the helix-loop-helix domain (for
hairy), respectively, as described by Damen et al. 2000
[21]. The degenerate primers for the isolation of Glomeris sloppy-paired, odd-paired, odd-skipped and pairberry-1 orthologs have been described in Damen et al.
2005 [13] and Schoppmeier and Damen 2005 [22]. To
obtain larger fragments of the genes we subsequently
performed 3’-RACE PCR using the MARATHON RACE
Kit (Clontech, Heidelberg, Germany).
Sequences of all fragments were determined from both
strands of several clones on a 3100 automated sequencer, using Big Dye dye-terminators version 3.1 (Big Dye

Page 2 of 15

Terminator Cycle Sequencing Kit; Perkin-Elmer Applied
Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). The sequences of
Glomeris pair rule gene orthologs are available under
the accession numbers AM279687 (Gm-eve), AM279688
(Gm-h1), FR715033 (Gm-h2), FR715033 (Gm-h3),
AM279692 (Gm-run), FR715039 (Gm-slp), FR715035
(Gm-opa), FR715036 (Gm-odd), FR715037 (Gm-pby1)
and FR715038 (Gm-pby2).
Sequence analysis

For the similarity analysis, we searched GenBank [23]
using the pairwise alignment program Gapped BLAST
[24]. Sequences were aligned using the multiple alignment program Clustal X [25]. The alignments were calculated from the blocks substitution matrix BLOSUM
62 using gap costs at 20 for existence and 0.2 for extension. Maximum likelihood analysis was performed using
the Quartet Puzzling method [26] as implemented in
PAUP 4.0b10 [27].
In situ hybridization and nuclei staining

Whole mount in situ hybridizations were performed as
described in Prpic and Tautz (2003) [28]. Double in situ
staining with digoxigenin (DIG) and fluorescein (FL)
labeled RNA probes in parallel is described in Janssen et
al. (2008) [29]. For reasons of enhanced signal clearness
(yolk stains yellow when using INT/BCIP or FastRed)
embryos were flat mounted prior to photography.
A detailed in situ hybridization protocol is available
from the authors upon request.
Cell nuclei distribution was visualized by using the
fluorescent dye 4-6-Diamidin-2-phenylindol (DAPI).
Incubation in 1 μg/ml DAPI in phosphate buffered saline with 0.1% Tween-20 (PBST) for 30 minutes was followed by extensive washes in PBST. Embryos were
analyzed under a Leica dissection microscope (Leica,
Heerbrugg, Switzerland) equipped with either an Axiocam (Zeiss, Jena, Germany) or a D70 digital camera
(Nikon, Tokyo, Japan). Brightness, contrast, and color
values were adjusted in all images using the image processing software Adobe Photoshop CS2 (Version 9.0.1
for Apple Macintosh (Adobe Systems Inc. San Jose, CA,
USA).

Results
Transcripts and phylogenetic analysis

We recovered gene fragments with significant similarity
to the even-skipped, runt, sloppy-paired, odd-skipped
and odd-paired genes from Drosophila melanogaster
and other arthropods that we designated as Glomeris
even-skipped (Gm-eve), Glomeris runt (Gm-run), Glomeris sloppy-paired (Gm-slp), Glomeris odd-skipped
(Gm-odd) and Glomeris odd-paired (Gm-opa), respectively (Figure 1). The Gm-eve fragment covers almost

Janssen et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:5
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/5

Page 3 of 15

Figure 1 Phylogenetic analysis of Glomeris pair rule gene orthologs. (A) Phylograms of orthologs of the Drosophila pair rule genes Evenskipped, Odd-skipped, Odd-paired and Sloppy-paired from various arthropods and the mouse. Closely-related genes from the Drosophila
genome serve as outgroups. Un-rooted majority rule consensus trees are shown, computed from 1000 intermediate trees produced with the
Quartet Puzzling Method [25]. Reliability values are indicated at the edges. Abbreviations for animals: Cs, Cupiennius salei (spider); Dm, Drosophila
melanogaster (fly); Gm, Glomeris marginata (millipede); La, Lithobius atkinsoni (centipede); Mm, Mus musculus (mouse); Sm; Strigamia maritima
(centipede); Tribolium castaneum (beetle). Abbreviations for gene names: LMD, Lame duck; SUG, Sugarbabe; BOWL, Brother of odd with entrails
limited; CROC, Crocodile; EVE, Even-skipped; EVX, vertebrate Even-skipped ortholog; FKH, Forkhead; FKHBG, Forkhead box G1; ODD, Odd-skipped;
ODDR, Odd-skipped-related; OPA, Odd-paired; OPR, Odd-paired-related; PB, Proboscipedia; SLP, Sloppy-paired; SOB, Sister of odd and bowl. (B)
Alignment of Runt, Hairy and Paired sequences. Orthologs from Drosophila melanogaster, Tribolium castaneum, Cupiennius salei and mouse are
aligned with the available Glomeris marginata gene fragments. Aligned is part of the Runt domain and the C-terminal consensus (for Runt); part
of the bHLH domain and the orange domain (for Hairy); part of the Paired domain, the octapeptide and part of the homeodomain (for Paired/
Pairberry). Dashes denote identical amino acids, dots indicate gaps introduced to improve the alignment. Question marks stand for missing
sequence information. Species abbreviations as in (A). Gene name abbreviations as in (A). Additional abbreviations: DPN, Deadpan; GSB,
Gooseberry; GSBN, Gooseberry-neuro; Pax3/7, Pax group III genes; PRD, Paired; H, Hairy; HES, Hairy/Enhancer of split; LZ, Lozenge; PBY, Pairberry;
RUN, Runt.

Janssen et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:5
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/5

the complete homeodomain (except its very N-terminal
end), the complete C-terminal part of the open reading
frame (ORF) and a subsequent 3’untranslated region
(UTR) ending in a poly-A tail. Within a reasonable distance from the poly-A sequence is a putative polyadenylation signal (AATAAA). The Gm-run fragment covers
most of the runt-domain (except its N-terminal end),
the complete C-terminal part of the ORF including the
characteristic C-terminal WRPY motif (Figure 1B) [30].
Remarkably, this C-terminal WRPY motif is not at the
very end of the ORF in Glomeris as it is in other arthropod and vertebrate runt orthologs, but is followed by a
sequence of an additional six amino acids (Figure 1B).
The subsequent 3’UTR ends in a poly-A stretch, but an
obvious polyadenylation signal is not present.
The Gm-slp fragment encodes the C-terminal part of
the protein including part of the forkhead-domain and
the complete 3’-UTR as indicated by the presence of a
putative polyadenylation signal (AATAAA). Gm-odd
and Gm-opa encode part of the zinc-finger domains.
The 5’and 3’ends of these two genes have not been
recovered.
We isolated three gene fragments that show significant
similarities to Drosophila hairy (Figure 1B). Drosophila
possesses several bHLH transcription factors related to
hairy with deadpan and side showing most similarities
to hairy (Figure 1B). Since the order of branches in our
phylogenetic analysis is statistically unresolved (trees not
shown; cf. [21]) we designated the Glomeris fragments
simply as Gm-h1, Gm-h2, and Gm-h3. All fragments
encode the bHLH-domain (except its basic N-terminal
part), the orange-domain, and the complete C-terminal
part of the ORF each ending in a WRPW motif which,
like the orange-domain, is characteristic for the hairyclass of bHLH-domain genes. All Glomeris hairy fragments contain a 3’UTR ending in a poly-A tail with a
putative polyadenylation signal (that is, AATAAA for
Gm-h1 and ATTAAA for Gm-h2 and Gm-h3) just
upstream.
We obtained partial fragments for two Glomeris PaxIII
group genes, which we named pairberry-1 (Gm-pby1)
and pairberry-2 (Gm-pby-2) because of their sequence
similarity to the Drosophila PaxIII group genes (that is,
paired, gooseberry-neuro and gooseberry). The conceptually
translated protein fragment contains the paired-domain
(except its very N-terminal part), the octapeptide domain
and the homeodomain (except its very C-terminal part)
(Figure 1B).
Expression of primary PRG orthologs during Glomeris
trunk segmentation

Three of the known pair rule genes (PRGs) from Drosophila, that is, even-skipped, runt and hairy, are described
as primary since they act upstream of the so-called

Page 4 of 15

secondary PRGs and control the expression of the latter
[1]. The following section focuses on the expression of
the orthologs of the primary PRGs during trunk segmentation in Glomeris.
Gm-eve is expressed in segmental stripes. During the
process of segment formation it is dynamically
expressed in the SAZ (Figures 2 A-D, M and 3A, B).
This dynamic expression starts with two small patchlike expression domains on either side of the proctodaeum in the posterior part of the SAZ (Figure 2B, D)
that soon after broadens into a single patch-like expression domain (Figure 2A) and finally refines into a single
stripe of expression in the very anterior of the nascent
segment and posterior adjacent to the segmental expression of engrailed (en) (Figures 2A-D, M and 3A, B).
This segmental eve expression covers the ventral and
dorsal tissue in nascent segments and the SAZ (Figure
2C, D). The dorsal segmental expression persists slightly
longer than the ventral (Figure 2C, D). eve is expressed
in circles surrounding the proctodaeum in the most
posterior segments (Figures 2M and 3A). At later stages
this is less obvious since the SAZ and its surrounding
tissue narrows. Apart from its expression during segment formation, Gm-eve is also expressed in the developing ventral nervous system (CNS) (Figure 2C, D).
Gm-run is expressed in segmental stripes at early segmentation stages (Figure 2E). Like Gm-eve, Gm-run is also
dynamically expressed in the SAZ (Figures 2E-L, N and
3C, D). In contrast to the dynamic expression of eve, run
initially appears in a small domain in the SAZ anterior
adjacent to the proctodaeum (Figures 2E, G and 3C),
that later broadens and finally fills the complete SAZ
(Figure 2F, H). Then this domain disappears from the SAZ
and only leaves a distinct stripe of expression in the very
anterior of the nascent segment (Figures. 2K and 3C, D).
The ventral portion of this stripe disappears soon after
while the dorsal part persists (Figure 2L). As described for
eve, the expression of run in the most posterior segments
is also in circles (Figure 2N). The segmental expression
persists longer in younger stages (Figures 2E-H and 3C)
than in older stages (Figure 3D). Apart from its expression
during segment formation, Gm-run is also expressed in
broad, but well-defined, domains in the CNS (Figures 2GL, N and 3D) including the ocular region (Figures 2F-H
and 3C, D). This expression is initially weaker in the
antennal and premandibular segment (Figures 2F-H and
3C). The dorsal expression in the postmaxillary segment is
enhanced (Figures 2H and 3D).
Gm-h1 is expressed in transversal segmental stripes at
early segmentation stages (Figure 4A). Unlike eve and
run, h1 is not expressed dynamically in the SAZ, but
only appears at the very anterior of it, where it covers
ventral and dorsal tissue (Figure 4A-C). Again the segmental expression is more obvious at younger stages. In

Janssen et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:5
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/5

Page 5 of 15

Figure 2 Expression of Glomeris even-skipped and runt. Expression of even-skipped (A-D, M) and runt (E-L, N). (A’-D’) show DAPI counterstaining of the embryos shown in (A-D). (A) Stage 1 embryo. Segmental stripes in every segment. Bracket marks premandibular and mandibular
segments. Asterisk marks stripe of expression in the SAZ. (B) Stage 1.1 embryo. Arrow points to fading ventral expression. Note that the
expression in the SAZ in (A) (asterisk) is now in the nascent segment anterior to the SAZ (asterisk in (B)) and a new expression domain is
forming in the SAZ (filled circle). (C) Stage 1.2 embryo. Arrow points to expression in the CNS. Note that the expression domain seen in the SAZ
in (B) has developed into a single broad domain (filled circle). (D) Stage 2 embryo. Former expression in the SAZ has transformed into a stripe in
the nascent segment (filled circle). A new expression domain forms in the SAZ (open circle). (A’-D’) DAPI counter-staining of the embryos shown
in (A-D). (E) Stage 0.4 embryo. Bracket marks premandibular and antennal segments. Expression in the SAZ (asterisk). (F) Stage 1 embryo. Arrow
points to disappearing ventral expression. Expression seen in the SAZ in A now lies in the nascent segment anterior to the SAZ (asterisk). A new
domain of expression has formed in the SAZ (filled circle). Bracket as in (E). (G) Stage 1.2 embryo. Arrow points to expression in the CNS.
Expression in the SAZ seen in (F) is now in the nascent segment anterior to the SAZ (filled circle). Expression seen in the SAZ in (E) (asterisk) is
now one segment anterior to it. A new domain appears in the SAZ (open circle). (H) Stage 2 embryo. Arrow as in (G). Expression in the SAZ
(open circle) expands. Arrowhead points to strengthened expression in the postmaxillary segment. (I-L) Dynamic expression of runt in the SAZ in
four consecutive developmental stages (that is, stage 3.1 to 3.4). (M, N) Concentric expression of even-skipped (M) and runt (N) around the
proctodaeum. In all pictures anterior is to the left. Abbreviations: an, antennae; ic, intercalary (premandibular) segment; md, mandibular segment;
oc, ocular field; P, proctodaeum; SAZ, segment addition zone; T, trunk segment.

Janssen et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:5
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/5

Page 6 of 15

Figure 3 Double staining of Glomeris PRGs (purple) with engrailed (red). Pictures denoted in capital letters are whole mounts; pictures
denoted in small letters show close-ups. All embryos are flat-mounted; yolk removed. (A, B) engrailed (en) is expressed anterior adjacent to evenskipped (eve). Arrow in (B) points to dot-like expression in the CNS. (C, D) en is expressed anterior adjacent to runt (run). Asterisks in (D) denote
enhanced dorsal expression in the postmaxillary segment. (E, F) en is expressed posteriorly adjacent to opa. The arrows mark opa expression at
the position where the premandibular and postmaxillary appendages should form, but are repressed by unknown mechanisms. (G, H) en is
expressed posterior to sloppy-paired (slp) at the anterior edge of the SAZ. (I, J) en is expressed posterior to and partially overlapping with
pairberry-1 (pby-1) in nascent segments. Abbreviations: md, mandibular segment; SAZ, segment addition zone; st, stage; T, trunk segment.

older embryos the ventral segmental expression disappears soon after its appearance and only the dorsal segmental expression persists (Figures 4A-C and Additional
file 1: Figure S1A, B). The dorsal stripes of h1 expression lie anterior to en (Additional file 1: Figure S1A, B).
The dorsal expression reaches into the dorsal extraembryonic tissue (Additional file 1: Figure S1K). Apart

from the expression during segment formation, h1 is
also expressed in the anal valves (Figure 4C) and in part
of the CNS including the ocular region (Figures 4B, C
and Additional file 1: Figure S1C). The expression
profile of Gm-h2 gene is similar to that of Gm-h1
(Additional file 1: Figure S1D/E). However, at younger
developmental stages the expression is very weak

Janssen et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:5
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/5

Page 7 of 15

Figure 4 Expression of Glomeris hairy-1, odd-paired, odd-skipped, sloppy-paired and pairberry-1. Expression of hairy-1 (h1) (A-C), odd-paired
(opa) (D-F), odd-skipped (odd) (G-I), sloppy-paired (slp) (J-L) and pairberry-1 (pby-1) (M-O). (A) Stage 1.1 embryo. Arrow points to antennal segment
that does not express h1 at this stage. Asterisk marks weaker expression near the ventral midline. (B) Stage 1.2 embryo. Asterisk as in (A). Note
that the segmental expression proceeds into the extra-embryonic tissue (filled circle). Enhanced patch-like expression in the central nervous
system (CNS) (arrowhead), the ocular region (oc) and the antennal segment (arrow). (C) Stage 3 embryo. Segmental stripes are restricted to
dorsal tissue (arrow). Dotted expression in the CNS (arrowhead) and in the anal valves (asterisk). (D) Stage 1.2 embryo. (E) Stage 2 embryo.
Expression is dis-continuous in the anterior segments (arrow). (F) Stage 3 embryo. Note that expression is restricted to ventral tissue only. (G)
Stage 2 embryo. Asterisk marks dynamic expression in the SAZ. Arrowhead points to dorsal segmental stripes. White arrow points to ventral
segmental stripes. Black arrow points to expression in the proctodaeum. (H) Stage 3 embryo. Note the transformation of the SAZ-expression
(asterisk in (G)) into dorsal patches (asterisk in H) in parallel with a clearance of expression from the SAZ. Arrows and arrowhead as in (G). (I)
Stage 4 embryo. Transformation of the dorsal patches (asterisk in (H)) into a dorsal stripe (asterisk in (I)). Arrows and arrowhead as in (G) and (H).
(J) Stage 1.1 embryo. (K) Stage 1.2 embryo. (L) Stage 4 embryo. Segmental expression is reduced to the ventral midline (arrow), the ventral part
of the appendages and small segmental domains in the CNS (arrowhead). (M) Stage 2 embryo. Note that expression does not extend into the
appendage buds, except for the mandibles (black arrow). (N) Stage 3 embryo. Enhanced expression in the CNS (white arrow). Black arrow as in
(M). (O) Stage 4 embryo. Arrows as in (N). Anterior is to the left in all pictures. Abbreviations as in Figure 2. Additional abbreviations: av, anal
valves; S, stomodaeum.

Janssen et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:5
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/5

compared to that of h1 and no dynamic expression in
the SAZ is detectable. Like h1, also h2 is expressed in
the dorsal embryonic tissue (Additional file 1: Figure
S1L). Gm-h3 is expressed in the neuroectoderm, in segmental spots in the dorsal tissue, in the anal valves and
at later stages in the tips of the appendages (Additional
file 1: Figure S1F-H).
Expression of secondary PRG orthologs during Glomeris
trunk segmentation

The Glomeris odd-paired ortholog (Gm-opa) is
expressed in segmental stripes. Its expression, however,
is strictly restricted to the ventral part of the embryo
(Figures 3E, F and 4D-F). opa is expressed posterior
adjacent to the expression of en (Figure 3E, F). opa is
also expressed in the SAZ (Figures 3E, F and 4D-F), but
in a way that is different from the dynamic expression
of eve and run. Initially the anterior SAZ expresses opa
in a broad domain, that later transforms into a single
small stripe in the newly formed segment (Figure 4D-F).
Gm-opa is expressed in rings around the outgrowing
appendages, with the exception of the labrum. The premandibular and postmaxillary segments do not form
appendages and here opa is expressed in the tissue corresponding to where the appendages form in the other
segments (Figure 3E, F).
Gm-odd is expressed dynamically in the SAZ (Figure
4G-I). This dynamic expression, however, never results
in ventral segmental stripes, but only in dorsal stripes.
Initially a faint propeller-shaped expression domain
appears in the SAZ (Figure 4G, I) that later becomes
more clearly visible (Figure 4G). This domain then disappears from its ventral part and continues to
strengthen in its dorsal part, leaving a strong patch of
expression in the dorsal tissue of the nascent segment
(Figure 4H). This then transforms into dorsal stripes
(Figure 4I). The dorsal segmental expression of odd lies
posterior to that of the segmental marker engrailed (en)
(Additional file 1: Figure S1I, J). As with h1 and h2, odd
expression also extends dorsally into the dorsal extraembryonic tissue (Additional file 1: Figure S1M). Gm-odd is
also strongly expressed in the region of the forming stomodaeum (Figure 4G), the ventral portion of the developing appendages (Figure 4G), a dot-like domain
anterior to the proctodaeum (Figure 4G-I) and in the
CNS (Figure 4G-I).
Gm-slp is expressed in segmental stripes anteriorly
abutting the expression of en (Figures 3G, H and 4J-L).
The segmental expression initially extends into dorsal
tissue, but soon after this expression pattern disappears
(Figures 3G, H and 4L). There is no dynamic expression
in the SAZ. The most posterior segmental stripe appears
anterior to en in the anterior part of the SAZ or the
nascent segment (Figures 3G, H and 4J-L). At later

Page 8 of 15

stages the segmental expression ceases in the anterior
segments and remains only in the ocular region, the
antennae, the walking legs, a restricted ventral region in
the CNS, and segmentally reiterated stripes along
the ventral midline (Figure 4L). The posterior part of
the SAZ remains free from slp transcripts at all stages
(Figures 3G, H and 4J-L).
Gm-pby1 is neither expressed dynamically in the SAZ
nor in stripes in the posterior part of the SAZ, but appears
first in a segmental stripe in the anterior of the SAZ or the
nascent segment (Figures 3I, J and 4M-O). However, its
expression is restricted to the ventral tissue only. The segmental expression disappears soon after its appearance in
the ventral midline and the legs (Figures 3I, J and 4M-O).
Its intra-segmental position overlaps with the posterior
part of wingless (wg) (not shown) and the anterior part of
en (Figure 3I, J). Gm-pby2 expression is restricted to the
tips of the legs at late embryonic stages (not shown).

Discussion
Pair rule gene orthologs are involved in myriapod
segmentation

So far only expression data of a few PRG orthologs in
centipede myriapods (Chilopoda) have been published,
but no data have been available for PRG orthologs of
millipedes (Diplopoda). Since functional studies have
not yet been established for any myriapod species our
knowledge on PRGs in myriapods is restricted to
sequence and expression data [16-18]. All canonical
PRGs are transcription factors with a spatially and
temporally regulated expression pattern and it is reasonable to suspect that they should, therefore, be functional more or less exclusively in those cells where
they are expressed. Thus, in the absence of functional
data the PRGs expression data can provide us with
clues as to their likely role in segmentation. Segmentation genes on the level of the segment polarity genes
(SPGs) and PRGs are in most cases expressed in transversal stripes within the segments or at least in the
posterior SAZ where the segments are formed, clearly
suggesting a role in segment specification and formation (Figure 5). Some functional studies in insects,
however, report possible exceptions from this rule. In
Tribolium, for example, RNAi did not uncover a function of the primary PRG hairy in posterior segmentation [31], although its expression pattern suggests this
[32,33]. Furthermore, in the same species fushi-tarazu
(ftz) and odd-paired (opa) did not show segmentation
defects in RNAi studies, although they are expressed in
the typical transversal stripes [9,34]. In most cases,
however, gene expression data in comparable developmental studies give a valuable clue on what a gene’s
function may be and if this function could be conserved in different organisms.

Janssen et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:5
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/5

Figure 5 Schematic summary of Glomeris pair rule gene
expression patterns in dorsal and ventral segments. Segmental
expression of PRG orthologs in young (A, B) and older (C, D)
segments. (B) and (D) represent ventral segments, (A) and (C)
represent dorsal segments. The genes are denoted in different
colors and patterns and are explained in the legend below the
drawings. Note that expression of the primary PRGs eve and run is
present in the nascent segments, but absent from older segments,
both in ventral and dorsal tissue. The patterning of dorsal and
ventral segments is very different at the level of the PRGs. Some
genes are exclusively expressed in dorsal or ventral segments,
respectively (for example, odd, pby1, opa). Other genes are
expressed in both ventral and dorsal segments, but show
differences in their temporal expression profile or their
intrasegmental position (for example, eve, run, h1). These results
support earlier results that suggested a decoupling between dorsal
and ventral segments, and indicate that this decoupling is already
present at the level of the PRGs. Abbreviations: en, engrailed; eve,
even-skipped; h1, hairy1; odd, odd-skipped; pby1, pairberry1; run, runt;
slp, sloppy-paired; wg, wingless.

The expression profiles of the PRGs examined here
suggest a general role in segment formation, or at least
the development of segmentally-iterated structures. Even
if some of the reported PRGs in Glomeris - despite their
expression patterns that are typical for segmentation
genes - might not be involved in segmentation, the data
from a wide range of arthropods including spiders and
myriapods support the idea that PRGs are generally
important factors in arthropod segmentation [13,21].
Posterior segments form in a single segmental periodicity

It is still an open question whether PRGs act in a pair
rule like manner in arthropods other than Drosophila
and Tribolium [1,9,10,35].

Page 9 of 15

In the hemimetabolous insect Schistocerca americana
and the spider-mite Tetranychus urticae the prd/pby
orthologs Sg-pby1 and Tu-Pax3/7 appear with delay in
every other segment in the anterior embryo which may
hint at an ancestral double segmental mechanism
[36,37]; discussed in [2]. However, outside the higher
insects such a pair rule mechanism may be restricted to
the anterior part of the embryo, which is patterned similarly as the Drosophila embryo. Therefore, mechanisms
found in anterior patterning are likely to be more conserved between short germ and long germ arthropods
than it is the case for posterior patterning (discussed in
[38-40]). Since expression data on PRGs in anterior patterning are scarce outside the insects, this theory
remains open for further debate and study.
There is, however, one example that supports a posterior pair-rule like mechanism outside higher insects.
In the centipede Strigamia maritima posterior segments
are added with a double segmental periodicity [17,18].
This pair-rule like mechanism appears, however, to be
the result of parallel evolution rather than a conserved
feature of arthropod posterior segmentation, because
some of the genes involved, like, for example, caudal,
appear to be co-opted for this special purpose [17], discussed in [41,42]. The expression of another PRG, eve,
in the centipede Lithobius atkinsoni, however, does not
show any kind of a double segmental pattern [16]
further supporting the thesis that the double segmental
mechanism found in Strigamia may be a peculiarity of
geophilomorphs rather than a general feature of myriapods or even short germ arthropods. This is also supported by data from the spider Cupiennius salei where
PRGs show no double segmental expression [13,21,22].
We find that none of the investigated PRGs are
expressed in alternating segments in the trunk. In fact,
the dynamic expression patterns of Gm-eve and Gm-run
demonstrate clearly that the posterior trunk segments
appear with a single segmental period (Figure 2). The
dynamic expression in the SAZ of either of these genes
can be followed into each nascent segment demonstrating that every single stripe of eve or run is correlated
with the formation of a single new posterior segment.
Conserved aspects of early PRG interaction

In Drosophila the PRGs are subdivided into two classes;
the primary PRGs, which are under control of maternal
factors and the gap genes; and the secondary PRGs,
which receive their input from the primary PRGs [1].
Recent studies in the beetle Tribolium have examined
the possibility of this PRG hierarchy being conserved
[9]. Although a number of differences exist in the regulation of the PRGs, the principal hierarchy of PRGs
between Drosophila and Tribolium is conserved. eve and
run act high in the regulatory network in both species

Janssen et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:5
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/5

[9,43-45] and prd and slp are under the control of these
primary PRGs [9,45,46]. Data from the spider Cupiennius support the idea that a hierarchic order of PRGs
may even be conserved in all arthropods, since Cs-eve
and Cs-run are expressed more posterior (that is, earlier)
in the SAZ than Cs-slp and Cs-pby-3 that are restricted
to the anterior of the SAZ and the anterior rim of the
SAZ, respectively [13,21,22].
In Glomeris eve and run both display the most prominent expression pattern in the SAZ passing through it
from its very posterior to its anterior and finally into the
nascent segments (Figure 2). Furthermore these two
PRG orthologs are the only ones in Glomeris being additionally expressed in concentric circles around the proctodaeum, as is the case for odr-1 in Strigamia [17] or
eve in Lithobius [16] (Figure 2M, N). The dominant
expression profiles of eve and run in the SAZ thus make
them good candidates for segmentation genes acting at
high level in a possible network, as it is the case for
their orthologs in Drosophila [45], Tribolium [9] and
possibly also Cupiennius [13,21].
The Glomeris orthologs of the secondary PRGs (that
is, Gm-slp and Gm-pby1) are never expressed dynamically in the SAZ, but appear relatively late in the SAZ
shortly before the inter-segmental borders form (Figure
4J-O). Notably these two genes also display highly conserved intra-segmental expression patterns (discussed
below). In addition, both orthologs are never expressed
in the posterior part of the SAZ in Cupiennius, but only
in the anterior SAZ (that is, Cs-pby-3) or at the anterior
rim of the SAZ (that is, Cs-slp) [13]. This led Damen
and colleagues [13] to suggest that these genes may be
under the control of genes like eve and run, which are
active earlier (that is, already in the posterior SAZ).
Since the relative tempo-spatial expression of some of
the putative primary and secondary PRGs in the SAZ is
conserved between Tribolium, Cupiennius and Glomeris,
we postulate that at least eve and run are acting at a
high level in a possible regulatory network of PRG
orthologs in all arthropods.
In Glomeris the odd gene, which is a primary PRG in
Tribolium and a secondary PRG in Drosophila, is also
expressed dynamically in the entire SAZ (Figure 4G-I),
suggesting that odd may play an important role in segment formation in Glomeris. Moreover, expression of
the odd ortholog odr-1 in the centipede Strigamia also
suggests a crucial role of this gene in posterior segment
formation [17]. Taken together these data imply that
odd may already have gained a dominant function in
segmentation in lower arthropods. Later, it may then
have been recruited as a primary PRG in Tribolium.
Indeed, in a bioinformatics study on transcriptional regulation of segmentation gene interaction in Drosophila
odd rather behaves like a primary PRG although

Page 10 of 15

functionally it is a secondary one [47]. This result
strengthens the idea that odd orthologs fulfill important
tasks in arthropod segmentation, even in Drosophila,
where its function in segmentation may be understated
by the fact that it acts like a secondary PRG.
Conserved segmental expression of secondary PRGs

As already discussed above, there appears to be a hierarchy of PRGs in Glomeris where putative primary PRGs
are expressed early and dynamically in the Glomeris
SAZ; whereas the expression of putative target genes
such as the secondary PRGs (and SPGs) is restricted to
anterior regions of the SAZ and the nascent segment.
However, in Drosophila some of the PRGs are also
expressed at later stages, where they function to stabilize
the parasegment boundary (PSB) [4]. Several studies
have shown that the parasegment boundary is a conserved entity among arthropods and characterized by
the expression of SPGs, like engrailed and wingless, at
either side of the parasegment boundary [8,19,29,48-51].
We, therefore, also analyzed the intra-segmental
expression of the Glomeris PRGs and discuss here to
what extend this late function/interaction of the Glomeris
PRGs may be conserved or have diverged. Expression
and function of most PRGs is known only from Drosophila and Tribolium, which are both rather derived holometabolous insects. Apart from that, the only almostcomplete set of PRG orthologs is known from the spider
Cupiennius. But the focus of this study is on the early
expression in the SAZ and does not include the examination of later segmental expression patterns [13]. The data
on “late” PRG expression are thus very limited except for
data on Pax3/7 group genes (that is, the Gm-pby1 orthologs) that are very abundant due to the availability of
cross-reacting antibodies detecting all genes of this family
in various arthropods (that is, orthologs of Drosophila
paired, gooseberry and gooseberry-neuro) [15,36].
The segmental expression patterns of the primary
PRGs in Glomeris are different from that in Tribolium
and/or Drosophila. For example, Gm-eve and Gm-run
are expressed posterior to Gm-en in the ventral segments with no or only very little overlap (Figure 3A-D),
whereas, in Drosophila and Tribolium eve and run
expression is overlapping with en [9].
The segmental expression of the secondary PRG opa is
only reported from the fly Drosophila and the spider
Cupiennius. In the fly an initial ubiquitous expression later
refines into faint segmental stripes, but the intra-segmental
position of these stripes is unclear [52]. In the spider the
gene is expressed in stripes in the SAZ and the newly
formed segments, but again the intra-segmental position
of its expression is unclear [13]. In Tribolium however opa
is expressed posterior abutting to en (with little overlap)
(CP Choe and SJ Brown personal communication). This

Janssen et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:5
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/5

expression is thus conserved at least between Tribolium
and Glomeris, and may therefore represent the ancestral
expression profile of opa (Figure 6).
The intra-segmental expression of Gm-slp and Gmpby1 is conserved between Glomeris and various
arthropods (for pby1) [15,36] and Glomeris, Drosophila
and Tribolium (for slp) [5,10]. In all cases slp is
expressed anteriorly adjacent to en, and the Pax3/7
ortholog pby-1 is expressed overlying the PSG boundary and, thus, partially overlapping the expression of
wg and of en (Figure 6).
We, therefore, propose that the late function of slp
and Pax3/7 orthologs is conserved in the formation of
the PSB in that slp represses en, and in that pby1 might
activate wg and en. Whether the segmental expression
profiles of the other Glomeris PRG orthologs is conserved among basal arthropods and what their late function in segmentation may be has to be examined in the
future. Data on expression and function of all PRG
orthologs from various basal arthropods would possibly
help in answering this question.
Decoupled dorsal and ventral segmentation

In Glomeris the germ band consists of ventral tissue
from the beginning of germ band extension on, but

Figure 6 Segmental expression of PRGs in Glomeris (ventral
segments only), Tribolium and Drosophila. Schematic drawing
and colour coding is based on [70]. Expression of en (red), wg
(blue), prd (purple), slp (yellow), opa (dark blue), run (petrol) and eve
(brown). Black lines represent parasegment boundaries; grey lines
represent segment boundaries. The expression of the segment
polarity genes en and wg is conserved, as well as that of the PRG
slp. Expression of prd is conserved with modification in every other
segment in Tribolium and Drosophila. Intra-segmental position of
opa is conserved between Tribolium and Glomeris, which may reflect
the ancestral pattern. Co-expression of eve and run is also conserved
Tribolium and Glomeris, but at a different intra-segmental position.

Page 11 of 15

dorsal tissue does not start developing before stage 3
(staging after [19]). We reported earlier that Glomeris
dorso-ventral segmentation is decoupled at the level of
the segment polarity (SPGs) and Hox genes suggesting
that the process of decoupling must have its origin at
earlier regulatory levels [19,20]. Since in Drosophila, the
SPGs are under control of the pair rule genes (PRGs) it
appeared likely that the decoupling of segmentation in
Glomeris is attributed to the level of the PRGs. Our
screen on Glomeris PRGs now revealed that some genes
display a profile that suggests restricted function in dorsal segmentation, while others are predominantly
expressed in ventral tissue (Figure 5). By contrast, the
genes opa and pby-1 are expressed in stripes only in the
ventral segments. Thus, they are likely to be involved in
ventral segmentation, but they are not required for the
formation of the dorsal segments. The remaining genes
are initially expressed in ventral and dorsal segmental
tissue, but show dorso-ventral differences in their persistence of expression. The expression of eve, runt and h1
stripes persist longer in dorsal tissue, whereas the slp
stripes persist longer on the ventral side (Figures 4
and 5). Our data thus suggest that decoupling of dorsal
and ventral segmentation already starts with the action
of the PRG orthologs. Especially those genes that are
initially expressed on both sides, but then “decide” for
either ventral or dorsal persistence, provide further
insight into the possible mechanisms of dorso-ventral
decoupling. These genes are likely members of a core
segmentation network that is common to both ventral
and dorsal segments, but then are regulated differently
on both sides to achieve the specific metamerisms of
the ventral and dorsal sides, respectively.
The finding that the ventral segmentation gene
expressions in Glomeris show similarities to those in
other arthropods not only on the level of the SPGs but
also of the PRGs, while the dorsal patterns deviate on
this level as well, strengthens the notion that the ventral
metamerism in Glomeris is homologous to the segmentation in other arthropods, while the dorsal metamerism
mechanisms have diversified independently in different
arthropod lineages [19].
The idea of an arthropod “segmentation clock”

Segmentation in short-germ arthropods and vertebrates
displays fundamental morphological similarities. Separate body units (that is, segments and somites, respectively) are added sequentially from a posterior region in
the embryo: the SAZ in arthropods and the presomitic
mesoderm (PSM) in vertebrates [53,54]. The cyclic
expression of genes that is involved in the formation of
new somites in vertebrates very closely resembles the
dynamic expression of the Glomeris PRGs eve, run and
also odd. The cyclic gene expression in vertebrates is

Janssen et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:5
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/5

under control of a so-called “segmentation clock” or
“oscillator”, of which Notch/Delta signaling is a key
component [54]. Recent work on the spider Cupiennius
salei and the cockroach Periplaneta americana [55,56]
has shown that Notch/Delta signaling is a main component of arthropod segmentation as well, and implies
that the lack of Notch/Delta signaling in Drosophila segmentation is the derived state. The morphological similarities of segment formation in arthropods and
vertebrates and the common usage of Notch/Delta
expression suggest that segmentation in both phyla
traces from a common ancestor [55]. However, the
functional similarities between segmentation in arthropods and vertebrates are more extensive than just using
Notch/Delta signaling. Recent work in the spider
Achaearanea tepidariorum has shown that a posterior
expression of the Wnt8 gene is involved in the maintenance of SAZ activity [57-59] and the ortholog of this
gene, Wnt8 is required for the proper function of the
PSM in vertebrates [60,61].
It is currently unclear how these newly discovered vertebrate-like mechanisms feed into the more canonical segmentation mechanisms in arthropods, that is, the level of
the pair rule and segment polarity genes. It has been suggested that these levels are under control of a posterior
segmentation clock involving Notch/Delta signaling [39].
So far there is only circumstantial evidence that supports
this idea. First, the vertebrate Her/Hes genes, that are
orthologs of the arthropod PRG hairy, are controlled by
the Notch/Delta oscillator [62,63], thus providing a link
between these two components in vertebrates. It is possible that this link has been conserved and extended during
arthropod evolution. Indeed, in the spider Cupiennius
hairy expression is changed upon Notch and Delta RNAi
[55,64]. Second, the PRG odd is regulated downstream of
Notch signalling in Drosophila leg development [65]. This
fact caused Chipman et al. [17] to suggest that odd might
be under the control of Notch/Delta signaling in other
processes as well, including segment formation. In agreement with this idea, in Glomeris and two other myriapods,
Strigamia and Lithobius, Notch and Delta are expressed
dynamically in the SAZ [18,66,67], strikingly similar to the
dynamic patterns that we find in the present work for the
segmentation genes. In Glomeris this dynamic Notch pattern results in dorsal segmental Notch stripes [66] and we
have shown here that the odd stripes in Glomeris also persist only in the dorsal segments, thus pointing to a possible
link between Notch signaling and odd activation. Another
argument for the involvement of Notch/Delta signalling in
dorsal segment formation comes from the expression of
Gm-h1 (Figure 4B, C). Like Gm-Notch and Gm-odd also
Gm-h1 becomes restricted to dorsal segments soon after
its expression in the SAZ (Figure 4B, C). The expression
profiles of Notch, Delta, odd, and h1 would be in

Page 12 of 15

agreement with the suggested ancestral interaction of a
posterior “segmentation clock” mechanism and PRG
orthologs [39,68].
Expression of PRGs in dorsal extraembryonic tissue

In most arthropods a thin layer of dorsal ectodermal tissue connects the separated dorsal edges of the developing embryo [69]. The nature and function of this tissue
is not very well understood and the lack of expression
of the segmentation genes in this tissue in most species
suggests that it is not metamerized or subdivided into
separate developmental units. However, in Glomeris the
primary PRGs, eve and run are expressed in circles
around (or within) the SAZ, which is especially clear at
early developmental stages (Figure 2); the segmental
expression of these genes thus includes extraembryonic
tissue. A similar expression profile has also been
reported for pair rule genes, for example, odr1 (odd
ortholog) and eve1/2, in Strigamia [18] and it was, thus,
not unexpected to find similar patterns in Glomeris as
well. In Glomeris, however, h1 and odd are not only
expressed in the dorsal segments (discussed above), but
their segmental expression in the extraembryonic tissue
persists even in older stages (Additional file 1: Figure
S1). Since neither the segment polarity genes nor the
Hox genes are expressed in the extraembryonic tissue it
appears unlikely that this tissue is patterned or metamerized in the classical sense. But what then is the
function of h1, h2 and odd expression in the extraembryonic tissue?
We postulate that the expression of the hairy genes
(h1 and h2) and odd may be involved in “guiding” the
two dorsal sides of the embryo in order to assure that
“matching” tissue meets during the process of dorsal
closure. This would be especially important, because the
matching cannot be guided via the connection across
the ventral side, as the dorsal segments are functionally
decoupled from the ventral side.

Conclusions
The activation of the pair rule genes (PRGs) appears to
be a crucial step in arthropod segmentation as it marks
the transition from a non-periodic pattern to a periodic
pattern. It is, therefore, surprising to some degree that
this step of the segmentation mechanisms appears to be
the most variable and diverse level, especially when it is
compared to the evolutionarily conserved steps of the
SPGs or the Hox genes [40,70,71]. Expression of all
investigated PRGs in the millipede Glomeris is consistent with a role in segmentation. The PRGs in Glomeris
seem to act in a hierarchic manner, and can be subdivided into primary and secondary PRG, similar as has
been described for insects and a spider [9,13]. However,
the exact interactions between the Glomeris PRGs

Janssen et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:5
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/5

remain unclear due to the lack of functional methods.
The expression of the primary PRGs strongly supports
the idea that the initial patterning of the segments is in
a single segmental period. A similar single segmental
period has also been observed in other arthropods
implying that it represents the ancestral mode for segment patterning and formation [22].
Our work is the first analysis in a non-insect arthropod in which the late expression of the PRGs has been
studied. The intrasegmental positions of the expression
patterns show similarities but also differences among
the species analysed (Figure 6A). The comparison of
insect data (that is, Tribolium and Drosophila) with data
from a myriapod may help to distinguish between conserved and derived features of segmentation and thus
provide clues about the origin and evolution of segmentation mechanisms in the arthropods.
In both Tribolium and Glomeris the intra-segmental
expression of opa, slp and prd/pby1 is conserved, and
although its function is unclear, it may be part of the
ancestral patterning system (Figure 6).
An interesting case of “partial” conservation is
provided by the genes run and eve. These genes are
co-expressed in Tribolium and Glomeris (but not in
Drosophila) (Figure 6). However, the co-expression
stripes of run and eve do not have the same intrasegmental position in the two species. Thus, co-expression
of these two genes appears to be a conserved feature
already present in the common ancestor of insects and
myriapods, but the mechanisms that position the run/eve
stripe within a segment must differ in the two species.
Our results also add to the previous finding that the
segmentation mechanisms in the dorsal and ventral segments of Glomeris are decoupled [19]. Previous results
have shown that dorsal and ventral segmentation
mechanisms differ mainly in their usage of the segmentation genes of the segment polarity group, but our present
data show that strong dorso-ventral differences already
exist in the expression of the orthologs of the PRGs.
The ancestral role of the PRGs in arthropod segmentation remains unclear until comparative data on
expression and function are available for representatives
of all groups of arthropods, as well as their assumed sister-groups, the onychophorans and the tardigrades [72].
Shared conserved or diverged aspects of the segmentation process may then also contribute to the unraveling
of arthropod phylogeny [73], which appears still not
fully resolved [74,75].

Additional material
Additional file 1: Figure S1. Additional aspects of h1 and odd
expression, expression of h2 and h3 and single-colour expression
detection of h1+en and odd+en. (A, B) Double single-colour staining

Page 13 of 15

of h1+en. The black arrows point to expression of en; the white arrows
point to expression of h1 anteriorly abutting the expression of en. (C)
Expression of h1 in a stage 5 embryo (cf. similar expression of h2 in (E)).
White arrow points to expression in the ventral nervous system. Asterisk
marks expression in the brain. (D, E) Expression of h2. White arrow and
asterisk in (E) as in (C). (F-H) Expression of h3. Arrows in (F) point to
expression in the brain and the ventral nervous system. Arrowhead
points to expression in the SAZ. Asterisk marks expression in the labrum.
(G) Same embryo as in (F) but slightly rotated to show a rear aspect and
the posterior expression in the SAZ (arrowhead). (H) De novo expression
in lateral tissue (arrow) and in the appendages (arrowhead). (H’) Same
embryo as in (H); DAPI stained; arrow and arrowhead point to same
position as in (H). (I) Double single-colour staining of odd+en. (I’) Same
embryo as in (I); DAPI stained. (J) Close-up on dorsal tissue of the
embryo shown in (I/I’). Black arrow points to expression of en. White
arrow points to expression of odd. (K) Dorsolateral view of a stage 5
embryo stained for h1. Dorsal segmental expression is connected by
weak expression (asterisks) in the dorsal extraembryonic tissue (e). (L)
Dorsal view. Expression of h2 in the (e). Asterisks as in (K). (M) Dorsal
view. Expression of odd in the (e). Asterisks as in (K). Abbreviations: (e),
dorsal extraembryonic tissue; en, engrailed, h, hairy; odd, odd-skipped; st,
stage.

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Hilary Pioro ( neé Dove) for Notch and Delta clones
and two anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments and suggestions.
This work has been supported by the Swedish Research Council (VR: grant
to GEB), the European Union via the Marie Curie Training network “ZOONET”
(MRTN-CT-2004-005624 (to GEB, RJ and WGMD)). The work of NMP is funded
by the University of Göttingen, the Graduate School for Neurosciences and
Molecular Biosciences (GGNB), and the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft.
Author details
1
Uppsala University, Department of Earth Sciences, Palaeobiology, Villavägen
16, SE-752 36 Uppsala, Sweden. 2Georg-August-Universität Göttingen,
Johann-Friedrich-Blumenbach Institut für Zoologie und Anthropologie,
Abteilung für Entwicklungsbiologie, GZMB Ernst-Caspari-Haus, Justus-vonLiebig-Weg 11, 37077 Göttingen, Germany. 3Friedrich-Schiller-University Jena,
Department of Genetics, Philosophenweg 12, D-07743 Jena, Germany.
Authors’ contributions
RJ carried out the experiments, wrote the first draft of the manuscript and
was mainly responsible for the experimental outline. GEB, NMP and WGMD
were involved in drafting the final version of the manuscript. NMP and
WGMD discussed the experimental outline. RJ and WGMD initiated work on
Glomeris segmentation.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 18 October 2010 Accepted: 25 February 2011
Published: 25 February 2011
References
1. Pankratz MJ, Jäckle H: Blastoderm segmentation. In The development of
Drosophila melanogaster. Edited by: Bate M, Martinez Arias A. Cold Spring
Harbor: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press; 1993:467-516.
2. Davis GK, Patel NH: Playing by pair rules? BioEssays 2003, 25:425-429.
3. Nüsslein-Volhard C, Wieschaus E: Mutations affecting segment number
and polarity in Drosophila. Nature 1980, 287:795-801.
4. Ingham PW, Baker NE, Martinez-Arias A: Regulation of segment polarity
genes in the Drosophila blastoderm by fushi tarazu and even skipped.
Nature 1988, 331:73-75.
5. Cadigan KM, Grossniklaus U, Gehring WJ: Localized expression of sloppy
paired protein maintains the polarity of Drosophila parasegments. Genes
Dev 1994, 8:899-913.
6. Sanson B: Generating patterns from fields of cells. EMBO reports 2001,
2:1083-1088.

Janssen et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:5
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/5

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.
14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.
21.

22.

23.
24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

Davis GK, Patel NH: Short, long, and beyond: molecular and
embryological approaches to insect segmentation. Annu Rev Entomol
2002, 47:669-699.
Janssen R, Le Gouar M, Pechmann M, Poulin F, Bolognesi R, Schwager EE,
Hopfen C, Colbourne JK, Budd GE, Brown SJ, Prpic NM, Kosiol C,
Vervoort M, Damen WGM, Balavoine G, McGregor AP: Conservation, loss,
and redeployment of Wnt ligands in protostomes: implications for
understanding the evolution of segment formation. BMC Evol Biol 10:374.
Choe CP, Miller SC, Brown SJ: A pair rule gene circuit defines segments
sequentially in the short-germ insect Tribolium castaneum. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 2006, 103:6560-6564.
Choe CP, Brown SJ: Evolutionary flexibility of pair rule patterning
revealed by functional analysis of secondary pair rule genes, paired and
sloppy-paired in the short-germ insect, Tribolium castaneum. Dev Biol
2007, 302:281-94.
Liu PZ, Kaufman TC: even-skipped is not a pair rule gene but has
segmental and gap-like functions in Oncopeltus fasciatus, an
intermediate germband insect. Development 2005, 132:2081-2092.
Mito T, Kobayashi C, Sarashima I, Zhang H, Shinahara W, Miyawaki K,
Shinmyo Y, Ohuchi , Noji S: even-skipped has gap-like, pair rule-like, and
segmental functions in the cricket Gryllus bimaculatus, a basal,
intermediate germ insect (Orthoptera). Dev Biol 2007, 303:202-213.
Damen WGM, Janssen R, Prpic NM: Pair rule gene orthologs in spider
segmentation. Evol Dev 2005, 7:618-628.
Copf T, Rabet N, Celniker SE, Averof M: Posterior patterning genes and the
identification of a unique body region in the brine shrimp Artemia
franciscana. Development 2003, 130:5915-5927.
Davis GK, D’Alessio JA, Patel NH: Pax3/7 genes reveal conservation and
divergence in the arthropod segmentation hierarchy. Dev Biol 2005,
285:169-184.
Hughes CL, Kaufman TC: Exploring myriapod segmentation: the
expression patterns of even-skipped, engrailed, and wingless in a
centipede. Dev Biol 2002, 247:47-61.
Chipman AD, Arthur W, Akam M: A double segment periodicity underlies
segment generation in centipede development. Curr Biol 2004,
14:1250-1255.
Chipman AD, Akam M: The segmentation cascade in the centipede
Strigamia maritima: involvement of the Notch pathway and pair rule
gene homologues. Dev Biol 2008, 319:160-169.
Janssen R, Prpic NM, Damen WGM: Gene expression suggests decoupled
dorsal and ventral segmentation in the millipede Glomeris marginata
(Myriapoda: Diplopoda). Dev Biol 2004, 268:89-104.
Janssen R, Damen WGM: The ten Hox genes of the millipede Glomeris
marginata. Dev Genes Evol 2006, 216:451-465.
Damen WGM, Weller M, Tautz D: The expression patterns of hairy, evenskipped, and runt in the spider Cupiennius salei imply that these genes
were segmentation genes in a basal arthropod. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2000, 97:4515-4519.
Schoppmeier M, Damen WGM: Expression of Pax group III genes
suggests a single-segmental periodicity for opisthosomal segment
patterning in the spider Cupiennius salei. Evol Dev 2005, 7:160-167.
Benson DA, Karsch-Mizrachi I, Lipman DJ, Ostell J, Wheeler DL: GenBank.
Nucleic Acids Res 2003, 31:23-27.
Altschul SF, Madden TL, Schäffer AA, Zhang J, Zhang Z, Miller W,
Lipman DJ: Gapped BLAST and PsiBLAST: a new generation of protein
database search programs. Nucleic Acids Res 1997, 25:3389-3402.
Thompson JD, Gibson TJ, Plewniak F, Jeanmougin F, Higgins DG: The
CLUSTAL_X windows interface: flexible strategies for multiple sequence
alignment aided by quality analysis tools. Nucleic Acids Res 1997,
25:4876-4882.
Strimmer K, von Haeseler A: Quartet puzzling: a quartet maximum
likelihood method for reconstructing tree topologies. Mol Biol Evol 1996,
13:964-969.
Swofford DL: PAUP*. Phylogenetic Analysis Using Parsimony (*and
Other Methods). Sinauer Associates, Sunderland, Massachusetts; 2002,
Version 4.
Prpic NM, Tautz D: The expression of the proximodistal axis patterning
genes Distal-less and dachshund in the appendages of Glomeris
marginata (Myriapoda: Diplopoda) suggests a special role of these
genes in patterning the head appendages. Dev Biol 2003, 260:97-112.

Page 14 of 15

29. Janssen R, Budd GE, Damen WG, Prpic NM: Evidence for Wg-independent
tergite boundary formation in the millipede Glomeris marginata. Dev
Genes Evol 2008, 218:361-370.
30. Ogawa E, Maruyama M, Kagoshima H, Inuzuka M, Lu J, Sakate M,
Shigesada K, Ito Y: PEBP2/PEA2 represents a family of transcription
factors homologous to the products of the Drosophila runt gene and
the human AML1 gene. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1993, 90:6859-6863.
31. Aranda M, Marques-Souza H, Bayer T, Tautz D: The role of the
segmentation gene hairy in Tribolium. Dev Genes Evol 2008, 218:465-477.
32. Sommer RJ, Tautz D: Involvement of an orthologue of the Drosophila pair
rule gene hairy in segment formation of the short germ-band embryo
of Tribolium (Coleoptera). Nature 1993, 361:448-450.
33. Eckert C, Aranda M, Wolff C, Tautz D: Separable stripe enhancer elements
for the pair rule gene hairy in the beetle Tribolium. EMBO Rep 2004,
5:638-642.
34. Brown SJ, Hilgenfeld RD, Denell RE: The beetle Tribolium castaneum has a
fushi tarazu homolog expressed in stripes during segmentation. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 1994, 91:12922-12926.
35. Maderspacher F, Bucher G, Klingler M: Pair rule and gap gene mutants in
the flour beetle Tribolium castaneum. Dev Genes Evol 1998, 208:558-568.
36. Davis GK, Jaramillo CA, Patel NH: Pax Group III genes and the evolution of
insect pair rule patterning. Development 2001, 128:3445-3458.
37. Dearden PK, Donly C, Grbic M: Expression of pair rule gene homologues:
early patterning of the two-spotted spider mite Tetranychus urticae.
Development 2002, 129:5461-5472.
38. Minelli A: A three-phase model of arthropod segmentation. Dev Genes
Evol 2001, 211:509-521.
39. Peel A, Akam M: Evolution of segmentation: Rolling back the clock. Curr
Biol 2003, 13:R708-R710.
40. Peel A: The evolution of arthropod segmentation mechanisms. BioEssays
2004, 26:1108-111.
41. Damen WGM: Arthropod segmentation: Why centipedes are odd. Curr
Biol 2004, 14:R557-R559.
42. Chipman AD: Parallel evolution of segmentation by co-option of
ancestral gene regulatory networks. BioEssays 2010, 32:60-70.
43. Harding K, Rushlow C, Doyle HJ, Hoey T, Levine M: Cross-regulatory
interactions among pair rule genes in Drosophila. Science 1986,
233:953-959.
44. Howard K, Ingham P: Regulatory interactions between the segmentation
genes fushi tarazu, hairy, and engrailed in the Drosophila blastoderm. Cell
1986, 44:949-957.
45. Gutjahr T, Frei E, Noll M: Complex regulation of early paired expression:
initial activation by gap genes and pattern modulation by pair rule
genes. Development 1993, 117:609-623.
46. Fujioka M, Jaynes JB, Goto T: Early even-skipped stripes act as
morphogenetic gradients at the single cell level to establish engrailed
expression. Development 1995, 121:4371-4382.
47. Schroeder MD, Pearce M, Fak J, Fan H, Unnerstall U, Emberly E, Rajewsky N,
Siggia ED, Gaul U: Transcriptional control in the segmentation gene
network of Drosophila. PLoS Biol 2004, 2:E271.
48. Hidalgo A: Interactions between segment polarity genes and the
generation of the segmental pattern in Drosophila. Mech Dev 1991,
35:77-87.
49. Oppenheimer DI, MacNicol AM, Patel NH: Functional conservation of the
wingless-engrailed interaction as shown by a widely applicable
baculovirus misexpression system. Curr Biol 1999, 9:1288-1296.
50. Damen WG: Parasegmental organization of the spider embryo implies
that the parasegment is an evolutionary conserved entity in arthropod
embryogenesis. Development 2002, 129:1239-1250.
51. Prpic NM: Parasegmental appendage allocation in annelids and
arthropods and the homology of parapodia and arthropodia. Front Zool
2008, 5:17.
52. Benedyk MJ, Mullen JR, DiNardo S: odd-paired: a zinc finger pair rule
protein required for the timely activation of engrailed and wingless in
Drosophila embryos. Genes Dev 1994, 8:105-117.
53. Pourquie O: Notch around the clock. Curr Opin Genet Dev 1999, 9:599-565.
54. Pourquie O: The segmentation clock: converting embryonic time into
spatial pattern. Science 2003, 301:328-330.
55. Stollewerk A, Schoppmeier M, Damen WGM: Involvement of Notch and
Delta genes in spider segmentation. Nature 2003, 423:863-865.

Janssen et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:5
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/5

Page 15 of 15

56. Pueyo JI, Lanfear R, Couso JP: Ancestral Notch-mediated segmentation
revealed in the cockroach Periplaneta americana. PNAS 2008,
105:16614-16619.
57. McGregor AP, Pechmann M, Schwager EE, Feitosa NM, Kruck S, Aranda M,
Damen WG: Wnt8 is required for growth-zone establishment and
development of opisthosomal segments in a spider. Curr Biol 2008,
18:1619-1623.
58. McGregor AP, Pechmann M, Schwager EE, Damen WG: An ancestral
regulatory network for posterior development in arthropods. Commun
Integr Biol 2009, 2:174-176.
59. Murat S, Hopfen C, McGregor AP: The function and evolution of Wnt
genes in arthropods. Arthropod Struct Dev 2010, 39:446-452.
60. Lekven AC, Thorpe CJ, Waxman JS, Moon RT: Zebrafish wnt8 encodes two
wnt8 proteins on a bicistronic transcript and is required for mesoderm
and neuroectoderm patterning. Dev Cell 2001, 1:103-114.
61. Li HY, Bourdelas A, Carron C, Gomez C, Boucaut JC, Shi DL: FGF8, Wnt8 and
Myf5 are target genes of Tbx6 during anteroposterior specification in
Xenopus embryo. Dev Biol 2006, 290:470-481.
62. Takke C, Campos-Ortega JA: her1, a zebrafish pair rule like gene, acts
downstream of notch signalling to control somite development.
Development 1999, 126:3005-3014.
63. Sieger D, Tautz D, Gajewski M: her11 is involved in the somitogenesis
clock in zebrafish. Dev Genes Evol 2004, 214:393-406.
64. Schoppmeier M, Damen WGM: Suppressor of Hairless and Presenilin
phenotypes imply involvement of canonical Notch-signalling in
segmentation of the spider Cupiennius salei. Dev Biol 2005, 280:211-224.
65. Rauskolb C, Irvine KD: Notch-mediated segmentation and growth control
of the Drosophila leg. Dev Biol 1999, 210:339-350.
66. Dove H, Stollewerk A: Comparative analysis of neurogenesis in the
myriapod Glomeris marginata (Diplopoda) suggests more similarities to
chelicerates than to insects. Development 2003, 130:2161-2171.
67. Kadner D, Stollewerk A: Neurogenesis in the chilopod Lithobius forficatus
suggests more similarities to chelicerates than to insects. Dev Genes Evol
2004, 214:367-379.
68. Damen WGM: Evolutionary conservation and divergence of the
segmentation process in arthropods. Dev Dyn 2007, 236:1379-1391.
69. Anderson D: Embryology and Phylogeny in Annelids and Arthropods Oxford:
Pergamon Press; 1973.
70. Choe CP, Brown SJ: Genetic regulation of engrailed and wingless in
Tribolium segmentation and the evolution of pair-rule segmentation. Dev
Biol 2009, 325:482-491.
71. Hughes CL, Kaufman TC: Hox genes and the evolution of the arthropod
body plan. Evol Dev 2002, 4:459-499.
72. Dunn CW, Hejnol A, Matus DO, Pang K, Browne WE, Smith SA, Seaver E,
Rouse GW, Obst M, Edgecombe GD, Sörensen MV, Haddock SHD, SchmidtRhaesa A, Okusu A, Kristensen RM, Wheeler WC, Martindale MQ, Giribet G:
Broad phylogenomic sampling improves resolution of the animal tree of
life. Nature 2008, 452:745-749.
73. Telford MJ, Budd GE: The place of phylogeny and cladistics in Evo-Devo
research. Int J Dev Biol 2003, 47:479-490.
74. Budd GE, Telford MJ: The origin and evolution of arthropods. Nature 2009,
457:812-817.
75. Rota-Stabelli O, Campbell L, Brinkmann H, Edgecombe GD, Longhorn SJ,
Peterson KJ, Pisani D, Phillipe H, Telford MJ: A congruent solution to
arthropod phylogeny: phylogenomics, microRNAs and morphology
support monophyletic Mandibulata. Proc Biol Sci 2011, 278:298-306.
doi:10.1186/2041-9139-2-5
Cite this article as: Janssen et al.: Expression of myriapod pair rule gene
orthologs. EvoDevo 2011 2:5.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
