<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Conservation, loss, and redeployment of Wnt ligands in protostomes: implications for understanding the evolution of segment formation</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:374. doi:10.1186/1471-2148-10-374"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Ralf Janssen"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Janssen et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:374
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/374
Daphnia Genomics
Consortium

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Conservation, loss, and redeployment of Wnt
ligands in protostomes: implications for
understanding the evolution of segment
formation
Ralf Janssen1†, Martine Le Gouar2†, Matthias Pechmann3†, Francis Poulin4,11, Renata Bolognesi5,12,
Evelyn E Schwager6, Corinna Hopfen7, John K Colbourne8, Graham E Budd1, Susan J Brown5, Nikola-Michael Prpic3,
Carolin Kosiol7, Michel Vervoort2,10, Wim GM Damen9*, Guillaume Balavoine2,10*, Alistair P McGregor7*

Abstract
Background: The Wnt genes encode secreted glycoprotein ligands that regulate a wide range of developmental
processes, including axis elongation and segmentation. There are thirteen subfamilies of Wnt genes in metazoans
and this gene diversity appeared early in animal evolution. The loss of Wnt subfamilies appears to be common in
insects, but little is known about the Wnt repertoire in other arthropods, and moreover the expression and
function of these genes have only been investigated in a few protostomes outside the relatively Wnt-poor model
species Drosophila melanogaster and Caenorhabditis elegans. To investigate the evolution of this important gene
family more broadly in protostomes, we surveyed the Wnt gene diversity in the crustacean Daphnia pulex, the
chelicerates Ixodes scapularis and Achaearanea tepidariorum, the myriapod Glomeris marginata and the annelid
Platynereis dumerilii. We also characterised Wnt gene expression in the latter three species, and further investigated
expression of these genes in the beetle Tribolium castaneum.
Results: We found that Daphnia and Platynereis both contain twelve Wnt subfamilies demonstrating that the
common ancestors of arthropods, ecdysozoans and protostomes possessed all members of all Wnt subfamilies
except Wnt3. Furthermore, although there is striking loss of Wnt genes in insects, other arthropods have
maintained greater Wnt gene diversity. The expression of many Wnt genes overlap in segmentally reiterated
patterns and in the segment addition zone, and while these patterns can be relatively conserved among
arthropods and the annelid, there have also been changes in the expression of some Wnt genes in the course of
protostome evolution. Nevertheless, our results strongly support the parasegment as the primary segmental unit in
arthropods, and suggest further similarities between segmental and parasegmental regulation by Wnt genes in
annelids and arthropods respectively.
Conclusions: Despite frequent losses of Wnt gene subfamilies in lineages such as insects, nematodes and leeches,
most protostomes have probably maintained much of their ancestral repertoire of twelve Wnt genes. The
maintenance of a large set of these ligands could be in part due to their combinatorial activity in various tissues

* Correspondence: wim.damen@uni-jena.de; balavoine.guillaume@ijm.univparis-diderot.fr; alistair.mcgregor@vetmeduni.ac.at
† Contributed equally
2
Centre de Génétique Moléculaire du CNRS, FRE 3144, avenue de la Terrasse
91198 Gif-sur-Yvette, France
7
Institut für Populationsgenetik, Veterinärmedizinische Universität Wien,
Veterinärplatz 1, A-1210, Vienna, Austria
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
© 2010 Janssen et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Janssen et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:374
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/374

Page 2 of 21

rather than functional redundancy. The activity of such Wnt ’landscapes’ as opposed to the function of individual
ligands could explain the patterns of conservation and redeployment of these genes in important developmental
processes across metazoans. This requires further analysis of the expression and function of these genes in a wider
range of taxa.

Background
Wnt signalling regulates many developmental processes
in metazoans, including cell proliferation, migration and
pattern formation [1]. The Wnt genes encode secreted
glycoprotein ligands that bind to various transmembrane
receptors thereby triggering intracellular cascades,
including the b-catenin pathway, to regulate transcription in target cells [2].
Among protostomes, Wnt signalling has been most
intensively studied in the nematode worm Caenorhabditis elegans and the fly Drosophila melanogaster. These
two model ecdysozoans have five and seven Wnt genes
respectively [3-13], which generally reflects the number
of Wnt genes found in insects with sequenced genomes
[14-16]. However, thirteen subfamilies of Wnt genes
have been reported in metazoans [17-19]. All thirteen
subfamilies are found in deuterostomes, although WntA
may have been lost in vertebrates and other lineages
[18-20]. Twelve subfamilies have also been recently
reported in lophotrochozoans, which is evidence for a
large set of Wnt genes ancestrally in protostomes [17].
This complexity in the repertoire of Wnt genes appeared
very early in metazoan evolution because twelve subfamilies are also found in the cnidarians Nematostella vectensis and Hydra magnipapillata [18,21,22]. Taken
together, these earlier studies demonstrate striking patterns of Wnt gene loss in insects and Caenorhabditis in
comparison to other animals. However, it is not yet
known if this loss of Wnt genes is a derived feature of
insects or a more general characteristic of arthropods
(or ecdysozoans). Moreover, our understanding of the
evolution of the Wnt gene family is hampered by the
paucity of expression and functional studies in arthropods and protostomes other than Drosophila and Caenorhabditis [14,17,23-25].
A major exception to this paucity of knowledge is
wingless (wg/Wnt1). Among many other roles in Drosophila, wg functions as a segment polarity gene to specify
and maintain boundaries and cell fates across the primary segmental units or parasegments [3,9,26-29]. wg is
expressed at the posterior boundary of each parasegment directly juxtaposed to cells expressing engrailed
(en) at the anterior parasegmental boundary. Studies of
wg and en in other arthropods indicate that their delineation of parasegmental boundaries is an ancestral feature of these animals [30-34]. Furthermore, the
expression of the wg, en and hh homologues also

delimits segmental boundaries in the annelid, Platynereis
dumerilii: a representative of lophotrochozoans, the
large sister-clade of the ecdysozoans within protostomes
[35,36]. This observation suggests that the wg-en regulatory system was either independently recruited for segment boundary determination in annelids and
arthropods or is plesiomorphic with respect to a segmented common ancestor. This debate [37-39] could be
resolved by comparing the expression of other genes
involved in segmentation within and among arthropods
and annelids. Intriguingly, segmental expression of several other Wnt genes has been observed in various
arthropods, suggesting that these Wnt genes may also
be involved in segmentation [23,24,30,33].
To investigate the Wnt repertoire of arthropods and
protostomes more broadly, we surveyed the Wnt genes
found in a crustacean, the water flea Daphnia pulex, a
myriapod, the millipede Glomeris marginata, two chelicerates, the spider, Achaearanea tepidariorum and the
tick, Ixodes scapularis, and an annelid, the polychaete
worm Platynereis dumerilii. We then characterised the
expression of Wnt genes in Achaearanea, Glomeris, Platynereis, and Tribolium to compare the possible roles of
Wnt genes in segmentation and other developmental
processes among the arthropods, and protostomes
generally.
Our survey and analysis of Wnt genes demonstrates
that the common ancestor of arthropods contained
twelve of the thirteen subfamilies, and, therefore, that
the ancestral protostome contained all Wnt gene subfamilies except Wnt3 as was previously suggested by data
from lophotrochozoans [17]. We found twelve, eleven
and ten Wnt genes in Daphnia, Achaearanea and Ixodes
respectively, including orthologues of Wnt2 and Wnt4,
which are not found in insects. This shows that the loss
of Wnt genes observed in insects is not a general feature
of arthropods.
We found that many Wnt genes are expressed in segmentally reiterated patterns in protostomes. For example, Wnt10 and Wnt16, and wg, are expressed in similar
segmental patterns in arthropods and in the annelid Platynereis. However, we also found taxon-specific segmental expression of several Wnt genes, even among the
arthropods. This pattern of conservation and redeployment of Wnt genes expressed in segmentally reiterated
patterns in arthropods and the annelid was also reflected
in the expression of these genes in the posterior

Janssen et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:374
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/374

segment addition zone (SAZ) [31,40,41] (hereafter we
use this more general term rather than ‘growth zone’ as
commonly used for arthropods, see Discussion), appendages, nervous system and other tissues. Indeed, the
overlapping expression of multiple Wnt genes in the
same tissues supports the hypothesis that Wnt signalling
operates through a combinatorial code of different Wnt
ligands [42].

Methods

Page 3 of 21

GenBank deposits (Additional file 1). A fragment of a
tenth Ixodes Wnt gene was also identified through
tblastn searches (Additional file 1).
Six Platynereis Wnt genes were isolated in a previous
study [19]. Two more Wnt genes (Pd-Wnt5 and PdWnt8) were found in an EST collection [45]. To identify
remaining Wnt orthologues a combination of more specific primers were used (Additional file 2). The accession
numbers of all Wnt gene sequences used in this study
are shown in Additional file 1.

Wnt gene sequences

Members of the Wnt subfamilies, 1, 2, 5, 7, 8, A and 16,
were previously isolated from Achaearanea or Cupiennius, and subfamilies 1, A and 16 from Glomeris (Additional file 1). Note that Glomeris Wnt16 and WntA were
previously erroneously characterised as Wnt7 and Wnt5
orthologues respectively [33]. We obtained sequences of
a further four Wnt genes from both Achaearanea and
Glomeris using degenerate PCR with embryonic cDNA
template. The sequences of degenerate primer pairs
used to isolate Wnt genes are shown in Additional file
2. Larger fragments of initial PCR fragments were
obtained via RACE PCR using the Marathon RACE Kit
(Clontech). RNA isolation from spiders and Glomeris,
and cDNA synthesis was carried out as described previously [33,43].
For Daphnia, known Wnt gene sequences were
obtained from GenBank and protein sequences were
used to perform tblastn searches of assembled genomic
scaffolds, predicted gene models and ESTs (Daphnia
pulex v1.1, September 2006; http://www.jgi.doe.gov/
Daphnia and http://wFleaBase.org). Segment pairs with
an E-value smaller than 105 were selected and the corresponding scaffolds were manually curated with the help
of Dappu v1.1 filtered gene models. Predicted gene
structures were refined by comparison to Wnt genes
from other species (Nematostella vectensis, Drosophila
melanogaster, Tribolium castaneum, Apis mellifera,
Homo sapiens, Mus musculus and Strongylocentrotus
pupuratus) to identify the correct open reading frames.
Partial cDNAs were cloned to confirm most intron-exon
boundaries. Briefly, TRIzol (Invitrogen) was used to isolate RNA from Daphnia embryos of mixed stages. RNA
was reverse transcribed using SuperScriptIII (Invitrogen)
and RT-PCR was performed using primers specific to
each predicted Wnt open reading frame. Sequence from
each gene model was used to search the Daphnia
assembly and confirm the presence of twelve Wnt gene
sequences and the absence of any additional Wnt family
members (Additional file 1). The synteny of Daphnia
Wnt genes was inferred from their linkage on the same
genomic scaffolds.
Gene models of nine Wnt genes from the tick Ixodes
scapularis were retrieved from VectorBase [44] and

Phylogenetic analysis

Two data sets were used for the analysis, the first set
consisted of 93 amino acid sequences from arthropods,
Platynereis and human (Additional file 3: Wnt sequence
data set 1), and the larger second set included additional
sequences from a nematode, cnidarian and three lophotrochozoans (Additional file 4: Wnt sequence data set
2). Sequences in both data sets were aligned using Tcoffee [46] and hand-edited in SeaView [47] to remove
poorly aligned amino acid positions (Additional files 3
and 4).
Initially, the best-scoring substitution model was
determined among the amino acid models in RAxML
[48] as WAG+F+Γ (WAG with empirical base frequencies and the Γ model of rate heterogeneity; Whelan and
Goldman [49]).
Bayesian phylogenetic analyses were performed with
MrBayes [50]. The final topology was estimated using
13,000,000 iterations using 3250 burning cycles and
sampling every 1000 iteration. Clade support was
assessed with posterior probabilities computed with
MrBayes and non-parametric bootstrapping implemented in RAxML [48] based on 1000 replicates.
Animals

Spiders (Achaearanea tepidariorum and Cupiennius
salei) were obtained from laboratory stocks in Cologne
and Göttingen [24,51]. Spider embryos were staged
according to Akiyama-Oda and Oda [52]. General handling and staging of Glomeris is described in Janssen et
al., [33]. Tribolium beetles (Ga-1 strain) were obtained
from laboratory stocks at Kansas State University. Beetles were reared at 30°C in whole-wheat flour supplemented with 5% dried yeast. Platynereis larvae and
juveniles were obtained from a breeding culture established in Gif-sur-Yvette according to the protocols of
Fischer and Dorresteijn http://www.platynereis.de.
Staining and microscopy

Whole mount in situ hybridisation (WMISH) was performed for spiders as described in the published protocol for Cupiennius embryos [43]. For Glomeris, WMISH
was performed as described in Prpic and Tautz [53] and

Janssen et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:374
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/374

Janssen et al. [32]. Both spider and Glomeris embryos
were counterstained with Sytox Green or DAPI and
images were captured with a Leica dissection microscope or a Zeiss Axioplan-2 microscope. For Tribolium
and Platynereis, WMISH was performed as described
previously [41,54-57]. All digital images have been subjected to adjustment of brightness, colour values and
contrast using Adobe Photoshop CS3.
In Achaearanea and Cupiennius gene expression was
investigated in stage 4 to stage 10 embryos, which represent germ disc embryos with radial symmetry (stages 4
to 6), and germ band embryos with axial symmetry
(stages 7 to 10) and up to 7 opisthosomal segments
[52,58]. In Glomeris, gene expression was investigated in
stage 0 (blastoderm) to stage 6.1 embryos; see Janssen et
al. [33] for a detailed description of staging. In Tribolium, gene expression was analysed in embryos at the
fully extended germ band stage. In Platynereis, as in
many other annelids, the elongation of the body axis
continues during post-embryonic development as new
segments are added from a sub-terminal SAZ [41]. We
thus compared the expression of Wnt genes during
trunk formation in both embryonic and post-embryonic
development.

Results
Phylogenetic analysis of Wnt protein sequences and
designation of Wnt gene subfamilies

Combining the findings of database searches, genome
annotation, degenerate PCR and Wnt genes identified in
previous studies (see Methods), we found a total of eleven Wnt genes in Achaearanea, (with WntA from
Cupiennius representing a twelfth spider Wnt gene),
seven in Glomeris, twelve in Daphnia, ten in Ixodes and
twelve in Platynereis. These sequences were then aligned
with the Wnt sequences of Acyrthosiphon pisum, Drosophila, Homo and Tribolium (Additional files 1 and 3). A
further alignment was generated using a larger set of
Wnt genes containing the Wnt sequences from Caenorhabditis, Capitella, Helobdella, Lottia and Nematostella
in addition to the sequences used in the first set of Wnt
genes (Additional files 1 and 4). We then carried out
phylogenetic analyses using Maximum likelihood
approaches (Wnt sequence sets 1 and 2) and additional
Bayesian approaches (Wnt sequence set 1) (see Methods) (Figure 1 and Additional files 5, 6, 7).
Our phylogenetic analyses of both sets of Wnt
sequences found good support for the thirteen metazoan
Wnt gene subfamilies and twelve protostome Wnt subfamilies, which corroborates the findings of several previous studies (Figure 1 and Additional files 5, 6, 7)
[17-19,21]. The phylogenetic assignment of Wnt genes
from each organism to particular subfamilies is summarised in figure 2.

Page 4 of 21

Our results show that the common ancestor of the
arthropods possessed members of all Wnt subfamilies
with the exception of Wnt3, supporting the previous
suggestion that Wnt3 was lost in the lineage leading to
protostomes [17]. This is most strikingly evidenced by
the identification of members of all the other twelve
Wnt subfamilies in both Daphnia and Platynereis (Figures 1, 2 and Additional files 5, 6, 7).
Comparison of insects to other arthropods illustrates
that the loss of Wnt genes appears to be more common
among the insects, either through loss in the lineage
leading to the insects, for example, Wnt2 and Wnt4, or
losses in particular clades, for example, Wnt16 in holometabolous insects, Wnt11 in dipterans, and WntA in
Drosophila (Figure 2). However there are probably also
some cases of Wnt gene loss in non-insect arthropods,
for example, Wnt10 may have been lost in chelicerates
and myriapods (Figure 2), and we were unable to find a
Wnt2 orthologue in Ixodes. In addition, we cannot
exclude that there has been more extensive loss of Wnt
genes in Glomeris as an alternative explanation to limitations in screening using degenerate PCR in this
species.
In contrast to the patterns of Wnt gene loss, the presence of duplicates of Wnt genes appears to be less frequent. While we found duplications of both Wnt7 and
Wnt11 in Achaearanea, no other duplications have yet
been found in any other arthropod (Figure 2). Furthermore, although duplications of Wnt5, Wnt11 and Wnt16
are found in other lophotrochozoans, we found only single copies of each Wnt gene in Platynereis (Figure 2) [17].
Several Drosophila and Caenorhabditis Wnt genes
have previously been described as ‘orphan’ genes, however, our phylogenetic analysis allowed us to assign
these genes to specific subfamilies. We found strong
support that Drosophila WntD is the Drosophila orthologue of Wnt8 [19,59] (Figures 1, 2, and Additional file
5). Moreover, while the Caenorhabditis Wnt genes Cwn1, Cwn-2 and lin-44 were previously assigned to the
Wnt4, Wnt5 and Wnt10 subfamilies respectively, the
homology of mom-2 and egl-20 could not be determined
[19]. Our analysis supports the previous assignments of
Cwn-1, Cwn-2 and lin-44, and furthermore indicates
that mom-2 and egl-20 are probably Wnt9 and Wnt16
orthologues respectively (Additional file 5).
Synteny of Wnt genes

Analysis of the arrangement of Wnt genes on the Daphnia genome scaffolds revealed two syntenic clusters of
these genes: Wnt9-Wnt1-Wnt6-Wnt10 and Wnt5-Wnt7
(Additional file 8). This is consistent with similar Wnt
clusters in other metazoans, including Nematostella, and
therefore reflects an ancient arrangement of Wnt genes
in animals [17,60]. Indeed Lottia gigantea and Daphnia

Janssen et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:374
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/374

Page 5 of 21

Figure 1 Maximum likelihood tree of Wnt amino acid sequences in selected metazoans. Bootstrap values/poster probabilities from
Maximum likelihood and Bayesian analyses respectively are given on branches. Note that support for the position of Is_Wnt16 was only found
using Maximum likelihood (see also Additional file 5). Wnt amino acid sequences were used from the following species: Achaearanea
tepidariorum (At), Acyrthosiphon pisum (Ap), Cupiennius salei (Cs), Daphnia pulex (Dp), Drosophila melanogaster (Dm), Glomeris marginata (Gm),
Homo sapiens (Hs), Ixodes scapularis (Is), Platynereis dumerilii (Pd) and Tribolium castaneum (Tc). Bootstrap values and posterior probabilities of all
branches are given in Additional files 6 and 7 respectively.

Janssen et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:374
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/374

Page 6 of 21

Figure 2 Metazoan Wnt genes. The Wnt subfamilies (1 to 11, 16 and A) found in the various metazoans are represented by coloured boxes.
Grey boxes indicate the loss of particular Wnt subfamilies and boxes with question marks indicate Wnts not found in some animals, but which
cannot be definitively described as ‘lost’ because the relevant genomes have not been sequenced or require more comprehensive annotation.
Duplicated Wnts are represented by two overlapping boxes. Note that Wnt8 is also called WntD in Drosophila and Tribolium. The phylogenetic
relationships of the various animals is indicated by the tree on the left [14-16,21]. The asterisk indicates that for WntA an orthologue was isolated
from another spider, Cupiennius. Note that the complete Achaearanea Wnt6 sequence was only identified subsequent to the phylogenetic
analysis.

exhibit very similar organisation of these Wnt genes
(Additional file 8). However, the precise organisation of
these clusters can vary between lineages, for example,
Wnt6 and Wnt9 are oriented differently in Drosophila
and Daphnia (Additional file 8). Interestingly, these Wnt
clusters may represent ancient duplications of Wnt
genes; a hypothesis supported by the phylogenetic relationships of wg and Wnt6, and Wnt9 and Wnt10 in our
study (Figure 1 and Additional file 5) and several previous studies [17-19].
Expression of Wnt genes

To further compare the Wnt genes among arthropods
and annelids and to investigate the possible developmental roles of these genes, we characterised the expression of these genes in Achaearanea, Glomeris, and
Platynereis and further characterised Wnt genes with
segmentally reiterated expression in Tribolium [14].
Note that the Drosophila Wnt gene names do not refer
to homology with vertebrate Wnt subfamilies, but rather
they were mostly named in the order they were discovered (e.g. DWnt2 is actually a Wnt7 orthologue not a
Wnt2 orthologue). Therefore, below, we use the gene

name with respect to its vertebrate orthologue and
where appropriate give the Drosophila name in parenthesis, with the exception of wg (also see Additional file 1).
wg

In Achaearanea, wg is expressed in stripes in the L1 and
L2 segments, but only during stage 8, and such stripes
are never observed in the other prosomal segments
(Additional file 9: panel a). Subsequently, dots of wg
expression associated with the developing limb buds are
observed in all prosomal segments (Figure 3a, and Additional file 9: panel b). In the opisthosoma, At-wg is only
expressed in the dorsal cells of the O2 and O3 segments
(Figure 3c, d, and Additional file 9: panel b), and is not
observed in the SAZ at any stage (Figure 3b). Later in
development, At-wg expression continues in the prosomal appendages, and is also observed in opisthosomal
limb buds, the labrum and the hindgut (Figure 3d, and
Additional file 9: panel c).
In contrast, in a different spider, Cupiennius, wg is
expressed at the posterior of each parasegment and in
the SAZ [30] consistent with classic roles in segment
addition and boundary formation as described in other

Janssen et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:374
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/374

Page 7 of 21

Figure 3 wg, Wnt2, Wnt4, Wnt7-1, Wnt7-2 and Wnt11-2 expression in Achaearanea. At-wg is expressed in the anterior ventral portion of the
limb buds (a), but is not observed in ventral or dorsal regions of the prosomal segments or in the SAZ (b). Expression of At-wg extends along
the axis of the growing legs and is observed in dorsal stripe in O2 and O3 (c) and later in O1 to O5 in groups of cells in the opisthosomal limb
buds (d). At-Wnt2 expression is observed from stage 9 onwards in a central and lateral triangular shaped domain in the developing head lobes
(e). At-Wnt4 is only expressed in a few cells at the very posterior of the SAZ during late embryonic development (f). Whereas At-Wnt7-1 is only
expressed in the SAZ (g), At-Wnt7-2 is expressed at the base of the appendages and in a lateral anterior and posterior domain in the head lobes
(h). At-Wnt11-2 expression appears at stage 6 in the posterior end of the embryo and persists in the SAZ throughout embryonic development (i).
At-Wnt11-2 is also expressed in an anterior domain along the proximo-distal leg axis, the buds of the opisthosomal appendages and in the
stomodeal region (i). Ch, cheliceres; Pp, pedipalps; L1 and L4, leg bearing segments; O1 to O5, opisthosomal segments; SAZ, segment addition
zone. (a) to (d), ventral views of whole mounted embryos. (e), lateral view. (f), anterior view with posterior curving to the right. (g) to (i), flat
mounted embryos with anterior to the left.

arthropods such as Tribolium (Figure 4a, b)
[3,33,34,61,62]. Remarkably, this suggests that Achaearanea has either lost the expression and associated functions of wg in most segments and the SAZ or there is
an additional paralogous wg gene in this spider not
found in our PCR screen.
wg expression in Platynereis was previously described
in [35]. wg is expressed at the posterior boundary of
each segment both in the trochophore larva (Figure 5a,
b) and during posterior growth (Figure 6a). During
annelid posterior growth, wg expression is also observed
in the hindgut and in the posterior-most pygidial ectoderm (Figures 6b) [35].
Wnt2

It is likely that the Wnt2 subfamily was lost in the lineage leading to insects (Figure 2), and although we were

unable to isolate an orthologue from Glomeris we
assayed the expression of the Wnt2 genes from the spider Achaearanea and the annelid Platynereis.
In the spider Achaearanea, Wnt2 is first expressed
relatively late in embryogenesis, in the ocular region of
the developing cephalic lobes at stage 9, and this expression pattern persists into stage 10 (Figure 3e). We did
not observe a distinct expression pattern for Wnt2 in
Platynereis, possibly because of a low level of expression.
Wnt4

It is probable that the Wnt4 subfamily was also lost in
the lineage leading to insects, but is present in other
arthropods and lophotrochozoans (Figure 2). Analysis of
Wnt4 expression in Achaearanea and Platynereis shows
it is highly divergent between chelicerates and annelids.
In Achaearanea, Wnt4 expression is restricted to only

Janssen et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:374
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/374

(a)

T1

Page 8 of 21

(b)

T3

A9

wg
en

(c)

A7

A8

(d)
A8

T3
Wnt5
en

T1

(e)

T1

T3

A2

A3

(f)

A8

Wnt6
en
A2

(g)

A3

(h)
A9

T1

Wnt7
en

T3

(i)

A2

A3

(j)
A9

T1

Wnt10
en

T3

(k)

A8

A9

(l)
WntA
en
T1

T3

A9

A2

A3

Figure 4 Expression of wg, Wnt5, Wnt6, Wnt7 Wnt10 and WntA with respect to en in Tribolium. Germ band extended Tribolium embryos
double stained for transcripts of en and wg (a), (b); Wnt5 (c), (d); Wnt6 (e), (f); Wnt7 (g), (h); Wnt10 (i), (j) and WntA (k), (l). High magnification
images of segments are shown in (b), (d), (f), (h), (j) and (l). All embryos are shown with anterior to the left. thoracic (T1, T2) and abdominal (A2,
A3, A8, A9) segments are indicated.

Janssen et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:374
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/374

Page 9 of 21

Figure 5 Expression patterns of five Wnt genes in 48 hours post-fertilization trochophore larvae of the annelid Platynereis. The
expression of these Wnt genes is observed either in reiterated ectodermal segmental stripes and/or in the pygidial/proctodeal presumptive
territory. A schematic description of the trochophore larva is given in (k). pt: the prototroch, a ciliated belt used for swimming, also highlighted
by a black line on larvae photographs, divides the larva into an apical episphere and a vegetal hyposphere; pr: proctodeum; s: stomodeum; ps:
peristomium, a band of embryonic tissues around the forming mouth; 0: anterior-most segmental unit; 1-3: presumptive areas of the larval
appendage-bearing segments. h: the future head of the worm formed by the episphere plus peristomium plus segment 0; t: the future trunk of
the worm formed by larval segments 1-3 plus the pygidium. (l) shows the two approximate focal planes that are used for larvae photographs.
The first and third panel columns (a), (c), (e), (g), (i) show ventral views of trochophore larvae, focusing mainly on tissues of the ventral
neuroectoderm that will form the ventral nerve cord. The second and fourth panel columns (b), (d), (f), (h), (j) are frontal optical section focusing
on the lateral parapodia-forming fields. The Wnt stripes corresponding to each presumptive larval segment are numbered 1, 2, 3. In addition, a
more anterior metameric unit located just below the prototroch is numbered 0. This unit does not produce a larval segment but fuses with the
head early in development. Black asterisks show expressions in the pygidial/proctodeal area. Green asterisks show expressions in the stomodeal
bulb that will give rise to the mouth. The midline expression of Pd-Wnt4 is indicated by a black arrow. Internal Pd-Wnt5 and Pd-Wnt11 expression
potentially located either in the segmental mesoderm or in ectodermal cells of the chaetal sacs are shown by red arrowheads. Additional
expression of Wnt genes in the nascent brain are described elsewhere [84].

few cells at the very posterior of the germ band during
the later stages of embryogenesis (Figure 3f). In contrast,
in Platynereis, Wnt4 is expressed in stripes in the anterior part of each segment and could therefore be
involved in defining segment boundaries (Figures 5c, d,
6l). The stripes are limited to the dorsal and lateral
parts of nascent embryonic and post-embryonic segments. Additionally, Pd-Wnt4 is expressed in a longitudinal stripe along the ventral midline in forming

segments as well as the SAZ and the ventral pygidial
ectoderm (Figures 5c, d, 6l).
Wnt5

In Tribolium, Wnt5 is expressed in ventral stripes at the
posterior of each parasegment and curiously in at least
one row of cells in the anterior of each parasegment
overlapping with en expression (Figure 4c, d). Tc-Wnt5
expression is also observed in the SAZ, distal tips of

Janssen et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:374
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/374

(a)

Wnt1

Page 10 of 21

(e)

vent Wnt11

(b)

vent Wnt16

(f )

Wnt11

dors Wnt5

dors Wnt16

vent

(n)

(j)

(g)
Wnt1

(m)

(i)

sag

(k)

Wnt5

vent

(o)

sag

(c)
Wnt11

front

(h)
Wnt16

sag

(l)
Wnt10

Wnt5

lat
lat

(p)

vent

(d)
Wnt16

vent
Wnt7

Wnt10

dors

Wnt4

Wnt1

Wnt10

Wnt11

Wnt4

Wnt5

front

vent

Wnt16

Wnt7

Figure 6 Expression patterns of seven Wnt genes during posterior segment addition in the annelid Platynereis. All panels show series of
segments produced 8 days after caudal amputation and regeneration; vent, dors, lat: ventral, dorsal and lateral views respectively. Sag and front:
sagittal and frontal sections (optical or tissue) respectively. The SAZ is highlighted with a yellow dashed line in all micrographs. The pygidium is
located below or right of the SAZ line, depending on the view. In (g), (j), (l), (n), arrows indicate the position of segmental grooves. (a), (b)
Expression of Wnt1 in the posterior part of forming segments and parapodia (a), in the hindgut (hollow arrowheads) and in the ectoderm of the
pygidium (black arrowhead). (c), (d) Expression of Wnt10 in the posterior part of forming segments and parapodia, as well as in the hindgut
(hollow arrowheads). (e)-(g) Expression of Wnt11 in the posterior part of forming segments and parapodia, in a pair of cells of the ganglia of the
ventral nerve cord (black arrowhead) and in the ectoderm at the base of the pygidial cirri (hollow arrowheads). (g)-(k) Expression of Wnt16 in the
posterior part of forming segments but not in parapodia. (k) Expression of Wnt16 in the mesoderm of the pygidium (red arrowhead) but not in
the ectoderm (black arrowheads). (l) Expression of Wnt4 in the ventral midline of forming segments (black arrow), in the ventral part of the SAZ
and pygidium (hollow arrowhead) and in the anterior part of forming segments. (m)-(o) Expression of Wnt5 in stripes in the anterior part of
forming segments and in a complex pattern in the forming parapodia. (n) Is a close up view of (m) at the level of the ventral ectoderm,
showing the location of Wnt5 stripes posterior to the segmental grooves. (o) Shows the weaker dorsal stripes of Wnt5 that do not reach the
dorsal midline, unlike Wnt10, Wnt11 and Wnt16. Black arrowheads show the forming parapodia. (p) Expression of Wnt7 in the hindgut (hollow
black arrowhead) and broadly in the segmental mesoderm (red arrowheads). Patterns are recapitulated schematically in the lower part of the
figure. All schemes are ventral views. A brown dashed line represent the SAZ. For the purpose of clarity, the expression of Wnt5 and Wnt7 in the
mesoderm of forming segments has been omitted.

Janssen et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:374
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/374

Page 11 of 21

Figure 7 Expression of Wnt5, Wnt8 and Wnt16 in Achaearanea. At-Wnt5 is expressed segmentally in the developing neuroectoderm directly
anterior to en (a), (b). At-Wnt5 expression can also be detected in the head lobes, the developing labrum, the developing heart, a ring like
domain in the appendages and in the SAZ (a). At-Wnt8 is expressed segmentally and directly anterior to en expression (c), (d). At-Wnt8 is also
expressed in the SAZ, the cephalic lobes, the developing stomodeum and the appendages. At-Wnt16 transcripts are also found in segmental
strips directly anterior to en (e), (f), as well as in the tips of the legs and in a broad domain in the developing brain. At-Wnt16 expression is not
observed in the SAZ (e). L1 and L4, leg bearing segments; O1 to O4, opisthosomal segments; SAZ, segment addition zone. All embryos are flat
mounted with anterior to the left.

developing appendages, in the region of the labrum/
stomodeum, and the ocular region of the head lobes
(Figure 4c) [14].
In Achaearanea, Wnt5 is first expressed in a broad
anterior domain (Additional file 9: panel d), and subsequently, in the cephalic lobes, throughout the SAZ,
and segmentally in the developing neuroectoderm on
either side the ventral midline, juxtaposed to en
expressing cells (Figure 7a, b). At-Wnt5 transcripts can
also be detected in a medial ring in the appendages,
the labrum and the heart (Figure 7a). Similar expression patterns have been described for Wnt5 in Cupiennius [30,63].
In Platynereis, Wnt5 is also expressed in clear segmental stripes. However, in contrast to Wnt5 expression
observed at the posterior region of parasegments in
arthropods, Pd-Wnt5 is only expressed in the anterior
part of segments (Figures 5e, f, 6m-o, and Additional
file 10: panel f). These stripes encompass both the ectoderm and the underlying mesoderm (Figure 5f). PdWnt5 is also expressed weakly in the hindgut during

posterior growth and in a complex pattern in forming
appendages.
Wnt6

In Tribolium, Wnt6 is expressed in the developing brain,
appendages, and in segmental stripes that overlap with
en expressing cells (i.e. posterior to wg expression) (Figure 4e, f). Tc-Wnt6 is also expressed in a sub-terminal
region of the SAZ (Figure 4e) [14]. In Glomeris, Wnt6 is
expressed in reiterated stripes in completed segments,
directly anterior to en expression, and at later stages is
observed in dorsal patches in each segment (Figure 8a,
b) similar to Wnt6 expression in older Tribolium
embryos. In addition, Gm-Wnt6 is expressed in specific
domains in the developing brain, in and at the posterior
of the germ band, including expression in the anal
valves (Figure 8a). Diffuse expression of Gm-Wnt6 is
also observed in the gut later in embryogenesis (not
shown).
In Platynereis, Wnt6 is expressed in the mesoderm of
trochophore larvae, and in the mesodermal layer of the

Janssen et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:374
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/374

Page 12 of 21

Figure 8 Expression of Wnt genes in Glomeris. Stage 3 embryo double stained for Wnt6 and en (a). Higher magnification of ventral trunk
segments T1 to T3 of same embryo in (a) showing abutting expression of Wnt6 and en (b). Expression of Wnt16 and en in a stage 3 embryo (c).
Higher magnification of ventral trunk segments T1 to T3 of same embryo in (c) showing abutting segmental expression of Wnt16 and en (d).
Expression of WntA and en in a stage 5 embryo (e). Higher magnification of ventral trunk segments T1 to T4 of same embryo in (e) showing
abutting segmental expression of WntA and en (f). Stage 5 embryo stained for Wnt7 (g). Arrow indicates expression in the midgut. Note that
Gm-Wnt7 expression appears to be restricted to embryos older than approximately stage 3. Expression of Wnt8 in a stage 0.3 embryo (h). Faint
expression of Gm-Wnt8 at the posterior is out of focus in this picture. Coloration in the middle of the embryo is in the yolk; this artificial staining
appears when over-staining Glomeris embryos, which was necessary to detect specific Wnt8 transcripts. Note that Gm-Wnt8 expression appears
to be restricted to embryos younger than approximately stage 1. Expression of Wnt11 in a stage 0.3 embryo (i) and a stage 3 embryo (j).
Expression of Gm-Wnt11 is restricted to the anal valves (av) and the growing appendages (i), (j). Expression of Glomeris wg is described elsewhere
[32,33]. All embryos are shown with anterior to the left. Embryos in (a) to (f) are flat mounted. Abbreviations: an, antennal segment; av, anal
valve; lb, labrum; md, mandibulary segment; mx, maxillary segment; OC, optic lobes; pmd, pre-mandibulary segment; pmx, post-maxillary
segment; T1-T4, trunk segments one to four.

Janssen et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:374
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/374

Page 13 of 21

intestine in the growing juvenile (Additional file 10:
panels a and g).

observed in a few cells scattered in the gut endoderm
(Additional file 10: panel h).

Wnt7

Wnt10

In Tribolium, Wnt7 is expressed segmentally in two
clusters of cells either side of the ventral midline abutting en expressing cells, essentially in a similar pattern
to Tc-wg (Figure 4a, b, g, h) [14]. Tc-Wnt7 is later
expressed in the dorsal of the developing limbs and in
the developing brain (Figure 4g) [14].
The two Achaearanea Wnt7 paralogues exhibit nonoverlapping expression patterns similar to subsets of TcWnt7 expression: At-Wnt7-1 is expressed only in the
SAZ (Figure 3g), and At-Wnt7-2 is expressed in the
proximal dorsal region of the developing appendages
and in the developing brain (Figure 3h). However,
neither of the spider Wnt7 genes or Glomeris Wnt7 is
expressed in a segmental pattern like Tc-Wnt7. GmWnt7 is expressed in older embryos at the posterior of
the germ band in the anal valves, the brain, the heart,
the midgut, the labrum, the mandibles, and possibly also
weakly in the other developing appendages (Figure 8g).
In Platynereis, Wnt7 is expressed in the mesoderm of
the larva (not shown) and later during juvenile growth
(Figure 6p). Pd-Wnt7 is also strongly expressed in the
hindgut (Figure 6p).

Again we were unable to isolate a Wnt10 gene from
either Achaearanea or Glomeris and in addition no
Wnt10 orthologue was found in the Ixodes gene models
(Figure 2). In Tribolium, Wnt10 is expressed in a similar
pattern to wg in the cephalic lobes, appendages and at
the posterior parasegmental boundaries abutting en
expression (Figure 4i, j) [14]. Similar to wg/Wnt1
expression in Platynereis, Pd-Wnt10 is expressed at the
posterior boundary of each segment and in the hindgut
during posterior growth (Figure 6c, d). Surprisingly, we
did not observe a similar expression pattern in the trochophore larva perhaps due to probe detection limitations. Instead, two pairs of cells were stained
presumably in the anterior larval mesoderm (Additional
file 10: panel d).
Wnt11

In Achaearanea embryos, Wnt8 is expressed in the posterior most cells of the SAZ, the cephalic lobes, the
developing stomodeum, the appendages, and in ectodermal stripes anterior to en in each segment (Figure 7c, d)
[24]. Although Wnt8 is also expressed in the SAZ of
Tribolium embryos, it is not expressed segmentally in
this beetle [14,23].
In Glomeris, Wnt8 is expressed in two anterior
domains and in the putative SAZ (albeit quite weakly),
however, expression was only found in early embryos
(Figure 8h) and no segmentally reiterated expression
was observed.
Platynereis Wnt8 is expressed strongly in the future
brain of the larva (Additional file 10: panel b). Faint ventral stripes are also detected in late stage trochophore
larvae (Additional file 10: panel b), but no corresponding pattern is detected during posterior growth.

There are two Wnt11 genes in Achaearanea. While we
did not detect any embryonic expression of the Wnt11-1
paralogue, At-Wnt11-2 is expressed in the SAZ starting
at stage 6 (Additional file 9: panel e) and then throughout segmentation (Figure 3i). At-Wnt11-2 is also
expressed in the developing appendages in an anterior
domain along the proximo-distal axis of the prosomal
appendages and in a distal domain in the buds of
opisthosomal appendages (Figure 3i). In Glomeris,
Wnt11 is first expressed at the posterior of the germ
band (Figure 8i), and later in the anal valves, and at the
tips of each appendage (Figure 8j). In the maxillae three
spots of expression are also observed that resemble the
expression of wg in Glomeris (Figure 8j).
In Platynereis, Wnt11 is strongly expressed in segmental stripes in the posterior part of each segment in a
similar position to wg in the larva (Figure 5g, h) and
during juvenile growth (Figure 6e-g). Pd-Wnt11 is also
expressed in the brain (not shown), the stomodeum and
the presumptive pygidium (Figure 5h). During posterior
growth, it is also strongly expressed posteriorly, but in
the ectoderm covering the pygidium at the base of the
tentacular cirri rather than in the hindgut like other
Wnt genes (Figure 6e).

Wnt9

Wnt16

We were unable to isolate a Wnt9 gene from either spider species or Glomeris, but this may reflect a limitation
of degenerate PCR rather than a loss in these lineages
because a Wnt9 orthologue is found in the tick Ixodes
(Figure 2). In Platynereis, Wnt9 is first expressed at the
posterior pole in the trochophore larva (Additional file
10: panel c). During juvenile posterior growth, it is just

Investigation of Wnt16 expression in Achaearanea, Glomeris and Platynereis showed that in all three of these
animals Wnt16 is expressed in segmental stripes directly
anterior to en (Figures 5i, j, 6h-j, 7e, f, 8c, d). Thus like
wg, Wnt16 might be involved in the generation of segmental and parasegmental boundaries in annelids and
arthropods respectively (perhaps with the exception of

Wnt8

Janssen et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:374
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/374

holometabolous insects, see figure 2). In nascent segments of Glomeris and Achaearanea embryos, Wnt16 is
observed in ventral restricted stripes (Figures 7e, f, 8c).
However, in older segments Wnt16 is expressed in
stripes either side of the ventral midline (Figures 7e, f,
8c, d). Wnt16 expression is also observed in the cephalic
lobes and the distal tips of the appendages in the spider
and millipede (Figures 7e, 8c).
In Platynereis, Wnt16 is expressed in segmental stripes
just at the posterior border of segments (Figure 5i, j, 6hk). Interestingly, the trochophore larvae show five stripes
of Wnt16 of unequal strength, in addition to the three
parapodia bearing larval trunk segments delineated by
the other Wnt genes. Pd-Wnt16 is also expressed in the
peristomium (the “ring” that carries the mouth just
below the prototroch in annelids) and in a transient segmental anlage just posterior to it. Both segment-like
structures fuse with the head at metamorphosis. During
posterior growth, Pd-Wnt16 is also expressed in the
pygidium mesoderm, but not in the hindgut or pygidial
ectoderm like other Wnt genes (Figure 6k).
WntA

Analysis of the expression of WntA orthologues in Tribolium, Cupiennius and Platynereis again revealed quite
different patterns for this Wnt subfamily across protostomes. In Tribolium, WntA is expressed in the head
lobes, appendages, SAZ and segmental stripes (Figure
4k, l) [14]. The segmental expression of WntA in Tribolium is again found anterior to en in a similar domain
to wg (Figure 4l). Glomeris WntA is expressed in clusters
of cells in the ventral neuroectoderm posterior to en
expressing cells, at the posterior end of the germ band
(weakly) and developing heart (Figure 8e, f) [33]. Expression of WntA is also observed in the SAZ of the spider
Cupiennius (Additional file 9: panel g), and although we
also observed expression in a distal domain in the spinnerets and a lateral spot in the cheliceres, WntA is not
expressed segmentally in this spider (Additional file 9:
panels g-i). Thus WntA expression is rather different
between mandibulates and chelicerates.
In Platynereis, Pd-WntA is strongly expressed in the
parapodial anlagen in larvae and during posterior
growth (Additional file 10: panels e and i). Pd-WntA
expression is later observed at the distal extremities of
growing parapodia (Additional file 10: panel i). A striped
expression in the mesoderm during posterior growth
has probably no connection to segment formation as
high magnification shows that these stripes correspond
to the walls of lateral blood vessel branching from the
dorsal and ventral blood vessels (Additional file 10:
panel j).

Page 14 of 21

Discussion
Ancestral composition, conservation, loss and duplication
of protostome Wnt genes

It has been shown that the thirteen subfamilies of Wnt
genes found in metazoans appeared before the evolution
of bilaterians, and that thirteen and twelve subfamilies
are represented in extant deuterostomes and protostomes
respectively [17-22] (Figure 2). Strikingly we have now
found twelve Wnt subfamilies in both an arthropod, the
crustacean Daphnia, and in the annelid Platynereis confirming that the common ancestor of protostomes contained all Wnt subfamilies except Wnt3. Furthermore,
our study, the first broad survey of Wnt gene diversity
across arthropods, shows that the common ancestors of
arthropods and ecdysozoans also contained representatives of all twelve Wnt subfamilies found in protostomes
(Figures 1, 2, and Additional file 5).
In insects there has been extensive loss of Wnt genes,
for example, only seven and six Wnt genes are found in
Drosophila and Acyrthosiphon respectively [14,16]. This
reflects the absence of Wnt2 and Wnt4 in all insects
and lineage specific patterns of loss such as Wnt11 in
dipterans (Figure 2). Moreover, this suggests that while
the loss of Wnt genes has been common in insects and
the nematode Caenorhabditis, most ecdysozoans may
actually have retained a larger repertoire of these genes
(Figure 2). Similarly, the leech, Helobdella, also appears
to have lost a number of Wnt genes with respect to
other lophotrochozoans like Capitella [17] and Platynereis. However the reasons for retention of a large repertoire of Wnt genes in some lineages and extensive loss
in others is currently unknown.
Curiously duplications of individual Wnt genes (i.e.
apart from those generated by whole genome duplications in deuterostomes) are rather rare (Figure 2). The
reason for this could be that the concentration of individual Wnt ligands is important for the overall combinatorial output of Wnt signalling in particular tissues (see
below). Indeed, in animals with Wnt duplications, the
paralogues appear to have been subject to subfunctionalisation, as evidenced by distinct expression patterns of
the Wnt7 and Wnt11 paralogues in the spider, and
duplicated Wnt genes in lophotrochozoans [17]. Our
data also support previous phylogenetic studies of Wnt
genes suggesting ancient duplications may have given
rise to clusters of Wnt genes, such as the Wnt9-wgWnt6-Wnt10 cluster found in Daphnia and other
metazoans (Additional files 5 and 8).
Combinatorial action of Wnts

Our present study of Wnt gene expression in a range
of arthropods and an annelid, and previous studies in

Janssen et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:374
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/374

SAZ/Pg

Figure 9 Metameric and posterior expression of Wnt genes in
protostomes. Expression of Wnt genes is illustrated with respect to
the parasegmental and segmental boundaries of arthropods and
annelids respectively, and the SAZ/Pg (boundaries are represented
by dashed vertical lines). Anterior is to the left. Expression in the
ventral part of the segment and SAZ/Pg is shown as filled boxes
and expression in the dorsal represented by hatched boxes. Note
that the metameric dorsal expression of Gm-Wnt7 and Gm-Wnt16 is
restricted to presumptive heart tissue. SAZ, segment addition zone;
Pg, pygidium; NA, not applicable; Dm, Drosophila melanogaster; At,
Achaearanea tepidariorum; Cs, Cupiennius salei, Gm, Glomeris
marginata; Pd, Platynereis dumerilii; Tc, Tribolium castaneum.

Page 15 of 21

other metazoans [14,17,18,21,64,65], show that numerous Wnt genes are often expressed in the same cells or
tissues; for example, various Wnt genes are expressed
in the SAZ and at the same position within segments
(Figure 9). Does this imply that Wnt ligands are essentially redundant? The lack of obvious phenotypic
effects associated with the loss of expression of some
Wnt genes in particular tissues suggests that they may
be functionally interchangeable in certain contexts [e.g.
[23,66]]. However, there are also several arguments
against the general functional redundancy of these
ligands. First, the fact that twelve or thirteen Wnt
genes are retained in many animals argues against
redundancy. Second, since Wnt ligands diffuse from
source cells and thus can act on a range of different
target cells, expression of multiple Wnts in the same
cell does not necessarily mean they have the same
function. Third, studies directly comparing the function of different Wnts have provided direct experimental evidence that these ligands are functionally distinct.
In Drosophila wg and Wnt9 (DWnt4) have similar
expression in segmental stripes, but they play different
roles in ectodermal patterning [5,67], while overexpression of the other five Drosophila Wnt genes has
no affect on cuticular patterns [64,68]. Furthermore,
Llimargas and Lawrence [64] found that wg and Wnt7
(DWnt2) act together during Drosophila tracheal development, but none of the five other Drosophila Wnts
could perform the same roles. These results, as well as
those of studies in Caenorhabditis [e.g. [65,66]], reflect
increasing evidence that Wnt signalling is more complex than simple linear signalling pathways, and that
Wnt ligands expressed in similar patterns may work
agonistically and antagonistically to fine tune cellular
responses [42]. Indeed, it is perhaps even more realistic
to think of an overall Wnt ligand landscape or code
rather than the function of individual Wnts [69].
The specificity of Wnt signalling is also facilitated by
the great complexity of transduction mechanisms
employed [42]. Wnt ligands are capable of binding to
several different receptors, including 7-pass Frizzled
receptors and the receptor tyrosine kinases Ryk and Ror,
which in turn are capable of activating several crosstalking cytoplasmic pathways. It has been proposed that
these transduction mechanisms allow a combinatorial
action of Wnt ligands in particular tissues [42]. Interestingly, however, this also opens the possibility that a
given cellular response might be achieved with several
different Wnt ligand combinations. Therefore, the
expression of alternative Wnt combinations in a given
tissue in different taxa could still generate the same
intracellular signalling outcome. This may partly explain
the diversification Wnt ligand gene expression across
metazoans.

Janssen et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:374
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/374

Wnts and segmentation in protostomes

Our analysis allows the first broad comparison of Wnt
expression patterns across the arthropods, and our characterisation of Wnt expression in an annelid extends
this comparison to other segmented protostomes.
Arguably, one of the most interesting observations
emerging from this comparison is the high proportion
of Wnt genes expressed in segmental stripes reminiscent
of segment polarity gene expression in Drosophila (Figure 9). In fact, no less than six Wnt genes show this
kind of pattern in Platynereis and Tribolium, and at
least five in Glomeris and four in Achaearanea (Figure
9). It is particularly striking that eleven out of twelve
protostome Wnt genes (the exception being Wnt2) exhibit a striped pattern in at least one species, and no less
than nine (Wnt11 and Wnt4 are the exceptions) in at
least one arthropod (Figure 9). Generally, these stripes
appear before the morphological appearance of segments, suggesting that some of these genes may play
roles in segment formation, although others may only
be involved in the ontogenesis of segmental organs
rather than segmental patterning. The last common
ancestor of all arthropods was undoubtedly a metameric
animal, and our study suggests that a number of Wnt
genes probably played a role in the patterning of its segments. However, only wg is expressed in similar stripes
across all arthropod species considered here, and even
the function of this gene may have changed somewhat
in Achaearanea. Therefore, some Wnt genes have lost
their segmental expression in some lineages, and indeed,
Wnt16 was lost altogether in holometabolous insects
(Figure 2). Conversely, some Wnt genes may have
evolved segmental patterning functions, for example,
Wnt7 in Tribolium.
Experimental approaches have also revealed differences among Wnt genes with respect to their role in
segmental patterning. In Drosophila, only wg and Wnt9
(DWnt4) appear to regulate the establishment of the
metameric pattern [5,7,64,68,70]. In Tribolium, while wg
RNAi produces segmentation defects [23], RNAi against
other segmentally expressed Wnt genes did not affect
segmentation. Clearly functional data on the other Wnt
genes in arthropods, particularly non-insect arthropods,
is required to investigate the roles of these genes in segmental patterning further.
Despite differences in the expression and probably the
function of Wnt genes across taxa, there are nevertheless some noticeable similarities: Wnt5 is expressed in
ventral stripes in Tribolium, Achaearanea and Platynereis; Wnt16 is expressed in reiterated stripes in Achaearanea, Glomeris and Platynereis; Wnt10 forms stripes in
Tribolium and Platynereis (Figure 9). Furthermore, with
a few exceptions, segmental expression of Wnt genes
nearly always anteriorly abuts en expression in

Page 16 of 21

arthropods (Figure 9). Together with the fact that no
Wnt gene demarcates the segmental boundary in arthropods (with the possible exception of Tribolium Wnt6),
this vindicates the view that parasegment boundaries are
the essential organizers of segmental patterning in these
animals [30,31].
It was previously proposed that the ancestral protostome was an annelid-like segmented worm, and that
arthropod cuticular segmentation evolved out of frame
with the ancestral segmentation [71]. This is supported
by en, wg [35] and hedgehog [36] expression patterns in
Platynereis. In this view, arthropod parasegments are an
embryonic recapitulation of ancestral segmentation. In
Platynereis, although incomplete stripes of Wnt4 and
Wnt5 are found in the anterior region of segments, wg,
Wnt10, Wnt11 and Wnt16 are all expressed in circular
stripes at the posterior segmental boundaries, anterior
to en (Figure 9), thus supporting the hypothesis that
arthropod parasegments and annelid segments are
homologous. It is noteworthy, however, that the analysis
of the expression patterns of a complete set of Wnt
genes in another annelid, the leech Helobdella, led the
authors of this study to very different interpretations
[17]. In the leech, the duplicated genes Wnt11a,
Wnt11c, Wnt16a and Wnt16b also give striped segmental patterns but only in the late germ band stage well
after the segmental pattern is already laid down, whereas
in Capitella, Wnt5, Wnt11 and Wnt16 are not expressed
in ectodermal stripes but rather in segmentally iterated
patterns in the mesoderm [17]. Only Capitella Wnt11 is
expressed transiently in the ectoderm of the SAZ. These
discrepancies show that the actual role of Wnt signalling
in segment formation will have to be tested in detail in
non-insect arthropod and annelid models before reaching conclusions on its evolution.
Wnt signalling and posterior development

Drosophila undergoes a long germ band mode of development, where all segments are formed simultaneously.
In contrast most insects and other arthropods develop
through variations of the short germ band mode, which
is more ancestral. In the short germ band mode of
development, only the anterior-most segments are initially specified and subsequently the posterior segments
are added sequentially from unsegmented posterior tissue, which is often called a posterior growth zone
[72,73]. However, even within arthropods, the term
“growth zone” encompasses a diversity of tissue types
that use different combinations of cell proliferation,
movement and differentiation to generate new segments
[40]. Therefore, the ‘growth zone’ may be more appropriately named a segment addition zone (SAZ) because
sequential addition of segments is truly the key common
process involved [31,40,41]. Despite differences in the

Janssen et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:374
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/374

process of segment addition among arthropods, it has
also been argued that this is an ancestral character of
bilaterians [41].
A large proportion of Wnt genes in Tribolium,
Achaearanea and Glomeris embryos are expressed in
the SAZ (Figure 9). The crucial role played by Wnt signalling during segment addition has been functionally
demonstrated in a few arthropods. Wnt8 knockdown in
both Tribolium and in Achaearanea resulted in a posterior truncation of the body [23,24]. A similar phenotype is obtained in Oncopeltus with wg RNAi [25], but
not in Tribolium [23] or Gryllus [74], despite expression
of wg in the SAZ of this beetle. This suggests that the
respective roles of Wnt ligands during segment addition
have evolved differentially among arthropod lineages,
and is consistent with differences in the expression of
Wnt genes in this region (Figure 9).
Axis truncations produced by depletions of armadillo/
b-catenin, pangolin/TCF and arrow/LRP5/6 in Gryllus,
Tribolium and Oncopeltus [23,25,74,75] further evidence
the crucial role played by the b-catenin pathway in segment addition. Nevertheless, given the multiplicity of
ligands involved, it will be important to investigate
whether posterior addition of segments in arthropods is
regulated by Wnt ligands through combinatorial transduction pathways [42].
Analysis of posterior expression of Wnt genes in the
annelid Platynereis brings some valuable insight to
understanding segment addition in protostomes. No less
than six Wnt ligands are expressed in the terminal
region of the annelid body, the pygidium, during axis
elongation. However the annelid SAZ is located anterior
to the pygidium and is represented by a thin ring of
cells in which even-skipped and caudal (cad) are
involved in regulating the synchronous mitotic cycles
that produce new segments [41]. The posterior expression domains of Platynereis wg, Wnt5, Wnt7, Wnt10,
Wnt11 and Wnt16 cannot completely be superimposed
because they cover the hindgut, the external pygidial
ectoderm, and the pygidium mesoderm. However none
of these Platynereis Wnt genes is actually expressed in
the SAZ sensu stricto, suggesting that they act from a
posterior signalling centre located in the mitotically
quiescent pygidium and separate from the proliferating
cells that are the source of the new segments [41].
In the short germ band arthropods considered in this
work, the detailed organization of the SAZ is largely
unknown and therefore it is not known if there is a
separate segment founder cell zone and putative signalling centre that differentially express Wnt genes. Clearly
some arthropod Wnt genes are expressed in the proctodeum towards the end of embryogenesis, and thus in a
location homologous to the annelid hindgut. Interestingly, the posterior expression of wg in an arthropod

Page 17 of 21

with anamorphic development (segments are added during larval development), the crustacean Triops, shows
two separate domains: a complete ring near or in the
SAZ and the hindgut [62].
It has been shown that knockdown of the posteriorly
expressed Wnt8 in a spider perturbs the posterior
expression of cad and Delta/Notch pathway components
[24]. Given similar observations in several vertebrates
[76-79], a Wnt signalling centre acting upstream of cad
and the Delta/Notch pathway may have regulated posterior development in the last common ancestor of bilaterian animals (Urbilateria) [80,81]. This interpretation
is further strengthened by the arthropod expression data
in our study. Moreover, we also found evidence for a
posterior Wnt signalling centre in a distantly related
protostome group, the annelids, in which cad and
Delta/Notch are also involved in posterior addition
[41,82,83]. However, the evolution of posterior Wnt signalling has likely been complex in bilaterians, for example, Wnt8 is not expressed at this location in annelids
and therefore its role must be played by one or several
other Wnts ligands in these animals.

Conclusions
We have found evidence that combinations of many
Wnt genes probably regulate segment addition and patterning across protostomes. However further functional
studies in a range of protostomes are required to investigate the precise roles of these ligands during these
important developmental processes. As well as giving
greater insights into the complexities of Wnt signalling,
such analyses will also allow questions regarding the
evolution of segmentation [37,38] to be addressed
further.
Additional material
Additional file 1: Table of species and Wnt genes used in this study.
Additional file 2: Table of degenerate primer sequences.
Additional file 3: Alignment of 93 Wnt amino acid sequences from
Achaearanea, Acyrthosiphon. Cupiennius, Daphnia, Drosophila, Glomeris,
Homo, Ixodes, Platynereis and Tribolium.
Additional file 4: Alignment of 147 Wnt amino acid sequences from
Achaearanea, Acyrthosiphon, Caenorhabditis, Capitella, Cupiennius,
Daphnia, Drosophila, Glomeris, Helobdella, Homo, Ixodes, Lottia,
Nematostella, Platynereis and Tribolium.
Additional file 5: Maximum likelihood tree of metazoan Wnt amino
acid sequences from set 2. Bootstrap values from Maximum likelihood
analysis are given on branches. Wnt amino acid sequences were used
from the following species: Achaearanea tepidariorum (At), Acyrthosiphon
pisum (Ap), Caenorhabditis elegans (Ce), Capitella teleta (Ct), Cupiennius
salei (Cs), Daphnia pulex (Dp), Drosophila melanogaster (Dm), Glomeris
marginata (Gm), Helobdella robusta (Hr), Homo sapiens (Hs), Ixodes
scapularis (Is), Lottia gigantea (Lg), Nematostella vectensis (Nv), Platynereis
dumerilii (Pd) and Tribolium castaneum (Tc).
Additional file 6: Maximum likelihood tree of Wnt amino acid
sequences from set 1. Bootstrap values are given on branches. Wnt

Janssen et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:374
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/374

amino acid sequences were used from the following species:
Achaearanea tepidariorum (At), Acyrthosiphon pisum (Ap), Cupiennius salei
(Cs), Daphnia pulex (Dp), Drosophila melanogaster (Dm), Glomeris
marginata (Gm), Homo sapiens (Hs), Ixodes scapularis (Is), Platynereis
dumerilii (Pd) and Tribolium castaneum (Tc).
Additional file 7: Bayesian tree of Wnt amino acid sequences from
set 1. Posterior probabilities are given on branches. Wnt amino acid
sequences were used from the following species: Achaearanea
tepidariorum (At), Acyrthosiphon pisum (Ap), Cupiennius salei (Cs), Daphnia
pulex (Dp), Drosophila melanogaster (Dm), Glomeris marginata (Gm), Homo
sapiens (Hs), Ixodes scapularis (Is), Platynereis dumerilii (Pd) and Tribolium
castaneum (Tc).
Additional file 8: Synteny of Wnt genes in metazoans. Position and
orientation of syntenic Wnt genes in Drosophila melanogaster, Tribolium
castaneum, Apis mellifera, Daphnia pulex, Lottia gigantea and Nematostella
vectensis. The sizes of the clusters are not drawn to scale. Note that Wnt5
and Wnt7 gene are found in Drosophila, Tribolium and Apis but are not
clustered in these species.
Additional file 9: wg, Wnt5, Wnt11 and Wnt16 expression in
Achaearanea, and WntA expression in Cupiennius. At-wg expression is
first detected at stripes in L1 and L2 (a). By stage 9, At-wg is expressed in
anteroventral regions of the prosomal limb buds and dots in the dorsal
of O2 and O3, but no expression is seen in the other opisthosomal
segments or in the SAZ (b). Later at stage 10, At-wg is expressed as
stripes in O2 and O3 and expression is also observed in the labrum and
the hindgut (c). At-Wnt5 expression is first observed in an anterior stripe
at stage 5 that broadens during stage 6 (d). At-Wnt11-2 is first expressed
at the posterior pole of the embryo during stage 6 (e). Similar to AtWnt5, At-Wnt16 expression is observed as a broad anterior stripe at stage
6 (f). Strong expression of Cs-WntA is visible in the SAZ (g), (g’). Weaker
expression of Cs-WntA is also detectable at the distal ends of the
spinnerets (h), (h’) and in two small spots in the cheliceres (i), (i’)
indicated by arrows. Lateral views are shown in (a), (b), (g) and (g’),
ventral views with posterior wrapping to the right in (c), (d) and (f),
posterior view with dorsal up in (e), ventral views with posterior to the
right in (h) and (h’), and anterior views with posterior to the right in (i)
and (i’). Brightfield and DAPI counterstained images of the same embryos
are shown in (g), (h), (i) and (g’), (h’), (i’) respectively. Ch, cheliceres; Lb,
labrum; L1 and L4, leg bearing segments; O1 to O5, opisthosomal
segments; SAZ, segment addition zone.
Additional file 10: Additional expression patterns of Wnt ligand
genes in the annelid Platynereis. (a)-(e) ventral views of 48 hpf
trochophores. The black dashed line is the prototroch. Red arrowheads:
Broad Pd-Wnt6 expression in the mesodermal bands (a) and in few cells
of the anterior mesoderm for Pd-Wnt10 (d); Black hollow arrowhead: PdWnt9 expression in the proctodeum; Black asterisk: Pd-WntA expression in
the stomodeum; pX: Pd-WntA expression in the setal sacs. (f)-(j) details of
Wnt gene expression during posterior growth. (f) Frontal optical section
of a 7-day regenerate; Red arrowhead: striped Pd-Wnt5 expression in the
mesoderm and ectoderm of forming segments. (g) Ventral view of a 7day regenerate showing the mesodermal expression of Pd-Wnt6. (h)
Transverse section in a nascent segment of a 7-day regenerate, showing
isolated cells in the gut expressing Pd-Wnt9; g: gut lumen; end: gut
endoderm; gm: gut mesoderm; dlm: dorsal longitudinal muscles; vlm:
ventral longitudinal muscles; vnc: ventral nerve cord; p: parapodia. (i)
Ventral view of a 7-day regenerate showing parapodial expression of PdWntA. (j) Close up dorsal view of nascent segments in a 7-day
regenerate, showing Pd-WntA expression in the walls of lateral vessels
(red arrowheads) branching from the dorsal longitudinal vessel (dlv). The
yellow dashed line in (e), (g), (i) is the approximate position of the SAZ.

Acknowledgements
APM, WMGD, GEB and RJ were funded by by the European Union via the
Marie Curie Training network “ZOONET” (MRTN-CT-2004-005624). Financial
funding was provided to GEB by the Swedish Natural Science Council
(VR) and the Swedish Royal Academy of Sciences (KVA). The Balavoine
group wishes to acknowledge the CNRS, the University Paris-Diderot, the

Page 18 of 21

ANR (grant BLAN-0294) for funding. F.P. is a Research Fellow of The Terry
Fox Foundation through an award from the National Cancer Institute of
Canada. Work in the group of NMP is funded by the DFG (grant PR1109/
1-1). The sequencing of Daphnia and portions of the analyses were
performed at the DOE Joint Genome Institute under the auspices of the
U.S. Department of Energy’s Office of Science, Biological and
Environmental Research Program, and by the University of California,
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory under Contract No. W-7405Eng-48, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory under Contract No.
DE-AC02-05CH11231, Los Alamos National Laboratory under Contract No.
W-7405-ENG-36 and in collaboration with the Daphnia Genomics
Consortium (DGC), http://daphnia.cgb.indiana.edu. Additional analyses
were performed by wFleaBase, developed at the Genome Informatics Lab
of Indiana University with support to Don Gilbert from the National
Science Foundation and the National Institutes of Health. Coordination
infrastructure for the DGC is provided by The Center for Genomics and
Bioinformatics at Indiana University, which is supported in part by the
METACyt Initiative of Indiana University, funded in part through a major
grant from the Lilly Endowment, Inc. Our work benefits from and
contributes to the Daphnia Genomics Consortium. We thank Natália
Feitosa for technical assistance, Catherine Hill for information and
discussion regarding Ixodes sequences, and Nico Posnien for critical
reading of the manuscript.
Author details
1
Department of Earth Sciences, Palaeobiology, Villavägen 16, SE-75236
Uppsala, Sweden. 2Centre de Génétique Moléculaire du CNRS, FRE 3144,
avenue de la Terrasse 91198 Gif-sur-Yvette, France. 3Georg-August-Universität
Göttingen, Johann-Friedrich-Blumenbach-Institut für Zoologie und
Anthropologie, Abteilung Entwicklungsbiologie, GZMB, Ernst-Caspari-Haus,
Justus-von-Liebig-Weg 11, 37077 Göttingen, Germany. 4Department of
Integrative Biology, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA.
5
Division of Biology, Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS 66506, USA.
6
Department of Organismic and Evolutionary Biology, Harvard University, 16
Divinity Ave, Cambridge MA 02138, USA. 7Institut für Populationsgenetik,
Veterinärmedizinische Universität Wien, Veterinärplatz 1, A-1210, Vienna,
Austria. 8The Center for Genomics and Bioinformatics, Indiana University,
Bloomington, IN 47405, USA. 9Friedrich-Schiller-University Jena, Department
of Genetics, Philosophenweg 12, 07743 Jena, Germany. 10Institut Jacques
Monod, CNRS/Université Paris-Diderot, 15 rue Hélène Brion, 75205 Paris
Cedex 13, France. 11Genzyme Corporation, One The Mountain Road,
Framingham, MA 01701, USA. 12Monsanto Company, St. Louis, MO, 63107,
USA.
Authors’ contributions
Experiments were conceived by APM, GB, RJ, WGMD, FP, SJB and RB.
Experiments were performed by RJ, MLG, GB, MP, FP, RB, ES, CH and APM.
Analysis of the data was carried out by all authors. The paper was written by
APM, GB, WGMD, RJ, CK and MV. All authors contributed to revising early
versions of the manuscript and read the final version.
Received: 21 May 2010 Accepted: 1 December 2010
Published: 1 December 2010
References
1. Logan CY, Nusse R: The Wnt signaling pathway in development and
disease. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 2004, 20:781-810.
2. Croce JC, McClay DR: Evolution of the Wnt pathways. Methods Mol Biol
2008, 469:3-18.
3. Baker NE: Molecular cloning of sequences from wingless, a segment
polarity gene in Drosophila: the spatial distribution of a transcript in
embryos. EMBO J 1987, 6(6):1765-1773.
4. Ganguly A, Jiang J, Ip YT: Drosophila WntD is a target and an inhibitor of
the Dorsal/Twist/Snail network in the gastrulating embryo. Development
2005, 132(15):3419-3429.
5. Graba Y, Gieseler K, Aragnol D, Laurenti P, Mariol MC, Berenger H, Sagnier T,
Pradel J: DWnt-4, a novel Drosophila Wnt gene acts downstream of
homeotic complex genes in the visceral mesoderm. Development 1995,
121(1):209-218.
6. Herman MA, Vassilieva LL, Horvitz HR, Shaw JE, Herman RK: The C. elegans
gene lin-44, which controls the polarity of certain asymmetric cell

Janssen et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:374
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/374

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

divisions, encodes a Wnt protein and acts cell nonautonomously. Cell
1995, 83(1):101-110.
Janson K, Cohen ED, Wilder EL: Expression of DWnt6, DWnt10, and
DFz4 during Drosophila development. Mech Dev 2001, 103(12):117-120.
Maloof JN, Whangbo J, Harris JM, Jongeward GD, Kenyon C: A Wnt
signaling pathway controls hox gene expression and neuroblast
migration in C. elegans. Development 1999, 126(1):37-49.
Rijsewijk F, Schuermann M, Wagenaar E, Parren P, Weigel D, Nusse R: The
Drosophila homolog of the mouse mammary oncogene int-1 is identical
to the segment polarity gene wingless. Cell 1987, 50(4):649-657.
Rocheleau CE, Downs WD, Lin R, Wittmann C, Bei Y, Cha YH, Ali M,
Priess JR, Mello CC: Wnt signaling and an APC-related gene specify
endoderm in early C. elegans embryos. Cell 1997, 90(4):707-716.
Russell J, Gennissen A, Nusse R: Isolation and expression of two novel
Wnt/wingless gene homologues in Drosophila. Development 1992,
115(2):475-485.
Shackleford GM, Shivakumar S, Shiue L, Mason J, Kenyon C, Varmus HE:
Two wnt genes in Caenorhabditis elegans. Oncogene 1993,
8(7):1857-1864.
Thorpe CJ, Schlesinger A, Carter JC, Bowerman B: Wnt signaling polarizes
an early C. elegans blastomere to distinguish endoderm from
mesoderm. Cell 1997, 90(4):695-705.
Bolognesi R, Beermann A, Farzana L, Wittkopp N, Lutz R, Balavoine G,
Brown SJ, Schroder R: Tribolium Wnts: evidence for a larger repertoire in
insects with overlapping expression patterns that suggest multiple
redundant functions in embryogenesis. Dev Genes Evol 2008, 218(34):193-202.
Dearden PK, Wilson MJ, Sablan L, Osborne PW, Havler M, McNaughton E,
Kimura K, Milshina NV, Hasselmann M, Gempe T, et al: Patterns of
conservation and change in honey bee developmental genes. Genome
Res 2006, 16(11):1376-1384.
Shigenobu S, Bickel RD, Brisson JA, Butts T, Chang C, Christiaens O,
Davis GK, Duncan EJ, Ferrier DEK, Iga M, et al: Comprehensive survey of
developmental genes in the pea aphid, Acyrthosiphon pisum: frequent
lineage-specific duplications and losses of developmental genes. Insect
Molecular Biology 2010, 19:47-62.
Cho SJ, Valles Y, Giani VC Jr, Seaver EC, Weisblat DA: Evolutionary
dynamics of the Wnt gene family: a lophotrochozoan perspective. Mol
Biol Evol 2010, 27:1645-1658.
Lengfeld T, Watanabe H, Simakov O, Lindgens D, Gee L, Law L, Schmidt HA,
Ozbek S, Bode H, Holstein TW: Multiple Wnts are involved in Hydra
organizer formation and regeneration. Dev Biol 2009, 330(1):186-199.
Prud’homme B, Lartillot N, Balavoine G, Adoutte A, Vervoort M:
Phylogenetic analysis of the Wnt gene family. Insights from
lophotrochozoan members. Curr Biol 2002, 12(16):1395.
Garriock RJ, Warkman AS, Meadows SM, D’Agostino S, Krieg PA: Census of
vertebrate Wnt genes: isolation and developmental expression of
Xenopus Wnt2, Wnt3, Wnt9a, Wnt9b, Wnt10a, and Wnt16. Dev Dyn 2007,
236(5):1249-1258.
Kusserow A, Pang K, Sturm C, Hrouda M, Lentfer J, Schmidt HA, Technau U,
von Haeseler A, Hobmayer B, Martindale MQ, et al: Unexpected complexity
of the Wnt gene family in a sea anemone. Nature 2005,
433(7022):156-160.
Lee PN, Pang K, Matus DQ, Martindale MQ: A WNT of things to come:
evolution of Wnt signaling and polarity in cnidarians. Semin Cell Dev Biol
2006, 17(2):157-167.
Bolognesi R, Farzana L, Fischer TD, Brown SJ: Multiple Wnt genes are
required for segmentation in the short-germ embryo of Tribolium
castaneum. Curr Biol 2008, 18(20):1624-1629.
McGregor AP, Pechmann M, Schwager EE, Feitosa NM, Kruck S, Aranda M,
Damen WG: Wnt8 is required for growth-zone establishment and
development of opisthosomal segments in a spider. Curr Biol 2008,
18(20):1619-1623.
Angelini DR, Kaufman TC: Functional analyses in the milkweed bug
Oncopeltus fasciatus (Hemiptera) support a role for Wnt signaling in
body segmentation but not appendage development. Dev Biol 2005,
283(2):409-423.
Ingham PW, Baker NE, Martinez-Arias A: Regulation of segment polarity
genes in the Drosophila blastoderm by fushi tarazu and even skipped.
Nature 1988, 331(6151):73-75.

Page 19 of 21

27. Martinez-Arias A, Lawrence PA: Parasegments and compartments in the
Drosophila embryo. Nature 1985, 313(6004):639-642.
28. Martinez-Arias A, Baker NE, Ingham PW: Role of segment polarity genes in
the definition and maintenance of cell states in the Drosophila embryo.
Development 1988, 103(1):157-170.
29. Nusslein-Volhard C, Wieschaus E: Mutations affecting segment number
and polarity in Drosophila. Nature 1980, 287(5785):795-801.
30. Damen WG: Parasegmental organization of the spider embryo implies
that the parasegment is an evolutionary conserved entity in arthropod
embryogenesis. Development 2002, 129(5):1239-1250.
31. Damen WG: Evolutionary conservation and divergence of the
segmentation process in arthropods. Dev Dyn 2007, 236(6):1379-1391.
32. Janssen R, Budd GE, Damen WG, Prpic NM: Evidence for Wg-independent
tergite boundary formation in the millipede Glomeris marginata. Dev
Genes Evol 2008, 218(7):361-370.
33. Janssen R, Prpic NM, Damen WG: Gene expression suggests decoupled
dorsal and ventral segmentation in the millipede Glomeris marginata
(Myriapoda: Diplopoda). Dev Biol 2004, 268(1):89-104.
34. Hughes CL, Kaufman TC: Exploring myriapod segmentation: the
expression patterns of even-skipped, engrailed, and wingless in a
centipede. Dev Biol 2002, 247(1):47-61.
35. Prud’homme B, de Rosa R, Arendt D, Julien JF, Pajaziti R, Dorresteijn AW,
Adoutte A, Wittbrodt J, Balavoine G: Arthropod-like expression patterns of
engrailed and wingless in the annelid Platynereis dumerilii suggest a
role in segment formation. Curr Biol 2003, 13(21):1876-1881.
36. Dray N, Tessmar-Raible K, Le Gouar M, Vibert L, Christodoulou F, Schipany K,
Guillou A, Zantke J, Snyman H, Behague J, et al: Hedgehog signaling
regulates segment formation in the annelid Platynereis. Science 2010,
329(5989):339-342.
37. Chipman AD: Parallel evolution of segmentation by co-option of
ancestral gene regulatory networks. Bioessays 2010, 32(1):60-70.
38. Couso JP: Segmentation, metamerism and the Cambrian explosion. Int J
Dev Biol 2009, 53(8-10):1305-1316.
39. Prpic NM: Parasegmental appendage allocation in annelids and
arthropods and the homology of parapodia and arthropodia. Front Zool
2008, 5:17.
40. Peel AD, Chipman AD, Akam M: Arthropod segmentation: beyond the
Drosophila paradigm. Nat Rev Genet 2005, 6(12):905-916.
41. de Rosa R, Prud’homme B, Balavoine G: Caudal and even-skipped in the
annelid Platynereis dumerilii and the ancestry of posterior growth. Evol
Dev 2005, 7(6):574-587.
42. van Amerongen R, Nusse R: Towards an integrated view of Wnt signaling
in development. Development 2009, 136(19):3205-3214.
43. Prpic NM, Schoppmeier M, Damen WG: The American Wandering Spider
Cupiennius salei. The Handbook of Non-Model Organisms Cold Spring
Harbor Press; 2008.
44. Lawson D, Arensburger P, Atkinson P, Besansky NJ, Bruggner RV, Butler R,
Campbell KS, Christophides GK, Christley S, Dialynas E, et al: VectorBase: a
data resource for invertebrate vector genomics. Nucleic Acids Res 2009, ,
37 Database: D583-587.
45. Raible F, Tessmar-Raible K, Osoegawa K, Wincker P, Jubin C, Balavoine G,
Ferrier D, Benes V, de Jong P, Weissenbach J, et al: Vertebrate-type intronrich genes in the marine annelid Platynereis dumerilii. Science 2005,
310(5752):1325-1326.
46. Notredame C, Higgins DG, Heringa J: T-Coffee: A novel method for fast
and accurate multiple sequence alignment. J Mol Biol 2000,
302(1):205-217.
47. Gouy M, Guindon S, Gascuel O: SeaView version 4: A multiplatform
graphical user interface for sequence alignment and phylogenetic tree
building. Mol Biol Evol 27(2):221-224.
48. Stamatakis A, Ludwig T, Meier H: RAxML-III: a fast program for maximum
likelihood-based inference of large phylogenetic trees. Bioinformatics
2005, 21(4):456-463.
49. Whelan S, Goldman N: A general empirical model of protein evolution
derived from multiple protein families using a maximum-likelihood
approach. Mol Biol Evol 2001, 18(5):691-699.
50. Huelsenbeck JP, Ronquist F: MRBAYES: Bayesian inference of phylogenetic
trees. Bioinformatics 2001, 17(8):754-755.
51. Pechmann M, Prpic NM: Appendage patterning in the South American
bird spider Acanthoscurria geniculata (Araneae: Mygalomorphae). Dev
Genes Evol 2009, 219(4):189-198.

Janssen et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:374
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/374

52. Akiyama-Oda Y, Oda H: Early patterning of the spider embryo: a cluster
of mesenchymal cells at the cumulus produces Dpp signals received by
germ disc epithelial cells. Development 2003, 130(9):1735-1747.
53. Prpic NM, Tautz D: The expression of the proximodistal axis patterning
genes Distal-less and dachshund in the appendages of Glomeris
marginata (Myriapoda: Diplopoda) suggests a special role of these
genes in patterning the head appendages. Dev Biol 2003, 260(1):97-112.
54. Klingler M, Gergen JP: Regulation of runt transcription by Drosophila
segmentation genes. Mech Dev 1993, 43(1):3-19.
55. Brown SJ, Parrish JK, Beeman RW, Denell RE: Molecular characterization
and embryonic expression of the even-skipped ortholog of Tribolium
castaneum. Mech Dev 1997, 61(1-2):165-173.
56. Tautz D, Pfeifle C: A non-radioactive in situ hybridization method for the
localization of specific RNAs in Drosophila embryos reveals translational
control of the segmentation gene hunchback. Chromosoma 1989,
98(2):81-85.
57. Tessmar-Raible K, Steinmetz PR, Snyman H, Hassel M, Arendt D: Fluorescent
two-color whole mount in situ hybridization in Platynereis dumerilii
(Polychaeta, Annelida), an emerging marine molecular model for
evolution and development. Biotechniques 2005, 39(4):460-464.
58. McGregor AP, Hilbrant M, Pechmann M, Schwager EE, Prpic NM,
Damen WG: Cupiennius salei and Achaearanea tepidariorum: Spider
models for investigating evolution and development. Bioessays 2008,
30(5):487-498.
59. Nusse R: An ancient cluster of Wnt paralogues. Trends Genet 2001,
17(8):443.
60. Sullivan JC, Ryan JF, Mullikin JC, Finnerty JR: Conserved and novel Wnt
clusters in the basal eumetazoan Nematostella vectensis. Dev Genes Evol
2007, 217(3):235-239.
61. Nagy LM, Carroll S: Conservation of wingless patterning functions in the
short-germ embryos of Tribolium castaneum. Nature 1994,
367(6462):460-463.
62. Nulsen C, Nagy LM: The role of wingless in the development of
multibranched crustacean limbs. Dev Genes Evol 1999, 209(6):340-348.
63. Janssen R, Damen WG: Diverged and conserved aspects of heart
formation in a spider. Evol Dev 2008, 10(2):155-165.
64. Llimargas M, Lawrence PA: Seven Wnt homologues in Drosophila: a case
study of the developing tracheae. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2001,
98(25):14487-14492.
65. Zinovyeva AY, Yamamoto Y, Sawa H, Forrester WC: Complex network of
Wnt signaling regulates neuronal migrations during Caenorhabditis
elegans development. Genetics 2008, 179(3):1357-1371.
66. Gleason JE, Szyleyko EA, Eisenmann DM: Multiple redundant Wnt
signaling components function in two processes during C. elegans
vulval development. Dev Biol 2006, 298(2):442-457.
67. Gieseler K, Graba Y, Mariol MC, Wilder EL, Martinez-Arias A, Lemaire P,
Pradel J: Antagonist activity of DWnt-4 and wingless in the Drosophila
embryonic ventral ectoderm and in heterologous Xenopus assays. Mech
Dev 1999, 85(1-2):123-131.
68. Fradkin LG, Noordermeer JN, Nusse R: The Drosophila Wnt protein DWnt3 is a secreted glycoprotein localized on the axon tracts of the
embryonic CNS. Dev Biol 1995, 168(1):202-213.
69. Guder C, Philipp I, Lengfeld T, Watanabe H, Hobmayer B, Holstein TW: The
Wnt code: cnidarians signal the way. Oncogene 2006, 25(57):7450-7460.
70. Buratovich MA, Anderson S, Gieseler K, Pradel J, Wilder EL: DWnt-4 and
Wingless have distinct activities in the Drosophila dorsal epidermis. Dev
Genes Evol 2000, 210(3):111-119.
71. Snodgrass RE: Evolution of Annelida, Onychophora and Arthropoda.
Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections 1938, 138:1-77.
72. Liu PZ, Kaufman TC: Short and long germ segmentation: unanswered
questions in the evolution of a developmental mode. Evol Dev 2005,
7(6):629-646.
73. Davis GK, Patel NH: Short, long, and beyond: molecular and
embryological approaches to insect segmentation. Annu Rev Entomol
2002, 47:669-699.
74. Miyawaki K, Mito T, Sarashina I, Zhang H, Shinmyo Y, Ohuchi H, Noji S:
Involvement of Wingless/Armadillo signaling in the posterior sequential
segmentation in the cricket, Gryllus bimaculatus (Orthoptera), as
revealed by RNAi analysis. Mech Dev 2004, 121(2):119-130.
75. Bolognesi R, Fischer TD, Brown SJ: Loss of Tc-arrow and canonical Wnt
signaling alters posterior morphology and pair-rule gene expression in

Page 20 of 21

76.

77.

78.

79.

80.
81.

82.

83.
84.

85.

86.

87.

88.

89.

90.

91.

92.

93.

94.

95.

96.

97.

the short-germ insect, Tribolium castaneum. Dev Genes Evol 2009,
219(7):369-375.
Li HY, Bourdelas A, Carron C, Gomez C, Boucaut JC, Shi DL: FGF8, Wnt8
and Myf5 are target genes of Tbx6 during anteroposterior specification
in Xenopus embryo. Dev Biol 2006, 290(2):470-481.
Shimizu T, Bae YK, Muraoka O, Hibi M: Interaction of Wnt and caudalrelated genes in zebrafish posterior body formation. Dev Biol 2005,
279(1):125-141.
Takada S, Stark KL, Shea MJ, Vassileva G, McMahon JA, McMahon AP: Wnt3a regulates somite and tailbud formation in the mouse embryo. Genes
Dev 1994, 8(2):174-189.
Thorpe CJ, Weidinger G, Moon RT: Wnt/beta-catenin regulation of the
Sp1-related transcription factor sp5l promotes tail development in
zebrafish. Development 2005, 132(8):1763-1772.
Martin BL, Kimelman D: Wnt signaling and the evolution of embryonic
posterior development. Curr Biol 2009, 19(5):R215-219.
McGregor AP, Pechmann M, Schwager EE, Damen WG: An ancestral
regulatory network for posterior development in arthropods. Commun
Integr Biol 2009, 2(2):174-176.
Rivera AS, Gonsalves FC, Song MH, Norris BJ, Weisblat DA:
Characterization of Notch-class gene expression in segmentation stem
cells and segment founder cells in Helobdella robusta
(Lophotrochozoa; Annelida; Clitellata; Hirudinida; Glossiphoniidae). Evol
Dev 2005, 7(6):588-599.
Rivera AS, Weisblat DA: And Lophotrochozoa makes three: Notch/Hes
signaling in annelid segmentation. Dev Genes Evol 2009, 219(1):37-43.
Tomer R, Denes AS, Tessmar-Raible K, Arendt D: Profiling by image
registration reveals common origin of annelid mushroom bodies and
vertebrate pallium. Cell 2010, 142(5):800-809.
Gordon MD, Dionne MS, Schneider DS, Nusse R: WntD is a feedback
inhibitor of Dorsal/NF-kappaB in Drosophila development and immunity.
Nature 2005, 437(7059):746-749.
van Ooyen A, Kwee V, Nusse R: The nucleotide sequence of the human
int-1 mammary oncogene; evolutionary conservation of coding and
non-coding sequences. EMBO J 1985, 4(11):2905-2909.
Wainwright BJ, Scambler PJ, Stanier P, Watson EK, Bell G, Wicking C,
Estivill X, Courtney M, Boue A, Pedersen PS, et al: Isolation of a human
gene with protein sequence similarity to human and murine int-1 and
the Drosophila segment polarity mutant wingless. EMBO J 1988,
7(6):1743-1748.
Katoh M, Hirai M, Sugimura T, Terada M: Cloning, expression and
chromosomal localization of Wnt-13, a novel member of the Wnt gene
family. Oncogene 1996, 13(4):873-876.
Nusse R, Brown A, Papkoff J, Scambler P, Shackleford G, McMahon A,
Moon R, Varmus H: A new nomenclature for int-1 and related genes: the
Wnt gene family. Cell 1991, 64(2):231.
Saitoh T, Hirai M, Katoh M: Molecular cloning and characterization of
WNT3A and WNT14 clustered in human chromosome 1q42 region.
Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2001, 284(5):1168-1175.
Smolich BD, McMahon JA, McMahon AP, Papkoff J: Wnt family proteins
are secreted and associated with the cell surface. Mol Biol Cell 1993,
4(12):1267-1275.
Clark CC, Cohen I, Eichstetter I, Cannizzaro LA, McPherson JD, Wasmuth JJ,
Iozzo RV: Molecular cloning of the human proto-oncogene Wnt-5A and
mapping of the gene (WNT5A) to chromosome 3p14-p21. Genomics
1993, 18(2):249-260.
Saitoh T, Katoh M: Molecular cloning and characterization of human
WNT5B on chromosome 12p13.3 region. Int J Oncol 2001,
19(2):347-351.
Gavin BJ, McMahon JA, McMahon AP: Expression of multiple novel Wnt-1/
int-1-related genes during fetal and adult mouse development. Genes
Dev 1990, 4(12B):2319-2332.
Ikegawa S, Kumano Y, Okui K, Fujiwara T, Takahashi E, Nakamura Y:
Isolation, characterization and chromosomal assignment of the human
WNT7A gene. Cytogenet Cell Genet 1996, 74(1-2):149-152.
van Bokhoven H, Kissing J, Schepens M, van Beersum S, Simons A,
Riegman P, McMahon JA, McMahon AP, Brunner HG: Assignment of
WNT7B to human chromosome band 22q13 by in situ hybridization.
Cytogenet Cell Genet 1997, 77(3-4):288-289.
Saitoh T, Katoh M: Molecular cloning and characterization of human
WNT8A. Int J Oncol 2001, 19(1):123-127.

Janssen et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:374
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/374

Page 21 of 21

98. Lako M, Strachan T, Curtis AR, Lindsay S: Isolation and characterization of
WNT8B, a novel human Wnt gene that maps to 10q24. Genomics 1996,
35(2):386-388.
99. Bergstein I, Eisenberg LM, Bhalerao J, Jenkins NA, Copeland NG,
Osborne MP, Bowcock AM, Brown AM: Isolation of two novel WNT genes,
WNT14 and WNT15, one of which (WNT15) is closely linked to WNT3 on
human chromosome 17q21. Genomics 1997, 46(3):450-458.
100. Kirikoshi H, Sekihara H, Katoh M: WNT10A and WNT6, clustered in human
chromosome 2q35 region with head-to-tail manner, are strongly
coexpressed in SW480 cells. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2001,
283(4):798-805.
101. Hardiman G, Kastelein RA, Bazan JF: Isolation, characterization and
chromosomal localization of human WNT10B. Cytogenet Cell Genet 1997,
77(3-4):278-282.
102. Lako M, Strachan T, Bullen P, Wilson DI, Robson SC, Lindsay S: Isolation,
characterisation and embryonic expression of WNT11, a gene which
maps to 11q13.5 and has possible roles in the development of skeleton,
kidney and lung. Gene 1998, 219(1-2):101-110.
103. McWhirter JR, Neuteboom ST, Wancewicz EV, Monia BP, Downing JR,
Murre C: Oncogenic homeodomain transcription factor E2A-Pbx1
activates a novel WNT gene in pre-B acute lymphoblastoid leukemia.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1999, 96(20):11464-11469.
doi:10.1186/1471-2148-10-374
Cite this article as: Janssen et al.: Conservation, loss, and redeployment
of Wnt ligands in protostomes: implications for understanding the
evolution of segment formation. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010 10:374.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
