<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Shotgun proteomic analysis of mulberry dwarf phytoplasma</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Proteome Science 2010, 8:20. doi: 10.1186/1477-5956-8-20"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Xianling Ji, Yingping Gai, Baoyun Lu, Chengchao Zheng, Zhimei Mu"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 8.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 7.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Ji et al. Proteome Science 2010, 8:20
http://www.proteomesci.com/content/8/1/20

Open Access

RESEARCH

Shotgun proteomic analysis of mulberry dwarf
phytoplasma
Research

Xianling Ji†1, Yingping Gai†2, Baoyun Lu1, Chengchao Zheng2 and Zhimei Mu*1

Abstract
Background: Mulberry dwarf (MD), which is caused by phytoplasma, is one of the most serious infectious diseases of
mulberry. Phytoplasmas have been associated with diseases in several hundred plant species. The inability to culture
phytoplasmas in vitro has hindered their characterization at the molecular level. Though the complete genomes of two
phytoplasmas have been published, little information has been obtained about the proteome of phytoplasma.
Therefore, the proteomic information of phytoplasmas would be useful to elucidate the functional mechanisms of
phytoplasma in many biological processes.
Results: MD phytoplasmas, which belong to the 16SrI-B subgroup based on the 16S DNA analysis, were purified from
infected tissues using a combination of differential centrifugation and density gradient centrifugation. The expressed
proteome of phytoplasma was surveyed by one-dimensional SDS-PAGE and nanocapillary liquid chromatographytandem mass spectrometry. A total of 209 phytoplasma proteins were unambiguously assigned, including the proteins
with the functions of amino acid biosynthesis, cell envelope, cellular processes, energy metabolism, nucleosides and
nucleotide metabolism, replication, transcription, translation, transport and binding as well as the proteins with other
functions. In addition to these known function proteins, 63 proteins were annotated as hypothetical or conserved
hypothetical proteins.
Conclusions: Taken together, a total of 209 phytoplasma proteins have been experimentally verified, representing the
most extensive survey of any phytoplasma proteome to date. This study provided a valuable dataset of phytoplasma
proteins, and a better understanding of the energy metabolism and virulence mechanisms of MD phytoplasma.
Background
The mulberry tree, whose leaves are the chief food for
mulberry silkworm (Bombyx mori L.), is a perennial
woody plant of considerable economic importance and
has long been cultivated for sericulture. Mulberry trees
are often affected by a number of diseases prevalent
throughout their life cycles in different agroclimatic
zones. Among all the diseases, mulberry dwarf (MD) is
one of the most serious infectious diseases [1]. The causal
pathogen of this disease, MD phytoplasma, was observed
in the sieve tubes of plants affected for the first time in
1967 [2]. Phytoplasmas infect several hundred plant species worldwide, representing about 100 families including
ornamental plants and many important crops [3]. They
* Correspondence: gypsd@sina.com
1

College of Forestry, Shandong Agricultural University, Tai'an, Shandong,
271018, PR China
† Contributed equally
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

are morphologically and ultrastructurally resembled animal mycoplasmas [4], which are cell-wall-less prokaryotes in the class Mollicutes [5]. Due to inability in
culturing phytoplasmas in vitro, our knowledge about the
underlying molecular mechanisms for the determination
of factors involved in their pathogenicity and the symptoms evoked in the host plants is limited [5]. The complete genome of the onion yellows phytoplasma and
'Candidatus phytoplasma australiense' have recently
been published [6-8]. Although gene prediction programs
have become more accurate and sensitive, it is still difficult to predict genes accurately from genomic data when
the genes are small or have little homology to other
known genes. Therefore, it is becoming increasingly
important to annotate the genomes, and to distinguish
between authentic genes and pseudo-genes. Verification
of a gene product by proteomic methods is an important
first step in 'annotating the genome' [9]. Analysis of proteins provides more reliable evidence for existence and

© 2010 Ji et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attri-

BioMed Central bution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any
medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Ji et al. Proteome Science 2010, 8:20
http://www.proteomesci.com/content/8/1/20

function of predicted proteins. Although the study of
phytoplasma proteins will benefit greatly from the availabe genome sequence, there are still a great many which
remain to be identified. To better understand the functional mechanisms of phytoplasma in many biological
processes, it is necessary to characterize the expressed
proteome of phytoplasma. With the development of proteomics, more and more proteomics techniques (such as
two-dimensional polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (2DE), matrix-assisted laser desorption ionisation-time-offlight mass spectrometry, liquid chromatography tandem
mass spectrometry, and surface-enhanced laser desorption/inionation-time of flight-mass spectra) are used to
profile proteins [10]. Shotgun proteomics is a method of
identifying proteins in complex mixtures using a combination of high performance liquid chromatography combined with mass spectrometry [11]. Compared with
traditional proteomic methods such as 2-DE, shotgun
proteomics serves as a powerful tool to separate and
identify proteins from complex protein mixtures and possesses the virtues of high efficiency, time, and labor saving [12].
In this study, we performed nanocapillary liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (GeLC-MS/MS)
to characterize the expressed proteome of mulberry
dwarf phytoplasmas by using shotgun proteomics. This
research provides not only a technique to study the phytoplasma proteome, but also a valuable dataset of phytoplasma proteins, thus providing better understanding of
the functional mechanisms of phytoplasma in many biological processes.

Results
MD symptoms and MD phytoplasma phylogenetic analysis

The infected mulberry plants developed typical MD
symptoms including yellowing, chlorosis, phyllody, stunting, and witches' broom (Fig. 1B), when compared to
healthy plants (Fig. 1A). Plants with MD symptoms were
positive by PCR assay, whereas healthy ones were negative, with a diagnostic amplified fragment of 1097 bp containing the 16S rRNA gene (GenBank Accession No.
EF532410). Phylogenetic analysis showed that the
sequenced nucleotides were highly homologous to those
of the 16SrI-B subgroup (aster yellows groups). In addition, the MD phytoplasmas were detected in the sieve
tube of the infected phloem tissues by EM (Fig. 1C). The
visualized cells were spherical or oval, from 50 nm to 200
nm in diameter, and with bilamina membrane. In contrast, these were not found in the healthy plant samples.
No other pathogenic organisms, bacteria, virus, nor
virus-like structures were observed.
Isolation of MD phytoplasma from the infected tissues

The purified MD phytoplasmas were examined by TEM
observation. The result showed that the visualized cells in

Page 2 of 8

the thin slices of purified samples were similar to those
observed in the sieve tubes of infected plants. Most of the
purified MD phytoplasmas were intact, and no organelles, plant cells and their debris were found (Fig. 2). To
display and compare the extractions from infected and
healthy mulberry plants, we carried out SDS-PAGE using
the modified TCA/acetone extraction protocol in combination with CBB staining (Fig. 3). The result indicated
that the purified sample from infected mulberry plants
should be the MD phytoplasma. The purified sample was
subjected to trypsin digestion and analyzed by GeLCMS/MS. Only a few mulberry protein were identified (see
Additional file 1), which might further validate the purification protocol.
Identification and categorization of the MD phytoplasma
protein

The proteins presented in the gel bands were subjected to
trypsin digestion and analyzed by GeLC-MS/MS. Using
the criteria mentioned above, we identified 209 nonredundant proteins including membrane proteins, low
abundance proteins, high molecular weight proteins, and
proteins with extreme pIs (see Additional file 2 and Fig.
4). The most acidic and basic proteins identified by
GeLC-MS/MS have pIs of 2.6 and 12.3, respectively (Fig.
4). These 209 identified proteins could be sorted into 11
categories according to their functions. The most abundant category was hypothetical proteins (38%), and transport and binding proteins (11%) and translation
associated proteins (11%) were in the second place. Replication proteins (8%) were in the third place. Other functional categories included amino acid biosynthesis, cell
envelope, cellular processes, energy metabolism, nucleoside and nucleotide metabolism, and transcription (Fig.
5).

Discussion
Phytoplasma energy metabolism

Phytoplasma, which inhabits nutrient-rich phloem tissue,
has the presence of novel mechanism(s) for energy
metabolism. In this study, 2 protein subunits (see Additional file 2, No. 28 and 29) encoded by genes of the
ATPase operon were identified. However, phytoplasmas
appear to have lost the genes for the ATPase during evolution, and were energy parasites unable to synthesize
their own ATP [6]. So it is likely that these ATPase components identified are not involved in energy generation,
but most likely candidates for generating the electrochemical gradient over the membrane [5]. This is similar
to Chlamydia trachomat, which were thought to have lost
the genes for the ATPase, but have several protein subunits encoded by the genes of ATPase operon [13].
Phytoplasmas have the genes encoding enzymes for
glycolysis, suggesting that they possess a functional glycolysis pathway [14]. Seven enzymes associated with the

Ji et al. Proteome Science 2010, 8:20
http://www.proteomesci.com/content/8/1/20

A

Page 3 of 8

B

C

Figure 1 Mulberry dwarf disease symptoms and mulberry dwarf phytoplasma cells in symptomatic area of the infected leaf. A: Healthy mulberry tree; B: Mulberry dwarf disease tree; C: Mulberry dwarf phytoplasma cells in the infected leaf. Arrow indicates a typical mulberry dwarf phytoplasma cells. Bar 200 nm.

Figure 2 Transmission electron micrographs of ultrathin sections
of phytoplasma cells purified. Bar 200 nm.

glycolysis pathway, including glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase, L-lactate dehydrogenase, phosphoglycerate kinase, pyruvate kinase, triosephosphate
isomerase, fructose-bisphosphate aldolase and phosphoglycero mutase, are also present in our dataset (see Additional file 2, No. 26, 27, 30, 32, 34, 36, and 38).
Phytoplasmas have no phosphotransferase system (PTS)
to import sugars and to generate glucose-6-phosphate to
feed the glycolysis pathway [7]. But the pentitol phosphotransferase enzyme, one of the PTS components, was
found in our dataset (see Additional file 2, No. 35). It is
not clear whether the enzyme has the function to import
pentitol into the cell to feed glycolysis or it is just the left
part of the structural genes which are not completely lost
in evolutionary process. Our proteomic analysis supports
the concept that phytoplasmas depend on the uptake of
phosphorylated hexoses for their carbon source to enter
the glycolytic pathway, because some kinds of ABC transporters (see Additional file 2, No. 104-122), which can
import phosphorylated hexoses from the cytoplasm of
host, were identified. But the conversion of these
imported sugars to glucose-6-phosphate for glycolysis
were not clear and the enzymes required for the conversion were not found in the phytoplasma genomes and our
data, indicating that the glycolysis pathway in phytoplasma may be a concise one. In addition to the components of glycolytic pathways, the pyruvate dehydrogenase
(see Additional file 2, No. 33) which is the key linker reaction enzyme of the glycolysis pathway and the citric-acid
(TCA) cycle was found. Although genetic evidence shows
that the TCA cycle is incomplete in phytoplasma, these

Ji et al. Proteome Science 2010, 8:20
http://www.proteomesci.com/content/8/1/20

Page 4 of 8

findings support the idea that a modified pathway operates [6]. Therefore, the phytoplasmasare are capable of
producing their own energy, but most likely depend
mainly on the glycolytic pathway. The model for the
energy metabolism of MD phytoplasma has been provided (Fig. 6).
Phytoplasma virulence

A

B

Figure 3 Examination of the purified dwarf phytoplasma cell by
one-dimensional SDS-PAGE. A: Separation of phytoplasma proteins
by one-dimensional SDS-PAGE; B: Separation of the healthy mulberry
plant sample extracts from by one-dimensional SDS-PAGE. 150 μg of
proteins was separated on 12% Bis-Tris gel and stained to allow protein
identification.

300

Calculated MW (kDa)

250

Plant pathogenic bacteria possess different types of
pathogenicity genes [15]. However, the phytoplasma
genome possesses no genes homologous to these known
pathogenicity genes, suggesting it has novel mechanisms
for virulence. There was one hemolysin-like protein gene
identified as a possible virulence factor in phytoplasma
genome [14]. Our proteomic data proved the existence of
such a hemolysin-like protein (see Additional file 2, No.
24), speculating that it had the same function as the bacterial virulence factor. Phytoplasmas lack many genes
which are considered to be essential for cell metabolism,
suggesting that they may import a vast array of biological
molecules from the host cytoplasm. This may result in
the metabolic unbalance of the host cell and cause the
disease symptoms. The phytoplasma genome contains
many genes encoding transporter systems, such as ABC
transporters, which aggressively import nutrients from
host cells [14]. Our proteomic analysis proved the existence of these transporters (see Additional file 2, No. 104122). Some proteins of ABC transporters are usually
secreted lipoproteins that bind an external substrate of
the cell and deliver the substrate to the ABC transporters
and may also be involved in adherence to cell surfaces [7].
Furthermore, some ABC transporters can also secrete
toxins into the host cells. Hence, these proteins of ABC
transporters are possible virulence factors of phytoplasmas. Immunodominant proteins of pathogenic bacteria
are likely candidates for host-pathogen interactions such
as attachment to host cells, which could be a prerequisite
for colonization and infection [5]. One immunodominant
protein was recognized in our phytoplasma proteomic
analysis (see Additional file 2, No. 8), which is also a possible virulence factor of phytoplasmas.

200

Hypothetical proteins

150

100

50

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

Calculated pI

Figure 4 The calculated pI of identified phytoplasma proteins
plotted against their calculated molecular weight on a logarithmic scale.

Hypothetical or conserved hypothetical proteins were
proteins that were predicted from nucleic acid sequences
only and either had no homologues in the protein
sequence databases, or were homologous to genomic
sequences of unknown functions [16]. These proteins are
of interest as candidates for gene disruption to reveal new
biological functions, especially if the predicted proteins
can be shown to be temporally produced or have a known
biological activity. Totally 63 proteins designated as
'hypothetical' or 'conserved hypothetical' were detected,

Ji et al. Proteome Science 2010, 8:20
http://www.proteomesci.com/content/8/1/20

Page 5 of 8

Figure 5 The functional category distribution of the 209 identified proteins.

making this the most numerous group of proteins identified in this study (see Additional file 2, No. 130-192). The
detection of peptides from the predicted proteins substantiates the existence of the latter and paves the way for
more detailed studies to characterize their functions. For
phytoplasma has the novel mechanism(s) for virulence
and energy metabolism, these hypothetical proteins may
possibly be responsible for virulence, intracellular survival and energy metabolism. Further analyses of these
proteins using bioinformatics tools, gene expression and
specific antibodies will likely yield new scientific insights
into the adaptation lifestyle and pathogenicity of this
important plant pathogen.
Other proteins

Genome analysis showed that phytoplasmas lack most of
the genes necessary to synthesize nucleotide, amino acid
biosynthesis and fatty acid [6,7]. Our proteomic analysis
supports these results. Only a few proteins related to this
process were detected in our data. So the phytoplasmas
probably cannot synthesize most of the metabolites
assimilated from the host cells. Although phytoplasmas
are bounded to host tissues, their genomes contain a very
limited number of genes encoding proteins related to the
cell envelope biogenesis, cell motility, and secretion [14].
There were also a limited number of proteins detected in
our data related to these processes. This might support
that the ancestor of the phytoplasma may have possessed

a cell wall [14]. Though phytoplasmas can import small
biological molecules from the surrounding host cytoplasm, they cannot import functional housekeeping
enzymes outside their cells. Phytoplasmas have a greater
proportion of proteins for DNA replication, transcription, translation, and other cellular processes, suggesting
that they possess a functional replication, transcription
and translation pathway which may be a concise one.

Conclusions
In conclusion, MD disease is associated with phytoplasmas belonging to the 16SrI-B subgroup (aster yellows). A
method for the purification of MD phytoplasmas from
infected tissues was developed for proteomic analysis.
The expressed proteome of phytoplasma was surveyed by
using a shotgun strategy. Taken together, a total of 209
phytoplasma proteins were verified, representing the
most extensive survey of any phytoplasma proteome to
date. Analysis of MD phytoplasma proteome suggests
that the phytoplasmas depended mainly on a glycolytic
pathway for producing their own energy. In addition, the
phytoplasmas might have a novel mechanism(s) for virulence, and many of the proteins, which are possible virulence factors, were verified. The methods and data in our
study might provide a technique to study phytoplasma
proteome and a better understanding of the functional
mechanisms of phytoplasma in many biological processes.

Ji et al. Proteome Science 2010, 8:20
http://www.proteomesci.com/content/8/1/20

Page 6 of 8

PTS

?

Phytoplasma cell
Plant cell

Figure 6 Model for the energy metabolism of MD phytoplasma.

Methods
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) detection of MD
phytoplasma and sequence analysis

Naturally infected and healthy mulberry samples were
collected from plants in the same garden showing either
well-developed MD symptoms or no MD symptoms.
PCR analyses were performed as follows. Total DNA was
extracted using the cetyltrimethyl-ammonium bromide

method as previously described [17]. The 16S rDNA of
the phytoplasma was amplified by PCR using a universal
primer set as described before [18]. The produced DNA
fragments were individually subcloned into pMD18-T
vector and sequenced. The nucleotide sequences were
analyzed using the DNAMAN (version 4.0) and GenBank
databases.

Ji et al. Proteome Science 2010, 8:20
http://www.proteomesci.com/content/8/1/20

Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) detection of MD
phytoplasma cells in infected leaf

Small pieces of tissue cut from diseased and healthy
leaves were prefixed in 2.5% (w/v) glutaraldehyde, 0.1 M
phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) (pH 7.3) for 2 h at 4°C,
and postfixed in 1% (w/v) OsO4, 0.1 M phosphate-buffered saline (pH 7.3) for 1.5 h at 4°C before dehydration
using an ethanol series, and embedding in Epon 812 resin
(TAAB, Berkshire, UK). Ultrathin sections were cut with
an ultramicrotome (LKB 4800; LKB Products, Bromma,
Sweden) and observed with a transmission electron
microscope (JEM 1010; JEOL, Tokyo, Japan) at 80 kV
after staining with uranyl acetate and lead citrate.
Mulberry dwarf phytoplasma purification

Soft vascular tissues from the diseased mulberry plants
were used for MD phytoplasma purification, following
the method as previously described [19-21] with some
modifications. One hundred and twenty grams of fresh
tissues were cut into pieces and blended in cold PBS (pH
7.0), then were disrupted in a food processor at low speed
for 1 min. The disrupted tissues were rinsed through a
100 (100 mesh/inch) mesh screen, and the vascular tissues were retained. The retained vascular tissues were
homogenized in ice-cold buffer (0.3 M glycin, 0.01 M
MgCl2, 80 U gentamycin, pH 7.4) until no vascular fibers
were discernible and then were squeezed through three
layers of cheesecloth. The solution was blended with the
enzymes (cellulose 1 mg/ml, hemicellulose 0.4 mg/ml,
tartaric acid enzyme 1.5 mg/ml) and maintained at 35°C
for 2 h. The precipitate was collected by centrifugation at
12 000 g for 1 h and resuspended with ice-cold buffer (0.3
M glycin, 0.01 M MgCl2, 0.3 M mannitol, 0.02 M Na2SO4,
80 U gentamicin, pH 7.4). The suspension was subjected
to two cycles of differential centrifugation (5000 g for 15
min and 12 000 g for 1 h at 4°C). The pellets were resuspended with the same buffer and clarified by centrifugation at 2000 g for 5 min. The supernatant was loaded onto
a discontinuous Percoll density gradient and centrifuged
as described by Jiang and Chen [21]. After centrifugation,
the pellet was collected from the fraction at the interphase between 30% and 60% Percoll layers, diluted with
suspending medium (0.3 M D-mannitol and 20 mM
MOPS, pH 7.0) and then centrifuged at 100 000 g for 3 h
at 4°C to remove the Percoll from the suspension. Soft
vascular tissues from the healthy mulberry trees as control were extracted as above. The final pellets were resuspended in PBS (pH 7.0) and examined by electron
microscopy observation. Soft vascular tissues from the
healthy mulberry plants were extracted samely, and the
pellets obtained were used as control.

Page 7 of 8

Examination of the purified MD phytoplasma cells

The extractions obtained as above were first negatively
stained with OsO4 for transmission electron microscopy
using formvar coated copper grids, onto 10 μl of MD phytoplasma cell suspension. After 1 min, the excess liquid
was wicked off with a piece of filter paper, and 10 μl of a
2% OsO4 solution was placed on the grid. After 1 min of
staining of the sample with OsO4, the excess solution was
wicked off, and the grid was allowed to air-dry. Grid was
examined by transmission electron microscopy as
described above.
MD phytoplasma protein extraction and SDS-PAGE

The extractions collected above were homogenized by
ultrasonication, and extracted by TCA-acetone (10%
TCA in acetone containing 0.07% (v/v) β-mercaptoethanol, and incubation overnight at -20°C). After centrifugation (25 000 g for 1 h at 4°C), the pellet was washed twice
with acetone containing 0.07% (v/v) β-mercaptoethanol
(-20°C) and applied on a 12% Bis-Tris gel. The electrophoresis was run on the Ettan DALTII unit (GE Healthcare, Uppsala, Sweden) and the gels were visualized by
Coomassie staining.
GeLC-MS/MS shotgun analysis of MD phytoplasma
proteome

After visualization by Coomassie staining, the whole gel
lanes of MD phytoplasma protein as above were cut into
four pieces of equal size and subjected to in-gel tryptic
digestion as described by [22]. 1-D-LC MS/MS was performed using an LTQ linear IT mass spectrometer
(Thermo, San Jose, CA, USA). The system was fitted with
a C18 RP column (0.15 mm × 150 mm, BioBasic C18,
Thermo Hypersil-Keystone). Mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid in water) and the mobile phase B (0.1% formic
acid in 84% ACN) were selected. The tryptic peptide mixtures were eluted using a gradient of 4-50% B over 50
min, 50-100% B over 4 min and maintained at 100% B for
6 min. The LTQ linear IT mass spectrometer was set so
that one full MS scan was followed by ten MS/MS scans
on the ten most intense ions from the MS spectrum with
the following Dynamic Exclusion™ settings: repeat count
2, repeat duration 30 s, exclusion duration 90 s [18]. Each
sample was analyzed in triplicate.
Protein identification

A forward protein database was extracted from UniProKB http://www.uniprot.org/ using keyword "Mollicutes"
http://www.uniprot.org/uniprot/
?query=Mollicutes&sort=score. There were 36, 627 proteins reported by UniProtKB. For each reported protein
sequence in the forward Mollicutes protein database, a

Ji et al. Proteome Science 2010, 8:20
http://www.proteomesci.com/content/8/1/20

reversed protein sequence was generated using in-house
developed software. All reversed protein sequences were
then attached to the end of the forward Mollicutes protein database to construct an integrated Mollicutes protein database, which was then used for protein
identification. Each raw instrument data were first converted into mzXML format. All mzXML files were then
uploaded into Computational Proteomics Analysis System empowered with three database search engines,
SEQUEST, Mascot, and X!Tandem. Parameters used for
all three protein database search engines are as follows:
parent peptide ion mass-to-charge variation 10 ppm,
fragment ion mass variation 0.7 Dalton, maximum
missed cleavage site of trypsin 1. PeptideProphet and
ProteinProphet were used to assess the confidence of
peptide and protein identification, respectively. We further employed false discovery rate (FDR) to control the
peptide identifications based on the probability scores
given by PeptideProphet. We set FDR ≤ 0.05 for every
MS/MS dataset. Functional classifications were performed according to [19]. To see if any contaminating
proteins are present, the protein data were searched
against the viridiplantae database as described above.

Page 8 of 8

2.

3.

4.
5.
6.

7.

8.

9.
10.
11.

12.

Additional material
Additional file 1 Mulberry dwarf phytoplasma proteins identified in
this study. M: Experimental molecular weight; C: Percentage of protein
amino acid sequence coverage by the identified peptide
Additional file 2 Mulberry proteins identified in the purified sample
from infected mulberry plants. M: Experimental molecular weight; C: Percentage of protein amino acid sequence coverage by the identified peptide.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors' contributions
XL was responsible for design, sample preparations, PCR analysis, electron
microscopy detection and protein purification, and contributed to write the
manuscript. YP carried out GeLC-MS/MS shotgun analysis, identification of proteins obtained and also contributed to write the manuscript. BY carried out
SDS-PAGE analysis. CC and ZM made substantial contributions to the study
conception and design and critically revised the manuscript for intellectual
content. All authors edited the manuscript and approved the final version.
Acknowledgements
This work was funded by the national natural science foundation of China and
science foundation for the excellent youth scholars of Shandong province of
China (Grant No. 30972366, BS2009NY024).
Author Details
1College of Forestry, Shandong Agricultural University, Tai'an, Shandong,
271018, PR China and 2State Key Laboratory of Crop Biology, Shandong
Agricultural University, Tai'an, Shandong, 271018, PR China
Received: 17 September 2009 Accepted: 8 April 2010
Published: 8 April 2010

13.
14.

15.
16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.
22.

winter buds, and roots of mulberry trees. J Gen Plant Pathol 2004,
70:168-173.
Doi Y, Teranaka M, Yora K, Asayama H: Mycoplasma or PLT group-like
microorganisms found in the phloem elements of plants infected with
mulberry dwarf and potato witches broom. Ann Phytopathol Soc Jpn
1967, 33:259-266.
Garnier M, Foissac X, Gaurivaud P, Laigret F, Renaudin J, Saillard C, Bové
JM: Mycoplasmas, plants, insect vectors: a matrimonial triangle. C R
Acad Sci 2001, 324:923-928.
Lee IM, Davis RE, Gundersen-Rindal DE: Phytoplasma: Phytopathogenic
mollicutes. Annu Rev Microbiol 2000, 54:221-255.
Christensen NM, Axelsen KB, Nicolaisen M, Schulz A: Phytoplasmas and
their interactions with hosts. Trends in Plant Sci 2005, 10:526-535.
Oshima K, Kakizawa S, Nishigawa H, Jung HY, Wei W, Suzuki S, Arashida R,
Nakata D, Miyata S, Ugaki M, Namba S: Reductive evolution suggested
from the complete genome sequence of a plant-pathogenic
phytoplasma. Nat Genet 2004, 36:27-29.
Bai X, Zhang J, Ewing A, Miller SA, Radek AJ, Shevchenko DV, Tsukerman K,
Walunas T, Lapidus A, Campbell JW, Hogenhout SA: Living with genome
instability: the adaptation of phytoplasmas to diverse environments of
their insect and plant hosts. J Bacteriol 2006, 188:3682-3696.
Liefting LW, Havukkala I, Andersen MT, Lough TJ, Beever RE: International
organization for mycoplasmology. Proceedings of 16th International
Congress. Cambridge, UK 2006:45.
Pandey A, Mann M: Proteomics to study genes and genomes. Nature
2000, 405:837-846.
Wu KL, Zhang YL: Clinical application of tear proteomics: Present and
future prospects. Proteomics-Clinical Applications 2007, 1:972-982.
Hu L, Ye M, Jiang X, Feng S, Zou H: Advances in hyphenated analytical
techniques for shotgun proteome and peptidome analysis-a review.
Anal Chim Acta 2007, 598:193-204.
Wu SL, Choudhary G, Ramstrom M, Bergquist J, Hancock WS: Evaluation
of shotgun sequencing for proteomic analysis of human plasma using
HPLC coupled with either ion trap or fourier transform mass
spectrometry. J Proteome Res 2003, 2:383-393.
Skipp P, Robinson J, O'Connor CD, Clarke IN: Shotgun proteomic analysis
of Chlamydia trachomatis. Proteomics 2005, 5:1558-1573.
Oshima K, Miyata S, Sawayanagi T, Kakizawa S, Nishigawa H, Jung HY,
Furuki K, Yanazaki M, Suzuki S, Wei W, Kuboyama T, Ugaki M, Namba S:
Minimal set of metabolic pathways suggested from the genome of
onion yellows phytoplasma. J Gen Plant Pathol 2002, 68:225-236.
Staskawicz BJ, Mudgett MB, Dangl JL, Galan JE: Common and contrasting
themes of plant and animal diseases. Sci 2001, 292:2285-2289.
Fejes AP, Yi EC, Goodlett DR, Beatty JT: Shotgun proteomic analysis of a
chromatophore-enriched preparation from the purple phototrophic
bacterium Rhodopseudomonas palustris . Photosynth Res 2003,
78:195-203.
Sato M, Mitsuhashi W, Watanabe K, Kawakita H: PCR detection of
mulberry dwarf disease-phytoplasmas in mulberry tissues, phloem sap
collected by laser stylectomy and insect vector Hishimonus sellatus . J
Seric Sci Jpn 1996, 65:352-358.
Lee IM, Gundersen DE, Hammond RW, Davis RE: Use of mycoplasmalike
organism (MLO) group-specific oligonucleotide primers for nestedPCR assays to detect mixed-MLO infections in a single host plant.
Phytopathology 1994, 84:559-566.
Zhu BM, Xu WJ, Cheng ZY, Shen JY: Purification and antiserum
preparation of mycoplasma-like organism of mulberry dwarf disease.
Acta Sericol Sin 1982, 8:6-10.
Lee IM, Davis RE: Phloem-limited prokaryotes in sieve elements isolated
by enzyme treatment of diseased plant tissues. Phytopathology 1983,
73:1540-1543.
Jiang YP, Chen TA: Purification of mycoplasma-like organisms from
lettuce with aster yellows disease. Phytopathology 1987, 77:949-953.
Shevchenko A, Wilm M, Vorm O, Mann M: Mass spectrometric
sequencing of proteins silver-stained polyacrylamide gels. Anal Chem
1996, 68:850-858.

© 2010 Ji Openlicenseearticle distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
This is an etis available from: http://www.proteomesci.com/content/8/1/20
Proteome Science 2010, BioMed Central Ltd.
article al; Access 8:20

References
1. Jiang H, Wei W, Saiki T, Kawakita H, Watanabe K, Sato M: Distribution
patterns of mulberry dwarf phytoplasma in reproductive organs,

doi: 10.1186/1477-5956-8-20
Cite this article as: Ji et al., Shotgun proteomic analysis of mulberry dwarf
phytoplasma Proteome Science 2010, 8:20

</pre>
</body>
</html>
