<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Evolutionary history and stress regulation of the lectin superfamily in higher plants</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010 10:79. doi:10.1186/1471-2148-10-79"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Shu-Ye Jiang"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Jiang et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:79
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/79

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Evolutionary history and stress regulation of the
lectin superfamily in higher plants
Shu-Ye Jiang, Zhigang Ma, Srinivasan Ramachandran*

Abstract
Background: Lectins are a class of carbohydrate-binding proteins. They play roles in various biological processes.
However, little is known about their evolutionary history and their functions in plant stress regulation. The
availability of full genome sequences from various plant species makes it possible to perform a whole-genome
exploration for further understanding their biological functions.
Results: Higher plant genomes encode large numbers of lectin proteins. Based on their domain structures and
phylogenetic analyses, a new classification system has been proposed. In this system, 12 different families have
been classified and four of them consist of recently identified plant lectin members. Further analyses show that
some of lectin families exhibit species-specific expansion and rapid birth-and-death evolution. Tandem and
segmental duplications have been regarded as the major mechanisms to drive lectin expansion although
retrogenes also significantly contributed to the birth of new lectin genes in soybean and rice. Evidence shows that
lectin genes have been involved in biotic/abiotic stress regulations and tandem/segmental duplications may be
regarded as drivers for plants to adapt various environmental stresses through duplication followed by expression
divergence. Each member of this gene superfamily may play specialized roles in a specific stress condition and
function as a regulator of various environmental factors such as cold, drought and high salinity as well as biotic
stresses.
Conclusions: Our studies provide a new outline of the plant lectin gene superfamily and advance the
understanding of plant lectin genes in lineage-specific expansion and their functions in biotic/abiotic stress-related
developmental processes.

Background
Lectins are carbohydrate-binding proteins that specifically recognize diverse sugar structures and mediate a
variety of biological processes [1,2]. Lectin proteins contain at least one carbohydrate-binding domain. Based on
this, three major types of lectins are distinguished,
namely merolectins, hololectins and chimerolectins [3].
The merolectins have only single carbohydrate-binding
domain and the hololectins contain two or more
domains which are either identical or very homologous.
The chimerolectins are fusion proteins consisting of one
or more carbohydrate-binding domains and unrelated
domains. Lectins are ubiquitous in nature, found in all
kinds of organisms, from virus to humans [4]. Plant lectins are usually considered as a very heterogeneous
* Correspondence: sri@tll.org.sg
Temasek Life Sciences Laboratory, 1 Research Link, the National University of
Singapore, Singapore 117604

group of proteins because comparative biochemical studies clearly indicate that they differ from each other
with respect to their biochemical/physicochemical properties, molecular structure, carbohydrate-binding specificity and biological activities [5]. Therefore, it is difficult
to find a widely acceptable way to classify plant lectins.
Currently, several attempts have been made to group
plant lectins. One of them was based on the carbohydrate-binding specificity. As a result, mannose- mannose/glucose-, mannose/maltose-, Gal/GalNAc,
GlcNAc/(GlcNAc)n-, fucose- and salic acid-binding lectins have been distinguished ([5,6]. This classification
emphasizes the use of lectins as tools with different carbohydrate-binding specificity. However, evolutionarily
unrelated lectins may also be classified together. Besides
this, another classification has been suggested, which is
based on 3D structures of lectins. They classified lectins
as 6 major groups including a-D-mannose-specific plant

© 2010 Jiang et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Jiang et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:79
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/79

lectin (monocot lectin), agglutinin with hevein domain,
b-prism plant lectin, b-trefoil lectin, cyanovirin-N
homolog and legume lectin http://www.cermav.cnrs.fr/
lectines/. Besides these, a more complicated classification system has been proposed which is based on either
serological relationships or sequence similarities or both
as well as their evolutionary relationships. Based on
such criterion, 7 lectin families have been classified
including the legume lectins, the monocot mannosebinding lectins, the chitin-binding lectins, the type 2 RIP
and related lectins, jacalin-related lectins, Amaranthin
lectins and Cucurbitaceae phloem lectins [6]. Recently,
these authors made an update of the system since many
new plant lectins have been isolated and characterized
[7]. They have classified plant lectins into 12 families
and at least one member in each family has been characterized in some detail and we named this system as
“system 1”. These families are as follows: ABA (Agaricus
bisporus agglutinin), Amaranthin, CRA (chitinase-related
agglutinin), Cyanovirin, EEA (Euonymus europaeus
agglutinin), GNA (Galanthus nivalis agglutinin), Hevein,
Jacalins, Legume lectin, LysM (lysin motif), Nictaba and
Ricin_B families. However, the classification system was
based on the available plant lectin information and animal lectins were not used to explore lectin-like members in the plant genomes.
Rapid progress has been achieved in genome sequencing with the great achievement in new sequencing
technologies [8,9]. Both Arabidopsis and rice genomes
have been completely sequenced [10-13] as model plants
for dicot and monocot plants, respectively. Currently,
soybean genome has also been completely sequenced
(Soybean Genome Project, DoE Joint Genome Institute,
http://www.phytozome.net/soybean). Up to now, genomes from 110 eukaryotes, 844 bacterial and 63 archaeal
have been completely sequenced and published and the
sequencing for 1028 eukaryotes, 2606 bacterial and 96
archaeal genomes are in progress based on the genome
online database V 2.0 ([14]; http://www.genomesonline.
org/gold.cgi, June 8, 2009). All these data provide us
additional information to further analyze the lectin
superfamily in their molecular evolution, classification
and biological functions. However, limited data has been
reported on the genome-wide characterization and
molecular evolution of this superfamily in plants. As a
result, little is known on the outline of all lectin genes
in a completely sequenced plant genome and no new
classification system has been proposed on the basis of
the whole genome sequence information.
On the other hand, another major question that one
may concern is on the biological functions of plant lectins. Many reviews or books have summarized the possible functions of plant lectins [4-6,15-18]. However, no
definitive answers have been given. Generally, plant

Page 2 of 24

lectins have both internal and external activities [17].
The former refers to the functions acting within the
plants during various developmental processes such as
interactions with storage proteins or enzymes [17]. The
latter includes the roles of lectins in response to various
biotic and abiotic stresses. Evidence has shown the
insecticidal activity of lectins against a spectrum of
insects [19-24]. Some of lectin genes could be used for
improving plant tolerance/resistance to various insects
by transgenic technology [22,25-33]. However, such a
desired effect in crop protection was not observed in
some cases [34-36]. The protection functions of lectins
against other biotic stresses were also reported including
fungi [37-42] and virus [43,44]. Plant lectins are not
only assumed to be part of the defense system [3,45],
they have been also implicated as playing an important
role in mediating recognition and specificity in the symbiosis with root nodule bacteria [46-49]. Besides biotic
stresses, plant lectins may also play roles in abiotic stresses [50]. Reports have shown that several lectin genes
exhibit differential expression abundance under various
abiotic stresses including temperature shock, drought
and high salinity stresses [51-56].
Since limited data is available on the genome-wide
analysis of lectin genes, we do not know how many
members of this family in a genome are involved in biotic and abiotic stress-related biological processes and
how these genes have been expanded or evolved with
such functions. In this report, we first identified and
characterized all lectin genes encoded by the soybean,
rice and Arabidopsis genomes. We then proposed a new
classification system on the basis of protein domain
structures and phylogenetic analyses. We also evaluated
their expansion mechanisms and evolutionary history by
investigating their duplication and/or transposition history. Subsequently, we examined their expression by
full-length cDNA, Expression Sequence Tag (EST),
microarray and Massively Parallel Signature Sequencing
(MPSS [57]) datasets. Finally, we investigated their
expression divergence under various stresses to further
annotate their biological functions. Our analyses
advance the understanding of plant lectin genes as being
involved in lineage-specific expansion, and that they
function in biotic and abiotic stress-related developmental processes. We also identified putative new lectin
genes which were not be experimentally detected at present in plant genomes and provided a new outline of
the plant lectin gene superfamily.

Results and Discussion
Genome-wide identification of the lectin superfamily in
soybean, rice and Arabidopsis

To survey lectin genes in legume plants, the soybean
(Glycine max) genome was selected as it has been

Jiang et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:79
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/79

completely sequenced. To better understand their
expansion history and expression divergence, two other
genomes were also selected for comparative analyses
including rice (model plant for monocot) and Arabidopsis (model plant for dicot) genomes. We have used both
BLAST and Hidden Markov model (HMM) searches
(Methods) to identify lectin members presented in these
genomes. After multiple cycles of searches, total of 349,
339 and 204 putative lectin genes have been detected in
soybean, rice and Arabidopsis, respectively. These members were then subjected to the Pfam ([58]; http://pfam.
sanger.ac.uk/) and SMART ([59]; http://smart.embl-heidelberg.de/) databases to confirm the presence of corresponding domains. The analysis revealed some members
with incomplete domain structures, which have been
confirmed by both domain searches and manual check.
These members contain no typical domain structure
and have no expression evidence with the characters of
pseudogenes. Due to the low feasibility of phylogenetic
analyses by integrating these partial fragments, we
removed these members from our analyses although we
may under-estimate the rate of gene duplication. Thus,
our analyses reveal that soybean, rice and Arabidopsis
genomes encode total of 309, 267 and 199 members of
lectin superfamilies (Figure 1A). Their locus name, physical position and annotated protein sequences were
deposited in the Additional file 1 (soybean), 2 (rice) and
3 (Arabidopsis).
A new classification system of the lectin superfamily in
higher plants

To classify these members, domain sequences from all
members in each genome were aligned together and
were then submitted to phylogenetic tree construction
(Methods). The analyses show that all 3 organisms have
12 families of lectins (Figure 1B). They are named
according to their domain description in the Pfam database, i.e., the B_lectin, Lectin_legB, Jacalin, Phloem, Lectin_C, Chitin_bind_1, Ricin_B_Lectin, Gal_lectin,
Gal_binding_Lectin, Calreticulin, EEA and LysM
families. In most cases, each family has a Pfam domain
ID as shown in Figure 1A. However, no domain ID has
been detected for the phloem and EEA families. The
phloem domain was first structurally identified by
Dinant et al. (2003) [60] with 4 conserved motifis and is
characterized by a high frequency of charged residues
and seven conserved Trp residues although phloem lectins were described in the seventies. Similarly, the EUL
(Euonymus lectin) domain in the EEA family was
recently identified [7,61] although the family members
were described more than 20 years ago [62]. Among the
total 12 identified families, both B_lectin and Lectin_legB are the largest families for soybean and rice. However, in Arabidopsis, the largest one is the Jacalin family

Page 3 of 24

followed by Lectin_legB, B_lectin and Phloem families
(Figure 1A). The smallest families contain only one or
two members including Lectin_C, Ricin_B_Lectin and
EEA families (Figure 1).
Based on the phylogenetic analyses of all genomewidely identified lectin genes in three organisms, we
have proposed a new classification system. In this new
system, each family contains members from a single carbohydrate binding-related domain. Compared with the
classification system 1 [7], 8 families, including B-lectin,
Lectin_legB, Jacalin, Chitin_bind_1, Ricin_B_Lectin,
EEA, LysM and Phloem, have been found to match
their corresponding families each other. Their coordinates are GNA, Legume lectin, Jacalins, Hevein, Ricin_B,
EEA, LysM and Nitaba lectin families, respectively (Figure 2). No lectin member was identified in both rice
and Arabidopsis genomes that was classified into the
remaining 4 families including Cyanovirin, ABA, Amaranthin and CRA, which were reported by Van Damme
et al (2008) [7]. The result was confirmed by our
searches and the soybean genome may also lack lectins
from these families (Figure 2). Thus, these families may
be species-specific.
On the other hand, we also compared our new system
with the classification system 2 as described in the website http://www.cermav.cnrs.fr/lectines/. Among the 6
classes of lectins in this system, 5 of them including aD-mannose-specific plant lectin, Legume lectin, b-prism
plant lectin, Agglutinin with hevein domain and b-trefoil
lectin have been detected to match their corresponding
families including B-lectin, Lectin_legB, Jacalin, Chitin_bind_1 and Ricin_B_lectin classes in our new system
(Figure 2). Similarly, the class “Cyanovirin-N homolog”
members have not been detected in our new system
since they are mainly from fungi and bacteria. Furthermore, based on our taxonomic coverage analyses by the
InterPro database [63], these 12 families are ubiquitous
in higher plants while only limited species could be
detected with the four families identified by the system
1 including Cyanovirin, ABA, Amaranthin and CRA.
Thus, our new system can be used for the general lectin
classification in higher plants and can not be used for
species-specific lectins.
Genome-wide identification reveals new classes of lectin
families in soybean, rice and Arabidopsis

Interestingly, we have detected four more families
including Calreticulin, Gal_binding_lectin, Gal_lectin
and Lectin_C, which are not detected in the two classification systems (Figure 2). They were usually detected in
animals. However, the Calreticulin, Gal_binding_lectin
and Gal_lectin families were also previously identified as
putative plant lectins [64]. To our knowledge, no experimental data has been reported to confirm these

Jiang et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:79
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/79

Page 4 of 24

Figure 1 Genome-wide identification of lectin superfamily members and their classification. (A) All lectin members from 12 different
lectin family in soybean, rice and Arabidopsis genomes. (B) Phylogenetic analysis of all lectin members in three different genomes.

Jiang et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:79
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/79

Page 5 of 24

Figure 2 Comparison of the new classification system with two other systems. Classification system 1 is based on the description by Van
Damme et al., (2008) [7]. The system 2 was based on 3D structures of lectins as described in the website: http://www.cermav.cnrs.fr/lectines/.
The lectin families with no detectable member in soybean, rice and Arabidopsis were indicated by the rectangle with black lines and newly
identified lectin families in the new classification system were framed by the rectangle with red lines.

Jiang et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:79
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/79

members as plant lectins. For the Calreticulin family,
many members have been identified in plants [65].
However, no evidence shows their lectin activities
although the family has been regarded as one of animal
lectin groups [66]. The Lectin_C family is known as Stype lectins in animals and fungi. We have detected 2
members of the lectin_C family lectins in soybean and
one member in both rice and Arabidopsis (Figure 1).
Expression evidence is from EST for 2 soybean members
and from full-length cDNAs for rice and Arabidopsis
members, suggesting their presence in plants. Moreover,
domain amino acid sequence alignments showed that
these 4 Lectin_C domains from plants have at least 30%
sequence identities when compared with the most closely related domains from animals, demonstrating their
possible function as C-type lectins.
Both the Gal_binding_lectin and Gal_lectin families
are known as S-type lectins. For these two families,
expression evidence was from EST for most of soybean
members and from full-length cDNAs for both rice
and Arabidopsis. The fact demonstrates the presence of
these two domains in plants. However, their domain
amino acid sequences share low identities (around
30%) when compared with the most closely related
domains from animals. Thus, their functions as lectins
should be demonstrated by testing their activities. We
have randomly selected one of these newly identified
lectin members for further analyses. This gene was
named as LOC_Os03g06940 and contains two domains
including both Glyco_hydro_35 and Gal_lectin (Figure
3A). The cDNA sequences from different domain
regions were cloned into the expression vector pGEX6p. The GST fusion proteins were expressed in the
Escherichia coli BL21 (Figure 3B). The recombinant
protein extracts were used for detecting lectin activities
by hemagglutination testing (Figure 3C-F). This
method has been widely used for testing the lectin
activity [55,67]. Our data show that the Gal_lectin
domain indeed exhibits the agglutination activity
whereas the Glyco_hydro_35 domain has no this function. The data suggest that this should be a new lectin
identified in plants although its carbohydrate-binding
specificity is not yet determined.
On the other hand, some of these four families of
newly identified lectins contain other domains. Thus,
many of them may be annotated as other proteins. For
example, most of Gal_lectin or Gal-Binding lectin family
members have been annotated as b-galactosidase or
galactosyltransferase since these members contain Glyco_hydro_35 or Galactosyl_T domain, respectively.
These domain combinations are also observed in bacteria, nematodes and higher animals. Therefore, they
can be regarded as chimerolectins if their sugar binding
properties can be experimentally validated.

Page 6 of 24

Different families show difference in their expansion and
large-scale expansions occurred after the divergence from
their ancestors

Different lectin families exhibited differential expansions
and as a result, plants have evolved into different sizes
of lectin families. To infer the patterns of gene family
expansions, we aligned the domain sequences of all
members of each family from three organisms. The
alignments were used to generate the phylogenetic trees
and one of them is shown in Figure 4A, which was constructed with B-lectin domain sequences. The phylogenetic tree was then broken down into ancestral units,
which were clades that were present before the divergence of these organisms according to the method
described by Shiu et al (2004) [68]. The nodes of the
most recent common ancestor (MRCA) were labeled
with solid red circles between soybean and Arabidopsis
and with black circles among 3 analyzed organisms (Figure 4A). We found that there were 9 ancestral units
among 105 soybean and 38 Arabidopsis B-lectin members; however, only 5 MRCAs have been detected
among total of 230 B-lectin family members from these
three organisms (Figure 4A). The result indicated that
the ancestral organism contained small family of B-lectin members and suggested that the large scale of
expansions occurred after the divergence from their
ancestors. A similar method was used for searching the
lectin members of the ancestral organism for the
remaining 8 families of lectins. The analysis showed that
the ancestral organism between two dicot plants or
among these three organisms also contained small numbers of lectin families (Figure 4B). Furthermore, we have
also found several species-specific sub-family members
for all three organisms (Figure 4A). All these results
confirmed that the large scale of expansions occurred
after the divergence from their common ancestors.
Tandem and segmental duplications represent the major
mechanism of lectin family expansion

Based on the genome-scale duplication data in Arabidopsis and rice [69,70], one ancestral gene in the MRCA
of Arabidopsis and rice may give birth to four and two
novel genes in Arabidopsis and rice, respectively [71].
Thus, maximal 20 Arabidopsis and 10 rice B-lectin
genes could be born on the basis of 5 members in the
MRCA between these two species. However, they have
much more numbers of lectin genes, suggesting that
other mechanisms, such as tandem, segmental duplication and/or retroposition must have also contributed to
the expansion of the lectin gene super family.
To investigate the contribution of tandem duplication
to the expansion of lectin genes, we examined the chromosomal distribution of members in each family of all
three organisms. Such analyses show that many genes

Jiang et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:79
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/79

Page 7 of 24

Figure 3 Hemagglutination activity assay of the rice Gal_lectin member LOC_Os03g06940. (A) Domain structures of the positive control
(up) and the Gal-lectin member detected by Pfam database. (B) In vitro expression of the recombinant proteins as shown by rectangles. M,
molecular marker; 1, expressed GST tag in the vector pGEX-6p as a negative control; 2, recombinant protein from the Gal_lectin domain and its
flanking region; 3, from the Glyco_hydro_35 domain; 4, exactly from the Gal_lectin domain; 5, from the Jacalin domain as a positive control. (C)
and (D) No agglutination of the erythrocytes was observed when E. coli extracts from the empty vector (lane1 in B) or from the recombinant
construct containing the Glyco_hydro_35 domain (lane 3 in B) were used for the activity assay. (E) and (F) Agglutination of erythrocytes by the
E. coli extract from positive control (E) or from the recombinant construct containing the Gal_lectin domain (F). Recombinant proteins from both
lane 2 and 4 show the agglutination activity and only the latter is shown in (F).

are clustered together according to the criterion as
described in Methods section, suggesting that they were
the results of tandem duplication. Totally, we have
detected 131 (43%), 140 (55%) and 110 (551%) lectin
genes being involving in tandemly duplicated events in
soybean, rice and Arabidopsis, respectively (Figure 5).
On the other hand, we also genome-widely identified
segmental duplications in soybean, rice and Arabidopsis
genomes and then searched the duplication blocks that

contain lectin genes. In this case, tandemly arrayed
genes were treated as a single gene copy. We have
detected total of 71 segmental blocks and their duplicated blocks with the same family of lectin genes in soybean (Additional file 4_sheet1). These genes were from
total of 11 different families. One of the families is the
Lectin_C and only one member was detected in both
rice and Arabidopsis. However, two members were
detected in soybean, which was due to the segmental

Jiang et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:79
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/79

Page 8 of 24

Figure 4 Phylogenetic analysis and evolutionary dynamics of the lectin superfamily. (A) Phylogenetic analysis of the B-lectin family
members in Soybean, rice and Arabidopsis. B-lectin domain amino acid sequences were employed to construct phylogenetic tree using the
bootstrap method with a heuristic search of the PAUP 4.0b8 program. Generated trees were similar to those from Bayesian analyses. Ancestral
units were defined according to Shiu et al (2004) [68]. Red circles represent the most recent common ancestor (MRCA) units between soybean
and Arabidopsis and black circles indicate the MRCA units among soybean, Arabidopsis and rice. (B) The MRCA analyses in all 12 lectin families.

duplication as shown in the Additional file 4_sheet1.
Similarly, we have 19 and 15 segmental and their duplicated blocks with lectin genes in rice and Arabidopsis,
respectively (Additional file 4_sheet 2 and 3). In summary, we have detected total of 181 (59%), 105 (40%)
and 85 (43%) lectin genes being involving in segmentally
duplicated events in soybean, rice and Arabidopsis,
respectively (Figure 5). These data suggested that both
tandem and segmental duplications play a major role in
lectin gene expansions. Further investigation showed
that some tandemly duplicated genes were also within
segmentally duplicated regions with overlaps between
these two duplications. Figure 5 summarizes the

contributions of tandem and segmental duplications to
the expansions of various lectin gene families in three
different organisms. Generally, the highest contribution
rate was observed in soybean with up to 84% of lectin
genes were involved in tandem and/or segmental duplications and the remaining 16% of lectin genes were
from other mechanisms. In both rice and Arabidopsis,
similar results were observed with around 28% and 34%
of lectin genes were from other mechanisms in general
(Figure 5). However, the contributions of tandem and
segmental duplications to lectin expansions differ
among different lectin families. For example, only 1224% of B-lectin family members were from the other

Jiang et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:79
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/79

Page 9 of 24

Figure 5 Expansion mechanisms of lectin genes. Pie diagrams were given to indicate the contributions of tandem (red), segmental (green)
duplications and both of them (pink) as well as other mechanisms (blue) to the expansion of lectin superfamily in soybean, Arabidopsis and rice
genomes. In each pie diagram, the number prior to the semicolon “;” indicates the total expanded members by different expansion mechanisms
and its percentage is given following the semicolon.

Jiang et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:79
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/79

expansion mechanisms while the corresponding percentage has been up to 25-37% for Lectin_legB family (Figure 5). Furthermore, a same family also exhibits
differences in their expansions among three organisms.
For example, 14 of 15 Gal_Bind_1 family members were
within segmentally duplicated regions in soybean
whereas only 4 of 10 rice members have been involved
in such events and no member in Arabidopsis has been
born by tandem/segmental duplications (Figure 5).
These facts may be regarded as one of reasons contributing to differential expansions of lectin members in
different families of a same genome or in different genomes in a same family.
Besides the lectin superfamily, many other gene families
also expanded themselves by tandem and/or segmental
duplications in Arabidopsis and rice [72-74]. Since the
soybean (Glycine max) genome sequencing data were
released recently, limited data is available on the genome-wide identification of a gene family and its expansion history. We have genome-widely analyzed
segmentally duplicated chromosome blocks in soybean.
We found that many gene families in soybean also
expanded themselves by segmental duplication such as
AP2 domain encoding genes (estimated members: 345),
WRKY transcription factors (estimated members: 176)
and heavy-metal-associated domain encoding genes
(estimated members: 127) and so on. For example, we
have detected 55 out of 127 (43%) heavy-metal-associated domain encoding genes being involved in segmental duplication.
Species-specific expansion and rapid birth-and-death
evolution of some lectin families

We have observed that a same lectin family shows difference in their expansion among three species, exhibiting species-specific expansion. For example, the soybean
genome encodes 105 B-lectin genes whereas only 38
members were detected in Arabidopsis (Figure 1). To
survey the possible mechanisms leading to species-specific expansion, we examined the contribution of tandem
and/or segmental duplications to their expansion of
these with at least two-fold difference in family members among 3 species including the B-lectin, Jacalin,
Gal_lectin and Gal-Binding_lectin families. The investigation revealed multiple possible reasons responsible for
the species-specific expansion. For example, deep expansion in the soybean B-lectin family is mainly due to the
over expansion of tandem genes located on non-segmentally duplicated region (Figure 5). The Arabidopsis
Jacalin family over-expanded themselves mainly by tandem and segmental mutual duplications (Figure 5).
However, the major contribution of the species-specific
expansion of the Gal_lectin and Gal_binding_1 lectin

Page 10 of 24

families is mainly due to the segmental duplication
(Figure 5).
The evidence showed that monocot branched off from
dicot plants 140-150 million years ago (MYA) [75-77].
Based on the divergence era and the estimation of the
MRCA among soybean, rice and Arabidopsis as shown
in Figure 4, the birth rate of B-lectin genes (counting
only survival copies) is at least 13.3, 10.9 and 4.4 genes
per 100 million years (MY) per ancestral gene in
lineages leading to soybean, rice and Arabidopsis,
respectively. The average rate of gene duplication is
around 1 gene per 100 MY per ancestral gene in eukaryotes such as Homo sapiens, Mus musculus, Drosophila
melanogaster, Caenorhabditis elegans, Saccharomyces
cerevisiae and Arabidopsis thaliana [78]. Thus, these
rates are significantly higher than the average one. Similarly, we have estimated the birth rates in other
expanded families (Additional file 5). The analyses show
that different families exhibit difference in their gene
duplication rates. The highest rate was observed in the
Jacalin family, where 30 genes per 100 million years in
the lineage leading to Arabidopsis. The lowest rate was
0.3, significantly lower than the average rate, and
occurred in the Arabidopsis Gal-Bind_lectin and Calreticulin families. On the contrary, by comparing the
expansion mechanisms (Figure 5) and gene birth rates
(Additional file 5), we found that high gene birth rates
are mainly due to tandem and/or segmental duplications. For these families, whose members being involving in both tandem and segmental duplications
account for more than 50% of total identified lectins in
all families and species, their gene birth rates were estimated at least 2 genes per 100 MY per ancestral gene.
In addition, the rates of gene birth in multiple lectin
gene families may be under-estimated. The actual numbers of duplicate genes that once existed in three species
could be more than that we have detected as some
duplicate copies might have already been deleted from
the genome or been evolved into pseudogenes that are
not included in this study. We have detected 86, 101
and 20 members from total of 12 families with partial
domain sequences in soybean, rice and Arabidopsis,
respectively. These partial sequences usually lack regions
corresponding to sugar binding properties. Thus, they
may be nonfunctional and could be regarded as pseudogenes. There seems to be a correlation between tandem
duplication and pseudogenization since most of these
members were from tandem duplication related expansion. On the other hand, some duplicated copies might
be too divergent to be recognized now, which may also
contribute to the under-estimation. Thus, higher rates
of gene duplication should have occurred for some lectin families in these three species.

Jiang et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:79
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/79

Differential expansion patterns of tandem and segmental
dual duplications among three organisms

Since the tandem duplication has been observed to largely contribute to the birth of new lectin genes, we
further analyzed their expansion patterns. Domain
amino acid sequences from the same tandem cluster
were aligned first and were then used for the construction of their phylogentic tree, which were employed to
analyze their expansion history. Based on such analyses,
we found that parental genes were not always physically
linked to their descendant genes and different expansion
rates were observed for tandem genes in a same array.
One of such examples was shown in Figure 6. In this
example, we analyzed the patterns of tandem duplication in one of the largest tandem clusters in the soybean
B-lectin family. We first investigated their expansion
history by phylogenetic analyses (Figure 6A). The 19
tandem genes are in three clades, suggesting that this
cluster was the results of three ancestral units,
which may be evolved from ancient tandem duplication
events. One of them contains only one gene, i.e. Glyma06g40130. No expansion was detected for this gene

Page 11 of 24

or its expanded genes have been lost during long evolutionary history. The second clade has 4 members
whereas the third clade contains 14 members. On the
basis of the phylogenetic tree, we deduced the hypothetical origins of 19 genes by tandem duplication (Figure
6B). The analyses showed that these genes were generated by at least 8 rounds of tandem duplication. After
expansion, these genes were then not always inserted
into the loci according to their physical orders. For
example, the putative tandem pair of the Glyma06g40400 gene is Glyma06g40480 but not its physical
neighbor Glyma06g40430. On the other hand, we found
that most of tandem duplication occurred by a one-gene
mode, i.e. only one gene was duplicated in a one tandem
duplication event as shown in Figure 6. However, these
cases were also observed that two or more genes in a
cluster were duplicated through a single tandem duplication event (data not shown).
Based on our analyses on the expansion of the lectin
superfamily by tandem and segmental duplications in
three organisms (Figure 5), the evolution of considerable
genes are related to both tandem and segmental

Figure 6 Expansion of one of the largest tandam clusters in B_lectin family by tandem duplications in soybean. (A) Phylogenetic
relationships of 19 members from the tandem cluster. (B) Hypothetical origins of tandemly duplicated genes. The prefix “Glyma” of gene locus
names have been omitted for convenience.

Jiang et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:79
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/79

duplications. To further investigate their contribution
and patterns to the expansion of lectin members, segmental block pairs with at least 3 detectable tandemly
arrayed genes were selected for more detail analyses.
Totally, 6 pairs of segmental blocks with such criteria
were detected. Three of them were from soybean
including 2 B-lectin and 1 Lectin_legB pairs. Two of
them were from Arabidopsis B-lectin and Jacalin
families, respectively. The remaining one pair was from

Page 12 of 24

rice B-lectin family. Total of 6 phylogenetic trees were
constructed for 6 pairs of segmentally and tandemly
duplicated members. In most cases (5 of 6 pairs), a part
of genes from the first tandem array are clustered
together with another part of genes from the secondary
tandem array. They exhibit tandem-segment mixed
duplication model. These cases were observed in both
dicot plants soybean and Arabidopsis as shown in Figure
7A and 7B. Such model of duplication may occur in two

Figure 7 Differential expansion of lectin genes by both tandem and segmental duplications among soybean, Arabidopsis and rice. (A)
and (B) Tandem-segment mixed duplication model in soybean and Arabidopsis, respectively. (C) Tandem-segment separated duplication model
in rice. All analyzed example genes were from B-lectin family.

Jiang et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:79
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/79

ways. One of them is tandem-segment-tandem duplication. In this case, the expansion was by tandemly duplication first and was then by segmental duplication
followed by tandem duplication. The second way is segment-tandem-segment duplication. However, in the
monocot rice genome, lectin expansion was through
another model as shown in Figure 7C. In this model,
genes from a tandem array were clustered together and
no clade was detected with members from both tandem
arrays, exhibiting a tandem-segment separated duplication model. Based on the phylogenetic relationship of
these tandemly and segmentally duplicated members,
one reasonable explain is that they underwent segmental
duplication first followed by tandem duplication.
Limited but significant contribution of retrogenes to the
birth of new lectin genes in both soybean and rice

Since tandem and segmental duplications can not
explain all the duplication events, we expect some of
other mechanisms may also contribute to the expansion
of the lectin superfamily. These include both retrotransposon and transposon mediated gene expansion, which
has been reported in multiple species including rice and
Arabidopsis [79-83]. By retrotransposition, a reversetranscribed mRNA was inserted into a new genomic
position to form a retrogene. Such a retrogene is usually
devoid of introns and with the presence of target site
duplications and/or a poly (A) tract [82,84]. To survey
the contribution of retrogenes to the expansion of the
lectin superfamily, one-exon-containing lectin genes
were used as query protein sequences for BLASTP
searches against all two or more exon-containing lectins
(Methods). The searches produced many candidate retrogenes in soybean and rice. We then manually identified these candidates by the presence of target site
duplications (TSD) and/or a poly (A) tract. The analyses
revealed 4 putative retrogenes in soybean and 7 in rice
(Figure 8A). Some of them are still with 3 hallmarks of
retrogenes. One example is the soybean retrogene Glyma08g46960 with both hallmarks including TSD and
poly (A) tract; its parental gene Glyma03g00530 contains two exons (Figure 8B). On the other hand, not all
identified retrogenes possess all three features, especially
the poly (A) tract and short direct repeats [82,84]. These
two hallmarks may no longer be recognized since they
can be easily masked by base substitutions, insertions
and/or deletions during a long evolutionary history [82].
Although very limited contribution has been detected by
retrogenes (Figure 8A), they may play significant roles
in the expansion of lectin genes. After the birth of a
retrogene, it may further be expanded by tandem duplication. For example, the putative retrogene Glyma08g46960 was detected with tandem duplication
followed by the birth of three new lectin genes including

Page 13 of 24

Glyma08g46970, Glyma08g46990 and Glyma08g47000
(Figure 8C). Moreover, no retrogene has been detected
in the Arabidopsis lectin superfamily.
On the other hand, to investigate the contribution of
DNA transposons to the expansion of lectin genes, a
100-110 Kb region including 50 Kb upstream and downstream sequences for each gene was achieved and was
then used for the identification of major DNA transposons. We have analyzed class I mobile elements including Mutator-like transposable element (MULE), CACTA
and hAT as well as class II Helitron elements presented
in these regions (Methods). In Arabidopsis, no above
mentioned DNA transposon was detected to cover the
lectin gene regions. However, we have identified considerable numbers of transposons presented in the 100-110
Kb regions in soybean. For example, 14 MULE-like, 3
CACTA and 20 Helitron elements have been detected
and no hAT element has been identified in soybean.
However, most of these elements are located outside the
corresponding lectin genes. Only 4 genes were identified
within 4 Helitron elements. These genes include Glyma08g07040 (Lectin_legB), Glyma09g21970 (Gal_lectin),
Glyma13g42210 (Chitin_bind_1) and Glyma20g02580
(Phloem). They are candidates to contribute to the
expansion of lectin genes. Thus, DNA transposon elements have limited contribution to the expansion of the
lectin superfamily in soybean. A similar situation was
also observed in rice. In this organism, we have detected
6 MULE-like elements and all of them are located
within lectin genes. Five of these elements are within
introns of corresponding lectin genes including
LOC_Os04g03579 (Lectin_legB), LOC_Os04g34410
(B_lectin),
LOC_Os05g35360
(Gal_Lectin),
LOC_Os11g39420 (Jacalin) and LOC_Os12g24170 (Gal_Lectin). The remaining one contributes the insertion of
6 exons of the lectin gene LOC_Os10g18400 (Gal_Lectin) and this MULE-like element was named TI0006870
as described by Juretic et al (2005) [80]. In addition, the
remaining elements including CACTA, hAT and Helitron have not been detected to contribute to the expansion of the lectin superfamily in rice.
Expression profiling of the lectin superfamily in soybean,
rice and Arabidopsis

To survey the expression of all identified lectin genes,
expression evidence was obtained from various expression databases as described in the Methods section. We
identified a gene to be an expressed gene if a full-length
cDNA, EST and/or microarry/RNA_Seq [85] could be
available. Based on our investigation, more than 90% of
lectin genes from all three organisms are regarded as
expressed genes (Figure 9A). For soybean, only 10 lectin
genes were experimentally detected to contain fulllength cDNAs and most expression evidence was from

Jiang et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:79
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/79

Page 14 of 24

Figure 8 Retrogenes and their contributions to the expansion of lectin genes. (A) Retrogenes identified in soybean and rice genomes. (B)
An example showing evolution of a lectin gene Glyma08g46960 by retrotranspositions from another lectin gene Glyma03g00530. The red
arrowheads indicate the detected flanking direct repeats in an identified retrogene. The green arrowheads show the start (left) and end (right)
positions of an annotated gene. The green boxes indicate the predicted 5’-UTR (left) and 3’-UTR (right) in a retrogene. The blue boxes indicate
exons in both retrogenes and their host genes. The white boxes indicate an intron in the parental gene. (C) A retrogene mediated tandem
duplication.

Jiang et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:79
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/79

Page 15 of 24

Figure 9 Expression profiles of lectin superfamilies in soybean, rice and Arabidopsis. (A) A general expression analysis showing the total
expressed lectin genes in three organisms. (B) Five lectin genes showing up-regulation by the pathogen P. Sojae in soybean. The prefix “Glyma“
in locus names was omitted for convenience. (C) Seven down-regulated and six up-regulated lectin genes by soybean cyst nematode. (D) and
(E) Transcriptional profiles of lectin genes under various biotic and abiotic stresses rice and Arabidopsis, respectively.

Jiang et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:79
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/79

ESTs. In contrast, 127 of 267 (48%) lectin genes have
full-length cDNAs as expression evidence in rice and
more than half of Arabidopsis lectin genes (131 of 199
or 66%) have their corresponding full-length cDNAs.
To investigate the expression profiles under various
biotic and abiotic stresses, microarray/MPSS data were
achieved from various databases and statistic analyses
were carried out (see Methods) to determine if the
expression of a lectin gene is regulated by biotic/abiotic
stresses. For soybean, only 71 lectin genes were probed
in the Affymetrix microarray chips based on the annotation http://soybase.org/AffyChip/index.php. These
genes are from 9 of 12 lectin families including B_lectin, Lectin_legB, Jacalin, Lectin_C, Chitin_bind_1, Gal_lectin, Gal_binding_Lectin, EEA and LysM. To analyze
the expression profiles of these probed genes, microarray data were downloaded from Gene Expression
Omnibus (GEO) DataSets [86] and Arrayexpress database [87] as described in the Methods section. We
have analyzed the effects of both Phytophthora sojae
and cyst nematode infections on the lectin gene
expression. The analyses showed that 6 lectin genes
exhibited up-regulation after the infection of the pathogen P. sojae (Figure 9B). These lectin genes include
Glyma06g41150 (B-lectin), Glyma07g08630 (LysM),
Glyma09g27700 (Lectin_legB) and three Chitin_bind_1
family genes: Glyma13g42210, Glyma19g43460 and
Glyma19g43470. On the other hand, we have detected
16 lectin genes with changed expression by cyst nematode including 7 down-regulated and 9 up-regulated
genes (Figure 9C). Among them, three genes were coregulated by both biotic stresses including Glyma09g27700, Glyma13g42210 and Glyma19g43460
(Figure 9A and 9B). Thus, total of 19 out of 71 lectin
genes (27%) have been detected to be involved in biotic
stress-related signaling pathways.
On the other hand, we are also very interested in the
soybean lectin genes related to legume-rhizobium symbiosis. We have found numbers of soybean-specific lectin family members based on the phylogenetic analysis.
We are wondering whether some families of lectins
involved in legume-rhizobium symbiosis are unique to
soybean or are absent/non-functional in rice and Arabidopsis. A 36, 760 probe-containing microarray analysis
showed that at least 73 lectin-related probes have been
detected with Bradyrhizobium japonicum-regulated
expression patterns [88]. These probes were from both
soybean-specific and non-specific lectin genes. No
enough evidence shows that soybean has evolved into
some soybean-specific lectins specially for the legumerhizobium symbiosis. For example, the Lectin_legB
family member Glyma02g18090 was up-regulated by the
rhizobium. However, it is not soybean-specific lectin
gene. Generally, our data have demonstrated that

Page 16 of 24

soybean lectin families have been involved in legumerhizobium symbiosis.
In rice and Arabidopsis, expression data of most lectin
genes are available under various biotic and abiotic
stresses. We have downloaded all expression data of rice
lectin genes under biotic and abiotic stresses from rice
MPSS database (Methods). Data analyses showed that
total of 58 and 62 lectin genes were differentially
expressed after infection by the fungus and bacterium
pathogens Megnaporthe grisea (Mg) and Xanthomonas
oryzae pv oryzae (Xoo), respectively, among which 29
genes were regulated by both pathogens (Figure 9D,
Additional file 6). Thus, the expression abundance of
total of 91 genes (34%) was regulated by biotic stresses
(Figure 9D). On the other hand, we have detected 68
genes (25%) with differential expression under cold,
drought and/or high salinity stresses, among which 18
genes were regulated by all of three abiotic stresses (Figure 9D, Additional file 6). Totally, we have detected 109
of 267 rice lectin genes (41%) with differential abundance under biotic and/or abiotic stresses as 50 genes
were regulated by both biotic and abiotic stresses (Figure 9D). The percentages of regulated genes in each
family vary from 19% for the LysM to 65% for the
Phloem families (Figure 9D).
In Arabidopsis, 63 of 199 lectin genes exhibited difference in their transcript abundance after the infection by
the fungus and bacterium pathogens Botrytis cinerea
(Bcin) or Erysiphe orontii (EOr), accounting for 32% of
the lectin superfamily members (Figure 9E, Additional
file 7). Up to 89 genes (45%) were regulated by cold,
drought and/or high salinity stresses and this ratio is
significantly higher than that in rice (Figure 9E, Additional file 7). Thus, total of 116 genes (58%) underwent
biotic/abiotic-stress regulation in their expression and
each family showed difference in its response to both
stresses with the percentages ranging from 31% for the
Gal_lectin to 100% for the Chitin_bind_1, EEA and Calreticulin families (Figure 9E).
Besides the expression analyses under various stresses,
we have also investigated the transcript profiling among
different tissues to examine if the lectin superfamily has
been involved in tissue specificity and functionality. In
rice, we have examined the expression abundance in 13
different tissues. Our analysis showed that 7 out of 12
lectin families have been detected to contain genes with
tissue-specific expression. The percentages of tissue-specific genes are 8.0%, 40.0%, 14.3%, 41.7%, 21.4%, 4.3%
and 10.0% in the B-lectin, Chitin_binding_1, EEA, Gal_Lectin, Jacalin, Lectin_legB and Phloem families, respectively (Additional file 8). These lectin genes were
preferentially expressed only in one or two tissues. In
Arabidopsis, the transcript abundance was investigated
among six different tissues including callus, germinating

Jiang et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:79
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/79

seedlings, inflorescence (mixed stages), leaves (21 day),
root (21 day), silique (24-48 hour post-fertilization).
Based on our analysis, only 4 out 12 lectin families contain genes with tissue-specific expression, significantly
less than rice. These genes were from the B-lectin, Jacalin, Lectin_legB and Phloem families. The percentages of
tissue-specific genes in these 4 families are 23.7%, 2.2%,
9.8% and 16.7%, respectively (Additional file 9). These
data demonstrated that lectin genes not only play a role
in specific stress conditions some lectin families but also
have been involved in tissue specific biological functions.
Expression divergence among tandemly and segmentally
duplicated genes

Our data show that both tandem and segmental duplications have significantly contributed to the expansion of
the lectin superfamily and high percentage of lectin
members exhibited differential expression patterns
under various biotic and abiotic stresses. To explore the
effect of both tandem and segmental duplication on the
expression patterns, we have carried out a detail analyses on their expression divergence among tandemly or
segmentally duplicated members.
In soybean, among analyzed 71 lectin genes, four
members were from two tandem clusters. One of them
exhibits expression divergence after infection by cyst
nematode as shown in Figure 10A. On the other hand,
we have also detected 8 segmentally duplicated blocks
among 71 probed lectin genes in Affymetrix chips.
Three blocks (38%) exhibits expression divergence after
infection by P. sojae or cyst nematode. For example, the
gene Glyma12g17280 exhibits no difference in its
expression after infection by P. sojae whereas its segmentally duplicated coordinate Glyma06g41150 was
regulated by the pathogen (Figure 10B). Similar case was
observed in another segmentally duplicated coordinates
Glyma04g34620 and Glyma06g20030 (up-regulated by
cyst nematode as shown in Figure 9C). However, for the
third coordinates Glyma13g31250 and Glyma15g08100,
both of them were down-regulated by cyst nematode
and they exhibited difference in response to the infection time (Figure 10B).
In rice, we have analyzed the expression divergence of
total of 42 tandem clusters and 24 segmental blocks. If
the expression patterns of any members of a tandem
cluster exhibit difference from any other members in
the cluster under either any biotic or abiotic stresses,
this cluster is regarded as a divergent cluster in their
expression. A similar criterion has also been applied to
the evaluation of expression divergence in segmental
duplications. Based on the evaluation, we have identified
29 tandem clusters and 21 segmental blocks with differential expression under various biotic and abiotic stresses, accounting for 69% of total clusters and 88% of

Page 17 of 24

total segmental blocks, respectively (Figure 10C).
Further analyses show that different lectin families exhibit significant difference in their expression divergence
after tandem duplication, ranging from 40% for the Jacalin family to 100% for the Chitin_bind_1, Gal_binding
and Phloem families (Figure 10C). On the other hand,
for segmentally duplicated blocks, most of them show
expression divergence for most of families (Figure 10C).
However, the percentage may be over-estimated since
the expression divergence from tandem duplication
were also included if a tandem duplication occurred
after segmental duplication.
In Arabidopsis, We have investigated total of 27 tandem clusters and 17 segmental blocks. Around 78% of
tandem clusters and 82% of segmental blocks have been
observed with regulated expression patterns under either
biotic or abiotic stresses (Figure 10D). In summary,
expression data from soybean, rice and Arabidopsis
demonstrate that tandem and segmental duplications
significantly contribute to gene expression divergence
under various biotic and abiotic stresses.
Domain combinations, high percentages of expression
divergence and biological functions of lectin genes

Due to the presence of hololectins and chimerolectins,
we have submitted all lectin protein sequences for other
domain detection. The analyses revealed that many lectins also contained other domains besides the carbohydrate-binding domain. We have detected at least 5 other
domains presented in at least 30% of corresponding
family members. They are Kinase domain for B-lectin,
Lectin_legB and Lectin_C families, F-box domain for
phloem family, Glyco_hydro_19 domain for chitin_bind_1 family, Glyco_hydro_35 domain for Gal_lectin
family and Galactosyl_T domain for Gal-Binding Lectin
family (Table 1). Among them, more detail analyses
have been carried out for the F-box-containing phloem
lectins and they may play a role in nucleocytoplasmic
protein degradation [60,89]. The presence of other
domain suggests the more complicated functions and
evolutions of plant lectins.
One may concern why the lectin families have evolved
in these ways and how these duplicated genes are
retained and whether there are any biological needs or
advantages to drive their evolution. Domain combinations are the processes that generate new genes and
functional divergences [90,91]. In this study, we have
detected 5 domains presented in 7 families (Table 1).
One of them is the kinase domain, which was presented
in three families including B-lectin, Lectin_legB and
Lectin_C. Here we focus on the B-lectin and Lectin_legB
families since only one or two members were detected
for the Lectin_C family in plants. For these two families,
the combination with kinase domain did not occur in

Jiang et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:79
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/79

Page 18 of 24

Figure 10 Expression divergence among tandemly and segmentally duplicated lectin genes in soybean, rice and Arabidopsis. (A) and
(B) Examples of expression divergence under cyst nematode treatment after tandem (A) or segmental (B) duplications in soybean. (C) and (D)
The effect of tandem and segmental duplications on gene expression divergence of different lectin families under abiotic and biotic stresses in
rice and Arabidopsis, respectively.

Jiang et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:79
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/79

Page 19 of 24

Table 1 Taxonomic coverage and domain combination of the lectin superfamily
Other domaina
Percentage (%)
Family

Taxonomic coverage

Name

Soybean

Rice

Arabidopsis

B-lectin

Mainly in plants

Kinase

90.5

92.0

78.9

Lectin_legB

Mainly in plants

72.7

87.0

85.4

Lectin_C

Mainly in animals

100.0

100.0

100.0

Jacalin

Plants, animals and microorganisms

-

-

-

-

Phloem

Only in plants

F-box

82.1

46.4

56.7

Chitin_bind_1

Mainly in plants and fungi

Glyco_hydro_19

71.4

80.0

87.5

Ricin_B_Lectin

Plants, animals and microorganisms

-

-

-

-

Gal_lectin

Mainly in animals

Glyco_hydro_35

100.0

100.0

69.2

Gal-Binding Lectin

Mainly in animals

Galactosyl_T

100.0

100.0

100.0

Calreticulin

Plants and animals

-

-

-

-

EEA

Mainly in plants

-

-

-

-

LysM

Plants, animals and microorganisms

-

-

-

-

a

Only domains presented in at least 30% of corresponding family members were listed

animals, bacteria and fungi, suggesting that the domain
composition was established during the course of plant
evolution. Phylogenetic analyses showed that most of
these domains were from the receptor-like kinase
(RLK)/Pelle family [68]. Interestingly, this family also
underwent a rapid birth-and-death evolution in plants
[68]. Thus, both lectin and kinase domains were maintained by according evolution.
We try to further elucidate the biological benefits to
drive the expansion and retention of the lectin superfamily by surveying the effect of tandem and/or segmental duplications on the expression divergence under
biotic and abiotic stresses. Previous reports have showed
that tandemly duplicated genes tend to be involved in
biotic and abiotic stresses [72,83]. Many of the RLK
family members are B-lectin or Lectin_legB domaincontaining proteins in rice and Arabidopsis [68]. Interestingly, the expression data also support the importance of this family in stress response [92]. These results
further confirmed the co-evolution of B-lectin/Lectin_legB and kinase domains. Our expression data suggest a
link between biotic/abiotic stresses and tandem/segmental duplications in lectin families and also suggest that
not only tandem but also segmental duplications of lectin genes may be regarded as drivers for plants to adapt
various environmental stresses through duplication followed by expression divergence, thus, providing an
explanation for why some of lectin families exhibit large
expansion. Highly divergent expression profiles also
demonstrate that each member of this gene superfamily
may play specialized roles in a specific stress condition
and function as a regulator of various environmental
factors such as cold drought and high salinity stresses as
well as biotic stresses. The detection of tissue-

specifically expressed genes further demonstrated the
comprehensive biological functions of this superfamily.

Conclusions
Our data show that higher plant genomes encode large
numbers of lectin proteins. These proteins can be phylogenetically classified into 12 different families and four of
them consist of recently identified plant lectin members.
Further analyses show that some of lectin families exhibit
species-specific expansion and rapid birth-and-death evolution. Tandem and segmental duplications have been
regarded as the major mechanisms for lectin expansion.
Our analyses also shows that lectin genes have been
involved in biotic/abiotic stress regulations and tandem/
segmental duplications may be regarded as drivers for
plants to adapt various environmental stresses through
duplication followed by expression divergence. All in all,
our studies provide a new outline of the plant lectin gene
superfamily and advance the understanding of plant lectin genes in their evolution, expansion and biotic/abiotic
stress-related biological functions.
Methods
Databases, annotations and sequence retrieval

Three different databases have been selected to retrieve
all lectin genes encoded by the soybean, rice and Arabidopsis genomes. The annotated protein sequences from
these three genomes have been downloaded from the
following websites: http://www.phytozome.net/soybean
for soybean (Glyma1.0), http://rice.plantbiology.msu.edu
for rice (release 6) and http://www.Arabidopsis.org for
Arabidopsis (TAIR8).
All lectin domains were achieved from both Pfam and
EBI database http://www.ebi.ac.uk/. Key sequences of

Jiang et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:79
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/79

various domains were obtained from the Pfam databases. However, the key sequences of the phloem and
EEA lectin domains were obtained from Dinant et al
(2003) [60] and Van Damme et al (2008) [7], respectively, since no Pfam ID is available in the database.
These key domain sequences from each lectin domain
were aligned by ClustalX 2.0 [93] and were then used to
generate HMM profiles for HMM searches with e-value
cutoff of 1.0. After filtration by domain confirmation
using both the Pfam and the SMART databases,
sequences with full-length domain were used for BLAST
searches to achieve more lectin sequences.
Sequence alignment and phylogenetic analysis

The DNASTAR program was used for the preliminary
sequence manipulations. The sequence alignment was
generated using ClustalX (Version 2.0) with manual
adjustments using lectin domain sequences from various
lectin families. The aligned amino acid sequences
formed the basis for the phylogenetic analysis using the
program Mac PAUP 4.0b8 (ppc) http://www.paup.csit.
fsu.edu and MrBayes 3.1 [94] according to the description by Jiang and Ramachandran (2006) [95].
Detection of duplication-related lectin genes

Tandemly duplicated lectin genes in soybean, rice and
Arabidopsis were identified by three criteria: (1) they are
less than or equal to 10 genes apart; (2) they belong to
the same lectin family; and (3) they are within 100 kb
for Arabidopsis or 350 kb for both soybean and rice as
suggested by Lehti-Shiu et al. (2009) [92].
The genome-wide identification of segmentally duplicated chromosome blocks has been carried out previously in soybean http://www.phytozome.net/soybean.
php, rice [70,73] and Arabidopsis [96]. We examined the
segmental duplicates by comparing positions of lectin
genes with known duplicated chromosomal blocks.
Since some of these investigations only dealt with relatively recent (for soybean) or ancient (for Arabidopsis)
duplication events, we also compared the flanking
regions (50 kb upstream and downstream) of the lectin
gene pairs in these two species to identify the ancient
(for soybean) or recent (for Arabidopsis) duplicated
blocks according to the method [71].
Detection of transposable element (TE)-related lectin
genes

To detect the contribution of class I TEs (retrotransposons) to the expansion of lectin gene families, possible
retrogenes in the lectin superfamily were identified. Lectin genes encoded by single exon were subjected to
BLASTP searches against all the remaining lectin protein sequences with two or more exon-containing

Page 20 of 24

coding sequences. Homologs were collected for further
analysis while minimum 70% of queried protein coding
regions were aligned with an E-value threshold at 10-8.
We then selected candidate retrogenes based on the criteria [82].
To determine the contribution of class II TEs (DNA
transposons) to the expansion of this superfamily, the
flanking genomic sequences of the 50 kb upstream and
downstream of lectin genes were used for the identification of 4 major transposon family members. These
include mutator-like transposable element (MULE),
hAT, CACTA and Helitron families.
We identified MULE members using similar methods
as described by Jiang et al (2004) [79] and Juretic et al
(2005) [80]. To identify the members of hAT and
CACTA DNA transposon families, we used two separate
approaches including BLASTN and HMM searches as
described by one of our previous reports [97].
Processing of expression data under biotic and abiotic
stresses as well as among various tissues in soybean, rice
and Arabidopsis

We obtained the expression evidence of a lectin gene by
examining the availability of a full-length cDNA, EST or
expressed microarray/RNA_seq tags in a lectin gene.
The investigation was carried out by searching the following databases: http://www.phytozome.net/soybean.
php for soybean, http://rice.plantbiology.msu.edu/ for
rice and http://www.Arabidopsis.org/ for Arabidopsis.
The soybean expression data under the pathogen Phytophthora sojae was downloaded from the GEO DataSets [86] with accession number GSE7124. The
microarray data after the infection by soybean cyst
nematode were obtained from the Arrayexpress database
[87] with accession number E-MEXP-808 [98]. Lectin
genes with at least 2-fold difference in their average
expression signals under normal and stressed conditions
were subjected to students’t-test to determine if the
genes were significantly regulated by stresses. For rice,
the expression data from the MPSS database [57] were
used to analyze the transcriptional profiles of lectin
genes under biotic and abiotic stresses as well as among
different tissues. We have analyzed the effects of cold,
drought and high salinity stresses as well as bacterium
and fungus pathogens on the expression of lectin genes.
Similar criteria have been employed to identify differentially expressed genes as described above for soybean.
For Arabidopsis, the recently published expression data
under biotic and abiotic stresses were downloaded and
differentially expressed lectin genes were identify
according to the description [99]. We used the Arabidopsis MPSS database [100] to investigate the tissuespecifically expressed genes.

Jiang et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:79
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/79

In Vitro expression of a lectin gene and hemagglutination
tests

Since we have detected three new lectin families based
on the genome-wide identification, one of the family
members were randomly selected for the detection of
the lectin activity. The cDNA sequence of the Gal_lectin family member LOC_Os03g06940 with corresponding full-length cDNA (accession number: AK102192)
was isolated by RT-PCR using rice total RNA as template. The cDNA sequence region corresponding to its
Gal_lectin domain and the remaining region were
separately subcloned into Escherichia coli expression
vector pGEX-6P (GE Healthcare). One of the Jacalin
family members LOC_Os01g24710 with known lectin
activity [55] was used as positive control. A total of 6
mL of E. coli culture was collected by centrifuging at
3000 rpm for 10 min at 4°C. The collection was dissolved with 1 × PBS buffer and was sonicated on ice
in short bursts. The hemagglutination test was carried
out by mixing 20 μl sonicated culture extract with
20 μl 2% suspension of rabbit red blood cells. Agglutination was assessed visually after 1 h at room
temperature.
Additional file 1: The lectin superfamily in soybean. This file lists all
annotated soybean lectin members.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2148-1079-S1.XLS ]
Additional file 2: The lectin superfamily in rice. This file lists all
annotated rice lectin members.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2148-1079-S2.XLS ]
Additional file 3: The lectin superfamily in Arabidopsis. This file lists
all annotated Arabidopsis lectin members.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2148-1079-S3.XLS ]
Additional file 4: Segmentally duplicated lectin genes in soybean,
rice and Arabidopsis. This file lists all segmentally duplicated lectin
members in soybean, rice and Arabidopsis.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2148-1079-S4.XLS ]
Additional file 5: The estimation of birth rates in 7 expanded
families among soybean, rice and Arabidopsis. This file provides the
estimation of birth rates in 7 expanded families among soybean, rice and
Arabidopsis.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2148-1079-S5.XLS ]
Additional file 6: Regulated lectin genes under various biotic and
abiotic stresses in rice. This file lists the lectin genes with up/downregulated expression patterns under various biotic and abiotic stresses in
rice.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2148-1079-S6.XLS ]

Page 21 of 24

Additional file 7: Regulated lectin genes under various biotic and
abiotic stresses in Arabidopsis. This file lists the lectin genes with up/
down-regulated expression patterns under various biotic and abiotic
stresses in Arabidopsis.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2148-1079-S7.XLS ]
Additional file 8: Lectin genes with tissue-specific expression
patterns in rice. This file lists the lectin genes with tissue-specific
expression patterns in rice.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2148-1079-S8.XLS ]
Additional file 9: Lectin genes with tissue-specific expression
patterns in Arabidopsis. This file lists the lectin genes with tissuespecific expression patterns in Arabidopsis.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2148-1079-S9.XLS ]

Abbreviations
ABA: Agaricus bisporus agglutinin; CRA: chitinase-related agglutinin; EEA:
Euonymus europaeus agglutinin; EST: expression sequence tag; EUL:
Euonymus lectin; GEO: gene expression omnibus; GNA: Galanthus nivalis
agglutinin; HMM: hidden markov model; LysM: lysin motif; MPSS: massively
parallel signature sequencing; MRCA: most recent common ancestor; MULE:
Mutator-like transposable element; TE: transposable element; TSD: target site
duplications
Acknowledgements
We thank Zheng Xiumin for the preliminary data processes. We also thank
Subramanian Kabilan for providing rabbit red blood cells. The soybean
sequence data were produced by the US Department of Energy Joint
Genome Institute http://www.jgi.doe.gov/ in collaboration with the user
community.
Authors’ contributions
SR supervised the study. SYJ conceived of the study and carried out most of
the work. ZM performed the hemagglutination activity assay. All authors
read and approved the final manuscript.
Received: 27 August 2009 Accepted: 18 March 2010
Published: 18 March 2010
References
1. Lis H, Sharon N: Lectins: carbohydrate-specific proteins that mediate
cellular recognition. Chem Rev 1998, 98:637-674.
2. Vijayan M, Chandra N: Lectins. Curr Opin Struct Biol 1999, 9:707-714.
3. Peumans WJ, Van Damme EJM: Lectins as Plant Defense Proteins. Plant
Physiol 1995, 109:347-352.
4. Sharon N: Lectins: past, present and future. Biochem Soc Trans 2008,
36:1457-1460.
5. Van Damme EJM, Peumans WJ, Barre A, Rouge P: Plant lectins: a
composite of several distinct families of structurally and evolutionally
related proteins with diverse biological roles. Crystal Rev Plant Sci 1998,
17:575-692.
6. Van Damme EJM, Peumans WJ, Pusztai A, Bardocz S: Handbook of plant
lectins: properties and biomedical applications. John Wiley & Sons,
Chichester, UK 1998.
7. Van Damme EJM, Lannoo N, Peumans WJ: Plant Lectins. Adv Botanical Res
2008, 48:107-209.
8. Mardis ER: Next-generation DNA sequencing methods. Annu Rev
Genomics Hum Genet 2008, 9:387-402.
9. Lister R, Gregory BD, Ecker JR: Next is now: new technologies for
sequencing of genomes, transcriptomes, and beyond. Curr Opin Plant Biol
2009, 12:107-118.

Jiang et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:79
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/79

10. The Arabidopsis Genome Initiative: Analysis of the genome sequence of
the flowering plant Arabidopsis thaliana. Nature 2000, 408:796-815.
11. Goff SA, Ricke D, Lan TH, Presting G, Wang R, Dunn M, Glazebrook J,
Sessions A, Oeller P, Varma H, et al: A draft sequence of the rice genome
(Oryza sativa L. ssp. Japonica). Science 2002, 296:92-100.
12. Yu J, Hu S, Wang J, Wong GK, Li S, Liu B, Deng Y, Dai L, Zhou Y, Zhang X,
et al: Draft Sequence of the Rice Genome (Oryza sativa L. ssp. Indica).
Science 2002, 296:79-92.
13. International Rice Genome Sequencing Project: The map-based sequence
of the rice genome. Nature 2005, 436:793-800.
14. Liolios K, Mavrommatis K, Tavernarakis N, Kyrpides NC: The genomes on
line database (GOLD) in 2007: status of genomic and metagenomic
projects and their associated metadata. Nucleic Acids Res 2008, 36:
D475-D479.
15. Etzler ME: New insights into the functions of legume lectins. Trends
Glycosci Glycotechnol 1998, 10:247-55.
16. Rudiger H, Rouge P: Structure and function of plant lectins. Carbohydrates
in Europe 1998, 23:18-22.
17. Rudiger H, Gabius HJ: Plant lectins: occurrence, biochemistry, functions
and applications. Glycoconj J 2001, 18:589-613.
18. Sharon N, Lis H: Lectins. Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2 2003.
19. Fitches E, Woodhouse SD, Edwards JP, Gatehouse JA: In vitro and in vivo
binding of snowdrop (Galanthus nivalis agglutinin; GNA) and jackbean
(Canavalia ensiformis; Con A) lectins within tomato moth (Lacanobia
oleracea) larvae; mechanisms of insecticidal action. J Insect Physiol 2001,
47:777-787.
20. Gatehouse AMR, Down RE, Powell KS, Sauvion N, Rahbe Y, Newell CA,
Merryweather A, Hamilton WDO, Gatehouse JA: Transgenic potato plants
with enhanced resistance to the peach-potato aphid Myzus persicae.
Entomol Exp Appl 1996, 34:295-307.
21. Wang W, Hause B, Peumans WJ, Smagghe G, Mackie A, Fraser R, van
Damme EJ: The Tn antigen-specific lectin from ground ivy is an
insecticidal protein with an unusual physiology. Plant Physiol 2003,
132:1322-1334.
22. Nagadhara D, Ramesh S, Pasalu IC, Rao YK, Sarma NP, Reddy VD, Rao KV:
Transgenic rice plants expressing the snowdrop lectin gene (gna)
exhibit high-level resistance to the whitebacked planthopper (Sogatella
furcifera). Theor Appl Genet 2004, 109:1399-1405.
23. Sadeghi A, Smagghe G, Broeders S, Hernalsteens JP, De Greve H,
Peumans WJ, Van Damme EJM: Ectopically expressed leaf and bulb
lectins from garlic (Allium sativum L.) protect transgenic tobacco plants
against cotton leafworm (Spodoptera littoralis). Transgenic Res 2008,
17:9-18.
24. Subramanyam S, Smith DF, Clemens JC, Webb MA, Sardesai N, Williams CE:
Functional characterization of HFR1, a high-mannose N-Glycan-specific
wheat lectin induced by hessian fly Larvae. Plant Physiol 2008,
147:1412-1426.
25. Hilder VA, Powell KS, Gatehouse AMR, Gatehouse JA, Gatehouse LN, Shi Y,
Hamilton WDO, Merryweather A, Newell CA, Timans JC, et al: Expression of
snowdrop lectin in transgenic tobacco plants results in added
protection against aphids. Transgenic Res 1995, 4:18-25.
26. Gatehouse AMR, Davison GM, Newell CA, Merryweather A, Hamilton WDO,
Burgess EPJ, Gilbert RJC, Gatehouse JA: Transgenic potato plants with
enhanced resistance to the tomato moth Lacanobia oleracea: Growth
room trials. Mol Breeding 1997, 3:49-63.
27. Rao KV, Rathore KS, Hodges TK, Fu X, Stoger E, Sudhakar D, Williams S,
Christou P, Bharati M, Bown DP, et al: Expression of snowdrop lectin
(GNA) in transgenic rice plants confers resistance to rice brown
planthopper. Plant J 1998, 15:469-477.
28. Tinjuangjun P, Loc NT, Gatehouse AMR, Gatehouse JA, Christou P:
Enhanced insect resistance in Thai rice varieties generated by particle
bombardment. Mol Breeding 2000, 6:391-399.
29. Maqbool SB, Riazuddin S, Loc NT, Gatehouse AMR, Gatehouse JA, Christou P:
Expression of multiple insecticidal genes confers broad resistance against
a range of different rice pests. Mol Breeding 2001, 7:85-93.
30. Nagadhara D, Ramesh S, Pasalu IC, Rao YK, Krishnaiah NV, Sarma NP,
Bown DP, Gatehouse JA, Reddy VD, Rao KV: Transgenic Indica rice
resistant to sap-sucking insects. Plant Biotechnol J 2003, 1:231-240.

Page 22 of 24

31. Pham Trung N, Fitches E, Gatehouse JA: A fusion protein containing a
lepidopteran-specific toxin from the South Indian red scorpion
(Mesobuthus tamulus) and snowdrop lectin shows oral toxicity to target
insects. BMC Biotechnol 2006, 6:18.
32. Saha P, Majumder P, Dutta I, Ray T, Roy SC, Das S: Transgenic rice
expressing Allium sativum leaf lectin with enhanced resistance against
sap-sucking insect pests. Planta 2006, 223:1329-1343.
33. Yarasi B, Sadumpati V, Immanni CP, Vudem DR, Khareedu VR: Transgenic
rice expressing Allium sativum leaf agglutinin (ASAL) exhibits high-level
resistance against major sap-sucking pests. BMC Plant Biol 2008, 8:102.
34. Birch ANE, Geoghegan IE, Majerus MEN, McNicol JW, Hackett CA,
Gatehouse AMR, Gatehouse JA: Tri-trophic interaction involving pest
aphids, predatory 2-spot ladybirds and transgenic potatoes expressing
snowdrop lectin for aphid resistance. Mol Breeding 1999, 5:75-83.
35. Bell HA, Fitches EC, Down RE, Marris GC, Edwards JP, Gatehouse JA,
Gatehouse AMR: The effect of snowdrop lectin (GNA) delivered via
artificial diet and transgenic plants on Eulophus pennicornis
(Hymenoptera: Eulophidae), a parasitoid of the tomato month Lacanobia
oleracea (Lepidoptera; Noctuidae). J Insect Physiol 1999, 45:983-991.
36. Bell HA, Fitches EC, Marris GC, Bell J, Edwards JP, Gatehouse JA,
Gatehouse AMR: Transgenic GNA expressing potato plants augment the
beneficial biocontrol of Lacanobia oleracea (Lepidoptera; Noctuidae) by
the parasitoid Eulophus pennicornis (Hymenoptera; Eulophida). Transgen
Res 2001, 10:35-42.
37. Ponstein AS, Bres-Vloemans SA, Sela-Buurlage MB, Elzen van den PJ,
Melchers LS, Cornelissen BJ: A novel pathogen- and wound-inducible
tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum) protein with antifungal activity. Plant Physiol
1994, 104:109-118.
38. Wang X, Bauw G, Van Damme EJ, Peumans WJ, Chen ZL, Van Montagu M,
Angenon G, Dillen W: Gastrodianin-like mannose-binding proteins: a
novel class of plant proteins with antifungal properties. Plant J 2001,
25:651-661.
39. Koo JC, Chun HJ, Park HC, Kim MC, Koo YD, Koo SC, Ok HM, Park SJ,
Lee SH, Yun DJ, et al: Over-expression of a seed specific hevein-like
antimicrobial peptide from Pharbitis nil enhances resistance to a fungal
pathogen in transgenic tobacco plants. Plant Mol Biol 2002, 50:441-452.
40. Chen X, Shang J, Chen D, Lei C, Zou Y, Zhai W, Liu G, Xu J, Ling Z, Cao G,
et al: A B-lectin receptor kinase gene conferring rice blast resistance.
Plant J 2006, 46:794-804.
41. Chen J, Liu B, Ji N, Zhou J, Bian HJ, Li CY, Chen F, Bao JK: A novel sialic
acid-specific lectin from Phaseolus coccineus seeds with potent
antineoplastic and antifungal activities. Phytomedicine 2009, 16:352-360.
42. Baker RL, Brown RL, Chen ZY, Cleveland TE, Fakhoury AM: A maize lectinlike protein with antifungal activity against Aspergillus flavus. J Food Prot
2009, 72:120-127.
43. Saha P, Dasgupta I, Das S: A novel approach for developing resistance in
rice against phloem limited viruses by antagonizing the phloem feeding
hemipteran vectors. Plant Mol Biol 2006, 62:735-752.
44. Keyaerts E, Vijgen L, Pannecouque C, Van Damme E, Peumans W,
Egberink H, Balzarini J, Van Ranst M: Plant lectins are potent inhibitors of
coronaviruses by interfering with two targets in the viral replication
cycle. Antiviral Res 2007, 75:179-187.
45. Chrispeels MJ, Raikhel NV: Lectins, lectin genes, and their role in plant
defense. Plant Cell 1991, 3:1-9.
46. Diaz CL, Melchers LS, Hooykass PJJ, Lugtenberg BJJ, Kijne JW: Root lectin as
a determinant of host-plant specificity in the Rhizobium-legume
symbiosis. Nature 1989, 338:579-581.
47. Brewin NJ, Kardailsky IV: Legume lectins and nodulation by Rhizobium.
Trends 1997, 2:92-98.
48. Hirsch AM: Role of lectins (and rhizobial exopolysaccharides) in legume
nodulation. Curr Opin Plant Biol 1999, 2:320-326.
49. Navarro-Gochicoa MT, Camut S, Timmers AC, Niebel A, Herve C, Boutet E,
Bono JJ, Imberty A, Cullimore JV: Characterization of four lectin-like
receptor kinases expressed in roots of Medicago truncatula. Structure,
location, regulation of expression, and potential role in the symbiosis
with Sinorhizobium eliloti. Plant Physiol 2003, 133:1893-1910.
50. Babosha AV: Inducible lectins and plant resistance to pPathogens and
abiotic stress. Biochem (Moscow) 2008, 73:812-825.

Jiang et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:79
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/79

51. Spadoro-Tank PJoanne, Etzler EMarilynn: Heath shock enhances the
synthesis of a lectin-related protein in Dolichos biflorus cell suspension
cultures. Plant Physiol 1988, 88:1131-1135.
52. Cammue BP, Broekaert WF, Kellens JT, Raikhel NV, Peumans WJ: Stressinduced accumulation of wheat germ agglutinin and abscisic acid in
roots of wheat seedlings. Plant Physiol 1989, 91:1432-1435.
53. Shakirova FM, Bezrukova MV, Shayakhmetov F: Effect of temperature shock
on the dynamics of abscisic acid and wheat germ agglutinin
accumulation in wheat cell culture. Plant Growth Regulation 1996,
19:85-87.
54. Hirano K, Teraoka T, Yamanaka H, Harashima A, Kunisaki A, Takahashi H,
Hosokawa D: Novel mannose-binding rice lectin composed of some
isolectins and its relation to a stress-inducible salT gene. Plant Cell Physiol
2000, 41:258-267.
55. Zhang W, Peumans WJ, Barre A, Astoul CH, Rovira P, Rougé P, Proost P,
Truffa-Bachi P, Jalali AA, Van Damme EJ: Isolation and characterization of a
jacalin-related mannose-binding lectin from salt-stressed rice (Oryza
sativa) plants. Planta 2000, 210:970-978.
56. Abebe T, Skadsen RW, Kaeppler HF: A proximal upstream sequence
controls tissue-specific expression of Lem2, a salicylate-inducible barley
lectin-like gene. Planta 2005, 221:170-183.
57. Nobuta K, Venu RC, Lu C, Belo A, Vemaraju K, Kulkarni K, Wang W, Pillay M,
Green PJ, Wang GL, et al: An expression atlas of rice mRNAs and small
RNAs. Nat Biotechnol 2007, 25:473-477.
58. Finn RD, Mistry J, Schuster-Böckler B, Griffiths-Jones S, Hollich V,
Lassmann T, Moxon S, Marshall M, Khanna A, Durbin R, et al: Pfam: clans,
web tools and services. Nucleic Acids Res 2006, 34:D247-251.
59. Letunic I, Doerks T, Bork P: SMART 6: recent updates and new
developments. Nucleic Acids Res 2009, , 37 Database: D229-D232.
60. Dinant S, Clark AM, Zhu Y, Vilaine F, Palauqui JC, Kusiak C, Thompson GA:
Diversity of the superfamily of phloem lectins (phloem protein 2) in
angiosperms. Plant Physiol 2003, 131:114-128.
61. Fouquaert E, Peumans WJ, Smith DF, Proost P, Savvides SN, Van Damme EJ:
The “old” Euonymus europaeus agglutinin represents a novel family of
ubiquitous plant proteins. Plant Physiol 2008, 147:1316-1324.
62. Pacak F, Kocourek J: Studies on phytohemagglutinins. XXV. Isolation and
characterization of hemagglutinins of the spindle tree seeds (Evonymus
europaea L.). Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1975, 400:374-386.
63. Mulder N, Apweiler R: InterPro and InterProScan: tools for protein
sequence classification and comparison. Methods Mol Biol 2007,
396:59-70.
64. Shridhar S, Chattopadhyay D, Yadav G: PLecDom: a program for
identification and analysis of plant lectin domains. Nucleic Acids Res 2009,
37:W452-458.
65. Jia XY, He LH, Jing RL, Li RZ: Calreticulin: conserved protein and diverse
functions in plants. Physiol Plant 2009, 136:127-138.
66. Dodd RB, Drickamer K: Lectin-like proteins in model organisms:
implications for evolution of carbohydrate-binding activity. Glycobiology
2001, 11:71R-79R.
67. Xing L, Li J, Xu Y, Xu Z, Chong K: Phosphorylation modification of wheat
lectin VER2 is associated with vernalization-induced O-GlcNAc signaling
and intracellular motility. PLoS One 2009, 4:e4854.
68. Shiu SH, Karlowski WM, Pan R, Tzeng YH, Mayer KF, Li WH: Comparative
analysis of the receptor-like kinase family in Arabidopsis and rice. Plant
Cell 2004, 16:1220-1234.
69. Blanc G, Hokamp K, Wolfe KH: A recent polyploidy superimposed on
older large-scale duplications in the Arabidopsis genome. Genome Res
2003, 13:137-144.
70. Vandepoele K, Simillion C, Peer Van de Y: Evidence that rice and other
cereals are ancient aneuploids. Plant Cell 2003, 15:2192-2202.
71. Kong H, Landherr LL, Frohlich MW, Leebens-Mack J, Ma H, dePamphilis CW:
Patterns of gene duplication in the plant SKP1 gene family in
angiosperms: evidence for multiple mechanisms of rapid gene birth.
Plant J 2007, 50:873-885.
72. Rizzon C, Ponger L, Gaut BS: Striking similarities in the genomic
distribution of tandemly arrayed genes in Arabidopsis and rice. PLoS
Comput Biol 2006, 2:e115.
73. Lin H, Zhu W, Silva JC, Gu X, Buell CR: Intron gain and loss in segmentally
duplicated genes in rice. Genome Biol 2006, 7:R41.

Page 23 of 24

74. Cannon SB, Mitra A, Baumgarten A, Young ND, May G: The roles of
segmental and tandem gene duplication in the evolution of large gene
families in Arabidopsis thaliana. BMC Plant Biol 2004, 4:10.
75. Chaw SM, Chang CC, Chen HL, Li WH: Dating the monocot-dicot
divergence and the origin of core eudicots using whole chloroplast
genomes. J Mol Evol 2004, 58:424-441.
76. Davies TJ, Barraclough TG, Chase MW, Soltis PS, Soltis DE, Savolainen V:
Darwin’s abominable mystery: insights from a supertree of the
angiosperms. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2004, 101:1904-1909.
77. Anderson CL, Bremer K, Friis EM: Dating phylogenetically basal eudicots
using rbcL sequences and multiple fossil reference points. Am J Bot
2005, 92:1737-1748.
78. Lynch M, Conery JS: The evolutionary fate and consequences of
duplicate genes. Science 2000, 290:1151-1155.
79. Jiang N, Bao Z, Zhang X, Eddy SR, Wessler SR: Pack-MULE transposable
elements mediate gene evolution in plants. Nature 2004, 431:569-573.
80. Juretic N, Hoen DR, Huynh ML, Harrison PM, Bureau TE: The evolutionary
fate of MULE-mediated duplications of host gene fragments in rice.
Genome Res 2005, 15:1292-1297.
81. Zhang Y, Wu Y, Liu Y, Han B: Computational identification of 69
retroposons in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol 2005, 138:935-948.
82. Wang W, Zheng H, Fan C, Li J, Shi J, Cai Z, Zhang G, Liu D, Zhang J,
Vang S, et al: High rate of chimeric gene origination by retroposition in
plant genomes. Plant Cell 2006, 18:1791-802.
83. Hanada K, Zou C, Lehti-Shiu MD, Shinozaki K, Shiu SH: Importance of
lineage-specific expansion of plant tandem duplicates in the adaptive
response to environmental stimuli. Plant Physiol 2008, 148:993-1003.
84. Betran E, Thornton K, Long M: Retroposed new genes out of the X in
Drosophila. Genome Res 2002, 12:1854-1859.
85. Wang Z, Gerstein M, Snyder M: RNA-Seq: a revolutionary tool for
transcriptomics. Nat Rev Genet 2009, 10:57-63.
86. Barrett T, Troup DB, Wilhite SE, Ledoux P, Rudnev D, Evangelista C, Kim IF,
Soboleva A, Tomashevsky M, Marshall KA, et al: NCBI GEO: archive for
high-throughput functional genomic data. Nucleic Acids Res 2009, 37:
D885-890.
87. Parkinson H, Kapushesky M, Kolesnikov N, Rustici G, Shojatalab M,
Abeygunawardena N, Berube H, Dylag M, Emam I, Farne A, et al:
ArrayExpress update–from an archive of functional genomics
experiments to the atlas of gene expression. Nucleic Acids Res 2009, 37:
D868-872.
88. Brechenmacher L, Kim MY, Benitez M, Li M, Joshi T, Calla B, Lee MP,
Libault M, Vodkin LO, Xu D, Lee SH, Clough SJ, Stacey G: Transcription
profiling of soybean nodulation by Bradyrhizobium japonicum. Mol Plant
Microbe Interact 2008, 21:631-645.
89. Lannoo N, Peumans WJ, Van Damme EJ: Do F-box proteins with a Cterminal domain homologous with the tobacco lectin play a role in
protein degradation in plants?. Biochem Soc Trans 2008, 36(Pt 5):843-847.
90. Apic G, Gough J, Teichmann SA: Domain combinations in archaeal,
eubacterial and eukaryotic proteomes. J Mol Biol 2001, 310:311-325.
91. Chothia C, Gough J, Vogel C, Teichmann SA: Evolution of the protein
repertoire. Science 2003, 300:1701-1703.
92. Lehti-Shiu MD, Zou C, Hanada K, Shiu SH: Evolutionary history and stress
regulation of plant receptor-like kinase/pelle genes. Plant Physiol 2009,
150:12-26.
93. Thompson JD, Gibson TJ, Plewniak F, Jeanmougin F, Higgins DG: The
ClustalX windows interface: flexible strategies for multiple sequence
alignment aided by quality analysis tools. Nucleic Acids Res 1997,
25:4876-4882.
94. Huelsenbeck JP, Ronquist F: Bayesian inference of phylogenetic trees.
Bioinformatics 2001, 17:754-755.
95. Jiang SY, Ramachandran S: Comparative and evolutionary analysis of
genes encoding small GTPases and their activating proteins in
eukaryotic genomes. Physiol Genomics 2006, 24:235-251.
96. Simillion C, Vandepoele K, Van Montagu MC, Zabeau M, Peer van de Y: The
hidden duplication past of Arabidopsis thaliana. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2002, 99:13627-13632.
97. Jiang SY, Christoffels A, Ramamoorthy M, Ramachandran S: Expansion
mechanisms and functional annotations of hypothetical genes in rice
genome. Plant 2009, 150:1997-2008.

Jiang et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:79
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/79

Page 24 of 24

98. Ithal N, Recknor J, Nettleton D, Hearne L, Maier T, Baum TJ, Mitchum MG:
Parallel genome-wide expression profiling of host and pathogen during
soybean cyst nematode infection of soybean. Mol Plant Microbe Interact
2007, 20:293-305.
99. Matsui A, Ishida J, Morosawa T, Mochizuki Y, Kaminuma E, Endo TA,
Okamoto M, Nambara E, Nakajima M, Kawashima M, et al: Arabidopsis
transcriptome analysis under drought, cold, high-salinity and ABA
treatment conditions using a tiling array. Plant Cell Physiol 2008,
49:1135-1149.
100. Meyers BC, Tej SS, Vu TH, Haudenschild CD, Agrawal V, Edberg SB,
Ghazal H, Decola S: The use of MPSS for whole- genome transcriptional
analysis in Arabidopsis. Genome Res 2004, 14:1641-1653.
doi:10.1186/1471-2148-10-79
Cite this article as: Jiang et al.: Evolutionary history and stress
regulation of the lectin superfamily in higher plants. BMC Evolutionary
Biology 2010 10:79.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
