<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>The existence of species rests on a metastable equilibrium between inbreeding and outbreeding. An essay on the close relationship between speciation, inbreeding and recessive mutations</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Biology Direct 2011, 6:62. doi:10.1186/1745-6150-6-62"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Etienne Joly"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Joly Biology Direct 2011, 6:62
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/62

RESEARCH

Open Access

The existence of species rests on a metastable
equilibrium between inbreeding and
outbreeding. An essay on the close relationship
between speciation, inbreeding and recessive
mutations
Etienne Joly1,2

Abstract
Background: Speciation corresponds to the progressive establishment of reproductive barriers between groups of
individuals derived from an ancestral stock. Since Darwin did not believe that reproductive barriers could be
selected for, he proposed that most events of speciation would occur through a process of separation and
divergence, and this point of view is still shared by most evolutionary biologists today.
Results: I do, however, contend that, if so much speciation occurs, the most likely explanation is that there must
be conditions where reproductive barriers can be directly selected for. In other words, situations where it is
advantageous for individuals to reproduce preferentially within a small group and reduce their breeding with the
rest of the ancestral population. This leads me to propose a model whereby new species arise not by populations
splitting into separate branches, but by small inbreeding groups “budding” from an ancestral stock. This would be
driven by several advantages of inbreeding, and mainly by advantageous recessive phenotypes, which could only
be retained in the context of inbreeding. Reproductive barriers would thus not arise as secondary consequences of
divergent evolution in populations isolated from one another, but under the direct selective pressure of ancestral
stocks. Many documented cases of speciation in natural populations appear to fit the model proposed, with more
speciation occurring in populations with high inbreeding coefficients, and many recessive characters identified as
central to the phenomenon of speciation, with these recessive mutations expected to be surrounded by patterns
of limited genomic diversity.
Conclusions: Whilst adaptive evolution would correspond to gains of function that would, most of the time, be
dominant, this type of speciation by budding would thus be driven by mutations resulting in the advantageous
loss of certain functions since recessive mutations very often correspond to the inactivation of a gene. A very
important further advantage of inbreeding is that it reduces the accumulation of recessive mutations in genomes.
A consequence of the model proposed is that the existence of species would correspond to a metastable
equilibrium between inbreeding and outbreeding, with excessive inbreeding promoting speciation, and excessive
outbreeding resulting in irreversible accumulation of recessive mutations that could ultimately only lead to
extinction.
Reviewer names: Eugene V. Koonin, Patrick Nosil (nominated by Dr Jerzy Jurka), Pierre Pontarotti
Keywords: speciation, inbreeding, saeptation, mutation load, extinction, evolution

Correspondence: atnjoly@mac.com
1
CNRS, IPBS (Institut de Pharmacologie et de Biologie Structurale), 205 route
de Narbonne, F-31077 Toulouse, France
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
© 2011 Joly; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Joly Biology Direct 2011, 6:62
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/62

Foreword
2009 was the Darwin year, celebrating the 200th anniversary of Charles Darwin’s birth, and 150 years since
the publication of his fabulous milestone book, ‘The
Origin of Species’ (to which I will subsequently refer to
as ‘The Origin’). For a few years, I have been inhabited
by a nagging ethical concern: how would humans deal
with a situation where a group of individuals found
themselves fertile among one another, but with limited
fertility with the rest of the human race? In other
words, could speciation occur within the human race?
This concern sprouted from the idea that chromosomal
rearrangements seemed to me like a very probable initial
step of a speciation process, since systematic surveys of
the human populations have actually shown that such
rearrangements are relatively frequent (frequency of the
order of 1/1000, [1]). Furthermore, given the success of
the human race, having resulted in the huge numbers of
human beings currently living on our planet, and given
the amazing propensity of nature to generate new species, I felt that the chances must be quite high that speciation could occur within the human population. Most
scientists concerned with evolution and speciation
would probably not share those concerns because the
commonly held view is that speciation is most often
allopatric, i.e. it occurs when populations of individuals
evolve separately from one another for a sufficiently
long time that they would no longer breed efficiently
with one another when they are reunited. The mobility
of modern humans would thus preclude this type of
phenomenon.
The year 2009 has seen the publication of a plethora
of review articles on the subject of evolution and speciation, which have allowed me to start catching up on
these vast subjects, and to mature my reflections on the
mechanisms involved in speciation. The reading of these
reviews has also allowed me to confirm that the ideas I
have developed are in disagreement with the generally
held views, i.e. that allopatric speciation is the most
common and probable route for the appearance of new
species. All the ideas developed in this essay are, however, relatively simple, and most of them are related to
previously published works. But so much work has
already been published on evolution and speciation that
an autodidactic newcomer such as myself could not
hope to read, let alone understand and remember all the
primary papers published previously on evolution and
speciation.
Because, as a rule, I have adopted the principle of
never citing a paper that I have not read, numerous
times during the writing of this essay, I have found
myself unable to decide what specific paper to cite as
the appropriate original source of a particular concept

Page 2 of 55

or observation. Although I have tried to read as many
primary papers as I could rather than reviews, I found
that I simply could not read everything. In addition
many papers were not available to me in our institute’s
library or freely online (As another rule, I refuse to pay
for online access, because I firmly believe that all primary research papers should be freely available to all),
and this problem was even more acute for books. In
such situations when I had not managed to read the primary texts (for whatever reason), I have very often chosen to cite the very comprehensive et quite recent
reference book “Speciation” by Coyne and Orr (2004),
and to refer to it as ‘C&O’, with the indication of the
appropriate chapter or page number.
Probably because inbreeding does not have very good
press, including among evolutionary biologists, despite
reading extensively about speciation and evolution, it is
only very recently, more than a year after completing
the initial version of this assay, that I have finally come
across certain papers which are related to populations
structures and/or to the benefits of inbreeding, and were
thus highly relevant to the ideas developed in this
manuscript (for example, the works of W. Shields [2], S.
Wright [3,4] or H. Carson [5], which are now duly cited
and discussed in the current version). If I have failed to
acknowledge other previous works developing ideas
related to those put forward here, the reader can be
assured that this was not done maliciously but simply as
a result of my relative naivety on the subject. I do, however, hold the firm conviction that, if some of the ideas
developed in this essay prove to be correct and relatively
novel, it was only rendered possible because of this
naivety.

Background
Among the myriad of reviews and articles that have
been written about “The Origin of Species” by Charles
Darwin, a very large proportion underlines the fact that,
despite the title of his book, what Darwin established
150 years ago was the mechanism of adaptive evolution
by the process of natural selection, but that he failed to
provide answers to the many questions that surround
the origin of species.
One of the important reasons for this failure was
related to an issue to which he alluded to repeatedly in
his book, which is that species are basically impossible
to define. The main problem, which he acknowledged
himself, and stays whole today, lies in the fuzzy limit
between species and varieties: “From these remarks it
will be seen that I look at the term species, as one arbitrarily given for the sake of convenience to a set of individuals closely resembling each other, and that it does not
essentially differ from the term variety, which is given to

Joly Biology Direct 2011, 6:62
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/62

less distinct and more fluctuating forms. The term variety, again, in comparison with mere individual differences, is also applied arbitrarily, and for mere
convenience sake.” (The Origin, p. 52 mid Ch II).
One of the most important concepts that derives from
the work of Darwin is that the process of life is one of
constant evolution, which explains why so few of the life
forms that occupied the earth 20 millions ago are still
around today. The somewhat uncomfortable but inescapable conclusion from this is that the existence of
every single one of the millions of species that surround
us, including ours, must also be transitory, and this
probably contributes to the difficulty that many humans
have in accepting the theory of evolution, in addition to
the fact that it also brings serious questions as to the
existence of an almighty God. The processes of evolution and speciation are, however, very slow ones, and
the 5000 years of human history (which is usually
defined as starting with the invention of writing, i.e.
since humans first started scribbling cuneiform signs in
Mesopotamia, or hieroglyphs in Egypt) do not amount
to even a tick on the clock of evolutionary times, and to
our human eyes, the stability of the world thus appears
as if it should stay the same for ever, and so with the
species that occupy it. The fact that species are not
stable entities, but in constant evolution is another factor that adds to the difficulty of defining them.
Initially, species were recognised and defined by naturalists and palaeontologists mostly in relation to their
anatomical features, and it is on the basis of these features that Linnaeus opened the way to taxonomic classifications in the middle of the 18th century. Regarding
taxonomic definitions of species, dogs are a particularly
telling example of the fact that, when considering species based on morphological traits, certain organisms
can differ greatly in their anatomy and still belong to
the very same species.
It is some hundred years after Linnaeus, and well after
Darwin and Wallace had laid down the principles of
natural selection, that the biological species concept
emerged, which introduced the notion of the central
importance of fertility, and of the capacity to hybridize,
in the definition of species. Today, the most popular
definition of biological species is that proposed by Ernst
Mayr in 1942, as “groups of actually or potentially interbreeding natural populations, which are reproductively
isolated from other such groups”.
The first thing to underline in this definition is that
species are not defined as standalone entities, but
always in relation to other species (which provides
some rationale, albeit retroactive, to the fact that the
singular of species is species and not specie, which
refers to coined money). The second important point
about the definition of biological species is about the

Page 3 of 55

difficulty of implementing it. Indeed, many closely
related species still show some degree of fertility with
one another. For example, many species which do not
detectably hybridize in the wild can produce perfectly
fit and fertile offspring under experimental conditions.
Furthermore, even if one was to set a threshold value
for the degree of hybridisation between two separate
populations to consider them as separate species, the
degree of mixing of populations can vary greatly
depending on circumstances such as population densities, or environmental fluctuations such as clarity of
waters for certain fish that use visual clues to recognise their own kin.
More recently, the amazingly fast progress in molecular biology has allowed geneticists to follow and quantify
the occurrence of gene flow between divergent populations, and this is often taken into consideration when
discussing whether two populations represent “good
species” or not. On the subject of gene flow, one can,
however, take the slightly provocative stance that gene
flow can never reach the absolute zero, which is related
to the fact that all organisms are based on the same
genetic code. Indeed, there is more and more evidence
accumulating about the prominence of horizontal gene
transfer between all sorts of organisms, mediated by varied mechanisms that can involve viruses, and particularly retroviruses, or possibly by incorporation of whole
organisms or just DNA. And transgenesis is another
recent progress of technology which reinforces the
notion that “zero gene flow” is only a theoretical limit
towards which speciation can tend.
Considering the various difficulties one encounters in
trying to define species, I will not engage in the somewhat sterile debate (excuse the bad pun) of what constitutes ‘good species’, or rather of when two groups of
animals can be considered as separate species. And even
less in the consideration of whether asexual organisms
can be grouped into species. Rather, I will only engage
in a reflection within the ‘biological species concept’, as
initially defined by Ernst Mayr. Furthermore, in considering only groups of organisms that reproduce sexually,
I will focus on the phenomenon of speciation. Indeed,
although species are well nigh impossible to define, one
cannot dispute that speciation occurs, i.e. the fact that,
starting from an ancestral population, some groups of
animals will start breeding more among one another
than with the rest of the population, and will progressively acquire a range of characters that sets them apart
from the original group. This, in fact, happens everywhere and all the time around us, in wild and domestic
species and is the reason for the appearance of particular characters, or traits, that lead to the definition of
subtypes, morphotypes, races, varieties, subspecies,
species....

Joly Biology Direct 2011, 6:62
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/62

Although the possibility that speciation can occur
without complete separation of two populations seems
to be gaining more and more proponents [6-8], the
most prevalent view about speciation today remains that
geographical separation is the most likely mechanism
for the origin of species: independent adaptation to different environments will push the evolution of the two
populations sufficiently apart that their offspring would
be unfit because outbreeding between the two populations will result in the disruption of co-adapted gene
complexes. The term used to describe this type of speciation is allopatry, as opposed to sympatry, where
ancestral and descendant species coexist in the same
environment (or parapatry if they exist side by side, with
a hybridisation zone in between). If two populations
having evolved separately come back in contact later on,
the intermediate phenotype of their offspring could
make them unfit for either environment, and this would
then provide the selective pressure for the selection of
additional reproductive barriers, in a process called reinforcement, and often referred to as ‘the Wallace effect’.
Indeed, the earliest promoter of the view that reinforcement could occur under the pressure of natural selection was undoubtedly Alfred Wallace, who disagreed
with Darwin’s views that reproductive isolation could
not possibly result from natural selection: “The sterility
of first crosses and of their hybrid progeny has not been
acquired through natural selection” (The Origin, Summary of Hybridism chapter). This point was a subject of
written exchanges and arguments in private correspondence between the two around 1858, 10 years after their
joint communication to the Linnean Society in July
1858, but Wallace formally published his views only in
1889, some twenty year later, in chapter VII of his book
called Darwinism.
On the subject of allopatry versus sympatry, I do
take a very divergent view to that adopted by a majority of evolutionary biologists to this day. Rather, I
choose to follow Wallace’s path against Darwin’s in
thinking that natural selection plays a direct role in
promoting the reproductive isolation that defines species, and I shall actually venture some steps further
than Wallace, and will advocate in the following pages
that natural selection can act on the very first stages
of reproductive isolation, and not just on reinforcement after divergence has taken place. Such views
were also, but temporarily, those of Theodozius Dobzhansky early in his career [9], when he stated that “...
Occurence of hybridisation between races and species
constitutes a challenge to which they may respond by
developing or strengthening isolating mechanisms that
would make hybridisation difficult or impossible”.
Worthy of note, Darwin must also have had a similar
initial intuitions, as can be inferred from the following

Page 4 of 55

statement: “At one time it appeared to me probable, as
it has to others, that the sterility of first crosses and of
hybrids might have been slowly acquired through the
natural selection of slightly lessened degrees of fertility“
found in chapter IX of the editions of The Origin
after 1866.
As for myself, I contend that, if there is so much speciation, i.e. mechanisms, be they genetic or not, causing
reproductive isolation evolving everywhere, all the time,
it must be because there can be basic, fundamental
selective advantages for subgroups of individuals to
breed preferentially among one another, and reduce
their capacity to hybridize with the rest of the population. As will become clearer later on, I adopt the point
of view that, if species arise as a result of direct selective
pressures, then most events of speciation, even in their
earliest steps, must take place as a result of the pressure
of natural selection, and must therefore occur in settings
of sympatry, or at least parapatry rather than allopatry
since, under allopatric conditions, there can be no selective pressure to reduce breeding with individuals that
are seldom encountered.
In this regard, one remarkable observation is that,
inasmuch as legions of well documented examples exist
where divergent types of varieties have been generated
under domestication, very few, if any, examples exist
where truly significant reproductive isolation has been
witnessed. Thomas Huxley, one of the earliest and most
dedicated advocates of Darwin’s theory, actually referred
to the fact that domestic varieties did not undergo speciation as ‘Darwin’s weak point’. But this can find an
explanation within the frame of the model proposed
here, since domestic varieties evolve in the absence of
pressure from the ancestral stock, under what is effectively equivalent to allopatric conditions. This point of
view is supported by the set of data collated by Rice and
Hostert [10] from a large number of studies aimed at
studying the evolution of reproductive isolation under
experimental conditions. The conclusion reached by
these authors is that it is neither allopatry or bottlenecks
that promote reproductive isolation, but rather the
occurrence of multifarious divergent selection, in conjunction, or followed by, reinforcement, as demonstrated
by experiments where hybrids are experimentally
eliminated.
Advocating that it can be advantageous for a handful
of individuals to breed preferentially among one another
rather than with the rest of the population is, however,
very counter-intuitive because it is basically equivalent
to advocating that inbreeding can bring on a selective
advantage. And it is common knowledge to almost
everyone that inbreeding can be disastrously disadvantageous, whereas hybrid vigour almost always brings your
direct descendants a selective advantage.

Joly Biology Direct 2011, 6:62
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/62

I will, however, endeavour to demonstrate that
inbreeding can have numerous advantages, particularly
in the long run, and that the selective advantages
brought about by inbreeding are the main driving force
behind the phenomenon of speciation, whilst the short
term advantages of panmixia will come at a cost of
accumulation of recessive mutations that will eventually
represent a threat for the survival of species.

Results and discussion
I) Potential advantages of inbreeding

We will hence start our reflection by asking ourselves
what the advantages of inbreeding could be. If one carries out a simple literature search for the single keyword
“inbreeding” on a server such as Google scholar, one
can rapidly identify tens of thousands of citations. Upon
rapid examination, it is actually striking to find that, in
over 90% of those, the word inbreeding is systematically
associated with either depression, cost or avoidance,
compared to only a handful of papers where the potential benefits of inbreeding have actually been objectively
considered. One important point to make here is that
inbreeding is different from incest. Incest is the mating
of extremely closely related individuals, usually sharing
half of their genome (such as parent-child or brothersister), or at least a quarter (such as grand-parent with
grand-child). On the other hand, inbreeding results
from the pairing of individuals that are more closely
related than if they were picked at random from the
surrounding population. What many studies have
labelled as ‘inbreeding avoidance’ actually corresponded
to ‘incest avoidance’, and we will see that, in many natural populations, although there are numerous examples
of mechanisms to prevent selfing or incest, multiple
strategies also exist that promote some degree of
inbreeding.
I have actually identified so few papers that have constructively considered the positive aspects of inbreeding
that it is possible to summarise them in just a few sentences. The notion that “selfing” is potentially advantageous can be traced back to R. Fisher in 1941 [11].
Around the same time, the works of S. Wright underlined that natural populations are seldom panmictic, but
usually structured in partially subdivided, and more
inbred demes. These divisions not only help to maintain
more allelic and phenotypic diversity, but can also
favour evolution and promote speciation [3,4,12]. In
1959, H. Carson put forward a model whereby speciation is promoted in small (marginal) inbred populations,
whilst large, more outbred populations, will senesce, i.e.
increasingly rely on heterosis, and progressively lose
their capacity to evolve and to give rise to new ‘young’
species [5]. Many of the ideas developed in that article
are very closely related to the ones I am presenting

Page 5 of 55

here. Because he adopted the view that speciation most
often occurred through allopatry, later works by Carson
focused on founder events, for which he is nowadays
better known and this particular paper actually received
surprisingly little attention from people trying to establish models of speciation (for example, it is not even
cited in the book Speciation by C&O). Some twenty
years later, based on the observation that quails mated
preferentially with their cousins, P. Bateson produced
the concept of optimal outbreeding [13-15], supported
the following year by the work of Price and Waser on a
wildflower [16]. Very soon afterwards, W. Shields put
forward the theory that philopatry, i.e. the tendency of
individuals of many species to breed near their birthplace, was related to the advantages conveyed by
inbreeding, and in particular the capacity of inbreeding
to maintain successful gene combinations [2]. Outside
of the concept of crisis inbreeding developed by C.
Grobbelaar in 1989 [17], and more recent works on the
somewhat unexpected long term reproductive success of
consanguineous marriages [18-20], I have so far failed to
identify other works exploring the benefits of inbreeding
that would contribute significantly to the ideas developed here (More recent but less directly relevant papers
on the subject of inbreeding can be found in the 1993
book of collected works entitled ‘Natural History of
Inbreeding’ [[21]] or in a 2006 paper by Kokko and Ots
[[22]]). In the following pages, I will thus try to present
and summarize the various advantages which can be
found to inbreeding.
1) Inbreeding is necessary for the expression of
advantageous recessive phenotypes

This undisputable advantage of inbreeding is the one
which is most central to the model presented. In the
first place, I thus felt that it was important to clearly
define what is meant by dominant, recessive, co-recessive and co-dominant phenotypes. The laws of genetics
initially discovered by Gregor Mendl at the end of the
19th century concerned the transmission of characters in
diploid organisms. Starting from homogenous stocks of
peas, what he established was that all F1 had homogenous phenotypes (first law), but that those segregated in
F2 generations, according to the well known 1/4 - 3/4
ratios for recessive versus dominant phenotypes (second
law). A further observation was that different characters
segregated independently from one another (third law).
The considerations of linkage between genes and of
genetic distance would be discovered by others, at the
beginning of the 20th century, after the ‘re-discovery’ of
Mendel’s results.
Conversely to Mendelian genetics, which concern
genes that remain identical through successive generations, the process of evolution involves mutations, which
correspond to changes occurring in the DNA. Thus,

Joly Biology Direct 2011, 6:62
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/62

starting from an ancestral genome, a new mutation will
occur one day in the cellular lineage comprising the
germline of an individual, and will only affect one strand
of DNA. That mutation will thus be transmitted to
some of the offspring (half at the most) in which it will
be heterozygous. If the new mutation leads to a new
phenotype, this new trait will only surface in the first
generation of offspring having inherited the mutated
DNA if it corresponds to a dominant character. If it is a
recessive character, some degree of inbreeding between
the descendants of that individual will be necessary for
it to come to light.
Evolutionary “progress” is often perceived as the
acquisition of new functions, resulting from mutations
driving the appearance of new genes, or at least new
functions in existing genes. Since the process of evolution is blind, however, new mutations will, much more
often have a detrimental effect, if only because it is
much easier to brake something that works than to create a new function from scratch. As early as 1930, Fisher
had indeed realised that most new mutations are detrimental [23]. But this was even before the structure of
DNA was known, and we now know that this is not
quite true: most mutations actually occur in the silent
DNA that surrounds genes, and thus have no detectable
phenotype. Today, it is commonly acknowledged that, in
humans, something of the order of 100 mutations take
place every generation. Of those, the vast majority will
occur in silent DNA, but somewhere between 3% and
1‰, i.e. between 3 and 0.1 per individual per generation
will result in a detrimental phenotype, most of them
through the inactivation of genes [24]. From work on
laboratory strains of knock-out animals such as drosophila or transgenic mice, at least a third, and possibly as
much as 50% of the mutations that result in the invalidation of genes, such as those interrupting an open
reading frame, would actually be expected to be directly
lethal in homozygotes, or to have such serious consequences that the homozygous bearer of such mutations
would probably not go on to breed under natural conditions of selection.
Regarding mutations that actually result in new function, the proportion of those is difficult to evaluate precisely, but textbooks classically tell us that somewhere
between one for every 104 and 105 new mutations will
lead to new or different functions, i.e. one in every one
hundred to one thousand individuals.
There is, however, a very important difference
between mutations that inactivate genes, and those that
result in new or different functions: in diploid individuals, having just one functional copy of a gene is very
often sufficient, and most mutations that inactivate
genes will thus be recessive, and thus have no detectable
phenotype in heterozygous individuals. In a similar

Page 6 of 55

proportion of cases, however, there will be an effect of
gene dosage, whereby individuals having lost one copy
of the gene harbour an intermediate phenotype, and
those mutations are then called co-recessive. Conversely,
mutations that result in a gain of function will usually
be dominant. The term co-dominant does not, however
apply to mutations resulting in a gain of function with
an effect of gene dosage (those are still co-recessive),
but to mutations resulting in a change of function of a
gene, where heterozygotes will thus express both functions, but homozygotes can only express one or the
other. To clarify things, I have summarized those considerations in table 1.
Even if most recessive mutations correspond to alterations in the DNA that will result in the loss of a function, there are many cases, however, where losing a
function can be advantageous for individuals. For example, losing certain patterns of colours can bring definite
advantages to escape predators, such as the stripes of
the African ancestor of zebras and horses. Those stripes
were presumably very advantageous for remaining
inconspicuous to predators in the savannah, but probably had the reverse effect for the early equidae that
colonised more northern and greener latitudes and
would later evolve into horses. As could already be suspected from the observations reported by Darwin in the
‘Analogous Variations’ section of The Origin, and later
elegantly recounted by Stephen Jay Gould [25], crosses
between various species of equidae, and more specifically between zebras and horses, reveal that the stripy
phenotype is the dominant one. For the ancestors of
horses to loose their stripes, significant inbreeding must
therefore have occurred to express that recessive stripeless phenotype, and similar reasoning could be applied
for the loss of any dominant character that may have
been selected for in ancestors, but was no longer beneficial, for whatever reason (climate modification, colonisation, evasion of an extinct predator or pathogen, sexual
character that is no longer attractive...).
Outside of the visible external phenotypes such as
those considered in the previous paragraph, the capacity
to resist infections by pathogens is another type of
recessive trait which I perceive as particularly likely to
Table 1 Mendelian genetics from the perspective of
evolutionary biology.
Type of mutation

Usual phenotype

Estimated Frequency
(in mammalian genomes)
97 - 99.9%

Silent

None

Gene inactivation

Recessive

3 - 0.1%

New gene function

Dominant

10-4 - 10-5

Gene dosage effect

Co-recessive

3 - 0.1%

Change of function

Co-dominant

10-4 - 10-5

Joly Biology Direct 2011, 6:62
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/62

play a major role in the selection of relatively inbred
sub-populations. Most pathogens, and in particular
viruses, do show high degrees of specificity for their
hosts. This is due to the fact that pathogens use particular receptors to penetrate the body and/or the cells of
their hosts. Infections by harmful pathogens will therefore eliminate individuals expressing that receptor, and
select for organisms able to resist invasion because they
carry mutated receptors to which that pathogen can no
longer bind. Such characters of natural resistance are,
however, usually recessive because heterozygous individuals will still carry one gene for a functional receptor,
which will suffice to render those individuals susceptible
to invasion by that pathogen. One particularly relevant
example of this is the case of humans carrying the
CCR5-Δ32 mutation, which, when homozygous, provides complete resistance to HIV infection, and an
increased survival of a couple of years when heterozygous [26]. This delayed sickness would, incidentally,
favour the spreading of HIV rather than be beneficial to
the population, and thus bring a further advantage to
the homozygotes for the CCR5-Δ32 allele. The geographic distribution of the mutant CCR5-Δ32 allele does
suggest that this mutation arose several hundred years
ago in northern Europe, and it is hypothesized that it
was probably selected for because it provided resistance
to a pathogen different from HIV, because the HIV epidemic only arose much later, in Africa [26].
Although the pressure of a particular pathogen can provide a very definite advantage to those individuals that can
resist infection by that pathogen, the fact that this resistance will only be found in homozygotes would be a major
hindrance for the spreading of that resistant allelic form to
a whole population (something often referred to as Haldane’s sieve), but would hugely favour particular subgroups where that allele would be homozygous, which
could only occur through inbreeding. In addition to the
fact that natural populations tend to be fragmented [4,12],
increased inbreeding will also result from increased selective pressures such as abrupt environmental changes or
epidemics caused by very virulent pathogens, via a reduction in the effective size of populations. Under such conditions of increased strain, the individuals issued from
groups harbouring advantageous recessive mutations will
be endowed with a massive selective advantage. But the
recessive nature of the characters that would be selected
for under those conditions would provide the grounds for
reinforcing breeding within the group rather than with
members of the ancestral stock. Pushing this concept even
further, Chris Grobbelaar actually proposed, over twenty
years ago, the interesting idea that a mechanism of crisis
inbreeding would be advantageous, whereby situations of
stress would result in a shift from sexual preferences
towards inbreeding [17].

Page 7 of 55

2) Reducing the recombination load

One important concept in evolutionary genetics is that
the fitness of individuals is not the result of a simple
sum of functions harboured by each one of their genes,
or loci, but that complex relationships exist between
these different loci. For example, many phenotypes are
epistatic: they result from particular associations of
alleles carried by different genes. One of the major
advantages of sex is that it will favour the shuffling of
alleles between individuals, and thus promote the formation of such functional allelic combinations. It is commonly accepted that, if such associations of alleles from
different genes are particularly advantageous, this can
lead to the selection of co-adapted genomes. But, as outlined by S. Wright, “in a panmictic population, combinations are formed in one generation only to be broken
up in the next“ [3]. This dissociation of functional gene
combinations is what is called the recombination load.
And inbreeding is the only strategy that will reduce it,
by allowing the maintenance of particular allelic combinations, albeit in only a portion of the offspring.
These aspects have been extensively developed and
thoroughly documented by W. Shields in his book on
the relationship between philopatry and inbreeding [2]:
“One potential advantage of inbreeding, then, is that its
genomic consequence of maintaining interlocus allele
associations may permit more faithful transmission of
coadapted genomes than would be possible with wider
outbreeding“.
From the point of view of the ideas developed here,
advantageous allele associations are actually quite similar to recessive phenotypes, even if they are based on
the association of dominant phenotypes. Indeed, once
they have become fixed in a population, their fate will
be threatened by hybridisation with an outside population that would not harbour those particular alleles. The
threat would be less direct because, contrarily to recessive phenotypes, the advantageous association of two
dominant alleles would still be present in all F1 individuals, but it would only be maintained in 9/16 of an F2
offspring, and in just 25% if the F1 matted with an individual from the outside population. On the other hand,
the advantageous epistatic combination will be maintained in all future generations if the hybrid offspring
backcrossed with the isolated population. If ‘invaders’
were rare, this would represent a very effective way for
the introgression of genetic diversity into the isolated
group, but under a more sustained presence of outsiders, we can see how the recombination load could promote the selection of reproductive barriers.
Alterations in the chromosomal structure also contribute very significantly to the recombination load (for
example the case of a reciprocal translocation which will
be depicted later (see Figure 2 and text relating to it).

Joly Biology Direct 2011, 6:62
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/62

Page 8 of 55

Figure 2 Predicted chromosomal structures in zygotes issued from individuals carrying a whole arm reciprocal chromosomal
translocation. In an individual carrying a reciprocal chromosomal translocation, only 50% of the offspring is viable (first line). If the cross takes
place between two heterozygotes, the proportion of viable offspring drops to 6/16 (= 3/8). Once the translocation has become fixed in a
population, crosses with the ancestral stock will generate a first generation (F1) that will be 100% viable, but those F1 individuals will be back to
the situation of reduced fertility faced by the individuals who first carried the translocation, and this will be true whether they cross to
individuals from the ancestral stock, or to individuals homozygous for the translocation.

Joly Biology Direct 2011, 6:62
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/62

For such translocations, the general rule is basically the
same as for epistatic combinations, with healthy F1 offspring. And the reduced fertility of those F1 effectively
correspond to an extremely reduced fitness of those F2
individuals that do not inherit the right genetic combination. And similarly to advantageous gene combinations, once a particular chromosomal rearrangement has
become fixed in a population, usually through inbreeding, the most effective way for the descendants of hybrid
offspring to recover complete fertility will be by backcrossing with the isolated group. In cases where populations differ by several chromosomal rearrangements,
however, hybridisation would become a real threat
because the fertility of hybrid would be dramatically
affected.
3) Fighting Muller’s ratchet

A third advantage of inbreeding is that, for diploid
organisms, it is the only effective way to fight off the
accumulation of recessive deleterious mutations in their
genomes. The notion that mutations accumulate inexorably in genomes over the course of generations is commonly referred to as Muller’s ratchet [27]. Muller
advocated that a major reason for the prominence of
sexual reproduction among all animal species was due
to the need to eliminate these mutations through genomic recombination. Following the views initially
expressed by Fisher [23], Muller, in his early work on
Drosophila, had documented himself that most new
mutations tended to have recessive phenotypes. When it
came to persistence of those in the genome over generations, however, he considered that all mutations were
partially dominant (i.e. co-recessive, see table 1), and
that even the most recessive deleterious mutations must
have some slight effect (2 to 5%) on reproductive fitness
[28]. Those weakly deleterious mutations would therefore be eliminated progressively over successive generations. Muller, however, carried out all of his work before
the discovery of the structure of DNA and of how genes
worked. Although his arguments were clearly valid for
weakly deleterious co-recessive mutations, we now know
that a very large proportion of deleterious mutations
will be perfectly recessive and that mut/WT heterozygotes will show very little, if any, reduction in fitness
compared to WT homozygotes [29,30]. At any rate,
even if inactivation of a fair portion of genes leads to
co-recessive phenotypes through an effect of gene
dosage, the frequency of deleterious mutations giving
rise to completely recessive phenotypes will still be
much higher than those leading to dominant, or codominant traits. Inbreeding, by promoting the conditions whereby recessive mutations can find themselves
in a homozygous state, will hence allow the expression
of those deleterious effects resulting from recessive
mutations.

Page 9 of 55

We will now attempt to compare the effects of accumulation of recessive deleterious mutations in populations undergoing various degrees of inbreeding and with
a theoretical completely outbred population. As depicted
in the upper panel of Figure 1, when breeding takes
place between two individuals each carrying one copy of
a defective essential gene, one quarter of their offspring
will be either non viable, or very unfit because they will
be homozygous for the deleterious mutation. If the
mutation is truly recessive, the other three quarters will
be perfectly viable, and two out of three among that
viable offspring will be heterozygous for the mutation.
The allelic frequency of that deleterious allele will hence
pass from 0.5 in the parents to 0.33 in the offspring,
and the mutation load from 1 to 0.66 mutations per
individual.
As a rough estimate based on the simplistic case of a
single gene, one could therefore say that a rate of spontaneous mutation of 0.17 per generation (0.5 - 0.33) will
be compensated by a reduction of 0.25 in fertility. This
value of 0.17 is rather compatible with the various estimates of the rate of spontaneous mutations, which are,
for humans, between 0.1 and 3 new deleterious mutation per genome per generation [24]. Although I realise
that those figures are probably inaccurate for the additive effect of multiple genes, it was beyond my limited
mathematical capacities to perform more precise calculations. I am confident, however, that others will later
find such calculations rather straightforward, and it will
then be particularly interesting to evaluate what types of
equilibriums are reached for various mutations loads,
various rates of mutations, and various effective sizes of
population (i.e. various degrees of inbreeding).
In panel B of Figure 1, I have tried to evaluate the fertility of breeding pairs as a function of mutation loads
and inbreeding coefficients. The theoretical fertility of
breeding pairs in a population can be calculated as a
function of M, the average number of recessive mutations per individual (i.e. the mutation load) and of I, the
overall average inbreeding coefficient in that population
(i.e. the probability that a locus taken at random in the
genome will be homozygous by descent, corresponding
to half the average degree of consanguinity of parents).
The average fertility will then be (1- I)M. The different
coloured curves were calculated for the indicated
inbreeding coefficients, and we can see that fertilities
only start to be significantly affected for populations
with inbreeding coefficients > 0.01, corresponding to
parents with degrees of consanguinity of 0.02, i.e.
roughly that of third or fourth cousins.
In parallel, one can also evaluate the fertility of breeding pairs in an panmictic infinitely large population,
where there is effectively no inbreeding (in real populations, the average fertility would actually be a factor of

Joly Biology Direct 2011, 6:62
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/62

Page 10 of 55

Figure 1 Comparing the effects of accumulation of recessive deleterious mutations in populations undergoing various degrees of
inbreeding, and with a theoretical completely outbred population. Panel A: Mendelian laws predict that when a crossing occurs between
two individuals heterozygous for a recessive deleterious mutation, allelic frequency for that mutation drops from 0.5 in the parents to 0.33 in the
offspring. Panel B: Evaluation of the fertility as a function of mutation loads and inbreeding coefficients. The thick red curve corresponds to the
fertility predicted in a completely outbred population. It was drawn with the equation F = (1- M2.10-8)10,000 (see text). The thinner curves of
different colours correspond to the fertility of crosses with a certain degree of inbreeding, as indicated on the figure. Those were calculated as F
= (1- I)M, where F is the predicted fertility, M the average mutation load in the population, and I the inbreeding coefficient. In natural
populations, the actual fertility would be a factor of those two theoretical degrees of fertility.

the two degrees of fertility). For mammals, if one estimates that roughly one third of genes are essential, this
would amount to a total of approximately 104 essential
genes. If the mutation load in the population is M, the
probability of any locus being mutated will be M/104,
and the probability of carrying two mutated alleles of
any given gene will be (M/104 ) 2 = M 2 .10-8 and hence
the effect on fertility would be (1- M2.10-8)10,000 overall
since the threat applies for every single one of the
10,000 essential genes. This is represented as the thick
red curve on panel B. We can see that, whilst the
chance of carrying two inactivated copies of the same
gene remains extremely low for mutation loads below
20, it starts becoming quite significant for mutation
loads over 30, and fertility will drop below 75% when

genomes have accumulated, on average, over 50 recessive mutations. For populations harbouring levels of
consanguinity superior to 0.02, the reduction in fertility
is, as could be expected, much more sensitive to mutation load, and for a population with an inbreeding coefficient of 0.06, a drop of fertility to 75% will occur with
a mutation load between 5 and 6, but this figure climbs
to nearly 30 mutations for an inbreeding coefficient of
0.01.
We have seen in the previous paragraph that, based
on calculations for a single gene, a drop of 0.25 in fertility would keep up with the rate of 0.17 new deleterious
recessive mutation, i.e. one per genome every six generations. The figures would possibly be slightly different
if one considered the additive effect of multiples

Joly Biology Direct 2011, 6:62
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/62

recessive deleterious mutations affecting different genes,
each with lower allelic frequencies, and clearly different
with different mutation rates. The mutation rate of 0.17
per generation cannot, however, be very far from reality
since the most extreme estimates go from 0.1 to 3, and
a decrease in fertility of 0.25 does not seem a completely
unrealistic figure to keep up with new recessive mutations occurring once every six generations. For humans,
this does not, however, mean that one in four newborn
babies would come to the world with mental retardation
or grievous physical defects. Indeed, most recessive
mutations that touch essential genes would be expected
to cause spontaneous premature abortions at very early
stages of pregnancy, and many even before they would
be recognised as miscarriages. From this point of view,
it is actually rather striking to note that, in modern
humans, miscarriages occur at a rate of somewhere
between 10 and 40%. Whilst the occurrence of these
miscarriages is clearly also related to other factors such
as the age and the health of the mother, these figures
suggest that it is not unreasonable to envisage that the
price to pay to fight Muller’s ratchet is that a fair proportion of the zygotes (say 20 to 30%) will have to be
lost to compensate for the occurrence of one new recessive mutation every six generations. And these figures
also seem compatible with what one sees in mice.
Indeed, although mice can have as many as 10 to 12
pups in a litter, inbred strains are much less prolific,
with litters often limited to 4 to 6 pups. When I have
had to sacrifice pregnant female mice for experiments
on embryonic tissues, I have often been struck by the
proportion of aborted foetuses one can find in the
uterus of a gestating female mouse, which is often near
50%. Thus, even in inbred mice in which the inherited
mutation load must be close to zero, the rate of abortions suggests that de novo recessive mutations occur at
a rate that is probably superior to one in six zygotes, or
one in six generations.
The adjective “inbred” has clear derogatory connotations when referring to human beings and the commonly held perception about inbreeding is that it
promotes degeneracy of the genome. Somewhat ironically, inbreeding actually results in “improving” the genome, and the fact that inbreeding results in elimination
of recessive deleterious mutations from the population
is actually well known, at least by animal or plant breeders and scientists: the extent of inbreeding depression
decreases over successive generations of inbreeding [31]
1
(throughout the manuscript, subscript numbers refer
the reader to footnotes which can be found in addendum 4, at the end of the manuscript). Via this type of
phenomenon, the consequence of inbreeding will be
that the allelic frequency of recessive mutations will be
lower in the offspring than in their parents. For each

Page 11 of 55

mutation, the efficiency of the process is, however,
remarkably low. Indeed, in the case of a heterozygous
breeding pair, the allelic frequency for the mutated copy
of the gene would only pass from 0.5 in the parents
(each heterozygote for the deleterious allele), to 0.33 in
the offspring (see Figure 1A). But inbreeding is the only
practical way for the members of a species with an obligatory diploid genome to cleanse their genomes off the
recessive mutations that will otherwise inexorably accumulate over successive generations until they reach an
equilibrium, when the average number of recessive
mutations in the genomes of individuals is sufficiently
high that the rate at which they accumulate in the genome is balanced by a rate of elimination by random
chance rather than by consanguineous descent (see Figure 1 and above text). The reason why I have used the
word “practical” in the previous sentence is because of
the bdelloid rotifers, the one undisputed example of
asexual diploid organisms, that seem to have adopted an
alternative strategy to sex to cleanse their diploid genomes from recessive mutations, but as discussed in
addendum 1, it calls upon such extremes that it would
be impractical for most other organisms. Haploid organisms such as prokaryotes do not have this problem of
keeping their genome from accumulating deleterious
mutations, because in haploids, all mutations are dominant, and deleterious ones will hence be eliminated very
rapidly. Multiple cases exist in nature of the use of a
haploid state by otherwise diploid eukaryotes, and in
addendum 2, I have developed three such examples that
I find particularly eloquent i.e. the cases of organisms
that go through haploid stages, of the sexual chromosomes and of the endosymbiotic organelles.
Diploid genomes must have contributed greatly to the
adaptive ‘explosion’ which took place among eukaryotes
1,5 billion years ago. The most important factor for this
must have been the robustness of organisms, i.e. their
newfound tolerance to new mutations that would have
been instantaneously deleterious in haploid organisms.
Conceivably, this may even have allowed the diploid
organisms to “lower their guard”, i.e. to reduce the fidelity of the replication of their DNA, and favour mechanisms of recombination [32], thereby favouring the
appearance of novel adaptive mutations, helping them in
particular to combat pathogens more efficiently, or to
adapt to new environments. This view is supported by
the fact that the vast majority of metazoans of today are
obligatory diploids. The drawback of relying only on
diploid genomes is that this also gives rise to the insidious type of Muller’s ratchet I have just discussed,
whereby recessive deleterious mutations can start accumulating silently in the genome of outbred individuals.
Without sex, the benefits of a diploid genome would,
thus, be very short lived, especially on the evolutionary

Joly Biology Direct 2011, 6:62
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/62

time scale, and genomes would ultimately reach a mutational meltdown [33]. But sex without inbreeding is
fraught with even more insidious, and thus far greater
dangers that, as we will see, can ultimately lead to species extinction.
DNA replication is far from being a perfectly faithful
process, and the rate of appearance of mutations in the
genomes of vertebrates is commonly recognised to be of
the order of 2.10-8 per nucleotide for every generation,
although the complete sequencing of the whole genomes
of a family of four suggests it may be half as high [34].
For mammals, since their haploid genomes comprises
roughly 3.109 base pairs, each diploid newborn will thus
carry, on average, around 100 nucleotides that will differ
from those it should have inherited from its parents if
DNA replication was perfectly faithful, and if DNA was
perfectly stable and completely resistant to damages by
radiation and chemicals. Among those mutations, the
vast majority will be silent, but, as developed on table 1
some will modify or inactivate gene functions, and most
of those will be deleterious, but recessive.
In the long run, the phenomenon of evolution will be
based mostly on the acquisition of new characters, corresponding to dominant mutations. But this can very
easily be obscured by the much higher prevalence of
recessive mutations. This can be ascertained by the
repeated observations that the particular characters
selected for in domestic species prove almost systematically to be recessive against the phenotype of the wild
stock 2 . Even if DNA replication could be selected to
become completely faithful, this would not be a solution, because, as famously underlined by Leigh van
Valen [35], organisms have no choice but to evolve continuously in the face of natural selection, just like Lewis
Carol’s Red Queen, who needs to keep running just to
stay in the same place.
But because evolution is blind, and occurs only by
random mutations, in order to have a chance to see
adaptive mutations arise, be they new functions or the
advantageous loss of existing ones, there will be no
avoiding the hundred fold excess of deleterious mutations, which will need to be eliminated by natural selection. As alluded to earlier, most of those deleterious
mutations will, however, be perfectly recessive, i.e. they
will have no phenotype in heterozygotes. Hence, within
a large out-breeding population, the chance that one
individual will carry two copies of an inactivated gene
will be very low. But those will consequently be transmitted to half of the offspring, and over successive generations, since such mutations will keep accumulating,
the mutation load will inexorably increase. Even at the
lowest rate of the range envisaged above, i.e. one additional recessive mutation every ten generations, the
mutation load will thus still increase rather rapidly until,

Page 12 of 55

as proposed by Muller [28], it reaches an equilibrium
where as many mutations are eliminated at every generation than arise due to new spontaneous mutations.
This process of elimination, which correlates directly
with infertility, will, obviously, be greatly dependant on
the inbreeding coefficient, i.e. on the effective size of the
population. Above, I have tried to evaluate how the
accumulation of recessive mutations in a population can
affect the fertility of individuals as a function of the
inbreeding coefficient in that population. From rather
simplistic calculations, I conclude that, if the rate of
accumulation of recessive mutations is of the order of
one every six generations, this will be compensated by a
drop in fertility of the order of 0.25. These figures,
although rather speculative, seem to be compatible with
the rates of spontaneous abortions one sees in human
and mice, of which a fair proportion (I would guess
between one and two thirds) are probably due to genetic
causes. As already underlined by Muller 60 years ago
[28], the proportion of miscarriages due to genetic
defects necessary to keep the mutation load in a steady
state will be principally dependent on the rate with
which new mutations appear in the genome at every
generation. The process of outbreeding will indeed
reduce the initial frequency at which recessive mutations
are found on both copies of a gene, but this advantage
will only last for a while, until the mutation load has
increased to levels where the decrease in fertility due to
mutations once again compensates for the rate at which
they appear. The advantage of outbreeding is thus very
short lived on the evolutionary time scale. And, as mentioned earlier, I contend that it opens the door to a
much greater threat. Indeed, if a large population undergoes extensive outbreeding for hundreds of generations,
the equilibrium will only be reached when each individual carries, on average, several dozens of recessive
mutations in its genome. If that population undergoes a
sudden increase in selective pressures, for example
because of a novel pathogen, of competition with
another species, of a recrudescence in predators or of
abrupt changes in the natural environment, the effective
size of that population will shrink, and the inbreeding
coefficient among the survivors will consequently
become very significant 3. If we imagine that the mutation load in such a large population had reached 40, and
that the reduced numbers of individuals causes the
inbreeding coefficient to rise to 0.03 in the remaining
population, this will result in only 30% of viable zygotes.
If we consider that this would happen under conditions
where natural selection would be particularly harsh, the
delayed cost of having avoided inbreeding for the short
term benefits provided by outbreeding may well, in the
long run, play a major role in the rapid extinction of
that species, as well as reducing their capacity to

Joly Biology Direct 2011, 6:62
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/62

colonise new environments (in the section ‘convergence
of character’ of The Origin, Darwin himself remarked
that ‘When any species becomes very rare, close interbreeding will help to exterminate it’). In the face of Muller’s ratchet, as Muller himself very rightly stated 60
years ago, “We cannot eat our cake today and have it
tomorrow“ [28] p150.
In cases where there is a relatively sudden shift in the
pressures of natural selection, such as those caused by
natural catastrophes (volcano, meteorites...), or by a global change in the earth’s temperature, the resulting
shrinkage in effective populations sizes would thus be
expected to be less well tolerated by the more prominent populations, i.e. probably those having taken full
advantage of extensive outbreeding. Incidentally, such a
mechanism would provide an explanation for the phenomenon of punctuated equilibrium proposed by Gould
and Eldredge [36,37]. Indeed, over periods of stability,
the individuals of the most successful species will proliferate and colonise ever increasing territories. They will
thus be the ones most likely to be found in the fossil
record. But with this increase in effective sizes of populations will come the insidious consequence of increased
mutation loads, and consequently the least chances to
survive when unrest arises, causing dramatic reduction
in the sizes of the populations. From this point of view,
it is thus not surprising that, during periods when the
natural scene changes, it should be the most numerous
species, those found in the fossil record, that would
struggle the most in the face of imposed inbreeding
caused by population shrinkage, and become extinct
with an apparent simultaneity.
4) Reducing the cost of sex

Another advantage of inbreeding is that it reduces the
cost of sex. Indeed, in sexual reproduction, each parent
passes only half of its genome to each of its offspring,
which is directly related to the consideration that the
cost of sex is two-fold [38], as compared to asexual
reproduction, where each offspring inherits all of the
parent’s genome. But this factor of two is not quite a
completely accurate measurement, if only because for
most metazoans, sexual reproduction is obligatory and
not an option. Furthermore, if we consider a hypothetical species with the most outbred population possible,
each individual of that species will still be more genetically closely related to all the other individuals of the
same species than to any other individual of a closely
related species. In other words, all individuals of a given
species share more common ancestors than they do
with those of a closely related species. Hence when they
breed within their own species, individuals do share
some significant level of relatedness with their sexual
partner compared with that of an individual of another
species. So, even in a completely outbred population,

Page 13 of 55

because individuals of the same species will necessarily
share some common ancestors, the cost of sex is never
quite as high as two. And the more closely related an
individual is to it’s partner, the less that cost will be, for
both of them 4 . Consequently, any evolutionary step
that will favour inbreeding rather than producing offspring with more distantly related individuals, even of
the same species, will thus reduce the cost of sex.
5) Inbreeding promotes population fragmentation, which
can, in turn, promote collaborative or altruistic behaviour

From the point of view of the ‘selfish gene’ hypothesis
[39], individuals should always favour their own interests, or at least those of closely related individuals
[40,41]. On the other hand, mathematical modelling has
led certain population biologists to conclude that group
level selection cannot work, and that for any behavioural
trait to be selected, that trait must have a direct selective
advantage for the individual. Such views are, however,
much less prominent today, and anyone who is not convinced that group-level selection can play a major role
in evolution should read the excellent recent review by
Wilson and Wilson [42].
The type of reasoning which led to the rejection of
group-selection was always based on the assumption
that populations consist of large numbers of individuals
breeding freely with the rest of the population. But, as
underlined by Wright himself [12], natural populations
are not like that. If we only look at the human population, although all individuals can theoretically breed
with all those of the opposite sex with apparently
equivalent efficiencies, we can see that the total human
population is structured in ethnic groups, races, types,
families... and that certain characters are more prominent in certain groups of individuals than in the rest of
the population. In addition to the well recognised and
very significant advantage of slowing down the spread of
pathogens, and of favouring the maintenance of genetic
diversity [4], population fragmentation has the other,
much less direct and less obvious benefit of favouring
the evolution of altruistic behaviours, by making grouplevel selection possible [42]. On the subject of group
selection, I choose to adopt the view that, in fragmented
populations, each group effectively becomes equivalent
to a multi-cellular organism (see [43] for recent views
on organismality). In metazoans, the fact that all the
cells share the very same genetic makeup makes it possible for the vast majority of cells to sacrifice themselves
either directly by apoptosis, or by differentiating into
somatic cells that have absolutely no hope of generating
offspring, for the benefit of the very few that will be destined to the germ line. Similarly, if a population is comprised of many small groups of individuals that are
more closely related to one another than to the rest of
the population, I firmly believe that it then becomes

Joly Biology Direct 2011, 6:62
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/62

possible for natural selection to favour the evolution of
collaborative or altruistic behaviours, because, in the
end, even if those behaviours do not directly benefit the
individuals that undertake those altruistic behaviours,
the members of that group, and hence, on average, all
the genes of the gene pool of that group, will fare better
than those of the “group next door” that may have stuck
with strictly selfish behaviours. On this subject, in 1871,
Darwin himself made the following statement in his
book “The Descent of Man":
It must not be forgotten that although a high standard
of morality gives but a slight or no advantage to each
individual man and his children over the other men of
the same tribe... an increase in the number of wellendowed men and an advancement in the standard of
morality will certainly give an immense advantage to
one tribe over another.
Although, when one looks at natural populations,
scores of examples can be found in all the kingdoms of
life where altruistic, or at least collaborative behaviours
have apparently been selected for, the questions linked
to group level selection remain very contentious issues
today. I know of no better example of cooperative
altruistic behaviour than that of the lowly slime mould,
Dictyostelium discoideum, and I contend that it is promoted by the ability of single cells to colonise new
niches, resulting in fragmented populations. One of the
reasons for which I find the example of Dictyostelium
particularly telling is that it is not complicated by the
intervention of sexual reproduction (see addendum 3 for
more details).
In some cases, speciation could conceptually correspond to the need for populations having developed
cooperative/altruistic strategies to fend off more selfish
invaders. The issue of altruism is, however, really a side
issue to the main focus of this essay. All I wish to say
here is that, from an admittedly ultra-Darwinian point
of view, the only realistic way to explain the evolution
of cooperativity and altruism in natural populations is
via group level selection, and this selection can only
occur in populations that are fragmented into small
groups of genetically inter-related individuals, or in
other words, by natural selection acting on groups
undergoing more inbreeding than if the population was
considered as a whole. The fact that inbreeding can
have the additional characteristic of providing a selective
advantage at the levels of populations simply reinforces
the view that inbreeding can and will occur and will not
always be avoided. This will result in structured populations, which will, in turn contribute to the phenomenon
of speciation.
6) Disadvantages of inbreeding

For the sake of fairness of argument, it seems necessary
to counterbalance our arguments here, and underline

Page 14 of 55

that inbreeding also has several very significant disadvantages. Indeed, when starting from an outbred population, inbreeding depression will result in a high
proportion of completely unfit offspring, and in most of
the offspring being less fit than those from outbred
breeding pairs. Another consequence of excessive
inbreeding is that, by reducing the gene pool available
for generating varied combinations of genotypes, it will
result in less diversity, and thus in a more limited adaptability of the populations. Hence populations that
undergo excessive inbreeding will be less likely to
develop new functions than large populations undergoing outbreeding, where new functions bringing selective advantages can rapidly spread to the whole
population, and can further combine with other advantageous functions that will have arisen independently in
other individuals. Inbreeding may thus result in a slower
rate of evolution.
This last argument does, however, need to be balanced
by several counter-arguments. First, as we have seen
previously, advantageous traits are not necessarily dominant, and those that are recessive can only come to light
under some level of inbreeding. Thus, although inbreeding will reduce the probability of dominant traits
spreading to whole populations, it will increase the frequency at which recessive traits appear, and since the
mutations causing such traits are much more frequent
than those causing novel functions this may balance the
effect of inbreeding on slowing evolution. Second, when
it comes to epistatic phenotypes resulting from advantageous gene combinations, we have seen that inbreeding
is, once again, the only way to maintain them. Finally, as
has been recognised for a long time, the rate at which
characters can become fixed in populations is inversely
correlated to the size of those populations [44]. By reducing the effective size of populations, the slower rate of
evolution caused by inbreeding may thus also be compensated. As we will see later on, I actually contend that
excessive inbreeding, leading to excessive speciation, will
consequently result in the shorter lifespan of individual
species, and thus in an accelerated rate of the species’
turnover, which is not the same thing as the rate of evolution, although the two are too often considered
equivalent.
Another potential disadvantage of excessive inbreeding
is that it could result is reductions in the levels of polymorphism in a population, by provoking what would
effectively amount to repetitive bottlenecks. For jawed
vertebrates, which rely on polymorphism at the level of
the MHC (Major Histocompatibility Complex) for fighting and eliminating infectious pathogens, this would be
expected to have particularly nefarious consequences.
As we will see later, however, comparing MHC polymorphism between related species reveals that

Joly Biology Direct 2011, 6:62
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/62

inbreeding, and speciation, can apparently take place
without losing healthy levels of polymorphism over the
MHC region [45,46], and presumably over most of the
genome.
II) Focusing our reflections on what the ORIGIN of species
could be

Or how can it sometimes be beneficial for a few individuals to breed preferentially among themselves rather
than with the rest of the population, in others words
with the ancestral stock?
We have thus underlined how inbreeding can have
numerous advantages, and how systematic outbreeding
is actually a strategy which has mostly short-term
advantages, but that can lead to great drawbacks in the
long run. I now propose to follow the path laid out by
Darwin in the title of his book, and to focus on the very
origin of species, i.e. to try to imagine what initial
genetic event could eventually lead to the separation of
a subgroup of individuals that will breed preferentially
with one another rather than with the rest of the
population.
Outside of the rather anecdotic cases of one step speciation via polyploidy (see C&O, p321), for the vast
majority of metazoans, successive steps of progressive
separation appear as more likely scenarios to reach speciation. But even if it does not result in instant speciation, an initial mutation must occur at some stage
which will eventually result in promoting the interbreeding between individuals carrying that mutation rather
than with the rest of the population. I have chosen to
call such a process ‘saeptation’, from the latin word
saeptum: barrier, envelope. In other words, saeptation
will be the consequence of a mutation that will promote
increased inbreeding within a group inheriting that
mutation, and thus in a reduction of the gene flow
between this new group and its immediate ancestral
stock.
Lets us now envisage what type of mutation could
eventually lead to saeptation. This new mutation will,
one day, occur on one strand of DNA of one cell
belonging to the germline, and hence be present in up
to half of its gametes, and go on to be present on one
chromosome of all the cells of some of its offspring.
1) Saeptation scenarios caused by a recessive mutation

As alluded to repeatedly in the previous paragraphs, I
think the most likely scenario involves a recessive mutation as the very first step, i.e. the initial saeptation,
which will end up promoting partial reproductive isolation of its bearers. The first reason for this is that, as
outlined in table 1 outside of silent mutations, new
mutations will most frequently lead to loss of functions,
and will usually be recessive. But, as we have seen in the

Page 15 of 55

previous section, a loss of function does not necessarily
mean a selective disadvantage.
Let us go back to the example of the horse precursors,
and how they could have lost the stripes carried by their
zebra-like ancestors. In the first place, to reveal the nonstriped recessive phenotype, some significant inbreeding
must have taken place. That inbreeding could actually
have been promoted by the very fact that the group for
which the stripe-less phenotype was advantageous was
in the process of colonising more northern latitudes.
Colonising populations, having smaller effective sizes,
have consequently higher inbreeding coefficients [47],
and we will see later that this is particularly relevant for
the situations of island colonisation. Another consequence of the small size of such a group is that it will
greatly facilitate the fixation of an advantageous recessive phenotype [44]. This isolation of a small relatively
inbred group would hence result in reduction of the
gene flow with the ancestral group because the adapted
group would occupy a different territory. This would
not, however, really represent a step of biological speciation, i.e. bona fide reproductive isolation, because if one
individual of that adapted group ended up among individuals of the ancestral stock, it would probably breed
with them very happily and efficiently, and the defining
stripe-less phenotype would be diluted and only surface
on very rare occasions (as we will see later on, this type
of phenomenon actually happens in sticklebacks, which
gain a selective advantage by losing their armour plates
when they colonise freshwater environments). This type
of situation would, however, lay the grounds for the
evolution of further isolating characters because, in the
context of their isolated group, it would be very disadvantageous for individuals to breed with stripy partners
from the ancestral pool since all off their offspring
would then end up with the dreaded stripes on their
back, and thus be much more susceptible to becoming
eliminated by predators.
Consequently, if an additional mutation took place in
a member of that adapted group that led to more effective reproduction with kin than with individuals not carrying that second mutation, the inherent disadvantage of
such a mutation due to the reduction of fertility with
the rest of the adapted group would be balanced by a
very significant advantage to its bearers because it
would help prevent that sub-group of individuals from
being re-invaded by the dominant but disadvantageous
trait. This preferential mating with kin would also
amount to promoting further inbreeding. This may be
further facilitated by the fact that, when populations
have previously gone through stages of significant
inbreeding, the cost of inbreeding depression is very
much reduced because most recessive deleterious

Joly Biology Direct 2011, 6:62
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/62

mutations will have already been cleansed from the genome. Hence, from the above reasoning, we see that, in
the context of an outbred population, a mutation that
simply results in promoting inbreeding will struggle to
become established because it would have many disadvantages to weigh against the advantage of reducing the
cost of sex. But in the context of a group having undergone significant inbreeding, the safeguard of the mutation load against further inbreeding will have become
much weaker, and under the selective pressure of the
persistent threat posed by invasion by the ancestral
stock, the probability of additional steps of saeptation
within that group would thus be much higher.
2) Scenarios involving two mutations (Dobzhansky-Muller
model)

To explain how mutations promoting reproductive isolation could ever appear in natural populations, Bateson
(1909), Dobzhansky (1936) and Muller (1942) all came
up with a similar hypothetical model, which is nowadays
unjustly referred to as the Dobzhansky-Muller model
(see C&O, p 269). This model calls upon the existence
of two completely separated groups (allopatry), where
two separate mutations take place that would each have
no effect on the reproductive fitness in the group in
which they arise, but that would result in incompatibility
between the groups if and when those two groups are
brought back in contact with one another. Such models
are, however, not in line with Darwin’s views that each
step along the very long path of an evolutionary process
must carry its own selective advantage. In the context of
a group carrying a recessive advantageous mutation,
however, we can see how the pressure of the outside
populations, carrying dominant but disadvantageous
alleles, could promote the selection of a mutation
favouring reproductive isolation from the ancestral
stock. At the end of the previous paragraph, I have
argued that this selective pressure may be sufficient to
promote further steps of saeptation, i.e. isolation from
the other members within the adapted group, because
the disadvantages of this mutation promoting inbreeding
would be overcome by the advantage of resisting invasion by the dominant disadvantageous phenotype. And
this modified tilt of the balance would be further
favoured by the reduced inbreeding depression resulting
from the relatively high level of inbreeding already present within that group.
Another scenario is, however, possible, which is to a
certain degree related to the Dobzhansky-Muller model
in that it would involve multiple steps, but those would
occur in sequence, and not independently: the secondary
steps of isolation would target traits specific to the saeptated population which could quite possibly be the one
having driven the saeptation, but not necessarily. Indeed,
during the initial phases of saeptation, inbreeding among

Page 16 of 55

a limited number of individuals would result in a high
proportion of other genes becoming homozygous, and
could thus reveal additional recessive phenotypes only
rarely encountered in the ancestral population. In addition, in other genes than the one having driven the
saeptation, certain alleles would have become much
more frequent, either because they were genetically
linked to the advantageous mutation, or simply because
the smaller size of the population had favoured their
drift towards fixation. For these three types of genes
(additional recessive phenotype, genetically linked to the
advantageous recessive mutation, gene having reached
fixation by chance), the allelic frequencies would therefore be very different in the saeptated inbred population
and in the ancestral one. And those would then represent as many potential targets for the selection of isolating mechanisms that would prevent the individuals of
the saeptated group from mating back with the ancestral
group. Technically speaking, this would, however, not
represent saeptation, but reinforcement, because the
mechanism of isolation would specifically target the outsiders, and not the direct ancestral stock, i.e. the isolated
group. This type of scenario would thus involve two or
more steps like the Dobzhansky-Muller model, but the
fundamental difference with the Dobzhansky-Muller
model is that selective pressures would be driving the
isolation, rather than rely on chance for the separate
evolution of two traits that will, at a later stage, turn out
to be incompatible. One of the predictions inferred from
the Dobzhansky-Muller model is that the rate of accumulation of reproductive barriers should increase with
time, the so called “snowball effect” [48-50]. But this
prediction does not actually allow to discriminate with
the sympatric scenario described above. Indeed, if the
threat of hybridisation is maintained throughout the
speciation process, one would expect a similar snowball
effect: once some degree of reproductive isolation has
started accumulating between the two populations,
resulting in reduced inclusive fitness of the hybrids
further than the simple initial loss of the recessive
advantageous phenotype (for various reasons including
reduced fertility, intermediate maladaptive phenotypes,
poor health, increased recombination load or even lethality), the cost of mating and/or breeding with the
ancestral stock will have increased even more. Consequently, the pressure for selecting further mechanisms
of reproductive isolation will also be increased, and one
would thus expect the rate at which such traits are
selected to go up, until such times when the two populations are sufficiently isolated that neither represents a
significant threat for the other one.
3) Scenarios involving a dominant mutation

Lets us now consider whether a scenario can be envisaged whereby a dominant mutation would promote

Joly Biology Direct 2011, 6:62
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/62

saeptation. The most obvious type of such a mutation
would seem to be one that modifies the actual niche of
the population, a phenomenon often referred to as ecological speciation. Indeed, if individuals carrying a novel
mutation can start occupying new territories (geographical, seasonal, nutritional...) they will, in this new territory, naturally find themselves in the presence of those
other individuals carrying the same mutation, which
will, by definition, be descended from the same ancestor,
and will therefore be their close relatives (sibs or cousins). Since we are now talking about a dominant mutation, to allow the first individuals with the new
mutation to find mates to reproduce, the initial separation between the adapted subgroup and the ancestral
stock can, however, only be partial, and the possibility
of hybridisation between the two groups must therefore
be preserved. Although inbreeding among colonisers
may carry an initial cost because of inbreeding depression, this could easily be offset by the advantage of the
lack of competition in the new territory, and the
inbreeding depression would only be transient, and
recede after a few generations. Although, as we will see
later, dominant mutations could play important roles in
further steps of the speciation process, i.e. in reinforcement, it is thus hard to envisage how they could, on
their own, promote the selection of reproductive barriers with the ancestral stock. In the case of a dominant
mutation leading to the colonisation of a new niche, the
increased inbreeding among the individuals carrying the
mutation would, however, greatly increase the probability of revealing some additional recessive characters, of
which some may turn out to be adaptive to the newly
colonised environment. And those recessive mutations
could, in turn, provide the grounds for a selective
advantage to stop breeding with the ancestral stock.
4) The special cases of co-recessive characters,
chromosomal translocations and reinforcement

4a) Co-recessive characters Within the frame of the
analyses carried out in the previous paragraphs, mutations that lead to hybrids harbouring intermediate corecessive phenotypes (see table 1) would seem particularly prone to promoting speciation. Indeed, if such a
mutation brings about an adaptive phenotype, such that
the partial gain or the partial loss of a function makes it
possible to colonise a new niche (warmer or colder climates, higher altitude, different food, different breeding
time...), the heterozygotes of the first few generations
would be closely related to one another, but would be
expressing intermediate phenotypes that would not
separate them too much from the ancestral stock, and
hence allow for the generation of multiple individuals.
Crossing of those semi-adapted individuals with one
another would be favoured by the fact that they would
occupy that new niche. This would result in a quarter of

Page 17 of 55

their offspring becoming homozygous for the adaptive
trait, which they would hence express more strongly,
and would possibly be restricted to occupying only the
newly colonised niche, with little or no possibility of
contact with the ancestral one. The intermediate phenotype of the heterozygotes could thus be likened to some
sort of stepping stone for the assembly of an isolated,
necessarily more inbred group of individuals homozygous for the adaptive trait. Once that group has been
constituted, in addition to the fact that the cost of sex
would be higher with the outside group than within the
group, a further advantage would be that additional
adaptations to the new niche would probably be selected
for quite rapidly, and the phenotype of the offspring that
would result from encounters with the ancestral stock
would very possibly make them unfit for either environment. This would thus provide the grounds for the Wallace effect, i.e. for the selection of further mutations
reinforcing the reproductive isolation between the two
populations. We can thus see how co-recessive traits
could conceptually promote reproductive isolation even
more rapidly than completely recessive ones.
Importantly, whether the mutation driving the saeptation is completely recessive or co-recessive could have
significant consequences on the size of founder populations. Indeed, in the case of completely recessive mutations, those could stay completely silent for long periods
of time within a population, and hence surface when
crossings occur between individuals that are not necessarily very closely related to one another. In the case of
a co-recessive mutation, however, the new intermediate
character will be expressed in half the offspring of the
founding individual, and the founding population will
thus necessarily be comprised mostly by brother-sister
matings, or close cousins at best. We will come back
later to considerations regarding the size of founder
populations and preservation of heterogeneity in the
population.
4b) Chromosomal translocations Chromosomes can be
either circular, as in most bacteria and in endosymbiont
organelles, or linear, as in all eukaryotes and a few bacteria. As far as I know, there are no known organisms
with circular chromosomes that can carry out meiotic
sexual reproduction, and all eukaryotes also have multiple chromosomes. Multiple linear chromosomes thus
appear as a prerequisite to meiosis, with three chromosomes being the smallest number documented, in the
fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe (most species
have several dozens, and up to several hundreds, or
even over one thousand in certain ferns). One of the
main reasons having driven the arrangement of the
genetic information on such multiple and linear structures is almost certainly to promote one of the main
purposes of sex, i.e. to achieve an efficient shuffling of

Joly Biology Direct 2011, 6:62
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/62

the genes between individuals having evolved in parallel,
via both inter- and intra-chromosomal recombination.
Another commonly recognised advantage of this
arrangement in metazoans is that the maintenance of
telomeres provides a certain level of safeguard against
the rogue selfish multiplication of cells that will lead to
cancer. Outside of these two obvious advantages, I perceive that the arrangement of genomes on multiple linear chromosomes is also likely to play a central role in
the phenomenon of speciation. Indeed, in line with the
observation that even closely related species almost
always differ in their chromosomal architecture, the role
of chromosomal rearrangements in speciation has long
been hypothesized (see C&O p 256-267, citing White
1978). One hurdle to this hypothesis, however, is that a
chromosomal rearrangement such as the textbook
example of a whole arm reciprocal translocation pictured in Figure 2 will result in a significant decrease of
the fertility of the individuals in which this translocation
occurs in the first place, with half of the zygotes predicted to be non viable when mating occurs with individuals of the rest of the population, which would not
carry this translocation. Once the translocation has
become fixed within a group, complete fertility will be
restored to all individuals of that group. But for this to
happen, heterozygous individuals carrying the same
mutation will first have to mate with one another, and
under such circumstances, the proportion of viable offspring is predicted to drop even a little bit more, from
1/2 to 3/8 (Figure 2), and this is without accounting for
the inbreeding depression that would necessarily occur
since those individuals would, logically, have to be closely related to one another. Furthermore, the translocation would then become homozygous in only 1/6 of
their viable offspring (corresponding to 1/16 of the
zygotes). Although other types of chromosomal remodelling, such as inversions or centromeric fusions, may
not affect the proportion of viable offspring to the same
extent as reciprocal translocations, some effect on the
proportion of viable gametes would still be expected
since such modifications are known to disturb the phenomenon of chromosomal pairing that takes place during meiosis [51].
Given the above considerations, it is difficult to see
how chromosomal translocations could ever take hold
in any population and reach fixation unless they were
directly associated with a phenotype endowed with a
very significant selective advantage. If that advantage
corresponded to a dominant phenotype, the remodelled
chromosomes could spread to the whole population.
Many phenotypes associated to chromosomal remodelling would, however, be expected to get fixed via
inbreeding rather than through a selective sweep. For

Page 18 of 55

example, a chromosomal modification could bring loci
corresponding to an advantageous gene combination
near to one another on the same DNA strand, and thus
reduce the recombitional load. Many such genetically
linked sets of genes can actually be found in the genome, for example in the MHC [52]. This genomic architecture can only have been the fruit of successive events
of genomic remodelling, and the fixation of most of
those must have required very significant inbreeding.
Alternatively, one of the breakpoints may disrupt a
gene, and this would be expected to lead to a recessive
phenotype, which, once again, would only be expressed
in the context on inbreeding.
In addition to the argument that even very closely
related species usually do show significant differences in
their chromosomal architecture, the view that chromosomal remodelling plays a significant role in speciation
is also supported by the relatively high frequency at
which chromosomal rearrangements do occur, and
could thus conceivably be sufficiently frequent to occur
even in small isolated groups undergoing saeptation.
Indeed, systematic studies of human karyotypes have
revealed that detectable neo-rearrangements occur at a
frequency of approximately one in a thousand [53].
Whilst many of such rearrangements may result in
spontaneous abortions (as many as 50% of human
reproductive failures could be due to chromosomal
abnormalities), many others will be viable, as testified by
the fact that as many as one in 625 phenotypically
healthy human beings carries a reciprocal chromosomal
translocation [54]. Because those translocations do provoke significantly reduced fertility, unless they are linked
to an advantageous phenotype, they are expected to get
progressively eliminated from large outbreeding populations over successive generations. But finding them at
such a sizeable frequency vouches for the fact that individuals carrying chromosomal rearrangements will occur
quite often in humans, and hence probably in all
species.
Another possibility to consider is that chromosomal
rearrangements could be selected for as secondary saeptation steps, i.e. simply because they would reduce fertility of a saeptated group when they breed with the
ancestral group, even if it would initially also involve
some reduced fertility with the rest of that founder
group. Conceptually, this decrease in fertility may sometimes represent a sufficient advantage to be selected for
its own sake, as suggested by the observation that chromosomal rearrangements are more frequent between
sympatric than between allopatric species of drosophila
[55]. The recessive beneficial advantage would then be
one of maintaining optimised fertility, but the process
would certainly be much more direct, and thus favoured

Joly Biology Direct 2011, 6:62
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/62

if the chromosomal translocation was directly associated
to a mutated gene leading to an advantageous
phenotype.
4c) The Wallace effect: Secondary steps towards speciation, i.e. reinforcement Once a small group of individuals has ‘sprouted’ from the ancestral stock, if they
have to keep expressing the recessive advantageous traits
that drove the constitution of that group, breeding with
the ancestral stock will represent a permanent threat for
the welfare of their offspring, and the different sizes of
the two groups will be a factor that greatly increases the
weight of this threat (see [56]). If the initial mutation
was directly linked to a chromosomal rearrangement,
this would limit the gene flow between the two groups,
but would actually further increase the threat because
the hybrid offspring would be viable, but less fertile.
After an initial step of saeptation, further steps of
reproductive isolation from the ancestral stock would
therefore be clearly advantageous for that new, but
much smaller group. Within the saeptated group, any
further mutation that would increase reproductive isolation from the ancestral stock would therefore be
expected to carry a very significant advantage, and could
thus rapidly spread to the whole group, which the small
size of the saeptated group would further favour.
We can now ask ourselves what sort of mutations
and/or traits could intervene in the progressive establishment of completely separated populations, i.e. undetectable gene flow, such as what one witnesses between
closely related groups recognised as separate species,
although living side by side in natural environments.
And I contend that, once a saeptated group has been
constituted, in which individuals are all more closely
related to one another than to the rest of the ancestral
group, further steps of reproductive isolation will not
necessarily have to rely on recessive mutations. In the
previous paragraphs, I have argued that, in some circumstances, the selective pressure from the ancestral
stock may be sufficient to promote further steps of saeptation within the isolated group, based on additional
recessive mutations, which would be favoured by the
increased inbreeding coefficient, and consequent low
mutation load within that saeptated group. On the other
hand, dominant traits would presumably spread to the
group very rapidly, and would have the added advantage
that the process would not require the elimination of
the rest of the group. In the long run, as long as hybridisation with the ancestral stock remains a threat, any
additional trait that significantly reduces the chance of
producing offspring with members of that ancestral
population could bring on a sufficient advantage to be
selected for. As such, mechanisms that prevent either
mating or the formation of zygotes (and hence called
prezygotic isolation) such as sexual preference,

Page 19 of 55

occupation of niches more remote from the ancestor,
gamete incompatibility or even culturally acquired traits
could all contribute to protecting the newly formed
group from the threat of breeding with the ancestral
population. This type of reasoning, which assumes an
asymmetric relationship between a newly formed group
and a more numerous ancestral stock, provides an
explanation for the observation first underlined by Muller in 1942 that incompatibilities between closely related
species are very often asymmetric (C&O, p274).
When prezygotic isolation is not complete, and closely
related species can still mate and produce zygotes, those
hybrids are often found to be either non-viable, or fit,
but sterile. Scenarios for the development of this type of
barrier between species, which is called postzygotic isolation, are slightly more difficult to envisage because one
needs to explain how, although mating has occurred and
gametes used to generate zygotes, it can still be more
advantageous not to produce offspring at all than to
produce hybrids. For explaining this, however, I find
one observation particularly useful: whilst problems of
viability usually affect offspring of both sexes, problems
of sterility usually follow Haldane’s rule, and almost
always affect only the heterogametic sex (C&O, p311312). We can thus consider the problems of explaining
hybrid lethality and hybrid sterility as completely separate cases of postzygotic isolation.
Regarding hybrid lethality, I can see two obvious reasons whereby it would be better not to produce offspring at all than to produce hybrids. First, if there is a
significant cost to one or both parents for the rearing of
offspring that will ultimately be unfit, it will be advantageous to save those resources for the subsequent rearing
of “purebred” offspring. And second, if the hybrid offspring occupies a niche that overlaps with that of the
purebred offspring, those two types of offspring would
then be competing with one another. Sometimes, a
further threat for the more inbred offspring could lie
with the fact that the hybrids would be particularly
fierce competitors for the occupation of the niche
because they would benefit from hybrid vigour, and it
would thus be best not to produce that hybrid offspring
at all.
Regarding the phenomenon of hybrid sterility, I can
see three ways whereby it can be promoted, which are
not mutually exclusive.
1) The first one lies with chromosomal rearrangements. As already mentioned in the previous pages,
chromosomal rearrangements are very often associated
to phenomena of speciation, and even closely related
species are often found to diverge by several chromosomal structural differences. Although hybrids carrying a
single chromosomal translocation such as the one
depicted on Figure 2 will only see their fertility drop by

Joly Biology Direct 2011, 6:62
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/62

50% when they mate with homozygous individuals of
either type, this proportion will drop further for every
additional chromosomal rearrangement and soon reach
figures approaching zero. A factor further contributing
to sterility is the observation that chromosome pairing
has been found to be a necessary step for the proper
completion of meiosis, at least in eutherian mammals
(C&O p 262-264, citing Searle1993). As we have seen in
the previous pages, the fixation of such rearrangements
would be most likely to occur when they are directly
linked to an advantageous phenotype. The observation
that there are more differences in chromosomal architecture between drosophila species living in sympatry
that in allopatry [55] does, however, suggest that the
reduced fertility provided by such rearrangements may
sometimes represent a sufficient advantage per se.
2) The second reason lies with the haploid nature of
the sex chromosomes in the heterogametic sex (see
addendum 2). As already discussed earlier (section II-3),
following a process of saeptation, the allelic frequencies
of many genes in the newly formed group would be
expected to be significantly different from that in the
ancestral population. Similarly to what was discussed
above, those genes, whether carried by autosomes or
sexual chromosomes, would thus represent potential targets for the selection of new mutations carried by the
sexual chromosomes: newly mutated genes would still
function well with the genotypes frequently present in
the isolated group, but would no longer work in combination with the genotypes prominent in the ancestral
stock. This would be particularly likely for the heterogametic sex because any mutation carried by one or the
other of the sex chromosomes, even those corresponding to a loss of function, would be immediately dominant, as already underlined by Muller in 1940, and
formalised as the dominance theory put forward by Turelli and Orr [57]. Since sexual chromosomes are, necessarily, endowed with many genes related to sexual
reproduction, a likely phenotype resulting from such a
selective process would be one affecting the sexual capacities, and hence result in the sterility of the heterogametic sex. Alternatively, the genes involved in the
reproductive isolation may be part of the large number
of genes carried by the chromosomes which are diploid
in half the individuals (X in mammals and flies or Z in
certain insects, fish, reptiles and birds. For the sake of
clarity and simplicity, I will use X as an example for the
rest of this paragraph, but I could just as well have used
Z). Lets us now envisage that a mutation takes place on
a gene carried by the X chromosome, such that the
gene product will still function well with the allelic form
of some other gene found at high frequency in the saeptated group threatened by hybridisation, but will no
longer function with the allelic form(s) found in the

Page 20 of 55

ancestral group. As long as the individuals of the group
breed among one another, that mutation would have no
detectable effect, and would thus not really have any
reason to spread to the whole group. But if hybridisation
with the ancestral stock took place, because this mutation corresponds to a loss of function, it will most of
the time result in a recessive phenotype, and it would
thus have the typical characteristics of X-linked deficiencies, i.e. be silent in diploid female offspring, and
expressed in the hemizygous males. The X chromosome
carries many genes involved in vital functions, and disabling of those would presumably result in lethal phenotypes. Under the threat of generating hybrid offspring
with an outside group, the individuals carrying such
mutations would then be endowed with a definite
advantage that would explain how, although neutral
within the saeptated population, such mutations could
be driven to fixation in the group undergoing speciation.
The above scenarios would thus explain why phenotypes
of reproductive isolation are often asymmetric, why they
are often stronger in situations of sympatry, and provide
potential explanations for Haldane’s rule, i.e. why, when
inter-species crosses take place, if only one sex is
affected, it is usually the heterogametic one that is either
non-viable [58], which I contend could often occur by
recessive mutations of vital genes on the X chromosome, or sterile, by mutations of genes involved in sexual reproduction carried either by the Y or the X
chromosome.
3) The third reason for which hybrid sterility may be
selected for lies with the fact that sexual reproduction is
usually much more costly for females than for males,
with the latter having the capacity to produce virtually
unlimited numbers of offspring. In the case where a
population undergoing speciation competes with the
ancestral stock for the occupation of a niche, I contend
that the generation of hybrids where females are fit and
fertile, but males are unfit can represent an extremely
advantageous strategy. These aspects will be developed
further in section IV.
III) There is probably seldom such a thing as truly
allopatric speciation

In the previous section, we have seen how advantageous
recessive traits could promote the formation of small
saeptated groups within large populations, and how the
need to keep expressing those recessive phenotypes
could subsequently drive reinforcement, i.e. further
steps of reproductive isolation, based on a whole array
of different mechanisms. The recurring theme of the
reasoning developed in the previous pages is that reproductive isolation would not arise as a bystander effect of
divergent evolution, but would be directly selected for
under the pressure of an outside group, most frequently

Joly Biology Direct 2011, 6:62
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/62

the immediate ancestral population. Even if today, the
majority of evolutionary scientists believe that most
events of speciation must have occurred in allopatry, I
do actually believe that if truly allopatric speciation ever
happens, i.e. for whole populations to drift apart sufficiently to become infertile with one another, it must be
an extremely slow process, and consequently a very rare
occurrence. Indeed, if populations of individuals are
completely separated, there will be no selective pressure
for evolving features that will further reduce gene flow
between the two groups, because the gene flow will
already be non extant. If the geographical barrier is later
lifted, the features of the individuals in each group will
almost certainly be quite different because they will
have adapted to their respective environment. Some
mechanisms of preference between similar phenotypes
may favour reproduction among the individuals having
co-evolved, but since there will have been no selective
pressure, I contend that there would be no reason why
the individuals from either group should have become
infertile with those of the other group. This is in fact in
complete agreement with what has been very recently
described for Caribbean Anoles lizards. Those have
evolved independently for millions of years on separate
islands that only joined relatively recently to form the
large island of Martinique, and more reproductive barriers appear to have been selected for between populations that have evolved side by side to adapt to coastal
or mountainous conditions than between those that
have evolved on separate islands [59].
This is also exactly what happens with domesticated
species. Under conditions of domestication, species can
diverge to become very noticeably different, and reproduce for scores of generations under very divergent conditions of selection, yet they do not become infertile
with one another. In this regard, I find the example of
dog breeds particularly telling. Upon comparing the skeletons of a great Dane and of a Chihuahua, or of a
Dachshund and a Saint-Bernard, no taxonomist in their
right mind would ever place them as belonging to the
same species. Yet, when my steps take me to public
parks or other places where people go to let their four
legged friends relieve their natural needs, I am often
struck (and amused) to see how dogs of very different
sizes and appearances can still recognise one another as
potential sexual partners. And we do know that they do
indeed belong to the same species. They all share
exactly the same chromosomal architecture as wild
wolves. In fact, if all these dogs of different sizes were
placed in a giant enclosure and fed regularly, some sexual preferences between certain types may surface (see
long citation of Wallace’s book in section V), pregnancies between small females and large males may turn
out to be fatal for the mothers, and the smaller males

Page 21 of 55

would probably not fare too well in fights with larger
ones, but in the end, all those dogs would produce
extremely fit offspring that would certainly be much
more homogenous than the starting population, and
would almost certainly contain genes inherited both
from the Chihuahuas and the great Danes. I contend
that, if domesticated species do not undergo speciation,
it is because the process of selection is carried out by
the breeders, and not by natural selection. Under natural
conditions, individuals, and groups of individuals, compete directly with one another for the production of offspring and the occupation of a niche, and loosing this
competition means dying with no offspring.
In settings of domestication, even if most characters
that are selected by the breeders are recessive, and
could even sometimes be associated to chromosomal
rearrangements, there is never any direct pressure for
individuals to stop breeding with the ancestral stock,
and there can thus be no selection for either saeptation,
or reinforcement. The fact that different domestic
breeds, including dogs and pigeons, have now been
maintained in effective allopatry, i.e. in complete separation from one another for hundreds of generations without any discernible sign of speciation ever being
witnessed is, in my eyes, one of the stronger arguments
against the possibility that allopatric speciation, resulting
from divergent selection and/or genetic drift, could play
a significant role in the phenomena of speciation that
are clearly taking place continuously in the natural
world.
Another argument against the role of intrinsic genetic
incompatibility resulting from a random process in the
evolution of reproductive isolation can be found in comparing the estimations of lifetime of species, and of the
time it takes for such incompatibilities to develop.
Indeed, for both mammals and birds, the fossil record
tells us that the average time of existence of a species is
around one million years [35], whereas the time it takes
for the genomes of mammals to diverge sufficiently to
become genetically incompatible is estimated to be
around 2-4 million years [60], and well over 10 million
years for birds [61]. Given those numbers, one can note
that there is a flagrant inconsistency between the biological data and the fossil record since one would have to
envisage that most taxonomic species would become
extinct before they would have a chance of evolving into
genetically incompatible species. I perceive this as a
strong argument against the idea that allopatric (and
hence passive) genetic divergence could be the main factor responsible for speciation.
Detractors of the views expressed in this essay would
not fail to point out that there are many documented
examples of allopatric speciation, i.e. where groups of
individuals that were geographically separated have

Joly Biology Direct 2011, 6:62
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/62

become “good species”, i.e. completely infertile with one
another. But to counter this argument, we only need to
think back to the ancestral species, the one which is
presumed to have occupied the ancestral territory, and
colonised the new one (or, as proposed by Darwin,
become split in two by a rising mountain range). If the
two modern species cannot breed with one another,
then we can safely assume that at least one of the two
would also have been infertile with the ancestral species.
But, by definition, individuals of that ancestral species
were initially present on the two territories, and that
species cannot have disappeared before the appearance
of a subgroup of individuals that were less fertile with
the ancestral individuals, and would eventually lead to
the modern species. The logical consequence of this
point of view is that, when allopatric speciation appears
to have occurred, it actually probably corresponds to
several successive steps of ‘sympatric’ saeptation, with
the new, better adapted group replacing the ancestral
intermediate.
The most striking examples of speciation often occur
on islands, and when Charles Darwin visited the Galapagos in the course of his voyage on The Beagle, the
observation of all the very unusual specimen found on
those remote islands would later on help him greatly to
formulate his theory of evolution, as well as to consider
the idea that geographic isolation could contribute to
speciation because of the independent evolution of
populations that would progressively become infertile
with one another.
Let us now consider the phenomenon of island speciation from the point of view developed in the previous
paragraphs, i.e. that speciation occurs mostly as a consequence of natural selection, in other words in a context
where it is advantageous for subgroups of individuals to
stop breeding with the ancestral stock. Colonisation of
islands are, inherently, very rare events, and even more
so for an obligatory sexual species because this implies
that at least two individuals from opposite sexes find
themselves on the same island at the same time, which
could, quite often, be brothers and sisters descended
from a single pregnant female. The initial population
will, consequently, go through a very tight bottleneck,
with extreme degrees of inbreeding. The resulting
reduced fitness of the individuals may, however, be well
tolerated because, in the newly colonised territories,
those few individuals will have no competition from kin,
and presumably very few predators and pathogens
adapted to them. Because of this initial episode of
inbreeding, however, the cost of subsequent inbreeding
will be expected to become much reduced after just a
few generations, and this population of colonisers would
then presumably multiply quite rapidly to occupy its
newfound niche. But the characters of the ancestral

Page 22 of 55

stock would probably not be best adapted to their new
environment, and conditions would thus seem very
favourable for the selection of new characters allowing
them to adapt. As we have seen before, mutations leading to recessive characters are much more frequent than
dominant ones. And these would be even more likely to
come to light in the envisaged conditions, where
inbreeding would be favoured both by the small size of
the population, and by the fact that inbreeding depression would be minimal. Hence, if a recessive mutation
occurred that brought on an adaptive advantage to the
new environment of the colonised island, there would
be a very significant advantage for the individuals carrying the adapted, recessive, phenotype, to reduce their
breeding with the rest of the colonising group. Any
mutation coming to reinforce that saeptation would
thus be advantageous, and would not necessarily have to
be recessive itself. Hence, mechanisms reinforcing the
isolation of the adapted group from the rest of the
population, such as traits of genetic or post-natally
inherited sexual preference, gametic incompatibility,
genomic incompatibility or chromosomal rearrangements could evolve within that group, whereas the
initial selection of such traits is normally not favoured
in larger, more outbred populations, where inbreeding
depression is high.
The picture we get from the above scenario is one
where, when a secluded niche, such as an island, is initially invaded by very few individuals, successive steps of
saeptation and/or reinforcement among a few adapted
individuals will be greatly favoured by the initial
inbreeding episode. And at every step, the betteradapted descendants of that group would most probably
wipe out the less-well adapted stock of their immediate
ancestors. For every one of these steps, the reduction of
gene flow with the immediate ancestors would not
necessarily be very high but, although that ancestral
stock would have long been eliminated from the island,
each one of those steps would reduce the fertility
between the population of adapted individuals and their
immediate ancestors, and consequently would be
expected to have a cumulative effect on the fertility
between the adapted population and the ancestral stock.
Hence, if the population of individuals that have adapted
to the island through successive steps of saeptation and/
or reinforcement was ever brought back in contact with
the more numerous, outbreeding population which
stayed on the continent, individuals from those two
groups would very probably be completely infertile with
one another, even if the latter one had not evolved away
much from the ancestral stock. The speciation process
so witnessed would, however, not really have occurred
in allopatry, but as a succession of sympatric steps
which can only occur under the selective pressure of the

Joly Biology Direct 2011, 6:62
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/62

immediate ancestral stock. An argument that supports
the validity of this type of reasoning is the recurrent
observation that events of speciation seem especially
prone to occur in the context of small populations, such
as those promoted by small islands. The size of the
niche itself (for example a small island, or a small lake)
could indeed be the main factor contributing to the
maintenance of a relatively high degree of inbreeding,
and hence to the reduced level of inbreeding depression
that can promote speciation. Thus, even in the context
of islands that are not completely isolated from the regular invasion by individuals from the mainland (such as
the Baleares, the Caribbean or the Canaries), or from
other nearby islands (such as the Galapagos), small
islands have been found to be particularly propitious to
speciation in all sorts of genera (birds, lizards, mammals,
insects...).
To conclude this section, I would say that, for most
cases considered as undisputable examples of allopatric
speciation, the times of separation are often much
longer than the expected lifetime of the species considered. Also, since in most cases ancestor and speciating
groups probably co-exist for much less time than the
lifetime of species, it is not surprising that so few cases
of speciation appear sympatric. But it is not because we
do not see it happen that sympatric speciation does not
happen. Thus, contrarily to the stance proposed by
Coyne and Orr, I contend that allopatric speciation
should not be considered as the default mode (C&O,
p84). Rather, to prove that truly allopatric speciation has
ever taken place, I advocate that one would have to
demonstrate that no step of saeptation has taken place
during the evolutionary process, whereby one sub-population would have become reproductively isolated from
its immediate sympatric ancestor, and subsequently
eliminated it.
IV) What relationship can be expected between the
different modes of speciation, the mechanisms of
reproductive isolation that are being selected for, and the
diversity of the newly separated population? 5

Despite the arguments presented in the previous section,
there is no denying that the conditions under which
speciation occurs (sympatry, parapatry, allopatry) would
be likely to play important roles on both what types of
reproductive isolation mechanisms are being selected
for, and on the size and diversity of the founding population that will ultimately result from the speciation process. In Figure 3, I have drawn simplistic sketches that
would correspond to scenarios of speciation occurring
in those three conditions. In this drawing, the shapes
represent the niche occupied by a population. I feel that
an important point to underline regarding the nature of
niches is that they are not solely linked to geographical

Page 23 of 55

constraints, but to many other factors such as the nature of the nutrients, the timing of the life cycle, the
identity of other partner species such as pollinators for
plants, or hosts for parasites, etc... All in all, I perceive
that the defining point between parapatry and sympatry
is whether the niches of two populations undergoing
speciation are sufficiently non overlapping that neither
could ever wipe out the other one. On the other hand,
even if two groups have such different life styles or life
cycles that they seldom breed with one another, but still
compete for the very same food, or for the same territory, one could fully expect that one of the two protagonists will, sooner or later, inherit a new character
allowing it to eliminate the other one completely. In
short, when occupation of the niche equates to competition for survival, I will call this sympatry; if the two
populations can exist side by side without one ever
being wiped out by the other one, I will call this parapatry; and when the two populations have so few interactions that neither is a threat for the other one, I will call
this allopatry.
In Figure 3, within the niches, I have not represented
populations as uniform entities, but as fragmented in
subpopulations, where the less intense areas correspond
to reduced densities of population, and hence higher
degrees of inbreeding. Under conditions of parapatric
speciation, the group undergoing speciation will colonise
a different, adjacent niche (new territory, different nutrients, different breeding period...). For the reasons
exposed in section II, the process of speciation will be
much more likely to be triggered if the character that
allows this colonisation is recessive, and hybridisation
between the two groups would thus represent a much
bigger threat for the members of the newly formed and
less numerous group than for the ancestral stock. Under
such conditions, one would thus expect reinforcement,
or further saeptation, to be selected for essentially in the
younger group.
Particularly interesting examples of parapatric speciation are those provided by ring species, whereby new
species arise in successive steps around a circumventable geographic barrier such as a mountain (Greenish
Warbler around the Himalaya), an ocean (Herring Gulls
around the Atlantic Ocean) or a valley (Ensatina Salamanders around the central valley in California) [62]. In
the end, although some gene flow persists between
direct neighbours, i.e. between ancestral stock and new
populations having colonised a new parapatric niche,
the species that end up meeting at the opposite end of
the ring are completely infertile with one another. The
simplest explanation for this type of phenomenon seems
to be that the additive effect of incomplete reproductive
barriers will finally result in truly isolated species. With
regard to the ideas proposed here, it will be particularly

Joly Biology Direct 2011, 6:62
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/62

Page 24 of 55

Figure 3 Schematic representation of the three major modes of speciation.

interesting to see if characters can be identified that
have contributed to the progressive adaptation of the
species along the barriers, and when those are due to
recessive characters, whether this is accompanied by
more significant reproductive isolation from the ancestral stock.
In a context of sympatric speciation, the younger
group having undergone saeptation will have to compete
directly with the individuals of the ancestral stock for
the occupation of the niche. Whilst the speciating group
would have the advantage of the newly acquired, but
recessive, advantageous trait such as the resistance to a
pathogen, the ancestral group would have the important
advantage of a much more numerous starting population, presumably harbouring more diversity. The counterbalance of this would be, however, that this larger
and older group would probably also carry a heavier
mutation load than the speciating group. In the context
of a competitive struggle between the two groups,

population densities would presumably thin out for both
groups, leading to increased inbreeding. Whilst this
would not be a problem for the younger group, it would
most probably result in a very significant drop in fertility
for the older and more numerous ancestral stock
because it would carry a heavier mutation load. This
view is supported by a recent report showing that the
fitness of an invasive species of ladybirds is actually
increased by bottlenecks having resulted in a decrease of
their mutation load [63]. In such circumstances, because
of both the newly acquired selective advantage having
driven the saeptation, and its lighter mutation load, the
odds would thus seem very likely to tilt towards the
younger population most of the times.
The lower part of Figure 3 sketches the scenario of
island colonisation developed in the previous section,
whereby a handful of founding individuals give rise to a
completely isolated population, and the high inbreeding
conditions, resulting in low mutation load, favour

Joly Biology Direct 2011, 6:62
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/62

successive steps of sympatric saeptation that will ultimately result in complete infertility between the population occupying the island and the ancestral stock.
The common point between the last two scenarios of
speciation is that the newly formed groups have to compete with their direct ancestors for the occupation of
the niche. In line with Darwin’s views, the stakes in this
struggle are ‘the survival of the fittest’, which implies the
ultimate elimination of the other kind. Hence, for a
population undergoing sympatric speciation, to paraphrase General Philip Sheridan, “the only good ancestor
is a dead ancestor”. For achieving this, I perceive that
post-zygotic mechanisms, which will often affect only
the heterogametic sex, are particularly effective strategies which can have, as we will see, multiple types of
advantages. Indeed, in the context of a newly formed
group, even if the members of the group somewhat benefit from the advantageous recessive character they
express, they may also be affected by more inbreeding
depression, and the much smaller effectives of the newly
founded population could easily be overwhelmed by the
sheer number of the competitors. Lets us now envisage
the consequences of generating hybrid offspring where
one sex is fertile and the other one is either sterile or
dead. For the next generation, this will result in a deficit
in potential partners of the heterogametic sex, and that
situation will have several consequences: i) it will free
up some space in the niche that the purebred members
of the saeptating group can then move into without
competition. In a further elaboration, one could even
envisage that there could be an advantage to the sterile
hybrids being very fit because of hybrid vigour. They
would thus occupy a large portion of the niche, but
would eventually die with no offspring, and leave all
that space vacant for the offspring of their fertile neighbours. ii) In mammals and flies, where the males are
heterogametic, a further advantage would be conferred
by the fact that the males can produce offspring with
numerous partners at very little cost. In conditions
where hybrid females remain fertile and hybrid males
are sterile, the males from the saeptated group would
thus find themselves with more potential partners. Subsequently, the offspring resulting from mating with
those hybrid females would generate more fertile
females, and, if the sterility was due to only one locus,
presumably only 50% of fertile males. Although this type
of reasoning could also apply to species where the
females are heterogametic (certain insects, fish, reptiles
and birds), this effect of the process would be somehow
restricted by the fact that females are, by nature,
restricted in the number of eggs, and hence offspring
that they can generate. This could, however, be compensated for by monogamous behaviours, because a sterile
hybrid female would effectively neuter the sexual activity

Page 25 of 55

of her fertile male partner. In this regard, it is quite
remarkable to note that, whilst 90% of bird species are
monogamous, only an estimated 3% of mammals are 6.
iii) An important consequence of the process of ‘sleeping with the enemy’ will be that, among the offspring
resulting from crosses between the purebred stock and
the hybrid homogametic offspring, 50% will become
homozygous for the advantageous recessive trait, and
could thus formally join the saeptated group. Through
this type of process, the saeptated group, which may
initially have been endowed with rather limited genetic
diversity, may thus progressively incorporate a significant portion of the diversity present in the ancestral
stock.
This last point brings us to consider the question of
the evolution of genetic diversity through the process of
speciation. In this regard, great insights can be gathered
from comparing the diversity of the major histocompatibilty complex (MHC) between closely related species.
The MHC, which is found in all jawed vertebrates, is
the most polymorphic region of their genomes. The reason for this is that it is involved in many aspects of
immunity, and thus under very strong selection, with
the diversity of MHC molecules being used to fight off
the amazing capacity of pathogens to adapt to their host
7
. Comparisons of allelic diversity between closely
related species such as human and chimpanzee [45], or
mouse and rat [46], have revealed that certain polymorphisms of MHC molecules have survived all the
successive steps of speciation that have separated each
species from their common ancestor. Such observations
thus strongly suggest that speciation, even if it involves
inbreeding, does not necessarily have to occur via very
tight bottlenecks, and thus tend to support the validity
of the types of scenarios proposed at the end of the last
paragraph.
In the case of human and chimps, the presumed last
common ancestor is called Nakalipithecus, who lived
some 10 million years ago. Since then, although the precise details of our ancestry are stilled hotly debated, it is
clear that our family tree must have counted at least
half a dozen successive species, first belonging to the
gender Australopithecus (anamensis, afarensis, africanus...), and then to the gender Homo (habilis, erectus...).
Over that time, 30 million sequence differences have
accumulated between the human and chimp genomes,
corresponding to 1% divergence, as well a 10 chromosomal modifications (9 inversions and 1 centromeric
fusion), of which one can reasonably expect that about
half must have taken place in the branch leading to
humans, and the other half in that leading to chimps.
Incidentally, although it is interesting to note that the
number of chromosomal rearrangements is roughly of
the same order as the number of speciation steps on the

Joly Biology Direct 2011, 6:62
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/62

presumed path between Nakalipithecus and the two
modern species, it does not prove in any way that each
of those rearrangements was necessarily correlated to a
phenomenon of speciation. Indeed, some of those chromosomal rearrangements could have become fixed in
the population because they were directly linked to
dominant beneficial characters, and would thus have
undergone selective sweeps.
Another intriguing recent observation is that the evolution of humans has involved the loss of more than
500 stretches of DNA which are otherwise found in
chimps and in many other mammal species [64]. Since
most of these DNA sequences are located in non-coding
regulatory regions, such alterations would be more likely
to result in intermediate phenotypes in hybrids than in
purely recessive traits. Following the reasoning developed in the previous pages, most of these mutations
may thus have spread to the whole populations, but the
fixation of some may have involved and/or contributed
to the isolation of relatively small groups of individuals
from their direct ancestors.
When two separate human genomic sequences are
compared, one allegedly finds around 0.2% divergence,
which would amount to 6 million mutations per haploid
genome. Our species has only been around for 250,000
years, and thus approximately 10,000 generations. As we
have seen previously, new mutations accumulate at the
rate of approximately 60 per haploid genome per generation. One would thus expect only 600,000 new mutations to have accumulated in each genome since the
appearance of Homo Sapiens. The level of divergence
seen between human genomic sequences thus provides
additional support for the fact that events of speciation,
even if they implicate a process of inbreeding, do allow
for the conservation of high levels of genomic diversity
(The model of Transilience developed by Templeton
[[65]] addresses similar issues from the point of view of
population genetics).
Genomic divergence between populations tends to be
highly variable across the genome, and divergent selection has been proposed as the main reason for this
observation [66]. This unevenness of genomic diversity
would, however, also occur with the various scenarios
envisaged in the previous pages: the genomic regions
surrounding the loci having contributed to driving
reproductive isolation would be expected to have
reached fixation very rapidly, and hence to show very
limited diversity. Furthermore, the rate of fixation would
be very different if they corresponded to recessive or to
dominant characters. Indeed, if a recessive character
leading to saeptation is being selected for, it will necessarily be fixed very rapidly in the saeptated population,
and one would thus expect a few centimorgans of the
genomic region surrounding the recessive allele to

Page 26 of 55

become fixed with it, and hence to harbour very limited
diversity, and this would be even more true for co-recessive traits. Conversely, whilst the allelic frequency of an
advantageous dominant character will rapidly increase
to 70 or 80% in a population, it will take a very long
time to reach complete fixation, i.e. to eliminate all the
non-advantageous recessive alleles. Somewhat ironically,
it is actually inbreeding that would allow the elimination
of the last ancestral, recessive and less advantageous
alleles, via a mechanism equivalent to the one described
in section I-3. Consequently, during all that time before
complete fixation of the dominant allele, there will be
many chances for crossing-overs to occur around the
gene coding for the advantageous dominant trait, and
the size of the region of reduced diversity should therefore be much more limited than in the case of the selection for a recessive trait.
The prediction that follows this reasoning is that this
may actually provide the means to identify the regions
carrying the genes involved in events of speciation, and
conceivably even the very genes having driven the speciation (If the selective force driving the selection was a
particularly nefarious pathogen, however, it may well be
that it would have disappeared with it’s host, and all
that would be left would be an allelic form of a gene
that was once used as a receptor for a now long vanished pathogen) This type of exercise may even provide
a reasonably accurate estimation of the dates at which
speciation happened. Indeed, as is already well under
way for humans with the 1000 genome project [67], if
one documented the levels of diversity of silent intergenic DNA over the whole genome for a good number
of unrelated individuals belonging to the same species,
this would not only provide the means to really evaluate
the degree of inbreeding within a population, as well as
the inbreeding coefficient for each individual, but one
would also expect to be able to rapidly identify regions
of limited diversity. Although the occurrence of chromosomal rearrangements may confuse the interpretation
[51,68], the gene responsible for driving the fixation
would be expected to be at the centre of such regions,
and the level of divergence of intergenic sequences
within those regions would provide a relatively precise
estimate of the time of fixation.
Finally, the slope with which the level of diversity
decreases with genetic distance from the centre would
provide an indication of whether the character that
drove the fixation was recessive, and was hence probably
involved in a phenomenon of saeptation, co-recessive, or
dominant, and hence corresponded to adaptive evolution (including mechanisms of reinforcement). If such
an exercise was carried out for tens of thousands of
markers distributed over the whole genome in hundreds
of unrelated individuals belonging to the same species,

Joly Biology Direct 2011, 6:62
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/62

this could, I predict, provide a very informative picture
of the successive steps of speciation in the evolutionary
history of that species 8.
V) The existence of species can only be transitory
because it corresponds to a metastable equilibrium

The field of Taxonomy was initiated by the Swedish
zoologist, Carolus Linnaeus, who, in his book Systema
Naturae (first edition published in 1735, tenth and last
in 1758), recorded some 9000 species of plants and animals. Today, this number has reached several millions,
and it is estimated that around ten millions species of
plants and animals of more than one millimetre inhabit
our planet [69], and this number probably corresponds
to less than 1% of the species that have existed since
metazoan life started on earth 1.5 billion years ago, with
an estimated average lifetime of a species around 4 million years, based, obviously, on morphological data from
the fossil record rather than on biological ones [70,71]9.
In this regard, the estimated number of 5000 extant
mammal species represents only a tiny portion, and
mammal species are particularly short lived, with an
estimated average lifetime of just one million years,
whilst reptiles, and species of higher plants and trees
can last over 20 million years. All in all, it is pretty clear
that very few of the species that we can find on earth
today were there 20 million year ago. As already underlined in the introduction, the somewhat uncomfortable,
but inescapable conclusion from this observation is that
all the species that surround us, including our own, are
bound for extinction.
The theory developed in the previous pages can actually lead us to suggest an explanation for this observed
inherent tendency of species to disappear over time.
Indeed, we have seen that the mutation load in a population is inversely related to the degree of inbreeding in
this population, and the existence of species thus
appears to rely on a fragile, metastable equilibrium,
which I find very appropriate to represent in the context
of the Yin Yang symbol to evoke the balance between
degrees of inbreeding and outbreeding (Figure 4).
On the one hand, increased inbreeding will initially be
costly, but once the safeguard of a sizeable mutation
load has been lifted by a few rounds of inbreeding
within a small group of individuals, further inbreeding is
likely to have more advantages than disadvantages:
favouring the expression of adaptive recessive phenotypes, keeping the mutation and the recombination
loads down, reducing the cost of sex, and promoting
collaborative behaviours by population fragmentation.
But, as we have seen, this increased inbreeding will at
the same time favour the appearance of saeptated
groups, for whom the way of existence will equate to

Page 27 of 55

the elimination of the ancestral stock, and hence the
disappearance of the original species.
On the other hand, extensive outbreeding will bring
hybrid vigour, and delay the appearance of reduced fertility due to the accumulation of recessive deleterious
mutations. This type of phenomenon may be particularly prominent for very successful species that end up
effectively panmictic rather than being fractionated into
smaller subpopulations. The evolution of individuals
within such population would then favour the strongest,
longest lived, largest individuals. In this regard, van
Valen underlined that, for mammals, “Occasionally, a
small mammal becomes a large one, but a large mammal never becomes a small one” [72] (It should be
noted, however, that these rules do not seem to apply to
island mammals that are larger than rabbit size, which
tend to become smaller there. Leigh van Valen called
this the island rule). Regarding the fossil record on
which van Valen based most of his work, it may in fact
be worth to consider the possibility that it’s composition
may be biased towards species that, having adopted a
panmictic strategy, would see the size of the populations
swell very rapidly to very large numbers, but would also,
as proposed by Carson [5], be going down an evolutionary dead end. Indeed, after only of few dozens of generations, the accumulation of recessive mutations would
subsequently prevent any chance of any significant
degree of inbreeding, and hence any possibility of a
fresh start via an event of speciation. Because of their
large populations, and their persistence over relatively
long periods because of their decreased capacity for evolution, such species would thus have a high chance of
“making it” into the fossil record. But, at some stage
down the road, such populations would inescapably fall
victims of their own success because they would have a
very poor capacity to respond to crises triggered by
increased levels of selective pressures by outside factors
such as pathogens, predators, competitors, natural catastrophes or shifts of the climatic conditions. For example, this type of situation may well have applied to the
Multituberculates, which were very common mammals
during the paleocene, but underwent complete extinction during the Eocene [73], probably because of the
competition of the newly arisen rodent competitors. If
there are 10 million species on our planet, and the average lifetime of a species is 4 million years, then the
turnover rate should be under three species per year.
This may appear as a clear underestimate, especially in
our modern era, which has been dubbed the anthropocene, since ecological changes due to human activities
provokes the disappearance of thousands of species
every year. We should, however, bear in mind that the
extinction rates measured by paleontologists are those

Joly Biology Direct 2011, 6:62
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/62

Page 28 of 55

Figure 4 The existence of species rests on a metastable equilibrium between inbreeding and outbreeding.

which correspond to the disappearance of organisms
based on the anatomical features detectable in fossils,
and that species differentiated by colours, timing of life
cycle or breeding habits would not be registered. Similarly, events of speciation corresponding to the loss of
one or a few recessive traits would almost certainly not
de detected by the fossil record. Based on the arguments
raised above, I perceive that most events of extinction
identified by paleontologists probably correspond to
those of panmictic species having succumbed to
increased selective pressures which initiated a process of

irreversible decimation because of high inbreeding
depression resulting from important mutation loads.
Hence, one major difference between the outbreeding
and inbreeding strategies is that the former leads to a
very high probability of ultimate extinction, whilst the
latter would lead to an increased probability of formation of saeptating group(s) within the population, that
will ultimately cause the elimination of the ancestral
group by one or more descendant new species. The outbreeding strategy, however, is probably the one that
takes place most frequently in natural populations

Joly Biology Direct 2011, 6:62
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/62

because it brings on much more immediate advantages.
Darwin and Wallace’s theory of evolution, which is concerned with the acquisition of new adaptive traits, is in
fact based on considering this type of strategy. And it is
indeed by relying on the flexibility and variability of the
genome taking place in parallel in the numerous individuals of a large population that one can hope to see surface the very rare events that will correspond to new
adaptive functions. Since such new traits will, most of
the time, be expressed in a dominant fashion, they will
thus rapidly spread to the whole population.
On the other hand, there are many instances where it
is advantageous to get rid of a character, and the susceptibility to pathogens seems to be particularly relevant
here. But, as discussed at length in the previous pages,
the loss of a function usually corresponds to a recessive
trait, and the expression of recessive traits necessarily
calls for some degree of inbreeding. Another important
consideration is that inbreeding will be necessary to
maintain, and ultimately fix certain gene combinations,
and this will also be true of chromosomal rearrangements. On this subject, W. Shields offered the interesting point of view that one can consider that individuals
belong to separate species when the intensity of outbreeding depression is so high that no long term descendants can result from their crossing [2].
The degree of inbreeding necessary to keep mutation
loads in check is probably much less than that
required to promote speciation, and if we consider the
very divergent outcomes of the two strategies, and the
timescales involved in evolutionary processes, we can
easily see why most natural populations are so seldom
panmictic, as outlined by Wright over 60 years ago
[4,12]. Extensive outbreeding may indeed be endowed
with short term advantages for individuals, but in the
long run, there is not really a choice between the two
strategies in the struggle for survival. And I thus contend that, if so many of the species that surround us
are not panmictic, it is because they derive from a
long line of ancestral species that have not succumbed
to the short term benefits of excessive outbreeding.
From the above arguments, I conclude that, even if
inbreeding is not immediately advantageous, it is an
absolute requirement, an unavoidable price to pay, for
long term survival of the descendants. This probably
provides the ultimate example of group level selection
because species that fall for the short sighted advantage of extensive outbreeding will relatively rapidly
have to face the cost of unmanageable mutation loads,
leading to unavoidable extinction.
Many factors contribute to the fact that natural populations do not become panmictic. First, the world is so
vast that most species are necessarily fragmented into
myriads of small groups, with every event of

Page 29 of 55

colonisation providing an opportunity for episodes of
increased inbreeding, resulting in a reduction of the
mutation load. And there is also a natural tendency for
individuals to associate with kin, as Wallace himself
underlined in the following paragraph taken from his
book, ‘Darwinism’, in Chapter VII’s section entitled ‘The
Isolation of Varieties by Selective Association’, (1889),
which I do not resist the pleasure of sharing with you:
But there is also a very powerful cause of isolation in
the mental nature–the likes and dislikes–of animals; and
to this is probably due the fact of the comparative rarity
of hybrids in a state of nature. The differently coloured
herds of cattle in the Falkland Islands, each of which
keeps separate, have been already mentioned; and it
may be added, that the mouse-coloured variety seem to
have already developed a physiological peculiarity in
breeding a month earlier than the others. Similar facts
occur, however, among our domestic animals and are
well known to breeders. Professor Low, one of the greatest
authorities on our domesticated animals, says: “The
female of the dog, when not under restraint, makes selection of her mate, the mastiff selecting the mastiff, the terrier the terrier, and so on.” And again: “The Merino
sheep and Heath sheep of Scotland, if two flocks are
mixed together, each will breed with its own variety.”
Mr. Darwin has collected many facts illustrating this
point. One of the chief pigeon-fanciers in England
informed him that, if free to choose, each breed would
prefer pairing with its own kind. Among the wild horses
in Paraguay those of the same colour and size associate
together; while in Circassia there are three races of horses
which have received special names, and which, when living a free life, almost always refuse to mingle and cross,
and will even attack one another. On one of the Faroe
Islands, not more than half a mile in diameter, the halfwild native black sheep do not readily mix with
imported white sheep. In the Forest of Dean, and in the
New Forest, the dark and pale coloured herds of fallow
deer have never been known to mingle; and even the curious Ancon sheep of quite modern origin have been
observed to keep together, separating themselves from the
rest of the flock when put into enclosures with other
sheep. The same rule applies to birds, for Darwin was
informed by the Rev. W.D. Fox that his flocks of white
and Chinese geese kept distinct.
This constant preference of animals for their like, even
in the case of slightly different varieties of the same species, is evidently a fact of great importance in considering
the origin of species by natural selection, since it shows
us that, so soon as a slight differentiation of form or colour has been effected, isolation will at once arise by the
selective association of the animals themselves; and thus
the great stumbling-block of “the swamping effects of
intercrossing,” which has been so prominently brought

Joly Biology Direct 2011, 6:62
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/62

forward by many naturalists, will be completely
obviated.
Such types of preference for closely related individuals
may not need to be based on purely genetic factors, but
could be culturally inherited, i.e. transmitted as memes
[39], as has been documented many times with the phenomenon of imprinting in birds raised in nests of different species. In addition, there is probably also simply a
natural tendency of individuals with similar phenotypes
to breed more willingly and effectively with one another.
The concept that social structures and altruism are
more likely to arise between genetically related individuals was initially developed by Hamilton [40,41], and
this was later coined as the green beard altruism effect
by Richard Dawkins [39], to describe a hypothetical
gene that would result in both a detectable trait and in
altruistic behaviour among those bearing it. The occurrence of such a gene seems, however, rather unlikely,
and there are, indeed, very few reported occurrences of
such possible green beard genes. Moreover, the green
beard hypothesis posits that the green beard would be a
dominant character, i.e. a gain or a change of function,
which, as underlined repeatedly in the previous pages, is
far less likely to arise through mutations than a loss of
function.
More recently, however, mathematical modelling of
beard chromodynamics yielded the conclusion that the
most stable arrangement for the maintenance of altruism was for a situation where beard colours are polymorphic, and the genes for altruism only loosely
coupled to those for beard colours [74]. In other words,
populations are most likely to get organised into groups
of individuals that behave altruistically towards one
another if the polymorphism of characters in the global
population allows individuals to recognise those that are
most likely to be genetically related to themselves, i.e.
the ones that look like them, and the social genes do
not have to be the same as those used to evaluate kinship. In French, we have a proverb that says ‘Ce qui se
ressemble s’assemble’, and the existence of races and
varieties in the natural world vouches for the spontaneous occurrence of structuration of natural populations
which can only be the result of some preferential association, and reproduction, between individuals that are
more closely related to one another than to the rest of
the population. The recent finding that, even in the fungus Neurospora, some degree of reproductive isolation
could be observed between stocks that had been grown
for relatively short periods in different selective environments [75] indicates that a tendency for preferential
mating with individuals bearing similar phenotypes can
occur even in microscopic organisms.
For species that live exclusively on land, most niches
would naturally have patchy distributions, providing an

Page 30 of 55

automatic enforcement of a fragmentation of populations. But for species that live in the sea, or that can
take to the air such as birds or insects, there will be no
enforced limitation to taking advantage of the short
term benefits of extensive outbreeding. In this regard, it
is actually remarkable to note that many species of
birds, fish, or marine mammals not only show strong
preference for kin characters, but, as outlined by Shields
[2], also show strong philopatry. On this subject, I am
in complete agreement with his views that the tendency
of these animals to come back to breed to the very
same place where they were born was most probably
selected for because it promotes a significant degree of
inbreeding. This would once more be the result of
group selection, with the groups or species adopting
more outbreeding strategies succumbing rapidly to
unmanageable mutation loads. Individual examples of
various mechanisms promoting inbreeding will be developed in the next section.
The picture we come to at the end of this section is
indeed one of a Yin Yang equilibrium between outbreeding and inbreeding, in line with the notion of optimal
outbreeding proposed by Bateson [13], whereby outbreeding is necessary for the acquisition of new characters favoured by the parallel evolution of the many
individuals in whole populations, and inbreeding is
necessary to eliminate not only the deleterious recessive
mutations, but also to maintain certain favourable gene
combinations, and lose certain functions that have
become undesirable, and in particular the susceptibility
to pathogens. Like many things in biology, including life
itself [76], the existence of species has all the characteristics of a metastable equilibrium because departing from
it will promote further distancing from the equilibrium,
either of outbreeding, destined for extinction, or inbreeding, which will favour speciation. The observation of the
constant rates of extinction within genera reported by
van Valen [35] does find an explanation in this model
because the occurrence of events of destabilisation of the
equilibrium would correspond to presumably rare stochastic events, as was concluded by a recent study [77].
V) Many classical examples of speciation appear to fit the
model proposed

For a scientist, one of the main problems in trying to
understand the phenomenon of speciation is that it is
basically impossible to perform experiments that will
lead to bona fide speciation, i.e. complete reproductive
isolation between two groups of individuals. The first
reason has been dubbed a ‘methodological contradiction’
by Lewontin in 1974. Indeed, studying the genetics of
speciation involves experiments that cannot be done, i.e.
cross species that are, by definition infertile with one
another.

Joly Biology Direct 2011, 6:62
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/62

The second reason is one of the time scale, and/or of
the size of the samples required. Indeed, because the
mutations that lead to evolution and/or speciation occur
purely by chance, they will only ever occur very rarely.
In the previous sections of this essay, I have argued that
speciation is promoted by inbreeding, i.e. by the small
size of breeding groups. But the probability of a new
mutation occurring in the very few individuals of that
breeding group is consequently infinitely small, and if
one started from just one such breeding group, one
would probably have to wait for thousands of generations for saeptation to occur. This is probably similar to
what happens on isolated islands, where the time scales
estimated to reach speciation are of the order of tens of
thousands of years (and no one would ever get funding
for an experiment on this time scale;-). Of note, in the
Park Grass Experiment performed in East Anglia, adjacent plots of meadow have been continuously subjected
to different fertilizer treatments since 1858, and some
signs of reproductive isolation, with reinforcement via
different flowering times, have been identified between
populations derived from one type of grass [78]. I could,
however, find no reported data regarding the reciprocity
of this reproductive isolation, or about the character
which may have been selected for (and hence even less
about its dominant or recessive nature).
Another approach to test the validity of a model of
speciation is to make predictions regarding the type of
results that could be expected from the model proposed,
and then to check whether those predictions hold up
when the genetic source of reproductive isolation is dissected between closely related species. Many such predictions can thus be made from the model(s) developed
here, with the main ones being that i) When speciation
occurs, i.e. when a new group gets reproductively isolated from an ancestral population, this should very
often be due to one or more recessive advantageous
mutation(s) occurring in the new group. ii) Genera that
undergo a lot of speciation should be those that carry
the lowest mutation loads, correlating to lifestyles
favouring inbreeding such as frequent self fertilisation,
or very fragmented populations.
As we will see in the following pages (summarized in
table 2), those predictions match the situations of many
(and possibly most) of the most extensively documented
examples of speciation in wild populations, and this
holds true for all branches of plants and animals, including our own 10.
Fish

The first ancestral vertebrate was a fish that lived in the
ocean over 500 million years ago, and today more than
30,000 species of fish occupy our planet’s waters, having
adapted to the many diverse habitats found in oceans,

Page 31 of 55

seas, rivers, lakes... Since all these different species of
fish occupy niches of very different sizes and architectures, one would not expect the same inbreeding/outbreeding strategies to have been selected in all fish, for
example those breeding in the open ocean and to those
living in lakes or in small streams.
Among fishes, the most often cited and discussed case
of speciation is that of the haplochromine cichlids found
in the African lakes, which are hosts to hundreds of closely related species. Cihlids actually represent a very
large family of over 3000 species which are widely distributed over the lakes and rivers of Africa and South
America (some of their best know representatives are
the Tilapia, which are used extensively for aquaculture,
and the Angelfish, of Amazonian origin, which is commonly found in domestic tropical aquaria). For many
years, speciation of cichlids has been the subject of various heated controversies. The first one over whether
the speciation seen in African lakes really occurred in
sympatry or allopatry, and a very strong argument for
the fact that sympatric speciation was possible for
cichlids recently came from work on cichlids found in a
very small crater lake of central America [79].
Another contentious issue has been whether some of
the sympatric populations found in the African lakes
represent varieties or ‘good species’. This latter question
is particular relevant for the diverse groups of Lake Victoria which were initially behaving as completely isolated groups, because of assortative mating mostly based
on colour patterns. In recent years, as a result of human
activity, the waters of the lake have become progressively more and more turbid, and the various vibrant
colours which characterised the males of the various
types of cichlids one hundred years ago disappeared
progressively because the members of the various ‘species’ hybridised with one another, to result in a much
more homogenous and duller population [80]. The first
point to make from this observation is that, once again,
it underlines the difficulty of defining species, since it
shows that effectively good species can later on become
varieties when their living conditions change, even in
the wild. From the point of view of the ideas developed
in this essay, the observation that hybridisation resulted
in the disappearance of the vibrant colours is very reminiscent of the colours of Darwin’s pigeons, and does
thus strongly suggest that the expression of many of
these vibrant colours corresponds to recessive mutations, and that the expression of these must therefore
require inbreeding. Conversely, another bright phenotype know as orange blotch is a dominant trait
expressed only in females, to whom it brings a selective
advantage [81]. This phenotype is encountered in certain individuals of several species of the lakes Malawi
and Victoria, but has not led to speciation. Thus, as

Joly Biology Direct 2011, 6:62
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/62

Page 32 of 55

Table 2 Many of the documented examples of speciation in natural species fit the proposed model.
Species

Nature of the phenotype associated to
speciation

Population structure and mutation load

Fish
Salmonidae

Highly philopatric
Studies on MHC give conflicting results suggesting optimal outbreeding
model

Cichlids

Bright colours typical of species are recessive
(disappear in hybrids)

Close preference for kin, with no detectable inbreeding depression

Sticklebacks

EDA mutation (armour plate loss) is completely
recessive
Pitx1 mutation (loss of pelvic structures) is
recessive

Studies on MHC support optimal outbreeding model

Panmictic species (cod,
macquerel, tuna...)

Susceptible to large and unpredictable fluctuations in numbers

Birds

Migrating birds are highly philopatric

Quail

Preferential mating among cousins (led to Bateson’s optimal oubreeding)

Darwin’s finches

High inbreeding coefficient due to small size of the niche

Mammals

Rate of speciation inversely related to the effective size of populations

Mice and rats

Very fragmented populations correlates with capacity to inbreed

Pikas

Optimal outbreeding

Insects
Haplodiploids (bees,
ants, termites)

Very low mutations loads correlate with very high species richness, and
global ecological success

Drosophila

Mating preferences are recessive (disappear in
F1)

Apple maggot fly

Fruit preference is recessive (disappears in F1)

Heliconius mimetic
butterflies

Sexual preference of the males is asymmetric,
and linked to the recessive yellow colour

Plants
Monkey flowers

Assortative mating, and chromosomal rearrangements are more
prominent between populations that are in close contact in the wild.
H. Carson highlighted the correlation of speciation with small populations
based mostly on data from drosophila.

Selfing plants undergo more speciation, but the species go extinct more
quickly
The red derived phenotype is recessive to the
pink ancestral one

Please refer to text in section V for relevant bibliographic references

predicted by the model, bright colours associated to
recessive mutations lead to reproductively isolated
groups, whilst those associated to dominant mutations
do not.
We will now turn to the reason why cichlids may have
such a tendency to undergo explosive speciation, and I
contend that an explanation can be found in another
recent study, based on Pelvicachromis taeniatus, a riverinhabiting African cichlid. In this report, Thünken and
collaborators look at the mating preferences of this
cichlid fish, and find a strong preference for kin over
non-kin, and, importantly, no sign of inbreeding depression in the offspring resulting from sib mating [82].
These observations strongly suggest that, in cichlids,
there can be an inherent tendency to prefer mating with
very closely related individuals. In rivers, where the context is presumably easily disruptive for population structures, this preference for kin may be important for the

maintenance of low mutation loads, and for the expression of recessive phenotypes. When cichlids with extensive inbreeding habits colonise lakes, however, the
disrupting of groups of closely related animals would no
longer occur, and this could promote frequent saeptation and result in the explosive speciation that is witnessed in African lakes. The existence of those species
will, however, be particularly fragile, because of the segmentation of the whole population into a myriad of very
small groups, that will be reproductively isolated from
one another, and will thus not benefit from sharing
their gene pool with a very large number of individuals.
And the high probability of saeptation of some subgroup
will, in addition, represent another permanent threat for
the occupation of the niche. The situation of cichlids
thus represents an inherently unstable situation, with an
excessive tendency for speciation. Ultimately, a more
stable equilibrium would presumably be reached if some

Joly Biology Direct 2011, 6:62
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/62

sub-population lost its inherent preference for kin, and
started adopting a more outbreeding strategy.
Although visual clues clearly play a pivotal role in the
preferences of cichlids for kin, another important component could possibly involve the MHC since, in other
fish genera, MHC discrimination has been shown to be
involved in inbreeding avoidance, or more correctly,
incest avoidance. In this regard, the case of salmon provides a particularly interesting example of equilibrium
whereby the MHC is used both by the mating adults for
promoting MHC diversity (but not for inbreeding avoidance) [83], but conversely, fertilisation is apparently
favoured when eggs and sperm share MHC similarity
[84]. Since, under normal conditions, salmon copulation
is usually polyandrous, and thus provides the grounds
for sperm competition and/or sperm selection by the
ovum, the choice of mates would seem to play a relatively minor role, especially since, as alluded to earlier,
the tendency of salmon to return to the very same place
where they were born must further enhance their tendency for inbreeding. In the study by Landry et al., however, a relatively small number of males (41) and
females (35) were placed in the arm of a river that is
not usually occupied by salmon because of impassable
waterfalls. Under such conditions of unfamiliar grounds
and low populations numbers, the results obtained by
typing offspring for the MHC class II b chain suggested
that matings had occurred to favour offspring that was
heterozygous. In arctic charr, which is closely related to
salmon, Olsen et al. found that ancestry, whereby sibs
were preferred to non-sibs, had a more important influence than MHC preference [85]. The fact that these two
latter studies looked at the MHC class II locus whilst
the study of Yeates et al. looked at MHC class I may be
of some importance because, in teleost fish, the regions
for class I and class II are not linked [86], and cues conveyed by one class of MHC molecules could have different consequences to those of the other class, which may
have contributed to the apparent discrepancy of some of
those results.
Sticklebacks are another type of fish which are found
both in the sea and in fresh waters and have been very
useful for the study of speciation. Sticklebacks, which
are also known as tiddlers in English, are very efficient
colonisers, and are widespread in the northern hemisphere, over much of Europe, Asia, and America.
Regarding the role of the MHC in mating preference, an
intriguing observation is that sticklebacks appear to
favour mating with individuals of intermediate MHC
divergence, to yield offspring with an optimal number of
5 to 6 MHC class II b alleles [87], which they apparently
achieve by smelling the peptides that can bind to MHC
molecules [88]. In another study, however, Frommen
and Bakker found some signs of inbreeding avoidance in

Page 33 of 55

groups of fish raised separately, but with no data on the
correlation to MHC similarity [89]. From the point of
view of the ideas developed in this essay, the data from
salmon and sticklebacks contribute to the drawing of a
picture whereby clues from the MHC allow fish to mate
preferentially with individuals with which they share
some genetic similarity, but not too much, which is
entirely compatible with the idea of a balance between
inbreeding and outbreeding.
Another fascinating observation made on sticklebacks
is the phenomenon of parallel speciation. Indeed, when
populations of sticklebacks colonise freshwater environments, and lakes in particular, they have a strong tendency to evolve into adapted forms that lack certain
features that characterise the anadromous (sea dwelling)
sticklebacks:
- In shallow lakes, one finds mostly a form called
benthic, which is larger, with smaller eyes, and feeds
mostly on invertebrates found on the lake’s bed. The
benthic form has a great reduction in the number of
armour plates and of pelvic structures.
- In deep lakes with steep sides, the favoured adaptation tends to be a form called limnetic, which corresponds to a smaller fish which feeds mostly on plankton
at the lake’s surface, and is, overall, less different to the
ancestral marine fish.
In at least 6 lakes of British Columbia, Canada, evolution has repeatedly driven the apparition of both benthic
and limnetic forms from the same ancestral stocks.
Those benthic and limnetic forms, although capable of
producing perfectly fertile offspring when given no
choice of partner, cohabit in those lakes in apparent
complete reproductive isolation from one another. For
those various sympatric pairs, size and colour were
shown to be the two main phenotypes that contribute
most to the reproductive isolation [90]. A truly remarkable finding was the observation that, for all these populations, benthic individuals from one lake mated
preferentially with benthic partners from other lakes
than with limnetic ones from any lake and the converse
was true for limnetic fish [91]. As underlined by the
authors, the observation that, under similar conditions,
evolution can lead to the parallel selection of similar
sympatric reproductively isolated populations is a very
strong argument in favour of the idea that natural selection is involved in the speciation process. This was in
fact further supported by their observation that reproductive isolation between benthic and limnetic individuals seemed even more pronounced between fish from
the same lakes than between fish obtained from different lakes. It thus suggested that reproductive barriers
could be selectively raised against the population that
represented the most direct threat, i.e. the fish of the
same lake, but of the other morph.

Joly Biology Direct 2011, 6:62
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/62

Further work, orchestrated by the group of David
Kingsley, has led to the dissection of the genetic
mechanisms responsible for the loss of armour plates or
of pelvic structures which are both particularly prominent in benthic sticklebacks. As predicted by the model
proposed in this essay, both phenotypes were found to
be due to mostly recessive mutations. The loss of
armour plates was mapped to the ectodysplasin gene
(EDA) which, in mammals, is known to be involved in
many ectoderm features such as teeth and hair [92].
Remarkably, the same allele of the EDA gene, which
carries just four amino acid differences compared to
that found in fully plated fish, was identified in all the
low plated morphs obtained from Europe, and from
both the American coasts. That same allele was also
identified in fully plated fish caught in river estuaries,
albeit at low frequencies (3.8% in California and 0.2% in
British Columbia). Another allele was, however, found
in Japanese stocks, which shows no changes from the
wild type in the protein coding sequence, but falls in the
same complementation group as the other low-plate
phenotypes. These results suggest that the allele responsible for plate loss in sticklebacks has been around for
several million years, and has spread widely over the
northern hemisphere, probably because it is associated
to a very significant advantage in freshwater populations,
where it would thus get amplified, and then fed back
into the marine population by episodes of hybridisation.
Because it is essentially recessive, this allele can remain
‘hidden’ at low frequency in the marine populations.
When marine stocks colonise freshwater niches, however, this must favour some degree of inbreeding, which
would rapidly reveal the recessive phenotype, and the
selective advantage would then rapidly increase the allelic frequency in the isolated population. In conditions
where the threat of the fully-plated allele persists, this
will provide the grounds for selection of reinforcement
via mechanisms such as reproductive isolation, which
could ultimately result in proper speciation.
The loss of pelvic structures was also very recently
shown to be due to recessive mutations corresponding
to deletions in the promoter regions of the Pitx1 gene
[93]. Remarkably, characterisation of the promoter
regions of this gene in nine different populations of
benthic sticklebacks revealed that the same 488-bp segment was missing in all nine populations, but this was
due to nine different events of deletion. This observation thus testifies that the advantageous phenotype of
losing pelvic structures arose repeatedly and independently in all those completely separate benthic populations as a result of selective pressures, and, contrarily to
the previous example, was not ‘hidden’ as a recessive
trait in the ancestral marine population. The other
point that can be made from this observation is that,

Page 34 of 55

under the right conditions of selection, recessive mutations due to loss of existing genetics materials are sufficiently common that they can be repeatedly obtained in
completely independent populations. Another remarkable observation contained in that article is that, as predicted at the end of section IV, there is a considerable
reduction in the heterogeneity of sequences focused on
the region surrounding the Pitx1 gene [93]. Amazingly,
this reduction only spreads over a few kilobases, which
suggests that events of DNA recombination such as
crossing-overs must occur very frequently over the
region carrying this gene. As discussed in section IV,
the tightness of the region of reduced polymorphism
may actually be related to the fact that a sizeable proportion of the Pitx1 mutations have a completely recessive phenotype, which would increase the delay with
which the genomic regions carrying the mutation would
become fixed, and thus provide plenty of opportunities
for crossing-overs to occur in the close vicinity of that
region.
Altogether, the picture that shapes itself regarding
speciation in sticklebacks adapted to lake environments
is one where either hidden recessive phenotypes, or relatively probable inactivating mutations initially result in
recessive advantageous phenotypes, promoting successive steps of saeptation from the ancestral stock of fish
of anadromous origin. Subsequently, once separate
groups have been formed, reinforcement based on sexual preferences will then follow, driven either by the
ancestral stock or by the other morph, based on a variety of phenotypes, among which size and colour are particularly prominent.
So far, in this section, we have only considered fish
species that are naturally structured and/or have been
recognised as prone to undergo speciation (both factors
actually going hand in hand if we accept the proposed
model). In the oceans there are, however, many other
types of fish populations that are extremely numerous,
and hence probably much more prone to panmictic
reproductive strategies. Those that spring to mind are,
for example, mackerels, sardines, anchovies or cods, and
for all of those, great fluctuations of numbers have been
witnessed over the years, with recovery rates that often
prove difficult to predict. This is particularly true for the
cod populations, which are proving very slow to recover
from the overfishing that has taken place over the past
decades. In line with the model proposed in this essay, I
contend that, for fish populations that are sufficiently
numerous to adopt a panmictic strategy, the variations
in numbers, and in particular their episodic slow recovery after population shrinkage, could partly be due to
reduced fertility caused by high mutation loads in the
context of increased inbreeding coefficients caused by
population shrinkage.

Joly Biology Direct 2011, 6:62
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/62

To conclude about fish, the currently available data
suggest that, in species that tend to have a certain structure imposed by the niche they occupy and/or their
breeding habits, mechanisms exist that would ensure a
balance between inbreeding and outbreeding by favouring mating between individuals of relative relatedness.
When circumstances change, however, such as when
cichlids or sticklebacks find themselves in the more
stable and secluded environment of a lake rather than in
streams or the ocean, this will tilt the balance towards
inbreeding, and favour speciation.
Birds

For birds, the capacity to take to the air potentially
opens an almost limitless capacity for dissemination.
Many bird species are, however, rather sedentary, with a
strong tendency for territoriality. And for those that are
migratory, similarly to fish, there is strong philopatry, i.
e. a very strong tendency to return to the very place of
their birth when they reach sexual maturity.
Contrarily to fish, however, there is no clear sign that
the MHC plays a strong role in regulating the relatedness of mating partners, probably because the sense of
smell is less developed in birds than in fish. Rather,
visual and auditory clues are used extensively in the
establishment of the usually monogamous breeding
pairs. Remarkably, rather than being innate, sexual preferences of birds are actually mostly cultural, i.e. mainly
acquired via a mechanism called imprinting, which takes
place during the first few weeks of life. One must, however, underline that there must also be some level of
innate capacity of certain birds to recognise kin. Otherwise, how would the cuckoo ever recognise it’s mate?
During the imprinting period, birds learn to identify various characters such as the song of their parents, as well
as the size, shape and colours of their parents’ or siblings’ anatomical features such as beaks or plumage.
Imprinting has been demonstrated in too many bird
species to cite them all here, with varying degrees of
importance put on song or anatomical features depending on each species. The most picturesque and best
know example is certainly that of the experiments performed with geese by Konrad Lorenz where he showed
that the goslings became imprinted on him (or more
precisely on his gumboots) during the first few hours
after their hatching. When it comes to choosing a mate,
those preferences would hence promote pairing between
closely related individuals. Working with Japanese
quails, Bateson actually demonstrated that cousins were
the preferred partners, i.e. individuals that differed a little bit from the parental picture, but not too much [14].
Based on his observations, Bateson proposed the notion
of ‘optimal outbreeding’[13], which could not possibly
be more in line with the ideas put forward in this essay.

Page 35 of 55

One could not possibly evoke the subject of speciation
in birds without mentioning the most emblematic case
of Darwin’s finches. I will thus briefly discuss those as a
final example. Those famous finches were collected by
Darwin (or more precisely shot and preserved by his
servant, Syms Covington) on the Galapagos islands during the second voyage of The Beagle, and only identified
later by the ornithologist John Gould as a new group of
twelve separate species of finches which seemed most
related to ground finches found on the south American
continent. Today, Darwin’s finches are classified into
fourteen different species that have different distributions on the different islands of the archipelago, and for
which the most telling anatomical difference lies in the
size and shape of the beaks, which are variously adapted
to feed on different nutriments (different size of seeds,
different parts of cactuses, or various other sources such
as insects or larvae). Molecular characterisation of those
different species has led to the conclusion that all those
species derive from a common ancestral stock which
probably comprised at least 30 founders (C&O, p 403).
There is clear reproductive isolation between the various
species, with imprinting documented to occur both on
songs and on beak shape (incidentally, the shape of the
beak has by itself a strong influence on the song). The
main factors that control the shape of the beak have
actually been indentified as bmp4 (depth and width)
[94] and Calmodulin (length) [95]. Both factors act independently from one another, and in a dose-dependent
manner. The various beak phenotypes are thus expected
to behave as co-recessive traits since hybrids would
express intermediate, less suitable phenotypes.
Since some hybridisation (of the order of a few %)
between certain species can still occur [96], a dogmatic
evolutionist could argue that those populations thus do
not represent true species. For the purpose of the ideas
developed in this essay, Darwin’s finches simply provide
a very telling example of a population of individuals
founded by a very limited number. In the restrained
context of those small islands, inbreeding coefficient
were thus necessarily increased, and, given the natural
propensity of birds to prefer mating with close kin, and
the co-recessive nature of the traits selected, this situation has led to one of the most impressive examples of
adaptive radiation documented to date.
Mammals

Contrarily to fish and birds, most mammals are
restricted in their dispersion (the technical term for this
is limited vagility), and most populations of mammals
are thus naturally fragmented, and this is particularly
true for those that live in relatively small groups, such
as horses or certain primates, or are active colonisers,
such as murine rodents (i.e. rats and mice; the fact that

Joly Biology Direct 2011, 6:62
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/62

it has been possible to generate consanguineous lines of
rats and mice has proven extremely useful for scientific
research. For other species such as rabbits, hamsters or
guinea pigs, this has, however proven much more difficult. I contend that this could in part be explained by
the natural tendency of muridae to colonise new environments, which must have kept their mutation loads
very low, and also shaped their genomes to cope with
repeated episodes of extreme inbreeding).
When the natural tendency of a species is for a small
number of individuals to find themselves repeatedly isolated into separate colonies, thus imposing high inbreeding coefficients, it is expected that the natural instincts
should evolve to compensate for this, and thus favour
outbreeding whenever possible rather than further
inbreeding.
Such behaviours have indeed been documented in
many mammalian species, and in particular in the house
mouse, Mus Musculus domesticus. For many years,
experimental evidence has been accumulated showing
that there was indeed inbreeding, or rather incest avoidance between mice from different inbred strains, and
documenting that the MHC was playing a pivotal role
in this phenomenon. More recently, however, the group
of Jane Hurst used wild mice rather than inbred strains
to document the mating behaviours of mice, and identified that major urinary proteins (MUPs) had a much
more potent influence on kin recognition, and incest
avoidance, than did the MHC [97]. The discrepancy
between those results and those obtained previously by
other groups finds an explanation with the fact that the
process of deriving inbred mice has yielded strains with
very limited inter-strain variability of the MUPs [98].
Furthermore, in an extremely recent paper, the group of
Jane Hurst actually characterises Darcin, an invariant
urinary protein found in the urine of male mice, which
behaves as a pheromone by inducing contact-dependent
imprinting of females to prefer the males harbouring the
other smells found in that urine [99]. The observation
that diverse MUP complexes undergo parallel evolution
in different species suggests that polymorphic MUPs, as
well as other polymorphic factors [100], may play an
important role in regulating the mating behaviour in
many species [101], which may call for revisiting some
of the results obtained regarding the pivotal role of the
MHC in regulating the degree of inbreeding between
individuals in vertebrate species, including fish.
The precise mechanism(s) driving incest avoidance is,
however, of little relevance to the ideas discussed here.
Rather, we can find multiple arguments that provide
strong support for the ideas proposed here in the study
published by Bush et al. more than 30 years ago [102].
Firstly, they underline that the effective size of mammal populations (which is inversely correlated to the

Page 36 of 55

average inbreeding coefficient) appears to be inversely
correlated to the rate of speciation: Whilst speciation is
very rapid in horses and primates, which have very
structured populations, it is much slower in marsupials
and carnivores, which have much more diffusive breeding strategies, and slowest in bats and whales, probably
because of their high vagility. The various altruistic
behaviours frequently witnessed in certain colonies of
bats is, however, often viewed as being due to high
levels of relatedness between the individuals comprising
those colonies. One could thus envisage that the
remarkable longevity of bat species may relate to the
stability of the equilibrium between outbreeding (due to
their high vagility) and inbreeding (due to the structure
of their colonies, promoted by the importance of cooperative behaviours for their survival [103]).
Second, the rate of speciation is also shown to be
strongly correlated to the rate of chromosomal evolution, and horses, primates and rodents are indeed genera
where many instances of chromosomal rearrangements
have been documented between closely related species,
which can sometimes produce hybrids that are either
infertile (as for the equine species) or of limited fertility,
as for the chromosomal species of alpine mice [104,105].
Third, the authors also underline that the organisation
of populations into clan or harems, where a single
dominant male sires most of the females is another
mechanism which reduces the effective size of populations, and thus increases the average inbreeding coefficient. There are a few notable exceptions where it is
actually the female that gives rise to most of the offspring of a colony. One of them is the African wild dog,
which lives in pack of 20 to 40 animals, and inbreeding
is reduced by males and non-reproducing females emigrating away from the population. Another one is the
eusocial naked mole rat, which is found in east Africa
and is actually more closely related to porcupines than
to rats. Those live exclusively underground, in colonies
of 50-100 individuals where all the offspring descends
from one single ‘queen’. Although inbreeding coefficients have been found to be extremely high in those
animals, this must be a consequence of their lifestyle
rather than by choice since outbreeding was found to be
preferred when available [106].
Inbreeding is, however, not avoided to the same
degree in all mammal species, and there are also numerous examples of kin preference in mammals, which are
often the result of imprinting, in other words a cultural
rather than a genetic heritage. On the whole, one finds
that mammals in which inbreeding avoidance is the
most prominent are those for which their natural lifestyle would most often provoke the isolation of small
groups. Yet, they should presumably be those carrying
the smallest mutation loads. Hence, they should be the

Joly Biology Direct 2011, 6:62
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/62

ones for which inbreeding is the less costly. For mammals as for fish and birds, the overall picture therefore
seems to match a model of balance between inbreeding
and outbreeding, in line with Bateson’s optimal outbreeding model [13] rather than outright and systematic
inbreeding avoidance. One study carried out in wild
American Pikas (which are related to rabbits and hares)
actually found that, much like Bateson’s Japanese quails,
the preferred partners were those of intermediate relatedness [107].
Insects

With more than one million species identified, the class
of the insects is, by far, the most numerous one of the
whole kingdom of eukaryotic life, and basically comprises half of the metazoan species recorded to date.
Insects are thus clearly very prone to speciation.
Although insect populations are often very large, they
are also very frequently fragmented into very restricted
and diverse niches, which often exist only transitorily,
and which must thus be repeatedly colonised by a
handful of individuals. To my knowledge, no behavioural inbreeding avoidance has ever been described in
insects, and it is only very recently that some level of
outbreeding preference has been reported, in polyandrous female field crickets, via a process of preferential
sperm-storage [108], and this despite similar success of
mating with sibs or non-sibs [109]. Conversely, numerous instances have been documented whereby insects
show kin preference, based on a whole range of processes which include preferred mating protocols, acoustic and visuals clues and pheromone detection.
Repeated episodes of colonisation, and the absence of
inbreeding avoidance must contribute to keeping the
mutation loads down, and thus promote the phenomenon of speciation in insects. As developed in addendum 2, the haplodiploid mode of reproduction of
insects such as the hymenoptera (ants, bees, wasps...)
corresponds to a very effective way of eliminating recessive mutations, and it is quite remarkable that the
hymenoptera represent more than 30% of all insect species. Another factor which may contribute significantly
to the tendency of insects to undergo speciation is that
the selective pressures due to predation are particularly
significant for insects, and traits that can reduce detection by predators are quite often recessive.
Among all insects, Drosophila has proven a particularly useful tool for many aspects of biology, and particularly for genetics and the study of speciation. So
much data has been published on speciation in Drosophila that it would be unrealistic to attempt to summarise it here (there are more than 50 sections discussing
Drosophila in the book Speciation by Coyne and Orr
(2004), many of them several pages long). I will

Page 37 of 55

therefore restrict myself to outlining a few points that
seem to be most relevant to the ideas developed in this
essay.
- Regarding genetic loads in fragmented populations,
as early as 1964, Dobzhansky was underlining the observations made by several groups that “the heaviest genetic
loads are found in common and ecologically most versatile species of Drosophila, and the lightest ones in rare
and specialized species and in marginal colonies of common ones“ [110].
- Reproductive isolation between different species of
Drosophila relies mainly on two mechanisms: choosiness
of females for the males of their own species, and hybrid
sterility.
- When crossings occur between different species,
mating preferences almost systematically disappear in F1
females (C&O, chapter 6), which testifies for the recessive nature of those phenotypes. If we follow the type of
reasoning developed in the previous pages, this would
suggest that such characters leading to behavioural isolation must have arisen in the context of saeptation,
which could have been either primary, or secondary to
the constitution of two populations. The repeated observation that stronger assortative mating is found between
populations of flies that are in close contact in the wild
(C&O, p 357-365) brings very strong support to the idea
that reproductive isolation is a phenotype that is
selected for, and not just the result of divergence
between populations that are not in contact with one
another.
- Regarding hybrid sterility, it follows Haldane’s rule
since it is almost always the males that are sterile. A
large body of evidence from various studies suggests
that this sterility is often asymmetric (ie concerns the
males obtained through only one of the two types of
crossings), and results from the accumulation of multiple small effects mapping to various genes rather than
to the large effect of major genes (see C&O, p299-319).
This is in complete agreement with the scenarios proposed in section III and sketched in Figure 3, whereby
reproductive isolation arises as a succession of small
steps, most often selected for under the threat of hybridisation with the ancestral population expressing a
dominant but deleterious trait.
- Multiple studies, of which many come from the
group of Mohamed Noor, underline the implication of
chromosomal rearrangements in the reproductive isolation seen between closely related species of drosophila.
When they have been mapped, the genes for female preference and hybrid male sterility were found to be associated with chromosomal rearrangements [55,111], and
furthermore, such rearrangements are much more prominent between sympatric species than between allopatric ones ([55] C&0, p309). The explanation most

Joly Biology Direct 2011, 6:62
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/62

commonly offered for these observations, in line with
the Dobzhanski-Muller model, is that the chromosomal
rearrangements prevent recombinations between multiple genes having co-evolved. As proposed in section II
5c, if reproductive isolation evolves as a response to the
threat of hybridisation with a neighbouring distinct
population, chromosomal rearrangements could also
have two additional effects contributing to the isolating
phenotypes: first induce some level of infertility in
hybrids, and second be endowed with an intrinsic phenotype, either by the inactivation of a gene leading to an
advantageous recessive phenotype, or by modifying the
genomic context of the genes surrounding the
rearrangement.
To conclude with the most important, it is based on
reviewing a large number of studies carried out by himself and by many other groups working on Drosophila
that, as early as 1959, Carson proposed his model
whereby speciation is promoted in small, more inbred
populations [5].
Altogether, the masses of data accumulated with various species of drosophila seem to be in perfect agreement with the model proposed, whereby the flies’
lifestyle, which involves repeated colonising of isolated
habitats by a few individuals, results in very fragmented
populations, with high inbreeding coefficients and thus
much smaller N e than would be inferred from their
large numbers [3]. Consequently, such Drosophila populations will carry low mutation loads, which must
increase the probability of both the appearance of
advantageous recessive phenotypes, and fixation of chromosomal rearrangements. Whilst the resulting groups
would not initially be strongly infertile with the ancestral population, hybridisation will be detrimental to the
fitness of the offspring, which would promote reinforcement mostly in the more threatened, less numerous
newly arisen group, thus explaining the asymmetry of
the isolation phenotypes often observed between drosophila populations.
Another fly species which is an old favourite for the
study of speciation is the apple maggot fly, Rhagoletis
pomonella, which one finds in North America and
which adapted very rapidly from its native hawthorn
host to cultivated apples after those were introduced in
north America in the 1800’s, and the first report of this
speciation can be traced back to Walsh in 1867, less
than 70 years after apples were introduced, and very
soon after Darwin’s publication of The Origin. Although
some gene flow can still occur, there is very significant
reproductive isolation between the two species, based on
a combination of factors which include the fact that larvae have different timings for their emergence from
their diapause (i.e. the larval life), leading to adults having reduced overlapping periods for hybridisation, and

Page 38 of 55

also that Rhagoletis mate on or near the fruit of their
host plant. The data on Rhagoletis fits the proposed
model very well: Firstly, preferential responses to specific fruit odours are recessive since they have been
shown to disappear in F1 hybrids [112]. Second, multiple loci related to diapause have actually been mapped
to regions of chromosomal rearrangements which have
been shown to have introgressed from an isolated population of Mexican Rhagoletis. The overall picture is thus
one where recessive odour-based fruit preference would
drive saeptation, and chromosomal rearrangements
associated to different diapause phenotypes would reinforce the isolation both by favouring intra-group synchrony, and presumably also by reducing inter-group
fertility.
Chromosomal rearrangements are found in closely
related species, or sub-species in many other types of
insects, and the best documented example is probably in
the Australian wingless grasshoppers, which were studied by White, and which led him to propose the model
of stasipatric speciation [113](C&O, p16), and more
recently that of chains of chromosomal changes [114],
whereby sequential chromosomal rearrangements progressively reinforce the genetic isolation of a population
from the ancestral one, in conjunction with other
mechanisms of reinforcement such as hybrid sterility
[113].
If we now turn to butterflies, we can find two examples that underline the correlation between the recessivity of phenotypes and the phenomenon of speciation.
The first example is that of the peppered moth, Biston
betularia, which was first reported by J.W. Tutt in 1896,
and has since become an emblematic example of adaptive evolution. Originally, the populations of those
moths were light colored (peppered), which provided
very good camouflage against the barks of trees. During
the industrial revolution, however, many lichen died,
and the average color of tree trunks turned much darker
because of soot deposits. This made the light colored
peppered moths much more conspicuous for their bird
predators, and led to the selection of a darker phenotype, the black-bodied moth, which initially represented
less than 2% of individuals, but raised to around 95%
over the five decades between the middle and the end of
the 19th century. With the color of tree trunks progressively returning to a more natural light color, the frequency of dark moths has since been decreasing slowly.
The rapidity of the initial selection process is explained
by the fact that the darker phenotype is due to a dominant mutation. In fitting with the model, this did not,
however, lead to any detectable process of reproductive
isolation.
Conversely, in another butterfly, a recent report
describes that a recessive phenotype is associated with

Joly Biology Direct 2011, 6:62
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/62

the type of mating preference expected to correspond to
the early steps of speciation [115]. In western Ecuador,
one finds Heliconius cydno alithea, which is a mimetic
butterfly which follows the models of other Heliconius
butterflies, H. sapho (white) and H. eleuchia (yellow).
Those two latter species produce toxic chemicals that
protect them against predation. Within the population
of H. cydno alithea, depending on the region, one finds
white and yellow butterflies in various proportions,
which correlate with the relative abundance of the
respective white and yellow models in that same region.
Whilst white and yellow H. cydno alithea are not reproductively isolated, Chamberlain and colleagues found
that the yellow males showed a marked preference for
yellow females, whilst white males were indiscriminate.
Crosses between yellow and white butterflies also
revealed that white is the dominant phenotype. Remarkably, male preference was found to segregate with the K
locus coding for wing colour, which may be explained
by the fact that the same pigments dictating wing colour
are also used as filtering pigments in insect eyes.
Thus, in butterflies as in cichlids, selection of advantageous recessive colour patterns can lead to some degree
of reproductive isolation, whilst dominant ones do not.
Flowering Plants

With close to 300,000 species recorded, flowering plants
compete with arthropods for the second place for the
phylum with the most species [69,116]. Among those,
the rate of speciation appears to be particularly prominent in plants capable of self-fertilisation. This is in part
related to the phenomenon of speciation by polyploidy,
which is actually relatively rare, and occurs over just
one or very few generations, and is thus not really relevant to the mechanisms we are trying to dissect in this
essay (see C&O, chapter 9). As first proposed by Baker
in 1953, the higher number of species among selfing
plants is often interpreted as related to their higher
capacity to colonise new environments (see [117]), and
this does indeed fit the para- and/or allopatric scenarios
proposed in section III.
An additional factor may, however, be that the capacity to self fertilise, which is the ultimate form of
inbreeding, would be very effective at reducing the
mutation load, which would, in turn, favour speciation.
In a more recent report Heilbuth concluded that it was
not so much the capacity to self-fertilise that increased
speciation, but dioecy (i.e. the complete separation of
the population between males and females) that was
associated with lower number of species [118], which is
in complete agreement with the observation that dioecious plants only comprise 6% of all flowering plants,
among which one finds Holy, Willow, Ash, Juniper and
Gingko biloba (one of the longest lived species know to

Page 39 of 55

date, C&O, p425). To reach this conclusion, Heilbuth
compared multiple plant families for species richness
among three types of plants: those capable of selfing,
those where selfing could be possible but is prevented
via various self-incompatibility mechanisms, and dioecious plants, and found comparatively low numbers of
species only in the latter. This puzzling observation can,
however, find explanations in the light of the model
proposed here. Indeed, the prediction from the model is
that, under conditions of excessive inbreeding, populations will undergo very frequent speciation, but the durability of these species will, consequently, be much
reduced because most new species will tend to eliminate
their immediate ancestor. The incapacity to self fertilise
may thus reduce the rate of speciation, but would
increase the lifetime of the species, with a net result of
equivalent numbers of species. Furthermore, the diversity of mechanisms used for self-incompatibility in various plant species suggests that those have been
repeatedly and independently selected for, probably
because they represented a selective advantage in populations that had an excessive tendency to undergo rampant speciation. These views are supported by very
recent report in which Goldberg and collaborators documented that, in solanaceae, self-incompatibility has been
maintained for over 30 million years in 40% of species
because, although self-fertilising species undergo more
speciation, they also go extinct more rapidly, which the
authors suggest could be due to a conjunction of their
smaller effective population sizes, decreased polymorphism, narrower geographic distribution, decreased capacity to select for advantageous gene combinations and
to eliminate the deleterious ones [119].
In addition to underlining the correlation between the
selfing capacity of plants and their propensity to colonise remote grounds, Baker was also among the first to
propose that sex could have evolved as a mean to
reduce inbreeding [120]. Multiple arguments exist to
suggest that dioecy is a much more efficient guard
against inbreeding than mechanisms of self incompatibility such as gametophyte incompatibility (see [118]),
and switches between dieocious and selfing modes of
reproduction must also be much less likely than
between self-incompatible and -compatible ones, such
as recently described for the annual plant Capsella
[121]. Given this, it is thus not surprising that dioecious
species should be guarded against inbreeding via higher
mutations loads, and thus have a much lower tendency
towards speciation, and thus be much less numerous
than those with complete or partial hermaphrodism.
One should not, however, make the mistake of equating
speciation with adaptive evolution. Evolution is related
to the acquisition of new characters, which is much
favoured by the exchange of genetic material among

Joly Biology Direct 2011, 6:62
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/62

numerous individuals in large and long established
populations. Speciation, according to our model, is
mainly due to the loss of some undesirable trait(s),
which can only occur via inbreeding between a necessarily restricted number of individuals, which will almost
always result in some loss of diversity, and thus reduce
further adaptability.
To conclude on plants, we will turn towards a couple
of examples which are common favourites of speciation
specialists.
The first case is that of two closely related species of
monkeyflowers, Mimulus lewisii and cardinalis. Those
are found in the hills and mountains of California, with
the pink M. lewisii occupying higher altitudes, and the
bright red M. cardinalis occupying the valleys. Although
the ranges of the two species overlap between 1500 and
2000 meters, and despite the fact that they are capable
of producing viable and fertile offspring in the greenhouse, hybrids are almost never found in the wild,
which is highly related to the fact that the red M. cardinalis is pollinated mostly by hummingbirds, whilst the
paler M. lewisii is pollinated almost exclusively by bumble bees. Phylogenetic comparisons have established that
the ancestral phenotype was the paler colour of M. lewisii, and the bright colour of M. cardinalis is actually a
recessive phenotype due to a mutation in the YUP gene,
which prevents carotenoid deposition in the petals
[122]. By deriving near-isogenic lines of Mimulus for
various characters, Bradshaw and Schemske managed to
demonstrate that, although the two species have
diverged by many other detectable traits that segregated
diversely, the preference of either hummingbirds or
bumblebees was primarily controlled by this single
locus. Hence, we have here an example where a recessive mutation has led to what I consider a clear case of
parapatric speciation by provoking a switch to a different pollinator, which presumably allowed M. cardinalis
to colonise the lower ranges and valleys where hummingbirds are found.
The last plant example I have chosen to discuss is that
of oaks (Quercus), for their extraordinary capacity to
resist speciation, since complete reproductive isolation
still has not been reached between many of the approximately 400 ‘species’ of oaks recorded to date. Those correspond to very different types which are distributed
over very spread and diverse habitats of the northern
hemisphere, but many of those ‘species’, and particularly
the group of white oaks which are most prominent in
north America, can still intercross and yield perfectly fit
offspring, with clear signs of hybridisation and gene flow
having been documented in wild populations [123-125].
Whilst these observations have led to numerous and
lengthy debates on the appropriateness of such or such
definition of species, and left evolution biologists

Page 40 of 55

puzzled for many years, the very limited tendency of
oaks to undergo speciation may also find an explanation
in the model proposed here. Firstly, although oaks are
monoecious, gametophytic self-incompatibilty has been
found in many types of oaks. Second, oaks have a very
significant capacity to spread both via pollen and via
acorns that can be transported over rather short distances by animals such as squirrels, but also over much
longer distances by floating down streams, or conceivably even across sea waters (Darwin spends several pages
of The Origin discussing the resistance of various seeds
to seawater). This capacity to diffuse must greatly favour
hybridisation, and thus the spread of dominant advantageous traits. At the same time, oaks have a clear tendency to congregate in forests that are comprised
mostly of oaks, and this must surely provide the
grounds for a certain degree of inbreeding, which must
result in the mutation load remaining reasonably low.
Another factor that must favour the selection of very
vigorous hybrids lies with the number of acorns that an
oak produces. Indeed, during its very long lifetime, a
single oak produces hundreds of thousands of acorns,
which will give rise to several thousands of seedlings,
and maybe a few dozen young trees, but of which only a
handful (two, statistically) will go on to produce progeny
themselves. This tremendous level of selective pressure
probably contributes significantly to preventing the survival of those suffering from any significant degree of
inbreeding depression. Altogether, I would surmise that
the situation of oaks probably hovers near the equilibrium between the yin of inbreeding and the yang of
outbreeding, with a mutation load sufficiently low to
prevent insurmountable inbreeding depression when
selective pressures rise, sufficient outcrossing to share
dominant advantageous phenotypes, and at the same
time maintaining a mutation load sufficiently high to
prevent the degree of close inbreeding that promotes
the successive steps of saeptation leading to speciation.
White Sand lizards: an experiment in progress

In the first paragraphs of this section, I underlined why
it was so difficult to carry out experiments related to
speciation. The example I have chosen to conclude this
section is one where nature may actually have provided
us with such an experiment, including the indispensible
internal control. In White Sands, New Mexico, USA,
dunes of white gypsum formed less than 6000 years ago.
In those dunes, one finds several types of lizards harbouring very light colours, which are each descended
from their darker relatives found in the nearby Chihuahuan desert. Amazingly, in three separate species, the
group of Erica Rosenblum has recently mapped the
cause of this albinism to different mutations of the very
same gene: the melanocortin-1 receptor (which is,

Joly Biology Direct 2011, 6:62
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/62

incidentally, also associated to red hair in human). Even
more remarkably, the mutation leading to a white phenotype is dominant in two species, Sceloporus undulatus
and Holbrookia Maculata, whereas it is recessive in
another, Aspidoscelis inornata [126]. In line with the
ideas developed here, in previous versions of this essay,
I had predicted that, if there was asymmetry in the mating preferences, those should be stronger in the morphs
with the recessive form (white or brown), and most prominent in Aspidoscelis inornata, for whom the white
phenotype is recessive, and the threat of breeding with
the more numerous ancestral stock of brown lizards
thus much more significant. Although the mating preferences between white and brown lizards have not yet
been documented for those species, Rosenblum and
Harmon have since combined data from nuclear and
mitochondrial genotyping with morphological assessments to evaluate the progress of each of these ecotypes
towards speciation [127]. Their results suggest that, contrary to my above prediction, A. inornata seems to have
progressed less towards speciation that the other two
species. The results did, however, support the model
presented here: a correlation was found between the
degree of ecological speciation evaluated in these three
sets of lizard populations and their population structure:
The most consistent signs of speciation were found in
H. maculata, which lives in small isolated groups. Conversely, very few signs of speciation were found in A.
inornata, for which populations adopt a much more
continuous distribution, and intermediate degrees of
speciation and of population structure were found for
the third one, S. undulatus. For those lizards, it thus
seems that initial populations structures had much more
influence than simply the dominant or recessive nature
of a single trait being selected.
VI) And what about Homo sapiens?

“Dans un oeuf, y’a du blanc et du jaune. Eh bien quand
on mélange, il n’y a que du jaune”. Coluche, Les
Vacances (1979)
In the paragraph discussing mammals, I purposefully
avoided the difficult subject of the situation of the
human race. As we will see in the following paragraphs,
there are many aspects whereby what we know of past
and current structures of human populations, as well as
human instincts appears to fit the model, if only too
well for comfort. Indeed, the subjects of our mutation
loads and of our species preservation give rise to such
grave questions, especially with the spectres of eugenics
and Nazism still looming in our not so distant past, that
I felt it was best to discuss the data and the situation of
Homo Sapiens separately.
Today, the human population comprises well over 6
billion people, and this number is predicted to reach 9

Page 41 of 55

billion in about forty years, despite serious uncertainties
about the capacity of our planet to sustainably feed that
many people. Although it is universally admitted that
we all belong to the same species, humans are split into
many ethnic groups and races. If one looks at the situation in places where those groups come into close contact with one another, such as in big cities, one does,
however, witness a very significant level of intra-racial
preferential pairing. Furthermore, offspring of interracial
couples, whilst benefitting from high physical fitness,
often suffer from reduced social fitness because they
find themselves struggling to integrate into either of the
groups that their parents came from. In this sense, to
highlight once again the difficulty of defining species, if
one adopted the same criteria as are often applied to
animal or plant species in the wild, one could conclude
that speciation has already started occurring in humans.
In support of this rather provocative stance, the most
distinctive phenotypes to distinguish between ethnies
are the colours of skin, hair and eyes, which have progressively gone from dark in our African ancestors to
the very pale skin, blond hair and blue eyes seen in
Northern European populations. And it is completely
fitting with the model that secondary mechanisms of
isolation such as xenophobia or racism, should often be
asymmetrical, and strongest on the side that expresses
the recessive traits. For example, we know that all the
“arian” traits that were the basis of the selection criteria
of the Nazi doctrine do not actually correspond to real
improvements by a gain of a new function, but all correspond to mutations causing losses of function in various
pigment genes, which are all either recessive, or corecessive. Another even darker aspect of the human
practices matches certain points discussed in section IV:
War is very similar to a sympatric struggle, i.e. a conflict
for the occupation of the niche between separate populations. In times of conflict, sexual violence and systematic rape have been used for centuries as a weapon
of war (see http://www.unicef.org/sowc96pk/sexviol.
htm). Indeed, in the context of a sympatric struggle, the
practice of systematic rape is a very effective strategy to
neutralise the reproductive force of the opposing population, and imposes a burden that can last for many
years by producing children that are often rejected by
both camps. Thankfully, since 1998, the United Nations
as decided to consider this abominable practice as genocide, and as a crime against humanity.
The recent discoveries of a few percents of Neanderthal sequences in the genome of Eurasian populations and not in those of sub-Saharan African descent
[128], as well as that of Denisovans specifically in present day Melanesians [129] are also in perfect agreement
with this type of scenario: the ancestral population of
Homo sapiens, having formed in Africa, came in

Joly Biology Direct 2011, 6:62
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/62

prolonged contact with Neanderthal or Denisovan populations when it started colonising more northern latitudes, and the two ancestral occupants were most
probably out-competed for territory occupation. Under
such conditions, it would not be surprising if Haldane’s
rule applied between Homo sapiens and the older populations, with interspecies mating resulting in hybrid progeny comprised of sterile males and fertile females, for
whom further mating with Homo sapiens males would
be the most effective way to produce offspring. Over
successive generations, genomic DNA from those
females would thus have entered the gene pool of the
Homo sapiens population during its out of Africa colonising migration, which could actually have proven to
be a very effective strategy to acquire sets of genes that
were better adapted to the colder and greener territories
being colonised, and which the Neanderthal and Denisovan populations had inhabited, and thus adapted to for
hundreds of thousands of years.
To date, despite this hybridisation with Neanderthal,
and despite the fractionation of Homo sapiens into
separate races for tens of centuries, Homo sapiens is
still clearly a single species because no population has
been described that would be less fertile with another,
or that would differ in its overall genetic constitution,
for example a fixated chromosomal rearrangement.
Regarding the occurrence of inbreeding in humans,
there has been a considerable evolution over the past
few decades. For many centuries, the structures of
human populations were probably quite similar to those
seen in great apes today, being split into groups of a few
dozens, with some individuals, most often females, passing from one group to another. Over the centuries, the
advent of civilisation resulted in the progressive increase
in the size of those groups, driven by a whole range of
reasons, among which the most significant were probably i) the conflicts with adjacent groups (with the smaller groups being eliminated) ii) the advent of
agriculture, which imposed sedentarity and allowed the
sustenance of denser populations iii) the specialisation
of individuals into classes of farmers, craftsmen, soldiers,
carers... resulting in an increase in the groups’ critical
mass, i.e. the number of people necessary for having sufficient numbers of the various kinds in each group.
Until the middle ages, the size of most human communities remained small, and average inbreeding coefficients in human populations must thus have been quite
significant. In this regard, the recent sequencing of the
genome from the hair of a 4000 year old Eskimo gave
results consistent with an inbreeding coefficient of 0,06
[130], equivalent to that of the offspring of parents with
0.12 of consanguinity corresponding to the degree
shared by first cousins.

Page 42 of 55

Later on, recognising the existence of infectious
microbes, leading to the concept of hygiene, did considerably favour the increase in size of cities by decreasing
the incidence of epidemics (when visiting the tower of
London a few years ago, I learnt from the guide that, if
London was the largest city in the world for many years,
it was thought to be related to the English’s love of tea.
Indeed, boiling the water greatly reduced the spreading
of water-born pathogens such a typhus, dysentery or
cholera). The concept of aseptia also greatly reduced the
numbers of deaths during childbirth. Later on, progress
in medicine such as vaccination, antibiotics, surgery
would increase the survival of individuals, resulting in
further swelling of the populations and of the sizes of
towns and cities.
Today, nearly 50% of the world population lives in
major town and cities [131]. For western populations,
one can thus consider that the situation has become
progressively panmictic in just a few generations, as testified by the study of regions of extended homozygosity
in samples of the North American population, which
found that average inbreeding coefficients were above
1% in people born in 1900, but nearing zero in those
born around 2000 [132]. These changes in population
structures are widely perceived as beneficial because
they should result in reduced incidence in the occurrence of rare genetic diseases due to recessive mutations
[19,131]. But, as has been discussed at length in this
essay, this could to be a very short sighted perspective
because it equates to, as Muller once put it, “eating all
of our cake today” by allowing the recessive mutation
load to increase progressively to higher levels, until the
rate of elimination by genetic defects once again balances the rate of their accumulation [28].
Incest, the union of individuals sharing half of their
genomes (or at least 0.25 in a direct line) is avoided and
condemned as taboo in virtually all societies, and this
situation probably evolved to counter our natural
instincts attracting us to our closest kin, of which the
famous Oedipus complex is probably the most striking
example. Historically, consanguineous unions have been
particularly prominent in rural populations as well as in
the upper classes (for example among Egyptians pharaohs or European royalty and aristocracy), whilst stern
avoidance of consanguinity is mostly a trait typical of
more urban middle classes. Today, the attitudes of various societies and cultures towards consanguinity
diverge greatly. Indeed, although first cousin marriage
are widely perceived as undesirable in the most developed nations, and are even illegal in 31 of the 50 states
of the USA, as well as in China, this is not the case in
many other parts of the world such as the middle east
or Asia, where weddings between uncles and nieces

Joly Biology Direct 2011, 6:62
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/62

(degree of consanguinity F = 0,25, resulting in offspring
with an inbreeding coefficient I = 0.125) or between
first cousins (F = 0.125, I = 0.06) are common, and even
sometimes actively encouraged [18,19]. Today, despite
the phenomenal increase of the proportion of the
human population living in urban environments, more
than 10% of the world’s unions are still consanguineous,
and this is sometimes transiently reinforced in the communities of recent urban immigrants [18,19].
Although consanguineous marriages do result in a
detectable cost in the fitness and viability of the offspring, this is balanced by various factors such as more
stable marriages, better relationships between the members of the extended family, a stronger sense of community, enhanced female autonomy, and, importantly, the
economic benefits of keeping the family land and
belongings together [18].
Fifteen years ago, Bittles and Neel used a meta-analysis of 23 different studies to compare the fate of the offspring from unions between first cousins with those
from non-consanguineous parents, and estimated that
first cousin marriages resulted approximately in an additional 4% of the offspring dying in the interval between
6 months gestation and ten years of age [133]. Based on
the figure of an increase of 4% in the incidence of
deaths between 6 months of gestation and 10 years of
age in the offspring of first cousins, Beetles & Neel concluded that the average mutation load must be 0.7 lethal
equivalent per gamete, and hence 1.4 per zygote. Considering that a large proportion of recessive mutations
would probably provoke undetected early abortions, we
can presume that the average total load in recessive
deleterious mutations was at least twice that figure, and
quite possibly somewhere between 5 and 10.
More recently, a study based on the complete birth
records of the Icelandic population over the past 200
years not only confirmed that an evolution towards less
consanguinity was also taking place in Iceland, but also
showed that couples that were consanguineous at the
level of third or fourth cousins produced more grandchildren than those that were either more or less related
[20]. The couples that were more closely related had
produced at least as many children, but a higher proportion of those had died earlier and/or never reproduced,
most probably as a consequence of deleterious recessive
mutations.
Today, the situation of human populations is clearly
not in a state of equilibrium, but in the process of evolving rapidly. On the one hand, the populations of well
developed countries combine low fertility rates with
panmictic reproductive strategies that will result in significant increases in mutation loads for the future generations, as well as promoting more and more selfish
behaviours. On the other hand, the world’s most prolific

Page 43 of 55

populations are also the poorest (fertility rates are highest in Latin America, Sub-Saharan Africa and the Middle East), and in many of those, the common
occurrence of consanguineous unions should maintain
the mutation load to low levels, but this will presumably
promote further separation between the various populations of the world in the long run. Indeed, although
consanguinity rarely results in very high degrees of
inbreeding in humans, I contend that it is only a question of time before a significant chromosomal rearrangement finds itself associated to an advantageous recessive
mutation. If such a mutation were to become fixed in
an certain portion of the population, which would then
have reduced fertility with the rest of the population,
the questions of one or more species within the human
race would become very real, and lead to extremely serious ethical concerns.
Although circumstances such as wars, water rises due
to global warming and food shortages due to overpopulation represent much more pressing threats today than
those based on genetic events, the same may not be
true for the evolution of the balance between various
populations over the next coming decades. Given the
differences in fertility rates between the wealthy and
poor populations, even if the progress of molecular biology will probably be able to help control genetic loads
by pre-natal screening, one does not need to be called
Thomas Malthus to see that the situation does indeed
look poised for a progressive replacement of the populations descended from those living today in more developed countries by those coming from less developed
countries. This may be even amplified further by the
well know fact that, when the standards of living first
increase in poor populations, this causes the fertility
rates first to increase even more for one or two generations, before decreasing dramatically.
The challenge for future generations will be to find a
model of society which, at the same time would provide
sufficient levels of quality of life to all human beings to
curb their fertility, so that economies can be built on
sustainable resources, and also promote the right balance between inbreeding and outbreeding: i) enough
consanguinity to maintain mutation loads in check, and
to nurture the perpetration of traditions and cultures, as
well as cooperative behaviours ii) enough outbreeding to
allow the shuffling of races, ideas and cultures. Indeed,
for ideas and for genes alike, exchanging and mixing is
the most effective way to promote the new encounters,
the new combinations that result in truly significant
innovations and progress, i.e. true evolution. It is, at the
same time, also the best way to prevent the phenomenon of speciation. For, even if it results in the awesome
natural diversity that surrounds us today, the truth of
the matter is that the phenomenon of speciation first

Joly Biology Direct 2011, 6:62
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/62

and foremost is a downward step since it corresponds to
a loss in opportunities for exchange of genetics materials
between organisms, which is a direct consequence of the
fact that, most of the time, it is initiated by the loss of a
pre-existing function rather than by the gain of a new
one.

Conclusion
The ideas developed in this essay are mostly based on
rather basic, not to say simplistic, concepts. One of the
reasons that kept me from writing up those ideas for
several years was the reasoning that, if this model was
even partially correct, then one of the many geneticists
that have pondered about speciation for the past 150
years should have developed similar ideas before me.
And although it took me a long time to identify many
of the previously published works most relevant to the
ideas presented here, those have turned out to be in line
with the models et theories developed by people like
Wright, Carson, Shields and Bateson. To date, however,
the ideas put forward by these various people have
received remarkably little attention from the scientists
trying to understand the mechanisms of speciation. I
contend that the main reason for this is that speciation
has been considered as a phenomenon that should be
explained by population genetics. And apart from the
fact that recessive phenotypes are much more difficult
to integrate into models, the most important factor is
probably that most of the grounds for population genetics were laid during the first half of the twentieth century, initially by Fisher, Haldane, and Wright himself,
with highly mathematical papers, and later by others
such as Dobzhansky, Mayr and Muller, to reach the global concept of what is known as “The modern synthesis”. All this groundwork by very intelligent and gifted
people took place before the structure of DNA, the
genetic code, the digital nature of genetic information
and the structure of genes were discovered, which all
happened after WW2. But because they did not have
access to this molecular knowledge, pre-war geneticists,
and Muller in particular [28], considered all mutations
as essentially dominant in their calculations. We now
know that dominant mutations are usually due to a gain
of function, recessive ones to a loss of function, codominant ones to a change of function and co-recessive
ones to the effect of gene dosage (see table 1). And we
now also know that most recessive mutations are indeed
truly recessive: having just one functional copy of a particular gene is usually sufficient, and heterozygotes with
one wild type and one mutated copy of a particular
gene have absolutely no detectable phenotype, and a
perfect capacity to reproduce (contrarily to the pre-war
assumption of an average effect of 2-5% effect on fitness
[28,134]). As long as one does not recognise that many

Page 44 of 55

mutations are truly recessive, one simply cannot venture
towards the idea that deleterious ones are driving the
absolute requirement for inbreeding, and advantageous
ones the initial steps of speciation.
Another factor that could have contributed to certain
geneticists not following the paths I followed in these
pages may have been related to the darkness, the political ‘incorrectness’ of the conclusions that these paths
lead to regarding our future, and particularly that of our
westernised populations. As Winston Churchill said:
Once in a while you will stumble upon the truth but
most of us manage to pick ourselves up and hurry along
as if nothing had happened.
But, as a geneticist, one should not lose sight of the
fact that nature, and particularly the process of natural
selection, is not politically correct. Indeed, when one
thinks of the survival of the fittest, one often fails to
consider the darker side of natural selection and that
the counter-balance of the “survival of the fittest” is the
“death (or disappearance) of the less fit”. As considered
at length by both Darwin and Wallace in their respective works, most reproducing organisms in natural
populations produce many more than two offspring, and
of those, most will not go on to breed and their genes
will hence disappear forever. I thus contend that the
concept of “mildly deleterious mutations” derived from
a very anthropocentric perspective of well fed, wealthy,
healthy and secure people. For the vast majority of living
organisms, including most human beings on this planet
today, there is no such thing as mild natural selection.
Under natural conditions, the struggle for existence, as
outlined by Darwin himself, is a very tough one in natural populations where only one in ten, hundred or
even thousand of conceived zygotes will become a
mature organism that goes on to produce offspring. A
very recent paper looking at wild population of field
crickets reported the very unexpected observation that
only one in ten of sexually active adults actually yielded
offspring the following year, and this was true for both
males and females [135]. If it were not the case, we
would not see so much variation, so many new characters being selected for in the first place, and selected
against later on, and consequently so many species
around us.

Reviewers comments
Eugene V. Koonin

This is a very lengthy, very interesting, very provocative
essay written with inimitable flare. I believe the main
motivation and probably the principal idea of this treatise comes here (quoting from the abstract):”...if so
much speciation occurs, it must result from a process of
natural selection, whereby it is advantageous for individuals to reproduce preferentially within a group and

Joly Biology Direct 2011, 6:62
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/62

reduce their breeding with the rest of the population.” I
plainly refuse to see why wide spread of speciation (in
organisms with obligate sexual reproduction, this is the
scope of the discussion) implies its adaptive character.
Both allopatric and sympatric speciation do not appear
to be incompatible with a neutral scenario. This is
obvious for the allopatric case but is fully reasonable for
the sympatric case as well, e.g., via chromosomal rearrangements caused by spread of mobile elements and
other factors that may have nothing to do with selective
advantage and adaptation. More generally, I believe that
the construction of any evolutionary scenario should
start with a neutral null hypothesis. Only when and if
the neutral hypothesis is clearly falsified, should one
start developing explanations rooted in selection [1-4].
Otherwise, any evolutionary scenario smacks of an adaptationist ‘just so story’[1]. This is not meant in a pejorative sense, indeed, this is how evolutionary biology
operated for more than a century after Darwin but I
believe that in 2011 we are beyond that stage. Again:
the task of a work with the claims made here should be
not to show that inbreeding ‘might’ be beneficial and
hence speciation ‘might’ be adaptive (the essay develops
perhaps a credible case for that) but rather to show that
these processes cannot occur (are highly unlikely) under
the neutral model (this is not even attempted in the
paper).
The above is by no means intended to deter readers
from carefully going through the entire article (its length
notwithstanding): it is excellent, thought-provoking
reading. Only, I do not accept the conclusions but the
work is labelled an essay, so its main value is perhaps
not in the conclusions but in stimulating thinking on
major and well-explored but still thorny problems such
as speciation. In this, the paper truly succeeds.
1. Gould SJ, Lewontin RC: The spandrels of San
Marco and the Panglossian paradigm: a critique of the
adaptationist programme. Proc R Soc Lond B Biol Sci
1979, 205(1161):581-598.
2. Koonin EV: A non-adaptationist perspective on evolution of genomic complexity or the continued dethroning of man. Cell Cycle 2004, 3(3):280-285.
3. Lynch M: The frailty of adaptive hypotheses for the
origins of organismal complexity. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 2007, 104 Suppl 1:8597-8604.
4. Koonin EV: The Logic of Chance: The Nature and
Origin of Biological Evolution Upper Saddle River, NJ:
FT press; 2011.
Response: I am not only very grateful to Eugene Koonin
for his positive appreciation of my work, but even more
so for putting his finger with such accuracy on a point of
dissention between my views and those of many evolutionary biologist of today. I had indeed not identified
this question of ‘null hypothesis’ previously, and I have

Page 45 of 55

therefore not treated it in my essay. Inasmuch as I completely agree with the argument that any sound scientific
approach should first aim to disprove the null hypothesis, when it comes to life and evolution, I beg to differ
with the view that the null hypothesis rests with things
happening simply by chance. Whilst I do completely
agree with the views expressed by Gould, Lewontin,
Lynch and Koonin in the literature cited above on the
ridicule of trying to explain EVERYTHING by means of
direct selective advantages, I contend that one should
remain careful not to throw the baby out with the bath
water. Indeed, as far as I am concerned, what Darwin
(and Wallace) established 150 years ago still remains
true today: short of a divine intervention, the only way
to explain the occurrence of life, and its progressive gain
in complexity over time, is via the process of evolution
driven by natural selection, and even if this makes me a
retrograde conservative in the eyes of some, I stand firmly
by my views that the most likely explanation of any evolutionary process (and hence the null hypothesis) lies
with the process of natural selection, be it direct or indirect (I would have a lot more to say about the difference
between direct vs indirect selection, but this does not
seem to be the appropriate place). All in all, I am not
saying that neutral mutations cannot reach fixation
through non-adaptive processes such as genetic drift and
bystander selection and/or cannot lead to the fixation of
things like genomic complexity or even certain anatomical features. But when something is found to occur over
and over and over again, such as the appearance of
reproductive barriers, then I contend that the most likely
explanation lies with the possibility of direct natural
selection.
Incidentally, I have tried to dampen the strength of
that particular sentence in the abstract, which now
reads:” if so much speciation occurs, the most likely
explanation is that there must be conditions where
reproductive barriers can be directly selected for.”
Patrick Nosil (nominated by Dr Jerzy Jurka)

The manuscript by Joly proposes that the formation of
new species occurs by small inbreeding groups budding
off from ancestral groups. This process is driven by several advantages of inbreeding, including its ability to
purge recessive mutations. This model of speciation is
contrasted with more traditional models where new species form by diverging from one another through selection or drift. A number of empirical observations are
put forth in support of the inbreeding model. I commented on an earlier version of this article, and many of
my smaller suggestions have been incorporated into the
submitted article. I thus here focus on a few larger
issues, which if considered, would lead to a more
balanced (although perhaps not as pointed) article.

Joly Biology Direct 2011, 6:62
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/62

1) Disadvantages of inbreeding favoring outbreeding and
thus increasing gene flow

The author makes some convincing arguments for some
advantages of inbreeding. The author also discusses how
inbreeding may often not be as disadvantageous (deleterious) as generally put forth. Although the issues discussed appear not incorrect, it would be fairer to at
least provide some discussion of what happens during
speciation when indeed inbreeding is deleterious (i.e.,
reduces fitness). If this is not done, then weaknesses of
the proposed model are ignored, leading to a somewhat
one-sided treatment of the overall model. For example,
when inbreeding does result in reduced fitness, selection
could actually favor individuals who outbreed, resulting
in an increase in interbreeding (i.e., gene flow) between
different populations or species. This inbreeding avoidance mechanism could constrain the divergence of
populations, and thus speciation.
Inbreeding avoidance thus might sometimes counteract processes driving divergence and thus stabilize intermediate points in the speciation process. However, this
inbreeding mechanism does not apply to allopatric taxa
that have no opportunity to outcross, and might not
apply during the initial stages of speciation where gene
flow is still high and inbreeding depression is not occurring. Thus inbreeding avoidance might affect population
divergence, but is not likely to be a universally applicable stabilizing mechanism that always keeps populations at intermediate points in the speciation process.
Response: Although I am not sure to have followed the
above arguments completely, I believe that we are in fact
in complete agreement. Whilst I admittedly have gone to
great lengths to list and demonstrate the potential
advantages of inbreeding, I have also repeatedly tried
(and possibly not succeeded?) to underline its disadvantages, for example in section I,6. If I have not spent so
much time in presenting the negative aspects of inbreeding, it is mostly because this has been done so many
times before, by so many others, and also because they
are rather straightforward to present: once you have said
that inbreeding leads to inbreeding depression, and
reduces population diversity, I find that there is little
else to be said about the disadvantages of inbreeding.
As far as inbreeding avoidance is concerned, my point
of view is indeed that, although it may contribute to preventing speciation, it is rather the mutation load itself
that acts as the main safeguard against rampant speciation. In line with this, in the introductory paragraph of
section I, I argue that it is more often incest avoidance
than inbreeding avoidance which is being witnessed in
natural populations.
2) Traditional models of speciation

Some of the treatment of the more ‘traditional’ models
of speciation are somewhat inaccurate or slightly

Page 46 of 55

misleading (I am not proposing this was done on purpose, but the writing could be modified slightly). This is
especially true in the Abstract, which should be modified to clear up a few things. First and foremost, traditional models of speciation did not all see speciation as
a passive process, and certainly they did not all propose
speciation occurred as a byproduct of random genetic
drift. For example, reinforcement speciation is driven by
selection against unfit hybrids, which drives the evolution of mating discrimination between populations or
species. Even in models of speciation where selection
does not favor the evolution of reproductive isolation
per se, selection can still play a role. For example, during ‘ecological speciation’ divergent selection results in
divergent adaptation between populations, and these
adaptive changes between populations also result in speciation because they happen to generate reproductive
isolation. The manuscript, and especially the abstract,
should be modified to indicate that previous models of
speciation indeed often involved selection, albeit invoked
a very different mechanism from the one proposed by
Joly.
Response: I acknowledge that I may have, in many
places, overstated the importance of the proposed model
beyond what can be proven today. This is because I am
personally convinced that most events of speciation do
occur via this process, but I have to agree that I am still
very far from having proven it. I am therefore very grateful to Patrick Nosil for his help in identifying the places,
both in an earlier version of this essay and in this latter
one, where changes were advisable or even necessary. I
have now modified the abstract, and several other passages in the manuscript to try to present a more tempered view of the possible broad relevance of the model
of “speciation by budding”. On the subject of reinforcement speciation and unfit hybrids, however, I would like
to underline that this picture fits with the model proposed since, if hybrids are unfit, then this suggests that
at least one, and possibly several traits of the parents
are recessive since they are not maintained in the F1
offspring.
3) Empirical evidence

The evidence put forth in support of the model
strengthen the manuscript, but might be overstated at
times. For example, in the abstract it is claimed that
‘Most documented cases of speciation in natural populations appear to fit the model proposed....’. Is ‘most’ really
the case, or would ‘many’ or ‘some’ be fairer. Without a
more formal and quantitative test of the model, it is
likely premature to conclude whether most cases of speciation support it.
Response: Although I personally believe the model proposed here can explain most events of speciation, I fully
agree that, at this stage, I have not demonstrated it. I

Joly Biology Direct 2011, 6:62
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/62

have thus edited the manuscript in several places to
replace “most “by” many”.
4) Predictions

In general, more explicit predictions could be put forth
that would allow researchers to distinguish the proposed
inbreeding model from previously proposed models.
Response: I have tried to make such predictions in at
least two places along the manuscript:
- In section IV, which deals with genomic diversity, I
predicted that recessive mutations having driven the speciation process should be at the centre of regions of very
limited diversity, with the slope of decrease of diversity
being even steeper for co-recessive mutations. This prediction should actually become easily testable in the
near future with the much expected results of the ongoing
1000 genome project
- At the start of section V, I offered the following two
predictions i) When speciation occurs, i.e. when a new
group gets reproductively isolated from an ancestral
population, this should very often be due to one or more
recessive advantageous mutation(s) occurring in the new
group. ii) Genera that undergo a lot of speciation should
be those that carry the lowest mutation loads, correlating
to lifestyles favouring inbreeding such as frequent self fertilisation, or very fragmented populations. (and also see
note 10 in addendum 4 about the fact that many of
these predictions were actually supported by many
papers that were already published, but which I discovered only after I had described the model)
Pierre Pontarotti

This article/review/Hypothesis represents a great
amount of work. I am really impressed by the new
insights brought by Etienne Joly on a theme that has
been extensively debated: Speciation.
I think that the author should go ahead develop his
ideas and go for a book.
Response: Although books have historically been a crucial vector for the dissemination of scientific data and
ideas, I personally find that printed books, and copyright
restrictions, have now become a major hindrance of
scientific progress. With electronic publishing, it is in the
interest of all scientists (both the authors and the readers) that scientific information should be made available
for free to anyone who cares to access it. For example,
Eugene Koonin’s very recent book (see above citation)
can be found on Google books, but I only managed to
access half the pages. For this reason, I am afraid that I
am sternly against the idea of publishing this manuscript
in the form of a book, and this is also one of the main
reasons why I have chosen Biology Direct, because it is
Open Access. As far as I am concerned, the only justification for a printed book nowadays would be if it was
aimed at the general public. And I sadly recognise that

Page 47 of 55

this is clearly not the case of this lengthy and complicated manuscript which I do not think would make
appropriate reading for the layperson on a train journey
and even less on the beach.
Comments

However, I have several criticisms that could be considered to improve the manuscript:
I) On the form, the paper is especially rich and very difficult
to read at the moment, I would organize it a little bit
differently

A) Sympatric versus allopatric speciation The author
starts his paper by stating that most scientists believe
that most events of speciation occur via processes of
separations and divergences. I do not agree with this
statement, please include the classical article: On the
origin of species by sympatric speciation by Dieckmann
and Doebeli (Nature 1999)
B) Mechanisms leading to sympatric speciation (note
that this chapter has been well developed) Response:
Although I wish it were not so true, I am afraid that this
statement is indeed the reflection of the situation today.
As a proof, we can simply turn once more to “Speciation”, our preferred reference textbook (C&O, 2004),
where the following sentence can be found on page 84: “
While most evolutionists still accept allopatric speciation
as the most common mode, others claim that sympatric
speciation may be nearly as frequent, or, in some groups,
even more frequent”. And further along “One can argue
that allopatric speciation should be considered the
“default” mode of speciation because it is supported by
substantial evidence...”.
Regarding the suggestion to cite the paper by Dieckmann and Doebeli, the reason I have not included it is
because it is a very theoretical paper which I have found
to be completely beyond my grasp, and, as explained in
the foreword, I make a rule of not citing papers I have
not read, or not managed to understand. In the introduction, however, there are already three references to
the ongoing up-rise of alternate views advocating the
potential importance of sympatric speciation (Via, 2001,
Nosil et al. 2005, Mallet et al. 2009), and the paper by
Dieckmann and Doebeli is duly referenced in two of
those more recent publications. Although the suggestion
to rearrange the layout of this manuscript may possibly
contribute to making it easier to read, I am afraid that,
after more than two years of work on this manuscript,
such a major overhaul is well beyond my available capacity today.
II) Etienne Joly gave at the end part of his article, many
examples arguing for his hypothesis

The main idea of the author is the Saeptation hypothesis: “initial mutation must occur at some stage which
will eventually result in promoting the interbreeding

Joly Biology Direct 2011, 6:62
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/62

between individuals carrying that mutation rather than
with the rest of the population.”
When I focus on one of the first example given by Etienne Joly, the Loss of EDA in stickleback, I cannot conclude if this loss has promoted interbreeding between
individuals carrying this mutation. Indeed, the inbreeding in that case could be explained by bottleneck and
the fixation of the EDA minus genotype by neutral or
positive selection. It has been shown that this event
(loss of EDA) occurred on a convergent manner, but
that still could be explained as bottleneck events.
In this case, the polymorphism decrease link to a speciation events is not due to inbreeding but to a bottleneck events Most of the examples developed here can
be challenged this way.
Response: What is most remarkable in the cases of parallel speciation witnessed in sticklebacks is the existence
of reproductive barriers between benthic and limnetic
populations within each of several separate lakes, i.e.
between groups of fish that independently derived from
separate ancestral stocks. Regarding the ‘chicken and egg’
question, i.e. who came first, it is obviously always the
mutation which has to come before saeptation, and in
this case it can be affirmed since the very same EDA
mutation is found throughout the world, and thus clearly
pre-existed the isolation of those fish in their separate
lakes. In this sense it is thus not a case of convergent evolution, whilst the loss of a promoter element in the pitx1
gene is (see text).
If those events of speciation were just a consequence of
tight bottlenecks, some recessive alleles may end up being
fixed, but then one would expect that all individuals
would carry that one allele, not just the benthic populations. The same reasoning can also apply at the genomic
level for the pitx1 gene: if it were just a consequence of
bottlenecks, then the genomic diversity should be diminished for the whole genome in isolated populations, but
what is found is that dramatically reduced diversity is
only found at the level of that particular gene.
As is have argued in sections III and IV, bottlenecks
such as in the case seen for island (or lake) colonisation
will contribute very significantly to promoting speciation
because the reduction in the effective population size will
result in a decrease in mutation loads, hence lifting the
safeguard against further events of speciation. The counter example of this is the case of domestic breeds, which
are maintained through repeated bottlenecks, but
because they are never subjected to the pressure of their
ancestral stocks, they do not develop reproductive barriers against them.
III) Concerning the Chapter VI: And What about Homo
Sapiens?

It seems that the author believes in the concept of Race
(For example he wrote to date despite this hybridization

Page 48 of 55

with Neanderthal and despite the fractionation of race
for tens of century)
I recommend the lecture of the following paper:
Implications of biogeography of human populations for
“Race “and medecine by Tishkoff and Kidd (Nature
genetics 2004: 36: S21-27), I do not think that the concept of race can be used for the human species.
Response: I have read this paper with interest, but I do
not think that the authors really question the existence
of human races (for example, their Figure 4actually
shows a very well supported tree for 37 different such
races, based on 80 independent loci). What this paper
concludes is that there is too much variation within
human genomes, and too much gene flow in modern
populations, to make the simplistic classification of people into races useful for biomedicine, for example for the
identification of differential risk to disease or pharmacosensitivity. This does not, however, rule out the existence
of races in human populations.

End Notes
Addendum one: Bdelloid Rotifers: A scandal about a
ratchet, or a ratchet about a presumed scandal?

Bdelloid Rotifers, which have been dubbed an “evolutionary scandal” by John Maynard Smith, are the only
known example of multi-cellular organisms for which
there is absolutely no doubt that they reproduce strictly
asexually. They are minuscule females (< 1 mm), who
can lay several dozens of parthenogenetic eggs in the
course of their 40-day adult lifetime. Bdelloids are found
in freshwater and the geological record tells us that they
have been around for at least 35 million year. In this
sense, they are clearly among the most long lived “taxonomic species” in existence (I specify taxonomic here
since the biological species concept only applies to sexual organisms), and they can be found all around the
world, testifying of the success of their reproductive
strategy. The downside of this is, however, that they
probably have extremely limited capacities for evolution,
since they have apparently not yielded any more elaborate descendants over that very long period. It therefore
seems fair to say that they may well be stuck in an evolutionary dead end, from which more elaborate life
forms are extremely unlikely to arise. Outside of their
asexual lifestyle, Bdelloids have three very special peculiarities which, I contend, are related to the need to
cleanse their diploid genome from recessive mutations:
- They are only found in wet or moist habitats that
are prone to successive rounds of desiccation and rehydration. This correlates with what is called anhydrobiosis, i.e. the capacity to survive complete dehydration at
any stage of their life cycle.
- They are the most radiation resistant organisms
known to date [136], due to an amazing capacity to

Joly Biology Direct 2011, 6:62
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/62

repair damages to their genomic DNA, which can be
explained by the fact that during the dehydration which
is part of their natural life cycle, DNA will sustain multiple damages and strand breakage.
- Individuals kept under continuous state of hydration
will quite rapidly show reduced fitness compared to
individuals undergoing regular cycles of dehydration,
which maintain the level of fitness seen in the seeding
stock [137]. A very recent study suggests that the main
reason for this reduced fitness is presumably due to
pathogens such as parasitic yeasts, which the bdelloids
are not armed to eliminate. During the desiccation
cycles, however, bdelloids will scatter randomly to other
locations, where the pathogens will not have followed
them, and will then be able to resume their life cycle
without the pathogens, at least for a while [138].
My interpretation of the observation that bdelloids are
primarily founds in environments that are prone to regular desiccation rather than in permanently hydrated
surroundings is that the desiccation cycles could act in
place of sexual reproduction to fight off the accumulation of deleterious mutations. Indeed, after DNA has
been extensively chopped up by desiccation, DNA repair
will involve chromosomal pairing and gene conversion
will presumably cause significant homogenisation of the
DNA sequences. In addition, I envisage that Bdelloids
may have very good DNA repair, but rather low faithfulness in DNA replication. Indeed, this later trait may be
required to maintain some level of adaptability in those
asexual organisms. The coupled processes of relatively
unfaithful DNA replication, together with homogenisation triggered as a result of reiterated DNA damage
occurring during desiccation, may thus be replacing sex
as a mean to keep some level of adaptability in Bdelloids, whilst fighting off infectious pathogens and Muller’s ratchet at the same time. This is in fact exactly
equivalent to the lottery that is played by sexual reproduction with a degree of inbreeding, by keeping only
those individuals that have at least one good copy of
each gene, and eliminating the unlucky ones that get
two copies of a bad one. In the short term, this will
result in reduced numbers of individuals recovering
from desiccation. But given the bdelloid’s individual prolificacy, repopulating their environment after a cycle of
desiccation does presumably not represent a major challenge, whilst keeping their genome functional must be
one ! This is why I suggest that, in Bdelloids, the desiccation cycles would thus act in place of sexual reproduction to fight off the accumulation of deleterious
recessive mutations. And other classes of animals that
undergo anhydrobiosis, such as the tardigrades or the
darwinulids, may also be taking advantage of desiccation
for regular shearing of their DNA to ensure homogenisation of their diploid genomes.

Page 49 of 55

Radiations induce damages to DNA that are very similar to those caused by desiccation. In several places on
our planet, the use of nuclear power by humans has
caused and still causes the natural environment to be
exposed to very high levels of radiation. As a rather wild
prediction, I would not be surprised if certain asexual
forms of life turned out to be able to adapt to those
environments, using radiations instead of the cycles of
desiccation used by the bdelloids, both to provoke intermittent haploidisation of some of their genome, and to
destroy any infectious pathogens.
Addendum 2: Three particular examples of the
occurrence of haploidy in eukaryotes

How does it feel.... to be on your own? Bob Dylan
Haploid stages

Within the frame of the biological species concept, the
phenomenon of speciation is only relevant to the organisms that can reproduce sexually, i.e. that can go
through meiosis. Through the process of meiosis, a
diploid cell will become haploid by eliminating half of
its chromosomes, and later fuse with another haploid
cell to restore a state of diploidy. A critical step in the
process leading to meiosis is the pairing of chromosomes, during which many events of recombination
occur such as crossing-overs and gene conversion,
which ultimately contribute to homogenisation of
sequences, and can influence the rate of occurrence of
mutations via processes such as biased gene conversion
[139]. Depending on the organisms, the haploid state
can last for more or less time, and even implicate stages
of haploid cell division. Certain classes of organisms,
such as yeasts, fungi, algi, many plants and social
insects, systematically pass via haploid stages during
their life cycles. All these species hence go through the
most thorough screen possible for eliminating recessive
deleterious mutations, and would not need inbreeding
to fight Muller’s ratchet. Social insects (ants, bees, wasps
and termites) are known as haplodiploids because the
males are haploid, whilst the females are diploid. A proposed explanation for the fact that this strategy has promoted their social behaviour is that, in species where
the queen mates with only one male, such as honey
bees, the female workers are more related to the offspring of their mother (75%) than to any offspring they
would produce themselves if they were to mate (50%).
Hence, at every generation, half of a social insect’s genome goes through a haploid stage that must give rise to
a fully fit and sexually active male. The fact that haplodiploid insects do not require inbreeding for the maintenance of their genome is supported by the fact that they
actually have a safeguard against inbreeding: according
to the complementary allele model, the sex-determining
locus of social insects must be heterozygous for the

Joly Biology Direct 2011, 6:62
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/62

generation of a female [140]. In haploid males, the locus
is necessarily hemizygous. If inbreeding takes place, i.e.
if the allele of the sex-determining locus carried by the
male matches that of one of the two carried by the
queen, half of the eggs will be homozygous at the sexdetermining locus, and this will give rise to males, but
they will be infertile because their offspring would be
triploid.
Sex chromosomes

Although not all animal species where males and
females can be found have sexual chromosomes, this is
by far the most common situation. In such species,
including ours, the genomes of males and females differ
in the chromosomal composition, with either the males
being heterogametic (XY, as in mammals, or flies), or
the females (ZW, as in certain insects, fish, reptiles and
birds). The platypus, the only known egg-laying mammal, carries as many as 10 sex chomosomes (5X and
5Y), which share features with both the mammals and
the bird sex chromosomes [141,142]. Yet another possibility of sex chromosome arrangements is for the males
to carry just one copy of the sex chomosome (XO, in
certain insects like grasshoppers and roaches), or the
females (ZO, in some butterflies), whilst the rest of their
genomes is diploid. For all those species, the sex chromosomes they contain will be in a haploid state either
all the time (Y and W chromosomes), or in half of the
individuals (X in males and Z in females). For the genes
carried by these chromosomes, the accumulation of
recessive mutations will hence not be a particular problem. The selective pressures that they are submitted to,
and the rate at which these genes evolve has, indeed,
been found to differ quite significantly from the genes
carried by autosomes (see [143] for recent review), and
the recent comparison of the human and chimpanzee Y
chromosomes has revealed an unexpectedly high level of
divergence between the two, both in sequence and
structure [144]. As developed in section II, the haploid
character of sexual chromosomes in heterogametic individuals could be a central factor in allowing selective
pressures to give rise to hybrid sterility in those heterogametic individuals whilst remaining silent in homogametic ones (Haldane’s rule [58]), thereby favouring the
inbreeding that will ultimately lead to speciation.
Endosymbionts

Apart from a nuclear envelope, another central characteristic feature of most eukaryotes is that they possess
mitochondria, the powerhouses of eukaryotic cells,
which provide ATP via respiration. Since Lynn Margulis
proposed it in the late 60’s, it has been globally accepted
that a critical step in the genesis of the ancestral aerobic
eukaryote was a symbiotic arrangement whereby an
aerobic bacteria, probably related to the rickettsia, was
engulfed by the anaerobic ancestor of eukaryotes, which

Page 50 of 55

probably helped it to cope with the levels of oxygen
which started rising 2.5 billion years ago due to the
appearance of photosynthetic cyanobacteria on our planet. This engulfed aerobic bacterium was the ancestor
of the mitochondria found in the cytoplasms of virtually
all eukaryotes today. On at least three separate occasions, photosynthetic eukaryotes would later arise by the
engulfment of cyanobacteria by early eukaryotes, giving
rise respectively to the green, red and the glaucophytes’chloroplasts. One remarkable aspect regarding all these
endosymbiotic organelles is that they have been maintained as separate entities for billions of years in the
cytoplasm of their hosts, where they still replicate by fission, similarly to their bacterial ancestors. And during
all that time, although some of their genes have
‘migrated’ to their hosts’ genomes, all those endosymbionts have maintained their own self-replicating circular genomes. Yet, in most metazoan species, the
endosymbiotic organelles are inherited from only one
parent [145]. The fact that, in yeasts, sexual reproduction results in bi-parental transmission of mitochondria
argues in favour of the view that, when sex evolved in
the ancestral diploid eukaryote, both parents probably
contributed to the offspring’s initial stocks of mitochondria. And at first glance, this may seem like a very suitable solution, since having two populations of
mitochondria would effectively be equivalent to being
diploid, and should hence favour adaptive evolution by
promoting the occurrence of new gene combinations.
The fact that bi-parental inheritance of mitochondria
has almost universally evolved into uni-parental modes
(mostly from the mother, but sometimes also from the
father) does, however, suggest that bi-parental inheritance of mitochondria must have had more disadvantages than advantages. The first obvious problem would
be that it would inevitably lead to Darwinian competition between the two stocks of bacteria, and that the
host could end up paying the price of this intestinal
wrestling [146]. The second problem is the one related
to the subject being discussed here, i.e. the maintenance
of the integrity of diploid genomes. Although the main
role of mitochondria is respiration, they are also
endowed with many other functions such as regulation
of cell potential, calcium signalling, apoptosis, and various metabolic pathways. If the stocks of mitochondria
were systematically inherited from both parents, they
would effectively behave as diploids, and recessive mutations in the genomes of some of them could be tolerated because they would be complemented by the
function of the others. But this could not be fixed by
recombination between the genomes of the mitochondria because they do not perform sexual reproduction,
and hence recombine only rarely. And during mitosis of
eukaryotic cells, mitochondria are passed onto daughter

Joly Biology Direct 2011, 6:62
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/62

cells following simple passive distribution. Over several
divisions, many cells will hence end up with only one
type of mitochondria. This would not necessarily be
very serious for a mono-cellular organism because those
unlucky cells inheriting just mutated mitochondria
would simply die out and make more room for the
others. In certain plants, chloroplasts can be inherited
from both parents. In such plants, it is possible to isolate variegated varieties, due to the fact that one of the
parents carries mutant chloroplasts that can no longer
make chlorophyll. The variegations correspond to areas
of the plants that have, randomly, lost the chloroplasts
that could make chlorophyll. Such plants are, however,
not found in natural environments. For animal mitochondria, it is rather easy to picture how the inheritance
of a diploid pool of mitochondria could rapidly become
a significant problem rather than an advantage because,
for the harmonious development of multi-cellular organisms, if they had inherited a mixed pool of mutated and
un-mutated mitochondria, they would end up loosing a
significant portion of their cells in certain organs where
the mutated mitochondria would have randomly taken
over. The final picture that delineates itself from this
type of reasoning underlines the close relationship that
ties sex and the need to cleanse obligatory diploid genomes off the recessive mutations that they tend to accumulate silently.
Addendum 3: The social lifestyle of a lowly amoeba

Dictyostelium discoideum (Dd) is an amoeba, which is
found in the soil of forests, where it feeds on bacteria.
On rare occasions, when Dds of different mating types
find themselves growing side by side in conditions of
darkness and moderate abundance of nutrients, they
undergo sexual reproduction, which involves the formation of a macrocyst [147]. Most of the time, however,
Dd amoebas multiply asexually, by mitosis. When food
becomes scarce, these unicellular eukaryotes that were
until then growing completely independently from one
another will gather to form a microscopic slug that can
then migrate towards the surface, and form a minuscule
plant-like structure, with a stalk and a spore-containing
head. Of the 100,000 cells that gathered at the start,
around 60 to 70% will end up as spores, with an
increased chance of reaching more suitable environments. But this will be at the cost of 30 to 40% of the
initial stock having sacrificed their chances of survival
to differentiate in stalk cells, or other cells types. In the
lab, one can see that slugs will form by incorporating
amoebae that are not necessarily related to one another,
and at first glance, this would seem particularly prone
to promote the evolution of selfish behaviour, whereby
some individuals would avoid ever becoming stalk cells
[148]. This can actually be found under experimental

Page 51 of 55

conditions, where the amoebae are grown in bulk, but
this is not what is seen in the wild: Dictyostelium amoebae that are found in forest soils are usually all prone to
forming well proportioned fruiting bodies, with the optimal proportion of cells sacrificing themselves towards
the doomed stalk lineage. I contend that, if Dictyostelids
have been able to evolve this social lifestyle, it is
because of their capacity to sporulate and disseminate,
and hence for single individuals (or at most a handful
of amoebae originating from the same fruiting body) to
colonise new isolated niches. The resulting populations
must thus be comprised of groups of individuals that
are highly related to one another, or even very often
clonal. Under such conditions, selfish mutants will be
doomed because, when they find themselves on their
own, their incapacity to form stalk cells will condemn
the fate of their offspring to staying in the same spot.
This type of selection can thus be assimilated to group
selection, whereby it is not the immediate advantage of
an individual withing a group that matters, but the
capacity of a group of related individuals to adopt a
strategy that will favour the survival of some
descendants.
Addendum 4: Footnotes

1) On the subject of inbreeding resulting in cleaner genomes: I owe the notion that inbreeding is bad for your
offspring, but good for their genomes, and hence for
future generations, to a conversation I had several years
ago with my former colleague Geoff Butcher regarding
the criticisable habit of certain scientists of using
outbred rodents for their experiments on the grounds
that those are usually healthier and fitter than inbred
ones. This practice indeed introduces genetic variability
in the experimental samples, which can lead to results
that are either too variable to be significant, or even
sometimes plain artefactual. On this subject, Geoff
Butcher expressed the extremely wise point of view that,
if a scientist wants to work with very healthy rodents,
he/she should be using F1 animals obtained from crossing two separate inbred strains. Those types of animals
all have strictly the same genetic background, and are
indeed extremely healthy because they benefit from
remarkable luxuriance, in other words hybrid vigour
that is seen in individuals that carry almost no recessive
or partially recessive deleterious mutations.
2) On the subject of traits specific to domestic breeds
being mostly recessive: since they did not know about
Mendel’s laws, the capacity of certain mutations in both
pigeons and dogs to complement one another to restore
a wild type phenotype after many generations of ‘true’
breeding did contribute greatly to confuse both Darwin
and Wallace about the durability of acquired recessive
traits.

Joly Biology Direct 2011, 6:62
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/62

3) Regarding crisis inbreeding: There is a rather counterintuitive potential further advantage for inbreeding in
times of harshness since increased inbreeding coefficient
usually causes individuals to become smaller. Indeed,
smaller individuals require less nutrients for their survival, and size is also well known to be inversely proportional to population density. Hence, a rather intriguing
possibility lies with the idea that, under conditions of
increased natural selection, small sizes caused by
inbreeding depression may actually bring on a selective
advantage in the struggle for survival.
4) On the subject of calculating the cost of sex: rather
than relying on coefficients of consanguinity, I perceive
that a much simpler and accurate way of calculating the
cost of sex is by simply counting the sheer number of
nucleotide differences between parents and offspring. With
this type of approach, one can easily see that mating with a
member of the same race or variety will be less costly than
with a more remotely related individual. This also provides
the simple means to incorporate the accumulation of neo
mutations over successive generations in the calculations,
or to compare parthenogenesis with self-fertilisation.
5) The views developed in section IV are somewhat
related to the considerations on founder effects developed as models of ‘genetic revolution’ by Mayr (1954)
(see C&O p 387-393), ‘founder-flush theory’ by Carson
(1975) and ‘genetic transilience’ by Templeton [[65]],
but contrarily to those, I do not believe that drift under
conditions of true allopatry would suffice to promote
the fixation of characters of reproductive isolation other
than on extremely rare occasions.
6) On the subject of bird monogamy: in The Origin,
Darwin himself underlines several times the fact that it
has been possible to derive and keep so many different
breeds of pigeons because those can be paired for life,
and then kept in the same aviary. His report of the common observation of sudden reversion of certain phenotypes towards wild type phenotypes does, however,
vouch for the fact that even among birds, some adultery
still occurs regularly.
7) Regarding the relationship between speciation and
immune responses, an extremely recent paper (published during the refereeing process of this manuscript)
suggests that the loss of certain antigens expressed in
either sperm or placenta may be contributing to the
establishment of reproductive barriers because females
lacking that particular antigen could then develop an
immune response against it, The antigen studied in that
report is the Neu5GC glycan, which is present in primates and not in humans, due to the loss of the CMAH
enzyme which occurred in early hominins [149]
8) On the subject of diversity at the level of loci driving
speciation: I would not be surprised if a locus having

Page 52 of 55

driven saeptation in the ancestors of the laboratory rat,
Rattus Norvegicus, was one day found to lie near the
MHC because the rat MHC has been found to have a
much more restricted diversity of MHC haplotypes than
those found in Mouse or Human. Alternatively, it may be
that the ancestors of the rat population have gone
through one or several tight bottlenecks, resulting in limited diversity of sequences through the whole genome.
9) On the subject of the number of species that exist
and have existed on our planet: If we consider that sexually reproducing eukaryotes have existed for 1500 million
years, and if the average lifetime of a species has been 4
million years since then, this amounts to an average
number of approximately 400 steps of speciation separating the species of today from the first metazoan ancestors. If, along the way, every species had speciated into
two descendants every 4 million years, this would give a
number of species equal to 2400 which is so big that my
desktop calculator refuses to calculate it, but which I
make out to be something near 10120, which is a number
vastly superior to the number of atoms on earth (ca.
1050). From this type of calculation, we can see that the
struggle for existence highlighted by Darwin and Wallace
for individuals must also apply to species, and that the
destiny of most species is either to disappear, or sometimes to yield one, and seldom more descendants.
10) Regarding the predictive value of the proposed
model, my relative naivety on the subject of speciation, to
which I have already alluded to in the foreword of this
essay, has proven to be a great advantage. Indeed, it not
only contributed to my capacity to have ideas that seem to
diverge quite significantly from the currently accepted
dogmas, but once I had formally developed these ideas, it
allowed me to gather data which already existed in the literature, but of which I was not aware, to test the validity
of the model. In this respect, I think it is worth underlining that my writing of sections I-IV preceded the writing
of the last section, which coincided with my acquisition of
the knowledge about the precise details corresponding to
the various models of speciation. I consider this to be very
significant because the model therefore has the added
strength of having proven to be predictive rather than
being adapted to explain the evidence.

Additional material
Additional file 1: The latest version, in the originally intended
format (i.e. before the manuscript was modified to conform with
the journal’s style), is provided as an additional file to this
manuscript. Previous versions are also available as formatted pdfs from
http://precedings.nature.com/documents/5003, or http://arxiv4.library.
cornell.edu/abs/1011.0825, or http://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-00531362/
fr/.

Joly Biology Direct 2011, 6:62
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/62

Acknowledgements
I am employed by INSERM, and I work at the IPBS, which depends both
from CNRS and the University of Toulouse. My very special thanks and
thoughts go to the late Leigh van Valen, who passed away in October 2010,
and had provided me with many bibliographic references and ideas at the
early stages of this work, and had also read one of the earliest versions of
this essay and provided many helpful suggestions for its improvement. I am
also particularly grateful to all those who accepted to read earlier versions of
this manuscript for their comments and suggestions that have helped me to
improve it: Fernando Roch, Patrick Bateson, Chris Grobbelaar, Tanguy
Chouard, Pascal Gagneux, Philippe Druet, Gilbert Fournié, Sharat Chandra,
William Shields, Justin Leiber, Donald Forsdyke and the three referees Pierre
Pontarotti, Patrick Nosil, and Eugene Koonin (the first two having also read
earlier versions). I am also extremely grateful to the people who run the
Google Scholar and JSTOR online services. Without those, I could never have
found and accessed the information and bibliography that allowed me to
develop and mature the ideas exposed in this essay. I am also grateful to
Michael Lynch, Claudia Ricci, Erica Rosenblum and Alan Bittles who sent me
copies of their work and replied patiently to my often blunt enquiries.
Author details
1
CNRS, IPBS (Institut de Pharmacologie et de Biologie Structurale), 205 route
de Narbonne, F-31077 Toulouse, France. 2Université de Toulouse; UPS; IPBS;
F-31077 Toulouse, France.
Authors’ contributions
EJ carried out all work and wrote the manuscript.
Competing interests
The author declares that they have no competing interests.
Received: 12 August 2011 Accepted: 9 December 2011
Published: 9 December 2011
References
1. van Dyke DL, Weiss L, Roberson JR, Babu VR: The frequency and mutation
rate of balanced autosomal rearrangements in man estimated from
prenatal genetic studies for advanced maternal age. Am J Hum Genet
1983, 35:301-308.
2. Shields WM: Philopatry, inbreeding, and the evolution of sex State University
of New York Press; 1982.
3. Wright S: Breeding Structure of Populations in Relation to Speciation. The
American Naturalist 1940, 74:232-248.
4. Wright S: The genetical structure of populations. Annals of Human
Genetics 1949, 15:323-354.
5. Carson HL: Genetic conditions which promote or retard the formation of
species. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol 1959, 24:87-105.
6. Mallet J, Meyer A, Nosil P, Feder JL: Space, sympatry and speciation. J Evol
Biol 2009, 22:2332-2341.
7. Nosil P, Vines TH, Funk DJ: Perspective: Reproductive isolation caused by
natural selection against immigrants from divergent habitats. Evolution
2005, 59:705-719.
8. Via S: Sympatric speciation in animals: the ugly duckling grows up.
Trends Ecol Evol 2001, 16:381-390.
9. Dobzhansky T: Speciation as a Stage in Evolutionary Divergence. The
American Naturalist 1940, 74:312-321.
10. Rice WR, Hostert EE: Laboratory Experiments on Speciation: What Have
We Learned in 40 Years? Evolution 1993, 47:1637-1653.
11. Fisher RA: Average excess and average effect of a gene substitution.
Annals of Eugenics 1941, 11:53-63.
12. Wright S: Evolution and the Genetics of Populations, Variability Within and
Among Natural Populations Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press; 1978.
13. Bateson P: Sexual imprinting and optimal outbreeding. Nature 1978,
273:659-660.
14. Bateson P: Preferences for cousins in Japanese quail. Nature 1982,
295:236-237.
15. Bateson P: Optimal Outbreeding. In Mate Choice. Edited by: Bateson P.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press; 1983:257-277.
16. Price MV, Waser NM: Pollen dispersal and optimal outcrossing in
Delphinium nelsoni. Nature 1979, 277:294-297.

Page 53 of 55

17. Grobbelaar CS: Crisis inbreeding: rapid evolution in large, ecologically
intact populations? Evolutionary Theory 1989, 8:365-395.
18. Bittles AH: A community genetics perspective on consanguineous
marriage. Community Genet 2008, 11:324-330.
19. Bittles AH, Black ML: Evolution in health and medicine Sackler
colloquium: Consanguinity, human evolution, and complex diseases.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2010, 107(Suppl 1):1779-1786.
20. Helgason A, Palsson S, Gudbjartsson DF, Kristjansson T, Stefansson K: An
association between the kinship and fertility of human couples. Science
2008, 319:813-816.
21. Thornhill NW: The Natural history of inbreeding and outbreeding: theoretical
and empirical perspectives Chicago: University of Chicago Press; 1993.
22. Kokko H, Ots I: When not to avoid inbreeding. Evolution 2006, 60:467-475.
23. Fisher RA: The genetical theory of natural selection Oxford: Clarendon Press;
1930.
24. Nachman MW, Crowell SL: Estimate of the mutation rate per nucleotide
in humans. Genetics 2000, 156:297-304.
25. Gould SJ: Hen’s Teeth and Horse’s Toes New York: W. W. Norton & Company;
1984.
26. Stephens JC, Reich DE, Goldstein DB, Shin HD, Smith MW, Carrington M,
Winkler C, Huttley GA, Allikmets R, Schriml L, Gerrard B, Malasky M,
Ramos MD, Morlot S, Tzetis M, Oddoux C, di Giovine FS, Nasioulas G,
Chandler D, Aseev M, Hanson M, Kalaydjieva L, Glavac D, Gasparini P,
Kanavakis E, Claustres M, Kambouris M, Ostrer H, Duff G, Baranov V, et al:
Dating the origin of the CCR5-Delta32 AIDS-resistance allele by the
coalescence of haplotypes. Am J Hum Genet 1998, 62:1507-1515.
27. Muller HJ: The relation of recombination to mutational advance. Mutation
Research/Fundamental and Molecular Mechanisms of Mutagenesis 1964, 1:2-9.
28. Muller HJ: Our load of mutations. Am J Hum Genet 1950, 2:111-176.
29. Kacser H, Burns JA: The molecular basis of dominance. Genetics 1981,
97:639-666.
30. Wright S: Physiological and Evolutionary Theories of Dominance. The
American Naturalist 1934, 68:24-53.
31. Swindell WR, Bouzat JL: Ancestral inbreeding reduces the magnitude of
inbreeding depression in Drosophila melanogaster. Evolution 2006,
60:762-767.
32. Lynch M: The origins of eukaryotic gene structure. Mol Biol Evol 2006,
23:450-468.
33. Lynch M, Burger R, Butcher D, Gabriel W: The mutational meltdown in
asexual populations. J Hered 1993, 84:339-344.
34. Roach JC, Glusman G, Smit AF, Huff CD, Hubley R, Shannon PT, Rowen L,
Pant KP, Goodman N, Bamshad M, Shendure J, Drmanac R, Jorde LB,
Hood L, Galas DJ: Analysis of genetic inheritance in a family quartet by
whole-genome sequencing. Science 2010, 328:636-639.
35. van Valen L: A new evolutionary law. Evol Theory 1973, 1:1-30.
36. Eldredge N, Gould SJ: Punctuated equilibria: an alternative to phyletic
gradualism. In Model in Paleobiology. Edited by: Schopg TJM. San Francisco:
Freeman, Cooper and Co.; 1972:82-115.
37. Gould SJ, Eldredge N: Punctuated Equilibria: The Tempo and Mode of
Evolution Reconsidered. Paleobiology 1977, 3:115-151.
38. Maynard Smith J: The Evolution of Sex Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press;
1978.
39. Dawkins R: The selfish gene Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press; 1976.
40. Hamilton WD: The genetical evolution of social behaviour. II. J Theor Biol
1964, 7:17-52.
41. Hamilton WD: The genetical evolution of social behaviour. I. J Theor Biol
1964, 7:1-16.
42. Wilson DS, Wilson EO: Rethinking the theoretical foundation of
sociobiology. Q Rev Biol 2007, 82:327-348.
43. Queller DC, Strassmann JE: Beyond society: the evolution of
organismality. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 2009, 364:3143-3155.
44. Nei M, Maruyama T, Wu CI: Models of evolution of reproductive isolation.
Genetics 1983, 103:557-579.
45. Lawlor DA, Ward FE, Ennis PD, Jackson AP, Parham P: HLA-A and B
polymorphisms predate the divergence of humans and chimpanzees.
Nature 1988, 335:268-271.
46. Figueroa F, Gunther E, Klein J: MHC polymorphism pre-dating speciation.
Nature 1988, 335:265-267.
47. Pujol B, Zhou SR, Sanchez Vilas J, Pannell JR: Reduced inbreeding
depression after species range expansion. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2009,
106:15379-15383.

Joly Biology Direct 2011, 6:62
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/62

48. Orr HA: The population genetics of speciation: the evolution of hybrid
incompatibilities. Genetics 1995, 139:1805-1813.
49. Moyle LC, Nakazato T: Hybrid incompatibility “snowballs” between
Solanum species. Science 2010, 329:1521-1523.
50. Matute DR, Butler IA, Turissini DA, Coyne JA: A test of the snowball theory
for the rate of evolution of hybrid incompatibilities. Science 2010,
329:1518-1521.
51. Rieseberg LH: Chromosomal rearrangements and speciation. Trends Ecol
Evol 2001, 16:351-358.
52. Joly AL, Le Rolle AL, Gonzalez AL, Mehling WJ, Stevens WJ, Coadwell WJ,
Hunig JC, Howard JC, Butcher GW: Co-evolution of rat TAP transporters
and MHC class I RT1-A molecules. Curr Biol 1998, 8:169-172.
53. Jacobs PA: Mutation rates of structural chromosome rearrangements in
man. Am J Hum Genet 1981, 33:44-54.
54. Oliver-Bonet M, Navarro J, Carrera M, Egozcue J, Benet J: Aneuploid and
unbalanced sperm in two translocation carriers: evaluation of the
genetic risk. Mol Hum Reprod 2002, 8:958-963.
55. Noor MA, Grams KL, Bertucci LA, Reiland J: Chromosomal inversions and
the reproductive isolation of species. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2001,
98:12084-12088.
56. Nosil P, Crespi BJ, Sandoval CP: Reproductive isolation driven by the
combined effects of ecological adaptation and reinforcement. Proc Biol
Sci 2003, 270:1911-1918.
57. Turelli M, Orr HA: The Dominance Theory of Haldane’s Rule. Genetics 1995,
140:389-402.
58. Haldane JBS: Sex-ratio and unisexual sterility in hybrid animals. Journal of
Genetics 1922, 12:101-109.
59. Thorpe RS, Surget-Groba Y, Johansson H: Genetic tests for ecological and
allopatric speciation in anoles on an island archipelago. PLoS Genet 2010,
6:e1000929.
60. Fitzpatrick MJ: Pleiotropy and the genomic location of sexually selected
genes. Am Nat 2004, 163:800-808.
61. Price TD, Bouvier MM: The evolution of F1 postzygotic incompatibilities
in birds. Evolution 2002, 56:2083-2089.
62. Irwin DE, Irwin JH, Price TD: Ring species as bridges between
microevolution and speciation. Genetica 2001, 112-113:223-243.
63. Facon B, Hufbauer RA, Tayeh A, Loiseau A, Lombaert E, Vitalis R,
Guillemaud T, Lundgren JG, Estoup A: Inbreeding depression is purged in
the invasive insect Harmonia axyridis. Curr Biol 2011, 21:424-427.
64. McLean CY, Reno PL, Pollen AA, Bassan AI, Capellini TD, Guenther C,
Indjeian VB, Lim X, Menke DB, Schaar BT, Wenger AM, Bejerano G,
Kingsley DM: Human-specific loss of regulatory DNA and the evolution
of human-specific traits. Nature 2011, 471:216-219.
65. Templeton AR: The theory of speciation via the founder principle.
Genetics 1980, 94:1011-1038.
66. Nosil P, Funk DJ, Ortiz-Barrientos D: Divergent selection and
heterogeneous genomic divergence. Mol Ecol 2009, 18:375-402.
67. The_1000_Genomes_Project_Consortium: A map of human genome
variation from population-scale sequencing. Nature 2010, 467:1061-1073.
68. Navarro A, Barton NH: Chromosomal speciation and molecular
divergence–accelerated evolution in rearranged chromosomes. Science
2003, 300:321-324.
69. May RM: How many species inhabit the earth? Scientific American 1992,
267:42-48.
70. Makarieva AM, Gorshkov VG: On the dependence of speciation rates on
species abundance and characteristic population size. J Biosci 2004,
29:119-128.
71. Raup DM: A Kill Curve For Phanerozoic Marine Species. Paleobiology 1991,
17:37-48.
72. van Valen L: Group Selection, Sex, and Fossils. Evolution 1975, 29:87-94.
73. van Valen L, Sloan RE: The Extinction of the Multituberculates. Systematic
Zoology 1966, 15:261-278.
74. Jansen VA, van Baalen M: Altruism through beard chromodynamics.
Nature 2006, 440:663-666.
75. Dettman JR, Anderson JB, Kohn LM: Divergent adaptation promotes
reproductive isolation among experimental populations of the
filamentous fungus Neurospora. BMC Evol Biol 2008, 8:35.
76. Gatenby RA, Frieden BR: The role of non-genomic information in
maintaining thermodynamic stability in living systems. Math Biosci Eng
2005, 2:43-51.

Page 54 of 55

77. Venditti C, Meade A, Pagel M: Phylogenies reveal new interpretation of
speciation and the Red Queen. Nature 2010, 463:349-352.
78. Silvertown J, Servaes C, Biss P, Macleod D: Reinforcement of reproductive
isolation between adjacent populations in the Park Grass Experiment.
Heredity 2005, 95:198-205.
79. Barluenga M, Stolting KN, Salzburger W, Muschick M, Meyer A: Sympatric
speciation in Nicaraguan crater lake cichlid fish. Nature 2006, 439:719-723.
80. Seehausen O, Alphen JJMv, Witte F: Cichlid Fish Diversity Threatened by
Eutrophication That Curbs Sexual Selection. Science 1997, 277:1808-1811.
81. Roberts RB, Ser JR, Kocher TD: Sexual conflict resolved by invasion of a
novel sex determiner in Lake Malawi cichlid fishes. Science 2009,
326:998-1001.
82. Thunken T, Bakker TC, Baldauf SA, Kullmann H: Active inbreeding in a
cichlid fish and its adaptive significance. Curr Biol 2007, 17:225-229.
83. Landry C, Garant D, Duchesne P, Bernatchez L: ’Good genes as
heterozygosity’: the major histocompatibility complex and mate choice
in Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar). Proc Biol Sci 2001, 268:1279-1285.
84. Yeates SE, Einum S, Fleming IA, Megens H-J, Stet RJM, Hindar K, Holt WV,
Van Look KJW, Gage MJG: Atlantic salmon eggs favour sperm in
competition that have similar major histocompatibility alleles.
Proceedings Biological sciences/The Royal Society 2009, 276:559-566.
85. Olsen KH, Grahn M, Lohm J, Langefors A: MHC and kin discrimination in
juvenile Arctic charr, Salvelinus alpinus (L.). Anim Behav 1998, 56:319-327.
86. Kelley J, Walter L, Trowsdale J: Comparative genomics of major
histocompatibility complexes. Immunogenetics 2005, 56:683-695.
87. Reusch TB, Haberli MA, Aeschlimann PB, Milinski M: Female sticklebacks
count alleles in a strategy of sexual selection explaining MHC
polymorphism. Nature 2001, 414:300-302.
88. Milinski M, Griffiths S, Wegner KM, Reusch TB, Haas-Assenbaum A, Boehm T:
Mate choice decisions of stickleback females predictably modified by
MHC peptide ligands. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005, 102:4414-4418.
89. Frommen JG, Bakker TCM: Inbreeding avoidance through non-random
mating in sticklebacks. Biology Letters 2006, 2:232-235.
90. Boughman JW, Rundle HD, Schluter D: Parallel Evolution of Sexual
Isolation in Sticklebacks. Evolution 2005, 59:361-373.
91. Rundle HD, Nagel L, Wenrick Boughman J, Schluter D: Natural selection
and parallel speciation in sympatric sticklebacks. Science 2000,
287:306-308.
92. Colosimo PF, Hosemann KE, Balabhadra S, Villarreal G Jr, Dickson M,
Grimwood J, Schmutz J, Myers RM, Schluter D, Kingsley DM: Widespread
parallel evolution in sticklebacks by repeated fixation of Ectodysplasin
alleles. Science 2005, 307:1928-1933.
93. Chan YF, Marks ME, Jones FC, Villarreal G Jr, Shapiro MD, Brady SD,
Southwick AM, Absher DM, Grimwood J, Schmutz J, Myers RM, Petrov D,
Jonsson B, Schluter D, Bell MA, Kingsley DM: Adaptive evolution of pelvic
reduction in sticklebacks by recurrent deletion of a Pitx1 enhancer.
Science 2010, 327:302-305.
94. Abzhanov A, Protas M, Grant BR, Grant PR, Tabin CJ: Bmp4 and
morphological variation of beaks in Darwin’s finches. Science 2004,
305:1462-1465.
95. Abzhanov A, Kuo WP, Hartmann C, Grant BR, Grant PR, Tabin CJ: The
calmodulin pathway and evolution of elongated beak morphology in
Darwin’s finches. Nature 2006, 442:563-567.
96. Grant BR, Grant PR: Fission and fusion of Darwin’s finches populations.
Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 2008, 363:2821-2829.
97. Sherborne AL, Thom MD, Paterson S, Jury F, Ollier WE, Stockley P,
Beynon RJ, Hurst JL: The genetic basis of inbreeding avoidance in house
mice. Curr Biol 2007, 17:2061-2066.
98. Cheetham SA, Smith AL, Armstrong SD, Beynon RJ, Hurst JL: Limited
variation in the major urinary proteins of laboratory mice. Physiol Behav
2009, 96:253-261.
99. Roberts SA, Simpson DM, Armstrong SD, Davidson AJ, Robertson DH,
McLean L, Beynon RJ, Hurst JL: Darcin: a male pheromone that stimulates
female memory and sexual attraction to an individual male’s odour.
BMC Biol 2010, 8:75.
100. Karn RC, Laukaitis CM: The Mechanism of Expansion and the Volatility it
created in Three Pheromone Gene Clusters in the Mouse (Mus
musculus) Genome. Genome Biol Evol 2009, 2009:494-503.
101. Logan DW, Marton TF, Stowers L: Species specificity in major urinary
proteins by parallel evolution. PLoS One 2008, 3:e3280.

Joly Biology Direct 2011, 6:62
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/62

102. Bush GL, Case SM, Wilson AC, Patton JL: Rapid speciation and
chromosomal evolution in mammals. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1977,
74:3942-3946.
103. Kerth G: Causes and Consequences of Sociality in Bats. BioScience 2008,
58:737-746.
104. Capanna E, Castiglia R: Chromosomes and speciation in Mus musculus
domesticus. Cytogenet Genome Res 2004, 105:375-384.
105. Hauffe HC, Panithanarak T, Dallas JF, Pialek J, Gunduz I, Searle JB: The
tobacco mouse and its relatives: a “tail” of coat colors, chromosomes,
hybridization and speciation. Cytogenet Genome Res 2004, 105:395-405.
106. Ciszek D: New colony formation in the “highly inbred” eusocial naked
mole-rat: outbreeding is preferred. Behav Ecol 2000, 11:1-6.
107. Peacock MM, Smith AT: Nonrandom mating in pikas Ochotona princeps:
evidence for inbreeding between individuals of intermediate
relatedness. Mol Ecol 1997, 6:801-811.
108. Bretman A, Newcombe D, Tregenza T: Promiscuous females avoid
inbreeding by controlling sperm storage. Mol Ecol 2009, 18:3340-3345.
109. Simmons LW, Beveridge M, Wedell N, Tregenza T: Postcopulatory
inbreeding avoidance by female crickets only revealed by molecular
markers. Mol Ecol 2006, 15:3817-3824.
110. Dobzhansky T: How Do the Genetic Loads Affect the Fitness of Their
Carriers in Drosophila Populations? The American Naturalist 1964,
98:151-166.
111. Brown KM, Burk LM, Henagan LM, Noor MA: A test of the chromosomal
rearrangement model of speciation in Drosophila pseudoobscura.
Evolution 2004, 58:1856-1860.
112. Linn CE Jr, Dambroski HR, Feder JL, Berlocher SH, Nojima S, Roelofs WL:
Postzygotic isolating factor in sympatric speciation in Rhagoletis flies:
reduced response of hybrids to parental host-fruit odors. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 2004, 101:17753-17758.
113. White MJD: Models of Speciation. Science 1968, 159:1065-1070.
114. White MJD: Chain Processes in Chromosomal Speciation. Systematic
Zoology 1978, 27:285-298.
115. Chamberlain NL, Hill RI, Kapan DD, Gilbert LE, Kronforst MR: Polymorphic
butterfly reveals the missing link in ecological speciation. Science 2009,
326:847-850.
116. Rieseberg LH, Willis JH: Plant speciation. Science 2007, 317:910-914.
117. Baker HG: Self-Compatibility and Establishment After ‘Long-Distance’
Dispersal. Evolution 1955, 9:347-349.
118. Heilbuth JC: Lower Species Richness in Dioecious Clades. The American
Naturalist 2000, 156:221-241.
119. Goldberg EE, Kohn JR, Lande R, Robertson KA, Smith SA, Igic B: Species
selection maintains self-incompatibility. Science 2010, 330:493-495.
120. Baker HG: Reproductive methods as factors in speciation in flowering
plants. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol 1959, 24:177-191.
121. Foxe JP, Slotte T, Stahl EA, Neuffer B, Hurka H, Wright SI: Recent speciation
associated with the evolution of selfing in Capsella. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 2009, 106:5241-5245.
122. Bradshaw HD, Schemske DW: Allele substitution at a flower colour locus
produces a pollinator shift in monkeyflowers. Nature 2003, 426:176-178.
123. Burger WC: The Species Concept in Quercus. Taxon 1975, 24:45-50.
124. Curtu AL, Gailing O, Finkeldey R: Evidence for hybridization and
introgression within a species-rich oak (Quercus spp.) community. BMC
Evol Biol 2007, 7:218.
125. Rushton B: Natural hybridization within the genus Quercus L. Ann For Sci
1993, 50:73s-90s.
126. Rosenblum EB, Rompler H, Schoneberg T, Hoekstra HE: Molecular and
functional basis of phenotypic convergence in white lizards at White
Sands. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2010, 107:2113-2117.
127. Rosenblum EB, Harmon LJ: “Same same but different": replicated
ecological speciation at White Sands. Evolution 2011, 65:946-960.
128. Green RE, Krause J, Briggs AW, Maricic T, Stenzel U, Kircher M, Patterson N,
Li H, Zhai W, Fritz MH, Hansen NF, Durand EY, Malaspinas AS, Jensen JD,
Marques-Bonet T, Alkan C, Prufer K, Meyer M, Burbano HA, Good JM,
Schultz R, Aximu-Petri A, Butthof A, Hober B, Hoffner B, Siegemund M,
Weihmann A, Nusbaum C, Lander ES, Russ C, et al: A draft sequence of
the Neandertal genome. Science 2010, 328:710-722.
129. Reich D, Green RE, Kircher M, Krause J, Patterson N, Durand EY, Viola B,
Briggs AW, Stenzel U, Johnson PLF, Maricic T, Good JM, Marques-Bonet T,
Alkan C, Fu Q, Mallick S, Li H, Meyer M, Eichler EE, Stoneking M, Richards M,
Talamo S, Shunkov MV, Derevianko AP, Hublin J-J, Kelso J, Slatkin M,

Page 55 of 55

130.

131.
132.

133.
134.
135.

136.
137.

138.

139.

140.

141.

142.

143.
144.

145.
146.

147.
148.
149.

Paabo S: Genetic history of an archaic hominin group from Denisova
Cave in Siberia. Nature 2010, 468:1053-1060.
Rasmussen M, Li Y, Lindgreen S, Pedersen JS, Albrechtsen A, Moltke I,
Metspalu M, Metspalu E, Kivisild T, Gupta R, Bertalan M, Nielsen K,
Gilbert MT, Wang Y, Raghavan M, Campos PF, Kamp HM, Wilson AS,
Gledhill A, Tridico S, Bunce M, Lorenzen ED, Binladen J, Guo X, Zhao J,
Zhang X, Zhang H, Li Z, Chen M, Orlando L, et al: Ancient human genome
sequence of an extinct Palaeo-Eskimo. Nature 2010, 463:757-762.
Campbell H, Rudan I, Bittles AH, Wright AF: Human population structure,
genome autozygosity and human health. Genome Med 2009, 1:91.
Nalls MA, Simon-Sanchez J, Gibbs JR, Paisan-Ruiz C, Bras JT, Tanaka T,
Matarin M, Scholz S, Weitz C, Harris TB, Ferrucci L, Hardy J, Singleton AB:
Measures of autozygosity in decline: globalization, urbanization, and its
implications for medical genetics. PLoS Genet 2009, 5:e1000415.
Bittles AH, Neel JV: The costs of human inbreeding and their implications
for variations at the DNA level. Nat Genet 1994, 8:117-121.
Haldane J: The cost of natural selection. Journal of Genetics 1957,
55:511-524.
Rodriguez-Munoz R, Bretman A, Slate J, Walling CA, Tregenza T: Natural
and sexual selection in a wild insect population. Science 2010,
328:1269-1272.
Gladyshev E, Meselson M: Extreme resistance of bdelloid rotifers to
ionizing radiation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008, 105:5139-5144.
Ricci C, Caprioli M, Fontaneto D: Stress and fitness in parthenogens: is
dormancy a key feature for bdelloid rotifers? BMC Evol Biol 2007, 7(Suppl
2):S9.
Wilson CG, Sherman PW: Anciently asexual bdelloid rotifers escape lethal
fungal parasites by drying up and blowing away. Science 2010,
327:574-576.
Duret L, Galtier N: Biased gene conversion and the evolution of
mammalian genomic landscapes. Annu Rev Genomics Hum Genet 2009,
10:285-311.
van Wilgenburg E, Driessen G, Beukeboom LW: Single locus
complementary sex determination in Hymenoptera: an “unintelligent”
design? Front Zool 2006, 3:1.
Grutzner F, Rens W, Tsend-Ayush E, El-Mogharbel N, O’Brien PC, Jones RC,
Ferguson-Smith MA, Marshall Graves JA: In the platypus a meiotic chain of
ten sex chromosomes shares genes with the bird Z and mammal X
chromosomes. Nature 2004, 432:913-917.
Rens W, Grutzner F, O’Brien P C, Fairclough H, Graves JA, FergusonSmith MA: Resolution and evolution of the duck-billed platypus
karyotype with an X1Y1X2Y2X3Y3X4Y4X5Y5 male sex chromosome
constitution. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2004, 101:16257-16261.
Qvarnstrom A, Bailey RI: Speciation through evolution of sex-linked
genes. Heredity 2009, 102:4-15.
Hughes JF, Skaletsky H, Pyntikova T, Graves TA, van Daalen SKM, Minx PJ,
Fulton RS, McGrath SD, Locke DP, Friedman C, Trask BJ, Mardis ER,
Warren WC, Repping S, Rozen S, Wilson RK, Page DC: Chimpanzee and
human Y chromosomes are remarkably divergent in structure and gene
content. Nature 2010, 463:536-539.
Neiman M, Taylor DR: The causes of mutation accumulation in
mitochondrial genomes. Proc Biol Sci 2009, 276:1201-1209.
Hastings IM: Population genetic aspects of deleterious cytoplasmic
genomes and their effect on the evolution of sexual reproduction. Genet
Res 1992, 59:215-225.
Chang MT, Raper KB: Mating types and macrocyst formation in
Dictyostelium. J Bacteriol 1981, 147:1049-1053.
Pal C, Papp B: Selfish cells threaten multicellular life. Trends Ecol Evol 2000,
15:351-352.
Ghaderi D, Springer SA, Ma F, Cohen M, Secrest P, Taylor RE, Varki A,
Gagneux P: Sexual selection by female immunity against paternal
antigens can fix loss of function alleles. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2011,
108:17743-17748.

doi:10.1186/1745-6150-6-62
Cite this article as: Joly: The existence of species rests on a metastable
equilibrium between inbreeding and outbreeding. An essay on the
close relationship between speciation, inbreeding and recessive
mutations. Biology Direct 2011 6:62.

</pre>
</body>
</html>
