<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Rostral growth of commissural axons requires the cell adhesion molecule MDGA2</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Neural Development 2011, 6:22. doi:10.1186/1749-8104-6-22"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Pascal Joset"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Joset et al. Neural Development 2011, 6:22
http://www.neuraldevelopment.com/content/6/1/22

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Rostral growth of commissural axons requires the
cell adhesion molecule MDGA2
Pascal Joset1†, Andrin Wacker2†, Régis Babey1†, Esther A Ingold1, Irwin Andermatt2, Esther T Stoeckli2 and
Matthias Gesemann1,2*

Abstract
Background: Long-distance axonal growth relies on the precise interplay of guidance cues and cell adhesion
molecules. While guidance cues provide positional and directional information for the advancing growth cone, cell
adhesion molecules are essential in enabling axonal advancement. Such a dependence on adhesion as well as
guidance molecules can be well observed in dorsal commissural interneurons, which follow a highly stereotypical
growth and guidance pattern. The mechanisms and molecules involved in the attraction and outgrowth towards
the ventral midline, the axon crossing towards the contralateral side, the rostral turning after midline crossing as
well as the guidance along the longitudinal axis have been intensely studied. However, little is known about
molecules that provide the basis for commissural axon growth along the anterior-posterior axis.
Results: MDGA2, a recently discovered cell adhesion molecule of the IgCAM superfamily, is highly expressed in
dorsolaterally located (dI1) spinal interneurons. Functional studies inactivating MDGA2 by RNA interference (RNAi)
or function-blocking antibodies demonstrate that either treatment results in a lack of commissural axon growth
along the longitudinal axis. Moreover, results from RNAi experiments targeting the contralateral side together with
binding studies suggest that homophilic MDGA2 interactions between ipsilaterally projecting axons and postcrossing commissural axons may be the basis of axonal growth along the longitudinal axis.
Conclusions: Directed axonal growth of dorsal commissural interneurons requires an elaborate mixture of
instructive (guidance) and permissive (outgrowth supporting) molecules. While Wnt and Sonic hedgehog (Shh)
signalling pathways have been shown to specify the growth direction of post-crossing commissural axons, our
study now provides evidence that homophilic MDGA2 interactions are essential for axonal extension along the
longitudinal axis. Interestingly, so far each part of the complex axonal trajectory of commissural axons uses its own
set of guidance and growth-promoting molecules, possibly explaining why such a high number of molecules
influencing the growth pattern of commissural interneurons has been identified.

Background
For its function the mammalian central nervous system
depends on precisely organized neuronal circuits. Synaptic
connections between the cells of a circuit are established
during development when axonal growth cones grow
along specific pathways, reaching even very distant targets
with exceptionally high precision. A combination of cell
adhesion molecules, surface receptors and axon guidance
molecules enables the growth cone to invade permissive
* Correspondence: matthias.gesemann@imls.uzh.ch
† Contributed equally
1
Brain Research Institute, University of Zurich and Swiss Federal Institute of
Technology (ETH), Department of Biology, 8057 Zurich, Switzerland
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

areas and grow along specific molecular gradients [1,2].
Long distances are covered by splitting the entire trajectory into smaller segments with intermediate targets [3].
Such intermediate targets, also called choice points, mark
the end of one segment and the beginning of another. At
choice points the growth cone morphology as well as the
axonal trajectory change dramatically, often leading to
temporary stalling and a decrease in growth rate [4].
Choice points have first been described in invertebrates
such as grasshopper or Drosophila, where these intermediate targets are represented by specific cells called guidepost cells, whose ablation leads to axon stalling and missprojections [3].

© 2011 Joset et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Joset et al. Neural Development 2011, 6:22
http://www.neuraldevelopment.com/content/6/1/22

One of the best studied choice points in vertebrates is
the ventral midline, where specialized cells called floorplate cells selectively regulate axon crossing in bilaterally
symmetric animals [2,5]. While some axons are attracted
by the floor plate, others are selectively repelled. Cell
populations whose axons are attracted by the floor plate
are dorsolateral commissural interneurons (dI1 and dI2)
[2]. Upon reaching the midline, commissural axons
cross the floor plate to reach the contralateral side,
where they turn orthogonally into the longitudinal axis,
growing either along the floor-plate or extending laterally to join the ventral or lateral funiculus [2,6,7].
The role of the floor-plate as an important choice point
for commissural axons has been clearly demonstrated in
several studies [8-10]. The floor-plate-derived molecule
netrin-1 was identified as the major chemoattractant for
dorsolaterally located commissural axons [8]. Inactivation
of either netrin-1 or its receptor, DCC (Deleted in colorectal cancer), causes severe miss-projections of commissural axons, leaving only few axons reaching the midline
correctly [8,9]. No axons reached the midline when
netrin-1 -/- mice were treated with the Shh inhibitor
cyclopamine, demonstrating a role of Shh not only as a
morphogen but also as a guidance molecule that cooperates with the chemoattractant netrin-1 [10].
While both netrin-1 and Shh are responsible for attracting commissural axons towards the ventral midline, other
short-range guidance cues and adhesion molecules govern
midline crossing. The best-studied molecules in this context are cell adhesion molecules of the immunoglobulin
superfamily, such as axonin-1/TAG-1, NgCAM/L1,
NrCAM, nectins and SynCAMs/Nectin-like molecules
(Necls) [11-13]. Axonin-1 is highly expressed by commissural interneurons, whereas NrCAM, Nectin3, and SynCAM2/Necl3 are strongly up-regulated in floor-plate cells
during the period of axonal midline crossing. Direct evidence for a role of these molecules in commissural axon
outgrowth came from in vivo perturbation assays demonstrating that, in the absence of axonin-1/NrCAM, heterophilic nectin or heterophilic SynCAM interactions, axons
either failed to enter and cross the floor plate or had problems turning into the longitudinal axis [11-13].
Aberrant pathfinding at the ventral midline was also
found when ephrinB/EphB signalling was perturbed
[14,15] or in the absence of F-spondin function [16].
While F-spondin seemed to regulate the turning angle of
commissural axons, the morphogens Shh and Wnt were
shown to be required for post-crossing commissural
axon guidance [17-19]. In the mouse, Wnt4 is expressed
in a decreasing anterior-to-posterior gradient in the floor
plate and attracts post-crossing commissural axons rostrally in a Frizzled3-dependent manner [17]. Shh was
found to be expressed in an opposite gradient, with the
highest expression levels in the caudal spinal cord.

Page 2 of 16

In vivo loss- and gain-of-function studies demonstrated
that Shh was required for the correct navigation of postcrossing commissural axons in the chicken spinal cord
and that this effect was mediated by hedgehog-interacting protein (Hhip) [18]. Intriguingly, in chicken, Wnts
were not expressed in a gradient along the anteroposterior axis. Rather, a Wnt activity gradient was formed by
the graded expression of the Wnt antagonist Sfrp1
(secreted frizzled related protein 1), which was shaped by
Shh [19]. Both a Wnt activity gradient and a Shh expression gradient provide directional information for postcrossing commissural axons. However, it is less clear
whether they also affect neurite elongation directly. Interestingly, Avraham and colleagues [20] have recently
shown that the axons of contralaterally and ipsilaterally
projecting dI1 interneurons intermingle during longitudinal growth, suggesting that adhesive interaction between
different fascicles might be a driving force for longitudinal growth.
Recently, we have isolated two novel cell adhesion molecules of the immunoglobulin superfamily, called MDGA1
and MDGA2, which are exclusively expressed in the peripheral and central nervous system [21]. Rat MDGA1
shows high expression levels in developing dI1 interneurons, whereas rat MDGA2 is predominantly expressed in
spinal motoneurons and some subpopulations of spinal
interneurons [21]. In chicken, MDGA1 has been shown to
be highly expressed in motoneurons and in the floor plate
[22]. In contrast to the rat counterpart, expression of
chicken MDGA1 in commissural interneurons is rather
low and can be observed only at later stages, raising the
question of whether some functions of the mammalian
MDGA1 are covered by the MDGA2 homolog in chicken.
In order to study MDGA2 function in vivo, we have
cloned the chicken MDGA2 ortholog. Chicken MDGA2
RNA is highly expressed in commissural interneurons and
dorsal root ganglia (DRG) neurons. Using RNA interference (RNAi) and function-blocking antibodies, we were
able to show that MDGA2 plays a crucial role in the
growth of commissural axons along the longitudinal axis,
suggesting that MDGA2 is required for axonal elongation,
whereas Wnt and Shh signalling controls the growth
direction of commissural axons after midline crossing.

Results
With the development of in ovo RNAi as a tool for specific gene silencing, the chicken embryo became a powerful
system to study gene function during development [23].
We thus decided to use the chicken embryo for studies
addressing MDGA function. Database searches indicated
that the chicken genome, as observed for other vertebrate
species, contains two MDGA genes. The domain organization of the chicken MDGA proteins is identical to that
of the corresponding rat ortholog: six immunoglobulin

Joset et al. Neural Development 2011, 6:22
http://www.neuraldevelopment.com/content/6/1/22

C-2 type repeats are combined with a fibronectin type III
repeat and a MAM domain. Amplification of MDGA2
resulted in the identification of two different cDNA transcripts. One transcript shows an identical organization to
rat MDGA2, and the other transcript has an insertion of
48 bp at position 2,032. Conservation between chicken
and rat MDGAs is in the range 80% to 90%, suggesting
that rat and chicken proteins might have conserved functions. For more details on the conservation and the phylogenetic relation of MDGAs, see Additional files 1 and 2.
MDGA2 transcripts are highly expressed in spinal
interneurons

As MDGA1 expression in the spinal cord during the
period of commissural axon outgrowth has recently
been described [22], we decided to focus our attention
on the expression of MDGA2. In contrast to chicken
MDGA1, which is not or only weakly expressed by dorsally located dI1 commissural interneurons, MDGA2
transcripts could be readily detected in this neuronal
subpopulation (white asterisk in Figure 1, stage 22; for
information on chicken stages see [24]; for details on
the identity of commissural interneurons see Additional

Page 3 of 16

file 3). Expression started as early as stage 22, when dorsal commissural axons had just entered the floor plate.
Expression was up-regulated by stage 24, the age at
which commissural axons made a sharp turn into the
longitudinal axis. Expression levels in commissural interneurons remained high until stage 28 but dropped significantly by stage 30. In addition to the expression
observed in dI1 interneurons, MDGA2 transcripts could
also be observed in other interneuron subpopulations,
such as dI3 and more ventrally located V1 interneurons
(arrows in Figure 1), motoneurons as well as DRG neurons. At stage 36, MDGA2 expression in spinal interneurons was no longer detected, but could still be seen
in some motoneurons (arrowheads in Figure 1), boundary cap cells (arrows in Figure 1) and very strongly in
DRG neurons.
MDGA2 is present on growth cones and neurites of
commissural and dorsal root ganglia neurons

As a tool for our analysis, we raised peptide antibodies
against different MDGA2 epitopes (Figure 2A). Two of
the three peptides were designed in regions of immunoglobulin folds and one peptide was located within the

Figure 1 Expression of MDGA2 mRNA in the chicken spinal cord. Cross-sections of lumbosacral chicken spinal cords were incubated with
Dig-labelled MDGA2 antisense RNA and the resulting RNA complexes were visualized using AP-conjugated anti-Dig antibodies. At stage 20,
expression is mainly restricted to boundary cap cells at the ventral motor exit points (black asterisks). At stages 24 and 26, MDGA2 mRNA is
clearly detectable in commissural interneurons (white asterisks). Starting at stage 24, transcripts can also be observed in dI6/V0 (white
arrowheads) and ventrally located V1 interneurons (white arrow) and in a subpopulation of DRG neurons. Between stages 24 and 26 a weak
transient expression of MDGA2 transcripts can also be seen in floor-plate cells (FP) and in various interneuron subpopulations. By stage 24,
expression of MDGA2 transcripts become up-regulated in different motoneuron subpopulations. Expression levels of MDGA2 transcripts in the
spinal cord gradually decrease after stage 28, and by stage 36 only expression in DRG neurons and a subpool of motoneurons persists. The
embryonic (Hamburger-Hamilton (HH) stages are indicated. Scale bars represent 200 μm for stages 18 to 26 and 400 μm for stages 28, 32 and
36.

Joset et al. Neural Development 2011, 6:22
http://www.neuraldevelopment.com/content/6/1/22

Page 4 of 16

Figure 2 Peptide antibodies specifically recognize the MDGA2 protein. (A) Structural representation of the MDGA2 protein, with the
different domains and amino acids chosen for immunization indicated. Immunoglobulin (Ig) domains are represented as open circles, the
fibronectin type III repeat (FN3) is depicted as a box and the MAM domain is shown as a hexagonal structure. Two of the peptides used for
immunization are located within Ig domains, the third peptide was generated against an amino acid sequence deriving from the MAM domain.
(B) Demonstration of MDGA2 antibody specificity. Recombinant flag-tagged MDGA2, MDGA1, NrCAM and axonin-1 were separated by SDS-PAGE
and the different proteins were detected by western blotting using either a monoclonal antibody against the flag tag or the newly generated
MDGA2 peptide antibodies. While the flag antibody clearly recognizes all recombinant IgCAMs, the pooled MDGA2 peptide antibodies
specifically recognize the MDGA2 protein. Note that even when loading higher protein concentrations or using much longer exposure times, no
cross-reactivity of the MDGA2 peptide antibodies with other IgCAMs could be detected.

MAM domain. The specificity of the antibodies was
tested on a variety of flag-tagged IgCAM ectodomain
fusion proteins, including MDGA2, MDGA1, NrCAM
and axonin-1. Conditioned media derived from transfected 293T cells contained the expected recombinant
tagged proteins as shown by western blotting with flagspecific antibodies (Figure 2B). The MDGA2 peptide
antibodies only gave a signal in the lane containing
MDGA2, indicating that the antisera did not cross-react
with the tested IgCAM superfamily members (Figure
2B). When a full-length MDGA2 amino-terminal flag
tagged construct was transfected into COS7 cells, a specific surface staining could be detected, suggesting that
MDGA2 was indeed present on the surface of transfected cells, either as a glycophosphatidylinositol (GPI)linked molecule or as a transmembrane variant (for
details on surface staining and GPI anchor prediction
see Additional file 4).

Western blot analysis of protein extracts isolated from
stage 30 DRG identified a single band with a molecular
weight of 135 kDa, demonstrating that our peptide antibodies also recognized native MDGA2 protein (Figure 3F).
MDGA2 peptide antibodies stained neurites as well as
growth cones of dissociated dorsal commissural interneurons (Figure 3A) as well as DRG neurons (Figure 3D,E). A
similar pattern was found with the dorsal commissural
neuron marker axonin-1 (Figure 3B).
Down-regulation of MDGA2 causes pathfinding errors of
commissural axons

To test whether MDGA2 is indeed involved in axonal
growth and/or guidance, we performed RNAi-mediated
knockdown experiments in commissural interneurons
(Figure 4). In open-book preparations of stage 26
embryos commissural interneurons were labelled with
DiI. Trajectories of dorsolateral commissural axons in

Joset et al. Neural Development 2011, 6:22
http://www.neuraldevelopment.com/content/6/1/22

Page 5 of 16

Figure 3 MDGA2 is expressed on the surface of commissural interneurons and dorsal root ganglia neurons. (A-C) Immunolabelling of
dissociated dorsal commissural axons. Cultured dorsal commissural neurons express MDGA2 (A,A’) as well as the dorsal commissural marker
axonin-1 (B,B’) on their surface. The position of the cell body is indicated by the asterisk. The growth cone as well as the axonal shaft (A’,B’) are
strongly labelled in both cases whereas a control staining with the secondary antibody only (C’) did not yield any labelling. (A’,B’) Higher
magnification images of the axon shaft and growth cone of the neuron seen in (A,B), whereas (C) shows a phase contrast image of the neuron
stained with the secondary antibody only (C’). (D,E) Immunolabelling of sensory neurons in culture. While immunostaining using MDGA2
peptide antibodies results in bright labelling of sensory growth cones (D, arrowheads), neuronal shafts are less intensely labelled. (E) Higher
magnification image of a sensory growth cone. Note that not only the central part of the growth cone is stained with MDGA2 antibodies but
also the extending filopodia. Scale bars: 10 μm in (A-C,E); 100 μm in (D). (F) Western blot analysis of DRG extracts using MDGA2 peptide
antibodies. A band of around 135 kDa can be seen in protein extracts from stage 30 DRGs separated by SDS-PAGE and visualized using MDGA2
peptide antibodies.

control-injected embryos expressing yellow fluorescent
protein (YFP) were indistinguishable from non-injected
controls (Figure 4C, D). The YFP expression pattern
demonstrated that the electroporation efficiency was
very high, as brightly labelled YFP-positive cells could
be easily detected in the electroporated half of the
spinal cord (Figure 4E). In contrast to non-injected and
YFP plasmid-injected embryos, embryos injected and
electroporated with double-stranded RNA (dsRNA)
derived from different regions of the MDGA2 message
showed aberrant commissural axon growth (Figure 4F,
G). No such change in commissural axon outgrowth
was observed when dsRNA for MDGA1 was electroporated into the dorsolateral part of the spinal cord (Additional file 5). Electroporation of MDGA2 dsRNA
resulted in downregulation of its mRNA on the targeted

side to 28.9 ± 8.0% when compared to the unelectroporated side (for details see Material and methods). While
the circumferential growth towards, as well as their
entry into, the floor plate seemed to be unaffected by
MDGA2 knockdown, both floor-plate exit and especially
growth along the anteroposterior axis were clearly disturbed (Figures 4 and 5). Interestingly, this phenotype
was quite different from the ones observed when axonin-1, NgCAM or NrCAM were downregulated by
dsRNA ([23] and data not shown). In embryos treated
with dsRNA derived from MDGA2 about 25% of the
commissural axons were unable to reach the contralateral side and stalled within the floor plate. More importantly, the axons that made it to the contralateral side
displayed no growth along the longitudinal axis (Figures
4 and 5).

Joset et al. Neural Development 2011, 6:22
http://www.neuraldevelopment.com/content/6/1/22

Page 6 of 16

Figure 4 Down-regulation of MDGA2 causes pathfinding errors of commissural axons. (A) Schematic diagram of the time course of
commissural axon pathfinding. Note that midline crossing occurs between stages 22 and 24, and rostral axon turning is initiated around stage
24. (B) Schematic drawing of a stage 26 open-book preparation. The red circle represents the DiI injection site labelling cell bodies of
dorsolateral commissural neurons and their axons. (C,D) Confocal images of DiI-injected open-book preparations of an untreated control embryo
(C) and an embryo injected and electroporated with a YFP control plasmid (D). Note that in both cases commissural axons make a sharp turn
upon leaving the midline area and grow rostrally along the longitudinal axis of the spinal cord. The area between the dashed lines indicates the
location of the floor-plate. (E) Electroporation efficiency with YFP. An embryo electroporated with a YFP-plasmid was imaged with
epifluorescence. (F,G) RNAi knockdown experiments in which embryos were co-injected with long dsRNA and a YFP expression plasmid. Two
independent, non-overlapping fragments were used to produce long dsRNA. Numbers in parentheses indicate the cDNA sequences used to
produce dsRNA. Ipsilateral electroporation resulted in a slightly reduced number of axons reaching the contralateral side and a lack of growth of
commissural axons along the longitudinal axis. Identical defects were seen with both dsRNA fragments. (H,I) A similar phenotype was observed
when MDGA2 peptide antibodies (Ab) were injected into the central canal of stage 20 chicken embryos (H), whereas normal axon growth was
seen in embryos injected with a control IgG (I). Scale bars: 100 μm.

The phenotype observed after MDGA2 knockdown
could be phenocopied when MDGA2 antibodies were
injected into the central canal (Figure 4H). As observed
for the RNAi experiments, injections of MDGA2 antibodies did not affect the circumferential growth of

commissural axons nor did they prevent them from
crossing the midline (Figures 4 and 5). However, as seen
after RNAi-mediated knockdown of MDGA2, postcrossing commissural axons of embryos treated with
MDGA2 antibodies did not turn into the longitudinal

Joset et al. Neural Development 2011, 6:22
http://www.neuraldevelopment.com/content/6/1/22

Page 7 of 16

Figure 5 Quantification of commissural axon outgrowth defects after perturbation of MDGA2 function by RNAi and antibody
injection. (A) Schematic representation of the areas used to measure fluorescence intensities in control, RNAi and antibody (Ab)-treated
embryos. A, ipsilateral; B, floor plate; C, floor-plate exit; D, rostral longitudinal axis; E, caudal turn; F, no turn; G, 45° turn; H, -45° turn. Background
fluorescence (A’, B’, C’...) at corresponding locations were subtracted from the values obtained at the different measurement sites (A, B, C....). The
table shows the normalized intensities, with Atot (A - A’) of the control situation set as the reference value (100; for details see Materials and
methods). Note that the fluorescent intensities (at sites B, C, D...) for all experimental conditions are adjusted by the same factor as calculated by
the normalization at the site Atot. (B) Data obtained by measurements of fluorescence intensity are presented as histograms to indicate the
percentages of fluorescence intensity at particular locations. Values for control embryos were set to 100% at each of the analyzed sites. While in
all analyzed conditions commissural axons were able to enter the floor plate (B, left panel), in MDGA2 RNAi-treated, as well as in embryos
injected with the MDGA2 antibody fewer axons exited at the contralateral site (B, middle panel). The strongest difference between control and
experimental animals was seen in commissural axon growth along the longitudinal axis, with only 15 to 30% of the axons extending rostrally
after perturbation of MDGA2 function (B, right panel). While the effect on commissural axon stalling in the floor plate was not statistically
significant, the lack of commissural axon growth along the longitudinal axis was highly significant (***P < 0.005; standard t-test). Error bars are
given as standard errors (SEM).

axis. The majority of the axons stalled at the floor-plate
exit site. In contrast to embryos treated with MDGA2
antibodies, embryos injected with IgG control antibodies
did not show any perturbation of commissural axon
growth, demonstrating that high concentrations of IgGs
diffusing from the central canal did not influence axonal
growth and pathfinding of commissural neurons unspecifically (Figure 4I).

MDGA2 interacts homophilically

The fact that both RNAi-mediated protein knockdown
as well as antibody perturbation prevented post-crossing commissural axon growth along the longitudinal
axis suggested that MDGA2-mediated interactions
were required for axonal elongation. As IgCAMs often
engage in homophilic interactions [25], we first tested
the self-aggregating activity of MDGA2 in two

Joset et al. Neural Development 2011, 6:22
http://www.neuraldevelopment.com/content/6/1/22

Page 8 of 16

Figure 6 MDGA2 is capable of interacting homophilically. Two independent assays were used to analyze the binding capabilities of MDGA2.
In an aggregation assay, fluorescent beads were coupled with BSA, proteins from conditioned medium of non-transfected cells, recombinant
axonin-1 or recombinant MDGA2 and analyzed for their aggregation behaviour. (A-D) While no aggregates were observed with BSA (A) or
beads coated with proteins released by mock-transfected cells (B), strong aggregation was detected with axonin-1- (C) and MDGA2-coupled
beads (D). (E-G) Similar results were seen when chemical cross-linkers were used to monitor the binding capabilities of these molecules. (E)
Silver staining of gels indicated that, in a concentrated BSA solution, no high molecular weight aggregates were formed in the presence of the
chemical cross-linkers. Crosslinking of conditioned media containing recombinant flag-tagged axonin-1 (F) or flag-tagged MDGA2 (G) resulted in
a molecular weight shift of a substantial part of the detected protein as observed by western blot assays using anti-flag antibodies. In the case
of axonin-1, note that two additional bands are observed in the presence of chemical cross-linkers, indicating that axonin-1 is capable of
forming multimeric complexes.

independent assays. Because IgCAM interactions are
often of low affinity [26], we used a fluorescent bead
aggregation assay as well as chemical cross-linking to
visualize interactions. To test for the efficiency and the
specificity of our methods, we performed a variety of
control experiments, testing the binding properties of
proteins known to exist as monomeric entities as well
as IgCAMs known to form dimers or multimers.
While bovine serum albumin (BSA)-coated beads as
well as beads coated with proteins from conditioned
media of control transfected HEK293T cells did not
form any aggregates (Figure 6A,B), beads coated with
axonin-1 formed large aggregates (Figure 6C). Beads
coated with MDGA2 also resulted in the formation of
large aggregates, indicating that MDGA2 was also capable of mediating homophilic interactions (Figure 6D),
similar to findings for axonin-1. To independently

verify the results seen in the bead aggregation assays,
we used bivalent chemical cross-linkers. While the
addition of chemical cross-linkers did not lead to the
formation of higher molecular weight aggregates in
concentrated BSA suspension (Figure 6E), axonin-1- as
well as MDGA2-containing suspensions did show protein aggregates in the presence of chemical cross-linkers, indicating that these proteins can self aggregate
(Figure 6F,G). As neither of our aggregation assays
could discriminate between interactions occurring in
cis or in trans, we additionally performed cell aggregation assays using cells transfected with full-length
MDGA2. While cell suspensions of cells transfected
with GFP revealed mainly single cells, transfection of
cells with MDGA2 resulted in the formation of larger
cellular aggregates (Additional file 6), demonstrating
that MDGA2 interactions can indeed occur in trans.

Joset et al. Neural Development 2011, 6:22
http://www.neuraldevelopment.com/content/6/1/22

Page 9 of 16

Figure 7 Ipsilaterally and contralaterally projecting tracts co-localise in the ventral funiculus. (A,B) The lipophilic dyes DiI (red) and DiA
(green) were injected into contra- and ipsilaterally projecting neurons, respectively. Subsequently, the tissue was cut into 25-μm thick sections.
Panel (B) represents the plane of dye injection, and the section shown in (C-E) was 100 μm more rostral relative to (B) (schematic drawing in (A)
labels the sections). (C) Post-crossing axons of DiI-labelled dorsal interneurons project in the contralateral ventral funiculus (arrowhead). (D) DiAlabelled ipsilaterally projecting axons are found throughout the ventral funiculus, including the medial part close to the floor plate, where dorsal
interneurons turn into the longitudinal axis (arrowhead). (E) An overlay of contra- and ipsilaterally projecting axons shows that these populations
co-localize in the ventral funiculus (arrowhead). Note that due to the juxtaposition of the dorsal interneurons and the dorsal funiculus, injection
of DiI also stained the longitudinal axonal tracts of the dorsal funiculus (asterisk in (B,C,E)). Ca, caudal; Ro, rostral. Scale bar: 200 μm.

Ipsilaterally and contralaterally projecting axonal tracts
intermingle in the longitudinal axis

Contralateral knockdown of MDGA2 causes similar
turning phenotypes

As MDGA2 was found to be expressed in both contralaterally as well as ipsilaterally (dI1, V1) projecting
interneurons, we tested whether MDGA2-mediated
homophilic interactions would be required for axon
growth along the longitudinal axis. To this end we first
needed to analyze whether V1 ipsilaterally projecting
and dI1 contralaterally projecting interneurons indeed
intermingled in the longitudinal axis. Labelling dorsal
and ventral populations of interneurons with different
dyes (Figure 7A,B) resulted in the staining of contra(DiI, Figure 7C) as well as ipsilaterally located axonal
tracts (DiA, Figure 7D). Double labelling clearly indicated that ipsilateral and contralateral tracts were
indeed overlapping (Figure 7E).

The fact that MDGA2 was able to mediate homophilic
interactions and the finding that longitudinal axon tracts
formed by ipsi- and contralateral projecting axons intermingled in the longitudinal axis raised the question of
whether the growth of commissural axons along the
longitudinal axis depended on homophilic MDGA2
trans-interactions. To test this hypothesis, we performed
knockdown experiments targeting the contralateral
instead of the ipsilateral side. While most commissural
axons were still able to cross the floor plate in embryos
with contralateral MDGA2 knockdown, the growth of
commissural axons along the longitudinal axis was
almost completely abolished (Figure 8A-C). Quantification of the phenotype indicated that less than 15% of

Joset et al. Neural Development 2011, 6:22
http://www.neuraldevelopment.com/content/6/1/22

Page 10 of 16

Figure 8 Down-regulation of MDGA2 on the contralateral side causes phenotypes similar to those seen in ipsilateral knockdowns.
Embryos were injected with either of the two non-overlapping long dsRNA fragments covering the sequences -15 to 1,248 and 1,975 to 2,746,
respectively. Following contralateral electroporation, embryos treated with either fragment did show severe defects in commissural axon growth.
(A,C) While the table (A) gives the fluorescent intensities measured at different locations in control and RNAi-treated embryos (for details see
Figure 4 and Materials and methods), the histogram (C) depicts the normalized fluorescent intensities in percentage of the control. In analogy to
the results seen with ipsilateral electroporations of MDGA2 dsRNA (Figure 4), rostral turning of commissural axons after midline crossing in
contralateral RNAi knockdown embryos is strongly reduced compared to control embryos. (B) Representative confocal pictures of open-book
preparations of embryos after MDGA2 knockdown are shown. Most post-crossing commissural axons stalled at the floor-plate exit site and did
not grow along the longitudinal axis. FP, floor-plate. Error bars given as standard errors (SEM). Scale bar: 100 μm.

the post-crossing commissural axons were able to grow
along the longitudinal axis compared to control embryos
(Figure 8C). The fact that down-regulation of MDGA2
on the contralateral side had such a strong effect on the
growth of dorsal commissural interneurons clearly indicated that homophilic MDGA2 interactions were
required for their proper elongation along the longitudinal axis.

Discussion
Commissural interneurons located in the dorsal part of
the chicken spinal cord send out axons along very specific, highly stereotypic pathways [2]. In the lumbosacral
spinal cord, outgrowth of commissural axons starts as

early as stage 19, and by stage 22 commissural axons
have reached the ventral midline and start crossing it
[5]. By stage 25, most commissural axons have turned
into the longitudinal axis and extend rostrally within the
ventral funiculus before deviating from the ventral midline to join more dorsally located fibre tracts. Our
experiments have shown that MDGA2 is strongly
expressed in pre- as well as post-crossing commissural
axons and that RNAi-mediated knockdown and antibody perturbation causes severe pathfinding defects in
commissural axons.
However, knockdown of MDGA2 did not influence
axon outgrowth towards the floor plate, nor did it cause
obvious axon stalling at the ipsilateral side. Commissural

Joset et al. Neural Development 2011, 6:22
http://www.neuraldevelopment.com/content/6/1/22

Page 11 of 16

Figure 9 Mechanism of commissural axon growth and guidance after midline crossing. Schematic drawings of the commissural axon
trajectory under various experimental conditions. Dorsally located commissural interneurons are depicted in red, whereas ipsilaterally projecting
interneurons are shown in green. Wnt (dark green) and Shh (light red) gradients are indicated. Expression sites for MDGA2 are highlighted by the
plus signs. Areas of MDGA2 knockdown are indicated by the yellow striped regions. (A) Under control conditions commissural axons turn
rostrally to grow along the longitudinal axis towards the brain. (B) In embryos lacking rostrocaudal activity gradients of the guidance cues Wnt4
or Shh, commissural axons either stall or turn randomly either rostrally or caudally. (C,D) Ipsilateral knockdown of MDGA2 prevents commissural
axonal growth along the longitudinal axis (C), a phenotype also seen after contralateral knockdown of MDGA2 (D). FP, floor-plate.

axons stalled at the floor-plate exit site and growth
along the anteroposterior axis was completely abolished
after MDGA2 knockdown or antibody perturbation. In
contrast to the pathfinding defects seen after perturbation of Wnt and Shh signalling, the phenotype obtained
after perturbation of MDGA2 may reflect the failure of
post-crossing commissural axons to grow. In contrast to
the guidance effect mediated by opposing gradients of
Shh and Wnt, MDGA2-mediated commissural axon
growth seems to be based on an entirely different
mechanism. The fact that MDGA2 was able to form
homophilic interactions and that MDGA2 knockdown
on the contralateral side resulted in commissural axon
stalling after midline crossing suggests that ipsilaterally
projecting axons serve as a substrate for commissural
axons to elongate (Figure 9). In accordance with this
model, ventrolaterally located ipsilaterally projecting
interneurons express high levels of MDGA2 transcripts
between stages 24 and 26 (Figure 1). Therefore,
MDGA2 might exert its growth-promoting effect by
mediating fasciculation of post-crossing commissural
axons with early established ipsilaterally projecting fibers
[20,27-30]. The fact that we also see the phenotype after
contralateral MDGA2 knockdown suggests that the
observed axon outgrowth defect is not based on a failure
of commissural axons to change their responsiveness to
different guidance cues upon midline crossing, a
mechanism recently suggested for several cases [31,32].
As neither MDGA2 in commissural neurons nor in the
floor plate is targeted in the contralateral knockdown
experiments, such a scenario seems unlikely. Moreover,
the patterning or specification of dI1 neurons should be
unaffected in contralateral MDGA2 knockdowns, as the

unelectroporated side receives no dsRNA that could
alter MDGA2 expression. Instead, a homophilic interaction between MDGA2 is in line with the observation
that the phenotypes after ipsi- and after contralateral
knockdown of MDGA2 are identical.
At this point it is worth mentioning that MDGA2 is
also transiently expressed by floor-plate cells during the
time when commissural axons cross the ventral midline.
This most likely explains how perturbation of MDGA2
function could also interfere with midline crossing of
commissural axons. About 25% of the commissural
axons failed to cross the midline. However, due to the
redundancy of IgCAMs with growth-promoting function,
75% of the axons reached the contralateral side normally.
Previous studies demonstrated a growth-promoting effect
of NrCAM and NgCAM [33]. Like NrCAM, MDGA1 and
MDGA2 are also expressed by floor plate cells [12,34]
(MG and PJ, unpublished observation). Expression of
these molecules may enable commissural axons to enter
and cross the ventral midline area. In this respect it will
be interesting to study the binding properties of MDGA2
in more detail. While we have clearly demonstrated
homophilic interactions between MDGA2 molecules,
heterophilic interaction partners have not yet been identified. Putative candidates might be other members of the
Ig superfamily, especially MDGA1, axonin-1, F11,
NrCAM and NgCAM. Binding sites for MDGA1 within
the developing spinal cord have been studied by Fujimura
and colleagues [22]. Interestingly, MDGA1 binding sites
only partially overlap with MDGA1 or MDGA2 expression sites, suggesting that MDGA1 does not or only
weakly interacts homophilically or heterophilically with
MDGA2. Using chemical cross-linkers we indeed found

Joset et al. Neural Development 2011, 6:22
http://www.neuraldevelopment.com/content/6/1/22

neither homophilic MDGA1 interactions nor did we
observe the formation of MDGA1-MDGA2 heterodimers
(Additional file 7).
While chicken MDGA2 is highly expressed in dorsal
commissural interneurons, its rat counterpart seems to
be absent or only weakly expressed in the corresponding
dI1 interneurons [21]. In rat, however, MDGA1 is highly
expressed in dI1 interneurons, suggesting that functions
might have been shifted between rat and chicken
MDGA1 and MDGA2 during evolution. Such functional
shifts have already been observed for a number of proteins, such as NgCAM/L1 [35] and Wnt proteins [19].
While such species differences might initially lead to
some confusion about protein function, it will ultimately
help to better understand and predict functional divergence between different species, including humans.

Conclusions
An essential mechanism enabling axonal growth is the
generation of neuron-substrate interactions via cell
adhesion molecules. In contralaterally and ipsilaterally
projecting spinal interneurons the cell adhesion molecule MDGA2 is expressed during the period of growth
along the longitudinal axis. Axons of these neuronal
populations intermingle during elongation in the ventral
funiculus. Elongation of dorsal commissural neurons
after midline crossing is impaired when MDGA2 is
knocked down in this neuronal population; a defect that
is phenocopied when MDGA2 is downregulated on the
contralateral side. Hence, for longitudinal growth of
post-crossing commissural axons a homophilic interaction of MDGA2 is required.
Materials and methods
Cloning of chicken MDGA2

Reverse transcription was done on total RNA isolated
from stage 26 spinal cord using either random hexamers
or oligodT primers. A MDGA2 fragment covering the
sequence between 1,966 and 2,541 was amplified using
the following two degenerated primers based on the rat
MDGA-2 sequence: cartggacrcaratgaa (sense) and
tgrtgrccrtacatrtg (antisense).
The 3’ end of MDGA2 was isolated using a PCR
RACE (rapid amplification of cDNA ends) strategy.
Using this strategy, a MDGA2 fragment covering the
area between positions 2,226 and 3,332 could be isolated, having a designated stop codon at position 2,917.
Template cDNA was generated using a specific 3’ RACE
primer (cccgaattctagaagcttctcgag[T]18V). PCR primers
for the first reaction were as follows: gaggcatatgaagtccg
(sense; 2,179 to 2,195) and cccgaattctagaagcttc (antisense) followed by a nested reaction with the sense primer ggactccactattcgggt (2,226 to 2,243).

Page 12 of 16

The 5’ end was cloned by PCR using the sense primer
atgttcatgttcacgtgaagatg (based on the rat sequence) and
specific antisense primer ggagcactatacttgatg (2,244 to
2,261) on a cDNA template that has been reverse transcribed from total RNA isolated from stage 26 spinal
cords with a specific reverse transcription primer,
aggactgacaag, corresponding to sequence 2,491 to 2,502.
The atg sequence given in bold represents the putative
atg start codon.
MDGA2 expression constructs

Expression constructs for soluble (ΔGPI) and full-length
MDGA2 were cloned. An EcoRI restriction site and a
partial Kozak consensus sequence were added at the 5’
site of the sense primer aaaaagaattcaccatggatgtagcgatcggg, allowing easy cloning and optimal expression.
The antisense primer aaaatgcggccgctgatcgtaaattgttggc
contains a Not restriction site at the 5’ end, allowing inframe expression. The resulting PCR fragments were
cloned into the Topo pCR2 vector (TOPO® TA Cloning
kit; Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) and verified by
sequencing. ΔGPI fragments were subcloned in-frame
into the expression vectors pcDNAI or a derivate of
pMES containing either a FLAG tag (Sigma-Aldrich, St
Louis, MO, USA) or a myc tag at the 3’ end. Full length
MDGA2 containing a FLAG tag introduced 3’ of the signal sequence was subcloned into pcDNAI.
In situ hybridization

Linearised templates spanning the MDGA2 sequences 1
to 1,284 and 1,285 to 2,920 were used to obtain Diglabelled sense and antisense RNA probes (DIG RNA
Labelling Kit; Roche Diagnostics GmbH, Mannheim,
Germany) with T3 and T7 RNA polymerase (Roche
Diagnostics).
Chicken embryos were staged as described by Hamburger and Hamilton [24]. Fixation times (4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) fixation) varied between 20 minutes
(stages 14 to 20) and 1 hour (stages 36 and older). Subsequently, tissues were embedded in Tissue-Tek® compound (Sakura Finetek Europe, Zoeterwoude, The
Netherlands), frozen on dry ice and stored at -80°C. Sections cut at a thickness of 25 μm were collected on
SuperFrost Plus slides (Menzel GmbH & Co. KG,
Braunschweig, Germany) and immediately dried for 2 to
4 hours. Sections were hybridized with two RNA probes
for MDGA2 (1 to 1,284; 1,285 to 2,920) using previously
published protocols [36]. After hybridization, sections
were developed in colouring solution (240 μg/ml levamisole, 35 μg/ml nitro blue tetrazolium, 17.5 μg/ml 5bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl phosphate in TBS buffer) in
the dark until the desired intensity of reaction product
was achieved.

Joset et al. Neural Development 2011, 6:22
http://www.neuraldevelopment.com/content/6/1/22

Dorsal root ganglia outgrowth

DRGs from stage 30 chicken were dissected and placed
on polylysine-coated dishes and incubated at 37°C for 2
to 3 days in growth medium (DMEM/F12, 10% FCS,
0.36% methocel solution, AraC, 100 ng/ml nerve growth
factor (NGF), 50 μg/ml gentamycin).
Immunohistochemistry

DRGs were fixed in 4% PFA for 15 minutes and subsequently incubated for 30 minutes in PBS containing 2%
goat serum and 0.2% fish skin gelatine. MDGA2 peptide
antibodies were added for 1 h at room temperature following several wash steps with PBS and the application
of the secondary antibody for 30 minutes.
Dissociated commissural neurons

The dorsal most 25% of stage 26 spinal cords were dissected. After trypsin treatment and trituration, the dissociated neurons were cultured on polylysine-coated (10
μg/ml;Sigma) eight-well LabTek slides (Nalgene-Nunc,
Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rochester, NY 14625, USA) for
24 h in growth medium (MEM with GlutaMAX-I (Invitrogen), 1 mM pyruvate, 4 mg/ml Albumax (Invitrogen),
N3 (100 μg/ml transferring, 10 μg/ml insulin, 20 ng/ml
triiodothyronine, 40 nM progesterone, 200 ng/ml corticosterone, 200 μM putrescine, 60 nM sodium selenite;
reagents from Sigma). Cells were fixed with 4% PFA for
15 minutes, washed in PBS and blocked in PBS containing 10% FCS for 20 minutes. The cells were subsequently
incubated with the primary antibodies (rabbit anti-axonin-1, rabbit anti-MDGA2) in 10% FCS/PBS for 90 minutes and washed several times with PBS. After incubation
with the secondary antibody (goat anti-rabbit-Cy3; Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories, Inc., West Grove, PA
19390, USA), the cells were washed well in PBS and subsequently analyzed by confocal microscopy.
Real-time PCR

Total RNA was isolated from the electroporated and the
unelectroporated side of stage 26 MDGA2 knockdown
embryos and reverse transcribed using oligodT primers.
Real-time PCR was performed with two different sets of
MDGA2 primers amplifying the regions 826 to 995 and
2,436 to 2,607 and one primer pair for an actin control
(916 to 1,089) as well as a GAPDH control (770 to 880).
Amplification of a MDGA1 fragment (2,439 to 2,584) on
the above described cDNAs was used to demonstrate the
specificity of the MDGA2 downregulation (MDGA1 levels
in the MDGA2 dsRNA electroporated side were 91.8 ±
6.3% compared to the control non-electroporated side).
Binding studies

Transfection of HEK293T cells was done using the PolyFect transfection reagent (Qiagen GmbH, 40724 Hilden,

Page 13 of 16

Germany) according to the manufacturer’s instruction.
Serum-free conditioned media containing recombinant
MDGA2 carrying either a flag or a myc tag were concentrated to approximately 20 μg/ml using the Centricon centrifugation device (Milipore-Amicon, Billerica,
MA 01821, USA). Chemical cross-linkers (bis(sulfosuccinimidyl) suberate, ethylene glycolbis(sulfosuccinimidylsuccinate), 3,3’-dithiobis(sulfosuccinimidylproprionate))
were added at a ten-fold molar excess (in respect to the
present free amino groups) and incubated at room temperature for 30 minutes. The reaction was terminated
by adding 10 mM Tris-buffered saline and the formed
protein complexes were analyzed by western blot. Beads
(Fluorosbrite PolyFluor Microspheres; Polysciences, Inc.,
Warrington, PA 18976, USA) were coupled according to
the manufacturer’s instructions with either BSA or conditioned medium containing different forms of recombinant MDGA2. Prior to the aggregation, assay beads
were briefly sonicated. Aggregation was performed in a
rotating shaker for exactly 30 minutes and the formed
aggregates were immediately analysed by fluorescent
microscopy.
Long double-stranded RNA synthesis

Two long dsRNA fragments covering different parts of
the designated cDNA sequence (-15 to 1,248 and 1,975
to 2,746) were used to down-regulate MDGA2 functions. Linearised plasmids containing the different fragments were transcribed with T3 or T7 polymerase
according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Roche Diagnostics). Following transcription, the plasmid DNA was
digested with RNase-free DNase for 1 h. Single-stranded
RNA molecules were then extracted once with phenolchloroform-isoamylalcohol (25:24:1; pH 4.5) and once
with chloroform-isoamylalcohol (24:1) before precipitating with ethanol. Equal amounts of sense and antisense
RNA were mixed, heated for 5 minutes to 95°C and
subsequently allowed to cool down to room temperature
overnight. Formation of dsRNA was confirmed by nondenaturing agarose gel electrophoresis.
In ovo RNAi and antibody injection

Hisex chicken embryos obtained from a local supplier
were used according to regulations of the Veterinäramt
des Kantons Zürich. Electroporation was done as
described previously [23]. Between 0.1 and 0.5 μl
dsRNA (300 ng/μl) mixed with a YFP control plasmid
(20 ng/μl) and Trypan Blue (0.04% v/v; Invitrogen) were
injected into the central canal of 3-day-old chick
embryos (stages 18 to 20) using glass capillaries. Five
pulses of 50-ms duration at 25 V were given using platinum electrodes (BTX, Genetronics, San Diego, CA,
USA) of 4 mm length with a distance of 4 mm between
anode and cathode. MDGA2 antibodies were raised

Joset et al. Neural Development 2011, 6:22
http://www.neuraldevelopment.com/content/6/1/22

against three different peptides whose sequences are
indicated in Figure 2A. A standard immunisation protocol offered by Eurogentec was used for the antibody
production (Eurogentec, 4102 Seraing, Belgium). Antibodies from the final bleed were affinity purified against
the corresponding peptides. Peptide antibodies against
MDGA2 (3 to 5 μg/μl) were injected into the central
canal of stage 18 chicken embryos as previously
described [12]. For control injections, purified IgGs
from non-immunized rabbit were used at identical
concentrations.
Tracing of contra- and ipsilateral axons

Five-day-old chicken embryos were decapitated and
fixed in 4% PFA/1× PBS for 1.5 h at room temperature.
A 2-mm thick transverse section of the embryo (at the
lumbar level of the spinal cord) was injected with lipophilic dye (FastDiI and FastDiA, 5 mg/ml in methanol;
Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR, USA) at the caudal surface as indicated in Figure 7A. Sections were cryoprotected overnight with 25% sucrose in 0.1 M sodium
phosphate buffer (pH 7.4), embedded in OCT TissueTek and frozen on dry ice. For analysis, the tissue was
cut into 25-μm thick sections on a cryostat (Leica
CM1850).
DiI injection

Open-book preparations of stage 26 chicken spinal
cords were prepared as described previously [37]. Briefly,
FastDiI (Molecular Probes) at a concentration of 5 mg/
ml was injected into the region of dorsally located interneurons. After 2 days of incubation to allow for the diffusion of the dye, spinal cords were mounted in PBS
between coverslips and analyzed by confocal microscopy. Confocal sections were taken with a step size of
approximately 0.6 μm for a maximal projection of
approximately 50 μm.
Phenotype quantification

Fluorescence intensities at different locations along the
trajectory of commissural axons (see schematic representation in Figure 5: A, ipsilateral; B, floor plate; C,
floor-plate exit; D, rostral longitudinal axis; E, caudal
turn; F, no turn; G, 45° turn; H, -45° turn) were quantified using the NIH ImageJ program [38]. Background
fluorescence levels A’ to H’ at corresponding locations
were subtracted from the values obtained at the different sites of measurement (Atot (A - A’), Btot (B - B’)...).
The raw data are given in the table in Figure 5A. Subsequently, fluorescence intensities were normalized to the
control values, with the control representing 100% at
each given location. Injection sites (n between 40 and
60) were quantified using the program Prism 4 (GraphPad Software Inc., La Jolla, CA 92037, USA) and the

Page 14 of 16

obtained data were converted into a histogram (Figure
5B) showing the percentage of commissural axon intensity being present at particular locations compared to
control values (floor-plate, floor-plate exit, rostral turn).

Additional material
Additional file 1: Conservation and phylogenetic relation of MDGA
transcript and protein sequences. MDGA sequences used for
comparisons and phylogenetic analysis were manually annotated, using
combined information from EST and genome databases (GeneBank and
Ensembl, version 50/51, 2008). Human and mouse sequences were used
as initial query (for more details on sequences annotation see [39]).
Transcript and protein sequences of MDGAs were pair-wise aligned using
the blast two sequences program. (A) Comparison between human (hs),
mouse (mm) and chicken (gg) MDGA protein sequences. The percentage
of identical amino acids between species is given in bold numbers,
whereas the percentage of conserved amino acids is given in
parentheses. Conservation between orthologs is highlighted in green,
whereas conservation between MDGA1 and MDGA2 is given in red. (B)
Comparison between coding sequence of human (hs), mouse (mm) and
chicken (gg) MDGAs. The percentage of identical nucleotides between
the sequences is given. Conservation between orthologs is highlighted
in green, whereas conservation between MDGA1 and MDGA2 is shown in
red. (C) Phylogeny of MDGA proteins. In order to cover a broad
spectrum of different species, three mammalian (hs, Homo sapiens; mm,
Mus musculus; rn, Rattus norvegicus), one marsupial (md, Monodelphis
domestica), two avian (tg, Taeniopygia guttata; gg, Gallus gallus), one
reptilian (ac, Anolis carolinensis) and one amphibian (xt, Xenopus tropicalis)
species were used. As an outgroup to root the tree, an MDGA homolog
found in Ciona intestinalis was included. Sequences were aligned using
MUSCLE [40]. A conserved stretch of 809 amino acids determined by the
program Gblocks [41] was used for phylogenetic reconstruction. The
phylogenetic tree was built using the maximum likelihood method with
the WAG amino acid replacement matrix. The approximate likelihood
ratio test (aLRT) was used to judge branch reliability. aLRT values above
0.5 are shown. Avian proteins are shown in red. The scale bar represents
the percentage (0.3 equals 30%) of amino acid substitutions required to
generate the corresponding tree. For more details on phylogenetic
analysis and the programs used, see [39].
Additional file 2: Fasta formats of MDGA proteins. Amino acid
sequences of the different MDGA proteins. Positions denoted as ‘Xs’
represent unknown amino acids that could not be deduced from the
corresponding genome or EST database as these sequence stretches
were not yet covered.
Additional file 3: MDGA2 is expressed in dI1 and additional
interneuron subpopulations. (A) Schematic drawing of a cross-section
through the chicken spinal cord. The red square represents the section
of the spinal cord depicted in B,C,E,F. (B,C,E,F) In situ hybridisations for
MDGA2 and the commissural marker LHX2 were performed on
consecutive cryosections of stage 24 (B,C) and stage 26 (E,F) chicken
spinal cords. At both stages MDGA2 is expressed in LHX2-positive cells
(arrowheads), confirming the expression of MDGA2 in commissural dI1
interneurons. Note that MDGA2 is also highly expressed in more ventrally
located interneurons, which are not stained with LHX2. (D) At stage 26,
LHX2-positive cells at the dorsal border of the spinal cord also co-localise
with cells expressing the MDGA2 protein.
Additional file 4: MDGAs are predicted GPI-anchored proteins and
recombinant chicken MDGA2 is present on the surface. (A) GPIanchor prediction. MDGA sequences were analyzed using the PredGPI
predictor [42]. Sequences of chicken, human and rat MDGA proteins
were used. For all six sequences, a putative GPI-anchor was predicted,
with the highest probabilities for rat MDGA1, human MDGA2 and mouse
MDGA2. The lowest probability was seen in chicken MDGA1. Predicted
omega-site positions (position after which cleavage of the polypeptide
chain occurs) are highlighted in red and the specificity of GPI anchor
attachment to this site is shown in green. Similar results were obtained
using the GPI-SOM program [43]. (B) Comparison of the putative GPI-

Joset et al. Neural Development 2011, 6:22
http://www.neuraldevelopment.com/content/6/1/22

anchoring sequences of the MDGA proteins to membrane dipeptidase
(MDP). When compared with the GPI anchoring sequence of MDP
[44,45], MDGAs share the anchoring characteristics. The ω-site is followed
by a spacer region and a hydrophobic stretch. The different regions are
indicated. (C) Recombinant full-length MDGA2 is targeted to the cell
membrane. Live stainings on cells transfected with a full-length MDGA2
flag-tagged construct resulted in surface staining with anti-flag
antibodies, whereas cells transfected with a construct lacking the
putative GPI anchoring sequence showed no staining. Anti-actin
antibodies did not stain living cells. In permeabilised cells anti-flag
staining resulted in a typical endoplasmic reticulum/Golgi staining with
either MDGA2 construct, demonstrating that these constructs are
processed in the secretory pathway. Under these conditions, cytoskeletal
actin staining can also be observed with anti-actin antibodies. Note that
the cell density in both cultures is identical, but that only around 20% of
the cells were transfected with the MDGA2 full-length or MDGA2ΔGPI
plasmids. For the live staining pre-cooled cells were incubated with the
primary antibody in culture medium for 30 minutes at 4°C. The antibody
was washed away with culture medium and the cells were fixed in PFA
for 30 minutes at 4°C. After several wash steps in PBS the cell were
incubated with secondary antibody, washed again and imaged with a
fluorescent microscope. For the permeabilised conditions cells were fixed
and permeabilised using triton before adding the primary antibody.
Additional file 5: RNAi-mediated knockdown of MDGA1 had no
effect on commissural axon pathfinding. (A) Electroporation of
MDGA1 dsRNA into the dorsolateral spinal cord did not alter the growth
pattern of dI1 commissural interneurons. Numbers in parentheses
indicate the cDNA sequence of MDGA1 used to produce dsRNA. Scale
bars: 100 μm.
Additional file 6: Homophilic MDGA2 interactions can be mediated
via trans aggregation. Cell aggregation assays were performed in
suspensions of COS7 cells. In these assays 3.5-cm dishes of adherent
COS7 cells (60 to 70% confluence) were transfected with either GFP
containing plasmid (0.7 μg/dish) or MDGA2 full-length constructs (3.5 μg/
dish). After 36 h cells were treated with Trypsin/EDTA and the detached
cells were re-suspended in 2 ml of cell culture medium (DMEM, 10%
FCS) and incubated in a horizontally stored 50-ml Falcon tube for 45
minutes. Subsequently, cell suspensions were titurated and kept in
culture under mild shaking conditions for another 10 minutes. After this
period an aliquot was removed and the formation of cellular aggregates
was analysed in a Neubauer chamber. (A,B) While in cell suspensions of
cells transfected with full-length MDGA2 large cellular aggregates could
be observed (A,A’), GFP-transfected COS7 cells were mainly single cell
suspensions (B,B’). As membrane associated cell adhesion molecules are
oriented at the cell surface, the formation of cellular aggregates is an
indication for a trans-interaction of MDGA2. (B,B’) Phase contrast pictures
overlaid with GFP fluorescence (bright cells). Note that transfection
efficiency is in the range of 70% but under the depicted condition only
cells expressing high levels of GFP could be detected. Scale bar: 50 μm.
Additional file 7: MDGA1 and MDGA2 do not interact
heterophilically. Western blot analysis using anti myc antibodies. (A)
The addition of cross-linkers to serum free conditioned media containing
recombinant myc-tagged MDGA1ΔGPI did not lead to higher molecular
weight aggregates, suggesting that MDGA1 does not interact
homophilically. (B) The combination of myc-tagged MDGA1ΔGPI with
flag-tagged MDGA2ΔGPI also did not reveal any higher molecular weight
aggregates when stained with myc antibodies, indicating that MDGA1
also forms no heterophilic interactions with MDGA2.

Abbreviations
bp: base pair; BSA: bovine serum albumin; DMEM: Dulbecco’s modified
Eagle’s medium; DRG: dorsal root ganglia; dsRNA: double-stranded RNA; EST:
expressed sequence tag; FCS: foetal calf serum; GFP: green fluorescent
protein; GPI: glycophosphatidylinositol; Necl: Nectin-like; PBS: phosphatebuffered saline; PFA: paraformaldehyde; RNAi: RNA interference; Shh: Sonic
hedgehog; YFP: yellow fluorescent protein.

Page 15 of 16

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Swiss National Science Foundation, TH
Research Grants from the ETH Zurich and the EMDO Foundation Zurich.
Author details
1
Brain Research Institute, University of Zurich and Swiss Federal Institute of
Technology (ETH), Department of Biology, 8057 Zurich, Switzerland. 2Institute
of Molecular Life Sciences, University of Zurich, Winterthurerstrasse 190, CH8057 Zurich, Switzerland.
Authors’ contributions
PJ, RB, AW, EI, IA, ES and MG carried out experiments and read and
approved the final version of the manuscript. PJ, AW and MG analyzed the
data and prepared the final figures. MG conceived the study and wrote the
manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 26 October 2010 Accepted: 4 May 2011
Published: 4 May 2011
References
1. Chilton JK: Molecular mechanisms of axon guidance. Dev Biol 2006, 292:13-24.
2. Kaprielian Z, Runko E, Imondi R: Axon guidance at the midline choice
point. Dev Dyn 2001, 221:154-181.
3. Bentley D, Caudy M: Pioneer axons lose directed growth after selective
killing of guidepost cells. Nature 1983, 304:62-65.
4. Palka J, Whitlock KE, Murray MA: Guidepost cells. Curr Opin Neurobiol 1992,
2:48-54.
5. Stoeckli ET: Molecular mechanisms of commissural axon pathfinding.
Prog Brain Res 1998, 117:105-114.
6. Moon MS, Gomez TM: Adjacent pioneer commissural interneuron growth
cones switch from contact avoidance to axon fasciculation after midline
crossing. Dev Biol 2005, 288:474-486.
7. Stoeckli ET: Longitudinal axon guidance. Curr Opin Neurobiol 2006,
16:35-39.
8. Keino-Masu K, Masu M, Hinck L, Leonardo ED, Chan SS, Culotti JG, TessierLavigne M: Deleted in Colorectal Cancer (DCC) encodes a netrin
receptor. Cell 1996, 87:175-185.
9. Serafini T, Colamarino SA, Leonardo ED, Wang H, Beddington R,
Skarnes WC, Tessier-Lavigne M: Netrin-1 is required for commissural axon
guidance in the developing vertebrate nervous system. Cell 1996,
87:1001-1014.
10. Charron F, Stein E, Jeong J, McMahon AP, Tessier-Lavigne M: The
morphogen sonic hedgehog is an axonal chemoattractant that
collaborates with netrin-1 in midline axon guidance. Cell 2003, 113:11-23.
11. Okabe N, Shimizu K, Ozaki-Kuroda K, Nakanishi H, Morimoto K, Takeuchi M,
Katsumaru H, Murakami F, Takai Y: Contacts between the commissural
axons and the floor plate cells are mediated by nectins. Dev Biol 2004,
273:244-256.
12. Stoeckli ET, Landmesser LT: Axonin-1, Nr-CAM, and Ng-CAM play different
roles in the in vivo guidance of chick commissural neurons. Neuron 1995,
14:1165-1179.
13. Niederkofler V, Baeriswyl T, Ott R, Stoeckli ET: Nectin-like molecules/
SynCAM are required for post-crossing commissural axon guidance.
Development 2010, 137:427-435.
14. Imondi R, Kaprielian Z: Commissural axon pathfinding on the
contralateral side of the floor plate: a role for B-class ephrins in
specifying the dorsoventral position of longitudinally projecting
commissural axons. Development 2001, 128:4859-4871.
15. Kadison SR, Makinen T, Klein R, Henkemeyer M, Kaprielian Z: EphB
receptors and ephrin-B3 regulate axon guidance at the ventral midline
of the embryonic mouse spinal cord. J Neurosci 2006, 26:8909-8914.
16. Burstyn-Cohen T, Tzarfaty V, Frumkin A, Feinstein Y, Stoeckli E, Klar A: FSpondin is required for accurate pathfinding of commissural axons at
the floor plate. Neuron 1999, 23:233-246.
17. Lyuksyutova AI, Lu CC, Milanesio N, King LA, Guo N, Wang Y, Nathans J,
Tessier-Lavigne M, Zou Y: Anterior-posterior guidance of commissural
axons by Wnt-frizzled signaling. Science 2003, 302:1984-1988.

Joset et al. Neural Development 2011, 6:22
http://www.neuraldevelopment.com/content/6/1/22

18. Bourikas D, Pekarik V, Baeriswyl T, Grunditz A, Sadhu R, Nardo M, Stoeckli ET:
Sonic hedgehog guides commissural axons along the longitudinal axis
of the spinal cord. Nat Neurosci 2005, 8:297-304.
19. Domanitskaya E, Wacker A, Mauti O, Baeriswyl T, Esteve P, Bovolenta P,
Stoeckli ET: Sonic hedgehog guides commissural axons directly and
indirectly by regulating Wnt activity. J Neurosci 2010, 30:11167-11176.
20. Avraham O, Hadas Y, Vald L, Zisman S, Schejter A, Visel A, Klar A:
Transcriptional control of axonal guidance and sorting in dorsal
interneurons by the Lim-HD proteins Lhx9 and Lhx1. Neural Dev 2009,
4:21.
21. Litwack ED, Babey R, Buser R, Gesemann M, O’Leary DD: Identification and
characterization of two novel brain-derived immunoglobulin superfamily
members with a unique structural organization. Mol Cell Neurosci 2004,
25:263-274.
22. Fujimura Y, Iwashita M, Matsuzaki F, Yamamoto T: MDGA1, an IgSF
molecule containing a MAM domain, heterophilically associates with
axon- and muscle-associated binding partners through distinct
structural domains. Brain Res 2006, 1101:12-19.
23. Pekarik V, Bourikas D, Miglino N, Joset P, Preiswerk S, Stoeckli ET: Screening
for gene function in chicken embryo using RNAi and electroporation.
Nat Biotechnol 2003, 21:93-96.
24. Hamburger V, Hamilton HL: A series of normal stages in the development
of the chick embryo. J Morphol 1951, 88:49-92.
25. Sonderegger P: Axonin-1 and NgCAM as “recognition” components of
the pathway sensor apparatus of growth cones: a synopsis. Cell Tissue
Res 1997, 290:429-439.
26. van der Merwe PA, Barclay AN: Transient intercellular adhesion: the
importance of weak protein-protein interactions. Trends Biochem Sci 1994,
19:354-358.
27. Shiga T, Oppenheim RW, Grumet M, Edelman GM: Neuron-glia cell
adhesion molecule (Ng-CAM) expression in the chick embryo spinal
cord: observations on the earliest developing intersegmental
interneurons. Brain Res Dev Brain Res 1990, 55:209-217.
28. Silos-Santiago I, Snider WD: Development of interneurons with ipsilateral
projections in embryonic rat spinal cord. J Comp Neurol 1994,
342:221-231.
29. Yaginuma H, Shiga T, Oppenheim RW: Mechanisms of axonal guidance
used by interneurons in the chick embryo spinal cord. Perspect Dev
Neurobiol 1993, 1:205-215.
30. Yaginuma H, Shiga T, Homma S, Ishihara R, Oppenheim RW: Identification
of early developing axon projections from spinal interneurons in the
chick embryo with a neuron specific beta-tubulin antibody: evidence for
a new ‘pioneer’ pathway in the spinal cord. Development 1990,
108:705-716.
31. Parra LM, Zou Y: Sonic hedgehog induces response of commissural
axons to Semaphorin repulsion during midline crossing. Nat Neurosci
2010, 13:29-35.
32. Nawabi H, Briancon-Marjollet A, Clark C, Sanyas I, Takamatsu H, Okuno T,
Kumanogoh A, Bozon M, Takeshima K, Yoshida Y, Moret F, Abouzid K,
Castellani V: A midline switch of receptor processing regulates
commissural axon guidance in vertebrates. Genes Dev 2010, 15:396-410.
33. Fitzli D, Stoeckli ET, Kunz S, Siribour K, Rader C, Kunz B, Kozlov SV,
Buchstaller A, Lane RP, Suter DM, Dreyer WJ, Sonderegger P: A direct
interaction of axonin-1 with NgCAM-related cell adhesion molecule
(NrCAM) results in guidance, but not growth of commissural axons. J
Cell Biol 2000, 149:951-968.
34. Stoeckli ET, Sonderegger P, Pollerberg GE, Landmesser LT: Interference
with axonin-1 and NrCAM interactions unmasks a floor-plate activity
inhibitory for commissural axons. Neuron 1997, 18:209-21.
35. Kadmon G, Altevogt P: The cell adhesion molecule L1: species- and celltype-dependent multiple binding mechanisms. Differentiation 1997,
61:143-150.
36. Liu Q, Dwyer ND, O’Leary DD: Differential expression of COUP-TFI, CHL1,
and two novel genes in developing neocortex identified by differential
display PCR. J Neurosci 2000, 20:7682-7690.
37. Perrin FE, Stoeckli ET: Use of lipophilic dyes in studies of axonal
pathfinding in vivo. Microsc Res Tech 2000, 48:25-31.
38. Image J. [http://rsb.info.nih.gov/ij/index.html].
39. Gesemann M, Lesslauer A, Maurer CM, Schönthaler HB, Neuhauss SCF:
Phylogenetic analysis of the vertebrate Excitatory/Neutral Amino Acid

Page 16 of 16

40.
41.
42.
43.
44.

45.

Transporter (SLC1/EEAT) family reveals lineage specific subfamilies. BMC
Evol Biol 2010, 10:117.
MUSCLE. [http://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/msa/muscle/].
Gblocks. [http://molevol.cmima.csic.es/castresana/Gblocks.html].
PredGPI. [http://gpcr2.biocomp.unibo.it/predgpi/pred.htm].
GPI-SOM. [http://gpi.unibe.ch/].
Hooper NM, Low MG, Turner AJ: Renal dipeptidase is one of the
membrane proteins released by phosphatidylinositol-specific
phospholipase C. Biochem J 1987, 244:465-469.
White IJ, Souabni A, Hooper NM: Comparison of the glycosylphosphatidylinositol cleavage/attachment site between mammalian cells
and parasitic protozoa. J Cell Sci 2000, 113:721-727.

doi:10.1186/1749-8104-6-22
Cite this article as: Joset et al.: Rostral growth of commissural axons
requires the cell adhesion molecule MDGA2. Neural Development 2011
6:22.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
