<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title></title>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 5.0.5 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Journal
of Biology

BioMed Central
Open Access

Research article

The Drosophila Forkhead transcription factor FOXO mediates
the reduction in cell number associated with reduced insulin
signaling
Martin A Jünger*, Felix Rintelen*†, Hugo Stocker*, Jonathan D Wasserman‡§,
Mátyás Végh¶¥, Thomas Radimerski#, Michael E Greenberg‡ and Ernst Hafen*
Addresses: *Zoologisches Institut, Universität Zürich, Winterthurerstr. 190, CH-8057 Zürich, Switzerland. †Current address: Serono
Pharmaceutical Research Institute, Serono International S.A., 14, Chemin des Aulx, CH-1228 Plan-les-Ouates, Geneva, Switzerland.
‡Division of Neuroscience, Children’s Hospital and Department of Neurobiology, Harvard Medical School, 300 Longwood Ave, Boston, MA
02115, USA. §Current address: Harvard-Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Division of Health Sciences and Technology, Cambridge, MA
02139, USA. ¶Institut für Molekularbiologie, Universität Zürich, Winterthurerstr. 190, CH-8057 Zürich, Switzerland. ¥Current address: The
Genetics Company, Inc., Wagistr. 27, CH-8952 Schlieren, Switzerland. #Friedrich-Miescher-Institut, Novartis Research Foundation,
Maulbeerstr. 66, CH-4058 Basel, Switzerland.
Correspondence: Ernst Hafen. E-mail: hafen@zool.unizh.ch
Published: 7 August 2003

Received: 28 March 2003
Revised: 2 July 2003
Accepted: 9 July 2003

Journal of Biology 2003, 2:20
The electronic version of this article is the complete one and can be
found online at http://jbiol.com/content/2/3/20

© 2003 Jünger et al., licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article: verbatim copying and redistribution of this article are permitted in all
media for any purpose, provided this notice is preserved along with the article's original URL.

Abstract
Background: Forkhead transcription factors belonging to the FOXO subfamily are
negatively regulated by protein kinase B (PKB) in response to signaling by insulin and insulinlike growth factor in Caenorhabditis elegans and mammals. In Drosophila, the insulin-signaling
pathway regulates the size of cells, organs, and the entire body in response to nutrient
availability, by controlling both cell size and cell number. In this study, we present a genetic
characterization of dFOXO, the only Drosophila FOXO ortholog.
Results: Ectopic expression of dFOXO and human FOXO3a induced organ-size reduction and
cell death in a manner dependent on phosphoinositide (PI) 3-kinase and nutrient levels.
Surprisingly, flies homozygous for dFOXO null alleles are viable and of normal size. They are,
however, more sensitive to oxidative stress. Furthermore, dFOXO function is required for
growth inhibition associated with reduced insulin signaling. Loss of dFOXO suppresses the
reduction in cell number but not the cell-size reduction elicited by mutations in the insulinsignaling pathway. By microarray analysis and subsequent genetic validation, we have identified
d4E-BP, which encodes a translation inhibitor, as a relevant dFOXO target gene.
Conclusion: Our results show that dFOXO is a crucial mediator of insulin signaling in
Drosophila, mediating the reduction in cell number in insulin-signaling mutants. We propose
that in response to cellular stresses, such as nutrient deprivation or increased levels of
reactive oxygen species, dFOXO is activated and inhibits growth through the action of target
genes such as d4E-BP.

Journal of Biology 2003, 2:20

20.2 Journal of Biology 2003,

Volume 2, Issue 3, Article 20

Jünger et al.

Background
Receptors for insulin and insulin-like growth factors (IGFs)
are central regulators of energy metabolism and organismal
growth in vertebrates and invertebrates. In mammals, the
insulin receptor regulates glucose homeostasis and embryonic growth [1], whereas the insulin-like growth factor 1
receptor (IGF1-R) regulates embryonic and postembryonic
growth [2] and longevity [3]. In Caenorhabditis elegans,
DAF-2 - the homolog of the mammalian insulin/IGF receptor
- controls organismal growth in response to poor nutrient
conditions indirectly by controlling formation of the longlived, stress-resistant dauer stage during larval development, and lifespan in the adult [4]. In Drosophila, the
insulin/IGF receptor homolog DInr controls organismal
growth directly by regulating cell size and cell number [5].
Furthermore, reduced insulin signaling causes female sterility and independently increases lifespan [6,7]. The striking
conservation of insulin receptor function is also reflected in
the conservation of the intracellular signaling cascade.
Binding of insulin-like peptides to their receptor tyrosine
kinases leads to the activation of class IA phosphatidylinositol (PI) 3-kinases and increased intracellular concentrations of the lipid second messenger phosphatidylinositol
(3,4,5)-trisphosphate (PIP3). This results in recruitment to
the membrane, and activation, of the protein kinases phosphoinositide-dependent protein kinase 1 (PDK1) and
protein kinase B (PKB/AKT), both of which contain pleckstrin homology (PH) domains and which in turn modulate
the activity of downstream effector proteins [8]. The lipid
phosphatase PTEN (phosphatase and tensin homolog on
chromosome 10) catalyzes the 3-dephosphorylation of
PIP3, thereby acting as a negative regulator of insulin signaling [9]. The demonstration that the lethality associated
with loss of dPTEN in Drosophila is rescued by a mutant
form of dPKB with impaired affinity for PIP3 indicates that
PKB is a key effector of this pathway [10]. Genetic and biochemical studies have identified two critical targets of PKB,
namely forkhead transcription factors of the FOXO subfamily and the Tuberous Sclerosis Complex 2 (TSC2)
tumor suppressor protein.
In C. elegans, the only FOXO transcription factor is encoded
by daf-16. Loss-of-function mutations in daf-16 completely
suppress the dauer-constitutive and longevity phenotypes
associated with reduced function of insulin-signaling components. On the basis of knowledge about DAF signaling in C.
elegans, forkhead transcription factors belonging to the FOXO
subfamily have been identified as direct targets of insulin/IGF
signaling in mammals [11-13]. The mammalian DAF-16
homologs comprise the proteins FOXO1 (FKHR), FOXO3a
(FKHRL1) and FOXO4 (AFX). Their phosphorylation by the
insulin-activated kinases PKB and serum- and glucocorticoidregulated protein kinase (SGK) creates binding sites for

http://jbiol.com/content/2/3/20

14-3-3 proteins, and this leads to inactivation of FOXO proteins via cytoplasmic sequestration [12,14]. The result of
this process is an insulin-induced transcriptional repression
of FOXO target genes, which are involved in the response to
DNA damage [15] and oxidative stress [16,17], apoptosis
[12,18], cell-cycle control [19-21] and metabolism [22]. In
addition to their transcriptional activation capabilities,
FOXO proteins have recently been shown to induce cellcycle arrest by repressing transcription of genes encoding Dtype cyclins [23,24]. FOXO transcription factors mediate
insulin resistance in diabetic mice [25], and have been proposed to be tumor suppressors, as several chromosomal
translocations disrupting FOXO genes are found in cancers
[26,27], and overexpressed FOXO proteins can inhibit
tumor growth [23].
TSC2, the second target of PKB, forms a complex with TSC1
and acts as a negative regulator of growth in Drosophila, and
as a tumor suppressor in mammals. Overexpressed activated
PKB phosphorylates TSC2 and thereby disrupts the TSC1/2
complex in Drosophila and in mammalian cells [28,29]. In
Drosophila, the TSC1/2 complex functions by negatively regulating two kinases, dTOR (homolog of the mammalian
target of rapamycin) [30] and dS6K (homolog of the mammalian ribosomal protein S6 kinase) [31]. Recent genetic
and biochemical evidence indicates that TSC1/2 regulates
S6K activity by acting as a GTPase-activating protein (GAP)
for the small GTPase Rheb [32-35]. Interestingly, flies
lacking dS6K function are reduced in size because of a
reduction in cell size but not in cell number [36]. The
growth control pathways regulating cell size and cell
number therefore bifurcate either at dPKB or between dPKB
and dS6K.
In this study, we describe the identification of dFOXO, the
single FOXO ortholog in Drosophila. Although dFOXO function is not essential for development and organismal
growth control under normal culture conditions, it mediates the reduction in cell number associated with reduced
insulin signaling. Our results show that dFOXO regulates
expression of d4E-BP, which mediates part of the cellnumber reduction in dPKB mutants. We propose that
dFOXO upregulates d4E-BP transcription under conditions
of low insulin signaling. Furthermore, our observations
suggest that dFOXO is required for resistance against oxidative stress in adult flies.

Results
dFOXO is the only Drosophila homolog of FOXO
and DAF-16
The Drosophila genome contains a single homolog of the
DAF-16/FOXO family of transcription factors. This notion is

Journal of Biology 2003, 2:20

http://jbiol.com/content/2/3/20

Journal of Biology 2003,

supported by the phylogenetic tree diagram calculated from
the multiple sequence alignment (Figure 1a). The dFOXO
gene is more closely related to the mammalian FOXO subfamily and daf-16 than any other Drosophila forkhead gene.
The amino-acid sequences of the predicted 613 amino-acid
dFOXO protein and hFOXO3a are 27% identical over the full

protein length, and 82% identical within the forkhead DNAbinding domain. Furthermore, dFOXO is the only Drosophila
forkhead gene encoding a putative protein containing conserved PKB phosphorylation sites [37]. The orientation of the
three PKB consensus sites relative to the forkhead domain
(Figure 1b) is conserved among the mammalian FOXO

(a)

Volume 2, Issue 3, Article 20

Jünger et al. 20.3

(b)

dFOXO
hFOXO1
hFOXO3a
hFOXO4
DAF-16

T44

S190

S259
Glutamine-rich

DBD

jumu
CG16899
CHES1-like
CG12632
CG11799
CG11152
mmHNF-3γ
fkh
fd96Ca
fd96Cb
fd59a
croc
fd64A
slp1
slp2
CG9571

PEST

NLS

NES

(c)
S1

Helix 1

Helix 2

loop T′

W124STOP (dFOXO25)
W95STOP (dFOXO21)
KK N S S RR N A WG N L S YA DLI TH AIG SA TDK RL TLS QI YEW MV QNV PY FKD K GD S N
KS S S S RR N A WG N L S YA DLI TK AIE SS AEK RL TLS QI YEW MV KSV PY FKD K GD S N
RK C S S RR N A WG N L S YA DLI TR AIE SS PDK RL TLS QI YEW MV RCV PY FKD K GD S N
RK G G S RR N A WG N Q S YA EFI SQ AIE SA PEK RL TLA QI YEW MV RTV PY FKD K GD S N
KK T T T RR N A WG N M S YA ELI TT AIM AS PEK RL TLA QV YEW MV QNV PY FRD K GD S N

d F OX O
h F OX O 1
h F OX O 3 a
h F OX O 4
D A F- 1 6

Helix 3
d F OX O
h F OX O 1
h F OX O 3 a
h F OX O 4
D A F- 1 6

S2

W1

S3

W2

S SA G W KN S I R HN LSL HN RFM RV QNE GT GKS SW WML NP EA- KP GKS V RR - - - RA A S ME T S
S SA G W KN S I R HN LSL HS KFI RV QNE GT GKS SW WML NP EGG KS GKS P RR - - - RA A S MD N N
S SA G W KN S I R HN LSL HS RFM RV QNE GT GKS SW WII NP DGG KS GKA P RR - - - RA V S MD N S
S SA G W KN S I R HN LSL HS KFI KV HNE AT GKS SW WML NP EGG KS GKA P RR - - - RA A S MD S S
S SA G W KN S I R HN LSL HS RFM RI QNE GA GKS SW WVI NP DA- KP GRN P RR T R E RS N T IE T T

(d)
EP35-147
TAG

ATG

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

kb

Figure 1
dFOXO is the only Drosophila FOXO/DAF-16 homolog. A TBLASTN search of the Drosophila genome for known and predicted genes encoding
forkhead transcription factors retrieved 16 genes. (a) A phylogenetic tree calculated from a multiple sequence alignment of the forkhead domains of
these 16 proteins and of the human FOXO proteins FOXO1 (FKHR), FOXO3a (FKHRL1) and FOXO4 (AFX), the C. elegans DAF-16 and mouse
Foxa3 (HNF-3␥; protein names on the figure are from GenBank). The similarity of dFOXO to FOXO proteins is highlighted in blue. (b) dFOXO has
three PKB phosphorylation sites in the same orientation as those of mammalian FOXO proteins. The sites are indicated above the protein; PEST
(destruction), nuclear localization (NLS), nuclear export (NES) and DNA-binding sequences are also shown. (c) A multiple amino-acid sequence
alignment of the dFOXO, human FOXO and DAF-16 forkhead domains illustrates the high degree of sequence conservation especially within the
DNA-binding domain. The secondary structure is indicated above the alignment. Similar and identical amino-acid residues are shaded in gray and black,
respectively. The region encoding helix 3 of the forkhead domain, which is the DNA-recognition helix contacting the major groove of the DNA
double helix, is identical in the five proteins. Given the high structural similarity between the DNA-binding domains of FOXO4 (AFX) and HNF-3␥
[86], it is likely that FOXO proteins contact insulin response elements through helix 3. Two EMS-induced point mutations described in this study are
shown in red. (d) The dFOXO gene spans a genomic region of 31 kilobases (kb) and contains 11 exons (blue bars). The EP35-147 transposable element
is inserted in the second intron upstream of the open reading frame, allowing GAL4-induced expression of endogenous dFOXO.

Journal of Biology 2003, 2:20

20.4 Journal of Biology 2003,

Volume 2, Issue 3, Article 20

Jünger et al.

proteins, DAF-l6 and dFOXO. Figure 1c shows the high
degree of sequence conservation between dFOXO and
FOXO/DAF-16 proteins within the DNA-binding domain.

GMR-Gal4

(a)

hFOXO3a

(b)

(f)

hFOXO3a Fed

(k)

(g)

hFOXO3a Sugar

(l)

Taken together, these observations strongly suggest that
dFOXO is the only Drosophila homolog of the mammalian
FOXO transcription factors and C. elegans DAF-l6.

hFOXO3a-TM

(c)

dPKB−/−
+ hFOXO3a

Dp110DN
+ hFOXO3a

http://jbiol.com/content/2/3/20

hFOXO3a-TM
Cell clones

(d)

UAS-dFOXO

(h)

hFOXO3a PBS

(m)

EP-dFOXO

(i)

dFOXO Fed

(n)

Dp110DN

(e)

Dp110DN
+ EP-dFOXO

(j)

dFOXO Sugar

(o)

Figure 2
Targeted hFOXO3a and dFOXO expression in the developing Drosophila eye induces organ-size reduction and cell death, and the phenotypes are
sensitive to insulin signaling and nutrient levels. (a) GMR-Gal4-expressing control fly. (b) No discernible phenotype results from hFOXO3a
expression. (c) Expression of hFOXO3a-TM in the eye disc leads to pupal lethality; escapers at 18°C show a necrotic phenotype and severely
disrupted cell specification. (d) Expression in w --marked clones of cells induces a similar phenotype at 25°C. (e) Dp110DN expression slightly
reduces eye size, and (f) co-expression of wild-type hFOXO3a partially mimicks the hFOXO3a-TM escaper phenotype. (g) The same enhancement of
hFOXO3a activity was observed in a dPKB-/- background. (h,i) Expression of transgenic or endogenous dFOXO results in a small-eye phenotype,
which is also dramatically enhanced by (j) Dp110DN. (k-o) hFOXO3a and dFOXO phenotypes are progressively exacerbated by protein deprivation
(‘sugar’) and complete starvation (‘PBS’). Flies like the one shown in (m) die within one day, and complete starvation of dFOXO-expressing flies
resulted in pupal lethality (not shown). Genotypes are: (a) y w; GMR-Gal4/+; (b) y w; GMR-Gal4/+; UAS-hFOXO3a/+; (c) y w; GMR-Gal4/+; UAShFOXO3a-TM/+; (d) y w hs-flp/y w; GMR > FRT- w+ STOP - FRT > Gal-4/+; UAS-hFOXO3a-TM/+; (e) y w; GMR-Gal4 UAS-Dp110DN/+; (f) y w; GMR-Gal4
UAS-Dp110DN/+; UAS-hFOXO3a/+; (g) y w; UAS-hFOXO3a/GMR-Gal4; dPKB3/dPKB1; (h) y w; UAS-dFOXO/GMR-Gal4; (i) y w; GMR-Gal4/+; EP-dFOXO/+;
(j) y w; GMR-Gal4 UAS-Dp110DN/+; EP-dFOXO/+; (k-m) y w; GMR-Gal4/+; UAS-hFOXO3a/+; (n,o) y w; GMR-Gal4/+; EP-dFOXO/+.

Journal of Biology 2003, 2:20

http://jbiol.com/content/2/3/20

Journal of Biology 2003,

Overexpressed dFOXO is responsive to insulin
signaling and nutrient levels, inducing organ-size
reduction and cell death

lowered insulin signaling. Indeed, we observed that the overexpression phenotypes of both hFOXO3a and dFOXO are
enhanced under conditions of starvation. Drosophila larvae
that are starved until 70 h after egg laying (AEL) die within a
few days. But if the onset of nutrient deprivation occurs after
they have surpassed the metabolic ‘70 h change’ [40,41], they
survive and develop into small adult flies. We therefore subjected larvae expressing hFOXO3a or dFOXO (under GMR
control) to either protein starvation (sugar as the only energy
source) or complete starvation, starting 80-90 h AEL, and
analyzed the effect on the adult’s eyes. Both phenotypes
(Figure 2k,n) were progressively exacerbated by protein starvation (Figure 2l,o) and complete starvation (Figure 2m), the
latter condition being accompanied by early adult or larval
lethality, in the case of hFOXO3a or dFOXO, respectively. The
resulting phenotypes are due to the FOXO transgenes, as
wild-type control flies that have been starved during development display only a body-size reduction while maintaining
normal proportions and normal eye structure.

To assess whether dFOXO has a key function in insulin signaling like that of DAF-16 in C. elegans, we tested whether
overexpression of wild-type or mutant forms of hFOXO3a
and dFOXO could antagonize insulin signaling. Elimination
of the three PKB consensus phosphorylation sites in mammalian FOXO3a prevents its phosphorylation, subsequent
binding to 14-3-3 proteins, and sequestration in the cytoplasm [12]. This leads to constitutive nuclear localization of
the mutant FOXO3a and transcriptional activation of its
target genes. Assuming that blocking the PKB signal would
have the same activating effect on dFOXO, we overexpressed
wild-type and triple PKB-phosphorylation-mutant variants
of both dFOXO and human FOXO3a. Furthermore, we identified an EP transposable element insertion in the second
dFOXO intron, which permits the GAL4-induced overexpression of endogenous dFOXO (Figure 1d). We used the
GMR-Gal4 construct to drive UAS-dependent expression in
postmitotic cells in the eye imaginal disc [38]. While expression of wild-type hF0X03a in the developing eye did not
result in a visible phenotype (Figure 2b), hFOXO3a-TM
expression caused pupal lethality. Few escaper flies eclosed
and displayed a strong necrotic eye phenotype (Figure 2c).
A block of cell differentiation and necrosis was also
observed when hFOXO3a-TM was expressed in cell clones in
the developing eye (Figure 2d).
Assuming that the lack of a phenotype observed upon UAShFOXO3a expression is due to hFOXO3a inactivation by
endogenous DInr signaling in the eye disc, we performed the
same experiment in a background of reduced insulin signaling. Indeed, in the presence of a dominant-negative (DN)
form of Dp110 (encoding the PI 3-kinase catalytic subunit)
[39], hFOXO3a expression induced a necrotic phenotype
similar to the one observed with the hyperactive phosphorylation mutant (Figure 2f). To confirm that hFOXO3a is
responsive to Drosophila insulin signaling and rule out artificial coexpression effects, we expressed hFOXO3a in flies
mutant for either dPKB (Figure 2g) or Dp110 (not shown),
and observed similar phenotypes to those seen upon coexpression of Dp110DN. Drosophila FOXO has qualitatively
similar, but stronger effects. Expressing the wild-type form of
dFOXO causes a weak eye-size reduction and disruption of
the ommatidial pattern even in a wild-type background
(Figure 2h,i), and the phenotype is strongly affected by
Dp110DN as well (Figure 2j). The UAS-dFOXO-TM transgene
appears to cause lethality even in the absence of a Gal4 driver,
as we did not obtain viable transgenic lines with this construct. Furthermore, we examined the effects of nutrient
deprivation on FOXO-expressing tissues. If nutrient availability is limited, FOXO should be more active in response to

Volume 2, Issue 3, Article 20

Jünger et al. 20.5

The dFOXO overexpression phenotype (Figure 2i,j) does not
appear to be caused by the activation of any of the known
cell-death pathways. Expression of the caspase inhibitors
p35 or DIAP1, or of p21, an inhibitor of p53-induced apoptosis [42], and loss of eiger, which encodes the Drosophila
homolog of tumor necrosis factor (TNF) [43], did not suppress the eye phenotype (data not shown). In agreement
with our results, it was observed in a parallel study that the
GMR-dFOXO overexpression phenotype is insensitive to
caspase inhibitors, and is not accompanied by increased
acridine-orange-detectable apoptosis in the imaginal disc
[44]. It therefore remains unclear whether high levels of
nuclear dFOXO induce a specific caspase-independent celldeath program or whether nuclear accumulation of overexpressed dFOXO leads to secondary necrosis in a rather
nonspecific fashion. Furthermore, the necrotic eye phenotype does not reflect the phenotype observed following a
complete block in insulin signaling. Loss-of-function mutations in insulin-signaling components reduce cell size and
cell number but do not increase cell death in larval tissues
[45,46]. In summary, our overexpression experiments are
consistent with a model in which, under normal conditions,
excess FOXO transcription factor is phosphorylated by
dPKB and kept inactive in the cytoplasm. Under conditions
of reduced insulin-signaling activity or nutrient deprivation,
dFOXO or hFOXO3a protein translocates to the nucleus
and induces growth arrest and necrosis.

dFOXO loss-of-function mutants are viable, have no
overgrowth phenotype and are hypersensitive to
oxidative stress
Although the overexpression experiments described above
did not reveal the physiological function of dFOXO, they

Journal of Biology 2003, 2:20

20.6 Journal of Biology 2003,

Volume 2, Issue 3, Article 20

Jünger et al.

provided the entry point for isolation of loss-of-function
mutations. We made use of the EP35-147 element, which
permits the generation of the necrotic eye phenotype
(Figure 2j) by driving expression of endogenous dFOXO in
the presence of Dp110DN. We mutagenized homozygous EP
males, mated them to homozygous GMR-Gal4 UASDp110DN females and then screened the F1 generation for
reversion of the strong gain-of-function phenotype and its
associated semilethality. Several loss-of-function alleles of
dFOXO were isolated and molecularly characterized. Two
such revertants are shown in Figure 3c (dFOXO21) and
Figure 3d (dFOXO25). In dFOXO21 and dFOXO25, the codons
for W95 and W124 within the forkhead domain are mutated
to stop codons, respectively (Figure 1c), so they are assumed
to be null alleles of dFOXO. We performed the subsequent
phenotypic and epistasis analyses with these two lines.
Because FOXO transcription factors have been proposed to
be the primary effectors of insulin signaling, on the basis of
epistasis of daf-16 over daf-2 in C. elegans, it seemed reasonable to expect an overgrowth phenotype in dFOXO-/- flies as
is observed in dPTEN loss-of-function mutants. To our surprise, dFOXO loss-of-function mutants are homozygousviable and display no obvious phenotype under normal
culturing conditions (Figure 3h). Thus, dFOXO is not essential for development. Only close inspection of the dFOXO
mutants revealed that their wing size is significantly reduced
(Figure 4i). But cellular and organismal growth are unaffected
by dFOXO mutations. To assess whether dFOXO-mutant tissue
grows to a different size than wild-type tissue, we recombined
the dFOXO21 and dFOXO25 alleles onto the FRT82 chromosome and induced genetic mosaic flies with the ey-Flp/FRT
system [47]. When the eye and head capsule were composed
almost exclusively of dFOXO-/- tissue (w --marked in
Figure 3e,f, on the right), no head-size difference was observed
compared to the control fly with a head homozygous for the
FRT82 chromosome without the dFOXO mutation
(Figure 3e,f, left). This is consistent with experience from
extensive genetic screens for recessive growth mutations

http://jbiol.com/content/2/3/20

carried out in our lab. An ey-Flp-screen on the right arm of
chromosome 3 did not reveal any mutations in dFOXO
based on an altered head-size phenotype (H.S. and E.H.,
unpublished observations).
We next asked whether cell size, like organ size, was not
affected by the loss of dFOXO. For this purpose, we used a
heat shock-inducible Flp construct to generate clones of
homozygous dFOXO-/- photoreceptor cells and wild-type
cells within one adult eye (Figure 3g). The cells lacking
dFOXO are marked by the absence of pigment granules.
Consistent with the absence of a ‘bighead’ phenotype,
dFOXO-/- cells and wild-type cells have the same size. Similarly, no significant difference in the body weight of mutant
and control flies was observed (Figure 3h). In contrast, flies
with a viable heteroallelic combination of dPTEN loss-offunction alleles are significantly bigger than wild-type flies
[48]. Taken together, these results argue that with the exception of the slight wing-size reduction, dFOXO is not
required to control cellular, tissue, or organismal growth in
a wild-type background.
A critical role has been reported for mammalian and
C. elegans FOXO proteins in resistance against various cellular stresses, in particular oxidative stress [16,17,49], DNA
damage [15] and cytokine withdrawal [50]. We tested the
stress resistance of adult dFOXO mutant flies by measuring
survival time following different challenges. Among starvation on water, oxidative-stress challenge, bacterial infection,
heat shock, and heavy-metal stress, the only condition for
which hypersensitivity was observed is oxidative stress.
When placed on hydrogen-peroxide-containing food,
dFOXO mutant flies display a significantly reduced survival
time compared to control flies (Figure 3i). A very similar
effect is elicited by paraquat feeding. These observations are
consistent with the paraquat hypersensitivity of daf-16
mutants in C. elegans [51], suggesting that a role for FOXO
proteins in protecting against oxidative stress is conserved
across species.

Figure 3 (see figure on the next page)
Null dFOXO mutants are viable, have no overgrowth phenotype and are hypersensitive to oxidative stress. (a) Dp110DN expressing control fly.
(b) EP-driven coexpression of dFOXO elicits a necrotic eye phenotype. (c,d) EMS-induced mutations in dFOXO lead to a reversion of the
overexpression phenotype. (e,f) Selective removal of dFOXO from the head (right) does not lead to an organ-size alteration compared to a control
fly (left). (g) w --marked dFOXO-deficient photoreceptor cells are the same size as wild-type cells. (h) In contrast to dPTEN, dFOXO null mutants
have no organismal growth phenotype. For each genotype, the left bar indicates the body weight of females and the right bar the weight of males.
Values are shown ± standard deviation (SD). (i) dFOXO mutants are hypersensitive to oxidative stress. The graph shows a survival curve of male
adult flies on PBS/sucrose gel containing 5% hydrogen peroxide. The observed hypersensitivity is more pronounced in males, but is also observed in
females (not shown). The increased resistance of homozygous EP-dFOXO flies might be caused by low basal dFOXO overexpression from the EP
element, which occurs due to leakiness of UAS enhancers in the absence of Gal4. Control flies placed on PBS/sucrose without oxidant survived
during the time window shown. Genotypes are: (a) y w; GMR-Gal4 UAS-Dp110DN/+; (b) y w; GMR-Gal4 UAS-Dp110DN/+; EP-dFOXO/+; (c) y w; GMRGal4 UAS-Dp110DN/+; EP-dFOXO21/+; (d) y w; GMR-Gal4 UAS-Dp110DN/+; EP-dFOXO25/+; (e,f) y w ey-flp/y w; FRT82/FRT82 cl3R3 w+ (left); y w ey-flp/y
w; FRT82 EP-dFOXO21/FRT82 cl3R3 w+ (right); (g) y w hs-flp/y w; FRT82 EP-dFOXO21/FRT82 w+.

Journal of Biology 2003, 2:20

http://jbiol.com/content/2/3/20

Journal of Biology 2003,

Dp11ODN
+ dFOXO

Dp11ODN

(a)

FRT82

Dp11ODN
+ dFOXO21

(b)

Volume 2, Issue 3, Article 20

Jünger et al. 20.7

Dp11ODN
+ dFOXO25

(c)

(d)

FRT82 dFOXO21

(h)

(e)

2,500

Body weight (µg)

2,000

(f)

1,500
1,000
500
0

dFOXO−/−

dPTEN−/− dFOXO+/− EP-dFOXO

(i)
100

EP-dFOXO
dFOXO+/−
dFOXO−/−

dFOXO−/− cell clones

(g)

Survival under 5% H2O2
oxidative stress (%)

90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

0

12

Figure 3 (see legend on the previous page)

Journal of Biology 2003, 2:20

24

36
Time (h)

48

60

72

20.8 Journal of Biology 2003,

Volume 2, Issue 3, Article 20

Jünger et al.

The growth-deficient phenotypes of DInr, chico,
Dp110 and dPKB mutants are significantly
suppressed by loss of dFOXO
We performed genetic epistasis experiments to examine
whether the growth phenotypes of DInr-signaling mutants
are dependent on dFOXO function. For this purpose, we
either generated double-mutant flies or investigated the
double-mutant effect only in the head using the ey-Flp/FRT
system. In contrast to the absence of a growth phenotype in
single dFOXO mutant flies, lack of dFOXO significantly suppresses the growth-deficient phenotype observed in flies
mutant for the insulin receptor substrate (IRS) homolog
chico (Figure 4). Flies mutant for chico are smaller because
they have fewer and smaller cells [45]. Loss of one dFOXO
copy dominantly suppresses the cell-number reduction in
chico mutant flies without affecting cell size. The suppression
is more pronounced when both copies of dFOXO are
removed in a chico mutant background. In this situation, the
chico small body-size phenotype is partially suppressed.
Homozygous chico-dFOXO double-mutant flies have more,
and even slightly smaller, cells than homozygous chico single
mutants. It seems that removal of dFOXO accelerates the cell
cycle at the expense of cell size in a chico background.
We next asked whether dFOXO interacts with other components of the Drosophila insulin-signaling pathway. The eyFlp/FRT system was used to generate heterozygous
insulin-signaling mutant flies with heads homozygous for
each mutation. Removal of DInr, Dp110 or dPKB leads to a
characteristic ‘pinhead’ phenotype, which is substantially
suppressed by the presence of a dFOXO loss-of-function
allele on the same FRT chromosome as the insulin-signaling
mutation. In all three cases, we observed a partial rather
than a complete rescue of the tissue growth repression, consistent with the finding that dFOXO mutations affect only
the cell-number aspect of the chico phenotype. Surprisingly,
loss of dFOXO dramatically delays lethality in dPKB
mutants. Complete loss of dPKB leads to larval lethality in
the early third instar, but homozygous dPKB-dFOXO double
mutants are able to develop into pharate adults of reduced
size, most of which fail to eclose (Figure 5l). The lethality
associated with the complete loss of dPKB is therefore
largely due to hyperactivation of dFOXO.
We also observed that dFOXO interacts with the tumor suppressors dTSC1 and dPTEN. Tissue-specific removal of either
gene from the head leads to a bighead phenotype
(Figure 5h,j). The dTSC1-/- bighead phenotype is enhanced
by loss of dFOXO (Figure 5i). This observation is consistent
with the recently reported negative feedback loop between
dS6K and dPKB. Mutant dTSC1 larvae have elevated levels
of dS6K activity, which in turn downregulates dPKB activity
[31]. This reduction in dPKB activity probably leads to

http://jbiol.com/content/2/3/20

enhanced activation of dFOXO, which in turn partially mitigates the overgrowth phenotype by slowing down proliferation. The dTSC1 phenotype can therefore be enhanced by
loss of the inhibitory function of dFOXO. Unexpectedly, the
dPTEN-/- bighead phenotype was slightly suppressed by
dFOXO mutations (Figure 5k). From the current model, it
would be expected that in a dPTEN mutant dPKB activity is
high and dFOXO is to a large extent inactive in the cytoplasm. Thus, removal of dFOXO function should have no
effect on the dPTEN phenotype. At present, we can only speculate about possible explanations for this observation. In a
parallel study, it has been shown that dFOXO can induce
transcription of DInr [52]. It may be that in a dPTEN-mutant
background dFOXO activates DInr expression in a negativefeedback loop. In this model, concomitant loss of dFOXO
would alleviate the dPTEN overgrowth phenotype by lowering DInr levels. Another possible explanation is that dFOXO
has additional functions when localized to the cytoplasm or
during its nuclear export, such as interacting with other proteins. Loss of dFOXO might affect the function of interaction
partners that have a role in dPTEN signaling.
In summary, our epistasis analysis provides strong genetic
evidence that dFOXO is required to mediate the organismal
growth arrest that is elicited in insulin-signaling mutants.

dFOXO upregulates transcription of the d4E-BP
gene
We have shown previously that Drosophila embryonic Kc167
cells respond to insulin stimulation with upregulated activities of dPKB and dS6K [53,54]. We performed mRNA profiling experiments using the Affymetrix GeneChip system to
measure on a genome-wide scale the transcriptional
changes induced by insulin in these cells. On the basis of
the currently held model that FOXO transcription factors
are transcriptional activators that are negatively regulated by
insulin, we expected potential dFOXO target genes to be
repressed in Kc167 cells upon insulin stimulation. Figure 6a
shows a selection of dFOXO target gene candidates that are
transcriptionally downregulated by a factor of two or more
upon insulin stimulation and whose promoter regions
contain one or more conserved forkhead-response elements
(FHREs) with the consensus sequence (G/A)TAAACAA [55].
Three of these candidate gene products are each involved in
one of two biological processes known to be negatively regulated by insulin, namely gluconeogenesis (PEPCK) and
lipid catabolism (CPTI and long-chain-fatty-acid-CoAligase). The remaining candidates are involved in stress
responses (cytochrome P450 enzymes), DNA repair (DNA
polymerase iota), transcription and translation control
(d4E-BP and CDK8), and cell-cycle control (centaurin
gamma and CG3799). Several of the insulin-repressed genes
have been reported to be transcriptionally induced in

Journal of Biology 2003, 2:20

http://jbiol.com/content/2/3/20

Journal of Biology 2003,

Drosophila larvae under conditions of complete starvation
(d4E-BP and PEPCK) or sugar-only diet (CPTI and longchain-fatty-acid-CoA-ligase) [41,56].

We chose d4E-BP for further investigation, because it has previously been reported to be insulin-regulated at the level of
protein phosphorylation, but not at the level of gene expression

dFOXO−/−

EP/EP

(a)

(b)

(c)

dFOXO+/−, chico−/−

(d)

(g)

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(i)

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

Wing cell area (µm2)

Cells per wing

10,000
8,000
6,000
4,000
2,000

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

9,000
8,000
7,000
6,000
5,000
4,000
3,000
2,000
1,000
0

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(k)

12,000

(a)

chico−/−

(h)

900
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0

(j)
2.0
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

Jünger et al. 20.9

(e)

Ommatidial size
(arbitrary units)

1,800
1,600
1,400
1,200
1,000
800
600
400
200
0

Ommatidia per eye

Body weight (µg)

(f)

Wing area (106 µm2)

dFOXO−/−, chico−/−

Volume 2, Issue 3, Article 20

0

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

200
180
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0

Figure 4
Loss of dFOXO suppresses the cell-number reduction in chico mutants. (a-e) Partial rescue of the chico phenotype by mutations in dFOXO. Bar sizes
are 100 ␮m (low magnification) and 20 ␮m (high magnification). Each graph displays the variation of a single parameter between the five genotypes
shown in (a–e): (f) body weight, (g) cell number in the eye, (h) cell size in the eye, (i) wing area, (j) cell number in the wing, and (k) cell size in the
wing. (f) dFOXO-/- partially suppresses the low-body-weight phenotype of chico-/-. The suppression is less pronounced in the wing (i), because dFOXOnull mutants have significantly smaller wings than control flies, although their body weight is the same. In a chico-/- background, loss of dFOXO leads
to increased cell numbers in the eye (g) and in the wing (j) compared to the chico single mutant. Although organ and tissue size is increased, cell size
significantly decreases in the chico-dFOXO double mutant both in the eye (h) and in the wing (k). It seems that loss of dFOXO in a chico-/- background
leads to increased proliferation rates. All values are shown ± SD. Genotypes are: (a) y w;; EP-dFOXO/EP-dFOXO; (b) y w;; EP-dFOXO21/EP-dFOXO25; (c)
y w; chico1/chico2; EP-dFOXO21/+; (d) y w; chico1/chico2; EP-dFOXO21/ EP-dFOXO25; (e) y w; chico1/chico2.

Journal of Biology 2003, 2:20

20.10 Journal of Biology 2003,

Volume 2, Issue 3, Article 20

Jünger et al.

[57]. The d4E-BP gene encodes a translational repressor and
was initially identified as the immune-compromised Thor
mutant in a genetic screen for genes involved in the innate

DInr−/−

Wild-type

(a)

(b)

TSC1−/−

(h)

DInr−/−,
dFOXO−/−

(c)

TSC1−/−,
dFOXO−/−

(i)

dPTEN−/−

(j)

http://jbiol.com/content/2/3/20

immune response to bacterial infection [58,59]. Figure 6b
shows the presence of several FHREs in the genomic region
around the d4E-BP locus. The d4E-BP protein is negatively

Dp110−/−,
dFOXO−/−

Dp110−/−

(d)

(e)

dPKB−/−

(f)

dPTEN−/−,
dFOXO−/−

(k)

dFOXO−/−

dPKB−/−,
dFOXO−/−

(g)

dPKB−/−,
dFOXO−/− dPKB−/−

(l)

Figure 5
Growth-deficient phenotypes of DInr, Dp110 and dPKB mutants are suppressed by loss of dFOXO. (a) Control fly. (b) Selective removal of DInr
from the head leads to a pinhead phenotype, which is partially suppressed by the loss of dFOXO (c). The same suppression is observed in Dp110-,
and dPKB-pinheads (d-g). The TSC1-/- bighead phenotype (h) is enhanced by mutations in dFOXO (i), but the dPTEN-/- bighead (j) is slightly
suppressed (k). (l) Living without PKB. In contrast to the larval lethality of dPKB null mutants, dPKB-dFOXO double mutants develop into small
pharate adults, most of which fail to eclose. Bar sizes are 200 ␮m (low magnification) and 20 ␮m (high magnification). Genotypes are: (a) y w ey-flp/y
w; FRT82/FRT82 cl3R3 w+; (b) y w ey-flp/y w; FRT82 DInr304/FRT82 cl3R3 w+; (c) y w ey-flp/y w; FRT82 DInr304 EP-dFOXO25/FRT82 cl3R3 w+; (d) y w ey-flp/y
w; FRT82 Dp1105W3/FRT82 cl3R3 w+; (e) y w ey-flp/y w; FRT82 Dp1105W3 EP-dFOXO25/FRT82 cl3R3 w+; (f) y w ey-flp/y w; FRT82 dPKB1/FRT82 cl3R3 w+;
(g) y w ey-flp/y w; FRT82 dPKB1 EP-dFOXO25/FRT82 cl3R3 w+; (h) y w ey-flp/y w; FRT82 dTSC1Q87X/FRT82 cl3R3 w+; (i) y w ey-flp/y w; FRT82 dTSC1Q87X EPdFOXO25/FRT82 cl3R3 w+; (j) y w ey-flp/y w; FRT40 dPTEN117-4/FRT40 cl2L3 w+; (k) y w ey-flp/y w; FRT40 dPTEN117-4/FRT40 cl2L3 w+; FRT82 EPdFOXO25/FRT82 cl3R3 w+; (l) y w;; EP-dFOXO21/EPdFOXO25 (left), y w;; dPKB1 EP-dFOXO21/dPKB1 EP-dFOXO25 (middle), dPKB1/dPKB1 (right).

Journal of Biology 2003, 2:20

http://jbiol.com/content/2/3/20

Journal of Biology 2003,

Volume 2, Issue 3, Article 20

Jünger et al. 20.11

(a) Transcripts repressed upon insulin stimulation
Gene product

Biological Process

FlyBase ID

Fold repressed

PEPCK (phosphoenolpyruvate
carboxykinase)

Gluconeogenesis

FBgn0003067

4.6

Phosphorylase kinase gamma

Glycogen breakdown

FBgn0011754

Lipid catabolism

FBgn0027842

Lipid catabolism

FBgn0027601

Translation control

FBgn0022073

3.3

Cyclin-dependent kinase 8

Transcription control

FBgn0015618

3.3

Cyp4e2 (cytochrome P450)

Stress response

FBgn0014469

2.9

Cyp9c1 (cytochrome P450)

Stress response

FBgn0015040

4.1

(e)

2.7

d4E-BP

(d)

Dp110DN + dFOXO

4.5

Long-chain-fatty-acid-CoA-ligase

(c)

Dp110DN

2.4

CPTI (mitochondrial carnitine
palmitoyltransferase )

Dp110DN

DNA polymerase iota

DNA repair

FBgn0037554

Cell-cycle control

FBgn0028509

Cell-cycle control

FBgn0027593

(g)

(h)

3.2

CG3799

(f)

Thor1 + hFOXO3a-TM

3.4

Centaurin gamma

Thor

Wild-type

4.2

(b)

(i)
600
500
Ommatidia per eye

FHRE

d4E-BP
kb
0

1

2

3

4

5

400
300
200
100
0

d4EBP−/−
dPKB−/−

d4EBP+/−
dPKB−/−

dPKB−/−

Figure 6
dFOXO regulates transcription of the d4E-BP gene. (a) A selection of microarray-identified genes that are transcriptionally downregulated after 2 h
of insulin stimulation in Kc167 cells and contain forkhead response elements (FHREs) in their genomic upstream or intronic sequences. (b) FHREs
(red) at the d4E-BP locus; black boxes are exons. (c,d) Overexpression of Dp110DN alone does not induce transcription of d4E-BP in imaginal discs,
but (e) coexpression of dFOXO strongly upregulates the gene. (f-h) Expression of human FOXO3a-TM induces expression of the d4E-BP enhancer
trap line Thor1. (i) d4E-BP and dPKB interact genetically. The Thor1 mutation increases the ommatidial number in dPKB-mutants by 9% without
affecting cell size. Values are shown ± SD. Genotypes are: (c) y w; GMR-Gal4 UAS-Dp110DN/+; (d) y w; GMR-Gal4 UAS-Dp110DN/+; (e) y w; GMR-Gal4
UAS-Dp110DN/+; EP-dFOXO/+; (f) y w; (g) y w; Thor1/+; (h) y w; Thor1/GMR-Gal4; UAS-hFOXO3a-TM/+; (i) from right to left: y w;; dPKB3/dPKB1, y w;
Thor1/+; dPKB3/dPKB1, y w; Thor1/Thor1; dPKB3/dPKB1.

regulated by insulin through LY294002- and rapamycin-sensitive phosphorylation [57], suggesting involvement of the
Dp110 and dTOR signaling pathways. Phosphorylation of
d4E-BP leads to the dissociation of d4E-BP from its binding
partner, the translation initiation factor deIF4E, which then
participates in the formation of a functional initiation complex.
Positive transcriptional regulation of d4E-BP by dFOXO, which
corresponds to negative transcriptional regulation by insulin,
would be a complementary mechanism of regulation.
We then investigated whether overexpression of endogenous
dFOXO could induce transcriptional upregulation of the

d4E-BP gene. On the basis of our overexpression results, we
chose the Dp110DN-dFOXO coexpression to efficiently activate dFOXO. Eye imaginal discs from Dp110DN-expressing
third instar larvae display a low level of basal d4E-BP transcription throughout the disc, which is not induced by the driver
construct alone (Figure 6d). Coexpression of dFOXO elicited a
dramatic upregulation of d4E-BP transcription posterior to the
morphogenetic furrow (Figure 6e). Consistent with this observation, we were able to induce expression of the d4E-BP
enhancer trap line Thor1 with human FOXO3a-TM (Figure 6fh). It remained unclear, however, whether regulation of d4EBP expression by dFOXO is of physiological relevance.

Journal of Biology 2003, 2:20

20.12 Journal of Biology 2003,

Volume 2, Issue 3, Article 20

Jünger et al.

It has been previously reported that overexpression of d4EBP partially suppresses the dPKB overexpression phenotype
[57], but as ectopic expression experiments have to be interpreted with some caution, we assessed whether loss of d4EBP function suppresses the cell-number reduction in
insulin-signaling mutants as does loss of dFOXO function.
We generated double-mutant flies for dPKB and d4E-BP and
observed that the Thor1 mutation slightly but significantly
suppressed the reduced cell-number phenotype in a dosedependent manner. The Thor1 mutation itself had no effect
on ommatidial number compared to wild-type flies (data
not shown), so we can rule out additive effects of d4E-BP
and dPKB. These observations strongly argue that under
conditions of reduced insulin-signaling activity the dFOXOdependent reduction in cell number is in part mediated by
the transcriptional upregulation of its target d4E-BP.
Microarray studies in both mammalian [23] and Drosophila
[52] cells imply that FOXO transcription factors exert their
physiological functions by modulating expression of large
sets of target genes.

Discussion
Forkhead transcription factors of the FOXO subfamily
mediate insulin-regulated gene expression in C. elegans and
mammals. In this study, we provide genetic evidence that
the Drosophila FOXO/DAF-16 homolog dFOXO is an important downstream effector of Drosophila insulin signaling and
a regulator of stress resistance.

dFOXO is a critical target of dPKB but mediates
only part of its function
Genetic studies in C. elegans and Drosophila have led to two
models regarding the output of the insulin pathway. First,
the complete epistasis of daf-16 over the insulin pathway
mutants daf-2, age-1, akt-1 and akt-2 suggests that the
primary function of PKB is to inactivate FOXO transcription
factors [60]. Second, it has been proposed that the TSC
tumor suppressor complex is the major target of PKB
[61,62] in the regulation of cell growth in Drosophila. Our
analysis of Drosophila FOXO indicates that it is indeed a critical PKB target, but that it mediates only one aspect of PKB
function. Several lines of evidence support this model.
Firstly, the effects of ectopic overexpression of dFOXO and
hFOXO3a in the developing Drosophila eye are altered by
Dp110 and dPKB signaling as well as by nutrient levels.
Under conditions of lowered insulin signaling, the phenotypes resulting from expression of dFOXO and hFOXO3a
were dramatically enhanced. This situation was mimicked
by expressing a dPKB-insensitive phosphorylation mutant,
suggesting that endogenous dPKB signaling is required to
mitigate the effects of ectopically expressed dFOXO and
hFOXO3a. Secondly, the physiological relevance of dFOXO

http://jbiol.com/content/2/3/20

in dPKB signaling is most vividly demonstrated by our
observation that the larval lethality associated with the complete loss of dPKB is rescued by dFOXO mutations to the
extent that some flies develop to pharate adults. The lethality associated with loss of dPKB function is therefore to a
large extent due to the hyperactivation of dFOXO. Thirdly,
loss of dFOXO function suppresses the effects of insulinsignaling mutations only partially; dFOXO mediated a
reduction in cell number but not in cell size in response to
reduced insulin signaling.

dFOXO controls the reduction in cell number in
body-size mutants
Genetic analysis of the control of body size in Drosophila has
revealed two classes of mutations. Flies carrying mutations
in chico or viable allelic combinations of DInr, Dp110, and
dPKB are reduced in body size by up to 50% owing to a
reduction in both cell size and cell number. Conversely,
flies mutant for dS6K exhibit a more moderate reduction in
body size, caused almost exclusively by a reduction in cell
size [36]. This suggests that the pathways controlling cell
number and cell size bifurcate at or below dPKB. Although
dFOXO single mutants have no obvious size phenotype,
loss of dFOXO substantially suppresses the cell-number
reduction observed in insulin-signaling mutants. It appears
that dFOXO mediates the repression of proliferation in flies
mutant for DInr, chico, Dp110, and dPKB without being
required for the reduction in cell size. Chico-dFOXO double
mutant flies even have slightly smaller cells than chico
mutants, suggesting that removal of dFOXO permits cellcycle acceleration under conditions of impaired insulin signaling. The pathway controlling body size in response to
insulin therefore bifurcates at the level of dPKB: dPKB controls cell number by inhibiting dFOXO function and dPKB
controls cell size, at least under some conditions, by regulating S6K activity by phosphorylation of dTSC2 [29].
The signaling systems controlling cell size and cell number
are tightly interconnected. Genetic and biochemical analyses have revealed five different links between the dTSCdTOR-dS6K pathway and the DInr-dPKB-dFOXO pathway.
First, under conditions of unnaturally high insulin-signaling
activity (that is, following the oncogenic activation of
dPKB) dPKB phosphorylates and inactivates dTSC2, resulting in increased activation of dS6K [29]. Under normal
culture conditions this regulation does not seem critical,
however, loss of dPKB function does not lower dS6K activity in larval extracts [54]. Second, under physiological conditions, dPDK1 regulates dPKB as well as dS6K [63]. Third,
dS6K itself downregulates dPKB activity in a negative feedback loop [31]. Fourth, under severe starvation conditions,
nuclear dFOXO presumably activates target genes that
reduce cell proliferation. One of these target genes is

Journal of Biology 2003, 2:20

http://jbiol.com/content/2/3/20

Journal of Biology 2003,

d4E-BP, which encodes an inhibitor of translation initiation.
When conditions improve, the insulin and TOR signaling
pathways can stimulate translation by disrupting the 4EBP/eIF4E complex via phosphorylation of 4E-BP, and in parallel by repressing FOXO-dependent 4E-BP expression. Fifth,
under even more severe starvation or stress conditions, full
activation of dFOXO upregulates expression of the insulin
receptor itself, thus rendering the cell hypersensitive to low
insulin levels (see [52]). These multiple positive and negative interactions ensure a continuous fine adjustment of the
growth rate to changing environmental conditions.

has been shown that cytochrome P450 enzymes reduce the
toxic effects of paraquat in mice [67], they might partially
mediate the protective effect of dFOXO. Furthermore, it
remains to be established whether the regulation of dFOXO
by insulin is required for dFOXO’s protective properties. It
is tempting to speculate that distinct stress-induced signaling pathways activate dFOXO under conditions of cellular
stress, in addition to the negative input from the insulin
cascade, as several stress-induced phosphorylation sites are
conserved between hFOXO3a and dFOXO (A Brunet and
ME Greenberg, personal communication). This view is supported by our observation that overexpression of a FOXO
variant that cannot be inactivated by PKB elicits cell death,
a phenotype not observed in larval tissues lacking insulinsignaling components [45]. This result argues that dFOXO
induces cellular responses that are independent of insulin.

Evolutionary conservation of insulin signaling and
FOXO function
Genetic dissection of signaling by insulin and its target
DAF-16 has been pioneered in C. elegans and has helped to
unravel the role of this pathway in dauer formation and
longevity. Our analysis shows that the same pathway with
the homologous nuclear targets operates in flies in the
control of cell growth and proliferation, processes that do
not involve insulin signaling in worms. Dauer formation
and possibly longevity affect the entire organism and do not
depend on cell-autonomous functions of the insulin signaling pathway [64]. The cell-growth phenotype in Drosophila,
however, depends on the cell-autonomous functioning of
the insulin-signaling cascade [45]. Insects enter diapause in
response to diverse environmental cues (nutrients, day
length or temperature) and arrest development or the aging
process in a manner similar to dauer formation in worms
[65]. Ageing, and possibly diapause, is also under the
control of the insulin pathway in Drosophila [65,66]. It has
recently been shown that heterozygous IGF-1R mutant mice
also exhibit a prolonged lifespan [3]. It therefore appears
that the function of the insulin pathway, its components,
and possibly at least some of its targets, have been conserved throughout evolution.

dFOXO may integrate different forms of cellular
stress
The longevity phenotype of IGF-1R-deficient mice is associated with enhanced resistance to oxidative stress [3]. It is
likely that this phenomenon is due to hyperactivation of
FOXO proteins, as several studies have shown that FOXO
transcription factors play a role in the oxidative-stress
response in mammalian cells [16,17] as well as in C. elegans
[49]. Our observation that dFOXO mutant flies are hypersensitive to oxidative stress confirms that, in addition to
their role in insulin signaling, the role of FOXO proteins in
protecting against cellular stress is highly conserved. The
mechanism by which dFOXO confers oxidative-stress resistance is not yet known. In our microarray experiment, we
identified several genes encoding cytochrome P450
enzymes as dFOXO target gene candidates (Figure 6a). As it

Volume 2, Issue 3, Article 20

Jünger et al. 20.13

The emerging model postulates that positive and negative
inputs converge on FOXO proteins in response to different
environmental conditions, making them central and important integrators controlling cellular (cell-cycle progression)
and organismal adaptations (dauer formation, diapause
and longevity; see Figure 7). Elucidating the positive inputs
that converge on FOXO, by mutating conserved phosphorylation sites in the single Drosophila homolog of this class,
should help us to better understand dFOXO’s integrator
function.

Materials and methods
Identification of dFOXO
We searched the Drosophila genome [68] using a TBLASTN
algorithm for sequences with homology to the DNAbinding domain of human FOXO3a (amino acids 157251). The resultant matches were further assessed for the
presence of consensus PKB phosphorylation sites R-X-R-XX-S/T [37].
We used a genomic DNA stretch flanking the only identified
region fulfilling these criteria to search a collection of
Drosophila expressed sequence tags [69], which eventually
identified two clones (LD05569 and LD18492) containing
identical full-length cDNA sequences of 3.7 kb length. The
dFOXO gene is annotated in FlyBase [70] (FBgn0038197)
under the name foxo.

Generation of plasmids and transgenic flies
The cDNA clone LD05569 contains the full-length dFOXO
cDNA within the pBS-SK(+/-) vector (Stratagene [71]). To
generate a triple PKB phosphorylation mutant of dFOXO, we
used PCR-based site-directed mutagenesis (QuickChange,
Stratagene) to introduce the three point mutations T44A,
S190A and S259A. Primer sequences are available upon

Journal of Biology 2003, 2:20

20.14 Journal of Biology 2003,

Volume 2, Issue 3, Article 20

Jünger et al.

http://jbiol.com/content/2/3/20

UAS-dFOXO-TM, for which we did not obtain a viable
transformant line.
dInr
PIP2

dPKB

P Chico
P

p60

P

dPDK1

P

p110

dPI3K

Oxidative
stress

EMS reversion mutagenesis

PIP3

dPTEN
dTsc1/2

P P

dFOXO P

d4E-BP

dTOR

P

dFOXO

Cell number

dS6K P

To generate dFOXO loss-of-function mutants, homozygous
y w;; EP35-147 males were mutagenized with 27 mM ethyl
methanesulfonate (EMS) according to standard procedures
[74]. Mutagenized males were mated to homozygous y w;
GMR-Gal4 UAS-Dp110DN virgins. Roughly 60,000 F1
progeny were screened for suppression of semilethality and
the eye phenotype shown in Figure 3b. F1 revertants were
retested for transmission of the reversion to F2 and positive
candidate lines were then balanced over TM3 Sb Ser. To
characterize the mutations, the dFOXO open reading frame
from each individual mutagenized chromosome was amplified by RT-PCR and sequenced. The cDNA derived from the
unmutagenized EP35-147 chromosome was used as a reference sample to identify mutations. Promising mutations
were verified by double peak analysis of PCR fragments
amplified from genomic DNA using the Sequencher
program (Gene Codes Corporation [75]).

Drosophila strains

Cell size

Figure 7
dFOXO may be an integrator of cellular stress. We propose a model in
which dFOXO senses different forms of cellular stress (that is, nutrient
deprivation or reactive oxygen species) and induces cellular responses,
such as proliferation arrest, in part by repressing translation via
upregulation of d4E-BP. The various signaling proteins shown in the
figure are discussed in the text.

request. The mutated sequence was confirmed by doublestranded DNA sequencing. To generate UAS constructs, the
cDNA inserts from both wild-type dFOXO and triple-mutant
dFOXO were subcloned from pBS-SK(+/-) into the pUAST
transformation vector [72] as EcoRI-Asp718 fragments. The
corresponding UAS constructs containing the cDNA encoding wild-type and triple-mutant hFOXO3a [12] were generated by subcloning the inserts from pECE-HA-hFOXO3a and
pECE-HA-hFOXO3a-TM (generous gifts of Anne Brunet)
into pUAST as BglII-XbaI fragments. Fragments were excised
from the pECE clones via complete digestion with XbaI followed by partial BglII digestion. All sequences were confirmed by double-stranded DNA sequencing. The four
resultant UAS constructs are referred to as UAS-dFOXO,
UAS-dFOXO-TM, UAS-hFOXO3a and UAS-hFOXO3a-TM.
To generate transgenic Drosophila lines, P-element-mediated
germline transformation was carried out as described
previously [73]. Several independent transformant lines
were recovered for each construct with the exception of

The EP-35-147 line was kindly provided by Konrad Basler,
the GMR-Gal4 driver was a gift from M. Freeman. The GMRGal4, UAS-Dp110DN line was obtained from Sally Leevers,
the eiger mutants from Masayuki Miura, and the Thor1 line
from Paul Lasko.

Phenotype analyses
All phenotypes were analyzed in females raised at 25°C
unless indicated otherwise. Body weight, cell size and cell
number were determined as described previously [5]. The
body weight experiment was performed in duplicate, and
male and female flies were measured separately (n = 12 for
each gender and genotype; the highest and lowest values
were excluded from the analysis). Flies were reared under
identical, non-crowding conditions and were of identical
age (2 d) at the time of the experiment. The sizes of ommatidia and rhabdomeres were quantified with the program
NIH Image 1.61. [76].

Clonal analysis
To induce loss-of-function clones, we used the Flp/FRT and
ey-Flp systems to generate mosaic flies by mitotic recombination [47,77]. Overexpression clones were generated as
described [63].

In situ hybridizations
In situ hybridizations to eye imaginal discs was performed
as described [78,79]. The d4E-BP cDNA was PCR-amplified
with Pfu polymerase from Promega [80] from total doublestranded cDNA derived from adult y w flies and cloned

Journal of Biology 2003, 2:20

http://jbiol.com/content/2/3/20

Journal of Biology 2003,

into the pCAPS vector (PCR blunt-end cloning kit from
Roche [81]). Insert orientation was determined by sequencing. Vector-specific PCR primers flanking the multiple
cloning site (MCS) and containing either T7 or SP6 RNA
polymerase promoters were used to synthesize doublestranded DNA templates for the labeling in vitro transcription reaction. The sense probe was transcribed with T7 and
the antisense probe with SP6 RNA polymerase.

was placed in vials containing the PBS-sucrose gel without
oxidant. Dead flies were counted every 12 h (n = 80 for each
gender and genotype). The hydrogen peroxide and paraquat
experiments were each done in triplicate. Larval starvation
was performed by rearing larvae on normal fly food until 80
h after egg deposition, then floating them in 30% glycerol,
washing with water and transfering batches of 30-40 larvae
to vials containing a gel of either PBS, 20% sucrose and
0.8% agarose (sugar condition) or PBS-agarose only (complete starvation).

Cell culture
Drosophila embryonic Kc167 cells were maintained as
described elsewhere [53]. Briefly, cells were grown at 25°C
in Schneider’s Drosophila medium (Gibco/Invitrogen [82])
supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated fetal calf serum,
FCS. Cells were split and diluted to a density of 1x106 per
ml twice a week. For the microarray experiment, cells were
grown into the stationary phase for 7 d and then stimulated
with 100 nM bovine insulin for 2 h.

Microarray experiment
The microarray experiment was performed at the Functional
Genomics Center Zürich (FGCZ) using the Affymetrix
GeneChipTM system [83]. Total RNA was extracted from
untreated control cells and insulin-treated cells 2 h after
stimulation using the RNeasy Mini kit (Qiagen [84])
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. From each cell
population, three independent samples were taken,
processed in parallel and hybridized to three separate
microarrays. Synthesis of cDNA and labeled cRNA, array
hybridization and scanning were performed according to
the standard Affymetrix protocols. The .chp files for the
individual scanned microarrays were imported into the
Affymetrix Data Mining ToolTM software for data analysis.

Stress treatments
Stress-resistance experiments were performed with 3-dayold adult flies, and males and females were assayed separately. For bacterial infection experiments, adult flies were
pricked with a thin needle which had been dipped in a concentrated bacterial culture [85]. Bacterial strains tested were
the Gram-negative Erwinia carotovora carotovora and the
Gram-positive Micrococcus luteus. Heat shock was performed
by continuous exposure to 37°C. Resistance to heavy metals
during development was assayed by rearing flies on food
containing either 2.5 mM copper, 6 mM zinc or 200 ␮M
cadmium. For the starvation test, flies were transferred from
normal food to empty vials closed with a wet foam stopper.
For oxidative-stress challenge, flies were starved in empty
vials for 6 h and then transferred to vials containing a gel of
phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), 10% sucrose, 0.8% lowmelt agarose and the respective oxidative agent (either 5%
H2O2 or 20 mM paraquat). The oxidant was added to the
solution after cooling to 40°C. A control population of flies

Volume 2, Issue 3, Article 20

Jünger et al. 20.15

Acknowledgements
We thank Konrad Basler, Sally Leevers, Paul Lasko and Masayuki Miura
for fly stocks; Anne Brunet for the hFOXO3a constructs and critical
reading of the manuscript; Christof Hugentobler and Dieter Egli for help
with fly work and scanning electron microscopy; the DNA sequencing
core facility at Children’s Hospital, Boston, for DNA sequencing; Ruth
Keist, Laura Huopaniemi and Andrea Patrignani for assistance in the
microarray experiment; the FGCZ for financial support; members of
the Hafen lab for helpful discussions; and Robert Tjian and Brian E.
Staveley for exchanging information prior to publication. This work was
supported by grants from the Swiss National Science Foundation and
the Swiss Cancer League to E.H., by the Roche Research Foundation to
T.R., and by the National Institutes of Health and the Mental Retardation Research Center to M.E.G. A research fellowship from Trinity
College, Cambridge supported J.D.W. in part.

References
1.

Takahashi Y, Kadowaki H, Momomura K, Fukushima Y, Orban T,
Okai T, Taketani Y, Akanuma Y, Yazaki Y, Kadowaki T: A
homozygous kinase-defective mutation in the insulin
receptor gene in a patient with leprechaunism. Diabetologia
1997, 40:412-420.
2. Baker J, Liu JP, Robertson EJ, Efstratiadis A: Role of insulin-like
growth factors in embryonic and postnatal growth. Cell
1993, 75:73-82.
3. Holzenberger M, Dupont J, Ducos B, Leneuve P, Geloen A, Even
PC, Cervera P, Le Bouc Y: IGF-1 receptor regulates lifespan
and resistance to oxidative stress in mice. Nature 2003,
421:182-187.
4. Kimura KD, Tissenbaum HA, Liu Y, Ruvkun G: daf-2, an insulin
receptor-like gene that regulates longevity and diapause
in Caenorhabditis elegans. Science 1997, 277:942-946.
5. Brogiolo W, Stocker H, Ikeya T, Rintelen F, Fernandez R, Hafen E:
An evolutionarily conserved function of the Drosophila
insulin receptor and insulin-like peptides in growth
control. Curr Biol 2001, 11:213-221.
6. Tatar M, Kopelman A, Epstein D, Tu MP, Yin CM, Garofalo RS: A
mutant Drosophila insulin receptor homolog that extends
life-span and impairs neuroendocrine function. Science
2001, 292:107-110.
7. Clancy DJ, Gems D, Harshman LG, Oldham S, Stocker H, Hafen E,
Leevers SJ, Partridge L: Extension of life-span by loss of
CHICO, a Drosophila insulin receptor substrate protein.
Science 2001, 292:104-106.
8. Cantley LC: The phosphoinositide 3-kinase pathway. Science
2002, 296:1655-1657.
9. Maehama T, Dixon JE: The tumor suppressor, PTEN/
MMAC1, dephosphorylates the lipid second messenger,
phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate. J Biol Chem 1998,
273:13375-13378.
10. Stocker H, Andjelkovic M, Oldham S, Laffargue M, Wymann MP,
Hemmings BA, Hafen E: Living with lethal PIP3 levels: viability of flies lacking PTEN restored by a PH domain mutation in Akt/PKB. Science 2002, 295:2088-2091.

Journal of Biology 2003, 2:20

20.16 Journal of Biology 2003,

Volume 2, Issue 3, Article 20

Jünger et al.

11. Burgering BM, Kops GJ: Cell cycle and death control: long
live Forkheads. Trends Biochem Sci 2002, 27:352-360.
12. Brunet A, Bonni A, Zigmond MJ, Lin MZ, Juo P, Hu LS, Anderson
MJ, Arden KC, Blenis J, Greenberg ME: Akt promotes cell
survival by phosphorylating and inhibiting a Forkhead
transcription factor. Cell 1999, 96:857-868.
13. Kops GJ, de Ruiter ND, De Vries-Smits AM, Powell DR, Bos JL,
Burgering BM: Direct control of the Forkhead transcription
factor AFX by protein kinase B. Nature 1999, 398:630-634.
14. Brunet A, Park J, Tran H, Hu LS, Hemmings BA, Greenberg ME:
Protein kinase SGK mediates survival signals by phosphorylating the forkhead transcription factor FKHRL1
(FOXO3a). Mol Cell Biol 2001, 21:952-965.
15. Tran H, Brunet A, Grenier JM, Datta SR, Fornace AJ, Jr., DiStefano
PS, Chiang LW, Greenberg ME: DNA repair pathway stimulated by the forkhead transcription factor FOXO3a
through the Gadd45 protein. Science 2002, 296:530-534.
16. Kops GJ, Dansen TB, Polderman PE, Saarloos I, Wirtz KW, Coffer
PJ, Huang TT, Bos JL, Medema RH, Burgering BM: Forkhead
transcription factor FOXO3a protects quiescent cells
from oxidative stress. Nature 2002, 419:316-321.
17. Furukawa-Hibi Y, Yoshida-Araki K, Ohta T, Ikeda K, Motoyama N:
FOXO forkhead transcription factors induce G(2)-M
checkpoint in response to oxidative stress. J Biol Chem 2002,
277:26729-26732.
18. Dijkers PF, Medema RH, Lammers JW, Koenderman L, Coffer PJ:
Expression of the pro-apoptotic Bcl-2 family member Bim
is regulated by the forkhead transcription factor FKHRL1. Curr Biol 2000, 10:1201-1204.
19. Dijkers PF, Medema RH, Pals C, Banerji L, Thomas NS, Lam EW,
Burgering BM, Raaijmakers JA, Lammers JW, Koenderman L, et al.:
Forkhead transcription factor FKHR-L1 modulates
cytokine-dependent transcriptional regulation of p27(KIP1).
Mol Cell Biol 2000, 20:9138-9148.
20. Alvarez B, Martinez AC, Burgering BM, Carrera AC: Forkhead
transcription factors contribute to execution of the
mitotic programme in mammals. Nature 2001, 413:744-747.
21. Medema RH, Kops GJ, Bos JL, Burgering BM: AFX-like Forkhead transcription factors mediate cell-cycle regulation by
Ras and PKB through p27kip1. Nature 2000, 404:782-787.
22. Barthel A, Schmoll D, Kruger KD, Bahrenberg G, Walther R, Roth
RA, Joost HG: Differential regulation of endogenous
glucose-6-phosphatase and phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase gene expression by the forkhead transcription
factor FKHR in H4IIE-hepatoma cells. Biochem Biophys Res
Commun 2001, 285:897-902.
23. Ramaswamy S, Nakamura N, Sansal I, Bergeron L, Sellers WR: A
novel mechanism of gene regulation and tumor suppression
by the transcription factor FKHR. Cancer Cell 2002, 2:81-91.
24. Schmidt M, de Mattos SF, van der Horst A, Klompmaker R, Kops
GJ, Lam EW, Burgering BM, Medema RH: Cell cycle inhibition
by FoxO forkhead transcription factors involves downregulation of cyclin D. Mol Cell Biol 2002, 22:7842-7852.
25. Nakae J, Biggs WH, 3rd, Kitamura T, Cavenee WK, Wright CV,
Arden KC, Accili D: Regulation of insulin action and pancreatic beta-cell function by mutated alleles of the gene
encoding forkhead transcription factor Foxo1. Nat Genet
2002, 32:245-253.
26. Borkhardt A, Repp R, Haas OA, Leis T, Harbott J, Kreuder J, Hammermann J, Henn T, Lampert F: Cloning and characterization
of AFX, the gene that fuses to MLL in acute leukemias
with a t(X;11)(q13;q23). Oncogene 1997, 14:195-202.
27. Sublett JE, Jeon IS, Shapiro DN: The alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma PAX3/FKHR fusion protein is a transcriptional activator. Oncogene 1995, 11:545-552.
28. Inoki K, Li Y, Zhu T, Wu J, Guan KL: TSC2 is phosphorylated
and inhibited by Akt and suppresses mTOR signalling. Nat
Cell Biol 2002, 4:648-657.
29. Potter CJ, Pedraza LG, Xu T: Akt regulates growth by directly
phosphorylating Tsc2. Nat Cell Biol 2002, 4:658-665.
30. Gao X, Zhang Y, Arrazola P, Hino O, Kobayashi T, Yeung RS, Ru
B, Pan D: Tsc tumour suppressor proteins antagonize
amino-acid-TOR signalling. Nat Cell Biol 2002, 4:699-704.

http://jbiol.com/content/2/3/20

31. Radimerski T, Montagne J, Hemmings-Mieszczak M, Thomas G:
Lethality of Drosophila lacking TSC tumor suppressor
function rescued by reducing dS6K signaling. Genes Dev
2002, 16:2627-2632.
32. Stocker H, Radimerski T, Schindelholz B, Wittwer F, Belawat P,
Daram P, Breuer S, Thomas G, Hafen E: Rheb is an essential
regulator of S6K in controlling cell growth in Drosophila.
Nat Cell Biol 2003, 5:559-566.
33. Zhang Y, Gao X, Saucedo LJ, Ru B, Edgar BA, Pan D: Rheb is a
direct target of the tuberous sclerosis tumour suppressor
proteins. Nat Cell Biol 2003, 5:578-581.
34. Saucedo LJ, Gao X, Chiarelli DA, Li L, Pan D, Edgar BA: Rheb
promotes cell growth as a component of the insulin/TOR
signalling network. Nat Cell Biol 2003, 5:566-571.
35. Garami A, Zwartkruis FJ, Nobukuni T, Joaquin M, Roccio M,
Stocker H, Kozma SC, Hafen E, Bos JL, Thomas G: Insulin activation of Rheb, a mediator of mTOR/S6K/4E-BP signaling, is
inhibited by TSC1 and 2. Mol Cell 2003, 11:1457-1466.
36. Montagne J, Stewart MJ, Stocker H, Hafen E, Kozma SC, Thomas
G: Drosophila S6 kinase: a regulator of cell size. Science
1999, 285:2126-2129.
37. Alessi DR, Caudwell FB, Andjelkovic M, Hemmings BA, Cohen P:
Molecular basis for the substrate specificity of protein
kinase B; comparison with MAPKAP kinase-1 and p70 S6
kinase. FEBS Lett 1996, 399:333-338.
38. Hay BA, Wassarman DA, Rubin GM: Drosophila homologs of
baculovirus inhibitor of apoptosis proteins function to
block cell death. Cell 1995, 83:1253-1262.
39. Leevers SJ, Weinkove D, MacDougall LK, Hafen E, Waterfield MD:
The Drosophila phosphoinositide 3-kinase Dp110 promotes cell growth. EMBO J 1996, 15:6584-6594.
40. Beadle G, Tatum E, Clancy C: Food level in relation to rate of
development and eye pigmentation in Drosophila
melanogaster. Biol Bull 1938, 75:447-462.
41. Zinke I, Schutz CS, Katzenberger JD, Bauer M, Pankratz MJ:
Nutrient control of gene expression in Drosophila:
microarray analysis of starvation and sugar-dependent
response. EMBO J 2002, 21:6162-6173.
42. Ollmann M, Young LM, Di Como CJ, Karim F, Belvin M, Robertson
S, Whittaker K, Demsky M, Fisher WW, Buchman A, et al.:
Drosophila p53 is a structural and functional homolog of
the tumor suppressor p53. Cell 2000, 101:91-101.
43. Igaki T, Kanda H, Yamamoto-Goto Y, Kanuka H, Kuranaga E,
Aigaki T, Miura M: Eiger, a TNF superfamily ligand that
triggers the Drosophila JNK pathway. EMBO J 2002,
21:3009-3018.
44. Kramer JM, Davidge JT, Lockyer JM, Staveley BE: Expression of
Drosophila FOXO regulates growth and can phenocopy
starvation. BMC Dev Biol 2003, 3:5.
45. Bohni R, Riesgo-Escovar J, Oldham S, Brogiolo W, Stocker H,
Andruss BF, Beckingham K, Hafen E: Autonomous control of
cell and organ size by CHICO, a Drosophila homolog of
vertebrate IRS1-4. Cell 1999, 97:865-875.
46. Weinkove D, Neufeld TP, Twardzik T, Waterfield MD, Leevers SJ:
Regulation of imaginal disc cell size, cell number and
organ size by Drosophila class I(A) phosphoinositide 3kinase and its adaptor. Curr Biol 1999, 9:1019-1029.
47. Newsome TP, Asling B, Dickson BJ: Analysis of Drosophila photoreceptor axon guidance in eye-specific mosaics. Development 2000, 127:851-860.
48. Oldham S, Stocker H, Laffargue M, Wittwer F, Wymann M, Hafen
E: The Drosophila insulin/IGF receptor controls growth
and size by modulating PtdInsP(3) levels. Development 2002,
129:4103-4109.
49. Honda Y, Honda S: The daf-2 gene network for longevity
regulates oxidative stress resistance and Mn-superoxide
dismutase gene expression in Caenorhabditis elegans. FASEB
J 1999, 13:1385-1393.
50. Dijkers PF, Birkenkamp KU, Lam EW, Thomas NS, Lammers JW,
Koenderman L, Coffer PJ: FKHR-L1 can act as a critical effector of cell death induced by cytokine withdrawal: protein
kinase B-enhanced cell survival through maintenance of
mitochondrial integrity. J Cell Biol 2002, 156:531-542.

Journal of Biology 2003, 2:20

http://jbiol.com/content/2/3/20

Journal of Biology 2003,

51. Yanase S, Yasuda K, Ishii N: Adaptive responses to oxidative
damage in three mutants of Caenorhabditis elegans (age-1,
mev-1 and daf-16) that affect life span. Mech Ageing Dev 2002,
123:1579-87.
52. Puig O, Marr MT, Ruhf ML, Tjian R: Control of cell number by
Drosophila FOXO: downstream and feedback regulation
of the insulin receptor pathway. Genes Dev, in press.
53. Radimerski T, Mini T, Schneider U, Wettenhall RE, Thomas G,
Jeno P: Identification of insulin-induced sites of ribosomal
protein S6 phosphorylation in Drosophila melanogaster. Biochemistry 2000, 39:5766-5774.
54. Radimerski T, Montagne J, Rintelen F, Stocker H, van der Kaay J,
Downes CP, Hafen E, Thomas G: dS6K-regulated cell growth
is dPKB/dPI(3)K-independent, but requires dPDK1. Nat Cell
Biol 2002, 4:251-255.
55. Furuyama T, Nakazawa T, Nakano I, Mori N: Identification of
the differential distribution patterns of mRNAs and consensus binding sequences for mouse DAF-16 homologues.
Biochem J 2000, 349:629-634.
56. Zinke I, Kirchner C, Chao LC, Tetzlaff MT, Pankratz MJ: Suppression of food intake and growth by amino acids in
Drosophila: the role of pumpless, a fat body expressed gene
with homology to vertebrate glycine cleavage system.
Development 1999, 126:5275-5284.
57. Miron M, Verdu J, Lachance PE, Birnbaum MJ, Lasko PF, Sonenberg
N: The translational inhibitor 4E-BP is an effector of
PI(3)K/Akt signalling and cell growth in Drosophila. Nat Cell
Biol 2001, 3:596-601.
58. Bernal A, Kimbrell DA: Drosophila Thor participates in host
immune defense and connects a translational regulator with
innate immunity. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2000, 97:6019-6024.
59. Rodriguez A, Zhou Z, Tang ML, Meller S, Chen J, Bellen H, Kimbrell DA: Identification of immune system and response
genes, and novel mutations causing melanotic tumor
formation in Drosophila melanogaster. Genetics 1996,
143:929-940.
60. Paradis S, Ruvkun G: Caenorhabditis elegans Akt/PKB transduces insulin receptor-like signals from AGE-1 PI3 kinase
to the DAF-16 transcription factor. Genes Dev 1998,
12:2488-2498.
61. Potter CJ, Huang H, Xu T: Drosophila Tsc1 functions with
Tsc2 to antagonize insulin signaling in regulating cell
growth, cell proliferation, and organ size. Cell 2001,
105:357-368.
62. Gao X, Pan D: TSC1 and TSC2 tumor suppressors antagonize insulin signaling in cell growth. Genes Dev 2001,
15:1383-1392.
63. Rintelen F, Stocker H, Thomas G, Hafen E: PDK1 regulates
growth through Akt and S6K in Drosophila. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 2001, 98:15020-15025.

64. Apfeld J, Kenyon C: Cell nonautonomy of C. elegans daf-2
function in the regulation of diapause and life span. Cell
1998, 95:199-210.
65. Tatar M, Yin C: Slow aging during insect reproductive diapause: why butterflies, grasshoppers and flies are like
worms. Exp Gerontol 2001, 36:723-738.
66. Partridge L, Gems D: Mechanisms of ageing: public or
private? Nat Rev Genet 2002, 3:165-175.
67. Shimada H, Furuno H, Hirai K, Koyama J, Ariyama J, Simamura E:
Paraquat detoxicative system in the mouse liver postmitochondrial fraction. Arch Biochem Biophys 2002, 402:149-157.
68. Adams MD, Celniker SE, Holt RA, Evans CA, Gocayne JD, Amanatides PG, Scherer SE, Li PW, Hoskins RA, Galle RF, et al.: The
genome sequence of Drosophila melanogaster. Science 2000,
287:2185-2195.
69. Rubin GM, Hong L, Brokstein P, Evans-Holm M, Frise E, Stapleton
M, Harvey DA: A Drosophila complementary DNA
resource. Science 2000, 287:2222-2224.
70. FlyBase [http://flybase.org]
71. Stratagene [http://www.stratagene.com]
72. Brand AH, Perrimon N: Targeted gene expression as a
means of altering cell fates and generating dominant phenotypes. Development 1993, 118:401-415.
73. Basler K, Christen B, Hafen E: Ligand-independent activation of
the sevenless receptor tyrosine kinase changes the fate of
cells in the developing Drosophila eye. Cell 1991, 64:1069-1081.
74. Ashburner M: Drosophila. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press:
Cold Spring Harbor; 1989.
75. Gene Codes Corporation [http://www.genecodes.com]
76. NIH Image [http://rsb.info.nih.gov/nih-image]
77. Xu T, Rubin GM: Analysis of genetic mosaics in developing
and adult Drosophila tissues. Development 1993, 117:1223-1237.
78. Lehmann R, Tautz D: In situ hybridization to RNA. Methods
Cell Biol 1994, 44:575-598.
79. O’Neill JW, Bier E: Double-label in situ hybridization using
biotin and digoxigenin-tagged RNA probes. Biotechniques
1994, 17:870-875.
80. Promega [http://www.promega.com]
81. Roche [http://www.roche-applied-science.com]
82. Invitrogen life technologies [http://www.invitrogen.com]
83. Affymetrix [http://www.affymetrix.com]
84. Qiagen [http://www.qiagen.com]
85. Lemaitre B, Reichhart JM, Hoffmann JA: Drosophila host
defense: differential induction of antimicrobial peptide
genes after infection by various classes of microorganisms. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1997, 94:14614-14619.
86. Weigelt J, Climent I, Dahlman-Wright K, Wikstrom M: Solution
structure of the DNA binding domain of the human forkhead transcription factor AFX (FOXO4). Biochemistry 2001,
40:5861-5869.

Journal of Biology 2003, 2:20

Volume 2, Issue 3, Article 20

Jünger et al. 20.17

</pre>
</body>
</html>
