<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Families of transposable elements, population structure and the origin of species</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Biology Direct 2011, 6:44. doi:10.1186/1745-6150-6-44"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Jerzy Jurka"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Jurka et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:44
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/44

HYPOTHESIS

Open Access

Families of transposable elements, population
structure and the origin of species
Jerzy Jurka*, Weidong Bao and Kenji K Kojima

Abstract
Background: Eukaryotic genomes harbor diverse families of repetitive DNA derived from transposable elements
(TEs) that are able to replicate and insert into genomic DNA. The biological role of TEs remains unclear, although
they have profound mutagenic impact on eukaryotic genomes and the origin of repetitive families often correlates
with speciation events. We present a new hypothesis to explain the observed correlations based on classical
concepts of population genetics.
Presentation of the hypothesis: The main thesis presented in this paper is that the TE-derived repetitive families
originate primarily by genetic drift in small populations derived mostly by subdivisions of large populations into
subpopulations. We outline the potential impact of the emerging repetitive families on genetic diversification of
different subpopulations, and discuss implications of such diversification for the origin of new species.
Testing the hypothesis: Several testable predictions of the hypothesis are examined. First, we focus on the
prediction that the number of diverse families of TEs fixed in a representative genome of a particular species
positively correlates with the cumulative number of subpopulations (demes) in the historical metapopulation from
which the species has emerged. Furthermore, we present evidence indicating that human AluYa5 and AluYb8
families might have originated in separate proto-human subpopulations. We also revisit prior evidence linking the
origin of repetitive families to mammalian phylogeny and present additional evidence linking repetitive families to
speciation based on mammalian taxonomy. Finally, we discuss evidence that mammalian orders represented by
the largest numbers of species may be subject to relatively recent population subdivisions and speciation events.
Implications of the hypothesis: The hypothesis implies that subdivision of a population into small
subpopulations is the major step in the origin of new families of TEs as well as of new species. The origin of new
subpopulations is likely to be driven by the availability of new biological niches, consistent with the hypothesis of
punctuated equilibria. The hypothesis also has implications for the ongoing debate on the role of genetic drift in
genome evolution.
Reviewers: This article was reviewed by Eugene Koonin, Juergen Brosius and I. King Jordan.

Background
Eukaryotic genomes contain multiple copies of TEs historically known as “interspersed repetitive DNA.” This
repetitive DNA originates from different classes of TEs,
multiplying and integrating themselves or other DNA in
the host genomes at different evolutionary periods. TEs
play an intrinsic role in genome evolution [1-5] and are
even viewed by some as major drivers of genome evolution including speciation events [6-9]. All interspersed
* Correspondence: jurka@girinst.org
Genetic Information Research Institute, 1925 Landings Drive, Mountain View,
CA 94043, USA

repeats tend to be composed of distinct families in
terms of their age and DNA sequence characteristics, as
was first documented in the case of human Alu elements [10-15]. It is generally accepted that most, if not
all, large mammalian families of TEs originate from a
small number of actively expressed copies called
“source”, “founder” or “master” genes and produce discrete families of “repetitive elements”.
Sequence studies point to a large diversity among TE
families originating in different species. For example,
mammals tend to harbor a small number of large families
with few recently active elements whereas plants, insects
and fish frequently harbor numerous small families

© 2011 Jurka et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Jurka et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:44
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/44

composed of very young TEs [16]. Furthermore, many
families of TEs are species-specific even in species from
the same lineage. Biological properties of TEs and their
interactions with the host molecular environment do not
satisfactorily explain these observed patterns.
In this paper we propose that the observed speciesspecific differences between families of TEs are determined, at least to a large extent, by the population
structure of the host. Fixation of TEs can take place in
small populations by genetic drift [17-20], and small
population sizes might have played a major role in fixation of non-adaptive DNA in eukaryotes, including TEs
[21-23]. Recently a link between accumulation of TEs
and small population sizes was hypothesized in the context of speciation [24]. Here we further explore this link
to address the observed lineage-specific properties of
repetitive families and their coincidence with speciation
events.
A large population with a heterogeneous pool of active
TEs can subdivide into small subpopulations (demes),
each carrying a random set of active elements. If the subpopulations are small enough and gene flow among them
slow enough, they will be subject to genetic drift [25].
Some of the subpopulations may eventually evolve into
independent species, each with unique assortment of
repetitive families derived from the founding set of active
elements. This is known as the “founder effect” that was
first fully articulated by Ernst Mayr in 1952 (see [26]).
Those demes that do not evolve into a new species may
go extinct or exchange their genetic material within the
population and contribute to its genetic diversity. If the
hypothesis is correct, then studies of repetitive families
can be of fundamental importance for understanding the
relationship between population structure and speciation.

Presentation of the hypothesis
The carrier subpopulation (CASP) hypothesis

We assume that most eukaryotic populations include
individuals that carry a variety of active TEs (source
genes), not fully suppressed by the silencing mechanisms.
Active TEs that survive the silencing are likely to be outliers in terms of their mosaic structure (e.g. new SINE
elements), or sequence divergence. We also assume that
the fixation of repetitive families takes place primarily in
small populations by genetic drift and that the transposed
copies of TEs are neutral or slightly harmful. The number of TEs fixed under relaxed selection in small populations is determined primarily by the rate of transposition
and the time during which the elements were active
[27-29].
Figure 1 schematically illustrates a hypothetical splitting of a large population, with a pool of active TEs,
into small subpopulations that inherit either some of the
active TEs (Figure 1B, C, D), or none (Figure 1A). The

Page 2 of 16

(A)

(B)

(C)

(D)

Figure 1 Schematic subdivision of a population into
subpopulations. Colored circles represent active TEs (source genes).

inherited active elements can produce new families of
repetitive elements primarily due to fixation by genetic
drift in small subpopulations. If two or more different
types of TEs are active in a small subpopulation (Figure
1C), they may generate multiple families of similar age
due to parallel fixation by genetic drift.
Most subpopulations will remain connected to their
metapopulations through migrations of their genetic
material (gene flow), and the distribution of different
families of TEs in metapopulations is likely to be determined by a balance between genetic drift and migrations,
analogously to the distribution of neutral genes [30].
Over time, highly structured metapopulations are
expected to accumulate unique sets of diverse families of
TEs due to local fixations in subpopulations, often
exposed to local environmental challenges, followed by
migrations [31-33]. This diversity will eventually be
reflected by the number of different families fixed in the
genomic DNA of the surviving species. The hypothesis
implies that highly subdivided populations will harbor
multiple families of diverse TEs and vice versa. The size
of each family is expected to positively correlate with the
rate of transposition and to negatively correlate with the
rate of genetic flow between different subpopulations.
Carrier subpopulations and the origin of species

The potential involvement of TEs in speciation has been
discussed since the early eighties based on the contributions of Barbara McClintock (reviewed in [34]), and the
discovery of hybrid dysgenesis [35,36]. The common
thread of these early hypotheses was that bursts of TEs
could contribute to reproductive isolation between some
populations, which eventually can evolve into new species. However, over time the general appeal of those
ideas has diminished as it became clear that hybrid dysgenesis may not be sufficiently common to support a

Jurka et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:44
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/44

more general involvement of TEs and their contribution
to reproductive isolation remained elusive [37,38]. Nevertheless, more recent studies of interspecific hybridization
and its role in activation of TEs [39-42] bring a renewed
interest in the classical ideas of speciation and the involvement of TEs [43,44]. The ubiquitous amplification of
TEs by genetic drift in subdivided populations may provide a new framework to pursue those classical ideas.
The CASP hypothesis proposes that the population subdivision triggers fixation of repetitive families by genetic
drift. Therefore, new repetitive families are likely to coincide with the origin of a new species from small subpopulations whether or not TEs contribute to the process of
speciation. At the same time, accumulation of TEs in different subpopulations may eventually help them to “drift
apart” due to their mutagenic impact driven by the rate of
transposition, which can increase the probability of reproductive isolation due to genetic diversification. Such
mechanistic scenarios were already explored in the early
eighties [45], but the general role of genetic drift in amplification of repetitive families was not clearly recognized at
the time. The population subdivision and the resulting
diversification of local subpopulations will also inevitably
lead to occasional formation of hybrids combining ancestral mutations and accumulating new ones generated by
active TEs introduced during crossbreeding. From this
perspective, the emergence of a new species is a process
rather than an event and it is likely to involve multiple factors [46], including the TE-mediated diversification of different subpopulations.
The TE-mediated diversification is most likely to cause
productive speciation if TEs can expand to large families
in a relatively short time and increase the chances of
reproductive isolation. Probably only a few subpopulations can survive large bursts of mutations and only a
few active TEs can reach such bursts of activity. Therefore, large repetitive families are probably derived from a
small number of the most active TEs, which is consistent
with the “master gene” hypothesis [15]. Slowly replicating
TEs are probably less likely to affect speciation. They are
also less destructive and, as such, less frequently suppressed by the silencing mechanisms. Therefore, they are
more likely to be represented by multiple active copies as
proposed by the “transposon model” [47,48].
The rapid TE-mediated diversification is likely to be
evolutionarily significant in populations that cannot
easily subdivide into isolated subpopulations for any
extended period of time. Highly dispersible populations
are less likely to produce species with large species-specific repetitive families. Furthermore, the critical mass of
mutations that contribute to the effective separation of
different subpopulations is expected to positively correlate with genome size. As new species emerge, and their
populations continue to grow, the rate of fixation of

Page 3 of 16

new TEs by genetic drift is likely to decline. It can be
revived again by new cycles of subdivisions producing
small subpopulations and new families of TEs.

Testing the hypothesis
Diverse families of TEs and the population structure

Table 1 illustrates diversity of TEs in vertebrates, insects
and plants [16] for selected, well annotated species from
Repbase [49,50]. The diversity is defined as the number
of different TE families per species (listed in columns 2
and 3), irrespective of their biological classification. To
simplify the analysis, we do not distinguish between
families and subfamilies of TEs [49-51]. Also, throughout this paper we focus primarily on the analysis of relatively young families, which are better preserved than
the older ones and can be more reliably identified and
classified. As is shown in the Table, the numbers of
diverse families in two different mosquito species (A.
gambiae and A. aegypti) differ by a factor of magnitude.
Analogous, although less dramatic differences in the
diversity of TEs can be seen in vertebrates and plants.
Among the four plants listed, the most “primitive” ones
(S. moellendorffii and P. patens) have the lowest numbers of different families of TEs.
The CASP hypothesis implies that the number of diverse
families of TEs fixed in a genome of an individual representing a particular species will positively correlate with
the cumulative number of subpopulations (demes) in the
historical metapopulation from which the species has
emerged. Based on the hypothesis we predict that the
population of A. aegypti has been more subdivided in its
recent evolutionary history than that of A. gambiae. This
is consistent with the apparent adaptability of A. aegypti as
it spread to new geographical locations in recent history
[52]. In plants, more primitive species (S. moellendorffii
and P. patens) probably generated fewer subpopulations in

Table 1 Diversity of TEs in selected species
Species

No. Families
< 1% divergent

No. Families
< 5% divergent

Danio rerio

124

217

Mammals (range)

0-23

5-113

Xenopus tropicalis

26

91

Anopheles gambiae

50

115

Aedes aegypti

561

1093

Drosophila melanogaster

19

49

Arabidopsis thaliana

52

199

Zea mays
Selaginella moellendorffii

149
11

265
24

4

8

Physcomitrella patens

Diversity of TEs is defined as the number of different families per genome.
DNA sequence divergence for individual families is defined as a percentage of
base substitutions either relative to their consensus sequences or between
LTRs in the case of LTR retrotransposon families.

Jurka et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:44
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/44

their recent evolutionary history than the more modern
ones (A. thaliana, Z. mays). This may be due to lack of
niches that could be successfully invaded by new subpopulations due to competition from modern plant species.
Invasion of new niches may also be difficult for highly specialized organisms, including colonial insects and parasites,
some of which are known to have no active TEs [53].
Active TEs may develop complex relationships with
each other and with the host environment [16,54], which
may lead to a competitive relationship and negative correlation between families derived from biologically unrelated TEs such as LTR and non-LTR retrotransposons.
On the other hand, the CASP hypothesis predicts positive
correlation between the total number of diverse families
and the number of subpopulations in metapopulations.
This implies that any two subsets of biologically unrelated families should also positively correlate with each
other as they both correlate with the number of subpopulations. To test this prediction, we analyzed correlation
between the overall numbers of families of long terminal
repeats (LTRs) and all the remaining families derived
from non-LTR retrotransposons and DNA transposons,
for 111 groups of species represented in Repbase [49,50].
The species were combined into groups based on the
first part of their binomial names. For example, all Drosophilidae (D. melanogaster, D. mojavensis, D. pseudoobscura, etc.) were combined into a single group. In the next
step, we calculated the total number of different LTRs
deposited in Repbase, and the analogous combined number of all the remaining TEs for the same group of species. Each sequence deposited in Repbase represents a
single family of TEs [51]. In this way we obtained 111
pairs of numbers representing the total counts of LTR
families and of the remaining TE families for each group
of species, excluding mammals, which were analyzed
separately. We calculated linear correlation between logarithmic values of the corresponding family counts due to
a substantial positive skew in their distribution (Figure 2:
r = 0.43; P < 0.0001). In a separate analysis, a significant
positive correlation was also found between analogous
sets of mammalian repetitive families less than 15%
divergent from their consensus sequences (r = 0.74; P <
0.0001). However, the significance was marginal for
families < 5% divergent from their consensus sequences
due to relative underrepresentation of young families in
mammals.
Parallel fixation of multiple TE families in a subpopulation

A small subpopulation can “incubate” multiple repetitive
families fixed by genetic drift, provided that it carries
multiple active TEs (Figure 1C). This may lead to the
corresponding species-specific assortments of diverse
repetitive families if the subpopulation becomes the
founder populations for new species. The parallel

Page 4 of 16

fixation model also predicts that repetitive families generated by TEs in small populations are likely to be of
similar age and are likely to be accompanied by contemporary fixations of unrelated mutations such as base
substitutions, satellite amplifications, chromosomal rearrangements etc.
Currently, the most detailed comparative data on multiple repetitive families of TEs are available for mammalian species (Table 2). Most young families of TEs listed
in Table 2 (< 1% divergent from their respective consensus sequences), are species-specific, i.e. they are closer to
each other within species than between species. In this
respect they most likely reflect a stochastic assortment of
diverse active TEs from which they were derived. Mammalian TEs are derived from two major types of TEs
using different mechanisms of reproduction: L1 retrotransposons (LINEs, SINEs) and endogenous retroviruses. However, in bat (Myotis lucifugus), these two
groups are accompanied by at least two different types of
DNA transposons (hAT, Mariner). Some of them (e.g.
SPIN_NA_1_Et) were probably introduced by a horizontal transfer [55], but they all appear to have expanded
into repetitive families in a similar period of time.
According to one variant of the CASP hypothesis, this
could be due to favourable conditions for fixation by
genetic drift in a small subpopulation ancestral to at least
one species of bats. The same logic applies to older likely
horizontal transfers in mammals such as Vingi TEs in
hedgehogs [56] or RTE TEs in ruminants [57], except
that families derived from these TEs are shared by multiple species descending from the ancestral population in
which the horizontal transfer and fixation originally took
place.
Origin of multiple families by crossbreeding

The human and chimpanzee genomes share some Alu
subfamilies such as AluYc1 and a small number of
AluYa5- and AluYb8-like copies, but most young families
present in humans are absent from chimpanzees (e.g.
L1HS, AluYg6, AluYb9, AluYd8, AluYa8, LTR5_Hs,
AluYh9, HERVK). One possibility is that that they were
fixed in parallel in a single proto-human population after
its separation from the chimpanzee lineage. Alternatively,
some of them might have originated in separate subpopulations and merged by subsequent crossbreeding. Natural hybridization in mammalian populations has
recently been demonstrated in bats as a rare mechanism
for the origin of new species [58].
The possibility of hybridization between individuals
from diverse subpopulations is intrinsically associated with
population subdivision and analysis of species-specific
families of TEs may help us to understand whether or not
the hybridization contributed to the origin of a particular
species. Here we analyze the possibility that AluYa5 and

Jurka et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:44
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/44

Page 5 of 16

Figure 2 Correlation between unrelated TE families in diverse groups of species. Vertical axis: natural logarithms of cumulative numbers of
non-LTR retrotransposon and DNA transposon families. Horizontal axis: natural logarithms of cumulative numbers of LTR retrotransposon families.

AluYb8 originated in separate proto-human populations.
The ratios of chromosomal densities of AluYa5 elements
are consistent with the model of paternal transmission, i.e.
inheritance of active Alu elements through male germ line
only [59,60]. The density ratio of AluYb8 elements on
chromosome X relative to autosomes (~0.71) is comparable to that for AluYa5 (~0.72) and is consistent with
paternal transmission, which predicts the ratio to be equal
to 0.67 (2/3). However, the ratios of AluYb8 densities on
chromosome Y relative to autosomes (~0.9) and chromosome X (~1.3) are much lower than the corresponding
values for AluYa5 elements (~1.94 and ~2.52), and the
values predicted by the paternal transmission model (2.0
and 3.0, respectively). The overall number of AluYb8 elements on chromosome Y is lower by at least 40% than
expected by extrapolation from the observed ratios of
AluYa5 chromosomal densities. Closer inspection indicates an underrepresentation of older AluYb8 elements on
chromosome Y (not shown).
The underrepresentation of older elements among
young Alu families on chromosome Y was indirectly
noted before [61]. It was then proposed that Alu elements were probably removed from the male sex chromosome over time. Alternatively, they might have been
missing from the beginning if some young Alu families
were introduced to the human genome by crossbreeding
with another, now extinct, proto-human population.
According to this scenario, older AluYb8 elements that
were already fixed in the “Yb8 population” could be
passed to the hybrid population by crossbreeding and

spread over the population by homologous recombination between chromosomes except of chromosome Y,
which does not recombine outside its pseudoautosomal
regions. It is proposed that the surviving chromosome
in the hybrid population carried the original AluYa5 elements but acquired AluYb8 elements by retroposition
after the crossbreeding took place. In other words, the
surviving human chromosome Y might have been
exposed to a shorter “bombardment” [62] by the
AluYb8 elements than by the indigenous AluYa5 elements and this is why an older fraction of AluYb8 elements is missing. This scenario may apply to other
human-specific Alu families, and beyond.
Relationship between families of TEs and speciation

The presence of lineage-specific amplification of SINE
elements was first observed over a decade ago [63], and
successfully used in biological systematics, particularly
in mammals [64-73]. According to the hypothesis, large
lineage- or species-specific bursts of repetitive families
[56,74-79] are consistent with their involvement in rapid
diversification of subpopulations that could lead to speciation. Other studies of the human genomic fossil
record revealed temporal correlation between outbursts
of fixation of retropseudogenes and different speciation
events, based on analysis of retropseudogenes in the primate lineage [80]. The observed outbursts of retropseudogenes are likely to be caused by the high activity of
L1 elements that are also responsible for large speciesspecific outbursts of SINE families.

Page 6 of 16

Jurka et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:44
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/44

Table 2 Diversity of TEs in mammalian species
Species
(genome size)

< 1% divergence
Repbase ID names (genomic copy number in parentheses)

< 5% divergence
No.
Families

Total
Count

No.
Families

Total
Count

Human
(2.87GB)

AluYa5(2696), AluYb8(1499), AluY(215), AluYc1(433), L1HS(332), AluYg6(242), AluYb9(213),
AluYd8(122), AluYa8(40), LTR5_Hs(38), AluYh9(18), HERVK(6).

12

5981

48

33613

Chimpanzee
(2.90GB)

AluY(150), AluYc1(1320), PTERV1c_LTR(80), CERV1_LTR(53), L1Pt(24), AluYa5(11), AluYb8(7).

8

1799

50

23832

Rhesus
macaque
(2.64GB)

AluMacYb2(1122), AluMacYb4(1047), AluMacYa3(364), L1_RS1_5end(69), MacERVK2_LTR1a
(52), MacERV1_LTR4a(40), MacERV1_LTR3a(23), MacERV3_LTR2(22), MacERV4_LTR1a(22),
MacERV4_LTR4(20), MacERV3_LTR3(14), MacERV2_LTR1(11), MacERVK2_LTR1c(11),
MacERV1_LTR4d(9), MacERV2_LTR2a(8).
HAL1-1C_Cja(32).

15

2834

67

70319

1

32

11

1299

Tarsier (2.77GB)

LTR10_TS(11), LTR13_TS(7).

2

18

23

7705

Mouse lemur
(1.85GB)

LTR3_Mim(49), ERV1-Mim_LTR(23), LTR10_Mim(22), LTR1_Mim(22), ERV2N1-Mim_LTR(14),
LTR10B_Mim(8), LTR14_Mim(5).

7

143

26

6066

Bushbaby
(1.97GB)

GarnAlu1(80), LTR8_OG(21).

2

101

12

18970

Mouse (2.62GB) L1_MM(1244), RLTRETN_MM(154), IAPLTR1_Mm_LTR(65), MMERGLN_LTR(59), IAPLTR1a_MM
(58), RLTR1IAP_MM(54), RLTR6B_Mm(39), B1_Mm(34), B2_Mm1a(30), IAPEY4_LTR(30),
LTRIS_Mm(26), B1_Mus2(23), ERVB7_1-I_MM(22), ORR1A0(20), ERVB7_1-LTR_MM(11),
IAPLTR1a_I_MM(11), ERVB4_1B-LTR_MM(10), MTA_Mm_LTR(10), MMERVK10C(8), IAPLTR3(6),
RLTR13B2(6), L1Md_Gf_5end(5), LTRIS3(5).

23

1930

113

72236

Rat (2.48GB)

21

5755

92

67356

Kangaroo rat
(1.84GB)

ID_Rn1(4510), B2_Rn(349), L1_RN(212), NICER2_Rn(113), ID_Rn2(107), RNLTR12(73), B2_Rn1
(61), RNLTR19A(61), RNLTR8C(54), B2_RnY(50), NICER1B_Rn_LTR(37), RNIAP1aLTR(26),
RNIAP1bLTR(18), RNLTR8C2(16), RNNICER3_I(15), B2_Rat2(12), RNLTR12-int(11), RNLTR2a(9),
NICER3A_Rn(8), B2_Rn2(7), ERVB5_3-LTR_RN(6).
DIPODE1(126), BC1_Dor(115), DERV2a_LTR(32), LTR13B_Dor(18), L1-1_Dor(14), ERV2-Dor_LTR
(9).

6

314

21

54065

Guinea pig
(2.66GB)

CAVID(392), L1-1C_Cpo(377), L1-1D_Cpo(139), HAL1-1H_Cpo(106), HAL1-3D_Cpo(54), HAL11G_Cpo(50), HAL1-1E_Cpo(37), ERV1NA-CPo_LTR(36), 5S_CPo(15), ERV1A1-CPo_LTR(9).

10

1215

39

38173

Squirrel
(1.91GB)

LTR3_Str(65), ERV2-1_STr-LTR(40), LTR27_Str(19), STRID3(9), LTR8_Str(7).

5

140

47

13754

Marmoset
(2.76GB)

Rabbit (2.08GB)

LTR26_OC(24), LTR10_OC(23), ERVH_OC_LTR(5).

3

52

36

47855

Pika (1.92GB)

CSINE3_OP(210), ERV2-1N-OP_LTR(48), LTR2B1_Opr(40), ERV2-1-LTR_Opr(31), ERV2-4_OprLTR(22), LTR10_Opr(14), LTR30_Opr(10), LTR7_Opr(10), ERV1-1_OPr-LTR(8), ERV2-2_Opr-LTR
(8).

10

401

54

14259

Cow (2.73GB)

ERV2-1-LTR_BT(25), BTLTR1B(14), L1-BT(7).

3

46

31

63422

0

0

10

420

Alpaca (1.92GB)
Dog (2.38GB)

L1-Y_CF(354), SINEC2A1_CF(79), CfERVF1_LTR(18), SINEC2A2_CF(11).

4

462

14

81969

Cat (1.64GB)
Horse (2.42GB)

SINEC_Fc(2312), ERV1-2_FCa-LTR(36), ERV1-3_FCa-LTR(24).
ERE1(532), L1-1_EC(61)

3
2

2372
593

16
20

59515
19683

Megabat
(1.83GB)
Bat (1.67GB)

ERV1-1_PVa-LTR(102), ERV2-2_PVa-LTR(21), ERV2-3_PVa-LTR(12), LTR15_PVa(5).

4

140

16

1924

nhAT6_ML(1428), nhAT4a_ML(975), nhAT2_ML(823), nhAT1_ML(310), nhAT5b_ML(295),
hAT-2N2_ML(227), nhAT3_ML(167), nhAT5a_ML(13), LTR30A_ML(9), ERV1X1-LTR_ML(7),
ERV2X1-LTR_ML(7), SPIN_NA_1_Et(6), Ves(6), LTR27D2_ML(5), MARIN1_ML(5).

15

4283

55

99014

Hedgehog
(2.13GB)

Vingi-1N3_EE(311), LTR4_EE(54), LTR1C_EE(38), ERV2-4_EE-LTR(28), (13), ERV2-1_EE-LTR(11),
LTR26_EE(8), ERV2-3_EE-LTR(7), LTR13_EE(5).

9

475

63

14890

Shrew (1.83GB)
Elephant
(2.30GB)

LTR6_Sar(45), LTR1_Sar(22), LTR2_Sar(22), LTR7_Sar(10), LTR8_Sar(8), LTR18C_Sar(5).

6
0

112
0

25
7

2803
1052

Tenrec (2.11GB)
Hyrax (2.41GB) ERV2-6_Pca-LTR(166), ERV2-3_Pca-LTR(130), ERV2-1-Pca_LTR(56), MLT1Z_Pca(16), ERV12_PCa-LTR(8), LTR15B_Pca(7).
Armadillo
(2.15GB)
Sloth (2.12GB)
ERV2N1_CHo-LTR(402), LTR3_Cho(142), ERV2N1B_CHo-LTR(6), LTR5A_Cho(6).

0
6

0
383

5
40

4783
9945

0

0

6

5950

4

556

23

3709

Opossum
(3.34GB)

8

1393

70

46497

L1-1_MD(953), SINE-1_MD(193), ERV2_MD_I(109), ERV2_MD_LTR(70), L1A-2_MD(42),
MARINERNA6_MD(10), LTR32_MD(9), ERV1_MD_I(7).

Jurka et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:44
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/44

Page 7 of 16

Table 2 Diversity of TEs in mammalian species (Continued)
Wallaby
(2.54GB)

MERVK1B_LTR(10), MERVK1D_LTR(5).

Platypus
(1.84GB)

2

15

7

9514

0

0

10

214

Each family is composed of at least five elements per genome. Column 1: common species name and the size of the sequence data. Column 2: Repbase ID
names of families with < 1% of divergence from their consensus sequences. Columns 3 and 5: the number of different families (< 1% and < 5% divergent from
their respective consensus sequences). Columns 4 and 6: the corresponding total combined numbers per genome (total counts). Scientific names of species used
are as follows: human, Homo sapiens; chimpanzee, Pan troglodytes; Rhesus macaque, Macaca mulatta; marmoset, Callithrix jacchus; tarsier, Tarsius syrichta; mouse
lemur, Microcebus murinus; bushbaby, Otolemur garnettii; mouse, Mus musculus; rat, Rattus norvegicus; kangaroo rat, Dipodomys ordii; Guinea pig, Cavia porcellus;
squirrel, Spermophilus tridecemlineatus; rabbit, Oryctolagus cuniculus; pika, Ochotona princeps; cow, Bos taurus; alpaca, Lama pacos; dog, Canis lupus familiaris; cat,
Felis catus; horse, Equus caballus; megabat, Pteropus vampyrus; bat, Myotis lucifugus; hedgehog, Erinaceus europaeus; shrew, Sorex araneus; elephant, Loxodonta
africana; tenrec, Echinops telfairi; hyrax, Procavia capensis; armadillo, Dasypus novemcinctus; sloth, Choloepus hoffmanni; opossum, Monodelphis domestica; wallaby,
Macropus eugenii; platypus, Ornithorhynchus anatinus.

There is also an apparent correlation between activity
of TEs and mammalian taxonomies. To illustrate the pattern, we focus on sample analysis of “young” families in
mammals representing lineages with different taxonomic
structure. Table 2 (column 3) lists the numbers of different families, less than 1% divergent from their respective
consensus sequences, for most mammalian genomes
sequenced to date. For example, the pika (Ochotona princeps) genome carries 54 families < 5% divergent from
their consensus sequences (Table 2, column 5), of which
10 are relatively young (< 1% divergent). The corresponding numbers of families for rabbit (Oryctolagus cuniculus)
are 36 and 3. O. princeps belongs to genus Ochotona
represented by ~30 species, and O. cuniculus is the only
species in genus Oryctolagus. However, O. cuniculus
belongs to the Leporidae family that includes several different genera of rabbits and hares representing around 50
species, whereas all 30 species of pika belong to a single
genus only. This suggests earlier major speciation events
in rabbits, associated with amplification of older families
of TEs, consistent with phylogenetic analysis based on
activities of SINE elements [70]. Figure 3 shows the number of different families of TEs in rabbit (yellow) and in
pika (blue) for three different time intervals measured by

Figure 3 Cumulative numbers of TE families from the rabbit
and pika genomes. The bars indicate numbers of TE families >
85%, > 90% and > 95% identical to their respective consensus
sequences in the genomes of rabbit (yellow) and pika (blue).

sequence similarity to consensus. Older families with elements > 85% and > 90% identical to consensus are more
abundant in rabbit than in pika. Conversely, families >
95% identical to consensus are more numerous in pika
than in rabbit, consistent with more recent speciation
events in pika. In general, higher taxonomic levels reflect
older speciation events and are expected to be associated
with fixation of older families of TEs in more ancient
subpopulations. This is in line with the view that species
are implicitly identified by reference to particular historical populations [81].
The number of surviving species in a lineage reflects
the rate of speciation less extinctions that occur over
time, i.e. more ancient speciation events are likely to
leave fewer surviving species in the lineage than the more
recent ones. According to the CASP hypothesis, the relatively large number of species observed in some orders
may reflect evolutionarily recent population subdivisions
and speciation events associated with recent amplification of TEs by genetic drift rather than the TE-triggered
“fecundity” of the lineages [8,9]. For example, mammalian species with the highest numbers of young families
in Table 2, such as mouse (23 families), rat (21), bat (15),
Rhesus macaque (15) and human (12), represent the largest mammalian orders of Rodentia, Chiroptera and Primates. On the other end of the spectrum are species
representing relatively species-poor lineages such as
alpaca, elephant, tenrec, armadillo and platypus. They do
not harbor any young families of TEs (< 1% divergent
from their consensus sequences), which, according to the
hypothesis indicates limited population subdivisions and
speciation in their recent evolutionary history. However,
phylogenetic analyses clearly indicate more ancient speciation events associated with older families of TEs.

Implications of the hypothesis
Recently, it has been proposed that TEs constitute the
main engine of the so called “genomic drive”, which
according to the hypothesis can explain various aspects
of speciation [8,9]. If the CASP hypothesis is correct,
then major speciation events are driven not by “periodic

Jurka et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:44
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/44

infestations” by TEs [8] but by subdivisions of populations into small subpopulations, some of which may
become founder populations for new species. It also proposes that small populations resulting from the subdivisions are primary incubators of new repetitive families
derived from TEs, which are fixed by genetic drift. Fundamentally, TEs should be viewed more as drifters
accompanying population subdivision rather than the
drivers of speciation. The accumulation of TEs by genetic
drift does not rule out their involvement in various evolutionary processes, including speciation. In fact, the
intrinsic association between population subdivision and
fixation of TEs proposed by the CASP hypothesis makes
such involvement inevitable. TEs can act as mutator
genes to bring opportunistic bursts of mutations at critical evolutionary junctions leading to new species [24,82].
Many bursts of mutations caused by the most active TEs
are likely to have catastrophic consequences and the
resulting multiple extinctions of small populations are
expected to accompany speciation events. However, the
surviving subpopulations are prime candidates for founder populations for new species. Massive injection of new
repetitive elements is likely to be followed by periods of
genetic instabilities with multiple evolutionary consequences for the surviving populations. Some repetitive
elements subject to purifying selection over time [83]
might have been recruited during such periods.
The origin of repetitive families is associated with historical population structures that existed during speciation events. The layers of repetitive elements added to
genomic DNA by genetic drift can account for fluctuations in the amounts of the non-coding genomic DNA
in different species. This is consistent with some earlier
empirical observations [84,85] and with the original
hypothesis by Lynch and Conery [21], linking effective
population size (N e ) to genome size and proposing a
central role of non-adaptive processes in the evolution
of genome architecture. The hypothesis attracted substantial interest due to its potential explanatory power
[86], but it continues to be debated due to the apparent
lack of significant correlation between Ne and genome
size in the context of phylogenetically restricted models
[87-89]. The CASP hypothesis predicts a correlation
between N e of historical populations and the corresponding layers of repetitive DNA deposited in the genome rather than the overall correlation between the Ne
of contemporary populations and the total genome size.
Therefore, the fixation of TEs by genetic drift cannot be
separated from their phylogenetic history and must be
analyzed in the context of historical populations.
The origin of new subpopulations can be fueled by the
availability of new ecological niches due to geographical
factors or mass extinctions. New niches can also be
opened by major evolutionary breakthroughs such as the

Page 8 of 16

emergence of echolocation in bats [90] or of the adaptive
immune system in vertebrates [91]. The hypothesis
implies that punctuated equilibria [92] reflect rare evolutionary breakthroughs during the history of life that lead
to exploration of new niches accompanied by subdivisions of the population and speciation. Consequently, the
outbursts of discrete families of different age preserved in
mammalian genomes are likely to reflect major invasions
of new niches by the ancestral mammalian populations.
In short, this points to a “niche-driven speciation hypothesis” rather than the “genomic drive hypothesis.”
The presence of young families of TEs in the genomic
fossil record can be a powerful indicator of the evolutionarily recent or ongoing subdivisions in the population
that underlie speciation events. However, the lack of
young families in a genome is less informative because
it may be due to a random loss of active source genes in
the founder populations. Even organisms losing important active TEs such as LINE1 elements [93] can represent structured populations in the process of active
adaptation to new niches. This may suggest that the
mutagenesis by TEs is not essential for speciation, at
least in the short run. Alternatively, other types of TEs
or unrelated mutations such as chromosomal rearrangements, satellite amplifications or nucleotide substitutions
may compensate for the loss of the mutagenic impact of
the LINE1 family. The long-term survival of TEs in
most eukaryotic lineages is a strong argument in support of their evolutionary importance.
In summary, families of TEs deposited in genomic
DNA are likely to reflect structural changes in historical
populations caused by recurrent waves of colonization,
drifting apart, extinctions and crossbreeding which can
be studied in contemporary populations [58,94-97]. A
prolonged lack of any significant fixation of TEs in a
population may indicate that the population is locked in
a constrained niche with little room for further colonization and population subdivision. Over time, the
reduced activity of TEs may translate to smaller genome
sizes unless it is offset by DNA amplifications unrelated
to expansion of TEs.
During the final stages of the preparation of this paper
we became aware of a recently proposed “frozen plasticity theory” [98], which also emphasizes a role of population subdivision in the process of speciation and links
population subdivisions to punctuated equilibria based
on evidence unrelated to TEs. The frozen plasticity theory sparked a vigorous debate [98], emphasizing the
need for systematic studies and new evidence that could
further the fundamental understanding of speciation. If
families of repetitive elements are associated with speciation as proposed by our hypothesis, this could open a
goldmine of genomic fossil data directly relevant in this
debate.

Jurka et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:44
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/44

Reviewers’ comments
Reviewer 1

Eugene V. Koonin, NCBI, NLM, NIH, Bethesda, MD
20894, USA
Jurka and colleagues address the connections between
transposable elements propagation and speciation of the
host organisms. The principal message of the article is
very simple: TEs might not be a causative factor in speciation. Rather, waves of TE propagation are thought to
coincide with speciation because both phenomena are
triggered by the division of large populations into small
sub-populations (demes) in which drift is important.
I find this hypothesis to be perfectly sensible and actually a better null hypothesis than the scenario with the
causal role of TEs in speciation. The hypothesis presented
in this paper is fully in line with Lynch’s populationgenetic hypothesis on non-adaptive evolution of complexity, and I am surprised that the paper makes no reference
to this theory (Lynch 2007; Lynch 2007).
Response: These important references were accidentally lost from the Backgroud section during formatting.
They were restored and they are also discussed in the
Implications section.
I further wonder whether the argument presented in
this paper could be coached in quantitative terms by
using the data on the abundance of TEs in different
mammalian genomes to estimate just how small those
subpopulations should have been to sustain the observed
level of TE propagation. This estimate would be analogous to Lynch’s and my own estimates of the effective
population size required to maintain intron-rich genes
(Lynch 2007; Koonin 2009). I think such estimate would
make the story more interesting and compelling.
Response: Such estimate may be more complex as the
CASP hypothesis is centered on genetic drift in the context
of historical population structures associated with speciation events. This also has implications for the ongoing
debate on the phylogenetic context of genome evolution
(see the discussion section and refs. 87-89). We believe
that any specific quantitative models deserve a separate
study that goes beyond the scope of this paper.
My final comment goes to the core of the matter:
should the propagation of TEs via drift in small subpopulations and the causal role of TEs in speciation be
viewed as mutually exclusive? Is a feedback imaginable
whereby TEs propagate by drift and then contribute to
reproductive isolation?
Response: Excellent point. We added a new section
“Carrier subpopulations and the origin of species” to outline the historical perspective and conditions when the
role of TEs in speciation could be of particular importance. We also discuss this point under implications of
the hypothesis.

Page 9 of 16

Koonin, E. V. (2009) “Intron-Dominated Genomes of
Early Ancestors of Eukaryotes.” J Hered 100: 618-623.
Lynch, M. (2007) “The Frailty of Adaptive Hypotheses
for the Origins of Organismal Complexity.” Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 104 Suppl 1: 8597-8604.
Lynch, M. (2007). The Origins of Genome Archiecture.
Sunderland, MA: Sinauer Associates.
Reviewer 2

Jürgen Brosius, University of Muenster, Germany
This is an interesting, but highly speculative manuscript on the connection of transposable elements (TEs)
to speciation in the light of population genetics, termed
the carrier subpopulation (CASP) hypothesis.
Common sense would dictate that fixation of TEs is
associated with speciation and that occasionally TEs facilitate or even trigger speciation. Just as most TE insertions
are neutral to slightly deleterious, occasionally are
selected against and rarely result in exaptation of a novel
functional part of a gene. Hence, the two views should
not be presented as being diametrically opposed. Furthermore, not only fixation but also the activity of retroposition should be taken into consideration. For example, in
case of non-autonomous TEs, the expression and structure of the RNA template or the efficiency of the machinery harbored by a simultaneously active autonomous
element and their interplay determines burst or bust.
Response: As stated in the paper, TEs can affect speciation but their amplification in small populations is a
more general mechanistic phenomenon, which we propose
to use as a “null hypothesis” for analysis of the undeniable
and diverse impact of TEs (see the response to Reviewer
1). See section: “Carrier subpopulations and the origin of
species”. In response to the second point, it is emphasized
in the “Presentation of the hypothesis” section that the
rate of (retro)transposition is the same as the fixation rate
under relaxed selection in small populations.
Major points

1) The presence of many (young) retroposons in the
various species crucially depends on the state of annotation (high, for example in pica; low in rabbit and hare).
An additional explanation for species with the highest
numbers of young families in Table 2 such as mouse
(23 families), rat (21), bat (15), Rhesus macaque (15)
and human (12), representing the largest mammalian
orders of Rodentia, Chiroptera and Primates could be a
faster clock (higher mutation rate) compared to other
mammals as sure is the case in rodents.
Response: Annotation is particularly problematic for
older families because they are often difficult to define
due to high sequence divergence. Therefore, we focused
on relatively young families. These were studied for quite

Jurka et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:44
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/44

some time before the table was generated. Regarding the
mutation rate: there is more TE activity in humans than
in chimpanzees (see Table 2and Britten, R.J. PNAS, 107:
19945-19948). It is debatable whether or not humans
mutate faster than chimpanzees. Furthermore, a faster
clock means faster elimination of TEs. For example,
MIRs are much less preserved in rodents than in
humans. The CASP hypothesis links the activity of TEs
to population structure and genetic drift. Certainly, there
are complicated variations on the theme when selection
is considered, but selection models are beyond the scope
of the hypothesis and of this paper.
2) A major problem is that the data in Table 2 upon
which the hypothesis is based on are incomplete if not
selected.
There are large numbers of TEs or TE families in
Xenarthra and Afroteria some of them highly specific
to genera and species (for examples see: [Churakov
G, Smit AF, Brosius J, Schmitz J (2005) A novel abundant family of retroposed elements (DAS-SINEs) in
the nine-banded armadillo (Dasypus novemcinctus).
Mol Biol Evol. 22:886-93; Möller-Krull M, Delsuc F,
Churakov G, Marker C, Superina M, Brosius J, Douzery EJ, Schmitz J (2007) Retroposed elements and
their flanking regions resolve the evolutionary history
of xenarthran mammals (armadillos, anteaters, and
sloths). Mol Biol Evol 24:2573-82; in particular see
Figure 3]; Nishihara H, Kuno S, Nikaido M, Okada N.
MyrSINEs: a novel SINE family in the anteater genomes. Gene. (2007) 400:98-103; Nishihara H, Satta Y,
Nikaido M, Thewissen JG, Stanhope MJ, Okada N
(2005) A retroposon analysis of Afrotherian phylogeny. Mol Biol Evol 22:1823-33.]
In the Platypus genome [Warren WC et al. (2008)
Genome analysis of the platypus reveals unique signatures of evolution. Nature 453:175-83] there are
more than 40 specific families of L2 LINEs and associated Mon-SINEs. These families are not present in
other sequenced genomes of birds and mammals. In
several Mon-SINE families there is less than 2%
divergency, which would indicate young age (Supplementary Notes S20 in the aforementioned citation).
Response: Many families of TEs from the species listed
above were discovered and entered to Repbase by the
authors of this manuscript. Nevertheless, most of them are
more than 5% divergent from their consensus sequences
(even though they are species- or lineage-specific), and we
decided not to detail them in this hypothesis. They deserve
a separate in-depth analysis and we stand by this decision.
However, we gratefully acknowledge a large underlying
point made by the reviewer: we did not take advantage of
a large body of excellent phylogenetic studies involving old

Page 10 of 16

families of TEs, due to the original focus on response to the
“genomic drive hypothesis”. This omission is remedied and
phylogenetic analyses are prominently cited in the revised
manuscript.
3) CASP also proposes that small subpopulations
resulting from the subdivisions are primary incubators of
new repetitive families originally fixed by genetic drift,
and subsequently undergoing purifying selection. I doubt
that most new repetitive families are under purifying
selection. There are a few exceptions where novel RNAs,
namely BC1 and BC200 RNA, itself generated by retroposition in rodents and primates, respectively, were
exapted into a function. Now, they are under purifying
selection and also happened to be master genes for
repeats (a subfamily of ID SINEs and BC200-derived
monomeric Alus, respectively).
Response: This must be a misunderstanding since we
certainly did not mean to imply that “most new repetitive
families are under purifying selection.” However, a certain
fraction of elements will eventually become a conserved
part of the genome. We rephrased the sentence and
included ref. 83 to broaden the context.
4) “However, the lack of young families in genome is
less informative because it may be caused by random loss
of active source genes in founder populations.”
In contrast to the mosquito genome, the honeybee
(Apis mellifera) has no active TEs except for two
families of DNA transposons [Weinstock et al (2006)
Insights into social insects from the genome of the honeybee Apis mellifera. Nature 443: 931-949]. There are
32 known Apis species, 24 of which are close to Apis
mellifera. This would contradict CASP. Perhaps CASP
does not apply to all phylogenetic branches?
Another observation is the paucity of TEs in birds
despite a tremendous speciation activity during neoavian
radiation [Suh, A., Paus, M., Kiefmann, M., Churakov, G.,
Franke, F.A., Brosius, J., Kriegs, J.O., Schmitz, J. (2011)
Mesozoic retroposons reveal parrots as the closest living
relatives of passerine bird. Nature Communications, in
press]. An additional problem is that one cannot conclude from extant species to species diversity in the various lineages over the past dozens of million years.
Response: The CASP hypothesis predicts that at least
some species including those living in marginal niches (e.g.
primitive plants), or species such as the honeybee do not
encounter enough opportunities to explore new alternative
niches and to split into many small subpopulations for
any extended period of time. The same may apply to
“fine-tuned” parasites and deserves a separate analysis.
On the other side of the spectrum are birds that can disperse more readily than mammals into local subpopulations (with the possible exception of bats). Therefore, in
birds high activity of TEs might have been less relevant
for speciation. According to the hypothesis, mammalian

Jurka et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:44
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/44

populations certainly preserved many smaller bird-like
families of TEs, but they are not necessarily associated
with speciation. For example, there are multiple families
of LTR retrotransposons in mammals, but they probably
didn’t proliferate fast enough to sufficiently affect the
divergence of different subpopulations, which is a prerequisite for the origin of new species with large families.
Minor points

1) The manuscript would gain a lot by including more
references.
Just to give a few examples, such as earlier publications on the role of TEs in speciation: [Bingham PM,
Kidwell MG, Rubin GM (1982) The molecular basis
of P-M hybrid dysgenesis: the role of the P element, a
P-strain-specific transposon family. Cell. 1982 Jul;29
(3):995-1004]. Or, publications on the source, founder, master gene concepts: [Shen MR, Batzer MA,
Deininger PL (1991) Evolution of the master Alu
gene(s). J Mol Evol33:311-20]. Or, a reference concerning the proposal that Alu elements were probably
removed from the male sex chromosome over time
(page 10).
In support to some suggestions, fixation of individual
TEs in connection to the population structure was
proposed based on experimental data in the following
articles: [Churakov G, Kriegs JO, Baertsch R, Zemann
A, Brosius J, Schmitz J (2009) Mosaic retroposon
insertion patterns in placental mammals. Genome
Res19:868-75; Nishihara H, Maruyama S, Okada N
(2009) Retroposon analysis and recent geological data
suggest near-simultaneous divergence of the three
superorders of mammals. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
106:5235-40; Churakov G, Sadasivuni MK, Rosenbloom KR, Huchon D, Brosius J, Schmitz J (2010),
Rodent evolution: back to the root. Mol Biol Evol 27
(:1315-26]. These findings should be discussed in
connection to CASP hypothesis.
Response: All the references under this point and many
listed above are added and discussed in the context of the
revised manuscript.
2) The TINE1 element is not a good example to illustrate a “new family” of retroelements. TINE1 is not specific for the tarsier family as it is found in other primates,
and hence a “master gene” appeared prior to tarsier speciation. In addition, characterization of TINE1 as a “processed pseudogene” is questionable, because there is no
processing except polyadenylation at a solitary LTR.
Response: Deleted.
3) The sentence: “ The hypothesis predicts that repetitive families represent only the most visible and probably
most abundant portion of all types of mutations be fixed

Page 11 of 16

in small populations in addition to TEs.” is unclear: Repetitive families consist of TEs?
Response: Rephrased and clarified. Throughout the
paper “repetitive families” and “families of TEs” are used
interchangeably.
4) Not clear why the AluYa5 and AluYb8 families of
repeats are of particular interest? Why are the ratios of
chromosomal densities of AluYa5 elements consistent
with the model of paternal transmission, i.e. inheritance
of active Alu elements through male germ line only?
Response: These families are the largest among the
potentially active ones and as such they are subject to
meaningful statistics. The second point: apparently Alu
elements are activated in male germ line. This may be
related to de-methylation of chromosome Y (see reference
37 in publication 61 cited in this paper).
5) “... that Alu elements were probably removed from
the male sex chromosome over time.” - citation is necessary, and explanation of the removal process would be
useful.
Response: See ref. 61 page 1271 (bottom) and page
1272 (top).
6) CSINE2 - is a family present in pika and all Leporidae and were active before pika and rabbit speciation
[Kriegs JO, Zemann A, Churakov G, Matzke A, Ohme M,
Zischler H, Brosius J, Kryger U, Schmitz J (2010) Retroposon insertions provide insights into deep lagomorph
evolution. Mol Biol Evol 27:2678-81, Figure 2] and are
present in pika and rabbit genomes in comparable
amounts (see: previous citation, Figure 1). It is too speculative to discuss divergence of CINE2 in rabbit genome
without comparison with pika genomic data.
Response: We added Figure 3with cumulative numbers of all families and for phylogenetic details we
included the reference to Kriegs et al. (70).

Reviewer 3
I. King Jordan, Georgia Institute of Technology, USA
In this compelling hypothesis paper, Jerzy Jurka and
colleagues lay out their vision for the relationship
between the genome dynamics of transposable elements
(TEs) and the process of speciation. They present the
‘carrier subpopulation (CASP)’ hypothesis, which emphasizes that species-specific differences in TE family composition are best explained by differences in species’
population structure. The basic idea of the CASP hypothesis is that subdivided populations will inherit distinct
sets of active TEs, or TE subfamilies, and furthermore
different subsets of these TEs will be randomly fixed by
genetic drift among the divided subpopulations. Meanwhile, given sufficient time and the availability of distinct
niches, the divided subfamilies will diverge into new species. Together, this will lead to a greater relative diversity
of young TE families for lineages that include numerous

Jurka et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:44
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/44

species. The CASP hypothesis is notable for the fact that
it posits a passive, rather than a causal, role for TE activity and accumulation in the process of speciation. As
such, the CASP hypothesis serves as a counter-point to
the ‘genomic drive’ hypothesis for the significance of TEs
with respect to speciation, which holds that amplification
of TEs leads to speciation by increasing genomic
variability.
The presentation of the CASP hypothesis in this paper
is interesting, thoughtful and timely, and I expect that
this work will be quite thought provoking to investigators working on TEs, evolution and genomics. Thus, I
certainly support publication of the work in Biology
Direct. Below, I provide a number of comments, questions and suggestions that the authors may wish to consider prior to finalization of their manuscript.
1. There are assumptions of the CASP model that need
to be critically interrogated. One critical assumption of
the model is that fixation of repetitive families takes
place primarily in small populations by genetic drift. Of
course, it is entirely reasonable to posit that random fixation any genetic element would occur preferentially in
small populations. However, this assumption seems to
imply that TE fixation dynamics are dominated, or even
exclusively shaped, by population level forces. In fact, the
population dynamics of repetitive elements can be considered to take place at two levels - there are indeed
population level dynamics predicated upon differential
reproductive success of individual organisms but there
are also genome level dynamics based upon differential
reproductive success of individual TE copies or subfamilies. This understanding was articulated in the early formulation of the selfish DNA theory when it was
theoretically demonstrated that TEs could increase in
copy number even if their replication was deleterious to
the host (Hickey 1982 Genetics 101: 519). In other
words, the genome level replication dynamics of TEs
could overcome the population level effects of selection.
This may be an extreme view, but there is certainly an
interplay between population dynamics and genome level
dynamics when it comes to TE replication and fixation.
Any model that only treats one or the other of these two
important levels may be missing a critical component.
Response: The CASP hypothesis is based on neutral
theories (refs. 27-29) that include slightly deleterious
mutations under relaxed selection in small populations.
Under relaxed selection the mutation rate by TEs (the
rate of transposition) and the fixation rate are the same,
which may leave the impression that one is missing.
2. Another important aspect of the model is the idea
that randomly divided subpopulations will inherit different sets of active TE copies (Figure 1). On its face this
seems quite reasonable. However, the master copy model
for TE replication holds that one or a few copies of a TE

Page 12 of 16

(sub)family are primarily responsible for the replication
and ongoing expansion of the family. If there are only a
few master copies, or if they are highly identical in terms
of sequence/structure, then the likelihood of different
subpopulations inheriting distinct sets of active TEs
would seem to be reduced. How well does the master
copy model hold for the species examined here, in particular for the primate lineage with respect to Alus and
L1s, which are discussed at length? And how would this
impact the CASP hypothesis?
Response: The CASP hypothesis permits subpopulations without active TEs. However, such subpopulations
may be less likely to diversify fast enough to become foundations for new species (see section “Carrier subpopulations and the origin of species”). The hypothesis implies
that very active TEs are most likely to contribute to productive speciation. Nevertheless, they can be very destructive and only a few of them left behind viable
subpopulations that were foundations for new species.
They also left behind large repetitive families in primates
that were the basic evidence for the master gene hypothesis (refs. 10-15). Slowly replicating TEs are much less
likely to affect speciation. They are also less destructive
and probably less frequently suppressed by the silencing
mechanisms. Therefore, they are more likely to be represented by multiple active copies as proposed by the “transposon model” (refs. 47-48).
3. There is one slightly troubling (or perhaps simply
confusing) aspect of the CASP hypothesis articulated in
the conclusion (implications) section of the article. Here,
the authors mention that the ‘genomic record of young
TEs can be a powerful indicator of... subdivisions in the
population that underlie speciation events’ but then go
on to state that the opposite pattern of a lack of young
TE families in a genome may not be informative because
it could be due to other factors. This would seem to suggest that the hypothesis lacks discriminating power with
respect to the relationship between the extent of young
TE families in a genome and speciation rates along a lineage. Is this really the case? Does this mean that one
would not be able to systematically relate the extent, or
lack, of young TE families to high or low levels of
speciation?
Response: The CASP hypothesis links speciation to
population subdivision, which is driven by the availability
of biological niches. There are three basic categories of subpopulations: (1) those that do not carry any active TEs but
still evolve into new species, due to geographical factors
allowing both survival and reproductive isolation; (2) subpopulations that carry moderately active TEs that have little or no impact on potential speciation events and (3)
subpopulations that are rapidly mutated by very active
TEs and, if they survive, they are likely to become founding
populations for new species. Given the ubiquitous nature of

Jurka et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:44
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/44

TEs, the first category of subpopulations is probably rare.
We think that the most common is category 2 and majority
of the diverse families of TEs originate in such subpopulations (see “Origin of diverse families of TEs”). The last category is the “extreme version” of the category 2.
4. Michael Lynch has written extensively on the
importance of non-adaptive aspects of evolution, i.e. the
role of genetic drift, in shaping genome architecture (see
his book The Origins of Genome Architecture). Similar
to what is proposed here, Lynch holds that TEs are able
to accumulate to high copy numbers owing to the
reduced efficacy of natural selection in small populations. The CASP hypothesis should be considered in
light of the previous work of Lynch along with the ensuing discussion (controversy) that his work engendered.
Response: In the last section we discuss the relationship between the CASP hypothesis and the Lynch & Conery hypothesis in the context of the ongoing debate on the
role of drift in evolution of genomic complexity.
5. The authors make a very clear and strong statement
in the abstract regarding the relationship between the
numbers of young TEs in genomes and the number of
species in a lineage. In the body of the manuscript, they
go on to provide data on the diversity of TE families
among several vertebrate, plant and insect genomes
(Table 1) and additional more detailed data on the diversity of TEs in mammalian species (Table 2). However, it
was not immediately apparent how, or even whether,
these data directly support the CASP hypothesis. For
example, they show that closely related Anopheles species have large differences in TE diversity and they speculate as to the pattern of population subdivision this would
predict, but they do not confirm whether this conjecture
is borne out by the data. Similarly for Table 2, the
authors discuss the data in depth as they relate to various
aspects of TE and species population dynamics, but they
don’t show a clear pattern of high numbers of young TEs
and high numbers of species in a lineage. It would really
help the reader to clearly and succinctly point out how
the TE diversity data do or do not support the hypothesis. More to the point, a clear and quantitative (perhaps
a regression analysis?) demonstration of the relationship
between the numbers of young TEs in genomes and the
numbers of species in a lineage is needed to provide support for the unequivocal statement made in the abstract.
Response: The main points can be summarized as follows (with some oversimplification): (1) Multiple families
of TEs in a genome are associated with multiple subpopulations in the historical population from which the genome has emerged (younger multiple families are
associated with more recent subdivisions). (2) Speciation
events are likely to correlate with the cumulative number
of subpopulations that originated (and vanished) during
the history of a lineage and indirectly with the number of

Page 13 of 16

families of TEs generated in those subpopulations (recent
speciation events are likely to correlate indirectly with
recent fixations of repetitive families). (3) On average,
there should be higher proportions of surviving species
from recent speciation events than from the old ones.
Currently, there is not enough data to correlate the
number of species or speciation events with the population structure over geologic time. However, we found a
way to indirectly support the first point above by showing
a significant positive correlation between two unrelated
families (see Figure 2) based on the prediction that they
both correlate with the number of subpopulations in a
population.
6. A corollary to comment #5 is that the best hypotheses make very specific predictions that can be empirically tested - or in the case of evolutionary hypotheses at
least interrogated via direct observations on standing variation. The CASP hypothesis directly contradicts the
genomic drive hypothesis (Oliver and Greene 2009 Bioessays 31:703) with respect to the agency of TEs in the process of speciation. Here, it would help if the authors
could set up some mutually exclusive predictions that
would clearly distinguish these two hypotheses. Oliver
and Greene have recently published additional evidence
for their genomic drive hypothesis (Oliver and Greene
2011 Mobile DNA 2: 8). Consideration of this work
could be relevant to the authors’ efforts to distinguish the
two hypotheses.
Response: The basic premise of the genomic drive
hypothesis is that TEs constitute the main engine of the
process that can result in the generation of “widely divergent new taxa, fecund lineages, lineage selection, and
punctuated equilibrium.” We find this premise untenable
without rooting it in a broader context of the population
structure, which is the frame of reference for the definition
of species and other taxonomic units in a lineage (see ref.
81). Furthermore, in their papers Oliver and Greene
ignored the fundamental problem of reproductive isolation. In the most recent version of the hypothesis published
in Mobile DNA, the authors moved closer to the population genetics perspective by invoking “environmental and
ecological factors.” However, they ended up with enumeration of changes introduced by TEs in primates to support
their premise. Therefore, we find little theoretical overlap
between the CASP hypothesis based on the fundamental
concepts of the population genetics and the genomic drive
hypothesis except that both hypotheses attempt to make
sense of the undeniable evidence linking TEs and speciation. In the revised manuscript we comment only on the
concept of “fecundity” in the context of large mammalian
orders and briefly address the main premise of the
hypothesis in the Implications section.
7. The authors work at the Genetic Information
Research Institute - the home of Repbase - and thus

Jurka et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:44
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/44

would seem to have a uniquely close perspective and
deep insight into the distribution of TE diversity among
evolutionary lineages. However, the rationale behind the
choice of species/lineages represented among the primary
data presented in Tables 1 &2 may not be immediately
apparent to readers less familiar with Repbase. It would
help to have a clear explanation for how and why the
genomes and lineages represented among these data
were chosen.
Response: First, we focused on young families of TEs to
minimize uncertainties associated with annotations of
older repeats. In Table 1we tried to focus on well annotated species to illustrate the proposed correlation
between population structure and the diversity of TEs. In
Figure 2, inspired by this review, we use a more extensive
dataset from Repbase to verify the predicted correlation.
In Table 2we focus on mammalian species that are not
only well annotated in Repbase, but they also have been
extensively studied from the evolutionary point of view.
This helped to combine multiple lines of published evolutionary evidence in support of the hypothesis.

Page 14 of 16

8.
9.
10.

11.
12.

13.
14.

15.
16.

17.
18.
19.
20.

List of abbreviations used
TE(s): transposable element(s); SINE: short interspersed element; LINE: long
interspersed element; CASP: carrier subpopulation; LTR: long terminal repeat;
Ne: effective population size.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health grant 5 P41
LM006252. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does
not necessarily represent the official views of the National Library of
Medicine or the National Institutes of Health. We gratefully acknowledge
excellent comments and suggestions made by the reviewers. We also thank
Karolina Walichiewicz for critically reading the manuscript.

21.
22.
23.
24.

25.
26.
27.

Authors’ contributions
JJ developed the hypothesis and wrote the manuscript. WB and KKK
contributed to data preparation, analysis and final revisions of the
manuscript. All authors read and approved the paper.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

28.
29.
30.
31.

Received: 15 June 2011 Accepted: 19 September 2011
Published: 19 September 2011
References
1. Weiner AM, Deininger PL, Efstratiadis A: Nonviral retroposons: genes,
pseudogenes, and transposable elements generated by the reverse flow
of genetic information. Annu Rev Biochem 1986, 55:631-661.
2. Brosius J: Retroposons–seeds of evolution. Science 1991, 251:753.
3. Kidwell MG, Lisch D: Transposable elements as sources of variation in
animals and plants. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1997, 94:7704-7711.
4. Kidwell MG, Lisch DR: Transposable elements and host genome
evolution. TREE 2000, 15:95-99.
5. Kidwell MG, Lisch DR: Perspective: transposable elements, parasitic DNA,
and genome evolution. Evolution Int J Org Evolution 2001, 55:1-24.
6. Kazazian HH Jr: Mobile elements: drivers of genome evolution. Science
2004, 303:1626-1632.
7. Bohne A, Brunet F, Galiana-Arnoux D, Schultheis C, Volff JN: Transposable
elements as drivers of genomic and biological diversity in vertebrates.
Chromosome Res 2008, 16:203-215.

32.

33.
34.
35.

36.

37.
38.

Oliver KR, Greene WK: Transposable elements: powerful facilitators of
evolution. Bioessays 2009, 31:703-714.
Oliver KR, Greene WK: Mobile DNA and the TE-Thrust hypothesis:
supporting evidence from the primates. Mob DNA 2011, 2:8.
Slagel V, Flemington E, Traina-Dorge V, Bradshaw H, Deininger PL:
Clustering and subfamily relationships of the Alu family in the human
genome. Mol Biol Evol 1987, 4:19-29.
Willard C, Nguyen HT, Schmid CW: Existence of at least three distinct Alu
subfamilies. J Mol Evol 1987, 26:180-186.
Britten RJ, Baron WF, Stout DB, Davidson EH: Sources and evolution of
human Alu repeated sequences. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1988,
85:4770-4774.
Jurka J, Smith T: A fundamental division in the Alu family of repeated
sequences. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1988, 85:4775-4778.
Quentin Y: The Alu family developed through successive waves of
fixation closely connected with primate lineage history. J Mol Evol 1988,
27:194-202.
Shen MR, Batzer MA, Deininger PL: Evolution of the master Alu gene(s). J
Mol Evol 1991, 33:311-320.
Venner S, Feschotte C, Biemont C: Dynamics of transposable elements:
towards a community ecology of the genome. Trends Genet 2009,
25:317-323.
Charlesworth B, Charlesworth D: The population dynamics of transposable
elements. Genet Res Camb 1983, 42:1-27.
Langley CH, Brookfield JF, Kaplan N: Transposable elements in mendelian
populations. I. A theory. Genetics 1983, 104:457-471.
Brookfield JF, Badge RM: Population genetics models of transposable
elements. Genetica 1997, 100:281-294.
Le Rouzic A, Capy P: The first steps of transposable elements invasion:
parasitic strategy vs. genetic drift. Genetics 2005, 169:1033-1043.
Lynch M, Conery JS: The origins of genome complexity. Science 2003,
302:1401-1404.
Lynch M: The frailty of adaptive hypotheses for the origins of organismal
complexity. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2007, 104(Suppl 1):8597-8604.
Lynch M: The Origins of Genome Archiecture Sunderland MA: Sinauer
Associates, Inc; 2007.
Jurka J, Kapitonov VV, Kohany O, Jurka MV: Repetitive sequences in
complex genomes: structure and evolution. Annu Rev Genomics Hum
Genet 2007, 8:241-259.
Wright S: Evolution in Mendelian Populations. Genetics 1931, 16:97-159.
Provine WB: Ernst Mayr: Genetics and speciation. Genetics 2004,
167:1041-1046.
Kimura M: On the probability of fixation of mutant genes in a
population. Genetics 1962, 47:713-719.
Ohta T: Slightly deleterious mutant substitutions in evolution. Nature
1973, 246:96-98.
Ohta T, Gillespie JH: Development of Neutral and Nearly Neutral Theories.
Theor Popul Biol 1996, 49:128-142.
Slatkin M: Gene flow in natural populations. Ann Rev Ecol Syst 1985,
16:393-430.
Vieira C, Biemont C: Geographical variation in insertion site number of
retrotransposon 412 in Drosophila simulans. J Mol Evol 1996, 42:443-451.
Kalendar R, Tanskanen J, Immonen S, Nevo E, Schulman AH: Genome
evolution of wild barley (Hordeum spontaneum) by BARE-1
retrotransposon dynamics in response to sharp microclimatic
divergence. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2000, 97:6603-6607.
Capy P, Gasperi G, Biemont C, Bazin C: Stress and transposable elements:
co-evolution or useful parasites? Heredity 2000, 85(Pt 2):101-106.
Lonnig WE, Saedler H: Chromosome rearrangements and transposable
elements. Annu Rev Genet 2002, 36:389-410.
Kidwell MG, Kidwell JF, Sved JA: Hybrid dysgenesis in Drosophila
melanogaster: a syndrome of aberrant traits including mutation, sterility
and male recombination. Genetics 1977, 86:813-833.
Bingham PM, Kidwell MG, Rubin GM: The molecular basis of P-M hybrid
dysgenesis: the role of the P element, a P-strain-specific transposon
family. Cell 1982, 29:995-1004.
Coyne JA: Meiotic segregation and male recombination in interspecific
hybrids of Drosophila. Genetics 1986, 114:485-494.
Coyne JA: A test of the role of meiotic drive in fixing a pericentric
inversion. Genetics 1989, 123:241-243.

Jurka et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:44
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/44

39. O’Neill RJ, O’Neill MJ, Graves JA: Undermethylation associated with
retroelement activation and chromosome remodelling in an interspecific
mammalian hybrid. Nature 1998, 393:68-72.
40. Labrador M, Farre M, Utzet F, Fontdevila A: Interspecific hybridization
increases transposition rates of Osvaldo. Mol Biol Evol 1999, 16:931-937.
41. Ungerer MC, Strakosh SC, Zhen Y: Genome expansion in three hybrid
sunflower species is associated with retrotransposon proliferation. Curr
Biol 2006, 16:R872-873.
42. Kawakami T, Strakosh SC, Zhen Y, Ungerer MC: Different scales of Ty1/
copia-like retrotransposon proliferation in the genomes of three diploid
hybrid sunflower species. Heredity 2010, 104:341-350.
43. Noor MA, Chang AS: Evolutionary genetics: jumping into a new species.
Curr Biol 2006, 16:R890-892.
44. Michalak P: An eruption of mobile elements in genomes of hybrid
sunflowers. Heredity 2010, 104:329-330.
45. Rose MR, Doolittle WF: Molecular biological mechanisms of speciation.
Science 1983, 220:157-162.
46. Michalak P: Epigenetic, transposon and small RNA determinants of
hybrid dysfunctions. Heredity 2009, 102:45-50.
47. Brookfield JF, Johnson LJ: The evolution of mobile DNAs: when will
transposons create phylogenies that look as if there is a master gene?
Genetics 2006, 173:1115-1123.
48. Johnson LJ, Brookfield JF: A test of the master gene hypothesis for
interspersed repetitive DNA sequences. Mol Biol Evol 2006, 23:235-239.
49. Jurka J: Repbase Update: a database and an electronic journal of
repetitive elements. Trends Genet 2000, 16:418-420.
50. Jurka J, Kapitonov VV, Pavlicek A, Klonowski P, Kohany O, Walichiewicz J:
Repbase Update, a database of eukaryotic repetitive elements. Cytogenet
Genome Res 2005, 110:462-467.
51. Kapitonov VV, Jurka J: A universal classification of eukaryotic transposable
elements implemented in Repbase. Nat Rev Genet 2008, 9:411-412, author
reply 414.
52. Mousson L, Dauga C, Garrigues T, Schaffner F, Vazeille M, Failloux AB:
Phylogeography of Aedes (Stegomyia) aegypti (L.) and Aedes
(Stegomyia) albopictus (Skuse) (Diptera: Culicidae) based on
mitochondrial DNA variations. Genet Res 2005, 86:1-11.
53. Gardner MJ, Hall N, Fung E, White O, Berriman M, Hyman RW, Carlton JM,
Pain A, Nelson KE, Bowman S, et al: Genome sequence of the human
malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum. Nature 2002, 419:498-511.
54. Hua-Van A, Le Rouzic A, Boutin TS, Filee J, Capy P: The struggle for life of
the genome’s selfish architects. Biol Direct 2011, 6:19.
55. Pace JK, Gilbert C, Clark MS, Feschotte C: Repeated horizontal transfer of a
DNA transposon in mammals and other tetrapods. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2008, 105:17023-17028.
56. Kojima KK, Kapitonov VV, Jurka J: Recent expansion of a new Ingi-related
clade of Vingi non-LTR retrotransposons in hedgehogs. Mol Biol Evol
2011, 28:17-20.
57. Zupunski V, Gubensek F, Kordis D: Evolutionary dynamics and
evolutionary history in the RTE clade of non-LTR retrotransposons. Mol
Biol Evol 2001, 18:1849-1863.
58. Larsen PA, Marchan-Rivadeneira MR, Baker RJ: Natural hybridization
generates mammalian lineage with species characteristics. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 2010, 107:11447-11452.
59. Jurka J, Krnjajic M, Kapitonov VV, Stenger JE, Kohkanyy O: Active Alu
elements are passed primarily through paternal germlines. Theor Popul
Biol 2002, 61:519-530.
60. Kvikstad EM, Makova KD: The (r)evolution of SINE versus LINE
distributions in primate genomes: sex chromosomes are important.
Genome Res 2010, 20:600-613.
61. Jurka J, Kohany O, Pavlicek A, Kapitonov VV, Jurka MV: Duplication,
coclustering, and selection of human Alu retrotransposons. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2004, 101:1268-1272.
62. Brosius J: Genomes were forged by massive bombardments with
retroelements and retrosequences. Genetica 1999, 107:209-238.
63. Shimamura M, Yasue H, Ohshima K, Abe H, kato H, Kishiro T, Goto M,
Munechika I, Okada N: Molecular evidence from retroposons that whales
form a clade within even-toed ungulates. Nature 1997, 388:666-670.
64. Shedlock AM, Okada N: SINE insertions: powerful tools for molecular
systematics. Bioessays 2000, 22:148-160.
65. Shedlock AM, Takahashi K, Okada N: SINEs of speciation: tracking lineages
with retroposons. Trends Ecol Evol 2004, 19:545-553.

Page 15 of 16

66. Okada N, Shedlock AM, Nikaido M: Retroposon mapping in molecular
systematics. Methods Mol Biol 2004, 260:189-226.
67. Kriegs JO, Churakov G, Kiefmann M, Jordan U, Brosius J, Schmitz J:
Retroposed elements as archives for the evolutionary history of
placental mammals. PLoS Biol 2006, 4:e91.
68. Kriegs JO, Churakov G, Jurka J, Brosius J, Schmitz J: Evolutionary history of
7SL RNA-derived SINEs in Supraprimates. Trends Genet 2007, 23:158-161.
69. Nishihara H, Maruyama S, Okada N: Retroposon analysis and recent
geological data suggest near-simultaneous divergence of the three
superorders of mammals. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2009, 106:5235-5240.
70. Kriegs JO, Zemann A, Churakov G, Matzke A, Ohme M, Zischler H, Brosius J,
Kryger U, Schmitz J: Retroposon insertions provide insights into deep
lagomorph evolution. Mol Biol Evol 2010, 27:2678-2681.
71. Moller-Krull M, Delsuc F, Churakov G, Marker C, Superina M, Brosius J,
Douzery EJ, Schmitz J: Retroposed elements and their flanking regions
resolve the evolutionary history of xenarthran mammals (armadillos,
anteaters, and sloths). Mol Biol Evol 2007, 24:2573-2582.
72. Nishihara H, Satta Y, Nikaido M, Thewissen JG, Stanhope MJ, Okada N: A
retroposon analysis of Afrotherian phylogeny. Mol Biol Evol 2005,
22:1823-1833.
73. Shim WB, Dunkle LD: Malazy, a degenerate, species-specific transposable
element in Cercospora zeae-maydis. Mycologia 2005, 97:349-355.
74. Churakov G, Smit AF, Brosius J, Schmitz J: A novel abundant family of
retroposed elements (DAS-SINEs) in the nine-banded armadillo (Dasypus
novemcinctus). Mol Biol Evol 2005, 22:886-893.
75. Nishihara H, Kuno S, Nikaido M, Okada N: MyrSINEs: a novel SINE family in
the anteater genomes. Gene 2007, 400:98-103.
76. Hawkins JS, Kim H, Nason JD, Wing RA, Wendel JF: Differential lineagespecific amplification of transposable elements is responsible for
genome size variation in Gossypium. Genome Res 2006, 16:1252-1261.
77. Yang HP, Barbash DA: Abundant and species-specific DINE-1 transposable
elements in 12 Drosophila genomes. Genome Biol 2008, 9:R39.
78. Gogolevsky KP, Vassetzky NS, Kramerov DA: 5S rRNA-derived and tRNAderived SINEs in fruit bats. Genomics 2009, 93:494-500.
79. Venancio TM, Wilson RA, Verjovski-Almeida S, DeMarco R: Bursts of
transposition from non-long terminal repeat retrotransposon families of
the RTE clade in Schistosoma mansoni. Int J Parasitol 2010, 40:743-749.
80. Devor EJ, Moffat-Wilson KA: Molecular and temporal characteristics of
human retropseudogenes. Hum Biol 2003, 75:661-672.
81. Ereshefsky M, Matthen M: Taxonomy, Polymorphism, and History: An
Introduction to Population Structure Theory. Philosophy of Science 2005,
72:1-21.
82. Jurka J: Conserved eukaryotic transposable elements and the evolution
of gene regulation. Cell Mol Life Sci 2008, 65:201-204.
83. Lowe CB, Bejerano G, Haussler D: Thousands of human mobile element
fragments undergo strong purifying selection near developmental
genes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2007, 104:8005-8010.
84. Kidwell MG: Transposable elements and the evolution of genome size in
eukaryotes. Genetica 2002, 115:49-63.
85. Vieira C, Nardon C, Arpin C, Lepetit D, Biemont C: Evolution of genome
size in Drosophila. is the invader’s genome being invaded by
transposable elements? Mol Biol Evol 2002, 19:1154-1161.
86. Koonin EV: Evolution of genome architecture. Int J Biochem Cell Biol 2009,
41:298-306.
87. Whitney KD, Garland T Jr: Did genetic drift drive increases in genome
complexity? PLoS Genet 2010, 6.
88. Lynch M: Statistical inference on the mechanisms of genome evolution.
PLoS Genet 2011, 7:e1001389.
89. Whitney KD, Boussau B, Baack EJ, Garland T Jr: Drift and genome
complexity revisited. PLoS Genet 2011, 7:e1002092.
90. Jones G, Teeling EC: The evolution of echolocation in bats. Trends Ecol
Evol 2006, 21:149-156.
91. Kapitonov VV, Jurka J: RAG1 core and V(D)J recombination signal
sequences were derived from Transib transposons. PLoS Biol 2005, 3:e181.
92. Gould SJ, Eldredge N: Punctuated equilibria: the tempo and mode of
evolution reconsidered. Paleobiology 1977, 3:115-151.
93. Casavant NC, Scott L, Cantrell MA, Wiggins LE, Baker RJ, Wichman HA: The
end of the LINE?: lack of recent L1 activity in a group of South
American rodents. Genetics 2000, 154:1809-1817.
94. Lima M, Marquet PA, Jaksic FA: Extinction and colonization processes in
subpopulations of five neotropical species. Oecologia 1996, 107:197-202.

Jurka et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:44
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/44

Page 16 of 16

95. Hunt JJ, Bonsall MB: The effects of colonization, extinction and
competition on co-existence in metacommunities. J Anim Ecol 2009,
78:866-879.
96. Cadotte MW, Strauss SY: Phylogenetic patterns of colonization and
extinction in experimentally assembled plant communities. PLoS One
2011, 6:e19363.
97. Baskett ML, Gomulkiewicz R: Introgressive hybridization as a mechanism
for species rescue. Theor Ecol 2011, 4:223-239.
98. Flegr J: Elastic, not plastic species: frozen plasticity theory and the origin
of adaptive evolution in sexually reproducing organisms. Biol Direct 2010,
5:2.
doi:10.1186/1745-6150-6-44
Cite this article as: Jurka et al.: Families of transposable elements,
population structure and the origin of species. Biology Direct 2011 6:44.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
