<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Decreased HIV diversity after allogeneic stem cell transplantation of an HIV-1 infected patient: a case report</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Virology Journal 2010 7:55. doi:10.1186/1743-422X-7-55"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Christel Kamp"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Kamp et al. Virology Journal 2010, 7:55
http://www.virologyj.com/content/7/1/55

CASE REPORT

Open Access

Decreased HIV diversity after allogeneic stem cell
transplantation of an HIV-1 infected patient:
a case report
Christel Kamp1†, Timo Wolf2†, Ignacio G Bravo4†, Benjamin Kraus1, Birgit Krause1, Britta Neumann1,
Gudrun Winskowsky1, Alexander Thielen5, Albrecht Werner3, Barbara S Schnierle1*

Abstract
The human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) coreceptor use and viral evolution were analyzed in blood samples from an HIV-1 infected patient undergoing allogeneic stem cell transplantation (SCT). Coreceptor use was predicted in silico from sequence data obtained from the third variable loop region of the viral envelope gene with
two software tools. Viral diversity and evolution was evaluated on the same samples by Bayesian inference and
maximum likelihood methods. In addition, phenotypic analysis was done by comparison of viral growth in peripheral blood mononuclear cells and in a CCR5 (R5)-deficient T-cell line which was controlled by a reporter assay confirming viral tropism. In silico coreceptor predictions did not match experimental determinations that showed a
consistent R5 tropism. Anti-HIV directed antibodies could be detected before and after the SCT. These preexisting
antibodies did not prevent viral rebound after the interruption of antiretroviral therapy during the SCT. Eventually,
transplantation and readministration of anti-retroviral drugs lead to sustained increase in CD4 counts and
decreased viral load to undetectable levels. Unexpectedly, viral diversity decreased after successful SCT. Our data
evidence that only R5-tropic virus was found in the patient before and after transplantation. Therefore, blocking
CCR5 receptor during stem cell transplantation might have had beneficial effects and this might apply to more
patients undergoing allogeneic stem cell transplantation. Furthermore, we revealed a scenario of HIV-1 dynamic
different from the commonly described ones. Analysis of viral evolution shows the decrease of viral diversity even
during episodes with bursts in viral load.
Background
Allogeneic stem cell transplantation is frequently used
to treat hematologic neoplasms and is a feasible treatment option for patients also infected with human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV). Infection of the target
cell with HIV-1 requires the presence of the CD4 receptor and a chemokine receptor, mostly either CCR5 (R5)
or CXCR4 (X4). Primary HIV-1 infection usually arises
from R5-tropic HIV strains. In around 50% of the
patients infected with a HIV-1 subtype B virus, a switch
in viral co-receptor usage from R5 to X4 can be
observed and the presence of X4-tropic HIV is usually
accompanied by a faster disease progression [1]. The
cause of the coreceptor switch is still unknown, but it
* Correspondence: Schba@pei.de
† Contributed equally
1
Paul-Ehrlich-Institut, Paul-Ehrlich-Strasse 51-59, 63225 Langen, Germany

can be regarded as a side-effect of selective sweeps in
response to evolutionary pressures imposed by the
immune response and/or by anti-retroviral therapy
(ART). Within-patient HIV evolution is a complex process that is influenced by a multitude of host-, virus- or
therapy-specific factors and usually proceeds towards
increased diversity of viral isolates with time [2]. Therefore we were interested in analyzing the HIV-1 evolutionary dynamics in samples isolated diachronically from
a HIV-infected patient with severe aplastic anemia who
underwent stem cell transplantation and was further
monitored for 384 days. The viral-host interaction in
this patient can be thus considered as occurring after a
partial restart of the adaptive immune response due to
the stem cell transplantation thereby resembling a primary HIV infection.

© 2010 Kamp et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Kamp et al. Virology Journal 2010, 7:55
http://www.virologyj.com/content/7/1/55

Methods
Stem cell transplantation

The 34 year-old HIV-infected male had been diagnosed
with an HIV-infection in 2001 and with severe aplastic
anemia in 2005. The patient had regularly followed
highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) for 50
months before transplantation and was treated with an
allogeneic stem cell transplant of a 10/10 alleles HLAmatched. HAART was discontinued on day 0 until day
34 to avoid potential drug interactions. The conditioning
regimen included fludarabine and cyclophosphamide [3].
Blood samples were supplied anonymously by TW who
obtained written informed consent from the patient for
publication of this case report.
Sequence analysis of Env V3 region

Either chromosomal DNA from peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) or viral RNA was used as template. RNA was prepared from the cell-free supernatant
of infected cell cultures using QIAamp viral RNA kit
(Quiagen, Hilden, Germany) and reverse transcribed
using the First strand cDNA Synthesis Kit (Amersham
Biosciences, UK). PCR amplification of the V3 region
was performed as previously described [4]. Amplification
products were directly ligated into the pGEMT vector
(Promega, Mannheim, Germany) and nucleotide sequencing was performed using dye-labeled terminators
(Eurofins/MWG/operon; Ebersberg, Germany). For each
sample ten separate sequences were determined and can
be obtained on request.
Phenotypic determination of coreceptor usage

Virus-containing supernatants were serially diluted in
media and aliquoted (50 μL per well, three replicates
per dilution) into U-well microtiter plates containing
2 × 105 of IsnoR5 cells or 4.5 × 105 PBMC from healthy
blood donors in 150 μL medium. After 14 days of incubation at 37°C, cultures were centrifuged and cell-free
supernatants were inactivated by the addition of Tween
20 to a final concentration of 0.2%. 25 μL of each sample was transferred to the corresponding well of an
ELISA plate for detection of viral Gag protein using a
p24 antigen capture assay [4].
TZM-bl cells were obtained from the NIH AIDS
Research and Reference Reagent Program (No. 8129).
This is a genetically engineered HeLa cell clone that
expresses CD4, CXCR4, and CCR5 and contains Tatresponsive reporter genes for firefly luciferase and
Escherichia coli ß-galactosidase under regulatory control
of an HIV-1 long terminal repeat. 1 × 106 TZM-bl cells
were seeded in 6 well- plates (Sarstedt) in presence or
absence of 1.5 μM Vicrivroc (Selleck). One day after
plating media was renewed and cells were infected with

Page 2 of 9

the different HIV isolates. Infection of TZM-bl cells was
assessed 2 days after infection by fixing in cold 2% paraformaldehyde in PBS. Afterwards cells were stained for
one hour at 37°C by adding 5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl-ß-galactopyranoside (X-Gal) substrate (Roth) at
0.5 mg/ml in PBS containing 4 mM potassium ferrocyanide, 4 mM potassium ferricyanide, 2 mM magnesium
chloride. Blue-stained cells/syncytia were counted.
Humoral immune responses

The presence of antibodies directed against HIV-1 or
HIV-2 antigens in plasma samples of the patient were
detected with MP Diagnostics HIV BLOT Version 2.2
Western Blots (Illkirch, France)) following the description of the manufacturer.
In silico coreceptor prediction

The coreceptor prediction was done either with the
WebPSSM http://indra.mullins.microbiol.washington.
edu/webpssm/[5] or the geno2pheno http://coreceptor.
bioinf.mpi-inf.mpg.de/index.php[6] software tools [7].
WebPSSM is a bioinformatic tool for predicting HIV-1
coreceptor use from the amino acid sequence of the V3
loop of the envelope gene in subtype B and subtype C
HIV. Sequences are aligned against a consensus
sequence and their amino acid composition is evaluated
on the basis of a position specific scoring matrix
(PSSM) which contains information about the amino
acid composition of the V3 loop in R5 and X4 viruses.
A positive score indicates X4 tropism while negative
values can predict X4 virus with high uncertainty only.
Geno2pheno is based on a statistical learning method
called a support vector machine (SVM). The program is
only trained to detect CXCR4 use, in which X4 and
R5X4 viruses are taken as belonging to the X4 class. All
predictions were done applying the default FPR of 10%.
Phylogenetic analysis

V3 sequences were aligned at the amino acid level with
MUSCLE and corrected by hand. Bayesian phylogenetic
analysis was performed at the nucleotide level with
BEAST v1.4.8 http://beast.bio.ed.ac.uk[8] using the GTR
+Γ4 model of evolution for both strict clock and uncorrelated log normal relaxed clock, introducing three partitions that corresponded to each of the codon
positions, and unlinking parameters across codon positions. Exploratory runs were performed with 50 million
steps, writing every 1,000 steps, both for the relaxed and
strict clock and compared by calculating the Bayes factor on the corresponding likelihoods. There was better
support for the relaxed clock calculations (log Bayes factor = 24.2 ± 0.44). A chain of 100 million steps was
therefore calculated for a relaxed clock model, writing

Kamp et al. Virology Journal 2010, 7:55
http://www.virologyj.com/content/7/1/55

every 1,000 steps (later reduced to every 2,000 steps for
further analysis), and analyzed with a burn-in of ten million steps. Effective viral population sizes were calculated using the time-labeled sequences gained from the
patient, as a “Bayesian skyline” [9]. Maximum Likelihood
(ML) phylogenetic analysis was performed with RAxML
HPC [10,11] using the GTR+Γ4 model of evolution and
the CAT approximation of rate heterogeneity [10],
introducing three partitions that corresponded to each
of the codon positions. Pair-wise distances between
sequences collected at the same day were calculated
with the same ML parameters using the best ML tree.

Case presentation
The 34 year-old HIV-infected male was diagnosed with
severe aplastic anemia in 2005. The patient was treated
with an allogeneic stem cell transplant and HAART was
discontinued on day 0 until day 34. As indicated in figure 1, HIV viral load rapidly rose from undetectable
levels to 6.8 × 106 copies/mL after transplantation and
antiretroviral therapy was reintroduced at day 34, resulting in a prompt 4-log reduction of the viral load, and
gradually normalizing CD4 counts. A 99% donor

Page 3 of 9

chimerism was determined from bone marrow samples
and the patient is in CDC-stage A2 now. A progression
of his HIV infection could not be noted throughout the
procedure [3].
Genotyping of HIV-1 coreceptor use

The genotypic coreceptor prediction was done by
sequence analysis of the third variable loop (V3) region
of the viral envelope (env) gene, which is the primary
determinant of coreceptor use. Env sequences were
derived of cellular genomic DNA (except for sample at
day 198 after transplantation, where cDNA from viral
supernatants was isolated) isolated from the patient at
different time points as indicated in figure 2 with the
date of SCT as reference day 0. Two different algorithms
were used for in silico coreceptor prediction: WebPSSM
[5] and geno2pheno [7]. All env sequences were classified
as subtype B HIV-1 by the geno2pheno tool.
WebPSSM predicted CXCR4 use except for one sample obtained from the patient. However the negative
score of the prediction implied a high degree of uncertainty (figure 2). Geno2pheno predicted for all samples
X4 use (figure 2, left).

Figure 1 Viral load and CD4 counts in the stem cell transplanted patient. The gray bars indicate the duration of ART, which was
discontinued at day 0 for allogenic SCT and was restarted at day 34, the inset shows the first 100 days after allo-SCT. Additional sequence
samples for phylogenetic analysis were taken at time points marked by arrows. CD4 counts are given in gray and viral load in black.

Kamp et al. Virology Journal 2010, 7:55
http://www.virologyj.com/content/7/1/55

Page 4 of 9

in silico prediction
Sample/
HIV-1 strain
d(–61)
d(-8)
d 20
d 35
d 42
d 105
d 198
d 384

Web PSSM
X4
(-4.47- -2.84)

R5
(-7.94)

X4
(-4.19)

X4
(-4.19)

X4
(-4.19)

X4
(-4.19)

X4
(-4.19 - -3.50)

X4
(-4.28 - -4.19)

in vitro phenotyping
TZMBL
Cells

TZMBL
Cells + R5i

Geno2
pheno

IsnoR5
Cells

PBMCs

X4

-

+

272

1

R5

X4

-

-

0

0

-

X4

-

25608

1

R5

X4

-

-

1

0

-

X4

n.d.

n.d.

n.d.

n.d.

-

X4

-

-

0

0

-

X4

-

+

24

1

R5

X4

n.d.

n.d.

n.d.

n.d.

-

(LacZ positive cells) (LacZ positive cells)

+

Results
phenotyping

HIV-1 SF2

X4

X4

+

+

66

128

X4

HIV-1 SF162

R5

R5

-

+

36472

63

R5

Figure 2 Summary of genotypic coreceptor predictions and phenotypic coreceptor determinations. The HIV-1 env C2V5 sequence was
amplified from genomic DNA isolated from patient derived PBMCs at the indicated time points as described before [4]. Coreceptor usage was
predicted either with WebPSSM (score of sequences shown) or geno2pheno. Patient derived HIV-1 was amplified once on donor PBMCs and
was used to infect PBMCs or IsnoR5 cells. Viral replication in the analyzed cells was determined by p24 Elisa [4] and is indicated as + or -. In a
second confirmatory assay, patient-derived virus or lab strains were used to infect TZM-bl cells or TZM-bl cells in the presence of Vicrivroc (R5i)
and infection was monitored by lacZ staining. Positive cells were counted and the numbers are indicated. The last column gives the coreceptor
use deduced from in vitro phenotyping. N.d. = not done.

In addition to the V3 region, sequence changes within
the V1, V2 and C4 regions of the envelope protein have
also been shown to have a profound impact on coreceptor use (reviewed in [12]) and coreceptor predictions by
bioinformatic tools still encounter limitations as R5 and
X4 viruses are not trivially separable on the basis of
their V3 loop amino acid sequence [13,14]. Therefore
we characterized the patient-derived HIV-1 isolates for
coreceptor tropism with two cell-based assays. Patientderived viruses were amplified by one passage in
PBMCs of an unrelated donor and for three samples
sufficient amounts of virus could be obtained for testing.
The coreceptor use was determined by comparison of
viral growth in the recently established CCR5-deficient
CD4-positive T cell line, IsnoR5 and PBMCs in triplicates [4]. Viral replication in IsnoR5 cells indicates X4

or alternative receptor use, whereas absence of replication in IsnoR5 cells reveals R5 use. The viruses were
able to replicate in PBMCs but not in IsnoR5 cells indicating R5 use (figure 2, columns 4 and 5). To verify
these results, we used TZM-bl cells, which are a genetically engineered HeLa cell clone that expresses CD4,
CXCR4, and CCR5 and contains a Tat-responsive
ß-galactosidase gene and allows for monitoring of HIV1 infection by staining the cells for ß-galactosidase activity. In addition, we analyzed infection of TZM-bl cells in
the presence of Vicrivroc, a specific CCR5 inhibitor.
TZM-bl cells could be infected with the patient-derived
virus, but infection was inhibited in the presence of
Vicrivroc (R5i), demonstrating R5 use. For control, we
used the typical R5-tropic HIV-1 SF162 and infection of
TZM-bl cells was also diminished by Vicrivroc, whereas

Kamp et al. Virology Journal 2010, 7:55
http://www.virologyj.com/content/7/1/55

a typical X4 virus (SF2) was not significantly affected
(figure 2 columns 6 and 7).
The data clearly show that in contrast to the in silico
predictions virions isolated from the patient both before
and after the SCT use the CCR5 receptor for entry.
Humoral immune response

The immunoblot analysis of HIV antigens revealed the
presence of HIV-1 specific antibodies throughout days
-92 to +384 after stem cell transplantation. The patient

Page 5 of 9

had antibodies reactive towards HIV-1 proteins and was
HIV-2 negative (figure 3).
Intrapatient HIV evolution

The here described SCT can be considered as a treatment interruption in combination with an extensive
depletion of the cellular immune response which
resulted in a strong viral rebound. Still, HIV specific
antibodies remain prevalent in the patient and CD4
cell counts stabilize with the control of viral load after

Figure 3 Humoral immunity. HIV-1-specific antibodies were detected by Western blot analysis (MP Diagnostics HIV BLOT Version 2.2 Western
Blots (Illkirch, France)) from plasma samples at the indicated time points. The major HIV-1 proteins are indicated by arrows and negative, positive
and week positive control samples were included.

Kamp et al. Virology Journal 2010, 7:55
http://www.virologyj.com/content/7/1/55

re-initiation of HAART. To analyze viral dynamics in
this specific setting, we have studied viral diversity and
phylogeny by means of ML and Bayesian methods. We
have reconstructed the phylogeny of HIV in the patient
assuming viral evolution following a general time-reversible model allowing for heterogeneity in substitution
rates among codon positions and sites and incorporating
an uncorrelated relaxed clock for the branch rates. In a
Bayesian MCMC framework implemented in the software Beast, these parameters and associated tree topologies are sampled and optimized to maximize posterior
probabilities given the evidence of sequence samples
taken from the patient (d-61, d-8, d20, d35, d42, d105,
d120, d198, d384 after transplantation). Time-labeled
sequences are used to estimate diachronic changes in
effective viral population sizes from its posterior distribution. This so called skyline plot is a proxy for the
diversity of the viral population over time [9].
Additionally, pair-wise distances based on ML analyses
were calculated for the sequences gathered at each time
point. A summary of this analysis can be found in figure 4.
Interruption of HAART before SCT treatment results
in a burst in viral load (figure 1, inset). However, we
could not observe an increase in viral diversity or the
emergence of a multitude of strains from reservoirs as a
consequence of strong viral replication at the release of
viral control. To the contrary, phylogenetic analysis
showed that viral diversity decreased after SCT and
remained at low levels thereafter. This can be seen qualitatively in the shape of the tree (figure 4A) that is
reduced to a backbone of one branch after SCT and
more quantitatively in the associated skyline plot (figure
4B) in which the effective population size shrinks to a
few sequences indicating minimal diversity and in the
decreasing values for pair-wise distances among contemporaneous sequences (figure 4C).

Discussion
One of the unsolved mysteries of HIV-1 infection is the
observation that most HIV-1 transmissions result in a
R5 virus infection. Only with time, X4 variants arise in
approximately 50% of infected individuals and their
appearance correlates with unfavourable clinical outcome [1]. We described here the analysis of the viral
rebound of a HIV-infected patient after discontinuation
of HAART as a result of bone marrow transplantation.
Although genotypic analyses predicted the presence X4tropic viruses in the patient, phenotypic coreceptor
determination revealed only the presence of R5-tropic
viruses before and after SCT including one sample
taken during the viral rebound. The discrepancy
between geno- and phenotyping is most likely due to
the fact that the positions 9-10 of the V3 loop, unusually
encode for the amino acids arginine and lysine (RK) or

Page 6 of 9

lysine and lysine (KK), however the sequences of the
patient had an asparagine and lysine (NK) at this position, which could hamper the predictions [7]. Phenotypic coreceptor determination using IsnoR5 cells is
highly sensitive and is able to detect minor amounts of
X4-tropic HIV, suggesting that no X4 viruses were present in the patient [4]. This is reminiscent to the
recently described stem cell transplantation with donor
cells homozygous for CCR5delta32 [15]. In this case,
putative minor populations of X4-tropic HIV did not
cause a re-infection of the patient even two years after
transplantation. This indicates that new infection of the
donor lymphocytes is either limited to R5-tropic strains
or replication of the less abundant X4-tropic strains has
not yet been detected [15]. In addition, structured treatment interruption (STI) of chronically HIV-1 infected
patients has been described to lead to a rapid re-emergence of HIV from reservoirs and to a dominance of
R5- over X4-using strains in patients [16]. This suggests
that R5-tropic strains have a selection advantage after
stem cell transplantation and STI and that the preferred
infection via R5 is independent of the way of entry into
the body. This implies that CCR5 inhibitors might be
beneficial during the transplantation procedure. In addition, stem cell gene modification, inactivating CCR5
receptor expression, might be considered to be useful,
too.
The patient described here had successfully undergone
stem cell transplantation and showed a 99% chimerism,
which should have eliminated most preexisting HIVspecific effector T cells. Despite the strong decrease in
CD4 counts, HIV-specific antibodies were present during stem cell transplantation, which might be caused by
long-lived plasma cells that survived the conditioning
and the immunosuppressive treatments. The data suggest that the high prevalence of HIV-specific antibodies
during viral rebound was unable to prevent rapid HIV
replication, but we cannot exclude that they contributed
to restrict viral evolution.
The viral envelope protein is exposed to the surface
and is subject to selection pressure by the immune system and the rate of evolution of this gene is approximately 1% per year [17]. Both the immune system and
antiretroviral therapy impose a selection pressure on the
virus towards the emergence of resistant viral strains
that usually decrease viral replicative fitness. Thus, viral
strains can re-emerge from hidden viral reservoirs in
patients as soon as therapy- or immune responsemediated selective pressures are released [18]. This has
especially been investigated for STI which mostly leads
to a viral rebound associated to the re-emergence of
strains and the development of resistances and often
linked to a decline in CD4 cell counts [16,19,20]. Surprisingly, the typical pattern of increased viral load and

Kamp et al. Virology Journal 2010, 7:55
http://www.virologyj.com/content/7/1/55

Page 7 of 9

Figure 4 Viral evolution. A) Bayesian evolutionary chronogram for the time-labelled viral sequences sampled at the indicated dates. Note that
the evolutionary tree evolves towards simplification and finishes simply as a backbone of a single branch. B) Viral effective population sizes as
inferred after Bayesian skyline calculation; median value is shown in continuous line; dotted lines represent the 95% highest posterior density
(HPD) interval around the median. Viral diversity decreases with time and plateaus after SCT. C) Pair-wise distances among sequences sampled at
the corresponding dates, as inferred after maximum likelihood criterion using the GTR+Γ4 model.

Kamp et al. Virology Journal 2010, 7:55
http://www.virologyj.com/content/7/1/55

increased viral diversity found in STI does not occur in
our case. While HAART interruption does result in a
viral rebound, there is no increased diversity of viral
strains that might be released from the patient’s hidden
reservoirs. This indicates that the, at least partial knockout of the immune system and the establishment of a
new immune system imposes a selection pressure different from those generated by STI.
One might hypothesize that viral load is controlled by
therapeutic measures before the patient’s immune system is again operational after SCT. Therefore no specific
immune response could be newly established shifting
the relevance of evolutionary pressures towards the less
strain specific therapeutic measures. This might decrease
the selection pressure for diversity in the viral quasispecies [21,22]. However, this does not resolve the puzzle
why HIV shows less diversity in this patient after SCT
and STI than under STI alone. It would be anticipated
instead that the additional depletion of the cellular
immune system should worsen the ambivalent prognosis
after STI. Maybe elimination of hidden HIV-1 reservoirs
before SCT suffices to reduce the potential to generate
viral diversity from dormant sequences, implying that
viral diversity arising de novo through viral evolution is
limited.

Conclusion
In summary, our data from this case report of an HIV1-infected patient undergoing SCT evidence that only
R5-tropic virus was found in the patient before and
after transplantation. In addition, the presence of HIV1-specific antibodies was found in all plasma samples
over time. Remarkably, the patient experienced an HIV1 dynamic scenario different from commonly described
ones. Detailed analysis of viral evolution shows the
decrease of viral diversity even during episodes with
bursts of viral load in contrast to observations under
STI.
Given that SCT has become a more frequent treatment option for HIV infected patients, it will be important to investigate in future studies whether our
observations of only one patient are rather anecdotal
evidence or point instead towards an important
mechanism of HIV evolution. In addition, our findings
might have implications for vaccine development, which
is mainly hampered by the great diversity of HIV.
Consent
Written informed consent was obtained by TW from
the patient for publication of this case report and any
accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is
available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal
upon request.

Page 8 of 9

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by a grant from the German Ministry of Health
(BMG). IGB is funded by the Spanish MICINN (BFU2009-06702-E/BMC) and
Ramón y Cajal Program.
Author details
1
Paul-Ehrlich-Institut, Paul-Ehrlich-Strasse 51-59, 63225 Langen, Germany.
2
Johann-Wolfgang-Goethe University, Medical School, Theodor-Stern-Kai 7,
Frankfurt am Main, Germany. 3European Commission, Directorate Health and
Consumer Protection, Health Threat Unit C3, Luxembourg. 4Centro Superior
de Investigación en Salud Pública, CSISP, Valencia, Spain. 5Max-Planck-Institut
für Informatik, Campus E14, 66123 Saarbrücken, Germany.
Authors’ contributions
BeK, BiK, BN, GW carried out the molecular genetic studies and participated
in the genotypic coreceptor predictions; AT carried out the genotypic
coreceptor predictions and helped to draft the manuscript; CK and IGB
performed the bioinformatic analysis and helped to draft the manuscript.
TW and AW conceived the study, and participated in its design and
coordination. BSS conceived and coordinated the study and drafted the
manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 7 December 2009 Accepted: 8 March 2010
Published: 8 March 2010
References
1. Regoes RR, Bonhoeffer S: The HIV coreceptor switch: a population
dynamical perspective. Trends Microbiol 2005, 13:269-277.
2. Shankarappa R, Margolick JB, Gange SJ, Rodrigo AG, Upchurch D,
Farzadegan H, et al: Consistent viral evolutionary changes associated
with the progression of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 infection.
J Virol 1999, 73:10489-10502.
3. Wolf T, Rickerts V, Staszewski S, Kriener S, Wassmann B, Bug G, et al: First
case of successful allogeneic stem cell transplantation in an HIVpatient who acquired severe aplastic anemia. Haematologica 2007, 92:
e56-e58.
4. Binninger-Schinzel D, Muller D, Wolf T, Krause B, Meye B, Winskowsky G,
et al: Characterization of a chemokine receptor CCR5-negative T cell line
and its use in determining human immunodeficiency virus type 1
phenotype. J Med Virol 2008, 80:192-200.
5. Jensen MA, Li FS, ’t Wout AB, Nickle DC, Shriner D, He HX, et al: Improved
coreceptor usage prediction and genotypic monitoring of R5-to-X4
transition by motif analysis of human immunodeficiency virus type 1
env V3 loop sequences. J Virol 2003, 77:13376-13388.
6. Sing T, Low AJ, Beerenwinkel N, Sander O, Cheung PK, Domingues FS, et al:
Predicting HIV coreceptor usage on the basis of genetic and clinical
covariates. Antivir Ther 2007, 12:1097-1106.
7. Lengauer T, Sander O, Sierra S, Thielen A, Kaiser R: Bioinformatics
prediction of HIV coreceptor usage. Nat Biotechnol 2007, 25:1407-1410.
8. Drummond AJ, Rambaut A: BEAST: Bayesian evolutionary analysis by
sampling trees. BMC Evol Biol 2007, 7:214.
9. Drummond AJ, Rambaut A, Shapiro B, Pybus OG: Bayesian coalescent
inference of past population dynamics from molecular sequences. Mol
Biol Evol 2005, 22:1185-1192.
10. Stamatakis A: RAxML-VI-HPC: maximum likelihood-based phylogenetic
analyses with thousands of taxa and mixed models. Bioinformatics 2006,
22:2688-2690.
11. Stamatakis A, Ludwig T, Meier H: RAxML-III: a fast program for maximum
likelihood-based inference of large phylogenetic trees. Bioinformatics
2005, 21:456-463.
12. Hartley O, Klasse PJ, Sattentau QJ, Moore JP: V3: HIV’s switch-hitter. AIDS
Res Hum Retroviruses 2005, 21:171-189.
13. Chesebro B, Wehrly K, Nishio J, Perryman S: Macrophage-tropic human
immunodeficiency virus isolates from different patients exhibit unusual
V3 envelope sequence homogeneity in comparison with T-cell-tropic
isolates: definition of critical amino acids involved in cell tropism. J Virol
1992, 66:6547-6554.

Kamp et al. Virology Journal 2010, 7:55
http://www.virologyj.com/content/7/1/55

Page 9 of 9

14. Bozek K, Thielen A, Sierra S, Kaiser R, Lengauer T: V3 loop sequence space
analysis suggests different evolutionary patterns of CCR5- and CXCR4tropic HIV. PLoS ONE 2009, 4:e7387.
15. Hutter G, Nowak D, Mossner M, Ganepola S, Mussig A, Allers K, et al: Longterm control of HIV by CCR5 Delta32/Delta32 stem-cell transplantation.
N Engl J Med 2009, 360:692-698.
16. Silva WP, Santos DE, Leal E, Brunstein A, Sucupira MC, Sabino EC, et al:
Reactivation of ancestral strains of HIV-1 in the gp120 V3 env region in
patients failing antiretroviral therapy and subjected to structured
treatment interruption. Virology 2006, 354:35-47.
17. Diaz RS, Zhang L, Busch MP, Mosley JW, Mayer A: Divergence of HIV-1
quasispecies in an epidemiologic cluster. Aids 1997, 11:415-422.
18. Madsen TV, Gerstoft J, Nielsen C, Jorgensen LB: Reappearance of an
11-year-old sequence in an HIV-1 infected patient during treatment
interruption. Scand J Infect Dis 2008, 40:174-182.
19. Willberg CB, Nixon DF: Treatment interruption in chronic HIV-1 infection:
does it deliver? Curr Opin HIV AIDS 2007, 2:26-30.
20. Pai NP, Tulsky JP, Lawrence J, Colford JM Jr, Reingold AL: Structured
treatment interruptions (STI) in chronic suppressed HIV infection in
adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2005, CD005482.
21. Bonhoeffer S, Holmes EC, Nowak MA: Causes of HIV diversity. Nature 1995,
376:125.
22. Bittner B, Bonhoeffer S, Nowak MA: Virus load and antigenic diversity. Bull
Math Biol 1997, 59:881-896.
doi:10.1186/1743-422X-7-55
Cite this article as: Kamp et al.: Decreased HIV diversity after allogeneic
stem cell transplantation of an HIV-1 infected patient: a case report.
Virology Journal 2010 7:55.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
