<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Phylogenetic and regulatory region analysis of Wnt5 genes reveals conservation of a regulatory module with putative implication in pancreas development</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Biology Direct 2010 5:49. doi:10.1186/1745-6150-5-49"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Maria Kapasa"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Kapasa et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:49
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/49

RESEARCH

Open Access

Phylogenetic and regulatory region analysis of
Wnt5 genes reveals conservation of a regulatory
module with putative implication in pancreas
development
Maria Kapasa1,2,3, Stilianos Arhondakis1, Sophia Kossida1*

Abstract
Background: Wnt5 genes belong to the large Wnt family, encoding proteins implicated into several tumorigenic
and developmental processes. Phylogenetic analyses showed that Wnt5 gene has been duplicated at the
divergence time of gnathostomata from agnatha. Interestingly, experimental data for some species indicated that
only one of the two Wnt5 paralogs participates in the development of the endocrine pancreas. The purpose of this
paper is to reexamine the phylogenetic history of the Wnt5 developmental regulators and investigate the
functional shift between paralogs through comparative genomics.
Results: In this study, the phylogeny of Wnt5 genes was investigated in species belonging to protostomia and
deuterostomia. Furthermore, an in silico regulatory region analysis of Wnt5 paralogs was conducted, limited to those
species with insulin producing cells and pancreas, covering the evolutionary distance from agnatha to
gnathostomata. Our results confirmed the Wnt5 gene duplication and additionally revealed that this duplication
event included also the upstream region. Moreover, within this latter region, a conserved module was detected to
which a complex of transcription factors, known to be implicated in embryonic pancreas formation, bind.
Conclusions: Results and observations presented in this study, allow us to conclude that during evolution, the
Wnt5 gene has been duplicated in early vertebrates, and that some paralogs conserved a module within their
regulatory region, functionally related to embryonic development of pancreas. Interestingly, our results allowed
advancing a possible explanation on why the Wnt5 orthologs do not share the same function during pancreas
development. As a final remark, we suggest that an in silico comparative analysis of regulatory regions, especially
when associated to published experimental data, represents a powerful approach for explaining shift of roles
among paralogs.
Reviewers: This article was reviewed by Sarath Janga (nominated by Sarah Teichmann), Ran Kafri (nominated by
Yitzhak Pilpel), and Andrey Mironov (nominated by Mikhail Gelfand).

Background
Wnt genes have undergone a rapid structural and functional change in a surprisingly short period of time,
<100 million years ago (MYA; 1). In particular, the
Wnt5 gene has been found to be duplicated in those
species arisen in evolution later than the divergence
* Correspondence: skossida@bioacademy.gr
1
Bioinformatics & Medical Informatics Team, Biomedical Research Foundation
of the Academy of Athens, 11527, Athens, Greece
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

time of jawed vertebrates (gnathostomata) from the lineage of agnatha, including hagfish and lampreys, nearly
560 MYA [1,2]; see also Figure 1). Indeed species
belonging to protostomia invertebrates (Drosophila melanogaster) deuterostomia invertebrates (Ciona intestinalis) and to the class of agnatha vertebrates (Petromyzon
marinus), were found to have one Wnt5 gene, while
gnathostomata vertebrates have two, namely Wnt5a and
Wnt5b. These genes encode growth factors, known to
be implicated in several developmental and tumorigenic

© 2010 Kapasa et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Kapasa et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:49
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/49

Page 2 of 13

Figure 1 Phylogenetic tree of Wnt5a and Wnt5b proteins. Letters a and b, respectively denote the Wnt5a and Wnt5b paralogs.

processes [3,4]. Forsooth, it has been shown that Wnt5a
signaling determines the migration of insulin-positive
cells during murine pancreatic morphogenesis [5].
Moreover, an abnormal formation of pancreas in early
embryos of mice occurred after over-expression of
Wnt5a [6]. Finally, after induction of the key transcription factor (TF) for endocrine pancreas specification,
the Neurogenin3 (NGN3), an altered expression level
of Wnt5a in murine embryonic pancreas progenitors
was detected [7], whereas that of Wnt5b remained unaltered [8].
A previous study [5] showed that in some species carrying both Wnt5 paralogs only one participates in cell
migration events during the endocrine pancreas development. More explicitly, they showed that in early mice

embryos Wnt5a expression guides the migration of islet
cells in order to properly form the endocrine part of
pancreas, while in zebrafish embryos, the Wnt5 signalling is required for the proper migration of insulin producing cells during pancreas development [5]. However,
previous studies aiming to establish the function of
Wnt5 genes, observed that, despite the similarity in
expression pattern between zebrafish ZfWnt5 and murine Wnt5a during pancreatic development [9-12], the
former was found to be characterized by a higher amino
acid sequence similarity to that of the mouse Wnt5b [3].
Taking into account the importance of Wnt5 genes
during development of pancreas, in relation to shifting
roles between paralogs, we decided to conduct a phylogenetic and an in silico comparative regulatory region

Kapasa et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:49
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/49

analysis of Wnt5 genes. Our data confirmed that the
duplication of the Wnt5 gene, including also its
upstream region, has occurred at the divergence time of
gnathostomata from agnatha. Additionally, within this
region we identified a conserved regulatory module
binding trans regulators annotated to be related to pancreas development.

Results and Discussion
Phylogenetic Analysis

The orthologous protein sequences of Wnt5a and
Wnt5b genes were identified in many species, covering a
phylogenetic distance from invertebrate protostomia to
vertebrate deuterostomia (see Materials and Methods).
The phylogenetic relationships, as estimated from amino
acid sequence similarities, are shown in a cladogram
tree in Figure 1. According to this tree, the Wnt5
sequences of Ciona, Drosophila and of P. marinus (Lamprey) were found at separated branches to those of the
other Wnt5a and Wnt5b proteins of the gnathostomata.
Afterwards, the syntenies for Wnt5a and Wnt5b genes
were investigated (see Figure 2; for details see Materials
and Methods). In this figure, the genomic regions surrounding each Wnt5 gene were shown to be conserved,
and only for some species partial inversions have
occurred. Summarizing, the Wnt5a gene was surrounded by Erc2 and Cacna2d3, with Ltrm1 being in
the genomic neighbourhood of the latter (Figure 2a). On
the other hand, Wnt5b was surrounded by Adipor2 and
Fbxl14, with Erc1 in close proximity of the latter in
most species (Figure 2b). Finally, in Figure 2c the syntenic regions for the Wnt5 gene of Lamprey (P. marinus),
Ciona (C. intestinalis), and Drosophila (D. melanogaster)
are presented. For Petromyzon, Cacna2d3 and Adipor2
genes were identified (Figure 2c), both on the same side
of Wnt5 gene. It is worth noting that these genes were
found to surround Wnt5a and Wnt5b paralogs in species belonging to gnathostomata. In proximity to Wnt5
in Ciona and Fruitfly, Erc1/2 and Fbxl14 were identified,
found also in the syntenic regions of both Wnt5 duplicates in gnathostomata. The above findings suggest that
a gene duplication event has occurred approximately at
the divergence time of gnathostomata, involving the
Wnt5 gene and its neighbouring genomic region, followed by genomic translocation.
Regulatory Region Analysis

An in silico analysis of the regulatory regions of Wnt5a
and Wnt5b genes, was performed only for those species
having pancreas and cells producing insulin (see Materials and Methods). Indeed, Ciona and Fruitfly were
excluded from the analysis [13-15], while Lamprey, the
only living representative of agnatha with known genome, having both pancreas and insulin producing cells

Page 3 of 13

[16,17] was maintained. Therefore, the regulatory region
analysis was conducted only to species covering the evolutionary distance from agnatha to mammals (Figure 3).
Through the application of an extensive filtering method
[18] on the selection of transcription factor binding sites
(TFBS), a conserved distant regulatory module was identified within the upstream region of some Wnt5 genes.
Figure 3 shows those Wnt5 paralogs for each species in
which this module was identified, the TFBS relative
positions (in scale), and the absolute distance of the regulatory module from the transcription start site (TSS) of
each gene. Strikingly, this conserved regulatory region
covers a narrow genomic locus containing the binding
motifs of 6 TFs belonging to the following families:
NEUR (NGN1/3), HNF1, HNF6, BRNF (BRN2, BRN3,
BRN4, and BRN5), PDX1 (PDX1 and ISL1), and LEFF
(LEF1). The p-values of those TFs found to cluster
together with NEUR are given in Table 1.
Despite the variable length of this regulatory module,
its changeable distance from the TSS, and the different
order where the TFBS are found, the specific region was
conserved in all species investigated herein. Indeed,
highly conserved transcription regulators are usually
expected to be found around and within their target
genes as well as at random positions within a genome
[19-21] spanning variable distances upstream or downstream of the TSS [22].
It seems that selective pressure during evolution has
acted within these genomic sequences, in order to maintain unaltered the binding motifs of the previously
referred TFs, known to participate in pancreas development. Explicitly, NGN3 is required for the specification
of the cells’ subtypes of the endocrine pancreas [7]. On
the other hand, PDX1 and ISL1 regulate islet cell development and insulin gene expression, while HNF6 and
HNF1 are both transcriptional activators of pancreasspecific genes [23-27]. Moreover, the members of the
BRNF family (BRN2, BRN3, BRN4, and BRN5), participate in mammalian embryogenesis by regulating different patterns of gene expression, with BRN4 involved in
cell fate determination of cells capable of producing glucagon [28,29]. Finally, LEF1 mediates the effects of the
canonical Wnt signaling pathway, on which several
organogenic events depend [30].
These TFs are predicted to bind to this regulatory
region, during pancreas development, simultaneously or
not. Hence, the presence of this under question regulatory module indicates the participation of the respective
Wnt5 paralog in pancreas differentiation procedures. In
order to test the sensitivity of our method we performed
exactly the same analysis on the constitutively expressed
gene of b-actin (see Materials and Methods). Our results
showed absence of the regulatory module, with the only
exception that of zebrafish b-actin, where the same

Kapasa et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:49
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/49

Page 4 of 13

Figure 2 Wnt5 syntenies. The syntenies for the genomic loci of Wnt5a and Wnt5b genes are presented in Figures 2a and 2b respectively,
whereas the only genomic locus containing a Wnt5 gene for Lamprey, Ciona and Fruitfly is shown in Figure 2c. The boxes represent the coding
regions of the genes and those with horizontal lines the predicted orthologs of the genes named inside them.

cluster of TFBS to that of Wnt5 was identified, although
within a region of approximately the double length. The
given findings from the above negative control experiment, in relation to the documented implication in pancreas development of the murine Wnt5a and the
zebrafish Wnt5b [3,5], both carrying this cluster of
TFBS (Figure 3), further support the functionality of this
conserved regulatory module.

Finally, Figure 4 shows those species in which this regulatory region was identified in at least one Wnt5 paralog. Interestingly, while this module is conserved in both
Wnt5 paralogs of gnathostomata fishes, for one representative of this class, Danio rerio (zebrafish), as for
mammals and birds, it was identified in only one paralog (Figure 4). Concerning the regulatory module’s loss
in the Wnt5 of zebrafish, it has been shown that in

Kapasa et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:49
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/49

Page 5 of 13

Figure 3 The regulatory module of Wnt5. Schematic representation of the regulatory module for those Wnt5 paralogs, in which this cluster of
TFBS was identified. The regions demarcating the regulatory module are indicated with vertical lines, and the ruler at the top indicates the
distance from the TSS. The TF families are indicated with different symbols: the rhomb is used to depict NEUR binding sites, the triangle HNF6,
the circle HNF1, the crescent PDX1, the square BRNF and the thunder LEFF TFBS.

teleosts after gene duplication only one gene maintains
the regulatory module in its neighborhood [21].
Functional Domain Analysis

In order to understand why both Wnt5 genes were preserved after the duplication event, whereas only one
maintained the regulatory module, we conducted a functional domain analysis (see Material and Methods). Our
Table 1 The p-values of the TF families identified in the
regulatory module
TF Family

p-value

LEFF

5.1 10-6

NEUR

1.2 10-5

PDX1

2.4 10-5

HNF6
HNF1

3.7 10-5
1.1 10-3

BRNF

1.5 10-3

The first column reports the TF families of those elements identified at the
conserved regulatory module and the second one the corresponding p-values
(probability of random identification of the binding motifs of each element, in
the entire submitted sequence).

analysis revealed the presence of the same functional
domain at approximately the same position in both proteins. More precisely in mice, Wnt5a and Wnt5b,
included the domain Wnt1 in the positions of their
amino acid sequences, 51-360 and 63-372, respectively,
while those of D. rerioin the positions, 65-374 and 54363 (Data available upon request).
Wnt1 domain is known to be implicated at the development of multicellular organisms, the Wnt receptor
signalling pathway, and the calcium modulating pathway. The canonical Wnt signalling pathway (Wnt/b
catenin pathway) is involved in cell fate specification
and proliferation [31] and the other two non canonical
(b-catenin independent) Wnt signalling pathways are
implicated into organ formation through antagonising
the canonical Wnt signalling pathway [4,32]. In vertebrates, the latter ones regulate cell polarity and guide
cell migration events during embryogenesis leading into
endoderm patterning and more precisely in pancreas
formation (see 33 and references therein).
A recent study [33] has shown that in zebrafish while
Wnt5b activates the non canonical Wnt signalling

Kapasa et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:49
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/49

Page 6 of 13

Figure 4 Plylogenetic tree of the taxa included in the regulatory region analysis. The circular phylogenetic tree shows the evolutionary
relationships for those species, used for the regulatory region analysis. The putative time of the gene duplication event is shown with the grey
dot, corresponding to the divergence time of gnathostomata. Under the name of each organism the Wnt5 paralogs are shown, with the
regulatory module, when present, marked with a black box.

pathway, contemporaneously acts as a negative feedback
loop for the regulation of the canonical one. On the other
hand, Topol et al., 2003 [32], showed that in mouse the
inhibition of the canonical pathway is attributed to the
Wnt5a gene. Summarizing, the conservation of both Wnt5
paralogs after the duplication event is related to a negative
cross regulatory inhibition between the canonical and the
non canonical Wnt signalling pathways, maintaining a
responsive backup circuit [34]. From the above, we may
suggest that in the pancreatic development the expression
of mouse Wnt5a and zebrafish Wnt5b genes, both carrying the conserved regulatory module, in greater amounts
than their paralogs is necessary, in order to inhibit the
canonical Wnt signalling pathway and achieve a proper
cell migration for the pancreatic islets formation.
Expression Profile Analysis

Within this section, the expression pattern of the human
and mouse Wnt5a and Wnt5b genes were investigated

in several adult human tissues and during mouse
embryonic development of pancreas. In the first case,
expression patterns of human Wnt5 paralogs were
retrieved from GeneCards V3 database [35] and from
the publicly available data of Su et al., 2004, [36]. Both
approaches revealed a similarity between human Wnt5
paralogs expression patterns (see Additional file 1, Panel
A and B), supporting the previously referred hypothesis
of genomic conservation related to a responsive backup
circuit [34], in which both genes participate. Indeed, taking into account that during early somitogenesis, the
endoderm patterning initially requires suppression of
the canonical Wnt signalling, while later an increased
Wnt/beta activity is necessary [37], we understand that
both genes are implicated in the regulation of the canonical and non canonical Wnt signalling pathways.
On the other hand, the expression patterns of both
mouse Wnt5 paralogs, as given from microarray experiments investigating the pancreatic development in early

Kapasa et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:49
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/49

murine embryos from day 12.5 until 16.5, revealed distinct profiles in their expression (see Additional file 1,
Panel C). More precisely, until 13.5 days of mice pancreatic development the expression level of Wnt5a gene
(carrying the module) is higher to that of Wnt5b, while
at 14.5 day, where pancreatic ducts become visible [15],
both genes hold similar expression. Afterwards (until
day 16.5), Wnt5a gene further decreases its expression,
reaching lower levels than those of Wnt5b. Summarizing, the above described pattern indicates that as pancreatic development proceeds the amount of Wnt5a
gene gradually decreases, while that of Wnt5b is maintained constant. In this case, as we have already
described, the murine Wnt5a (carrier of the conserved
regulatory module) gene, controls the proper migration
of the cells in order to properly form the pancreatic
islets [5]. This last procedure, is estimated to take place
approximately during those days for which Wnt5a
expression is higher to that of Wnt5b (see Additional
file 1, Panel C). Indeed in early mice embryos of 11.5
days, the insulin precursors of mature b-cells appear
[15] and afterwards they migrate along the ducts and
blood vessels in a cord like linear pattern in order to
form the islets (see 38 and references therein), where
until the 14th day they are arrayed as single cells within
the ductal epithelium. Finally, at a 16 days old embryo,
endocrine cells begin to organize into islet like clusters,
and when the embryo reaches the 18 th -19 th day, the
islets are fully formed [39].
Summarizing, the expression patterns shown here for
Wnt5a and Wnt5b, in human and mouse, represent
additional evidence on why both genes are conserved
after duplication, and indicate the functional role of this
module in the Wnt5a gene during mice pancreatic
development.
On the other hand, the shift of the regulatory module
in rhesus monkey Wnt5a compared to human Wnt5b,
prompted us to further investigate expression data of
Wnt5 genes in embryonic stem cells and several adult
tissues of Macaque. The obtained profiles in both analyses (stem cells and adult) showed that Wnt5a gene
(carrier of the module) is constantly expressed, while
Wnt5b not (Panels A, B and C of Additional file 2).
These results indicate that the conservation of the regulatory module in a paralog is linked with a functional
advantage.

Conclusions
In this study, phylogenetic and regulatory region analyses
of Wnt5 genes were conducted. A special feature of the
phylogeny in our work is the inclusion of Lamprey, the
only living representative of the agnatha (jawless), with
known genome, from which all jawed vertebrates
diverged [40]. The phylogenetic analysis confirmed that

Page 7 of 13

in those species arisen after the divergence time of
gnathostomata two Wnt5 paralogs exist, whereas in the
agnathon Petromyzon (P. marinus) and the representatives of protostomia (D. melanogaster) and deuterostomia
(C. intestinalis) invertebrates, only one (see Figure 1).
This is explained by a duplication event which has
occurred at the evolutionarily time that gnathostomata
diverged from agnatha (before 560 MYA; 1, 2).
Finally, the comparative regulatory region analysis
allowed the identification of a conserved region, where
many TFs, annotated to participate in pancreas formation, bind and regulate Wnt5 expression. The presence
of these binding motifs, which cluster inside this regulatory region, might explain the implication of the corresponding Wnt5 paralog into the processes enlisted
necessarily for the pancreatic cells subtypes’ differentiation. Providing the fact that the Wnt5 gene is a member
of the Wnt family, it is interesting to identify LEF1, a
known mediator of Wnt signalling pathway [30], as a
regulatory factor of Wnt5 expression, which further
guides this pathway. On the other hand, the regulation
of the Wnt5 gene through TFs with known implication
in pancreas organogenesis, and more specifically in the
proper orchestration of cell movements, gives evidence
for the necessity of this regulatory module for the
proper differentiation of cells capable of producing insulin. It is worth pointing out that, Lamprey with both
pancreas and insulin producing cells has preserved this
module inside the regulatory sequence of the Wnt5
gene.
Taking into account that the evolutionary time, when
Wnt5 and its regulatory sequence were duplicated, is
close to the divergence time of gnathostomata, it is not
surprising that in some gnathostomata fishes this module was identified in both Wnt5 paralogs, while for evolutionary younger jawed vertebrates, together with
zebrafish, it is preserved in only one. It is worth noting
that in Osteichthyes, in which zebrafish belongs, regulatory module divergence and subfunctionalization
between paralogous genes are common phenomena
[41]. Evaluating the results of our study we may conclude that the Wnt5 paralog, the regulatory module of
which was lost (Wnt5a of zebrafish and Wnt5b of
mouse) was excluded from the participation of the pancreatic cells’ subtype specification procedures. This
could be characterized as a neofunctionalization rather
than as a subfuntionalization event. Indeed, as we have
already anticipated, a study of Kikuta et al., 2007 [21]
has shown that in teleosts there are numerous cases,
where a highly conserved regulatory module remains
near to only one duplicated gene, providing a satisfactory explanation why in zebrafish this regulatory module
was maintained only in the Wnt5b, which is also the
one implicated in pancreas development [3].

Kapasa et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:49
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/49

The conservation of this regulatory module in at least
one paralog of the species investigated in this study (Figure 4) reflects its functional importance. Indeed, the
experimental data from mouse and zebrafish reinforce a
possible relation between the presence of this regulatory
module in a Wnt5 paralog, and its implication in pancreas formation [3,5]. Moreover, the presence of this
TFBS cluster in human Wnt5b, absent in that of the
rodents (mouse and rat), not only explains the observed
human-rodents divergence of Wnt5b promoters [42],
but also agrees with its implication in human type 2 diabetes [43]. Finally, the herein examined profiles for
Wnt5 genes for two distinct cases; mice pancreatic
development and across several human adult tissues add
evidence on the functionality of this module and explain
why genic preservation has occurred respectively.
Indeed, the first case supports the fundamental role that
mouse Wnt5a (carrier of the regulatory module) plays
during pancreatic development. On the other hand, the
human adult tissues expression profiles reveal a low
expression divergence between Wnt5 genes in the adult
state, which supports the preservation of Wnt5 genes,
known to be implicated into a responsive backup circuit
[34]. Concluding, it is very likely that selective pressure
through evolution forced the coding regions of Wnt5
paralogs to remain unaltered and maintained the functionality of at least one regulatory module inside their
upstream sequence. This last point is further supported
by the expression profiles of macaque Wnt5 genes.
Despite the fact that some issues presented herein,
might require further experimental exploration, the
approach adopted in this work managed to offer a putative explanation why either Wnt5a or Wnt5b across different species preserved the same function. In relation
to this, we conclude suggesting that similar analyses
associated to experimentally produced data, could represent an efficient strategy in order to investigate cases
where a shift in the functional role of paralogs has
occurred.

Materials and methods
Ortholog Identification and Phylogenetic Analysis

Wnt5a and Wnt5b orthologs were identified with the
Reciprocal Best Blast Hit method [44-46], using as reference sequences the murine Wnt5a and Wnt5b proteins,
as retrieved and extracted from Ensembl database ([47];
Ensembl release 52-Dec 08, Ensembl release 53 - Mar
2009), with accession numbers, [Ensembl: ENSMU
SP00000107891 and Ensembl: ENSMUSP00000032273]
respectively.
Syntenic genes to Wnt5 paralogs were identified using
the same version of Ensembl database in combination
with the ortholog identification method [44-46]. Protein
alignment of the orthologous peptides was performed

Page 8 of 13

using ClustalW [48]. On the basis of this alignment, and
using Bioedit and Phylip package [49] a phylogenetic
tree was reconstructed with the Maximun Parsimony
method setting a bootstrap value of 2000 [50-52]. The
commonly accepted tree of the taxa shown in Figure 4
was extracted from NCBI database, using the Taxonomy
Browser [53]. Trees presented in this work were visualized using TreeExplorer in MEGA 4.0 [54].
Functional Domain Analysis

The functional domain identification in both Wnt5 protein sequences was performed using the SMART algorithm [55] and the protein sequences of Wnt5a and
Wnt5b for mouse and zebrafish as queries (mouse
accession numbers [Ensembl: ENSMUSP00000064878
and Ensembl: ENSMUSP00000112448]; zebrafish accession numbers [Ensembl: ENSDARP00000018037 and
Ensembl: ENSDARP00000041851]).
Regulatory Region Analysis

The genomic regions of the orthologous Wnt5a and
Wnt5b genes, spanning 4500 bp upstream to 500 bp
downstream from the TSS were extracted from Ensembl
database [47] for the species given in Figure 3. The TSS
for every gene was annotated also at Ensembl Database
[47]. The extracted regulatory regions were submitted to
the MatInspector platform in Genomatix Database [56].
The putative TFBS for all TFs from Matrix Library 7.1
were detected using a core similarity value of 0.75, and
the “optimized” matrix similarity as cut- off parameters.
In order to increase robustness of our analysis, we
sought only the common TFBS for the orthologous
sequences of each gene. As a second filtering step we
searched the sub-regions with maximum length of 1000
bp, which contained at least one binding site for the
TFs Neurogenin1/3 (NGN1/3), clustered at the NEUR
TF family. More precisely, only those NEUR TFBS with
the highest core and matrix similarity values, inside the
regulatory sequences of every species paralogs, were
selected as anchors. This parameter was implemented
since Wnt5a gene has been shown to be regulated by
NGN3; a conclusion drawn by the fact that its expression levels were found to be altered after NGN3 induction [9]. Considering these NEUR TFBS as anchors and
in combination with a methodology described in a previous work [18], we searched the TFBS of other common elements (TFs) in all orthologs from the species
shown in Figure 3. In conclusion, we tried to discover
regions where TFBS from TFs belonging to NEUR
family were co-localized with those of other trans regulatory elements, also implicated into pancreas differentiation procedures.
The above analysis was repeated for b-actin, after we
identified the orthologous genes (query sequence:

Kapasa et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:49
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/49

murine b-actin; [Ensembl: ENSMUSG00000029580]) for
the same number of species (Figure 3) covering the
same phylogenetic distance to those of Wnt5 genes.
Expression Profile Analysis

Expression patterns for both Wnt5a and Wnt5b genes in
human, mouse and macaque were investigated. For the
human Wnt5 paralogs, expression data were retrieved
from two sources: the GeneCards V3 [35] and the dataset browser of GEO database (Gene Expression Omnibus; 57). More precisely, in the second source,
expression data were retrieved and compared for the
replicates of 79 physiological human tissues, provided by
Su et al., 2004 [36].
Concerning the murine Wnt5 genes, the analysed
expression data were also retrieved from the dataset
browser of GEO database, [57] from microarray experiment during mice pancreatic development, using the
Affymetrix Murine Genome U74 Version 2 array [58].
For the macaque, expression data were retrieved from
embryonic stem cells [59], and from several adult tissues
[60,61].

Additional material
Additional file 1: Panel A: Human Wnt5a and Wnt5b expression
profiles in healthy adult tissues. Panel B: Graphical comparative
representation of Wnt5a and Wnt5b expression profiles in healthy adult
human tissues. Panel C: Graphical representation of Wnt5a and Wnt5b
expression profiles in early mouse embryos.
Additional file 2: Panel A: Macaque Wnt5a and Wnt5b expression
profiles in embryonic stem cells. Panel B and C: Macaque Wnt5a and
Wnt5b expression profiles adult tissues.

Abbreviations
MYA: Million Years Ago; TF: Transcription Factor; NGN3: Neurogenin3; TFBS:
Transcription Factor Binding Sites; TSS: Transcription Start Site; NGN1/3:
Neurogenin 1/3.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors’ contributions
SK conceived the present study and designed the in silico approach. MK
carried out the acquisition, analysis, interpretation of the data and drafted
the manuscript. SA offered valuable insight to the interpretation of the
results and conducted the expression profile analysis. All authors revised and
approved the final version of the manuscript.
Authors’ information
MK: PhD Student in the Department of Pharmacy of University of Patras and
in the Biomedical Research Foundation of the Academy of Athens (BRFAA).
SA: PhD, post-doc in Bioinformatics & Medical Informatics Team, in the
BRFAA.
SK: DPhil, Investigator C-Assistant Professor Level, Head of Bioinformatics &
Medical Informatics Team, in the BRFAA.
Reviewers’ comments
First Reviewer
Ran Kafri (nominated by Yitzhak Pilpel)

Page 9 of 13

Lahav Lab, Department of Systems Biology, Harvard Medical School
Report
I read your manuscript and found it very interesting. Gene duplications have
always been close to my heart. It was very interesting that you were able to
identify both synteny and regulatory motif conservation. This conservation
indicates the importance of the functional role played by Wnt and of the
lack of redundancy in the time of duplication. I think that the main aspect
that may improve the work is to embed it within the larger framework of
current models describing duplicate gene evolution. Specifically, the fate of
duplicate genes, following a duplication event, is typically described in terms
of one of three possibilities (see ref 1). Neofunctionalization,
subfunctionalization and gene loss. Obviously, this above description is a
form of simplification. For example, a pair of duplicates can undergo both
partial subfunctionalization and neofunctionlization. Nevertheless, the ne-/
sub funcitonalization model serves a very good axis for describing fates of
gene duplicates. In the case of Wnt5, which of the two processes would you
say is a better descriptor of what happened?
Another meta-question that is interesting to address is why, following the
gene duplication event, have both Wnt5a and Wnt5b been evolutionarily
conserved? Redundancy is known to be evolutionarily instable. The fact that
both duplicates have been retained throughout evolution suggests that
there is a functional advantage to having both (see ref 2). What is that
advantage? Maybe a guess at that question could be based on the motif
analysis of both genes. Which motifs are old, which are new. What
processes do these below to?
ref 1:
The evolutionary fate and consequences of duplicate genes. Lynch M,
Conery JS. Science. 2000 Nov 10;290(5494):1151-5.
ref 2:
The regulatory utilization of genetic redundancy through responsive backup
circuits. Kafri R, Levy M, Pilpel Y. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2006 Aug 1;103
[31]:11653-8. Epub 2006 Jul 21.
Authors’ response
We do agree with reviewers’ comments, and we have now added in our
manuscript a possible model describing Wnt5 gene duplication event, and
on why both copies were preserved. We hope now to fully answer to the
comments of the reviewer.
Second Reviewer
Sarath Chandra Janga (nominated by Sarah Teichmann).
MRC-Laboratory of Molecular Biology. Darwin college, University of
Cambridge.
Report 1
In this work the authors present an evolutionary and regulatory region
analysis for the Wnt5 family of genes in different vertebrate and invertebrate
genomes. Although the work is interesting and in general well-presented, I
have few concerns regarding the presentation and clarity of the manuscript.
Given that the manuscripts only major observations are that Wnt5 gene is
duplicated early in evolution after the divergence time of gnathostomata
and that in several genomes with paralogs the regulatory region
corresponding to wnt5a and wnt5b paralogs appears to be conserved, the
authors should consider addressing all these comments below in order to
increase the readability and clarity of the manuscript.
General Comment 1
The title appears very abstract without any novel implications although the
authors did carry out some meticulous first hand analysis. So I suggest
changing the title to something more informative like “Phylogenetic and
regulatory region analysis of Wnt5 genes reveals change in genomic context
of the two paralogs [despite conservation of regulatory elements]”
General Comment 2
One major concern with the study is that the authors have a series of
observations with regard to the regulatory region analysis but it is not
evident if what are the interpretations of these observations, as the authors
never conclusively discuss them in the context of known knowledge about
Wnt signalling. For instance, the authors mention very briefly an show in
Figure 3 that only one of the two Wnt5 paralogs contain the regulatory
module in several higher eukaryotes however it is not clear if this is due to
sensitivity of the search method adopted or if this is true what are the
implications in terms of the expression patterns of the other Wnt gene.
These observations should be discussed in detail.
General Comment 3a

Kapasa et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:49
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/49

In this context, more generally how do the expression levels of wnt genes
in various human and mouse tissues compare? For instance using the
microarray datasets like Andrew Su et. al. PNAS for expression data do the
authors see a correlation in their levels or a divergence.
General Comment 3b
It appears to me that the authors claim (and expect) at some point in the
manuscript that they are both still involved in the same tissue-specific
processes (these observations primarily based on previous expression
studies) however the lack of regulatory module conservation with change in
neighborhood suggests the opposite- So the authors should discuss their
observations in light recent studies such as Janga et. al. PNAS 2008 -and De
et. al. Genome Research 2008 where the authors show rewiring of
regulatory networks due to change in context.
General Comment 4
The authors show in Figure 3 that NGN3 binds to wnt5b in both human
and chimp but not wnt5a however the discuss in the introduction in light
of references 7 and 8 that wnt5b expression is unaltered while wnt5a
changes in expression due to the induction of NGN3. This has to be clarified
in light of authors (apparently) contrasting observations.
General Comment 5
The authors should consider introducing/showing the phylogeny shown in
Figure 1 in the introduction itself and mark the genomes into different
groups of vertebrate and invertebrates on the figure to improve clarify. Do
the authors see the same tree if the alignment was done by grouping
wnt5a and wnt5b proteins as different groups.
General Comment 6
In most locations of the manuscript, the authors do not cite corresponding
materials and methods section.
General Comment 7
What do the authors mean by “.. between the evolutionary age of P.
marinus and that of gnathostomata” towards the end of the section on
phylogenetic analysis?
General Comment 8
How do the author identify the Transcription Start Site (TSS) in various
genomes? are these a mix of experimental and computational predictions.
This has to be detailed in the methods.
General Comment 9
Related to point 8 above the authors could use the relative locations of TSS
and the binding regions of TFs to propose whether the regulatory context is
indeed conserved between the paralogs across genomes analyzed.
General Comment 10a
The authors should discuss the following scenarios based on their findings
What is the likelihood that the paralogs for which there is conservation of
regulatory module there is lack of expression/process context.
General Comment 10b
Those paralogs which don’t have the regulatory module are they expressed
in general? or alternatively is it possible that they are non-functional over
times.
Minor comments for revision
There are grammatical inconsistencies and lack of clarity in presentation in
different parts of the manuscript, which I expect the authors to revise. Below
is an incomplete list which should be corrected.
1) Introduction, Rephrase the sentence to improve clarity “.. and ciona
intestinalis (deuterostome), and to early vertebrates, like agnatha, including
hagfish and lampreys, were.”
2) Rephrase the sentence in Phylogenetic analysis section “The orthologous
peptides for Wnt5a and for their wnt5b paralogs were identified..”
3) Page 4, “Formaly” should be “Formally”
4) In conclusions section rephrase “.., situated in close proximity one to each
other, and..”
5) On page 10, para 2 change “evolutionary” to “evolutionarily”
6) Rephrase Page 11, last para, “..on why for some species different Wnt5
paralogs
7) The authors use regulatory element and module synonymously in
different places. Since the search was for a set of regulatory elements, they
should use regulatory module or set of associated TFBS as a common
terminology throughout the manuscript in order to avoid confusion to nonspecialists.
Authors’ response
Answer to General Comment 1

Page 10 of 13

Having taking into account the constructive suggestion concerning the title
of our manuscript, we changed it to read: “Phylogenetic and regulatory
region analysis of Wnt5 genes reveals conservation of a regulatory module
with putative implication in pancreas development.”
Answer to General Comment 2
We agree with this comment of the reviewer. In order to test whether the
presence of this module in Wnt5 genes is due to sensitivity of our method,
we repeated exactly the same analysis (same parameters and for the same
species) for the constitutively expressed gene of b-actin, finding absence of
the module, with exception that of zebrafish. For details please see section
Regulatory Region Analysis.
Answer to General Comment 3a
We agree that an estimation of a correlation in expression divergence of
Wnt genes in various human and mouse tissues would be a very interesting
topic. However, we believe that it would alter the main scope of our work,
which is focused on investigating the implication of Wnt5 genes in pancreas
development, based in the background knowledge that in mice embryonic
stem cells upon Ngn3 induction (key regulator of pancreas development)
Wnt5a gene shows the greatest alteration in expression compared to the
other Wnt genes, i.e., Wnt4 and Wnt11 (Serafimidis et.al., 2008). Moreover,
we believe that the suggested analyses by the reviewer, involving the
expression divergence of several Wnt genes for only two species (mouse
and human; Su et al., 2002, 2004) in adult state, would not add new
elements on our study which is limited to the Wnt5 paralogs of several
species during embryonic pancreas development.
Answer to General Comment 3b
Our manuscript suggests that only the Wnt5 paralog carrying the regulatory
module is implicated into the endocrine pancreas formation, and not both.
However, those Wnt5 genes without the element have important role in
other processes and in light of some additional analyses we now explain
why both copies were conserved (see new section Functional Domain
Analysis). Finally, concerning the studies of Janga et al., (2008) and De et al.,
(2008) both reporting important observations at genomic level, in our
opinion, it cannot be directly related to our work, where the paralogs of a
single gene (Wnt5) across several species is investigated, and not several
genes within an organism.
Answer to General Comment 4
Reference 7 and 8 are not contrasting to what is shown in Figure 3 for
human and chimp, since these studies refer to murine cells.
Answer to General Comment 5
We now refer Figure 1 also in the introduction, and we added vertebrate
and invertebrates indication.
We repeated the analysis with Wnt5a and Wnt5b proteins separated and
results were maintained rather constant to the submitted tree (details on
the results are available upon request).
Answer to General Comment 6
We have now reviewed the manuscript and where necessary it has been
added (see materials and methods).
Answer to General Comment 7
We have now rephrased this section of our manuscript.
Answer to General Comment 8
We now added the above in the material and methods section
Answer to General Comment 9
We have now added a comment on the relative positions of TSS and the
binding regions of the TFs.
Answer to General Comment 10a
In the two last paragraphs of our manuscript we clearly report that our
conclusions are limited only to those organisms where experimental data
support the relation between conserved modules and function, the latter
one additionally supported by the results of the suggested negative control
experiment. In our opinion any further discussion concerning the presence
of the module and lack of its expression/process, would be purely
speculative in absence of any experimental information or evidence.
Answer to General Comment 10b
As we already anticipated, our study is focused on those Wnt5 genes
implicated in pancreas developmental processes guided by Ngn3 induction.
However, it has already been shown that both, Wnt5a and Wnt5b paralogs,
are necessary for several developmental processes demanding proper cell
migration and cell polarisation events (Cooper et. al., 2006, Hardy et al., 2008,
Yang et al., 2003, Kim et al,, 2005). In this regard we have now included in

Kapasa et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:49
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/49

our work a comment on their implication in different processes, and on why
both Wnt5 genes were preserved.
Answer to the Minor comments for revision
We have corrected all minor comments.
Report 2
Thanks for addressing some of the concerns raised by me however i still feel
that the manuscript can be significantly strengthened by improving two
aspects of the study
1) By improving the discussion in light of your observations by extrapolating
to observations made by other groups in various tissues
2) I still feel that since the manuscript is already a very short piece (as it is)
and so it warrants an in depth analysis of expression patterns at least in
pancreas and related tissues if not across all the tissues for which expression
data is available.
This analysis is rather easy using currently available gene centric databases
such as ‘genecards’ for humans and i urge the authors to do this analysis
and present a heatmap showing this to support the discussion part. If you
are able to address these minor concerns I am willing to support the
publication of your work.
Authors’ response
According to your suggestions, we investigated the expression patterns of
both Wnt5 genes, in several adult tissues of human and during pancreatic
development of mice.
For the human Wnt5 genes, a similarity in their expression profiles was
observed (for details please refer to the main text of the updated version of
our manuscript, attached in this email). The high correlation in their
expression profiles in adult state of human is in agreement with the
conservation of both genes in order to maintain a responsive backup circuit,
which controls the canonical and non canonical Wnt signaling pathways.
Concerning the expression pattern of the murine Wnt5 genes during
pancreatic development, we found a distinct and well maintained profile in
their expression. More precisely, during those days of pancreatic
development in which the migration of those cells forming the pancreatic
islets is estimated to take place, the murine Wnt5a gene (carrier of the
conserved regulatory module) shows a higher expression than Wnt5b.
Summarizing, the given results and observations, from the herein conducted
expression analyses, agree with what we describe in the manuscript (please
see attached manuscript for details).
We look forward to hearing from you and thanking you very much for your
constructive comments and the time you took to review our manuscript
thoroughly.
Report 3
Thank you very much for addressing the concerns which I raised in my
previous round of comments. The manuscript now reads well and I think is
suitable for publication.
Third Reviewer
Andrey A. Mironov (nominated by Mikhail Gelfand).
Department of Bioengineering and Bioinformatics, Moscow State University.
Report 1
The paper gives some observations about evolution and regulation of Wnt5
genes. On my opinion the paper has very limited interest. Found some
paralogs in some genomes, found some binding sites. So what?
Genome contains about 20k more or less conserved genes. The same work
can be done almost for every gene in genome with almost the same result
&#65533; some paralogs, some regulation...
At least the analysis of regulation should be extended to find co-regulated
genes and to reconstruct a genetic network.
Some particular comments:
Comment 1
The direction of Wnt5 genes on fig. 2 should the same on all lines. For
example the line 2 on fig 2a should be presented on opposite direction.
Comment 2
The analysis of regulatory modules should be given not only for species
with insulin producing cells. Structure of possible modules for other
organisms can be used as a control and will be able to show some possible
evolution features of the system.
Authors’ response
In a previous work (Kapasa et al., 2008) has been proposed a putative
regulatory genetic network which leads into the differentiation of the
endocrine pancreas cell sub-types. Taking into account that the
extension of a similar analysis upon Wnt5 genes would not change the

Page 11 of 13

previous model, we decided to focus our work on the relation between
the conservation of the regulatory module and its functionality in
pancreas development, as supported by experimental data.
Answer to Comment 1
In Figure 2 we decided to maintain the relative direction of the syntenic
genes as given by Ensembl database (5-3 or 3-5), in order to help the reader
understand the modules’ position, and provide information concerning the
conservation of the orientation of the genes in the investigated species.
Answer to Comment 2
Towards this direction, we have now performed a negative control
experiment using b-actin orthologs covering the same phylogenetic
distance, and including the same number of species to those for Wnt5
genes. This analysis showed absence of regulatory module, with the only
exception the b-actin of Zebrafish, in which a cluster of the same TFBS was
identified, in a region of approximately the double length to that of the
Wnt5 in zebrafish. Moreover, for the Wnt5 genes of those organisms without
pancreas and insulin producing cells (Ciona and Droshophyla) we did not
found the Ngn1/3 binding sites, which is the main criterion for the
identification of the regulatory modules.
Report 2
I do not change my opinion now. In current form the paper have limited
interest. It gives some information but not knowledge.
Comment 1
A negative control on b-globin is useful. But to understand the quality of
prediction of regulatory modules you should provide real control - to search
such modules for about 1000 random selected genes.
Comment 2
Other way is to provide search such regulatory module genome-wide (In
cited paper only some other Wnt genes were analysed) to find possible
coregulated genes and to analyse consistency of set of coregulated genes
in different genomes.
Comment 3
Fig 2: The direction of Wnt5 genes should be the same (as it is done in, for
example, Strings database). In this case the evolution events of gene
rearrangement will be clear. The gene orientation in genome databases is
more or less random and it is not related to evolution events.
Comment 4
Fig 4: We can see something interesting: in human and chimp the
regulatory module exists in upstream region of Wnt5b while very close
related organism - macaque - has such module in upstream of Wnt5a.
Seems the regulation is switched from one gene to another. Or may be the
filter is too strong and both genes really are regulated but the PREDICTED
regulatory efficiency are slightly different?
Authors’ response
Answer to Comment 1
Following your suggestion, we used the non-expressed in embryonic stem
cells gene of b-globin, as a second negative control marker. We found
absence of the regulatory module, as for actin genes (first negative control
marker). The results from the negative control markers, combined with those
coming from the additional analyses of Wnt5 paralogs expression profiles in
several human adult tissues and during mouse embryonic development (See
additional file 2 of the updated version of the manuscript), reinforce not
only the functionality of this conserved module in Wnt5 genes, but also the
validity of our method.
“But to understand the quality of prediction... 1000 random selected genes.”
We believe that such an analysis would be justified if our study was a
genome-wide study, and not a study restricted to a specific gene (Wnt5)
during a specific process (pancreas development).
Answer to Comment 2
Our study is limited to the paralogs of Wnt5 gene in several species, in
order to give a putative explanation for the shifting role concerning
pancreas development among these genes. However, a similar regulatory
region analysis in experimentally verified co-regulated genes (WIPS1 and
CTGF) has been applied elsewhere with satisfactory results (see Kapasa et. al.,
2008).
Answer to Comment 3
We still do not find necessary the modification of Fig. 2. In our opinion, the
availability of the genes’ relative orientation allows the reader to correlate
the genomic translocations among organisms, when present, with the
preservation of the regulatory module always in the 5’ region of the gene in
every case. In addition, several studies preferred showing the orientation of

Kapasa et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:49
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/49

genes, as we did in figure 2 (Kawahara and Lambeth, BMC Evolutionary
Biology 2007, 7:178; Jane et. al., Nature 2002, 419: 512-519, Roach et al., Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA. 2005, 102: 9577-9582).
Answer to Comment 4
Concerning this point, we performed an additional investigation. Strikingly,
for the Wnt5 genes of Rhesus Monkey, we extracted expression data from
embryonic stem cells http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?
acc=GSE4446 and from several adult tissues (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE9531, and http://blast.wip.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/
query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE7094), in order to investigate their expression profiles.
Our results show that in the embryonic cells and the adult organs the
Wnt5a gene (carrier of the module) is constantly expressed, while Wnt5b
not (Panels A, B and C of Additional file 2). This different profiles between
the macaque Wnt5a (module carrier) and Wnt5b (non carrier), the former
being permanently expressed, suggest a functional advantage for the
observed shift of the module’s preservation within the macaque paralogs.
Besides that, we have already tested the sensitivity of our method in order
to identify only functional regulatory modules either in both or in only one
paralog of Wnt5 gene (see figure 4).
We thank you for your constructive criticisms, and we hope through our
additional analyses to have fully satisfied your remarks concerning our study.
Report 3
Additional information about expression profile analysis is helpful.
But I can not find the Additional File 1 (seems you mean Table 1 in figure
file?).
Now I have two suggestion.
First - to change fig.2! You are speculating about sintheny region (alignment
of genes) but you do not want to show the information in aligned form!
Why?
Second - some speculation about contradiction of phylogeny of Wnt5a and
standard evolution tree needed. This contradiction is related to structure of
regulation on fig 4. Seems here we can observe some positive selection
events (have you checked it?) or/and some significant aminoacid changes.
On my point of view this is the most interesting result.
By now I think you can publish the paper in current form (with changed fig
2 and fixed misprint with Additional File 1).
Acknowledgements
We thank Dr. A. Gavalas for the valuable discussions on experimental results
associated to pancreas development.
Author details
Bioinformatics & Medical Informatics Team, Biomedical Research Foundation
of the Academy of Athens, 11527, Athens, Greece. 2Developmental Biology
Laboratory, Biomedical Research Foundation of the Academy of Athens,
11527, Athens, Greece. 3Department of Pharmacy, School of Health Sciences,
University of Patras, GR-26500 Rion-Patras, Greece.

Page 12 of 13

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.
16.

17.

18.

19.

1

20.

Received: 6 February 2010 Accepted: 4 August 2010
Published: 4 August 2010
21.
References
1. Sidow A: Diversification of the Wnt gene family on the ancestral lineage
of vertebrates. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1992, 89:5098-5102.
2. Kumar S, Hedges SB: A molecular timescale for vertebrate evolution.
Nature 1998, 392:917-920.
3. Strähle U, Ingham PW: Three Wnt genes expressed in a wide variety of
tissues during development of the zebrafish, Danio rerio: developmental
and evolutionary perspectives. Dev Genes Evol 1996, 206:3-13.
4. Westfall TA, Brimeyer R, Twedt J, Gladon J, Olberding A, Furutani-Seiki M,
Slusarski DC: Wnt-5/pipetail functions in vertebrate axis formation as a
negative regulator of Wnt/beta-catenin activity. J Cell Biol 2003,
162:889-898.
5. Kim HJ, Schleiffarth JR, Jessurun J, Sumanas S, Petryk A, Lin S, Ekker SC:
Wnt5 signaling in vertebrate pancreas development. BMC Biol 2005, 3:23.
6. Heller RS, Dichmann DS, Jensen J, Miller C, Wong G, Madsen OD, Serup P:
Expression patterns of Wnts, Frizzleds, sFRPs, and misexpression in
transgenic mice suggesting a role for Wnts in pancreas and foregut
pattern formation. Dev Dyn 2002, 225:260-270.

22.
23.

24.

25.

26.

Gradwohl G, Dierich A, LeMeur M, Guillemot F: Neurogenin3 is required
for the development of the four endocrine cell lineages of the pancreas.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2000, 97:1607-1611.
Serafimidis I, Rakatzi I, Episkopou V, Gouti M, Gavalas A: Novel effectors of
directed and Ngn3-mediated differentiation of mouse embryonic stem
cells into endocrine pancreas progenitors. Stem Cells 2008, 26:3-16.
Gavin BJ, McMahon JA, McMahon AP: Expression of multiple novel Wnt-1/
int-1-related genes during fetal and adult mouse development. Genes
Dev 1990, 4:2319-2332.
Dealy CN, Roth A, Ferrari D, Brown AM, Kosher RA: Wnt-5a and Wnt-7a are
expressed in the developing chick limb bud in a manner suggesting
roles in pattern formation along the proximodistal and dorsoventral
axes. Mech Dev 1993, 43:175-186.
Moon RT, Campbell RM, Christian JL, McGrew LL, Shih J, Fraser S: Xwnt-5A:
a maternal Wnt that affects morphogenetic movements after
overexpression in embryos of Xenopus laevis. Development 1993,
119:97-111.
Parr BA, Shea MJ, Vassileva G, McMahon AP: Mouse Wnt genes exhibit
discrete domains of expression in the early embryonic CNS and limb
buds. Development 1993, 119:247-261.
Sherwood NM, Tello JA, Roch GJ: Neuroendocrinology of protochordates:
Insights from Ciona genomics. Comparative Biochemistry and Physiology
2006, 144:254-271.
Kim J, Bang H, Ko S, Jung I, Hong H, Kim Ha J: Drosophila ia2 modulates
secretion of insulin-like peptide. Comparative Biochemistry and Physiology
2008, , Part A 151: 180-184.
Slack JM: Developmental biology of the pancreas. Development 1995,
121:1569-1580.
Elliott WM, Youson JH: Development of the adult endocrine pancreas
during metamorphosis in the sea lamprey, Petromyzon marinus L. II.
Electron microscopy and immunocytochemistry. Anat Rec 1993,
237:271-290.
Plisetskaya EM, Pollock HG, Elliott WM, Youson JH, Andrews PC: Isolation
and structure of lamprey (Petromyzon marinus) insulin. Gen Comp
Endocrinol 1988, 69:46-55.
Kapasa M, Serafimidis I, Gavalas A, Kossida S: Identification of
phylogenetically conserved enhancer elements implicated in pancreas
development in the WISP1 and CTGF orthologs. Genomics 2008,
92:301-308.
Sandelin A, Bailey P, Bruce S, Engstrom PG, Klos JM, Wasserman WW,
Ericson J, Lenhard B: Arrays of ultraconserved non-coding regions span
the loci of key developmental genes in vertebrate genomes. BMC
Genomics 2004, 5:99.
Lindblad-Toh K, Wade CM, Mikkelsen TS, Karlsson EK, Jaffe DB, Kamal M,
Clamp M, Chang JL, Kulbokas EJ, Zody MC, Mauceli E, Xie X, Breen M,
Wayne RK, Ostrander EA, Ponting CP, Galibert F, Smith DR, DeJong PJ,
Kirkness E, Alvarez P, Biagi T, Brockman W, Butler J, Chin CW, Cook A, Cuff J,
Daly MJ, DeCaprio D, Gnerre S, et al: Genome sequence, comparative
analysis and haplotype structure of the domestic dog. Nature 2005,
438:803-819.
Kikuta H, Fredman D, Rinkwitz S, Lenhard B, Becker TS: Retroviral enhancer
detection insertions in zebrafish combined with comparative genomics
reveal genomic regulatory blocks - a fundamental feature of vertebrate
genomes. Genome Biol 2007, 8(Suppl 1):S4.
Davidson EH: The regulatory genome:. Gene regulatory networks in
development and evolution Academic Press, San Diego 2006.
Poll AV, Pierreux CE, Lokmane L, Haumaitre C, Achouri Y, Jacquemin P,
Rousseau GG, Cereghini S, Lemaigre FP: A vHNF1/TCF2-HNF6 cascade
regulates the transcription factor network that controls generation of
pancreatic precursor cells. Diabetes 2006, 55:61-69.
Wilding L, Gannon M: The role of pdx1 and HNF6 in proliferation and
differentiation of endocrine precursors. Diabetes Metab Res Rev 2004,
20:114-123.
Smith SB, Gasa R, Watada H, Wang J, Griffen SC, German MS: Neurogenin3
and hepatic nuclear factor 1 cooperate in activating pancreatic
expression of Pax4. J Biol Chem 2003, 278:38254-38259.
Iype T, Francis J, Garmey JC, Schisler JC, Nesher R, Weir GC, Becker TC,
Newgard CB, Griffen SC, Mirmira RG: Mechanism of insulin gene
regulation by the pancreatic transcription factor Pdx-1: application of
pre-mRNA analysis and chromatin immunoprecipitation to assess

Kapasa et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:49
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/49

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.
32.

33.

34.

35.
36.
37.

38.
39.
40.

41.
42.
43.

44.
45.
46.

47.
48.

49.
50.
51.

52.

formation of functional transcriptional complexes. J Biol Chem 2005,
280:16798-16807.
Miyatsuka T, Kaneto H, Kajimoto Y, Hirota S, Arakawa Y, Fujitani Y,
Umayahara Y, Watada H, Yamasaki Y, Magnuson MA, Miyazaki J, Hori M:
Ectopically expressed PDX-1 in liver initiates endocrine and exocrine
pancreas differentiation but causes dysmorphogenesis. Biochem Biophys
Res Commun 2003, 310:1017-1025.
Heller RS, Stoffers DA, Liu A, Schedl A, Crenshaw EB, Madsen OD, Serup P:
The role of Brn4/Pou3f4 and Pax6 in forming the pancreatic glucagon
cell identity. Dev Biol 2004, 268:123-134.
Hussain MA, Miller CP, Habener JF: Brn-4 transcription factor expression
targeted to the early developing mouse pancreas induces ectopic
glucagon gene expression in insulin-producing beta cells. J Biol Chem
2002, 277:16028-16032.
van Genderen C, Okamura RM, Farinas I, Quo RG, Parslow TG, Bruhn L,
Grosschedl R: Development of several organs that require inductive
epithelial-mesenchymal interactions is impaired in LEF-1-deficient mice.
Genes Dev 1994, 8:2691-2703.
Slusarski DC, Yang-Snyder J, Busa WB, Moon RT: Modulation of embryonic
intracellular Ca2+ signaling by Wnt-5A. Dev Biol 1997, 182:114-120.
Topol L, Jiang X, Choi H, Garrett-Beal L, Carolan PJ, Yang Y: Wnt-5a inhibits
the canonical Wnt pathway by promoting GSK-3-independent betacatenin degradation. J Cell Biol 2003, 162:899-908.
Stoick-Cooper CL, Weidinger G, Riehle KJ, Hubbert C, Major MB, Fausto N,
Moon RT: Distinct Wnt signaling pathways have opposing roles in
appendage regeneration. Development 2007, 134:479-489.
Kafri R, Levy M, Pilpel Y: The regulatory utilization of genetic redundancy
through responsive backup circuits. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006,
103:11653-11658.
[http://www.genecards.org/].
[http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sites/GDSbrowser?acc=GDS596].
Mc Lin V, Rankin S, Zorn A: Repression of Wnt/beta-catenin signaling in
the anterior endoderm is essential for liver and pancreas development.
Development 2007, 134:2207-2217.
Gittes G: Developmental biology of the pancreas: A comprehensive
review. Developmental Biology 2009, 326:4-35.
Habener J, Kemp D, Thomas M: Minireview: Transcriptional Regulation in
Pancreatic Development. Endocrinology 2004, 146:1025-1034.
Kuratani S, Kuraku S, Murakami Y: Lamprey as an evo-devo model: lessons
from comparative embryology and molecular phylogenetics. Genesis
2002, 34:175-183.
Woolfe A, Elgar G: Comparative genomics using Fugu reveals insights
into regulatory subfunctionalization. Genome Biol 2007, 8:R53.
Katoh M, Katoh M: Comparative genomics on Wnt5a and Wnt5b genes.
Int J Mol Med 2005, 15:749-753.
Kanazawa A, Tsukada S, Sekine A, Tsunoda T, Takahashi A, Kashiwagi A,
Tanaka Y, Babazono T, Matsuda M, Kaku K: Association of the gene
encoding wingless-type mammary tumor virus integration-site family
member 5B (WNT5B) with type 2 diabetes. Am J Hum Genet 2004,
75(5):832-843.
Ye J, McGinnis S, Madden TL: BLAST: improvements for better sequence
analysis. Nucleic Acids Res 2006, , 34 Web Server: W6-9.
Wall DP, Fraser HB, Hirsh AE: Detecting putative orthologs. Bioinformatics
2003, 19:1710-1711.
Fulton DL, Li YY, Laird MR, Horsman BG, Roche FM, Brinkman FS: Improving
the specificity of high-throughput ortholog prediction. BMC
Bioinformatics 2006, 7:270.
The Ensembl Database. [http://www.ensembl.org/index.html].
Larkin MA, Blackshields G, Brown NP, Chenna R, McGettigan PA,
McWilliam H, Valentin F, Wallace IM, Wilm A, Lopez R, Thompson JD,
Gibson TJ, Higgins DG: Clustal W and Clustal X version 2.0. Bioinformatics
2007, 23:2947-2948.
Felsenstein J: PHYLIP. Phylogeny Inference Package, Version 3.6 2002.
Huelsenbeck JP: Performance of phylogenetic methods in simulation. Syst
Biol 1995, 44:17-48.
Studier JA, Keppler KJ: Performance of maximum parsimony and
likelihood phylogenetics when evolution is heterogeneous. Nature 2004,
431:980-984.
Felsenstein J: Confidence limits on phylogenies: an approach using the
bootstrap. Evolution 1985, 39:783-791.

Page 13 of 13

53. The Taxonomy Browser. [http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Taxonomy/Browser/
wwwtax.cgi?mode=Root].
54. Kumar S, Nei M, Dudley J, Tamura K: MEGA: a biologist-centric software
for evolutionary analysis of DNA and protein sequences. Brief Bioinform
2008, 9:299-306.
55. SMART: Simple Modular Architecture Research Tool.[http://smart.emblheidelberg.de/].
56. The Genomatix Database. [http://www.genomatix.de/].
57. GEO Dataset Browser. [http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sites/GDSbrowser/].
58. GEO Accession viewer: Expression profiling of pancreas development.
[http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE8070].
59. GEO Accession viewer: Transcriptional profiling of rhesus monkey
embryonic stem cells.[http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?
acc=GSE4446].
60. GEO Accession viewer: Rhesus Macaque gene expression data obtained
using Rhesus Macaque Array or Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array.
[http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE9531].
61. GEO Accession viewer: Expression data from 5 rhesus tissues at 3
centers.[http://blast.wip.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE7094].
doi:10.1186/1745-6150-5-49
Cite this article as: Kapasa et al.: Phylogenetic and regulatory region
analysis of Wnt5 genes reveals conservation of a regulatory module
with putative implication in pancreas development. Biology Direct 2010
5:49.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
