<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>A phylogenetic survey of myotubularin genes of eukaryotes: distribution, protein structure, evolution, and gene expression</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010 10:196. doi:10.1186/1471-2148-10-196"/>
<meta name="Author" content="David Kerk"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Kerk and Moorhead BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:196
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/196

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

A phylogenetic survey of myotubularin genes of
eukaryotes: distribution, protein structure,
evolution, and gene expression
David Kerk, Greg BG Moorhead*

Abstract
Background: Phosphorylated phosphatidylinositol (PtdIns) lipids, produced and modified by PtdIns kinases and
phosphatases, are critical to the regulation of diverse cellular functions. The myotubularin PtdIns-phosphate
phosphatases have been well characterized in yeast and especially animals, where multiple isoforms, both
catalytically active and inactive, occur. Myotubularin mutations bring about disruption of cellular membrane
trafficking, and in humans, disease. Previous studies have suggested that myotubularins are widely distributed
amongst eukaryotes, but key evolutionary questions concerning the origin of different myotubularin isoforms
remain unanswered, and little is known about the function of these proteins in most organisms.
Results: We have identified 80 myotubularin homologues amidst the completely sequenced genomes of 30
organisms spanning four eukaryotic supergroups. We have mapped domain architecture, and inferred evolutionary
histories. We have documented an expansion in the Amoebozoa of a family of inactive myotubularins with a novel
domain architecture, which we dub “IMLRK” (inactive myotubularin/LRR/ROCO/kinase). There is an especially large
myotubularin gene family in the pathogen Entamoeba histolytica, the majority of them IMLRK proteins. We have
analyzed published patterns of gene expression in this organism which indicate that myotubularins may be
important to critical life cycle stage transitions and host infection.
Conclusions: This study presents an overall framework of eukaryotic myotubularin gene evolution. Inactive
myotubularin homologues with distinct domain architectures appear to have arisen on three separate occasions in
different eukaryotic lineages. The large and distinctive set of myotubularin genes found in an important pathogen
species suggest that in this organism myotubularins might present important new targets for basic research and
perhaps novel therapeutic strategies.

Background
Phosphatidylinositol (PtdIns) phospholipids are quantitatively minor but functionally significant membrane lipid
components which have been shown to be involved in
regulating diverse aspects of cellular function, such as
proliferation, survival, growth, cytoskeletal reorganization, and various membrane trafficking events. The inositol ring can be phosphorylated at the D3, D4 or D5
position to produce a set of seven distinct phosphorylated derivatives, which are preferentially located in various cellular membranes or microdomains, specifying
their identity, and mediating cellular functions by
* Correspondence: moorhead@ucalgary.ca
Department of Biological Sciences, University of Calgary, 2500 University
Drive N.W., Calgary, Alberta, T2N 1N4, Canada

recruiting various effector proteins with specialized
lipid-binding domains [1]. The homeostasis of these
phosphorylated PtdIns lipids is mediated by a number
of specific kinases and phosphatases.
Myotubularins are members of the protein tyrosine
phosphatase (PTP) superfamily, which feature a characteristic HCX(5)R catalytic motif, where the cysteine is
the catalytic residue, the histidine is important for the
nucleophilic properties of the cysteine, and the arginine
is important in coordinating the substrate phosphate
group. Myotubularins have been shown to be specific
lipid phosphatases, cleaving the D3 phosphate from
PtdIns3P and PtdIns(3,5)P2. There is a large myotubularin family in humans (14 genes) which encode both
catalytically active and inactive members. Mutations in

© 2010 Kerk and Moorhead; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Kerk and Moorhead BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:196
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/196

either active or inactive members of this family bring
about human disease, which involves chiefly skeletal
muscle (X-linked myotubular myopathy [XLMTM]) or
peripheral neurons (Charcot-Marie-Tooth [CMT] neuropathies) [2-4]. Previous phylogenetic studies have
reported the presence of myotubularin genes in plants,
fungi and some protists, with the latter group only containing both active and inactive forms [2,5].
This study presents a systematic survey of myotubularin
genes in a large number of completely sequenced eukaryotic genomes, representing a broad array of taxonomic
groups. Most genomes contain one to a few myotubularin
genes, though they are absent in certain groups. The evidence is consistent with the independent appearance of
inactive myotubularin genes, featuring novel domain combinations, in different taxonomic groups. The greatest
expansion of the myotubularin gene family yet observed

Page 2 of 16

occurs in the pathogenic species Entamoeba histolytica.
Functional evidence derived from published gene expression studies indicates that these genes may be important
in pathogen transmission and host infection.

Results
Phylogenetic Distribution, Gene Evolution, Domain
Architecture

Recent work in eukaryotic systematics has increasingly
defined large organismal “supergroups” encompassing
many traditional smaller groups [6-8]. We have conducted a broad survey of fully sequenced genomes
amongst these large organismal groups for the presence
of myotubularin gene homologues. Only the Rhizaria
were excluded as there is as yet no completed genome in
that group. Our results are summarized in Figure 1. We
searched 30 genomes, and identified 80 sequences. We

Figure 1 Myotubularin Homologues in Eukaryotic Protein Datasets. Listed is the set of eukaryotic species with completely sequenced
genomes whose protein datasets were searched for myotubularin homologues. The number of myotubularin homologues detected for each
genome is listed. Color coding: Excavates (gray); Unikonts, Amoebozoa (pale blue); Unikonts, Choanoflagellates/Metazoa (medium blue); Unikonts,
Fungi (dark blue); Chromalveolates (yellow); Plantae (green). Taxonomy was taken from: NCBI Taxonomy Browser http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
Taxonomy/Browser/wwwtax.cgi?mode=Root; Tree of Life http://tolweb.org/Eukaryotes/3; and Koonin, 2010 [8]. The URLs for downloading of all
organismal datasets, and the original publication references, are given in Additional File 4. Figure design after Gazave et al., 2009 [68].

Kerk and Moorhead BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:196
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/196

found that myotubularin genes are nearly ubiquitous in
eukaryotes, being readily identifiable in all the major
eukaryotic groups and in all genomes examined with the
notable exception of the obligate intracellular parasites
Encephalitozoon cuniculi (Microsporidia) and Plasmodium falciparum (Apicomplexa) and eukaryotic algae,
both red (Cyanidioschyzon merolae) and green (Ostreococcus sp., Chlamydomonas reinhardtii). Most organisms
(19 out of 24 species with myotubularins) posses one to
three genes. The notable exception to this general pattern
occurs in members of the Unikonta (Amoebozoa, Choanoflagellida, Metazoa) (for more information on organisms, see the Tree of Life project [9]).
We utilized domain-searching strategies detailed in
Methods to determine the molecular architecture of
myotubularin gene encoded proteins. The results are presented in Figure 2. It is apparent that nearly all myotubularin proteins contain both a myotubularin phosphatase
domain and a PH-GRAM domain (Pleckstrin-Homology,
Glucosyltransferases, Rab-like GTPase Activators and
Myotubularins). In studies of animal myotubularin proteins it has been shown that the PH-GRAM domain
binds phosphoinositide lipids, and confers both specific
subcellular localization and regulation of the phosphatase
domain [10]. The nearly constant presence of the PHGRAM domain in myotubularins across a broad range of
organisms suggests that this domain architecture was
established early in eukaryotic evolution. We observed,
however, that there were a number of sequences where
complete PH-GRAM domains with the characteristic
architecture observed in human proteins could not be
detected, despite the use of the most sensitive structural
analysis methods available (see Figure 2). This indicates
that PH-GRAM domain sequences can be very divergent,
which we also noted in multiple sequence alignments
including the PH-GRAM domain region (see the full
myotubularin sequences alignment presented as Additional File 1). This suggests that although the architectural coupling of a PH-GRAM along with a myotubularin
phosphatase domain is a standard feature of these proteins, the specific molecular properties and functions of
the PH-GRAM domains have the potential to be quite
diverse and distinct.
The catalytic loop signature of human myotubularins
is: HCSDGWDR [2]. Inspection of the myotubularin
sequence alignment presented in Figure 3 shows that
this is found invariant in most of the myotubularin
sequences, indicating that they all share a common local
active site architecture and catalytic mechanism. One of
the notable features of human myotubularins is the presence of several catalytically inactive subunits, resulting
from mutations to the key catalytic cysteine and arginine residues in the catalytic loop region. It has been
previously noted that myotubularin genes with

Page 3 of 16

apparently inactive catalytic loop signatures can be
observed in Giardia and Dictyostelium, suggesting that
inactive subunits arose early in evolution [2,5]. Our
work confirms these findings, and sheds further light on
the origin of these sequences. Three Excavate myotubularin sequences lack a PH-GRAM domain, the only
sequences we observed with this characteristic (see
Figure 2). Giardia sequence GL50803_112811 lacks
both the cysteine and arginine residues from the catalytic loop region (see Figure 3). Leishmania sequence
LmjF12.0320 and Trypanosoma sequence Tb927.6.870
each possess both the cysteine and the arginine, but lack
the histidine preceding the cysteine. Since this histidine
is universally conserved in active PTP phosphatases, and
has been shown to be important in the catalytic
mechanism by altering the nucleophilic properties of the
neighboring cysteine [11], it is likely that these proteins
are also catalytically inactive. The lack of a PH-GRAM
domain, unique to these Excavate inactive myotubularins, suggests that they comprise a single gene lineage.
Amoebozoan IMLRK (Inactive Myotubularin/LRR/ROCO/
Kinase) Genes and Proteins

The amoebozoans Dictyostelium and Entamoeba each
have a large number of myotubularin homologues (see
Figure 1 and Figure 2). Dictyostelium has nine active
myotubularin subunits, and Entamoeba has eight. In
addition, there are a number of inactive myotubularin
subunits. The Dictyostelium gene pats1 (encoding
sequence DDB0191503) was previously incorrectly
reported to contain an active myotubularin domain [12].
In addition, this protein contains a LRR domain, a
recently described ROCO domain [13,14] (comprised of
a ROC [Ras of complex proteins] and COR [C-terminal
of ROC] region), and a protein kinase domain. The
LRR/ROCO/kinase architecture was also known to be
shared by Dictyostelium sequence DDB0191512, which
also has an N-terminal Rho-GAP domain. By use of a
sensitive myotubularin-sequence based HMM search
strategy, we found that this sequence also contains an
inactive myotubularin domain. Further application of
this HMM search revealed that Entamoeba contains eleven proteins with divergent, but clearly recognizable
inactive myotubularin domains (EHI_140980,
EHI_137960, EHI_185230, EHI_048230, EHI_151670,
EHI_107230, EHI_135010, EHI_141820, EHI_078170,
EHI_197200, EHI_188050). Our findings confirm and
extend previous observations [5]. Further examination of
the domain architecture of the newly discovered Entamoeba inactive myotubularin sequences revealed that 9
of them also showed significant similarity to the solved
structures of LRR proteins and protein kinases, and
weaker but still significant similarity to the solved structure of a bacterial ROCO protein (PDB: 3dpu_A) [15] as
detected by both the FFAS03 (Fold and Function

Kerk and Moorhead BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:196
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/196

Page 4 of 16

Figure 2 Myotubularin Protein Domain Architecture. Candidate myotubularin homologue sequences were obtained by searching the protein
datasets of fully sequenced eukaryotic genomes, as detailed in Methods. PH-GRAM, myotubularin phosphatase, and other structural domains
were identified as detailed in Methods. To conserve space, organisms are identified in the Figure as genus names only. Organisms are grouped
in this figure by taxonomic category as in Figure 1. The domain architecture of human MTMR2 is given for orientation purposes. The organisms
are as follows: Homo sapiens, Giardia lamblia, Leishmania major, Trypanosoma brucei, Dictyostelium discoideum, Entamoeba histolytica, Monosiga
brevicollis, Trichoplax adhaerens, Nematostella vectensis, Aspergillus niger, Fusarium graminearum, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Schizosaccharomyces
pombe, Laccaria bicolor, Ustilago maydis, Cryptosporidium hominis, Paramecium tetraurelia, Tetrahymena thermophila, Thalassiosira pseudonana,
Arabidopsis thaliana, Oryza sativa, Populus trichocarpa, Sorghum bicolor, Vitis vinifera, Physcomitrella patens. The complete set of sequences
illustrated in the Figure, along with database accession numbers, is available as Additional File 5. As detailed in Methods, some incomplete
candidate myotubularin sequences with annotation mistakes were corrected with additional sequence, and are denoted with the suffix “C” in
the Figure. Sequence “Mbrevi5R3” was assembled manually from individual genomic sequence reads unincorporated into scaffolds, through use
of TBLASTN against Monosiga genomic DNA with Nematostella myotubularin homologue query sequences.

Kerk and Moorhead BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:196
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/196

Page 5 of 16

Figure 3 Alignment of Catalytic Region of Myotubularin Domain Sequences. Human myotubularin sequences were obtained from the
literature and database keyword searches. For the other species represented, candidate myotubularin sequences were obtained by either
utilizing BLASTP at NCBI [69] or searching the protein datasets of fully sequenced eukaryotic genomes, as detailed in Methods. The contiguous
sequence encompassing the PH-GRAM domain and the myotubularin phosphatase domain was identified as detailed in Methods, and multiple
alignment was performed as detailed in Methods. Sequences are presented in the general order of taxonomic groups specified in Figure 1, with
the exception that Choanoflagellate/Metazoan sequences are grouped according to phylogenetic classification as in Table 2. Non-human
sequences in the alignment are generally designated by an organism prefix followed by numerals. This Figure presents the portion of the
alignment around the catalytic loop region. The full alignment is presented as Additional File 1. At the top of the alignment, in the line
designated “SS”, is depicted the secondary structure of the solved structure of human MTMR2 (PDB:1LW3[70]). “H” indicates alpha helix, “C”
indicates random coil, “E” indicates beta strand. Above the alignment a blue bar (positions 1380 - 1389) indicates the location of the catalytic
motif of the myotubularin phosphatase domain (HCSDGWDR for active subunits). The sequences for all myotubularin homologues, along with
their database accession numbers, and designations used in this Figure, are presented in Additional File 5. The URLs for all web sites used to
obtain organism specific databases, plus original literature citations, are presented in Additional File 4.

Kerk and Moorhead BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:196
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/196

Assignment System ) sequence:profile technique, and
the HHPred (HMM-HMM {Hidden Markov Model}
structure prediction) profile:profile technique. This indicated that these nine proteins might also share the inactive myotubularin/LRR/ROCO/kinase architecture
previously detected in Dictyostelium sequences. We suggest the acronym “IMLRK” to refer to this somewhat
cumbersome domain architecture.
To confirm the identity of the ROCO domains of these
Entamoeba sequences we performed iterative multiple
sequence alignments, HMM construction, database
searches and realignment, to assemble the data presented
as Figure 4. During this process, we identified several
previously unreported ROCO proteins (2 from Monosiga
and 9 from Trichoplax). The alignment presents a comparison between our set of newly identified ROCO
domain sequences and those from previously characterized Dictyostelium proteins. In their report of the solved
structure of a bacterial ROCO protein, Gotthardt et al.
[15] identified residues important to both the function of
the bacterial protein, and animal ROCO protein homologues. These include residues in the ROC domain important for GTPase binding and residues in both the ROC
and COR domains important for domain interactions
and GTPase activity (see Legend to Figure 4). It is evident
by inspection of the alignment in Figure 4 that on the
whole, conservation of this critical residue set for the
Entamoeba IMLRK sequences is poor. Despite the overall
apparent similarity of these sequences to the rest of
the comparison set, several of the Entamoeba sequences
have deletions in these critical residues, and would therefore presumably lack GTPase activity. Only one Entamoeba sequence (EHI_048230) has a set of residues
which might confer enzymatic activity.
Comparison with sequence models at NCBI CDD
(Conserved Domain Database) indicates that the protein
kinase domains of the Entamoeba IMLRK proteins
resemble both Ser-Thr and Tyr kinases (see Table 1).
This is consistent with previous characterization of
kinase domains in ROCO proteins as being of the TKL
(Tyrosine kinase-like) group [16,17]. We performed a
multiple sequence alignment with these kinase domains,
which is presented in Figure 5. We examined the group
of ten important functional sequence positions characterized by Kannan et al. [18]. For 7 of the 9 Entamoeba
sequences, all of these critical functional residues are
conserved. The exceptions are: EHI_107230, where there
is an H to T mutation at the position corresponding to
PKA (Protein Kinase A) H158; and EHI_135010, where
there is a D to N mutation at the position corresponding to PKA D166, and an N to A mutation at the position corresponding to PKA N171. Thus we would
predict that nearly all of these sequences are catalytically
active [18].

Page 6 of 16

Five of the newly discovered Entamoeba sequences
have predicted N-terminal Rho-GAP (Rho-GTPase Activating Protein) domains. Of these five domains, however, only one (that for EHI_048230) is strong enough
to appear in a domain search at NCBI CDD with default
settings, indicating that it is probably enzymatically
active. The enzymatic activity of the other four domains
is questionable, due to their evident sequence divergence. These five sequences with an N-term Rho-GAP
domain resemble the architecture of the Dictyostelium
gene roco9 (protein sequence DDB0191512), and it is
possible that they represent a distinct gene lineage.
The myotubularin domains of the IMLRK proteins are
divergent, as is evident by inspection of our sequence
alignments (Figure 3 and Additional File 1). The Entamoeba IMLRK proteins have all suffered deletion of the
a14 region of the phosphatase domain (positions 1701 1706 of our reference alignment [Additional File 1]).
Sequence EHI_197200 is clearly the most divergent of
the group. It is also missing the a8 and a9 regions, and
the C-terminus of the phosphatase domain (from a14
on). In summary, the IMLRK domain architecture is distinctive, being seen in no other taxonomic group besides
the Amoebozoa, which suggests that the origin of these
genes comprises a second, independent event in myotubularin gene evolution.
Finally, we attempted to determine, by multiple
sequence alignment and phylogenetic tree analysis (data
not shown) the possible origin of the two inactive
Entamoeba myotubularins without a ROCO domain.
EHI_188050 appears to be closely related to an active subunit (EHI_104710), and has therefore probably recently
suffered inactivating mutations. The origin of EHI_140980
is more obscure - it does not appear to be closely related
to any of the other inactive Entamoeba myotubularins.
Myotubularins in the Choanoflagellate/Metazoan
Assemblage

Previous phylogenetic analyses [2,3] of myotubularin
sequences from human, other vertebrates, and a collection
of invertebrates defined six similarity clusters - three composed of catalytically active subunits (in human: ["M1
Group": MTM1 {Myotubular myopathy}, MTMR1
{MTM-related}, MTMR2]; ["R3 Group": MTMR3,
MTMR4]; ["R6 Group": MTMR6, MTMR7, MTMR8])
and three composed of catalytically inactive subunits (in
human: ["R5 Group": MTMR5, MTMR13]; ["R9 Group":
MTMR9]; ["R10 Group": MTMR10, MTMR11,
MTMR12]). We have extended this analysis by finding
previously unreported myotubularin homologues in the
metazoans Nematostella and Trichoplax, and the choanoflagellate Monosiga. Our results are presented in Table 2,
along with Bayesian and Maximum Likelihood clade supports for each group. Bayesian support is high for all
groups, with the mean posterior probability exceeding

Kerk and Moorhead BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:196
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/196

Page 7 of 16

Figure 4 Alignment of ROCO Domain Sequences. ROCO domain sequences were identified and aligned as detailed in Methods. The alignment
presents the sequences of six ROCO domain reference proteins: “Ct_ROCO” (Chlorobium tepidum); “Ns_LRRP1” (Nostoc sp. PCC 7120); “Mb_ROCO1”
(Methanosarcina barkeri str. Fusaro); “Hs_LRK1” (Homo sapiens); “Hs_LRRK2” (Homo sapiens); and “Ce_LRK1” (Caenorhabditis elegans). Most of the
other sequences are designated by an organism prefix, followed by a number from the appropriate organism-specific protein database. Several
Dictyostelium ("Dd”) sequences are referred to by their gene names. Further information about the reference and candidate ROCO sequences,
including organism prefixes and database accession numbers, are provided in Additional File 6. Conserved residues shown by Gotthardt et al. [15]
as being critical to the functioning of both the bacterial protein and the human ROCO protein homologue LRRK2 are marked with blue lettering
outlining and blue arrows. These positions are as follows: “T484” (our T53); “L487” (our L61); “G518” (our G110); and “Y804” (our Y642). Above the
alignment is shown in red the secondary structure of the solved structure of the ROCO domain of Chlorobium tepidum (PDB: 3dpu_A). “A” indicates
alpha helix, “B” indicates beta strand, and arrowhead symbols ("<” and “>“) denote the beginning and ending of secondary structure regions. The
functionally important “Switch I” ("SW1”) and “Switch II” ("SW2”) regions are indicated. Areas with “+++” symbols in purple represent poorly aligned
sequence regions which have been edited from the alignment. The initial sequence region (positions 1-365) represents the ROC domain. The
beginning of the COR domain is indicated.

Kerk and Moorhead BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:196
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/196

Table 1 ROCO Kinase Domain CDD Hits
Query Sequence

NCBI CDD Hits

E values

EHI_137960

cd00180, S_TKc
cd00192, PTKc

4.00E-35
2.00E-32

EHI_151670

cd00192, PTKc
cd00180, S_TKc

8.00E-38
1.00E-29

EHI_135010

cd00192, PTKc
cd00180, S_TKc

5.00E-33
7.00E-28

EHI_048230

cd00180, S_TKc
cd00192, PTKc

1.00E-28
5.00E-26

EHI_107230

cd00192, PTKc
cd00180, S_TKc

1.00E-35
2.00E-26

EHI_185230

cd00180, S_TKc
cd00192, PTKc

8.00E-34
3.00E-32

EHI_078170

cd00192, PTKc
cd00180, S_TKc

7.00E-37
1.00E-31

EHI_141820

cd00192, PTKc
cd00180, S_TKc

1.00E-45
3.00E-41

EHI_197200

cd00192, PTKc
cd00180, S_TKc

2.00E-35
3.00E-31

DDB0191503

cd00192, PTKc
cd00180, S_TKc

2.00E-52
1.00E-38

DDB0191512

cd00192, PTKc
cd00180, S_TKc

3.00E-40
3.00E-38

HuLRRK2

cd00180, S_TKc
cd00192, PTKc

3.00E-38
5.00E-36

HuPKAalpha1

cd00180, S_TKc
cd00192, PTKc

3.00E-82
3.00E-22

SRC_Hu

cd00192, PTKc
cd00180, S_TKc

3.00E-104
9.00E-51

Myotubularin homologue sequences were identified, and protein kinase
domains identified, as described in Methods. Protein kinase domains were
subjected to analysis at NCBI CDD [40,41]. This table summarizes the returns
for those searches - the query sequences, the hit models, and E values.
Models: cd00180, S_TKc (Serine/Threonine protein kinases, catalytic domain);
cd00192, PTKc (Catalytic Domain of Protein Tyrosine Kinases).

0.90 in every case. Bootstrap support in Maximum Likelihood is weaker and more variable, depending more on
details of alignment composition, but nevertheless the
mean exceeds 80% for each group. Despite repeated
attempts using distinct input alignments, data-transformation techniques (i.e. identifying and removing rapidly evolving sites [6]) and amino acid substitution models, we
were unable to obtain consistent tree topologies with high
support for deep interior branch points. This indicates a
high degree of sequence divergence of the several myotubularin sub-types.
The domain architecture data presented in Figure 2
are for the most part consistent with the placement of
the new myotubularin homologues into similarity clusters based on phylogenetic tree inference data. All of the
new sequences placed into similarity groups have a full
PH-GRAM domain, and a myotubularin phosphatase
domain (predicted to be active or inactive) consistent
with their class placement. The myotubularins of
the “R5” group characteristically possess a DENN

Page 8 of 16

(Differentially Expressed in Neoplastic versus Normal
cells) domain N-terminal to the PH-GRAM domain,
and a PH (Plekstrin Homology) domain C-terminal to
the phosphatase domain. This is true for the new
sequences Tad51481 (Trichoplax) and Nv19357 (Nematostella). However sequence M001750622 (Monosiga)
has an additional domain of unknown function at the
extreme N-terminus, and lacks the C-terminal PH
domain. This may indicate that the stable “R5” subunit
domain architecture had not yet been achieved at this
early stage of myotubularin gene evolution. Myotubularins of the “R3” group characteristically have a FYVE
domain (Fab 1, YO1B, Vac 1, and EEA1 (early endosome antigen 1)) C-terminal to the phosphatase domain.
This is true for sequence Tad64213 (Trichoplax). However, sequence N001631983 (Nematostella), also classified as an R3 member, lacks this domain. Furthermore,
sequence N001626810 (Nematostella), classified as a
member of the “R6” group, has a C-terminal FYVE
domain. This is characteristically absent from the members of the R6 group, and for example, is absent from
sequence Tad56124 (Trichoplax), also classified in this
group. Thus it would appear that the Nematostella
sequences in the R3 and R6 groups may have exchanged
the FYVE domain. This may represent a novel, interesting genetic event in the evolution of the Nematostella
myotubularin genes. Alternatively, it is conceivable that
this might represent an error in genomic sequence
assembly and annotation. Finally, the sequences
M01745983C and Tad51955 are intriguing. These
sequences cluster together consistently as a “new clade”
in phylogenetic analysis based on alignments made from
the PH-GRAM and phosphatase domains (see Legend
to Table 2). In addition, each of them also possesses an
N-terminal C2 domain (Protein kinase C Conserved
region 2; phospholipid binding), which has not been
reported previously in Metazoan myotubularins. This
data supports the existence of a previously undescribed
myotubularin architecture, perhaps restricted to Choanoflagellates and early Metazoa.
It is clear from the above phylogenetic analysis that
even in the genome of Trichoplax, the most deeply
diverging Metazoan known [19], there is a representative
in each of the six typical myotubularin similarity groups.
This pattern is continued throughout the rest of the
Metazoans. This indicates that the gene diversification
into the three catalytically active and three inactive myotubularin groups had been completed at the very base of
the Metazoan clade.
The situation is less clear for the Monosiga genome.
Representatives can only be identified clearly for the R5,
R6, and R9 groups. This would suggest that the split
between catalytically active and inactive myotubularins
characteristic of the Metazoan clade had occurred

Kerk and Moorhead BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:196
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/196

Page 9 of 16

Figure 5 Alignment of ROCO Kinase Domain Sequences. Myotubularin homologue sequences were identified as detailed in Methods. The
protein kinase domains of these sequences were identified by searching at the NCBI CDD [40,41]. “EHI” refers to Entamoeba histolytica
myotubularin proteins, “DDB” refers to Dictyostelium discoideum myotubularin proteins, “Hu” refers to Homo sapiens proteins. Reference protein
kinase sequences were obtained from the literature and keyword search as follows: “HuLRRK2” (GenBank: NP_940980); “TAK1Hu” (PDB: 2EVA_A);
“TESK1Hu” (GenBank: NP_006276.2); “MOS_Hu” (GenBank: NP_005363.1); “SRC_Hu” (Swiss-Prot:P12931); “ABL_Hu” (Swiss-Prot:P00519). The figure
has arrows marking the positions of functionally important residues, as defined by Kannan et al. [18].

already in the common ancestor of Choanoflagellates
and Metazoans. However, it is impossible to propose a
precise model for this process, as three similarity groups
have no identified members. This might represent a
genuine absence, and therefore have evolutionary significance. On the other hand, it is conceivable that the
apparent absence of myotubularin gene types is an artefact of genome assembly and annotation. That this
might be the case is supported by the discovery of the

partial sequence Mbrevi5R3, which was manually constructed from unassembled genomic sequence reads. It
therefore seems most prudent to say that the precise
status of myotubularin genes in Choanoflagellates will
have to await the completion of genome sequencing
projects for other species in this group.
Accessory Protein Domains

Figure 6 presents a summary tabulation of the various
domains found in myotubularin homologue sequences

Table 2 Placement of Myotubularin Homologue Sequences into Phylogenetic Similarity Clusters
“M1”(+)

“R3”(+)

“R5”(-)

“R6”(+)

“R9”(-)

“R10”(-)

0.998 ± 0.0005

0.998 ± 0.0005

0.958 ± 0.032

1.000 ± 0.000

0.990 ± 0.014

0.913 ± 0.118

84.8 ± 10.5

91.5 ± 15.0

87.5 ± 8.2

98.5 ± 1.3

95.3 ± 2.5

89.0 ± 19.4

MTM1_Hu

MTMR3_Hu

MTMR5_Hu

MTMR6_Hu

MTMR9_Hu

MTMR10_Hu

MTMR1_Hu
MTMR2_Hu

MTMR4_Hu
N001631983

DrMTMR5
MTMR13_Hu

MTMR7_Hu
DrMTMR7

DrMTMR9
N001625874

DrMTMR10
MTMR11_Hu

DrMTMR2

Tad64213

Nv109357

MTMR8_Hu

Tad28926

MTMR12_Hu

N001636543

Tad51481

N001626810

M01749550C

N001629628

Tad38469

M001750622

Tad56124

Tad54716

M01746603C
Myotubularin homologue sequences from human ("Hu”) and Danio rerio ("Dr”) were obtained from the literature and database keyword searches. For the other species
represented, candidate myotubularin sequences were obtained by searching the protein datasets of fully sequenced eukaryotic genomes, as detailed in Methods. The
prefix “N” or “Nv” followed by a numeral denotes sequences from Nematostella vectensis, “Tad” followed by a numeral denotes sequences from Trichoplax adhaerens,
and “M” followed by a numeral denotes sequences from Monosiga brevicollis, (except “Mbrevi5R3” which is also from Monosiga). The sequences were aligned as
detailed in Methods. Phylogenetic trees were inferred as detailed in Methods. Shown are the composition and clade support for the six similarity groups previously
identified [2,3]. The plus and minus symbols (+,-) indicate the presence of enzymatically active or inactive catalytic loop sequence signatures, respectively. For each
group, the number above the line indicates the Bayesian clade support (posterior probability), and the number below the line indicates the bootstrap support (out of
100 total replicates) in Maximum Likelihood (ML). Results presented are the mean (± SD) of four distinct alignments.
Sequences Tad51955 and M01745983 consistently clustered together as a distinct “new clade”. The mean Bayesian posterior probability was: 0.998 (± 0.0005) (n = 4).
The mean bootstrap support in Maximum Likelihood (ML) was: 97.5 (± 0.577) (n = 4).
Sequences Nv82921, Tad62282 and MBrevi5R3 could not be placed into a similarity group with confidence.

Kerk and Moorhead BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:196
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/196

Page 10 of 16

Figure 6 Summary of Domain Distribution in Eukaryotic Myotubularin Homologues. Myotubularin homologues were identified by HMM
searches of protein datasets from completely sequenced eukaryotic genomes and domains were mapped as detailed in Methods. Colour code: In
black, domain present; In white, domain absent; In gray, inactive myotubularin in Entamoeba histolytica plus PH-GRAM domain, relationship to
similar proteins in Choanoflagellates and Metazoa indeterminate. IMLRK (inactive myotubularin/LRR/ROCO/Kinase proteins) of Amoebozoa also
contain a PH-GRAM domain. Species are identified by a three letter abbreviation (Genus species [e.g. Gsp]). Species are as in Figure 1. Taxonomic
descriptions and color coding are as in Figure 1. “Apicom” = Apicomplexa; “Archam” = Archamoebae"; “Bryophyt” = Bryophyta; “Choano” =
Choanoflagellida; “Dictyo” = Dictyostelida; “Diplomon” = Diplomonadida; “Stramen” = Stramenopiles. Figure design after Gazave et al., 2009 [68].

across the diverse eukaryotic groups examined in this
study. It indicates the presence of active myotubularins
with associated PH-GRAM domains in most species
examined, across all the major supergroups. It summarizes the occurrence of the inactive myotubularins
without PH-GRAM domains in the Excavates, the
IMLRK proteins in the Amoebozoans, and the inactive
myotubularins with PH-GRAM domains in the Choanoflagellates and Metazoa. This figure also indicates that
several types of accessory domains are also sometimes
observed in myotubularin homologues.
Nearly all animal myotubularins characterized to date
possess coiled-coil domains C-term to the myotubularin
domain. These have been shown to be important in
mediating the protein-protein interactions between myotubularin subunits [3], and might conceivably provide
interaction sites for other protein partners. We find that
the presence of coiled-coil domains is much more
sporadic in the entire myotubularin set (see Figure 6
and also Figure 2), with many proteins lacking them.
Where they occur, the most common location is C-term
to the myotubularin domain, however a number of
sequences, particularly in the Amoebozoa, have N-term
coiled-coil domains. The lack of coiled-coil domains in
a number of myotubularins would suggest that potential
protein-protein interactions would need to be facilitated
by some other structural feature. It may be relevant in
this context that PH domains, as a broad group, are
known to often facilitate protein-protein interactions, as
well as protein-lipid binding [20]. It may be that some
of the structural and sequence diversity we observed in
the PH-GRAM domains of the myotubularins in our
sequence set arises due to this domain mediating protein-protein interactions. Protein-protein interactions

might also be mediated by the observed ANK [Ankyrin],
LRR [Leucine-rich repeat], and WD40 domains.
Several domains are found which typically mediate
membrane localization (PH, PX [Phox-like], C1, C2 [Protein kinase C conserved region 1 and 2], FYVE [Fab 1,
YO1B, Vac 1, and EEA1 (early endosome antigen 1)]),
which is consistent with the postulated role of myotubularin proteins in vesicle transport. The presence of RhoGAP domains might indicate a role in direct regulation
of the cytoskeleton.
A few sequences show a predicted transmembrane
domain, and one has a predicted signal peptide. These
are very unusual for myotubularin sequences, and would
be consistent with localization in a particular intracellular membrane compartment, and entry into the endomembrane system, respectively.
Finally, several sequences contain a predicted nuclear
localization signal (NLS). This was true for Nv109357
(Nematostella), and several other metazoan members of
the R5 clade. This data is presented in Additional File 2.
Amongst these sequences was the Drosophila homologue of MTMR5/MTMR13. This is consistent with the
observation that this protein (originally called “Sbf1”
[SET binding factor 1]) co-localizes with the epigenetic
regulatory protein Trithorax (Trx) on polytene chromosomes [21]. The presence in several members of the R5
clade of a well-conserved basic sequence loop and NLS
prediction together suggest that nuclear localization may
be possible for other members of this group. In addition,
we observed predicted NLS in two sequences from the
plant Populus trichocarpa. This data is summarized in
Additional File 3. Recently the Arabidopsis myotubularin
At3g10550 was shown to participate in a partially overlapping drought-response gene regulatory network with

Kerk and Moorhead BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:196
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/196

the epigenetic regulatory Trithorax homologue protein
ATX1 [22]. This has raised the question as to whether
this protein might be able to enter the nucleus. Our
finding of a conserved basic sequence region supports
this possibility.
Myotubularin Gene Expression in Entamoeba

The unusually large complement of myotubularin
homologues in Entamoeba histolytica, a well-known
pathogenic organism, prompted us to explore the literature to examine patterns of myotubularin gene expression in this species. Davis et al. [23] reported differences
in gene expression between the infective E. histolytica
strain HM-1:IMSS and the non-pathogenic E. histolytica
strain Rahman. Sequence EHI_141820 (one of the
IMLRK proteins) showed an increase of 4.4× in expression (p = 1.07E-07). Ehrenkaufer et al. [24] identified
“cyst-specific” E. histolytica genes which are differentially expressed in recent clinical isolates (which form
cysts) as compared to laboratory strains or strains isolated from the mouse colon (which do not form cysts).
Genes encoding two active myotubularins showed
increases in expression (EHI_070120 [6.3×, p = 2.4E-03],
EHI_049780 [5.3×, p = 7.3E-03]). Genes for four inactive
myotubularins also showed increases in expression
(EHI_140980 [6.3×, p = 5.0E-03], EHI_188050 [2.6×,
p = 2.3E-03], EHI_185230 [10.7×, p = 7.4E-07],
EHI_078170 [5.2×, p = 1.3E-04]). The latter two
sequences are IMLRK proteins.

Discussion
A variety of experiments in animal and fungal systems
including in vitro enzymatic studies, mutational analysis,
complementation assays, and in vivo overexpression,
agree in characterizing myotubularins as phosphatases
of the D3 position in the inositol headgroup of inositol
phospholipids. PI3P and PI(3,5)P2 appear to be primarily localized to the cellular endomembrane system and
restricted domains of the plasma membrane, mediating
transitions between endosomes and lysosomes, retrograde transport between the endosomal compartment
and trans Golgi network, and endocytosis of some materials from the cell surface [1,3]. Mutations of animal and
yeast myotubularins lead to abnormal accumulations of
PI3P and PI(3,5)P2, apparently disrupting normal cellular membrane trafficking events, perhaps through abnormal concentrations and/or localizations of PI-phosphate
specific membrane-binding effector proteins [2-4]. One
would anticipate that such intracellular membrane trafficking processes, and the mechanisms regulating them,
would be very ancient, having arisen quite early in
eukaryotic evolution. This is consistent with our most
common observation of a small number of myotubularin
genes in organisms across a broad phylogenetic

Page 11 of 16

distribution, suggesting the presence of a single such
gene in the last common ancestor for all extant eukaryotic groups. The PH-GRAM domain appears to be a
very early acquisition, perhaps coincident with the divergence of a generic PTP domain into the characteristic
elaborated myotubularin phosphatase domain.
Inactive myotubularin subunits are one of the particularly interesting features of this gene group. Our data
are consistent with these having appeared on three separate occasions in eukaryotic evolution, in different taxonomic groups. The distinctive lack of a PH-GRAM
domain in the inactive Excavate myotubularins makes it
likely that these represent a unique lineage. Similarly,
the IMLRK domain architecture of the Amoebozoa
inactive myotubularins suggests they too have a unique
origin. Finally, it is likely that an active myotubularin
lineage then began an independent diversification event
somewhere around the base of the Choanoflagellate/
Metazoan divergence to produce the six similarity
groups characteristic of the Metazoans. This is consistent with our finding of all six myotubularin subgroups
being identifiable in the deeply diverging Placozoan Trichoplax, but only three subgroup representatives being
clearly identifiable from the Choanoflagellate Monosiga.
More completed genome sequences from Choanoflagellates and even more deeply diverging protistan “animal
allies” (e.g. Ichthyosporea and Filasterea [25,26]) will be
necessary to precisely define this pivotal period in myotubularin gene history.
Myotubularin function has been most intensively studied in humans, where a number of diseases arising from
inherited mutations have been characterized. It has been
suggested that a common unifying pathophysiological
mechanism in these disorders may be abnormality in the
membrane trafficking necessary to alter the characteristic
molecular composition and identity of the plasma membrane and specialized derivative membrane structures
during cellular differentiation [4]. In this model the disordered membrane trafficking would be secondary to perturbations in the normal levels and perhaps subcellular
distribution of PI3P and PI(3,5)P2, the normal substrates
of myotubularins. This model suggests that the normal
function of myotubularins becomes especially critical in
situations where cells are required to turn over and alter,
on a large scale, through membrane trafficking, the suites
of proteins and perhaps lipids characterizing particular
domains on the plasma membrane and components of
the endomembrane system.
Myotubularin genes have undergone an expansion in the
Amoebozoan species Dictyostelium discoideum. Nine
myotubularins are predicted to be enzymatically active,
and two inactive. Nothing is known about the function of
the myotubularins in this organism. However, it is reasonable to suggest that they are involved in the regulation of

Kerk and Moorhead BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:196
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/196

the substantial intracellular trafficking events that would
accompany membrane reorganization during a complex
life cycle. The two inactive Dictyostelium myotubularins
also possess the distinctive IMLRK domain architecture.
“ROCO” proteins (which usually contain LRR/ROCO/
kinase domains, but not myotubularin domains) were
initially characterized in Dictyostelium, are biochemically
best understood in this organism, but have a widespread
phylogenetic distribution in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes [13]. In Dictyostelium, where there are 11 ROCO
genes in all, functional evidence is available for four: gene
gbpC is involved in chemotaxis; genes QkgA/roco2 and
roco5 are involved in growth and development; and gene
pats1 (our IMLRK sequence DDB0191503) is involved in
cytokinesis. The ROCO proteins have recently received
considerable attention because in humans the family
member LRRK2 is involved in familial and some cases of
sporadic Parkinson’s disease [13]. Biochemical approaches,
analysis of disease-associated mutations, and solved protein structures have revealed that the protein kinase
domain is regulated by the GTPase activity of the ROC
domain, through protein-protein dimerization mediated
by the COR domain [15,27]. Thus these proteins have
been likened to a “stand-alone” intramolecular signal
transduction cascade, mediated by their multiple functional domains. Dictyostelium pats1 (DDB0191503) is
essential for cytokinesis, and contains an enzymatically
inactive myotubularin domain, whose function has not
been experimentally tested. A reasonable proposal would
be that the myotubularin-like portion of the protein could
provide membrane localization via its PH-GRAM domain.
It is known that specialized plasma membrane domains
enriched in PI(4,5)P2 accumulate at the intercellular
bridge during cytokinesis, where they regulate the underlying actin cytoskeleton [28]. The Dictyostelium gene roco9
(DDB0191512) also encodes an IMLRK protein. Nothing
is known about the function of this protein, but it contains
a Rho-GAP domain, which might indicate a role in regulation of the actin cytoskeleton. Once again, the myotubularin-like region of the protein could supply membrane
localization. Another functional possibility for the inactive
myotubularin domains of both pats1 and roco9 is that
they might bind to one or more of the many active Dictyostelium myotubularins, and mediate regulation of their
activities. Several such combinations of active plus regulatory inactive myotubularin subunits are well characterized
in animal cells [3].
In Entamoeba, another Amoebozoan, there is an
even larger myotubularin gene set than observed in Dictyostelium - there are 8 active myotubularins, and 11 inactive myotubularins (9 of them with the IMLRK domain
architecture). This is the largest collection of myotubularin
genes observed to date in any eukaryotic genome examined. This large repertoire of active plus inactive subunits

Page 12 of 16

suggests the possibility of a particularly rich network of
regulatory protein-protein associations. It is particularly
striking that, in contrast to the intricate multicellular associations of Dictyostelium, the Entamoeba life cycle is morphologically rather simple. Underlying this apparently
simplicity, however, is probably complex turnover and
change to plasma membrane protein sets accompanying
life cycle transitions and invasive contact with host tissues
[29-31]. It might be hypothesized that the large complement of myotubularin genes found in this organism is
necessary for precise spatial and temporal regulation of
these membrane trafficking events, over and above the
“constitutive” requirements of any eukaryotic cell. Their
numbers would suggest that the IMLRK proteins might be
particularly important. The data suggest that the protein
kinase domains of the IMLRK proteins will be active, and
that the ROC domains lack GTPase activity. This would
indicate a change to the typical paradigm of ROC
GTPase-mediated control of the kinase domain. It is possible that the divergent ROCO domains in these proteins
effect protein kinase regulation via interaction with novel
accessory proteins.
In most human cases of infection with Entamoeba histolytica, the organism remains in the lumen of the intestine, in contact with the epithelium. In a minority of
cases, invasion of the intestinal wall occurs, which may
lead to liver abscesses. The life cycle is completed by
the organism forming cysts, which are released from the
host in excrement, to infect new hosts. A significant
increase in gene expression was noted in a myotubularin
gene in a pathogenic vs a non-pathogenic strain of
E. histolytica [23]. Significant upregulation was noted in
several myotubularin genes which appear to be acting
specifically in the encystment stage of the life cycle [24].
Taken together, these data suggest that myotubularin
genes are important to both completion of the life cycle,
and invasive disease in this organism.

Conclusions
We have presented a phylogenetic survey of myotubularin genes across a diverse array of eukaryotes, including
distribution, domain architecture, and inferred evolutionary history. We have characterized an expansion of genes
in the Amoebozoa encoding proteins with the novel
combination of “IMLRK” (inactive myotubularin/LRR/
ROCO/kinase) domains. This group is particularly prominent in the pathogenic organism Entamoeba histolytica, which contains the largest myotubularin gene family
of any eukaryotic genome yet examined. Gene expression
data in E. histolytica indicates that myotubularin function
may be important to both critical life cycle transitions
and host infection. The data indicate that pathogen myotubularin genes may be important targets for basic
research, and perhaps novel strategies for disease control.

Kerk and Moorhead BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:196
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/196

Methods
Identification of Putative Myotubularin Homologue
Sequences

Sequences of all 14 human myotubularin proteins were
obtained from NCBI Entrez [32]. A multiple sequence
alignment was constructed and edited as presented in the
next section. Eukaryotes with a completely sequenced genome were identified using the Genomes Online Database
[33,34], and organismal protein datafiles were obtained
from the sites linked therein. A Hidden Markov Model
(HMM) of the human myotubularin multiple sequence
alignment was constructed using the HMMER program
package, which was then used to search the various eukaryotic protein sequence datafiles (program commands
“hmmbuild”, “hmmcalibrate” and “hmmsearch”, threshold
E = 1). Candidate sequences were determined by a combination of low E value (generally less than E = 0.01) and a
long alignment to the HMM model. A spreadsheet with
the URLs of websites used to obtain protein datasets
within which candidate myotubularin homologue
sequences were found is presented in Additional File 4.
Determination of Myotubularin Similarity Regions within
Sequences

Candidate myotubularin sequences obtained from the
initial HMM search of protein datafiles were subjected
to sequence:profile (FFAS03) [35,36] and profile:profile
(HHPred) [37-39] analysis to identify the boundaries of
the characteristic PH-GRAM and myotubularin phosphatase domains, by comparison with the solved structures of human MTMR2 (PDB: 1LW3, 1ZSQ). For most
sequences this was a contiguous region, which was then
utilized for multiple sequence alignment. FFAS03
returns standardized variable ("Z”) scores for comparisons between a query and a solved template structure
sequence, with a score of 9.5 cited by the authors as
being statistically significant. Candidate myotubularin
sequences routinely exceeded this threshold. HHPred
returns a probability score reflecting both the alignment
between HMMs formed based on the query sequence
and solved structure sequences, and predicted secondary
structure. A probability of 95% is cited by the authors as
having a very low false positive rate. Candidate myotubularin sequences routinely exceeded this threshold.
Characterization of Non-Myotubularin Domains within
Sequences

Candidate myotubularin homologue sequences obtained
by HMM search as described above were examined for
functional domains using FFAS03 and HHPred as
described above (except now using as a comparison all
sequences with solved structures in the PDB), and also
NCBI CDD [40,41], Pfam [42,43], and InterProScan

Page 13 of 16

[44,45], all with default settings. For the identification of
ROCO domain sequences the comparison structure was
that of the ROCO domain of Chlorobium tepidum (PDB:
3dpu_A [15]). The identity of the domains was confirmed
by successive rounds of multiple sequence alignment (as
detailed below), Hidden Markov Model construction (as
detailed above), and database searching.
Characterization of Additional Protein Sequence Features

Candidate myotubularin homologue sequences obtained
by HMM search as described above were examined for
the presence of predicted signal peptides (Phobius
[46,47], SignalP [48,49]), predicted transmembrane
helices (Phobius [46,47], TMHMM [50,51]), predicted
coiled-coil regions (Marcoil [52,53], PairCoil2 [54,55]),
and nuclear localization signals NLStradamus [56,57]).
Multiple Sequence Alignment
Candidate Myotubularin Sequences

Candidate myotubularin sequences (including both the
PH-GRAM domain and the myotubularin phosphatase
domain, or just the phosphatase domain alone (as defined
by the sequence of the solved structure of MTMR2_Hu
(PDB:1LW3)) were aligned utilizing as necessary several
multiple sequence alignment programs: Muscle [58], TCoffee [59] or M-Coffee [60,61]. Quality of alignments
was guided by evaluation at the T-Coffee web server. In
some instances, sub-alignments were constructed, and
then either sequences, or other sub-alignments were
added using the Profile alignment mode of T-Coffee or
ClustalX [62] (default program settings). Alignments
were displayed and edited using the program GeneDoc
[63]. After alignment analysis, it was found that some
database sequences for candidate myotubularin homologues were incomplete due to annotation mistakes. These
were supplemented with additional sequence by use of
the appropriate organismal genome browser, and search
of the organismal genomic DNA utilizing TBLASTN.
Such sequences are denoted with the suffix “C” in the figure legends. For the reference multiple sequence alignment presented as Additional File 1 (100 sequences), no
sequence regions were deleted.
Protein Kinase and ROCO Domains

Protein kinase domain and ROCO domain sequences
within some myotubularin homologue candidates,
detected as described above, were subjected to multiple
sequence alignment with M-Coffee, displayed and edited
with GeneDoc, as described above.
Phylogenetic Tree Inference

Multiple sequence alignments were constructed as
detailed above. In some instances rapidly evolving sites
(Category 8) were identified with PAML [64] and

Kerk and Moorhead BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:196
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/196

removed from the alignment (analysis performed using
the programs AIR-Identifier and AIR-Remover at the
University of Oslo BioPortal http://www.bioportal.uio.no/
.
Bayesian phylogenetic trees were inferred with PhyloBayes 3.2d [65]. Two independent Markov Chains were
run under various amino acid substitution models, and
between-sites rate variation models (UL3, Dirichlet; UL3,
Uniform; WLSR5, Dirichlet) for approximately 5,000
cycles, using a 20% (approximately 1,000 cycle) burn-in.
Chain convergence was checked using the statistics
“maxdiff” < 0.10 and “effsize” > 100. Maximum likelihood
trees were inferred with PhyML 3.0 [66] and PhyMLmixture [67]. A two-stage process was used [6], where
first the best tree was inferred from 20 random starts,
using SPR moves, from a Parsimony input tree (PhyML)
or a BioNJ input tree (PhyML-mixture). Various amino
acid substitution models and models for between site
rate variation were used ([JTT plus 4 Gamma categories,
empirical amino acid frequencies, proportion of invariant
sites estimated], [WAG plus 4 Gamma categories,
empirical amino acid frequencies, proportion of invariant
sites estimated], [LG plus 4 Gamma categories, empirical
amino acid frequencies, proportion of invariant sites estimated], [EX3, single rate category, model amino acid frequencies]). Then a second stage utilized the best tree
from the first stage as a user input tree, and inferred 100
bootstrap replicates, using SPR moves, employing the
same amino acid substitution and site rate variation parameters as in the first stage.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Full Myotubularin Sequences Alignment. This file
presents the full myotubularin sequences alignment, a portion of which
was presented in Figure 3. All details of this alignment are the same as
described in the Legend to Figure 3, except that in this figure a blue bar
is used to denote the extent of the N-terminal PH-GRAM domain, and an
orange bar denotes the extent of the phosphatase domain catalytic
signature motif.
Additional file 2: Predicted Nuclear Localization Signals (NLS) in
Animal Myotubularin Homologue Sequences. This file presents data
summarizing predicted nuclear localization signals (NLS) in metazoan
myotubularin homologue sequences of the R5 clade.
Additional file 3: Predicted Nuclear Localization Signals (NLS) in
Plant Myotubularin Homologue Sequences. This file presents data
summarizing predicted nuclear localization signals (NLS) in plant
myotubularin homologue sequences.
Additional file 4: URLs for Protein Databases. This file contains the
URLs for downloading of all organismal protein datasets searched for
myotubularin homologues in this study. It also contains the original
literature citation for the publication of each completely sequenced
organismal genome.
Additional file 5: Myotubularin Protein Sequences. This file contains
the FASTA-formatted sequences for all myotubularin homologues
identified in this study, reference human myotubularin proteins, database
accession numbers, and sequence designations as used in the data
figures.

Page 14 of 16

Additional file 6: Additional Information on ROCO Sequence
Alignment. This file presents species designations and database
accession numbers for sequences presented in the multiple sequence
alignment of Figure 4.

Abbreviations
ANK: Ankyrin domain; CDD: Conserved Domain Database; CMT: CharcotMarie-Tooth; C1: Protein kinase C conserved region 1 (C1) domain (Cysteinerich domain); C2: Protein kinase C conserved region 2 (C2) domain
(Cysteine-rich domain); DENN: differentially expressed in neoplastic versus
normal cells; FFAS: Fold and Function Assignment System; FYVE: Fab 1,
YO1B, Vac 1, and EEA1 (early endosome antigen 1); GAP: GTPase activating
protein; GRAM: glucosyltransferases, Rab-like GTPase activators and
myotubularins; HHPred: HMM-HMM structure prediction; HMM: Hidden
Markov Model; IMLRK: Inactive myotubularin/LRR/ROCO/Kinase domain
architecture of Amoebozoa; LRR: Leucine-rich repeat; MTMR: MTM1-related;
NLS: Nuclear localization signal; PDB: Protein Data Bank; PH: Pleckstrinhomology; Pfam: Protein Families; PKA: Protein kinase A; PTP: Protein
tyrosine phosphatase; PX: Phox-like; Rho-GAP: Rho-GTPase Activating Protein;
ROCO: Ras of complex proteins (ROC) + C-term of ROC (COR); TKL: Tyrosine
kinase-like; WD40: structural motif of 40-43 amino acids in the beta subunit
of G-proteins; XLMTM: X-linked myotubular myopathy
Acknowledgements
The authors thank Mhairi Nimick for assistance with figure composition. DK,
GBGM and MN are supported by the Natural Sciences and Engineering
Research Council of Canada, the Alberta Cancer Board, and the Alberta
Ingenuity Carbohydrate Research Group.
Authors’ contributions
GBGM and DK conceived of the study. DK designed the implementation of
the study. DK collected all sequence data, performed domain mapping,
multiple sequence alignment, phylogenetic tree analysis, and mined
published gene expression data. DK composed the data figures and tables.
DK and GBGM wrote and approve the manuscript.
Received: 14 August 2009 Accepted: 24 June 2010
Published: 24 June 2010
References
1. Rutherford AC, Cullen PJ: Phosphoinositides: Navigation Through the
Endosomal Maze. The Biochemist 2009, 31:20-25.
2. Laporte J, Bedez F, Bolino A, Mandel JL: Myotubularins, a large diseaseassociated family of cooperating catalytically active and inactive
phosphoinositides phosphatases. Hum Mol Genet 2003, 12(Spec No 2):
R285-292.
3. Robinson FL, Dixon JE: Myotubularin phosphatases: policing 3phosphoinositides. Trends Cell Biol 2006, 16:403-412.
4. Nicot AS, Laporte J: Endosomal phosphoinositides and human diseases.
Traffic 2008, 9:1240-1249.
5. Lecompte O, Poch O, Laporte J: PtdIns5P regulation through evolution:
roles in membrane trafficking? Trends in Biochemical Sciences 2008,
33:453-460.
6. Burki F, Shalchian-Tabrizi K, Jan Pawlowski J: Phylogenomics reveals a new
‘megagroup’including most photosynthetic eukaryotes. Biol Lett 2008,
4:366-369.
7. Dacks JB, Walker G, Field MC: Implications of the new eukaryotic
systematics for parasitologists. Parasitol Int 2008, 57:97-104.
8. Koonin EV: The Incredible Expanding Ancestor of Eukaryotes. Cell 2010,
140:606-608.
9. The Tree of Life. [http://tolweb.org/tree/].
10. Begley MJ, Dixon JE: The structure and regulation of myotubularin
phosphatases. Curr Opin Struct Biol 2005, 15:614-620.
11. Zhang ZY, Dixon JE: Active site labeling of the Yersinia protein tyrosine
phosphatase: the determination of the pKa of the active site cysteine
and the function of the conserved histidine 402. Biochemistry 1993,
32:9340-9345.

Kerk and Moorhead BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:196
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/196

12. Abysalh JC, Kuchnicki LL, Larochelle DA: The identification of pats1, a
novel gene locus required for cytokinesis in Dictyostelium discoideum.
Mol Biol Cell 2003, 14:14-25.
13. Marin I, van Egmond WN, van Haastert PJ: The Roco protein family: a
functional perspective. FASEB J 2008, 22:3103-3110.
14. Lewis PA: The function of ROCO proteins in health and disease. Biol Cell
2009, 101:183-191.
15. Gotthardt K, Weyand M, Kortholt A, Van Haastert PJ, Wittinghofer A:
Structure of the Roc-COR domain tandem of C. tepidum, a prokaryotic
homologue of the human LRRK2 Parkinson kinase. EMBO J 2008, 27:2352.
16. Manning G, Whyte DB, Martinez R, Hunter T, Sudarsanam S: The protein
kinase complement of the human genome. Science 2002, 298:1912-1934.
17. Marin I: The Parkinson disease gene LRRK2: evolutionary and structural
insights. Mol Biol Evol 2006, 23:2423-2433.
18. Kannan N, Taylor SS, Zhai Y, Venter JC, Manning G: Structural and
functional diversity of the microbial kinome. PLoS Biol 2007, 5:e17.
19. Dellaporta SL, Xu A, Sagasser S, Jakob W, Moreno MA, Buss LW,
Schierwater B: Mitochondrial genome of Trichoplax adhaerens supports
placozoa as the basal lower metazoan phylum. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2006, 103:8751-8756.
20. Lemmon MA: Pleckstrin homology domains: not just for
phosphoinositides. Biochem Soc Trans 2004, 32:707-711.
21. Petruk S, Sedkov Y, Smith S, Tillib S, Kraevski V, Nakamura T, Canaani E,
Croce CM, Mazo A: Trithorax and dCBP acting in a complex to maintain
expression of a homeotic gene. Science 2001, 294:1331-1334.
22. Ding Y, Lapko H, Ndamukong I, Xia Y, Al-Abdallat A, Lalithambika S,
Sadder M, Saleh A, Fromm M, Riethoven JJ, et al: The Arabidopsis
chromatin modifier ATX1, the myotubularin-like AtMTM and the
response to drought. Plant Signal Behav 2009, 4:1049-1058.
23. Davis PH, Schulze J, Stanley SL Jr: Transcriptomic comparison of two
Entamoeba histolytica strains with defined virulence phenotypes
identifies new virulence factor candidates and key differences in the
expression patterns of cysteine proteases, lectin light chains, and
calmodulin. Molecular & Biochemical Parasitology 2007, 151:118-128.
24. Ehrenkaufer GM, Haque R, Hackney JA, Eichinger DJ, Singh U: Identification
of developmentally regulated genes in Entamoeba histolytica: insights
into mechanisms of stage conversion in a protozoan parasite. Cell
Microbiol 2007, 9:1426-1444.
25. Shalchian-Tabrizi K, Minge MA, Espelund M, Orr R, Ruden T, Jakobsen KS,
Cavalier-Smith T: Multigene phylogeny of choanozoa and the origin of
animals. PLoS One 2008, 3:e2098.
26. Ruiz-Trillo I, Roger AJ, Burger G, Gray MW, Lang BF: A phylogenomic
investigation into the origin of metazoa. Mol Biol Evol 2008, 25:664-672.
27. Deng J, Lewis PA, Greggio E, Sluch E, Beilina A, Cookson MR: Structure of
the ROC domain from the Parkinson’s disease-associated leucine-rich
repeat kinase 2 reveals a dimeric GTPase. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008,
105:1499-1504.
28. Montagnac G, Echard A, Chavrier P: Endocytic traffic in animal cell
cytokinesis. Curr Opin Cell Biol 2008, 20:454-461.
29. Debnath A, Das P, Sajid M, McKerrow JH: Identification of genomic
responses to collagen binding by trophozoites of Entamoeba histolytica.
J Infect Dis 2004, 190:448-457.
30. Ackers JP, Mirelman D: Progress in research on Entamoeba histolytica
pathogenesis. Curr Opin Microbiol 2006, 9:367-373.
31. Marion S, Guillen N: Genomic and proteomic approaches highlight
phagocytosis of living and apoptotic human cells by the parasite
Entamoeba histolytica. Int J Parasitol 2006, 36:131-139.
32. NCBI-Entrez. [http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sites/entrez?db=protein].
33. Liolios K, Mavromatis K, Tavernarakis N, Kyrpides NC: The Genomes On Line
Database (GOLD) in 2007: status of genomic and metagenomic projects
and their associated metadata. Nucleic Acids Res 2008, 36:D475-479.
34. Genomes Online Database. [http://www.genomesonline.org/].
35. Rychlewski L, Jaroszewski L, Li W, Godzik A: Comparison of sequence
profiles. Strategies for structural predictions using sequence information.
Protein Sci 2000, 9:232-241.
36. FFAS03. [http://ffas.ljcrf.edu/ffas-cgi/cgi/ffas.pl?ses=].
37. Soding J: Protein homology detection by HMM-HMM comparison.
Bioinformatics 2005, 21:951-960.

Page 15 of 16

38. Soding J, Biegert A, Lupas AN: The HHpred interactive server for protein
homology detection and structure prediction. Nucleic Acids Res 2005, 33:
W244-248.
39. HHPred. [http://toolkit.tuebingen.mpg.de/hhpred].
40. Marchler-Bauer A, Anderson JB, Chitsaz F, Derbyshire MK, DeWeese-Scott C,
Fong JH, Geer LY, Geer RC, Gonzales NR, Gwadz M, et al: CDD: specific
functional annotation with the Conserved Domain Database. Nucleic
Acids Res 2009, 37:D205-210.
41. NCBI-CDD. [http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Structure/cdd/cdd.shtml].
42. Finn RD, Tate J, Mistry J, Coggill PC, Sammut SJ, Hotz HR, Ceric G,
Forslund K, Eddy SR, Sonnhammer EL, Bateman A: The Pfam protein
families database. Nucleic Acids Res 2008, 36:D281-288.
43. Pfam. [http://pfam.janelia.org/].
44. Apweiler R, Attwood TK, Bairoch A, Bateman A, Birney E, Biswas M,
Bucher P, Cerutti L, Corpet F, Croning MD, et al: The InterPro database, an
integrated documentation resource for protein families, domains and
functional sites. Nucleic Acids Res 2001, 29:37-40.
45. InterProScan. [http://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/InterProScan/].
46. Kall L, Krogh A, Sonnhammer EL: A combined transmembrane topology
and signal peptide prediction method. J Mol Biol 2004, 338:1027-1036.
47. Phobius. [http://phobius.sbc.su.se/].
48. Emanuelsson O, Brunak S, von Heijne G, Nielsen H: Locating proteins in
the cell using TargetP, SignalP and related tools. Nat Protoc 2007,
2:953-971.
49. SignalP. [http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/SignalP/].
50. Krogh A, Larsson B, von Heijne G, Sonnhammer EL: Predicting
transmembrane protein topology with a hidden Markov model:
application to complete genomes. J Mol Biol 2001, 305:567-580.
51. TMHMM. [http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/TMHMM/].
52. Delorenzi M, Speed T: An HMM model for coiled-coil domains and a
comparison with PSSM-based predictions. Bioinformatics 2002, 18:617-625.
53. Marcoil. [http://www.isrec.isb-sib.ch/webmarcoil/webmarcoilC1.html].
54. McDonnell AV, Jiang T, Keating AE, Berger B: Paircoil2: improved
prediction of coiled coils from sequence. Bioinformatics 2006, 22:356-358.
55. PairCoil2. [http://groups.csail.mit.edu/cb/paircoil2/paircoil2.html].
56. Nguyen Ba AN, Pogoutse A, Provart N, Moses AM: NLStradamus: a simple
Hidden Markov Model for nuclear localization signal prediction. BMC
Bioinformatics 2009, 10:202.
57. NLStradamus. [http://www.bar.utoronto.ca/~anguyenba/].
58. Edgar RC: MUSCLE: a multiple sequence alignment method with reduced
time and space complexity. BMC Bioinformatics 2004, 5:113.
59. Notredame C, Higgins DG, Heringa J: T-Coffee: A novel method for fast
and accurate multiple sequence alignment. J Mol Biol 2000, 302:205-217.
60. Wallace IM, O’Sullivan O, Higgins DG, Notredame C: M-Coffee: combining
multiple sequence alignment methods with T-Coffee. Nucleic Acids Res
2006, 34:1692-1699.
61. T-Coffee Server. [http://www.igs.cnrs-mrs.fr/Tcoffee/tcoffee_cgi/index.cgi].
62. Thompson JD, Gibson TJ, Plewniak F, Jeanmougin F, Higgins DG: The
CLUSTAL_X windows interface: flexible strategies for multiple sequence
alignment aided by quality analysis tools. Nucleic Acids Res 1997,
25:4876-4882.
63. Nicholas KB, Nicholas HBJ, Deerfield DWI: GeneDoc: analysis and
visualization of genetic variation. EMBNEWNews 1997, 4:1-4.
64. Yang Z: PAML 4: phylogenetic analysis by maximum likelihood. Mol Biol
Evol 2007, 24:1586-1591.
65. Lartillot N, Philippe H: A Bayesian mixture model for across-site
heterogeneities in the amino-acid replacement process. Mol Biol Evol
2004, 21:1095-1109.
66. Guindon S, Gascuel O: A simple, fast, and accurate algorithm to estimate
large phylogenies by maximum likelihood. Syst Biol 2003, 52:696-704.
67. Le SQ, Lartillot N, Gascuel O: Phylogenetic mixture models for proteins.
Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 2008, 363:3965-3976.
68. Gazave E, Lapebie P, Richards GS, Brunet F, Ereskovsky AV, Degnan BM,
Borchiellini C, Vervoort M, Renard E: Origin and evolution of the Notch
signalling pathway: an overview from eukaryotic genomes. BMC Evol Biol
2009, 9:249.
69. NCBI-BLAST. [http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi].

Kerk and Moorhead BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:196
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/196

Page 16 of 16

70. Begley MJ, Taylor GS, Kim SA, Veine DM, Dixon JE, Stuckey JA: Crystal
structure of a phosphoinositide phosphatase, MTMR2: insights into
myotubular myopathy and Charcot-Marie-Tooth syndrome. Mol Cell 2003,
12:1391-1402.
doi:10.1186/1471-2148-10-196
Cite this article as: Kerk and Moorhead: A phylogenetic survey of
myotubularin genes of eukaryotes: distribution, protein structure,
evolution, and gene expression. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010 10:196.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
