<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Towards realistic benchmarks for multiple alignments of non-coding sequences</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Bioinformatics 2010 11:54. doi:10.1186/1471-2105-11-54"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Jaebum Kim"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Kim and Sinha BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:54
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/54

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Towards realistic benchmarks for multiple
alignments of non-coding sequences
Jaebum Kim1, Saurabh Sinha1,2*

Abstract
Background: With the continued development of new computational tools for multiple sequence alignment, it is
necessary today to develop benchmarks that aid the selection of the most effective tools. Simulation-based
benchmarks have been proposed to meet this necessity, especially for non-coding sequences. However, it is not
clear if such benchmarks truly represent real sequence data from any given group of species, in terms of the
difficulty of alignment tasks.
Results: We find that the conventional simulation approach, which relies on empirically estimated values for
various parameters such as substitution rate or insertion/deletion rates, is unable to generate synthetic sequences
reflecting the broad genomic variation in conservation levels. We tackle this problem with a new method for
simulating non-coding sequence evolution, by relying on genome-wide distributions of evolutionary parameters
rather than their averages. We then generate synthetic data sets to mimic orthologous sequences from the
Drosophila group of species, and show that these data sets truly represent the variability observed in genomic data
in terms of the difficulty of the alignment task. This allows us to make significant progress towards estimating the
alignment accuracy of current tools in an absolute sense, going beyond only a relative assessment of different
tools. We evaluate six widely used multiple alignment tools in the context of Drosophila non-coding sequences,
and find the accuracy to be significantly different from previously reported values. Interestingly, the performance of
most tools degrades more rapidly when there are more insertions than deletions in the data set, suggesting an
asymmetric handling of insertions and deletions, even though none of the evaluated tools explicitly distinguishes
these two types of events. We also examine the accuracy of two existing tools for annotating insertions versus
deletions, and find their performance to be close to optimal in Drosophila non-coding sequences if provided with
the true alignments.
Conclusion: We have developed a method to generate benchmarks for multiple alignments of Drosophila noncoding sequences, and shown it to be more realistic than traditional benchmarks. Apart from helping to select the
most effective tools, these benchmarks will help practitioners of comparative genomics deal with the effects of
alignment errors, by providing accurate estimates of the extent of these errors.

Background
The availability of genome sequences of closely related
species (such as 18 placental mammal species [1] and 12
Drosophila species [2]) has provided opportunities to
solve several key biological problems such as the inference of phylogenetic trees, reconstruction of ancestral
genomes, estimation of evolutionary rates, identification
of conserved and non-conserved regions, and more generally the study of genome structure and evolution. The
* Correspondence: sinhas@illinois.edu
1
Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at UrbanaChampaign, Urbana, IL 61801, USA

alignment of multiple sequences, highlighting regions of
homology among the sequences and predicting nucleotide level relationships among them, plays a critical role
in such analyses. Numerous attempts have been made
to develop accurate and efficient methods to solve the
multiple sequence alignment problem (reviewed in
[3-6]), offering us much flexibility, as well as difficulty,
in choosing the most appropriate tool(s) for the task.
Another important task related to multiple alignment is
the annotation of insertions and deletions (indels) in the
alignment, a task that has received some attention in
recent years [7-12] in light of the realization that indels

© 2010 Kim and Sinha; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Kim and Sinha BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:54
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/54

may be responsible for genomic variation as much as
nucleotide substitutions are [13], and that indels may
affect regional mutation rates [14].
Given the availability of multiple tools to perform
either of these two tasks, a researcher faces two important questions: “Which of the tools should I use for my
task?” and “How accurate will the tool be on my data?”
Answers to these come from studies that use data sets
("benchmarks”) where the true answers are known, to
evaluate and compare different tools. The design of
benchmarks therefore directly affects the reliability of
bioinformatics analyses that use those tools. The two
most widely used benchmarking approaches for alignment tools are (i) to make use of biological sequences
and their manually curated alignments from databases
such as Homstrad [15], BAliBASE [16], and SABmark
[17], or (ii) to simulate the evolution of biological
sequences by using specialized tools such as Dawg [18],
Rose [19] and INDELible [20]. The main advantage of
the former approach is the use of real biological
sequences and alignments that are produced by using
protein structure information. This approach does not
apply to non-coding DNA sequences, whose alignments
form the basis of regulatory comparative genomics.
Therefore, simulation-based benchmarks have been
widely adopted in this context [21-26]. The simulation
approach, however, is highly dependent on its parameters that reflect the underlying evolutionary processes
and their rates. It is not clear how to choose “correct”
settings for these parameters and how to assess if the
simulated sequences mimic real data well enough for
claims about alignment accuracy, both in relative terms
(i.e., comparison of tools) and in the absolute, to generalize from the benchmarks to the real world setting. We
address these questions in this work, whose main contributions are the following.
1) We present a new simulation-based benchmarking
method that is based on the entire spectrum of values
of its parameters as inferred from real data. This is in
contrast to existing approaches that rely on the average
observed values of the parameters.
2) We quantify the difficulty of aligning a data set by
leveraging recent developments [27] on estimating alignment accuracy without requiring the “true” alignments.
We reason that if the synthetic data sets truly mimic
real orthologous sequences, the difficulty of aligning
them ought to match that for the real data. This is the
key insight used to determine how realistic a particular
benchmark (i.e., collection of data sets) is, and we use
this idea to show that the novel simulation method produces far more realistic benchmarks than the existing
approach.
3) Using our new benchmarks, we evaluate and compare the accuracy of six multiple alignment tools

Page 2 of 13

(ClustalW [28], Dialign-TX [29], Mafft [30], Mavid [31],
Mlagan [32], and Pecan [33]) on Drosophila non-coding
sequences. The specific alignment task we consider is
that of global alignment of ~1-10 Kbp long sequences,
and our conclusions may not apply to the task of local
alignment, which was studied in [21]. We are able to
estimate the accuracy of alignment for specific sets of
Drosophila genomes, and find these to be very different
from previously reported values. We also evaluate two
schemes for annotating insertions and deletions specifically, and find their accuracy to be comparable, and
close to optimal.
4) We find that data sets with an excess of deletions
over insertions are more amenable to accurate alignment than those with an excess of insertions, suggesting
an implicit bias (in the alignment tools) with respect to
their treatment of indels, even though none of the evaluated tools explicitly makes a distinction between insertions and deletions.

Results
Simulation of non-coding sequences by a traditional
method

Modeling of DNA sequence evolution has been studied
extensively in the past, and state-of-the-art simulation
programs [18-20] draw on various aspects of such
models. Simulation of non-coding sequences [21]
incorporates current understanding of the architecture
of such sequences in terms of regions of evolutionary
constraint, for example by stipulating the presence of
short (but variable length) subsequences that evolve at
a much slower rate than the rest of the sequence. We
refer the reader to [18,21] for a comprehensive
description of these approaches, which form the foundation of our own work reported here. These simulation programs rely crucially on the values of their
parameters (e.g., substitution rate or frequency of constrained blocks). The parameters serve to fully specify
the stochastic processes from which evolutionary
events (e.g., substitutions or indels) will be sampled,
and prescribe the expected frequency of those events
in the generated data sets. Variation in the frequency
of these events, which underlie the difficulty of alignment tasks, results from the inherent randomness of
the simulation process, i.e., the differences in random
choices made from one “run” of the process to
another. It is natural to ask if the resulting variability
across data sets in a synthetic benchmark is comparable to the corresponding variability observed in real
orthologous sequences. The question is particularly
relevant due to the heterogeneity of non-coding
sequences with respect to the density of functional elements and also motivated by the known variation in
evolutionary rates across loci [34-36].

Kim and Sinha BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:54
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/54

We began by implementing the above-mentioned
simulation paradigm, which we call the “traditional”
paradigm, by incorporating the “constraint blocks” idea
of Pollard et al. [21] into the Dawg simulation program
[18]. Parameters, including phylogeny, branch lengths,
indel frequency, and various parameters related to conserved blocks were set based on previously published
values from the literature [21,37] or estimated by us
from published multiple alignments of Drosophila noncoding sequences (see Methods). A key difference in our
implementation was that branch lengths (i.e., average
substitution rates) were estimated from non-coding
sequences themselves, instead of synonymous substitution rates from coding sequences, as has been done previously. We elaborate on this important issue later in
this section.
We considered the alignments of real Drosophila
sequences from eight species (see Methods), computed
the sum of branch lengths of the phylogenetic tree estimated from ~1 Kbp segments of alignment, and found
the distribution of this statistic to have a large variance
across the genome (black bars in Figure 1). The same
distribution, when computed from 100 synthetic data
sets generated using the traditional simulator described
above, and the same alignment program, shows a very
sharp peak around the mean (dark gray bars in Figure
1). We note that the means of the two distributions are
similar (1.87 in real data and 1.94 in synthetic data),
since the benchmark was parameterized by the average
substitution rates observed in real data. This is the first
clear evidence that existing simulators fall short of
representing the range of conservation levels in real
data.
Since substitution rates are generally correlated with
indel rates, a large variance in the former implies a corresponding variance in indel frequencies, which of
course lie at the root of the alignment problem. This
suggests that if we could measure the “difficulty of
alignment” in any region of the genome (e.g., by having
knowledge of the true alignment, and measuring the
accuracy of a powerful alignment program), we ought to
see a large variability in this measure across the genome.
Moreover, if the observed distribution of the alignment
difficulty measure is comparable to that in a benchmark,
we would be confident in making claims about performance of alignment tools based on that benchmark.
The problem is that measuring alignment difficulty on
real data requires knowledge of their true alignment,
which is unavailable. Recent work by Landan and Graur
[27] showed that a reasonable surrogate for the accuracy
of an alignment program on a data set can be computed
even without the true alignment. They reasoned that
good alignments should be invariant to the orientation
of the input sequences, and therefore defined the

Page 3 of 13

Figure 1 Distributions of sum of branch lengths in a
phylogenetic tree estimated from real data and synthetic data
respectively. Sequences of eight Drosophila species were collected
from real data ("Real”), data produced by a traditional simulator
("Traditional”), and data produced by the new simulator based on
parameter sampling ("New”). The traditional simulator used the
average substitution rates observed in the real data, while the new
simulator used the empirical distribution of substitution rates in real
data. The branch lengths were estimated by Paml [51].

“Heads or Tails (HoT)” alignment quality score as the
agreement between two alignments, one generated from
original sequences and the other from their reversed
versions. Hall [38] later showed that there is a clear
positive correlation between HoT alignment quality
scores and the real alignment accuracy measured by
comparison with the true alignment. This remarkable
finding inspired us to formulate the following strategy
for quantifying the spectrum of alignment difficulty in
data sets. We computed the HoT alignment quality
score on the computed alignment of a data set, and
used this score as a surrogate for the alignment difficulty of the data set. (The alignment was computed
using a well-established alignment program called Pecan
[33], but other choices would not affect our conclusions.) Low values of the alignment quality score indicate that the data set is particularly hard to align, and
high values are suggestive of an “easy” data set. As
shown in Figure 2A, the distributions of the score were
significantly different between synthetic and real data
sets. Alignment quality scores for 83% of the synthetic
sequences are above 95, whereas close to 50% of real
sequences had scores below this range. This strongly
suggests that by and large the synthetic sequences

Kim and Sinha BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:54
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/54

simulated by the traditional approach are easier to align
than real sequences, even though the former were generated with evolutionary parameters mirroring their real
data counterparts. In particular, the variance of alignment quality (and presumably of alignment difficulty) is
much smaller in synthetic data sets.
Simulation based on a mixture model of parameters

We hypothesized that the above observation about synthetic data sets was due to the use of a single setting of
the branch lengths, and the relatively low variability
resulting from the randomness of the process itself (Figure 1). If this is true, then one way to alleviate the problem would be to allow for multiple phylogenies for
simulation of different data sets, with the variability of
branch lengths across phylogenies introducing an additional source of data set variability. We therefore considered a set of K = 10 phylogenies {j1, j2, ..., jK} that
are scaled versions of the original phylogeny j 0 , i.e.,
every branch length in phylogeny ji is a constant factor
τ i times the corresponding branch length in j 0 . (We
used {τi} = {1,2, ..., 10}.) We modified the simulator to
first sample at random one of the K phylogenies, and
simulate according to this setting of branch lengths,
with all other parameters being fixed as before. In other
words, the distribution of alignment quality scores from
the new simulation process is a mixture distribution,
with components parameterized by different phylogenies
and the probability of sampling any particular phylogeny
being the mixture weight. We estimated an upper
bound on the agreement between this mixture distribution and the observed distribution of alignment quality
scores, by maximum likelihood training of mixture
weights, through expectation-maximization algorithm
[39]. This “best fit” mixture distribution is shown in Figure 2B, along with the real data distribution, and reveals
a much stronger agreement between the two distributions, as compared to Figure 2A. The same trend was
seen when allowing for a set of values of the “substitution to indel ratio” parameter (with values 10:1,10:2, ...,
10:5), keeping all other parameters, including the phylogeny, fixed (Figure 2C). These results strongly suggested
that the use of a range of parameter values instead of a
single value has great impact on the variability of alignment difficulty in synthetic data sets, and has the potential to lead to the generation of realistic sequences.
Simulation based on parameter sampling

The above results, while encouraging in terms of better
reproducing the genomic variability of alignment difficulty, were obtained by fitting parameters of the simulation process so as to best match real data. We next
asked if we could achieve the same or better agreement
between the synthetic and real data distributions without having seen the real distribution of alignment quality scores. This would then allow us to use the observed

Page 4 of 13

agreement as a relatively unbiased assessment of how
realistic the benchmark is. Developing the mixture
model idea from the previous section, we now computed for each parameter the entire distribution of
values observed in real data alignments, just as the traditional approach estimates the average of these values.
The simulation process was now made to sample each
parameter independently from its empirical distribution,
and then generate a data set based on the sampled parameter values. The benchmark thus constructed (comprising 10000 different data sets) was examined for its
distribution of alignment quality scores, and as seen in
Figure 2D, this distribution was remarkably close to that
observed in real sequences. In other words, the newly
constructed benchmark meets our pre-specified criterion
for a “realistic” benchmark. (It also shows strong agreement, as expected, with real data in terms of estimated
branch lengths; Figure 1.)
The above analysis was performed using the sum-ofpairs score (SPS), which is the simplest of the scores
defined in the HoT approach [27]. We repeated all analyses with another score, called the HoT column score
(CS), and observed the same trends (Figure 2E-H),
although the agreement between synthetic and real data
distributions was not as strong now as with the SPS
(Figure 2D) (also see Discussion).
Assessment of multiple alignment tools
Accuracy of multiple alignments

We used our new benchmark to evaluate and compare
six leading multiple alignment tools that are publicly
available and can align DNA sequences. These are ClustalW 2.0.5 [28], Dialign-TX 1.0.0 [29], Mafft 6.240 [30],
Mavid 2.0 build 4 [31], Mlagan 2.0 [32], and Pecan 0.7
[33]. We performed the assessment with varying numbers of species, K = 3, ..., 8. For each choice of K, 10000
sets of sequences corresponding to K different Drosophila species were simulated and the above alignment
tools were run with default parameters or with the best
setting recommended by their authors. We then compared the resulting alignments to the “true” alignments
reported by the simulation program, using the following
three commonly used evaluation measures [40,41]: (i)
alignment agreement, which is the fraction of aligned
base pairs (or bases aligned to gaps) in the predicted
alignment that agree with the true alignment, (ii) alignment sensitivity, which is the fraction of aligned base
pairs of the true alignment that agree with the predicted
alignment, and (iii) alignment specificity, which is the
fraction of aligned base pairs of the predicted alignment
that agree with the true alignment. Whereas the alignment agreement score considers aligned base pairs as
well as bases aligned to gaps, the sensitivity and specificity scores are calculated only from aligned base pairs.
The results of our evaluations are shown in Figure 3

Kim and Sinha BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:54
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/54

Page 5 of 13

Figure 2 Distributions of alignment quality scores - HoT SPS (A-D) and HoT CS (E-H) - between real and simulated sequences. Synthetic
sequences were simulated by (A, E) a traditional method, (B, F) using a mixture model of evolutionary rates, (C, G) using a mixture model of
ratios of substitutions to indels, and (D, H) a novel method that relies on observed genome-wide distributions of its parameters.

Kim and Sinha BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:54
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/54

and Additional files 1 and 2 (left panels) (see Additional
file 3 for an example of true and computed alignments
by the six alignment programs). The Pecan alignment
program was found to be superior by all three measures,
across all values of K. Its performance degrades more
slowly (with increasing K) than the other tools, as a
result of which the gap between Pecan and the other
tools became larger more species were included in the
tests. The average alignment agreement in five species
alignments produced by Pecan (the species most divergent from D. melanogaster being D. pseudoobscura) was
close to 80%, but degraded to ~67% when aligning all
eight species.
We performed the same evaluations by limiting ourselves to those data sets (in the benchmark) that had an
excess of insertions over deletions, and separately to
those data sets with an excess of deletions (Figure 3,
and Additional files 1 and 2; middle and right panels).
Surprisingly, we saw a clear difference between these
two classes of data sets, with most tools performing significantly worse when there was an excess of insertions
in the data set. For example, on data sets with K = 8,
ClustalW showed an alignment agreement of 36% or
46% depending on whether there was an excess of insertions or deletions (respectively). The same trend was
seen in terms of the alignment sensitivity and specificity
measures. Noticably, Pecan was largely unaffected by
this dichotomy of data sets. (For additional insights on
how alignment accuracy depends on various other
descriptive statistics of a data set, e.g., total divergence,
indel count, or total indel length, see Additional file 4.)
The evaluation measures used above consider all pairs
of species in the K-species alignment and sum the accuracy values obtained from all pairs, without regard to
the varying divergences of different pairs. In an attempt
to address this issue, we separately measured the

Page 6 of 13

alignment accuracy of different pairs of species (e.g., D.
melanogaster - D. simulans, D. melanogaster - D.
yakuba, etc.), limiting ourselves to the eight-species data
sets. All trends reported above were also seen in this
alternative view of the results (Figure 4, and Additional
files 5 and 6). The alignment agreement, using Pecan,
for D. melanogaster with D. yakuba, D. anannassae, D.
pseudoobscura and D. willistoni was found to be 96%,
77%, 71% and 60% respectively.
Disagreement with estimates based on existing benchmark

We found a substantial disagreement between our performance estimates and those previously reported by
Pollard et al. [21] using their own benchmark. For
instance, the alignment sensitivity for the D. melanogaster - D. pseudoobscura pair comes out to be ~70% in
our assessment and ~40% by their estimates, using the
Mlagan alignment tool. We observe such gaps (with
higher numbers in our benchmark) also for alignment
specificity, and for other species pairs and alignment
programs as well (Additional files 7 and 8). (We confirmed this by evaluating the alignment programs ourselves on the Pollard et al. [21] benchmark, see
Methods.) While this discordance could be in part due
to the fact that our benchmark employs a spectrum of
parameter values to achieve greater and more realistic
variability, we believe the major difference here is that
even the average substitution rate, a key parameter in
both simulation programs, is widely different between
their study and ours. The estimate used by Pollard et al.
[21] (~2.4 substitutions per site) is based on silent positions in codons, while our estimate (~0.38 substitutions
per site) reflects the average subsitution frequency
(between these species) seen in non-coding sequences.
In light of the results of Figure 2D, where we show that
our benchmark accurately mirrors the range of alignment difficulty in real data, the use of non-coding

Figure 3 Performance of multiple alignment tools compared by alignment agreement. The scores were calculated by using all synthetic
data sets (left panel), and by using only data sets where the expected number of insertions is two times more than the number of deletions or
vice versa (middle and right panels respectively).

Kim and Sinha BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:54
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/54

Page 7 of 13

Figure 4 Performance of multiple alignment tools compared by alignment agreement of pairs of species. The scores were calculated by
using all synthetic data sets (left panel), and by using only data sets where the expected number of insertions is two times more than the
number of deletions or vice versa (middle and right panels respectively).

sequences in estimating this key parameter seems better
justified. We investigated this issue with additional tests.
We collected data sets representing the D. melanogaster
- D. pseudoobscura pair from Pollard et al. [21], as well
as from our benchmark and the real genomes. The
alignment quality score (HoT SPS) distributions were
computed for each type of benchmark, and are shown
in Figure 5. We observed a close agreement between
our data sets and the real orthologous sequences, while
the Pollard et al. [21] data sets were harder to align on
average, consistent with the greater substitution rate
used there. As noted in Methods, the overall substitution frequency observed in non-coding sequences may
be viewed as an average of the corresponding frequency
in conserved blocks and the much higher frequency outside conserved blocks. This average is determined by
two key parameters a, the fraction of sequence length
that falls into conserved blocks, and b, the ratio of the
evolutionary rate of conserved blocks to that outside
blocks. Given that the divergence estimate used by Pollard et al. [21] for these two species is ~2.24 (median)
substitutions per site, if we are to treat this value as the
neutral rate (i.e., rate outside conserved blocks) in noncoding sequences, what values of a and b would lead to
the observed overall substitution frequency of 0.38? We
determined that if b = 0.1, as was used by Pollard et al.
[21] (and also by us), a has to be ~0.92, i.e., about 92%
of non-coding sequences have to be conserved blocks,
which is far higher than most current estimates of this
parameter [37,42]. Similarly, if we are to trust the values
of a = 0.2 and b = 0.1, as was used by Pollard et al. [21]
(and also by us, based on estimates from real data), then
the overall divergence, after averaging between conserved blocks and non-blocks, would be ~1.84 substitutions per site, far greater than what is observed (0.38).
We therefore concluded that the use of synonymous

substitution rates as the neutral rate for non-coding
sequence is likely to lead to benchmarks with overly
“diverged” sequences that are more difficult to align
than real sequences from those species.
Assessment of indel annotation schemes

Traditional alignment programs mark the predicted
locations of insertions and deletions as “gaps”, and do
not proceed to annotate these gaps as being insertions
or deletions. This latter task has received some attention
recently with at least two “indel annotation schemes”

Figure 5 Distributions of alignment quality scores of data sets
representing D. melanogaster - D. pseudoobscura pair from real
genomes, Pollard et al. [21], and our benchmark. The collected
data sets from each of the three sources were aligned by Pecan
[33] and then their alignment quality scores were calculated by HoT
SPS [27] method.

Kim and Sinha BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:54
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/54

being published, based on maximum-parsimony ("sbInfer” [7]) and probabilistic-models ("Indelign” [12])
respectively. We examined the accuracy of these two
alignment-related tools on our new benchmark. (Indelign was modified for additional efficiency, see Methods.) We noted that the best alignment agreement score
(among all methods, as shown in Figure 4) is ~70% for
D. melanogaster - D. pseudoobscura, and decreases to
~60% when a more diverged species (D. willistoni) is
added. Reasoning that phylogenies for which computed
alignments are largely inaccurate would not be suitable
for insertion/deletion annotation in any case, we chose
to limit our assessment to the following five Drosophila
species: D. melanogaster, D. simulans, D. yakuba, D.
ananassae, and D. pseudoobscura (see Additional file 9
for phylogeny). The “true” alignment (as indicated by
the simulation program) was provided to the two indel
annotation tools and the insertion/deletion annotations
on each of the five terminal branches (leading to the
extant species) of the phylogeny were compared to the
“true” annotations. The following three measures were
used for assessment, borrowed from [12]: (i) Indel
Count Agreement, which is the agreement of indel
counts between true and predicted annotations, (ii)
Indel Ratio Agreement, which is the agreement of the
ratio of the number of insertions to the total number of
indels between the two annotations, and (iii) Indel
Annotation Coverage, which is the fraction of indel positions on which the two annotations agree (see Methods).
(Both sensitivity and specificity scores were calculated
for the Indel Annotation Coverage.)
As summarized in Table 1, Indel Count Agreement
scores of the two tools were very similar to each other
and close to optimal (0) for most species except D.
pseudoobscura, the species with the longest terminal
branch in the phylogeny. Indel Ratio Agreement scores
of both tools were close to optimal (1) in all five species.
While the sensitivity scores of Indel Annotation Coverage of the two tools were above 90% across all five species, the specificity scores were above 90% only for the
four species except D. pseudoobscura. The loss of accuracy on the D. pseudoobscura branch is presumably due
to the fact that there is no “outgroup” species to aid disambiguation of insertions and deletions on this branch.
We further discuss the implications of these observations in the next section. We also repeated our assessment for sequences with an excess of insertions or of
deletions, as above, but no significant differences was
observed between these two categories (data not shown).

Discussion
Choosing the most suitable tool for aligning orthologous
sequences is essential to studies in comparative genomics and in molecular evolution, making it critical to

Page 8 of 13

develop accurate benchmarking methodology. In this
study, we propose a novel simulation-based approach to
generate realistic data sets mimicking orthologous noncoding sequences from multiple Drosophila species.
This new simulation method exploits the spectrum of
values of evolutionary statistics (e.g., substitution rate,
indel frequency) seen across a genome. We take advantage of an objective “alignment quality” measure to
show that the synthetic sequences produced agree with
real sequences not only in terms of evolutionary statistics, but are also as easy or hard to align as real data
sets. In this sense, our evaluation results are more likely
to reflect the actual accuracy values of alignment-related
tools on data from Drosophila species. We note that our
strategy of sampling parameters (used in evolutionary
simulations) from their empirical distribution has parallels with traditional Bayesian inference where one integrates over (i.e., samples from) a prior distribution on
parameters, rather than using a single point estimate.
A key step in our benchmark construction was the
ability to assess the quality of an alignment without
access to the corresponding true alignment. This ability
has been the result of several recent publications by
other authors. Prakash and Tompa [43,44] developed
statistical methods to assess if a multiple sequence alignment appears contaminated with one or more unrelated
sequences, based on which they identified regions of
whole genome alignments as being suspect. The development of the “HoT” method by Landan and Graur [27]
then came as a breakthrough to assess the reliability of
multiple sequence alignments. Later on, Landan and
Graur [45] extended the HoT method to take advantage
of co-optimal alternative alignments generated by progressive alignment tools. However, the implementation
of this method is too dependent on the specific procedures of a progressive alignment method, making the
original HoT score [27] a natural choice for our
purpose.
While our benchmark is shown to be very close to
real sequences in terms of the distribution of HoT SPS,
we are cautioned by the discrepancy observed between
simulated and real sequences in terms of the HoT CS,
an alternative alignment quality score from the same
authors (Figure 2E-H). This is likely the product of
properties of non-coding sequences that are not adequately represented in our simulation process. For
example, modeling the functional constraints embedded
in non-coding sequences through short conserved
blocks (with scaled down phylogenies) is surely an oversimplification of the complexity of genomic architecture.
Important progress has been made on this front, in the
form of specialized evolutionary simulators that model
transcription factor binding site evolution in realistic
ways [24,46,47]. Each of these simulators makes specific

Kim and Sinha BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:54
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/54

Page 9 of 13

Table 1 Performance of indel annotation tools compared by different measures (ICA, IRA, IAC) on five-species
alignments.
ICAa

IRAb

IACc (sensitivity)

IACc (specificity)

Species

Indelign

sbInfer

Indelign

sbInfer

Indelign

sbInfer

Indelign

sbInfer

D. sim

0.06

0.06

1.00

1.01

0.97

0.96

0.99

0.99

D. mel

0.04

0.04

1.00

1.01

0.99

0.99

0.99

0.98

D. yak

0.06

0.05

1.00

1.01

0.98

0.97

0.97

0.98

D. ana

0.08

0.07

1.00

1.00

0.93

0.91

0.93

0.96

D. pse

0.24

0.27

1.02

1.03

0.94

0.96

0.79

0.79

a

Indel Count Agreement (optimal value = 0)
b
Indel Ratio Agreement (optimal value = 1)
c
Indel Annotation Coverage (optimal value = 1)

assumptions about cis-regulatory architecture, vis-a-vis
the density and evolution of binding sites. However, it is
not yet clear which, if any, of these different assumed
models of regulatory sequence evolution is most suited
to represent the variability in constraint patterns across
different regions of the genome. Our simplistic “conserved block” model (borrowed from [37]) seems to be a
good approximation that captures the most prominent
patterns in orthologous non-coding sequences, in terms
of alignment difficulty. We expect that future research
on more realistic models of cis-regulatory architecture
will lead us to replace the alternating arrangement of
conserved blocks and faster evolving segments with a
pattern more in line with reality. Future work may also
include careful modeling of genomic repeats and repeat
generating evolutionary events, since repeat-rich genomes may present additional challenges for the alignment task. Our proposed framework of sampling
evolutionary parameters before running the simulation
process will remain equally important in future benchmarks that implement such sophisticated models.
Some clarification is in order with respect to our manner of choosing substitution rates for the simulation
process, since it marks a significant departure from traditional thinking. The latter, as embodied in the work of
Pollard et al. [21], prescribes that the “unconstrained”
parts of the sequence evolve with nucleotide substitution
rate equal to that infered from synonymous mutations
in the nearby gene (or average over all genes). This rate
(~2.4 substitutions/site for D. melanogaster - D. pseudoobscura) is widely different from the value observed
in real non-coding sequence alignments (~0.4 substitutions/site). One could argue that this gap may be offset
if we set an appropriate frequency of conserved positions (with very low rates), resulting in an average substitution rate that is close to the empirically observed
value. However, this turned out not be the case for any
realistic setting of the frequency of conserved positions
(data not shown). We therefore chose to be guided by
existing estimates of the frequency and length distribution of conserved blocks, with substitution rates that are

some constant b (see Methods) times the “neutral” rate
outside of the blocks, and set this neutral rate so that
the average rate for the entire sequence matches
observed values. Our choice reflects the philosophy that
simulated data sets ought to match real data in terms of
various evolutionary statistics and net alignment difficulty, and the discordance of the used neutral rate from
synonymous substitution rates is ignored for the sake of
practicality.
To our knowledge, no previous benchmarking study
has evaluated the effect of insertions and deletions on
the performance of alignment tools. Some studies
[21-25] have used equal frequencies for insertions and
deletions and focused on the collective effects of indels.
Here, we attempted to elucidate the differing effects of
insertions and deletions by separately summarizing
results for the two extreme cases where the number of
insertions is at least two times the frequency of deletions and vice versa. The results were surprising, and
indicated that most multiple alignment tools find it
harder to accurately align data sets with an excess of
insertions than those with more deletions (Figures 3 and
4). Löytynoja and Goldman [48] offered valuable insight
into a possible source of this asymmetry, pointing out
that progressive alignment methods (a category to
which all the methods tested here belong) “end up penalizing single insertion events multiple times”. We speculate therefore, as they did, that claims about insertion/
deletion frequencies along the genome should be preceded by an examination of the alignment method’s
accuracy in regimes of high insertion frequency.
Finally, a note about our findings on insertion/deletion
annotation. Indelign [12] is a probabilistic tool that
annotates insertions and deletions by maximum likelihood training of an evolutionary model. sbInfer [7] is a
greedy algorithm that reconstructs ancestral sequences
based on the maximum parsimony principle, and therefore allows us to infer insertion/deletion annotations. To
assess these two tools without being confounded by
errors of an alignment program, we examined their performance on the true alignments. We found the two

Kim and Sinha BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:54
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/54

programs to have comparable accuracy on our benchmark for the five Drosophila species. While the accuracy
was close to optimal on four of the five terminal
branches, we observed that both tools over-estimate
insertions as well as deletions on the longest branch
(leading to D. pseudoobscura), while accurately predicting the ratio of insertions to deletions. We note that the
D. pseudoobscura branch in the phylogenetic tree originates from the root of the tree, and we would expect to
have better annotation results for this branch if an
appropriate outgroup species was used. For studies that
intend to use insertion to deletion ratio profiling to
identify loci with unusual evolutionary patterns (e.g., [9])
it may be safe to examine all five terminal branches of
this tree; however, for the more common requirement
of accurately annotating insertion and deletion events, e.
g., to study gain and loss patterns of specific classes of
transcription factor binding sites [49], we do not recommend using events on the D. pseudoobscura branch.

Conclusions
We have presented a novel method for generating
benchmarks of non-coding sequence alignments, that
relies on a spectrum of parameter values reflecting the
genome-wide variation of those parameters. We have
shown our benchmarks to accurately match the difficulty of aligning real data, by taking advantage of recent
developments in measurement of alignment quality.
Benchmark evaluations on Drosophila non-coding
sequences suggest a greater accuracy of multiple alignment tools (in this domain) than previously reported,
and points to a clear asymmetry in the handling of
insertions versus deletions by most alignment tools.
Methods
Drosophila non-coding sequences and alignments

Whole-genome multiple alignments of Drosophila genome sequences (release 5) with 14 insects were downloaded from UCSC Genome Browser Database [1] and
all exon positions were masked with symbol “N”. An
initial phylogeny was obtained from the AAA Drosophila website [50]. In cases where two sibling species are
very close to each other, we chose one of them to
include in this analysis leading to the following set of
eight species: D. melanogaster, D. simulans, D. yakuba,
D. ananassae, D. pseudoobscura, D. willistoni, D. mojavensis, and D. grimshawi. We extracted fragments of the
genome-wide multiple alignments that have sequences
for all eight species, whose minimum length is 1 Kbp,
and which have less than 50% of their length masked (a
total of 11867 alignment fragments with a total length
of ~17 Mbp D. melanogaster sequences). The extracted
alignments were used to estimate simulation parameter
values, as described below. The distribution of HoT

Page 10 of 13

alignment quality scores [27] was computed from the
sequences in these alignments by realigning them using
Pecan [33].
Non-coding sequence simulation by traditional method

Median branch lengths of a phylogenetic tree for eight
Drosophila species were estimated from the multiple
alignments described above, using Paml [51]. This phylogenetic tree is shown in Additional file 9. This tree
was provided as input to the Dawg simulation program
[18], with the evolutionary model being F81 [52], substitution to indel ratio set to 10:1 [21] and insertion to
deletion ratio set to 1:1. We modified the Dawg program to model indel lengths as following a mixture of
two geometric distributions, following [49], with parameters trained from the above multiple alignments and
Indelign-based annotation of insertions and deletions.
We also modified Dawg to allow it to simulate a
sequence that includes so-called “conserved blocks”,
which are contiguous short segments of varying length,
where the evolutionary rate is different from the rest of
the sequence. Such conserved blocks were made to
cover 20% of the sequence length on average, and their
evolutionary rate was 10% of that outside the blocks
[21]. The length distribution of the conserved blocks
was obtained from Bergman and Kreitman [37]. The
length of root sequences in the simulation was 10 Kbp
[21] and the root sequence was sampled from a random
pool of 10 Kbp non-coding segments of the D. melanogaster genome.
The estimated median branch lengths mentioned
above reflect an average of the rates in conserved and
non-conserved regions of real non-coding sequences,
whereas the phylogeny input to Dawg by definition
represents the substitution rate outside of blocks. Therefore, the branch lengths of the phylogeny were adjusted
based on the specified coverage of conserved blocks and
their evolutionary rates. Let to be the overall evolutionary rate (the estimated branch length), tn be the unconstrained evolutionary rate (values provided to the
simulation program), a be the fraction of sequence
length that falls into conserved blocks, and b be the
ratio of the evolutionary rate of conserved blocks to that
outside blocks. Then we have:
t o      t n  (1   )  t n
Distributions of simulation parameter values

The collection of branch lengths estimated from each
fragment of multiple alignments described above, using
Paml, was used to produce the distribution of branch
lengths. As was done in the traditional simulation
method, these branch lengths were adjusted by the
above formula. The distributions of the ratio of

Kim and Sinha BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:54
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/54

substitutions to indels and the ratio of insertions to
deletions were estimated from the above multiple alignments and Indelign-based annotation of insertions and
deletions. The length distribution of indels was determined as in the traditional simulation method. To
obtain the genome-wide distribution of the fraction of
conserved blocks, we collected Phastcons [35] conservation scores from UCSC Genome Browser Database [1],
scanned multiple alignments of Drosophila non-coding
sequences and marked consecutive columns as a conserved block if the following two conditions hold: (i)
they span at least 10 consecutive non-gapped columns
and (ii) Phastcons scores of all columns are greater than
or equal to 0.9 (see Additional file 10 for the distribution of the fraction of conserved blocks). The relative
evolutionary rate of conserved blocks was set to the
fixed value of 0.1, as in the traditional simulation. The
length of a root sequence was set to 1 Kbp (average
length of non-coding sequences in the extracted fragments of Drosophila alignments) and the root sequence
was sampled from the D. melanogaster non-coding genome (see Additional file 11 for various descriptive statistics of traditional and new benchmarks).
Evaluation of alignment programs on Pollard et al.
benchmark

The benchmark generated by Pollard et al. [21] parameterizes each data set by a single value (substitutions per
site) for the parameter, divergence distance. They provided estimate of this parameter value for the D. melanogaster and D. pseudoobscura pair (mean 2.4 and
median 2.24) to link their simulations to the pair of species. They later updated this value in a new phylogeny
http://www.danielpollard.com/trees.html. We used their
divergence estimates from the latter phylogeny and the
benchmark they prescribed for this level of divergence,
and evaluated the alignment programs ourselves on this
benchmark.
Evaluation measures for indel annotation schemes

Indel Count Agreement is defined by the following formula, where NIt and NDt are true numbers of insertions
and deletions, and NIe and NDe are predicted numbers
of insertions and deletions.
(N It  N Ie ) 2 (N Dt  N De ) 2
(N It ) 2 (N Dt ) 2

Indel Ratio Agreement is defined by the following formula, with notation as above:
N Ie (N Ie  N De )
N It (N It  N Dt )

Page 11 of 13

Indel Annotation Coverage is the fraction of indel
positions on which the two annotations agree.
Modification of Indelign

The time complexity of the Indelign program is exponential in the number of “conditionally dependent
blocks” and this prohibits fast annotation of certain data
sets with relatively large numbers of species [10]. To
reduce the time complexity, when there are more conditionally dependent blocks than a predefined threshold,
the alignment is heuristically partitioned by a block that
has the smallest effect on the final indel annotation.
This process is repeated until all dependent blocks with
size greater than the threshold are resolved.
Supplementary website

Source code for the modified Dawg and Indelign programs, phylogenetic trees, simulated sequences and their
alignments, and computed alignments by six alignment
tools are available from http://europa.cs.uiuc.edu/RealisticAlignmentBenchmarks/.
Additional file 1: Performance of multiple alignment tools
compared by alignment sensitivity. The scores were calculated by
using all synthetic data sets (left panel), and by using only data sets
where the expected number of insertions is two times more than the
number of deletions or vice versa (middle and right panels respectively).
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2105-1154-S1.DOC ]
Additional file 2: Performance of multiple alignment tools
compared by alignment specificity. The scores were calculated by
using all synthetic data sets (left panel), and by using only data sets
where the expected number of insertions is two times more than the
number of deletions or vice versa (middle and right panels respectively).
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2105-1154-S2.DOC ]
Additional file 3: An example data set from the benchmark shown (in
part) with true alignment (top panel) and alignments computed by each
different programs.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2105-1154-S3.DOC ]
Additional file 4: Dependence of performance (sensitivity (left) and
specificity (right)) of each alignment program on various descriptive
statistics of the data sets.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2105-1154-S4.DOC ]
Additional file 5: Performance of multiple alignment tools
compared by alignment sensitivity of pairs of species. The scores
were calculated by using all synthetic data sets (left panel), and by using
only data sets where the expected number of insertions is two times
more than the number of deletions or vice versa (middle and right
panels respectively).
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2105-1154-S5.DOC ]
Additional file 6: Performance of multiple alignment tools
compared by alignment specificity of pairs of species. The scores
were calculated by using all synthetic data sets (left panel), and by using
only data sets where the expected number of insertions is two times
more than the number of deletions or vice versa (middle and right
panels respectively).

Kim and Sinha BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:54
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/54

Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2105-1154-S6.DOC ]
Additional file 7: Comparison of estimated alignment sensitivity and
specificity, using Mlagan or Pecan, as obtained from the Pollard et al. [21]
benchmark and from our benchmark.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2105-1154-S7.DOC ]
Additional file 8: Comparison of estimated alignment sensitivity and
specificity as obtained from the Pollard et al. benchmark.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2105-1154-S8.DOC ]
Additional file 9: Phylogenetic trees and branch lengths in Newick
format.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2105-1154-S9.TXT ]
Additional file 10: Genome-wide distribution of the fraction of
conserved blocks estimated by using Phastcons conservation scores and
multiple alignments of Drosophila non-coding sequences obtained from
UCSC Genome Browser Database.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2105-1154-S10.DOC ]
Additional file 11: Descriptive statistics of traditional and new
benchmarks.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2105-1154-S11.DOC ]

Page 12 of 13

5.
6.
7.

8.

9.

10.
11.
12.

13.
14.

15.

16.

17.

18.
Abbreviations
Indel: insertion and deletion; SPS: sum-of-pair score; CS: column score
Acknowledgements
This work was supported in part by the NSF (CAREER Grant DBI 0746303 to
SS) and the NIH (Grant 1R01GM085233-01 to SS). We are thankful to Mathieu
Blanchette for sharing the sbInfer software for indel annotation.
Author details
1
Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at UrbanaChampaign, Urbana, IL 61801, USA. 2Institute for Genomic Biology, University
of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801, USA.
Authors’ contributions
JK and SS conceived of the study, participated in its design, performed the
analysis, and drafted the manuscript. JK developed the software and
performed experiments. Both authors read and approved the final
manuscript.
Received: 7 August 2009
Accepted: 26 January 2010 Published: 26 January 2010
References
1. Karolchik D, Kuhn RM, Baertsch R, Barber GP, Clawson H, Diekhans M,
Giardine B, Harte RA, Hinrichs AS, Hsu F, et al: The UCSC Genome Browser
Database: 2008 update. Nucleic Acids Res 2008, 36:D773-779.
2. Clark AG, Eisen MB, Smith DR, Bergman CM, Oliver B, Markow TA,
Kaufman TC, Kellis M, Gelbart W, Iyer VN, et al: Evolution of genes and
genomes on the Drosophila phylogeny. Nature 2007, 450:203-218.
3. Simossis V, Kleinjung J, Heringa J: An overview of multiple sequence
alignment. Curr Protoc Bioinformatics 2003, Chapter 3(Unit 3):7.
4. Edgar RC, Batzoglou S: Multiple sequence alignment. Curr Opin Struct Biol
2006, 16:368-373.

19.
20.
21.

22.
23.
24.

25.

26.

27.
28.

29.

30.
31.

Notredame C: Recent evolutions of multiple sequence alignment
algorithms. PLoS Comput Biol 2007, 3:e123.
Pirovano W, Heringa J: Multiple sequence alignment. Methods Mol Biol
2008, 452:143-161.
Blanchette M, Green ED, Miller W, Haussler D: Reconstructing large regions
of an ancestral mammalian genome in silico. Genome Res 2004,
14:2412-2423.
Chindelevitch L, Li Z, Blais E, Blanchette M: On the inference of
parsimonious indel evolutionary scenarios. J Bioinform Comput Biol 2006,
4:721-744.
Snir S, Pachter L: Phylogenetic profiling of insertions and deletions in
vertebrate genomes. Research in Computational Molecular Biology,
Proceedings 2006, 3909:265-280.
Bradley RK, Holmes I: Transducers: an emerging probabilistic framework
for modeling indels on trees. Bioinformatics 2007, 23:3258-3262.
Diallo AB, Makarenkov V, Blanchette M: Exact and heuristic algorithms for
the Indel Maximum Likelihood Problem. J Comput Biol 2007, 14:446-461.
Kim J, Sinha S: Indelign: a probabilistic framework for annotation of
insertions and deletions in a multiple alignment. Bioinformatics 2007,
23:289-297.
Sinha S, Siggia ED: Sequence turnover and tandem repeats in cisregulatory modules in drosophila. Mol Biol Evol 2005, 22:874-885.
Tian D, Wang Q, Zhang P, Araki H, Yang S, Kreitman M, Nagylaki T,
Hudson R, Bergelson J, Chen JQ: Single-nucleotide mutation rate
increases close to insertions/deletions in eukaryotes. Nature 2008,
455:105-108.
Mizuguchi K, Deane CM, Blundell TL, Overington JP: HOMSTRAD: a
database of protein structure alignments for homologous families.
Protein Sci 1998, 7:2469-2471.
Thompson JD, Koehl P, Ripp R, Poch O: BAliBASE 3.0: latest developments
of the multiple sequence alignment benchmark. Proteins 2005,
61:127-136.
Van Walle I, Lasters I, Wyns L: SABmark–a benchmark for sequence
alignment that covers the entire known fold space. Bioinformatics 2005,
21:1267-1268.
Cartwright RA: DNA assembly with gaps (Dawg): simulating sequence
evolution. Bioinformatics 2005, 21(Suppl 3):iii31-38.
Stoye J, Evers D, Meyer F: Rose: generating sequence families.
Bioinformatics 1998, 14:157-163.
Fletcher W, Yang Z: INDELible: a flexible simulator of biological sequence
evolution. Mol Biol Evol 2009, 26:1879-1888.
Pollard DA, Bergman CM, Stoye J, Celniker SE, Eisen MB: Benchmarking
tools for the alignment of functional noncoding DNA. BMC Bioinformatics
2004, 5:6.
Rosenberg MS: Multiple sequence alignment accuracy and evolutionary
distance estimation. BMC Bioinformatics 2005, 6:278.
Ogdenw TH, Rosenberg MS: Multiple sequence alignment accuracy and
phylogenetic inference. Syst Biol 2006, 55:314-328.
Pollard DA, Moses AM, Iyer VN, Eisen MB: Detecting the limits of
regulatory element conservation and divergence estimation using
pairwise and multiple alignments. BMC Bioinformatics 2006, 7:376.
Lunter G, Rocco A, Mimouni N, Heger A, Caldeira A, Hein J: Uncertainty in
homology inferences: assessing and improving genomic sequence
alignment. Genome Res 2008, 18:298-309.
Dress AW, Flamm C, Fritzsch G, Grunewald S, Kruspe M, Prohaska SJ,
Stadler PF: Noisy: identification of problematic columns in multiple
sequence alignments. Algorithms Mol Biol 2008, 3:7.
Landan G, Graur D: Heads or tails: a simple reliability check for multiple
sequence alignments. Mol Biol Evol 2007, 24:1380-1383.
Larkin MA, Blackshields G, Brown NP, Chenna R, McGettigan PA,
McWilliam H, Valentin F, Wallace IM, Wilm A, Lopez R, et al: Clustal W and
Clustal X version 2.0. Bioinformatics 2007, 23:2947-2948.
Subramanian AR, Kaufmann M, Morgenstern B: DIALIGN-TX: greedy and
progressive approaches for segment-based multiple sequence
alignment. Algorithms Mol Biol 2008, 3:6.
Katoh K, Toh H: Recent developments in the MAFFT multiple sequence
alignment program. Brief Bioinform 2008, 9:286-298.
Bray N, Pachter L: MAVID: constrained ancestral alignment of multiple
sequences. Genome Res 2004, 14:693-699.

Kim and Sinha BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:54
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/54

Page 13 of 13

32. Brudno M, Do CB, Cooper GM, Kim MF, Davydov E, Green ED, Sidow A,
Batzoglou S: LAGAN and Multi-LAGAN: efficient tools for large-scale
multiple alignment of genomic DNA. Genome Res 2003, 13:721-731.
33. Paten B, Herrero J, Beal K, Birney E: Sequence progressive alignment, a
framework for practical large-scale probabilistic consistency alignment.
Bioinformatics 2009, 25:295-301.
34. Bejerano G, Pheasant M, Makunin I, Stephen S, Kent WJ, Mattick JS,
Haussler D: Ultraconserved elements in the human genome. Science 2004,
304:1321-1325.
35. Siepel A, Bejerano G, Pedersen JS, Hinrichs AS, Hou M, Rosenbloom K,
Clawson H, Spieth J, Hillier LW, Richards S, et al: Evolutionarily conserved
elements in vertebrate, insect, worm, and yeast genomes. Genome Res
2005, 15:1034-1050.
36. Lunter G, Ponting CP, Hein J: Genome-wide identification of human
functional DNA using a neutral indel model. PLoS Comput Biol 2006, 2:e5.
37. Bergman CM, Kreitman M: Analysis of conserved noncoding DNA in
Drosophila reveals similar constraints in intergenic and intronic
sequences. Genome Res 2001, 11:1335-1345.
38. Hall BG: How well does the HoT score reflect sequence alignment
accuracy?. Mol Biol Evol 2008, 25:1576-1580.
39. Dempster AP, Laird NM, Rubin DB: Maximum Likelihood from Incomplete
Data Via EM Algorithm. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B
(Methodological) 1977, 39:1-38.
40. Blanchette M, Kent WJ, Riemer C, Elnitski L, Smit AF, Roskin KM, Baertsch R,
Rosenbloom K, Clawson H, Green ED, et al: Aligning multiple genomic
sequences with the threaded blockset aligner. Genome Res 2004,
14:708-715.
41. Bradley RK, Roberts A, Smoot M, Juvekar S, Do J, Dewey C, Holmes I,
Pachter L: Fast statistical alignment. PLoS Comput Biol 2009, 5:e1000392.
42. DrosOCB a high resolution map of conserved non coding sequences in
Drosophila. http://arxiv.org/abs/0710.1570.
43. Prakash A, Tompa M: Statistics of local multiple alignments. Bioinformatics
2005, 21(Suppl 1):i344-350.
44. Prakash A, Tompa M: Measuring the accuracy of genome-size multiple
alignments. Genome Biol 2007, 8:R124.
45. Landan G, Graur D: Local reliability measures from sets of co-optimal
multiple sequence alignments. Pac Symp Biocomput 2008, 15-24.
46. Huang W, Nevins JR, Ohler U: Phylogenetic simulation of promoter
evolution: estimation and modeling of binding site turnover events and
assessment of their impact on alignment tools. Genome Biol 2007, 8:R225.
47. He X, Ling X, Sinha S: Alignment and prediction of cis-regulatory
modules based on a probabilistic model of evolution. PLoS Comput Biol
2009, 5:e1000299.
48. Loytynoja A, Goldman N: An algorithm for progressive multiple
alignment of sequences with insertions. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005,
102:10557-10562.
49. Kim J, He X, Sinha S: Evolution of regulatory sequences in 12 Drosophila
species. PLoS Genet 2009, 5:e1000330.
50. AAA Drosophila website. http://rana.lbl.gov/drosophila/index.html.
51. Yang Z: PAML 4: phylogenetic analysis by maximum likelihood. Mol Biol
Evol 2007, 24:1586-1591.
52. Felsenstein J: Evolutionary trees from DNA sequences: a maximum
likelihood approach. J Mol Evol 1981, 17:368-376.
doi:10.1186/1471-2105-11-54
Cite this article as: Kim and Sinha: Towards realistic benchmarks for
multiple alignments of non-coding sequences. BMC Bioinformatics 2010
11:54.

Publish with Bio Med Central and every
scientist can read your work free of charge
"BioMed Central will be the most significant development for
disseminating the results of biomedical researc h in our lifetime."
Sir Paul Nurse, Cancer Research UK

Your research papers will be:
available free of charge to the entire biomedical community
peer reviewed and published immediately upon acceptance
cited in PubMed and archived on PubMed Central
yours — you keep the copyright
Submit your manuscript here:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/info/publishing_adv.asp

BioMedcentral

</pre>
</body>
</html>
