<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>The proteomic complexity and rise of the primordial ancestor of diversified life</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:140. doi:10.1186/1471-2148-11-140"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Kyung Mo Kim"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
The proteomic complexity and rise of the
primordial ancestor of diversified life
Kim and Caetano-Anollés

Kim and Caetano-Anollés BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:140
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/140 (25 May 2011)

Kim and Caetano-Anollés BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:140
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/140

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

The proteomic complexity and rise of the
primordial ancestor of diversified life
Kyung Mo Kim1,2 and Gustavo Caetano-Anollés1*

Abstract
Background: The last universal common ancestor represents the primordial cellular organism from which
diversified life was derived. This urancestor accumulated genetic information before the rise of organismal lineages
and is considered to be either a simple ‘progenote’ organism with a rudimentary translational apparatus or a more
complex ‘cenancestor’ with almost all essential biological processes. Recent comparative genomic studies support
the latter model and propose that the urancestor was similar to modern organisms in terms of gene content.
However, most of these studies were based on molecular sequences, which are fast evolving and of limited value
for deep evolutionary explorations.
Results: Here we engage in a phylogenomic study of protein domain structure in the proteomes of 420 free-living
fully sequenced organisms. Domains were defined at the highly conserved fold superfamily (FSF) level of structural
classification and an iterative phylogenomic approach was used to reconstruct max_set and min_set FSF repertoires
as upper and lower bounds of the urancestral proteome. While the functional make up of the urancestral sets was
complex, they represent only 5-11% of the 1,420 FSFs of extant proteomes and their make up and reuse was at
least 5 and 3 times smaller than proteomes of free-living organisms, repectively. Trees of proteomes reconstructed
directly from FSFs or from molecular functions, which included the max_set and min_set as articial taxa, showed
that urancestors were always placed at their base and rooted the tree of life in Archaea. Finally, a molecular clock
of FSFs suggests the min_set reflects urancestral genetic make up more reliably and confirms diversified life
emerged about 2.9 billion years ago during the start of planet oxygenation.
Conclusions: The minimum urancestral FSF set reveals the urancestor had advanced metabolic capabilities, was
especially rich in nucleotide metabolism enzymes, had pathways for the biosynthesis of membrane sn1,2 glycerol
ester and ether lipids, and had crucial elements of translation, including a primordial ribosome with protein
synthesis capabilities. It lacked however fundamental functions, including transcription, processes for extracellular
communication, and enzymes for deoxyribonucleotide synthesis. Proteomic history reveals the urancestor is closer
to a simple progenote organism but harbors a rather complex set of modern molecular functions.

Background
Cellular organisms in the contemporary living world
have been classified into superkingdoms Archaea, Bacteria, and Eukarya [1] ever since archaebacteria were
discovered over three decades ago [2]. Every newly
recorded species of the over a million that have been
described (belonging to the ~107-108 that probably exist
on Earth [3-5]) has failed to escape from the boundary
of the three-superkingdom natural system. This system
* Correspondence: gca@illinois.edu
1
Evolutionary Bioinformatics Laboratory, Department of Crop Science,
University of Illinois, Urbana, IL 61801, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

confers a rigid universal taxonomic structure for a universal ‘tree of life’, a phylogeny that describes how
lineages on Earth diversified from a primordial ancestor.
In phylogenetics, the most basal and ancient (plesiomorphic) node of an evolutionary tree defines a common ancestor of the organismal set (taxa) under study.
Generally, this node is a hypothetical entity, the first of
a chain of ancestors giving rise to each and every organism in the tree. The tree of life defines the last universal
common ancestor (LUCA), an organism responsible for
the emergence of Earth’s primary lineages [6-12]. However, the current tree of life is not universal, i.e. not all
primary lineages are represented in the tree. The tree

© 2011 Kim and Caetano-Anollés; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Kim and Caetano-Anollés BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:140
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/140

describes the evolution of organisms with ribosome-containing cells (ribocells) and does not incorporate viruses
or other lineages that lack ribosomes (virocells), have
biological boundaries that are difficult to define, or are
evolutionarily highly mobile [13,14]. The tree of life may
also have reticulations because of horizontal gene transfer (HGT), convergent evolution, and recruitment processes that complicate the genetic make up of lineages.
While the terms “network” or “rhizome” have been proposed, reticulations often affect the history of organismal components but maintain the integrity of lineages
[15], and all lineages most probably had a single evolutionary origin [16]. LUCA is believed to be a cellular
entity, even though its make up has been considered
contentious [6,17]. Its cellular status was probably
attained progressively, starting with molecular components drawn from the emerging and fuzzy biochemistry
of primordial Earth and ending with more complex biological machinery needed to sustain the integrity of
lineages in an increasingly diversified world. In particular, cell-defining ribosomes evolved from the start as
ribonucleoprotein ensembles [18] but emerged before
the loss of the first protein fold in a superkingdom 2.6
billion years (giga-annum; Ga) ago, a first indication of
clear organism diversification [19,20]. Conceptually, the
primordial ancestor by definition cannot represent a formal lineage; no prior phylogenetic ancestor precedes it,
being first and last of a gradually evolving community of
primordial organisms. Consequently, we regard this primordial ancestral entity as the most basal node of the
tree of life and name it for simplicity the ‘urancestor’
(root ‘ur’ = primitive), a primitive organism that evolved
in a time when improving the molecular make up was
the main focus of the evolutionary progression.
The emergence of the urancestor probably represents
a singular evolutionary chain of events responsible for
the universal genetic code and widely shared biological
structure. However, defining the complexity (or simplicity) of its molecular features (characters) is problematic, as it often depends on the levels of molecular
structure analyzed (e.g., molecular sequence, motifs in
sequence, structural motifs, structural domains), the
rooting of the tree of life, and the methods used for
ancestral character state reconstruction. While it is likely
that the urancestor had functional ribosomal RNA
(rRNA) and some transfer RNA (tRNA) molecules
[6,8,21], as revealed by phylogenetic analysis of RNA
and protein structure [18,22]), and was probably
endowed with functions associated with DNA replication [23], its translational apparatus has been considered
to be rudimentary [6,24]. Penny and Poole [8] later on
expanded urancestral complexity to include besides
translation and DNA replication, transcription, cell division, and regulatory elements of information processing,

Page 2 of 24

suggesting a functionally complex entity much akin to
that of modern life. Comparative genomic studies that
included the first archaeal genome that was sequenced,
Methanococcus jannaschii, resulted in arguable conclusions [25]. Broader comparative analyses of entire genomic repertoires were still inconclusive, supporting the
simple ‘progenote’ model proposed by Woese [6] or the
complex ‘cenancestor’ (sensu [26]) model that equated
the urancestor to modern organisms [7-12]. For example, Koonin [9] traced evolutionary histories of orthologous genes in ~100 genomes using parsimony thinking
and phylogenetic trees of ribosomal proteins and rRNA.
Although the numbers of urancestral genes ranged from
tens to ~1,800 depending on composite parameter
values of rates of differential HGT and gene loss, the
gene set included most of the translation apparatus and
a few transcriptional components but lacked DNA replication regardless of parametric values. In contrast,
Ouzounis and colleagues initially identified ~300 ancient
proteins from homologues of M. jannaschii open reading frames [7]. Except for regulatory elements related to
information (i.e. translation, transcription, etc), proteins
encompassed Penny and Poole’s urancestral functions. A
more recent study of 184 genomes identified 669 orthologous protein families, which cover 561 detailed functional classes that are involved in almost all essential
biological processes of extant life, including translation,
transcription and its regulation, DNA replication,
recombination, and repair, transport and membraneassociated functions, electron transfer, and metabolism
[10]. Similarly, comparison of protein fold structures
among lineages of the three superkingdoms supported
an urancestor with functional complexity similar to that
of extant life [11,27].
Mutation and chromosomal rearrangement change the
sequence of nucleic acids and proteins continuously.
The high pace of sequence change can complicate phylogenetic analysis and character state reconstruction.
Differential evolutionary rates among organismal
lineages, horizontal gene transfer (HGT), and nonorthologous gene displacement can generate phylogenetic artifacts such as long-branch attraction and unrecognized paralogy [8,9,15,28]. This compounds with
difficulty in identifying homology by sequence alignment
[29], the troublesome task of assigning orthologous relationships [28], and the problem of saturation of substitutions [15]. These phylogenetic artifacts can be
responsible for the variable rootings of the tree of life.
Finally, origins of genes can be highly variable depending on reference trees that are used for tracing their
evolutionary histories. Except for a couple of studies
[11,27], all surveys of urancestral molecular repertoires
that were fully based on sequence conservation must be
considered susceptible to these problems.

Kim and Caetano-Anollés BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:140
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/140

In this study we focus on the three-dimensional (3D)
structure of protein domains that result from the folding
of polypeptide chains. These structures are grouped into
fold families (FF), fold superfamilies (FSFs), and folds (F)
in a robust hierarchical classification scheme, the structural classification of proteins (SCOP)[30]. In particular,
we focus on FSFs, groups of FFs (protein structures that
are homologous based on sequence identity) that share
structural and functional features suggestive of a common evolutionary origin. SCOP currently defines ~2,000
FSFs, and ~7 × 107 proteins present in ~1,124 completely sequenced genomes (October 2009)[31] have been
assigned to at least one FSF by scanning with hidden
Markov models (HMMs)[32]. The relatively small number of FFs, FSFs, and Fs present in nature indicates protein structure is much more conserved than sequence
and is refractory to evolutionary change [27]. In fact, a
comparative analysis of structurally aligned protein
domains and aligned protein sequences showed structures are 3-10 times more conserved than sequences
[33]. The structures are therefore good phylogenetic
markers for deep events in evolutionary history. The
large and growing number of genomic sequences and
their associated FSF assignments also guarantees a
broad organismal census. Moreover, the evolutionary
conservation and deep phylogenetic signal of FSFs has
been repeatedly verified by recovery of reliable phyletic
patterns describing the evolution of the three superkingdoms [34,35] and by successful exploration of the origin
of modern metabolic networks [36]. All of these features
and the fact that domains diversify mostly by vertical
descent [37-39] make domain structure extremely useful
for the evolutionary study of proteomes and urancestral
protein repertoires.
Here we build a tree of life using a census of FSF
domains in 420 free-living (FL) proteomes and employ
an iterative strategy to reconstruct the urancestral proteome (Figure 1). Initially, FSFs that are placed in the
root branch of the tree are assigned to the urancestor.
We reason that FSFs that appear after the division of
the three superkingdoms must be absent in a nondiversified organismal world. We therefore exclude
FSFs of relatively recent age iteratively, using FSFs in
the root branch of an initial proteome tree as phylogenetic characters for reconstructing a new tree. The
procedure identifies a set of urancestral FSFs that is
shielded from the so-called ‘modern effect’, the impact
of recent convergent evolutionary processes on ancient
repertoires [40]. Finally, biological functions associated
with upper and lower bounds of an urancestral proteome are annotated using a coarse-grained functional
classification of FSFs [41]. This information served to
define the molecular functions and biological processes
of the primordial ancestor of diversified life and

Page 3 of 24

allowed to time the actual appearance of this elusive
but crucial ancestral entity.

Results
Genomic census and reconstruction of a Tree of Life

In this study we conducted a genomic census of protein
domains at FSF level of structural complexity in organisms that have been completely sequenced and used this
information to build trees of life describing the evolution of proteomes. We first analyzed 645 complete proteomes in 49 archaeal, 421 bacterial, and 175 eukaryotic
species (the Total set). Using an E-value cutoff of 10-4,
we extracted reliable proteomic HMM hits for 1,531
FSFs, 1,446 of which covered ca. 80% of the total FSFs
defined in SCOP. We then generated intrinsically rooted
phylogenomic trees directly from FSF abundances in the
645 proteomes. A most parsimonious reconstruction of
a tree of life (Total-tree) showed that organisms in the
three superkingdoms formed distinct groups (Additional
file 1, Figure S1). Eukaryotic proteomes were placed in a
monophyletic group that was supported by a 50% bootstrap support (BS) value. In turn, archaeal and bacterial
proteomes were para- and polyphyletically grouped,
respectively. A manual analysis of organismal lifestyles
using various sources of information revealed that proteomes from obligate and non-obligate parasitic organisms (225 in total) were distributed throughout the tree
but generally occupied the most ancient branches of the
superkingdom groups (e.g. Mycoplasma spp. and Rickettsia spp. in Bacteria; Cryptosporidium spp. and Plasmodium spp. in Eukarya). Basal organisms included
notable obligate parasites (N. equitans in Archaea,
Chlorobium chlorochromatii in Bacteria, and Encephalitozoon cuniculi in Eukarya).
The genomes of organisms that are parasitic or that
establish symbiotic relationships with other organisms
have frequently experienced reductive evolution, discarding enzymatic and cellular machineries in exchange
for resources from their hosts. Since the inclusion of
these genomes can lead to incorrect phylogenetic trees
[15,42], we excluded genomes from all but 420 FL
organisms. This FL set included 48 archaeal, 239 bacterial, and 133 eukaryotic organisms. The exclusion of
non-FL genomes resulted in 26 FSFs that were absent in
the proteomes of FL organisms. We therefore reconstructed a most parsimonious rooted tree that described
the evolution of FL organisms from genomic abundances of the remaining 1,420 FSF. The tree of FL proteomes (FL-tree) also supported the trichotomy of the
superkingdoms (Figure 1A). Unlike the Total-tree, the
FL-tree showed that archaeal species formed a polyphyletic group and were basal in the tree. The proteomes of
Bacteria and Eukarya formed strong monophyletic
groups supported by 88 and 100% BS values,

Kim and Caetano-Anollés BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:140
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/140

Page 4 of 24

Figure 1 Phylogenomic trees of proteomes and domain structures. A. Phylogenomic tree of proteomes describing the evolution of 420 FL
organisms. One most parsimonious tree was recovered from an analysis of the abundances of 1,420 FSFs in the proteomes of the FL organisms
(1,388 parsimoniously informative sites; 130,844 steps; CI = 0.075; RI = 0.774; g1 = -0.199). Taxa are proteomes and characters are FSFs. Nonparametric bootstrap values that have more than 50% supports were shown above or below branches that cluster the superkingdoms or much
higher groups. Terminal leaves of Archaea, Bacteria, and Eukarya were labeled in red, blue, and cyan, respectively. B. A phylogenomic tree of
protein domain structure describing the evolution of 1,420 FSFs. One most parsimonious tree was recovered from analysis of genomic
abundances of FSFs in 420 FL proteomes (420 parsimoniously informative sites; 201,838 steps; CI = 0.046; RI = 0.806; g1 = -0.0187). Taxa are FSFs
and characters are proteomes. Terminal leaves were not labeled, since they would not be legible. INSET: A timeline was unfolded from the tree
of FSFs using a PERL script that calculates the relative age (node distance; nd) of individual FSFs by counting the number of internal nodes
along a lineage from the root to a terminal node on a relative 0-1 scale. The bar diagram shows ranges of age (nd) for FSFs that are unique to
superkingdoms (A, B, or E) or are shared by two (AB, AE, or BE) or all (ABE) superkingdoms. The basal_set represents the set of FSFs that
appeared before the first appearance of an FSF not shared by all superkingdoms, a BE FSF.

Kim and Caetano-Anollés BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:140
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/140

respectively. A sister-clade relationship between Bacteria
and Eukarya existed but was poorly supported (57% BS).
While statistics describing the skewness [43] of the
Total-tree were close to zero (g1 = -0.065), the FL-tree
had more significant phylogenetic structure (g1 = -0.199,
P < 0.01). Our focus therefore centered on FL-tree
reconstructions.
In the FL-tree, the number of bacterial proteomes
dominates those of organisms in other superkingdoms.
It is thus possible to argue that the bias of sampled proteomes per superkingdom can cause long-branch attraction, which can eventually lead to incorrect deep
phylogenetic relationships. We thus sampled equal numbers of proteomes per superkingdom and replicated
trees of proteomes. We first chose only one proteome
per genus in Archaea because the numbers of proteomes vary depending on individual archaeal genera.
As a result, we selected 34 out of 48 archaeal proteomes. We then classified bacterial and eukaryal proteomes at the phylum level of the two superkingdoms.
While some phyla contained large number of proteomes
(e.g., 50 proteomes in Firmicutes), some other contained
very few (e.g., only two proteomes in Acidobacteria).
We thus randomly sampled bacterial and eukaryal proteomes whose numbers are proportional to the size of
corresponding phyla and then adjusted the number of
sampled proteomes per superkingdom to the sample
size of Archaea (34 proteomes). By following the same
steps described in Methods, the genomic abundances of
1,370 FSFs in the balanced set of 102 proteomes
resulted in one most parsimonious tree (Additional file
1, Figure S2). The phylogenetic relationships among the
three superkingdoms that we found in the FL-tree of
420 proteomes ([Archaea, [Bacteria, Eukarya]]; Figure
1A) were consistently present in the newly reconstructed tree (Additional file 1, Figure S2). Furthermore,
monophyly of Bacteria and Eukarya, and paraphyly of
Archaea were maintained. These results indicate our
phylogenetic approach based on genomic abundance is
robust against uneven sampling of proteomes in
superkingdoms.
Iterative refinement to identify urancestral FSFs

We traced gains and losses (character state changes) of
characters (FSFs) along the branches of the FL-tree
using the APOLIST option in PAUP* [44]. A set of 352
plesiomorphic FSF characters (the 352_set) was positioned at the root branch. Most FSFs in the 352_set
were present in the three superkingdoms (Figure 2A).
These ancient FSFs exhibited only gains (no losses were
detected) and were assigned as initial set of characters
to each of 30 different iterative chains to define the set
of urancestral FSFs. In individual chains, FSFs that are
positioned at the root branch of the Xth proteome tree

Page 5 of 24

were used as character set for building the (X+1)th proteome tree, where the iteration number X ranges from 0
to 49. All of the proteome trees that were generated
during the iterations showed absence of loss of FSFs in
their root branches. The numbers of distinct FSFs and
tree lengths decreased dramatically in early iterations of
all the chains, especially before iteration 10, and converged to values with little variance (Figure 2B). Some
of the iterations produced two or more equally parsimonious trees. The numbers of plesiomorphic FSFs and
tree lengths for over 1,500 most parsimonious trees that
were retained ranged from 152 to 219 and from 17,576
to 18,215 steps, respectively. The minimal set of 152
FSFs was observed in 107 iterations of four different
chains (e.g., iterations 35 to 50 of chain 26; Figure 2B).
However, one most parsimonious tree (iteration 36 of
chain 26) belonged to the set of trees that generated the
smallest number of the FSFs (152; Figure 2B).
In general, some of character-state changes on a given
phylogenetic tree can be ambiguous. That is, these
changes can occur on different branches without increase
or decrease in the number of steps of the tree. In the root
branch of the FL-tree, 50 out of the 352 FSFs had character-state changes that were ambiguously assigned. However, the ambiguity sharply decreased in the early
iterations of every chain as shown in Additional file 1,
Figure S3. Consequently, all of the 152 FSFs that were
obtained from iteration 36 onwards of chain 26 had
purely unambiguous character-state changes.
To remove FSFs that might be derived from ancient
HGT or convergent evolutionary processes, we used
information in a rooted tree of domain structure that
describes the evolution of 1,420 FSFs (taxa) and was
reconstructed from FSF abundance in the proteomes of
420 FL organisms (characters). In this tree, the most
basal 130 FSFs were present in the three superkingdoms
and appeared before the rise of the first FSF that was
completely lost in a superkingdom (Archaea) (Figure
1B). The intersection of this ancient set of 130 FSFs
with the set of 152 FSFs defined 70 urancestral FSFs.
Iteration analysis of this new urancestral FSF set with
the same numbers of chains and iterations showed there
was no further decrease in the number of FSFs,
although tree lengths varied slightly from 10,271 to
10,284 steps. We therefore define the sets of 152 and 70
urancestral FSFs as the maximum (max_set) and minimum (min_set) boundaries of the urancestral FSF repertoire, respectively. The biological rationale for the use of
the iterative analysis and the tree of domain structures
can be found in Discussion.
Taxonomic distribution of urancestral FSFs

Under the 3-superkingdom taxonomic system, an individual FSF can be unique to superkingdom Archaea (A),

Kim and Caetano-Anollés BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:140
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/140

Page 6 of 24

Figure 2 Defining urancestral FSFs by serial and iterative phylogenetic and character state reconstruction analysis. A. Venn diagrams
with seven cells describing the distribution of FSFs in the three superkingdoms of life, Archaea (A), Bacteria (B), and Eukarya (E), in sets derived
from iterative refinement. The Venn diagram in the top shows the taxonomic occurrence of the modern set of 1,420 FSFs in the 420 FL
organisms analyzed in this study. The Venn diagram of the 352_set describes the distribution of 352 FSFs that are plesiomorphic and positioned
at the root branch of the proteome tree of Figure 1A. The Venn diagram of the urancestral max_set describes the distribution of a minimal set
of 152 FSFs that was recovered by serial and iterative phylogenetic and character state reconstruction analysis (see B). The set was defined by
identifying a tree of proteomes with minimal length, extracting FSF that are plesiomorphic and basal, and updating the character set of FSFs for
further phylogenetic analysis in 30 chains of 50 rounds of iterations each. The Venn diagram of the min_set describes the distribution of 70 FSFs
identified by the intersection of the max_set and a basal_set of 130 FSFs that are present in the three superkingdoms and are placed at the base
of the tree of domain structure described in Figure 1B. B. Change in the length of trees and number of FSFs recovered in individual iterations of
chain number 26. For the ith iteration, the left y-axis indicates the number of distinct FSFs that appear in the root branch of the (i-1)th proteome
tree and the right y-axis represents the lengths of the reconstructed tree. The numbers of FSFs converged into a single value after the 35th
iteration. The arrow points to the iteration that generates the most parsimonious trees with the minimal tree length in the chain. C. Correlation
between mean of G and f indexes for the different sets of FSFs.

Kim and Caetano-Anollés BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:140
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/140

Bacteria (B) or Eukarya (E), or can be shared by two
(AB, BE, or AE) or all three superkingdoms (ABE). The
initial 352_set of FSFs that were basal and plesiomorphic
consisted of 314 ABE, 10 AB, 27 AE, and 1 A FSF (Figure 2A). As expected, the max_set of 152 urancestral
FSFs (and the min_set of 70 FSFs embedded in it) had
only ABE domains. To describe the popularity of urancestral FSFs in proteomes, we adopted two different
indexes: (1) a distribution index f, the fraction of organisms that contain a certain FSF (in a 0-1 scale); and (2)
the mean of G, the sum of g values of all sampled proteomes for a particular FSF divided by the total number
of proteomes. The 352_set had f and mean of G values
that ranged 0.055-1 and 0.114-13.781, respectively (Figure 2C). The max_set has corresponding values that
ranged 0.694-1 and 1.529-13.781 and the min_set had
values that ranged 0.964-1 and 3.807-13.781. Clearly,
min_set FSFs are ubiquitous and highly represented in
proteomes.
FSF architectures and functions of minimum and
maximum urancestral sets

For each FSF that belongs to the 352_set, the max_set,
and the min_set, we tabulated molecular functions
defined by SCOP coarse-grained functional classification, mean of G and f indices, and superkingdoms distribution in Additional file 1, Table S1. Since it is difficult
to describe the urancestor based on FSF structural and
functional information, we grouped urancestral FSFs
within seven major categories and 49 sub-categories of
functions. To avoid confusion, category names are displayed in italics and the initial letters are capitalized
(General, Information, Metabolism, Intra-cellular processes, Extra-cellular processes, Regulation, and Other).
While all seven major categories were present in the
352_set, the max_set of urancestral FSFs involved six (all
except for Extra-cellular processes) and the min_set
involved only five (all except Extra-cellular processes
and Other) (Figure 3). The FSFs of the three sets were
distributed in 34, 26, and 20 sub-categories, respectively
(Figure 3; Additional file 1, Table S2). For General, both
the max_set and the min_set had five FSFs that belong
to sub-categories protein interaction and small molecule
binding while the 352_set had 13 FSFs with additional
functions related to binding activities (i.e. ion and ligand
binding; Figure 3). For Information, the profile of subcategories for the max_set was identical to that for the
352_set, although the former set had fewer FSFs than
the latter for individual sub-categories (Figure 3). The
functions of the max_set encompassed DNA replication/
repair, translation, transcription, and RNA processing,
where the last two categories were absent in the min_set. In the three sets, the nuclear structure and chromatin structure functions essential for developing the

Page 7 of 24

eukaryotic cell were absent. For Metabolism, the FSFs of
the three sets were commonly distributed in coenzyme
m/tr, amino acids m/tr, other enzymes, carbohydrate m/
tr, transferases, polysaccharide m/tr, redox, secondary
metabolism, energy, and storage, where ‘m/tr’ means
metabolism and transport (Figure 3; Additional file 1,
Table S2). FSFs that function in photosynthesis and cell
envelope m/tr were completely absent in all of the sets.
While few FSFs of electron transfer, nitrogen m/tr, and
lipid m/tr were present in the 352_set, they were absent
in both the urancestral max_set and min_set. For Intracellular processes, subcategories protein modification,
transport, proteases, and ion m/tr were shown by all of
the sets while cell cycle related to apoptosis, phospholipid m/tr, cell motility, and trafficking/secretion were
absent in all. Only one FSF of the Extra-cellular processes category was present in the 352_set and belonged
to sub-category cell adhesion (out of four in the category). For Regulation, min_set FSFs were kinases/phosphatases and DNA-binding and max_set FSFs were
additionally involved in receptor activity and other regulatory functions. The sub-category Signal transduction
was present in the 352_set, but not in the max_set and
the min_set. Five and 23 FSFs that are grouped into
unknown function of category Other were assigned to
the max_set and the 352_set, respectively. Two FSFs in
the 352_set were not annotated in sub-categories and
are labeled NONA in Additional file 1, Table S1.
Comparing the functions of urancestral FSF sets and
extant proteomes

The functional repertoire of urancestral FSFs was compared to that of the set of 1,420 FSFs that are present in
the 420 extant FL proteomes we analyzed. Since 4 FSFs
were not annotated, the remaining 1,416 FSFs were used
as a the reference (extant) set and included 101 FSFs in
General, 192 in Information, 506 in Metabolism, 192 in
Intra-cellular processes, 69 in Extra-cellular processes,
184 in Regulation, and 172 in Other. Less than 10% of
these FSFs were present in the urancestral min_set (Figure 4). With the exception of FSFs linked to Information
(with more than 25% of extant FSFs), less than 15% of
extant FSFs in the remaining categories were present in
the urancestral max_set. Within the min_set and max_set, Metabolism was the most abundant (i.e. 40 out of
70 FSFs in the min_set; 62 out of 152 FSFs in the max_set). However, while the most abundant category of the
min_set was Metabolism, Information was prevalent in
the max_set (Figure 4). To examine which sub-functional categories were enriched in the urancestral sets,
we conducted a statistical test for each of them based
on the hypergeometric distribution (for a complete list,
see Additional file 1, Table S3). The analysis revealed
that three and two categories were enriched in the

Kim and Caetano-Anollés BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:140
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/140

Page 8 of 24

Figure 3 Distribution of molecular functions in the FSF 352_set that encompasses the urancestral max_set and min_set. In the diagram,
the min_set has 70 FSFs. A total of 82 FSFs are unique to the max_set when compared to the min_set. The 200 remaining FSFs are not included
in both of the urancestral sets. The bar graph displays 49 coarse-grained functional sub-categories (bottom labels) in seven major categories (top
labels) defined by Vogel and Chothia [41]. Bars describe the number of FSFs in different sets, with heights normalized for sub-categories. The
bars in the diagram show the initial appearance of molecular functions in the min_set or their additional accumulation in the max_set or 352_set
for individual sub-categories. For example, the sub-category translation in Information has 6, 28, and 18 FSFs, that are included in the min_set,
the 82 FSFs of the max_set, and the 200 FSFs of the 352_set, respectively. Here, 6 FSFs are common in all of the three sets, 28 FSFs are absent in
the min_set but appear in the max_set and 352_set, and 18 FSFs are unique to the 352_set.

min_set and the max_set with more than 95% confidence level, respectively (Table 1). The enrichment of
nucleotide m/tr of the category Metabolism was supported by both of the urancestral sets. In turn, small
molecule binding of General and transferases of Metabolism were uniquely enriched in the min_set, and translation of Information was enriched only by the max_set.
Structural complexity of the urancestor

Figure 4 The general molecular functions of urancestral FSF
sets relative to those present in the modern protein world.
Bars describe the relative proportion of FSFs that are prent in
urancestral sets and are annotated to the corresponding major
functional categories were displayed on the top of the bars. For
each of the major categories, the height of a bar was calculated by
dividing the number of FSFs in urancestral sets by the number of
FSFs that are in the global set of 1,416 FSFs that are present in the
420 FL proteomes examined. Note that 4 FSFs were not assigned to
any of the categories.

In order to determine if urancestral FSF sets were simpler in number than FSFs of extant organisms, we
checked the number of distinct FSFs (FSF diversity) for
each of the 420 FL proteomes sampled (Figure 5A). The
numbers of distinct FSF ranged from 374 in Staphylothermus marinus (a sulfur-reducing hyperthermophilic
archaeon) to 964 FSFs in Capitella sp. (a polychaete
worm). Proteomic occurrence levels of extant FSFs
showed that over 200 additional FSFs are necessary in
urancestral FSF sets to account for the complexity of
the simplest organism in existence today.
We also compared the abundance of urancestral FSFs
(FSF reuse) to that of extant organisms (Figure 5B).
While it is difficult to infer multiple appearances of individual FSFs in organisms before the advent of the three
superkingdoms, proteome trees were generated from
FSF abundance levels (g values) and provide histories of

Kim and Caetano-Anollés BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:140
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/140

Page 9 of 24

Table 1 The enrichment of molecular functions in the urancestral FSF sets
Urancestor Functional sub-categories
(categories)

Urancestral FSFs
(sample)

Extant FSFs
(bkgd)

Rate for
sample

Rate for
bkgd

Ratio P
value

min_set

Transferases (Metabolism)

6

29

0.066

0.020

4.19

0.0021

Small molecule binding (General)
Nucleotide m/tr (Metabolism)

4
7

22
29

0.057
0.100

0.016
0.020

3.68
4.88

0.021
0.00037

Translation (Information)

34

89

0.224

0.063

3.56

E-12

Nucleotide m/tr (Metabolism)

8

29

0.053

0.020

2.57

0.0083

max_set

We evaluated which of 49 sub-categories are enriched by the min_set or the max_set. In the table, sample means the min_set (70 FSFs) or max_set (152 FSFs).
The 1,416 FSFs represent the background (bkgd). For convenience, let us assume that M and k represent the number of FSFs that are assigned to a particular
sub-category in the background (extant FSFs) and sample (urncestral FSFs) and N and n are the total numbers of FSFs in the background and sample without
functional categorizations. The rates for the sample and the background are notated by k/n and M/N, respectively. The ratio was determined by dividing the
sample rate by the background rate. The P values were calculated using the hypergeometric distribution. The enrichment of the sub-categories that are listed
was supported at the 95% confidence level.

character state changes for individual characters (FSFs).
We therefore counted how many gains or losses of individual urancestral FSFs occurred in the root branches of
the trees. In the process of identifying the two urancestral FSF sets, we obtained most parsimonious trees of
proteomes in iterations that generated the 70 and 152
FSF sets. In these trees, min_set and max_set FSFs
appeared 303 and 507 times without any event of loss,
respectively. Using a similar rationale, we counted gains
and losses of FSFs in individual proteomic lineages by
traveling from the root to terminal leaves of the proteome tree. Total abundance levels for FSFs in each of
the 420 FL proteomes (i.e. the total number of FSFs in a
proteome) ranged from 1,076 to 81,230. The proteome
that had the lowest total abundance level was Ignicoccus
hospitalis, a chemolithoautotrophic and hyperthermophilic archaeon (Figure 5B). As expected, the FSF

abundance levels of the urancestral sets were simpler
than those of any FL proteome in existence today.
To strengthen the quantitative results presented
above, we reconstructed trees of proteomes that
included the urancestral proteomes as taxa. These trees
illustrate the evolution of the 420 FL organisms and that
of the urancestor if this entity existed today. We defined
the two urancestral FSF sets as artificial proteomes and
assigned character states (N) to abundance levels of
urancestral FSFs. Because character states represent
maximum transformed g values, the urancestor had
maximum abundance levels for the given urancestral
FSFs. On the other hand, we assigned ‘0’ to the FSFs
that were not present in the urancestral sets. Each of
the urancestral proteomes was separately added to the
matrix of 1,420 FSFs and 420 FL proteomes, and proteome trees were reconstructed that included the

Figure 5 Diversity and reuse of FSFs in proteomes. A. Frequency distribution plot describing the number of proteomes for increasing
numbers of distinct FSFs in individual proteomes, in bins of 5. The FSF numbers of the min_set, max_set, and the smallest and the largest
proteomes are given in parentheses. B. Frequency distribution plot describing the number of proteomes for increasing levels of FSFs reuse in
individual proteomes. Reuse scales multiple occurrences of FSFs in proteomes and is logarithmically normalized.

Kim and Caetano-Anollés BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:140
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/140

min_set and max_set urancestor (Figure 6A and 6B). In
both cases, the artificial urancestral proteomes (resurrected in silico) appeared at the base of the trees supported by 94% BS levels, and were basal to the most
basal archaeal proteomes in the tree. Furthermore, over
2,000 character-state changes explicitly discriminate the
artificial urancestors from other FL proteomes as shown
in the sub-trees that displays the 10 most ancient taxa
(Figure 6).
Functional complexity of the urancestor

In order to determine if the functions of the urancestor
were simpler than of extant proteomes, we extracted
FSFs from each of the 420 FL proteomes examined and
assigned coarse-grained functional sub-categories to
them. Their number ranged from 34 to 46 (Figure 7A).
The simplest functional profile was that of the simplest
methanogenic archaeon, Methanosphaera stadtmanae,
and the most complex functional profile was exhibited
by a set of 30 eukaryotic proteomes. As already
described, the functions of FSFs in the min_set and the
max_set were classified into 20 and 26 distinct functional categories, respectively. Consequently, the upper
bound urancestral FSF set lacked 8 functional sub-categories when compared to the functions of the simplest
FL organism.
Using a strategy similar to the one described above
for domain structure, we again regarded the two urancestral FSF sets as taxa and evaluated their phylogenomic positions on the proteome trees. Inspired by a
recent phylogenomic analysis of molecular functions
that was derived directly from ontological data [45], we
defined the 49 functional sub-categories as phylogenetic
characters and calculated individual g values for FSFs
pooled by function. Characters in this analysis have
character states that describe the number of distinct
FSFs that are assigned to a particular pair of a functional sub-category and proteome. As expected, phylogenomic trees reconstructed from transformed g values
for FL proteomes and artificial urancestors showed
again that the urancetor was basal in the most parsimonious trees (Figure 7B). While the basal placements of
the functional urancestral sets were weakly supported
(BS < 50%), over 100 character-state changes between
the urancestor and the set of the 10 most ancient taxa
(all archaeal in origin) supported the functional simplicity of the urancestor of life.
Ribosome evolution in the urancestor

Crucial ribosomal proteins act as landmarks of ribosomal evolution [19]. Four FSFs present in universal ribosomal proteins, the nucleic acid-binding protein (b.40.4),
ribosomal protein S5 domain 2-like (d.14.1), translation
protein (b.43.3), and translation protein SH3-like

Page 10 of 24

domain (b.34.5) FSFs, were recruited into ribosomal
function prior to a major transition in ribosomal evolution (ndFSF = 0.173) that is claimed to be responsible for
modern protein synthesis [18]. All of these FSFs belong
exclusively to the urancestral min_set (Table 2). A set of
6 additional FSFs that were found to associate with the
ribosome immediately after this transition but before
the appearance of L7/L12 protein complex (nd FSF =
0.329), and ensemble that stimulates the activity of elongation factor G, are all exclusively included in the urancestral max_set (Table 2). Primordial protein synthesis
was therefore developed in the urancestral lineage.
Placing the appearance of the urancestor in the
geological record

We used a molecular clock of domain structures based
on the phylogenetic tree of FSFs described in Figure 1B
to date the appearance of the youngest domain structures in the urancestral min_set and max_set (Figure 8).
The clock was calibrated using FSFs linked to geological
ages derived from fossils, events of organismal diversification, and geochemical, biochemical and biomarker
data [20]. Plotting fold age (nd FSF ) against geological
time (in Ga) revealed a significant linear correlation (y =
-0.250 x + 0.903; R 2 = 0.922, P < 0.0001; c2 = 0.358),
which was then used to assign geological age to urancestral FSFs. The age (ndFSF) of the min_set FSFs ranged
0-0.205 and the age of the max_set FSFs ranged 0-0.425.
The earliest start of organismal diversification therefore
occurred sometime between 2.91 and 2.03 Ga ago.
Interestingly, the first and second transitions in the evolution of the ribosome occurred before the youngest age
of the min_set and max_set FSFs, respectively (Figure 8),
suggesting efficient ribosomal protein synthesis was prerequisite for organismal diversification.

Discussion
A novel phylogenomic strategy identifies the proteome
of the urancestor

A number of recent studies have focused on the complexity of the urancestor, its primordial functions, alternative rootings of the tree of life, and the rampancy of
HGT [6-12,23,46]. However, results are not congruent,
the rooting of the tree of life is still controversial, and
the make up of the urancestor remains shrouded in
mystery. It is indeed difficult to characterize an entity
that existed billions of years ago using information in
molecules of life that are modern. When using for
example nucleic acid or protein sequences, the pervasive
effects of mutation can cloud (saturate) any significant
evolutionary signal. Some early studies focused on genomic sequence conservation but suffered for example
from the effects of genetic losses and take-overs (e.g.,
non-orthologous gene displacement [9-11]). The analysis

Kim and Caetano-Anollés BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:140
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/140

Page 11 of 24

Figure 6 Phylogenetic placement of the urancestor in trees of proteomes reconstructed from FSF domain structure. A single most
parsimonious tree of proteomes that included the urancestral min_set (1,388 parsimoniously informative sites; 132,829 steps; CI = 0.080; RI =
0.773; g1 = -0.3354) or the max_set (1,388 parsimoniously informative sites; 134,801 steps; CI = 0.090; RI = 0.773; g1 = -0.239) as artificial taxa was
recovered from a maximum parsimony analysis of genomic abundance levels of 1,420 FSFs (characters) in 421 proteome (taxa). Cladograms and
subtrees containing the urancestor and a set of 10 taxa that were the most basal in the trees show that urancestral sets are more ancient than
any of the 420 FL proteomes that were analyzed. Phylogenetic relationships with BS > 50% are displayed above branches.

we here report is based on genomic content of protein
domain structures at FSF level of the structural hierarchy. FSFs are much more conserved than protein
sequence and are highly shared by organismal lineages.
About half of FSFs (682 out of 1,420) in the 420 FL

proteomes we analyzed in this study are common to the
three superkingdoms (Venn diagram; Figure 2A). It is
clear that FSFs are more robust against genetic losses
and take-overs than corresponding sequences and carry
deep evolutionary signatures [36,42,47,48]. Furthermore,

Kim and Caetano-Anollés BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:140
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/140

Page 12 of 24

Figure 7

Figure 7 Phylogenetic placement of the urancestor in trees of proteomes reconstructed from molecular functions. A. Box plot
describing the distribution of the numbers of functional sub-categories (maximum is 49) that are associated with FSF repertoires in urancestral
min_set and max_set and the 420 FL proteomes analyzed. The box was delimited by lower, median, and upper quartiles. Whiskers encompass
5% to 95% values, and crosses 1% and 99% percentiles. Lines on the top and bottom of the plot indicate maximum and minimum numbers.
Organisms associated with these values are labeled. The mean is indicated with a rectangle. B. Trees of proteomes and urancestors generated
directly from the number of individual functional subcategories. A single most parsimonious tree of proteomes that included the urancestral
min_set (46 parsimoniously informative sites; 5,269 steps; CI = 0.121; RI = 0.815; g1 = -0.069) or the max_set (46 parsimoniously informative sites;
5,270 steps; CI = 0.121; RI = 0.814; g1 = -0.133) as artificial taxa was recovered from a maximum parsimony analysis of diversity of molecular
functions in proteomes. The matrix contained 421 taxa (i.e. 420 FL proteomes and the urancestral set) and 49 functional sub-categories as
characters, with character states describing numbers of functional sub-categories. These trees were identical to each other. Cladograms and
subtrees containing the urancestor and a set of 10 taxa that were the most basal in the trees show that urancestral sets are more ancient than
any of the 420 FL proteomes that were analyzed. Phylogenetic relationships with BS > 50% are displayed above branches.

the distribution of FSFs in proteomes meets crucial phylogenetic marker criteria since: (i) it rarely changes relative to speciation events (SCOP domains and FSFs are
discovered at average rates of once every ~0.1 and ~5
million years, respectively [27]), (ii) is minimally affected
by HGT [37,38], and (iii) is not under active natural
selection (structural designs spread at rates of gene
duplication and are vastly unaffected by change at
sequence level [33]). We caution however that secondary adaptations in organism lifestyles such as parasitism

could significantly affect FSF abundances in lineages
undergoing reductive evolution. Given all these features,
FSFs are well suited for inferring the make up of the
urancestor.
Current top-down phylogenetic strategies used to
build a tree of life generate unrooted trees and use deep
taxa as outgroups a posteriori to root phylogenies. One
major technical limitation of determining if given genes
have an origin in the urancestor using this approach is
the need of a universal tree that is accurately rooted. In

Kim and Caetano-Anollés BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:140
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/140

Page 13 of 24

Table 2 Ribosomal proteins used as markers of ribosomal evolution in the urancestor
SCOP ID

FSF

r-proteins

SCOP fold superfamily

min_set

max_set

50249

b.40.4

S12, S17

Nucleic acid-binding proteins

+

+

54211

d.14.1

S9

Ribosomal protein S5 domain 2-like

+

+

50447

b.43.3

L3

Translation proteins

+

+

50104

b.34.5

L2, L24

Translation proteins SH3-like domain

+

+

55174

d.66.1

S4

Alpha-L RNA-binding motif

-

+

46946

a.156.1

S13

S13-like H2TH domain

-

+

56053

d.141.1

L6

Ribosomal protein L6

-

+

57716
53137

g.39.1
c.55.4

S14
L18, S11

Glucocorticoid receptor-like (DNA-binding domain)
Translational machinery components

-

+
+

54768

d.50.1

S5

dsRNA-binding domain-like

-

+

48300

a.108.1

L7, L12

Ribosomal protein L7/12, oligomerisation (N-terminal) domain

-

+

some traditional studies that were based on sequence
conservation, gene genealogies were largely dependent
on the position of the root in trees that are used as
reference (guide trees)[6,8,9,15]. However, guide trees
built from rRNAs or some ancient proteins, such as
elongation factors and aminoacyl-tRNA synthases
(aRSs), produced rooting scenarios that were not congruent. Inconsistencies of this kind and the possibility of
unrecognized paralogy leading to incorrect gene trees
have made urancestral gene assignments unreliable [15].
Although a recent technical advance makes it possible
to infer ancestral states of a given gene content using
the parsimony method (GeneTRACE [49]), it still
requires organismal or genomic trees as guides and does

not explore the effects of gene abundance. Due to these
technical limitations, the first use of FSFs to make inferences of the urancestor was solely based on the distributions of FSFs in genomes (analogous to the f index we
use here) without any phylogenetic consideration [11].
In contrast, our bottom-up phylogenetic strategy uses
the Lundberg method [50] to generate rooted phylogenomic trees without the need of outgroups (Figure 1
and Additional file 1, Figures S1 and S2). Evolution’s
arrow is established directly by the evolutionary model,
the rationale and assumptions of which have been
recently reviewed [51]. Operationally, the tree reconstruction algorithm finds the shortest unrooted tree(s)
without specifying character polarity and then roots the

Figure 8 The rise of the urancestor. A geological timeline defined by a molecular clock of domain structure at FSF level is used to date the
FSF repertoires of the urancestral sets. Oxygen levels are indicated as percentage of present day atmospheric levels (PAL) [70]. Colored circles
indicate FSF used for clock calibration. Black and red arrowheads labeled a and b indicate major and second transitions in ribosomal evolution,
respectively [18], and lines indicate the appearance of FSFs associated with ribosomal proteins (table 2). Arrows show the discovery of crucial
FSFs linked to membrane glycerol ester and ether lipid chemistries and sn1,2 and sn2,3 lineages. Time is given in billions of years (Ga).

Kim and Caetano-Anollés BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:140
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/140

tree(s) by invoking a hypothetical ancestor defined by
ancestral character states and selecting the rooted topology that minimizes overall tree length (see Methods). In
this study, a phylogenomic tree that describes the evolution of 420 FL proteomes revealed the three superkingdoms as distinct groups and placed Archaea at the root,
with a rooting that was internal (paraphyletic) to the
superkingdom (Figure 1A). A tree of life describing the
evolution of a balanced set of proteomes corresponding
to the three superkingsdoms revealed the same diversification patterns (Additional file 1, Figure S2), suggesting
that biases in taxon sampling do not affect the rooting
of trees. The archaeal rooting of the tree of life has been
reliably obtained in numerous studies with different proteomic sets [27,35,42] and is congruent with phylogenetic analysis of the structure of tRNA [22,52], 5S rRNA
[53] and RNase P [54], and of tRNA paralogs [55-58].
While its significance is not the focus and will not be
discussed in this paper, a rooting in Archaea (see discussion in [42]) departs significantly from the ‘canonical’
bacterial rooting of the tree of life, which is traditionally
derived from analyses of the sequence of ancient gene
paralogs (e.g., ATPases, aaRSs, elongation factors). It
thus questions the bacterial-like origin of cellular life
inferred from sequence comparisons. In turn, the phylogenomic tree that describes the evolution of 1,420 FSF
domain structures showed that the most ancient FSFs at
the base of the tree (the basal_set) were shared by the
three superkingdoms and were mostly universal (Figure
1B). Remarkably, the first loss of ancient FSFs occurred
exclusively in archaeal lineages, an observation that also
supports the ancestrality of Archaea. Again, patterns of
distribution of FSFs in the trees were obtained congruently with numerous proteomic sets and releases of
SCOP as genomic sequences and structures were
acquired with time [27,35,42,47,59,60].
Trees of proteomes and trees of FSFs are generated
from the same genomic structural census but represent
two sides of the same story (Figure 1). They describe
the evolution of proteomes or the evolution of the FSF
structures that make up the potein complement, respectively. Proteomes at the root of the tree of life are populated by FSFs that are shared by all three
superkingdoms and proteomes at its crown are enriched
in ‘signature’ FSFs that are unique to individual lineages.
Relatively few signature FSFs exist that are specific to
superkingdoms. Remarkably, proteome comparisons
reveal these signatures are very unequally divided
among superkingdoms [61] and already suggest (following parsimony thinking) that bacterial and archaeal
lineages evolved from a primordial eukaryotic-like lineage by reductive loss [62]. Phylogenomic analysis confirms this reductive evolutionary tendency, showing that
the first diversified lineage to emerge by loss of FSFs

Page 14 of 24

gives rise to Archaea, which in turn has the least number of signature FSFs and expresses the lowest levels of
diversity and reuse of FSFs in nature [42]. The results
we here report confirm once again these patterns (Figure 1B), indicating that the urancestral proteome is
populated by ancestral sets of FSFs at the base of the
tree of life that appeared in the tree of FSFs before the
reductive evolutionary tendency in Archaea was evident
[42].
In order to define the proteomic make up of the urancestor, we first identified a set of 352 primitive (plesiomorphic) FSFs (the 352_set) at the root branch of the
tree of FL proteomes. All FSFs of the 352_set exhibited
only gains in genomic abundance, most (314 FSFs) were
common to the three superkingdoms, and interestingly,
all were present in Archaea (see the four cells that are
occupied in the Venn diagram; Figure 2A). However,
tracing the 352_set FSFs in the tree of domain structures
revealed the set was not conservative enough to define
the urancestor. A timeline describing the age of each
FSF unfolded directly from the tree shows that the FSFs
that are not universally shared by superkingdoms
appeared for the first time in evolution in the order: BE
(nd = 0.210), AB FSFs (nd = 0.415), B (nd = 0.433), E
(nd = 0.538), A (nd = 0.538) and AE (nd = 0.589) FSF
groups (Figure 1B). Remarkably, no FSFs of the ancient
BE-specific group were present in the 352_set, which
contains besides the universal basal_set the more
derived AB, AE and A groups. Similarly, the single Aspecific FSF in the set (related to transcriptional regulation; d.236.1) cannot be part of the urancestor (Figure
2A). The FSF is not only absent in Bacteria and Eukarya
but is also absent in nearly 50% of archaeal lineages
examined (Additional file 1, Table S1). These results
suggest many non-universal FSFs in the 352_set should
not be considered urancestral and were the result of the
‘modern effect’.
In order to decrease the number of false negatives,
FSFs in the 352_set were assigned as initial characters in
a parallel and iterative exercise of tree building and plesiomorphic character selection, with the goal of selecting
for the most parsimonious tree of proteomes and the
minimum number of FSFs. In each of 30 chains, 50
cycles of iteration dramatically reduced the space of
urancestral FSFs (Figure 2A). The iterative procedure
resulted in a more realistic max_set of 152 FSFs, which:
(i) were common to the three superkingdoms (Figure
2A), (ii) excluded FSFs with decreased organismal distribution and genomic abundance levels (i.e with smaller
values of f and mean of G; Figure 2C), and (iii) excluded
FSFs that had ambiguous character-state changes in the
root branch of the tree of proteomes (Additional file 1,
Figure S3). Consequently, the iteration strategy works
well to selectively filter false positives assigned to the

Kim and Caetano-Anollés BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:140
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/140

root branch by the modern effect, decreases biases
introduced by the archaeal rooting, and mitigates uncertainties in character-state reconstructions.
We note that real urancestral FSFs that have evolved
with intensive losses in numerous proteomic lineages
are still possible and their origins will be seen as more
derived under the parsimony criterion. These false negatives in the urancestral set cannot be dissected from
FSFs that diverged more recently. Since the initial
352_set includes a significant number of of FSFs in the
proteomes examined (~25%), this initial large coverage
shields against exclusion of unknown false negatives and
makes the max_set a maximum bound for the urancestral proteome. On the other hand, false positives resulting from ancient HGT events [6,40] can still occur. For
example, FSFs that appeared soon after organismal
diversification but transferred extensively to different
lineages may be regarded as urancestral. The gap that
exists between the discovery of urancestral FSFs and
FSFs that emerged at the start of organismal diversification can be identified in the tree of protein domains,
since this tree unfolds the evolutionary order of appearances of each of the 1,420 FSFs that are present in the
modern proteomes we sampled (Figure 1B). Tracing the
max_set FSFs in the tree of domain structures revealed
that the set was not conservative enough to accurately
define the urancestor and that many FSFs had low proteomic distribution (f) and abundance (mean of G)
levels. We therefore defined a more conservative min_set by intersecting the max_set derived from phylogenetic iteration and the basal_set derived from the tree
of domain structure (Figure 1B). The min_set excluded
82 FSF with relatively smaller f and mean of G values.
This set can be considered a lower bound for the urancestral proteome.
The proteomic and functional complexity of the
urancestor

We here define the urancestor as an entity that accumulated genetic information in a period that spans the
emergence of life and the emergence of diversified cellular life. We also consider the urancestor as a primordial
isoform of the modern ribonucleoprotein world, regardless of it being a single organism or a communal population [6], especially because it contains fully functional
ribosomes (see below). We therefore compare the proteomic and functional sets of the two worlds, the
ancient world of the urancestor and the modern world
of extant organisms, and make inferences about biological complexity using information in molecules that are
modern.
We find that the upper bound urancestral FSF max_set contains almost all essential biological processes,
including crucial metabolism and transport activities

Page 15 of 24

linked to amino acids, nucleotides, carbohydrates, polysaccharides, and coenzymes, and functions associated
with the Information (translation, DNA replication/
repair, transcription, RNA processing), Intra-cellular processes (transport, protein modification, proteases), Regulation (e.g. kinases/phosphatases, DNA binding, RNA
binding), and General (small molecule binding, protein
interaction) categories (Figure 3, Additional file 1, Table
S2). As expected, the set lacks the Extra-cellular processes category, which includes molecular functions
linked to definition of self and inter-cellular interactions
(toxins, cell adhesion, immunity, etc). Although some of
the sub-categories (i.e. transcription, RNA processing,
and RNA binding) were not present in the urancestral
min_set, the functions of the two urancestral sets are
similar and suggest a functional complex entity [8,10].
However, the numbers of urancestral FSFs participating
in individual subcategories were always smaller than
those of FSFs in modern proteomes (Figure 4, Additional file 1, Table S2). Consequently, the functional
repertoire of the urancestor while exhibiting almost all
essential functions should be regarded as being simpler
than the repertoire of modern proteomes. We suggest
FSFs of this limited repertoire acted as melting pot for
new molecular functions when organismal lineages
emerged, with founder biological activities being primitive and relatively non-specific [19]. The development of
the ribosome illustrates such an origin [18].
The numbers of the FSFs in major categories of the
min_set, especially in Information, were smaller than
those of the max_set (Figure 4). In general, informational genes tend to form multi-component complexes
stabilized by protein-protein interactions. For this reason, it has been thought that these genes are refractory
to HGTs [63]. The robustness of informational genes
against transfer was previously contrasted with the rampant transfer among lineages of ancient metabolic
(operational) genes [6,8]. However, a recent study
reveals HGT does not exhibit functional preferences and
occurs randomly [64]. In turn, analysis of HGT in trees
that describe the evolution of function directly from
ontological data are congruent with our analysis and
suggests a preferential role of HGT in shaping information-related functions [45]. Similarly, a recent comparative statistical analysis of homoplasy levels in trees of
proteomes reveals information-related domains at FF
level suffered limited but comparatively significant levels
of lateral exchange [19]. These FFs were discovered
quite early in protein evolution before and after the
start of the diversified world. Thus, phylogenomic analysis of HGT of both biological functions and FSF structures can be used to explain why the min_set excludes
preferentially these ancient HGT-susceptible FSFs. To
further examine the role of ancient HGT processes on

Kim and Caetano-Anollés BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:140
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/140

urancestral proteomic make up, we tested which of 49
functional sub-categories were preferentially enriched in
the max_set and min_set relative to extant FL proteomes. Remarkably, only two functional categories,
translation (Information) and nucleotide m/tr (Metabolism) were enriched in the max_set while metabolismrelated transferases (Metabolism), small molecule binding (General), and nucleotide m/tr (Metabolism) functions were enriched in the min_set (Table 1). We note
that the three sub-categories enriched in the min_set
include FSF belonging to primordial metabolic folds (see
below). While we do not know how many real urancestral FSFs that evolved without major HGT effects were
excluded in the max_set to min_set transition, it is
apparent that the proportion of horizontally transferred
FSFs in the min_set is smaller than that in the max_set.
Consequently, the absence of translation and presence
of nucleotide-related metabolic activities in the enriched
functions of the min_set provides statistical support to
operational genes being more robust against ancient
HGTs than translation-related informational genes, a
result that is in contrast with previous proposals [6,8].
We hypothetize that translation was necessarily simple
and flexible during its early metabolic urancestral inception [19]. Fewer molecular interactions between components in a simpler translation system left HGT
unchecked and free to shape the spread of FSFs that
were recruited for the new translation functions. The
numbers of translation FSFs are 6 and 34 in the min_set
and max_set, respectively, which represent 6.7% and
38.2% of modern translational FSFs. While ancient HGT
processes appear to have shaped the evolution of
ancient translation-related genes during urancestral history, HGT may have not affected metabolism to such
levels, especially because metabolism was already quite
developed when translation materialized in evolution
[19]. A detailed phylogenomic analysis of protein
domain structure in metabolic networks reveals that the
nine most ancient folds were responsible for the explosive appearance of most modern enzymatic functions
[36]. A succession of recruitment gateways, each
mediated by the discovery of a new fold showed metabolism originated in enzymes of nucleotide metabolism
harboring the P-loop-containing NTP hydrolase fold
(c.37), probably in pathways linked to the purine metabolic subnetwork [36]. Crucial FSFs of these primordial
metabolic folds are part of the urancestral min_set and
many are part of nucleotide metabolism subnetworks [e.
g., P-loop-containing NTP hydrolases (c.37.1); ribulosephosphate binding barrel (c.1.2); NAD(P)-binding Rossmann-fold domain (c.2.1); ribonuclease H-like (c.55.3)].
The congruent enrichment of nucleotide m/tr in both
urancestral sets suggests operational genes encoding
nucleotide metabolism were built in the urancestor and

Page 16 of 24

diverged vertically in primary lineages of the superkingdoms. Interestingly, highly conserved protein-encoding
sequences related to nucleotide biosynthetic pathways,
including putative phosphoribosyl pyrophosphate
synthase and thioredoxin enzymes, were previously identified as being important part of the urancestral set [46].
This is also consistent with a study of physical clustering
of genes in bacterial genomes, which also reveals the
most ancient group of genes is related to metabolism
[65]. Due to statistical limitations of the hypergeometric
distribution significant enrichments could not be
resolved for the remaining 5 informational and 14
operational categories. A more comprehensive study will
be needed to evaluate the extent of HGT in whole sets
of ancient operational and informational genes.
Finally, a comparison of structural and functional components of the urancestor and FL proteomes revealed the
complexity of the make up of the urancestor relative to
extant organisms. In terms of FSF repertoires, the numbers of distinct FSFs (diversity) of the urancestral sets were
significantly smaller than those of each and every one of
the FL organisms we analyzed (Figure 5A), even if FSF
reuse was considered (Figure 5B). Our estimates therefore
indicate that the FSF repertoire of the urancestor (70-152
FSFs) and its reuse in domains (303-507 domains) was at
least 5 and 3 times smaller than that of extant FL organisms, respectively. Furthermore, the inclusion of artificial
urancestral proteomes resurrected in silico in tree reconstructions generated trees of proteomes that always placed
the urancestor at their base (Figure 6). These results support the distant relationship that exists between the urancestor with the simplest of extant proteomes, confirming
the relative simplicity of the reconstructed ancestral entity.
Similarly, phylogenetic reconstructions derived from functional data confirm urancestral functions were quantitatively and phylogenetically simpler than functions in any
extant FL proteome (Figure 7). Consequently, the actual
repertoire of the urancestor inferred from FSFs in modern
proteomes, while relatively complex in the number of
molecular functions it embodies, is closer to the simple
progenote model and distant from the complex cenancestor model. We note however that proteins in the relatively
simple FSF repertoire of the urancestor could have been
non-specific, harboring a multiplicity of functions. These
would have increased the effective complexity of this primordial organism. Furthermore, the complex functional
repertoire we reveal suggests the urancestor was a quite
advanced version of the progenote, with a multiplicity of
metabolic and biosynthetic functions.
Emergence of translation and ribosomal machinery in the
urancestor during the Late Archean

In a previous study, we used phylogenies of FSF and FF
to study the emergence of the translation apparatus

Kim and Caetano-Anollés BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:140
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/140

[19]. Dissection of first appearance of fundamental innovations in molecular machinery (evolutionary landmarks)
associated with metabolism and translation revealed
translation had metabolic origins. It appeared after the
discovery of a large number of metabolic functions but
before enzymes necessary for the synthesis of DNA. A
clear timeline of molecular diversification was apparent,
with domains associated with aminoacylation appearing
first, immediately followed by molecular switches and
regulatory factors important for tRNA shepherding and
RNA transport. Additional file 1, Table S1 shows landmark domains that interact with RNA (some of which
have metabolic roles) were present in the min_set,
including class I (c.26.1, ndFSF = 0.064) and II catalytic
(d.104.1, ndFSF = 0.128) and anticodon-binding (a.27.1;
nd FSF = 0.141) domains of aRSs, GTP-binding (c.37.1,
ndFSF = 0) and elongation factor (b.43.3, ndFSF = 0.128)
domains of translation factors, and even ribonuclease P
and PH domains (d.14.1, ndFSF = 0.059) crucial for endoand exoribonucleolytic cleavage of RNA and nucleotydiltransferase activities necessary for damage repair. In contrast, none of domains present in ribonucleotide
reductase enzymes responsible for producing the deoxyribonucleotide components necessary for DNA-linked
functions, the ferritin-like domain (a.25.1, ndFSF = 0.242),
N-terminal domain of cbl (a.48.1, ndFSF = 0.685), and the
the PFL-like glycyl radical enzyme domain (c.7.1, ndFSF =
0.279), were present in the min_set. Only one of these
domains, c.7.1, was present in the max_set. We note that
the reduction of ribonucleotides to deoxyribonucleotides
involves the production of an active site thiyl radical that
requires contacts with cysteins in all protein domains of
the catalytic subunit of the oligomeric enzymatic complex [66], suggesting modern ribonucleotide reductase
functions is indeed derived. We also note that the active
site domains of class III ribonucleotide reductases share
the c.7.1 domain and the associated radical-based chemistry with pyruvate formate-lyase enzymes, a link proposed to have mediated the RNA-to-DNA biological
transition [67]. However, phylogenomic analysis at FF
level [19] suggests the pyruvate formate-lyase domain
(c.7.1.1; ndFF = 0.518) emerged later than its ribonucleotide reductase counterpart (c.7.1.2; nd FF = 0.235). It is
therefore likely that the urancestor stored genetic information as RNA and not DNA.
The set of FSFs of ribosomal proteins that are universal establish crucial contacts with substructures of the
rRNA subunits in the ribosome and appear much later
than aRSs and regulatory factors [19]. A careful phylogenetic analysis of ribosomal history directly from protein
and RNA structure established the relative time of
appearance of ribosomal proteins and rRNA substructures in the ribosome [18]. The study reveals that proteins and RNA co-evolved form the start and structures

Page 17 of 24

supporting protein synthesis appeared in a fundamental
major transition once processivity functions involving
interactions with transfer and templating RNA were
already functional. A set of four FSFs were recruited
into ribosomal function during this initial period,
including ancient ribosomal proteins with OB-fold and
related SH3-like small b-barrel folds. Remarkably, all of
these FSFs belong exclusively to the urancestral min_set
(Table 2). A set of 6 additional FSFs that associated with
the ribosome immediately after the major transition but
before the appearance of the L7/L12 protein complex
[18], are all exclusively included in the urancestral
max_set (Table 2). The L7/L12 complex crucially stimulates the GTPase activity of elongation factor G, a ribosomal factor that catalyzes elongation and enhances
ribosomal processivity [68,69]. Primordial protein synthesis was therefore active in the urancestor and the processivity and efficiency of the ribosome was actively
improved during urancestral evolution.
In order to place the history of the urancestor and of
the ribosome in a timeline, we used a molecular clock
of protein domain structure to define evolutionary timescales [20]. Using a clock derived from the tree of FSFs
of Figure 1B but using the calibration points of Wang et
al. [20], the appearance of the youngest FSFs in the
urancestral min_set and max_set suggests organismal
diversification was established sometime between 2.9
and 2 Ga ago (Figure 8). Remarkably, the earliest date
coincides with the discovery of arobic metabolism and
the start of planet exigenation [20] that lead to the
Great Oxidation Event [70], a geological time where
oxygen reached 1% of present atmospheric levels. We
note that integration of molecular, physiological, paleontological, and geochemical data suggests that a diversified clade of cyanobacteria with marked heterocyst and
cell differentiation appeared no later than 2.1 Ga ago
[71] and a number of FSFs linked to events of organismal diversification and the fossil record [20] (Figure 8)
are only compatible with the existence of an urancestor
before that time. This indicates the urancestral max_set
is not conservative enough to accurately define the
urancestor and that the min_set is clearly more appropriate. Remarkably, the first and second transitions in
ribosomal evolution occurred before the youngest age of
min_set FSFs, 3.04 and 2.41 Ga ago, respectively, suggesting efficient ribosomal protein synthesis was prerequisite for organismal diversification and emerged
prior to the aerobic metabolism and the start of planet
oxygenation (Figure 8).
The diversification of cellular membranes marks the end
of the urancestor

The chirality and chemistry of glycerol membrane lipids
is different in Archaea (sn2,3 isoprenoid ether lipids)

Kim and Caetano-Anollés BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:140
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/140

than in Bacteria and Eukarya (sn1,2 fatty acid ester
lipids), a feature that is claimed to be important for the
rise of a diversified organismal world [72-74]. In fact, a
widely popular model for organismal diversification is
the existence of heterochiral glycerolipids in the primordial membranes of the urancestor, which were synthetized as racemates but then segregated in sn1,2 and
sn2,3 lineages during organismal diversification [75].
These different chiral forms are synthetized in two different metabolic pathways that start with the reduction
of a keto group from dihydroxyacetone phosphate
(DHAP or glycerone phosphate) and use two different
stereochemistry-specific glycerol phosphate backbones.
In Bacteria and Eukarya, the synthesis of sn1,2 fatty acid
ester lipids starts with the convertion of DHAP to snglycerol 3-phosphate (G3P) by the activity of glycerol-3phosphate dehydrogenase (G3PDH)(EC 1.1.1.94). This
enzymatic reaction is the first step of pathways needed
to produce the ester-fatty acid double layer typical of
eukaryotes and mesophylic and psychrophilic bacteria.
DHAP

EC 1.1.1.94

←→

G3P [BACTERIA AND EUKARYA]

In contrast, the first step in the synthesis of sn2,3 isoprenoid ether lipids in Archaea starts by the reduction
of DHAP to sn-glycerol 1-phosphate (G1P), the enantiomer of G3P, by the Zn 2+ -dependent glycerol-1-phosphate dehydrogenase (G1PDH) metalloenzyme (EC
1.1.1.261). The biosynthesis of polar lipids in Archaea
requires the activity of two additional enzymes, the (S)3-O-geranylgeranylglyceryl phosphate synthase (GGGPS)
(EC 2.5.1.41) and the (S)-2,3-di-O-geranylgeranylglyceryl
phosphate synthase (DGGGPS)(EC 2.5.1.42) that
together alkylate the hydroxy groups of G1P to give sn3-O-(geranylgeranyl)glycerol 1-phosphate (GGGP) and
2,3-bis-O-(geranylgeranyl)glycerol (DGGGP) and later
produce unsaturated archaetidic acid with geranylgeranyl chains and CDP-unsaturated archaeol through
downstream activity of the CDP-archaeol synthase (EC
2.7.7.67) enzyme.
DHAP

EC 1.1.1.261

←→

G1P

EC 2.5.1.41

←→

GGGP

EC 2.5.1.42

←→

DGGGP [ARCHAEA]

To date there are no known exceptions to a G1P
backbone chemistry in Archaea and a G3P backbone
chemistry in the other two superkingdoms. However,
some extremophilic bacteria also contain membrane
ether lipids (the typical archaeal trait), including di-glycerol ether lipids, tetraether non-isoprenoid lipids, and
mixed ester-ether lipids, but they are all of the sn1,2
kind (reviewed in [12]).
Since DGGGPS is not stereospecific, the chirality of
the isoprenoid ether lipids in Archaea appears entirely
determined by GGGPS [76]. Remarkably, the 6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase C-terminal domain-like

Page 18 of 24

(a.100.1; ndFSF = 0.110) FSF of the bacterial and eukaryal
G3PDH (a.100.1.6; ndFF = 0.233) and the FMN-linked
oxydoreductase domain (c.1.4; ndFSF = 0.114) FSF of the
GGGPS (c.1.4.1; ndFF = 0.041) necessary for downstream
membrane lipid biosynthesis in Archaea were present in
the urancestral min_set and appeared in the timeline of
domain architectures quite early in evolution. A min_set
G3DPH suggests primordial sn1,2 fatty acid ester lipids
of some kind were already present in the urancestor. In
turn, a min_set GGGPS enzyme harboring the only TIM
b/a-barrel fold-containing enzyme with a prenyltransferase function [76] suggests chirality-enabling enzymatic
activities downstream of G1DPH were already present
in the urancestor.
We note that CDP-archaeol synthase activity, which is
downstream of G1PDG, does not require specificity for
ester or ether bonds nor of glycerol phosphate enantiomers [77] and that full conversion of bacterial-like lipids
to archaeal-like lipids requires the crucial discovery or
recruitment of G1PDH metalloenzyme activities necessary for the production fo the G1P backbone [76]. The
urancestral GGGPS catalyses the first CDP-archaeol biosynthesis pathway-specific step of isoprenoid ether lipids
in Archaea but displays a strong preference for the G1P
substrate [78]. G1PDH does not yet have a crystallographic structural entry. However, molecular modeling
suggests the enzyme was derived from glycerol dehydrogenase (EC 1.1.1.6; e.22.1.2; ndFSF = 0.288; ndFF = 0.191)
[79], which is present in the three superkingdoms and
has the dehydroquinate synthase-like domain (e.22.1)
FSF. A total of 110 UniProt entries with EC 1.1.1.261
functions were analyzed with HMMs of structural
recognition. All sequence entries were indeed assigned
the e.22.1 FSF. Two entries had also the HAD-like
domain (c.108.1). While this analysis confirms the original structural assingment [79], we find the G1PDH FSF
was not part of any of the urancestral FSF sets. This
strongly suggests isoprenoid ether lipids derived from
G1P were not present in the urancestor. Instead, and as
suggested by Glansdorff et al. [12], sn1,2 isoprenoid
ether lipids were probably synthetized by the activity of
the urancestral GGGPS, which at that time could have
exhibited a preference for G3P. Recruitment of a
G1PDH in emerging archaeal lineages displaced the possible use of G3P by GGGPS and enabled the synthesis of
sn2,3 isoprenoid ether lipids using the G1P backbone. It
is significant that the molecular clock of FSFs established that the GGGPS c.1.4 FSF appeared 3.27 Ga ago
and that the G1PDH e.22.1 FSF appeared 2.45 Ga ago at
a time that coincides with the Great Oxidation Event
(arrows, Figure 8). In this regard, cyclic and acyclic phytanes and biphytanes, which are present in sediments
and petroleum in 2.7-Ga-old metasedimentary rocks in
several parts of the world [80,81] and are biomarkers of

Kim and Caetano-Anollés BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:140
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/140

methanotrophic pelagic microbes, are thought to derive
from archaeol and caldarchaeol molecules of Archaea
[80]. The existense of GGGPS prior to this date supports the existence of a primordial CDP-archaeol biosynthetic pathway and of ether and ester membrane
lipids in the urancestor, prior to the loss of the first FSF
in a superkingdom (Archaea) that marks the start of the
tripartite world and the earliest date of organismal
diversification (~2.9 Ga ago; Figure 8). The synthesis of
an enantiomeric alternative of G3P in primordial
archaeal lineages, 800 million years later and during late
planet oxygenation, provided the proper molecular chirality and backbone necessary for cell membrane diversification. Our findings are important and support the
proposal that the urancestor had sn1,2 ester and ether
fatty acid lipids and that discovery and recruitment of
new enzymatic activities resulted in the synthesis of
sn3,4 isoprenoid ether lipids and the emergence of thermophilic archaeal lineages [12]. Under this scenario, the
ester and ether lipids in the urancestor provided already
adaptations to adverse conditions (high temperature,
pressure, etc), a trend that was later exploited by the
emerging Archaeal lineages in a primordial quest
towards extremophily.

Conclusions
The history of proteomes and the protein world was
reconstructed from a census of protein domain structure
at FSF level of structural complexity in hundreds of FL
proteomes. Applying an iterative approach of character
state reconstruction, we identified the most parsimonious repertoire of domain structures that was present
in the urancestor. Upper and lower bounds of the repertoire defined conservative limits for the diversity of
domains and associated functions and showed the uracestor had a functionally complex but relatively simple
repertoire, with numbers of FSFs probably orders of
magnitude below that of extant organisms. Since the
lower bound is more compatible with a molecular clock
of FSFs and the fossil record, we can make reasonable
inferences about the molecular make up of this primordial organism. The urancestor had an advanced metabolic network, especially rich in nucleotide metabolism
enzymes, had primordial pathways for the biosynthesis
of membrane glycerol ether and ester lipids, crucial elements of translation, including aRSs, regulatory factors,
and a primordial ribosome with protein synthesis capabilities. It lacked however transcription and in
advanced evolutionary stages stored genetic information
in RNA (not DNA) molecules. As this ancient organism
expanded its protein biosynthetic functions ~3 Ga ago,
it added crucial ribosomal proteins that enhanced the
reliability and processivity of the ribosome and crucial
enzymes that diversified its membrane lipid make up.

Page 19 of 24

We here propose the enhancement of the primordial
ribosomal machinery and the make up of the cellular
containment, which coincided with the rise of planetary
oxygen, enabled the rise of lineages and a truly diversified world of organisms.

Methods
Genomic and proteomic data

We downloaded SUPERFAMILY ver. 1.73 [82] MYSQL
database that assigns protein architectures to sequences
in the genomes of over 1,000 organisms, 645 of which
have been completely sequenced. Manual inspection of
organismal lifestyles showed there were 48 archaeal, 239
bacterial, and 133 eukaryotic FL species (420 in total),
71 bacterial and 22 eukaryotic species that were parasitic
(93 in total), and 1 archaeal, 111 bacterial, and 20 eukaryotic species that were obligate parasitic (132 in total) in
the 645 set. According to our definitions, only one parasitic/obligate parasitic organism was present in Archaea,
Nanoarchaeum equitans. Given this information, we
excluded genomes from all but the 420 FL organisms.
SUPERFAMILY has built HMM libraries for SCOPdefined FSFs. Proteomes deposited in the database were
searched against the HMM libraries using the iterative
Sequence Alignment and Modeling System (SAM)
method [83], which has generated FSF assignments covering on average ~ 60% of amino acid residues of individual proteomes [82]. From the local MYSQL, we
obtained all FSFs assignments for each of the 645 proteomes. The E-value of 10-4 has been known as an ideal
cutoff to minimize rate of false positives in the HMM
searches [84]. FSF assignments that fulfill the E-value
cutoff were extracted from the individual proteomes.
Domain structures were identified with SCOP concise
classification strings (ccs) (e.g., c.37.1.12, where c represents the protein class, 37 the F, 1 the FSF, and 12 the
FF).
Phylogenomic analysis

In this study, phylogenomic trees describing the evolution of proteomes are reconstructed using a census of
the abundance of FSF domains in proteomes [47]
instead of simply their occurrence [34]. We have shown
that a comparison of the two methods produces phyletic
patterns that are congruent [35,42]. Since there has
been a hypothetical agreement that genetic components
of the urancestor were redundant and versatile [6,85],
we chose to build trees of proteomes derived from FSF
abundance to identify both the FSF set and the levels of
reuse of these FSF domains. This is not possible with an
FSF occurrence-based approach.
In SUPERFAMILY, remote homology of protein
sequences is determined by more than 30% of sequence
identity and by sharing a common ancestor in terms of

Kim and Caetano-Anollés BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:140
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/140

structure and function [32]. Consequently, a certain FSF
can be present in multiple protein sequences. We
counted how many times individual FSFs are assigned
to each of the proteomes that were sampled. We defined
the number of multiple occurrences of a FSF per proteome as a genomic abundance value (g) and calculated
g values for all pair-wise combinations between given
proteomes and FSFs, building a two-dimensional data
matrix. Empirically, g values ranged from 0 to hundreds,
resembling morphometic data with a large variance
[35,42]. Because existing phylogenetic programs can
generally process < 30 phylogenetic character states
(depending on user’s CPU performance), the space of g
values in the matrix was reduced to a limited number of
character states using gap recoding [86] and the following formula [35].
gab norm = Round[

ln(gab + 1)
× 23]
ln(gmax + 1)

In this equation, gab describes the g value of FSF a in
proteome b and gmax denotes the maximum g value in
the matrix. The round function normalizes g for particular FSF in a proteome relative to its maximum value,
and standardizes values to a 0-23 scale. The 24 transformed values represent character states and were linearly ordered and encoded using an alphanumeric format
of numbers 0-9 and letters A-N that are compatible
with PAUP* ver. 4.0b10 [44]. The matrix was used to
build trees of proteomes by defining taxa and characters
as proteomes and FSFs, repectively. The matrix was also
transposed to build trees of FSF architectures, with taxa
and characters representing FSFs and proteomes, repectively. Trees of proteomes were built by polarizing character states from ‘0’ to ‘N’ using the ANCSTATES
command of the PAUP*, with ‘0’ being primordial.
Trees of FSF architectures were built by polarizing states
from ‘N’ to ‘0’, with ‘N’ being the most ancient. These
trees were rooted without invoking outgroup taxa using
the Lundberg method [50]; the most ancient proteome
or architecture was positioned at the base of their corresponding trees. Our evolutionary model considers that
the abundance and diversity of individual FSF architectures increases progressively in nature, even when
expanding FSFs suffer loss in individual lineages, and
even when FSFs are selectively or differentially constrained during evolution. Consequently, we consider
ancient architectures are more abundant and widely present in the protein world than younger ones, supporting
the polarization from ‘N’ to ‘0’. We also assume that
proteomes have built their FSF repertoires progressively
in evolution, increasing both the diversity and abundance of the FSF make up. Genomes that are ancient
developed their repertoires earlier from a pool of FSF

Page 20 of 24

architectures that was comparatively simpler. Consequently, their repertoires are today simpler than those
that developed their repertoires more recently from a
more complex and diverse pool. This supports the ‘0’ to
‘N’ polarization. We note that convergent evolution (e.g.
due to HGT) and rampant expansion of genes by gene
or genome duplications in specific lineages can bias
architectural complexity, especially in ancient organisms.
While the extent of these effects remains controversial
[6,8], convergent evolution of domains appears to be
rare [37,38] and the effect of HGT to be limited at this
high levels of hierarchical complexity [39,45,64]. Moreoever, trees of proteomes match for the most part established organismal classification (e.g., [35,42]). We
therefore postulate that these evolutionary mechanisms
do not overwhelm the vertical inheritance of protein
architectures along individual organismal lineages.
Details on character argumentation and absence of circularity in assumptions were comprehensively discussed
in previous publications and are not developed further
here [35,36,42,47].
Phylogenomic trees were reconstructed from the
transformed and polarized matrices using the maximum
parsimony method in PAUP* with 1,000 replicates of
random taxon addition, tree bisection reconnection
(TBR) branch swapping, and maxtrees unrestricted. The
trees generated were rooted by the Lundberg method,
which does not require the need of an outgroup taxon.
Phylogenetic confidence was evaluated by the nonparametric bootstrap method with 1,000 replicates (resampling size matches the number of the genomes sampled;
TBR; maxtrees, unrestricted). The consensus of most
parsimonious proteome trees was obtained using the
Python library SumTrees with the option of 50% majority-rule [87]. The degree of phylogenetic signal for taxa
was measured using the skewness (g1) test with a tree
length distribution obtained from 1,000 random trees
[43].
Since trees are rooted and are highly unbalanced, we
unfolded the relative age of protein domains directly for
each phylogeny as a distance in nodes (node distance,
nd) from the hypothetical ancestral architecture at the
base of the trees in a relative 0-1 scale. Given a rooted
tree, we calculated nd by counting the number of internal nodes along a lineage from the root to a terminal
node (a leaf) of the tree on a relative 0-1 scale with the
following equation: nda = (# of internal nodes between
nodes r and a)/(# of internal nodes between nodes r
and m), where a means a target leaf node, r is a
hypothetical root node, and m is a leaf node that has
the largest possible number of internal nodes from the
node r. Consequently, the nd value of the most ancestral
taxon is 0 while that of the most recent one is 1. nd can
be a good measure of age given a rooted tree since the

Kim and Caetano-Anollés BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:140
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/140

emergence of protein domains (i.e. taxa) is displayed by
their ability to diverge (cladogenesis or molecular speciation) rather than by the amount of character state
change that exists in branches of the tree (branch
lengths).
Iteration analysis

Phylogenetic characters (FSFs) defining the root of the
tree of proteomes can be used to identify the urancestral
repertoire of protein domains. However, FSFs appearing
after the advent of the diversified world (the ‘modern
effect’) were by definition absent in the urancestor and
must be excluded to avoid bias in the identification of
urancestral FSFs. We developed an iteration analysis to
refine the urancestral set of FSFs. First, we extracted
FSFs positioned at the root branch of the tree of proteomes, which was reconstructed prior to each step of
iteration. As an initial character set, the FSFs were
imported into each of 30 chains, each of which proceeded with the following steps: (i) reconstruct a proteome tree; (ii) extract FSFs that are in the root branch;
(iii) update the character set with the FSFs; (iv) iterate
steps 1 to 3 a total of 50 times.
We then gathered all of the most parsimonious trees
that were generated from the 1,500 iterations, and
selected one tree with minimal tree length and the smallest set of FSF domains. Prior to iteration analysis, simulation with hundreds of iterations per chain showed that
decreases of tree length and the number of the plesiomorphic FSFs become stationary after ~40 iterations.
FSF sets in the root branches were progressively stabilized as iterations progressed in individual chains and
ambiguous plesiomorphic FSF assignments were
reduced. In addition, multiple chains made it possible to
explore as many parsimony islands that were possible to
avoid the risk of the search of optimal trees being
trapped by sub-optimal portions of a given tree space
[88].
Functional annotations of FSF domain architectures

Nearly 80% of FSFs defined in SCOP have more than
one family [89]. Because a single family can be regarded
as a functionally orthologous unit [30], FSFs with more
than one family can be considered multi-functional. For
example, the P-loop-containing NTP hydrolase (c.37.1)
is the most abundant FSF in nature and has more than
20 distinct families, most of which are involved in tens
of metabolic pathways [36]. In spite of the difficulty of
assigning functions to FSFs, Vogel and Chothia [41] suggested a coarse-grained functional classification for
known FSFs based on information in various resources,
including COG and GO databases, and literature surveys. When an FSF had multiple families, the most
dominant function was assigned to the FSF. While this

Page 21 of 24

coarse-grained classification cannot provide a complete
functional profile for individual FSFs, the classification is
highly suitable to infer the originating functions of FSFs
because the most ancient function of a FSF tends to be
the most abundant and widely present in contemporary
proteomes. For urancestral FSFs uncovered by the iteration analysis, we annotated their function using the
coarse-grained functional classification. Although it is
likely that functional recruitments or take-overs had
arisen during evolution of the urancestral lineage, we do
not consider the role of these processes. Their dissection
is per se a difficult problem.
Enrichment of functional categories

In the coarse-grained classification of functions we
described above, FSFs are assigned to 50 sub-categories
that are subsequently grouped into seven major categories. The sub-category named “not annotated” was
not considered in this study. We evaluated which functional categories were enriched by the set (sample) of
urancestral FSFs in comparison to the set of all FSFs
(background) of the sampled proteomes. For each of the
two sets, we counted the number of FSFs that were
annotated to individual sub-categories, and then calculated the probability of enrichment of a particular subcategory present in urancestral FSFs using the hypergeometric distribution and the equation:

P(X = k) =

M
k

N−M
n−k
N
n

, where

a
b

=

a!
b!(a − b)!

Observed values M and k indicate the number of FSFs
that are assigned to a sub-category in the background
and sample, respectively. The values N and n are the
total number of FSFs of the two sets regardless of the
functional classification. The probability P(X = k) implies
the chance that a random variable X has k FSFs for a
given functional category. Referring to the equation and
previous literature [38], we calculated P values for the
individual sub-categories that have k/n larger than M/N,
and evaluated statistical significance with 95% confidence level (P < 0.05).
Assigining domain structures to KEGG enzymes

Enzymes that are related to metabolic pathways of glycerol cell membrane lipids were identified using the
Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG;
http://www.genome.jp/kegg/). We retrieved UniProt
Knowledgebase Identifiers (UniProtKB IDs) from KEGG,
the Enzyme Commission (EC) numbers of the enzymes.
Protein sequences that correspond to the UniProt IDs
were obtained from the UniProt (http://www.uniprot.

Kim and Caetano-Anollés BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:140
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/140

org/). To assign SCOP protein domains at the FSF level
of classification, we searched the protein sequences of
the individual enzymes against HMMs of total FSFs that
are provided by the locally downloaded SUPERFAMILY
database. The FSFs were assigned to given protein
sequences using the SAM method with an E-value cutoff of 10-4.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Figure S1. Inclusion of non-FL proteomes in
phylogenomic analyses makes relationships of lineages incorrect.
Cladogram of a most parsimonious rooted tree obtained from 1,446 FSFs
and 645 proteomes (1,414 parsimoniously informative sites; 177,229
steps; CI = 0.057; RI = 0.780; g1 = -0.065). Terminal leaves of Archaea (A),
Bacteria (B), and Eukarya (E) were labeled in red, blue, and cyan,
respectively. The dotted lines explicitly display the borders between two
superkingdoms. The life-styles of proteomes were displayed using a
vertical bar beside their terminal leaves. Free-living (FL), parasitic (O), and
obligate parasitic (OP) proteomes were labeled in blue, gray, and red,
respectively. The 645 proteomes consist of 420 FL (48 A, 239 B, 133 E), 93
parasitic (0 A, 71 B, 22 E), and 132 obligate parasitic (1 A, 111 B, 20 E)
organisms. OP lineages were present at the base of the three
superkingdoms. Figure S2. Representative phylogenomic tree of
proteomes describing the evolution of 102 FL organisms sampled
equally across superkingdoms (34 archaeal, bacterial, and eukaryal
proteomes, respectively). One most parsimonious tree was
reconstructed based on genomic abundances of 1,370 FSFs in the
proteomes (1,311 parsimoniously informative sites; 50,564 steps; CI =
0.194; RI = 0.724; g1 = -0.486). Non-parametric bootstrap values that have
more than 50% supports were shown above or below branches that
cluster the superkingdoms or much higher groups. Terminal leaves of
Archaea, Bacteria, and Eukarya were labeled in red, blue, and cyan,
respectively. Figure S3. The iterative analysis increases the reliability
of FSFs that are positioned in the root nodes of the proteome
trees. For the chain that produced the minimum number of LUCA FSFs
and the smallest tree length, the ambiguity of character-state changes
for the FSFs in the root nodes of the proteome trees was examined. In
the plot, the x-axis indicates the number of iterations from 1 to 50, with
zero representing the initial proteome tree. The y-axis denotes the
number of the FSFs that had ambiguous character-state changes in their
root branches of the proteome trees. The dramatic decreases of
ambiguous character-state changes in root branches were consistently
observed in all of the 30 chains that were examined. Table S1. FSF
repertoires in the 352_set and urancestral max_set and min_set.
Table S2. FSF molecular functions. Table S3. Functional enrichment.

Abbreviations
FSF: fold superfamily; FF: fold family; FL: free living; Ga: giga-annum; HGT:
horizontal gene transfer; LUCA: last universal common ancestor; SCOP:
Structural Classification of Proteins.
Acknowledgements
We thank Dr. Liudmila S. Yafremava for helping with assignments of
organismal lifestyles and members of the GCA research team for valuable
comments. Research was supported by the National Science Foundation
(MCB-0749836), CREES-USDA, and the International Atomic Energy Agency in
Vienna. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions and recommendations
expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the funding agencies.
Author details
Evolutionary Bioinformatics Laboratory, Department of Crop Science,
University of Illinois, Urbana, IL 61801, USA. 2Korean Bioinformation Center,
1

Page 22 of 24

Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology, 111 Gwahangno,
Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 305-806, Korea.
Authors’ contributions
Both authors design experiments, analyzed data, and wrote the paper. Both
authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 2 February 2011 Accepted: 25 May 2011
Published: 25 May 2011
References
1. Woese CR, Kandler O, Wheelis ML: Towards a natural system of
organisms: proposal for the domains Archaea, Bacteria, and Eucarya.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1990, 87:4576-4579.
2. Woese CR, Fox GE: Phylogenetic structure of the prokaryotic domain: the
primary kingdoms. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1977, 74:5088-5090.
3. May RM: How many species are there on earth? Science 1988,
241:1441-1449.
4. Bull AT, Goodfellow M, Slater JH: Biodiversity as a source of innovation in
biotechnology. Annu Rev Microbiol 1992, 46:219-252.
5. Whitman WB, Coleman DC, Wiebe WJ: Prokaryotes: the unseen majority.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1998, 95:6578-6583.
6. Woese CR: The universal ancestor. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1998,
95:6854-6859.
7. Kyrpides N, Overbeek R, Ouzounis C: Universal protein families and the
functional content of the last universal common ancestor. J Mol Evol
1999, 49:413-423.
8. Penny D, Poole A: The nature of the last universal common ancestor.
Curr Opin Genet Dev 1999, 9:672-677.
9. Koonin EV: Comparative genomics, minimal gene-sets and the last
universal common ancestor. Nat Rev Microbiol 2003, 1:127-136.
10. Ouzounis CA, Kunin V, Darzentas N, Goldovsky L: A minimal estimate for
the gene content of the last universal common ancestor-exobiology
from a terrestrial perspective. Res Microbiol 2006, 157:57-68.
11. Ranea JAG, Sillero A, Thornton JM, Orengo CA: Protein superfamily
evolution and the last universal common ancestor (LUCA). J Mol Evol
2006, 63:513-525.
12. Glansdorff N, Xu Y, Labedan B: The last universal common ancestor:
emergence, constitution and genetic legacy of an elusive forerunner.
Biol Direct 2008, 3:29.
13. Bandea C: A unifying scenario on the origin and evolution of cellular
and viral domains. Nature Proceedings 2009 [http://hdl.handle.net/10101/
npre.2009.3888.1].
14. Forterre P: Giant viruses: Conflicts in revisiting the virus concept.
Intervirology 2010, 53:362-378.
15. Gribaldo S, Brochier C: Phylogeny of prokaryotes: does it exist and why
should we care? Res Microbiol 2009, 160:513-521.
16. Theobald DL: A format test of the theory of universal common ancestry.
Nature 2010, 465:219-222.
17. Forterre P, Philippe H: Where is the root of the universal tree of life?
BioEssays 1999, 21:871-879.
18. Harish A, Caetano-Anollés G: Ribosomal history reveals origins of modern
protein synthesis. 2011.
19. Caetano-Anollés D, Kim KM, Mittenthal JM, Caetano-Anollés G: Proteome
evolution and the metabolic origins of translation and cellular life. J Mol
Evol 2011, 72:14-32.
20. Wang M, Jiang Y-Y, Kim KM, Qu G, Ji HF-, Mittenthal JE, Zhang HY-,
Caetano-Anollés G: A universal molecular clock of folds and its power in
tracing the early history of aerobic metabolism and planet oxygenation.
Mol Biol Evol 2011, 28:567-582.
21. Reanney DC: On the origin of prokaryotes. Theor Biol 1974, 48:243-251.
22. Sun F-J, Caetano-Anollés G: Evolutionary patterns in the sequence and
structure of transfer RNA: early origins of Archaea and viruses. PLoS
Comput Biol 2008, 4:e1000018.
23. Edgell DR, Doolittle WF: Archaea and the origin(s) of DNA replication
proteins. Cell 1997, 89:995-998.
24. Olsen GJ, Woese CR: Lessons from an archaeal genome: What are we
learning from Methanococcus jannaschii? Trends Genet 1996, 12:377-379.

Kim and Caetano-Anollés BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:140
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/140

25. Bult CJ, White O, Olsen GJ, Zhou L, Fleischmann RD, Sutton GG, Blake JA,
FitzGerald LM, Clayton RA, Gocayne JD, et al: Complete genome sequence
of the methanogenic archaeon, Methanococcus jannaschii. Science 1996,
273:1058-1073.
26. Fitch WM, Upper K: The phylogeny of tRNA sequences provides evidence
for ambiguity reduction in the origin of the genetic code. Cold Spring
Harb Symp Quant Biol 1987, 52:759-767.
27. Caetano-Anollés G, Wang M, Caetano-Anollés D, Mittenthal JE: The origin,
evolution and structure of the protein world. Biochemical J 2009,
417:621-637.
28. Kim KM, Sung S, Caetano-Anollés G, Han JY, Kim H: An approach of
orthology detection from homologous sequences under minimum
evolution. Nucleic Acids Res 2008, 36:e110.
29. Morrison DA: Why would phylogenetics ignore computerized sequence
alignment? Syst Biol 2009, 58:150-158.
30. Murzin A, Brenner SE, Hubbard T, Chothia C: SCOP: a structural
classification of proteins for the investigation of sequences and
structures. J Mol Biol 1995, 247:536-540.
31. Liolios K, Mavrommatis K, Tavernarakis N, Kyrpides NC: The genome on line
database (GOLD) in 2007: status of genomic and metagenomic projects
and their associated metadata. Nucleic Acids Res 2007, 36:D475-D479.
32. Gough J, Karplus K, Hughey R, Chothia C: Assignment of homology to
genome sequences using a library of hidden Markov models that
represent all proteins of known structure. J Mol Biol 2001, 313:903-919.
33. Illergård K, Ardell DH, Elofsson A: Structure is three to ten times more
conserved than sequence - a study of structural response in protein
cores. Proteins 2009, 77:499-508.
34. Yang S, Doolittle RF, Bourne PE: Phylogeny determined based on protein
domain content. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005, 102:373-378.
35. Wang M, Caetano-Anollés G: Global phylogeny determined by the
combination of protein domains in proteomes. Mol Biol Evol 2006,
23:2444-2454.
36. Caetano-Anollés G, Kim HS, Mittenthal JE: The origin of modern metabolic
networks inferred from phylogenomic analysis of protein architecture.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2007, 104:9358-9363.
37. Gough J: Convergent evolution of domain architectures (is rare).
Bioinformatics 2005, 21:1464-1471.
38. Forslund K, Henricson A, Hollich V, Sonnhammer ELL: Domain tree-based
analysis of protein architecture evolution. Mol Biol Evol 2007, 25:254-264.
39. Yang S, Bourne PE: The evolutionary history of proteins domains viewed
by species phylogeny. PLoS One 2009, 4:e8378.
40. Brown JR: Ancient horizontal gene transfer. Nat Rev Genet 2003, 4:121-132.
41. Vogel C, Chothia C: Protein family expansions and biological complexity.
PLoS Comput Biol 2006, 2:e48.
42. Wang M, Yafremava LS, Caetano-Anollés D, Mittenthal JE, CaetanoAnollés G: Reductive evolution of architectural repertoires in proteomes
and the birth of the tripartite world. Genome Res 2007, 17:1572-1585.
43. Hillis DM, Huelsenbeck JP: Signal, noise, and reliability in molecular
phylogenetic analyses. J Hered 1992, 83:189-195.
44. Swofford DL: Phylogenetic analysis using parsimony and other program
(PAUP*), ver. 4.0b10. Sinauer, Sunderland, MA; 2002.
45. Kim KM, Caetano-Anollés G: Emergence and evolution of modern
molecular functions inferred from phylogenomic analysis of ontological
data. Mol Biol Evol 2010, 27:1710-1733.
46. Delaye L, Becerra A, Lazcano A: The last common ancestor: What’s in a
name? Orig Life Evol Biosph 2005, 35:537-554.
47. Caetano-Anollés G, Caetano-Anollés D: An evolutionarily structured
universe of protein architecture. Genome Res 2003, 13:1563-1571.
48. Caetano-Anollés G, Caetano-Anollés D: Universal sharing patterns in
proteomes and evolution of protein fold architecture and life. J Mol Evol
2005, 60:484-498.
49. Kunin V, Ouzounis CA: GeneTRACE - reconstruction of gene content of
ancestral species. Bioinformatics 2003, 19:1412-1416.
50. Lundberg JG: Wagner networks and ancestors. Syst Zool 1972, 18:1-32.
51. Caetano-Anollés G, Sun FJ, Wang M, Yafremava LS, Harish A, Kim HS,
Knudsen V, Caetano-Anollés D, Mittenthal JE: Origins and evolution of
modern biochemistry: insights from genomes and molecular structure.
Front Biosci 2008, 13:5212-5240.
52. Sun F-J, Caetano-Anollés G: The origin and evolution of tRNA infrerred
from phylogenetic analysis of structure. J Mol Evol 2008, 66:21-35.

Page 23 of 24

53. Sun F-J, Caetano-Anollés G: The evolutionary history of the structure of
5S ribosomal RNA. J Mol Evol 2009, 69:430-443.
54. Sun F-J, Caetano-Anollés G: The ancient history of the structure of
ribonuclease P and the early origins of Archaea. BMC Bioinformatics 2010,
11:153.
55. Xue H, Tong K-L, Marck C, Grosjean H, Wong JT-F: Transfer RNA paralogs:
evidence for genetic code-amino acid biosynthesis coevolution and an
archaeal root of life. Gene 2003, 310:59-66.
56. Xue H, Ng S-K, Tong K-L, Wong JT-F: Congruence of evidence for a
Methanopyrus-proximal root of life based on transfer RNA and
aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase genes. Gene 2005, 360:120-130.
57. Wong JT-F, Chen J, Mat W-K, Ng S-K, Xue H: Polyphasic evidence
delineating the root of life and roots of biological domains. Gene 2007,
403:39-52.
58. Di Giulio M: The tree of life might be rooted in the branch leading to
Nanoarchaeota. Gene 2007, 401:108-113.
59. Wang M, Boca SM, Kalelkar R, Mittenthal JE, Caetano-Anollés G: A
phylogenomic reconstruction of the protein world based on a genomic
census of protein fold architecture. Complexity 2006, 12:27-40.
60. Wang M, Caetano-Anollés G: The evolutionary mechanics of domain
organization in proteomes and the rise ofmodularity in the protein
world. Structure 2009, 17:66-78.
61. Kurland CG, Canbäck B, Berg OG: The origins of modern proteomes.
Biochimie 2007, 89:1454-1463.
62. Kurland CG, Collins LJ, Penny D: Genomics and the irreducible nature of
eukaryotic cells. Science 2006, 312:1011-1016.
63. Jain R, Rivera MC, Lake JA: Horizontal gene transfer among genomes: The
complexity hypothesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1999, 96:3801-3806.
64. Choi I-G, Kim SH: Global extent of horizontal gene transfer. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 2007, 104:4489-4494.
65. Danchin A, Fang G, Noria S: The extant core bacterial proteome is an
archive of the origin of life. Proteomics 2007, 7:875-889.
66. Uhlin U, Eklund H: Structure of ribonucleotide reductase protein R1.
Nature 1994, 370:533-539.
67. Stubbe J: Ribonucleotide reductases: the link between an RNA and a
DNA world? Curr Op Struct Biol 2000, 10:731-736.
68. Rodnina MV, Savelsbergh A, Katunin VI, Wintermeyer W: Hydrolysis of GTP
by elongation factor G drives tRNA movement on the ribosome. Nature
1997, 385:37-41.
69. Savelsbergh A, Mohr D, Wilden B, Wintermeyer W, Rodnina MV: Stimulation
of the GTPase activity of translation elongation factor G by ribosomal
protein L7/12. J Biol Chem 2000, 275:890-894.
70. Sessions AL, Doughty DM, Welander PV, Summons RE, Newman DK: The
continuing puzzle of the great oxidation event. Curr Biol 2009, 19:
R567-R574.
71. Tomitani A, Knoll AH, Cavanaugh CM, Ohno T: The evolutionary
diversification of cyanobacteria: molecular-phylogenetic and
paleontological perspectives. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006,
103:5442-5447.
72. Wächtershäuser G: Groundworks for an evolutionary biochemistry: the
iron-sulphur world. Prog Biophys Mol Biol 1992, 58:85-201.
73. Koga Y, Kyuragi T, Nishihara M, Sone N: Did archaeal and bacterial cells
arise independently from noncelullar precursors? A hypothesis stating
that the advent of membrane phospholipids with enantiomeric
glycerophosphate backbones caused the separation of the two lines of
descent. J Mol Evol 1998, 46:54-63.
74. Peretó J, López-Garcia P, Moreira D: Ancestral lipid biosynthesis and early
membrane evolution. Trends Biochem Sci 2004, 29:469-477.
75. Wächtershäuser G: From pre-cells to eukarya: a tale of two lipids. Mol
Microbiol 2003, 47:13-22.
76. Payandeh J, Pai EF: Enzyme-driven speciation: crystallizing Archaea via
lipid capture. J Mol Evol 2007, 64:364-374.
77. Morii H, Nishimara M, Koga Y: CTP: 2,3-di-O-geranylgeranyl-sn-glycero-1phosphate cytidyltransferase in the methanogenic archaeon
Methanothermobacter thermoautotrophicus. J Biol Chem 2000,
275:36568-36574.
78. Chen A, Zhang D, Poulter CD: (S)-geranylgeranylglyceryl phosphate
synthase. Purification and characterization of the first pathway-specific
enzyme in archaebacterial membrane lipid biosynthesis. J Biol Chem
1993, 268:21701-217055.

Kim and Caetano-Anollés BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:140
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/140

Page 24 of 24

79. Daiyasu H, Hiroike T, Koga Y, Toh H: Analysis of membrane
stereochemistry with homology modeling of sn-glycerol-1-phosphate
dehydrogenase. Prot Eng 2002, 15:987-995.
80. Ventura GT, Kenig F, Reddy CM, Schieber J, Frysinger GS, Nelson RK, Dinel E,
Gaines RB, Schaeffer P: Molecular evidence of Late Archean archaea and
the presence of a subsurface hydrothermal biosphere. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 2007, 104:14260-14265.
81. Fischer WW: Life before the rise of oxygen. Nature 2008, 455:1051-1052.
82. Wilson D, Pethica R, Zhou Y, Talbot C, Vogel C, Madera M, Chothia C,
Gough J: SUPERFAMILY-sophisticated comparative genomics, data
mining, visualization and phylogeny. Nucleic Acids Res 2009, 37:
D380-D386.
83. Gough J, Chothia C: SUPERFAMILY: HMMs representing all proteins of
known structure. SCOP sequence searches, alignments, and genome
assignments. Nucleic Acids Res 2002, 30:268-272.
84. Wilson D, Madera M, Vogel C, Chothia C, Gough J: The SUPERFAMILY
database in 2007: families and functions. Nucleic Acids Res 2007, 35:
D308-D313.
85. Labedan B, Boyen A, Baetens M, Charlier D, Chen P, Cunin R, Durbeco V,
Glansdorff N, Herve G, Legrain C, et al: The evolutionary history of
carbamoyltransferases: a complex set of paralogous genes was already
present in the last universal common ancestor. J Mol Evol 1999,
49:461-473.
86. Thiele K: The holy grail of the perfect character: The cladistic treatment
of morphometric data. Cladistics 1993, 9:275-304.
87. Sukumaran J, Holder MT: SumTrees: summarization of split support on
phylogenetic trees. version 10.0.2. 2008, (part of the DendroPy
phylogenetic computation library version 2.1.3);.
88. Nixon KC: The parsimony ratchet, a new method for rapid parsimony
analysis. Cladistics 1999, 15:407-414.
89. Andreeva A, Howorth D, Chandonia J-M, Brenner SE, Hubbard TJP,
Chothia C, Murzin AG: Data growth and its impact on the SCOP
database: new developments. Nucleic Acids Res 2008, 36:D419-D425.
doi:10.1186/1471-2148-11-140
Cite this article as: Kim and Caetano-Anollés: The proteomic complexity
and rise of the primordial ancestor of diversified life. BMC Evolutionary
Biology 2011 11:140.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
