<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title></title>
<meta name="Creator" content="Adobe InDesign CS4 (6.0.3)"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Adobe PDF Library 9.0"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Kim and Archibald BMC Biology 2010, 8:73
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/73

CO M M E N TA R Y 	

Open Access

Plastid evolution: gene transfer and the
maintenance of ‘stolen’ organelles
Eunsoo Kim and John M Archibald*
See research article http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/366

Acquired phototrophy in dinoflagellates
Most photosynthetic dinoflagellates harbor canonical
peridinin-pigmented plastids (of as yet unclear
evolutionary origin), but a handful of species acquired
their photosynthetic organelles from green algae, diatoms,
and haptophytes [3]. Some heterotrophic dino­ agellates
fl

also perform ‘acquired phototrophy’ by harboring
photosynthetic endosymbionts or sequestering plastids
from prey, a phenomenon known as klepto­ lastidy [4].
p
Gymnodinium acidotum, for example, acquires transient
plastids from cryptophytes, a phylum of small unicellular
algae (Figure 1a). In addition to the plastid, the dino­
flagellate retains the ‘nucleomorph’ (the secon­ ary endo­
d
symbiont nucleus), mitochondrion, and in some cases
the nucleus of the engulfed cryptophyte [5]. In contrast,
the dinoflagellate Amphidinium wigrense possesses three
membrane-bound transient plastids of cryptophyte
origin but does not retain a nucleomorph or any other
endosymbiont-derived organelles [6].
By hosting the plastids of other organisms, dino­ agel­
fl
lates that are otherwise heterotrophic can supplement
their diet by utilizing fixed carbon and other compounds
provided by photosynthetic plastids [4]. Predictably, the
extent to which dinoflagellate hosts depend on acquired
phototrophy increases as the availability of prey
decreases. When food is limiting, D. acuminata can
obtain 45 to 100% of its entire carbon budget from its
cryptophyte-derived, photosynthetic plastids, a fraction
that decreases to only 10 to 30% when prey is abundant
[7]. The retention time of transient plastids in dino­ agel­
fl
lates varies greatly depending on the species involved and
the conditions under which they are grown (Table 1). For
instance, cryptophyte-derived plastids of Gymnodinium
‘gracilentum’ persist for only 1 to 2 days whereas those of
Dinophysis caudata remain active for around 2 months
[8,9]. Collectively, these observations underscore the
signi­ cance of mixotrophy (the combination of photo­
fi
trophy and heterotrophy) for the survival and prolifera­
tion of dinoflagellates living in changing environmental
conditions, but do little to shed light on how the stolen
organelles maintain functionality for extended periods of
time.

*Correspondence: jmarchib@dal.ca
Canadian Institute for Advanced Research, Program in Integrated Microbial
Biodiversity, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Sir Charles
Tupper Medical Building, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS B3H 1X5, Canada

Plastids in Dinophysis
The dinoflagellate genus Dinophysis is broadly distributed
in the ocean and currently includes over 100 species,

Abstract
Many heterotrophic organisms sequester plastids from
prey algae and temporarily utilize their photosynthetic
capacity. A recent article in BMC Genomics reveals that
the dinoflagellate Dinophysis acuminata has acquired
photosynthesis-related genes by horizontal gene
transfer, which might explain its ability to retain ‘stolen’
plastids for extended periods of time.

The evolution of plastids - the light-gathering organelles
of eukaryotic algae and plants - was a pivotal event in
eukaryotic evolution. A number of eukaryotic lineages
have acquired photosynthesis directly from cyanobacteria
(that is, primary endosymbiosis) or indirectly via secon­
dary or even tertiary endosymbiotic events involving
eukaryotes in the role of both host and endosymbiont [1].
The dinoflagellates, a phylum of unicellular eukaryotes
con­ aining both photosynthetic and heterotrophic mem­
t
bers, are the undisputed champions of plastid acquisition,
having obtained plastids from phylogenetically diverse
algal groups. Using the latest transcriptome sequencing
technologies, Wisecaver and Hackett [2], in a paper
recently published in BMC Genomics, provide fascinating
insight into the genetics and cell biology of the
dinoflagellate Dinophysis acuminata, an organism whose
‘stolen’ plastids appear to be serviced by nucleus-encoded
proteins of diverse evolutionary origins.

© 2010 Kim and Archibald; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Kim and Archibald BMC Biology 2010, 8:73
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/73

Page 2 of 3

Figure 1. Light micrographs of the dinoflagellates Gymnodinium
acidotum and Dinophysis fortii. (a) G. acidotum harbors blue-greencolored, transient plastids that are derived from a Chroomonas-like
cryptophyte alga. (b) D. fortii periodically captures cryptophytederived, orange-colored plastids from the ‘photosynthetic’ ciliate
Myrionecta rubra. Scale information for (b) is not available. A normal
cell of D. fortii is typically 51 to 83 μm long and 41 to 58 μm wide. (a)
Photo courtesy of Lee W Wilcox and Gary J Wedemayer; (b) photo
courtesy of Kazuhiko Koike and Kiyotaka Takishita.

some of which pose major economic and health concerns
as agents of diarrhetic shellfish poisoning. Dinophysis is
well known for its ability to sequester and utilize
functional plastids of cryptophyte and, less commonly,
haptophyte origins [4]. Curiously, strains of Dinophysis
appear incapable of harvesting plastids directly from the
algal cells; they acquire them indirectly by engulfing the
ciliate Myrionecta rubra, a heterotroph that itself feeds
on cryptophytes belonging to the Teleaulax/Geminigera
clade [8]. In M. rubra, the cryptophyte-derived plastids
exist as chloroplast (plastid)-mitochondrial complexes
(CMCs), and one or more cryptophyte nuclei are retained
separately from the CMCs in the ciliate host cytoplasm
[4]. In contrast, cryptophyte-derived plastids of Dinophysis
are bounded by two membranes and are devoid of
nucleo­ orphs and mitochondria [8].
m
Whether or not the plastids of Dinophysis are perma­
nent or transient has been the subject of much debate.
Recent molecular data and culture experiments support

the idea that Dinophysis plastids are most likely to be
transient and need to be periodically ‘replaced’ by reuptake of photosynthetic M. rubra [8,10]. However,
differ­ nces in the ultrastructure of Dinophysis plastids
e
and those of free-living cryptophyte cells suggest to some
researchers that Dinophysis consumes M. rubra not to
replace its plastids, but rather to obtain growth factors
and other essential compounds [4].
In the case of the dinoflagellates D. caudata and D. fortii,
the acquired cryptophyte plastids remain func­ ional for
t
well over a month in the absence of the crypto­ hyte
p
nucleomorph and nucleus [8,11]. This is remark­ ble
a
given that present-day plastids possess at most around
200 protein-coding genes, a fraction of the coding
capacity of their cyanobacterial progenitors, and are
depen­ ent on the import of hundreds of nucleusd
encoded proteins. Wisecaver and Hackett [2] surveyed
the expressed gene set of D. acuminata in an effort to
deter­ ine the extent to which its nuclear genome
m
contains cryptophyte-derived genes for plastid-targeted
proteins that could aid in the long-term stability of stolen
plastids. In doing so, the authors took advantage of the
22-bp trans-spliced leader (SL) sequence present on
mature dinoflagellate mRNAs, but not on those of ciliates
or cryptophytes. D. acuminata poly(A)-primed cDNA
was amplified using a 5’ SL primer and sequenced using
ultra-high-throughput 454 pyrosequencing. To control
for the possibility of contamination, the transcriptomes
of the ciliate M. rubra and the cryptophyte Geminigera
cryophila, the organisms from which D. acuminata
acquires its plastid, were also surveyed. The results are
significant for two main reasons.
First, from a set of approximately 6,000 unique gene
clusters, Wisecaver and Hackett [2] identified only five
dinoflagellate nuclear genes that were strong candidates
for being plastid-related - psbU, petF, and psbM and
genes for the light-harvesting protein LI818 and the
triose-phosphate transporter TPT. As predicted, the
protein products of these five genes possess putative
transit peptides: that is, amino-terminal leader sequences
that are required to translocate host-synthesized proteins

Table 1. Retention time of transient plastids in dinoflagellates under laboratory conditions
Dinoflagellate host	

Source of transient plastids	

Retention time	

Dinophysis caudata	

Teleaulax sp. (cryptophyte) 	

Around 2 months	

[8]

Dinophysis fortii	

Teleaulax amphioxeia (cryptophyte)1	

At least 40 days	

[11]

Gymnodinium acidotum	

Chroomonas sp. (cryptophyte)	

At least 10 days	

[5]

Gymnodinium ‘gracilentum’	

Rhodomonas salina (cryptophyte)	

1-2 days	

[9]

Pfiesteria piscicida	

Rhodomonas sp. (cryptophyte)	

At least 9 days2	

[13]

Unnamed dinoflagellate	

Phaeocystis antarctica (haptophyte)	

5-8 months	

[14]

1

Reference

D. caudata and D. fortii cannot sequester plastids directly from the cryptophyte cells, and instead obtain them from the ciliate Myrionecta rubra that consumes
cryptophytes.
2
Retention time varies depending on light intensity.
1

Kim and Archibald BMC Biology 2010, 8:73
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/73

across the two inner plastid membranes in other algae
[1]. D. acuminata thus appears to possess significantly
fewer plastid-related genes in its nucleus than do dino­
flagellates with permanent plastids, suggesting that
transfer of additional genes for plastid-targeted proteins
must occur if the stolen plastids are to be fully integrated
into the host dinoflagellate. Second, sequence analyses
reveal that only one of the plastid-related genes identified
in D. acuminata (psbM) actually comes from the same
source as its stolen plastid - that is, cryptophyte algae.
The remaining four genes appear to have been acquired
by horizontal gene transfer from other sources, including
haptophytes and fucoxanthin-containing dinoflagellates [2].
The results of Wisecaver and Hackett [2] are particu­
larly interesting when contrasted with the evolution of
kleptoplastidy in the sea slug Elysia chlorotica, an
organism that harvests plastids from the stramenopile
alga Vaucheria litorea [12]. The transient plastids of
E. chlorotica remain remarkably stable for up to 10 months
in the absence of the algal nucleus. Recent studies have
uncovered a number of genes for putative plastidtargeted proteins in the sea-slug nucleus, such as psbO
(for photosystem II) and fcp (for light-harvesting
complexes) [12]. These sea-slug genes have uniformly
high sequence identities to homologs in V. litorea,
suggest­ ng that the genes were transferred relatively
i
recently from the algal nucleus. This is in stark contrast
to the situation in D. acuminata, whose putative plastidtargeted proteins have been acquired from multiple algal
sources. This difference is perhaps explained by the
trophic strategy of D. acuminata, which, in contrast to
E. chlorotica, consumes a variety of prey, including many
different photosynthetic algae, while performing acquired
phototrophy. Exactly when D. acuminata acquired these
‘foreign’ genes is unclear. Some or all heterotrophic dino­
flagellates are thought to be ancestrally photosynthetic
[1], and so at least some of them might be holdovers from
a time when Dinophysis species harbored more conven­
tional plastids.
The advent of ultra-high-throughput sequencing has
made it possible to obtain massive sequence datasets
from experimentally challenging organisms - and even
collections of intimately associated organisms - on a scale
unimaginable even a few years ago. The results of
Wisecaver and Hackett [2] represent a landmark in this
regard, providing an important launch point for future

Page 3 of 3

dissection of the molecular and biochemical processes
involved in dinoflagellate kleptoplastidy. Such experimen­
tation will include definitive proof that the gene products
in question are indeed targeted to the plastids in the
context of D. acuminata cells, and even deeper transcrip­
tome sequencing to further assess the degree of plastid
proteome mosaicism in these intriguing organisms.
Acknowledgements
We thank LW Wilcox, LE Graham, and JD Hackett for comments on an earlier
version of this article.
Published: 10 June 2010
References
1.	 Sanchez-Puerta MV, Delwiche CF: A hypothesis for plastid evolution in
chromalveolates. J Phycol 2008, 44:1097-1107.
2.	 Wisecaver JH, Hackett JD: Transcriptome analysis reveals nuclear-encoded
proteins for the maintenance of temporary plastids in the dinoflagellate
Dinophysis acuminata. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:366.
3.	 Hackett JD, Anderson DM, Erdner DL, Bhattacharya D: Dinoflagellates:
a remarkable evolutionary experiment. Am J Bot 2004, 91:1523-1534.
4.	 Johnson MD: The acquisition of phototrophy: adaptive strategies of
hosting endosymbionts and organelles. Photosynth Res 2010, in press.
5.	 Fields SD, Rhodes RG: Ingestion and retention of Chroomonas spp.
(Cryptophyceae) by Gymnodinium acidotum (Dinophyceae). J Phycol 1991,
27:525-529.
6.	 Wilcox LW, Wedemayer GJ: Dinoflagellate with blue-green chloroplasts
derived from an endosymbiotic eukaryote. Science 1985, 227:192-194.
7.	 Riisgaard K, Hansen PJ: Role of food uptake for photosynthesis, growth and
survival of the mixotrophic dinoflagellate Dinophysis acuminata. Mar Ecol
Prog Ser 2009, 381:51-62.
8.	 Park MG, Park JS, Kim M, Yih W: Plastid dynamics during survival of
Dinophysis caudata without its ciliate prey. J Phycol 2008, 44:1154-1163.
9.	 Skovgaard A: Role of chloroplast retention in a marine dinoflagellate. Aquat
Microb Ecol 1998, 15:293-301.
10.	 Takishita K, Koike K, Maruyama T, Ogata T: Molecular evidence for plastid
robbery (kleptoplastidy) in Dinophysis, a dinoflagellate causing diarrhetic
shellfish poisoning. Protist 2002, 153:293-302.
11.	 Nagai S, Nitshitani G, Tomaru Y, Sakiyama S, Kamiyama T: Predation by the
toxic dinoflagellate Dinophysis fortii on the ciliate Myrionecta rubra and
observation of sequestration of ciliate chloroplasts. J Phycol 2008,
44:909-922.
12.	 Rumpho ME, Worful JM, Lee J, Kannan K, Tyler MS, Bhattacharya D, Moustafa
A, Manhart JR: Horizontal gene transfer of the algal nuclear gene psbO to
the photosynthetic sea slug Elysia chlorotica. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008,
105:17867-17871.
13.	 Lewitus AJ, Glasgow HB, Burkholder JM: Kleptoplastidy in the toxic
dinoflagellate Pfiesteria piscicida (Dinophyceae). J Phycol 1999, 35:303-312.
14.	 Gast RJ, Moran DM, Dennett MR, Caron DA: Kleptoplasty in an Antarctic
dinoflagellate: caught in evolutionary transition? Environ Microbiol 2007,
9:39-45.

doi:10.1186/1741-7007-8-73
Cite this article as: Kim E, Archibald JM: Plastid evolution: gene transfer and
the maintenance of ‘stolen’ organelles. BMC Biology 2010, 8:73.

</pre>
</body>
</html>
