<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title></title>
<meta name="Creator" content="Adobe InDesign CS4 (6.0.3)"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Adobe PDF Library 9.0"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
King and Hurst BMC Biology 2010, 8:101
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/101

CO M M E N TA R Y 	

Open Access

Losing the desire: selection can promote obligate
asexuality
Kayla C King1 and Gregory DD Hurst2*
See research article http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/229

Abstract
Whilst parthenogenesis has evolved multiple times
from sexual invertebrate and vertebrate lineages, the
drivers and consequences of the sex-asex transition
remain mostly uncertain. A model by Stouthamer et al.
recently published in BMC Evolutionary Biology shows
a pathway by which obligate asexuality could be
selected for following endosymbiont infection.

Although sexual reproduction is costly, it is extremely
widespread and is the dominant and ancestral mode of
reproduction of eukaryotic organisms [1]. It is thus clear
that sex must confer great benefits, and parthenogenesis
(a type of asexual reproduction) is disadvantageous [2].
Despite their low evolutionary potential, parthenogenetic
lineages do ‘spin off ’ from sexual ancestors in a broad
range of animals [3]. Several vertebrate and invertebrate
species are composed of both sexual and asexual lineages.
Stouthamer et al. [4] have now published a model of how
obligate asexuality could evolve in parasitoid wasps with
the help of a symbiont.

Routes to parthenogenesis
There are several evolutionary routes to parthenogenesis
in animals [3] (Box 1). One of the more remarkable recent
experiments on the origin of asexuality demonstrated
that certain haplodiploid taxa could be ‘cured’ of
asexuality when treated with antibiotics [5]. Haplodiploid
taxa, which include many social insects such as termites
and wasps, produce males from unfertilized eggs and
females from fertilized eggs. This demonstration [5] was
explained by the fact that parthenogenesis can arise from
manipulation by endosymbionts.
This system is now one in which the forces driving the
establishment of asexual lineages are well known.
*Correspondence: g.hurst@liverpool.ac.uk
2
Institute of Integrative Biology, University of Liverpool, Liverpool L69 7ZB, UK

Bacterial symbionts (such as Wolbachia, Cardinium and
Rickettsia) can be transmitted only through the
cytoplasm of eggs, from a female to her offspring. Males
are essentially ‘dead ends’, and symbiont fitness is thus
maximized by converting male progeny to female
develop­ ent. In arrhenotokous haplodiploid taxa (such
m
as the parasitoid wasps studied by Stouthamer et al.
[4,5]), this can be achieved by the parasite taking haploid
unfertilized eggs that would develop into males and
diploidizing their genome, such that they develop as
females. At the start of this process, symbiont-infected
females do mate with males, and fertilized eggs resulting
from these matings develop into normal, sexually
produced daughters. It is only the unfertilized haploid
eggs that are subject to genome doubling and become
asexually produced daughters.

Some sex or no sex?
An important topic in the evolution of asexuality is the
degree to which newly derived parthenogenetic lineages
will be reproductively isolated from sexual ancestors.
Organisms can have lineages that are parthenogenetic
but experience rare sex with males (cyclically partheno­
genetic), whereas other lineages may be obligately parthe­
no­ enetic. Waterfleas (Daphnia spp.), are examples of
g
such organisms. Although some populations consist of
cyclic parthenogens, in others meiotic suppressor genes
have spread and transformed them to strict parthenogens
[6]. In addition, some parthenogenetic vertebrates arising
from hybridization show an incomplete loss of sex, and
females may still require insemination even if the sperm
do not contribute to the genetic composition of offspring.
In the case of symbiont-induced asexuality, an infected
female can be in the curious position of being able to
reproduce both sexually and asexually. All progeny are
daughters, with sexually produced female offspring
following from fertilization of haploid eggs and asexually
produced daughters arising from unfertilized eggs
following chromosome doubling. Obligate asexuality
occurs only when infection drives the complete loss of

© 2010 King and Hurst; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

King and Hurst BMC Biology 2010, 8:101
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/101

Box 1. Modes of parthenogenesis in animals
Organisms can possess lineages composed of facultative
parthenogens (tychoparthenogens) or obligate parthenogens.
In the case of the former, eggs infrequently and spontaneously
develop without fertilisation, whilst in the latter ’cloning‘ is
the only mode of reproduction. The forms of parthenogenesis
include:
Apomictic parthenogenesis (apomixis) - meiosis is suppressed
and unfertilized eggs develop into offspring by mitotic cell
division. Apomixis occurs in rotifers and waterfleas.
Automictic parthenogenesis (automixis) - meiosis occurs, but
diploidy is restored by duplication or fusion of gametes from the
mother. Automixis is found in some stick insects and weevils.
Gynogensis - sperm from males of a related species activate egg
development, but the sperm nuclei do not fuse with egg nuclei.
Only maternal genes are expressed in the offspring.
Hybridogenesis - the genome is transmitted both sexually and
clonally. Sperm and egg nuclei fuse and genes from the father
are expressed in the offspring. When female offspring produce
their own eggs, only the maternal genome is transmitted to the
next generation; the father’s genes are discarded. Hybridogenesis
can occur in organisms that are hybrids of two species.
If unfertilized eggs develop into females, the organisms
are thelytokous parthenogens. The unfertilized eggs of
arrhenotokous parthenogens develop into males, as in the case
of the haplodiploid insects of interest in Stouthamer et al. [1].

males in the population. This outcome requires two
conditions to be met: (i) the bacterium must transmit
from mother to daughter with near perfect fidelity, such
that all females in the population are infected; and (ii) the
diploidization of infected males must occur with high
penetrance, such that no males slip through the femini­ a­
z
tion process. Despite these stringent conditions, the
majority of species carrying parthenogenesis-inducing
symbionts are obligately asexual and mixed sexual/
asexual populations are rare.
This apparent contradiction - that conditions for obli­
gate transition to symbiont-induced asexuality are
stringent, but the process occurs commonly - has been
addressed in a new model by Stouthamer et al. [4]. Their
idea is motivated by the observation that a lack of sex in
species in which feminizing-symbionts are fixed is
associated not just with symbiont presence, but also with
loss of sexual function in females [7] (males created
through antibiotic exposure are somewhat sexually func­
tional [8]). They [4] provide a pathway for the transition
from facultative sex to obligate asexuality that operates
through selection. Simply, female receptivity to mating or
a female’s ability to store and process sperm are degraded
by selection to produce sons. This selection acts when the
population is still sexual, and is driven by the presence of
the female-biased population sex ratio associated with
the actions of the symbiont.

Page 2 of 3

Their argument is an elegant one. As a feminizing
infection invades, the sex ratio becomes progressively
more female-biased. However, sex is still occurring, and
natural selection at the level of the individual will act to
promote production of sons. In arrhenotokous haplo­
diploid taxa, male-biased sex ratios can be achieved by
females either refusing to mate or not using sperm. An
uninfected mother that does not fertilize her eggs will
produce only sons, but an infected mother will produce
the maximal number of sons possible given the con­
straints of a feminizing symbiont. A conflict between
cytoplasmic genes (favoring Wolbachia transmission and
daughter production) and nuclear genes (favoring male
production by preventing egg fertilization) ensues. Traits
favoring production of males will, in an infected mother,
in fact be rather ineffective as the symbiont causes the
diploidization of unfertilized eggs. Nevertheless, the
conflict results in the spread of traits that make sex
impossible for females. As a result, the transition to
parthenogenesis is irreversible.

Outcomes of a sexual past and an infected,
parthenogenetic future
It is commonly observed that parthenogenetic lineages
are short twigs on phylogenetic trees, implying that most
are short lived on an evolutionary timescale. This is
generally thought to be the result of the inherent low
adaptability of asexual populations; such populations
have ‘difficulty’ both in removing deleterious mutations
and in recombining advantageous mutations into a single
genome. However, it is possible that the low adaptability
of asexual populations is particularly acute in recently
evolved clones. This may explain the contrast between
the few parthenogenetic lineages that are ancient and the
majority which are short lived.
Low adaptability of newly parthenogenetic lineages
may be driven by the process discussed by Stouthamer
et al. [4], that is, parthenogenetic lineages contain many
useless sexually selected traits. Although the authors [4]
argue that directly selected virginity mutations drive the
sexual-asexual transition, they note that once a popu­
lation switches from sexual to parthenogenetic repro­
duc­ ion, many genes for sexual function (for attracting
t
mates, copulation or fertilization) become functionally
redundant. If any of these traits are costly, then
mutations that erode these functions will be under
positive selection, and there will be a series of selective
sweeps, each reducing sexual traits that are now costly.
Study of Wolbachia-infected parthenogenetic popula­
tions indeed verifies that morphological and physio­
logical sexual traits shaped previously by male-female
coevolution do degrade, but the rate of erosion may
vary among traits [9]. Essentially, the older the
partheno­ enetic lineage or the longer the population
g

King and Hurst BMC Biology 2010, 8:101
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/101

has been fixed for infection, the less sexually functional
females and males are expected to be.
We cannot currently quantify the relative contributions
of positive selection and mutation accumulation to the
observed loss of function in the courtship and repro­
ductive systems of recent asexual lineages. It is likely,
however, that many redundant sexual traits are costly and
the early phase of asexual life is characterized by
recurrent bouts of positive selection favoring loss-offunction mutations in the reproductive system. Because
asexual populations lack recombination, these selective
sweeps will reduce standing genetic diversity. Reduced
genetic diversity is thought to put asexual lineages at a
great disadvantage when faced with complex or fluctuat­
ing environments (such as coevolving parasites [10]) and
thus we arrive at a potential explanation for why many
parthenogenetic populations are short lived. Overall,
positive selection for the removal of redundant sexual
traits in newly established asexual lineages is likely to
reduce standing genetic variation, which may make the
population more susceptible to a range of extinction
risks associated with fluctuating biotic and abiotic
environ­ ents.
m
Why and how asexuality arises from otherwise sexual
species remains, for the most part, an enigma to
evolutionary biologists. The pathway modeled by Stout­
hamer et al. [4] potentially resolves the conundrum of
obligate asexuality through manipulation by symbionts.
Under their model, the combination of symbiont
manipulation and natural selection can actually favor
obligate asexuality in the short term. However, in the
long term, the selective sweeps removing superfluous
sexual traits may erode genetic variation and may be
critical in increasing the vulnerability of novel asexual
lineages to extinction.

Page 3 of 3

Author details
1
Department of Biology, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN 47405, USA.
2
Institute of Integrative Biology, University of Liverpool, Liverpool L69 7ZB, UK.
Published: 28 July 2010
References
1.	 Malik S-B, Pightling AW, Stefaniak LM, Schurko AM, Logsdon JM: An
expanded inventory of conserved meiotic genes provides evidence for
sex in Trichomonas vaginalis. PLoS One 2007, 3:e2879.
2.	 Bell G: The Masterpiece of Nature: the Evolution and Genetics of Asexuality.
Berkeley, CA: University of California Press; 1982.
3.	 Simon J-C, Delmotte F, Rispe C, Crease T: Phylogenetic relationships
between parthenogens and their sexual relatives: the possible routes to
parthenogenesis in animals. Biol J Linn Soc 2003, 79:151-163.
4.	 Stouthamer R, Russell JE, Vavre F, Nunney L: Parthenogenesis inducing
Wolbachia ends with irreversible loss of sexual reproduction. BMC Evol Biol
2010, 10:229
5.	 Stouthamer R, Luck RF, Hamilton WD: Antibiotics cause parthenogenetic
Trichogramma (Hymenoptera/Trichogrammatidae) to revert to sex. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 1990, 87:2424-2427.
6.	 Lynch M, Seyfert A, Eads B, Williams E: Localization of the genetic
determinants of meiosis suppression in Daphnia pulex. Genetics 2008,
180:317-327.
7.	 Pannebakker BA, Schidlo NS, Boskamp GJF, Dekker L, Van Dooren TJM,
Beukeboom LW, Zwann BJ, Brakefield PM, Van Alphen JJM: Sexual
functionality of Leptopilina clavipes (Hymenoptera: Figitidae) after
reversing Wolbachia-induced parthenogenesis. J Evol Biol 2005,
18:1019-1028.
8.	 Russell JE, Stouthamer R: The genetics and evolution of obligate
reproductive parasitism in Trichogramma pretiosum infected with
parthenogensis-inducing Wolbachia. Heredity 2010, doi: 10.1038/
hdy.2010.48.
9.	 Kraaijeveld K, Franco P, Reumer BM, Van Alphen JJM: Effects of
parthenogenesis and geographic isolation on female sexual traits in a
parasitoid wasp. Evolution 2009, 63:3085-3096.
10.	 Jokela J, Dybdahl MF, Lively CM: The maintenance of sex, clonal dynamics,
and host-parasite coevolution in a mixed population of sexual and
asexual snails. Am Nat 2009, 174:S43-S53.

doi:10.1186/1741-7007-8-101
Cite this article as: King KC, Hurst GDD: Losing the desire: selection can
promote obligate asexuality. BMC Biology 2010, 8:101.

</pre>
</body>
</html>
