<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Ultraviolet stress delays chromosome replication in light/dark synchronized cells of the marine cyanobacterium Prochlorococcus marinus PCC9511</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Microbiology 2010 10:204. doi:10.1186/1471-2180-10-204"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Christian Kolowrat"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Kolowrat et al. BMC Microbiology 2010, 10:204
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/10/204

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Ultraviolet stress delays chromosome replication
in light/dark synchronized cells of the marine
cyanobacterium Prochlorococcus marinus PCC9511
Christian Kolowrat1,2, Frédéric Partensky1,2*, Daniella Mella-Flores1,2, Gildas Le Corguillé1,3, Christophe Boutte1,2,
Nicolas Blot1,2,4, Morgane Ratin1,2, Martial Ferréol5, Xavier Lecomte1,2, Priscillia Gourvil1,2, Jean-François Lennon1,
David M Kehoe6, Laurence Garczarek1,2

Abstract
Background: The marine cyanobacterium Prochlorococcus is very abundant in warm, nutrient-poor oceanic areas.
The upper mixed layer of oceans is populated by high light-adapted Prochlorococcus ecotypes, which despite their
tiny genome (~1.7 Mb) seem to have developed efficient strategies to cope with stressful levels of
photosynthetically active and ultraviolet (UV) radiation. At a molecular level, little is known yet about how such
minimalist microorganisms manage to sustain high growth rates and avoid potentially detrimental, UV-induced
mutations to their DNA. To address this question, we studied the cell cycle dynamics of P. marinus PCC9511 cells
grown under high fluxes of visible light in the presence or absence of UV radiation. Near natural light-dark cycles
of both light sources were obtained using a custom-designed illumination system (cyclostat). Expression patterns
of key DNA synthesis and repair, cell division, and clock genes were analyzed in order to decipher molecular
mechanisms of adaptation to UV radiation.
Results: The cell cycle of P. marinus PCC9511 was strongly synchronized by the day-night cycle. The most
conspicuous response of cells to UV radiation was a delay in chromosome replication, with a peak of DNA
synthesis shifted about 2 h into the dark period. This delay was seemingly linked to a strong downregulation of
genes governing DNA replication (dnaA) and cell division (ftsZ, sepF), whereas most genes involved in DNA repair
(such as recA, phrA, uvrA, ruvC, umuC) were already activated under high visible light and their expression levels
were only slightly affected by additional UV exposure.
Conclusions: Prochlorococcus cells modified the timing of the S phase in response to UV exposure, therefore
reducing the risk that mutations would occur during this particularly sensitive stage of the cell cycle. We identified
several possible explanations for the observed timeshift. Among these, the sharp decrease in transcript levels of the
dnaA gene, encoding the DNA replication initiator protein, is sufficient by itself to explain this response, since DNA
synthesis starts only when the cellular concentration of DnaA reaches a critical threshold. However, the observed
response likely results from a more complex combination of UV-altered biological processes.

Background
Since its discovery two decades ago [1], the marine cyanobacterial genus Prochlorococcus has rapidly become
established as a model organism in microbial ecology
[2-4]. As for other cyanobacteria with an obligate photoautotrophic lifestyle, Prochlorococcus has an absolute
* Correspondence: partensky@sb-roscoff.fr
1
UPMC-Université Paris 06, Station Biologique, Place Georges Teissier, 29680
Roscoff, France

dependency on solar energy for cell maintenance and
multiplication [5]. In the field, the rhythmic nature of
light availability imposes a synchronization of its whole
metabolism. Indeed, light/dark (L/D) entrained Prochlorococcus cells were shown to display a strong diurnal periodicity of many cellular functions, including cell cycle
[6-8], pigment synthesis [9], carbon fixation [10], and
amino acid uptake [11]. Synchronization primarily acts
on gene expression, as evidenced first by studies focusing on individual cell cycle (e.g. dnaA, ftsZ) and

© 2010 Kolowrat et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Kolowrat et al. BMC Microbiology 2010, 10:204
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/10/204

photosynthesis related genes (e.g. pcbA, psbA) [12,13],
then more recently at the whole transcriptome level
[14]. Under optimal growth conditions, generation times
of Prochlorococcus populations are generally around
24 h, though faster growth rates have sometimes been
reported [8]. The DNA replication period is usually
restricted to the late afternoon and dusk period and
cytokinesis occurs during the night [6,7,13].
Studying the interplay between energy source fluctuations (i.e. changes in light quantities and/or spectral
composition) and cell cycle dynamics of Prochlorococcus
is of special interest as it lays the foundation for designing reliable population growth models for this key
organism, considered to be the most abundant free-living photosynthetic organism on Earth [15]. As early as
1995, Vaulot and coworkers [7] noticed that in field
populations of Prochlorococcus, the timing of DNA
replication varied with depth, with the initiation of DNA
synthesis occurring about 3 h earlier below the thermocline than in the upper mixed layer. At that time, these
authors interpreted this delay as a possible protective
mechanism to prevent exposure of replicating DNA to
the high midday irradiances and especially UV. Since
then, a number of studies have shown that Prochlorococcus populations are in fact composed of several genetically distinct ecotypes adapted to different light niches
in the water column [16-18]. The upper mixed layer is
dominated by the so-called high light adapted (HL) ecotypes (HLI and HLII, also called eMED4 and eMIT9312,
respectively), whereas low light adapted (LL) ecotypes
(such as LLII and LLIV, also called eSS120 and
eMIT9313, respectively) are restricted to the bottom of
the euphotic zone [19-22]. These studies also showed
that a third ecotype (eNATL), initially classified as a LL
clade (LLI), preferentially lived at intermediate depth,
reaching maximal concentrations in the vicinity of the
thermocline. Comparative genomics revealed that these
various ecotypes display a number of genomic differences, including distinct sets of genes involved in DNA
repair pathways [3,23,24]. For instance, genes encoding
DNA photolyases, which are involved in the repair of
thymidine dimers, are found in HL and eNATL ecotypes, but not in “true” LL strains (i.e., LLII-IV clades).
Besides this light niche specialization, a dramatic genome reduction has affected all Prochlorococcus lineages
except the LLIV clade, situated at the base of the Prochlorococcus radiation. This streamlining process seemingly reduced their signal transduction and gene
expression regulatory capacity, raising the question how
Prochlorococcus cells sense environmental signals and
translate them into cellular responses [25]. Thus, HL
ecotypes possess only five sensor histidine kinases and
seven response regulators, the two protein types that
make up two-component regulatory systems in

Page 2 of 24

cyanobacteria [4,24,26,27]. As this set is considerably
smaller than that found in most other prokaryotes, additional regulatory mechanisms are likely to exist. Recent
experimental evidence indeed suggested the involvement
of sophisticated post-translational regulatory mechanisms and a key role of non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) in
acclimation processes of Prochlorococcus marinus MED4
cells to a variety of environmental stresses [28].
The discovery of ecotypes with different light response
characteristics, each with a specific depth distribution in
the field calls into question the abovementioned interpretation of the delay in DNA synthesis initiation
noticed in field populations by Vaulot and coworkers
[7]. Comparative cell cycle dynamics of the P. marinus
HLI strain MED4 and the LLII strain SS120 under similar light/dark conditions indeed showed that SS120
initiated DNA replication 1-2 h earlier than MED4 [6].
So, ecotypic differences may also explain this delay. In
the present paper, we reexamine this issue by directly
characterizing the effects of UV radiation on the cell
cycle dynamics and gene expression patterns of L/D
synchronized cultures of the HLI strain PCC9511.

Results
Comparative cell cycle dynamics of acclimated P. marinus
PCC9511 cells grown in batch cultures with and without
UV radiation

A first series of preliminary experiments using batch
cultures of P. marinus PCC9511 was performed in order
to examine the effects of UV exposure on cell cycle and
growth. Cells were acclimated for several weeks to a
modulated 12 h/12 h L/D cycle of photosynthetically
available radiation (PAR) reaching about 900 μmol
photons m-2 s-1 at virtual noon (HL condition), or with
modulated UV radiation added (HL+UV condition), the
UV dose at noon reaching 7.6 W m-2 for UV-A and 0.6
W m-2 for UV-B (see additional file 1: Fig. S1). Samples
were then taken every hour during three consecutive
days and the DNA content of cells was measured by
flow cytometry (Fig. 1). In both light conditions, Prochlorococcus population growth conformed to the slowgrowth case of Cooper and Helmstetter’s prokaryotic
cell cycle model [29], with only one DNA replication
round per day. Indeed, as described before [6,7], Prochlorococcus DNA distributions always resembled the
characteristic bimodal DNA distributions observed for
eukaryotes, with a first discrete gap phase (G1), where
cells possess one chromosome copy, preceding a well
defined chromosome replication phase (S), followed by a
second gap phase (G 2 ), where cells have completed
DNA replication but have not yet divided, and thus possess two chromosome copies (see additional file 2: Fig.
S2). The G1/S/G2 designation will therefore be used in
the text hereafter.

Kolowrat et al. BMC Microbiology 2010, 10:204
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/10/204

Page 3 of 24

Figure 1 Effect of UV exposure on the timing of the cell cycle phases of Prochlorococcus marinus PCC9511 cells grown over a 12 h/12
h light/dark cycle in batch culture. A, distribution of cells in G1 (blue), S (red) and G2 (green) phases for batch cultures of PCC9511 grown
under HL. B, same for HL+UV conditions. The experiment was done in duplicates shown by filled and empty symbols. Note that only the UV
radiation curve is shown in graph B since the visible light curve is the same as in graph A. White and black bars indicate light and dark periods.
The dashed line indicates the irradiance level (right axis). HL, high light; PAR, photosynthetically available radiation; UV, ultraviolet radiation.

Figure 1 shows the time course variations of the percentages of cells in the different phases of the cell cycle.
Under HL condition, cells started to enter the S phase
about 4 h before the light-to-dark transition (LDT) and
the peak of S cells was reached exactly at the LDT. The

first G2 cells appeared at the LDT and the peak of G2
cells was reached 4 h later. Most cells had completed
division before virtual sunrise, as shown by a percentage
of cells in G1 close to 100% at (or 1 h after) that time
(Fig. 1A). PCC9511 cultures acclimated to HL+UV

Kolowrat et al. BMC Microbiology 2010, 10:204
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/10/204

Page 4 of 24

conditions showed a remarkable cytological response
with regard to the timing of chromosome replication. In
the presence of UV, entry into S was clearly delayed,
with the onset of chromosome replication occurring
about 1 h before the LDT and the maximum number of
cells in S phase reached 2 h after the LDT. Entry into
G2 was also delayed by 3 h, but the peak of G2 cells was
reached more quickly, so that it occurred on average
only 1 h after that observed under the HL condition
(Fig. 1B).
The faster progression of cells through S and G 2
phases under HL+UV than HL only conditions in batch
culture was confirmed by calculating the lengths of the
S and G2 phases, which were shorter in the former condition (Table 1). Cells grown under HL+UV exhibited a
higher level of synchronization (as shown by a lower
synchronization index, Sr) than those grown under HL
only. However, the calculated growth rates were not significantly different between the two conditions. Therefore, the dose of UV irradiation that was used in this
experiment did not prevent cells from growing at near
maximal rate despite the delay of entry in S phase
(Table 1). It must be noted that growth rates calculated
from the percentages of cells in S and G2 (μcc) using the
method described by Carpenter & Chang [30] were systematically about 10% higher than those calculated from
the change in cell number (μnb). Since the latter method
was used to assess the growth rate of continuous cultures (see below), these experiments in batch cultures
were therefore useful to estimate the bias brought by
these cell cycle-based growth rate measurements.
Cell cycle dynamics of P. marinus PCC9511 cells in batch
culture during shifts to a different light condition

A second series of preliminary experiments in batch culture was performed to see i) whether changes in PAR
level from modulated low light (LL; corresponding to a
maximum irradiance level E max at noon ~ 100 μmol
photons m-2 s-1) to modulated HL (Emax at noon ~ 900

μmol photons m-2 s-1) would also affect the timing of
the initiation of DNA replication in P. marinus cells and
ii) how fast was the delay in chromosome replication
observed when PCC9511 cells pre-acclimated to HL
were suddenly exposed to HL+UV conditions.
When acclimated to modulated LL, P. marinus cells
generally started chromosome replication slightly earlier
(LDT minus 5 h) than under HL conditions and the S
phase maximum was also reached 1 h earlier (Fig. 2A).
When shifted to HL, cells initiated DNA replication at
the same time as in LL, but the peak of S cells was
shifted to the LDT, as observed for HL acclimated cells.
This event was accompanied by a notable increase in
the peak height of the S cell maximum (from 48 to
85%) on the first day of increased PAR, but on the second day after HL shift, this percentage decreased to
levels (ca. 65%) comparable to those observed in HL
acclimated cultures (compare Figs. 1A and 2A). Indeed,
PCC9511 cells grew much faster under HL than LL conditions and the maximal growth rate (comparable to
that of HL acclimated cells) was reached already on the
first day of increased PAR (Table 2). This enhanced
growth rate resulted from a dramatic shortening of the
G1 phase and, to a less extent, of the G2 phase, whereas
the S phase was extended (Table 2). However, this
rather long S phase, as compared to HL acclimated
cells, suggests that cultures were not physiologically
fully acclimated to the new light conditions, even two
days after the shift.
In the second shift experiment, HL acclimated
PCC9511 cultures were sampled during one complete
L/D cycle, then on the following two days were subjected to a modulated L/D cycle of HL+UV radiations.
As for the HL+UV acclimated cells, UV exposure
seemed to cause a delay in the initiation of DNA replication, but with the peak of S cells occurring 3 to 4 h
after the LDT (Fig. 2B), instead of 2 h. Furthermore,
although the UV dose received by the cells was the
same in the UV acclimation and UV shift experiments,

Table 1 Growth parameters of batch and continuous cultures of Prochlorococcus marinus PCC9511 grown under a 12
h/12 h light/dark cycle under HL supplemented or not with UV radiations
Batch Cultures

Continuous Cultures

Growth parameters*

HL

HL+UV

HL

HL+UV
0.66 ± 0.04

μcc (d )

0.67 ± 0.05

0.68 ± 0.03

0.69 ± 0.09

μnb (d-1)

0.60 ± 0.13

0.62 ± 0.11

n.a.

n.a.

TG1 (h)

16.8 ± 1.6

18.4 ± 0.8

17.8 ± 2.5

19.0 ± 1.5

-1

TS (h)

4.03 ± 0.30

3.47 ± 0.28

3.71 ± 0.77

3.83 ± 0.49

TG2 (h)

3.97 ± 0.30

2.53 ± 0.28

2.95 ± 0.31

2.51 ± 0.60

Sr

32.4 ± 2.2

24.6 ± 1.1

27.2 ± 1.2

25.0 ± 1.4

Values are averages (± SD) of three consecutive days and two biological replicates
* Growth rates per day calculated from: cell cycle data (μcc) or cell numbers (μnb); TG1, TS, TG2: cell cycle phase duration in hours; Sr: rate of synchronization
estimated from the ratio (TS+TG2)/(TG1+TS+TG2)
n.a.: not applicable

Kolowrat et al. BMC Microbiology 2010, 10:204
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/10/204

Page 5 of 24

Figure 2 Effect of shifting light/dark-entrained cultures to a new light condition on the cell cycle phase patterns of Prochlorococcus
marinus PCC9511. A, distribution of cells in G1 (blue), S (red) and G2 (green) phases for small volume batch cultures of PCC9511 acclimated
under LL and shifted to HL conditions. B, HL acclimated cultures were followed during one L/D cycle then shifted to HL+UV conditions. The
experiment was done in duplicates shown by filled and empty symbols. Note that only the UV radiation curve is shown in graph B since the
visible light curve is the same as in graph A. Black arrows indicate the time point of the shift. White and black bars indicate light and dark
periods. The dashed line indicates the growth irradiance curve (right axis). Abbreviations as in Fig. 1.

UV irradiation was clearly much more stressful for the
cells in the second case, as they reacted by dramatically
decreasing their growth rate (Table 3), an effect which
was even more marked on the second day after switching the UV lamps on.

Comparative cell cycle dynamics of acclimated P. marinus
PCC9511 cells grown in continuous cultures with and
without UV radiation

Large volume, continuous cultures of P. marinus cells
acclimated to either HL or HL+UV conditions were

Kolowrat et al. BMC Microbiology 2010, 10:204
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/10/204

Page 6 of 24

Table 2 Growth parameters of PCC9511 batch cultures
shifted from LL to HL during 12 h/12 h L/D cycles
Growth Parameters*

Cycle 1 (LL)

Cycle 2 (HL)

Cycle 3 (HL)

μcc (d-1)

0.43 ± 0.03

0.67 ± 0.01

0.62 ± 0.01

-1

μnb (d )

0.37 ± 0.04

0.59 ± 0.09

0.58 ± 0.05

TG1 (h)
TS (h)

30.8 ± 3.1
4.12 ± 0.01

16.7 ± 0.3
5.15 ± 0.14

18.8 ± 0.2
5.53 ± 0.12

TG2 (h)

3.89 ± 0.01

2.85 ± 0.14

2.47 ± 0.12

Sr

20.8 ± 1.7

32.4 ± 0.4

29.8 ± 0.3

during the whole sampling period used for gene expression analyses.

Values shown are averages (± mean deviation) of two biological replicates
* Growth rates per day calculated from: cell cycle data (μcc) or cell numbers
(μnb); TG1, TS, TG2: cell cycle phase duration in hours; Sr: rate of synchronization
estimated from the ratio (TS+TG2)/(TG1+TS+TG2)

used for gene expression analyses. These cultures were
sampled for RNA eight times per day during three consecutive days. A shorter sampling interval (every 2 h)
was used during the DNA replication period (Fig. 3), to
closely analyze transcriptome changes caused by UV
radiation during this critical phase of the cell cycle. The
pattern of G1, S and G2 phases in HL+UV was similar
to that in the batch experiments, with the same 2 h
delay of the S phase into the dark period (Fig. 1). However, in HL conditions, the G2 maximum in continuous
culture occurred on average 1 h earlier than in batch
cultures due to a shorter G2 period and a better synchronization index of the whole population (Table 1).
This is possibly linked to the particularly fast growth
rate (μcc of 0.71 d-1, corresponding approximately to a
μnb of 0.64 d-1) observed in this experiment (Table 1).
Another notable difference between the two sets of
experiments is the fact that during the second and third
day in the continuous HL+UV culture, there was a
shoulder on the left of the S peak (Fig. 3), suggesting
that a small percentage of cells already had entered into
S phase 2 h before the LDT, though the bulk of the cell
population replicated DNA only during the dark period.
The comparison of μcc between batch and continuous
cultures clearly demonstrated that the latter were growing exponentially in both HL and HL+UV conditions
Table 3 Growth parameters of PCC9511 batch cultures
shifted from HL to HL+UV during 12 h/12 h L/D cycles
Growth
Parameters*

Cycle 1
(HL)

Cycle 2 (HL
+UV)

Cycle 3 (HL
+UV)

μcc (d-1)
μnb (d-1)

0.69 ± 0.02
0.64 ± 0.05

0.61 ± 0.01
0.45 ± 0.02

0.45 ± 0.00
0.1 ± 0.02

TG1 (h)

18.0 ± 0.6

21.4 ± 0.3

29.3 ± 0.2

TS (h)

3.67 ± 0.14

3.72 ± 0.09

6.25 ± 0.03

TG2 (h)

2.33 ± 0.14

2.28 ± 0.09

1.75 ± 0.03

Sr

25.0 ± 0.7

21.9 ± 0.2

21.5 ± 0.1

Values shown are averages (± mean deviation) of two biological replicates
*Growth rates per day calculated from: cell cycle data (μcc) or cell numbers
(μnb); TG1, TS, TG2: cell cycle phase duration in hours; Sr: rate of synchronization
estimated from the ratio (TS+TG2)/(TG1+TS+TG2)

Effects of ultraviolet radiation on the whole
transcriptome dynamics

Microarray analyses were used to identify which genes
were differentially expressed between HL and HL+UV
during the active phases of the cell cycle of P. marinus
PCC9511, with the goal to understand the molecular
bases of the delay of DNA replication in the latter condition. We made pairwise comparisons of microarray
datasets corresponding to the same time points around
the LDT in HL+UV and HL conditions, i.e. 15:00
(UV15 vs. HL15; corresponding to the G1 phase in each
condition), 18:00 (UV18 vs. HL18), 20:00 (UV20 vs.
HL20) and 22:00 (UV22 vs. HL22; corresponding to the
G 2 phase in each condition). To better analyze the
changes in gene expression patterns occurring during
the DNA synthesis (S) phase, we also compared samples
taken at 20:00 in HL+UV and at 18:00 in HL (UV20 vs.
HL18), respectively, as this corresponds to the maximum percentage of cells in S for each condition (see
Fig. 3).
Overall, 217 genes of the 1,963 analyzed genes (11.1%)
showed statistically significant differential expression
levels in all comparisons performed between the two
light conditions, with a false discovery rate (FDR) ≤ 0.1
using t-test and/or LIMMA analyses (including 115
genes with significant fold change (FC) values, i.e. with
log2(FC) > 1; see Fig. 4 and additional file 3: Table T1).
The greatest number of differentially expressed genes
was obtained for the UV18 vs. HL18 (136 genes, including 66 with log2(FC) > 1; Fig. 4) and the UV20 vs. HL18
comparisons (86 genes, including 45 with log2(FC) > 1;
Fig. 4).
Hierarchical clustering analysis using Pearson’s correlation of the whole expression dataset (averaged over 2
consecutive days) showed that for any given light treatment and time of the day, cultures A and B grouped
well together (Fig. 5). This showed that experimental
conditions influenced the expression data more than did
technical and biological variability between replicates.
Furthermore, whole transcriptomic profiles clustered
according to the sampling time and/or cell cycle stage,
since UV15 and HL15 corresponded to G1, UV20 and
HL18 to S, and UV22 and HL22 to G2. It is noteworthy
that the two replicates of UV18 were not congruent,
since sample B clustered close to HL15 and UV15, as
expected for cells that are seemingly arrested in G 1 ,
whereas sample A clustered with the HL18 dataset, i.e.
according to sampling time. Finally, the HL20 dataset
clustered with the UV22 and HL22 datasets, consistent
with the fact that part of the population of the HL20
sample was already in G2 (see Fig. 3A). Thus, it seems

Kolowrat et al. BMC Microbiology 2010, 10:204
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/10/204

Page 7 of 24

Figure 3 Effect of UV exposure on the timing of the cell cycle phases of Prochlorococcus marinus PCC9511 cells grown in large
volume, continuous cultures used for real time quantitative PCR (qPCR) and microarray analyses. A, distribution of G1 (blue), S (red) and
G2 (green) phases for large volume continuous cultures of PCC9511 grown acclimated to HL. B, same for HL+UV conditions. The experiment was
done in duplicates shown by filled and empty symbols. Note that only the UV radiation curve is shown in graph B since the visible light (PAR)
curve is the same as in graph A. Asterisks indicate the time points of sampling for qPCR (grey) and microarrays (black). White and black bars
indicate light and dark periods. The dashed line indicates the growth irradiance (right axis). Abbreviations as in Fig. 1.

that the S phase delay had a strong effect on the
PCC9511 transcriptome, competing with the strong
effect of diurnal rhythm, since most genes are lightregulated in these organisms [14].
Among the statistically significant genes mentioned
above, only 115 genes (or 53.0%) displayed fold changes
higher than two-fold in HL vs. HL+UV timepoint

pairwise comparisons (see Fig. 4 and additional file 3:
Table T1). The following paragraphs discuss the most
meaningful comparisons.
Eleven genes from this dataset were differentially
expressed in UV15 vs. HL15 (G 1 phase) and may be
involved in the cell response to UV exposure. Seven of
them were upregulated under HL+UV (see additional

Kolowrat et al. BMC Microbiology 2010, 10:204
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/10/204

Page 8 of 24

Figure 4 Functional categories of the differentially regulated genes for the different pairwise timepoint comparisons. LIMMA and
Student’s t-test were used to perform pairwise comparisons of different samples (UV15 vs. HL15, UV18 vs. HL18, UV20 vs. HL20, UV22 vs. HL22,
UV20 vs. HL18) and genes with a log2(FC) > 1 and an adjusted p-value (FDR ≤ 0.1) with either one of these methods were selected to draw the
bar chart.

file 3: Table T1). These were one non-coding RNA
(ncRNA, Yfr7; [28]), five photosynthetic genes, including
PMM1118, one member of the high light inducible (hli)
gene family (hli04), and PMM0743, an ortholog of
slr0228, which encodes FtsH, a protein involved in D1
repair and degradation in Synechocystis sp. PCC6803
[31]. Consistently with quantitative PCR analyses (see
below), the PMM1697 gene encoding the type II s factor RpoD4 was downregulated at 15:00 in cultures
exposed to HL+UV, though its p-value was statistically
significant only before Benjamini and Hochberg (BH)
adjustment (FDR ≤ 0.1; see additional file 3: Table T1).
The UV18 vs. HL18 comparison showed the largest
number (66) of differentially expressed genes, as
expected from the fact that cells were essentially in G1
in the HL+UV condition, whereas in HL most cells
were in S (Fig. 3). One third of these genes (24) had no
assigned function. The gene coding for one of the main
subunits of the ATP synthase (atpA; PMM1451) was
downregulated under HL+UV and most genes coding

for other subunits of this complex (atpD, E, F, G and H,
encoded by PMM1452, PMM1439 and PMM1453-1455,
respectively) were also very close to the statistically significant fold change (FC) cutoff (see additional file 3:
Table T1). If these relative reductions in the transcript
levels of atp genes at 18:00 in the cells grown in HL
+UV actually translated into a lower amount of ATPase
produced, this could have resulted into a relative
decrease (or delay) in energy supply of these cells during
the dark period. Two key genes for the synthesis of
RNA polymerase, i.e. rpoA (PMM1535), encoding the a
subunit, and PMM0496, encoding the major s factor
RpoD1/SigA, were also expressed at much lower levels
under HL+UV than HL conditions at 18:00. Assuming
that this reduction resulted in correspondly lower protein levels, it is possible that the overall transcriptional
activity of UV-acclimated cells could be reduced after
the LDT. Since PMM1629, encoding the type II s factor
RpoD8, was upregulated under HL+UV, it is possible
that RpoD8 replaces RpoD1 in the early dark period.

Kolowrat et al. BMC Microbiology 2010, 10:204
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/10/204

Figure 5 Hierarchical clustering analysis of the microarray
dataset. Clustering analysis was performed on a selected gene list
(819 genes) generated by one-way ANOVA with an adjusted p-value
(FDR ≤ 0.1) and after combining data from days 1 and 2 for both
cultures (A and B) and light conditions (HL and HL+UV) and at each
time point. The dendrogram was produced as described in the text.
Colored triangles correspond to the different cell cycle phases with
G1 in blue, S in red and G2 in green. The orange square indicates
the stage where cells exhibit a delay in the S phase under HL+UV
condition.

The transcriptional regulator gene pedR (PMM0154)
and two genes potentially involved in DNA repair
(PMM1528 and PMM0843, encoding respectively an
HNH endonuclease and a possible TldD-like modulator
of DNA gyrase) were also upregulated at 18:00 in the
HL+UV condition (see additional file 3: Table T1), suggesting that the latter genes were directly or indirectly
involved in the repair of DNA damage caused by UV
irradiation.
Surprisingly, the UV20 vs. HL18 comparison also
revealed a high number of up- or downregulated genes

Page 9 of 24

(45), suggesting that although cells were predominantly
in S phase in both light conditions, UV irradiation during the day altered differentially the pattern of expression of genes from the different metabolic pathways
around the LDT. Among annotated genes of this dataset, those most represented belonged to the functional
categories of ribosomal proteins (14, all upregulated
under HL+UV; see Fig. 4 and additional file 3: Table
T1). However, most of these genes were also upregulated in the HL20 vs. HL18 comparison (data not
shown), indicating that the diel expression pattern of
these key translation genes was less affected by UV
stress than by daytime, at least around the LDT period.
Most of the genes that were differentially regulated in
the UV20 vs. HL18 but not in the HL20 vs. HL18 comparisons belonged to the conserved hypothetical gene
category (data not shown).
Few genes were differentially expressed between HL
and HL+UV during the dark period (4 genes in the
UV20 vs. HL20 and none in the UV22 vs. HL22 comparisons, corresponding to the G2 phase and the beginning of cell division, respectively; Fig. 4) and most of
them were not assignable to a characterized functional
category (see Fig. 4 and additional file 3: Table T1).
This suggests that the effect of UV irradiation on the
PCC9511 transcriptome was no longer significant only a
few hours after the LDT.
Altogether, surprisingly few genes belonging to pathways directly linked to the cell cycle crossed the statistical significance (FDR < 0.1) and FC [log2(FC) < -1 or >
1] cutoffs (see additional file 3: Table T1). To insure
that this was not due to a lack of sensitivity of the
arrays and to gain more detailed information on the
behavior of this gene category, seventeen genes were
selected and subsequently analyzed by real time quantitative PCR (hereafter qPCR). This set includes genes
that were either differentially expressed in microarray
analyses or representative of key processes, including
DNA replication, cell division, DNA repair, transcriptional regulation and the circadian clock. All genes that
exhibited significantly different expression levels (i.e.,
with FDR ≤ 0.1) in one of our comparisons in microarray analyses showed a similar response (up- or downregulation) in qPCR experiments [Pearson’s correlation
coefficient of 0.86 for pairwise comparisons with a log2
(FC) < -0.5 or > 0.5].
Expression patterns of genes involved in the initiation of
chromosome replication and cell division are strongly
affected by UV radiation

Three genes were selected as representatives of the
DNA replication and cell division pathways, dnaA
(PMM0565), encoding the DNA replication initiation
protein DnaA, ftsZ (PMM1309), encoding the tubulin

Kolowrat et al. BMC Microbiology 2010, 10:204
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/10/204

Page 10 of 24

homolog GTPase protein FtsZ, which forms a ringshaped septum at midcell during cell division, and sepF
(PMM0395), encoding a protein involved in the assembly and stability of the FtsZ ring [32]. The transcript
levels of all three genes exhibited strong temporal variations during the diel cycle in both light conditions (Fig.
6). Under HL+UV conditions, although expression levels
of both dnaA and ftsZ genes significantly increased at
15:00 compared to the 6:00 time point, the expression
level was 3- to 5-fold lower than under HL at 15:00.
The sepF gene expression pattern was characterized by a
strong peak at the LDT in HL, but like for the other two
genes, the diel variations of sepF expression levels were
dramatically reduced in UV-irradiated cells. In both
light conditions, the sepF expression was maximum during the S phase (Fig. 6C).
Transcript levels of DNA repair genes are moderately
affected by UV radiation

Analyses of diel expression patterns of six genes representative of different DNA repair pathways were compared between HL and HL+UV conditions (Fig. 7).
These patterns were very different among the six genes,
suggesting a refined orchestration of the different pathways. A first set of DNA repair genes, including phrA
(PMM0285), which codes for a DNA photolyase and
uvrA (PMM1712), encoding the subunit A of the excinuclease UvrABC, an enzyme of the nucleotide excision
DNA repair (NER) pathway, was strongly expressed during the light period. Their expression levels followed
more or less closely the diel cycle of irradiance (Fig.
7A). Interestingly, the relative expression levels of both
genes were already high under HL and exposure to UV
radiations did not provoke any further increase of these
levels, even at midday. The only notable difference
between the HL and HL+UV profiles was a slightly
higher expression level at 9:00 am for both genes in the
former condition (Fig. 7A).
Expression levels of mutS (PMM1645), a gene
involved in the DNA mismatch repair (MMR) pathway,
rose throughout the light period at the same rate in
both light conditions, peaked right before the peak of S
cells (i.e. 3 h before the LDT in HL and at the LDT in
HL+UV), then decreased during the dark period (Fig.
7B). In sharp contrast with other DNA repair genes, the
ruvC gene (PMM1054), which encodes the subunit C of
the RuvABC resolvase endonuclease, an enzyme
involved in recombinational DNA repair processes by
homologous recombination, was downregulated during
the daytime and was only induced at the LDT (Fig. 7B).
It showed no response to the addition of UV radiation.
Among all DNA repair genes, the diel expression pattern of recA (PMM1562), which encodes an ATPase
involved in repair of DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs)

Figure 6 Gene expression patterns of L/D-synchronized
Prochlorococcus marinus PCC9511 cultures under HL and UV
growth conditions, as measured by qPCR. A, dnaA. B, ftsZ. C,
sepF. The percentage of cells in the S phase of the cell cycle under
HL (solid line) and HL+UV (dashed line) are also shown for
comparison. Error bars indicate mean deviation for two biological
replicates. For each graph, transcript levels were normalized to the
reference time point 6:00 in HL condition. Grey and black bars
indicate light and dark periods.

by homologous recombination, was seemingly the most
affected by the presence of UV radiation. This pattern
closely resembled that of sepF, with expression maxima
concomitant with the S peak in both light conditions (i.
e. delayed in HL+UV; Fig. 7C). However, in contrast to
sepF, the height of the expression peak (normalized to

Kolowrat et al. BMC Microbiology 2010, 10:204
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/10/204

Page 11 of 24

Figure 7 Gene expression patterns of L/D-synchronized Prochlorococcus marinus PCC9511 cultures under HL and UV growth
conditions, as measured by qPCR. A, phrA and uvrA. B, mutS and ruvC. C, recA and umuC. The percentage of cells in the S phase of the cell
cycle under HL (solid line) and HL+UV (dashed line) are also shown for comparison. Error bars indicate mean deviation for two biological
replicates. For each graph, transcript levels were normalized to the reference time point 6:00 in HL condition. Grey and black bars indicate light
and dark periods.

Kolowrat et al. BMC Microbiology 2010, 10:204
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/10/204

the 6:00 level in HL) was similar between HL and HL
+UV conditions (Fig. 7C). The temporal expression pattern of umuC (PMM0937), encoding a subunit of the
error-prone polymerase V (PolV), was also somewhat
affected by UV exposure, since in HL+UV, the gene
remained highly expressed for 8 h after the midday
maximum, whereas in HL only, umuC gene expression
decreased sharply after the noon expression peak (Fig.
7C). This suggests that cells which were exposed to UV
irradiation before entering S phase might use the DNA
translesion synthesis (TLS) pathway [33] in order to
overcome UV-induced lesions potentially blocking DNA
replication.
Global transcription regulators and circadian clock genes
are mildly affected by UV stress

RNA polymerase sigma factors are transcriptional regulators involved in the response of cyanobacteria to a
variety of stress conditions [34]. The Prochlorococcus
marinus PCC9511 genome encodes five sigma factors
[4], which have been named here mainly following the
nomenclature used for Synechococcus sp. PCC7942 [35]
(see Cyanorak database: http://www.sb-roscoff.fr/Phyto/
cyanorak/). This includes one member of the principal
group 1 sigma factor (PMM0496, RpoD1), and four
members of the group 2 sigma factors (PMM1697,
RpoD4; PMM1289, RpoD6; PMM0577, RpoD7 and
PMM1629, RpoD8), of which RpoD7-8 are specific for
marine picocyanobacteria [34]. In the present study, we
used a qPCR approach to examine the expression of
rpoD4 and rpoD8, which were previously shown to have
very distinct diel patterns under modulated diel cycles
of PAR [14,36]. The rpoD8 gene was upregulated earlier
in HL than HL+UV conditions, with equivalent expression at noon under both growth conditions, then downregulated during the rest of the day with a greater
decrease throughout the subjective night period under
HL+UV growth conditions (Fig. 8A). This pattern was
completely the opposite of rpoD4, which was expressed
at a low level until noon in HL (or until 15:00 in HL
+UV), was strongly upregulated at the LDT, then
returned to the same expression level as at 6:00 (or even
less in HL+UV) for the rest of the dark period (Fig. 8A).
The lexA gene (PMM1262) encodes a transcriptional
regulator, which in Escherichia coli governs the SOS
DNA damage repair response [37]. Like rpoD4, the lexA
RNA level was the lowest during the morning hours,
then strongly increased after midday so that expression
was maximal at the LDT and decreased slowly thereafter
(Fig. 8B). The pattern was similar in both light conditions, except that the peak in HL+UV was slightly lower.
Two genes linked to the circadian clock machinery
were also studied, kaiB (PMM1343), encoding one of
the only two core clock proteins (since all

Page 12 of 24

Prochlorococcus strains lack KaiA [36]) and sasA
(PMM1077), coding for a two-component sensory transduction histidine kinase which relays clock output signal
to downstream genes [38]. In HL, the level of kaiB
mRNA decreased during the first hours of the light period, reaching a minimum at noon and then increasing
until 20:00, when it reached an expression level similar
to the 6:00 reference level (Fig. 8C). In HL+UV, kaiB
expression pattern was generally the same as in HL,
except that its relative expression level was two-fold
lower at noon, then increased progressively to reach the
reference expression level at approximately 2:00. As
already noted in a previous study [14], diel changes in
kaiC gene (PMM1342) expression levels were very low,
with no significant differences under HL and HL+UV
growth conditions (data not shown).
A diel cycle in the transcript levels of the sasA gene
was also observed. In HL, it roughly followed that of
kaiB except that there was no mimima at noon, but
rather a long period of downregulation lasting from 9:00
to 18:00, then a slight upregulation at the beginning of
the night (Fig. 8C). In the presence of UV, the relative
sasA expression levels were lower than in HL during
most of the day, consistent with the effect of UV irradiation on kaiB RNA levels. The most notable difference
between the two light conditions is (as for ruvC) that
the switch from down- to upregulation of sasA was
delayed in HL+UV and concomitant with the S peak
(Fig. 8C), suggesting a possible involvement of circadian
clock output signals on timing of cell cycle progression
in PCC9511.

Discussion
Importance of the modulated character of UV radiation
and of light history on the response of Prochlorococcus
cells to UV stress

Several field studies using on-deck incubations have suggested that the marine cyanobacterium Prochlorococcus
is particularly susceptible to the direct (or indirect, i.e.
via the generation of reactive oxygen species) effects of
UV irradiation, in particular in comparison to the cooccurring and phylogenetically closely related genus
Synechococcus, which is seemingly much more resistant
to UV stress [39,40]. This apparent sensitivity has been
attributed in part to the tiny size of Prochlorococcus
cells as well as their streamlined genomes, encompassing
a minimal gene complement for a phototroph and hence
reduced UV protection machinery [23,25,41]. Still, Prochlorococcus is very abundant in the upper layer of most
oligotrophic waters (with the notable exception of the S
Pacific gyre; see [3]) and can sustain high growth rates
in near surface, UV-irradiated waters [7,8,42-44].
In order to better understand the molecular mechanisms by which Prochlorococcus manages to cope with

Kolowrat et al. BMC Microbiology 2010, 10:204
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/10/204

Page 13 of 24

Figure 8 Gene expression patterns of L/D-synchronized Prochlorococcus marinus PCC9511 cultures under HL and UV growth
conditions, as measured by qPCR. A, rpoD8 and rpoD4. B, lexA. C, kaiB and sasA. The percentage of cells in the S phase of the cell cycle under
HL (solid line) and HL+UV (dashed line) are also shown for comparison. Error bars indicate mean deviation for two biological replicates. For each
graph, transcript levels were normalized to the reference time point 6:00 in HL condition. Grey and black bars indicate light and dark periods.

Kolowrat et al. BMC Microbiology 2010, 10:204
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/10/204

UV stress, we grew P. marinus strain PCC9511 under
quasi natural light conditions by using a customdesigned illumination system which provided a modulated L/D cycle of PAR and UV radiation. This system
induced a very tight synchronization of cell cycle and
division (Figs. 1 and 3). Most studies that have analyzed
UV effects on cyanobacteria thus far have been performed on asynchronously growing cells either by
abruptly subjecting cultures to short-term UV stress
(see e.g. [45-47]) or longer term acclimation to constant
UV exposure [48,49]. The long term (acclimation)
response of cells is known to be significantly different
from the short term (shock) response, as it involves different sets of genes and regulation networks [48]. Yet,
the modulated character of UV stress in nature, its cooccurrence with high light stress (also modulated) and
the existence of long, dark recovery periods (i.e., nights)
are also very important factors to take into account to
fully understand how cells can acclimate to UV stress in
nature. The dynamic aspect of this stress triggers a succession of signalling, gene regulation and/or repair pathways that lead to a temporally complex, coordinated
response [50]. This finely tuned orchestration of the
transcriptome and metabolome cannot be observed after
merely subjecting cultures to a continuous (and often
harsh) UV treatment, as it generally provokes a “distress” response that may eventually activate programmed
cell death [51-53]. In our experiments, even though P.
marinus sp. PCC9511 was growing at similar rates (ca. 1
division per day) in HL and HL+UV conditions (Figs. 1
and 3; Table 1), this strain could not tolerate a sudden
shift from HL to HL+UV conditions, as this provoked a
sharp decrease of its growth rate (Fig. 2B and Table 3)
and ultimately death of the culture within a few days
(not shown). To successfully acclimate our cultures to
our experimental HL+UV conditions, we therefore had
to increase the UV dose incrementally with several days
of acclimation at each step (see methods). Thus, acclimation of Prochlorococcus cells to UV stress is the result
of a very subtle balance between the light environment
experienced by cells in their specific niche (encompassing diel variations of visible and UV radiations) and a
precise temporal succession of metabolic and repair processes that closely matches the ambient level of stress at
any time of the day. Hence, attempts to sample cells
from their natural environment and to incubate them in
other (even slightly different) conditions, (as usually
done to study the effects of UV stress in situ [39,40]
might well disrupt this fragile balance and rapidly lead
to cell death.
It must be stressed that i) this hypothesis does not
necessarily apply to other cyanobacteria that have a larger variety of UV protection systems [53] or at least (in
the case of marine Synechococcus) a larger set of DNA

Page 14 of 24

repair genes (e.g. several putative photolyases), conferring them with a better resistance to UV stress, and ii)
PCC9511 seems to cope with high light much better
than with UV shock, since after cultures were shifted
from LL to HL, their growth rate increased to one doubling per day by the day after the shift (Table 2). In contrast, LL-adapted Prochlorococcus spp. strains (such as
SS120 or MIT9313) seemingly need to be acclimated
incrementally to higher irradiances [54].
Molecular bases of the chromosome replication delay

One of the main results of the present study is that P.
marinus PCC9511 can acclimate to relatively high doses
of UV irradiation (commensurate with those that cells
can experience in the upper mixed layer of oceans) by
delaying DNA synthesis (S phase) towards the dark period. This strategy could reduce the risk of UV-induced
replication errors [50]. It is probable that this delay is
also needed for cells to repair UV-induced damages to
DNA accumulated during the period preceding chromosome replication. In UV-irradiated cultures, we sometimes observed that a minor fraction of the population
seemingly initiated chromosome replication at 15:00 (i.e.
similar to the HL condition), as suggested by the
shoulder to the left of the S peak before dusk (Fig. 3B).
However, the absence of any skew on the left of the corresponding G2 peak suggests that these cells either had
an extended S phase (i.e. were temporarily blocked in S)
or died before completing DNA replication. The maintenance of a high growth rate under HL+UV conditions
favors the former hypothesis.
Most UV-irradiated cells could not enter the S phase
before complete darkness. One may wonder whether
this observation is compatible with the occurrence of a
UV stress-induced cell cycle “checkpoint”, i.e. “a regulatory pathway that controls the order and timing of
cell cycle transitions and ensure that critical events
such as DNA replication and chromosome segregation
are completed with high fidelity” [55]. If it exists, this
checkpoint could be a “DNA replication initiation
checkpoint”, i.e. located before the G 1 -S transition.
However, this hypothesis would not account for the
previously mentioned small percentage of the population that was seemingly blocked in S. The occurrence
of a “DNA replication completion checkpoint” was
suggested for UV-C irradiated E. coli cells [56]. Cells
in G1 could not start chromosome replication while S
cells could not complete replication and hence divide;
only cells already in G2 at the time of irradiation were
able to complete cytokinesis. In our case, however,
because of the tight synchronization of the population,
virtually no cell was sufficiently advanced in the cell
cycle during the pre-dusk period to complete
cytokinesis.

Kolowrat et al. BMC Microbiology 2010, 10:204
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/10/204

Page 15 of 24

It is generally thought that checkpoints are controlled
by specific protein complexes involved in signaling
(photoreceptors) and/or checking [57]. Thus, Prochlorococcus might possess a UV sensor which, when detecting
these wavelengths, could launch a cascade of controlling
mechanisms ultimately stopping the replication machinery. A UV-B sensor was characterized in the diazotrophic
cyanobacterium Chlorogloeopsis sp. PCC6912 and was
shown to mediate the induction of mycosporine-like
amino acids synthesis [58]. However, no evidence for
such a UV sensor is available in Prochlorococcus and, as
argued later in this paper, its presence is rather unlikely.
Recently, Cooper [59] proposed that checkpoints may in
fact result from purely internal controls. It is possible
that PCC9511 cells actually entered the early S phase but
that the extensive occurrence of replication fork stalling
due to accumulated DNA lesions and the elevated need
for recovery of the replication process by lesion removal
and replisome reloading [60] slowed down or even
arrested the whole DNA synthesis process for a few
hours, therefore explaining the observed delay without
any need for a light sensing signal. The fact that UVacclimated cultures did not show any obvious decrease in
their overall growth rate indicates that if stalling of replication forks occurred, efficient DNA repair mechanisms
must have allowed those cells blocked in S to restart and
complete chromosome replication.

active form (DnaA-ATP), capable of initiating chromosome replication [65]. We hypothesize that the lowered
expression levels of ATP synthase genes in HL+UV during the daytime, as seen both in microarray (for atpA,
D, E, F, G and H; see above) and qPCR analyses (for
atpD and atpH; see additional file 4: Fig. S3) could have
caused a decrease in intracellular ATP levels that might
have also contributed to delayed DnaA induction activity in PCC9511.
Even if the lowered expression of dnaA is sufficient by
itself to explain the observed S phase delay, it appears
that UV exposure also strongly affected the expression
of several (and possibly all) genes involved in cell division, including ftsZ and sepF, both encoding key components of the divisome [66]. This similar behavior
suggests that the DNA replication and cell division
machineries could be controlled by the same regulatory
network, though the timing of maximal expression varies between genes (Fig. 6). SepF is thought to be
involved in the polymerization and stability of FtsZ filaments. Marbouty and co-workers [32] showed in vitro
that SepF binds to preassembled FtsZ polymers, suggesting that SepF is required only after all the FtsZ protofilaments needed to make a Z-ring have been synthesized.
This hypothesis is consistent with the delay observed
between the peaks of expression of ftsZ and sepF in
both light conditions.

UV stress leads to the downregulation of DNA replication
and cell division genes

DNA repair genes are activated under high light

To further our understanding of the molecular bases of
the observed delay in S phase completion, we analyzed
the expression of key genes involved in chromosome
replication and cell division. As is typically observed in
model bacteria [61,62], the dnaA gene, encoding the
master initiator protein of chromosome replication, was
induced just before entry of cells into the S phase.
Although an increase in dnaA expression occurred at
the same time under HL and HL+UV, its level of
expression was considerably lower in the latter condition. It is well known in Escherichia coli that initiation
of chromosome replication depends on reaching a
threshold level of DnaA protein [63]. Thus, it is plausible that the low amounts of dnaA transcripts at 15:00 in
UV-irradiated PCC9511 cells (as compared to those in
HL) may have resulted in a decreased rate of DnaA protein accumulation in the cell, resulting in a several hour
delay in the time at which the DnaA threshold concentration is reached. No homologs of regulators (e.g. seqA,
dam, hda) known in other bacteria to control the mode
of action of DnaA [64] have yet been identified in
PCC9511. Still, one possible regulatory mechanism may
involve ATP, since it is a necessary co-factor transforming the inactive form of DnaA (DnaA-ADP) into its

Another surprising result from this study is that UV
exposure did not result in any significant upregulation
of DNA repair genes (relative to HL conditions), including some which are known to be involved in repairing
damage specifically induced by UV stress. This includes
the phrA gene, which encodes an enzyme involved in
repair (by photoreactivation) of the most frequent DNA
lesions in response to UV, i.e. cyclobutane pyrimidine
dimers (CPDs; [67]). Our results demonstrate that phrA
is also strongly expressed under HL, with a pattern during the day that somewhat matched the irradiance
curve, suggesting that the expression of this gene is
strongly regulated by light. Recently, Osburne and coworkers [68] described a mutant of P. marinus MED4
exhibiting high resistance to UV stress. By comparing
the whole genomes of the mutant and wild type, they
could only find a single point mutation, located
upstream of a two-gene operon consisting of phrA
(called “phrB“) and a gene coding for a nudix hydrolase
(annotated “MutT”, though its specific substrate is not
known). This mutation resulted in the constitutive
expression of this operon even under non-inductive
conditions, suggesting that the occurrence of high levels
of DNA photolyase and nudix hydrolase in the cells
prior to UV treatment conferred these cells with better

Kolowrat et al. BMC Microbiology 2010, 10:204
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/10/204

resistance to this stress than wild type cells, which
needed some time to synthesize those proteins. In order
to exclude the possibility that the PCC9511 strain used
in our experiments possessed the point mutation
described by Osburne and co-workers [68], we used the
PCR primers defined by authors to amplify this region
directly from cells collected from each duplicate culture
of the HL and HL+UV experiments. In all cases, the
sequences were the same as for the wild type (L. Garzarek and M. Ratin, unpublished data). It is noteworthy
that Zinser and co-workers [14], who studied the diel
variations of the whole transcriptome of L/D synchronized MED4 cultures, observed a very different expression pattern for phrA as we did here (Fig. 7A), with an
increase at night and a decrease during the day (see
[69]). Since they used a moderate light irradiance, reaching only one fourth of our HL conditions at virtual noon
(232 vs. 875 μmol photons m-2 s-1 in the present study),
it is possible that high PAR conditions are needed to
trigger the synthesis of the DNA photolyase.
The uvrA gene showed an expression pattern very
similar to that of phrA in both conditions. It encodes
the DNA damage recognition component of the
UvrABC system which in bacteria and archaea is
involved in the nucleotide excision repair pathway
(NER) [70]. This pathway, which has the ability to repair
a wide range of structurally unrelated DNA lesions [71],
is seemingly fully functional in P. marinus PCC9511,
since it possesses conserved homologs of all three subunits of the UvrABC system. In Zinser and coworkers’
study [14], uvrA transcript levels showed a rapid
increase at the beginning of the light period, remained
at quasi steady state during the rest of the day, then
decreased at night (see [69]). This indicates that the
uvrA system is also activated at moderate light, though
it might not need to be adjusted as precisely to the
ambient light as under HL.
Another essential safeguard of genomic integrity in
prokaryotes is the DNA mismatch repair (MMR) pathway, which removes base mispairings, unpaired bases,
and small insertion or deletion loops in DNA by the
concerted action of MutS-L-H repair proteins [72]. The
genome of P. marinus MED4 contains one homolog of
mutS, which in E. coli encodes the DNA damage recognition component of the MMR system. Transcript levels
of mutS were the lowest at dawn, increased continuously during the light period and decreased at the beginning of the S phase, suggesting that expression of this
gene could increase together with the accumulation of
UV and/or reactive oxygen species-induced mutations
to DNA. However, no homologs of mutL, encoding an
ATPase that forms a complex with MutS once the latter
has recognized a DNA lesion, and mutH, coding for a
restriction endonuclease that cleaves DNA at GATC

Page 16 of 24

sites, can be found in the MED4 genome (and hence
PCC9511). The following step of the MMR process, i.e.
DNA excision, is ensured in E. coli by several genes,
including recJ, which encodes a single-stranded DNAspecific exonuclease and the xseAB operon, which
encodes the two subunits of the exodeoxyribonuclease
VII [72]. Surprisingly, homologs of these genes can be
found in the genomes of the low light-adapted Prochlorococcus ecotypes, but not in high light adapted ecotypes,
including MED4 [3]. Thus, even though putative homologs of enzymes involved in DNA resynthesis (the last
step of MMR [72]) are present in MED4, including SSB,
which has been implicated in the repair of single strand
breaks, and several DNA ligases (in addition to the universal, error-free replicative DNA polymerase III, or Pol
III, which is also involved in this process), biochemical
studies are needed to determine whether MutS is associated with an MMR-like system in HL-adapted P. marinus strains or if this system is absent in these organisms.
Expression patterns of the umuC gene, encoding the
subunit C of the UmuD’2C error-prone DNA polymerase V (Pol V), indicate that DNA translesion synthesis
(TLS) reactions, used to bypass lesions in DNA templates on which Pol III usually stalls, occur in PCC9511
[73]. The umuC gene expression increased during the
G1 phase with a peak at noon and was downregulated
during the S phase. Interestingly, in HL+UV conditions,
its expression level remained high during the entire period of S blockage. Posttranslational activation of Pol V
requires the presence of RecA nucleoprotein filaments
bound to ssDNA in order to generate its catalytically
active form [74]. One can therefore speculate that, even
though umuC expression was upregulated in the middle
of the day under HL+UV conditions, the transcriptional
repression of recA during that time may have delayed
activation of Pol V. As a result, stalled replication forks
may have taken longer to be rescued [75], providing
another possible cause for the delay in S maximum
observed under HL+UV. The umuCD-dependent cell
cycle checkpoint model proposed for E. coli [57] may
thus be applicable to P. marinus PCC9511.
While the NER (and possibly MMR) pathway is
mainly active during the G1 phase, Prochlorococcus cells
seem to activate another DNA repair system after the
initiation of chromosome replication, namely the homologous recombination pathway that acts on double
strand breaks. In this process, RuvA and RuvB, form a
complex that promotes branch migration of Holliday
junctions, then the endonuclease RuvC resolves the Holliday junctions by introducing nicks into DNA strands
[76]. The fact that the diel expression pattern of the
ruvC gene was similar under HL or HL+UV conditions
suggests that the homologous recombination pathway is
likely independent of the transcriptional control by the

Kolowrat et al. BMC Microbiology 2010, 10:204
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/10/204

Page 17 of 24

LexA/RecA system (see below), as is also the case in the
freshwater cyanobacterium Anabaena sp. PCC7120 [77].

of a typical, coordinated SOS response to DNA
damages [37].

Transcriptional regulation of the SOS response by LexA

Effect of UV on sigma factors and clock gene expression

The LexA protein of E. coli is a transcriptional repressor of the SOS DNA damage repair response, which is
induced upon recognition of DNA damage caused by a
wide range of intra- and extracellular elicitors, including UV-irradiation, oxidative stress and DNA replication abnormalities [78]. In PCC9511, the lexA
expression pattern was almost the same under HL and
HL+UV, suggesting that it is oxidative stress rather
than UV which is the inducing factor for lexA expression. At a molecular level, de-repression of the fortythree genes constituting the lexA regulon in E. coli
[79] is dependent upon the autocatalytic cleavage of
the LexA protein, which is stimulated in response to
DNA damage by interaction with ssDNA-RecA filaments [37]. This repressor cleavage reaction in E. coli
requires several conserved sequence motifs in the
LexA repressor, a catalytic serine nucleophile (S119), a
basic lysine residue (K156) and an alanine-glycine cleavage bond (A84-G85) [80]. Absence of the LexA
nucleophile and cleavage bond, a lack of lexA DNA
damage inducibility in Synechocystis sp. PCC6803 [81]
and its involvement in carbon fixation led Domain and
co-workers [82] to question whether the E. coli type
SOS regulon was conserved in cyanobacteria. However,
sequence analysis of the LexA protein encoded by P.
marinus MED4 shows that these three sequence motifs
are conserved (see additional file 5: Fig. S4). Furthermore, a search for the LexA binding site in several
Prochlorococcus genomes, including MED4 [83], uncovered the consensus motif TAGTACA-N 2 -TGTACTA
upstream of the recA, umuC and umuD genes as well
as lexA itself, a motif which is similar to the previously
described consensus LexA site of gram-positive bacteria [77]. Therefore, unlike Synechocystis sp. PCC6803,
it seems that P. marinus PCC9511 could well possess a
LexA-regulated DNA repair system similar to that in
E. coli. The different expression patterns of the LexAcontrolled genes might reflect differences in the
sequence conservation of this motif relative to the
LexA consensus sequence [84]. Still, the late occurrence during the cell cycle of the lexA gene expression
peak and its concomitance with the recA expression
maximum in HL conditions is somewhat surprising,
given that their products act as repressor and activator
of the SOS response, respectively [78] and one might
have expected some differential expression patterns.
The delay of the recA but not lexA expression peaks in
UV-irradiated cells is therefore worth noting in this
context as it is more compatible with the expected
succession of LexA and RecA regulators in the frame

Zinser and coworkers [14] recently showed that the five
sigma factors of P. marinus MED4 were differentially
regulated by light and suggested that this differential
phasing, which is in agreement with the idea that they
compete for the same core RNA polymerase, contribute
to the variety of diel gene expression patterns observed
within the whole transcriptome. In order to gain insight
into the effects of UV irradiation on the diel RNA accumulation patterns of these expression regulators in
PCC9511, we studied the expression of two group II
sigma factors (rpoD4 and rpoD8). Their patterns of
expression, which are globally consistent with those
reported earlier [14,36], suggests that rpoD8 is maximally expressed shortly after dawn and one can
hypothesize that its gene product (RpoD8) could control
the expression of genes upregulated in the morning
(such as phrA, uvrA and umuC). Similarly, rpoD4 RNA
levels peak at LDT, and it is possible that RpoD4 could
control the expression of genes expressed during this
period (such as recA, sepF and lexA). The presence of
UV radiation appeared to affect the expression patterns
of both sigma factor genes. For rpoD8, because the daily
amplitudes of variation were relatively modest (given
that FC values ranging between -1 and +1 meant that
genes were not differentially expressed; see methods),
the differences observed during the light period might
not be significant. In contrast, for rpoD4, there was a
clear decrease in its relative expression at 15:00 in HL
+UV compared to HL conditions, which could potentially result in a delay in the expression of the whole set
of genes under the control of this sigma factor.
It has been proposed that the RpoD2 sigma factor of
Synechococcus sp. strain PCC7942 is involved in a circadian clock output pathway [85]. There is no direct
ortholog of of the rpoD2 gene in MED4 (and hence
PCC9511), but one or several of the five sigma factors
of this strain might have a similar function. The
observed down-regulation of the circadian clock core
oscillator kaiB gene at noon under HL+UV conditions
could result in a modification of the diel expression patterns of one or several of these sigma factors, which in
turn modified the expression of genes under their control (see above). Another gene known to convey the circadian clock output signal is sasA, which encodes a
sensory histidine kinase. Like kaiB, it is maximally
expressed during the night and its expression dramatically decreased at the beginning of the light period.
However, while in HL it recovered its expression just
after noon, this recovery took much longer in the presence of UV radiation, which could also potentially

Kolowrat et al. BMC Microbiology 2010, 10:204
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/10/204

affect expression of the whole transcriptome. Indeed,
SasA plays a key role in chromosome condensation and
superhelicity status, which are known to regulate global
gene expression and separation of replicated chromosomes [86].

Page 18 of 24

studies are needed to check which of our different
hypotheses for the observed delay in S phase is the most
likely.

Methods
Strain and culture conditions

Conclusion
In this study, we analyzed the response of Prochlorococcus marinus PCC9511 to an environmentally relevant
UV stress, provided as a modulated light/dark cycle, as
occurs in nature. Our results show that the primary
response of UV-irradiated Prochlorococcus cultures
involves a shift of chromosome replication phase
towards the dark period, potentially minimizing the risk
of UV-induced replication errors. Since the genes
involved in DNA replication and cell division are most
affected by UV stress, this delay of the S phase is probably related to the strong repression of those genes, in
particular dnaA.
Another important outcome of this work is that the
strong synchronization of the PCC9511 cells entrained
by the modulated light-dark cycle allowed us to observe
a clear temporal succession of the expression of genes
encoding components of the different DNA repair pathways through the day. The first line of defense is provided by the light-dependent repair of CPDs by the
DNA photolyase and removal of damaged oligonucleotides by NER. The presence of a light-regulated mutS
gene suggests a possible involvement of MMR during
G1, but we have no clear evidence yet that a fully operational MMR system exists in PCC9511. At later stages
of the L/D cycle, when irradiation levels reached their
maxima, recA and lexA expression increase. We
hypothesize that the SOS response of PCC9511 is activated later in the afternoon due to LexA inactivation,
resulting in the de-repression of genes involved in recAmediated HR events (such as ruvC) and DNA repair by
the error-prone TLS pathway [87].
In summary, DNA repair pathways appear to operate
in a similar way in PCC9511 than in well studied, model
organisms such as E. coli or Bacillus subtilis. The signal,
if any, that activates the DNA repair pathways in this
organism is still unclear, however. If it operates through
a photoreceptor, we predict that it involves a visible
light sensor rather than a UV sensor. Indeed, there is
some evidence for the presence of a blue light photoreceptor in P. marinus MED4 [88]. It must be noted that
in the field, UV irradiation is always accompanied by
high photon fluxes of visible light, so given its minimalist regulation system, it is quite possible that Prochlorococcus has only one light signalling pathway for both
stresses. Alternatively, DNA repair mechanisms could be
activated by reactive oxygen species that are produced
in response to both stresses [89]. Further biochemical

The axenic Prochlorococcus marinus strain PCC9511
used in this study has a morphology, pigment content
and 16S rRNA sequence identical to the fully sequenced
strain MED4, a.k.a. CCMP1378 or CCMP1986 [90] and
these strains are genetically extremely similar, if not
identical. Cultures of PCC9511 were grown at 22 ±
0.5°C in 0.2 μm filtered PCR-S11 medium [90]. For all
experiments using a modulated 12 h/12 h L/D cycle, we
used a custom-designed, computer-controlled illumination system (hereafter called ‘cyclostat’), a modification
of a previously described system [91] with an UV module added. PAR was provided by two symmetrical banks
of 8 dimmable, U-shaped Philips PL-L 90 daylight fluorescence tubes (Philips Lightning, Eindhoven, NL)
located on each side of the 50 L glass tank containing
the culture flasks, whereas UV radiation was supplied by
five pairs of UVA-340 fluorescent tubes (Q-Panel Lab
products, Westlake, OH, USA) located above the cultures. PAR level was adjusted to reach a midday maximum of 100 μmol photons m -2 s -1 for LL conditions
and 900 μmol photons m-2 s-1 for HL conditions. For
long or short term UV experiments, HL conditions were
supplemented by a 12 h/12 h L/D cycle of UV radiation
reaching 7.59 W m -2 UVA (320-400 nm) and 0.57 W
m-2 UVB (280-320 nm) at virtual noon (see additional
file 1: Fig. S1).
For preliminary growth experiments, replicate 600 mL
batch cultures were maintained in 1L Erlenmeyer glass
flasks (Schott Duran, Mainz, Germany) for HL only
experiments or 1 L Erlenmeyer quartz flasks (Atelier
Jean Premont, Bordeaux, France) for HL+UV experiments. For transcriptomic analyses, two 7 L replicate
cultures were kept in exponential growth phase at cell
densities of around 108 cells mL-1 by continuous dilution with fresh medium, at a rate adjusted to population
growth (e.g., 4.83 L must be added per day to a 7 L culture growing at one division per day). For these largescale experiments, we used custom-made, cylindrical 8 L
quartz flasks (Ellipse, La Chapelle-la-Reine, France). All
cultures were acclimated to experimental light conditions at least two weeks before the start of sampling.
For long-term HL+UV conditions, cultures were slowly
acclimated by incrementally increasing the UV dose by
ca. 2 W m-2 steps with at least 2-3 days of acclimation
at each step. To further reduce UV stress, the pre-cultures were diluted daily at dawn and maintained at a
cell density higher than 5×105 cells ml-1. To check for
the eventual occurrence of self shading, we analyzed the

Kolowrat et al. BMC Microbiology 2010, 10:204
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/10/204

Page 19 of 24

timing of the S phase peak and the percentage of cells in
S in the peak in samples collected at different depths of
the quarz flask (i.e. different distances from UV lamps)
and observed that there were no significant differences
(data not shown).

number of samples collected at fixed intervals during
one diurnal cycle, fS (ti) and fG2 (ti) are the fractions of
cells in S and G 2 phases at time t i , T S +T G2 (h) is the
sum of S and G2 phases durations, computed as twice
the delay (Δt) between the peaks of cells in these phases
[2 × (tG2max - tSmax)].

Growth and cell cycle analyses by flow cytometry

Culture samples for cell density measurements and cell
cycle analyses were taken automatically at 1 h intervals
using an electronic peristaltic pump (Masterflex Cartridge Pump 8; Fisher Bioblock Scientific, Illkirch,
France) fitted to a custom-designed fraction collector.
Aliquots were kept at 4°C in the dark and fixation of
cells was done within a maximum timeframe of 9 h
after sampling, a delay shown to cause only negligible
changes on the DNA content in Prochlorococcus cells
[92]. 400 microliter aliquots were fixed in glutaraldehyde
(0.25% final concentration; Sigma Aldrich, Saint-Louis,
MO, USA), incubated for 10 min at 4°C in the dark, frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C. Frozen samples were thawed at room temperature (RT), then
diluted in TE buffer (pH 9) (Tris HCl 10 mM, EDTA 1
mM) and cell concentrations were analyzed in the presence of 0.95 μm fluorescent microspheres (Polysciences, Warrington, PA, USA) which were used as
internal references as previously described [93]. For cell
cycle analyses, diluted samples were first stained with
SYBR Green I (Invitrogen Molecular Probes, Carlsbad,
CA, USA), used at a final concentration of 10-4 of the
commercial stock solution, as described [94]. Samples
were analyzed either on a BD FACS Aria or a BD FACS
Canto flow cytometer (Becton Dickinson Biosciences,
San Jose, CA, USA), both equipped with a blue (488
nm) excitation laser. Cell count data files were analysed
using the CytoWin 4.31 software [95] (available at
http://www.sb-roscoff.fr/Phyto/) and cell cycle data files
using the MultiCycle 4.0 software suite (Phoenix Flow
Systems, San Diego, CA, USA). The duration of particular cell cycle phases was estimated based on the equations of Carpenter and Chang [30]. For batch cultures,
division rates per day were computed from cell number
variations using: m nb =

Ln( N (t 2 )/ N (t1))
(t 2 − t1)

; where μnb is

-1

the estimated growth rate (d ) and N(t) is the average
cell concentration of two duplicate cultures at time
points t 2 and t 1 taken at a 24 h interval, in a period
when no division occurred, e.g. early morning when
most cells were in G1 phase. For continuous cultures,
division rates were estimated from cell cycle data using
the formula of Carpenter and Chang [30]:
n

ln[1+ f S (t i ) + f G2 (t i )]
∑
m cc = i =1 n +(T + T )
× 24
S

G2

;

where μ cc is the estimated growth rate (d-1 ), n is the

RNA sampling and extraction

For transcriptomic analyses, cultures were sampled by
pumping 400 mL aliquots into 1 L glass Erlenmeyer
flasks eight times per L/D cycle during three consecutive
days, with a shortened sampling interval around the
expected S phase period, i.e. at 06:00, 09:00, 12:00,
15:00, 18:00, 20:00, 22:00 and 02:00. Immediately after
harvesting, samples were chilled by swirling into liquid
nitrogen for about 30 s (so that their temperature
rapidly dropped down to ca. 4°C) and transferred into
pre-chilled 450 mL polycarbonate centrifuge buckets
(Beckman Coulter, Fullerton, CA, USA) containing a
Pluronic F68 solution (0.005% final concentration;
Sigma Aldrich). Samples were then harvested by centrifugation at 17,700 × g for 7 min at 4°C followed by a
second centrifugation in microtubes (1.5 min at RT and
16,100 × g). Cell pellets were finally re-suspended in
500 μl Trizol (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA), frozen in
liquid nitrogen and kept at -80°C. During all transfer
steps, samples were kept on ice in the dark. The total
workflow from sampling to freezing the samples took
no longer than 18 min.
RNA extractions were performed mainly as described
in [45] except that the miRNeasy kit was used (as
recommended by the manufacturers; Qiagen, Valencia,
CA, USA) instead of the RNeasy protocol (after Trizol
extraction), in order to recover both large and small
RNAs. Two successive DNase treatments were performed on the columns using the Qiagen RNase-free
DNase Set (Qiagen), followed by elution from the column in 30 ml DEPC-treated water. RNA samples were
precisely quantified using a NanoDrop 1000 spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific, Wilmington, DE, USA),
quality-controlled with a BioAnalyzer 2100 using the
RNA 6000 Nano Kit (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA, USA)
and the absence of significant DNA contamination was
confirmed by qPCR. All RNA samples were frozen in
liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C.
Quantitative PCR analyses

Real time qPCR analyses were carried out on a DNA
Engine/Chromo4 Real Time PCR-Detector (BioRad,
Hercules, CA, USA) and using absolute SYBR Green
ROX Mix (Abgene, Epsom, UK), as previously described
[47] but starting from 50 ng of each RNA sample and
using 250 nM of each primer. Primers used in this
study, which were designed using Primer-Express

Kolowrat et al. BMC Microbiology 2010, 10:204
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/10/204

software (v2.0; Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA,
USA), are listed in Table 4. All reactions were performed in duplicate. Resulting data were analysed using
the comparative CT (ΔΔCT) method as described in the
Applied Biosystems user bulletin #2 [96] using the rnpB
gene as an internal standard [27] to normalize the transcript levels from all time points and light conditions to
the HL 06:00 time point, which was used as a reference.
DNA microarray analyses

Microarray analyses were performed for time points
15:00, 18:00, 20:00 and 22:00 in HL and HL+UV conditions for two L/D cycles and two culture replicates,
resulting in a total of 4 biological replicates per time
point and light condition. All microarray expression
analyses described in this study were performed using a
P. marinus MED4 whole genome 4-Plex tiling microarray (Roche NimbleGen, Madison, WI, USA) carrying 4
× 60,053 probes with average size of 50 nucleotides
(assuming that the genome of P. marinus PCC9511 is
identical to that of MED4). cDNA labeling and hybridization steps were performed as recommended by the
manufacturer [97]. Briefly, cDNA was synthesized from
10 μg of total RNA using the SuperScript™ DoubleStranded cDNA Synthesis kit (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA,
USA) followed by cDNA labeling of 1 μg of double
stranded cDNA using 5’-Cy3- or 5’-Cy5-labeled random
primers (TriLink Technologies, San Diego, CA, USA).
cDNA amplification and labeling efficiency was checked

Page 20 of 24

using the NanoDrop ND-1000 spectrophotometer, a
minimum of a 10-fold cDNA increase being considered
necessary for further use of the sample. Subsequent
hybridization of labeled cDNA (2 μg of each labeled
cDNA diluted in Nimblegen hybridization solution) to
the NimbleGen array was performed overnight (16 h at
42°C in the dark) using the NimbleGen Hybridization
System. Array slides were washed and dried using NimbleGen Wash Buffer kit, followed by scanning using the
GenePix Personal 4100A scanner (Molecular Devices,
Sunnyvale, CA, USA) at 5 μm resolution. The NimbleScan v2.6 software suite [98] was then used to extract
the raw probe signal intensities for both Cy3 and Cy5
channels from the array TIFF images. In order to maximize the number of spots with a significant signal to
background ratio, the reference sample hybridized on all
arrays corresponded to a RNA pool of all samples of
one complete day harvested in both light conditions and
at all stages under investigation (all time points, cultures
A and B, HL and UV conditions). Furthermore, replicate
samples from the two examined L/D cycles (the same
time point and light condition) were systematically
hybridized in dye switch experiments in order to minimize bias due to differential dye bleaching or unequal
incorporation of the Cy3 and Cy5 dyes during cDNA
labeling reactions.
All microarray experiments were MIAME compliant
and raw data were deposited under experiment name
PCC9511-15-18-20-22 and accession number E-TABM-

Table 4 Primer sets used for qPCR analyses of the diel cycle of expression of selected genes from Prochlorococcus
marinus PCC9511
Locus tag

Gene

Forward Primer

RNA_42

rnpB

64-AAGTCCGGGCTCCCATATG

135-TGTGGCACTATCCTCACGGTTA

PMM0285

phrA

1000-GGAGAGACCGGAGTACCTATAGTTGA

1088-GCGACTATCATCCTACATCTATTATGCA

PMM0395

sepF

397-GAAAGAGTCGGTGAAAGCATTTTT

470-GCCTCCTCTGGGAAAGAACTAGT

PMM0565

dnaA

492-TGGTGTCGGTCTTGGAAAGAC

568-CTTTCGCATCTGGATCAATTTCT

PMM0937

umuC

762-TCAAGTAAGTAGAAGCTTTGGAAAACC

889-TAGTAATGGCAGATGATTTTAAGCTTTG

PMM1054

ruvC

331-GCAGGCTCTGGCAAAGCA

407-TTTGGTGCACGGGTTAAATTT

PMM1077

sasA

430-CTTTTAAGAATGGTTGCACATGAATT

511-TTTGTCCTAGTTTTTGACTTTGAATAGC

PMM1262
PMM1309

lexA
ftsZ

227-AGATCTTTGAGGGAGTCCCAATT
415-GGGATAGTAACCAAGCCATTTTCA

299-TGGAGGTCGGAAAATGTTTCA
494-TCTGCTAATCTTGCAATCCCTTCT

PMM1342

kaiC

666-AGGAACCGTACATATGAAAGGAGAA

746-CTCATCGCTCCTAAGGCAAAA

PMM1343

kaiB

142-AAACAACCTCAACTTGCTGAAGAA

193-TAACAGGAGGAGGTAAAATCTTTGC

PMM1452

atpD

435-AATCGACCCATCCCTCATTG

512-ATTTGAGAGGCAAGACTAGCATCA

PMM1455

atpH

68-GCCCGGGCCTTGGA

129-AGGTTGGCGGGCAATACC

PMM1562

recA

319-GCTGAACATGCTTTAGATCCAGTCT

398-GTATCTGGCTGCGAAACTAGTAAATTT

PMM1629

rpoD8

726-CAAAGCTGGGCAGCCAGTA

820-CAGTCCATTTCGATTTGCTCATC

PMM1645
PMM1697

mutS
rpoD4

2281-ACAAGAATTGGAGCCGTAGATGA
746-CTCAAAGTGCTCCATGCGC

2366-TGATTTAGTATTGATGCTGTTTCTGACA
848-GATTGTTCTATCCATCCCTTCCA

PMM1712

uvrA

2775-GATAATTGATCTTGGACCTGATGGA

2865-ACTTATTGGATGCTTCGCAACA

The locus tag of the corresponding genes in P. marinus MED4 are indicated

Reverse Primer

Kolowrat et al. BMC Microbiology 2010, 10:204
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/10/204

1028 at the ArrayExpress database of the EMBL-EBI
(http://www.ebi.ac.uk/microarray-as/ae/).
Statistical Analyses of microarrays

Statistical analyses were done using custom-designed
scripts written under the R environment [99]. The
probe dataset used in this study covered 1,968 probes
out of the 2,014 genes identified so far in the MED4
genome [23,28]. The missing genes (see additional file 6:
Table T2) corresponded to two probe categories that
were systematically removed from the analysis. These
probes were either to highly conserved multiple copy
genes for which it was not possible to design specific
probes (e.g. for some hli genes) or to very short ORFs
for which the only designed probes were overlapping
another gene or intergenic areas. The functional category of each gene was assigned using the Cyanobase
database [100].
Microarray background bias was removed using the
robust multi-chip average (RMA) background subtraction algorithm [101] from the preprocess Core R package implemented Bioconductor, an open source and
open development software project [102]. This step
was followed by normalization of the Cy3 and Cy5 signal intensities within arrays by loess normalization as
well as between arrays by applying a quantile normalization, implemented in the R package LIMMA [103].
Data summarization of preprocessed probe sets covering individual genes was done by using the median
polishing algorithm from the stats R package [99]. Student’s t-test and the linear modeling features and
empirical Bayes test statistics of the LIMMA package
[104] were used to perform pairwise comparison of the
different light conditions at the same time point (i.e.
UV15 vs. HL15, UV18 vs. HL18, UV20 vs. HL20, UV22
vs. HL22) as well as comparing the S phase maximum
under HL and UV (i.e. UV20 vs. HL18). Variance
between all data points was also analyzed using one
way ANOVA analysis and two way ANOVA analysis
(TFA) where “light” and “time” were chosen to create
suitable groups [105,106]. Since multiple tests were
performed, statistical significance was adjusted based
on the Benjamini and Hochberg algorithm [107] to
control the FDR at 1%. Finally, to investigate the technical and biological reproducibility of our results, hierarchical clustering analyses [108] was performed with
the hclust function from the stats R package [99] using
the clustering method “average” and a Pearson correlation on a subset of differentially expressed genes
selected based on the statistical significance of their
differential expression as determined by one way
ANOVA (FDR ≤ 0.1).

Page 21 of 24

Additional material
Additional file 1: Figure S1. Diel cycle of visible and UV radiations,
as measured in the cyclostat growth chamber. The different plots
correspond to the photosynthetically active radiation [PAR; Emax(400-700
nm) = 875 μmol photons m-2 s-1; red line], the total UV radiation [Emax
(280-400 nm) = 8.22 W m-2; green line], the UV-A radiation [Emax(320-400
nm) = 7.59 W m-2; yellow line] and the UV-B radiation [Emax(280-320 nm)
= 0.57 W m-2; violet line] components. When only visible light neon
tubes were switched on, UV radiation levels were near detection limits
[Emax(280-400 nm) = 0.04 W m-2; data not shown].
Additional file 2: Figure S2. Examples of flow cytograms and cell
cycle analyses of Prochlorococcus marinus PCC9511 cells grown
under HL and sampled at different times of the L/D cycle. A, dot
plot of green fluorescence from DNA vs. side scatter, for a culture sample
taken during the G1 phase, stained with the DNA dye SYBR Green I, then
analyzed by flow cytometry. B, FL1 histogram of the same sample as in
Fig. A, showing the DNA frequency distribution of Prochlorococcus cells,
from which the proportions of cells in G1, S and G2 phases were
calculated using the MultiCycle AV™ software. C, same as graph A, but for
a culture sample taken during the S phase. D, same as graph B for the
sample used to draw graph C. E, same as graph A, but for a culture
sample taken during the G2 phase. F, same as graph B for the sample
used to draw graph E.
Additional file 3: Table T1. Complete set of gene expression data as
measured by microarray analyses. This table includes locus tags, gene
names, product description as well as cyanobase functional categories
and sub-categories for all 1,963 genes present on the PCC9511 array.
Expression data are shown as log2(FC) calculated for each experimental
sample (blue background) as well as for the 5 pairwise comparisons
performed in this study (UV15 vs. HL15, UV18 vs. HL18, UV20 vs. HL18,
UV20 vs. HL20 and UV22 vs. HL22; green background). For the latter, pvalues and adjusted p-values were calculated using LIMMA and t-test
(beige background). Values highlighted in red correspond to genes and
pairwise comparisons for which adjusted p-values (FDR) was ≤ 0.1 and
log2(FC) > 1. This subset of genes corresponds to the one used to build
Fig. 4. The last columns show p-values and adjusted p-values calculated
with one-way and two-way ANOVA where group 1 corresponds to light
treatment and group 2 to “sampling time” (purple background).
Additional file 4: Figure S3. Patterns of atpD and atpH gene
expression of L/D-synchronized Prochlorococcus marinus PCC9511
cultures under HL and UV growth conditions, as measured by
qPCR. The percentage of cells in the S phase of the cell cycle under HL
(solid line) and HL+UV (dashed line) are also shown for comparison. Error
bars indicate mean deviation for two biological replicates. Grey and black
bars indicate light and dark periods.
Additional file 5: Figure S4. Sequence alignment of LexA homologs.
LexA protein sequences from Prochlorococcus marinus MED4 (PMM1262),
Synechococcus sp. WH7803 (SynWH7803_1680) and Synechocystis sp.
PCC6803 (Sll1626) were aligned against the Escherichia coli K12 LexA
sequence (B4043). The DNA binding domain, preventing expression of
DNA repair proteins (blue frame) and the peptidase S24-like domain,
catalyzing self-cleavage of LexA (green frame) are indicated as well as
conserved bases involved in the LexA repressor cleavage reaction (A84G85 cleavage bond, S119 nucleophile, basic K156; red frame; [80].
Sequence alignments were made with BioEdit using ClustalW.
Additional file 6: Table T2. Subset of P. marinus PCC9511 genes not
included in microarray analyses.

Acknowledgements
We thank Dr. Antoine Sciandra for providing a preliminary version of the
cyclostat software and M. Cédric Prevost for adapting it to our custom
experimental set up. Dr. John Kenneth Colbourne and Jacqueline Ann Lopez
are acknowledged for their help with microarray experiments as well as Dr.

Kolowrat et al. BMC Microbiology 2010, 10:204
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/10/204

Simon Dittami and M. Animesh Shukla for discussion about statistical
analyses. CK received a Marie Curie grant from EU (Esteam PhD program).
Author details
1
UPMC-Université Paris 06, Station Biologique, Place Georges Teissier, 29680
Roscoff, France. 2CNRS, UMR 7144, Groupe Plancton Océanique, 29680
Roscoff, France. 3CNRS, FR 2424, Service Informatique et Génomique, 29680
Roscoff, France. 4Clermont Université, Université Blaise Pascal, UMR CNRS
6023, Laboratoire Microorganismes: Génome et Environnement, BP 10448,
63000 Clermont-Ferrand, France. 5CEMAGREF, UR Biologie des Ecosystèmes
Aquatiques, Laboratoire d’Hydroécologie Quantitative, 3 bis quai Chauveau,
CP 220, 69336 Lyon Cedex 09, France. 6Department of Biology, 1001 East
Third Street, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN 47405, USA.
Authors’ contributions
LG, FP, DK and CK conceived the experiments. CK, FP, DMF, CB, NB, XL, PG
and LG participated in sampling. CK did the flow cytometry measurements
and cell cycle analyses. CK and MR extracted RNA samples and performed
the microarrays and qPCR analyses. LG, GLC and MF wrote scripts in R to
analyze microarrays and CK and MR participated in these analyses. JFL, LG
and FP conceived and/or built the UV-visible cyclostat. CK, FP, DK and LG
wrote the paper. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Received: 8 May 2010 Accepted: 29 July 2010 Published: 29 July 2010
References
1. Chisholm SW, Olson RJ, Zettler ER, Goericke R, Waterbury JB,
Welschmeyer NA: A novel free-living prochlorophyte abundant in the
oceanic euphotic zone. Nature 1988, 334:340-343.
2. Coleman ML, Chisholm SW: Code and context: Prochlorococcus as a
model for cross-scale biology. Trends Microbiol 2007, 15:398-407.
3. Partensky F, Garczarek L: Prochlorococcus: Advantages and limits of
minimalism. Ann Rev Mar Sci 2010, 2:211-237.
4. Scanlan DJ, Ostrowski M, Mazard S, Dufresne A, Garczarek L, Hess WR,
Post AF, Hagemann M, Paulsen I, Partensky F: Ecological genomics of
marine picocyanobacteria. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 2009, 73:249-299.
5. Asato Y: Toward an understanding of cell growth and the cell division
cycle of unicellular photoautotrophic cyanobacteria. Cell Mol Life Sci 2003,
60:663-687.
6. Jacquet S, Partensky F, Marie D, Casotti R, Vaulot D: Cell cycle regulation
by light in Prochlorococcus strains. Appl Environ Microbiol 2001, 67:782-790.
7. Vaulot D, Marie D, Olson RJ, Chisholm SW: Growth of Prochlorococcus, a
photosynthetic prokaryote, in the equatorial Pacific Ocean. Science 1995,
268:1480-1482.
8. Shalapyonok A, Olson RJ, Shalapyonok LS: Ultradian growth in
Prochlorococcus spp. Appl Environ Microbiol 1998, 64:1066-1069.
9. Claustre H, Bricaud A, Babin M, Bruyant F, Guillou L, Le Gall F, Marie D,
Partensky F: Diel variations in Prochlorococcus optical properties. Limnol
Oceanogr 2002, 47:1637-1647.
10. Bruyant F, Babin M, Genty B, Prasil O, Behrenfeld MJ, Claustre H, Bricaud A,
Garczarek L, Holtzendorff J, Koblizek M, et al: Diel variations in the
photosynthetic parameters of Prochlorococcus strain PCC 9511:
Combined effects of light and cell cycle. Limnol Oceanogr 2005,
50:850-863.
11. Mary I, Garczarek L, Tarran GA, Kolowrat C, Terry MJ, Scanlan DJ, Burkill PH,
Zubkov MV: Diel rhythmicity in amino acid uptake by Prochlorococcus.
Environ Microbiol 2008, 10:2124-2131.
12. Garczarek L, Partensky F, Irlbacher H, Holtzendorff J, Babin M, Mary I,
Thomas JC, Hess WR: Differential expression of antenna and core genes
in Prochlorococcus PCC 9511 (Oxyphotobacteria) grown under a
modulated light-dark cycle. Environ Microbiol 2001, 3:168-175.
13. Holtzendorff J, Partensky F, Jacquet S, Bruyant F, Marie D, Garczarek L,
Mary I, Vaulot D, Hess WR: Diel expression of cell cycle-related genes in
synchronized cultures of Prochlorococcus sp. strain PCC9511. J Bacteriol
2001, 183:915-920.
14. Zinser ER, Lindell D, Johnson ZI, Futschik ME, Steglich C, Coleman ML,
Wright MA, Rector T, Steen R, McNulty N, et al: Choreography of the
transcriptome, photophysiology, and cell cycle of a minimal
photoautotroph, Prochlorococcus. PLoS ONE 2009, 4:e5135.
15. Partensky F, Hess WR, Vaulot D: Prochlorococcus, a marine photosynthetic
prokaryote of global significance. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 1999, 63:106-127.

Page 22 of 24

16. Campbell L, Vaulot D: Photosynthetic picoplankton community structure
in the subtropical North Pacific Ocean near Hawaii (station ALOHA).
Deep Sea Res 1993, 40:2043-2060.
17. Moore LR, Chisholm SW: Photophysiology of the marine cyanobacterium
Prochlorococcus: Ecotypic differences among cultured isolates. Limnol
Oceanogr 1999, 44:628-638.
18. Moore LR, Rocap G, Chisholm SW: Physiology and molecular phylogeny
of coexisting Prochlorococcus ecotypes. Nature 1998, 393:464-467.
19. Johnson ZI, Zinser ER, Coe A, McNulty NP, Woodward EM, Chisholm SW:
Niche partitioning among Prochlorococcus ecotypes along ocean-scale
environmental gradients. Science 2006, 311:1737-1740.
20. West NJ, Schonhuber WA, Fuller NJ, Amann RI, Rippka R, Post AF,
Scanlan DJ: Closely related Prochlorococcus genotypes show remarkably
different depth distributions in two oceanic regions as revealed by in
situ hybridization using 16S rRNA-targeted oligonucleotides. Microbiology
2001, 147:1731-1744.
21. Zinser ER, Johnson ZI, Coe A, Karaca E, Veneziano D, Chisholm SW:
Influence of light and temperature on Prochlorococcus ecotype
distributions in the Atlantic Ocean. Limnol Oceanogr 2007, 52:2205-2220.
22. Malmstrom RR, Coe A, Kettler GC, Martiny AC, Frias-Lopez J, Zinser ER,
Chisholm SW: Temporal dynamics of Prochlorococcus ecotypes in the
Atlantic and Pacific oceans. ISME J 2010.
23. Kettler GC, Martiny AC, Huang K, Zucker J, Coleman ML, Rodrigue S, Chen F,
Lapidus A, Ferriera S, Johnson J, et al: Patterns and implications of gene
gain and loss in the evolution of Prochlorococcus. PLoS Genet 2007,
3:2515-2528.
24. Rocap G, Larimer FW, Lamerdin J, Malfatti S, Chain P, Ahlgren NA,
Arellano A, Coleman M, Hauser L, Hess WR, et al: Genome divergence in
two Prochlorococcus ecotypes reflects oceanic niche differentiation.
Nature 2003, 424:1042-1047.
25. Dufresne A, Salanoubat M, Partensky F, Artiguenave F, Axmann IM, Barbe V,
Duprat S, Galperin MY, Koonin EV, Le Gall F, et al: Genome sequence of
the cyanobacterium Prochlorococcus marinus SS120, a nearly minimal
oxyphototrophic genome. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2003, 100:10020-10025.
26. Ashby MK, Houmard J: Cyanobacterial two-component proteins:
Structure, diversity, distribution, and evolution. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev
2006, 70:472-509.
27. Mary I, Vaulot D: Two-component systems in Prochlorococcus MED4:
Genomic analysis and differential expression under stress. FEMS Microbiol
Lett 2003, 226:135-144.
28. Steglich C, Futschik ME, Lindell D, Voss B, Chisholm SW, Hess WR: The
challenge of regulation in a minimal photoautotroph: non-coding RNAs
in Prochlorococcus. PLoS Genet 2008, 4:1-14.
29. Cooper S, Helmstetter CE: Chromosome replication and the division cycle
of Escherichia coli B/r. J Mol Biol 1968, 31:519-540.
30. Carpenter EJ, Chang J: Species-specific phytoplankton growth-rates via
diel DNA-synthesis cycles. I. Concept of the method. Mar Ecol Prog Ser
1988, 43:105-111.
31. Komenda J, Knoppova J, Krynicka V, Nixon PJ, Tichy M: Role of FtsH2 in
the repair of Photosystem II in mutants of the cyanobacterium
Synechocystis PCC 6803 with impaired assembly or stability of the CaMn
(4) cluster. Biochim Biophys Acta 2010, 1797:566-575.
32. Marbouty M, Saguez C, Cassier-Chauvat C, Chauvat F: Characterization of
the FtsZ-interacting septal proteins SepF and Ftn6 in the sphericalcelled cyanobacterium Synechocystis strain PCC6803. J Bacteriol 2009,
191:6178-6185.
33. Beuning PJ, Simon SM, Godoy VG, Jarosz DF, Walker GC: Characterization
of Escherichia coli translesion synthesis polymerases and their accessory
factors. Methods Enzymol 2006, 408:318-340.
34. Osanai T, Ikeuchi M, Tanaka K: Group 2 sigma factors in cyanobacteria.
Physiol Plant 2008, 133:490-506.
35. Imamura S, Asayama M: Sigma factors for cyanobacterial transcription.
Gene Regul Syst Biol 2009, 3:65-87.
36. Holtzendorff J, Partensky F, Mella D, Lennon JF, Hess WR, Garczarek L:
Genome streamlining results in loss of robustness of the circadian clock
in the marine cyanobacterium Prochlorococcus marinus PCC 9511. J Biol
Rhythms 2008, 23:187-199.
37. Butala M, Zgur-Bertok D, Busby SJW: The bacterial LexA transcriptional
repressor. Cell Mol Life Sci 2009, 66:82-93.
38. Golden SS: Timekeeping in bacteria: the cyanobacterial circadian clock.
Curr Opin Microbiol 2003, 6:535-540.

Kolowrat et al. BMC Microbiology 2010, 10:204
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/10/204

39. Llabres M, Agusti S: Picophytoplankton cell death induced by UV
radiation: Evidence for oceanic Atlantic communities. Limnol Oceanogr
2006, 51:21-29.
40. Sommaruga R, Hofer JS, Alonso Saez L, Gasol JA: Differential sunlight
sensitivity of picophytoplankton from surface Mediterranean coastal
waters. Appl Environ Microbiol 2005, 71:2154-2157.
41. Dufresne A, Garczarek L, Partensky F: Accelerated evolution associated
with genome reduction in a free-living prokaryote. Genome Biol 2005, 6:
R14.
42. Binder BJ, Chisholm SW, Olson RJ, Frankel SL, Worden AZ: Dynamics of
picophytoplankton, ultraphytoplankton and bacteria in the central
equatorial Pacific. Deep Sea Res II 1996, 43:907-931.
43. Liu H, Campbell L, Landry MR, Nolla HA, Brown SL, Constantinou J:
Prochlorococcus and Synechococcus growth rates and contributions to
production in the Arabian Sea during the 1995 Southwest and
Northeast monsoons. Deep Sea Res II 1998, 45:2327-2352.
44. Liu HB, Nolla HA, Campbell L: Prochlorococcus growth rate and
contribution to primary production in the equatorial and subtropical
North Pacific Ocean. Aquat Microb Ecol 1997, 12:39-47.
45. Garczarek L, Dufresne A, Blot N, Cockshutt AM, Peyrat A, Campbell DA,
Joubin L, Six C: Function and evolution of the psbA gene family in
marine Synechococcus: Synechococcus sp. WH7803 as a case study. ISME
J 2008, 2:937-953.
46. Huang LX, McCluskey MP, Ni H, LaRossa RA: Global gene expression
profiles of the cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp. strain PCC6803 in
response to irradiation with UV-B and white light. J Bacteriol 2002,
184:6845-6858.
47. Six C, Joubin L, Partensky F, Holtzendorff J, Garczarek L: UV-induced
phycobilisome dismantling in the marine picocyanobacterium
Synechococcus sp. WH8102. Photosynth Res 2007, 92:75-86.
48. Ehling-Schulz M, Schulz S, Wait R, Gorg A, Scherer S: The UV-B stimulon of
the terrestrial cyanobacterium Nostoc commune comprises early shock
proteins and late acclimation proteins. Mol Microbiol 2002, 46:827-843.
49. Gao Y, Xiong W, Li XB, Gao CF, Zhang YL, Li H, Wu QY: Identification of
the proteomic changes in Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 following
prolonged UV-B irradiation. J Exp Bot 2009, 60:1141-1154.
50. Shadan FF: Circadian tempo: a paradigm for genome stability? Med
Hypotheses 2007, 68:883-891.
51. Ross C, Santiago-Vazquez L, Paul V: Toxin release in response to oxidative
stress and programmed cell death in the cyanobacterium Microcystis
aeruginosa. Aquat Toxicol 2006, 78:66-73.
52. Ning SB, Guo HL, Wang L, Song YC: Salt stress induces programmed cell
death in prokaryotic organism Anabaena. J Appl Microbiol 2002, 93:15-28.
53. Singh SP, Hader DP, Sinha RP: Cyanobacteria and ultraviolet radiation
(UVR) stress: Mitigation strategies. Ageing Res Rev 2009, 9:79-90.
54. Moore LR, Coe A, Zinser ER: Culturing the marine cyanobacterium
Prochlorococcus. Limnol Oceanogr Meth 2007, 5:353-362.
55. Elledge S: Cell cycle checkpoints: preventing an identity crisis. Science
1996, 274:1664-1672.
56. Helmstetter CE, Pierucci O: Cell division during inhibition of
deoxyribonucleic acid synthesis in Escherichia coli. J Bacteriol 1968,
95:1627-1633.
57. Opperman T, Murli S, Smith BT, Walker GC: A model for a umuDCdependent prokaryotic DNA damage checkpoint. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
1999, 96:9218-9223.
58. Portwich A, Garcia-Pichel F: A novel prokaryotic UVB photoreceptor in the
cyanobacterium Chlorogloeopsis PCC 6912. Photochem Photobiol 2000,
71:493-498.
59. Cooper S: Checkpoints and restriction points in bacteria and eukaryotic
cells. Bioessays 2006, 28:1035-1039.
60. Rudolph CJ, Upton AL, Lloyd RG: Replication fork stalling and cell cycle
arrest in UV-irradiated Escherichia coli. Genes Dev 2007, 21:668-681.
61. Theisen PW, Grimwade JE, Leonard AC, Bogan JA, Helmstetter CE:
Correlation of gene-transcription with the time of initiation of
chromosome-replication in Escherichia coli. Mol Microbiol 1993,
10:575-584.
62. Hottes AK, Shapiro L, McAdams HH: DnaA coordinates replication
initiation and cell cycle transcription in Caulobacter crescentus. Mol
Microbiol 2005, 58:1340-1353.

Page 23 of 24

63. Lobner-Olesen A, Skarstad K, Hansen FG, Vonmeyenburg K, Boye E: The
DnaA protein determines the initiation mass of Escherichia coli K-12. Cell
1989, 57:881-889.
64. Boye E, Lobner-Olesen A, Skarstad K: Limiting DNA replication to once
and only once. EMBO Rep 2000, 1:479-483.
65. Sekimizu K, Bramhill D, Kornberg A: ATP activates dnaA protein in
initiating replication of plasmids bearing the origin of the E. coli
chromosome. Cell 1987, 50:259-265.
66. Marbouty M, Saguez C, Cassier-Chauvat C, Chauvat F: ZipN, an FtsA-like
orchestrator of divisome assembly in the model cyanobacterium
Synechocystis PCC6803. Mol Microbiol 2009, 74:409-420.
67. Ng WO, Zentella R, Wang YS, Taylor JSA, Pakrasi HB: phrA, the major
photoreactivating factor in the cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp. strain
PCC6803 codes for a cyclobutane-pyrimidine-dimer-specific DNA
photolyase. Arch Microbiol 2000, 173:412-417.
68. Osburne MS, Holmbeck BM, Frias-Lopez J, Steen R, Huang K, Kelly L, Coe A,
Waraska K, Gagne A, Chisholm SW: UV hyper-resistance in Prochlorococcus
MED4 results from a single base pair deletion just upstream of an
operon encoding nudix hydrolase and photolyase. Environ Microbiol 2010.
69. Prochlorococcus portal. [http://proportal.mit.edu/].
70. Truglio JJ, Croteau DL, Van Houten B, Kisker C: Prokaryotic nucleotide
excision repair: The UvrABC system. Chemical Rev 2006, 106:233-252.
71. Van Houten B, Croteau DL, Della-Vecchia MJ, Wang H, Kisker C: ’Closefitting sleeves’: DNA damage recognition by the UvrABC nuclease
system. Mutation Res 2005, 577:92-117.
72. Schofield MJ, Hsieh P: DNA mismatch repair: Molecular mechanisms and
biological function. Ann Rev Microbiol 2003, 57:579-608.
73. Schlacher K, Pham P, Cox MM, Goodman MF: Roles of DNA polymerase V
and RecA protein in SOS damage-induced mutation. Chem Rev 2006,
106:406-419.
74. Shinagawa H, Iwasaki H, Kato T, Nakata A: RecA protein-dependent
cleavage of UmuD protein and SOS mutagenesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
1988, 85:1806-1810.
75. Tippin B, Pham P, Goodman MF: Error-prone replication for better or
worse. Trends Microbiol 2004, 12:288-295.
76. West SC: Processing of recombination intermediates by the RuvABC
proteins. Annu Rev Genet 1997, 31:213-244.
77. Mazon G, Lucena JM, Campoy S, de Henestrosa ARF, Candau P, Barbe J:
LexA-binding sequences in Gram-positive and cyanobacteria are closely
related. Mol Genet Genom 2004, 271:40-49.
78. Erill I, Campoy S, Barbe J: Aeons of distress: an evolutionary perspective
on the bacterial SOS response. FEMS Microbiol Rev 2007, 31:637-656.
79. Courcelle J, Khodursky A, Peter B, Brown PO, Hanawalt PC: Comparative
gene expression profiles following UV exposure in wild-type and SOSdeficient Escherichia coli. Genetics 2001, 158:41-64.
80. Slilaty SN, Little JW: Lysine-156 and serine-119 are required for LexA
repressor cleavage - A possible mechanism. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1987,
84:3987-3991.
81. Patterson-Fortin LM, Colvin KR, Owttrim GW: A LexA-related protein
regulates redox-sensitive expression of the cyanobacterial RNA helicase,
CrhR. Nucl Acids Res 2006, 34:3446-3454.
82. Domain F, Houot L, Chauvat F, Cassier-Chauvat C: Function and regulation
of the cyanobacterial genes lexA, recA and ruvB: LexA is critical to the
survival of cells facing inorganic carbon starvation. Mol Microbiol 2004,
53:65-80.
83. Kielbasa SM, Herzel H, Axmann IM: Regulatory elements of marine
cyanobacteria. Genome Informatics Covent Garden: Imperial College
PressMiyano S, DeLisi C, Holzhutter HG, Kanehisa M 2007, 18:1-11.
84. Fernandez de Henestrosa AR, Ogi T, Aoyagi S, Chafin D, Hayes JJ,
Ohmori H, Woodgate R: Identification of additional genes belonging to
the LexA regulon in Escherichia coli. Mol Microbiol 2000, 35:1560-1572.
85. Tsinoremas NF, Ishiura M, Kondo T, Anderson CR, Tanaka K, Takahashi H,
Johnson CH, Golden SS: A sigma factor that modifies the circadian
expression of a subset of genes in cyanobacteria. EMBO J 1996,
15:2488-2495.
86. Sherratt DJ: Bacterial chromosome dynamics. Science 2003, 301:780-785.
87. Michel B: After 30 years of study, the bacterial SOS response still
surprises us. PLoS Biol 2005, 3:1174-1176.

Kolowrat et al. BMC Microbiology 2010, 10:204
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/10/204

88. Steglich C, Futschik M, Rector T, Steen R, Chisholm SW: Genome-wide
analysis of light sensing in Prochlorococcus. J Bacteriol 2006,
188:7796-7806.
89. Latifi A, Ruiz M, Zhang CC: Oxidative stress in cyanobacteria. FEMS
Microbiol Rev 2009, 33:258-278.
90. Rippka R, Coursin T, Hess W, Lichtlé C, Scanlan DJ, Palinska KA, Iteman I,
Partensky F, Houmard J, Herdman M: Prochlorococcus marinus Chisholm et
al. 1992 subsp. pastoris subsp. nov. strain PCC 9511, the first axenic
chlorophyll a2/b2-containing cyanobacterium (Oxyphotobacteria). Intl J
Syst Evol Microbiol 2000, 50:1833-1847.
91. Bruyant F, Babin M, Sciandra A, Marie D, Genty B, Claustre H, Blanchot J,
Bricaud A, Rippka R, Boulben S, et al: An axenic cyclostat of
Prochlorococcus PCC 9511 with a simulator of natural light regimes. J
Appl Phycol 2001, 13:135-142.
92. Jacquet S, Lennon JF, Vaulot D: Application of a compact automatic sea
water sampler to high frequency picoplankton studies. Aquat Microb Ecol
1998, 14:309-314.
93. Marie D, Partensky F, Vaulot D, Brussaard C: Enumeration of
phytoplankton, bacteria, and viruses in marine samples. Current Protocol
Cytom 1999, 10:11.11.11-11.11.15.
94. Marie D, Simon N, Guillou L, Partensky F, Vaulot D: DNA/RNA analysis of
phytoplankton by flow cytometry. Curr Protocol Cytom 2000,
11:11.11.11-11.12.18.
95. Vaulot D: CYTOPC: Processing software for flow cytometric data. Signal
Noise 1989, 2.
96. User Bulletin #2 - ABI PRISM 7700 Sequence Detection System (Applied
Biosystems). [http://www3.appliedbiosystems.com/cms/groups/
mcb_support/documents/generaldocuments/cms_040980.pdf].
97. NimbleGen Arrays User’s Guide - Gene Expression Analysis, version 3.0.
[http://www.nimblegen.com/products/lit/expression_userguide_v5p0.pdf].
98. NimbleScan User’s Guide, version 2.6. [http://www.nimblegen.com/
products/lit/NimbleScan_v2p5_UsersGuide.pdf].
99. R_Development_Core_Team: R: A language and environment for
statistical computing. Computing RFfS. Vienna, Austria 2009 [http://www.Rproject.org].
100. Nakao M, Okamoto S, Kohara M, Fujishiro T, Fujisawa T, Sato S, Tabata S,
Kaneko T, Nakamura Y: CyanoBase: the cyanobacteria genome database
update 2010. Nucl Acids Res 2009, 38:D379-D338.
101. Bolstad BM, Collin F, Simpson KM, Irizarry RA, Speed TP: Experimental
design and low-level analysis of microarray data. Int Rev Neurobiol 2004,
60:25-58.
102. Gentleman RC, Carey VJ, Bates DM, Bolstad B, Dettling M, Dudoit S, Ellis B,
Gautier L, Ge Y, Gentry J, et al: Bioconductor: open software development
for computational biology and bioinformatics. Genome Biol 2004, 5:R80.
103. Smyth GK, Speed T: Normalization of cDNA microarray data. Methods
2003, 31:265-273.
104. Smyth GK: Linear models and empirical bayes methods for assessing
differential expression in microarray experiments. Stat Appl Genet Mol Biol
2004, 3, Art. 3.
105. Churchill GA: Using ANOVA to analyze microarray data. Biotechniques
2004, 37:173-177.
106. Kerr MK, Martin M, Churchill GA: Analysis of variance for gene expression
microarray data. J Comput Biol 2000, 7:819-837.
107. Thissen D, Steinberg L, Kuang D: Quick and easy implementation of the
Benjamini-Hochberg procedure for controlling the false positive rate in
multiple comparisons. J Educ Behav Stat 2002, 27:77-83.
108. Eisen MB, Spellman PT, Brown PO, Botstein D: Cluster analysis and display
of genome-wide expression patterns. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1998,
95:14863-14868.
doi:10.1186/1471-2180-10-204
Cite this article as: Kolowrat et al.: Ultraviolet stress delays chromosome
replication in light/dark synchronized cells of the marine
cyanobacterium Prochlorococcus marinus PCC9511. BMC Microbiology
2010 10:204.

Page 24 of 24

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
