<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>The common ancestry of life</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Biology Direct 2010, 5:64. doi:10.1186/1745-6150-5-64"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Eugene V Koonin"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Koonin and Wolf Biology Direct 2010, 5:64
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/64

COMMENT

Open Access

The common ancestry of life
Eugene V Koonin*, Yuri I Wolf

Abstract
Background: It is common belief that all cellular life forms on earth have a common origin. This view is supported
by the universality of the genetic code and the universal conservation of multiple genes, particularly those that
encode key components of the translation system. A remarkable recent study claims to provide a formal,
homology independent test of the Universal Common Ancestry hypothesis by comparing the ability of a commonancestry model and a multiple-ancestry model to predict sequences of universally conserved proteins.
Results: We devised a computational experiment on a concatenated alignment of universally conserved proteins
which shows that the purported demonstration of the universal common ancestry is a trivial consequence of
significant sequence similarity between the analyzed proteins. The nature and origin of this similarity are irrelevant
for the prediction of “common ancestry” of by the model-comparison approach. Thus, homology (common origin)
of the compared proteins remains an inference from sequence similarity rather than an independent property
demonstrated by the likelihood analysis.
Conclusion: A formal demonstration of the Universal Common Ancestry hypothesis has not been achieved and is
unlikely to be feasible in principle. Nevertheless, the evidence in support of this hypothesis provided by
comparative genomics is overwhelming.
Reviewers: this article was reviewed by William Martin, Ivan Iossifov (nominated by Andrey Rzhetsky) and Arcady
Mushegian. For the complete reviews, see the Reviewers’ Report section.

Background
In the Origin of Species, Charles Darwin famously proposed what we may now call the Universal Common
Ancestry (UCA) hypothesis: “I should infer from analogy
that probably all the organic beings which have ever
lived on this earth have descended from some one primordial form, into which life was first breathed.” [1].
For a century after the publication of Darwin’s bold proposition, before the advent of molecular biology, the
UCA hypothesis remained an untested and hardly testable speculation. However, first the universality of the
genetic code and later the demonstration of the (near)
universal conservation of approximately 100 RNA and
protein-coding genes among cellular life forms provided
ample evidence in support of the UCA [2,3]. Although
generally considered compelling, this evidence fell short
of a rigorous, formal test of the UCA hypothesis.
In a recent, remarkable Letter to Nature, Theobald
applied an information-theoretical approach to offer just
* Correspondence: koonin@ncbi.nlm.nih.gov
National Center for Biotechnology Information, National Library of Medicine,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20894, USA

that: a formal, homology-independent test for the
hypothesis of the common ancestry of the extant cellular life forms [4], a claim that is further reaffirmed in
the accompanying News and Views article by Steel and
Penny [5]. Following the general information theoretical
framework for statistical tests of common ancestry laid
out previously by Sober and Steel [6], Theobald reports
a likelihood ratio test of the common ancestry hypothesis for genes represented by orthologs in the three
domains of life. According to Theobald, “...when comparing a common-ancestry model to a multiple-ancestry
model, the large test scores are a direct measure of the
increase in our ability to accurately predict the sequence
of a genealogically related protein relative to an unrelated protein.” [4]. It is interesting to note that this “formal demonstration of the common ancestry of life”
seems to quickly gain quite some following. Thus, the
Wikipedia article on the Last Universal Ancestor quotes
Theobald’s study as the principal argument in support
of the UCA [7].
We maintain, however, that the purported formal
demonstration of the Universal Common Ancestry of all

© 2010 Koonin and Wolf; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Koonin and Wolf Biology Direct 2010, 5:64
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/64

known cellular life forms is illusory. Indeed, in the
quoted key sentence, the claim that the sequence of one
of the universal proteins (e.g., a bacterial version) predicts another (e.g., the corresponding archaeal version)
is simply a restatement of the fact that these proteins
display a highly statistically significant sequence
similarity.

Results
To formally demonstrate the independence of Theobald’s test on the common ancestry of the compared
sequences, we designed and performed the following
computational experiment (Figure 1). We derived a statistical model (frequencies of amino acids) for each of
the 5242 columns in the alignment of universally conserved proteins (primarily those involved in translation)
used by Ciccarelli et al. to reconstruct a “Tree of Life”
[8,9]. Then we constructed 100 alignments each of
which contained 20 sequences of length 200. Each column of these alignments was generated by randomly

Page 2 of 5

selecting a statistical model (from the set of 5242
models) and then emitting 20 random amino acid characters with probabilities derived from the chosen model.
In each of the 100 generated alignments, all sequences
are highly similar to each other because each alignment
column is derived from a single statistical model. However, these alignments contain no signal of common
ancestry (in more general terms, no evolutionary signal)
whatsoever because each position in each sequence is
generated independently from other positions.
We then split each alignment into two alignments of
10 sequences each and reconstructed phylogenetic trees
for each of the resulting 300 alignments (100 original
ones plus two halves for each; Figure 1) using the
PhyML program (WAG evolutionary model, alpha parameter of gamma distribution set to 1) [10]. Log likelihood values reported by PhyML were collected for each
original alignment and for its two halves. In all 100
cases, the log likelihood of the combined alignment was
higher than the sum of log likelihoods of the halves

Figure 1 The computational experiment on the estimation the likelihoods of alignments of similar but evolutionarily unrelated
sequences. (A) Generation of random alignments from statistical models of real alignment columns (alignment columns containing >50% of
gap characters were removed). (B) Construction of phylogenetic trees from random alignment halves and likelihood analysis.

Koonin and Wolf Biology Direct 2010, 5:64
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/64

(difference ranged from +432 to +565 log likelihood
units with the mean of +506). The difference in log likelihoods accumulated over 100 alignments amounted to
the combined alignments being more likely than an
independent emergence of the two halves by a factor of
~10 21993 , a value that leaves no doubts about its
significance.
In contrast, when unrelated alignments were merged
(first half of alignment #1 with the second half of alignment #2 etc), all log likelihoods from combined alignments were substantially lower than the sum of
individual log likelihoods (difference ranged from -133
to -45 log likelihood units with the mean of -90). In this
case, the lower likelihood of the combined alignment
reflects the improbability of a very long tree branch connecting two dissimilar clusters of sequences.
This experiment demonstrates that the phenomenon
observed by Theobald [4] is, indeed, entirely a product
of “our ability to accurately predict the sequence of a...
related protein relative to an unrelated protein” regardless of the actual history of the corresponding
sequences. Alignments of statistically similar but phylogenetically unrelated sequences successfully mimic the
purported effect of common origin. Thus, the nature
and origin of the similarity between the aligned
sequences are irrelevant for the prediction of “common
ancestry” of proteins under Theobald’s approach.
Accordingly, common ancestry (or homology, in the
modern, post-Darwinian sense) of the compared proteins remains an inference from sequence similarity
rather than an independent property demonstrated by
the likelihood analysis.

Discussion
The tests described above show that there is currently
no formal demonstration of the universal common
ancestry of the extant life forms. The likelihood tests of
the kind described by Theobald [4] fail to address the
problem because they yield results “in support of common ancestry” for any sufficiently similar sequences.
The alternative to UCA is convergent evolution of
highly similar sequences of the universal proteins (under
the convergence hypothesis, the phrase “universally conserved” becomes an oxymoron). The plausibility of the
convergence hypothesis depends on the strength of constraints that affect evolutionary trajectories of isofunctional proteins [11]. Several lines of evidence indicate
that convergence is not a viable explanation for the
extensive sequence similarity that is observed among
universal proteins. First, the available experimental studies, however limited, suggest that, although only a
small fraction of the vast sequence space is open for
evolution, the available trajectories are nevertheless
numerous, so that evolution is far from deterministic

Page 3 of 5

[12,13]. Second, the few described cases of actual convergent evolution of similar protein sequences, resulting
in independent emergence of the same enzyme specificity, involve only a few key amino acid residues and do
not attest to convergent origin of highly similar
sequences [14,15]. Third, and perhaps most convincing,
for about 10% of the known enzyme specificities, isofunctional proteins without detectable sequence or
structure similarity have been detected, an indication
that multiple, independent solutions to the same biological function are accessible to evolution [16,17].
We believe that together this evidence makes convergent evolution of the highly similar sequences in over
100 proteins that are confidently traced back to the
putative Last Universal Cellular Ancestor (a highly conservative estimate) [2] a virtual impossibility. However,
formal demonstration of UCA, independent of the
assumption that universally conserved orthologous proteins with highly similar sequences actually originate
from common ancestral forms, remains elusive and
might not be feasible in principle.

Reviewers’ comments
Reviewer 1

William Martin, University of Duesseldorf
Here, Koonin and Wolf show that “the purported
demonstration (by Theobald [4]) of the universal common ancestry is a trivial consequence of significant
sequence similarity between the analyzed proteins”.
They are absolutely right on this in my view and there
is not much more to say about this set of circumstances,
really. The issue is a recent paper by Theobald claiming
to have found evidence for common ancestry of life
based on the analysis of 23 sequences that Jim Brown
and colleagues [18] had identified as “universal” among
genomes on the basis of database searches and sequence
comparisons, but 10 years ago (in 2001). One might
addd that in 2000, Hansmann and Martin showed that
the same proteins that Theobald investigated are even
encoded in the same superoperon in most prokaryotes
[19]. One wonders whether Theobald should have perhaps commented on the “razor sharp” intellectual
insight of those 2000 and 2001 authors to infer that the
proteins that they identified are related via common
ancestry (because of obvious sequence similarity), the
conclusion in the title of Theobald’s paper. Cogniscenti
cringed when they saw the Theobald paper, knowing
that “it is trivial”. It is trivial because the straw man that
Theobald attacks in a text largely formulated in convoluted legalese, is that significant sequence similarity
might arise by chance as opposed to descent with modification. Ignoring the strength of the universality of the
genetic code and the commonality of central intermediary metabolism among cells as evidence, Theobald

Koonin and Wolf Biology Direct 2010, 5:64
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/64

construed a non-issue that the referees of his paper,
whoever they may have been, found convincing and
novel (!).
Here, Koonin and Wolf reexamine the issue from an
independent standpoint and find that Theobald’s result
“is simply a restatement of the fact that these proteins
display a highly statistically significant sequence similarity”. I could not agree more and recommend that this
crisp paper go to publication in present form.
Reviewer 2

Ivan Iossifov, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, nominated by Andrey Rzhetsky
In this manuscript Koonin and Wolf critique the
model-selection method used by Theobald in a recent
Nature publication to formally prove the UCA (Universal Common Ancestor) hypothesis. The main argument
is that the method fails to differentiate between the
UCA hypothesis and convergent evolution hypothesis.
The authors perform a simulation experiment which
clearly demonstrates their point–the Theobald’s method
chooses UCA hypothesis with virtual certainty over data
generated by a convergent evolution model. The critique
is of only theoretical nature—as the authors themselves
state (and provide strong evidence for), the convergent
evolution is not a viable alternative to UCA. I find the
manuscript to be concise, clear, and well written. I do
believe that the theoretical discussion would be of interest to the mathematical biology community.
Reviewer 3

Arcady Mushegian, Stowers Institute for Medical
Research
The question that Koonin and Wolf address in this
communication is important in its own right, and also
became a hot topic after publication of D. Theobald’s
Nature paper earlier this year. Even a brief communication in Biology Direct should be self-sufficient, so I
think that the first thing the authors of the current
study should do is to explain what Theobald did in his
work, not only what he claimed to have done. Perhaps
the proper place to start may be an earlier paper by
Sober and Steel [6]. Theobald cites it but does not mention that his own work is, to an extent, the attempt to
realize the proposal by Sober and Steel.
Response: We agree and incorporated this point into
the revised version of the article: “Following the general
information theoretical framework for statistical tests of
common ancestry laid out previously by Sober and Steel
[6], Theobald reports a likelihood ratio test of the common ancestry hypothesis for genes represented by orthologs in the three domains of life.”
Discussion of all this, by both Theobald and Koonin &
Wolf, is a bit confusing, at least to this reviewer, in at

Page 4 of 5

least two respects. First, it is unclear what hypothesis is
being tested in either of the two papers. Is it a null
hypothesis testing sensu Fischer, or testing of two alternate hypotheses sensu Neyman-Pearson, and in either
case, what the hypothes(i/e)s is/are?
Response: A rather subtle issue but we are inclined to
interpret these tests within the null hypothesis framework. The hypotheses are stated quite explicitly by both
Theobald and ourselves: the general null hypothesis of
independent ancestry and the specific hypothesis of common ancestry.
Second, I have a problem with multiple statements in
both papers about this or that thing not being dependent on the hypothesis of the common ancestry. It does
not require any simulation to point out, e.g., a flaw of
this class in Theobald’s work, when he says one cannot
conclude anything direct about common ancestry from
BLAST P-value, and has to infer it somehow. Surely,
one must know that the inference in this case is possible
because Karlin-Altschul statistics relies on the scoring
system (s parameter) that is derived from the large dataset of alignments of bona fide homologous proteins!
This and other examples seem to indicate that Theobald’s argument may be based on tautology. Can the
authors elaborate on whether their simulation is testing
the circularity of the argument (and whether it is even
able to do so, as the simulation itself is also not completely devoid of the evolutionary signal, having been built
by sampling from the models that are derived from
alignments of orthologs), or is it doing something else?
Response: We tend to disagree: the whole point is that
the shuffled alignment columns in our test carry a signal
of sequence similarity but not an evolutionary signal.
Although each column in the shuffled alignment originates from an alignment of homologous sequences, the
statistical models do not depend on this fact and do not
actually retain the information of the evolutionary relatedness of the respective genes but rather could have been
generated a priori. We clarify this in the revision.
I would also be cautious asserting that there may be
no good statistical test for the common ancestry in principle. For example, we may try to use a joint probability
of several events occurring independently, to show that
such probability is infinitesimally low, even if the probability of each individual event is not particularly low.
One such collection of events may be the preponderance of non-omnipresent, but widely distributed in
diverse organisms, genes that were not used to build the
consensus Tree of Life, but whose own phylogeny is
compatible, or at least very close, to such a tree.
Response: We do not “assert” the infeasibility of this
kind of test. However, we currently cannot think of a
schema that would allow it, so we cautiously point out
that such a test “might not be feasible in principle”.

Koonin and Wolf Biology Direct 2010, 5:64
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/64

Finally, some more mileage can be gotten out of explicitly rejecting the hypothesis of the convergent or parallel origin of similar protein sequences, even if not in the
sense of statistical hypothesis testing, but in the more
lay sense of stating that all the evidence points in the
opposite direction, and none of the examples of longrange sequence convergence withstand the scrutiny. I
agree with all arguments that the authors present here,
but I wish that they extend their argument and mention
and perhaps discuss the essay by R.F. Doolittle [11],
where this is laid out in more detail.
Response: We do not see a need to elaborate much but
Doolittle’s paper is cited in the revision.

Page 5 of 5

17. Omelchenko MV, Galperin MY, Wolf YI, Koonin EV: Non-homologous
isofunctional enzymes: a systematic analysis of alternative solutions in
enzyme evolution. Biol Direct 2010, 5:31.
18. Brown JR, Douady CJ, Italia MJ, Marshall WE, Stanhope MJ: Universal trees
based on large combined protein sequence data sets. Nat Genet 2001,
28(3):281-285.
19. Hansmann S, Martin W: Phylogeny of 33 ribosomal and six other proteins
encoded in an ancient gene cluster that is conserved across prokaryotic
genomes: influence of excluding poorly alignable sites from analysis. Int
J Syst Evol Microbiol 2000, 50(Pt 4):1655-1663.
doi:10.1186/1745-6150-5-64
Cite this article as: Koonin and Wolf: The common ancestry of life.
Biology Direct 2010 5:64.

Acknowledgements
We thank Douglas Theobald for helpful discussions. The authors’ research is
supported by intramural funds of the US Department of Health and Human
Services (National Library of Medicine, NIH).
Authors’ contributions
EVK initiated the study, EVK and YIW designed research, YIW performed
research, EVK and YIW wrote and edited the manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 3 September 2010 Accepted: 18 November 2010
Published: 18 November 2010
References
1. Darwin C: On the Origin of Species. London: Murray;, 1 1859.
2. Koonin EV: Comparative genomics, minimal gene-sets and the last
universal common ancestor. Nature Rev Microbiol 2003, 1:127-136.
3. Glansdorff N, Xu Y, Labedan B: The Last Universal Common Ancestor:
emergence, constitution and genetic legacy of an elusive forerunner.
Biol Direct 2008, 3:29.
4. Theobald DL: A formal test of the theory of universal common ancestry.
Nature 2010, 465(7295):219-222.
5. Steel M, Penny D: Origins of life: Common ancestry put to the test.
Nature 465(7295):168-169.
6. Sober E, Steel M: Testing the hypothesis of common ancestry. J Theor Biol
2002, 218(4):395-408.
7. Last Universal Ancestor. [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Last_universal_ancestor].
8. Ciccarelli FD, Doerks T, von Mering C, Creevey CJ, Snel B, Bork P: Toward
automatic reconstruction of a highly resolved tree of life. Science 2006,
311(5765):1283-1287.
9. Tree of Life. [http://www.bork.embl.de/tree_of_life/tree_Feb15_alignment.
phy.txt].
10. Guindon S, Gascuel O: A simple, fast, and accurate algorithm to estimate
large phylogenies by maximum likelihood. Syst Biol 2003, 52(5):696-704.
11. Doolittle RF: Convergent evolution: the need to be explicit. Trends
Biochem Sci 1994, 19(1):15-18.
12. Weinreich DM, Delaney NF, Depristo MA, Hartl DL: Darwinian evolution
can follow only very few mutational paths to fitter proteins. Science
2006, 312(5770):111-114.
13. Koonin EV, Wolf YI: Constraints and plasticity in genome and molecularphenome evolution. Nat Rev Genet 2010, 11(7):487-498.
14. Stewart CB, Schilling JW, Wilson AC: Adaptive evolution in the stomach
lysozymes of foregut fermenters. Nature 1987, 330(6146):401-404.
15. Zhang J, Kumar S, Nei M: Small-sample tests of episodic adaptive
evolution: a case study of primate lysozymes. Mol Biol Evol 1997,
14(12):1335-1338.
16. Galperin MY, Walker DR, Koonin EV: Analogous enzymes: independent
inventions in enzyme evolution. Genome Res 1998, 8(8):779-790.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
