<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Phylogenetic analysis of fungal ABC transporters</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Genomics 2010 11:177. doi:10.1186/1471-2164-11-177"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Andriy Kovalchuk"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Kovalchuk and Driessen BMC Genomics 2010, 11:177
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/177

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Phylogenetic analysis of fungal ABC transporters
Andriy Kovalchuk1,2*, Arnold JM Driessen1,2

Abstract
Background: The superfamily of ABC proteins is among the largest known in nature. Its members are mainly, but
not exclusively, involved in the transport of a broad range of substrates across biological membranes. Many
contribute to multidrug resistance in microbial pathogens and cancer cells. The diversity of ABC proteins in fungi is
comparable with those in multicellular animals, but so far fungal ABC proteins have barely been studied.
Results: We performed a phylogenetic analysis of the ABC proteins extracted from the genomes of 27 fungal
species from 18 orders representing 5 fungal phyla thereby covering the most important groups. Our analysis
demonstrated that some of the subfamilies of ABC proteins remained highly conserved in fungi, while others have
undergone a remarkable group-specific diversification. Members of the various fungal phyla also differed
significantly in the number of ABC proteins found in their genomes, which is especially reduced in the yeast
S. cerevisiae and S. pombe.
Conclusions: Data obtained during our analysis should contribute to a better understanding of the diversity of the
fungal ABC proteins and provide important clues about their possible biological functions.

Background
ATP-binding cassette (ABC) proteins constitute one of
the largest protein families, with the number of known
members exceeding 10,000 while expanding rapidly with
each new genome sequence that becomes available [1].
ABC proteins are present in every living cell, ranging
from archaea and bacteria to higher eukaryotes [2]. The
majority of the ABC proteins characterized so far are
involved in the ATP-dependent transport of a remarkably broad range of substrates across biological membranes. However, their role is not limited to active
transport as some of them function as ion channels or
receptors or are even involved in mRNA translation and
ribosome biogenesis. The importance of ABC transporters is emphasized by the fact that they often contribute
to multidrug resistance in microbial pathogens and
tumor cells whereby they interfere with an effective
treatment of infectious disease and cancer [3-5]. Mutations in many of the human ABC genes are linked to
the hereditary diseases such as cystic fibrosis, adrenoleukodystrophy, disorders of cholesterol metabolism and
other diseases [6,7].
* Correspondence: a.kovalchuk@rug.nl
1
Department of Microbiology, Groningen Biomolecular Sciences and
Biotechnology Institute and Zernike Institute for Advanced Materials,
University of Groningen, Kerklaan 30, 9751 NN HAREN, The Netherlands

The structure of a prototypical ABC transporter
includes four core domains, two nucleotide-binding
folds (NBFs) and two transmembrane domains (TMDs)
that may be expressed as separate polypeptide chains or,
alternatively, as multidomain proteins. Two arrangements are common for eukaryotic ABC transporters.
The functional unit is either composed from two “halftransporters”, each containing its own TMD and NBF,
or there is one large polypeptide chain that includes all
four domains (Figure 1). ABC proteins not involved in
membrane transport generally lack the TMDs. Within
the NBFs, there are several conservative motifs that
allow for an easy identification of ABC proteins within
genome sequences. Those motifs include the so called
Walker A and Walker B boxes [8], separated by
~120 amino acid residues, and an ABC signature motif
situated between the two Walker boxes [9].
In the past, several classification schemes were proposed to accommodate the diversity of ABC proteins
[2,6,7,10,11]. The Human Genome Organization
(HUGO)-approved scheme was initially introduced to
classify ABC proteins of vertebrates, however, nowadays
it is also widely used for invertebrate and plant ABC
protein [6,12,13]. According to this scheme, all eukaryotic ABC proteins are divided into eight major subfamilies, from A to H. An additional group I was recently

© 2010 Kovalchuk and Driessen; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Kovalchuk and Driessen BMC Genomics 2010, 11:177
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/177

Page 2 of 21

Figure 1 Predicted topology and domain organization of different subfamilies of fungal ABC proteins. NBD, nucleotide-binding domain;
NTE, N-terminal extension; TMS, transmembrane segment. Modified after [14].

proposed to include ‘prokaryotic-type’ ABC proteins in
eukaryotic genomes [12]. This classification reflects the
phylogenetic relationships between ABC proteins, allowing an assignment into structural classes based on
sequence comparison of their NBF motifs. Here we have
applied this scheme to fungal ABC proteins in order to
facilitate their comparison with plant and animals, and
to investigate their diversity and distribution.
Prior to the genomic era, the study of fungal ABC
proteins was mainly performed with two model species,
i.e., the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae and, to a
lesser extent, fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe.
During the last two decades, this has led to a significant
insight in the diversity and function of ABC transporters
[14-17]. S. cerevisiae was also the first eukaryote whose

genome was sequenced and for which a complete list of
ABC proteins became available [18]. Yeast ABC transporters have quite diverse physiological functions, ranging from the secretion of the mating a-factor peptide,
the biogenesis of iron-sulfur proteins to fatty acid metabolism and cell protection against different classes of
toxic compounds [14]. ABC proteins have also been
implicated in mRNA translation and ribosome biogenesis. Thus their role goes beyond functions in membrane transport.
Only few ABC proteins from other fungal species have
been functionally characterized, except for those mainly
reported to be involved in multidrug resistance in
human pathogens such as Candida albicans [19-23],
Aspergillus fumigatus [24,25], and Cryptococcus

Kovalchuk and Driessen BMC Genomics 2010, 11:177
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/177

neoformans [26-28], the model filamentous fungus
Emericella nidulans (anamorph Aspergillus nidulans)
[29-32], and the plant pathogen Magnaporthe grisea
[33-35] (also see [36] for a review). On the other hand,
recent sequencing projects unearthed an astonishing
diversity of ABC proteins in fungal genomes, providing
a unique opportunity for the comparative analysis of
ABC proteins within this group of organisms. Previous
attempts of phylogenetic analysis of fungal ABC proteins
were either focused on a rather narrow group of species
[37,38] or on a particular subfamily of ABC proteins
[39,40]. Up to this date, a complete analysis has not
been performed.
Trying to fill this gap, we analyzed a representative
set of fungal genomes for their content and distribution of ABC proteins. For this purpose, species were
included such that all major groups of the fungal kingdom are covered, with the requirement that the completed genome sequences are publicly available (Figure
2) [41]. In total, we analyzed the genome sequences of
27 species representing five phyla and eighteen orders
of fungi.

Results and Discussion
Identification of fungal ABC proteins

A set of 27 fungal species representing major evolutionary lineages within fungal kingdom [41] was used
in our analysis. They were selected in order to create a
representative set that covers the diversity of modern
fungi as much as possible. So, within the defined
orders of ascomycetes, the preference was given to the

Page 3 of 21

phylogenetically most distantly related species and,
when available, to the species with different life styles
(i.e, soil fungi, plant or animal pathogens). We also
included in our analysis important model organisms
(S. cerevisiae, S. pombe, and A. nidulans) and species
from which at least some ABC proteins were characterized before.
The ABC proteins from the selected genomes were
identified by multiple BLAST searches against the
selected genome sequences. Members of every known
subfamily of ABC proteins were used as queries for
these searches. All BLAST hits with the E-value below
10-4 were taken into subsequent analysis. This cut-off
value was determined empirically as it allowed us to
separate ABC proteins sensu stricto from more distantly
related ATPases such as Rad50, SMC (Structural Maintenance of Chromosomes) and MSH (MutS Homologues) proteins. ABC proteins have in common that they
all contain a nucleotide-binding domain with the characteristic Walker A and Walker B motifs. Thus this also
led to the identification of Rad50, SMC and MSH proteins in our searches. However, members of the last
three groups are treated separately as they do not represent transporters and for this reason they were not
included in our analysis.
Similar results were obtained when instead of the fulllength proteins, the ABC domains were used as BLAST
queries. The hits with the highest score included proteins belonging to the same subfamily as a one used as
a query. Numerous members of other subfamilies also
had E-values well above the threshold. Other proteins

Figure 2 The scheme illustrating phylogenetic positions of the analyzed fungal species. The scheme is based on the analysis performed
by [41]. Letters next to the species names indicate their life style. Saprophytic species are shown with S, animal pathogens with A, and plant
pathogens with P.

Kovalchuk and Driessen BMC Genomics 2010, 11:177
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/177

containing nucleotide-binding domains were often identified in such searches as hits with a score below the
threshold. Different results were obtained when only the
transmembrane domains of ABC transporters were used
as BLAST queries. These searches generally identified
only proteins belonging to the same subfamily indicating
that the degree of conservation of the transmembrane
domains between different subfamilies of fungal ABC
proteins is low.
The use of the members of all known ABC subfamilies
allowed us to unequivocally identify all proteins of interest as well as fragments of ABC proteins less than
200 amino acids in size (Additional file 1). Taking this
into account, we conclude that our searches resulted in
the identification of a complete set of ABC proteins from
the analyzed fungal genomes. As will be discussed below,
in several cases certain ABC transporters were absent
from the analyzed genome(s), whereas in other cases, the
transporter appeared to be ‘missing’ because the corresponding genes contained gaps as these concerned nearly
completed, but as yet unfinished genome sequences.
In total, 1109 predicted ORFs encoding putative ABC
proteins were identified (Additional files 1, 2 and 3).
The HUGO-approved scheme was used to classify the
identified ABC transporters, and members of all subfamilies of eukaryotic ABC transporters were identified
except for the ABC-H subfamily. The number of ABC
proteins per genome varied by more than 5-fold
between different species (Additional files 2 and 3) and
is the largest in members of the subphylum Pezizomycotina. In the next sections, the results of our analysis are
discussed for each subfamily.
Subfamily A

ABC-A subfamily members were previously reported to
be present in the genomes of animals, plants, and various
protists (Dictyostelium, oomycetes, trypanosomes and
entamoebae), but are absent in yeasts [7,12,42,43]. A
characteristic feature of these proteins is the presence of
a regulatory domain with multiple phosphorylation sites
following the first NBF and a large extracellular loop
between the first two transmembrane helices in the TMD
(Figure 1) [44]. Both full-length and half-size transporters
of the ABC-A class exist, although the half-size transporters appear to be absent from animal genomes. ABC-A
transporters of vertebrates are the best characterized
members of this group. They play a crucial role in lipid
transport and metabolism, and have for instance been
implicated in high-density lipoproteins biogenesis, lung
surfactant production, retinal integrity and skin keratinization [45]. Currently, for none of the fungal ABC-A proteins their exact transport function is known.
Our analysis revealed an uneven distribution of ABCA proteins among fungi (Additional file 2) indicating

Page 4 of 21

multiple loss events during fungal evolution. We could
not find members of this group in the genomes of
S. cerevisiae and other species of the order Saccharomycetales (with a remarkable exception of Y. lipolytica),
and also none in the genomes of E. cuniculi, R. oryzae,
S. pombe, P. chrysogenum and the basidiomycetes
C. neoformans, M. globosa and P. graminis. Most of the
ABC-A proteins identified in the genomes of the
remaining species are full-length transporters (Group I)
(Figure 3). Half-size ABC-A proteins (Group II) were
exclusively limited to the two species of chytrid fungi
included in our analysis, S. punctatus and B. dendrobatidis, where they occur together with full-size transporters
(Figure 3). It is generally accepted that chytridiomycetes
belong to the most ancient fungi that are rooted close
to the base of the fungal evolutionary tree. Thus, our
observations indicate that both full-length and half-size
ABC-A proteins must have been present in the genome
of the common ancestor of modern fungi. The half-size
transporters were likely lost in the lineage that led to
the ascomycetes and basidiomycetes.
All four genes encoding ABC-A proteins in the genome of S. punctatus (two full-length and two half-size
transporters) are apparently intact. At the same time,
only five out of thirteen ABC-A genes in the B. dendrobatidis genome (BDEG_00459, BDEG_01570,
BDEG_03765, BDEG_05951, and BDEG_05952) seem to
encode for functional proteins (all half-size transporters). The other ABC-A proteins lack a transmembrane
domain, which makes it unlikely that they are involved
in membrane transport.
The genomes of the other species included in our analysis do not contain half-size ABC-A transporters, and
mostly contain just a single gene for a full-length ABCA transporter. The ascomycetes M. grisea, B. fuckeliana
and P. nodorum contain two full-length ABC-A encoding genes (Additional file 2).
The absence of ABC-A transporters in a significant
proportion of the analyzed genomes suggests that fungal
ABC-A proteins are not essential for viability. They
might be required under specific physiological conditions. Indeed, the only fungal ABC-A transporter which
was functionally characterized so far, the M. grisea Abc4
protein (MGG_00937), is required for pathogenesis and
appressoria formation [34]. A function in lipid transport
and metabolism seem probable for fungal ABC-A proteins based on functional studies performed with mammalian homologs, but further studies are required to
fully understand their role and reveal the identity of
their substrates. The observed distribution also indicates
that a loss of ABC-A genes occurred several times independently in the different fungal lineages. Both the highest number and diversity of ABC-A proteins is observed
in the ancient chytrid species, while many of the more

Kovalchuk and Driessen BMC Genomics 2010, 11:177
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/177

Page 5 of 21

Figure 3 Phylogenetic tree of fungal ABC-A proteins. Predicted amino acid sequences of analyzed proteins were aligned, and the alignment
was used to generate a phylogenetic tree using the neighbour-joining method. Numbers next to the branching points indicate the relative
support from 500 replicates. Analysis was performed with MEGA 4.0.2 software package.

advanced fungi are completely devoid of ABC-A genes.
Remarkably, these genes are absent from the compact
genomes of yeast-like species, but also from much larger
genomes of for instance R. oryzae and P. graminis.
Therefore, genome size reduction was not the only driving force causing the elimination of ABC-A genes.
Subfamily B

ABC-B proteins represent a large group of ABC proteins
that includes both full and half-size transporters. These
systems are widely distributed among eukaryotes, and
are functionally diverse. They are for instance involved
in multidrug resistance, antigen processing, mitochondrial peptides and pheromone export, Fe/S cluster proteins biogenesis and heavy metal resistance.
Undoubtedly, the most well-known members of this
group are mammalian multidrug transporters, such as
P-glycoprotein (Pgp) that is involved in drug resistance
in cancer cells [46]. Recently, the elucidation of the crystal structure of the mouse P-glycoprotein [47] provided
important clues on the structural basis of the remarkable broad substrate specificity of these transporters.

Eventually, structural and functional studies will result
in the design of novel Pgp antagonists. Plant members
of this group are involved in the export of auxins, secondary metabolites, and xenobiotics [12,48]. Interestingly, at least two plant ABC-B proteins appear to
function as importers or uptake systems, a property that
is very unusual for eukaryotic ABC transporters [49-51].
Both the full and half-size ABC-B transporters are
abundantly distributed among the fungal genomes.
While there is relatively little variation in the number of
half-transporters between members of different fungal
groups, full-size ABC-B proteins have undergone an
extensive amplification, which is especially remarkable
in the members of the subphylum Pezizomycotina.
Fungal full-size ABC-B transporters have been characterized to quite some detail during the last decades.
Clearly, the S. cerevisiae protein Ste6p (YKL209c) is the
best characterized member of this group, being the first
ABC transporter identified in yeast [52,53]. Ste6p is haploid-specific, and required for the export of the farnesylated peptide pheromone known as a-factor. ScSte6p
orthologues in S. pombe (Mam1, SPBC25B2.02c) and

Kovalchuk and Driessen BMC Genomics 2010, 11:177
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/177

C. albicans (Hst6, CaO19.7440) fulfill a similar function
[54,55].
Not surprisingly, a number of fungal full-length ABCB proteins are involved in multidrug resistance, as, for
example, S. pombe Pmd1 (SPCC663.03), A. fumigatus
Mdr1 (Afu5g06070), or A. nidulans AtrD (ANIG_02300)
[25,30,56]. Additionally, a role in b-lactam secretion was
proposed for the A. nidulans AtrD transporter [30]. The
physiological significance of ABC-B transporters is not
limited to drug extrusion and pheromone export only.
The M. grisea Abc3 transporter (MGG_13762) is
involved in the oxidative stress response, and is required
for host penetration [35], while the A. fumigatus AbcB

Page 6 of 21

(Afu3g03430) protein was demonstrated to be involved
in the excretion of siderophore peptide breakdown products [57]. The latter is of special interest as a number
of fungal ABC transporters are closely associated with
nonribosomal peptide synthetase (NRPS) clusters
[58] and, therefore, might have a role in the secretion of
peptide-like secondary metabolites.
Full-size ABC-B transporters are present in all analyzed fungal species except for E. cuniculi. Phylogenetic
analysis separates them in several clusters that are
briefly discussed below (Figure 4, Additional file 4). The
first group (Group I, “pheromone transporters”) consists
of ScSte6 orthologues, presumably involved in sex

Figure 4 Phylogenetic tree of fungal full-length ABC-B proteins. The tree was generated as described in the legend to the Figure 3.

Kovalchuk and Driessen BMC Genomics 2010, 11:177
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/177

pheromone export. Its members were found in all analyzed species except for E. cuniculi, S. punctatus,
R. oryzae, and A. nidulans. The absence of the pheromone transporter from the A. nidulans genome is
quite surprising, as the corresponding gene was identified in all other analyzed ascomycetous genomes,
including A. fumigatus and A. oryzae. Its absence
might be explained by the homothallic nature of
A. nidulans. The remainder of the analyzed genomes
contain only one gene belong to this group, with the
exception of C. cinerea that has two identical copies of
an ABC-B transporter on supercontig #6. Pheromone
transporters are the only full-size ABC-B transporters
identified in the genomes of S. cerevisiae, K. lactis,
C. albicans, and P. graminis. The B. dendrobatidis protein BDEG_08356 was placed next to this group in
some of the constructed trees, but this suggestion is
not supported by bootstrap analysis. Therefore, it
remains uncertain whether this protein should be
include into this group.
Members of the second cluster (Group II) were found
mainly in the subphylum Pezizomycotina but also in
chytrid S. punctatus and basidiomycetes like U. maydis
and M. globosa. Their number ranges from 1 to 3 genes
per genome. The A. fumigatus SitT transporter
(Afu3g03430) (also known as AbcB) is required for the
excretion of fusarinine breakdown products [57]. Interestingly, the fusarinine biosynthesis clusters in the genomes of other Pezizomycotina also contains transporters
closely related to A. fumigatus SitT, suggesting a conserved function [57,58].
The next group of full-size ABC-B transporters
(Group III) is limited in its distribution to species of the
subphylum Pezizomycotina. They contain up to five
members of this subgroup. Little is known about their
functional role. The expression of the A. nidulans AtrC
(ANIG_03608) transporter increases in the presence of
cycloheximide, but the corresponding gene deletion
mutant had no obvious phenotype or sensitivity towards
cycloheximide [30,59]. Another member of this group,
M. grisea Abc3 (MGG_13762), is required for host cell
penetration, but the underlying mechanisms remain
unknown [35].
The last cluster recognized in our analysis (Group
IV) consists of proteins showing similarity with the
S. pombe Pmd1 (SPCC663.03) transporter. Members of
this cluster are found in the genome of most of the
analyzed species with the exception of E. cuniculi,
S. cerevisiae, K. lactis, C. albicans, and P. graminis. The
number of genes belonging to this group ranges
between one and five per genome. All fungal ABC-B
proteins with a known function in multidrug resistance
belong to this cluster, but the exact function of the
majority of these proteins is unknown.

Page 7 of 21

In contrast to full-size ABC-B proteins, the functions
of the ABC-B half-transporters are not linked to the
multidrug resistance. Two major subgroups are usually
recognized: HMT (heavy metal tolerance) and MPE
(mitochondrial peptide exporter). All fungal ABC-B
half-transporters characterized so far are proteins that
localize either in the mitochondrial or vacuolar
membrane.
HMT transporters were found in the genomes of
every analyzed species except for E. cuniculi (Figure 5,
Additional file 5). Iconic members of this group are the
S. cerevisiae Atm1p (YMR301C) and S. pombe Hmt1
(SPCC737.09c) proteins. S. cerevisiae Atm1p localizes to
the inner membrane of mitochondria, where it exports
precursors of iron-sulfur (Fe/S) clusters synthesized in
the mitochondria and exported into the cytosol [60-62].
The function of Atm1p in the biogenesis of Fe/S clusters is highly conserved in the evolution, as homologous
proteins of plants and animals have a similar role
[63,64]. A single copy of the corresponding gene was
found in the genome of every species included in our
analysis except for E. cuniculi (Group I on Figure 5).
Another well-studied transporter of this group, the S.
pombe Hmt1, resides in the vacuolar membrane and is
required for the cadmium tolerance. It is able to transport both phytochelatin- and glutathione-cadmium complexes, contributing in this way to the sequestration of
these molecules in the vacuole [65-67]. The function of
Hmt1 is evolutionary conserved, as homologous proteins
were demonstrated to be involved in cadmium tolerance
in Caenorhabditis elegans [68], Chlamydomonas reinhardtii [69] and Drosophila melanogaster [67]. Homologues of the S. pombe Hmt1 (Group II) were found in
the genomes of most of the analyzed species, with the
exception of E. cuniculi and members of the order Saccharomycetales. The copy number of Hmt1-related
genes in different fungi varies between one and three
per genome, so it cannot be excluded that the paralogous proteins fulfill alternative functions.
Finally, a small group of Hmt-related transporters
(Group III on the Figure 5) is specific for the subphylum
Pezizomycotina. One or two corresponding genes were
identified in most of the analyzed species. As many as
six genes were found in C. immitis, four of which, however, represent putative pseudogenes. Proteins belonging
to this group are apparently absent from the genomes of
P. chrysogenum and Aspergillus species. The biological
function of the members of this cluster currently
remains unknown.
MPE transporters constitute a second group of halfsize ABC-B transporters in fungal genomes. Their prototype is the S. cerevisiae protein Mdl1p (YLR188W).
This protein localizes to the inner mitochondrial membrane and is required for the export of peptides released

Kovalchuk and Driessen BMC Genomics 2010, 11:177
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/177

Page 8 of 21

Figure 5 Phylogenetic tree of fungal half-size ABC-B proteins. The tree was generated as described in the legend to the Figure 3.

upon proteolysis of inner-membrane proteins by the mAAA protease [70]. It also plays a role in the regulation
of cellular resistance to oxidative stress [71]. The function of the related S. cerevisiae protein Mdl2p
(YPL270W) is less well understood. MPE transporters
are ubiquitously present in all species included in our
analysis except for E. cuniculi and S. punctatus. There is
only one MPE transporter in most of the analyzed fungi.
The presence of two MPE genes in the genomes of R.
oryzae, C. neoformans, and hemiascomycetous yeasts S.
cerevisiae, K. lactis and C. albicans most likely resulted
from independent lineage-specific duplication events.
Unclassified ABC-B half-transporters not placed
within any of the above-described groups were assigned
to Group V (Figure 5). This group includes, among
others, six E. cuniculi transporters, two of which
(ECU01_0200 and ECU01_1410) are identical. Notably,
five of those E. cuniculi proteins contain putative mitochondrial pre-sequences [72] suggesting a localization to
the mitosomes, mitochondrial remnants of microsporidia. The function of the E. cuniculi ABC-B transporters
is currently unknown.

Group V also includes six C. cinerea proteins showing
some similarity to the bacterial HlyB/MsbA transporters.
Related proteins were also found in the genome of some
other basidiomycetous fungi (data not shown). The
function of these proteins has not been addressed so far.
There is also one R. oryzae and one M. grisea protein
placed within group V.
Subfamily C

ABC-C proteins are full-length transporters found in all
major groups of eukaryotes. Many, but not all contain
an additional N-terminal hydrophobic region (Figure 1).
Some ABC-C transporters are involved in the detoxification of toxic compounds by means of their extrusion
from the cell or sequestration in the vacuole. However,
the substrates include conjugates of drugs with organic
anionic molecules like glutathione and glucuronide
rather than the drugs themselves. Fungal ABC-C proteins, except for the S. cerevisiae transporters, are poorly
characterized. Notably, some of the animal ABC-C
transporters are not primarily active transporters, as
they function either as ATP-gated chloride channels

Kovalchuk and Driessen BMC Genomics 2010, 11:177
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/177

(the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator CFTR (ABCC7)) or as potassium channel regulators
(sulfonylurea receptors SUR1 (ABCC8) and SUR2
(ABCC9)) [7]. No such functions were reported for fungal ABC-C proteins so far.
Members of the ABC-C subfamily are found in the
genomes of all analyzed species except for E. cuniculi.
As many as seven phylogenetic clusters exist (Figure 6,
Additional file 6). Three include S. cerevisiae proteins,
and an additional cluster contains the S. pombe

Page 9 of 21

transporters. The three remaining groups contain no
proteins with known functions. One of these (group III
in Figure 6) is specific for Pezizomycotina and basidiomycetes, and there is a single corresponding gene in the
genomes of ascomycetes and C. neoformans, and two
genes in other basidiomycetes. Three of the analyzed
species (C. immitis, Ch. globosum and M. globosa) lack
members of this group.
Group II includes transporters of R. oryzae, Pezizomycotina species (except for P. tritici-graminis and

Figure 6 Phylogenetic tree of fungal ABC-C proteins. The tree was generated as described in the legend to the Figure 3. A. nidulans
transporters clustered with secondary metabolism genes are marked with asterisks.

Kovalchuk and Driessen BMC Genomics 2010, 11:177
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/177

P. nodorum) and basidiomycetes (with the exception of
P. graminis). Their number ranges from one to five per
genome, with the highest number in A. oryzae. Group V
is present in the genomes of Pezizomycotina and U.
maydis, and their number per species ranges from two
to up to thirteen. Again, the highest number was
observed in A. oryzae, but some are putative pseudogenes. Remarkably, at least four out of the seven A.
nidulans proteins belonging to this group are associated
with secondary metabolism clusters. ANIG_00015,
ANIG_11934 (previously known as AN1240), and
ANIG_07879 are found in the immediate vicinity of
NRPS genes, and ANIG_07839 is located next to the
putative polyketide synthase (PKS)-like enzyme
[58]. The structure of some of those clusters is highly
conserved among aspergilli, and it seems very likely that
those transporters are involved in the export of the corresponding secondary metabolites.
The presence of yeast transporters within the remaining clusters of the ABC-C subfamily provides at least
some clues about the possible functions of these proteins. Group I contains transporters with similarity to
S. cerevisiae Ybt1p (YLL048C). This vacuolar protein
transports bile acids [73], but its physiological role is
not fully understood. Two of the other S. cerevisiae proteins belonging to this cluster, i.e., Vmr1p (YHL035C)
and Nft1p (YKR103W) are largely uncharacterized.
There is no information about the function of Ybt1prelated transporters from other fungi available. Ybt1p
homologues appear absent from the genomes of S.
pombe, C. albicans and C. cinerea. There is a single
Ybt1p orthologue in most of the remaining ascomycetes,
with the exceptions of S. cerevisiae (three genes) and
Ch. globosum (two genes), whereas members of the
other fungal phyla contain up to five Ybt1-like genes,
such as in R. oryzae and B. dendrobatidis.
Group IV is a small collection of fungal ABC-C proteins that in our analysis only contains a total of ten
members. There is a single representative in the genomes of A. oryzae, G. zeae, M. grisea, N. crassa,
C. cinerea and C. neoformans, whereas both S. pombe
and A. fumigatus have two of these systems. A vacuolar
localization was demonstrated for the S. pombe Abc4
(SPAC30.04c). The S. pombe Abc1 (SPAC9E9.12c) protein localizes to ER-like membranes, but this might be
due to a mislocalization as a result of the overexpression
[15]. The S. pombe Abc4 protein together with the Abc2
transporter were shown to be involved in the export of
the red-colored purine intermediate in the ade1 mutant
strain [15], but its function under normal physiological
conditions remains unclear.
Group VI includes ABC-C transporters related to S.
cerevisiae Ycf1p (YDR135C) and Bpt1p (YLL015W) proteins. Those two yeast transporters localize to the

Page 10 of 21

vacuolar membrane and are involved in the detoxification of heavy metals via transport of glutathione conjugates. They are also able to transport unconjugated
bilirubin [74-76]. Ycf1p homologues were identified in
every species included in our analysis except for E. cuniculi. While most of the fungi have only a single Ycf1
homologue, there are two Ycf1-related transporters in
the S. pombe and P. graminis genomes. An especially
remarkable expansion of this family occurred in the Saccharomycetales lineage. The genomes of S. cerevisiae
and K. lactis contain two members of this group, C.
albicans contains three members, and as many as six
are present in Y. lipolytica. One of the C. albicans transporters belonging to this group, Mlt1 (CaO19.5100), was
demonstrated to be involved in virulence [77].
Members of group VII are closely related to the S. cerevisiae Yor1p (YGR281W). This plasma membrane-localized transporter mediates export of many different
organic anions including oligomycin as well as phospholipids [78-80]. Disruption of the yor1 gene causes an
increased sensitivity to a variety of drugs and xenobiotics. Yor1 homologues were not found in the genomes
of R. oryzae and S. pombe. Most of other ascomycetes
and the basidiomycetes M. globosa and P. graminis contain a single Yor1-like transporter, but G. zeae and M.
grisea have two genes. Y. lipolytica even contains three
Yor1-like transporters. The genomes of the basidiomycetes U. maydis and C. neoformans contain two Yor1
homologues, while five members of this group were
identified in C. cinerea. Finally, two chytrid species, B.
dendrobatidis and S. punctatus, contain as many as eleven and eight Yor1-like transporters, respectively. None
of the proteins belonging to this cluster has been characterized so far except for the S. cerevisiae Yor1p itself.
Subfamily D

ABC-D transporters of animals, fungi and protists are
half-size transporters that localize to the peroxisomal
membrane. They mediate the import of long-chain fatty
acids. Both full and half-size ABC-D proteins were identified in plant genomes. The A. thaliana Abcd2 (Pmp1)
protein contains a putative chloroplast transit peptide,
and has been suggested to be plastid localized [12,81].
S. cerevisiae has two proteins that belong to this group,
Pxa1p (YPL147W) and Pxa2p (YKL188C). These proteins function as a heterodimer. Corresponding mutants
are unable to grow on fatty acids such as palmitate or
oleate as a sole carbon source [82-84].
ABC-D transporters are found in every species
included in our analysis except for E. cuniculi and S.
pombe. While E. cuniculi lacks peroxisomes [85], a set
of PEX genes required for peroxisome biogenesis was
identified in the genome of S. pombe [86], and peroxisomes were also observed in budding yeast cells [87].

Kovalchuk and Driessen BMC Genomics 2010, 11:177
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/177

Therefore, the lack of ABC-D transporters in S. pombe
is quite unexpected. The presence of this set of ABC-D
transporters in other fungi is a conserved feature (Figure
7). The only two exceptions are S. punctatus with three
ABC-D transporters and R. oryzae that contains four
homologs and one putative pseudogene.
Phylogenetic analysis separates fungal ABC-D transporters into two groups with the S. cerevisiae transporters Pxa1p and Pxa2p as their prototypic members
(Figure 7, Additional file 7). Only two transporters in
our analysis, S. punctatus SPPG_03987 and R. oryzae

Page 11 of 21

RO3G_15328, were placed outside of these well-defined
groups. It would be of interest to investigate in details
whether the function of these two particular transporters is different from those described for other ABC-D
proteins.
Subfamilies E and F: soluble ABC proteins

Both the ABC-E and ABC-F proteins lack transmembrane domains and consist solely of two nucleotidebinding domains. Their function within the cell is not
related to transport. Nevertheless, the crucial role of the

Figure 7 Phylogenetic tree of fungal ABC-D proteins. The tree was generated as described in the legend to the Figure 3.

Kovalchuk and Driessen BMC Genomics 2010, 11:177
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/177

members of these groups is emphasized by the fact that
three of them (Rli1, Arb1, and Yef3) are essential for
viability of S. cerevisiae cells [16].
ABC-E proteins were identified in the genomes of
both eukaryotes and archaea. Most of the eukaryotic
genomes analyzed so far have a single member of this
group, although plants contain two. The prototypical
ABC-E protein, S. cerevisiae Rli1p (YDR091C), is an
essential iron-sulfur protein required for ribosome biogenesis and translation initiation [88,89]. A single corresponding gene was found in every species included in
our analysis (Figure 8, Additional file 8), except for
R. oryzae, were two highly similar genes (93% identity

Page 12 of 21

on nucleotide level) exist, that likely emerged from a
recent duplication. The uniforms distribution of ABC-E
proteins among fungi and other eukaryotes supports the
notion that they are involved in a highly conserved
activity in the cell.
The functions of ABC-F proteins are related to different aspects of translation, as they are involved in ribosome biogenesis, translational control, mRNA export, or
act as translational elongation factors. Most of the analyzed fungal genomes have either four or five members
of this group, however, there is only a single ABC-F
protein in E. cuniculi whereas as many as ten genes
were identified in R. oryzae genome.

Figure 8 Phylogenetic tree of fungal ABC-E and ABC-F proteins. The tree was generated as described in the legend to the Figure 3.

Kovalchuk and Driessen BMC Genomics 2010, 11:177
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/177

Phylogenetic analysis separated the fungal ABC-F proteins into five groups (Figure 8, Additional file 8). The
Group I of fungal ABC-F proteins is related to the
S. cerevisiae Arb1p (YER036C) protein. This essential
protein is involved in 40S and 60S ribosome biogenesis
[90]. Most of the fungal genomes harbor a single Arb1p
orthologue, but the gene is absent in the E. cuniculi
genome while S. punctatus, R. oryzae and S. pombe contain two Arb1 homologues.
The S. cerevisiae Gcn20p protein (YFR009W) is a prototypical member of Group II and it functions as a positive regulator of Gcn2p kinase activity [91]. There is a
single member of this group present in every analyzed
genome. The only identified ABC-F protein of E. cuniculi also belongs to this group.
Members of Group III fungal ABC-F proteins are
absent from the genomes of S. cerevisiae and S. pombe.
In addition to these yeast species, none of the proteins
belonging to this cluster were found in the genomes of
E. cuniculi, other Saccharomycetales species, C. immitis,
N. crassa, C. neoformans, M. globosa and P. graminis.
There is a single member of the group present in the
remaining species.
Representative members of Group IV are the S. pombe
Elf1 (SPAC3C7.08c) and S. cerevisiae New1p
(YPL226W). The fission yeast protein Elf1 is known to
function as a mRNA export factor [92]. ScNew1p was
not functionally characterized so far, but the presence of
an Asn/Gln-rich region supports the formation of [NU+]
prions. All analyzed species except for E. cuniculi contain
a single Elf1-related protein.
Proteins of Group V are related to the S. cerevisiae
Yef3p (YLR249W) and Hef3p (YNL014W) proteins.
Both function as translation elongation factor 3 proteins that stimulate the binding of aminoacyl-tRNA to
ribosomes [93,94]. Under normal laboratory conditions
Hef3p is not expressed, and Yef3p is responsible for
the EF3 function. Yef3p is essential for cell viability,
while a HEF3 gene disruption has a little effect. In
most of the analyzed species there is only a single
Yef3-like protein, so S. cerevisiae with two EF3 proteins
appears an exception among the fungi. The only other
species with more than one member of this group is R.
oryzae that contains four corresponding genes and one
putative pseudogene. A putative pseudogene belonging
to this group was also found in the genome of A.
fumigatus.
Subfamily G

The characteristic feature distinguishing ABC-G transporters from other subfamilies discussed above is their
reverse topology, i.e. the nucleotide-binding domain precedes the transmembrane domain (Figure 1). Both fulllength and half-size members of this subfamily are

Page 13 of 21

known, however, full-length ABC-G proteins are apparently absent from animal genomes. This group was
intensively studied as several of these transporters are
linked to pleiotropic drug resistance (PDR) phenomena.
Hence, full-length ABC-G transporters are often
referred to as PDR transporters. Extensive phylogenetic
analysis of the fungal members of this group was published recently [39]. The half-size ABC-G proteins are
sometimes called WBC transporters after the prototypical members of this group, D. melanogaster whitebrown complex transporters required for eye pigment
formation.
Ten ABC-G transporters are known from the genome
of S. cerevisiae. Despite the fact that yeast PDR transporters were studied extensively during the last two
decades, the functions of three are still unknown, i.e.,
Adp1p (YCR011C), Pdr18p (YNR070W) and YOL075C.
Five S. cerevisiae transporters (Snq2p (YDR011W),
Pdr5p (YOR153W), Pdr10p (YOR328W), Pdr11p
(YIL013C), and Pdr15p (YDR406W)) are part of the
PDR network and they contribute to the pleiotropic
drug resistance by export of various, chemically unrelated hydrophobic molecules from the cell [95,96]. The
Pdr12p (YPL058C) protein confers cell resistance to
weak organic acids [97,98]. The function of PDR proteins is not limited to drug export, as Pdr11p and
Aus1p (YOR011W), are required for sterol uptake and
anaerobic growth [99]. Additionally, a role for two PDR
proteins, Snq2p and Pdr5p, in yeast quorum sensing has
been proposed recently [100]. ABC-G transporters
described from other fungal species often contribute to
drug resistance too (see [101] for a recent review). However, the physiological functions of PDR transporters
might also relate to the translocation of various lipid
molecules, as shown for C. albicans transporters [102].
A comprehensive phylogenetic analysis of fungal ABCG transporters proved to be complicated by the fact that
their massive expansion in fungal genomes apparently
occurred after the diversification of the major fungal
lineages. However, proteins related to the S. cerevisiae
Adp1p and YOL075C form two groups that are clearly
separated from the other fungal ABC-G transporters
(Figure 9, Additional file 9).
Although Adp1 was one of the first yeast PDR transporters discovered [103], its function has remained enigmatic. This transporter is unusual as it has only one
central NBD located between two transmembrane
domains, and its first NBD is replaced by a large soluble
domain containing EGF (Epidermal Growth Factor)
repeats [16,17]. Adp1 also displays sequence similarity
with the D. melanogaster white, brown and scarlet halftransporters involved in pigment precursor transport in
the eye. Related proteins (Group VII in Figure 9) are
found in most of the analyzed species with the

Kovalchuk and Driessen BMC Genomics 2010, 11:177
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/177

Page 14 of 21

Figure 9 Phylogenetic tree of fungal ABC-G proteins. The tree was generated as described in the legend to the Figure 3.

exception of S pombe, Y. lipolytica and M. globosa.
Their number ranges from a single copy in most ascomycetes to six genes in chytrid S. punctatus.
Similarly to Adp1p, the function of the S. cerevisiae
YOL075C protein remains unknown. Related proteins
(Group VI) were found in most of the species included
in our analysis. However, they are apparently missing in
the genomes of R. oryzae, S. pombe, M. globosa and
P. graminis. Notably, some of fungal ABC-G transporters that belong to this group have the characteristic
NBD-TMS 6 topology of half-transporters (like

CaO19.3120), while other like YOL075Cp are typical
full-size transporters with the topology NBD-TMS 6 NBD-TMS6. The number of members of this group in
fungal genomes ranges from one to four, with the highest number observed in A. oryzae. Adp1- and
YOL075C-related proteins are the only ABC-G transporters identified in the genomes of E. cuniculi and B.
dendrobatidis. Taking into account an early origin and a
wide distribution of these two groups in the fungal genomes, these transporters might perform some important
but so far unknown function.

Kovalchuk and Driessen BMC Genomics 2010, 11:177
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/177

The ‘true’ PDR transporters were identified in most of
the analyzed genomes, with the exception for the most
basal species E. cuniculi and B. dendrobatidis. Their
number per genome varies significantly ranging from
two in S. punctatus, S. pombe and M. globosa to as
many as seventeen in A. oryzae and P. chrysogenum.
Previous observations [101,104] and our phylogenetic
analysis indicates that PDR transporters are the least
conserved among fungal ABC proteins, suggesting their
rapid evolution after the divergence of the main fungal
lineages. Because of multiple gene duplications and/or
loss events, it is difficult to define the groups of orthologous PDR proteins in the different species. However,
five clusters of PDR transporters could be recognized in
our phylogenetic analysis (Figure 9, Additional file 9).
All of them, except for Group IV, are restricted to the
genomes of higher fungi (ascomycetes and
basidiomycetes).
The largest Group I contains more than 70 members.
Corresponding proteins are found in all ascomycetes
except for S. pombe, but they are almost entirely missing
from the analyzed basidiomycetes with C. neoformans as
only exception. The number ranges from a single gene
in N. crassa up to eight genes in G. zeae. These systems
are also remarkably abundant in the genomes of P. chrysogenum and Aspergillus species. This group includes
transporters with well-established roles in multidrug
resistance as for instance the S. cerevisiae Pdr5p, Pdr10p
and Pdr15p as well as the C. albicans Cdr1p, Cdr2p,
Cdr3p, and Cdr4p proteins.
Group II is much smaller than Group I. Members are
present only in S. pombe, species of the order Saccharomycetales and three of the analyzed basidiomycetes (C.
cinerea, U. maydis, and M. globosa). This branch of the
phylogenetic tree received relatively low support in the
bootstrap analysis, so the members from ascomycetes and
basidiomycetes might be treated as two separate groups.
In different species, the number of the proteins belonging
to this group ranges from one to five. The highest number
is found in the genome of S. cerevisiae, including Snq2p,
Pdr11p, Pdr12p, Pdr18p and Aus1p. The S. pombe brefeldin A efflux protein Bfr1 is also placed in this group.
Groups III and V are similar in their distribution as
they are only found in the species of Pezizomycotina
and basidiomycetes. Group III members are absent in
C. immitis and M. grisea, but present in the two species of basidiomycetes, U. maydis and C. neoformans.
Proteins belonging to Group V, on the other hand,
were found in all analyzed species of Pezizomycotina,
while the only representative among basidiomycetes is
in C. neoformans. Members of Group III are less abundant and usually present as one or two copies (only P.
chrysogenum has three of them). Up to seven transporters belonging to Group V could be found in A. oryzae.

Page 15 of 21

Unlike the two previous groups, members of Group
IV are also found outside of the higher fungi, namely in
S. punctatus and R. oryzae. They are missing, however,
from the genomes of Saccharomycetales, M. globosa,
and, quite surprisingly, also absent in A. oryzae. In other
ascomycetes they are universally present as a single
copy, while there are two of such genes in U. maydis
and S. punctatus, three were found in P. graminis, and
as many as eight are present in R. oryzae.
Finally, four ABC-G proteins from the genomes of S.
pombe (Pdr1), A. oryzae, P. chrysogenum and P. graminis, could not be assigned to any of the groups
described above. Their phylogenetic relationships remain
unclear.
Non-classified ABC proteins

In addition to the members of the well-defined subfamilies ABC-A to G, fungal genomes also contain several
genes encoding ABC proteins that can not be classified
into any of the known groups (Figure 10). These proteins lack transmembrane domains, but their amino
acids sequences of the NBDs clearly demonstrates that
they belong to the superfamily of ABC proteins. One of
these groups consists of proteins related to S. cerevisiae
Caf16p (YFL028C), and these are found in all analyzed
species except for E. cuniculi and B. dendrobatidis.
Caf16p is part of the CCR4-NOT transcriptional regulatory complex involved in controlling mRNA initiation,
elongation and degradation [105]. However, the role for
Caf16p within this complex is currently not well
understood.
The prototypical member of the second group of fungal non-classified ABC proteins is S. cerevisiae
YDR061W. It displays similarity to the components of
bacterial multisubunit ABC systems. However, no corresponding transmembrane components have been found,
and thus the existence of such multisubunit ABC system
in fungi remains questionable. Related proteins are
found in most of the species analyzed, with the exception of E. cuniculi, B. dendrobatidis, and P. graminis.
Little is known about the function of those proteins in
fungi. They are present in a single copy in most of
the analyzed species, but there are two members of
this branch present in R. oryzae, C. cinerea, and
C. neoformans.

Conclusions
Our analysis of fungal ABC proteins provides an insight
into the diversity of this group of proteins within the
main fungal lineages. It shows that ABC proteins are a
highly dynamic group that has undergone a significant
diversification after the divergence of fungal phyla (chytridiomycetes, ‘zygomycetes’, ascomycetes, and basidiomycetes). The process of gene duplication was

Kovalchuk and Driessen BMC Genomics 2010, 11:177
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/177

Page 16 of 21

Figure 10 Phylogenetic tree of unclassified fungal ABC proteins. The tree was generated as described in the legend to the Figure 3.

apparently accompanied by gene loss events, and this
resulted in a great variety of ABC proteins that we can
observe today in the fungal genomes. Clearly, two evolutionary scenarios can be recognized. The number of
members of the ‘small’ subfamilies (ABC-A, -D, -E, -F,
half-size ABC-B proteins, and unclassified ABC proteins) remained low and quite constant in the analyzed
species, with only few exceptions, like an amplification

of the ABC-F subfamily in R. oryzae. On the other hand,
there is a remarkable variation in the number of members of the ‘large’ subfamilies (ABC-B, -C, and -G)
between the different species. These differences can be
as high as 11-fold in the case of ABC-G proteins. The
reasons for the massive proliferation of ABC-G proteins,
most notably in species of the Pezizomycotina group, is
currently not well understood. This is because of the

Kovalchuk and Driessen BMC Genomics 2010, 11:177
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/177

very limited information available about the physiological functions of fungal ABC transporters in general
except for S. cerevisiae and S. pombe.
Few ABC proteins are strictly required for cell viability. For example, in S. cerevisiae there are only three
essential ABC proteins, Yef3p, Arb1p, and Rli1p, none
of which is involved in transport. The number of essential ABC proteins might be larger in filamentous fungi,
especially with respect to the mitochondrial transporters.
On the other hand, an extensive amplification of ABC
transporters in fungal genomes may have resulted in
their partial functional redundancy. Trying to define a
‘minimal’ set of ABC proteins in fungi, we focused on
two species that contain the lowest numbers, namely E.
cuniculi and S. pombe with 13 and 19 ABC proteins,
respectively. E. cuniculi is a highly specialized parasitic
species with a very compact genome. Members of only
four out of the 7 eukaryotic subfamilies of ABC proteins
were found in this species (ABC-B, -E, -F, and-G), and
ABC proteins are only distantly related to those of other
fungi. So, this species can hardly serve as a good model
for fungi in general. On the other hand, the set of S.
pombe ABC proteins may be close to the minimal set
needed for a free-living organism, as it is among the
smallest of the sequenced eukaryotic genomes according
to the TransportDB database [106]. It lacks ABC-A proteins and even more remarkably it is the only free-living
species in our analysis that lacks peroxisomal ABC-D
transporters, although peroxisomes are present in this
organism. At the same time, there are no counterparts
of two S. pombe transporters, Pmd1 and Hmt1, in the
genomes of Saccharomycetales, indicating that even a
further reduction of the number of ABC transporters
might be possible.
Three species, S. punctatus, B. dendrobatidis and R.
oryzae, were of special interest as they represent basal
lineages that received only little attention as compared
to asco- and basidiomycetes. Some of ABC proteins
from these species could be assigned to the well-defined
groups of orthologous proteins (like Atm1-, Mdl1-, or
Hmt1-related transporters) that are highly conserved
throughout the fungal kingdom. However, there are also
a lot of lineage-specific proteins that form separated
clusters in the phylogenetic trees. Especially remarkable
is the coexistence of full-length and half-size ABC-A
transporters in the genomes of chytrid fungi, which is
unique among the species included in our analysis.
Sets of ABC proteins in the genomes of basidiomycetes and ascomycetes (in particular members of
the subphylum Pezizomycotina) have a lot in common.
The number of members of the particular subfamilies
in the genomes of basidiomycetes, however, tends to be
lower than in those of ascomycetes, and P. graminis has
the lowest number of ABC proteins per 1 Mb of

Page 17 of 21

genome among analyzed species (Additional file 2).
Within the phylum Ascomycota, there is a trend towards
an increase of the number of ABC proteins. This is
especially evident within the subphylum Pezizomycotina
(especially prominent in Aspergillus species and in G.
zeae), while S. pombe and members of the order Saccharomycetales contain a significantly reduced set of
ABC proteins, as several of the groups of ABC-proteins
present in other ascomycetes are missing from their
genomes. Some distinct features of the S. pombe transportome were already discussed above. Members of Saccharomycetales also lack ABC-A proteins, with a notable
exception of Y. lipolytica indicating that these systems
were most likely lost after the divergence of the lineage
leading to this species from the rest of the group. The
full-length ABC-B transporters in Saccharomycetales are
represented by a single protein, the mating pheromone
transporter Ste6p/Hst6 (again, Y. lipolytica is an exception from this rule, as it has 3 additional full-length
ABC proteins). Finally, Saccharomycetales species (once
again, except for Y. lipolytica) are characterized by the
duplication of the gene encoding the mitochondrial halfsize transporters Mdl1. Higher ascomycetes belonging to
the subphylum Pezizomycotina contain the most diverse
sets of ABC proteins, with several groups of proteins
specific for this subphylum. Unfortunately, the information about their physiological functions is still scarce
and mainly restricted to multidrug resistance.
The expansion of ABC proteins must have occurred
frequently and independently in different lineages of the
fungal kingdom. The difficulty in establishing groups of
orthologous proteins poses problems for the nomenclature. So far, the only fungal species with names assigned
to all ABC proteins are S. cerevisiae and S. pombe. However, those gene names can hardly be used to classify
the diversity of fungal ABC proteins simply because the
two model species lack many of the ABC proteins found
in filamentous fungi. Therefore, we suggest to adopt a
nomenclature system recently proposed for plant ABC
proteins [12]. According to this system, the name of a
given fungal ABC transporter should contain a species
identifier based on a Latin binomial (e.g., Sc for S. cerevisae), the subfamily abbreviation (e.g. ABCB) and a
number for each gene family member (e.g. ABCB1,
ABCB2 and so forth). Use of such nomenclature should
help to cope with an increasing amount of data about
fungal ABC proteins produced by numerous genome
sequencing projects.
Another problem is the lack of functional data on fungal ABC transporters. Most of the available information
was obtained from studies on S. cerevisiae and S. pombe.
Both species have significantly reduced set of ABC proteins and cannot serve as a good model for other fungi.
Only a small fraction of ABC proteins found in the

Kovalchuk and Driessen BMC Genomics 2010, 11:177
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/177

Page 18 of 21

remaining species have been characterized so far, but for
the majority the function is unknown. In fact, most of
the papers published on fungal ABC transporters in the
last decade deal with the role of these transporters in
the multidrug resistance, leaving other aspects of their
biology unnoticed. This view is, however, slowly changing as it has become increasingly clear that the physiological roles of the proteins previously described as
multidrug transporters is much broader. Our analysis
contributes to the functional characterization of the fungal ABC proteins in several ways. First, it identified
orthologues of the well-characterized ABC proteins thus
providing a first clue about their function. It also highlights the areas of special interest and that have only
been marginally studied thus far. One of those is a role
of ABC-A proteins in fungi. This group appears to be
much more abundant within the fungal kingdom than
previously realized. Its function(s), however, remains less
understood, in part because of the absence of members
from the genomes of both S. cerevisiae and S. pombe.
Another largely unexplored area concerns the role of
fungal ABC proteins in secondary metabolism. It is well
known that ABC transporters are often found within
prokaryotic secondary metabolism clusters where they
contribute to the excretion of final products. Our analysis shows that some of the transporters associated with
secondary metabolism clusters are highly conserved
within fungi. Further experiments are needed to uncover
their role within such clusters.
Although our analysis does not cover the whole set of
ABC proteins present in the databases, it provides an
insight into their astonishing diversity. The obtained
results can be used as a starting point for the development of an universal classification system of fungal ABC
proteins and for a further in-depth characterization of
members of this highly important group.

Phylogenetic analysis was performed with the program
package MEGA4 [107] using neighbor-joining, minimum evolution and maximum parsimony algorithms
and bootstrapping with 500 replicates. First, ABC proteins of each species were separated into subfamilies by
their comparison with S. cerevisiae, A. nidulans, Homo
sapiens, Arabidopsis thaliana, and Dictyostelium discoideum transporters. Afterwards, members of each subfamily and, in the case of ABC-B transporters, also fulllength and half-size proteins were analyzed separately.
Although the topologies of the phylogenetic trees produced with the different algorithms showed some minor
differences, the same major groups of ABC proteins
were recognized with all three algorithms.

Methods
To identify gene loci encoding ABC proteins in the fungal genomes, multiple blastp and tblastn searches
against selected genomes were performed either at the
National Center for Biotechnology Information website
or at the website of the Broad Institute. Sequences of S.
cerevisiae and A. nidulans ABC proteins representing all
known subfamilies were used as queries, so that two
searches per subfamily (except for ABC-A, for which no
S. cerevisiae members are known) were performed. All
hits producing E-values below 10-4 were further analyzed. For the genome sequences deposited at the Broad
Institute, produced data sets were additionally checked
against the list of sequences containing PFAM protein
domains ‘ABC transporter’, ‘ABC-2 type transporter’,
and ‘ABC transporter transmembrane region’.

Additional file 6: Figure S3. Phylogenetic tree of fungal ABC-C proteins
(traditional view).
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-11177-S6.EPS ]

Additional file 1: Table S1. Accession numbers, loci, and amino acid
sequences of all ABC proteins used in the phylogenetic analysis.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-11177-S1.XLS ]
Additional file 2: Table S2. Distribution of the subfamilies of ABC
proteins among analyzed fungal species. Numbers given in parentheses
include putative pseudogenes.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-11177-S2.DOC ]
Additional file 3: Table S3. Distribution of the phylogenetic groups of
ABC proteins identified in our analysis among analyzed species. Numbers
given in parentheses include putative pseudogenes.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-11177-S3.XLS ]
Additional file 4: Figure S1. Phylogenetic tree of fungal full-length ABCB proteins (traditional view).
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-11177-S4.EPS ]
Additional file 5: Figure S2. Phylogenetic tree of fungal half-size ABC-B
proteins (traditional view).
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-11177-S5.EPS ]

Additional file 7: Figure S4. Phylogenetic tree of fungal ABC-D proteins
(traditional view).
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-11177-S7.EPS ]
Additional file 8: Figure S5. Phylogenetic tree of fungal ABC-E and
ABC-F proteins (traditional view).
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-11177-S8.EPS ]
Additional file 9: Figure S6. Phylogenetic tree of fungal ABC-G proteins
(traditional view).
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-11177-S9.EPS ]

Kovalchuk and Driessen BMC Genomics 2010, 11:177
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/177

Acknowledgements
This project was financially supported by the Netherlands Ministry of
Economic Affairs and the B-Basic partner organizations http://www.b-basic.nl
through B-Basic, a public-private NWO-ACTS programme (ACTS = Advanced
Chemical Technologies for Sustainability) and by the Kluyver Centre for
Genomics of Industrial Fermentation which is part of the Netherlands
Genomics Initiative/Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research.
Author details
1
Department of Microbiology, Groningen Biomolecular Sciences and
Biotechnology Institute and Zernike Institute for Advanced Materials,
University of Groningen, Kerklaan 30, 9751 NN HAREN, The Netherlands.
2
Kluyver Centre for Genomics of Industrial Fermentation, P.O. Box 5057, 2600
GA Delft, The Netherlands.
Authors’ contributions
AK performed an identification and phylogenetic analysis of ABC proteins
from the selected fungal genomes and wrote the manuscript. AJMD
initiated the study, participated in its coordination and helped to draft the
manuscript. Both authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Received: 20 October 2009 Accepted: 16 March 2010
Published: 16 March 2010
References
1. ABCISSE database (ABC systems: Information on Sequence, Structure
and Evolution). [http://www1.pasteur.fr/recherche/unites/pmtg/abc/
database.iphtml].
2. Dassa E, Bouige P: The ABC of ABCS: a phylogenetic and functional
classification of ABC systems in living organisms. Res Microbiol 2001,
152:211-229.
3. Piddock LJ: Multidrug-resistance efflux pumps - not just for resistance.
Nat Rev Microbiol 2006, 4:629-636.
4. Lubelski J, Konings WN, Driessen AJ: Distribution and physiology of ABCtype transporters contributing to multidrug resistance in bacteria.
Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 2007, 71:463-476.
5. Lage H: ABC-transporters: implications on drug resistance from
microorganisms to human cancers. Int J Antimicrob Agents 2003,
22:188-199.
6. Dean M, Rzhetsky A, Allikmets R: The human ATP-binding cassette (ABC)
transporter superfamily. Genome Res 2001, 11:1156-1166.
7. Dean M, Annilo T: Evolution of the ATP-binding cassette (ABC)
transporter superfamily in vertebrates. Annu Rev Genomics Hum Genet
2005, 6:123-142.
8. Walker JE, Saraste M, Runswick MJ, Gay NJ: Distantly related sequences in
the alpha- and beta-subunits of ATP synthase, myosin, kinases and
other ATP-requiring enzymes and a common nucleotide binding fold.
EMBO J 1982, 1:945-951.
9. Bairoch A: PROSITE: a dictionary of sites and patterns in proteins. Nucleic
Acids Res 1992, 20(Suppl):2013-2018.
10. Sanchez-Fernandez R, Davies TG, Coleman JO, Rea PA: The Arabidopsis
thaliana ABC protein superfamily, a complete inventory. J Biol Chem
2001, 276:30231-30244.
11. Bouige P, Laurent D, Piloyan L, Dassa E: Phylogenetic and functional
classification of ATP-binding cassette (ABC) systems. Curr Protein Pept Sci
2002, 3:541-559.
12. Verrier PJ, Bird D, Burla B, Dassa E, Forestier C, Geisler M, Klein M,
Kolukisaoglu U, Lee Y, Martinoia E, et al: Plant ABC proteins–a unified
nomenclature and updated inventory. Trends Plant Sci 2008, 13:151-159.
13. Sturm A, Cunningham P, Dean M: The ABC transporter gene family of
Daphnia pulex. BMC Genomics 2009, 10:170.
14. Jungwirth H, Kuchler K: Yeast ABC transporters– a tale of sex, stress,
drugs and aging. FEBS Lett 2006, 580:1131-1138.
15. Iwaki T, Giga-Hama Y, Takegawa K: A survey of all 11 ABC transporters in
fission yeast: two novel ABC transporters are required for red pigment
accumulation in a Schizosaccharomyces pombe adenine biosynthetic
mutant. Microbiology 2006, 152:2309-2321.

Page 19 of 21

16. Schuller C, Bauer BE, Kuchler K: Inventory and evolution of fungal ABC
protein genes. ABC Proteins: From Bacteria to Man ElsevierHolland IB, Cole
SPC, Kuchler K, Higgins CF 2003, 279-293.
17. Bauer BE, Wolfger H, Kuchler K: Inventory and function of yeast ABC
proteins: about sex, stress, pleiotropic drug and heavy metal resistance.
Biochim Biophys Acta 1999, 1461:217-236.
18. Decottignies A, Goffeau A: Complete inventory of the yeast ABC proteins.
Nat Genet 1997, 15:137-145.
19. Franz R, Michel S, Morschhauser J: A fourth gene from the Candida
albicans CDR family of ABC transporters. Gene 1998, 220:91-98.
20. Balan I, Alarco AM, Raymond M: The Candida albicans CDR3 gene codes
for an opaque-phase ABC transporter. J Bacteriol 1997, 179:7210-7218.
21. Sanglard D, Ischer F, Monod M, Bille J: Cloning of Candida albicans genes
conferring resistance to azole antifungal agents: characterization of
CDR2, a new multidrug ABC transporter gene. Microbiology 1997, 143(Pt
2):405-416.
22. Gaur M, Choudhury D, Prasad R: Complete inventory of ABC proteins in
human pathogenic yeast, Candida albicans. J Mol Microbiol Biotechnol
2005, 9:3-15.
23. Prasad R, De WP, Goffeau A, Balzi E: Molecular cloning and
characterization of a novel gene of Candida albicans, CDR1, conferring
multiple resistance to drugs and antifungals. Curr Genet 1995, 27:320-329.
24. Slaven JW, Anderson MJ, Sanglard D, Dixon GK, Bille J, Roberts IS,
Denning DW: Increased expression of a novel Aspergillus fumigatus ABC
transporter gene, atrF, in the presence of itraconazole in an itraconazole
resistant clinical isolate. Fungal Genet Biol 2002, 36:199-206.
25. Tobin MB, Peery RB, Skatrud PL: Genes encoding multiple drug resistancelike proteins in Aspergillus fumigatus and Aspergillus flavus. Gene 1997,
200:11-23.
26. Thornewell SJ, Peery RB, Skatrud PL: Cloning and characterization of
CneMDR1: a Cryptococcus neoformans gene encoding a protein related
to multidrug resistance proteins. Gene 1997, 201:21-29.
27. Sanguinetti M, Posteraro B, La SM, Torelli R, Fiori B, Santangelo R, Delogu G,
Fadda G: Role of AFR1, an ABC transporter-encoding gene, in the in vivo
response to fluconazole and virulence of Cryptococcus neoformans.
Infect Immun 2006, 74:1352-1359.
28. Posteraro B, Sanguinetti M, Sanglard D, La SM, Boccia S, Romano L,
Morace G, Fadda G: Identification and characterization of a Cryptococcus
neoformans ATP binding cassette (ABC) transporter-encoding gene,
CnAFR1, involved in the resistance to fluconazole. Mol Microbiol 2003,
47:357-371.
29. do Nascimento AM, Goldman MH, Goldman GH: Molecular
characterization of ABC transporter-encoding genes in Aspergillus
nidulans. Genet Mol Res 2002, 1:337-349.
30. Andrade AC, Van Nistelrooy JG, Peery RB, Skatrud PL, de Waard MA: The
role of ABC transporters from Aspergillus nidulans in protection against
cytotoxic agents and in antibiotic production. Mol Gen Genet 2000,
263:966-977.
31. Andrade AC, Del SG, Van Nistelrooy JG, Waard MA: The ABC transporter
AtrB from Aspergillus nidulans mediates resistance to all major classes
of fungicides and some natural toxic compounds. Microbiology 2000,
146(Pt 8):1987-1997.
32. Del Sorbo G, Andrade AC, Van Nistelrooy JG, Van Kan JA, Balzi E, de
Waard MA: Multidrug resistance in Aspergillus nidulans involves novel
ATP-binding cassette transporters. Mol Gen Genet 1997, 254:417-426.
33. Urban M, Bhargava T, Hamer JE: An ATP-driven efflux pump is a novel
pathogenicity factor in rice blast disease. EMBO J 1999, 18:512-521.
34. Gupta A, Chattoo BB: Functional analysis of a novel ABC transporter
ABC4 from Magnaporthe grisea. FEMS Microbiol Lett 2008, 278:22-28.
35. Sun CB, Suresh A, Deng YZ, Naqvi NI: A multidrug resistance transporter
in Magnaporthe is required for host penetration and for survival during
oxidative stress. Plant Cell 2006, 18:3686-3705.
36. Del Sorbo G, Schoonbeek H, de Waard MA: Fungal transporters involved
in efflux of natural toxic compounds and fungicides. Fungal Genet Biol
2000, 30:1-15.
37. De Hertogh B, Hancy F, Goffeau A, Baret PV: Emergence of species-specific
transporters during evolution of the hemiascomycete phylum. Genetics
2006, 172:771-781.
38. Seret ML, Diffels JF, Goffeau A, Baret PV: Combined phylogeny and
neighborhood analysis of the evolution of the ABC transporters

Kovalchuk and Driessen BMC Genomics 2010, 11:177
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/177

39.

40.

41.

42.
43.

44.

45.

46.
47.

48.
49.

50.

51.

52.

53.

54.

55.

56.

57.

58.
59.

conferring multiple drug resistance in hemiascomycete yeasts. BMC
Genomics 2009, 10:459.
Lamping E, Baret PV, Holmes AR, Monk BC, Goffeau A, Cannon RD: Fungal
PDR transporters: Phylogeny, topology, motifs and function. Fungal Genet
Biol 2009, 47:127.
Cannon RD, Lamping E, Holmes AR, Niimi K, Baret PV, Keniya MV, Tanabe K,
Niimi M, Goffeau A, Monk BC: Efflux-mediated antifungal drug resistance.
Clin Microbiol Rev 2009, 22:291-321.
James TY, Kauff F, Schoch CL, Matheny PB, Hofstetter V, Cox CJ, Celio G,
Gueidan C, Fraker E, Miadlikowska J, et al: Reconstructing the early
evolution of Fungi using a six-gene phylogeny. Nature 2006, 443:818-822.
Anjard C, Loomis WF: Evolutionary analyses of ABC transporters of
Dictyostelium discoideum. Eukaryot Cell 2002, 1:643-652.
Morris PF, Phuntumart V: Inventory and comparative evolution of the
ABC superfamily in the genomes of Phytophthora ramorum and
Phytophthora sojae. J Mol Evol 2009, 68:563-575.
Peelman F, Labeur C, Vanloo B, Roosbeek S, Devaud C, Duverger N,
Denefle P, Rosier M, Vandekerckhove J, Rosseneu M: Characterization of
the ABCA transporter subfamily: identification of prokaryotic and
eukaryotic members, phylogeny and topology. J Mol Biol 2003,
325:259-274.
Wenzel JJ, Piehler A, Kaminski WE: ABC A-subclass proteins: gatekeepers
of cellular phospho- and sphingolipid transport. Front Biosci 2007,
12:3177-3193.
Gottesman MM, Fojo T, Bates SE: Multidrug resistance in cancer: role of
ATP-dependent transporters. Nat Rev Cancer 2002, 2:48-58.
Aller SG, Yu J, Ward A, Weng Y, Chittaboina S, Zhuo R, Harrell PM, Trinh YT,
Zhang Q, Urbatsch IL, et al: Structure of P-glycoprotein reveals a
molecular basis for poly-specific drug binding. Science 2009,
323:1718-1722.
Yazaki K: ABC transporters involved in the transport of plant secondary
metabolites. FEBS Lett 2006, 580:1183-1191.
Santelia D, Vincenzetti V, Azzarello E, Bovet L, Fukao Y, Duchtig P,
Mancuso S, Martinoia E, Geisler M: MDR-like ABC transporter AtPGP4 is
involved in auxin-mediated lateral root and root hair development. FEBS
Lett 2005, 579:5399-5406.
Shitan N, Bazin I, Dan K, Obata K, Kigawa K, Ueda K, Sato F, Forestier C,
Yazaki K: Involvement of CjMDR1, a plant multidrug-resistance-type ATPbinding cassette protein, in alkaloid transport in Coptis japonica. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 2003, 100:751-756.
Terasaka K, Blakeslee JJ, Titapiwatanakun B, Peer WA, Bandyopadhyay A,
Makam SN, Lee OR, Richards EL, Murphy AS, Sato F, et al: PGP4, an ATP
binding cassette P-glycoprotein, catalyzes auxin transport in Arabidopsis
thaliana roots. Plant Cell 2005, 17:2922-2939.
McGrath JP, Varshavsky A: The yeast STE6 gene encodes a homologue of
the mammalian multidrug resistance P-glycoprotein. Nature 1989,
340:400-404.
Kuchler K, Sterne RE, Thorner J: Saccharomyces cerevisiae STE6 gene
product: a novel pathway for protein export in eukaryotic cells. EMBO J
1989, 8:3973-3984.
Christensen PU, Davey J, Nielsen O: The Schizosaccharomyces pombe
mam1 gene encodes an ABC transporter mediating secretion of Mfactor. Mol Gen Genet 1997, 255:226-236.
Raymond M, Dignard D, Alarco AM, Mainville N, Magee BB, Thomas DY: A
Ste6p/P-glycoprotein homologue from the asexual yeast Candida
albicans transports the a-factor mating pheromone in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. Mol Microbiol 1998, 27:587-598.
Nishi K, Yoshida M, Nishimura M, Nishikawa M, Nishiyama M, Horinouchi S,
Beppu T: A leptomycin B resistance gene of Schizosaccharomyces
pombe encodes a protein similar to the mammalian P-glycoproteins.
Mol Microbiol 1992, 6:761-769.
Kragl C, Schrettl M, Eisendle M, Haas H: The Aspergillus fumigatus ABC
transporter AbcB is involved in excretion of siderophore breakdown
product. Proceedings of the 9th European Conference on Fungal Genetics: 5-8
April 2008; Edinburgh, Scotland, UK 2008, 130.
von Dohren H: A survey of nonribosomal peptide synthetase (NRPS)
genes in Aspergillus nidulans. Fungal Genet Biol 2009, 46(Suppl 1):S45-S52.
Angermayr K, Parson W, Stoffler G, Haas H: Expression of atrC - encoding
a novel member of the ATP binding cassette transporter family in
Aspergillus nidulans - is sensitive to cycloheximide. Biochim Biophys Acta
1999, 1453:304-310.

Page 20 of 21

60. Kispal G, Csere P, Guiard B, Lill R: The ABC transporter Atm1p is required
for mitochondrial iron homeostasis. FEBS Lett 1997, 418:346-350.
61. Kispal G, Csere P, Prohl C, Lill R: The mitochondrial proteins Atm1p and
Nfs1p are essential for biogenesis of cytosolic Fe/S proteins. EMBO J
1999, 18:3981-3989.
62. Leighton J, Schatz G: An ABC transporter in the mitochondrial inner
membrane is required for normal growth of yeast. EMBO J 1995,
14:188-195.
63. Kushnir S, Babiychuk E, Storozhenko S, Davey MW, Papenbrock J, De RR,
Engler G, Stephan UW, Lange H, Kispal G, et al: A mutation of the
mitochondrial ABC transporter Sta1 leads to dwarfism and chlorosis in
the Arabidopsis mutant starik. Plant Cell 2001, 13:89-100.
64. Pondarre C, Antiochos BB, Campagna DR, Clarke SL, Greer EL, Deck KM,
McDonald A, Han AP, Medlock A, Kutok JL, et al: The mitochondrial ATPbinding cassette transporter Abcb7 is essential in mice and participates
in cytosolic iron-sulfur cluster biogenesis. Hum Mol Genet 2006,
15:953-964.
65. Ortiz DF, Kreppel L, Speiser DM, Scheel G, McDonald G, Ow DW: Heavy
metal tolerance in the fission yeast requires an ATP-binding cassettetype vacuolar membrane transporter. EMBO J 1992, 11:3491-3499.
66. Ortiz DF, Ruscitti T, McCue KF, Ow DW: Transport of metal-binding
peptides by HMT1, a fission yeast ABC-type vacuolar membrane protein.
J Biol Chem 1995, 270:4721-4728.
67. Preveral S, Gayet L, Moldes C, Hoffmann J, Mounicou S, Gruet A, Reynaud F,
Lobinski R, Verbavatz JM, Vavasseur A, et al: A common highly conserved
cadmium detoxification mechanism from bacteria to humans: heavy
metal tolerance conferred by the ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporter
SpHMT1 requires glutathione but not metal-chelating phytochelatin
peptides. J Biol Chem 2009, 284:4936-4943.
68. Vatamaniuk OK, Bucher EA, Sundaram MV, Rea PA: CeHMT-1, a putative
phytochelatin transporter, is required for cadmium tolerance in
Caenorhabditis elegans. J Biol Chem 2005, 280:23684-23690.
69. Hanikenne M, Matagne RF, Loppes R: Pleiotropic mutants hypersensitive
to heavy metals and to oxidative stress in Chlamydomonas reinhardtii.
FEMS Microbiol Lett 2001, 196:107-111.
70. Young L, Leonhard K, Tatsuta T, Trowsdale J, Langer T: Role of the ABC
transporter Mdl1 in peptide export from mitochondria. Science 2001,
291:2135-2138.
71. Chloupkova M, LeBard LS, Koeller DM: MDL1 is a high copy suppressor of
ATM1: evidence for a role in resistance to oxidative stress. J Mol Biol
2003, 331:155-165.
72. Cornillot E, Metenier G, Vivares CP, Dassa E: Comparative analysis of
sequences encoding ABC systems in the genome of the microsporidian
Encephalitozoon cuniculi. FEMS Microbiol Lett 2002, 210:39-47.
73. Ortiz DF, St Pierre MV, Abdulmessih A, Arias IM: A yeast ATP-binding
cassette-type protein mediating ATP-dependent bile acid transport.
J Biol Chem 1997, 272:15358-15365.
74. Klein M, Mamnun YM, Eggmann T, Schuller C, Wolfger H, Martinoia E,
Kuchler K: The ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporter Bpt1p mediates
vacuolar sequestration of glutathione conjugates in yeast. FEBS Lett 2002,
520:63-67.
75. Li ZS, Szczypka M, Lu YP, Thiele DJ, Rea PA: The yeast cadmium factor
protein (YCF1) is a vacuolar glutathione S-conjugate pump. J Biol Chem
1996, 271:6509-6517.
76. Petrovic S, Pascolo L, Gallo R, Cupelli F, Ostrow JD, Goffeau A, Tiribelli C,
Bruschi CV: The products of YCF1 and YLL015w (BPT1) cooperate for the
ATP-dependent vacuolar transport of unconjugated bilirubin in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Yeast 2000, 16:561-571.
77. Theiss S, Kretschmar M, Nichterlein T, Hof H, Agabian N, Hacker J,
Kohler GA: Functional analysis of a vacuolar ABC transporter in wild-type
Candida albicans reveals its involvement in virulence. Mol Microbiol 2002,
43:571-584.
78. Cui Z, Hirata D, Tsuchiya E, Osada H, Miyakawa T: The multidrug
resistance-associated protein (MRP) subfamily (Yrs1/Yor1) of
Saccharomyces cerevisiae is important for the tolerance to a broad
range of organic anions. J Biol Chem 1996, 271:14712-14716.
79. Decottignies A, Grant AM, Nichols JW, de WH, McIntosh DB, Goffeau A:
ATPase and multidrug transport activities of the overexpressed yeast
ABC protein Yor1p. J Biol Chem 1998, 273:12612-12622.
80. Katzmann DJ, Hallstrom TC, Voet M, Wysock W, Golin J, Volckaert G, MoyeRowley WS: Expression of an ATP-binding cassette transporter-encoding

Kovalchuk and Driessen BMC Genomics 2010, 11:177
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/177

81.
82.

83.

84.

85.

86.
87.

88.

89.

90.

91.

92.

93.
94.

95.
96.

97.

98.

99.

100.

101.

gene (YOR1) is required for oligomycin resistance in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. Mol Cell Biol 1995, 15:6875-6883.
Theodoulou FL, Holdsworth M, Baker A: Peroxisomal ABC transporters.
FEBS Lett 2006, 580:1139-1155.
Hettema EH, van Roermund CW, Distel B, van den BM, Vilela C, RodriguesPousada C, Wanders RJ, Tabak HF: The ABC transporter proteins Pat1 and
Pat2 are required for import of long-chain fatty acids into peroxisomes
of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. EMBO J 1996, 15:3813-3822.
Shani N, Valle D: A Saccharomyces cerevisiae homolog of the human
adrenoleukodystrophy transporter is a heterodimer of two half ATPbinding cassette transporters. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1996,
93:11901-11906.
Shani N, Sapag A, Watkins PA, Valle D: An S. cerevisiae peroxisomal
transporter, orthologous to the human adrenoleukodystrophy protein,
appears to be a heterodimer of two half ABC transporters: Pxa1p and
Pxa2p. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1996, 804:770-772.
Katinka MD, Duprat S, Cornillot E, Metenier G, Thomarat F, Prensier G,
Barbe V, Peyretaillade E, Brottier P, Wincker P, et al: Genome sequence and
gene compaction of the eukaryote parasite Encephalitozoon cuniculi.
Nature 2001, 414:450-453.
Kiel JA, Veenhuis M, van dKI: PEX genes in fungal genomes: common,
rare or redundant. Traffic 2006, 7:1291-1303.
Jourdain I, Sontam D, Johnson C, Dillies C, Hyams JS: Dynamin-dependent
biogenesis, cell cycle regulation and mitochondrial association of
peroxisomes in fission yeast. Traffic 2008, 9:353-365.
Dong J, Lai R, Nielsen K, Fekete CA, Qiu H, Hinnebusch AG: The essential
ATP-binding cassette protein RLI1 functions in translation by promoting
preinitiation complex assembly. J Biol Chem 2004, 279:42157-42168.
Kispal G, Sipos K, Lange H, Fekete Z, Bedekovics T, Janaky T, Bassler J, guilar
Netz DJ, Balk J, Rotte C, et al: Biogenesis of cytosolic ribosomes requires
the essential iron-sulphur protein Rli1p and mitochondria. EMBO J 2005,
24:589-598.
Dong J, Lai R, Jennings JL, Link AJ, Hinnebusch AG: The novel ATP-binding
cassette protein ARB1 is a shuttling factor that stimulates 40S and 60S
ribosome biogenesis. Mol Cell Biol 2005, 25:9859-9873.
Garcia-Barrio M, Dong J, Ufano S, Hinnebusch AG: Association of GCN1GCN20 regulatory complex with the N-terminus of eIF2alpha kinase
GCN2 is required for GCN2 activation. EMBO J 2000, 19:1887-1899.
Kozak L, Gopal G, Yoon JH, Sauna ZE, Ambudkar SV, Thakurta AG, Dhar R:
Elf1p, a member of the ABC class of ATPases, functions as a mRNA
export factor in Schizosacchromyces pombe. J Biol Chem 2002,
277:33580-33589.
Kamath A, Chakraburtty K: Role of yeast elongation factor 3 in the
elongation cycle. J Biol Chem 1989, 264:15423-15428.
Sarthy AV, McGonigal T, Capobianco JO, Schmidt M, Green SR, Moehle CM,
Goldman RC: Identification and kinetic analysis of a functional homolog
of elongation factor 3, YEF3 in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Yeast 1998,
14:239-253.
Balzi E, Goffeau A: Yeast multidrug resistance: the PDR network.
J Bioenerg Biomembr 1995, 27:71-76.
Rogers B, Decottignies A, Kolaczkowski M, Carvajal E, Balzi E, Goffeau A: The
pleitropic drug ABC transporters from Saccharomyces cerevisiae. J Mol
Microbiol Biotechnol 2001, 3:207-214.
Holyoak CD, Bracey D, Piper PW, Kuchler K, Coote PJ: The Saccharomyces
cerevisiae weak-acid-inducible ABC transporter Pdr12 transports
fluorescein and preservative anions from the cytosol by an energydependent mechanism. J Bacteriol 1999, 181:4644-4652.
Piper P, Mahe Y, Thompson S, Pandjaitan R, Holyoak C, Egner R,
Muhlbauer M, Coote P, Kuchler K: The pdr12 ABC transporter is required
for the development of weak organic acid resistance in yeast. EMBO J
1998, 17:4257-4265.
Wilcox LJ, Balderes DA, Wharton B, Tinkelenberg AH, Rao G, Sturley SL:
Transcriptional profiling identifies two members of the ATP-binding
cassette transporter superfamily required for sterol uptake in yeast. J Biol
Chem 2002, 277:32466-32472.
Hlavacek O, Kucerova H, Harant K, Palkova Z, Vachova L: Putative role for
ABC multidrug exporters in yeast quorum sensing. FEBS Lett 2009,
583:1107-1113.
Coleman JJ, Mylonakis E: Efflux in fungi: la piece de resistance. PLoS
Pathog 2009, 5:e1000486.

Page 21 of 21

102. Smriti , Krishnamurthy S, Dixit BL, Gupta CM, Milewski S, Prasad R: ABC
transporters Cdr1p, Cdr2p and Cdr3p of a human pathogen Candida
albicans are general phospholipid translocators. Yeast 2002, 19:303-318.
103. Purnelle B, Skala J, Goffeau A: The product of the YCR105 gene located
on the chromosome III from Saccharomyces cerevisiae presents
homologies to ATP-dependent permeases. Yeast 1991, 7:867-872.
104. Gbelska Y, Krijger JJ, Breunig KD: Evolution of gene families: the multidrug
resistance transporter genes in five related yeast species. FEMS Yeast Res
2006, 6:345-355.
105. Liu HY, Chiang YC, Pan J, Chen J, Salvadore C, Audino DC,
Badarinarayana V, Palaniswamy V, Anderson B, Denis CL: Characterization
of CAF4 and CAF16 reveals a functional connection between the CCR4NOT complex and a subset of SRB proteins of the RNA polymerase II
holoenzyme. J Biol Chem 2001, 276:7541-7548.
106. Ren Q, Chen K, Paulsen IT: TransportDB: a comprehensive database
resource for cytoplasmic membrane transport systems and outer
membrane channels. Nucleic Acids Res 2007, 35:D274-D279.
107. Tamura K, Dudley J, Nei M, Kumar S: MEGA4: Molecular Evolutionary
Genetics Analysis (MEGA) software version 4.0. Mol Biol Evol 2007,
24:1596-1599.
doi:10.1186/1471-2164-11-177
Cite this article as: Kovalchuk and Driessen: Phylogenetic analysis of
fungal ABC transporters. BMC Genomics 2010 11:177.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
