<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Evolutionary changes in the notochord genetic toolkit: a comparative analysis of notochord genes in the ascidian Ciona and the larvacean Oikopleura</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:21. doi:10.1186/1471-2148-11-21"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Jamie E Kugler"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Evolutionary changes in the notochord genetic toolkit:
a comparative analysis of notochord genes in the
ascidian Ciona and the larvacean Oikopleura
Kugler et al.
Kugler et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:21
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/21 (20 January 2011)

Kugler et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:21
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/21

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Evolutionary changes in the notochord genetic
toolkit: a comparative analysis of notochord
genes in the ascidian Ciona and the larvacean
Oikopleura
Jamie E Kugler1†, Pierre Kerner1†, Jean-Marie Bouquet2, Di Jiang2, Anna Di Gregorio1*

Abstract
Background: The notochord is a defining feature of the chordate clade, and invertebrate chordates, such as
tunicates, are uniquely suited for studies of this structure. Here we used a well-characterized set of 50 notochord
genes known to be targets of the notochord-specific Brachyury transcription factor in one tunicate, Ciona
intestinalis (Class Ascidiacea), to begin determining whether the same genetic toolkit is employed to build the
notochord in another tunicate, Oikopleura dioica (Class Larvacea). We identified Oikopleura orthologs of the Ciona
notochord genes, as well as lineage-specific duplicates for which we determined the phylogenetic relationships
with related genes from other chordates, and we analyzed their expression patterns in Oikopleura embryos.
Results: Of the 50 Ciona notochord genes that were used as a reference, only 26 had clearly identifiable orthologs
in Oikopleura. Two of these conserved genes appeared to have undergone Oikopleura- and/or tunicate-specific
duplications, and one was present in three copies in Oikopleura, thus bringing the number of genes to test to 30.
We were able to clone and test 28 of these genes. Thirteen of the 28 Oikopleura orthologs of Ciona notochord
genes showed clear expression in all or in part of the Oikopleura notochord, seven were diffusely expressed
throughout the tail, six were expressed in tissues other than the notochord, while two probes did not provide a
detectable signal at any of the stages analyzed. One of the notochord genes identified, Oikopleura netrin, was
found to be unevenly expressed in notochord cells, in a pattern reminiscent of that previously observed for one of
the Oikopleura Hox genes.
Conclusions: A surprisingly high number of Ciona notochord genes do not have apparent counterparts in
Oikopleura, and only a fraction of the evolutionarily conserved genes show clear notochord expression. This
suggests that Ciona and Oikopleura, despite the morphological similarities of their notochords, have developed
rather divergent sets of notochord genes after their split from a common tunicate ancestor. This study
demonstrates that comparisons between divergent tunicates can lead to insights into the basic complement of
genes sufficient for notochord development, and elucidate the constraints that control its composition.

Background
The notochord is the synapomorphy that gives chordates their name. In vertebrates, this embryonic structure is transient, as it is replaced by the vertebral
column, and acts as a powerful organizer, secreting
* Correspondence: and2015@med.cornell.edu
† Contributed equally
1
Department of Cell and Developmental Biology Weill Medical College of
Cornell University 1300 York Avenue, Box 60, New York, NY 10065, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

signals required for the patterning of several organs,
such as the floor plate, somites, pancreas, heart and dorsal aorta [1]. Developing chordate embryos, including all
vertebrates as well as the invertebrate chordates (cephalochordates and tunicates), require a notochord for
structural stability, tail elongation, and as an anchor
point for muscle contraction [2]. Due to the limited
experimental accessibility of the vertebrate notochord
and the time and expenses required to generate transgenic vertebrate embryos, a considerable amount of the

© 2011 Kugler et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Kugler et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:21
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/21

recent research on notochord genes and their transcriptional regulation has been carried out in invertebrate
chordates, particularly ascidians, such as Ciona intestinalis [3-6] and Halocynthia roretzi [7,8], which together
with thaliaceans and larvaceans [9] are part of the tunicate subphylum. Studies in Ciona intestinalis have identified numerous notochord genes, both evolutionarily
conserved [10-13] and lineage-specific [14]. Parallel studies of a subset of orthologs of Ciona notochord genes
have shown their expression in the mouse notochord
[15].
While these observations indicate that ascidians represent a valid model for studying the evolutionary origins
of the notochord, they also raise questions on the
applicability of these findings to other invertebrate chordates. In fact, a considerable degree of variability in the
structure and genetic makeup of the notochord has
been found among invertebrate chordates; the most
striking example of such variability is arguably the notochord of amphioxus (cephalochordate), which is functionally related to the ascidian notochord but expresses
numerous muscle genes [16,17], in addition to typical
notochord markers [18,19]. Even within ascidians, divergent species such as Ciona (Order Enterogona) and
Halocynthia (Order Pleurogona), employ different molecular strategies to build morphologically similar structures, as shown by studies on the molecular control of
secondary notochord induction [20,21].
In this study, we have begun probing the extent of
variation tolerable in the notochord gene complement
used by representatives of two classes of tunicates. To
this aim, we tested in the larvacean Oikopleura dioica
the expression patterns of notochord genes previously
characterized in the ascidian Ciona intestinalis.
Oikopleura dioica (hereinafter Oikopleura) is a small
pelagic tunicate which possesses the most compact

Page 2 of 16

genome identified in any chordate, at only 72 Mb [22].
Oikopleura has a 6-day life cycle at 15°C [23] and can
be cultured in vitro in a suitably staffed laboratory.
Oikopleura and other larvaceans are unique among tunicates in that they retain the notochord throughout their
lifespan [9,24]. Differently from the notochord of a
Ciona tailbud, which consists of 40 cells and is flanked
on each side by 18 muscle cells [25], the notochord of a
tailbud Oikopleura embryo contains only 20 cells (19
columnar cells plus one round terminal cell), flanked on
each side by 10 muscle cells [9]. While in Ciona the 40
notochord cells cease to divide by the early tailbud stage
[25] and are gradually reabsorbed at metamorphosis
[26], the notochord cells in Oikopleura increase their
number through additional mitoses, which bring their
final count to 120-160 by the third day of life [27].
Nevertheless, the overall “stack-of-coins” arrangement of
the notochord cells and the morphogenetic events that
characterize notochord differentiation, including the formation of vacuoles which eventually coalesce to form a
hollow lumen, appear quite similar between these tunicates [27] (Figure. 1). The main difference identified so
far at the molecular level is in the expression of Hox
genes, which are absent from the Ciona notochord [28]
but are expressed in the Oikopleura notochord in a spatial sequence resembling the colinear expression seen in
vertebrates [29]. Most importantly, the Oikopleura notochord also expresses Brachyury [30], a T-box transcription factor necessary for notochord formation in Ciona
and in all chordates analyzed thus far [31,32]. Most of
the currently known Brachyury-downstream notochord
genes have been identified in Ciona intestinalis
[13,33,34].
The conserved notochord expression of Brachyury
homologs in Ciona and Oikopleura prompted us to use
the 50 notochord genes identified so far as bona fide

Figure 1 The notochord of Ciona intestinalis and Oikopleura dioica embryos. Microphotographs of a Ciona intestinalis embryo (A) and an
Oikopleura dioica embryo (B) at comparable developmental stages. In each panel the notochord is highlighted by an arrowhead. Anterior is to
the left and dorsal is up.

Kugler et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:21
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/21

Ciona Brachyury (Ci-Bra) targets to assess whether, and
to what extent, Oikopleura retains the notochord gene
battery identified in Ciona. The work presented here
therefore begins by surveying the Oikopleura genome
and by identifying in silico orthologs of Ci-Bra target
genes. The expression of these genes was then analyzed
by WMISH on Oikopleura embryos fixed at embryonic
stages that correspond, approximately, to the stages at
which notochord expression is detected in Ciona [27] as
well as on embryos at later developmental stages. Our
results show that of the 50 Ci-Bra target genes that
were used as a starting point, 24 did not have detectable
counterparts in the Oikopleura genome. We were able
to clone and analyze 28 of the remaining 30 genes (26
+4 lineage-specific duplicate genes), and found that 13
of these genes were expressed in the notochord, seven
were expressed at low levels throughout the tail, thus
possibly including the notochord, six were clearly
expressed in tissues other than the notochord, and two
were not detectable under the experimental conditions
employed. Taken together, our results suggest a considerable divergence in the notochord genetic toolkit
between Ciona and Oikopleura and begin to pinpoint
genes and pathways that might be conserved in this
structure as a result of evolutionary constraints.

Results and Discussion
Lineage-specific duplication events among Oikopleura
orthologs of Ciona notochord genes

To identify notochord genes in Oikopleura, we used as a
starting point a list of 50 notochord genes which had
been previously characterized in Ciona intestinalis as
Ci-Bra transcriptional targets [13,33] (Additional file 1
and references therein). One gene, Ci-collagen a1 type
XVIII 1, included in a previously published list of Ci-Bra
targets [33], was excluded from this study due to discrepancies in gene model references. We used the reciprocal best BLAST hit method [35,36] to detect and
characterize bona fide orthologs of Ci-Bra targets present in the Oikopleura genome. Briefly, we used both
the allelic and reference first draft genome assembly of
Oikopleura, as well as 18,020 computer-generated gene
models (http://www.genoscope.cns.fr/externe/GenomeBrowser/Oikopleura/ and [37]) as databases for our
BLASTX or TBLASTN queries [38], using Ciona JGI
version 1.0 translated gene models (Additional file 1) for
first-pass screens and subsequently comparing the
results with the updated Ciona KH (Kyoto Hoya) gene
models [39] as reported in the ANISEED database
(http://www.aniseed.cnrs.fr/). Out of 50 queries, only 26
yielded identifiable positive reciprocal best BLAST hits
(Additional file 1).
For each reciprocal best BLAST hit, the corresponding
Oikopleura genomic region, gene model and available

Page 3 of 16

ESTs sequences were collected and aligned to allow
manual curation prior to cloning (data not shown). This
procedure uncovered possible duplication events. In particular, we noticed that two different genes seemed to
have been duplicated in Oikopleura, Od-Noto15 and OdCalumenin, while a third one, Od-Noto9, was found to
be present in three copies. For this reason, in the case
of these genes (Figures. 2, 3 and Additional file 2) and a
few more (data not shown), we resorted to the generation of phylogenetic reconstructions in order to minimize mis-assignments of orthologous relationships.
To construct a phylogenetic tree of orthologs of
Ci-Noto15 (Figure. 2A), we performed a BLAST search
against GenBank (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genbank/).
Interestingly, this search retrieved predominantly tunicate sequences, from the ascidians Ciona savignyi,
Halocynthia roretzi, Molgula tectiformis and Diplosoma
listerianum, as opposed to other deuterostome
sequences. Extensive BLAST searches of specific databases of genomic and EST sequences, including Strongylocentrotus purpuratus, Saccoglossus kowalevskii,
Branchiostoma floridae, Petromyzon marinus and Mus
musculus, yielded hits with poor e-values (below e-12),
even though a conserved Ras-like domain [40] was
detected in the Ci-Noto15 protein sequence. Among
those hits, five uncharacterized predicted protein
sequences from Branchiostoma floridae (amphioxus)
with e-values between 2e -4 and 6e -12 were retrieved
(Figure. 2A). To root the tree, we used two different
representative sequences of the Ras-superfamily (Ranand Rho-like) as outgroups. Surprisingly, tunicate
Noto15 putative orthologs bundled together, while no
clear relationships were found with any of the five predicted amphioxus proteins, which group themselves
separately in our tree (Figure. 2A), though without sufficient statistical support. This suggests that we
retrieved bona fide tunicate Noto15 orthologs which
belong to either a novel family specific to the tunicate
lineage, or to a group of divergent members eluding
identification, or that the Noto15 and unidentified
amphioxus genes represent a group of chordate-specific
genes that arose early during the evolutionary history of
the lineage, and has been preserved in cephalochordates
and tunicates but secondarily lost in the vertebrate lineage. Moreover, the two putative Noto15 orthologs found
in Oikopleura are grouped together with a statistical
support of 99% by both neighbor-joining and Bayesian
inference methods; this suggests that these copies arose
from a duplication event specific to Oikopleura. In an
effort to trace back this event, we studied the genomic
localization and neighboring genes of Od-Noto15a and
Od-Noto15b, but we did not find conclusive syntenic
relationships between these genes, either intra- or interspecifically (data not shown).

Kugler et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:21
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/21

Page 4 of 16

Figure 2 Phylogenetic analyses of Noto15 and Noto9 duplicates found in Oikopleura. Phylogenetic reconstructions performed for
(A) Noto15 and (B) Noto9 (Far UpStream Element Binding Proteins, or FUSEBPs) duplicates found in Oikopleura. Trees were obtained from
neighbor-joining analyses and rooted using heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein K (HNRNPK) and Rho-like and Ran protein sequences,
respectively, as outgroups. Statistical support values ≥80% obtained with different methods are included over conserved nodes; the first number
indicates the bootstrap support in neighbor-joining analysis (1000 bootstrap replicates), the second number reports the posterior probabilities in
Bayesian inference analysis. Note that a single value of 54% posterior probability was kept on the node grouping all tunicate Noto15 orthologs.
Abbreviations: Ci: Ciona intestinalis; Cs: Ciona savignyi; Mt: Molgula tectiformis; Hr: Halocynthia roretzi; Dl: Diplosoma listerianum; Od: Oikopleura
dioica; Bf: Branchiostoma floridae; Hs: Homo sapiens; Mm: Mus musculus; Pm: Petromyzon marinus; Sk: Saccoglossus kowalevskii; Sp:
Strongylocentrotus purpuratus; Pl: Paracentrotus lividus. The scale bars indicate the branch length that corresponds to the number of substitutions
per residue.

Kugler et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:21
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/21

Page 5 of 16

Figure 3 Phylogenetic analyses and genomic organization of Calumenin orthologs found in deuterostome genomes. (A) Phylogeny of
the predicted proteins encoded by the duplicate Calumenin genes found in Oikopleura. The tree was constructed based upon neighbor-joining
analyses and rooted using Reticulocalbin. Statistical support values ≥80% obtained with different methods are included over conserved nodes, as
described in Figure. 2. Abbreviations are as in Figure. 2. (B) Schematic depictions of the genomic regions encompassing Calumenin paralogs in
Ciona intestinalis, Ciona savignyi, Oikopleura dioica and Strongylocentrotus purpuratus. The names of the genes flanking the Calumenin genes are
either those indicated in the genome browsers of the respective species or those identified using the reciprocal best BLAST hit method.

Kugler et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:21
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/21

Three copies of the Ciona Noto9/FUSEBP gene are present
in the Oikopleura genome

We used the reciprocal best BLAST hit method to identify orthologs of Ci-Noto9 in other deuterostome
sequence databases. All best hits corresponded to Far
UpStream Element Binding Proteins (FUSEBPs) [41]
and were found in diverse animals spanning the main
branches of the deuterostome lineage (Figure. 2B).
FUSEBPs belong to the large superfamily of RNA-binding proteins, and more specifically to the K-homology
(KH) RNA-binding domain [42]. We therefore rooted
the tree with various deuterostome heterogeneous
nuclear ribonucleoprotein K (HNRNPK) protein
sequences as outgroups. In most deuterostomes, a single
copy of FUSEBP (Noto9) was found, while 3 FUSEBPs
were found in mammalian genomes as well as in Oikopleura. However, our phylogenetic analysis suggests that
the three copies found in mammals and Oikopleura
arose from independent lineage-specific duplication
events. In fact, vertebrate FUSEBPs group together with
a statistical support of 98% with the neighbor-joining
method and 100% of posterior probabilities as calculated
by the Bayesian inference method, whereas Od-Noto9a,
Od-Noto9b and Od-Noto9c group together with a statistical support of 92% and 100%, respectively, in a
related yet separate tunicate monophyletic group.
Despite our efforts, no other copies were found in other
tunicate databases, which tentatively indicates that these
duplications were isolated events circumscribed to the
peculiar genomic evolutionary history of Oikopleura;
however, this conclusion might have to be revisited
once complete genomic sequences become available for
other tunicates.
Gene duplications, synteny and genomic rearrangements:
the case of the Calumenin genes

Another phylogenetic tree was constructed to study the
evolutionary history and reciprocal relationships of
Calumenin genes from basal deuterostomes (Figure.
3A). Calumenin proteins belong to a family of low-affinity Ca 2+ -binding, multiple EF-hand proteins which
includes Cab45, Reticulocalbin, ERC-55, and Calumenin
(CREC) [43]. As numerous copies of these genes are
present in mammalian genomes, and as these were not
annotated following a rigorous phylogenetic reconstruction, we restricted our analysis to basal deuterostomes
by excluding gnathostome sequences from this study.
To root the tree we employed ascidian Reticulocalbin
sequences. We found multiple copies of Calumenin
genes in invertebrate deuterostome genomes: two copies
in the sea urchin Strongylocentrotus purpuratus, two in
Oikopleura and three copies in the sister species Ciona
intestinalis and Ciona savignyi. Despite our extensive
efforts, only single-copy genes were found in amphioxus,

Page 6 of 16

enteropneust and lamprey genomes. We also observed
that in our phylogenetic reconstructions putative
Calumenin orthologs in Oikopleura were not satisfactorily linked to any monophyletic group in this tree.
Although Od-Calumenin1 is found inside a statistically
supported group with all other Calumenin sequences,
Od-Calumenin2 is not reliably linked to this group,
likely because of the high evolutionary rate of divergence of Oikopleura genes. In addition, the two copies
found in the sea urchin genome seem to have arisen
from a duplication event independent from that which
gave rise to the three copies found in ascidians. In order
to trace these duplication events, we analyzed the genomic location and flanking genes of Calumenin paralogs
found in Ciona, Strongylocentrotus and Oikopleura
(Figure. 3B). This allowed us to gain more insights into
the evolutionary history of these genes in different genomes, as we found that all Calumenin paralogs map to a
single chromosome (or sequence scaffold) in ascidians
as well as in the sea urchin. In particular, the Calumenin paralogs that we found in Ciona savignyi are clustered in a contiguous arrangement on Reftig14, which
suggests that they originated from two tandem duplication events. In Ciona intestinalis, the three Calumenin
genes are found on the same chromosome, but Calumenin1a and Calumenin1b are separated by more than 1.1
Mb from Calumenin2 (Figure. 3B). Nevertheless, we
found that Calumenin paralogs are flanked in both
Ciona species by two genes: a gene similar to the unannotated gene model Kyotograil2005.162.27.1 (green
arrows in Figure. 3B), and a gene annotated as GPR128
(G-protein coupled receptor 128 precursor) (light blue
arrows in Figure. 3B). These observations indicate that
the linked arrangement found in Ciona savignyi might
have been split by a chromosomal rearrangement in
Ciona intestinalis. The fact that the genes flanking
Calumenin paralogs are identical between the two
Ciona species but different from those found in the sea
urchin, strengthens the hypothesis that the echinoderm
Calumenin paralogs arose from distinct duplication
events. In Oikopleura, Calumenin paralogs map to different scaffolds and are flanked by genes that are not
found in the vicinity of the ascidian Calumenin paralogs,
which limits the conclusions that can be drawn on their
origin.
Identification of novel Oikopleura notochord genes

Specific cDNA fragments corresponding to 28 Oikopleura genes identified as bona fide orthologs of Ciona
notochord genes were cloned by PCR (Additional file 3),
and used to synthesize antisense RNA probes that were
tested on Oikopleura embryos by WMISH. Time-points
of 2.5 (mid-tailbud/early hatchling), 4 (Stage 1), and 5.5
(Stage 2) hpf at 21°C were used, as these corresponded,

Kugler et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:21
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/21

approximately, to the developmental stages at which the
Ciona counterparts are known to be expressed [27]. Of
the 28 probes tested, two (Od-Noto15b and Od-pellino)
yielded no signal at any of the stages analyzed, despite
repeated attempts. Thirteen of the genes tested were
expressed in all or part of the notochord in at least
one developmental stage: Od-prickle, Od-quaking, Odthrombospondin 3, Od-Fibrillar collagen 1 (Od-FCol1),
Od- b1,4-Galactosyltransferase (Od-b4-GalT), OdCalumenin1, Od-Calumenin2, Od-Ezrin/radixin/moesin
(Od-ERM), Od-IQ motif-containing GTPase-activating
protein (Od-IQGAP), Od-leprecan, Od-Zipper (Figure. 4
and Additional file 4), Od-netrin and Od-laminin a1
(Figure. 5 and Additional file 4). Seven probes, Odcdc45, Od-Noto9a, Od-Noto9b, Od-Noto9c, Od-Noto10,
Od-Noto15a and Od-Noto17, yielded a diffuse, weak signal in the tail, which might indicate low expression
levels in the notochord (Figure. 6 and Additional file 4).
Finally, six of the probes tested revealed distinct staining
patterns which did not include notochord: Od-aryl
hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (Od-ARNT),
Od-proliferating cell nuclear antigen (Od-PCNA), Odtensin, Od-ATP citrate lyase (Od-ACL), ATP sulfurylase/
adenosine 5’-phosphosulfate (APS) kinase (Od-ASAK)
and Od-calmodulin-dependent protein kinase (OdCaMK) (Figure. 7 and Additional file 4).
We found that conserved Oikopleura notochord genes
exhibited variable expression patterns (Figure. 4), and
some of these genes were expressed in other tissues in
addition to the notochord. Od-prickle (Figure. 4A-C)
and Od-Calumenin1 (Figure. 4P-R) were also expressed
in some areas of the trunk, while Od-quaking (Figure.
4D-F), Od-FCol1 (Figure. 4J-L), and possibly Od-b4GalT (Figure. 4M-O) were expressed in muscle cells as
well as in notochord cells. Interestingly, similarly to Odquaking and Od-FCol1, Ci-quaking and CiFCol1 are also
expressed in notochord and muscle cells, with the latter
gene being expressed also in nervous system and
endoderm in addition to these territories [13,44]. Odthrombospondin 3 (Figure. 4G-I), Od-Calumenin2
(Figure. 4S-U), Od-ERM (Figure. 4V-X), Od-IQGAP (Figure. 4Y-AA), Od-leprecan (Figure. 4AB-AD) and OdZipper (Figure. 4AE-AG) were notochord-specific at
these stages. Additional variability was seen in the developmental windows of expression of these genes. While
most genes were expressed in the notochord at all timepoints between mid-tailbud/early hatchling and Stage 2,
four of them, Od-b4-GalT (Figure. 4M-O), Od-Calumenin2 (Figure. 4S-U), Od-ERM (Figure. 4V-X) and OdIQGAP (Figure. 4Y-AA), were expressed only transiently
and their expression had more or less faded by Stage 2.
For eight of these Oikopleura notochord genes we identified expression in notochord precursors at the neurula
stage (Additional file 5, panels A-H); remarkably,

Page 7 of 16

Figure 4 Identification of novel notochord genes in Oikopleura.
(A-AG) Microphotographs of Oikopleura dioica embryos hybridized in
situ with antisense probes against the genes indicated at the bottom
right of each row. The developmental stages tested are indicated in
the column headings. Embryos are oriented with their anterior ends
to the left and their dorsal sides up. Red arrowheads highlight
notochord staining. The inset in (L) shows stained muscle cells.

however, none of the Oikopleura genes were expressed
in the notochord after Stage 2 (Additional file 6 and
data not shown). These observations confirm the correlation previously described between the morphogenetic
events of notochord formation for Ciona intestinalis and
Oikopleura dioica [45], according to which by eight

Kugler et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:21
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/21

hours after fertilization Oikopleura dioica embryos reach
the ascidian stage IV, which is characterized by completion of vacuolization and formation of a hollow tubular
notochord.
While little is known about the possible role of the
putative non-muscle myosin heavy chain encoded by
Zipper in notochord formation, the conserved Ci-Bra
target orthologs expressed in the Oikopleura notochord
encode proteins that in other organisms have been
reported to serve a wide range of functions. Od-FCol1,
Od-thrombospondin 3 and Od-leprecan encode components of the extracellular matrix which are required for
notochord integrity [15,46,47]. prickle, which encodes a
planar cell polarity protein, has been shown to be necessary for notochord cell intercalation in both Ciona intestinalis and Ciona savignyi [48,49]. Ezrin-radixin-moesin,
which belongs to a class of proteins which help to organize the cell cortex through their cytoskeletal and transmembrane interaction domains [50], has been shown to
be required for notochord cell elongation in Ciona intestinalis [49]. The conserved notochord genes, quaking,
b4-GalT, Calumenin1, Calumenin2 and IQGAP, which
encode, respectively, an RNA-binding protein, an
enzyme involved in lactose biosynthesis, Ca 2+-binding
proteins, and a scaffolding protein of the Rho family,
respectively, have also been found to be expressed in the
notochord of other chordates [51,52]. In particular, the
Quaking RNA-binding protein has been shown to be
necessary for notochord formation in Xenopus, where it
stabilizes the mRNAs for proteins that are required for
notochord development, including that of Xenopus Brachyury [51], while XIQGAP1 has been reported to be
predominantly localized to lamellipodia and filopodia in
the Xenopus notochord, at the time when the morphogenetic movements leading to notochord formation take
place [52].
Oikopleura netrin, laminin a1, and the molecular
heterogeneity of the notochord of basal chordates

Among the Oikopleura genes for which we found conserved notochord expression, one, Od-netrin, displayed a
strikingly uneven pattern, being detectable only in a
subset of notochord cells. Proteins of the Netrin family
are diffusible chemoattractants required for axon guidance in a wide variety of animals [53]. Od-netrin was
first detected in a few notochord precursors at the neurula stage (Additional file 5, panel H); at the mid-tailbud/
early hatchling stage and Stage 1, notochord expression
was distinctively discontinuous (Figure. 5A-C) and the
signal began fading from the notochord cells shortly
after, by Stage 2, when it was detected only in anterior
notochord cell(s) (Figure. 5D and data not shown),
although it remained clearly visible in the trunk. While
in mid-tailbud embryos there were two groups of

Page 8 of 16

stained notochord cells separated by a gap, in all
embryos at Stage 1 we could distinguish three groups of
contiguous stained cells separated by two gaps of blank
cells (insets in Figure. 5E-H; Figure. 5I). The anteriormost segment of stained notochord contained on average 2-3 cells, while the middle segment contained five
cells, displaying variable levels of staining (insets in Figure. 5F,G) and the posterior-most segment contained
two cells. The gaps usually spanned three cells (insets in
Figure. 5E-H; Figure. 5I). The pattern that we observed
for Od-netrin is substantially different from that
reported for Ci-netrin, as the latter is expressed quite
homogeneously in all notochord cells at all stages analyzed [54].
A discontinuous pattern similar to the pattern that we
observed for Od-netrin had been previously reported for
one of the Oikopleura Hox genes, Od-Hox4, which
shows a distinct gap between two stained regions of the
notochord [29] (schematic in Figure. 5J); another Oikopleura Hox gene, Od-Hox11, is expressed only in a
stretch of six contiguous notochord cells ([29]; Figure.
5J). However, the Od-netrin pattern cannot be perfectly
superimposed to the pattern seen for either of the two
Od-Hox genes, suggesting that other transcription factors and/or additional regulatory mechanisms might be
modulating this peculiar expression. Within tunicates, a
similarly irregular pattern in notochord cells has been
reported for Ciona multidom, a Ci-Bra-downstream
notochord gene that does not have counterparts in
Oikopleura (Additional file 1). However, Ci-multidom is
expressed in a completely mosaic fashion, whereby
expression surfaces randomly in a variable number of
notochord cells whose position along the anterior-posterior axis of the notochord is randomized as well [55].
Remarkably, an amphioxus netrin gene, AmphiNetrin,
has been described to be expressed with variable intensity along the notochord in a stage-dependent fashion
[56]. In particular, at neurulation, AmphiNetrin is
strongly expressed in the anterior extension of the notochord underlying the cerebral vesicle, while in early larvae expression in this region is no longer detectable
[56].
The functional meaning and developmental consequences of a discontinuous source of Netrin in the
notochord remain to be elucidated. However, it is intriguing that the Oikopleura caudal nerve cord contains
ganglia scattered along its length at irregular intervals
[45], from which thin peripheral nerve fibers project
ventrally on the surface of the notochord cells [57]. In
hatched larvae around 4 hpf (at 21°C), which is approximately the stage shown in Figure. 5C and 5E-I, the first
nerve fibers become visible in the caudal ganglion and
in the nerve cord, dorsal to the notochord [58], and by
4 hours and 45 minutes after fertilization the full

Kugler et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:21
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/21

Page 9 of 16

Figure 5 Uneven expression of Oikopleura netrin and laminin a1 in the notochord. (A-I) Microphotographs of Oikopleura embryos at the
mid-tailbud/early hatchling (A), late tailbud (B), Stage 1 (C,E-I), and Stage 2 (D), hybridized in situ with a digoxigenin-labeled Od-netrin antisense
probe. All embryos are oriented with anterior to the left. Red lines delineate the notochord domains of Od-netrin expression. Individual
notochord cells are outlined in aqua in (I) and in the insets showing the magnified notochord (E-H). In (D), a red arrowhead indicates residual
staining in one of the notochord cells close to the trunk-tail boundary. (J) Schematic representation of the Oikopleura notochord cells (20
numbered red squares), followed, for comparison purposes, by a delineation of the Od-Hox4 (green), Od-Hox11 (purple) [29], and Od-netrin (blue)
expression patterns. (K-M) Microphotographs of Oikopleura embryos at the mid-tailbud/early hatchling (K), Stage 1 (L), and Stage 2 (M),
hybridized in situ with a digoxigenin-labeled Od-laminin a1 antisense probe. A red arrowhead indicates the staining in the terminal notochord
cell, which is magnified in the insets in panels (L) and (M).

complement of post-mitotic neurons has already been
reached [45]. It is therefore conceivable that the
unevenly distributed sources of Netrin that we have
identified in the notochord might serve a specific role in
the guidance of the peripheral nerve fibers which emanate from the ganglia of the nerve cord.
Another peculiar expression pattern has been revealed
by this study for Od-laminin a1. In embryos at the midtailbud stage, this gene is visibly expressed in the trunk
and in what appears to be the posterior-most of the 20
notochord cells present at this stage (Figure. 5K). This

notochord cell is also known as the “terminal” cell or
“t-cell” [9,27] and displays a characteristic round shape
(insets in Figure. 5L-M). Transient staining was also
observed in other cells of the tail flanking the notochord
(Figure. 5L); however, no signal was detected in notochord cells other than the terminal cell at either earlier
(data not shown) or later stages (Figure. 5K-M, Additional file 6, panels A,B and data not shown). In
embryos at 7-8 hpf and 10-12 hpf, expression of Odlaminin a1 is detected in a small region of the developing intestine and also in the subchordal cells [9], whose

Kugler et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:21
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/21

Page 10 of 16

Figure 6 Oikopleura genes expressed throughout the tail. (A-U) Oikopleura embryos hybridized in situ with antisense probes for the genes
indicated at the bottom right of each row. The developmental stages are indicated in the column headings; all embryos are oriented with
anterior to the left and dorsal up, with the exception of the embryos in panels (N) and (T), which are shown as dorsal views. Pink arrowheads
indicate the notochord in all embryos showing diffuse expression throughout the tail.

function is yet to be elucidated (Additional file 6, panels
A,B and insets therein).
Oikopleura genes expressed at low levels throughout the
tail

Seven of the Oikopleura probes employed in this study
yielded a more or less diffuse staining throughout the
tail at one or more of the developmental stages that
were tested (Figure. 6). The diffuse staining that we

observed in the tail in these cases appeared to encompass the notochord (pink arrowheads in Figure. 6A,F,G,
J,M,N,P,S) and was frequently accompanied by staining
in the trunk. In the majority of cases, the diffuse
staining in the tail was observed exclusively at the midtailbud/early hatchling stage (Figure. 6A,G,J,P,S). However, in the case of Od-Noto9a, only embryos at Stage 2
displayed a weak signal in some regions of the notochord (Figure. 6F). Interestingly, this diffuse staining was

Kugler et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:21
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/21

Page 11 of 16

observed for all three Noto9 genes (Figure. 6D-L),
although while the spatio-temporal expression pattern
of Od-Noto9b and Od-Noto9c appear practically identical, expression of Od-Noto9a becomes detectable only at
Stage 2. In embryos at 7-8 hpf, expression of all three
genes became confined to the pharynx, in a region likely
including the developing ciliary funnel (Additional file 6,
panels C,E,G). In embryos at 10-12 hpf, expression in
the presumptive ciliary funnel was still detectable for
Od-Noto9b and Od-Noto9c (Additional file 6, panels F,
H) but not for Od-Noto9a (Additional file 6, panel D).
Oikopleura genes that are not expressed in notochord
cells

Six of the Oikopleura orthologs of Ciona notochord genes
analyzed in this study turned out to be expressed in tissues
other than the notochord (Figure. 7). Three of these genes,
Od-ARNT (Figure. 7A-C), Od-PCNA (Figure. 7D-F) and
Od-tensin (Figure. 7G-I) were predominantly expressed in
the trunk. Od-tensin was also transiently expressed in
what might be one of the neurons of the caudal ganglion
(inset in Figure. 7I). For three additional genes, Od-ACL,
Od-ASAK and Od-CaMK, we could not detect any signal
in neurulae, mid-tailbud/early hatchlings and Stages 1 and
2 (data not shown); however, we were able to detect convincing staining in embryos at later stages, namely 7-8 hpf
and 10-12 hpf (Figure. 7J-O). In particular, Od-ACL was
detected in a subpopulation of tail neurons, some of which
grouped in the caudal ganglion, at both these stages (Figure. 7J,K). Od-ASAK expression at 7-8 hpf was localized to
the spiracles and to some of the posterior trunk cells that
eventually constitute the base of the Langerhans receptors
(Figure. 7L and data not shown), and to the presumptive
ciliary funnel and various epithelial regions at 10-12 hpf
(Figure. 7M). The Od-CaMK probe labeled the ciliary funnel at both 7-8 hpf and 10-12 hpf (Figure. 7N,O); in addition, at 10-12 hpf, a strong signal was detected in the
cerebral ganglion, in an area that seems to encompass the
statocyst (Figure. 7O).
Considering the morphological similarities between
the notochords of Ciona and Oikopleura, it seems surprising that the Oikopleura genome is apparently lacking
roughly half of the notochord genes that we searched
for, and that only a fraction of the Ciona notochord
genes that possess identifiable counterparts (i.e., that are
not divergent to the point of not being recognizable by
our searches) in Oikopleura are expressed in the notochord. The Ciona notochord genes that we used as a
reference for this study are active in many cellular processes; genes of still unknown function comprise the largest percentage, while genes encoding transcription
factors and other nucleic acid-binding proteins make up
the smallest portion (Figure. 8A). Only 21% of the genes
of still unknown function (Ciona Noto genes; [59]) were

Figure 7 Oikopleura orthologs of Ciona notochord genes
expressed in tissues other than the notochord. (A-I) Oikopleura
embryos hybridized in situ with the antisense probes indicated at the
bottom right of each row. The developmental stages are indicated in
the column headings; all embryos are oriented with anterior to the
left and dorsal up. The inset in (I) shows a magnified view of a cell
specifically stained by Od-tensin, likely part of the caudal ganglion. (JO) High-magnification views of Oikopleura embryos at 7-8 and 10-12
hpf, hybridized in situ with antisense probes for Od-ACL (J,K), Od-ASAK
(L,M) and Od-CaMK (N,O). Black arrows in (J,K) indicate tail neurons
(magnified in the insets); yellow arrowheads indicate spiracles; a thin
black arrow in (L) indicates putative cells of the base of the
Langerhans receptor; green arrowheads indicate the ciliary funnel (MO) and a black arrow in (O) indicates signal detected in the cerebral
ganglion, at the level of the statocyst.

found in the Oikopleura genome, and only some of
them are expressed in the notochord (Figure. 8B).
Genes involved in cellular metabolism and replication
represented the largest category of Ciona notochord
genes for which we found orthologs in the Oikopleura

Kugler et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:21
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/21

Page 12 of 16

Figure 8 Conservation of Ciona notochord genes in Oikopleura. (A) Graph showing the distribution of Ci-Bra target genes based on their
putative function. Putative functions were ascertained from the published literature [13,35]. (B) Graph showing the conservation of Ci-Bra target
genes in Oikopleura. The x-axis indicates the number of genes in each category. Figure S1. Sequence alignments used for phylogenetic
reconstructions. Multiple alignments of the Noto15, Noto9 and Calumenin protein sequences used to construct the phylogenetic trees shown
in Figures. 2 and 3. Shaded areas match a cutoff threshold of 80% identity/similarity calculated according to the BLOSUM62 similarity scoring
matrix [76]. Abbreviations: Hs: Homo sapiens; Ci: Ciona intestinalis; Bf: Branchiostoma floridae; Cs: Ciona savignyi; Hr: Halocynthia roretzi; Mt: Molgula
tectiformis; Dl: Diplosoma listerianum; Od: Oikopleura dioica. Figure S2. Whole-mount in situ hybridization of Oikopleura neurulae. Oikopleura
embryos at the neurula stage (1.8 hpf), hybridized in situ with the antisense probes indicated above each panel. Dorsal views, anterior to the
top. Red arrowheads indicate notochord precursors. Figure S3. Additional expression patterns in Oikopleura embryos at 7-8 and 10-12
hpf. Oikopleura embryos at 7-8 hpf and 10-12 hpf hybridized in situ with the antisense probes indicated at the bottom right of each row. Insets
in (A,B) show high magnification views of the regions of the tail showing hybridization signal. Black arrows indicate subchordal cells, green
arrowheads indicate the developing ciliary funnel.

genome, although only 37.5% of them were expressed in
the Oikopleura notochord (Figure. 8B).
It has been demonstrated by previous studies that
extracellular matrix proteins are crucial for notochordal
integrity [46,47] and we have previously shown that
extracellular matrix genes are highly conserved between
the notochords of vertebrates and Ciona [13]. Only seven
of the Ciona notochord genes included in this study
encode extracellular matrix proteins (Figure. 8A); of

these, four are present in the Oikopleura genome, and
are indeed expressed in the Oikopleura notochord, either
homogeneously, as in the case of Od-thrombospondin 3,
Od-FCol1, and Od-leprecan (Figure. 4G-L, AB-AD), or
in an unusually restricted pattern, as in the case of Odlaminin a1 (Figure. 5K-M). These data might tentatively
suggest that either fewer extracellular matrix proteins
are required in Oikopleura for notochordal integrity,
or, perhaps more likely, that in Oikopleura different

Kugler et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:21
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/21

extracellular matrix genes, which are not necessarily
found or are still undescribed in the Ciona notochord,
have been co-opted to this structure. Nevertheless, the
similarity in the expression pattern of Od-FCol1 in notochord and muscle cells, which is directly comparable to
that of the CiFCol1 pattern [60,61], seems a strong indication of the requirement of fibrillar collagen for the
structural role of the notochord, and possibly of its
flanking muscle [62].
First insights into the cis-regulatory mechanisms
controlling notochord gene expression in Oikopleura

A comparison between the expression patterns of the
Oikopleura notochord genes identified by this analysis
and the published expression pattern for Oikopleura
Brachyury (OdiT) reveals considerable differences, at
both the spatial and the temporal level. Differently from
Ci-Bra, which is notochord-specific at all stages [10],
OdiT is expressed in a notochord-specific fashion only
at early embryonic stages, while in larvae incubated at
12°C and fixed 30 minutes after hatching (roughly corresponding to the late Stage 1 in this study) expression
begins to expand to endodermal territories in the trunk
and to slowly decline in notochord cells [30]. Finally, in
larvae one hour after hatching (approximately Stage 2 in
this study), OdiT is still strongly expressed in the trunk,
but has completely faded in the notochord [30].
Most of the notochord genes identified in this study
are expressed in the notochord at mid-tailbud and Stage
1; however, in Stage 2 embryos expression of several of
these genes begins to fade in notochord cells, and in
older embryos all these genes become no longer detectable. This suggests that the temporal regulation of the
transcription of these genes is differentially modulated
in Oikopleura, possibly through the interplay of more
activators that might be themselves transiently expressed
in notochord cells. A complementary scenario would
imply that late-onset transcriptional repressor(s) begin
counteracting the function of the notochord activator(s)
by the time Stage 2 is reached. In either case, it is still
possible that OdiT might be (co-)regulating the transcription of at least some of the genes described here in
notochord cells. This hypothesis seems supported by the
observation that the genomic loci of most of the newly
discovered Oikopleura notochord genes contain various
putative Brachyury binding sites matching the core
sequences previously identified in Ciona [14,34,63],
although their distribution is quite variable and does not
mirror that of the binding sites found in the Ci-Bra
direct target genes (data not shown). Therefore, the
notochord genes identified through this analysis are
likely to provide a useful platform for future studies of
the molecular mechanisms through which notochord
gene expression is controlled in Oikopleura.

Page 13 of 16

Conclusions
Tunicate embryos provide excellent model systems for
studies of notochord development and evolution. Here
we have compared the molecular toolkits of the simple
notochords of two divergent tunicates, Ciona intestinalis
and Oikopleura dioica, and we have begun to make
inferences about the commonalities and discrepancies
among their genetic makeup. Based only upon the low
conservation of the 50 notochord genes that we analyzed in these two tunicates, it might be concluded that
significantly less genes than expected are required for
notochord formation in Oikopleura. However, since the
Oikopleura genome is considerably divergent from those
of other tunicates, it seems reasonable to assume that
other genes might fill the roles played by the nonconserved genes. In fact, despite the apparent absence
from the Oikopleura genome of a large fraction of the
notochord genes found in Ciona, which parallels the
striking lack of genes required for the metabolism of
retinoic acid [64], we have found that two of the genes
that are single-copy in Ciona, Noto15 and Noto9, are
duplicated in Oikopleura. Gene losses accompanied by
duplications of some of the remaining genes seem to
match a general genome-wide trend in Oikopleura [37],
which has been previously observed in the divergent and
compact genome of C. elegans (e.g., [65]). It has been
hypothesized that retention of duplicates can be causally
linked to genome compaction [37]. The retention of
duplicate genes might also explain why, despite its smaller size and the lack of several genes that are found in
Ciona, the Oikopleura genome is estimated to contain
approximately 18,020 genes ([22,37], a number comparable to that assessed for Ciona [66].
The results of the expression studies presented here
suggest that the gene duplications that we have uncovered may have included to a variable extent the cisregulatory modules (CRMs) controlling the expression
of the duplicated genes. For example, Od-Calumenin1
and Od-Calumenin2 are both expressed in the Oikopleura notochord, although they lie on different scaffolds, suggesting, among other scenarios, the possibility
that their notochord CRM(s) were duplicated along with
their coding regions. However, Od-Calumenin1 is
expressed in the notochord at all stages tested, while
Od-Calumenin2 expression is curtailed by Stage 2,
which in turn indicates that the temporal regulation of
the notochord expression of these genes has changed.
Similar differences are observed when the expression
patterns of the Od-Noto9 paralogs are compared,
whereby the expression patterns of Od-Noto9b and OdNoto9c are practically overlapping and Od-Noto9a seems
to have a later developmental onset.
In higher chordates, the notochord is known to serve
a dual function: providing structural support to the

Kugler et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:21
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/21

developing embryo, and secreting patterning signals
required for tissue specification and organogenesis [1].
The conserved expression of netrin in Ciona [54] and in
Oikopleura suggests that the tunicate notochord, in
addition to its structural role, is able to provide some
essential positional cues to the developing nervous system. We included in this study also four genes that we
had previously found to be expressed in both the Ciona
and mouse notochord, namely ASAK, leprecan, pellino
and Noto2 [15]. Interestingly, Od-leprecan was also
expressed in the Oikopleura notochord, while Od-ASAK
was undetectable in this structure at all the stages analyzed. No signal was obtained for Od-pellino, and no
ortholog was identified in Oikopleura for Noto2.
These observations, together with the remarkable
absence from the Oikopleura genome of Sonic hedgehog
(D. Chourrout, personal communication) and previous
observations that in Ciona neither one of the two hedgehog-related genes seems to be expressed in notochord
cells [67], begin to pinpoint the molecular pathways that
are already present in the simple tunicate notochord, as
opposed to vertebrate innovations. Oikopleura and
Ciona therefore provide us with a model for investigating the role of mechanisms such as co-option and divergence in notochord evolution and for ascertaining the
extent of modifications that its genetic toolkit can sustain without major morphogenetic changes. By comparing the essential complement of genes employed by
these divergent tunicates to build their simple notochords, we can begin to envision how notochord structure and function have changed during chordate
evolution.

Methods
Animal collection and culture

Oikopleura dioica adults were collected in fjords near
Bergen (Norway) and maintained in culture in plastic
beakers at 15°C [23]. In vitro fertilizations were set up
to collect embryos for WMISH; females were collected
in watch glasses, washed with artificial seawater and left
to spawn. Sperm from 3-5 males was checked for viability and used for fertilization. The resulting embryos
were allowed to develop at 21°C and collected at the
time-points specified in the text.
Identification of Oikopleura orthologs of Ciona notochord
genes

Putative Oikopleura orthologs of Ci-Bra target genes
were retrieved using BLASTX and TBLASTN algorithms
[38] on the current assembly and translated gene models
from the Oikopleura genome ([37] and http://www.
genoscope.cns.fr/externe/GenomeBrowser/Oikopleura/).
Additional sequences from chordates of interest were
retrieved through the BLASTX, TBLASTN and BLASTP

Page 14 of 16

algorithms using the respective genome and/or ESTs
browsers. The reciprocal best BLAST hit method was
used to select putative orthologous sequences. Whenever necessary, existing gene models were individually
verified by aligning genomic and EST sequences using
the BioEdit sequence alignment editor [68].
Phylogenetic analyses

Multiple alignments of deuterostomes sequences were
performed using the MUSCLE 3.6 software and modified manually whenever necessary [69]. Neighbor-joining
analyses were done using the BioNJ algorithm [70] and
1000 bootstrap replicates on MEGA version 4.0 [71].
Bayesian inferences were performed on the Phylogeny.fr
platform (http://www.phylogeny.fr/) [72] using the
method implemented in the MrBayes (v3.1.2) program
[73,74]. The number of substitution types was fixed to
six. We used the WAG substitution frequency matrix
[75], while rates variation across sites was fixed to
“invgamma”. Four Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
chains were run for 100,000 generations (sufficient to
obtain chain convergence), sampling every 10 generations, with the first 2500 sampled trees discarded as
“burn-in”. Marginal probabilities at each internal branch
were taken as a measure of statistical support.
Probe Preparation

All probe templates were amplified by RT-PCR as previously described [55] using cDNA prepared from 4-5
hpf Oikopleura embryos. A complete list of the primers
used can be found in Additional file 3. Plasmids were
purified using the QIAprep Spin Miniprep kit (Qiagen,
Valencia, CA, USA), linearized using appropriate restriction enzymes (New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA,
USA), then cleaned by standard phenol-chloroform
extraction followed by ethanol precipitation. 1 μg of
each purified plasmid DNA was used as a template for
in vitro transcription of antisense RNA probes in the
presence of 11-digoxigenin-UTP (Roche, USA), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Probes were purified by lithium chloride precipitation, then resuspended
in 50% formamide, 5x SSC, 500 μg/ml yeast tRNA,
50 μg/ml heparin, 9.2 mM citric acid, and 0.1% Triton
X-100, and stored at -20°C.
Whole-mount in situ hybridization (WMISH)

Embryos were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde, 0.1 M
MOPS (pH 7.5), and 0.5 M sodium chloride overnight at
4°C, then washed in 0.1 M MOPS (pH 7.5) and 0.5 M
sodium chloride, and stored in 70% ethanol at -20°C until
use. Hybridization and detection of probes were performed as in [29] with the following modifications: the
protease K treatment was extended to three minutes and
was followed by incubation in 4% paraformaldehyde; the

Kugler et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:21
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/21

Page 15 of 16

RNase A digestion was omitted; the antibody incubation
was performed at 4°C overnight.

4.

Additional material

6.

5.

7.
Additional file 1: Table 1. Ci-Bra target notochord genes and their
Oikopleura counterparts found by the reciprocal best BLAST hit method.
Additional file 2: Figure S1. Protein sequences used for phylogenetic
reconstructions.
Additional file 3: Table 2. Sequences of the oligonucleotides used as
primers in the PCR amplifications.

8.

9.

Additional file 4: Table 3. Summary of the in situ hybridization results.
Additional file 5: Figure S2. Whole-mount in situ hybridization of
Oikopleura neurulae.
Additional file 6: Figure S3. Additional expression patterns in
Oikopleura embryos at 7-8 and 10-12 hpf.

10.

11.
12.

Abbreviations
bp: base pair(s); cDNA: complementary DNA; EST: Expressed Sequence Tag;
hpf: hour(s) post-fertilization; kb: kilobase(s), or 1000 base pairs; Mb:
megabase(s); MOPS: 3-(N-morpholino) propanesulfonic acid; PCR: Polymerase
Chain Reaction; RT: reverse transcriptase; SSC: saline-sodium citrate solution;
tRNA: transfer RNA; WMISH: whole-mount in situ hybridization.
Acknowledgements
We are grateful to Dr. Daniel Chourrout for his invaluable help with
Oikopleura sequences and gene models and for his generous, expert advice.
We thank Dr. Eric Thompson and Dr. Joel Glover for their kind advice on
Oikopleura anatomy, and two anonymous reviewers for constructive
suggestions. This work was supported by grant NIH/NICHD R01HD050704
and by grant 1-FY08-430 from the March of Dimes Birth Defects Foundation
to A.D.G. and by grant 133335/V40 from the Norwegian Research Council to
D.J. J.E.K. was supported in part by a short-term fellowship from the Guest
Research Fund of the Sars International Centre for Marine Molecular Biology
(Bergen, Norway). A.D.G. is an Irma T. Hirschl Scholar.

13.

14.

15.

16.
17.

18.

19.
Author details
1
Department of Cell and Developmental Biology Weill Medical College of
Cornell University 1300 York Avenue, Box 60, New York, NY 10065, USA. 2Sars
International Centre for Marine Molecular Biology Thormøhlensgt. 55 N-5008
Bergen, Norway.
Authors’ contributions
JEK performed BLAST searches, cloned and synthesized probes for WMISH,
performed WMISH, and drafted portions of the manuscript. PK performed
BLAST searches, carried out the phylogenetic analyses, cloned and
synthesized probes for WMISH, performed WMISH, and drafted portions of
the manuscript. J-MB oversaw the Oikopleura culturing, and collected and
fixed embryos. DJ supervised experiments and edited the manuscript. ADG
designed the study, supervised experiments and wrote the manuscript. All
authors read and approved the final manuscript. The order of the co-first
authors was decided by the co-first authors and approved by all other
authors.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

Received: 16 August 2010 Accepted: 20 January 2011
Published: 20 January 2011

26.

References
1. Cleaver O, Krieg PA: Notochord patterning of the endoderm. Dev Biol
2001, 234(1):1-12.
2. Stemple DL: Structure and function of the notochord: an essential organ
for chordate development. Development 2005, 132(11):2503-2512.
3. Fujiwara S, Maeda Y, Shin IT, Kohara Y, Takatori N, Satou Y, Satoh N: Gene
expression profiles in Ciona intestinalis cleavage-stage embryos. Mech
Dev 2002, 112(1-2):115-127.

27.

28.

29.

Jiang D, Smith WC: Ascidian notochord morphogenesis. Dev Dyn 2007,
236(7):1748-1757.
Passamaneck YJ, Di Gregorio A: Ciona intestinalis: chordate development
made simple. Dev Dyn 2005, 233(1):1-19.
Satoh N, Satou Y, Davidson B, Levine M: Ciona intestinalis: an emerging
model for whole-genome analyses. Trends Genet 2003, 19(7):376-381.
Kawai N, Takahashi H, Nishida H, Yokosawa H: Regulation of NF-kappaB/
Rel by IkappaB is essential for ascidian notochord formation. Dev Biol
2005, 277(1):80-91.
Matsumoto J, Kumano G, Nishida H: Direct activation by Ets and Zic is
required for initial expression of the Brachyury gene in the ascidian
notochord. Dev Biol 2007, 306(2):870-882.
Nishida H: Development of the appendicularian Oikopleura dioica:
culture, genome, and cell lineages. Dev Growth Differ 2008, 50(Suppl 1):
S239-256.
Corbo JC, Levine M, Zeller RW: Characterization of a notochord-specific
enhancer from the Brachyury promoter region of the ascidian, Ciona
intestinalis. Development 1997, 124(3):589-602.
Di Gregorio A, Corbo JC, Levine M: The regulation of forkhead/HNF-3beta
expression in the Ciona embryo. Dev Biol 2001, 229(1):31-43.
Dunn MP, Di Gregorio A: The evolutionarily conserved leprecan gene: its
regulation by Brachyury and its role in the developing Ciona notochord.
Dev Biol 2009, 328(2):561-574.
Kugler JE, Passamaneck YJ, Feldman TG, Beh J, Regnier TW, Di Gregorio A:
Evolutionary conservation of vertebrate notochord genes in the ascidian
Ciona intestinalis. Genesis 2008, 46(11):697-710.
Passamaneck YJ, Katikala L, Perrone L, Dunn MP, Oda-Ishii I, Di Gregorio A:
Direct activation of a notochord cis-regulatory module by Brachyury and
FoxA in the ascidian Ciona intestinalis. Development 2009,
136(21):3679-3689.
Capellini TD, Dunn MP, Passamaneck YJ, Selleri L, Di Gregorio A:
Conservation of notochord gene expression across chordates: insights
from the Leprecan gene family. Genesis 2008, 46(11):683-696.
Suzuki MM, Satoh N: Genes expressed in the amphioxus notochord
revealed by EST analysis. Dev Biol 2000, 224(2):168-177.
Urano A, Suzuki MM, Zhang P, Satoh N, Satoh G: Expression of musclerelated genes and two MyoD genes during amphioxus notochord
development. Evol Dev 2003, 5(5):447-458.
Holland PW, Koschorz B, Holland LZ, Herrmann BG: Conservation of
Brachyury (T) genes in amphioxus and vertebrates: developmental and
evolutionary implications. Development 1995, 121(12):4283-4291.
Shimeld SM: Characterisation of amphioxus HNF-3 genes: conserved
expression in the notochord and floor plate. Dev Biol 1997, 183(1):74-85.
Hudson C, Yasuo H: A signalling relay involving Nodal and Delta ligands
acts during secondary notochord induction in Ciona embryos.
Development 2006, 133(15):2855-2864.
Lemaire P: Unfolding a chordate developmental program, one cell at a
time: invariant cell lineages, short-range inductions and evolutionary
plasticity in ascidians. Dev Biol 2009, 332(1):48-60.
Seo HC, Kube M, Edvardsen RB, Jensen MF, Beck A, Spriet E, Gorsky G,
Thompson EM, Lehrach H, Reinhardt R, Chourrout D: Miniature genome in
the marine chordate Oikopleura dioica. Science 2001, 294(5551):2506.
Bouquet JM, Spriet E, Troedsson C, Ottera H, Chourrout D, Thompson EM:
Culture optimization for the emergent zooplanktonic model organism
Oikopleura dioica. J Plankton Res 2009, 31(4):359-370.
Stach T, Winter J, Bouquet JM, Chourrout D, Schnabel R: Embryology of a
planktonic tunicate reveals traces of sessility. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008,
105(20):7229-7234.
Satoh N: Developmental biology of ascidians. Cambridge England; New
York: Cambridge University Press; 1994.
Deschet K, Nakatani Y, Smith WC: Generation of Ci-Brachyury-GFP stable
transgenic lines in the ascidian Ciona savignyi. Genesis 2003,
35(4):248-259.
Soviknes AM, Glover JC: Continued growth and cell proliferation into
adulthood in the notochord of the appendicularian Oikopleura dioica.
Biol Bull 2008, 214(1):17-28.
Ikuta T, Yoshida N, Satoh N, Saiga H: Ciona intestinalis Hox gene cluster: Its
dispersed structure and residual colinear expression in development.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2004, 101(42):15118-15123.
Seo HC, Edvardsen RB, Maeland AD, Bjordal M, Jensen MF, Hansen A,
Flaat M, Weissenbach J, Lehrach H, Wincker P, Reinhardt R, Chourrout D:

Kugler et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:21
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/21

30.

31.
32.

33.

34.

35.

36.
37.

38.

39.

40.
41.

42.
43.

44.

45.
46.

47.

48.

49.

50.
51.

52.

Hox cluster disintegration with persistent anteroposterior order of
expression in Oikopleura dioica. Nature 2004, 431(7004):67-71.
Bassham S, Postlethwait J: Brachyury (T) expression in embryos of a
larvacean urochordate, Oikopleura dioica, and the ancestral role of T. Dev
Biol 2000, 220(2):322-332.
Kispert A, Hermann BG: The Brachyury gene encodes a novel DNA
binding protein. EMBO J 1993, 12(12):4898-4899.
Chiba S, Jiang D, Satoh N, Smith WC: Brachyury null mutant-induced
defects in juvenile ascidian endodermal organs. Development 2009,
136(1):35-39.
Hotta K, Takahashi H, Satoh N, Gojobori T: Brachyury-downstream gene
sets in a chordate, Ciona intestinalis: integrating notochord specification,
morphogenesis and chordate evolution. Evol Dev 2008, 10(1):37-51.
Di Gregorio A, Levine M: Regulation of Ci-tropomyosin-like, a Brachyury
target gene in the ascidian, Ciona intestinalis. Development 1999,
126(24):5599-5609.
Bork P, Dandekar T, Diaz-Lazcoz Y, Eisenhaber F, Huynen M, Yuan Y:
Predicting function: from genes to genomes and back. J Mol Biol 1998,
283(4):707-725.
Tatusov RL, Koonin EV, Lipman DJ: A genomic perspective on protein
families. Science 1997, 278(5338):631-637.
Denoeud F, Henriet S, Mungpakdee S, Aury JM, Da Silva C, Brinkmann H,
Mikhaleva J, Olsen LC, Jubin C, Canestro C, et al: Plasticity of animal
genome architecture unmasked by rapid evolution of a pelagic tunicate.
Science 2010, 330(6009):1381-1385.
Altschul SF, Madden TL, Schaffer AA, Zhang J, Zhang Z, Miller W,
Lipman DJ: Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new generation of protein
database search programs. Nucleic Acids Res 1997, 25(17):3389-3402.
Satou Y, Mineta K, Ogasawara M, Sasakura Y, Shoguchi E, Ueno K,
Yamada L, Matsumoto J, Wasserscheid J, Dewar K, Wiley GB, Macmil SL,
Roe BA, Zeller RW, Hastings KE, Lemaire P, Lindquist E, Endo T, Hotta K,
Inaba K: Improved genome assembly and evidence-based global gene
model set for the chordate Ciona intestinalis: new insight into intron
and operon populations. Genome Biol 2008, 9(10):R152.
Wennerberg K, Der CJ: Rho-family GTPases: it’s not only Rac and Rho
(and I like it). J Cell Sci 2004, 117(Pt 8):1301-1312.
Davis-Smyth T, Duncan RC, Zheng T, Michelotti G, Levens D: The far
upstream element-binding proteins comprise an ancient family of singlestrand DNA-binding transactivators. J Biol Chem 1996, 271(49):31679-31687.
Dreyfuss G, Kim VN, Kataoka N: Messenger-RNA-binding proteins and the
messages they carry. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2002, 3(3):195-205.
Honore B, Vorum H: The CREC family, a novel family of multiple EF-hand,
low-affinity Ca(2+)-binding proteins localised to the secretory pathway
of mammalian cells. FEBS Lett 2000, 466(1):11-18.
Kugler JE, Gazdoiu S, Oda-Ishii I, Passamaneck YJ, Erives AJ, Di Gregorio A:
Temporal regulation of the muscle gene cascade by Macho1 and Tbx6
transcription factors in Ciona intestinalis. J Cell Sci 2010, 123(Pt
14):2453-2463.
Soviknes AM, Glover JC: Spatiotemporal patterns of neurogenesis in the
appendicularian Oikopleura dioica. Dev Biol 2007, 311(1):264-275.
Veeman MT, Nakatani Y, Hendrickson C, Ericson V, Lin C, Smith WC:
Chongmague reveals an essential role for laminin-mediated boundary
formation in chordate convergence and extension movements.
Development 2008, 135(1):33-41.
Parsons MJ, Pollard SM, Saude L, Feldman B, Coutinho P, Hirst EM,
Stemple DL: Zebrafish mutants identify an essential role for laminins in
notochord formation. Development 2002, 129(13):3137-3146.
Jiang D, Munro EM, Smith WC: Ascidian prickle regulates both
mediolateral and anterior-posterior cell polarity of notochord cells. Curr
Biol 2005, 15(1):79-85.
Hotta K, Yamada S, Ueno N, Satoh N, Takahashi H: Brachyury-downstream
notochord genes and convergent extension in Ciona intestinalis
embryos. Dev Growth Differ 2007, 49(5):373-382.
Fehon RG, McClatchey AI, Bretscher A: Organizing the cell cortex: the role
of ERM proteins. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 11(4):276-287.
Zorn AM, Krieg PA: The KH domain protein encoded by quaking
functions as a dimer and is essential for notochord development in
Xenopus embryos. Genes Dev 1997, 11(17):2176-2190.
Yamashiro S, Noguchi T, Mabuchi I: Localization of two IQGAPs in
cultured cells and early embryos of Xenopus laevis. Cell Motil Cytoskeleton
2003, 55(1):36-50.

Page 16 of 16

53. Kennedy TE, Serafini T, de la Torre JR, Tessier-Lavigne M: Netrins are
diffusible chemotropic factors for commissural axons in the embryonic
spinal cord. Cell 1994, 78(3):425-435.
54. Hotta K, Takahashi H, Asakura T, Saitoh B, Takatori N, Satou Y, Satoh N:
Characterization of Brachyury-downstream notochord genes in the
Ciona intestinalis embryo. Dev Biol 2000, 224(1):69-80.
55. Oda-Ishii I, Di Gregorio A: Lineage-independent mosaic expression and
regulation of the Ciona multidom gene in the ancestral notochord. Dev
Dyn 2007, 236(7):1806-1819.
56. Shimeld S: An amphioxus netrin gene is expressed in midline structures
during embryonic and larval development. Dev Genes Evol 2000,
210(7):337-344.
57. Flood PP: Scanning electron microscope observations on the muscle
innervation of Oikopleura dioica Fol (Appendicularia, Tunicata) with
notes on the arrangement of connective tissue fibres. Cell Tissue Res
1975, 164(3):357-369.
58. Soviknes AM, Chourrout D, Glover JC: Development of the caudal nerve
cord, motoneurons, and muscle innervation in the appendicularian
urochordate Oikopleura dioica. J Comp Neurol 2007, 503(2):224-243.
59. Takahashi H, Hotta K, Erives A, Di Gregorio A, Zeller RW, Levine M, Satoh N:
Brachyury downstream notochord differentiation in the ascidian
embryo. Genes Dev 1999, 13(12):1519-1523.
60. Kugler JE, Gazdoiu S, Oda-Ishii I, Passamaneck YJ, Erives AJ, Di Gregorio A:
Temporal regulation of the muscle gene cascade by Macho1 and Tbx6
transcription factors in Ciona intestinalis. J Cell Sci 123(Pt 14):2453-2463.
61. Wada H, Okuyama M, Satoh N, Zhang S: Molecular evolution of fibrillar
collagen in chordates, with implications for the evolution of vertebrate
skeletons and chordate phylogeny. Evol Dev 2006, 8(4):370-377.
62. Rychel AL, Swalla BJ: Development and evolution of chordate cartilage. J
Exp Zool B Mol Dev Evol 2007, 308(3):325-335.
63. Di Gregorio A, Levine M: Analyzing gene regulation in ascidian embryos:
new tools for new perspectives. Differentiation 2002, 70(4-5):132-139.
64. Canestro C, Postlethwait JH: Development of a chordate anteriorposterior axis without classical retinoic acid signaling. Dev Biol 2007,
305(2):522-538.
65. Blair JE, Shah P, Hedges SB: Evolutionary sequence analysis of complete
eukaryote genomes. BMC Bioinformatics 2005, 6:53.
66. Dehal P, Satou Y, Campbell RK, Chapman J, Degnan B, De Tomaso A,
Davidson B, Di Gregorio A, Gelpke M, Goodstein DM, et al: The draft
genome of Ciona intestinalis: insights into chordate and vertebrate
origins. Science 2002, 298(5601):2157-2167.
67. Takatori N, Satou Y, Satoh N: Expression of hedgehog genes in Ciona
intestinalis embryos. Mech Dev 2002, 116(1-2):235-238.
68. Hall TA: BioEdit: a user-friendly biological sequence alignment editor and
analysis program for Windows 95/98/NT. Nucleic Acids Symposium Series
1999, 41:95-98.
69. Edgar RC: MUSCLE: multiple sequence alignment with high accuracy and
high throughput. Nucleic Acids Res 2004, 32(5):1792-1797.
70. Gascuel O: BIONJ: an improved version of the NJ algorithm based on a
simple model of sequence data. Mol Biol Evol 1997, 14(7):685-695.
71. Tamura K, Dudley J, Nei M, Kumar S: MEGA4: Molecular Evolutionary
Genetics Analysis (MEGA) software version 4.0. Mol Biol Evol 2007,
24(8):1596-1599.
72. Dereeper A, Guignon V, Blanc G, Audic S, Buffet S, Chevenet F, Dufayard JF,
Guindon S, Lefort V, Lescot M, Claverie JM, Gascuel O: Phylogeny.fr: robust
phylogenetic analysis for the non-specialist. Nucleic Acids Res 2008, , 36
Web Server: W465-469.
73. Huelsenbeck JP, Ronquist F: MRBAYES: Bayesian inference of phylogenetic
trees. Bioinformatics 2001, 17(8):754-755.
74. Ronquist F, Huelsenbeck JP: MrBayes 3: Bayesian phylogenetic inference
under mixed models. Bioinformatics 2003, 19(12):1572-1574.
75. Burge C, Karlin S: Prediction of complete gene structures in human
genomic DNA. J Mol Biol 1997, 268(1):78-94.
76. Henikoff S, Henikoff JG: Amino acid substitution matrices from protein
blocks. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1992, 89(22):10915-10919.
doi:10.1186/1471-2148-11-21
Cite this article as: Kugler et al.: Evolutionary changes in the notochord
genetic toolkit: a comparative analysis of notochord genes in the
ascidian Ciona and the larvacean Oikopleura. BMC Evolutionary Biology
2011 11:21.

</pre>
</body>
</html>
