<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Molecular evolution of a chordate specific family of G protein-coupled receptors</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:234. doi:10.1186/1471-2148-11-234"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content="GPRC5; chordate development; retinoic acid; phylogeny; GPCR"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Stefan Kurtenbach"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Kurtenbach et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:234
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/234

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Molecular evolution of a chordate specific family
of G protein-coupled receptors
Stefan Kurtenbach1, Christoph Mayer2, Thomas Pelz3, Hanns Hatt1, Florian Leese4 and Eva M Neuhaus3,5*

Abstract
Background: Chordate evolution is a history of innovations that is marked by physical and behavioral
specializations, which led to the development of a variety of forms from a single ancestral group. Among other
important characteristics, vertebrates obtained a well developed brain, anterior sensory structures, a closed
circulatory system and gills or lungs as blood oxygenation systems. The duplication of pre-existing genes had
profound evolutionary implications for the developmental complexity in vertebrates, since mutations modifying the
function of a duplicated protein can lead to novel functions, improving the evolutionary success.
Results: We analyzed here the evolution of the GPRC5 family of G protein-coupled receptors by comprehensive
similarity searches and found that the receptors are only present in chordates and that the size of the receptor
family expanded, likely due to genome duplication events in the early history of vertebrate evolution. We propose
that a single GPRC5 receptor coding gene originated in a stem chordate ancestor and gave rise by duplication
events to a gene family comprising three receptor types (GPRC5A-C) in vertebrates, and a fourth homologue
present only in mammals (GPRC5D). Additional duplications of GPRC5B and GPRC5C sequences occurred in teleost
fishes. The finding that the expression patterns of the receptors are evolutionarily conserved indicates an important
biological function of these receptors. Moreover, we found that expression of GPRC5B is regulated by vitamin A in
vivo, confirming previous findings that linked receptor expression to retinoic acid levels in tumor cell lines and
strengthening the link between the receptor expression and the development of a complex nervous system in
chordates, known to be dependent on retinoic acid signaling.
Conclusions: GPRC5 receptors, a class of G protein-coupled receptors with unique sequence characteristics, may
represent a molecular novelty that helped non-chordates to become chordates.
Keywords: GPRC5, chordate development, retinoic acid, phylogeny, GPCR

Background
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) are diverse in their
primary structure, which has been used for their phylogenetic classification into subfamilies [1,2]. Most GPCRs
belong to one of five subfamilies; Rhodopsin (also termed
family A), Adhesion and Secretin (together formerly classified as family B), Glutamate (also termed family C) and
Frizzled/Taste2. The Rhodopsin receptor family contains
~670 out of a total of ~800 full-length human receptor
proteins [3] and is highly heterogeneous in primary
structure and ligand specificity, although most Rhodopsin
family receptors do share specific sequence motifs.
* Correspondence: eva.neuhaus@charite.de
3
NeuroScience Research Center, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin,
Charitéplatz 1, 10117 Berlin, Germany
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

Family C includes a total of 22 human proteins, metabotropic glutamate receptors, the calcium sensing receptor,
g-aminobutyric acid type B receptors, the sweet and
umami taste receptors, GPRC6A and several orphan
receptors [4]. While the vast majority of GPCRs have
short N-termini and (proposed) agonist binding sites
within the seven-transmembrane (7TM) domains, family
C receptors are characterized by a large extracellular
amino-terminal domain of up to 600 amino acids, which
has been shown to function as a ligand binding site [4].
GPRC5 receptors are classified as members of the
GPCR family C, but have a shorter N-terminus compared
to the other family members. They build a subfamily with
four known members GPRC5A, GPRC5B, GPRC5C, and
GPRC5D, for which no specific ligands are described [5].
GPRC5A is expressed at high levels in the lung [6-8],

© 2011 Kurtenbach et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Kurtenbach et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:234
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/234

whereas the expression pattern of GPRC5B is mostly
neuronal with some expression in other tissues [9-11].
GPRC5C is expressed more widely than GPRC5A and
GPRC5B, with high expression levels in, e.g., kidney, liver
and cerebellum [10]. GPRC5D was found to be associated
with hard-keratinized structures, like cortical cells of the
hair shaft [12]. The role of these receptors in the tissues
they are expressed in is so far unknown. In vitro studies
showed that expression of GPRC5 receptors can be upregulated by retinoic acid (RA), a metabolite of vitamin A,
which lead to their classification as retinoic acid inducible
genes (RAIG) [10,13,14]. The finding of transcriptional
regulation of GPRC5 receptors by RA is remarkable,
because RA is known to play crucial roles in cell differentiation and neurogenesis [15]. The aim of this study was
to examine the evolution of GPRC5 receptors. Using
similarity searches, we compared GPRC5 receptor
sequences in all listed species, analyzed expression patterns and examined their regulation by RA.

Page 2 of 13

Additional file 1, Figure S1A). Posterior probabilities are
usually higher than bootstrap support values. Mammalian
sequences of the receptor types GPRC5A and GPRC5D
occur in two well-separated clusters. Similar receptor
sequences in other taxa (birds, reptiles and amphibians)
have sequences, which branch off the internal edge leading to the bifurcation of mammalian GPRC5A and
GPRC5D receptor sequences (Figure 1A). This finding is
supported by high posterior probability and ML-bootstrap values. Given this fact, we think the correct name
for these ancestral receptors is GPRC5A/D and not
GPRC5A, as stated in several online databases. The
sequences from Ciona and Branchiostoma, which are the
most ancient sequences in our dataset, group with
XRAIG4, a sequence only present in amphibians (Xenopus). We found XRAIG4 to be expressed in oocytes, in
the eye and stomach of Xenopus laevis, weaker expression was detected in the liver, brain and kidney (Additional file 1, Figure S1B). The receptor sequences from
lamprey form a distinct lineage.

Results
GPRC5 receptor families

Evolutionary conservation of expression patterns

An initial BLAST search for GPRC5 sequences in different species was carried out using the ENSEMBL database
(E-value threshold = 10). Similarity searches showed that
the four known GPRC5 receptor sequences can be found
in all mammalian genomes, while additional sequences
sharing higher similarities to GPRC5 receptors than to
other GPCRs do not exist in mammals. Interestingly,
GPRC5D is only present in mammals, but neither in
other tetrapods nor in fish. Birds, reptiles, amphibians,
teleost fish and cartilaginous fish have three receptor
sequences (GPRC5A-C), Xenopus has an additional
GPRC5 sequence previously published as XRAIG4 [16].
The genome of the lamprey Petromyzon marinus, a jawless vertebrate, contains two GPRC5-like sequences. In
addition, we found single GPRC5-like sequences in two
urochordates (Ciona intestinalis and Ciona savignyi) and
in the lancelet amphioxus, a cephalochordate species.
These sequences likely represent ancestral forms of
GPRC5 receptors. Receptor homologues were not found
in the genome of Oikopleura dioica, another urochordate
species belonging to the class of Appendicularia.
Prottest determined the JTT+G+F amino acid substitution model as most appropriate for the phylogenetic analysis. Therefore, RAxML analyses were conducted using
the PROTGAMMAJTTF model, and for the MrBayes
analyses the parameters “aamodelpr = fixed(jones)” and
“rates = gamma” (amino acid frequencies could not be
varied in MrBayes) were used. The burnin value for the
Bayesian analysis of the main data set was 10500. The
complete phylogenetic tree of the “main data set” is
shown in Figure 1A. The topologies of the Bayesian and
the ML tree are largely identical (ML tree shown in

To date, expression patterns of GPRC5 receptors have
only been published for mammals. To investigate
whether GPRC5 receptor expression patterns are evolutionarily conserved, we designed primers to amplify different GPRC5 members in chicken (Gallus gallus) and
fish (Oryzias latipes). Mammalian GPRC5A is expressed
in highest amounts in the lung, but not in skin, and
GPRC5D is expressed in skin but not in the lung tissue.
Expression patterns of GPRC5 receptors were analyzed
for brain and lung tissues in chicken (Figure 1B). RTPCR analyses showed, that GPRC5A/D is expressed in
high amounts in the lung of chicken and GPRC5B is
expressed in high amounts in the brain. To investigate
whether the GPRC5A/D sequence we found in fish (see
next chapter) could be an early ancestor of GPRC5A and
GPRC5D, RT-PCR analysis was used to screen various
tissues from Oryzias latipes for mRNA expression. We
found GPRC5A/D to be expressed in gills and skin, but
not in other tissues investigated (Figure 1C). Highest
expression of GPRC5Ba was detected in the brain of Oryzias, while expression of GPRC5Bb could not be detected
in any of the tissues tested (for nomenclature of fish
sequences see next chapter).
GPRC5 gene duplications in fish

While GPRC5-like receptors have not been identified in
fish by one study investigating presence of class C
GPCRs across vertebrate and invertebrate taxa [5],
GPRC5B and GPRC5C sequences were found in a survey of GPCRs in Tetraodon nigrovirides [17]. In the present study, we document the presence of three types of
GPRC5-like receptors, confirming the presence of

Kurtenbach et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:234
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/234

Page 3 of 13

Figure 1 Phylogenetic analysis and conserved expression of GPRC5 receptors. (A) Phylogenetic tree obtained by Bayesian analysis, branch
labels indicate posterior probabilities and ML-bootstrap values. (B) Amplification of GPRC5A-C in lung and brain from chicken (Gallus gallus) by
RT-PCR. Beta-actin (Actb) was used as positive control, mRNA without RT as negative control. (C) Amplification of GPRC5A/D, GPRC5Ba and
GPRC5Bb in skin, spinal cord, intestines, muscle, eye, gills, lung and brain from fish (Oryzias latipes) by RT-PCR. Beta-actin (Actb) was used as
positive control.

Kurtenbach et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:234
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/234

GPRC5B and GPRC5C in several fish species and establishing the existence of an additional sequence
(GPRC5A/D).
In addition, all bony fish in this study have two sets of
GPRC5B, which share a similarity of 49-66% and shall be
referred to as GPRC5Ba and GPRC5Bb receptors. We
also found two classes of GPRC5C receptors (GPRC5Ca
and GPRC5Cb) in four different fish species, while only
one GPRC5C sequence was found in zebrafish (Danio
rerio). This is interesting, because the zebrafish is the
only fish sequenced so far that belongs to the class of
Ostarioclupeomorpha (Ostariophysi), whereas the other
fish belong to the Euteleostei (Acanthopterygii). The phylogenetic analysis shows that GPRC5Ca and GPRC5Cb,
as well as GPRC5Ba and GPRC5Bb sequences cluster in
different branches with high support values (Figure 2A,
see also Figure 1).
To ascertain whether differences in the number of
GPRC5 genes is specific for certain fish species, we
designed degenerate primers that target conserved areas
of the GPRC5C receptor sequences, but still allowed differentiation between GPRC5Ca and GPRC5Cb. Genomic
DNA from Danio rerio and Oryzias latipes was used as a
positive control, since GPRC5Ca and GPRC5Cb were
found in the genome of Oryzias, while in the genome of
Danio rerio GPRC5Ca, but not GPRC5Cb was found,
although the genome project already reached maintenance stage for this organism. Analysis with isolated
genomic DNA from Rasbora espei, a member of the
Ostariophysi, and a member of Acanthopterygii (Poecilia
reticulata) revealed that GPRC5Cb sequences are not
present in Rasbora espei, but were detectable in Poecilia
reticulata (Figure 2B). This finding supports to our
hypothesis that two GPRC5C receptor sequences are

Page 4 of 13

present in Acanthopterygii and perhaps also in other
Euteleostei, but not in Cyprinidae, belonging to the
superorder of Ostarioclupeomorpha fish. However it
must be noted, that indetectability by PCR cannot completely rule out presence of the gene. Attempts to confirm absence of GPRC5b in Cyprinidae by amplification
of both genes with degenerate primers did not yield in
clear results due to the frequent occurrence of unspecific
amplificates.
GPRC5 receptors in invertebrates

Invertebrates have sequences that were previously classified as GPRC5-like, e.g. BOSS in D. melanogaster and
other insects, or GPRC5B in C. elegans [18]. The phylogenetic analysis of the “early chordata data set” revealed,
that invertebrate receptors show only low similarities to
GPRC5 receptors (Figure 3A). Nevertheless, analysis of
the domain structure of the encoded proteins clearly
showed that unlike other class C GPCRs, all GPRC5
receptors possess short N-termini. The invertebrate
receptors have long N-termini, like other class C GPCRs
and unlike GPRC5 receptors in Chordata (Figure 3B).
Also in Echinodermata, which represent the closest
non-chordate relatives, the closest homologue to chordate GPRC5 receptors has a long N-terminus and
groups with other class C GPCRs in the alignment (Figure 3A). Furthermore, we could not identify GPRC5-like
receptors in Parazoa (Amphimedon queenslandica) or
single-celled eukaryotes such as Monosiga brevicollis,
Saccharomyces cerevisisae or Dictyostelium discoideum.
The transition between N-terminus and transmembrane domain (TM) 1 of GPRC5B and GPRC5C receptors contains a stretch of amino acids which is highly
conserved in all species, including urochordates but not
in insect BOSS-like receptors (Additional file 2).
Together our results suggest that GPRC5 receptors
seem to be a chordate specific class of GPCRs.
Intron-exon structure

Figure 2 GPRC5 receptor family in fish. (A) Phylogenetic tree of
all GPRC5B and GPRC5C sequences found in fish showing the
separation of GPRC5Ba/GPRC5Bb, and GPRC5Ca/GPRC5Cb. Branch
labels indicate posterior probabilities. Branch lengths represent
phylogenetic distances. The burnin value for the Bayesian analysis
was 500. (B) PCR with degenerate primers for amplification of
GPRC5Ca and GPRC5Cb. O. latipes and P. reticulata showed a
GPRC5Cb amplicon, whereas D. rerio and R. espei did not. Marker
(250 bp) is indicated with M.

The prevailing genomic structure of GPRC5 receptors is
composed of a large exon containing the transmembrane domains, followed by two small C-terminal exons.
Number and size of exons of GPRC5 genes is highly
conserved among vertebrates (Figure 4). Only the duplicated GPRC5Bb fish sequences show a clearly different
gene structure compared to the other GPRC5B genes.
GPRC5A and GPRC5D are always located directly adjacent to each other on the respective chromosomes
(Chromosome 12p3 in human, 12 in chimpanzee, 6G1
in mouse, 4q23 in rat, 5 in cow, and 27 in dog) indicating that those arose via recent gene duplication. The
chromosomal regions around GPRC5 receptors are
almost identical in most species (with sufficient
sequence information), further indicating that the

Kurtenbach et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:234
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/234

Figure 3 GPRC5-like sequences in invertebrates. (A)
Phylogenetic tree of GPRC5-like sequences from invertebrates
together with GPRC5B and GPRC5C from mammals (Mus musculus
(Mm), Homo sapiens (Hs)) and calcium sensing receptors (CaSR),
pheromone receptors (V2R2), metabotrope glutamate receptors
(mGluR) and GABA receptors (GABA-A and GABA-B). Branch labels
indicate posterior probabilities. Branch lengths represent
phylogenetic distances. The burnin value for the Bayesian analysis
was 500. (B) Domain structure of GPRC5 receptors and GPRC5-like
sequences in invertebrates. Sequences are aligned at their 7TM
domain areas (dark grey). The number of amino acids in each
sequence is indicated on the right. GPRC5 sequences are
highlighted in red in A and B.

receptors arose from gene duplication events (Additional
file 3). Only the organization of GPRC5 genes in Ciona
and Branchiostoma differ from the organization in
vertebrates.
Sequence analysis of GPRC5 receptors

GPRC5 receptors have short extracellular N-termini, and
GPRC5B and GPRC5C protein sequences contain cleavable signal peptides (SP). GPRC5B sequences, which are
also present in invertebrate species, show the highest
degrees of similarity (Additional file 4, 5), despite the
large phylogenetic distance between the species included
in this alignment. To display patterns of sequence conservation in GPRC5 receptors we generated a sequence
logo plot of all GPRC5 sequences (Figure 5), showing
areas which display very high amino acid similarities. In

Page 5 of 13

Figure 4 Intron/exon structures of GPRC5 receptor sequences
from different species. The exon sizes are drawn to scale. Introns
are all shown in the same size. Intron-exon structures for mouse
and human are taken from the “Consensus CDS (CCDS)” project,
since this database only includes protein coding regions that are
consistently annotated and of high quality. “?” in Petromyzon GPRC5
indicates that the 3’ sequence is incomplete in the database.
Transmembrane domains are indicated in grey, the signal peptides
(predicted with SignalP 3.0) are indicated in black.

general, the TM regions of the receptors are well conserved, especially the second, third, and seventh helices.
The extracellular loops (ELs), especially EL2 and EL3 in
GPRC5A and GPRC5D (Additional file 4, 5), show a
lower degree of conservation than the rest of the proteins. The intracellular loops (ILs), that likely act as
points of interaction with cytosolic proteins, are highly
conserved.
Among the highly conserved sequence motifs is the WV
(V/A)W motif in TM6, which aligns with the CWXP
motif in rhodopsin and the WL motif in other class C
GPCRs. A motif that is not found is the PKXY motif present in TM7 of class C GPCRs. The two cysteines in EL1
and EL2 of class C GPCRs are conserved in GPRC5B and
GPRC5C, but not in GPRC5A and GPRC5D (Figure 5
and Additional file 6, Figure S6A). Moreover, we identified putative IQ motifs in GPRC5 receptors (Additional
file 6, Figure S6B), which are known to be present also in
other class C GPCRs.
Another motif that is conserved in all GPRC5 family
members, WDD, is located at the junction of EL3 and
TM7, except for GPRC5B, which has a WXD motif. At
the C-terminus of GPRC5B and GPRC5C a highly conserved motif (M/V)ENKAFSMDE was identified. In IL3
we found a conserved motif composed mainly of basic

Kurtenbach et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:234
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/234

Page 6 of 13

Figure 5 Sequence logo plot of all GPRC5 receptor sequences. Polar amino acids are labeled in green, basic in blue, acidic in red and
hydrophobic in black. Transmembrane (TM), intracellular (IL) and extracellular (EL) loops are indicated. Transmembrane areas are additionally
marked with blue lines, the degree of conservation is indicated by the bar diagram in grey.

amino acids at a position that is likely involved in the
interaction with cytosolic proteins. A strongly conserved
stretch of unknown functional significance is located
approximately ten amino acids upstream of TM1 (Figure
5 and Additional file 2), where the LCD motiv at the
core, followed by a conserved tryptophan, is present in
all family members. Longer stretches of conserved features in the vicinity of this motiv were found in
GPRC5B and GPRC5C sequences.
Nearly no conserved serines and threonines are present, which may indicate that S/T dependent phosphorylation events do not play a major role in the signaling
cascades of these receptors. Furthermore, GPRC5 receptors contain neither consensus sequences for N-linked
glycosylation, nor residues in their C-termini serving as
putative palmitoylation sites.
No evidence for positive selection among GPRC5
receptors

Apart from conserved sequence stretches that are found
in all four GPRC5 families, some motifs are unique for
specific subfamilies, e.g. in EL1 (Additional file 6, Figure
S6A). Since ELs are in contact with the cell’s environment, these sequence patterns might be involved in
ligand binding. In this case, gene duplication could have
facilitated the acquisition of novel functions (recognition
of novel ligands) through the fixation of beneficial mutations, i.e., neofunctionalization. To test whether GPRC5A
or GPRC5D have undergone neofunctionalization, we
analyzed the evolutionary constraints that are acting on
the ELs of this gene family. dN/dS ratios for the ELs of
GPRC5A and GPRC5D revealed evidence for moderate
to strong negative selection, no evidence for any positively selected site was found. This finding has been verified for the whole receptor sequences. Moreover, for the
whole sequences it was possible to compute meaningful

dN/dS rations for the individual branches connecting the
outgroup and the GPRC5A as well as the GPRC5D
sequences. Again no positive selection could be detected
(Table 1 and Additional file 7).
In vivo expression alters in vitamin A-deficient animals

Expression of GPRC5 receptor in tumor cell lines was
reported to depend on retinoic acid (RA) [10]. To test
whether RA also effects GPRC5 expression under in
vivo conditions, we produced vitamin A-deficient mice,
according to the diagram shown in Figure 6A, and analyzed GPRC5 mRNA expression. When pronounced
symptoms of vitamin A deficiency developed (approximately at week 22), expression of GPRC5 mRNA was
quantified by real-time PCR (Figure 6B). Expression of
GPRC5B in the brain was significantly decreased, while
GPRC5A in the lung and GPRC5C in the brain showed
non-significant regulation.

Discussion
In this study, we identified and compared the complete
repertoires of GPRC5 genes deposited to commonly
accessible databases. We analyzed their phylogenetic
relationships and revealed an evolutionarily conserved
expression pattern, suggesting an important function of
this receptor family in chordate evolution. A possible
evolutionary scenario for the vertebrate GPRC5 gene
family was derived from the results of these analyses.
GPRC5 receptor families in different species

Several families of GPRC5 genes were identified in all
major classes of chordate species, as well as in the sea
lamprey, an example of a jawless vertebrate. We did not
detect pseudogenes in any of the analyzed animals. In
simple chordate species, such as amphioxus and sea
squirts, we found one GPRC5-like receptor, no GPRC5C-

Kurtenbach et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:234
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/234

Page 7 of 13

Table 1 dN/dS values for extracellular loops (El1-El3) of GPRC5A and GPRC5D, the last column shows verification with
PAML program using the whole receptor sequence
dN/dS ratio

EL1

EL2

EL3

whole receptor sequence

GPRC5A

0.129308

0.164821

0.596208

0.2146

GPRC5D

0.207865

0.144241

0.109638

0.1669

GPRC5A+D

0.269276

0.478913

0.302212

0.1842

Branch leading from outgroup to 5A group

n.n.

n.n.

n.n.

0.0708

Branch leading from outgroup to 5D group

n.n.

n.n.

n.n.

0.2333

Extracellular loops were too short to compute dN/dS rations along individual branches.

like sequences were identified in more basal Deuterostomia species, Protostomia or more primitive Eumeatazoa.
Given these facts, we hypothesize that the receptors are
present exclusively in chordate species.

Bayesian and RAxML analyses of the identified
sequences (Figure 1, Additional file 1) showed that all
receptor sequences form four distinct families, GPRC5AD, that have been identified previously in mammals [5].
Not all sequences included in the phylogenetic trees were
available in full length in the databases, meaning that
small modifications of the tree might be possible once
the entire sequences are available. Since we included only
receptors with high sequence coverage (> 95%), major
changes are unlikely to occur.
The sequences from Ciona, amphioxus and Petromyzon
constitute a separate branch with similarities to GPRC5C
receptors from vertebrates. The Xenopus RAIG4 sequence
clusters with the sequences from species from early diverging lineages. The receptor was previously described as
XRAIG4a, together with a close homolog called XRAIG4b
in Xenopus laevis. XRAIG4a and XRAIG4b were classified
as pseudoalleles due to gene duplication in the Xenopus
laevis lineage [16], but could also represent splice variants
or even sequencing errors (Additional file 8). Since we did
not find XRAIG4-like sequences in other species, the
receptors could be a divergent ortholog, grouping with the
other long branches of the non-vertebrate chordates. Since
Xenopus-specific duplications were also found in other
protein families [19], XRAIG4 could originate from an
amphibian (or Xenopus) specific duplication of GPCR5C.
Alternatively, it could be an “Ohnolog gone missing” [20]
from all other vertebrate lineages (which express only 3
receptor types after 2 rounds of genome duplication). Both
scenarios cannot be unambiguously distinguished at the
moment.
GPRC5 family in teleost fish

Figure 6 GPRC5 genes are regulated by vitamin A. (A)
Schematic representation of the generation of vitamin A-deficient
mice (VitA-). (B) Quantitative PCR analysis of GPRC5 mRNA
expression levels in lung (GPRC5A) and in whole brain lysates
(GPRC5B and GPRC5C). GPRC5B mRNA was significantly reduced in
vitamin A deficient mice (n = 5 animals), whereas GPRC5C and
GPRC5A mRNAs showed only a non-significant reduction compared
to non-treated wt mice (n = 5 animals). Error bars represent SEM.

Although GPRC5 receptor genes were not identified in
fish in a previous study [5], we found that the number
of putatively functional GPRC5 genes in teleost fish
(ray-finned fish) is actually larger than in tetrapods due
to the presence of additional receptor sequences that
share similarities with GPRC5B and GPRC5C, named
GPRC5Bb and GPRC5Cb in this study (Figure 2). These
additional receptor genes may result from the 3R teleost-specific genome duplication events, which occurred
in an ancestor of the teleost lineage around 300-350

Kurtenbach et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:234
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/234

million years ago [21]. In addition we found sequences
denoted as GPRC5A/D, which are clearly located on the
branch leading to the bifurcation of mammalian
GPRC5A and GPRC5D receptor families in the Bayesian
and the ML tree (supported by high posterior probabilities and ML bootstrap values). Interestingly, we found
GPRC5A/D genes only in Acanthopterygii, and not in
Ostariophysi, although sequence information is limited
due to the fact that Danio rerio is the only species
sequenced from the latter class.
While GPRC5Bb receptors were found in all teleost fish
species investigated, additional GPRC5Cb sequences were
only detected in the genomes of Oryzia latipes, Gasterosteus aculeatus, Takifugu rubripes and Tetraodon nigrovirides, all belonging to the superorder Acanthopterygii.
Genomic analysis using degenerate primers, designed to
amplify GPRC5B and GPRC5C receptor sequences from
not yet fully sequenced fish, supports our finding that
Acanthopterygii have two GPRC5C sequences, while different members of the Cyprinidae family (belonging to
superorder Ostariophysi) may have only one. GPRC5Cb
genes may have been lost during the speciation process in
some teleost species (Cyprinidae), while being retained in
others (belonging to the superorder Acanthopterygii).
It is interesting to note that also the number of orthologues to the mammalian glutamate receptors is much
lower in Danio rerio than in Takifugu rubripes [5]. It is
noteworthy that tetraploidization in teleost fish did not
increase the number of other class C GPCRs such as
TAS1R, GABA, GPCR6 and CASR. So far the only known
gene duplication in this group led to duplication of glutamate receptor 1 in fugu and glutamate receptor 2 in fugu
and zebrafish. Thus, the proposed tetraploidization events
in teleosts did not have a major effect on the repertoire of
the class C family of GPCRs, except for GPRC5 receptors.
Origin of GPRC5 receptors

It has been proposed by Susumu Ohno [22] that series of
large-scale whole-genome duplications occurred on the
vertebrate stem lineage providing the genomic basis for
the evolution of vertebrate complexity. Comparison of
sequences from sea squirt, lamprey, elephant shark and
several bony fish revealed that two rounds of duplication
have probably taken place and constrained the timing of
the whole-genome events to after the divergence of vertebrates from tunicates and lancelets, but before the split
between cartilaginous fishes and bony vertebrates [23].
Within the resolution of our analysis, we found evidence
that the genes that arose from duplication of the evolutionarily early GPRC5C-like genes are retained in vertebrate
genomes, followed by a loss of one gene early in the vertebrate lineage (summarized in Figure 7). We found three
GPRC5-like receptors in all vertebrates, indicating that the
genes indeed stem from the early duplication events at the

Page 8 of 13

vertebrate stem. The presence of two genes in lamprey is
consistent with the hypothesis that lamprey radiated after
the first round of these whole-genome duplications.
Regarding the position of both lamprey sequences together
on their own branch of the phylogenetic tree, an alternative scenario could be that if lamprey shared one of the
ancient duplications, the ancient GPRC5 paralog may have
been lost, followed by an independent genome duplication
in this lineage [24]. The same event could have led to two
lamprey genes, even if lamprey did not undergo the first
round of whole genome duplication in the vertebrate lineage. The fact that the Ciona genomes contain only one
GPRC5-like sequence implies that the GPRC5 genes originate from the rounds of duplication after the divergence
of the urochordate lineage.
The fact that three of the GPRC5 genes are retained in
vertebrates is remarkable, as sequencing of the human and
other vertebrate genomes has shown that most gene duplicates from whole-genome duplication events were lost
rapidly, since gene numbers in vertebrates is comparable
to that of invertebrates [25]. What is typically retained in
modern genomes is a disproportionate number of genes
involved in developmental processes, which are significantly enriched for functions associated with signal transduction, transcriptional regulation and neuronal activities.
Genes implicated in signal transduction are more than
twice as likely to be retained in two or more copies compared to the overall retention rate [23].
Evolution of gene function

Duplicated genes often encode protein products that,
although not essential for viability of the organism, are
important for the adaptation of the species to specific ecological niches [26]. Although not much is known about
the functions of the receptors to confirm their role in vertebrate development, the expression patterns seem to be
evolutionarily conserved. GPRC5B shows a neuronal
expression pattern in mammals [10,11], which we could
also find in birds and fish. All species for which GPRC5Blike sequences were detected have a complex central nervous system.
GPRC5A/D is expressed in the lung of different tetrapods and in the gills and skin of teleosts. The mammalian
GPRC5A/D paralogs arose from gene duplication when
or shortly after mammals diverged, but before the radiation of the eutherian (placental) orders of mammals.
GPRC5A is known to be expressed in mammalian lungs
[27,28], and although it has been shown in knock-out
mice that GPRC5A is not necessary for normal lung
development (for the parameters investigated) [8,28], loss
of GPRC5A expression increases the incidence of lung
tumors [28]. On the other hand, reduction of GPRC5A
expression was found to be associated with reduced
growth in different cell types [29,30].

Kurtenbach et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:234
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/234

Page 9 of 13

Figure 7 Evolution of GPRC5 receptors. Scale bar in million years (mya). Basal taxa (sea squirts, amphioxus and lamprey) have receptor
sequences similar to XRAIG4, which is present in frogs, but not in all other vertebrate species. All vertebrates have genes for GPRC5B, GPRC5C
and GPRC5A/D, only some bony fish (Ostariophysi) seem to have lost the 5A/D receptor sequence. GPRC5B is duplicated in all bony fish,
GPRC5C is duplicated in Acanthopterygii fish. GPRC5A retains at least one ancestral (or plesiomorphic) tetrapod expression domain, in lungs,
while GPRC5D may have recruited an ancestral vertebrate skin expression domain into derived, mammalian structures (hair).

GPRC5D is expressed in differentiating cells that produce hard keratin and have been suggested to be
involved in the regulation of keratin synthesis in hard
epithelial tissues [12]. All mammals have hairy skin or
have evolved from ancestors that had hair, which was
necessary for all mammals to save energy while maintaining their body temperature and for protection from
UV light. Although also birds and reptiles have hard
appendages (claws, feathers, scales), the molecular composition of these structures is different from mammals.
A GPRC5D sequence is also present in dolphin (T. truncatus), which, as all hairless mammals that live in the
sea, is thought to be a descendent of the Mesonyx, a

hairy, dog-like animal that developed back to a sea-living creature during evolution. The dolphin GPRC5D
sequence shows a couple of unique changes in the
amino acid sequence compared to the mammalian
GPRC5D consensus sequence (Additional file 9) which
might indicate functional changes of the protein.
Several models have been proposed to explain why
genes might survive after whole genome duplication
[31]. Sequence analysis of the subtype specific sequences
of EL1 revealed similarities between GPRC5A and
GPRC5D (conserved proline residue at the C-terminal
end of the loop) and marked differences reflected by the
loss of charged amino acids in GPRC5D (present in

Kurtenbach et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:234
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/234

GPRC5A/D and GPRC5A). This could in principle lead
to differences in function of the duplicated receptors,
such as, e.g., different activating ligands. According to
the neofunctionalization model, one would expect to
detect signs of positive selection in the loop sequences
based on the analysis of dN/dS ratios, which was not
the case. Since dN/dS ratios are not always reliable indicators of positive selection in the case of highly similar
sequences, final interpretation of the results is difficult.
Another concern is that episodic positive selection could
have operated only around a certain time window,
whereas over the majority of the evolutionary time the
genes could have been dominated by selective
constraints.
According to the subfunctionalization model, duplicated gene copies specialize to perform complementary
functions. The fact that mammalian GPRC5A and
GPRC5D show restricted expression patterns in certain
tissues (lung/skin) would be consistent with paralogs
that do not have different functions, but partitioned
expression patterns. This scenario is supported by the
fact that the teleost GPRC5A/D receptor is expressed in
skin and gills. Since we do not know whether GPRC5A/
D is expressed in parts of the gill of endodermal origin,
we cannot draw conclusions about putative similarities
to the expression of GPRC5A in the mammalian lung,
also being of endodermal origin, although expression of
the receptors in endodermal structures might be evolutionarily conserved. Closer histological investigation of
the expression of GPRC5A/D in gills and analysis of the
expression of GPRC5A/D receptors in the skin of nonmammalian tetrapods could be performed in the future
to strengthen the subfunctionalization model.
In the balanced gene drive model, duplicates are
retained because the gene dosage change results in
increased fitness. Since GPRC5C seems to be relatively
ubiquitously expressed, coexpression of GPRC5B,
GPRC5A, and GPRC5D may specifically increase the
gene dosage in some tissues. To further investigate this
model, it would be necessary to investigate the expression strength, the subcellular localization and the physiology of the different proteins.
Function of GPRC5 receptors

GPRC5 receptors have also been named RAIGs, since
expression of the respective mRNAs is induced in
tumor cell lines by stimulation with RA. We showed
here that expression of GPRC5B is significantly downregulated in the brain of mice fed a RA-deficient diet.
Expression of GPRC5 receptors is therefore regulated,
directly or due to a secondary effect by RA in vivo. We
did not detect a significant regulation of GPRC5A in the
lung, and GPRC5C in the brain of these animals,
although expression levels seem to be reduced. RA, a

Page 10 of 13

physiologically active form of vitamin A, regulates gene
expression by binding to a complex of retinoic acid
receptors (RARs) and retinoid X receptors (RXRs).
Expression of RARa was found to be synchronized with
that of GPRC5B, indicating the involvement of GPRC5B
in RA-dependent morphogenesis/angiogenesis [13].
Induction of receptor expression was found to be
mediated by a functional RAR/RXR binding site identified in the proximal 5’ upstream region of the GPRC5A
gene [14]. Since RA plays crucial roles in many physiological events, such as embryonic development, reproduction, metabolism and homeostasis [15], RAIGs are
considered essential to RA-dependent physiological
events.
Because the action of RA during development was
regarded as being restricted to chordates for a long
time, it had been proposed that development of RAbinding nuclear hormone receptors and the RA-synthesizing and RA-degrading enzymes was an important
step for the origin of the chordate body plan [31]. Interestingly, the larvacean urochordate Oikopleura dioica,
which maintains a chordate body plan throughout life,
lacks genes for RA synthesis, degradation, and reception
[32]. Although we found GPRC5 receptors in two urochordate species (sea squirts), we did not find GPRC5like receptors in the genome of Oikopleura, also belonging to the class of Urochordata. This suggests that the
RA-machinery was lost during larvacean evolution and
predicts that Oikopleura development has become independent of RA-signaling.

Conclusions
The vertebrate GPRC5 receptors GPRC5C, GPRC5B and
GPRC5A/D evolved from a receptor present in basal
chordate species, which has no clear homolog in invertebrates. One of these sequences, GPRC5A/D, has duplicated into GPRC5A and GPRC5D receptors in
mammals. The receptors show conserved expression
patterns in lung (GPRC5A), hairy skin (GPRC5D) and
the nervous system (GPRC5B). Due to their regulation
by the RA signaling cascade, their high degree of conservation, and their specific expression patterns, this
receptor class forms an interesting target for future
studies.
Methods
Phylogenetic analysis

In this study, three data sets have been analyzed, namely
the “main GPRC5 data set” with 143 sequences (Figure
1, Additional files 1, 10), the “B-B2-C-C2 data set” consisting of 19 receptor sequences of taxa that were found
to have an additional copy of the GPRC5B and/or the
GPRC5C receptors (Figure 2). This data set is a true
subset of the main GPRC5 data set. The “invertebrate

Kurtenbach et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:234
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/234

data set“ consists of 26 receptor sequences, including
sequences from invertebrates that have homologies to
GPRC5 receptors (Additional file 11). The MAFFT
alignments of the three data sets used for phylogenetic
reconstructions had the following main characteristics:
“main data set": 143 sequences, 809 amino acids, B-B2C-C2 data set: 19 sequences, 667 amino acids, “invertebrate data set": 26 sequences, 2309 amino acids. All
three data sets of amino acid sequences have been
aligned independently using MAFFT version 6 [33,34]
with the E-INS-I algorithm using the MAFFT-plugin in
the Geneious software. An appropriate amino acid substitution model was determined using ProtTest version
2.4 [35]. MrBayes version 3.1.2 [36] and RAxML versions 7.0.4 and 7.2.7 [37] were employed to estimate
phylogenetic trees. Bayesian analyses of all three data
sets were conducted by computing 10 × 10 6 Markov
Chain Monte Carlo generations in two parallel runs,
each with four chains. Trees were sampled every 100
generations. Convergence was determined for both runs.
For the “main data set”, the most likely tree was determined with RAxML by conducting 30 ML searches on
30 randomized stepwise addition parsimony trees.
Furthermore, a total of 4,000 normal bootstrap replicates have been computed with RAxML. They were
used (i) to compute a majority rule consensus tree and
(ii) to map support values on the best tree. All phylogenetic analyses were performed with protein sequences,
to avoid errors due to multiple substitutions and homoplasic characters present in nucleotide sequences.
The global dN/dS ratios for the extracellular loops of
GPRC5A and GPRC5D receptor coding sequences were
determined by using the HyPhy package http://www.
datamonkey.org. These values have been verified with
the codeml program from the PAML package according
to methods described in [38]. To make inferences about
selective pressure (positive and negative selection) on
individual codons (sites) within the coding sequences,
the Single Likelihood Ancestor Counting (SLAC) package was used (http://www.datamonkey.org).
Search for novel GPRC5 sequences

Blastn, blastp and tblastn searches were performed (on
http://www.ensembl.org) against genomes of various species using as query all known GPRC5 sequences available
at this time. Subsequently, we aligned all GPRC5A-D
sequences and used conserved sequence motifs detected
to run further blast searches. We examined whole genome
sequence assemblies obtained from the ENSEMBL website
including eight primates, eight rodents, 16 other mammals, two birds, one reptile, five fish and one amphibian
species. We also investigated genomes from: lamprey (Petromyzon marinus, data was produced by the Genome

Page 11 of 13

Center at Washington University School of Medicine in
St. Louis and can be obtained from http://genome.ucsc.
edu/), elephant shark (Callorhinchus milii, http://esharkgenome.imcb.a-star.edu.sg, Assembly: Eshark 1.4X [39],
Amphioxus (Branchiostoma floridae, http://genome.jgipsf.org, Assembly v1.0 [23], Oikopleura dioica http://www.
genoscope.cns.fr/externe/GenomeBrowser/Oikopleura/,
Medaka (Oryzias latipes, http://genome.ucsc.edu, Assembly: Oct. 2005 NIG/UT MEDAKA1/oryLat2, produced by
the National Institute of Genetics (NIG) and the University of Tokyo), Xenopus tropicalis (http://genome.jgi-psf.
org, Assembly v4.1), sea urchin (Strongylocentrotus purpuratus (http://www.spbase.org/SpBase/, v2.5), acorn
worm (Saccoglossus kowaleyskii, http://www.hgsc.bcm.tmc.
edu/project-species-o-Acorn%20worm.hgsc), draft assembly Skow_1.0, sea anemone (Nematostella vectensis, http://
genome.jgi-psf.org), sponges (Amphimedon queenslandica,
http://www.metazome.net/amphimedon, 9× assembly),
choanoflagellates (Monosiga brevicollis, http://genome.jgipsf.org/, v1.0), Dictyostelium discoideum (http://www.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/projects/genome/guide/dicty/, 2.1); accession
numbers of the sequences are listed in Additional file 12.
For intron-exon analysis of mouse and human
sequences, the consensus CDS (CCDS) project was used
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/CCDS/). Signal peptides
were predicted with SignalP 3.0 (http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/
services/SignalP/), transmembrane domains were predicted with TMHMM v2.0 http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/TMHMM/).
Animals used for tissue preparation and PCR Analysis

DNA was prepared from zebrafish (Danio rerio), medaka
(Oryzias latipes), rasbora (Rasbora espei) and guppy (Poecilia reticulata). RNA was prepared from frog (Xenopus
laevis), chicken (Gallus gallus), mouse (Mus musculus)
and medaka (Oryzias latipes). mRNA was prepared using
RNeasy kits (Qiagen), including DNaseI digestion. Genomic DNA from fish was isolated with the QIAamp DNA
kit (Qiagen). The primers used were the following (numbers indicate amplicon size): Fish: 5Bb-Fish-410-fw:
MGAAGCGCAGCGGYRTSG; 5Bb-Fish-410-rev: CTC
CCTCAGCACGGTSAG; 5Ba-Fish-409-fw: GACCTGGAGKCRRTVTGGGG; 5Ba-Fish-409-rev: CCCTGNACNAGCAARCWSGARAARC; 5Ca-Fish-305-fw: CTGCT
GGCCRGCSTKCCCTTC; 5Cb-Fish-305-rev: GTGTTGA
TGAYYACYTCCACC; 5Cb-Fish-240-fw: CTTYACSC
TSGGACTSTTYGG; 5Cb-Fish-240-rev: GCCAYTCNG
TRTTGATGATNACCTC; 5A/D Oryzias-fw: GCCTTCT
CCTGCCTGCTGGC; 5A/D Oryzias-rev: AGAGCAGGAGCGGCACAGGA; Actb Oryzias-fw: CTGCGTC
TGGACTTGGCCGG; Actb Oryzias-rev: GGCCTCTG
GGCAACGGAACC; chicken: 5A/D-chic-256-fw: GAAGAGACACGGAGCACACA; 5A/D-chic-256-rev: GAAT

Kurtenbach et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:234
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/234

GTGGGTTGGCAGAAGT; 5B-chic-254-fw: AATAGTT
GTGGAGGCGGTTG; 5B-chic-254-rev: GCAAGCATGAGAAGCACAAA; actb-chic-235-fw: ATGAAGCCCAGAGCAAAAGA; actb-chic-235-rev: ACATACATG
GCTGGGGTGTT. Frog primers: 5A/D-xenopus-231-fw:
GCTTTAGTAGCCAACGGCTG;5A/D-xenopus-231-rev:
GGCAATGGTAGCATCGTTCT; 5B-xenopus-234-fw:
AGGTCCACTGCACCATTCTC; 5B-xenopus-234-rev:
GGTACACGTTGCTTCGGAAT; XRAIG4-fw: AGTCGG
GATGTCCCGTCC; XRAIG4-rev: GATAGCTGATGGAAGG; ODC-xenopus-386-fw: GTCAATGATGGAGTGTATGGATC;ODC-xenopus-386-rev: TCCATTC
CGCTCTCCTGAGCAC.

Page 12 of 13

Additional material
Additional file 1: Phylogenetic analysis. (A) Phylogenetic tree
obtained by RAxML. (B) Screening of XRAIG4 expression in different
tissues from Xenopus laevis by RT-PCR.
Additional file 2: Partial GPRC5 alignments. Alignment showing a
sequence between the end of the N-terminus and the transition into
transmembrane region 1 from different GPRC5 receptors.
Additional file 3: Analysis of the neighboring genomic regions
surrounding of GPRC5 receptors. Genes in the vicinity of GPRC5
receptors from different species.
Additional file 4: Sequence logos. Sequence logos of all GPRC5
receptor sequences found in mammals.
Additional file 5: Hydropathy plots. Hydropathy plots and degree of
conservation of GPRC5 consensus sequences from different species.
Additional file 6: Sequence analysis of GPRC5 receptors. (A)
Alignment of the first extracellular loops from different classes of GPRC5
receptors. (B) Putative IQ motifs in GPRC5 receptors.

cDNA preparation and quantitative PCR analysis

RNA was isolated with RNeasy Mini Kits (Qiagen) from
freshly prepared tissues. cDNA was synthesized with the
iScript cDNA synthesis kit (Biorad). qPCR was performed
with iQ™ SYBR™ Supermix (Biorad) and standard parameters (5 min 95°C, then 40 cycles with 1 minute 95°C, 1
minute 60°C and 1 minute 72°C. At the end a final 72°C
step was performed for 10 minutes). All PCR products
were sequenced to verify target amplification. Sequencing
was carried out by the Department of Biochemistry,
Ruhr-University Bochum. Experiments were carried out
in triplets, with 5 animals each. mRNA expression levels
were calculated according to the Pfaffl method [40].
Detailed information regarding qPCR including sample
preparation/handling are listed according to MIQE
(Minimum Information for Publication of Quantitative
Real-Time PCR Experiments) (Additional file 12).
Primers used for qPCR: GPRC5A-fw: TTGGTTTTC
TGTGGATCCTTCT; GPRC5A-rw: GGCAAGATATAAAATGCCAG; GPRB5B-fw: TTCCGGAGATCCACTACACC; GPRC5B-rw: TCTTTGCTCCAAGCTTCCAT;
GPRC5C-fw: CTTCCATTTGTGCAGGACACTA; GPRC
5C-rw: GAAAGGACGTGAGCTACCAG; Actb-fw: GATCATTGCTCCTCCTGAGC; Actb-rw: GAAAGGGTGT
AAAACGCAGC.
Vitamin A-deficient mice

Vitamin A-deficient mice were produced as described
previously [41]. Briefly, starting 2 weeks post coitum
pregnant female C57/BL6 mice were fed a diet containing no sources or precursors of vitamin A (VAD diet,
C1016). A second mouse group received a control diet
(C1000, both from Altromin, Germany). At three weeks
of age pups were separated from their mother and fed
the respective diet. First signs of vitamin A deficiency
were observed at 18 weeks of age, pronounced symptoms at week 22. All animal experiments were in accordance with the German Guidelines for Animal Care and
Use, approved by an ethics committee and the LANUV
NRW.

Additional file 7: Negative selection sites in GPRC5 receptors.
GPRC5A and GPRC5D sequences from Mus musculus with marked sites
where negative selection was predicted.
Additional file 8: mRNA sequences of Xenopus laevis sequences.
Alignment of available mRNA sequences from XRAIG4 and GPRC5
receptors from Xenopus laevis.
Additional file 9: GPRC5D from dolphin. Alignment of GPRC5D from
Tursiops truncatus with the consensus of all mammalian GPRC5D
sequences.
Additional file 10: GPRC5alignment.nex. Alignment of all sequences
included in the study.
Additional file 11: alignment (Figure 3).nex. Alignment used to
generate Figure 3A.
Additional file 12: Additional Materials. Figure legends of additional
files, list of accession numbers of sequences included in this study, qPCR
information.

Abbreviations
RA: retinoic acid; GPCR: G-protein coupled receptor; TM: transmembrane
domain; EL: extracellular loop; IL: intracellular loop; RT: reverse transcription;
RAIG: retinoic acid inducible gene.
Acknowledgements and Funding
We thank Sigrun Korsching (University of Cologne) for helpful comments
during this study. The work was supported by the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft (Exc 257, SFB 642), by the Max-Planck Research
School for Chemical Biology (IMPRS), and by the Ruhr-University Research
School.
Author details
Department of Cell Physiology, Ruhr University Bochum, Universitaetsstrasse
150, 44801 Bochum, Germany. 2Zoologisches Forschungsmuseum Alexander
Koenig, Adenauerallee 160-163, 53113 Bonn, Germany. 3NeuroScience
Research Center, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Charitéplatz 1, 10117
Berlin, Germany. 4Department of Animal Ecology, Evolution and Biodiversity,
Ruhr-University Bochum, Universitaetsstrasse 150, 44801 Bochum, Germany.
5
author to whom correspondence should be addressed, Eva M. Neuhaus,
NeuroScience Research Center, Charité, Charitéplatz 1, 10117 Berlin,
Germany.
1

Authors’ contributions
EMN and SK conceived the study, designed experiments and wrote the
manuscript. SK and TP carried out the molecular biological experiments, SK,
TP and EMN did sequence analyses/alignment and database mining. CM
and FL carried out phylogenetic analyses and helped discussing the results.
HH supervised part of the work. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript.

Kurtenbach et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:234
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/234

Received: 11 February 2011 Accepted: 9 August 2011
Published: 9 August 2011
References
1. Bockaert J, Pin JP: Molecular tinkering of G protein-coupled receptors: an
evolutionary success. EMBO J 1999, 18:1723-1729.
2. Kolakowski LF Jr: GCRDb: a G-protein-coupled receptor database.
Receptors Channels 1994, 2:1-7.
3. Gloriam DE, Fredriksson R, Schioth HB: The G protein-coupled receptor
subset of the rat genome. BMC Genomics 2007, 8:338.
4. Lagerstrom MC, Schioth HB: Structural diversity of G protein-coupled
receptors and significance for drug discovery. Nat Rev Drug Discov 2008,
7:339-357.
5. Bjarnadottir TK, Fredriksson R, Schioth HB: The gene repertoire and the
common evolutionary history of glutamate, pheromone (V2R), taste(1)
and other related G protein-coupled receptors. Gene 2005, 362:70-84.
6. Sporn MB: A new tumor suppressor gene, selective for lung cancer. J
Natl Cancer Inst 2007, 99:1654-1655.
7. Tao Q, Cheng Y, Clifford J, Lotan R: Characterization of the murine orphan
G-protein-coupled receptor gene Rai3 and its regulation by retinoic
acid. Genomics 2004, 83:270-280.
8. Xu J, Tian J, Shapiro SD: Normal lung development in RAIG1-deficient
mice despite unique lung epithelium-specific expression. Am J Respir Cell
Mol Biol 2005, 32:381-387.
9. Brauner-Osborne H, Krogsgaard-Larsen P: Sequence and expression
pattern of a novel human orphan G-protein-coupled receptor, GPRC5B,
a family C receptor with a short amino-terminal domain. Genomics 2000,
65:121-128.
10. Robbins MJ, Michalovich D, Hill J, Calver AR, Medhurst AD, Gloger I, Sims M,
Middlemiss DN, Pangalos MN: Molecular cloning and characterization of
two novel retinoic acid-inducible orphan G-protein-coupled receptors
(GPRC5B and GPRC5C). Genomics 2000, 67:8-18.
11. Robbins MJ, Charles KJ, Harrison DC, Pangalos MN: Localisation of the
GPRC5B receptor in the rat brain and spinal cord. Brain Res Mol Brain Res
2002, 106:136-144.
12. Inoue S, Nambu T, Shimomura T: The RAIG family member, GPRC5D, is
associated with hard-keratinized structures. J Invest Dermatol 2004,
122:565-573.
13. Imanishi S, Sugimoto M, Morita M, Kume S, Manabe N: Changes in
expression and localization of GPRC5B and RARalpha in the placenta
and yolk sac during middle to late gestation in mice. J Reprod Dev 2007,
53:1131-1136.
14. Ye X, Tao Q, Wang Y, Cheng Y, Lotan R: Mechanisms underlying the
induction of the putative human tumor suppressor GPRC5A by retinoic
acid. Cancer Biol Ther 2009, 8:951-962.
15. Maden M: Retinoic acid in the development, regeneration and
maintenance of the nervous system. Nat Rev Neurosci 2007, 8:755-765.
16. Harada Y, Yokota C, Habas R, Slusarski DC, He X: Retinoic acid-inducible G
protein-coupled receptors bind to frizzled receptors and may activate
non-canonical Wnt signaling. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2007,
358:968-975.
17. Metpally RP, Sowdhamini R: Genome wide survey of G protein-coupled
receptors in Tetraodon nigroviridis. BMC Evol Biol 2005, 5:41.
18. Kohyama-Koganeya A, Kim YJ, Miura M, Hirabayashi Y: A Drosophila
orphan G protein-coupled receptor BOSS functions as a glucoseresponding receptor: loss of boss causes abnormal energy metabolism.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008, 105:15328-15333.
19. Wei S, Whittaker CA, Xu G, Bridges LC, Shah A, White JM, Desimone DW:
Conservation and divergence of ADAM family proteins in the Xenopus
genome. BMC Evol Biol 2010, 10:211.
20. Postlethwait JH: The zebrafish genome in context: ohnologs gone
missing. J Exp Zool B Mol Dev Evol 2007, 308:563-577.
21. Ravi V, Venkatesh B: Rapidly evolving fish genomes and teleost diversity.
Curr Opin Genet Dev 2008, 18:544-550.
22. Ohno S: Evolution by Gene Duplication. Berlin, Springer. Ref Type: Generic.
23. Putnam NH, Butts T, Ferrier DE, Furlong RF, Hellsten U, Kawashima T, et al:
The amphioxus genome and the evolution of the chordate karyotype.
Nature 2008, 453:1064-1071.
24. Fried C, Prohaska SJ, Stadler PF: Independent Hox-cluster duplications in
lampreys. J Exp Zool B Mol Dev Evol 2003, 299:18-25.

Page 13 of 13

25. Wolfe KH: Yesterday’s polyploids and the mystery of diploidization. Nat
Rev Genet 2001, 2:333-341.
26. Conant GC, Wolfe KH: Turning a hobby into a job: how duplicated genes
find new functions. Nat Rev Genet 2008, 9:938-950.
27. Cheng Y, Lotan R: Molecular cloning and characterization of a novel
retinoic acid-inducible gene that encodes a putative G protein-coupled
receptor. J Biol Chem 1998, 273:35008-35015.
28. Tao Q, Fujimoto J, Men T, Ye X, Deng J, Lacroix L, Clifford JL, Mao L, Van
Pelt CS, Lee JJ, Lotan D, Lotan R: Identification of the retinoic acidinducible Gprc5a as a new lung tumor suppressor gene. J Natl Cancer
Inst 2007, 99:1668-1682.
29. Hirano M, Zang L, Oka T, Ito Y, Shimada Y, Nishimura Y, Tanaka T: Novel
reciprocal regulation of cAMP signaling and apoptosis by orphan Gprotein-coupled receptor GPRC5A gene expression. Biochem Biophys Res
Commun 2006, 351:185-191.
30. Nagahata T, Sato T, Tomura A, Onda M, Nishikawa K, Emi M: Identification
of RAI3 as a therapeutic target for breast cancer. Endocr Relat Cancer
2005, 12:65-73.
31. Fujiwara S, Kawamura K: Acquisition of retinoic acid signaling pathway
and innovation of the chordate body plan. Zoolog Sci 2003, 20:809-818.
32. Canestro C, Postlethwait JH, Gonzalez-Duarte R, Albalat R: Is retinoic acid
genetic machinery a chordate innovation? Evol Dev 2006, 8:394-406.
33. Katoh K, Kuma K, Toh H, Miyata T: MAFFT version 5: improvement in
accuracy of multiple sequence alignment. Nucleic Acids Res 2005,
33:511-518.
34. Katoh K, Toh H: Recent developments in the MAFFT multiple sequence
alignment program. Brief Bioinform 2008, 9:286-298.
35. Abascal F, Zardoya R, Posada D: ProtTest: selection of best-fit models of
protein evolution. Bioinformatics 2005, 21:2104-2105.
36. Huelsenbeck JP, Ronquist F: MRBAYES: Bayesian inference of phylogenetic
trees. Bioinformatics 2001, 17:754-755.
37. Stamatakis A: RAxML-VI-HPC: maximum likelihood-based phylogenetic
analyses with thousands of taxa and mixed models. Bioinformatics 2006,
22:2688-2690.
38. Yang Z, Nielsen R: Codon-Substitution Models for Detecting Molecular
Adaptation at Individual Sites Along Specific Lineages. Mol Biol Evol 2002,
19:908-917.
39. Venkatesh B, Kirkness EF, Loh YH, Halpern AL, Lee AP, Johnson J,
Dandona N, Viswanathan LD, Tay A, Venter JC, Strausberg RL, Brenner S:
Survey sequencing and comparative analysis of the elephant shark
(Callorhinchus milii) genome. PLoS Biol 2007, 5:e101.
40. Pfaffl MW: A new mathematical model for relative quantification in realtime RT-PCR. Nucleic Acids Res 2001, 29:e45.
41. Ponnamperuma RM, Kirchhof SM, Trifiletti L, De Luca LM: Ovariectomy
increases squamous metaplasia of the uterine horns and survival of
SENCAR mice fed a vitamin A-deficient diet. Am J Clin Nutr 1999,
70:502-508.
doi:10.1186/1471-2148-11-234
Cite this article as: Kurtenbach et al.: Molecular evolution of a chordate
specific family of G protein-coupled receptors. BMC Evolutionary Biology
2011 11:234.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
