<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>From the scala naturae to the symbiogenetic and dynamic tree of life</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Biology Direct 2011, 6:33. doi:10.1186/1745-6150-6-33"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Ulrich Kutschera"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Kutschera Biology Direct 2011, 6:33
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/33

OPINION

Open Access

From the scala naturae to the symbiogenetic and
dynamic tree of life
Ulrich Kutschera

Abstract
All living beings on Earth, from bacteria to humans, are connected through descent from common ancestors and
represent the summation of their corresponding, ca. 3500 million year long evolutionary history. However, the
evolution of phenotypic features is not predictable, and biologists no longer use terms such as “primitive” or
“perfect organisms”. Despite these insights, the Bible-based concept of the so-called “ladder of life” or Scala
Naturae, i.e., the idea that all living beings can be viewed as representing various degrees of “perfection”, with
humans at the very top of this biological hierarchy, was popular among naturalists until ca. 1850 (Charles Bonnet,
Jean Lamarck and others). Charles Darwin is usually credited with the establishment of a branched evolutionary
“Tree of Life”. This insight of 1859 was based on his now firmly corroborated proposals of common ancestry and
natural selection. In this article I argue that Darwin was still influenced by “ladder thinking”, a theological view that
prevailed throughout the 19th century and is also part of Ernst Haeckel’s famous Oak tree (of Life) of 1866, which
is, like Darwin’s scheme, static. In 1910, Constantin Mereschkowsky proposed an alternative, “anti-selectionist”
concept of biological evolution, which became known as the symbiogenesis-theory. According to the
symbiogenesis-scenario, eukaryotic cells evolved on a static Earth from archaic prokaryotes via the fusion and
subsequent cooperation of certain microbes. In 1929, Alfred Wegener published his theory of continental drift,
which was later corroborated, modified and extended. The resulting theory of plate tectonics is now the principal
organizing concept of geology. Over millions of years, plate tectonics and hence the “dynamic Earth” has caused
destructive volcanic eruptions and earthquakes. At the same time, it created mountain ranges, deep oceans, novel
freshwater habitats, and deserts. As a result, these geologic processes destroyed numerous populations of
organisms, and produced the environmental conditions for new species of animals, plants and microbes to adapt
and evolve. In this article I propose a tree-like “symbiogenesis, natural selection, and dynamic Earth (synade)-model”
of macroevolution that is based on these novel facts and data.
Reviewers: This article was reviewed by Mark Ragan, W. Ford Doolittle, and Staffan Müller-Wille.
Background
In his Autobiography [1], Charles Darwin (1809 - 1882)
presented a self-critical review of his achievements as a
naturalist that revealed much about the character of this
key figure of the evolutionary sciences and other
branches of biology and geology [2-4]. With respect to
the most influential of Darwin’s 16 scientific books, On
the Origin of Species, the author remarked that “Sixteen
thousand copies have now (1876) been sold in England
and considering how stiff a book it is, this is a large sale”
[1]. This judgement is in part due to the fact that the
Correspondence: kut@uni-kassel.de
Institute of Biology, University of Kassel, Heinrich-Plett-Str. 40, D-34109 Kassel,
Germany

Origin of Species was not designed by Darwin as a separate book; rather, it was published as an Abstract, taken
from a much larger manuscript entitled Natural Selection
[5]. Ironically, Darwin’s major, scheduled “Magnum
opus” with the tentative title Natural Selection never
appeared in print, but the Extract published by the
author in November 1859 in order to establish priority
with respect to his theory of the “preservation of favourable variations and the rejection of injurious variations”
became a best- and longseller [6].
The second and more important reason for the “stiffness” of Darwin’s Origin of Species is attributable to the
almost complete lack of illustrations. In contrast to Darwin’s books on botanical and zoological issues, which
contain numerous pictures [2-4], his Abstract published

© 2011 Kutschera; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Kutschera Biology Direct 2011, 6:33
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/33

in 1859 (6th and final edition, 1872) [6,7] contained only
one rather “sterile” diagram, a phylogenetic scheme. This
“tree-like” figure is part of Chapter IV entitled “Natural
Selection” in the first edition [6], and re-named “Natural
Selection; or the Survival of the Fittest” in the 6th and
final version of the “Species book” [7]. It should be noted
that the phrase “survival of the fittest” was borrowed by
Darwin from the philosopher Herbert Spencer (18201903), who was also the first to introduce the word “evolution” sensu phylogenetic development (a term not used
by Darwin in the first edition [6]) into the emerging
biological sciences of the 19th century [5].
With reference to his abstract illustration, Darwin
explained at length the principle of “descent with modification by means of natural selection”, and concluded,
with his Bible-educated readers in mind, that “On the
view that each species has been independently created, I
can see no explanation of this great fact (i.e., the relatedness of all animals and all plants) in the classification
of all organic beings; but, ..., it is explained though
inheritance and the complex action of natural selection,
entailing extinction and divergence of character as we
have seen illustrated in the diagram” [6] p. 100.
Although Darwin made many changes and added
entire sections to the text during the five revisions of his
original version of the Origin [6], one key sentence
remained unchanged: At the end of Chapter IV, the
author wrote, with reference to his tree-like diagram, that
“As buds give rise by growth to fresh buds, and these, if
vigorous, branch out and overtop on all sides many a feebler branch, so by generation I believe it has been with
the great Tree of Life, which fills with its dead and broken branches the crust of the earth, and covers the surface with its ever-branching and beautiful ramifications”
[6], p. 101; [7], p. 137.
In this article I argue that the metaphorical “Tree of
Life"-statement quoted above was still heavily rooted in
the religious pre-Darwinian “evolutionary ladder-” or
Scala Naturae-thinking of earlier naturalists. In the second
part of this account I show that Darwin’s view of a static,
“Animals and Plants-based Tree of Life” that does not take
into account micro-organisms and endosymbiotic events,
is outdated. Finally, I review evidence indicating that the
dynamic Earth (plate tectonics), geological processes
unknown to Darwin, must be integrated into a more realistic picture of the evolution of life on our ever changing
“planet of the microbes” [5].

From the earliest Moral Tree to the Great Chain
of Being
The Spanish philosopher and theologian Ramon Llull
(1232-1315) was one of the first to publish a tree-like
scheme illustrating the growth and interrelationships of

Page 2 of 25

the basic knowledge of his time. Born into a wealthy
family in Palma, and well educated, he worked as a
teacher in Majorca and Paris. Llull’s diagram of the
“apostolic and moral tree” (Figure 1) formed part of a
unified system of knowledge. At the top of this extensively rooted tree, Jesus, the incarnation of the Biblical
God, is depicted, surrounded by the latin words “gloria”
(fame) and “pena” (penalty). The woodcut depicted here
is a modified version of the original that does not show
all the details [8]. In his writings, Ramon Llull argued
that there is no difference between philosophy (i.e., natural history) and Bible-based theology, and therefore
between reason and faith [8,9]. Hence, even the most
absurd mysteries may be proven by means of logical
inferences and the use of Llull’s Ars Magna [9]. This
way of thinking removed all distinctions between natural
(fact-based) truths and supernatural (spiritual) myths.
This “rationalistic mysticism” was taken up by the followers of the Spanish theo-philosopher ("Llullists”) and
later evolved into an ideology that was called “Llullism”
[9]. The basic tenet of the “Illuminated Doctor” is illustrated in his apostolic tree, which depicts real things
(humans and a tree-like plant), mixed up with a supernatural being (Jesus, the son of God, as the crown of the
“tree of knowledge”) [8]. Since Llull also wrote treatises
on medieval natural history (alchemy, botany), and had a
great influence on the mathematician Gottfried W. Leibnitz (1646-1716), he is also recognized as a pioneer in
computation theory. However, since he had several religious visions, and was a convinced Christian, Raymon
Llull, throughout his later life, mixed up facts of nature
and religious imaginations [9].
Although the influence of the “Llullists” may have been
limited, the pre-Christian idea of the Scala Naturae
("Great Chain of Being”) [10-14] is unequivocally related
to the Bible-based scheme depicted in Figure 1. The order
of the static world, between “earth and heaven”, was
shown and thought of as a linear sequence of bodies (from
minerals via plants, animals to man). On top of this hierarchical arrangement of “created beings” we find the
almighty Biblical God, who, according to Llull, had the following positive attributes: “goodness, greatness, power,
eternity, wisdom, will, virtue, truth, and glory” [9].
One popular version of the Scala Naturae, which was
published in 1779 by the Swiss naturalist Charles Bonnet
(1720-1793), is shown in Figure 2. At the base of this version of the “Great Chain of Being” are non-living objects
such as minerals and earth, followed by plants, insects,
reptiles (snakes) and mammals. On top of this “natural
ladder” we find the “Orang-Outang”, followed by
“L’Homme” (man) [15]. It should be noted that Bonnet,
who discovered the phenomenon of parthenogenesis in
insects, was convinced that species do not change over

Kutschera Biology Direct 2011, 6:33
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/33

Page 3 of 25

Figure 1 The “Moral Tree”, published posthumously in 1505 in a book authored by Raymon Llull (1232-1315). This Spanish philosopher
and Christian theologian mixed up natural phenomena with supernatural religious dogma and hence became the spiritual father of a medieval
ideology called “Llullism” [part of a woodcut, adapted from ref. 8].

long time periods. In his monograph of 1779 from which
the Scala Naturae is reproduced [15], Bonnet concluded
that there is no visible change in nature, everything
remains largely identical, and species are constant.

Hence, Bonnet and most naturalists of his time were convinced that animals and plants are static essences created
individually by the Biblical God, a religious view that
Darwin attacked and thoroughly refuted [5-7,11-14].

Kutschera Biology Direct 2011, 6:33
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/33

Page 4 of 25

Figure 2 Upper part of the “Great Chain of Being” or Scala Naturae, as published in 1745 by Charles Bonnet (1720-1793) (left
column). On the right side, the title page of the most influential book of Jean Lamarck (1744-1829) and his tree-like scheme of 1809 is shown
[adapted from refs. 15 and 16].

Kutschera Biology Direct 2011, 6:33
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/33

Jean Lamarck and the origin of evolutionary treethinking
The French botanist and zoologist Jean-Baptiste de
Lamarck (1744-1829) was expected by his father to take
a career in the Catholic church. However, the young
naturalist was not inclined to the ministry, and after his
father’s death in 1860 Lamarck quit his Jesuit college to
become a botanist. Later, he made the switch to zoology, coined key-terms such as “invertebrates”, and published new concepts on the relationships between
different groups of animals [16,17].
In his most important book entitled Philosophie Zoologique [16], Lamarck juxtaposed the “conventional view”,
i.e., the dogma of independent creations of animals (and
plants) as described in the Bible, with his “new opinion":
According to Lamarck [16], there are ongoing spontaneous generations of primitive forms of life on Earth.
Later, these non-specialized living beings transformed
into “higher” animals during the history of our planet.
Hence, fifty years before Darwin’s Origin of Species was
published [6], Lamarck proposed, in 1809, the principle
of the gradual transformation of species and depicted his
“theory of evolution” in a famous tree-like diagram that
is reproduced in Figure 2.
However, a comparison of Lamarck’s original scheme
with Bonnet’s Scala Naturae reveals striking similarities:
The “Tableau” of Lamarck, who was an adherent of the
philosophy behind the “Great Chain of Being” [14], is
more “ladder-like” than a true tree with branches and
twigs (Figure 2). In a subsequent book published in 1815,
Lamarck depicted an “Order presuming the formation of
animals in two separate series” [17]. This scheme [reproduced in ref. 14] is again more a ladder than a tree. The
author distinguished between three hierarchy levels:
Apathic-, sensible- and intelligent animals, respectively.
Concerning the means by which the structure of an
organism altered over generations, Lamarck proposed his
famous theory that is still known today as the “inheritance
of acquired characteristics”. According to the French
scientist, changes occurred because an animal passed on
to its offspring physiological changes, such as strengthened
muscules it had acquired in its own lifetime, and those
modifications came about in response to its survival needs.
Conversely, the disuse of an organ would cause it to wither
and disappear, which “explained”, how snakes lost their
legs etc. It should be noted that Lamarck’s concept of
inheritance, which is not supported by empirical evidence
[18], was accepted by Darwin. In addition, Lamarck suggested that species transformations happen according to a
pre-determined plan and that the results have already
been decided by forces he was unable to identify.
Although Lamarck’s theory of the gradual transmutation of species over long (geological) time periods was

Page 5 of 25

popular until his death in 1829, his ideas encountered
fierce religious and political opposition, notably by
Georges Cuvier (1769-1832). As a result, the achievements of Lamarck were soon forgotten so that his “principle of the gradual transformation of species” was
superseded again by Biblical myths.

Charles Darwin’s Tree of Life and the sterile,
static hierarchy of nature
In a little-known paper of 1855 entitled “On the law
which has regulated the introduction of new species”
[19], Alfred Russel Wallace (1823-1913), the co-discoverer of the Darwinian “principle of natural selection”
[20], described a “Tree of Life-concept” referring to
“branching of the lines of affinity, as intricate as the
twigs of a gnarled oak ... and to ..... minute twigs and
scattered leaves”. In an article published one year later,
Wallace described a method of tree-building, which has
recently been discussed in this journal [14].
Charles Darwin’s famous first “Tree of Life"-sketch,
which was supplemented by the phrase “I think”
(Figure 3A), was drawn into his “Notebook B” of 1837,
only one year after the junior scientist had returned
from his five-year long voyage on HMS Beagle [5].
Darwin’s sketch appears on page 36 of his “Notebook
B” - the first 35 pages are taken up by considerations
on the “evolutionary thoughts” of his famous grandfather Erasmus Darwin (1731-1802). The older Darwin
published his revolutionary thoughts on the transformation of species in his book entitled Zoonomia
(1794). With respect to (endothermic) mammals Erasmus Darwin wrote that “... would it be too bold to
imagine that, in the great length of time since the
earth began to exist, perhaps millions of years ... that
all warm-blooded animals have arisen from one living
filament, which the great First Cause endued with animality, ... and thus possessing the faculty of continuing
to improve by its own inherent activity, and of delivering down those improvements by generation to its posterity, world without end? ... as the earth and ocean
were probably peopled with vegetable productions long
before the existence of animals ... shall we conjecture
that one and the same kind of living filament is and
has been the cause of all organic life?” [21].
It has been argued that, with respect to Charles Darwin’s botanical works, the influence of his grandfather
may have been larger than he later admitted [3]. The
passage cited above suggests that the younger Darwin
developed his famous “I think-sketch” of 1837 (Figure 3
A), at least in part, under the spiritual leadership of his
grandfather Erasmus.
However, what is certain is that for Charles Darwin
the “Tree of Life” was not so much thought of as a

Kutschera Biology Direct 2011, 6:33
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/33

Page 6 of 25

Figure 3 Charles Darwin’s early sketch of an evolutionary tree (or a coral), drawn in 1837 (A). Marine organism (Bossea arbignyana)
collected by Darwin and classified by him as a coral ("family Corallinae”). Later it was discovered that this “coral-like” inhabitant of sea waters (B)
is a red alga (family Corallinaceae, Phylum Rhodophyta). Red coral (Corallium rubrum), which grows on rocky sea bottom either in the depths or
in dark caverns (C). This wide-spread species, which is found mainly in the Mediterranean Sea, was known to Darwin and possibly served as a
model for his diagram (see Figure 4) [adapted from ref. 22].

woody plant, but rather as a coral. As Bredekamp [22]
has documented in detail, Darwin wrote in his “Notebook B” of 1837 that “The tree of life should perhaps be
called the coral of life”. This view of the “unity of life on
Earth” was in part based on Darwin’s hands-on experience as a geologist, who had studied coral reefs in nature. A coral-like organism, later identified as an red alga
(Bossea arbignyana), was collected and preserved by
Darwin (Figure 3 B). This living being resembles the
wide-spread stone coral (Corallium rubrum) (Figure 3
C), which served as the living model organism for Darwin’s novel concept that has been summarized under
the term “tree-thinking” [23-25].
The only diagram Darwin included into the “sterile”
text of his Origin of Species illustrates the essence of the
“one long argument” developed by the author [6,7].
However, a comparison between the first and last (definitive) editions of 1859 and 1872, respectively, reveals a
striking improvement of the text: Darwin (1872) had
added a headline entitled “The probable effects of the
action of natural selection through divergence of character and extinction, on the descendants of a common
ancestor” to the text so that his discussion of the treelike diagram became a separate paragraph in Chapter
IV. On these pages of the Origin, Darwin’s five “species
theories” that were identified and described for the first
time by Ernst Mayr (1904-2005) [11,12], are apparent
(Figure 4):
1. Descent with modification (Darwin’s definition of
evolution) as a fact of nature versus supernatural acts of
independent species creations, labelled by the author as

religious dogma. 2. The principle of the last common
ancestor of all forms of life (see A in Figure 4). 3. The
theory of gradual, step-by-step species transformations.
4. The multiplication of species over evolutionary time
(thousands of generations) and 5. The principles of natural (and sexual) selection as the major “driving forces”
for the transformation of species.
In addition to these five “Darwinian species theories”
[for details, see refs. 5, 11, 12], the author discussed the
phenomenon of extinction. According to Darwin, the
“improved descendant” of any species has the tendency
to supplant and finally exterminate at each stage of evolutionary development “their predecessors and original
progenitor” [6,7]. Finally, it should be noted that Darwin
[6,7] unequivocally proposed a continuum between “speciation” and the evolutionary development of novel body
plans, processes that were later called “micro- and
macroevolution”, respectively [11,12]. This concept was
described by the British naturalist, with reference to his
famous scheme (Figure 4), in the following words: “In the
diagram, each horizontal line has hitherto been supposed
to represent a thousand generations; but each may represent a million or more generations ... I see no reason to
limit the process of modification ... to the formation of
genera alone ... new families, or orders, are descended
from two species of the original genus” [7].
Despite these tremendous insights provided by Darwin, who was one of the first to replace the “Ladder of
Life” (Figure 2) by a “Tree-like concept” [22-25], our
modern view of the biosphere, and the processes that
have brought about the diversity of life as we know it

Kutschera Biology Direct 2011, 6:33
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/33

Page 7 of 25

Figure 4 Partial reproduction of the single illustration in Darwin’s Origin of Species of 1859 (6. ed. 1872). This famous diagram may have
been inspired by corals (or coral-like organisms) as depicted in Figure 3 B, C. Darwin’s five theories are added to the figure (1. to 5.), which
illustrate the transformation and diversification of species, which originate from a common ancestor (A) [adapted from ref. 7].

today, have advanced to such an extent that Lamarck
and Darwin would hardly understand our current evolutionary concepts. What are the problems with Darwin’s
19th century-ideas about the evolution of life?
First, Darwin [6,7] used old-fashioned terms such as
“perfection, improvement, higher vs. lower (or primitive)
forms of life” etc. that are no longer in use today and
may document relicts of religiously motivated “ladderthinking” in his texts. Second, Darwin discussed in none
of his 16 books in any detail the bacteria, although
microbes were already known at that time [2]. In other
words, the scientific work of the British naturalist is
restricted to macro-organisms (animals, plants) to the
exclusion of microbes. His references to “Infusoria”,
“Animalcules”, or “Lower Organisms” [6,7] are confusing
and unclear. Finally, although Darwin experienced a
severe earthquake during his voyage with the HMS Beagle [5], his “species book” [6,7] is based on the implicit
assumption that the Earth is a static planet.
Today it is well established by numerous independent
studies that (1.) bacteria are, based on their collective
protoplasmic biomass, the dominant forms of life, and

by no means “primitive”, (2.) endosymbiotic processes
due to the fusion of ancient microbes have been key
events in the history of life, and (3.) the Earth is not static, but dynamic. Our post-Darwinian view of the symbiogenetic and dynamic tree of life is described in the
next sections.

Ernst Haeckel’s static trees and the origin of
Monerology
In Germany, the zoologist Ernst Haeckel (1834-1919) was
one of the most prominent popularizers of Darwin’s
ideas, notably of his “theory of descent with modification
by means of natural selection” (i.e., the concepts 1. and 5.
depicted in Figure 4). It should be noted that, in contrast
to many of his colleagues, Haeckel fully acknowledged
the achievements of Jean Lamarck. In one of his popular
books, Haeckel argued that the term “Lamarckism”
should be used to denote the principle of the transformation of species (i.e., evolution as such, corresponding to
Darwin’s theory no. 1), whereas the word “Darwinism”
should denote the concept of natural selection, one of
the British biologist’s most important insights and

Kutschera Biology Direct 2011, 6:33
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/33

contributions to the developing evolutionary sciences of
the 19th century [20,26].
With respect to the “Tree of Life” as a coral-like structure (Figures 3 and 4) it should be remembered that
Haeckel discovered and later described a marine coral
from the Red Sea that was named after his friend and colleague Charles Darwin. A drawing of this organism (Monoxenia darwinii Haeckel 1876) is shown in Figure 5 A. One
of Haeckel’s greatest and most original contributions to
evolutionary biology, his “Gastraea-Theorie”, was based on
his detailed investigations of the development of “Darwin’s
coral” (Monoxenia darwinii). In a journal article published
in 1874 (two years before the organism M. darwinii was

Page 8 of 25

described as a new species), Haeckel concluded that the
two-layered gastrula (i.e., the “Gastraea” or “Urdarmtier”) is
the ancestral form of all animals. This is the essence of
Haeckel’s Gastraea theory for the origin of the Metazoa
(multicellular animals) [27], a concept that has been corroborated by numerous subsequent studies.
In Vol. 2 of his Generelle Morphologie der Organismen
published in 1866, Haeckel outlined his “biogenetic law”,
which the author later described in more detail, in the
following words: “Ontogenesis is the short and fast recapitulation of phylogenesis, controlled through the physiological functions of inheritance (reproduction) and
adaptation (nutrition)” [28]. The significance of Haeckel’s

Figure 5 Adult specimen of “Darwin’s coral” and ontogenesis of Haeckel’s model system. Morphology of the coral Monoxenia darwinii (A),
an organism discovered by Ernst Haeckel in 1873 in the Red Sea and later described by him as a new species, named in honour of Charles
Darwin. The development of M. darwinii is shown in (B), from the fertilized egg (A/B) to the so-called “Becherlarve” (beaker larvae) or gastrula (K/
I). Haeckel coined the term “Gastraea” to denote this phylogenetically conserved stage in animal development [adapted from ref. 27].

Kutschera Biology Direct 2011, 6:33
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/33

“law” (which is today down-sized to a “rule” that permits
exceptions), with respect to the evolution of animals, has
recently been described by Olsson et al. [29]. More
importantly within the context of this article are the
“genealogical trees” drawn and depicted by Haeckel in his
classic monograph. In all of these tree-like diagrams,
German oaks were used as the representative woody
plant. This choice is not surprising. According to the
pre-Darwinian idea of the Scala Naturae (Figure 2), the
one primate of plants, organisms that were ranked in this
Christian medieval hierarchy below the animals, were
oak trees [10]. Since the British scientist Wallace likewise
referred to the “twigs of a gnarled oak” [19], we have to
conclude that so-called “ladder-thinking” was still alive in
the minds of Haeckel and Wallace, who published major
books on organismic evolution after the death of Darwin
in 1882.
The most prominent “general” evolutionary tree of
Haeckel, depicting the presumed phylogenetic relationships between animals, plants and various “lower organisms” is reproduced in Figure 6. Three facts should be
highlighted in this context. First, Haeckel [28] argued
that the “Stammbaum der Organismen” (Tree of Life) is
monophyletic. This hypothesis, which corresponds to
Darwin’s “species theory No. 2” (see Figure 4), has
recently been corroborated by D. J. Theobald [30], based
on protein sequence and other molecular data. The
author concluded that “the last universal common
ancestor [LUCA] may have comprised a population of
organisms with different genotypes that lived in different
places at different times” [30]. Second, in contrast to
Darwin [6,7], whose work was based on the 19th-century “animal-plant-classification”, Haeckel distinguished
between three “Kingdoms of life":
1. Archephylum vegetabile (Plantae), 2. Archephylum
protisticum (Protista), and 3. Archephylum animale (Animalia). Hence, unicellular “lower organisms” (Protista,
inclusive of the Moneres, i.e., Bacteria), living beings that
were largely ignored by Darwin [6,7], were present in
Haeckel’s view of biodiversity on Earth. Finally, Haeckel
[28] coined the term “Moneres autogonum” to denote
micro-organisms at the common root ("Radix communis
Organismorum”) of his “Tree of Life” (Figure 6). However, it should be noted that on other pages of his books,
Haeckel [28] refers to polyphyletic origins of species. A
discussion of all of Haeckel’s pertinent ideas is beyond
the scope of this article.
The inclusion of microbes that lack a true nucleus
("Moneres autogonum”) into an evolutionary scheme was
a large step towards our modern view of biodiversity.
Today we know that the moneres (Kingdom Bacteria or
Monera) are the dominant forms of life on Earth [31]. It
is obvious that, via the inclusion of the Protista (i.e.,
micro-organisms with and without a nucleus), Haeckel

Page 9 of 25

[28,32] tremendously enlarged our view of life on Earth the discipline of “Monerology” (i.e., Bacteriology and
Protozoology) with respect to evolutionary questions
rests to a large extent on the work of this famous German biologist. In some of his later writings, Haeckel
mentioned the principle of endosymbiosis (or symbiogenesis), with reference to the origin of certain green
algae. This topic is discussed in the next section.

Constantin Mereschkowsky’s symbiogenesis
theory and the origin of eukaryotes
In a seminal paper published a century ago in German,
the Russian biologist Constantin Mereschkowsky (18551921) wrote that the most important question of the biological sciences concerns the origin of species on Earth.
However, according to Mereschkowsky [33], earlier
attempts of Darwin and Haeckel were not successful,
because “at the time when they were active not all the
facts that are necessary to solve this problem were available. However, in the meantime novel facts from disciplines such as cytology, biochemistry, physiology, notably
of the lower organisms, accumulated so that a new
approach to solve the riddle concerning the origin of living beings is justified” [33].
As an alternative to the Darwinian principle of “descent
with modification (i.e., biological evolution) by means of
natural selection”, Mereschkowsky proposed his theory
of symbiogenesis [34,35]. This concept posits that new
organisms, at the level of single cells, occur via symbiotic
events, i.e., by means of the fusion and subsequent cooperation of microbes or “Moneren”. Since the origin of the
nucleus was one of Mereschkowsky’s major topics, the
term “symbiogenesis” includes “eukaryogenesis”, i.e., the
evolutionary development of nucleated cells from nonnucleated, bacteria-like ancestors. Hence, the original
word “symbiogenesis” should be used instead of the more
recently introduced term “eukaryogenesis” to denote
those processes that led to the origin of the earliest
nucleated (eukaryotic) cells [35].
Based on Mereschkowsky’s insights and those of other
cytologists, L. Margulis proposed the “serial endosymbiosis
hypothesis of the origin of eukaryotic cells” that contain a
nucleus and organelles (mitochondria, chloroplasts) within
their cytoplasm [36,37]. The evidence for this version of
the “symbiogenesis theory” has been summarized and discussed at length by Kutschera and Niklas [38,39], Cavelier-Smith [40-43], Koonin [44-47] an others [48,49]. As E.
Koonin has recently stated in this journal, according to the
well-supported “symbiogenesis sceniario”, a single endosymbiotic event involving the uptake and subsequent
domestication/enslavement of an alpha-proteobacterium
by an archaebacterial host cell led to the generation of the
mitochondria within heterotrophic eukaryotic cells. In a
second step, the uptake of an ancient cyanobacterium, led

Kutschera Biology Direct 2011, 6:33
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/33

Page 10 of 25

Figure 6 Reproduction of Ernst Haeckel’s genealogical oak tree depicting the Kingdoms Plantae (plants), Protista (micro-organisms)
and Animalia (animals). Note that the author explicitly pointed out that this general Tree of Life is monophyletic [adapted from ref. 28].

to the origin of plastids (chloroplasts) [44]. These key
events in the history of life on Earth (i.e., serial primary
endosymbioses 1 and 2) occurred ca. 2200 to 1500 and ca.
1500 to 1200 million years ago, respectively, during the

Palaeo- and Mesoproterozoic [38]. At that time, the oxygen content of the oceans was about to rise due to cyanobacterial photosynthesis. Gross and Bhattacharya [50] have
proposed that the “birth of eukaryotes, a milestone in the

Kutschera Biology Direct 2011, 6:33
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/33

evolution of life on our planet”, was driven by the selective
pressure caused by reactive oxygen species (ROS). These
ROS were light-mediated by-products of the local rise
in O 2 -levels within marine ecosystems during the
Proterozoic.
Although many details concerning the evolutionary
origin of the earliest nucleated, organelle-containing
cells are still a matter of debate [51-53], there is agreement among scientists that symbiogenesis (primary
endosymbiosis) was an early key process in the history
of life [38,39,54]. However, although Mereschkowsky
[33] was the first to clearly point out the importance of
endosymbiotic events during evolution, he did not
accept the “Darwin-Wallace principle of natural selection” [20] as a driving force for the transformation of
species. This idea prevails to the present day: a number
of “symbiogenesis-researchers” consider endosymbiotic
events and directional natural selection as mutually
exclusive concepts (see ref. 38 for a discussion of this
topic). However, as documented in detail elsewhere
[26,54,55], this view of the natural world is at odds with
numerous observations and experiments. Symbiogenesis,
i.e., primary (and secondary) endosymbioses, combined
with directional natural selection caused by slowly changing environmental conditions, have been two key processes or “driving forces” of organismic evolution, since
the origin of the hypothetical Last Universal Common
Ancestor (LUCA) that gave rise to a heterogeneous
population of aquatic, bacteria-like Proto-cells ca. 3800

Page 11 of 25

million years ago [24,30]. These “factors” of biological
evolution, with respect to the “Tree of Life”, are
depicted in Figure 7.
It should be noted that the relevance of endosymbiotic
events, combined with the process of (bacterial) horizontal gene transfer, has already been discussed with
reference to the “Tree of Life” [23-25,42,56]. However, a
third key process shown in Figure 7, the movements of
tectonic plates (i.e., the dynamic Earth), has been
ignored by these investigators. The significance of these
gradual (sometimes abrupt) changes in the environment
with respect to biological evolution are discussed in the
next section.

Alfred Wegener’s vision of the dynamic Earth,
volcanism and plate tectonics
Four decades ago, J. C. Maxwell summarized the concept
of the dynamic Earth in the following words: “The earth’s
surface, in the context of geologic time, may be likened
to a boiling vat of maple syrup. The crust, with its highstanding continents, is analogous to the scum which rises
from boiling syrup, coalesces, drifts apart, and rejoins in
different patterns on the surface of the convecting liquid.
The earth’s crust is a similarly thin scum of relatively
light rocks ‘floating’ on the mantle, a zone of heavier
materials extending halfway to the earth’s center and
overlying the inner metallic core. By some cosmic accident the earth has been endowed with a magnetic field,
apparently for much of its 4.5-billion-year history.

Figure 7 Symbiogenesis, natural selection, and the dynamic Earth as key processes that caused biological evolution. The Last Universal
Common Ancestor (LUCA) evolved into the earliest self-replicating proto-cells (ancient microbes) ca. 4000 to 3500 million years ago. Over the
subsequent eons, these archaic microbes evolved into numerous bacterial ecotypes that today inhabit every micro-niche where organic
molecules (or light) are available. Moreover, these micro-organisms gave rise to larger, eukaryotic cells via symbiogenesis (primary
endosymbiosis). These nucleated cells further evolved into multicellular organisms, such as algae, fungi, animals and plants.

Kutschera Biology Direct 2011, 6:33
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/33

Changes in the field with respect to a point on the surface are recorded by successively formed sequences of
rock. Analysis of these ancient magnetic fields gives convincing evidence of extensive differential movements in
the earth’s crust. The composition of the crust and the
forces which cause its deformation are apparently determined by gravitational and thermal instabilities within
the outer few hundred kilometers of the mantle. Temperature within the earth increases downward at a rate
exceeding the adiabatic gradient for the upper few hundred kilometers, hence this outer zone is intrinsically
unstable. Vertical movements, once initiated, tend to be
self-propagating. These instabilities may give rise to lateral and vertical movements approximating convecting
currents in liquids. Rising currents have apparently
occurred largely in oceanic areas, bringing new mantle
material to the surface in the oceans and sweeping older
oceanic rocks towards and perhaps beneath the highstanding continents. The great mountain ranges which
border many continents are believed to be related in
some way to the convective overturn of rocks in the
earth’s crust and upper mantle” [57]. This description,
published in 1971, was a concise summary of a long series of articles and books that originated in 1858.
In this year, the French geographer Antonio Snider-Pellegrini (1802-1885) published two imaginative maps
depicting the continents of the Earth, “before and after
separation” [58]. This early outline of the idea of continental drift, and hence the dynamic Earth (Figure 8 A), did
not convince the geologists of the time, because SniderPellegrini’s speculations were largely based on Biblical
myths and only on few scattered empirical data. As a
result, the old concept of a static Earth, the “geological
basis” of all views of the “hierarchy and organization of life
on our planet”, as depicted in ladders and trees, from
Charles Bonnet’s Scala via Darwin’s Diagram to Ernst
Haeckel’s Oak, prevailed (Figures 1 to 6).
Seven decades after Snider-Pellegrini’s account was published, the last (definitive) edition of Alfred Wegener’s
(1880-1930) book on The Origin of the Continents and the
Oceans [59] appeared in print. In this monograph of 1929,
the German scientist summarized a long list of empirical
evidence for a novel fact-based theory of continental drift
that overshadowed the earlier, Bible-inspired speculations
of the French geographer. In essence, Wegener stated that
the isolated continents as we observe them today were
once united and formed a super-continent. This giant
proto-land mass ("Pangaea”) may have covered up to 50%
of the surface of our planet and was surrounded by one
large ocean ("Panthalassa”). Due to “continental drift” via
mechanisms inexplicable to Wegener, the land masses
finally reached, in the course of millions of years of steady
motion, the position they have today. Despite Wegener’s
inability to explain the physical processes that may have

Page 12 of 25

caused the drift of these large land masses, the author proposed that the formation of mountains, via compressive
forces, the occurrence of earthquakes, and volcanism are
consequences of continental drift [59]. Today it is well
established that Wegener was right (Figures 8 B, C; 9).
Only a few years before J. C. Maxwell published his
summary of the “Dynamic Earth” quoted above, the
concept of plate tectonics was proposed. This unifying
theory of geology states that the Earth’s outer rigid shell
(i.e., the lithosphere) is broken into more than a dozen
giant, rigid plates that float on the hot, ducile mantle
(i.e., the asthenosphere) like pieces of ice on a lake.
Most of the Earth’s documented history results from
plates rifting into pieces to form new ocean basins.
When they converge back together, they can form
mountains and large continents (Figure 8 C). As shown
in Figure 9, the rigid lithospheric plates differ in size
and their direction of internal heat-driven motion. Some
pieces of the outer crust, such as the North American
Plate, carry continents and attached pieces of the ocean
floor. Other parts of the lithosphere, such as the Pacific
Plate, are entirely covered by oceans and are made of
oceanic crust. For instance, in the area of San Francisco
(California) and elsewhere, the North American and
Pacific Plates are pushed at each other, and the spontaneous release of pressure causes abrupt, short plate
movements, so-called “earthquakes” (Figure 8 B). These
rapid, unpredictable geologic events may have devastating secondary effects. For instance, the 2011 Sendai 9.0
megathrust earthquake that occurred on March 11 off
the coast of Japan triggered destructive tsunami waves
with highs of up to 12 m. These masses of sea water
have travelled up to 10 km inland, destroyed the terrestrial landscape, and caused thousands of deaths. Frequently, such devastating earthquakes occur along the
so-called “Pacific Ring of Fire”, stretching from New
Zealand, along the eastern edge of Asia north across the
Aleutian Islands of Alaska and south along the coast of
North and South America. The “Ring of Fire”, which
has 452 volcanoes, is a direct consequence of plate tectonics and hence the movements/collisions of crustal
plates [60].
What is the significance of the theory of plate tectonics for the geological sciences? Theodosius Dobzhansky (1900-1975) once said that “Nothing in biology
makes sense except in the light of evolution” [61].
Accordingly, earth scientists may conclude that “Not
much in geology makes sense except in the light of
plate tectonics”. In other words, the theory of plate tectonics is the unifying principle of historical geology.
The consequences of the internal heat-driven movements of tectonic plates for the evolution of life on
Earth, as well as the “Tree-models” depicting this process, are obvious: new habitats are created and existing

Kutschera Biology Direct 2011, 6:33
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/33

Page 13 of 25

Figure 8 Scheme depicting the idea of continental drift as envisioned by A. Snider-Pellegrini in 1858 (A). This concept was re-discovered
and supported by empirical evidence by A. Wegener in 1929. Decades later, the theory of plate tectonics was deduced. Plate tectonics accounts
for most of the planet’s earthquakes, which may result in deep cracks in the Earth’s surface (B) and the formation of mountains as a result of
horizontal compression of the crust (C) [adapted from ref. 58 and from photographs of the US Geological Survey, 1938].

Kutschera Biology Direct 2011, 6:33
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/33

Page 14 of 25

Figure 9 Model of the Earth’s surface, which is broken into drifting fragments, the so-called tectonic plates. The “lubricant” of plate
movements is liquid water. In this picture, the South American and African plates are highlighted. In addition, the moon, a solid satellite without
water and plate movements, is shown in the upper left quarter. Red lines: Regions where volcanic eruptions occur frequently [adapted from
ref. 75].

ones are re-modelled or destroyed by these geologic
events (Figure 7). Major mass extinctions, such as those
that occurred 251 and 65 million years ago, respectively,
were at least in part caused by massive volcanic eruptions and hence the dynamic Earth [54,60].
In a recent publication it was documented that the
break-up of the super-continent Pangaea (which existed
from the Perminan into the Jurassic, ca. 299 to 200 million years ago), due to plate tectonics, accounts for the
evolutionary diversification of many groups of animal,
such as dinosaurs, mammals and the land leeches of
Madagascar [62]. Another example for the role of plate
tectonics as driving force for speciation are amphibious
tetrapods, such as salamanders. A detailed analysis of
numerous collected specimens of the four-toed Asian
salamanders (family Hynobiidae) revealed that the 46
biospecies were “created” as a result of plate tectonics.
About 110 million years ago, much of Asia was a lowlying humid region where salamanders of all varieties
existed. A series of geologic events, which resulted in
the lifting up of the Tibetan Plateau and mountainbuilding led to the isolation of sub-populations that
evolved, over millions of years, into separate,

geographically isolated species [63]. Hence, the dynamic
Earth must be interpreted as a major factor that drove
the evolutionary diversification of many macro-organisms on our planet [64,65] (Figures 8, 9). It should be
mentioned that wildfires, which have a large impact on
the distribution and diversification of plants and animals, are regularly caused by massive volcanic eruptions
(Figures 10, 11). These secondary consequences of plate
tectonics may also have been an important cause for the
extinction of the dinosaurs that occurred 65 million
years ago [54,61,66].
Finally, we have to address the question as to the consequences of volcanism (and the associated wildfires) on
the evolutionary patterns of micro-organisms, such as
bacteria, soil amoebae and unicellular algae (diatoms
etc.) [67]. One case study may illustrate this topic. The
eruption of Mount St. Helens in southwest Washington,
USA, on May 18, 1980 released superheated steam and
gases. Moreover, this catastrophic event resulted in pyroclastic flows, landslides, mudflows, and ash fall. As a
result, novel habitats were formed, whereas old ones
were re-structured, scoured, or eliminated [68]. Six
years after the eruption, some aquatic habitats were

Kutschera Biology Direct 2011, 6:33
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/33

Page 15 of 25

Figure 10 The massive 1872 eruption of the Vesuvius, the only active volcanoe in mainland Europe (Italy). Vesuvius is most famous for
the 79 A. D. eruption that destroyed the Roman cities of Pompeii and Herculaneum. Plate tectonics is the major cause for these violent
eruptions, which document ongoing magmatic processes driven by heat from the radioactive decay within the Earth [adapted from an
anonymous painting, ca. 1880].

analyzed with respect to the presence of micro-organisms. The results show that species richness and microbial diversity were very low at the most heavily
disturbed sites around the cool volcano, documenting a
large mass extinction event at the “micro-scale” [69].
However, more work on other volcanic sites is necessary
to corroborate these results. These data document that
volcanic eruptions (and wildfires) lead to a temporary
“sterilisation” of the affected aquatic and terrestrial habitats and hence to the destruction of most of the microorganisms that existed there before the catastrophic
event occurred (Figures 10, 11). The patterns of re-colonization by microbial communities and the resulting
evolutionary diversifications are not yet explored in
detail.

Conclusions: The tree-like Synade-model of
macroevolution
In a recent analysis of Charles Darwin’s “species book” it
was documented in detail that the British naturalist and
theologian used Biblical phrases such as “He who ...”
throughout his Origin of Species [70]. Darwin’s key
metaphor for the principle of descent with modification,
combined with his theory of the last common ancestor,
was the “great Tree of Life” [6,7]. In this context I
would like to add that the symbol of Trees appears in
the creation myth of the Old Testament (Genesis 2, 9):

“And the Lord God made all kinds of trees grow out of
the ground - trees that were pleasing to the eye and
good for food. In the middle of the garden were the tree
of life and the tree of the knowledge of good and evil”.
In this article I have shown that, from the earliest,
Bible-inspired “Moral Tree” (Figure 1), via the hierarchical Scala Naturae, to Darwin’s and Haeckel’s static trees
(or corals) of life, the old, Biblical “woody plant-model”
evolved by descent with modification: The Christian
“ladder-thinking” was gradually replaced by the postDarwinian ("Haeckelian”) atheistic “oak-tree-concept”
that included animals, plants and micro-organisms
(Figure 6). However, neither Darwin nor Haeckel took
the principle of symbiogenesis (primary endosymbiosis)
into account, because this evolutionary process - the
“creation” of more complex eukaryotic cells via the
fusion of archaic microbes and the subsequent cooperation of the partners - was largely unknown at that time.
It should be stressed that Haeckel mentioned symbiogenetic events in the context of the origin of green algae
and land plants [34], but the German biologist failed to
integrate this insight into his general picture of the evolution of life on Earth.
Moreover, the trees of Darwin and Haeckel are “static”, based on their implicit assumption of an Earth surface that does not display significant movements.
Unfortunately, even the “architects” of the Synthetic

Kutschera Biology Direct 2011, 6:33
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/33

Page 16 of 25

Figure 11 Volcanic eruptions can ignite wild fires that result in the destruction of the vegetation, soil micro-organisms, and less
mobile animals. In this drawing, Zebras and other mammals are depicted that are just about to escape from a severe wild fire [adapted from a
drawing of H. Harder, 1912].

Theory of Biological Evolution developed between 1937
and 1950, Theodosius Dobzhansky (1900-1975), Ernst
Mayr (1904-2005), Julian Huxley (1887-1975), George
G. Simpson (1902-1984), Bernhard Rensch (1900-1990),
and G. Ledyard Stebbins (1906-2000) ignored symbiogenetic events and the dynamic Earth [54,61,71-73]. These
fundamental processes were, like the insights gained
from the disciplines of evolutionary developmental biology ("Evo-Devo”) and geology (mass extinctions), integrated into the “Expanded Synthesis” published in 2004
[54,74]. Due to this steady growth of our “Tree of modern evolutionary knowledge”, the scientific discipline of
evolutionary biology has been defined as a “system of
theories” that explains the various aspects of those processes that Charles Darwin described as “descent with
slight and successive modifications” [6,7].

W. F. Doolittle [23-25,56] and others [52] have
recently argued that the construction of a universal Tree
of Life, as originally suggested by Darwin [6,7] and
Haeckel [28] (Figures 4 and 6), may be difficult to
achieve. These authors based their judgement on two
facts. First, in prokaryotes (bacteria, cyanobacteria),
which comprise the majority of life forms on Earth and
were the sole organisms during ca. 2/3 of the early history of organismic evolution on this planet, lateral gene
transfer (the exchange of genetic information between
extant microbes) occurs regularly. Second, endosymbiotic events, and hence the fusion of microbial lineages,
should be taken into account when tree-like models are
drawn [51].
In my view, symbiogenesis, denoted here as early primary endosymbiotic processes that gave rise to the

Kutschera Biology Direct 2011, 6:33
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/33

organelle-bearing eukaryotic cells during the Proterozoic, and subsequent, secondary endosymbiotic events
that are responsible for the origin of the majority of the
unicellular marine phytoplanktonic organisms
[38,39,54,74], were key events during the history of life.
Moreover, plate tectonics and hence the dynamic Earth
must be incorporated into our view of any tree-like
reconstruction of biological evolution. Based on the
facts summarized in this article and elsewhere [5,62,75]
I propose that symbiogenesis, (directional) natural selection, and the dynamic Earth were key processes that
must be viewed as three important “driving forces” of
organismic evolution (Figure 7).
A more precise “tree-like” version of this “synademodel” of macroevolution, which takes into account all
organisms on Earth (i.e., members of the Kingdoms Bacteria, Protoctista, Animalia, Fungi, and Plantae) is
depicted in Figure 12. The oldest branch of living
beings, the Bacteria (syn. Kingdom Monera), represent
more than 50% of the protoplasmic biomass on Earth
[31]. They are, as pathogens and/or symbionts, important “factors” in the evolution of all Eukaryotes. Hence,
ancient and recent prokaryotic microbes are included as
“background organisms” [31,67]. In addition, a scheme
of our planet depicting the centre of the Earth is shown
in Figure 12. Without internal heat, which is primarily
caused by the energy given off as a result of the radioactive decay of uranium, our “blue planet” would probably
be as static as the moon (Figure 9).
According to the “tree-like” synade-model of macroevolution proposed here (Figures 7 and 12), all extant
and extinct organisms have, through the eons of geological time, benefited from the dynamic Earth due to the
creation of early terrestrial land masses within giant
marine habitats, and the subsequent formation of mountains, deserts, freshwater ecosystems, and deep oceans
[64,75]. On the other hand, massive volcanic eruptions,
which are “side effects” of plate tectonics, have caused
(or significantly contributed to) several mass extinctions
during Earth’s history. Hence, the mobile tectonic plates
led to the destruction of countless living beings on this
“blue planet of the microbes”. Finally, it should be
stressed that micro-organisms, the “unseen majority”
[31] that Darwin largely ignored [76,77], are the true
“winners” in the ongoing, ca. 3.500 million-year-long
“struggle for life” on our ever changing, dynamic Earth
[5,59-62,78-86].

Reviewer’s comments
Reviewer 1: Mark Ragan, University of Queensland,
Australia

Reviewer’s comments: In this article the Author develops
a new perspective on macroevolution, based on a

Page 17 of 25

narrative of how our understanding of the living world
has evolved particularly over recent centuries. The main
models along this trajectory are a static Chain of Being,
a static Tree of Life, and finally a geologically (hence
environmentally) dynamic tree-like “synade” driven primarily by symbiogenesis, “directional” natural selection
and plate tectonics. I completely agree that it is important to situate our understanding, not least about evolution, in historical perspective, and the Author rightly
attempts to weave together this history from developments in two fields, geology and biology. He further
reminds us of the broader contexts of the intellectual
enterprise, referencing philosophy, religion, human
behaviour as well as scientific content per se. Addressing
this important challenge requires broad but careful
interdisciplinary scholarship, and my comments largely
focus on issues of historical accuracy, not on the (undisputed) merit of the undertaking itself.
The author claims that the Scala Naturae was a
“Western medieval Christian” idea. Lovejoy (Great
Chain of Being, 1936) and others have clearly shown
that ideas of perfection, vertical ordering and continuity
long preceded Christianity. The Chain of Being infuses
the teachings of Pythagoras (Sixth century BCE), and
Paul Kuntz (Jacob’s Ladder, 1987) finds it common to
most religious traditions. In any event there is substantial overlap between the various canons of the (Christian) Old Testament and the (Hebrew) Tanakh. Nor is it
helpful to refer to the Chain of Being as Christian
“dogma” (a belief that cannot be doubted, against a penalty of excommunication).
Author’s response: I agree with the opinion of the
referee and have modified the text accordingly.
Reviewer’s comments: Regarding Lull (or Llull), it is a
little imprecise to say he published a tree-like scheme,
as the printing-press came into use more than 120 years
after his death. Trees of logic, divisio scientiarum and
genealogy appeared many centuries before Lull. Nor was
Lull’s diagram unique in admixing the real with the
supernatural, mystical or conceptual (cf. Jacob’s Ladder,
medieval cosmologies, sephirotic trees). The Author correctly states that Lull had only limited influence, but
goes on in the same sentence to claim that nonetheless
“...the Western medieval Christian idea of the Scala naturae... is unequivocally related to the Bible-based ideology depicted in Figure 1“ [Lull’s apostolic tree]. Precisely
what does “related to” mean here?
Author’s response: The text was re-written in order to
clarify these points.
Reviewer’s comments: The Author incorrectly characterises Bonnet as having believed that “there is no change
in nature, everything remains identical, and species are
constant”. Bonnet did indeed embrace a static framework

Kutschera Biology Direct 2011, 6:33
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/33

Page 18 of 25

Figure 12 The tree-like “Synade-model of macroevolution”, taking into account all five Kingdoms of life on Earth. According to this
theory, symbiogenesis (primary and secondary endosymbiotic events), (directional) natural selection, and the (internal heat-driven) dynamic Earth
were and still are key drivers of macroevolution on our “planet of the bacteria” [adapted and modified from ref. 62].

of increasingly perfect steps that we recognise as biological taxa, but wrote (Palingénésie philosophique, 1769)
that the germ of each form of life gradually progresses
within this framework, i.e. works its way step-by-step up
the Chain. Buffon had entertained similar ideas slightly

earlier, as would Lamarck later. The Author’s Figure 2
shows only the top half of Bonnet’s chain of being, which
was first published in 1745 (Traité de Insectologie), and
later (1779, not 1719) appeared in the first volume of his
Oeuvres.

Kutschera Biology Direct 2011, 6:33
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/33

Author’s response: The text was modified as recommended and the legend to Figure 2 corrected.
Reviewer’s comments: I do not understand how any
branched tree can be said to be “more ladder-like than a
true tree with branches”, nor how Lamarck’s 1809 and
1815 trees are topologically any more ladder-like than
the one in Darwin’s Origin. Trees have branches, ladders
do not, and Lamarck’s diagrams show branches.
Author’s response: These unclear sentences were rewritten and ... “branches with twigs” added so that this
misunderstanding is now corrected. In my view,
Lamarck’s table of 1809, reproduced in Figure 2, looks
more like a ladder than a “true tree”. For instance,/Infusoires, Polypes and Radiaires/,/Insectes, Arachnides,
Crustacés/and/Annelides, Cirrhipèdes, Mollusques/are
depicted as ladders, but no such A/B/C-arrangement
can be found in Darwin’s tree reproduced in Figure 4.
However, I agree with the referee that this is my own
personal view and one can likewise imagine a tree in
this static Tableau.
Reviewer’s comments: The Author refers to Cuvier’s
“religious” opposition to Lamarck. While Cuvier was a
Protestant and Lamarck, born into a Catholic family,
became a deist, their famous antagonism was above all
else a “competition for priority and empire” (Outram,
Georges Cuvier, 1984). To my (admittedly limited)
knowledge, Cuvier was not similarly belligerent toward
other non-Protestants; nor am I aware that he criticised
Lamarck for his religious beliefs per se.
Author’s response: This sentence was modified as follows: After his death, Lamarck encountered fierce religious and political opposition.
Reviewer’s comments: The Author insists that Darwin’s
use of “old-fashioned terms such as ‘perfection, improvement, higher vs lower (or primitive) forms of life’ ...
clearly documents relicts of religiously motivated ‘ladderthinking’ in his mind”. A scan of the Origin for occurrences of perfect finds that Darwin used it to describe
structural complexity, specialisation and competitiveness
in the struggle for existence - arguably fair use for a general audience in 1859, and utterly distinct from its sense
in Bonnet, much less Bonaventure. Nor were many specialist terms available - recall Haeckel’s orgy of neologism
in Generelle Morphologie (1866). While I don’t deny that
Darwin, like us all, was a product of his intellectual place
and time, the Author fails to make his case that these
terms arose from ladder-thinking per se and not simply
from the broader Western intellectual tradition (e.g. the
idea of perfection in Timaeus).
Author’s response: I agree that my conclusion is not
supported by strong evidence and have therefore modified the text accordingly.
Reviewer’s comments: The Author takes Darwin to task
for failing to mention bacteria in his published work.

Page 19 of 25

Microscopic life had long been imagined (Ovid, Pliny),
and its eventual observation (Leeuwenhoek, mid-1670s)
prompted Thomas Hobbes to praise the majesty of God
revealed in His microscopic creation (Decameron Physiologicum, 1678). By 1859 microbial life was known to
be abundant and diverse, although bacteria per se
remained poorly known: Pasteur began his work on bacteria in the early 1860s, Koch from the mid-1870s, and
Cohn’s classifications date from 1872. O’Malley (Trends
in Microbiology 17:341-347, 2009) documents that Darwin was well aware of progress in microbiology, corresponded with Ehrenberg and Haeckel, and even invited
Cohn to Down House. Whether because he concluded
that the state of knowledge would not advance his argument, or judged the area as too unfamiliar to his audience, Darwin omitted mention of microbes in the first
edition of Origin. Responding to criticism, however, he
added text on “some of the lowest forms, as the infusoria and rhizopods” for the third edition (1861).
Author’s response: I have modified the text and suggested that Darwin’s remarks on microbes are confusing
and unclear.
Reviewer’s comments: The Author rightly calls attention to Haeckel’s acknowledgement of Lamarck: the second volume of Generelle Morphologie (1866) was
dedicated to Darwin, Lamarck and Goethe. Readers with
German may be interested in Haeckel’s Die Naturanschauung von Darwin, Goethe und Lamarck (1882).
Author’s response: In Germany, most of the books of
Haeckel, which were sometimes distributed via local
publishers, are no longer available. Moreover, no complete list of publications (papers, books, monographs)
has ever been published, due to a lack of interest in this
eminent biologist in this country - a “Haeckel-Industry”
does not exist in Germany. Unfortunately, I am unable
to purchase a copy of Haeckel (1882) and study this
“Schrift”.
Reviewer’s comments: The Author refers to the oak tree
as “the primate of plants” in the “Christian medieval hierarchy” of the Scala Naturae, and on this basis reads
Haeckel’s choice of the oak for his classic tree-diagrams,
and an 1855 comment by Wallace, as examples of atavistic “ladder-thinking”. I know of very little evidence that
the oak tree was widely considered as the most-perfect
plant, hence to link vegetables with animals. Quite the
opposite: for Bradley (Philosophical Account, 1721) the
most-perfect plant was the fig; for Linnaeus (Ordines
Naturales, 1764) the palms; for Bonnet (Contemplation,
1764) Mimosa; for Oken (Elements, 1847) the apple; for
Haeckel (Natürliche Schöpfungsgeschichte, 1868) the bellblossom; for A.P. de Candolle, Endlicher and E. Fries the
Ranunculaceae, Papilionaceae and Compositae respectively, with Nägeli (Mechanisch-physiologische Theorie,
1884) tending to support Fries. Cotton Mather (Christian

Kutschera Biology Direct 2011, 6:33
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/33

Philosopher, 1721) lauded the cabbage-tree and banana,
while in a paragraph beginning “Even the most noxious
and the most Abject of the Vegetables...” described fungi
in “rotten Barks of Oaks”.
Author’s response: In Germany, Oaks are the symbol
of strength and beauty. I believe that, for this reason,
the German biologist Haeckel used the Oak in all of his
drawings wherein he depicted phylogenetic trees.
Reviewer’s comments: The Author claims that Haeckel
argued that the Tree of Life is monophyletic, and to be
sure, trees depicting a monophyletic origin of organisms
appear in his work (e.g. Natürliche Schöpfungsgeschichte,
opposite page 569). In two other places even in this
same book, however (pages 347, 382), Haeckel depicts
multiple origins via spontaneous generation, with nine
and six lineages respectively persisting to the present.
His discussions in Protistenreich (page 66) and especially
Generelle Morphologie (Vol. I, chapter 7) are nuanced,
but he comes down on the side of polyphyly. By the
sixth edition of History of Creation (Lankester’s translation of the eighth edition of Natürliche Schöpfungsgeschichte), Haeckel finds the question to be “of very
subordinate importance” (Vol. II, page 42).
Theobald’s argument is powerful, but few things in
natural history are “unequivocal”.
Author’s response: I have added the sentence “However, ...” and extended the legend to Figure 6 accordingly. The statement concerning ref. 30 was modified.
Reviewer’s comments: The Author correctly states that
Haeckel included both nucleate and anucleate microorganisms in his Protista, but most subsequent authors
restrict the term to morphologically simple eukaryotes. To
my knowledge Haeckel never used the term Monerologie
and, given potential confusion with Monadologie (Leibniz)
or Monismus (Haeckel again), I caution against its
adoption.
Author’s response: I think that the term “Monerology”
is justified, because, as a result of Haeckel’s work, the
study of the Monera gathered momentum. Therefore,
the text was not modified as recommended by the
referee.
Reviewer’s comments: The idea that organisms were or
continue to be assembled from free-living units can be
traced to Schimper (1883, 1885) and Oken (Die Zeugung,
1805), indeed to various seventeenth-century corpuscular
theories. As the Author states, Mereschkowsky put symbiosis centre-stage as the key to cellular origin, and a unifying evolutionary principle. It is, however, imprecise to
say that Mereschkowsky’s symbiogenesis includes eukaryogenesis, as the term Eucaryotes was introduced by
Chatton only in 1925. The 1992 translation of Khakhina’s
Concepts of Symbiogenesis (Russian original 1979) is an
indispensable reference on Mereschkowsky and his
period.

Page 20 of 25

Author’s response: I disagree with this opinion. In
Mereschkowsky’s paper the origin of the nucleus is discussed at length. Hence, symbiogenesis includes eukaryogenesis, as described in the text. The book of
Khakhina (1992) is cited and discussed in detail in ref.
35 (in German).
Reviewer’s comments: I disagree with the Author that a
“static Earth” prevailed in geology pre-1858. In fact the
previous decades had been characterised by intense
debate: uniformitarians (Lyell, Chambers) versus catastrophists (Cuvier, Sedgwick, Whewell), Neptunists
(Werner, Jameson) versus Vulcanists (Hutton, Playfair),
Deluge universalists (Buckland) versus regionalists (Hugh
Miller). Many, perhaps all, of these competing explanations were presented by their respective proponents as
consistent with the Biblical account.
Author’s response: According to Wegener (1929), ref. 59,
the “static earth-view” was the dominant hypothesis of
most scientists before ca. 1858. However, I agree with the
referee that some geologists may have published “dynamic
Earth-like” hypotheses and ideas before 1858, that are not
cited anymore. The principle of natural selection was likewise proposed before Darwin (1859) by many authors. A
detailed description of all of these concepts is beyond the
scope of this article.
Reviewer’s comments: I’m unfamiliar with this earthscience variant of Dobzhansky’s saying (which, by the way,
is slightly misquoted), and ask the Author to provide a
citation. I don’t dispute the importance of plate tectonics,
but does it entirely crowd out, say, Steno’s Laws as the
sole “unifying principle of historical geology"?
Author’s response: I have re-written this sentence
accordingly.
Reviewer’s comments: Figures 8, 9, 10, 11 are simply
illustration, not scientific argument.
Author’s response: In view of the devastating 2011 Sendai megathrust 9.0-earthquake and tsunami that
occurred on March 11 in Japan (briefly discussed in the
revised text) these figures are important illustrations of
the most significant arguments of the paper. The text
was extended with reference to the catastrophe that
occurred in Japan.
Reviewer’s comments: The Author cites himself (reference [70]) as documenting that Darwin (now additionally
identified as a theologian) “used Biblical phrases such as
‘He who...’ throughout his Origin”. This raises the not
insignificant matter of what constitutes a Biblical phrase,
or more precisely a Biblical turn of expression. Darwin
was familiar with the King James version (KJV, 16041611), while the phrase “He who laughs last, laughs longest” was in use by 1608, implying that “He who...” phrases
entered the KJV from the broader language, not viceversa. Many of course originated as Latin as “Qui...”
phrases, for example “He who dares, wins” (Qui audet,

Kutschera Biology Direct 2011, 6:33
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/33

vincet). “Qui...” expressions are not uncommon in the
works of (or attributed to) e.g. Publius Syrus, Ovid and
Seneca, and thus predate the Vulgate by 450-600 years.
Darwin is likely to have encountered these in his schooling (in his Autobiography he refers, somewhat disparagingly, to his classics training at Cambridge).
Author’s response: I agree with the referee: Darwin
may have been indoctrinated with these Biblical “He
who"-phrases during his education. However, it is clear
that these “He who"-phrases can also be found in nonBiblical texts such as those cited above. Since Darwin
was a theologian by training I have restricted my discussion to Biblical phrases.
Reviewer’s comments: In the same passage, the Author
adds that “the symbol of Trees first appears in the creation
myth of the Old Testament”. I remind the Author that
Enkidu and Gilgamesh (27th Century BCE) felled the
giant cedar to serve as the door to the Temple of Enlil - a
symbolic use if ever there were one. A sacred tree was
associated with King Ashurnasirpal II of Assyria (883-859
BCE). Moses is considered to have lived around the 14th
Century BCE, and the books of the Pentateuch/Torah
were written quite a few centuries later. For early treesymbols in other cultures and contexts see Cook, The Tree
of Life: Image for the Cosmos (1974).
Author’s response: I agree with the referee and have
removed the word “first”.
Reviewer’s comments: The Author asserts that “the trees
of Darwin and Haeckel are ‘static’, based on their implicit
assumption of an Earth surface that does not display significant movements.” Haeckel in fact corresponded
with Philip Sclater (Secretary of the Zoological Society of
London 1860-1902, and founder of The Ibis) concerning a
supposed lost continent (Lemuria) that had once served as
a land bridge between Madagascar and India (explaining
the modern distribution of lemurs) but was supposed to
have since subsided. Nor is it necessary to invoke plate
tectonics to bring dynamism into species trees: dispersal
and allopatric speciation provide that, at least for macroscopic organisms.
Author’s response: I have read the books of Darwin and
Haeckel very carefully: In no section or sentence a
dynamic Earth is mentioned, i.e., these biologists
assumed that the earth is static (see Wegener 1929, who
documents, in the first sections of his book, that, in the
19 th century, the “static Earth-view” prevailed). However, I agree with the referee that, in their notebooks etc.,
both Darwin and Haeckel may have envisioned a
dynamic Earth. To the best of my knowledge, there is no
proof for this speculation.
Reviewer’s comments: The Author concludes by proposing that symbiogenesis, “directional” natural selection
in sensu Weismann and Schmalhausen, and the dynamic
Earth “must be viewed as the three most important

Page 21 of 25

‘driving forces’ of organismic evolution.” I admit to
scepticism about Top Three lists, but if we’re to play
the game, then why, after (wrongly) excoriating Darwin
for ignoring microbes, and calling Earth our “planet of
the bacteria”, does the Author select such eukaryotecentric processes? What about genetic variation, barriers
to gene flow, energy flow through ecosystems, or planetary climate change? Or might we embrace Top Three
List pluralism, according prokaryotes a separate set of
drivers that might include surface-volume ratios, extrachromosomal inheritance and/or lateral genetic transfer?
Author’s response: I fully agree with the referee and
therefore have removed “the most” so that this sentence
is now less “dogmatic”. We are eukaryotic macro-organisms, with domesticated bacteria (mitochondria) in all of
our body cells. Therefore, an “eukaryote-centric” view
may be justified.
Reviewer 2: W. Ford Doolittle, Dalhousie University,
Halifax, Canada

Reviewer’s comments: I very much enjoyed this thoughtprovoking essay, as, I am sure, will other readers of this
issue of Biology Direct. So let’s get right to some of the
thoughts it provokes.
On causes of evolution. In general it is hard to complain
about the general notion here, which is that the neo-neoDarwinian synthesis for this post-postgenomic era will be
further loosened by the admission that symbiogenesis,
reticulation at the gene level and a sort of born-again catastrophism will be (in fact long have been) muscling their
way on to the center of the explanatory stage as causes of
evolution. It is possible to complain, though, that
Kutschera and so many others who promote this or that
process as the or (even just one of the) principal causes of
this or that pattern in evolution seem to believe that the
idea of cause, and in particular the notion that we might
rank causes by relative importance, is unproblematic. A
search for “causation” in the online Stanford Encylopedia
of Philosophy reveals that it is not, and especially when
there are no conceivable common units of measure with
which the complex of factors behind everything that has
happened in the history of life on this earth might be
quantitatively compared. Symbiogenesis, if seen as a natural predisposition or drive on the part of organisms is
obviously out, but as a frequent solution to evolutionary
challenges may well need more emphasis. The impact of
spectacular but localized geological events on microbial
evolution has certainly not been thought much about,
maybe because of the belief that everything is and always
has been everywhere.
Ladder-of-life-ism. I’d agree with the Dr. Kutschera
that Darwin had not given up the notion that evolution
is in some ways progressive, and it is common, as the
author does, to deride such residual ladder-of-life or

Kutschera Biology Direct 2011, 6:33
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/33

great-chain-of-being type of thinking. But we do all imagine that when life began it was very much simpler than
today. Many contemporary biologists accept the ideas
developed by Eors Szathmary and the late John Maynard
Smith in their book The Major Transitions in Evolution.
Indeed symbiogenesis itself of one of the examples of
contingent irreversibility Szathmary and Maynard Smith
stress, as a rung on what looks very like a ladder of
advancing complexity. The Great Chain of Being, like
Ontogeny Recapitulates Phylogeny, is something we are
not supposed to believe in but that points obliquely to a
truth. Maybe, as Dr. Kutschera claims, the old, bad, ladder-of-life thinking that he feels still infected Darwin
was religious in character. But a new understanding of
the inevitable increase in complexity is not, surely.
LUCA. Another point I and other enthusiastic lateralists might disagree with this author is in his claim that
Douglas Theobald, in his recent Nature paper, confirmed Darwin’s “species theory N. 2” ("the principle of
the last common ancestor of all forms of life”). We’d
agree that this was Darwin’s idea, but not that it is true
or that Theobald confirmed it. In fact, he (Theobald)
writes that “the last universal common ancestor [LUCA]
may have comprised a population of organisms with different genotypes that lived in different places at different
times.” This doesn’t fit any reasonable definition of
ancestor and in fact the model for evolution that several
of us hold boils down to saying that LUCA is still alive
and well. It is necessary to realize that having common
ancestry does not logically entail sharing a common
ancestor.
Author’s response: I have re-written the unclear sentences accordingly and cited the important book of E.
Szathmary and I. Maynard Smith (1998). The key sentence of the paper of Theobald (2010) was included.
Reviewer 3: Staffan Müller-Wille, University of Exeter,
United Kingdom

Reviewer’s comments: This article presents some interesting suggestions as to the chief ingredients of contemporary attempts to tell the history of life on earth - natural
selection, symbiogenesis and plate tectonics - but it fails
miserably as a piece of intellectual history. I do not have
the expertise to judge the “synade model” of macroevolution Kutschera proposes, but as a historian of the lifesciences I would like to point out some of the many inaccuracies and weaknesses of argument that permeate his
account of how, in his own words, “the old Biblical
‘woody plant-model’ evolved by descent with modification.” I will conclude with a few words on why I think it
is important for contemporary biologists and their audiences to get the history of their discipline right.
I will begin with one of those details that historians
like to fuss about. Figure 1 of Kutschera’s article shows,

Page 22 of 25

as the caption describes it, “the ‘Tree of Knowledge’,
drawn ca. 1304 by Raymon Lull (1235-1315)” (the correct, Catalan spelling of his name is Ramon Llull). Any
attentive beholder will notice immediately that the
“drawing” is in fact a woodcut, a technique Europeans
began to employ around 1400 only, that is, almost a
century after Llull had died. The image is, of course,
taken from a posthumous print edition of Ramon Llull’s
Arbor Scientie that appeared in Lyon in 1505. And it
does not represent the tree of knowledge but - as a
heading in the original book indicates - a “moral tree”.
Latin inscriptions in the original, erased from the reproduction Kutschera uses, indicate that the fruits on the
right-hand side of the tree - i.e., the tree’s actual lefthand side - symbolize the seven deadly sins (wrath,
greed, sloth, pride, lust, envy, and gluttony) growing out
of corruption (vitiositas) which in turn roots in malice,
stupidity, falsehood and absence of (good) purpose (privatio finis). Correspondingly, on the left-hand side of
the tree we find the seven cardinal virtues, held securely
in the ground by many more roots, including kindness,
magnanimity and wisdom. The figure on top of the tree
is of course not God, but Jesus, pruning the tree on its
‘evil side’ with the help of an axe (Figure 1).
The example demonstrates that Ramon Llull was able
to exploit visual tree-metaphors in a number of ways,
and that it is worthwhile attending closely to details and
context [87]. In the case of the moral tree, the tree is
actually split into two, and the basic idea illustrated by
the tree metaphor is a dynamic one: virtue breeds virtue,
and vice breeds vice, so that Jesus has to return to his
worldly father’s profession. Llull is also known for representations of the scale of nature (Figure 2), but in this
case - unlike his “moral tree” - the underlying logic has
very little to do with “Bible-based ideology”, as Kutschera
claims. The idea of a scale of nature pre-dates Christianity, with Plato as its first systematic proponent [88]. It
builds on a simple intuitive idea, namely that diversity
derives from the presence or absence of qualities and
capacities, from “privation” and “perfection” in contemporary parlance. Take away rationality from a human,
and you end up with an animal, take away sensation and
locomotion, and you end up with plants. This has a lot
do with ideology, but also with basic logic, yet very little
specifically with the Bible or the Christian creed. Note
that God, or Jesus for that matter, is conspicuously
absent from Llull’s scale of nature. The “highest” position
is taken in by “Being (Ens)”, i.e. substance in its most
general sense, the “lowest” by individual humans like
Plato and Socrates. If one prefers to read the “tree” topdown, an entirely materialist picture presents itself, with
two pagan philosophers occupying the highest place.
Still, Christianity seems to be the main-culprit in the
rather linear and static history that Kutschera himself

Kutschera Biology Direct 2011, 6:33
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/33

tells about the evolution of tree-of-life-ideas. To call
Llull a “fanatic Christian” is ludicrous. His doctrines
were in fact condemned by papal decree in 1376.
Georges Cuvier’s opposition to Lamarck did certainly
not lead to a return to “Biblical myths.” Quite on the
contrary, the morphological evidence he had gathered
for the existence of four “embranchements” in the animal kingdom - vertebrates, molluscs, articulates, and
radiates -, dealt the final death-blow to the idea of a
scale of nature. When Darwin criticized “independent
species creations” he did not have in mind “religious
dogma” in general, but the theory that his friend Charles
Lyell had laid out in his three-volume Principles of Geology (1831-1833). The diagram in Darwin’s Origin of Species will only appear as a straight-forward tree, if one
cuts it down like Kutschera does in Figure 4 - the original illustration shows a structure with no trunk but
multiple roots (Figure 3). Darwin did include microbes
in his scientific work [77], p. 229, and his view of our
planet was certainly not static. And finally, while he did
speak in terms of perfection and improvement, he
handled these terms relationally, and shared with his
contemporaries and predecessors, at least since Carl
Linnaeus (1735-1778), a curious predilection for levelling out the presumed steps in the scale of nature, for
example by demonstrating that earthworms possess
intelligence in his last book [89], p. 189. In an almost
random manner, Kutschera behaves like Jesus on Llull’s
moral tree, pruning out whatever idea appears wrongheaded to him as corrupted by religious myth on the
one hand, and reducing the history of biology to a
straight, progressive path towards what we, or rather he,
considers to be true today.
Why should all this matter? Well, first of all, because
demands on empirical accuracy and objectivity are as
exacting in the humanities as they are in the sciences. It
may matter whether it was indeed the oak tree - or not
perhaps the date-palm, the only plant known to antiquity to possess sexuality [90] - that ranked below animals in the scale of nature (I could not find any
reference to oak trees in the paper by William Bynum
that Kutschera quotes in support of his rather bold
claim). But there is a deeper reason. Portraying the history of science as a perennial battle between good
science and evil religious influences just leaves out too
much of the middle-ground that exists between these
poles. What one is usually left with are equally unsatisfactory and unappealing versions of both. The current
clashes between Neo-Darwinians and Intelligent Design
proponents presents the public with bad theology and
bad science, both claiming to have found answers to
everything. Science as a pursuit of knowledge about the
world, raising difficult questions about things that

Page 23 of 25

matter deeply, gets lost in this reduced landscape of
Legoland-caricatures of science and religion.
Figure captions:
Figure 1: “Moral tree”. Woodcut from Ramon Llull,
Arbor scientie, Lyon 1515; available at http://www.gallica.bnf.fr.
Figure 2: “Natural and logical tree”. Woodcut from
Ramon Llull, Logica nova, Valencia 1512; available at
http://bvpb.mcu.es/.
Figure 3: Diagram from Charles Darwin, On the Origin
of Species, London 1859; available at http://darwinonline.org.uk/.
Author’s response: I am grateful for this comprehensive
review of the text that helped me to improved the ms
considerably. Figure 1 was reproduced from a text written by a historian of science (ref. 8), who labelled this
woodcut “The tree of knowledge”, but I have changed
this as recommended by the referee into “The Moral
Tree”.
All suggestions and recommendations were incorporated into the revised text.
The references O’Malley 2009 (76) and Müller-Wille
2009 (77) were added to the text and briefly discussed.
I have studied all major works of Charles Darwin micro-organisms are not taken into consideration by the
author. His brief references to “lower organisms” are
confusing, unclear and, from our modern perspective,
simply wrong, because Darwin was unaware of the concept of symbiogenesis that was discovered/developed
after his death (see ref. 39 for a detailed discussion of
this topic).
In my view, the general conclusion that religion has
prevented the progress of science and is in conflict with
rational thinking is justified. I do not want to change
this statement, which is based on many facts and is,
moreover, corroborated by corresponding conclusions
published in numerous articles and books cited at the
end of the text.
Acknowledgements
I thank the Alexander von Humboldt-Foundation (Bonn, Germany) for
financial support (AvH fellowship Stanford/USA, 2010-2011, to U. K.) and The
Leverhulme Trust (London, United Kingdom) for payment of the articleprocessing charges as part of the project “Questioning the Tree of Life”.
Competing interests
The author declares that they have no competing interests.
Authors’ contributions
The author planned and wrote the paper.
Received: 11 January 2011 Accepted: 30 June 2011
Published: 30 June 2011
References
1. Barlow N, (ed.): The Autobiography of Charles Darwin London: Collins; 1958.

Kutschera Biology Direct 2011, 6:33
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/33

2.
3.
4.

5.
6.

7.

8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.

24.
25.
26.

27.

28.

29.

30.
31.
32.

Kutschera U, Niklas KJ: Evolutionary plant physiology: Charles Darwin’s
forgotten synthesis. Naturwissenschaften 2009, 96:1339-1354.
Kutschera U, Briggs WR: From Charles Darwin’s botanical country-house
studies to modern plant biology. Plant Biol 2009, 11:785-795.
Kutschera U, Elliott JM: Charles Darwin’s observations on the behaviour of
earthworms and the evolutionary history of a giant endemic species
from Germany, Lubricus badensis (Oligochaeta: Lumbricidae). Appl
Environm Soil Sci 2010, 2:1-11.
Kutschera U: Charles Darwin’s Origin of Species, directional selection, and
the evolutionary sciences today. Naturwissenschaften 2009, 96:1247-1263.
Darwin C: On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection, or the
Preservation of Favoured Races in the Struggle for Life London: John Murray;
1859.
Darwin C: The Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection, or the
Preservation of Favoured Races in the Struggle for Life. 6 edition. London:
John Murray; 1872.
Kearney H: Science and Change 1500-1700 New York and Toronto: World
University Library; 1971.
Bonner A, (ed.): Doctor Illuminatus: A Ramon Lull Reader Princeton: Princeton
University Press; 1985.
Bynum WF: The Great Chain of Being after forty years: An appraisal.
History of Science 1975, 13:1-28.
Mayr E: The Growth of Biological Thought. Diversity, Evolution, and Inheritance
Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press; 1982.
Mayr E: What Evolution Is New York: Basic Books; 2001.
Junker T, Hoßfeld U: Die Entdeckung der Evolution. 2 edition. Auflage.
Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft; 2009.
Ragan MA: Trees and networks before and after Darwin. Biol Direct 2009,
4:43.
Bonnet C: In Oeuvres d’histoire naturelle et de philosophie. Volume 1.
Neuchatel; 1779.
Lamarck J-B: Philosophie Zoologique, ou Exposition des Considérations relatives
à l’ Histoire naturelle des Animaux Paris: Dentu et ‘l Auteur; 1809.
Lamarck JB: Histoire Naturelle des Animaux sans Vertèbres Paris: Verdière; 1815.
Koonin EV, Wolf YI: Is evolution Darwinian or/and Lamarckian? Biol Direct
2009, 4:42.
Wallace AR: On the law which has regulated the introduction of new
species. Ann Mag Nat Hist (n s) 1855, 16:184-196.
Kutschera U: Darwin-Wallace principle of natural selection. Nature 2008,
453:27.
Darwin E: In Zoonomia; or the Laws of Organic Life. Volume 1 to 3. Boston:
Thomas & Andrews; 1794.
Bredekamp H: Darwins Korallen Die frühen Evolutionsdiagramme und die
Tradition der Naturgeschichte Berlin: Verlag Klaus Wagenbruch; 2005.
Doolittle WF: The practice of classification and the theory of evolution,
and what the demise of Charles Darwin’s tree of life hypothesis means
for both of them. Phil Trans R Soc Lond B: Biol Sci 2009, 364:2221-2228.
Doolittle WF: Phylogenetic classification and the universal tree. Science
1999, 284:2124-2128.
Doolittle WF: The attempt on the life of the Tree of Life: science,
philosophy and politics. Biol Philos 2010, 25:455-473.
Kutschera U: A comparative analysis of the Darwin-Wallace papers and
the development of the concept of natural selection. Theory Biosci 2003,
122:343-359.
Haeckel E: Die Gastraeatheorie, die phylogenetische Classification des
Thierreiches und die Homologie der Keimblätter. Jena Z Naturwiss 1874,
8:1-55.
Haeckel E: Generelle Morphologie der Organismen. Allgemeine Grundzüge der
organischen Formen-Wissenschaft, mechanisch begründet durch die von
Charles Darwin reformierte Descendenztheorie. Bd. 1 und 2 Berlin: De Gruyter;
1866.
Olsson L, Levit GS, Hoßfeld U: Evolutionary developmental biology: its
concepts and history with a focus on Russian and German
contributions. Naturwissenschaften 2010, 97:951-969.
Theobald DL: A formal test of the theory of universal common ancestry.
Nature 2010, 465:219-222.
Whitman WB, Coleman DC, Wiebe WJ: Prokaryotes: the unseen majority.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1998, 95:6578-6583.
Haeckel E: Das Protistenreich. Eine populäre Übersicht über das Formengebiet
der niedersten Lebewesen. Mit einem wissenschaftlichen Anhang: System der
Protisten Leipzig: Ernst Günther; 1878.

Page 24 of 25

33. Mereschkowsky C: Theorie der zwei Plasmaarten als Grundlage der
Symbiogenesis, einer neuen Lehre von der Entstehung der Organismen.
Biol Zentralblatt 1910, 30:278-303.
34. Sapp J, Carrapico F, Zolotonosov M: Symbiogenesis: The hidden face of
Constantin Merezhkowsky. Hist Phil Life Sci 2002, 24:413-440.
35. Geus A, Höxtermann E: Evolution durch Kooperation und Integration. Zur
Entstehung der Endosymbiosetheorie in der Zellbiologie. BasiliskenPresse, Marburg; 2007, (Hg).
36. Margulis L: Symbiosis in Cell Evolution. Microbial Communities in the
Archean and Proterozoic Eons. 2 edition. New York: W. H. Freeman & Co;
1993.
37. Margulis L: Archaeal-eubacterial mergers in the origin of Eukarya:
Phylogenetic classification of life. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1996,
93:1071-1076.
38. Kutschera U, Niklas KJ: Endosymbiosis, cell evolution, and speciation.
Theory Biosci 2005, 124:1-24.
39. Kutschera U, Niklas KJ: Macroevolution via secondary endosymbiosis: a
Neo-Goldschmidtian view of unicellular hopeful monsters and Darwin’s
primordial intermediate form. Theory Biosci 2008, 127:277-289.
40. Cavalier-Smith T: Membrane heredity and early chloroplast evolution.
Trends Plant Sci 2000, 5:174-182.
41. Cavalier-Smith T: Deep phylogeny, ancestral groups, and the four ages of
life. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B: Biol Sci 2010, 365:111-132.
42. Cavalier-Smith T: Origin of the cell nucleus, mitosis and sex: roles of
intracellular coevolution. Biol Direct 2010, 5:7.
43. Cavalier-Smith T: Rooting the tree of life by transition analysis. Biol Direct
2006, 1:19.
44. Koonin EV: On the origin of cells and viruses. Primordial virus world
scenario. Ann NY Acad Sci 2009, 1178:47-64.
45. Koonin EV: The origin and early evolution of eukaryotes in the light of
phylogenomics. Genome Biol 2010, 11:209.
46. Koonin EV, Wolf YI: The fundamental units, processes and patterns of
evolution, and the Tree of Life conundrum. Biol Direct 2009, 4:33.
47. Yutin N, Wolf MY, Wolf YI, Koonin EV: The origins of phagocytosis and
eukaryogenesis. Biol Direct 2009, 4:9.
48. Bowman JL, Floyd SK, Sakakibara K: Green genes - comparative genomics
of the green branch of life. Cell 2007, 129:229-234.
49. Knoll AH: Life on a Young Planet. The First Three Billion Years of Evolution
on Earth Princeton and Oxford, Princeton University Press; 2003.
50. Gross J, Bhattacharya D: Uniting sex and eukaryote origins in an
emerging oxygenic world. Biol Direct 2010, 5:53.
51. Davidov Y, Jurekvitch E: Predation between prokaryotes and the origin of
eukaryotes. BioEssays 2009, 31:748-757.
52. Lane CE, Archibald JM: The eukaryotic tree of life: Endosymbiosis takes its
TOL. Trends Ecol Evol 2008, 23:268-275.
53. Lane N, Martin W: The energetics of genome complexity. Nature 2010,
467:929-934.
54. Kutschera U, Niklas KJ: The modern theory of biological evolution: an
expanded synthesis. Naturwissenschaften 2004, 91:255-276.
55. Bell G: Selection: the mechanism of evolution New York: Chapman and Hall;
1997.
56. Doolittle WF, Bapteste E: Pattern pluralism and the tree of life hypothesis.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2007, 104:2043-2049.
57. Maxwell JC: Dynamic Earth. J Appl Physics 1971, 42:1467.
58. Snider-Pellegrini A: La Création et ses mystères dévoilés Franck et Dentú,
Paris; 1858.
59. Wegener A: Die Entstehung der Kontinente und Ozeane. 4. Auflage
Braunschweig, F. Vieweg & Sohn; 1929, (1. Auflage 1915).
60. Skinner BJ, Porter SC: The Dynamic Earth: An Introduction to Physical
Geology. 5 edition. New York: John Wiley & Sons; 2003.
61. Gould SJ: The structure of evolutionary theory Cambridge, Massachusetts,
Harvard University Press; 2002.
62. Kutschera U: Symbiogenesis, natural selection, and the dynamic Earth.
Theory Biosci 2009, 128:191-203.
63. Zhang P, Chen YQ, Zhou H, Lin YF, Wang XL, Papenfuss TJ, Wake DB,
Qu LH: Phylogeny, evolution, and biogeography of Asiatic Salamanders
(Hynobiidae). Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006, 103:7360-7365.
64. Nield T: Supercontinent. Ten billion years in the life of our planet Cambridge,
Harvard University Press; 2007.
65. Steinberger B: Reconstructing earth history in three dimensions. Science
2008, 322:866-868.

Kutschera Biology Direct 2011, 6:33
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/33

Page 25 of 25

66. Whelan RJ: The Ecology of Fire Cambridge, Cambridge University Press; 1995.
67. Kutschera U: Plant-associated methylobacteria as co-evolved
phytosymbionts. A hypothesis. Plant Signal Behav 2007, 2:74-78.
68. Franklin JR, Mac Mahon JA, Swanson FJ, Sedell JR: Ecosystem response to
the eruption of Mount St. Helens. Nat Geogr Res 1985, 1:198-216.
69. Steinman AD, Lamberti GA: Lotic algal communities in the Mt. St. Helens
region six years following the eruption. J Phycol 1988, 24:482-489.
70. Kutschera U: Darwin’s philosophical imperative and the Furor
Theologicus. Evo Edu Outreach 2009, 2:688-694.
71. Reif W-E, Junker T, Hoßfeld U: The synthetic theory evolution: general
problems and the German contribution to the synthesis. Theory Biosci
2000, 119:41-91.
72. Scheiner SM: Toward a conceptual framework for biology. Quart Rev Biol
2010, 85:293-318.
73. Niklas KJ: The Evolutionary Biology of Plants Chicago: The University of
Chicago Press; 1997.
74. Kutschera U: From Darwinism to evolutionary biology. Science 2008,
321:1157-1158.
75. Weiner J: Planet Earth New York: Bantam Books; 1986.
76. O’Malley MA: What did Darwin say about microbes, and how did
microbiology respond? Trends Microbiol 2009, 17:341-347.
77. Müller-Wille S: The dark side of evolution: Caprice, deceit, redundancy.
Hist Phil Life Sci 2009, 31:183-199.
78. Schopf WJ: Fossil evidence of Archaean life. Phil Trans R Soc B 2006,
361:869-885.
79. Doolittle WF, Zhaxybayeva O: On the origin of prokaryotic species.
Genome Res 2009, 19:744-756.
80. Cracraft J, Donoghue MJ: Assembling the Tree of Life Oxford: Oxford
University Press; 2004.
81. Kutschera U: Lay aside the ladder of descent. Nature 2011, 471:37.
82. Herrada EA, Tessone CJ, Klemm K, Eguiluz M, Hernandez-Garcia E,
Duarte CM: Universal scaling in the branching of the tree of life. PLoS
One 2008, 3:e 2757.
83. Eldredge N: Macroevolutionary dynamics:Species, niches and adaptive
peaks. New York: McGraw - Hill; 1989.
84. Levin HL: The Earth through Time. 7 edition. Hoboken, John Wiley; 2003.
85. Gradstein FM, Ogg JG, Smith AG, (eds): A geologic time scale 2004
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge; 2004.
86. Szathmary E, Maynard Smith J: The Major Transitions in Evolution Oxford:
Oxford University Press; 1998.
87. Yates F A: The art of Ramon Lull:An approach to it through Lull’s theory
of the elements. J Warburg Courtauld 1953, 17:115-173.
88. Lovejoy A: The Great Chain of Being: A Study of the History of an Idea
Cambridge: Harvard University Press; 1936.
89. Müller-Wille S: Cell theory, specificity, and reproduction, 1837-1870. Stud
Hist Phil Sc C 2010, 41:225-231.
90. Zirkle C: The Beginnings of Plant Hybridization Philadelphia: University of
Pennsylvania Press; 1935.
doi:10.1186/1745-6150-6-33
Cite this article as: Kutschera: From the scala naturae to the
symbiogenetic and dynamic tree of life. Biology Direct 2011 6:33.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
