<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Lineage-specific co-evolution of the Egf receptor/ligand signaling system</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010 10:27. doi:10.1186/1471-2148-10-27"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Juliette AGC Laisney"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Laisney et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/27

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Lineage-specific co-evolution of the Egf receptor/
ligand signaling system
Juliette AGC Laisney1, Ingo Braasch1, Ronald B Walter2, Svenja Meierjohann1, Manfred Schartl1*

Abstract
Background: The epidermal growth factor receptor (Egfr) with its numerous ligands has fundamental roles in
development, cell differentiation and physiology. Dysfunction of the receptor-ligand system contributes to many
human malignancies. Consistent with such various tasks, the Egfr gene family has expanded during vertebrate
evolution as a consequence of several rounds of whole genome duplication. Of particular interest is the effect of
the fish-specific whole genome duplication (FSGD) on the ligand-receptor system, as it has supplied this largest
group of vertebrates with additional opportunities for sub- and/or neofunctionalization in this signaling system.
Results: We identified the predicted components of the Egf receptor-ligand signaling system in teleost fishes
(medaka, platyfish, stickleback, pufferfishes and zebrafish). We found two duplicated egfr genes, egfra and egfrb, in
all available teleost genomes. Surprisingly only one copy for each of the seven Egfr ligands could be identified in
most fishes, with zebrafish hbegf being the only exception. Special focus was put on medaka, for which we more
closely investigated all Egf receptors and Egfr ligands. The different expression patterns of egfra, egfrb and their
ligands in medaka tissues and embryo stages suggest differences in role and function. Preferential co-expression of
different subsets of Egfr ligands corroborates the possible subfunctionalization and specialization of the two
receptors in adult tissues. Bioinformatic analyses of the ligand-receptor interface between Egfr and its ligands show
a very weak evolutionary conservation within this region. Using in vitro analyses of medaka Egfra, we could show
that this receptor is only activated by medaka ligands, but not by human EGF. Altogether, our data suggest a
lineage-specific Egfr/Egfr ligand co-evolution.
Conclusions: Our data indicate that medaka Egfr signaling occurs via its two copies, Egfra and Egfrb, each of them
being preferentially coexpressed with different subsets of Egfr ligands. This fish-specific occurrence of Egf receptor
specialization offers unique opportunities to study the functions of different Egf receptor-ligand combinations and
their biological outputs in vertebrates. Furthermore, our results strongly support the use of homologous ligands in
future studies, as sufficient cross-specificity is very unlikely for this ligand/receptor system.

Background
Signaling by the epidermal growth factor receptor (Egfr,
also named ErbB1 or HER in humans) has fundamental
roles in mammalian development, where it regulates
diverse processes such as eyelid opening, tooth growth,
wound healing, hair follicle and mammary gland development. On the cellular level, it controls key functions
including cell division, differentiation, survival, motility
and apoptosis [1]. Thus, it is not surprising that many
tumors are associated with EGF receptor overexpression,

* Correspondence: phch1@biozentrum.uni-wuerzburg.de
1
Department of Physiological Chemistry I, Biocenter, University of Würzburg,
Würzburg, Germany

mutations or autocrine production of growth factors
[2,3].
The use of animal models such as Drosophila melanogaster and Caenorhabditis elegans has provided considerable advancement in understanding Egf receptor
functions in development and physiology [4-6]. In vertebrate model organisms, numerous studies have been
conducted in the mouse, but in the common fish models - the zebrafish (Danio rerio) and the Japanese
medaka (Oryzias latipes) - only few publications address
Egfr function. In zebrafish, Egf receptor signaling was
shown to regulate cardiovascular processes during development [7]. Furthermore, it promotes oocyte maturation
in vitro [8] and in vivo [9]. Egf receptor signaling

© 2010 Laisney et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Laisney et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/27

appears to be self-regulated by several of its ligands in
the zebrafish ovarian follicle [10], as deduced from the
usage of recombinant human (rh) EGF, rh-betacellulin
(BTC) and rh-heparin-binding EGF-like growth factor
(HBEGF). For the medaka, Egfr detection with a human
antibody directed against the tyrosine kinase domain
showed temporarily and spatially different expression
patterns during development [11].
It is generally accepted that in addition to the two
whole genome duplication events that occurred early in
the vertebrate lineage ("R1” and “R2 duplication”), a
later third whole genome duplication event, the socalled FSGD (fish-specific genome duplication or R3)
occurred within the actinopterygian (ray-finned) fish
lineage approximately 320-350 million years ago [12-14].
Most of the duplicated genes have been lost secondarily
(nonfunctionalization). In many instances, however,
gene duplicates from this event have persisted within
fish genomes, for example when one of the duplicates
acquired a new function (neofunctionalization) and/or
when the ancestral gene functions have been distributed
among the two gene copies (subfunctionalization)
[14-16].
In the present study, we carried out phylogenetic and
synteny analyses for a detailed insight into the evolution
of Egf receptors and their ligands in teleost fishes.
Importantly, all previous studies in fish (zebrafish,
goldfish and trout) that included the application of Egf
receptor ligands were performed using recombinant
mammalian proteins [9,17,18]. This implies that mammalian Egfr and Egfr ligands share high structural similarity and functional homology with their fish
counterparts and that mammalian ligands consequently
have the ability to interact with the fish Egfr binding
domain to trigger its dimerization and activation. However, it is unclear whether heterologous application of
ligands truly mimics the physiological situation. Therefore, we examined Egf receptor domains conservation
between tetrapods and teleosts and investigated the
domains involved in ligand binding. We particularly
focused on medaka, monitored expression pattern profiles for the two copies of the Egf receptor and the
seven Egf receptor ligands in the embryo and adult fish.
Finally, we developed an in vitro system to verify the
functionality of medaka Egf receptor ligands in terms of
receptor activation. To our knowledge, this is the first
work encompassing a functional analysis of the fish Egf
receptor-ligands system in this evolutionary context.

Results and Discussion
Phylogenetic and syntenic analyses of teleost Egfr ligands

In mammals, seven ligands bind and activate Egfr,
namely epidermal growth factor (Egf), transforming
growth factor alpha (Tgfa), amphiregulin (Areg),

Page 2 of 16

betacellulin (Btc), epiregulin (Ereg), heparin-binding
EGF-like growth factor (Hbegf) and epigen (Epgn).
Using BLASTn and tBLASTn searches, we thoroughly
surveyed the teleost genome assemblies from medaka
(Oryzias latipes), stickleback (Gasterosteus aculeatus),
green spotted pufferfish (Tetraodon nigroviridis), torafugu (Takifugu rubripes) and zebrafish (Danio rerio)
http://www.ensembl.org/ - as well as a platyfish (Xiphophorus maculatus) EST sequence database (R. B. Walter
et al., unpublished) for Egf receptors and Egf receptor
ligands. While we could identify two gene copies for the
Egf receptor in all teleost species investigated, surprisingly only one gene copy for each of the seven Egfr
ligands was isolated except for zebrafish that possesses
two gene copies of the hbegf gene. A recent study by
Kassahn et al. in five teleost fishes [15] also provided
evidence that duplicated Egfr but not Egfr ligands genes
have been retained after FSGD. Amino acid sequences
alignments of the identified tetrapod and teleost Egf
receptors and of the mature Egfr ligands are shown in
[Additional file 1: Supplemental figure S1B] and [Additional file 2].
For a more detailed insight into Egfr ligand evolution,
a phylogenetic analysis based on tetrapod and teleost
Egfr ligand genes was performed. The mature part of
the ligands containing the Egfr-interacting motif was
found to be the only part sufficiently conserved among
all species to allow a phylogenetic tree reconstruction. A
maximum likelihood (ML) bootstrap consensus tree of
the 138 bp nucleotide sequences encoding the mature
part of the ligands is shown in Figure 1. A ML tree
based on the original data is shown in [Additional file
3]. Due to the short alignment used for its reconstruction, the trees exhibit many collapsed or poorly supported nodes, respectively. Based on these and other
trees obtained with different methods (not shown), the
orthology between teleost and tetrapod genes is well
supported only for Egf, Tgfa, Hbegf, and Ereg. Therefore,
we also undertook micro- and macro-synteny conservation analyses (Figure 2 and [Additional file 4]) in order
to obtain further information about the relationship of
the teleost ligands to their tetrapod counterparts.
The Egf ligand gene

The chromosomal region surrounding the egf gene
showed conserved synteny between and within tetrapods
and teleosts (Figure 2A). Moreover, in D. rerio and T.
nigroviridis, the egf gene is located on chromosomes
Dre14 and Tni20, which have been shown to correspond
to the EGF containing human chromosome Hsa4 [19].
A further large-scale synteny conservation analysis using
the Synteny Database [20,21] revealed that the egf-containing regions in D. rerio [Additional file 4: Supplemental figure S4A] and T. nigroviridis [Additional file 4:

Laisney et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/27

Page 3 of 16

Figure 1 Phylogeny of Egfr ligand genes. Circle tree representation of a Maximum Likelihood consensus tree based on 138 bp of nucleotide
sequences encoding the Egf domain (GTR+G+I substitution model). Bootstrap values for Maximum Likelihood and Neighbor Joining methods
are shown. The tree was rooted on the branch leading to Egf sequences. Monophyly is supported for Egf, Hbegf, Tgfa and Ereg genes, but many
other nodes remain unresolved [Additional file 10: Supplemental table S3]. Dre, Danio rerio; Gac, Gasterosteus aculeatus; Gga, Gallus gallus; Hsa,
Homo sapiens; Mmu, Mus musculus; Ola (red), Oryzias latipes; Ssa, Salmo salar; Tni, Tetraodon nigroviridis; Tru, Takifugu rubripes; Xma, Xiphophorus
maculatus.

Supplemental figure S4B] are derived from the teleost
protochromosome f [19,22]. Medaka egf has not been
mapped to any chromosome yet and is found on ultracontig 115. Still it was found in the vicinity of the same
genes that surround EGF in the human genome (Figure
2A). In addition, the phylogenetic grouping with characterized tetrapod and zebrafish egf (Figure 1) and the
gene’s unique structure further validated it as true EGF
ortholog. From the large-scale synteny analysis it can be
inferred that medaka egf is most likely located on chromosomes Ola10 or Ola18 [Additional file 4: Supplemental figure S4C].

The Tgfa ligand gene

Tgfa displayed no conserved synteny between tetrapods
and teleosts (Figures 2B and [Additional file 4: Supplemental figure S5]). D. rerio and T. nigroviridis tgfa are
located on chromosomes Dre6 and Tni11 respectively,
which possess only few orthologous genes that are
located on TGFA containing human chromosome Hsa2
[23,24] [Additional file 4: Supplemental figure S5A and
S5B]. Medaka tgfa (ultracontig 62) has not been mapped
to a particular chromosome. The large-scale analysis
shows that the TGFA region on Hsa2 is syntenic to several chromosomes in the three teleost genomes but not

Laisney et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/27

Page 4 of 16

Figure 2 Synteny analysis of vertebrate Egf, Tgfaand Hbegf and ligand cluster regions. A) Egf region. B) Tgfaregion. C) Hbegf region. D)
Epgn, Ereg, Areg and Btcregion.

to the tgfa containing ones [Additional file 4: Supplemental figure S5A to S5C]. This might be due to an
interchromosomal translocation of the tgfa gene in the
teleost ancestor. Nevertheless, the high bootstrap values
of the teleost and tetrapod node (see Figure 1), support
the orthology of vertebrate Tgfa genes.
The Hbegf ligand gene

In the micro-synteny analysis, no conservation of synteny in Hbegf regions was found between tetrapods and
teleosts. The gene order is only maintained within the
group of tetrapods or teleosts independently (Figure
2C). However, teleost hbegf genes are located on Dre14,
Dre21, Tni1 and Ola10, which were reported previously
to be syntenic to Hsa5 where the HBEGF gene is found
[19,23,24] [Additional file 4: Supplemental figure S6]. In
addition, the phylogeny data also support the grouping
of teleost hbegf with tetrapod Hbegf (Figure 1).
The zebrafish is the only investigated teleost species
that has two paralogs for hbegf. One copy, called hbegfa,
is located on chromosome Dre14 (orthologous to Ola10
hbegf); the other, called hbegfb, is found on Dre21 (corresponding to Ola14). The macro-synteny analysis
revealed that the region containing HBEGF on Hsa5 is
highly syntenic to Dre14 and Dre21, Tni1 and Tni7, as

well as Ola10 and Ola14 [Additional file 4: Supplemental figure S6]. These chromosomes were previously
shown to be derived from the teleost protochromosome
g [19,22]. Thus, the most-likely scenario is that hbegf
gene was initially duplicated in the teleost ancestor during the FSGD event. While hbegfa and hbegfb were kept
in zebrafish, only the hbegfa copy was maintained in
medaka and pufferfish, and the hbegfb copy was lost. So
far, the two zebrafish hbegf paralogs are the only known
teleost Egfr ligand genes that were maintained in two
copies after the fish specific genome duplication.
The Epgn-Ereg-Areg-Btc ligand gene cluster

An interesting feature of the Egfr ligands is the clustering of the four remaining ligand genes, namely Epgn,
Ereg, Aregand Btc on human Hsa4 and mouse Mmu5
(Figure 2D). This cluster was also found on all wellannotated mammalian genomes. In chicken, only Epgn,
Ereg and Areg genes are part of a cluster on Gga4.
Two exons of chicken Btc could be found on another
segment of Gga4 but they were not defined well
enough to conclude the presence of a full functional
Btc on chromosome 4 in this species. Still, it is likely
that birds also possess a functional Btc gene, since it
was possible to identify a well defined Btc gene on

Laisney et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/27

chromosome 4 of the zebrafinch (Taeniopygia guttata)
(data not shown).
The orthology of these tetrapod genes with their teleost counterparts could not be resolved from the phylogenetic tree as most of the nodes were unresolved or
poorly supported. The only exception is the relatively
well supported monophyly of vertebrate Ereg genes (Figure 1). We note that a previous study by Stein and
Staros [25] described similar problems with establishing
the relationships of these genes among vertebrates using
phylogenetic reconstructions only. Therefore, we relied
here on conservation of synteny to clarify the orthology
of the respective medaka genes.
In medaka three of the ligands are also present in a
cluster on Ola9, namely epgn, ereg and areg (Figure 2D).
The medaka btc gene is located on Ola12. In contrast to
that, epgn was not found in pufferfishes and no ereg
gene could be identified in zebrafish and pufferfish genomes. The zebrafish areg (Dre5) and epgn (Dre8) genes
showed no conserved microsynteny with the medaka
cluster (data not shown). However, there is conserved
synteny between the teleost btc regions (Dre21, Tni4
and Ola12) (Figure 2D).
According to the macro-synteny analysis, Dre5, Dre8
and Dre21, Tni12 and Tni4, as well as Ola9 and Ola12
share numerous orthologous genes with the ligand cluster region on Hsa4 [Additional file 4: Supplemental figure S7]. These teleost chromosomes were previously
reported to be derived from the teleost protochromosome i [19,22]. Thus, it appears that the ligand cluster
located on protochromosome i was duplicated during
the FSGD. After the FSGD, one of the cluster copies,
which is now present on Ola9, has lost btc. In the zebrafish lineage, it broke further apart, separating areg and
ereg genes. The other cluster then lost all genes but btc
now found on Ola12, Tni4 and Dre21, respectively (Figure 2D). Thereby, the single teleost epgn-ereg-areg and
btc genes are located on paralogous rather than orthologous chromosomal segments. Thus, the absence of the
complete cluster in teleosts is not the result of translocation of btc to a new chromosome, but is due to differential gene loss from initially two clusters after the
FSGD. A similar phenomenon has been observed for
example for the Parahox cluster [26,27].
Evolution of the vertebrate Egfr ligand gene family by
whole genome and other types of duplications

How did the Egfr ligand gene family in vertebrates
evolve in the first place? To answer this question, the
surroundings of the human EGFR ligand genes were
analyzed with the Synteny Database [20,21]. Dot plots of
paralogous genes within the human genome revealed
that the human EGFR ligand regions on Hsa2 (TGFA),
Hsa4 (EGF and ligand gene cluster) and Hsa5 (HBEGF)

Page 5 of 16

are highly syntenic to each other as well as with Hsa10,
which does not contain an EGFR ligand gene (Figure
3A). This pattern also became visible using a circle plot
representation of human EGFR ligand regions: all four
EGFR ligand gene regions share many paralogous connections with each other (Figure 3B). Furthermore, all
regions are connected to Hsa10, while no other human
chromosomes shares comparable numbers of paralogous
connections with all four EGFR ligand regions.
It has been previously hypothesized that parts of chromosomes Hsa2, Hsa4, Hsa5 and Hsa10 are derived from
the vertebrate protochromosome C, which was then
duplicated twice during the R1/R2 whole genome duplications giving rise to the gnathostome protochromosomes C0, C1, C2 and C3[22]. The chromosomal
locations of Egfr ligand genes in the chicken and teleost
genomes (Figure 2) are also compatible with being
derived from vertebrate protochromosome C and its
four gnathostome derivatives. Thus, we hypothesize that
all Egfr ligand genes in the present vertebrate genomes
can be traced back to a single pre-R1/R2 Egfr ligand
gene. Importantly, this does not rule out the possibility
that multiple Egfr ligand genes were present before the
R1/R2 genome duplications. Our model rather suggests
that only one gene gave rise to the diversity of Egfr
ligand genes found in vertebrate genomes today. The
situation in other chordates, which could help to resolve
this issue, remains unclear as we did not find clear
orthologs of the vertebrate Egfr ligand in the genomes
of Ciona or amphioxus using BLAST and synteny analyses (data not shown).
According to our model (Figure 3C), the ancestral
Egfr ligand gene was then duplicated twice during the
R1/R2 genome duplications. The Egfr ligand gene
located on gnathostome protochromosome C0, which
later became part of Hsa10, was lost secondarily. Protochromosome C1gave rise to Hsa4 [22]. The Egfr ligand
gene on this protochromosome was duplicated again
onto the same chromosome. This might have been the
duplication of a larger chromosomal block as several
paralogous connections are found between the two
EGFR ligand gene regions on Hsa4. One of the two
genes then became Egf, while the other gene underwent
several tandem duplications, thereby generating the
EGFR ligand gene cluster. The fact that the egf and cluster genes are not found on the same chromosome in teleosts may be due to the fission of protochromosome C1
in fish [22].
Our model suggests that an original cluster consisting
of Epgn, Ereg, Aregand Btc dates back at least to a common bony vertebrate ancestor of fish and tetrapods.
Unfortunately, the genome assemblies of elephant shark
(cartilaginous vertebrates) and lamprey (jawless vertebrates) are still too fragmentary to get more insights

Laisney et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/27

Page 6 of 16

Figure 3 Synteny and evolution of human EGFR ligand regions. A) The surroundings of human EGFR ligand genes were analyzed with the
Synteny Database [21]. Dot plots of paralogous genes in the human genome are displayed in red. The HBEGF gene region (blue circle) on Hsa5
was used as reference. Paralogs are indicated by red crosses and are found around the other EGFR ligand regions on Hsa2 (TGFA, green circle)
and Hsa4 (EGF and ligand cluster, gray-red circle). Chromosomes Hsa10 and to a lesser degree also Hsa13 and Hsa8 share many paralogous
connections with the HBEGF region. Similar pictures were obtained using other EGFR ligand regions as reference. B) Circle plot of paralogous
genes from the human EGFR ligand regions as obtained from the Synteny Database[21]. Many paralogous connections are found between the
EGFR ligand regions (red lines). All four regions also share many paralogous connections with Hsa10 (black lines). On Hsa4, several
intrachromosomal paralogous connections (green lines) are found. C) Model of Egfr ligand gene family evolution in vertebrates. An ancestral
gene on vertebrate protochromosome C was duplicated twice during the R1 and R2 whole genome duplications. The gene on gnathostome
protochromosome C0 was lost, while the gene on protochromosome C1 was duplicated intrachromosomally. One of the two descendent genes
became Egf, the other one was duplicated in tandem giving rise to the ligand cluster. The protochromosome nomenclature follows ref [22].

into the timing of the Egfr ligand cluster establishment
in vertebrates (data not shown). Since its establishment,
the cluster linkage has then been kept in the tetrapod
lineage but is absent in the teleost lineage due to the
differential loss of gene duplicates after the FSGD (see
above).
Protochromosomes C1 and C3, finally, became parts
of Hsa5 and Hsa2 containing HBEGF and TGFA,
respectively.

We note that other ligand genes with Egf domain, i.e.
tomoregulins, neuregulins and others, may be related to
the canonical seven Egfr ligands analyzed here [25,28].
However, the tomoregulin genes do not show obvious
synteny with the Egfr ligand gene regions. Their origin
in relation to the canonical Egfr ligands will have to be
further investigated. The neuregulin gene family members (NRG1, NRG2, NRG3), in contrast, are also located
in protochromosome C-derived regions (Hsa8, Hsa5,

Laisney et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/27

Hsa13) and could have evolved along with the canonical
Egfr ligands (data not shown).
Evolution of tetrapod and teleost Egfr subdomains

To get a better insight into the evolutionary need of
maintaining so many Egfr ligands, and, at least in fish,
two copies of Egfr, we investigated the conservation of
the functional domains of the receptor, including the
receptor-ligand interface. It is generally assumed that
functional and interaction sites e.g. ligand binding
pockets, are usually under high selection pressure and
therefore more conserved than other subdomains of
the protein. We investigated here the variability of
functional sites of tetrapod and teleost Egfr homologs,
with a special focus on the receptor-ligand protein
interface.
Similarity between tetrapod and teleost Egfr subdomains

The epidermal growth factor receptor is a transmembrane receptor tyrosine kinase [29]. It comprises an
extracellular domain (ECD), a transmembrane domain
(TM), an intracellular juxtamembrane domain (JM) and
a tyrosine kinase domain (TK) [Additional file 1: Supplemental figure S1A].
For our evolutionary study we looked at the amino
acid conservation for each domain of the EGF receptor
between tetrapod and teleost species (Table 1). All teleost species we investigated possess two gene copies for
the Egf receptor gene, egfra and egfrb, with egfra being
more similar to tetrapod Egfr. For our amino acid analysis, we omitted the domain located carboxy-terminally
of the kinase domain since its length is highly divergent
between the investigated species. Nevertheless, the alignment between human EGFR and medaka Egfra and
Egfrb displayed in [Additional file 5] shows that all
major phosphorylation sites of the carboxy-terminal tail
are conserved.
Expectedly, the tyrosine-kinase domain displays the
highest similarity between tetrapod Egfr and teleost
Egfra (88 to 92%, Table 1). The intracellular juxtamembrane domain, involved in the allosteric control of
ligand binding by stabilization of the tyrosine kinase
domain dimer [30-32], is also well conserved. Conversely, the whole extracellular domain is the least conserved part of the receptor, even when compared among
teleosts (55 to 58% similarity).
Three-dimensional structures of the extracellular
domains (ECD) have been resolved for human EGFR,
revealing four subdomains in the extracellular part of
the receptor [33,34]. Subdomains I and III are involved
in the formation of high-affinity ligand binding pocket,
subdomains II and IV are forming an intramolecular
autoinhibitory tether in the absence of ligand. On this
level, subdomains I and III, implicated in ligand binding,
exhibit only low identity between tetrapods and teleosts

Page 7 of 16

Table 1 Amino acid similarity between tetrapod and
teleost EGF receptor subdomains
Extracellular
domain
Hsa
100
88

Mmu

Hsa
Mmu

Gga

Ola

Xma

Dre

Tni

Tru

Gac

Gga

72

72

100

Ola

57

56

57

Xma

55

54

56

80

100

Dre

58

56

58

66

63

100

Tni

55

57

57

75

74

64

100

Tru

55

55

57

79

76

66

86

100

Gac

55

55

57

80

75

65

75

79

100

Hsa

Mmu

Gga

Ola

Xma

Dre

Tni

Tru

Gac

100
100

Trans- and
Juxtamembrane
Hsa

100

Mmu
Gga

91
85

100
88

100

Ola

74

72

77

100

Xma

74

72

75

90

100

Dre

80

81

82

81

82

100

Tni

75

74

78

91

94

85

100

Tru

75

74

78

90

94

87

97

100

Gac

75

74

78

90

91

84

95

94

100

Hsa

Mmu

Gga

Ola

Xma

Dre

Tni

Tru

Gac

Tyrosine
kinase
domain
Hsa

100

Mmu

98

100

Gga
Ola

97
90

97
90

100
91

100

Xma

90

90

91

96

100

Dre

89

89

91

95

94

100

Tni

88

88

88

91

93

93

100

Tru

91

91

92

96

97

95

95

100

Gac

91

91

92

94

95

95

94

97

100

Similarity percentages between human (Hsa), mouse (Mmu), chicken (Gga),
medaka (Ola), platyfish (Xma), zebrafish (Dre), green-spotted pufferfish (Tni),
fugu (Tru) and three-spined stickleback (Gac) Egfr extracellular, trans- and
juxta-membrane and intracellular tyrosine kinase domains.

(47-61%) [Additional file 6: Supplemental table S1]. Subdomain II, involved in receptor dimerization, is the
most conserved part of the extracellular domain with 62
to 67% identity. Presumably, this is at least partly due to
the numerous conserved cysteine residues necessary for
the proper secondary structure.
Altogether, this indicates that the Egfr extracellular
part may have evolved differently compared to the rest
of the protein between tetrapods and teleosts, and even
among teleosts.

Laisney et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/27

The Egfr/Egfr ligand interface

We were particularly interested in the evolutionary conservation of subdomains I and III, which compose the
interface between receptor and ligand. To analyze this
region in detail, we compared the human EGFR residues
known to directly interact with EGF and TGFA [33,34]
with their corresponding counterparts in medaka Egfra
and Egfrb [Additional file 7]. We analyzed these receptor regions using the ConSurf tool http://consurf.tau.ac.
il/[35]. This tool calculates evolutionary conservation
scores between homologous proteins from different species and maps them on a given three-dimensional protein structure. Thus, important regions on the protein
surface can be identified and visualized. The conservation score of a given amino acid residue is directly
linked to its evolutionary rate. Some sites evolve slowly
and are referred to as “conserved” while others evolve
rapidly and are referred to as “variable”.
As input, we supplied protein alignment and phylogenetic tree of human, mouse, rat and chicken Egfr and
their medaka, platyfish, spotted green pufferfish, torafugu and stickleback Egfra and Egfrb co-orthologous
proteins. The three-dimensional structure of the extracellular part of human EGFR in complex with TGFA
[33] was chosen as template. The overall view [Additional file 7: Supplemental figure S9A] outlines the three
main interaction sites between receptor and ligand.
[Additional file 7: Supplemental figure S9B and S9C]
display the interface between receptor and ligand in
more detail. [Additional file 7: Supplemental figure S9D]
recapitulates all amino acid substitutions between
human and teleost species for Egfr residues that directly
interact with Egfr ligands within subdomains I and III.
Amino acid substitution can either be classified as
radical or conservative, whether it involves or not a
major change in the amino acid physicochemical properties. Our analyses reveal that many amino acids
located in the ligand-binding pocket are not conserved
among vertebrates, and some even replaced with residues that induce a radical amino acid substitution. A
similar picture emerged when comparing the Egfr
ligands, namely tetrapod and teleost Egf and Tgfa [Additional file 2]. In both cases, amino acids that directly
interact with Egfr [33,34] are not always conserved
between species. Examples are the non-polar Met17 in
mammalian Egf that is replaced by the small polar Asp
in chicken and by the aromatic Phe in teleosts. Likewise,
the aliphatic Ile19 in mammals is replaced by a smaller
aliphatic Val residue in chicken and by the aromatic Phe
or Tyr in teleosts. Another example is the positively
charged Lys24 in human EGFR that is replaced by a
small polar Ser in mouse, a small polar Asp in chicken,
small non-polar Ala in medaka and small polar Ser in
all other investigated teleosts and the mouse.

Page 8 of 16

This lack of conservation suggests separate ways of
receptor-ligand co-evolution in tetrapods and teleosts. It
also implicates a possible subfunctionalization of the
duplicated teleost receptors. To further investigate this
hypothesis, we analyzed receptor and ligand expression
exemplarily for teleosts in the medaka fish.
Expression of medaka egfrs and Egfr ligands
Embryonic expression

Both egfra and egfrb transcripts are present from stage 8
(before mid-blastula transition) to the hatching stage,
but with much lower levels of expression past the stage
16 (late gastrula stage) when compared to stage 8
[Additional file 8: Supplemental figure S10A]. This suggests that both receptor transcripts are maternally
deposited in the embryo and low zygotic expression
levels are sufficient until hatching to fulfill their functions. This is concomitant with immunochemistry data
using an antibody recognizing both isoforms where during early development of medaka embryo all cells
stained moderately for Egfr until late blastula. Then, at
24-somite stage, staining was detected only in the surface epithelia, aorta, intestinal epithelium and pronephric duct [11].
In platyfish, egfra is slightly expressed in embryos
whereas egfrb was not detected [36]. Moreover, in zebrafish, addition of Egfr kinase inhibitors resulted in cardiovascular defects in the developing embryo [7]. In the
mouse, knock-out experiments pointed to a complex
role of Egfr during embryogenesis and early development; mutant mice are growth retarded and die at different postnatal stages depending on their genetic
background. Surviving mice present a wide range of
abnormalities (see [37] for a review).
The Egfr ligand transcripts for tgfa and ereg appear to
be maternally deposited into the medaka egg as well but
are not detected in the embryo after the mid-blastula
transition [Additional file 8: Supplemental figures S10C
and S10F]. This points to no important contribution of
tgfato later embryonic development. However, mutant
mice for Tgfashow defects in hair follicles, eye development and decreased forebrain neural progenitor cell
proliferation [38,39]. Zygotic transcription is observed
for egf, hbegf areg, epgn and btc [Additional file 8: Supplemental figures S10B, S10D, S10E, S10G and S10H],
with different expression patterns according to the
developmental stage. From knock-out mice experiments,
Hbegf is known to be important for normal heart development [40]. The only growth factor gene to exhibit a
strong transcription in medaka embryos is areg, with
increasing levels of transcripts past stage 30, when for
instance the blood vessel system develops. In mammals,
Areg was shown to be the most potent mitogen for vascular smooth muscle cells [41].

Laisney et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/27

Medaka embryonic stem (ES) cells, which are blastuladerived cells, displayed large amounts of egfra mRNA,
whereas egfrb was only weakly expressed (Figure 4A).
Only one EGFR ligand is thoroughly expressed in the
medaka ES cells, namely hbegf (Figure 4D). Low expression levels are observed for btc (Figure 4H) and areg
(Figure 4G), but all the other ligands are not present in
medaka ES cells.
In summary, the specific expression pattern of the
seven medaka EGFR ligands during embryogenesis suggest different functions, although the possibility for signaling redundancy by autocrine, paracrine and/or
juxtacrine modes of action remains (for a review see
[42]).
Expression in adult tissues and organs

In adult medaka, both receptors are transcribed to a
similar extent in brain, eye, heart, testis and muscles.
However, egfra is expressed more strongly in spleen,
kidney, and skin as well in stem cells, while egfrb is prominently expressed in gills, ovary and liver (Figure 4A).
These results are consistent with the observations made
in the platyfish [36]. These distinct expression profiles
for egfra and egfrb may reflect different functions for the
two egfr genes.
In medaka ovary, prominent expression of egfrb is
accompanied with the presence of tgfa, ereg and areg
(Figures 4C, F and 4G). In kidney, only egfra is transcribed, together with hbegf (Figure 4D). Both receptors
are present in skin, egfra being the major transcript.
Here, hbegf is mostly strongly expressed compared to
other ligands but presence of tgfa, areg and ereg is also
detectable to a lesser extent.
Taken together, the partly divergent expression patterns indicate that the two copies of the medaka egfr
gene may have been preserved by subfunctionalization, a
process where the ancestral gene functions are distributed among duplicated genes [14,43,44]. Moreover, the
two receptors not only show dissimilar expression patterns but are co-expressed with different subsets of
ligands. In general, egfra is co-expressed with hbegf,
while egfrb is co-expressed with tgfa, areg and ereg.
Functionality of the medaka Egfra-Egfr ligand system

The low conservation of ligand/receptor protein interface [Additional file 6] calls into question the usage of
heterologous ligands for biochemical studies. In the few
existing works on Egfr signaling within fish species, only
recombinant heterologous ligands from mammals have
been used to activate fish Egfrs [9,17,18]. In these studies, mammalian Egf, but also Tgfa, Hbegf and Btc were
described to cross-react with the fish receptor. However,
for the platyfish, only human EGF, but neither human
TGFA nor mouse Egf was able to activate Egfra and
induce a mitogenic effect [36]. As the Egf receptor

Page 9 of 16

ligand binding pocket is not well conserved between tetrapods and teleosts, the use of heterologous ligand to
activate fish Egfr may differ and could hamper or event
prevent the biological output. To analyze on the one
hand the functionality of medaka Egfr and on the other
hand its possible cross-specificity with human EGF, we
performed stimulation experiments using either recombinant human EGF or a donor cell line expressing
medaka ligands to stimulate a receptor cell line which
over-expressed medaka egfr. We decided to examine
only medaka Egfra activation, as this receptor is more
related to human EGFR than Egfrb, thus rendering
Egfra a more likely candidate for ligand cross-reactivity.
First, we applied recombinant hEGF on murine melanocyte wild-type cells (melan-a WT, lacking endogenous
Egfr), melan-a cells that were stably transfected with
medaka egfra (melan-a Ola-egfra) or melan-a cells stably
transfected with human EGFR (melan-a HER). As
shown by Western blot analysis, only melan-a HER cells
displayed EGF-dependent phosphorylation of EGFR and
the downstream signaling components Akt and Erk1/2
(Figure 5A). In case of melan-a Ola-egfra cells, hEGF
treatment had no visible effect, thus speaking against
cross-reactivity between hEGF and the medaka receptor
(Figure 5A).
As Egfra did not respond to hEGF, we had to examine
its functionality with species-specific ligands. As receptor
cell line we used melan-a Ola-egfra cells and as donor cell
line we transiently transfected human embryonic kidney
(HEK) 293-T cells with expression vector constructs containing the cDNA of different medaka ligands (pCS2
+-Ola-egf, pCS2+-Ola-areg, pCS2+-Ola-hbegf). Expression
of the different constructs was verified by PCR [Additional
file 9]. Wild-type melan-a cells and melan-a Ola-egfra cells
were then stimulated for 30 minutes with conditioned
supernatants from the transfected 293-T cells and activation of receptor and downstream signaling pathways was
assessed by Western blot analysis. As expected, melan-a
WT cells did not display any activation of Egf receptor
and its downstream signaling pathways in response to any
of the conditioned supernatants (Figure 5B). In contrast,
melan-a Ola-egfra could be stimulated with Ola-Egf, OlaAreg or Ola-Hbegf conditioned supernatants as demonstrated by anti phospho-Tyr (P-Tyr) staining of a protein
with the size of medaka Egfra, that was only visible in cells
expressing this receptor (Figure 5B). Ola-Hbegf conditioned supernatant showed the strongest effect on receptor-, Akt- and Erk1/2 phosphorylation, whereas the
response was much weaker with Ola-Egf and Ola-Areg
conditioned supernatants. However, a clear receptor phosphorylation was always and repeatedly observed in independent experiments. An explanation for the weak
activation of downstream pathways by medaka Egf and
Areg may indicate a better reactivity of medaka Egfra with

Laisney et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/27

Page 10 of 16

Figure 4 Expression of Egf receptors and their ligands in medaka tissues and embryonic stem cells. A) Expression of egfra and egfrb, B)
egf, C) tgfa, D) hbegf, E)epgn , F)ereg, G)areg and H) btc in adult medaka tissues or organs, and in medaka stem cells. Values for each gene were
normalized to expression levels of elongation factor 1 alpha 1 (ef1a1) using the 2-DDCT method [52]. Expression in brain was set as reference
(value: 1); Data are presented as mean ± standard deviation of three independent quantitative real-time PCR experiments.

Laisney et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/27

Page 11 of 16

Figure 5 Western blot analysis of medaka Egfra activation by human EGF and by medaka Egfr ligands. A) Melan-a WT, melan-a Ola-egfra
and melan-a HER cells were stimulated for 30 minutes with 100 ng/ml of recombinant human EGF at 37°C. P-Tyr: phospho-tyrosine antibody; PAkt: phospho-Akt antibody; Akt: Akt antibody; P-Erk1/2: phospho-Erk1/2 antibody; Erk2: Erk2 antibody. B) Melan-a cells WT or melan-a Ola-egfra
stimulated for 30 minutes at 37°C with overnight conditioned supernatant of 293-T cells expressing vector alone, medaka egf, medaka areg or
medaka hbegf. P-Tyr: phospho-tyrosine antibody; P-Akt: phospho-Akt antibody; Akt: Akt antibody; P-Erk1/2: phospho Erk1/2; Erk2: Erk2 antibody.
The anti-P-Tyr antibody recognizes a band of the size of Egfra, thus indicating activated receptor.

medaka Hbegf when compared to other ligands, corroborating the expression patterns in adult organs data where
medaka egfra was found to be preferentially expressed
together with hbegf. Differences in receptor- or Erk1/2
turnover in response to different stimuli or, alternatively,
different ligand half-lives in solution are other possible
explanations for the observed differences.
Altogether, whereas recombinant hEGF did not trigger
any response, all three medaka ligands led to activation
of medaka Egfra or downstream pathways, indicating
receptor functionality.

Conclusions
A detailed examination of the medaka Egfr/Egfr ligand
system, considering both functional and evolutionary

aspects, revealed that the medaka genome contains two
Egfr gene copies, namely egfra and egfrb, but only one
copy of each of the seven Egfr ligand genes. Including
conserved synteny data from various vertebrate genomes, we found that most likely all present vertebrate
Egfr ligands date back to a single Egfr ligand gene,
which gave rise to the Egfr ligand repertoire found in
extant teleost genomes.
All investigated fish Egf receptor genes occur in two
copies that have been maintained in the course of teleost
evolution. This may be due to subfunctionalization and
specialization of the two receptor proteins. This theory is
supported by the differential expression of both genes in
medaka embryo and adult tissues, together with the
expression of a distinct subset of ligand genes.

Laisney et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/27

Finally, we assessed medaka Egf, Areg and Hbegf functionality, demonstrating that all of them could trigger
medaka Egfra receptor activation. This was not accomplished using human EGF. Consequently, we strongly
support the use of homologous ligands as prerequisite
in future functional biochemical studies.

Methods
Database surveys

All the species used in this study are listed in [Additional file 10: Supplemental table S2]. Using human and
fish sequences as queries, searches for Egfr and Egfr
ligand sequences was performed in databases accessible
with the Basic Local Alignment Search Tool (BLAST)
on the servers of the National Center for Biotechnology
Information (NCBI), the Ensembl Database http://www.
ensembl.org/. A list of the gene accession numbers is
given in [Additional file 10: Supplemental table S3].
The sequences of X. maculatus tgfa, hbegf, btc, ereg and
epgn were obtained blasting the published medaka aminoacid sequences against the Xiphophorus ESTs database (R.
B. Walter, unpublished data; sequences available under
accession numbers GU144290 to GU144294). In the
search of Egf receptor ligands, only the mature Egf motif
was used to perform the BLAST searches since this is the
only conserved domain [Additional file 2].
Phylogenetic tree reconstruction

The nucleotide sequences of the Egf motif of the Egfr
ligands from tetrapod and teleost species were retrieved
from Ensembl and NCBI databases, loaded into BioEdit
[45], translated into amino acid sequences and aligned with
CLUSTALW [46] as implemented in BioEdit. Maximum
likelihood phylogenies based on the nucleotide sequences
were inferred with PHYML Online [47] using the GTR+I+R
model and 500 bootstrap replications. A bootstrap consensus tree from this analysis was then generated and drawn
with MEGA4 [48]. Neighbor Joining bootstrap values of
10,000 replications were also obtained from MEGA4.
Synteny analyses

Synteny analyses of Egf, Tgfa, Hbegf and the ligand cluster were performed using information from the genome
browsers from human, mouse, chicken, zebrafish, Tetraodon and medaka from the Ensembl database http://
www.ensembl.org/.
The Synteny Database [20,21] was used for large-scale
synteny analyses. Generally, 20 Mb around the human
EGFR ligand genes were taken into account. For the analysis of paralogous relationships within the human genome,
amphioxus was chosen as outgroup genome. The Ciona
genome as outgroup gave similar results. The results were
then compared to previously published synteny regions
[19,22] to infer protochromosome connections.

Page 12 of 16

Fishes and fish cell lines

All animal studies have been approved by the author’s
Institutional Review Board (Animal Welfare Officer of the
University of Würzburg). Fishes were kept under standard
conditions in the aquarium facility of the Biozentrum at
the University of Würzburg. The medaka Carbio strain
(outbred strain, mixed genetic background of southern
medaka) was used in this study. The origin of the medaka
stem cell and fibroblast cell lines has previously been published previously [49]. Embryonic developmental stages
are described as defined by Iwamatsu [50].
RNA extraction, first strand DNA synthesis and real-time
PCR analysis

RNA extraction from different medaka tissues and cell
lines was done using Total RNA Isolation Reagent
(ABgene, Epsom, UK) as recommended by the manufacturer. For analysis of gene expression, standard PCR for
control of gene expression or real-time PCR for the
expression pattern analyses was done. For the embryonic medaka stages study, a pool of 10 embryos per stage
was prepared and the early morula stage, stage 8, was
chosen as expression reference. Given that Egfr signaling
is observed in the CNS, a feature conserved from invertebrates to vertebrates, we took medaka adult brain as a
reference organ for the adult tissues. cDNA was prepared from total RNA from a pool of 6 adult fish brains,
eyes, gills, hearts, ovaries, testes, spleens, kidneys, livers,
skins, fins, muscles, as well as medaka stem cells line
using the RevertAid kit with random hexamer primers
(Fermentas, Burlington, Canada). PCR primers were
designed using Primer3 software [51]. A list of the different primer combinations is given in [Additional file
10: Supplemental table S4]. For the different embryonic
stages, adults organs and the stem cell line each PCR
was carried out in duplicate and was repeated 3 times
independently in a 25 μl volume using a SYBR green
containing master mix for 4 minutes at 95°C for initial
denaturation followed by 40 cycles of 95°C for 30 seconds and 60°C for 60 seconds in the iCycler IQ (BioRad, Hercules, CA). All PCR products were confirmed
by sequencing using the CEQ DTCS dye terminator
cycle sequencing kit and run on a CEQ 2000XL DNA
sequencing system (Beckmann Coulter, Krefeld, Germany). Values for each gene were normalized to expression levels of elongation factor 1 alpha 1 (ef1a1) using
the 2-DDCT method [52].
ConSurf analysis

ConSurf http://consurf.tau.ac.il/[35], an automated web
based server, was used to project the site conservation
grades between tetrapod and teleost Egfr onto the molecular surface of the human EGF receptor protein in
complex with TGFA [33]. In this study, the rate of

Laisney et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/27

evolution at each site was calculated using the empirical
Bayesian paradigm that was shown to significantly
improve the accuracy of conservation scores estimations
over the Maximum Likelihood method, in particular
when a small number of sequences was used for the
calculations [53].
Using this tool, we could display the patches of low or
highly conserved residues that are important for ligand
binding. Confidence intervals were generated and high
and low values of each interval were assigned color
grades according to the 1-9 coloring scheme. If the
interval in a specific position spans 4 or more color
grades, the score is considered as unreliable and the
position is colored light yellow in the graph. The positions indicated in the figure refer to the positions of the
human mature EGFR protein.
Cloning and sequencing of medaka egfra, egf, areg and
hbegf

To isolate medaka egfra, egf, areg and hbegf, we searched
the medaka genome database http://www.ensembl.org/
Oryzias_latipes/index.html by tBLASTN and BLASTn
comparison [54]. We identified the corresponding genes
on chromosome 17 (egfra), ultracontig115 (egf), chromosome 9 (areg), and chromosome 10 (hbegf).
The deduced mRNAs of the different genes were predicted by using GeneScan analysis [55]. The coding
region of medaka egfra, egf, areg and hbegf were amplified from cDNA prepared from pooled medaka tissues
at standard PCR conditions using Triple Master Taq
polymerase proof-reading Taq polymerase (Eppendorf,
Westbury, NY) (primer sequences available on request).
The PCR products were inserted directly by TA cloning
into the pCR2.1 vector (TA Cloning Kit, Invitrogen),
and individual clones were sequenced using CEQ DCTS
dye terminator cycle sequencing kit and run on a CEQ
2000XL DNA sequencing system (Beckman-Coulter).
Expression constructs for Medaka egfra, egf, areg and
hbegf

Xba I and SnaBI restriction sites were inserted at the 5’
and the 3’ termini of medaka egfra, respectively, in order
to ligate the gene into the XbaI and SnaBI digested
PCS2+ expression vector to create the construct pCS2
+-Ola-egfra.
To generate the different pCS2+ expression constructs
for medaka egf, areg and hbegf, EcoRI and XbaI restriction sites were inserted at the 5’ and 3’ termini of medaka
egf, EcoRI and XhoI were inserted at the 5’ and 3’ termini
of medaka areg and ClaI and XbaI were inserted at the 5’
and 3’ termini of medaka hbegf to insert them in the corresponding digested pCS2+ vector. Expression of medaka
egfra, egf, areg and hbegf by the different cell lines was
assessed by RT-PCR [Additional file 9].

Page 13 of 16

Cell culture, transfections and stimulation assays

Mouse wild-type melanocytes (melan-a WT) [56], lacking
endogenous Egfr expression [57,58], were cultured in
DMEM, 10% FCS in the presence of cholera toxin (12
nmol/L), and TPA (200 nmol/L). Melan-a WT cells were
then stably transfected with the pCS2+-Ola-egfra construct using Fugene transfection reagent (Roche). HEK
293T cells (human embryonic kidney fibroblasts with
SV40 T-antigen) were grown in DMEM (Invitrogen, Karlsruhe, Germany) supplemented with 10% FCS, 1% glutamine and antibiotics. Expression constructs pCS2+-Olaegf, pCS2+-Ola-areg and pCS2+-Ola-hbegf were transiently
transfected into HEK 293T cells by the calcium-phosphate
method [59]. Expression of medaka egfra in melan-a cells
and medaka egf, areg and hbegf RNA in 293T cells was
checked by reverse-transcription PCR analysis.
For the stimulation assays, cells were incubated either
with human EGF (100 ng/ml) (Tebu-bio, Offenbach,
Germany) or with the 293T cells overnight conditioned
supernatants for 30 minutes at 37°C.
Cell lysis and Western blotting

Cells were trypsinized, rinsed twice with PBS and lyzed
in 50 mmol/L HEPES (pH 7.5), 150 mmol/L NaCl, 1.5
mmol/L MgCl2, 1 mmol/L EGTA, 10% glycerol, 1% Triton X-100, 10 μg/mL aprotinin, 10 μg/mL leupeptin,
200 μmol/L Na3VO4 , 1 mmol/L phenylmethylsulfonyl
fluoride (PMSF), and 100 mmol/L NaF. 50 μg of protein
lysate was separated by SDS-PAGE and analyzed by
Western blotting onto nitrocellulose. Membranes were
blocked for 60 minutes with TBS (10 mmol/L Tris-HCl
(pH 7.9) and 150 mmol/L NaCl), 0.1% Tween-20, and
5% bovine serum albumin (BSA) and were incubated
overnight at 4°C with the first antibody. Monoclonal
antiphosphotyrosine P-Tyr (PY20) was from BD Biosciences (San Jose, CA). Phospho-ERK 1/2 (Thr202/
Tyr204) and rabbit polyclonal Akt antibodies were purchased from Cell Signaling Technology (Danvers, MA).
Rabbit polyclonal anti-phospho Akt (Ser473) was
obtained from New England Biolabs (Ipswich, MA) and
rabbit polyclonal anti-Erk2 (c-14) from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Santa Cruz, CA). The secondary antibodies
were conjugated with horseradish peroxidase and were
directed against mouse (Pierce, Rockford, IL) or rabbit
(Bio-Rad).
Additional file 1: Supplemental figure S1. Structure and amino acid
sequence alignment for tetrapod and teleost Egfr. A) Overall Egfr
structure comprising the amino-terminus (NH2), the extracellular domain
(ECD), the transmembrane domain (TM), the intracellular juxtamembrane
domaine (JM), the intracellular tyrosine kinase domaine (TK) and the
carboxy-terminus (COOH). B) Alignment was generated in ClustalX. The
color bars indicate the different subdomains of the Egfr protein:
subdomain I in green, subdomain II in blue, subdomain III in magenta,
subdomain IV in orange, transmembrane domain in yellow, intracellular
juxtamembrane in grey and tyrosine kinase in red.

Laisney et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/27

Page 14 of 16

directly interacting with the ligand or surrounding the binding site are
not evolutionary conserved (B and C). In some cases amino acid
substitution leads to an important shift in the amino acid property, e.g.,
positively vs. negatively charged [60]. For example, aromatic Phe20 of
mammals is replaced in teleosts by basic Lys or Arg, nucleophilic Thr or
acidic Glu. Gln47 in mammals is replaced in teleosts by acidic Asp or Glu,
neutral Ala or hydrophobic Leu. Similar radical amino acid substitutions
are also observed for Ala103 and Lys105. Regarding site 2 (C), ligandinteracting Asp355 is well conserved between tetrapods and teleosts, but
radical amino acid substitutions occur for other interacting residues, like
the aromatic Phe357 which is replaced in teleost Egfrb by a basic His.
Here again, many amino acids located at the interface show no
conservation, like for Pro349, Arg353, Ser356 and His359. At site 3, even
more radical amino acid substitutions were observed, e.g. for His409,
Phe412, Val417, and Ile438.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2148-1027-S7.PNG ]

Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2148-1027-S1.PNG ]
Additional file 2: Supplemental figure S2. Amino acid sequence
alignment for tetrapod and teleost Egfr ligands. Alignment was
generated in ClustalX [46]. Only the conserved Egf motif DNA sequences
were used for the analysis.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2148-1027-S2.PNG ]
Additional file 3: Supplemental figure S3. Phylogeny of EGFR ligand
genes. Original Maximum Likelihood tree based on the 138 bp of the
Egf domain using the GTR+G+I substitution model. Bootstrap values for
Maximum Likelihood and Neighbor Joining methods are shown. The tree
was rooted on the branch leading to Egf sequences. Only bootstrap
values above 50% are shown. Monophyly is supported for Egf, Hbegf,
Tgfa and Ereg genes, but many other nodes remain poorly supported.
Dre, Danio rerio; Gac, Gasterosteus aculeatus; Gga, Gallus gallus; Hsa, Homo
sapiens; Mmu, Mus musculus; Ola (red), Oryzias latipes; Ssa, Salmo salar;
Tni, Tetraodon nigroviridis; Tru, Takifugu rubripes; Xma, Xiphophorus
maculatus [Additional file 10: Supplemental table S3].
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2148-1027-S3.PNG ]

Additional file 8: Supplemental figure S10. Expression of Egf
receptors and their ligands in medaka embryo. A) Expression of egfra,
egfrb, B) egf, C) tgfa, D) hbegf, E)epgn , F)ereg, G)areg and H) btc in
medaka embryo stages 8, 24, 27-28, 30, 37-38 and 39. Values for each
gene were normalized to expression levels of elongation factor 1 alpha 1
(ef1a1) using the 2-DDCT method [52]. Data are presented as mean ±
standard deviation. Expression at stage 8 was set to one fold as a
reference; data are average values of three independent quantitative realtime PCR experiments.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2148-1027-S8.PNG ]

Additional file 4: Supplemental figures S4 to S7. Synteny Database
[21] dot plots showing orthologous genes (red crosses) from human EGF
(S4), TGFA(S5), HBEGF(S6) and the ligand cluster (S7) regions.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2148-1027-S4.PDF ]

Additional file 9: Supplemental figure S11. PCR analysis of medaka
egfra, egf, areg and hbegfexpression in melan-a and 293T cells. A)
Expression of medaka egfra in melan-a WT and melan-a Ola-egfracells. B)
Expression of medaka egf, areg and hbegf in 293T cells transiently
transfected with the expression vector alone (vector), medaka egf (egf),
medaka areg (areg) or medaka hbegf (hbegf).
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2148-1027-S9.PNG ]

Additional file 5: Supplemental figure S8. Structure and amino acid
sequences alignment for human and medaka Egfr. A) Overall Egfr
structure comprising the amino-terminus (NH2), the extracellular domain
(ECD), the transmembrane domain (TM), the intracellular juxtamembrane
domaine (JM), the intracellular tyrosine kinase domaine (TK) and the
carboxy-terminus (COOH). B) Alignment was generated in ClustalX. The
color bars indicate the different subdomains of the Egfr protein:
subdomain I in green, subdomain II in blue, subdomain III in magenta,
subdomain IV in orange, transmembrane domain in yellow, intracellular
juxtamembrane in grey and tyrosine kinase in red. Major phosphorylation
sites in the carboxy terminal tail are indicated by asterisks (*).
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2148-1027-S5.PNG ]
Additional file 6: Supplemental table S1. Amino acid similarity
between tetrapod and teleost Egf receptor extracellular
subdomains. Similarity percentages between human (Hsa), mouse
(Mmu), chicken (Gga), medaka (Ola), platyfish (Xma), zebrafish (Dre),
green-spotted pufferfish (Tni), fugu (Tru) and three-spined stickleback
(Gac) Egfr extracellular subdomains I, II, III and IV.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2148-1027-S6.PDF ]
Additional file 7: Supplemental figure S9. ConSurf evolutionary
conservation analysis of the Egfr ligand binding pocket residues
between tetrapods and teleosts. A) Overall strucure of extracellular
subdomains I and III of Egfr in complex with Tgfa, 3 interface sites are
outlined. B) View of site 1 interface. C) View of sites 2 and 3 interfaces.
Non-conserved residues are colored in turquoise whereas conserved
residues are coloured in pink and maroon. Yellow color indicates amino
acids for which data were not sufficient to calculate reliable conservation
values. D) Table displaying the residues of the ligand binding pocket in
human EGFR and medaka Egfra and Egfrb. Bold font indicates amino
acid changes in either medaka Egfra or Egfrb compared to human EGFR.
Amino acid substitutions that also involve an important change in the
amino acid physicochemical properties are quoted by a (R) for radical
amino acid substitution. Some of the residues shown to directly interact
with Egf [34] or with Tgfa [33] (D) such as Tyr89 (site 1), Asp355 (site 2)
or Leu17 and Glu384 (site 3) are well conserved. However, many residues

Additional file 10: Supplemental tables S2 to S4. S2) List of all species
used in this analysis. S3) Accession numbers of all genes used in this
analysis. S4) List of primers used for quantitative real-time PCR analyses.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2148-1027-S10.PDF ]

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the GK 639, SFB 487 and DFG SCHA 408/8-1.
Author details
Department of Physiological Chemistry I, Biocenter, University of Würzburg,
Würzburg, Germany. 2Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Texas
State University, San Marcos, Texas, USA.

1

Authors’ contributions
JAGCL performed the computational search for tetrapod and teleost Egfr
and Egfr ligand genes, the synteny analyses, the study of Egfr subdomains
and Egfr extracellular part evolutionary conservation, the expression analyses,
the cloning and sequencing of medaka egfra, areg, egf and hbegf, the
functional experimentations and wrote the manuscript. IB did the
phylogenetic analysis, the large-scale synteny examination, the study of
vertebrate EGFR ligand evolution and wrote the manuscript. RBW generated
and provided the Xiphophorus maculatus sequences for tgfa, hbegf, btc, ereg
and epgn. MS produced and supplied the fish material. SM and MS both
designed the study and helped draft the manuscript. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript.

Laisney et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/27

Received: 30 July 2009
Accepted: 27 January 2010 Published: 27 January 2010
References
1. Jorissen RN, Walker F, Pouliot N, Garrett TP, Ward CW, Burgess AW:
Epidermal growth factor receptor: mechanisms of activation and
signalling. Exp Cell Res 2003, 284(1):31-53.
2. Blume-Jensen P, Hunter T: Oncogenic kinase signalling. Nature 2001,
411(6835):355-365.
3. Yarden Y, Sliwkowski MX: Untangling the ErbB signalling network. Nat Rev
Mol Cell Biol 2001, 2(2):127-137.
4. Schweitzer R, Shilo BZ: A thousand and one roles for the Drosophila EGF
receptor. Trends Genet 1997, 13(5):191-196.
5. Shilo BZ: Signaling by the Drosophila epidermal growth factor receptor
pathway during development. Exp Cell Res 2003, 284(1):140-149.
6. Sundaram MV: RTK/Ras/MAPK signaling. WormBook 2006, 1-19.
7. Goishi K, Lee P, Davidson AJ, Nishi E, Zon LI, Klagsbrun M: Inhibition of
zebrafish epidermal growth factor receptor activity results in
cardiovascular defects. Mech Dev 2003, 120(7):811-822.
8. Pang Y, Ge W: Epidermal growth factor and TGFalpha promote zebrafish
oocyte maturation in vitro: potential role of the ovarian activin
regulatory system. Endocrinology 2002, 143(1):47-54.
9. Wang Y, Ge W: Cloning of epidermal growth factor (EGF) and EGF
receptor from the zebrafish ovary: evidence for EGF as a potential
paracrine factor from the oocyte to regulate activin/follistatin system in
the follicle cells. Biol Reprod 2004, 71(3):749-760.
10. Tse AC, Ge W: Differential regulation of betacellulin and heparin-binding
EGF-like growth factor in cultured zebrafish ovarian follicle cells by EGF
family ligands. Comp Biochem Physiol A Mol Integr Physiol 2009,
153(1):13-17.
11. Boomsma RA, Scott H, Walters K: Immunocytochemical localization of
epidermal growth factor receptor in early embryos of the Japanese
medaka fish (Oryzias latipes). Histochem J 2001, 33(1):37-42.
12. Froschauer A, Braasch I, Volff JN: Fish genomes, comparative genomics
and vertebrate evolution. Current Genomics 2006, 7:43-57.
13. Meyer A, Peer Van de Y: From 2R to 3R: evidence for a fish-specific
genome duplication (FSGD). Bioessays 2005, 27(9):937-945.
14. Postlethwait J, Amores A, Cresko W, Singer A, Yan YL: Subfunction
partitioning, the teleost radiation and the annotation of the human
genome. Trends Genet 2004, 20(10):481-490.
15. Kassahn KS, Dang VT, Wilkins SJ, Perkins AC, Ragan MA: Evolution of gene
function and regulatory control after whole-genome duplication:
comparative analyses in vertebrates. Genome Res 2009, 19(8):1404-1418.
16. Kleinjan DA, Bancewicz RM, Gautier P, Dahm R, Schonthaler HB, Damante G,
Seawright A, Hever AM, Yeyati PL, van Heyningen V: Subfunctionalization
of duplicated zebrafish pax6 genes by cis-regulatory divergence. PLoS
Genet 2008, 4(2):e29.
17. Ebner HL, Blatzer M, Nawaz M, Krumschnabel G: Activation and nuclear
translocation of ERK in response to ligand-dependent and -independent
stimuli in liver and gill cells from rainbow trout. J Exp Biol 2007, 210(Pt
6):1036-1045.
18. MacDougall TM, Kraak Van Der G: Peptide growth factors modulate
prostaglandin E and F production by goldfish ovarian follicles. Gen Comp
Endocrinol 1998, 110(1):46-57.
19. Kasahara M, Naruse K, Sasaki S, Nakatani Y, Qu W, Ahsan B, Yamada T,
Nagayasu Y, Doi K, Kasai Y: The medaka draft genome and insights into
vertebrate genome evolution. Nature 2007, 447(7145):714-719.
20. Catchen JM, Conery JS, Postlethwait JH: Automated identification of
conserved synteny after whole-genome duplication. Genome Res 2009,
19(8):1497-1505.
21. The Synteny Database. http://teleost.cs.uoregon.edu/synteny_db/.
22. Nakatani Y, Takeda H, Kohara Y, Morishita S: Reconstruction of the
vertebrate ancestral genome reveals dynamic genome reorganization in
early vertebrates. Genome Res 2007, 17(9):1254-1265.
23. Woods IG, Wilson C, Friedlander B, Chang P, Reyes DK, Nix R, Kelly PD,
Chu F, Postlethwait JH, Talbot WS: The zebrafish gene map defines
ancestral vertebrate chromosomes. Genome Res 2005, 15(9):1307-1314.
24. Naruse K, Tanaka M, Mita K, Shima A, Postlethwait J, Mitani H: A medaka
gene map: the trace of ancestral vertebrate proto-chromosomes
revealed by comparative gene mapping. Genome Res 2004, 14(5):820-828.

Page 15 of 16

25. Stein RA, Staros JV: Insights into the evolution of the ErbB receptor
family and their ligands from sequence analysis. BMC Evol Biol 2006,
6(79).
26. Mulley JF, Chiu CH, Holland PW: Breakup of a homeobox cluster after
genome duplication in teleosts. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006,
103(27):10369-10372.
27. Siegel N, Hoegg S, Salzburger W, Braasch I, Meyer A: Comparative
genomics of ParaHox clusters of teleost fishes: gene cluster breakup and
the retention of gene sets following whole genome duplications. BMC
Genomics 2007, 8(312).
28. Schneider MR, Wolf E: The epidermal growth factor receptor ligands at a
glance. J Cell Physiol 2009, 218(3):460-466.
29. Carpenter G, King L Jr, Cohen S: Epidermal growth factor stimulates
phosphorylation in membrane preparations in vitro. Nature 1978,
276(5686):409-410.
30. Macdonald-Obermann JL, Pike LJ: The intracellular juxtamembrane
domain of the epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor is responsible for
the allosteric regulation of EGF binding. J Biol Chem 2009,
284(20):13570-13576.
31. Jura N, Endres NF, Engel K, Deindl S, Das R, Lamers MH, Wemmer DE,
Zhang X, Kuriyan J: Mechanism for activation of the EGF receptor
catalytic domain by the juxtamembrane segment. Cell 2009,
137(7):1293-1307.
32. Red Brewer M, Choi SH, Alvarado D, Moravcevic K, Pozzi A, Lemmon MA,
Carpenter G: The juxtamembrane region of the EGF receptor functions
as an activation domain. Mol Cell 2009, 34(6):641-651.
33. Garrett TP, McKern NM, Lou M, Elleman TC, Adams TE, Lovrecz GO, Zhu HJ,
Walker F, Frenkel MJ, Hoyne PA: Crystal structure of a truncated
epidermal growth factor receptor extracellular domain bound to
transforming growth factor alpha. Cell 2002, 110(6):763-773.
34. Ogiso H, Ishitani R, Nureki O, Fukai S, Yamanaka M, Kim JH, Saito K,
Sakamoto A, Inoue M, Shirouzu M: Crystal structure of the complex of
human epidermal growth factor and receptor extracellular domains. Cell
2002, 110(6):775-787.
35. Landau M, Mayrose I, Rosenberg Y, Glaser F, Martz E, Pupko T, Ben-Tal N:
ConSurf 2005: the projection of evolutionary conservation scores of
residues on protein structures. Nucleic Acids Res 2005, , 33 Web Server:
W299-302.
36. Gomez A, Volff JN, Hornung U, Schartl M, Wellbrock C: Identification of a
second egfr gene in Xiphophorus uncovers an expansion of the
epidermal growth factor receptor family in fish. Mol Biol Evol 2004,
21(2):266-275.
37. Sibilia M, Kroismayr R, Lichtenberger BM, Natarajan A, Hecking M,
Holcmann M: The epidermal growth factor receptor: from development
to tumorigenesis. Differentiation 2007, 75(9):770-787.
38. Luetteke NC, Qiu TH, Peiffer RL, Oliver P, Smithies O, Lee DC: TGF alpha
deficiency results in hair follicle and eye abnormalities in targeted and
waved-1 mice. Cell 1993, 73(2):263-278.
39. Tropepe V, Craig CG, Morshead CM, Kooy van der D: Transforming growth
factor-alpha null and senescent mice show decreased neural progenitor
cell proliferation in the forebrain subependyma. J Neurosci 1997,
17(20):7850-7859.
40. Iwamoto R, Yamazaki S, Asakura M, Takashima S, Hasuwa H, Miyado K,
Adachi S, Kitakaze M, Hashimoto K, Raab G: Heparin-binding EGF-like
growth factor and ErbB signaling is essential for heart function. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2003, 100(6):3221-3226.
41. Kato M, Inazu T, Kawai Y, Masamura K, Yoshida M, Tanaka N, Miyamoto K,
Miyamori I: Amphiregulin is a potent mitogen for the vascular smooth
muscle cell line, A7r5. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2003,
301(4):1109-1115.
42. Singh AB, Harris RC: Autocrine, paracrine and juxtacrine signaling by
EGFR ligands. Cell Signal 2005, 17(10):1183-1193.
43. Force A, Lynch M, Pickett FB, Amores A, Yan YL, Postlethwait J:
Preservation of duplicate genes by complementary, degenerative
mutations. Genetics 1999, 151(4):1531-1545.
44. Rastogi S, Liberles DA: Subfunctionalization of duplicated genes as a
transition state to neofunctionalization. BMC Evol Biol 2005, 5(1):28.
45. Hall TA: BioEdit: a user-friendly biological sequence alignment editor and
analysis program for Windows 95/98/NT. Nucl Acids Symp Ser 1999,
41:95-98.

Laisney et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/27

Page 16 of 16

46. Chenna R, Sugawara H, Koike T, Lopez R, Gibson TJ, Higgins DG,
Thompson JD: Multiple sequence alignment with the Clustal series of
programs. Nucleic Acids Res 2003, 31(13):3497-3500.
47. Guindon S, Delsuc F, Dufayard JF, Gascuel O: Estimating Maximum
Likelihood Phylogenies with PhyML. Methods Mol Biol 2009, 537:113-137.
48. Tamura K, Dudley J, Nei M, Kumar S: MEGA4: Molecular Evolutionary
Genetics Analysis (MEGA) software version 4.0. Mol Biol Evol 2007,
24(8):1596-1599.
49. Wagner TU, Kraeussling M, Fedorov LM, Reiss C, Kneitz B, Schartl M: STAT3
and SMAD1 signalling in Medaka embryonic stem-like cells and blastula
embryos. Stem Cells Dev 2008, 18(1):151-160.
50. Iwamatsu T: Stages of normal development in the medaka Oryzias
latipes. Mech Dev 2004, 121(7-8):605-618.
51. Rozen S, Skaletsky H: Primer3 on the WWW for general users and for
biologist programmers. Methods Mol Biol 2000, 132:365-386.
52. Livak KJ, Schmittgen TD: Analysis of relative gene expression data using
real-time quantitative PCR and the 2(-Delta Delta C(T)) Method. Methods
2001, 25(4):402-408.
53. Mayrose I, Graur D, Ben-Tal N, Pupko T: Comparison of site-specific rateinference methods for protein sequences: empirical Bayesian methods
are superior. Mol Biol Evol 2004, 21(9):1781-1791.
54. Altschul SF, Gish W, Miller W, Myers EW, Lipman DJ: Basic local alignment
search tool. J Mol Biol 1990, 215(3):403-410.
55. Burge C, Karlin S: Prediction of complete gene structures in human
genomic DNA. J Mol Biol 1997, 268(1):78-94.
56. Bennett DC, Cooper PJ, Hart IR: A line of non-tumorigenic mouse
melanocytes, syngeneic with the B16 melanoma and requiring a tumour
promoter for growth. Int J Cancer 1987, 39(3):414-418.
57. Leikam C, Hufnagel A, Schartl M, Meierjohann S: Oncogene activation in
melanocytes links reactive oxygen to multinucleated phenotype and
senescence. Oncogene 2008, 27(56):7070-7082.
58. Meierjohann S, Wende E, Kraiss A, Wellbrock C, Schartl M: The oncogenic
epidermal growth factor receptor variant Xiphophorus melanoma
receptor kinase induces motility in melanocytes by modulation of focal
adhesions. Cancer Res 2006, 66(6):3145-3152.
59. Chen C, Okayama H: High-efficiency transformation of mammalian cells
by plasmid DNA. Mol Cell Biol 1987, 7(8):2745-2752.
60. Gu X: A simple statistical method for estimating type-II (cluster-specific)
functional divergence of protein sequences. Mol Biol Evol 2006,
23(10):1937-1945.
doi:10.1186/1471-2148-10-27
Cite this article as: Laisney et al.: Lineage-specific co-evolution of the
Egf receptor/ligand signaling system. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010
10:27.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
