<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Energetics and genetics across the prokaryote-eukaryote divide</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Biology Direct 2011, 6:35. doi:10.1186/1745-6150-6-35"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Nick Lane"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Lane Biology Direct 2011, 6:35
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/35

RESEARCH

Open Access

Energetics and genetics across the prokaryoteeukaryote divide
Nick Lane

Abstract
Background: All complex life on Earth is eukaryotic. All eukaryotic cells share a common ancestor that arose just
once in four billion years of evolution. Prokaryotes show no tendency to evolve greater morphological complexity,
despite their metabolic virtuosity. Here I argue that the eukaryotic cell originated in a unique prokaryotic
endosymbiosis, a singular event that transformed the selection pressures acting on both host and endosymbiont.
Results: The reductive evolution and specialisation of endosymbionts to mitochondria resulted in an extreme
genomic asymmetry, in which the residual mitochondrial genomes enabled the expansion of bioenergetic
membranes over several orders of magnitude, overcoming the energetic constraints on prokaryotic genome size,
and permitting the host cell genome to expand (in principle) over 200,000-fold. This energetic transformation was
permissive, not prescriptive; I suggest that the actual increase in early eukaryotic genome size was driven by a
heavy early bombardment of genes and introns from the endosymbiont to the host cell, producing a high
mutation rate. Unlike prokaryotes, with lower mutation rates and heavy selection pressure to lose genes, early
eukaryotes without genome-size limitations could mask mutations by cell fusion and genome duplication, as in
allopolyploidy, giving rise to a proto-sexual cell cycle. The side effect was that a large number of shared eukaryotic
basal traits accumulated in the same population, a sexual eukaryotic common ancestor, radically different to any
known prokaryote.
Conclusions: The combination of massive bioenergetic expansion, release from genome-size constraints, and high
mutation rate favoured a protosexual cell cycle and the accumulation of eukaryotic traits. These factors explain the
unique origin of eukaryotes, the absence of true evolutionary intermediates, and the evolution of sex in eukaryotes
but not prokaryotes.
Reviewers: This article was reviewed by: Eugene Koonin, William Martin, Ford Doolittle and Mark van der Giezen.
For complete reports see the Reviewers’ Comments section.

Background
We used to think that if we knew one, we knew two,
because one and one are two. We are finding that we
must learn a great deal more about ‘and’. Sir Arthur
Eddington (1882-1944)
The origin of the eukaryotic cell was a unique event

There is little doubt that all known eukaryotic cells share
a common ancestor that arose only once in four billion
years of evolution. Common traits range from the conserved position of many introns [1], to the structure of
nuclear pore complexes [2], to complex traits such as
Correspondence: nick.lane@ucl.ac.uk
Department of Genetics, Evolution and Environment, University College
London, Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT, UK

syngamy and two-step meiosis [3]. It is implausible that
all of these shared properties arose by lateral gene transfer (which is inherently asymmetric in mechanism) or
convergent evolution (which implies that traits like
intron position are dictated by selective constraints,
rather than historical contingency). Common ancestry is
much the most parsimonious explanation.
However, a single ancestor is perfectly consistent with
multiple origins if all ‘protoeukaryotic’ lines arising later
were driven to extinction by fully-fledged eukaryotes
already occupying every niche, and if all earlier protoeukaryotes were displaced by modern eukaryotes (or fell
extinct for some other reason). This cannot be addressed
phylogenetically, as any phylogenetic evidence for their
existence is lost. Nor is the fossil record any help. It is

© 2011 Lane; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Lane Biology Direct 2011, 6:35
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/35

hard to distinguish between eukaryotic and prokaryotic
microfossils let alone prove the existence of extinct lines
of protoeukaryotes. While asserting the unprovable existence of extinct lines of eukaryotes is unsatisfying, if not
unscientific, extinction is commonplace, and the argument
seems, on the face of it, irrefutable.
But there are several reasons to doubt that prokaryotes
have repeatedly given rise to more complex ‘protoeukaryotes’, which were ultimately all driven to extinction by
modern eukaryotes that came to occupy every niche. The
periodic mass extinctions of plants and animals, followed
by evolutionary radiations of hitherto suppressed groups,
are not characteristic of microbial evolution-such radiations explore morphological, not metabolic, space. Moreover, large animals and plants generally have tiny
populations in comparison with microbes, and cannot
acquire life-saving genes by lateral gene transfer, making
animals and plants much more vulnerable to extinction.
The continuity of global geochemical cycles over three
billion years [4] shows that no major prokaryotic group
has been driven to extinction, not even methanogens and
acetogens, the most energetically tenuous forms of life.
The abundance of apparently parallel niches [5] suggests
that extinction is not the rule. Archaea, once believed to
be restricted to extreme environments such as hydrothermal vents and salt flats, are common in temperate oceans
[6], whereas eukaryotes, long thought to be excluded
from extreme environments by their delicate constitutions, are in fact abundant in anoxic conditions [7] and in
rivers contaminated with heavy metals [8]. Picoeukaryotes compete directly with prokaryotes in many environments [9], yet neither group has fallen extinct.
Extinction seems too facile an explanation to account
for fact that all complex life on Earth shares a common
ancestor that only arose once. If indeed many other independently arising lineages of protoeukaryotes all fell
extinct, more persuasive reasons are needed than simple
displacement by more competitive modern eukaryotes.
The existence of a diverse group of morphologically
simple eukaryotes that occupy an intermediate niche
between prokaryotes and more complex protists refines
this point. Described as archezoa by Cavalier-Smith in
the 1980s [10,11], the group was seen as primitively amitochondriate protoeukaryotes, living fossils of the prokaryotic-eukaryotic transition [12,13]. Genetic and
morphological studies, however, revealed that all known
archezoa possessed mitochondria in the past, and lost
them via reductive evolution to specialised organelles
called hydrogenosomes and mitosomes [14-17]. This is
significant in terms of extinction. There are at least 1000
species of simple protist that lack mitochondria, yet all of
them evolved by reductive evolution from more complex
ancestors, rather than evolving ‘up’ from more simple
prokaryotes. Considered purely in terms of chance, the

Page 2 of 31

likelihood of this is around one in 10300 against. Allowing
for independent phylogenetic origins on a more realistic
20 separate occasions, the probability is still one in a
million. This pattern is unlikely to be chance. Either
there was a competitive advantage to reductive evolution
(but if so, why should complex aerobic protists displace
anaerobic specialists by becoming more like them?) or
there was heavy selection against prokaryotes evolving
greater morphological complexity. That seems to be true.
Prokaryotes show no tendency to evolve greater
morphological complexity

Despite their metabolic virtuosity, living prokaryotes are
barely distinguishable from 3-billion year old microfossils
in their morphological appearance [18]. At a molecular
level there is no obvious reason for this limitation: bacteria made a start up every avenue of complexity, but
then stopped short. There are prokaryotic examples of
straight chromosomes [19], DNA recombination [20],
multiple replicons [21], introns and exons [22], extreme
polyploidy [23], nucleus-like structures [24], internal
membranes [25], giant size [26], dynamic cytoskeleton
[27], predation [28], parasitism [29], intercellular signalling [30], endocytosis [31], even endosymbionts [32,33].
What prokaryotes lack is the characteristic eukaryotic
accumulation of all of these traits at once, typically in
much larger cells with complex internal compartments
and intracellular transport networks, all encoded by genomes that range freely from bacterial size up to scores of
Gigabases, even in protists [34]. The absence of real morphological complexity in bacteria is plausibly ascribed to
the dominant mode of prokaryotic evolution: prokaryotes
are streamlined by selection for small genomes and fast
replication, quickly losing unnecessary genes, and frequently acquiring new genes from the metagenome,
when needed, by lateral gene transfer [35,36].
But why are eukaryotes not equally subject to heavy
selection for streamlining? Some are, certainly, but many
are not, and most eukaryotic streamlining appears to be
secondary. Population geneticists ascribe the accumulation of genes in eukaryotes to reduced purifying selection
in small populations [37]; but if so, why don’t smaller
populations of prokaryotes accumulate larger genomes
for exactly the same reasons? If the constraint was circular chromosomes [38] why didn’t bacteria with straight
chromosomes and multiple replicons become complex?
If phagocytosis was the critical step [39,40], what stopped
wall-less prokaryotes with an incipient capacity for endocytosis (protein uptake) and dynamic cytoskeletons from
evolving true complexity? This is ultimately a question
about the nature of natural selection. If traits such as the
nucleus, phagocytosis and meiotic sex evolved by natural
selection acting on ordinary mutations in large or small
populations of prokaryotes, and each step offered an

Lane Biology Direct 2011, 6:35
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/35

advantage, then why did the same traits not evolve
repeatedly in prokaryotes, as did the eye [41] in eukaryotes? As noted already, there is no reason to suppose
that such protoeukaryotes should have been driven to
extinction by more competitive modern eukaryotes;
rather, prokaryotes just seem to have no proclivity to
explore morphological space.
Eukaryotes originated in an endosymbiosis between
prokaryotes

The fact that all eukaryotic cells either have, or once
had, mitochondria, means that the acquisition of mitochondria by some host cell was at the very least an early
event in eukaryotic evolution. And large scale, genomewide phylogenetic studies [42-46] suggest that an endosymbiosis between prokaryotes might well have been the
singular event that broke the eternal loop of prokaryotic
simplicity.
There is little doubt that the ancestor of the mitochondria was a free-living bacterium, probably most closely
related to a-proteobacteria [47] (whatever they were 1.5-2
billion years ago), but its metabolic capabilities are uncertain and disputed [48]. However, given the ubiquitous phylogenetic distribution of anaerobic mitochondria and
hydrogenosomes across all the eukaryotic supergroups
[49], the most parsimonious answer is that the mitochondrial ancestor was a metabolically versatile, facultatively
anaerobic bacterium, perhaps similar to Rhodobacter [50].
The identity of the host cell is even more contentious
[51,52]. Most large-scale genomic analyses point to a
bona fide prokaryote, an archaeon of some sort [42-46],
albeit not falling clearly into any modern group, so
again its metabolic capabilities are unknown. It is therefore difficult to reconstruct the relationship between the
endosymbiont and host cell by phylogenetics alone. A
common argument against this scenario (an endosymbiosis between two prokaryotes) is that one prokaryote
could not have gained entry to another except through
phagocytosis. This argument is refuted by two known
examples of prokaryotic cells living within other prokaryotes [32,33] (Figure 1)–plainly it is possible, even if
extremely uncommon. Indeed, the very improbability of
such an event helps to explain the unique origin of
eukaryotes [53]. (It should also be noted that endosymbionts are also known in fungi, despite the fact that
fungi are no more phagocytic than bacteria [54].)
Because phylogenetics cannot presently constrain the
identity of either host cell or endosymbiont, it cannot
give a clear insight into eukaryogenesis–the crossing of
that deep gulf between prokaryotes and eukaryotes. One
cell inside another cell may have broken the eternal
prokaryotic loop, but this situation is far removed from
the morphological complexity of even the simplest
eukaryotic cell. Is it possible to gain an insight into

Page 3 of 31

what happened next without the aid of phylogenetic
reconstruction?

Cell fusions best explain the accumulation of
eukaryotic traits
Any hypothesis for the origin and evolution of eukaryotes
must explain why prokaryotes show little tendency to
evolve morphological complexity; why the Last Eukaryotic Common Ancestor, LECA, was morphologically complex; and why no true evolutionary intermediates exist,
despite the niche being viable, and indeed filled with
thousands of simple protists [10,11]. Prokaryotes and
eukaryotes both speciate profligately, meaning that
genetic variation falls into innumerable discrete clusters,
which correspond to species as defined by Darwin and
elaborated by Mallet [55]. Despite this universal tendency
to vary and diverge, there was no successful speciation
across the prokaryote-eukaryote transition. That is to say,
there are no surviving evolutionary intermediates–no
‘early branching’ species, equivalent to the discredited
archezoa, despite the great evolutionary distance crossed.
If the arguments marshalled here are correct, the trigger,
or starting point, for eukaryogenesis was an endosymbiosis between prokaryotes: a prokaryote within a prokaryote, lacking a nucleus or any of the other signature
eukaryotic traits. In contrast, LECA was recognizably
eukaryotic, with a nucleus, straight chromosomes, introns
and exons, a cell cycle, meiosis and mitosis, dynamic
cytoskeleton, motor proteins and intracellular transport
mechanisms, endomembrane systems and mitochondria.
All of these traits apparently evolved in a population of
cells that never diverged to form a successful earlybranching species. There are no evolutionary intermediates with a nucleus but no endoplasmic reticulum, or
mitochondria but no nucleus, or a dynamic cytoskeleton
but no meiosis. Over this long evolutionary distance, the
prokaryote-eukaryote transition, the tree of life is neither
a branching tree nor a reticular network, but what
amounts to an unbranching trunk (Figure 2).
Only certain forms of inheritance could begin to
explain such a trunk. Being inherently asymmetric, lateral gene transfer surely cannot explain the universality
of eukaryotic basal traits: it is far more likely to give rise
to the pattern that is actually seen in prokaryotes, in
which different species possess different traits, and none
possesses them all. But reciprocal sex (or some form of
cell fusion) can readily explain the accumulation of
eukaryotic traits. If so, then sex must have arisen very
early in eukaryotic evolution, as is borne out by phylogenetic analyses [56-58]; but here this is a logical inference, not an observation.
Likewise, the evolution of eukaryotes must have been
rapid, in a small population. If the population had been
large, the individual cells should have been successful

Lane Biology Direct 2011, 6:35
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/35

(a)

(c)

Page 4 of 31

(b)

(d)

Figure 1 Genomes and membranes in eukaryotes and prokaryotes. (a). TEM of cyanobacteria, showing large expansion of bioenergetic
membrane surface area as internal thylakoid membranes. However, cyanobacteria are sufficiently small that one or a few copies of the genome
(not visible) are sufficient to retain control over chemiosmotic coupling. Scale bars: 50 nm. Reproduced with permission from Miller SR et al.
PNAS 2005, 102:850-855. (b). TEM of intracellular bacteria living within free-living cyanobacteria (Pleurocapsa minor): one of only two known
examples of a prokaryote inside a (walled) prokaryote, which must have gained entry without phagocytosis. Scale bars: 1 μM. Reproduced with
permission from Wujek D. Trans Am Micros Soc 1979, 98:143-145. (c). Multiple copies of nucleoids, each containing the complete genome of
Thiomargarita, stained with DAPI. Giant vacuole above in black. Scale bar 50 μM. Courtesy of Heide Schultz-Vogt. (d). Extreme polyploidy in
Epulopiscium, (stained with DAPI) showing peri-membrane location of nucleoids, each genome about 3.8 Mb in size. Scale bar 50 μM. Courtesy
of Esther Angert.

(stable and viable) and should have become structured
in space. Spatial structuring of stable populations should
have led to divergence and speciation, at least some of
which ought to have permanently occupied the ‘archezoan niche’ (that filled by morphologically simple, ‘primitive’ eukaryotes). They did not, despite the viability of
the niche, so the population must have been small. For

similar reasons, evolution had to be fast. If the pace of
evolution was slow, the individual cells should have
been successful (stable and viable) and so should have
become structured in time and space: they should have
undergone speciation. The fact that they did not again
implies instability. Finally, the requirement for sex also
implies that the population was small; large stable

Lane Biology Direct 2011, 6:35
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/35

Page 5 of 31

(b)

Time

Genetic distance

(a)

Figure 2 Endosymbiotic origin of eukaryotes by time and genetic distance. Schematic depiction of the chimeric origin of eukaryotes (in
red) by (a) genetic distance and (b) time. Bacteria and archaea are shown to the left and right, respectively. Reticular networks of lateral gene
transfer are not shown for simplicity, but characterise prokaryotic evolution. In (a) the unbranching red trunk depicts the prokaryote-eukaryote
transition without any successful speciation (as attested by the absence of true evolutionary intermediates; see text) across the long genetic
distance from an endosymbiotic origin in prokaryotes to LECA. In (b) the absence of this unbranching trunk depicts the short timescale and
rapid evolution of LECA, driven by endosymbiotic gene transfer, a high mutation rate, cell fusions and genome doublings, accumulating traits
within a single small population.

populations should speciate, as indeed happened immediately after the crystallization of LECA, with a nearimmediate radiation of the eukaryotic supergoups [2].
These surmises are consistent with calculations based
on intron density, which also suggest a tight bottleneck
at the origin of eukaryotes [59].
It is thus likely that eukaryotes evolved from a small
population of prokaryotes with endosymbionts: unstable,
rapidly evolving, protosexual cells. These circumstances
enabled the ubiquitous acquisition of traits, but for
some reason, unlike bacteria, there was little selection
pressure to lose them again.
Mitochondria solve the riddle of eukaryotic origins

I shall argue in this paper that a singular event–the
acquisition of mitochondria–transformed the selection
pressures acting on the prokaryotic host cell. Mitochondria and specifically mitochondrial genes, enabled the
surface area of bioenergetic membranes to be increased
over several orders of magnitude, which in turn permitted expansion of the host cell genome capacity over
several orders of magnitude [34]. That lifted the ceiling
on prokaryotic genome size, eliminating the selection
pressure to lose genes, but did not drive the accumulation of genes; it was permissive, not prescriptive. Two
factors did drive the expansion of eukaryotic genomes,
and I shall argue that both were linked to the bombardment of DNA from the mitochondria to the host cell:
first, the host cell acquired bacterial genes by standard

nonhomologous recombination without any requirement
to lose them again; and second, the bombardment of
mitochondrial DNA produced a high mutation rate,
which was offset by cell fusion and masking with new
genes–the origin of sex.

Results and Discussion
Energy per gene

Prokaryotes and eukaryotes respire at roughly a similar
rate–the mean metabolic rate is 0.19 ± 0.5 W g-1 (1 Watt =
1 J sec-1) in prokaryotes (based on a mean of 55 samples)
versus 0.06 ± 0.1 W g-1 in protozoa (based on 12 samples)
[60,61]. However, these mean metabolic rates per gram
conceal a host of subtleties, as eukaryotic cells are, on average, much larger than prokaryotes, with a mean mass of
40,100 × 10-12 g for eukaryotes versus 2.6 × 10-12 g for prokaryotes. The mean metabolic rate per cell is therefore 0.49
pW for bacteria, versus 2,286 pW for protozoa. In other
words, metabolic rate per gram is not particularly different
(a factor of 3) but cell volume is very different (a factor of
15,000), so an average protozoan has nearly 5000 times
more metabolic power (W) than a single bacterium.
This additional metabolic power supports additional
genes and DNA in eukaryotes, as can be seen from a
consideration of energy per gene. The metabolic power
per Mb of DNA is similar in bacteria and protozoa, to
within an order of magnitude. Assuming 6 Mb of DNA,
an ‘average’ bacterium has about 0.08 pW Mb-1 . The
largest bacterial genomes, around 10 Mb, would have

Lane Biology Direct 2011, 6:35
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/35

about 0.05 pW Mb-1, while the smallest free-living bacteria, with around 1.5 Mb, would have about 0.3 pW
Mb-1, in each case assuming a similar cell size (but see
below on scaling). These values are in the same range as
those calculated for specific bacteria and discussed elsewhere [34].
Protists exhibit an extraordinary range of genome sizes,
from bacterial sizes up to around 100,000 Mb [62,63].
While many fungi and small protists have genome sizes
in the range 10-40 Mb [64,65], fungal genome sizes range
up to 1000 Mb [65]. The mean for mitochondriate phagotrophs is about 700 Mb [63], ranging up to 10,000 Mb
[Jékely and Cavalier-Smith, personal communication].
Mean genome sizes for algae are larger again, at around
3000 Mb for Cryptophycaea and Dinoflagellates, ranging
up to 10,000 and 100,000 Mb, respectively [66,67]. Taking an ‘average’ of 3000 Mb, protists would have a power
of 0.76 pW Mb -1 . Thus, despite the fact that bacteria
have a faster metabolic rate per gram than protozoa, their
small size disguises the fact that the power dedicated to
each Mb of DNA has remained roughly constant, to
within an order of magnitude. If the nuclear genome
were smaller, say 100 Mb, then the energy per Mb of
DNA would expand to 22 pW Mb-1. A genome of 10 Mb
would give the protist a power of 228 pW Mb -1, nearly
3000 times greater than the bacterium. Having said that,
the actual metabolic rate, and the number of mitochondria required to support it, is very much lower than the
protozoan average in such small protists. Ochromonas,
for example [34], with a haploid genome of 300 Mb, has
a power of only 0.04 pW Mb-1, squarely in the bacterial
range. The point is that eukaryotes and prokaryotes often
have a similar metabolic power per Mb of DNA, but prokaryotic genome sizes are limited to 10 Mb or less,
whereas eukaryotic genome sizes can expand freely to
100,000 Mb, and in doing so are plainly not constrained
by energetics.
This conclusion remains true even when considering the
genomic weight of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA). Over
evolutionary time, mtDNA has been whittled away to
between 6 Kb and 77 Kb in protozoa [68]. Taking an average mitochondrial genome of 30 Kb in 200,000 copies (as
in large amoebae [69]), the total mtDNA content per cell
is 6000 Mb, twice the size of the average haploid nuclear
genome, or 9000 Mb in total for the ‘average’ protist. The
genomic power now corresponds to 0.25 pW Mb-1; still
more than most bacteria, yet unlike bacteria sustaining a
nuclear genome of 3000 Mb.
The situation is more pronounced in terms of gene
number. An average bacterial genome (such as E. coli)
contains nearly 5,000 genes, compared with some 20,000
in an average protist, such as Euglena ranging up to
40,000 in Paramecium [62,63,70,71]. At a metabolic rate
of 0.49 pW per cell, a bacterium with 5000 genes has

Page 6 of 31

only 0.1 fW per gene. Smaller bacteria, with around
2,500 genes, have a power of 0.2 fW per gene. Larger bacteria, with around 10,000 genes are surely close to a
lower functional limit, with a power of just 0.05 fW per
gene. In contrast, at a power of 2,286 pW per cell and
20,000 genes, an average protist has about 115 fW per
gene, over 1000-fold more energy per gene than an average bacterium, and more than 2000-fold more than a
large bacterium. Increasing bacterial gene number
further, without an equivalent increase in ATP synthesis,
is unlikely to be sustainable; and increasing bacterial
gene number up to the eukaryotic mean of 20,000 genes
would give bacteria nearly 5000-fold less energy per gene
(Figure 3). This perspective helps explain why both gene
number and genome size remain within tight limits
across prokaryotes. The lower limit is set by the number
of genes needed for a free-living existence; the upper
limit, arguably, by energetic constraints. I will develop
this argument further below.
It is notable that eukaryotes support, on average,
around 500 times more DNA than prokaryotes but only
four times as many genes. Non-coding DNA is relatively
cheap, but its maintenance still has an energetic cost, as
well as slowing replication [72,73]. In general, DNA replication consumes around 2% of bacterial energy budget.
Increasing DNA content 10-fold would still only consume 20% of the cell’s energy budget, no doubt affordable. But increasing DNA content to 3000 Mb, the
protist mean, would require the bacterial energy budget
to be raised 12-fold, a serious cost in its own right. And if
the genome expanded to 100,000 Mb, the upper reaches
of protistan genomes, the energy budget would need to
be raised 400-fold. It is therefore hardly surprising that
bacteria maintain a high gene density, 500-1000 genes
per Mb (compared to the eukaryotic average of around
12 genes per Mb). They do so by eliminating most intergenic and intragenic material that might happen to arise
[72-74] (preventing the potential evolution of regulatory
elements and microRNAs), by organising genes into
operons, and by restricting the median length of proteins
[75]. In contrast, eukaryotes have invested freely in regulatory microRNAs [76].
But the energetic constraints on DNA content are relatively forgiving compared with the far heavier energetic
constraints on protein synthesis, and therefore on the
energy per gene. Given that protein synthesis accounts
for a remarkable 75% of the total energy budget of growing microbes [77], there is a near linear relationship
between the number of genes and the energetic cost, a
cost that is made tangible by ribosome numbers. E. coli,
for example, has up to 13,000 ribosomes, compared with
13 million on the rough ER alone in a liver cell–100010,000 times more [34]. This value corresponds closely to
the abundance of energy that eukaryotes are able to

Lane Biology Direct 2011, 6:35
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/35

Page 7 of 31

(a)

Metabolic rate fW ·

(b)

gene-1

Metabolic rate fW· gene-1
100

100

10
10

1

1

0.1
0.01

0.1

0.001
0.01
0.0001

a.

a.

b.

b.

(c)

Metabolic rate · pW

(d)

Mb-1

10,000

100

1000

100

%

10

10

1

0.1
0.01

a.

b.

c.

d.

e.

a.

b.

Figure 3 Energetics of genome size in eukaryotes and prokaryotes. (a). Mean energy per gene in prokaryotes versus eukaryotes equalised
for genome size. Prokaryotes in red, eukaryotes in blue. Note log scale. (b). Mean energy per gene in prokaryotes versus eukaryotes equalised for
genome size and cell volume; see text. Prokaryotes in red, eukaryotes in blue. Note log scale. (c). Power per haploid genome (energy per gene x
number of genes in one haploid genome) in a. E. coli (metabolic rate taken from Ref 60); b. Thiomargarita (metabolic rate taken from Ref 83); c.
Epulopiscium (metabolic rate taken, conservatively, to be equal to A. proteus); d. Chlamydomonas (metabolic rate taken from Ref 60); e. Amoeba
proteus (metabolic rate taken from Ref 61). Note log scale and broad agreement with derived mean values in (a) and (b). (d). Proportion of
genome free to vary (in red) equalised to 100,000 Mb in a. Epulopiscium and b. Amoeba proteus. Blue bar depicts proportion of total DNA
content required for maintaining control over cytoplasm using an equal copy number (26,000; scaled from values given in text) of a. a 3.8 Mb
genome; and b. a 30 Kb mitochondrial genome. ‘Free to evolve’ means genomic capacity beyond a standard prokaryotic genome required to
govern a fixed volume of cytoplasm.

Lane Biology Direct 2011, 6:35
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/35

dedicate to the expression of their additional genes–
nearly 5000-fold more when normalised for genome size.
This additional 1000-5000-fold more energy per gene
helps to explain why the dynamic eukaryotic lifestyle,
including archetypal traits like phagocytosis, never arose
in prokaryotes. Phagocytosis is not unknown in amitochondriate eukaryotes such as ‘archezoa’ that lost their
mitochondria secondarily. However, the energetic costs
for the de novo ’invention’ of complex traits like phagocytosis must far exceed the costs of simply inheriting a
functional system. Thus it might well require mitochondria to ‘invent’ phagocytosis, but once invented it is possible to evolve reductively in certain environments,
while retaining phagocytosis. For example, Entamoeba
histolytica is an amitochondriate phagotroph with nearly
10,000 genes [78], equivalent to a large bacterial genome. Characteristically for parasites it has undergone
reductive evolution from more complex mitochondriate
ancestors, and today lacks pathways for amino acid biosynthesis, purine and pyrimidine synthesis, fatty acid
biosynthesis and TCA cycle [78]. In other words, by cutting back on the costs of intermediary metabolism,
E. histolytica has been able to maintain its expensive
phagocytic machinery (albeit this is pared down too
relative to large free-living amoebae). Thus the acquisition of mitochondria enabled an accumulation of DNA
and genes, allowing profligate experimentation with new
protein folds, new proteins, gene families and regulatory
elements, without the heavy bacterial selection pressure
to lose them all again. I am proposing that this freedom
permitted the de novo evolution of complex traits like
phagocytosis, not possible without mitochondria. But
once in existence, there was nothing to stop complex
eukaryotes evolving reductively in certain environments,
while retaining some complex traits like phagocytosis. In
these cases, their energy per gene (and genome size) is
no longer greater than bacteria; but their ability to phagocytose enables them to compete successfully in ‘bacterial’ niches, despite being metabolically less versatile.
Thus prokaryotes exist at the bottom of a deep canyon
in the energy landscape, from which they have never
escaped, except at the origin of the eukaryotic cell [34].
Eukaryotes have 1000-5000-fold more energy to burn per
gene at least in part because they are larger. Obviously,
larger cells need to generate more energy per gene to
sustain themselves. Bacteria, in contrast, are usually
small. I shall argue that the reason bacteria are small is
that large bacteria cannot generate a lot more energy per
gene. On the contrary, they generate a lot less. The problem relates to scaling.
The issue of scaling

The problem of scaling does not relate simply to surface-area to volume constraints. If the linear dimensions

Page 8 of 31

of the cell are increased 25-fold–corresponding to a
15,000-fold increase in cell volume, equivalent to the
mean difference in cell volume between prokaryotes and
eukaryotes in this study–the surface area of the plasma
membrane increases 625-fold. The deficit of prokaryotes
relative to eukaryotes is then apparently reduced to a
mere 8-fold–surely not an insurmountable difference,
especially if bacteria internalise respiration to some
extent on invaginated membranes, as happens in more
complex prokaryotes like cyanobacteria, with their internal thylakoid membranes (Figure 1).
Of course, if the giant bacterium is metabolically
active and composed of proteins, then demand for protein synthesis would rise by 15,000-fold (the increase in
cell volume) and this increased demand must be met by
a 625-fold increase in ATP production. This, however, is
equally true for eukaryotes, which still must synthesise
the proteins to fill their volume. Thus a giant bacterium
respiring over its plasma membrane would not be penalised much relative to a large eukaryote respiring internally. It is true that there are few limits to the number of
mitochondria that a eukaryote could accumulate in principle; but the same might seem to apply to internal
membranes in bacteria. However, this is not the case.
The catch here lies in the assumption that ATP synthesis per unit membrane is a constant, without a cost in
protein synthesis or distribution. Obviously this is not
true-scaling is not transubstantiation. The very act of
increasing cell volume and surface area on such a scale in
turn demands some sort of compensation in terms of
ribosome numbers, genome copies and protein synthesis,
otherwise the scaled up bacterium is merely an empty
bag, not a living cell. ATP synthesis depends on respiratory proteins implanted into the membrane at high concentration. If the rate of protein synthesis is unchanged,
but the surface area of plasma membrane is increased
625-fold, then ATP synthesis per unit area must fall by
625-fold (not even allowing for inefficiencies in intracellular transport). It is impossible for a bacterium to step
up the rates of transcription and translation by 625-fold
from a single genome; the only reasonable solution to
scaling up on such a scale would be to scale up the total
number of genomes accordingly–most reasonably,
assuming that streamlined bacteria already approach the
limits of efficiency, by a factor of 625-fold. If so, then the
energy available per gene remains unchanged, and the
cell would have 625 copies of its genome, each controlling an equivalent volume of cytoplasm and area of bioenergetic plasma membrane.
But what of the internal volume? There are two
extreme possibilities: either the internal volume is metabolically inert, in which case the cell is not equivalent to
a eukaryote; or it is metabolically active. In the first case,
the internal volume is like a balloon, with a thin skin of

Lane Biology Direct 2011, 6:35
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/35

active cytoplasm surrounding an inert space, metabolically equivalent to a giant vacuole. It has the same energy
per gene as any other bacterium, but is faced with a serious challenge when it comes to cell division, as bacterial
division usually depends on a Z-ring with a maximal diameter of about 1 μM [79]. Giant bacteria are obliged to
produce endospores or to divide reductively (giving rise
to clumps of cells that have been mistaken for animal
embryos [80]). Either way, normal binary fission will not
do; scaled-up bacteria are obliged to evolve novel forms
of division.
The second possibility is for the inner volume to be
metabolically active, as is the case in eukaryotes. But the
scaled up bacterium would now face an even more serious problem: rates of transcription and translation could
not be scaled-up 15,000-fold to service the increased cell
volume, except by scaling up genome number, as before.
But scaling up genome number 15,000-fold with only a
625-fold increase in ATP availability would reduce the
energy per gene a further 25-fold. Equalising for both
gene number (4,600-fold less energy per gene in bacteria)
and cell volume gives a factor of 115,000 times less
energy per gene than the comparable eukaryote. If the
bacterium were scaled up to the size of a large amoeba (a
50-fold increase in linear dimension) then the energy per
gene would be a remarkable 230,000-fold less than the
amoeba (Figure 3). This is the real scale of the energy
canyon that has forced prokaryotes to remain prokaryotic
for 4 billion years.
This line of argument is substantiated by several examples of extreme polyploidy in giant bacteria (Figure 1).
The best example is Epulopiscium, a giant Gram-positive
bacterium that lives only in the anaerobic guts of the surgeonfish. Growing up to 0.6 mm in length, this cigarshaped bacterium has as many as 200,000 copies of its
full genome [23], all of them associated with the plasma
membrane. The inner volume is metabolically relatively
inert, and is ultimately filled with daughter cells growing
within–each with their own plasma membranes and associated genomes [81]. A second example is Thiomargarita,
an even larger, free-living g-proteobacterium that traps
nitrates from up-welling currents in giant internal
vacuoles [82]. Here the cytoplasm is a thin active layer,
again exhibiting extreme polyploidy–in this case around
8,000-17,000 copies of the full genome [Heide SchultzVogt, personal communication; Figure 1]. In both these
examples the number of genomes is very much in line
with theory; and in both cases the internal volume is
metabolically quite inert, totally so in the case of Thiomargarita [82,83].
Taking into consideration the energetic costs of
expressing these multiple genomes (each one 3-4 Mb in
size) the energy available per gene falls well within the
prokaryotic range–exactly as would be predicted given

Page 9 of 31

the metabolic inertia of the inner volume–several orders
of magnitude below eukaryotic values (Figure 3). In the
case of Epulopiscium, with 200,000 copies of its 3.8 Mb
genome, a single bacterium must sustain an extraordinary 760 Mb of DNA just to get through its life cycle.
Each genome governs a ‘bacterial’ volume of cytoplasm
in a bacterial fashion (without eukaryotic active transport mechanisms) and there is no spare bioenergetic
capacity to evolve more genes, or express them with
eukaryotic profligacy. Despite their giant size and their
prodigious quantity of DNA, giant prokaryotes remain,
in all other ways, prokaryotic. Given that cell division is
much more complicated than in smaller bacteria, it is
not surprising that giant bacteria only flourish in marginal ecosystems.
But why are eukaryotes not weighed down by the
colossal genomic weight of extreme polyploidy? The
answer is that they are not immune to the problem–it is
simply that the nature of the ploidy has changed as a
direct consequence of endosymbiosis. Rather than
extreme polyploidy, eukayotes exhibit extreme genomic
asymmetry.
Only endosymbiosis can fashion giant nuclear genomes

Endosymbiosis characteristically results in the reductive
evolution of endosymbiont genomes [84]. In the case of
the bacteria that eventually became mitochondria, almost
the entire genome was either lost or transferred to the
nucleus, leaving only a tiny residual genome in most cases
(and nothing at all in almost all hydrogenosomes [85]).
But mitochondria are by no means unique in this regard.
Chloroplasts, too, have lost almost all the genes required
by free-living cyanobacteria [86]. Other bacterial endosymbionts living inside eukaryotic cells, such as Buchnera
[87,88]Wolbachia [89], Rickettsia [90] and Carsonella [91]
have retained only stumps of genomes; in the case of Carsonella, smaller than many plant mitochondrial genomes
[91]. This process probably reflects competition between
individual endosymbiotic cells for succession to the next
generation. The fastest replicators, typically with the smallest genomes and lowest demand for de novo protein
synthesis, prevail. The outcome is that unnecessary genes
are jettisoned and the genome is gradually pared away.
But this process–no more than standard practice for
populations of endosymbionts–has the most profound
repercussions for the host cell.
The genetic machinery of mitochondria is often
thought of as a highly redundant system-hundreds or
thousands of copies of mtDNA in every cell, encoding
just a handful of respiratory proteins, plus the tRNAs
and rRNAs needed to express these proteins in situ.
Surely, the argument goes, it would be economically
more rational to move all these mitochondrial genes to
the nucleus, manufacture all mitochondrial proteins on

Lane Biology Direct 2011, 6:35
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/35

cytosolic ribosomes, and import the proteins into the
mitochondria, as more than a thousand are in any case;
and as happens without exception in all other membrane systems, such as the endoplasmic reticulum. Of
course, this argument only makes sense if there are no
countering benefits to the mitochondrial genes remaining in situ; and there almost certainly are some important benefits (see below). But in any case, the current
arrangement is only uneconomic in relation to a perceived ideal. The relevant comparison is not to a situation in which all mitochondrial genes reside in the
nucleus, but to a situation in which all mitochondrial
genes reside in the mitochondria–which is analogous to
the state of extreme polyploidy in giant bacteria.
In comparison to Epulopiscium, with its 760,000 Mb
of DNA, a large eukaryote with 200,000 copies of an
average protist mitochondrial genome (30 Kb) needs to
support only 6000 Mb of DNA. All the rest of the mitochondrial DNA that is lost altogether or transferred to
the nucleus as pseudogenes is by definition no longer
needed in situ, and so is free to vary–to evolve, to
encode new proteins with new properties. Equalising for
a total genome size of 100,000 Mb, more than 99% of
the DNA (that in the nucleus) is essentially free to
evolve in the eukaryote, compared with less than 1% in
the giant bacterium, with its requirement for many
copies of its full genome (Figure 3).
There are two critical points here. The first is that the
total amount of DNA sustained by the single cell, and
the total amount of protein expressed, could easily be
the same in both cases; what has changed is the distribution of DNA and variety of protein within the cell.
Eukaryotes exhibit extreme genomic asymmetry, with
lots of tiny mitochondrial genomes sustaining a massive
nuclear genome. This arrangement depends on cytoplasmic inheritance, with independent replication machinery
residing within each endosymbiont, at least during the
early phase of eukaryotic evolution. Cytoplasmic inheritance is not possible in the case of extreme polyploidy,
where the individual genomes are not independent cellular entities and so cannot partition themselves autonomously within the cell or compete among themselves
for succession. During cell division a small proportion
of genomes are distributed to daughter cells (1-2% in
the case of Epulopiscium), and then clonally amplified
during daughter cell growth, a process repeated generation after generation. Such clonal amplification makes
extreme polyploidy inflexible–essentially unevolvable–
and all the copies of an identical genome must remain
exactly that–copies of an identical genome, with no
potential to lose genes. The acquisition of plasmids
might seem to be a way out, but it is not (see below).
Second, in eukaryotes, the process of endosymbiotic
gene loss is slow and evolvable (and practically

Page 10 of 31

inevitable), with the potential to slowly accumulate large
changes over many generations. Because there are so
many endosymbionts in eukaryotic cells, even trivial
changes in mitochondrial genome size can be significant
and selectable at the level of the whole cell. The point is
that, as functions are lost (they need to be lost–if they
are simply transferred to the nucleus, there is no net
gain) there is a net fall in required protein synthesis,
saving the host cell a great deal in ATP synthesis. But
because the endosymbionts ultimately produce ATP for
the host cell, and are just as effective at this despite the
loss of genes (as they specialise as energy-transducing
organelles) there is in effect a net gain in ATP availability, which can be spent on other projects about the cell,
such as a dynamic cytoskeleton, at no net cost. There
are two very significant points about mitochondria here
that do not apply to all endosymbionts–first, they produce ATP for the host cell; and second, the process of
endosymbiotic gene loss ultimately cost their independence as cells, and enabled their specialisation as organelles. Specialisation (via selection) for ATP synthesis is
crucial, as it means that most other endosymbiont functions can be lost altogether, and the energetic savings
diverted into host cell proteome projects.
Consider what might happen if 5% of each endosymbiont genome was initially dispensable, because the symbiont relies on the host cell for some metabolites. In a
host cell equivalent Epulopiscium, the total amount of
DNA sustained by the cell would fall from 760,000 to
720,000 Mb. In terms of genes, if the endosymbionts no
longer needed to express 200 out of 4000 proteins, the
total protein expression in the cell as a whole would fall
by 40 million proteins. In terms of ATP requirements,
the ATP cost for transcription and translation of a single peptide bond is a minimum of five ATPs [92], or
1,250 ATPs for a single polypeptide of median bacterial
length of 250 amino acids [93]. If each polypeptide were
present in a conservative 1000 copies, the total ATP savings would be 50 trillion (50 × 1012) ATPs over a 24 hr
lifecycle (equivalent to Epulopiscium), or 20 million glucose moieties per second.
If such energy savings were redirected to the fabrication of a dynamic ATP-consuming cytoskeleton in the
host cell, they could (in principle, if not in practice) fuel
the de novo synthesis and self-assembly of 800 microns
of actin filaments every second. Such dynamism is a small
evolutionary step in terms of genetic mutation, but is
energetically prohibited in giant bacteria that are unable
to dispense with other genes via the reductive evolution
of cytoplasmic inheritance. But reductive evolution, by
permitting the evolution of energetically expensive intracellular transport systems, enables the loss of endosymbiont genes, affording further energy savings. Thus the
whole process feeds on itself, paring away at symbiont

Lane Biology Direct 2011, 6:35
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/35

genomes, and enabling the accumulation of more DNA,
new genes and gene families in the host cell genome,
with no net energetic cost. At each step, the host cell and
endosymbiont both benefit, the endosymbiont steadily
losing its autonomy as it becomes integrated into the
host, in the end becoming an organelle-mitochondria.
Genome outposts are required for major expansion of
oxidative phosphorylation

Importantly, the end of this process of gene transfer is
not the complete loss of mitochondrial genes, but the
paring away of the mitochondrial genome to a functional
minimum, invariably encoding the same core group of
integral membrane proteins, subunits of the respiratory
chain [47,68]. Exactly why this same core group is always
retained is still disputed, but the Co-location for Redox
Regulation (CoRR) hypothesis is by far the most persuasive explanation, being both necessary and sufficient to
account for the retention of mitochondrial genes, along
with the ribosomes needed to express them on site
[94-96]. In essence, genome outposts and ribosomes are
needed in the immediate vicinity of the bioenergetic
membranes to enable swift and local responses to
changes in membrane potential and electron flux in the
face of abrupt changes in substrate availability, oxygen
concentration (or redox state more generally) and ATP
demand. The extreme mitochondrial membrane potential
sets the mitochondrial inner membrane apart from
any other intracellular membrane system, such as the
endoplasmic reticulum [34]. A membrane potential of
150 mV across a 5 nm membrane gives a field strength
of 30 million Volts per metre, equal to that discharged by
a bolt of lightning. Mistakes can be penalised in a matter
of seconds to minutes by free-radical leak, loss of cytochrome c and falling ATP levels–the archetypal trigger
for controlled cell death across eukaryotes, from singlecelled algae to plants and animals [97-99]. Thus any
failure to control mitochondrial membrane potential is
punishable by sudden death, which is avoidable because
mitochondrial genes enable swift and local compensation
at the level of respiratory protein expression. Competing
hypotheses for the retention of mitochondrial genes
(such as the hydrophobicity hypothesis [100]) are far
from mutually exclusive: if importing highly hydrophobic
proteins into the mitochondria is laborious and slow, yet
there is a requirement for rapid and local responses in
gene expression to changes in membrane potential, then
hydrophobicity becomes merely a subclause of the CoRR
hypothesis.
Mitochondrial genes are undoubtedly necessary for
oxidative phosphorylation in eukaryotic cells. A large
body of data shows that the rate of respiration depends
on the copy number of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA),
with active cells having more copies of the genome

Page 11 of 31

[101-104]. Cells depleted in mtDNA have a low respiratory capacity [105], while mutations that cause mtDNA
depletion are typically associated with mitochondrial diseases [106]. The rate of transcription of mitochondrial
genes, notably ND5, controls the overall rate of assembly of respiratory complexes [107,108]. Presumably, the
reverse is true for prokaryotes: in the absence of local
genome outposts, giant bacteria could not respire across
a significantly wider area of bioenergetic membrane,
whether internal or external. All known examples of
giant bacteria do indeed have multiple genomes, invariably placed close to the plasma membrane (rather than
distributed randomly across the cell) suggesting that
local genome outposts are necessary for respiration.
The fact that the plasma membrane is a continuous
unbroken sheet in giant bacteria (rather than discrete
mitochondria) does not detract from this argument. Proton diffusion and conductivity is extremely high, such that
the membrane potential would equalize across the entire
surface area in essentially zero time [109]. In contrast,
electron flux depends on the concentration of substrates
such as NADH, ADP, Pi and oxygen, all of which diffuse
orders of magnitude more slowly. Electron flux also
depends on the expression and activity of respiratory proteins, which is slower still. Equalisation of membrane
potential could therefore drive reverse electron flow, high
ROS leak and futile cycling in different regions of the
membrane, unless gene expression was sensitive to local
changes in redox state, and so compensated for the differences. That requires local genomes encoding the requisite
proteins, transcription sensitive to local redox state, and
translation coupled directly to membrane insertion; hence
the need for multiple local genome outposts.
Given the size similarity of mtDNA to bacterial plasmids, it might seem possible to control respiration over a
wide area of bioenergetic membranes by co-locating plasmids encoding all the genes needed for oxidative phosphorylation. There are various problems with plasmids,
which have been discussed in detail elsewhere [34]. However, from the perspective developed here, plasmids
could not enable the scaling up of bacteria to eukaryotic
size. This is because plasmids cannot meet the general
transcriptional and translational requirements of giant
bacteria, whereby a single genome controls a roughly
fixed volume of cytoplasm in the absence of dynamic
transport networks [110]. If there were a single central
genome (a standard prokaryotic genome) with hundreds
or thousands of large plasmids controlling respiration
across a large surface area of membranes, the cell would
have plenty of ATP, but would still be unable to distribute any other proteins or substrates about the cell in the
absence of highly evolved transport networks (which
would take generations to evolve). The cell would fail
and die. This problem does not arise if full genomes are

Lane Biology Direct 2011, 6:35
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/35

distributed throughout the cell, as each genome provides
both the energy and proteins required to control a ‘prokaryotic’ volume of cytoplasm (Figure 4). In other words,
while mtDNA is misleadingly similar in size and complexity to a large bacterial plasmid today, it could only
become so through the reductive evolution of the full
bacterial genome, such that steady gene loss over many
generations was continuously compensated for, within
the host cell as a whole, by equally gradual improvements
in intracellular trafficking, evolving over many
generations.
Thus there are two overwhelming reasons for why prokaryotes remain prokaryotic. First, scaling up to a eukaryotic volume requires scaling up the number of genomes
accordingly, which undercuts the energy available per
gene by five orders of magnitude. Second, multiple genomes are necessary to retain control of oxidative phosphorylation over a wide area of bioenergetic membranes.
Literally, only endosymbiosis solves both problems,
because cytoplasmic inheritance enables the evolutionary
loss or transfer of genes and DNA to the nucleus, which
in turn permits the evolution of intracellular trafficking
systems at no net energetic cost, while leaving in place the
core genomes necessary for respiration across a wide area
of membranes.

10000 1000

100

10
10

Figure 4 Volume of cytoplasm controlled by a single genome.
The long reach of the eukaryotic gene. Mean eukaryotic cell volume
is 15,000 times greater than mean bacterial cell volume (red circle),
and is controlled by a single nuclear genome. In the case of
Thiomargarita (yellow circle) the cell volume is larger than most
eukaryotic cells but is mostly filled with inert vacuole. The band of
active cytoplasm contains multiple nucleoids, each one governing a
volume of cytoplasm equivalent to a single E. coli cell, hence
volume per gene is prokaryotic.

Page 12 of 31

The fact that endosymbiosis is strictly necessary to
evolve beyond the prokaryotic way of life, but is exceptional (if still documented) in prokaryotes, goes some
way to explaining why eukaryotes only arose once in
four billion years of evolution. But the next step–converting an endosymbiont into an organelle–was equally
challenging, as attested by the absence of evolutionary
intermediates.
Endosymbiotic gene transfer, mutagenesis and the origin
of sex

Besides steadily transforming the energy availability per
gene, mitochondria influenced their host cells in other
critically important ways, notably by bombarding the
host cell genome with DNA: not only genes but also
genetic parasites such as spliceosomal introns [59,111].
Prokaryotes assimilate DNA from their environment by
lateral gene transfer. This is especially true when DNA
derives from their own internal environment [112]. Lysis
of endosymbionts releases DNA into the cytosol of the
host cell, which can be integrated into the host cell chromosome by standard non-homologous recombination. If
there is more than one endosymbiont, DNA is transferred
via a gene ratchet from the endosymbionts to the host cell
(if the host cell lyses, the endosymbionts die along with
their host, so DNA only rarely flows the other way). The
reality of endosymbiotic gene flow is testified by numts
(nuclear mitochondrial sequences) [113] and nupts
(nuclear plastid sequences) [114], which accumulate in the
nuclear chromosomes despite physical obstacles, such as
the nuclear membrane, chromatin packing and cell-cycle
check-points. Presumably, in the absence of a nucleus in a
prokaryotic host cell, such mutagenic insertions would
have been more common and more serious.
Lateral transfers to the nucleus also occur with other
eukaryotic endosymbionts such as Wolbachia, with
repeated transfers to the genomes of insects and nematodes, ranging from nearly the entire Wolbachia genome
(> 1 Mb) to shorter insertions [115,116]. Lateral transfers frequently assimilate into genes, and numts are
known to cause de novo genetic diseases [113] and
potentially contribute to ageing [117,118]. Most data on
numt and nupt accumulation refer to germline acquisitions over evolutionary time, but the actual mutation
rate can be much higher during the chronological lifespan in yeast and mice [117,118]. Such mutations, of
course, would mostly not have been in the form of
nucleotide substitutions but rather aberrant recombinations: insertions, deletions, duplications, transpositions
and other rearrangements. Aberrant recombinations frequently cause cytoplasmic male sterility in plants today
[119], and are also found in Wolbachia endosymbionts,
some of which have a remarkably high density of mobile
group II introns and other transposable elements [120].

Lane Biology Direct 2011, 6:35
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/35

The fact that around 75% of eukaryotic genes with prokaryotic sequence similarties are related to bacteria
rather than archaea [121] hints at the possible scale of
such an early endosymbiotic DNA bombardment, albeit
not all of these genes are necessarily derived from mitochondria. As noted above, the very existence of mitochondria abolished the selective penalty for accumulating
genes and DNA in the nucleus, so endosymbiotic gene
transfer alone might have driven the increase in nuclear
genome size to some extent. However, three factors suggest that simple endosymbiotic gene transfer was not the
most important driver of genome size. First, as argued
earlier, the absence of evolutionary intermediates suggests the intermediates were not stable, implying a mutagenic process. Second, the common ancestry of many
large gene families in eukaryotes attests to the importance of gene and whole genome duplications in early
eukaryotic evolution [122,123]. The last eukaryotic common ancestor (LECA) had already increased its genetic
repertoire by some 3000 novel gene families [122,123].
And third, the deep conservation of intron position suggests that many introns were already present in LECA
[1,59,111]. Given the likely origins of eukaryotic spliceosomal introns as mobile group II introns deriving from
the bacterial endosymbiont [124-126], it is likely that the
archaeal host cell was subject to an early bombardment
of introns that proliferated throughout the host cell genome, before decaying [111,122]. This heavy intron bombardment has been argued, compellingly, to have driven
the evolution of the nucleus as a way of separating the
slow splicing of intronal RNA after transcription from
the somewhat faster process of ribosomal translation,
thereby avoiding the synthesis of aberrant proteins [127].
Some suggest that such an early proliferation of introns
would only have been possible in a sexually reproducing
host cell [128], despite examples to the contrary
[120,129,130]. In fact it is more likely to be exactly the
other way round: the high mutation rate exerted by intron
replication and gene transfer might have driven the evolution of sex, or at least cell fusions and genome doublings,
very early in eukaryotic evolution, potentially aiding intron
spread even further. Introns induce mutations in part by
inserting themselves into functional genes, but also, notably, through aberrant recombinations [131], which have
the potential to break circular bacterial chromosomes into
straight chromosomes [111]. In providing the ribozyme
machinery requisitioned by telomerase enzymes, spliceosomal introns offered up at least part of the solution to the
problem of straight chromosomes [111]. Even so, the host
cell must have had nearly insurmountable problems in
getting through its life cycle, faced as it was by a high
mutation rate from the bombardment of genes and
introns, variable numbers of now straight chromosomes,

Page 13 of 31

and presumably, an inability to divide by the standard
archaeal chromosomal segregation.
One conceivable way in which the host cell might have
segregated its straight chromosomes would have been by
utilising plasmid segregation machinery [132], and it is
notable that some prokaryotes can segregate large plasmids on TubZ microtubules, functionally equivalent to
the microtubules in the eukaryotic spindle [133-135].
The dynamism of cytoskeletal components, both actin
and tubulin, could have been promoted by the loss of
genes from mitochondria, as discussed earlier, permitting
the de novo synthesis and assembly of monomers, and
indeed motor proteins, at no net energetic cost. Notably,
the early evolution of a dynamic cytoskeleton would have
permitted the loss of the prokaryotic cell wall (as presumably happened before LECA, given the lack of
homology in the walls of fungi, algae and protists). The
possibility that phagocytosis evolved independently on
three separate occasions early in eukaryotic evolution
does indeed suggest an early evolution of a dynamic
cytoskeleton [136] but still after the acquisition of the
mitochondrial endosymbiont. Likewise, the internalization of oxidative phosphorylation in mitochondria may
have reduced the need for a cell wall [137]. Whatever the
reasons, the loss of the cell wall would presumably have
facilitated cell fusions; and it is plausible, if unsubstantiated, that such fusions might have been manipulated by
mitochondria (which could only invade a new host via
cell fusion) [138]. By masking mutations and facilitating
the spread of mitochondria, cell fusions would have
benefited both the host cell and the endosymbiont.
Cell fusions and genome doublings, as in allopolyploid
speciation in many plants today [139], could potentially
explain the origin of the eukaryotic cell cycle, and work
on a mathematical model here is ongoing. The salient
point is that a high mutation rate combined with the
expansion of bioenergetic and genomic capacity over several orders of magnitude permitted a radical solution not
available to prokaryotes: cell fusion masked mutations in
genes, while doubling the genome enabled cell division
despite variable numbers of chromosomes. This model
could also potentially explain why eukaryotes have accumulated the entire basal set of eukaryotic traits, thus
beginning to explain the evolutionary void between prokaryotes and eukaryotes.
Regardless of how early eukaryotes escaped from their
predicament, it is plain that the problems faced by a prokaryotic host cell with bacterial endosymbionts are serious, if not irreconcilable, and go a long way towards
explaining why there are no surviving evolutionary intermediates between prokaryotes and eukaryotes. It is easy
to see why all the intermediates should all have fallen
extinct; harder to model a path through the thicket of

Lane Biology Direct 2011, 6:35
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/35

problems. On the other hand, presumably there must be
an evolutionary explanation for why eukaryotes have deeply conserved intron positions, straight chromosomes,
telomeres, the nucleus, large genomes, non-coding DNA,
a microtubule spindle, cell fusions, multiple genome
duplications, large gene families and meiotic (reciprocal)
sex. Remarkably, the hypothesis developed here predicts
all these traits as strikingly plausible consequences of a
cell within a cell.

Conclusions
All complex life on Earth is eukaryotic, and eukaryotes
arose just once in four billion years of evolution, via a singular endosymbiosis between prokaryotes. The acquisition
of bacterial endosymbionts by a prokaryotic (archaeal)
host cell is an extremely rare occurrence, albeit there are
known examples in walled prokaryotes in the absence of
phagocytosis [32,33]. Cytoplasmic inheritance of endosymbionts is the only mechanism able to solve the scaling problems faced by prokaryotes expanded to eukaryotic
genome size and cell volume. Prokaryotes can be
expanded to eukaryotic volume via extreme polyploidy
[23], but cytoplasmic inheritance is strictly necessary for
energetic expansion, as it alone enables the loss of the vast
majority of endosymbiont genes, while retaining the few
genes needed to maintain control over oxidative phosphorylation across a wide membrane area [34]. This
extreme genomic asymmetry is in fact diagnostic of eukaryotes, and enabled the expansion of both bioenergetic
membrane surface area and genome size over several
orders of magnitude.
This bioenergetic expansion was permissive, not prescriptive. The actual increase in eukaryotic genome size
was mainly driven by the bombardment of genes and
introns from endosymbionts, which caused a high mutation rate, breaking the circular prokaryotic chromosomes
into straight eukaryotic chromosomes [111]. Cell fusions
and genome doublings were made feasible by a combination of the loss of the cell wall (no longer needed in the
presence of a dynamic intracellular cytoskeleton) and relief
from the heavy prokaryotic selection pressure to lose
genes and DNA. By masking mutations and enabling a
functional cell cycle, cell fusions and genome doublings
laid the foundations of the eukaryotic sexual cell cycle.
The major side effect of the protosexual cell cycle was the
accumulation of all basal eukaryotic traits in a single population, giving rise to the LECA, utterly different in its
genetic and morphological makeup to all known prokaryotes. The perspective developed here explains why the
eukaryotic cell arose just once in 4 billion years of evolution; why there are no surviving evolutionary intermediates between prokaryotes and eukaryotes; why eukaryotes
are morphologically complex and share many common
traits; and why reciprocal sex arose in eukaryotes but not

Page 14 of 31

in prokaryotes. All these unexplained features of the
prokaryote-to-eukaryote transition unfold in effortless
inference as highly plausible consequences of an endosymbiosis between prokaryotes.

Reviewers’ Comments
Reviewer 1

Eugene V. Koonin, National Center for Biotechnology
Information (NCBI)
This is a very interesting, provocative paper that perfectly fits the “Beyond the TOL” series as it tackles in earnest an evolutionary process that was essential for a major
evolutionary transition, the origin of eukaryotes, but had
nothing to do with TOL, namely endosymbiosis and the
ensuing extensive gene flow from the mitochondrial to the
nuclear genome. Lane brings a welcome energetic perspective to this issue and uses specific numbers to address
it. This is an excellent approach. Having said this, I have a
variety of problems, questions and misgivings which I list
and discuss below in the order they appear in the article
rather than in the order of perceived importance. A summary of key points is given at the end of the review.
Author’s response

Thank you. I address the problems, questions and misgivings below and in the text as appropriate
The first section is entitled “The origin of the eukaryotic
cell was a unique event”. I am not at all convinced by the
argument here. There is a big difference here with the
statement, in the first sentence: “There is little doubt that
all known eukaryotic cells share a common ancestor that
evolved only once in four billion years of evolution”. I
believe there is not “little” but no doubt whatsoever that
all extant eukaryotic cells had a common ancestor. The
evidence is overwhelming (parenthetically, the second part
of the quoted sentence is at face value oxymoronic: if
there was a common ancestor, certainly it evolved once).
A single origin of ALL eukaryotic cells is a different matter. I am not compelled by the argument against extinction
of many lineages of protoeukaryotes. As pointed out in
this article and many others, the early stages of eukaryogenesis were a trying time for the chimaeric organism(s),
and there might have been quite a few botched trials.
Unfortunately, we indeed do not have a good way to find
out, so to me the only argument for the uniqueness of
eukaryogenesis is Occam’s razor.
Author’s response

I agree that there is “no doubt” that eukaryotes share a
common ancestor, at least in my own mind; nonetheless,
without more formal proof, ‘no doubt’ seems too strong. I
mention two other possible mechanisms of inheritance by
which eukaryotes could feasibly share common traits,
and note that they are far less likely than common

Lane Biology Direct 2011, 6:35
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/35

ancestry to explain the observations. But if Occam’s
razor is the best proof then the case must be considered
formally unproved, as I indicate.
We seem to agree about extinction. My argument is
against the facile invocation of extinction to account for
the absence of true archezoa, which is to say, against the
former existence of a primitive nucleated phagocyte as
host cell to the mitochondrial endosymbiont (i.e. eukaryogenesis proceeds largely in a non-chimeric cell). I have
clarified this in the manuscript. The fact that morphologically simple eukaryotes, formerly known as archezoa,
actually do exist, is the critical point, recognized incidentally in the review by Ford Doolittle. Plainly these primitive eukaryotes are not driven to extinction by
competition from more complex eukaryotes. The niche
for morphologically simple eukaryotes, lacking mitochondria, ER and many other standard eukaryotic traits, is
not only viable, but is filled with morphologically simple
eukaryotes that have not been outcompeted to extinction
by more complex eukaryotes. Yet every single one of these
1000 or more species arose by reductive evolution from
more complex ancestors. On purely statistical grounds
this is very unlikely, as I argue. It is more likely that the
dice was loaded in some way, such that reductive evolution from a more complex ancestor is altogether more
likely than complexification (ugly word–is there a better
one?) of prokaryotic ancestors.
Now if that is true–there are ecological intermediates
but no true evolutionary intermediates–then it follows
that there are a lot of extinct true evolutionary intermediates between prokaryotes and the last eukaryotic
common ancestor. Koonin does not disagree with this
perspective; on the contrary, he writes that eukaryogenesis was a ‘trying time for the chimeric organism’. I
couldn’t agree more. My whole point is that there were
specific reasons for it being a trying time, not least Koonin’s own ‘intron catastrophe’, which I discuss at some
length later in the paper. So what I object to is the glib
assertion of ‘extinction’ of all true archezoa through competition, not the fact that eukaryogenesis was a trying
time. My whole paper is really an exploration of why
prokaryotes do not tend to become eukaryotic, and why,
of all chimeric prokaryotes that must have existed in the
past (we know of two examples today which are patently
not eukaryotic), only one line survived. This gave rise to
a surprisingly complex last eukaryotic common ancestor,
and only after that to the simpler ecological intermediates that we know, via reductive evolution.
“What prokaryotes lack is the characteristic eukaryotic
accumulation of all of these traits at once, bound up in
massive, wasteful genomes [34].”
I think one should tread carefully here and try to be
explicit. First of all, these traits are combined not so
much in genomes, but in eukaryotic cells themselves

Page 15 of 31

(obviously, the respective genes are combined in genomes). That’s semantics, though. More importantly, a
great many eukaryotic genomes are not that large and
only minimally more wasteful (in terms of the size–and
hence the replication cost–of the genome itself) than
the (relatively) large genomes of prokaryotes. The really
dramatic wastefulness is seen only in a few lineages, primarily multicellular organisms (above all, vertebrates) as
well as some free-living amoebae. Many unicellular
eukaryotes have compact genomes, only slightly less
compact than prokaryotes. Have all compact eukaryotic
genomes been secondarily streamlined, some quite dramatically? This is a distinct possibility (see for example
[59]) but it would be best to discuss it explicitly.
Author’s reply

This is a fair point, and I have revised the manuscript in
several places accordingly, to give range values. However,
I do not agree that profligate genomes are restricted to
multicellular organisms, and mostly plants and vertebrates. According to data from Gáspár Jékely and Tom
Cavalier-Smith (personal communication, collated from
references 62-67) the mean genome size of microsporidia
is around 10 Mb, and fungi around 40 Mb, in the range
mentioned by Koonin. However, fungal genome sizes range
up to 1000 Mb, while the mean for mitochondriate phagotrophs is about 700 Mb, ranging up to 10,000 Mb. The
mean genome sizes of algae are larger again, at around
3000 Mb for Cryptophyceae and Dinoflagellates–the
value discussed in the paper–ranging up to 10,000 and
100,000 Mb respectively.
My point is not that the acquisition of mitochondria
determines genome size, but that it released an energetic
constraint faced by all prokaryotes (their largest genome
size being barely more than 10 Mb). Almost certainly the
actual genome sizes of these modern groups is set by factors
such as cell volume, nuclear volume and lifestyle; but in
terms of lifestyle it is striking that Chlorophyta and cyanobacteria share an equivalent lifestyle–oxygenic photosynthesis–yet the mean genome size of Chlorophyta is about
500 Mb, compared with less than 10 Mb for cyanobacteria.
Why the 50-fold gap? My answer is that cyanobacteria are
constrained in genome size for energetic reasons but that
Chlorophyta are not, and so have ultimately adapted to a
larger cell volume and genome size, set by other constraints
no doubt, but permitted by mitochondria.
“...there was no successful speciation across the prokaryote-eukaryote transition, despite the great evolutionary distance. Over this transition, the tree of life is
neither a branching tree nor a reticular network, but an
unbranching trunk (Figure 2).”
I have difficulty understanding what “speciation across
...transition” means but I assume that here again the
monophyly of all extant eukaryotes is the point. This is

Lane Biology Direct 2011, 6:35
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/35

true, regardless of how much extinction of protoeukaryotes might have taken place, but is it surprising? I
think only if one takes a very specific view of the biological world as two “empires”, prokaryotes and eukaryotes, then the uniqueness of the connecting trunk
appears striking. However, if one simply views eukaryotes as a monophyletic group (clade), then the existence of unique trunk (same as root) is not that
remarkable.
Author’s response

By transition, I mean the evolutionary gap between a prokaryote within a prokaryote–what I would take to be an
alpha-proteobacterium inside an archaeon, without a
nucleus or other eukaryotic traits–and the last eukaryotic
common ancestor, which had a nucleus, straight chromosomes, introns and exons, nuclear pore complexes, mitosis
and meiosis, mitochondria, ER, dynamic cytoskeleton,
motor proteins, etc, etc. This is a long evolutionary distance by any account. It is not merely the root of the
eukaryotic “tree” but a very long branch indeed (which I
describe as a trunk because it is beneath the base of the
eukaryotic tree). Unlike long-branch artefacts, this distance is not an artefact, because the evolutionary distance
is real. The question then becomes, why do we not see speciation in this long evolutionary journey between a cell
within a cell and LECA? Why do we not see some eukaryotes without mitochondria, others without meiosis, some
without a nucleus, others without an endoplasmic reticulum? Of course we do see eukaryotes without some of
these traits, and we used to call them archezoa. If the
archezoa were “real”, then they would represent early
branches of the eukaryotic tree, i.e. speciation across the
prokaryote-eukaryote divide. But it now turns out that the
archezoa are not true evolutionary intermediates, but
evolved from a common ancestor that did have all these
traits. So the question has even more force: why do we not
see any true intermediates? Rephrase: why do we not see
any early branching species? As I note above, the standard glib answer is that they were all outcompeted to
extinction, but the existence of plentiful ecological intermediates–the archezoa–questions that conclusion. What
we see instead, as Koonin himself points out, is something
more like a big bang: no early branching at all. Why not?
The answer that I give might be wrong but at least it
gets at the question. Ironically, my answer here is no
more than the answer that Koonin himself gives, i.e. we
do not see intermediates because the intron catastrophe,
and other nearly intractable consequences of a cell
within a cell, made early eukaryogenesis a trying time. I
go further to suggest that it was so trying that the evolution of sex was the only way out. Unlike bacteria, cell
fusion and genome doublings were permitted by the lifting of energetic constraints, and allowed escape from an

Page 16 of 31

unprecedentedly high mutation rate–caused by a heavy
bombardment of endosymbiotic DNA–but had the side
effect of accumulating traits in a single population.
Traits could accumulate because there was no heavy
selection pressure to lose them on energetic grounds. I
readily admit that this is speculation, but so is any
hypothesis. The real question is, is it testable? Not easily,
obviously, but potentially so. I am working with colleagues at UCL on a mathematical model which I hope
might give some insights, especially into the question of
mutation rates that can be mitigated by lateral gene
transfer versus meiotic sex. So this paper sketches the
outlines of a testable hypothesis.
“Spatial structuring of stable populations should have
led to divergence and speciation, at least some of which
ought to have permanently occupied the Archezoan
niche.”
What is that niche? I am afraid I do not really understand the reasoning here.
Author’s response

I have made this clearer in the article, also in response to
Bill Martin’s query. The archezoan niche is the niche that
is occupied by morphologically simple unicellular eukaryotes, the ones that we used to call archezoa. In other
words, there is an ecological niche between prokaryotes
and more complex eukaryotes which is occupied by ‘primitive’ eukaryotes. If the transition from prokaryotes to
eukaryotes was a walk in the park, then archezoa would
have been real evolutionary intermediates. It wasn’t a
walk in the park. The archezoa are real ecological intermediates, so there is nothing wrong with the niche itself.
Simple eukaryotes without mitochondria do perfectly
well–they have not been outcompeted to extinction. My
point is that if there was nothing wrong with the niche
then there must have been something wrong with the
intermediates–for example they comprised a highly
unstable small population that never managed to thrive
or do anything other than hang on for dear life while mating (fusing cells) to survive, and incidentally accumulating
traits. Finally, these early eukaryotes achieved some kind
of stability, by which time they were already quite complex and close to LECA. There were no true archezoa
because the early eukaryotes themselves were unstable,
not the niche. The big bang of eukaryotic evolution (the
very short branches between the eukaryotic supergroups)
occurred as soon as LECA became stable enough to thrive,
diverge, and invade different niches. This was, quite literally, the origin of species.
“An ‘average protozoan’ has 3000 Mb of DNA giving
it a power of 0.76 pW Mb”
I am not sure that this is a fair value for the mean size
of a protozoan genome. I realize that the number comes
from the comprehensive review by Gregory [63] but I

Lane Biology Direct 2011, 6:35
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/35

wonder about the contribution of inaccurate measurements as well as polyploidy to these estimates. In any
case, the important point is that the genome size range
of 10-30 Mb is densely populated among protists and
fungi (see for example [140], and by no means are all
these organisms parasites with degraded genomes. In
principle, the most relevant number here would be the
genome size of LECA. Certainly, we do not have that
number but I strongly doubt it was in the gigabase
range. Accordingly, when estimated per megabase of the
nuclear genome, the metabolic power would be three
orders of magnitude greater than in prokaryotes. The
estimate of the total mitochondrial genome size in the
article seems to be correct, so when it comes to the
sum total, the estimates may be not that far off. Nevertheless, the above requires attention.
Author’s response

I agree with all of this, and have modified the text accordingly. I too wonder about the contribution of polyploidy.
Plainly this is greater than has been appreciated. But the
existence of polyploidy does not undermine the arguments
set forth here and in my Nature paper with Bill Martin
[34]in any way; on the contrary, it is central to it. Some
eukaryotes are highly polyploid; for example Paramecium,
which can have 800-1000 copies of the macronucleus, a
serious genomic burden. In this context it is notable that
almost all introns and intergenic material is removed
from the macronuclei, paring them down to a minimum.
Paramecium nonetheless has 40,000 genes, incidentally
somewhat more than most vertebrates. In terms of energy
per gene, it can only just support this genome size, on
practically bacterial rations per gene; so it is interesting
that the genome in macronuclei (not micronuclei) is
streamlined in essentially bacterial fashion. There is no
reason to suppose that this streamlining has anything to
do with replication speed (see below).
Certainly there are issues about the accuracy of genome
size estimates. For many years the genome size of Amoeba
dubya was cited as the largest known eukaryotic genome,
at an extraordinary 670,000 Mb, memorably 200 times
the size of the human genome. More careful studies have
revised this number down to around 100,000 Mb. Replicating this amount of DNA certainly has an energetic cost
(see below), especially the portion of it that codes for proteins, and in that respect it doesn’t matter whether it is
diploid, triploid (as has been claimed) or massively polyploid. The most serious cost is the cost of protein synthesis–the number of ribosomes–which affects polyploids as
much as haploids.
I agree that the most relevant number here would be
the genome size of LECA; but even then we could not be
certain what the mitochondrial genome size was at that
point in eukaryotic evolution, so there is necessarily a

Page 17 of 31

sliding scale. I have added range values to the paper
(some of which were also given, along with some specific
examples, in the Nature paper [34]). The main point,
which persists through all of this, is that prokaryotes face
tight energetic constraints, which are not solved by giant
size and polyploidy (on the contrary energy per gene is
less than in E. coli), but which are released by mitochondria in eukaryotes, allowing essentially a free expansion
in size up to the transport limits of single cells, or conversely, a paring down via reductive evolution even to the
point of competing with prokaryotes on prokaryotic terms
(ie fast replication, streamlined genomes, and restricted
energy per gene). Thus again, energetics permits expansion of genome size but does not prescribe it.
If, as Koonin suggests, the genome size of LECA was in
the order of tens to hundreds of Mb, then the arguments
of the paper are only strengthened, as the distinction
between prokaryotes and eukaryotes simply widens, to
three orders of magnitude, as Koonin observes. I note this
is the paper.
The per gene estimates are not very convincing (and
the numbers seem not quite accurate). An average bacterium hardly has about 5,000 genes. The current distribution is bimodal, and the mean will come closer to
2,000-3,000 genes. More importantly, however, there are
many bacteria with ~10,000 genes (e.g. [141]), not many
fewer than, say, Drosophila, a rather complex eukaryote
by any account. I do not find it plausible that, say, doubling the number of genes in bacteria is strictly prohibited due to energetic constraints. In more general terms,
I am unsure that metabolic power per gene is in itself
particularly important. So I question this conclusion
“The lower limit is set by the number of genes necessary
for a free-living existence; the upper limit by energetic
constraints.” We do not know what is the dominant factor that determines the upper bound on the number of
genes in prokaryotes and whether it even makes sense
to speak of such a factor. However, I am rather confident that energy limitation is not it. A better candidate
at least seems to be the “bureaucratic ceiling” hypothesis
maintaining that the quadratic scaling of the number of
regulators with genome size at some point renders
further genome growth unsustainable [141,142]. Metabolic power per gene may be an important quantity but
in terms of increasing the number of genes but rather in
terms of the cost of expression in the large eukaryotic
cells.
Author’s response

A mean of 5000 genes is just over the genome size for E.
coli, which is hardly untypical. I have given range values
in the paper for both 2,500 and 10,000 genes. Neither
value alters the conclusions, as in any case noted by
Koonin.

Lane Biology Direct 2011, 6:35
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/35

The larger question here is whether or not energetic
constraints determine the upper bound on the number of
genes in prokaryotes. Of course my argument that they
do is a hypothesis. It is supported by the fact that the
energy-per-gene shrinks in larger bacteria, and is miniscule in giant bacteria, even though they have small haploid genome sizes (typically in the range of 3-4 Mb with
little more than 3000 genes). These small haploid genome sizes are predicted on bioenergetic grounds–giant
bacteria simply do not have the energy to support large
genomes, despite (or rather, because of) the fact that they
sustain massive amounts of DNA overall.
Larger cells do not have more energy per gene expressed;
on the contrary, they have less. Three facts are important:
(i) protein synthesis accounts for 75-90% of the ATP budget
of growing bacteria, so there is a near-linear relationship
between gene number and ATP expense; (ii) initiation of
bacterial replication depends on the ATP/ADP ratio (e.g.
via the binding of multiple ATP-bound DnaA proteins to
OriC, the replication origin), therefore replication depends
on the rate of ATP synthesis in relation to protein synthesis;
and (iii) larger cells face surface-area-to-volume constraints
in the rate of ATP synthesis relative to protein synthesis.
Given these three factors, it is inevitable that larger cells
will be constrained in genome size at some point, unless
they can internalize respiration. Obviously they cannot
internalize respiration on anything like the eukaryotic scale
(they fall 3-5 orders of magnitude short–that is an empirical observation). So where does this limit lie? I would suggest that it lies around 10,000 genes with 10 Mb of DNA.
This statement is a testable hypothesis, and is borne out by
known data.
What about the “bureaucratic ceiling hypothesis”
favoured by Koonin? Why should the quadratic scaling of
regulators limit prokaryotes but not eukaryotes? From an
energetic point of view, the answer is simple: bacteria
have a limit on the total number of genes, and without
additional genes to regulate, what is the point of having
more regulators? None. Even a small cost without an
advantage will be penalized by selection for replication
speed. It has been argued that the difference between
eukaryotes and prokaryotes lies in regulation, and that
eukaryotes don’t necessarily accrue massive energetic costs
because transcription factors can be produced at low copy
number, or as micro RNAs, eliminating the costs of protein synthesis altogether. We addressed this view in detail
in our Nature paper [34], so I have not dealt with it
further here. The observed fact is that protein synthesis
does indeed scale with gene number in eukaryotes, as can
be seen from a simple consideration of ribosome numbers.
E. coli, for example, has up to 13,000 ribosomes, whereas
a human liver cell has 13 million on the rough endoplasmic reticulum alone – 1,000 to 10,000-fold more, entirely
in keeping with the arguments set forth here. Eukaryotes

Page 18 of 31

have more regulators because they have a lot more to
regulate. The proteins that they regulate make up the
morphological complexity of the eukaryotic cell, which is
and has always been the most striking difference between
eukaryotes and prokaryotes.
Incidentally, a bimodal distribution of genome size in
bacteria is predicted on energetic grounds. Very small cells
will be favoured in terms of replication speed, but must
support a minimum number of genes for a free-living lifestyle. The smaller the cell, the smaller the absolute plasma
membrane surface area for chemiosmotic coupling, which
constrains energy per gene for very small cell sizes because
the genome size is necessarily quite large in relation to surface area. As cells become larger, they presumably reach
some kind of energetic optima in the region of 2,500-5000
genes. Much larger genomes, up to 10,000 genes, are not
generally favoured, except in cells that have complex internal membranes, such as cyanobacteria and nitrifying bacteria. These complex bacteria are under less heavy
selection pressure for replication speed (I assume because
they draw on resources unavailable to other bacteria), but
are still far less complex than quite mundane unicellular
algae like Euglena. Why the gap? Many cyanobacteria
with complex internal membranes are also polyploid,
which permits a larger surface area of bioenenergetic membrane, as in giant bacteria like Epulopiscium and Thiomargarita, but with all the costs and limitations discussed
for them. I am not aware of systematic studies of metabolic
rate in large cyanobacteria, but such studies could give
invaluable insights into the energetic limitations of large
bacterial genomes.
“It is notable that eukaryotes support, on average,
around 500 times more DNA than prokaryotes but only
four times as many genes.”
This is more or less correct about genes but dubious
at best when it comes to DNA: only some animals, polyploid plants and a few protist lineages have genomes
that big.
Author’s response

I have already addressed this above
“Bacteria therefore maintain high gene density, around
500-1000 genes per Mb, and do so by eliminating intergenic and intragenic material [72-74], including regulatory elements and microRNAs, by organising genes into
operons, and by restricting the median length of proteins [75].”
Bacteria do show a trend for genome streamlining.
However, I once again doubt that the energetic cost is
the defining factor here. Bacteria are after all highly efficient organisms that are capable of producing proteins at
an extremely high rate and rapidly divide. At least under
favorable conditions, they do not experience any shortage
of energy. Energetic considerations might come into play

Lane Biology Direct 2011, 6:35
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/35

Page 19 of 31

as an explanation for the contraction of proteins but
when it comes to intergenic regions, I suspect that speed
of replication is more important (in bacterial populations
with their large characteristic effective population size,
even a small decrease in the speed of replication is “seen”
by purifying selection). On a different issue arising from
these same passages: It seems somewhat disingenuous to
speak of genome streamlining resulting from elimination
of regulatory elements and microRNAs. The implication
here seems to be that ancestral bacteria had those, and
this is most likely not the case. Rather, any genome
expansion in bacteria is tightly controlled by selection, so
bacteria have evolved these features only to a limited
extent.

mitochondria, which always retain genes, which enable
local control of chemiosmotic coupling and so give them a
freely expandable source of ATP. This eliminates the energetic barrier to larger cell volume, large genome size, etc.
This in itself does not explain why eukaryotes evolved as
they did, it merely removes the energetic barrier to evolution; but it does explain why prokaryotes do not tend to
become eukaryotic.
“For example, one of the smallest anaerobic phagotrophs, Entamoeba histolytica has nearly 1000 genes
[78]–more than the largest known bacterial genome”
E. histolytica has nearly 10,000 genes (not 1000) but
this is fewer than the largest known bacterial genomes
(Myxococci).

Author’s response

Author’s response

I agree that replication speed is more likely to be responsible for the elimination of small amounts of intergenic
and intragenic material in bacteria, subject to the provisos mentioned earlier (that there is no point in having
additional regulatory elements if there is nothing for
them to regulate).
However, DNA replication accounts for about 2% of the
ATP budget in growing microbes. Increasing the DNA content by 10-fold would increase the cellular energy budget
by about 20%, presumably a relatively trivial cost, at least
in comparison with increasing gene number by 10-fold
(which would increase energy budget by nearly 10-fold).
But increasing genome size to a eukaryotic mean of
3000 Mb (see earlier discussion to justify this value) would
increase energy demand 12-fold, not a trivial consideration.
Unicellular algae and protozoa have genome sizes ranging
up to 100,000 Mb so the cost would be even greater. Even
expansion to a relatively small eukaryotic genome size of
100 Mb would mean that 40% of the cell’s energy budget
would need to be spent on totally pointless DNA replication, which would undoubtedly be penalized by selection,
as noted by Koonin.
There is a broader point here which brings me to Koonin’s second point. I am not for a moment suggesting that
bacteria face any ATP limitation. Plainly they do not.
What I am suggesting is that they would face an ATP limitation if they stopped being bacteria and evolved in the
direction of being eukaryotic–larger cell volume, larger
genome size, more proteins, more regulation. Then they
would undoubtedly suffer an ATP shortage for exactly the
reasons I discuss in this paper. The fact that we do not see
bacteria evolving into eukaryotes is perfectly explained by
the fact that prokaryotes lie in a deep canyon in the
energy landscape, with high energetic barriers preventing
their escape. Bacteria have remained bacteria precisely
because as bacteria they do not experience any shortage of
energy. Eukaryotes alone tunneled through the walls of
this energetic canyon, because eukaryotes alone have

An unfortunate typo. It is in the same order as the largest known bacterial genomes. I have addressed this
point in more detail in response to Mark van der
Giezen’s comments.
Here is a very general point: “Eukaryotes have 10005000-fold more energy to burn per gene because they
are larger.”
I think this turns the issue on its head: because eukaryotic cells are indeed much larger, they need to generate
much more energy per gene, to produce the proteins
required for the maintenance of those large cells.
Author’s response

I have modified the wording. The point, as developed
above, is that bacteria do not become larger because if they
do they have less, not more, energy per gene. Certainly
eukaryotes need to generate much more energy per gene
because they are larger, but then so would bacteria.
Bacteria are not larger because they cannot generate a lot
more energy per gene.
“The issue of scaling” and the next two sections: Here I
think convincing (if not exactly compelling as I discuss
below) arguments on the inevitability of endosymbiosis for
the evolution of complex cells are starting to appear
although I am not certain that they have been developed
to the extent necessary. I still do not understand some
numbers like “The deficit of prokaryotes relative to eukaryotes is then apparently reduced to a mere 8-fold..."-where
does the number 8 come from? Regardless, though, I
think the important numbers are straightforward: “If the
rate of protein synthesis is unchanged, but the surface area
of plasma membrane is increased 625-fold, then ATP
synthesis per unit area must fall by 625-fold (not even
allowing for inefficiencies in intracellular transport). It is
impossible for a bacterium to step up the rates of transcription and translation by 625-fold from a single genome; the only reasonable solution to scaling up on such a
scale would be to scale up the total number of genomes

Lane Biology Direct 2011, 6:35
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/35

accordingly–most reasonably, assuming that streamlined
bacteria already approach the limits of efficiency, by a factor of 625-fold”. Then, this argument I believe is important: “Rather than extreme polyploidy, eukaryotes exhibit
extreme genomic asymmetry”. Indeed, such asymmetry
sharply divides eukaryotes from any giant bacteria known.
Why this is possible in eukaryotes is clear–gene transfer
from mitochondria to the nuclei and even more importantly, elimination of many bacterial genes. Indeed, if all
endosymbiont genes except for a handful remaining in the
mitochondrial genomes, were transferred to the nuclei,
then expressed and the proteins transported back to the
mitochondria, there would have been no energetic gain as
the same amount of protein would have to be produced
anyway. The trick (not mentioned in the paper) is that
only a few hundred genes from the original bacterial symbiont are transferred to the nucleus whereas the rest are
lost irreversibly, being superfluous in the intracellular
environment. What is less clear to me, is why the giant
bacteria would have to rely on extreme polyploidization as
the only route to efficient energetics (a route that at the
end is a blind alley). If one speaks of “reasonable solutions”, why not evolving a high ploidy plasmid that would
carry all genes required for the formation of energy-generating complexes? I do not think that this claim “That
makes extreme polyploidy fundamentally inflexible–unevolvable–and all the copies of an identical genome must
remain exactly that–copies of an identical genome, with
no potential to lose genes” is very strong: there is such
potential leading to a plasmid (there is no impenetrable
barrier between prokaryotic “chromosomes” and “megaplasmids”). Later on, Lane brings up this possibility and
concludes that “...the cell would have plenty of ATP, but
would still be unable to distribute any other proteins or
substrates about the cell in the absence of highly evolved
transport networks. It would fail and die.” This is a sensible conclusion. There is simply no way to make a large
cell functional (without an inert internal space) other than
developing elaborate intracellular compartmentalization,
that is ...becoming a eukaryote (or at least “eukaryotelike”).
Author’s comments

The 8-fold reduction: The mean metabolic rate of an
average protozoan, as cited in the paper, is 2,286 pW. The
mean for bacteria is 0.49 pW. If the bacterium were
expanded by 25-fold in linear dimension, giving it an
equivalent volume to a protozoan, the surface area would
increase 625-fold. Assuming a fixed rate of ATP synthesis
per unit area, the metabolic rate would be 0.49 × 625 =
306 pW. This is 7.5 times less than 2,286 pW (rounded up
to 8-fold).
I agree that if all the genes transferred to the nucleus
were expressed, there would be no energetic gain. It is

Page 20 of 31

not true that I do not make this point. I based two paragraphs of calculations on the energy savings made if a
proportion (initially 5%) of endosymbiont genes were not
necessary in the context of an endosymbiosis, and so
were lost altogether (paragraphs described as ‘spectacular’ by Bill Martin). The calculation showed that if this
loss occurred in a cell equivalent to Epulopiscium, the
energy savings would be sufficient to fuel the de novo
synthesis and self-assembly of 800 microns of actin filaments every second. Ultimately the energy savings stem
from the specialization of the endosymbiont as an
energy-transducing organelle, as emphasized by Bill
Martin in his review (and addressed there). It is in fact
misleading to talk of energy savings, because they are
spent on other things, such as the evolution of dynamic
transport networks, at no net energetic cost. Transport
networks enable other savings, because they provide the
endosymbionts with more of what they need, allowing
the endosymbionts to lose more genes. Again the energy
savings are virtual, and are spent on the evolution of
other proteins, such as motor proteins (or whatever).
I think it is likely that far more than a few hundred
genes were transferred from the mitochondria to the host
cell nucleoid. The host cell nucleoid was surely bombarded with DNA. The point is that most of this DNA
was no longer necessary for its original purpose. It became
pseudogenes, and new gene families, the basis of variation
and evolution. It is correct to say that not duplicating
functions was key, the specialization of the endosymbiont
as an energy-transducing organelle. The critical point,
which I make clear, is that the fundamental difference
between eukaryotes and prokaryotes is not the total
amount of DNA that can be sustained (that is quite similar in eukaryotes and giant prokaryotes) or the cell
volume (again that can be similar) but the genomic asymmetry, in which tiny specialized mitochondrial genomes
support a giant host cell genome. That giant host cell genome is not filled with repetitive copies of the same gene
making the same protein, but is free to vary, a point I
make specifically in Figure 3.
Finally: plasmids. It is an empirical observation that all
known giant bacteria have multiple nucleoids rather than
plasmids associated with their plasma membrane. In the
Nature paper [34]we addressed the issues with plasmids
in some detail and I have not reiterated that here. Briefly,
bacteria tend to have either multiple copies of small plasmids, which segregate randomly at cell division, or a few
copies of giant plasmids, which segregate like chromosomes on a protein scaffold. A plasmid containing all the
genes necessary for oxidative phosphorylation is not
unthinkable, but would need to contain several score
genes, and so would be a giant plasmid. How these genes
would come to sit together on a single plasmid is a question we can put to one side. Assuming that such a

Lane Biology Direct 2011, 6:35
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/35

plasmid existed, it would need to be present in potentially
hundreds or thousands of copies, and segregated on a
protein scaffold every cell division. That goes against the
bacterial grain. Worse, these multiple giant plasmids
would need to associate closely with the plasma membrane at roughly equal distances, each and every generation–again not a typical bacterial trait. These reasons
seemed strong rather than compelling. It is still not
unthinkable that a bacterium could solve the problem
with plasmids (and if it is thinkable then it should have
happened).
Then I stumbled across the explanation I put forward in
this paper. I personally find this compelling, and in any
case it should only be added to the reasons given above.
The answer concerns the volume of cytoplasm governed by
a single nucleoid, and the number of generations. If a prokaryote were to magically wave into existence multiple
copies of the requisite plasmid in exactly the right places,
it would still be a prokaryote, with a prokaryotic genome
and no intracellular transport networks worth speaking
of. It would have all the energy that it needed, but it
would be unable to distribute anything about the cell.
Until such transport networks evolved, which would presumably take quite a few generations, the bacterium
would gain no advantage from being bigger, in which case
the plasmid would be unnecessary and lost as superfluous
baggage; or the bacterium would expand in size, in which
case the plasmid would be useful, but in the absence of
intracellular transport networks, which take many generations to evolve, the cell would die anyway. So plasmids
do not solve the problem.
What about endosymbionts? The critical point here is
that endosymbionts govern a bacterial volume of cytoplasm, because they are bacteria. They do not face a
transport problem. Slowly, over many generations, as the
endosymbionts lose unnecessary genes, the host cell makes
energy savings that can in principle be dedicated to the
evolution of a dynamic intracellular transport network at
no net energetic cost. Bacteria can’t do this because they
don’t have the spare energetic capacity to evolve the genes
necessary–they simply get outcompeted by more streamlined competitors. So the key is generations: endosymbiosis
is a relatively stable state over hundreds or thousands or
billions of generations. Gene loss is the standard outcome
of endosymbiont evolution. As the intracellular transport
networks evolve, more genes can be lost from the endosymbiont, until finally, over many generations, the endosymbiont genome has become a plasmid-like mitochondrial
genome. At all times the host cell was able to distribute
resources to all parts of itself, and at all times the energetic price of evolving a dynamic intracellular transport
system was paid for in the hard currency of ATP, made
available by the slow loss of unnecessary endosymbiont
genes over many generations. Thus the resemblance of

Page 21 of 31

mtDNA to a plasmid is a mirage. Plasmids cannot solve
the supply problem, and full genomes (which have to be
copied and inherited using the cell’s own segregation and
division machinery) are fixed in size and cannot solve the
energy problem.
In summary. Asking ‘Why?’ questions in evolutionary
biology is dangerous, trying to answer them with sweeping hypotheses is dangerous doubly (I certainly realize
that I am as guilty as anyone else on this account). Still,
this type of risk-taking has to be applauded if we wish to
“understand” evolution in any meaningful way. More specifically, I believe that the energetic efficiency argument is
important to explain why there are (as far as we know)
no primary amitochondrial eukaryotes: symbiosis triggered eukaryogenesis, and allowing a dramatic increase
in cell size through efficient energetic was part and parcel
of this chain of events. As nicely put by Lane, it was “permissive not prescriptive”, i.e., a critical condition but by
no account an overarching cause of eukaryogenesis;
other factors such as, for example, a massive intron
attack on the host genome could have been extremely
important as well. I am much more skeptical about the
role of energetic consideration as the explanation for the
increase of the genome size and gene number in eukaryotes. The extreme genome inflation is a late affair occurring only in some lineages. Granted, this inflation would
not have been possible outside the context of the eukaryotic cell but this does not seem to be relevant when
eukaryogenesis is considered. The moderate genome
expansion seen in unicellular eukaryotes does not require
such an explanation, and other factors including the
change in regulatory strategies could be much more
important.
Author’s response

I have addressed most of these points already. I have at
no point argued that mitochondria drove eukaryogenesis,
but I maintain that they were necessary to permit genome sizes above the bacterial maximum of around
10,000 genes and 10 Mb. A question that I did not raise
in the paper, but which seems worth mentioning here, is
how much genetic experimentation is necessary to evolve
complex traits such as phagocytosis? Modern phagotrophs dedicate at least several hundred genes, possibly
as many as a couple of thousand, to phagocytosis.
Admittedly many of these will be refinements and unnecessary for some rudimentary form of phagocytosis. On
the other hand, genes and proteins do not spring fully
formed from the head of Zeus. How many failed experiments, proteins expressed but not fully functional, does it
take to evolve a completely new trait like phagocytosis? I
imagine, but don’t know how to get at this question
experimentally (or theoretically) that it must take many
more than the total number of genes that are required in

Lane Biology Direct 2011, 6:35
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/35

the end. Ten times as many? I don’t know but that
doesn’t sound unreasonable. I suspect that it requires
energy to burn, that cells must not be penalized for profligacy and experimentation with new gene families, new
protein folds, new traits, and so on. This is utterly different from simply picking up fully functional operons,
which is what prokayotes do. What mitochondria did
was give eukaryotes the energetic freedom to experiment
with new genes, new traits, new forms of regulation, in a
profligate manner, all of which lie beyond the energetic
bounds of prokaryotes. This energetic freedom enabled
the unparalleled genomic experimentation at the origin
of eukaryotes, when according to Koonin’s own work,
some 2500-3000 new gene families evolved–an extraordinary period of invention which was permitted, but not
prescribed, by mitochondria.
As an aside, and relevant to Mark van der Giezen’s
comments below as well, the potentially profligate energy
costs of de novo protein evolution for phagocytosis also
explains why some phagocytes can do without mitochondria, and with bacterial genome sizes, such as Entamoeba
with its 10,000 genes. Yes, it is a phagocyte without mitochondria (they became mitosomes), but this does not
mean that phagocytosis can evolve in the absence of
energy-transducing mitochondria. Quite the contrary.
Entamoeba effectively inherited a cassette of fully functional genes for phagocytosis from a mitochondriate
ancestor. All the profligate experimentation with new
genes had already been done and dusted. Over many generations it adapted to its new niche, and along the way
eliminated unnecessary traits, as parasites usually do. It
lost its mitochondria, as they evolved reductively into
mitosomes. Critically, as I note in the paper, it also lost
major aspects of intermediary metabolism that it could
also do without in the context of its parasitic lifestyle. It
ended up without mitochondrial power, and lo and
behold it fits in beautifully, with 10,000 genes, at around
the bacterial maximum genome size in the absence of
mitochondria. This is hardly proof, but as circumstantial
evidence for the power of mitochondria, it is wonderful.
Finally, Koonin notes that other mechanisms, such as
massive intron attack, might have been very important,
and I wholly concur. I suggest that the combination of a
high mutation rate (caused by intron attack) with the
elimination of genome size constraints and the loss of the
cell wall, enabled cell fusions and genome duplications–
the origin of a sexual cell cycle–placing many theoretical
ideas on the origin of sex in a specific setting. Again,
these ideas can be tested via mathematical models, and
work on this has begun.
Reviewer 2

William Martin, Heinrich-Heine-Universität, Düsseldorf

Page 22 of 31

This is an exceptional paper. While those who think
in categories of branches as the key to understanding
eukaryote origin are in a traffic jam of stagnation, those
focusing on the origin of mitochondria as the key to the
issue find themselves in the fast-lane with good visibility,
dry asphalt, and no cars in sight. This paper spearheads
progress in understanding what the prokaryote-eukaryote divide is all about, makes progress with tempo, and
in exquisite style to boot. I offer a few thought that the
author might wish to consider.
Author’s response

Thank you for a wonderful and constructive review!
The origin of the eukaryotic cell was a unique event

Para 3: Prokaryotic extinctions. The SOS responses of
prokaryotes, like the more facile incorporation of foreign
DNA in E. coli (MutS down-regulation) or gene transfer
agents in proteobacteria exemplify the difference
between dinosaurs and prokaryotes in terms of reacting
to potential individual-or species-terminating threats. In
other words, animals do not have the option of getting
foreign genes or mating with new species as a means to
avoid extinction. Prokaryotes do.
Author’s response

Fair point. They also have much smaller population
sizes.
Para 4: the assumed existence of a diverse ....the group
was seen
Para 4: however later revealed that all ..... evolution to
specialized organelles
Eukaryotes originated in an endosymbiosis between
prokaryotes

Para 2: ... [47] whatever we would have called an alphaproteobacterium 1.5-2 billion years ago...
Para 3: maybe... albeit different studies suggesting affinities with modern archaebacterial groups. [why cite
[46] twice?]
Cell fusions best explain the accumulation of eukaryotic
traits

Para 3: ...occupied the Archezoan niche. What does that
mean? What is an Archezoan niche as opposed to a
eukaryotic niche?
Energy per gene

Para 7: Entamoeba has about 9938 genes (typo 1000)
Author’s response

I have amended all these in the text.
The issue of scaling

Para 2: Somewhere in this paragraph you could use terms
like “concentrations of DNA, ribosomes, proteins” etc. to
make it clear what volume is doing. Explain that you
adjust the volume first, then worry about chromosome

Lane Biology Direct 2011, 6:35
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/35

and ribosome copy numbers to compensate. That is the
point in scaling, no?
Author’s response

Yes. Amended.
Para 3: why is cell division a problem? Explain, not
clear to me.
Para 6: ...given that cell division
It seems prudent to consider how giant bacteria actually
do divide and some of the incisive thoughts of HP Erickson [79] on this aspect. There are bioenergetic constraints
here, too, as Z rings never get bigger than about 1 micron.
Author’s response

A large bacterium cannot divide using a Z ring, as
noted; and a vacuole makes binary fission difficult.
Giant bacteria have evolved strikingly different mechanisms of cell division. In the case of Epulopiscium, daughter cells (endospores) grow inside the mother cell; in the
case of Thiomargarita, the cell divides reductively to
form four daughter cells in much the same way as animal embryos, for which they may have been mistaken in
the fossil record. Either way, becoming larger precludes
standard binary fission, and so forces the evolution of
other mechanisms of cell division.
I have added a couple of explanatory sentences to the
text.
Only endosymbiosis can fashion giant nuclear genomes

Para 5: This is a beautiful, a spectacular paragraph, maybe
split it into two or more, and maybe prime the reader a bit
better for what is coming. Maybe make it a section with
subheader. The 5% genes for metabolites is one entry to
the topic. Maybe a good one, maybe. What you are into is
the energetic consequences of specialization of the endosymbiont. If we just transfer genes, but need the proteins
in the organelle (requires invention of TIM & TOM) then
there is no real savings, because the cost of making the
proteins is the same whether made in cytosol or organelle.
The genes transferred to the host can also be expressed (at
a cost) in the host cytosol, regardless of where the proteins
end up. So the real energetic benefit comes from specialization of the organelle towards energetic ends (not reduction in general). Energetic specialization requires the AAC.
Reduction is not so much the issue as specialization. Some
other numbers come to mind, for E. coli.
http://redpoll.pharmacy.ualberta.ca/CCDB/cgi-bin/
STAT_NEW.cgi
10 Number ATP to make 1 cell 55 billion ATP
11 Number Glucose molecules consumed 1.4 billion
molecules
12 Cell division rate 1 division/30 minutes
They stack up well against your 50 trillion ATPs, or 2
trillion per hour or 1 trillion per 30 minute E. coli divi-

Page 23 of 31

sion. How many endosymbionts are you assuming
here??? (ahh, 1000 proteins copies, OK). These are very
interesting calculations possibly worth further fleshing
out. This is a uniquely original approach to the problem,
one that textbooks could use to illustrate what mitochondria have done for us lately.
Author’s response

I have expanded on this as suggested, in the preceding
paragraph. In particular, I agree that the critical factor is
specialization. I have emphasized this in the text. As an
aside, it would be interesting to compare the energetics of
eukaryotic endosymbioses generally with mitochondria in
particular. Endosymbionts lose genes, and to a point specialize to live in their intracellular surroundings, but they
must always be a burden to their host cell. In energetic
terms they are pure cost, as they do not export ATP to their
host cell. Loss of function is presumably beneficial to both
the host cell and the endosymbiont, and this explains why
reductive evolution is common; but if all functional losses
are simply transferred to the host cell (eg nucleotide synthesis, amino acid biosynthesis, etc) then there can be no net
gain by gene loss because overall protein synthesis (for
which read ribosome number) is unchanged.
In the case of mitochondria, the export of ATP to the
host cell means that they are never pure cost, but the size
of the energetic gain depends on the loss of function. This
is an interesting distinction between an endosymbiont
and an organelle. An endosymbiont, being an independent self-replicating entity, can’t lose the traits required
for independence, either directly or indirectly (meaning
they are provided by the host cell). In contrast, an organelle can be stripped down to almost nothing. This is specialization, as pointed out by Martin and also in the
review by Koonin, and appears to be critical.
Para 5: It is about specialization. Specialization. But
specialization via selection. That meshes well with
CoRR, too.
Genome outposts are required for major expansion of
oxidative phosphorylation

Para 1: People always focus on the retention of genomes, and it is just as much about the retention of ribosomes (for the same reasons as CoRR states), and that
might be worth mentioning. And do we see plasmids
with rrn (ribosomal RNA) operons????? Interesting.
Para 2: Regardless... I would delete that clause, it
sounds as if you doubt the strengths of CoRR, which I
do not think you do.
Author’s response

To the three points above: agreed, and text modified
accordingly.
Paras 4-5: Excellent and exquisitely important text.

Lane Biology Direct 2011, 6:35
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/35

Endosymbiotic gene transfer, mutagenesis and the origin of
sex

Para 2: Endosymbiotic gene flow is also backed by comparative genomics, for example plants-cyanobacteria.
Para 4: Yes, that is exactly right. Excellent points.
Paras 4-6: This is interesting.
Para 6: First principles. Hmm. I’m not so sure that we
are really back to first principles in this paper. We
clearly have a set of very explicit premises about the
nature of the host and the symbiont, some processes
and some logical consequences from which complexity
is permitted (but not prescribed, to lift your prescient
abstract text). But when Harold Morowitz goes to first
principles, he is in quantum mechanics, the Pauli exclusion principle, the periodic table and so forth. So maybe
something a bit more modest here would fit, too.
Conclusions

Para 2: “are predicted from first principles”
I disagree. The paper contains logical inferences, not a
set of predictions. The inferences unfold in an effortless
manner to be sure, and they are all tightly interlocked via
the same kind of hard-nosed reasoning (energetic, biochemical, made of molecules, and mechanistic). But first
principles? If first principles stays, then please explain in
a list what the first principles are, and I think what that
will uncover is more accurately described as a set of premises (something assumed or proved as a basis for argument or inference).
Maybe “unfold in effortless inference”.
Author’s response

I have removed the offending phrase ‘from first principles’,
if only because I would not wish to seem immodest. For the
record, I don’t mean quantum mechanics, but I am exploring what I believe to be the fundamental principles of bioenergetics: why proton gradients are universal (because
unlike scalar chemical reactions, which are stoichiometric,
gradients allow substoichiometric energy conservation, and
this is strictly necessary for the growth of anaerobic chemolithotrophs); and why the requirement for gradients over
membranes, controlled by genes, ultimately constraints the
evolution of complex life. These are basic principles of bioenergetics and as such are likely to apply to all life everywhere in the universe. Only partly tongue in cheek: aliens
will need mitochondria too.
It was a pleasure to read this paper.

Page 24 of 31

in that area, and comment or expand on just a few of
the Nick Lane’s general evolutionary propositions.
There’s enough in his paper to take up several issues of
Biology Direct.
Author’s response

Thank you!
Nick Lane argues against there having been a long
period for the stepwise acquisition of the many features
that distinguish all and every eukaryote from all and
every prokaryote. If that time were long, many lineages
which had not yet got all of these features might be
expected to have diverged, and some should have left
survivors. These would be true “archezoa”, sensu Cavalier-Smith. Since such survivors are not found we might
justifiably assume a very rapid evolution of the many
eukaryote-defining features, driven by selection and
(Lane postulates) an elevated mutation rate, this from
“early bombardment of genes and introns from the
endosymbiont to the host cell”.
This is not a new argument, but it is very well articulated
here, nicely cartooned by Figure 2. I myself used to favor
the neglected alternative, what I call the “Fourth Domain
Hypothesis”. With this we would imagine a fourth lineage,
diverging below the root at the bottom of the trees in Figure 2, bearing homologs of many of the genes now found
in bacteria and archaea but also developing those many
distinguishing eukaryotic features, with one of its sublineages serving as the host in the initial mitochondrial
symbiosis. The added distance down and up the tree would
be enough to account for the generally great distance
between eukaryote-defining genes and their prokaryotic
homologs, only some few of these being still recognizable.
This would be a sort of the reciprocal solution: we
don’t have to imagine a time-compressing speeding up
of the evolution of novelties, but we do have to propose
that all the other lineages of the fourth domain went
extinct. It’s not clear to me why this alternative should
be so widely neglected now. Mitch Sogin and Hy Hartman (though not generally in agreement) both used to
like the idea. Lane’s argument that the fact that lineages
that we once thought to be Archezoa seem to have
arisen several times and are doing fine makes it even
less parsimonious to imagine the extinction of any true
Archeozoa is a good one, though.
Author’s response

Author’s response

Thank you!
Reviewer 3

W. Ford Doolittle, Dalhousie University
This is a complex, challenging and ambitious paper. I
will leave the bioenergetics to reviewers more competent

I would not say that the idea of a ‘fourth domain’, by
which I understand a primitive amitochondriate eukaryotic lineage dating back to LUCA, now extinct, has been
neglected at all. It has been argued forcefully by the likes
of Christian de Duve, David Penny, Anthony Poole,
Patrick Forterre, Carl Woese, and most engagingly,
Frank Harold. Cavalier-Smith, while arguing for a much

Lane Biology Direct 2011, 6:35
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/35

later origin of eukaryotes these days, still sees the host
cell as a phagocyte, albeit possibly quite a rudimentary
one before the acquisition of mitochondria. The idea is
less popular now than previously, if only because the
excellent testable prediction–that representatives of the
fourth domain should still be lurking among the archezoa–turned out to be falsified, at least in most people’s
view. That of course does not rule out their extinction–in
fact it demands it–but I am surprised at how little critical thought appears to have been addressed to the
extinction argument. I am pleased that Doolittle thinks
the argument I put forward is a good one.
What I have tried to do here is consider the alternative
possibility, as rigorously as I can. It may all be wrong, but
at least it leads to a number of quite surprising and testable predictions. One reason that the archezoa hypothesis
was good is that it too raised a number of testable predictions, and the phylogenetic and morphological studies that
addressed them moved the field along positively. This avenue appears to have dried up, however, and it is time to
address alternative possibilities, if only, ultimately, to
exclude them too.
“We don’t have to imagine the time-compressing speeding up of the evolution of novelties.” I think the assumption of a clocklike mutation rate that applies to all cells
is surely equally imaginary. The phylogenetic problems
with long-branch attraction among supposedly earlybranching eukaryotes such as microsporidia, which later
turned out to be highly derived fungi, shows that the evolution rates of parasites are often elevated. Episodes of
‘quantum evolution’ have been propounded by CavalierSmith and dismissed on phylogenetic grounds by Bill
Martin and others. However, in the case of the early
eukaryotes, it is hard to see how an essentially parasitic
situation could have led to anything other than a fast
rate of evolution. To postulate that the mutation rate
should remain clock-like through an early bombardment
of endosymbiotic DNA, including mobile type II introns,
surely defies the imagination.
I do not think that the “early bombardment of genes
and introns from the endosymbiont to the host cell”,
the kind of enhanced mutation that Lane wants to claim
as a sort of necessary side-effect in his scenario, will
necessarily fill the bill. If current numts and nupts are
the model for bombardment (and we have no other
model), how much do we really expect basal mutation
rate to be elevated by endosymbiosis? And is it a given
that mutation rates in eukaryotes are actually elevated
in a way that would speed up the evolution of evolutionary novelty? In a 1998 summary [143], Jan Drake, the
Charlesworths and Jim Crow write ...
“Mutation rates in microbes with DNA-based chromosomes are close to 1/300 per genome per

Page 25 of 31

replication ... Mutation rates in higher eukaryotes
are roughly 0.1-100 per genome per sexual generation but are currently indistinguishable from 1/300
per cell division per effective genome (which
excludes the fraction of the genome in which mutations are neutral).”
Maybe there is an argument that domain shuffling and
gene rearrangements that this bombardment might have
especially favored are in fact just what was needed to
evolve the new eukaryotic functions, in which case Lane
might want to make it more explicitly.
Author’s response

Insofar as numts and nupts are the model for bombardment, it is certainly not their evolutionary rate of accumulation that matters, as this only reflects germ-line
transfers, at least in ‘higher’ eukaryotes. The actual rates
of bombardment in somatic cells and in the chronological ageing of yeast are substantially higher, as several
recent studies show [117,118]. We must also bear in
mind that the rate of gene transfer would presumably
have been slowed down by the barrier of the nucleus,
eukaryotic chromosome packing and the many checks
and balances of the eukaryotic cell cycle. In the absence
of such defences, the impact of an early intron or DNA
bombardment from the endosymbionts would surely have
been greater. For these reasons it is not appropriate to
consider the mutation rates of modern eukaryotes, as
this is in no way representative of the evolutionary situation. My point is not that eukaryotes have a high mutation rate today (they do not) but that they almost
certainly did have one during early eukaryogenesis, especially transpositions and rearrangements; and that the
evolution of the nucleus and the cell cycle restored some
sort of equanimity.
I would agree that domain shuffling and gene rearrangements would be an important facet of a high mutation
rate caused by bombardment, and I have added a short
discussion on this; I envisage the situation to be similar to
that pertaining to plant mitochondria today, which is to
say a large number of aberrant recombinations (which
can give rise to cytoplasmic male sterility) without necessarily an elevated nucleotide substitution rate. The closest
equivalent today might be the remarkably high density of
mobile group II introns and other transposable elements
in Wolbachia endosymbionts, as reported by Leclercq et
al. [120], albeit here the endosymbiont, not the host, is the
vulnerable party. As noted in my response to Koonin, a
mathematical model incorporating plausible mutation
rates might offer a way forward here, and we are working
on this.
Lane argues that both prokaryotes and eukaryotes
“speciate profligately”. I think this is a bit bold, when we

Lane Biology Direct 2011, 6:35
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/35

really have no good definition or understanding of the
possible meaning of species in prokaryotes and only a
limited definition for some eukaryotes. Jeff Lawrence’s
clever title “Speciation without species” [144] notwithstanding, I’m not sure we can have one without the
other. Indeed, recently, I’ve started to wonder whether a
case could be made for the difference between eukaryotes and prokaryotes having to do with the different
degrees to which species–defined as units on which species selection might operate–might exist among them.
Good tight species might allow more complex hierarchical selection, which arguably might be how and why the
tempo and mode of prokaryotic and eukaryotic evolution seem so different. (Just saying.) It also might be
that it is the multi-"species” community–rather than the
individual organism–that is the appropriate unit for
comparing prokaryote and eukaryote complexities
(again, just saying.)
Author’s response

By speciation I mean no more than the emergence of distinct genetic clusters, groups identifiable by genotype or
phenotype, not the biological species concept as propounded by Mayr and others, but something closer to
the species definition of Jim Mallet, and indeed dating
back to Darwin himself [55]. This applies to both prokaryotes and eukaryotes, and I have added a clarification
and a citation to Mallet here [55]. I don’t want to get
embroiled in the fierce arguments over the definition or
distinction between species, but rather to draw attention
again to the fact that there is a tremendous variety of
extant discontinuous diversity among prokaryotes and
eukaryotes, in both cases dispersed into distinct genetic
clusters, albeit with differing tightness. When I say there
is a lack of speciation across the prokaryote-eukaryote
transition, I mean that the genetic clusters, or species,
that do occupy this morphological niche are all derived
from more complex eukaryotic ancestors, and therefore
invaded this space from ‘above’, not ‘below’.
Similarly, there is a lot packed in to Lane’s claim that
“the requirement for sex also implies that the population
was small; large stable populations should speciate, as
indeed happened immediately after the crystallization of
LECA, with a near immediate radiation of the eukaryotic
supergroups.” To be sure, small populations, which large
eukaryotes might of necessity have, are better for fixing
neutral or even deleterious traits, like introns, possibly.
But the first eukaryotes were surely not large organisms
and it’s not clear why they should have had smaller populations than their still-prokaryotic sisters. And unless we
want to argue that all those eukaryote-specific complex
traits that LECA supposedly quickly acquired–phagocytosis, cytoskeleton, endomembrane system and so forth–
arose neutrally, it would be easier to see them arising in a

Page 26 of 31

large population where selection could be more effective,
and perhaps easier still if there were many “species” with
such populations, swapping advancements by lateral gene
transfer, for all that process is in Lane’s view “inherently
asymmetric”. Of course some of us might argue that
many eukaryote-specific complex traits indeed arose neutrally [145], but that’s not I think the kind of scenario
Lane has in mind here.
Author’s response

I would see quite a lot of the rudimentary eukaryotic cell
structures, but not necessarily more complex traits like
phagocytosis, as arising early in eukaryogenesis through
the shuffling and accumulation of existing traits–probably
not involving the de novo evolution of completely new
traits, so much as an exploration of the morphological
potential within existing traits, such as endomembrane
systems. I see this as a response to novel and heavy selection pressures–therefore not strictly neutral evolution–but
not necessarily involving a large amount of de novo
genetic invention. So, for example, the loss of the cell wall
and the origin of the nuclear membrane and internal
membranes like the endoplasmic reticulum, do not
require a large amount of de novo invention so much as
gene transfer to the nucleus and disruption of normal
gene expression, as suggested by Bill Martin and others.
Already this would be a recognizable eukaryote with a
nucleus, endomembranes, mitochondria and a rudimentary cell cycle–cell fusion, genome doublings, straight
chromosomes, chromosomal segregation on a protein scaffold derived from plasmid segregation machinery, etc.
This is essentially a rearrangement of existing structures
in new morphological space. The de novo inventions
required at this point would be relatively limited–spliceosomes, telomeres (both derived from mobile group II
introns), dynamic cytoskeleton (derived from bacterial or
archaeal homologues), nuclear pore complexes, and some
degree of targeting to the mitochondria and other endomembranes, I imagine with a great deal less sophistication than today). More complex traits like phagocytosis
seem to have evolved independently on three separate
occasions after LECA, which fits in very well with this
scenario.
I would see this period as the origin of various eukaryotic gene families and signature proteins, but not necessarily in large and sophisticated groups–that may well have
happened later, after LECA, but explaining why so many
gene families do trace back to LECA. Presumably these
gene families arose from prokaryotic proteins by limited
rearrangements combined with a release from purifying
selection for genome streamlining. Later on, in larger and
more stable populations, these nascent gene families
expanded and were selected for specific functions in different eukaryotic supergroups.

Lane Biology Direct 2011, 6:35
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/35

Regarding lateral gene transfer in these early eukaryotes, yes of course it might have been important. I
assume that it became less important as the properties of
the chimeric cell trended from prokaryotic to eukaryotic.
If this period was indeed the origin of the cell cycle and
reciprocal meiotic sex, then the question arises, why? My
suggestion is that lateral gene transfer alone was insufficient to prevent the death of cells through the accumulation of mutations, because it does not trade in whole
genomes. Bacteria such as the radiation-resistant Deinococcus radiodurans apparently survive heavy mutation
rates not by lateral gene transfer but by accumulating
multiple copies of genes, and this is all that I am proposing. In the case of early eukaryotes, I am suggesting that
these additional genomes would have been gained by cell
fusion with no more than the conventional benefit of outbreeding in sex, i.e. masking of mutations by undamaged
copies.
Overall, then, I am not suggesting neutral evolution so
much as selection–meaning merely successful avoidance of
death–in small populations for some quite rudimentary
morphological reorganizations, mostly drawing on existing
genes and proteins, but in new patterns permitted by the
acquisition of mitochondria and the elimination of the
heavy selection pressure to lose genes and proteins common
to prokaryotes. I would see LECA as morphologically
eukaryotic, showing the beginnings of most eukaryotic gene
families (presumably derived from existing archaeal or bacterial genes, perhaps with some degree of domain shuffling
and rearrangement, but not in a sophisticated guise), but
probably not including genuinely complex traits such as
phagocytosis at this point.
Reviewer 4
Mark van der Giezen, University of Exeter

In this intriguing manuscript, the author posits that the
true reason behind the rise of the eukaryotes, or even their
raison d’être, is their increased ability to produce the ATP
that relaxes the energetic constraints facing prokaryotes
and therefore allows eukaryotes to become more complex.
This increased production of ATP originates from their
mitochondria, a prokaryote which got severely crippled in
the process of endosymbiosis. That ATP production is
behind the mitochondrial endosymbiosis might sound
somewhat similar to other hypotheses about mitochondrial origins but appearances are deceiving. Lane does not
discuss the forces that forged the symbiosis but the consequences of that event. In addition, most models of eukaryogenesis presume that the bacterial symbiont was taken
up by a protoeukaryote. This is energetically not possible
according to Lane’s argument. In a convincing and an inhindsight obvious claim, Lane calculates that it is energetically simply not possible to be a eukaryote without mitochondria. There is just not enough energy available in a

Page 27 of 31

prokaryotic cell to produce the energy required to sustain
larger cell sizes or evolve phagocytosing capability at the
expense of essential ATP producing capability. Using two
well known giant bacteria, Epulopisium and Thiomargarita, Lane shows, using some carefully argued calculations,
that these two bacterial species more or less forgot to
divide and ended up with several thousand copies of their
genome in a massive cell, solely to sustain their energetic
demand. In addition, their largeness is perceived rather
than real, because their centre is metabolically inactive
and everything happens in a thin layer of cytoplasm near
the cell membrane.
Author’s response

Thank you, a very good synopsis!
It is generally understood that the evolution of eukaryotes must have been a rare event and that it only happened once. Successfully that is. Undoubtedly, there
must have been other attempts but the hurdles were so
high that we only know of one winner, which is the lineage that includes ourselves. The presence of many universal eukaryotic features such as conserved intron
positions, straight chromosomes, telomeres, etc. argues
for the establishment of all these features very early on in
eukaryotic life. There might have been more attempts to
become eukaryotic but there are no traces left of such
attempts. The unsatisfying thing is that we know of no
intermediates and the microfossils that are several billion
years old are not that illuminating either.
Lane’s hypothesis is well argued and the manuscript
well written. However, due to the complexity of what is
on offer, some sections might need to be re-read to
assess the fullness of what is on offer; at least, I had to.
I have, however, some puzzling thoughts left. Entamoeba is put forward as an example of a simple eukaryote with only 1000 genes (this must be a typo as there
are roughly 10 x more than that). It is ‘allowed’ to be a
eukaryote on energetic grounds as it apparently has 3
orders of magnitude more energy than prokaroytes. This
allows it to maintain a costly phagocytotic machinery.
However, Entamoeba no longer maintains classic mitochondria that produce a lot of ATP. Actually, its mitosomes most likely do not produce any ATP at all!
Obviously, this is a derived state but how is this organism capable of maintaining its costly lifestyle if not supported by the copious amounts of ATP supplied by
mitochondria? Similarly, Encephalitozoon cuniculi has
an even smaller genome (~2000 protein coding genes)
and a gene density that might be closer to prokaryotic
than eukaryotic genomes. Is that gene density a necessity to lower the energy bill in the lack of classic mitochondria? It is intriguing to realise that mitosomes and
hydrogenosomes were at the base of our renewed interest in eukaryotic and mitochondrial evolution and still
seem to be playing a pivotal role.

Lane Biology Direct 2011, 6:35
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/35

Author’s response

I am grateful for this very thoughtful response to my
paper.
Yes, indeed the 1000 genes in Entamoeba was an unfortunate typo, now corrected. I did not intend to suggest that
Entamoeba has three orders of magnitude more energy
than bacteria. I have deleted this ambiguity. I imagine they
have a similar energy per gene. This is precisely because
Entamoeba has mitosomes, rather than mitochondria
capable of oxidative phosphorylation. I have made the
point elsewhere that the acquisition of mitochondria was
permissive rather than prescriptive: they enabled (from an
energetic point of view) and potentially drove (from a
mutational point of view) the evolution of quite a complex
eukaryotic common ancestor, LECA. However, LECA was
free to evolve in any direction, either towards greater complexity, as happened in many prostists, algae, fungi, plants
and animals, or reductively, towards morphological simplicity, as happened in the archezoa, including Entamoeba. A
major point of my paper is that this group arose by reductive evolution from more complex ancestors, and in so
doing lost both morphological and genetic complexity, and
was accordingly free to lose bioenergetic complexity too.
Plainly the same process went even further, to an extreme
degree, in Encephalitozoon cuniculi, which is small even by
prokaryotic standards. I am nowhere suggesting that these
reduced eukaryotes have some kind of energetic advantage
over prokaryotes; on the contrary, in purely bioenergetic
terms they are likely to be at a relative disadvantage. However, they have compensating advantages, such as being
able to phagocytose, not known in any prokaryote.
The point I am making about Entamoeba is that it was
able to maintain the relatively costly lifestyle of phagocytosis at least in part because its parasitic lifestyle enabled it
to lose various other energetically costly traits, such as
amino-acid and nucleotide biosynthesis, along with the
protein synthesis required to maintain these pathways. It
ended up with a ‘bacterial’ number of genes (10,000) and
presumably a bacterial energy per gene, but quite a different spectrum of genes and traits, enabling it to compete
successfully in a ‘bacterial niche.’
I repeat here a point I made in response to Koonin:
evolving a complex trait like phagocytosis de novo is a
very different matter to inheriting a fully functional suite
of genes from more complex ancestors, and then steadily
losing unnecessary traits or superfluous genes in a given
environment. I have argued that the de novo evolution of
phagocytosis requires abundant energy per gene, enabling
genetic ‘experimentation’, that is unavailable to prokaryotes. This energetic preclusion explains why phagocytosis
never arose in prokaryotes, and why it apparently arose
independently on perhaps three occasions very early in
eukaryotic evolution. Once phagocytosis has evolved, it is
perfectly possible to lose mitochondria secondarily.

Page 28 of 31

A final point on phagocytosis: prokaryotes compete
among themselves, ultimately on the basis of replication
speed, albeit under a wide range of conditions, permitting
large variations in cell size and metabolic versatility.
Regardless of this variation, replication speed depends in
large part on ATP availability (to the point that initiation
of replication depends on the ATP/ADP ratio), which is in
general optimal in quite small cells, with high surfacearea-to-volume ratio, hence the typically small size of
bacteria. Phagocytosis, once it has evolved, breaks this
loop, as success no longer depends on replication speed–a
phagocyte can simply eat the opposition, and the faster
they replicate the more it has to eat. Thus, once phagocytosis has evolved, the terms of the deal change. Energy per
gene becomes relatively unimportant, as large cells simply
sequester their dinner and digest it later, even using comparatively inefficient processes such as fermentation. Thus
the key point of this paper is that prokaryotes are constrained in genome size and morphological complexity by
their energetics, to the point that they cannot evolve complex traits such as phagocytosis de novo. Mitochondria
eliminated these energetic constraints, allowing the free
accumulation of potentially massive amounts of DNA in
a central nucleus, the genetic raw material needed for the
evolution of larger size and morphological complexity.
Having eliminated this barrier, complex traits such as
phagocytosis could evolve–could evolve, I emphasize that
the energetics are permissive, not prescriptive–which ultimately meant that lifestyle became much more important
than energy-per-gene as the major determinant of genome
size in eukaryotes.
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank Bill Martin, George Zhang and Mike Murphy for
valuable discussions, and Ana Hidalgo, Don Braben, Frank Harold and John
Allen for helpful comments on the manuscript. I am indebted to the UCL
Provost’s Venture Research Fellowship for funding.
Received: 13 March 2011 Accepted: 30 June 2011
Published: 30 June 2011
References
1. Rogozin IB, Wokf YI, Sorokin AV, Mirkin BG, Koonin EV: Remarkable
interkingdom conservation of intron positions and massive, lineagespecific intron loss and gain in eukaryotic evolution. Current Biol 2003,
13:1512-1517.
2. Koonin EV: The origin and early evolution of eukaryotes in the light of
phylogenomics. Genome Biol 2010, 11:209.
3. Wilkins AS, Holliday R: The evolution of meiosis from mitosis. Genetics
2009, 181:3-12.
4. Canfield DE, Rosing MT, Bjerrum C: Early anaerobic metabolisms. Phil Trans
R Soc B 2006, 361:819-1836.
5. DeLong EF, Pace N: Environmental diversity of bacteria and archaea. Syst
Biol 2001, 50:470-478.
6. Prosser JI, Nicol GW: Relative contributions of archaea and bacteria to
aerobic ammonia oxidation in the environment. Env Microbiol 2008,
10:2931-2941.
7. Danovaro R, Dell’Anno A, Pusceddu A, Gambi C, Heiner I, Kristensen RM:
The first metazoa living in permanently anoxic coditions. BMC Biol 2010,
8:30.

Lane Biology Direct 2011, 6:35
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/35

8.

9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.

19.
20.
21.

22.
23.
24.

25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.

33.
34.
35.
36.

37.
38.
39.
40.
41.

Amaral Zettler LA, Gómez F, Zettler E, Keenan BG, Amils R, Sogin ML:
Microbiology: Eukaryotic diversity in Spain’s river of fire. Nature 2002,
417:137.
Piganeau G, Desdevises Y, Derelle E, Moreau H: Picoeukaryotic sequences
in the Sargasso Sea metagenome. Genome Biol 2008, 9:R5.
Cavalier-Smith T: Eukaryotes with no mitochondria. Nature 1987,
326:332-333.
Cavalier-Smith T: Archaebacteria and Archezoa. Nature 1989, 339:100-101.
Keeling PJ: A kingdom’s progress: archezoa and the origin of eukaryotes.
BioEssays 1998, 20:87-95.
Poole A, Penny D: Eukaryote evolution: engulfed by speculation. Nature
2007, 447:913.
van der Giezen M, Tover J: Degenerate mitochondria. EMBO reports 2005,
6:525-530.
van der Giezen M: Hydrogenosomes and mitosomes: Conservation and
evolution of functions. J Eukaryot Microbiol 2009, 56:221-231.
Tielens AGM, et al: Mitochondria as we don’t know them. Trends Biochem
Sci 2002, 27:564-572.
Henze K, Martin W: Essence of mitochondria. Nature 2003, 426:127-8.
Brasier M, McLoughlin N, Green O, Wacey D: A fresh look at the fossil
evidence for early Archaean cellular life. Phil Trans Roy Soc Lond B 2006,
361:887-902.
Bentley SD, et al: Complete genome sequence of the model
actinomycete Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2). Nature 2002, 417:141-147.
Maynard Smith J, Smith NH, O’Rourke M, Spratt BG: How clonal are
bacteria? Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1993, 90:384-388.
Robinson NP, Bell SD: Extrachromosomal element capture and the
evolution of multiple replication origins in archaeal chromosomes. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 2007, 104:5806-5811.
Simon D, Zimmerly S: A diversity of uncharacterized retroelements in
bacteria. Nucleic Acids Res 2008, 36:7219-7229.
Mendell JE, Clements KD, Choat JH, Angert ER: Extreme polyploidy in a
large bacterium. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008, 105:6730-6734.
Lindsay MR, et al: Cell compartmentalisation in planctomycetes: novel
types of structural organisation for the bacterial cell. Arch Microbiol 2001,
175:413-429.
Pinevich AV: Intracytoplasmic membrane structures in bacteria. Endocyt
Cell Res 1997, 12:9-40.
Schulz HN, Jorgensen BB: Big bacteria. Annu Rev Microbiol 2001, 55:105-137.
Vats P, Yu J, Rothfield L: The dynamic nature of the bacterial
cytoskeleton. Cell Mol Life Sci 2009, 66:3353-3362.
Davidov Y, Jurkevitch E: Predation between prokaryotes and the origin of
eukaryotes. BioEssays 2009, 31:748-757.
Moran NA: Symbiosis as an adaptive process and source of phenotypic
complexity. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2007, 104:8627-8633.
Waters CM, Bassler BL: Quorum sensing: Cell-to-cell communication in
bacteria. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 2005, 21:319-346.
Lonhienne TGA, et al: Endocytosis-like protein uptake in the bacterium
Gemmata obscuriglobus. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2010, 107:12883-12888.
von Dohlen CD, Kohler S, Alsop ST, McManus WR: Mealybug betaproteobacterial symbionts contain gamma-proteobacterial symbionts.
Nature 2001, 412:433-436.
Wujek DE: Intracellular bacteria in the blue-green-alga Pleurocapsa minor.
Trans Am Micros Soc 1979, 98:143-145.
Lane N, Martin W: The energetics of genome complexity. Nature 2010,
467:929-934.
Kunin V, Ouzounis CA: The balance of driving forces during genome
evolution in prokaryotes. Genome Res 2003, 13:1589-1594.
Dagan T, Martin W: Ancestral genome sizes specify the minimum rate of
lateral gene transfer during prokaryote evolution. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2007, 104:870-5.
Lynch M, Conery JS: The origins of genome complexity. Science 2003,
302:1401-1404.
Maynard Smith J, Szathmary E: The Major Transitions in Evolution. OUP,
Oxford; 1995.
Cavalier-Smith T: Predation and eukaryote cell origins: A coevolutionary
perspective. Int J Biochem Cell Biol 2009, 41:307-322.
de Duve C: The origin of eukaryotes: a reappraisal. Nat Rev Genet 2007,
8:95-403.
Land MF, Milsson DE: Animal eyes. OUP, Oxford; 2002.

Page 29 of 31

42. Rivera MC, Lake JA: The ring of life provides evidence for a genome
fusion origin of eukaryotes. Nature 2004, 431:152-155.
43. Koonin EV: Darwinian evolution in the light of genomics. Nucleic Acids Res
2009, 37:1011-1034.
44. Pisani D, Cotton JA, McInerney JO: Supertrees disentangle the chimeric
origin of eukaryotic genomes. Mol Biol Evol 2007, 24:1752-1760.
45. Cox CJ, Foster PG, Hirt RP, Harris SR, Embley TM: The archaebacterial origin
of eukaryotes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008, 105:20356-20361.
46. Yutin N, Makarova KS, Mekhedov SL, Wolf YI, Koonin EV: The deep archaeal
roots of eukaryotes. Mol Biol Evol 2008, 25:1619-1630.
47. Gray MW, Burger G, Lang BF: Mitochondrial evolution. Science 1999,
283:1476-1481.
48. Mentel M, Martin W: Energy metabolism among eukaryotic anaerobes in
light of Proterozoic ocean chemistry. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci
2008, 363:2717-29.
49. Mentel M, Martin W: Anaerobic animals from an ancient, anoxic
ecological niche. BMC Biol 2010, 8:32.
50. Esser C, Martin W, Dagan T: The origin of mitochondria in light of a fluid
prokaryotic chromosome model. Biol Lett 2006.
51. Embley TM, Martin W: Eukaryotic evolution, changes and challenges.
Nature 2006, 440:623-630.
52. Zimmer C: On the origin of eukaryotes. Science 2009, 325:666-668.
53. Martin W, Müller M: The hydrogen hypothesis for the first eukaryote.
Nature 1998, 392:37-41.
54. Minerdi D, Bianciotto V, Bonfante P: Endosymbiotic bacteria in mycorrhizal
fungi: from their morphology to genomic sequences. Plant Soil 2002,
244:211-219.
55. Mallet J: Why was Darwin’s view of species rejected by twentieth
century biologists? Biol Philosoph 2010, 25:497-527.
56. Schurko AM, Logsdon AM: Using a meiotic toolkit to investigate ancient
asexual “scandals” and the evolution of sex. BioEssays 2008, 30:579-589.
57. Ramesh MA, Malik SB, Logsdon JM: A phylogenomic inventory of meiotic
genes: evidence for sex in Giardia and an early eukaryotic origin of
meiosis. Curr Biol 2005, 15:185-191.
58. Schurko AM, Neiman M, Logsdon AM: Signs of sex: what we know and
how we know it. Trends Ecol Evol 2009, 24:208-217.
59. Koonin E: Intron-dominated genomes of early ancestors of eukaryotes. J
Heredity 2009, 100:618-623.
60. Makarieva AM, Gorshkov VG, Li BL: Energetics of the smallest: do bacteria
breathe at the same rate as whales? Proc R Soc Lond B 2005, 272:2219-2224.
61. Fenchel T, Finlay BJ: Respiration rates in heterotrophic, free-living
protozoa. Microb Ecol 1983, 9:99-122.
62. Gregory TR et al: Eukaryotic genome size databases. Nucleic Acids Res
2007, 35:D332-338.
63. Gregory TR: Synergy between sequence and size in large-scale
genomics. Nature Rev Genet 2005, 6:699-708.
64. Amigo JM, Gracia MP, Salvado H, Vivares CP: Pulsed field gel
electrophoresis of three microsporidian parasites of fish. Acta
Protozoologica 2002, 41:11-16.
65. Amogan HP, Martinez JP, Ciuffetti LM, Field KG, Reno PW: Karyotype and
genome size of Nadelspora canceri determined by pulsed field gel
electrophoresis. Acta Protozoologica 2006, 45:249-254.
66. LaJeunesse TC, Lambert G, Andersen RA, Coffroth MA, Galbraith DW:
Symbiodinium (Pyrrhophyta) genome sizes (DNA content) are smallest
among dinoflagellates. J Phycol 2005, 41:880-886.
67. Beaton MJ, Cavalier-Smith T: Eukaryotic non-coding DNA is functional:
evidence from the differential scaling of cryptomonad genomes. Proc
Roy Soc B 1999, 266:2053-2059.
68. Gray MW, Lang BF, Burger G: Mitochondria of protists. Annu Rev Genet
2004, 38:477-524.
69. Daniels EW, Breyer EP: Starvation effects on the ultrastructure of amoeba
mitochondria. Zeitschrift Zellforschung 1968, 91:159-169.
70. Parfrey LW, Lahr DJG, Katz LA: The dynamic nature of eukaryotic
genomes. Mol Biol Evol 2008, 25:787-794.
71. Aury J-M, et al: Global trends of whole genome duplications revealed by
the ciliate Paramecium tetraurelia. Nature 2006, 444:171-178.
72. Vellai T, Vida G: The origin of eukaryotes: the difference between
prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells. Proc R Soc Lond B 1999, 266:1571-1577.
73. Vellai T, Takacs K, Vida G: A new aspect to the origin and evolution of
eukaryotes. J Mol Evol 1998, 46:499-507.

Lane Biology Direct 2011, 6:35
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/35

74. Kuo CH, Ochman H: The extinction dynamics of bacterial pseudogenes.
PLoS Genet 2010, 6:e1001050.
75. Wagner A: Energy constraints on the evolution of gene expression. Mol
Biol Evol 2005, 22:1365-1374.
76. Peterson KJ, Dietrich MR, McPeek MA: MicroRNAs and metazoan
macroevolution: insights into canalization, complexity, and the
Cambrian explosion. BioEssays 2009, 31:736-747.
77. Harold FM: The Vital Force: A Study of Bioenergetics. WH Freeman, New
York; 1986.
78. Loftus B, Anderson I, Davies R, et al: The genome of protist parasite
Entamoeba histolytica. Nature 2005, 433:865-868.
79. Erickson HP: Evolution of the cytoskeleton. BioEssays 2007, 29:668-677.
80. Bailey JV, Joye SB, Kalanetra KM, Flood BE, Corsetti FA: Evidence of giant
sulphur bacteria in Neoproterozoic phosphorites. Nature 2007,
445:198-201.
81. Ward RJ, Clements KD, Choat JH, Angert ER: Cytology of terminally
differentiated Epulopiscium mother cells. DNA Cell Biol 2009, 28:57-64.
82. Schulz HN: The genus Thiomargarita. Prokaryotes 2006, 6:1156-1163.
83. Schulz HN, de Beer D: Uptake rates of oxygen and sulphide measured
with individual Thiomargarita namibiensis cells by using microelectrodes.
Appl Environ Microbiol 2002, 68:5746-5749.
84. Lane CE, Archibald JM: The eukaryotic tree of life: endosymbiosis takes its
TOL. Trends Ecol Evol 2008, 23:268-275.
85. Akhmanova A, Voncken F, van Alen T, van Hoek A, et al: A
hydrogenosome with a genome. Nature 1998, 396:527-528.
86. Martin W, Stoebe B, Goremykin V, Hansmann S, Hasegawa M, Kowallik KV:
Gene transfer to the nucleus and the evolution of chloroplasts. Nature
1998, 393:162-165.
87. Gil R, Sabater-Muñoz B, Latorre A, Silva FJ, Moya A: Extreme genome
reduction in Buchnera spp.: Toward the minimal genome needed for
symbiotic life. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2002, 99:4454-4458.
88. Van Ham RC, Kamerbeek J, Palacios C, et al: Reductive genome evolution
in Buchnera aphidicola. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2003, 100:581-6.
89. Foster J, Ganatra M, Kama I, et al: The Wolbachia genome of Brugia
malayi: Endosymbiont evolution within a human pathogenic nematode.
PLoS Biol 2005, 3(4):e121.
90. Blanc G, Ogata H, Robert C, et al: Reductive genome evolution from the
mother of Rickettsia. PLoS Biol 2007, 3(1):e14.
91. Nakabachi A, Yamashita A, Toh H, Ishikawa H, Dunbar HE, Moran NA,
Hattori M: The 160-kilobase genome of the bacterial endosymbiont
Carsonella. Science 2006, 314:267-267.
92. Fine EJ, Feinman RD: Thermodynamics of weight loss diets. Nutrition
Metab 2004, 1:15.
93. Brocchierri L, Karlin S: Protein length in eukaryotic and prokaryotic
proteomes. Nucl Acid Res 2005, 33:3390-3400.
94. Allen JF: Control of gene expression by redox potential and the
requirement for chloroplast and mitochondrial genomes. J Theor Biol
1993, 165:609-631.
95. Allen JF: The function of genomes in bioenergetic organelles. Phil Trans R
Soc Lond B 2003, 358:19-37.
96. Puthiyaveetil S, Kavanagh TA, Cain P, et al: The ancestral symbiont sensor
kinase CSK links photosynthesis with gene expression in chloroplasts.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008, 105:10061-66.
97. Koonin EV, Aravind L: Origin and evolution of eukaryotic apoptosis: the
bacterial connection. Cell Death Different 2002, 9:394-404.
98. Bidle KD, Falkowski PG: Cell death in planktonic, photosynthetic
microorganisms. Nat Rev Microbiol 2004, 2:643-655.
99. Lane N: The origins of death. Nature 2008, 453:583-85.
100. de Grey ADNJ: Forces maintaining organellar genomes: Is any as strong
as genetic code disparity or hydrophobicity? BioEssays 2005, 27:436-46.
101. Williams RS: Mitochondrial gene expression in mammalian striated
muscle: evidence that variation in gene dosage is the major regulatory
event. J Biol Chem 1986, 261:12390-12394.
102. Williams RS, et al: Regulation of nuclear and mitochondrial gene
expression by contractile activity in skeletal muscle. J Biol Chem 1986,
261:376-380.
103. Shay JW, Pierce DJ, Werbin H: Mitochondrial DNA copy number is
proportional to total cell DNA under a variety of growth conditions. J
Biol Chem 1990, 265:14802-14807.

Page 30 of 31

104. Moreno-Loshuertos R, et al: Differences in reactive oxygen species
production explain the phenotypes associated with common mouse
mitochondrial DNA variants. Nature Genet 2007, 38:1261-1268.
105. Rocher C, et al: Influence of mitochondrial DNA level on cellular energy
metabolism: implications for mitochondrial diseases. J Bioenerg Biomembr
2008, 40:1573-1581.
106. Schapira AH: Mitochondrial disease. Lancet 2006, 368:70-82.
107. Bai Y, Shakeley RM, Attardi G: Tight control of respiration by NADH
dehydrogenase ND5 subunit gene expression in mouse mitochondria.
Mol Cell Biol 2000, 20:805-815.
108. Chomyn A: Mitochondrial genetic control of assembly and function of
complex I in mammalian cells. J Bioenerget Biomembr 2001, 33:251-257.
109. Alexiev U, Mollaaghababa R, Scherrer P, Khorana HG, Heyn MP: Rapid longrange proton diffusion along the surface of the purple membrane and
delayed proton transfer into the bulk. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1995,
92:372-376.
110. Trevors JT, Masson L: How much cytoplasm can a bacterial genome
control? J Microbiol Methods 2011, 84:147-150.
111. Koonin E: The origin of introns and their role in eukaryogenesis: a
compromise solution to the introns-early versus introns-late debate? Biol
Direct 2006, 1:22.
112. Lane N: Plastids, genomes and the probability of gene transfer. Genome
Biol Evol 2011.
113. Hazkani-Covo E, Zeller RM, Martin W: Molecular poltergeists: Mitochondrial
DNA copies (numts) in sequenced nuclear genomes. PLoS Genet 2010,
6(2):e1000834.
114. Smith DR, Crosby K, Lee RW: Correlation between nuclear plasmid
abundance and plastid number supports the limited transfer window
hypothesis. Genome Biol Evol 2011.
115. Hottop JCD, Clark ME, Oliveira DCSG, et al: Widespread lateral gene
transfer from intracellular bacteria to multicellular eukaryotes. Science
2007, 317:1753-1756.
116. Saridaki A, Bourtzis K: Wolbachia: more than just a bug in insects genitals.
Current Opin Microbiol 2010, 13:67-72.
117. Caro P, et al: Mitochondrial DNA sequences are present inside nuclear
DNA in rat tissues and increase with age. Mitochondrion 2010, 10:479-486.
118. Cheng X, Ivessa AS: The migration of mitochondrial DNA fragments to
the nucleus affects the chronological aging process of Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. Aging Cell 2010, 9:919-23.
119. Sabar M, Gagliardi D, Balk J, Leaver CJ: ORFB is a subunit of F1FO-ATP
synthase: insight into the basis of cytoplasmic male sterility in
sunflower. EMBO reports 2003, 4:381-386.
120. Leclercq S, Giraud I, Cordaux R: Remarkable abundance and evolution of
mobile group II introns in Wolbachia bacterial endosymbionts. Mol Biol
Evol 2011, 28(1):685-697.
121. Esser C, Ahmadinejad N, Wiegand C, et al: A genome phylogeny for
mitochondria among alpha-proteobacteria and a predominantly
eubacterial ancestry of yeast nuclear genes. Mol Biol Evol 2004,
21:1643-60.
122. Koonin EV, et al: A comprehensive evolutionary classification of proteins
encoded in complete eukaryotic genomes. Genome Biol 2004, 5:R7.
123. Fritz-Laylin LK, et al: The genome of Naegleria gruberi illuminates early
eukaryotic versatility. Cell 2010, 140:631-642.
124. Lambowitz AM, Zimmerly S: Mobile group II introns. Ann Rev Genet 2004,
38:1-35.
125. Roy SW, Gilbert W: The evolution of spliceosomal introns: patterns,
puzzles and progress. Nature Rev Genet 2006, 7:211-221.
126. Lynch M, Richardson AO: The evolution of spliceosomal introns. Current
Opin Genet Devel 2002, 12:701-10.
127. Martin W, Koonin EV: Introns and the origin of nucleus-cytosol
compartmentalization. Nature 2006, 440:41-45.
128. Poole AM: Did group II intron proliferation in an endosymbiont-bearing
archaeon create eukaryotes? Biol Direct 2006, 1:36.
129. Wu M, Sun LV, Vamathevan J, et al: Phylogenomics of the reproductive
parasite Wolbachia pipientis wMel: A streamlined genome overrun by
mobile genetic elements. PLoS Biol 2004, 2(3):0327-41.
130. Newton ILG, Bordenstein SR: Correlations between bacterial ecology and
mobile DNA. Current Microbiol 2011, 62:198-208.

Lane Biology Direct 2011, 6:35
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/35

Page 31 of 31

131. Prak ETL, Kazazian HH: Mobile elements and the human genome. Nature
Rev Genet 2000, 1:134-144.
132. Ebersbach G, Gerdes K: Plasmid segregation mechanisms. Annu Rev Genet
2005, 39:453-479.
133. Salje J: Plasmid segregation: how to survive as an extra piece of DNA.
Crit Rev Biochem Mol Biol 2010, 45:296-317.
134. Löwe J, Amos LA: Evolution of cytomotive filaments: The cytoskeleton
from prokaryotes to eukaryotes. Int J Biochem Cell Biol 2009, 41:323-329.
135. Barilla D: One-way ticket to the cell pole: Plasmid transport by the
prokaryotic tubulin homolog TubZ. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2010,
107:12061-62.
136. Yutin N, Wolf MY, Wolf YI, Koonin EV: The origins of phagocytosis and
eukaryogenesis. Biol Direct 2009, 4:9.
137. Lane N: Power, sex, suicide: Mitochondria and the meaning of life. OUP,
Oxford; 2005.
138. Blackstone N, Green DR: The evolution of a mechanism of cell suicide.
BioEssays 1999, 24:84-88.
139. Soltis DE, Soltis PS: Polyploidy: Recurrent formation and genome
evolution. Trends Ecol Evol 1999, 14:348-352.
140. Koonin EV: Evolution of genome architecture. Int J Biochem Cell Biol 2009,
41:298-306.
141. Koonin EV, Wolf YI: Genomics of bacteria and archaea: the emerging
dynamic view of the prokaryotic world. Nucleic Acids Res 2008,
36:6688-6719.
142. Van Nimwegen E: Scaling laws in the functional content of genomes.
Trends Genet 2003, 19:479-484.
143. Drake JW, Charlesworth B, Charlesworth D, Crow JF: Rates of spontaneous
mutation. Genetics 1998, 148:1667-86.
144. Lawrence JG: Gene transfer in bacteria: speciation without species? Theor
Pop Biol 2002, 61:449-460.
145. Gray MW, Lukes J, Archibald JM, Keeling PJ, Doolittle WF: Cell biology.
Irremediable complexity? Science 2010, 330:920-921.
doi:10.1186/1745-6150-6-35
Cite this article as: Lane: Energetics and genetics across the prokaryoteeukaryote divide. Biology Direct 2011 6:35.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
