<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Genomes and geography: genomic insights into the evolution and phylogeography of the genus Schistosoma</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Parasites & Vectors 2011, 4:131. doi:10.1186/1756-3305-4-131"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Scott P Lawton"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Lawton et al. Parasites & Vectors 2011, 4:131
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/4/1/131

REVIEW

Open Access

Genomes and geography: genomic insights into
the evolution and phylogeography of the genus
Schistosoma
Scott P Lawton1,2,5*, Hirohisa Hirai3, Joe E Ironside1, David A Johnston2,4 and David Rollinson2

Abstract
Blood flukes within the genus Schistosoma still remain a major cause of disease in the tropics and subtropics and
the study of their evolution has been an area of major debate and research. With the advent of modern molecular
and genomic approaches deeper insights have been attained not only into the divergence and speciation of these
worms, but also into the historic movement of these parasites from Asia into Africa, via migration and dispersal of
definitive and snail intermediate hosts. This movement was subsequently followed by a radiation of Schistosoma
species giving rise to the S. mansoni and S. haematobium groups, as well as the S. indicum group that reinvaded
Asia. Each of these major evolutionary events has been marked by distinct changes in genomic structure evident
in differences in mitochondrial gene order and nuclear chromosomal architecture between the species associated
with Asia and Africa. Data from DNA sequencing, comparative molecular genomics and karyotyping are indicative
of major constitutional genomic events which would have become fixed in the ancestral populations of these
worms. Here we examine how modern genomic techniques may give a more in depth understanding of the
evolution of schistosomes and highlight the complexity of speciation and divergence in this group.
Introduction
Members of the genus Schistosoma are digenean (Strigeiformes: Schistosomatidae) blood flukes of mammals,
comprising of 23 known species, with at least 7 of these
contributing to the neglected medically important disease schistosomiasis [1]. It is estimated that more than
200 million people are infected in 74 countries throughout the tropics and subtropics [1]. The evolutionary history of these parasites has generated much interest,
especially with regard to understanding the relative roles
that particular species have in causing human disease
[1]. With the advent of molecular data, ranging from
chromosomal morphology and small gene sequences to
the annotation of full genomes, several theories have
been put forward as an alternative to the “out of Africa”
hypothesis [1-3]. This review aims to discuss some of
the evidence generated from molecular biology and
genomics that has contributed to the now generally
accepted “out of Asia” hypothesis, but also aims to
* Correspondence: s.p.lawton@kingston.ac.uk
1
The Institute of Biological, Environmental & Rural Sciences, Aberystwyth
University, Penglais, Aberystwyth, Ceredigion, SY23 3D, UK
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

provide alternative theories to some of the established
concepts in schistosome genome evolution.
Biogeography and evolutionary origins of the genus
Schistosoma

Schistosoma species are found throughout the tropical
and developing regions of the world, with primary foci
in Asia, Africa and South America. The distribution of
these parasites is closely linked with the geography of
the obligate intermediate snail hosts that each species
has adapted to exploit within given regions [4,5]. The
species of Schistosoma were originally categorised into
four major groups based on distribution, host specificity
and egg morphology [4,6]. There are two groups primarily found throughout Asia; the S. japonicum group
found throughout eastern and south eastern Asia,
including China, the Philippines and Malaysia, and the
S. indicum group which inhabits the western and southern regions including India, Sri Lanka and Thailand
[4,7,8]. Both S. mansoni and S. haematobium groups are
found throughout Africa, with species from both groups
often sharing overlapping geographical ranges [6,8].
However, the only representative of the genus

© 2011 Lawton et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Lawton et al. Parasites & Vectors 2011, 4:131
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/4/1/131

Schistosoma to be found in South America is S. mansoni, which is mainly restricted to areas of Brazil, Venezuela, Surinam and the Caribbean.
Many theories on the origin of these parasites have
been put forward, developed and reviewed, with primary
arguments for both an African and Asian origin [2-8].
Davis [2,3] proposed that the genus Schistosoma arose
before the separation of the super continent Gondwanaland (which was made up of what is today Africa, South
America, Antarctica and Australia) more than 150 million years ago (MYA) and had already begun to exploit
pulmonate and pomatiopsid snails, of which extensive
fossil records suggest a Gondwanan origin. This implies
that the spread of these parasites was due to continental
drift and that the ancestor of the Asian schistosomes
was carried across to Asia as India separated from
Africa and moved towards Asia 70-148 MYA, giving rise
to the S. indicum and S. japonicum groups [2]. This theory also suggests that the remaining African stock began
to radiate over 120 MYA, giving rise to the ancestral
lineages of the S. mansoni and the S. haematobium
groups. This would have meant that the S. mansoni
appeared approximately 80 MYA in order for both the
parasite and it’s snail vector Biomphalaria to invade and
colonise South America before the fragmentation of
Gondwanaland [3,5] (Figure 1).
More recently, arguments were put forward for an
Asian origin for the schistosomes [5,6,9-12]. This theory
suggests that the ancestral stock of Asian schistosomes
may have originally had a pomastiopsid or a pulmonate
snail host. Snyder & Loker [13] related the radiation of
the S. japonicum group to that of their pomatiopsid
hosts in the mid-Miocene. If this was the case, it would
indicate that the schistosomes colonised Africa approximately 15-20 MYA, almost 70 million years after the
separation of the South American and African plates, as
Gondwanaland drifted apart. Upon invasion of the African continent, the parasites evolved to exploit pulmonate snails exclusively, thus developing a more
specialised host range [5,10,13] (Figure 1)
Schistosoma phylogeny and speciation

Over the past 15 years, there has been an increase in the
use of molecular tools to study the interrelationships
between organisms, with the most robust phylogenies of
the schistosomes and the schistosomatids being constructed in the past eleven years by several researchers
and several new species being described [7-15].
Although a range of genetic markers have been used to
construct these trees, the nuclear marker ribosomal
RNA gene unit (18S, 5.8S, 28S, internal transcribed
spacer region (ITS)) and a number of the mitochondrial
genes have been used extensively in both phylogenetic
and phylogeographic studies of the schistosomes [5-19].

Page 2 of 11

Using a multiple gene approach has provided validity to
the construction of robust phylogenies. More recently,
research has seen a move towards the use of mitochondrial markers to construct phylogenies and a standard
phylogeny of the genus Schistosoma has been established
and referenced in the literature [8-15] (Figure 2).
Although the phylogeny of the schistosomatids shows
the schistosomes to be monophyletic, the genus Schistosoma is suggested to be split into six defined clades
which correlate with the different geographical distributions of the parasites [7,8,11]. The species that form the
Schistosoma japonicum complex (S. sinensium, S. ovuncatum, S. japonicum, S. malayensis and S. mekongi)
appear basal on the tree, with the position of this clade
providing strong evidence for the Asiatic origins of this
parasite, suggesting an oriental origin and its colonisation of both the eastern and south eastern provinces of
Asia [1,4,7,9].
The second major split in the phylogeny encompasses
the species that are parasites found throughout Africa.
However, there appears to be several distinct clades
within this major split, with the most basal lineage
described here as the S. hippopotami clade, containing
both S. hippopotami and S. edwardiense, which were
both described from the vascular system of hippos from
western Uganda [10]. The next division within the phylogeny, termed as the proto-S. mansoni clade, has been
shown to be basal to the true African species and is
represented by two species, Orientobilharzia turkestanicum, which is now known to belong to the genus Schistosoma, and S. incognitum [8]. Both species are found in
southern and western Asia, throughout the Middle East,
while O. turkestanicum has also been found in Eastern
Europe utilising red deer as a definitive host in particular foci in Hungary [11]. This again adds weight to the
argument of an Asian origin for the African schistosomes and may even give an insight into speciation
events that occurred before the colonisation of the African continent [[4,7,8] and [15]].
The African schistosomes form two distinct clades, the
S. mansoni clade (S. mansoni and S. rodhaini) and the S.
haematobium clade (S. margrebowiei, S. leiperi, S. mattheei, S. intercalatum, S. haematobium, S. guineensis, S.
curassoni, S. bovis and S. kisumuensis). However, sitting
between the two major African clades is the S. indicum
group (S. indicum, S. spindale and S. nasale) which are
found throughout southern and western Asia suggesting
a reinvasion of the Asiatic subcontinent [4,5,7,8,12,15].
Evolution of the schistosome mitochondrial genome

Mitochondrial genes have been used to facilitate the
molecular analysis of the relationship between different
species, because they tend to have higher mutation rates
than nuclear markers and exist in high numbers. This

Lawton et al. Parasites & Vectors 2011, 4:131
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/4/1/131

Page 3 of 11

Figure 1 Maps displaying the two hypotheses of the origins of the schistosomes. 1a showing the African origin as suggested by Davis
[2,3] 1) and 2) indicate the African Schistosoma moving over to Asia on the Indian plate 70-148 MYA, giving rise to the S. indicum group and
diversifying into the S. japonicum group. 3) and 4) suggest the Schistosoma ancestor remaining in Africa diverged > 120 MYA, giving rise to the
S. mansoni and S. haematobium groups. 1b showing the Asian origin as put forward by Rollinson et al. [6], Snyder and Loker [13]: 1) S.
japonicum-like ancestor arises and diversifies in Asia. 2) Asian descendents of the ancestral schistosome move into Africa with the widespread
mammal migration between 12-19 MYA. 3) and 4) the African schistosome diverges 1-4 MYA, giving rise to the S. mansoni and S. haematobium
groups. At this time, the ancestors of the S. indicum group emerge and move to India again via the mass movement of large mammals (Figure
adapted from [5]).

Lawton et al. Parasites & Vectors 2011, 4:131
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/4/1/131

Page 4 of 11

Schistosoma ovuncatum

99

Schistosoma sinensium

Central &
S. E. Asia

Schistosoma japonicum

100

S. japonicum clade

Schistosoma malayensis

100

Schistosoma mekongi
Schistosoma edwardiense

98

Africa

Schistosoma hippopotami
Orientobilharzia turkestanicum
100

Schistosoma incognitum
100

Central Asia,
Near East
& E. Europe
p

S. hippopotami clade
Proto - S. mansoni clade

Schistosoma mansoni

Africa

Schistosoma rodhaini

100

S. mansoni clade

Schistosoma nasale
Schistosoma spindale

100
100

India &
S. Asia

S. indicum clade

Schistosoma indicum

100

Schistosoma margrebowiei
Schistosoma leperi

100

Schistosoma mattheei
100

Schistosoma kisumuensis

97
80

Schistosoma intercalatum

Africa

S. haematobium clade

Schistosoma haematobium

84

Schistosoma guineensis
100

Schistosoma curassoni
100
99

Schistosoma bovis

Figure 2 Summary schematic phylogeny of the interrelationships of members of the species within the Schistosoma genus estimated
with a Bayesian analysis of combined partial lsrDNA, complete ssrDNA and partial cox1. Nodal support indicated as posterior probabilities
and bootstrap percentages (n = 2000) from maximum parsimony analysis. This tree also indicates the four main clades and the two referred to
in this study, which in the past have been classified on their egg morphology and both intermediate and definitive hosts: the S. japonicum
group (S. sinensium, S. ovuncatum (inferred from partial lsrDNA) S. japonicum, S. malayensis, S. mekongi) being basal to the Schistosoma group,
and the S. mansoni group (S. mansoni, S. rodhaini) being the first major split in the African clades, with the S. indicum group (S. nasale, S.
spindale, S indicum) and the S. haematobium group (S. margrebowiei, S. leiperi, S. mattheei, S. intercalatum, S. kisumuensis, S. haematobium, S.
guineensis, S. curassoni and S. bovis). The tree also illustrates the basal nature of Asian schistosomes, being ancestral to the African stock due to
the relative positions of S. hippopotami, S. edwardiense (Inferred from partial cox1), Orientobilharzia and S. incognitum. (Adapted from [8-10])

has consequently led to their extensive exploitation for
studying phylogenetic relationships and genetic variation
in these parasites [17,20,21]. As discussed previously,
most of the widely accepted ideas and concepts of Schistosoma phylogeny have primarily been based on the
alignments of multiple gene sequences from a handful
of genes such as cox1, cox2, nad4, rrnL and rrnS
[8,10,15,20-22]. However, recent work has focused on
gene order arrangement around the circular genome of
the mitochondria, to utilise these molecular changes as
phylogenetic markers [19]. Mitochondrial gene rearrangements are considered to be rare evolutionary events
and the mutual differences that can be detected or

observed among groups of organisms are thought to be
indicative of shared ancestry [22,23].
Currently, there are complete mitochondrial genomes
available for six species of schistosome including S. japonicum, S. mekongi, S. malayensis, S. spindale, S. mansoni
and S. haematobium [22-24]. Le et al. [23] illustrated
that the mitochondrial genomes of S. japonicum and S.
mekongi displayed the same gene order as each other
and that of other digenea and cestodes [22]. However, S.
mansoni shows several differences in gene order compared to the species from the S. japonicum clade. The S.
mansoni type rearrangement was also seen in S. haematobium and S. spindale (Figure 3) [22]. This provided

Lawton et al. Parasites & Vectors 2011, 4:131
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/4/1/131

nad4L

nad3

Page 5 of 11

NR

nad6

cox3

cob

nad4

nad1

cox1

rrnL

rrnS

cox2

atp6 nad2

nad5

Schistosoma spindale

cox3

cob

nad4

nad1

cox1

rrnL

rrnS

cox2

atp6 nad2

nad5

Schistosoma haematobium

atp6 nad2

nad5

Schistosoma mansoni

nad5

Schistosoma japonicum

nad5

Schistosoma malayensis

nad4L

nad3

NR

cox3

cob

nad4

nad1

cox3

cob

nad4

atp6 nad2

nad6
cox1

nad1

nad4L
cox3

cob

nad4

rrnL

rrnS

cox1

cox2

rrnL

rrnS

nad3
atp6 nad2

nad1

nad4L

cox2
nad6

cox1

rrnL

rrnS

cox2
nad6

nad3

cox3

cob

nad4

atp6 nad2

nad1

cox1

rrnL

rrnS

cox2

cox3

cob

nad4

atp6 nad2

nad1

cox1

rrnL

rrnS

cox2

nad4L
cox3

cob

nad4

nad3
atp6 nad2

nad1

SNR

SNR
nad5

cox1

rrnL

rrnS

cox2

Fasciola hepatica

nad5

nad6

Schistosoma mekongi

SNR
nad5

Paragonimus westermani

Figure 3 Gene order rearrangements within the Schistosoma mitochondrial genome. The Asian schistosomes from the S. japonicum
complex appear to have retained the general digenean gene order in their mitochondrial genomes when compared to other flukes such as
Fasciola and Paragonimus. However, major gene order changes in the African clades (S. mansoni and S. haematobium) and the S. indicum group
are apparent. The phylogeny is a maximum likelihood tree estimated from complete 18S rDNA and gene order rearrangements in mitochondrial
genomes provide characters for estimating positions on the phylogeny. Where the cytochrome oxidase genes are cox1, cox2, cox3; NADH
dehydrogenase genes are nad1, nad2, nad3, nad4, nad4L, nad5, nad6; ATP synthase gene is atp6, cytochrome b gene is cob, rrnL is 16s, rrnS is
12s SNR, is the short noncoding region and the circles represent tRNAs (Adapted from [22-24]).

yet further evidence for the Asian ancestry of the schistosomes, and gave weight to the concept of the reinvasion of Asia by the S. indicum group from Africa
[7,22,24]. This unique gene order rearrangement in the
African schistosomes and their descendants is of particular interest when considering the phylogenetic position of O. turkestanicum and S. incognitum and their
geographical ranges. These species may give insights
into when and where these genomic changes occurred
during the invasion of Africa and the radiation of the
Schistosoma [22].
The schistosome genome and karyotype evolution

All members of the Schistosoma genus are normally
diploid and have eight pairs of chromosomes of which
seven pairs are autosomal and, unlike most other trematodes, a pair of heterogametic sex chromosomes (maleZZ and is female-ZW) [6,21,25,26], though a tentative
triploid has been reported [27]. The current assembly of
the S. mansoni and S. japonicum genome has shown
that the nuclear genome is approximately 360 megabases, 40% repetitive, with the other 60% representing

single copy sequences or small gene families, composed
from approximately 11, 809 genes [28].
Short [29] compared the C banded pattern of the
chromosomes in the African schistosomes, and found
that these species all displayed very similar patterns
except for the patterns on the W chromosome. The heterochromatin composition on the W chromosome differed considerably between species. The centromeric
area and proximal part of the long arm of the W chromosomes of S. mansoni, S. rodhaini, S. intercalatum
and S. margrebowiei were shown to be heterochromatic.
In S. haematobium, 3-5 differential staining heterochromatic bands were identified along the long arm of the
W chromosome in addition to a paracentromeric block
of heterochromatin (Figure 4) [30]. However, S. bovis
and S. mattheei differed from the other species; S. bovis
had a large euchromatic gap between two blocks of heterochromatin with a proportionally shorter, terminally
located, euchromatic region. This was also true for S.
mattheei except that the euchromatic gap was smaller
than that in S. bovis [29]. When compared with the
Asian schistosomes, there appeared to be many

Lawton et al. Parasites & Vectors 2011, 4:131
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/4/1/131

Page 6 of 11

A) Model of the evolution of the schistosomatid sex chromosome morphology
prior to the advent of molecular phylogenetic studies

Asian
Schistosoma
japonicum

African
Schistosoma
mansoni

N. American

Schistosoma Schistosoma
haematobium
bovis

S. rodhaini

B) Model of the evolution of the schistosomatid sex chromosome morphology
based on mitochondrial phylogenetics and heterochromatinization events

Schistosomatium
douthitti

S. bovis,

Heterobilharzia
americana

Schistosomatium
douthitti

S. mekongi

Heterobilharzia
americana

S. matteei

S. malayensis

S. haematobium

S. mattheei
Trichobilharzia spp

S. intercalatum
S. margrebowiei

2, 3, 4

3, 4

1, 3, 4

1, 3

1, 3

1, 3

2, 4

2

S. rodhaini

2, 3, 4

S. margrebowiei
Host change to
mammals

2, 3

3, 4

3, 4

Ancestor of the Asian
Schistosoma

Ancestor of the bird
schistosomatids

3, 4

Hypothetical Ancestor of
the non – schistosome
schistosomatids

1. Inversion

2, 3

S. intercaltum

3

Ancestor of the African
Schistosoma

1, 2, 4

1

3

S. mansoni

S. japonicum

2, 4

3

S. sinensium

3, 4

Hypothetical Ancestor of
the genus Schistosoma
(Host change to mammals)

3, 4

2. Translocation
3. Heterochromatization
4. Deletion

Hypothetical Schistosome Ancestor
(Parasite of early birds)

Figure 4 Two models on the evolution of sex chromosomes of the schistosomatids. A) Short and Grossman’s (1981, 1983) Ideograms
proposing the evolution of the sex chromosomes to have followed a similar trend to the rest of the genome, arising from a hermaphrodite
ancestor. Two homologous chromosomes that contained the genes for sex determination began to diverge as a result of reduced
recombination and gave rise to the ancestors of each schistosomatid group independently. B) Based on the mtDNA data and morphology of
the chromosomes, a plausible model of sex chromosome evolution can be put forward suggesting that heterochromatinization events are the
major factor in the differentiation of the sex chromosomes in the schistosomatids but also that the pattern of morphological differentiation
shows the same relationship as the mitochondrial genome data.

similarities with the African species in chromosome
number and morphology (Figure 4).
Short and Grossman’s studies [26,29,30] led them to
theorise that there was a polyphyletic origin of the
structure of the schistosome genome, and described two
separate origins for the African and Asian species. However, Hirai et al. [21] compared the C banding patterns
of the S. japonicum complex with S. mansoni and S.
haematobium, and found lower heterochromatization
throughout the karyotypes and lower recombination
rates through chiasma frequency in the Asian species
[31]. An intermediate between the Asian and African
karyotype patterning was also identified in the karyotype
of S. sinensium. This species showed the highest level of
heterochromatization on the sex chromosomes resulting
in the largest W chromosome compared to the Z of all
the Asian species, but also has the same C banding pattern as the African S. mansoni on chromosome 2 [21].
These findings lead to the hypothesis that the African

schistosomes were derived from an Asian S. japonicum
like ancestor as also suggested by Snyder and Loker [13]
and were not polyphyletic as suggested by Short [29]
(Figure 4).
The widely accepted and universal theory suggests
that sex chromosome evolution occurs by a gradual
arrest of recombination between two homologous chromosomes, followed by the genetic decay of one of these
chromosomes that will gradually become the gametotype of the heterogametic sex [32,33]. This process may
be triggered by the favourable disequilibrium between
sex-determining and a sexually antagonistic locus which
acts as a selective pressure to reduce recombination of
these loci [32,33] (however see Ironside [34] for an
alternative view). As a result, there is an eventual loss of
functional genes from the heterogametic sex chromosome due to the gradual mutations or rearrangements
[32,33,35]. This has been suggested to be driven by several processes including Muller’s ratchet, genetic hitch

Lawton et al. Parasites & Vectors 2011, 4:131
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/4/1/131

hiking and even background selection, all of which
relate to population size, density and distribution. In
spite of a lack of molecular knowledge, Short (1983)
[29] touched on these concepts and suggested that during the early evolution of sex chromosomes in schistosomes, the homologues were originally morphologically
identical; with subtle differences in only a few genes and
as sex determining genes accumulated on a specific
homologous pair of chromosomes, the potential for sex
chromosomes arose. Differentiation of the true Z and W
chromosomes in these worms depended on some
mechanism to prevent crossing over of regions with sex
determining genes in order to reduce free recombination [29]. Grossman et al. [30] suggested that it may
have been possible that the heterochromatin activity
prevented crossing over between the differential segments of the ancestral Z and W and suppressed the
expression of particular genes, allowing the development
of true sex chromosomes in the schistosomes, which
was also indicated in investigations by Hirai et al. [31]
on chiasma frequencies in parasitic flukes.
Although the autosomal karyotype of the African
schistosome species is indistinguishable the sex chromosomes are markedly different in both size and structure
displaying species specific characteristics in heterochromatic patterns on the W chromosome [29]. This is also
true of the S. japonicum group being distinguished by
metacentric sex chromosomes with little heterochromatin. The Asian schistosomes show the W chromosome
to be much smaller than the Z chromosome, conforming to the hypothesis that the W chromosome is degenerate resulting from the lack of recombination [31,35].
However, the W chromosome is relatively much larger
than the Z chromosome in the African species, although
all chromosomes are considerably smaller than those of
the Asian schistosomes [25]. This alteration in size is
the consequence of the increased heterochromatization
of the W chromosomes in African species and may be
used to indicate regions where there is suppression of
recombination [31,35,36]. These heterochromatic bodies
have occurred in the respective areas of recombination
in the S. japonicum group and S. mansoni, suggesting
that there may be some selection for heterochromatization of the W chromosome as an adaptation to suppress
recombination with the homologous regions of the Z
chromosome [25-30] (Figure 4).
However, when the cytogenetic data from both Short
[29] and Hirai et al. [25] are combined with the “true”
phylogeny adapted from Webster et al. [8] an alternative
theory of the evolution of sex chromosomes can be proposed, which conforms to the out of Asia hypothesis
that Hirai et al. [25] eluded to (Figure 4). The Asian
schistosomes appear to have lower levels of heterochromatization on the sex chromosomes than do the African

Page 7 of 11

schistosomes. In the Asian clade, S. japonicum has a
relatively simpler set of sex chromosomes with a small
W chromosome and a larger Z chromosome. Both S.
mekongi and S. malayensis show a similar pattern of
heterochromatization as S. japonicum but have a larger
mass of heterochromatin on the W, suggesting these
species were derived from this type of karyotype. As
noted by Hirai et al. [25], S. sinensium appears to have
characteristics of both Asian and African chromosomes,
and although the W chromosome is smaller than the Z
chromosome, the W chromosome does show a very
similar pattern of heterochromatin on the p and q arms,
as is found in S. mansoni, leading to the suggestion that
S. sinensium has retained the ancestral characteristics of
both African and Asian species. Therefore, it is plausible
that S. japonicum diverged from a basal S. sinensiumlike stock and the African like characteristics were lost
as the S. japonicum group arose. The African clade
shows several marked differences, with the Z chromosome being smaller than the W chromosome, and W
chromosome having large heterochromatic masses; however both the sex chromosomes are markedly smaller
than those observed in Asian species. The S. mansoni
type sex chromosomes appear to occur in both the S.
mansoni and the S. haematobium clade with all other
forms appearing to be derived from it, suggesting this to
be the ancestral form that would have originally invaded
Africa. Both S. bovis and S. haematobium show higher
levels of heterochromatin in the W chromosome than
that of S. mansoni. This could have happened as a gradual heterochromatization event during speciation to
give rise to the two different forms or may have resulted
from an inversion event on the W chromosome of the
S. mansoni-like ancestor, involving inversion of the large
heterochromatin mass into the pseudoautosomal region.
Additionally this could have happened as the S. haematobium type karyotype arose from such an inversion followed by a heterochromatization event that produced
the S. bovis type sex chromosome karyotype (Figure 4).
Genomic insights into the evolution of Schistosoma

By combining the mitochondrial data with that of the
cytogenetic data, and Attwood’s et al. [1] description of
the movement of schistosomes, a plausible theory can
be constructed to aid in the understanding of the evolution of these parasites (Figure 4 &5):
1) Asian origin: mitochondrial, nuclear and cytogenetic data suggest an Asian origin with the S. japonicum group appearing to be basal to other members
of the genus [8,15,16,20]. These observations suggest
that S. sinensium is basal to the S. japonicum group
and the cytogenetic data show it to have characters
of both African and Asian species. Although the

Lawton et al. Parasites & Vectors 2011, 4:131
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/4/1/131

Page 8 of 11

Schistosoma Ancestor
The ancestor of the S. japonicum complex diversity
rapidly and colonise Central, Eastern and South East
Asia. Mt genome gene order is the same as all other
trematodes and cestodes
Population bottle neck occurred marked
by a change in mtgenome gene order and
in sex chromosome size and gave rise to
the proto – S. mansoni clade

Second invasion of Africa by ancestors that
where similar to Orientobilharzia turkestanicum
and S. incognitum

S. mansoni type sex chromosome karyptype seen
throughout both groups of African Schistosoma species and
thus considered to be the ancestral form

First
invasion
of
Africa
by
schistosomes giving rise to the S.
hippopotomi clade. This is basal to
the rest of the non African/ non S.
japonicum group species and
assumed to have the same mt gene
genome order as the Asian
schistosomes

S. japonicum

S. sinensium

Schistosoma indicum group? Retained
the African mt genome gene order no
karytype information available

S. mekongi

S. malayensis
S. haematobium is the only species in Africa
with this karyotype but shares homology with
the other African species in mt gene order

Reinvasion of Asia from the Africa giving rise
to the S. indicum group

Both species, S. bovis and S. mattheei primarily
found in cattle and appear to have the same
karyotype even though the mtDNA shows them to
be phylogenetically distinct

Figure 5 Semi-schematic summarizing a phylogeography and genome evolution of Schistosoma with respect to the evolutionary
biogeography of the parasites showing that the genus arose in Central Asia in rodents during the Miocene. The S. japonicum lineage
radiates in rodents in China and Southeast Asia. Orientobilharzia acquires artiodactyls as hosts in Central Asia sharing homology with an ancestor
that enters Africa during the late Miocene and gives rise to the S. haematobium and S. mansoni lineages. The Pliocene large mammal radiation
in Africa triggers the divergence of several lineages of Schistosoma utilizing Artiodactyla. The Plio-Pleistocene large mammal divergence into Asia
and the emergence of Bovidae then drives the divergence of the Schistosoma indicum lineage from one of the African artiodactyle Schistosoma
clades. Schistosoma of bovids establish on the Indian subcontinent and in Southeast Asia but apparently less so in Central Asia. In Southeast
Asia, both S. incognitum and S. spindale undergo near isochronous colonization and radiation from India. The schematic indicates the
evolutionary signals that have been produced by genomic data to provide the evidence of the Asian origin of the schistosomes. The ancestor of
the African schistosomes shared homology with Orientobilharzia and S. incognitum and a genetic bottleneck occurred, as indicated by the
reduction in size of the sex chromosomes and fixed the mt genome rearrangement as the schistosomes moved into Africa. The African
schistosomes evolved from a S. mansoni-like ancestor with all African parasites showing the same gene order in the mt genome and all showing
karyotypes to be derived from the S. mansoni type, a trend also seen in the S. indicum group as it reinvaded Asia (Adapted from [1]).

shape and structure of the sex chromosomes within
S. sinensium corresponds to that of the Asian S.
japonicum clade, in that the Z chromosome is markedly larger than the W chromosome, they do have
high levels of differentiation similar to that in the
African species. Chromosome 2 also shows marked
similarities to that of the African species and in fact
this worm has similar egg morphology to the S.
mansoni group. With this in mind, it is possible to
suggest that a S. sinensium-like genome is most
likely to be the ancestral state, with S. japonicum
diverging forming a sister group. Also, S. ovuncatum,
the sister taxon of S. sinensium, has an egg

morphology which closely resembles that of S.
mekongi rather than the S. mansoni type of morphology seen in S. sinensium [9]. This again suggests that
other African type characteristics could have been
soon lost in the radiation of the Asian lineages. The
similarities seen between S. mekongi and S. malayensis may also suggest recent divergence away from
the ancestral state, with the sex chromosomes
appearing more divergent from those found in S.
japonicum but the whole genome sharing the majority of traits. (Figure 4).
2) The invasion of Africa: According to the molecular mitochondrial data the invasion of Africa

Lawton et al. Parasites & Vectors 2011, 4:131
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/4/1/131

happened on at least two separate occasions. The
first event occurred when the ancestors of the hippos moved across the land bridge between Africa
and Asia utilising the large freshwater networks that
eventually would have given rise to the Nile basin
and the Mediterranean Sea [10]. This would have
evolved into the S. hippopotami clade which will
have probably become isolated and diversified in
Africa after the last ice age [1,10] The S. hippopotami clade shares a common Asian ancestor, with O.
turkestanicum and S. incognitum subsequently basal
to the African stock of Schistosoma that gave rise to
the S. mansoni and S. haematobium clades [8,13].
However, due to the lack of a complete mitochondrial genome or a full karyotype for these species, it
is only possible to speculate what their ancestral
genomic state may have been. Comparison of the
mitochondrial genome of the Asian and African species shows that there are substantial gene order rearrangements. By studying this in O. turkestanicum
and S. incognitum, it may be possible to gain some
insight into where and when these changes happened and under which circumstances such mutations arose. Interestingly, this also coincides with the
marked difference in the sex chromosomes between
the Asian and African clades. The African species
appear to have smaller chromosomes than the Asian
stock but their sex chromosomes are much more
differentiated from each other and, due to higher
levels of heterochromatization, the W chromosome
has become much larger than the Z chromosome.
Both genomic changes in the mitochondria and
reduction in sex chromosome size can often be associated with population bottlenecks which would
coincide with the movement of parasites from Asia
and the colonisation of Africa during the mid-Miocene with radiation of mammals from Asia into
Africa [1]. It is also important to note that when the
karyotypes of the African species are compared with
the phylogenies constructed by Lockyer et al. [15]
and Webster et al. [8] the majority of species have
the S. mansoni type karyotype and sex chromosome
patterning, suggesting that this was the ancestral
state of the genome of the African stock (Figure 4).
However, there is much more variation of the sex
chromosome patterning in the S. haematobium
clade although the S. mansoni type still appears to
be the most common and is found in S. margrebowiei which is basal to this clade, and in S. intercalatum/S. guineensis which are situated within the
clade. This suggests that the variation seen in the
patterns of sex chromosomes are variations on the S.
mansoni karyotype and may have occurred relatively
recently. This corroborates the molecular data that

Page 9 of 11

suggest a radiation in the S. haematobium group
within the past 2-5 million years, but with both S.
mansoni and S. haematobium diverging some 15
million years previously [1](Figure 4).
3) Reinvasion of Asia: based primarily on the molecular data provided by Lockyer et al. [15] and Webster et al. [8] and the complete mitochondrial
genome of S. spindale [18], there are substantial affinities between the S. indicum group and the African
stock that suggests an African ancestry. Unfortunately, like O. turkestanicum and S. incognitum there
is currently no data on the karyotypes of the S. indicum group but two scenarios could be suggested
based on the evidence from the African stock. 1) It
is most likely that these species show the S. mansoni
type of sex chromosomes or 2) because of the recent
divergence may show drastic heterochromatic
changes in sex chromosome patterns, as have
occurred in S. bovis, S. mattheei and S. haematobium. However, this is purely speculation and needs
further investigation (Figure 4). Interestingly, the
reinvasion of Asia was not accompanied by any definitive host switching into primates and carnivores
with S. indicum, S. spindale and S. nasale continuing
to parasitise ungulates and rodents [1,8].
By considering the genomic evidence a general scenario for the history of the schistosomes can be put forward. The genus Schistosoma arose in Asia from an
avian schistosomatid, probably as parasites of murid
rodents, possibly 60-70 million years ago, eventually followed by another host shift to utilise ungulates approximately 20 million years ago during the mid to late
Miocene [1] (Figure 5). This was probably the trigger
for the diversification of the S. japonicum group, as this
also coincided with the diversification of their pomatiopsid hosts [13]. The S. japonicum group share distinct
genomic similarities with the avian parasites, including
mitochondrial gene order and the relative size ratio
between the Z and W chromosome. This indicates that
the S. japonicum group retained some of the “ancestral”
type genome traits. It is also important to note that S.
japonicum has over 40 different hosts which may be a
strategy that would have allowed the proto forms of the
S. japonicum group to retain ancestral genome characteristics [4,6]. If this is the case, it could be suggested
that the variation seen in molecular data and from cytogenetics may have been influenced by the specialisation
to specific hosts (Figure 5).
During this host switch from rodents to ungulates, it
has been suggested that O turkestanicum represents an
offshoot of the Asian rodent parasites that began to specialise in utilising artiodactylians in central and eastern
Asia [1,37]. This coincides with the divergence of

Lawton et al. Parasites & Vectors 2011, 4:131
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/4/1/131

ungulates across Europe, Asia and Africa that took place
during the Miocene. If this is the case, then the mass
movement of ungulates between Africa and Asia as the
Tethyan seaway closed would have given a viable route
for the schistosomes to invade Africa [1,13] (Figure 5).
This also corresponds with RFLP data, suggesting that S.
mansoni was in Africa before the end of the Miocene
[9,38]. However, during the invasion of the Middle East
and Africa, population bottlenecks would have occurred
as a result of the lack of a pomatiopsid intermediate
host, forcing a host change to planorbid snails. The
reduction in the sex chromosome size indicates that
such a bottleneck may have occurred and would have
been the event that also fixed the mitochondrial gene
order change in the ancestral stock of the African schistosomes [39] (Figure 5).
Both the S. mansoni type karyotype and mitochondrial
genome represent the proto African schistosome with
all other species appearing to be derived from it. With
the radiation of both the S. mansoni and S. haematobium groups, this allowed species to utilise not only
ungulates and rodents but also primates as definitive
hosts and eventually allowed them to specialise in snails
of the Biomphalaria (S. mansoni group) and Bulinus
genus (S. haematobium group). Attwood et al. [1] suggested that reinvasion of Asia by the ancestral stock of
the S. indicum group probably occurred about 2-3 million years ago as large ungulates migrated across the
Sinai-Levant dispersal tract between the Pliocene and
Pleistocene, and the emergence of the Bovidae during
this period, probably facilitated diversification of the S.
indicum group giving rise to both S. nasale and S. spindale (Figure 5).

Conclusion
With the absence of fossil evidence for the schistosomes, it would be impossible to infer theories on
their evolution without the use of genomic data from
both molecular and cytogenetic techniques. Although
some gaps still remain in the data, it is possible to
speculate on the causes of those changes at the genomic level and to provide strong evidence for the Asian
origin of these parasites (Figure 5). With the completion of the S. mansoni and S. japonicum genome and
the first version of the assembly available in the public
domain, it is now possible to swiftly develop genetic
markers that can be utilised to understand the evolutionary history of the these parasites [40]. Such markers, including gene sequences, microsatellites and
SNPs, must be used together if an accurate account of
schistosome evolution is to be inferred [6,8,41]. In the
broader context, the data generated using molecular
and genetic techniques not only gives an insight into
the evolutionary history of these organisms but also

Page 10 of 11

into the population biology of these parasites which
consequently has a direct impact on species identification, biology, and disease epidemiology.
Abbreviations
cox1: Cytochrome oxidase 1; cox2: Cytochrome oxidase 2; MYA: Million years
ago; nad4: NADH dehydrogenase; lsrDNA: Large subunit of ribosomal DNA;
ssrDNA: Small subunit of ribosomal DNA; RFLP: Restriction fragment length
polymorphism; RNA: Ribose nucleic acid; rDNA: ribosomal DNA; rrnL:
mitochondrial large subunit of ribosomal DNA; rrnS: mitochondrial small
subunit of ribosomal DNA; SNPs: Single nucleotide polymorphism.
Acknowledgements and Funding
The work in this review formed part of the PhD studies of SPL which was
funded by a NERC CASE studentship between Aberystwyth University and
The Natural History Museum London.
Author details
1
The Institute of Biological, Environmental & Rural Sciences, Aberystwyth
University, Penglais, Aberystwyth, Ceredigion, SY23 3D, UK. 2Wolfson
Wellcome Biomedical Laboratories, Dept. of Zoology, Natural History
Museum, London, SW7 5BD, UK. 3The Primate Research Institute, University
of Kyoto, Inuyama, Aichi 484-8506, Japan. 4School of Medicine, University of
Southampton, Mailpoint 12, Level B, Lab and Path Block, Southampton
General Hospital, Southampton SO16 6YD, UK. 5School of Life Sciences,
Kingston University London, Penrhyn Road, Kingston upon Thames, Surrey
KT1 2EE, UK.
Authors’ contributions
SPL wrote the manuscript and was responsible for conceiving the new
proposed theories and hypotheses based on current genomic knowledge of
the schistosomes. HH developed the theoretical aspects of chromosome
structural evolution and helped with the draft of manuscript. JEI provided
expertise into general sex chromosome evolutionary theory and critically
reviewed manuscript before publication. DAJ provided expertise and opinion
on schistosome genomics and molecular evolution and helped with the
draft of the manuscript. DR provided expertise on schistosome biology and
population genetics and critically approved several drafts of the manuscript
before publication. All authors read and approved the final version of the
manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 31 May 2011 Accepted: 7 July 2011 Published: 7 July 2011
References
1. Attwood SW, Fatih FA, Mondal MM, Alim MA, Fadjar S, Rajapakse RP,
Rollinson D: A DNA sequence-based study of the Schistosoma indicum
(Trematoda: Digenea) group: population phylogeny, taxonomy and
historical biogeography. Parasitology 2007, 134:2009-2020.
2. Davis GM: Evolution of prosobranch snails transmitting Asian
Schistosoma; coevolution with Schistosoma: A review. Progress in Clinical
Parasitology 1992, 3:145-204.
3. Davis GM: Snail hosts of Asian Schistosoma infecting man: evolution and
coevolution. In the Mekong Schistosome. Malacological Review 1980,
2:195-238.
4. Agatsuma T: Origin and evolution of Schistosoma japonicum. Parasitol Int
2003, 52:335-340.
5. Morgan JA, Dejong RJ, Snyder SD, Mkoji GM, Loker ES: Schistosoma
mansoni and Biomphalaria: past history and future trends. Parasitology
2001, 123:211-228.
6. Rollinson D, Kaukas A, Johnston DA, Simpson AJ, Tanaka M: Some
molecular insights into schistosome evolution. Int J Parasitol 1997,
27:11-28.
7. Agatsuma T, Iwagami M, Liu CX, Rajapakse RP, Mondal MM, Kitikoon V,
Ambu S, Agatsuma Y, Blair D, Higuchi T: Affinities between Asian nonhuman Schistosoma species, the S. indicum group, and the African
human schistosomes. J Helminthol 2002, 76:7-19.

Lawton et al. Parasites & Vectors 2011, 4:131
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/4/1/131

8.

9.

10.
11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.
21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.
27.
28.

Webster BL, Southgate VR, Littlewood DT: A revision of the
interrelationships of Schistosoma including the recently described
Schistosoma guineensis. Int J Parasitol 2006, 36:947-955.
Attwood SW, Panasoponkul C, Upatham ES, Meng XH, Southgate VR:
Schistosoma ovuncatum n. sp. (Digenea: Schistosomatidae) from
northwest Thailand and the historical biogeography of Southeast Asian
Schistosoma Weinland, 1858. Syst Parasitol 2002, 51:1-19.
Morgan JA, DeJong RJ, Kazibwe F, Mkoji GM, Loker ES: A newly-identified
lineage of Schistosoma. Int J Parasitol 2003, 33:977-985.
Majoros G, Dán A, Erdélyi KA: Natural focus of the blood fluke
Orientobilharzia turkestanicum (Skrjabin, 1913) (Trematoda:
Schistosomatidae) in red deer (Cervus elaphus) in Hungary. Vet Parasitol
2010, 170:218-223.
Hanelt B, Brant SV, Steinauer ML, Maina GM, Kinuthia JM, Agola LE,
Mwangi IN, Mungai BN, Mutuku MW, Mkoji GM, Loker ES: Schistosoma
kisumuensis n. sp.(Digenea: Schistosomatidae) from murid rodents in the
Lake Victoria Basin, Kenya and its phylogenetic position within the S.
haematobium species group. Parasitology 2009, 136:987-1001.
Snyder SD, Loker ES: Evolutionary relationships among the
Schistosomatidae (Platyhelminthes: Digenea) and an Asian origin for
Schistosoma. J Parasitol 2000, 86:283-288.
Kane RA, Southgate VR, Rollinson D, Littlewood DT, Lockyer AE, Pagès JR,
Tchuem Tchuentè LA, Jourdane J: A phylogeny based on three
mitochondrial genes supports the division of Schistosoma intercalatum
into two separate species. Parasitology 2003, 127:131-137.
Lockyer AE, Olson PD, Ostergaard P, Rollinson D, Johnston DA,
Attwood SW, Southgate VR, Horak P, Snyder SD, Le TH, Agatsuma T,
McManus DP, Carmichael AC, Naem S, Littlewood DT: The phylogeny of
the Schistosomatidae based on three genes with emphasis on the
interrelationships of Schistosoma Weinland, 1858. Parasitology 2003,
126:203-224.
Snyder SD: Phylogeny and paraphyly among tetrapod blood flukes
(Digenea: Schistosomatidae and Spirorchiidae). Int J Parasitol 2004,
34:1385-1392.
Johnston DA, Dias Neto E, Simpson AJ, Rollinson D: Opening the can of
worms: molecular analysis of schistosome populations. Parasitol Today
1993, 9:286-291.
Johnston DA, Kane RA, Rollinson D: Small subunit (18S) ribosomal RNA
gene divergence in the genus Schistosoma. Parasitology 1993,
107:147-156.
Kane RA, Rollinson D: Repetitive sequences in the ribosomal DNA internal
transcribed spacer of Schistosoma haematobium, Schistosoma
intercalatum and Schistosoma mattheei. Mol Biochem Parasit 1994,
63:153-156.
Loker ES, Brant SV: Diversification, dioecy and dimorphism in
schistosomes. Trends Parasitol 2006, 22:521-528.
Johnston DA: Genomes and genomics of parasitic flatworms. Parasitic
Flatworms: molecular biology, biochemistry, immunology and physiology CAB
International, Wallingford; 2006, 279-291.
Littlewood DT, Lockyer AE, Webster BL, Johnston DA, Le TH: The complete
mitochondrial genomes of Schistosoma haematobium and Schistosoma
spindale and the evolutionary history of mitochondrial genome changes
among parasitic flatworms. Mol Phylogenet Evol 2006, 39:452-67.
Le TH, Humair PF, Blair D, Agatsuma T, Littlewood DT, McManus DP:
Mitochondrial gene content, arrangement and composition compared
in African and Asian schistosomes. Mol Biochem Parasit 2001, 117:61-71.
Zarowiecki MZ, Huyse T, Littlewood DT: Making the most of mitochondrial
genomes-markers for phylogeny, molecular ecology and barcodes in
Schistosoma (Platyhelminthes: Digenea). Int J Parasitol 2007, 37:1401-1148.
Hirai H, Taguchi T, Saitoh Y, Kawanaka M, Sugiyama H, Habe S, Okamoto M,
Hirata M, Shimada M, Tiu WU, Lai K, Upatham ES, Agatsuma T:
Chromosomal differentiation of the Schistosoma japonicum complex. Int
J Parasitol 2000, 30:441-452.
Grossman AI, Short RB, Kuntz RE: Somatic chromosomes of Schistosoma
rodhaini, S. mattheei, and S. intercalatum. J Parasitol 1981, 67:41-44.
Hirai H, LoVerde PT: Triploid cells found in intramolluscan stages of
Schistosoma mansoni. J Parasitol 1989, 75:800-802.
Berriman M, Haas BJ, LoVerde PT, Wilson RA, Dillon GP, Mashiyama ST, AlLazikani B, Andrade LF, Ashton PD, Aslett MA, Bartholomeu DC, Blandin G,
Caffrey CR, Coghlan A, Coulson R, Day TA, Delcher A, DeMarco R, Djikeng A,
Eyre T, Gamble JA, Ghedin E, Gu Y, Hertz-Fowler C, Hirai H, Hirai Y,

Page 11 of 11

29.
30.

31.

32.
33.

34.
35.
36.
37.

38.

39.
40.

41.

Houston R, Ivens A, Johnston DA, Lacerda D, Macedo CD, McVeigh P,
Ning Z, Oliveira G, Overington JP, Parkhill J, Pertea M, Pierce RJ, Protasio AV,
Quail MA, Rajandream MA, Rogers J, Sajid M, Salzberg SL, Stanke M,
Tivey AR, White O, Williams DL, Wortman J, Wu W, Zamanian M, Zerlotini A,
Fraser-Liggett CM, Barrell BG, El-Sayed N: The genome of the blood fluke
Schistosoma mansoni. Nature 2009, 460:352-358.
Short RB: Presidential address: Sex and the single schistosome. J
Parasitology 1983, 69:. 3-22.
Grossman AI, Short RB, Cain GD: Karyotype evolution and sex
chromosome differentiation in schistosomes (Trematoda,
Schistosomatidae). Chromosoma 1981, 84:413-430.
Hirai H, Hirata M, Aoki Y, Tanaka M, Imai HT: Chiasma analyses of parasite
flukes, Schistosoma and Paragonimus (Trematoda), by using the chiasma
distribution graph. Genes Genet Syst 1996, 71:181-188.
Charlesworth B: The evolution of chromosomal sex determination.
Novartis Found Symp 2002, 244:207-219.
Ellegren H, Carmichael A: Multiple and independent cessation of
recombination between avian sex chromosomes. Genetics 2001,
158:325-231.
Ironside JE: No amicable divorce? Challenging the notion that sexual
antagonism drives sex chromosome evolution. Bioessay 32:718-726.
Charlesworth B: The evolution of sex chromosomes. Science 1991,
251:1030-1030.
Charlesworth B: The evolution of chromosomal sex determination and
dosage compensation. Curr Biol 1996, 6:149-162.
Li L, Yu LY, Zhu XQ, Wang CR, Zhai YQ, Zhao JP: Orientobilharzia
turkestanicum is grouped within African schistosomes based on
phylogenetic analyses using sequences of mitochondrial genes. Parasitol
Res 2008, 102:939-943.
Despres L, Imbert-Establet D, Combes C, Bonhomme F: Molecular evidence
linking hominid evolution to recent radiation of schistosomes
(Platyhelminthes: Trematoda). Mol Phylogenet Evol 1992, 1:295-304.
Amos W, Harwood J: Factors affecting levels of genetic diversity in
natural populations. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 1998, 353:177-186.
Williams SA, Johnston DA: Helminth genome analysis: the current status
of the filarial and schistosome genome projects. Filarial Genome Project.
Schistosome Genome Project. Parasitol 1999, 118:19-38.
Xiao N, Remais J, Brindley PJ, Qiu D, Spear R, Lei Y, Blair D: Polymorphic
microsatellites in the human bloodfluke, Schistosoma japonicum,
identified using a genomic resource. Parasite Vectors 2011, 4:13.

doi:10.1186/1756-3305-4-131
Cite this article as: Lawton et al.: Genomes and geography: genomic
insights into the evolution and phylogeography of the genus
Schistosoma. Parasites & Vectors 2011 4:131.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
