<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>1471-2105-8-S9-S2.fm</title>
<meta name="Author" content="Inal.Ramadan"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 7.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 7.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
BMC Bioinformatics

BioMed Central

Open Access

Proceedings

BioCAD: an information fusion platform for bio-network inference
and analysis
Doheon Lee*, Sangwoo Kim and Younghoon Kim
Address: Department of Bio and Brain Engineering, KAIST, 373-1 Guseong-Dong, Yuseong-Gu, Daejeon, 305-701, Republic of Korea
Email: Doheon Lee* - dhlee@biosoft.kaist.ac.kr; Sangwoo Kim - swkim@biosoft.kaist.ac.kr; Younghoon Kim - yhkim@biosoft.kaist.ac.kr
* Corresponding author

from First International Workshop on Text Mining in Bioinformatics (TMBio) 2006
Arlington, VA, USA. 10 November 2006
Published: 27 November 2007
BMC Bioinformatics 2007, 8(Suppl 9):S2

doi:10.1186/1471-2105-8-S9-S2

<supplement> <title> <p>First International Workshop on Text Mining in Bioinformatics (TMBio) 2006</p> </title> <editor>Min Song and Zoran Obradovic</editor> <note>Proceedings</note> </supplement>

This article is available from: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/8/S9/S2
© 2007 Lee et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd.

Abstract
Background: As systems biology has begun to draw growing attention, bio-network inference and
analysis have become more and more important. Though there have been many efforts for bionetwork inference, they are still far from practical applications due to too many false inferences and
lack of comprehensible interpretation in the biological viewpoints. In order for applying to real
problems, they should provide effective inference, reliable validation, rational elucidation, and
sufficient extensibility to incorporate various relevant information sources.
Results: We have been developing an information fusion software platform called BioCAD. It is
utilizing both of local and global optimization for bio-network inference, text mining techniques for
network validation and annotation, and Web services-based workflow techniques. In addition, it
includes an effective technique to elucidate network edges by integrating various information
sources. This paper presents the architecture of BioCAD and essential modules for bio-network
inference and analysis.
Conclusion: BioCAD provides a convenient infrastructure for network inference and network
analysis. It automates series of users' processes by providing data preprocessing tools for various
formats of data. It also helps inferring more accurate and reliable bio-networks by providing
network inference tools which utilize information from distinct sources. And it can be used to
analyze and validate the inferred bio-networks using information fusion tools.

Background
Understanding internal networks of a given system is one
of the ultimate goals in biological studies. Inferring precise networks includes both processes of assigning functional annotations to each element of networks and
predicting flows of causal effects between those elements.
To complete these processes, plenty of data from various

sources and proper algorithms for network inference are
needed.
Most of the studies of inferring biological networks have
taken computational and statistical approaches. In the
case of inferring genetic regulatory networks, microarray
expression profile data has been widely used to look into
the internal activities of cells, and a lot of studies have

Page 1 of 7
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2007, 8(Suppl 9):S2

been done to apply computational algorithms for network inference to such data. So far, Bayesian network has
been widely used because it has sound mathematical basis
and the characteristic of noise resistance [1,2]. Other computational techniques like correlation metric construction
[3], dynamic Bayesian network [4,5], S-system [6,7],
Boolean network [8], logic gate model [9] and Petri-net
[10] were also applied to inferring or modeling genetic
regulatory networks from microarray gene expression
data. Besides, literature information also has been used to
build biological networks [11,12].
Although such techniques for inferring biological networks have been developed and improved up to now, several problems still exist. First, those inferred networks
usually contain many false inferences and they are mainly
due to the lack of information (the amount of available
data is very limited in general). Most of available microarray data does not contain enough number of experiments
to infer reliable networks when considering the large
number of genes. Noise problems in preprocessing and
information loss in inference processes are also reasons of
such false inferences. Second, the relationships such as
dependency, coherence or causality in the inferred networks can be ambiguous. The network itself usually does
not elucidate why those edges exist; how strongly the elements affect the others; and which of activation or repression they indicate.
Because the network inference from single data source has
such limitations mentioned earlier, there have been several studies of utilizing additional information. Hartemink et al [13] used location and expression data
together to infer genetic regulatory networks. Kato et al
[14] proposed a kernel-based method for supervised network inference based on multiple types of biological datasets such as gene expression, phylogenetic profiles and
amino acid sequences. Xing et al [15] also used gene
expression and sequence data to infer gene regulatory networks.
Information fusion processes can be also used for further
analysis of inferred networks after the inference process.
Validating inferred networks requires additional information sources such as annotation database, literature and
other already known networks. Text mining tools play an
important role in utilizing such information sources. Analyzing inferred networks reveals the characteristics of networks such as connectivity, topology, network motifs and
dynamics. Using network validation and analysis processes enables the inferred networks to be more accurate,
reliable and rationally elucidated.
However, the information fusion process is not always
easy to be applied in general. First, the format of available

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/8/S9/S2

data is not unified. For example, there are more than six
data formats which are used widely for microarray expression profile data including SOFT format of NCBI GEO
database [16], Mage-ML [17], GenePix format, Spot format, conventional tab delimited or comma separated format. This variety of data format becomes more serious
when we consider data-to-data conversion in the data preprocessing and network inference processes. Second, we
need to have various algorithms and tools to deal with the
diverse types of data including microarray expressions,
mass spectrometry, and literature information. Thus it is
not easy to find optimal tools for network inference and
validation with respect to the various data formats and
characteristics.
About these problems, several works have been proposed
to serve integration platforms where different types of
data and processing algorithms are used. Cytoscape [18] is
a plug-in oriented information fusion platform. Its core
function is network visualization, but a set of plug-ins
enables one to assay microarray data and annotate
inferred networks. Systems Biology Workbench (SBW)
[19] also tries to connect various tools for given data. The
approach of SBW is to connect programs each other
tightly with a common data model, which is SBML. Taverna Project [20] has a little bit different characteristic,
which serves workflows defined by Web Services technologies. Taverna enables users to define their own biological
workflows, connect to the designated Web Services so that
a series of processes can be done in one phase. Although
previous information fusion platforms were successful in
some aspects, several important features have to be considered for the network inference and analysis processes
in information fusion platforms. An information fusion
platform should provide effective modules that users can
easily use for reliable inference, validation and elucidation of bio-networks. Further, sufficient extensibility and
well defined workflows are also required to help users
incorporate various information sources. Cytoscape and
SBW provide good network inference and analysis tools
via TCP/IP socket connection and in the form of plug-in
modules. However, both platforms do not provide the
workflow feature and sufficient extensibility such as Web
Services in Taverna. Taverna has very good extensibility
with user definable workflows. But its target is too general
so that users cannot easily apply it to network inference
and analysis. In this study, we propose an information
fusion platform named BioCAD, which supports the
whole processes of network inference and analysis with
good extensibility and the workflow features.

Results and discussion
BioCAD system architecture
BioCAD is an integration environment where various
functional modules are inter-operated. The name of Bio-

Page 2 of 7
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2007, 8(Suppl 9):S2

CAD represents Bio Computer Aided Design because the
processes of network inference and analysis are a part of
general designing processes. BioCAD has been developed
on the Netbeans platform using the Java language. Basically, all the BioCAD modules are independent of each
other except the structural modules used for software
building and user interface. This feature of modularization enables the BioCAD software to have good extensibility. The aspect of BioCAD user interface is shown in Figure
1.
BioCAD functional modules are divided into three major
categories – Data preprocessing module, network inference module, network analysis module. Data preprocessing module takes charge of modification of given data to

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/8/S9/S2

the best form for subsequent works. This includes data-filtering, re-scaling, taking logs and normalization with
respect to given data formats. PCA analysis and general
clustering and classification tools can be used in users'
needs. Network inference module has a set of tools for
inferring network shaped structures from other types of
data.
Currently, inference tools which implemented Temporal
Association Rule Mining [21] and MONET [22] are supported. Other inference tools are being developed and
planned to corporate via Web Services. Network analysis
module includes validating inferred network using external information such as protein-protein interaction and
text-mining data. And static/dynamic network analysis

Figure 1
User Interface of BioCAD
User Interface of BioCAD. BioCAD is composed of various data preprocessing and functional modules. Most of jobs are
selected and executed in the Project Explorer Window (left)

Page 3 of 7
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2007, 8(Suppl 9):S2

algorithms such as network motif analysis, network characteristic analysis and network dynamics analysis are
planned to be implemented. Using these modules, users
can advance their own jobs with their own data along
with the predefined workflows.
Inferring networks using network inference tools
BioCAD provides whole processes used for network inference. A series of processes provided by BioCAD software
is called a BioCAD project. A BioCAD project consists of
source data and processed data from working modules.
When users have their own data sources and want to infer
a network from the source, BioCAD project is created by a
new project wizard. Using the wizard, the user can assign
the data source from various data formats the BioCAD
software provides, and start the user's job along with the
workflow. Data formats supported in BioCAD projects is
shown in Table 1.

As we mentioned earlier, there have been a lot of network
inference studies, which can be included in BioCAD as
network inference modules. Boolean networks map the
activity level of a gene into a binary state, on or off.
Although the constructed Boolean network can simulate
the flow of regulations, the binary representation of state
and synchronous transition is two major drawbacks.
Other algebraic approaches including differential equation model, S-system can construct very accurate networks
which are able to be simulated. However, most of data
have too few samples compared to the number of genes,
it is meaningless to extract that much of information from
the data, and the inference process is to be too time-consuming.
As importing network inference modules into BioCAD,
we considered two major features – usability and accuracy. For the usability's sake, algorithms which need too
much time to calculate such as S-system, differential equation model, conventional Bayesian network model are
excluded. And for accuracy's sake, Boolean network is
excluded due to the limitation of network notation. Currently, we focus on ARACNE and MONET. ARACNE [23]
is a novel algorithm using microarray expression profiles
and mutual information processes between a pair of random variables.

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/8/S9/S2

ARACNE algorithm shows good performance compared
to the algorithm complexity and the result represents sufficient information of causes and affections. MONET is
basically a Bayesian Network algorithm. However,
MONET has adopted a divide-and-conquer approach to
alleviate the dimensionality problems. MONET shows
good usability due to its modularizing processes and
noticeable improvement of accuracy.
Assuming that a user wants to infer a network starting
from NCBI's GEO SOFT file, the user connects to a Web
Services tool that imports the file from the Web. From the
microarray database file, microarray expression profile
can be extracted. Next, the user can preprocess the
extracted profile data using data preprocessing modules
either provided in BioCAD's built-in tools or supported
Web Services tools. BioCAD provides effective preprocess
tools associated with the BioConductor package. Finally
MONET starts inferring process with the user's request.
MONET uses Gene Ontology database in its inferring
process. Because BioCAD does not involve the MONET
module in the form of built-in tool, MONET's information fusion process with GO term can be accomplished in
the specified MONET server. The inferred Bayesian network is shown both in graph and table view. This network
data is also a part of BioCAD project, and can be used for
subsequent processes.
Analyzing networks using information fusion tools
In the BioCAD project, inferred bio-network is treated as
a new source for subsequent analysis and validation processes. One good validating method is inspecting network's relations utilizing text mining tools. There have
been various studies in applying text mining techniques to
the bioinformatics area by means of information extraction, information retrieval and natural language processing (NLP). Donaldson et al [24] used a support vector
machine to extract protein-protein interaction data. Saric
et al [12] created rule based system STRING-IE to construct gene and protein regulatory networks from Medline
database. The text mining techniques are also used for
extracting gene/protein's information and automatic
annotation [25].

Table 1: Supported Data Formats in BioCAD Project

Data Category

Data Format

Microarray Image File
Microarray Database File
Microarray Expression Profile
Static Network
Dynamic Network

TIFF, AffyMetrix Cel File
SOFT
Tab Delimited, CSV
SBML, GML, Pajek
SBML

BioCAD Supports reading and writing most commonly used file formats. Some of the file formats and additional formats are being implemented.

Page 4 of 7
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2007, 8(Suppl 9):S2

Currently BioCAD is equipped with a text mining tool
which finds regulation or interaction information
between two genes from literature search. The constructed
network in the previous step is to be examined through
the validating step by putting a pair of genes which are
connected in the network into the text mining tool. As a
result, we can find out whether each network connection
has its supporting literature information and in what kind
of relation it is connected.
Information fusion can be used between different types of
large-scale data. Cohen et al [26] used chromosome correlation maps to express patterns of genes of the same chromosome. Drawid et al [27] used protein subcellular
localization data to inspect the relationship with gene
expression profiles. Lotem et al [28] integrated proteinprotein interaction and transcription regulation data of S.
cerevisiae to find specific regulatory relations, such as positive and negative feedback circuits. Using those inter-data
analysis models, separated networks or databases can be
integrated to elucidate more specific and accurate relations.
The network analysis tool provided in BioCAD is integration a genetic regulatory network with its corresponding
protein-protein interaction map, named Bio-viaduct. Bioviaduct defines a pathway where a gene can affect another
gene via transcriptional regulation and protein-protein
interactions. For example, when there is a directed edge
from gene A to gene B in the inferred network, it searches
paths from expressed protein of gene A to gene B's transcription factor connected by intermediate protein(s),
Bio-viaduct module is also provided via Web Services so
that the user can proceed only by operating a command,
invoking the remote Bio-viaduct server to receive the
source network and compute the pathways using the
server-side protein-protein interaction information
Extending modules with Web services and BPEL workflows
One of the most potential ability of BioCAD is the good
extensibility from applying the Web Services technologies.
Web Services is a software system designed to support
interoperable machine-to-machine interaction over a network. Because this definition encompasses many different
systems, in common usage the term usually refers to those
services that use SOAP-formatted XML envelopes and
have their interfaces described by WSDL. Even though
Web Services is another attempt to standardize the
Remote procedure call protocol (RPC) between platforms
by piggybacking on the near-universally deployed HTTP
protocol, it has its own advantages; it is loosely coupled
thereby facilitating a distributed approach to application
integration and it is Independent of the client side technologies used.

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/8/S9/S2

When a new network inference or analysis module is
required, BioCAD can register the target tools using the
module's WSDL file. Every public Web Services program
has its WSDL file to describe the program's functionalities
and a required set of input. In the case of that a target tool
is not in the form of public Web Services, BioCAD can
read the target program's compiled file and create the
WSDL file. Currently, several modules are in the process
of integration to BioCAD. This extensibility enables the
BioCAD to keep up with the new technologies of data preprocessing, network inference and network analysis.
BioCAD uses BPEL (Business Process Execution Language) [29] as the description language of workflows.
BPEL is standard language that defines business process
and execution in Web Services environment. BPEL provides a rich vocabulary for defining processes and has several features which are not found in programming
languages. Also, the Netbeans platform supports designing BPEL processes since version 5.5. A sample BPEL flow
defined in BioCAD is shown in Figure 2. BioCAD provides
a Project Flow Window which makes the users can monitor the current status and available processes in the workflow.

Conclusion
We have proposed an information fusion platform named
BioCAD. It provides a convenient infrastructure for network inference and network analysis. We showed three
major profits that can be obtained from using BioCAD.
First, it automates series of users' processes by providing
data preprocessing tools for various formats of data. The
RCP based user interface and workflows make it easier
and more familiar to use the software. Second, BioCAD
helps inferring more accurate and reliable bio-networks
with providing network inference tools which utilize
information from distinct sources. We showed a process
of Bayesian network construction from an entry of microarray database using MONET which makes use of gene
annotation information. Third, BioCAD can be used to
analyze and validate the inferred bio-networks. Text mining and Bio-viaduct tools are in capable of integrating different types of information into the constructed networks.
One of the most potential features of BioCAD is its extensibility. Because the whole functionalities of BioCAD are
modularized, any other tools which provide related functions such as network inference and network analysis and
other types of functions including network visualization
and network topology analysis can be easily added. Due
to the workflow facility, those all new modules also can be
integrated to the currently provided modules.

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Page 5 of 7
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2007, 8(Suppl 9):S2

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/8/S9/S2

Authors' contributions
DL developed the main idea of component based framework for reverse engineering. SK implemented core and
functional modules of the program. YK implemented network inference modules that this program makes use of.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Korea Science and Engineering Foundation(KOSEF) through the National Research Lab. Program funded by the
Ministry of Science and Technology (No. 2005-01450). We would also like
to thank CHUNG MoonSoul Center for BioInformation and BioElectronics
for providing research and computing facilities.
This article has been published as part of BMC Bioinformatics Volume 8 Supplement 9, 2007: First International Workshop on Text Mining in Bioinformatics (TMBio) 2006. The full contents of the supplement are available
online at http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/8?issue=S9.

References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.

Figure 2
BPEL Workflow of BioCAD
BPEL Workflow of BioCAD. A simplified diagram of bioreverse engineering processes of BioCAD. Further workflows are defined while users add, remove or repeat each of
the jobs.

16.
17.
18.

Friedman N, et al.: Using Bayesian Networks to Analyze
Expression Data. Journal of Computational Biology 2000, 7(3–
4):601-620.
Pena JM, Bjorkegren J, Tegner J: Growing Bayesian network
model of gene networks from seed genes. Bioinformatics 2005,
21(Suppl 2):ii224-ii229.
Arkin A: A Test Case of Correlation Metric Construction of a
Reaction Pathway from Measurements.
Science 1997,
277(5330):1275-1279.
Madigan D, Raftery AE: Model Selection and Accounting for
Model Uncertainly in Graphical Models Using Occam's Window. Journal of the American Statistical Association 1994, 89(428):.
Kim SY, Imoto S, Miyano S: Dynamic Bayesian Network and
Nonparametric Regression Model for Inferring Gene Networks. Genome Informatics 2002, 13:371-372.
Kikuchi S, et al.: Dynamic modeling of genetic networks using
genetic algorithm and S-system.
Bioinformatics 2003,
19(5):643-650.
Kimura S, Hatakeyama M, Konagaya A: Inference of S-system
models of genetic networks from noisy time-series data.
Chem-Bio Informatics Journal 2004, 4(1):1-14.
Lädesmäi H, Shmulevich I, Yli-Harja O: On Learning Gene Regulatory Networks Under the Boolean Network Model.
Machine Learning 2003, 52(1):147-167.
Bulashevska S, Eils R: Inferring genetic regulatory logic from
expression data. Bioinformatics 2005, 21(11):2706-2713.
Mayo M: Learning Petri net models of non-linear gene interactions. Biosystems 2005, 82(1):74-82.
Saric J: Large-Scale Extraction of Gene Regulation for Model
Organisms in an Ontological Context. In Silico Biology 2005,
5(1):21-32.
Saric J, et al.: Extraction of regulatory gene/protein networks
from Medline. Bioinformatics 2006, 22(6):645.
Hartemink AJ, et al.: Combining location and expression data
for principled discovery of genetic regulatory network models. Pac Symp Biocomput 2002, 7:437-449.
Kato T, Tsuda K, Asai K: Selective integration of multiple biological data for supervised network inference. Bioinformatics
2005, 21(10):2488-2495.
Xing B, van der Laan MJ: A Statistical Method for Constructing
Transcriptional Regulatory Networks Using Gene Expression and Sequence Data. Journal of Computational Biology 2005,
12(2):229-246.
Edgar R, Domrachev M, Lash AE: Gene Expression Omnibus:
NCBI gene expression and hybridization array data repository. Nucleic Acids Research 2002, 30(1):207-210.
Brazma A, et al.: ArrayExpress – A public repository for microarray gene expression data at the EBI. Nucleic Acids Research
2003, 31(1):68-71.
Shannon P, et al.: Cytoscape: a software environment for integrated models of biomolecular interaction networks. Genome
Res 2003, 13(11):2498-504.

Page 6 of 7
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2007, 8(Suppl 9):S2

19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.

29.

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/8/S9/S2

Hucka M, et al.: The ERATO Systems Biology Workbench:
enabling interaction and exchange between software tools
for computational biology. Pac Symp Biocomput 2002, 1:450-461.
Stevens RD, Robinson AJ, Goble CA: myGrid: personalised bioinformatics on the information grid.
Bioinformatics 2003,
19(Suppl 1):i302-i304.
Temporal Association Rule Mining [http://biosoft.kaist.ac.kr/
~hjnam/TARM/TARM.html]
Lee PH, Lee D: Modularized learning of genetic interaction
networks from biological annotations and mRNA expression
data. Bioinformatics 2005, 21(11):2739-2747.
Margolin AA, et al.: ARACNE: an algorithm for the reconstruction of gene regulatory networks in a mammalian cellular
context. BMC Bioinformatics 2006, 7(Suppl 1):S7.
Donaldson I, et al.: PreBIND and Textomy – mining the biomedical literature for protein-protein interactions using a
support vector machine. BMC Bioinformatics 2003, 4:11.
Tamames J: Text detective: a rule-based system for gene
annotation in biomedical texts. BMC Bioinformatics 2005,
6(Suppl 1):S10.
Cohen BA, et al.: A computational analysis of whole-genome
expression data reveals chromosomal domains of gene
expression. Nat Genet 2000, 26(2):183-6.
Drawid A, Jansen R, Gerstein M: Genome-wide analysis relating
expression level with protein subcellular localization. Trends
Genet 2000, 16(10):426-30.
Yeger-Lotem E, Margalit H: Detection of regulatory circuits by
integrating the cellular networks of protein-protein interactions and transcription regulation. Nucleic Acids Res 2003,
31(20):6053-61.
Business Process Execution Language for Web Services
(BPEL), Version 1.1 [http://www-128.ibm.com/developerworks/
library/specification/ws-bpel/]

Publish with Bio Med Central and every
scientist can read your work free of charge
"BioMed Central will be the most significant development for
disseminating the results of biomedical researc h in our lifetime."
Sir Paul Nurse, Cancer Research UK

Your research papers will be:
available free of charge to the entire biomedical community
peer reviewed and published immediately upon acceptance
cited in PubMed and archived on PubMed Central
yours — you keep the copyright

BioMedcentral

Submit your manuscript here:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/info/publishing_adv.asp

Page 7 of 7
(page number not for citation purposes)

</pre>
</body>
</html>
