<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Genome sequence of the necrotrophic plant pathogen Pythium ultimum reveals original pathogenicity mechanisms and effector repertoire</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Genome Biology 2010 11:R73. doi:10.1186/gb-2010-11-7-r73"/>
<meta name="Author" content="C André Lévesque"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Lévesque et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R73
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/7/R73

RESEARCH

Open Access

Genome sequence of the necrotrophic plant
pathogen Pythium ultimum reveals original
pathogenicity mechanisms and effector repertoire
C André Lévesque1,2, Henk Brouwer3†, Liliana Cano4†, John P Hamilton5†, Carson Holt6†, Edgar Huitema4†,
Sylvain Raffaele4†, Gregg P Robideau1,2†, Marco Thines7,8†, Joe Win4†, Marcelo M Zerillo9†, Gordon W Beakes10,
Jeffrey L Boore11, Dana Busam12, Bernard Dumas13, Steve Ferriera12, Susan I Fuerstenberg11, Claire MM Gachon14,
Elodie Gaulin13, Francine Govers15,16, Laura Grenville-Briggs17, Neil Horner17, Jessica Hostetler12, Rays HY Jiang18,
Justin Johnson12, Theerapong Krajaejun19, Haining Lin5, Harold JG Meijer15, Barry Moore6, Paul Morris20,
Vipaporn Phuntmart20, Daniela Puiu12, Jyoti Shetty12, Jason E Stajich21, Sucheta Tripathy22, Stephan Wawra17,
Pieter van West17, Brett R Whitty5, Pedro M Coutinho23, Bernard Henrissat23, Frank Martin24, Paul D Thomas25,
Brett M Tyler22, Ronald P De Vries3, Sophien Kamoun4, Mark Yandell6, Ned Tisserat9, C Robin Buell5*

Abstract
Background: Pythium ultimum is a ubiquitous oomycete plant pathogen responsible for a variety of diseases on a
broad range of crop and ornamental species.
Results: The P. ultimum genome (42.8 Mb) encodes 15,290 genes and has extensive sequence similarity and
synteny with related Phytophthora species, including the potato blight pathogen Phytophthora infestans. Whole
transcriptome sequencing revealed expression of 86% of genes, with detectable differential expression of suites of
genes under abiotic stress and in the presence of a host. The predicted proteome includes a large repertoire of
proteins involved in plant pathogen interactions, although, surprisingly, the P. ultimum genome does not encode
any classical RXLR effectors and relatively few Crinkler genes in comparison to related phytopathogenic oomycetes.
A lower number of enzymes involved in carbohydrate metabolism were present compared to Phytophthora
species, with the notable absence of cutinases, suggesting a significant difference in virulence mechanisms
between P. ultimum and more host-specific oomycete species. Although we observed a high degree of orthology
with Phytophthora genomes, there were novel features of the P. ultimum proteome, including an expansion of
genes involved in proteolysis and genes unique to Pythium. We identified a small gene family of cadherins,
proteins involved in cell adhesion, the first report of these in a genome outside the metazoans.
Conclusions: Access to the P. ultimum genome has revealed not only core pathogenic mechanisms within the
oomycetes but also lineage-specific genes associated with the alternative virulence and lifestyles found within the
pythiaceous lineages compared to the Peronosporaceae.

Background
Pythium is a member of the Oomycota (also referred to
as oomycetes), which are part of the heterokont/chromist clade [1,2] within the ‘Straminipila-Alveolata-Rhizaria’ superkingdom [3]. Recent phylogenies based on
* Correspondence: buell@msu.edu
† Contributed equally
5
Department of Plant Biology, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI
48824, USA

multiple protein coding genes indicate that the oomycetes, together with the uniflagellate hyphochytrids and
the flagellates Pirsonia and Developayella, form the sister clade to the diverse photosynthetic orders in the
phylum Ochrophyta [2,4]. Therefore, the genomes of
the closest relatives to Pythium outside of the oomycetes
available to date would be those of the diatoms Thalassiosira [5] and Phaeodactylum [6], and the phaeophyte
algae Ectocarpus [7].

© 2010 Lévesque et al.; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Lévesque et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R73
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/7/R73

Pythium is a cosmopolitan and biologically diverse
genus. Most species are soil inhabitants, although some
reside in saltwater estuaries and other aquatic environments. Most Pythium spp. are saprobes or facultative
plant pathogens causing a wide variety of diseases,
including damping-off and a range of field and post-harvest rots [8-12]. Pythium spp. are opportunistic plant
pathogens that can cause severe damage whenever
plants are stressed or at a vulnerable stage. Some species
have been used as biological control agents for plant
disease management whereas others can be parasites of
animals, including humans [13-15]. The genus Pythium,
as currently defined, contains over a hundred species,
with most having some loci sequenced for phylogeny
[16]. Pythium is placed in the Peronosporales sensu lato,
which contains a large number of often diverse taxa in
which two groups are commonly recognized, the paraphyletic Pythiaceae, which comprise the basal lineages of
the second group, the Peronosporaceae.
The main morphological feature that separates
Pythium lineages from Phytophthora lineages is the process by which zoospores are produced from sporangia.
In Phytophthora, zoospore differentiation happens
directly within the sporangia, a derived character or
apomorphism for Phytophthora. In Pythium, a vesicle is
produced within which zoospore differentiation occurs
[12]; this is considered the ancestral or plesiomorphic
state. There is a much wider range of sporangial shapes
in Pythium than is found in Phytophthora (see [17] for
more detailed comparison). Biochemically, Phytophthora
spp. have lost the ability to synthesize thiamine, which
has been retained in Pythium and most other oomycetes. On the other hand, elicitin-like proteins are abundant in Phytophthora but in Pythium they have been
mainly found in the species most closely related to Phytophthora [18-20]. Many Phytophthora spp. have a
rather narrow plant species host range whereas there is
little host specificity in plant pathogenic Pythium species
apart from some preference shown for either monocot
or dicot hosts. Gene-for-gene interactions and the associated cultivar/race differential responses have been
described for many Phytophthora and downy mildew
species with narrow host ranges. In constrast, such
gene-for-gene interactions or cultivar/race differentials
have never been observed in Pythium, although single
dominant genes were associated with resistance in
maize and soybean against Pythium inflatum and
Pythium aphanidermatum, respectively [21,22], and in
common bean against P. ultimum var. ultimum (G
Mahuku, personal communication). Lastly, in the necrotroph to biotroph spectrum, some Pythium spp. are
necrotrophs whereas others behave as hemibiotrophs
like Phytophthora spp. [23].

Page 2 of 22

P. ultimum is a ubiquitous plant pathogen and one of
the most pathogenic Pythium spp. on crop species [13].
It does not require another mating type for sexual
reproduction as it is self-fertile - that is, homothallic but outcrossing has been reported [24]. P. ultimum is
separated into two varieties: P. ultimum var. ultimum is
the most common and pathogenic group and produces
oospores but very rarely sporangia and zoospores,
whereas P. ultimum var. sporangiiferum is a rare and
less pathogenic group that produces both oospores and
sporangia [12]. The isolate (DAOM BR144 = CBS
805.95 = ATCC 200006) reported in this study belongs
to P. ultimum var. ultimum and was found to be the
most representative strain [16,25,26]. We use P. ultimum to refer to P. ultimum var. ultimum unless stated
otherwise.
In this study, we report on the generation and analysis
of the full genome sequence of P. ultimum DAOM
BR144, an isolate obtained from tobacco. The genomes
of several plant pathogenic oomycetes have been
sequenced, including three species of Phytophthora (Ph.
infestans, Ph. sojae, and Ph. ramorum [27,28]), allowing
the identification and improved understanding of pathogenicity mechanisms of these pathogens, especially with
respect to the repertoire of effector molecules that govern the outcome of the plant-pathogen interaction
[27-30]. To initially assess the gene complement of
P. ultimum, we generated a set of ESTs using conventional Sanger sequencing coupled with 454 pyrosequencing of P. ultimum (DAOM BR144) hyphae grown in
rich and nutrient-starved conditions [31]. These transcriptome sequence data were highly informative and
showed that P. ultimum shared a large percentage of its
proteome with related Phytophthora spp. In this study,
we report on the sequencing, assembly, and annotation
of the P. ultimum DAOM BR144 genome. To gain
insight into gene function, we performed whole transcriptome sequencing under eight growth conditions,
including a range of abiotic stresses and in the presence
of a host. While the P. ultimum genome has similarities
to related oomycete plant pathogens, its complement of
metabolic and effector proteins is tailored to its pathogenic lifestyle as a necrotroph.

Results and discussion
Sequence determination and gene assignment

Using a hybrid strategy that coupled deep Sanger
sequencing of variable insert libraries with pyrosequencing, we generated a high quality draft sequence of the
oomycete pathogen P. ultimum (DAOM BR144 = CBS
805.95 = ATCC 200006). With an N50 contig length of
124 kb (1,747 total) and an N 50 scaffold length of
773,464 bp (975 total), the P. ultimum assembly

Lévesque et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R73
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/7/R73

represents 42.8 Mb of assembled sequence. Additional
metrics on the genome are available in Additional file 1.
P. ultimum, Ph. sojae and Ph. ramorum differ in mating behaviour: P. ultimum and Ph. sojae are homothallic
while Ph. ramorum is heterothallic. The outcrossing preference in Ph. ramorum is reflected in the 13,643 single
nucleotide polymorphisms identified in this species versus 499 found in the inbreeding Ph. sojae [27]. Although
the Ph. sojae genome size is twice that of P. ultimum, a
large number (11,916) of variable bases (that is, high
quality reads in conflict with the consensus) were present within the DAOM BR144 assembly, indicating that
the in vitro outcrossing reported for P. ultimum [24]
might be common in nature.
The final genome annotation set (v4) contained 15,297
genes encoding 15,329 transcripts (15,323 protein coding and 6 rRNA coding) due to detection of alternative
splice forms. Global analysis of the intron/exon structure revealed that while there are examples of intronrich genes in the P. ultimum genome, the majority of
genes tend to have few introns, with an average 1.6
introns occurring per gene that are relatively short
(average intron length 115 bp), consistent with that of
Ph. infestans (1.7 introns per gene, 124 bp average
intron length). Coding exons in the P. ultimum genome
tend to be relatively long when compared to other
eukaryotes [32-40], having an average length of 498 bp,
with 38.9% of the P. ultimum genes encoded by a single
exon. This is comparable to that observed in P. infestans, in which the average exon is 456 bp with 33.1%
encoding single exon genes.
In eukaryotic genomes such as that of Arabidopsis
thaliana and human, 79% and 77% of all genes contain
an InterPro domain, respectively. In comparison, only
60% of all P. ultimum genes contain an InterPro protein
domain, which is comparable to that observed with Phytophthora spp. (55 to 66%). This is most likely attributable to the higher quality annotation of the human and
Arabidopsis proteomes and, potentially, the lack of
representation of oomycetes in protein databases.
Earlier transcriptome work with strain DAOM BR144
involved Sanger and 454 pyrosequencing of a normalized cDNA library constructed from two in vitro growth
conditions [31]. When mapped to the DAOM BR144
genome, these ESTs (6,903 Sanger- and 21,863 454assembled contigs) aligned with 10,784 gene models,
providing expression support for 70.5% of the gene set.
To further probe the P. ultimum transcriptome and to
aid in functional annotation, we employed mRNA-Seq
[41] to generate short transcript reads from eight
growth/treatment conditions. A total of 71 million reads
(2.7 Gb) were mapped to the DAOM BR144 genome
and 11,685 of the 15,297 loci (76%) were expressed
based on RNA-Seq data. Collectively, from the Sanger,

Page 3 of 22

454, and Illumina transcriptome sequencing in which
eight growth conditions, including host infection, were
assayed, transcript support was detected for 13,103
genes of the 15,291 protein coding genes (85.7%). When
protein sequence similarity to other annotated proteins
is coupled with all available transcript support, only 190
of the 15,291 protein coding genes lack either transcript
support or protein sequence similarity (Table S1 in
Additional file 2).
Repeat content in DAOM BR144

In total, 12,815 repeat elements were identified in the
genome (Table S2 in Additional file 2). In general, the
relatively low repeat content of the P. ultimum genome
(approximately 7% by length) is similar to what would
be expected for small, rapidly reproducing eukaryotic
organisms [42,43]. While the repeat content is much
lower than that of the oomycete Ph. infestans [28], the
difference is likely due to the presence of DNA methylases identified by protein domain analyses in the P. ultimum genome, which have been shown to inhibit repeat
expansion [44]. Interestingly, the oomycete Ph. infestans
lacks DNA methylase genes, the absence of which is
believed to contribute to repeat element expansion
within that organism, with repeats making up > 50% of
the genome [27,28,45].
Mitochondrial genome

The P. ultimum DAOM BR144 mitochondrial genome
is 59,689 bp and contains a large inverted repeat (21,950
bp) that is separated by small (2,711 bp) and large
(13,078 bp) unique regions (Figure S1 in Additional file
3). The P. ultimum DAOM BR144 mitochondrion
encodes the same suite of protein coding (35), rRNA
(2), and tRNA (encoding 19 amino acids) genes present
in other oomycetes such as Phytophthora and Saprolegnia [46-48]. However, the number of copies is different
due to the large inverted repeat as well as some putative
ORFs that are unique to P. ultimum (Additional file 1).
No insertions of the mitochondrial genome into the
nuclear genome were identified.
Proteins involved in plant-pathogen interactions

Comparative genome analyses can reveal important differences between P. ultimum and the Peronosporaceae
that may contribute to their respective lifestyles, that is,
the non-host specific P. ultimum and the host specific
Phytophthora spp. We utilized two approaches to probe
the nature of gene complements within these two clades
of oomycetes. First, using the generalized approach of
examining PANTHER protein families [49], we identified major lineage-specific expansions of gene families.
Second, through targeted analysis of subsets of the P.
ultimum proteome, including the secretome, effectors,
proteins involved in carbohydrate metabolism, and
pathogen/microbial-associated molecular patterns

Lévesque et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R73
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/7/R73

Page 4 of 22

Table 1 Major lineage-specific gene family expansions leading to differences in the P. ultimum gene complement
compared to Phytophthora
Biological process

Comparison to Phytophthora

Protein family expansions (number of genes in P. ultimum/Ph. ramorum)

Proteolysis

Over-represented

HECT E3 ubiquitin ligase (56/28)
Subtilisin-related serine protease S8A (43/7)
Trypsin-related serine protease S1A (17/31)
Pepsin-related aspartyl protease A1 (25/15)
Metalloprotease M12 (12/3)

Intracellular

Under-represented

signaling cascade

PTHR23257 S/T protein kinase (78/158)
PTHR22985 S/T protein kinase (23/51)
PTHR22982, CaM kinase (50/85)
Phospholipase D (9/18)

Sulfur metabolism

Under-represented

Sulfatase (7/14)
Cysteine desulfurylase (4/11)
Sulfate transporter (10/18)

Water transport

Under-represented

Aquaporin (11/35)

(PAMPs or MAMPs; for review see [50]), we revealed
commonalities, as well as significant distinct features, of
P. ultimum in comparison to Phytophthora spp.
Over-represented gene families

Several families involved in proteolysis were over-represented in P. ultimum compared to Phytophthora spp.
(Table 1). This is primarily due to a massive expansion
of subtilisin-related proteases (PTHR10795) in P. ultimum following the divergence from ancestors of Phytophthora. With regard to the total complement of
serine proteases, the subtilisin family expansion in
P. ultimum is somewhat counterbalanced by the trypsin-related serine protease family, which has undergone
more gene duplication events in the Phytophthora lineage than the Pythium lineage. The metalloprotease M12
(neprolysin-related) family has also undergone multiple
expansions, from one copy in the stramenopile most
recent common ancestor, to three in the oomycete most
recent common ancestor (and extant Phytophthora),
then up to 12 in P. ultimum (data not shown).
E3 ligases are responsible for substrate specificity of
ubiquitination and subsequent proteolysis, and secreted
E3 ligases have been shown to act as effectors for pathogens by targeting host response proteins for degradation
[51,52]. The HECT E3 family of ubiquitin-protein ligases
(PTHR11254) apparently underwent at least two major
expansions, one in the oomycete lineage after the divergence from diatoms and another in the P. ultimum lineage (Figure S2 in Additional file 3; Table 1). Most of the
expansion in the P. ultimum lineage appears to be
derived from repeated duplication of only two genes
that were present in the Pythium-Phytophthora common
ancestor. This expanded subfamily is apparently orthologous to the UPL1 and UPL2 genes from A. thaliana. Of
the 56 predicted HECT E3 ligases in the P. ultimum
genome (that had long enough sequences for

phylogenetic analysis), 16 are predicted by SignalP [53]
to have bona fide signal peptides, and another 10 have
predicted signal anchors, a substantially larger number
than reported for other oomycete genomes [54].
Under-represented gene families

Several gene families are significantly under-represented
in the P. ultimum genome compared to Phytophthora
(Table 1) and it appears that these are mostly due to
expansions in the Phytophthora lineage rather than
losses in the Pythium lineage, though the relatively long
distance to the diatom outgroup makes this somewhat
uncertain. These include the aquaporin family
(PTHR19139), the phospholipase D family (PTHR18896;
Additional file 1), four families/subfamilies of intracellular serine-threonine protein kinases, and three families
involved in sulfur metabolism (sulfatases (PTHR10342),
cysteine desulfurylases (PTHR11601) and sulfate transporters (PTHR11814)).
The P. ultimum secretome

As oomycete plant pathogens secrete a variety of proteins to manipulate plant processes [30,55], we predicted
and characterized in detail the soluble secreted proteins
of P. ultimum. The secretome of P. ultimum was identified by predicting secreted proteins using the PexFinder
algorithm [56] in conjunction with the TribeMCL protein family clustering algorithm. The P. ultimum secretome is composed of 747 proteins (4.9% of the
proteome) that can be clustered into 195 families (each
family contains at least 2 sequences) and 127 singletons
(Table S3 in Additional file 2; selected families are
shown in Figure S3 in Additional file 3). Of these, two
families and one singleton encode transposable-elementrelated proteins that were missed in the repeat masking
process. The largest family contains 77 members, mostly
ankyrin repeat containing proteins, of which only 3 were
predicted to have a signal peptide. Notable families of

Lévesque et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R73
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/7/R73

Page 5 of 22

secreted proteins include protease inhibitors (serine and
cysteine), NPP1-like proteins (toxins), cellulose-binding
elicitor lectin (CBEL)-like proteins with carbohydrate
binding domains, elicitins and elicitin-like proteins,
secreted E3 ubiquitin ligases (candidate effectors), cellwall degrading enzymes, lipases, phospholipases, potential adhesion proteins, highly expanded families of proteases and cytochrome P450 (Table 2), and several
families of ‘unknown’ function. A subset (88 proteins) of
the secretome showed exclusive similarity to fungal
sequences yet are absent in other eukaryotes (Table S4
in Additional file 2; see Table S1 in [57] for a list of
organisms). These may represent shared pathogenicity
proteins for filamentous plant pathogens, such as peroxidases (Family 68), CBEL-like proteins (Family 8), and
various cell wall degrading enzymes and other
hydrolases.
RXLR effectors

Many plant pathogens, especially biotrophic and hemibiotrophic ones, produce effector proteins that either
enter into host cells or are predicted to do so [27,58,59].
The genomes of Ph. sojae, Ph. ramorum and Ph. infestans encode large numbers (370 to 550) of potential
effector proteins that contain an amino-terminal cellentry domain with the motifs RXLR and dEER [28,29],
which mediate entry of these proteins into host cells in
the absence of pathogen-encoded machinery [60,61].
RXLR-dEER effectors are thought, and in a few cases
shown, to suppress host defense responses, but a subset

of these effectors can be recognized by plant immune
receptors resulting in programmed cell death and disease resistance. To search for RXLR effectors in the genome of P. ultimum, we translated all six frames of the
genome sequence to identify all possible small proteins,
exclusive of splicing. Among these, a total of 7,128
translations were found to contain an amino-terminal
signal peptide based on SignalP prediction. We then
used the RXLR-dEER Hidden Markov Model (HMM)
[29] to search the translations for candidate effectors
and, as a control, the same set of translations following
permutation of their sequences downstream of the signal peptide (Figure 1a). Only 35 sequences with significant scores were found in the non-permuted set while
an average of 5 were found in 100 different permuted
sets. In comparison to the Ph. ramorum secretome, 300
hits were found without permutation. Examination of
the 35 significant sequences revealed that most were
members of a secreted proteinase family [62] in which
the RXLR motif was part of a conserved subtilisin-like
serine protease domain of 300 amino acids in length,
and thus unlikely to be acting as a cell entry motif. A
string search was then performed for the RXLR motif
within the amino terminus of each translation, 30 to
150 residues from the signal peptide. In this case, the
number of hits was not significantly different between
the real sequences and the permuted sequences. The
same result was obtained with the strings RXLX and RX
[LMFY][HKR] (Figure 1b). HMMs have been defined to

Table 2 Protein families implicated in plant pathogenesis: P. ultimum versus Phytophthora spp. or diatoms
P.
ultimum

Ph.
infestans

Ph.
sojae

Ph.
ramorum

Thalassiosira pseudonana
(diatom)

Phaeodactylum tricornutum
(diatom)

ABC transportersa

140

137

141

Aspartyl protease families A1, A8b
Crinklers (CRN-family)a

29
26

16
196

16
100

135

57

65

18
19

ND
0

8
0

Cutinasec

0

4

13

4

0

ND

Cysteine protease families C1, C2,
C56a

42

38

33

42

ND

11

Cytochrome P450sb

41

28

31

31

ND

10

Elicitin-like proteinsd

24

40

57

50

0

0

Glycoside hydrolasesc

180

277

301

258

59

ND

Lipasesd

31

19

27

17

22

17

NPP1-like proteins (necrosis-inducing
proteins)d

7

27

39

59

0

0

PcF/SCR-liked

3

16

8

1

0

0

Pectin esterasesc

0

13

19

11

0

ND

Polysaccharide lyasesc
Phospholipasesd

29
20

67
36

54
31

49
28

0
18

ND
11

Protease inhibitors, alld

43

38

26

18

11

5

RXLR effectorsa

0

563

350

350

0

0

Serine protease families S1A, S8, S10b

85

60

63

57

ND

31

a

Data from manual curation/analyses. bData from PANTHER family analyses (MEROPS classification). cData from CAZy. dData from analysis of TRIBEMCL families.
ND, not determined.

Lévesque et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R73
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/7/R73

Page 6 of 22

Figure 1 An original repertoire of candidate effector proteins in P. ultimum. (a) The number of candidate RXLR effectors estimated by
Hidden Markov Model (HMM) searches of predicted proteins with amino-terminal signal peptides. The numbers of false positives were derived
from HMM searches of the permutated protein sequences. (b) The number of candidate RXLR effectors discovered by motif searching. The
search was performed on the total set of six-frame translated ORFs from the genome sequences that encode proteins with an amino-terminal
signal peptide. The motif RXLR and two more degenerate motifs, RXLX or RX[LMIFY][HKR], were required to occur within 100 amino acids of the
amino termini. (c) The typical architecture of a YxSL[RK] effector candidate inferred from 91 sequences retrieved from P. ultimum, three
Phytophthora genomes and A. euteiches. (d) The YxSL[RK] motif is enriched and positionally constrained in secreted proteins in P. ultimum and
Phytophthora spp. The top graph compares the abundance of YxSL[RK]-containing proteins among secreted and non-secreted proteins from four
oomycete genomes. The middle and bottom graphs show the frequency of the YxSL[RK] motif among non-secreted and secreted proteins,
respectively, according to its position in the protein sequence. (e) Cladogram based on the conserved motifs region of the 91YxSL[KR] proteins,
showing boostrap support for the main branches.

Lévesque et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R73
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/7/R73

identify carboxy-terminal motifs conserved in about 60%
of RXLR-dEER effectors [29,63]. Searching the secretome and the permutated secretome with this HMM
also identified no significant numbers of candidate effectors (data not shown). Blast searches with the most conserved Phytophthora effectors likewise produced no hits.
Based on synteny analysis of surrounding genes, a
small number of Phytophthora effectors share conserved
genomic positions [27]. Synteny analysis (see below) was
used to identify the corresponding positions in the P.
ultimum genome, but no predicted secreted proteins
were found in those positions in the P. ultimum genome. A paucity of predicted RXLR effector sequences
was reported previously in the transcriptome of P. ultimum [31]; the one candidate noted in the transcriptome
sequence dataset has proven to be a false positive,
matching the negative strand of a conserved transporter
gene in the genome sequence. Therefore, we conclude
that the P. ultimum genome lacks RXLR effectors that
are abundant in other oomycetes, although this analysis
does not rule out the possible presence of other kinds of
effectors (see below). Nonetheless, the lack of RXLR
effectors in P. ultimum is consistent with the absence of
gene-for-gene interactions, all known instances of which
in Phytophthora spp. involve RXLR effectors with avirulence activities.
CRN protein repertoire

In Phytophthora spp. the Crinkler (crn) gene family
encodes a large class of secreted proteins that share a
conserved amino-terminal LFLAK domain, which has
been suggested to mediate host translocation and is followed by a major recombination site that forms the junction between the conserved amino terminus and diverse
carboxy-terminal effector domains [28]. In sharp contrast
to the RXLR effectors, the CRN protein family appears
conserved in all plant pathogenic oomycete genomes
sequenced to date. BLASTP searches of 16 well-defined
amino-terminal domains from Ph. infestans against the P.
ultimum predicted proteome identified 18 predicted proteins within P. ultimum (BLAST cutoff of 1 × 10 -10 ;
Table S5 in Additional file 2). Examination of protein
alignments revealed considerable conservation of the P.
ultimum LFLAK domain. We used P. ultimum CRN
sequence alignments to build an HMM and through
HMM searches identified two additional predicted proteins with putative LFLAK-like domains. We assessed the
distribution of candidate CRN proteins within P. ultimum families and identified six additional candidates in
Family 64. Further examination of candidates confirmed
the presence of LFLAK-like domains (Table S5 in Additional file 2). Surprisingly, only 2 (approximately 7.5%) of
the 26 predicted CRN proteins were annotated as having
signal peptides (Table S5 in Additional file 2). Two additional CRNs (PYU1_T003336 and PYU1_T002270) have

Page 7 of 22

SignalP v2.0 HMM scores of 0.89 and 0.76, respectively,
which although below our stringent cutoff of 0.9 may still
suggest potential signal peptides. Several of the remaining
genes have incomplete ORFs and gene models, suggesting a high frequency of CRN pseudogenes as previously
noted in Ph. infestans [28]. All 26 amino-terminal regions
were aligned to generate a sequence logo. These analyses
revealed a conserved LxLYLAR/K motif that is shared
amongst P. ultimum CRN proteins (Figure S4 in Additional file 3) and is followed by a conserved WL motif.
The LxLYLAR/K motif is closely related to the F/LxLYLALK motif found in Aphanomyces euteiches [64]. Consistent with results obtained in other oomycete genomes,
we found that the LxLYLAR/K motif was located
between 46 and 64 amino acids after the methionine, followed by a variable domain that ended with a conserved
motif at the proposed recombination site (HVLVxxP),
reflecting the modular design of CRN proteins in the
oomycetes (Figure S4 in Additional file 3). This recombination site, which is characteristic for the DWL domain,
was found highly conserved in 11 of the putative P. ultimum CRN genes, consisting of an aliphatic amino acid
followed by a conserved histidine, another three aliphatic
amino acids, two variable amino acids and a conserved
proline. In a phylogenetic analysis, these 11 genes were
predominantly placed basal to the validated CRNs from
Phytophthora (Figure S5 in Additional file 3). Although
the CRN-like genes in Pythium are more divergent than
the validated CRNs of Phytophthora (Figure S5 in Additional file 3), both the recombination site and the LxLYLAR/K-motif, which is a modification of the prominent
LxLFLAK-motif present in most Phytophthora CRNs,
show a significant degree of conservation, highlighting
that the CRN family, greatly expanded in Phytophthora
[28], had already evolved in the last common ancestor of
P. ultimum and Phytophthora.
A novel family of candidate effectors

In the absence of obvious proteins with an amino-terminal RXLR motif, we used other known features of effectors to identify candidate effector families in P.
ultimum. Ph. infestans RXLR effectors are not only
characterized by a conserved amino-terminal translocation domain but also by their occurrence in gene-sparse
regions that are enriched in repetitive DNA [28]. Based
on the length of the flanking non-coding regions, the
distribution of P. ultimum genes is not multimodal as
was observed in Ph. infestans (Figure S6 in Additional
file 3). However, relative to the rest of the genes, P. ultimum secretome genes more frequently have long flanking non-coding regions (Figure S7 in Additional file 3).
In addition, the secretome genes show a higher proportion of closely related paralogs, suggesting recent duplications in P. ultimum (Figure S7 in Additional file 3)
and indicating that the secretome genes may have

Lévesque et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R73
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/7/R73

distinct genome organization and evolution as noted in
Phytophthora spp. [28,57]. Using genome organization
properties to identify families of secreted proteins in P.
ultimum that could correspond to novel effector candidates, we sorted the 194 secretome families based on
highest rate of gene duplication, longest flanking noncoding region, and lowest similarity to Ph. infestans proteins (see Figure S8 in Additional file 3 for examples).
One relatively large family of secreted proteins, Family
3, stood out because it fulfilled the three criteria and
included proteins of unknown function. BlastP similarity
searches identified similar sequences only in oomycete
species (Phytophthora spp. and A. euteiches). Furthermore, of the 44 family members in P. ultimum for
which transcripts could be detected, 32 (73%) were
induced more than 2-fold during Arabidopsis infection
compared to mycelia, with 5 members induced more
than 40-fold. In total, we identified a set of 91 predicted
secreted proteins with similarity to Family 3 proteins
from the various oomycete species (Additional file 4).
Multiple alignments of these proteins, along with motif
searches, identified a YxSL[RK] amino acid motif (Figure
1c). This motif is at least two-fold enriched in secreted
proteins compared to non-secreted proteins in four
oomycete species (Figure 1d). In addition, the YxSL[RK]
motif is positionally constrained between positions 61
and 80 in secreted oomycete proteins only (Figure 1d).
The 91 YxSL[RK] proteins show a modular organization
with a conserved amino-terminal region, containing four
conserved motifs, followed by a highly variable carboxyterminal region (Figure 1c; Figure S9 in Additional file
3) as reported for other oomycete effectors [30]. Phylogenetic analyses of the YxSL[RK] family revealed four
main clades and suggest an expansion of this family in
Phytophthora spp. (Figure 1e).
The YxSL[RK] motif appears to be a signature for a
novel family of secreted oomycete proteins that may
function as effectors. It is intriguing that the YxSL[RK]
motif shares some similarity in sequence and position
with the canonical RXLR motif, a resemblance increased
by the fact that the variable amino acid is a basic amino
acid (lysine) in 28 out of the 91 family members.
Whether the YxSL[RK] motif defines a host-translocation domain as noted for RXLR effectors remains to be
determined.

Page 8 of 22

these cell-surface proteins were detected in P. ultimum
(Additional file 1), suggesting that P. ultimum produces
typical oomycete MAMPs, which can be efficiently perceived by a wide range of plant species. The occurrence
of PAMPs/MAMPs in P. ultimum suggests that this
pathogen must have evolved mechanisms to evade
PAMP-triggered immunity. This could occur through a
necrotrophic mechanism of infection or using the candidate effector proteins described above.
Metabolism of complex carbohydrates

A total of 180 candidate glycoside hydrolases (GHs)
were identified in P. ultimum using the CAZy annotation pipeline [68]. This number is apparently similar to
those reported previously for Ph. ramorum (173), Ph.
sojae (190), and Ph. infestans (157) [27,28]. However,
when the CAZy annotation pipeline was applied to Ph.
sojae, Ph. ramorum and Ph. infestans, 301, 258 and 277
GHs were found, respectively, nearly twice the number
present in P. ultimum (Table 2). Among these we identified putative cellulases belonging to families GH5,
GH6 and GH7. All six GH6 candidate cellulases harbor
secretion signals. Only one GH6 protein contains a
CBEL domain at the carboxyl terminus. Three contain a
transmembrane domain and one contains a glycosylphosphatidylinisotol anchor, features suggesting that these
proteins may be targeting the oomycete cell wall rather
than plant cell walls. The P. ultimum strain studied here
could not grow when cellulose was the sole carbon
source (Table 3; Figure S10 in Additional file 3).
Cutinases are a particular set of esterases (CAZy
family CE5) that cleave cutin, a polyester composed of
hydroxy and hydroxyepoxy fatty acids that protects aerial plant organs. No candidate cutinases could be found
Table 3 Growth comparison of P. ultimum DAOM BR 144
on different carbon sources and the pH of the medium
after 7 days
DAOM BR144
Carbon source

Mycelium density

pH on day 7

No carbon
25 mM D-glucose

+++

5.1
2.9

25 mM D-fructose

+++

2.9

25 mM D-xylose

-

5

25 mM L-arabinose

-

5

Detection of P. ultimum by the host

25 mM cellobiose

+++

4

Detection of pathogens through the perception of
PAMPs/MAMPs leads to the induction of plant immune
responses (for review, see [50]). Oomycetes produce various and specific molecules able to induce defense
responses like elicitins (for review, see [65]), but only
two oomycete cell-surface proteins containing a MAMP
have been characterized: a transglutaminase [66] and a
protein named CBEL [67]. Genes encoding both of

25 mM sucrose

+++

3.2

1% cellulose
1% birch wood xylan
1% soluble starch
1% citrus pectin*

-

5.2

+++

4.7
3.5

+

5

The symbols indicate poor growth (+), moderate growth (++), good growth (+
++), very good growth (++++), or growth less than or equal to the no-carbon
medium (-). The data are the average of the two duplicates used for this
experiment.

Lévesque et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R73
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/7/R73

in the P. ultimum genome. Cutinase activity was
reported in culture filtrates of P. ultimum, but its
growth was not supported on apple cutin [69] and low
levels of fatty acid esterase were detected in P. ultimum
only in 21-day-old culture [70]. The absence of recognizable cutinases suggests these enzymes are not critical
for penetration and infection by P. ultimum, which
attacks young, non-suberized roots and penetrates tissues indirectly through wounds. This contrasts with the
number of putative cutinases identified in several Phytophthora spp. [27,71-73], which presumably promote
penetration of leaf and stem tissues that are protected
by a thick cuticle or colonization of heavily suberized
root and bark tissue.
The xylan degrading capacity of P. ultimum appears to
be limited, if not totally absent. No members of the
GH10 and GH11 families encoding endoxylanases
essential for xylan degradation could be found. Furthermore, families involved in the removal of xylan side
chains or modifications such as GH67, CE3, and CE5
are absent while families CE1 and CE2 contain only a
limited number of members. The lack of significant
xylan digestion was confirmed by the absence of growth
when xylan was used as a carbon source (Table 3; Figure S10 in Additional file 3), consistent with previous
work on P. ultimum and other Pythium spp. [70].
Pectinases play a key role in infection by Pythium spp.
[74]. Twenty-nine candidate pectin/pectate lyases (PL1,
PL3 and PL4 families) are present in P. ultimum while
the genomes of Phytophthora spp. [27,28] encode even
larger PL families (Table 2). In P. ultimum, the set of
pectin lyases is complemented by 11 pectin hydrolases
from family GH28, several of which having been functionally characterized in various Phytophthora spp.
[75-78]. P. ultimum lacks pectin methylesterases as well
as genes encoding family GH88 and GH105 enzymes
and therefore cannot fully saccharify the products of
pectin/pectate lyases, consistent with previous reports of
incomplete pectin degradation and little or no galacturonic acid production during P. ultimum infection of bentgrass [79]. The data from the carbon source utilization
experiment (Table 3; Figure S10 in Additional file 3)
show only limited growth on medium with citrus pectin
as the sole carbon source.
We also observed that the P. ultimum genome
encodes candidate GH13 a-amylases, GH15 glucoamylase and a GH32 invertase, suggesting that plant starch
and sucrose are targeted. The growth data confirm these
observations, with excellent growth on soluble starch
and sucrose (Figure S10 in Additional file 3).
The CAZy database also contains enzymes involved in
fungal cell wall synthesis and remodeling. Cell walls of
oomycetes differ markedly from cell walls of Fungi and
consist mainly of glucans containing b-1,3 and b-1,6

Page 9 of 22

linkages and cellulose [80-82]. The P. ultimum genome
encodes four cellulose synthases closely related to their
orthologs described for Ph. infestans [82]. The genome
also specifies a large number of enzyme activities that
may be involved in the metabolism of b-1,3- and b-1,6glucans (Additional file 1), as well as a large set of candidate b-1,3-glucan synthases likely involved in synthesis
of cell wall b-glucans and in the metabolism of mycolaminaran, the main carbon storage compound in Phytophthora and Pythium spp. [81,83,84].
Reponses to fungicide

Metalaxyl and its enantiopure R form mefenoxam have
been used widely since the 1980s for the control of
plant diseases caused by oomycetes [17,85]. The main
mechanism of action of this fungicide is selective inhibition of ribosomal RNA synthesis by interfering with the
activity of the RNA polymerase I complex [86]. P. ultimum DAOM BR144 is sensitive to mefenoxam at concentrations higher than 1 μl/l (data not shown) and 45
genes were expressed five-fold or more when P. ultimum was exposed to it (Table S6 in Additional file 2).
Active ABC pump efflux systems are important factors
for drug and antifungal resistance in Fungi and oomycetes [87-91]. Although the substrates transported by
ABC proteins cannot be predicted on the basis of
sequence homology, it is clear that these membrane
transporters play a key role in the adaptation to environmental change. Three pleiotropic drug resistance proteins (ABC, subfamily G) were strongly up-regulated (>
27-fold) in response to mefenoxam. These genes arose
from a tandem duplication event but remain so similar
that it is possible that only one of these genes is actually
up-regulated under these conditions due to our inability
to uniquely map mRNA-seq reads when there are highly
similar paralogs. A fourth gene and a member of the
multidrug resistance associated family was also up-regulated more than nine-fold. Notably, the ABC transporters in P. ultimum that were up-regulated are distinct
from those that were up-regulated in Ph. infestans in
response to metalaxyl [92], indicating that a unique set
of ABC transporters may be involved in the response to
the fungicide in P. ultimum. Three genes coding for E3
ubiquitin-protein ligase were more than 18-fold upregulated in response to mefenoxam compared to the
control, but not in the other tested conditions. Ubiquitin/proteasome-mediated proteolysis is activated in
response to stress - such as nutrient limitation, heat
shock, and exposure to heavy metals - that may cause
formation of damaged, denatured, or misfolded proteins
[93,94]. Thus, increased expression of these enzymes in
P. ultimum exposed to mefenoxam might be related to
decreased synthesis of rRNA and expression of aberrant
proteins.

Lévesque et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R73
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/7/R73

Comparative genomics
Zoospore production

P. ultimum does not typically exhibit release of zoospores from sporangia in culture [12] but zoospore
release directly from aged oospores has been reported
[95]. Comparative genomics with well studied whiplash
flagellar proteins from the green algae Chlamydomonas
reinhardtii and other model organisms indicates that
indeed P. ultimum does have the necessary genetic complement for flagella. Orthologs of tinsel flagellar mastigoneme proteins have also been identified in P. ultimum
through comparison to those studied in Ochromonas
danica, a unicellular member of the Straminipila kingdom. Overall, approximately 100 putative whiplash and
tinsel flagellum gene orthologs were identified in P. ultimum (Table S7 in Additional file 2) with corresponding
orthologs present in Ph. infestans, Ph. sojae, and Ph.
ramorum. Expression of flagellar orthologs was observed
in 8 growth conditions used in whole transcriptome
sequencing, although 14 putative flagellar orthologs for
axonemal dynein and kinesin and intraflagellar transport
did not show expression in any condition.
Cadherins, an animal gene family found in oomycetes

Perhaps the most remarkable discovery relative to gene
family expansion is that there are four P. ultimum genes
that encode cadherins. Previously, members of this gene
family have only been found in metazoan genomes (and
the one fully sequenced genome from the clade of nearest relatives, the choanoflagellate Monosiga brevicollis).
Cadherins are cell adhesion proteins that presumably
evolved at the base of the clade containing metazoans
and choanoflagellates [96]. Cadherin-related proteins are
encoded in several bacterial genomes, but these bacterial
proteins lack important calcium ion-binding motifs (the
LDRE and DxND motifs) found in the extracellular (EC)
repeat domains of ‘true’ cadherins [97]. The cadherin
genes in P. ultimum do contain these motifs, and this is
therefore the first report of true cadherins in a genome
outside the metazoans/choanoflagellates. In metazoans,
but not in choanoflagellates, some cadherins also contain an intracellular catenin-binding domain (CBD) that
connects intercellular binding via EC domains to intracellular responses such as cytoskeletal changes. A search
of predicted gene models with the PANTHER HMMs
for cadherins (PTHR10596) identified two genes containing cadherin EC domains in the Ph. infestans genome, but none in the Ph. ramorum, Ph. sojae and
Phaeodactylum tricornutum genomes. The identification
of cadherin EC domains in both P. ultimum and Ph.
infestans led us to postulate that such genes may also
exist in other Phytophthora genomes that were not
found in the original analysis of these genomes. Indeed,
a TBLASTN search of genomic DNA using the predicted P. ultimum cadherin domain-containing proteins

Page 10 of 22

identified one putative cadherin-containing ORF in the
Ph. sojae genome and four in the Ph. ramorum genome.
The P. ultimum cadherin genes contain between 2 and
17 full-length cadherin EC domains, as predicted by the
Pfam database [98] at the recommended statistical significance threshold, and likely a number of additional
cadherin domains that have been truncated and/or have
diverged past this similarity threshold. The genes from
the Phytophthora genomes each contain between one
and seven intact cadherin EC domains, though we did
not attempt to construct accurate gene models for the
Phytophthora genes. None of the oomycete cadherins
appear to have the catenin-binding domain, nor do
these genomes appear to encode a b-catenin gene, so
like in M. brevicollis, the b-catenin-initiated part of the
classical metazoan cadherin pathway appears to be
absent from oomycetes.
In order to explore the evolution of these domains in
the oomycetes, we performed a phylogenetic analysis.
The first (amino-terminal) cadherin EC domain has
been used to explore gene phylogeny among the cadherins [96,99], and to facilitate comparison we used both
neighbor joining [100] and maximum likelihood (using
the PhyML program [101,102]) to estimate a phylogenetic tree for these same sequences together with all of
the intact cadherin domains from the P. ultimum and
Ph. infestans genomes (Figure 2). To generate a highquality protein sequence alignment for phylogeny estimation, we used the manual alignment of Nollet et al.
[99] as a ‘seed’ for alignment of other sequences using
MAFFT [102]. We found that all of the oomycete
domains fall within a single clade. However, this clade is
broad and also contains several cadherins from the
choanoflagellate M. brevicollis, as well as some of the
more divergent metazoan cadherins (Cr-2 and Cr-3 subfamilies). In general, the branches in this clade are very
long, making phylogenetic reconstruction somewhat
unreliable (all branches with bootstrap values > 50% are
marked with a circle in Figure 2). Nevertheless, most of
the cadherin domains found in P. ultimum are reliably
orthologous to domains in one or more Phytophthora
species, suggesting descent from a common ancestor by
speciation. The most notable example is for the genes
PITG_09983 and PYU1_T011030, in which a region
spanning three consecutive EC repeats appears to have
been inherited by both species from that common
ancestor (apparently followed by substantial duplication
and rearrangement of individual cadherin domains).
These repeats are also apparently orthologous to repeats
in both Ph. sojae and Ph. ramorum. The oomycete cadherins may have been initially obtained either vertically
(by descent from the common ancestor with metazoans)
or horizontally (by transfer of metazoan DNA long after
divergence). No cadherins have been found in genomes

Lévesque et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R73
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/7/R73

Page 11 of 22

Figure 2 Phylogenetic tree of the cadherin family, showing all members of the novel oomycete subfamily (green) and their
relationships to representative metazoan and choanoflagellate cadherins. The major clades of cadherins [96] are colored: C-1 (blue), Cr-1a
and Cr-1b (red), C-2 (purple), and Cr-3 (orange). Most of the oomycete cadherins fall within a fairly distinct subfamily (green), though this
subfamily has many long branches and also includes some cadherins from the choanoflagellate M. brevicollis (labeled starting with ‘MB’) that are
also highly diverged from other cadherins. Reliable branches (bootstrap > 50%) are labeled with a circle. All full-length oomycete cadherin
domains are shown, from P. ultimum (labeled starting with ‘Pu’ and ending with the number of the repeat relative to the amino terminus), Ph.
infestans (labeled starting with ‘Pi’), Ph. sojae (Ps) and Ph. ramorum (Pr). Other cadherins are from the human genome (’Hs’) unless labeled
starting with ‘Dm’ (Drosophila melanogaster) or ‘Ce’ (Caenorhabditis elegans). The figure was drawn using the iTOL tool [143].

sequenced from other clades more closely related to
either oomycetes (for example, diatoms and alveolates)
or the metazoan/choanoflagellates (for example, Fungi
and amoebozoa). This means that, if cadherins were
present in the most recent common ancestor of oomycetes and metazoans, these genes must have been lost

independently in all of these other diverging lineages.
Given the data currently available, it is more probable
that at least one horizontal cadherin gene transfer event
occurred from a choanoflagellate or metazoan to an
oomycete ancestor, prior to the divergence of Pythium
from Phytophthora. The source of the metazoan DNA

Lévesque et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R73
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/7/R73

Page 12 of 22

Synteny with other oomycete plant pathogens

P. ultimum. Due to a much larger number of repeat
sequences, and expanded gene numbers, the corresponding region in Ph. infestans spans 2.38 Mb and 499
predicted genes, but the order of the orthologous genes
is highly conserved with that of Ph. ramorum. The Ph.
sojae genome shows similar conservation of gene order
in this region but for simplicity is not shown.

A phylogenetic approach (PHRINGE [103]) was used to
identify P. ultimum proteins orthologous to proteins
encoded in the genomes of Ph. infestans, Ph. sojae, and
Ph. ramorum. Of the 15,322 proteins predicted from the
P. ultimum genome sequence, 12,230 were identified as
orthologous to a protein in at least one Phytophthora
genome sequence. A total of 11,331 proteins were identified as orthologs common to all three Phytophthora
spp., and of these, 8,504 had identifiable orthologs in
P. ultimum. PHRINGE was also used to examine the
conservation of gene order (synteny) between the Phytophthora and P. ultimum genomes. As previously
described [27], the gene order of orthologs is very highly
conserved among Phytophthora spp. In P. ultimum the
ortholog content was very similar between broad regions
of the P. ultimum and Phytophthora genomes, but the
local gene order was greatly rearranged, primarily as a
result of inversions. Only short runs of up to 10 orthologs were found to be collinear, whereas runs of more
than 100 could be identified between the Phytophthora
spp. Figure 3 shows an example spanning a wellassembled region of the Ph. infestans, Ph. ramorum and
P. ultimum genome sequences. In Ph. ramorum, the
region spans 1.18 Mb and 383 predicted genes and in
P. ultimum the region spans 1.15 Mb and 435 predicted
genes. Of these genes, 286 are identified as orthologs. In
the Ph. ramorum sequence there are an additional 38
genes with orthologs in Ph. infestans but not in

Conclusions
Analysis of the P. ultimum genome sequence suggests
that not all oomycete plant pathogens contain a similar
‘toolkit’ for survival and pathogenesis. Indeed, P. ultimum has a distinct effector repertoire compared to Phytophthora spp., including a lack of the hallmark RXLR
effectors, a limited number of Crinkler genes, and a
novel YxSL[RK] family of candidate effectors. The
absence of any convincing RXLR effectors from the predicted proteome of P. ultimum, first noted by Cheung
et al. [31] and rigorously confirmed here, provides a
striking contrast to the Phytophthora genomes. RXLR
effectors are also absent from the proteome of A.
euteiches, a member of the Saprolegniales, which was
predicted from an EST collection [64]. It is possible that
RXLR effectors are confined to oomycete pathogens in
the family Peronosporaceae, and represent an adaptation
to facilitate biotrophy. The absence of RXLR effectors
from P. ultimum (and possibly all other species of the
genus) may be functionally associated with the very
broad host range of Pythium pathogens. It also correlates with the lack of gene-for-gene resistance against
Pythium and the fact that Pythium pathogens are generally restricted to necrotrophic infection of seedlings,
stressed plants, and plant parts (for example, fruit) with
diminished defenses against infection. In contrast to the
RXLR effectors, the genome of P. ultimum does encode

may have been a host of the ancestral oomycete, or possibly introduced by a virus. Nevertheless, the subsequent
preservation of cadherin domains in at least two lineages
of oomycetes over a substantial period of time suggests
that the genes are likely to perform an important function, which remains to be explored.

Figure 3 Rearrangements in gene order in the P. ultimum genome relative to Phytophthora genomes. Vertical brown bars indicate
orthologs shared among P. ultimum, Ph. infestans and Ph. ramorum. Gold bars indicate orthologs shared only between Ph. infestans and Ph.
ramorum. Turquoise bars indicate genes with orthologs in other regions of the compared genomes (that is, non-syntenic orthologs). Grey bars
indicate genes without orthologs. Gray and red shaded connections indicate blocks of syntenic orthologs with the same or opposite relative
transcriptional orientations, respectively. Non-coding regions of the genome are not depicted.

Lévesque et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R73
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/7/R73

members of the Crinkler class of effectors, albeit not at
the numbers present in Phytophthora genomes. These
effectors may also enter host cells, and can trigger cell
death [28]. They are also found in A. euteiches [64] and
may represent a basal family of effectors that contribute
to necrotrophy. This study uncovered a third family of
secreted proteins conserved across all oomycetes
sequenced so far with characteristics that suggest they
might act inside host cells. These characteristics include
high sequence variability, small size, hydrophilic nature,
and a conserved RXLR-like motif (YxSL[KR]) with several family members specifically and highly expressed
during infection. However, as yet no experimental data
support this hypothesis.
The repertoire of metabolic genes within the P. ultimum genome reflects its pathogenic lifestyle (Figure 4).
P. ultimum is an opportunistic pathogen of young seedlings and plant roots with little or no cuticle or heavily
suberized tissue, consistent with lack of cutinase encoding genes. It is a poor competitor against secondary
invaders of damaged plant tissues and soil organisms
with better saprobic ability [13]. The P. ultimum genome contains a suite of GHs that fits well with an
organism in this ecological niche. The genome encodes
cellulases and pectinases that facilitate initial penetration
and infection of the host, but it does not appear to use
these plant polysaccharides as a major carbon source in
culture and it lacks the ability to effectively degrade
other complex polysaccharides such as xylan [70] (Table
3) and chitin [74,104]. As a primary pathogen that
usually initiates infection, P. ultimum probably has firsthand access to easily degradable carbohydrates such as
starch and sucrose. Following depletion of these carbon
sources, it appears to focus on quick reproduction and
production of survival structures [13] rather than
switching its metabolism to the more difficult carbon
sources such as plant cell wall polysaccharides. Intriguingly, the arsenal of P. ultimum enzymes targeting plant
carbohydrates is strikingly similar to that found in the
genome of the root-knot nematode Meloidogyne incognita [105], a root pathogen that also lacks xylanases yet
has a strong pectin degrading capacity. In summary,
access to the P. ultimum genome sequence has reinforced earlier hypotheses on pathogenesis and survival
mechanisms in oomycete plant pathogens and has
advanced our understanding of events at the plantpathogen interface, especially during necrotrophy.

Materials and methods
Sequencing, assembly and autoclosure of P. ultimum
DAOM BR144

P. ultimum (DAOM BR144 = CBS 805.95 = ATCC
200006) was sequenced using a whole-genome shotgun
sequencing approach. Sequencing of three Sanger

Page 13 of 22

libraries generated 263,715 quality filtered reads
(281,088 attempted reads). Three full runs of 454 FLX
standard pyrosequencing [106] generated 1,296,941
reads. These were assembled by a ‘shredding’ pipeline
[107] that generates pseudo-Sanger reads from the contigs of a Newbler assembly [106] of 454 reads and then
assembles all of the reads with Celera Assembler [108].
This yielded 2,659 contigs in 714 scaffolds with an N50
contig size of 40,520 bp. The 1,945 intra-scaffold gaps
were subjected to AutoClosure, an in-house pipeline
that automates primer design, template re-array, and
reaction orders. This produced 6,468 reads, of which
5,014 passed quality filtering. Subsequently, the Celera
Assembler software was modified to accept 454 reads
without shredding [109] and Celera Assembler 5.2 was
run on the Sanger shotgun, 454 shotgun, and Sanger
AutoClosure reads together. Contigs for the mitochondrial genome were identified and annotated separately
with 16,277 sequences assembled for a greater than 200fold coverage. The whole genome shotgun project has
been deposited at NCBI [GenBank:ADOS00000000]
along with the 454 reads [SRA:SRX020087], the mitochondrial genome [GenBank:GU138662], and the Sanger
reads (NCBI Trace Archive under species code
‘PYTHIUM ULTIMUM DAOM BR144’). The version
described in this paper is the first version [WGS:
ADOS01000000].
Genome annotation

The P. ultimum genome annotations were created using
the MAKER program [110]. The program was configured to use both spliced EST alignments as well as single exon ESTs greater than 250 bp in length as evidence
for producing hint-based gene predictions. MAKER was
also set to filter out gene models for short and partial
gene predictions that produce proteins with fewer than
28 amino acids. The MAKER pipeline was set to produce ab initio gene predictions from both the repeatmasked and unmasked genomic sequence using SNAP
[111], FGENESH [112], and GeneMark [113]. Hintbased gene predictions were derived from SNAP and
FGENESH.
The EST sequences used in the annotation process
were derived from Sanger and 454 sequenced P. ultimum DAOM BR144 ESTs [31] considered together with
ESTs from dbEST [114] for Aphanomyces cochlioides,
Phytophthora brassicae, Phytophthora capsici, Phytophthora parasitica, Ph. sojae, Ph. infestans, and
Pythium oligandrum. Protein evidence was derived from
the UniProt/Swiss-Prot protein database [115,116] and
from predicted proteins for Ph. infestans [28], Ph.
ramorum [27], and Ph. sojae [27]. Repetitive elements
were identified within the MAKER pipeline using the
Repbase repeat library [117] and RepeatMasker [45] in

Lévesque et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R73
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/7/R73

Page 14 of 22

Figure 4 The P. ultimum genome contains genes encoding enzyme activities necessary for the degradation of plant cell wall
polysaccharides and storage sugars (blue ticks indicate the polysaccharides targeted by P. ultimum enzymes). Some activities are
equally relevant for P. ultimum’s own cell wall metabolism. Degradation of the plant cell wall relies essentially on the action of cellulases and
pectinases. Significantly, the absence of identified enzymes with xylanase, pectin methylesterase or cutinase activities is in agreement with
previous studies of P. ultimum and other Pythium spp. [70,104,144]. For Pythium’s pathogenic action, penetration is primarily limited to wounded
tissue, or to young roots and germinating seedlings with little or no suberized tissue. Penetration and root rot, for some Pythium spp., is limited
to the first layers of cells (RC and EC) [104]. Other genes, including those coding for transporters, elicitin-like, and stress proteins, were
upregulated when P. ultimum was grown in contact with A. thaliana seeds. CC, cortical cells; EC, epidermal cells; RC, root cap; H, hyphae. (Figure
adapted from [104,144-146].)

Lévesque et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R73
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/7/R73

conjunction with a MAKER internal transposable element database [118] and a P. ultimum specific repeat
library prepared for this work (created using PILER
[119] with settings suggested in the PILER documentation). Ab initio gene predictions and hint-based gene
predictions [110] were produced within the MAKER
pipeline using FGENESH trained for Ph. infestans,
GeneMark trained for P. ultimum via internal self-training, and SNAP trained for P. ultimum from a conserved
gene set identified by CEGMA [110].
Following the initial MAKER run, a total of 14,967
genes encoding 14,999 transcripts were identified, each
of which were supported by homology to a known protein or had at least one splice site confirmed by EST
evidence. Additional ab initio gene predictions not overlapping a MAKER annotation were scanned for protein
domains using InterProScan [120-122]. This process
identified an additional 323 gene predictions; these were
added to the annotation set, producing a total of 15,290
genes encoding 15,322 transcripts (referred to as v3).
Selected genes within the MAKER produced gene annotation set were manually annotated using the annotation-editing tool Apollo [123]. The final annotation set
(v4) contained 15,297 genes encoding 15,329 transcripts,
including six rRNA transcripts.
Putative functions were assigned to each predicted P.
ultimum protein using BLASTP [124] to identify the
best homologs from the UniProt/Swiss-Prot protein
database and/or through manual curation. Additional
functional annotations include molecular weight and
isoelectric point (pI) calculated using the pepstats program from the EMBOSS package [125], subcellular localization predicted with TargetP using the non-plant
network [126], prediction of transmembrance helices via
TMHMM [127], and PFAM (v23.0) families using
HMMER [128] in which only hits above the trusted
cutoff were retained. Expert annotation of carbohydraterelated enzymes was performed using the CarbohydrateActive Enzyme database (CAZy) annotation pipeline
[68].
Transcriptome sequencing

Eight cDNA libraries were constructed to assess the
expression profile of P. ultimum. Initially, plugs of 10%
V8 agar containing P. ultimum strain DAOM BR144
were incubated for 1 day in yeast extract broth (YEB; 30
g/l sucrose, 1 g/l KH2PO4, 0.5 g/l MgSO4·7H2O, 0.5 g/l
KCl, 10 mg/l FeSO4·7H2O, 1 g/l yeast extract) at 25°C
with shaking (200 rpm). Approximately 50 mg of hyphae
growing out of the plugs were then transferred to flasks
containing media for the various expression assays.
Mycelium was grown under the following conditions: 1,
nutrient-rich YEB medium for 3 days at 25°C with shaking (200 rpm) and nutrient-starved Plich medium (S

Page 15 of 22

Kamoun, unpublished) for 10 days at 25°C in standing
culture, as previously described [31]; 2, YEB medium
under hypoxic conditions (oxygen concentration of
0.2%) for 1 and 3 days in standing liquid culture at
25°C; 3, YEB medium for 2 days at 25°C with shaking
(200 rpm) followed by the addition of 1 and 100 μl/l of
the fungicide mefenoxam (Subdue MAXX™, Novartis
Crop Production, Greensboro, NC, USA) and subsequent incubation for an additional 0.25, 3 and 6 hours
at the same temperature and with agitation; 4, YEB
medium for the same time periods but without the addition of mefenoxam was included (mefenoxam control);
5, YEB medium for 2 days at 25°C with shaking (200
rpm) followed by a cold stress of 0°C with shaking (200
rpm) for 0.25, 3 and 6 hours; or 6, YEB medium for 2
days at 25°C with shaking (200 rpm) followed by exposure to heat stress of 35°C for 0.25, 3 and 6 hours; 7,
YEB medium for 2 days at 25°C followed by exposure to
25°C for 0.25, 3 and 6 hours (temperature control); 8,
0.1% V8-juice medium containing surface-sterilized A.
thaliana ecotype Columbia Col-0 seeds. Approximately
200 seeds were placed in the liquid medium at 25°C
with shaking (200 rpm) for 1, 2 and 7 days. Mycelium
of P. ultimum was then added and allowed to grow in
contact with the seeds for 3 days.
For each condition listed above, mycelium was harvested, macerated in liquid nitrogen and RNA was
extracted using TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad,
CA, USA) as described [31]. RNA was treated with
DNAse (Promega RQ1 RNase-Free DNase, Madison,
WI, USA) and 10 μg RNA was used to construct cDNA
using the mRNA-Seq Sample Prep Kit (Illumina, San
Diego, CA, USA), which was sequenced with Illumina
Genome Analyzer (GA) II using version 3 sequencing
reagents for 41 cycles. Base calling was carried out using
the Illumina GA pipeline v1.4.
For each library, the filtered reads from the Illumina
GA II pipeline were mapped using Tophat, a splice-siteaware short read mapper that works in conjunction with
Bowtie short read aligner [129]. Reads were deposited in
the NCBI Short Read Archive [SRA:SRP002690]. The
minimum and maximum intron sizes were 5 bp and 15
kbp, respectively, for each Tophat run. The final annotation GFF3 file was provided to Tophat and expression
values were calculated using reads per kilobase of exon
model per million mapped reads (RPKM) [130]. The
minimum RPKM for all eight conditions was 0, the
median RPKM ranged from 5 to 8, while the maximum
RPKM ranged from 10,182 in the YEP+Plich library to
32,041 from the 35°C temperature treatment. Using a
RPKM value of 2.5 (approximately half of the median
RPKM of all genes in each library) as a cutoff for
expression, loci with differential expression in treatment
versus control were identified (comparisons: hypoxia

Lévesque et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R73
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/7/R73

versus YEB+Plich; Arabidopsis versus YEB+Plich; mefenoxam treatment versus mefenoxam control; heat treatment versus temperature control; cold treatment versus
temperature control; Table S6 in Additional file 2). The
fold changes were calculated for loci with RPKM ≥ 2.5
in both treatment and control samples. Loci with control values < 2.5 RPKM but with expression in treatment
conditions were flagged as ‘U’ as a true ratio could not
be calculated. Loci with treatment values < 2.5 RPKM
but with expression in control conditions were flagged
as ‘D’ as a true ratio could not be calculated. Loci with
RPKM < 2.5 in both treatment and control samples
were flagged as ‘N’.

Page 16 of 22

Motif searches were done using the MEME [132] prediction server with default parameters except the following: min width = 4; max width = 12; min sites = 10.
Sequences with homology to gene models in oomycetes
genomes were identified by BLAST analysis against the
NR database and aligned using MUSCLE [133]. For phylogenetic inference of the CRN genes, alignments were
done using RevTrans [134] with the dialign-T algorithm.
Molecular phylogenetic reconstructions were done using
RAxML [135] version 7.0. Sequence logos were constructed on the basis of the RevTrans alignment using
WebLogo [136].
Comparative genomics analyses

Identification of secreted proteins and effector families

The secretome of P. ultimum was identified using SignalP V2.0 program following the PexFinder algorithm
as described previously [56]. In addition, sequences
that were predicted to contain transmembrane
domains or organelle targeting signals were omitted
from the secretome. Each sequence in the secretome
was searched against two ‘Darwin’ databases [57] that
were compiled from > 50 eukaryote whole proteomes
from major phylogenetic branches using BLASTP with
an E-value cutoff of 1 × 10-3. One database contained
sequences only from Fungi and the other contained
the sequences from other organisms excluding the
Fungi and oomycetes. Protein sequences of the secretome were clustered into families along with their
related non-secretory proteins by using the TRIBEMCL algorithm [131] using BLASTP with an E-value
cutoff of 1 × 10-10. Each family was named according
to the existing annotation of the member sequences.
Families and singletons were searched against Pfam-A
release 24.0 using the HMMER3 beta 3 hmmsearch
with trusted cutoffs to detect any transposable-element-related proteins that may have been missed in
the repeat masking process. Families or singletons
where at least 50% of the members matched transposon-associated Pfam domains were manually curated to
identify and exclude true transposon-related sequences
from the secretome.
For the analysis of genome organization, P. ultimum
predicted genes were binned according to the length of
their flanking non-coding regions (FIRs). FIRs were
computed using predicted gene coordinates on scaffolds.
Binning according to 5’ FIRs and 3’ FIRs was performed
along the x-aixs and y-axis, respectively, using conditional counting functions. Logarithmic size was chosen
for the bins in order to allow a maximum dispersion of
the values. A color code was used to represent the number of genes or average values in bins. Average values
were computed for bins containing a minimum of three
genes.

In order to find substantial expansions and contractions
of gene families observed in other eukaryotes, we used
the PANTHER Classification System [49,137,138]. We
first scored all predicted proteins from the P. ultimum
genome against the PANTHER HMMs, and created a
tab-delimited file with two columns: the P. ultimum protein identifier and the PANTHER HMM identifier from
the top-scoring HMM (if E-value < 0.001). We created
similar files for three Phytophthora genomes (Ph. infestans, Ph. ramorum, and Ph. sojae), and a diatom genome
(P. tricornutum) for comparison. We removed protein
families of probable viral origin or transposons
(PTHR19446, PTHR10178, PTHR11439, PTHR23022,
PTHR19303). This left 7,762 P. ultimum proteins in
PANTHER families, 8,169 from Ph. infestans, 7,667 from
Ph. ramorum and 7,701 from Ph. sojae. We then
uploaded the tab-delimited files to the PANTHER Gene
List Comparison Tool [137,139] and analyzed the list for
under- and over-representation of genes with respect to
molecular functions, biological processes, and pathways.
For each class that was significantly different (Bonferroni-corrected P < 0.05) between P. ultimum and all of
the Phytophthora genomes, we determined the protein
family expansions or contractions that made the biggest
contributions to these differences (Table 1). Finally, we
determined likely gene duplication and loss events that
generated the observed protein family expansions and
contractions by building phylogenetic trees of each of
these families using the 48 genomes included in the trees
on the PANTHER website [140], in addition to the five
stramenopile genomes above (P. ultimum, Ph. infestans,
Ph. ramorum, Ph. sojae, P. tricornutum). Phylogenetic
trees were constructed using the GIGA algorithm [141],
which infers the timing of likely gene duplication events
relative to speciation events, allowing the reconstruction
of ancestral genome content and lineage-specific duplications and losses. Using v3 of the annotation (MAKER
output without manual curation), P. ultimum genes
orthologous to genes in Ph. infestans, Ph. sojae and Ph.
ramorum were identified using PHRINGE (’Phylogenetic

Lévesque et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R73
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/7/R73

Resources for the Interpretation of Genomes’) [103] in
which the evolutionary relationships among all oomycete
protein families are reconstructed.
Carbohydrate utilization

Growth was compared on different media. Carbon
sources were added to Minimal Media (MM; per liter:
0.5 g KH 2PO4 , 0.5 g K2 HPO 4, 4 × 10-4 g MnSO 4, 4 ×
10-4 g ZnSO4, 1.05 g NH4Cl, 6.8 ml 1M CaCl2·2H2O, 2
ml 1M MgSO 4 ·7H 2 O, 4 × 10 -3 g FeSO4 and 1% (w/v)
agarose) at the following concentrations: 1% (w/v) for
cellulose, soluble starch, citrus pectin and birchwood
xylan and 25 mM for D-glucose, D-fructose, D-xylose,
cellobiose, sucrose and L-arabinose. The pH of the medium was adjusted to 6.0 and the medium was autoclaved
at 121°C for 20 minutes. CaCl2, MgSO4, and monosaccharides were autoclaved separately from the rest of the
medium and FeSO4 was sterile filtered (Whatman 0.2
μm millipore filter, Dassel, Germany). All of these components were added to the autoclaved medium before it
solidified. The growth of P. ultimum DAOM BR144 was
compared on the different media mentioned above;
Minimal Media without a carbon source was used as
the negative control in this experiment. The strain was
initially grown on Potato Carrot Agar [142]. A small
agar plug containing mycelium (1 mm diameter) was
transferred from the edge of a vigorously growing 1day-old colony to the center of the Petri dishes with the
different media. The cultures were incubated in the dark
at 21°C. Mycelium density and colony diameter were
measured daily for the first 5 days and again after 7
days. Colony morphology pictures were taken, and pH
was measured after 7 days. The growth test was conducted twice for each strain.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Supplemental methods and results. Additional
details on sequencing methods and analysis results citing methods or
data from [147-166].
Additional file 2: Supplemental Tables S1 to S11 providing detailed
lists and analyses.
Additional file 3: Supplemental Figures S1 to S16, supporting data
analyses.
Additional file 4: Multiple sequence alignment of oomycete
proteins with similarity to P. ultimum Family 3 proteins. Predicted
secreted proteins (91) with similarity to Family 3 proteins from various
oomycete species were aligned demonstrating the YxSL[KR] motif.

Abbreviations
bp: base pairs; CBEL: cellulose-binding elicitor lectin; CRN” Crinkler; EC:
extracellular; EST: expressed sequence tag; FIR: flanking non-coding region;
GH: glycoside hydrolase; HMM: Hidden Markov Model; MAMP: microbialassociated molecular pattern; ORF: open reading frame; PAMP: pathogen-

Page 17 of 22

associated molecular pattern; RPKM: reads per kilobase of exon model per
million mapped reads; YEB: yeast extract broth.
Acknowledgements
Funding for the work was provided by the US Department of Agriculture
(USDA) National Institute of Food and Agriculture Microbial Genome
Sequencing Program to CRB and NT (2007-35600-17774 and 2007-3560018886). The MAKER genome annotation pipeline is funded by NIH/NHGRI
5R01HG004694 to MY. Analysis of the genome was funded in part by grants
to BMT from the National Research Initiative of the USDA CSREES #200735600-18530 and from the National Science Foundation #MCB-0731969. CAL
and GPR are supported by the NSERC Discovery and Network programs.
CMMG is the recipient of a Marie Curie Intra-European Fellowship (MIEF-CT2006-022837) and a European Reintegration Grant (PERG03-GA-2008-230865)
from the European Commission. HB is supported by the Dutch Ministry of
Agriculture, Nature and Food Quality through a FES program. MT
acknowledges support by the Max-Planck Society, the German Science
Foundation (DFG), the Landesstiftung Baden-Württemberg and the LOEWE Landes-Offensive zur Entwicklung Wissenschaftlich-ökonomischer Exzellenz
research program of Hesse’s Ministry of Higher Education, Research, and the
Arts. An allocation of computer time from the Center for High Performance
Computing at the University of Utah is gratefully acknowledged. The
computational resources for annotating the genome were provided by the
National Institutes of Health (grant # NCRR 1 S10 RR17214-01) on the Arches
Metacluster, administered by the University of Utah Center for High
Performance Computing. We want to thank the Canadian Collection of
Fungal Cultures (CCFC/DAOM) for supplying and maintaining the culture for
this study. We acknowledge the assistance of Nicole Désaulniers for
culturing and DNA extractions as well as Jason Miller and Brian Walenz of
the J Craig Venter Institute in assembly of the P. ultimum genome. We want
to thank George Mahuku for sharing results on resistance of beans before
publication.
Author details
1
Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, 960 Carling Ave, Ottawa, ON, K1A 0C6,
Canada. 2Department of Biology, Carleton University, Ottawa, ON, K1S 5B6,
Canada. 3CBS-KNAW, Fungal Biodiversity Centre, Uppsalalaan 8, Utrecht, 3584
CT, The Netherlands. 4The Sainsbury Laboratory, Norwich, NR4 7UH, UK.
5
Department of Plant Biology, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI
48824, USA. 6Eccles Institute of Human Genetics, University of Utah, 15 North
2030 East, Room 2100, Salt Lake City, UT 84112-5330, USA. 7Biodiversity and
Climate Research Centre, Georg-Voigt-Str 14-16, D-60325, Frankfurt, Germany.
8
Department of Biological Sciences, Insitute of Ecology, Evolution and
Diversity, Johann Wolfgang Goethe University, Siesmayerstr. 70, D-60323
Frankfurt, Germany. 9Department of Bioagricultural Sciences and Pest
Management, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO 80523-1177, USA.
10
School of Biology, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE1 7RU,
UK. 11Genome Project Solutions, 1024 Promenade Street, Hercules, CA 94547,
USA. 12J Craig Venter Institute, 9704 Medical Center Dr., Rockville, MD 20850,
USA. 13Surfaces Cellulaires et Signalisation chez les Végétaux, UMR5546
CNRS-Université de Toulouse, 24 chemin de Borde Rouge, BP42617,
Auzeville, Castanet-Tolosan, F-31326, France. 14Scottish Association for Marine
Science, Oban, PA37 1QA, UK. 15Laboratory of Phytopathology, Wageningen
University, NL-1-6708 PB, Wageningen, The Netherlands. 16Centre for
BioSystems Genomics (CBSG), PO Box 98, 6700 AB Wageningen, The
Netherlands. 17Institute of Medical Sciences, University of Aberdeen,
Foresterhill, Aberdeen, AB25 2ZD, UK. 18The Broad Institute of MIT and
Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02141, USA. 19Department of Pathology, Faculty of
Medicine-Ramathibodi Hospital, Mahidol University, Rama 6 Road, Bangkok,
10400, Thailand. 20Department of Biological Sciences, Bowling Green State
University, Bowling Green, OH 43403, USA. 21Department of Plant Pathology
and Microbiology, University of California, Riverside, CA 92521, USA.
22
Virginia Bioinformatics Institute, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State
University, Washington Street, Blacksburg, VA 24061-0477, USA.
23
Architecture et Fonction des Macromolecules Biologiques, UMR6098, CNRS,
Univ. Aix-Marseille I & II, 163 Avenue de Luminy, 13288 Marseille, France.
24
USDA-ARS, 1636 East Alisal St, Salinias, CA, 93905, USA. 25Evolutionary
Systems Biology, SRI International, Room AE207, 333 Ravenswood Ave,
Menlo Park, CA 94025, USA.

Lévesque et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R73
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/7/R73

Authors’ contributions
CAL, NT, and CRB directed the project, performed analyses, and drafted the
manuscript. GWB drafted the manuscript. HB, LC, EH, SR, GR, MT, JW, JLB, BD,
SIF, CMMG, EG, FG, LG-B, NH, RHYJ, TK, HJGM, PM, VP, ST, SW, PvW, PMC, BH,
FM, PDT, BMT, RPDV, and SK participated in the genome analysis and
drafted the manuscript. JPH, CH, BRW, and MY conducted genomic/
transcriptomic analyses and drafted the manuscript. MMZ isolated RNA,
constructed cDNA libraries, participated in the genome analysis and drafted
the manuscript. DB, JJ, HL, BM, DP, and JES conducted genomic/
transcriptomic analyses. SF, JH, and JS performed genome sequencing. All
authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Received: 17 February 2010 Revised: 2 May 2010
Accepted: 13 July 2010 Published: 13 July 2010
References
1. Cavalier-Smith T, Chao EE: Phylogeny and megasystematics of
phagotrophic heterokonts (kingdom Chromista). J Mol Evol 2006,
62:388-420.
2. Riisberg I, Orr RJ, Kluge R, Shalchian-Tabrizi K, Bowers HA, Patil V,
Edvardsen B, Jakobsen KS: Seven gene phylogeny of heterokonts. Protist
2009, 160:191-204.
3. Burki F, Shalchian-Tabrizi K, Pawlowski J: Phylogenomics reveals a new
‘megagroup’ including most photosynthetic eukaryotes. Biol Lett 2008,
4:366-369.
4. Tsui CK, Marshall W, Yokoyama R, Honda D, Lippmeier JC, Craven KD,
Peterson PD, Berbee ML: Labyrinthulomycetes phylogeny and its
implications for the evolutionary loss of chloroplasts and gain of
ectoplasmic gliding. Mol Phylogenet Evol 2009, 50:129-140.
5. Armbrust EV, Berges JA, Bowler C, Green BR, Martinez D, Putnam NH,
Zhou SG, Allen AE, Apt KE, Bechner M, Brzezinski MA, Chaal BK, Chiovitti A,
Davis AK, Demarest MS, Detter JC, Glavina T, Goodstein D, Hadi MZ,
Hellsten U, Hildebrand M, Jenkins BD, Jurka J, Kapitonov VV, Kroger N,
Lau WWY, Lane TW, Larimer FW, Lippmeier JC, Lucas S, et al: The genome
of the diatom Thalassiosira pseudonana: ecology, evolution, and
metabolism. Science 2004, 306:79-86.
6. Bowler C, Allen AE, Badger JH, Grimwood J, Jabbari K, Kuo A, Maheswari U,
Martens C, Maumus F, Otillar RP, Rayko E, Salamov A, Vandepoele K,
Beszteri B, Gruber A, Heijde M, Katinka M, Mock T, Valentin K, Verret F,
Berges JA, Brownlee C, Cadoret JP, Chiovitti A, Choi CJ, Coesel S, De
Martino A, Detter JC, Durkin C, Falciatore A, et al: The Phaeodactylum
genome reveals the evolutionary history of diatom genomes. Nature
2008, 456:239-244.
7. Cock JM, Sterck L, Rouze P, Scornet D, Allen AE, Amoutzias G, Anthouard V,
Artiguenave F, Aury JM, Badger JH, Beszteri B, Billiau K, Bonnet E,
Bothwell JH, Bowler C, Boyen C, Brownlee C, Carrano CJ, Charrier B, Cho GY,
Coelho SM, Collen J, Corre E, Da Silva C, Delage L, Delaroque N,
Dittami SM, Doulbeau S, Elias M, Farnham G, et al: The Ectocarpus genome
and the independent evolution of multicellularity in brown algae. Nature
465:617-621.
8. Cook RJ, Sitton JW, Waldher JT: Evidence for Pythium as a pathogen of
direct-drilled wheat in the Pacific Northwest. Plant Dis 1980, 64:102-103.
9. Larkin RP, English JT, Mihail JD: Effects of infection by Pythium spp. on the
root system morphology of alfalfa seedlings. Phytopathology 1995,
85:430-435.
10. Sumner DR, Gascho GJ, Johnson AW, Hook JE, Threadgill ED: Root diseases,
populations of soil fungi, and yield decline in continuous double-crop
corn. Plant Disease 1990, 74:704-710.
11. Snowdon AL: A color atlas of post-harvest diseases & disorders of fruits
and vegetables. CRC Press 1990, I:302.
12. van der Plaats-Niterink AJ: Monograph of the genus Pythium. Studies Mycol
1981, 21:242.
13. Martin FN, Loper JE: Soilborne plant diseases caused by Pythium spp.:
ecology, epidemiology, and prospects for biological control. Crit Rev
Plant Sci 1999, 18:111-181.
14. Saunders GA, Washburn JO, Egerter DE, Anderson JR: Pathogenicity of
fungi isolated from field-collected larvae of the western treehole
mosquito, Aedes sierrensis (Diptera: Culicidae). J Invertebr Pathol 1988,
52:360-363.
15. Mendoza L, Ajello L, McGinnis MR: Infections caused by the oomycetous
pathogen Pythium insidiosum. J Mycologie Medicale 1996, 6:151-164.

Page 18 of 22

16. Lévesque CA, deCock WAM: Molecular phylogeny and taxonomy of the
genus Pythium. Mycol Res 2004, 108:1363-1383.
17. Erwin DC, Ribeiro OK: Phytophthora Diseases Worldwide. St Paul, MN:
American Phytopathological Society 1996.
18. Cooke DE, Drenth A, Duncan JM, Wagels G, Brasier CM: A molecular
phylogeny of Phytophthora and related oomycetes. Fungal Genet Biol
2000, 30:17-32.
19. Panabières F, Ponchet M, Allasia V, Cardin L, Ricci P: Characterization of
border species among Pythiaceae: several Pythium isolates produce
elicitins, typical proteins from Phytophthora spp. Mycol Res 1996,
101:1459-1468.
20. Jiang RH, Tyler BM, Whisson SC, Hardham AR, Govers F: Ancient origin of
elicitin gene clusters in Phytophthora genomes. Mol Biol Evol 2006,
23:338-351.
21. Rosso ML, Rupe JC, Chen P, Mozzoni LA: Inheritance and genetic mapping
of resistance to Pythium damping-off caused by Pythium
aphanidermatum in ‘Archer’ soybean. Crop Sci 2008, 48:2215-2222.
22. Yang DE, Jin DM, Wang B, Zhang DS, Nguyen HT, Zhang CL, Chen SJ:
Characterization and mapping of Rpi1, a gene that confers dominant
resistance to stalk rot in maize. Mol Genet Genomics 2005, 274:229-234.
23. Latijnhouwers M, de Wit PJGM, Govers F: Oomycetes and fungi: similar
weaponry to attack plants. Trends Microbiol 2003, 11:462-469.
24. Francis DM, St Clair DA: Outcrossing in the homothallic oomycete,
Pythium ultimum, detected with molecular markers. Curr Genet 1993,
24:100-106.
25. Barr DJS, Warwick SI, Desaulniers NL: Isozyme variation, morphology, and
growth response to temperature in Pythium ultimum. Can J Bot 1996,
74:753-761.
26. Martin F: Phylogenetic relationships among some Pythium species
inferred from sequence analysis of the mitochondrially encoded
cytochrome oxidase II gene. Mycologia 2000, 92:711-727.
27. Tyler BM, Tripathy S, Zhang X, Dehal P, Jiang RH, Aerts A, Arredondo FD,
Baxter L, Bensasson D, Beynon JL, Chapman J, Damasceno CM,
Dorrance AE, Dou D, Dickerman AW, Dubchak IL, Garbelotto M, Gijzen M,
Gordon SG, Govers F, Grunwald NJ, Huang W, Ivors KL, Jones RW,
Kamoun S, Krampis K, Lamour KH, Lee MK, McDonald WH, Medina M, et al:
Phytophthora genome sequences uncover evolutionary origins and
mechanisms of pathogenesis. Science 2006, 313:1261-1266.
28. Haas BJ, Kamoun S, Zody MC, Jiang RH, Handsaker RE, Cano LM,
Grabherr M, Kodira CD, Raffaele S, Torto-Alalibo T, Bozkurt TO, Ah-Fong AM,
Alvarado L, Anderson VL, Armstrong MR, Avrova A, Baxter L, Beynon J,
Boevink PC, Bollmann SR, Bos JI, Bulone V, Cai G, Cakir C, Carrington JC,
Chawner M, Conti L, Costanzo S, Ewan R, Fahlgren N, et al: Genome
sequence and analysis of the Irish potato famine pathogen
Phytophthora infestans. Nature 2009, 461:393-398.
29. Jiang HY, Tripathy S, Govers F, Tyler BM: RXLR effector reservoir in two
Phytophthora species is dominated by a single rapidly evolving superfamily with more than 700 members. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008,
105:4874-4879.
30. Kamoun S: A catalogue of the effector secretome of plant pathogenic
oomycetes. Annu Rev Phytopathol 2006, 44:41-60.
31. Cheung F, Win J, Lang J, Hamilton J, Vuong H, Leach J, Kamoun S,
Levesque CA, Tisserat N, Buell CR: Analysis of the Pythium ultimum
transcriptome using Sanger and pyrosequencing approaches. BMC
Genomics 2008, 9:542.
32. Venter JC, Adams MD, Myers EW, Li PW, Mural RJ, Sutton GG, Smith HO,
Yandell M, Evans CA, Holt RA, Gocayne JD, Amanatides P, Ballew RM,
Huson DH, Wortman JR, Zhang Q, Kodira CD, Zheng XH, Chen L, Skupski M,
Subramanian G, Thomas PD, Zhang J, Gabor Miklos GL, Nelson C, Broder S,
Clark AG, Nadeau J, McKusick VA, Zinder N, et al: The sequence of the
human genome. Science 2001, 291:1304-1351.
33. Adams MD, Celniker SE, Holt RA, Evans CA, Gocayne JD, Amanatides PG,
Scherer SE, Li PW, Hoskins RA, Galle RF, George RA, Lewis SE, Richards S,
Ashburner M, Henderson SN, Sutton GG, Wortman JR, Yandell MD,
Zhang Q, Chen LX, Brandon RC, Rogers YH, Blazej RG, Champe M,
Pfeiffer BD, Wan KH, Doyle C, Baxter EG, Helt G, Nelson CR, et al: The
genome sequence of Drosophila melanogaster. Science 2000,
287:2185-2195.
34. Lander ES, Linton LM, Birren B, Nusbaum C, Zody MC, Baldwin J, Devon K,
Dewar K, Doyle M, FitzHugh W, Funke R, Gage D, Harris K, Heaford A,
Howland J, Kann L, Lehoczky J, LeVine R, McEwan P, McKernan K,

Lévesque et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R73
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/7/R73

35.

36.

37.
38.

39.

40.

41.

42.

43.
44.
45.

46.

47.

48.

49.

50.

51.

52.

53.
54.

Meldrim J, Mesirov JP, Miranda C, Morris W, Naylor J, Raymond C, Rosetti M,
Santos R, Sheridan A, Sougnez C, et al: Initial sequencing and analysis of
the human genome. Nature 2001, 409:860-921.
Waterston RH, Lindblad-Toh K, Birney E, Rogers J, Abril JF, Agarwal P,
Agarwala R, Ainscough R, Alexandersson M, An P, Antonarakis SE,
Attwood J, Baertsch R, Bailey J, Barlow K, Beck S, Berry E, Birren B, Bloom T,
Bork P, Botcherby M, Bray N, Brent MR, Brown DG, Brown SD, Bult C,
Burton J, Butler J, Campbell RD, Carninci P, et al: Initial sequencing and
comparative analysis of the mouse genome. Nature 2002, 420:520-562.
C. elegans Sequencing Consortium: Genome sequence of the nematode
C. elegans: a platform for investigating biology. Science 1998,
282:2012-2018.
Arabidopsis Genome Initiative: Analysis of the genome sequence of the
flowering plant Arabidopsis thaliana. Nature 2000, 408:796-815.
Goffeau A, Barrell BG, Bussey H, Davis RW, Dujon B, Feldmann H, Galibert F,
Hoheisel JD, Jacq C, Johnston M, Louis EJ, Mewes HW, Murakami Y,
Philippsen P, Tettelin H, Oliver SG: Life with 6000 genes. Science 1996,
274:546-567.
Galagan JE, Calvo SE, Borkovich KA, Selker EU, Read ND, Jaffe D,
FitzHugh W, Ma LJ, Smirnov S, Purcell S, Rehman B, Elkins T, Engels R,
Wang S, Nielsen CB, Butler J, Endrizzi M, Qui D, Ianakiev P, Bell-Pedersen D,
Nelson MA, Werner-Washburne M, Selitrennikoff CP, Kinsey JA, Braun EL,
Zelter A, Schulte U, Kothe GO, Jedd G, Mewes W, et al: The genome
sequence of the filamentous fungus Neurospora crassa. Nature 2003,
422:859-868.
Yandell M, Mungall CJ, Smith C, Prochnik S, Kaminker J, Hartzell G, Lewis S,
Rubin GM: Large-scale trends in the evolution of gene structures within
11 animal genomes. PLoS Comput Biol 2006, 2:e15.
Wang ET, Sandberg R, Luo S, Khrebtukova I, Zhang L, Mayr C, Kingsmore SF,
Schroth GP, Burge CB: Alternative isoform regulation in human tissue
transcriptomes. Nature 2008, 456:470-476.
Devos KM, Brown JKM, Bennetzen JL: Genome size reduction through
illegitimate recombination counteracts genome expansion in
Arabidopsis. Genome Res 2002, 12:1075-1079.
Eichler EE, Sankoff D: Structural dynamics of eukaryotic chromosome
evolution. Science 2003, 301:793-797.
Yoder JA, Walsh CP, Bestor TH: Cytosine methylation and the ecology of
intragenomic parasites. Trends Genet 1997, 13:335-340.
Judelson HS, Randall TA: Families of repeated DNA in the oomycete
Phytophthora infestans and their distribution within the genus. Genome
1998, 41:605-615.
Avila-Adame C, Gomez-Alpizar L, Zismann V, Jones KM, Buell CR, Beagle
Ristaino J: Mitochondrial genome sequences and molecular evolution of
the Irish potato famine pahtogen, Phytophthora infestans. Curr Genet
2005, 49:39-46.
Grayburn WS, Hudspeth DS, Gane MK, Hudspeth ME: The mitochondrial
genome of Saprolegnia ferax : organization, gene content, and
nucleotide sequence. Mycologia 2004, 96:981-989.
Martin FN, Bensasson D, Tyler BM, Boore JL: Mitochondrial genome
sequences and comparative genomics of Phytophthora ramorum and P.
sojae. Curr Genet 2007, 51:285-296.
Mi H, Lazareva-Ulitsky B, Loo R, Kejariwal A, Vandergriff J, Rabkin S, Guo N,
Muruganujan A, Doremieux O, Campbell MJ, Kitano H, Thomas PD: The
PANTHER database of protein families, subfamilies, functions and
pathways. Nucleic Acids Res 2005, 33:D284-288.
Boller T, He SY: Innate immunity in plants: an arms race between pattern
recognition receptors in plants and effectors in microbial pathogens.
Science 2009, 324:742-744.
Rosebrock TR, Zeng L, Brady JJ, Abramovitch RB, Xiao F, Martin GB: A
bacterial E3 ubiquitin ligase targets a host protein kinase to disrupt
plant immunity. Nature 2007, 448:370-374.
Zeng LR, Vega-Sanchez ME, Zhu T, Wang GL: Ubiquitination-mediated
protein degradation and modification: an emerging theme in plantmicrobe interactions. Cell Res 2006, 16:413-426.
Bendtsen JD, Nielsen H, von Heijne G, Brunak S: Improved prediction of
signal peptides: SignalP 3.0. J Mol Biol 2004, 340:783-795.
Birch PR, Armstrong M, Bos J, Boevink P, Gilroy EM, Taylor RM, Wawra S,
Pritchard L, Conti L, Ewan R, Whisson SC, van West P, Sadanandom A,
Kamoun S: Towards understanding the virulence functions of RXLR
effectors of the oomycete plant pathogen Phytophthora infestans. J Exp
Bot 2009, 60:1133-1140.

Page 19 of 22

55. Birch PR, Rehmany AP, Pritchard L, Kamoun S, Beynon JL: Trafficking arms:
oomycete effectors enter host plant cells. Trends Microbiol 2006, 14:8-11.
56. Torto TA, Li S, Styer A, Huitema E, Testa A, Gow NA, van West P, Kamoun S:
EST mining and functional expression assays identify extracellular
effector proteins from the plant pathogen Phytophthora. Genome Res
2003, 13:1675-1685.
57. Win J, Bos J, Krasileva K, Cano L, Chapparo-Garcia A, Ammar R,
Staskawicz BJ, Kamoun S: Adaptive evolution has targeted the C-terminal
domain of the RXLR effectors of plant pathogenic oomycetes. The Plant
Cell 2007, 19:2349-2369.
58. Chisholm ST, Coaker G, Day B, Staskawicz BJ: Host-microbe interactions:
shaping the evolution of the plant immune response. Cell 2006,
124:803-814.
59. Panstruga R, Dodds PN: Terrific protein traffic: the mystery of effector
protein delivery by filamentous plant pathogens. Science 2009,
324:748-750.
60. Dou D, Kale SD, Wang X, Jiang RHY, Bruce NA, Arredondo FD, Zhang X,
Tyler BM: RXLR-mediated entry of Phytophthora sojae effector Avr1b into
soybean cells does not require pathogen-encoded machinery. Plant Cell
2008, 20:1930-1947.
61. Whisson SC, Boevink PC, Moleleki L, Avrova AO, Morales JG, Gilroy EM,
Armstrong MR, Grouffaud S, van West P, Chapman S, Hein I, Toth IK,
Pritchard L, Birch PR: A translocation signal for delivery of oomycete
effector proteins into host plant cells. Nature 2007, 450:115-118.
62. Bangyeekhun E, Cerenius L, Soderhall K: Molecular cloning and
characterization of two serine proteinase genes from the crayfish plague
fungus, Aphanomyces astaci. J Invertebr Pathol 2001, 77:206-216.
63. Dou D, Kale SD, Wang X, Chen Y, Wang Q, Wang X, Jiang RHY,
Arredondo FD, Anderson R, Thakur P, McDowell J, Wang Y, Tyler BM:
Carboxy-terminal motifs common to many oomycete RXLR effectors are
required for avirulence and suppression of BAX-mediated programmed
cell death by Phytophthora sojae effector Avr1b. Plant Cell 2008,
20:1118-1133.
64. Gaulin E, Madoui MA, Bottin A, Jacquet C, Mathe C, Couloux A, Wincker P,
Dumas B: Transcriptome of Aphanomyces euteiches: New oomycete
putative pathogenicity factors and metabolic pathways. PLoS ONE 2008,
3:e1723.
65. Hein I, Gilroy EM, Armstrong MR, Birch PR: The zig-zag-zig in oomyceteplant interactions. Mol Plant Pathol 2009, 10:547-562.
66. Brunner F, Rosahl S, Lee J, Rudd JJ, Geiler C, Kauppinen S, Rasmussen G,
Scheel D, Nurnberger T: Pep-13, a plant defense-inducing pathogenassociated pattern from Phytophthora transglutaminases. EMBO J 2002,
21:6681-6688.
67. Gaulin E, Drame N, Lafitte C, Torto-Alalibo T, Martinez Y, AmelineTorregrosa C, Khatib M, Mazarguil H, Villalba-Mateos F, Kamoun S, Mazars C,
Dumas B, Bottin A, Esquerre-Tugaye MT, Rickauer M: Cellulose binding
domains of a Phytophthora cell wall protein are novel pathogenassociated molecular patterns. Plant Cell 2006, 18:1766-1777.
68. Cantarel BL, Coutinho PM, Rancurel C, Bernard T, Lombard V, Henrissat B:
The Carbohydrate-Active EnZymes database (CAZy): an expert resource
for glycogenomics. Nucleic Acids Res 2009, 37:D233-D238.
69. Baker CJ, Bateman DF: Cutin degradation by plant pathogenic fungi.
Phytopathology 1978, 68:1577-1584.
70. Campion C, Massiot P, Rouxel F: Aggressiveness and production of cellwall degrading enzymes by Pythium violae, Pythium sulcatum and
Pythium ultimum, responsible for cavity spot on carrots. Eur J Plant Pathol
1997, 103:725-735.
71. Belbahri L, Calmin G, Mauch F, Andersson JO: Evolution of the cutinase
gene family: evidence for lateral gene transfer of a candidate
Phytophthora virulence factor. Gene 2008, 408:1-8.
72. Muñoz CI, Bailey AM: A cutinase-encoding gene from Phytophthora
capsici isolated by differential-display RT-PCR. Curr Genet 1998,
33:225-230.
73. Jiang RH, Tyler BM, Govers F: Comparative analysis of Phytophthora genes
encoding secreted proteins reveals conserved synteny and lineagespecific gene duplications and deletions. Mol Plant Microbe Interact 2006,
19:1311-1321.
74. Chérif M, Benhamou N, Bélanger RR: Ultrastructural and cytochemical
studies of fungal development and host reactions in cucumber plants
infected by Pythium ultimum. Physiol Mol Plant Pathol 1991, 39:353-375.

Lévesque et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R73
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/7/R73

75. Torto TA, Rauser L, Kamoun S: The pipg1 gene of the oomycete
Phytophthora infestans encodes a fungal-like endopolygalacturonase.
Curr Genet 2002, 40:385-390.
76. Wu CH, Yan HZ, Liu LF, Liou RF: Functional characterization of a gene
family encoding polygalacturonases in Phytophthora parasitica. Mol Plant
Microbe Interact 2008, 21:480-489.
77. Yan HZ, Liou RF: Cloning and analysis of pppg1, an inducible
endopolygalacturonase gene from the oomycete plant pathogen
Phytophthora parasitica. Fungal Genet Biol 2005, 42:339-350.
78. Götesson A, Marshall JS, Jones DA, Hardham AR: Characterization and
evolutionary analysis of a large polygalacturonase gene family in the
oomycete plant pathogen Phytophthora cinnamomi. Mol Plant Microbe
Interact 2002, 15:907-921.
79. Moore LD, Couch HB: Influence of calcium nutrition on pectolytic and
cellulolytic enzyme activity of extracts of highland bentgrass foliage
blighted by Pythium ultimum. Phytopathology 1968, 58:833-838.
80. Bartnicki-Garcia S: Cell wall chemistry, morphogenesis, and taxonomy of
fungi. Annu Rev Microbiol 1968, 22:87-108.
81. Blaschek W, Käsbauer J, Kraus J, Franz G: Pythium aphanidermatum:
culture, cell-wall composition, and isolation and structure of antitumour
storage and solubilised cell-wall (1->3), (1- >6)-beta-D-glucans. Carbohydr
Res 1992, 231:293-307.
82. Grenville-Briggs LJ, Anderson VL, Fugelstad J, Avrova AO, Bouzenzana J,
Williams A, Wawra S, Whisson SC, Birch PR, Bulone V, van West P: Cellulose
synthesis in Phytophthora infestans is required for normal appressorium
formation and successful infection of potato. Plant Cell 2008, 20:720-738.
83. Zevenhuizen LP, Bartnicki-Garcia S: Structure and role of a soluble
cytoplasmic glucan from Phytophthora cinnamomi. J Gen Microbiol 1970,
61:183-188.
84. Wang MC, Bartnicki-Garcia S: Distrubution of mycolaminarans and cell
wall b-glucans in the life cycle of Phytophthora. Exp Mycol 1980,
4:269-280.
85. Cohen Y, Coffey MD: Systemic fungicides and the control of oomycetes.
Annu Rev Phytopathol 1986, 24:311-338.
86. Davidse L: Phenylamide fungicides: Mechanism of action and resistance.
Fungicide Resistance in North America St Paul, Minnesota: American
Phytopathological SocietyDelp CJ 1988, 63-65.
87. Bauer BE, Wolfger H, Kuchler K: Inventory and function of yeast ABC
proteins: about sex, stress, pleiotropic drug and heavy metal resistance.
Biochim Biophys Acta 1999, 1461:217-236.
88. Cannon RD, Lamping E, Holmes AR, Niimi K, Baret PV, Keniya MV, Tanabe K,
Niimi M, Goffeau A, Monk BC: Efflux-mediated antifungal drug resistance.
Clin Microbiol Rev 2009, 22:291-321.
89. Connolly MS, Sakihama Y, Phuntumart V, Jiang Y, Warren F, Mourant L,
Morris PF: Heterologous expression of a pleiotropic drug resistance
transporter from Phytophthora sojae in yeast transporter mutants. Curr
Genet 2005, 48:356-365.
90. Katzmann DJ, Hallstrom TC, Voet M, Wysock W, Golin J, Volckaert G, MoyeRowley WS: Expression of an ATP-binding cassette transporter-encoding
gene (YOR1) is required for oligomycin resistance in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. Mol Cell Biol 1995, 15:6875-6883.
91. Kolaczkowski M, Kolaczowska A, Luczynski J, Witek S, Goffeau A: In vivo
characterization of the drug resistance profile of the major ABC
transporters and other components of the yeast pleiotropic drug
resistance network. Microb Drug Resist 1998, 4:143-158.
92. Judelson H, Senthil G: Investigating the role of ABC transporters in
multifungicide insensitivity in Phytophthora infestans. Mol Plant Pathol
2006, 7:17-29.
93. Goldberg AL: Protein degradation and protection against misfolded or
damaged proteins. Nature 2003, 426:895-899.
94. Staszczak M: The role of the ubiquitin-proteasome system in the
response of the ligninolytic fungus Trametes versicolor to nitrogen
deprivation. Fungal Genet Biol 2008, 45:328-337.
95. Dreschler C: Zoospore development from oospores of Pythium ultimum
and Pythium debaryanum and its relation to rootlet-tip discoloration.
Plant Disease Reporter 1946, 30:226-227.
96. Hulpiau P, van Roy F: Molecular evolution of the cadherin superfamily. Int
J Biochem Cell Biol 2009, 41:349-369.
97. Cao L, Yan X, Borysenko CW, Blair HC, Wu C, Yu L: CHDL: a cadherin-like
domain in Proteobacteria and Cyanobacteria. FEMS Microbiol Lett 2005,
251:203-209.

Page 20 of 22

98. Finn RD, Tate J, Mistry J, Coggill PC, Sammut SJ, Hotz HR, Ceric G,
Forslund K, Eddy SR, Sonnhammer EL, Bateman A: The Pfam protein
families database. Nucleic Acids Res 2008, 36:D281-288.
99. Nollet F, Kools P, van Roy F: Phylogenetic analysis of the cadherin
superfamily allows identification of six major subfamilies besides several
solitary members. J Mol Biol 2000, 299:551-572.
100. Saitou N, Nei M: The neighbor-joining method: a new method for
reconstructing phylogenetic trees. Mol Biol Evol 1987, 4:406-425.
101. Guindon S, Gascuel O: A simple, fast, and accurate algorithm to estimate
large phylogenies by maximum likelihood. Syst Biol 2003, 52:696-704.
102. Katoh K, Toh H: Recent developments in the MAFFT multiple sequence
alignment program. Brief Bioinform 2008, 9:286-298.
103. PHRINGE.. [http://genomeprojectsolutions.com/PHRINGE_pipeline.html].
104. Boudjeko T, Andème-Onzighi C, Vicré M, Balangé A, Ndoumou D,
Driouich A: Loss of pectin is an early event during infection of cocoyam
roots by Pythium myriotylum. Planta 2006, 223:271-282.
105. Abad P, Gouzy J, Aury JM, Castagnone-Sereno P, Danchin EG, Deleury E,
Perfus-Barbeoch L, Anthouard V, Artiguenave F, Blok VC, Caillaud MC,
Coutinho PM, Dasilva C, De Luca F, Deau F, Esquibet M, Flutre T,
Goldstone JV, Hamamouch N, Hewezi T, Jaillon O, Jubin C, Leonetti P,
Magliano M, Maier TR, Markov GV, McVeigh P, Pesole G, Poulain J,
Robinson-Rechavi M, et al: Genome sequence of the metazoan plantparasitic nematode Meloidogyne incognita. Nat Biotechnol 2008,
26:909-915.
106. Margulies M, Egholm M, Altman WE, Attiya S, Bader JS, Bemben LA, Berka J,
Braverman MS, Chen YJ, Chen Z, Dewell SB, Du L, Fierro JM, Gomes XV,
Godwin BC, He W, Helgesen S, Ho CH, Irzyk GP, Jando SC, Alenquer ML,
Jarvie TP, Jirage KB, Kim JB, Knight JR, Lanza JR, Leamon JH, Lefkowitz SM,
Lei M, Li J, et al: Genome sequencing in microfabricated high-density
picolitre reactors. Nature 2005, 437:376-380.
107. Goldberg SM, Johnson J, Busam D, Feldblyum T, Ferriera S, Friedman R,
Halpern A, Khouri H, Kravitz SA, Lauro FM, Li K, Rogers YH, Strausberg R,
Sutton G, Tallon L, Thomas T, Venter E, Frazier M, Venter JC: A Sanger/
pyrosequencing hybrid approach for the generation of high-quality
draft assemblies of marine microbial genomes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2006, 103:11240-11245.
108. Myers EW, Sutton GG, Delcher AL, Dew IM, Fasulo DP, Flanigan MJ,
Kravitz SA, Mobarry CM, Reinert KH, Remington KA, Anson EL, Bolanos RA,
Chou HH, Jordan CM, Halpern AL, Lonardi S, Beasley EM, Brandon RC,
Chen L, Dunn PJ, Lai Z, Liang Y, Nusskern DR, Zhan M, Zhang Q, Zheng X,
Rubin GM, Adams MD, Venter JC: A whole-genome assembly of
Drosophila. Science 2000, 287:2196-2204.
109. Miller JR, Delcher AL, Koren S, Venter E, Walenz BP, Brownley A, Johnson J,
Li K, Mobarry C, Sutton G: Aggressive assembly of pyrosequencing reads
with mates. Bioinformatics 2008, 24:2818-2824.
110. Cantarel BL, Korf I, Robb SM, Parra G, Ross E, Moore B, Holt C, Sanchez
Alvarado A, Yandell M: MAKER: an easy-to-use annotation pipeline
designed for emerging model organism genomes. Genome Res 2008,
18:188-196.
111. Korf I: Gene finding in novel genomes. BMC Bioinformatics 2004, 5:59.
112. Salamov AA, Solovyev VV: Ab initio gene finding in Drosophila genomic
DNA. Genome Res 2000, 10:516-522.
113. Lomsadze A, Ter-Hovhannisyan V, Chernoff YO, Borodovsky M: Gene
identification in novel eukaryotic genomes by self-training algorithm.
Nucleic Acids Res 2005, 33:6494-6506.
114. Boguski MS, Lowe TMJ, Tolstoshev CM: dbEST - database for “expressed
sequence tags”. Nat Genet 1993, 4:332-333.
115. Bairoch A, Apweiler R: The SWISS-PROT protein sequence database and
its supplement TrEMBL in 2000. Nucleic Acids Res 2000, 28:45-48.
116. UniProt Consortium: The Universal Protein Resource (UniProt). Nucleic
Acids Res 2007, 35:D193-197.
117. Jurka J, Kapitonov VV, Pavlicek A, Klonowski P, Kohany O, Walichiewicz J:
Repbase Update, a database of eukaryotic repetitive elements. Cytogenet
Genome Res 2005, 110:462-467.
118. Smith CD, Edgar RC, Yandell MD, Smith DR, Celniker SE, Myers EW,
Karpen GH: Improved repeat identification and masking in Dipterans.
Gene 2007, 389:1-9.
119. Edgar RC, Myers EW: PILER: identification and classification of genomic
repeats. Bioinformatics 2005, 21 Suppl 1:i152-i158.
120. Apweiler R, Attwood TK, Bairoch A, Bateman A, Birney E, Biswas M,
Bucher P, Cerutti L, Corpet F, Croning MDR, Durbin R, Falquet L,

Lévesque et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R73
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/7/R73

121.

122.

123.

124.
125.
126.

127.

128.
129.

130.

131.
132.

133.
134.
135.

136.
137.

138.
139.
140.
141.
142.
143.
144.

145.

Fleischmann W, Gouzy J, Hermjakob H, Hulo N, Jonassen I, Kahn D,
Kanapin A, Karavidopoulou Y, Lopez R, Marx B, Mulder NJ, Oinn TM,
Pagni M, Servant F, Sigrist CJA, Zdobnov EM: The InterPro database, an
integrated documentation resource for protein families, domains and
functional sites. Nucleic Acids Res 2001, 29:37-40.
Quevillon E, Silventoinen V, Pillai S, Harte N, Mulder N, Apweiler R, Lopez R:
InterProScan: protein domains identifier. Nucleic Acids Res 2005, 33:
W116-120.
Mulder NJ, Apweiler R, Attwood TK, Bairoch A, Bateman A, Binns D,
Biswas M, Bradley P, Bork P, Bucher P, Copley R, Courcelle E, Durbin R,
Falquet L, Fleischmann W, Gouzy J, Griffith-Jones S, Haft D, Hermjakob H,
Hulo N, Kahn D, Kanapin A, Krestyaninova M, Lopez R, Letunic I, Orchard S,
Pagni M, Peyruc D, Ponting CP, et al: InterPro: An integrated
documentation resource for protein families, domains and functional
sites. Brief Bioinform 2002, 3:225-235.
Lewis SE, Searle SM, Harris N, Gibson M, Lyer V, Richter J, Wiel C,
Bayraktaroglir L, Birney E, Crosby MA, Kaminker JS, Matthews BB,
Prochnik SE, Smithy CD, Tupy JL, Rubin GM, Misra S, Mungall CJ, Clamp ME:
Apollo: a sequence annotation editor. Genome Biol 2002, 3:RESEARCH0082.
Altschul SF, Gish W, Miller W, Meyers EW, Lipman DJ: Basic Local
Alignment Search Tool. J Mol Biol 1990, 215:403-410.
Rice P, Longden I, Bleasby A: EMBOSS: the European Molecular Biology
Open Software Suite. Trends Genet 2000, 16:276-277.
Emanuelsson O, Brunak S, von Heijne G, Nielsen H: Locating proteins in
the cell using TargetP, SignalP and related tools. Nat Protoc 2007,
2:953-971.
Krogh A, Larsson B, von Heijne G, Sonnhammer EL: Predicting
transmembrane protein topology with a hidden Markov model:
application to complete genomes. J Mol Biol 2001, 305:567-580.
HMMER.. [http://hmmer.org/].
Langmead B, Trapnell C, Pop M, Salzberg SL: Ultrafast and memoryefficient alignment of short DNA sequences to the human genome.
Genome Biol 2009, 10:R25.
Mortazavi A, Williams BA, McCue K, Schaeffer L, Wold B: Mapping and
quantifying mammalian transcriptomes by RNA-Seq. Nat Methods 2008,
5:621-628.
Enright AJ, Van Dongen S, Ouzounis CA: An efficient algorithm for largescale detection of protein families. Nucleic Acids Res 2002, 30:1575-1584.
Bailey TL, Elkan C: Fitting a mixture model by expectation maximization
to discover motifs in biopolymers. Proc Int Conf Intell Syst Mol Biol 1994,
2:28-36.
Edgar RC: MUSCLE: multiple sequence alignment with high accuracy and
high throughput. Nucleic Acids Res 2004, 32:1792-1797.
Wernersson R, Pedersen AG: RevTrans: Multiple alignment of coding DNA
from aligned amino acid sequences. Nucleic Acids Res 2003, 31:3537-3539.
Stamatakis A: RAxML-VI-HPC: maximum likelihood-based phylogenetic
analyses with thousands of taxa and mixed models. Bioinformatics 2006,
22:2688-2690.
WebLogo3.. [http://weblogo.berkeley.edu].
Thomas PD, Campbell MJ, Kejariwal A, Mi H, Karlak B, Daverman R,
Diemer K, Muruganujan A, Narechania A: PANTHER: a library of protein
families and subfamilies indexed by function. Genome Res 2003,
13:2129-2141.
PANTHER Database.. [http://www.pantherdb.org].
PANTHER Classification System.. [http://www.pantherdb.org/tools/
compareToRefListForm.jsp].
PANTHER ftp site.. [ftp://ftp.pantherdb.org/genome/pthr7.0].
Thomas PD: GIGA: a simple, efficient algorithm for gene tree inference in
the genomic age. BMC Bioinformatics 11:312.
Gams KW, Hoekstra ES, Aptroot A: CBS Course of Mycology. Baarn, The
Netherlands: Centraalbureau voor Schimmelcultures 1998.
Letunic I, Bork P: Interactive Tree Of Life (iTOL): an online tool for
phylogenetic tree display and annotation. Bioinformatics 2007, 23:127-128.
Campion C, Vian B, Nicole M, Rouxel F: A comparative study of carrot root
tissue colonization and cell wall degradation by Pythium violae and
Pythium ultimum, two pathogens responsible for cavity spot. Can J
Microbiol 1998, 44:221-230.
Buckeridge MS, dos Santos HP, Tiné MA: Mobilisation of storage cell wall
polysaccharides in seeds. Plant Physiol Biochem 2000, 38:141-156.

Page 21 of 22

146. Doblin MS, Vergara CE, Read S, Newbigin E, Bacic A: Plant cell wall
biosynthesis: making the bricks. The Plant Cell Ithaca, New York: Blackwell
Publishing Ltd - CRC PressRose JKC 2003, 8:183-222.
147. Denisov G, Walenz B, Halpern AL, Miller J, Axelrod N, Levy S, Sutton G:
Consensus generation and variant detection by Celera Assembler.
Bioinformatics 2008, 24:1035-1040.
148. Levy S, Sutton G, Ng PC, Feuk L, Halpern AL, Walenz BP, Axelrod N,
Huang J, Kirkness EF, Denisov G, Lin Y, MacDonald JR, Pang AW, Shago M,
Stockwell TB, Tsiamouri A, Bafna V, Bansal V, Kravitz SA, Busam DA,
Beeson KY, McIntosh TC, Remington KA, Abril JF, Gill J, Borman J,
Rogers YH, Frazier ME, Scherer SW, Strausberg RL, et al: The diploid
genome sequence of an individual human. PLoS Biol 2007, 5:e254.
149. Brunner F, Wirtz W, Rose JK, Darvill AG, Govers F, Scheel D, Nürnberger T: A
beta-glucosidase/xylosidase from the phytopathogenic oomycete,
Phytophthora infestans. Phytochemistry 2002, 59:689-696.
150. Chérif M, Benhamou N, Bélanger RR: Occurence of cellulose and chitin in
the hyphal walls of Pythium ultimum: a comparative study with other
plant pathogenic fungi. CanJMicrobiol 1993, 39:213-222.
151. Cosgrove DJ: Loosening of plant cell walls by expansins. Nature 2000,
407:321-326.
152. Espagne E, Lespinet O, Malagnac F, Da Silva C, Jaillon O, Porcel BM,
Couloux A, Aury JM, Segurens B, Poulain J, Anthouard V, Grossetete S,
Khalili H, Coppin E, Dequard-Chablat M, Picard M, Contamine V, Arnaise S,
Bourdais A, Berteaux-Lecellier V, Gautheret D, de Vries RP, Battaglia E,
Coutinho PM, Danchin EG, Henrissat B, Khoury RE, Sainsard-Chanet A,
Boivin A, Pinan-Lucarre B, et al: The genome sequence of the model
ascomycete fungus Podospora anserina. Genome Biol 2008, 9:R77.
153. Coutinho PM, Anderson MR, Kolenova K, vanKuyk PA, Benoit I, Gruben BS,
Trejo-Aguilar B, Visser H, van Solingen P, Pakula T, Seiboth B, Battaglia E,
Aguilar-Osorio G, de Jong JF, Ohm RA, Aguilar M, Henrissat B, Nielsen J,
Stålbrand H, de Vries RP: Post-genomic insights into the plant
polysaccharide degradation potential of Aspergillus nidulans and
comparison to Aspergillus niger and Aspergillus oryzae. Fungal Genet Biol
2009, 46 Suppl 1:S161-S169.
154. Agnihotri VP, Vaartaja O: The influence of nitrogenous compounds on
growth of 711-727 species. Can J Microbiol 1967, 13:1509-1519.
155. Gaulin E, Jauneau A, Villalba F, Rickauer M, Esquerré-Tugayé MT, Bottin A:
The CBEL glycoprotein of Phytophthora parasitica var-nicotianae is
involved in cell wall deposition and adhesion to cellulosic substrates. J
Cell Sci 2002, 115:4565-4575.
156. Torto-Alalibo T, Tian M, Gajendran K, Waugh M, van West P, Kamoun S:
Expressed sequence tags from the oomycete fish pathogen Saprolegnia
parasitica reveals putative virulence factors. BMC Microbiol 2005, 5:46.
157. Tian M, Benedetti B, Kamoun S: A second Kazal-like protease inhibitor
from Phytophthora infestans inhibits and interacts with the apoplastic
pathogenesis-related protease P69B of tomato. Plant Physiol 2005,
138:1785-1793.
158. Song J, Win J, Tian M, Schornack S, Kaschani F, Ilyas M, van der Hoorn RA,
Kamoun S: Apoplastic effectors secreted by two unrelated eukaryotic
plant pathogens target the tomato defense protease Rcr3. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2009, 106:1654-1659.
159. Tian M, Huitema E, Da Cunha L, Torto-Alalibo T, Kamoun S: A Kazal-like
extracellular serine protease inhibitor from Phytophthora infestans
targets the tomato pathogenesis-related protease P69B. J Biol Chem
2004, 279:26370-26377.
160. Tian M, Win J, Song J, van der Hoorn R, van der Knaap E, Kamoun S: A
Phytophthora infestans cystatin-like protein targets a novel tomato
papain-like apoplastic protease. Plant Physiol 2007, 143:364-377.
161. Bouzidi MF, Parlange F, Nicolas P, Mouzeyar S: Expressed sequence tags
from the oomycete Plasmopara halstedii, an obligate parasite of the
sunflower. BMC Microbiol 2007, 7:110.
162. Meijer HJ, Govers F: Genomewide analysis of phospholipid signaling
genes in Phytophthora spp.: novelties and a missing link. Mol Plant
Microbe Interact 2006, 19:1337-1347.
163. Werck-Reichhart D, Feyereisen R: Cytochromes P450: a success story.
Genome Biol 2000, 1, REVIEWS3003.
164. Iordachescu M, Imai R: Trehalose biosynthesis in response to abiotic
stresses. J Integr Plant Biol 2008, 50:1223-1229.
165. Vogel G, Aeschbacher RA, Muller J, Boller T, Wiemken A: Trehalose-6phosphate phosphatases from Arabidopsis thaliana: identification by

Lévesque et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R73
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/7/R73

Page 22 of 22

functional complementation of the yeast tps2 mutant. Plant J 1998,
13:673-683.
166. Moustafa A, Beszteri B, Maier UG, Bowler C, Valentin K, Bhattacharya D:
Genomic footprints of a cryptic plastid endosymbiosis in diatoms..
Science 2009, 324:1724-1726.
doi:10.1186/gb-2010-11-7-r73
Cite this article as: Lévesque et al.: Genome sequence of the
necrotrophic plant pathogen Pythium ultimum reveals original
pathogenicity mechanisms and effector repertoire. Genome Biology 2010
11:R73.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
