<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Molecular analysis of the diversity of vaginal microbiota associated with bacterial vaginosis</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Genomics 2010 11:488. doi:10.1186/1471-2164-11-488"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Zongxin Ling"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Ling et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:488
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/488

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Molecular analysis of the diversity of vaginal
microbiota associated with bacterial vaginosis
Zongxin Ling1, Jianming Kong1,2, Fang Liu1, Haibin Zhu3, Xiaoyi Chen1, Yuezhu Wang4, Lanjuan Li1,
Karen E Nelson5, Yaxian Xia3*, Charlie Xiang1,5*

Abstract
Background: Bacterial vaginosis (BV) is an ecological disorder of the vaginal microbiota that affects millions of
women annually, and is associated with numerous adverse health outcomes including pre-term birth and the
acquisition of sexually transmitted infections. However, little is known about the overall structure and composition
of vaginal microbial communities; most of the earlier studies focused on predominant vaginal bacteria in the
process of BV. In the present study, the diversity and richness of vaginal microbiota in 50 BV positive and
50 healthy women from China were investigated using culture-independent PCR-denaturing gradient gel
electrophoresis (DGGE) and barcoded 454 pyrosequencing methods, and validated by quantitative PCR.
Results: Our data demonstrated that there was a profound shift in the absolute and relative abundances of bacterial
species present in the vagina when comparing populations associated with healthy and diseased conditions. In spite
of significant interpersonal variations, the diversity of vaginal microbiota in the two groups could be clearly divided
into two clusters. A total of 246,359 high quality pyrosequencing reads was obtained for evaluating bacterial diversity
and 24,298 unique sequences represented all phylotypes. The most predominant phyla of bacteria identified in the
vagina belonged to Firmicutes, Bacteroidetes, Actinobacteria and Fusobacteria. The higher number of phylotypes in BV
positive women over healthy is consistent with the results of previous studies and a large number of low-abundance
taxa which were missed in previous studies were revealed. Although no single bacterium could be identified as a
specific marker for healthy over diseased conditions, three phyla - Bacteroidetes, Actinobacteria and Fusobacteria, and
eight genera including Gardnerella, Atopobium, Megasphaera, Eggerthella, Aerococcus, Leptotrichia/Sneathia, Prevotella
and Papillibacter were strongly associated with BV (p < 0.05). These genera are potentially excellent markers and
could be used as targets for clinical BV diagnosis by molecular approaches.
Conclusions: The data presented here have clearly profiled the overall structure of vaginal communities and
clearly demonstrated that BV is associated with a dramatic increase in the taxonomic richness and diversity of
vaginal microbiota. The study also provides the most comprehensive picture of the vaginal community structure
and the bacterial ecosystem, and significantly contributes to the current understanding of the etiology of BV.

Background
An enormous number of microorganisms, the vast
majority of which are bacterial species, are known to
colonize and form complex communities, or microbiota,
at various sites within and on the human body [1,2].
Microbial cells that thrive on and within the human
* Correspondence: xya55@sohu.com; cxiang@zju.edu.cn
1
State Key Laboratory for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious Diseases,
the First Affiliated Hospital, College of Medicine, Zhejiang University,
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, 310003, China
3
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, the First Affiliated Hospital,
College of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, 310003, China
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

body are approximately 10 times more numerous than
our own cells and contain, in aggregate, about 100 times
more genes, leading to the suggestion that humans and
our microbial symbionts be considered “supraorganisms”
[3]. A growing body of evidence suggests that the composition and function of the microbiota in different
human body habitats plays a vital role in human development, physiology, immunity, and nutrition [1,4-8]. As
one of the important human- microbial habitats, the
vagina harbors different species of bacteria in very large
numbers that are known to have important effects on
health [9]. Many of these bacteria such as hydrogen

© 2010 Ling et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Ling et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:488
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/488

peroxide- and lactic acid- producing Lactobacillus spp.
are not simply passive or transient colonizers, but rather
appear to be adapted to the specific environment of the
vagina [10-12]. These resident species effectively constitute an ecological guild - a group of species that have
similar requirements and play a similar role within a
community - and maintaining high numbers of these
populations is a hallmark of healthy conditions [13].
The dramatic changes in the types and relative proportions of the microbial species in the vagina could lead to
a diseased state [14]. One important component of the
Human Microbiome Project (HMP), states that it is
necessary to explore the bacterial diversity of vagina in
health and disease and to understand whether changes
in the vaginal microbiome can be correlated with
changes in human health [2].
BV is the most prevalent lower genital tract infection
in women of reproductive age throughout the world
[15-18]. It affects millions of women annually [19] and
is strongly associated with several adverse health outcomes, including preterm labor and delivery [20,21], pelvic inflammatory disease [22], postpartum and
postabortal endometritis [23], and increased susceptibility to infection with various pathogens, such as Neisseria
gonorrhoeae, Trichomonas vaginalis, Chlamydia trachomatis, Candida, and even HPV, HSV-2, and HIV-1
[24-30]. Abnormal vaginal discharge may be the only
symptom of BV, and many affected women are asymptomatic [31]. Zhou et al. have suggested that a certain
number of women without any symptoms do have vaginal communities that resemble BV [13]. Previous studies
have demonstrated that BV is a polymicrobial syndrome,
characterized by a shift in vaginal microbiota from a
predominant population of Lactobacillus spp. [14,32] to
their gradual or total replacement with anaerobes such
as Gardnerella vaginalis [33], Morbiluncus spp. [34],
Prevotella spp. [14], Mycoplasma hominis [21] and the
recently identified metronidazole resistant Atopobium
vaginae [35]. These species are however also found in
subjects who do not suffer from BV with low copy numbers and thus cannot be used as a specific marker for
disease.
Because of our inability to cultivate most of the
microbial species that reside in the vagina, we have not
fully understood the taxonomic composition of the vaginal microbiota, its community structure, and ultimately,
its function. With the advent of new molecular techniques, we have been able to investigate bacterial diversity
in different microhabitats using molecular fingerprinting
methods and sequence analysis of microbial small subunit ribosomal (r) RNA genes (16S rRNA) and other universal targets (such as cpn60) [13,36,37]. Among these
molecular fingerprinting methods, PCR-DGGE represents a rapid and reliable technique to identify the

Page 2 of 16

predominant microbiota in various ecological niches
[38,39]. Sequencing of 16S rRNA genes from different
samples by constructing clone libraries, (typically at
most a few thousand clones from a low number of individuals), has revolutionized our understanding of microbial systematics and diversity [40,41]. However, this
cloning and sequencing method identifies only the predominant microorganisms in a sample. Detection of
low-abundance taxa requires analysis of datasets that are
orders of magnitude larger than those currently available
[42]. The recently available high-throughput 454 pyrosequencing now allows for very in-depth sequencing and
analysis of microbial community composition, and also
allow for a dramatic increase in throughput via parallel
in-depth analysis of a large number of samples with limited sample processing and lower costs [43-45].This
technique has been successfully used in various ecosystems including deep mines [46], soil [47], fermented
seafood [48], skin [49], chronic wounds [50], and oral
microbiota [42].
In order to better estimate the diversity of the vaginal
community of the healthy and BV positive women, and
to identify the key population changes relevant to BV
development, we first utilized PCR-DGGE with broad
range primers that correspond to the bacterial 16S
rRNA hypervariable V3 region to investigate the predominant vaginal microbiota in these populations. We
then used massively parallel pyrosequencing, combined
with a DNA barcoding, to characterize the overall structure and composition of the vaginal bacterial community in 50 BV and 50 CN (non-infected healthy women;
CN) individuals in China. We also quantified the abundance of total Bacteria and bacterial subgroups that
associated significantly with BV using quantitative PCR
(qPCR). Our data provides a more comprehensive picture over current knowledge of the community structure
of the vaginal bacterial ecosystem. These results also
help to define the potential pathogenic populations in
BV and provide new insights into the etiology and treatment of the disease.

Results
PCR-DGGE analysis of vaginal bacterial communities

PCR-DGGE is a useful tool to examine microbial diversity and community structure in specific microhabitats
and has been widely applied for comparative analysis of
parallel samples. The differences of DGGE profiles in
the same community DNA samples might be caused by
different primer sets selected targeting the different
hypervariable regions of the 16S rRNA genes. The
hypervariable region(s) chosen for amplification can
influence the PCR-DGGE profiles and diversity indices
produced from community DNA samples, and even
subtle differences in primer sequences can result in

Ling et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:488
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/488

substantially different profiles and downstream assessments of microbial diversity. By comparing different
hypervariable regions of 16S rRNA genes for PCRDGGE, Yu and Morrison (2004) have shown that the
DGGE profiles of the V3 region were the most reliable
[51]. As shown in Figure 1 A, the PCR-DGGE profiles
of BV and CN revealed significant differences in the
overall structure and composition of the vaginal community by targeting the V3 region of 16S rDNA. Bacterial diversity was higher in the BV group than that in the
CN group. DGGE profiles were significantly different
from one another and varied with the participants. Figure 1 B depicts the results of Ward’s analysis in which
the Dice coefficient for measuring similarity in banding
patterns was applied. The BV and CN groups displayed
a statistically significant clustering of profiles, cluster Ⅰ
(BV group) and cluster II (CN group). 11 dominant
fragments that could represent the pattern of the DGGE
profiles were excised from the DGGE lanes, reamplified,
sequenced and identified by BLAST with the 16S rRNA
V3 region sequences. Lactobacillus was the predominant
genus in the CN group and bacterial diversity of the BV
group was far more complex and was dominated by A.
vaginae, uncultured Sneathia sp., Fusobacterium nucleatum subsp., uncultured Eggerthella sp., uncultured
Megasphaera sp., Clostridium acetobutylicum and Clostridium thermocellum. From these results, we propose

Page 3 of 16

that PCR-DGGE analysis could be used to monitor the
dramatic shift of bacterial transition and routinely
defined BV in laboratory.
Sequence analysis by pyrosequencing

From 50 BV and 50 CN individuals, more than 321,400
PCR amplicons of the V3 hyper-variable regions of the
16S rRNA gene were sequenced, of which a total of
246,359 pyrosequencing tags passed quality control,
and were included in our data analysis. Specifically, we
obtained 90,227 sequences from the BV group and
156,132 sequences from the CN group respectively.
The average length of the sequences was 145 bp after
trimming the primers and the average number of
sequence reads was 2,464 per sample. The total number of unique sequences from the two groups was
24,298 and represented all phylotypes. It was unexpected that we obtained more sequences from CN
samples than from BV samples (p < 0.05, data not
shown) because the same amount of bacterial DNA
was used for preparing the library for pyrosequencing.
It can be assumed that the biased ratio of the two
groups was not only because of an inefficiency in the
emPCR technique for different species of vaginal bacteria, but also because of the impurities or unknown
compounds disturbing the accurate measurement of
DNA amount [48,52].

Figure 1 Figure 1 PCR-DGGE analysis of the predominant bacterial communities in vaginal swabs from bacterial vaginosis (BV group)
and healthy women (CN group). (A) Each lane of the PCR-DGGE gel represented one subject which was selected in its group at random. M
represents a marker constructed in this study with the identified bands to facilitate the interpretation of the figure. Bands: 1: Uncultured Sneathia
sp.; 2: Fusobacterium nucleatum subsp. nucleatum ATCC 25586; 3: Clostridium thermocellum ATCC 27405; 4: Lactobacillus iners; 5: Clostridium
acetobutylicum; 6: Lactobacillus iners; 7: Clostridium thermocellum ATCC 27405; 8: Atopobium vaginae; 9: uncultured Eggerthella sp.; 10:
uncultured Megasphaera sp.; 11: Lactobacillus crispatus. (B) Dendrogram of the DGGE profiles shown in panel A.

Ling et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:488
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/488

The diversity of vaginal microbiota in BV and CN
individuals

The numbers of species detected in a sample, or the
numbers of organisms discerned at any given phylogenetic level, are strongly affected by the number of
sequences analyzed. Rarefaction analysis provides a
powerful method for evaluating the diversity and richness of different microhabitats in the human body. Rarefaction curves were generated for unique, 1%, 2%, 3%,
5% and 10% sequence dissimilarities as described previously [47]. As shown in Figure 2, we found that there
was much more richness in bacterial diversity in BV
individuals than in CN individuals at the 3% dissimilarity level. The number of OTUs continued to increase at
the 3% or 5% dissimilarity level in the BV group, however, the rarefaction curve in the CN group almost
reached the saturation level, which indicated that additional sampling was needed to determine the true
microbial diversity in the BV vaginal community. Based
upon the literature, the nonparametric ACE and Chao1
estimators are correlated positively with the number of
sequences analyzed [53] and overestimate the number of
species while the rarefaction estimator underestimates
the number of species at the 0% dissimilarity level.
However, the rarefaction estimator could accurately predict the number of species at the 3% dissimilarity level
and the number of genera at the 5% dissimilarity level.

Page 4 of 16

For the two groups of vaginal communities analyzed at
the 3% dissimilarity level, the number of OTUs detected
was close to the total number of OTUs estimated by
Chao1 and ACE diversity indices, presenting additional
evidence that the natural communities were well covered during sequencing (Table 1). Good’s coverage was
more than 99.0% for all sequences in the two groups,
indicating that less than one additional phylotype would
be expected for every 100 additional sequenced reads.
This level of coverage indicated that the 16S rRNA
sequences identified in these groups represent the
majority of bacterial sequences present in the samples
under study. With the unique sequences analyzed, the
species diversity was evaluated with Shannon Index
(2.6133 in the CN group Vs. 3.7965 in the BV group)
and Simpson Index (0.3793 in the CN group Vs. 0.1240
in the BV group). So, the overall levels of bacterial
diversity was significantly different between the BV
group and the CN group (p < 0.05 for the two groups,
parametric ANOVA for Shannon and Simpson index)
(Figure 3), and bacterial communities were significantly
different between individuals from the two groups. The
vaginal community in the BV group (Evenness = 0.3327)
was more even than in the CN group (Evenness =
0.2185) and indicated that bacterial community in the
BV group had greater species diversity. All these parameters corroborated each other and confirmed clearly

Figure 2 Rarefaction curves were used to estimate richness (in this case the number of taxa at a 3% dissimilarity level) among BVpositive and BV-negative groups. The vertical axis shows the number of OTUs that would be expected to be found after sampling the
number of tags or sequences shown on the horizontal axis.

Ling et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:488
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/488

Page 5 of 16

Table 1 Comparison of phylotype coverage and diversity estimation of the 16S rRNA gene libraries at the 3%
dissimilarity from the pyrosequencing analysis
Group

Reads

OTUs1

Good2

ACE

95% C.I.

Chao

95% C.I.

Shannon

Evenness3

Simpson

BV-Negative

156,132

1,584

0.996

2,857

(2,714, 3,000)

2,500

(2,375, 2,625)

2.6133

0.2185

0.3793

BV-Positive

90,227

2,455

0.990

4,009

(3,808, 4,209)

3,694

(3,509, 3,879)

3.7965

0.3327

0.1240

1

The operational taxonomic units (OTUs) were defined with 3% dissimilarity level.
2
The coverage percentage (Good), richness estimators (ACE and Chao1) and diversity indices (Shannon and Simpson) were calculated using Good’s method
(Good, 1953) and the MOTHUR program.
3
The Shannon index of evenness was calculated with the formula E = H/ln(S), where H is the Shannon diversity index and S is the total number of sequences in
that group.

that the vaginal community was more diverse in BV
positive women than in BV negative women. The samples in each group or in an individual sample were
divided into two clusters based on UniFrac metrics
(Figure 4), although there were few BV samples which
clustered in the CN group and vice versa. Although
more subclusters existed in the BV group, we found
that samples in the BV group formed a large cluster
that was very distinct from the CN group, which was
similar to the PCR-DGGE pattern, indicating that they
harbored quite different microbial communities.
The phylogenetic classification of sequences from the
vagina by phylum is summarized in Figure 5. The composition and relative abundance of the vaginal microbiota by phylum might be not help one to understand
the etiology of BV. However, it did reveal the overall
structure of the vaginal microbiota. Eight phyla were
found in the vaginal microbiota in women with or without BV. Our data showed that the vast majority of
sequences belonged to one of the four major phyla:
Bacteroidetes, Firmicutes, Actinobacteria and Fusobacteria. Of these major phyla, Firmicutes was the most
dominant phyla in the vaginal microbiota of healthy
subjects, while bacteria belonging to Firmicutes, Bacteroidetes, Actinobacteria and Fusobacteria constituted the
complex vaginal microbiota in the BV group. The
remaining bacteria belonged to the phyla Chloroflexi,

Tenericutes, Proteobacteria and candidate division TM7
(around 0.1-1.0% of total sequences). The composition
of the vaginal microbiota at the phylum level was significantly associated with BV by SPSS with One-Way
ANOVA (p <0.001). At the genus level, sequences from
the two combined groups represented 116 different genera, with 99 different genera in the BV group and 58
different genera in the CN group respectively (the taxonomy of the vaginal bacterial communities with RDP
classifier showed details in Additional file 1, Table S1).
Many genera found in the vaginal community were
unexpected, and our results suggest that this is one of
the most comprehensive investigations of vaginal microbiota conducted to date (Figure 6). Eleven genera
(Lactobacillus, Gardnerella, Atopobium, Megasphaera,
Eggerthella, Aerococcus, Alloiococcus, Streptococcus,
Leptotrichia/Sneathia, Prevotella and Papillibacter) constituted more than 95% of the vaginal microbiota. Not
surprisingly, our study showed that the genus Lactobacillus constituted the major proportion of vaginal microbiota in healthy women. This confirmed findings from
previous studies [13,14].
There was a significant difference between the BV and
CN group in all genera obtained from the vagina. The
abundance of Lactobacillus, Alloiococcus, Gardnerella,
Atopobium, Megasphaera, Eggerthella, Aerococcus,
Leptotrichia/Sneathia, Prevotella and Papillibacter was

Figure 3 Shannon index and Simpson index were used to estimate diversity (i.e., a combined assessment of the number of 1%
dissimilar bacterial taxa and their abundance) among the eight groups. Data shown as mean with SEM. There were significant differences
between BV-positive and BV-negative groups by parametric ANOVA.

Ling et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:488
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/488

Page 6 of 16

Figure 4 Differentiation in vaginal bacterial communities from 100 individual samples of BV-positive and BV-negative groups
(interpersonal variations). Community differentiation was measured by using the unweighted UniFrac algorithm; the scale bar indicates the
distance between clusters in UniFrac units. All of the branch nodes shown here were found to be significant (p <0.001), indicating that BVpositive and BV-negative harbored distinct bacterial communities.

significantly different between the two groups (p < 0.05)
(Figure 7). This indicated that the composition and
abundance of the vaginal bacterial communities including these genera played an important role in BV. At the
species level, defined as OTUs at the 3% dissimilarity
level, around 1,500 species and about 2,500 species were
found in the CN and BV group, respectively. While at a
more conservative level, defined as OTUs at the 5% dissimilarity level, about 550 phylotypes in the CN group
and about 1,000 phylotypes in the BV group were
found. The two groups also shared a great degree of
community similarity in the vagina at the 3% dissimilarity level–about 30% of the total phylotypes were present
in both groups (Figure 8). Our Venn diagrams agree
with previous findings that some genera in vaginal communities were not specific for BV, but also existed in
the healthy women.
Total bacteria and species-specific qPCR

Our qPCR results supported the pyrosequencing results
in terms of which species were associated with BV,

although the relative abundance was not in concordance
(Additional file 2, Table S2). Consistent with previous
findings, we found that L. iners was a major component
of the vaginal microbiota in healthy women and
decreased markedly in BV subjects. Gardnerella, Atopobium, Megasphaera, Eggerthella, Leptotrichia/Sneathia
and Prevotella were more common and present at a
higher copy numbers in the BV group, although there
were significant interpersonal variations (data not
shown). Our qPCR revealed the bacterial subgroups that
associated significantly with BV and verified the results
of PCR-DGGE and pyrosequencing data. Our quantitative studies of the bacterial species in the vaginal communities demonstrated one common finding: increased
numbers of these bacteria were found during the advent
of BV. Compared with vaginal microbiota in healthy
women, the relative abundance or copy numbers of
these bacteria combined with each other was associated
with BV significantly and could be potentially used as a
molecular marker of microbiota shift in vagina and as a
target for diagnosis of BV.

Ling et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:488
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/488

Page 7 of 16

Figure 5 The relative abundance of vaginal bacterial V3 tags obtained by pyrosequencing from BV-positive and BV-negative
individuals, by phylum. Phylogenetic classification for the pyrosequencing analysis obtained from Ribosomal Database Project Classifier
analyses. The phyla of Firmicutes, Bacteroidetes, Actinobacteria, Fusobacteria were significant differences between BV-positive and BV-negative
groups by parametric ANOVA (p <0.000).

Figure 6 The relative abundance of vaginal bacterial V3 tags obtained by pyrosequencing from BV-positive and BV-negative
individuals, by genus and profiled the overall structure of vaginal communities.

Ling et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:488
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/488

Page 8 of 16

Figure 7 Predominant genera detected in vagina from BV-positive and BV-negative individuals. Among these predominant genera,
Lactobacillus, Gardnerella, Atopobium, Alloiococcus, Sneathia, Prevotella, Papillibacter, Megasphaera, Eggerthella, Aerococcus were associated with BV
significantly (* p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01). Except for Lactobacillus and Alloiococcus, which were detected at a higher level, other genera were more
abundant in BV-positive individuals.

Figure 8 Venn diagrams for overlap between BV-positive observed OTUs versus BV-negative observed OTUs. The Venn diagrams show
the overlap in all OTUs calculated at the 3% dissimilarity level. The number of species in group BV-positive is 2,455. The number of species in
group BV-negative is 1,584. The number of species shared between groups BV-positive and BV-negative is 930. Percentage of species that are
shared in groups BV-positive and BV-negative is 29.91%.

Ling et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:488
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/488

Comparison of pyrosequencing with PCR-DGGE analysis

The bacterial diversity of vaginal microbiota was analyzed
by PCR-DGGE fingerprinting and barcoded pyrosequencing. These phylotypes detected in the vagina matched
each other with two molecular analytical methods. PCRDGGE fingerprinting, which is a conventional molecular
ecological approach, only detected the predominant
microbiota (Lactobacillus, A. vaginae, uncultured
Sneathia sp., F. nucleatum subsp., uncultured Eggerthella
sp., and uncultured Megasphaera sp.) in the vagina, and
these phylotypes were also abundant in the 454 pyrosequencing reads. However, the bacterial communities
determined with the pyrosequencing analysis were more
diverse than those communities determined with the
PCR-DGGE analysis, as there were more phylotypes
revealed with the pyrosequencing analysis than with
PCR-DGGE fingerprinting. As we could not excise and
sequence all bands in the DGGE profiles, several dominant bands were missed, of which might contain some
predominant bacteria such as G. vaginalis in the vaginal
communities. Pyrosequencing provided a high-throughput approach to analyze the 16S rRNA gene sequences
and explore bacterial diversity in different microhabitats
deeply, which can compensate for the disadvantage with
the PCR-DGGE method in detecting minor populations
in microbiota. As only predominant microbiota could be
detected by PCR-DGGE, band richness could not reveal
the overall extent of bacterial diversity in the vagina.
With clustering analysis using the UniFrac algorithm, we
found similar cluster profiles in the two groups. The samples in the BV and CN group were divided into two clusters respectively (Figure 1B and Figure 4). To analyze
bacterial diversity, PCR-DGGE fingerprinting and highthroughput pyrosequencing were two important and useful methods, which could corroborate one another.

Discussion
An understanding of the composition and richness of
the vaginal microbial ecosystem in relation to vaginal
health is essential for comprehensively understanding
the etiology of vaginal diseases, and for the prevention
and treatment of these diseases. We analyzed the vaginal
communities of healthy participants and women with
clinically defined BV which was diagnosed by Amsel criteria and clearly confirmed by Nugent criteria with
Nugent score ≥ 7. Indeed, few of these subjects were
asymptomatic BV, where the shift of vaginal microbiota
has occurred but the symptoms are absent. However,
both the Gram staining and PCR-DGGE verified our
diagnosis. Although there are several previous studies
that focus on the vaginal microbiota in health and disease or in different races, molecular analysis such as the
broad-range PCR assays, terminal restriction fragment
length polymorphisms (T-RFLPs) and PCR-clone library

Page 9 of 16

analysis still cannot demonstrate the overall structure
and composition of vaginal microbiota comprehensively
[13,14,54]. In fact, the depth of the bacterial diversity in
a specific microhabitat is strongly influenced by the
total number of sequences that are used for analysis
[47]. These previous studies obtained only hundreds of
reads for each sample which severely limited the depth
of understanding of the overall structure of vaginal
microbiota. However, pyrosequencing of the 16S rRNA
gene amplicons for microbial community profiling can,
for equivalent costs, yield more than two orders of magnitude more sensitivity than traditional PCR cloning and
Sanger sequencing [55]. In our study, multiplex barcoded pyrosequencing analysis enabled us to analyze an
increased number of samples at a time, to obtain more
reads in a single run, to monitor the sequencing error
rate, and to perform in-depth analyses for studies of
comparative microbial ecology. Although the pyrosequencing read lengths of the sequences were significantly short compared with the sequences obtained with
traditional Sanger sequencing methods (600-800bp),
these short sequences (about 145bp in our study) provided not only excellent coverage but also excellent
recovery for classification at the genus level [56]. In
addition, the 145bp in the highly variable region V3 of
the 16S rRNA gene had good discerning power (provided that a 1bp difference in the 16S rRNA gene
sequences differentiated the reads by 0.55% for bacteria)
and were long enough to be sufficient for assigning the
taxa [48]. Engelbrektson et al. (2010) have shown that
for a given number of reads, shorter 16S rRNA gene
amplicons yield greater species richness than do longer
amplicons. Approximately 100bp amplicons produced
significantly higher estimates of richness than 400bp or
1,000bp products did [57]. All indicated that multiplex
parallel pyrosequencing offered a highly automated,
rapid, economical and accurate method for the analysis
of bacterial diversity. Our study represents one of the
most extensive investigations of bacterial diversity in the
vagina.
With 454 pyrosequencing analysis, we found that the
vaginal bacterial diversity in participants with BV was
remarkably high and much greater than previously
reported with culture-independent approaches such as
PCR-DGGE and cloning and sequencing [13,14,37,
39,58] and similar with the deep-sequencing techniques
by Spear et al. (2008) [59]. The higher number of phylotypes in BV positive women over healthy was consistent
with the results of previous studies, and most of which
were previously uncultivated species and undiscovered
novel phylotypes in the vagina. Compared with other
molecular methods for microbiota diversity analysis
such as cloning and sequencing approaches, we
observed higher bacterial diversity by high-throughput

Ling et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:488
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/488

parallel pyrosequencing analysis (Good’s coverage more
than 99.0%) [13,54,60]. The rarefaction curves were still
not saturated at the 3% dissimilarity level even if more
than 150,000 sequences in the CN group were retrieved,
which indicated that more sequencing effort should be
undertaken to obtain the saturation of the curves. However, the Good’s coverage of more than 99.0% of our
study showed that we had obtained almost all bacterial
species in the vaginal communities. Recently, a computational model revealed that more than 9 million unique
genes were likely to be present in the human gut bacterial community. It was far more rich than had been
expected [61]. Based on more pyrosequencing reads and
good coverage, that’s why the depth of the vaginal communities in our study was superior to those previous
studies [13,14,54,58,59]. Other diversity indices shown
in Table 1, such as Shannon index, Chao1 and ACE,
were also higher in the BV group than in the CN group
at the same dissimilarity level. Furthermore, for each
sample analyzed in our study, these diversity indices
showed significantly interpersonal variations even in the
same group (data not shown), similar to that observed
for the gastrointestinal tract and human skin [40,62,63].
The variation might be due to hormone levels, personal
hygiene behavior and even diet [64-66]. Although there
were pronounced interpersonal variations in the bacterial community composition of the vagina, the participants also shared a great degree of community similarity
in each group and the overall structure of the vaginal
bacterial communities in the two groups was obviously
divided into two clusters.
Our study represents one of the most extensive examinations of bacterial diversity in the vagina. We demonstrated in this research that BV was associated with
compositional changes in the vaginal microbiota mostly
apparent at high taxonomic level (phylum) and even
genus level. From the eight phyla that we observed in
the vaginal ecosystem, Firmicutes constituted the vast
majority of vaginal microbiota in healthy women, while
Bacteroidetes, Actinobacteria and Fusobacteria were
strongly associated with BV. It is not surprising that the
predominant bacterial populations in the healthy vagina
contained lactic acid bacteria (mainly the genus of Lactobacillus) [67] because these genera can maintain a low
vaginal pH through their metabolic activity and thereby
play a role in colonization resistance providing protection against invasion by overt pathogens or against overgrowth and dominance by potentially pathogenic species
among the normal microbiota [68-70]. However, the
genera of Alloiococcus (member of the lactic acid bacteria), which was previously an unrecognized common
member of the healthy vaginal ecosystem, was detected
more frequently as normal microbiota in the healthy
women in our study. Our data firstly indicated that the

Page 10 of 16

members of Alloiococcus along with members of the
Lactobacillus might contribute to maintaining the balance of the healthy vaginal ecosystem. Extensive diversity within the Lactobacillus species complex of the
vagina has been observed in previous studies. With species-specific qPCR, we also found that L. iners was one
of the most abundant vaginal Lactobacillus species in
healthy women, while about 100 to 1000-fold copies
declined or were even absent in the subjects with BV.
Research has shown that L. iners is a dominant part of
the vaginal microbiota when in a transitional stage
between abnormal and normal health, either because of
treatment or because of physiological changes such as
varying estrogen levels [71,72]. As a result, L. iners
could be considered as even more typical for normal
vaginal microbiota and be a sensitive marker of changes
in the vaginal microbiota. Other species of Lactobacillus
such as L. crispatus and L. jensenii were also commonly
detected Lactobacillus species in the vaginal microbiota
but at a lower relative abundance. Previously, L. crispatus has been suggested to be more often linked with
health and L. iners with disease [72]. However, no clear
quantitative support was found for this claim in our
study.
The onset of BV is marked by a decline in the Lactobacillus species and other facultative or anaerobic species as
the vaginal microbial ecosystem changes from eubiosis to
dysbiosis [73]. In our study, eight BV-related genera, i.e.,
Gardnerella, Atopobium, Megasphaera, Eggerthella, Aerococcus, Leptotrichia/Sneathia, Prevotella and Papillibacter,
were detected at higher prevalence and higher relative
abundance in women with BV. These genera included
pathogenic species that participated in BV progression.
Previous studies have shown that G. vaginalis (belonging
to Actinobacteria), was found in most subjects with BV
and showed higher sensitivity for the diagnosis of BV
[14,33,74], but our data also found this species in subjects
with low abundance level who did not have BV. This suggests that this species cannot be used as a specific marker
for this disease. The difference might be associated with
the depth of the pyrosequencing method. Despite its nonspecific discrimination between BV and CN, we did
observe that it was one of most important species in the
vaginal communities that associate with BV. Another
genus in Actinobacteria, Atopobium, which plays an
important role in the development of BV and treatment
failure, is highly abundant in the vaginal microbiota of BV
[35]. Our pyrosequencing study showed that Atopobium is
present in a significant proportion (84%) of women clinically diagnosed as having BV, but in only 22% women in
CN group (p < 0.05). Although Atopobium was also a lactic acid bacterium, its cellular morphology and role was
distinctly different from that of Lactobacillus [75]. With
this aspect, Bradshaw et al. (2006) suggested that

Ling et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:488
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/488

Atopobium was even more specific than G. vaginalis in BV
(77% and 35%, respectively) [76]. Our results also confirmed this implication. Eggerthella, like A. vaginae in this
phylum, was strongly correlated with BV. Tamrakar et al.
(2007) reported that the presence of Eggerthella was an
independent risk factor of BV scores (Nugent score ≥ 7)
[77]. In our study, we highlighted this genus in the vaginal
bacterial community in the process of BV. Many studies
have shown that Mobiluncus (belonging to Actinomycetaceae in the phylum of Actinobacteria) was found in vaginal
bacterial communities only when BV was present, and had
a high-level resistance to metronidazole [78]. However, we
obtained only low abundance of this genus in our study,
which was consistent with a previous study [60]. Other
members of the Firmicutes, Megasphaera (especially
Megasphaera typeⅠ), Aerococcus and Papillibacter, were
also associated with BV significantly, although these genera could not be detected in all BV samples. However, the
clinical significance of these genera in the vaginal ecosystem is still unknown. Previous work has shown that Megasphaera typeⅠ appeared to have a stronger association
with BV than type Ⅱ [79]. We also found that Megasphaera typeⅠwas common in BV patients and those two
unfamiliar genera of Aerococcus and Papillibacter in vaginal bacterial communities were obviously correlated with
BV for the first time. Prevotella (belonging to Bacteroidetes), one of the recently identified predominant microbiota in the complex vaginal communities of BV subjects,
was significantly associated with BV in our qPCR and pyrosequencing studies (p < 0.05). Prevotella was dramatically
higher (7 orders of magnitude) in almost all patients with
the clinically defined BV in our qPCR experiment. Our
data showed that Prevotella spp. were more common and
abundant than other BV-associated genera in the vagina.
Ammonia flow from Prevotella to G. vaginalis has been
demonstrated and a commensal relationship proposed
[80]. It might be implicated that Prevotella showed a
synergistic effect with G. vaginalis and aggravated the process of BV. The combination of bacterium-specific PCR
assays for Prevotella and G. vaginalis might improve sensitivity or specificity for the diagnosis of BV. Leptotrichia/
Sneathia (belonging to Fusobacteria), which was also a
lactic acid-producer, was strongly associated with BV in
our study. However, there was little known about the ecology of this genus. Fredricks et al. (2005) showed that
detection of Leptotrichia species was very specific for BV
by bacterium-specific PCR assays [14]. Our observations
in qPCR and pyrosequencing studies showed that the prevalence of Leptotrichia/Sneathia in BV patients was higher
than in CN subjects. It could be a new marker of BV in
the pathogenic vaginal communities like others mentioned
above. Compared with the ten predominant genera, other
bacteria identified from the complex vaginal bacterial
communities were detected at low relative abundance.

Page 11 of 16

Some have been detected in the vagina before, but most of
them were first found in our study.
However, there were also some limitations to our
study. First, there was no analysis of Nugent score and
pH in relation to the change of vaginal community
structure and composition as participants diagnosed as
BV in our study were almost with Nugent score ≥ 7 and
a pH of vaginal discharge ≥ 4.5. For such an analysis it
would be necessary to explore the relationship between
intermediate vaginal microbiota (4 ≤ Nugent score < 7)
and asymptomatic BV. Second, we did not explore the
dynamics of vaginal bacterial communities in the process of BV and the bacterial diversity for re-establishment of vaginal microbiota after effective treatment by
the high-throughput pyrosequencing. Further studies of
the vaginal microbiota-host interplay, especially those
bacteria found in our study with low relative abundance
and its influence on local vaginal immunity, will be
necessary in order to understand extensively the ecological role of the complex vaginal bacterial communities in
the BV process. This new insight into the overall structure of vaginal community in BV may provide fundamental information for future investigations.

Conclusions
Our results elucidated that vaginal microbiota are more
diverse in BV participants than we expected before.
This provides novel insights into the vaginal microbiota
in the etiology of BV and confirms that the barcoded
pyrosequencing approach can be a powerful tool for
characterizing the microbiota in vaginal ecosystems
compared with classical molecular ecological
approaches, such as PCR-DGGE. The study represents
one of the most extensive examinations of bacterial
diversity in the vagina. We observed that at a high taxonomic level, the phylum of Bacteroidetes, Actinobacteria
and Fusobacteria were significantly associated with BV.
Although no single bacterium can be identified as
uniquely associated with BV, our data indicated that the
vaginal communities including Gardnerella, Atopobium,
Megasphaera, Eggerthella, Aerococcus, Leptotrichia/
Sneathia, Prevotella and Papillibacter were clearly associated with BV. These genera in the vaginal communities were potentially excellent markers of BV and
could be used as targets for BV diagnosis by molecular
approaches alone or in combination. Our results have
provided a comprehensive picture of our current knowledge of the community structure of the vaginal bacterial
ecosystem and have significantly increased current
understanding of the etiology of BV. Continuing
exploration of vaginal bacterial communities and host
interplay in different healthy and diseased states will
shed light on the BV susceptibility and provide new
insights for treatment.

Ling et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:488
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/488

Methods
Subject Selection

One hundred women with regular menstrual cycles (2435 days) aged 19 to 51 years, including 50 BV positive
women (BV group, aged 33.3 ± 9.1) and 50 healthy control women (CN group, aged 32.0 ± 8.1), who came to
the Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology of the
First Affiliated Hospital, College of Medicine, Zhejiang
University for routine gynecology examination from
October 2008 to May 2009, were recruited for this
study. Informed written consent was obtained from all
participants prior to enrollment, with approval of the
ethical committee of the First Affiliated Hospital,
College of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Zhejiang province, China. Individuals who participated in this study
were examined by two gynecologists. BV status was
assessed using Amsel clinical criteria for all subjects [81]
and confirmed using Gram stain criteria (Nugent scores)
[82]. Only participants with Nugent score ≥ 7 were
selected for the following analysis. Any participant having any of the following exclusion criteria was excluded
from participation: <18 years of age, pregnancy, diabetes
mellitus, the use of antibiotics or vaginal antimicrobials
(orally or by topical application in vulvar/vaginal area)
in the previous month, menstruation, presence of an
intrauterine device, vaginal intercourse within the latest
3 days, known active infection due to Chlamydia, yeast,
N. gonorrhoeae, or T. vaginalis, clinically apparent
herpes simplex infection, or defined diagnosed HPV,
HSV-2, or HIV-1 infection. (The clinical data for each
participant were shown in Additional file 3, Table S3).
The participants who met three or more of the following criteria were clinically diagnosed as BV: homogenous
vaginal discharge, >20% clue cells on wet mount,
elevated pH (≥4.5) of vaginal discharge, and release of a
fishy amine odor upon addition of 10% potassium
hydroxide solution to vaginal fluid ("whiff” test) [81].
Then based on the criteria for BV assessment developed
by Nugent et al. [82], participants with the Gram stain
score of ≥7 were finally confirmed as BV. Participants
without these changes were defined as the healthy control group.
Sample Collection and Preparation

When women underwent genital examination, 2 swabs
from each woman were taken near the mid-vagina using
a sterile swab, packaged and placed in ice packs. (Kim et
al. (2009) [83] have revealed that the vaginal microbiota
is not homogenous throughout the vaginal tract but differs significantly within an individual with regard to anatomical site and sampling method used.) The first swab
was rolled onto a slide for Gram staining; the second
vaginal swab was used for bacterial genomic DNA

Page 12 of 16

extraction. The vaginal swabs for bacterial genomic
DNA extraction were transferred to the laboratory
immediately in an ice-box, and stored at -80°C after preparation within 15 min for further analysis.
Total bacterial genomic DNA extraction

The bacterial cells retrieved on swabs were submerged
in 1 ml of sterile normal saline (prepared with RNase
free H 2O, pH 7.0) and vigorously agitated to dislodge
cells. The cells were pelleted by centrifugation (Thermo
Electron Corporation, Boston, MA, USA) at full speed
(≥ 10,000 g) for 10 min, washed by re-suspending cells
in sterile normal saline and centrifuged at full speed for
5 min. Then bacterial DNA was extracted from the vaginal swabs using QIAamp DNA Mini Kit (QIAGEN, Hilden, Germany) according to manufacturer’s instructions
with minor modification. Briefly, the bacterial pellet was
suspended in 180 μl of lysis buffer (buffer ATL) and
homogenized by vortexing. A total of 20 μl of a proteinase K solution (20 mg/ml) and 100 mg of zirconium
beads (0.1 mm) were then added. The mixtures were
agitated in a mini bead beater (FastPrep, Thermo Electron Corporation, USA) three times, 40 s each time, and
incubated at 56°C for approximately 40 min. 200 μl of
the second lysis buffer (buffer AL) provided in the kit
was added, and the sample was incubated at 70°C for
10 min. Next, 200 μl of ethanol was added; this mixture
was then loaded on the QIAamp spin column and centrifuged at 8,000 g for 1 min. The QIAamp spin column
was placed in a new 2 ml collection microtube, and the
containing filtrate was discarded. The column material
was washed with 500 μl buffer AW1 and with 500 μl
buffer AW2 provided in the kit. Finally, the DNA was
eluted with 20 μl of distilled water (2 × 10 μl). The concentration of extracted DNA was determined by using a
NanoDrop ND-1000 spectrophotometer (Thermo Electron Corporation, USA); its integrity and size were
checked by 1.0% agarose gel electrophoresis containing
0.5 mg/ml ethidium bromide. All DNA was stored at
-20°C before further analysis.
PCR-DGGE analysis

Universal bacterial primers 341F and 534R for the V3
regions of 16S rRNA genes were used to amplify
approximately 200 bp, based on positions 341 to 534 of
the Escherichia coli 16S rRNA gene, as described by
Muyzer et al. (1993) [38,51]. The reaction conditions
were those as described previously by Li et al. (2008)
[41] with minor modifications. The DGGE analysis
(with 35% to 50% gradient) and the sequence analysis of
the excised DGGE bands was performed as described
[41]. The similarities of PCR-DGGE DNA profiles were
analyzed with Quantity One® 1-D Analysis software

Ling et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:488
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/488

(version 4. 6.2; Bio-Rad Laboratory, Hercules, CA, USA).
A similarity matrix was constructed using Dice’s similarity coefficient. A dendrogram was constructed by the
unweighted pair group method, using arithmetic
averages (UPGMA) (details in Additional file 4, Supplementary Information).

Page 13 of 16

7900 Real-time PCR instrument according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Applied Biosystems, Foster city,
CA). Details of the standards and PCR conditions
are provided in Additional file 4, Supplementary
Information.

Additional material
454 pyrosequencing and data analysis

PCR amplification of the 16S rRNA gene hypervariable
V3-region was performed with universal bacterial primers (It must be noted that 454 adaptor sequences and
barcodes are not shown here): 341F (5’- ATTACCGC
GGCTGCTGG -3’) and 534R (5’-CCTACGGGAGGCAGCAG -3’) (details in Additional file 4, Supplementary Information) as described [48]. Amplicon
pyrosequencing was performed with standard 454/Roche
GS-FLX protocols [84]. After pyrosequencing, all reads
were screened and filtered for quality and length using
customized Perl scripts written by ourselves. Raw
sequences were processed and analyzed following the
procedure described previously [43]. Approximately
23.3% of the total raw pyrosequencing reads was not
passed quality control. Sequences were assigned to samples by examining the 8-bp barcode (Additional file 5,
Table S4) [85]. The qualified 16S rRNA gene fragments
were processed as previously described [86]. OTUs and
OTU rarefaction curves were created by aligning unique
tag sequences and used to determine richness and diversity indexes (Shannon Weaver and Simpson diversity
indices), ACE, Chao1, Good’s coverage at each dissimilarity level using MOTHUR (version 1.5.0) http://
schloss.micro.umass.edu/[87]. Read level taxonomic
assignments were performed using the Ribosomal Database Project (RDP) Classifier program http://rdp.cme.
msu.edu/[88] with an 80% bootstrap score. Community
comparative analysis was performed using the webbased service UniFrac [89]. The neighbor-joining tree
was constructed using the MEGA 4.0 program based on
the Jukes-Cantor model and used for UniFrac analysis.
The statistical significance of differences in microbial
community composition, and Shannon and Simpson
index between sample categories was determined by
SPSS with One-Way ANOVA (details in Additional file
4, Supplementary Information).
Validation of the relative abundance of vaginal
microbiota with qPCR

To estimate the accurate copy numbers of total Bacteria
and bacterial subgroups in the samples, and to validate
the relative abundance of genus-specific bacteria as
determined by 454 pyrosequencing. 16S rRNA gene-targeted qPCR (species-specific primers in Additional file
6, Table S5) was performed with a Power SYBR Green
PCR Master Mix (Takara, Dalian, China) on an ABI

Additional file 1: Table S1. The taxonomy of vaginal bacterial
communities with RDP Classifier. Taxonomic assignments at the genus
level were made with a bootstrap confidence range at ≥ 80% using the
RDP Classifier.
Additional file 2: Table S2. The abundance of vaginal bacteria
relative to total Bacteria gene copy number by species-specific
qPCR. Comparisons of the relative abundance of the specific bacteria in
the vagina between women with BV and women without BV were
calculated with independent-samples T-tests (SPSS Data Analysis Program
version 16.0, SPSS Inc, Chicago, IL) and were considered statistically
significant if p < 0.05. These qPCR results supported the pyrosequencing
results in terms of which species were associated with BV, although the
relative abundance was not in concordance.
Additional file 3: Table S3. The Clinical Data for Each Participant.
100 subjects (50 women with BV and 50 women without BV) that
participated in our study were diagnosed with Amsel clinical criteria and
Nugent criteria.
Additional file 4: Supplementary Information. Supplemental materials
and methods used in our study.
Additional file 5: Table S4. List of the 100 8-bp barcodes used to
tag each PCR product analyzed as part of the study. Table of 8-bp
barcodes used to identify each sample from the sample pool.
Additional file 6: Table S5. Species-specific primer sets for detection
of vaginal bacteria by qPCR. Table of primers used in this study to
carry out real-time PCR analysis of total bacteria and 10 bacterial species
in the vagina.

Acknowledgements
This present work was funded by the grants of National Basic Research
Program of China (973 program) Grant 2007CB513001 and partly supported
by grants from China’s National Science and Technology Major Project (No.
2008ZX10004-002, No. 2009ZX10004-105) and a Qiu-Shi Scholarship from
Zhejiang University. We thank Barbara Nelson for her critical reading of our
manuscript.
Author details
1
State Key Laboratory for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious Diseases,
the First Affiliated Hospital, College of Medicine, Zhejiang University,
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, 310003, China. 2Zhejiang-California International
Nanosystems Institute (ZCNI), Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang,
310029, China. 3Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, the First Affiliated
Hospital, College of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang,
310003, China. 4Chinese National Human Genome Center at Shanghai,
Shanghai, 201203, China. 5J. Craig Venter Institute, 9704 Medical Center
Drive, Rockville, Maryland 20850, USA.
Authors’ contributions
ZXL conducted the experimental design, sample collection, PCR-DGGE, realtime PCR, barcodes design, analyzed results and wrote the paper. JMK
carried out experimental design, samples collection, barcodes design, PCR
amplification and analyzed results. FL, HBZ and YXX participated in sample
collection and partial data analysis. XYC carried out quantitative real-time
PCR and data analysis. YZW carried out partial data analysis. LJL, KEN, YXX
and CX conceived of the study, and participated in its design and
coordination and helped to draft the manuscript. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript.

Ling et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:488
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/488

Received: 12 April 2010 Accepted: 7 September 2010
Published: 7 September 2010
References
1. Dethlefsen L, McFall-Ngai M, Relman DA: An ecological and evolutionary
perspective on human-microbe mutualism and disease. Nature 2007,
449:811-818.
2. Turnbaugh PJ, Ley RE, Hamady M, Fraser-Liggett CM, Knight R, Gordon JI:
The human microbiome project. Nature 2007, 449:804-810.
3. Gill SR, Pop M, Deboy RT, Eckburg PB, Turnbaugh PJ, Samuel BS, Gordon JI,
Relman DA, Fraser-Liggett CM, Nelson KE: Metagenomic analysis of the
human distal gut microbiome. Science 2006, 312:1355-1359.
4. Cash HL, Whitham CV, Behrendt CL, Hooper LV: Symbiotic bacteria direct
expression of an intestinal bactericidal lectin. Science 2006,
313:1126-1130.
5. Ley RE, Peterson DA, Gordon JI: Ecological and evolutionary forces
shaping microbial diversity in the human intestine. Cell 2006,
124:837-848.
6. Ley RE, Turnbaugh PJ, Klein S, Gordon JI: Microbial ecology: human gut
microbes associated with obesity. Nature 2006, 444:1022-1023.
7. Mazmanian SK, Liu CH, Tzianabos AO, Kasper DL: An immunomodulatory
molecule of symbiotic bacteria directs maturation of the host immune
system. Cell 2005, 122:107-118.
8. Turnbaugh PJ, Ley RE, Mahowald MA, Magrini V, Mardis ER, Gordon JI: An
obesity-associated gut microbiome with increased capacity for energy
harvest. Nature 2006, 444:1027-1031.
9. Rosenstein IJ, Morgan DJ, Sheehan M, Lamont RF, Taylor-Robinson D:
Bacterial vaginosis in pregnancy: distribution of bacterial species in
different gram-stain categories of the vaginal flora. J Med Microbiol 1996,
45:120-126.
10. Antonio MA, Hawes SE, Hillier SL: The identification of vaginal
Lactobacillus species and the demographic and microbiologic
characteristics of women colonized by these species. J Infect Dis 1999,
180:1950-1956.
11. Boskey ER, Cone RA, Whaley KJ, Moench TR: Origins of vaginal acidity:
high D/L lactate ratio is consistent with bacteria being the primary
source. Hum Reprod 2001, 16:1809-1813.
12. Redondo-Lopez V, Cook RL, Sobel JD: Emerging role of lactobacilli in the
control and maintenance of the vaginal bacterial microflora. Rev Infect
Dis 1990, 12:856-872.
13. Zhou X, Brown CJ, Abdo Z, Davis CC, Hansmann MA, Joyce P, Foster JA,
Forney LJ: Differences in the composition of vaginal microbial
communities found in healthy Caucasian and black women. ISME J 2007,
1:121-133.
14. Fredricks DN, Fiedler TL, Marrazzo JM: Molecular identification of bacteria
associated with bacterial vaginosis. N Engl J Med 2005, 353:1899-1911.
15. Schwebke JR: New concepts in the etiology of bacterial vaginosis. Curr
Infect Dis Rep 2009, 11:143-147.
16. Kalra A, Palcu CT, Sobel JD, Akins RA: Bacterial Vaginosis: Culture- and
PCR-based Characterizations of a Complex Polymicrobial Disease’s
Pathobiology. Curr Infect Dis Rep 2007, 9:485-500.
17. Schwebke JR: Bacterial Vaginosis. Curr Infect Dis Rep 2000, 2:14-17.
18. Allsworth JE, Peipert JF: Prevalence of bacterial vaginosis: 2001-2004
National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey data. Obstet Gynecol
2007, 109:114-120.
19. Wang J: Bacterial vaginosis. Prim Care Update Ob Gyns 2000, 7:181-185.
20. Gravett MG, Hummel D, Eschenbach DA, Holmes KK: Preterm labor
associated with subclinical amniotic fluid infection and with bacterial
vaginosis. Obstet Gynecol 1986, 67:229-237.
21. Hillier SL, Nugent RP, Eschenbach DA, Krohn MA, Gibbs RS, Martin DH,
Cotch MF, Edelman R, Pastorek JG, Rao AV, McNellis D, Regan JA, Carey JC,
Klebanoff MA: Association between bacterial vaginosis and preterm
delivery of a low-birth-weight infant. The Vaginal Infections and
Prematurity Study Group. N Engl J Med 1995, 333:1737-1742.
22. Sweet RL: Role of bacterial vaginosis in pelvic inflammatory disease. Clin
Infect Dis 1995, 20(Suppl 2):S271-275.
23. Haggerty CL, Hillier SL, Bass DC, Ness RB: Bacterial vaginosis and
anaerobic bacteria are associated with endometritis. Clin Infect Dis 2004,
39:990-995.

Page 14 of 16

24. Cherpes TL, Meyn LA, Krohn MA, Lurie JG, Hillier SL: Association between
acquisition of herpes simplex virus type 2 in women and bacterial
vaginosis. Clin Infect Dis 2003, 37:319-325.
25. Wiesenfeld HC, Hillier SL, Krohn MA, Landers DV, Sweet RL: Bacterial
vaginosis is a strong predictor of Neisseria gonorrhoeae and Chlamydia
trachomatis infection. Clin Infect Dis 2003, 36:663-668.
26. Kaul R, Nagelkerke NJ, Kimani J, Ngugi E, Bwayo JJ, Macdonald KS,
Rebbaprgada A, Fonck K, Temmerman M, Ronald AR, Moses S: Prevalent
herpes simplex virus type 2 infection is associated with altered vaginal
flora and an increased susceptibility to multiple sexually transmitted
infections. J Infect Dis 2007, 196:1692-1677.
27. Watts DH, Fazzari M, Minkoff H, Hillier SL, Sha B, Glesby M, Levine AM,
Burk R, Palefsky JM, Moxley M, Ahdieh-Grant L, Strickler HD: Effects of
bacterial vaginosis and other genital infections on the natural history of
human papillomavirus infection in HIV-1-infected and high-risk HIV-1uninfected women. J Infect Dis 2005, 191:1129-1139.
28. Myer L, Kuhn L, Stein ZA, Wright TC Jr, Denny L: Intravaginal practices,
bacterial vaginosis, and women’s susceptibility to HIV infection:
epidemiological evidence and biological mechanisms. Lancet Infect Dis
2005, 5:786-794.
29. Sewankambo N, Gray RH, Wawer MJ, Paxton L, McNaim D, WabwireMangen F, Serwadda D, Li C, Kiwanuka N, Hillier SL, Rabe L, Gaydos CA,
Quinn TC, Konde-Lule J: HIV-1 infection associated with abnormal vaginal
flora morphology and bacterial vaginosis. Lancet 1997, 350:546-550.
30. Sobel JD: Pathogenesis of Recurrent Vulvovaginal Candidiasis. Curr Infect
Dis Rep 2002, 4:514-519.
31. Klebanoff MA, Schwebke JR, Zhang J, Nansel TR, Yu KF, Andrews WW:
Vulvovaginal symptoms in women with bacterial vaginosis. Obstet
Gynecol 2004, 104:267-272.
32. McDonald HM, Brocklehurst P, Gordon A: Antibiotics for treating bacterial
vaginosis in pregnancy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2007, CD000262.
33. Gardner HL, Dukes CD: Haemophilus vaginalis vaginitis: a newly defined
specific infection previously classified non-specific vaginitis. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 1955, 69:962-976.
34. Spiegel CA, Eschenbach DA, Amsel R, Holmes KK: Curved anaerobic
bacteria in bacterial (nonspecific) vaginosis and their response to
antimicrobial therapy. J Infect Dis 1983, 148:817-822.
35. Verstraelen H, Verhelst R, Claeys G, Temmerman M, Vaneechoutte M:
Culture-independent analysis of vaginal microflora: the unrecognized
association of Atopobium vaginae with bacterial vaginosis. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 2004, 191:1130-1132.
36. Hill JE, Goh SH, Money DM, Doyle M, Li A, Crosby WL, Links M, Leung A,
Chan D, Hemmingsen SM: Characterization of vaginal microflora of
healthy, nonpregnant women by chaperonin-60 sequence-based
methods. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2005, 193:682-692.
37. Schellenberg J, Links MG, Hill JE, Dumonceaux TJ, Peters GA, Tyler S, Ball TB,
Severini A, Plummer FA: Pyrosequencing of the chaperonin-60 universal
target as a tool for determining microbial community composition. Appl
Environ Microbiol 2009, 75:2889-2898.
38. Muyzer G, de Waal EC, Uitterlinden AG: Profiling of complex microbial
populations by denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis analysis of
polymerase chain reaction-amplified genes coding for 16S rRNA. Appl
Environ Microbiol 1993, 59:695-700.
39. Vitali B, Pugliese C, Biagi E, Candela M, Turroni S, Bellen G, Donders GG,
Brigidi P: Dynamics of vaginal bacterial communities in women
developing bacterial vaginosis, candidiasis, or no infection, analyzed by
PCR-denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis and real-time PCR. Appl
Environ Microbiol 2007, 73:5731-5741.
40. Grice EA, Kong HH, Conlan S, Deming CB, Davis J, Young AC, Bouffard GG,
Blakesley RW, Murray PR, Green ED, Turner ML, Segre JA: Topographical
and temporal diversity of the human skin microbiome. Science 2009,
324:1190-1192.
41. Li M, Wang B, Zhang M, Rantalainen M, Wang S, Zhou H, Zhang Y, Shen J,
Pang X, Zhang M, Wei H, Chen Y, Lu H, Zuo J, Su M, Qiu Y, Jia W, Xiao C,
Smith LM, Yang S, Holmes E, Tang H, Zhao G, Nicholson JK, Li L, Zhao L:
Symbiotic gut microbes modulate human metabolic phenotypes. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 2008, 105:2117-2122.

Ling et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:488
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/488

42. Keijser BJ, Zaura E, Huse SM, van der Vossen JM, Schuren FH, Montijn RC,
ten Cate JM, Crielaard W: Pyrosequencing analysis of the oral microflora
of healthy adults. J Dent Res 2008, 87:1016-1020.
43. Hamady M, Walker JJ, Harris JK, Gold NJ, Knight R: Error-correcting
barcoded primers for pyrosequencing hundreds of samples in multiplex.
Nat Methods 2008, 5:235-237.
44. Meyer M, Stenzel U, Hofreiter M: Parallel tagged sequencing on the 454
platform. Nat Protoc 2008, 3:267-278.
45. von Bubnoff A: Next-generation sequencing: the race is on. Cell 2008,
132:721-723.
46. Edwards RA, Rodriguez-Brito B, Wegley L, Haynes M, Breitbart M,
Peterson DM, Saar MO, Alexander S, Alexander EC Jr, Rohwer F: Using
pyrosequencing to shed light on deep mine microbial ecology. BMC
Genomics 2006, 7:57.
47. Roesch LF, Fulthorpe RR, Riva A, Casella G, Hadwin AK, Kent AD, Daroub SH,
Camargo FA, Farmerie WG, Triplett EW: Pyrosequencing enumerates and
contrasts soil microbial diversity. ISME J 2007, 1:283-290.
48. Roh SW, Kim KH, Nam YD, Chang HW, Park EJ, Bae JW: Investigation of
archaeal and bacterial diversity in fermented seafood using barcoded
pyrosequencing. ISME J 2010, 4:1-16.
49. Fierer N, Hamady M, Lauber CL, Knight R: The influence of sex,
handedness, and washing on the diversity of hand surface bacteria. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 2008, 105:17994-17999.
50. Dowd SE, Sun Y, Secor PR, Rhoads DD, Wolcott BM, James GA, Wolcott RD:
Survey of bacterial diversity in chronic wounds using pyrosequencing,
DGGE, and full ribosome shotgun sequencing. BMC Microbiol 2008, 8:43.
51. Yu Z, Morrison M: Comparisons of different hypervariable regions of rrs
genes for use in fingerprinting of microbial communities by PCRdenaturing gradient gel electrophoresis. Appl Environ Microbiol 2004,
70:4800-4806.
52. Binladen J, Gilbert MT, Bollback JP, Panitz F, Bendixen C, Nielsen R,
Willerslev E: The use of coded PCR primers enables high-throughput
sequencing of multiple homolog amplification products by 454 parallel
sequencing. PLoS One 2007, 2:e197.
53. Schloss PD, Handelsman J: Introducing DOTUR, a computer program for
defining operational taxonomic units and estimating species richness.
Appl Environ Microbiol 2005, 71:1501-1506.
54. Hyman RW, Fukushima M, Diamond L, Kumm J, Giudice LC, Davis RW:
Microbes on the human vaginal epithelium. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005,
102:7952-7957.
55. Tringe SG, Hugenholtz P: A renaissance for the pioneering 16S rRNA
gene. Curr Opin Microbiol 2008, 11:442-446.
56. Liu Z, DeSantis TZ, Andersen GL, Knight R: Accurate taxonomy
assignments from 16S rRNA sequences produced by highly parallel
pyrosequencers. Nucleic Acids Res 2008, 36:e120.
57. Engelbrektson A, Kunin V, Wrighton KC, Zvenigorodsky N, Chen F,
Ochman H, Hugenholtz P: Experimental factors affecting PCR-based
estimates of microbial species richness and evenness. ISME J 2010,
4:642-647.
58. Zhou X, Bent SJ, Schneider MG, Davis CC, Islam MR, Forney LJ:
Characterization of vaginal microbial communities in adult healthy
women using cultivation-independent methods. Microbiology 2004,
150:2565-2573.
59. Spear GT, Sikaroodi M, Zariffard MR, Landay AL, French AL, Gillevet PM:
Comparison of the diversity of the vaginal microbiota in HIV-infected
and HIV-uninfected women with or without bacterial vaginosis. J Infect
Dis 2008, 198:1131-1140.
60. Oakley BB, Fiedler TL, Marrazzo JM, Fredricks DN: Diversity of human
vaginal bacterial communities and associations with clinically defined
bacterial vaginosis. Appl Environ Microbiol 2008, 74:4898-4909.
61. Yang X, Xie L, Li Y, Wei C: More than 9,000,000 unique genes in human
gut bacterial community: estimating gene numbers inside a human
body. PLoS One 2009, 4:e6074.
62. Eckburg PB, Bik EM, Bernstein CN, Purdom E, Dethlefsen L, Sargent M,
Gill SR, Nelson KE, Relman DA: Diversity of the human intestinal microbial
flora. Science 2005, 308:1635-1638.
63. Gao Z, Tseng CH, Pei Z, Blaser MJ: Molecular analysis of human forearm
superficial skin bacterial biota. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2007,
104:2927-2932.
64. Farage M, Maibach H: Lifetime changes in the vulva and vagina. Arch
Gynecol Obstet 2006, 273:195-202.

Page 15 of 16

65. Neggers YH, Nansel TR, Andrews WW, Schwebke JR, Yu KF, Goldenberg RL,
Klebanoff MA: Dietary intake of selected nutrients affects bacterial
vaginosis in women. J Nutr 2007, 137:2128-2133.
66. Newton ER, Piper JM, Shain RN, Perdue ST, Peairs W: Predictors of the
vaginal microflora. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2001, 184:845-53, discussion 853855.
67. Doderlein A: Die Scheidensekretuntersuchungen. Zentralbl Gynaekol 1894,
18:10-14.
68. Eschenbach DA, Davick PR, Williams BL, Klebanoff SJ, Young-Smith K,
Critchlow CM, Holmes KK: Prevalence of hydrogen peroxide-producing
Lactobacillus species in normal women and women with bacterial
vaginosis. J Clin Microbiol 1989, 27:251-256.
69. Hillier SL, Krohn MA, Klebanoff SJ, Eschenbach DA: The relationship of
hydrogen peroxide-producing lactobacilli to bacterial vaginosis and
genital microflora in pregnant women. Obstet Gynecol 1992, 79:369-373.
70. Hillier SL, Krohn MA, Rabe LK, Klebanoff SJ, Eschenbach DA: The normal
vaginal flora, H2O2-producing lactobacilli, and bacterial vaginosis in
pregnant women. Clin Infect Dis 1993, 16(Suppl 4):S273-281.
71. Ferris MJ, Norori J, Zozaya-Hinchliffe M, Martin DH: Cultivationindependent analysis of changes in bacterial vaginosis flora following
metronidazole treatment. J Clin Microbiol 2007, 45:1016-1018.
72. Jakobsson T, Forsum U: Lactobacillus iners: a marker of changes in the
vaginal flora? J Clin Microbiol 2007, 45:3145.
73. Sobel JD: Bacterial vaginosis. Annu Rev Med 2000, 51:349-356.
74. Menard JP, Fenollar F, Henry M, Bretelle F, Raoult D: Molecular
quantification of Gardnerella vaginalis and Atopobium vaginae loads to
predict bacterial vaginosis. Clin Infect Dis 2008, 47:33-43.
75. Rodriguez Jovita M, Collins MD, Sjoden B, Falsen E: Characterization of a
novel Atopobium isolate from the human vagina: description of
Atopobium vaginae sp. nov. Int J Syst Bacteriol 1999, 49(Pt 4):1573-1576.
76. Bradshaw CS, Tabrizi SN, Fairley CK, Morton AN, Rudland E, Garland SM: The
association of Atopobium vaginae and Gardnerella vaginalis with
bacterial vaginosis and recurrence after oral metronidazole therapy. J
Infect Dis 2006, 194:828-836.
77. Tamrakar R, Yamada T, Furuta I, Cho K, Morikawa M, Yamada H, Sakuragi N,
Minakami H: Association between Lactobacillus species and bacterial
vaginosis-related bacteria, and bacterial vaginosis scores in pregnant
Japanese women. BMC Infect Dis 2007, 7:128.
78. Nyirjesy P, McIntosh MJ, Steinmetz JI, Schumacher RJ, Joffrion JL: The
effects of intravaginal clindamycin and metronidazole therapy on
vaginal mobiluncus morphotypes in patients with bacterial vaginosis.
Sex Transm Dis 2007, 34:197-202.
79. Zozaya-Hinchliffe M, Martin DH, Ferris MJ: Prevalence and abundance of
uncultivated Megasphaera-like bacteria in the human vaginal
environment. Appl Environ Microbiol 2008, 74:1656-1659.
80. Pybus V, Onderdonk AB: Evidence for a commensal, symbiotic
relationship between Gardnerella vaginalis and Prevotella bivia involving
ammonia: potential significance for bacterial vaginosis. J Infect Dis 1997,
175:406-413.
81. Amsel R, Totten PA, Spiegel CA, Chen KC, Eschenbach D, Holmes KK:
Nonspecific vaginitis. Diagnostic criteria and microbial and
epidemiologic associations. Am J Med 1983, 74:14-22.
82. Nugent RP, Krohn MA, Hillier SL: Reliability of diagnosing bacterial
vaginosis is improved by a standardized method of gram stain
interpretation. J Clin Microbiol 1991, 29:297-301.
83. Kim TK, Thomas SM, Ho M, Sharma S, Reich CI, Frank JA, Yeater KM,
Biggs DR, Nakamura N, Stumpf R, Leigh SR, Tapping RI, Blanke SR,
Slauch JM, Gaskins HR, Weisbaum JS, Olsen GJ, Hoyer LL, Wilson BA:
Heterogeneity of vaginal microbial communities within individuals. J Clin
Microbiol 2009, 47:1181-1189.
84. Margulies M, Egholm M, Altman WE, Attiya S, Bader JS, Bemben LA, Berka J,
Braverman MS, Chen YJ, Chen Z, Dewell SB, Du L, Fierro JM, Gomes XV,
Godwin BC, He W, Helgesen S, Ho CH, Irzyk GP, Jando SC, Alenquer ML,
Jarvie TP, Jirage KB, Kim JB, Knight JR, Lanza JR, Leamon JH, Lefkowitz SM,
Lei M, Li J, Lohman KL, Lu H, Makhijani VB, McDade KE, McKenna MP,
Myers EW, Nickerson E, Nobile JR, Plant R, Puc BP, Ronan MT, Roth GT,
Sarkis GJ, Simons JF, Simpson JW, Srinivasan M, Tartaro KR, Tomasz A,
Vogt KA, Volkmer GA, Wang SH, Wang Y, Weiner MP, Yu P, Begley RF,
Rothberg JM: Genome sequencing in microfabricated high-density
picolitre reactors. Nature 2005, 437:376-380.

Ling et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:488
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/488

Page 16 of 16

85. Parameswaran P, Jalili R, Tao L, Shokralla S, Gharizadeh B, Ronaghi M,
Fire AZ: A pyrosequencing-tailored nucleotide barcode design unveils
opportunities for large-scale sample multiplexing. Nucleic Acids Res 2007,
35:e130.
86. Sogin ML, Morrison HG, Huber JA, Mark Welch D, Huse SM, Neal PR,
Arrieta JM, Herndl GJ: Microbial diversity in the deep sea and the
underexplored “rare biosphere”. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006,
103:12115-11220.
87. Schloss PD, Westcott SL, Ryabin T, Hall JR, Hartmann M, Hollister EB,
Lesniewski RA, Oakley BB, Parks DH, Robinson CJ, Sahl JW, Stres B,
Thallinger GG, Van Horn DJ, Weber CF: Introducing mothur: open-source,
platform-independent, community-supported software for describing
and comparing microbial communities. Appl Environ Microbiol 2009,
75:7537-7541.
88. Wang Q, Garrity GM, Tiedje JM, Cole JR: Naive Bayesian classifier for rapid
assignment of rRNA sequences into the new bacterial taxonomy. Appl
Environ Microbiol 2007, 73:5261-5267.
89. Lozupone C, Hamady M, Knight R: UniFrac–an online tool for comparing
microbial community diversity in a phylogenetic context. BMC
Bioinformatics 2006, 7:371.
doi:10.1186/1471-2164-11-488
Cite this article as: Ling et al.: Molecular analysis of the diversity of
vaginal microbiota associated with bacterial vaginosis. BMC Genomics
2010 11:488.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
