<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>1475-2859-3-5.fm</title>
<meta name="Author" content="csproduction"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 7.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 5.0.5 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Microbial Cell Factories

BioMed Central

Open Access

Commentary

Thermus thermophilus genome analysis: benefits and implications
Efthimia E Lioliou, Anastasia A Pantazaki and Dimitrios A Kyriakidis*
Address: Laboratory of Biochemistry, Department of Chemistry, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, 54124 Thessaloniki, Greece
Email: Efthimia E Lioliou - elioliou@chem.auth.gr; Anastasia A Pantazaki - natasa@chem.auth.gr; Dimitrios A Kyriakidis* - kyr@chem.auth.gr
* Corresponding author

Published: 10 May 2004
Microbial Cell Factories 2004, 3:5

Received: 03 May 2004
Accepted: 10 May 2004

This article is available from: http://www.microbialcellfactories.com/content/3/1/5
© 2004 Lioliou et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article: verbatim copying and redistribution of this article are permitted in all
media for any purpose, provided this notice is preserved along with the article's original URL.

Abstract
The genome sequence analysis of Thermus thermophilus HB27, a microorganism with high
biotechnological potential, has recently been published. In that report, the chromosomal and the
megaplasmid sequence were compared to those of other organisms and discussed on the basis of
their physiological and metabolic features. Out of the 2,218 putative genes identified through the
large genome sequencing project, a significant number has potential interest for biotechnology. The
present communication will discuss the accumulating information on molecules participating in
fundamental biological processes or having potential biotechnological importance.

Introduction
The T. thermophilus HB27 genome sequence, published on
April 4 2004 [1], has already made an impact on the
research community and raised intriguing questions. In
the last decade a great deal of effort has been put on the
biochemistry and physiology of the prokaryotes and especially the thermophilic bacteria. Since the first publication
of a complete microbial genome in 1995, more than 100
microbial genomes have been completely sequenced and
another 300 microbial genome sequencing projects are
estimated to be in progress worldwide. Every genome that
has been sequenced to date has provided new insight into
the biological processes, activities and potential of these
species that had not been evident before. Gene transfer,
environmental applications and virulence mechanisms
are only some of the many processes for which significant
insight has been gained through these projects.
The genome of T. thermophilus, consists of a 1,894,877
base pair chromosome and a 232,605 base pair megaplasmid, designated pTT27 [1]. The completion of the T. thermophilus HB27 genome sequencing project resulted in the
discovery of a number of new genes with potential interest
for biotechnological applications [1]. Since in ther-

mophilic bacteria, fundamental cell mechanisms and
processes such as protein thermostability, replication,
transcription, translation, secretion, cell-signaling etc are
not well understood yet, the T. thermophilus genome analysis will greatly improve our understanding towards that
direction.
Recent reviews discuss the enzymes from T. thermophilus
with biotechnological interest [2] and the biochemical
and molecular features of thermozymes [3-6]. All these
thermozymes display higher stability and activity than
their counterparts currently used in the biotechnological
industry. These enzymes are not only more thermostable
than their mesophilic homologues, but are also more
resistant to chemical agents, properties that make them
extremely attractive for industrial processes [3]. Recent
structural comparisons among mesophiles (or mesozymes) and thermozymes have validated numerous protein stabilizing mechanisms including hydrophobic
interactions, packing efficiency, salt bridges, hydrogen
bonding, reduction of conformational strain, loop stabilization, resistance to covalent destruction [6] and binding
to RNA [7]. The thermal adaptation of protein synthesis in
T. thermophilus was attributed to a key enzyme, a thiolase
Page 1 of 3
(page number not for citation purposes)

Microbial Cell Factories 2004, 3

http://www.microbialcellfactories.com/content/3/1/5

responsible for a post-transcriptional modification of the
thermophilic bacterial tRNAs [8].

encoding different biosynthetic enzymes or regulatory
proteins.

Discussion

Examination of all sequenced genomes reveals that
almost 40% of each genome remains as hypothetical proteins. This demands that high-throughput methodologies
be developed for the efficient analysis of these large data
sets, including high-throughput proteomics, gene expression and protein-protein interaction studies [11]. Microarrays are rapidly becoming standard laboratory tools for
investigating gene expression under different conditions,
as well as for looking at the presence and absence of genes
in different strains or species that are related to a reference
genome.

The 2,218 identified putative genes from T. thermophilus
[1] were compared to those of the closest relative
sequenced so far, the mesophilic bacterium Deinococcus
radiodurans. Both organisms share a similar set of proteins,
although their genomes lack extensive synteny. Substantial similarity to annotated data base entries allowed the
authors to assign putative functions to 1,482 protein-coding genes. Of the remaining 736 open reading frames,
about 488 had no substantial similarity to entries in public databases, and were therefore designated hypothetical
proteins [1]. These were found more frequently on the
plasmid (39%) than on the chromosome (20%). The
G+C content in the T. thermophilus genome was 69.4% on
average [1]. Regions with substantial lower G+C content
represented ribosomal RNA clusters and at least three
more gene clusters that were flanked by mobile elements.
A cluster containing 15 genes with atypical codon usage
showed similarities to sugar transferases, epimerases and
dehydrogenases involved in lipopolysaccharide O-antigen biosynthesis.
The authors posed the question of how the thermophilic
cells respond to thermal challenge at the molecular level.
Surprisingly, the Ung family of proteins, coding for uracilDNA-glycosylases, was not found in T. thermophilus. It is
known that this gene family act as a general line of defense
against cytosine deamination and its members are nearly
ubiquitous in the bacterial and eukaryotic domains of the
phylogenetic tree. However, base excision repair genes are
represented in the T. thermophilus genome, while in the
absence of a LexA homologue, the corresponding repair
genes may be expressed constitutively.
In bacterial genomes, functionally related genes often
facilitate the coordination of operons. The finding of the
well studied operons in the thermophilic organisms, now
in the light of the total genome analysis of T. thermophilus,
will form the basis for further investigation into genome
evolution and gene regulation. Recently, an unusual gene
structure has been described in T. thermophilus, in which
the ribosomal protein L34 coding sequence (rpmH) was
found to be entirely overlapped by the unusually large
RNase P protein subunit sequence (rnpA) [9]. These genes,
which were part of the same operon in E. coli, are located
near the origin of replication [9]. This co-localization of
genes in a wide range of bacterial genomes implies an
important linkage in their regulation of gene expression.
The gene disruption method for deleting genes of interest
[10] combined with the T. thermophilus genome sequence
project will provide a unique opportunity for taking a
genomics-based approach toward identifying genes

The full genome sequence of T. thermophilus [1] will revolutionize both the character and the steps on discoveries
of new biotechnological enzymes or products. Stable
enzymes are useful not only for industrial applications,
but also for structural biology research [1,2]. T. thermophilus cells can now be used as a host for the selection
of stable enzymes. Within this context, vector systems
have been developed for extreme thermophiles and the
production of stabilized mutants (3-isopropylmalate
dehydrogenase) has been accomplished [10]. Moreover,
T. thermophilus can synthesize vitamin B12, carotens, polyhydroxyalkanoate polymers in different media, suggesting that thermophilic bacteria could be useful in
producing compounds of much current interest [1,2,12].
T. thermophilus chaperonins, a kind of heat shock proteins
(Hsp), demonstrate ability to facilitate folding of several
enzymes [2]. In the past, T. thermophilus was characterized
as a treasure house for the discovery of new naturally
occurring polyamines or other secondary metabolites and
now most of their biosynthetic genes are predicted [1].
Ornithine decarboxylase, the key enzyme for polyamine
biosynthesis, and its antizyme were purified from T. thermophilus [7,13]. The observation that both these regulatory proteins are bound to nucleic acids indicates that this
binding facilitates the stabilization of the enzymic activities of the thermophilic organisms. Fewer two-component
signal transduction systems are predicted to exist in T.
thermophilus compared to mesophiles [1], but a more specific alignment of the sequences of interest may reveal the
presence of others. The products of atoS and atoC genes,
for example, have been previously predicted to constitute
a two-component signal transduction system in E. coli,
regulating expression of the atoDAEB operon-encoded
enzymes that control short-chain fatty acid catabolism
upon acetoacetate induction and antizyme has been
reported to be the atoC gene product [14,15]. The two proteins of the fore mentioned system which have been biochemically characterized in E. coli [16] as well as the
corresponding regulated operon were found to have
homologues in the T. thermophilus genome. The absence

Page 2 of 3
(page number not for citation purposes)

Microbial Cell Factories 2004, 3

of chemotaxis cascades or methyl-accepting chemotaxis
proteins and flagella biosynthetic genes indicates that the
motility of this organism is restricted. However, type IV
pili-forming genes were identified. Also, numerous proteases, lipases, pullulanases, α- and β-glucosidases, galacturonases,
esterases,
phosphatases,
alcohol
dehydrogenases and DNA/RNA processing enzymes were
identified in the genome sequence as well.
The availability of the full genome sequence of T. thermophilus will immeasurably advance the re-interpretation
of bacterial evolution using criteria that include the ultra
structure of the cell envelope that identifies this genus as
an intermediate evolutionary step between the Gram-positive (monoderms) and the Gram-negative (diderms) bacteria [17]. It has recently been reported that T. thermophilus
actually has a periplasmic space, which is functionally
similar to that of proteobacteria [18].
Transfer of genetic material between different individual
bacterial cells (i.e. horizontal gene transfer) is mediated
by plasmids, bacteriophages or conjugative elements. The
latter have been named gene islands, or depending on
their function, pathogenicity, symbiosis or degradation
islands [19]. The possible presence of gene islands in the
genome or megaplasmid of T. thermophilus will enlighten
the evolutionary mechanisms that took place in order to
shape the genetic content of this microorganism.

http://www.microbialcellfactories.com/content/3/1/5

4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

9.
10.

11.
12.

13.

14.

15.
16.

Conclusions
We have attempted to channel into the advantages coming from the genome sequence of the extreme thermophile T. thermophilus. It is evident that additional
information and a lot of work are necessary. Our understanding of the function of many thermostable enzymes
or proteins will improve by the analysis of the T. thermophilus genome. Nevertheless, many uncertainties must
be clarified before it can be considered worthwhile to put
more research endeavor in these "hot" areas. Further
advances on large-scale preparation of thermophilic bacteria with high transformation efficiency, in new bioreactors working at high temperatures, could lead to
significant improvements in thermophilic enzymes and
other cell factory products.

References
1.

2.
3.

Henne A, Bruggemann H, Raasch C, Wiezer A, Hartsch T, Liesegang
H, Johann A, Lienard T, Gohl O, Martinez-Arias R, Jacobi C, Starkuviene V, Schlenczeck S, Dencker S, Huber R, Klenk HP, Kramer W,
Merkl R, Gottschalk G, Fritz HJ: The genome sequence of the
extreme thermophile Thermus thermophilus. Nat Biotechnol
2004, 22:547-53.
Pantazaki AA, Pritsa AA, Kyriakidis DA: Biotechnologically relevant enzymes from Thermus thermophilus. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 2002, 58:1-12.
Lasa I, Berenguer J: Thermophilic enzymes and their biotechnological potential. Microbiologia 1993, 9:77-89.

17.
18.

19.

Leuschner C, Antranikian G: Heat-stable enzymes from
extremely thermophilic and hyperthermophilic microorganisms. World J Microbiol Biotechnol 1995, 11:95-114.
Zeikus JG, Vieille C, Savchenko A: Thermozymes: biotechnology
and structure-function relationships. Extremophiles 1998,
2:179-183.
Niehaus F, Bertoldo C, Kahler M, Antranikian G: Extremophiles as
a source of novel enzymes for industrial application. Appl
Microbiol Biotechnol 1999, 51:711-729.
Pantazaki AA, Liakopoulou-Kyriakides M, Kyriakidis DA: Ornithine
decarboxylase in Thermus thermophilus: An RNA-associated
enzyme. Amino Acids 1997, 13:299-309.
Shigi N, Suzuki T, Tamakoshi M, Oshima T, Watanabe K: Conserved
bases in the TPsi C loop of tRNA are determinants for thermophile-specific 2-thiouridylation at position 54. J Biol Chem
2002, 277:39128-35.
Ellis JC, Brown JW: Genes within genes within bacteria. TRENDS
Biochem Sci 2003, 10:521-523.
Tamakoshi M, Yaoi T, Oshima T, Yamagishi A: An efficient gene
replacement and deletion system for an extreme thermophile, Thermus thermophilus. FEMS Microbiol Lett 1999,
173:431-437.
Nelson KE: The future of microbial genomics. Environ Microbiol
2003, 5:1223-1225.
Pantazaki AA, Tambaka MG, Langlois V, Guerin P, Kyriakidis DA: Polyhydroxyalkanoate (PHA) biosynthesis in Thermus thermophilus: Purification and biochemical properties of PHA
synthase. Mol Cell Biochem 2003, 254:173-183.
Pantazaki AA, Anagnostopoulos CG, Lioliou EE, Kyriakidis DA:
Characterization of ornithine decarboxylase and regulation
by its antizyme in Thermus thermophilus. Mol Cell Biochem 1999,
195:55-64.
Canellakis ES, Paterakis AA, Huang S-C, Panagiotidis CA, Kyriakidis
DA: Identification, cloning, and nucleotide sequencing of the
ornithine decarboxylase antizyme gene of Escherichia coli.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1993, 90:7129-7133.
Jenkins LS, Nunn WD: Regulation of the ato operon by the atoC
gene in Escherichia coli. J Bacteriol 1987, 169:2096-2102.
Lioliou EE: Polyamine biosynthesis regulation and metabolic
control of a two-component signal transduction system. PhD
Thesis Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Chemistry Department;
2003.
Gupta RS: The natural evolutionary relationships among
prokaryotes. Crit Rev Microbiol 2000, 26:111-31.
Castan P, Zafra O, Moreno R, de Pedro MA, Vallis C, Cava F, Caro E,
Schwarz H, Berenguer J: The periplasmic space in Thermus thermophilus: evidence from a regulation-defective S-layer
mutant overexpressing an alkaline phosphatase. Extremophiles
2002, 6:225-232.
van der Meer JR, Sentchilo V: Genomic islands and the evolution
of catabolic pathways in bacteria. Curr Opin Biotechnol 2003,
14:248-254.

Publish with Bio Med Central and every
scientist can read your work free of charge
"BioMed Central will be the most significant development for
disseminating the results of biomedical researc h in our lifetime."
Sir Paul Nurse, Cancer Research UK

Your research papers will be:
available free of charge to the entire biomedical community
peer reviewed and published immediately upon acceptance
cited in PubMed and archived on PubMed Central
yours — you keep the copyright

BioMedcentral

Submit your manuscript here:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/info/publishing_adv.asp

Page 3 of 3
(page number not for citation purposes)

</pre>
</body>
</html>
