<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>A computational approach to candidate gene prioritization for X-linked mental retardation using annotation-based binary filtering and motif-based linear discriminatory analysis</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Biology Direct 2011, 6:30. doi:10.1186/1745-6150-6-30"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Zané Lombard"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Lombard et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:30
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/30

RESEARCH

Open Access

A computational approach to candidate gene
prioritization for X-linked mental retardation
using annotation-based binary filtering and
motif-based linear discriminatory analysis
Zané Lombard1*†, Chungoo Park2,3†, Kateryna D Makova2 and Michèle Ramsay1

Abstract
Background: Several computational candidate gene selection and prioritization methods have recently been
developed. These in silico selection and prioritization techniques are usually based on two central approaches - the
examination of similarities to known disease genes and/or the evaluation of functional annotation of genes. Each
of these approaches has its own caveats. Here we employ a previously described method of candidate gene
prioritization based mainly on gene annotation, in accompaniment with a technique based on the evaluation of
pertinent sequence motifs or signatures, in an attempt to refine the gene prioritization approach. We apply this
approach to X-linked mental retardation (XLMR), a group of heterogeneous disorders for which some of the
underlying genetics is known.
Results: The gene annotation-based binary filtering method yielded a ranked list of putative XLMR candidate
genes with good plausibility of being associated with the development of mental retardation. In parallel, a motif
finding approach based on linear discriminatory analysis (LDA) was employed to identify short sequence patterns
that may discriminate XLMR from non-XLMR genes. High rates (>80%) of correct classification was achieved,
suggesting that the identification of these motifs effectively captures genomic signals associated with XLMR
vs. non-XLMR genes. The computational tools developed for the motif-based LDA is integrated into the freely
available genomic analysis portal Galaxy (http://main.g2.bx.psu.edu/). Nine genes (APLN, ZC4H2, MAGED4, MAGED4B,
RAP2C, FAM156A, FAM156B, TBL1X, and UXT) were highlighted as highly-ranked XLMR methods.
Conclusions: The combination of gene annotation information and sequence motif-orientated computational
candidate gene prediction methods highlight an added benefit in generating a list of plausible candidate genes, as
has been demonstrated for XLMR.
Reviewers: This article was reviewed by Dr Barbara Bardoni (nominated by Prof Juergen Brosius); Prof Neil Smalheiser
and Dr Dustin Holloway (nominated by Prof Charles DeLisi).

* Correspondence: zane.lombard@nhls.ac.za
† Contributed equally
1
Division of Human Genetics, School of Pathology, Faculty of Health
Sciences, National Health Laboratory Service & University of the
Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, 2000, South Africa
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
© 2011 Lombard et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Lombard et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:30
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/30

Background
The identification of genes and genetic variants that
result in disease, or contribute to disease susceptibility,
is a critical objective in medical research. Such findings
have contributed to improvements in diagnosis, prognosis and therapy [1]. The typical approach taken for
disease gene discovery for monogenic traits involves the
identification of affected families, genotyping and linkage
analysis. Subsequent fine mapping of the identified
linked region is performed to focus the candidate region
and reduce the number of putative candidate genes, and
mutation detection is done to uncover the genetic cause
of the disorder [2,3]. This approach has been successfully used to pinpoint the genetic contributors for over a
thousand diseases, including Huntington disease [4],
Duchenne muscular dystrophy [5] and cystic fibrosis [6].
With the successful identification of disease genes for
many single-gene disorders, the focus has shifted to diseases with a complex, multifactorial etiology [7,8]. The
candidate gene approach has often been used in the
search for complex disease genes, but with the advent of
massively parallel sequencing and genotyping, genomewide approaches (such as genome-wide association studies [GWAS]) are starting to take precedence [9]. However, these approaches can result in large sets of
potentially implicated genes, with the challenge then
being to identify the actual genes involved with disease
pathogenesis - a potentially laborious and costly
exercise.
Recently, many computational candidate gene selection and prioritization methods have been developed, in
part to provide new avenues to pinpoint disease genes
or to prioritize genes from a large list of candidates
[10-21]. Most often, one of two approaches is taken to
identify and prioritize putative disease genes - either
investigating similarities (such as sequence resemblance)
to known disease genes or evaluating functional annotation of genes. The first is based on the premise that differences exist between disease genes, and other human
genes, including differences in gene sequence and structure, which can then be utilized to single out candidate
disease genes [13,14,22,23]. This information can also be
used for other objectives such as the discovery of
sequences important in X-chromosome inactivation, and
the subsequent prediction of expression status of individual genes [24]. The second is an annotation-based
approach that centers on the hypothesis that similar diseases may be influenced by genes with comparable features (such as function). This method relies heavily on
the terms used to describe genes and their related products, and standardized ontologies utilized across databases (such as Gene Ontology (GO) and eVOC) are
imperative to the efficiency of this approach.

Page 2 of 17

In an attempt to increase the probability of correctly
identifying disease related genes by producing a short
list of highly probable candidate genes, a combined
approach could reduce uncertainty. This could be done
by combining multiple independent lines of evidence,
each by itself lacking sufficient power. In this paper, a
previously described method of candidate gene selection
based primarily on gene annotation [25] is complemented by the evaluation of pertinent DNA sequence motifs
or signatures to refine the gene selection approach [24].
The intercept between these approaches is evaluated,
and the usefulness of combining the two is discussed.
We have applied this approach to X-linked mental retardation (XLMR), a group of related but heterogeneous
disorders for which some of the underlying genetics is
known (reviewed in [26]).

Results
Annotation-based gene prioritization using a binary
filtering method

The complete set of X chromosome genes (a total of
814 X-linked genes; Ensembl v49) was subjected to candidate gene selection for XLMR using a previously
described method [25]. Gene annotation terms found to
be relevant to XLMR were identified through literature
and data-mining (a total of 40 terms; summarized in
Table 1). Each term was used as a selection criterion to
populate a gene list (containing all genes within the
Ensembl database annotated with that term). Candidate
genes were then prioritized using a binary evaluation
grid that assessed the term gene lists against the Xlinked gene list, and genes were scored (see Methods for
details) accordingly, and the X-linked gene list was subsequently prioritized for putative involvement in XLMR.
X-linked genes with the most matches to the annotation-derived gene lists (27/40 being the most matches
for any gene) were ranked as strong candidate XLMR
genes. Figure 1 shows the relative enrichment for known
XLMR genes within the prioritized list, both cumulatively and as percentage enrichment. Table S1 (Additional File 1) shows the prioritization of X-linked genes
as XLMR candidates using this approach, serving as a
test for the sensitivity of this approach. The genes
ranked highly by this method (i.e. more terms matched,
therefore stronger support of being a likely candidate)
have a higher enrichment for known XLMR genes than
for non-XLMR genes. Conversely, the enrichment
becomes moderated as one moves lower down the
prioritized list.
By considering the higher ranking genes on the prioritized list (signified by an arbitrary cut-off of 10/40
matches), it is observed that 66% (54/82) of known
XLMR genes are present. This signifies a two-fold

Lombard et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:30
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/30

Page 3 of 17

Table 1 Annotation terms identified to be pertinent to XLMR using a literature- and data-mining approach
ANNOTATION TERM CATEGORIES1
Anatomical site

Biological Process

Phenotype

Animal model homology

Developmental

Development

Seizures

Phenotype

Liver

Transcription

Epilepsy

Behaviour/Neurological

Central nervous system

Metabolism

Acidosis

Nervous system related

Respiratory

Phosphorylation

Microcephaly

Embryogenesis

Cerebellum

Brain development

Tremor

Kidney

Timing

Hippocampus
Spinal cord

Pre-Embryonic
Embryonic

Cerebral cortex

Fetal

Testis
Brain stem
Peripheral nerve
Cerebrum
Substantia nigra

Anatomy
2
TS8-9 Ectoderm
TS10-13 Neural Ectoderm
TS14-26 CNS

Cardiovascular
Adrenal gland
Thyroid
Ovary
Amygdala
Musculoskeletal
Ganglion
Hypothalamus
1

These terms were used to extract gene lists that were compared to all X chromosome genes in a binary filtering process. Annotation terms are divided into four
categories based on their ontological classification.
TS - Theiller stage: A term used to denote the stage of development of a mouse as described by Theiler in “The House Mouse: Atlas of Mouse Development”
(Springer-Verlag, New York, 1989)

2

enrichment for XLMR genes (54/255; 0.212) in this
group compared to all currently identified XLMR genes
relative to X-linked genes (82/814; 0.101). Among the
higher ranking genes, there were 201 genes that have
not previously been associated with XLMR, which may
be interesting candidates (Table S2, Additional File 1).
MECP2, a known XLMR causative gene (OMIM
*300005), had the most annotation term matches (27/
40) and matched at least one term in all four nomenclature categories used in prioritization (i.e., anatomical
site terms, biological process, animal homology, and
phenotype; see Methods for details). MECP2 is a
widely expressed transcriptional repressor and has two
conserved functional domains, the methyl-CpG binding
domain and the transcription repression domain [27].
MECP2 displays extreme allelic heterogeneity, with
more than 100 different mutations in the MECP2 gene
being described in patients with Rett Syndrome
[28,29]. Further to this, MECP2 mutations have also
been shown to produce non-syndromic male fatal neonatal encephalopathy, progressive spasticity and nonsyndromic Angelman and Prader-Willi-like phenotypes
[29-32]. Rett syndrome is a prime example of the locus
heterogeneity associated with XLMR as MECP2 mutations account for only approximately 70-80% of cases,

whereas locus heterogeneity is hypothesized to explain
the occurrence of the syndrome among MECP2 negative cases [29]. It is therefore likely that other genes
that have been prioritized by the binary ranking
method may be genetic candidates for Rett syndrome
(among other forms of mental retardation).
The dystrophin gene (DMD) was ranked second highest (24/40 matches) and mutations in this gene have
been associated with X-linked mental retardation in
some, but not all cases. DMD is one of the largest
known genes, measuring 2.4 Mb, and was identified as
the gene responsible for Duchenne (DMD) and Becker
(BMD) muscular dystrophies. Dystrophin mRNA is
present in brain tissue and is therefore thought to
potentially contribute to mental retardation, as observed
in some DMD patients [33]. Dystrophin in brain is transcribed from a different promoter to that used in muscle. Chelly et al. (1990) [34] demonstrated that the
brain-type promoter of the dystrophin gene is highly
specific to neurons.
Prioritization based on sequence motifs

Gene sets were selected to identify distinguishing
sequence-based features in the immediately upstream
regions of the transcriptions start sites (TSSs) between

Lombard et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:30
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/30

Page 4 of 17

Figure 1 Prioritization of genes on the X chromosome as XLMR candidates using a binary filtering process. The effective cumulative
coverage of XLMR genes from lowest to highest ranked categories is depicted (left Y-axis) as well as the percentage of genes that are XLMR-linked
within each of the categories (right Y-axis).

the sets. The X-linked genes were divided into two
groups: genes demonstrated to be involved in XLMR
(prior validated and published research) and genes that
have not been identified as being involved in XLMR
(called non-XLMR - this group would include both
genes not involved in XLMR and genes that have not
yet been discovered to cause XLMR). In this part of the
study, 81 and 486 genes were labeled as XLMR and
non-XLMR genes, respectively. The remaining X-linked
genes were excluded from the analysis because of the
lack of annotated putative transcription start sites. To
consider the effects of the observed nonrandom distribution of XLMR genes along the X chromosome [35,36]
and the possible influence of distinct origins and evolutionary pressures on XLMR genes [37], genes were
labeled as belonging to the X-added region (XAR; representing evolutionary young strata) or the X-conserved
region (XCR; representing ancestral mammalian X),
determined by their genomic location [38,39] and were
analyzed separately (Table 2).
To detect sequence motifs (hereafter called “oligomers”) that may discriminate XLMR from non-XLMR
genes (separately for XAR and XCR genes), genomic
sequences (hereafter called “subgenomes”) were

compiled to form four subgenomes. They included
regions upstream from the transcription start sites of
each gene (hereafter called “contigs”) and four variable
distances were considered for the contigs: 5 kilobases
(kb), 10 kb, 50 kb, and 100 kb upstream from the TSS of
each gene. If a contig overlapped with a neighboring contig and both shared the same profile (XLMR or nonXLMR), the two were merged into a single, larger contig.
If a contig overlapped with a contig from the opposite
profile (e.g., XLMR and non-XLMR), then both contigs
were discarded. Finally, if a contig from one profile overlapped with any part of a gene that was classified in the
opposite profile, the contig was discarded (Table S3 Additional File 1). Because the 3’ portions of genes regulate mRNA stability and translational efficiency [40,41]
and play an important role in development and disease
Table 2 Number of genes considered for sequence-based
prioritization
XAR

XCR

TOTAL

XLMR

25

56

81

Non-XLMR

110

376

486

TOTAL

135

432

Lombard et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:30
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/30

[42,43], these regions might contain cis-acting sequences
regulating XLMR genes. To address this possibility, we
performed the same analysis using subgenomes involving
regions both upstream and downstream from the TSSs of
genes. We found no distinct difference between the two
approaches in terms of classification success rates (data
not shown). For this reason, we use the subgenomes
derived from the upstream region of the TSSs of genes in
the subsequent analysis.
To identify the overrepresented oligomers in each subgenome, the following criteria were considered: first,
each oligomer was required to occur at least ten times
in the subgenome (because each subgenome usually had
at least 10 genes; Table S3) and second, to be retained
for a particular subgenome (e.g. XLMR; XAR), the oligomer was required to occur five times more frequently in
that subgenome compared to the alternative (e.g. nonXLMR, XAR; because the median value for the gene
ratio between XLMR and non-XLMR subgenomes is ~5;
Table S3). For the analysis described below, only
12-mers within 10 kb, 50 kb, and 100 kb of each gene
were used as they had the highest total number of overrepresented oligomers (Table S4 - Additional File 1);
too few overrepresented oligomers were found in the 5
kb subgenomes, so this scale was omitted from the
further analysis (see Methods for details). Permutation
tests were performed to evaluate the significance of the
overrepresentation of oligomers (Table S5 - Additional
File 1). Subsequently, overlapping (among different
subgenomes) oligomers were merged into longer ones

Page 5 of 17

resulting in 268 (two from XLMR and 266 from
non-XLMR) and 584 (11 from XLMR and 573 from
non-XLMR) overrepresented oligomers found for XAR
and XCR, respectively. Remarkably, the majority of
these oligomers (about 97%) overlapped with known
classes of interspersed elements. There was no clear difference in sequence classes between XLMR and nonXLMR. For overrepresented oligomers not mapping to
the interspersed elements, they did not match known
transcription factor binding motifs from the JASPAR
CORE database [44].
Statistical analyses were performed to predict whether,
using the set of overrepresented oligomers, genes could
be classified as putative XLMR genes or non-XLMR
genes. Linear discriminant analysis (LDA [45]) was used
as a classifier to distinguish between XLMR and nonXLMR genes, considering XAR and XCR genes separately. Genes and counts of overrepresented oligomers
upstream from TSSs of genes, identified above, were
used as the units and features for classification. Utilizing
two distinct sets of training data (either genes from the
XAR or XCR), both LDA classifiers achieved classification accuracy of greater than 80% for both XLMR and
non-XLMR classes except for the 10 kb range (Table 3).
The high rates of correct classification imply that classifiers based on counts of overrepresented oligomers
effectively capture genomic signals found near XLMR
vs. non-XLMR genes. In the case of the 100 kb range,
correct classification rates for both classifiers were ≥
96% for XLMR and non-XLMR classes (Figure 2 and

Figure 2 LDA classification success rates for different values of the tuning parameter. (A) All XAR genes were used for training and test
sets. (B) All XCR genes were used for training and test sets. Leave-one-out cross-validation was utilized to calculate correct classification rates.
Dots indicate optimal values of τ. More detailed information is given in Table 3.

Lombard et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:30
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/30

Page 6 of 17

Table 3 Number of genes for training and success rates of LDA
Set Analyzed

Parameter

10 kb (Genes)

50 kb (Genes)

100 kb (Genes)

Training and test set of genes in XAR

τ

0.96

0.43

0.4

Success in XLMR

100% (19)

100% (15)

100% (9)

Success in non-XLMR

45% (84)

91% (40)

96% (26)

τ

0.87

0.75

0.62

Success in XLMR

87% (38)

100% (16)

100% (7)

Success in non-XLMR

52% (257)

82% (141)

96% (74)

Training and test set of genes in XCR

τ is a tuning parameter, which was selected to maximize the sum of correct classification rates for XLMR and non-XLMR sets

Table 3). All genes tested in XAR with the 100 kb distance were perfectly classified (Table S7 - Additional
File 1). For genes in XCR with the 100 kb distance, two
genes (out of seven) in the XLMR class and three genes
(out of 75) in non-XLMR class were incorrectly classified. Among these three incorrectly classified genes, one
gene (STARD8) was consistently misclassified an XLMR
gene at 10 kb and 50 kb distances as well, indicating
that this gene may be a strong candidate XLMR gene.
The other two genes that were misclassified with the
100 kb distance - TRO and NUDT10 - were not consistently misclassified across all three distances (Table S7),
which lowers our confidence in them being true candidates. In addition to this there were a further seven
non-XLMR genes that were incorrectly classified as
XLMR-genes at both 10 kb and 50 kb distances (ESX1,
FGF16, ZC4H2, MAMLD1, ODZ1, PAGE4 and
TMEM28).
Combined analysis of annotation-based and sequence
motif assessment in classifying X-linked genes as putative
XLMR genes

To evaluate which genes are classified as high-probability XLMR genes by both of the assessment approaches,
a step-wise approach was used. This was first done by
analyzing the 255 top-ranked genes from the annotation-based approach (matching at least 10/40 criteria)
and comparing them to the outcomes of the XLMR vs.
non-XLMR discriminatory sequence-based classifiers.
For this analysis, 154 genes (out of 255) were excluded
from the dataset; either because of the lack of an annotated TSS (18 genes) or because of the short length of
contigs (136 genes; namely, the distance from the TSS
of the gene to its closest neighbor gene was less than

10 kb). The remaining 101 genes with at least 10 kb
contigs were classified as XLMR [46] or non-XLMR
genes and assessed using the sequence-based method to
determine whether they had a XLMR or non-XLMR
signature. In the case of genes whose contig length was
greater than 50 kb (42 genes), 78.6% (33/42) had signatures as expected based on prior knowledge ("correctly
classified” i.e. based on validated knowledge of involvement with XLMR vs. not previously associated with
XLMR), and for contig lengths greater that 100 kb (22
genes), 86.4% (19/22) were correctly classified (Table 4).
Of particular interest would be the high-ranked candidates that had not previously been identified as being
involved with XLMR, yet scored highly as probable
XLMR genes and were therefore considered “incorrectly
classified”, i.e. they were included in the non-XLMR set,
but may actually be XLMR genes. This group of genes
would constitute good candidates for further research in
the context of a mental retardation phenotype. Further
analysis of genes with >50 kb contigs, using the
sequence-based classifiers with the 50 kb and 100 kb
distances, revealed that 14 genes were classified as putative XLMR genes (Table 5). Five of them are known
XLMR genes (AP1S2, ARHGEF9, BCOR, HUWE1, and
ZDHHC9) and the remaining nine (APLN, ZC4H2,
MAGED4, MAGED4B, RAP2C, FAM156A, FAM156B,
TBL1X, and UXT) are strong candidates for XLMR and
merit further analysis (Table 6). Interestingly, only one
of these nine genes (0.11) is located in the XAR, which
is lower than the relative proportion of XAR genes analyzed (266/573; 0.46).
The second comparison was to examine all the nonXLMR genes that had a low predictive score on the
sequence-based LDA within at least two categories (10

Table 4 Number of genes with ten or more matched categories using the annotation approach that were classified
correctly by sequence-based LDA method
Genes classified successfully
Length of contigs

Number of genes tested

10 kb (Genes)

50 kb (Genes)

100 kb (Genes)

> 10 kb
> 50 kb

101

54.5% (55)

52.5% (53)

52.5% (53)

42

59.5% (25)

78.6% (33)

> 100 kb

88.1% (37)

22

59.1% (13)

81.8% (18)

86.4% (19)

Lombard et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:30
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/30

Page 7 of 17

Table 5 Classification of genes with > 50 kb contigs that were present in at least ten annotation categories
No of annotation terms matched (/40

HGNC symbol

XLMR gene1

50 kb2

100 kb2

Dist (kb)3

24

DMD

1

NX

Strata

NX

71.7

23

GPM6B

0

XAR

NX

NX

68

19

AP1S2

XAR

1

X

X

61.4

19

XAR

FGF13

0

NX

NX

157.8

XCR

19

ZDHHC9

1

X

NX

60.7

XCR

18

TAF9B

0

NX

NX

133

XCR

18

FAM156A

0

X

NX

90.8

XCR

18
17

FAM156B
ARHGEF9

0
1

X
NX

NX
X

90.8
259.5

XCR
XCR

17

TMEM47

0

NX

NX

285.5

XAR

16

NAP1L2

0

NX

NX

182.7

XCR

16

NSBP1

0

NX

NX

80.3

XCR

16

PCSK1N

0

NX

NX

56.7

XCR

16

UXT

0

X

NX

64.4

XCR

15

BCOR

1

X

X

253.8

XAR

15
15

ENOX2
HUWE1

0
1

NX
X

NX
NX

155
224.7

XCR
XCR

15

LAS1L

0

NX

NX

132.8

XCR

15

THOC2

0

NX

NX

124

XCR

14

CXorf61

0

NX

NX

323.4

XCR

14

TBL1X

0

X

NX

190.3

XAR

14

TMLHE

0

NX

NX

154.8

XCR

13

C1GALT1C1

0

NX

NX

102.9

XCR

13
13

KAL1
PPP2R3B

0
0

NX
NX

NX
NX

58.6
237.4

XAR
XAR

13

RNF12

0

NX

NX

65.4

XCR

13

ZMAT1

0

NX

NX

77

XCR

12

GABRE

0

NX

NX

103

XCR

12

ZC4H2

0

X

NX

431.8

XCR

12

MAGED4

0

NX

X

115.6

XCR

12

MAGED4B

0

NX

X

115.6

XCR

12
12
11
11

MORC4
RAI2
APLN
KLHL13

0
0
0
0

NX
NX
X

NX
NX
NX

64.2
302.1
84.5

XCR
XAR
XCR

NX

NX

83.1

XCR

11

MUM1L1

0

NX

NX

93.4

XCR

11

RAP2C

0

X

NX

160.1

XCR

11

SLITRK4

0

NX

NX

72.2

XCR

11

SYTL4

0

NX

NX

88.2

XCR

10
10

CHRDL1
PHF16

0
0

NX
NX

NX
NX

300.5
72.4

XCR
XAR

10

STAG2

0

NX

NX

60.9

XCR

1

Indicates if gene is a known XLMR (= 1) or not (= 0)
2
X indicates that a gene was classified as an XLMR gene and NX signifies classificiation as a non-XLMR gene.
3
Distance from the TSS of gene to its closest neighbor gene

kb, 50 kb or 100 kb subgenomes) and to compare them
to the scores based on the annotation-based binary filtering method. STARD8 was the only gene that was
consistently misclassified as across all three distances. It
did not receive a particularly high ranking using the

annotation-based approach (6/40) and might have been
overlooked as a putative XLMR gene by this method
alone. The other two genes that were misclassified with
the 100 kb distance - TRO and NUDT10 - were both
highly ranked as candidates using the annotation

Lombard et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:30
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/30

Page 8 of 17

Table 6 Nine genes highlighted as XLMR candidates by both the annotation and sequence motif method
HGNC
symbol

Description

Location

Function

FAM156A

Family with sequence similarity 156,
member A

Xp11.23

Function Unknown

FAM156B

Family with sequence similarity 156,
member B

Xp11.22

Function Unknown

UXT

Ubiquitously-expressed transcript

Xp11.23p11.22

Plays a role in facilitating receptor-induced transcriptional activation [83]

TBL1X

Transducin (beta)-like 1X-linked

Xp22.3

Plays an essential role in transcription activation mediated by nuclear
receptors [84]

MAGED4

Melanoma antigen family D, 4

Xp11

Mainly tumour cell proliferation [85]

MAGED4B

Melanoma antigen family D, 4B

Xp11

Mainly tumour cell proliferation [85]

ZC4H2

Zinc finger, C4H2 domain containing

Xq11.1

Hepatocellular carcinoma-associated antigen [38]

APLN

Apelin

Xq25

Neuropeptide involved in the regulation of body fluid homeostasis and
cardiovascular functions [86]

RAP2C

Member of RAS oncogene family

Xq25

Involved in serum response element mediated gene transcription [64]

method - receiving a score of 20/40 and 10/40 respectively. Of the other seven non-XLMR genes that were
incorrectly classified at both 10 kb and 50 kb distances
(ESX1, FGF16, ZC4H2, MAMLD1, ODZ1, PAGE4 and
TMEM28) none received a high-rank score in the annotation method, and would have been missed if the candidates were evaluated by only this method.

Discussion
Mental retardation is defined as a disability characterized by significant limitations both in intellectual functioning and adaptive behaviour [47]. The importance of
genes on the X-chromosome in the cause of mental
retardation has been recognized for decades, largely due
to the fact that males outnumber females in nearly all
surveys of mental retardation by approximately a third
[48]. For the more than 200 forms of XLMR described,
more than 82 causative genes have been catalogued [46]
and ongoing research means that causative genes are
continually identified [49-52].
Mammalian X and Y chromosomes diverged independently after evolving from a pair of autosomes [53-55].
The X chromosome is particularly gene-poor, has an
overall low GC-content compared with the genome
average [38] and is highly enriched for interspersed
repeats. It can be divided into the following evolutionary
domains: the X-added region (XAR) and the X-conserved region (XCR). In this study we use XLMR as an
example to test a combined gene annotation and
sequence-based assessment model for candidate disease
gene prediction.
The annotation-based gene prioritization method
using binary filtering identified 201 X-linked genes that
were annotated in at least ten out of the 40 categories
chosen as representing biological categories expected to
have a link to XLMR, but which had not previously

been associated with XLMR. The annotation categories
included gene expression site, protein function, related
phenotype and animal homology. Of the top ranked
genes that had not previously been associated with a
mental retardation phenotype, several are compelling
candidates for XLMR based on their function.
The highest ranked novel candidate XLMR gene was
TIMP1 (24/40 matches) that encodes a natural inhibitor of the matrix metalloproteinases (MMP), a group
of peptidases involved in degradation of the extracellular matrix. TIMP1 was shown to reside within a
genetic hotspot for neurodegenerative disorders on the
X chromosome [56]. It has recently been shown that
MMP9-mediated TIMP1-regulated extracellular proteolysis is a novel mechanism contributing to synaptic
plasticity. It is thought that the MMP9/TIMP1 system
could be involved in a broad range of physiological
and pathological phenomena in various brain regions,
including developmental reorganization of the cerebellum, hippocampus-dependent learning and long-term
potentiation [57].
The major caveat of the annotation-based binary filtering method is that it relies on current gene annotation data in the public domain. These data are
incomplete, but constantly growing, and therefore it is
feasible that the method has a biased probability of
prioritizing better annotated genes, regardless of
whether these genes are relevant to the disease of
interest.
In this study we used an additional evaluation method
that depends on DNA sequence that is readily available
in the public domain, and not on gene annotation, and
would therefore be less biased. This method requires
some information that would allow one to build training
sets of genes to identify motifs that will discriminate
between high probability candidate genes and weak

Lombard et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:30
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/30

candidates. We used a prioritization method based on
sequence motifs to explore the feasibility of differentiating XLMR genes from non-XLMR genes. In order to
construct the training data sets we needed to take into
account the evolutionary origin of segments of the X
chromosome, as explained above. It is known that the X
chromosome can be divided into two evolutionary distinct domains, XAR and XCR. Therefore, for this investigation LDA classifiers were constructed for the XAR
and XCR genes separately to consider the possible influence of distinct origins and evolutionary pressures on
XLMR genes [37]. This showed high rates of correct
classification for known XLMR genes and genes on the
X chromosome not previously associated with XLMR.
We tested whether a classifier trained on XAR genes
could predict the XLMR status of XCR genes, and vice
versa. A low success rate was achieved when each LDA
classifier was used to predict the XLMR status in
another test set (Table S6 and Figure S1 - Additional
Files 1 and 2, respectively). It suggests that each set of
overrepresented oligomers captures distinct genomic
signals for XLMR genes in either the XAR or XCR, but
not both.
Using the sequence-based approach, STARD8 (also
known as DLC3), which is not a known XLMR gene,
was identified as a strong candidate XLMR gene by the
sequence-based classification approach. A partial deletion of STARD8 is associated with the craniofrontonasal
syndrome especially in females [58]. STARD8 is also
involved in the growth and metastasis of tumor cells
[59] as are DLC1 and DLC2. Structurally, this protein is
composed of three protein domains: a sterile a-motif, a
RhoGAP (Rho GTPase-activating protein) domain, and
a START domain (StAR, steroidogenic acute regulatory
protein, related lipid transfer). King and colleagues
(2002) [60] revealed that the StAR is expressed in glia
and neurons of the mouse brain and has a role in the
production of neurosteroids supporting STARD8 as a
tentative biological role player in genetic disorders
related to brain functioning.
One of the limitations of the sequence-based motif
approach is the stipulation that a gene must have an
annotated TSS and must have a region of at least 10 kb
upstream of the TSS that does not overlap with another
gene, in order to be assessed. This meant that out of the
top 255 genes identified using the annotation-based binary filtering method, less than half (only 101) could be
assessed.
Interestingly, STARD8 was not ranked within the top
255 genes using the annotation criteria as it only
matched six of the 40 annotation criteria used for
assessment. Of these criteria matches four were related
to the anatomical site of expression (pinpointing the
brain as a significant expression location of this gene)

Page 9 of 17

and the other two were related to phenotype similarity
in the mouse. STARD8 is not a very extensively studied
gene, which could explain its relatively low level of
annotation and subsequent poor ranking obtained with
the annotation-based evaluation
Despite these limitations, a set of nine genes not previously associated with XLMR has emerged as high likelihood candidates by both prioritization approaches.
These genes represent the overlap of the highest ranking
genes among those that could be assessed by both
methods. A summary of these genes and their main
functions is found in Table 6. Evaluation of these genes’
function and expression sites, among other features,
reveal that these genes do have some putative link to
mental retardation. First and most importantly, all of
the genes are expressed in the central nervous system or
brain in normal tissues and have all been linked to a
neurological-related phenotype or function in the mouse
model [61]. APLN has been shown to play a critical role
in fluid homeostasis and pressure/volume homeostasis
in the brain [62]. This particular function is of utmost
importance to the developing brain and research has
shown that APLN is involved in modifications of the
microvasculature in the immature brain, affecting cerebral blood flow during a hypoxic insult [63]. RAP2C has
a more general function as it forms part of the Ras
family, which regulates a wide variety of cellular functions that include cell growth, differentiation, and apoptosis [64]. TBLX1 has previously been associated with
lissencephaly, a rare brain formation disorder caused by
defective neuronal migration resulting in a lack of brain
fold and grooves development [65]. Similarly, UXT has
been shown to interact with RCAN1, which codes for
the Down syndrome candidate region 1 (DSCR1) protein, and it is thought to play a role in the mental disability features of this syndrome [66]. It is interesting
that all nine of the prioritized genes also have a link to
cancer. This could indicate an important role in expression regulation mechanisms such as epigenetic modifications, RNA interference and nonsense-mediated mRNA
decay in XLMR development. These mechanisms are
often disregulated in cancers, and show redundancy
related to their role in human development and pathology [67-69].
One approach to evaluate the credibility of the genes
prioritized by these two methods is to compare them to
the set of XLMR genes recently identified through a
large-scale resequencing project [51]. This study found
six known XLMR genes (AP1S2, CUL4B, BRWD3,
UPF3B, ZDHHC9 and SLC9A6) in which there were
multiple truncating variants, as well as three (SYP,
ZNF711 and CASK) that are new additions to the list of
XLMR genes. Four of the known XLMR genes highlighted by the Tarpey et al. [51] study, with the

Lombard et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:30
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/30

exception of BRWD3 and SLC9A6, were also prioritized
as top candidates by the annotation method, as were the
three newly identified genes (Table S2). Due to exclusion criteria for the sequence-motif approach only one
of the three newly identified XLMR genes was evaluated
in that approach (ZNF711), and was not classified as a
likely XLMR candidate.
A recent study [70] describes the prioritization of XLMR
candidates based on spatially mapped gene expression,
and focuses on the 718 genes on the X chromosome
recently resequenced by Tarpey et al. [51]. There is significant overlap (P = 2.4 × 10-6 by hypergeometric test: H(k;
N, m, n), where k is intersection genes (33), N is the total
number of genes tested (814), m is the number of genes
targeted by [70] (56; from the best 10% of the prioritized
lists), and n is the given XLMR genes (255)) between the
prioritized genes from this paper and the ones prioritized
by our annotation-based method (Table S2). It should be
noted that this method also provides a novel list of candidates, highlighting the precision challenges of computational prediction methods, and underscores that the aim
of these methods is to highlight promising candidates.
Although both methods described here have specific
caveats, our approach does yield credible candidates for
XLMR, and the merit of applying candidate gene prioritization methods with different areas of focus, in parallel, is demonstrated. Candidate gene prioritization for
XLMR could be further improved by the addition of
further lines of evidence, such as expression data, phylogenetic profiles or shared protein motifs.

Conclusion
As information in public databases becomes more complete, gene annotation will improve, increasing the likelihood of detecting appropriate candidates and decreasing
the bias due to uneven annotation of genes. When using
a sequence motif-based approach examining regions
upstream of the TSSs of genes, one is limited in compiling training sets, especially in regions that are gene rich,
resulting in genome overlaps and leading to the exclusion of genes for analysis. More extensive sequencedbased analysis could investigate other gene regions, for
example the 3’UTRs, for motifs that may be related to
RNAi regulatory mechanisms [71]. While combining
gene annotation information and sequence motif-orientated computational candidate gene prediction methods,
it is possible to identify a set of plausible candidate
genes for disease, as has been demonstrated for XLMR.
Methods
Annotation-based gene prioritization using binary
filtering

A list of HGNC IDs for all genes on the X chromosome
(n = 814) were obtained from Ensembl (v49) and were

Page 10 of 17

prioritized for XLMR candidature using a previously
described computational method [25]. This is a gene
prioritization method based on annotation and genes
are evaluated to establish whether their known features
indicate that they are likely to be involved in a particular
disease. The main strength of this approach is the use of
the eVOC ontology, which is a set of controlled vocabularies that merges gene expression data by linking
genome sequence- and expression phenotype information. In particular, eVOC incorporates terms describing
the sample source of cDNA, SAGE libraries and labeled
target cDNAs for microarray experiments [72]. eVOC
contains four orthogonal ontologies - anatomical system,
cell type, pathology and developmental stage.
Annotation terms were divided into four categories
based on their ontological classification (Table 1) - anatomical site, function, phenotype and animal homology
(no category takes precedence over another). Each term
was then used as a selection criterion to populate a gene
list (containing all genes within the Ensembl database
annotated with that term). All X-linked genes were
prioritized for XLMR using a binary evaluation grid.
The most recent list of cloned XLMR genes (obtained
from [46]) was compared to the ranked list to assess the
ability of this approach to identify known XLMR genes.
Gene annotation terms found to be pertinent to XLMR
were identified through literature and data-mining as
follows: PubMed abstracts related to XLMR were
obtained and the literature mining tools Dragon Disease
Explorer and Dragon TF Association Miner (DTFAM)
[73] (Part of Dragon Explorer System (DES), a licensed
tool of OrionCell http://www.orioncell.org) were used to
extract eVOC and GO ontology terms, respectively from
the abstracts. These terms were then used to populate
the annotation term lists, as described above. The categories of genes that were selected from the mouse database are: genes associated with phenotypes relevant to
XLMR; genes expressed at different prenatal developmental stages and genes expressed in the developing
brain. To populate the genes list related to animal
homology, human orthologues were obtained by mining
the Jackson Laboratory Mouse Genome database [61].
The binary evaluation was performed as follows: A
gene in the X-linked list was assigned a 1 when that
gene was also present in an annotation term list. If the
gene was absent from that list it was assigned a 0. For
each of the X chromosome genes a final binary score
was calculated, simply by summing all binary scores for
each of the terms used. Then all genes were ranked
based on this score, with those having higher scores
being higher in the rank list. Genes in the list that
matched most annotation terms (i.e. those genes that
obtained the most 1-scores in the binary matrix)
received the highest rank as XLMR candidates. Similarly,

Lombard et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:30
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/30

genes that matched very few or none of the terms have
a lower rank and are considered to be weak candidates.
Prioritization based on sequence motifs

To perform the analysis for sequence-based prioritization a total 87 non-redundant candidate XLMR genes
were collected from four main sources: Euro-MRX consortium (http://www.euromrx.com/en/database.html; 18
genes), 83 genes from [74], 62 genes from [75] and 69
genes collected from additional experimental literature.
Because it can be difficult to define the candidate nonXLMR genes, as many genes as possible that are likely
involved in XLMR were considered. The majority of
genes (80 out of 87) gathered here were already utilized
in the annotation-based approach and seven candidate
XLMR genes were additionally obtained. In this analysis,
it was assumed that X-linked genes, excluding the 87
genes listed above, are non-XLMR genes, resulting in
647 X-linked genes being classified as non-XLMR genes.
The reference sets of X-linked genes were obtained
from the UCSC Refseq track (hg18) and the Ensembl
HUGO track (release 48 of NCBI build 36).
The putative TSSs of genes were identified using the
methods described in [76]. Briefly, using data from two
sets of 5’-end-tag-capture technologies (i.e., CAGE [77]
and PET [78]), TSS-tag clusters for genes were identified. To map the TSS-tag clusters to their corresponding
genes, the following two criteria were considered. First,
the strand of a TSS-tag cluster must be identical to the
strand of a gene. Second, a TSS-tag cluster must be
located in the 5’ upstream region from the coding start
site of a gene. If multiple TSS-tag clusters were identified for a single gene, then only the TSS-tag site supported by the highest number of tags was selected to be
used as the representative TSS. If multiple TSS-tag clusters had the same highest tag score, the TSS cluster closest to the coding start site was chosen to serve as the
representative TSS. To ensure the reliability of the TSStag data, TSS-tag clusters with a single tag were
excluded. Using RefSeq [79], H-Invitational [80] and
human ESTs [81] from the UCSC genome browser server (hg18), TSS-tag clusters were also discarded if the
genomic coordinate of the 5’ end of the putatively corresponding cDNAs or ESTs did not overlapped with the
TSS-tag clusters. As a result, putative transcription start
sites for 81 XLMR and 486 non-XLMR genes were
obtained from experimental data.
The motif discovery method used in [24] was adopted to
detect significantly overrepresented oligomers from each
subgenome (i.e., the XLMR and non-XLMR subgenome),
for the XAR and XCR genes separately. Briefly, first all
possible oligomers found within each subgenome were
enumerated and sequentially counted. Five specified sizes
(8-, 12-, 16-, 20-, and 24-mers) of oligomers were

Page 11 of 17

considered. Counts of oligomers were combined with
counts of their reverse complement sequences. Exact
matches were required. To define an oligomer as an overrepresented oligomer, two criteria were used: the oligomer
should (1) occur at least 10 times in the relevant subgenome and (2) should be enriched at least five-fold in the
relevant subgenome as compared to the other subgenome
(e.g. to be defined as an oligomer for XLMR using the 10
kb distance as an example, an oligomer must occur at
least five times more often in the 10 kb region upstream
of an XLMR gene vs. the frequency of the same oligomer
in the 10 kb region upstream of a non-XLMR gene). Permutation tests were performed to evaluate whether the
overrepresented oligomers identified were significantly
overrepresented in one subgenome compared to the other.
For this permutation test, the subgenomes (XLMR and
non-XLMR subgenomes) were pooled together and then
divided into nonoverlapping 2 kb fragments. Each 2 kb
fragment was randomly assigned to either a pseudoXLMR or a pseudo-non-XLMR subgenome until the two
pseudo subgenomes were equal to the two actual subgenomes in size. Within each pseudo subgenome the oligomers that satisfied the above two criteria for
overrepresented oligomers were identified. This process
was repeated 1000 times, and those oligomers that were
identified in fewer than 50 out of the 1000 pseudo subgenome trials (p < 0.05) were considered significantly
overrepresented.
LDA analysis was performed as reported in [24] with the
only difference being that the P value for the p-dimensional predictor vector was 268 for XAR and 584 for XCR
classifiers (Table 2). Leave-one-out cross-validation was
utilized to calculate correct classification rates. The computational tools for Principal Component Analysis (PCA),
LDA and ROC visualization were developed and integrated
into a freely available genomic analysis portal, Galaxy
(http://main.g2.bx.psu.edu/ under Statistics tools; [20]).
To evaluate the overrepresented oligomers for potential functional motifs, we compared them to known
transcription factor binding sites. We aligned the oligomers against all binding sites in JASPAR CORE database
(version 3.0) [44] using MATLIGN [82] with the Euclidean distance scoring function. RepeatMasker tables at
the UCSC Genome Browser (hg18) were utilized to map
the coordinates of transposable elements into the genomic region of X chromosome.

Reviewers’ comments
Reviewer #1: Dr Barbara Bardoni (nominated by Prof
Juergen Brosius)

Institute of Molecular and Cellular Pharmacology,
University of Nice-Sophia Antipolis, Valbonne,
France
This reviewer provided no comments for publication.

Lombard et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:30
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/30

Reviewer #2: Prof Neil Smalheiser

Department of Psychiatry, University of Illinois at
Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA
This manuscript attempts to predict genes that can
cause or contribute to X-linked mental retardation, by
combining annotation-based and sequence-based methods. The underlying hypothesis is that genes which are
“similar” to known causal genes will be likely to cause
disease too. Although this is a very reasonable idea, the
ms. is currently in very rough shape and the conclusions
are misleading at best.
One problem is that the authors never address a fundamental question head-on: What is the expected/estimated total number of genes that they expect to exist
that cause XLMR? What fraction is currently known,
and what fraction of the remaining genes is similar to
those already known? Maybe the vast majority of new
genes to be discovered are NOT similar to those already
known, so their method has quite limited power to discover. The gene numbers may be related to those given
in Table S1, but they should be clearly discussed in the
text at the outset.
Conversely, it is also possible (even likely) that ALL
genes that are involved in synaptic function or signalling
can cause XLMR when mutated or altered. If so, then
again, their combined method has quite limited power
and scope, and may show marginal improvement over
simply making a list of all genes expressed at synapses.
There are also severe technical issues that should be
resolved, if possible, which will be listed in order that
they were encountered within the manuscript:
1. Their method excludes all noncoding RNAs, as well
as elements (e.g., enhancers) whose effects are not local.
Authors’ Response

Since the method is modular in its design, it could be
adjusted to include any number of addition criteria. In
this paper, we focus on the potential function of proteincoding genes, as a first-line of evaluation.
2. They acknowledge a “major caveat” in the annotation approach but this may actually be a fatal flaw.
Namely, better studied genes are better annotated, and
genes already known to be involved in disease are better
studied. This probably creates a confound so that the
authors cannot use the fact that known genes are highly
ranked in their schemes as evidence that the method
works well.
Authors’ Response

This is correct; however, more genes are becoming well
annotated. Although known disease genes are often wellstudied, there are several other non-disease genes that
are equally or even better studied. The premise here is
that one expects genes involved in the same disease to
share commonalities in their functional annotation, relative to other genes in the genome. Some types of

Page 12 of 17

annotation are less likely to be biased as they have been
studies on a genome wide basis (i.e. gene expression site
and animal homology). The method’s modularity means
that more evidence can be added to extend its accuracy
and to strengthen the confidence in a finding (as is illustrated here by the addition of sequence motifs as an
extra layer of evidence for candidacy).
3. On p. 8, they note that fully a third of known
XLMR genes fail to be ranked highly by the annotation
scheme, which indicates rather poor performance. An
error analysis should be carried out to see why this is
so, and whether the method can be improved [sequence
based analysis does NOT improve performance since it
was only applied to those genes that ranked highly by
annotation alone].
Authors’ Response

The sequence-based approach was applied to the full
gene set to produce a set of highly-ranked candidates.
These are now listed in Table 2and Table S7. This result
was then compared to the highly-ranked list from the
annotation approach (Table 4, 5, and 6). This approach
has previously been shown to be appropriate for the
investigation of complex disease aetiology due to selection
of multiple most likely disease genes, and can be used to
identify pathways and regulatory networks of aetiological
significance.
4. The genes not known experimentally to cause
XLMR are treated like a negative set, but this is quite
confusing, both technically and in the narrative of the
paper. Really this is a mixed set (some truly negative,
some truly positive but not yet discovered). It is very
confusing to read that putative discoveries are those
which are “incorrectly classified” in the non-XLMR set.
How are those distinguished from errors in the method?
What is the estimated relative numbers of true discoveries vs. errors in the “incorrectly classified” set?
Authors’ Response

These sections have been clarified as follows:
“The X-linked genes were divided into two groups:
genes demonstrated to be involved in XLMR (prior validated and published research) and genes that have not
been identified as being involved in XLMR (called nonXLMR - this group would include both genes not
involved in XLMR and genes that have not yet been discovered to cause XLMR).”
And also “In the case of genes whose contig length was
greater than 50 kb (42 genes), 78.6% (33/42) had signatures as expected based on prior knowledge ("correctly
classified” i.e. based on validated knowledge of involvement with XLMR vs. not previously associated with
XLMR), and for contig lengths greater that 100 kb (22
genes), 86.4% (19/22) were correctly classified (Table 4).
Of particular interest would be the high-ranked candidates that had not previously been identified as being

Lombard et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:30
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/30

involved with XLMR, yet scored highly as probable
XLMR genes and were therefore considered “incorrectly
classified”, i.e. they were included in the non-XLMR set,
but may actually be XLMR genes. This group of genes
would constitute good candidates for further research in
the context of a mental retardation phenotype.”
5. The sequence based approach is not very promising
as used in this paper, both because it was only applied
to a subset of genes [those that ranked highly by annotation] and because it could only be applied to a minority of THOSE genes. Even if the combined performance
was perfect, it is not clear that this is a practical method
that can be advocated for others to use and take seriously. As it is, the results do not clearly indicate how
much better the combined method is, compared to each
method alone, in the usual performance parameters
(precision, recall, accuracy, etc.). The data may be there,
but it was not obvious to me. I could not find a legend
for Supplemental File 1.
Authors’ Response

We did apply the sequence based approach for all 567
genes (81 and 486 for XLMR and non-XLMR genes,
respectively; see p. 9-12). After we had done both analyses, we then scrutinized the 255 top-ranked genes from
the annotation-based approach for their scoring in the
motif-based method. We have now also added the
inverse comparison.
We agree the reviewer that comparisons of the each
method including combined one will be valuable, but
this is not possible at present since we do not know
which additional X-linked genes are currently unknown
XLMR genes. However, our main purpose was to identify
potential candidate XLMR genes using heterogeneous
biological information.
The legend for Supplemental File 1 can be found at the
end of this manuscript, under the heading of Description
of additional data files.
6. In the list of references to prior work, Dmitar Hristovski and others who use implicit (not explicit) similarity should be added.
Authors’ Response

These papers have been added.
Reviewer #3: Dr Dustin Holloway (nominated by Prof
Charles DeLisi)

Boston University Writing Program & Center for the
History and Philosophy of Science, Boston University
General Remarks It has been known for some time that
the combination of orthogonal datatypes (e.g., motif data
and functional annotation) produce results that are
often better than individual methods at predicting the
function of unannotated genes or suggesting their correlation to disease. However, the authors correctly point
out that current GWAS studies are limited in

Page 13 of 17

pinpointing genes and mutations that are truly causative
for disease. Here, the authors use a combination of data
mining, sequence analysis, and pattern recognition algorithms to predict a set of genes that credibly relate to a
specific disease, X-Linked Mental Retardation. Overall,
their report is clear and very well written. The analysis
performed, while not entirely novel was cleverly, methodically, and effectively applied to the specific problem of
discovering candidate disease genes for a particular condition. I feel that their methods are valuable tools in the
hunt for causative disease genes and should be applied
to more disease conditions in the future. Though I
would like to see some further issues discussed in
greater detail (see below), and I would like to see a
more complete analysis of discovered sequence motifs, I
believe that their paper is of publishable quality and will
be of significant value to the community.
Other Comments • Results, paragraph 1: The authors
use data mining to identify terms associated with XLMR
and then use each of those terms to seed a gene list.
The author’s straightforward description doesn’t place
much emphasis on the fact that the ontology used to
derive functional terms (e.g., eVOC) actually contains
information from gene expression studies, sequence
homology, etc. I believe that this information is important and increases the significance of their work. Some
functional ontologies (e.g, ECC codes) operate on smaller scales and deal mainly with biochemical function.
The author’s chosen ontologies are broader and incorporate a variety of experimental data that are more relevant to the problem they are addressing.
Authors’ Response

The following text was added, to emphasize the use of
the eVOC ontologies in this approach (p23):
The main strength of this approach is the use of the
eVOC ontology, which is a set of controlled vocabularies
that merges gene expression data by linking genome
sequence- and expression phenotype information. In particular, eVOC incorporates terms describing the sample
source of cDNA, SAGE libraries and labeled target
cDNAs for microarray experiments.
• Do they have a sense of how the varying types of
data contribute to the analysis? That is, do sequence
homology terms, gene expression terms, or GO terms
tend to provide the most prediction power in their
method? In future work, could the ontologies be
improved? What scope do they have for adding additional datasets?
Authors’ Response

The efficacy of varying types of data in prediction has
not been tested on a test data set, but could be done in
future, and the different prediction terms can then be
weighted to include this knowledge. The scope of this
paper was however not to test the proficiency of

Lombard et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:30
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/30

prediction of any one annotation type, but rather to
assess whether increased efficiency in prediction is
observed when adding more lines of evidence to this
method.
• Methods used by the Authors rely to some extent
on known functional annotations. In the annotation
based analysis, known annotations are required to prioritize gene lists. In the motif analysis, known functions
are required to identify positive and negative sets for
motif discovery and LDA. However, there are presumably many additional candidate genes which are poorly
annotated and don’t contain useful transcriptional
motifs and would thus be missed by these methods.
The Authors have created a system which is simple
enough and seems flexible enough to incorporate additional data. I would suggest a short discussion about
how their method could be expanded to include new
information and expand their ability to address genes of
unknown function. For example, it would probably be
simple to include phylogenetic profiles, or shared protein motifs (across species) to identify genes that may
be related to disease. They touch on some ideas briefly,
but this could be important future work for their
method.
Authors’ Response

As mentioned before, the method is modular in its design
and can easily include any number of additions.
• In the section discussing “combined analysis” the
authors’ state “Interestingly only one of these nine genes
is located in the XAR.” What is the significance (or
hypothesized significance) of this?
Authors’ Response

The sentence was modified as follows: “Interestingly, only
one of these nine genes (0.11) is located in the XAR,
which is lower than the relative proportion of XAR genes
analyzed (266/573; 0.46).”
• In the discussion, the authors discuss a reference
(their reference 63) which uses spatially mapped gene
expression to identify XLMR genes. The authors note
that the gene set they prepared shows significant overlap
with that of ref. 63. I suggest calculating the statistical
significance of this overlap with a hypergeometric test. If
significant, it would provide additional confidence that
their method is enriching for interesting genes.
Authors’ Response

We added the following to the manuscript:
“There is significant overlap (P = 2.4e-6 by hypergeometric test: H(k; N, m, n), where k is intersection genes
(33), N is the total number of genes tested (814), m is the
number of genes targeted by [70](56; from the best 10%
of the prioritized lists), and n is the given XLMR genes
(255)) between the prioritized genes from this paper and
the ones prioritized by our annotation-based method
(Table S2).”

Page 14 of 17

• For the motif analysis, the authors choose to examine 12 mers only. Why 12 mers specifically? What about
known transcription factor motifs (e.g., Transfac
motifs)?
Authors’ Response

We mentioned this in the manuscript (p. 11; “only 12mers within 10 kb, 50 kb, and 100 kb of each gene were
used as they had the highest total number of overrepresented oligomers (Table S4 - Additional File 1)”).
To evaluate the overrepresented oligomers for potential
functional motifs, we analysed them further and added
the following to the manuscript:
“Remarkably, the majority of these oligomers (about
97%) overlapped with known classes of interspersed elements. There was no clear difference in sequence classes
between XLMR and non-XLMR. For overrepresented oligomers not mapping to the interspersed elements, they
did not match known transcription factor motifs from
the JASPAR CORE database.”
In addition: The method is included in the appropriate
section.
• The authors identify several hundred over-represented oligomers in their datasets, but they don’t comment on the sequences themselves. I think it is
important to look at these sequences to decide how biologically relevant they might be. Are many of them similar, i.e., just variations of a few “core” motifs? Do they
match with or correspond to any known mammalian
transcription factor motifs? Do the motifs appear to be
high in “information content,” meaning that they appear
to be biologically relevant rather than just repeat elements such as long stretches of GC or A sequence?
Authors’ Response

These issues have been addressed above.
• While LDA is a perfectly valid method for classification, did the authors consider alternatives such as SVM
or Random Forest? SVMs offer greater flexibility to
choose non-linear classifiers and also have well established kernel methods to handle sequence motif data (e.
g., the spectrum kernel: http://helix-web.stanford.edu/
psb02/leslie.pdf ).
Authors’ Response

While we agree that SVMs tend to offer greater flexibility
than LDA (for example, any distributional assumptions
of datasets (e.g., normal distribution) are not required,
and continuous and qualitative variables in datasets are
controlled well), however, if the main aim of the study is
to extract many more variables (i.e., oligomers) including
discriminative information (conversely, parsimonious and
less variables for SVM) to classify the data as well as to
achieve high classification accuracies, LDA fits well in
this situation. Although we did not show them for our
model in detail due to the small number of oligomers
from XLMR, the use of the LDA has merit and would be

Lombard et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:30
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/30

worth performing as more XLMR genes become
available.

Additional material

Page 15 of 17

7.
8.
9.

Additional File 1: Supplementary tables supporting the analysis.
Additional File 2: Figure S1 - LDA classification success rates for
different values of the tuning parameter τ. (A) Test set of XAR genes,
with training performed on XCR genes. (B) Test set of XCR genes, with
training performed on XAR genes. Leave-one-out cross-validation was
utilized to calculate correct classification rates. Dots indicate optimal
values of τ (see Table S6 - Additional file 1).

10.

Acknowledgements
We are thankful to Svitlana Tyekucheva for sharing R code for LDA, PCA and
ROC analysis and for testing Galaxy tools, to Melissa Wilson Sayres for
proofreading parts of the manuscript prior to publication, to Dan
Blankenberg and the Galaxy team for assisting in integrating the tools
developed here into Galaxy. MR and ZL acknowledge support from the
South African National Bioinformatics Network (NBN), the South African
National Research Foundation (NRF), the NHLS and the University of the
Witwatersrand. CP and KM were supported by start-up funds from Penn
State and the R01 HD056452 NIH grant to Laura Carrel.

13.

Author details
1
Division of Human Genetics, School of Pathology, Faculty of Health
Sciences, National Health Laboratory Service & University of the
Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, 2000, South Africa. 2Center for Comparative
Genomics and Bioinformatics, Department of Biology, The Pennsylvania State
University, University Park, PA 16802, USA. 3Department of Ecology and
Evolutionary Biology, University of Michigan, 1075 Kraus Natural Science
Bldg., 830 N. University, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1048, USA.

16.

Authors’ contributions
MR proposed the initial idea, ZL did preliminary investigation, KDM
stimulated the addition of the sequence motif-based analysis, and ZL and
CP performed the bioinformatics analyses. MR, KDM, ZL and CP discussed
and interpreted the results, ZL and CP wrote the first draft. All authors read
and approved the final manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 20 January 2011 Accepted: 13 June 2011
Published: 13 June 2011
References
1. O’Connor TP, Crystal RG: Genetic medicines: treatment strategies for
hereditary disorders. Nature reviews 2006, 7:261-276.
2. Botstein D, Risch N: Discovering genotypes underlying human
phenotypes: past successes for mendelian disease, future approaches
for complex disease. Nature genetics 2003, 33 Suppl:228-237.
3. Haines JLaP-V MA: Designing a study for identifying genes in complex
traits. In Genetic analysis of complex disease.. 2 edition. Edited by: Haines
JLaP-V, M.A. New Jersey: Wiley-Liss; 2006:455-467.
4. Gusella JF, Wexler NS, Conneally PM, Naylor SL, Anderson MA, Tanzi RE,
Watkins PC, Ottina K, Wallace MR, Sakaguchi AY, et al: A polymorphic DNA
marker genetically linked to Huntington’s disease. Nature 1983,
306:234-238.
5. Koenig M, Hoffman EP, Bertelson CJ, Monaco AP, Feener C, Kunkel LM:
Complete cloning of the Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) cDNA
and preliminary genomic organization of the DMD gene in normal and
affected individuals. Cell 1987, 50:509-517.
6. Riordan JR, Rommens JM, Kerem B, Alon N, Rozmahel R, Grzelczak Z,
Zielenski J, Lok S, Plavsic N, Chou JL, et al: Identification of the cystic

11.

12.

14.

15.

17.
18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.
27.
28.
29.

fibrosis gene: cloning and characterization of complementary DNA. In
Science. Volume 245. New York, NY; 1989:1066-1073.
Altshuler D, Daly MJ, Lander ES: Genetic mapping in human disease. In
Science. Volume 322. New York, NY; 2008:881-888.
Orr N, Chanock S: Common genetic variation and human disease.
Advances in genetics 2008, 62:1-32.
Fan JB, Chee MS, Gunderson KL: Highly parallel genomic assays. Nature
reviews 2006, 7:632-644.
Hristovski D, Friedman C, Rindflesch TC, Peterlin B: Exploiting semantic
relations for literature-based discovery. AMIA Annu Symp Proc 2006,
349-353.
Hristovski D, Peterlin B, Mitchell JA, Humphrey SM: Using literature-based
discovery to identify disease candidate genes. Int J Med Inform 2005,
74:289-298.
Keerthikumar S, Bhadra S, Kandasamy K, Raju R, Ramachandra YL,
Bhattacharyya C, Imai K, Ohara O, Mohan S, Pandey A: Prediction of
candidate primary immunodeficiency disease genes using a support
vector machine learning approach. DNA Res 2009, 16:345-351.
Tranchevent LC, Barriot R, Yu S, Van Vooren S, Van Loo P, Coessens B, De
Moor B, Aerts S, Moreau Y: ENDEAVOUR update: a web resource for gene
prioritization in multiple species. Nucleic acids research 2008, 36:W377-384.
Calvo B, Lopez-Bigas N, Furney SJ, Larranaga P, Lozano JA: A partially
supervised classification approach to dominant and recessive human
disease gene prediction. Computer methods and programs in biomedicine
2007, 85:229-237.
Franke L, van Bakel H, Fokkens L, de Jong ED, Egmont-Petersen M,
Wijmenga C: Reconstruction of a functional human gene network, with
an application for prioritizing positional candidate genes. American
journal of human genetics 2006, 78:1011-1025.
Freudenberg J, Propping P: A similarity-based method for genome-wide
prediction of disease-relevant human genes. In Bioinformatics. Volume 18.
Oxford, England; 2002:(Suppl 2):S110-115.
Perez-Iratxeta C, Wjst M, Bork P, Andrade MA: G2D: a tool for mining
genes associated with disease. BMC genetics 2005, 6:45.
Tiffin N, Kelso JF, Powell AR, Pan H, Bajic VB, Hide WA: Integration of textand data-mining using ontologies successfully selects disease gene
candidates. Nucleic acids research 2005, 33:1544-1552.
van Driel MA, Cuelenaere K, Kemmeren PP, Leunissen JA, Brunner HG,
Vriend G: GeneSeeker: extraction and integration of human diseaserelated information from web-based genetic databases. Nucleic acids
research 2005, 33:W758-761.
Blankenberg D, Von Kuster G, Coraor N, Ananda G, Lazarus R,
Mangan M, Nekrutenko A, Taylor J: Galaxy: a web-based genome
analysis tool for experimentalists. Curr Protoc Mol Biol 2010, Chapter
19:11-21, Unit 19 10.
Kaur M, Schmeier S, MacPherson CR, Hofmann O, Hide WA, Taylor S,
Willcox N, Bajic VB: Prioritizing genes of potential relevance to diseases
affected by sex hormones: an example of myasthenia gravis. BMC
genomics 2008, 9:481.
Adie EA, Adams RR, Evans KL, Porteous DJ, Pickard BS: SUSPECTS: enabling
fast and effective prioritization of positional candidates. In Bioinformatics.
Volume 22. Oxford, England; 2006:773-774.
Lopez-Bigas N, Ouzounis CA: Genome-wide identification of genes likely
to be involved in human genetic disease. Nucleic acids research 2004,
32:3108-3114.
Carrel L, Park C, Tyekucheva S, Dunn J, Chiaromonte F, Makova KD:
Genomic environment predicts expression patterns on the human
inactive X chromosome. PLoS genetics 2006, 2:e151.
Lombard Z, Tiffin N, Hofmann O, Bajic VB, Hide W, Ramsay M:
Computational selection and prioritization of candidate genes for fetal
alcohol syndrome. BMC genomics 2007, 8:389.
Gecz J, Shoubridge C, Corbett M: The genetic landscape of intellectual
disability arising from chromosome X. Trends Genet 2009, 25:308-316.
Adkins NL, Georgel PT: MeCP2: structure and function. Biochem Cell Biol
2011, 89:1-11.
Matijevic T, Knezevic J, Slavica M, Pavelic J: Rett syndrome: from the gene
to the disease. Eur Neurol 2009, 61:3-10.
Renieri A, Meloni I, Longo I, Ariani F, Mari F, Pescucci C, Cambi F: Rett
syndrome: the complex nature of a monogenic disease. J Mol Med 2003,
81:346-354.

Lombard et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:30
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/30

30. Gonzales ML, LaSalle JM: The role of MeCP2 in brain development and
neurodevelopmental disorders. Curr Psychiatry Rep 2010, 12:127-134.
31. Amir RE, Van den Veyver IB, Wan M, Tran CQ, Francke U, Zoghbi HY: Rett
syndrome is caused by mutations in X-linked MECP2, encoding methylCpG-binding protein 2. Nature genetics 1999, 23:185-188.
32. Meloni I, Bruttini M, Longo I, Mari F, Rizzolio F, D’Adamo P, Denvriendt K,
Fryns JP, Toniolo D, Renieri A: A mutation in the rett syndrome gene,
MECP2, causes X-linked mental retardation and progressive spasticity in
males. American journal of human genetics 2000, 67:982-985.
33. Chamberlain JS, Pearlman JA, Muzny DM, Gibbs RA, Ranier JE, Caskey CT,
Reeves AA: Expression of the murine Duchenne muscular dystrophy
gene in muscle and brain. In Science. Volume 239. New York, NY;
1988:1416-1418.
34. Chelly J, Gilgenkrantz H, Lambert M, Hamard G, Chafey P, Recan D, Katz P,
de la Chapelle A, Koenig M, Ginjaar IB, et al: Effect of dystrophin gene
deletions on mRNA levels and processing in Duchenne and Becker
muscular dystrophies. Cell 1990, 63:1239-1248.
35. Ropers HH, Hamel BC: X-linked mental retardation. Nature reviews 2005,
6:46-57.
36. Ropers HH, Hoeltzenbein M, Kalscheuer V, Yntema H, Hamel B, Fryns JP,
Chelly J, Partington M, Gecz J, Moraine C: Nonsyndromic X-linked mental
retardation: where are the missing mutations? Trends Genet 2003,
19:316-320.
37. Delbridge ML, McMillan DA, Doherty RJ, Deakin JE, Graves JA: Origin and
evolution of candidate mental retardation genes on the human X
chromosome (MRX). BMC genomics 2008, 9:65.
38. Ross MT, Grafham DV, Coffey AJ, Scherer S, McLay K, Muzny D, Platzer M,
Howell GR, Burrows C, Bird CP, et al: The DNA sequence of the human X
chromosome. Nature 2005, 434:325-337.
39. Graves JA: The origin and function of the mammalian Y chromosome
and Y-borne genes–an evolving understanding. Bioessays 1995,
17:311-320.
40. Bartel DP: MicroRNAs: target recognition and regulatory functions. Cell
2009, 136:215-233.
41. de Moor CH, Meijer H, Lissenden S: Mechanisms of translational control
by the 3’ UTR in development and differentiation. Semin Cell Dev Biol
2005, 16:49-58.
42. He L, Thomson JM, Hemann MT, Hernando-Monge E, Mu D, Goodson S,
Powers S, Cordon-Cardo C, Lowe SW, Hannon GJ, Hammond SM: A
microRNA polycistron as a potential human oncogene. Nature 2005,
435:828-833.
43. Chatterjee S, Pal JK: Role of 5’- and 3’-untranslated regions of mRNAs in
human diseases. Biol Cell 2009, 101:251-262.
44. Vlieghe D, Sandelin A, De Bleser PJ, Vleminckx K, Wasserman WW, van
Roy F, Lenhard B: A new generation of JASPAR, the open-access
repository for transcription factor binding site profiles. Nucleic acids
research 2006, 34:D95-97.
45. Hastie T, Tibshirani R, Friedman JH: The elements of statistical learning: data
mining, inference, and prediction New York: Springer; 2001.
46. Chiurazzi P, Schwartz CE, Gecz J, Neri G: XLMR genes: update 2007. Eur J
Hum Genet 2008, 16:422-434.
47. Katz G, Lazcano-Ponce E: Intellectual disability: definition, etiological
factors, classification, diagnosis, treatment and prognosis. Salud Publica
Mex 2008, 50(Suppl 2):s132-141.
48. Lehrke R: Theory of X-linkage of major intellectual traits. Am J Ment Defic
1972, 76:611-619.
49. Giannandrea M, Bianchi V, Mignogna ML, Sirri A, Carrabino S, D’Elia E,
Vecellio M, Russo S, Cogliati F, Larizza L, et al: Mutations in the small
GTPase gene RAB39B are responsible for X-linked mental retardation
associated with autism, epilepsy, and macrocephaly. American journal of
human genetics 2010, 86:185-195.
50. Dibbens LM, Tarpey PS, Hynes K, Bayly MA, Scheffer IE, Smith R, Bomar J,
Sutton E, Vandeleur L, Shoubridge C, et al: X-linked protocadherin 19
mutations cause female-limited epilepsy and cognitive impairment.
Nature genetics 2008, 40:776-781.
51. Tarpey PS, Smith R, Pleasance E, Whibley A, Edkins S, Hardy C, O’Meara S,
Latimer C, Dicks E, Menzies A, et al: A systematic, large-scale resequencing
screen of X-chromosome coding exons in mental retardation. Nature
genetics 2009, 41:535-543.
52. Depienne C, Trouillard O, Saint-Martin C, Gourfinkel-An I, Bouteiller D,
Carpentier W, Keren B, Abert B, Gautier A, Baulac S, et al: Spectrum of

Page 16 of 17

53.
54.

55.

56.

57.

58.

59.

60.

61.

62.

63.

64.

65.

66.

67.
68.
69.
70.

71.

72.

73.

SCN1A gene mutations associated with Dravet syndrome: analysis of
333 patients. J Med Genet 2009, 46:183-191.
Lahn BT, Page DC: Four evolutionary strata on the human X
chromosome. In Science. Volume 286. New York, NY; 1999:964-967.
Graves JA, Koina E, Sankovic N: How the gene content of human sex
chromosomes evolved. Current opinion in genetics & development 2006,
16:219-224.
Waters PD, Wallis MC, Marshall Graves JA: Mammalian sex–Origin and
evolution of the Y chromosome and SRY. Semin Cell Dev Biol 2007,
18:389-400.
Thiselton DL, McDowall J, Brandau O, Ramser J, d’Esposito F,
Bhattacharya SS, Ross MT, Hardcastle AJ, Meindl A: An integrated,
functionally annotated gene map of the DXS8026-ELK1 interval on
human Xp11.3-Xp11.23: potential hotspot for neurogenetic disorders.
Genomics 2002, 79:560-572.
Wilczynski GM, Konopacki FA, Wilczek E, Lasiecka Z, Gorlewicz A, Michaluk P,
Wawrzyniak M, Malinowska M, Okulski P, Kolodziej LR, et al: Important role
of matrix metalloproteinase 9 in epileptogenesis. J Cell Biol 2008,
180:1021-1035.
Twigg SR, Matsumoto K, Kidd AM, Goriely A, Taylor IB, Fisher RB,
Hoogeboom AJ, Mathijssen IM, Lourenco MT, Morton JE, et al: The origin
of EFNB1 mutations in craniofrontonasal syndrome: frequent somatic
mosaicism and explanation of the paucity of carrier males. American
journal of human genetics 2006, 78:999-1010.
Durkin ME, Ullmannova V, Guan M, Popescu NC: Deleted in liver cancer 3
(DLC-3), a novel Rho GTPase-activating protein, is downregulated in
cancer and inhibits tumor cell growth. Oncogene 2007, 26:4580-4589.
King SR, Manna PR, Ishii T, Syapin PJ, Ginsberg SD, Wilson K, Walsh LP,
Parker KL, Stocco DM, Smith RG, Lamb DJ: An essential component in
steroid synthesis, the steroidogenic acute regulatory protein, is
expressed in discrete regions of the brain. J Neurosci 2002,
22:10613-10620.
Eppig JT, Bult CJ, Kadin JA, Richardson JE, Blake JA, Anagnostopoulos A,
Baldarelli RM, Baya M, Beal JS, Bello SM, et al: The Mouse Genome
Database (MGD): from genes to mice–a community resource for mouse
biology. Nucleic acids research 2005, 33:D471-475.
Ladeiras-Lopes R, Ferreira-Martins J, Leite-Moreira AF: The apelinergic
system: the role played in human physiology and pathology and
potential therapeutic applications. Arq Bras Cardiol 2008, 90:343-349.
Gustavsson M, Mallard C, Vannucci SJ, Wilson MA, Johnston MV, Hagberg H:
Vascular response to hypoxic preconditioning in the immature brain. J
Cereb Blood Flow Metab 2007, 27:928-938.
Guo Z, Yuan J, Tang W, Chen X, Gu X, Luo K, Wang Y, Wan B, Yu L: Cloning
and characterization of the human gene RAP2C, a novel member of Ras
family, which activates transcriptional activities of SRE. Mol Biol Rep 2007,
34:137-144.
Emes RD, Ponting CP: A new sequence motif linking lissencephaly,
Treacher Collins and oral-facial-digital type 1 syndromes, microtubule
dynamics and cell migration. Hum Mol Genet 2001, 10:2813-2820.
Silveira HC, Sommer CA, Soares-Costa A, Henrique-Silva F: A calcineurin
inhibitory protein overexpressed in Down’s syndrome interacts with the
product of a ubiquitously expressed transcript. Braz J Med Biol Res 2004,
37:785-789.
Froyen G, Bauters M, Voet T, Marynen P: X-linked mental retardation and
epigenetics. J Cell Mol Med 2006, 10:808-825.
Lukong KE, Chang KW, Khandjian EW, Richard S: RNA-binding proteins in
human genetic disease. Trends Genet 2008, 24:416-425.
Chang TC, Mendell JT: microRNAs in vertebrate physiology and human
disease. Annu Rev Genomics Hum Genet 2007, 8:215-239.
Piro RM, Molineris I, Ala U, Provero P, Di Cunto F: Candidate gene
prioritization based on spatially mapped gene expression: an application
to XLMR. In Bioinformatics. Volume 26. Oxford, England; 2010:i618-624.
Wang X, Wang G, Shen C, Li L, Mooney SD, Edenberg HJ, Sanford JR, Liu Y:
Using RNase sequence specificity to refine the identification of RNAprotein binding regions. BMC genomics 2008, 9(Suppl 1):S17.
Kelso J, Visagie J, Theiler G, Christoffels A, Bardien S, Smedley D, Otgaar D,
Greyling G, Jongeneel CV, McCarthy MI, et al: eVOC: a controlled
vocabulary for unifying gene expression data. Genome Res 2003,
13:1222-1230.
Pan H, Zuo L, Choudhary V, Zhang Z, Leow SH, Chong FT, Huang Y,
Ong VW, Mohanty B, Tan SL, et al: Dragon TF Association Miner: a system

Lombard et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:30
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/30

74.

75.
76.

77.

78.

79.

80.

81.
82.
83.

84.

85.

86.

Page 17 of 17

for exploring transcription factor associations through text-mining.
Nucleic acids research 2004, 32:W230-234.
de Brouwer AP, Yntema HG, Kleefstra T, Lugtenberg D, Oudakker AR, de
Vries BB, van Bokhoven H, Van Esch H, Frints SG, Froyen G, et al: Mutation
frequencies of X-linked mental retardation genes in families from the
EuroMRX consortium. Human mutation 2007, 28:207-208.
Ropers HH: X-linked mental retardation: many genes for a complex
disorder. Current opinion in genetics & development 2006, 16:260-269.
Park C, Makova KD: Coding region structural heterogeneity and turnover
of transcription start sites contribute to divergence in expression
between duplicate genes. Genome biology 2009, 10:R10.
Carninci P, Sandelin A, Lenhard B, Katayama S, Shimokawa K, Ponjavic J,
Semple CA, Taylor MS, Engstrom PG, Frith MC, et al: Genome-wide analysis
of mammalian promoter architecture and evolution. Nature genetics 2006,
38:626-635.
Ng P, Wei CL, Sung WK, Chiu KP, Lipovich L, Ang CC, Gupta S, Shahab A,
Ridwan A, Wong CH, et al: Gene identification signature (GIS) analysis for
transcriptome characterization and genome annotation. Nature methods
2005, 2:105-111.
Pruitt KD, Tatusova T, Maglott DR: NCBI reference sequences (RefSeq): a
curated non-redundant sequence database of genomes, transcripts and
proteins. Nucleic acids research 2007, 35:D61-65.
Imanishi T, Itoh T, Suzuki Y, O’Donovan C, Fukuchi S, Koyanagi KO,
Barrero RA, Tamura T, Yamaguchi-Kabata Y, Tanino M, et al: Integrative
annotation of 21,037 human genes validated by full-length cDNA
clones. PLoS biology 2004, 2:e162.
Benson DA, Karsch-Mizrachi I, Lipman DJ, Ostell J, Wheeler DL: GenBank:
update. Nucleic acids research 2004, 32:D23-26.
Kankainen M, Loytynoja A: MATLIGN: a motif clustering, comparison and
matching tool. BMC Bioinformatics 2007, 8:189.
Schroer A, Schneider S, Ropers H, Nothwang H: Cloning and
characterization of UXT, a novel gene in human Xp11, which is widely
and abundantly expressed in tumor tissue. Genomics 1999, 56:340-343.
Yoon HG, Chan DW, Huang ZQ, Li J, Fondell JD, Qin J, Wong J: Purification
and functional characterization of the human N-CoR complex: the roles
of HDAC3, TBL1 and TBLR1. EMBO J 2003, 22:1336-1346.
Ito S, Kawano Y, Katakura H, Takenaka K, Adachi M, Sasaki M, Shimizu K,
Ikenaka K, Wada H, Tanaka F: Expression of MAGE-D4, a novel MAGE
family antigen, is correlated with tumor-cell proliferation of non-small
cell lung cancer. Lung Cancer 2006, 51:79-88.
Tatemoto K, Hosoya M, Habata Y, Fujii R, Kakegawa T, Zou MX, Kawamata Y,
Fukusumi S, Hinuma S, Kitada C, et al: Isolation and characterization of a
novel endogenous peptide ligand for the human APJ receptor. Biochem
Biophys Res Commun 1998, 251:471-476.

doi:10.1186/1745-6150-6-30
Cite this article as: Lombard et al.: A computational approach to
candidate gene prioritization for X-linked mental retardation using
annotation-based binary filtering and motif-based linear discriminatory
analysis. Biology Direct 2011 6:30.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
