<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Recent transfer of an iron-regulated gene from the plastid to the nuclear genome in an oceanic diatom adapted to chronic iron limitation</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Genomics 2010, 11:718. doi:10.1186/1471-2164-11-718"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Markus Lommer"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Recent transfer of an iron-regulated gene from
the plastid to the nuclear genome in an oceanic
diatom adapted to chronic iron limitation
Lommer et al.
Lommer et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:718
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/718 (20 December 2010)

Lommer et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:718
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/718

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Recent transfer of an iron-regulated gene from
the plastid to the nuclear genome in an oceanic
diatom adapted to chronic iron limitation
Markus Lommer1, Alexandra-Sophie Roy1, Markus Schilhabel2, Stefan Schreiber2, Philip Rosenstiel2, Julie LaRoche1*

Abstract
Background: Although the importance and widespread occurrence of iron limitation in the contemporary ocean is
well documented, we still know relatively little about genetic adaptation of phytoplankton to these environments.
Compared to its coastal relative Thalassiosira pseudonana, the oceanic diatom Thalassiosira oceanica is highly
tolerant to iron limitation. The adaptation to low-iron conditions in T. oceanica has been attributed to a decrease in
the photosynthetic components that are rich in iron. Genomic information on T. oceanica may shed light on the
genetic basis of the physiological differences between the two species.
Results: The complete 141790 bp sequence of the T. oceanica chloroplast genome [GenBank: GU323224],
assembled from massively parallel pyrosequencing (454) shotgun reads, revealed that the petF gene encoding for
ferredoxin, which is localized in the chloroplast genome in T. pseudonana and other diatoms, has been transferred
to the nucleus in T. oceanica. The iron-sulfur protein ferredoxin, a key element of the chloroplast electron transport
chain, can be replaced by the iron-free flavodoxin under iron-limited growth conditions thereby contributing to a
reduction in the cellular iron requirements. From a comparison to the genomic context of the T. pseudonana petF
gene, the T. oceanica ortholog can be traced back to its chloroplast origin. The coding potential of the T. oceanica
chloroplast genome is comparable to that of T. pseudonana and Phaeodactylum tricornutum, though a novel
expressed ORF appears in the genomic region that has been subjected to rearrangements linked to the petF gene
transfer event.
Conclusions: The transfer of the petF from the cp to the nuclear genome in T. oceanica represents a major
difference between the two closely related species. The ability of T. oceanica to tolerate iron limitation suggests
that the transfer of petF from the chloroplast to the nuclear genome might have contributed to the ecological
success of this species.

Background
In contemporary oceans, diatoms account for approximately 40% of the oceanic primary production and play a
critical role in the sequestration of atmospheric CO2 into
the deep ocean [1]. The high diversity of diatoms and
their cosmopolitan distribution in the marine environment reflect the ecological success endured by this group
since their first appearance more than 150 Ma ago [2].
Although diatoms thrive in coastal areas where dissolved nutrients are high, many species of diatoms are
* Correspondence: jlaroche@ifm-geomar.de
1
Leibniz Institute of Marine Sciences at Kiel University IFM-GEOMAR, Kiel,
Germany
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

prevalent in high-nutrient, low-chlorophyll (HNLC)
oceanic regions where primary production is chronically
iron-limited [3]. Iron fertilization experiments in HNLC
regions have repeatedly demonstrated the ability of
opportunistic diatom species to bloom once iron is no
longer growth limiting [4]. In contrast, some diatom
species such as Thalassiosira oceanica thrive equally
well in the presence or absence of iron [5]. A key determinant for the survival and growth of phytoplankton
under iron limitation must be the ability to carry out
photosynthesis efficiently, despite the high iron requirements of the photosynthetic infrastructure.
The photosynthetic apparatus, largely contained in the
chloroplasts, is jointly coordinated by the plastid and

© 2010 Lommer et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Lommer et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:718
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/718

nuclear genomes, involving more than 700 genes [6].
The chloroplast genome of most species generally
retained less than 200 of the genes contributing to
chloroplast function, as the majority of the endosymbiont’s chloroplast genes have been lost or incorporated
into the host nuclear genome. The plastids of diatoms
and other chromalveolates, originated from a secondary
endosymbiosis with a red alga, have retained a higher
proportion of the symbiont’s genes in their genomes
relative to their green counterparts, which derived from
a primary endosymbiosis with a cyanobacterium. The
red origin of the chloroplasts [7] and the lower cellular
iron requirements of the red lineage [8] may have
contributed to the ecological success of diatoms in the
marine environment in terms of a putative evolutionarybased pre-adjustment to iron-deplete conditions.
The retention of a core set of chloroplast genes and
the factors preventing their transfer to the nucleus are
the subject of ongoing debates [9]. The known chloroplast genomes of diatoms are circular with an extended
inverted repeat region (IR) and are subject to internal
rearrangements such as inversions [10]. Occasional
organelle lysis and free release of organellar DNA is
considered an important first step in the transfer of
organelle-encoded genes to the nuclear genome. Indeed
high quantities of chloroplast (cp) and mitochondrial
(mt) DNA are frequently transferred and inserted into
the nuclear genome, thereafter referred to as nuclear
plastid or nuclear mitochondrial DNA (NUPTs,
NUMTs) [11-14]. However, stable replacement of a
plastid gene by its nuclear copy requires a retargeting of
the nuclear gene product back to the chloroplast compartment as well as a functional expression and regulation. Until this multi-step development has been
accomplished the chloroplast version cannot be discarded and the gene exists in two copies, which might
even overlap in function in a differentially regulated
manner [15]. Genes that provide a dual targeting
sequence enabling import to both mitochondria and
chloroplasts at the same time are also known [16].
Here, we present the complete T. oceanica CCMP1005
chloroplast genome sequence [GenBank: GU323224],
which we assembled from a massively parallel pyrosequencing data set. Assembled genomic shotgun reads
show that in the T. oceanica genome, the ferredoxin
petF gene has been transferred to the nucleus. Ferredoxin is a photosynthetic redox protein that contains
iron, and in diatoms it can be replaced by the iron-free
flavodoxin, when iron-limited growth conditions prevail.
The petF transfer to the nuclear genome may enable a
refined regulation of this gene in response to iron availability in T. oceanica. Through comparative genomics
between the coastal Thalassiosira pseudonana and the
oceanic T. oceanica, we can trace the T. oceanica PETF

Page 3 of 13

gene back to its chloroplast origin and identify elements
that may have played a role in the transfer of this
important photosynthetic gene.

Results
Characteristics of the T. oceanica chloroplast genome

The cp genome of T. oceanica has a physical size of
141790 bp and maps to a circular topology (Figure 1),
slightly larger in size than the published cp genomes of
the closely related T. pseudonana and the more distantly
related P. tricornutum (Table 1). The cp genome of
P. tricornutum shows a significantly higher G+C content
and contains three protein coding genes not present in
the cp genomes of T. oceanica or T. pseudonana, while
the 6.9 Kbp inverted repeat region is significantly smaller than in the two Thalassiosira species. The gene composition of the large and small single copy regions (LSC,
SSC) and inverted repeat subdomains (IRa, IRb) is
nearly identical between T. oceanica and T. pseudonana.
The differences in the overall size of their cp genomes
can be solely attributed to the expansion of the inverted
repeat region in T. oceanica leading to a de facto duplication of the three genes clpC, trnC and trnL, and to
the loss of the petF gene from the large single copy
region. Novel features of the T. oceanica cp genome are
the appearance of an expressed orf127 at the site
affected by the petF gene transfer event, and the partial
duplication of the RNA gene ffs referred to as flrn
(ffs-like RNA). Synteny between T. oceanica and
T. pseudonana is weakly conserved (data not shown)
and indicates a high degree of dynamic restructuring of
chloroplast genomes mainly in form of small scale inversions, though restricted to the respective subdomains
(LSC, SSC, IR) without crossing the borders of these elements (compare [10]).
Transfer of petF gene to the nuclear genome in T.
oceanica

The ferredoxin petF gene is not present in the cp genome
of T. oceanica indicating a loss or transfer of that gene to
the nucleus. To address this question, BLAST analysis of
454 whole genome shotgun data was performed and
revealed the presence of a nuclear genomic contig containing a complete PETF gene, confirming the gene
transfer event. The nuclear genomic context of the PETF
region could be assembled manually from the 454
sequence read data and was compared to the syntenic
region of T. pseudonana (Figure 2). In the T. pseudonana
cp genome, the petF gene is located between the genes
rpl19 and psaB; the comparable site in T. oceanica shows
the T. pseudonana petF gene being replaced by a
sequence block consisting of the novel orf127 and the
tRNA genes trnV and trnR. Interestingly, the latter unit is
surrounded by an unusually large dispersed 74 bp

Lommer et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:718
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/718

Page 4 of 13

Figure 1 Circular Map of the Thalassiosira oceanica CCMP1005 Chloroplast Genome. Genes on the outer forward strand are transcribed
clockwise, genes on the inner reverse strand counterclockwise. Gene symbols are colour-coded according to functional groups as indicated,
tRNA genes are represented by single-letter code. Features not present in T. pseudonana CCMP 1335 are marked red (orf127, flrn). LSC large
single-copy region; SSC small single-copy region; IRa and IRb inverted repeat regions.

inverted repeat, indicating major genomic rearrangements in that region mediated by these elements and
involving a recruitment of the two tRNA genes from a
more distant site. Mapping of the PETF gene on the
nuclear genomic fragment revealed a PETF gene model
composed of two exons separated by an intron. The first
exon encodes a chloroplast targeting peptide, while the
second exon carries the information for the conserved

functional part of the ferredoxin gene product. The predicted gene model reveals a nuclear promoter as well as a
polyA-signal. The PETF gene and the adjacent PDD gene
encoding for a pyridoxal-dependent decarboxylase [17]
are surrounded by larger non-related repeat elements
(>1000 bp) likely representing remnants of recombinational genomic rearrangements involved in the petF gene
transfer event. A highly conserved ortholog of the PDD

Lommer et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:718
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/718

Page 5 of 13

Table 1 Chloroplast Genome Features of T. oceanica in Comparison with T. pseudonana and P. tricornutum
Thalassiosira oceanica CCMP
1005
genome size [bp]

Thalassiosira pseudonana
CCMP 1335

Phaeodactylum tricornutum CCAP
1055/1

141 790

128 814

117 369

LSC
SSC

70 298
24 106

65 250
26 889

63 674
39 871

IR

23 693

IRa: 18 338

6 912

IRb: 18 337
G+C content [%]

30,39

30,66

32,56

A+T content [%]

69,61

69,34

67,44

gene content [#]

158+2

159

162

126 +orf127
3

127
3

130
3

27

27

27

2 +flrn

2

2

protein coding
rRNA
tRNA
other RNAs
in T. oceanica, but not in T. pseudonana

orf127a, flrn
petFa

in T. pseudonana, but not in T. oceanica
in IR of T. oceanica, but not in IR of T.
pseudonana

clpC, trnC, trnL

in P. tricornutum only

tsf, syfB, acpP

presence or absence of petF and orf127 in T. oceanica is the result of a gene transfer event.
Genes duplicated in the IR are counted once. The increased genome size of T. oceanica can conveniently be explained by an expansion of the IR region. Orf127
and flrn are potential pseudogenes and are listed as additional gene content (+2).
a

gene exists in T. pseudonana and its genomic context is
shown as a virtual destination for the gene transfer in
T. oceanica. The chloroplast’s contribution to the newly
formed nuclear PETF gene must at least be the conserved
part of the petF ORF encoding for ferredoxin. Indeed the
5’ and 3’ borders of the conserved main coding region of
the petF gene in the T. pseudonana chloroplast match
comparable sequences in the nuclear PETF gene of T.
oceanica (Figure 2 center). The situation at the 3’ end
illustrates that only a few changes are needed to transform
parts of the AT-rich stem-loop terminating many chloroplast transcription units into a functional polyA-signal
(C2) favouring termination of nuclear transcription. However, other conserved elements (C1, C3) are maintained as
well and support the chloroplast origin of a de novo
nuclear polyA-signal. For functional transcription, the
5’ end of the T. oceanica PETF exon 2 had to acquire a
splice acceptor site linking it to the exon 1, encoding for
the cp transit peptide. We observe that the T. pseudonana
petF sequence contains motifs in its coding region that
may act as a functional splice acceptor site (coloured bars)
in a nuclear genomic context. In summary, the petF
sequence as present in the T. pseudonana cp genome
already contains several sequence motifs that would permit an incorporation of the petF gene as a nearly functional exon into a nuclear genomic context, thereby
facilitating the modular acquisition of a second exon and
promoter through further rearrangements.

An important step towards establishing a nuclear PETF
gene is a functional retargeting of the ferredoxin gene product for import into the chloroplast and, hence, the acquisition of a chloroplast transit peptide. In T. oceanica this
transit peptide is encoded as a functional unit by a separate exon, suggesting the presence of a donor gene encoding for another protein of plastid destination as a potential
source for such a module by duplication and exon shuffling events. An alignment of the ferredoxin gene products, showing the exon structure of the T. oceanica PETF
and LI818 (a gene encoding for a chlorophyll-binding
light-harvesting protein) as such a possible donor gene for
the transit peptide, is provided in Figure 3. The transit
peptide in diatoms [18] has a length of approx. 28 aa and,
while the T. oceanica PETF exon 2 encodes the highly
conserved part of the protein, the part encoded by the 3’
half of its exon 1 is less conserved and could have evolved
from a sequence similar to the LI818 exon 1.
Functional expression and differential regulation of PETF

Ferredoxin contains iron and is often replaced by the ironfree flavodoxin in iron-limited growth conditions. Relative
quantification studies using RT-qPCR confirm the functional expression of the transferred T. oceanica PETF gene.
The down-regulation of PETF under iron-limited growth
conditions was similar to that of PCY, the gene encoding
for plastocyanin, another photosynthetic protein involved
in electron transfer (Figure 4). PETF and PCY show a

Lommer et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:718
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/718

Page 6 of 13

Figure 2 Genomic Context of the Thalassiosira petF Gene Transfer. The genomic context of the ferredoxin genes in T. oceanica and
T. pseudonana indicates a recent gene transfer event. The T. pseudonana petF gene is part of the cp genome and is located between rpl19 and
psaB (bottom left), serving as a model for the genomic situation in a common ancestor of the two species. The T. oceanica PETF gene is found
in the nuclear genome next to a PDD gene encoding for a pyridoxal-dependent decarboxylase (upper right) with a conserved ortholog present
in T. pseudonana (upper left). The sites of excision (chloroplast) and insertion (nuclear fragment) in T. oceanica show major genome
rearrangements in conjunction with the presence of a novel protein coding gene orf127 in the chloroplast. Both nuclear and chloroplast sites in
T. oceanica contain various forms of repeat elements („repeat”, „74 bp IR”) and motifs („C5”) that point to the recombinational events underlying
the complex multi-step gene transfer (upper and bottom right); these are not present at the comparable sites in T. pseudonana. An alignment
between the T. pseudonana and T. oceanica ferredoxin genes reveals sequence similarities at what might be the 5’ and 3’ ends of the transferred
DNA segment (center). The T. pseudonana petF coding sequence already contains a potential functional splice acceptor site near the N-terminus
of the reading frame. A comparable situation in the ancestral T. oceanica cp genome would have facilitated the acquisition of an intron in a new
genomic context leaving the major conserved part of the protein unaffected by the process (center left); the stem-loop (yellow bar), that serves
as a transcriptional terminator for petF in the T. pseudonana cp genome, contains motifs that are retained in the nuclear genomic context of
T. oceanica PETF, one of them being slightly modified to become an eukaryotic polyA-signal (center right).

concerted down-regulation upon iron limitation as
expected for constitutive photosynthesis genes, and in
agreement with the observed down-regulation of photosynthesis in response to iron limitation. As expected, FLDA
appears strongly up-regulated under iron-limited growth
conditions, thereby supporting the idea of a mutual substitution of the ferredoxin and flavodoxin proteins.

Novel features of the T. oceanica cp genome

The genomic rearrangements in the T. oceanica cp genome accompanying the petF transfer led to a novel
orf127 appearing at the inferred petF excision site. This
gene encodes a protein of 140 aa containing two predicted transmembrane helices (Figure 5a) with no similarity to any known proteins in the NCBI nr database.

Lommer et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:718
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/718

Page 7 of 13

Figure 3 Chloroplast Retargeting of Ferredoxin. The T. oceanica nuclear ferredoxin protein sequence is aligned to its chloroplast counterparts
from T. pseudonana and P. tricornutum. The PETF gene is composed of two exons, the second of which encodes the complete conserved part
of the protein and is clearly of chloroplast origin, while the first exon contributes the chloroplast retargeting part and is of nuclear origin. Such a
modular gene structure is not uncommon in genes encoding chloroplast targeted products as can be seen at the T. oceanica LI818 gene
belonging to the large group of nuclear FCP genes. The LI818 gene encodes a cp transit peptide in a structurally separated exon and is
presented as a potential donor gene candidate to provide the freshly transferred PETF DNA segment with the required targeting module.

The size and overall topology appear somewhat similar
to the small transmembrane proteins from the FCP
group of chlorophyll binding proteins, though sequence
similarity or characteristic motifs are lacking. The gene
is placed in a well-defined genomic context with an
obvious ribosomal binding sequence GGGAGGG at -15

Figure 4 Functional Expression and Differential Regulation of
PETF as a Function of Iron Level. Relative transcript abundances
of the genes FLDA, PETF and PCY in triplicate iron-limited (light blue
bars) and iron-replete cultures (orange bars) of T. oceanica were
measured using a RT-qPCR approach with gene-specific primers
pairs (Table 2). The normalized ΔCT values is calculated as 22-ΔCT,
where 22 is an arbitrary number chosen to provide a comparable
positive logarithmic scale for the transcript abundance of the three
genes tested, where a high normalized ΔCT represents a high
transcript level.

and two small inverted repeats serving as a putative
rho-independent transcriptional terminator.
As a second novel feature in the T. oceanica chloroplast genome we identified a duplication of the ffs RNA
gene referred to as flrn. The ffs RNA adopts a stem-loop
structure and is part of a signal recognition particle that
might play a role at insertion of proteins into the inner
chloroplast membrane [19]. An alignment of the flrn
gene with the ffs genes of T. oceanica, T. pseudonana and
P. tricornutum (Figure 5b) reveals that the flrn gene is
truncated and contains a nucleotide polymorphism in the
conserved loop region. Although the similarity between
flrn and ffs is high, the truncated nature of flrn suggests
that this sequence may represent a pseudogene.

Discussion
With new sequencing technologies emerging and an enormous increase of available sequence data, chloroplast genomes have drawn considerable interest not only for the
purpose of phylogenetic reconstructions [20], but also for
elucidating basic principles of genome organisation and
dynamics of structural recombination events in comparative approaches [10]. Chloroplast genomes show a remarkable diversity among phototrophic eukaryotes [21].
However, their coding potential, ranging between 50 and
200 genes (Figure 6), is not even closely approaching the
size and complexity of the plastid proteome needed to
carry out the metabolic and physiological functions of the
chloroplast. The plastid proteome is estimated to contain
more than 700 proteins, many of uncertain structure and
function [6]. Regulation of photosynthesis might even

Lommer et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:718
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/718

Page 8 of 13

Figure 5 Novel Features in the T. oceanica Chloroplast Genome. Two novel features of the T. oceanica cp genome are not found in T.
pseudonana or other diatoms. The orf127 gene encodes a hypothetical transmembrane protein of 140 aa with no homology to any other
proteins (a), the RNA gene flrn appears to have originated from a duplication of the conserved ffs gene that produces the RNA component of a
particle involved in membrane insertion processes. An alignment of flrn to the ffs sequences from T. oceanica, T. pseudonana and P. tricornutum
shows the high degree of conservation (b). EST evidence for both is weak, pointing to a potential pseudogene status, though orf127 shows a
well-formed genomic structure with a strong RBS (GGGAGGG) and two stem-loops that might serve as a transcriptional terminator, while the flrn
gene shows a remarkable conservation compared to its ffs counterpart with one of very few mismatches placed in the loop region (*).

affect more than 4000 genes in Arabidopsis and novel proteins involved in elemental steps of photosynthesis are still
being discovered [22].
The chloroplast genome is a dynamic structure in
which the collinear binding of the inverted repeat regions
likely leads to a handle-like structure isolating the LSC
and SSC regions in separate domains and serving as a
basis for occasional recombinational events that result in
an inversion of the SSC region [23]. The weak conservation of synteny between T. oceanica and T. pseudonana

cp genomes implies high structural dynamics of the circular genomic molecule, best explained by frequent
inversion events. The remarkable lack of genomic rearrangements across the borders of the single copy regions,
as observed by comparison between T. oceanica and
T. pseudonana, could be explained by the structural
separation of the LSC and SSC in a handle-like structure
and supports this structural model.
The establishment of the primary endosymbiont as a
chloroplast led to the loss of many of the endosymbiont’s

Lommer et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:718
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/718

Figure 6 Subcellular Localization of the petF/PETF Gene in the
Phylogenetic Context. A comparison of the chloroplast gene
content between the main phylogenetic groups shows a reduced
coding potential in the green line (Chlorophytes + Streptophytes,
Euglenophytes) and in the Alveolates indicating extensive gene
transfer to the nucleus or gene loss. The localization of the
ferredoxin petF/PETF gene correlates with the extent of genome
reduction, hence, petF is generally retained in the larger cp
genomes of Glaucophytes, Rhodophytes, Stramenopiles (incl.
diatoms) and Cryptophytes. Protein gene numbers are taken from
the Chloroplast Genome Database [54] and represent the majority
of species in the respective groups, though exceptions can deviate
from the given range. Phylogenetic groups originating from
secondary endosymbiosis are indented.

genes or their transfer to the host’s nucleus. Red algal
and Glaucophyte chloroplasts retain about 200 protein
coding genes, while most members of the green lineage
exhibit a further genome reduction to less than 100
genes, indicating functional transfer of several essential
genes to the nuclear genome. The substantial retention
of coding potential in the primary plastids of the red
algal lineage has been hypothesized to have an impact on
the chloroplast portability during secondary endosymbiosis, preferentially facilitating further endosymbiotic
events of autotrophs from the red lineage over their
more reduced green counterparts [7]. Gene content of
extant cp genomes derived from the red-algal lineage
indicate that further gene loss or transfer proceeded after
secondary endosymbiosis events, leading to a gene content of approx. 140 genes in the Stramenopiles and Cryptophytes. Stronger reductions can be found within the
Apicomplexa and Dinophytes, referred to as Alveolates,
perhaps because the known members of the Apicomplexa and several of the Dinophytes are non-photosynthetic organisms, and sometimes parasitic [24]. All of
these subgroups are regarded as descendants of an
ancient red algal endosymbiont and its host [7].
Occasional free release of cp genomic DNA upon
chloroplast lysis is considered an important source of
chloroplast DNA for integration into the nuclear genome. This mechanism can operate only in organisms

Page 9 of 13

containing multiple plastids. Indeed the higher degree
of gene retention in P. tricornutum compared to Thalassiosira species might be partially explained by the
presence of a single, unique chloroplast in P. tricornutum which would not be available for lysis in the context of the living cell. T. oceanica and T. pseudonana
cells on the other hand are equipped with approx. 4
plastids each [25,26].
As for other evolutionary processes, the transfer of
chloroplast-encoded genes to the nuclear genome is difficult, if not impossible, to observe. Experimental
approaches with transgenic tobacco have demonstrated
that plastid genes can be successfully transferred to the
nuclear genome [27], but most of the evidence for the
inferred transfers is derived from phylogenetic and phylogenomic arguments [20]. Why certain genes are preferentially retained or transferred is puzzling and several
theories have emerged ranging from a simple economic
hypothesis in favour of gene transfer [28] to the CORR
(CO-location for Redox Regulation) hypothesis in favour
of gene retention [29]. The ferredoxin petF gene is not
essentially retained in the CP genome, as a nuclear location is observed in several phylogenetic groups. So far,
with the exception of T. oceanica, the petF gene has
been retained in large cp genomes (Figure 6) such as
the ones from red algae and descendants (including diatoms), and has generally been transferred to the nucleus
in groups with reduced cp genomes such as Chlorophytes and Streptophytes. Several intrinsic features of
the petF gene, conserved in the cp genomes of the closely related species T. pseudonana and T. weissflogii
[30], may have facilitated the functional transfer of
petF from the chloroplast to the nuclear genome in
T. oceanica. Thus, in the coastal species T. pseudonana
and T. weissflogii, the petF gene transfer may be waiting
to happen as well, given appropriate environmental
selection pressures. However, at this point, the establishment of the PETF gene in the nuclear genome of
T. oceanica represents an exception within the diatoms
for which genome information is available so far.
It has been demonstrated that the photosynthetic
architecture in T. oceanica is better adapted to iron-limited areas than its coastal counterpart T. weissflogii [5].
Tolerance to iron limitation most likely arises from a
combination of several genetic adaptations that contribute to a better streamlining of the photosynthetic apparatus towards low iron requirements. The low
abundance of PSI relative to PSII in T. oceanica is
clearly important in reducing the cellular iron requirements [5]. The substitution of the iron-requiring cytochrome c 6 by the copper-containing plastocyanin in
T. oceanica is an additional strategy to further reduce
photosynthetic iron requirements, and, hence, the iron
quota of this diatom [31]. Likewise, the flavodoxin

Lommer et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:718
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/718

expression is up-regulated upon iron limitation in many
diatom species [32] while a simultaneous down-regulation of the expression of the ferredoxin petF gene is
observed (e.g. [33]). In our study, we could confirm the
expression and iron-dependent regulation of the ferredoxin PETF, the plastocyanin PCY and the flavodoxin
FLDA gene in T. oceanica (Figure 4). The concerted
down-regulation of PETF and PCY upon iron limitation
is expected as part of the general down-regulation of
the photosynthetic apparatus under iron limitation. In
contrast, FLDA is strongly up-regulated in order to substitute ferredoxin with flavodoxin, consequently keeping
intact the electron-transport interface between membrane-bound light reactions and dark reactions in the cp
stroma.
The contrast in photosynthetic physiology between
T. oceanica and its coastal relatives T. pseudonana and
T. weissflogii make an attractive case to infer an adaptive
significance for the transfer of petF, an iron-regulated cp
gene, to the nuclear genome. Whether the transfer of
petF to the nuclear genome is simply a byproduct of
evolutionary trends towards chloroplast genome reduction or truly confers an ecological advantage with
respect to the response to iron remains uncertain,
though the observed high tolerance of T. oceanica to
severe iron limitation relative to its close relatives
T. pseudonana and T. weissflogii suggests that the latter
hypothesis is worthy of further investigation.
Single gene transfers are the elemental steps of cp
genome reduction and may confer benefits to single species in the context of niche adaptation. It is tempting to
speculate that larger phylogenetic groups whose members share a reduced cp genome (as in the green lineage) likewise emerged from a founder species that
profited from the benefits of cp genome reduction and
improved nuclear control over organelle function. Centralized and synchronized regulation of cp metabolism is
assumed to be a potential driving force for intracellular
gene transfers. Organisms that already experienced
large-scale cp genome reduction should benefit as well
from an improved regulation of the transferred genes.
The uniform genomic situation in larger phylogenetic
groups raises the question whether such competitive
advantages might even apply to these groups as a whole.
A comparative evaluation of this effect between the red
and green lineage is complicated by the interference
with different extents of gene losses in both groups as
well as the presence of distinct types of photosynthetic
physiology in general. However, the terrestrial environment has been conquered exclusively by members of the
green lineage, and prerequisite for this achievement
might (at least partially) have been the improvement of
regulatory capacities linked to cp genome reduction by
large scale gene transfer. The settlement of the land

Page 10 of 13

represented the occupation of a new ecological niche
rich in abiotic stresses of a novel type. It remains to be
elucidated to which extent such specific environmental
stresses exert a selective pressure favouring gene transfer
events [34], ultimately leading to competitive advantage
and enhanced fitness.

Conclusions
Although the chloroplast genomes of some closely related
marine phytoplankton species have been sequenced, the
differences between species within a genus have been
small and restricted to gene reshuffling. Our findings,
reporting a traceable single gene transfer from the chloroplast to the nuclear genome, are unique so far, in part
because of the availability of both plastid and nuclear genome sequences for T. oceanica and T. pseudonana. The
example of petF shows that chloroplast and nuclear genomes are of remarkable plasticity. Whether or not the
gene transfer described for T. oceanica confers a competitive advantage still needs to be assessed through experimental approaches. Future analyses of cp genomes from a
wider range of ecologically diverse species will likely reveal
other surprising patterns of cp gene content, loss and regulation, and further enhance our understanding of their
impacts on the evolutionary fitness of species.
Methods
Strains and Cultures

T. oceanica Hasle [25] strain CCMP1005 was grown
from an axenic clonal isolate, obtained from serial dilutions of a stock culture to extinction. T. oceanica cells
were grown in 8 l batch cultures using iron-free f/2
nutrients [35] in ASW (artificial seawater medium [36])
supplied with 10 μM FeCl3 at 100 μE, 25°C and a 14/10
h light/dark cycle. Cells were harvested by filtration on
47 mm 5 μ-PC [polycarbonate]-filters, resuspended into
a small volume of media, followed by centrifugation at
4°C for 10 min at 11000 rpm. Cell pellets were frozen in
liquid N2 and stored at -80°C. Genome comparison was
conducted with the genome data available at JGI and
NCBI for T. pseudonana Hasle & Heimdal CCMP1335
[26,37] and Phaeodactylum tricornutum Bohlin
CCAP1055/1 [38,39].
Nucleic Acid Extraction and Sequencing

Total genomic DNA for sequencing of the T. oceanica
genome was extracted from nutrient-replete cells using
the QIAGEN DNeasy kits. The quality of nucleic acids
was assessed by NanoDrop UV absorption profiles and
agarose gel electrophoresis. Next generation 454 sequencing technology [40] was applied to the gDNA as follows. After mechanical shearing, specific sequencing
adaptors were ligated and the genomic DNA fragments
were shotgun sequenced using massively parallel

Lommer et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:718
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/718

pyrosequencing on a 454 gs-flx instrument (Roche,
Penzberg, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s
protocol. The resulting libraries were sequenced on a
gs-flx sequencer using the standard manufacturer’s
protocol.
Cp Genome Sequence Assembly and Gap Closure

1.2 Mio flx pyrosequencing reads were assembled into
contigs with the TGICL assembler using the CAP3 algorithm [41]. The quality of the resulting contigs was
manually confirmed by inspection using the CLVIEW
cluster viewer program. Using the local BLAST package
from NCBI [42], we identified 9 contigs with high
sequence coverage as elements of the cp genome. Additional information extracted from the contig ends of the
ace-file of the original assembly, enabled the manual
assembly of the cp genome to near completeness. The
two remaining small gaps were targeted by PCR amplification of the contig ends and demonstrated physical
continuity of the gap regions. Bridging fragments were
cloned in a TOPO cloning vector and their sequences
determined by Sanger sequencing.
Sequence Analysis and Annotation

The assembled chloroplast genome sequence was analyzed by BLAST against the related T. pseudonana cp
genome sequence, the NCBI nr (non-redundant) protein
database and the NCBI CDD Conserved Domain Database. The BLAST analysis revealed few obvious artificial
frameshifts within the original contigs, allowing correction of the chloroplast scaffold for single nucleotide
errors placed in low complexity regions of single nucleotide repeats that generally appear to be critical in 454
data. The final chloroplast scaffold was annotated using
Artemis [43] and the submission software Sequin [44].
Inverted repeats at the 3’ end of genes representing
putative rho-independent transcriptional terminators
[45,46] were identified with the EINVERTED tool from
the EMBOSS software package [47]. Ribosomal Binding
Sites (RBS) were determined manually from similarity to
the AGGAGGT consensus sequence [48] and close
proximity to the respective translation start. The contig
containing the nuclear ferredoxin gene PETF was
assembled manually from raw genomic 454 reads using
local BLAST, database sequence retrieval and BioEdit
[49]. Gene modelling was done with the GENSCAN
webserver [50] and confirmed by NCBI blastx against
the nr protein database. The derived transcript encoded
a protein with high homology to T. pseudonana and
P. tricornutum petF protein orthologs.
Circular Map Construction

The circular genomic map was constructed from the primary embl-annotation file using CGVIEW [51] as follows:

Page 11 of 13

The embl-file was converted into an xml-file with the perlscript cgview_xml_builder.pl, which is enclosed in the
CGVIEW package; the xml-file containing the formatting
details for the circular map was then customized manually
by adding functional categorization and appropriate gene
symbol shapes and dimensions. The circular map was constructed from the xml-file as png-graphic, using the
CGVIEW main function. Gene names were added using
the open source graphics program GIMP [52].
RT-qPCR data

Based on the transcript sequences of the 18S-rDNA,
PETF, FLDA and PCY genes derived from the assembly
data, sets of primers were designed and optimized to
detect gene specific amplicons of approx. 100 bp with
uniformly high amplification efficiency (>95%, Table 2).
A local BLASTN analysis of the primers against all
sequences available for T. oceanica confirmed the specificity of the primers for their respective genes. cDNA
template was prepared from 1 μg RNA by reverse transcription using the QuantiTect Rev. Transcription Kit
(QIAGEN), followed by digestion of residual DNA using
the included gDNA wipeout reagents. The cDNA was
diluted to 0.5 ng μl -1 and 2.5 ng were used per qPCR
reaction run on an ABI Prism 7000 (Applied Biosystems). Cycling conditions were 2 min at 50°C (once), 2
min at 95°C (once), and 40 cycles of 95°C for 0:15 min,
followed by 0:30 min at 60°C. The qPCR mixtures contained 12.5 μl SYBR qPCR SUPERMIX W/ROX (Invitrogen), 0.5 μl of 10 μM forward and reverse primer
each, 6.5 μl H 2 O and 5 μl of cDNA template. Gene
expression was assessed as the mean from the CT values
of 2-4 replicate reactions at a threshold level of 0.2.
Relative expression of genes with respect to the 18SrDNA gene was calculated using the ΔCT method (ΔCT
[geneX] = C T [geneX] - C T [18S]). Final data are presented as the mean ± s.e.m. of the ΔC T values from
three biological replicates.
Nomenclature of Gene Names

The nomenclature of gene names follows the recommendations for Chlamydomonas reinhardtii [53]. Gene
names are typed in italic and uppercase for nuclear
genes (PETF) or italic and lower case for organelle
genes (petF).

Table 2 Oligonucleotide Primers used for RT-qPCR
Analyses
Gene

Forward Primer (5’®3’)

Reverse Primer (5’®3’)

PETF

AGGCCACCTCCCTCGACTAC

GCGGCATCGACGATGAAG

FLDA

CCGGCCTTTTCTACTCGACC

TTGACGTCTCCGATGTCCTTC

PCY

CTCCGCCCCTGCTTACG

TCCCTTGCAGACAGTGACCTT

Lommer et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:718
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/718

Acknowledgements
We thank Prof. Stefan Rose-John (Department of Biochemistry, ChristianAlbrechts-Universität, Kiel, Germany) for advice in the isolation of nuclear
genomic DNA from T. oceanica and the access to his laboratory and
equipment. This work was supported in part by a DFG grant to JLR
(RO2138/6-1) and by the DFG Cluster of Excellence Future Ocean (EXC 80).
Prof. T. Bosch and Dr. Georg Hemmrich provided help with the initial cp
contig assembly. We thank Tania Klüver for help with the laboratory
experiment and culturing of the algae.
Author details
1
Leibniz Institute of Marine Sciences at Kiel University IFM-GEOMAR, Kiel,
Germany. 2Institute of Clinical Molecular Biology, Christian-AlbrechtsUniversity Kiel, Kiel, Germany.
Authors’ contributions
ML performed the gap closure cloning, the cp genome assembly and
annotation, the analysis of the petF gene transfer, prepared the figures and
wrote a major portion of the manuscript.
ASR cultured the algae, carried out the RT-qPCR work and commented on
the manuscript.
MS prepared the gDNA libraries and performed the 454 sequencing.
SS provided the sequencing technology and supply.
PR coordinated the sequencing and contributed to manuscript writing.
JLR coordinated the study, isolated the T. oceanica gDNA, and made major
contributions to discussion and manuscript writing.
All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Received: 1 June 2010 Accepted: 20 December 2010
Published: 20 December 2010
References
1. Dugdale RC, Wilkerson FP: Silicate regulation of new production in the
equatorial Pacific upwelling. Nature 1998, 391:270-273.
2. Finkel ZV, Katz ME, Wright JD, Schofield OME, Falkowski PG: Climatically
driven macroevolutionary patterns in the size of marine diatoms over
the cenozoic. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005, 102:8927-8932.
3. Martin JH, Coale KH, Johnson KS, Fitzwater SE, Gordon RM, Tanner SJ,
Hunter CN, Elrod VA, Nowicki JL, Coley TL, Barber RT, Lindley S, Watson AJ,
Van Scoy K, Law CS, Liddicoat MI, Ling R, Stanton T, Stockel J, Collins C,
Anderson A, Bidigare R, Ondrusek M, Latasa M, Millero FJ, Lee K, Yao W,
Zhang JZ, Friederich G, Sakamoto C, Chavez F, Buck K, Kolber Z, Greene R,
Falkowski P, Chisholm SW, Hoge F, Swift R, Yungel J, Turner S,
Nightingale P, Hatton A, Liss P, Tindale NW: Testing the Iron Hypothesis in
Ecosystems of the Equatorial Pacific-Ocean. Nature 1994, 371:123-129.
4. Boyd PW, Jickells T, Law CS, Blain S, Boyle EA, Buesseler KO, Coale KH,
Cullen JJ, de Baar HJ, Follows M, Harvey M, Lancelot C, Levasseur M,
Owens NP, Pollard R, Rivkin RB, Sarmiento J, Schoemann V, Smetacek V,
Takeda S, Tsuda A, Turner S, Watson AJ: Mesoscale iron enrichment
experiments 1993-2005: Synthesis and future directions. Science 2007,
315:612-617.
5. Strzepek RF, Harrison PJ: Photosynthetic architecture differs in coastal and
oceanic diatoms. Nature 2004, 431:689-692.
6. Kleffmann T, Russenberger D, von Zychlinski A, Christopher W, Sjolander K,
Gruissem W, Baginsky S: The Arabidopsis thaliana chloroplast proteome
reveals pathway abundance and novel protein functions. Curr Biol 2004,
14:354-362.
7. Falkowski PG, Katz ME, Knoll AH, Quigg A, Raven JA, Schofield O, Taylor FJR:
The evolution of modern eukaryotic phytoplankton. Science 2004,
305:354-360.
8. Quigg A, Finkel ZV, Irwin AJ, Rosenthal Y, Ho TY, Reinfelder JR, Schofield O,
Morel FMM, Falkowski PG: The evolutionary inheritance of elemental
stoichiometry in marine phytoplankton. Nature 2003, 425:291-294.
9. Timmis JN, Ayliffe MA, Huang CY, Martin W: Endosymbiotic gene transfer:
Organelle genomes forge eukaryotic chromosomes. Nat Rev Genet 2004,
5(2):123-135.
10. Oudot-Le Secq M-P, Grimwood J, Shapiro H, Armbrust EV, Bowler C,
Green BR: Chloroplast genomes of the diatoms Phaeodactylum
tricornutum and Thalassiosira pseudonana: comparison with other
plastid genomes of the red lineage. Mol Genet Genomics 2007,
277:427-439.

Page 12 of 13

11. Martin W: Gene transfer from organelles to the nucleus: Frequent and in
big chunks. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2003, 100:8612-8614.
12. Richly E, Leister D: NUPTs in sequenced eukaryotes and their genomic
organization in relation to NUMTs. Mol Biol Evol 2004, 21:1972-1980.
13. Bock R, Timmis JN: Reconstructing evolution: gene transfer from plastids
to the nucleus. BioEssays 2008, 30:556-566.
14. Sheppard AE, Timmis JN: Instability of Plastid DNA in the Nuclear
Genome. PLoS Genet 2009, 5:e1000323.
15. Fujita K, Ehira S, Tanaka K, Asai K, Ohta N: Molecular phylogeny and
evolution of the plastid and nuclear encoded cbbX genes in the
unicellular red alga Cyanidioschyzon merolae. Genes Genet Syst 2008,
83:127-133.
16. Ueda M, Nishikawa T, Fujimoto M, Takanashi H, Arimura S, Tsutsumi N,
Kadowaki K: Substitution of the gene for chloroplast RPS16 was assisted
by generation of a dual targeting signal. Mol Biol Evol 2008, 25:1566-1575.
17. Jackson FR: Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Pyridoxal-Dependent
Decarboxylases Are Homologous. J Mol Evol 1990, 31:325-329.
18. Kilian O, Kroth PG: Identification and characterization of a new conserved
motif within the presequence of proteins targeted into complex diatom
plastids. Plant J 2005, 41:175-183.
19. Ulbrandt ND, Newitt JA, Bernstein HD: The E-coli signal recognition
particle is required for the insertion of a subset of inner membrane
proteins. Cell 1997, 88:187-196.
20. Moustafa A, Beszteri B, Maier UG, Bowler C, Valentin K, Bhattacharya D:
Genomic Footprints of a Cryptic Plastid Endosymbiosis in Diatoms.
Science 2009, 324:1724-1726.
21. Simpson CL, Stern DB: The treasure trove of algal chloroplast genomes.
Surprises in architecture and gene content, and their functional
implications. Plant Physiol 2002, 129:957-966.
22. Eberhard S, Finazzi G, Wollman F-A: The Dynamics of Photosynthesis.
Annu Rev Genet 2008, 42:463-515.
23. Cattolico RA, Jacobs MA, Zhou Y, Chang J, Duplessis M, Lybrand T, McKay J,
Ong HC, Sims E, Rocap G: Chloroplast genome sequencing analysis of
Heterosigma akashiwo CCMP452 (West Atlantic) and NIES293 (West
Pacific) strains. BMC Genomics 2008, 9:211.
24. Hackett JD, Anderson DM, Erdner DL, Bhattacharya D: Dinoflagellates: A
remarkable evolutionary experiment. Am J Bot 2004, 91:1523-1534.
25. Hasle GR: The Marine, Planktonic Diatoms Thalassiosira-Oceanica Sp-Nov
and Thalassiosira-Partheneia. J Phycol 1983, 19:220-229.
26. Hasle GR, Heimdal BR: Some species of the centric diatom genus
Thalassiosira studied in the light and electron microscopes. Beih zur Nova
Hedwigia 1970, 31:543-581.
27. Huang CY, Ayliffe MA, Timmis JN: Direct measurement of the transfer rate
of chloroplast DNA into the nucleus. Nature 2003, 422:72-76.
28. Douglas AE, Raven JA: Genomes at the interface between bacteria and
organelles. Philos Trans R Soc B 2003, 358:5-17.
29. Allen JF, Puthiyaveetil S, Ström J, Allen CA: Energy transduction anchors
genes in organelles. BioEssays 2005, 27:426-435.
30. Gueneau P, Morel F, LaRoche J, Erdner D: The petF region of the
chloroplast genome from the diatom Thalassiosira weissflogii: sequence,
organization and phylogeny. Eur J Phycol 1998, 33:203-211.
31. Peers G, Price NM: Copper-containing plastocyanin used for electron
transport by an oceanic diatom. Nature 2006, 441:341-344.
32. LaRoche J, Murray H, Orellana M, Newton J: Flavodoxin Expression as an
Indicator of Iron Limitation in Marine Diatoms. J Phycol 1995, 31:520-530.
33. Allen AE, LaRoche J, Maheswari U, Lommer M, Schauer N, Lopez PJ,
Finazzi G, Fernie AR, Bowler C: Whole-cell response of the pennate
diatom Phaeodactylum tricornutum to iron starvation. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 2008, 105:10438-10443.
34. Cullis CA, Vorster BJ, Van Der Vyver C, Kunert KJ: Transfer of genetic
material between the chloroplast and nucleus: how is it related to stress
in plants? Ann Bot 2009, 103:625-633.
35. Guillard RRL, Ryther JH: Studies of marine planktonic diatoms. I. Cyclotella
nana Hustedt and Detonula confervacea Cleve. Can J Microbiol 1962,
8:229-239.
36. Goldman JC, McCarthy JJ: Steady-State Growth and Ammonium Uptake
of a Fast-Growing Marine Diatom. Limnol Oceanogr 1978, 23:695-703.
37. Armbrust EV, Berges JA, Bowler C, Green BR, Martinez D, Putnam NH,
Zhou SG, Allen AE, Apt KE, Bechner M, Brzezinski MA, Chaal BK, Chiovitti A,
Davis AK, Demarest MS, Detter JC, Glavina T, Goodstein D, Hadi MZ,
Hellsten U, Hildebrand M, Jenkins BD, Jurka J, Kapitonov VV, Kroger N,

Lommer et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:718
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/718

38.
39.

40.

41.

42.
43.

44.
45.

46.

47.
48.
49.

50.
51.
52.
53.
54.

Lau WWY, Lane TW, Larimer FW, Lippmeier JC, Lucas S, Medina M,
Montsant A, Obornik M, Parker MS, Palenik B, Pazour GJ, Richardson PM,
Rynearson TA, Saito MA, Schwartz DC, Thamatrakoln K, Valentin K, Vardi A,
Wilkerson FP, Rokhsar DS: The genome of the diatom Thalassiosira
pseudonana: Ecology, evolution, and metabolism. Science 2004,
306:79-86.
Bohlin K: Zur Morphologie und Biologie einzelliger Algen. Öfvers af K Vet
Acad Förhandl Stockholm 1897, 54:519-522.
Bowler C, Allen AE, Badger JH, Grimwood J, Jabbari K, Kuo A, Maheswari U,
Martens C, Maumus F, Otillar RP, Rayko E, Salamov A, Vandepoele K,
Beszteri B, Gruber A, Heijde M, Katinka M, Mock T, Valentin K, Verret F,
Berges JA, Brownlee C, Cadoret JP, Chiovitti A, Choi CJ, Coesel S, De
Martino A, Detter JC, Durkin C, Falciatore A, Fournet J, Haruta M,
Huysman MJ, Jenkins BD, Jiroutova K, Jorgensen RE, Joubert Y, Kaplan A,
Kröger N, Kroth PG, La Roche J, Lindquist E, Lommer M, Martin-Jézéquel V,
Lopez PJ, Lucas S, Mangogna M, McGinnis K, Medlin LK, Montsant A,
Oudot-Le Secq MP, Napoli C, Obornik M, Parker MS, Petit JL, Porcel BM,
Poulsen N, Robison M, Rychlewski L, Rynearson TA, Schmutz J, Shapiro H,
Siaut M, Stanley M, Sussman MR, Taylor AR, Vardi A, von Dassow P,
Vyverman W, Willis A, Wyrwicz LS, Rokhsar DS, Weissenbach J, Armbrust EV,
Green BR, Van de Peer Y, Grigoriev IV: The Phaeodactylum genome
reveals the evolutionary history of diatom genomes. Nature 2008,
456:239-244.
Wolff J, Bayer T, Haubold B, Schilhabel M, Rosenstiel P, Tautz D: Nucleotide
divergence versus gene expression differentiation: 454 transcriptome
sequencing in natural isolates from the carrion crow and its hybrid zone
with the hooded crow. Mol Ecol 2010, 19(Suppl 1):162-75.
Pertea G, Huang XQ, Liang F, Antonescu V, Sultana R, Karamycheva S, Lee Y,
White J, Cheung F, Parvizi B, Tsai J, Quackenbush J: TIGR Gene Indices
clustering tools (TGICL): a software system for fast clustering of large
EST datasets. Bioinformatics 2003, 19:651-652.
Altschul SF, Gish W, Miller W, Myers EW, Lipman DJ: Basic Local Alignment
Search Tool. J Mol Biol 1990, 215:403-410.
Rutherford K, Parkhill J, Crook J, Horsnell T, Rice P, Rajandream MA, Barrell B:
Artemis: sequence visualization and annotation. Bioinformatics 2000,
16:944-945.
Benson DA, Karsch-Mizrachi I, Lipman DJ, Ostell J, Wheeler DL: GenBank.
Nucleic Acids Res 2006, 34:D16-D20.
Farnham PJ, Platt T: Rho-Independent Termination - Dyad Symmetry in
DNA Causes Rna-Polymerase to Pause During Transcription Invitro.
Nucleic Acids Res 1981, 9:563-577.
Wilson KS, Von Hippel PH: Transcription Termination at Intrinsic
Terminators - the Role of the RNA Hairpin. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1995,
92:8793-8797.
Rice P, Longden I, Bleasby A: EMBOSS: The European molecular biology
open software suite. Trends Genet 2000, 16:276-277.
Shine J, Dalgarno L: Determinant of Cistron Specificity in Bacterial
Ribosomes. Nature 1975, 254:34-38.
Hall TA: BioEdit: a user-friendly biological sequence alignment editor and
analysis program for Windows 95/98/NT. Nucleic Acids Symp Ser 1999,
41:95-98.
The GENSCAN Web Server at MIT. [http://genes.mit.edu/GENSCAN.html].
Stothard P, Wishart DS: Circular genome visualization and exploration
using CGView. Bioinformatics 2005, 21:537-539.
GNU Image Manipulation Program. [http://www.gimp.org/].
Chlamy Center - An Online Informatics Resource for Chlamydomonas.
[http://www.chlamy.org/nomenclature.html].
Cui L, Veeraraghavan N, Richter A, Wall K, Jansen RK, Leebens-Mack J,
Makalowska I, dePamphilis CW: ChloroplastDB: the chloroplast genome
database. Nucleic Acids Res 2006, 34:D692-D696.

doi:10.1186/1471-2164-11-718
Cite this article as: Lommer et al.: Recent transfer of an iron-regulated
gene from the plastid to the nuclear genome in an oceanic diatom
adapted to chronic iron limitation. BMC Genomics 2010 11:718.

Page 13 of 13

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
