<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>A genomic approach highlights common and diverse effects and determinants of susceptibility on the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae exposed to distinct antimicrobial peptides</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Microbiology 2010, 10:289. doi:10.1186/1471-2180-10-289"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Belén López-García"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
A genomic approach highlights common and diverse effects and
determinants of susceptibility on the yeast Saccharomyces
cerevisiae exposed to distinct antimicrobial peptides
López-García et al.

López-García et al. BMC Microbiology 2010, 10:289
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/10/289 (15 November 2010)

López-García et al. BMC Microbiology 2010, 10:289
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/10/289

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

A genomic approach highlights common and
diverse effects and determinants of susceptibility
on the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae exposed to
distinct antimicrobial peptides
Belén López-García1,2†, Mónica Gandía1†, Alberto Muñoz1,3, Lourdes Carmona1, Jose F Marcos1*

Abstract
Background: The mechanism of action of antimicrobial peptides (AMP) was initially correlated with peptide
membrane permeation properties. However, recent evidences indicate that action of a number of AMP is more
complex and involves specific interactions at cell envelopes or with intracellular targets. In this study, a genomic
approach was undertaken on the model yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae to characterize the antifungal effect of two
unrelated AMP.
Results: Two differentiated peptides were used: the synthetic cell-penetrating PAF26 and the natural cytolytic
melittin. Transcriptomic analyses demonstrated distinctive gene expression changes for each peptide. Quantitative
RT-PCR confirmed differential expression of selected genes. Gene Ontology (GO) annotation of differential gene
lists showed that the unique significant terms shared by treatment with both peptides were related to the cell wall
(CW). Assays with mutants lacking CW-related genes including those of MAPK signaling pathways revealed genes
having influence on sensitivity to peptides. Fluorescence microscopy and flow cytometry demonstrated PAF26
interaction with cells and internalization that correlated with cell killing in sensitive CW-defective mutants such as
Δecm33 or Δssd1. GO annotation also showed differential responses between peptides, which included ribosomal
biogenesis, ARG genes from the metabolism of amino groups (specifically induced by PAF26), or the reaction to
unfolded protein stress. Susceptibility of deletion mutants confirmed the involvement of these processes.
Specifically, mutants lacking ARG genes from the metabolism of arginine pathway were markedly more resistant to
PAF26 and had a functional CW. In the deletant in the arginosuccinate synthetase (ARG1) gene, PAF26 interaction
occurred normally, thus uncoupling peptide interaction from cell killing. The previously described involvement of
the glycosphingolipid gene IPT1 was extended to the peptides studied here.
Conclusions: Reinforcement of CW is a general response common after exposure to distinct AMP, and likely
contributes to shield cells from peptide interaction. However, a weakened CW is not necessarily indicative of a
higher sensitivity to AMP. Additional processes modulate susceptibility to specific peptides, exemplified in the
involvement of the metabolism of amino groups in the case of PAF26. The relevance of the response to unfolded
protein stress or the sphingolipid biosynthesis, previously reported for other unrelated AMP, was also
independently confirmed.

* Correspondence: jmarcos@iata.csic.es
† Contributed equally
1
Departamento de Ciencia de los Alimentos, Instituto de Agroquímica y
Tecnología de Alimentos (IATA), CSIC, Apartado de Correos 73, Burjassot,
46100 Valencia, Spain
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
© 2010 López-García et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

López-García et al. BMC Microbiology 2010, 10:289
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/10/289

Background
Antimicrobial peptides (AMP) and peptide-related molecules are widespread in nature in organisms all along
the phylogenetic scale, and are considered part of an
ancestral innate system of defence against pathogen
attack or competition for nutrients [1]. They are small
peptides and proteins with common properties such as
direct antimicrobial activity, abundance of cationic and
hydrophobic residues, amphipathic conformations and
diverse structures. Synthetic AMP have also been either
designed de novo on the basis of these properties or
identified by means of combinatorial and non-biased
approaches. AMP show great potential as alternatives to
face the decreasing efficacy of conventional antibiotics
in clinic [2,3], new tools in plant protection [4,5], or
novel food preservatives [6,7].
In contrast with the hundreds of peptides endowed
with antimicrobial activity that are currently known,
only a minor proportion of them have been studied in
detail in relation to their mechanism of action. Detailed
knowledge of mode of action is critical to sustain the
potential application of AMP. It was initially considered
that microbial killing was a primary consequence of the
in vitro membrane disturbing properties shared by many
cationic and amphipathic AMP. Nevertheless, today it is
established for a number of peptides that there are also
non-lytic modes of action that might involve specific
interactions at cell envelopes and/or with intracellular
targets, even among peptides known as potentially
membrane-disrupting [8-12]. Significant examples
include: the binding of either the peptidic lantibiotic
nisin [13,14] or the amphipathic fungal defensin plectasin [15] to the bacterial peptidoglycan precursor Lipid
II; the requirement of plant defensins for the presence
of distinct classes of membrane glycolipids [16-18]; the
interaction of different AMP with heat shock related
proteins [19-21]; or the induction of DNA damage and
apoptosis [22-24]. Also, cell penetrating properties are
being discovered among peptides previously known as
antimicrobials and, reversibly, some penetrating-like
peptides show antimicrobial potency [25].
Genome-wide techniques and transcriptional profiles
have contributed to the characterization of AMP
mechanisms [15]. The underlying assumption is that
these studies will provide non-biased clues to the mode
of action and specificity determinants of compounds
(peptides), which will subsequently help in the design of
new generations of improved antimicrobials, in terms of
inhibitory potency and selectivity. Such analyses might
also highlight novel targets for antimicrobials. Moreover,
expression profiling is considered as a fingerprint to find
common and distinct responses that could aid in the
design of combined therapies of unrelated compounds,

Page 3 of 18

to which AMP might contribute. However, this type of
studies are still scarce in the case of AMP, with only a
few examples in bacteria [26-29] and fungi, mostly yeast
[30-33]. Transcriptome profiling has been used to characterize the response of the model yeast Saccharomyces
cerevisiae to distinct antifungals [34-39], including
selected AMP [30,33].
In this study we aim to compare at a genomic scale
the effects onto S. cerevisiae of two AMP with distinctive properties. Melittin is an a-helical membrane active
peptide identified from honeybee venom that is recognized as a model pore-forming peptide for the study of
peptide interaction with lipid bilayers and cell permeating properties [40]. On the other hand, PAF26 is a short
de novo-designed hexapeptide [41], which shares
sequence similarity with other AMP from natural [42]
or synthetic origin [43,44]. It has activity against plant
pathogenic fungi as well as several microorganisms of
clinical relevance, including the yeast Candida and several dermatophytic fungi [45]. PAF26 at low micromolar
(sub-inhibitory) concentrations has been recently shown
to have cell penetrating properties in the mycelium and
conidia of the filamentous plant pathogen Penicillium
digitatum [46] and the model fungus Neurospora crassa
(A. Muñoz and N. Read, unpublished observations).
Contrary to melittin, PAF26 is less active against bacteria and is not haemolytic under assay conditions in
which other peptides including melittin are [45].
We combined global analyses of transcriptomic
changes upon exposure of S. cerevisiae to sub-lethal
concentrations of either PAF26 or melittin with sensitivity tests of strains lacking genes identified by the transcriptomic data. Our results both reinforce and extend
similar studies undertaken previously with two unrelated
a-helical AMP [33], and reveal that PAF26 and melittin
have common but also distinctive effects on yeast.

Results
Antimicrobial activity of peptides PAF26 and melittin
against S. cerevisiae

PAF26 and the pore-forming peptide melittin inhibited
yeast growth [41], as was confirmed herein with strain
FY1679 (Figure 1A and Additional File 1) in experiments that show a slight 2-fold higher potency of melittin. Dose-response experiments with additional strains
of yeast with distinct genetic backgrounds and at two
temperatures of incubation confirmed the activity of
both peptides and also indicated a differential sensitivity
of strains (Additional File 1). Thus, BGW7a, which has
a weakened CW and is also sensitive to an increase in
growth temperature and to plant antimicrobial proteins
[47], was markedly more sensitive than other strains to
melittin and, to a minor extent, PAF26. On the other

López-García et al. BMC Microbiology 2010, 10:289
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/10/289

Figure 1 Antifungal activity of peptides PAF26 and melittin to
S. cerevisiae FY1679. (A) Dose response curve of cell killing
activity. Cells were exposed to different concentrations of peptides
for 24 h. Cell survival (measured as CFU/mL) was determined by
dilution and plating. (B) Time course of cell population growth was
followed in the presence of 5 μM of peptide. No significant
differences were found between each of the peptides and the
control treatment. In both (A) and (B) panels, grey circles and white
triangles indicate PAF26 and melittin samples, respectively; in (B),
white squares show controls in the absence of peptide.

Page 4 of 18

the two peptides even after up to 24 hours of treatment
(Figure 1B). DNA macroarrays representing more than
6,000 yeast genes were hybridized with the cDNAs from
treated cells. The complete data set containing the
quantification of signals has been submitted to the GEO
public database http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/.
Annotation, processing and statistical significance of
expression change for each DNA probe are shown in
Additional File 2. Subsequent data analysis allowed the
identification of genes with differential expression after
each peptide treatment, as compared with control sample in the absence of peptide. In total, 385 genes (7.4%)
of the 5,174 analyzed genes were responsive to melittin
treatment while 355 genes (6.8%) of the 5,230 analyzed
were differentially expressed after PAF26 treatment.
Additional File 3 shows additional information on the
genes with higher induction or repression upon each
treatment. Some examples of the most differential genes
are ARG1 as the gene with the highest induction specific
of PAF26, PSO2 having the highest co-induction with
both peptides, or STE5 and BTN2 as the most repressed
with both peptides.
Figure 2 shows the distribution of differential genes
upon each treatment and emphasizes that only a minor
proportion of genes co-expressed with both peptides
(only 30 genes were induced and 13 genes were
repressed by both peptides, see also Additional Files 3.5
and 3.6), providing an initial indication of the differential response of S. cerevisiae and/or to differences in the
mode of action of the two peptides. Moreover, 15 genes
were induced by PAF26 but repressed by melittin, while
7 were induced by melittin and repressed by PAF26.

hand, strain RAY3A [48] had a susceptibility to peptide
killing similar to strains FY1679 and BY4741.
Global transcriptome response of S. cerevisiae to PAF26
and melittin

In order to gain knowledge and compare the antifungal
effect of PAF26 and melittin we carried out the characterization of the transcriptome of S. cerevisiae after
exposure to these peptides. The global transcriptome
response to peptides was undertaken by treating S. cerevisiae FY1679 cells in the logarithmic growth phase to
sub-lethal concentrations (5 μM) of either PAF26 or
melittin for 3 hours. Under these assay conditions, no
significant effects on growth were observed for any of

Figure 2 Distribution of differentially expressed genes after
peptide treatment. A z-test for two independent conditions was
conducted for each peptide treatment compared to the control
treatment. Effective p-values were <3.3E-03 and <3.7E-03 for PAF26
and melittin, respectively. Diagram shows genes induced (up) or
repressed (down) by peptides. The small circles on the upper part
refer to 15 genes induced by PAF26 and repressed by melittin and
7 genes induced by melittin and repressed by PAF26.

López-García et al. BMC Microbiology 2010, 10:289
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/10/289

Among the former class, the two copies of the locus
CUP1 (CUP1_1 and CUP1_2) were relevant due to their
induction by PAF26 and strong repression by melittin.
CUP1 is a copper binding metallothionein involved in
resistance to toxic concentrations of copper and cadmium. Among the seven genes in the second class, we
found YLR162W, which has previously been related to
sensitivity of yeast to the plant antimicrobial peptide
MiAMP1 [49].
We focussed on genes from MAPK signalling pathways that regulate response to environmental stresses/
signals [50-52], and were also responsive to peptides.
Within the HOG1 osmotic stress cascade there were
several genes that responded to PAF26 but not to melittin, such as the stress-responsive transcriptional activator MSN2 and the phosphorelay sensing YPD1 that
were induced, or that coding for the MAPKK PBS2p
that was markedly repressed. In addition, the gene coding for the phosphatase PTC3p involved in HOG1p
dephosphorylation was also markedly induced. These
transcription changes related to the osmolarity HOG
pathway seemed to be specific to PAF26. Within the
CW growth pathway, the sensing genes MID2 and
RHO1 also changed their expression upon exposure to
melittin or PAF26, respectively. The only gene from
these MAPK pathways that responded similarly to both
peptides was the scaffold STE5, which in turn showed
the strongest repression by both PAF26 and melittin
(Additional File 3).
Only a limited number of genes coding for transcription factors were responsive to peptide treatments, and
in most cases showing an induction of expression. In
addition to the above mentioned MSN2, there were the
stress-responsive HOT1, NTH1 and YAP1.
Functional annotation analysis of the expression changes
induced in response to PAF26 and melittin

Genome-scale functional annotation of the transcriptomic data was obtained by using the FatiGO tool [53],
integrated in the GEPAS package http://gepas.org/ [54].
This tool extracts Gene Ontology (GO) terms that are
over- or under-represented in sets of differentially
expressed genes, as compared with the reference sets of
non-responsive genes. It also provides statistical significance corrected for multiple testing and the level of GO
annotation. The complete non-redundant data set for
the different combinations of treatments of our study is
available in the Additional File 4. The analysis revealed
significant terms among the genes that were induced
and/or repressed by each peptide.
After exposure to 5 μM of PAF26, we observed upregulation of genes involved in cell wall organization
and biogenesis, belonging to the GO annotation “chitinand beta-glucan-containing cell wall” (Additional File

Page 5 of 18

4.1). Of the 14 induced genes grouped under this annotation, 6 of them were also induced after exposure to 5
μM of melittin (plb1, tos1, pir3, pir2, dse2 and ecm33).
Remarkably, this cell-wall related class was the only significant annotation common to PAF26 and melittin
treatments found in our GO analyses (Additional File
4.3).
Also significantly up-regulated by PAF26 were 5 genes
belonging to the GO term “non-protein amino acid
metabolic process” (Additional File 4.1), including
ARG1, ARG3, ARG5,6 and ARG7, all involved in arginine metabolism and urea cycle KEGG pathway (http://
www.kegg.com/, sce00330). All of them were significantly induced by PAF26 but were either non-induced
or non-analyzed (due to threshold quality criteria) under
the melittin treatment.
There were no significant GO annotations among the
genes specifically up-regulated by PAF26 and that did
not also respond to melittin, contrary to what occurs
with the repressed genes (Additional File 4.4). Most of
the genes specifically down-regulated upon exposure to
PAF26 were functionally related to tricistronic rRNA
processing and ribosome organization, biogenesis and
maintenance (up to 82 distinct genes), small nucleolar
RNA binding and also to translational initiation (Additional Files 4.1 and 4.4). The majority of these genes
code for RNA binding proteins, and we have previously
reported that PAF26 is capable of in vitro binding of
tRNA from S. cerevisiae [46]. As an additional clue to
the differential effects of both peptides, some of these
categories and genes were even up-regulated by melittin
(18 genes from “rRNA processing” at GO level 7, Additional File 4.2) or significantly underrepresented among
the melittin-repressed genes (none of the 392 genes
annotated by the biological process “RNA processing” at
level 6 were down-regulated by melittin) (Additional
Files 4.4 and 4.5). Moreover, there was a very significant
GO annotation of “ribosome biogenesis and assembly”
(adjusted P-value 0.00019) within the seven genes upregulated by melittin but repressed by PAF26 (Figure 2),
since six genes (i.e., NOP1, CGR1, ALB1, DBP2,
RPL14A, and UTP23) share this term.
Validation of gene expression changes by
quantitative RT-PCR

In order to sustain the macroarray data, 14 genes were
arbitrarily selected taking into account different criteria,
as the magnitude of the expression change, the differential behaviour with both peptides, or the GO annotation
results; and their expression change was determined by
quantitative RT-PCR (Figure 3). Thus, 8 genes (DSE2,
ECM33, PIR1, PIR2, PIR3, PIR4, SED1 and SSD1) were
selected as related to CW composition and organization.
Representatives of genes related to ribosome biogenesis

López-García et al. BMC Microbiology 2010, 10:289
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/10/289

Page 6 of 18

Figure 3 Quantitative real time PCR analysis of gene expression changes after peptide treatment. All the panels show the mean relative
expression ± SD (y-axis) of each individual gene upon each peptide treatment as compared to the control treatment with no peptide. (A) and
(B) graphs are end-point analyses of expression of the indicated genes (x-axis) after 3 h of peptide treatment; grey bars indicate 5 μM PAF26,
black bars 25 μM PAF26, and white bars 5 μM melittin. Note the different expression scales in panels (A) and (B). (C) Graph shows time-course
changes of expression of ARG1 following treatment with either 5 μM PAF26 or 5 μM melittin. In all the panels, the genes ALG9, TAF10 and UBC6
were simultaneously used as constitutive references (see Methods for details).

and processing were NOP16 and CGR1. Finally ARG1,
ARG3, ARG7 and BTN2 were chosen because of the
magnitude of their induction or repression, respectively,
under PAF26 exposure. Importantly, an additional control was included in these experiments. Given that
melittin was slightly more active on S. cerevisiae than
PAF26 (Figure 1A), a five-fold higher concentration of
PAF26 (25 μM) was included to rule out a peptide dose
effect that might alter the interpretation of the macroarray data. Overall, this approach discards such a dose

effect for a substantial number of the genes (Figure 3).
The qRT-PCR results of the 14 selected genes validate
the macroarray data. Notably, the differential response
to peptides was confirmed for NOP16, CGR1 or the
three ARG genes analysed (Figure 3A and 3B). The
induction of ARG1 was around 15 times greater than
control levels after exposure to PAF26 but we did not
observe a significant change of expression after exposure
to 5 μM of melittin (Figure 3B and Additional File 2).
A similar PAF26 specific induction was confirmed for

López-García et al. BMC Microbiology 2010, 10:289
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/10/289

ARG3 and ARG7 (Figure 3B). The specific up-regulation
of ARG1 was confirmed through independent experiments of treatment of S. cerevisiae with PAF26 or melittin, in which RNA samples were collected to quantify
expression by quantitative RT-PCR in a time course
experiment (Figure 3C).
Susceptibility to PAF26 or melittin of S. cerevisiae
deletion mutants

Considering the results described above, a set of 50
S. cerevisiae deletion mutants [55] were analyzed for
susceptibility to PAF26 or melittin. The annotation and
complete dataset of the susceptibility of mutants is
found in Additional File 5. Only significant findings are
discussed and shown in detail below. Deletion strains
were divided into distinct groups according to their
functional classification, significance or expression behaviour. Two numerous groups are related to (i) enzymes
or structural proteins involved in CW composition and
strengthening, and (ii) the distinct stress-sensing MAPK
signalling cascades related to CW in S. cerevisiae. As
many of these genes are related to CW composition and
response, the deletion mutants were also analyzed for
their sensitivity to the membrane and CW interfering
agents, sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS) and calcofluor
white (CFW).
Figure 4 exemplifies our analyses in the case of structural CW proteins. From our experiments it was concluded that lethal concentrations of melittin act quicker
on yeast than PAF26 under our assay conditions, since a
shorter exposure to melittin (2 h) was sufficient to kill
cells while a much longer time of treatment (24 h) was
needed for the PAF26 effect to be noticeable (compare
Figure 4A and 4B, respectively). A similar observation
was found previously in the fungus P. digitatum [46],
since melittin induced changes of mycelium quicker
than PAF26. Consequently, all our experiments were
conducted at least at these two exposure times and the
Additional File 5 reflects the overall data obtained.
A significative but minor effect on susceptibility to peptides was observed among several of the CW-related
genes analyzed (i.e., only one five-fold CFU dilution difference). Despite the well-known severe lethality of
Δecm33, Δssd1 and Δpir2 in the presence of SDS or
CFW, only a modest outcome of higher sensitivity to
peptides was found (Figure 4 and Additional File 5).
Function redundancy, for instance among PIR genes,
could be partially responsible for this result. Thus, we
assayed the triple mutant Δpir1-3 in a different genetic
background (S. cerevisiae RAY3A cells) [48] but did not
observe a significant effect (Additional File 6), contrary
to the higher sensitivity of the same strain to the antifungal plant protein osmotin [56]. In addition, the deletion of SSD1 in RAY3A resulted in a slight increase in

Page 7 of 18

sensitivity to peptides, particularly PAF26, as occurred
with the corresponding BY4741 derivative. In some
experiments such as the one shown in Figure 4, a slight
increase in resistance was observed for Δsed1 and
Δdse2, in response to PAF26 treatment.
Deletion strains from all the well characterized MAPK
signalling pathways [50,52] were selected from at least
at three points of each pathway, with an emphasis on
signalling related to CW integrity and construction and
osmoregulation (see Additional File 7). Some of the
mutants showed a minor increase of resistance to
PAF26. Several deletions tested in our experiments
were, as already known, heavily affected in terms of sensitivity to SDS or CFW (i.e., Δpbs2, Δhog1, Δslt2, or
Δfks1), indicating strong alterations in the CW deposition or response to stress. Remarkably, none of these
and the other MAPK pathway mutants were severely
affected in their sensitivity to peptides (see also Additional File 5).
Other deletion strains were selected from the GO processes identified by functional annotation. From the
three mutants tested that lack genes involved in ribosome biogenesis and RNA processing, two of them
(Δcgr1 and Δnop16) were more resistant to PAF26 than
to melittin (Figure 5A). A noticeable specific response
occurred with most of the ARG deletants analyzed; all
of them involved in the “arginine biosynthesis” and
“urea cycle and metabolism of amino groups” pathways.
In addition to deletants from ARG1, ARG3, ARG5,6 and
ARG7 that showed a substantial specific up-regulation
by PAF26, those from ARG2, ARG4 and CAR1 were also
assayed. These seven deletants showed varying degrees
of increased resistance to PAF26, which was substantial
for ARG1, ARG4 and ARG5,6. Importantly, none of
these strains showed phenotypes associated to CW
weakening as determined by their sensitivity to SDS or
CFW (Figure 5B and Additional File 5).
The IPT1 gene codes for the enzyme responsible of
the last step in the biosynthesis of the major plasma
membrane sphingolipid mannose-(inositol-P)2-ceramide
[M(IP)2C] [57]. Its deletion confers resistance to other
antifungals and plant antimicrobial proteins [16,58]. In
our experiments, IPT1 expression decreased in response
to melittin but not in response to PAF26. Within the
same pathway, LCB1 encodes the enzyme of the first
committed step of sphingolipid biosynthesis, and its
expression was markedly repressed by PAF26 (see Additional File 3.2). The Δipt1 mutant showed a remarkable
phenotype of high resistance to PAF26 combined with
increased sensitivity to SDS (Figure 5C). Another
mutant lacking a gene involved in ceramide synthase
synthesis (i.e., YPC1/YBR183W) was assayed but no
alteration on sensitivity to peptides was found (see
details on Additional File 5).

López-García et al. BMC Microbiology 2010, 10:289
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/10/289

Page 8 of 18

Figure 4 Analysis of sensitivity to peptides and to CW disturbing compounds of S. cerevisiae deletion mutants in CW-related genes.
Data on sensitivity of the single gene deletion strains Δsed1, Δssd1, Δpir2, Δdse2, Δecm33, and the corresponding parental strain BY4741 are
shown. (A) and (B) show results after treatment of serial 5-fold dilutions of exponentially growing cells with each peptide for 2 hours (Panel A)
or 24 hours (Panel B) and subsequent plating onto YPD peptide-free plates. (C) and (D) show growth of serial dilutions of the same deletion
strains on YPD plates containing SDS (Panel C) or CFW (Panel D).

PAF26 and related peptides are arginine-rich and
penetratin-type peptides [46]. BTN2 codes for a protein
with protein binding activity involved in amino acid
transport, pH and ion homeostasis and arginine uptake
[59]. It was, together with STE5 (see above), the gene
with the highest repression common to both peptides
(Figure 3 and Additional File 2). However, neither the
corresponding deletion strain nor the related Δbtn1 [60]
displayed significant differences regarding sensitivity to
peptides (Figure 5C).
HSC82 was used as a representative of the several heat
shock proteins (HSP) that are markedly repressed by
PAF26 and/or melittin such as HSP78, HSP12 or STI1
(Additional File 3). Indeed, the response to unfolded
protein stress GO term was significantly repressed upon
melittin treatment (Additional File 4). HSC82 was
repressed by PAF26, and the corresponding deletion
strain was selectively more resistant to PAF26
(Figure 5C).
Interaction of PAF26 with S. cerevisiae cells

We have previously reported that PAF26 is capable to
interact with and be internalized by the hyphal cells of

the filamentous fungus P. digitatum at sub-inhibitory
concentrations (0.3 μM) [46]. PAF26 is markedly less
active against S. cerevisiae than towards P. digitatum
[41] and, accordingly, although internalization of fluorescently labeled PAF26 into S. cerevisiae FY1679 could
be demonstrated through confocal microscopy, 100-fold
higher peptide concentrations (30 μM) were required
(Figure 6A).
In order to determine whether the sensitivity to
PAF26 is correlated with the interaction and uptake of
the peptide into S. cerevisiae, and also how this is associated with cell viability, we set up an assay in which
cells were treated with FITC-PAF26 followed by treatment with the cell death marker propidium iodide (PI)
and the CW stain CFW (Figure 6B). Approximately
5-20% of S. cerevisiae BY4741 were labeled by FITCPAF26 under these assay conditions (see also below),
and such labeling co-localized with that of PI. Also,
staining by CFW showed strong cell wall disorganization
for those non-viable cells into which peptide were
located. Despite not using confocal optics as in Figure
6A, this three-fluorophore staining also supports the
internalization of the peptide and confirmed that cells

López-García et al. BMC Microbiology 2010, 10:289
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/10/289

Page 9 of 18

Figure 5 Analysis of sensitivity to peptides and to SDS of specific S. cerevisiae deletion mutants. (A), (B) and (C) show results of three
independent experiments, with specific genes as indicated in the figure. See the text for additional details on the selected genes. Other details
as in Figure 4.

showing the highest peptide signal were the most
permeable to PI. Our microscopy experiments also show
FITC-PAF26 accumulation in the cytosol, excluded from
the vacuole (Figures 6A and 6B).
Selected deletion mutants were analyzed using this
approach (Figure 7, high magnification and data on
CFW staining are not shown for simplicity). Microscopical observations were validated by quantification of
labeled PAF26 binding by flow cytometry (Figure 8).
Deletion strains in genes involved in cell wall construction such as SSD1 or ECM33 showed a correlation with
the higher sensitivity to PAF26 in that a proportion of
cells higher than in the parental strain were labeled by
the peptide and showed intense staining by PI. However,
the resistant Δarg1, Δnop16 or Δipt1 mutants did not
show a noticeable difference of peptide labeling as

compared with the parental strain (Figure 8) and in
some experiments, such as the one shown in the corresponding panel of Figure 7 (Δarg1), a higher proportion
of cells were labeled with the peptide. This latter result
indicates that the higher resistance of these strains is
not due to lack of interaction and/or internalization of
the peptide.

Discussion and Conclusions
We have carried out a functional genomic approach on
yeast to gain insight into the mechanism of two AMP
that presumably have different modes of antifungal killing. Analogous reports have addressed the mode of
action of distinct antifungal agents [35-38,61,62], including other AMP [30,32,33]. These latter studies on AMP
used inhibitory concentrations and found an array of

López-García et al. BMC Microbiology 2010, 10:289
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/10/289

Page 10 of 18

Figure 6 Fluorescence microscopy of S. cerevisiae exposed to FITC-PAF26. (A) Internalization of FITC-PAF26 into S. cerevisiae FY1679
demonstrated by confocal fluorescence microscopy. Cells were exposed to 30 μM FITC-PAF26 for 30 min. Bright-field (A1) and fluorescence (A2)
micrographs of the same field are shown. (B) Interaction of FITC-PAF26 with S. cerevisiae BY4741 visualized by fluorescence microscopy: DIC
bright field image, as well as FITC, propidium iodide (PI), and calcofluor white (CFW) signals of the same field are shown. Cells were incubated
with 30 μM FITC-PAF26 at 30°C for 2 h, and then at 20°C with 2 μM PI and 25 μM CFW for 5 min. Open arrowheads indicate peptide
internalization (compare location of the CW outer signal of CFW with the internal signal of PI and the FITC fluorescence resulting from FITCPAF26). Solid arrowhead indicates the lower FITC signal in the vacuole compared to the cytosol.

multifactorial effects, but could not distinguish those
processes primary related to peptide mechanism from
those secondarily derived from cell death. Since we have
observed biological changes of P. digitatum after exposure to sub-inhibitory (sub-micromolar) concentrations
of PAF26 that include peptide internalization [46], we
decided to use non-inhibitory concentrations of AMP in
the gene expression experiments (5 μM, Figure 1) in an
attempt to unveil primary effects of the peptides. Also,
by choosing two peptides with differentiated interactions
with fungal cells, we could isolate processes both common and specific of each one. The transcriptomic data
demonstrates specific and statistically significant changes
under these conditions that our fungicidal assays
demonstrate that are involved in sensitivity to peptides.
We have combined the identification of differentially
expressed genes with the use of global functional annotation tools [63]. From the wealth of available data (see
Additional Files 2, 3, 4, 5), we highlight in this report

the most relevant conclusions. First, our study reinforces
the idea that cell permeation is not the only mechanism
required to fully describe the effect of, and response to,
AMP in microorganisms [8-12]. We have also shown
that PAF26 and melittin have common but also differential effects on yeast. Finally, a previously overlooked
observation is that a significant part of the response
relies on genes of unknown function, or with poorly
informative GO terms associated to them.
A remarkable example of uncharacterized genes
uncovered in our study is YLR162W, the only gene not
related to ribosome biogenesis among the seven induced
by melittin and repressed by PAF26 (Figure 2). It is a
predicted gene of unknown function that codes for a
small protein with potential transmembrane domains
[49]. An independent study has shown that over expression of YLR162W confers resistance to the plant antimicrobial peptide MiAMP1 in a susceptible yeast strain
[49]. Strikingly, our study indicates (in a different yeast

López-García et al. BMC Microbiology 2010, 10:289
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/10/289

Page 11 of 18

Figure 7 Differential interaction of S. cerevisiae deletion mutants with FITC-PAF26. Representative fluorescence micrographs of the
parental BY4741 and S. cerevisiae deletion strains Δssd1, Δecm33, and Δarg1, as indicated at the left. Optical and image acquisition settings were
the same for each fluorophore and thus differences in fluorescence intensity among strains reflect real differences. Others details as in Figure 6B.

genotype) that YLR162W reacts distinctly to different
AMP, and thus highlights the interest of studying its
function since it might have an important and distinctive role in the response to AMP. BLAST searches do
not show any homolog of this gene in known fungal
sequences (data not shown).
The role of the fungal cell wall in susceptibility to AMP

The most obvious shared response is related to reinforcement of the cell wall. Among the 43 genes that were
co-expressed in the peptide treatments (Figure 2), the
only GO significant annotations were related to the fungal CW (Additional File 4.3). Additional studies found
altered genes involved in CW maintenance in response
to other antifungal agents or CW perturbants as well
[38,61,62]. Among the previous genomic studies of the
response to AMP in yeast, only the one that used the
esculentin 1-21 peptide highlighted CW responses at

the transcriptomic level [30], while others did not
[32,33]. In addition, six genes (different from those
found herein) were identified whose deletions confer
increased sensitivity to either dermaseptin S3 or magainin 2 [33]. Our observations sustain that the improvement of CW integrity is a common response of
S. cerevisiae to AMP. Further support arises from the
data on BWG7a strain, which has a weakened CW phenotype related to a dysfunctional SSD1 allele [47] that
compromises viability in the presence of AMP and at
higher incubation temperatures (Additional File 1).
Yeast cells are capable of reinforcing their CW when
subjected to stress or damage conditions [64], and our
study contributes to demonstrate that this is also the
case after AMP treatment. The use of BWG7a has
allowed the isolation of genes that partially overcome
sensitivity to the plant antimicrobial protein osmotin,
such as yeast PIR genes or Fusarium homologs of SSD1

López-García et al. BMC Microbiology 2010, 10:289
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/10/289

Figure 8 Differential interaction of S. cerevisiae deletion
mutants with FITC-PAF26. Flow cytometry measurements of FITCPAF26 binding to S. cerevisiae deletion mutants shown below as
compared with the parental strain BY4741. Graph shows the
percentage of fluorescence bound to cells after exposure of 20,000
cells to either 5 (upper panel) or 30 μM (lower panel) FITC-PAF26.
Mean and SD from two replicas in each of two independent
experiments are shown for each strain.

and SED1 [47,65]. On the other hand, deletion of specific CW proteins sensitize yeast to the antibacterial lantibiotic nisin [66]. Further, PAF26 induced severe
mycelial growth and cell-shape defects to the fungus P.
digitatum [46], changes that are typical for compounds
affecting the cell wall.
Our assays showed only a limited number of gene
deletions related to CW that have an effect on sensitivity to PAF26 or melittin. Even in these examples, the
magnitude of the phenotype of the mutants (i.e.,
changes in sensitivity) is modest compared to that of
mutants related to ribosome biogenesis, arginine metabolism, sphingolipid or HSP related genes (compare Figures 4 and 5). This holds even for genes such as the

Page 12 of 18

above mentioned SSD1, which mediates deposition of
other CW proteins in S. cerevisiae [56]. The corresponding deletion strain has a damaged CW as confirmed by
hyper-sensitivity to SDS or CFW, but comparatively
only a minor increase in susceptibility to AMP as
demonstrated in two genetic backgrounds (BY4741 and
RAY3A, see also Additional File 6). A similar phenotype
was observed in other strains such as Δecm33. Microscopy and flow cytometry studies in Δssd1 or Δecm33
showed a correlation between a higher sensitivity and an
increase of PAF26 uptake of cells (Figure 7), demonstrating that CW components modulate the interaction
with peptides.
Function redundancy might explain the lack of a dramatic change in the susceptibility in mutants related to
CW. Therefore multiple deletions would be expected to
have a higher impact and are being studied in our
laboratory. However, our current data do not support
this view either, as illustrated with the triple deletion of
PIR genes in the RAY3A background (Additional File 6).
Even in the case of gene deletions from MAPK signalling cascades involved in CW construction and response
to stress [51], we did not find major differences in sensitivity to peptides under our assay conditions (Additional
File 7). Representative examples are STE2 that was
highly repressed by both peptides, or SLT2, PBS2 and
HOG1, whose deletants are hypersensitive to CW interfering compounds. This result contrasts with previous
data in which mutations in the HOG osmoregulatory
pathway in the case of the peptide histatin [31] or the
RHO1-SLT2 CW growth pathway in a plant defensin
Pn-AMP1 [67] result in hypersensitivity.
Other CW-related gene deletions did not show significant differences in susceptibility to peptides and even in
a limited number of examples (as Δsed1) a slight higher
resistance was observed. It has been described that specific gene deletions result in counteracting mechanisms
to reinforce CW by enhancing levels of specific CW
constituents [64]. Also, it can not be discarded that lost
of specific CW proteins/components results in increased
resistance due to reduced peptide binding to cell surface
as shown for a dermaseptin derivative that seems to
bind CW protein mannosyl phosphate residues [68].
Under this view, an attractive hypothesis that needs to
be tested is that the different CW proteins identified in
ours and previous studies reflect differences in the interaction of distinct AMP with the cell envelope [30,33].
Involvement of the IPT1 gene in AMP sensitivity

A noteworthy mutant with a marked increased resistance to PAF26 was Δipt1 (Figure 5C). Sphingolipids are
essential components of the plasma membrane in all
eukaryotic cells and IPT1p catalyzes the last step in the
biosynthesis of the fungal sphingolipid M(IP) 2 C.

López-García et al. BMC Microbiology 2010, 10:289
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/10/289

Previous works with the Δipt1 mutant showed high
resistance to DmAMP1, an antifungal plant defensin,
and lower peptide binding to the yeast surface than the
wild-type strain [16]. The authors proposed that
DmAMP1 interacts with this sphingolipid to exert the
antifungal action [69]. In addition, mutants lacking the
IPT1 gene also showed resistance to syringomycin E
[58]. We found that the Δipt1 strain was resistant to
PAF26 (Figure 5C) but bound FITC-PAF26 to the same
extent as the parental strain (Figure 8), in contrast to
what was reported in the plant defensin example. This
apparent contradiction could be explained considering
that the initial binding of PAF26 to the fungal cell
occurs at the CW, and not at the plasma membrane.
Also remarkably, Δipt1 resistance to PAF26 is coincident with extreme sensitivity to the membrane perturbing SDS (Figure 5C). This differential behaviour was
unique among the strains analyzed in our study. It
neatly demonstrates that although interaction is the first
step in the antimicrobial mechanism of peptides, other
additional susceptibility factors exist since an abnormal
membrane and/or weakened CW does not always lead
to higher susceptibility to PAF26 and other antimicrobial peptides/proteins. Overall, the data indicate that
involvement of IPT1 and presence of M(IP) 2 C in the
yeast plasma membrane could be a common factor for
distinct AMP to exert their action onto S. cerevisiae.
Intracellular effects of PAF26

An overlapping response to distinct AMP seems to be
related to DNA breakdown and/or induction of apoptosis [23,24,33]. No significant annotation related to DNA
damage or apoptosis was found in our GO analyses
(Additional File 4). However, the gene with the highest
induction (around 10-fold) by both peptides was PSO2,
which was not identified in any of the previous studies.
It is highly induced after DNA strand breaks and binds
damaged DNA. On the other hand, the DNA ligase
gene DNL4 required for non-homologous end-joining
(NHEJ) and repair of dsDNA breaks is among the most
repressed by both peptides. Strikingly, LDB7 also
involved in NHEJ was the only gene repressed by two
unrelated AMP [33], demonstrating that independent
studies point to the same processes even though they
identify distinct individual genes. We have previously
shown that both PAF26 and melittin share with other
cationic AMP the capacity to bind nucleic acids in vitro
[33,46,70]. It remains to be determined to which extent
this binding activity has a functional significance in vivo.
GO profiling demonstrated a prominent differential
effect related to rRNA processing and ribosomal biogenesis, which were repressed by PAF26 but induced by
melittin. A high number of genes from these annotations showed this marked differential response with

Page 13 of 18

extremely significant p-values (Additional File 4), including the group of seven genes induced by melittin and
repressed by PAF26 (Figure 2), and was also confirmed
by quantitative RT-PCR in selected genes (Figure 3A,
CGR1 and NOP16). The repression behavior is shared in
the response to other AMP, antimicrobial compounds
and additional stress conditions [35,38,61]. mRNAs from
ribosomal proteins and rRNA processing enzymes are
predicted to destabilize under stress conditions [71]. It
is assumed that shutdown of ribosome biogenesis and
thus protein translation will free cell resources to cope
with a hostile environment. However, our study opens
additional questions as to the significance of the induction (rather than repression) of this response in the case
of melittin, or of the increased resistance to PAF26 in
some of the corresponding deletion strains such as that
of the nucleolar protein NOP16 (Figure 5A).
The gene BTN2 has been reported to modulate arginine uptake through down-regulation of the CAN1p
arginine permease [59]. Our study shows that BTN2 was
one of the most repressed gene by both peptides (Additional File 3), suggesting that the cell is sensing the high
arginine levels caused by peptide internalization and
mounts an active response to deal with it. GO profiling
indicated the specific involvement of the “nonprotein
amino acid metabolic process” in the response to
PAF26, including genes from the biosynthesis or arginine, metabolism of amino groups and urea cycle
(ARG1, ARG3, ARG5,6 and ARG7), which were induced
by PAF26 but not by melittin. ARG1 was the gene with
the highest PAF26-specific induction identified in our
macroarray study, and such strong expression change
was confirmed through qRT-PCR analysis (Figure 3).
ARG1 codes for the argininosuccinate synthase and is
known to be transcriptionally repressed in the presence
of arginine. Induction of these genes is indicative of
attempt of metabolization of the high concentration of
amino groups of cationic AMP such as PAF26. In fact,
their induction could lead to accumulation of derived
metabolites in the cell. Although the question of ammonium toxicity in yeast is still controversial [72], we speculate that this could be the case given the higher
resistance to PAF26 of the deletion mutants assayed. In
any case the high resistance to PAF26 of a number of
ARG gene deletants confirms the involvement of these
pathways in the peptide killing mechanism (Figure 5B).
Importantly, susceptibility to PAF26 did not correlate
with peptide interaction/internalization into cells in
Δarg1 (Figure 7). This mutant also combines a significant amount of peptide labelling with high resistance,
confirming that peptide binding and toxicity are separate processes.
Numerous chaperone-related genes respond to PAF26
and/or melittin, and the GO term “response to unfolded

López-García et al. BMC Microbiology 2010, 10:289
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/10/289

protein stress” was significantly repressed by melittin
(Additional File 4.2). The co-chaperone regulator of chaperone activity STI1 was the fifth most repressed gene
by both peptides (Additional File 3.6). HSC82p and
HSP82p are the two isoforms of the HSP90-like chaperone in yeast and are among the most abundant proteins
in the cytosol [73]. HSC82 is considered to be constitutive while HSP82 is strongly induced by heat stress; the
corresponding proteins are involved in folding of recalcitrant and denatured proteins. Contrary to HSP82, the
HSC82 gene was strongly repressed by PAF26 and the
deletion strain was more resistant to PAF26 killing
(Figure 5C). Previous reports suggest that although
nearly identical in sequence, these two isoforms are not
functionally equivalent [73]. Our study provides additional data on the involvement of protein chaperones
and heat shock proteins in antimicrobial peptide mode
of action, which has been invoked in previous reports
that include yeast and bacterial studies [9,20,21,26].
Among the eleven chaperones repressed by melittin we
found SSA2, coding for the CW protein that together
with SSA1p was shown to bind the AMP Histatin 5 and
promote peptide internalization [21].
In summary, our findings help to confirm that permeation is not the unique effect of these and other
AMP, and that additional (might be also overlapping)
mechanisms that go beyond cell lysis are involved. The
data presented support the idea that CW reinforcement
and modification are part of a general fungal response
to peptides with different modes of action. However, a
weakened CW is not necessarily indicative of a higher
sensitivity to AMP. The importance of the response to
unfolded protein stress or the sphingolipid biosynthesis,
previously reported for other unrelated AMP, was also
confirmed independently, therefore suggesting their
broad contribution to activity of antimicrobial peptides.
This study has also uncovered additional processes and
genes that will be further analyzed in the near future, as
is the case of the involvement of the metabolism of
amino groups in the case of PAF26 or the YLR162W
gene.

Methods
Synthesis of peptides

PAF26 was purchased at >90% purity from Genscript
Corporation (Piscataway, NJ, USA) and was acetylated
at the N-terminus and amidated at the C-terminus.
PAF26 was also synthesized labeled with fluorescein
5-isothiocyanate (FITC) by covalent modification of its
N-terminus with FITC. Melittin was provided by
Sigma-Aldrich (Cat nº M2272). Stock solutions of
peptides were prepared in 10 mM 3-(N-morpholino)propanesulfonic acid (MOPS) pH 7 buffer and stored

Page 14 of 18

at -20°C. Peptide concentrations were determined
spectrophotometrically.
Saccharomyces cerevisiae strains

S. cerevisiae strain FY1679 (MATa/MATa; ura3-52/
ura3-52; trp1Δ63/TRP1; leu2Δ1/LEU2; his3Δ200/HIS3;
GAL2/GAL2) was used in the macroarray assays. To
test the effect of gene deletion on the activity of peptides we used the S. cerevisiae strains BY4741 (MATa;
his3Δ1; leu2Δ0; met15Δ0; ura3Δ0) and the corresponding isogenic deletion strains from the Euroscarf public
collection http://web.uni-frankfurt.de/fb15/mikro/euroscarf, as well as RAY3A (MATa; his3; leu2; ura3; trp1)
and derived deletion strains [48].
DNA macroarray experimental procedure

25 ml cultures of 105 colony forming units (CFU)/ml of
S. cerevisiae FY1679 were grown with shaking at 30°C in
20% YPD medium (100% YPD is 1% yeast extract, 2%
peptone and 2% dextrose). After 3 hours of growth, 250
μl of a 100X stock solution of each peptide were added
to each yeast culture (final concentration 5 μM). The
same volume of MOPS buffer was added to the control
sample. Cultures were grown at 30°C with shaking for 3
additional hours. Yeast cells were collected by centrifugation and kept at -80°C until processed for RNA isolation. Three independent biological replicates were
conducted for each treatment.
Total RNA was extracted from cell pellets and ethanol
precipitated. Radiolabelled cDNA was obtained by
reverse transcription (RT) of 20 μg of total RNA, after
annealing to 3.75 μg of the anchor oligonucleotide oligo
(dT)VN (Invitrogen), in the presence of 5 mM DTT,
800 μM each of dATP, dTTP and dGTP, 5 μM dCTP,
5 μl of 3000 Ci/mmol a33P-dCTP, 10 units RNase inhibitor (Invitrogen), and 400 units SuperScript III reverse
transcriptase (Invitrogen), at 50°C for 2 h. Template
RNA was removed by alkaline hydrolysis, followed by
neutralization. Unincorporated nucleotides were separated from the 33 P-labelled cDNA probe by passage
through MicroSpin S-300HR columns (Amersham).
The nylon filters from the macroarray containing
6,020 yeast ORF (Laboratory of DNA chips, Universitat
de València, http://scsie.uv.es/chipsdna/) with platform
accession number GPL4565 at Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/,
were hybridized with 33 P-labelled cDNA probes and
stripped as described [74]. A total of three different filters were used, and each biological replicate from each
of the three treatments (control, 5 μM PAF26, and
5 μM melittin) was hybridized to a distinct filter. Therefore, each individual filter was subjected to three cycles
of hybridization and stripping. Filters were exposed for

López-García et al. BMC Microbiology 2010, 10:289
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/10/289

5-7 days to an imaging plate (BAS-MP 2040, FujiFilm),
which was scanned in a phosphorimaging scanner (FLA3000, FujiFilm).
Analysis of the macroarray hybridizations

Quantification, normalization and statistical analysis of
macroarray hybridization results were carried out with
the software packages ArrayVision v8.0 and ArrayStat
v1.0 (Imaging Research Inc.). The local background was
defined as the mean signal intensity of an area around
each block of 16 hybridized spots, and subtracted from
each signal. Resulting signals were log transformed and
normalized both within replicates and across treatments
by the iterative median procedure. Probe replicates
within a treatment were marked as outliers and removed
if deviated from the mean of the replicates plus or
minus two times the standard deviation. A minimum
number of valid replicates of 2 was set to calculate the
mean value for every probe (i.e., only 1 replicate was
allowed as outlier). Each peptide treatment was compared separately against the control treatment. To identify differentially expressed probes, a z-test for two
independent conditions was performed with false discovery rate (FDR) correction for multiple tests (nominal
alpha value of 0.05).
The complete data set has been deposited in NCBI’s
Gene Expression Omnibus http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
geo/ and are accessible through GEO Series accession
number GSE25279 http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/
query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE25279.
Lists of either induced or repressed genes upon each
treatment, and the combinations of them, were generated and subjected to Gene Ontology (GO) profiling
using the FatiGO tool from the GEPAS package http://
gepas.org/[53,63]. Annotations were considered significant when p-value adjusted for multiple testing was
lower than 0.05
Quantitative real time PCR

Two micrograms of total RNA from each sample were
treated with RNase-free DNase (Ambion), and retrotranscribed with SuperScript III reverse transcriptase (Invitrogen), essentially as described above. Real Time PCR
was performed using a LightCycler 480 Real-Time PCR
System (Roche Diagnostics), according to manufacturer´
s protocols using the LightCycler 480 SYBR Green I
Master (Roche Diagnostics), with the following thermal
profile: activation step (95°C for 10 min); amplification
step (40 cycles of 95°C for 10 s, 55°C for 10 s, 72°C for
10 s); melting curve program (95°C for 10 s, 60°C for 15
s, 95°C with a heating rate of 0.1°C/s); and cooling step
(40°C for 30 s). Primers for the target genes SED1, PIR1,
PIR2, PIR3, PIR4, SSD1, BTN2, ECM33, CGR1, NOP16,
ARG1, ARG3, ARG7, as well as ACT1, ALG9, TAF10

Page 15 of 18

and UBC6 as independent reference genes [75,76], were
designed to an equal annealing temperature of 57°C
(primer sequences are listed in Additional File 8). The
quantification cycle point (Cq) for each transcript was
obtained using the LightCycler 480 SW 1.5 (Roche
Diagnostics). Three technical of each one of the three
biological replicates were conducted. The algorithm
geNorm http://medgen.ugent.be/~jvdesomp/genorm/
[76] demonstrated expression stability of the three references genes ALG9, TAF10 and UBC6 under our experimental conditions. The Relative Expression Software
Tool (Multiple Condition Solver REST-MCS v2) was
used to determine the relative quantification of target
genes normalized to the three references genes [77].
In vitro antimicrobial activity assays

S. cerevisiae cells were grown to exponential phase
(OD600 0.4-0.5) in YPD medium at 30°C with shaking.
In order to quantify survival of yeast after peptide treatment, aliquots of yeast at 10 4 CFU/mL in 20% YPD
were incubated with different concentrations of peptides
for 24 h, diluted and spread onto peptide-free YPD agar
plates to monitor CFU recovery. In kinetic assays, 105
CFU/mL of yeast were incubated with 5 μM of peptides
in 20% YPD at 30°C for different times from 15 min to
24 h, and the CFU recovery was also quantified by
spreading onto peptide-free plates.
For experiments with the different S. cerevisiae strains
and deletion mutants, cultures were adjusted to 10 7
cells/ml in 20% YPD and serial 5-fold dilutions of cells
were prepared and subjected separately to peptide treatment. The treatments contained 45 μl of each yeast
dilution and 5 μl of a 10X stock solutions of each synthetic peptide, and were incubated in sterile 96-well
microtiter plates (Nunc) at 30°C for either 2 or 24 h.
Aliquots (5 μl) of each sample were dotted onto peptide-free YPD agar plates to determine viability after 2 h
or 24 h of incubation. In all experiments, YPD medium
contained 40 μg/ml chloramphenicol (to avoid bacterial
contamination) and the agar plates were incubated at
30°C for 2 days to allow colony visualization and/or
counting. In specific assays the temperature of incubation was 24°C.
Calcofluor white (CFW) (Sigma-Aldrich F3543) or
sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS) (Sigma-Aldrich L4509)
plates were prepared to desired final concentrations in
YPD agar medium. On these plates, aliquots (5 μl) of
serial 5-fold yeast dilutions (or ten-fold dilution in the
case of CFW plates) were spotted and growth was visualized after two days of incubation at 30°C.
Fluorescence microscopy

S. cerevisiae cells were grown to exponential phase
(OD600 0.4-0.5) at 30°C with shaking and the number of

López-García et al. BMC Microbiology 2010, 10:289
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/10/289

cells/ml was determined independently for each strain.
Yeast at 10 8 cells/ml (final concentration) were incubated in sterile water with 30 μM FITC-labeled PAF26
for 0.5-2 hours at 30°C in the dark. After this incubation, cells were further incubated with 2 μM propidium
iodide (PI) and 25 μM calcofluor white (CFW) for 5
min in order to check for viability/membrane integrity
and cell wall structure, respectively. Yeast cells were
washed and fluorescence was examined with an epifluorescence microscope (E90i, Nikon), with excitation/
emission wavelengths of 488/510-560 nm for FITC
detection, 544/612 nm for PI detection and 395/440 nm
for CFW detection. Differential interference contrast
(DIC) and fluorescence images were captured with ×40
and ×100 objectives using the software NIS-Elements
BR v2.3 (Nikon).
In order to confirm peptide internalization, S. cerevisiae at 5 × 105 cells/ml were incubated in sterile water
with 30 μM FITC-PAF26 in the dark, and visualized
with a TCS SL confocal laser scanning microscope
(Leica), with excitation at 488 nm and emission wavelengths at 510-560 nm.
Flow cytometry

S. cerevisiae cells were prepared as detailed above and
2.5 × 107 cells were incubated in 100 μL of sterile water
with FITC-PAF26 (5 or 30 μM) for 2 h at 30°C in the
dark. After this incubation, the cell suspension was
made up to 1 mL with sterile water. Analysis was
performed using an EPICS XL-MCL flow cytometer
(Beckman-Coulter, USA) equipped with an argon-ion
laser emitting a 488 nm beam at 15 mW. An acquisition
protocol was defined after measuring background fluorescence from non-treated BY4741 S. cerevisiae strain,
and Δssd1 cells treated with 30 μM FITC-PAF26. Data
(20,000 cells/sample) were analyzed with the Expo32
software included in the system acquisition.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Sensitivity of S. cerevisiae strains to peptides
PAF26 and Melittin. Sensitivity assays of S. cerevisiae strains RAY3A,
BWG7a, FY1679, and BY4741 (105 or 104 CFU/mL) to different
concentrations of peptides PAF26 and Melittin, at two different assay
temperatures.
Additional file 2: Transcriptome analysis of S. cerevisiae FY1679
after exposure to peptides PAF26 and Melittin. Excel File showing
the annotation, signal intensity, processing and statistical significance of
expression change for each DNA probe in the GPL4565 array.
Additional file 3: Representative S. cerevisiae genes that change
expression after exposure to peptides PAF26 and Melittin. Excel File
showing lists of genes with the most significant induction/repression
that are common or specific after exposure to peptides PAF26 and/or
Melittin.
Additional file 4: Non-redundant global GO annotation analyses of
S. cerevisiae genes differentially expressed upon peptide treatment.
Excel File showing lists of GO annotation terms significantly over- or

Page 16 of 18

under-represented among genes induced or repressed after exposure to
peptides PAF26 and/or Melittin.
Additional file 5: Sensitivity of gene deletion mutants of S.
cerevisiae to the antimicrobial peptides PAF26 and melittin and the
compounds SDS and CFW. Excel File showing the relative resistance or
sensitivity to PAF26, melittin, SDS or CFW of each of the 50 gene
deletion mutants assayed as compared to the reference parental strain.
Additional file 6: Sensitivity of S. cerevisiae RAY-3A and derived
deletion mutants to PAF26 and Melittin. Sensitivity assays of S.
cerevisiae strains RAY3A and derivatives Δssd1 and Δpir1,2,3 to either 32
μM Melittin or 64 μM PAF26.
Additional file 7: Sensitivity of S. cerevisiae gene deletion mutants
related to MAPK pathways to peptides and SDS. Sensitivity assays of
S. cerevisiae gene deletion mutants related to MAPK signaling pathways,
to either 32 μM Melittin, 64 μM PAF26, or 0.03% SDS.
Additional file 8: Oligonucleotide primers used in the quantitative
RT-PCR assays. Table showing the oligonucleotide primer sequences
used for each target and reference gene to determine mRNA
accumulation by quantitative RT-PCR.

Acknowledgements
S. cerevisiae strain RAY3A and derivatives were kindly provided by Dr. José I.
Ibeas (Centro Andaluz de Biologia del Desarrollo, CSIC/Universidad Pablo de
Olavide, Sevilla, Spain) to whom we also acknowledge suggestions to the
work. We acknowledge the Instituto de Biología Molecular y Celular de
Plantas (UPV-CSIC, Valencia, Spain) and M. Dolores Gómez from its
microscopy core facility for the use of the confocal microscope. We also
acknowledge Drs. José E. Perez-Ortín and José García-Martínez (Laboratory of
DNA Chips, Universitat de Valencia, Spain) for advice and suggestions with
the macroarray hybridizations and analyses. We appreciate the technical
assistance of M. José Pascual (IATA-CSIC), and the critical review of Adokiye
Berepiki (University of Edinburgh, UK). The work was funded by grants
BIO2006-09523 and BIO2009-12919 from the Ministry of Science and
Innovation (Spain) and ACOMP/2009/080 from Generalitat Valenciana. BLG
was hired by the “Ramón y Cajal” program (MEC, Spain), and MG by the
JAE-DOC postdoc program (CSIC).
Author details
1
Departamento de Ciencia de los Alimentos, Instituto de Agroquímica y
Tecnología de Alimentos (IATA), CSIC, Apartado de Correos 73, Burjassot,
46100 Valencia, Spain. 2Departamento de Genética Molecular de Plantas,
Centre for Research in Agricultural Genomics (CRAG) CSIC-IRTA-UAB,
Barcelona, Spain. 3Fungal Cell Biology Group, Institute of Cell Biology (ICB),
University of Edinburgh, Rutherford Building, Edinburgh EH9 3JH, UK.
Authors’ contributions
BLG carried out the macroarray experiment from design to hybridization;
contributed to the sensitivity assays; initiated the qRT-PCR experiments; and
helped to draft the manuscript. MG carried out most of the sensitivity assays
of the yeast strains; helped in the analysis of the qRT-PCR data; deposited
the array data at the GEO database; and contributed to draft the manuscript.
AM participated in the initial conception of the approach; initiated the
sensitivity assays; and performed the confocal microscopy experiments. LC
completed the qRT-PCR experiments and carried out the corresponding
analyses; and carried out the fluorescence microscopy and flow cytometry
experiments. JFM conceived and coordinated the study; carried out the
bioinformatic analysis of the macroarray data; and wrote the manuscript. All
authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Received: 14 June 2010 Accepted: 15 November 2010
Published: 15 November 2010
References
1. Zasloff M: Antimicrobial peptides of multicellular organisms. Nature 2002,
415:389-395.
2. Peschel A, Sahl HG: The co-evolution of host cationic antimicrobial
peptides and microbial resistance. Nat Rev Microbiol 2006, 4:529-536.

López-García et al. BMC Microbiology 2010, 10:289
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/10/289

3.
4.
5.

6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

Hancock REW, Sahl HG: Antimicrobial and host-defense peptides as new
anti-infective therapeutic strategies. Nat Biotechnol 2006, 24:1551-1557.
Montesinos E: Antimicrobial peptides and plant disease control. FEMS
Microbiol Lett 2007, 270:1-11.
Marcos JF, Muñoz A, Pérez-Payá E, Misra S, López-García B: Identification
and rational design of novel antimicrobial peptides for plant protection.
Annu Rev Phytopathol 2008, 46:273-301.
Rydlo T, Miltz J, Mor A: Eukaryotic antimicrobial peptides: Promises and
premises in food safety. J Food Sci 2006, 71:125-135.
Pellegrini A: Antimicrobial peptides from food proteins. Curr Pharm Des
2003, 9:1225-1238.
Brogden KA: Antimicrobial peptides: Pore formers or metabolic inhibitors
in bacteria? Nat Rev Microbiol 2005, 3:238-250.
Marcos JF, Gandía M: Antimicrobial peptides: to membranes and beyond.
Expert Opin Drug Discov 2009, 4:659-671.
Yeaman MR, Yount NY: Mechanisms of antimicrobial peptide action and
resistance. Pharmacol Rev 2003, 55:27-55.
Jenssen H, Hamill P, Hancock REW: Peptide antimicrobial agents. Clin
Microbiol Rev 2006, 19:491-511.
Otvos L Jr: Antibacterial peptides and proteins with multiple cellular
targets. J Pept Sci 2005, 11:697-706.
Wiedemann I, Breukink E, van Kraaij C, Kuipers OP, Bierbaum G, de Kruijff B,
et al: Specific binding of nisin to the peptidoglycan precursor lipid II
combines pore formation and inhibition of cell wall biosynthesis for
potent antibiotic activity. J Biol Chem 2001, 276:1772-1779.
Breukink E, Wiedemann I, van Kraaij C, Kuipers OP, Sahl HG, de Kruijff B: Use
of the cell wall precursor lipid II by a pore-forming peptide antibiotic.
Science 1999, 286:2361-2364.
Schneider T, Kruse T, Wimmer R, Wiedemann I, Sass V, Pag U, et al:
Plectasin, a fungal defensin, targets the bacterial cell wall precursor
Lipid II. Science 2010, 328:1168-1172.
Thevissen K, Cammue BPA, Lemaire K, Winderickx J, Dickson RC, Lester RL,
et al: A gene encoding a sphingolipid biosynthesis enzyme determines
the sensitivity of Saccharomyces cerevisiae to an antifungal plant
defensin from dahlia (Dahlia merckii). Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2000,
97:9531-9536.
Ramamoorthy V, Cahoon EB, Jia L, Thokala M, Minto RE, Shah DM:
Glucosylceramide synthase is essential for alfalfa defensin-mediated
growth inhibition but not for pathogenicity of Fusarium graminearum.
Mol Microbiol 2007, 66:771-786.
Thevissen K, Warnecke DC, François IEJA, Leipelt M, Heinz E, Ott C, et al:
Defensins from insects and plants interact with fungal
glucosylceramides. J Biol Chem 2004, 279:3900-3905.
Li XS, Reddy MS, Baev D, Edgerton M: Candida albicans Ssa1/2p Is the cell
envelope binding protein for human salivary Histatin 5. J Biol Chem 2003,
278:28553-28561.
Kragol G, Lovas S, Varadi G, Condie BA, Hoffmann R, Otvos LJr: The
antibacterial peptide pyrrhocoricin inhibits the ATPase actions of DnaK
and prevents chaperone-assisted protein folding. Biochemistry 2001,
40:3016-3026.
Sun JNN, Li WS, Jang WS, Nayyar N, Sutton MD, Edgerton M: Uptake of the
antifungal cationic peptide Histatin 5 by Candida albicans Ssa2p
requires binding to non-conventional sites within the ATPase domain.
Mol Microbiol 2008, 70:1246-1260.
Leiter E, Szappanos H, Oberparleiter C, Kaiserer L, Csernoch L, Pusztahelyi T,
et al: Antifungal protein PAF severely affects the integrity of the plasma
membrane of Aspergillus nidulans and induces an apoptosis-like
phenotype. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2005, 49:2445-2453.
Morton CO, dos Santos SC, Coote P: An amphibian-derived, cationic,
alpha-helical antimicrobial peptide kills yeast by caspase-independent
but AIF-dependent programmed cell death. Mol Microbiol 2007,
65:494-507.
Narasimhan ML, Damsz B, Coca MA, Ibeas JI, Yun DJ, Pardo JM, et al: A
plant defense response effector induces microbial apoptosis. Mol Cell
2001, 8:921-930.
Henriques ST, Melo MN, Castanho MARB: Cell-penetrating peptides and
antimicrobial peptides: how different are they? Biochem J 2006,
399:1-7.
Kramer NE, Van Hijum SAFT, Knol J, Kok J, Kuipers OP: Transcriptome
analysis reveals mechanisms by which Lactococcus lactis acquires nisin
resistance. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2006, 50:1753-1761.

Page 17 of 18

27. Li M, Lai YP, Villaruz AE, Cha DJ, Sturdevant DE, Otto M: Gram-positive
three-component antimicrobial peptide-sensing system. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 2007, 104:9469-9474.
28. Hong RW, Shchepetov M, Weiser JN, Axelsen PH: Transcriptional profile of
the Escherichia coli response to the antimicrobial insect peptide
Cecropin A. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2003, 47:1-6.
29. Tomasinsig L, Scocchi M, Mettulio R, Zanetti M: Genome-wide
transcriptional profiling of the Escherichia coli response to a proline-rich
antimicrobial peptide. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2004, 48:3260-3267.
30. Gamberi T, Cavalieri D, Magherini F, Mangoni ML, De Filippo C, Borro M,
et al: An integrated analysis of the effects of Esculentin 1-21 on
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Biochim Biophys Acta 2007, 1774:688-700.
31. Vylkova S, Jang WS, Li WS, Nayyar N, Edgerton M: Histatin 5 initiates
osmotic stress response in Candida albicans via activation of the Hog1
mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway. Eukaryot Cell 2007,
6:1876-1888.
32. Lis M, Fuss JR, Bobek LA: Exploring the mode of action of antimicrobial
peptide MUC7 12-mer by fitness profiling of Saccharomyces cerevisiae
genomewide mutant collection. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2009,
53:3762-3769.
33. Morton CO, Hayes A, Wilson M, Rash BM, Oliver SG, Coote P: Global
phenotype screening and transcript analysis outlines the inhibitory
mode(s) of action of two amphibian-derived, alpha-helical, cationic
peptides on Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2007,
51:3948-3959.
34. Liu TT, Lee REB, Barker KS, Lee RE, Wei L, Homayouni R, et al: Genome-wide
expression profiling of the response to azole, polyene, echinocandin,
and pyrimidine antifungal agents in Candida albicans. Antimicrob Agents
Chemother 2005, 49:2226-2236.
35. Guo N, Yu L, Meng RZ, Fan JW, Wang DC, Sun G, et al: Global gene
expression profile of Saccharomyces cerevisiae induced by dictamnine.
Yeast 2008, 25:631-641.
36. Zakrzewska A, Boorsma A, Brul S, Hellingwerf KJ, Klis FM: Transcriptional
response of Saccharomyces cerevisiae to the plasma membraneperturbing compound chitosan. Eukaryot Cell 2005, 4:703-715.
37. García R, Bermejo C, Grau C, Pérez R, Rodríguez-Peña JM, Francois J, et al:
The global transcriptional response to transient cell wall damage in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae and its regulation by the cell integrity signaling
pathway. J Biol Chem 2004, 279:15183-15195.
38. Agarwal AK, Rogers PD, Baerson SR, Jacob MR, Barker KS, Cleary JD, et al:
Genome-wide expression profiling of the response to polyene,
pyrimidine, azole, and echinocandin antifungal agents in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. J Biol Chem 2003, 278:34998-35015.
39. Barker KS, Pearson MM, Rogers PD: Identification of genes differentially
expressed in association with reduced azole susceptibility in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. J Antimicrob Chemoth 2003, 51:1131-1140.
40. Dempsey CE: The actions of melittin on membranes. Biochim Biophys Acta
1990, 1031:143-161.
41. López-García B, Pérez-Payá E, Marcos JF: Identification of novel
hexapeptides bioactive against phytopathogenic fungi through
screening of a synthetic peptide combinatorial library. Appl Environ
Microbiol 2002, 68:2453-2460.
42. Schibli DJ, Hwang PM, Vogel HJ: The structure of the antimicrobial active
center of lactoferricin B bound to sodium dodecyl sulfate micelles. FEBS
Lett 1999, 446:213-217.
43. Monk BC, Niimi K, Lin S, Knight A, Kardos TB, Cannon RD, et al: Surfaceactive fungicidal D-peptide inhibitors of the plasma membrane proton
pump that block azole resistance. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2005,
49:57-70.
44. Wessolowski A, Bienert M, Dathe M: Antimicrobial activity of arginine- and
tryptophan-rich hexapeptides: the effects of aromatic clusters, D-amino
acid substitution and cyclization. J Pept Res 2004, 64:159-169.
45. López-García B, Ubhayasekera W, Gallo RL, Marcos JF: Parallel evaluation of
antimicrobial peptides derived from the synthetic PAF26 and the
human LL37. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2007, 356:107-113.
46. Muñoz A, López-García B, Marcos JF: Studies on the mode of action of
the antifungal hexapeptide PAF26. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2006,
50:3847-3855.
47. Yun DJ, Zhao Y, Pardo JM, Narasimhan ML, Damsz B, Lee H, et al: Stress
proteins on the yeast cell surface determine resistance to osmotin, a
plant antifungal protein. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1997, 94:7082-7087.

López-García et al. BMC Microbiology 2010, 10:289
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/10/289

48. Toh-e A, Yasunaga S, Nisogi H, Tanaka K, Oguchi T, Matsui Y: Three yeast
genes, Pir1, Pir2 and Pir3, containing internal tandem repeats, are
related to each other, and Pir1 and Pir2 are required for tolerance to
heat-shock. Yeast 1993, 9:481-494.
49. Stephens C, Harrison SJ, Kazan K, Smith FWN, Goulter KC, Maclean DJ, et al:
Altered fungal sensitivity to a plant antimicrobial peptide through overexpression of yeast cDNAs. Curr Genet 2005, 47:194-201.
50. Levin DE: Cell wall integrity signaling in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 2005, 69:262-291.
51. Chen RE, Thorner J: Function and regulation in MAPK signaling pathways:
Lessons learned from the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. BBA-Mol Cell
Res 2007, 1773:1311-1340.
52. Hohmann S: Osmotic stress signaling and osmoadaptation in Yeasts.
Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 2002, 66:300-372.
53. Al-Shahrour F, Díaz-Uriarte R, Dopazo J: FatiGO: a web tool for finding
significant associations of Gene Ontology terms with groups of genes.
Bioinformatics 2004, 20:578-580.
54. Vaquerizas JM, Conde L, Yankilevich P, Cabezon A, Minguez P, DiazUriarte JRS, et al: GEPAS, an experiment-oriented pipeline for the analysis
of microarray gene expression data. Nucleic Acids Res 2005, 33:
W616-W620.
55. Giaever G, Chu AM, Ni L, Connelly C, Riles L, Veronneau S, et al: Functional
profiling of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae genome. Nature 2002,
418:387-391.
56. Ibeas JI, Yun DJ, Damsz B, Narasimhan ML, Uesono Y, Ribas JC, et al:
Resistance to the plant PR-5 protein osmotin in the model fungus
Saccharomyces cerevisiae is mediated by the regulatory effects of SSD1
on cell wall composition. Plant J 2001, 25:271-280.
57. Dickson RC, Nagiec EE, Wells GB, Nagiec MM, Lester RL: Synthesis of
mannose-(inositol-P)2-ceramide, the major sphingolipid in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae, requires the IPT1 (YDR072c) gene. J Biol Chem
1997, 272:29620-29625.
58. Stock SD, Hama H, Radding JA, Young DA, Takemoto JY: Syringomycin E
inhibition of Saccharomyces cerevisiae: Requirement for biosynthesis of
sphingolipids with very-long-chain fatty acids and mannose- and
phosphoinositol-containing head groups. Antimicrob Agents Chemother
2000, 44:1174-1180.
59. Chattopadhyay S, Pearce DA: Interaction with Btn2p is required for
localization of Rsg1p: Btn2p-mediated changes in arginine uptake in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Eukaryot Cell 2002, 1:606-612.
60. Kim Y, Chattopadhyay S, Locke S, Pearce DA: Interaction among Btn1p,
Btn2p, and Ist2p reveals potential interplay among the vacuole, amino
acid levels, and ion homeostasis in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
Eukaryot Cell 2005, 4:281-288.
61. Boorsma A, de Nobel H, ter Riet B, Bargmann B, Brul S, Hellingwerf KJ, et al:
Characterization of the transcriptional response to cell wall stress in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Yeast 2004, 21:413-427.
62. Zhang L, Zhang Y, Zhou YM, An S, Zhou YX, Cheng J: Response of gene
expression in Saccharomyces cerevisiae to amphotericin B and nystatin
measured by microarrays. J Antimicrob Chemoth 2002, 49:905-915.
63. Al-Shahrour F, Minguez P, Vaquerizas JM, Conde L, Dopazo J: BABELOMICS:
a suite of web tools for functional annotation and analysis of groups of
genes in high-throughput experiments. Nucleic Acids Res 2005, 33:
W460-W464.
64. Kapteyn JC, Hoyer LL, Hecht JE, Muller WH, Andel A, Verkleij AJ, et al: The
cell wall architecture of Candida albicans wild-type cells and cell walldefective mutants. Mol Microbiol 2000, 35:601-611.
65. Lee H, Damsz B, Woloshuk CP, Bressan RA, Narasimhan ML: Use of the
Plant Defense Protein Osmotin To Identify Fusarium oxysporum Genes
That Control Cell Wall Properties. Eukaryot Cell 2010, 9:558-568.
66. Dielbandhoesing SK, Zhang H, Caro LH, van der Vaart JM, Klis FM,
Verrips CT, et al: Specific cell wall proteins confer resistance to Nisin
upon yeast cells. Appl Environ Microbiol 1998, 64:4047-4052.
67. Koo JC, Lee B, Young ME, Koo SC, Cooper JA, Baek D, et al: Pn-AMP1, a
plant defense protein, induces actin depolarization in yeasts. Plant Cell
Physiol 2004, 45:1669-1680.
68. Harris M, Mora-Montes HM, Gow NAR, Coote PJ: Loss of
mannosylphosphate from Candida albicans cell wall proteins results in
enhanced resistance to the inhibitory effect of a cationic antimicrobial
peptide via reduced peptide binding to the cell surface. Microbiology
2009, 155:1058-1070.

Page 18 of 18

69. Thevissen K, François IEJA, Takemoto JY, Ferket KKA, Meert EMK,
Cammue BPA: DmAMP1, an antifungal plant defensin from dahlia
(Dahlia merckii), interacts with sphingolipids from Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. FEMS Microbiol Lett 2003, 226:169-173.
70. Marcos JF, Beachy RN, Houghten RA, Blondelle SE, Pérez-Payá E: Inhibition
of a plant virus infection by analogs of melittin. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
1995, 92:12466-12469.
71. Molina-Navarro MM, Castells-Roca L, Bellí G, García-Martínez J, MarínNavarro J, Moreno J, et al: Comprehensive transcriptional analysis of the
oxidative response in yeast. J Biol Chem 2008, 283:17908-17918.
72. Hess DC, Lu W, Rabinowitz JD, Botstein D: Ammonium toxicity and
potassium limitation in yeast. PLoS Biol 2006, 4:e351.
73. McClellan AJ, Xia Y, Deutschbauer AM, Davis RW, Gerstein M, Frydman J:
Diverse cellular functions of the Hsp90 molecular chaperone uncovered
using systems approaches. Cell 2007, 131:121-135.
74. Alberola TM, García-Martínez J, Antúnez O, Viladevall L, Barceló A, Ariño J,
et al: A new set of DNA macrochips for the yeast Saccharomyces
cerevisiae: features and uses. Int Microbiol 2004, 7:199-206.
75. Teste MA, Duquenne M, François JM, Parrou JL: Validation of reference
genes for quantitative expression analysis by real-time RT-PCR in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. BMC Mol Biol 2009, 10:99.
76. Vandesompele J, De Preter K, Pattyn F, Poppe B, Van Roy N, De Paepe A,
et al: Accurate normalization of real-time quantitative RT-PCR data by
geometric averaging of multiple internal control genes. Genome Biol
2002, 3:research0034.
77. Pfaffl MW, Horgan GW, Dempfle L: Relative expression software tool (REST
(c)) for group-wise comparison and statistical analysis of relative
expression results in real-time PCR. Nucleic Acids Res 2002, 30.
doi:10.1186/1471-2180-10-289
Cite this article as: López-García et al.: A genomic approach highlights
common and diverse effects and determinants of susceptibility on the
yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae exposed to distinct antimicrobial
peptides. BMC Microbiology 2010 10:289.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
