<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>webPRANK: a phylogeny-aware multiple sequence aligner with interactive alignment browser</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:579. doi:10.1186/1471-2105-11-579"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Ari Löytynoja"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
webPRANK: a phylogeny-aware multiple
sequence aligner with interactive alignment
browser
Löytynoja and Goldman
Löytynoja and Goldman BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:579
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/579 (26 November 2010)

Löytynoja and Goldman BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:579
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/579

SOFTWARE

Open Access

webPRANK: a phylogeny-aware multiple sequence
aligner with interactive alignment browser
Ari Löytynoja*, Nick Goldman

Abstract
Background: Phylogeny-aware progressive alignment has been found to perform well in phylogenetic alignment
benchmarks and to produce superior alignments for the inference of selection on codon sequences. Its
implementation in the PRANK alignment program package also allows modelling of complex evolutionary
processes and inference of posterior probabilities for sequence sites evolving under each distinct scenario, either
simultaneously with the alignment of sequences or as a post-processing step for an existing alignment. This has
led to software with many advanced features, and users may find it difficult to generate optimal alignments,
visualise the full information in their alignment results, or post-process these results, e.g. by objectively selecting
subsets of alignment sites.
Results: We have created a web server called webPRANK that provides an easy-to-use interface to the PRANK
phylogeny-aware alignment algorithm. The webPRANK server supports the alignment of DNA, protein and codon
sequences as well as protein-translated alignment of cDNAs, and includes built-in structure models for the
alignment of genomic sequences. The resulting alignments can be exported in various formats widely used in
evolutionary sequence analyses. The webPRANK server also includes a powerful web-based alignment browser for
the visualisation and post-processing of the results in the context of a cladogram relating the sequences, allowing
(e.g.) removal of alignment columns with low posterior reliability. In addition to de novo alignments, webPRANK
can be used for the inference of ancestral sequences with phylogenetically realistic gap patterns, and for the
annotation and post-processing of existing alignments. The webPRANK server is freely available on the web at
http://tinyurl.com/webprank .
Conclusions: The webPRANK server incorporates phylogeny-aware multiple sequence alignment, visualisation and
post-processing in an easy-to-use web interface. It widens the user base of phylogeny-aware multiple sequence
alignment and allows the performance of all alignment-related activity for small sequence analysis projects using
only a standard web browser.

Background
When used for evolutionary or phylogenetic analyses, a
sequence alignment is meant to represent evolutionary
homology and have the characters descended from a
common ancestor placed in the same column. Commonly used alignment programs do not consider phylogeny in their placement of gaps, however, and create
systematic errors with insertion-deletion events, affecting
downstream evolutionary analyses [1,2]. The phylogenyaware algorithm that distinguishes insertions from deletions [3] has been shown not to suffer from this bias and,
when the input guide phylogeny can be trusted, produces
* Correspondence: ari@ebi.ac.uk
EMBL-European Bioinformatics Institute, Hinxton, Cambridgeshire, UK

superior inference of character homology [2]. The alignments generated using the algorithm have been found to
perform well in phylogenetic alignment benchmarks
based on both real [4] and simulated [2] data, and give
the most accurate inference of selection on codon
sequences [5].
The phylogeny-aware algorithm, including support for
structure models describing differently-evolving site
classes [6], has been implemented in the PRANK alignment software and its graphical interface PRANKSTER
(both freely available from http://tinyurl.com/prankmsa). We now add an easy-to-use web interface called
webPRANK (Figure 1), and provide a powerful webbased browser to visualise and post-process the resulting

© 2010 Löytynoja and Goldman; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Löytynoja and Goldman BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:579
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/579

Page 3 of 7

Figure 1 The webPRANK submission page has a modular, easy-to-use interface and contains integrated documentation explaining the
main features. In addition to submission of new tasks and retrieval of finished jobs, the site allows uploading of existing alignments to a webbased alignment browser for visualisation and post-processing.

alignments (Figure 2). The new interface, with integrated
documentation, can be accessed at http://tinyurl.com/
webprank .We hope webPRANK will encourage a wide
range of researchers to consider explicitly the evolution of
the sequences they align and to properly account for gaps.

Implementation
The webPRANK server is based on the PRANK phylogeny-aware multiple sequence alignment software [3],
implemented in C++. The alignment tasks are executed
at the European Bioinformatics Institute’s computation

cluster using Web Services [7], supporting delayed
retrieval of finished jobs. The webPRANK user interface
is written in HTML and JavaScript and the server backend with Perl, using CGI and the SOAP messaging protocol for communication and accessing the web service.
The webPRANK server uses the XML-based HSAML
sequence alignment format (defined in http://tinyurl.
com/hsaml) extensively. The format is capable of storing
the full information of the alignment process, including
the guide tree and the posterior scores associated with
the pair-wise alignments at its internal nodes, in a

Löytynoja and Goldman BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:579
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/579

Page 4 of 7

Figure 2 Resulting alignments, and uploaded alignments in HSAML format, can be displayed and post-processed using a powerful
alignment browser. The alignments are shown alongside the guide tree relating the sequences; the tree is interactive and allows control of
the information tracks displayed. (A) The site-wise alignment reliability is indicated in shades of grey (bottom). Unreliably aligned sites are
deselected (columns marked grey) using an adjustable threshold (drop-down ‘Reliability’ menu) and the remaining sites can be exported in
various alignment formats for downstream evolutionary analyses. (B) Using the FAST/SLOW/CODON model, inferred sequence structure for
genomic DNA alignments is indicated in shades of green, red and blue (bottom). A prediction for a pre-computed EPO alignment [16] shows a
correctly inferred change from the FAST state (green) in the intron through the SLOW state (red) at the splice site to the three CODON states
(blue) in the exon.

Löytynoja and Goldman BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:579
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/579

single, computer-parsable file. This enables advanced
analysis and post-processing of newly-generated results
as well as full re-processing of earlier results, stored
locally in the format, within the associated alignment
browser.
The webPRANK alignment browser provides a powerful interface to analyse and post-process the results
within a standard web browser. Its interactive functions
are implemented using advanced features of JavaScript
and their full functionality requires a web browser with
a fast JavaScript engine. The processing of large data
sets can become computationally heavy and an alternative browser is provided for basic data visualisation.
This light-weight alignment viewer, implemented in
plain HTML, allows simple analyses with a web browser
not supporting the full JavaScript or using a less powerful computer.

Results
The webPRANK server (Figure 1) supports the alignment of DNA, protein and codon sequences, input in
FASTA format [8], using evolutionary substitution models [9-11]. It can translate, align as protein and backtranslate protein-coding DNA sequences. In addition,
webPRANK includes built-in support for two structure
models [6], FAST/SLOW and FAST/SLOW/CODON,
designed for aligning genomic DNA sequences with
sites evolving with different substitution dynamics and
differences in the patterns of alignment gaps. webPRANK accepts a user-defined phylogeny (Newick format) to guide its progressive alignment procedure, or
can compute one from the unaligned input sequences.
For each alignment task, the full combination of parameters, and the structure model if used, are provided in
the output so that the analyses can easily be repeated or
recreated with the stand-alone PRANK program.
The size of alignment tasks is limited to 4 GB of
memory and 24 hours of run time. The size and type of
data as well as the parameter settings affect the computation time. The PRANK algorithm has time complexity
O(a2nl2) where a, n and l are the size of the character
alphabet (four for DNA; 20 for amino acids; 61 for
codons) and the number and length of sequences,
respectively. (More precisely, l is the length of the subalignments to be aligned and, for large n, can be much
longer than any of the extant or inferred ancestral
sequences.) The alignment of 30 DNA sequences of
~1000 nucleotides typically takes 1-2.5 minutes depending on the options chosen; that of 100 DNA sequences
of similar length 3.5-20 minutes. The translation of
DNA sequences to amino acids or codons decreases
sequence lengths but increases alphabet size, requiring
computation times similar to (for amino acids) or significantly longer than (for codons) those for untranslated

Page 5 of 7

DNA sequences. By default, webPRANK uses alignment
anchoring to accelerate analyses of long DNA
sequences.
Significant proportions of the longer time estimates
for the alignment tasks are spent computing the guide
trees and, if a user-defined phylogeny is provided, even
larger data sets can be aligned in a reasonable time.
With a pre-defined guide tree, the alignment of 1000
simulated DNA sequences of ~1000 nucleotides could
be performed in 35 minutes; however, the alignment
matrix was 7247 columns wide (the correct width was
7235 columns) and so sparse that it was largely unreadable (see Additional file 1). In practice webPRANK is
able to align and display (see below) almost any set of
sequences for which subsequent alignment browsing is
feasible, and many realistic sets for which it is not.
The webPRANK-generated alignments can be downloaded in several alignment formats widely used in evolutionary analyses. The webPRANK server supports its own
HSAML format, as well as FASTA [8], PHYLIP (interleaved and sequential) [12], PAML [13] and NEXUS [14]
formats. The XML-based HSAML format is the only one
we know that can contain the full information of the
alignment process and allows for advanced analysis and
post-processing of the results with the integrated webPRANK browser or using the stand-alone PRANKSTER
alignment browser. The format can also be easily parsed
using external software, for example the XML library for
the R statistics package [15] or the libXML module for
the Perl programming language, allowing for complex
downstream analyses of the alignment data. Of the classical alignment formats, the NEXUS format also allows
incorporation of some additional information in the
alignment files: webPRANK extends alignments exported
in NEXUS format to include the alignment guide tree
and the column-wise minimum posterior reliability
scores or the excluded alignment sites (see below) using
the appropriate commands in the ‘Trees’, ‘Assumptions’
and ‘Paup’ blocks, respectively.
Before downloading the results, the sequence alignments can be visualised and post-processed using a
powerful, integrated alignment browser (Figure 2). A
distinctive feature of the webPRANK browser is the display of an interactive cladogram, representing the alignment guide tree, next to the sequences. The tree has
two purposes. First, we believe that evolutionary
sequence alignment should always be studied in the
context of the tree relating the sequences. The fact that
the guide tree used for the alignment may not be fully
correct does not change this, as the tree has nevertheless been used for the alignment and the solution
depends on it. Rather than hiding the tree, showing it
alongside the alignment helps to identify possible errors
and suggest actions to correct them. Second, the

Löytynoja and Goldman BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:579
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/579

PRANK alignments contain additional information
associated with the tree nodes and the easiest way to
represent and allow browsing this information is in the
context of the tree.
The interactive webPRANK browser uses advanced features of JavaScript and requires a modern web browser
such as Firefox version 3+, Safari 4+ or Chrome to work
properly. The processing of sequences can be computationally heavy, however, and the browser may open with
a small delay. The delay is not significant for small alignments and should be bearable for medium-sized alignments (up to 100-200 sequences and a few thousand
columns). For larger alignments (up to several thousands
of sequences), the webPRANK server provides an alternative, light-weight browser that allows basic horizontal and
vertical scrolling of the alignment matrices. Alternatively,
the full results can be downloaded in HSAML format
and analysed locally using the stand-alone PRANKSTER
program, or the aligned sequences exported in simpler
formats for visualisation with other browser software.
The PRANK algorithm can compute column-wise
reliability scores for the alignment and, when a structure
model is used, provide posterior probabilities for the
alignment sites evolving under different evolutionary
processes [6]. The reliability and probability values are
generated by the pair-wise alignments at the different
levels of the progressive alignment and are thus associated with the internal nodes of the tree. The information is displayed below the alignment as probability
tracks (Figure 2). The tracks for different stages of the
alignment can be selected by clicking the corresponding
nodes in the tree or using the drop-down menu.
The PRANK alignment reliability scores provide an
objective measure to remove less reliably aligned columns
from the data and the webPRANK browser includes
advanced functionality to select sets of alignment sites
using these scores. The webPRANK filtering is based on
the track currently displayed; repeated steps of filtering are
accepted and, for convenience, an additional track showing the minimum reliability score across all pair-wise
alignments is provided. The current selection of alignment
sites is indicated in the browser window using different
colouring (Figure 2A) and the subset of sites currently
selected can be exported in various different alignment
formats for the downstream analyses. Unlike other export
formats that permanently remove unreliable columns
from the data, the files saved in NEXUS format keep the
full alignment data and include additional commands
excluding a set of sites in the downstream analysis.
As a part of the alignment process, the PRANK algorithm reconstructs the sequence history with inferred
ancestral nodes. The inferred ancestral sequences, with
phylogenetically realistic patterns of character presence
vs. absence, can be displayed in the alignment browser

Page 6 of 7

or downloaded for further analyses. Ancestral sequences
can also be inferred from existing alignments. One
should note, however, that non-phylogeny-aware alignment algorithms tend to infer excess deletions [2] and
inference from systematically incorrect alignments typically produces unrealistically long ancestral sequences.
In addition to ancestral sequences, structure predictions
and alignment reliability scores can also be computed
for existing alignments (Figure 2B). This allows application of some of the advanced features of the PRANK
alignment package to other alignments, e.g. for objectively removing noise from the alignment data.
The webPRANK alignment browser is not limited to
the display of de novo alignments: it can be used for
visualisation and browsing of any FASTA- or HSAMLformatted alignment, although the full functionality of
the browser requires the richer HSAML format. By storing webPRANK-generated alignments in this format, the
user can later re-load the results to the webPRANK
browser for visualisation and post-processing, and thus
perform all alignment-related activity for small sequence
analysis projects using a standard web browser only.

Conclusions
The webPRANK server incorporates phylogeny-aware
multiple sequence alignment, visualisation and post-processing. It widens the user base of phylogeny-aware
multiple sequence alignment, which can lead to superior
inference of character homology and downstream evolutionary analyses. We encourage the consideration of
evolutionary sequence alignment in the context of the
tree relating the sequences, and the use of enhanced
alignment formats such as HSAML for the exchange of
linked phylogenetic and alignment information. Our various alignment-related software and format definitions
are all available via http://www.ebi.ac.uk/goldman-srv/
prank as well as at the URLs listed above.
Availability and Requirements
Project name: webPRANK
Project home page: http://www.ebi.ac.uk/goldman-srv/
webPRANK/
Operating systems: Platform independent (web server)
Programming language: C++ (PRANK alignment software), Perl/CGI/SOAP (server interface),
HTML/JavaScript (web site, alignment browser)
Licence: GNU GPL (PRANK alignment software)
Any restrictions to use by non-academics: none
Additional material
Additional file 1: The document contains a figure illustrating the
difficulty of browsing alignments of many sequences, even when
they are closely related, and text explaining this figure.

Löytynoja and Goldman BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:579
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/579

Page 7 of 7

Acknowledgements
We thank Simon Whelan for the help with DNA substitution models, Tim
Massingham for his critical comments and alternative ideas for visualising
sequences, Nicolas Rodriguez for the formal definition of HSAML format and
the EBI External Services team for setting up the web service. This work was
supported by the Wellcome Trust [Programme Grant GR078968].
Authors’ contributions
NG initiated the project and participated in its design, testing and
coordination. AL implemented the ideas, wrote the software and drafted the
manuscript. Both authors reviewed and approved the final manuscript.
Received: 9 July 2010 Accepted: 26 November 2010
Published: 26 November 2010
References
1. Wong K, Suchard M, Huelsenbeck J: Alignment uncertainty and genomic
analysis. Science 2008, 319:473-476.
2. Löytynoja A, Goldman N: Phylogeny-aware gap placement prevents
errors in sequence alignment and evolutionary analysis. Science 2008,
320:1632-1635.
3. Löytynoja A, Goldman N: An algorithm for progressive multiple
alignment of sequences with insertions. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005,
102:10557-10562.
4. Dessimoz C, Gil M: Phylogenetic assessment of alignments reveals
neglected tree signal in gaps. Genome Biol 2010, 11:R37.
5. Fletcher W, Yang Z: The effect of insertions, deletions and alignment
errors on the branch-site test of positive selection. Mol Biol Evol 2010,
27:2257-2267.
6. Löytynoja A, Goldman N: A model of evolution and structure for multiple
sequence alignment. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 2008,
363:3913-3919.
7. McWilliam H, Valentin F, Goujon M, Li W, Narayanasamy M, Martin J,
Miyar T, Lopez R: Web services at the European Bioinformatics Institute2009. Nucleic Acids Res 2009, 37:W6-W10.
8. Pearson W, Lipman D: Improved tools for biological sequence
comparison. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1988, 85:2444-2448.
9. Hasegawa M, Kishino H, Yano T: Dating of the human-ape splitting by a
molecular clock of mitochondrial DNA. J Mol Evol 1985, 22:160-174.
10. Whelan S, Goldman N: A general empirical model of protein evolution
derived from multiple protein families using a maximum-likelihood
approach. Mol Biol Evol 2001, 18:691-699.
11. Kosiol C, Holmes I, Goldman N: An empirical codon model for protein
sequence evolution. Mol Biol Evol 2007, 24:1464-1479.
12. Felsenstein J: PHYLIP (Phylogeny Inference Package) version 3.69. Distributed
by the author 2005.
13. Yang Z: PAML 4: Phylogenetic analysis by maximum likelihood. Mol Biol
Evol 2007, 24:1586-1591.
14. Maddison D, Swofford D, Maddison W: Nexus: An extensible file format
for systematic information. Syst Biol 1997, 46:590-621.
15. R Development Core Team: R: A Language and Environment for Statistical
Computing R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria; 2010,
[ISBN 3-900051-07-0].
16. Paten B, Herrero J, Fitzgerald S, Beal K, Flicek P, Holmes I, Birney E:
Genome-wide nucleotide-level mammalian ancestor reconstruction.
Genome Res 2008, 18:1829-1843.
doi:10.1186/1471-2105-11-579
Cite this article as: Löytynoja and Goldman: webPRANK: a phylogenyaware multiple sequence aligner with interactive alignment browser.
BMC Bioinformatics 2010 11:579.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
