<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Adaptive evolution of the matrix extracellular phosphoglycoprotein in mammals</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:342. doi:10.1186/1471-2148-11-342"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="João Paulo Machado"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Machado et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:342
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/342

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Adaptive evolution of the matrix extracellular
phosphoglycoprotein in mammals
João Paulo Machado1,2, Warren E Johnson3, Stephen J O’Brien3, Vítor Vasconcelos1,4 and Agostinho Antunes1,3,4*

Abstract
Background: Matrix extracellular phosphoglycoprotein (MEPE) belongs to a family of small integrin-binding ligand
N-linked glycoproteins (SIBLINGs) that play a key role in skeleton development, particularly in mineralization,
phosphate regulation and osteogenesis. MEPE associated disorders cause various physiological effects, such as loss
of bone mass, tumors and disruption of renal function (hypophosphatemia). The study of this developmental gene
from an evolutionary perspective could provide valuable insights on the adaptive diversification of morphological
phenotypes in vertebrates.
Results: Here we studied the adaptive evolution of the MEPE gene in 26 Eutherian mammals and three birds. The
comparative genomic analyses revealed a high degree of evolutionary conservation of some coding and noncoding regions of the MEPE gene across mammals indicating a possible regulatory or functional role likely related
with mineralization and/or phosphate regulation. However, the majority of the coding region had a fast
evolutionary rate, particularly within the largest exon (1467 bp). Rodentia and Scandentia had distinct substitution
rates with an increased accumulation of both synonymous and non-synonymous mutations compared with other
mammalian lineages. Characteristics of the gene (e.g. biochemical, evolutionary rate, and intronic conservation)
differed greatly among lineages of the eight mammalian orders. We identified 20 sites with significant positive
selection signatures (codon and protein level) outside the main regulatory motifs (dentonin and ASARM)
suggestive of an adaptive role. Conversely, we find three sites under selection in the signal peptide and one in the
ASARM motif that were supported by at least one selection model. The MEPE protein tends to accumulate amino
acids promoting disorder and potential phosphorylation targets.
Conclusion: MEPE shows a high number of selection signatures, revealing the crucial role of positive selection in
the evolution of this SIBLING member. The selection signatures were found mainly outside the functional motifs,
reinforcing the idea that other regions outside the dentonin and the ASARM might be crucial for the function of
the protein and future studies should be undertaken to understand its importance.

Background
Dentin, one of the major mineralized tissues of teeth, is
deposited by odontoblasts, which synthesize collagenous
and non-collagenous proteins (NCPs) [1,2]. Among the
NCPs, there is a family of small integrin-binding ligand
N-linked glycoproteins (SIBLINGs) consisting of dentin
matrix protein 1 (DMP1), dentin sialophosphoprotein
(DSPP), integrin-binding sialoprotein (IBSP), matrix
extracellular phosphoglycoprotein (MEPE, also known as
OF45) and osteopontin (SPP1) [3]. These genes share
* Correspondence: aantunes@ciimar.up.pt
1
CIMAR/CIIMAR, Centro Interdisciplinar de Investigação Marinha e Ambiental,
Universidade do Porto, Rua dos Bragas, 177, 4050-123 Porto, Portugal
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

common genetic and structural features, including a
small non-translational first exon, a start codon in the
second exon and a large coding segment in the last exon
(although exon number varies among the different genes)
[4]. The entire SIBLING protein family likely arose from
the secretory calcium-binding phosphoprotein (SCPP)
family by gene duplication, since this cluster of genes
encodes proteins with similar molecular-structural features and functions [5].
Members of this gene family are encoded by a compact
tandem gene cluster (located on chromosome 4 q in
Human and 5 q in mouse) characterized by: (i) common
exon-intron features, (ii) the presence of the integrinbinding tripeptide Arg-Gly-Asp (RGD) motif that

© 2011 Machado et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Machado et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:342
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/342

mediates cell attachment/signaling via interaction with
cell surface integrins [4], and (iii) post-translational
modifications of conserved phosphorylation and Nglycosylation sites [4]. In humans, the MEPE protein (525
amino acids) is encoded by four exons with a 1960 bp
transcript with two N-glycosylation motifs (at residues
477-481), a glycosaminoglycan (SGDG) attachment site
at residues 256-259, and the RGD cell attachment motif
at residues 247-249 [6]. The RGD motif has a similar
function in other members of the SIBLING’s (DSPP,
DMP1, IBSP, and SPP1) [7]. The protein MEPE has several predicted phosphorylation sites/motifs for protein
kinase C, casein kinase II, tyrosine kinase, and cAMPcGMP-dependent protein kinase and a large number of
N-myristoylation sites that appear to be also a feature of
the RGD-containing proteins [7]. The acidic serineaspartate-rich MEPE-associated motif (ASARM motif)
occurs at the C-terminus in MEPE (residues 509 to 522)
[7] and when phosphorylated this small peptide can bind
to hydroxyapatite and inhibit mineralization [8].
The basic MEPE protein was first cloned from a tumor
resected from a patient with tumor-induced osteomalacia
(OHO) [7,9], which is associated with hypophosphatemia
and is caused by a renal phosphate wasting. The MEPE
gene is also up-regulated in X-linked hypophosphatemic
rickets (XLH or HYP-osteoblasts) and OHO-tumors
[7,10-14]. Under normal conditions it is expressed primarily in osteoblasts, osteocytes, and odontoblasts [13].
Targeted disruption of the MEPE gene in mouse causes
increased bone formation and bone mass, suggesting that
MEPE plays an inhibitory role in bone formation and
mineralization [15]. In humans, MEPE inhibits mineralization and is also involved in renal phosphate regulation
[16,17]. The inhibition of mineralization and phosphate
uptake are related with the protease resistant small peptide
ASARM motif located near the end of the protein [7,17].
However, the MEPE protein has dual functions depending
on the proteolytic processing. When the protein is cleaved
by cathepsin B or D into several fragments, the small peptide ASARM is released [18] and when phosphorylated,
this small peptide can bind the hydroxyapatite crystal and
inhibit mineralization [8]. By contrast, when fragments
containing the RGD motif are released and the ASARM is
not degraded by proteases, mineralization is accelerated
[19]. The influence of MEPE-ASARM peptides in the
modulation of mineralization is due to a protein-protein
interaction with PHEX, an X-linked phosphate-regulating
endopeptidase homolog (also called the minhibin model)
[17]. PHEX is also expressed in osteoblasts, osteocytes and
odontoblasts and the protein interacts with MEPE, protecting it from the proteolytic process (from cathepsin-B)
and preventing ASARM from being released into blood
circulation [8]. Most of the disorders associated with

Page 2 of 23

MEPE result from a malfunction of this PHEX-MEPE
interaction, which in turn leads to an increase of ASARM
blood levels.
The majority of mammalian genes are strongly conserved in the coding sequence [20,21]. Genes carrying signatures of selection may be involved in adaptation and
functional innovation, and often have elevated ratios of
nonsynonymous/synonymous nucleotide substitutions
(dN/dS) in their coding regions [22]. However, evolutionary rates of nuclear and mitochondrial genes are not equal
in all the mammalian lineages [23]. For example, while
rodents tend to accumulate more mutations in nuclear
genes than humans [24], the differences between the rates
in the two lineages seems to be smaller than the generation time difference [23].
Since MEPE protein has an important role in the regulation of the skeleton mineralization process and since the
mineralized tissue is a critical innovation in vertebrate evolution, the evolutionary study of this developmental gene
could provide valuable insights on the adaptive diversification of morphological phenotypes in mammals. As the
MEPE gene has been suggested to be under selection [25],
our objective was to undergo a thorough analysis to evaluate signatures of positive selection using both a gene-level
and protein-level approaches. We assessed the evolution
of the MEPE protein-coding gene in 26 mammalian species, from Hyracoidea to Primates, showing that while four
regions/motifs in the MEPE gene have a high degree of
conservation, the majority of the coding region has a fast
evolutionary rate, especially in rodents and tree shrews.
Indeed, evidence of strong positive selection (gene and
protein-level) was found in 20 amino acids that encompass
MEPE protein, highlighting the role of molecular adaptation in the functionality of this gene.

Results
Presence of the MEPE in vertebrates

Twenty-six mammalian MEPE sequences were retrieved
from the GenBank and Ensembl databases, comprising
eight different mammalian Orders (Additional file 1: Table
S1). In addition, sequences of the putative MEPE orthologue, Ovocleidin-116, were obtained from the available bird
genome projects (Gallus gallus, Taeniopygia guttata,
Meleagris gallopavo) for comparative purposes. For the
majority of the mammals considered in this work, the
MEPE gene encompasses four exons that encode a transcript that varied from 1272 bp in Ochotona princeps to
2030 bp in Pan troglodytes. Some of the smallest reported
transcripts may be incomplete, as in the case of O. princeps, which is missing a stop codon. The absence of the
ASARM motif in the MEPE’s C-terminal in some species
(Equus caballus, Ochotona. princeps, Otolemur garnetti
and Pteropus. vampyrus) also suggests that those genes

Machado et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:342
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/342

were not fully annotated. Thus, we performed a detailed
search in databases for those species using TBLASTN
[26], which led to the identification of the ASARM in E.
caballus, but not in O. princeps, O. garnetti and P. vampyrus (in these cases, the missing end portion of the protein corresponds to the end of the contig available in the
database). However, several stop codons are present
between the end of the present sequence and the putative
ASARM motif in the E. caballus sequence and therefore it
was not included in subsequent analyses.
We performed blast searches (TBLASTN and
TBLAST) to determine if MEPE is present in non-mammalian or non-avian vertebrates (such as fish and
amphibians), but we were not able to detect an orthologue in those lineages, suggesting that this gene may be
considerably differentiated or even absent. In chicken
(G. gallus), a similar protein has been already described,
MEPE/OC116 [27] (i.e. Ovocleidin 116), and it is likely
a homologue of MEPE. This orthologue is also present
in two other birds (T. guttata, M. gallopavo). Although
our initial BLAST searches did not return a significant
hit in reptiles, a recent study suggests the presence of
MEPE in Anolis carolinensis [28]. Blast searches for the
MEPE gene in teleost fishes (e.g. Takifugu rubripes, Oryzias latipes and Danio rerio) did not retrieve a significant hit. Even searching synteny blocks between Human
and Zebrafish (results not shown), did not provide evidence of MEPE. This result is concordant with previous
studies [5,29-32] that show the likely presence of two
genes belonging to the SIBLING family in teleost fishes
but not a MEPE orthologue. Mammals and reptiles are
the only tetrapod lineages with all five SIBLING family
genes (Figure 1), as previously suggested [28,29].

Page 3 of 23

Sequence analyses

At the protein level MEPE is highly variable, especially in
the region encoding the last exon, with pairwise amino
acid similarity among mammals varying from 99% to 28%.
Nevertheless, four important regions within MEPE had
high amino acid conservation (> 80%): the signal peptide,
the RGD and SGDG regions (the glycosaminoglycan
attachment site), and the ASARM motif (Figure 2). Moreover, the protein is also highly conserved from positions
887 to 1091 bp of the human sequence, a region associated with a putative regulatory region (Ensembl annotation). Exon 2, only 54 bp long, encodes mainly the signal
peptide and is highly conserved. Remarkably, two alanines
(hydrophobic residues) are conserved in 25 of the 26
mammalian species studied (Figure 2). The fourth exon
(that encodes most of the protein) comprehends the RGD,
SGDG, and ASARM motifs and the putative regulatory
region. GC content was similar along most of the coding
sequences, with a few segments above 50% (Figure 2).
Phylogenetic analyses of the mammalian MEPE protein
sequences showed similar overall topologies with the three
reconstruction methods used: Neighbor-Joining (NJ),
Bayesian (BY), and Maximum Likelihood (ML) (Figure 3).
The topologies were also consistent with those retrieved
when using the MEPE nucleotide sequences (results not
shown), and all were mostly compatible with the accepted
phylogeny of mammals [33-36]. However, Rodentia and
Scandentia had long branches, suggesting higher mutation
rates (increased number of synonymous and non-synonymous substitutions). We performed the two-sided
Kishino-Hasegawa test (KH), the Shimodaira-Hasegawa
test (SH), and the Expected Likelihood Weights (ELW) in
TREE-PUZZLE to determine the best-fitting tree. The test

Figure 1 SIBLING (DSPP, DMP1, IBSP MEPE and SPP1) presence in vertebrates. Illustrative representation of the SIBLING (DSPP, DMP1, IBSP
MEPE and SPP1) genes presence/absence in vertebrates. The estimated divergence time of the different groups are placed near the nodes.

Machado et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:342
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/342

Page 4 of 23

Figure 2 Sliding window plot and motifs comparison of MEPE across the 26 mammalian species. Sliding window plot of GC-content and
nucleotide and amino acid conservation among the 26 mammalian MEPE coding sequences (exons 2, 3 and 4) that were used in this
evolutionary study. The plot was calculated after pairwise deletion of ambiguous sites and the windows were adjusted to correspond to the
same scale. The blue shading identifies conserved regions (> 80% nucleotide or amino acid similarity), the red line tracks nucleotide similarity,
the green line amino acid similarity and the black line % GC content. The three motifs/regions are represented within the boxes A-Signal
Peptide-, B-Dentonin (SDGG, RGD), C- Putative regulatory regions and D-ASARM. The yellow and red shadow represents selection at codon level
and amino acid level, respectively, while the grey shadow correspond to the species excluded from the positive selection analyses at site level.

of the three resulting phylogenetic trees suggests that the
ML tree best fit the multiple sequence alignment (values
of KH and SH were 1, and therefore were highly significant and ELW = 0.7771), although the Bayesian tree was
not significantly worse than the ML tree (Additional file 2:
Table S2). Conversely, after removing the rodents and tree
shrew the three methods produced similar topologies and
therefore no significant differences were obtained in the
tests implemented in TREE-PUZZLE. The best-fitting
trees for the two alignments were then used in subsequent
analyses. Likelihood mapping, implemented in TREEPUZZLE to inspect the phylogenetic signal of the alignment (Additional file 2: Table S2), showed a relevant value
for both alignments that was slightly reduced when

rodents and tree shrew were included. Phylogenies based
only on transversions or only on the first and the second
coding positions showed the same patterns (data not
shown).
In the non-coding gene regions, the nucleotide similarity
plots illustrate that the human sequence is highly conserved relative to the other primates, Pan troglodytes, Gorilla gorilla and Macaca mulatta (Figure 4A). At a lower
level the comparison of the MEPE non-coding regions
across all species showed several Conserved Non Coding
Sequences (CNS) after pairwise comparisons with the
human sequence across all species. This intronic conservation is particularly important since CNS have been associated with transcriptional regulation [37]. The length of

Machado et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:342
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/342

Page 5 of 23

Figure 3 Phylogenetic tree of MEPE. Depiction of MEPE protein phylogeny constructed using Bayesian inference (Bayes), Maximum Likelihood
(ML) and Neighbor-Joining (NJ) algorithms. Support for each node is summarized on the branch prior to the node (ML/Bayes/NJ). For the NJ
and ML analysis the bootstrap values < 50 are represented with the symbol (-). Branches are shaded with a gradient based on the branch
length, from green (short) to red (longer).

CNS decreases when the Human MEPE is compared with
homologues from more distantly related species, but not
necessarily in a direct association with phylogenetic distance (Figure 4A). For instance, the dog (Canis lupus
familiaris) and cattle (Bos taurus) are phylogenetically
more distant from human than the mouse (Mus musculus)
and rat (Rattus norvegicus), but showed a higher conservation both in coding and non-coding regions of the gene
(Figure 4A). By contrast, in the Order Lagomorpha there
is less conservation in the intronic regions but high conservation in the coding regions, and in rodents, there are
high numbers of differences both in coding and non-coding regions (Figure 4A). As expected, birds showed low
similarity in both coding and non-coding region with
mammals (Figure 4B), although they exhibited high similarity in the coding regions in pairwise comparisons with
G. gallus (Figure 4C). Furthermore, the two Galliform species also were similar in the non-coding regions while the
G. gallus and the T. guttata did not present high intronic
conservation.

Given the large difference in average length of CNS
(from 1.8 kb in Lagomorpha to 8.4 kb in Primates) and
their high similarity (from 71.4% in Lagomorha to 89.5%
in Primates) (Additional file 3: Figure S1), it is not surprising that introns have ample phylogenetic signal for
gene-tree reconstruction. The alignment of the intronic
regions comprehends 21120 bp and 856 of those sites
were clean of ambiguity data in all the species (Macaca
mullata was excluded since the intronic regions were not
available). MEPE intronic sequences provided a significant phylogenetic signal across all the studied mammals,
resulting in similar topologies as those trees reconstructed from coding regions and protein suggesting an
appreciable level of evolutionary constraints in MEPE
introns (Figure 5).
The MEPE protein is generally basic, with an average Isoelectric Point (pI) of 8.20 in the mammal species studied.
Generally the pI was lower in Laurasiatheria, reaching
5.82 in Felis catus (Figure 6). In the three available avian
sequences pI was less than 7 in the two Galliformes and

Machado et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:342
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/342

Page 6 of 23

Figure 4 Nucleotide conservation of MEPE in mVISTA. (A) MEPE gene conservation between 25 mammalian species orthologues compared
with the human MEPE sequenced portrayed in an mVISTA plot with the 100 bp window with a cut-off of 70% similarity. The Y-scale represents
the percent identity ranging from 0 to 100%. (B) Human MEPE compared with the three bird orthologues. (C) Pairwise comparison of the two
birds ovocleidin-116 with the G. gallus orthologue. Exons are highlighted in blue, nontranslated regions in green-blue, and conserved noncoding sequences (CNS) in pink.

Machado et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:342
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/342

Page 7 of 23

Figure 5 Phylogenetic tree of MEPE intronic regions. Phylogenetic depiction of the MEPE intronic region tree reconstructed using Bayesian
inference (Bayes), Maximum Likelihood (ML) and Neighbor-Joining (NJ) algorithms. The labels are positioned near the branches supporting the
tree and inside the brackets (Bayes/ML/NJ). The methodology was similar to the implemented in the coding regions. The alignment of the
intronic regions comprehends 856 out of 21120 sites completely clean of gaps in all the species (except for the Macaca mullata since the
intronic regions was not available).

slightly above 7 in Passeriformes. These differences in pI
may have dramatic effects on the protein folding, as
those changes are caused by significant differences in the
polarity of the amino acids that compose the protein.
Functional motifs

The cell attachment region, RGD, situated near the center
of the MEPE protein, is fully conserved in 20 of the 26
mammalian species (Figure 2). However, some changes
are observed in Tursiops truncatus, Procavia capensis, the
bats Pteropus vampyrus and Myotis lucifugus, and in the
rodents Dipodomys ordii and Spermophilus tridecemlineatus (Figure 2) and it is likely that such amino acids changes
in the RGD motif may have functional relevance. Moreover, the RGD motif is also present in other genes of this
gene-cluster family.

The SDGD is completely conserved among all the mammals, reinforcing the premise that this peptide region is,
along with RGD, important to the MEPE function. These
two motifs constitute the dentonin region, which was not
detected in any of the others members of the SIBLING
protein family. The chicken and the turkey MEPE orthologues appear to be exceptions, since they do not have the
cell-adhesion motif, RGD, but contain the glycosaminoglycan-binding motif, SGDG. In these species we found a
HGD near the SGDG motif, suggesting that RGD is
replaced by HGD (Additional file 4: Figure S2). A similar
change from RGD has been described in other members
of the DSPP orthologues (e.g. in rat, Rattus norvegicus, the
RGD replaces the HGD) [38]. Nevertheless, in zebra finch
(T. guttata) we found the RGD motif but not the SGDG
region (Additional file 4: Figure S2). The ASARM motif is

Machado et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:342
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/342

Page 8 of 23

Figure 6 MEPE isoelectric points (pI) calculated for the 26 mammalian and 3 avian species. The red shadow represents the acid pI while
the blue the basic pI, the grey shadow shows the nearly neutral proteins, from 6.5 to 7.5.

highly conserved within the 21 mammals for which
ASARM is annotated (average above 85%), although the
Bottlenose dolphin (Tursiops truncatus) has a similarity of
only 59.1%. Pairwise similarity among birds was 79.9%

(among the three avian species), but on average only
27.3% similarity was observed between birds and the
mammalian ASARM. Moreover, in birds this motif is
capped at the C-terminal by 21 (G. gallus, M. gallopavo)

Machado et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:342
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/342

to 24 (T. guttata) amino acids, and this region shows
77.2% similarity between G. gallus and M. gallopavo but
less than 40% between these two species and T. guttata,
showing that this region in birds is probably less constrained than the ASARM.
Rodentia and Scandentia selection signatures

The saturation plots (Figure 7A and 7B) showed that the
rodents and the tree shrew have accumulated a very
high number of transitions and transversions relative to
other mammalian species (also apparent in the long
branches of those species in the phylogenetic tree; Figure 3). Saturation of synonymous mutations can bias the
analysis of positive selection due to an underestimation
of dS that will increase ω [39]. Therefore, these species
have been excluded from the codon and amino acid
properties selection analyses (site models). When we
grouped rodents and the tree shrew, and compared
them with the other mammals, the Relative Ratio Test
(RRT) [40] showed that MEPE accumulated more mutations in the orders Rodentia and Scandentia (Table 1),
with an average number of synonymous substitutions of
0.635 and non-synonymous substitutions of 0.304, in
contrast with the other mammalian species with 0.527
and 0.235, respectively (both analyses being highly significant; p < 0.025). The tree shrew and the rodents
compared with the others mammals, had a higher GC
percentage (49.9% versus 44.9%, respectively). This
shows that Rodentia and Scandentia have accumulated
more synonymous and non-synonymous substitutions
(Figure 7C), which is consistent with the phylogenetic
analyses that suggest that the rodents and the tree
shrew have an accelerated rate of evolution.
To evaluate if orders Rodentia and Scandentia have different sites under positive selection we compared the
branch-site model A using the rodents (5 sequences) and
tree shrew (1 sequence) as the foreground branch versus
the other mammals as background branch (Additional file
5: Table S3). The rodents had 12 sites under positive selection, with four of these being highly significant (PP > 0.95)
after the Bayes Empirical Bayes (BEB) analysis; 42-Tyr,
158-Lys, 239-Gly, 247-Asp (using the Mus musculus protein as reference). The likelihood ratio test (LRT) demonstrated that the branch-site analysis was statistically
significant (p < 0.04). Sliding window analysis using the
Nei-Gojobori method also presented significant differences
in the sites/regions under positive selection between the
rodents/tree shrew and the other mammals (Figure 8).
When we applied a window = 15 and step = 9, the rodents
and the tree shrew showed eight regions with a dN/dS > 1,
while the others species had only two regions > 1, suggesting that the rodents not only present an accelerated rate
of evolution but also exhibited a different selection pattern
in the protein (Figure 8).

Page 9 of 23

Selection signatures at the codon level

The codeml test implemented in PAML was used to compare five different nested models in two situations, i.e.
including or excluding the ambiguity data in the alignment. The MEPE protein had a global dN/dS ratio of
0.462, with 75 sites under negative selection and 17 sites
under positive selection (Model 8 not removing the ambiguity data). When ambiguous data was removed the LRT’s
for the nested models, M1-M2, was rejected (Table 2), so
the results of positive selection for M2 were not taken into
account. In the LRT comparison between the more parameter-rich nested pairs of models (M8-M7), twice the loglikelihood difference was 7.1717(Table 2), rejecting M7
and favoring M8 (Chi-square df = 2; p < 0.05). Under M8,
87% of the sites fit the b distribution (1.584- 2.275), but
13% of the sites had a ω1 = 1.30. For posterior probabilities
of ω > 1 using BEB with M8 vs. M7, nine sites were under
positive selection (Table 2). However, none of these sites
passed the stringent criterion of statistical significance PP
> 0.95 (using the method BEB as the statistical post-analysis). Additionally, the LRT between the M8 and the alternative null model M8a was 1.95, below the critical value
(2.71 at p < 0.05), and therefore not favoring the evolutionary model. However, it has been shown that in some
cases this alternative LRT test has less power when the
category of positively selected sites has a ω value that is
only slightly larger than one [41].
The evaluation of positive selection using the model
implemented in Single Likelihood Ancestor Counting
(SLAC) showed three sites under selection, one of those
sites being similar to that retrieved with model M8 in
PAML. Since SLAC tends to be quite conservative, we
also estimated the selection signatures using the Fixed
Effects Likelihood (FEL) model, which is assumed to be
more powerful than SLAC [42,43]. The FEL model
revealed a total of 23 sites under selection using this
model, including a mutation in the highly conserved small
peptide ASARM (from aspartate to glicine) (Figure 2).
Such a radical change in ASARM was only observed in a
few species and further studies are needed to better document its frequency across mammals. All the sites presented in the model implemented in Datamonkey have a
significance value (p < 0.10) in FEL and SLAC, which is an
accepted level of significance for the test of those models
[42]. When we use a significance threshold of 0.05, the
number of positive selected amino acids decreased to 14
in FEL and zero in SLAC, meaning that 9 sites (out of the
23 detected with a significance level of 0.10) had less evidence of being under strong positive selection. However,
these positions may still be indicative of selection signatures. Recombination can affect several analyses, including
phylogenetic reconstruction and analysis of positive selection [44]. Therefore, we assessed gene recombination
using GARD implemented in the Datamonkey web-based

Machado et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:342
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/342

Page 10 of 23

Figure 7 Accumulation of saturation and altered evolutionary rate in Rodentia and Scandentia compared with other mammals. (A)
Nucleotide saturation plots excluding rodents and the tree shrew, showing transitions (S) and transversions (V) accumulated in the third
position; and the same analysis (B) including the rodents and the tree shrew (C) Pairwise dN/dS comparison of rodents and the other mammals.

server [43] and repeated the selection analysis including
and excluding recombination in the dataset. Partitioning
the data did not change the conclusions of the positive

selection analyses (data not show), suggesting that recombination is not significantly affecting the MEPE gene
evolution.

Machado et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:342
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/342

Page 11 of 23

Table 1 Results from the RRTree test comparing
substitution rates in Rodentia, Scandentia and the other
mammals
Group

%GC

Ka

Ks

Rodentia and Scandentia (n = 6)

49.9

0.304

0.635

Other Mammals (n = 20)

44.9

0.235

0.527

< 0.01

0.025

p-value

No additional sites were found using the SLR [45], but
six sites under selection in the previous analysis were
also statistically supported. Overall, across MEPE, 32 of
the 525 sites (referenced to the length of the human
MEPE) were under positive selection; additionally six
sites were supported by more than one codon analysis
(9 in PAML, 23 in FEL, 3 in SLAC, and 6 in SLR)
(Additional file 6: Table S4).
Selection at the amino acid level

Selection models that use dN/dS ratios to detect selection are generally not sensitive enough to detect subtle
molecular adaptations [46]. It is therefore necessary to
employ alternative criteria within generally conserved
protein-coding genes or within proteins with strict
motifs intermixed with regions under fast directional
evolution. Therefore, we used TreeSAAP [47], which
evaluates destabilizing radical changes at each site, and
an empirical threshold of change in three properties was
applied as evidence that a site is under positive (or
negative) selection.
At the global protein level, eight of 31 amino acids
properties were under strong positive selection in MEPE
(p < 0.001 for five and p < 0.05 for the remaining three

properties) (Table 3). Remarkably, pI is one of these
eight properties under positive selection in MEPE which
may also explain the high variability in pI observed
across taxa (Figure 6).
At the amino acid site level, MEPE has 181 sites
(33.8%) under positive selection in at least one property.
Although applying the empirical threshold of at least
three properties showing signatures of positive selection
the number of sites is reduced to 41 (7.6%) (Additional
file 7: Table S5). The majority of these 41 sites are
located in the N-terminal region of the protein and the
dentonin region (68% of the positive selected sites). The
alternative calculation method was performed using
CONTEST and estimates of variation in amino acid
charge and volume revealed 79 sites with signatures of
positive selection for at least one of the amino acid
properties (Additional file 8: Table S6). However, after
the Bonferroni and False Discovery Rate (FDR) correction, only one site showed positive selection. This site,
located at position 354 in the alignment (position 349 in
the human sequence), corresponds either to lysine or
glutamate and was not detected by TreeSAAP. The
ancestral protein reconstruction in TreeSAAP, based on
the baseml implemented in PAML, shows that glutamate is present in the common ancestor of nonAfrotheria mammals, suggesting that the radical change
to lysine occurred in Cetartiodactyla, Perissodactyla and
in at least one representative of the Lagomorpha.
Based on selection analyses at the protein level across
MEPE, 42 of the 525 sites (human MEPE as reference)
were under selection at the amino acid level (41
detected with TreeSAAP and 1 with CONTEST).

Figure 8 Differences in the selection pattern in Rodentia and Scandentia compared with other mammals. Sliding window analysis of the
Ka/Ks ratio applying the Nei and Gojobori method for the rodents and tree shrew MEPE compared with the other mammalian species.

Machado et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:342
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/342

Page 12 of 23

Table 2 PAML results of MEPE for the 20 mammalian species (excluding ambiguity data).
Model

Parameters

LnL

Model 0

ω = 0.46086

-7362.999747

Model 1

p0 = 0.63812 p1 = 0.36188

-7308.340814

Model 2

ω0 = 0.27631 ω1 = 1.00000 ω2 = 1.00000
p0 = 0.63812 p1 = 0.27244 p2 = 0.08944

Model 7

p0 = 0.86974 p = 1.58369 q = 2.27462
(p1 = 0.13026) ω1 = 1.29913

LRT

M2 vs M1

0

M8 vs M7

7.1717

p = 1.06299 q = 1.09727

Model 8

-7308.340814

Test

-7306.257659
-7302.671784

Selection at codon and amino acid level

Selection Signatures and the MEPE structure

We found 69 sites with signatures of positive selection,
but there was concordance between codon and amino
acid level methods for only 20 of these (Figure 9). More
conservatively, the number of sites dropped to five if the
most stringent and conservative criterion was used
(requiring three properties under selection at amino
acid level to be concordant with evidence from at least
one codon-based-method).

The MEPE protein belongs to a category of proteins classified as “intrinsically unstructured/natively disordered”,
with 53.8% and 55.8% of the human and the mouse
MEPE constituted by amino acids that are associated
with disorder/unstructured regions, respectively. This is
reinforced given that most of the protein (around 78.8%)
is disordered at a 0.05% false positive rate. Interestingly,
the ASARM motif has a high content of amino acids disorder promoters while the other functional motifs (such
as RGD and SGDG) incorporate regions that are structured (Additional file 11: Figure S3). The protein has a
high percentage of the amino acid aspartate, which characterizes the proteins of the SIBLING family. Given the
importance of disorder/order in MEPE, we analyzed the
implications of selection signatures relative to the protein
structural differences, and found that sites 75-Ser, 127Glu, and 481-Arg (human MEPE as reference) are under
positive selection and have a higher number of nonsynonymous mutations towards codons that encode the
amino acids disorder promoters.
The tertiary structure is similar to another extracellular
matrix protein, anosnim-1 [PDB:1ZLG] with a Root
Mean Square Deviation (RMSD) of 5.06. To determine if
the spatial organization of these sites is associated with
regions of functional importance, we plotted the positively selected sites (supported by at least two different
inference methods) in the tertiary structure (Figure 10).
The sites showing selection signatures in both analyses
are not restricted to any nature of the secondary structure (Figure 11) although most of the sites are located in
random coils. In human MEPE, 69.3% of the amino acids
are predicted to be found within random coils, but when
this analysis is restricted to the 69 sites under positive
selection (retrieved considering either the codon or
amino acid level method) the percentage increases to
71%. Of the 20 sites under selection (concordant sites
retrieved simultaneously with codon and amino acid level
methods) the percentage increases to 75%. This shows
that the sites comprehending the random coils tend to
have higher chances of being under selection. Similarly,

Directed evolution analysis (DEPS)

MEPE evolution has disproportionally accumulated serines, threonines (potential phosphorylation target residues), arginines, alanines and valines, as all these amino
acids showed directional evolution in the DEPS analysis
(with a P-value < 0.01) (Additional file 9: Table S7). The
MEPE protein had 14 sites under directional selection
(Additional file 10: Table S8), seven of which are amino
acids that tend to increase the disorder/unstructured
probability of the regions. Additionally, eight of these 14
sites had a tendency to change to amino acids that are
potentially phosphorylated residues, particularly at positions 496 and 503 (505 and 512 positions in the alignment), since these sites are relatively near the ASARM
motif and the cleavage site by cathepsin-B.

Table 3 MEPE properties under positive selection
determined in TreeSAAP
Property

Category

Z-Score

Compressibility

7

3.783***

Equilibrium constant (ionization of COOH)

8

3.236***

Isoelectric point

8

3.418***

Power to be at the C-terminal
Power to be at the middle of alpha-helix

7
7

1.926*
3.757***

Power to be at the N-terminal

8

2.373**

Solvent accessible reduction ratio

7

3.953***

Turn tendencies

7

2.307*

List of properties under selection, the impact category and the level of
significance (*** p < 0.001; ** p < 0.01; * p < 0.05).

Machado et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:342
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/342

Page 13 of 23

Figure 9 Amino acids in the same evolutionary positions showing strong signatures of selection at the amino acids and the
nucleotide level. Sites under positive selection confirmed by the different models used in this study for the dataset of 20 species (excluding
rodents). The sites were numbered according to the Homo sapiens position [EMBL:ENST00000361056]. The results for SLAC, FEL, PAML (Model 8),
TreeSAAP (at least one property under selection) and SLR are marked with a black box in the sites showing positive selection. The sites with
more than three properties under selection in TreeSAAP are marked with a white plus symbol. The background colors represent the amino acids
properties: polar positive (blue), polar negative (red and green), non-polar aliphatic (yellow), and P and G (pink).

the sites under positive selection tend to be in disordered
regions, as 78.8% of the MEPE protein was “intrinsic disordered”. Of sites under selection in both analyses
(codon and amino acid level), 90% were in disordered
regions compared with 80% when considering all the
sites under selection in at least one of the analyses. From
the 20 sites under strong positive selection (concordant
sites in both codon and amino acid level methods), 10
were solvent accessible, four were buried and the remaining six were in an intermediate category of neither buried
nor exposed (Figure 12). Estimates of protein stability
revealed 11 sites of human MEPE with sequence optimality values (Γ) less than -5 kcal/mol at positions 135, 166,
188, 195, 266, 301, 341, 366, 422, 444, and 446. While
none of those sites correspond to a site with a signature
of positive selection, when the Γ empirical cut-off is
reduced to -2 kcal/mol the number of sites with a nonoptimal state increases to 75. Of these, three sites are
under positive selection based on both codon and amino
acid analyses, and 11 of these sites show evidence of

being under positive selection at either the codon or
amino acid level.

Discussion
MEPE in the Tetrapods

Given the absence of the MEPE gene in fishes and
amphibians, its origin likely coincides with the divergence
of amniotes, when mineralization [11,48] and phosphate
regulation [49] had a crucial role in species survival and
diversification. SPP1 diverged from SPARCL1 (secreted
protein acidic cysteine-rich like 1) and both are expressed
in bone, participating in the bone formation (as an inhibitor of mineralization in SPP1) [50]. Therefore, the presence of SPP1 in fishes with a broader tissue expression
pattern [51] suggests that SPP1 might also have similar
functions to MEPE. Remarkably, after duplication, the
genes were conserved during evolution and probably
have differentiated to assume various functions related
with tissue mineralization specificity. Recently, it was
proposed that SPP1 is a more-powerful inhibitor of

Machado et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:342
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/342

Page 14 of 23

Figure 10 Tertiary structure of MEPE and the positive selected sites. The sites showing positive selection in at least two different analyses
(purple sticks, three letters amino acid code) and the sites clustered showing positive selection in at least one analysis (close up circles, one
letter amino acid code). The principal domains, RGD, SGDG and ASARM are also expanded and circled, as are the three “new” motifs (SEASEN,
LNXEXS and ENT) showing positive selection. The secondary structure obtained is defined according to the code of colors described in the
picture.

mineralization than MEPE [52]. This suggests that after
the emergence of the complete SIBLING family in vertebrates, some functions were possibly shared among
genes, notably because MEPE is absent in fishes.
The MEPE gene has similarities with other SIBLING
genes, suggesting that it originated through a duplication
event from another member of the gene family [5], but different dynamics of gene duplication and gene loss have
occurred among lineages (e.g. absence of MEPE - Figure
1). The five genes of the SIBLING family are present in
therian mammals and reptiles, but birds only have four
genes (IBSP, SPP1, DMP1 and MEPE/OC-116), while fish
only have two genes (SPP1 and DSPP-like). The DSPP
orthology in fishes is controversial [51]. However, despite
the low similarity, DSPP starmaker was identified as a
functional orthologue [31] clearly associated with DSPP
[32]. The presence/absence of various SIBLING family
genes in vertebrates suggests that despite the crucial role
of MEPE in mammals, birds and reptiles, its function may
have been compensated in other taxa by other genes of
the family. For example, in fishes a duplicated copy of
SPP1 has not been described, suggesting that the fish
SPP1 orthologue may have had a similar function to
MEPE since SPP1 and MEPE, interact with PHEX [52].
The release of the ASARM from the MEPE protein and
the phosphorylation of this motif lead to an inhibition of
mineralization [48]. Similarly, the ASARM from SPP1
inhibit the mineralization [52]. Moreover, the ASARM
from SPP1 is potentially phosphorylated and can interact

with the hydroxyapatite crystals leading to a negative regulation of mineralization [52]. Although SPP1 has an
ASARM motif near the center of the molecule, it does not
have the full dentonin region (just the RGD motif). Moreover, the SPP1-ASARM has been described as a morepotent mineralization inhibitor than the MEPE-ASARM
[52]. However, the knockouts of SPP1 and MEPE in mice
have different phenotypes. MEPE knockouts have
increased bone mass and inhibition of age-related bone
loss [11] while SPP1 knockouts cause a resistance to bone
loss and trabecular bone mass [53].
Functional Conservation

The functional motifs of MEPE (RGD, SGDG and
ASARM) are highly conserved among the studied mammals. In the SIBLING proteins the first coding exon
encodes the signal peptides [4,54], as is observed in
MEPE. The RGD motif is a common feature of all member of the SIBLING family, remaining functionally preserved after the tandem duplication that gave rise to all
the members of this gene family [4]. Surprisingly, birds
do not have a complete dentonin region (RGD and
SGDG), although the high conservation observed among
mammals suggests that this region has an important role
in the function of the protein. In fact, in mammals the
gene function apparently depends on the full dentonin
region, as the RGD motif alone does not enhance an
optimal adhesion on biomaterial surfaces in osteoblast
[55]. However, when SGDG is close to RGD the

Machado et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:342
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/342

Page 15 of 23

Figure 11 MEPE sequence optimality scores and the secondary structure. The sequence optimality scores (Γ) obtained in the Human MEPE,
with the pink bars highlighting the sites under selection retrieved in both codon and amino acid level analyses and the yellow bars representing
the sites showing selection in just one analysis (either codon or amino acid level methods). The secondary structure is represented in the top of
the graph, with the nature represented: blue - random coil, green - b-Strand and red - helices.

Machado et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:342
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/342

Page 16 of 23

Figure 12 Exposure of residues to the exterior of the MEPE protein. Plot of the ASA ratio calculated between the side-chain and the
‘random coil’ value of each residue. Sites with a ratio above 50% (yellow box) are considered to be exposed to the outside of the protein
whereas sites under 20% are considered to be buried (pink box). Sites under positive selection in both gene and protein-level analyses are
marked with the red dots (double) and sites showing selection in at least one of the analysis is represented as black dots (single).

mitogenic activity of dentonin increases, while the presence of only the SGDG motif promotes the cell proliferation [56]. In mammals, MEPE is involved in bone
formation and osteoblast proliferation [19,56], while in
birds it is involved in egg-shell formation [57]. This functional divergence may explain the sequence differences
observed between the two lineages, particularly reinforced by the absence of the full dentonin region in birds.
The ASARM motif is also highly conserved among mammals, but shares less than 50% similarity with the avian
ASARM. Moreover, we have not detected a similar cathepsin-B cleavage site near avian MEPE-ASARM and this
motif is capped at the C-terminal by 21 to 24 amino
acids. Amino acids towards the C-terminal after the
ASARM motif are also observed in marsupials [25].
Despite the lower similarity with the mammalian
ASARM and its different position, the high conservation
within birds suggests that this motif continues to have a
crucial role. The changes are probably not due a relaxation of selection, but instead may have an adaptive role.
In mammals, the cathepsin-B cleavage site is crucial for

the function of MEPE, since this small peptide only interferes with hydroxyapaptite crystals when released [17].
Therefore, birds are also expected to have a mechanism
for cleavage of ASARM. MEPE has not yet been annotated in a monotremata, no significant matches were
found in a representative species of this group, the platypus (Ornithorhynchus anatinus). Nevertheless, the discovery of this gene in egg-laying mammals would be of
great relevance to understanding the functional differences between mammals and birds.
The coding region of MEPE that flank the motifs
described above is less conserved, but retain considerable
phylogenetic signal across species. The human MEPE
sequence has a high similarity with the great apes and
with the genus Macaca (Cercophitecidae), even in the
non-coding regions (M. mulatta). To a lesser degree,
human MEPE also has some significant similarities in the
non-coding regions with the genes of the lower primates
(M. murinus and O. garnetti). MEPE appears to be particularly conserved among primates, in both coding and
non-coding regions. The intronic conservation could

Machado et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:342
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/342

provide valuable information about the role of non-coding sequences in the regulation/functionality of this gene.
Despite the accelerated evolution in rodents, intronic
conservation allowed us to reconstruct a well-supported
species phylogeny from intronic sequences (even including the rodents sequences) with similar results as those
obtained from MEPE coding regions.
Several human diseases increase MEPE expression
[7,14,58], which may imply functional constraints in the
gene even at the intronic level. Previous studies have
demonstrated that highly conserved intronic regions are
correlated with functional constraints and can be evidence of a hidden class of abundant regulatory elements
[59]. Recently, a SNP in the region 7 kb 3’ of the gene
was associated with osteoporosis, a disease characterized
by reduced bone mass and microarchitectural deterioration of bone tissue that reduces bone strength and leads
to an increased risk of fracture [60]. These findings suggest that intergenic regions can also be important in gene
function and may cause significantly different phenotypes. We hypothesize that intronic regions can also lead
to significant differences at the expression level and ultimately to differences in phenotypes. This is consistent
with our findings that there are strong evolutionary constraints in the MEPE intronic region.
Selection signatures and conservation

Within mammals, MEPE in rodents is evolving faster,
presenting a high amount of transitions and transversions. A similar trend is also observed in the tree shrew
T. belangeri. However, since we only had one MEPE
sequence from the order Scandentia we were unable to
infer if this pattern is species-specific or if it is typical of
this order. The increased number of substitutions in
rodents was expected as previous studies have shown
that rodents tend to accumulate more mutations in the
coding regions [24,61]. We hypothesize that the observed
differences in these two orders have resulted from either
a divergent functional role or simply a relaxation in Darwinian selection. It is not known if the function of the
rodent MEPE is similar to that in humans [62], but all
the functional motifs are conserved and the signatures of
positive selection or the differences observed were only
detected outside of these important motifs. It is clear that
positive selection may have an important role in the
functional divergence of homologous proteins during
adaptation to different habitats [63]. Indeed, selection
may be episodic as positive and negative selection shifts
over time across different lineages, reinforcing the importance of comparing sequences that have diverged within
appropriate time frames [64]. The branch-site model,
using rodents as foreground branches and allowing ω
ratio variation not only between the branches but also
among sites, identified 12 sites with strong signatures of

Page 17 of 23

positive selection. This suggests that the rodents and
probably Scandentia may have lineage-specific selection
differences in MEPE, not only in the magnitude of the
selective pressure found in the branch, but also in the
number of sites under selection. The acceleration of the
substitution rates in rodents and the tree shrew potentially compromises the assessment of positive selection
by increasing the number of synonymous mutations and
because this heterogeneous site selection is observed in
only two of the eight orders evaluated (i.e. Rodentia and
Scandentia). The results may also be biased by the mixing
of species with long and short generation times [61], as
well as the related long-branch-attraction effect in phylogenetic reconstruction. Therefore, we did not include the
rodents and the tree shrew in the site analysis.
The evolutionary analyses of mammalian MEPE
codons (excluding the rodents and the tree shrew)
found 32 sites under positive selection at codon level,
and remarkably three were in functional regions of the
protein, positions 6-Val and 11-Phe (Signal Peptide) and
position 517-Gly (ASARM motif) (Figure 2).
Recent methods for investigating selection in protein
coding genes have focused on evaluating the type of positive selection detected (directional or nondirectional, stabilizing or destabilizing), determining the presence of
purifying selection, and interpreting how selection affects
overall protein structure and function. Amino acid substitutions have different effects on a protein depending on
differences in physicochemical properties and their position in the protein structure [65]. Here, we performed
multiple analyses to differentiate among the different types
of selective pressures acting in MEPE at the amino acid
level. The evaluation of the amino acid physiochemical
properties changes in the mammalian MEPE identified 37
more sites (36 using TreeSAAP and one using CONTEST)
with selection signatures compared with the results
retrieved using codon models. This shows that total reliance on models based on dN/dS using codon models may
not detect some important sites with signatures of selection, often because a single adaptive mutation may occur
in a small number of species, resulting in an omega lower
than one. By contrast, these could also primarily be amino
acid stabilizing rather than destabilizing changes, and a
ω > 1 may not always be indicative of adaptive evolution.
Combining all the selection analyses, we found 69
amino acids with evidence of positive selection (20 wellsupported by both codon and amino acid level
approaches) (Additional file 12: Figure S4). Three clusters of positively selected sites revealed three new motifs
that likely have a functional role, SEASEN (75-80),
LNXEXS (96-101) and ENT (170-172) (Figure 10), using
the human protein as site reference.
Selection analysis of MEPE in TreeSAAP using amino
acid destabilizing properties revealed that the structural

Machado et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:342
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/342

properties tend to be more affected by positive selection
than the chemical properties. This suggests that the flexible and intrinsically unstructured nature of MEPE is
linked to its multiple biological roles. The ASARM
motif shows a “high tendency” to be a “disordered
region and highly acidic”, although the conformation of
ASARM should be dependent on the phosphorylation
level [66]. The ability to bind to hidroxyapatite is also
correlated with phosphorylation state and PHEX cleavage
of MEPE is dependent on the Serine phosphorylation status [8]. Moreover, our results shows that the protein
tends to accumulate numerous residues with potential
phosphorylation sites and this can be important to the
folding/function of the protein. Proteins fold to minimize
their free energy, although the structure also reflects an
organization that can allow the recognition of a ligand or
a transition state [67]. In fact, there is a balance between
protein function and stability, and most of functional
sites are non-optimal in terms of stability. If a residue is
replaced by another residue, the protein activity will be
reduced but the stability will be increased [67]. In MEPE
we detected 75 sites with a Γ lower than -2 kcal/mol,
indicating that a large number of sites in MEPE are nonoptimal and therefore possibly involved in protein function. Moreover, 13 of those sites showed signatures of
selection in one analysis, and sites 55, 127 and 276 in
both codon and amino acid level analyses. Proteins have
different secondary-structures and physicochemical properties and roles that help determine their evolutionary
flexibility [68]. Thus, amino acids that comprise disordered regions, such as random coils, are more likely to be
under positive selection than expected from their proportion in the proteins, compared with the residues in
helices and b-structures which are subjected to less positive selection [68]. Indeed, when we compare the evidence of positive selection with the protein secondary
structure in MEPE we observed that the number of sites
under selection in the random coils and disordered
regions are slightly higher than expected. This suggests
that a high number of sites probably have a functional
role or are at least relevant to an increase in MEPE protein flexibility.
Presently, most of the research on MEPE has centered
on the biological role of the RGD and ASARM regions.
However, our comparative study of mammalian MEPE
orthologues revealed that the protein has lineage-specific
properties (e.g. biochemical, evolutionary rate, intronic
conservation), and that outside these two well-described
motifs there are 69 sites (20 with high confidence level)
under positive selection and of probable functional relevance. As positively selected sites might be either near
catalytically important regions of the proteins [69] or be
functionally relevant sites [70,71], these sites are good
candidates for mutagenesis and structural studies to

Page 18 of 23

determine the functionality of MEPE relative with the
other SIBLING proteins.

Conclusions
MEPE is found in reptiles, birds and mammals (eutheria
and metatheria), and to date has not been identified in
monotremes. The description and study of MEPE in
other taxonomic groups will be crucial to fully understanding the differences reported in avian and mammalian orthologues, and the adaptive significance of these
differences. The absence of this gene in some vertebrate
lineages suggests that SPP1 might partially cover the
functions of MEPE in those groups. MEPE retains a
strong phylogenetic signal at both coding and non-coding
regions in mammals, probably due to in the functional
relevance of these regions. Nevertheless, the gene is
highly variable, particularly in the largest exon outside
the functional motif, while other regions appear to be
under strong positive selection. We found 20 sites with a
significant signature of positive selection at both nucleotide and amino acid level complimentary analyses (in
addition to other 69 sites with evidence of selection at
either the nucleotide or the amino acid level). The analyses identified three motifs (LNXEXS, SEASEN and
ENT) with selection signatures suggesting important
adaptive functions. We also showed that Rodentia and
Scandentia have an accelerated evolutionary rate with a
unique evolutionary pattern. Finally, we showed that
MEPE tends to accumulate amino acids that promote
“disorder” and that present potential phosphorylation targets, supporting the contention that other regions outside
the dentonin and ASARM might have crucial functional
roles and demonstrating the need for future studies to
understand the importance of these regions.
Methods
Comparative genomic analyses

MEPE nucleotide sequences were retrieved from GenBank
and ENSEMBL. We aligned 26 MEPE sequences representing eight orders of mammalian species and produced
two different alignments, one including all species and
another excluding rodents and the tree shrew due to its
nucleotide saturation bias. Given the low similarity
between the avian and the mammalian sequences, the
avian sequences were excluded from phylogenetic and
selection analyses. BLAST searches were used to retrieve
non-annotated sequences from several mammalian genomes. All the alignments were performed after the translation of nucleotides to amino acids and the corresponding
alignments were back-translated to nucleotides. The alignment were performed in ClustalW [72] implemented in
BIOEDIT v7.05 [73], MEGA4 [74] and LAGAN [75]. Sliding-window percent amino acid and nucleotide identity,
and % GC content were calculated in Swaap 1.0.3 [76].

Machado et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:342
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/342

Saturation plots (including or excluding the third-coding
position) and the estimated pI (excluding indels) were
assessed in DAMBE [77]. Conservation in the coding and
the non-coding regions was assessed using mVISTA [78].
Phylogenetic analyses

We used Modelgenerator version 0.85 [79] to determine
the optimal model of sequence substitution for our protein
dataset, employing the Jones-Taylor-Thornton (JTT+I+G)
substitution model. MrModeltest 2.3 [80] was employed
to determine the optimal model of sequence substitution
for our coding sequence dataset, employing the GeneralTime-Reversible (GTR+I+G) substitution model with the
invariant site plus gamma options (five categories). Bayesian inference methods with Markov chain Monte Carlo
(MCMC) sampling were performed in MrBayes [81,82].
The analysis was run for 5, 000, 000 generations with a
sample frequency of 100 and burn-in was set to correspond to 25% of the sampled trees. The Maximum-Likelihood (ML) phylogenetic tree was constructed in PHYML
[83], under the best-fit model for nucleotides and amino
acids, 1000 bootstrap replicates and the NNI branch
search algorithm. The parameters used in the tree reconstructions were set to: (i) Nucleotides: GTR+I+G with 6
substitution rate parameters and gamma-distributed rate
variation with a proportion of invariant sites; (ii) Amino
acids: JTT+I+G. A neighbor-joining tree was conducted in
MEGA 4 [74] using the complete deletion of ambiguous
data and the maximum composite likelihood option. The
topologies were tested in TREE-PUZZLE [84] to identify
the tree that best fits the alignment, using three tests: KH,
SH and ELW. A phylogenetic signal test was performed in
TREE-PUZZLE [84] using the implemented methodology
[85].
Detection of positive selection
Gene-level analyses

Positive selection analyses were performed in the Eutherian mammals (the closely-related taxa) to avoid nucleotide
saturation and base-compositional bias. We assessed positive selection using primarily a gene-level approach [65]
based on the ratio (ω) of nonsynonymous (dN) to synonymous (dS) substitutions rate (i.e., ω = dN/dS), implemented in PAML v4.3 [86] and in the web-based program
SELECTON [87,88], PAML uses LRT to compare two
nested models, a model that does not allow, and a model
that allows, sites categories > 1 (null versus positive selection, respectively). Here, we used three LRTs based on
site-specific models comparing the nested models: M1aM2a, M7-M8 and M8a-M8. The first LRT was performed
comparing M1a (nearly neutral: p0, p1, ω0 < 1, ω1 = 1, NS
sites = 1) against M2a (positive selection: p0, p1, p2, ω0 <
1, ω1 = 1, ω2 < 1, NSsites = 2); the second LRT was comparing M7 (beta: p, q, NS sites = 7) with M8 (beta & ω:

Page 19 of 23

p0, p1, p, q, ωs > 1, NS sites = 8). The third LRT was
between M8a (beta & ωs = 1: fix omega = 1, omega = 1,
NS sites = 8) and M8. However, a significant LRT only
demonstrated that the selection model is more suitable
than the neutral model; it does not provide any indication
of the sites under selection [89]. This can be accomplished
through an Empirical Bayes (EB) approach to calculate the
posterior probability (PP) that a given site comes from the
class with ω > 1. Sites presenting a PP above the defined
cut-off value (e.g. p > 95%) [90] are inferred to be under
positive selection. A robust method was used to accommodate the uncertainties in the MLEs of parameters in the
ω distribution, designated by BEB [90]. This approach was
shown to be reliable in both small and large data sets, and
also to have a good resolution power for identifying individual sites under positive selection, especially in large data
sets or with strong selective pressure. We also performed
an analysis using the branch-site model A [91] (model = 2
NSsites = 2), including and excluding the rodents and tree
shrew as foreground branch, allowing the ω ratio vary
both among sites and among lineages. The branch-site
test 2 was performed using the null model, ω2 = 1 fixed
(using the parameters fix omega = 1 and omega = 1). The
sites under selection in the foreground branches were
obtained after calculating probabilities of site classes using
the BEB procedure.
Although the PAML models [86] allow for variation in
the non-synonymous substitution rate, the synonymous
rate is fixed across the sequence. To overcome that specificity, we used SLAC and FEL [92] for detecting positive
selection while allowing variation in synonymous rate.
SLAC is a heavily modified and improved derivative of the
Suzuki-Gojobori counting approach [42,93] that maps
changes in the phylogeny to estimate selection on a siteby-site basis. SLAC calculates the number of non-synonymous and synonymous substitutions that have occurred
at each site using ML reconstructions of ancestral
sequences [42,93]. The FEL model estimates the ratio of
nonsynonymous to synonymous not assuming an a priori
distribution of rates across sites substitution on a site-bysite analysis [93]. The SLAC and FEL methods were implemented using the web interface Datamonkey [94]. Since
recombination in the gene can bias the analysis [44], we
also re-run SLAC and FEL in Datamonkey using the
GARD method [95], allowing each calculated partition to
have its own phylogenetic tree.
Additionally, we used the LRT based analysis as implemented in the SLR (Sitewise Likelihood-Ratio) software
package [45]. This method assumes that substitutions
(both synonymous and non-synonymous) can occur independently with every other site, modulating substitution
rates as a continuous-time Markov process. The LRT on a
site-wise basis is performed testing a null model (neutrality, ω = 1) against an alternative model ω ≠ 1.

Machado et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:342
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/342

Protein-level analyses

We performed multiple analyses to differentiate the different types of selective pressures acting in MEPE: (i) positive
versus negative selection, and (ii) stabilizing (selection that
tends to maintain the overall biochemistry of the protein)
versus destabilizing selection (selection that results in radical structural or functional shifts in local regions of the
protein). These analyses provided insight into the structural and functional consequences of the residues under
selection [46]. We used TreeSAAP v3.2 [47] and CONTEST [96] implemented in IMPACT [97] to detect selection signatures at the amino acid level. In TreeSAAP
positive destabilizing-selection is detected based on the
properties changes with significantly greater amino acid
replacements than would be expected under neutrality for
magnitude categories +7 and +8 (i.e., the two most-radical
property-change categories). Within TreeSAAP, 31 amino
acid properties were evaluated across the phylogenetic tree
to identify the specific amino acid residues within each
region that showed evidence of positive destabilization for
each property. The baseml implemented PAML [86] is
used in TreeSAAP [47] to reconstruct ancestral character
states at the nodes on the MEPE phylogeny.
To test if evolutionary rates varied between lineages
we used the relative-rate test, weighting by the predefined tree topology, as implemented in RRTree [98]. To
detect directional selection over the tree or a large number of substitutions towards a particular residue in a
maximum likelihood context we used the directional
evolution in protein sequences (DEPS) analysis to identify statistically significant directional changes in amino
acid residue frequencies [99].
MEPE Three-Dimensional Structure Modeling

To determine the position of the positive selected amino
acids when the protein is folded, we modeled the threedimensional (3D) structure of MEPE. Protein structure
prediction can be approached in three ways: (i) comparative modeling, (ii) threading, and (iii) ab-initio folding.
For MEPE, the first two methods, which build a protein
model by aligning query sequences onto solved template
structures, were not feasible. Thus, the only practical
strategy was to run the I-TASSER [100] to obtain an abinitio 3D model of MEPE. The model obtained using the
Homo sapiens sequence had a TM Score of 0.46 ± 0.15
and a C-Score = -2.18. To accurately infer the correct
topology, the model should have a C-score above -1.5,
varying from [-5; 2] [100]. A TM score above 0.5 means
that the obtained topology is not random [86]. Results
using the sequences of the rock hyrax (out-group), the
dog (i.e. one of the species showing differences in the pI)
and the mouse (which demonstrates accelerated evolution) all had similar C-scores and the 3D structures similar to the results retrieved for the human MEPE,
suggesting that the biochemical differences in the

Page 20 of 23

composition of the amino acids that constitutes the different orthologues are not imposing significant differences in the folding of the protein.
Structural analyses

To assess the surface exposure of the amino acids in the
protein structure, we used the GETAREA 1.1 [101] webbased program based on the atom coordinates of the
PDB file. This provides an estimate of the solvent exposure based on the ratio of the side-chain surface area to
“random coil” value per residue, performing an analytical
calculation of solvent accessible surface area residues.
These are considered to be solvent exposed if the ratio
value exceeds 50% and to be buried if the ratio is less
than 20% [101]. Since MEPE has been described as an
intrinsic unfolded protein, we also used the Protein DisOrder prediction System (PrDOS) server [102] to predict
natively disordered regions of a protein chain based on
the composition of the amino acid sequence. Protein stability was calculated with the PoPMuSiC 2.1 web server
[103] using the MEPE PDB file previously obtained in ITASSER to calculate the sites Γ considering all the possible mutations in each site. The secondary structure was
visualized in POLYVIEW [104].

Additional material
Additional file 1: Table S1. List of species used for the evolutionary
genomic analyses.
Additional file 2: Table S2. Tree topology and phylogenetic signal tests.
Additional file 3: Figure S1. Conserved Non Coding Sequences in the
26 mammalians.
Additional file 4: Figure S2. Alignment of Homo sapiens sequence with
the three birds in the present study.
Additional file 5: Table S3. Positive selection in branch-site model
using rodents as foreground branch.
Additional file 6: Table S4. The sites showing positive selection at
codon level.
Additional file 7: Table S5. The sites showing positive selection in
TreeSAAP.
Additional file 8: Table S6. The sites showing positive selection in
CONTEST.
Additional file 9: Table S7. Amino acids showing directional evolution
in MEPE.
Additional file 10: Table S8. MEPE protein sites showing directional
evolution.
Additional file 11: Figure S3. “Disordered” regions in human sequence
identified using PrDOS.
Additional file 12: Figure S4. Alignment of MEPE showing the
functional motif and the amino acids under positive selection.

Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the Portuguese Fundação para a Ciência e a
Tecnologia (FCT) for financial support to JPM (SFRH/BD/65245/2009) and the
project PTDC/BIA-BDE/69144/2006 (FCOMP-01-0124-FEDER-007065) and
PTDC/AAC-AMB/104983/2008 (FCOMP-01-0124-FEDER-008610). This work
was further supported by a grant from Iceland, Liechtenstein and Norway

Machado et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:342
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/342

through the EEA Financial Mechanism and the Norwegian Financial
Mechanism. We thank Siby Philip from LEGE/CIIMAR for discussion and
helpful suggestions. Comments made by the anonymous reviewers
improved a previous version of this manuscript.
Author details
1
CIMAR/CIIMAR, Centro Interdisciplinar de Investigação Marinha e Ambiental,
Universidade do Porto, Rua dos Bragas, 177, 4050-123 Porto, Portugal.
2
Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas Abel Salazar (ICBAS), Universidade do
Porto, Portugal. 3Laboratory of Genomic Diversity, National Cancer Institute,
Frederick, MD 21702-1201, USA. 4Departamento de Biologia, Faculdade de
Ciências, Universidade do Porto, Rua do Campo Alegre, 4169-007 Porto,
Portugal.
Authors’ contributions
JPM performed the phylogenetic, evolutionary and structure-function
analyses and drafted the manuscript. WEJ, SJOB and VV participated in the
drafting and coordination of the study. AA participated in the design,
genetic analyses, drafting and coordination of the study. All authors read
and approved the final manuscript.
Received: 31 March 2011 Accepted: 21 November 2011
Published: 21 November 2011

Page 21 of 23

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.
23.

References
1. Thesleff I: Epithelial-mesenchymal signalling regulating tooth
morphogenesis. J Cell Sci 2003, 116:1647-1648.
2. Butler WT: Dentin matrix proteins. Eur J Oral Sci 1998, 106(Suppl
1):204-210.
3. Chen S, Chen L, Jahangiri A, Chen B, Wu Y, Chuang HH, Qin C,
MacDougall M: Expression and processing of small integrin-binding
ligand N-linked glycoproteins in mouse odontoblastic cells. Arch Oral Biol
2008, 53:879-889.
4. Fisher LW, Fedarko NS: Six genes expressed in bones and teeth encode
the current members of the SIBLING family of proteins. Connect Tissue
Res 2003, 44(Suppl 1):33-40.
5. Kawasaki K, Weiss KM: Evolutionary genetics of vertebrate tissue
mineralization: the origin and evolution of the secretory calcium-binding
phosphoprotein family. J Exp Zool B Mol Dev Evol 2006, 306:295-316.
6. Yamada KM: Adhesive recognition sequences. J Biol Chem 1991,
266:12809-12812.
7. Rowe PS, de Zoysa PA, Dong R, Wang HR, White KE, Econs MJ, Oudet CL:
MEPE, a new gene expressed in bone marrow and tumors causing
osteomalacia. Genomics 2000, 67:54-68.
8. Addison WN, Nakano Y, Loisel T, Crine P, McKee MD: MEPE-ASARM
peptides control extracellular matrix mineralization by binding to
hydroxyapatite: an inhibition regulated by PHEX cleavage of ASARM. J
Bone Miner Res 2008, 23:1638-1649.
9. Ogbureke KU, Fisher LW: SIBLING expression patterns in duct epithelia
reflect the degree of metabolic activity. J Histochem Cytochem 2007,
55:403-409.
10. Argiro L, Desbarats M, Glorieux FH, Ecarot B: Mepe, the gene encoding a
tumor-secreted protein in oncogenic hypophosphatemic osteomalacia,
is expressed in bone. Genomics 2001, 74:342-351.
11. Gowen LC, Petersen DN, Mansolf AL, Qi H, Stock JL, Tkalcevic GT,
Simmons HA, Crawford DT, Chidsey-Frink KL, Ke HZ, et al: Targeted
disruption of the osteoblast/osteocyte factor 45 gene (OF45) results in
increased bone formation and bone mass. J Biol Chem 2003,
278:1998-2007.
12. Petersen DN, Tkalcevic GT, Mansolf AL, Rivera-Gonzalez R, Brown TA:
Identification of osteoblast/osteocyte factor 45 (OF45), a bone-specific
cDNA encoding an RGD-containing protein that is highly expressed in
osteoblasts and osteocytes. J Biol Chem 2000, 275:36172-36180.
13. Rowe PS: The wrickkened pathways of FGF23, MEPE and PHEX. Crit Rev
Oral Biol Med 2004, 15:264-281.
14. De Beur SM, Finnegan RB, Vassiliadis J, Cook B, Barberio D, Estes S,
Manavalan P, Petroziello J, Madden SL, Cho JY, et al: Tumors associated
with oncogenic osteomalacia express genes important in bone and
mineral metabolism. J Bone Miner Res 2002, 17:1102-1110.
15. Gluhak-Heinrich J, Kotha SP, Bonewald LF, Schaffler MB, Harris SE: In-vivo
site-specific correlation of dentin matrix protein 1 (DMPI) and matrix

24.
25.

26.
27.

28.
29.
30.
31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

37.
38.
39.
40.

extracellular phosphoglycoprotein (MEPE) gene expression: Effect of
overload. J Bone Miner Res 2004, 19:S73-S73.
Dobbie H, Shirley DG, Faria NJ, Rowe PS, Slater JM, Unwin RJ: Infusion of
the Bone-Derived protein MEPE causes phosphaturia in rats. J Am Soc
Nephrol 2003, 14:467a-468a.
Rowe PS, Kumagai Y, Gutierrez G, Garrett IR, Blacher R, Rosen D, Cundy J,
Navvab S, Chen D, Drezner MK, et al: MEPE has the properties of an
osteoblastic phosphatonin and minhibin. Bone 2004, 34:303-319.
Rowe PSN, Matsumoto N, Jo OD, Shih RNJ, Roudier M, Harrison J,
Yanagawa N: MEPE-ASARM-peptide associated mineralization defects in
X-linked hypophosphatemic rickets (hyp) is corrected by proteaseinhibitors. J Bone Miner Res 2005, 20:S42-S42.
Hayashibara T, Hiraga T, Yi B, Nomizu M, Kumagai Y, Nishimura R, Yoneda T:
A synthetic peptide fragment of human MEPE stimulates new bone
formation in vitro and in vivo. J Bone Miner Res 2004, 19:455-462.
Waterston RH, Lindblad-Toh K, Birney E, Rogers J, Abril JF, Agarwal P,
Agarwala R, Ainscough R, Alexandersson M, An P, et al: Initial sequencing and
comparative analysis of the mouse genome. Nature 2002, 420:520-562.
Lander ES, Linton LM, Birren B, Nusbaum C, Zody MC, Baldwin J, Devon K,
Dewar K, Doyle M, FitzHugh W, et al: Initial sequencing and analysis of
the human genome. Nature 2001, 409:860-921.
Ohta T: The Nearly Neutral Theory of Molecular Evolution. Annu Rev Ecol
Syst 1992, 23:263-286.
Hasegawa M, Thorne JL, Kishino H: Time scale of eutherian evolution
estimated without assuming a constant rate of molecular evolution.
Genes Genet Syst 2003, 78:267-283.
Wu CI, Li WH: Evidence for higher rates of nucleotide substitution in
rodents than in man. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1985, 82:1741-1745.
Bardet C, Delgado S, Sire JY: MEPE evolution in mammals reveals regions
and residues of prime functional importance. Cell Mol Life Sci 2010,
67:305-320.
Altschul SF, Gish W, Miller W, Myers EW, Lipman DJ: Basic local alignment
search tool. J Mol Biol 1990, 215:403-410.
Hillier LW, Miller W, Birney E, Warren W, Hardison RC, Ponting CP, Bork P,
Burt DW, Groenen MAM, Delany ME, et al: Sequence and comparative
analysis of the chicken genome provide unique perspectives on
vertebrate evolution. Nature 2004, 432:695-716.
Fisher LW: DMP1 and DSPP: Evidence for Duplication and Convergent
Evolution of Two SIBLING Proteins. Cells Tissues Organs 2011, 194:113-118.
Kawasaki K: The SCPP gene repertoire in bony vertebrates and graded
differences in mineralized tissues. Dev Genes Evol 2009, 219:147-157.
Kawasaki K, Weiss KM: SCPP gene evolution and the dental mineralization
continuum. J Dent Res 2008, 87:520-531.
Sollner C, Burghammer M, Busch-Nentwich E, Berger J, Schwarz H, Riekel C,
Nicolson T: Control of crystal size and lattice formation by starmaker in
otolith biomineralization. Science 2003, 302:282-286.
Ramialison M, Bajoghli B, Aghaallaei N, Czerny T, Wittbrodt J: Identification
of Starmaker-Like in Medaka as a Putative Target Gene of Pax2 in the
Otic Vesicle. Dev Dynam 2009, 238:2860-2866.
Perelman P, Johnson WE, Roos C, Seuanez HN, Horvath JE, Moreira MAM,
Kessing B, Pontius J, Roelke M, Rumpler Y, et al: A Molecular Phylogeny of
Living Primates. Plos Genet 2011, 7.
Springer MS, Murphy WJ, Eizirik E, O’Brien SJ: Placental mammal
diversification and the Cretaceous-Tertiary boundary. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 2003, 100:1056-1061.
Nishihara H, Hasegawa M, Okada N: Pegasoferae, an unexpected
mammalian clade revealed by tracking ancient retroposon insertions.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006, 103:9929-9934.
Meredith RW, Janecka JE, Gatesy J, Ryder OA, Fisher CA, Teeling EC,
Goodbla A, Eizirik E, Simao TL, Stadler T, et al: Impacts of the Cretaceous
Terrestrial Revolution and KPg extinction on mammal diversification.
Science 2011, 334:521-524.
Majewski J, Ott J: Distribution and characterization of regulatory
elements in the human genome. Genome Res 2002, 12:1827-1836.
McKnight DA, Fisher LW: Molecular evolution of dentin phosphoprotein
among toothed and toothless animals. Bmc Evol Biol 2009, 9.
Lynn DJ, Lloyd AT, Fares MA, O’Farrelly C: Evidence of positively selected
sites in mammalian alpha-defensins. Mol Biol Evol 2004, 21:819-827.
Muse SV, Gaut BS: Comparing patterns of nucleotide substitution rates
among chloroplast loci using the relative ratio test. Genetics 1997,
146:393-399.

Machado et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:342
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/342

41. Swanson WJ, Nielsen R, Yang Q: Pervasive adaptive evolution in
mammalian fertilization proteins. Mol Biol Evol 2003, 20:18-20.
42. Pond SL, Frost SD: Datamonkey: rapid detection of selective pressure on
individual sites of codon alignments. Bioinformatics 2005, 21:2531-2533.
43. Poon AF, Frost SD, Pond SL: Detecting signatures of selection from DNA
sequences using Datamonkey. Methods Mol Biol 2009, 537:163-183.
44. Anisimova M, Nielsen R, Yang Z: Effect of recombination on the accuracy
of the likelihood method for detecting positive selection at amino acid
sites. Genetics 2003, 164:1229-1236.
45. Massingham T, Goldman N: Detecting amino acid sites under positive
selection and purifying selection. Genetics 2005, 169:1753-1762.
46. McClellan DA, Palfreyman EJ, Smith MJ, Moss JL, Christensen RG,
Sailsbery AK: Physicochemical evolution and molecular adaptation of the
cetacean and artiodactyl cytochrome b proteins. Mol Biol Evol 2005,
22:437-455.
47. Woolley S, Johnson J, Smith MJ, Crandall KA, McClellan DA: TreeSAAP:
selection on amino acid properties using phylogenetic trees.
Bioinformatics 2003, 19:671-672.
48. Rowe PSN, Kumagai Y, Gutierrez G, Garrett IR, Blacher R, Rosen D, Chen D,
Drezner MK, Quarles LD, Mundy GR: MEPE regulates bone mineralization
and phosphate transport: PHEX and the MEPE ASARM-peptide. J Bone
Miner Res 2003, 18:S24-S24.
49. Quarles LD: FGF23, PHEX, and MEPE regulation of phosphate
homeostasis and skeletal mineralization. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab
2003, 285:E1-9.
50. Kawasaki K, Suzuki T, Weiss KM: Genetic basis for the evolution of
vertebrate mineralized tissue. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2004,
101:11356-11361.
51. Kawasaki K, Buchanan AV, Weiss KM: Biomineralization in humans: making
the hard choices in life. Annu Rev Genet 2009, 43:119-142.
52. Addison WN, Masica DL, Gray JJ, McKee MD: Phosphorylation-dependent
inhibition of mineralization by osteopontin ASARM peptides is regulated
by PHEX cleavage. J Bone Miner Res 2010, 25:695-705.
53. Yoshitake H, Rittling SR, Denhardt DT, Noda M: Osteopontin-deficient mice
are resistant to ovariectomy-induced bone resorption. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 1999, 96:8156-8160.
54. Fisher LW, Torchia DA, Fohr B, Young MF, Fedarko NS: Flexible structures
of SIBLING proteins, bone sialoprotein, and osteopontin. Biochem Biophys
Res Commun 2001, 280:460-465.
55. Dee KC, Andersen TT, Bizios R: Design and function of novel osteoblastadhesive peptides for chemical modification of biomaterials. J Biomed
Mater Res 1998, 40:371-377.
56. Liu H, Li W, Gao C, Kumagai Y, Blacher RW, DenBesten PK: Dentonin, a
fragment of MEPE, enhanced dental pulp stem cell proliferation. J Dent
Res 2004, 83:496-499.
57. Hincke MT, Gautron J, Tsang CP, McKee MD, Nys Y: Molecular cloning and
ultrastructural localization of the core protein of an eggshell matrix
proteoglycan, ovocleidin-116. J Biol Chem 1999, 274:32915-32923.
58. Brame LA, White KE, Econs MJ: Renal phosphate wasting disorders:
clinical features and pathogenesis. Semin Nephrol 2004, 24:39-47.
59. Hare MP, Palumbi SR: High intron sequence conservation across three
mammalian orders suggests functional constraints. Mol Biol Evol 2003,
20:969-978.
60. Rivadeneira F, Styrkarsdottir U, Estrada K, Halldorsson BV, Hsu YH,
Richards JB, Zillikens MC, Kavvoura FK, Amin N, Aulchenko YS, et al: Twenty
bone-mineral-density loci identified by large-scale meta-analysis of
genome-wide association studies. Nat Genet 2009, 41:1199-1206.
61. Li WH, Ellsworth DL, Krushkal J, Chang BH, Hewett-Emmett D: Rates of
nucleotide substitution in primates and rodents and the generationtime effect hypothesis. Mol Phylogenet Evol 1996, 5:182-187.
62. Liu S, Wang H, Wang X, Lu L, Gao N, Rowe PS, Hu B, Wang Y: MEPE/OF45
protects cells from DNA damage induced killing via stabilizing CHK1.
Nucleic Acids Res 2009, 37:7447-7454.
63. Levasseur A, Gouret P, Lesage-Meessen L, Asther M, Record E, Pontarotti P:
Tracking the connection between evolutionary and functional shifts
using the fungal lipase/feruloyl esterase A family. Bmc Evol Biol 2006,
6:92.
64. Messier W, Stewart CB: Episodic adaptive evolution of primate lysozymes.
Nature 1997, 385:151-154.

Page 22 of 23

65. Antunes A, Ramos MJ: Gathering computational genomics and
proteomics to unravel adaptive evolution. Evol Bioinform Online 2007,
3:207-209.
66. Martin A, David V, Laurence JS, Schwarz PM, Lafer EM, Hedge AM, Rowe PS:
Degradation of MEPE, DMP1, and release of SIBLING ASARM-peptides
(minhibins): ASARM-peptide(s) are directly responsible for defective
mineralization in HYP. Endocrinology 2008, 149:1757-1772.
67. Shoichet BK, Baase WA, Kuroki R, Matthews BW: A relationship between
protein stability and protein function. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1995,
92:452-456.
68. Ridout KE, Dixon CJ, Filatov DA: Positive selection differs between protein
secondary structure elements in Drosophila. Genome Biol Evol 2010,
2:166-179.
69. Morgan CC, Loughran NB, Walsh TA, Harrison AJ, O’Connell MJ: Positive
selection neighboring functionally essential sites and disease-implicated
regions of mammalian reproductive proteins. Bmc Evol Biol 2010, 10:39.
70. Moury B, Simon V: dN/dS-Based Methods Detect Positive Selection
Linked to Trade-Offs between Different Fitness Traits in the Coat Protein
of Potato virus Y. Mol Biol Evol 2011, 28:2707-2717.
71. Casasoli M, Federici L, Spinelli F, Di Matteo A, Vella N, Scaloni F, FernandezRecio J, Cervone F, De Lorenzo G: Integration of evolutionary and
desolvation energy analysis identifies functional sites in a plant
immunity protein. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2009, 106:7666-7671.
72. Thompson JD, Higgins DG, Gibson TJ: CLUSTAL W: improving the
sensitivity of progressive multiple sequence alignment through
sequence weighting, position-specific gap penalties and weight matrix
choice. Nucleic Acids Res 1994, 22:4673-4680.
73. Hall TA: BioEdit: a user-friendly biological sequence alignment editor and
analysis program for Windows 95/98/NT. Nucleic Acids Symp Ser 1999,
41:95-98.
74. Tamura K, Dudley J, Nei M, Kumar S: MEGA4: Molecular Evolutionary
Genetics Analysis (MEGA) software version 4.0. Mol Biol Evol 2007,
24:1596-1599.
75. Brudno M, Do CB, Cooper GM, Kim MF, Davydov E, Green ED, Sidow A,
Batzoglou S: LAGAN and Multi-LAGAN: efficient tools for large-scale
multiple alignment of genomic DNA. Genome Res 2003, 13:721-731.
76. Pride DT, Blaser MJ: Concerted evolution between duplicated genetic
elements in Helicobacter pylori. J Mol Biol 2002, 316:629-642.
77. Xia X, Xie Z: DAMBE: Software package for data analysis in molecular
biology and evolution. J Hered 2001, 92:371-373.
78. Frazer KA, Pachter L, Poliakov A, Rubin EM, Dubchak I: VISTA:
computational tools for comparative genomics. Nucleic Acids Res 2004, 32:
W273-W279.
79. Keane TM, Creevey CJ, Pentony MM, Naughton TJ, Mclnerney JO:
Assessment of methods for amino acid matrix selection and their use
on empirical data shows that ad hoc assumptions for choice of matrix
are not justified. Bmc Evolutionary Biology 2006, 6.
80. Nylander JAA: MrModeltest v2. Evolutionary Biology Centre, Uppsala
University; 2004, Program distributed by the author.
81. Huelsenbeck JP, Ronquist F: MRBAYES: Bayesian inference of phylogenetic
trees. Bioinformatics 2001, 17:754-755.
82. Ronquist F, Huelsenbeck JP: MrBayes 3: Bayesian phylogenetic inference
under mixed models. Bioinformatics 2003, 19:1572-1574.
83. Guindon S, Delsuc F, Dufayard JF, Gascuel O: Estimating maximum
likelihood phylogenies with PhyML. Methods Mol Biol 2009, 537:113-137.
84. Schmidt HA, Strimmer K, Vingron M, von Haeseler A: TREE-PUZZLE:
maximum likelihood phylogenetic analysis using quartets and parallel
computing. Bioinformatics 2002, 18:502-504.
85. Strimmer K, von Haeseler A: Likelihood-mapping: a simple method to
visualize phylogenetic content of a sequence alignment. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 1997, 94:6815-6819.
86. Yang ZH: PAML 4: Phylogenetic analysis by maximum likelihood. Mol Biol
Evol 2007, 24:1586-1591.
87. Stern A, Doron-Faigenboim A, Erez E, Martz E, Bacharach E, Pupko T:
Selecton 2007: advanced models for detecting positive and purifying
selection using a Bayesian inference approach. Nucleic Acids Res 2007, 35:
W506-W511.
88. Doron-Faigenboim A, Stern A, Bacharach E, Pupko T: Selecton: a server for
detecting evolutionary forces at a single amino-acid site. Bioinformatics
2005, 21:2101-2103.

Machado et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:342
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/342

Page 23 of 23

89. Osorio DS, Antunes A, Ramos MJ: Structural and functional implications of
positive selection at the primate angiogenin gene. Bmc Evol Bio 2007, 7.
90. Yang ZH, Wong WSW, Nielsen R: Bayes empirical Bayes inference of
amino acid sites under positive selection. Mol Biol Evol 2005,
22:1107-1118.
91. Zhang JZ, Nielsen R, Yang ZH: Evaluation of an improved branch-site
likelihood method for detecting positive selection at the molecular
level. Mol Biol Evol 2005, 22:2472-2479.
92. Pond SK, Muse SV: Site-to-site variation of synonymous substitution rates.
Mol Biol Evol 2005, 22:2375-2385.
93. Kosakovsky Pond SL, Frost SD: Not so different after all: a comparison of
methods for detecting amino acid sites under selection. Mol Biol Evol
2005, 22:1208-1222.
94. Pond SL, Frost SD: A genetic algorithm approach to detecting lineagespecific variation in selection pressure. Mol Biol Evol 2005, 22:478-485.
95. Kosakovsky Pond SL, Posada D, Gravenor MB, Woelk CH, Frost SD: GARD: a
genetic algorithm for recombination detection. Bioinformatics 2006,
22:3096-3098.
96. Dutheil J: Detecting site-specific biochemical constraints through
substitution mapping. J Mol Evol 2008, 67:257-265.
97. Maldonado E, Dutheil JY, da Fonseca RR, Vasconcelos V, Antunes A:
IMPACT: integrated multiprogram platform for analyses in ConTest. J
Hered 2011, 102:366-369.
98. Robinson-Rechavi M, Huchon D: RRTree: relative-rate tests between
groups of sequences on a phylogenetic tree. Bioinformatics 2000,
16:296-297.
99. Kosakovsky Pond SL, Poon AF, Leigh Brown AJ, Frost SD: A maximum
likelihood method for detecting directional evolution in protein
sequences and its application to influenza A virus. Mol Biol Evol 2008,
25:1809-1824.
100. Zhang Y: I-TASSER server for protein 3D structure prediction. BMC
Bioinformatics 2008, 9:40.
101. Fraczkiewicz R, Braun W: Exact and efficient analytical calculation of the
accessible surface areas and their gradients for macromolecules. J
Comput Chem 1998, 19:319-333.
102. Ishida T, Kinoshita K: PrDOS: prediction of disordered protein regions
from amino acid sequence. Nucleic Acids Res 2007, 35:W460-464.
103. Dehouck Y, Kwasigroch JM, Gilis D, Rooman M: PoPMuSiC 2.1: a web
server for the estimation of protein stability changes upon mutation
and sequence optimality. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:151.
104. Porollo AA, Adamczak R, Meller J: POLYVIEW: a flexible visualization tool
for structural and functional annotations of proteins. Bioinformatics 2004,
20:2460-2462.
doi:10.1186/1471-2148-11-342
Cite this article as: Machado et al.: Adaptive evolution of the matrix
extracellular phosphoglycoprotein in mammals. BMC Evolutionary Biology
2011 11:342.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
