<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>The elicitation of a systemic resistance by Pseudomonas putida BTP1 in tomato involves the stimulation of two lipoxygenase isoforms</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Plant Biology 2011, 11:29. doi:10.1186/1471-2229-11-29"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Martin Mariutto"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Mariutto et al. BMC Plant Biology 2011, 11:29
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/11/29

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

The elicitation of a systemic resistance by
Pseudomonas putida BTP1 in tomato involves the
stimulation of two lipoxygenase isoforms
Martin Mariutto1†, Francéline Duby1†, Akram Adam2, Charlotte Bureau1, Marie-Laure Fauconnier4, Marc Ongena3,
Philippe Thonart2,3, Jacques Dommes1*

Abstract
Background: Some non-pathogenic rhizobacteria called Plant Growth Promoting Rhizobacteria (PGPR) possess the
capacity to induce in plant defense mechanisms effective against pathogens. Precedent studies showed the ability
of Pseudomonas putida BTP1 to induce PGPR-mediated resistance, termed ISR (Induced Systemic Resistance), in
different plant species. Despite extensive works, molecular defense mechanisms involved in ISR are less well
understood that in the case of pathogen induced systemic acquired resistance.
Results: We analyzed the activities of phenylalanine ammonia-lyase (PAL) and lipoxygenase (LOX), key enzymes of
the phenylpropanoid and oxylipin pathways respectively, in tomato treated or not with P. putida BTP1. The
bacterial treatment did not stimulate PAL activity and linoleate-consuming LOX activities. Linolenate-consuming
LOX activity, on the contrary, was significantly stimulated in P. putida BTP1-inoculated plants before and two days
after infection by B. cinerea. This stimulation is due to the increase of transcription level of two isoforms of LOX:
TomLoxD and TomLoxF, a newly identified LOX gene. We showed that recombinant TomLOXF preferentially
consumes linolenic acid and produces 13-derivative of fatty acids. After challenging with B. cinerea, the increase of
transcription of these two LOX genes and higher linolenic acid-consuming LOX activity were associated with a
more rapid accumulation of free 13-hydroperoxy-octadecatrienoic and 13-hydroxy-octadecatrienoic acids, two
antifungal oxylipins, in bacterized plants.
Conclusion: In addition to the discovery of a new LOX gene in tomato, this work is the first to show differential
induction of LOX isozymes and a more rapid accumulation of 13-hydroperoxy-octadecatrienoic and 13-hydroxyoctadecatrienoic acids in rhizobacteria mediated-induced systemic resistance.

Background
Plants possess a large variety of defense mechanisms to
prevent and fight pathogen attacks: their structural and
chemical, preformed and inducible defense mechanisms
limit the infection. When an avirulent pathogen meets a
resistant plant, cells located around the infection site die
within a few hours of contact. This phenomenon, called
hypersensitive response, may cause damages to the
pathogen and also leads to a mobile signal that will
* Correspondence: J.Dommes@ulg.ac.be
† Contributed equally
1
Laboratory of Plant Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Faculty of
Sciences, Department of Life Sciences, University of Liège, Boulevard du
Rectorat, 27, Liège, Belgium
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

induce defense mechanisms in uninfected parts of the
plant [1]. In a zone of some millimeters around the
hypersensitive response site, cells develop the local
acquired resistance [2], characterized by the reinforcement of the cell wall, synthesis of antimicrobial phytoalexins, and expression of pathogenesis-related (Pr) genes
[3]. At distant sites in the plant, systemic acquired resistance (SAR) is induced [4]. This resistance is associated
with an accumulation of salicylic acid, Prgenes expression and stimulation of many defense pathways [5].
Other kinds of micro-organisms can induce a resistance in plants against diseases: the non-pathogenic rhizobacteria, referred to as plant growth promoting
rhizobacteria (PGPR), can protect plants against pathogens. PGPR can affect pest population by antibiosis,

© 2011 Mariutto et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Mariutto et al. BMC Plant Biology 2011, 11:29
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/11/29

nutrient competition or niche exclusion [6]. In addition
to these direct antagonisms, rhizobacteria can induce a
systemic resistance that makes the plant more resistant
to a future pathogen attack. This long lasting, broad
spectrum resistance, called induced systemic resistance
(ISR) [7], is phenotypically similar to SAR, but molecular events leading to its induction are different. ISR is
not associated with an increase of salicylic acid [8]
neither other hormones but needs the perception to jasmonate and ethylene [9]. Transduction pathway of ISR
and SAR are different but both need the regulatory protein NPR1 [10]. Downstream, the two pathways differ
again because Pr genes are not expressed in ISR [9].
Despite extensive work, the protective mechanisms
involved in ISR are less well understood than those
involved in SAR. In many pathosystems, two defense
pathways are generally associated with the enhanced
protection level conferred by ISR: the phenylpropanoid
pathway and the oxylipin pathway. Bacillus cereus
B101R and B. subtilis AF 1 induce lipoxygenase (LOX)
activity in tomato [11] and groundnut [12] respectively.
This enzyme is a dioxygenase that transforms polyunsaturated fatty acids into hydroperoxides. It catalyses
the first step of the oxylipin pathway. In tomato as in
other angiosperms, lipoxygenase is encoded by a multigene family. TomLoxA, TomLoxB, and TomLoxE are
expressed principally in fruits during ripening [13,14].
TomLoxC is expressed in fruits and leaves, and its products are converted into volatile aldehydes and alcohols
[14] responsible for the characteristic aroma of tomato
plants [15]. TomLoxD expression is stimulated by
wounding, jasmonate, and systemin. This enzyme leads
to the synthesis of defense compounds called octadecanoids [16]. Hydroperoxides are consumed by different
enzymes to generate oxylipins, among which one finds
signal molecules such as jasmonic acid, aldehydes, and
defense metabolites such as hexenal (a volatile), colneleic acid, and colnelenic acid [17].
In Pseudomonas fluorescens WCS417r-inoculated carnation, phytoalexin synthesis is stimulated [7]. In pea
treated with Bacillus pumilus SE34 [18], macroscopic
protection has been linked to reinforcement of the cell
wall by deposition of callose, pectin, and other phenolic
compounds. Trichoderma asperellum T-203 protects
cucumber against Pseudomonas syringae pv. lachrymans
by inducing phytoalexin synthesis through stimulation
of the expression of genes coding for phenylalanine
ammonia-lyase (PAL) and hydroperoxide lyase, an
enzyme of the oxylipin pathway [19]. Lignin and certain
phytoalexins are produced via the phenylpropanoid
pathway. The first step of this pathway is catalyzed
by PAL, which converts phenylalanine to cinnamic
acid, the precursor of lignin, salicylic acid, some pigments such as anthocyanidins, condensed tannins, and

Page 2 of 15

phytoalexin phenylpropanoids [20]. Enzyme stimulation
as part of ISR is generally effective after pathogen infection [9].
Previous studies have shown that P. putida BTP1, a
PGPR strain isolated from a barley field [21], can induce
ISR against Pythium aphanidermatum [22] in cucumber
and against Botrytis cinerea in bean [23] and tomato
[24]. In cucumber, the protection conferred by P. putida
BTP1 is associated with the accumulation, after pathogen inoculation, of fungitoxic phenolics that can be
viewed as phytoalexins. ISR in bean is characterized by
enhanced levels of LOX activity and poly-unsaturated
fatty acids before pathogen challenge, and by stimulation
of hydroperoxide lyase activity and volatile oxylipins
production after pathogen challenge. PAL activity, however, is not stimulated. LOX activity has been shown to
be stimulated in P. putida BTP1-treated tomato plants
after infection, but as these experiments were done on
detached leaves and as LOX activity is stimulated by
wounding [16], the results might be different for whole
plants.
In this work, ISR induced by P. putida BTP1 was studied in whole tomato plants. We showed that the PAL
activity is not induced by the ISR, contrary to the LOX
activity. As LOX is encoded by a multigene family, we
measured the expression levels of five genes to identify
which isoforms might contribute to this increase. We
showed that only two genes participated to this stimulation: TomLoxD and a newly identified gene, TomLoxF.
We cloned and expressed TomLoxF in bacteria to characterize its protein, and showed that the recombinant
TomLOXF preferentially consumed linolenic acid and
introduced oxygen onto the 13 th carbon of the fatty
acid. Finally, we confirmed our results by analyzing the
accumulation of the products of TomLOXF in the plant,
and showed that the 13-hydroperoxy-octadecatrienoic
acid and its reduced form were more abundant in bacterized plants.

Results
Phenylalanine ammonia-lyase is not stimulated in
P. putida BTP1-mediated ISR

PAL activity was quantified before and after pathogen
inoculation in control and bacterized plants, in order to
assess whether this pathway contributes to the enhanced
protection level associated with ISR. No significant difference was detected between control and P. putida BTP1treated plants, either before pathogen challenge or two or
four days after infection (by B. cinerea) (Figure 1).
P. putida BTP1 induces lipoxygenase activity

The linolenic-acid- and linoleic-acid-consuming LOX
activities of treated and untreated plants were monitored
to determine if they are stimulated by P. putida BTP1.

Mariutto et al. BMC Plant Biology 2011, 11:29
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/11/29

Page 3 of 15

Figure 1 Time course of phenylalanine ammonia-lyase (PAL)
activity. The activity was measured in the leaves of control (dotted
line) and P. putida BTP1- treated (continuous line) tomato plants
before (0), two days (+2), and four days (+4) after challenge with
B. cinerea. Statistical analysis (Student’s T test, a = 0.05) revealed that
differences between control and bacterized plants, at the same
infection time, were not significant. Data are means and standard
deviations calculated from three measurements on two enzyme
extracts.

Before infection, as shown in Figure 2, consumption of
linolenic acid by LOX was higher in bacterized plants
than in control plants. The activity increased in
response to infection and two days after pathogen
inoculation, it remained higher in the treated plants.
After four days of infection, the activity difference
was no longer significant (Student’s T test, a = 0,01)
(Figure 2a). In contrast, P. putida BTP1-treated and
control plants showed no significant difference in linoleic acid consumption either before or after inoculation
of B. cinerea (Figure 2b). The linoleic-acid-consuming
LOX activity thus did not seem to be influenced by
infection or by ISR.

Figure 2 Time course of consumption of linolenic (A) and
linoleic (B) acids by LOX. The activities were monitored in control
(dotted line) and P. putida BTP1-treated (continuous line) tomato
leaves. Samples were collected before (0), two days (+2), and four
days (+4) after inoculation of B. cinerea. Stars (*) indicate statistically
significant differences between control and treated plants (Student’s
t test, a = 0,01). Data are means and standard deviations calculated
from three measurements on two enzyme extracts.

Expression of TomLox genes in response to P. putida
BTP1 treatment

To determine which LOX isozyme(s) might be involved
in the LOX activity increase during ISR, we analyzed
TomLox gene expression. During our attempts to clone
a TomLoxC cDNA probe, a 500-bp RT-PCR product
was amplified from total RNA extracted from methyljasmonate-treated tomato leaves. Sequencing of this product revealed that the corresponding cDNA shares 82%
similarity with TomLoxC. Gene-specific primers for 3’
and 5’ rapid amplification of cDNA ends (RACE) were
synthesized on the basis of this sequence. The 5’RACE
and 3’RACE products were amplified from the RNA of
tomato leaves treated with methyljasmonate and from
the RNA of tomato leaves treated with P. putida BTP1.

The sequences of all the overlapping RACE products
were strictly identical (apart from a slight variability
observed at the level of the 5’- and 3’-UTRs), and a fulllength 2837-bp cDNA, called TomLoxF, was identified
(GenBank: FJ617476) (Figure 3). This cDNA sequence
was found to harbor a complete 2,709-bp open reading
frame flanked by a 40-bp 5’-UTR and a 88-bp 3’-UTR.
The first ATG encountered from the 5’-end of the
cDNA was considered to be the start codon of the open
reading frame (a TAA stop codon is located in frame,
9 bp upstream from this ATG). The deduced protein
sequence consists of 903 amino acid residues with a calculated molecular mass of 102.5 kDa. Blastp analysis of

Mariutto et al. BMC Plant Biology 2011, 11:29
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/11/29

Page 4 of 15

Figure 3 Analysis of the amino acid sequence of the tomato lipoxygenase F. A: Deduced amino acid sequence of TomLOXF. The
conserved motives are underlined, and the conserved amino acid residues involved in LOX iron binding, enzymatic activity, and regio-specificity
are in bold. The characters in italics indicate the putative chloroplastic transit peptide identified with ChloroP1.1. Numbers on the righ indicate
the position occupied in the protein sequence by the last amino acid of the line. B: Schematic representation of the PLAT_LH2 domain and of
the LOX domain pfam00305 identified in TomLOXF by the NCBI Conserved Domain Search program.

the deduced TomLOXF amino acid sequence showed
that this protein shares 40 to 79% identity with other
known plant LOX proteins and that it possesses the two
domains that are typically conserved in plant lipoxygenase proteins, the PLAT_LH2 domain (positions 72-206)
and the LOX domain pfam00305 (positions 215-886)
(Figure 3). The plant lipoxygenases most closely related
to TomLOXF are Solanum tuberosum StLOXH1 [25],
Nicotiana attenuata NaLOX2 [26], and Lycopersicon
esculentum TomLOXC [16], sharing respectively 79%,
78%, and 76% identity with TomLOXF at the amino
acid level. In contrast, the predicted amino acid
sequence of TomLOXF displays only 40-49% identity to

other identified tomato lipoxygenases. TomLOXF contains known LOX motifs harboring all the amino acid
residues conserved among plant LOX proteins (His560,
His565, His752, Asn756 and Ile902, Figure 3) and
involved in iron binding and enzyme catalytic activity
[27]. Furthermore, TomLOXF possesses the conserved
Ser/Phe motif (S617 and F618) occurring at the bottom
of the substrate-binding pocket of nearly all plant LOX
enzymes that introduce dioxygen onto the 13th carbon
of the fatty acid (13-LOX) and determining their
regio-specificity [28,29]. A phylogenetic analysis was
performed in order to determine the proximity of TomLOXF to other plant LOX proteins. Multiple sequence

Mariutto et al. BMC Plant Biology 2011, 11:29
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/11/29

alignments were done and an unrooted phylogenetic
tree was constructed (Figure 4). According to the classification of Feussner and Wasternack [28], the tree could
be divided into two major groups. The first group
includes the type 1 lipoxygenases, which are enzymes
harboring no transit peptide and sharing high withingroup sequence similarity. The second group includes
the type 2 lipoxygenases, which carry a putative chloroplast transit peptide sequence and share only moderate
overall within-group sequence similarity. To date, the
type-2 LOX proteins all belong to the 13-LOX subfamily
[28,29]. This group can be further divided into two subgroups. The first includes, among others, AtLOX2 [30],
BoLOX [31], NaLOX3 [26], TomLOXD [16], and
StLOXH3 [25], enzymes shown to be involved in the
wound-induced biosynthesis of jasmonic acid. The second group includes StLOXH1 [25] and TomLOXC [16],
two LOX isoforms playing a key role in the generation

Page 5 of 15

of fatty-acid-derived short-chain volatiles [14,32]. The
topology of the phylogenetic tree clearly shows that
TomLOXF belongs to the type-2 LOX group and that it
is closely related to enzymes producing hydroperoxides
consumed preferentially by hydroperoxide lyase, a
C6-volatile-producing enzyme. Prediction of the subcellular localization of the TomLOXF protein was done by
means of four different programs. The iPSORT program
predicted a mitochondrial localization, whereas the presence of a transit peptide for chloroplast targeting was
predicted by the TargetP1.1, WoLFPSORT, and
ChloroP1.1 programs. ChloroP1.1 identified a 54-residue
chloroplast transit peptide at the N- terminus of the
TomLOXF protein. This N-extension of the sequence
shows some features typical of a chloroplast sorting signal [33], including a high content in hydrophilic amino
acid residues (18.5% Lys, 16.7% Ser and Thr) and a very
low content in acidic residues (no Asp or Glu). In this

Figure 4 Phylogenetic tree of various lipoxygenases from plants. Sequence relatedness between the deduced amino acid sequence of
TomLOXF and sequences of LOX proteins of diverse plants was analyzed with ClustaW2 by the neighbor-joining method, and visualized with
the TreeDyn program. Accession numbers for the LOX amino acid sequences used to construct the tree are: Lycopersicon esculentum TomLOXA
[GenBank: AAA53184], TomLOXB [GenBank: AAA53183], TomLOXC [GenBank: AAB65766], TomLOXD [GenBank: AAB65767], TomLOXE [GenBank:
AAG21691]; Solanum tuberosum StLOXH1 [GenBank: CAA65268], StLOXH3 [GenBank: CAA65269], PotLX-3 [GenBank: AAB67865]; Nicotiana
attenuata NaLOX2 [GenBank: AAP83137], NaLOX3 [GenBank: AAP83138]; Nicotiana tabacum NtLOX1 [GenBank: CAA58859]; Camellia sinensis
CsLOX2 [GenBank: ACJ54281]; Populus deltoids PdLOX1 [GenBank: AAZ57444], PdLOX2 [GenBank: AAZ57445]; Phaseolus vulgaris PvLOX6 [GenBank:
ABM88259]; Citrus jambhiri RlemLOX [GenBank: BAB84352]; Arabidopsis thaliana AtLOX1 [GenBank: NP_175900], AtLOX2 [GenBank: AAL32689],
AtLOX3 [GenBank: CAB56692], AtLOX6 [GenBank: CAG38328]; Brassica oleracea BoLOX [GenBank: ABO32545]. Type 1 and Type 2 respectively
indicate LOX proteins involved in jasmonic acid or C6 volatile production.

Mariutto et al. BMC Plant Biology 2011, 11:29
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/11/29

group, AtLOX2, TomLOXC, TomLOXD, StLOXH1,
StLOXH3, and PvLOX6 have been demonstrated to be
actively imported into or localized within the chloroplast
[14,16,32,34-36]. On the basis of these observations, it is
likely that TomLOXF also encodes a chloroplast-targeted LOX.
As LOX activity was induced by the bacterial treatment, the expression of each gene in response to
P. putida BTP1 treatment was analyzed at transcript
level in order to determine the relative contribution of
the various isoforms to activity increase. Before infection, TomLoxA, TomLoxB, and TomLoxC transcripts
were barely detected in leaves of control and treated
tomato plants (Figure 5). These genes were found not to
be upregulated upon pathogen attack and the transcript
level was similar for control and treated plants. The
TomLoxD and TomLoxF genes displayed a different
expression profile: basal-level expression before infection
but clearly increased expression upon pathogen challenge, the increase being more pronounced in plants
bacterized beforehand with P. putida BTP1 than in control plants. This differential stimulation of the transcription level in control and treated plants was transient in
the case of TomLoxD, since similar amounts of transcripts were found to have accumulated in leaves from
both kinds of plants 96 hours after infection by
B. cinerea. Stimulation of the TomLoxF gene in bacterized plants appeared more consistent, since the transcript level remained slightly higher than in control
leaves four days post infection.
TOMLOXF uses linolenic acid as substrate and exhibits
13-LOX activity

To check whether increased TomLoxF transcription
could be partly responsible for increased linolenic acidconsuming activity, we cloned and expressed the TomLoxF cDNA in E. coli, without its choroplastic peptide
signal, but with a poly-His tag. Total proteins were
extracted by sonication and analyzed by SDS-PAGE and
Western blotting with an anti-His-tag antibody (Figure
6b). This showed the presence of a ± 100 kDa protein
in extracts from clones containing the TomLoxF. LOX
activity was assayed in the total protein extracts using
linolenic acid as substrate. We only detected LOX activity in the extract from the clone containing the TomLoxF sequence and induced by IPTG (Figure 6a).
Recombinant TOMLOXF was purified by affinity chromatography and detected through SDS-PAGE and Western blotting with an anti-His-tag antibody (Figure 7a).
The purity of the purified protein was checked by SDSPAGE and Coomassie blue staining. It showed the presence of some contaminating proteins. The activity of
the semi-purified TOMLOXF was evaluated using either
linoleic acid or linolenic acid as substrate. Partially-

Page 6 of 15

Figure 5 Comparison of expression levels of five TomLox genes
(A, B, C, D, and F). The expression levels were compared between
control (C) and P. putida BTP1-treated (T) plants. Samples were
collected before (0), two days (+2), and four days (+4) after
pathogen inoculation. + represents transcripts of the positive
control: for TomLoxA, TomLoxB, and TomLoxC, the positive control
was RNA extracted from breaker-stage fruit, for TomLoxD and
TomLoxF, the positive control was RNA extracted from
methyljasmonate-treated plants. Total RNA was extracted from
leaves and 20-μg samples were subjected to RNA-blot analysis,
except for the positive controls for TomLoxA, TomLoxB, and
TomLoxC, for which 2 μg was loaded. Transcripts were hybridized
with denatured cDNA-specific probes. Quantification of loading of
each sample RNA was done by measuring the U.V. fluorescence of
ethidium-bromide-stained 28 S rRNA. Loading was found to vary by
20% at most between samples.

purified TOMLOXF showed a higher activity on linolenic acid than on linoleic acid (activities of 5,74 U/mg of
total protein and 0,48 U/mg respectively) (Figure 7b).
Depending on their regiospecificity, LOX enzymes can
introduce the oxygen at the 9th or 13th position of linoleic and linolenic acids. To determine the regiospecificity of partially purified TOMLOXF, we first monitored
its pH activity profile using linolenic acid as substrate
(data not shown) to optimize the pH of the reaction
buffer. Partially purified TOMLOXF had an activity
optimum of pH 6.0. TOMLOXF was then incubated
at this pH with its two substrates, in combination or
separatly, and the reaction products were analyzed by

Mariutto et al. BMC Plant Biology 2011, 11:29
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/11/29

Page 7 of 15

Figure 6 Evaluation of recombinant TomLOXF produced in
E. coli. We verified the production and activity of the recombinant
TomLOXF through LOX activity assay (A) and SDS-PAGE and
Western blotting with an anti-His-tag antibody (B). Four clones were
tested: two clones containing pET28-a plasmid without the TomLoxF
insert (P) and two clones containing pET28-a with the TomLoxF
insert (F), induced (+) or not (-) by IPTG. M: Page Ruler Plus
Prestained Protein Ladder (Fermentas).

HPLC. In all cases only 13-derivatives (13-HPOT and
13-HPOD) of fatty acids were detected suggesting that
TomLOXF is a 13-LOX (Figure 7c).
On the basis of these similarities, it was hypothesized
that TomLOXD is a linolenate-consuming lipoxygenase
[16]. To confirm this activity, we also cloned and
expressed the TomLoxD cDNA to obtain recombinant
His-tagged TomLOXD protein. As the chloroplastic signal peptide can provoke some problems during the production in bacteria, we determined it with the “ChloroP”
bioinformatics program and it was not included in the
sequence cloned in pET-28a plasmid. Unfortunately, no
enzymatic activity was detected whatever the position of
the His’s-tag (amino terminal or carboxy terminal). We
hypothesized that the chloroplastic signal peptide determined by the program was maybe too long: it indeed
contained a part (5 amino acids) of a beta barrel probably involved in substrate binding. We aligned the
sequences of TomLOXF and TomLOXD and determined manually the signal peptide of TomLOXD. We
cloned once again the cDNA without the sequence of
the signal and expressed it in E. coli BL21. We also
cloned the full cDNA including the signal peptide. After
induction of expression, we were not able to detect any
LOX activity for any of the constructs. We also tried to
express the different constructs in other strains of
E. coli: E. coli C43DE3 (usually used for the production
of toxic proteins), in E. coli HMS174DE3, and in E. coli
KRX (autoinduction by rhamnose), but no result was
obtained (data not showed).

Figure 7 Characterisation of TomLOXF. A. The detection of histagged proteins was realized on Western blot with an anti-His-tag
antibody (1 and 2) and we evaluated the purity of the protein
through SDS-PAGE and Coomassie blue staining (3). 1: Page Ruler
Plus Prestained Protein Ladder (Fermentas), 1: total proteins
extracted from TomLOXF-expressing E. coli, 2 and 3: partially-purified
protein extracted from TomLOXF-expressing clone by nickel affinity
chromatography.B. LOX activity was evaluated on partially-purified
recombinant TomLOXF with linoleic (C18:2) and linolenic (C18:3)
acids as substrate. Reaction was performed at pH 6.0, room
temperature. C. Linolenic and linoleic acids were both incubated
with extracts of E. coli expressing TomLOXF in oxygenated buffer.
Produced hydroperoxides were separated by HPLC, and the profile
of compounds absorbing at 234 nm was compared with the profile
of pure 13-HPOT, 13-HPOD, 9-HPOT and 9-HPOD.

Treatment with P. putida BTP1 induces a more rapid
accumulation of oxylipins

We also analyzed the level of two free oxylipins: the
13-hydropreoxyoctadecatrienoic acid (13-HPOT), which
is produced by LOX from linolenic acid, and its reduced

Mariutto et al. BMC Plant Biology 2011, 11:29
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/11/29

derivative, the 13-hydroxyoctadecatrienoic acid
(13-HOT). We quantified these molecules before and
two days after pathogen inoculation, where transcriptional and enzymatic differences were shown to be maximal between control and bacterized plants. As expected,
we observed differences between control and treated
plants: before infection, the level of free 13-HOT was
only slightly higher in P. putida BTP1-treated plants than
in control plants, but two days after pathogen inoculation
it was about two fold higher in treated-plants than in
control plants (Figure 8). 13-HPOT also seemed more
abundant in bacterized plants after pathogen challenge.

Discussion
Results from this study show that pre-inoculation of the
rhizobacterium P. putida BTP1 on tomato roots protects the host plant against gray mold caused by the
fungal pathogen B. cinerea on leaves. Previous studies
carried out in cucumber [22], in bean [23] and in
tomato [24] showed that P. putida BTP1 is not able to
induce SAR. Moreover, the bacteria do not migrate to
the leaves, demonstrating that the reduction of the
symptoms is not caused by a direct antagonism between
P. putida BTP1 and B. cinerea [24]. These observations
suggest that disease reduction by P. putida BTP1 in
indeed a case of ISR.

Figure 8 Time course of accumulation of the free 13-HPOT and
its reduced derivative, the 13-HOT. The concentration of these
two compounds was measured in control plants before infection
(C0), and two days after pathogen inoculation (C2) and in P. putida
BTP1-treated plants before infection (T0) and two days after
pathogen inoculation (T2) in two independent experiments. The
analysis of variance (ANOVA 1, a = 0.05) revealed that differences
between control and bacterized tomatoes are significative for the
13-HPOT before B. cinerea inoculation, and for the 13-HOT and 13HPOT after infection. Means and standard deviations were
calculated from one measurement on two different extractions of
each sample.

Page 8 of 15

This resistance is not associated with stimulation of
phenylalanine ammonia-lyase. Involvement of this
enzyme in ISR can vary according to the plant species
and pre-inoculated rhizobacterial strain. As in the case
of P. putida BTP1, the resistance induced by B. cereus
B101R in tomato is not characterized by stimulation of
PAL [11], but in Pseudomonas fluorescens Pf1-treated
tomatoes, resistance is associated with enhanced PAL
activity after inoculation of the pathogen P. aphanidermatum [37]. T. asperellum T-203 protects cucumber
against P. syringae pv. lachrymans by inducing phytoalexin synthesis through stimulation of phenylalanine
ammonia-lyase expression [19]. In bean, P. putida BTP1
does not induce PAL activity [23], but in cucumber, the
resistance conferred by this rhizobacterium is associated
with the accumulation of fungitoxic phenolics that can
be viewed as phytoalexins and that may be produced via
the phenylpropanoid pathway [22].
Unlike PAL activity, LOX activity consuming linolenic
acid is stimulated by treatment with P. putida BTP1.
Before infection, LOX activity is higher in treated plants
than in controls. It increases in response to pathogen
attack, remaining higher in treated plants two days after
pathogen inoculation.
We have further investigated which LOX isoforms are
involved in this stimulation, and we have identified and
characterized a full-length cDNA encoding a new LOX
from tomato leaves: TomLOXF is the sixth lipoxygenase
isoform identified in tomato. Bioinformatic analysis
shows that the product of this gene belongs to the type
2 subset of LOX proteins. All the LOX proteins identified to date in this group are 13-LOX proteins, and a
chloroplastic localization has been demonstrated for
AtLOX2 from Arabidopsis thaliana, TomLOXC and
TomLOXD from tomato, StLOXH1 and StLOXH3 from
potato, and PvLOX6 from bean [14,16,32,34-36]. This
class of LOX is known to be involved in biotic and abiotic stresses. As initial reaction, 13-LOX catalyses the
insertion of molecular oxygen at position 13 of linoleic
or linolenic acid.
The fatty acid hydroperoxides produced might thus be
converted to jasmonic acid via the octadecanoid pathway or be metabolized via the lipoxygenase pathway by
a variety of enzymes, including hydroperoxide lyase,
allene oxide synthase, divinyl ether synthase, to form
diverse plant-associated oxylipins such as volatile aldehydes, alcohols, divinyl ethers,... [28,38,39]. Although different branches of the pathway utilize hydroperoxides as
a common substrate, recent studies tend to demonstrate
that specific substrates for the enzymes of these
branches are supplied by distinct LOX isoforms [40].
In Arabidopsis thaliana, AtLOX2 has been directly
linked to the biosynthesis of jasmonic acid [34]. Similarly, silencing of NaLox3 in Nicotiana attenuata

Mariutto et al. BMC Plant Biology 2011, 11:29
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/11/29

specifically suppresses JA accumulation upon injury, but
does not affect the production of leaf volatiles [26]. In
potato, antisense inhibition of StLoxH3 expression has no
effect on the release of volatiles [32] or on wound-induced
JA accumulation, but it drastically reduces the post injury
accumulation of protease inhibitors, thereby enhancing
the susceptibility of the plants to insect attack [41]. The
product of TomLoxD is expressed mainly in response to
wounding or methyl jasmonate treatment. It may also play
a role as a component of the octadecanoid defense-signaling pathway, leading to the production of jasmonic acid
[16], but not to the generation of volatiles [14].
On the other hand, specific depletion of TomLoxC in
tomato has no effect on jasmonic acid biosynthesis,
whereas it results in a marked reduction in the production of fatty-acid-derived C6 short-chain aldehydes and
alcohols [14]. It thus seems that the prime role of TomLOXC and StLOXH1 is to supply hydroperoxide lyase
with substrates for the production of C6 volatiles, but
not to supply hydroperoxides to the octadecanoid
pathway.
As mentioned by Feussner and Wasternack [28], phylogenetic tree analysis of the LOX multigene family
might be helpful in predicting at least some biochemical
features and may provide suggestions regarding physiological functions. From this analysis, it clearly appears
that TomLOXD, AtLOX3, NALOX3, and StLOXH3, all
similarly involved in JA biosynthesis, are closely related.
On the basis of these similarities, it was suggested that
TomLOXD possesses a linolenate-consuming lipoxygenase activity [16]. However this was never definitely
proved. So we tried to produce recombinant His-tagged
TomLOXD in E. coli. Unfortunately, despite numerous
attempts, we were not able to produce an active TomLOXD protein to confirm this hypothesis. TomLOXD
may be an inactive protein in plant tissues, but this
hypothesis could be excluded as a protein close to TomLOXD (stLOX3, 84% of identity with TomLOXD)
showed activity [25]. The E. coli expression system used
here is probably not appropriate for the expression of
TomLOXD.
TomLOXC and StLOXH1, key lipoxygenases specifically involved in the generation of volatiles, are grouped
on another branch of the tree. Phylogenetic analysis of
the deduced amino acid sequence of TomLOXF strongly
suggests that it belongs to the type-2 family of LOX
proteins, within the subgroup including TomLOXC and
StLOXH1. Recombinant His-tagged TomLOXF shows
13-LOX activity and uses preferentially linolenate as
substrate. Collectively, our data suggest that TomLOXF
encodes a 13-LOX probably involved in the production
of C6 volatile compounds. This hypothesis is consolidated by the fact that the hydroperoxide lyase of tomato
consumes preferentially 13-HPOT [42].

Page 9 of 15

Our transcriptional study of genes coding for five isoforms (TomLoxA, B, C, D, and F) has revealed that only
TomLoxD and TomLoxF contribute to the enhanced
LOX activity observed in P. putida BTP1-treated
tomatoes.
The time course of TomLoxD and TomLoxF induction
in treated plants compared to controls is very interesting. Levels of transcripts of these genes are higher in
bacterized plants during the first days of infection,
which are crucial for B. cinerea infection of tomato
leaves. This early activation of LOX might allow the
plant to develop a resistance mechanism during the first
stages of disease development. On the other hand, TomLoxA, TomLoxB, and TomLoxC are induced neither by
pathogen attack nor by treatment with P. putida BTP1.
TomLoxA is expressed principally in fruits during
maturation and in seeds during germination [13]. TomLoxB is expressed only in fruits during the latest phase
of ripening and during senescence [13]. The absence of
stimulation of TomLoxC transcription is surprising, as
the isozyme encoded by this gene produces hydroperoxides that are consumed principally by the hydroperoxide
lyase branch of the oxylipin pathway, and converted into
volatiles [14]. Some of these volatiles are fungitoxic [43]
or can induce expression of certain genes of the oxylipin
pathway, namely Lox and Allene oxide synthase [44].
TomLoxC is stimulated during the early stage of fruit
ripening [14], but not by wounding [16].
The stimulation of the linolenate-consuming activity
during ISR and TomLoxF transcription level are concomitant, suggesting that this isoform contributes to the
increased linolenic acid-consuming LOX activity. This
gene codes for a protein that consumes linolenic acid
preferentially. We showed that it consumes also linoleic
acid. But it seems that the increase in linoleic acidconsuming activity caused by the increase of TomLoxF
transcription is too low to be detectable.
To confirm our results, we also analyzed the accumulation of free 13-HPOT and 13-HOT in plants.
13-HOT, which is produced from 13-HPOT by the
hydroperoxyde reductase, by the peroxygenase, or by
auto oxidation [45], is more abundant after infection in
bacterized plants. 13-HPOT seemed also to be more
abundant in P. putida BTP1-treated plant than in controls after infection (but the difference was not significant in the second experiment). These results suggest
that, after infection, bacterized plants over-produce 13HPOT by the linolenate-consuming LOX activity, leading to the formation of antifungal 13-HOT. The increase
in oxylipin content could also be due to auto oxidation
of fatty acid following the pathogen attack, but it can
not explain the difference between control and treated
plants. Indeed, if the increase was totally caused by auto
oxidation after infection, the level of oxylipins should be

Mariutto et al. BMC Plant Biology 2011, 11:29
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/11/29

higher in control plants as the latter show higher infection rates. Only a precedent study showed an oxylipin
accumulation in ISR: in bean, P. putida BTP1 stimulates
the accumulation of 13-HPOT before infection with
B. cinerea, but the difference was not significative anymore after pathogen challenge [23].
In bean, LOX activity is enhanced before infection and
it remains higher in plants treated with P. putida BTP1
than in control plants for up to three days after
B. cinerea inoculation [23]. In cucumber, LOX activity is
not stimulated by the rhizobacterium, but the activity
of enzymes situated downstream the LOX in the pathway is higher in treated plants during the first days of
infection [46]. Hence, stimulation of the oxylipin pathway in the host plant may be a general phenomenon
associated with root colonization by P. putida BTP1.
But if it may be a general phenomenon, it is probably
not the only defense mechanism induced in plant by
the PGPR. Other defense mechanisms need to be analyzed to determine their implication in P. putida
BTP1-mediated ISR.
It is interesting to compare our results realized onto
whole plants with works realized by Adam et al [24] on
the same plant species with the same PGPR and same
pathogen, but on cut leaves. With cut leaves, the
increase of LOX activity is more rapid in treated plants
and, in control and treated tomatoes, reaches its maximal value two days after the beginning of the infection,
resulting in higher differences than in our work. In our
study, we wanted to see only the effect of P. putida
BTP1 on whole plant, because the wounding caused by
cutting the leaves could interfere with the ISR effect,
especially on the LOX, which is induced by wounding
[16]. So, it seems important to study defense mechanisms induced by ISR working with non stressed plant
material.

Conclusions
In conclusion, ISR induced by the PGPR P. putida BTP1
in tomato is associated with a higher level of TomLoxD
and TomLoxF transcription, the enzyme encoded by the
latter gene being a newly identified LOX isoform in this
plant. The products of these genes are most probably
partly responsible for the increase in overall LOX activity in resistant leaves. LOX might possibly not be the
only enzyme of the oxylipin pathway to be stimulated
by ISR in tomato. In bean, hydroperoxide lyase is stimulated in response to infection in treated plants [23].
A previous study on detached tomato leaves has
revealed that enzymes situated downstream in the LOX
pathway are stimulated by P. putida BTP1 [24]. Metabolite production and the activities of different enzymes of
the oxylipin pathway should be further studied in order

Page 10 of 15

to increase our knowledge of the importance of the
LOX pathway in ISR.

Methods
Microbial strains

P. putida BTP1 was selected for its capacity to induce
ISR in various plant species (cucumber [22], bean [23],
and tomato [24]). This strain was isolated from barley
rhizosphere for its ability to produce pyoverdines.
P. putida BTP1 was maintained on CAA agar medium
(5 g/l casamino acids; 0.9 g/l K 2 HPO 4 ; 0.25 g/l
MgSO4.7H2O; 15 g/l agar) at 4°C before use. B. cinerea
was grown on oat-based medium (25 g/l oat flour;
12 g/l agar) at room temperature. The fungus was
exposed to UV (15W, at a distance of about 20 cm from
the lamp) for one week to induce sporulation.
Induction of ISR

ISR was induced in tomato (Lycopersicon esculentum) cv
“merveille des marches”, according to the procedure
described in [22]. Before sowing, the seeds were rinsed
with 0.01 M MgSO4.7H2O, and soaked for 10 minutes
in a bacterial suspension at 108 CFU ml-1 concentration
or, for the control plants, in 0.01 M MgSO4.7H2O. The
seeds were then sown in pots of 10 cm in diameter containing universal compost. The soil was mixed beforehand with a bacterial suspension at 5x10 7 CFU g -1
concentration or with an equal volume of 0.01 M
MgSO4.7H2O for untreated plants. The plants were germinated and grown at 26°C, with a 16-h photoperiod
(artificial light, with an intensity of 54 μmol.m -2 .s -1 ).
Two and four weeks after sowing, 10 ml of bacterial
suspension (concentration: 108 CFU ml-1) were added to
the pots of treated plants (and 10 ml of 0.01 M
MgSO 4 .7H 2 O to the pots of control plants). After
approximately 5 weeks, the tomato plants were transferred to a high-humidity chamber at 20°C, with an 8-h
photoperiod. After 24 h, third leaves were infected with
Botrytis cinerea. Ten 5-μl droplets containing 2500
spores each prepared as described in Ongena et al. [23]
were deposited on the adaxial face of each leaf. To
determine the infection level, we used a very-used and
reproducible phenotypic method [22-24]: 3 days after
inoculation of the pathogen, the disease level was determined as the percentage of B. cinerea lesions having
extended beyond the inoculum drop zone to produce
spreading lesions. Three independent experiments were
carried out, with 48 plants per treatment. In all these
experiments, P. putida BTP1-treated plants showed a
disease reduction comprised between 33 and 52% compared to controls. The homogeneity of variance for disease reduction evaluation was tested by ANOVA 1 (a =
0.05), and results from the different repetitions were

Mariutto et al. BMC Plant Biology 2011, 11:29
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/11/29

subjected to ANOVA 2 (a = 0.05) so as to pool the data
from different experiments.
In every experiment, infected leaves from 12 plants
were randomly harvested just before challenge and also
2 days and 4 days after inoculation of the pathogen and
immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen. They were then
powdered with mortar and pestle and stored at -70°C
until used for analyses.
Methyljasmonate treatment

Five-week-old control tomato plants were transferred to
a chamber of 252000 cm 3 (20°C, 8-h photoperiod) in
the presence of 3 μl methyljasmonate deposited on
pads. The following day, leaves were harvested and
directly frozen in liquid nitrogen.
Assay of PAL activity

PAL activity was assayed by monitoring the conversion
of L-phenylalanine to L-trans-cinnamate. Powdered frozen leaf tissue (0.25 g) was extracted with 750 ml
extraction buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5, 14 mM mercapto-ethanol, 50 g/l polyethylene glycol). Extracts were
incubated for 1 h on ice and mixed every 10 minutes by
vortexing. Samples were then centrifuged for 10 minutes
at 13,000 g at 4°C. The supernatants were collected and
PAL activity was determined at 40°C in 3 ml Tris-HCl
50 mM pH 8.5 containing 10 mM L-phenylalanine.
Absorbance at 290 nm was monitored for 2 h with a
UVIKON XS spectrophotometer (Beun-De Ronde Serlabo sa, Drogenbos, Belgium). The enzymatic activity
was calculated using an ε of 11,600 M -1 cm -1 and
expressed in nano-enzymatic units per gram fresh
weight (μU/g FW).
Assay of LOX activity

LOX activity was assayed spectrophotometrically. Frozen
leaf tissue powder (0.25 g) was added to 750 μl ice-cold
100 mM sodium phosphate buffer containing 0.4 g/l
Na2S2O5 and 2.5 g/l Tween 20. The mixture was incubated for 1 hour on ice and mixed every 10 min. After
centrifugation (20,000 × g at 4°C for 10 min), 20 μl of
the supernatant was added to 976 μl of oxygenated
100 mM sodium phosphate buffer pH 7.0 and 4 μl of
18 mM linolenic or linoleic acid in 0.05N NaOH. Enzymatic activity was determined by monitoring the appearance of hydroperoxides at 234 nm at 30°C for 15 min
with a UVIKON XS spectrophotometer. LOX activity
was calculated using an ε of 25,000 M-1 cm-1 and was
expressed in micro-enzymatic units per gram fresh
weight (mU/g FW). The activity assay was performed
with leaf material collected at each time point. For the
proteins extracted from E. coli, the LOX activity was
tested by using 20 μl of total or semi-purified proteins,
976 μl of oxygenated 100 mM sodium phosphate buffer

Page 11 of 15

pH 7 and 4 μl of 18 mM linolenic or linoleic acid in
0.05N NaOH.
Cloning of the TomLoxC and TomLoxF cDNA probes

For the synthesis of the TomLoxC cDNA, total RNA
from leaves of tomato treated with Bacillus subtilis M4
was used. TomLoxF cDNA was first obtained from total
RNA of methyljasmonate-treated tomato leaves. Firststrand cDNA was synthesized (Smart PCR cDNA Synthesis Kit, Clontech, Saint-Germain-en-Laye, France)
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. PCR
amplifications were performed with the Advantage 2
PCR kit (Clontech). PCR reactions contained 1 μl firststrand cDNA and each primer at 0.5 μM. The primers
used, designed on the basis of the TomLoxC cDNA
sequence (GenBank: U37839), were TomLoxC-1F
(5’-ATCCTAGAAGGTGTAGAACCGGTC-3’) and
TomLoxC-1R (5’-TGATTCTGGAGGTCCAGACAC-3’).
Samples were amplified in a GeneAmp 9700 PCR System (Perkin-Elmer) as follows: 3 min at 94°C; 30 cycles
of 1 min at 94°C, 1 min at 58°C, and 1 min at 72°C;
7 min at 72°C. The PCR products were cloned by
TA-cloning in pGEM-T Easy vectors (Promega Corp.,
Madison, WI, U.S.A.), according to the manufacturer’s
protocols. Plasmids showing inserts of the expected size
after restriction were selected and sequenced by
CoGenics (Grenoble, France).
RACE-PCR of TomLoxF

To obtain the 5’- and 3’-ends of the coding sequence of
TomLoxF, rapid amplification of cDNA ends (RACE)
was performed with the SMART RACE cDNA Amplification Kit (Clontech) according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. The 3’-RACE Ready and 5’-RACE Ready
first-strand cDNAs were synthesized from 1 μg total
RNA extracted from leaves of tomato plants treated
with methyljasmonate or P. putida BTP1. Subsequent
rapid amplification of cDNA ends by PCR was then performed with the 3’-RACE (TomLoxF 3Ra 5’-AGGGTTGCAATCGATCATCACAGACCG-3’) and 5’-RACE
(TomLoxF 5Ra 5’-TGAAGTGCCGGAAGTTCTACTTCGACG-3’) gene-specific primers. TomLoxF gene-specific
primers were designed on the basis of the partial
sequence of TomLoxF obtained as described above.
They were designed to allow the use of touchdown
PCR, which significantly improves the specificity of
SMART RACE amplifications. Touchdown PCR was
performed as recommended by the manufacturer. The
5’- and 3’-RACE products were cloned into the pGEMT Easy vector (Promega), and sequenced by CoGenics.
RNA gel blot hybridizations

Total mRNA was extracted from frozen leaf tissue powder by the phenol/SDS method described by Ausubel

Mariutto et al. BMC Plant Biology 2011, 11:29
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/11/29

et al. [47]. Analysis of gene expression was done by
hybridization on Northern blots. RNA (20 μg) was electrophoresed through a formaldehyde agarose gel and
blotted onto Hybond N+ membranes (Amersham, Little
Chalfont, UK). Equal lane loading was checked by visualizing ethidium-bromide-strained ribosomal RNA after
electrophoresis. The membrane was hybridized with
DNA probes labeled by random priming with [a- 32P]
dATP according to the procedure recommended by the
manufacturer (Random Primers DNA labeling System;
Invitrogen, Carlsbad, Calif.). Blots were hybridized with
the following probes: a 904-bp XbaI fragment of the
TomLoxA cDNA [13], a 855-bp HindIII fragment of the
TomLoxB cDNA [13], a 506-bp EcoRI fragment of
the TomLoxC cDNA [16], a 910-bp BglII fragment of
the TomLoxD cDNA [16], and a 500-bp EcoRI fragment
of the TomLoxF cDNA. After hybridization, the blots
were washed and used to expose X-Ray film (Fujifilm,
Japan) for at least 48 h.
Bioinformatic analysis

Homology analysis of the cDNA and deduced amino
acid sequences of TomLoxF were performed with the
Blastp 2.2.19+ and Blastn 2.2.19+ programs, available
from the National Center for Biotechnology Information
http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi. ClustalW2 [48,49]
was used to align the deduced TOMLOXF protein
sequence with the sequences of other plant LOX proteins and an unrooted tree was constructed, with the
help of the TreeDyn program [50,51], publicly available
at the site phylogeny.fr [52,53]. Subcellular localization
was predicted with four different programs: ChloroP 1.1
[54,55], WoLF PSORT [56] and iPSORT Prediction
[57,58]. Conserved domains in the deduced amino acid
sequences were determined by the NCBI Conserved
Domain Search program [59]. For all the bioinformatic
analyses, default settings were used.
TomLoxD and TomLoxF genes amplification and cDNA
isolation for expression

The cDNA sequence of TomLoxD and TomLoxF was
synthesized by RT-PCR from total RNA of Lycopersicon
esculentum c. “merveille des marchés” by using couples
of primer 1(CATGCCATGGGTCACCACCACCACCACGCTATAAGTGAAAATTTGGTCAAAGTTGTG)
and primer 2 (CCGCTCGAGTTATATCGATACAC
TATTTGGAAC) - primer 3 (CATGCCATGGCAGC
TATAAGTGAAAATTTGGTCAAAGTTGTG) and primer 4 (CCGCTCGAGTTATATCGATACACTATTT
GGAAC) - primer 5 (CATGCCATGGGTGCTGTAGT
TACAGTAAGGAAC) and primer 6 (CCGCTCG
AGTATCGATACACTATTTGGAAC) - primer 7 (CA
TGCCATGGGTCACCACCACCACCACATGGCACT
TGCTAAAGAAATTATG) and primer 8 (CCGCTCGAG

Page 12 of 15

TTATATCGATACACTATTTGGAAC) for TomLoxD;
and primer 1 (5’-CTAGCTAGCAGTTCTACTGAAAATTCCTC-3’) and primer 2 (5’- CCGCTCGAGTTAAATGGAAATGCTATAAGGTAC-3’) for TomLoxF.
These primers were designed to exclude of the predicted
chloroplastic peptide signal from the amplification product. Artificial restriction sites were introduced for NcoI
and XhoI respectively in primers 1, 3, 5, 7 and primers 2,
4, 6, 8 for TomLoxD (underlined) and for NheI and XhoI
respectively in primer 1 and 2 for TomLoxF (underlined)
in order to clone the product in the pET28-a plasmid. For
the reverse transcription step 1 μg of total RNA was denatured 5 min at 70°C in presence of 0.5 μM primer 1 and
1× RNase OUT (Biolabs) in a total volume of 12 μl. After
cooling for 5 min at 4°C, the mix was incubated in 1×
M-MLV buffer with 10 mM DTT, 0.5 mM dNTPs and
200 U M-MLV, for 1 h at 42°C and then 15 min at 70°C.
5 μl of the reverse transcription products, in presence of
0.5 mM dNTPs, 0.5 μM of each primer and 2 U of DNA
Taq polymerase, were used for the PCR. Samples were
amplified in a GeneAmp 9700 PCR System (Perkin-Elmer)
as follows: 5 min at 94°C; 10 cycles of 1 min at 94°C, 1 min
at 56°C, and 4 min at 72°C; 30 cycles of 1 min at 94°C, 1
min at 66°C, and 4 min at 72°C; 7 min at 72°C.
Expression of TomLoxD and TomLoxF in E. coli

The TomLoxD and TomLoxF cDNA fragment were
digested by respectively by NcoI-XhoI and NheI-XhoI,
and purified using the Nucleospin extract II kit
(Macherey-Nagel). The fragment was ligated into the
expression plasmid pET28-a previously digested by
NcoI-XhoI for TomLoxD and NheI-XhoI for TomLoxF
and purified. As a result, the TomLoxD and TomLoxF
cDNA were cloned dowstream of the T7 promoter of
the T7 phage. E. coli BL21 strain was transformed with
pET28-a containing or not the TomLox sequence by
electroporation (2.5 kV/cm, 25 μF and 100 Ω). Transformants were selected on LB medium containing 50
μg/ml kanamycin. Plasmid DNA was extracted with
Nucleobond Xtra Midi columns (Macherey-Nagel) and
the 5’ part of TomLoxF was analyzed by sequencing to
confirm the correct integration of the fragment.
A freshly grown colony was inoculated in 2 ml of LB
medium containing 50 μg/ml kanamycin and grown
overnight at 37°C. 50 μl of this preculture was transferred to 50 ml of LB medium containing kanamycin
and grown at 37°C. When the O.D. reached 0.8, temperature was dropped down to 18°C and 1 mM isopropyl b-D-1-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG), was added in
the medium to induce the transcription of TomLoxD
and TomLoxF. After 20 h of induction, the culture was
centrifuged at 3500 rpm at 4°C and the supernatant was
eliminated. The cell pellet was suspended in 50 mM
sodium phosphate buffer (1/10 of culture volume)

Mariutto et al. BMC Plant Biology 2011, 11:29
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/11/29

containing 1 mM PMSF and sonicated (75 W) 6 times
during 30 s (Vibra Cell, Sonics and Materials), and then
centrifuged 2 times 10 min at 13,000 g at 4°C. The
supernatant containing the proteins was conserved.
SDS-PAGE analysis and immunodetection

SDS-PAGE was performed as described by Laemmli [60]
in gels containing 10% acrylamide. Protein bands were
visualized by staining with Coomassie blue: the gel was
soaked for 1 h in Coomassie blue (Code Blue Stain
Reagent (Thermo Scientific)) and washed over night in
water. Proteins contained in the gel were transferred
onto a nitrocellulose membrane (GE Healthcare) using a
Multiphor II apparatus (GE Healthcare). After blocking
for 16 h in TBS buffer (50 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl,
pH 7,5) containing 1× blocking reagent (Roche), the
membrane was incubated for 1 h with the primary
anti-pentahistidin monoclonal antibody (Chemicon
International) in TBS. Then the membrane was washed
four times for 10 min in TBS, incubated 30 min with
GtxMs IgG (Chemicon International) in TBS, and
washed four times for 10 min in TBS. Finally proteins
exhibiting a pentahistidine tail were detected with the
BM Chemiluminescence Western Blotting Kit (Roche)
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. After this
last stage, the blot was exposed to a X-Ray film
(Fujifilm, Japan) for 5 min.
Purification of His-tagged proteins

His-tagged proteins were purified by nickel column affinity chromatography (Äkta, Amersham Pharmacia Biotech) according the method described in Boutaud and
Brash [61]. The supernatant containing the proteins was
loaded on a nickel column (Hightrap HP, 1 ml, Amersham Pharmacia Biotech) equilibrated with 50 mM
potassium phosphate buffer, pH 7.2, 500 mM NaCl at
1 ml/min. The column was then washed with the equilibration buffer and the nonspecific bound proteins were
eluted with 50 mM potassium phosphate buffer, pH 7.2,
500 mM NaCl, 500 mM glycine. His-tagged proteins
were eluted with 50 mM potassium buffer, pH 7.2,
500 mM NaCL, 40 mM L-Histidine. Fractions of 1,5 ml
were collected and analyzed by SDS-PAGE, Western
blotting and immunodetection. LOX activity was also
assayed in the different fractions after 15 fold concentration on a vivaspin II column (Sartorius Stedim Biotech).
Determination of free 13-HPOT and 13-HOT
concentrations

Oxylipins were extracted from plant tissues and quantified
by HPLC using a method described in Fauconnier et al.
[62]. 1 g of powdered frozen leaf tissue was extracted in 20
ml of extraction medium (isohexane/2-propanol, 3/2 (v/v),
0.0025% (w/v) butylated hydroxytoluene). (6Z, 9Z, 11E,

Page 13 of 15

13S)-13-hydroxy-6, 9, 11-octadecatrienoic acid was used
as internal standard. After homogenization, the extract
was centrifuged at 1,300 g at 4°C for 10 min. The upper
phase was collected and added to a 6,7% (w/v) solution of
potassium sulfate to reach a volume of 32.5 ml. After
10 min of shaking at 4°C, the extract was centrifuged at
1,300 g at 4°C for 10 min. The upper phase was collected.
HPLC analysis was performed in two steps. The first step
was carried out on a reverse phase column, allowing the
recuperation of free oxylipins. The fraction of interest was
collected and then injected on straight-phase column, to
separate the 13-HPOT and 13-HOT. For the reverse
phase step, a volume of 80 μl of sample was injected onto
an EC250/2 Nucleosil 120-5 C18 column (250 × 2.1 mm,
5 μm particle size, Macherey and Nagel, Easton, PA, USA)
using this gradient system: solvent A (methanol/water/
acetic acid (75:15:0,1) (v/v)) and solvent B (methanol/
water/acetic acid (100:0:0,1) (v/v)) according to this gradient program: 20% solvent B for 10 min, followed by a linear increase of solvent B up to 40% within 28 min, then a
linear increase of solvent B up to 100% within 30 min and
held for 15 min, then a linear decrease up to 20% solvent
B within 5 min and finally an isocratic post-run at 15%
solvent B for 6 min. The flow rate was 0.18 ml/min up to
30 min and increased linearly to 0.36 ml/min within
35 min, held for 10 min, followed by a linear decrease to
0.18 ml/min within 50 min and post-run for 6 min.
Straight-phase HPLC was performed on a Zorbax Rx-SIL
column (150 × 2.1 mm, 5 μm particule size, Agilent, Palo
Alto, CA, USA) with n-hexane/2-propanol/acetic acid
(100:1:0.1 (v/v/v)) as a solvent system at a flow rate of
0.2 ml/min. 25 μl of sample were injected and the absorbance was recorded at 234 nm. The results were expressed
in nmol/g FW. The analysis was performed in duplicate.
To determine the products of the reaction catalyzed
by the recombinant TOMLOXF, we synthesized hydroperoxides from fatty acids according to a method
described in Royo et al [25]. Total proteins were
extracted from E. coli expressing TOMLOXF as
described above. Linoleic and linolenic acids (25 μmol),
in combination or separated, were incubated with the
protein extract (containing 6,032 U of LOX activity) in
25 ml of oxygen-saturated 50 mM sodium phosphate
buffer pH 6. After incubation at 25°C for 15 min with a
constant flow of oxygen, the produced hydroperoxides
were precipitated by lowering the pH to 3.0 with 6 N
HCl. Then, we purified and analyzed the produced
hydroperoxides on a C18 microcolumn (500 mg)
according a method used by Fauconnier et al [63]. The
LOX reaction products were separated and analyzed by
HPLC with a Inertsil 5 ODS 2 250 × 4,6 mm (Chromasil) column with water, acetonitril and NaH2PO4 as solvant (45:45:10 v/v during 22 min, then 37:53:10 v/v for
42 min, and 37:53:10 v/v until 120 min), flow rate of

Mariutto et al. BMC Plant Biology 2011, 11:29
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/11/29

0.5 ml/min, detection at 234 nm. The retention time of
TOMLOXF hydroperoxides were compared with those
of commercial 13- and 9- HPOD/HPOT (Larodan).
List of abbreviations
ISR: induced systemic resistance; HOD: hydroxy octadecadienoic acid; HOT
hydroxy octadecatrienoic acid; HPOT: hydroperoxy octadecatrienoic acid;
LOX: lipoxygenase; HPOD: hydroperoxy octadecadienoic acid; PAL:
phenylalanine ammonia-lyase; PGPR: Plant Growth Promoting Rhizobacteria;
SAR: systemic acquired resistance.
Acknowledgements
This work received financial support from the program F.R.F.C. n°2.4624.06 of
the Belgian National Fund for Scientific Research (FRS-F.N.R.S.). MM is an F.R.
S-FNRS research fellow and MO is a research associate at the FRS-F.N.R.S. AA
thanks the Atomic Energy Commission of Syria (AECS) for financial support.
We thank Prof. Grierson of the University of Nottingham (UK), who gave us
the E. coli clones containing the TomLoxA and TomLoxB probes, and Dr.
Heitz of the IBMP (France) for the gift of the E. coli clone containing the
TomLoxD probe. We thank Dr. Duez of the Centre for Protein Engineering
(University of Liège) for assistance during cloning and expression of
TomLoxD in E. coli C43DE3, HMS174DE3 and KRX strains.
Author details
Laboratory of Plant Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Faculty of
Sciences, Department of Life Sciences, University of Liège, Boulevard du
Rectorat, 27, Liège, Belgium. 2Walloon Centre of Industrial Biology, University
of Liège, Boulevard du Rectorat, 29, Liège, Belgium. 3Walloon Centre of
Industrial Biology, Gembloux Agro-Bio Tech, University of Liège, Passage des
Déportés, 2, Gembloux, Belgium. 4Plant Biology Unit, Gembloux Agro-Bio
Tech, University of Liège, Avenue de la Faculté, 2A, Gembloux, Belgium.
1

Authors’ contributions
MM carried out the culture and treatment of tomatoes, enzymatic and gene
expression analysis, cloning and expression of TomLoxD and TomLoxF in
E. coli, purification of the protein and determination of its substrates and
products, statistic analysis and wrote the manuscript. FD and AA realized
TomLoxC and TomLoxF probes. FD and CB realized RACE-PCR. FD realized
bioinformatic analysis of TOMLOXF. FD, MO, MLF, PT and JD conceived the
study, participated in its design and coordination and helped to draft the
manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Received: 9 March 2010 Accepted: 4 February 2011
Published: 4 February 2011
References
1. Hammond-Kosack KE, Jones JD: Resistance gene-dependent plant
defense responses. The Plant Cell 1996, 8:1773-91.
2. Ross AF: Localized acquired resistance to plant virus infection in
hypersensitive hosts. Virology 1961, 14:329-339.
3. Fritig B, Heitz T, Legrand M: Antimicrobial proteins in induced plant
defense. Curr Opin Immunol 1998, 10:16-22.
4. Ross AF: Systemic acquired resistance induced by localized virus
infections in plants. Virology 1961, 14:340-358.
5. Durrant WE, Dong X: Systemic acquired resistance. Annu Rev Phytopathol
2004, 42:185-209.
6. Bent E: Induced systemic resistance mediated by plant growthpromoting Rhizobacteria (PGPR) and fungi (PGPF). In Multigenic and
induced systemic resistance in plants. Edited by: Tuzun S, Bent E. New York,
Springer US; 2006:225-258.
7. Van Peer R, Nieman GJ, Schippers B: Induced resistance and phytoalexin
accumulation in biological control of Fusarium wilt of carnation by
Pseudomonas sp. strain WCS417r. Phytopathology 1991, 81:728-734.
8. Pieterse CMJ, Van Wees SCM, Hoffland E, Van Pelt JA, Van Loon LC:
Systemic resistance in Arabidopsis induced by biocontrol bacteria is
independent of salicylic acid accumulation and pathogenesis-related
gene expression. Plant Cell 1996, 8:1225-1237.
9. Van Loon LC, Bakker PAHM, Pieterse CMJ: Systemic resistance induced by
rhizosphere bacteria. Annu Rev Phytopathol 1998, 36:453-483.

Page 14 of 15

10. Pieterse CMJ, Van Wees SCM, van Pelt JA, Knoester M, Laan R, Gerrits H,
Weisbeek PJ, Van Loon LC: A novel signaling pathway controlling
induced systemic resistance in Arabidopsis. The Plant Cell 1998,
10:1571-1580.
11. Silva HSA, da Silva Romeiro R, Macagnan D, de Almeida Halfeld-Vieira B,
Peirera MCB, Mounter A: Rhizobacterial induction of systemic resistance
in tomato plants: non-specific protection and increase in enzyme
activities. Biol Control 2004, 29:288-295.
12. Sailaja PR, Podile AR, Reddanna P: Biocontrol strain of Bacillus subtilis AF
1 rapidly induces lipoxygenase in groundnut (Arachis hypogaea L.)
compared to crown rot pathogen Aspergillus niger. Eur J Plant Pathol
1997, 104:125-132.
13. Ferrie BJ, Beaudoin N, Burkhart W, Bowsher CG, Rothstein SJ: The cloning
of two tomato lipoxygenase genes and their differential expression
during fruit ripening. Plant Physiol 1994, 106:109-118.
14. Chen G, Hackett R, Walker D, Taylor A, Lin Z, Grierson D: Identification of a
specific isoform of tomato lipoxygenase (TomloxC) involved in the
generation of fatty acid-derived flavor compounds. Plant Physiol 2004,
136:1-11.
15. Krumbein A, Auerswald H: Characterization of aroma volatiles in
tomatoes by sensory analyses. Nahrung 1998, 42:395-399.
16. Heitz T, Bergey DR, Ryan CA: A gene encoding a chloroplast-targeted
lipoxygenase in tomato leaves is transiently induced by wounding,
systemin, and methyl jasmonate. Plant Physiol 1997, 114:1085-1093.
17. Prost I, Dhondt S, Rothe G, Vicente J, Rodriguez MJ, Kift N, Carbone F,
Griffiths G, Esquerré-Tugayé MT, Rosahl S, Castresana C, Hamberg M,
Fournier J: Evaluation of the antimicrobial activities of plant oxylipins
supports their involvement in defense against pathogens. Plant Physiol
2005, 139:1902-1913.
18. Benhamou N, Kloepper JW, Quadt-Hallmann A, Tuzun S: Induction of
defense-related ultrastructural modifications in pea root tissues
inoculated with endophytic bacteria. Plant Physiol 1996, 112:919-929.
19. Yedidia I, Shoresh M, Kerem Z, Benhamou N, Kapulnik Y, Chet I:
Concomitant induction of systemic resistance to Pseudomonas syringae
pv. lachrymans in cucumber by Trichoderma asperellum (T-203) and
accumulation of phytoalexins. Appl Environ Microb 2003, 69:7343-7353.
20. Dixon RA, Paiva NL: Stress-induced phenylpropanoid metabolism. The
Plant Cell 1995, 7:1085-1097.
21. Jacques P, Ongena M, Gwose I, Seinsche D, Schroder H, Delfosse P,
Thonart P, Taraz K, Budzikiewicz H: Structure and characterization of
isopyoverdin from Pseudomonas putida BTP1 and its relation to the
biogenetic pathway leading to pyoverdins. Z Naturforsch 1995,
50:622-629.
22. Ongena M, Daayf F, Jacques P, Thonart P, Benhamou N, Paulitz TC,
Bélanger RR: Systemic induction of phytoalexins in cucumber in
response to treatments with fluorescent pseudomonads. Plant Pathol
2000, 49:523-530.
23. Ongena M, Duby F, Rossignol F, Fauconnier ML, Dommes J, Thonart P:
Stimulation of the lipoxygenase pathway is associated with systemic
resistance induced in bean by a nonpathogenic Pseudomonas Strain.
Mol Plant Microbe 2004, 17:1009-1018.
24. Adam A, Ongena M, Duby F, Dommes J, Thonart P: Systemic resistance
and lipoxygenase-related defense response induced in tomato by
Pseudomonas putida strain BTP1. BMC Plant Biol 2008, 8:113.
25. Royo J, Vancanneyt G, Pérez A G, Sanz C, Störmann K, Rosahl S, SánchezSerrano JJ: Characterization of three potato lipoxygenases with distinct
enzymatic activities and different organ-specific and wound-regulated
expression patterns. J Biol Chem 1996, 271:21012-21019.
26. Halitschke R, Baldwin IT: Antisense LOX expression increases herbivore
performance by decreasing defense responses and inhibiting growthrelated transcriptional reorganization in Nicotiana attenuata. Plant J 2003,
36:794-807.
27. Prigge ST, Boyington JC, Faig M, Doctor KS, Gaffney BJ, Amzel LM:
Structure and mechanism of lipoxygenases. Biochimie 1997, 79:629-636.
28. Feussner I, Wasternack C: The lipoxygenase pathway. Annu Rev Plant Biol
2002, 53:275-297.
29. Liavonchanka A, Feussner I: Lipoxygenases: Occurrence, functions and
catalysis. J Plant Physiol 2006, 163:348-357.
30. Bell E, Mullet JE: Characterization of an Arabidopsis Lipoxygenase Gene
Responsive to Methyl Jasmonate and Wounding. Plant Physiol 1993,
103:1133-1137.

Mariutto et al. BMC Plant Biology 2011, 11:29
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/11/29

31. Zheng SJ, van Dijk JP, Bruinsma M, Dicke M: Sensitivity and speed of
induced defense of cabbage (Brassica oleracea L.): dynamics of BoLOX
expression patterns during insect and pathogen attack. Mol Plant
Microbe 2007, 20:1332-1345.
32. Leon J, Royo J, Vancanneyt G, Sanz C, Silkowski H, Griffiths G, SanchezSerrano JJ: Lipoxygenase H1 gene silencing reveals a specific role in
supplying fatty acid hydroperoxides for aliphatic aldehyde production.
J Biol Chem 2002, 277:416-423.
33. Keegstra K, Olsen LJ, Theg SM: Chloroplastic precursors and their
transport across the envelope membranes. Annu Rev Plant Phys 1989,
40:471-501.
34. Bell E, Creelman RA, Mullet JE: A chloroplast lipoxygenase is required for
wound-induced jasmonic acid accumulation in Arabidopsis. P Natl Acad
Sci USA 1995, 92:8675-8679.
35. Farmaki T, Sanmartın M, Jimenez P, Paneque M, Sanz C, Vancanneyt G,
Leon J, Sanchez-Serrano JJ: Differential distribution of the lipoxygenase
pathway enzymes within potato chloroplasts. J Exp Bot 2007, 58:555-568.
36. Porta H, Figueroa-Balderas R E, Rocha-Sosa M: Wounding and pathogen
infection induce a chloroplast-targeted lipoxygenase in the common
bean (Phaseolus vulgaris L.). Planta 2008, 227:363-373.
37. Ramamoorthy V, Raguchander T, Samiyappan R: Enhancing resistance of
tomato and hot pepper to Pythium diseases by seed treatment with
fluorescent Pseudomonads. Eur J Plant Pathol 2002, 108:429-441.
38. Blée E: Phytooxylipins and plant defense reactions. Prog Lipid Res 1998,
37:33-72.
39. Wasternack C, Stenzel I, Hause B, Hause G, Kutter C, Maucher H,
Neumerkel J, Feussner I, Miersch O: The wound response in tomato - Role
of jasmonic acid. J Plant Physiol 2006, 163:297-306.
40. Halitschke R, Ziegler J, Keinänen M, Baldwin IT: Silencing of hydroperoxide
lyase and allene oxide synthase reveals substrate and defense signaling
crosstalk in Nicotiana attenuate. The Plant J 2004, 40:35-46.
41. Royo J, Leon J, Vancanneyt G, Albar JP, Rosahl S, Ortego F, Castanera P,
Sanchez-Serrano JJ: Antisense-mediated depletion of a potato
lipoxygenase reduces wound induction of proteinase inhibitors and
increases weight gain of insect pests. P Natl Acad Sci USA 1999,
96:1146-1151.
42. Matsui K, Miyahara C, Wilkinson J, Hiatt B, Knauf V, Kajiwar T: Fatty Acid
Hydroperoxide Lyase in Tomato Fruits: Cloning and Properties of a
Recombinant Enzyme Expressed in Escherichia coli. Biosc Biotechnol
Biochem 2000, 64:1189-1196.
43. Vaughn SF, Garner HW: Lipoxygenase-derived aldehydes inhibit fungi
pathogenic on soybean. J Chem Ecol 1993, 19:2337-2344.
44. Bate NJ, Rothstein SJ: C6-volatiles derived from the lipoxygenase
pathway induce a subset of defense-related genes. The Plant J 1998,
16:561-569.
45. Schaller F: Enzymes of the biosynthesis of octadecanoid-derived
signalling molecules. J Exp Bot 2001, 52:11-23.
46. Adam A, Jourdan E, Ongena M, Duby F, Dommes J, Thonart P: Resistance
induced in cucumber and tomato by a non-pathogenic Pseudomonas
putida strain. Parasitica 2005, 61:13-22.
47. Ausubel FM, Brent R, Kingston RE, Moore DD, Seidman JG, Smith JA,
Struhl K: Phenol/SDS method for plant RNA preparation. Current protocols
in molecular biology Wiley and Sons. New York; 1987, 4.3.1-4.3.4.
48. Larkin MA, Blackshields G, Brown NP, Chenna R, McGettigan PA,
McWilliam H, Valentin F, Wallace IM, Wilm A, Lopez R, Thompson JD,
Gibson TJ, Higgins DG: Clustal W and Clustal X version 2.0. Bioinformatics
2007, 23:2947-2948.
49. [http://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/clustalw2/index.html].
50. Chevenet F, Brun C, Banuls A L, Jacq B, Chisten R: TreeDyn: towards
dynamic graphics and annotations for analyses of trees. BMC
Bioinformatics 2006, 7:439.
51. [http://www.phylogeny.fr/version2_cgi/one_task.cgi?task_type=treedyn].
52. [http://www.phylogeny.fr/version2_cgi/index.cgi].
53. Dereeper A, Guignon V, Blanc G, Audic S, Buffet S, Chevenet F, Dufayard JF,
Guindon S, Lefort V, Lescot M, Claverie JM, Gascuel O: Phylogeny.fr: robust
phylogenetic nalysis for the non-specialist. Nucleic Acids Res 2008, 36.
54. [http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/ChloroP/].
55. Emanuelsson O, Nielsen H, Brunak S, von Heijne G: Predicting subcellular
localization of proteins based on their N-terminal amino acid sequence.
J Mol Biol 2000, 300:1005-1016.
56. [http://wolfpsort.org/].

Page 15 of 15

57. [http://hc.ims.u-tokyo.ac.jp/iPSORT/].
58. Bannai H, Tamada Y, Maruyama O, Nakai K, Miyano S: Extensive feature
detection of N-terminal protein sorting signals. Bioinformatics 2002,
18:298-305.
59. NCBI Conserved Domain Search program. [http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
Structure/cdd/wrpsb.cgi].
60. Laemmli UK: Cleavage of structural proteins during the assembly of the
head of bacteriophage T4. Nature 1970, 227:680-685.
61. Boutaud O, Brash AR: Purification and catalytic activities of the two
domains of the allene oxide synthase-lipoxygenase fusion protein of the
coral Pleuxaura homomalla. The J of Biol Chem 1999, 274:33764-33770.
62. Fauconnier ML, Rojas-Beltran J, Dupuis B, Delaplace P, Frettinger P,
Gosset V, du Jardin P: Changes in oxylipin synthesis after Phytophtora
infestans infection of potato leaves do not correlate with resistance.
Plant Physiol Bioch 2008, 46:823-831.
63. Fauconnier ML, Delcarte J, Hoyaux P, du Jardin P, Marlier M: Potato tubers
exhibit both hemolytic and heterolytic hydroperoxide fatty acid-cleaving
activities. Bioch Soc 2000, 28:853-855.
doi:10.1186/1471-2229-11-29
Cite this article as: Mariutto et al.: The elicitation of a systemic
resistance by Pseudomonas putida BTP1 in tomato involves the
stimulation of two lipoxygenase isoforms. BMC Plant Biology 2011 11:29.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
