<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Conference highlights of the 15th international conference on human retrovirology: HTLV and related retroviruses, 4-8 june 2011, Leuven, Gembloux, Belgium</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Retrovirology 2011, 8:86. doi:10.1186/1742-4690-8-86"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Fabiola Martin"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Martin et al. Retrovirology 2011, 8:86
http://www.retrovirology.com/content/8/1/86

REVIEW

Open Access

Conference highlights of the 15th international
conference on human retrovirology: HTLV and
related retroviruses, 4-8 june 2011, Leuven,
Gembloux, Belgium
Fabiola Martin1*†, Charles RM Bangham2†, Vincenzo Ciminale3†, Michael D Lairmore4†, Edward L Murphy5†,
William M Switzer6† and Renaud Mahieux7,8*†

Abstract
The June 2011 15th International Conference on Human Retrovirology: HTLV and Related Viruses marks
approximately 30 years since the discovery of HTLV-1. As anticipated, a large number of abstracts were submitted
and presented by scientists, new and old to the field of retrovirology, from all five continents. The aim of this
review is to distribute the scientific highlights of the presentations as analysed and represented by experts in
specific fields of epidemiology, clinical research, immunology, animal models, molecular and cellular biology, and
virology.
Introduction
The biannual Conference on Human Retrovirology:
HTLV and Related Viruses, where 325 delegated from
17 countries gathered, was held in Leuven, Belgium in
June 2011. Two hundred and sixty one abstracts were
submitted, and those accepted divided into 77 oral and
184 poster presentations. All abstracts can be viewed
online: http://htlv.net and http://www.retrovirology.com/
supplements. Experts in seven fields of retrovirology
were asked to write summaries and comments on the
most intriguing novel data and share their views on
future research directions. During the meeting, Professor
K.T. Jeang received the The Dale McFarlin Prize, Professor L. Willems was awarded with the HTLV Retrovirology Prize and the Young Scientists Awards went to A.
Desrames, J. Turpin and C. Hhela.
The human T-lymphotropic virus type 1 (HTLV-1) retrovirus infects 15 to 20 millions individuals throughout
the world. HTLV-1 antibody prevalence rate varies from
* Correspondence: Fabiola.Martin@hyms.ac.uk; renaud.mahieux@ens-lyon.fr
† Contributed equally
1
Centre for Immunology and Infection, Department of Biology, Hull and York
Medical School, University of York, York, UK
7
Retroviral Oncogenesis Laboratory, INSERM-U758 Human Virology, 69364
Lyon cedex 07, France
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

0.2 to 10% among adults, depending on the geographical
area. It increases with age, in some places eventually
reaching 20 to 50% of the female population aged 60 and
above. The two major diseases associated with HTLV-1
are Adult T-cell Leukemia/Lymphoma or ATLL and
HTLV-1 Associated Myelopathy/Tropical Spastic Paraparesis or HAM/TSP [1]. Xenotropic Murine Leukemia
virus-Related Virus (XMRV) was identified in 2006 in
stromal cells associated with prostate cancers [2] and
later in patients suffering from chronic fatigue syndrome.
The etiological role of XMRV in these two diseases has
recently been challenged. Bovine Leukemia virus (BLV)
infects B-lymphocytes and cause B leukemia [3]. Foamy
viruses infect a wide number of animal species, as well as
humans, but do not cause any disease [4].

Epidemiology
Epidemiology of HTLV

Two studies used the blood bank setting to measure
HTLV prevalence on a large scale. A study from the
United States of America [5] included all first-time
blood donors at a large blood bank network over a tenyear period from 2000 through 2009. Among a total of
1,904,155 first-time blood donors, confirmed HTLV-1
and -2 prevalence was 1.43 per 104 (95% CI 1.19-1.72),

© 2011 Martin et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Martin et al. Retrovirology 2011, 8:86
http://www.retrovirology.com/content/8/1/86

including HTLV-1 0.40 per 104; HTLV-2 0.87 per 104;
and HTLV untypeable 0.25 per 104. HTLV-1/2 prevalence decreased from 2000 to 2009 (p trend < 0.0001),
consistent with a birth cohort effect for HTLV infection
in the United States of America as also described in
Japan. Proietti et al. performed a similar analysis in Brazil for 2007-2009 among 281,760 first-time blood donors
[6]. Overall HTLV-1 prevalence was 12.9 per 104 (95%
CI 11.6-14.2), with regional variation, but little changed
over the three years of the study. The same study calculated the HTLV-1 incidence among blood donors in
Brazil at 3.6 per 10 5 person-years, leading to an estimated residual transfusion risk after current blood bank
testing of 5.0 per 106 blood units transfused, about 10
times higher than in the United States of America [7].
HTLV prevalence data from Africa are rare, but Caterino-de-Araujo et al., studied several hundred patients
attending public health clinics in northern, central and
southern Mozambique, respectively [8]. An overall
HTLV-1/2 prevalence of 2.3% was observed, with regional variation; one HTLV-1 isolate was sequenced as the
Cosmopolitan subtype.
Molecular epidemiology of HTLV

In the STLV section, below, William Switzer has covered some interesting new findings on HTLV-2 molecular epidemiology in the Cameroonian rainforest. Those
data confirmed the close sequence homology between
HTLV-2 in Bakola Pygmies with that found in South
American Indians, consistent with ancient human
migrations. Changing continents, Desrames et al. analyzed LTR sequences from 55 HTLV-1 carriers from the
Caribbean and Africa. They found that all of the West
Indian strains except one belong to the Cosmopolitan
subtype, and only the Noir Marron ethnic group from
French Guiana was infected by the West African strain
[9]. Magri et al. analyzed samples from Brazil and found
concordance with HTLV-1 isolates from Angola and
Mozambique. These data suggested HTLV molecular
studies can shed new light on historical information
regarding slavery-related human transport and the transmission of HTLV-1 from Africa to the New World.

Page 2 of 15

immunoglobulin E (IgE) predicted a lower risk of ATL.
The authors suggested that a biomarker pattern predictive of heightened T-cell activation and HTLV-1 replication, as well as diminished type II immunity, can be
associated with ATL.
Izumo et al. reported on a large national survey of
HAM/TSP across 829 neurology clinics in Japan during 2007 and 2008 [11]. Response rate was 33.5%; and
790 cases of HAM/TSP were reported, leading to a
national estimate of 3600 HAM/TSP cases; half of the
patients lived in Kyushu and 15% each lived in the
Tokyo and Osaka metropolitan areas. Costa et al.
reported on the neurological manifestations of 102
HTLV-1 patients without HAM/TSP [12]. The prevalence of neurologic symptoms as well as arm and leg
weakness on examination was significantly associated
with overactive bladder after adjusting for age and sex.
Two studies examined neuropsychiatric outcomes of
HTLV infection. Guiltinan et al. found no association
between HTLV-1 or HTLV-2 and depression or generalized anxiety in a prospective cohort study of former
blood donors, after adjusting for education, alcohol
intake and self-reported health status [13]. Poor health
status early in the study, as measured by the general
well-being scale, predicted depression and anxiety
about 15 years later. In an uncontrolled study, GalvaoPhileto et al. found a 35% prevalence of depression
among persons living with HTLV-1 infection in Salvador de Bahia, Brazil. Depression was associated with
reporting poor quality of life [14]. Taken together,
these studies suggest that HTLV related health problems and social environment, rather than viral infection alone, lead to psychiatric symptoms.
Arruda et al. performed a meta-analysis of the association between HTLV infection and active tuberculosis
and yielded an estimated relative risk of 3.25 for the
association between HTLV infection and active tuberculosis [15]. The author suggests that tuberculosis chemoprophylaxis might be considered in HTLV-1 carriers
living in tuberculosis endemic areas. Einsiedel et al.
reported an association between HTLV-I infection and
bronchiectasis and pulmonary mortality among Australian aborigines [16].

Disease associations and pathogenesis

A multicenter collaborative investigation of biomarkers
which might predict ATL was reported by Birmann et
al. [10]. A total of 53 incident ATL cases and 150 carefully matched asymptomatic HTLV-1 carriers were
obtained from population-based studies in Japan,
Jamaica, the United States of America, and Brazil, and
multiple biomarkers were measured on PBMCs and
serum. Elevated levels of soluble interleukin-2 receptor
alpha (sIL2Ra) and anti-Tax antibody were both significantly associated with ATL. Elevated levels of total

Future directions

Ongoing, large-scale surveillance of HTLV prevalence is
needed in endemic countries, and blood donor data provide an inexpensive and largely comparable way of doing
this across countries. Molecular epidemiologic studies
may be increasingly useful in identifying fine scale patterns of HTLV dissemination, but would be even more
useful if they incorporated parallel data on human
genetics to complement viral sequence data. Especially
in endemic countries, prospective cohort studies are

Martin et al. Retrovirology 2011, 8:86
http://www.retrovirology.com/content/8/1/86

needed to better define prognostic markers for HTLV
diseases.

Clinical Research
Clinical Presentations

For the last 30 years, clinicians and scientists have been
searching for a disease dependent diagnostic, disease
progression predictive, and therapy responsive biomarker in HTLV-1 infection, similar to HIV-1 serum RNA
and CD4 + T cell count. So far we know that high
HTLV-1 proviral load/100 PBMCs (≥ 10%), high CD4
+
/CD25 + T cell lymphocyte count, and oligoclonal
expansion are associated with HTLV-1 associated disease, such as HTLV-1 associated myelopathy and ATL.
Similarly Demontis et al. reported that 15% of asymptomatic carriers (AC) attending the National Centre for
Human Retrovirology in London, UK, had a proviral
load (pVL) > 10% PBMCs, and 3% even had a pVL >
20% PBMCs [17]. These carriers might need long term,
close surveillance. She also reported a high mean intrapatient variability of pVL, not only in AC (65%, SD 21),
but also in patients with HAM/TSP (51%, SD 23). If
reproduced, this must be taken into consideration for
any HTLV-1 clinical trial sample size calculation.
The association between HTLV-1 pVL and HAM/TSP
was confirmed by Grassi et al. but the proviral load did
not differentiate between the three Belem diagnostic criteria of HAM/TSP (possible, probable and definite) [18].
Yamano et al. reported high levels of CXCL10 (Interferon g-induced protein) in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
and serum, neopterin in CSF, and soluble IL-2 receptor
in serum to correlate with severity of HAM/TSP disease
(n = 30). They also classified patients into different
stages of HAM/TSP disease [19]. This approach would
allow the recruitment of patients with similar disease
severity into clinical trials.
Treatments for HAM/TSP

Gotuzzo et al. observed that routine treatment of
patients with rapidly progressive HAM/TSP (< 2 years
onset) with oral prednisolone together with lamivudine
+/- zidovudine for 12 months led to a significant
decrease in HTLV-1 pVL in 7/11 patients (p = 0.01)
and an insignificant increase in 4/11 patients (p = 0.06)
at the 7 months follow up [20]. An early, but only transient clinical improvement, was observed (personal communication). Only a randomised control trial will be
able to control for the natural fluctuation of pVL within
patients and show true treatment effect.
Raltegravir, an integrase inhibitor, is a licensed antiviral drug against HIV and also inhibits cell free and cell
associated transmission of HTLV-1 as well as the
immortalisation of HTLV-1 positive PBMCs ex vivo
[21]. Contrary to previous reports, Fox et al. detected 1

Page 3 of 15

and 2 episomal long terminal repeat (LTR) HTLV-1
DNA circles in freshly and chronically HTLV-1 infected
cell lines and patient PBMCs (n = 16). These were readily detected in patients with HAM/TSP and ATL, but
not in AC. A significant rise in 2LTR DNA circles was
observed in freshly infected and raltegravir treated CEM
cell lines, especially within the first three days of infection [22]. In vivo, however, Trevino et al. observed only
a transient decrease of HTLV-1 pVL in two HAM/TSP
out of five HTLV-1 positive patients and no clinical
improvement, when treated for 12 months with raltegravir mono-therapy [23].
Treatments for ATLL

Haematopoetic stem cell transplantation (HSCT)
remains so far the only curative intervention for ATL
albeit with high myeloablation associated mortality. Uike
et al. reported the long term survival of 9/10 patients
with ATL treated in the NST-1/NST-2 clinical trial
(HSCT + reduced intensity conditioning) regime [24] at
a median 115 months follow up. All patients showed
complete donor chimera and 3/10 patients had undetectable HTLV-1 pVL at the last follow up [25]. Relapse
of ATL is frequent and difficult to treat, despite the
modernisation of first line chemotherapy with additional
azidothymidine (AZT) and interferon (IFN). Suarez et
al. treated patient with ATL with arsenic trioxide + IFN
a combination as maintenance therapy following induction chemotherapy +/- AZT and IFN a. Five/11 patients
(4 CR, 1 PR) were alive at follow up (9 to 46 months) of
whom 3/5 patients had lymphomatous ATL. However
6/11 patients who were progressing at the time of maintenance therapy did not respond and died [26]. Larger
randomised controlled phase III trials are needed to
reduce this selection bias.
Following a phase I trial [27], Utsunomiya et al. treated 13 patients with CCR4+ relapsed ATL with antiCCR4 antibody (KW-0761, i.v. 1 mg once weekly for 8
weeks) in multicentre phase II trial. The overall
response in 26/28 patients was 50% (8 CR, 5PR). Notably there was a marked difference between median overall and progression free survival (13.7 vs. 5.2 months)
[28].
HTLV-1 persists by driving clonal proliferation of
infected T lymphocytes [29], and several studies tested
the reinstatement of polyclonal versus oligoclonal T
lymphocytes as a marker of treatment response. Ramos
et al. presented preliminary clinical trial data of adding
histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor valproic acid to
maintenance therapy AZT+INF-a in 13 patients with
acute ATL and observed a serial decrease in clonal ATL
disease followed by molecular clearance in one patient.
In vitro testing of newer, more potent HDAC inhibitors
are planned [30]. Hodson et al. observed a 33% response

Martin et al. Retrovirology 2011, 8:86
http://www.retrovirology.com/content/8/1/86

rate in acute ATL (n = 3, median OS: 3 months, 1CR)
and 100% in chronic ATL (n = 5, median OS: 20
months) to AZT+ INF-a as first line therapy alone [31].
Again, not only a reduction in pVL, but also the reemergence of polyclonal integration patterns were associated with disease remission.

Page 4 of 15

anti-cancer drugs in a related abstract, further illustrating the usefulness of the model. Van den Broeke et al.
[36] utilized NOD-Scid-g immunodeficient mice to test
in vivo kinome profiles from BLV-induced leukemic
sheep.
Transgenic mice

Future directions

In summary, randomised controlled trials remain
urgently needed to determine reliable biomarkers of
HTLV-1 disease and of treatment response as well as to
establish a treatment strategy especially for lymphomatous ATL, relapsed ATL and any stage of HAM/TSP.

Animal Models
Presentations during the Animal Models section illustrate ongoing efforts to understand the pathogenesis of
HTLV-1-associated diseases using a variety of model
systems. The development of accurate and reproducible
animal models is critical to the understanding of the
pathogenesis of HTLV-1-associated diseases. No perfect
model exists that recapitulates all aspects of HTLV-1
diseases syndromes. Transmission and viral spread of
HTLV-1 have been studied in rabbits and non-human
primates, but lesion development and reagents are limited in these species. As reflected in the meeting
abstracts, the mouse provides a cost effective and highly
reproducible model in which to study factors related to
lymphoma development and the preclinical efficacy of
potential therapies against adult T-cell lymphoma and
leukemia (ATL). These include important transgenic
mouse models that have been utilized to study viral
determinants of lymphocyte transformation in vivo.
Immunodeficient mice

The six presentations chosen for platform presentations
covered a variety of relevant topics. Xenografts of adult
T-cell leukemia/lymphoma (ATL) cells or cell lines into
immunodeficient mice replicate features of ATL and
allow systems to test therapies against the neoplastic
disease [32]. Tezuka et al. reported their development of
ATL-like disease in humanized mice (huNOG) by the
intra-bone marrow transplantation of NOG-SCID
mouse with CD133+ hematopoietic stem cells purified
from human cord blood infected with HTLV-1 [33].
Inverse PCR analysis of provirus integration sites
revealed oligoclonal expansion of infected T cells in
CD4 + /CD25 + T-cells similar to HTLV-1-infected
humans. Villaudy et al. reported that HTLV-1 induces
alterations of the thymus of Rag2-/IL-2R gc- mice leading to expanded populations of mature CD4+/CD25+ T
cells and other pathological features such as splenomegaly and lymphomas compared with mock-infected mice
[34,35]. This unique model system was then used to test

Transgenic mouse models continue to provide new
insights into the molecular mechanisms of HTLV-1 Tax.
Swaims et al. reported on the role of HTLV-1 expression in chronically-infected CD4+ T cells using LTR-Tax
Transgenic mice [37]. In this system, immune activated
Tax CD4+ T cells express characteristics of several different CD4+ T cell subtypes, suggesting that HTLV-1
Tax induces changes in the normal pattern of CD4 +
subtype specification. In an interesting study using a
bioinformatics approach, Suzuki et al. [38] identified
proteins differentially expressed in a model of Taxinduced lymphoma [39]. Among the more than 700 proteins detected, levels of 53 proteins were increased in
stem cells, including one membrane protein, which
might potentially serve as a new target of antibodybased therapy.
Shinagawa et al. [40] constructed a Transgenic (Tg)
rat expressing human CRM1 (hCRM1), a cellular cofactor of Rex, and provided data that T cells derived from
Tg rats allowed production of HTLV-1 as efficiently as
human T cells [41]. Their results suggest the presence
of inhibitor(s) during the entry process in rat dentritic
cells. Rosewick et al. [42] reported ongoing studies in
the bovine leukemia virus (BLV) model using highthroughput sequencing to reveal down-regulation of
small non-coding viral RNAs that might contribute to
tumor-associated virus silencing and play a role in
immune escape mechanisms [43]. Ohsugi and Kumasaka reported their findings of a transgenic mouse
model of arthropathy expressing Tax in mature thymocytes and peripheral T lymphocytes [44,45]. Rauch et al.
reported that Tax expression in IL-15 knockout mice
[46,47] led to the development of larger and more
aggressive tumors, suggesting caution against IL-15
blockade as an ATLL therapy [8]. Taguchi et al. [48]
investigated the production of cytokines in HBZ Transgenic (HBZ-Tg) mice and provided data to support the
concept that altered Foxp3 expression in iTreg cells may
result in systemic inflammation [49].
Nonhuman primates

Moura et al. provided promising data for new targeted
therapy against ATL in a monkey model [50]. They
demonstrated that HTLV-1-infected cells constitutively
express high levels of surface transferrin receptor (TfR)
in acute forms of ATL and tested a monoclonal antibody (mAb A24) on ATL cells ex vivo. Importantly, in

Martin et al. Retrovirology 2011, 8:86
http://www.retrovirology.com/content/8/1/86

squirrel monkeys, (Saimiri sciureus), the administration
of single and repeated doses of A24 did not induce significant toxicity yet increased transferrin and elicited
apoptosis in lymph node samples in areas of high lymphocyte proliferation (germinal centres). This new agent
(A24) is a potential new treatment of acute forms of
ATL.
Rabbits

Haines et al. provided data on the development of an
oral model of HTLV-1 transmission in rabbits to allow
testing of the mucosal microenvironment during the
early stages of orally-acquired HTLV-1 [51].
BLV studies

Several investigators provided data on host and viral
determinants of BLV infection. Gutiérrez et al. [52] provided intriguing data on the efficacy of a life-attenuated
BLV vaccine to prevent viral transmission in cattle [53].
Aida et al. in a highly collaborative project identified
genetic markers of BLV induced disease [54].
Future directions

There is a great need to continue developing models
that reflect all stages of the infection and the full range
of disease syndromes in humans infected with HTLV-1.
Important gaps exist in the knowledge of early mucosal
transmission and cell-to-cell transmission, such as early
target cells and the tissue environmental influences that
allow the virus to spread following oral and sexual
routes of transmission. In addition, few animal models
accurately mimic the neurologic disorders associated
with HTLV-1 infection. Finally, models to reproduce the
influence of co-infections with HTLV-1 and how these
agents exacerbate the spectrum of HTLV-1 disease are
needed to fully understand the pathogenesis of HTLV-1
in humans and to assist in the development of new therapeutic agents to ablate these devastating diseases.

Molecular and cellular biology
Regulation of HTLV-1 5’LTR

The primary activity of Tax is to modulate viral expression through the CREB/ATF pathway. Using HTLV-1
integrated chromatin templates, Easley et al. showed
that an active viral promoter uses the chromatin remodelling complex PBAF [55]. McCabe et al. suggested
that the cellular FHL3 protein is involved in Taxmediated transactivation. On the other hand Robette et
al. [56] described that in latently infected cells, but not
in cells that actively produce HTLV-1 virions, the
CTIP2 complex (which contains histone deacetylases
and a methyltransferase) is recruited onto the 5’ LTR
and inhibits Tax-mediated transcription, similar to what
was described for HIV-1 [57].

Page 5 of 15

Tax post-translational modifications and NF-B activation

Tax is also involved in cell transformation, notably
through the constitutive activation of the NF-B pathway that can be divided into cytoplasmic and nuclear
events. Ubiquitinated Tax is mostly found in the cytoplasm, while SUMOylated Tax is located in the nucleus.
However, how Tax precisely shuttles between the cytoplasm and the nucleus and which fractions play a role
in the NF-B pathway is still a matter of debate. Kfoury
et al. demonstrated that the same Tax molecule shuttles
between the cytoplasm and the nucleus [58,59]. Ubiquitination targets Tax to nuclear bodies, but interestingly
both ubiquitination and SUMOylation control IKKg targeting to the centrosome where NF-B activation
begins. Bex et al. demonstrated that Tax co-localizes
with TAB2- and IKKg-positive structures in the cytoplasm, suggesting that they represent an important
domain in the NF-B activation process [60]. Whether
the Tax species that are present there are ubiquitinated
or not was not determined. Yasunaga et al. showed that
the ubiquitinated fraction of Tax is a substrate of
USP20, an ubiquitin specific peptidase, leading to Tax
deubiquitination and to the suppression of NF-B activation [61,62]. Interestingly, USP20 levels are low in
HTLV-1-infected cells, where NF-B is usually elevated.
It would now be of interest to determine whether this
protein promotes the accumulation of SUMOylated Tax.
By contrast, Lavorgna et al. described that STAMBPL1,
another deubiquitinating (DUB) enzyme, is necessary for
Tax activity [63]. Importantly, STAMBPL1 does not
induce Tax de-ubiquitination but protects Tax from
degradation. The target of STAMBPL1 now remains to
be identified. Fryrear et al. showed that the SUMOylated nuclear fraction is a substrate of RNF4, a SUMOtargeted ubiquitin ligase (STUbL) [64]. This promotes
Tax translocation from nucleus to cytoplasm and its
ubiquitination. siRNA suppression of RNF4 prevented
damage-mediated nuclear egress of Tax. Interestingly,
using T lymphocytes, Bonnet et al. showed that a Tax
mutant that is ubiquitinated, but not SUMOylated can
reach the nucleus, but is severely impaired for NF-B
activation, underscoring the complexity of the relationship between localization, post-translational modification
and transcriptional activity of Tax [65].
Adding to the complexity, Journo et al. demonstrated
that the HTLV-2 Tax protein, which does not localize
like HTLV-1 Tax in the cell (Figure 1), is barely ubiquitinated [66]. Nevertheless, it efficiently recruits IKKg,
promotes RelA nuclear translocation, and leads to NFB activation. Turci et al. showed however that Tax2
can be ubiquitinated and SUMOylated under experimental conditions where ubiquitin or SUMO is overexpressed [67]. Shembade et al. demonstrated that Tax
prevents TAX1BP1 phosphorylation and therefore

Martin et al. Retrovirology 2011, 8:86
http://www.retrovirology.com/content/8/1/86

Page 6 of 15

allows a constitutive NF-B activation [68]. Fu et al.
also showed that both the canonical and the non-canonical NF-B pathways play roles during Tax-mediated
tumorigenesis in vivo [69]. Even if NF-B is activated,
Tax expression is usually low in leukemic cells. Yamagishi et al. showed that mir-31 is down regulated in
these cells. Interestingly, a target of mir-31 is NIK, a
kinase that is involved in NF-B activation [70]. Altogether, these results suggest that (i) both HTLV-1 Tax
ubiquitination and SUMOylation are important for the
activation of the NF-B pathway, (ii) several DUBs are
directly or indirectly involved in the regulation of this
process, (iii) HTLV-2 Tax does not function as its
HTLV-1 counterpart, and (iv) in ATL cells, the NF-B
pathway is possibly activated through the down-regulation of cellular miRNAs.

functions are impaired. Peloponese et al. determined
how the HBZ promoter is regulated and suggested that,
in addition to Tax, HBZ itself regulates its own promoter through its interaction with JunD and its action on
the Sp1 binding sites [72]. Working on viral latency and
viral expression, Choudhary et al. demonstrated that
HBZ expression results in a lower p30 mRNA expression [73,74]. p30 is a negative post-transcriptional regulator. It specifically reduces the level of tax/rex
cytoplasmic mRNAs in a dose-dependent manner resulting in a decreased viral replication. This was demonstrated both in cells transfected with an HTLV-1
molecular clone and in HTLV-1 infected cells transduced with VSV-p30 pseudotyped viruses [75]. These
results would suggest that HBZ indirectly favours Tax
expression. Consistent with previous reports demonstrating that HBZ promotes cell proliferation, Mukai &
Ohshima suggested that HBZ activates the mTOR signalling which plays a role in cell proliferation [76], while
Zhi et al. reported that HBZ down-regulates NF-B and
prevents Tax-mediated senescence, therefore allowing
the infected cells to divide [77,78]. Given that ATL cells
display a constitutively active NF-B pathway, these
results suggest that the negative effect of HBZ on the
NF-B pathway is counteracted, possibly through mir31 down-regulation.
Marban et al. demonstrated that APH-2 (the HTLV-2
counterpart of HBZ) binds c-Jun, but contrary to HBZ,
enhances its ability to activate AP-1 [79]. Interestingly,
Larocque et al. showed that the APH-3 and APH-4 proteins (encoded respectively by HTLV-3 and HTLV-4)
also activate JunB, c-Jun and JunD-mediated transcription [80]. Altogether, these results suggest that, apart
from HBZ, and despite having very divergent aminoacid sequences, all APH proteins activate AP-1 factors.
Whether this plays a role in vivo remains to be
determined.

HBZ and cellular transformation

HTLV auxiliary proteins

Expression of Tax is rarely detected in ATL cells, thus
favoring a model in which Tax is necessary to initiate
cell immortalisation and transformation, but not the
proliferation of the tumour cells. The HBZ viral protein
might play a major role at the late stage of the disease,
by preventing transcription from the 5’ LTR and therefore tax expression, but also by promoting cell proliferation. Wright et al. showed that, in addition to its
physical interaction with CBP/p300 proteins, HBZ inhibits their Histone Acetyl Transferase (HAT) activity and
consequently represses 5’LTR transcription. Inhibition
of CBP/p300 HAT function also leads to a decreased
activity of other cellular transcription factors such as
p53 or p65/RelA [71]. It would now be important to
determine the fate of these cells, where CBP/p300

The p12, p13, p30 proteins play an important role in the
HTLV-1 viral cycle and in viral persistence in vivo.
Edwards et al. showed that following palmitoylation and
localization to membrane lipid rafts, both p12 and its
cleavage product p8 can form homo- and hetero-dimers
[81]. Interestingly, some HTLV-1 infected individuals
carry a virus encoding a mutated, dimerisation-impaired
p8 protein. Because p8 is involved in viral transmission,
this could suggest that some patients are better transmitters than others. Silic-Benussi et al. demonstrated
that p13 increased mitochondrial ROS production
resulting in activation of primary T-cells and sensitization to death of tumour T- cells [82,83]. Andresen et al.
suggested that, in the presence of Tax, p13 partially colocalizes and directly binds Tax in nuclear speckles. It

Figure 1 HTLV-1 Tax (Tax1) and HTLV-2 Tax (Tax2) have
different subcellular localization. pSG5M-Tax-1-His (left) and
pSG5M-Tax-2B-His (right) were transiently transfected into
coverglasses-seeded HeLa cells. Twenty four hours post-transfection,
cells were fixed and stained with a rabbit anti-histidine antibody (sc803, Santa Cruz Biotechnology) followed by a fluoresceinconjugated goat anti-rabbit antibody (green, Vector). Coverglasses
were then mounted with DAPI-containing mounting medium (blue,
Fluoromount-G, Southern Biotech) and cells were visualized using a
Leica TCS SP5 confocal microscope. Images of cells that are
representative of the entire population are shown.

Martin et al. Retrovirology 2011, 8:86
http://www.retrovirology.com/content/8/1/86

decreases Tax binding to the CBP/p300 transcriptional
co-activator, and, by reducing Tax transcriptional activity, suppresses viral expression [84,85]. This suggests
that p13 also negatively regulates the viral expression
and therefore favours latency. Finally, Turpin et al.
demonstrated the existence of two spliced mRNAs
encoded by STLV-3 pX ORFs. One of these mRNA
encodes a protein (tentatively named p8) whose function
seems similar to that of the HTLV-1 p30 or HTLV-2
p28, although its precise mechanism of action remains
unknown [86].
Future directions

It appears now clearly that Tax’s post-translational modifications impact its cellular localization, either in the
cytoplasm or in the cell nucleus and therefore its function. Despite a number of recent findings a number of
questions still exist: i) what is the exact role of Tax
post-translational modifications in NF-B activation and
in LTR transcription? ii) How are these post-translational modifications regulated? How is one Tax species
converted to another? iii) Since at least three different
HTLV-1 proteins repress Tax expression, how exactly is
the HTLV-1 cycle regulated in vivo? More research
needs to be done into the intimate interplay between
Tax and HBZ and their consequence on cell cycle, NFB and HTLV-1 pathogenesis.

Virology
Viral transmission

HTLV-1 propagation and persistence in vivo depend on
both de novo entry into host cells ("infectious transmission”) and “mitotic transmission” of the integrated viral
genome to daughter cells. Studies on HTLV-1 entry
focused on the importance of dendritic cells [87,88] and
on the HTLV-1 binding and entry into cells, which
involve the hierarchical interaction of viral envelope glycoproteins with three molecules on the surface of target
cells: heparan sulfate proteoglycans, Neuropilin 1 and
the glucose transporter GLUT1 [89]. Jensen et al. also
showed evidence for a role in HTLV-1 entry of Xylosyltransferase 2, an enzyme encoded on chromosome 17q
[90]. Efficient cell-to-cell spread of HTLV-1 occurs via a
highly organized cell-cell contact known as the virological synapse (VS). Nejmeddine et al. showed exclusion of
actin microfilaments in the VS in infected T-cells, a
change that may facilitate viral transmission [91].
Mother-to-child transmission through breastfeeding is a
major mode of HTLV-1 transmission. Martin-Latil et
al. developed an in vitro model to study passage of
HTLV-1 through an epithelial barrier. Results showed
that, although enterocytes were not susceptible to infection, HTLV-1 virions were detected in the basal

Page 7 of 15

compartment, suggesting a transcytotic mechanism of
passage [92].
Dynamics of HTLV-1 propagation/expression in vivo

Gillet et al. demonstrated that negative selection (possibly exerted by CTLs) dominates during chronic infection, favouring proviruses integrated in transcriptionally
silenced DNA [93].
Using splice site-specific qRT-PCR, Rende et al.
demonstrated a two-phase kinetics of HTLV-1 gene
expression in PBMCs from infected patients, with the
expression of Tax/Rex mRNA preceding that of other
viral transcripts; the authors also demonstrated the Rexdependency of this kinetics and showed that over 90%
of the HBZ mRNAs were localized in the nucleus [94].
Bender et al. showed that HTLV-2 exhibits a similar 2phase kinetics. However, a distinguishing characteristic
of HTLV-2 was its higher expression of mRNAs encoding potential inhibitors of Tax and Rex, i.e. p28 and
truncated isoforms of Rex [95]. Future studies should be
aimed at testing whether HTLV-2 exhibits a more latent
pattern of expression compared to HTLV-1. Belrose et
al. also analyzed HTLV-1 expression in PBMCsfrom
infected patients and showed that the HDAC inhibitor
valproate enhanced Tax while it blocked HBZ expression, suggesting that the balance between Tax and HBZ
may determine the outcome of VPA treatment [96].
Oka T et al. reported that the number of genes with
methylated CpG islands increased with ATLL progression, especially in ATLL lymphomas. The high number
of methylated genes correlated with a shorter patient
survival [97]. HTLV-1 and HTLV-2 tropism and spread
were also studied by Kannian et al. in a rabbit animal
model. Results showed that HTLV-2 proviral loads were
lower than HTLV-1, and infection was prevalent in CD8
+ cells [98].
Effects of HTLV-1 proteins on the DNA damage response

Boxus et al. showed that Tax associates with the minichromosome maintenance MCM2-7 helicase complex
and localizes to origins of replication. Through this
interaction, Tax fires supplementary origins at the onset
of S phase, thus accelerating S phase progression, but
also generating replicative stress and activation of the
DNA damage response [99]; this pathway is also
engaged by HTLV-1 p30 through its ability to bind
ATM and REGg [100], and by HBZ, which increases the
sensitivity of Jurkat cells to cell death induced by DNA
damaging drugs [101].
Post-transcriptional effects of Tax

Effects of Tax at the post-transcriptional level are also
emerging: Mocquet et al. demonstrated that Tax

Martin et al. Retrovirology 2011, 8:86
http://www.retrovirology.com/content/8/1/86

interacts with INT6, sequestering it from the Nonsense
Mediated mRNA Decay (NMD) factors UPF1/2. Tax
also increases the size and number of P bodies, the site
of UPF1 accumulation with mRNAs targeted by NMD.
These data suggest that Tax regulates mRNA degradation through NMD [102]. Van Duyne et al. reported a
down regulation of the RNAi component Drosha in
HTLV-1 infected cells; the colocalisation of Tax with
Drosha in nuclear speckles suggests functional interactions of Tax with the RNAi machinery [103].
Complementary-strand genes of HTLV-1 and HTLV-2

Borowiak et al. showed that primary leukemic cells isolated from ATLL patients express high amounts of
hTERT, the catalytic subunit of the telomerase complex,
and exhibit elevated expression of HBZ and Menin, an
inhibitor of hTERT expression [104]. Douceron et al.
observed that expression of HTLV-2 APH-2 and Tax
are correlated with HTLV-2 proviral load, but not with
lymphocytosis; consistent with this, APH2 (contrary to
HBZ of HTLV-1) did not promote cell proliferation in
vitro [105]. The nuclear localization of complementary
strand transcripts of both HTLV-1 and HTLV-2 [95]
might favour viral persistence by reducing translation
and exposure of the infected cell to the CTL response
while allowing function as a non-coding transcripts.

Immunology
It is now accepted that an efficient CD8 + cytotoxic T
cell (CTL) response to HTLV-1 reduces the proviral
load and the risk of inflammatory diseases such as
HAM/TSP, but it remains possible that CD8 + T cells
also contribute to the tissue damage that leads to neurological symptoms. It is also unknown, although it seems
highly probable, whether an efficient anti-HTLV-1 CTL
response also protects against ATLL.
CTL response

The Tax protein of HTLV-1 remains a focus of much
work on the CTL response, because the frequency of
Tax-specific CTLs is higher than that of CTLs specific
to any HTLV-1 antigen: that is, the Tax protein is
immunodominant in the CTL response. Kubota et al.
found that HLA-A24-restricted CTLs can recognize low
concentrations of Tax, and they suggest that such cells
might contribute to the pathogenesis of HAM/TSP
[106]. The expression of surface molecules associated
with T cell exhaustion (PD-1; Tim-3) is low on HTLV1-specific CTLs which may help to preserve a functional
antiviral response [107,108]. However, it is now apparent that the protective CTL response to HTLV-1 may
not in fact be directed against Tax, but against other
HTLV-1 proteins. Although the Tax protein is immunodominant, and HLA-A2 is protective in HTLV-1

Page 8 of 15

infection in southern Japan, and Tax peptides can bind
strongly to HLA-A2, there is no direct evidence that the
strong anti-Tax CTL response itself is protective.
Indeed, recent evidence shows that it is efficient CTL
recognition of the HBZ protein, not Tax, that confers
protection in HTLV-1 infection [109].
Interferon, interleukins and chemokines

Kannagi et al. reported the potentially important finding
that type 1 interferon (IFN) can reduce HTLV-1 Gag
protein expression in vitro [110]. If this is true in vivo, it
provides an attractive explanation for the puzzling
observation that HTLV-1 proviral expression spontaneously and dramatically rises in freshly isolated
PBMCs. Proviral transcription may be suppressed in
vivo by type 1 IFN produced by, for example lymphatic
endothelium; this repression would then be released
when the cells are incubated ex vivo, away from the
endothelium. Type 1 IFN has been tried as a treatment
for HAM/TSP, albeit with limited success. Moens et al.
reported that ascorbic acid has a more powerful antiviral and anti-proliferative effects than IFN-a alpha on
freshly isolated PBMCs from HTLV-1-infected people
[111]. Just as the CTL response might exert detrimental
effects as well as the observed protective effects in
HTLV-1 infection, so IFNs may exert mixed effects.
Tattermusch et al. used gene expression microarray analysis and discovered an IFN signature in HTLV-1 infection: high level expression of IFN-stimulated genes was
associated with the presence of HAM/TSP, independently of the proviral load [112]. Perhaps a local excess
of both IFNs and CTL activity in the CNS is detrimental, although each is beneficial in the host as a whole.
The role of chemokines and cytokines other than IFNs
deserves more attention in HTLV-1 infection. IL-15,
which promotes replication and survival of NK cells and
CD8+ T cells (CTLs), is upregulated in HTLV-1 infection. Rauch et al. provided a warning, however, that IL15 can also promote tumour growth in Tax-transgenic
mice [46]. IL-18 is a cytokine that stimulates the production of the potentially inflammatory IFN-g by NK
cells and T cells. Wagatsuma et al. reported that certain
polymorphisms in the IL-18 gene promoter were more
frequent in patients with HTLV-1 infection than uninfected controls in Brazil [113]. However, there was no
significant difference in allele frequency between asymptomatic HTLV-1 carriers and patients with HAM/TSP,
and it remains in question whether IL-18 plays a role in
the pathogenesis of HAM/TSP. HTLV-1 Tax protein
has previously been shown to cause infected T cells to
secrete the chemokine CCL22, which maintains the high
frequency of CD4 + FoxP3 + cells observed in HTLV-1
infection. Barrios et al. provided evidence that recombinant Tax from HTLV-1 (Tax-1) and HTLV-2 (Tax-2)

Martin et al. Retrovirology 2011, 8:86
http://www.retrovirology.com/content/8/1/86

can stimulate production of 3 CC chemokines by
PBMCs in vitro [114]. Further work is needed to assess
the possible significance of this observation in vivo.

Page 9 of 15

the balance of beneficial and harmful effects of interferon in HTLV-1 infection? What are the causes and
consequences of the observed reduction in the number
and activity of NK cells in HTLV-1 infection?

HBZ

It is now realized that the HBZ gene, encoded on the
negative strand of the HTLV-1 provirus, plays a critical
role in several aspects of HTLV-1 biology. Its importance as the antigen recognized by the protective class 1
HLA-associated immune response was mentioned
above. HBZ itself may also counter the immune
response: Douville et al. found that HBZ may inhibit
IFN type 1 responses when transfected into human
PBMCs and astrocytes, by down regulating IRF3-dependent signalling [115]. Miyazato et al. reported that HBZ
both upregulated expression of the transcription factor
FoxP3, which is characteristic of regulatory T cells
(Tregs), and simultaneously diminished the suppressive
(regulatory) functions of the FoxP3+ cells [116]. Intriguingly, both of these effects have also been reported to be
exerted by Tax. Sugata et al. observed that HBZ can
also repress transcription from the IFN gamma promoter, and the authors suggested that this repression might
contribute to the severe immunosuppression characteristic of adult T cell leukaemia/lymphoma [117].
Antibody response

The antibody response to HTLV-1 has been much less
studied than the T cell response. It has long been
known that anti-HTLV-antibody can reach very high
titres, especially in patients with HAM/TSP. Akahata et
al. have devised a luciferase immune-precipitation system to quantify anti-HTLV-1 antibodies, and suggest
that the assay may be useful as a prognostic or diagnostic test [118]. Kuo et al. used recombinant Env proteins
to generate potently antiviral monoclonal antibodies in
mice [119]. This system may prove useful to identify
potentially protective antibody epitopes in Env protein,
which varies in sequence compared with the Env protein
of HIV-1.
Future directions

The findings summarized above raise many important
questions that deserve more attention in future research.
Among these questions, we identify four of particular
interest: i) Since HTLV-1 with the same sequence
causes the full range of malignant and inflammatory diseases, the outcome of infection must be determined by
variation among hosts. The class 1-restricted CTL
response accounts for about 50% of the observed risk of
HAM/TSP: what accounts for the remaining 50%? And
does HLA class 1 genotype also determine the risk of
ATLL? ii) How does KIR genotype determine the efficiency of HLA class 1-mediated protection? iii) What is

Endogenous retroviruses, foamy viruses and
XMRV
The growing importance of non-HTLV human retroviruses was highlighted by the Scientific Committee
organizing two sessions entitled “Endogenous retrovirus,
foamy viruses and XMRV”. Debate and discussion of
whether Xenotropic Murine leukemia virus (MLV)
Related Virus (XMRV) represents genuine human
viruses or laboratory artefacts continued during these
two sessions.
XMRV

Two presentations did not find XMRV or related viruses
in persons with chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS) or multiple sclerosis (MS) while a third report found only polytropic MLV in both CFS patients and healthy controls
[120-123]. However, two articles published in Science
the week of the conference helped elucidate the origin
and significance of XMRV. Propotka et al. provided
strong evidence that XMRV was not present in the
human prostate cancer cell line 22Rv1, but rather is a
novel mouse gammaretrovirus generated via recombination during the passage of human prostate tissue xenografts in nude mice, containing near perfect chimeras of
the 5’ and 3’ halves of the consensus XMRV genome
[124]. Knox et al. using serology, culture, and PCR
methods, failed to confirm XMRV infection in persons
with chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS) [125], including
those found positive in the original study by Lombardi
et al. [126]. Knox et al. showed that sera containing
complement from CFS patients and matched controls
both inactivated XMRV and MLV in vitro, restricting
infection of human cells with these viruses, suggesting
that sustained infection in humans is highly unlikely
[125]. They reported evidence of contamination of
mouse monoclonal antibodies used in hot start PCR
enzymes and cell sorting/staining. Contamination and
non-specific serologic reactivity, as sources of false positive results in XMRV studies, were further emphasized
in presentations by Erlwein et al.[127] and Qiu et al.
[128]. Qiagen columns used for DNA extraction from
paraffin-embedded tissues contained both MLV and
XMRV gag sequences, adding to the plethora of
reagents, such as PCR enzymes, monoclonal antibodies
and cell lines found to be contaminated with these
viruses and sequences. Qiu et al. presented data showing
cross-reactivity of sera from HTLV-1-infected persons
with a conserved peptide region in the XMRV p15E
envelope surface protein. They also reported an absence

Martin et al. Retrovirology 2011, 8:86
http://www.retrovirology.com/content/8/1/86

of reactivity in a large number of US blood donors and
HIV-1-infected Africans using well-validated assays, suggesting that previous sero-reactive results obtained by
others may be due to cross-reactivity or non-specific
binding using incompletely validated tests [128].
Combined with the majority of the negative reports,
these findings have questioned the findings from laboratories previously reporting positive results which now
needs to exclude the possibility that the positive findings
may have arisen from contamination. Such was the case
in the presentation by Hanson et al. who described the
extensive testing done and still to be performed to rule
out false positive MLV results in the persons with CFS
and healthy controls in their study [120]. Although the
field is now heavily favouring an end to the investigation
of XMRV and MLV as human viruses, two ongoing studies at multiple institutions, one led by the National
Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI) of the NIH as
presented by Graham Simmons [129] and one led by
Ian Lipkin at Columbia University, should finally clarify
whether XMRV and MLV are present in blood donors
and persons with CFS, respectively.
Simian foamy viruses

While the end is seemingly near for XMRV, much more
research is needed to better understand the public
health importance of human infection with other retroviruses, including simian foamy virus (SFV), a common
infection in nonhuman primates (NHPs) [130]. From
the meeting, it is clear that SFV is widely distributed
across central Africa (Cameroon, Democratic Republic
of Congo, Gabon), mostly in persons with exposure to
NHPs, but also in persons without reported NHP exposure [123,131,132]. For example, the wife of an SFVinfected hunter in Cameroon was reported to be seropositive, raising the possibility of person-to-person transmission [131]. However, additional work is needed to
determine if SFV is transmitted secondarily and if so, at
what frequency.
STLVs

In addition to SFV, other simian retroviruses are known
to cross species and infect humans [133]. For example,
Calvignac-Spencer et al. provided evidence for zoonotic
transmission of Simian T-Lymphotropic Virus type 1
(STLV-1) from Colobus monkeys and chimpanzees in
Côte d’Ivoire [134]. In contrast, the lack of a closely
related STLV has been an enigma for understanding the
evolutionary history and origin of HTLV-2. STLV-2 in
captive and wild bonobos is genetically similar, but very
distinct from HTLV-2 [135]. The finding of only HTLV2 subtype b strains in Baka Pygmies, some of the oldest
inhabitants of Cameroon, phylogenetically related to
HTLV-2b in Amerindians, suggests an African origin for

Page 10 of 15

both STLV-2 and HTLV-2. HTLV-2b may have comigrated with the ancient movement of Africans
through Asia, across the Bering Strait, and into the
Americas [136]. Alternatively, HTLV-2b in the Baka
may be due to a more recent introduction into Africa.
An expanded search for STLV-2-like viruses in NHPs
and testing of other ancient African and Asian populations will help clarify these possibilities.
Endogenous retroviruses

ERVs integrated into the human genome millions of
years ago and have been associated with a variety of illnesses, including cancer and multiple sclerosis (MS),
though these associations remain controversial [137]. At
the conference, several presentations [138-141]
addressed the role of ERVs in MS and various cancers.
However, case-control studies and animal model studies
using infectious molecular clones are required to fully
understand what role, if any, ERVs may play in human
disease.
Future directions

Screening people for retroviruses in conjunction with
other blood borne and sexually transmitted infections in
endemic areas would help to determine if these viruses
are entering the general population and if co-infections
facilitate such transmission. Longitudinal, long-term follow-up studies will determine the pathogenicity of these
viruses in humans. Establishing the prevalence of so
called “harmless” retroviruses, such as SFV, in specific
patient cohorts with common chronic conditions, malignant and inflammatory, in endemic regions, would add
to our understanding of how these viruses might be
contributing to human diseases. Genetic characterization
of complete genomes and studying the intra-host and
inter-host evolution of these viruses, coupled with animal model studies, will help understand the possible
pathogenicity of these novel human viruses. Together,
population-based and expanded molecular epidemiologic
studies will determine how widespread these viruses are
and determine their natural history in their non-human
and human primate hosts.

Conclusions
As anticipated, the 15th HTLV Conference on Human
Retrovirology, HTLV and Related Viruses led to the
early distribution of exciting new data, especially in the
field of molecular and animal models of science.
Although little progress had been made specifically in
the development of treatment for lymphomatous ATL
and HAM/TSP since the 14th Conference in Bahia, Brazil, this conference supported the formation of two clinical trial groups: HAM/TSP and ATL Clinical Trial
Subgroups. The aims of these groups are three fold: i)

Martin et al. Retrovirology 2011, 8:86
http://www.retrovirology.com/content/8/1/86

to inform members of relevant published clinical data;
ii) to introduce working groups planning future clinical
trials and iii) to inform members of ongoing clinical
trials and expand recruitment. The HAM/TSP CTSG is
currently developing a multicentre, international phase
III clinical trial in patients with active HAM/TSP, with
principle investigators from Brazil, Japan, Peru, USA
and UK. These groups and much more are accessible
through the HTLV association website (http://htlv.net).
The HTLV 16 th conference will be held in Montreal,
Canada in June 2013.

Conflict of interests
None of the authors declared any conflict of interests.
Use of trade names is for identification only and does
not imply endorsement by the U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services, the Public Health Service,
or the Centres for Disease Control and Prevention. The
findings and conclusions in this report are those of the
author and do not necessarily represent the views of the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. RM is supported by ENS Lyon, INSERM and InCa.
Acknowledgements
We thank the conference organisers Prof. Anne-Mieke Vandamme and Prof.
Luc Willems, their helpers and the conference sponsors. We also thank Prof.
Kuan-Teh Jeang for his advice regarding manuscript preparation and Dr
Chloé Journo for her helpful suggestions and for the images that are
presented as Figure 1.
Note added in proof
Regarding the section in this report on XMRV, several papers published in
Retrovirology had suggested that some of the reported positive results might
have arisen from laboratory contamination [142-145]. Recently, a partial
retraction has been published by the authors of the original Science CFS
paper [126] “that some of the CFS peripheral blood mononuclear cell
(PBMC) DNA preparations are contaminated with XMRV plasmid DNA” [146].
Author details
Centre for Immunology and Infection, Department of Biology, Hull and York
Medical School, University of York, York, UK. 2Department of Immunology,
Wright-Fleming Institute, Imperial College London, London, UK. 3Department
of Oncology and Surgical Sciences and Istituto Oncologico Veneto-Istituto di
Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico (IRCCS), Padova, Italy. 4Department of
Veterinary Biosciences; Centre for Retrovirus Research; and Comprehensive
Cancer Centre, The Arthur James Cancer Hospital and Research Institute, The
Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA. 5University of California San
Francisco and Blood Systems Research Institute, San Francisco, California,
USA. 6Laboratory Branch, Division of HIV/AIDS Prevention, National Centre
for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and TB Prevention, Centres for Disease
Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA 30333, USA. 7Retroviral Oncogenesis
Laboratory, INSERM-U758 Human Virology, 69364 Lyon cedex 07, France.
8
Ecole Normale Supérieure de Lyon, 69364 Lyon cedex 07, France.
1

Authors’ contributions
FM wrote the clinical research section; CRMB wrote the immunology section;
VC wrote the virology section; MDL wrote the animal models section; ELM
wrote the epidemiology section; WMS wrote the endogenous retroviruses
foamy viruses and XMRV section; RM wrote the molecular and cellular
biology section. FM and RM edited the manuscript. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript.
Received: 4 August 2011 Accepted: 28 October 2011
Published: 28 October 2011

Page 11 of 15

References
1. Mueller N: The epidemiology of HTLV-I infection. Cancer Causes Control
1991, 2:37-52.
2. Urisman A, Molinaro RJ, Fischer N, Plummer SJ, Casey G, Klein EA, Malathi K,
Magi-Galluzzi C, Tubbs RR, Ganem D, et al: Identification of a novel
Gammaretrovirus in prostate tumors of patients homozygous for R462Q
RNASEL variant. PLoS Pathog 2006, 2:e25.
3. Gillet N, Florins A, Boxus M, Burteau C, Nigro A, Vandermeers F, Balon H,
Bouzar AB, Defoiche J, Burny A, et al: Mechanisms of leukemogenesis
induced by bovine leukemia virus: prospects for novel anti-retroviral
therapies in human. Retrovirology 2007, 4:18.
4. Delelis O, Lehmann-Che J, Saib A: Foamy viruses–a world apart. Curr Opin
Microbiol 2004, 7:400-406.
5. Kaidarova Z, Murphy E: HTLV-I and -II seroprevalence among United
States blood donors, 2000-2009 (Abstract). Retrovirology 2011, 8:A74.
6. Carneiro-Proietti A, Sabino E, Leao S, Loureiro P, Sarr M, Busch M, Proietti F,
Murphy E: HTLV-1/2 prevalence in Brazilian blood donors: regional and
demographic variation (Abstract). Retrovirology 2011, 8:A83.
7. Carneiro-Proietti A, Sabino EC, Leao S, Salles NA, Loureiro C, Sarr M,
Wright D, Busch M, Proietti F, Murphy E: HTLV-1 and -2 seroprevalence,
incidence and residual transfusion risk among blood donors in Brazil
during 2007-2009. AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses 2011.
8. Caterino-de-Araujo A, Magri M, Costa E, Manuel R: Prevalence of HTLV-1/2
and HIV-1/2 in individuals attending Public Health Center in
Mozambique. One HTLV-1 symptomatic case report (Abstract).
Retrovirology 2011, 8:A69.
9. Desrames A, Cassar O, Afonso P, Gout O, Hermine O, Gessain A: Molecular
epidemiology of HTLV-1 infection in the caribbean area as compared to
West Africa: relationship with the slave trade (Abstract). Retrovirology
2011, 8:A90.
10. Birmann B, Okayama A, Kim N, Arisawa K, Breen E, Carneiro-Proietti A,
Falk K, Hanchard B, Inoue M, Martinez-Maza O, et al: Altered host
immunity, human T lymphotropic virus type I replication, and risk of
adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma: a prospective analysis from the ATL
Cohort Consortium (Abstract). Retrovirology 2011, 8:A81.
11. Matsuzaki T, Kodama T, Kubota R, Izumo S: Recent epidemiologic trends of
HAM/TSP in Japan (Abstract). Retrovirology 2011, 8:A77.
12. Costa D, dos Santos AM, Castro N, Siqueira I, Carvalho E, Glesby M:
Neurological manifestations in HTLV-1 patients with overactive bladder
syndrome. A precursor of HAM/TSP? (Abstract). Retrovirology 2011, 8:A78.
13. Guiltinan A, Kaidarova Z, Behan D, Marosi C, Hutching S, Kaiser M, Moore E,
DeVita D, Murphy E: Major depression and generalized anxiety disorder
among HTLV-I/II infected former blood donors (Abstract). Retrovirology
2011, 8:A70.
14. Galvao-Phileto A, Boa-Sorte N, Kruschewsky R, Galvao-Castro B: Quality of
life (QOL) and depression in HTLV-1 carriers (Abstract). Retrovirology 2011,
8:A65.
15. Arruda S, Loureiro C, Almeida M, Mendes D, Grassi M, Lapa J, Kritski A,
Verdonck K, Gotuzzo E, Galvao-Castro B: Association between Human TCell Lymphotropic Virus Type 1 and 2 (HTLV 1/2) infection and
tuberculosis: systematic review and meta-analysis (Abstract). Retrovirology
2011, 8:A80.
16. Einsiedel L, Fernandes L, Spelman T, Gotuzzo E: Infection with Human T
Lymphotropic Virus 1 is associated with bronchiectasis among
Indigenous Australians (Abstract). Retrovirology 2011, 8:A38.
17. Demontis M, Hilburn S, Taylor G: The clinical utility of HTLV-1 viral load
measurement. Retrovirology 2011, 8:A46.
18. Grassi M, Olavarria V, Kruschewsky R, Mascarenhas RE, Dourado I, Correia L,
de Castro-Costa C, Galvao-Castro B: HTLV-1 proviral load of HAM/TSP
patients according to new diagnostic criteria of HAM/TSP. Retrovirology
2011, 8:A248.
19. Yamano Y, Sato T, Araya N, Yagishita N, Shimizu Y, Ando H, Utsunomiya A,
Izumo S, Jacobson S, Suzuki N: Clinical subtype of HAM/TSP based on
clinical course and laboratory findings. Retrovirology 2011, 8:A42.
20. Gotuzzo E, Alvarez C, Gonzalez E, Tipismana M, Lopez G, Verdonck K,
Clark D: Changes in proviral load (PVL) among patients with rapidly
progressive HTLV-1-associated myelopathy/tropical spastic paraparesis
(HAM/TSP) receiving empirical therapy. Retrovirology 2011, 8:A58.
21. Seegulam ME, Ratner L: Integrase inhibitors effective against human Tcell leukemia virus type 1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2011,
55:2011-2017.

Martin et al. Retrovirology 2011, 8:86
http://www.retrovirology.com/content/8/1/86

22. Fox J, Hiburn S, Cook L, Demontis M, Rowan A, Martin F, Taylor G:
Circularised 1 and 2 LTR DNA circles are present in freshly- and
chronically-infected cell lines and patient PBMCs, indicating ongoing
reverse transcriptase usage. Retrovirology 2011, 8:A51.
23. Trevino A, de Mendoza C, Parra P, Eiros J, de Lejarazu RO, Soriano V:
Treatment with Raltegravir, a retroviral integrase inhibitor, in patients
infected with HTLV-1. Retrovirology 2011, 8:A55.
24. Uike N, Tanosaki R, Utsunomiya A, Choi I, Okamura J: Can allo-SCT with RIC
cure ATLL? Long-term survivors with excellent PS and with
heterogenous HTLV-1 proviral load level. Retrovirology 2011, 8:A33.
25. Choi I, Tanosaki R, Uike N, Utsunomiya A, Tomonaga M, Harada M,
Yamanaka T, Kannagi M, Okamura J: Long-term outcomes after
hematopoietic SCT for adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma: results of
prospective trials. Bone Marrow Transplant 2011, 46:116-118.
26. Suarez F, Marcais A, Ghez D, Delarue R, Deau-Fischer B, Aoun C, Sicre de
Fontbrune F, Ysebaert L, Asnafi V, Canioni D, et al: Arsenic trioxyde in the
treatment of HTLV1 associated ATLL. Retrovirology 2011, 8:A59.
27. Yamamoto K, Utsunomiya A, Tobinai K, Tsukasaki K, Uike N, Uozumi K,
Yamaguchi K, Yamada Y, Hanada S, Tamura K, et al: Phase I study of KW0761, a defucosylated humanized anti-CCR4 antibody, in relapsed
patients with adult T-cell leukemia-lymphoma and peripheral T-cell
lymphoma. J Clin Oncol 2010, 28:1591-1598.
28. Utsunomiya A, Tobinai K, Yamamoto K, Ishida T, Uike N, Tsukasaki K,
Uozumi K, Tomonaga M, Ueda R: Promising results of an anti-CCR4
antibody, KW-0761, for relapsed Adult T-Cell Leukemia-Lymphoma (ATL).
Retrovirology 2011, 8:A40.
29. Gillet N, Hlela C, Verdonck T, Gotuzzo E, Clark D, Rodriguez S, Malani N,
Melamed A, Gormley N, Carter R, et al: HTLV-1 clonality during chronic
infection and BLV clonality during primary infection. Retrovirology 2011, 8:
A185.
30. Ramos J, Toomey N, Diaz L, Ruiz P, Barber G, Harrington W: Targeting
HTLV-I latency in Adult T-cell Leukemia/Lymphoma. Retrovirology 2011, 8:
A48.
31. Hodson A, Demontis M, Gillet N, Cook L, Bangham C, Fields P, Taylor G:
First line treatment of acute and chronic ATLL with zidovudine (AZT)
and interferon alpha (IFN-alpha): haematological and molecular
responses. Retrovirology 2011, 8:A53.
32. Zimmerman B, Niewiesk S, Lairmore MD: Mouse models of human T
lymphotropic virus type-1-associated adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma.
Vet Pathol 2010, 47:677-689.
33. Tezuka K, Xun R, Tei M, Ueno T, Tanaka M, Takenouchi N, Fujisawa J-i:
Inverse correlation between Tax and CD25 expressions in HTLV-1
infected CD4 T-cells in vivo. Retrovirology 2011, 8:A14.
34. Villaudy J, Wencker M, Gadot N, Scoazec J-Y, Gazzolo L, Manz M, Duc
Dodon M: HTLV-1 propels thymic human T cell development in “human
immune system” Rag2-/- IL-2R gammac-/- Mice. Retrovirology 2011, 8:A10.
35. Villaudy J, Wencker Ml, Gadot N, Gillet NA, Scoazec J-Y, Gazzolo L,
Manz MG, Bangham CRM, Dodon MD: HTLV-1 Propels Thymic Human T
Cell Development in ‚Human Immune System‚ Rag2-/- gamma c-/- Mice.
PLoS Pathog 2011, 7:e1002231.
36. Van den Broeke A, Arsenault R, Rosewick N, Cleuter Y, Martiat P, Burny A,
Napper S, Griebel P: Kinome profiling of BLV-induced ovine leukemia: an
approach for identifying altered signaling pathways associated with
oncogenesis. Retrovirology 2011, 8:A16.
37. Swaims AY, Khani F, Zhang Y, Roberts AI, Devadas S, Shi Y, Rabson AB:
Immune activation induces immortalization of HTLV-1 LTR-Tax
transgenic CD4+ T cells. Blood 2010, 116:2994-3003.
38. Suzuki T, Okayama A, Tsuji T, Ryo A, Hirano H, Sata T, Hall W, Hasegawa H:
Comparative proteomic analysis of cancer stem cells in a Tax-transgenic
(Tax-Tg) mouse model of adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma. Retrovirology
2011, 8:A9.
39. Hasegawa H, Sawa H, Lewis MJ, Orba Y, Sheehy N, Yamamoto Y,
Ichinohe T, Tsunetsugu-Yokota Y, Katano H, Takahashi H, et al: Thymusderived leukemia-lymphoma in mice transgenic for the Tax gene of
human T-lymphotropic virus type I. Nat Med 2006, 12:466-472.
40. Shinagawa M, Miyazaki K, Zhang X, Chen J, Ohashi T, Shida H: Entry
inhibition of human retroviruses in rat cells. Retrovirology 2011, 8:A20.
41. Hakata Y, Yamada M, Shida H: Rat CRM1 is responsible for the poor
activity of human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 Rex protein in rat cells. J
Virol 2001, 75:11515-11525.

Page 12 of 15

42. Rosewick N, dehouck C, Cleuter Y, Caiment F, Georges M, Martiat P,
Burny A, Van den Broeke A: High-throughput sequencing reveals novel
microRNAs in the Bovine Leukemia Virus (BLV)-induced ovine model of
leukemia. Retrovirology 2011, 8:A15.
43. Merimi M, Ozkan Y, Cleuter Y, Griebel P, Burny A, Martiat P, Van den
Broeke A: Epigenetics and leukemia: unraveling oncogenic processes in
the BLV ovine model. Front Biosci (Schol Ed) 2009, 1:154-163.
44. Ohsugi T, Kumasaka T: Low CD4/CD8 T-cell ratio associated with
inflammatory arthropathy in human T-cell leukemia virus type I Tax
transgenic mice. PLoS One 2011, 6:e18518.
45. Ohsugi T, Kumasaka T: Altered CD4+/CD8+ T-cell ratio in splenocytes of
human T-cell leukemia virus type I Tax transgenic mice with
inflammatory arthropathy. Retrovirology 2011, 8:A2.
46. Rauch D, Bokhari S, Harding J, Ratner L: IL-15 deficiency promotes tumor
growth in tax transgenic mice. Retrovirology 2011, 8:A24.
47. Rauch D, Gross S, Harding J, Bokhari S, Niewiesk S, Lairmore M, PiwnicaWorms D, Ratner L: T-cell activation promotes tumorigenesis in
inflammation-associated cancer. Retrovirology 2009, 6:116.
48. Taguchi N, Satou Y, Ohshima K, Matsuoka M: HTLV-1 bZIP factor induces
systemic inflammations in vivo. Retrovirology 2011, 8:A8.
49. Matsuoka M, Green PL: The HBZ gene, a key player in HTLV-1
pathogenesis. Retrovirology 2009, 6:71.
50. Moura I, Lepelletier Y, Arnulf B, Bazarbachi A, Monteiro R, Hermine O: A
neutralizing monoclonal antibody (mAb A24) directed against the
transferrin receptor induces apoptosis of tumor T lymphocytes from ATL
patients. Retrovirology 2011, 8:A60.
51. Haines R, Urbiztondo R, Haynes R, Niewiesk S, Lairmore M: Development of
a model of HTLV-1 oral transmission in the rabbit. Retrovirology 2011, 8:
A19.
52. Gutierrez G, Rodriguez S, Florins A, Vagnoni L, Alvarez I, Gillet N, Trono K,
Willems L: A life-attenuated BLV deletant as a candidate vaccine to
inhibit viral transmission in bovine herds. Retrovirology 2011, 8:A12.
53. Florins A, Gillet N, Asquith B, Boxus M, Burteau C, Twizere JC, Urbain P,
Vandermeers F, Debacq C, Sanchez-Alcaraz MT, et al: Cell dynamics and
immune response to BLV infection: a unifying model. Front Biosci 2007,
12:1520-1531.
54. Aida Y, Takeshima S-n, Matsumoto Y, Miyasaka T, Miyazaki Y, Tanabe Y,
Davis W, Okada K: Bovine MHC class II DR molecule plays a key role in
bovine leukemia virus (BLV)-induced lymphoma. Retrovirology 2011, 8:A7.
55. Easley R, Carpio L, Guendel I, Klase Z, Choi S, Kehn-Hall K, Kashanchi F:
Human T-Lymphotropic Virus Type 1 transcription and chromatinremodeling complexes. Retrovirology 2011, 8:A178.
56. McCabe A, Hall W, Sheehy N: Physical and functional interaction between
the HTLV-1 Tax oncoprotein and the cellular LIM domain protein FHL3.
Retrovirology 2011, 8:A160.
57. Robette G, Van Driessche B, Guiguen A, Burny A, Rohr O, Van Lint C: Role
of the cofactor CTIP2 (COUP-TF Interacting Protein 2) in the
transcriptional repression of HTLV-1 (Human T-lymphotropic Virus 1).
Retrovirology 2011, 8:A130.
58. Kfoury Y, Setterblad N, El-Sabban M, Zamborlini A, Dassouki Z, El Hajj H,
Hermine O, Pique C, de The H, Saib A, Bazarbachi A: Tax ubiquitylation and
SUMOylation control the dynamic shuttling of Tax and NEMO between
Ubc9 nuclear bodies and the centrosome. Retrovirology 2011, 8:A146.
59. Kfoury Y, Setterblad N, El-Sabban M, Zamborlini A, Dassouki Z, El Hajj H,
Hermine O, Pique C, de The H, Saib A, Bazarbachi A: Tax ubiquitylation and
SUMOylation control the dynamic shuttling of Tax and NEMO between
Ubc9 nuclear bodies and the centrosome. Blood 2011, 117:190-199.
60. Bex F, Avesani F, Romanelli M, Lodewick J, Turci M, Sampaio C, Roger P,
Bertazzoni U: Cytoplasmic and nuclear events controlling Tax-mediated
activation of the NF-kappaB pathway: involvement of TAB2, IKKgamma/
NEMO and calreticulin. Retrovirology 2011, 8:A138.
61. Yasunaga J, Lin F, Lu X, Jeang K-T: HTLV-1 Tax-induced NF-kappaB
activation is negatively regulated by Ubiquitin-specific peptidase 20
(USP20). Retrovirology 2011, 8:A129.
62. Yasunaga J, Lin FC, Lu X, Jeang KT: Ubiquitin-Specific Peptidase 20
Targets TRAF6 and Human T Cell Leukemia Virus Type 1 Tax To
Negatively Regulate NF-{kappa}B Signaling. J Virol 2011, 85:6212-6219.
63. Lavorgna A, Harhaj E: STAMBPL1 is a deubiquitinating enzyme that
regulates HTLV-I Tax subcellular localization and NF-kB activation.
Retrovirology 2011, 8:A190.

Martin et al. Retrovirology 2011, 8:86
http://www.retrovirology.com/content/8/1/86

64. Fryrear K, Kerscher O, Semmes O: The SUMO-targeted ubiquitin ligase
RNF4 regulates localization and function of the HTLV-1 oncoprotein Tax.
Retrovirology 2011, 8:A126.
65. Bonnet A, Favre-Bonvin A, Nzounza P, Nedelec M, Chazal M, Waast L,
Randrianarison V, Bazarbachi A, Mahieux R, Benit L, Pique C: Predominant
role of Tax sumoylation in Tax-induced NF-kB activation in T cells.
Retrovirology 2011, 8:A132.
66. Journo C, Bonnet A, Favre-Bonvin A, Turpin J, Chevalier S, Vinera J, Cote E,
Pique C, Mahieux R: Exclusion from the Golgi and very low levels of
HTLV-2 Tax ubiquitination do not prevent IKK-gamma/NEMO
relocalization and NF-kappaB activation. Retrovirology 2011, 8:A134.
67. Turci M, Di Gennaro G, Cotena A, Marin O, Avesani F, Cremonese G, Diani E,
Romanelli M, Bertazzoni U: Comparison of Tax-1 and Tax-2B posttranslational modifications using specific lysine mutants in relation to
activation of NF-kappaB and intracellular localization. Retrovirology 2011,
8:A143.
68. Shembade N, Harhaj E: The human T-cell leukemia virus type I (HTLV-I)
oncoprotein Tax promotes persistent NF-kappaB activation by blocking
the phosphorylation of the adaptor molecule TAX1BP. Retrovirology 2011,
8:A158.
69. Fu J, Qu Z, Yan P, Li S, Song X, Ishikawa C, Aqeilan R, Mori N, Rabson A,
Xiao G: Coordination of the canonical and noncanonical IKK/NF-kappaB
signaling pathways in HTLV-I Tax-mediated tumorigenesis. Retrovirology
2011, 8:A157.
70. Yamagishi M, Nakano K, Yamochi T, Miyake A, Kagami Y, Tsutsumi A,
Otsubo A, Ogawa S, Utsunomiya A, Yamaguchi K, et al: Genetic and
epigenetic loss of miR-31 activates NIK-dependent NF-kappaB pathway
in Adult T-cell Leukemia. Retrovirology 2011, 8:A128.
71. Wright D, Wurm T, Polakowski N, Mesnard J-M, Lemasson I: HBZ inhibits
the HAT activity of the cellular coactivators p300 and CBP. Retrovirology
2011, 8:A150.
72. Peloponese J-M, Lemasson I, Barbeau B, Mesnard J-M: JunD/HBZ enhances
HBZ enhances HTLV-1 antisense transcription. Retrovirology 2011, 8:A135.
73. Choudhary G, Ratner L: The HTLV-1 hbz antisense gene indirectly
promotes tax expression via down-regulation of p30(II) mRNA. Virology
2011, 410:307-315.
74. Choudhary G, Rauch D, Ratner L: The HTLV-1 hbz antisense gene
indirectly promotes tax expression via down-regulation of p30-II mRNA.
Retrovirology 2011, 8:A136.
75. Nicot C, Dundr M, Johnson JM, Fullen JR, Alonzo N, Fukumoto R,
Princler GL, Derse D, Misteli T, Franchini G: HTLV-1-encoded p30II is a
post-transcriptional negative regulator of viral replication. Nat Med 2004,
10:197-201.
76. Mukai R, Ohshima T: HTLV-1 HBZ activates mTOR signaling pathway via
inhibition of GADD34. Retrovirology 2011, 8:A155.
77. Zhi H, Yang L, Kuo Y-L, Ho Y-K, Shih H-M, Giam C-Z: NF-kappaB hyperactivation by HTLV-1 Tax induces cellular senescence, but can be
alleviated by the viral anti-sense protein HBZ. Retrovirology 2011, 8:A200.
78. Zhi H, Yang L, Kuo YL, Ho YK, Shih HM, Giam CZ: NF-kappaB hyperactivation by HTLV-1 tax induces cellular senescence, but can be
alleviated by the viral anti-sense protein HBZ. PLoS Pathog 2011, 7:
e1002025.
79. Marban C, Hall W, Sheehy N: Regulation of AP-1 activity by the HTLV-2
APH-2 protein. Retrovirology 2011, 8:A161.
80. Larocque E, Lemay G, Mesnard J-M, Switzer W, Barbeau B: HTLV-3 and
HTLV-4 antisense proteins activate JunB-, c-Jun- and JunD-dependent
transcription. Retrovirology 2011, 8:A141.
81. Edwards D, Fukumoto R, Van Prooyen N, Gold H, de Castro-Amarante M,
Alcantara L, Franchini G: Role of dimerization and palmitoylation on the
function of HTLV-1 p12 and p8. Retrovirology 2011, 8:A124.
82. Silic-Benussi M, Cavallari I, Chieco-Bianchi L, di Lisa F, D’Agostino D,
Bernardi P, Ciminale V: Control of ROS production and T-cell turnover by
HTLV-p13. Retrovirology 2011, 8:A154.
83. Silic-Benussi M, Cavallari I, Vajente N, Vidali S, Chieco-Bianchi L, Di Lisa F,
Saggioro D, D’Agostino DM, Ciminale V: Redox regulation of T-cell
turnover by the p13 protein of human T-cell leukemia virus type 1:
distinct effects in primary versus transformed cells. Blood 2010, 116:54-62.
84. Andresen V, Pise-Masison C, Sinha-Datta U, Parks R, Cecchinato V,
Fukumoto R, Nicot C, Franchini G: Tax-mediated re-routing of the HTLV-1
p13 protein to nuclear speckles. Retrovirology 2011, 8:A125.

Page 13 of 15

85. Andresen V, Pise-Masison CA, Sinha-Datta U, Bellon M, Valeri V, Washington
Parks R, Cecchinato V, Fukumoto R, Nicot C, Franchini G: Suppression of
HTLV-1 replication by Tax-mediated re-routing of the p13 viral protein
to nuclear speckles. Blood 2011, 118:1549-59.
86. Turpin J, Nga Ling Ko T, Villaudy J, Galioot A, Gessain A, Gazzolo L, Duc
Dodon M, Mahieux R: Identification and characterization of auxiliary
proteins encoded by the STLV-3 retrovirus pX region. Retrovirology 2011,
8:A133.
87. Jones K, Bertolette D, Bai X, Petrow-Sadowski C, Fu T, Franchini G, Nicot C,
Ruscetti F: Continuous long-term growth of plasmacytoid dendritic cells
following in vitro infection with HTLV-1. Retrovirology 2011, 8:A174.
88. Manuel S, Makedonas G, Betts M, Gardner J, Goedert J, Khan Z, Jain P:
Dynamics of dendritic cells and T cells in HTLV-1-associated
neuroinflammatory disease: implications in immunomodulatory
therapies and diagnostic tools. Retrovirology 2011, 8:A187.
89. Pique C, Hermine O, Ruscetti F, Jones K: New insights into HTLV entry.
Retrovirology 2011, 8:A183.
90. Jensen S, Jones K, Benit L, Bertolette D, Petrow-Sadowski C, Ruscetti F,
Pique C: Xylosyltransferase 2, a protein encoded on chromosome 17q, is
involved in HTLV entry. Retrovirology 2011, 8:A201.
91. Nejmeddine M, Clerc I, Taylor G, Bangham C: Exclusion of actin
microfilaments from the cell-cell contact zone in HTLV-1 infected Tlymphocyte during the establishment of a functional virological
synapse. Retrovirology 2011, 8:A199.
92. Martin-Latil S, Gnadig N, Mallet A, Prevost M-C, Desdouits M, Schwartz O,
Gessain A, Ozden S, Ceccaldi P-E: Mother-to-child transmission of HTLV-1:
in vitro study of HTLV-1 passage across a tight human epithelial barrier.
Retrovirology 2011, 8:A194.
93. Gillet NA, Malani N, Melamed A, Gormley N, Carter R, Bentley D, Berry C,
Bushman FD, Taylor GP, Bangham CR: The host genomic environment of
the provirus determines the abundance of HTLV-1-infected T-cell clones.
Blood 2011, 117:3113-3122.
94. Rende F, Cavallari I, Corradin A, Silic-Benussi M, Toulza F, Toffolo G,
Tanaka Y, Jacobson S, Taylor G, D’Agostino D, et al: Kinetics and
intracellular compartmentalization of HTLV-1 gene expression.
Retrovirology 2011, 8:A204.
95. Bender C, Cotena A, Ronzi P, Rende F, Cavallari I, Casoli C, Ciminale V,
Bertazzoni U: Analysis of temporal expression of HTLV-2 reveals
similarities and functional differences from HTLV-1. Retrovirology 2011, 8:
A192.
96. Belrose G, Gross A, Olindo S, Lezin A, Dueymes M, Smadja D, Tanaka Y,
Willems L, Mesnard J-M, Peloponese J-M, Cesaire R: Opposite effect of
Valproate on Tax and HBZ expression in T-lymphocytes from HTLV-1
asymptomatic carriers and HAM/TSP patients. Retrovirology 2011, 8:A198.
97. Oka T, Sato H, Al-Kader L, Shinnou Y, Washio K, Takata K, Murakami I,
Utsunomiya A, Ouchida M, Takahashi K, Yoshino T: Cumulative kinetics of
epigenetic abnormalities during initiation and progression of Adult Tcell Leukemia/Lymphoma (ATLL). Retrovirology 2011, 8:A195.
98. Kannian P, Yin H, Doueiri R, Green P: Cellular tropism exhibited by human
T lymphotropic virus type 1 (HTLV-1) and type 2 (HTLV-2). Retrovirology
2011, 8:A176.
99. Boxus M, Twizere J-C, Legros S, Kettmann R, Willems L: Interaction of
HTLV-1 Tax with minichromosome maintenance proteins accelerates the
replication timing program. Retrovirology 2011, 8:A140.
100. Anupam R, Datta A, Bowden N, Shkriabai N, Kvaratskhelia M, Lairmore M:
Human T-lymphotropic virus type 1 p30 interacts with REGgamma and
ATM (Ataxia Telangiectasia Mutated) to promote cell survival.
Retrovirology 2011, 8:A202.
101. Wurm T, Lemasson I: Potential interference of HTLV-1 HBZ protein with
the DNA damage response pathway. Retrovirology 2011, 8:A203.
102. Mocquet V, Neusiedler J, Rende F, Terme J-M, Morris C, Wittman J, Duc
Dodon M, Ciminale V, Jalinot P: The HTLV-1 Tax protein inhibits
nonsense-mediated mRNA decay by interacting with INT6/EIF3E and
UPF1. Retrovirology 2011, 8:A139.
103. Van Duyne R, Guendel I, Tyagi M, Narayanan A, Klase Z, Kehn-Hall K,
Semmes J, Kashanchi F: Localization and sub-cellular shuttling of HTLV-1
Tax with the RNAi machinery component Drosha. Retrovirology 2011, 8:
A159.
104. Borowiak M, Kuhlmann A-S, Girard S, Gazzolo L, Dodon M: HBZ impedes
the Menin function and up-regulates the transcription of the hTERT
gene in leukemic cells. Retrovirology 2011, 8:A182.

Martin et al. Retrovirology 2011, 8:86
http://www.retrovirology.com/content/8/1/86

105. Douceron E, Kaidarova Z, Miyazato P, Matsuoka M, Murphy E, Mahieux R:
APH-2 and Tax expression are correlated with a HTLV-2 proviral load but
not with lymphocytosis. Retrovirology 2011, 8:A184.
106. Kubota R, Takenouchi N, Matsuzaki T, Takashima H, Izumo S: HLA-A24restricted HTLV-I-specific CTL response reduces the HTLV-I proviral load
but the HLA increases the risk of HAM/TSP. Retrovirology 2011, 8:A113.
107. Abdelbary N, Abdullah H, Matsuzaki T, Hayashi D, Tanaka Y, Takashima H,
Izumo S, Kubota R: Reduced Tim-3 expression on HTLV-I Tax-specific
cytotoxic T lymphocytes in HTLV-I infection. Retrovirology 2011, 8:A112.
108. Leal F, Ndhlovu L, Hasenkrug A, Jha A, Carvalho K, Eccles-James I, Bruno F,
Vieira R, York V, Jones RB, et al: HTLV-1 Tax Specific CD8+ T cells express
low levels of Tim-3 in HTLV-1 infection: implications for progression to
neurological complications. Retrovirology 2011, 8:A94.
109. Bangham CRM, Gillet N, Melamed A, Toulza F, Rowan A, Laydon D,
Taylor G, Asquith B: HTLV-1 persistence in vivo: clonality, dynamics and
immune response. Retrovirology 2011, 8:A97.
110. Kannagi M, Kinpara S, Hasegawa A, Takamori A, Shimizu Y, Utsunomiya A:
The roles of innate and acquired immune responses on HTLV-I infection.
Retrovirology 2011, 8:A100.
111. Moens B, Decanine D, Khouri R, Lopez G, Talledo M, Gotuzzo E, Bex F,
Castro B, Vandamme A-M, Van Weyenbergh J: Ascorbic acid has superior
antiviral and antiproliferative effects over IFN-alpha in HAM/TSP PBMC
ex vivo. Retrovirology 2011, 8:A61.
112. Tattermusch S, Skinner J, Chaussabel D, Banchereau J, Berry M, O’Garra A,
Taylor G, Bangham C: An interferon signature is associated with HAM/TSP
but not viral containment in HTLV-1 infection. Retrovirology 2011, 8:A108.
113. Wagatsuma V, Ciliao-Alves D, Rocha-Junior M, Haddad R, Takayanagui O,
Donadi E, Covas D, Kashima S: Association of interleukin - 18 gene
polymorphism with susceptibility or protective effect to HTLV-1
infection. Retrovirology 2011, 8:A118.
114. Barrios C, Abuerreish M, Castillo L, Lairmore M, Murphy E, Giam C-Z,
Beilke M: Recombinant human T-cell leukemia virus types 1 and 2 Tax
proteins induce high levels of CC-chemokines and downregulate CCR5
in human peripheral blood mononuclear cells. Retrovirology 2011, 8:A98.
115. Douville R, Oliere S, Green P, Lin R, Hiscott J: HTLV-1 HBZ protein inhibits
IRF3-mediated innate immune responses. Retrovirology 2011, 8:A99.
116. Miyazato P, Satou Y, Yamaguchi T, Sakaguchi S, Ohshima K, Matsuoka M:
HTLV-1 bZIP factor-mediated dysfunction of regulatory T cells in vivo.
Retrovirology 2011, 8:A111.
117. Sugata K, Satou Y, Yasunaga J-i, Nosaka K, Matsuoka M: HTLV-1 bZIP factor
perturbs immune response to the pathogens in vivo by inhibiting IFNgamma production. Retrovirology 2011, 8:A102.
118. Akahata Y, Abrams A, Goedert J, Maloney E, Jacobson S: Quantitative
differences in antibody responses between normal donors HAM/TSP
patients, asymptomatic carriers, and ATL patients from Jamaica: can
they be used to estimate risk of disease? Retrovirology 2011, 8:A110.
119. Kuo C-W, Tulloch L, Brighty D: Robust neutralising activity and activation
of neutrophil cytotoxic responses mediated by antibodies targeting the
HTLV-1 envelope glycoprotein. Retrovirology 2011, 8:A170.
120. Hanson M, Lee L, Lin L, Bell D, Ruppert D: Detection of MLV-like gag
sequences in blood samples from a New York state CFS cohort.
Retrovirology 2011, 8:A234.
121. Maric R, Pedersen F, Kjeldbjerg A, Moeller-Larsen A, Bahrami S, Brudek T,
Petersen T, Christensen T: Absence of xenotropic murine leukaemia virusrelated virus in Danish patients with multiple sclerosis. Retrovirology 2011,
8:A213.
122. Satterfield BC, Garcia RA, Jia H, Tang S, Zheng H, Switzer WM: Serologic
and PCR testing of persons with chronic fatigue syndrome in the United
States shows no association with xenotropic or polytropic murine
leukemia virus-related viruses. Retrovirology 2011, 8:12.
123. Switzer W, Jia H, Zheng H, Tang S, Garcia R, Satterfield B: Serologic and
PCR testing of persons with chronic fatigue syndrome in the United
States shows no association with xenotropic or polytropic murine
leukemia virus-related virus. Retrovirology 2011, 8:A232.
124. Paprotka T, Delviks-Frankenberry KA, Cingoz O, Martinez A, Kung HJ,
Tepper CG, Hu WS, Fivash MJ, Coffin JM, Pathak VK: Recombinant Origin of
the Retrovirus XMRV. Science 2011, 333:97-101.
125. Knox K, Carrigan D, Simmons G, Teque F, Zhou Y, Hackett J, Qiu X, Luk KC,
Schochetman G, Knox A, et al: No Evidence of Murine-Like
Gammaretroviruses in CFS Patients Previously Identified as XMRVInfected. Science 2011, 333:94-7.

Page 14 of 15

126. Lombardi VC, Ruscetti FW, Das Gupta J, Pfost MA, Hagen KS, Peterson DL,
Ruscetti SK, Bagni RK, Petrow-Sadowski C, Gold B, et al: Detection of an
infectious retrovirus, XMRV, in blood cells of patients with chronic
fatigue syndrome. Science 2009, 326:585-589.
127. Erlwein O, Robinson M, Kaye S, McClure M, Walker M, Patel A, Kim W-J,
Uiprasertkul M, Gopalakrishnan G, Kimura T, Naresh K: XMRV infection in
human diseases. Retrovirology 2011, 8:A238.
128. Qiu X, Swanson P, Tang N, Leckie G, Devare S, Schochetman G, Hackett J:
Prevalence of XMRV in blood donors, HTLV and HIV cohorts. Retrovirology
2011, 8:A222.
129. Simmons G, Glynn SA, Holmberg JA, Coffin JM, Hewlett IK, Lo SC,
Mikovits JA, Switzer WM, Linnen JM, Busch MP: The Blood Xenotropic
Murine Leukemia Virus-Related Virus Scientific Research Working Group:
mission, progress, and plans. Transfusion 2011, 51:643-653.
130. Switzer W, Ahuka-Mundeke S, Tang S, Shankar A, Wolfe N, Heneine W,
Peeters M, Ayouba A, Mulembakani P, Rimoin A: Simian Foamy Virus (SFV)
infection from multiple monkey species in women from the Democratic
Republic of Congo. Retrovirology 2011, 8:A233.
131. Betsem E, Patricia T, Alain F, Gessain A: Frequent acquisition of simian
foamy viruses from gorillas, chimpanzees and monkeys through severe
bites in central African hunters with no evidence for intra-familial
dissemination. Retrovirology 2011, 8:A237.
132. Mouinga-Ondeme A, Caron M, Gessain A, Kazanji M: High level of interspecies transmission of simian foamy virus from non-human primates to
humans in Gabon, central Africa. Retrovirology 2011, 8:A229.
133. Wolfe N, Switzer W: Primate Exposure and the Emergence of Novel
Retroviruses. Primate Parasite Ecology Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press; 2009, 353-370.
134. Calvignac-Spencer S, Adjogoua E, Hedemann C, Akoua-Koffi C, Leendertz F:
PTLV-1 transmission from preys to hunters in Cote d’Ivoire. Retrovirology
2011, 8:A89.
135. Ahuka-Mundeke S, Liegeois F, Lunguya O, Mbenzo V, Mbende M,
Inogwabini B-I, Muyembe J-J, Delaporte E, Peeters M: Evidence of STLV-2
and STLV-3 infections in wild-living bonobos (P. paniscus) from the
Democratic Republic of Congo. Retrovirology 2011, 8:A92.
136. Mauclere P, Meertens L, Afonso P, Plancoulaine S, Filippone C, Betsem E,
Calattini S, Froment A, Van Beveren M, de The G, et al: HTLV-2 in Central
Africa: HTLV-2 subtype B strains similar to those found in Amerindian
tribes are endemic in Bakola Pygmies from south Cameroon but not in
surrounding Bantus and Baka Pygmies. Retrovirology 2011, 8:A82.
137. Kurth R, Bannert N: Beneficial and detrimental effects of human
endogenous retroviruses. International Journal of Cancer 2010, 126:306-314.
138. Brudek T, Christensen T, Petersen T, Moller-Larsen A: Expression of HERV-H/
W env epitopes on PBMCs from MS patients with active disease.
Retrovirology 2011, 8:A210.
139. Petersen T, Moller-Larsen A, Thiel S, Hansen T, Ellermann-Eriksen S, Brudek T,
Christensen T: Innate and adaptive anti-viral immune responses in MS
patients treated with interferon-beta. Retrovirology 2011, 8:A214.
140. Romano C, de Melo F, de A Zanotto P: Preferential expression of human
endogenous retrovirus K (HERV-K/HML-2) type 1 in tumor cells.
Retrovirology 2011, 8:A216.
141. Romano C, Nali L, Faria T, Olival G, Vidal J, Fink M, Sumita L, Oliveira A: Lack
of evidence of ERVWE1/Xq22.3 involvement in MRSV transcripts
detected in Multiple Sclerosis patients. Retrovirology 2011, 8:A217.
142. Hué S, Gray ER, Gall A, Katzourakis A, Tan C, Houldcroft CJ, McLaren S,
Pillay P, Futreal A, Garson JA, Pybus OG, Kellam P, Towers GJ: Diseaseassociated XMRV sequences are consistent with laboratory
contamination. Retrovirology 2010, 7:111.
143. Sato E, Furuta RA, Miyazawa T: An Endogenous Murine Leukemia Viral
Genome Contaminant in a Brendan Oakes, Albert K Tai, Oya Cingöz,
Madeleine H Henefield, Susan Levine, John M Coffin, Brigitte T Huber
Commercial RT-PCR Kit is Amplified Using Standard Primers for XMRV.
Retrovirology 2010, 7:110.
144. Oakes B, Tai AK, Cingöz O, Henefield MH, Levine S, J Coffin JM, Huber BT:
Contamination of human DNA samples with mouse DNA can lead to
false detection of XMRV-like sequences. Retrovirology 2010, 7:109.
145. Robinson MJ, Erlwein OW, Kaye S, Weber J, Cingoz O, Patel A, Walker MM,
Kim W-J, Uiprasertkul M, Coffin JM, McClure MO: Mouse DNA
contamination in human tissue tested for XMRV. Retrovirology 2010, 7:108.

Martin et al. Retrovirology 2011, 8:86
http://www.retrovirology.com/content/8/1/86

Page 15 of 15

146. Silverman RH, Gupta JD, Lombardi VC, Ruscetti FW, Pfost MA, Hagen KS,
Peterson DL, Ruscetti SK, Bagni RK, Petrow-Sadowski C, Gold B, Dean M,
Mikovits JA: Partial Retraction. Science 2011.
doi:10.1186/1742-4690-8-86
Cite this article as: Martin et al.: Conference highlights of the 15th
international conference on human retrovirology: HTLV and related
retroviruses, 4-8 june 2011, Leuven, Gembloux, Belgium. Retrovirology
2011 8:86.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
