<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Eukaryote-to-eukaryote gene transfer gives rise to genome mosaicism in euglenids</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:105. doi:10.1186/1471-2148-11-105"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Shinichiro Maruyama"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Maruyama et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:105
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/105

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Eukaryote-to-eukaryote gene transfer gives rise to
genome mosaicism in euglenids
Shinichiro Maruyama1,2*, Toshinobu Suzaki3, Andreas PM Weber4, John M Archibald2 and Hisayoshi Nozaki1

Abstract
Background: Euglenophytes are a group of photosynthetic flagellates possessing a plastid derived from a green
algal endosymbiont, which was incorporated into an ancestral host cell via secondary endosymbiosis. However, the
impact of endosymbiosis on the euglenophyte nuclear genome is not fully understood due to its complex nature
as a ‘hybrid’ of a non-photosynthetic host cell and a secondary endosymbiont.
Results: We analyzed an EST dataset of the model euglenophyte Euglena gracilis using a gene mining program
designed to detect laterally transferred genes. We found E. gracilis genes showing affinity not only with green
algae, from which the secondary plastid in euglenophytes evolved, but also red algae and/or secondary algae
containing red algal-derived plastids. Phylogenetic analyses of these ‘red lineage’ genes suggest that E. gracilis
acquired at least 14 genes via eukaryote-to-eukaryote lateral gene transfer from algal sources other than the green
algal endosymbiont that gave rise to its current plastid. We constructed an EST library of the aplastidic euglenid
Peranema trichophorum, which is a eukaryovorous relative of euglenophytes, and also identified ‘red lineage’ genes
in its genome.
Conclusions: Our data show genome mosaicism in E. gracilis and P. trichophorum. One possible explanation for
the presence of these genes in these organisms is that some or all of them were independently acquired by lateral
gene transfer and contributed to the successful integration and functioning of the green algal endosymbiont as a
secondary plastid. Alternative hypotheses include the presence of a phagocytosed alga as the single source of
those genes, or a cryptic tertiary endosymbiont harboring secondary plastid of red algal origin, which the
eukaryovorous ancestor of euglenophytes had acquired prior to the secondary endosymbiosis of a green alga.

Background
Photosynthetic eukaryotes are distributed across multiple branches of the eukaryotic tree of life. Currently, six
putative ‘super-groups’ of eukaryotes have been proposed: Opisthokonta, Amoebozoa, Rhizaria, Excavata,
Chromalveolata, and Archaeplastida [1]. The origin of
plastids (chloroplasts) from a cyanobacterial endosymbiont is referred to as primary endosymbiosis. Primary
plastid-containing eukaryotes, namely green algae and
land plants, glaucophytes and red algae, are classified
into Archaeplastida, of which the monophyly is still
debatable [2-7]. Subsequent to the evolution of primary
plastids, two independent lineages of green algae were
captured by two distinct lineages of phagotrophic
* Correspondence: maruyama@dal.ca
1
Department of Biological Sciences, Graduate School of Science, University
of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

protists via secondary (eukaryote-eukaryote) endosymbiosis, giving rise to the green secondary plastid-containing
euglenophytes
(Excavata)
and
chlorarachniophytes (Rhizaria). Chloroplast genome analyses suggest that the chlorarachniophyte plastid is
derived from a green alga belonging to the ulvophytetrebouxiophyte-chlorophyte group, while the ancestor of
the euglenophyte plastid is related to prasinophyte green
algae [8,9].
Red algae have also donated plastids to other eukaryotes by secondary endosymbiosis. It is well established
that secondary plastids in many ‘chromalveolate’ taxa
are derived from red algal endosymbiont(s), but the origin and evolutionary history of ‘chromalveolate’ plastids
are more controversial than those of green algal ancestry
[10-14]. Chromalveolata is composed of four major subgroups (stramenopiles, alveolates, cryptophytes and haptophytes) and most sub-groups include non-

© 2011 Maruyama et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Maruyama et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:105
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/105

photosynthetic members [1]. Recently, plastid-related
genes and/or putative plastid-like organelles were found
in several non-photosynthetic alveolate protists [15-19],
and a novel photosynthetic lineage Chromerida was
found and suggested to be a sister group of non-photosynthetic alveolates such as colpodellids [20,21]. Furthermore,
phylogenomic
analyses
suggest
that
Chromalveolata may be a paraphyletic super-group; two
major Chromalveolata lineages, stramenopiles and alveolates, are likely sister to another super-group, Rhizaria,
to the exclusion of cryptophytes and haptophytes
[22,23]. The recent description of Roombia, a new katablepharid, has led to a proposal to establish Hacrobia, a
new taxonomic group that includes many protists formerly with uncertain taxonomical affiliations; katablepharids, (pico)biliphytes, centrohelids, telonemids and
two traditional Chromalveolata lineages, cryptophytes
and haptophtyes [24]. It was proposed that Hacrobia
included multiple lineages that secondarily lost photosynthetic ability, although the existence of cryptic nonphotosynthetic plastids in some hacrobian lineages, like
those seen in some apicomplexans, cannot be ruled out.
These data suggest that the history of plastid acquisition
and loss in ‘chromalveolates’ is much more complicated
than previously thought (reviewed in [5]).
Surprisingly, recent analyses of the nuclear genomes of
the diatoms (stramenopiles; Chromalveolata) showed
that thousands of diatom genes are similar to those of
prasinophyte green algae, an observation that was interpreted as evidence for the existence of a cryptic endosymbiont of green algal origin in a ‘chromalveolate’
ancestor prior to the secondary endosymbiosis that gave
rise to the extant secondary plastid of red algal origin
[25]. These intriguing data still need to be investigated
further, because the host nuclear phylogeny and the
relationship between green algae and Chromalveolata is
unclear and the host components of these two groups
may be specifically related to one another [2,5].
The possible existence of multiple past endosymbioses
is also debated in another super-group, the Excavata.
Euglenophytes are photosynthetic flagellates belonging
to the Euglenida (Excavata) [1]. The Euglenida include
both heterotrophic and photoautotrophic protists, and
share common ancestry with Kinetoplastea, which
include the human parasites Trypanosoma and Leishmania [1]. Morphological, biochemical and phylogenetic
analyses suggest that only the last common ancestor of
the extant plastid-harboring euglenophytes experienced
the secondary endosymbiosis, but not the common
ancestor of Euglenozoa as a whole (Euglenida, Diplonemea and Kinetoplastea) [26]. However, the discovery of
algal-type genes and the specific features of a mitochondrion-targeted protein in Kinetoplastea showing similarity to those of euglenophytes led to the hypothesis that

Page 2 of 11

a plastid was present in the common ancestor of Kinetoplastea, or Euglenozoa [27]. Previously, we developed
an automated pipeline for single gene phylogenetic tree
construction and found a number of genes showing cyanobacterial ancestry in the amoeboflagellate Naegleria
(Heterolobosea, a sister group to Euglenozoa). One possible interpretation for the presence of these genes is
that the primary endosymbiosis might have occurred in
an ancestor of eukaryotes prior to the divergence of
Excavata [28]. At any rate, among the extant Excavata
lineages, the presence of plastids is thus far only known
in euglenophytes [26].
A preliminary expressed sequence tag (EST) analysis
of the model euglenophyte Euglena gracilis showed a
complex history of nuclear genes in this organism [29],
but many aspects of how the E. gracilis nuclear genome
integrated genes from the green algal endosymbiont via
secondary endosymbiosis are unclear. Moreover, recent
molecular phylogenies suggested the presence of ‘red
lineage’ genes in the nuclear genome of E. gracilis, but
their origins and evolutionary histories have not been
explored in detail [30-33]. Here we provide phylogenetic
evidence for the presence of a number of genes of nongreen algal origins in E. gracilis through an expanded
EST survey using the laterally transferred gene mining
pipeline [28]. We also discuss the possible evolutionary
origins of these genes via lateral and/or endosymbiotic
gene transfer (LGT/EGT).

Results
To understand the nature and extent of genome mosaicism in E. gracilis, we searched for E. gracilis genes
showing specific affinity to homologues of photosynthetic eukaryotes other than green algae, the latter being
the unambiguous source of the endosymbiont that gave
rise to the secondary plastid in euglenophytes. First,
using the E. gracilis protein sequences generated from
the EST database as queries, we assembled a set of
sequences showing strong similarity to green algal/plant
proteins in preliminary phylogenetic trees. We then
identified the organisms to which the E. gracilis proteins
showed the smallest distance to the query sequence on
each tree. 528 and 621 E. gracilis queries were found to
be ‘closest’ to the ‘Viridiplantae’ (green plants; namely
green algae and land plants) and the ‘red lineage’ (i.e.,
red algae and secondary algae with plastids of red algal
origin), respectively (Additional file 1: Supplementary
table S1). We further checked the tree topologies of
those putative ‘red lineage’-like matches manually. We
then chose the trees where the E. gracilis query was
nested in, or specifically associated with, the ‘red lineage’
clade as a monophyletic group with high support values.
Finally we identified fourteen protein trees in which
the E. gracilis sequence was monophyletic with the

Maruyama et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:105
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/105

‘red lineage’, not ‘green’ (Table 1). Among them, four
trees included E. gracilis sequences placed in the Chromalveolata (plus Rhizaria) clade (CR clade) that is sister to red algal clades (CR+Red type), another two
trees showed monophyletic clades of Chromalveolata
sequences plus E. gracilis branching with green algae
rather than red algae (CR+Green type). In the other
eight trees, the euglenids are monophyletic with CR
clades, but the sister group of the euglenids plus CR is
unclear. Phylogenetic affiliations were sometimes not
directly comparable due to differences in the availability of the gene/genome sequence data in each lineage.
Nevertheless, the haptophytes (Emiliania huxleyi) and
stramenopiles are associated with, and sister to, E. gracilis in most of the trees. Two ‘red lineage’ proteins
closely related to the E. gracilis counterparts were
found in the plastid-lacking euglenid Peranema
trichophorum.
CR+Red type genes

We found that the gene encoding homogentisate phytyltransferase (HPT) from E. gracilis branches within
the CR sub-clade, which itself is monophyletic with
the red algal clade (Figure 1A, Additional file 2: Supplementary fig. S1A). These genes were included in the
plastid and cyanobacteria type HPT gene family, and
function in the vitamin E biosynthesis pathway [34].
Specific insertion/deletion sequences (Indels) shared
with E. gracilis and the CR group supported the monophyly of these sequences. (Additional file 2: Supplementary fig. S1B)
E. gracilis was found to possess a gene encoding a
hypothetical protein with a putative oxidoreductase
domain. This protein family is thus far found only in

Page 3 of 11

photosynthetic organisms and conserved in the ‘red lineage’ including the cryptophyte nucleomorphs, which are
derived nuclei of red algal origin. Green plant sequences
were distributed on a branch separated from the CR
+Red clade including the E. gracilis gene (Additional file
2: Supplementary fig. S2).
The glucokinase (EC 2.7.1.2) gene from E. gracilis was
found to belong to the prokaryote-type gene family,
which was also conserved among primary and secondary
algae (Additional file 2: Supplementary fig. S3). Interestingly, animals, fungi, land plants and the excavates Trypanosoma and Monocercomonoides possess a different
type of genes for this glucokinase enzyme [35,36], showing no sequence homology to the prokaryote-type genes.
Although another excavate parasite Giardia possesses a
prokaryote-type glucokinase [37], the Giardia intestinalis counterpart was sister to eubacteria, separate from
the CR+Red clade in our preliminary analysis (data not
shown). No land plant-like homologues were found in
prasinophyte genomes.
In the E. gracilis EST database, we found a short
fragment showing similarity to the ATP-dependent Clp
protease proteolytic subunit (ClpP) (Additional file 2:
Supplementary fig. S4A). The E. gracilis ClpP was
more similar to nucleomorph-encoded cryptophyte
homologues and the plastid-encoded green algal counterparts than to mitochondrial-localized ClpP homologues, suggesting that the E. gracilis ClpP may function
in the plastid. Although this fragment is too short (299
bp) to allow construction of reliable phylogenetic trees,
several characteristic amino acid residues are shared
with cryptophyte nucleomorph-encoded proteins and
those of pelagophytes (Additional file 2: Supplementary
fig. S4B).

Table 1 ’Red lineage’ genes in E. gracilis
Cluster ID

gene product

CR+Red

0505

homogentisate phytyltransferase (HPT)

CR+Green

1748
5429

hypothetical protein
glucokinase

+
+

7874

Clp protease proteolytic subunit (ClpP)

+

2407

phosphoribulokinase (PRK)

+

2525

folate-biopterin transporter (FBT)

other

Peranema EST

+

+

1468

zeaxanthin epoxidase (ZEP)

+

2373

fructose 1,6-diphosphatase (FBP), plastidic

+

2373

FBP, cytosolic

+

4157
4273

6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase (GND)
ADP/ATP transporter

+
+

5532

GTP-binding protein LepA

+

6234

methionine adenosyltransferase (MAT)

+

AAQ19605

fatty acid desaturase

+
+

+

Original cluster IDs had “EEL0000” followed by the 4-digit numbers shown. The accession number is shown for the fatty acid desaturase gene, which was not
found in the EST database.

Maruyama et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:105
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/105

Euglena gracilis ELL00000505

B

Peranema trichophorum 04251

Eu

Eu

A

Page 4 of 11

Ectocarpus siliculosus CBJ48519
Aureococcus anophagefferens Auran1_67156

CR

Phaeodactylum tricornutum XP_002182033

Emiliania huxleyi Emihu1_115320

Bigelowiella natans Bigna1_75563
Galdieria sulphuraria Gs32880

Red

Cyanidioschyzon merolae CMN202C
Cyanothece sp. PCC 7425 ZP_03140811
Acaryochloris marina MBIC11017 YP_001518835
Synechococcus sp. JA-3-3Ab YP_475205

Ectocarpus siliculosus CBJ29086
Aureococcus anophagefferens Auran1_60513
Phaeodactylum tricornutum XP_002185087
Thalassiosira pseudonana XP_002290313

CR

Gloeobacter violaceus PCC 7421 NP_923229

Cyano

Anabaena variabilis ATCC 29413 YP_323974

Euglena gracilis ELL00004273

Chloroflexus aurantiacus J-10-fl YP_001637001
Ectocarpus siliculosus CBN75651

Chloroflexus aggregans DSM 9485 ZP_01515872

Phaeodactylum tricornutum XP_002185892

Bigelowiella natans Bigna1_53372
Galdieria sulphuraria Gs34090

CR Red

Thalassiosira pseudonana XP_002293015

Thalassiosira pseudonana XP_002293715

Figure 1 Maximum likelihood (RAxML) tree of the ‘red lineage’ proteins found in euglenids. The results of bootstrap analyses using
RAxML (upper) and the Bayesian inference posterior probability values using MrBayes (lower) are shown on each branch. A, the best tree of the
homogentisate phytyltransferase (HPT) family proteins shows that the E. gracilis HPT is closely related to the Chromalveolata and red algal
homologues. B, the ‘red lineage’ genes encoding prokaryote-type ADP/ATP transporter have been found in euglenids and Chromalveolata. Thick
branches represent BI and ML values not lower than 100 and 95, respectively. Eu, euglenids; CR, Chromalveolata plus Rhizaria; Red, red algae;
Cyano, cyanobacteria. See supplementary figures for full trees.

CR+Green type genes

The plastid Calvin cycle enzyme phosphoribulokinase
(PRK) is derived from the cyanobacterial ancestor of the
organelle [30]. Molecular phylogenetic analysis of PRK
genes suggested that extant Chromalveolata genes are
related to their green algal counterparts, not red algae,
and that these genes may not be derived from red algal
endosymbionts engulfed in the ancestor of CR. Our phylogenetic analysis of PRK genes recovered the previously
reported kinship [30] between green algal and Chromalveolata genes, and confirmed that the E. gracilis PRK
nests within the Chromalveolata clade (Additional file 2:
Supplementary fig. S5).
Folate/biopterin transporter (FBT) genes in CR have
been shown to be most closely related to their counterparts in green plants [16,28]. In the FBT protein tree
(Additional file 2: Supplementary fig. S6), the E. gracilis
sequence is monophyletic with proteins from Perkinsus
(Chromalveolata) and Bigelowiella (Rhizaria), and sister
to the clade including the diatom Thalassiosira and prasinophyte genes. Separation of the E. gracilis gene from
these prasinophyte genes is supported with the high support values (BI/ML = 1.00/100). In the CR assemblage
and land plants, this gene family is highly duplicated and
divergent, and the phylogenetic patterns are complicated.
The tree topology suggests that both gene duplications in
the ancestral lineages of CR and land plants, as well as
more recent lineage specific duplications (or losses) have

occurred. However, no evidence for gene duplication was
found in red algae.
E. gracilis genes with other affiliations

Zeaxanthin epoxidase (ZEP) is involved in the photoprotective xanthophyll cycle, catalyzing the addition of an
epoxy group to zeaxanthin to form violaxanthin under
low light conditions [32]. ZEP genes are not found in
cyanobacteria and red algae thus far, and molecular phylogenetic studies suggested that ZEP genes in Chromalveolata might have been derived from prasinophytes via
gene transfer events ([32] and Additional file 2: Supplementary fig. S7). Multiple duplicated ZEP genes are
found in Chromalveolata genomes, forming various subclades (Additional file 2: Supplementary fig. S7). The E.
gracilis gene was nested within a subclade of these
genes, not affiliated with green plant gene clades.
Fructose-bisphosphatase (FBP) is a key glycolytic
enzyme in eukaryotes and eubacteria. In photosynthetic
eukaryotes, duplicated genes encoding FBP form another
family functioning in carbohydrate metabolism such as
the Calvin cycle in the plastid [31]. Teich et al. showed
that both the plastid and cytosolic genes from E. gracilis
were monophyletic with CR, not green plants [31]. We
confirmed with detailed analysis that both types of E.
gracilis sequences are nested within the CR clades in
the plastid and cytosolic FBP gene families (Additional
file 2: Supplementary fig. S8 and 9, respectively).

Maruyama et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:105
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/105

However, the plastid FBP genes were duplicated in several lineages and the basal part of the CR FBP clade was
not sufficiently resolved to verify the sister group to the
E. gracilis plus CR clades.
The phylogenetic tree of 6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase (GND) of cyanobacterial ancestry shows that
the euglenid GNDs are monophyletic with the CR
assemblage (Additional file 2: Supplementary fig. S10). A
GND protein from the non-photosynthetic euglenid P.
trichophorum is monophyletic with the E. gracilis counterpart and contained within the euglenid-CR clade.
Thus the GND gene is likely a synapomorphic character
of euglenophytes and non-photosynthetic euglenids
[28,38]. We could not find a N-terminal extension on
the E. gracilis homolog compared to cyanobacterial
homologs (data not shown), thus it is likely that this
enzyme functions in cytosol in this organism.
We found a ‘red lineage’ gene encoding a conserved
protein with an ADP/ATP transporter domain in E. gracilis and P. trichophorum (Figure 1B, Additional file 2:
Supplementary fig. S11). This gene was found only in
euglenids and Chromalveolata among eukaryotes, in
addition to several lineages of eubacteria. Stramenopiles
possess duplicated forms of this gene.
We found another ‘red lineage’ gene, LepA, in E. gracilis. The LepA protein, also known as elongation factor
4 (EF4), is a GTP-binding protein conserved among
eubacteria and eukaryotes. A previous study [39] showed
that eukaryotic LepA genes are distributed in two
clades, a mitochondrial LepA clade and a plastid one,
with the plastid clade genes being sister to cyanobacterial homologues, suggesting that they are likely derived
from the cyanobacterial ancestor of the plastid via EGT.
Although Escherichia coli LepA was shown to catalyze
one-codon backward movement of ribosome complexes
in vitro [39], it has no apparent effect in vivo on the
fidelity control of protein synthesis, rather presumably
playing some role in protein folding [40]. In this study,
the E. gracilis protein was nested in the CR subclade
(BI/ML = 1.00/100) in the plastid clade (Additional file
2: Supplementary fig. S12).
Methionine adenosyltransferase (MAT) catalyzes the
synthesis of S-adenosylmethionine, which is the major
methyl donor and used as a substrate in a variety of
methylation reactions. Genes encoding a divergent form
of MAT, termed MATX, have been found in euglenophytes and CR, and it is suggested that the MATX genes
were acquired via EGT [33]. Although the E. gracilis
MATX is monophyletic with Chromalveolata MATX
counterparts with high support values (BI/ML = 1.00/
100), the origin of the MATX gene family is still unclear
[33,41] (Additional file 2: Supplementary fig. S13).
Tripodi et al. [42] showed that the gene encoding Δ4
fatty acid desaturase in E. gracilis was closely related to

Page 5 of 11

the homologues of Thalassiosira and the labyrinthulid
Thraustochytrium (stramenopiles). Although the
sequence of the E. gracilis desaturase gene was not
found in the EST database, we extended the phylogenetic analysis of this gene/protein with currently available data from other taxa. Our results (Additional file 2:
Supplementary fig. S14A) are consistent with the previous study [42]. Examination of the protein sequence
alignment revealed the presence of indels specific to the
Euglena/Thalassiosira plus Thraustochytrium clade that
are not shared with other excavate proteins from Trypanosoma, Leishmania and Naegleria (Additional file 2:
Supplementary fig. S14B).

Discussion
Evolutionary history of the ‘red lineage’ genes in
euglenophytes

We have shown that a number of E. gracilis genes are
monophyletic with ‘red lineage’ genes and that some of
them are nested within the CR clade, suggesting that
the E. gracilis genes were acquired from algae in this
group via LGT. In addition to the fact that no reports
show a close phylogenetic relationship between the host
cell components of euglenids and Chromalveolata (plus
Rhizaria), the apparent absence of homologues of these
E. gracilis genes in the available genome sequences of
close relatives such as Kinetoplastea and the heterolobosean amoeboflagellate N. gruberi further suggest that the
gene transfer events occurred in an ancestral lineage of
euglenids, rather than euglenozoans as a whole.
If the LGT scenario discussed above is true, what kind
of eukaryote-to-eukaryote LGT could have occurred?
One possible and most likely scenario is LGT from prey
to predator, as suggested in an EST-based analysis of
the mixotrophic chlorarachniophyte Bigelowiella natans
[43]. Although phagotrophy has apparently been lost in
their phototrophic offspring, the ancestor of euglenophytes was likely a eukaryovorous euglenid protist [26].
Morphological and ultra-structural analyses have
demonstrated that Peranema-like eukaryovorous euglenids are similar in size to photosynthetic euglenophytes
and are capable of ingesting algal prey by phagocytosis,
which is presumably a necessary prerequisite for the
eventual establishment of a secondary plastid [26]. A
study using video microscopy illustrated two types of
feeding in P. trichophorum: engulfment of a prey cell
whole (phagocytosis) as well as sucking out the prey cell
cytosol through the feeding apparatus (myzocytosis)
[44]. The presence of ‘red lineage’ genes in Peranema
(Additional file 2: Supplementary figs. S10, 11) supports
the idea that the LGT might have occurred prior to the
divergence of euglenophytes and at least some eukaryovorous euglenids, but after the branching of eukaryovorous euglenids from bacteriovorous ancestors [26]. In

Maruyama et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:105
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/105

Page 6 of 11

Gene loss?

Digestion

‘Red lineage’ gene
‘Green lineage’ gene

Eukaryovorous
euglenids

EGT

Photosynthetic
euglenophytes

Chromalveolata-like
prey alga

LGT

Eukaryovorous
ancestor

Phagocytosis /
endosymbiosis

LGT / EGT
Prasinophyte-like
green alga
Replacement?

Figure 2 Hypothesized evolutionary history of the ‘red lineage’ genes in euglenids. In this model, the ‘red lineage’ genes have been
acquired by the common ancestor of euglenophytes and eukaryovorous euglenids.

this scenario, the ancestor of euglenids might once have
ingested algae with ‘red lineage’ secondary plastids as
prey, and some genes might have been transferred from
the prey to the nuclear genome of the ancestor of euglenids (Figure 2).
What kind of relationship might have existed between
the above-mentioned LGT donors and recipients? Our
data are consistent with the notion that these ‘red lineage’ genes were acquired multiple times independently
via LGT from multiple sub-groups within the CR assemblage [43,45,46]. Under this view, some genes would
have been lost while others happened to acquire a function in the host organism, perhaps ultimately contributing to the successful integration and functioning of the
green algal endosymbiont that eventually became the
current euglenophyte secondary plastid. Importantly,
these genes were retained in the euglenophyte nuclear
genome (at least in E. gracilis) without being replaced
by the EGT-derived genes from the secondary greenalgal endosymbiont, which gave rise to the ‘modern-day’
secondary plastids in extant euglenophytes.
A previous study illustrated a remarkable example of
LGT from non-green algae to euglenophytes. Triosephosphate isomerase (TIM) genes from euglenophytes
have been shown to be monophyletic with red algal
homologues, and only distantly related to green algae,
Excavata and Chromalveolata, suggesting an LGT from
red algae to euglenophytes [47]. Interestingly, we found
that the TIM genes from the chlorarachniophyte Bigelowiella natans, a member of another algal lineage

harboring secondary plastid of green algal origin, were
also nested within the red algal clade (Additional file 2:
Supplementary fig. S15A). A unique insertion found in
red algae and euglenophytes [47] was also shared with
the B. natans gene (Additional file 2: Supplementary fig.
S15B). For consistency, we did not designate TIM as a
‘red lineage’ gene due to the absence of Chromalveolata
genes in the euglenid plus red algae clade. Future analyses will hopefully uncover the true history of this enigmatic gene family.
Endosymbiotic versus lateral gene transfer

Phagocytosis of prey cells, endosymbiosis and, ultimately, establishment of an organelle is a complex process that is difficult to understand from genomic data
alone [48], and at the earliest stages of organellogenesis,
the distinction between LGT and EGT is blurred.
Nevertheless, several lines of evidence from our study
are consistent with the possibility that at least some of
the ‘red lineage’ genes in euglenids are derived from
EGT rather than LGT. First, some of the ‘red lineage’
genes appear to have plastid-related functions (e.g.,
Additional file 2: Supplementary figs. S5, S7 and S8).
Second, Peranema possesses ‘red lineage’ genes (Fig. 1B,
Additional file 2: Supplementary figs. S10, S11) and the
basic morphological characteristics believed to be necessary for establishment of a secondary plastid: Peranemalike euglenids are larger than other bacteriovorous and
Dinema-like eukaryovorous euglenids, comparable in
size and in the number of strips around the cell

Maruyama et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:105
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/105

periphery (a well-established taxonomic character) to
several phototrophic euglenophytes such as Euglena and
Eutreptiella [26]. Genomic data from Peranema-like
eukaryovores are currently very limited. Regardless,
although morphological and phylogenetic analyses suggest that aplastidic (osmotrophic, bacteriovorous and
eukaryovorous) euglenids are paraphyletic in euglenid
phylogenies, Peranema-like eukaryovores are sister to
phototrophic euglenophytes and possibly form a monophyletic group with them [49]. Third, although tree
topologies are certainly dependent on taxon sampling
(and the number of genome sequences available), the
genes we have characterized can be interpreted as having come from an ancestral lineage within the broader
CR assemblage, rather than one or a few specific
lineages. On balance, it is thus possible that the incorporation (phagocytosis and perhaps endosymbiosis) of
an alga harboring a secondarily derived ‘red lineage’
plastid could have occurred in a Peranema-like eukaryovorous ancestor (Figure 2).
Under the EGT scenario, retention of genes encoding
plastid-targeted proteins such as PRK, ZEP and plastidtype FBP (Additional file 2: Supplementary figs. S5, S7
and S8, respectively) suggests that the secondary green
plastid might have replaced the ‘red lineage’ tertiary
plastid or succeeded it within a short period of time
after plastid loss (Figure 2). This may be comparable to
the situation seen in the ‘green’ plastid-harboring dinoflagellate Lepidodinium chlorophorum, where phylogenetic mosaicism of the nuclear-encoded plastid-targeted
proteins derived from both the ancestral peridinin-type
plastid, which is the most common plastid in dinoflagellates, and the ‘new’ secondary plastid of green algal origin, which is thought to have been acquired by plastid
replacement [46].
From our data alone, it is difficult to distinguish
unambiguously between the LGT and EGT hypotheses
for any given gene. The data do, however, represent
an interesting case study for discussing which hypothesis is most likely and under what conditions. If multiple phylogenetic trees suggest that the genes in
question are most closely related to different organisms, the “independent LGT” scenario is most likely
correct. However, if the tree topologies are consistent
with one another and all the genes appear to be
derived from the same source, then “ancient EGT” can
be considered. Nevertheless, consistent tree topologies
inferred from multiple genes/proteins do not necessarily prove that all the genes have a single origin, as
phylogenetic artefacts can be misleading and taxon
sampling is often insufficient to allow fine-scale resolution. On a gene-by-gene basis, LGT and EGT are
indistinguishable on the basis of phylogenetic tree
topology alone.

Page 7 of 11

Endosymbiosis can be considered a specific and
extreme case among numerous types of prey-predator
relationships [50]. Assuming that genes are repeatedly
transferred from the same prey organism and very close
relatives during the transition from endosymbiont to
organelle, an “ancient EGT” scenario entails stricter conditions on the nature of the organism engulfed by the
host. Thus, based on parsimony, regardless of the number of transferred genes identified, “ancient EGT” would
seem to be less likely than multiple LGTs form a single
donor lineage, or “single-origin LGT”. However, this
parsimony-based argument does not necessarily apply in
every biological context. For instance, when the host cell
retains an endosymbiont that shares a recent common
ancestor with the source organism of the transferred
genes, “EGT” would be regarded as the most parsimonious interpretation. Even when the host cell does not
possess such an endosymbiont, if the frequency of the
gene transfer correlates with the length of the period
when the prey is retained in the host cell, increasingly
large numbers of transferred genes would increasingly
favor the “EGT” scenario. One can also argue that if the
presumed functions of the transferred genes are
assumed to be reflective of the relationship between the
source organisms and the host cell, and if those genes
possess plastid-related functions, “ancient EGT” would
also seem to be a likely scenario. There are at present
no known criteria with which to quantify and compare
the probabilities of LGT and EGT from genomic data,
and further study will be necessary to verify whether the
above assumptions are biologically reasonable.
Alternative explanations and limitations in data
interpretation

As noted above, combined with the potential to be misled by phylogenetic artifact, insufficient taxon sampling
is also a concern when interpreting the phylogenies presented herein. A previous study suggested that the plastid-bearing ancestor of E. gracilis is related to the
prasinophyte genus Pyramimonas (Pyramimonadales)
[9], from which a complete nuclear genome sequence is
not yet available. If so, the E. gracilis genes would be
expected to be basally branching within the green plant
clade, or branching between green plants and other primary plastid-containing lineages (red algae and glaucophytes). However, only two genera, Ostreococcus and
Micromonas (Mamiellales), were included in our database among prasinophytes, making interpretation
difficult.
A recent genome-wide phylogenetic study demonstrated the presence of over 100 genes of apparent algal
affinity, probably derived from LGT events, in the choanoflagellate Monosiga brevicollis [51]. The red algal-like
glucokinase analyzed herein (Additional file 2:

Maruyama et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:105
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/105

Supplementary fig. S3), which was not identified in the
previous study [51], may provide another example of
LGT-derived algal genes in M. brevicollis. Nevertheless,
given that other eukaryotes (animals, fungi, land plants
and some excavates) possess a different type of enzyme
for phosphorylating hexose [35,36], our data do not rule
out the possibility of differential loss of multiple gene
families with overlapping functions early in eukaryotic
evolution.
It is also important to recognize that the Euglena and
Peranema EST data are far from complete gene repertoires and that nuclear genome sequences, especially of
basally branching green algae and euglenids, would be
helpful to better resolve the early history of plastids in
euglenophytes and other photosynthetic eukaryotes.
Wider and richer taxon sampling will also help to
reduce the impact of phylogenetic artifacts, e.g., longbranch attraction, stochastic variation or directional
biases of evolutionary signals.
As discussed above, recent studies have suggested that
the ancestor of Chromalveolata possessed a considerable
number of genes showing affinity to green plants
[2,5,25,32]. If chromalveolates are a monophyletic group,
how would such ‘green’-type genes be expected to
behave in phylogenetic trees relative to the EGT-/green
algal-derived genes of euglenids and chlorarachniophytes? ‘Green’-type genes in euglenids and CR could be
monophyletic due to phylogenetic artifacts (as could the
‘red’-type ones) and we set aside trees in which their
monophyly was weakly supported and/or the phylogenetic patterns were too ambiguous. It is notable that
phylogenetic patterns such as those seen in the FBT and
ZEP trees (Additional file 2: Supplementary figs. S6 and
S7, respectively) could be interpreted as a result of LGT
from CR specifically to prasinophytes, which is in the
opposite direction to the model proposed in previous
studies [25,32]. Thus, it is important to recognize that
the directionality of LGT events can be difficult to discern with confidence and greatly impact how we interpret global patterns of plastid gain and loss. Regardless,
despite numerous uncertainties our data clearly indicate
that euglenid nuclear genomes are evolutionary mosaics,
the result of a complex past in which LGTs from (i) CR
to euglenids, (ii) from green plants to CR (and the
reverse), as well as (iii) EGTs from red algae to CR and
(iv) from green algae to euglenids, appear to be overlaid
upon the ‘host lineage’ phylogeny. It is essential that our
understanding of the evolutionary histories of these be
reevaluated regularly and cautiously as more genomic
data accumulate.

Conclusions
We have identified a number of ‘red lineage’ genes in
the phototrophic euglenophyte E. gracilis, an organism

Page 8 of 11

that harbors a green algal-derived secondary plastid, as
well as in the plastid-lacking eukaryovorous euglenid P.
trichophorum. It is likely that these genes have been
acquired via eukaryote-to-eukaryote LGT, giving rise to
a complex pattern of genome mosaicism in euglenids.
The possible sources of these genes are from prey
organisms, and, possibly, the presence of a cryptic ‘red
lineage’ tertiary endosymbiont in an ancestral euglenid.
Such LGT- and/or EGT-derived genes may have contributed to the successful integration and functioning of
the green algal secondary plastid in modern-day
euglenids.

Methods
cDNA library and sequencing

P. trichophorum cells were co-cultured with Chlorogonium sp. as described previously [52]. The total RNA
was extracted using SV Total RNA Isolation (Promega,
WI, USA), and a cDNA library for P. trichophorum was
constructed and end-sequenced (TAKARA BIO Inc.,
Shiga, Japan). The prey Chlorogonium cells were
depleted in the cultures when the Peranema cells were
collected. For E. gracilis genes, 3’ end sequences were
amplified by rapid amplification of cDNA ends (RACE)
using the Omniscript RT kit (Qiagen, CA, USA). The E.
gracilis LepA and P. trichophorum ADP/ATP transporter gene fragments were deposited in DDBJ/EMBL/GenBank under the accession numbers AB617525 and
AB617526, respectively.
Data mining and phylogenetic analysis

The genome sequence data and phylogenetic tools used
in the similarity search and tree construction were as
described in our previous study [28]. The EST
sequences of E. gracilis were obtained from TBestDB
(http://tbestdb.bcm.umontreal.ca/) and all other
sequences were from the NCBI GenBank refseq database (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/), the JGI genome
database (http://genome.jgi-psf.org/) and the Galdieria
sulphuraria whole genome data (A.P.M. Weber, unpublished). We excluded amitochondrial and/or parasitic
eukaryotes, which might cause long branch attraction
artifacts due to unusual nucleotide compositions and
accelerated rates of sequence evolution [53,54].
For the first screening step, amino acid query
sequences derived from E. gracilis genes (8651 queries)
were automatically subjected to BLAST searches against
the GenBank non-redundant (nr) database using NCBI
netblast and EFetch utilities, extracting the genes showing the E-value smaller than 10e-5 to ‘Viridiplantae’ by
BLASTP. For the second step, the selected query
sequences (2632 queries) were subjected to BLASTP
analysis against ‘refseq-protein’ to fetch homologous
sequences with E-values less than 0.001, up to 500 hits

Maruyama et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:105
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/105

at a maximum. Multiple alignments, phylogenetic tree
constructions and laterally transferred gene mining were
carried out using a gene mining pipeline that we developed in a previous study [28]. Briefly, multiple alignments were then performed using MUSCLE [55],
followed by automated removal of indel-rich sites and
taxa. Bootstrapped neighbor-joining trees were produced
using QuickTree [56]. To diminish the sampling bias, all
the OTUs except for one representative OTU in a
monophyletic clade exclusively composed of OTUs from
a single genus were removed, and the trees were re-constructed for calculating the distance between the query
and any taxon of interest on the tree. In addition to the
automatic process, trees for genes previously published
as the putative photosynthetic endosymbiont-derived
genes, but not detected in our analysis, were manually
re-constructed.
Candidate ‘red lineage’ genes in E. gracilis were manually selected, and their homologues were collected based
on the BLASTP scores, and then subjected to multiple
protein sequence alignments using MUSCLE. Phylogenetic analyses were performed with maximum likelihood
(ML) using RAxML [57] and with Bayesian interference
(BI) using MrBayes [58]. ML and BI were based on the
WAG substitution matrix, which gave high scores for all
proteins in model selection using ModelGenerator [59],
with options of four gamma-distributed rate categories
and estimate of invariable sites (plus empirical base frequencies in ML). ML branch support was evaluated
with 1000 bootstrap replicates, and BI posterior probability values were calculated from the MCMC run data,
which summarized when the average standard deviation
of split frequencies reached less than 0.01. Except for
the trees of which monophyly was confirmed by previous studies, threshold values to assess the monophyly
of E. gracilis gene clades were 70% on ML bootstrap or
0.9 on BI posterior probability values.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Taxonomical distribution of the ‘closest gene’ to
the E. gracilis genes in distance on the first screening NJ trees.
Additional file 2: The HPT protein family. A, RAxML tree of the HPT
proteins. The RAxML bootstrap values (upper) and the MrBayes posterior
probability values (lower) are shown on each branch. Thick branches
represent BI and ML values not lower than 100 and 95, respectively.
Different phylogenetic affiliations are represented as follows: blue,
Excavata; orange, Chromalveolata plus Rhizaria; magenta, red algae;
green, green plants; gray, unikonts; sky blue, cyanobacteria. B, Partial
amino acid alignments showing the unique Indels in the HPT family
proteins. RAxML tree of hypothetical proteins. RAxML tree of GLK
proteins. ClpP protein family. A, RAxML tree of ClpP proteins. B, Partial
amino acid alignments showing the conserved amino acid residues in
the ClpP family proteins. RAxML tree of PRK proteins. RAxML tree of FBT
proteins. RAxML tree of ZEP proteins. RAxML tree of paltidic FBP proteins.
RAxML tree of cytosolic FBP proteins. RAxML tree of GND proteins.
Glaucophytes are represented in blue-green. RAxML tree of ADP/ATP

Page 9 of 11

transporter proteins. RAxML tree of LepA proteins. RAxML tree of MAT
proteins. Fatty acid desaturase protein family. A, RAxML tree of fatty acid
desaturase proteins. B, Partial amino acid alignments showing the unique
Indels in the fatty acid desaturase family proteins. TIM protein family. A,
RAxML tree of TIM proteins. B, Partial amino acid alignments showing
the unique Indels in the TIM family proteins.

Acknowledgements
The E. gracilis EST sequence data were generated by the Protist EST
Program. The B. natans genome sequencing was conducted by the U.S.
Department of Energy Joint Genome Institute and was supported by the
Office of Science of the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract No. DEAC02-05CH11231. M.W. Gray, P. Keeling, G.I. McFadden and C.E. Lane are
thanked for their ongoing contributions to the project. The super-computing
resource was provided by Human Genome Center, Institute of Medical
Science, University of Tokyo. This work was supported by Grants-in-Aid for
Research Fellowships for Young Scientists (No. 20-9894 to SM) from the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science; Scientific Research (Nos.
21657024 and 22112505 to HN) from The Ministry of Education, Culture,
Sports, Science and Technology, Japan.
Author details
Department of Biological Sciences, Graduate School of Science, University
of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan. 2The Canadian
Institute for Advanced Research, Program in Integrated Microbial Biodiversity,
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Dalhousie University, Sir
Charles Tupper Medical Building, 5850 College Street, Halifax, Nova Scotia,
B3H 1X5, Canada. 3Department of Biology, Graduate School of Science, Kobe
University, 1-1 Rokkodai-cho, Nada-ku, Kobe 657-8501, Japan. 4Institute for
Plant Biochemistry, Heinrich-Heine-University, Geb. 26.03.01,
Universitätsstrasse 1, D-40225 Düsseldorf, Germany.
1

Authors’ contributions
SM designed the study, conducted the analysis and wrote the manuscript.
TS carried out the Peranema culturing. APMW contributed the phylogenomic
analysis. HN helped designing and conducting the study. JMA and HN
contributed to the data interpretation and manuscript preparation. All
authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Received: 29 November 2010 Accepted: 18 April 2011
Published: 18 April 2011
References
1. Adl SM, Simpson AGB, Farmer MA, Andersen RA, Anderson OR, Barta JR,
Bowser SS, Brugerolle G, Fensome RA, Fredericq S, et al: The new higher
level classification of eukaryotes with emphasis on the taxonomy of
protists. J Eukaryot Microbiol 2005, 52(5):399-451.
2. Nozaki H, Maruyama S, Matsuzaki M, Nakada T, Kato S, Misawa K:
Phylogenetic positions of Glaucophyta, green plants (Archaeplastida)
and Haptophyta (Chromalveolata) as deduced from slowly evolving
nuclear genes. Mol Phylogenet Evol 2009, 53(3):872-880.
3. Stiller JW: Plastid endosymbiosis, genome evolution and the origin of
green plants. Trends Plant Sci 2007, 12(9):391-396.
4. Hampl V, Hug L, Leigh JW, Dacks JB, Lang BF, Simpson AGB, Roger AJ:
Phylogenomic analyses support the monophyly of Excavata and resolve
relationships among eukaryotic “supergroups”. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2009, 106(10):3859-3864.
5. Elias M, Archibald JM: Sizing up the genomic footprint of endosymbiosis.
Bioessays 2009, 31(12):1273-1279.
6. Inagaki Y, Nakajima Y, Sato M, Sakaguchi M, Hashimoto T: Gene sampling
can bias multi-gene phylogenetic inferences: the relationship between
red algae and green plants as a case study. Mol Biol Evol 2009,
26(5):1171-1178.
7. Rodríguez-Ezpeleta N, Brinkmann H, Burey SC, Roure B, Burger G,
Löffelhardt W, Bohnert HJ, Philippe H, Lang BF: Monophyly of primary
photosynthetic eukaryotes: green plants, red algae, and glaucophytes.
Curr Biol 2005, 15(14):1325-1330.

Maruyama et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:105
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/105

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.
14.
15.
16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.
27.

28.

29.

Rogers MB, Gilson PR, Su V, McFadden GI, Keeling PJ: The complete
chloroplast genome of the chlorarachniophyte Bigelowiella natans:
evidence for independent origins of chlorarachniophyte and euglenid
secondary endosymbionts. Mol Biol Evol 2007, 24(1):54-62.
Turmel M, Gagnon MC, O’Kelly CJ, Otis C, Lemieux C: The chloroplast
genomes of the green algae Pyramimonas, Monomastix, and
Pycnococcus shed new light on the evolutionary history of
prasinophytes and the origin of the secondary chloroplasts of euglenids.
Mol Biol Evol 2009, 26(3):631-648.
Parfrey LW, Grant J, Tekle YI, Lasek-Nesselquist E, Morrison HG, Sogin ML,
Patterson DJ, Katz LA: Broadly sampled multigene analyses yield a wellresolved eukaryotic tree of life. Syst Biol 2010, 59(5):518-533.
Baurain D, Brinkmann H, Petersen J, Rodríguez-Ezpeleta N, Stechmann A,
Demoulin V, Roger AJ, Burger G, Lang BF, Philippe H: Phylogenomic
evidence for separate acquisition of plastids in cryptophytes,
haptophytes, and stramenopiles. Mol Biol Evol 2010, 27(7):1698-1709.
Cavalier-Smith T: Principles of protein and lipid targeting in secondary
symbiogenesis: euglenoid, dinoflagellate, and sporozoan plastid origins
and the eukaryote family tree. J Eukaryot Microbiol 1999, 46(4):347-366.
Keeling PJ: Chromalveolates and the evolution of plastids by secondary
endosymbiosis. J Eukaryot Microbiol 2009, 56(1):1-8.
Sanchez-Puerta MV, Delwiche CF: A hypothesis for plastid evolution in
chromalveolates. J Phycol 2008, 44(5):1097-1107.
Slamovits CH, Keeling PJ: Plastid-derived genes in the non-photosynthetic
alveolate Oxyrrhis marina. Mol Biol Evol 2008, 25(7):1297-1306.
Reyes-Prieto A, Moustafa A, Bhattacharya D: Multiple genes of apparent
algal origin suggest ciliates may once have been photosynthetic. Curr
Biol 2008, 18(13):956-962.
Grauvogel C, Reece KS, Brinkmann H, Petersen J: Plastid isoprenoid
metabolism in the oyster parasite Perkinsus marinus connects
dinoflagellates and malaria pathogens–new impetus for studying
alveolates. J Mol Evol 2007, 65(6):725-729.
Matsuzaki M, Kuroiwa H, Kuroiwa T, Kita K, Nozaki H: A cryptic algal group
unveiled: A plastid biosynthesis pathway in the oyster parasite Perkinsus
marinus. Mol Biol Evol 2008, 25(6):1167-1179.
Teles-Grilo ML, Tato-Costa J, Duarte SM, Maia A, Casal G, Azevedo C: Is
there a plastid in Perkinsus atlanticus (Phylum Perkinsozoa)? Eur J Protistol
2007, 43(2):163-167.
Moore RB, Obornik M, Janouskovec J, Chrudimský T, Vancová M, Green DH,
Wright SW, Davies NW, Bolch CJS, Heimann K, et al: A photosynthetic
alveolate closely related to apicomplexan parasites. Nature 2008,
451(7181):959-963.
Janouskovec J, Horák A, Oborník M, Lukes J, Keeling PJ: A common red
algal origin of the apicomplexan, dinoflagellate, and heterokont plastids.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2010, 107(24):10949-10954.
Burki F, Shalchian-Tabrizi K, Pawlowski J: Phylogenomics reveals a new
‘megagroup’ including most photosynthetic eukaryotes. Biol Lett 2008,
4(4):366-369.
Burki F, Inagaki Y, Bråte J, Archibald JM, Keeling PJ, Cavalier-Smith T,
Sakaguchi M, Hashimoto T, Horak A, Kumar S, et al: Large-scale
phylogenomic analyses reveal that two enigmatic protist lineages,
telonemia and centroheliozoa, are related to photosynthetic
chromalveolates. Genome Biol Evol 2009, 2009:231-238.
Okamoto N, Chantangsi C, Horák A, Leander BS, Keeling PJ: Molecular
phylogeny and description of the novel katablepharid Roombia truncata
gen. et sp. nov., and establishment of the Hacrobia taxon nov. PLoS ONE
2009, 4(9):e7080.
Moustafa A, Beszteri B, Maier U, Bowler C, Valentin K, Bhattacharya D:
Genomic footprints of a cryptic plastid endosymbiosis in diatoms.
Science 2009, 324(5935):1724-1726.
Leander BS: Did trypanosomatid parasites have photosynthetic
ancestors? Trends Microbiol 2004, 12(6):251-258.
Bodył A, Mackiewicz P, Milanowski R: Did trypanosomatid parasites
contain a eukaryotic alga-derived plastid in their evolutionary past?
Journal of Parasitology 2010, 96(2):465-475.
Maruyama S, Matsuzaki M, Misawa K, Nozaki H: Cyanobacterial
contribution to the genomes of the plastid-lacking protists. BMC Evol Biol
2009, 9(1):197.
Ahmadinejad N, Dagan T, Martin W: Genome history in the symbiotic
hybrid Euglena gracilis. Gene 2007, 402(1-2):35-39.

Page 10 of 11

30. Petersen J, Teich R, Brinkmann H, Cerff R: A “green” phosphoribulokinase
in complex algae with red plastids: evidence for a single secondary
endosymbiosis leading to haptophytes, cryptophytes, heterokonts, and
dinoflagellates. J Mol Evol 2006, 62(2):143-157.
31. Teich R, Zauner S, Baurain D, Brinkmann H, Petersen J: Origin and
distribution of Calvin cycle fructose and sedoheptulose bisphosphatases
in plantae and complex algae: a single secondary origin of complex red
plastids and subsequent propagation via tertiary endosymbioses. Protist
2007, 158(3):263-276.
32. Frommolt R, Werner S, Paulsen H, Goss R, Wilhelm C, Zauner S, Maier UG,
Grossman AR, Bhattacharya D, Lohr M: Ancient recruitment by chromists
of green algal genes encoding enzymes for carotenoid biosynthesis. Mol
Biol Evol 2008, 25(12):2653-2667.
33. Sanchez-Perez GF, Hampl V, Simpson AGB, Roger AJ: A new divergent type
of eukaryotic methionine adenosyltransferase is present in multiple
distantly related secondary algal lineages. J Eukaryot Microbiol 2008,
55(5):374-381.
34. Collakova E, DellaPenna D: Isolation and functional analysis of
homogentisate phytyltransferase from Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 and
Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol 2001, 127(3):1113-1124.
35. Bork P, Sander C, Valencia A: Convergent evolution of similar enzymatic
function on different protein folds: the hexokinase, ribokinase, and
galactokinase families of sugar kinases. Protein Sci 1993, 2(1):31-40.
36. Liapounova NA, Hampl V, Gordon PMK, Sensen CW, Gedamu L, Dacks JB:
Reconstructing the mosaic glycolytic pathway of the anaerobic
eukaryote Monocercomonoides. Eukaryotic Cell 2006, 5(12):2138-2146.
37. Henze K, Horner DS, Suguri S, Moore DV, Sánchez LB, Müller M, Embley TM:
Unique phylogenetic relationships of glucokinase and glucosephosphate
isomerase of the amitochondriate eukaryotes Giardia intestinalis,
Spironucleus barkhanus and Trichomonas vaginalis. Gene 2001, 281(12):123-131.
38. Maruyama S, Misawa K, Iseki M, Watanabe M, Nozaki H: Origins of a
cyanobacterial 6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase in plastid-lacking
eukaryotes. BMC Evol Biol 2008, 8:151.
39. Qin Y, Polacek N, Vesper O, Staub E, Einfeldt E, Wilson DN, Nierhaus KH: The
highly conserved LepA is a ribosomal elongation factor that backtranslocates the ribosome. Cell 2006, 127(4):721-733.
40. Shoji S, Janssen BD, Hayes CS, Fredrick K: Translation factor LepA
contributes to tellurite resistance in Escherichia coli but plays no
apparent role in the fidelity of protein synthesis. Biochimie 2010,
92(2):157-163.
41. Kamikawa R, Sanchez-Perez GF, Sako Y, Roger AJ, Inagaki Y: Expanded
phylogenies of canonical and non-canonical types of methionine
adenosyltransferase reveal a complex history of these gene families in
eukaryotes. Mol Phylogenet Evol 2009, 53(2):565-570.
42. Tripodi KEJ, Buttigliero LV, Altabe SG, Uttaro AD: Functional
characterization of front-end desaturases from trypanosomatids depicts
the first polyunsaturated fatty acid biosynthetic pathway from a
parasitic protozoan. FEBS J 2006, 273(2):271-280.
43. Archibald JM, Rogers MB, Toop M, Ishida K, Keeling PJ: Lateral gene
transfer and the evolution of plastid-targeted proteins in the secondary
plastid-containing alga Bigelowiella natans. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2003,
100(13):7678-7683.
44. Triemer R: Feeding in Peranema trichophorum revisited (Euglenophyta).
Journal of Phycology 1997, 33(4):649-654.
45. Larkum AWD, Lockhart PJ, Howe CJ: Shopping for plastids. Trends Plant Sci
2007, 12(5):189-195.
46. Minge MA, Shalchian-Tabrizi K, Tørresen OK, Takishita K, Probert I, Inagaki Y,
Klaveness D, Jakobsen KS: A phylogenetic mosaic plastid proteome and
unusual plastid-targeting signals in the green-colored dinoflagellate
Lepidodinium chlorophorum. BMC Evol Biol 2010, 10:191.
47. Sun G, Shen W, Wen J: Triosephosphate isomerase genes in two trophic
modes of euglenoids (Euglenophyceae) and their phylogenetic analysis.
J Eukaryot Microbiol 2008, 55(3):170-177.
48. Keeling PJ, Archibald JM: Organelle evolution: what’s in a name? Curr Biol
2008, 18(8):R345-347.
49. Leander BS, Esson HJ, Breglia SA: Macroevolution of complex cytoskeletal
systems in euglenids. Bioessays 2007, 29(10):987-1000.
50. Reyes-Prieto A, Weber AP, Bhattacharya D: The origin and establishment
of the plastid in algae and plants. Annu Rev Genet 2007, 41:147-168.

Maruyama et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:105
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/105

Page 11 of 11

51. Sun G, Yang Z, Ishwar A, Huang J: Algal genes in the closest relatives of
animals. Mol Biol Evol 2010, 27(12):2879-2889.
52. Saito A, Suetomo Y, Arikawa M, Omura G, Khan SMMK, Kakuta S, Suzaki E,
Kataoka K, Suzaki T: Gliding movement in Peranema trichophorum is
powered by flagellar surface motility. Cell Motil Cytoskeleton 2003,
55(4):244-253.
53. Stiller JW, Duffield EC, Hall BD: Amitochondriate amoebae and the
evolution of DNA-dependent RNA polymerase II. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
1998, 95(20):11769-11774.
54. Stiller JW, Riley J, Hall BD: Are red algae plants? A critical evaluation of
three key molecular data sets. J Mol Evol 2001, 52(6):527-539.
55. Edgar RC: MUSCLE: multiple sequence alignment with high accuracy and
high throughput. Nucleic Acids Res 2004, 32(5):1792-1797.
56. Howe K, Bateman A, Durbin R: QuickTree: building huge NeighbourJoining trees of protein sequences. Bioinformatics 2002, 18(11):1546-1547.
57. Stamatakis A, Hoover P, Rougemont J: A rapid bootstrap algorithm for the
RAxML Web servers. Syst Biol 2008, 57(5):758-771.
58. Huelsenbeck JP, Ronquist F: MRBAYES: Bayesian inference of phylogenetic
trees. Bioinformatics 2001, 17(8):754-755.
59. Keane TM, Creevey CJ, Pentony MM, Naughton TJ, Mclnerney JO:
Assessment of methods for amino acid matrix selection and their use
on empirical data shows that ad hoc assumptions for choice of matrix
are not justified. BMC Evol Biol 2006, 6:29.
doi:10.1186/1471-2148-11-105
Cite this article as: Maruyama et al.: Eukaryote-to-eukaryote gene
transfer gives rise to genome mosaicism in euglenids. BMC Evolutionary
Biology 2011 11:105.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
