<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>A conserved cluster of three PRD-class homeobox genes (homeobrain, rx and orthopedia) in the Cnidaria and Protostomia</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="EvoDevo 2010, 1:3. doi: 10.1186/2041-9139-1-3"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Maureen E Mazza, Kevin Pang, Adam M Reitzel, Mark Q Martindale, John R Finnerty"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 8.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Mazza et al. EvoDevo 2010, 1:3
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/3

Open Access

RESEARCH

A conserved cluster of three PRD-class homeobox
genes (homeobrain, rx and orthopedia) in the
Cnidaria and Protostomia
Research

Maureen E Mazza†1, Kevin Pang†2, Adam M Reitzel†1,3, Mark Q Martindale2 and John R Finnerty*1

Abstract
Background: Homeobox genes are a superclass of transcription factors with diverse developmental regulatory
functions, which are found in plants, fungi and animals. In animals, several Antennapedia (ANTP)-class homeobox
genes reside in extremely ancient gene clusters (for example, the Hox, ParaHox, and NKL clusters) and the evolution of
these clusters has been implicated in the morphological diversification of animal bodyplans. By contrast, similarly
ancient gene clusters have not been reported among the other classes of homeobox genes (that is, the LIM, POU, PRD
and SIX classes).
Results: Using a combination of in silico queries and phylogenetic analyses, we found that a cluster of three PRD-class
homeobox genes (Homeobrain (hbn), Rax (rx) and Orthopedia (otp)) is present in cnidarians, insects and mollusks (a
partial cluster comprising hbn and rx is present in the placozoan Trichoplax adhaerens). We failed to identify this 'HRO'
cluster in deuterostomes; in fact, the Homeobrain gene appears to be missing from the chordate genomes we
examined, although it is present in hemichordates and echinoderms. To illuminate the ancestral organization and
function of this ancient cluster, we mapped the constituent genes against the assembled genome of a model
cnidarian, the sea anemone Nematostella vectensis, and characterized their spatiotemporal expression using in situ
hybridization. In N. vectensis, these genes reside in a span of 33 kb with the same gene order as previously reported in
insects. Comparisons of genomic sequences and expressed sequence tags revealed the presence of alternative
transcripts of Nv-otp and two highly unusual protein-coding polymorphisms in the terminal helix of the Nv-rx
homeodomain. A population genetic survey revealed the Rx polymorphisms to be widespread in natural populations.
During larval development, all three genes are expressed in the ectoderm, in non-overlapping territories along the
oral-aboral axis, with distinct temporal expression.
Conclusion: We report the first evidence for a PRD-class homeobox cluster that appears to have been conserved since
the time of the cnidarian-bilaterian ancestor, and possibly even earlier, given the presence of a partial cluster in the
placozoan Trichoplax. Very similar clusters comprising these three genes exist in Nematostella and diverse protostomes.
Interestingly, in chordates, one member of the ancestral cluster (homeobrain) has apparently been lost, and there is no
linkage between rx and orthopedia in any of the vertebrates. In Nematostella, the spatial expression of these three
genes along the body column is not colinear with their physical order in the cluster but the temporal expression is,
therefore, using the terminology that has been applied to the Hox cluster genes, the HRO cluster would appear to
exhibit temporal but not spatial colinearity. It remains to be seen whether the mechanisms responsible for the
evolutionary conservation of the HRO cluster are the same mechanisms responsible for cohesion of the Hox cluster
and other ANTP-class homeobox clusters that have been widely conserved throughout animal evolution.

* Correspondence: jrf3@bu.edu
1 Department of Biology, Boston University, 5 Cummington Street, Boston, MA
02215, USA
† Contributed equally

Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
© 2010 Mazza et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Mazza et al. EvoDevo 2010, 1:3
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/3

Background
Gene clusters have been crucially important in the evolution of animals because close physical linkage affects
genetic recombination, molecular evolution and gene
regulation [1-7]. For example, clustering can contribute
to coordinated transcriptional regulation of linked genes
if the local chromatin structure affects several genes in
the same chromosomal neighborhood or if shared regulatory elements drive the expression of neighboring genes,
such as the gene clusters of the human cardiac transcriptome [8].
Gene clusters are also important tools for reconstructing genome evolution. The clustering of related genes can
reveal the mechanism underlying the expansion of a gene
family, and conserved gene clusters define homologous
chromosomal segments that may be compared across
species [9-21].
Homeobox gene clusters, in particular, have received a
great deal of study. Since the pioneering studies by Ed
Lewis and co-workers on the Antennapedia (ANTP) and
Bithorax complexes of Drosophila [22], comparative
genomic studies have revealed (i) that certain homeobox
clusters are widely conserved throughout the animal
kingdom, (ii) that clustering may influence gene expression and (iii) that clustering may be conserved by stabilizing selection if disrupting the cluster has deleterious
effects on the spatiotemporal expression of linked genes
[23-28].
All of the aforementioned homeobox clusters consist of
ANTP-class genes [29]. Based on published studies, conserved clusters of non-ANTP class homeobox genes that
date from the time of the bilaterian common ancestor do
not appear to be as common, although less ancient clusters of PRD (PRD) class genes have been identified. A
cluster of several Rhox genes that function during gametogenesis appears to be restricted to rodents [15]. A cluster of three Otx genes has been identified in the sea
anemone Nematostella, but this cluster appears to be
restricted to anthozoan cnidarians [30].
The widespread occurrence of conserved ANTP-class
clusters could reflect the unique early history of this class;
recent studies suggest that the various ANTP-class gene
clusters can all be traced to four ancient arrays (extended
Hox, ParaHox, NKL and EHG box [10]) or even to a single ancestral 'metaHox' cluster [9]. Different elements of
the ancestral linkage arrangements could have been conserved in different animal lineages. The non-ANTP
homeobox genes may never have been organized in
metaclusters, so the retention of subclusters would not
have been possible. Alternatively, the apparent paucity of
evolutionarily conserved non-ANTP homeobox clusters
may simply reflect a search bias; the effort to identify
clusters of Hox-related genes has spanned about 20 years
and has involved dozens of laboratories. A comparable

Page 2 of 15

effort to identify clusters of non-ANTP homeobox genes
has not yet been undertaken; however, conserved clusters
of Iroquois (irx) genes have been identified in arthropods
and vertebrates [21]. The insect-crustacean ancestor is
thought to have possessed a cluster of two irx genes,
whereas a cluster of three irx genes is thought to have
been present in the common ancestor of vertebrates [21].
It is not yet clear whether a cluster of irx genes was
already present in the protostome-deuterostome ancestor, or whether clusters arose independently in arthropods and vertebrates.
A cluster of three PRD-class homeobox genes (Homeobrain (hbn), Rax (rx) and Orthopedia (otp)) has been
reported in Drosophila [31]. These three genes are clustered within a span of ~38 kb on chromosome 2, and they
exhibit very similar spatiotemporal expression. All three
genes are involved in patterning specific regions of the
embryonic brain. To date, a comparable cluster has not
yet been described in other species.
In this report, we describe the hbn-rx-otp cluster in the
sea anemone, Nematostella vectensis. The Nematostella
cluster spans only ~33.5 kb and the relative order of the
genes is the same as in Drosophila, although the transcriptional orientation of orthopedia is reversed. We also
report the conservation of all or part of this cluster in
other protostomes including a mollusk and a number of
insects (for example, mosquito, honeybee and flour beetle), suggesting that (i) this cluster was present in the cnidarian-bilaterian ancestor and (ii) linkage between these
genes may be under strong stabilizing selection in some
lineages. In the sea anemone, in situ hybridization reveals
that all three genes are expressed in the ectoderm in nonoverlapping territories along the oral-aboral axis. NvHbn
is expressed during early gastrula stages around the blastopore (future mouth), and expression persists in the
ectoderm around the base of the tentacles into the juvenile polyp stage. NvRx is expressed in individual cells in
the aboral ectoderm, and is first expressed in mid gastrula stages. NvOtp expression first becomes apparent in
the larva, in the ectodermal layer of the pharynx. Thus, in
Nematostella, the expression of these clustered genes is
consistent with temporal but not spatial colinearity.

Materials and methods
Retrieval of Nematostella PRD-class homeodomain genes

In total, 33 PRD-class homeobox genes were previously
identified in the Nematostella genome [32] by conducting
BLAST searches of a draft genome assembly (available at
StellaBase; http://www.stellabase.org/[33]). Phylogenetic
analysis of homeodomain sequences by Bayesian and
neighbor-joining methods identified single representatives of the homeobrain (HBN_Nv079), orthopedia
(OTP_Nv047) and rx (RX_Nv129) families in Nematostella [32]. Subsequently, we designed gene-specific prim-

Mazza et al. EvoDevo 2010, 1:3
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/3

Page 3 of 15

ers to amplify the 3' and 5' ends of the hbn, otp and rx
transcripts from cDNA (Table 1). Overlapping 5' and 3'
RACE (rapid amplification of cDNA ends) fragments
were conceptually spliced to reconstruct complete transcripts. In addition, hbn, otp and rx transcripts were also
identified among 150,000 Nematostella expressed
sequence tags (ESTs) sequenced as part of the genomesequencing project recently completed by the Joint
Genome Institute [34]. Once the full-length transcripts
were assembled, the longest open reading frames (ORFs)
in frame with the highly conserved homeodomain were
inferred using MacVector V.7.2.3 (Accelrys Inc., San
Diego, CA, USA).
Retrieval of PRD-class homeodomains from other taxa

Human and fruit fly (Drosophila melanogaster) homeodomains from the PRD class were taken from a previous
study [32]. We searched for hbn, rx and otp homeodomains in the partially or wholly sequenced genomes of
four additional vertebrates (Mus musculus, Gallus gallus,
Xenopus tropicalis and Danio rerio), four non-vertebrate
deuterostomes (Ciona intestinalis, Branchiostoma floridae, Saccoglossus kowalevskii and Strongylocentrotus purpuratus), three additional insects (Anopheles gambiae,
Apis mellifera and Tribolium castaneum), one nematode
(Caenorhabditis elegans), one mollusk (Lottia gigantea),
one annelid (Capitella teleta) and a placozoan (Trichoplax adhaerens). Database searches were conducted via
Entrez http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gquery/gquery.fcgi
using gene names (orthopedia, rx/rax, homeobrain), and
similarity searches were performed using the tBLASTn
and BLASTp search algorithms. The homeodomains of

hbn, otp and rx from Nematostella, human and fruit fly
were used as the query sequences. Sequences that
matched the query sequence were then subjected to
reciprocal tBLASTn and/or reciprocal BLASTp similarity
searches against the genome from which the query
sequence was derived. We formally tested for orthology
with phylogenetic analyses (see below).
Determination of gene linkage and gene structure

Predicted homeobox sequences for Nematostella hbn, otp
and rx were mapped to the publicly available assembly of
the Nematostella genome (DOE-Joint Genome Institute
(JGI) Nematostella vectensis genome assembly 1.0; http://
genome.jgi-psf.org/Nemve1/Nemve1.home.html) using
BLASTn to determine whether the hbn, rx and otp loci of
Nematostella are linked as in Drosophila [31]. Gene
structures were determined by mapping transcripts for
hbn, rx and otp against the genome. To identify possible
non-homeodomain genes that might be closely linked to
hbn, rx and otp, the regions flanking these genes were
compared against the RefSeq database using BLASTx
(V.2.2.15).
Identification of homeobrain-rx-orthopedia clusters in
other taxa

The genomic organization of the hbn, rx and otp cluster
in Drosophila has been described previously [31]. In
other species in which two or three of these PRD-class
genes were identified, the genes were mapped to the corresponding assembled genome to determine if they might
be linked. The level of coverage for different assemblies
varies widely, from completed genome assemblies for

Table 1: Primers used to amplify RACE products and characterize Rx polymorphism.
Sequence 5' T 3'

Gene

Procedure

Name

hb

5'-RACE

F1

CAGGCGAAGTCGAACTACGTTCACGACATACC

F2

CGCAA-TACCCCGATGTGTTCACGAGAGAGG

R1

TCTTGCCTCGCT-CAAGTCCAGCCGAAG

R2

GGGCAAGTTCCTCTCTCGTGAACACATCGG

3'-RACE

otp

5'-RACE

3'-RACE

F1

CGAGCGATGTTT-CGCCAGGACTCACTATC
CGGATGTGTTCATGCGAGAAGAGCTGG

R1

TGTACCCTAACTTCAGGGAGGCTTATTTTTAGCG

R2

5'-RACE

CGGA-TAGTGAGTCCTGGCGAAACATCGC

F2
rx

CGCTGCCAGCTCTTCTCGCATGAACAC

R2
3'-RACE

R1

TGGATAGTGGGATTTCTCGAAGGCTCGC

RACE = rapid amplification of cDNA ends.

TCAGAAGA-AACCGTACCACCTTCACAACG
TCGAGCGAGCCTTCGAGAAATCCC

RX_for

GATCCTTAATTCAAACCCTGGGAC

RX_rev

polymorphism

F1
F2

TCGGGCAAATCTGA TACGAGTAG

Mazza et al. EvoDevo 2010, 1:3
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/3

human, mouse, fruit fly and nematode, to assemblies at
the level of scaffolds, contigs and linkage groups for
numerous other animals. Therefore, we have uncertainty
for linkage of some genes that are present in the genome
because current assemblies limit absolute characterization of location. For species in which at least two of the
three genes matched the same scaffold, linkage group or
chromosome, we determined the relative position and
transcriptional direction of each gene from the cluster.
Phylogenetic analysis

Hbn, otp, rx and other PRD-class homeodomain
sequences were aligned using a web implementation of
the computer program Muscle [35]. The default parameters were used, and the alignment algorithm did not
introduce any alignment gaps. Phylogenetic analysis was
performed using the neighbor-joining method as implemented in the computer package Phylip (V.3.61; [36]). In
total, 111 PRD-class homeodomains were used in the
phylogenetic analysis, including 33 from Nematostella, 39
from human and 24 from fruit fly, which had been identified in a previous study [32]. Human and fruit fly homeodomain families comprising multiple invariant or nearly
invariant homeodomains were pared to a single representative. Select homeodomains were added to provide
broader representation from deuterostomes and protostomes (Deuterostomia: Branchiostoma floridae (otp, rx),
Strongylocentrotus purpuratus (otp, rx, hbn), Saccoglossus
kowalevskii (otp, rx); Protostomia: Caenorhabditis elegans (rx), Patella vulgata (otp), Platynereis dumerilii (rx)
and Capitella teleta (hbn). Distalless and hox1 homeodomains from Drosophila melanogaster and Branchiostoma
floridae were included as outgroups. Homeodomain
sequences and accession numbers for homeobrain, otp
and rx are provided in Figure 1. Sequences and accession
numbers for the other PRD-class homeodomains used in
the phylogenetic analysis are available from Ryan et al.
[32]. Pairwise distances between homeodomains were
calculated using the PAM distance matrix. Support for
individual nodes was assessed using 1,000 replicates of
the bootstrap [36]. Amino acid substitutions were localized to particular branches on the phylogeny using MacClade V.4 [37].
Population genetic analysis of polymorphisms in the
homeodomain of Rx

To confirm the existence and determine the geographic
distribution of two unusual polymorphisms at positions
52 and 59 within the homeodomain of Nematostella Rx,
we designed primers to amplify a 585 bp fragment of the
gene (Table 1). PCR was carried out using 0.5 U Taq DNA
polymerase, 1 × Mg-free PCR buffer, 1.7 mM MgCl2, 0.67
mM dNTPs, 1 μm of each primer and approximately 5 ng

Page 4 of 15

genomic DNA in 20 μl reactions. Thermal cycling consisted of denaturation for 5 minutes at 94LC, followed by
30 cycles of 30 seconds at 94°C, 30 seconds at 60°C and 1
minute at 72°C, with a final extension of 15 minutes at
72°C. PCR products were directly sequenced (RX_for;
Macrogen, Seoul, South Korea). All polymorphisms were
verified by eye.
In situ hybridization

Digoxygenin-labeled riboprobes were generated from 3'
RACE products for each gene (homeobrain, 749 nt; orthopedia, 1556 nt; rx, 1419 nt). Each probe included a portion of the homeobox, plus a region of highly divergent
coding sequence downstream of the homeobox and the 3'
untranslated region (UTR). Whole-mount in situ hybridization was performed on embryos and larvae using published protocols [38]. Stringent hybridization conditions
were employed (65°C for 20-44 hours using probe concentrations of 1.0 ng/μl).

Results
Nematostella Otp, Rx and Hbn transcripts and gene
structure

Using RACE PCR, we cloned and annotated full transcripts for otp, rx and hbn from Nematostella (accession
numbers HM004556-8). In addition, we queried the EST
databases for Nematostella to further annotate these
genes and to identify non-synonymous polymorphisms in
each gene.
Otp

The otp transcript is 1901 nucleotides long, and encodes
a predicted protein of 291 amino acids. When mapped to
the genomic sequence, this transcript spans 9587 nucleotides, including four exons (see Additional file 1). We
identified two putative full-length otp transcripts that
encode different splice variants in Nematostella. Comparing the two splice variants of the Nematostella otp gene,
one lacked a highly conserved transcriptional repression
domain that was present in the other and that is typical of
otp orthologs from other taxa. Neither splice variant that
we have identified encodes an OAR (otp, aristaless and
rax) domain. However, a highly conserved version of this
domain is predicted to be encoded by a stretch of nucleotides that is located immediately downstream and in
frame with exon 3 (see Additional file 1, boxed sequence).
The predicted OAR motif of Nematostella Otp is highly
conserved relative to deuterostome sequences; in fact, it
is identical to both the human and sea urchin sequences
at 15 of 16 residues. By contrast, in protostome orthopedia proteins, only the central core of the OAR domain
appears to be conserved (for example, SIAALRRRA in
Drosophila), or the OAR domain appears to have been

Mazza et al. EvoDevo 2010, 1:3
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/3

GENE
HBN

LINEAGE
CNIDARIAN

PLACOZOAN
PROTOSTOME

DEUTEROSTOME
OTP

CNIDARIAN
PLACOZOAN
PROTOSTOME

DEUTEROSTOME

RX

CNIDARIAN

PROTOSTOME

DEUTEROSTOME

SP
Nev
Hym
Acm
Tra
Drm
Aea
Ang
Apm
Trc
Log
Cap
Sp
Sak
Nev
Hym
Tra
Drm
Aea
Ang
Apm
Trc
Log
Cap
Stp
Sak
Cii
Brf
Hos
Mum
Gag
Dar
Xel
Nev
Nev
Acm
Drm
Ang
Ame
Trc
Log
Cap
Cae
Stp
Sak
Cii
Brf
Gag
Dar
Hos
Mum
Xel

OCT
YTIDMILG
FSIDMILG
HSIES-LYSIDQILG
--AIE---YSIDQILG
YSIDQILG
YSIDQILG
YSIESLLG
YSIDFLLG
?
HSIVGILN

HSIDAILG
HSIDAILG
HTIDAILG
HTID-ILG
HSIDAILG
HTIDNILG

HSIDAILG
HSIDAILG
-TIE----

HSIDVILG
HSIEAILG
HSIEAILG
HSIEAILG

Page 5 of 15

????????10????????20????????30????????40????????50????????60
RKRGRQTYTRYQTLELEKEFHFNRYLTRRRRIEIAHALCLTERQIKIWFQNRRMKWKKEN
VR.S.T.F.T..LHQ..RA.EKTQ.PDVFT.E.L.LR.D.S.ARVQV......A..R.RE
LR.N.TTF.T..LHQ..RS.DKTQ.PDVFT.ENL.LK.D.S.ARVQV......A..R.RE
MR.S.T.F.T..LHQ..QT.EKTQ.PDVFT.E.L.LR.D.S.ARVQV......A..R.RD
LR.S.T.F.TL.LHQ..RA.EKTQ.PDVFS.EDL.MR.E.T.ARVQV......A..R.QE
VR.S.T.F.TF.LHQ..RA.EKTQ.PDVFT.EDL.MR.D.S.ARVQV......A..R.RE
IR.S.T.F.TF.LHQ..RA.EKTQ.PDVFT.E.L.MR.D.S.ARVQV......A..R.RE
IR.S.T.F.T..LHQ..RA.EKTQ.PDVFT.E.L.MR.D.S.ARVQV......A..R.RE
VR.S.T.F.T..LH....A.GNTQ.PDVFT.E.L.MR.D.S.ARVQV......A..R.KE
IR.S.T.F.T..LHQ..RA.EKTQ.PDVFT.E.L.MR.D.S.ARVQV......A..R.RE
IR.S.T.F.T..LHQ..RA.EKTQ.PDVFT.E.L.LR.D.S.ARVQV......A..R.RE
IR.S.T.F.T..LHQ..RA.EKTQ.PDVFT.E.L.LR.D.S.ARVQV......A..R.RE
LR.S.T.F.TF.LHQ..RAFDMTQ.PDVFM.E.L.LR.D.S.SRVQV......A..R.KE
.D.S.T.F.T.LLHQ..RAFEKTQ.PDVFT.E.L.LR.D.S.ARVQV......A..R.RE
Q..H.TRF.PA..N...RC.ARTH.PDVFM.E.L.ARIG...SRVQV......A....RK
Q..H.TRFNPS.LN...RY.NKTH.PDIFV.E.L.LRIG...SRVQV......A....RK
P..H.TRF.PG..S...RC.SKTH.PDIFM.E.L.LRIG.S.SRVQV......A.Y..KK
Q..H.TRF.PA.LN...RC.SKTH.PDIFM.E...MRIG...SRVQV......A....RK
Q..H.TRF.PA.LN...RC.SKTH.PDIFM.E...MRIG...SRVQV......A....RK
Q..H.TRF.PA.LN...RC.SKTH.PDIFM.E...MRIG...SRVQ??????????????
Q..H.TRF.PA.LN...RC.NRTH.PDIFL.E...VKIG...SRVQV......A....RK
Q..H.TRF.PA.LN...RC.SKTH.PDIFM.E...MRIG...SRVQ??????????????
Q..H.TRF.PA.LN...RS.AKTH.PDIFM.E.M.LRIG...SRVQV......A....RK
Q..H.TRF.PA.LN...RA.EKTH.PDIFM.E.L.LRIG...SRVQV......A....RK
Q..H.TRF.PA.LN...RN.AKTH.PDIFM.E...MRVG...SRVQV......A....RK
Q..H.TRF.PA.LN...RN.AKTH.PDIFM.E...MRVG...SRVQV......A....RK
S..H.TRFAPS.LS...RS.SSTH.PDIFM.E....RIG...SRVQV......A....RK
Q..H.TRF.PA.LQ...RS.SKTH.PDIFM.E.L.LRIG...SRVQV......A....RK
Q..H.TRF.PAQLN...RS.AKTH.PDIFM.E.L.LRIG...SRVQV......A....RK
Q..H.TRF.PA.LN...RS.AKTH.PDIFM.E.L.LRIG...SRVQV......A....RK
Q..H.TRF.SA.LN...RS.AKTH.PDIFM.E.L.LRIG...SRVQV......A....RK
Q..H.TRF.PA.LN...RS.AKTH.PDIFM.E.L.LRIG.T.SRVQV......A....RK
Q..H.TRF.PA.LN...RS.AKTH.PDIFM.E.L.LRIG...SRVQV......A....RK
LR.N.T.F.TF.LH...RA.EKSH.PDVYT.E.L.LKIS.P.VRVQV......A..RRQE
LR.N.T.F.TF.LH...RA.EKSH.PDVYT.E.L.LKIS.P.VRVQV....K.A..RR.E
HR.N.T.F.TF.LH...QA.EKSH.PDVYT.E.L.LKID.P.VRVQV......A..RRQE
HR.N.T.F.T..LH...RA.EKSH.PDVYS.E.L.MKVN.P.VRVQV......A..RRQE
HR.N.T.F.T..LH...RA.EKSH.PDVYS.E.L.MKVN.P.VRVQV......A..RRQE
HR.N.T.F.T..LH...RA.EKSH.PDVYS.E.L.MKVN.P.VRVQV......A..RRQE
HR.N.T.F.T..LH...RA.EKSH.PDVYS.E.L.MKVN.P.VRVQV......A..RRQE
HR.N.T.F.TF.LH...RA.EKSH.PDVYS.E.L.IKIN.P.VRVQV......A..RRQE
HR.N.T.F.TF.LH...RA.EKSH.PDVYS.E.L.LKIS.P.VR--V......A..RRQE
QR.N.T.F.TF.LHA..AA.DKTH.PDVYA.ETL.AKVQ.P.VRVQV......A.FRRQE
HR.N.T.F.T..LH...RA.EKSH.PDVYS.E.L.LKVN.P.VRVQV......A..RRQE
HR.N.T.F.TF.LH...RA.EKSH.PDVYS.E.L.LKVN.P.VRVQV......A..RRQE
LR.N.T.F.TF.LH...RA.ERSH.PDVYS.E.L.GKIN.P.VRVQV......A..RRQE
HR.N.T.F.TF.LH...RA.EKSH.PDVYS.E.L.MKIN.P.VRVQV......A..RRQE
HR.N.T.F.T..LH...RA.EKSH.PDVYS.E.L.MKVN.P.VRVQV......A..RRQE
HR.N.T.F.T..LH...RA.EKSH.PDVYA.E.L.MKIS.P.VRVQV......A..RRQE
HR.N.T.F.T..LH...RA.EKSH.PDVYS.E.L.GKVN.P.VRVQV......A..RRQE
HR.N.T.F.T..LH...RA.EKSH.PDVYS.E.L.GKVN.P.VRVQV......A..RRQE
HR.N.T.F.T..LH...RA.EKSH.PDVYS.E.L.MKVN.P.VRVQV......A..RRQE

OAR MOTIF
RRTSIEDLRHKAKKHS
------SLR-----H-

R--S-E-LR-KA-E-L
--S-LEALRLR-QE-L
RKSSIEELRLRAKEHS
KK-SIDALR-KAKE-?
RGTSIASLRRKALEHQ

---SIAALRRRA---A

---SIAALRRRA---RG-SIAALRRRA-E-RGTSIAALRRKALEHS
RGTSIASLRRKALEHA
RGTSIA-LRRKALEHS
RGSSIASLR-KA-EHA
RGTSIASLRRKALEHT
RGTSIASLRRKALEHT
RGTSIASL------RGTSIASLRRKALEHT
RGTSIASLRRKALEHT
RSSSIATLRLKAKEHL
RSSSIATLRLKAKEHL
RTTSIVSLRKRAKEHRSNSIATLRIKAKEHL
RSNSIATLRIKAKEHL
RTTSI-ALRMRAKEHRTTSIAALRLKAKEHRNSSIAALRLKAREHQ

RSSSIVTLRQKAMEHL
RSSSIVSLRMKAKEHI

RSSSIASLRMKAKEHI
RSSSIAALRMKAKEHI
RNSSIAALRLKAKEHI
RNSSIAALRLKAKEHI
RNNSIASLRMKAKEHI

ACCESSION
ABG67879
CN557984.1
DY585681.1
JGI:9590
NP_788420
EAT47184.1
XP_315326
XP_001119902.1
XP_968410.1
JGI:92533
JGI:169576
XP_781057.2
gnl|ti|934885311
DV_90169.1
CX634291
JGI:9570
NP_523799.3
EAT47190.1
XP_001230964.1
XP_001120088.1
XP_973369.1
JGI:161252
JGI:80905
XP_784599.1
AAP79292.1
NP_001072023.1
JGI:243037
NP_115485.1
CAA71439.1
AAT94555.1
NP_571175.1
6790034
ABB83751
DY579491.1
NP_726006
XP_313972.2
XP_001119966.1
XP_973468.1
JGI:161249
JGI:76161
NP_492246.2
XP_782307
AAP79282
NP_001027683
JGI:243065
XP_001232119
AAB62325
NP_038463
NP_038861
NP_001081689

Figure 1 Alignment of octapeptide regions, homeodomains and OAR domains from representative hbn, otp and rx genes of cnidarians,
protostomes and deuterostomes. Homeodomain sequences are aligned against the Drosophila antennapedia homeodomain. Nematostella, human
and fruit fly representatives were taken from Ryan et al. [32]. Homeodomains from additional taxa were identified by similarity searches (tBLASTn and
BLASTp) conducted through the BLAST interface at National Center for Biotechnology Information (see Methods) and at respective genome assemblies available through the Joint Genome Institute. Abbreviations for taxa are as follows: (cnidarians: Acropora millepora (Acm), Hydra magnipapillata
(Hym), Nematostella vectensis (Nev); placozoan: Trichoplax adhaerens (Tra); protostome bilaterians: Aedes aegypti (Aea), Anopheles gambiae (Ang), Apis
mellifera (Apm), Caenorhabditis elegans (Cae), Capitella teleta (Cap), Lottia gigantea (Log), Tribolium castaneum (Trc); deuterostome bilaterians: Branchiostoma floridae (Brf), Ciona intestinalis (Cii), Danio rerio (Dar), Gallus gallus (Gag), Homo sapiens (Hos), Mus musculus (Mum), Saccoglossus kowalevskii
(Sak), Strongylocentrotus purpuratus (Stp), Xenopus laevis (Xel)). The octapeptide [72,73] and/or the OAR domain [51,75] are indicated when identified.
Two different versions of the Rx homeodomain of Nematostella are shown, and the polymorphic residues are highlighted.

lost entirely (for example, in Aedes aegypti or Anopheles
gambiae). Given this degree of sequence conservation, we
predict that Nematostella expresses at least one additional Otp splice variant that includes this OAR domain.
Whereas other reported orthopedia proteins lack an
octapeptide domain upstream of the homeodomain, the
Nematostella gene encodes a stretch of eight residues
upstream of the homeodomain that shares five out of
eight residues with the octapeptide of deuterostome Rx
proteins (HSIxxILx; Figure 1).
Rx

The Nematostella rx transcript we assembled using
RACE is 1792 nucleotides long and it encodes a predicted
protein 266 amino acids long (see Additional file 2). It
extends over a 4972-nucleotide region of the genome,

comprising three exons (see Additional file 2). There are
three noteworthy regions of similarity between the rx
proteins of Nematostella and bilaterians: the homeodomain, the octapeptide and the OAR domain (Figure 1). In
the homeodomain, Nematostella is identical to both
human and fruit fly at 90% of residues (54/60). Among
PRD-class homeodomains, the presence of a valine at residue 43 appears to be a synapomorphy of the rx family,
and this trait is shared by all the rx sequences in our dataset. The rx family is also characterized by arginine-alanine at positions 18-19 of the homeodomain. This is seen
in all taxa except the coral Acropora millepora, which has
a glutamine at position 18 [29,32,39,40]. The sea anemone is also identical to both human and fruit fly at six of
seven residues in the octapeptide. Within the OAR
domain, Nematostella and human are identical at 13 of 16

Mazza et al. EvoDevo 2010, 1:3
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/3

residues, and Nematostella and Drosophila are identical
at 14 of 16 residues (Figure 1).
We identified four additional EST sequences for Nematostella rx, two that were previously deposited at the
National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI)
(CAGN10625 and DV088198) and two that were generated by the Joint Genome Institute (JGI) as part of the
Nematostella genome sequencing initiative (2664141-1
and 2664141-2). One of the EST sequences (DV088198)
does not encode the complete OAR motif, instead producing a predicted protein 24 residues shorter than the
other transcripts (see Additional file 2). Comparison of
the genome assembly, our RACE product and these four
ESTs revealed 28 single-nucleotide polymorphisms,
including six that result in a change to the protein
sequence (Additional file 2). Two of the polymorphic
amino acid positions reside within helix 3 of the homeodomain, the so-called 'DNA-binding helix' (Figure 1; see
Additional file 2): an A/G polymorphism that results in
an amino acid change from arginine (R) to lysine (K) at
position 52, and a C/G polymorphism results in an amino
acid substitution from glutamine (Q) to glutamic acid (E)
at position 59, an amide to acidic amino acid. Both the
possession of lysine at position 52 and glutamic acid at
position 59 are unique within the Rx family (Figure 1). In
fact, the possession of a lysine at position 52 is very
unusual for PRD-class homeodomains in general; of the
111 PRD-class homeodomains included in our phylogenetic analysis, the only other sequence with a lysine at
this position is the Nematostella DMBXd homeodomain.
Over the entire PRD class, the possession of glutamic
acid at position 59 is not as uncommon. The Pax4/6 family exhibits glutamic acid at this position, as do three
other Nematostella PRD-class homeodomains (DMBXb,
NVHD_101 and NVHD_148).
To verify the existence of the two nonsynonymous
polymorphisms identified in EST sequences (see above)
in natural populations and to begin characterizing their
geographic distribution, we sequenced a fragment of the
rx gene from 95 individual animals collected throughout
the range of the species (see Additional file 3). At position
52, the phylogenetically unusual lysine variant is relatively
rare, accounting for only 15.16% of all alleles, but it does
exhibit a broad geographic distribution, being found in
seven different estuaries from both the Atlantic and
Pacific coasts of North America. However, despite the
wide distribution of the K allele, KK homozygotes were
only recovered in a single location, Kingsport in Nova
Scotia. The apparently limited geographic distribution of
this genotype is interesting considering that KR heterozygotes accounted for more than a quarter of all individual
animals assayed (RR = 71.58%, RK = 26.16%, KK = 2.11%).
At position 59, the glutamine variant accounted for

Page 6 of 15

96.28% of all alleles. Despite its overall rarity (3.72%), the
glutamic acid variant was recovered in four widely separated estuaries in New Jersey, Maryland, California and
Washington, although no EE homozygotes were recovered in any individual (QQ = 92.55%, QE = 7.45%, EE =
0.00%).
Hbn

The Nematostella homeobrain transcript that we assembled using RACE encompasses three exons (see Additional file 4). Similar to otp and rx, an intron interrupts
the homeodomain between positions 46 and 47. The
third exon, 647 nucleotides in length, encodes the final 14
amino acids of the homeodomain plus an OAR motif,
which is located near the carboxy terminus of the predicted protein. The Nematostella homeobrain protein has
high similarity to insect orthologs within the homeodomain region but very little similarity could be detected
elsewhere. For example, the homeodomain is identical to
its Drosophila ortholog at 95% of residues (57/60). Interestingly, the sequence identity between Nematostella and
Drosophila exceeds the sequence identity between Nematostella and its fellow cnidarian, Hydra magnipapillata
(83%; 53 of 60 identical residues). This suggests that the
Hydra homeodomain has evolved relatively quickly.
Phylogenetic analysis

The maximum-likelihood (ML) and neighbor-joining
(NJ) analyses performed here reinforce the conclusions of
Ryan et al. [32]: Nematostella hbn, otp and rx sequences
group with putative orthologs from bilaterian taxa with a
moderate to high level of bootstrap support (Figure 2).
The Nematostella hbn homeodomain is nested within a
clade that also includes hbn sequences from multiple animals including protostomes (for example, Capitella and
Drosophila), Trichoplax and two deuterostomes (Strongylocentrotus and Saccoglossus). Bootstrap support for this
clade is moderate (ML = 77, NJ = 64). We were unable to
recover a clear hbn ortholog from any chordate model
system [41]. Our phylogenetic analyses recovered a
monophyletic grouping for predicted rx orthologs from
all species sampled except the most basal member queried, the placozoan Trichoplax. Similar to the hbn clade,
bootstrap support was moderate for rx orthologs (ML =
43, NJ = 80). Finally, we identified putative otp orthologs
from all species expect the nematode C. elegans (ML =
66, NJ = 98).
The Homeobrain-Rax-Orthopedia cluster

The Nematostella hbn, otp and rx transcripts map to a
single scaffold in the publicly available assembly of the
Nematostella genome (jgi scaffold 62; DOE-JGI Nematostella vectensis genome assembly V.1.0; http://genome.jgipsf.org/Nemve1/Nemve1.home.html). The entire scaffold

Mazza et al. EvoDevo 2010, 1:3
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/3

Page 7 of 15

100 Hox1_Brf
labial_Drm
100 dll_Brf
dll_Drm
PTX_Nev
PTX1_Hos
100
84
PTX2_Hos
75
PTX3_Hos
PTX_Drm
OTP_Nev
67 OTP_Hos
99
OTP_Pv
34
96 OTP_Sak
49 49
OTP_Stp
OTP_Drm
OTP_Brf
20 HD146_Nev
LOC91464_Hos
HD002_Nev
16
HD148_Nev
61 HD114_Nev
HD101_Nev
61
Pax3_Brf
99
Pax7_Brf
34
49 gsb_Drm
51
gsb-n_Drm
prd_Drm
96 DMBXf_Nev
DMBXe_Nev
37
14 32 DMBXc_Nev
DMBXd_Nev
20
DMBXb_Nev
18
DMBXa_Nev
4
DMBX1_Hos
92 gsc_Nev
gsc_Drm
86
85 gsc_Hos
gscl_Hos
34
DuxB_Nev
100
DuxC_Nev
DuxA_Nev
Dux1_Hos
48
35
61 Dux3b_Hos
100
Dux4b_Hos
40
Dux5_Hos
44 Dux2_Hos
100
Dux4a_Hos
Dux3a_Hos
HESX1_Hos
HD058_Nev
27 HD031_Nev
8
HD052_Nev
MIXL1_Hos
HD074_Nev
Pax4-6_Nev
55
98 eyg_Drm
30
toe_Drm
Pax4_Hos
26
Pax6_Hos
99
98 ey_Drm
toy_Drm
otxC_Nev
95
otxB_Nev
55
otxA_Nev
otx1_Hos
97
99
65 otx2_Hos
26
oc_Drm
CRX_Hos
CG11294_Drm
HD037_Nev
23
38 PROP1_Hos
CG32532_Drm
rx_Nev
MGC15631_Hos
81 29
rx_Hos
20
rx_Stp
59 24
rx_Sak
75
rx_Drm
22 rx_Brf
12
rx_Pld
rx_Cae
98
PMX1_Hos
95
4
PMX2_Hos
CG9876_Drm
100
ARIX_Hos
87
PHOX2b_Brf
PHDP_Drm
unc4_Nev
72
79 unc4_Drm
OdsH_Drm
ceh10_Nev
53
96 90 CG4136_Drm
1
CG15782_Drm
100 CHX10_Hos
15
VSX1_Hos
86 50 cart1_Nev
Alx3_Hos
2
55
Alx4_Hos
cart1_Hos
68 repo_Nev
repo_Drm
53 HD100_Nev
17
ARX_Hos
15
al_Drm
Pph13_Drm
76 hbn_Nev
77
hbn_Cap
92
hbn_Drm
8
hbn_Stp
100
SHOX_Hos
SHOX2_Hos

Otp

PTX

OTP

79

PAX 3/7
DMBX

18

GSC

Hbn

Rx
stop

42 248
1792
142 7532
DV90169.1

stop

11730

324 171
673
90 3714
2688
CAGH6914

stop

882

261
2570

cDNA

Figure 3 Organization of the homeobrain-rx-orthopedia cluster of
Nematostella. Homeobrain orthopedia and rx ESTs map to a ~35 kb region within a single scaffold 1,036,593 nucleotides long in the Joint Genome Institute's assembly of the Nematostella genome (scaffold 062,
Joint Genome Institute Nematostella vectensis genome portal, V.1.0).
Arrows above the cluster indicate the transcriptional orientation of
each gene. The nucleotide length of each intron, exon and intergenic
region is indicated below the cluster.

DUX
ANF
MIX

6

PAX 4/6

43:V

Deuterostome
Protostome
Cnidarian

OTX
PROP1

RX
PRX

ARIX
UNC4
CEH-10

CART1
REPO
AL

HBN
SHOX

Figure 2 Neighbor-joining phylogeny of PRD class genes based
on homeodomain sequences. Pairwise distances between homeodomains were calculated using the PAM matrix in the computer program protdist in the Phylip package (Phylogenetic Inference Package,
V.3.61). Abbreviations for taxa are as in Figure 1. Numbers above nodes
indicate the percentage of 1000 bootstrap replicates in which the given node was recovered in a neighbor-joining analysis. The tree is rooted using Hox1 and distalless homeodomains from the lancelet and the
fruit fly.

is 1,036,593 nucleotides long, and the cluster is located
roughly 225,000 nucleotides from the nearest end of the
scaffold. The rx locus intervenes between the otp and hbn
loci. Otp and rx are encoded on one strand, whereas hbn
is encoded on the opposite strand (Figure 3). The entire
three-gene cluster spans 34,246 nucleotides (from the
first nucleotide in the predicted 5' exon of orthopedia to
the first nucleotide in the predicted 5' exon of homeobrain). The distance between the predicted stop codon of
hbn and the predicted stop codon of rx is only 3,437
nucleotides (Figure 3). The intergenic distance between
otp and the predicted transcription start site of rx is
12,158 nucleotides. Using BLASTx we searched for pre-

dicted genes positioned in the intergenic regions within
the otp-rx-hbn cluster. No significant hits were recovered
in the smaller intergenic region between rx and hbn (E <
10). We identified one position of moderate similarity to
other proteins in the region between otp and rx (~ 1 × 106). Upon closer inspection there were no consistent proteins, regions or domains identified from these results,
and the hits appeared as spurious matches. Based on the
current assembly of the Nematostella genome, the nearest annotated genes bracketing the cluster are a predicted
ferredoxin (JGI: 101894) located 16.6 kb from otp and a
predicted gene similar to RIKEN (JGI: 242384) located
5.8 kb from hbn.
The genomic organization of the Drosophila homeobrain cluster has been described previously [31]. The
fruit fly cluster exhibits the same relative gene order as
the Nematostella cluster, but the intergenic distances are
greater and the transcriptional orientation of otp is
reversed. The intergenic distance between hbn and rx is
approximately 17.0 kb in the Drosophila cluster, whereas
the intergenic distance between rx and otp is approximately 21.0 kb (Figure 4).
Other animal genomes in which otp, rx and hbn genes
have been identified or predicted were analyzed for evidence of gene linkage. A homeobrain cluster was identified in the sequenced genomes of three additional insects:
Anopheles gambiae (mosquito), Apis mellifera (honeybee) and Tribolium castaneum (flour beetle). In honeybee and flour beetle, the cluster organization is similar to
that of Drosophila: the clusters have the same gene order
(otp-rx-hbn), the genes exhibit the same transcriptional
orientations and the intergenic distances are comparable
(Figure 4). In the mosquito cluster, the gene order and
scale are different, with rx linked to otp across a span of
approximately 109 kb, and otp linked to hbn across a span
of approximately 386 kb. In addition, there are a number
of genes located in the intergenic spaces between these
Paired class genes. For example, a predicted ATP-synthase-like gene is located between rx and otp, and a calcium/calmodulin protein kinase is located between otp

Mazza et al. EvoDevo 2010, 1:3
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/3

Figure 4 Phylogenetic distribution of the Otp-Rx-Hbn cluster. Several sequenced metazoan genomes were searched for evidence of
linkage between orthopedia, rx and homeobrain. The genomic organization of the fruit fly homeobrain related gene was previously reported
identified by Walldorf et al. [31]. Predicted linkage of these three genes
was determined for insects (mosquito, honeybee, flour beetle), chordates (vertebrates, amphioxus, ascidian), sea urchin, two lophotrochozoans (limpet, polychaete annelid), sea anemone and placozoan
by querying the available genome sequences using the annotated/
predicted gene sequences for each gene (this study). Solid lines between genes represent linkage on a single chromosome, scaffold or
contig. Approximate distance (kb between genes) is noted above each
line, and the relative transcriptional orientation of each gene is indicated by the direction of the arrow (the arrow points from 5' to 3'). Question marks indicate uncertain linkage. Genes confirmed to be on
different chromosomes or genomic scaffolds are represented by
squares with no interconnecting lines.

and hbn. We also identified the three-member homeobrain cluster in the limpet Lottia. Interestingly, the gene
order (otp-hbn-rx) differs from the insects and Nematostella, suggesting that an inversion occurred in the lophotrochozoan lineage. For the annelid Capitella we were
only able to confirm linkage of otp-hbn, which has a comparable intergenic distance and the same transcriptional
orientation as Lottia, but rx was located on a different
scaffold in the current assembly, precluding a confident
assessment of linkage. Rx is located near the end of the
scaffold; however, there is one annotated gene (globin
precursor, JGI 21023) between rx and the end of scaffold.
Furthermore, if the orientation of the Capitella cluster is
the same as that for Lottia (the most closely related species in our analysis), there would be > 400 kb of sequence
separating these genes. We identified a number of genes
within 40 kb of hbn, none of which were rx or any homeobox gene.
The sea urchin Strongylocentrotus purpuratus and the
hemichordate Saccoglossus kowalevskii are the only deu-

Page 8 of 15

terostomes in which we could identify a homeobrain
gene. Because a public assembly of the Saccoglossus
genome is not yet available, we were unable to assess linkage and can only report that orthologs for all three members of the cluster are present. In the sea urchin, hbn and
rx are closely linked on the same genomic scaffold
(Scaffold_v2_14510, length 454945 nt). The two genes are
separated by a distance of approximately 22 kb. This
intergenic distance is similar to that observed in Drosophila, Apis, Tribolium and Lottia. However, unlike these
protostomes, in the urchin, both genes are encoded on
the same strand of DNA. Otp maps to a different scaffold
(Scaffold_v2_10421, length 387609 nt). Because otp
resides on a different scaffold, evidence of linkage to hbn
and rx could not be established. However, by taking into
account the distances flanking otp on its scaffold and hbn
and rx on their scaffold, otp can be no closer than 437,964
nucleotides from hbn and 193,112 nucleotides from rx.
We could not identify a homeobrain locus in the
genomes of the urochordate Ciona, the cephalochordate
Branchiostoma or any of the vertebrate taxa we queried
(Homo, Mus, Rattus, Gallus, Xenopus and Danio). In all of
the vertebrates and Ciona, otp and rx are located on different chromosomes, so no remnant of the hbn-rx-otp
cluster remains. In the current Branchiostoma assembly,
the otp and rx homeodomains are separated by ~162 kb
on the same genomic scaffold. There are seven annotated
genes within the intergenic region (JGI: 102897, 136227,
286088, 102900, 130204, 102902 and 270692) with
diverse functions (for example, SCAMP (secretory carrier membrane protein), N-acetyltransferase, tubulin
chaperone).
We identified orthologs of otp and hbn, but not rx, in
the placozoan Trichoplax. Both of these genes are located
on the same scaffold, are separated by approximately 15
kb and have the same transcriptional orientation.
Because Trichoplax represents the earliest diverging taxa
in our study, the close proximity of otp and hbn strongly
suggests that these genes have been clustered since very
early in animal evolution.
Developmental expression of otp, rx and homeobrain
Orthopedia

Whole-mount in situ hybridization using an antisense
NvOtp riboprobe of 1,556 bp revealed that expression
begins in mid planula stages (Figure 5e), well after gastrulation is complete. Expression is confined to the oral pole
and the oral end of the pharyngeal ectoderm. Expression
appears strongest at the oral opening but extends into the
pharyngeal ectoderm. Expression is also apparent in scattered cells in the body wall ectoderm, which appear to be
neurons based on morphological criteria, namely their
position deep within the ectoderm and their basally
located nuclei (Figure 5f, Figure 5g) [42]. Later, Otp

Mazza et al. EvoDevo 2010, 1:3
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/3

Page 9 of 15

throughout planula and polyp stages (Figure 6g-j). During
adult polyp stages, a second domain of expression is seen
in individual ectodermal cells in the middle of each tentacle (Figure 6).
Homeobrain

Figure 5 Expression of NvOtp. In situ hybridization using a 1556 bp
probe of otp. In all panels, the asterisk denotes the blastopore or oral
end. (a) Expression is not detected in the egg, (b) during early cleavage
or (c,d) during gastrulation. (e,f) Expression is detected in the planula
stage in the ectoderm around the pharynx (ph) and in single ectodermal cells (arrows). (g) Oral view of the same planula from (f). (h,i) Similar expression in later stages as tentacles (t) begin to grow. (j,k) Polyp
stages showing high expression in an oral ectodermal ring.

expression is also seen in the tentacle ectoderm (Figure
5h, Figure 5i). Oral expression persists well into polyp
stages (Figure 5j, Figure 5k). The probe used for in situ
hybridization overlaps a substantial portion (< 300 bp) of
all three predicted splice variants, so this probe would
presumably bind to all three.
Rx

Expression of Rx begins before otp expression, during
mid gastrulation (Figure 6c) Rx is initially expressed in
the aboral hemisphere (Figure 6d), but by the end of gastrulation, expression becomes refined to a band that
encircles the aboral side of the midbody but is excluded
from the aboral pole, including the position of the presumptive apical tuft. Within this band, expression is
spotty; only a fraction of the cells within the boundaries
of the expression domain actually express Rx. As with otp
and hbn, these rx-expressing cells in the ectoderm have
the morphological appearance of neurons (Figure 6f, Figure 6i). Rx expression persists in this aboral band

Figure 6 Expression of NvRx. In situ hybridization using a 1419 bp
probe of rx. The asterisks denote the blastopore or oral end. (a,b) No
expression is detected in the egg or early cleavage stages. (c,d) Mid
gastrula stages showing expression around the aboral ectoderm. (e)
Late gastrula stage showing a band of expression towards the aboral
pole. (f) The same embryo in (e) as viewed from the aboral pole, showing a lack of expression where the future apical tuft (at) will form. (g-j)
Planula stages, with (i) showing a surface view of the patchy expression. (k) Polyp stage, showing a close-up view of expression in the ectoderm of the tentacles (t).

Homeobrain is first detected in the late blastula, when it is
expressed throughout most of the blastoderm except in
the region surrounding the blastopore (the presumptive
gastrodermis; Figure 7c,d). With the onset of gastrulation, expression becomes excluded from the aboral pole,
where the apical tuft of sensory cilia will form (Figure
7d,e). As gastrulation proceeds, expression persists in
populations of ectodermal cells around the oral pole and
later in those that encircle the base of each developing
tentacle (Figure 7g,h). Expression is also seen in individual cells that are scattered throughout the mid body (Figure 7g). These cells have the morphological appearance of
neurons. During polyp stages, expression is confined primarily to the ectoderm at the base of the tentacles (Figure
7i-k).

Discussion
The functional evolution of hbn, rx and otp

Homeobrain was originally identified in Drosophila [43],
and mapped to a region of chromosome 2 that contained
two additional PRD-class homeobox genes, Orthopedia
and rx [44,45]. Homeobrain is expressed in the fly embryonic brain and ventral nerve cord [31]. Recently the first
lophotrochozan homeobrain-like gene was reported [41],
and found to be expressed in a restricted region of the
anterior brain. Hbn expression has also been reported in
the sea urchin, where it is expressed in oral ganglia of the
animal pole [46].

Figure 7 Expression of NvHbn. In situ hybridization using a 749 bp
probe of hbn. The asterisks mark the blastopore or oral end. (a,b) Egg
and early cleavage stages showing a lack of expression. (c) Blastula
stage embryo showing expression everywhere except in the blastopore. (d) Mid gastrula showing lack of expression in the invaginating
endoderm (en). (e,f) Lateral and oral views of a late gastrula, stage embryo. (g) Planula stage, showing strong expression around the future
tentacles (arrow) and in the putative neurons (n) of the mid body. (h,i)
Early polyp stage showing expression around the base of the tentacles
(t). (j,k) Older polyp stages, where expression is confined to the base of
the tentacles.

Mazza et al. EvoDevo 2010, 1:3
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/3

Otp is associated with neural development in a phylogenetically diverse collection of animals, and this may
represent an ancestral role for this homeodomain family.
Orthopedia-related genes in mouse are involved in brain
patterning and development [47-52]. In the hemichordate
Saccoglossus, otp has punctate, ectodermal expression in
neural domains of the prosome (proboscis) and mesocome (collar) [53]. In planaria, orthopedia is implicated in
patterning the branch structure of the brain [54,55]. In
the limpet, otp is involved in the development of the larval apical sensory organ [56], and in flies it is involved in
the developing CNS and hindgut and anal pads [51].
However, a connection to neural development is not
obvious in the sea urchin, where otp appears to be
involved in larval skeletal morphogenesis and the establishment of oral ectodermal cell fate [57-61].
Rx (retinal associated homeobox) genes have been
extensively studied in many deuterostome taxa including
human, mouse, Xenopus, chicken, zebrafish, medaka and
tunicate [45,62-70]. In all of these organisms, rx is
involved in brain development and the formation of retinal territories and associated neural structures. In the
hemichordate, rx is expressed throughout the prosome
ectoderm, the most anterior region of this organism, but
absent from the most apical pole [53]. Rx is expressed
more broadly during sea urchin development, with punctate expression in the animal pole and developing gut
[46]. A fruit fly rx gene has also been identified, and studies suggest that it is necessary for proper brain development, but it is not required for eye development [45,71].
Alternative splice variants in orthopedia and rx

In addition to a homeodomain and a PRD domain, two
additional motifs have been identified in some PRD-like
genes. The octapeptide motif [72,73], located towards the
N-terminus, is involved in transcriptional repression [74].
The OAR domain, found in otp, aristaless and rx
[40,51,67,75] is typically located at the C-terminus and is
known to function as a transactivator in Otp [40,51].
We have identified alternative transcripts for Nematostella orthopedia and rx. For rx, some transcripts encode a
highly conserved OAR domain and one transcript does
not. For orthopedia, none of our RACE products nor any
ESTs in publicly available databases included the OAR
domain. However, a well-conserved OAR domain was
identified downstream and in-frame of these sequences
in predicted genomic gene models, suggesting that this
domain is probably expressed in an as yet unidentified
splice variant. The OAR domain has been described as an
intramolecular switch, which acts to reduce the affinity of
the homeodomain transcription factor for its binding
site. In the mouse, ectopically expressed mutant forms of
the Alx3 and Cart1 proteins lacking the OAR domain
exhibit increased binding to their DNA targets [76].

Page 10 of 15

Alternative splice variants involving the presence or
absence of an OAR domain have also been identified the
mouse prx1 gene, a member of the PMX family of PRDclass homeobox genes [77]. The carboxy terminus of the
Prx1a protein includes an activation domain and an OAR
domain, whereas the carboxy terminus of Prx1b encodes
a repression domain and lacks an OAR domain [77,78].
The tissue distribution of both transcripts appears to be
similar in mice and humans, but different tissues exhibit
pronounced differences in the relative ratios of prx1a and
prx1b [79,80]. It has been hypothesized that the presence
of the OAR domain in prx1a could render it sensitive to
modulation via an unidentified partner protein that interacts with the OAR domain itself. In the absence of this
cofactor, the OAR domain masks the activation domain
and reduces the affinity of prx1a for DNA binding sites.
When bound by its co-factor, the activation domain
becomes unmasked and the DNA binding affinity
increases [76,77,81]. In the case of Nematostella rx, the
situation may be somewhat simpler than in the mouse
prx1 gene, because except for the presence or absence of
the OAR domain itself, the alternative splice variants
encode essentially identical proteins.
Functional inferences about Nematostella otp, rx and hbn
based on expression data

In the most famous example of a conserved homeobox
cluster, the Hox genes, the spatial ordering of Hox expression territories along the body's main axis and the timing
of their onset mirrors the physical ordering of linked Hox
genes (although not in all taxa). This correspondence is
termed colinearity. However, in animals with dispersed
Hox clusters, such as the urochordate Oikopleura dioica,
some spatial colinearity remains whereas temporal colinearity is absent [82]. This suggests that it is temporal
rather than spatial colinearity that is driving the maintenance of these clusters. Although work has been performed in studying temporal colinearity in Hox, ParaHox
and NK clusters, the homeobrain cluster could prove to
be another supporting example.
In Nematostella, hbn, rx and otp appear to be expressed
in a temporally colinear pattern. Hbn is expressed first, in
the blastula stages, followed by rx at mid gastrulation and
finally otp in the planula. However, in the case of the
Drosophila homeobrain cluster, there is no clear evidence
of temporal colinearity. Homeobrain is expressed first, in
the syncytial blastoderm, then otp is expressed slightly
before rx [31,51,65]. Future studies in other animals will
help determine whether temporal colinearity is widely
conserved among homeobrain clusters.
Although the expression of Nematostella hbn, rx and
otp is consistent with temporal colinearity, it is not consistent with spatial colinearity. The three genes are
expressed in non-overlapping domains along the oral-

Mazza et al. EvoDevo 2010, 1:3
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/3

aboral axis; however, these domains do not appear to be
related to their position in the cluster. NvRx is expressed
at the most aboral domain, although expression is not
present at the aboral pole, where the apical tuft will form.
NvHbn is more broadly expressed in oral ectoderm during early embryogenesis and becomes confined to the
most oral ectoderm, mainly around the base of the tentacles. Finally, NvOtp is also expressed in the oral ectoderm,
in the domain that will invaginate and form the pharynx.
NvOtp and NvHbn are both expressed in close proximity
to three paralogs of Otx (NvOtxA, B, C) in the pharyngeal
ectoderm and tentacles surrounding the oral pole [30].
In addition to the broad non-overlapping domains, all
these genes are also expressed in individual cells throughout the body column. Based on their cell morphology, it
appears that these cells may be neurons. Additionally, the
expression of NvOtp and NvOtx(A,B,C) in the oral ectoderm coincides with formation of the oral nerve ring
[30,42]. Considering the function of these genes in other
animals and the expression patterns seen here, it is likely
that hbn, rx and otp play some role in neural development
in Nematostella. However, it is interesting that there is no
expression in the apical tuft, another strongly neurogenic
region in Nematostella.
The evolutionary history of the homeobrain cluster

The literature on homeobox clusters would suggest that
the history of the ANTP class has been qualitatively different from that of the histories of other classes of
homeobox genes. The most intensively studied and
widely conserved homeobox clusters are all composed of
ANTP-class homeobox genes (the Antennapedia complex, the Bithorax complex, the Hox cluster, the ParaHox
cluster, the NK cluster and the EGH box cluster). Ultimately, all of these ANTP-class clusters may derive from
a single ancestral cluster. For example, the ANTP-C and
BX-C of Drosophila are clearly derived from a single
ancestral Hox cluster that is widely shared by protostomes and deuterostomes, and in simpler form, by cnidarians. The Hox cluster, in turn, appears to have broken
off from an ancestral 'mega-Hox' or 'extended Hox' cluster that at one time may have encompassed the Hox cluster, the ParaHox cluster, the EGH cluster and the NK
cluster. Over time, the hypothetical ancestral cluster
appears to have fragmented, and different remnants of
this ancestral cluster may be more highly conserved in
different animal lineages [83].
This study is the first to provide evidence that a nonANTP-class homeobox cluster was conserved over hundreds of millions of years of animal evolution. Clearly, the
hbn-rx-otp cluster has been fairly well conserved over the
evolutionary history of holometabolous insects. A cluster

Page 11 of 15

with the same constituent genes, in the same orientation,
spanning a comparable distance is found in representatives of three different orders of insects (Coleoptera, Diptera and Hymenoptera; Figure 4). The cluster also
appears to date to the ancestral Protostome, as evidenced
by conservation of the three-gene cluster in the limpet
Lottia, although the order of the genes has changed. In
addition, the cluster was also likely to have been present
in the cnidarian-bilaterian common ancestor, some 600
million years ago. The cluster in Nematostella involves
the same closely linked genes in the same order as the
inferred ancestral cluster of holometabolous insects, but
the otp locus has been inverted. Similarly, in four other
key taxa (cephalochordate, sea urchin, annelid and placozoan) we find evidence of a partial cluster, in which two of
the three genes are linked. Further sequencing and
assemblies of the echinoderm and hemichordate
genomes will reveal the extent of the hbn-rx-otp cluster in
the deuterostome ancestor. The placozoan genomic data
suggests that a portion of this cluster (hbn and otp) dates
back even further to the ancestral eumetazoan. However,
it remains to be seen whether rx was present in this
ancestor and lost in the placozoan lineage, or whether rx
evolved after the split.
Mechanistically, it is easier to envision how a cluster of
three closely related genes might remain linked than to
envision how three closely related genes, if already dispersed, could independently become so closely juxtaposed in multiple taxa. If the genes arose by tandem
duplication, the cluster would have originated as a result
of the gene duplication; that is, the starting point would
have been a cluster. Subsequently, the cluster could have
been maintained over hundreds of millions of years of
evolution in multiple animal lineages by stabilizing selection.
Closely linked genes will tend to reside in the same
chromosomal territories, and they may come under the
influence of shared regulatory elements. For this reason,
the proper regulation of linked genes may be related to
their physical proximity in the genome. This is the general explanation for why Hox genes have remained clustered for hundreds of millions of years in many animals
that have been examined. In the case of Hox genes, the
spatial ordering of Hox expression territories along the
body's main axis mirrors the physical ordering of linked
Hox genes along the chromosome. This correspondence
is termed colinearity. In the anterior CNS, rx, hbn and otp
are expressed in nested territories, which is somewhat
reminiscent of Hox genes. Future bioinformatics studies
could test for conserved regulatory elements within the
hbn-rx-otp clusters of fly, honeybee and flour beetle. The
functionality of these putative enhancer-binding sites

Mazza et al. EvoDevo 2010, 1:3
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/3

could then be studied experimentally. In addition, the
effect of cluster disruption can be examined experimentally in Drosophila and in mice, as it has been with Hox
genes [84,85]. It may also prove very informative to use
evolutionary comparisons of taxa with intact and disrupted clusters to investigate the consequences of cluster
disruption, as has recently been carried out for the ParaHox cluster [20].
The loss of homeobrain in chordates

The homeobrain gene appears to have been lost in chordates. We could not identify it in the sequenced genomes
of human, mouse, chicken, clawed frog, zebrafish, lancelet or tunicate (Figure 4). However, we identified clear
orthologs in two other deuterostomes (sea urchin and
hemichordate) and throughout the protostomes and
'basal' metazoans. Thus, this gene may have been truly
lost from the genome or it may have become so highly
modified that it is no longer recognizable as a homeobrain ortholog. The phylogenetic analysis performed
here, based on homeodomain sequences, does not
strongly suggest another PRD-class gene as a possible
ortholog. Unfortunately, we cannot rely on regions outside the 60-amino acid homeodomain to obtain additional phylogenetic signal because there was not
sufficient sequence conservation to permit alignments
across all genes represented in the phylogeny. The highly
conserved 128-amino acid Paired domain, present in
many PRD-class homeobox genes, is absent from the
homeobrain, orthopedia and rx families, among others
[29,39,40]. With the present data, our analyses support
the hypothesis that homeobrain was lost early in the chordate lineage.
Coding polymorphisms in Nematostella

Despite potential stabilizing selection to maintain the
cluster, we observed many polymorphisms in the Nematostella genes comprising the cluster, including nonsynonymous substitutions in the homeodomain of rx that
have a patchy distribution in natural populations. The
functional role of these polymorphisms awaits future
experimental characterization. The presence of few
homozygotes for the rare amino acid for each position in
our sampling of natural populations is potential evidence
for a functional difference between alleles.

Conclusions
A PRD-class homeobox cluster comprising homeobrain,
orthopedia and rax is widely conserved in animals and
thus represents an ancient gene cluster dating to early in
metazoan evolution. Very similar clusters comprising

Page 12 of 15

these three genes are present in Nematostella, in diverse
protostomes, and potentially in non-chordate deuterostomes. Chordates appear to have lost one member
(homeobrain) and the linkage between the other two
genes, rx and orthopedia, has dissolved in the diverse vertebrates we examined.

Additional material
Additional file 1 OTP annotation. Alignment of Orthopedia transcripts
against the assembled genome. Three otp transcripts were mapped against
scaffold_62 of the publicly available Nematostella genome assembly. The
position relative to the scaffold is indicated to the right of the nucleotide
sequence. For transcripts 1-3, identity to the genomic sequence is indicated
with a full stop (.). Long introns have been truncated for clarity. Polymorphic
positions are highlighted in black. We reconstructed one otp transcript (1)
by conceptually splicing overlapping 3' and 5' RACE fragments. This transcript is 1045 nucleotides long and it maps between positions 812065 and
802467 of the scaffold. Another otp transcript (2) was identified among the
ESTs sequenced as part of the Nematostella genome project
(jgi|Nemev1|205678|fgenesh1_pg.scaffold_62000087). This transcript maps
between positions 790736 and 812044 of the scaffold. A third Otp transcript
(3) had been previously deposited in the EST database at NCBI [86]; GenBank accession DV090169). This transcript is only 616 nucleotides in length
and it appears to be truncated at both ends. The predicted amino acid
sequences are shown beneath the nucleotide sequences. Three conserved
domains are indicated in bold type; the octapeptide (HSIVGILN), the 60
amino acid homeodomain and the 16 amino acid OAR domain. The OAR
domain is downstream and in frame with the homeodomain, but the
boxed amino acids are not encoded by any of the three otp transcripts we
recovered.
Additional file 2 RX annotation. Alignment of rx transcripts against the
assembled genome. We reconstructed one rx transcript (1) by conceptually
splicing overlapping 3' and 5' RACE fragments (RACE). We also identified
two rx sequences among the 150,000 ESTs generated by the Joint Genome
Institute Nematostella sequencing project (2: 2664141-1, 3: 2664141-2) and
two rx ESTs that were previously deposited at NCBI (4: CAGN10625,
5:CV088198). The RACE product spans nucleotides 785,552 to 790,345 of
scaffold_62 in the Joint Genome Institute Nematostella genome assembly.
Location relative to the scaffold is indicated to the right of the nucleotide
sequence. The long second intron (3713 nucleotides in length) has been
truncated for clarity. Polymorphic nucleotides are highlighted in black. Corresponding polymorphic amino acids are boxed. The predicted amino
sequence is shown below the nucleotide sequence. Three conserved
motifs are shown in bold type: the octapeptide (HSIDAILG), the 60-amino
acid homeodomain and the 16-amino acid OAR motif. There are two nonsilent polymorphisms within the homeodomain (K/R at position 52 and E/Q
at position 59 (see Figure 5 for geographic distribution). The EST CV088198
(5) does not encode the complete OAR motif. It encodes a predicted protein (ending in a phenylalanine) that is 24 residues shorter than the predicted protein encoded by the other transcripts.
Additional file 3 RX polymorphism map. Geographic distribution of rx
polymorphisms. In total, 95 individual animals were successfully genotyped
at each of the two polymorphic positions in the Rx homeodomain from 24
estuaries. Collection sites were as follows: 1, Spurwink River, ME; 2, Odiorne
Point, NH; 3, Rye Harbor, NH; 4, Wallis Sands, NH; 5, Old Town Hill, MA; 6,
Crane Reserve, MA; 7, Neponset River, MA; 8, Pocasset River, MA; 9, Sippewissett Marsh, MA; 10, Clinton, CT; 11, Kingsport, Nova Scotia; 12, Halifax,
NS; 13, Meadowlands, NJ; 14, Rhodes River, MD: 15, Baruch, SC; 16, San Juan
Island, WA; 17, Willapa Bay, WA; 18, Coos Bay, OR; 19, Humboldt, CA; 20,
Bodega Bay, CA; 21, Tomales Bay, CA; 22, Fort Gillkicker Lagoon, UK; 23, Salterns, UK; 24, Half Moon Lagoon, UK. The overall genotypic frequencies are:
position 52: KK = 71.58%, KR = 26.16%, RR = 2.11%; position 59: QQ =
92.55%, QE = 7.45%, EE = 0.00%.

Mazza et al. EvoDevo 2010, 1:3
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/3

Additional file 4 HBN annotation. Annotated Nematostella Homeobrain
locus. We reconstructed one hbn transcript (1) by conceptually splicing
overlapping 3' and 5' RACE fragments (RACE). We also identified three Hb
ESTs that were previously deposited at NCBI (2: DV0879878, 3: DV084683; 4:
DV086666). The transcript obtained by RACE is 1139 nucleotides long and
comprises three exons, which collectively span nucleotide positions
777,772 to 782,115 of scaffold_62 in the Joint Genome Institute Nematostella genome assembly. The position relative to the scaffold is indicated to
the right of the nucleotide sequence. The predicted amino acids are shown
below the nucleotides that encode them. Polymorphic nucleotides are
highlighted in black. Corresponding polymorphic amino acids are boxed.
Long introns have been truncated for clarity. Three conserved protein
motifs are shown in bold type; the octapeptide (YTIDMILG), the 60-amino
acid homeodomain and the 16-amino acid OAR domain.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors' contributions
MEM performed the majority of the gene mapping analysis, participated in the
phylogenetic analysis and contributed to drafting the manuscript. KP performed the in situ hybridization studies. AMR performed the population
genetic studies of rx and participated in the gene mapping studies and phylogenetic analysis. MQM participated in the design of the study and oversaw the
analysis of the gene expression data. JRF participated in the design of the study
and the phylogenetic analysis, and contributed to drafting the manuscript. All
authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Acknowledgements
We are extremely grateful for the insightful suggestions of two anonymous
reviewers. This research was supported by NSF grant IOS-0818831 to JRF.
Author Details
1Department of Biology, Boston University, 5 Cummington Street, Boston, MA
02215, USA, 2Kewalo Marine Lab, Pacific Biosciences Research Center,
University of Hawaii, 41 Ahui St., Honolulu, HI 96813, USA and 3Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institute, Woods Hole, MA 02543, USA
Received: 1 December 2009 Accepted: 5 July 2010
Published: 5 July 2010
© 2010 Mazza 1:3
This is an2010,et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
EvoDevo Open Access from: http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/3
article is available article distributed under the

References
1. Wotton KR, Weierud FK, Juarez-Morales JL, Alvares LE, Dietrich S, Lewis KE:
Conservation of gene linkage in dispersed vertebrate NK homeobox
clusters. Dev Genes Evol 2009, 219:481-496.
2. Lemons D, McGinnis W: Genomic evolution of Hox gene clusters.
Science 2006, 313:1918-1922.
3. Larroux C, Fahey B, Degnan SM, Adamski M, Rokhsar DS, Degnan BM: The
NK homeobox gene cluster predates the origin of hox genes. Current
Biology 2007, 17:706-710.
4. Shimeld SM, Boyle MJ, Brunet T, Luke GN, Seaver EC: Clustered Fox genes
in lophotrochozoans and the evolution of the bilaterian Fox gene
cluster. Dev Biol 2010, 340:234-48.
5. Jiang XJ, Li S, Ravi V, Venkatesh B, Yu WP: Identification and comparative
analysis of the protocadherin cluster in a reptile, the green anole lizard.
PLoS One 2009, 4:e7614.
6. Patel VS, Cooper SJ, Deakin JE, Fulton B, Graves T, Warren WC, Wilson RK,
Graves JA: Platypus globin genes and flanking loci suggest a new
insertional model for beta-globin evolution in birds and mammals.
BMC Biol 2008, 6:34.
7. Stock DW: The Dlx gene complement of the leopard shark, Triakis
semifasciata, resembles that of mammals: implications for genomic
and morphological evolution of jawed vertebrates. Genetics 2005,
169:807-817.
8. Vogel JH, von Heydebreck A, Purmann A, Sperling S: Chromosomal
clustering of a human transcriptome reveals regulatory background.
BMC Bioinformatics 2005, 6:230.
9. Coulier F, Popovici C, Villet R, Birnbaum D: MetaHox gene clusters. J Exp
Zool 2000, 288:345-351.
10. Pollard SL, Holland PW: Evidence for 14 homeobox gene clusters in
human genome ancestry. Curr Biol 2000, 10:1059-1062.

Page 13 of 15

11. Hughes AL: Evolution of the integrin alpha and beta protein families. J
Mol Evol 2001, 52:63-72.
12. Lopreato GF, Lu Y, Southwell A, Atkinson NS, Hillis DM, Wilcox TP, Zakon
HH: Evolution and divergence of sodium channel genes in vertebrates.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2001, 98:7588-7592.
13. Granadino B, Rey-Campos J: EVG, the remnants of a primordial
bilaterian's synteny of functionally unrelated genes. J Mol Evol 2003,
57:515-519.
14. Shibuya K, Kudoh J, Obayashi I, Shimizu A, Sasaki T, Minoshima S, Shimizu
N: Comparative genomics of the keratin-associated protein (KAP) gene
clusters in human, chimpanzee, and baboon. Mamm Genome 2004,
15:179-192.
15. Maclean JA, Chen MA, Wayne CM, Bruce SR, Rao M, Meistrich ML, Macleod
C, Wilkinson MF: Rhox: a new homeobox gene cluster. Cell 2005,
120:369-382.
16. Chourrout D, Delsuc F, Chourrout P, Edvardsen RB, Rentzsch F, Renfer E,
Jensen MF, Zhu B, de Jong P, Steele RE, Technau U: Minimal ProtoHox
cluster inferred from bilaterian and cnidarian Hox complements.
Nature 2006, 442:684-687.
17. Mazet F, Amemiya CT, Shimeld SM: An ancient Fox gene cluster in
bilaterian animals. Curr Biol 2006, 16:R314-316.
18. Ryan JF, Mazza ME, Pang K, Matus DQ, Baxevanis AD, Martindale MQ,
Finnerty JR: Pre-bilaterian origins of the hox cluster and the hox code:
evidence from the sea anemone, Nematostella vectensis. PLoS ONE
2007, 2:e153.
19. Sullivan JC, Ryan JF, Mullikin JC, Finnerty JR: Conserved and novel Wnt
clusters in the basal eumetazoan Nematostella vectensis. Dev Genes Evol
2007, 217:235-239.
20. Hui J, Raible F, Korchagina N, Dray N, Samain S, Magdelenat G, Jubin C,
Segurens B, Balavoine G, Arendt D, Ferrier D: Features of the ancestral
bilaterian inferred from Platynereis dumerilii ParaHox genes. BMC
Biology 2009, 7:43.
21. Kerner P, Ikmi A, Coen D, Vervoort M: Evolutionary history of the
iroquois/Irx genes in metazoans. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2009, 9:74.
22. Lewis EB: A gene complex controlling segmentation in Drosophila.
Nature 1978, 276:565-570.
23. Mann RS: Why are Hox genes clustered? Bioessays 1997, 19:661-664.
24. Balavoine G, de Rosa R, Adoutte A: Hox clusters and bilaterian
phylogeny. Mol Phylogenet Evol 2002, 24:366-373.
25. Martinez P, Amemiya CT: Genomics of the HOX gene cluster. Comp
Biochem Physiol B Biochem Mol Biol 2002, 133:571-580.
26. Arnone MI, Rizzo F, Annunciata R, Cameron RA, Peterson KJ, Martinez P:
Genetic organization and embryonic expression of the ParaHox genes
in the sea urchin S. purpuratus: insights into the relationship between
clustering and colinearity. Dev Biol 2006, 300:63-73.
27. Duboule D: The rise and fall of Hox gene clusters. Development 2007,
134:2549-2560.
28. Kurosawa G, Takamatsu N, Takahashi M, Sumitomo M, Sanaka E, Yamada K,
Nishii K, Matsuda M, Asakawa S, Ishiguro H, Miura K, Kurosawa Y, Shimizu
N, Kohara Y, Hori H: Organization and structure of hox gene loci in
medaka genome and comparison with those of pufferfish and
zebrafish genomes. Gene 2006, 370:75-82.
29. Bürglin TR: Homeodomain proteins. In Encyclopedia or Molecular Cell
Biology and Molecular Medicine 2nd edition. Edited by: Meyers RA.
Weinheim: Wiley-VCH Verlag; 2005.
30. Mazza ME, Pang K, Martindale MQ, Finnerty JR: Genomic organization,
gene structure, and developmental expression of three Clustered otx
genes in the sea anemone Nematostella vectensis. J Exp Zoolog B Mol
Dev Evol 2007, 308:494-506.
31. Walldorf U, Kiewe A, Wickert M, Ronshaugen M, McGinnis W:
Homeobrain, a novel paired-like homeobox gene is expressed in the
Drosophila brain. Mech Dev 2000, 96:141-144.
32. Ryan JF, Burton PM, Mazza ME, Kwong GK, Mullikin JC, Finnerty JR: The
cnidarian-bilaterian ancestor possessed at least 56 homeoboxes.
Evidence from the starlet sea anemone, Nematostella vectensis.
Genome Biol 2006, 7:R64.
33. Sullivan JC, Ryan JF, Watson JA, Webb J, Mullikin JC, Rokhsar D, Finnerty JR:
StellaBase: The Nematostella vectensis genomics database. Nucleic
Acids Res 2006, 34:D495-499.
34. Putnam NH, Srivastava M, Hellsten U, Dirks B, Chapman J, Salamov A, Terry
A, Shapiro H, Lindquist E, Kapitonov VV, Jurka J, Genikhovich G, Grigoriev
IV, Lucas SM, Steele RE, Finnerty JR, Technau U, Martindale MQ, Rokhsar

Mazza et al. EvoDevo 2010, 1:3
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/3

35.
36.
37.
38.

39.

40.

41.

42.

43.
44.
45.

46.

47.

48.

49.

50.

51.

52.

53.

54.

55.

56.

DS: Sea anemone genome reveals ancestral eumetazoan gene
repertoire and genomic organization. Science 2007, 317:86-94.
Edgar R: MUSCLE: multiple sequence alignment with high accuracy and
high throughput. Nucleic Acids Research 2004, 32:1792-1797.
Felsenstein J: PHYLIP (Phylogeny Inference Package) version 3.6.
Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle; 2005.
Maddison DR, Maddison WP: MacClade, version 4. 2005.
Finnerty JR, Paulson D, Burton P, Pang K, Martindale MQ: Early evolution
of a homeobox gene: the parahox gene Gsx in the Cnidaria and the
Bilateria. Evol Dev 2003, 5:331-345.
Bürglin TR: A comprehensive classification of homeobox genes. In
Guidebook to the Homeobox Genes Edited by: Duboule D. New York:
Oxford University Press; 1994:25-72.
Galliot B, de Vargas C, Miller DJ: Evolution of homeobox genes: Q50
Paired-like genes founded the Paired class. Dev Genes Evol 1999,
209:186-197.
Fröbius AC, Seaver EC: Capitella sp. I homeobrain-like, the first
lophotrochozoan member of a novel paired-like homeobox gene
family. Gene Expr Patterns 2006, 6:958-91.
Marlow HQ, Srivastava M, Matus DQ, Rokhsar D, Martindale MQ: Anatomy
and development of the nervous system of Nematostella vectensis, an
anthozoan cnidarian. Dev Neurobiol 2009, 69:235-254.
Barad M, Jack T, Chadwick R, McGinnis W: A novel, tissue-specific,
Drosophila homeobox gene. Embo J 1988, 7:2151-2161.
Dessain S, McGinnis W: Drosophila homeobox genes. Adv Dev Biochem
1993, 2:1-55.
Eggert T, Hauck B, Hildebrandt N, Gehring WJ, Walldorf U: Isolation of a
Drosophila homolog of the vertebrate homeobox gene Rx and its
possible role in brain and eye development. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
1998, 95:2343-2348.
Burke RD, Angerer LM, Elphick MR, Humphrey GW, Yaguchi S, Kiyama T,
Liang S, Mu X, Agca C, Klein WH, Brandhorst BP, Rowe M, Wilson K,
Churcher AM, Taylor JS, Chen N, Murray G, Wang D, Mellott D, Olinski R,
Hallböök F, Thorndyke MC: A genomic view of the sea urchin nervous
system. Dev Biol 2006, 300:434-460.
Acampora D, Postiglione MP, Avantaggiato V, Di Bonito M, Simeone A:
The role of Otx and Otp genes in brain development. Int J Dev Biol 2000,
44:669-677.
Acampora D, Postiglione MP, Avantaggiato V, Di Bonito M, Vaccarino FM,
Michaud J, Simeone A: Progressive impairment of developing
neuroendocrine cell lineages in the hypothalamus of mice lacking the
Orthopedia gene. Genes Dev 1999, 13:2787-2800.
Del Giacco L, Sordino P, Pistocchi A, Andreakis N, Tarallo R, Di Benedetto B,
Cotelli F: Differential regulation of the zebrafish orthopedia 1 gene
during fate determination of diencephalic neurons. BMC Dev Biol 2006,
6:50.
Lin X, State MW, Vaccarino FM, Greally J, Hass M, Leckman JF:
Identification, chromosomal assignment, and expression analysis of
the human homeodomain-containing gene Orthopedia (OTP).
Genomics 1999, 60:96-104.
Simeone A, D'Apice MR, Nigro V, Casanova J, Graziani F, Acampora D,
Avantaggiato V: Orthopedia, a novel homeobox-containing gene
expressed in the developing CNS of both mouse and Drosophila.
Neuron 1994, 13:83-101.
Wang W, Lufkin T: The murine Otp homeobox gene plays an essential
role in the specification of neuronal cell lineages in the developing
hypothalamus. Dev Biol 2000, 227:432-449.
Lowe CJ, Wu M, Salic A, Evans L, Lander E, Stange-Thomann N, Gruber CE,
Gerhart J, Kirschner M: Anteroposterior patterning in hemichordates
and the origins of the chordate nervous system. Cell 2003, 113:853-865.
Umesono Y, Watanabe K, Agata K: A planarian orthopedia homolog is
specifically expressed in the branch region of both the mature and
regenerating brain. Dev Growth Differ 1997, 39:723-727.
Umesono Y, Watanabe K, Agata K: Distinct structural domains in the
planarian brain defined by the expression of evolutionarily conserved
homeobox genes. Dev Genes Evol 1999, 209:31-39.
Nederbragt AJ, te Welscher P, van den Driesche S, van Loon AE, Dictus WJ:
Novel and conserved roles for orthodenticle/otx and orthopedia/otp
orthologs in the gastropod mollusc Patella vulgata. Dev Genes Evol
2002, 212:330-337.

Page 14 of 15

57. Di Bernardo M, Bellomonte D, Castagnetti S, Melfi R, Oliveri P, Spinelli G:
Homeobox genes and sea urchin development. Int J Dev Biol 2000,
44:637-643.
58. Di Bernardo M, Castagnetti S, Bellomonte D, Oliveri P, Melfi R, Palla F,
Spinelli G: Spatially restricted expression of PlOtp, a Paracentrotus
lividus orthopedia-related homeobox gene, is correlated with oral
ectodermal patterning and skeletal morphogenesis in late-cleavage
sea urchin embryos. Development 1999, 126:2171-2179.
59. Zhou N, Wilson KA, Andrews ME, Kauffman JS, Raff RA: Evolution of OTPindependent larval skeleton patterning in the direct-developing sea
urchin, Heliocidaris erythrogramma. J Exp Zoolog B Mol Dev Evol 2003,
300:58-71.
60. Cavalieri V, Bernardo MD, Spinelli G: Regulatory sequences driving
expression of the sea urchin Otp homeobox gene in oral ectoderm
cells. Gene Expr Patterns 2007, 7:124-30.
61. Cavalieri V, Spinelli G, Di Bernardo M: Impairing Otp homeodomain
function in oral ectoderm cells affects skeletogenesis in sea urchin
embryos. Dev Biol 2003, 262:107-118.
62. Bailey TJ, El-Hodiri H, Zhang L, Shah R, Mathers PH, Jamrich M: Regulation
of vertebrate eye development by Rx genes. Int J Dev Biol 2004,
48:761-770.
63. Casarosa S, Andreazzoli M, Simeone A, Barsacchi G: Xrx1, a novel
Xenopus homeobox gene expressed during eye and pineal gland
development. Mech Dev 1997, 61:187-198.
64. Chuang JC, Mathers PH, Raymond PA: Expression of three Rx homeobox
genes in embryonic and adult zebrafish. Mech Dev 1999, 84:195-198.
65. Chuang JC, Raymond PA: Zebrafish genes rx1 and rx2 help define the
region of forebrain that gives rise to retina. Dev Biol 2001, 231:13-30.
66. D'Aniello S, D'Aniello E, Locascio A, Memoli A, Corrado M, Russo MT,
Aniello F, Fucci L, Brown ER, Branno M: The ascidian homolog of the
vertebrate homeobox gene Rx is essential for ocellus development
and function. Differentiation 2006, 74:222-234.
67. Furukawa T, Kozak CA, Cepko CL: rax, a novel paired-type homeobox
gene, shows expression in the anterior neural fold and developing
retina. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1997, 94:3088-3093.
68. Loosli F, Winkler S, Burgtorf C, Wurmbach E, Ansorge W, Henrich T,
Grabher C, Arendt D, Carl M, Krone A, Grzebisz E, Wittbrodt J: Medaka
eyeless is the key factor linking retinal determination and eye growth.
Development 2001, 128:4035-4044.
69. Mathers PH, Jamrich M: Regulation of eye formation by the Rx and pax6
homeobox genes. Cell Mol Life Sci 2000, 57:186-194.
70. Ohuchi H, Tomonari S, Itoh H, Mikawa T, Noji S: Identification of chick rax/
rx genes with overlapping patterns of expression during early eye and
brain development. Mech Dev 1999, 85:193-195.
71. Davis RJ, Tavsanli BC, Dittrich C, Walldorf U, Mardon G: Drosophila retinal
homeobox (drx) is not required for establishment of the visual system,
but is required for brain and clypeus development. Dev Biol 2003,
259:272-287.
72. Burri M, Tromvoukis Y, Bopp D, Frigerio G, Noll M: Conservation of the
paired domain in metazoans and its structure in three isolated human
genes. EMBO J 1989, 8:1183-1190.
73. Schneitz K, Spielmann P, Noll M: Molecular genetics of aristaless, a prdtype homeo box gene involved in the morphogenesis of proximal and
distal pattern elements in a subset of appendages in Drosophila.
Genes Dev 1993, 7:114-129.
74. Smith ST, Jaynes JB: A conserved region of engrailed, shared among all
en-, gsc-, Nk1-, Nk2- and msh-class homeoproteins, mediates active
transcriptional repression in vivo. Development 1996, 122:3141-3150.
75. Miura H, Yanazawa M, Kato K, Kitamura K: Expression of a novel aristaless
related homeobox gene 'Arx' in the vertebrate telencephalon,
diencephalon and floor plate. Mech Dev 1997, 65:99-109.
76. Brouwer A, ten Berge D, Wiegerinck R, Meijlink F: The OAR/aristaless
domain of the homeodomain protein Cart1 has an attenuating role in
vivo. Mech Dev 2003, 120:241-252.
77. Norris RA, Kern MJ: The identification of Prx1 transcription regulatory
domains provides a mechanism for unequal compensation by the Prx1
and Prx2 loci. J Biol Chem 2001, 276:26829-26837.
78. Norris RA, Kern MJ: Identification of domains mediating transcription
activation, repression, and inhibition in the paired-related homeobox
protein, Prx2 (S8). DNA Cell Biol 2001, 20:89-99.

Mazza et al. EvoDevo 2010, 1:3
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/3

79. Kern MJ, Witte DP, Valerius MT, Aronow BJ, Potter SS: A novel murine
homeobox gene isolated by a tissue specific PCR cloning strategy.
Nucleic Acids Res 1992, 20:5189-5195.
80. Norris RA, Scott KK, Moore CS, Stetten G, Brown CR, Jabs EW, Wulfsberg
EA, Yu J, Kern MJ: Human PRRX1 and PRRX2 genes: cloning, expression,
genomic localization, and exclusion as disease genes for Nager
syndrome. Mamm Genome 2000, 11:1000-1005.
81. Chesterman ES, Kern MJ: Comparative analysis of Prx1 and Prx2
expression in mice provides evidence for incomplete compensation.
Anat Rec 2002, 266:1-4.
82. Seo HC, Edvardsen RB, Maeland AD, Bjordal M, Jensen MF, Hansen A, Flaat
M, Weissenbach J, Lehrach H, Wincker P, Reinhardt R, Chourrout D: Hox
cluster disintegration with persistent anteroposterior order of
expression in Oikopleura dioica. Nature 2004, 431:67-71.
83. Garcia-Fernandez J: The genesis and evolution of homeobox gene
clusters. Nat Rev Genet 2005, 6:881-892.
84. Spitz F, Herkenne C, Morris MA, Duboule D: Inversion-induced disruption
of the Hoxd cluster leads to the partition of regulatory landscapes. Nat
Genet 2005, 37:889-893.
85. Tiong SYK, Whittle JRS, Gribbin MC: Chromosomal continuity in the
abdominal region of the bithorax complex of Drosophila is not
essential for its contribution to metameric identity. Development 1987,
101:135-142.
86. Technau U, Rudd S, Maxwell P, Gordon PM, Saina M, Grasso LC, Hayward
DC, Sensen CW, Saint R, Holstein TW, Ball EE, Miller DJ: Maintenance of
ancestral complexity and non-metazoan genes in two basal
cnidarians. Trends Genet 2005, 21:633-639.
doi: 10.1186/2041-9139-1-3
Cite this article as: Mazza et al., A conserved cluster of three PRD-class
homeobox genes (homeobrain, rx and orthopedia) in the Cnidaria and Protostomia EvoDevo 2010, 1:3

Page 15 of 15

</pre>
</body>
</html>
