<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>BMCBiol-8-X_McClung.indd</title>
<meta name="Author" content="heri01"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="PScript5.dll Version 5.2.2"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 6.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
McClung BMC Biology 2010, 8:55
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/55

CO M M E N TA R Y

Open Access

A modern circadian clock in the common
angiosperm ancestor of monocots and eudicots
C Robertson McClung*
See research article http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/126

Abstract
The circadian clock enhances fitness through temporal
organization of plant gene expression, metabolism and
physiology. Two recent studies, one in BMC Evolutionary
Biology, demonstrate through phylogenetic analysis
of the CCA1/LHY and TOC1/PRR gene families that the
common ancestor of monocots and eudicots had
components sufficient to construct a circadian clock
consisting of multiple interlocked feedback loops.

The recent availability of several plant genome sequences
has made it clear that whole genome duplication (polyploidization) has occurred frequently during angiosperm
evolution. It is thought that the provision of duplicated
genes permits evolution through functional specialization
as well as the acquisition of innovative functions. There are
several examples in which multiple members of gene
families contribute to the circadian clock mechanism,
raising a number of questions. Practically, functional redundancy among family members limits the identiﬁcation of
clock components through forward genetics [1]. Of more
general interest is the question of how these gene families
have evolved among plants. In addition, there is considerable interest in determining the extent to which the
clock model that has been developed for Arabidopsis will
serve as a model for clock function among plants in general.
A recent paper in BMC Evolutionary Biology describing the
angiosperm PSEUDO-RESPONSE REGULATOR (PRR)
gene family addresses each of these questions [2].

Circadian clocks: complex and highly conserved
mechanisms for coordinating metabolism and
physiology with the environment
A circadian rhythm is an endogenously generated rhythm
with a period of about 24 h, approximating the period of
*Correspondence: mcclung@dartmouth.edu
Department of Biological Sciences, 6044 Gilman Laboratories, Dartmouth College,
Hanover, New Hampshire 03755, USA

the rotation of the earth on its axis. These rhythms
provide temporal organization of biological processes
from cyanobacteria to mammals [3]. In plants, circadian
rhythmicity is widespread and pervasive [4,5]. Approximately one-third of the Arabidopsis transcriptome shows
circadian oscillations in abundance in continuous
conditions [6], but if one looks under a variety of light
and temperature cycles that proportion grows to an
astonishing ~90% [7], underlining the probable
importance of circadian rhythm to overall ﬁtness [4,5].
Circadian clocks of taxonomic groups as diverse as
plants, fungi and animals are composed of multiple
interlocked feedback loops with positive and negative
components [3] and many of the components of these
clocks are encoded by members of gene families. The
Arabidopsis circadian clock, an example of this common
design principle, is composed of at least four interlocked
feedback loops (Figure 1). In the central loop (blue in
Figure 1), TIMING OF CAB EXPRESSION 1 (TOC1), the
founding member of a family of ﬁve PSEUDORESPONSE REGULATOR (PRR) genes, is a positive
regulator of CIRCADIAN AND CLOCK ASSOCIATED 1
(CCA1) and LATE ELONGATED HYPOCOTYL (LHY).
CCA1 and LHY are members of a small family of
REVEILLE genes that encode single Myb domain
transcription factors. Others members of this family have
been shown to play roles in clock function as well as in
regulation of clock output pathways [4,5]. To complete
the ﬁrst loop, CCA1 and LHY bind to the TOC1
promoter to inhibit its expression. In a second loop
(green in Figure 1) within the central loop, CCA1 and
LHY also repress expression of CCA1 HIKING
EXPEDITION (CHE), which encodes a TCP transcription
factor that binds to and represses expression from the
CCA1 promoter [1]. In the third loop (yellow in Figure 1),
termed the ‘morning’ loop based on the time of peak
mRNA accumulation of its constituents, CCA1 and LHY
are positive regulators of two TOC1 relatives, PRR7 and
PRR9, that are negative regulators of CCA1 and LHY
[4,5]. In a fourth loop (gray in Figure 1), termed the

© 2010 McClung; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any
medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

McClung BMC Biology 2010, 8:55
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/55

Page 2 of 4

morning
PRR9
PRR7
PRR5

evening

LH Y
CCA 1

ZT L
GI

CH E

TO C1

X (L UX /P C L, E LF 4)

PRR3

ZT L

Y
(G I
P R R 5)

Figure 1. Model of the Arabidopsis clock, emphasizing the roles of the TOC1/PRR (red) and CCA1/LHY (blue) genes. The model is
oversimplified to illustrate the interlocked feedback loops. Not all known clock components are included and undoubtedly more components
remain unidentified. The central loop of CCA1, LHY, TOC1, and ‘X’ is shaded blue. The second loop of CCA1 and CHE is shaded green. The third
(‘morning’) loop of CCA1, LHY, PRR9, PRR7, and PRR5 is shaded yellow, and the fourth (‘evening’) loop of TOC1 and ‘Y’ is shaded gray.

‘evening’ loop based again on the time of peak mRNA
accumulation, TOC1 represses a component, ‘Y’, that
includes GIGANTEA (GI) and possibly PRR5. This component in turn positively regulates TOC1 expression at least in
part through modulation by GI of proteasomal degradation
of TOC1 mediated by the F-box protein ZEITLUPE (ZTL)
[4,5]. In addition, proper regulation of CCA1 and LHY
requires other clock genes, including EARLY FLOWERING
4 (ELF4), which encodes a protein of unknown function,
and LUX ARRHYTHMO/PHYTOCLOCK1 (LUX/PCL),
which encodes a Myb domain transcription factor; these
and other clock components have yet to be fully
incorporated into current clock models [4,5]. The number
of interlocked feedback loops will undoubtedly increase as
the regulatory relationships among clock components are
more fully described.
The value of model organisms such as Arabidopsis
stems from the generalization of knowledge acquired in
the model to all ﬂowering plants, and especially to those
of agricultural signiﬁcance. The increasing availability of
genomic sequences from multiple plants is now
permitting our ﬁrst insights into this issue.

Phylogenetic analysis of the PRR and CCA1/LHY
gene families shows that circadian clocks composed
of multiple interlocked feedback loops evolved
prior to the divergence of monocots and eudicots
Molecular phylogenetic analysis of the PRR genes
indicates that the common ancestor of the monocots and
eudicots had three PRR gene clades [2]. Since the
divergence of the monocots and eudicots, the clades
corresponding to PRR3/PRR7 and PRR5/PRR9 have
expanded independently in both lineages as a result of
genome duplications [2]. Within the eudicots, or ‘true
dicots’, a subset of the former broad classiﬁcation of
dicots that includes more than half of extant plant
species, two further genome duplications occurred in
Arabidopsis following its divergence from papaya (Carica

papaya) but, after each duplication, one of the paralogs
was lost. In contrast, poplar has retained the duplicate
copies of PRR5, PRR7 and PRR9, which originated in a
genome duplication, termed the Salicoid duplication, that
occurred in the poplar lineage after its separation from
the papaya-Arabidopsis lineage. PRR3 has been
completely lost from the poplar genome, although it is
unclear whether this loss predated or followed the
Salicoid duplication. The Brassica rapa genome has
triploidized since its divergence form Arabidopsis
approximately 14.5 million years ago, yet for no members
of the B. rapa TOC1/PRR gene family have all three
copies persisted, making it clear that diﬀerential PRR
gene loss has occurred [8].
Takata et al. [9] have conducted a parallel analysis of
angiosperm CCA1/LHY genes, and their observations are
consistent with those obtained in their analysis of the
PRR genes; the common ancestor of monocots and
eudicots had one CCA1/LHY gene and there has been
independent duplication of the LHY/CCA1 genes in the
monocots and eudicots. Within the eudicots, there has
been independent duplication in poplar and Arabidopsis.
The key conclusion from these studies is that the
common ancestor of the monocots and eudicots had the
basic components necessary for the construction of a
circadian clock with multiple interlocked feedback loops
prior to the separation of these groups 200 million years
ago [2]. This makes it very likely that the Arabidopsis
clock will prove a useful model for most agricultural
species. It will be interesting to determine whether the
more basal angiosperms, such as the Magnoliales, also
share this common clock architecture.

Sub- and neo-functionalization among clock genes
One consequence of gene duplication is that it allows the
two copies to subdivide the functions of the ancestral
copy (functional specialization or sub-functionalization),
or for one copy to acquire a new function

McClung BMC Biology 2010, 8:55
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/55

Page 3 of 4

(neo-functionalization) while the other retains the
original function, thus preserving ﬁtness; but is there
evidence for either functional specialization or
acquisition of novel functions among PRR genes during
evolution of the angiosperms? The strongest evidence
comes from Arabidopsis, where clock function is best
studied. TOC1 and four other PRR genes each show
circadian oscillations in transcript abundance, with peak
abundance occurring at intervals spanning the day
starting at dawn with PRR9, followed by PRR7, PRR5,
PRR3, and ﬁnally at dusk with TOC1 (PRR1) [4,5]. As
shown in Figure 2, TOC1 is recruited to the CCA1
promoter and is a positive regulator of CCA1 expression,
although the molecular details remain incompletely
described [1]. PRR9, PRR7, and PRR5 are recruited to the
promoters of CCA1 and LHY and negatively regulate
their expression [10]. It is likely that the sequential
expression of PRR9, PRR7, and PRR5 contributes to
sustained repression of CCA1 and LHY expression
throughout the day. This indicates that, while the
function of these three genes is partially redundant, with
normal expression of the three genes the temporal
window of CCA1/LHY repression is extended. Thus,
PRR9, PRR7, and PRR5 oﬀer an example of subfunctionalization in the temporal domain. Although the
function of the rice (Oryza sativa) orthologs of PRR9,
PRR7, and PRR5 has not been established, there is a
similar sequential pattern of expression of OsPRR73/
OsPRR37 and then OsPRR95/OsPRR59, followed by
OsTOC1 (OsPRR1) [11].
In Arabidopsis, the PRR3 gene oﬀers an example of
acquisition of a novel function. PRR9, PRR7, and PRR5 all

PR R 5

PR R 7

PR R 9

have a similar role in negatively regulating CCA1 and
LHY, suggesting that this represents the ancestral function
(Figure 2). PRR3 appears, instead, to have acquired a novel
and specialized function in the vascular tissue, where
PRR3 binds to TOC1 and, in doing so, blocks the
interaction of TOC1 with ZTL, the F-box protein that
targets TOC1 for proteasomal degradation [12]. Thus,
PRR3 exhibits a restricted domain of expression and has
acquired a novel function, the regulation of TOC1
stability through protein-protein interaction (Figure 2). In
Arabidopsis, loss of PRR3 function confers only a very
small shortening of circadian period [13], which is consistent with the apparent loss of PRR3 in poplar, without
concomitant perturbation of clock function.
There are additional suggestions of evolving function in
the PRR7 lineage. In Arabidopsis, PRR7 contributes to the
determination of ﬂowering time, although the eﬀects are
not large and PRR7 is not a major determinant of ﬂowering time among natural populations [14]. In contrast, in
the monocots barley and wheat, PRR7 (Ppd-H1 and PpdD1, respectively) is one of the major determinants of
photoperiod sensitivity and ﬂowering time [15,16].
Whether this represents a true acquisition of novel function in the monocots or a loss of function in the eudicots
remains uncertain and will require more detailed
dissection of the roles of PRR7 in the ﬂowering pathways
of monocots and eudicots.

Future directions
There remains a great deal of work to achieve a
mechanistic understanding of how the circadian clock
keeps time. Four of the ﬁve PRR proteins are recruited to

C C A1

L HY

T OC 1

ZTL

PR R 3

Figure 2. Regulatory relationships among TOC1/PRRs and CCA1/LHY. CCA1, LHY, TOC1, PRR9, PRR7, and PRR5 all are recruited to promoters and
regulate transcription (yellow shading). PRR9, PRR7, and PRR5 are negative regulators (indicated in red) of CCA1 and LHY, whereas CCA1 and LHY are
both negative regulators (in red) of TOC1 and positive regulators (indicated in green) of PRR7 and PRR9. PRR3 is not known to regulate transcription.
Instead (blue shading), PRR3 interacts with TOC1 protein to protect it from ZTL-mediated recruitment for proteasomal degradation. Modified from
[10].

McClung BMC Biology 2010, 8:55
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/55

DNA yet they do not possess recognized DNA-binding
domains and are not known to bind DNA directly. How
are they recruited to the CCA1 and LHY promoters and
what makes TOC1 a positive regulator while PRR5,
PRR7, and PRR9 are repressors? Takata et al. [2,9]
establish that the common ancestor of monocots and
eudicots had PRR and CCA1/LHY genes and, therefore,
the materials with which to construct a functional
circadian clock. How has the diﬀerential ampliﬁcation of
these two gene families in the angiosperm lineages
allowed modulation of circadian timekeeping? How well
does the outline presented in Figures 1 and 2 apply across
the angiosperms and to more primitive plants? Within
species, has variation among clock genes contributed to
ﬁtness? There is no shortage of questions and the
increasing availability of genome sequences and tools to
probe gene function in many species make this a
wonderful time to study the basis of circadian timing.
Acknowledgements
Work in my laboratory on circadian rhythms is supported by grants from the
National Science Foundation (IOS 0605736 and IOS 0960803) and Binational
Science Foundation (2005223). I apologize to those authors whose work, due
to space constraints, was not directly cited.

Page 4 of 4

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

Published: 7 May 2010
References
1. Pruneda-Paz JL, Breton G, Para A, Kay SA: A functional genomics approach
reveals CHE as a novel component of the Arabidopsis circadian clock.
Science 2009, 323:1481-1485.
2. Takata N, Saito S, Saito CT, Uemura M: Phylogenetic footprint of the plant
clock system in angiosperms: evolutionary processes of pseudo-response
regulators. BMC Evol Biol 2010, 10:126.
3. Wijnen H, Young MW: Interplay of circadian clocks and metabolic rhythms.
Annu Rev Genet 2006, 40:409-448.
4. McClung CR: Comes a time. Curr Opin Plant Biol 2008, 11:514-520.
5. Harmer SL: The circadian system in higher plants. Annu Rev Plant Biol 2009,
60:357-377.

16.

Covington MF, Maloof JN, Straume M, Kay SA, Harmer SL: Global
transcriptome analysis reveals circadian regulation of key pathways in
plant growth and development. Genome Biol 2008, 9:R130.
Michael TP, Mockler TC, Breton G, McEntee C, Byer A, Trout JD, Hazen SP, Shen
R, Priest HD, Sullivan CM, Givan SA, Yanovsky M, Hong F, Kay SA, Chory J:
Network discovery pipeline elucidates conserved time-of-day-speciﬁc
cis-regulatory modules. PLoS Genet 2008, 4:e14.
Kim JA, Yang TJ, Kim JS, Park JY, Kwon SJ, Lim MH, Jin M, Lee SC, Lee SI, Choi
BS, Um SH, Kim HI, Chun C, Park BS: Isolation of circadian-associated genes
in Brassica rapa by comparative genomics with Arabidopsis thaliana. Mol
Cells 2007, 23:145-153.
Takata N, Saito S, Tanaka Saito C, Nanjo T, Shinohara K, Uemura M: Molecular
phylogeny and expression of poplar circadian clock genes, LHY1 and
LHY2. New Phytol 2008, 181:808-819.
Nakamichi N, Kiba T, Henriques R, Mizuno T, Chua N-H, Sakakibara H:
PSEUDO-RESPONSE REGULATORS 9, 7 and 5 are transcriptional repressors
in the Arabidopsis circadian clock. Plant Cell 2010, 22:in press.
Murakami M, Ashikari M, Miura K, Yamashino T, Mizuno T: The evolutionarily
conserved OsPRR quintet: rice pseudo-response regulators implicated in
circadian rhythm. Plant Cell Physiol 2003, 44:1229-1236.
Para A, Farré EM, Imaizumi T, Pruneda-Paz JL, Harmon FG, Kay SA: PRR3 is a
vascular regulator of TOC1 stability in the Arabidopsis circadian clock. Plant
Cell 2007, 19:3462-3473.
Michael TP, Salomé PA, Yu HJ, Spencer TR, Sharp EL, Alonso JM, Ecker JR,
McClung CR: Enhanced ﬁtness conferred by naturally occurring variation
in the circadian clock. Science 2003, 302:1049-1053.
Ehrenreich IM, Hanzawa Y, Chou L, Roe JL, Kover PX, Purugganan MD:
Candidate gene association mapping of Arabidopsis ﬂowering time.
Genetics 2009, 183:325-335.
Turner A, Beales J, Faure S, Dunford RP, Laurie DA: The pseudo-response
regulator Ppd-H1 provides adaptation to photoperiod in barley. Science
2005, 310:1031-1034.
Beales J, Turner A, ., Griffiths S, Snape JW, Laurie DA: A pseudo-response
regulator is misexpressed in the photoperiod insensitive Ppd-D1a mutant
of wheat (Triticum aestivum L.). Theor Appl Genet 2007, 115:721-733.

doi:10.1186/1741-7007-8-55
Cite this article as: McClung CR: A modern circadian clock in the common
angiosperm ancestor of monocots and eudicots. BMC Biology 2010, 8:55.

</pre>
</body>
</html>
