<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Annelid Distal-less/Dlx duplications reveal varied post-duplication fates</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:241. doi:10.1186/1471-2148-11-241"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Carmel McDougall"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
McDougall et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:241
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/241

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Annelid Distal-less/Dlx duplications reveal varied
post-duplication fates
Carmel McDougall1,2,3, Natalia Korchagina2, Jonathan L Tobin2 and David EK Ferrier1*

Abstract
Background: Dlx (Distal-less) genes have various developmental roles and are widespread throughout the animal
kingdom, usually occurring as single copy genes in non-chordates and as multiple copies in most chordate
genomes. While the genomic arrangement and function of these genes is well known in vertebrates and
arthropods, information about Dlx genes in other organisms is scarce. We investigate the presence of Dlx genes in
several annelid species and examine Dlx gene expression in the polychaete Pomatoceros lamarckii.
Results: Two Dlx genes are present in P. lamarckii, Capitella teleta and Helobdella robusta. The C. teleta Dlx genes
are closely linked in an inverted tail-to-tail orientation, reminiscent of the arrangement of vertebrate Dlx pairs, and
gene conversion appears to have had a role in their evolution. The H. robusta Dlx genes, however, are not on the
same genomic scaffold and display divergent sequences, while, if the P. lamarckii genes are linked in a tail-to-tail
orientation they are a minimum of 41 kilobases apart and show no sign of gene conversion. No expression in P.
lamarckii appendage development has been observed, which conflicts with the supposed conserved role of these
genes in animal appendage development. These Dlx duplications do not appear to be annelid-wide, as the
polychaete Platynereis dumerilii likely possesses only one Dlx gene.
Conclusions: On the basis of the currently accepted annelid phylogeny, we hypothesise that one Dlx duplication
occurred in the annelid lineage after the divergence of P. dumerilii from the other lineages and these duplicates
then had varied evolutionary fates in different species. We also propose that the ancestral role of Dlx genes is not
related to appendage development.

Background
Dlx genes are homeobox genes that were first discovered in Drosophila melanogaster [1] and are best known
for their role in appendage development in a wide range
of taxa [2-4]. This role is one of several, however, as Dlx
genes also have roles in nervous system development
and early embryogenesis [2,5-10]. Dlx genes are widespread throughout Metazoa and are found in early
branching lineages such as cnidarians [11-13] and placozoans [14]. It appears, therefore, that the Dlx gene
evolved early in metazoan evolution, before the divergence of protostomes and deuterostomes, but probably
after the divergence of sponges, which most likely lack a
Dlx gene [15].

* Correspondence: dekf@st-andrews.ac.uk
1
The Scottish Oceans Institute, University of St Andrews, East Sands, St
Andrews KY16 8LB, UK
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

Only one Dlx gene has been discovered in the genome
thus far in protostomes, echinoderms, and cephalochordates [6,10,16]. Therefore, it is likely that a single copy
of the gene is the ancestral state for bilaterians. Mice
and humans have three pairs of Dlx genes, which exist
in a tail-to-tail arrangement linked to a Hox cluster (the
HoxC cluster has no linked Dlx genes; [2]). It is thought
that the ancestral chordate Dlx gene was linked to the
Hox cluster, underwent a gene-specific duplication and
inversion, and the Dlx gene pair was then duplicated
during the whole genome duplications that occurred in
the vertebrate lineage [2,17,18]. In support of this
hypothesis, it appears that Dlx2, Dlx3 and Dlx5 form
one paralogous group and that Dlx1, Dlx4 and Dlx6
form another [17,19]. The urochordate Ciona intestinalis possesses three Dlx genes, two of which are arranged
in a tail-to-tail orientation. All three of the genes are
closely linked to CiHox13 and CiHox12 (the Hox cluster
is dispersed in C. intestinalis, and CiHox13 and

© 2011 McDougall et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

McDougall et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:241
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/241

CiHox12 exist as a bigene cluster; [20]). The divergent
nature of the C. intestinalis Dlx sequences has made the
deduction of clear gene orthologies difficult, but it is
thought that the paired ascidian Dlx genes are a result
of the same duplication that led to the paired arrangement of Dlx genes in the vertebrates [20]. The cephalochordate amphioxus possesses only one Dlx gene, which
is linked to the Hox cluster [21] and is thought to represent the pre-Dlx duplication state. To date, there are no
documented cases of Dlx gene duplications outside the
chordates.
The bulk of our knowledge about Dlx gene expression,
function, and genomic location is from vertebrates,
where Dlx has a large range of roles, including the control of limb formation, differentiation of neuronal subsets and various novel functions relating to the neural
crest, such as the development of craniofacial structures
(reviewed in [2]). Much less is understood about Dlx
genes in invertebrates, but the information that is available comes primarily from D. melanogaster, and partly
from other arthropods and the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans [5,6,22-24], all of which belong to only one of
the two protostome super-phyla, the Ecdysozoa. Our
understanding of Dlx in the second protostome superphylum, the Lophotrochozoa, is more rudimentary. A
cross-reactive Dlx antibody [25] has been used in both
molluscs and annelids, and distinct staining patterns are
consistent with these organisms possessing a Dlx gene
[3,9]. Fragments of Dlx have been cloned from two molluscs [26], and a Dlx gene has been isolated in the annelids P. dumerilii [27] and Neanthes arenaceodentata
[28]. Interestingly, the three Dlx expression studies performed in annelids show somewhat different expression
patterns; in Chaetopterus variopedatus the Dlx antibody
recognises regions in the parapodial rudiments as well
as in the neurogenic ectoderm [3], in N. arenaceodentata in-situ hybridisation shows NvDll expression in the
proximal part of appendages and in the brain [28],
whereas in P. dumerilii in-situ hybridisation indicates
that PduDlx (referred to in the original paper as
PduDlx1) is expressed in broad regions in the lateral
ectoderm which is interpreted to be at the border of
neurogenic and non-neurogenic ectoderm [27]. Each of
these studies examine restricted developmental stages,
making comparisons between the organisms difficult.
Thus, the function of Dlx in annelids is poorly understood, as is the extent of its variation between species.
In addition, there is no published information about the
genomic organisation of Dlx genes in any lophotrochozoan species.
Here we undertake a survey of Dlx genes in the polychaete annelids P. lamarckii and P. dumerilii, and identify Dlx genes in the genome assemblies of C. teleta and
H. robusta. All of these species, with the exception of P.

Page 2 of 16

dumerilii, possess two Dlx genes. In C. teleta, the two
Dlx genes exhibit a vertebrate-like tail-tail gene pair
arrangement and show evidence of gene conversion,
whereas there is no evidence for the close linkage of P.
lamarckii or H. robusta Dlx genes, which correlates with
a lack of evidence for gene conversion in these species.
We propose that a duplication of an ancestral Dlx gene
took place early in annelid evolution, after the divergence of the P. dumerilii lineage from the other annelid
lineages, and the subsequent divergence of the fates of
these duplicated genes. The P. lamarckii genes are
expressed in presumptive neural cells, but are not
detected during appendage development. The duplication of Dlx genes and their apparent absence from
appendage development mean that further characterisation of invertebrate Dlx genes is needed, and that evolutionary scenarios based on the assumption of single Dlx
genes in protostomes and a near universal role in
appendage development need to be re-assessed.

Results
P. lamarckii Dlx genes

Shotgun sequencing of Dlx positive phage clones and
subsequent RACE on identified homeodomain
sequences revealed two distinct genes with homology to
Dlx. PlaDlxa [Genbank: accession numbers JN175271
and JN175273] encodes a 380 amino acid protein,
whereas PlaDlxb [Genbank: accession numbers
JN175272 and JN175274] encodes a 396 amino acid
protein. Each gene encodes a 60 amino acid homeodomain and is comprised of three exons, with the second
intron between amino acids 44 and 45 of the homeodomain (Figure 1). Phylogenetic analysis clearly places
both genes within the Dlx clade (Figure 2). Genomic
walking by library screening focussed on determining
whether these genes are linked in a tail-to-tail arrangement and demonstrates that, if so, the two genes are a
minimum of 41 kb apart (Figure 1). Southern hybridisation and direct sequencing of other Dlx positive phage
clones failed to identify any additional Dlx sequences.
In-situ hybridisation of PlaDlxa and PlaDlxb showed
that both genes are expressed in isolated cells in the
early embryo, and in the apical ectoderm, prototroch,
lateral ectoderm, ventral nerve cords, apical organ, suboesophageal ganglion and in a band around the stomach
in the trochophore larva (Figure 3A-N). At the metatrochophore stage, expression of both genes becomes
punctate and is primarily located in discrete cells in the
vicinity of the stomach (Figure 3O,P). In early juvenile
(post-metamorphosis) animals, PlaDlxa and PlaDlxb
continue to be expressed in cells around the stomach; in
older animals the majority of expression can be found
in discrete cells near the intestine (Figure 3Q-T). No
expression is observed in the parapodia at any stage. In

McDougall et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:241
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/241

Page 3 of 16

Figure 1 Genomic arrangement of annelid Dlx genes. Exons are indicated by boxes, introns are indicated by lines adjoining these. Distances
are given in kb, the homeodomain is shaded in black. The distance to the end of the scaffold or contig is indicated at the ends of each
schematic.

general, the expression of the two genes is very similar,
although there may be down-regulation of the expression of PlaDlxb at the early trochophore stage whilst
PlaDlxa is still detectable (Figure 3 G,H). In all cases
where Dlx is detected, the precise pattern of cells
expressing Dlx genes is variable between individuals,
suggesting expression of Dlx is transient and dynamic.
Control hybridisations with two non-overlapping probes
for each gene gave consistent, comparable results (data
not shown) and the same protocol with different genes
gave clearly distinct staining patterns, as well as hybridisations with no probe producing no staining at all
(Additional File 1).
The ElaV gene is a commonly used neuronal differentiation marker. We isolated a 670 bp region of this gene
[Genbank: accession number JN175270], phylogenetic
analyses show that it is closely related to P. dumerilii
ElaV (Additional File 2). PlaElaV was also expressed in
a punctate pattern in the stomach of juvenile P.
lamarckii animals, reminiscent of the pattern seen for
the P. lamarckii Dlx genes (Figure 3U).
C. teleta Dlx genes

BLAST searches of the C. teleta trace files on NCBI and
Genscan predictions based on genomic sequence of
both the assembled genome on the JGI website and of a
genomic contig generated manually from trace files
resulted in the identification of two putative Dlx genes.
One of these genes shares some conserved sequence
motifs with PlaDlxa (see below and Figure 4) and also
groups with it in the phylogenetic trees (see Figure 2),
therefore we have designated it CtDlxa. The second
gene appears more divergent and has hence been named
CtDlxb. While the majority of the sequence of CtDlxa
and CtDlxb is quite divergent from each other, sequence

similarity within the homeodomains is very high. Specifically, the nucleotide sequence of the homeoboxes are
identical 5’ of the homeobox intron (and for the first 12
nucleotides of this intron), and there are only three
nucleotide differences at the 3’ end, giving an overall
similarity of 98.4% within this region.
While several different gene models are put forward
for each gene, the Fgenesh ab initio models (CtDlxa:
fgenesh1_pg.C_scaffold_237000015, CtDlxb: fgenesh1_pg.C_scaffold_237000013) predict an intron-exon
structure typical for Dlx genes (three exons, with the
second intron located between amino acids 44 and 45 of
the homeodomain, Figure 1). As there are no EST
sequences corresponding to either CtDlxa or CtDlxb
these predictions cannot currently be confirmed. CtDlxa
and CtDlxb are located adjacent to each other in a tailto-tail orientation on scaffold 237 of the whole genome
assembly. In this assembly, the intergenic distance is
18,352 bp, however there are some gaps within this
region. In order to confirm the gene arrangement and
intergenic distance, we completed our own assembly of
C. teleta genomic trace files spanning these genes. This
de novo assembly confirmed the tail-to-tail orientation
of CtDlxa and CtDlxb, and puts the intergenic distance
at 18,202 bp. It must be noted that some prediction
methods identify a gene within this intergenic region
(fgenesh1_pg.C_scaffold_237000014). However, this is
only predicted by a few of the methods, it has no
homology to any known sequence, and is not confirmed
by EST’s. We therefore consider it to be a false
prediction.
H. robusta Dlx genes

As with C. teleta, BLAST searches of the H. robusta
trace files on NCBI and Genscan predictions based on

McDougall et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:241
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/241

Page 4 of 16

Figure 2 Neighbour-joining analysis of the phylogenetic relationships of annelid Dlx genes. JTT method of substitution with 1000
bootstrap replicates. Percentage of bootstrap support is shown when over 50%, followed by Bayesian posterior probability values where these
are over 70%. The trees are rooted with BfMsx, branch lengths are to scale (scale = substitutions/site). Sequences from representative species
include Anopheles gambiae (arthropod), Athalia rosae (arthropod), Branchiostoma floridae (cephalochordate), Caenorhabditis elegans (nematode),
Ciona intestinalis (ascidian), Drosophila melanogaster (arthropod), Daphnia pulex (crustacean), Homo sapiens (vertebrate), Lottia gigantea (mollusc),
Mus musculus (vertebrate), Neanthes arenaceodentata (annelid), Nematostella vectensis (cnidarian), Ptychodera flava (hemichordate), Petromyzon
marinus (chordate), Saccoglossus kowalevski (hemichordate), Strongylocentrotus purpuratus (echinoderm), Trichoplax adhaerens (placozoan),
Tribolium castaneum (arthropod). Sequences that are the subject of this study are boxed. A. Analysis including highly divergent sequences. There
is some support for the homology of C. teleta and P. lamarckii Dlxa sequences but the relationships of the other annelid Dlx sequences are
unknown. H. robusta Dlxa and Dlb group together with other sequences with longer branch lengths, possibly as a result of long branch
attraction. B. Analysis excluding highly divergent sequences. As well as the grouping of C. teleta and P. lamarckii Dlxa genes, the Dlxb genes of
these two species now also show an affinity, but without strong support values.

McDougall et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:241
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/241

Page 5 of 16

Figure 3 PlaDlxa and PlaDlxb expression during P. lamarckii development. Scale bars = 50 μm. The mouth (m) is indicated as a reference
point. A. Early embryo, brightfield. PlaDlxa expression is higher in some cells, which seem to vary between individuals. B. Same embryo as A, DIC.
The prototroch is apparent, therefore these Dlx positive cells are mid-lateral. C. Early embryo, brightfield. PlaDlxb is expressed in multiple cells. D.
Same embryo as C, DIC. Prototroch and apical tuft are clear, therefore PlaDlxb expression is in both episphere and hyposphere. E. Early trochophore,
lateral view focused on episphere. PlaDlxa is expressed in apical ectoderm and prototroch. F. Same larva as E, hyposphere in focus. PlaDlxa is also
expressed in lateral ectoderm. G. Early trochophore, lateral view. No PlaDlxb expression is detected. H. Early trochophore, more developed than G.
No PlaDlxb expression is detected. The small patch of colouration in the intestinal lumen is attributable to background staining. I. Complete
trochophore, lateral view. PlaDlxa is expressed in ventral nerve cords, lateral ectoderm, and a band around the stomach (arrowhead). J. Same larva
as I, different focal plane. PlaDlxa is expressed in the suboesophageal ganglion and apical organ. The broad band around the stomach is still visible
(arrowhead). K. Complete trochophore, ventral view. PlaDlxa expression in the prototroch is clear, as is the band around the stomach (arrowhead)
and the lateral ectoderm. L. Complete trochophore, lateral view. PlaDlxb is expressed in the suboesophageal ganglion, ventral nerve cords, and a
ring around the stomach (arrowhead). M. Complete trochophore, apical-lateral view. PlaDlxb is expressed in apical ectoderm, apical organ and
prototroch. N. Complete trochophore, lateral view. PlaDlxb is expressed in the apical organ, suboesophageal ganglion, ventral nerve cords and
intestine. O. Metatrochophore, lateral view. PlaDlxa has a punctate pattern throughout the animal. P. Metatrochophore, ventral view. PlaDlxb is
primarily expressed in cells in the stomach area. Q. Young juvenile, ventral view. PlaDlxa is expressed in cells associated with the stomach. R. Young
juvenile, dorsal view. PlaDlxb is expressed in cells associated with the stomach. S. Posterior of older juvenile, ventral view. PlaDlxa expression is in
cells in the stomach, intestinal region, in individual cells in the pygidium and between intestinal folds (arrowhead). T. Posterior of older juvenile,
ventral view. PlaDlxb expressing cells in the intestinal region. U. Older juvenile, PlaElaV (a neural marker) expression shown for comparison. PlaElaV is
expressed in cells associated with the stomach, in some cells in the intestinal region, and in some cells in the parapodia (arrowhead). Apical
ectoderm (ae), apical organ (ao), apical tuft (at), branchial crown (bc), intestine (i), lateral ectoderm (le), operculum (op), prototroch (pt), pygidium
(py), stomach (st), suboesophageal ganglion (sg), ventral nerve cords (vnc).

McDougall et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:241
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/241

Page 6 of 16

Figure 4 Conserved Dlx motifs. Alignment of representative sequences, beneath each alignment is a sequence logo corresponding to the
alignment of all Dlx sequences used to generate the phylogenetic tree in Fig 1. The overall height of each column corresponds to the overall
sequence conservation at that position, and the height of each letter corresponds to the overall frequency of that amino acid. Sequence logos
were created using Weblogo [93]. A. Homeodomain alignment of representative Dlx genes. B. Conserved residues upstream of the
homeodomain. Note the shared gap in CtDlxa, CtDlxb and PlaDlxa (underlined) C. The SKSAFME motif, located close to the N-terminus of the
protein. A similar motif can be found in the same location in BfMsx. D. The YPY motif. E and F. Two conserved tryptophan residues are found
downstream of the homeodomain, the first is generally followed by an aspartic acid, and the second by a tyrosine. G. Hydrophobic terminal
motif, at or near the C-terminal of the protein. Species abbreviations are as follows: Branchiostoma floridae (Bf), Caenorhabditis elegans (Ce), Ciona
intestinalis (Ci), Drosophila melanogaster (Dm), Lottia gigantea (Lg), Mus musculus (Mm), Nematostella vectensis (Nv), Trichoplax adhaerens (Tad).

genomic sequence of the assembled genome on the JGI
website resulted in the identification of two putative Dlx
genes. Both sequences group with other Dlx genes in
phylogenetic trees (Figure 2A). Outside the homeodomain, there is very little conservation between either H.
robusta Dlx gene and any other Dlx gene; the genes
have therefore been arbitrarily designated HrDlxa and
HrDlb. None of the gene models in the JGI assembly
appear to predict the correct coding sequence for either
HrDlxa or HrDlb (the sequences are either truncated or
missing part of the homeobox, but see fgenesh4_pg.
C_scaffold_92000036 for the best prediction of HrDlxa,
and fgenesh4_pg.C_scaffold_41000062 for the best prediction of HrDlb), and there are no corresponding EST

sequences for this region. The coding sequences were
therefore predicted by running approximately 10 kb of
surrounding sequence through the GENSCAN program,
which indicates that both genes are comprised of three
exons with the second intron located between amino
acids 44 and 45 of the homeodomain (Figure 1). In each
case the sequences are much longer than the other
annelid Dlx sequences (HrDlxa and HrDlb encode predicted proteins of 860 and 871 amino acids, respectively), and contain many poly-amino acid tracts,
predominately polyglutamine.
HrDlxa can be found on scaffold 92, which is 486 kb
in length. Fgenesh ab initio models predict a homeoboxcontaining neighbour of this gene, a likely Pknox family

McDougall et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:241
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/241

member. This gene is 23 kb away from HrDlxa and
there are two other predicted genes in this intergenic
distance. This is the only other homeobox gene on this
scaffold. HrDlb can be found on scaffold 41, which is
1.73 Mb in length. There are no other homeobox genes
on this scaffold. From the genome assembly it is clear
that the two H. robusta Dlx genes are not closely linked;
if they are on the same chromosome the minimum distance between the two genes is approximately 659 kb.
P. dumerilii Dlx genes

A Dlx gene (PduDlx - Genbank AM114774) has previously been identified from P. dumerilii, it consists of five
exons, including two microexons (which differs from the
previously mentioned Dlx genes, Figure 1). Library screening was performed to determine whether a second Dlx
gene is present in the P. dumerilii genome. All BAC and
phage clones that produced a positive signal possessed
PduDlx, no additional Dlx sequences were obtained.
One PduDlx positive BAC clone has previously been
completely sequenced [29], Genbank CT030672. This
sequence was run through the online Genscan program
[30] in order to predict open reading frames (ORFs). 10
ORFs were predicted by Genscan, none of these contained a homeobox sequence. Two of the predicted
open reading frames are similar to each other (22%
identity, 49% positives) and both show high similarity to
the ‘ORF2’ region of a zebrafish LINE element (accession AB211149; [31], Additional Files 3, 4 and 5).
Conserved Dlx motifs

In addition to the homeodomain and a number of amino
acids adjacent to it (the ‘extended homeodomain’), there
are several other regions of conservation within the Dlx
protein (Figure 4). The most notable of these is located
close to the N-terminal of the protein and has been designated the ‘SKSAFME’ motif. This domain is present in
most Dlx genes except for those in Nematostella vectensis,
C. intestinalis, Strongylocentrotus purpuratus and H.
robusta (the Petromyzon marinus sequences appear to be
incomplete at the 5’ end of the gene and were therefore
excluded). The mammalian Dlx 2/3/5 clade possesses some
residues with identity to this motif but lack the full
sequence. A similar sequence is also found at the N-terminal of the B. floridae Msx gene which was included in this
study as an outgroup. Other conserved motifs include the
‘YPY’ motif, which is N-terminal to the homeodomain, two
regions of conservation each surrounding a tryptophan
residue C-terminal to the homeodomain, and a hydrophobic domain at or near the C-terminus of the protein.
Evolutionary relationships between annelid Dlx sequences

In order to understand the relationship between the various Dlx genes and duplicates discovered above, a

Page 7 of 16

neighbour joining tree was created using an alignment
of the homeodomain and its flanking sequences as well
as some of the conserved motifs mentioned above from
a range of taxa (for alignment see Additional File 6).
Bayesian analysis was also performed. The resulting tree
(Figure 2A) recovers the expected topology for mammalian Dlx genes, grouping Dlx 2/3/5 and Dlx 1/4/6
(although the latter group had weak bootstrap support).
Arthropod Dlx genes formed a clade (with the exclusion
of Tribolium castaneum Dll which had weak support)
and the two hemichordate Dlx genes (Saccoglossus
kowalevskii Dll and Ptychodera flava Dlx) were grouped
together with high support. Annelid Dlx genes were
generally not grouped together, although CtDlxa and
PlaDlxa formed a well-supported clade. Several of the
more divergent sequences (such as the C. intestinalis
and H. robusta Dlx genes) were grouped together, suggestive of long branch attraction. The analysis was
therefore repeated without these genes, which resulted
in very little change to the topology of the tree, except
that PlaDlxb now grouped with CtDlxb with low support (Figure 2B).
Gene conversion in C. teleta

From the Dlx sequence alignments it became apparent
that the two C. teleta Dlx genes demonstrated extremely
high sequence similarity in the homeodomain region.
This similarity was also observed at the nucleotide level.
In order to examine whether this was a general feature
of Dlx genes in taxa where two Dlx genes exist in an
inverted pair, alignments of the nucleotide sequences of
the homeoboxes were performed for each pair in each
species (Figure 5). From this alignment, it is evident that
the sequence identity seen between the two C. teleta
genes does not exist in any of the other gene pairs
investigated.
In order to test the significance of the amount of
identity seen in the C. teleta Dlx genes, nucleotide
alignments were run through the program Geneconv
[32], see Additional File 7 for results. This program
identified a fragment of 150 bp (corresponding to the
5’ part of the homeodomain and part of the intronic
sequence) which is highly likely to be undergoing gene
conversion in CtDlxa and CtDlxb. A second region
corresponding to the 3’ part of the homeodomain was
also identified, however this had a tract length of only
31 bp. Ten other significant tracts were identified in
both the C. teleta and P. lamarckii Dlx genes, however
these were very short, ranging from 21-10 bp in length.
The biological significance of these is uncertain given
the level of sequence conservation normally seen in
homeoboxes. The GC content of the tracts identified
by Geneconv did not differ from the remainder of the
sequence.

McDougall et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:241
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/241

Page 8 of 16

Figure 5 Sequence similarity at the nucleotide level in paired Dlx genes. Pairwise alignments of the homeobox from Dlx genes that are
arranged as inverted pairs, as well as H. robusta and P. lamarckii Dlx genes. Conserved nucleotides are indicated by a dot. Nucleotide similarity is
strikingly higher in the C. teleta Dlx genes than in any other gene pair.

Discussion
Functions of conserved Dlx motifs

The identification of several Dlx genes from annelids
and comparisons with other taxa allowed the identification of several highly conserved domains within these
sequences. These regions of amino acid conservation in
Dlx genes from distantly related taxa are presumably
functionally important. The SKSAFME domain is particularly well conserved and is situated close to the Nterminal of the protein. In many other homeodomain
containing genes, a domain in this position is responsible for transcriptional regulation of downstream targets
[33-35]. This domain has been identified individually in
many classes of homeodomain genes and therefore is
known by several names, including the Hep motif [35],
octapeptide [36], TN domain [37], eh1 homology region
[33,38], SNAG domain [39] and NK decapeptide [40]. A
similar domain (HNF-3) is found in unrelated Forkhead
genes [41]. Apart from their shared location within the
gene, some sequence similarity is evident when many
different domains are aligned (see Additional File 8,
adapted from [42], consensus sequences from
[33,35-38,41]). The SKSAFME domain found in Dlx
genes has previously been called the ‘Hep’ domain
[14,43], and shows some sequence similarity to these
regions (particularly those found in Vent and Msx
genes) in the alignment. It is therefore possible that the
SKSAFME domain in Dlx genes functions to control
transcription of downstream target genes.
As well as the Hep motif, many homeobox genes also
encode a conserved hexapeptide motif located N-terminal of the homeodomain which encodes a central tryptophan residue [38,44]. This motif, which is also called
the PID domain, is involved in binding PBX protein
cofactors, increasing the specificity of DNA binding by
the homeodomain [45,46]. No conserved motifs

containing a tryptophan can be found upstream of the
homeodomain in Dlx genes, however the two conserved
tryptophan residues 3’ of the homeodomain (Figure 4)
may fulfil this cofactor binding role.
Annelid Dlx duplicates - one duplication?

To date, duplicated Dlx genes have only been found in
chordate lineages, therefore the discovery of multiple
Dlx genes in several annelid lineages is surprising. In
particular, the similarity in arrangement of C. teleta Dlx
genes with those found in chordates (i.e., in an inverted
tail-to-tail pair) is intriguing and poses the question of
whether the annelid and chordate Dlx pairs arose as the
result of an ancient Dlx duplication which has been followed by the loss of one gene in multiple other lineages
(for example, in ecdysozoans, ambulacrarians and cephalochordates). Also there is a question as to whether
there is some kind of selective advantage or constraint
associated with having tandem duplicates linked in this
way, or whether the arrangement has occurred by
chance alone.
The phylogenetic analysis presented here does not
present any evidence to suggest that the chordate and
annelid Dlx genes arose from a common gene duplication, but there is limited resolution due to the relatively
short sequence aligned and few phylogenetically informative residues, a problem commonly encountered with
Dlx phylogenetic trees [28,47]. In any case, there is no
evidence of close linkages of annelid Dlx genes with
Hox genes, unlike the situation seen in chordates; the
Pknox gene found near HrDlxa is distantly related to
the Hox genes and unlikely to be significant, and while
PduDlx is on the same chromosome as the Hox cluster
in P. dumerilii, it is quite distant from it (Hui et al., submitted). While P. dumerilii and, presumably, the closely
related N. arenaceodentata, appear to possess only one

McDougall et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:241
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/241

Dlx gene, all other annelids examined in this study possess two. These annelid duplicates could be the result of
1) independent duplications, 2) of a pre-annelid duplication followed by gene loss in P. dumerilii, or 3) by a
duplication that occurred after the divergence of the P.
dumerilii lineage from that of the other annelids studied.
We favour the third scenario, given the grouping of
PlaDlxa and CtDlxa (and, to a lesser extent, PlaDlxb and
CtDlxb) in the phylogenetic trees and the similarities
seen within the sequences, i.e. the possession of one relatively prototypical Dlx gene which possesses the common
motifs, and one more divergent Dlx. In addition, the C.
teleta and P. lamarckii Dlx genes share some unusual
changes, such as a deletion in the extended homeodomain motif, and a shared aspartic acid at the end of their
SKSAFME motif (see Figure 4). We therefore tentatively
conclude that the presence of two Dlx genes in these species is a consequence of a single duplication in the ancestor of C. teleta and P. lamarckii, rather than the slightly
less well supported possibility that independent duplications in each lineage were followed by the divergence of
one gene and the stasis of the other. The H. robusta Dlx
genes are quite divergent from other annelid Dlx genes,
therefore it is unclear whether the Dlx genes of H.
robusta arose in an independent duplication or whether
they may also be descended from a single duplication
that gave rise to the C. teleta and P. lamarckii Dlx genes.
If the C. teleta, P. lamarckii, and possibly the H.
robusta Dlx genes arose in a single duplication, is the

Page 9 of 16

sole Dlx gene in P. dumerilii a result of gene loss or
divergence in the nereid lineage prior to the duplication?
A recent paper has examined relationships between
annelid families, and has demonstrated that, in general,
annelids belong to one of two major clades, the Errantia
(which includes P. dumerilii), or the Sedentaria (which
includes C. teleta, P. lamarckii and H. robusta) [48].
Therefore, the most parsimonious hypothesis using the
available data is that P. dumerilii diverged prior to a
duplication in the lineage leading to C. teleta, H. robusta
and possibly P. lamarckii (Figure 6). Further information
regarding the Dlx gene complement of other Errantia
species is required to confirm this proposal.
If the chordate and annelid duplicates are indeed independent, then the duplicated Dlx genes have converged
on the same tail-to-tail genomic arrangement in at least
two independent events. There are several other examples of homeobox genes being organised in this convergently transcribed manner, such as the engrailed and
invected genes in hexapods [49], and the iroquois genes
in multiple organisms [50,51]; these show both tail-totail and head-to-head organisation. Therefore, it appears
that having duplicates arranged in this way occurs often
and may well have some kind of selective advantage or
constraint. Sharing of enhancer elements has been proposed for the engrailed and iroquois examples mentioned above, and, in vertebrates, enhancer sharing has
been demonstrated for the Dlx1/2 and Dlx5/6 gene
pairs [52-55]. Such enhancer sharing can result in

Figure 6 Hypothesized location of the Dlx gene duplication in an annelid phylogeny. The annelids depicted are restricted to those
examined for Dlx content in this work. The topology of the phylogeny is based upon [48].

McDougall et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:241
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/241

similar expression patterns, and may lead to selective
advantage by allowing more precise transcriptional control of similar transcripts that act in a combinatorial
manner, such as the Hox genes [56-59]. Therefore, the
paired C. teleta and chordate Dlx genes may be the
result of parallel evolution of a favourable gene arrangement. It is interesting to note that the P. lamarckii Dlx
genes have very similar expression patterns, it will be
interesting to discover whether this is due to linkage
and enhancer sharing of the two genes once more genomic data is available.
Duplicated annelid Dlx genes have divergent fates

CtDlxa and CtDlxb are closely linked in a tail-to-tail
organisation and are predicted to encode two quite
divergent proteins. Despite this, there is 100% similarity
between the nucleotide sequences of the C. teleta Dlx
genes in the 5’ (pre-intron) part of the homeobox, and
in the 5’ part of the intra-homeobox intron. There is
also high similarity in the 3’ part of the homeobox. The
striking nucleotide identity between the two copies is
higher than expected even if the sequences were constrained due to selection, especially as there is also conservation in silent sites. In addition, if selection were
responsible for the maintenance of sequence a higher
degree of similarity would be expected between C. teleta
Dlx genes and those from other, related species. Figure
5 shows that this is clearly not the case. An alternative
explanation is that the similarity is due to the genes
being a product of a recent duplication, however this is
unlikely as the remainder of the gene exhibits a high
level of divergence.
This unexpectedly high level of conservation and the
closely linked and inverted physical arrangement of the
two genes (which is reminiscent of many other examples
of unexpected nucleotide conservation in duplicated
genes in the literature) is consistent with a proximitybased gene conversion mechanism. Gene conversion is
the ‘non-reciprocal transfer of information from one
DNA duplex to another’ [60], and concerted evolution
by gene conversion has been documented in several D.
melanogaster gene duplicates, such as Hsp70 and Hsp82
[61,62], a-amylase [63,64], and trypsin [65], and also in
putative antimicrobial proteins in C. elegans [66] and
within the extensive palindromic sequences on human
and chimp Y chromosomes [67]. Each of these examples
documents gene conversion between genes that are closely linked in an inverted orientation. Examples of gene
conversion in non-inverted duplicates also exist, for
example, Nv1 neurotoxin genes in N. vectensis [68] and
rRNA genes in D. melanogaster [69], as do examples of
conversion of genes on different chromosomes [70].
Gene conversion could therefore explain the high
nucleotide identity between the two C. teleta Dlx genes.

Page 10 of 16

The program Geneconv is a statistical test for gene conversion, and it identifies 4 tracts that are likely to have
undergone gene conversion in the C. teleta Dlx
sequences and 8 tracts in the P. lamarckii Dlx
sequences. However, the majority of these tracts are
extremely short. It is likely that a minimum length of
sequence homology is required for gene conversion to
take place, it has been reported that at least 50 bp of
homology are required ( [71] and references therein)
and other studies have used a minimum tract length of
100 bp to search for genes undergoing gene conversion
[72]. Despite this, very short (< 12 bp) gene conversion
tract lengths have been reported for yeast [73]. In addition, the identification of gene conversion based on
sequence similarity is complicated by the fact that the
homeobox is a highly conserved sequence, therefore
tracts of homology could occur by chance. Given that
CtDlxb and Homo sapiens Dlx1 exhibit a tract of perfect
homology of 25 bp, it is clear that this degree of similarity is indeed possible and can occur by chance alone. It
is therefore likely that the phenomenon of gene conversion is restricted only to the 5’ part of the homeobox
and some of the adjoining intron of CtDlxa and CtDlxb,
and possibly also to the 3’ part of the homeodomain, i.e,
the region of the gene which is most highly conserved
across taxa. This ‘mosaic’ pattern of gene conversion
within a gene is well documented [72], and gene conversion in homeobox genes has been described before, in
the hexapod engrailed and invected genes [49]. While
duplicated Dlx genes are seen elsewhere in the animal
kingdom, the C. teleta Dlx genes are the only known
example where gene conversion seems to be taking
place (see Figure 5). The mammalian genes, despite also
being arranged in a tail-to-tail orientation and having a
shorter intergenic distance [53,55] show a much higher
level of sequence divergence in the homeobox. This
might be explained by higher rates of evolution in these
genes, which would allow them to ‘escape’ gene conversion [66,74]. Mammalian Dlx4 genes have been shown
to have elevated sequence divergence (in comparison to
other mammalian Dlx genes), possibly due to reduced
selection pressure because of the redundancy that exists
within mammalian Dlx genes [75]. This redundancy
may also allow elevated evolution rates in the other
mammalian Dlx genes.
Within the annelids, H. robusta and P. lamarckii also
have duplicated Dlx genes which do not appear to be
subject to gene conversion. The H. robusta genes are
not closely linked, are much longer than Dlx genes
found in other species, and lack most of the conserved
motifs found in other Dlx genes. It therefore appears
that the H. robusta Dlx genes have been subject to
much higher rates of evolution than those of other
annelid species, and that any selective pressure or

McDougall et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:241
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/241

constraint to keep the Dlx duplicates together has been
overcome in this species.
While the genomic arrangement of P. lamarckii Dlx
genes is unknown, they are at least 41 kb apart if they
are tail to tail, or 8.5 kb apart if they are head to head.
Therefore, if they are linked in a tail to tail orientation
they are not as closely linked as the C. teleta Dlx gene
pair. There is no evidence of gene conversion between
PlaDlxa and PlaDlxb. While PlaDlxa shows similar
branch lengths to CtDlxa, the branch lengths of PlaDlxb
are significantly longer, indicating a higher rate of evolution of this particular gene. The similar expression patterns of PlaDlxa and PlaDlxb indicate that the two
genes may be co-expressed, possibly pointing to shared
cis-regulatory sequences if the two genes are indeed
linked.
Regardless of whether they are the result of a single or
multiple gene duplications, the paired Dlx genes of these
annelid species are not behaving in a similar manner
post-duplication. In the current post-genomic era, largescale studies are being conducted in order to understand
the dynamics of gene duplication and the effects of
these events on the evolution of the organisms involved.
General trends have been difficult to identify, and it
appears that the chances of a newly duplicated gene
being retained in the genome is a largely neutral process
[76]. From the example of duplicated Dlx genes in annelids, we can once again observe that there is no general
pattern evident in their sequence evolution that explains
the behaviour of duplicated genes.
The role of Dlx genes in annelid development

This study has found that Dlx genes are unlikely to be
playing a major role in appendage formation in P.
lamarckii. Throughout development, PlaDlxa and
PlaDlxb are expressed in what is interpreted to be
neural tissue, but the expression is dynamic and turned
off in various structures (such as the ventral nerve
cords) after their formation. We therefore hypothesise
that PlaDlxa and PlaDlxb are involved in the differentiation of the nervous system. In support of this, the P.
lamarckii homologue of ElaV, a neural differentiation
marker [27,77,78] is expressed in a punctate and
dynamic pattern in the juvenile stomach, which is very
similar to Dlx.
While Dlx is expressed in the parapodia of another
polychaete, C. variopedatus [3], it is not clear that this
expression is indicative of a role in the process of
appendage formation or if it is associated with the
development of sensory or neural structures. Indeed, in
N. arenaceodentata, Dlx expression observed at the base
of the parapodia is interpreted as being associated with
the parapodial ganglia [28]. In all four annelids studied
to date, Dlx expression is observed in what is assumed

Page 11 of 16

to be developing neural tissue. Dlx expression is also
observed in early embryogenesis in P. lamarckii; where
this has been demonstrated in other organisms it has
been implicated in the control of cellular movements
during gastrulation [8-10,79]. Despite the expression of
P. lamarckii Dlx genes in widely conserved expression
domains, the absence of an appendage formation role is
surprising. There is a possibility that a third P. lamarckii
Dlx gene exists and is involved in appendage formation
(however this is unlikely given the thoroughness of the
screening) or that the lack of Dlx expression in the
appendages in P. lamarckii represents a taxon specific
loss.
It is important to note that while Dlx is expressed in
the appendages of many organisms, in some cases ‘limb’
Dlx is more likely to be playing a role in limb-associated
neural structures [5]. In some cases it has been shown
that Dlx is not an absolute requirement for appendage
outgrowth. Dlx knockouts have been performed in spiders; in injected embryos appendages do form but they
lack the most distal region [23]. In fact, some arthropod
appendages do not exhibit any Dlx expression at all
[80]. The vertebrate condition is complicated by the
redundant nature of the multiple Dlx genes, and single
gene mutants have no visible defects in limb formation.
Combinatorial Dlx mutants exhibit malformations of the
distal limb (reviewed in [2]), but the limb itself still
forms. Therefore, the ‘conserved’ appendage function of
Dlx genes relates to its role in the development of the
distal appendage. Perhaps, then, the distal appendage
has been lost in the evolution of annelid parapodia, or
gained independently in arthropods and vertebrates.
There are clear examples of the Dlx gene being coopted into the formation of novel appendage-like structures, such as echinoderm tube feet and ascidian
siphons [3,81], so a gain of function in both arthropods
and vertebrates is certainly possible.
Dlx is associated with the nervous system in a multitude of taxa. Therefore, this is a much more likely
ancestral role for the gene than is limb formation. This
is supported by the very early origin of the gene in
metazoan diversification, i.e, prior to the radiation of
bilaterians, the ancestor of which may have lacked limbs
altogether (see [5] for discussion]. However, in some
cases Dlx expression has been observed very early in
embryogenesis [[8,9], this study], therefore we suggest
that the ancestral role of Dlx could also be in a specific
type of morphogenetic process that is utilised in numerous ways throughout animal development. A similar
hypothesis has been put forward by Irvine and colleagues [20]. One potential morphological process is evagination, as Dlx expression is seen during early embryonic
stages (gastrulation), which may use similar cellular
movements to the evaginations required during

McDougall et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:241
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/241

appendage formation [20]. Another potential morphogenetic process that Dlx may be involved in is cell adhesion. In C. elegans, RNAi knockdown of Dlx (ceh-43)
causes the loss of cells though a hole in the hypodermis
and an eventual rupture of the animal [6], therefore a
role of Dlx in cell adhesion was proposed. Interestingly,
cell adhesion can be mediated by neurons, which can
act as guidance cues for cellular movements [6,82], providing a potential link for Dlx in both morphogenetic
processes and in the nervous system. Elements of either,
or both, of these processes may then have been coopted into the process of appendage formation in several taxa.

Conclusions
We have presented here the first examples of duplicated
Dlx genes outside the chordates. We propose that a
duplication of the Dlx gene occurred within the annelid
lineage, after the split of P. dumerilli from the lineage
leading to H. robusta, C. teleta and P. lamarckii. The
two C. teleta Dlx genes are closely linked and have been
subject to gene conversion, the two H. robusta Dlx
genes are not closely linked and exhibit divergent gene
sequences, and the P. lamarckii genes do not show gene
conversion, but have very similar expression patterns.
Therefore, in these three cases, the duplicated Dlx genes
have had very different post-duplication fates.
Methods
Animal sources and library construction

Adult P. lamarckii were collected and spawned as
described [83]. Genomic DNA was extracted from
sperm and a phage library was created by Lofstrand
Labs, Maryland, USA using the LambdaFIX II (Xho1)
vector, and amplified. Genomic DNA was partially
digested with Sau2A1, filled in and cloned. The average
insert size of the library was calculated to be 16-17 kb.
XL1-Blue MRA(P2) cells (Agilent) were then transfected
and plated to give approximately 4× genome coverage
for library screening by hybridisation.
Sperm from a single male P. dumerilii worm was prepared in agarose plugs. DNA was then extracted from
the plugs before being sent to Loftstrand Labs for library
construction as outlined above. The average insert size
was also calculated to be 16-17 kb. This library was plated to give approximately 5× genome coverage for
screening by hybridisation.
Details of the P. dumerilii BAC genomic library can be
found in [29].
Library screening

A 5’ fragment (811 bp) of P. dumerilii Dlx (accession
AM114774.1) was generated from a cDNA clone using
specific primers (PdDLL5’ - 5’ GGG ATT ACA GCC

Page 12 of 16

TGA GAC and PdDLL3’ - 5’ TTT ACC TGA GTT
TGG GTG), and a labelled probe was synthesised using
the PCR DIG labelling mix (Roche) following the manufacturer’s instructions. The P. lamarckii genomic phage
library was then screened for Dlx using standard methods [84] with a hybridisation temperature of 37°C and
two post-hybridisation washes in 2× SSC, 0.1% SDS for
15 minutes at room temperature (RT), followed by two
washes in 0.5× SSC, 0.1% SDS for 15 minutes at 55°C.
Signals were detected using a 1:20,000 dilution of antidigoxygenin-AP (Roche) and CDP-Star chemiluminescent substrate (Roche) as per the manufacturer’s
instructions. Two phage plaques producing strong signals and giving different restriction digest patterns were
chosen for complete sequencing. Each clone was sonicated and A-overhangs added. They were then ligated
into the pGem-T Easy vector and sequenced using T3
and T7 primers. Vector trimming was performed manually and contig assembly was performed using the
DNAStar software (low stringency settings, no vector
trimming). Gaps in the phage insert sequences were
closed by sequencing using specific primers. These
sequences were checked for homology to known Dlx
genes using BLASTX, and intronic arrangement was
predicted using the GENSCAN software http://genes.
mit.edu/GENSCAN.html. In order to determine if the
two discovered Dlx genes were closely linked, genomic
walking was performed by designing probes to the end
sequences of the parental phage and screening the
library as detailed above, except that hybridisation temperatures were raised to 42°C and post-hybridisation
washes were increased to 65°C. Resulting phage
sequences were checked for the presence of Dlx genes
by PCR, and long range PCR was performed using the
Expand Long Template PCR kit (Roche) in order to
determine phage length.
The P. dumerilii genomic phage and BAC libraries
were screened using the same Dlx probe and conditions
as outlined above. Positive BAC clones were ordered
from BACPAC resources and checked for the presence
of PduDlx by PCR using the specific primers shown
above. The degree of overlap of BAC sequences was
determined by end-sequencing using vector primers.
Manual trace assembly

The C. teleta and H. robusta trace archives http://www.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Traces/trace.cgi were searched for Dlx
by using the discontiguous megaBLAST algorithm and
the homeodomain and flanking sequences of PlaDlxa
and PlaDlxb as the query sequence. Entire C. teleta and
H. robusta Dlx sequences and their orientations were
obtained by ‘walking’ from the trace files obtained in the
above searches. This involved blasting the terminal 200
bp of sequence against the trace archive, downloading

McDougall et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:241
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/241

overlapping traces and assembling the contigs using the
SeqMan assembler (DNAStar suite). Assembly settings
were default, with a medium level of end trimming, a
minimum match size of 12 and minimum match percentage of 80.

Page 13 of 16

discarded as burn-in) using the mixed amino acid substitution model and the gamma likelihood model for
among-site rate variation. Trees were viewed and edited
using FigTree [90].
Detection of gene conversion

Rapid Amplification of cDNA Ends

RACE-ready cDNA libraries were constructed from
mixed larval P. lamarckii total RNA and RACE performed using the BD SMART RACE cDNA Amplification Kit (Clontech) as per the manufacturer’s
instructions, except that the annealing temperatures for
the touchdown PCR were lowered (see brackets after
each primer listing for initial annealing temperatures).
Primer sequences were as follows:
PlaDlxa 5’: 5’ CGACAGGTACTGTGTTCGCTGGAAGATC (70°C)
PlaDlxa
5’
nested:
5’
GAGGAGTAGATGGTGCGGGGCTTGCGGA (66°C)
PlaDlxa 3’: 5’ GAGAGAGCCAGATGAGCCCACGCCCAAG (70°C)
PlaDlxa 3’ nested: 5’ CGGTCTCACACAGACACAGGTNAARATH (60°C)
PlaDlxb 5’: 5’ GCATTTGACCTTGGTTCTGCGAGGGAAT (70°C)
PlaDlxb 5’ nested: 5’ TTCACCTGAGTCTGTGTGACGCCAAGGC (66°C)
PlaDlxb 3’: 5’ AGAATGAACCTGGCATATCCTCCAAGGA (70°C)
PlaDlxb 3’ nested: 5’ GCCTTGGCGTCACACAGACTCAGGTGAA (66°C)
Phylogenetic analysis

Dlx sequences (and the B. floridae Msx sequence, which
was used as an outgroup) were retrieved from NCBI
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/. Accession numbers can
be found in Additional File 9. Sequences were formatted
in BBEdit Lite 6.1 [85] before being aligned using clustalx [86] with reduced gap penalties (for pairwise alignments the gap opening penalty was set to 5 and the gap
extension penalty to 0.05; for the multiple alignment the
gap opening penalty was set to 5 and the gap extension
penalty to 0.1). Alignments were manually edited using
Se-Al v2.0 [87]. Two alignments were produced, one
with a comprehensive Dlx dataset and another with the
most divergent taxa removed in order to reduce the
probability of tree topology disruption. Phylogenetic
trees were built using the Phylip 3.66 package of programs [88]. A neighbour joining tree was constructed
using the JTT matrix with 1000 bootstraps, and a consensus tree produced. Bayesian analysis was performed
using MrBayes v3.1.2 [89], with two runs for 2.5 (full
dataset) or 1.5 (dataset with divergent taxa removed)
million generations (sampled every 100, first 250 trees

Alignments of genomic Dlx sequences from C. teleta, P.
lamarckii, P. dumerilii and H. robusta (padded by an
additional 5000 bp both up and downstream) were performed using the program CHAOS with DIALIGN [91].
The alignment was searched for regions of potential
gene conversion between C. teleta or P. lamarckii
sequences using the program GENECONV [32] with
default settings except that monomorphic sites were
included.
For regions for which gene conversion was deemed to
be likely, GC content was determined manually for the
third codon positions of exons and for intronic
sequence.
In-situ hybridisation

Larvae and juveniles were cultured as described [83] and
fixed according to a previously reported protocol [92].
Larvae 36 hpf or older were relaxed by the addition of
an equal amount of 7% MgCl2 in FSW to the dish contents. Probes were synthesised using DIG RNA labelling
mix (Roche) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For each gene probes were designed 3’ of the
homeodomain, the PlaDlxa probe was 491 bp long and
synthesised using the primers PlaDlxa Fwd (5’
CCCTCTAACCCCACAGCCTCCG) and PlaDlxa Rev
(5’ CCGTAGCCACCCCAGCCCCCGT), the PlaDlxb
probe was 576 bp long and synthesised using PlaDlxb
Fwd (5’ TTCCCTCGCAGAATCAAGGTCA) and
PlaDlxb Rev (5’ CGCCACCATACGGGTAATAACC).
The PlaElaV sequence was isolated via degenerate
touchdown PCR using the primers ElaV-1 (5’
CGMTAYGGSTTYGTNAACTA) and ElaV-2 (5’
BACDGCBCCRAANGGNCCRAA) with an annealing
temperature of 60°C which was decreased by 0.5°C per
cycle for 40 cycles. The resulting product was used as a
probe and labelled as outlined above.
Prior to hybridisation fixed animals were stepped into
cold PBT (1× PBS, 0.1 M Tween-20) with 5 minute
washes. Juveniles were decalcified in PBTE (1× PBS, 0.1
M Tween-20, 0.05 M EGTA) for approximately 30 minutes until calcified tube was no longer visible. Samples
were then treated with 0.5 μg/ml proteinase K at 37°C
for 10 minutes and were post-fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde in 1× PBS for 45 minutes at room temperature.
Hybridisation was performed as described in [92], but
using a hybridisation temperature of 55°C. Negative controls that lacked probe were performed and showed no
staining (see Additional File 1). The reproducibility of

McDougall et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:241
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/241

the PlaDlxa and PlaDlxb stainings was confirmed by
using two probes from different regions of each gene
(data not shown) as well as by comparison to nonneural genes with different patterns of staining and
which do not stain the gut (see Additional File 1), thus
confirming that the staining around the gut in PlaDlxa
and PlaDlxb experiments is unlikely to be due to probe
trapping and instead is likely to reflect staining of visceral nerve cells. Stained specimens were cleared in 60%
glycerol and photographed using a Zeiss Axioskop 2 and
the Axiovision 4 software or a Zeiss Axioplan 2 and the
Openlab software.

Additional material
Additional file 1: In-situ hybridisation controls. Negative in situ
controls lacking probe and positive controls with an unrelated gene.
Additional file 2: Phylogenetic position of PlaElaV. Neighbour-joining
tree showing the relationships between ElaV genes from different taxa.
Additional file 3: Consensus sequence of PduL2. Sequence derived
from alignment of sequences found in several different BAC clones.
Additional file 4: The domain organisation of PduL2. Graphic
depicting the endonuclease and reverse transcriptase domains of PduL2.
Additional file 5: Phylogenetic position of PduL2. Neighbour joining
tree showing the relationships between PduL2 and other LINE elements.
Additional file 6: Dlx alignment. Alignment of homeodomain and
other conserved regions of Dlx genes used for phylogenetic analysis.
Additional file 7: Geneconv output. Tracts of Dlx sequences likely to
be undergoing gene conversion as predicted by Geneconv.
Additional file 8: Hep-like domains. Alignment of N-terminal Hep-like
domains of selected homebox and forkhead genes.
Additional file 9: Sequences used in phylogenetic analyses.
Accession numbers and database sources for sequences used in
phylogenetic analyses.

Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Carola Burgtorf (Berlin) for providing P.
dumerilii material for phage library construction, and Guillaume Balavoine
(Paris) for providing the P. dumerilii Dlx cDNA clone. CM was supported by a
Commonwealth Scholarship. Work in the authors’ laboratory is supported by
the BBSRC and the School of Biology, University of St Andrews.
Author details
1
The Scottish Oceans Institute, University of St Andrews, East Sands, St
Andrews KY16 8LB, UK. 2Department of Zoology, University of Oxford, South
Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3PS, UK. 3School of Biological Sciences, University of
Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland 4072, Australia.
Authors’ contributions
CM carried out molecular genetic studies, participated in the design of the
study and drafted the manuscript. JT performed the initial Dlx probe
synthesis and library screen of the P. lamarckii phage library. NK sequenced
the initial Dlx positive P. lamarckii phage clones and performed the first
round of genomic walking in this organism. DEKF conceived of the study,
participated in its design and was involved in drafting the manuscript. All
authors have read and approved the final manuscript.
Received: 22 April 2011 Accepted: 16 August 2011
Published: 16 August 2011

Page 14 of 16

References
1. Cohen SM, Bronner G, Kuttner F, Jurgens G, Jackle H: Distal-less encodes a
homeodomain protein required for limb development in Drosophila.
Nature 1989, 338:432-434.
2. Panganiban GEF, Rubenstein JLR: Developmental functions of the Distalless/Dlx homeobox genes. Development 2002, 129:4371-4386.
3. Panganiban GEF, Irvine SQ, Lowe CJ, Roehl H, Corley LS, Sherbon B,
Grenier JK, Fallon JF, Kimble J, Walker M, Wray GA, Swalla BJ,
Martindale MQ, Carroll SB: The origin and evolution of animal
appendages. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1997, 94:5162-5166.
4. Cohen SM, Jürgens G: Proximal-distal pattern formation in Drosophila:
cell autonomous requirement for Distal-less gene activity in limb
development. EMBO J 1989, 8:2045-2055.
5. Mittmann B, Scholtz G: Distal-less expression in embryos of Limulus
polyplremus (Chelicerata, Xiphosura) and Lepisma saccharina (Insecta,
Zygentoma) suggests a role in the development of mechanoreceptors,
chemoreceptors, and the CNS. Dev Genes Evol 2001, 211:232-243.
6. Aspock G, Burglin TR: The Caenorhabditis elegans Distal-less ortholog ceh43 is required for development of the anterior hypodermis. Dev Dyn
2001, 222:403-409.
7. Freeman MR, Delrow J, Kim J, Johnson E, Doe CQ: Unwrapping glial
biology: Gcm target genes regulating glial development, diversification,
and function. Neuron 2003, 38:567-580.
8. Asano M, Emori Y, Saigo K, Shiokawa K: Isolation and characterization of a
Xenopus cDNA which encodes a homeodomain highly homologous to
Drosophila Distal-Less. The Journal of Biological Chemistry 1992,
267:5044-5047.
9. Lee SE, Jacobs DK: Expression of Distal-less in molluscan eggs, embryos,
and larvae. Evolution & Development 1999, 1:172-179.
10. Holland ND, Panganiban GEF, Henyey EL, Holland LZ: Sequence and
developmental expression of AmphiDII, an amphioxus Distal-less gene
transcribed in the ectoderm, epidermis and nervous system: Insights
into evolution of craniate forebrain and neural crest. Development 1996,
122:2911-2920.
11. Gauchat D, Mazet F, Berney C, Schummer M, Kreger S, Pawlowski J,
Galliot B: Evolution of Antp-class genes and differential expression of
Hydra Hox/paraHox genes in anterior patterning. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2000, 97:4493-4498.
12. Ryan JF, Burton PM, Mazza ME, Kwong GK, Mullikin JC, Finnerty JR: The
cnidarian-bilaterian ancestor possessed at least 56 homeoboxes:
evidence from the starlet sea anemone, Nematostella vectensis. Genome
Biol 2006, 7:R64.
13. Ryan JF, Mazza ME, Pang K, Matus DQ, Baxevanis AD, Martindale MQ,
Finnerty JR: Pre-bilaterian origins of the Hox cluster and the Hox code:
Evidence from the sea anemone, Nematostella vectensis. PLoS ONE 2007,
2:e153.
14. Monteiro AS, Schierwater B, Dellaporta SL, Holland PWH: A low diversity of
ANTP class homeobox genes in Placozoa. Evolution & Development 2006,
8:174-182.
15. Larroux C, Luke GN, Koopman P, Rokhsar DS, Shimeld SM, Degnan BM:
Genesis and expansion of metazoan transcription factor gene classes.
Mol Biol Evol 2008, 25:980-996.
16. Howard-Ashby M, Materna SC, Brown CT, Chen L, Cameron RA,
Davidson EH: Identification and characterization of homeobox
transcription factor genes in Strongylocentrotus purpuratus, and their
expression in embryonic development. Dev Biol 2006, 300:74-89.
17. Stock DW, Ellies DL, Zhao ZY, Ekker M, Ruddle FH, Weiss KM: The evolution
of the vertebrate Dlx gene family. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1996,
93:10858-10863.
18. Amores A, Force A, Yan YL, Joly L, Amemiya C, Fritz A, Ho RK, Langeland JA,
Prince V, Wang YL, Westerfield M, Ekker M, Postlethwait JH: Zebrafish hox
clusters and vertebrate genome evolution. Science 1998, 282:1711-1714.
19. Ellies DL, Stock DW, Hatch G, Giroux G, Weiss KM, Ekker M: Relationship
between the genomic organization and the overlapping embryonic
expression patterns of the zebrafish Dlx genes. Genomics 1997,
45:580-590.
20. Irvine SQ, Cangiano MC, Millette BJ, Gutter ES: Non-overlapping expression
patterns of the clustered Dll-A/B genes in the ascidian Ciona intestinalis.
J Exp Zool B Mol Dev Evol 2007, 308B:428-441.

McDougall et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:241
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/241

21. Castro LFC, Holland PWH: Chromosomal mapping of ANTP class
homeobox genes in amphioxus: piecing together ancestral genomes.
Evolution & Development 2003, 5:459-465.
22. Niimi T, Kuwayama H, Yaginuma T: Larval RNAi applied to the analysis of
postembryonic development in the ladybird beetle, Harmonia axyridis.
Journal of Insect Biotechnology and Sericology 2005, 74:95-102.
23. Schoppmeier M, Damen WG: Double-stranded RNA interference in the
spider Cupiennius salei: the role of Distal-less is evolutionarily conserved
in arthropod appendage formation. Dev Genes Evol 2001, 211:76-82.
24. Scholtz G, Mittmann B, Gerberding M: The pattern of Distal-less expression
in the mouthparts of crustaceans, myriapods and insects: new evidence
for a gnathobasic mandible and the common origin of Mandibulata. Int
J Dev Biol 1998, 42:801-810.
25. Panganiban GEF, Sebring A, Nagy LM, Carroll SB: The development of
crustacean limbs and the evolution of arthropods. Science 1995,
270:1363-1366.
26. Lee SE, Gates RD, Jacobs DK: The isolation of a Distal-less gene fragment
from two molluscs. Dev Genes Evol 2001, 211:506-508.
27. Denes AS, Jékely G, Steinmetz PR, Raible F, Snyman H, Prud’homme B,
Ferrier DEK, Balavoine G, Arendt D: Molecular architecture of annelid
nerve cord supports common origin of nervous system centralization in
Bilateria. Cell 2007, 129:277-288.
28. Winchell CJ, Valencia JE, Jacobs DK: Expression of Distal-less, dachshund,
and optomotor blind in Neanthes arenaceodentata (Annelida, Nereididae)
does not support homology of appendage-forming mechanisms across
the Bilateria. Dev Genes Evol 2010.
29. Raible F, Tessmar-Raible K, Osoegawa K, Wincker P, Jubin C, Balavoine G,
Ferrier DEK, Benes V, de Jong P, Weissenbach J, Bork P, Arendt D:
Vertebrate-type intron-rich genes in the marine annelid Platynereis
dumerilii. Science 2005, 310:1325-1326.
30. Burge C, Karlin S: Prediction of complete gene structures in human
genomic DNA. J Mol Biol 1997, 268:78-94.
31. Sugano T, Kajikawa M, Okada N: Isolation and characterization of
retrotransposition-competent LINEs from zebrafish. Gene 2006, 365:74-82.
32. Sawyer S: GENECONV: A computer package for the statistical detection
of gene conversion. Book GENECONV: A computer package for the statistical
detection of gene conversion City: Distributed by the author, Department of
Mathematics, Washington University in St Louis; 1999, (Editor ed.^eds.).
33. Smith ST, Jaynes JB: A conserved region of engrailed, shared among all
en-, gsc-, Nk1-, Nk2- and msh-class homeoproteins, mediates active
transcriptional repression in vivo. Development 1996, 122:3141-3150.
34. Masson N, Greene WK, Rabbitts TH: Optimal activation of an endogenous
gene by HOX11 requires the NH2-terminal 50 amino acids. Mol Cell Biol
1998, 18:3502-3508.
35. Allen JD, Lints T, Jenkins NA, Copeland NG, Strasser A, Harvey RP,
Adams JM: Novel murine homeo box gene on chromosome 1 expressed
in specific hematopoietic lineages and during embryogenesis. Genes Dev
1991, 5:509-520.
36. Galliot B, de Vargas C, Miller DJ: Evolution of homeobox genes: Q50
Paired-like genes founded the Paired class. Dev Genes Evol 1999,
209:186-197.
37. Harvey RP: NK-2 homeobox genes and heart development. Dev Biol 1996,
178:203-216.
38. Bürglin TR: A comprehensive classification of homeobox genes. In
Guidebook to the Homeobox Genes. Edited by: Duboule D. Oxford: Oxford
University Press; 1994:.
39. Grimes HL, Chan TO, Zweidler-McKay PA, Tong B, Tsichlis PN: The Gfi-1
proto-oncoprotein contains a novel transcriptional repressor domain,
SNAG, and inhibits G1 arrest induced by interleukin-2 withdrawal. Mol
Cell Biol 1996, 16:6263-6272.
40. Watada H, Mirmira RG, Kalamaras J, German MS: Intramolecular control of
transcriptional activity by the NK2-specific domain in NK-2
homeodomain proteins. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2000, 97:9443-9448.
41. Shimeld SM: A transcriptional modification motif encoded by homeobox
and fork head genes. FEBS Lett 1997, 410:124-125.
42. Luke GN: The NK homeobox gene cluster of Branchiostoma floridae.
Thesis University of Reading, School of Biological Sciences; 2004.
43. Monteiro AS: Early evolution of homeobox genes. Thesis Universidade do
Porto, Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas de Abel Salazar; 2006.

Page 15 of 16

44. der Rieden PM, Mainguy G, Woltering JM, Durston AJ: Homeodomain to
hexapeptide or PBC-interaction-domain distance: size apparently
matters. Trends Genet 2004, 20:76-79.
45. Chang CP, Shen WF, Rozenfeld S, Lawrence HJ, Largman C, Cleary ML: Pbx
proteins display hexapeptide-dependent cooperative DNA binding with
a subset of Hox proteins. Gene Dev 1995, 9:663-674.
46. Neuteboom ST, Murre C: Pbx raises the DNA binding specificity but not
the selectivity of antennapedia Hox proteins. Mol Cell Biol 1997,
17:4696-4706.
47. Stock DW: The Dlx gene complement of the leopard shark, Triakis
semifasciata, resembles that of mammals: Implications for genomic and
morphological evolution of jawed vertebrates. Genetics 2005, 169:807-817.
48. Struck TH, Paul C, Hill N, Hartmann S, Hösel C, Kube M, Lieb B, Meyer A,
Tiedemann R, Purschke G, Bleidorn C: Phylogenomic analyses unravel
annelid evolution. Nature 2011, 471:95-98.
49. Peel AD, Telford MJ, Akam M: The evolution of hexapod engrailed-family
genes: evidence for conservation and concerted evolution. Proc Biol Sci
2006, 273:1733-1742.
50. Irimia M, Maeso I, Garcia-Fernàndez J: Convergent evolution of clustering
of Iroquois homeobox genes across metazoans. Mol Biol Evol 2008,
25:1521-1525.
51. Takatori N, Butts T, Candiani S, Pestarino M, Ferrier DEK, Saiga H,
Holland PWH: Comprehensive survey and classification of homeobox
genes in the genome of amphioxus, Branchiostoma floridae. Dev Genes
Evol 2008.
52. Sumiyama K, Ruddle FH: Regulation of Dlx3 gene expression in visceral
arches by evolutionarily conserved enhancer elements. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 2003, 100:4030-4034.
53. Ghanem N, Jarinova O, Amores A, Long QM, Hatch G, Park BK,
Rubenstein JLR, Ekker M: Regulatory roles of conserved intergenic
domains in vertebrate Dlx bigene clusters. Genome Res 2003, 13:533-543.
54. Park BK, Sperber SM, Choudhury A, Ghanem N, Hatch GT, Sharpe PT,
Thomas BL, Ekker M: Intergenic enhancers with distinct activities regulate
Dlx gene expression in the mesenchyme of the branchial arches. Dev
Biol 2004, 268:532-545.
55. Sumiyama K, Irvine SQ, Stock DW, Weiss KM, Kawasaki K, Shimizu N,
Shashikant CS, Miller W, Ruddle FH: Genomic structure and functional
control of the Dlx3-7 bigene cluster. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2002,
99:780-785.
56. Gould A, Morrison A, Sproat G, White RA, Krumlauf R: Positive crossregulation and enhancer sharing: two mechanisms for specifying
overlapping Hox expression patterns. Genes Dev 1997, 11:900-913.
57. Kmita M, van Der Hoeven F, Zákány J, Krumlauf R, Duboule D: Mechanisms
of Hox gene colinearity: transposition of the anterior Hoxb1 gene into
the posterior HoxD complex. Genes Dev 2000, 14:198-211.
58. Kmita M, Duboule D: Organizing axes in time and space; 25 years of
colinear tinkering. Science 2003, 301:331-333.
59. Sharpe J, Nonchev S, Gould A, Whiting J, Krumlauf R: Selectivity, sharing
and competitive interactions in the regulation of Hoxb genes. EMBO J
1998, 17:1788-1798.
60. Szostak JW, Orr-Weaver TL, Rothstein RJ, Stahl FW: The double-strandbreak repair model for recombination. Cell 1983, 33:25-35.
61. Benedict MQ, Levine BJ, Ke ZX, Cockburn AF, Seawright JA: Precise
limitation of concerted evolution to ORFs in mosquito Hsp82 genes.
Insect Mol Biol 1996, 5:73-79.
62. Leigh Brown AJ, Ish-Horowicz D: Evolution of the 87A and 87C heatshock loci in Drosophila. Nature 1981, 290:677-682.
63. Hickey DA, Bally-Cuif L, Abukashawa S, Payant V, Benkel BF: Concerted
evolution of duplicated protein-coding genes in Drosophila. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 1991, 88:1611-1615.
64. Shibata H, Yamazaki T: Molecular evolution of the duplicated Amy locus
in the Drosophila melanogaster species subgroup: concerted evolution
only in the coding region and an excess of nonsynonymous
substitutions in speciation. Genetics 1995, 141:223-236.
65. Wang S, Magoulas C, Hickey D: Concerted evolution within a trypsin gene
cluster in Drosophila. Mol Biol Evol 1999, 16:1117-1124.
66. Thomas JH: Concerted evolution of two novel protein families in
Caenorhabditis species. Genetics 2006, 172:2269-2281.
67. Rozen S, Skaletsky H, Marszalek JD, Minx PJ, Cordum HS, Waterston RH,
Wilson RK, Page DC: Abundant gene conversion between arms of

McDougall et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:241
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/241

68.

69.
70.
71.
72.

73.

74.

75.

76.

77.

78.
79.
80.

81.
82.

83.

84.
85.
86.

87.
88.

89.
90.
91.

92.

93.

palindromes in human and ape Y chromosomes. Nature 2003,
423:873-876.
Moran Y, Weinberger H, Sullivan JC, Reitzel AM, Finnerty JR, Gurevitz M:
Concerted evolution of sea anemone neurotoxin genes is revealed
through analysis of the Nematostella vectensis genome. Mol Biol Evol
2008, 25:737-747.
Eickbush TH, Eickbush DG: Finely orchestrated movements: evolution of
the ribosomal RNA genes. Genetics 2007, 175:477-485.
Xu S, Clark T, Zheng H, Vang S, Li R, Wong GK, Wang J, Zheng X: Gene
conversion in the rice genome. BMC Genomics 2008, 9:93.
Walsh JB: Sequence-dependent gene conversion: can duplicated genes
diverge fast enough to escape conversion? Genetics 1987, 117:543-557.
Carson AR, Scherer SW: Identifying concerted evolution and gene
conversion in mammalian gene pairs lasting over 100 million years. BMC
Evol Biol 2009, 9:156.
Palmer S, Schildkraut E, Lazarin R, Nguyen J, Nickoloff JA: Gene conversion
tracts in Saccharomyces cerevisiae can be extremely short and highly
directional. Nucleic Acids Res 2003, 31:1164-1173.
Beisswanger S, Stephan W: Evidence that strong positive selection drives
neofunctionalization in the tandemly duplicated polyhomeotic genes in
Drosophila. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008, 105:5447-5452.
Coubrough ML, Bendall AJ: Impaired nuclear import of mammalian Dlx4
proteins as a consequence of rapid sequence divergence. Exp Cell Res
2006, 312:3880-3891.
Meisel RP: Evolutionary dynamics of recently duplicated genes: selective
constraints on diverging paralogs in the Drosophila pseudoobscura
genome. J Mol Evol 2009, 69:81-93.
Meyer NP, Seaver EC: Neurogenesis in an annelid: characterization of
brain neural precursors in the polychaete Capitella sp. I. Dev Biol 2009,
335:237-252.
Soller M, White K: Elav. Curr Biol 2004, 14:R53.
Irvine SQ: Whole-mount in situ hybridization of small invertebrate
embryos using laboratory mini-columns. BioTechniques 2007, 43:764-768.
Khila A, Grbić M: Gene silencing in the spider mite Tetranychus urticae:
dsRNA and siRNA parental silencing of the Distal-less gene. Dev Genes
Evol 2007, 217:241-251.
Lowe CJ, Wray GA: Radical alterations in the roles of homeobox genes
during echinoderm evolution. Nature 1997, 389:718-721.
Chin-Sang ID, George SE, Ding M, Moseley SL, Lynch AS, Chisholm AD: The
ephrin VAB-2/EFN-1 functions in neuronal signaling to regulate
epidermal morphogenesis in C. elegans. Cell 1999, 99:781-790.
McDougall C, Chen WC, Shimeld SM, Ferrier DEK: The development of the
larval nervous system, musculature and ciliary bands of Pomatoceros
lamarckii (Annelida): heterochrony in polychaetes. Front Zool 2006, 3:16.
Sambrook J, Russell DW: Molecular Cloning: A Laboratory Manual. 3 edition.
New York: Cold Spring Harbor; 2001.
Siegel R, Woolsey P, Correia J, Hueras J, Kalkwarf S: BBEdit Lite. Book BBEdit
Lite. 6.1.2 edition. City: Bare Bones Software; 2001, (Editor ed.^eds.).
Thompson JD, Gibson TJ, Plewniak F, Jeanmougin F, Higgins DG: The
CLUSTAL_X windows interface: flexible strategies for multiple sequence
alignment aided by quality analysis tools. Nucleic Acids Res 1997,
25:4876-4882.
Rambaut A: Se-Al. Book Se-Al City; 1996, (Editor ed.^eds.) v2.0a11 edition.
Felsenstein J: PHYLIP (Phylogeny Inference Package). Book PHYLIP
(Phylogeny Inference Package) City: Department of Genetics, University of
Washington; 1995, (Editor ed.^eds.).
Huelsenbeck JP, Ronquist F: MRBAYES: Bayesian inference of phylogenetic
trees. Bioinformatics 2001, 17:754-755.
Rambaut A: FigTree. Book FigTree. 1.1.1 edition. City: University of
Edinburgh; 2006, (Editor ed.^eds.).
Brudno M, Steinkamp R, Morgenstern B: The CHAOS/DIALIGN WWW server
for multiple alignment of genomic sequences. Nucleic Acids Res 2004, 32:
W41-44.
Giusti AF, Hinman VF, Degnan SM, Degnan BM, Morse DE: Expression of a
Scr/Hox5 gene in the larval central nervous system of the gastropod
Haliotis, a non-segmented spiralian lophotrochozoan. Evol Dev 2001,
2:294-302.
Crooks GE, Hon G, Chandonia J-M, Brenner SE: WebLogo: a sequence logo
generator. Genome Res 2004, 14:1188-1190.

Page 16 of 16

doi:10.1186/1471-2148-11-241
Cite this article as: McDougall et al.: Annelid Distal-less/Dlx duplications
reveal varied post-duplication fates. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011
11:241.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
