<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>A comprehensive fate map by intracellular injection of identified blastomeres in the marine polychaete Capitella teleta</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="EvoDevo 2010, 1:8. doi: 10.1186/2041-9139-1-8"/>
<meta name="Author" content="N_va P Meyer, Michael J Boyle, Mark Q Martindale, Elaine C Seaver"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 8.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 7.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Meyer et al. EvoDevo 2010, 1:8
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/8

Open Access

RESEARCH

A comprehensive fate map by intracellular
injection of identified blastomeres in the marine
polychaete Capitella teleta
Research

Néva P Meyer1, Michael J Boyle2, Mark Q Martindale1 and Elaine C Seaver*1

Abstract
Background: The polychaete annelid Capitella teleta (formerly Capitella sp. I) develops by spiral cleavage and has been
the focus of several recent developmental studies aided by a fully sequenced genome. Fate mapping in polychaetes
has lagged behind other spiralian taxa, because of technical limitations.
Results: To generate a modern fate map for C. teleta, we injected 1,1'-dioctadecyl-3,3,3'3'-tetramethylindocarbocyanine
perchlorate (DiI) into individual identified blastomeres through fourth-quartet micromere formation. Confocal laser
scanning microscopy at single-cell resolution was used to characterize blastomere fates during larval stages. Our
results corroborate previous observations from classic studies, and show a number of similarities with other spiralian
fate maps, including unique and stereotypic fates for individual blastomeres, presence of four discrete body domains
arising from the A, B, C and D cell quadrants, generation of anterior ectoderm from first quartet micromeres, and
contributions to trunk ectoderm and ventral nerve cord by the 2d somatoblast. Of particular interest are several
instances in which the C. teleta fate map deviates from other spiralian fate maps. For example, we identified four to
seven distinct origins of mesoderm, all ectomesodermal. In addition, the left and right mesodermal bands arise from
3d and 3c, respectively, whereas 4d generates a small number of trunk muscle cells, the primordial germ cells and the
anus. We identified a complex set of blastomere contributions to the posterior gut in C. teleta, which establishes the
most complete map of posterior gut territories to date.
Conclusions: Our detailed cellular descriptions reveal previously underappreciated complexity in the ontogenetic
contributions to several spiralian larval tissues, including the mesoderm, nervous system and gut. The formation of the
mesodermal bands by 3c and 3d is in stark contrast to other spiralians, in which 4d generates the mesodermal bands.
The results of this study provide a framework for future phylogenetic comparisons and functional analyses of cell-fate
specification.
Background
Many metazoan embryos develop via highly stereotyped
cleavage programs that enable the identification of individual blastomeres during early development. Embryonic
features that aid identification include differences in cell
size or pigmentation, or in spindle orientation relative to
the primary egg axis. Such embryos are amenable to celllineage and fate-mapping studies, which establish the
developmental origins of definitive regions, tissues and
organs in larval and adult animals, and provide the
* Correspondence: seaver@hawaii.edu
1

Kewalo Marine Laboratory, Pacific Biosciences Research Center, University of
Hawaii, 41 Ahui Street, Honolulu, Hawaii 96813, USA

Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

groundwork for functional studies. Cell-lineage and fatemapping studies were among the first rigorous attempts
at characterizing embryogenesis in the late 19th century
in embryos as diverse as parasitic nematodes, ascidians,
ctenophores, annelids, mollusks and various other
marine invertebrates. The ability to follow descendants of
identified cells has increased dramatically in recent years
with the advent of improved fluorescent reagents for
intracellular labeling and advanced imaging techniques.
Early cell-lineage and fate-mapping studies revealed
that animals with dissimilar adult body plans probably
shared a common evolutionary ancestor, based on similar
developmental features. A spectacular example is a group
of animals that displays a pattern of early development

© 2010 Meyer et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Meyer et al. EvoDevo 2010, 1:8
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/8

called spiral cleavage. This pattern of development is recognizable by the timing, orientation and/or size of individual cell divisions, and is found in a large number of
diverse animal groups including mollusks, annelids,
sipunculans, echiurans, nemerteans, myzostomids, ectoprocts, polyclad flatworms and potentially gnathostomulids. Molecular phylogenomic analyses [1-4] have
indicated that the spiral cleavage program was probably
an ancestral characteristic of all non-ecdysozoan protostomes (lophotrochozoans) that was subsequently lost in
select taxa including lophophorates (brachiopods,
phoronids), gastrotrichs, rotifers, parasitic (non-polyclad) platyhelminthes and cephalopod mollusks. However, a better understanding of the exact relationships
among lophotrochozoans, particularly between members
of the Platyzoa (for example, gnathostomulids, gastrotrichs, rotifers and platyhelminthes), is needed to
determine whether spiral cleavage was an ancestral character for all lophotrochozoans (Spiralia) or just a subset
(Trochozoa).
During spiral cleavage, the cleavage spindles of the first
two divisions are oriented perpendicular to the animalvegetal axis, and divide the zygote into four quadrants.
The cells born from these first divisions are denoted the
A, B, C and D blastomeres (Figure 1A). In animals with
unequal spiral cleavage, the first two divisions are
unequal in size, allowing for unambiguous identification
of each blastomere. Starting with the third cleavage, the
four macromeres generate tiers of often smaller, animal
daughters (micromeres) in alternating orientation (Figure
1A). In the majority of spiralians, the first tier of micromeres is cleaved in a clockwise (dexiotropic) direction
when viewed from the animal pole. This is followed by a
counterclockwise cleavage (laeotropic) of the second tier
of micromeres. These divisions result from the alternating 90 degree orientation of the mitotic spindles, and produce a 'spiral' pattern of micromeres, the hallmark of the
spiral cleavage program. Blastomere nomenclature follows that of Conklin [5]. Macromeres are denoted by an
upper case letter and micromeres by a lower case letter,
corresponding to their quadrant of origin (Figure 1A).
Each blastomere has a number corresponding to its birth
order. For example, after the first spiral cleavage (eightcell stage), the macromeres are named 1A, 1B, 1C and 1D,
and the micromeres are named 1a, 1b, 1c and 1d; after the
second spiral cleavage (16-cell stage), the macromeres are
2A, 2B, 2C and 2D and the micromeres are 2a, 2b, 2c and
2d (Figure 1A). Subsequent micromere divisions are
denoted by numerical superscripts, a '1' for the animalmost daughter and a '2' for the vegetal daughter. For
example, first quartet micromeres divide to give rise to
four animal micromere cells (1a1, 1b1, 1c1 and 1d1) and
four vegetal micromere cells (1a2, 1b2, 1c2 and 1d2).

Page 2 of 27

In addition to the conserved pattern of spiral cleavage,
blastomere fates are also largely conserved. Generally,
animal micromeres give rise to ectoderm, whereas vegetal macromeres give rise to endoderm. Another frequently conserved fate is that of the left and right larval
eyes, which are generated by micromeres 1a and 1c,
respectively. Of particular importance in spiralian development are two cells derived from the D quadrant. In
annelids, the 2d micromere, called the primary somatoblast, gives rise to the majority of trunk ectoderm posterior to the mouth. The 4d cell, called the mesentoblast, is
the only micromere in any spiralian embryo that generates both mesoderm and endoderm [6,7].
Although early descriptive work on spiralian embryos
emphasized similarities in the fates of identified cells,
modern intracellular studies have identified a number of
species-specific differences. For example, the larval eyes
of chitons (polyplacophoran mollusks) are generated
from the second quartet micromeres 2a and 2c, rather
than from 1a and 1c as observed in all other species
examined [8]. Likewise, the origin of ectomesoderm,
which is mesoderm derived from the first three quartets
of ectodermal micromeres, varies across species and contrasts with the highly conserved origin of endomesoderm
derived from 4d [7,9-11]. Differences in blastomere fate
among species probably reflect meaningful phylogenetic
variation in the development of homologous cells over
evolutionary time, and provide a foundation for molecular investigations of the causal basis of cell-fate determination.
Polychaete annelids are a widely diverse group of primarily marine segmented worms. Although there are classic
cell-lineage descriptions from the late 19th century, generation of fate maps for polychaetes using intracellular
lineage tracers has lagged behind those of other taxa. The
only published intracellular fate-mapping study of a polychaete annelid is for the ragworm Platynereis dumerilii,
in which the first quartet micromeres (1a to 1d) and macromeres (1A to 1D), 2d112, 4d and 4d1 were directly filled
[12]. Although there are substantial detailed lineage data
for clitellid annelids (leeches and oligochetes), these animals have a modified spiral cleavage program that gives
rise to a specialized set of ectodermal and mesodermal
teloblast cells not described in polychaetes. To generate a
modern fate map for the polychaete annelid Capitella
teleta [13], previously known as Capitella sp. I, we
injected the fluorescent dye 1,1'-dioctadecyl-3,3,3'3'tetramethylindocarbocyanine perchlorate (DiI) intracellularly into identified blastomeres, and examined their
fate at larval stages using confocal laser scanning microscopy. We determined the fates of each blastomere
through formation of the fourth quartet of micromeres.
The results of this study are compared with fate maps of

Meyer et al. EvoDevo 2010, 1:8
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/8

Page 3 of 27

Figure 1 Spiral cleavage and Capitella teleta larval body plan. (A) Diagram of unequal spiral cleavage. (B) Diagram of a late stage 6/early stage 7
Capitella teleta larva. Mesoderm is shown in red. an = anus, br = brain, cm = commissure, ec = ectoderm, en = endoderm, es = esophagus, ey = eye,
fg = foregut, gl = gut lumen, mg = midgut, mo = mouth, ms = mesoderm, nt = neurotroch, ph = pharynx, pt = prototroch, rc = rectum, tt = telotroch,
vn = ventral nerve cord.

other spiralian embryos, with particular emphasis on
those fate maps generated using intracellular injections.

Results
C. teleta development and fate map overview

C. teleta embryos develop by unequal spiral cleavage,
thus individual blastomeres are easily identifiable. Starting at the two-cell stage, divisions occur approximately
every hour and are roughly synchronous between quadrants, although the D quadrant generally begins dividing
first. At the four-cell stage, the D macromere is the largest
cell, and shares a vegetal cross furrow with B. In this
paper, we use a lower case 'q' to refer to each micromere
quartet and an upper case 'Q' to refer to each macromere
quartet. The first quartet micromeres (1q) are born dexiotropically (clockwise) with respect to the macromeres
when viewed from the animal pole; second quartet
micromeres (2q) are born laeotropically (counterclockwise), and subsequent macromere cleavages alternate
between dexiotropic and laeotropic. Our observations of
the early cleavages of C. teleta are very similar to the
descriptions of Capitella capitata cleavages by Eisig in

1898 [14]. One notable exception is the size of 4d: Eisig
describes 4d as much larger than other fourth quartet
micromeres, whereas in C. teleta, we found 4d to be the
same size as other 4q cells.
A standard embryonic and larval staging system has
been described previously for C. teleta [15]. In general,
after 5 days of development at 19°C, the majority of larval
and adult structures are discernable. At this stage (late
stage 6, early stage 7), the larva consists of an anterior
head region, a segmented trunk and a posterior pygidium. The trunk is bounded by two ciliary bands: the prototroch (pt) anteriorly, and the telotroch (tt) posteriorly
(Figure 1B). A third ciliary band, the neurotroch (nt),
runs along the ventral midline (Figure 1B). There are also
rows of cilia in the pygidium called the pygidial ciliary
band (not shown in diagram) [16]. The larva has a centralized nervous system consisting of an anterior brain or
cerebral ganglion (br) and a ventral nerve cord (vn) consisting of up to 13 segmentally reiterated ganglia (Figure
1B). The cerebral commissure (cm) and pair of larval eyes
(ey) are also visible (Figure 1B). The mesoderm (ms) is
positioned between the ectoderm (ec) and endoderm (en)

Meyer et al. EvoDevo 2010, 1:8
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/8

Page 4 of 27

(Figure 1B), and many differentiated circular and longitudinal muscle fibers are present by this stage. The gut is
regionalized along the anterioposterior axis into a foregut
(fg), midgut (mg) and hindgut. The foregut is further subdivided into a buccal cavity, pharynx (ph) and esophagus
(es), and we used the term 'mouth' (mo) to refer to the
cells lining the opening of the buccal cavity (Figure 1B).
At mid to late larval stages, the mouth is continuous with
the presumptive pharynx and esophagus [17]The midgut
in C teleta comprises an intestine that extends from the
esophagus to the rectum. Traditionally, the 'hindgut' in
polychaetes is described as a proctodeal invagination of
ectoderm [18,19]. To more accurately interpret and compare the C. teleta fate map with other spiralian fate maps,
we used the terms 'rectum' and 'anus' when referring to
the posteriormost end (hindgut) of the alimentary canal.
In the larva of C. teleta, the rectum (rc) is a short region
in the pygidium that connects the intestine with a terminal anus (an) (Figure 1B). By late stage 6, a lumen (gl) is
visible within the developing midgut and rectum (Figure
1B). Late stage 6 C. teleta larvae are competent to metamorphose after another 3 to 4 days of development at
¯C
19A (stage 9).
The injection of individual blastomeres resulted in
clones of labeled descendant cells that were highly reproducible, enabling us to generate a stereotypic fate map for
C. teleta. Blastomeres 1q, 1q1, 1q2, 2q, 3q, 4d, 2Q, 3Q and
4D were injected with DiI (Table 1), allowed to develop to
stages 5 to 8, and scored as alive or fixed. Most animals
were scored between stages 6 and 7 because visualization
of DiI at later stages (8 and 9) is difficult in large clones
because of the dilution of DiI. In brief, first quartet
micromeres generate the anterior ectoderm including the
brain and prototroch (Figure 2A-D). The second quartet
micromeres generate the ectoderm posterior to the prototroch, the ventral nerve cord, portions of the mouth,
the majority of the foregut, a single posterior row of prototrochal cells, the telotroch and rectum (Figure 2E-H).
The third quartet of micromeres give rise to portions of

the foregut and mouth, anterior mesoderm, cells surrounding the anus, and the left and right mesodermal
bands in the trunk (Figure 2I-L). 4d forms a few muscle
cells, the anus and the primordial germ cells (Figure 2M).
Finally, macromeres 3A, 3B, 3C and 4D generate endoderm (Figure 2N-R). This fate map is largely consistent
with the fate map of other spiralians, especially with
respect to the ectodermal fates. The main deviation is
that 4d does not generate the mesodermal bands; this fate
is divided between 3c and 3d.
First quartet micromeres

In C. teleta, descendents of the first quartet micromeres
are subdivided between the left-right and dorsal-ventral
quadrants of the anterior ectoderm (1a, left-ventral; 1b,
right-ventral; 1c, right-dorsal; 1d, left-dorsal) (Figure 3AD). Micromeres 1a to 1d give rise to the anterior ectoderm, brain (or cerebral ganglion), larval eyes and the
prototroch (Figure 3).
Micromere 1a

Descendants of the 1a micromere form left-ventral head
ectoderm and the left-ventral prototroch (Figure 3A, E).
In C. teleta, there are two larval eyes, each consisting of
three cells: a sensory cell, a pigment cell and a supporting
cell [20]. Micromere 1a clearly forms the pigment cell (pc)
and sensory cell of the left eye, including the microvilli of
the sensory apparatus (sc mv), which are visible with
phalloidin staining (Figure 3I). Micromere 1a also probably generates the supporting cell of the left eye, although
this is more difficult to determine. In addition to the leftventral head ectoderm, left-ventral prototroch and left
eye, a small number of cells in the left side of the brain,
ventral to the cerebral commissure (cm), are descendants
of 1a (Figure 3E, arrowhead).
Micromere 1b

The 1b micromere generates right-ventral head ectoderm, the right-ventral prototroch and a small number of
cells in the right-ventral brain (arrowhead) (Figure 3B, F).
This pattern largely mirrors that of 1a descendants, with

Table 1: Number of larvae scored after injection of individual identified blastomeres.
Micromeres

Macromeres

a

b

c

d

A

B

C

D

First quartet

12

15

13

18

-

-

-

-

Second quartet

17

12

27

22

2

4

17

18

Third quartet

18

14

22

22

13

10

9

20

Fourth quartet

-

-

-

23

-

-

-

11

Meyer et al. EvoDevo 2010, 1:8
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/8

Page 5 of 27

Figure 2 General fate map of Capitella teleta. (A-M) Stage 6 to 7 larvae ~5 days after labeling the first to fourth quartet micromeres. (N-R) Stage 6
to 7 larvae ~5 days after labeling the third and fourth quartet macromeres. In all panels, differential interference contrast (DIC) images are overlaid with
red DiI fluorescent images. All images are of fixed larvae except for (D) and (H) and (I), which are of live animals. The arrow in (D) indicates a row of
DiI-labeled ectodermal cells posterior to the prototroch. The blastomere labeled with DiI is indicated in the upper-right corner, and the view is indicated in the lower-left corner of each panel (dors = dorsal, vent = ventral). Anterior is to the left in all panels.

the exception of the left eye (compare Figure 3E with Figure 3F).

the dorsolateral sides of the larva (not shown). Some of
these cells may be sensory neurons.

Micromere 1c

Micromere 1d

Micromere 1c gives rise to right-dorsal head ectoderm,
the right-dorsal prototroch (Figure 3C, G) and the right
eye (Figure 3J). Similar to the 1a micromere, the 1c
micromere forms the pigment cell, the sensory cell and
probably the supporting cell of the right eye (Figure 3J).
Micromere 1c also forms the majority of the right side of
the brain (br) (Figure 3G, K). DiI-labeled cells in the brain
are often positioned dorsal to the cerebral commissure,
and DiI is seen in the cerebral commissure (Figure 3G).
Descendants of 1c are also found in ectoderm just posterior to the prototroch, both on the dorsal midline and on

The 1d micromere generates left-dorsal head ectoderm,
the left-dorsal prototroch (Figure 3D, H) and the majority
of the left side of the brain (br) (Figure 3L). DiI-labeled
cells in the brain are usually positioned dorsal to the cerebral commissure, and DiI is seen in the cerebral commissure (Figure 3H). Descendants of 1d also give rise to a
thin line of ectodermal cells and scattered surface cells in
the trunk. The line of ectodermal cells forms a ring that
partially encircles the larva, terminating on the ventral
face, just lateral to the mouth. This ring of 1d-derived
cells is positioned posterior to the mouth, between two

Meyer et al. EvoDevo 2010, 1:8
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/8

Page 6 of 27

Figure 3 First quartet micromeres generate anterior ectoderm and prototroch. (A-D) Single-channel, z-stacks of confocal images of late stage
6 larvae from an anterior view 5 days after labeling first quartet micromeres with DiI (white). The stacks start at the anterior ectodermal surface and
end just posterior to the prototroch. (E-H) Z-stacks of merged, confocal images through a subset of the brain in late stage 6 larvae. The channels are
DiI (red), phalloidin (green) and TO-PRO-3 (blue). (E, F) Labeled brain cells positioned ventral to the cerebral commissure are indicated with an arrowhead in (E,F). (I-J) Digital magnification of the eye region bracketed in (E) and (G), respectively. One side of the eye sensory cell is outlined with a
dashed line. (K-L) Z-stacks of merged, confocal images through the entire brain of late stage 6 larvae. The channels are DiI (red) and TO-PRO-3 (blue).
The blastomere labeled with DiI is indicated in the upper-right corner, and the view is indicated in the lower-left corner of each panel (ant = anterior).
All images are from an anterior view, with ventral down. The position of the mouth is indicated with an asterisk. br = brain, cm = brain commissure,
pc = pigment cell, sc mv = sensory cell microvilli.

rows of pigment cells (Figure 2D, arrow). The scattered
trunk ectodermal cells formed by 1d are localized to the
dorsal and dorsolateral sides of the larva, and are positioned between the prototroch and line of 1d ectodermal
cells (not shown). Some of these cells are sensory neurons, whereas others have a distinct 'S'-shaped morphology. Phalloidin staining of the 'S'-shaped cells shows
repeated actin rings along the outside of each cell. Cells
with this 'S'-shaped morphology are found throughout
the surface ectoderm in the head, trunk and pygidium.
The pattern generated by micromere 1d largely mirrors
that seen after labeling 1c, with the exception of the right
eye and ectodermal cells in the trunk (compare Figure 3G
and 3K with Figure 3H and 3L).

Micromeres 1q1 and 1q2

The vegetal daughters of the first quartet micromeres, 1a2
to 1d2 (Figure 4), were labeled because in many other spiralians, these cells generate most of the prototroch. We
examined clones generated by 1q2 micromeres both at
late stage 6 and earlier at stage 5 when the prototochal
cells are larger and cell boundaries are easier to discern.
In C. teleta, we detected five rows of prototrochal cells
(Figure 5A). At late stage 6, the second and fourth rows of
prototrochal cells are densely ciliated, whereas the first
and fifth rows are more sparsely ciliated. The third row
may also be densely ciliated, but we could not determine
this at late stage 6. At late stage 4 and early stage 5, cells in
the second, third and fourth rows are relatively large

Meyer et al. EvoDevo 2010, 1:8
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/8

Page 7 of 27

Figure 4 Vegetal daughters of first quartet micromeres, 1q2, form the prototroch. (A, B, D, E, G, H, J, K) Z-stacks of merged, confocal images
through late stage 6 larvae 5 days after labeling 1q2 micromeres with DiI. The channels are DiI (red), phalloidin (green) and TO-PRO-3 (blue). (C, F, I, L)
Cropped, digitally magnified, z-stacks of merged, confocal images through the prototroch of late stage 6 larvae. The channels are DiI (red), phalloidin
(green) and TO-PRO-3 (blue). (C', F', I', L') Single channel images of DiI shown in (C), (F), (I) and (L), respectively. The arrow in (L) points to a DiI-labeled
prototroch cell that is separate from the rest of the clone. The blastomere labeled with DiI is indicated to the left of each row and the view is indicated
in the lower-left corner of each panel (dors = dorsal, vent = ventral, llat = left lateral, rlat = right lateral). Anterior is to the left in all ventral, dorsal and
left lateral images, and to the right in all right lateral images. The position of the mouth is indicated with an asterisk.

compared with cells in the first and fifth rows (Figure 5A).
Because of the pattern of ciliation and the size of the cells
in each row, we refer to the second through fourth rows
as the main prototroch, numbered 1 to 3 from anterior to
posterior (m1, m2, m3, respectively). We refer to the first
row as the anterior supporting prototroch (aT) and the
fifth row as the posterior supporting prototroch (pT).
The 1q2 micromeres of C. teleta generate the majority
of the densely ciliated main prototroch, including all of
the fourth row (m3), most of the third row (m2) and a
subset of the second row (m1) of prototrochal cells (Figure 4; Figure 5C,D). In general, 1a2 forms the left-ventral

region (n = 11; Figure 4A-C'), 1b2 forms the right-ventral
region (n = 15; Figure 4D-F'), 1c2 forms the right-dorsal
region (n = 13; Figure 4G-I') and 1d2 forms the left-dorsal
region (n = 14; Figure 4J-L'). The main exception to this
occurs laterally. Clones from 1c2 and 1d2 generate a larger
circumferential area than do those from 1a2 and 1b2
(compare Figure 4H and 4K with 4B and 4E; Figure
5C,D). Additionally, on the lateral sides of the prototroch,
1c2 and 1d2 only contribute to m2 and m3 (Figure 4H-I',
K-L'; Figure 5C,D).
We also labeled the 1q1 blastomeres (n = 5 for each
micromere) to determine whether these cells contribute

Meyer et al. EvoDevo 2010, 1:8
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/8

Page 8 of 27

Figure 5 Micromere contributions to the prototroch in Capitella teleta. (A) Diagram drawn from a confocal slice through a stage 5 larva showing
five prototrochal cells. At this stage, each of the main rows of prototochal cells (m1, m2, m3) meets apically to form the densely ciliated region of the
prototroch. The nuclei (black circles) are positioned apically for all five prototrochal cells. (B) Cropped z-stack of merged (left image) or single-channel
(channel indicated in the top left corner of each image), confocal images through the prototroch of a late stage 6 larva after injecting 1c1 with DiI. The
images are a reflected right lateral view. The channels in the merged image are DiI (red), phalloidin (green) and TO-PRO-3 (blue). The image to the farright is a close-up view of the single-channel phalloidin image. Each row of the prototroch is indicated with a horizontal line. (C, D) Anterior and left
lateral diagrams of a late stage 6 larva showing micromere contributions to the five rows of prototrochal cells. Descendants of each micromere are
indicated by specific colors, which are shown below the diagrams (light red = 1a1, light blue = 1b1, light orange = 1c1, light green = 1d1, red = 1a2,
blue = 1b2, orange = 1c2, green = 1d2, light grey = 2a, brown = 2b, dark grey = 2c). The orientation of the diagrams or confocal images is indicated
with arrows. A = anterior, aT = accessory prototroch, D = dorsal, L = left, m = main prototroch, P = posterior, phall = phalloidin, pT = posterior accessory
prototroch, R = right, V = ventral.

Meyer et al. EvoDevo 2010, 1:8
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/8

to the prototroch. In general, descendants of 1q1 form the
entire anterior supporting prototroch (1a1, left-ventral;
1b1, right-ventral; 1c1, right-dorsal; 1d1, left-dorsal) and
part of the main prototroch, including rows m1 (1a1, left;
1b1, ventral; 1c1, right; 1d1, dorsal) and m2 (1a1, left; 1c1,
right) (Figure 5C,D). The left and right lateral sides of row
m1 are generated by 1a1 and 1c1, respectively (Figure 5BD), which also generate the left and right eyes. 1b1 and
1d1 contribute a few daughters to the ventral and dorsal
regions of the m1 prototroch row (Figure 5C). 1q1 blastomeres also generate the anterior ectoderm, the brain, a
thin ring of body ectoderm, and the 'S'-shaped cells and
sensory neurons in the trunk.
Interestingly, the boundaries of each clone within the
prototroch are not completely stereotyped. In the larvae
examined, we found intercalation between clones and
clonal boundaries that were shifted with respect to the
animal axes from animal to animal. One, two or no DiIlabeled prototrochal cells were found to be interspersed
with unlabeled cells, and the number of labeled cells separate from the bulk of the clones was not the same for all
animals. For example, the animal in Figure 4L has a single
prototrochal cell separated from the rest of the clone
(arrow); however, in other animals in which 1d2 was
labeled, no cells, several single cells, or two cells were
found separated from the bulk of the clone (not shown).
This mixing at clonal boundaries may result from the
large number of prototrochal cells generated in C. teleta
versus other spiralians in which the prototrochal cells
become mitotically arrested early in development [21]. In
C. teleta, the second (m1) and fourth (m3) rows of prototrochal cells each contained ~55 cells at late stage 6
(five animals scored: 50, 54, 54, 58 and 60 m1 cells). Cells
in the third row (m2) were more difficult to count precisely, but there appeared to be ~1 cell for every 1.4 cells
in the second row (~ 39 m2 cells). We also found that prototrochal clones were somewhat variable in cell number,
although this could be due to developmental differences.
For example, 1b1 contributed four or six cells to the m1
prototrochal row at late stage 6.
Second quartet micromeres

Second quartet micromeres in C. teleta generate the fifth
row of prototrochal cells (posterior supporting prototroch), trunk ectoderm, pygidial ectoderm, neurotroch,
telotroch, pygidial ciliary band, foregut, ventral nerve
cord ganglia, putative ectomesodermal cells and the rectum (Figure 6; Figure 7).
Micromere 2a

Descendants of 2a form the fifth row of prototrochal cells
on the left side of the larva (Figure 5C,D; Figure 6A,D,D').
These cells have a single cilium (Figure 6D' inset, arrowhead). Micromere 2a also generates the majority of the

Page 9 of 27

left foregut, including the left presumptive pharynx and
esophagus (Figure 6B,B',C) and a few cells in the left posterior mouth. In addition, 2a gives rise to cells positioned
between the mesodermal bands and endoderm on the
ventral and lateral sides of the larva, between the ectoderm and endoderm on the dorsal side of the larva, and
scattered throughout the midgut (Figure 6C). These
labeled cells have a mesenchymal shape and extend
throughout the trunk and pygidium on the left side of the
larva (similar to the pattern seen after labeling 2c) (Figure
7). During the stages analyzed, these cells had not yet
adopted a terminally differentiated phenotype; therefore
we do not know their ultimate fates. Based on their internal position and shape, these cells may be ectomesodermal. Descendants of 2a also contribute to the rectum
(Figure 6c, arrow), which is discussed further in the 'Contributions to the hindgut' section below.
Micromere 2b

Micromere 2b gives rise to the medial-ventral region of
the fifth row of prototrochal cells (Figure 5C, Figure
6E,H,H') and a small, medial-anterior region of the
foregut and mouth (Figure 6F,F',G).
Micromere 2c

The pattern of labeled cells seen after injecting 2c is a
mirror image of that after injecting 2a. Micromere 2c
generates the right side of the fifth row of prototrochal
cells (Figure 5C; Figure 6I,L,L'), the majority of the right
foregut, including the right presumptive pharynx and
esophagus (Figure 6J,J',K) and a few cells in the right posterior mouth. In addition, 2c gives rise to cells that are
concentrated on the right side of the larva and are positioned between the mesodermal bands and endoderm on
the ventral and lateral sides of the larva, between the
ectoderm and endoderm on the dorsal side of the larva,
and scattered throughout the midgut (Figure 6K; Figure
7). The 2a and 2c descendants in the midgut are distinct
from the large, yolky endodermal cells (en) (Figure 7B,B').
These 2a/2c-derived interstitial cells (is) are smaller and
are interspersed between the endodermal cells (Figure
7B,B'). Furthermore, these interstitial cells are concentrated towards the interface between the endoderm and
mesodermal bands laterally or the endoderm and ectoderm dorsally. By contrast, endodermal cell nuclei are
localized towards the interior of the gut and are not in the
same plane as nuclei of the second quartet derivatives
(Figure 7B). We hypothesize that these 2a/2c-derived
interstitial cells may contribute to visceral mesoderm.
Finally, descendants of 2c form part of the rectum (discussed below).
Micromere 2d

The 2d micromere is the largest micromere generated in
C. teleta, and is born slightly before the other second
quartet micromeres. Similar to many other annelids, in C.

Meyer et al. EvoDevo 2010, 1:8
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/8

Page 10 of 27

Figure 6 Second quartet micromeres generate foregut and trunk ectoderm. (A-T) Z-stacks of merged, confocal images of late stage 6 larvae 5
days after labeling second quartet micromeres with DiI. The channels are DiI (red), phalloidin (green) and TO-PRO-3 (blue) except for (D), (H), (L) and
(T), which are DiI and phalloidin, and (Q) and (S), which are DiI and TO-PRO-3. Panels labeled with an apostrophe (for example, B',D') are single-channel images of DiI that correspond to the multichannel images with the same letter (for example, B, D). A subset of panels are cropped, digitally magnified, z-stacks of confocal images through the foregut (B, F, J, N), prototroch (D, H, L), brain (P), forming ventral nerve cord (Q), body ectoderm (R)
and dorsal body ectoderm just posterior to the prototroch (T). In (B, F, J, N) the foregut is outlined with a dashed line. The inset in (D') is an inverted,
digitally magnified image of a single DiI-labeled prototroch cell with cilium (arrowhead). In (P) one brain lobe is outlined with a dashed line, and clusters of 2d descendants in the brain (arrow) are indicated. In (P, Q) 2d descendants in the circumesophageal connectives (arrowheads) are indicated.
In (R') the boundary between mesoderm and endoderm is indicated with a dashed line. In (T) the arrow points to unlabeled ectodermal cells (arrow).
The blastomere labeled with DiI is indicated to the left of each row and the view is indicated in the lower-left corner of each panel (dors = dorsal, vent
= ventral, llat = left lateral, rlat = right lateral). Anterior is to the left in all ventral, dorsal and left lateral images, and to the right in all right lateral images.
The position of the mouth is indicated with an asterisk. ec = ectoderm, en = endoderm, ms = mesoderm, pt = prototroch, tt = telotroch, vn = ventral
nerve cord.

teleta, descendants of 2d generate the majority of ectoderm posterior to the prototroch (Figure 6M,O,Q,R,R',S).
This includes both the segmented body ectoderm and the
non-segmented pygidial ectoderm, which are separated
by the telotroch (Figure 6M,O,S). One exception is a thin
ring of 1d-derived cells that wrap around the trunk just
posterior to the prototroch (Figure 6T,T', arrow). 2d also

forms the neurotroch (Figure 6M), telotroch (tt) (Figure
6M,S) and pygidial ciliary bands. In addition, descendants
of 2d form the ventral nerve cord (vn) (Figure 6Q), two
small clusters of cells on the left-dorsal and right-dorsal
sides of the brain (Figure 6P,P', arrow) and cells along the
circumesophageal connectives (Figure 6P,P',Q, arrowheads). Although 2d does not contribute to the foregut

Meyer et al. EvoDevo 2010, 1:8
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/8

Page 11 of 27

Figure 7 Ectomesodermal descendants from 2c. (A, B) Z-stacks of merged, confocal images from a dorsal (dors) view through a late stage 6 (A) or
a stage 8 (B) larva after labeling micromere 2c. The channels are DiI (red), phalloidin (green) and TO-PRO-3 (blue). (A') Single-channel image of DiI
staining shown in (A). (B) Cropped, digitally magnified image of the posterior trunk. (B') Single-channel phalloidin image corresponding to the multichannel image in (B). A large endodermal (en) cell and two smaller interstitial (is) cells are indicated. Anterior is to the left in all images.

(Figure 6N, N'; Figure 6O, dashed line), labeled surface
ectodermal cells extend around the mouth opening (Figure 6M).
Third quartet micromeres

The third quartet micromeres generate cells in the
mouth, a small region of internal foregut, mesoderm in
the head, and cells surrounding the anus. In addition, the
third quartet micromeres form the left and right mesodermal bands, which give rise to most of the circular and
longitudinal muscle fibers in the larva and the visceral
mesoderm surrounding the foregut (Figure 8).
Micromere 3a

In C. teleta, micromere 3a generates cells on the left side
of the mouth (Figure 8A,C) and a thin band of internally
positioned medial foregut tissue (Figure 8B,B',C). By stage
8, some 3a descendants in the foregut contribute to a

putative valve between the esophagus and midgut, which
does not appear to be part of the foregut epithelium (not
shown). Descendents of 3a also form a population of
mesodermal cells in the head (Figure 8C,D), including a
number of muscle cells with fibers extending posteriorly.
These mesodermal cells are largely concentrated on the
anterior side of the brain, with a few cells surrounding the
lateral, ventral and posterior sides of the brain (Figure 8C,
arrowhead; Figure 8D). Finally, 3a forms at least two neurons whose somas are positioned just anterior to the
mouth on the ventral face of the animal (Figure 8A,
arrowheads). Axons from these neurons extend along
both sides of the ventral nerve cord.
Micromere 3b

Descendants of 3b give rise to cells on the right side of the
mouth (Figure 8E) and a small, internally positioned,
right-medial region of anterior foregut (Figure 8F-H). By

Meyer et al. EvoDevo 2010, 1:8
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/8

Page 12 of 27

Figure 8 Third quartet micromeres form the mesodermal bands and ectodermal structures. (A-P) Z-stacks of merged, confocal images of late
stage 6 larvae 5 days after labeling third quartet micromeres with DiI. The channels are DiI (red), phalloidin (green) and TO-PRO-3 (blue). Panels labeled
with an apostrophe (for example, B', F') are single-channel images of DiI corresponding to panels with the same letter (for example, B, F). Panels (B,
F, H, J, L, N, P) are cropped, digitally magnified, z-stacks of confocal images through the foregut (dashed line). Panel (D) is a cropped, digitally magnified, z-stack of confocal images through anterior mesoderm, with brain demarcated (dashed line). Arrowheads point to DiI-labeled neurons in (A),
DiI-labeled anterior mesoderm in (C), and DiI-labeled cells surrounding the anus (I, K, M, O). Closed arrowheads point to DiI-labeled neurotroch cells
in (I, K, M, O). The blastomere labeled with DiI is indicated to the left of each row, and the view is indicated in the lower-left corner of each panel (dors
= dorsal, vent = ventral, llat = left lateral, rlat = right lateral). Anterior is to the left in all ventral and left lateral images, to the right in all right lateral
images and down in all anterior images. The position of the mouth is indicated with an asterisk.

stage 8, some 3b descendants in the foregut contribute to
a putative valve between the esophagus and midgut (not
shown). Because the 3b-derived and 3a-derived putative
valve cells are in very similar positions between the
foregut and midgut, we think it likely that they contribute
to the same valve.
Micromere 3c

The 3c micromere forms the right mesodermal band
(Figure 8I), which extends from just posterior of the telotroch anteriorly to the foregut. In general, the right mesodermal band forms both longitudinal and circular muscle
fibers, and wraps around the entire right side of the
foregut (Figure 8J.J'). Micromere 3c also generates a small
number of cells in the right-posterior mouth (Figure 8I,K

L), cells that surround the right side of the anus (Figure
8I,K, arrowhead), and a single, ciliated anterior neurotrochal cell on the ventral midline (Figure 8I,K,L, closed
arrowhead).
Micromere 3d

The 3d micromere generates the left mesodermal band
(Figure 8M), including longitudinal and circular body
wall muscle fibers and mesoderm wrapping around the
left foregut (Figure 8N,N'). 3d also gives rise to cells in the
left-posterior mouth (Figure 8M,O,P), cells surrounding
the left side of the anus (Figure 8M,O, arrowhead), and a
few anterior ciliated neurotrochal cells (Figure 8M,O,P,
closed arrowhead). In general, the 3d micromere forms a
mirror-image clone to 3c, although 3d also generates a

Meyer et al. EvoDevo 2010, 1:8
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/8

small, internally positioned, medial-posterior region of
foregut (Figure 8N,N',P).
Mesodermal band expansion

At stage 4, each mesodermal band is visible as a row of
subsurface cells that extends from the telotroch anteriorly towards the foregut. At stage 5, the right and left
mesodermal bands (Figure 9A, G, arrow), descendants

Page 13 of 27

of 3c and 3d, respectively, begin to extend muscle
fibers (Figure 9A, D, G, J). At this stage, both longitudinal (Figure 9A,G, closed arrowhead) and circular (Figure 9A, arrowhead) muscle fibers can be seen, as well
as muscle-cell soma that are positionally distinct from
the mesodermal bands. These muscle cells originate
from the mesodermal bands. Each mesodermal band is
several cells wide along the dorsoventral and

Figure 9 Mesodermal band expansion. (A-L) Single-channel, z-stacks of confocal images of larvae (dashed line) after labeling micromeres 3c or 3d
with DiI (white). In (A, G) mesodermal bands (arrows), forming circular muscle fibers (arrowheads), and forming longitudinal muscle fibers (closed arrowheads) are indicated. The blastomere labeled with DiI is indicated to the left of each row, the stage of each larva is indicated above each column
and the view is indicated to the left of each row (vent = ventral, llat = left lateral, rlat = right lateral). Anterior is to the left in all ventral and left lateral
images and to the right in all right lateral images. The position of the mouth is indicated with an asterisk. The position of the prototroch (pt) and telotroch (tt) are indicated.

Meyer et al. EvoDevo 2010, 1:8
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/8

mediodistal axes, with the exception of the posterior
end, which contains a single large cell. By stage 6, the
mesodermal bands have begun expanding circumferentially in segmental rows. The first five segments
extend dorsally (Figure 9B,H) but not ventrally (Figure
9E,K). By stage 7, most of the mesodermal segments
have expanded both dorsally (Figure 9C,I) and ventrally (Figure 9F,L), and occupy the bulk of the larval
body wall. The majority of the musculature in the head
appears to arise from 3a, although thin muscle fibers,
but not cell bodies, from 3c and 3d are visible in the
head (Figure 9A-C,F,H,I,L). Previously, precursors of
the larval body segments were described by Eisig in
1898 [14]. These structures were referred to as 'bauchplatten' or 'belly plates' and can be seen as a higher
density of nuclei in the ventrolateral body of the larva,
starting at stage 4. The belly plates expand dorsally and
posteriorly as the larva develops [14,15,22]. Expansion
of the mesodermal bands seen after labeling 3c and 3d
corresponds to recent descriptions of belly plate
expansion by Thamm and Seaver [22].
4d
Micromere 4d

When 4d is born, it is comparable in cell size to other
third and fourth quartet micromeres. Concerning its fate,
the 4d micromere generates a few longitudinal and circular body wall muscle fibers (Figure 10A-B'), although 3c
and 3d form the majority of larval muscle fibers. Descen-

Page 14 of 27

dants of 4d are found at the posteriormost end of the gut,
probably the presumptive anus (Figure 10A-B', D,D',
closed arrowhead). These cells are positioned on the surface of the larva (Figure 10D, closed arrowhead) and contact the gut lumen (gl) (Figure 10D, arrow) at late stage 6.
The 4d micromere also generates an internal pair of cell
clusters that correspond to the presumptive primordial
germ cells (pgc) (Figure 10A-C', arrowheads). These cells
are in a similar position to nanos+, vasa+ and piwi+ cells
at similar stages ([23] and Seaver laboratory, unpublished
data). After labeling 4d, we also see spots of DiI in the
endoderm. We do not think that that these DiI spots are
labeled cells, because they do not appear to contain nuclei
and they do not have a stereotypic position that remains
constant from animal to animal. It is possible that some
descendants of 4d undergo programmed cell death and
that the remnants of these cells are visible in the endoderm. At this time, we do not have evidence that 4d contributes to midgut endoderm.
Third and fourth quartet macromeres

Macromeres 3A, 3B, 3C and 4D generate the endoderm
(Figure 2N-P, R), which eventually forms the intestinal
midgut. In general, endoderm formed from 3A and 4D is
restricted to the left side of the embryo, whereas endoderm from 3B and 3C is restricted to the right side of the
embryo. Furthermore, endoderm descended from 3A and
3B is more anteriorly positioned whereas endoderm from
3C and 4D is more posteriorly positioned (Figure 2N-P,

Figure 10 Micromere 4d forms the primordial germ cells and anus. (A-D) Z-stacks of merged, confocal images of late stage 6 larvae 5 days after
labeling micromere 4d with DiI. The channels are DiI (red), phalloidin (green) and TO-PRO-3 (blue). Panels labeled with an apostrophe (for example,
A', B') are single-channel images of DiI that correspond to panels with the same letter (for example, A, B). Panels (C, D) are cropped, digitally magnified,
z-stacks of confocal images showing the primordial germ cells (pgc) and anus, respectively. In (A-C) arrowheads point to primordial germ cells. In (A,
B, D) a closed arrowhead points to DiI-labeled anal cells. In (B) the position of the mouth is marked with an asterisk. In (D) an arrow points to the gut
lumen (gl). The view is indicated in the lower-right corner of each panel (vent = ventral, llat = left lateral). Anterior is to the left in all images.

Meyer et al. EvoDevo 2010, 1:8
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/8

R), although the position of the clones within the gut varies from animal to animal.
Contributions to the hindgut
Formation of the anus

Because several cells (2d, 3c, 3d and 4d) contribute to a
small region at the posterior end of the larva, including
the anus, we examined the relative position of these
clones from a posterior view using confocal laser scanning microscopy (Figure 11). At late stage 6, there is a
rosette (diagrams) of surface cells in the center of the
pygidium (Figure 11A-D). The number of cells in the
rosette increases from stage 5 to early stage 7. Immediately beneath this rosette, concentric rings of muscle
fibers surround the rectum and possibly the posterior end
of the midgut (Figure 11I-L). The forming gut lumen (gl)
is also visible in the center of the rectum (Figure 10D, Figure 11L, arrow). 2d descendants form the majority of
pygidial ectoderm. On the surface, 2d descendants form a
large number of the rosette cells and cells surrounding
the rosette (Figure 11, 2d diagram; Figure 11A, A', E, E').
At a deeper focal plane, 2d descendants can be seen in the
pygidial ectoderm that surrounds the rectum (Figure
11I,I'). Descendants of micromere 3c form the right outer
ring of rosette cells (Figure 11, 3c diagram; Figure
111B,B',F,F'). These cells extend below the surface and, at
a deeper focal plane, abut the border between the musclefiber rings and the rectum (Figure 11J,J'). The posterior
clone arising from micromere 3d is a mirror image of that
generated by 3c (compare diagram 3d with 3c in Figure
11; Figure 11C,C',G,G',K,K'). The cells generated by 3c
and 3d form some of the concentric rings of muscle
fibers, although they appear to be only a subset of the
fibers visible with phalloidin staining (not shown). We
could not determine whether other micromeres also contribute to these muscle rings. Finally, 4d descendants
form a few cells in the center of the rosette (Figure 11, 4d
diagram; Figure 11D,D',H,H'). These 4d rosette cells
extend from the surface towards the interior, where they
contact the gut lumen (Figure 10D). We hypothesize that
these 4d descendants form the future anus. 4d does not
appear to generate any subsurface cells in the posterior
end of the larva (Figure 11L,L').
Formation of the rectum

Because the gut continues to form throughout larval
development, we scored descendant clones at later stages
(stage 8, 7 days after labeling) (Figure 12) to examine
more closely the micromere contributions to the posterior end of the alimentary canal. We individually injected
micromeres 2a, 2c, 3Q and 4d with DiI. At stage 8, 1 day
before metamorphosis, regions within the posterior end
of the gut are more readily discernible than at stage 6. At
stage 8, a gut lumen can be seen extending from the posterior end of the esophagus to the anus, but not through

Page 15 of 27

it (Figure 12D-F). At this stage, the rectum is distinguishable from the midgut intestine by a few morphological
traits. First, the nuclear organization and cell size of the
rectal cells are distinct from the intestinal cells, which are
larger and more loosely organized (Figure 12F). Second,
the gut lumen narrows along the dorsoventral axis as it
passes from the intestine into the rectum (Figure 12D).
Third, the rectal portion of the gut lumen is more densely
ciliated than the intestinal portion of the lumen when
analyzed by anti-acetylated-tubulin staining (NPM,
unpublished observations). We found that descendants of
3C and 3D form the posterior end of the intestine, but not
the rectum (Figure 12A,A'). Descendants of 2a and 2c
form the rectum (Figure 12B,B'), whereas descendants of
4d form the presumptive anus (Figure 12C,C'). Interestingly, the anal cells derived from 4d do not appear to
change in shape or number (four cells) from stage 6 to
stage 8 (compare Figure 10D,D' with Figure 12C,C').

Discussion
Axial relationships of the micromere quartets

In spiralians for which a fate map exists, it has been noted
that descendants of the micromere quartets are arranged
similarly along the larval/adult body axes [6]. In the polyclad platyhelminth Hoploplana inquilina, the nemertean
Cerebratulus lacteus, the mollusk Patella vulgata, and the
annelids C. teleta and P. dumerilii, first quartet micromeres generate the left-ventral (1a), right-ventral (1b),
right-dorsal (1c) and left-dorsal (1d) tissues. For the second and third quartet micromeres, the pattern seems less
conserved. In H. inquilina and C. lacteus, second quartet
micromeres are segregated into left (2a), right (2c), ventral (2b) and dorsal (2d) positions, whereas in P. vulgata
and C. teleta, 2a and 2c clones are segregated into left and
right positions, respectively. Descendants of third quartet
micromeres are distributed similarly to those of the first
quartet in C. lacteus and P. vulgata (Figure 13, Figure
14A-C) [12,24-26]. In some spiralians, the symmetry
between sets of clones is more conserved than the position of the clones relative to the animal axes. For example,
in C. lacteus, P. vulgata, llyanassa obsoleta, Crepidula fornicata, C. teleta and Helobdella robusta, 2a/2c and 3c/3d
are mirror-image clones (Figure 14B, C) [10,25-28]. In the
mollusks P. vulgata, I. obseleta and C. fornicata, and the
nemertean C. lacteus, 3a/3b descendants also generate
mirror-image clones [10,25,26,28]. In two annelids and a
nemertean (C. teleta, H. robusta, P. dumerilii and C. lacteus), 1a/b and 1c/d generate mirror-image clones (Figure
14A) [12,26,27], whereas in mollusks (Chaetopleura apiculata, I. obseleta, C. fornicata), 1a/1c generate mirrorimage clones [8,10,29]. Thus, although there are some
similarities, the contributions relative to the plane of
bilateral symmetry vary between micromere quartets
within and across species.

Meyer et al. EvoDevo 2010, 1:8
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/8

Page 16 of 27

Figure 11 Multiple micromeres contribute to the region surrounding the presumptive anus. (A-L) Z-stacks of merged, confocal images of late
stage 6 larvae 5 days after labeling micromeres 2d (column 1), 3c (column 2), 3d (column 3) or 4d (column 4) with DiI. The channels are DiI (red), phalloidin (green) and TO-PRO-3 (blue). Panels labeled with an apostrophe (for example, A', B') are single-channel images of DiI that correspond to panels
with the same letter (for example, A, B). The depths of the confocal z-stacks, starting at the surface (A-D) and progressing into the larva, are indicated
to the left of each row. The diagrams at the top of each column are of the posterior rosette cells and are drawn from the images immediately below
them (that is, surface z-stacks). In (L) an arrow points to the forming gut lumen (gl). All images are from a posterior view with ventral down.

Meyer et al. EvoDevo 2010, 1:8
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/8

Page 17 of 27

Figure 12 Contributions to the developing gut at stage 8. (A-C) Cropped z-stacks of merged, confocal images through the posterior end of stage
8 larvae at the level of the gut lumen 7 days after labeling 3C, 2c or 4d with DiI. The channels are DiI (red), phalloidin (green) and TO-PRO-3 (blue). The
cell labeled with DiI is indicated in the upper-right corner. Panels labeled with an apostrophe (for example, A', B') are single-channel images of DiI
corresponding to panels with the same letter (for example, A, B). (D-F) Single-channel confocal z-stacks through the posterior end of stage 8 larvae
labeled with phalloidin (D, E) or TO-PRO-3 (F) to show the intestinal lumen or cell nuclei, respectively. Panels (E, F) are corresponding single-channel
images from (C). The view is indicated in the lower-right corner of each panel (vent = ventral, lat = lateral). Anterior is to the left in all images. mg =
midgut, rc = rectum.

Origins of nervous systems

In annelids, the majority of anterior unsegmented ectoderm is generated by the 1q micromeres, whereas the
majority of segmented trunk ectoderm is generated by
the 2d micromere. Furthermore, the brain or supraesoph-

ageal ganglion comes from 1q (1q1 where studied), and
the ventral nerve cord comes from 2d in Amphitrite
ornata, Nereis, Scoloplos armiger, Helobdella and C.
teleta (Figure 13; Figure 14A,B) [12,27,30-34]. Within the
context of the largely conserved origin of the annelid cen-

Meyer et al. EvoDevo 2010, 1:8
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/8

Page 18 of 27

Figure 13 Lineage tree showing blastomere fates in Capitella teleta. D = dorsal, L = left, pT = posterior supporting prototroch, R = right, V = ventral.

tral nervous system from 1q and 2d, we find some unique
features in C. teleta. Micromeres 1c1 and 1d1 generate the
majority of the brain with only minor contributions from
1a1 and 1b1 (Figure 13; Figure 14A,B). Furthermore, a
small population of 2d-derived cells are found in the

brain and positioned along the circumesophageal connectives (Figure 6P,Q; Figure 14B). Second quartet contributions to the brain have not been reported in annelids.
However, in the leech H. robusta, daughters of 2d (dnopq'
and dnopq") form putative glial cells in the supraesophageal

Meyer et al. EvoDevo 2010, 1:8
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/8

Page 19 of 27

Figure 14 Summary fate map diagrams for Capitella teleta. (A-D) Patterns seen after injecting DiI into individual micromeres or third quartet macromeres in C. teleta. Each panel corresponds to one micromere tier, and each color corresponds to one quadrant. The views are ventral, left lateral
through the mouth, anterior through the brain, anterior through the foregut, and posterior through the forming anus. D = dorsal, L = left, R = right, V
= ventral.

Meyer et al. EvoDevo 2010, 1:8
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/8

ganglion [27,35]. Based on their position, we think it is
unlikely that the 2d-derived brain cells in C. teleta are
glial.
There are several other cells that make minor contributions to the nervous system in the trunk of annelids. In C.
teleta, 1c1 and 1d1 give rise to putative trunk sensory neurons, and 3a generates two neurons near the mouth. In H.
robusta, micromeres 2a, 2c, 3c and 3d (a", c", c''', d''',
respectively) are all reported to give rise to putative neurons and/or mesenchyme in the proboscis and the anterior sucker. Furthermore, 3a (a''') forms a pair of neuronlike cells in the subesophageal ganglion that project to the
proboscis and posteriorly into the trunk [27]. This pair of
neurons is similar in description to the pair of 3a-derived
neurons by the mouth in C. teleta (Figure 8A, arrowheads). Unfortunately, we were unable to determine
whether micromeres other than 1q, 2d and 3a generate
neurons in C. teleta. Based on clonal position, we think it
likely that the rows of peripheral neurons in the trunk are
formed by 2d, and clusters of neurons in the foregut are
derived from 2a and 2c. Taken together, these results suggest that the origin of the annelid nervous system from 1q
and 2d is fairly conserved, although species-specific variations may emerge once more animals are studied in
detail.
Direct comparisons of nervous system fate maps
between annelids and other spiralians are more difficult.
In gastropod mollusks, the ganglia of the central nervous
system arise later in larval development [36-38], making
fate mapping technically challenging. The nemertean C.
lacteus undergoes a radical metamorphosis, with the larval nervous system being entirely replaced by derivatives
of imaginal discs. The polyclad flatworm H. inquilina also
has a biphasic life cycle, and the relationship of the larval
nervous system to the adult nervous system is not clear.
In the mollusks that have been examined, the anterior
ectoderm is formed by descendants of the first quartet
micromeres [8,10,25,29]. This suggests that the apical
ganglion and the cerebral ganglia are generated by 1q
micromeres, similar to annelids. There are some data that
support this hypothesis. In C. fornicata, 1a, 1c and 1d
contribute to the apical ganglion [10], and in C. apiculata, descendants of 1c1 and 1d1 form the apical organ [8].
A similar situation may exist in C. lacteus, as micromeres
1a and 1b were reported to give rise to the left and right
larval cephalic discs [26]. In other nemerteans that
develop via a pilidium larva (heteronemerteans), the
cephalic discs are thought to generate the head ectoderm
and cerebral ganglia of the juvenile [39-41].
Fate maps of ganglia in the body are more complicated
to compare. In mollusks, the nemertean C. lacteus, and
the polyclad flatworm H. inquilina, the 2d 'primary somatoblast' does not form the majority of body ectoderm as it
does in annelids [8-10,21,24,26,28]], and contributions to

Page 20 of 27

ganglia in the body may also be more variable. In C. fornicata, 2b contributes to the supra-intestinal and sub-intestinal ganglia, and 2a and 2c contribute to the left and
right pedal ganglia. Interestingly, 2d gives rise to the posterior mantle cell [10], which is one of the first neurons to
differentiate, and its axons may serve as a scaffold for
later central nervous system development [36,38].
Peripheral neurons in C. fornicata are generated by all 1q
and 2q micromeres [10], whereas third quartet contributions to the nervous system have not yet been determined. In C. lacteus and H. inquilina, the first quartet
forms the bulk of the larval ectoderm, and descendants of
many first to third quartet micromeres contribute to the
larval nervous system [24,26]. However, in heteronemerteans, the origin of the juvenile central nervous system in
the trunk is not clear and awaits results from fate-mapping experiments. In contrast to annelids, in which 2d
forms the majority of trunk ectoderm and all of the ganglia in the ventral nerve cord, multiple blastomeres may
generate the central and peripheral nervous systems in
the body of these other spiralians.
Origins of ciliated bands

Patterns of ciliation (for example, ciliated 'bands') in
marine larvae have played a central role in debates about
the homology of larval structures and life history evolution across metazoan taxa [42-47]. The evolutionary significance of ciliary bands in metazoans remains
unresolved. For example, some authors think that ciliated
bands evolved as feeding structures associated with
planktotrophy [48-53], whereas others argue that they are
primarily locomotory in lecithotropic species [54-59].
Spiralians are a rich group of animals in which to explore
these issues, as the pelagic phases of their life cycle bear
many distinct ciliated structures (for example, akrotroch,
prototroch, metatroch, telotroch and neurotroch), and
the developmental origins of ciliated structures can be
followed in detail due to the stereotyped spiral cleavage
program.
Modern intracellular cell-lineage studies such as the
work presented here give insights into some of these
issues. The prototroch is found in a wide variety of spiralian groups (including polychaetes, echiurans, sipunculans, mollusks, nemerteans and entoprocts), and
generally consists of multiple rows of cells bearing cilia.
These larval cells are shed during metamorphosis and are
often larger in size than adjacent cells because they
become mitotically arrested during early cleavage stages.
In general, the 1q12 micromeres (accessory trochoblasts)
contribute to the anteriormost prototrochal row (anterior
supporting row), 1q2 micromeres (primary trochoblasts)
largely form the two most heavily ciliated prototrochal
rows (main prototroch) and the 2q11 micromeres (secondary trochoblasts) contribute to the posteriormost

Meyer et al. EvoDevo 2010, 1:8
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/8

prototrochal row (posterior supporting row). There are
variations in this pattern, and each tier of trochoblasts
has been shown to contribute to multiple prototrochal
rows. These generalizations are based on many early lineage studies (including [14,33,34,60-62] and on more
recent intracellular fate mapping experiments in mollusks
and a paleonemertean [10,28,29,63-65]. The same general
pattern of contributions to each tier is found in C. teleta
(Figure 5). To our knowledge, C. teleta is the only polychaete in which the precursors of all tiers of prototrochal
precursors have been individually labeled. The clonal
contribution to each row is less stereotyped than other
studied spiralians, which is probably due to the relatively
large number of cells in the prototroch. For example, in
many mollusks, the entire prototroch can contain as few
as 20 to 40 cleavage arrested cells [21], whereas the prototroch in C. teleta is composed of hundreds of smaller
cells that interdigitate at clonal boundaries.
In spiralians, the D quadrant appears to have reduced
its contribution to the prototroch relative to the other
three quadrants. In most species studied, including C.
teleta, the 2a, 2b and 2c, but not 2d micromeres make a
contribution to the prototroch. The prototroch of the
polychaetes A. ornata and Podarke obscura and the gastropod C. fornicata do not appear to have a contribution
from 2d [10,34,62]. In P. obscura, descendents of 1a1, 1b1
and 1c1, but not 1d1 contribute to the prototroch [66]. In
the chiton C. apiculata, the third quartet micromere, 3d,
makes only a minor contribution to the prototroch [8]. In
summary, the prototroch is widely found among spiralians, and the shared embryological origins of the prototroch between species provide evidence of it being a
homologous structure.
Detailed information on the developmental origin of
other trochal bands such as the metatroch, telotroch and
neurotroch is much more limited. Intracellular fate-mapping studies of these other ciliated bands have not been
performed on many species and they are not found on all
spiralian taxa. For example, aplacophoran mollusk larvae
have a telotroch [67], but gastropod mollusks and nemerteans do not have telotrochs or neurotrochs, although
some mollusks have ciliated bands along the midline of
the foot. Within annelids, not all polychaetes possess the
same complement of ciliary bands. For example, P.
dumerilii does not possess a neurotroch or telotroch. The
neurotroch in the polychaete S. armiger is reported to be
derived from the third quartet micromeres 3c and 3d
[30]. In C. teleta, the first species in which intracellular
lineage tracers were used to study the origin of a neurotroch, most of the neurotroch is generated by the 2d
micromere (Figure 14B), whereas only small contributions near the mouth are provided by 3c and 3d (Figure 8,
closed arrowheads). The telotroch and pygidial ciliary
bands in C. teleta are generated entirely by derivatives of

Page 21 of 27

the 2d micromere (Figure 13, Figure 14B). The metatroch, the quintessential ciliary band required for
'opposed band feeding' in spiralian larvae, is not present
in nemerteans nor in the majority of polychaete families,
such as Capitellidae, which includes C. teleta [55,56]. The
origin of the metatroch has only been studied in a single
species of polychaete, Polygordius, in which it was
reported to be derived from the third quartet micromeres
3c and 3d [68]. If true, then the metatroch of Polygordius
is not developmentally homologous with the secondary
ciliary band or the ciliated food grove of the molluscan
velum, which are derived from 2a, 2b and 2c [10]. In
another example, the third quartet micromeres 3a and 3b
and derivatives of all first and second quartet micromeres
give rise to the ciliated bands in the pilidium larva of the
nemertean C. lacteus [26]. Thus, it appears that distinct
blastomeres can be co-opted to form various ciliated
bands in different spiralian lineages.
Nielsen suggests that prototrochs, metatrochs and telotrochs are all derived from a circumblastoporal ciliated
band in a radially symmetrical, holopelagic ancestor, and
that their differentiation was established in connection
with the evolution of a new body axis, the anterior-posterior axis, forming at an angle to the primary, apical-blastoporal axis [46,52,69]. This is unlikely because most
ciliated bands are not derived from the vicinity of the
blastopore, which forms at the vegetal pole [70]. Furthermore, the multiple embryonic origins of ciliary bands
imply that not all ciliary bands are homologous. The distinct embryological origins of ciliary bands and the multitude of ciliary band types in spiralians indicate that ciliary
bands are evolutionarily labile, thus caution must be used
in making statements about homology across distantly
related taxa.
Origins of mesoderm

The developmental origins of mesodermal cell types in C.
teleta represent significant modifications of the typical
spiralian fate map. One of the most important findings
from spiralian cell-lineage studies is the documentation
of dual embryological origins of mesoderm. One source is
from ectomesoderm (cells that give rise to both ectodermal and mesodermal derivatives) and the other from
endomesoderm ('embryonic precursors of both mesoderm and the endodermally derived intestine') [6,7].
Endomesoderm arises from a single fourth quartet
micromere in the D quadrant, 4d, and its origin from 4d
is a highly conserved feature within Spiralia (Table 2). In
C. teleta, 4d generates mesodermal cell types typically
found in other spiralians, including primordial germ cells
and muscle cells, but it does not contribute to the endodermally derived intestine (Figure 13; Figure 14D).
Although 4d makes a small contribution to the posterior
gut in C. teleta, this contribution is to the anus, an ecto-

Meyer et al. EvoDevo 2010, 1:8
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/8

Page 22 of 27

Table 2: Embryological sources of mesoderm in spiraliansa,b.
Species

Ectomesoderm

Endomesoderm

Reference

Nemertean

Cerebratulus

3a, 3b

4d

[26]

Polyclad tubellarian

Hoploplana

2b

4d

[9,24]

Chaetopleura

None

3D

[8]

Patella

3a, 3b

3D

[25]

Ilyanassa

2b, 2c, 3d,
3A, 3B, 3C

4d

[28]

Crepidula

2c, 3a, 3b

4d

[10]

Helobdella

1a (a'), 1b (b'), 1c (c'), 1d (d'), 3a (a'''), 3c (c'''), 3d (dm')
4d (DM'')

None

[27,32]

Platynereis

1A, 1B, 1C, 1D

4d

[12]

Capitella

2a?, 2c?, 3a, 3b?, 3c, 3d, 4d

none

This report

Mollusk

Annelid

aExamples

included are taken from fate maps determined through use of intracellular lineage tracers injected into embryos at the 8-64 cell

stage.
bOnly

blastomeres with confirmed mesoderm descendants are included.

dermal structure (Figure 10D). Therefore, we argue that
in C. teleta, 4d is not a mesentoblast, but a mesectoblast.
At first glance, it seems possible that 3D is the mesentoblast in C. teleta, because its descendants contribute to
both the endodermal midgut and mesodermal structures.
However, 3D also generates ectoderm (4d-derived anus),
eliminating it as a mesentoblast candidate (Figure 14C).
The descendants of 4d (DM'') in Helobdella are similar to
those on C. teleta: 4d generates mesoderm and ectoderm,
but not endoderm [32]. In the classic spiralian literature,
there are other examples of 4d generating only mesoderm
in polychaete annelids, including in A. ornata and Arenicola cristata [34,60]; however, these reports need to be
confirmed by direct intracellular labeling experiments. It
will be important to determine how widespread is the 4d
restriction to mesodermal fates within Annelida.
In Wilson's initial account of Nereis development, all 4d
derivatives were described to be mesodermal [33]. However, after Conklin's characterization of the Crepidula cell
lineage [5], Wilson re-examined the early cleavages of 4d
in Nereis and observed small daughter cells of 4d born
before the formation of the mesodermal bands. These
daughter cells contributed descendants to the posterior
endodermal archenteron [7]. Wilson proposed an evolutionary scenario to explain the observed variation in the
relative contribution of 4d to endoderm and mesoderm in

spiralians [7]. He speculated that in the ancestral spiralian
form, fourth quartet micromeres generated only endoderm. In subsequent spiralian descendants, mesodermal
derivatives eventually segregated entirely to 4d. Over
time, the capacity of 4d to form endoderm was reduced in
annelids. From a current phylogenetic framework, it is
difficult to find support for the idea that the spiralian
ancestor lacked endomesoderm, because it is likely, based
on comparative molecular and lineage studies, that endomesoderm was present in the bilaterian ancestor [71-74].
In contrast to the relatively conserved embryological
origin of endomesoderm, the origin of ectomesoderm is
more variable across spiralians (Table 2). In C. teleta,
micromeres 3a, 3c, 3d, 4d and possibly 2a, 2c and 3b generate ectomesoderm (Figure 13, Figure 14B-D), and the
contribution to ectomesoderm by second and third quartet micromeres is shared with mollusks, annelids and
nemerteans. A notable exception is the generation of
head mesoderm by first quartet micromeres in H. robusta
(Table 2) [27]. Newby also described a contribution to
mesoderm from first quartet micromeres in the echiuran
Urechis caupo [75], although this has not been directly
confirmed by intracellular lineage tracers. It is notable
that the B quadrant does not generate mesoderm in C.
teleta, with a minor possible exception of the 3b-derived
valve between the esophagus and midgut, which may be

Meyer et al. EvoDevo 2010, 1:8
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/8

mesodermal. B quadrant contributions to ectomesoderm
are commonly found in spiralians, including in C. lacteus,
P. vulgata, I. obsoleta, C. fornicata, Helobdella and P.
dumerilii. In H. inquilina, 2b appears to be the only ectomesoblast (Table 2).
In addition to 4d not being a 'mesentoblast' in C. teleta,
there is another modification of the typical 4d descendant
fates. In most spiralians, 4d gives rise to the mesodermal
bands, which extend along the anterioposterior axis and
contribute to the trunk mesoderm [76]. In C. teleta, the
mesodermal bands are generated by the third quartet
micromeres 3c and 3d rather than by 4d (Figure 13; Figure 14C). In his classic study of Capitella development,
Eisig also noted that 3c and 3d generate the coelomic linings [14]. Mesodermal bands arising from the 3c and 3d
micromeres have not been previously reported for any
other spiralian. Although generation of the mesodermal
bands by 3c and 3d is unique to Capitella among the animals studied to date, other descendent cell types generated by 3c and 3d, such as contributions to the
stomodeum, are shared with P. vulgata, H. inquilina and
C. lacteus [24-26]. In addition, in H. robusta and probably
in P. dumerilii, 3c and 3d generate mesoderm closely
associated with the foregut [12,27], a pattern shared with
C. teleta. Among the spiralians that have been examined
by intracellular fate mapping experiments, contributions
to visceral mesoderm by third quartet micromeres have
not been reported outside annelids. In conclusion, modifications of the spiralian program are complex, and do
not represent simple heterochronic shifts of fate or
whole-cell fate transformations. In C. teleta, unlike in
most other spiralians, the size of the 4d blastomere is not
obviously larger than other fourth quartet micromeres,
and the 3c and 3d micromeres are similar in size to the
other third quartet micromeres. It is interesting to consider whether 4d acts as the organizer in C. teleta, as it
does in some other spiralians [76], or whether this function is now assumed by cells that generate the mesodermal bands (3c and 3d).
In summary, the generation of the mesodermal bands
by 3c and 3d in C. teleta represents a radical departure
from the highly conserved 4d-derived mesodermal bands
described in other spiralians. Furthermore, our lineage
results indicate that although several distinct micromeres
generate mesodermal derivatives in C. teleta, all of these
arise from ectomesoderm, a feature shared with another
annelid, Helobdella.
Origins of the alimentary canal
Foregut

In spiralians, the anterior region of the gut is commonly
derived from second (2q) and third quartet (3q) micromeres, although the contribution of particular blastomeres
to mouth and foregut tissue varies among polychaete spe-

Page 23 of 27

cies, and between polychaete annelids and other spiralian
taxa. Classic cell-lineage studies use the term 'stomatoblast' when referring to blastomeres that line the oral cavity and show that stomatoblasts are micromere
derivatives of 2a to 2c in Nereis, 3a to 3d in A. cristata, 2a
to 2c, 3a and 3b in S. armiger, and 2b, 3a and 3b in P.
obscura [30,33,60,66]. These results are somewhat confusing because interpretations of particular cell fates are
based on the author's definition of 'stomodeum' (stomodeum synonymous with pharynx [33], stomodeum synonymous with mouth [60]). Furthermore, some of these
earlier studies inferred the fates of anterior gut cells based
upon their positions during gastrulation. Some authors
assumed that the mouth forms from the blastopore (A.
cristata [60], P. obscura [66], S. armiger [30]), whereas
others directly observed a distinct stomodeal opening at
later stages (Nereis [33], A. ornata [34], Capitella [14]).
Therefore, details from earlier fate maps of polychaetes
should be interpreted and compared with caution.
In the fate map of C. teleta that we generated by intracellular injections, descendants of 2a to 2c and 3a to 3d
contribute to cells in the mouth (Figure 13; Figure 14B,C).
These results are generally consistent with results from
classic lineage studies that examined micromere contributions to the stomodeum in other polychaete annelids.
In C. teleta, the larval pharynx and esophagus show
major contributions from 2a (left side) and 2c (right side)
lineages, and a moderate contribution from 2b (centralanterior) (Figure 13; Figure 14B), which are similar in lineage and axial position to blastomeres traced by traditional methods in Nereis, S. armiger and probably A.
cristata [30,33,60]. Taken together with C. teleta, these
four polychaete species generate four distinct foregut
architectures in the adult, but during developmental
stages, the same micromeres form similar regions of the
foregut. The larvae of these four species are predominantly lecithotrophic, and fate maps may be less conserved between these species and planktotrophic larvae
that undergo substantial changes in larval tissues and
organ systems during metamorphosis.
Modern fate maps have been published only for one
other polychaete species, P. dumerilii [12]. In that study,
'stomodeum' broadly refers to the developing foregut, and
contributions to the foregut fates were often inferred,
because second or third quartet blastomeres were not
injected directly. By injecting blastomeres at the eight-cell
stage, Ackerman et al. showed that descendents of 1A
and 1C, inferred to be 2a2 and 2c2, contribute to the left
and right stomodeum, respectively [12]. There was no
apparent contribution to stomodeal tissue from 1B or 1D.
This is in contrast to our findings in C. teleta, in which
descendents of both B and D lineages could be traced to
the mouth and/or foregut tissue (Figure 13; Figure
14B,C). Regarding oral ectoderm, Ackerman et al. [12]

Meyer et al. EvoDevo 2010, 1:8
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/8

further corrected Wilson's [33] interpretations by stating
that 3a to 3d are unlikely to be involved in 'the general
ectoblast of the circum-oral and circum-anal regions.'
This observation is notable because we show by direct
injection that 3a to 3d generate ciliated ectodermal cells
of the mouth in C. teleta. In the annelid H. robusta,
Huang et al. found that all four first quartet micromeres
contribute to the proboscis, along with 2a, 2c (a", c") and
3a and 3c (a''', c'''; discussed below) [27]. Second quartet
micromeres having foregut-related fates are consistent
with our findings in C. teleta; however, first quartet
micromere contributions represent a significant departure from both modern and traditional cell-lineage studies in polychaetes.
Modern fate maps from molluscan and polyclad turbellarian embryos also show important differences from our
map in C. teleta. For example, the respective foregut fates
of second and third quartet micromeres in gastropod
mollusks are essentially reversed in position relative to
the 2q and 3q micromeres in polychaete annelids. In
veliger larvae of both C. fornicata and I. obsoleta, 2q
descendants give rise to the cells lining the mouth, and 3q
descendants form the esophagus [10,28]. Within the trochophore larva of the limpet, P. vulgata, 2b, 3c and 3d
all have internally positioned foregut fates [25]. In the
polyclad H. inquilina, micromeres 2a, 2b and 2c contribute to oral ectoderm and associated cilia, whereas 3a, 3b
and 3c were found to label oral cilia [24]. Only one third
quartet micromere, 3d, makes a significant contribution
to the mouth in H. inquilina. Although the relative positions of 2q and 3q descendants in the stomodeum of H.
inquilina correlate with our results, one difference is that
in C. teleta, 2a, 2b and 2c micromeres generate internal
foregut tissues, unlike the pattern from any 2q labeling
observed by Boyer et al. [24]. One generalization that can
be made here is that micromeres from A and C quadrants
in mollusk and polyclad embryos generate, respectively,
the left and right structures of the larval mouth and
foregut. For instance, Boyer et al. observed that in the
blind gut of H. inquilina, 2a and 2c micromeres contribute to left and right regions of the stomodeum [24], which
also applies to C. teleta and other polychaetes. However,
there are important foregut-specific contributions in C.
teleta that do not conform to any general patterns, at least
until more spiralian taxa are examined by modern fatemapping techniques.
Midgut

The midgut in C. teleta and its intestinal counterpart in
other spiralians are derived entirely from endoderm. In
most spiralian taxa for which cell-lineage data are available, including mollusks, annelids, nemerteans and
sipunculans, 3A, 3B and 3C macromeres and all of their
descendants generate midgut endoderm. Both descen-

Page 24 of 27

dents of 3D (4D, 4d) also generate endoderm in mollusk,
nemertean and sipunculan embryos [10,26,28,77]. In
polychaetes, 4D contributes to endoderm. 4d also contributes to endoderm tissue in some polychaete species
[7,66], but not in others [12,30,34,60] including C. teleta
(Figure 13; Figure 14D).
Similar to the axial map of micromere derivatives in
both the foregut and nervous system, macromeres in C.
teleta also contribute to the intestine in a quadrant-specific pattern. Descendants of 3A and 4D are located predominantly on the left side and those of 3B and 3C on the
right side (Figure 14C). In P. dumerilii, 1A and 1C give
rise to left and right midgut anlagen [12], which is consistent with a general pattern of quadrant-specific endoderm contributions in polychaetes. Our intracellular
labeling also shows that the macromere contribution to
anterior midgut in C. teleta makes a relatively abrupt
junction with the esophagus, and therefore we conclude
that there is no endodermal component of the foregut in
this species. Furthermore, the macromere contribution to
the intestine abuts the rectum at its posterior end, thus,
endodermal cells do not generate hindgut tissue during
larval development.
Hindgut

Compared with other gut territories, the posterior end of
the alimentary canal or 'hindgut', has received little attention from previous cell-lineage studies on polychaetes.
Traditionally the hindgut of polychaetes has been defined
as a proctodeal invagination of ectoderm [18,19], implying that cells lining the rectal canal are internalized derivatives of surface ectoderm. However, in some spiralian
cell-lineage studies, the hindgut has been described as
endodermal [10,28]. For example, in gastropod mollusks,
the posterior end of the gut or intestine is endodermal
and derives from descendants of 4d [10,28,76]. The 4dderived portion of the larval gut in C. teleta consists
solely of a few surface cells restricted to the presumptive
anus, which we interpret as ectodermal. Late in larval
development, the gut canal passes through the posterior
midgut and rectum, but not the presumptive anus. Based
on this observation and our lineage data, we suggest that
an anal opening is the last developmental step in forming
a through gut in C. teleta, and that the hindgut (rectum
plus anus) does not form by a proctodeal invagination of
ectoderm. During metamorphosis the hindgut region
probably undergoes structural modifications, and with
further development, it becomes considerably longer
than it was before the metamorphic transition from a
non-feeding larva to a juvenile worm. We think it likely
that the 2a/2c-derived rectum undergoes such structural
modification.
I6P. dumerilii, Poonamali cellular contributions to the
proctodeum have not been characterized [12], whereas in

Meyer et al. EvoDevo 2010, 1:8
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/8

Nereis, Wilson mentions that 3q micromeres contribute
to 'portions' of the circum-anal region [33]. Only
Treadwell reports that specific micromere descendents of
2d2, 3c and 3d contribute to the proctodeal wall of P.
obscura [66]. In C. teleta, we found that the rectum is
derived from 2a and 2c, whereas the surrounding tissues
are generated from 2d, 3c and 3d micromeres (Figure
14B, C), including a ring-like system of musculature that
may function as a sphincter apparatus. The rectum abuts
the 3C/4D-derived midgut endoderm on its anterior end
and the 4d-derived presumptive anus on its posterior end
(Figure 14C,D). Our map of this region establishes the
most complete modern reference of posterior gut territories to date, and provides a framework that may be used
to assess whether any generalized trends exist in other
spiralians.

Conclusions
Intracellular injection of the lineage tracer DiI into individual blastomeres (1q, 1q1, 1q2, 2q, 3q, 4d, 2Q, 3Q and
4D) in C. teleta has provided the most complete fate map
for any polychaete annelid to date. Many features of the
C. teleta fate map are similar to those found in other
annelids, including the generation of the anterior ectoderm and prototroch by first quartet micromeres and the
majority of post-trochal ectoderm by the primary
somatoblast 2d. Increased resolution through the use of
confocal laser scanning microscopy enabled us to generate a detailed fate map for regions such as the prototroch,
mesoderm, nervous system and gut. Our analyses reveal
complex contributions to these structures from several
blastomere lineages. For example, more cells contribute
to the posterior gut than previously documented for any
other spiralian and four to seven distinct blastomeres
generate mesoderm in C. teleta, all from ectomesodermal
sources. We also identified modifications of the typical
spiralian fate map in C. teleta; the most dramatic difference is the formation of the mesodermal bands by 3c and
3d rather than by 4d, which generates the mesodermal
bands in all other spiralians examined. The fate map of C.
teleta will provide a framework for future comparisons
with other spiralian fate maps and the foundation for
functional experiments of cell-fate determination in this
species.
Methods
Animal care

A laboratory colony of C. teleta was maintained and
embryos were collected as described previously [15], with
the exception that adult animals were kept in filtered seawater (FSW) (passed through 20 μm filter) at 19°C. After
injection, embryos were raised at 19°C in FSW (through
0.2 μm filter) with 60 μg/ml penicillin (Sigma-Aldrich

Page 25 of 27

Co., St Louis, MO, USA) and 50 μg/ml streptomycin
(Sigma-Aldrich Co.) added.
DiI labeling

For injections, the egg shell was permeabilized by a 30second incubation in a 1:1 mixture of fresh 1 mol/L
sucrose and 0.25 mol/L sodium citrate followed by two to
three rinses with FSW. Individual blastomeres were pressure-injected with 1 part DiIC18(3) (1,1'-dioctadecyl3,3,3',3'-tetramethylindocarbocyanine perchlorate; Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) saturated in ethanol to 19
parts soybean oil (Wesson; ConAgra Foods Inc., Omaha,
NE, USA) using aluminosilicate needles (Sutter Instrument Co., Novata, CA, USA). After labeling, uninjected
and injected animals from the same brood (same stage of
development) were raised for the same amount of time,
and rates of development and morphological features
were compared. An experiment was not scored unless
90% of the injected and 90% of the uninjected animals
were healthy (morphologically normal and similar timing
of development).
Animals at various developmental stages were imaged
either live or fixed (DiI fixation) [78]. For compound fluorescence microscopy, fixed animals were incubated overnight at 4°C in a fluorescently conjugated toxin that
recognizes F-actin (BODIPY FL-phallacidin; Invitrogen)
diluted 1:100 in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), then
rinsed three to four times in PBS, incubated in 80%
glycerol in PBS plus 0.125 μg/mL bisbenzimide Hoechst
33342 (Sigma-Aldrich Co.) for 3 to 12 h at 4°C and then
analyzed. For confocal laser scanning microscopy, animals were incubated overnight at 4°C in a 1:1000 dilution
of a nucleic acid stain (TO-PRO-3 iodide; Invitrogen) and
1:100 dilution of a phallotoxin (either BODIPY FL-phallacidin or Alexa Fluor 488-phalloidin; Invitrogen) in PBS,
rinsed three to four times in PBS, then incubated in
mounting media with an antifade reagent (SlowFade
Gold; Invitrogen) for at least 3 h at 4°C, and analyzed.
Microscopy

For compound fluorescence imaging, live and fixed DiIlabeled animals were imaged (Axioskop 2 Plus with an
AxioCam HRm camera; both Carl Zeiss Inc., Munich,
Germany) and analyzed (Openlab software, version 4.0.1;
PerkinElmer Inc., Waltham, MA, USA). Confocal imaging was performed using a confocal microscope (LSM
510; Carl Zeiss). Z-stack projections were then generated
(ImageJ; National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD,
USA). Figures were constructed using illustration software (Photoshop CS4 and Illustrator CS4; Adobe Systems
Inc., San Jose, CA, USA).
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Meyer et al. EvoDevo 2010, 1:8
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/8

Authors' contributions
NPM carried out the injections, animal care, data collection and analyses, and
illustration preparation. MJB and ECS helped with initial data analyses, and MJB
contributed to illustration preparation. MQM contributed to initial injections.
All authors contributed to data interpretation and writing and editing of the
manuscript. All authors read and approved this manuscript.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Science Foundation (IOB05-44869 to
ECS).
Author Details
1Kewalo Marine Laboratory, Pacific Biosciences Research Center, University of
Hawaii, 41 Ahui Street, Honolulu, Hawaii 96813, USA and 2Smithsonian Marine
Station at Fort Pierce, 701 Seaway Drive, Fort Pierce, Florida 34949, USA
Received: 21 May 2010 Accepted: 15 September 2010
Published: 15 September 2010
© 2010 Meyer 1:8
This is an2010,et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd.the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
EvoDevo Open Access from: http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/8
article is available article distributed under

References
1. Dunn CW, Hejnol A, Matus DQ, Pang K, Browne WE, Smith SA, Seaver E,
Rouse GW, Obst M, Edgecombe GD, Sørensen MV, Haddock SH, SchmidtRhaesa A, Okusu A, Kristensen RM, Wheeler WC, Martindale MQ, Giribet G:
Broad phylogenomic sampling improves resolution of the animal tree
of life. Nature 2008, 452:745-749.
2. Giribet G, Dunn CW, Edgecombe GD, Hejnol A, Martindale MQ, Rouse GW:
Assembling the spiralian tree of life. In Animal Evolution: Genomes,
Fossils, and Trees Edited by: Telford MJaDTJL. Oxford: Oxford University
Press; 2009:52-64.
3. Hejnol A, Obst M, Stamatakis A, Ott M, Rouse GW, Edgecombe GD,
Martinez P, Baguna J, Bailly X, Jondelius U, Wiens M, Müller WE, Seaver E,
Wheeler WC, Martindale MQ, Giribet G, Dunn CW: Assessing the root of
bilaterian animals with scalable phylogenomic methods. Proc Biol Sci
2009, 276:4261-4270.
4. Helmkampf M, Bruchhaus I, Hausdorf B: Multigene analysis of
lophophorate and chaetognath phylogenetic relationships. Mol
Phylogenet Evol 2008, 46:206-214.
5. Conklin EG: The embryology of Crepidula. J Morphol 1897, 13:1-226.
6. Henry JJ, Martindale MQ: Conservation and innovation in spiralian
development. Hydrobiologia 1999, 402:255-265.
7. Wilson EB: Considerations on cell-lineage and ancestral reminiscence.
Ann NY Acad Sci 1898, XI:1-27.
8. Henry JQ, Okusu A, Martindale MQ: The cell lineage of the
polyplacophoran, Chaetopleura apiculata: variation in the spiralian
program and implications for molluscan evolution. Dev Biol 2004,
272:145-160.
9. Boyer BC, Henry JQ, Martindale MQ: Dual origins of mesoderm in a basal
spiralian: cell lineage analyses in the polyclad turbellarian Hoploplana
inquilina. Dev Biol 1996, 179:329-338.
10. Hejnol A, Martindale MQ, Henry JQ: High-resolution fate map of the snail
Crepidula fornicata: the origins of ciliary bands, nervous system, and
muscular elements. Dev Biol 2007, 305:63-76.
11. Henry JJ, Martindale MQ: The origins of mesoderm in the equalcleaving nemertean worm Cerebratulus lacteus. Biological Bulletin 1996,
191:286-288.
12. Ackermann C, Dorresteijn A, Fischer A: Clonal domains in postlarval
Platynereis dumerilii (Annelida: Polychaeta). J Morphol 2005,
266:258-280.
13. Blake JA, Grassle JP, Eckelbarger KJ: Capitella teleta, a new species
designation for the opportunistic and experimental Capitella sp. I, with
a review of the literature for confirmed records. Zoosymposia 2009,
2:25-53.
14. Eisig H: Zur Entwicklungsgeschichte der Capitelliden. Mittheilungen Aus
der Zoologischen Station Zu Neapel 1898, 13:1-292.
15. Seaver EC, Thamm K, Hill SD: Growth patterns during segmentation in
the two polychaete annelids, Capitella sp. I and Hydroides elegans:
comparisons at distinct life history stages. Evol Dev 2005, 7:312-326.
16. Eckelbarger KJ, Grassle JP: Interspecific variation in genital spine, sperm,
and larval morphology in six sibling species of Capitella. Bull Biol Soc
Wash 1987, 7:62-76.

Page 26 of 27

17. Boyle MJ, Seaver EC: Developmental expression of foxA and gata genes
during gut formation in the polychaete annelid, Capitella sp. I. Evol Dev
2008, 10:89-105.
18. Michel C: Intestine and digestive glands. The Ultrastructure of Polychaeta
(Microfauna Marina) 1988, 4:5-175.
19. Tzetlin A, Purshke G: Pharynx and intestine. Hydrobiologia 2005, 535/
536:199-225.
20. Rhode B: Larval and adult eyes in Capitella spec. I (Annelida,
Polychaeta). J Morphol 1993, 217:327-335.
21. Damen P: Cell-lineage, and specification of developmental fate and
dorsoventral organisation in the mollusc Patella vulgata. Thesis, Univ
Utrecht 1994.
22. Thamm K, Seaver EC: Notch signaling during larval and juvenile
development in the polychaete annelid Capitella sp. I. Dev Biol 2008,
320:304-318.
23. Dill KK, Seaver EC: Vasa and nanos are coexpressed in somatic and germ
line tissue from early embryonic cleavage stages through adulthood in
the polychaete Capitella sp. I. Dev Genes Evol 2008, 218:453-463.
24. Boyer BC, Henry JJ, Martindale MQ: The cell lineage of a polyclad
turbellarian embryo reveals close similarity to coelomate spiralians.
Dev Biol 1998, 204:111-123.
25. Dictus WJ, Damen P: Cell-lineage and clonal-contribution map of the
trochophore larva of Patella vulgata (mollusca). Mech Dev 1997,
62:213-226.
26. Henry JJ, Martindale MQ: Conservation of the spiralian developmental
program: cell lineage of the nemertean, Cerebratulus lacteus. Dev Biol
1998, 201:253-269.
27. Huang FZ, Kang D, Ramirez-Weber FA, Bissen ST, Weisblat DA: Micromere
lineages in the glossiphoniid leech Helobdella. Development 2002,
129:719-732.
28. Render J: Cell fate maps in the Ilyanassa obsoleta embryo beyond the
third division. Dev Biol 1997, 189:301-310.
29. Render J: Fate maps of the first quartet micromeres in the gastropod
Ilyanassa obsoleta. Development 1991, 113:495-501.
30. Anderson DT: The embryology of the polychaete Scoloplos armiger. Q J
Microsc Sci 1959, 100:89-166.
31. Nardelli-Haefliger D, Shankland M: Lox10, a member of the NK-2
homeobox gene class, is expressed in a segmental pattern in the
endoderm and in the cephalic nervous system of the leech Helobdella.
Development 1993, 118:877-892.
32. Weisblat DA, Kim SY, Stent GS: Embryonic origins of cells in the leech
Helobdella triserialis. Dev Biol 1984, 104:65-85.
33. Wilson EB: The cell-lineage of Nereis. A contribution to the cytogeny of
the annelid body. J Morphol 1892, 6:361-480.
34. Mead AD: The early development of marine annelids. J Morphol 1897,
XIII:227-327.
35. Dohle W: The ancestral cleavage pattern of the clitellates and its
phylogenetic deviations. Hydrobiologia 1999, 402:267-283.
36. Croll RP: Developing nervous systems in molluscs: navigating the twists
and turns of a complex life cycle. Brain Behav Evol 2009, 74:164-176.
37. Dickinson AJ, Croll RP: Development of the larval nervous system of the
gastropod Ilyanassa obsoleta. J Comp Neurol 2003, 466:197-218.
38. Dickinson AJ, Nason J, Croll RP: Histochemical localization of
FMRFamide, serotonin and catecholamines in embryonic Crepidula
fornicata (Gastropoda, Prosobranchia). Zoomorphology 1999, 119:49-62.
39. Bürger O: Studien zu einer Revision der Entwicklungsgeschichte der
Nemertinen Ber Naturf Ges Freiburg; 1894.
40. Maslakova SA: The Invention of the Pilidium Larva in an Otherwise
Perfectly Good Spiralian Phylum Nemertea. Integr Comp Biol 2010.
41. Salensky W: Morphogenetische Studien an Wurmern. II. Uber die
Morphogenese der Nemertinen. Entwiklungsgeschichte der
Nemertine im Inneren des Pilidiums. Mem Acad Sci St Petersb 1912,
30:1-74.
42. Arendt D, Technau U, Wittbrodt J: Evolution of the bilaterian larval
foregut. Nature 2001, 409:81-85.
43. Garstang W: The morphology of the Tunicata and its bearing on the
phylogeny of the Chordata. Q J Microsc Sci 1928, 72:51-54.
44. Hatschek B: Studien über die Entwicklungsgsgeschichte der Anneliden.
Ein Beitrag zur Morphologie der Bilaterien. Arb Zool Inst Univ Wien 1878,
1:277-404.

Meyer et al. EvoDevo 2010, 1:8
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/8

45. Lacalli TC: Ciliary bands in echinoderm larvae: evidence for structural
homologies and a common plan. Acta Zool 1993, 74:127-133.
46. Nielsen C, Nørrevang A: The Trochaea theory: an example of life cycle
phylogeny. In The Origins and Relationships of Lower Invertebrates Edited
by: Conway Morris S, George JD, Gibson R, Platt HM. Oxford: Clarendon
Press; 1985:28-41.
47. Rieger RM: The biphasic life cycle--a central theme of metazoan
evolution. Am Zool 1994, 34:484-491.
48. Jägersten G: Further remarks on the early phylogeny of Metazoa. Zool
Bider Upps 1959, 33:79-108.
49. Jägersten G: Evolution of the Metazoan life cycle London: Academic Press;
1972.
50. Nielsen C: Larval ciliary bands and metazoan phylogeny. Fortschr Zool
Syst Evolutionsforsch 1979, 1:178-184.
51. Nielsen C: Origin and evolution of animal life cycles. Biol Rev 1998,
73:125-155.
52. Nielsen C: How did indirect development with planktotrophic larvae
evolve? Biol Bull 2009, 216:203-215.
53. Strathmann RR: The evolution and loss of feeding larval stages of
marine invertebrates. Evolution 1978, 32:894-906.
54. Degnan SM, Degnan BM: The origin of the pelagobenthic metazoan life
cycle: what's sex got to do with it? Integr Comp Biol 2006, 46:683-690.
55. Rouse GW: Trochophore concepts: ciliary bands and the evolution of
larvae in spiralian Metazoa. Biol J Linn Soc 1999, 66:411-464.
56. Rouse GW: The epitome of hand waving? Larval feeding and
hypotheses of metazoan phylogeny. Evol Dev 2000, 2:222-233.
57. Runnegar B: No evidence for planktotrophy in Cambrian molluscs. Evol
Dev 2007, 9:311-312.
58. Salvini-Plawen LV: Was ist eine Trochophora? Eine Analyse der
Larventypen mariner Protostomier. Zool Jb Anat 1980, 103:389-423.
59. Sly BJ, Snoke MS, Raff RA: Who came first--larvae or adults? origins of
bilaterian metazoan larvae. Int J Dev Biol 2003, 47:623-632.
60. Child CM: The early development of Arenicola and Sternaspis. Arch
EntwMech Org 1900, 9:587-723.
61. Heath H: The development of Ischnochiton. Zool Jahrb, Abt Anat Ontog
Tiere 1899, 12:567-656.
62. Treadwell AL: The cell lineage of Podarke obscura. Zool Bull 1897,
1:195-203.
63. Damen P, Dictus WJ: Cell lineage of the prototroch of Patella vulgata
(Gastropoda, Mollusca). Dev Biol 1994, 162:364-383.
64. Maslakova SA, Martindale MQ, Norenburg JL: Fundamental properties of
the spiralian developmental program are displayed by the basal
nemertean Carinoma tremaphoros (Palaeonemertea, Nemertea). Dev
Biol 2004, 267:342-360.
65. Maslakova SA, Martindale MQ, Norenburg JL: Vestigial prototroch in a
basal nemertean, Carinoma tremaphoros (Nemertea; Palaeonemertea).
Evol Dev 2004, 6:219-226.
66. Treadwell AL: Cytogeny of Podarke obscura Verrill. J Morphol 1901,
17:399-486.
67. Okusu A: Embryogenesis and development of Epimenia babai
(Mollusca Neomeniomorpha). Biol Bull 2002, 203:87-103.
68. Woltereck R: Beiträge zur praktischen Analyse der PolygordiusEntwicklung nach dem "Nordsee-" und dem "Mittelmeer-Typus". Arch
EntwMech Org 1904, 18:377-403.
69. Nielsen C: Six major steps in animal evolution: are we derived sponge
larvae? Evol Dev 2008, 10:241-257.
70. Martindale MQ, Hejnol A: A developmental perspective: changes in the
position of the blastopore during bilaterian evolution. Dev Cell 2009,
17:162-174.
71. Henry JQ, Martindale MQ, Boyer BC: The unique developmental
program of the acoel flatworm, Neochildia fusca. Dev Biol 2000,
220:285-295.
72. Martindale MQ, Henry JQ: Intracellular fate mapping in a basal
metazoan, the ctenophore Mnemiopsis leidyi, reveals the origins of
mesoderm and the existence of indeterminate cell lineages. Dev Biol
1999, 214:243-257.
73. Martindale MQ, Pang K, Finnerty JR: Investigating the origins of
triploblasty: 'mesodermal' gene expression in a diploblastic animal,
the sea anemone Nematostella vectensis (phylum, Cnidaria; class,
Anthozoa). Development 2004, 131:2463-2474.
74. Technau U, Scholz CB: Origin and evolution of endoderm and
mesoderm. Int J Dev Biol 2003, 47:531-539.

Page 27 of 27

75. Newby WW: The Embryology of the Echiuroid Worm Urechis caupo
Philadelphia: The American Philosophical Society; 1940.
76. Lambert JD: Mesoderm in spiralians: the organizer and the 4d cell. J Exp
Zool B Mol Dev Evol 2008, 310:15-23.
77. Torrey JC: The early embryology of Thalassema mellita (Conn). Ann NY
Acad Sci 1903, 14:165-246.
78. Meyer NP, Seaver EC: Neurogenesis in an annelid: characterization of
brain neural precursors in the polychaete Capitella sp. I. Dev Biol 2009,
335:237-252.
doi: 10.1186/2041-9139-1-8
Cite this article as: Meyer et al., A comprehensive fate map by intracellular
injection of identified blastomeres in the marine polychaete Capitella teleta
EvoDevo 2010, 1:8

</pre>
</body>
</html>
