<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Travelling in time with networks: Revealing present day hybridization versus ancestral polymorphism between two species of brown algae, Fucus vesiculosus and F. spiralis</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:33. doi:10.1186/1471-2148-11-33"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Yann Moalic"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Moalic et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:33
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/33

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Travelling in time with networks: Revealing
present day hybridization versus ancestral
polymorphism between two species of brown
algae, Fucus vesiculosus and F. spiralis
Yann Moalic1, Sophie Arnaud-Haond1*, Cécile Perrin2, Gareth A Pearson2, Ester A Serrao2

Abstract
Background: Hybridization or divergence between sympatric sister species provides a natural laboratory to study
speciation processes. The shared polymorphism in sister species may either be ancestral or derive from
hybridization, and the accuracy of analytic methods used thus far to derive convincing evidence for the occurrence
of present day hybridization is largely debated.
Results: Here we propose the application of network analysis to test for the occurrence of present day
hybridization between the two species of brown algae Fucus spiralis and F. vesiculosus. Individual-centered
networks were analyzed on the basis of microsatellite genotypes from North Africa to the Pacific American coast,
through the North Atlantic. Two genetic distances integrating different time steps were used, the Rozenfeld (RD;
based on alleles divergence) and the Shared Allele (SAD; based on alleles identity) distances. A diagnostic level of
genotype divergence and clustering of individuals from each species was obtained through RD while screening for
exchanges through putative hybridization was facilitated using SAD. Intermediate individuals linking both clusters
on the RD network were those sampled at the limits of the sympatric zone in Northwest Iberia.
Conclusion: These results suggesting rare hybridization were confirmed by simulation of hybrids and F2 with
directed backcrosses. Comparison with the Bayesian method STRUCTURE confirmed the usefulness of both
approaches and emphasized the reliability of network analysis to unravel and study hybridization

Background
Speciation is a central process in evolution, but its complexity and duration render it difficult or impossible to
observe and study as a whole. Studies dealing with the
functional and genetic divergence between taxa, particularly when reproductive isolation is incomplete [1],
allow the distinction and analysis of the various stages
of this process. The relative influence of the different
mechanisms involved in the initiation and maintenance
of divergence can then be inferred. Understanding the
complexity of evolutionary and ecological mechanisms
leading to reproductive isolation and speciation through
integration of in situ observations, theoretical models
* Correspondence: Sophie.Arnaud@ifremer.fr
1
IFREMER, Institut Français de Recherche pour l’Exploitation de la Mer, centre
de Brest, BP70, 29280 Plouzané, France
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

and molecular analysis of genomes, is today one of the
major challenges in evolutionary ecology [2-6]. Important efforts towards modeling the processes acting in
hybrid zones and understanding the maintenance of
divergence have focused on the balance between dispersal and hybrid depression [7]. In these studies, incompatibility resulting from the allopatric divergence
between two genomes is considered as a predominant
factor causing hybrid depression. During the last decades, the development of the use of molecular markers
in a population genetics framework made possible the
testing and improvement of these theoretical models in
hybrid zones. This screening of genome divergence and
incompatibility also allowed testing the schematic models describing speciation as the result of processes spanning from pure vicariance (allopatry) to differential level
of gene flow (sympatric speciation, [8-11]).

© 2011 Moalic et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Moalic et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:33
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/33

From a statistical point of view however, analyses at
both the scales of populations and genes are still limited
by the panel of tools available. At the population level,
the analysis of molecular data is limited by the fact that
most mathematical models underlying classical population genetics analysis have been developed in an intraspecific framework, and some underlying hypotheses
such as random mating or Hardy Weinberg equilibrium
do not necessarily stand in real natural populations and
are out of scope in hybrid zones. Moreover, the detection and screening of hybrids requires an analysis of the
populations and hybrid zones at the individual level
whereas most summary statistics deliver estimates at the
population level.
Two families of analyses have been proposed recently
in order to partially release the underlying assumptions
of most classical population genetics data analyses, and
take better advantage of the information contained in a
given dataset. The first family is built around the coalescent theory and is mostly based on Bayesian computation methods of analysis. It allows individual-centered
analyses of genotype clustering [12-16]. The second
family is built around the network theory and proposes
an exploratory approach centered on the population or
individual (also called agents), illustrating the relationship among those agents and inferring their respective
roles and importance in the studied system [17-20].
Methods based on the coalescent theory trace the
ancestral genealogy of a sample rather than modeling
changes of gene frequencies in the population as a
whole. These methods have recently been explored in
order to improve mathematical models and take advantage of all the information contained in the data
[12,21,22]. They have proven useful in studying hybrid
zones [23] although they remain complex and timeconsuming. On the other hand, this combination
between high load of information not being optimally
exploited by the summary statistics, and statistical tools
available requiring heavy underlying hypotheses, suggests the use of another possible family of methods,
coming from science of complex systems based on network theory [24,25]. Network tools have indeed been
developed to take the best advantage of the information
contained in a complex data set, while minimizing the
assumptions required for the analysis and interpretation
of the complex system behavior [26].
A first step towards the use of the network theory to
unravel gene flow has recently been proposed for interpopulation analyses by Dyer and Nason [17]. They
applied the graph theory developed by Erdös and Renyi
[1960, in 27] to describe the complex topology resulting
from both history and contemporary genetic interactions
among populations of a widely distributed species of
cactus. This was further improved to extract from the

Page 2 of 13

graph topology hints as the dynamics of information
(here gene) flow through the system at the inter-individual [19] and inter-population levels [20]. Compared to
classical methods [28], these first steps proved useful in
illustrating the genetic relationship, and identifying clusters of individuals as well as agents acting as preferential
links or sources in the metapopulation system of a
threatened seagrass.
In the present study, we explored the usefulness of network analysis to study hybrids identified as agents linking
two differentiated clusters of individuals, or gene pools.
We tested network analysis in the hybrid zone between
our two model species, the two sister species of brown
seaweeds Fucus vesiculosus (F_ves) and F. spiralis (F_spi).
Both species are ecologically successful and widely distributed (North Atlantic, Channel and North Sea shores).
They are characteristic of respectively upper and midshore zones on rocky shores. Although distinct genetic
entities have been identified within the species F. spiralis
[F. spiralis-High and F. spiralis-Low, [29]] these
are nevertheless still one single monophyletic entity,
here designated as F. spiralis, distinct from its sister
F. vesiculosus [30]. These two sister taxa are a good
model system because, despite displaying diagnostic
reproductive system (F_ves is dioecious whereas F_spi is
hermaphroditic), they may hybridize when encountered
in sympatry [31-34], resulting in individuals with intermediate genotypes whose fitness in terms of reproductive
investment is not significantly reduced [35]. Whether the
occurrence of hybridization is the result of an ongoing
and incomplete speciation process or of a secondary contact with ongoing re-homogenization of the two entities
is still unclear and a matter of debate [36,37]. In order to
test for the hypothesis of ongoing speciation (i.e., ancestral shared polymorphism) versus present day hybridization due to secondary contact (introgression), we studied
the genetic relationships among samples collected both
in sympatric and allopatric regions of F_ves and F_spi
ranges (see FigureA1 in additional file 1). The global pattern of genetic relationships among individuals was illustrated by networks built with two different metrics
integrating different genetic information in term of time
and divergence history: the Rozenfeld distance (RD) [19]
and the Shared Allele distance (SAD) [38]. RD, based on
loci, helps to resolve ancestral polymorphism through
allele length impinged by slow evolutionary processes,
while SAD, based on shared alleles, helps to understand
recent gene flow characterized by direct allelic exchange
free from slow evolutionary process. We aimed at comparing the performance of network and Bayesian coalescent analysis (STRUCTURE, [16]) to test whether the
shared polymorphism and the absence of diagnostic
locus was mainly due to retained ancestral polymorphism, or to present day hybridization in sympatric zone.

Moalic et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:33
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/33

In the first case, we expected shared polymorphism at
neutral microsatellites to be distributed evenly across the
species distribution range, whereas in the other case a
higher proximity among species may be expected in sympatric zones.

Results
Networks of individuals F. spiralis and F. vesiculosus

Networks were analyzed at the percolation threshold
(see methods). This approach is based on the analysis of
the network keeping only essential links illustrating the
minimum genetic distance necessary to maintain connectivity across most components of the system. The
network based on the Rozenfeld distance (RD; Figure 1)
reveals diagnostic RD distances among both species. At
the percolation threshold distance (Dp = 7.15), genotypes corresponding to sampled F_spi (left) versus F_ves
(right) clearly segregate into two sub-clusters linked
through a succession of 4 nodes (Figure 1). Below this
percolation threshold, the network loses its integrity and

Page 3 of 13

the species-specific sub-clusters split into distinct clusters (see Figure A2 in additional file 2), each exclusively
composed of either F_spi or of F_ves individuals. The
ensuing clusters of individuals present a hierarchical
structure supported by a significant average clustering
coefficient: < CC > = 0.72 higher than the one expected
after randomly rewiring the links (< CCo > = 0.11 with
so = 0.1, after 10,000 random simulations). Thus illustrating the modularity of the network composed of two
clusters of species, with greater internal interconnection
than would be expected by chance.
The network based on Shared Alleles distance (SAD),
only influenced by allele frequencies and not by their
divergence, does not discriminate the species as clearly
as the RD did (Figure 2). Its different topology reveals
hierarchical clustering reflected already on the percolation profile (see methods and Figure A3 in additional
file 3) where the single peak with RD is replaced by
three peaks with the SAD. At the percolation threshold
(Dp = 0.5), the segregation of the sister species is not as

Figure 1 Network topology of F. spiralis and F. vesiculosus individuals with the Rozenfeld Distance (RD). Only links with value smaller
than or equal to the percolation distance Dp = 7.15 are present. Nodes representing individuals are circles for F. spiralis and squares for
F. vesiculosus. Colors correspond to geographical regions. One can identify 2 clusters, one for F. spiralis individuals and the other for F. vesiculosus.

Moalic et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:33
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/33

Page 4 of 13

Figure 2 Network topology of F. spiralis and F. vesiculosus individuals with the Shared Alleles Distance (SAD). Only links with value
smaller than or equal to the percolation distance Dp = 0.5 are present. Nodes representing individuals are circles for F. spiralis and squares for F.
vesiculosus. Colors correspond to geographical regions.

clear as with RD. A large number of pathways still connect the two species and the decrease of threshold does
not lead to a clear separation of F_spi and F_ves. Indeed,
the first disconnecting cluster corresponds to the Northern American F_ves (thr = 0.39, see Figure A4 A in
additional file 4), followed by the cluster of F_ves from
South Portugal and Morocco (thr = 0.33, see
Figure A4 B in additional file 4) while the last cluster of
F_ves from the sympatric zone of Northwest Iberia (i.e.,
Northwestern Spain and Northern Portugal) remains
linked to the complete cluster of F_spi. These observations are consistent with a significant average clustering
coefficient value inferior with SAD than RD: < CC > =
0.46 (< CCo > = 0.17 with so = 0.1, after 10,000 random
simulations).
The individuals of F_spi that are sharing the higher
number of links with individuals F_ves were also coming
from Northwest Iberia. Despite the global differences
denoted for our networks, this last observation is common to both the SAD and RD network topologies.
Indeed, both highlight individuals of F_spi and of F_ves
from Northwest Iberia relaying gene flow among their
two clusters. The combination of our two network

analyses with different distances indicates hybridization
in our dataset at the Northwest Iberia area.
Hybridization assessment through network analysis

As the network topology built with SAD was not discriminative for the 2 species, a method was developed to
derive expectations of SAD network topology under the
hypothesis of hybridization (see Hybridization simulation methods in Additional file 5). Indeed, at the threshold value of 0.39, on the network topology (see
Figure A4 A in additional file 4), some natural individuals of F_spi and F_ves of the sympatric zone of North
Iberia are making the link between the two species.
These 17 intermediate individuals were considered as
putative hybrids. The threshold value of 0.39 was
selected because of the background noise at 0.5 illustrated by direct links between individuals of F_spi and
F_ves coming from different geographic area. Hybridization simulations were thus conducted under 4 different
conditions (Table 1) and network analysis was employed
to compare the behavior of these hybrids when integrated into the initial natural dataset (hereafter called
hybrids datasets).

Moalic et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:33
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/33

Page 5 of 13

Table 1 Hybrids datasets used in this study
number of
simulated
hybrids

number of
natural
individuals

total number
of individuals

Hybrids F1

17

555

572

BC_F_spi

17

555

572

BC_F_ves
BC_F_spi_F_ves

17
17 (9+8)

555
555

572
572

The topologies of derived networks were compared
across the 4 hybrids datasets at decreasing thresholds,
0.39, 0.33 and 0.28 (Figure 3) allowing networks to pass
from a connected state to a disconnected one preventing
gene flow between the two species. At the threshold of
0.39, F_spi are connected to F_ves through synthetic

hybrids for all datasets. Nevertheless, differences appear
during the decrease of the threshold highlighting the
closer behavior of BC_F_ves and BC_F_spi_F_ves
hybrids datasets to the initial natural dataset than
hybrids F1 and BC_F_spi.
The comparison of network topologies with RD and
SAD helped to test for the hybridization scenario best
fitting the natural dataset network topology. As revealed
by the percolation curves (see Figure A5 in additional
file 6), the percolation thresholds shift globally to lower
values except for the BC_F_ves dataset (Dp = 7.5 vs.
Dp = 7.15 for the natural dataset). As for the natural
dataset, at the percolation threshold, hybrids datasets
have only one pathway making the connection between
each of the two clusters of species (Figure 4).

Figure 3 Network topology of F. spiralis and F. vesiculosus individuals + simulated hybrids with the SAD. Only links with value smaller
than or equal to the threshold values are present. Nodes representing individuals are circles for F. spiralis and squares for F. vesiculosus. Nodes
representing hybrids are triangles. Colors correspond to geographical regions.

Moalic et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:33
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/33

Page 6 of 13

Figure 4 Network topology of F. spiralis and F. vesiculosus individuals + simulated hybrids with the RD. Only links with value smaller
than or equal to the percolation thresholds are present. Nodes representing individuals are circles for F. spiralis and square for F. vesiculosus.
Nodes representing hybrids are triangles. (A) Hybrids F1 (B) hybrids BC_F_spi, (C) hybrids BC_F_ves, (D) hybrids BC_F_spi_F_ves, blue triangle are
F_ves hybrids and purple triangles are F_spi. Colors correspond to geographical regions.

Nevertheless, the network topologies, according to the
percolation threshold, reveal an intermediary state
between BC_F_ves and BC_F_spi_F_ves datasets where
the natural dataset seems to fit in.
Hybridization assessment through a Bayesian clustering
approach

In order to highlight the potential differences existing
between the two methods and to depict their advantages
and disadvantages in hybridization assessment, we compared the networks with the software STRUCTURE
[16], that assigns genotypes proportionally to clusters
defined based on minimizing linkage and HardyWeinberg disequilibria. The results obtained with
STRUCTURE for two clusters (k = 2) are coherent
with mainly two categories of individuals in agreement
with the morphological determination of the natural
dataset of all individuals into the two species
(Figure 5A). Nevertheless, 21 intermediate individual
genotypes (more than 10% of ancestry coming from one
of the 2 species) are counted: 3 F_spi and 18 F_ves. It
appears that only few of them (n = 5, 2 F_spi and
3 F_ves; ns = 1+1) are among the 17 putative hybrids
detected with the SAD network and relocated at the end
of the dataset (Figure 5B). It is also noticeable that
although most of the individuals (n = 13, n s = 3)

considered as admixed in STRUCTURE are in the sympatric zone of Northwest Iberia, some (n = 8, ns = 4) do
not have a clearly intermediate position on the SAD
network, with even one coming from an allopatric area
(Southwest Portugal).
When analyzing the datasets where putative natural
hybrids were replaced by synthetic hybrids, admixture is
mainly recovered. As with network analysis, all individuals of Hybrids F1 are clearly recognized as such by
STRUCTURE (Figure 5C). This result is coherent with
the network topology, as for backcrosses BC_F_spi,
BC_F_ves and BC_F_spi_F_ves, 15/17, 11/17 and 14/
17 (9+5) individuals are detected, respectively
(Figure 5D, E and 5F). Nevertheless, it should be noticed
that individuals BC_F_ves are less detected by STRUCTURE as admixed than BC_F_spi (9 vs. 2 on the totality
of backcrosses). This result is different from the network
analyses because individuals BC_F_spi tend to be closer
to natural individuals of F_spi than BC_F_ves to natural
individuals of F_ves.

Discussion
In this study, we developed a novel application of network analysis to the study of hybridization phenomena
between sister species. Networks were constructed based
on distinct genetic distances (RD and SAD), differently

Moalic et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:33
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/33

Page 7 of 13

Figure 5 Microsatellite detection of admixture (introgression) using the program STRUCTURE (Pritchard et al., 2000). Each individual is
represented in the figure by a vertical bar and its colors indicate the proportional membership in each of k = 2 clusters, thereby providing a
quantitative illustration of introgression. Red represents F. spiralis, green F. vesiculosus.

sensitive to time since divergence (respectively based on
allele lengths or on shared alleles), allowing the comparison of the divergence degree at different time-scales.
The first important picture obtained on network built
with Rozenfeld Distance (RD) is the straightforward
recognition of two well-defined clusters of F. vesiculosus
and F. spiralis (Figure 1). This confirms that reproductive isolation and genetic divergence is rather advanced

between those two species, despite a significant amount
of shared polymorphism. Thus this multi-locus phylogenetic distance may be used to assign individuals to their
species of origin. This result also supports the existence
of phylogenetic information from microsatellite loci [39]
which is accurately delivered by RD.
The second important result is the occurrence of clusters of individuals exhibiting an intermediate position

Moalic et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:33
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/33

between both species and maintaining a connection
between some F. vesiculosus populations and the F. spiralis cluster as revealed on the SAD network (Figures 2
and 3). This intermediate cluster is formed by tens of
individuals, among which those pointed out as intermediate with the RD. In case of the shared polymorphism being mostly ancestral, one may expect to observe
some connections anywhere in the distribution range
including in allopatric zones, but these F. vesiculosus
individuals of intermediate genotypes are only detected
in the Northwest Iberia, located specifically at the edge
of the locations where both species occur in sympatry.
Interestingly, intermediate individuals, although much
less numerous, also emerge in two other sympatric
areas: Northeastern America and the English Channel,
whereas no such individuals are observed in any of the
allopatric zones, further supporting the hybridization
hypothesis. The SAD distance integrates more recent
history, therefore giving it more weight than the RD,
which takes into account phylogenetic divergence
[19,38]. It is therefore likely to better reflect present day
exchange of genes between the two species. Those intermediate individuals that did cluster with the main
F. vesiculosus cluster with RD, with SAD do now connect closer to F. spiralis than to the other con-specifics.
This is likely caused by these individuals sharing more
alleles with F. spiralis than with the other F. vesiculosus
(therefore the branching with SAD distance), but the
alleles they do not share with F. spiralis exhibit a strong
divergence with this last species and are typical from
F. vesiculosus (therefore the clustering of those individuals with F. vesiculosus with RD). The occurrence of
all those individuals in the sympatric zone supports
these intermediate genotypes as the product of present
day hybridization between anciently diverged lineages/
species.
The four additional networks built including simulated
synthetic hybrids from F1, as well as backcrosses with
each of the mother species (Figure 3), confirm this scenario. Indeed, the synthetic hybrids are present at the
interface of the two sister-species, although they tend to
be more isolated than most of the natural putative
hybrids. This isolation seems due to the F1 nature of
synthetic hybrids, truly half F. spiralis/half F. vesiculosus,
while naturally occurring hybrids may be the product of
backcrosses. When the backcrosses are plugged into the
network, all possible backcrosses do not lead to a convergence towards the initial topology based on real data
only. The admixture of (F1 X F. spiralis) and (F1 X
F. vesiculosus) in the same dataset show the most similar
network topology to the original one, while backcrosses
resulting from (F1 X F. spiralis) or (F1 X F. vesiculosus)
plugged alone tend to cluster closer to their species of

Page 8 of 13

origin without fitting exactly the same position as the
natural intermediates.
The use of network here provides specific advantages,
mainly the ability to identify agents (nodes) connecting
identified clusters through genetic distance (links).
Hybridization indeed usually results in a reticulate tree
that cannot be built with classical phylogenetic methods
but can be easily grasped on a network. Moreover, the
possibility to follow the evolution of network topology
through a gradient of genetic distance threshold helps
to visualize and understand the attachment preferences
to one or the other of the species clusters.
The use of STRUCTURE also illustrates the clear
separation between the two species and allows the identification of admixed individuals, although not systematically the same as the intermediate agents appearing on
the networks. In order to test for the accuracy of each
method in those doubtful cases, the discrepancies
between results obtained with both methods can be
considered in perspective with geographical locations
and ecological conditions in which intermediate agents
(network) do not appear as admixed individuals
(STRUCTURE), or the other way round. Interestingly,
intermediate agents unidentified by STRUCTURE as
admixed individuals correspond to samples collected at
the edge of the zone where the two species occur in
sympatry, Northwest Iberia. On the contrary, the
admixed individuals detected by STRUCTURE that do
not appear as intermediate agents were collected in the
allopatric zone, thereby rendering enigmatic the origin
of such admixture.
When analyzing the accuracy of both methods with
synthetic hybrids and backcrosses, STRUCTURE shows
high reliability in detecting F1 hybrids (100%), whereas
only 71% of those are emphasized by an intermediate
position on network. The detection of mixed individuals
with STRUCTURE logically decreases to 92% for backcrosses with F. spiralis and to 64% for backcrosses with
F. vesiculosus. This difference between the two species
can be explained by the lower genetic diversity of F_spi,
likely due to its reproductive mode, as illustrated by
their GDS (see Figure A6 in additional file 7), resulting
in an easier detection of the insertion of new alleles in
the genetic pool. On the opposite, network analysis, by
relying on shared links, shows backcrosses with F_spi
having a stronger assimilation to its species of origin
than backcrosses with F_ves. The integration of backcross events into the species gene pool seems to be
rapid and renders them hard to identify. As a synthesis,
both approaches appear as complementary, as STRUCTURE may perform slightly better in the systematic
detection of admixed individuals, an advantage however
balanced by a lower amount of misleading detection of

Moalic et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:33
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/33

hybrids (i.e. type I errors) obtained with network analysis. Besides, network analysis allows further screening of
links and connections among geographic areas to
describe patterns of spatial connectivity.
At the within species scale, finally, network analysis
revealed two main genetically distinct clusters across the
distributional range of both sister species F. spiralis and
F. vesiculosus, (a) a Southern cluster in South Portugal,
Morocco, Azores and Canary Islands, and (b) and a
Northern cluster in North America, North Sea and Channel (see Figures A2 B and A4 B in additional files 2 and
4). These two regions are common to both species indicating a similar evolutionary history. Indeed, oscillations
of climate during the past thousands of years have caused
repeated geographic distributional shifts and extinction/
recolonization events often experienced by many marine
taxa. During the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM, 23-18 ka)
in Europe, permafrost extended south at 47° N [40], leaving temperate species to shift their distribution to potential refugia. Marine species, including intertidal taxa, are
also thought to have been displaced to small refugia in
the North around the British Isles, Norway or in the Brittany region and more Southerly from the Iberian Peninsula to Mauritania [41]. As the ice melted, species ranges
were able to expand back to previous latitudes [42,43].
On the North American Coast, the LGM may have covered by ice the complete hard substrate available there
[44] and have caused the extinction of rocky shore species in this region. North American rocky shores are
thought to have later been recolonized by European
populations [45]. For species in the genus Fucus, glacial
refugia have been inferred along the Brittany area
for F. serratus [45] or along Northwest Iberia for F. ceranoides [46] and F. vesiculosus along the American coast
shows a genetic signature of a recent recolonization from
Europe [47]. In F. spiralis and F. vesiculosus, clustering
on our networks is consistent with the presence of two
refuge areas in Europe, possibly a Northern refuge (possibly along the Brittany or North Iberian region) and a
southern one (possibly located along the southern Iberian
Peninsula and/or North Africa). These inferences are
thus consistent with a recent mitochondrial phylogeography of these two species for F. spiralis but are contradictory for F. vesiculosus, as the mitochondrial genome of
F. vesiculosus supports a single refugial zone [32]. Organelle genomes, with smaller effective population size than
nuclear ones, are however more prone to being highly
affected by introgressive sweeps, and indeed introgression
and massive expansion of F. vesiculosus organelles into
other Fucus species has been documented [32,46]. Isolation into distinct glacial refugia would have been followed
by a post-glacial expansion during which the Northern
and Southern populations might have converged in a
contact region along Northwest Iberia (Northern

Page 9 of 13

Portugal/Northwestern Spain) where despite hybridization genetic differentiation is still maintained nowadays
(see Figures A2 B and A4 B in additional files 2 and 4)
and which now also extends into the Brittany region
[29,30,32], although in regions not included in our sampling. In the southern region, F. spiralis occurs only on
the open coast whereas F. vesiculosus is present only in
isolated sheltered areas such as estuaries and coastal
lagoons [48]. Consequently, along the broad areas of
sympatry of their Northern distribution, the two sister
species can hybridize [33,34,49], whereas in Southern
Europe, their distribution is allopatric and hybridization
is highly unlikely due to the limited dispersal capability of
their gametes [50].
A more complex pattern appears on the networks in
Northwest Iberia area (Figure 2). The Northwest Iberian
close connection to the Northern cluster (North Sea and
Channel) indicates a recent secondary expansion either
from North Iberia into the Northern region or vice versa,
having kept restricted gene flow with the southern
clusters.
Another interesting point is the fact that hybrids are
mostly localized in the Southern limit of the sympatric
zone, where it contacts the allopatric zone ranging from
Southern Portugal-Northwestern Africa and Atlantic
islands. Hybridization may be favored by unknown factors
in this area, such as the rate of hybrid fertility that may
change between geographical locations, possibly being
higher in Northwest Iberia area as suggest by Billard et al.
[49]. Also, reinforcement may be weak due to the recent
gene flow from an allopatric zone where it would be lacking, whereas in the middle of the sympatric zone such
mechanism would already have developed to maintain
species integrity. This is further supported by the peculiar
position and clustering of the individuals from the extreme
edge of the sympatric zone in Mindelo, where more than
half intermediate individuals were detected on the network, and which is the only sympatric population of
F. spiralis clustering with the allopatric ones with Structure (k = 3; see Figure A7 in additional file 8). These
results are in agreement with a recent multi-gene phylogeny of these species that reveals that in Northwest Iberia
F. spiralis from southern origins become extremely introgressed [30].

Conclusions
The results of the present study suggest three main conclusions: (i) The accuracy of network analysis to unravel
hybridization phenomena. The detection of hybrids and
introgression is possible and reliable through network
analysis, although not systematic as some remain apparently undetected in any analysis attempted, either networks or STRUCTURE. (ii) The putative hybrids
detected in the SAD network seem more similar to

Moalic et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:33
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/33

Page 10 of 13

backcrosses (indifferently with one or the other of the
parental species) than to F1 Hybrids. This may be interpreted as a seldom occurrence of first generation hybrids,
with a dilution effect on the mosaic genomes produced
after backcross events. (iii) The biogeography of both
Fucus species addressed through the examination of networks supports the existence of Northern and Southern
glacial refuges where both species differentiated in two
clusters that came back into contact in Northwest Iberia
during post-glacial range changes. Interestingly, this area
corresponds to the boundary between the allopatric/sympatric zones, where most putative hybrids were detected,
suggesting weaker reinforcement in this area.

Methods

D( A, B) =

A total of 572 individuals of F_spi and F_ves (respectively 329 and 243) were collected throughout the North
Hemisphere (see FigureA1 and TableA1 for location distribution in additional files 1 and 9). The analysis covers
their entire latitudinal range. A combination of nine
microsatellite markers was selected for their amplification consistency and polymorphism in both species. The
marker combination includes L20-58-78-38-94 [34],
Fsp 1-2-4 [51] and F90 [33].
Genetic distances used in this study

Two different genetic distances taking or not phylogenetic information into account were chosen to perform
network analysis of our dataset.
First, we used the Goldstein distance for populations
[52] modified for use between individuals, as originally
presented by Rozenfeld et al. [19]. As the underlying
data are based on multilocus microsatellite genotypes,
an individual is characterized by a series of pairs of
microsatellite repetitions at k loci with k = 9.
More precisely, the genotype of an individual, called
A, is represented as

1
k

k

∑d ,
i

i =1

The second genetic distance used is the Shared Allele
distance (SAD). This genetic distance is based on the
proportion of shared alleles [38]. For individual pairwise
comparisons the proportion of shared alleles is estimated by:
PSA =

Dataset used in this study

1
2n u

∑ S,
u

where the number of shared alleles S is summed over
all loci u and nu is the number of loci.
Distance between individuals,
D SA = 1 − PSA ,

This individual measure can be used to look at population substructure. Bowcock et al. [53] constructed dendrograms based on this distance calculated from human
microsatellite data. Using this technique, a correlation
between genetic similarity and geographic location was
noted. This distance measure has also proven very successful at placing unknown individuals into the correct
subpopulation [54].
Finally, these distances help to resolve the relationship
between individuals at different time-scale. RD, based
on loci, helps to resolve individuals’ origin at an older
time, while SAD, based on shared alleles, helps to
understand recent gene flow.
Network analysis

A = (a1 , A1)(a 2 , A 2 )...(a k , A k ),

where a i and A i are the allele length (in number of
nucleotides) in both chromosomes at locus i.
Given a second individual, B, with genotype
B = (b1 , B1)(b i , Bi )...(b k , B k ),

we define a dissimilarity degree between A and B at
locus i as
d i ( A, B) = min ( A i − Bi + a i − b i , A i − b i + a i − Bi

Then we define the Rozenfeld distance (RD) among
Fucus individuals by averaging the contributions from
all loci

),

which provides a parsimonious (i.e. minimal) representation of the genetic distance, understood as the difference in allele length, between samples A and B.

Once we have calculated the matrices of genetic distances between individuals described above containing
all the individuals of our dataset, we built networks by
considering individuals as nodes and genetic distances
between them as links.
As we aimed to both visualize hybridization phenomenon on the network and localize its occurrence geographically, we started to remove links in a decreasing
order starting from the one with the highest value until
the network collapses. Just before this state, the percolation distance (Dp) is reached [55] and small clusters of
fields start to be released. This phenomenon can be
interpreted as the time when the integrity of the gene
flow is stopped all across the network. A standard methodology to calculate this value for finite system consists

Moalic et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:33
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/33

of calculating the average cluster size of the cluster
excluding the largest one [55],
S *=

1
N

∑

s 2ns ,

s 〈 S max

as a function of the last distance value removed, thr.
N is the total number of nodes not included in the largest cluster and ns is the number of clusters containing
s nodes. The resulting curves show a maximum followed
by a strong decrease where the percolation threshold is
positioned. Once this percolation threshold is identified,
we analyzed the network topology and its characteristics
at this point.
Estimate the global and local properties of the Network

The different indexes of network theory used to describe
and characterize our network are:
The connectivity degree ki of a given node i is the
number of other nodes linked to it (i.e., the number of
neighbor nodes).
The distribution P(k) gives the proportion of nodes in
the network having degree k.
The number of links Ei existing among the neighbours
of node i. This quantity takes values between 0 and Ei
(max)
= ki(ki-1)/2, which is the case of a fully connected
neighborhood.
The clustering coefficient Ci of node i is defined as
Ci =

Ei
Ei (max)

=

2 Ei
.
ki ( ki − 1 )

It quantifies how close the node i and its neighbors
are to being a clique (complete graph).
The clustering coefficient of the whole network < CC
> is defined as the average of all individual clustering
coefficients in the system.
The betweenness centrality [56] of node i, bc(i),
counts the fraction of shortest paths between pairs of
nodes that pass through node i. Let sst denote the number of shortest paths connecting nodes s and t and sst(i)
the number of those passing through the node i. Then,
bc(i) =

∑

s ≠t ≠i

 st ( i )
.
 st

Genetic diversity spectrum

The genetic distance between pairs of individuals within
all locations was calculated in order to plot the frequency distribution of all pairwise values. This

Page 11 of 13

distribution is referred as the genetic diversity spectrum
(GDS) as defined by Rozenfeld et al. [19].
Hybrids/backcrosses simulations

We generated hybrids by random simulation of individuals of which the genotype is half F_ves/half F_spi. To
do so, we used a random generator PERL script that
selects randomly natural individuals present in locations
where hybridization was suspected according to the SD
network topology (see results). Then, for each of the
nine loci, alleles (one from F_ves and the other from
F_spi) were randomly chosen to create hybrids of first
generation (F1). Among the natural individuals that
were chosen, we excluded the natural putative hybrids,
detected at the interface of the clusters of individuals
F. spiralis and F. vesiculosus (see Table A2 in additional
file 10), in order to avoid backcross hybridization in the
same set of simulations. The natural putative hybrids
are the individuals F. spiralis and F. vesiculosus connected between them allowing the information flow
between the clusters of the species inside the network.
For the backcrosses, we followed the same scheme but
we changed one of the natural individual by a hybrid
F1. For example, backcrosses F. spiralis are the fusion of
natural F. spiralis individuals and the hybrids F1. The
detailed methodology used to generate hybrids and
insert them into the networks is available in additional
file 5.
Admixture proportions of all individuals

In order to test for the ability of the network analysis to
detect hybrids, we compared its efficiency with the program STRUCTURE [16]. This method has been previously used in the literature to identify species and
hybrids in these species of Fucus, using microsatellite
data [29,34]. STRUCTURE was run on both raw data
and on data including synthetic hybrids for two clusters
(k = 2) assuming admixture and independent allele frequencies between F_spi and F_ves. Analyses were performed using a burn-in period of 5,000 followed by
10,000 Markov Chain Monte Carlo repetitions. Individuals were considered as intermediate genotypes when
they have more than 10% of ancestry coming from one
of the 2 species. The confidence interval was computed
(’print credible region’ parameter) and intermediate genotypes labeled as ‘significantly admixed’ when the confidence interval was strictly included between 0.1 and 0.9.
Results are detailed mentioning n as the number of
admixed individuals (admixture proportion included
between 0.1 and 0.9) and n s the number of those
admixed individuals included in the 90% confidence
interval.

Moalic et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:33
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/33

Additional material
Additional file 1: Figure A1: Map of the study locations. Colors
correspond to geographical regions as on network figures. Blue is
America, brown is North Sea, yellow is the Channel, red is Northwest
Iberia, green is South Portugal and black is Azores/Canary/Morocco. East
America, North Sea, the Channel and Northwest Iberia are sympatric sites
while the others are allopatric. See Table A1 for precise locations.
Additional file 2: Figure A2: Network topology of F. spiralis and F.
vesiculosus individuals with the Rozenfeld distance under the
percolation threshold. At the threshold values of 7.11 (A) and 4 (B).
Nodes representing individuals are circles for F. spiralis and squares for F.
vesiculosus. Colors correspond to geographical regions (see Figure A1).
One can see at D = 7.11, the network is composed of two giant clusters
corresponding respectively to the two species. At D = 4, the clusters of
F. spiralis is still entirety at the exception of a little cluster of North
Portugal.
Additional file 3: Figure A3: The average cluster size excluding the
largest one, as a function of the imposed genetic threshold
obtained with the natural individuals. (A) calculated with the
Rozenfeld distance, (B) calculated with the Shared alleles distance. The
arrows indicate the percolation threshold (Dp) on the curves.
Additional file 4: Figure A4: Network topology of F. spiralis and F.
vesiculosus individuals with the Shared alleles distance under the
percolation threshold. At the threshold values of 0.39 (A) and 0.33 (B).
Nodes representing individuals are circles for F. spiralis and squares for F.
vesiculosus. Colors correspond to geographical regions (see Figure A1).
Additional file 5: Hybridization simulation methods. This file includes
the description of the method used to randomly generate individual
hybrids.
Additional file 6: Figure A5: The average cluster size excluding the
largest one, as a function of the imposed genetic threshold
calculated with the Rozenfeld distance. (A) is the curve obtained with
the simulated hybrids spiralis/vesiculosus, (B) with back-crosses hybrids/
spiralis, (C) back-crosses hybrids/vesiculosus and (D) with back-crosses
hybrids/spiralis_vesiculosus. The arrows indicate the percolation threshold
(Dp) on the curves.
Additional file 7: Figure A6. The genetic diversity spectrum (GSD)
for F. spiralis (A) and F. vesiculosus (B) based on the Rozenfeld
distance.
Additional file 8: Figure A7: Microsatellite detection of admixture
(introgression) using the program STRUCTURE (Pritchard et al.,
2000). Each individual is represented in the figure by a vertical bar and
its colors indicate the proportional membership in each of k = 3 clusters,
thereby providing a quantitative illustration of introgression.
Additional file 9: Table A1: Global characteristics of the dataset
used in this study.
Additional file 10: Table A2: Natural putative hybrids highlighted
by the SD network.

Acknowledgements
The authors thank many international researchers throughout Europe and
the USA who collected samples from various regions (namely Arthur
Mathieson, Megan Dethier, Karl Gunnarson, Christine Maggs, Christy Henzler,
Henning Steen, Carolyn Engel, Claire Daguin, Ana Neto, Candelaria GilRodriguez) and Mirjam van de Vliet for the genotyping work. The authors
thank Alejandro Rozenfeld for his methodology of network analysis and the
members of the European project EDEN and the networks MARBEF, Marine
Genomics Europe and CORONA for helpful discussions. This project was
funded by projects of the Portuguese Science Foundation (FCT, and FEDER)
and by a FCT (and ESF) fellowship to CP.
Author details
IFREMER, Institut Français de Recherche pour l’Exploitation de la Mer, centre
de Brest, BP70, 29280 Plouzané, France. 2CCMAR, CIMAR, University of
Algarve, Gambelas, 8005-139, Faro, Portugal.

1

Page 12 of 13

Authors’ contributions
The network approach to the hybridization/polymorphism research question
was conceived by SAH and EAS, the question of hybridization/
polymorphism in allopatry versus sympatry was conceived by EAS, CP and
GAP. EAS, GAP and CP performed some of the sampling. CP and SAH
performed some of the genotyping. YM performed all the statistical
analyses. YM, SAH and EAS interpreted the results. YM, SAH, CP and EAS
wrote the paper. All authors have read and approved the final manuscript.
Received: 17 September 2010 Accepted: 31 January 2011
Published: 31 January 2011
References
1. Hewitt GM: Hybrid zones-natural laboratories for evolutionary studies.
Trends in Ecology & Evolution 1988, 3(7):158-167.
2. Orr MR, Smith TB: Ecology and speciation. Trends in Ecology & Evolution
1998, 13(12):502-506.
3. Schluter D: Ecology and the origin of species. Trends in Ecology &
Evolution 2001, 16(7):372-380.
4. Via S: The ecological genetics of speciation. The American Naturalist 2002,
159(Suppl 3):S1-7-S1-7.
5. Odling-Smee FJ, Laland KN, Feldman MW: Niche construction. Princeton
University Press; 2003.
6. Albert V, Jonsson B, Bernatchez L: Natural hybrids in Atlantic eels (Anguilla
anguilla, A. rostrata): evidence for successful reproduction and
fluctuating abundance in space and time. Molecular ecology 2006,
15(7):1903-1916.
7. Barton NH, Hewitt GM: Adaptation, speciation and hybrid zones. Nature
1989, 341(6242):497-503.
8. Jiggins CD, Mallet J: Bimodal hybrid zones and speciation. Trends in
Ecology & Evolution 2000, 15(6):250-255.
9. Bierne N, Bonhomme F, David P: Habitat preference and the marinespeciation paradox. Proceedings Biological Sciences/The Royal Society 2003,
270(1522):1399-1406.
10. Ogden R, Thorpe RS: Molecular evidence for ecological speciation in
tropical habitats. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America 2002, 99(21):13612-13615.
11. Vines TH, Köhler SC, Thiel M, Ghira I, Sands TR, MacCallum CJ, Barton NH,
Nürnberger B: The maintenance of reproductive isolation in a mosaic
hybrid zone between the fire-bellied toads Bombina bombina and B.
variegata. Evolution; International Journal of Organic Evolution 2003,
57(8):1876-1888.
12. Beerli P, Felsenstein J: Maximum-likelihood estimation of migration rates
and effective population numbers in two populations using a coalescent
approach. Genetics 1999, 152(2):763-773.
13. Chikhi L, Bruford MW, Beaumont MA: Estimation of admixture
proportions: a likelihood-based approach using Markov chain Monte
Carlo. Genetics 2001, 158(3):1347-1362.
14. Choisy M, Franck P, Cornuet JM: Estimating admixture proportions with
microsatellites: comparison of methods based on simulated data.
Molecular Ecology 2004, 13(4):955-968.
15. Mousset S, Derome N, Veuille M: A test of neutrality and constant
population size based on the mismatch distribution. Mol Biol Evol 2004,
21(4):724-731.
16. Pritchard JK, Stephens M, Donnelly P: Inference of population structure
using multilocus genotype data. Genetics 2000, 155(2):945-959.
17. Dyer RJ, Nason JD: Population Graphs: the graph theoretic shape of
genetic structure. Mol Ecol 2004, 13(7):1713-1727.
18. Fortuna MA, Albaladejo RG, Fernández L, Aparicio A, Bascompte J:
Networks of spatial genetic variation across species. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 2009, 106(45):19044-19049.
19. Rozenfeld AF, Arnaud-Haond S, Hernandez-Garcia E, Eguiluz VM, Matias MA,
Serrao E, Duarte CM: Spectrum of genetic diversity and networks of
clonal organisms. Journal of the Royal Society, Interface/the Royal Society
2007, 4(17):1093-1102.
20. Rozenfeld AF, Arnaud-Haond S, Hernandez-Garcia E, Eguiluz VM, Serrao EA,
Duarte CM: Network analysis identifies weak and strong links in a
metapopulation system. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008,
105(48):18824-18829.
21. Griffiths RC, Tavare S: Simulating probability distributions in the
coalescent. Theoretical Population Biology 1994, 46(2):131-159.

Moalic et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:33
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/33

22. Wilson GA, Rannala B: Bayesian inference of recent migration rates using
multilocus genotypes. Genetics 2003, 163(3):1177-1191.
23. Anderson EC, Thompson EA: A model-based method for identifying
species hybrids using multilocus genetic data. Genetics 2002,
160(3):1217-1229.
24. Amaral LA, Scala A, Barthelemy M, Stanley HE: Classes of small-world
networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America 2000, 97(21):11149-11152.
25. Strogatz SH: Exploring complex networks. Nature 2001, 410(6825):268-276.
26. Proulx SR, Promislow DEL, Phillips PC: Network thinking in ecology and
evolution. Trends Ecol Evol 2005, 20(6):345-353.
27. Barabasi AL, Albert R: Emergence of scaling in random networks. Science
(New York, NY 1999, 286(5439):509-512.
28. Arnaud-Haond S, Migliaccio M, Diaz-Almela E, Teixeira S, van de Vliet MS,
Alberto F, Procaccini G, Duarte CM, Serrao EA: Vicariance patterns in the
Mediterranean Sea: east-west cleavage and low dispersal in the
endemic seagrass Posidonia oceanica. J Biogeogr 2007, 34(6):963-976.
29. Billard E, Serrao E, Pearson G, Destombe C, Valero M: Fucus vesiculosus and
spiralis species complex: a nested model of local adaptation at the
shore level. Marine Ecology-Progress Series 2010, 405:163-174.
30. Zardi GI, Nicastro KR, Canovas F, Costa JF, Serrão EA, Pearson GA: Adaptive
traits are maintained on steep selective gradients despite gene flow and
hybridization in the intertidal zone. PLoS ONE .
31. Coyer JA, Hoarau G, Pearson GA, Serrao EA, Stam WT, Olsen JL: Convergent
adaptation to a marginal habitat by homoploid hybrids and polyploid
ecads in the seaweed genus Fucus. Biology Letters 2006, 2(3):405-408.
32. Coyer JA, Hoarau G, Costa JF, Hogerdijk B, Serrão EA, Billard E, Valero M,
Pearson GA, Olsen JL: Evolution and diversification within the intertidal
brown macroalgae Fucus spiralis/F. vesiculosus species complex in the
North Atlantic. Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution .
33. Wallace AL, Klein AS, Mathieson AC: Determining the affinities of salt
marsh fucoids using microsatellite markers: Evidence of hybridization
and introgression between two species of Fucus (Phaeophyta) in a
Maine estuary. Journal of Phycology 2004, 40(6):1013-1027.
34. Engel CR, Daguin C, Serrao EA: Genetic entities and mating system in
hermaphroditic Fucus spiralis and its close dioecious relative F.
vesiculosus (Fucaceae, Phaeophyceae). Molecular ecology 2005,
14(7):2033-2046.
35. Billard E, Daguin C, Pearson G, Serrao E, Engel C, Valero M: Genetic
isolation between three closely related taxa: Fucus vesiculosus, F. spiralis,
and F. ceranoides (Phaophyceae). Journal of Phycology 2005, 41(4):900-905.
36. Wallace AL, Klein AS, Mathieson AC: A reply to Engel et al. Molecular
ecology 2006, 15(4):1185-1187.
37. Engel CR, Daguin C, Serrao EA: When is a hybrid a hybrid? A counterreply to Wallace et al. Molecular ecology 2006, 15(11):3481-3482.
38. Chakraborty R, Jin L: Determination of relatedness between individuals
using DNA fingerprinting. Human Biology; an International Record of
Research 1993, 65(6):875-895.
39. Goldstein DB, Ruiz Linares A, Cavalli-Sforza LL, Feldman MW: An evaluation
of genetic distances for use with microsatellite loci. Genetics 1995,
139(1):463-471.
40. Hewitt GM: Genetic consequences of climatic oscillations in the
Quaternary. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London Series
B-Biological Sciences 2004, 359(1442):183-195.
41. Maggs CA, Castilho R, Foltz D, Henzler C, Jolly MT, Kelly J, Olsen J, Perez KE,
Stam W, Vainola R, et al: Evaluating signatures of Glacial Refugia for
North Atlantic benthic marine taxa. Ecology 2008, 89(11):S108-S122.
42. Gabrielsen TM, Brochmann C, Rueness J: The Baltic Sea as a model system
for studying postglacial colonization and ecological differentiation,
exemplified by the red alga Ceramium tenuicorne. Molecular ecology 2002,
11(10):2083-2095.
43. Coyer JA, Peters AF, Stam WT, Olsen JL: Post-ice age recolonization and
differentiation of Fucus serratus L. (Phaeophyceae; Fucaceae) populations
in Northern Europe. Molecular ecology 2003, 12(7):1817-1829.
44. Wares JP, Gaines SD, Cunningham CW: A comparative study of
asymmetric migration events across a marine biogeographic boundary.
Evolution 2001, 55(2):295-306.
45. Hoarau G, Coyer JA, Veldsink JH, Stam WT, Olsen JL: Glacial refugia and
recolonization pathways in the brown seaweed Fucus serratus. Molecular
ecology 2007, 16(17):3606-3616.

Page 13 of 13

46. Neiva J, Pearson GA, Valero M, Serrao EA: Surfing the wave on a borrowed
board: range expansion and spread of introgressed organellar genomes
in the seaweed Fucus ceranoides L. Molecular ecology 2010,
19(21):4812-4822.
47. Muhlin JF, Brawley SH: Recent versus relic: discerning the genetic
signature of Fucus vesiculosus (Heterokontophyta; Phaeophyceae) in the
Northwestern Atlantic. Journal of Phycology 2009, 45(4):828-837.
48. Ladah L, Bermudez R, Pearson G, Serrao E: Fertilization success and
recruitment of dioecious and hermaphroditic fucoid seaweeds with
contrasting distributions near their southern limit. Marine Ecology-Progress
Series 2003, 262:173-183.
49. Billard E, Serrao EA, Pearson GA, Engel CR, Destombe C, Valero M: Analysis
of sexual phenotype and prezygotic fertility in natural populations of
Fucus spiralis, F. vesiculosus (Fucaceae, Phaeophyceae) and their putative
hybrids. European Journal of Phycology 2005, 40(4):397-407.
50. Pearson GA, Serrao EA: Revisiting synchronous gamete release by fucoid
algae in the intertidal zone: fertilization success and beyond? Integrative
and Comparative Biology 2006, 46(5):587-597.
51. Perrin C, Daguin C, Van De Vliet M, Engel CR, Pearson GA, Serrao EA:
Implications of mating system for genetic diversity of sister algal
species: Fucus spiralis and Fucus vesiculosus (Heterokontophyta,
Phaeophyceae). European Journal of Phycology 2007, 42(3):219-230.
52. Goldstein DB, Ruiz Linares A, Cavalli-Sforza LL, Feldman MW: Genetic
absolute dating based on microsatellites and the origin of modern
humans. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America 1995, 92(15):6723-6727.
53. Bowcock AM, Ruiz-Linares A, Tomfohrde J, Minch E, Kidd JR, CavalliSforza LL: High resolution of human evolutionary trees with polymorphic
microsatellites. Nature 1994, 368(6470):455-457.
54. Estoup A, Garnery L, Solignac M, Cornuet JM: Microsatellite variation in
honey bee (Apis mellifera L.) populations: hierarchical genetic structure
and test of the infinite allele and stepwise mutation models. Genetics
1995, 140(2):679-695.
55. Stauffer D, Aharony A: Introduction to percolation theory. Taylor & Francis,
London; 1994.
56. Freeman LC: Set of measures of centrality based on betweenness.
Sociometry Sociometry 1977, 40(1):35-41.
doi:10.1186/1471-2148-11-33
Cite this article as: Moalic et al.: Travelling in time with networks:
Revealing present day hybridization versus ancestral polymorphism
between two species of brown algae, Fucus vesiculosus and F. spiralis.
BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011 11:33.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
