<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>An Intermediate in the evolution of superfast sonic muscles</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:31. doi:10.1186/1742-9994-8-31"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Hin-Kiu Mok"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Mok et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:31
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/31

RESEARCH

Open Access

An Intermediate in the evolution of superfast
sonic muscles
Hin-Kiu Mok1†, Eric Parmentier2†, Kuo-Hsun Chiu1,3, Kai-En Tsai1, Pai-Ho Chiu1 and Michael L Fine4*

Abstract
Background: Intermediate forms in the evolution of new adaptations such as transitions from water to land and
the evolution of flight are often poorly understood. Similarly, the evolution of superfast sonic muscles in fishes,
often considered the fastest muscles in vertebrates, has been a mystery because slow bladder movement does not
generate sound. Slow muscles that stretch the swimbladder and then produce sound during recoil have recently
been discovered in ophidiiform fishes. Here we describe the disturbance call (produced when fish are held) and
sonic mechanism in an unrelated perciform pearl perch (Glaucosomatidae) that represents an intermediate
condition in the evolution of super-fast sonic muscles.
Results: The pearl perch disturbance call is a two-part sound produced by a fast sonic muscle that rapidly
stretches the bladder and an antagonistic tendon-smooth muscle combination (part 1) causing the tendon and
bladder to snap back (part 2) generating a higher-frequency and greater-amplitude pulse. The smooth muscle is
confirmed by electron microscopy and protein analysis. To our knowledge smooth muscle attachment to a tendon
is unknown in animals.
Conclusion: The pearl perch, an advanced perciform teleost unrelated to ophidiiform fishes, uses a slow type
mechanism to produce the major portion of the sound pulse during recoil, but the swimbladder is stretched by a
fast muscle. Similarities between the two unrelated lineages, suggest independent and convergent evolution of
sonic muscles and indicate intermediate forms in the evolution of superfast muscles.
Keywords: sound production, acoustic communication, swimbladder, striated muscle, smooth muscle, adaptation,
evolutionary intermediates

Background
Although neural circuitry for vocalization shares similarities between some fishes and tetrapods [1], little is
known about the evolution of fish sonic mechanisms.
Rather than a homologous syrinx or larynx, fish sounds
are produced by an extraordinary diversity of mechanisms utilizing super-fast muscles that appear to evolve
convergently [2,3]. In common between fishes and tetrapods, muscles act on organs derived from endodermal
structures: swimbladder in fishes and trachea in tetrapods. Sonic swimbladder muscles can be extrinsic or
intrinsic. Extrinsic muscles typically originate on the
skull and insert on the swimbladder or a bony structure
* Correspondence: mfine@vcu.edu
† Contributed equally
4
Department of Biology, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA
23284-2012, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

attached to the bladder. Intrinsic muscles, the less common condition, attach exclusively to the swimbladder
wall and tend to be associated with prolonged tonal
sounds [4-6].
Muscles can change insertions over evolutionary time
[7], but how the process would start is unclear. Head
muscles have migrated to the swimbladder multiple
times, and all known examples are sonic except in the
lion fish in which the muscle appears to manipulate the
bladder for posture control [8]. Based on embryology [9]
and parsimony, Fine and Ladich [10] speculated that
extrinsic muscles preceded intrinsic ones because it
would be simpler to move the insertion of an existing
muscle to the swimbladder than to create a muscle de
novo. In support of this idea, intrinsic sonic muscles
and the sonic nerves in toadfish form in the occipital
spinal cord, migrate and attach to the swimbladder [9].

© 2011 Mok et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Mok et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:31
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/31

Fish swimbladder muscles are often considered the
fastest muscles in vertebrates [11]. Sound from fast
sonic systems is produced as a forced rather than a
resonant response, i.e. muscle cycle time (contraction
and relaxation) and not the natural frequency of the
swimbladder cavity, determines sound fundamental frequency [4,12,13]. For instance, the oyster toadfish routinely contracts its muscles at 200 Hz to produce a
courtship call with that fundamental frequency and can
follow an electrical stimulus at 400 Hz without tetanizing [12]. However, slow bladder movement does not
generate audible sound [12,14]. Therefore, the evolution
of superfast muscles has been a mystery since there was
no clear role for slow muscles, and intermediates were
lacking.
Recently, slow sonic swimbladder muscles have been
discovered in carapids [15] and appear to occur in various ophidiiform fishes [16-20]; these muscles tetanize
around 10 Hz [15]. The carapid swimbladder contains a
thin fenestra near its anterior pole, which stretches during contraction of the slow sonic muscle. The contraction pulls the anterior swimbladder forward until it
snaps back exciting sound production. Ophidion rochei
has more complex sonic system with a bean-shaped
rocker bone protruding from the forward wall of the
bladder that is rotated in opposite directions by antagonistic pairs of sonic muscle [20]. Its sound pulses consist
of two parts, potentially corresponding to opposite
motions of the rocker bone. Consistent with slow muscles, the muscle contraction rate generates the number
of sound pulses (one pulse per contraction) but not the
frequency spectrum of the pulses as in fast muscles.
The pearl perch Glaucosoma buergeri Richardson is an
advanced perciform teleost unrelated to ophidiiform
fishes and possesses swimbladder muscles suggestive of
sound production [21]. Its sonic anatomy is complex
and mirrors many aspects of ophidiids, suggesting the
presence of slow muscles. In this study we investigate
the anatomy of sound production including ultrastructure of sonic muscles and electrophoresis of muscle proteins, describe sound properties and relate them to sonic
anatomy, and posit an evolutionary scheme that for the
first time allows for intermediates in the evolution of
super-fast sonic muscles.

Materials and methods
Pearl perch were caught between about 60 and 150 m of
water on the bottom by hook and line about 100 km
from Kaohsiung Harbor, Taiwan. Despite decompression, most fish were capable of producing sounds, indicating intact swimbladders. We evoked disturbance
sounds in 6 fish (430 to 550 mm standard length) in a
polystyrene tank (52 × 30 cm: water depth 20 cm) by
gently touching the fish’s abdomen. Sounds were

Page 2 of 8

recorded with a hydrophone (HP-A1 Burns Electronics)
on to a Sony linear PCM-M10 recorder and analyzed
with Avisoft (at least eight sounds per fish). Protocols
were approved by the National Sun Yan-sen University
Animal Care and Use Committee.
Animals were returned to the lab for dissection, histology and electrophoresis. Histology on the internal
muscle fixed in 7% paraformaldehyde in phosphate buffer suggested it was a smooth muscle, and therefore
electron microscopy was performed on another individual. Several small samples of sonic and epaxial muscles
were fixed in 2.5% glutaraldehyde. Morphology was first
observed in 6-7 μm sections stained with toluidin blue
and then ultrathin sections were stained with uranyl
acetate and lead citrate and examined with a JEOL JEM
11SX electron microscope.
We utilized (1) SDS-PAGE analysis combined with
LC-MS/MS to probe the muscles for alpha transgellin, a
smooth-muscle specific protein and (2) Western blotting
for troponin T, a marker present in striated but not
smooth muscle, and alpha (sarcomeric) actin.
Nano-HPLC-MS/MS analysis

Approximately 0.1 g of the two sonic muscles, white
trunk muscle and the swim bladder were individually
homogenized with a Pro200 homogenizer (Pro Scientific
Inc. Oxford, CT USA) in 0.07 M sodium phosphate buffer (pH 7.4) and centrifuged at 4°C for 20 min at 16000
g to remove the cell debris. Supernatant protein concentration was determined with the Bradford protein assay
reagent (Bio-rad). Proteins were resolved by SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE) performed on a
12% gel, and bands were visualized with silver staining.
Specific bands were excised for identification, washed
three times with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate in
water and 50% (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN) in 25 mM
ammonium bicarbonate. Protein reduction was subsequently performed by incubating in 0.5 M dithiothrietol
(DTT) for 1 h at 56 °C and then alkylating with 50 μL
saturated iodoacetamide (IAA) for 45 min at room temperature in the dark. The gel sample was digested with
20 μg of sequencing-grade modified trypsin (Promega)
with a sufficient volume of 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate to completely saturate the gel. The sample was
incubated at 37 °C for an overnight digestion. Supernatants containing the peptides were transferred to siliconized 0.5 mL Eppendorf tubes. Remaining peptides in
the gel pieces were extracted by incubation with 20 μL
of 50% (v/v) ACN containing 5% (v/v) formic acid for
20 min. Extracted peptides were combined with those in
the Eppendorf tubes, and nano-HPLC-MS/MS analysis
was performed to identify tryptic peptides.
Extracted peptides were transferred to vials, and 8 μL
of sample was fractionated by capillary reverse-phase

Mok et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:31
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/31

Page 3 of 8

liquid chromatography on a C18 microcapillary column
(75 μm i.d. × 15 cm) coupled with an ion trap mass
spectrometer (LCQ DECA XP Plus, ThermoFinnigan,
San Jose, CA). The mobile phases were 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in H2O (buffer A) and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid
in acetonitrile (buffer B). The gradient profile consisted
of a linear 0% to 5% buffer B at 2 min and then progressed to 5% buffer B at 2 min and to 60% at 40 min.
The samples were introduced into the mass spectrometer through an electrospray source with the application of a distal 1.6-1.7 kV spraying voltage, and the scan
range of each full MS scan m/z 450-2000.
The proteins identified by MS/MS fragmentation spectra were searched against the NCBI Actinopterygii (rayfinned fishes) sequence database (version 20090616;
148434 sequences) with the MASCOT algorithm (v2.1.0,
Matrix Science, London, UK). The mass search parameters were set: peptide mass tolerance, 1 Da; MS/MS
tolerance, 1 Da; peptide charge, +1,+2, and +3; data format, sequence (DTA); Instrument, ESI-TRAP.; missed
cleavage, 2; consideration for fixed modifications such as
carbamidomethyl, and for variable modifications as deamidated and oxidation.
Western blotting

Western blotting was used to verify the expression of
selected proteins including troponin T and sarcomeric
actin. Ten μg of protein from the various muscles and

Results
The swimbladder, covered by a heavy white tunica
externa, is broad anteriorly and tapers to a point posteriorly (Figure 1, animation in additional file 1). The posterior bladder is firmly attached to the hemal spine of
the 9th vertebra and to a ventral osseus plate made by
the 7 th and 8 th vertebra and thus prevented from

III

Skull

A

the swim bladder were mixed with SDS sample buffer
and heated at 95°C for 5 min. Proteins were separated
on a 12% SDS-PAGE and transferred to PVDF membranes (Millipore). The swimbladder was used as negative control. The membranes were blocked in a 5%
nonfat milk solution for 1 h at room temperature and
then probed with antibodies against troponin T (1:200
dilution, Santa Cruz Biotechnology) and against a monoclonal antibody to alpha sarcomeric actin (1:1,000 dilution, Abcam). The membranes were washed 3× with
tris-buffered saline containing tween-20 (TBST) and
incubated with secondary antibody in TBST/2% skim
milk. Bound antibody was detected with the Enhanced
Chemiluminescence System. Chemiluminescent signals
were captured with the Fujifilm LAS 3000 system (Fujifilm). Duplicate experiments were performed at least 3×.
Because the swimbladder did not contain muscle
actin, 10 μg of each sample examined by Western blotting were separated and visualized by silver staining to
verify the protein integrity of each sample.

V

VII

IX

I

StSM

SB1

ribs

SB2

SmSM
ribs

B
V

VII

T

IX

p

C
SB1

SB2

p
Figure 1 Drawings of the sonic system of Glaucosoma buergeri. A. Lateral view of the sonic system. Latin numbers designate individual
vertebra. B. Ventral view of the vertebral column illustrating processes that support the posterior swimbladder and attachment of the sonic
tendon. The red circle indicates the insertion of the tendon on the paraphoyses of vertebra IX. C. Ventral view of the dorsal wall of the
swimbladder (base of the swimbladder removed) illustrating the attachment of the tendon-smooth muscle to the inner tunica externa.
Abbreviations: p parapohysis of vertebra IX, SB1 anterior part of the swimbladder, SB2 posterior part of the swimbladder, StSM: anterior striated
sonic muscle, SmSM: smooth sonic muscle, and T tendon from vertebra IX to the smooth sonic muscle. The swimbladder fenestra, although not
visible because it is covered by the tunica externa, is situated between SB1 and SB2.

Mok et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:31
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/31

Page 4 of 8

moving. The anterior pole of the bladder is unattached
and free to move. The swimbladder fenestra occurs
between the anterior and posterior regions of the bladder. It forms a dorsal slit that runs around the sides of
the bladder to the ventral surface. The fenestra is covered by but not attached to the tunica externa of the
posterior bladder.
Paired red anterior sonic muscles originate on the
base of the pterotic bones on the skull and insert on the
outside of the dorsal bladder at the forward edge of the
fenestra (Figure 1). A tendon from the 9th vertebra ends
in a single red-colored muscle that inserts on the tunica
externa on the inner side of the lumen of the anterior
swimbladder. Therefore, the anterior striated muscle
and posterior muscle-tendon spring apparatus attach to
opposite sides of the bladder and appear to function as
antagonists.
Electron microscopy indicates that the external sonic
muscles are striated with a somewhat radial orientation
in cross section and stacks of mitochondria at the fiber
periphery but few in the interior (Figure 2A). Compared
to epaxial fibers (Figure 2D), sonic fibers have thinner
myofibrils and a more developed sarcoplasmic reticulum

A

(Figure 2B, C), suggesting adaptations for speed [22]
and fatigue resistance [4,23]. The internal muscle that
connects the posterior tendon to the bladder has the
morphology of a typical smooth muscle with dense
bodies, myofibrils and a central nucleus adjacent to
mitochondria (Figure 2C).
The smooth muscle-specific protein transgellin was
identified in the smooth muscle but not in the anterior
striated sonic or trunk muscle (Figure 3, Additional file
2). Additionally troponin T, typical of striated and heart
muscle, was not present in the smooth muscle or the
sonic tendon but was present in epaxial and anterior
sonic muscle. Alpha actin was present in all three muscles but in lower concentrations, as expected, in the
smooth muscle. The tendon served as a negative control, and no actin or troponin T were present although
silver stained SDS-PAGE gels indicate abundant protein
in the tendon. Therefore, electron microscopy and protein analysis identified the muscle attached to the tendon as smooth.
Disturbance calls consisted of a variable series of
pulses (2-9) per call with a pulse period, or time from
the beginning of one pulse to the next, of about 30 ms

mf

B

bv
mf

10 m

bv

C

10 m
D

myo

mf
db

nu

2 m

10 m

Figure 2 Electron micrographs of sonic and hypaxial muscles of the pearl perch Glaucosoma buergeri. A. Cross section of a sonic fiber
from the anterior-striated sonic muscle. B. Longitudinal section of a fiber from the anterior-striated sonic muscle. C. Longitudinal section of a
fiber from the smooth muscle. D. Longitudinal section of epaxial trunk muscle. Note thicker myofibrils and thinner sarcoplasmic reticulum
compared to sonic fibers. Abbreviations: bv blood vessel, db dense bodies, mf myofibrils, myo myofilaments in the smooth muscle, nu nucleus.
Dark arrows indicate mitochondria and white arrows sarcoplasmic reticulum.

Mok et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:31
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/31

Page 5 of 8

Figure 3 SDS-PAGE (A) and Western blotting (B) analyses of Glaucosoma buergeri muscles. Band 1, blue arrow: a protein homologous to
the smooth-muscle specific protein transgelin, identified using LC-MS/MS followed by a database search, was revealed only in the smooth
muscle. Band 2 red arrow: indicates myosin light chain 3 (see Additional File 2) from striated muscle (trunk white and anterior sonic muscle). B.
Troponin T (upper panel) present in striated but not in the internal smooth muscle and alpha sacromeric actin (lower panel) present in muscles
but not in the tendon. Actin, as expected, is expressed at a lower level in smooth than in striated muscles.

Mok et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:31
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/31

Page 6 of 8

(means for individual fish varied from 24.7 to 32.6 ms)
and a duration of about 120 ms (means varied from 86 to
198 ms) (Figure 4). There were several frequency bands
and energy above 4 kHz, a rather high frequency for
swimbladder sounds [2]. Each pulse consisted of two
parts (pulse parts: PP1 and PP2). PP1 typically contained
about 2 cycles, with each half cycle longer than its predecessor, indicating a forced rather than a resonant
response. Note that cycle time would not change in a system primarily controlled by resonance). The period of the
waveform, measured as the time between the two positive
peaks, averaged 4.7 ± 0.3 ms (s.e.m.), equivalent to a frequency of 212 Hz (1,000 ms divided by pulse period).
PP2 cycles were significantly shorter (1.9 ± 0.1 ms, paired
t5 = 8.62, p = 0.0002), equivalent to a frequency of 540
Hz and exhibited several higher amplitude cycles before
decaying. The amplitude of PP2 was also considerably
greater than PP1 (calculated from voltage as 20 log VPP2/
VPP1) by an average of about 17 dB (Figure 4), suggesting
that PP2 is the more effective part of the call.
Pulling on the anterior sonic muscles extends the anterior bladder and fenestra forward and adds strain to the
tendon-internal muscle combination, which pulls the
bladder back upon relaxation of the anterior muscles. We
therefore conclude that the weak PP1 is caused by contraction of a fast sonic muscle (the anterior striated muscles), and the higher frequency and greater amplitude of
PP2 is caused by rapid rebound expected from a
stretched tendon [24], as in slow sonic mechanisms.

Frequency (kHz)

Discussion
The complex sonic anatomy of the pearl perch includes
a number of structures that are uncommon in fishes [2].

The involvement of the smooth muscle is extraordinary.
To our knowledge smooth muscles are not known to
attach to tendons. Smooth muscle does occur within
swimbladder walls as a thin layer [25] corresponding to
the muscularis mucosa of the digestive tract. The red
smooth sonic muscle is organized to assume a function
at least partially analogous to that of striated muscle. Its
precise function is not clearly understood, but slow
speed of contraction is unlikely to contribute to sound
frequency or pulse generation. In the syrinx of male
ducks, smooth muscle is not the source of sound but
has been hypothesized to modulate sound by altering
tension of the inner tympaniform membranes [26].
Similarly smooth muscle contributes to a collagenous
ring affecting gaze in primates [27]. For the pearl perch
we suggest a common mechanical analog of a spring
(the tendon) and a dashpot (the smooth muscle), which
would function to damp swimbladder vibrations permitting pauses within a relatively rapid series of pulses (Figure 4) [28]. This hypothesis is supported by sounds we
recorded from pempherids, a sister family to glaucosomatids. Pempherids have a tendon but no smooth muscle and produce longer duration pulses that continue to
oscillate for more cycles before damping. The mechanics
of contraction and rebound await study in these related
families.
Although many but not most fishes have sonic swimbladder muscles [29], there is no known phylogenetic
continuity as with the bird syrinx or mammalian larynx
[1]. In typical fast systems in fishes, sonic muscles
deform the bladder at a rapid rate that determines fundamental frequency [4,12,13]. Slow systems however,
typically depend on rebound of stretched swimbladders

4
3
2
1
25

50

75

100

125

150
Time (ms)

Figure 4 Oscillogram and sonagram of a series of sound pulses evoked by touching the abdomen of the pearl perch Glaucosoma
buergeri. The box in the oscillogram designates the first pulse, and the vertical dashed line separates pulse parts 1 and 2.

Mok et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:31
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/31

and tendons [15-20]: features include a free anterior
region of the swimbladder that is stretched by anterior
sonic muscles, a stretchable swimbladder fenestra, a
relatively fixed posterior region that is anchored to the
backbone, and a tendon or other means of storing strain
energy that causes the bladder to snap back rapidly. The
fast sonic muscles of the pearl perch produce a weak
component of the sound waveform suggesting that
acoustic communication at any distance would depend
on the second part of the pulse. The finding in pearl
perch of a hybrid system, i.e. a fast muscle in a sonic
system with the parallels to slow muscles listed above
indicates a transitional form in the evolution of superfast sonic muscles. Therefore, we suggest a series of
stages in sonic-muscle evolution: 1) no sonic muscles, 2)
slow muscles that work primarily with a bone or tendon
and produce sound by rebound, 3) fast muscles that still
utilize rebound (i.e. the pearl perch and related families)
and 4) fast muscles (extrinsic and intrinsic) that drive
the bladder directly to express the peak frequency of the
sound. Because swimbladder muscles appear to have
formed independently multiple times, we suggest these
stages would not necessarily correlate with the phylogenetic position of the family so that a more derived
family could be at an earlier stage in the progression.

Conclusion
The disturbance call of the pearl perch is composed of
two parts. Although the swimbladder is stretched by a
fast sonic muscle (part 1), the second and greater amplitude part of the call is produced by bladder recoil facilitated by strain energy in a tendon-smooth muscle pair.
Rebound sounds are characteristic of slow sonic
mechanisms in unrelated ophidiiform fishes. The pearl
perch utilizing characteristics of slow and fast systems
therefore represents in an intermediate condition in the
evolution of superfast sonic muscles that drive swimbladder vibration directly.
Additional material
Additional file 1: Animation of the sonic anatomy of the pearl
perch.
Additional file 2: Table S1. List of identified proteins. Table S2. List of
homologues protein of protein 1 via a BLAST search.

Acknowledgements
Supported in part by National Science Council (ROC) grant NSC96-2621-B110-003-MY3 to H.K.M. and FRFC n° 2.4.535.10.F from the F.R.S.-FNRS. R.C.
Shiue helped with sound analyses, and the National Cheng-Kung University
Proteomics Research Core Laboratory assisted in mass spectrometry analysis.
N. Decloux (ULg) helped with electron microscopy and Yves-Eric Corbisier
kindly realized the 3D movie. E.P. is Research Associate from the F.R.S.-FNRS
(Belgium).

Page 7 of 8

Author details
Institute of Marine Biology and Asia-Pacific Ocean Research Center, National
Sun Yat-sen University, Kaohsiung 80424, Taiwan. 2Laboratoire de
Morphologie Fonctionnelle et Evolutive, Institut de Chimie, Université de
Liège, - B6C, 4000 Liège, Belgium. 3Department and Graduate Institute of
Aquaculture, National Kaohsiung Marine University, 142 Hai-chuan Rd. Nantzu, Kaohsiung 81157, Taiwan. 4Department of Biology, Virginia
Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA 23284-2012, USA.
1

Authors’ contributions
HKM initiated the study, verified sound production and performed
dissections. EP performed electron and optical microscopy, made the
morphological study and the drawings and analyzed sound files. KHC
performed electrophoresis and proteomic analysis. KET collected specimens
and recorded sounds. PHC analyzed sounds. MLF analyzed data and wrote
most of the manuscript. All authors discussed the results, read and approved
the final manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 4 October 2011 Accepted: 29 November 2011
Published: 29 November 2011
References
1. Bass AH, Gilland EH, Baker R: Evolutionary Origins for Social Vocalization
in a Vertebrate Hindbrain-Spinal Compartment. Science 2008, 321:417-421.
2. Ladich F, Fine M: Sound-Generating Mechanisms in Fishes: A Unique
Diversity in Vertebrates. In Communication in Fishes. Volume 1. Edited by:
Ladich F, Collin SP, Moller P, Kapoor BG. Endfield: Science Publishers;
2006:3-43.
3. Parmentier E, Diogo R: Evolutionary trends of swimbladder sound
mechanisms in some teleost fishes. In Communication in Fishes. Edited by:
Ladich F, Collin SP, Moller P, Kapoor BG. Enfield, NH, USA: Jersey Plymouth:
Science Publishers; 2006:43-68.
4. Bass AH, McKibben JR: Neural mechanisms and behaviors for acoustic
communication in teleost fish. Progress in Neurobiology 2003, 69:1-26.
5. Fine ML, Thorson RF: Use of Passive Acoustics for Assessing Behavioral
Interactions in Individual Toadfish. Transactions of the American Fisheries
Society 2008, 137:627-637.
6. Tellechea JS, Norbis W, Olsson D, Fine ML: Calls of the black drum
(Pogonias cromis: Sciaenidae): geographical differences in sound
production between northern and southern hemisphere populations.
Journal of Experimental Zoology Part A: Ecological Genetics and Physiology
2011, 315A:48-55.
7. Diogo R, Abdala V: Muscles of vertebrates: comparative anatomy,
evolution, homologies and development. Enfield: Science Publishers; 2010.
8. Hornstra HM, Herrel A: Gas Bladder Movement in Lionfishes: A Novel
Mechanism for Control of Pitch. Journal of Morphology 2004, 260:1.
9. Tracy HC: Stages in the development of the anatomy of motility of the
toadfish (Opsanus tau). The Journal of Comparative Neurology 1959,
111:27-81.
10. Fine ML, Ladich F: Sound production, spine locking and related
adaptations. In Catfishes. Edited by: Kapoor BG, Arratia G, Chardon M,
Diogo R. Enfield: Science Publishers; 2003:248-290.
11. Tavolga WN: Sonic characteristics and mechanisms in marine fishes. In
Marine Bio-acoustics. Edited by: Tavolga WN. Oxford: Pergamon Press;
1964:195-211.
12. Fine ML, Malloy KL, King CB, Mitchell SL, Cameron TM: Movement and
sound generation by toadfish swimbladder. Journal of comparative
Physiology A 2001, 187:371-379.
13. Connaughton MA: Sound generation in the searobin (Prionotus
carolinus), a fish with alternate sonic muscle contraction. J Exp Biol 2004,
207:1643-1654.
14. Fine ML, King CB, Cameron TM: Acoustical properties of the swimbladder
in the oyster toadfish Opsanus tau. Journal of Experimental Biology 2009,
212:3542-3552.
15. Parmentier E, Lagardere J-P, Braquegnier J-B, Vandewalle P, Fine ML: Sound
production mechanism in carapid fish: first example with a slow sonic
muscle. J Exp Biol 2006, 209:2952-2960.

Mok et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:31
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/31

Page 8 of 8

16. Mann D, Bowers-Altman J, Rountree RA: Sounds Produced by the Striped
Cusk-Eel Ophidion marginatum (Ophidiidae) during Courtship and
Spawning. Copeia 1997, 1997:3.
17. Parmentier E, Fontenelle N, Fine ML, Vandewalle P, Henrist C: Functional
morphology of the sonic apparatus in Ophidion barbatum (Teleostei,
Ophidiidae). Journal of Morphology 2006, 267:1461-1468.
18. Fine ML, Lin H, Nguyen BB, Rountree RA, Cameron TM, Parmentier E:
Functional morphology of the sonic apparatus in the fawn cusk-eel
Lepophidium profundorum (Gill, 1863). Journal of Morphology 2007,
268:953-966.
19. Nguyen TK, Lin H, Parmentier E, Fine ML: Seasonal variation in sonic
muscles in the fawn cusk-eel Lepophidium profundorum. Biology Letters
2008, 4:707-710.
20. Parmentier E, Bouillac G, Dragičević B, Dulčić J, Fine M: Call properties and
morphology of the sound-producing organ in Ophidion rochei
(Ophidiidae). Journal of Experimental Biology 2010, 213:3230-3236.
21. McKay RJ: FAO species catalogue. Vol. 17. Pearl perches of the world.
(Family Glaucosomatidae). An annotated and illustrated catalogue of the
pearl perches known to date. FAO Fisheries Synopsis 1997, 125:26.
22. Feher J, Waybright T, Fine M: Comparison of sarcoplasmic reticulum
capabilities in toadfish sonic muscle and rat fast twitch muscle. Journal
of Muscle Research and Cell Motility 1998, 19:661-674.
23. Mitchell S, Poland J, Fine ML: Does muscle fatigue limit advertisement
calling in the oyster toadfish Opsanus tau? Animal Behaviour 2008,
76:1011-1016.
24. McNeill Alexander R: Tendon elasticity and muscle function. Comparative
Biochemistry and Physiology - Part A: Molecular & Integrative Physiology 2002,
133:1001-1011.
25. Smith FM, Croll RP: Autonomic control of the swimbladder. Autonomic
Neuroscience 2011, 165:140-148.
26. Frank T, Walter I, Probst A, König HE: Histological Aspects of the Syrinx of
the Male Mallard (Anas platyrhynchos). Anatomia, Histologia, Embryologia
2006, 35:396-401.
27. Demer J, Oh SY, Clark RA, Poukens V: Evidence for a pulley of the inferior
oblique muscle. Investiative Opthamology & Visual Science 2003,
44:3856-3865.
28. Steidel RF, (Ed): An introduction to mechanical vibration. New York: Wiley;
1989.
29. Lobel PS, Kaatz I, Rice AN: Acoustical behavior of reef Fishes. In
Reproduction and sexuality in marine fishes: patterns and processes. Edited by:
Cole KS. Berkeley: University of California Press; 2010:307-387.
doi:10.1186/1742-9994-8-31
Cite this article as: Mok et al.: An Intermediate in the evolution of
superfast sonic muscles. Frontiers in Zoology 2011 8:31.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
