<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Reconstructing the ups and downs of primate brain evolution: implications for adaptive hypotheses and Homo floresiensis</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Biology 2010 8:9. doi:10.1186/1741-7007-8-9"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Stephen H Montgomery"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Montgomery et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:9
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/9

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Reconstructing the ups and downs of primate
brain evolution: implications for adaptive
hypotheses and Homo floresiensis
Stephen H Montgomery1, Isabella Capellini2, Robert A Barton2, Nicholas I Mundy1*

Abstract
Background: Brain size is a key adaptive trait. It is often assumed that increasing brain size was a general
evolutionary trend in primates, yet recent fossil discoveries have documented brain size decreases in some
lineages, raising the question of how general a trend there was for brains to increase in mass over evolutionary
time. We present the first systematic phylogenetic analysis designed to answer this question.
Results: We performed ancestral state reconstructions of three traits (absolute brain mass, absolute body mass,
relative brain mass) using 37 extant and 23 extinct primate species and three approaches to ancestral state
reconstruction: parsimony, maximum likelihood and Bayesian Markov-chain Monte Carlo. Both absolute and relative
brain mass generally increased over evolutionary time, but body mass did not. Nevertheless both absolute and
relative brain mass decreased along several branches. Applying these results to the contentious case of Homo
floresiensis, we find a number of scenarios under which the proposed evolution of Homo floresiensis’ small brain
appears to be consistent with patterns observed along other lineages, dependent on body mass and phylogenetic
position.
Conclusions: Our results confirm that brain expansion began early in primate evolution and show that increases
occurred in all major clades. Only in terms of an increase in absolute mass does the human lineage appear
particularly striking, with both the rate of proportional change in mass and relative brain size having episodes of
greater expansion elsewhere on the primate phylogeny. However, decreases in brain mass also occurred along
branches in all major clades, and we conclude that, while selection has acted to enlarge primate brains, in some
lineages this trend has been reversed. Further analyses of the phylogenetic position of Homo floresiensis and better
body mass estimates are required to confirm the plausibility of the evolution of its small brain mass. We find that
for our dataset the Bayesian analysis for ancestral state reconstruction is least affected by inclusion of fossil data
suggesting that this approach might be preferable for future studies on other taxa with a poor fossil record.

Background
Phylogenetic comparative methods and ancestral state
reconstruction play important roles in evolutionary biology. They enable historical evolutionary processes, and
the function and evolution of specific traits, to be
inferred from patterns of diversity in extant species
[1-3]. Extant primate brains, which vary from 1.8 g
(Microcebus murinus) to 1330 g (Homo sapiens), fall
within the range of non-primate mammalian brain
masses [4]. However, after correcting for allometric
* Correspondence: nim21@cam.ac.uk
1
Department of Zoology, University of Cambridge, Downing Street,
Cambridge, UK

scaling with body mass, primates have relatively large
brains compared to most other mammals [5]. A trend
towards brain expansion is assumed to have occurred
throughout primate evolution [6] and this has been
interpreted as an indication of directional selection on
cognitive abilities, due, for example, to arms races in
social cognition [7,8].
Recent studies, however, indicate that brain size, measured either in volume or mass, may have decreased in
some vertebrate lineages [9,10]. Decreases in both absolute and relative brain size appear to have occurred in a
number of taxa including birds [11], bats [10], bovids
[12], elephants [13] and hippopotami [14,15]. Dwarfism

© 2010 Montgomery et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Montgomery et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:9
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/9

following island isolation (the island rule) can account
for some of these decreases [15,16] but not all. For at
least some of these cases it is likely that a reduction in
brain size has occurred to meet the demands of the species’ changing ecological needs rather than being due to
geographical isolation per se [10,11].
Although many studies have investigated the possible
selective advantages and disadvantages of increased
brain size in primates [5,17-21], few consider how frequently brain size has reduced. Periods of primate evolution which show decreases in brain size are of great
interest as they may yield insights into the selective
pressures and developmental constraints acting on brain
size. Bauchot & Stephan [22] noted the evolution of
reduced brain size in the dwarf Old World monkey
Miopithecus talapoin and Martin [23] suggested relative
brain size in great apes may have undergone a reduction
based on the cranial capacity of the extinct hominoid
Proconsul africanus. Taylor & van Schaik [24]reported a
reduced cranial capacity in Pongo pygmaeus morio compared to other Orang-utan populations and hypothesise
this reduction is selected for as a result of scarcity of
food. Finally, Henneberg [25] has shown that during the
late Pleistocene human absolute brain size has decreased
by 10%, accompanied by a parallel decrease in body size.
The importance of understanding the evolution of
reduced brain size in primates has recently been
brought into sharp focus with the discovery of a smallbrained hominin, Homo floresiensis, which overlapped
both geographically and temporally with modern
humans [26,27]. This has challenged our understanding
of human evolution and created much debate about
whether H. floresiensis was a distinct species or a pathological example of modern humans [28-30]. Studies
describing the endocast and post-cranial features of the
type specimen (LB1) have resulted in mixed conclusions
[31-38]. Analyses using known cases of dwarfism to
model brain and body size reduction in H. floresiensis
from an ancestral Homo erectus population suggested
insular dwarfism cannot explain the smaller brain and
body size [[39,40]; but also [15]]. However, recent studies have found that both the degree and temporal rate
of reduction in brain and body size observed in H. floresiensis, assuming ancestry with H. erectus, fall within the
range of size reductions in other island primate species
[41,42]. An alternative phylogenetic hypothesis for H.
floresiensis has recently been proposed and indicates
that this species may not have evolved by insular dwarfism of a known Homo species [43]. Instead Argue et al
[43] propose two equally parsimonious cladograms in
which H. floresiensis is a distinct early species Homo,
emerged after H. rudolfensis and either before or after
H. habilis (Figure 1b &1c). The debate about the place
of H. floresiensis in the primate tree and the possible

Page 2 of 19

evolutionary significance of its small size and encephalization could be illuminated by placing the specimens in
the context of a broader phylogenetic analysis.
Reconstructing ancestral brain and body sizes provides
a means of testing the generality of the trend of increasing brain and body size through primate evolution. It
also provides estimates of brain and body sizes at key
points along the primate phylogeny allowing inferences
to be made about the ecology of the ancestors of key
clades, based on what we know about the relationship
between body size, ecology and life history traits in living primates [44,45]. However, before making any inferences based on estimated ancestral states it is vital to
perform a thorough comparison of reconstruction methods in order to obtain the most reliable estimates. Previous studies have used weighted square change
parsimony and maximum likelihood (ML) to reconstruct
ancestral character states and infer the adaptive origins
of phenotypes [46-49] and to study important genotypephenotype associations [50]. However, basing conclusions on these methods may be problematic as they fail
to provide reliable estimates when there are directional
evolutionary changes and can also be adversely affected
when ancestral states fall outside the range of extant
species [51,52], as is expected to be the case for primate
brain evolution [6]. Incorporating data from fossils can
improve ancestral reconstruction estimates as they may
more completely describe the range and temporal distribution of the character’s history, and thus help improve
the estimated nodal values both in the presence of
directional trends and when ancestral values are markedly different from extant species values [47,53]. More
recently, a method to model directional change and find
the best-fitting models of evolution prior to ancestral
state reconstruction in Bayesian framework has been
developed [54,55]. Whether this method performs better
than parsimony and ML in estimating ancestral states
and whether it is influenced by including fossil data like
other methods has yet to be examined using real
datasets.
Here we investigate the evolution of brain and body
mass in Primates and assess whether brain mass and
body mass show evidence of directional trends. Given
the strong allometric relationship between brain and
body mass [5,6], relative brain size is most commonly
used in comparative studies [56] that aim to test the
evolutionary significance of an increased brain mass
above that predicted from a species’ body mass [for
example [7,57]]. However, absolute brain mass is of
evolutionary relevance too [58,59]; it may be related to
cognitive ability [60] and it is correlated with neuron
number [61] which in turn is likely to have important
implications for cognitive performance [4]. Furthermore, analysis of absolute brain and body size is

Montgomery et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:9
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/9

Page 3 of 19

Figure 1 Phylogeny of primates with extinct primates. a) Phylogeny used for main reconstruction analysis. Extinct primates are denoted with
an asterisk (*); b) and c) Phylogenies off Homini used for the H. floresiensis analysis based on the two most parsimonious topologies from Argue
et al. [43], the rest of the phylogeny was left as shown in a). b) corresponds to Argue et al.’s Tree 1 and c) to Tree 2. Branches are drawn
proportional to time. This figure was prepared in Mesquite [110].

necessary in order to interpret the nature of evolutionary changes in relative brain size. We therefore investigated the evolutionary history of both relative and
absolute brain size.
First, we adopted three approaches to reconstructing
the evolutionary history of these traits: weighted
squared-change parsimony, maximum likelihood (ML)
and Bayesian Markov-chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
[54,55,62,63] (see Methods), and performed each analysis with and without inclusion of fossil data. Following
previous studies showing that ancestral state reconstruction is improved by including fossil data particularly
when traits evolved under a directional trend [47,53], we
assessed the sensitivity of each method to the inclusion
of fossil data, and also compared estimates across

methods. The aim of the model comparison is to test
whether any method produces consistent estimates with
and without the inclusion of fossils, as this might suggest a more robust method which is less affected by
aspects of the trait’s evolution which decrease the accuracy of ancestral state reconstructions, such as directional trends or ancestral values which lie outside of the
range of extant species. Second, to explicitly model and
assess statistically whether there was a directional
increase in brain and body mass, we compared ancestral
reconstruction when a directional constant-variance random walk model of evolution was assumed versus a
non-directional constant-variance random walk model
as implemented in BayesTraits [54,55], using the phylogeny with fossil species included. We then examined the

Montgomery et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:9
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/9

pattern of change in brain and body size through the
tree under the most supported model.
We discuss the implications of our results for hypotheses on the adaptive origins of modern primates, and
identify branches along which brain mass has increased
greatly or at a high rate, or along which brain mass has
decreased in either absolute or relative terms. Finally we
use our results to evaluate alternative scenarios about
the origin of H. floresiensis, specifically from three different populations of H. erectus and from H. habilis. This
analysis aims to evaluate whether descent of H. floresiensis from a putative ancestral population involves a
decrease in brain and body mass that is beyond those
observed in other primate lineages. Our analyses show
that ancestral state reconstruction can be an informative
way to infer evolutionary processes using data from living species, but highlight the need to assess the reliability of these estimates when doing so.

Results and discussion
Ancestral reconstructions: congruence between estimates
with and without fossil data

Previous studies have used either volume or mass as a
measure of brain size. Here we used log10-transformed
brain and body mass in all analyses. Brain and body
mass estimates were collected for 37 extant and 23
extinct primate species (Additional file 1, Table S1). We
first performed the reconstruction analysis using three
alternative approaches (parsimony, ML and Bayesian
MCMC in BayesTraits). Following Webster & Purvis
[64], we then assessed the reliability of the estimates, by
comparing results obtained with and without fossil data
using correlations. In comparing results, estimates of
ancestral states for each node obtained in the Bayesian
framework were taken as the average of the posterior
distribution. The phylogenies that we used are shown in
Figure 1 (extant and extinct species) and Figure 2
(extant species).
Ancestral values for all nodes of the tree with and without the inclusion of fossil data were highly correlated
for absolute brain mass (parsimony, Spearman’s correlation coefficient (r s ) = 0.932; ML, r s = 0.932; Bayesian
MCMC, rs = 0.993, all P < 0.001) and body mass (parsimony, rs = 0.939; ML, rs = 0.941; Bayesian MCMC, rs =
0.960, all P < 0.001). As expected, ML and parsimony
methods produce almost identical results for estimates
made with (rs = 1.000, P < 0.001) and without fossils (rs
= 1.000, P < 0.001). We therefore only present the
results of further comparisons between ML and Bayesian MCMC. The lower rs values in the parsimony and
ML analyses are caused by increased disparity between
the estimates at deeper nodes. In particular, estimates of
log(brain mass) using fossils are 10-15% lower for the
root (Figure 2, node 38), the ancestral haplorhine (39),

Page 4 of 19

the ancestral anthropoid (40) and the ancestral New
World monkey (54) than estimates made without inclusion of the fossil data (Figure 3a), suggesting the accuracy of the estimates decreases at the deeper nodes
when fossil data are not used. The standard errors in
ML analysis support this conclusion, being larger for
deeper nodes. Conversely, the results of the Bayesian
MCMC analysis do not show this disparity and deep
nodes fall on the same line as shallower nodes (Figure
3a &3b) although confidence intervals of the root estimate are still higher than those of all other nodes (Additional file 1, Table S3).
The results from the Bayesian analyses agree more
strongly with ML when fossil data are included than
when they are excluded for both brain mass (with fossils: rs = 0.995, P < 0.001; without fossils: rs = 0.923, P <
0.001; Figure 3c and 3d) and body mass (rs = 0.981, P <
0.001 with fossils; rs = 0.926, P < 0.001 without fossils).
The greatest disparity between estimates made without
fossils between parsimony/likelihood analysis and Bayesian MCMC analysis are found at the root (node 38),
the ancestral haplorhine (39), the ancestral anthropoid
(40), the ancestral strepsirhine (65) and the ancestral
lemur (68). When fossil data are included disparity
between the MCMC & ML remain for nodes 38 and 39,
with the estimates from the Bayesian analysis being
lower than those made by the other methods.
To measure relative brain mass for the species in the
tree we performed a phylogenetically controlled GLS
regression analysis between log(brain mass) and log
(body mass) using ML in BayesTraits (see Methods),
that returned the following fit line: log(brain mass) =
2.18 + 0.684 [log(body mass)]. We then reconstructed
ancestral character states for relative brain size with two
alternative approaches. With the first approach, which
we term residuals second, we first inferred ancestral
brain and body sizes at each node and then derived relative brain size as the residual brain size on body size
using the ancestral state estimates at the nodes and the
phylogenetically controlled GLS equation. This approach
has the advantage of first finding the best fitting model
for brain and body mass, but does not explicitly model
the correlated evolution of brain and body mass, and
cannot be used for testing directionality in the evolution
of encephalization (relative brain mass) if brain and
body size evolved under different models. With the second approach, residuals first, we explicitly modelled the
evolution of encephalization as relative brain size, by
first calculating the residuals of brain on body mass in
the extant species with the phylogenetically controlled
fit line, and then used these residuals as data to perform
an ancestral state reconstruction of relative brain size.
This approach has the advantage of modelling encephalization but it cannot incorporate two distinct models

Montgomery et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:9
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/9

Page 5 of 19

Figure 2 Phylogeny of extant primate genera. Branches are drawn proportional to time. This figure was prepared in Mesquite [110].

for brain and body mass should they evolve under different models. These two approaches, however, produced very similar relative brain size values, as the
residuals at each node returned by the two methods
were highly correlated (r s = 0.979, P < 0.001) and we
therefore present only the results of the residuals second
method.
The level of congruence between ancestral state estimates made with and without fossil data was much
lower for relative brain mass than for absolute brain

mass. Spearman’s rank correlations for all three methods
were highly significant although r s values were much
lower for ML (rs = 0.743, P < 0.001) and parsimony (rs
= 0.743, P < 0.001) than for the Bayesian analysis (rs =
0.835, P < 0.001). All three approaches performed poorly
when estimating ancestral states of deep nodes, as indicated by the large disparities between estimates made
with and without fossils (Figure 4a and 4b). Estimates of
ancestral relative brain mass using parsimony and ML
were highly consistent both with and without fossil data

Montgomery et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:9
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/9

Page 6 of 19

Figure 3 Correlations between estimates of absolute brain mass in log(grams). a) Correlations are shown with and without fossil data
using ML; b) with and without fossil data using Bayesian MCMC; c) without fossil data between ML and Bayesian MCMC results; d) with fossil
data between ML and bayesian MCMC results. Numbers indicate nodes in figure 2.

(for both analyses: r s = 1.000, P < 0.001). The results
from Bayesian MCMC analysis were again more similar
to those estimated by the two other methods when fossil
data were included (r s = 0.994 with fossils, r s = 0.968
without; Figure 4c and 4d).
It is interesting to note that for all three approaches
the estimated brain mass of the last common ancestor
of humans and chimpanzees is larger when fossil data
are not included. For example, the average estimate of
brain mass for the Homo-Pan ancestor using MCMC
analysis was 569.4 g (95% CI: 567.7 - 572.2 g) without
fossils, while when fossils were included the average
estimate was 425.6 g (95% CI: 424.2 to 426.8 g). This
suggests the mass of the human brain can exert a large
influence over ancestral state reconstructions in the
great ape clade.
To summarise, parsimony and ML produced ancestral state estimates that were more discrepant between

analyses with and without fossils when compared to
estimates obtained with Organ et al.’s [55] method in
a Bayesian framework. Moreover, the estimates of the
Bayesian analysis were more consistent with those produced by ML and parsimony when fossil data were
included. These results thus suggest that Organ et al.’s
[55] method is more robust and therefore preferable
for reconstructing ancestral states with our dataset.
Although we cannot say whether this approach will
generally perform most reliably when reconstructing
ancestral states in taxa where little or no fossil data
are available, our results suggest that this might be the
case. It would thus be interesting to test whether
Organ et al.’s [55] method for reconstructing ancestral
states does perform better than parsimony and ML in
the absence of fossil data using simulations and datasets where the ancestral states are known [for example,
[51]].

Montgomery et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:9
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/9

Page 7 of 19

Figure 4 Correlations between estimates of relative brain mass. a) Correlations are shown with and without fossil data using ML; b) with
and without fossil data using Bayesian MCMC; c) without fossil data between ML and Bayesian MCMC results; d) with fossil data between ML
and bayesian MCMC results. Numbers indicate nodes in Figure 2.

One possible reason for lower consistency in estimates
with and without fossils, particularly for ML and parsimony, might be the presence of directional trends [51,64].
Although this problem can in part be mitigated by incorporating fossil data that provide temporal information and
variation not observed among living species and improve
the accuracy of ancestral state reconstructions with these
two methods [47,53], neither parsimony nor ML can explicitly model directional trends, unlike analyses in Bayesian
framework. Thus, we next addressed this issue and tested
whether body size, brain size and encephalization evolved
under directional trends in primates.
Evolutionary trends in body and brain mass evolution

We tested for evolutionary trends by comparing a directional random-walk model to the non-directional random-walk model in BayesTraits. The implementation of
the directional model requires variation in root-to-tip
branch length [3,55,65] which in our otherwise ultrametric tree is provided by the inclusion of fossil data.
To explicitly test for directionality in encephalization

rather than simply inferring this from the evolutionary
histories of brain and body mass, we used the residuals
of brain size on body size of the species (computed as
explained above with the residuals first approach) as
species data of relative brain size in this analysis. The
residuals second approach, in fact, could not be used in
this context since it is based on residuals computed at
internal nodes of the phylogeny.
We found no evidence for a directional trend in absolute body mass, as the directional model did not provide
a better fit to the data when compared to the non-directional model (Table 1; Figure 5). Therefore, in agreement
with other authors [46,66], we conclude that there is no
evidence that Cope’s Rule [67,68], which states body size
tends to increase through time, applies to primates. In
contrast there is strong evidence for a trend of increasing
absolute and relative brain size (Table 1; Figure 5) suggesting that the expansion of the primate brain has been
of major evolutionary significance across the modern primate phylogeny and throughout primate evolution.

Montgomery et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:9
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/9

Page 8 of 19

Figure 5 Posterior distributions of log-likelihoods for the non-directional and directional models. Figure a) shows body mass; b) brain
mass; c) relative brain size. The log-likelihood of the directional model is shown in red, the non-directional model in blue. The posterior
distributions of ancestral state estimates were obtained using uniform priors, two million iterations and a sampling interval of 100 (see Methods).
The harmonic means and Bayes Factors of the posterior distributions are given in Table 1.

To assess how the presence of a directional trend
affects the accuracy of estimates made with a non-directional model we performed correlations between the
results obtained from the directional and non-directional models. Correlations between the estimates made
for absolute brain mass under the directional and nondirectional models suggest no nodes are estimated less
accurately than others under the non-directional constant-variance model (rs = 0.995, P < 0.001). However,
the directional model tends to give lower estimates for
all nodes (Additional file 1, Figure S1 a). For relative
brain mass the rs between estimates under directional
vs. non-directional model is lower (r s = 0.943, P <
0.001) and, while nodes are generally estimated as having lower values under the directional model (Additional
file 1, Figure S1 b), the ancestral state reconstructions
for the deepest nodestend to differ more drastically.
Taken together our results suggest that the ancestral
state reconstruction procedure implemented in Bayesian
framework following Organ et al. [55] might be more
reliable in comparison to parsimony and ML methods,
as it first identifies the best predictive model based on
known data, and then uses such model to infer
unknown ancestral states. In addition it can explicitly
model directionality, and therefore we could identify a
directional trend to increase in both absolute and relative brain mass - but not body mass - in primates. For

the purposes of this paper, we conclude that the most
reliable estimates are thus obtained with Bayesian analyses, under a non-directional random walk model for
body mass and directional random walk for absolute
brain mass (Additional file 1, Table S3). For a discussion
of the rate parameters used in the final analyses see the
Supplementary information and Additional file 1, Table
S2.
Having obtained the most reliable estimates of ancestral states at each node in the tree for each phenotype it
is then possible to use these to make evolutionary inferences. For example our most supported estimate of the
body mass at the root of the primate tree using Bayesian
analysis is largely consistent with some previous qualitative estimates. Martin [23] suggested the ancestral primate probably weighed less than 500 g, while Fleagle
[45] used early primate fossils to conclude that the
ancestral primate was probably as small as 20 g. This is
similar to our estimated body mass at the root of the
phylogeny obtained with the inclusion of fossil species
(48.98 g, 95% CI: 48.97 g to 50.00 g; Figure 6). The estimate made without the fossils is similarly low (37.71 g,
CI: 37.60 g to 37.76 g). Importantly, our estimate of
body mass at the root lies within the range of the proposed extinct sister-group to modern primates, the plesiadapiforms, which ranged from 7 g (the
Micromomyidae family) to 3,000 g (the Carpolestidae

Table 1 Tests for evolutionary trends1.
Phenotype

Harmonic mean Log(Lh): Constant-variance model

Harmonic mean Log(Lh): Directional model

Bayes Factor

Absolute body size
Absolute brain size

-44.688
-30.282

-45.275
-27.087

-1.174
6.390

Relative brain size

1.647

8.576

13.857

1

The model with the highest log-likelihood is the best-fitting model.

Montgomery et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:9
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/9

family), and is consistent with the estimated body
masses of two putative early modern primates Altanius
(10 g) and Altiatlasius (50 to 100 g) [45,69]. In contrast,
a much higher estimate of ancestral primate body mass
[1,171 g (95% CIs: 236 to 3,610 g)] was recently
obtained using a parsimony method and extant species
data only [46]. However, our results show that in the
absence of fossil data parsimony leads to overestimates
of body size, thus questioning this conclusion.
Body mass variation is associated with a number of
behavioural, ecological and life history traits
[44,45,70-75] which are frequently used to infer characteristics of extinct species. Small body mass in extant
primates (less than 500 g) is usually associated with nocturnality, an insectivorous trophic niche [76] and leaping
mode of locomotion for species weighing less than 3,000
g [45]. The probable small body mass of the ancestral
primate has been interpreted as evidence that it occupied a fine-branch niche and was adapted for grasping
small insect prey [23,77]. On the basis of correlates of
body mass and ecological and life history traits of living
primates [44,45], our estimated mass at the root would
suggest the ancestral primate was a leaping insectivore,
which might have had a lifespan of four to six years.
This proposed ecology suggests that visual specialisation
to meet the demands of a fine-branch, insect grasping
niche may have had a significant role in the early expansion of the primate brain [18,23], a hypothesis consistent
with recent evidence revealing an association between
visual expansion and brain size in fossil endocasts of
early primates [78].
Our reconstructions suggest the ancestral primate had
a small brain (120.23 mg, 95% CI: 114.42 mg to 126.33

Page 9 of 19

mg) which, in relative terms, was much smaller than in
any living primate. This result is consistent with a study
of a virtual endocast of Ignacius graybullianus, an Early
Eocene Plesiadapiform (Paromomyidae), indicating that
early euprimates exhibited only small advances in brain
mass over ancestral groups and that the majority of
increases in brain size occurred after the origin of modern primates [78]. Finally we note that our best estimate
of brain mass for the last common ancestor of Homo
and Pan (338.75 mg, 95% CI: 321.37 mg to 340.64 mg;
which equates to a cranial capacity of 355.16 cm3, 95%
CI: 336.61 cm3 to 357.17 cm3) is similar to estimates for
the two earliest hominids known from the fossil record,
the 7.7 million year old Sahelanthropus tchadensis (360
to 370 cm3;) [79] and the 4.4 million year old Ardipithecus ramidus (280 to 350 cm3) [80]. These two fossil species were not included in our analysis due to uncertainty
in their phylogenetic position which has only recently
been resolved [80].
Increases in brain mass in particular lineages

We next examined the amount of change along different
branches of the tree, both as total change along the
branches and as rate of change accounting for differences in branch lengths (see below). We first calculated
the means of the posterior distribution of the ancestral
states for each node, using the same posterior predictive
model developed for brain and body mass, and we computed the change in absolute brain and body mass, and
relative brain mass (using the residuals second approach
described above) along each branch by comparing the
values (either observed (Additional file 1, Table S1) or
estimated (Additional file 1, Table S3)) at consecutive
nodes. Our estimates show that both absolute and

Figure 6 Posterior distributions of trait estimates for the LCA of living primates for a) body mass and b) brain mass. Histograms are
plotted from a posterior distribution of ancestral state estimates obtained using uniform priors (prior range: -100 to +100) acceptance rates were
within 20 to 40% (see methods). To ensure the chain fully explored the parameter space, we extended the MCMC run to 25 million iterations
with a sampling interval of 1500.

Montgomery et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:9
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/9

relative brain size have increased independently in all
major clades of primates (examples shown in Figure 7a
and 7b).
Changes in absolute brain mass along each branch of
the phylogeny can be considered in two ways: a proportional increase (as % of increase relative to the ancestor)
and an absolute increase in mass (described above). The
average proportional change in absolute brain mass

Page 10 of 19

along a branch is 0.243 (i.e. a 24.3% increase), with
changes greater than 0.344 being in the upper quartile,
which includes branches from all the major clades of
the phylogeny. Notably, three of the top four proportional increases are along the deepest branches (ancestral primate to ancestral strepsirrhine (node 38-node 65;
see Figure 2), 1.310; ancestral primate to ancestral haplorhine (38 to 39), 0.942; ancestral haplorhine to

Figure 7 Evolutionary trajectories of brain and body mass. Evolution of brain (red) and body (blue) mass from the ancestral primate to a)
Homo (solid line) and Pan (dashed line) and b) Ateles (solid line) and Daubentonia (dashed line) showing parallel increase in brain and body
mass; c) Callithrix, and d) Microcebus demonstrating secondary reduction in both brain and body mass: note the reduction in brain mass is lower
than the reduction in body mass leading to an increase in relative brain size (see Additional file 1, Table S4).

Montgomery et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:9
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/9

ancestral anthropoid (39 to 40), 0.929), suggesting selective pressures favouring the expansion of the brain were
strong early in primate evolution. Interestingly the proportional increase along the terminal human branch is
only the seventh largest change (0.594). However in
terms of absolute change the terminal human branch
shows the largest change, almost four times greater than
the second biggest change (the terminal Pongo branch).
The average proportional change in relative brain
mass is 0.201 (that is, 20.1% increase), with changes
above 0.278 falling in the upper quartile, which again
includes branches from all major primate groups. The
five branches which show the largest increase in relative
brain mass are the terminal Tarsius branch (0.917), the
terminal Daubentonia branch (0.837), the terminal
Galago branch (0.514), the terminal human branch
(0.479) and the branch between the last common ancestor of Catarrhines and PlatyrrhinesSimiformes and the
ancestral Platyrrhine (40 to 54: 0.431). Because Daubentonia and Tarsius are no more gregarious than their
close relatives [81], this suggests that social complexity
is unlikely to have been the sole factor in primate brain
mass evolution [c.f [7]] and that other selective pressures have also been important. For example the large
brain of Daubentonia is partly due to olfactory specialisation [82,83] which is consistent with selection acting
on sensory systems having had a significant role in brain
size evolution [84]. The finding that the human branch
only comes fourth by this measure is perhaps surprising,
but we note that of these five branches the terminal
human branch is the shortest.
We next examined evolutionary changes along
branches controlling for branch length (change relative
to time). The average rates were an increase of 0.025/
million years (that is, a 2.5% increase/million years) for
a proportional change in brain mass, 5,640 mg/million
years for an absolute change in brain mass, and 0.020/
million years for a change in relative brain mass confirming that most change in relative brain mass was due
to brain rather than body mass. The branch with the
highest rate of change in absolute brain mass is the
terminal human branch (140,000 mg/million years).
However for rate of proportional change in absolute
brain mass the human branch comes only fourth, below
the branches between the last common ancestor of
Macaques and other Papionini, and the last common
ancestor of baboons, mangabeys and mandrills (48 to
49), the ancestral primate and ancestral haplorhine (38
to 39) and the branch between the last common ancestor of Cebinae, Aotinae and Callitrichidae, and the
ancestral Cebinae (58 to 60). The rate of change in relative brain mass along the human branch (0.068/million
years) is also exceeded by the branch between the last
common ancestor of Alouatta, Ateles and Lagothrix

Page 11 of 19

with the last common ancestor of Ateles and Lagothrix
(branch 55 to 56; 0.73), the branch connecting the last
common ancestor of Cebinae, Aotinae and Callitrichidae, and the ancestral Cebinae (branch 58 to 60; 0.074/
million years) and the branch connecting the last common ancestor of the Papionini with the last common
ancestor of Papio, Mandrillus and Cercocebus (branch
48 to 49; 0.084). We therefore conclude that only in
terms of absolute mass and the rate of change in absolute mass has the increase in brain size been exceptional
along the terminal branch leading to humans. Once
scaling effects with body mass have been accounted for
the rate of increase in relative brain mass remains high
but is not exceptional.
It is also notable that the estimated brain size of the
last common ancestor of modern primates is smaller
relative to body size than any living species and that the
expansion of the primate brain began early, with the
deepest branches (for example, 38 to 39; 38 to 65; 39 to
40) ranking in the upper quartile in terms of both
increases in absolute and relative brain mass (Additional
file 1, Table S4).
Decreases in brain mass and evolutionary scenarios for H.
floresiensis

Despite both absolute and relative brain mass showing
strong and significant evolutionary trends to increase,
we find several branches go against this trend (examples
shown in Figure 7c and 7d; Additional file 1, Table S4).
Absolute brain mass decreases on approximately 14% of
branches (10/70); independent decreases are observed in
Old World monkeys (the terminal Cercocebus branch);
in New World monkeys - several branches in the callitrichids, supporting the conclusion that this family has
evolved by a process of phyletic dwarfism [85]; and in
strepsirhines - several branches in the lemur clade.
Branches on which there is an overall decrease in absolute brain mass account for approximately 6% of the
total evolutionary time covered by the phylogeny used
in this analysis. In all cases a decrease in absolute brain
mass is accompanied by a decrease in absolute body
mass. Body mass decreases much more frequently: 46%
of branches show a decrease, accounting for 47% of the
total evolutionary time covered. Decreases in relative
brain mass occur less frequently, with only 4% (3/70) of
branches showing a decrease in relative brain mass,
representing only 2.1% of evolutionary time. Decreases
in relative brain mass mostly appear to be linked to
body mass increasing to a greater extent than brain
mass. This, for example, provides some support for the
hypothesis that small relative brain size in gorillas
reflects increased somatisation rather than decreased
encephalization [[86]; but see [87]].
To assess whether the proposed evolution of Homo
floresiensis is consistent with observed decreases in

Montgomery et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:9
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/9

Page 12 of 19

brain mass which have occurred elsewhere in the primate phylogeny, we calculated the ratio change in brain
and body mass [(brain descendant - brain ancestor)/
(body descendant-body ancestor)] for branches showing
a decrease, in order to facilitate comparisons with the
literature (see methods). We used log values to take variation in body mass into account; decreases here are
therefore proportional decreases in absolute mass. Our
aim in this analysis is not to estimate the probability or
likelihood of the evolution of a hominin with reduced
brain and body mass but rather to test whether or not
decreases seen during the evolution of Homo floresiensis
fall within the range of other observed decreases in Primates. First we consider the evolution of the H. floresiensis brain assuming descent from a known hominin
by insular dwarfism, a widely cited hypothesis
[15,16,39,40]. For the 10 branches which showed a
decrease the average ratio was 0.265 and the range was
0.006 to 0.825. We calculated the same ratio using H.
floresiensis (estimated brain mass c. 380 g [26,31]) and
three possible ancestral forms of Homo erectus, following Martin et al. [39]: Homo erectus broadly defined,
Ngandong H. erectus, and Dmanisi hominins. We also
include Homo habilis which has not been ruled out as a
possible ancestor [36]. The change in brain size and the
ratio of the change in brain and body mass were calculated for the two extreme values of body mass estimated
for H. floresiensis (16 and 32 kg) [26] and their midpoint. In addition we used the brain/body mass scaling
relationships [(brain descendant - brain ancestor)/(body
descendant-body ancestor)] during the 10 decreases in
brain mass to estimate the decrease in brain mass
expected for the observed decrease in body mass for
each ancestor and body mass. The results of this analysis are shown in Additional file 1, Table S5 and invoke
similar conclusions to those discussed below.

Under a number of scenarios the evolution of H. floresiensis lies within the range of decreases in brain mass
estimated here (Table 2). For any ancestor, except
Ngandong hominoids, and a H. floresiensis body mass of
16 kg the decreases in brain and body mass always fall
within the range of the decrease that we found in other
primate branches. For a H. floresiensis body mass of 32
kg the decrease in relative brain mass is not consistent
with changes estimated in other branches, but assuming
a body mass estimate of 24 kg and descent from a Dmanisi hominin population, the decrease in relative brain
size falls within the range of decreases observed elsewhere in the primate phylogeny. We also note that for
both body mass estimates the proportional change in
absolute brain mass from either a Dmanisi hominin
(-0.216) or H. habilis (-0.137)ancestor is actually smaller
than the decrease in the terminal Microcebus branch
(-0.273). Finally the calculated change in relative brain
mass from any of the four ancestors is compatible with
the results obtained here only for a H. floresiensis body
mass close to 16 kg, or descent from either a Dmanisi
hominin or H. habilis if H. floresiensis had a body mass
towards 24 kg.
Thus under the insular dwarfism model, if H. floresiensis descended from either an ‘average’ H. erectus or
Ngandong populations, the decrease in brain mass is
not compatible with our results unless H. floresiensis
had a body mass near 16 kg. The evolution of H. floresiensis also appears less likely if it had a body mass
towards the upper estimate, as the decrease in relative
brain mass falls outside our estimates on other
branches. However, if H. floresiensis had a body mass of
16 to 24 kg, descent from either a Dmanisi hominin or
H. habilis ancestor is in line with decreases in brain and
body mass along other primate lineages. We therefore
conclude that further studies addressing the affinities of

Table 2 Evolution of brain size during the evolution of H. floresiensis from four possible ancestors by insular dwarfism.
Ancestor

H. floresiensis body
mass (kg)

Ratio of change in log(absolute brain mass) &
log(body mass)2

Change in log(brain
mass)

Change in log(relative
brain mass)

H. erectus

16

0.720*

-0.398

-0.020*

24

1.058

-0.398

-0.141

32

1.586

-0.398

-0.226

16

0.784

-0.450

-0.058

24

1.131

-0.450

-0.178

32

1.649

-0.450

-0.264

16

0.437*

-0.216*

0.122*

24
32

0.678*
1.116

-0.216*
-0.216*

0.002*
-0.084

16

0.420*

-0.137*

0.059*

24

0.908

-0.137*

-0.034

32

5.219

-0.137*

-0.147

Ngandong

Dmanisi

H. habilis

1

computed as: [(brain descendant - brain ancestor)/(body descendant-body ancestor)]
* indicates a result which falls within the range of decreases in brain size for Primates estimated in this study.

Montgomery et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:9
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/9

Page 13 of 19

H. floresiensis with different possible ancestors and more
accurate predictions of body mass are necessary to rule
out the possibility of H. floresiensis being a true novel
hominin using this kind of analysis. Our analysis suggests it is possible that, under the insular dwarfism
model, the only unexpected aspect of H. floresiensis’
evolution is the rate at which brain mass decreased,
however some evidence suggests morphological evolution may accelerate on islands [88].
Next we performed several analyses to test whether
the evolution of the H. floresiensis brain under the alternative phylogenetic scenario proposed by Argue et al.
[43] by estimating the ancestral brain and body masses
of the node at the base of the H. floresiensis lineage
(Additional file 1, Table S6) and subsequently analysing
the evolution of brain size along that lineage. The analysis was run for each of the two most parsimonious trees
separately and then for both trees together, taking
advantage of BayesTraits ability to take phylogenetic
uncertainty into account. The results again suggest that
if H. floresiensis body mass did not greatly exceed 24 kg
the decrease in brain size observed along the lineage
leading to H. floresiensis falls within the range seen elsewhere in the primate phylogeny, scales with body mass
in a way consistent with other episodes of brain mass
reductions, and actually results in an increase in relative
brain size (Table 3; Additional file 1, Table S7). Conversely, a larger body size produces an allometric decrease
in brain size beyond the range observed in the primate
tree. To conclude, for a body mass toward the lower
end of the range of estimates all the phylogenetic
hypotheses on the ancestry of H. floresiensis so far proposed are consistent with the observed decrease in brain
size. An alternative method of these hypotheses based
on using the model of brain evolution developed in
BayesTraits is presented in the supplementary information, and produces results broadly consistent with the
main analysis.

To further study the selective pressures and anatomical
changes associated with decreases in brain mass we suggest Microcebus, Callithrix and Miopithecus or Cercocebus may be useful, independent models. For example,
Falk et al. [31] identified a number of potentially derived
features in an endocast of H. floresiensis, and comparative
analyses of the brain anatomies of these species might
show whether similar structures are modified in independent episodes of brain mass reduction. Likewise a comparative analysis of the ecologies of these smaller brained
primates may reveal selective pressures associated with
decreases in brain and body mass. We note that for both
decreases in absolute and relative brain mass there
appears to be no relation with isolation on islands, nor is
there any clear single ecological trait that can explain
these decreases. As with evolutionary increases in brain
mass, decreases in mass are likely to be influenced by a
number of ecological factors. For example, Taylor & van
Schaik [24] have shown that brain size has decreased during the evolution of Pongo p. morio, particularly in
females. These authors suggest this reduction is associated with an increase in periods of food scarcity resulting in selection to minimise brain tissue which is
metabolically expensive [17]. Food scarcity is also
believed to have played a role in the decrease in brain
size in the island bovid Myotragus [12]. Taylor & van
Schaik [24] therefore propose that H. floresiensis may
have experienced similar selective pressures as Myotragus
and Pongo p. morio. Future studies are needed to address
the relative contributions of proposed social and ecological factors in both decreases and increases in brain mass
across Primates and other species.

Conclusions
By reconstructing ancestral states of brain and body
mass in primates we have shown that Organ’s et al [55]
method, implemented in BayesTraits using Bayesian
analysis, is least affected by the inclusion of fossil data

Table 3 Evolution of brain size during the evolution of H. floresiensis under two phylogenetic scenarios1.

Argue Tree 2

Ratio of change in
log(absolute brain mass) & log(body mass)2

Change in
log(brain mass)

Change in
log(relative brain mass)

16

0.400*

-0.171*

0.121*

0.639*
1.116

-0.171*
-0.171*

0.012*
-0.066

16

0.428*

-0.173*

0.104*

24

Argue Tree 1

H. floresiensis body mass (kg)

24
32

Ancestor

0.709*

-0.173*

-0.006*

32

-0.173*

-0.084

0.418*

-0.176*

0.110*

0.679*

-0.176*

-0.001*

32
1

1.336

16
24

Both trees

1.225

-0.176*

-0.076

These are the two most parsimonious topologies obtained by Argue et al. [43] and are shown in Figure 1 b (tree 1) & c (tree 2)
computed as: [(brain descendant - brain ancestor)/(body descendant-body ancestor)]
* indicates a result which falls within the range of decreases in brain size for Primates estimated in this study.
2

Montgomery et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:9
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/9

and is therefore more reliable for our dataset. In this
respect this approach outperforms parsimony and ML
methods which instead tend to produce lower estimates
at deep nodes when using only data of extant species.
This is likely to be because BayesTraits first identifies
the best predictive model based on known tip data to
then infer unknown ancestral states at each node of
interest in the tree and can incorporate evolutionary
trends. If Organ et al.’s [55] method generally outperforms ML and parsimony methods, this may have
important implications for future studies which attempt
to estimate ancestral states in groups where little fossil
information is available, or where evolutionary trends
are suspected, especially when the reconstruction is performed on deep nodes within phylogenies which cover
large time periods. Studies on datasets with known
ancestral states are thus needed to fully assess if the
method implemented in BayesTraits consistently produces more reliable ancestral state reconstructions.
Our results provide robust confirmation for the suggestion that strong evolutionary trends have governed
the expansion of the primate brain. In contrast body
size evolution has not tended to increase in primates,
implying brain and body mass have been subject to
separate selection pressures and supporting the findings
of previous studies in other taxonomic groups that these
two highly correlated traits can show differences in their
patterns of evolution [89,90]. In primates, brain mass
has independently expanded in both absolute and relative terms in all the major clades of the primate phylogeny and began to increase early in primate evolution.
We have highlighted branches along which the change
or rate of change in brain mass is particularly large. Surprisingly only in terms of change in absolute mass is the
terminal human branch exceptional; once scaling effects
are accounted for, humans rank only seventh. Despite
the presence of an overall trend to increase mass, we
also provide evidence for independent decreases in brain
mass in New and Old World Monkeys and in strepsirhines. From our analyses of evolution of H. floresiensis
brain size under different phylogenetic hypotheses, we
conclude that the evolution of H. floresiensis is consistent with our results across the primate phylogeny if it
either evolved from populations of H. habilis or Dmanisi
hominin by insular dwarfism, or under Argue et al.’s
[43] proposed phylogenetic scenarios, and if H. floresiensis had a body mass towards the lower end of the range
of estimates obtained from skeletal remains. In this
respect we note that Brown et al. [26] suggested the
lower body mass estimates are probably most appropriate, assuming H. floresiensis shared the lean body shape
typical of Old World tropical modern humans. If this
were true we estimate the evolution of H. floresiensis
involved a reasonable decrease in absolute brain mass,

Page 14 of 19

but an increase in relative brain size. Our analysis,
together with studies of brain size in island populations
of living primates[41,42], therefore suggests we should
perhaps not be surprised by the evolution of a small
brained, small bodied hominin, although further clarification of the relationships between H. floresiensis and
other hominins are required to confirm this observation.
Finally, our analyses add to the growing number of studies that conclude that the evolution of the human
brain size has not been anomalous when compared to
general primate brain evolution [59,61,91,62-94].

Methods
Brain and body mass data

Data for body and brain mass were obtained from previously published datasets [22,82,95]. For reconstructions of ancestral brain and body mass, we used data
from as many extant genera as possible, leading to a
dataset of 37 primate genera including 14 catarrhines,
12 platyrrhines, 1 tarsier and 10 strepsirhines (Additional file 1, Table S1a).
Through a literature search we obtained data for fossils where cranial remains were sufficiently intact to
make reliable estimates of cranial capacity (N = 23,
Additional file 1, Table S1b). We converted cranial
capacity to brain mass using the equation given in Martin [23]: Log(cranial capacity) = [1.018 × Log(brain
mass)] - 0.025. Where body and brain mass estimates
were not available from the same individual we took the
body mass estimate for the species given in Fleagle [45].
The dataset includes seven extinct hominins, which we
use to examine whether ancestral values were overly
influenced by the large disparity between the brain mass
of Homo sapiens and the other apes.
To calculate relative brain mass we performed a phylogenetically-controlled regression analysis (see below)
between log(brain mass) and log(body mass) in BayesTraits [54,96]. In all the analyses using Generalised Least
Squares models (GLS), the phylogeny is converted into a
variance-covariance matrix representing the shared evolutionary path between the species [3,54,65]. The GLS
regression analysis was performed with ML and MCMC.
Bayesian MCMC analyses were completed using uniform
priors (prior range -100.00 to 100.00), with 2,000,000 iterations and a sampling period of 100, after a burn in of
500,000. The rate deviation was set to obtain an average
parameter acceptance rate of 20 to 40%. We first identified, in Bayesian framework [97,98], the regression model
that best described the relationship between brain and
body mass, by testing whether additional branch-length
scaling parameters to the default Brownian motion model
improved the fit to the data. These were lambda, which
reveals to what extent the phylogeny predicts the pattern
of covariance between species for a trait (the phylogenetic

Montgomery et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:9
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/9

signal); kappa, which stretches and compresses branch
lengths; and delta, which scales path lengths. As these
parameters can improve the fit to the data, we first estimated all parameters at once following Organ et al. [55]
and, where a parameter was significantly different from
the default value of 1, indicating gradualism, it was then
estimated in the final regression analysis. However, while
lambda can be estimated alone, kappa and delta are better
estimated as additional parameters in the model that also
included lambda. The regression was highly significant (t59
= 14.53, R2 = 0.858, P < 0.001), the branch-length scaling
parameters lambda and delta were not significantly different from the default value of one (lambda: lambda =
0.979, LR = 2.04, P = 0.153; delta: delta = 1.091, LR = 0.03,
P = 0.857). Conversely, kappa was estimated to be 0.474,
significantly different to one (LR = 8.132, P = 0.004).
Relative brain mass on body mass for each species
(extant or extinct) was calculated as residual values
using the regression equation (see below). These residuals were used to test for an evolutionary trend to
increase relative brain mass and to reconstruct ancestral
states (residuals first).
Phylogeny

It is important to incorporate both topology and branch
length information during reconstruction analyses as
species are part of a hierarchically structured phylogeny,
therefore not statistically independent, and differences
in time since divergence from the common ancestors
determines differential potential for evolutionary change
[3,47,99,100]. We used a genus level composite phylogeny of primates using published trees. The topology is
taken from Goodman et al. [101] for haplorhine primates and Horvath et al. [102] for strepsirhines. Proportional branch lengths were obtained from recent studies
of primate divergence dates [103-106] scaled to agree
with dates of divergence for the deeper primate nodes
estimated by Steiper & Young [107]. The tree obtained
therefore has branch length information and is ultrametric. There are two trichotomies: one between the
Cebidae, Pitheciidae and Atelidae, the other at the base
of Cebidae (Figure 2). As the topology of our composite
phylogeny is well studied and the branch lengths are
based on the best available divergence date estimates in
all subsequent analyses it is assumed our phylogeny is
known without error.
Where fossil data were included we follow Finarelli &
Flynn [47] in minimising phylogenetic assumptions and
placed extinct taxa as polytomies at the node nearest to
their estimated position in the primate phylogeny.
Branch lengths for fossil species were calculated as the
time from this node to the end of the geological period
in which they are last found. Both phylogenetic relationships and temporal presence in the fossil record were
taken from Fleagle [45]. Where the programs described

Page 15 of 19

below require a fully bifurcating tree, trichotomies were
randomly resolved and the new, intervening branch
given a branch length of zero.
We also use the two most parsimonious Hominin
topologies obtained by Argue et al. [43]. Here branch
lengths were determined based on the earliest and latest
known fossils for each species [27,45,108,109], with
divergence dates of internal nodes coming from the first
appearance of any species within the lineages which
evolved from that node. Where the time of origin for a
lineage could not be determined in this way we minimise phylogenetic assumptions by placing in the node
in centre of the branch. The rest of the phylogeny was
identical to that presented in Figure 1[110].
Reconstruction methods

Ancestral state reconstructions of absolute brain and
body mass and relative brain mass at each node of the
phylogeny were estimated using three methods:
weighted squared-change parsimony in the Mesquite
[101], ML in the program ANCML [63], and Bayesian
MCMC [97,98], in BayesTraits following Organ et al.’s
[55] method, all of which incorporate phylogenetic
information
Weighted squared-change parsimony infers ancestral
states by minimising the square-change along branches
[62,63], but parsimony approaches are not robust to violations of assumptions of constant rate of evolution or
equal probability of change in either direction
[3,51,64,111]. Throughout the paper we refer to this
method as Parsimony method.
ML reconstruction is based on a Brownian motion
model to estimate transitions at any node along the phylogeny. The advantages of this method are that the
probability of change at any point in the tree is not
dependent on a prior state change or on changes on
other branches [2]. Like parsimony approaches however,
the model assumes a constant rate of evolution and may
perform poorly if the trait shows an evolutionary trend
[2,51,64] (see below). Throughout the paper we refer to
this method as the ML method.
Finally, the ancestral state reconstructions of brain and
body size were performed in Bayesian framework with
MCMC in BayesTraits [3,54], following the method
described in Organ et al. [55]. Throughout the paper we
refer to the results obtained from BayesTraits as the Bayesian analysis. BayesTraits first identifies the best fitting
evolutionary model (see below) to the species data, and
then uses such model to infer unknown ancestral states at
internal nodes along the tree. The ancestral state reconstruction is therefore performed in two steps. The constant variance random walk model has only one
parameter, alpha, which describes the instantaneous variance of evolution [3,65]; this model represents the default
model with all branch length scaling parameters, kappa,

Montgomery et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:9
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/9

lambda and delta, set as 1 [3,65]. We then simultaneously
estimated the branch length scaling parameters, because
these parameters can improve the fit to the data and thus
help identify the best evolutionary model for the data. We
tested whether the branch scaling parameters differed
from the default value of one by comparing the harmonic
mean of the model in which the parameters were estimated to the harmonic mean of the model where they
were set as one, using Bayes factors. The Bayes Factor is
computed as: 2(log [harmonic mean(directional model) log[harmonic mean(constant variance model)]. A positive
Bayes factor greater than two is taken as positive evidence
for a difference between the two models with the best fitting model having the highest log(harmonic mean), a
Bayes factor greater than five represent strong evidence
and greater than 10 is very strong evidence [97]. Thus, the
default value of one for a scaling parameter was used in
the final analysis when the Bayes factor was less than two.
Where they did, the rate parameters were incorporated in
the estimation for the best fitting model (see supplementary information). Therefore, contrary to parsimony and
ML, this method has the advantage of finding the best
model of trait evolution before estimating ancestral states.
Results of the Bayesian analysis obtained using 2 or 10
million runs were qualitatively similar, therefore we performed all analyses with two million runs. All analyses
were performed using uniform priors (prior range: -100
to +100), with 2,000,000 MCMC runs after a burn-in of
500,000, sampling every 100 runs, and repeated multiple
times to test the stability of the harmonic means. Rate
deviation was adjusted to obtain an acceptance of the
proposed model parameters (above) between 20% and
40%. Ancestral state reconstructions were then simultaneously estimated using the best evolutionary model for
the data; data deviation was adjusted to obtain an acceptance rate for each node’s estimate between 20 to 40%.
Next we tested if a directional-change random walk
model improved the fit to the data relative to the best
non-directional random walk (Brownian motion) model
obtained as described above. While the non-directional
random walk model has one parameter - alpha, the variance of evolution - the directional random-walk model
has an additional parameter that captures the directional
change using a regression between trait values and the
total path length (beta) [3,65]. Because all species have
the same total path length in ultrametric trees, this analysis could be done only with the tree that incorporated
fossil species as the directional model requires root-totip (path length) variation in order to estimate directionality unless the scaling parameters are used. The harmonic mean of the likelihoods of the directional and nondirectional random walk models can be compared with
Bayes factors [97,98] to determine which model fits the
data best (see above).

Page 16 of 19

ANCML (ML analysis) provide standard errors for each
nodal value reconstruction. However, some authors consider standard errors to be underestimated and difficult
to compare across methods [52]. The vast majority of
posterior distributions of estimates made by the Bayesian
MCMC runs were normally distributed using a W-test,
so we present the mean and 95% confidence intervals for
each node. To test for the sensitivity of each method to
the inclusion of fossil species, we followed Webster &
Purvis [64] and checked the strength of the association
between estimates at each node made with and without
fossil data using correlation analysis in GenStat (VSNi,
Hemel Hempstead, UK). For the Bayesian analysis we
thus calculated the mean of the posterior distribution of
the ancestral states at each node of the tree. Because
some sets of estimates made with different methods were
not normally distributed, we used Spearman’s rank correlation for all tests to allow correlation coefficients (rs) to
be fully comparable throughout the analysis.
The change in brain and body mass along each branch
was calculated by taking the difference between consecutive nodes. As the estimates for each node using absolute
values of log brain and body mass are log values, subtracting consecutive node values gives a proportional
change in mass. We therefore also converted log values
into absolute numbers before calculating differences to
get the absolute change in mass. Estimates of ancestral
relative brain mass are based on residual values from a
regression analysis of two log values. We therefore simply
subtracted successive nodes to calculate change in relative brain mass. Finally, to control for differential potential in divergence due to longer time since the last
splitting event we repeated the analysis and calculated
the rate of change by dividing the change along a branch
by the branch length, for each measure of brain mass.
Additional file 1: Supplementary tables and figures. 1. Table S1: Brain
and body mass of primates used in the analyses. 2. Table S2: Posterior
distribution of the scaling parameters to identify the best model before
reconstructing ancestral states in Bayesian analysis. 3. Figure S1:
Correlations between estimates made using directional constant variance
random walk and non-directional constant variance random walk models
in BayesTraits. 4. Table S3: Ancestral state estimates using most
supported models. 5. Table S4: Change in absolute brain and body mass
and relative brain mass along each branch. 6. Additional analyses in
relation to H. floresiensis: • Table S5: Range of estimated decreases in
brain mass during the evolution of H. floresiensis given scaling
relationships during episodes of brain mass reduction. • Table S6:
Estimated Log(body) and Log(brain) masses for the node at the base of
the H. floresiensis terminal branch using the topologies proposed by
Argue et al. [43]. • Table S7: Range of estimated decreases in brain mass
during the evolution of H. floresiensis using the topologies proposed by
Argue et al. [43] and given scaling relationships during brain mass
reduction in primates.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1741-7007-8-9S1.DOC ]

Montgomery et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:9
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/9

Abbreviations
CI: Confidence Interval; GLS: Generalised Least Squares; MCMC: Markov-Chain
Monte Carlo; ML: Maximum Likelihood.
Acknowledgements
We thank Chris Venditti for advice and help with the analysis in BayesTraits
and for helpful comments on the manuscript, and Brenda Bradley, Adrian
Friday, Dieter Lukas, Jeremy Niven and four anonymous reviewers for helpful
comments on the manuscript. SHM & NIM thank BBSRC, the Leverhulme
Trust and Murray Edwards College for financial support. IC & RAB thank
BBSRC/NERC for financial support (grant number BB/E014593/1).
Author details
1
Department of Zoology, University of Cambridge, Downing Street,
Cambridge, UK. 2Evolutionary Anthropology Research Group, Department of
Anthropology, Durham University, Dawson Building, South Road, Durham,
DH1 3LE, UK.
Authors’ contributions
SHM, NIM, IC and RAB designed the study, SHM performed the study, SHM,
NIM, IC and RAB wrote the manuscript.
Received: 19 March 2009
Accepted: 27 January 2010 Published: 27 January 2010
References
1. Harvey PH, Pagel MD: The Comparative Method in Evolutionary Biology
Oxford University Press, Oxford 1991.
2. Cunningham CW, Omland KE, Oakley TH: Reconstructing ancestral
character states: a critical reappraisal. Trends Ecol Evol 1998, 13:361-366.
3. Pagel M: Inferring the historical patterns of biological evolution. Nature
1999, 401:877-884.
4. Roth G, Dicke U: Evolution of the brain and intelligence. Trends Cogn Sci
2005, 9:250-257.
5. Barton RA: Primate brain evolution: integrating comparative,
neurophysiological and ethological data. Evolutionary Anthropology 2006,
15:224-236.
6. Jerison HJ: Evolution of the Brain and Intelligence New York: Academic Press
1973.
7. Dunbar R, Schultz S: Evolution in the social brain. Science 2007,
7:1344-1347.
8. Pérez-Barberia FJ, Shultz S, Dunbar RIM: Evidence for coevolution of
sociality and relative brain size in three orders of mammals. Evolution
2007, 61:2811-2821.
9. Niven JE: Brain evolution: Getting better all the time?. Curr Biol 2005, 15:
R625-R626.
10. Safi K, Seid MA, Dechmann KN: Bigger is not always better: when brains
get smaller. Biol Lett 2005, 1:283-286.
11. Boerner M, Krüger O: Why do parasitic cuckoos have small brains?
Insights from evolutionary sequence analyses. Evolution 2008,
62:3157-3169.
12. Köhler M, Moyá-Solá S: Reduction of brain and sense organs in the fossil
insular bovid Myotragus. Brain Behav Evol 2004, 63:125-140.
13. Roth VL: Inferences from allometry and fossils: dwarfing of elephants on
islands. Oxford Surveys in Evolutionary Biology 1992, 8:259-288.
14. Simmons AH: Faunal Extinction in an Island Society: Pygmy
Hippopotamus Hunters of Cyprus. Plenum Press, New York 1999.
15. Weston EM, Lister AM: Insular dwarfism in hippos and a model for brain
size reduction in Homo floresiensis. Nature 2009, 459:85-88.
16. Niven JE: Brains, islands and evolution: breaking all the rules. Trends Ecol
Evol 2007, 22:57-59.
17. Aiello LC, Wheeler P: The expensive-tissue hypothesis: the brain and the
digestive system in human and primate evolution. Curr Anthropol 1995,
36:199-221.
18. Barton RA: Visual specialization and brain evolution in primates. Proc Roy
Soc B 1998, 265:1933-1937.
19. Dunbar R: The social brain hypothesis. Evol Anthrop 1998, 6:178-190.
20. Brown WM: Natural selection of mammalian brain components. Trends
Ecol Evol 2001, 16:471-473.
21. Reader SM, Laland KN: Social intelligence, innovation, and enhanced
brain size in primates. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2002, 99:4436-4441.

Page 17 of 19

22. Bauchot R, Stephan H: Encéphalisation et niveau evolutif chez les
Simiens. Mammalia 1969, 33:225-275.
23. Martin RD: Primate origins and evolution. London: Chapman & Hall 1990.
24. Taylor AB, van Schaik CP: Variation in brain size and ecology in Pongo. J
Hum Evol 2007, 52:59-71.
25. Henneberg M: Evolution of the human brain: is bigger better?. Clin Exp
Pharmacol Physiol 1998, 25:745-749.
26. Brown P, Sutikna T, Morwood MJ, Soejono RP, Jatmiko , Saptomo EW,
Due RA: A new small-bodied hominin from the Late Pleistocene of
Flores, Indonesia. Nature 2004, 431:1055-1061.
27. Roberts RG, Westaway KE, Zhao J, Turney CSM, Bird MI, Rink WJ, Fifield LK:
Geochronology of cave deposits at Liang Bua and of adjacent river
terraces in the Wae Racang valley, western Flores, Indonesia: a synthesis
of age estimates for the type locality of Homo floresiensis. J Hum Evol
2009, 57(5):484-502.
28. Jacob T, Indriati E, Soejono RP, Hsu K, Frayer DW, Eckhardt RB,
Kuperavage AJ, Thorne A, Henneberg M: Pygmoid Australomelanesian
Homo sapiens skeletal remains from Liang Bua, Flores: Population
affinities and pathological abnormalities. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006,
103:13421-13426.
29. Hershkovitz I, Kornreich L, Laron Z: Comparative skeletal features between
Homo floresiensis and patients with primary growth hormone
insensitivity (Laron Syndrome). Am J Phys Anthropol 2007, 134:198-208.
30. Delaval B, Doxsey S: Dwarfism, where pericentrin gains stature. Science
2008, 319:732-733.
31. Falk D, Hildebolt C, Smith K, Morwood MJ, Sutikna T, Brown P, Jatmiko,
Wayhu Saptomo E, Brunsden B, Prior F: The brain of LB1, Homo
floresiensis. Science 2005, 308:242-245.
32. Weber J, Czarnetzki A, Pusch CM: Comment on “The brain of LB1, Homo
floresiensis”. Science 2005, 310:236.
33. Falk D, Hildebolt C, Smith K, Morwood MJ, Sutikna T, Jatmiko, Saptomo EW,
Imhof H, Seidler H, Prior F: Brain shape in human microcephalics and
Homo floresiensis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2007, 104:2513-1518.
34. Larson SG, Jungers WL, Tocheri MW, Orr CM, Morwood MJ, Sutikna T,
Awe RD, Djubiantono T: Descriptions of the upper limb skeleton of Homo
floresiensis. J Hum Evol 57(5):555-570.
35. Tocheri MW, Orr CM, Larson SG, Sutikna T, Jatmiko , Saptomo EW, Awe RD,
Djubiantono T, Morwood MJ, Jungers WL: The primitive wrist of Homo
floresiensis and its implications for Hominin evolution. Science 2007,
317:1743-1745.
36. Gordon AD, Nevell L, Wood B: The Homo floresiensis cranium (LB1): Size,
scaling, and early Homo affinities. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008,
105:4650-4655.
37. Falk D, Hildebolt C, Smith K, Morwood MJ, Sutikna T, Jatmiko, Saptomo EW,
Prior F: LB1’s virtual endocast, microcephaly, and hominin brain
evolution. J Hum Evol 2009, 57(5):597-60.
38. Jungers WL, Harcourt-Smith WEH, Wunderlich RE, Tocheri MW, Larson SG,
Sutikna T, Due Awe Rhokus, Morwood MJ: The foot of Homo floresiensis.
Nature 2009, 459:81-84.
39. Martin RD, MacLarnon AM, Phillips JL, Dussubieux L, Williams PR,
Dobyns WB: Comment on “the brain of LB1 Homo floresiensis“. Science
2006, 312:999b.
40. Martin RD, MacLarnon AM, Phillips JL, Dussubieux L, Williams PR,
Dobyns WB: Flores Hominoid: new species or microcephalic dwarf?. Anat
Rec 2006, 288A:1123-1145.
41. Bromham L, Cardillo M: Primates follow the ‘island rule’: implications for
interpreting Homo floresiensis. Biol Lett 2007, 3:398-400.
42. Welch JJ: Testing the island rule: primates as a case study. Proc Roy Soc B
2009, 276:675-682.
43. Argue D, Morwood M, Sutikna T, Jatmiko , Saptomo W: Homo floresiensis:
A cladistic analysis. J Hum Evol 2009, 57(5):623-639.
44. Jungers WL: Body size and scaling of limb proportions in primates. Size
and Scaling in Primate Biology Plenum Press, New YorkJungers WL 1985.
45. Fleagle JG: Primate Adaptation and Evolution. New York: John Wiley &
Sons, Second 1999.
46. Soligo C, Martin RD: Adaptive origins of primates revisited. J Hum Evol
2006, 50:414-430.
47. Finarelli JA, Flynn JJ: Ancestral state reconstruction of body size in the
Caniformia (Carnivora, Mammalia): The effects of incorporating data
from the fossil record. Syst Biol 2006, 55:301-313.

Montgomery et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:9
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/9

48. Finarelli JA, Flynn JJ: The evolution of encephalization in Caniform
carnivores. Evolution 2007, 61:1758-1772.
49. Masters JC, Lovegrove BG, de Wit MJ: Eyes wide shut: can
hypometabolism really explain the primate colonization of Madagascar?.
J Biogeogr 2007, 34:21-37.
50. Ali F, Meier R: Positive selection in ASPM is correlated with cerebral
cortex evolution across primates but not with whole-brain size. Mol Biol
Evol 2008, 25:2247-2250.
51. Oakley TH, Cunningham CW: Independent contrasts succeed where
ancestor reconstruction fails in a known bacteriophage phylogeny.
Evolution 2000, 54:397-405.
52. Garland T, Bennet AF, Rezende EL: Phylogenetic approaches in
comparative physiology. J Exp Biol 2005, 208:3015-3035.
53. Polly PD: Paleontology and the comparative method: Ancestral node
reconstructions versus observed node values. Am Nat 2001, 157:596-609.
54. Pagel M, Meade A, Barker D: Bayesian estimation of ancestral character
states on phylogenies. Systematic Biology 2004, 53:673-684.
55. Organ CL, Shedlock SM, Meade A, Pagel M, Edwards SV: Origin of avian
genome size and structure in non-avian dinosaurs. Nature 2007,
446:180-184.
56. Healy SD, Rowe C: A critique of comparative studies of brain size. Proc R
Soc B 2007, 274:453-464.
57. MacLean E, Barrickman NL, Johnson EM, Wall CE: Sociality, ecology and
relative brain size in lemurs. J Hum Evol 2009, 56(5):471-478.
58. Striedter GF: Principles of brain evolution. Sunderland, MA: Sinauer
Associates 2005.
59. Marino L: Absolute brain size: did we throw the baby out with the
bathwater. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006, 103:13563-13564.
60. Deaner RO, Isler K, Burkart J, van Schaik C: Overall brain size, and not
encephalization quotient, best predicts cognitive ability across nonhuman primates. Brain Behav Evol 2007, 70:115-124.
61. Herculano-Houzel S, Collins CE, Wong P, Kaas JH: Cellular scaling rules for
primate brains. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2007, 204:3562-3567.
62. Maddison WP: Squared-change parsimony reconstructions of ancestral
states for continuous-valued characters on a phylogenetic tree.
Systematic Zoology 1991, 40:304-314.
63. Schluter D, Price T, Mooers AO, Ludwig D: Likelihood of ancestor states in
adaptive radiation. Evolution 1997, 51:1699-1711.
64. Webster AJ, Purvis A: Testing the accuracy of methods for reconstructing
ancestral states of continuous characters. Proc Roy Soc B 2002,
269:143-149.
65. Pagel M: Inferring evolutionary processes from phylogenies. Zool Scripta
1997, 26:331-348.
66. Soligo C: Correlates of body mass evolution in primates. Am J Phys
Anthropol 2006, 130:283-293.
67. Alroy J: Cope’s Rule and the dynamics of body mass evolution in North
American fossil mammals. Science 1998, 280:731-734.
68. Polly PD: Cope’s Rule. Science 1998, 282:50-51.
69. Bloch JI, Silcox MT, Boyer DM, Sargis EJ: New paleocene skeletons and the
relationship of plesiadapiforms to crown-clade primates. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 2007, 104:1159-1164.
70. Barton RA: Allometry of food intake in free-ranging anthropoid primates.
Folia Primatol 1992, 58:56-59.
71. Peters RH: The ecological implications of body size. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge 1983.
72. Schmidt-Nielsen K: Scaling: why is animal size so important?. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge 1984.
73. Charnov E, Berrigan D: Why do primates have such long lifespans and so
few babies. Evol Anthrop 1993, 1:191-194.
74. Ross C: Primate life histories. Evol Anthropol 1997, 6:54-63.
75. Dial KP, Greene E, Irschick DJ: Allometry of behavior. Trends Ecol Evol 2008,
23:394-401.
76. Kay RF: On the use of anatomical features to infer foraging behaviour in
extinct primates. Adaptations for foraging in nonhuman primates Columbia
University Press, New YorkRodman PS, Cant JGH 1984, 21-53.
77. Cartmill M: Arboreal adaptations and the origin of the order Primates.
The functional and evolutionary biology of Primates Aldine-Athertone,
ChicagoTuttle R 1872, 97-122.
78. Silcox MT, Dalmyn CK, Bloch JI: Virtual endocast of Ignacius graybullianus
(Paromomyidae, Primates) and brain evolution in early primates. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 2009, 106(27):10987-10992.

Page 18 of 19

79. Zollikofer CPE, Ponce de León MS, Lieberman DE, Guy F, Pilbeam D,
Likius A, Mackaye HT, Vignaud P, Brunet M: Virtual cranial reconstruction
of Sahelanthropus tchadensis. Science 2005, 434:755-759.
80. Suwa G, Asfaw B, Kono RT, Kubo D, Loverjoy CO, White TD: The
Ardipithecus ramidus skull and its implications for Hominid origins.
Science 2009, 326:68e1-68e7.
81. Smuts BB, Cheney DL, Seyfarth RM, Wrangham RW, Struhsaker TT: Primate
Societies. University of Chicago Press 1987.
82. Stephan H, Frahm H, Baron R: New and revised data on volume of brain
structures in insectivores and primates. Folia Primatol 1981, 35:1-29.
83. Kaufman JA, Ahrens ET, Laidlaw DH, Zhang S, Allman JM: Anatomical
analysis of an aye-aye brain (Daubentonia madagascariensis, Primates:
Prosimii) combining histology, structural magnetic resonance imaging,
and diffusion-tensor imaging. Anat Rec A Discov Mol Cell Evol Biol 2005,
287A:1026-1037.
84. Barton RA, Purvis A, Harvey PH: Evolutionary radiation of visual and
olfactory brain systems in primates, bats and insectivores. Phil Trans R
Soc Lond B 1995, 348:381-392.
85. Ford S: Callitrichids as phyletic dwarfs, and the place of the Callitrichidae
in Platyrrhini. Primates 1980, 21:21-43.
86. Byrne RW: The Thinking Ape: Evolutionary Origins of Intelligence. Oxford
University Press, Oxford 1995.
87. Deaner RO, Nunn CL: How quickly do brains catch up with bodies? A
comparative method for detecting evolutionary lag. Proc R Soc Lond B
1999, 266:687-694.
88. Millien V: Morphological Evolution Is Accelerated among Island
Mammals. PLoS Biol 2006, 4:e321, doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0040321.
89. Finarelli JA, Flynn JJ: Brain-size evolution and sociality in Carnivora. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 2009, 106(23):9345-9349.
90. Gonzalez-Voyer A, Winberg S, Kolm N: Distinct evolutionary patterns of
brain and body size during adaptive radiation. Evolution 2009,
63:2266-2274.
91. Zilles K, Armstrong E, Moser KH, Schleicher A, Stephan H: Gyrification in
the cerebral cortex of primates. Brain Behav Evol 1989, 34:143-150.
92. Semendeferi K, Lu A, Damasio H: Humans and great apes share a large
frontal cortex. Nat Neurosci 2002, 5:272-276.
93. Bush EC, Allman JC: The scaling of frontal cortex in primates and
carnivores. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2004, 101:3962-3966.
94. Sherwood CC, Stimpson CD, Raghanti MA, Wildman DE, Uddin M,
Grossman LI, Goodman M, Redmond JC, Bonar CJ, Erwin JM, Hof PR:
Evolution of increased glia-neuron rations in the human frontal cortex.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006, 203:13606-13611.
95. Zilles K, Rehkemper G: The brain with special reference to the
telencephalon. Orang-utan Biology Oxford University Press, OxfordSchwartz
JH 1988, 157-176.
96. Pagel M, Meade A: Bayesian analysis of correlated evolution of discrete
characters by reversible-jump Markov Chain Monte Carlo. American
Naturalist 2006, 167:808-825.
97. Kass RE, Raftery AE: Bayes factors. J Am Stat Assoc 1995, 90:773-795.
98. Gilks WR, Richardson S, Spiegelhalter DJ: Introducing Markov Chain Monte
Carlo. Markov Chain Monte Carlo in Practice London: Chapman and HallGilks
WR, Richardson S, Spiegelhalter DJ 1996, 1-19.
99. Felsenstein J: Phylogenies and the comparative method. Am Nat 1985,
125:1-15.
100. Nunn CL, Barton RA: Comparative methods for studying primate
adaptation and allometry. Evol Anthropol 2001, 10:81-98.
101. Goodman M, Grossman LI, Wildman DE: Moving primate genomics
beyond the chimpanzee genome. Trends Genet 2005, 21:511-517.
102. Horvath JE, Weisrock DW, Embry SL, Fiorentino I, Balhoff JP, Kappeler P,
Wray GA, Willard HF, Yoder AD: Development and application of a
phylogenomic tookit: Resolving the evolutionary history of Madagascar’s
lemurs. Genome Res 2008, 18:489-499.
103. Opazo JC, Wildman DE, Prychitko T, Johnson RM, Goodman M:
Phylogenetic relationships and divergence times among New World
monkeys (Platyrrhini, Primates). Mol Phylogenet Evol 2006, 40:274-280.
104. Page SL, Goodman M: Catarrhine phylogeny: Noncoding DNA evidence
for a diphyletic origin of the mangabeys and for a human-chimpanzee
clade. Mol Phylogenet Evol 2001, 18:14-25.
105. Poux C, Douzery EJ: Primate phylogeny, evolutionary rate variations, and
divergence times: a contribution from the nuclear gene IRBP. Am J Phys
Anthropol 2004, 124:1-16.

Montgomery et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:9
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/9

Page 19 of 19

106. Purvis A: A composite estimate of primate phylogeny. Phil Trans Roy Soc
B 1995, 348:405-421.
107. Steiper ME, Young NM: Primate molecular divergence dates. Mol
Phylogenet Evol 2006, 41:384-394.
108. Wood B, Collard M: The human genus. Science 1999, 284:65-71.
109. Vekua A, Lordkipanidze D, Rightmire GP, Agusti J, Ferring R, Maisuradze G,
Mouskhelishvili A, Nioradze M, Ponce de Leon M, Tappen M,
Tvalchrelidze M, Zollikofer C: A new skull of early Homo from Dmanisi,
Georgia. Science 2002, 297:85-89.
110. Maddison WP, Maddison DR: Mesquite: A modular system for
evolutionary analysis. Version 2.5. 2008http://mesquiteproject.org.
111. Pedersen N, Holyoak DT, Newton AE: Systematics and morphological
evolution within the moss family Bryaceae: A comparsion between
parsimony and Bayesian methods for reconstruction of ancestral
character states. Mol Phylogenet Evol 2007, 43:891-907.
doi:10.1186/1741-7007-8-9
Cite this article as: Montgomery et al.: Reconstructing the ups and
downs of primate brain evolution: implications for adaptive hypotheses
and Homo floresiensis. BMC Biology 2010 8:9.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
