<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>The human genome: a multifractal analysis</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Genomics 2011, 12:506. doi:10.1186/1471-2164-12-506"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Pedro A Moreno"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Moreno et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:506
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/506

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

The human genome: a multifractal analysis
Pedro A Moreno1*†, Patricia E Vélez2,3†, Ember Martínez4, Luis E Garreta1, Néstor Díaz4, Siler Amador4,
Irene Tischer1, José M Gutiérrez5, Ashwinikumar K Naik6, Fabián Tobar3 and Felipe García3

Abstract
Background: Several studies have shown that genomes can be studied via a multifractal formalism. Recently, we
used a multifractal approach to study the genetic information content of the Caenorhabditis elegans genome. Here
we investigate the possibility that the human genome shows a similar behavior to that observed in the nematode.
Results: We report here multifractality in the human genome sequence. This behavior correlates strongly on the
presence of Alu elements and to a lesser extent on CpG islands and (G+C) content. In contrast, no or low
relationship was found for LINE, MIR, MER, LTRs elements and DNA regions poor in genetic information. Gene
function, cluster of orthologous genes, metabolic pathways, and exons tended to increase their frequencies with
ranges of multifractality and large gene families were located in genomic regions with varied multifractality.
Additionally, a multifractal map and classification for human chromosomes are proposed.
Conclusions: Based on these findings, we propose a descriptive non-linear model for the structure of the human
genome, with some biological implications. This model reveals 1) a multifractal regionalization where many regions
coexist that are far from equilibrium and 2) this non-linear organization has significant molecular and medical
genetic implications for understanding the role of Alu elements in genome stability and structure of the human
genome. Given the role of Alu sequences in gene regulation, genetic diseases, human genetic diversity, adaptation
and phylogenetic analyses, these quantifications are especially useful.

Background
The human genome is one of the most complex molecular structures ever seen in nature. Its extraordinary
information content has revealed a surprising mosaicims
between coding and non-coding sequences [1-4]. This
highly regionalized structure introduces complex patterns for understanding the gene structure and repetitive
DNA sequence composition and its role in human
development, physiology, medicine and phylogeny. The
coding regions are defined, in part, by an alternative series of motifs responsible for a variety of functions that
take place on the DNA and RNA sequences, such as,
gene regulation, RNA transcription, RNA splicing, and
DNA methylation. For example, sequencing of the
human genome revealed a controversial number of
interrupted genes (25,000 - 32,000) with their regulatory
sequences [1,2] representing about 2% of the genome.
* Correspondence: pedro.moreno@correounivalle.edu.co
† Contributed equally
1
Escuela de Ingeniería de Sistemas y Computación, Universidad del Valle,
Santiago de Cali, Colombia
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

These genes are immersed in a giant sea of different
types of non-coding sequences which make up around
98% of the genome. The non-coding regions are characterized by many kinds of repetitive DNA sequences,
where almost 10.6% of the human genome consists of
Alu sequences, a type of SINE (short interspersed elements) sequence [3]. These elements are not randomly
distributed throughout the genome but rather are biased
toward gene-rich regions [5]. They can act as insertional
mutagens and the vast majority appears to be genetically
inert [6]. LINES, MIR, MER, LTRs, DNA transposons,
and introns are other kinds of non-coding sequences,
which together conform about 86% of the genome. In
addition, some of these sequences are overlapped one to
another, for example, the CpG islands (CGI), which
complicates analysis of the genomic landscape. In turn,
each chromosome is characterized by some particular
properties of structure and function. Furthermore, the
new era of rapid sequencing methods will have available
more than one thousand human genome sequences [7],
which reveals the genetic variation between different
human groups. This knowledge will have a major impact

© 2011 Moreno et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Moreno et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:506
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/506

on human health (disease origin), population studies and
adaptation, among others. All these structural variations
are challenging the inventive of theoretical and experimental scientists to create, develop and apply new
approaches to quantify them. These variations allow carrying out studies of comparative genomics aimed at discovering correlations with some life characterizing
properties [8,9]. Given that all these genomic variations
produce a regionalized genomic landscape in the human
genome, we thought fractal geometry could be an
appropriate approach to studying how the genetic information content is fragmented.
The methodologies derived from fractal geometry have
been a very useful approach to studying the degree of
fragmentation (or irregularity) in natural, artificial and
statistical structures or processes [10]. Fractal structures
are characterized by self-similarity, scaling independence, and a fractal dimension, an exponent obtained
from a power or scaling law [11,12]. Thus, power laws
are powerful tools for searching self-similar properties
in biological structures and processes and for quantifying the scaling properties of information contents.
Few studies have used the fractal approach and power
laws to study the whole human genome [13,14]. However, due to the complexity of the human genome, one
exponent may not be enough to characterize a complex
phenomenon. Multifractal formalism allows using more
exponents [15]. In this case, the object of analysis is
divided into several fractal sets, each generating a fractal
dimension that is then translated into a continuous
spectrum of exponents (the so-called singularity spectrum). The multifractality degree (MD) obtained from
this continuous spectrum allows measuring the genetic
information content. Multifractal systems are common
in nature, especially in geophysics. They include fully
developed turbulence [16], stock market time series,
heartbeat dynamics [17], human gait, and natural luminosity time series, among others. In post-genomics times,
multifractal analysis has been a very useful approach to
studying problems related with microorganism classification [18,19], distinguishing coding and non-coding
sequences [20], studying proteins [21], promoter prediction [22], and - recently - this formalism was used to
study human chromosomes [23] and the genetic information content in the C. elegans genome [24]. In the
latter work, a significant relationship between the structural genetic information content and multifractal parameters was found, which has important biological
implications. We thought that applying a similar method
could be a valid approach to study the structure of the
human genome. In the present paper, we report multifractal analysis from the draft sequence of the human
genome.

Page 2 of 17

Results
Three approaches were followed to examine multifractality in the human genome from the Chaos Game
Representation (CGR) (Figure 1A).
1) Multifractal analysis by chromosome fragment
1.1) Analyses of multifractal parameters

The multifractal parameters for 9,379 chromosome fragments were calculated and analyzed (Additional file 1).
Initially, the generalized dimension spectrum and MD
for all chromosome fragments were determined. The
extreme generalized dimension spectra and a medium
spectrum are depicted for comparison (Figure 1B). Note
that the maximum varies very little due to the fact that
negative q values are associated with the structure and
properties of sparse regions, with few points in the CGR
of the human genome. In contrast, the Dq minimum
varies widely because positive q values emphasize
regions where the points are dense.
Subsequently, the corresponding scaling exponents
τ(q) were calculated for each fragment (Additional file
2). The three multifractal spectra τ(q) show differences
related to each other (Figure 1C). The scaling exponent
τ(q) can reveal aspects of chromosome fragment structure. Monofractal behavior would correspond to a
straight line for τ(q); for multifractal behavior, τ(q) is
nonlinear. The changing curvature for the data for the
chromosome fragments indicates multifractality. In contrast, τ(q) tends to be linear for that chromosome fragment with the lowest multifractality, indicating partial
loss of multifractality.
Using the whole data set for each chromosome we
calculated the MD from each generalized dimension
spectrum. Thus, the degree of multifractality for all
chromosome fragments goes from ~0.79 to 1.56 with an
average of 1.042 and median of 1.018 (Additional file 1).
Analysis by range of multifractality (RM) reveals that
the multifractal behavior for the whole data set is biased
toward low multifractal values, as expected (Figure 1D).
Next, we used a discrimination method based on 2-D
distributions to study the information dimension for all
chromosome fragments. The data show two different
informational patterns (similar to a > symbol), one with
high information content (Figure 1E, dots on top) and
the other with low and medium information content
(Figure 1E, dots on bottom) being the occurrence the
latter more numerous in data than the former. We
hypothesize that these behaviors are related with some
molecular parameter, which is analyzed in the following
section.
1.2) Analyses of molecular parameters

The annotated contents of coding and non-coding
sequences for each fragment were determinated

Moreno et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:506
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/506

Page 3 of 17

Figure 1 Analyses of multifractal parameters: A: CGR of an H. sapiens chromosome I fragment (~80,000 bp). B: Generalized dimension
spectra for two chromosome fragments with the highest (blue) and lowest multifractality (red). A medium multifractality is depicted (green) for
comparison. C: Multifractal spectrum τ(q) for the fragments of B. D: Number of chromosome fragments per RM. E: Distribution of 2-D points (Dq
(q = 1), Dq (q = -1)) of the human genome. Dq (q = 1) is called the information dimension.

(Additional file 1). These counts were similar to those
reported by other studies [1,2] suggesting that our
results are consistent at chromosome level. We
hypothesize that these multifractal behaviors might be
explained by different repetitive DNA contents in the
human genome, similar to the results found in C. elegans [24]. Therefore, we examine several molecular
density parameters against the MD. We especially

focused on the Alu sequence content, given its high
polymorphism. We observe 1,078,720 Alu sequences
which is equivalent to about 10.58% of the human genome where chromosome fragments contain 0-563 Alu
sequences with an average of 115 Alus, i.e., one Alu
element for about every 2,600 bp of genomic DNA.
We demonstrated how strong the relationship between
the MD and Alu content is (Figure 2A).

Moreno et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:506
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/506

Page 4 of 17

Figure 2 Analyses of molecular parameters: Relationships between the MD versus A: Alu content, R2 ~0.86, p < 0.05 and B: Alu subfamilies:
Alu-S (R2 ~0.84, p < 0.05), Alu-J (R2 ~0.7), and Alu-Y (R2 ~0.52). C: Alu content per range of ΔDq. D: Multifractality versus log (CGI), R2 ~0.64, p <
0.05. E: LINE, MIR, MER and LTR contents per RM. F: Distribution of 3-D points (Dq (q = 1), Dq (q = -1), Alu content) of the human genome. We
used a cut point ≥ 217.9 Alus (blue dots) according to paragraph 1.4.

This relationship was assessed in terms of Alu families
and the Alu-S was found to be more correlated than the
other Alu families (Figure 2B). Furthermore, the Alu
contents (in conjunction with CGI) are biased toward
high multifractal ranges suggesting the significant role
of these sequences in determining the non-linearity in
the human genome (Figure 2C).
When sequencing the human genome, a strong relationship between Alu and CGI contents [1,2] also
became evident. We observe that CGI have a lower multifractal relationship than that found for the Alu

elements (Figure 2D). However, when both parameters
are combined a significant fit was obtained (R2 = 0.85, p
< 0.05). Other molecular parameters such as gene density, exons, introns, LINE, MIR, MER, and LTRs did not
show a significant fit by a simple linear regression. However, when all repetitive elements (Alu, LINE, MIR,
MER, and LTRs) are taken into account the R2 ~0.57.
Thus, among the studied genomic features, Alu has the
highest correlation with multifractal degree.
Multivariate analyses of ΔDq versus all variables
(Alu, G+C, CGI, LINE, MIR, MER, LTRs, nCoding,

Moreno et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:506
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/506

nNonCoding, exons, genes, and SNPs) per chromosome
were carried out and for each case the most relevant
variables explaining ΔDq were selected. The most frequently used variables are (G+C), Alu, CGI, which are
significant in 23, 23, 21 cases of the 24 chrs. (Additional
file 3). CGI coefficients in all regressions are negative,
probably compensating the high positive (G+C) coefficients, given that (G+C) and CGI are strongly correlated
(R ~0.805). Positioning Alus among the most relevant
variables confirms our prior analyses based on 1 and 2
dimensional regression. In the same way, we analyzed
ΔDq for the whole genome, obtaining again (G+C), Alu,
CGI as the most relevant variables explaining ΔDq
(Additional file 4). Moreover, when the long interspersed repeats are analyzed by RM they tend to be
located on low and medium multifractality (LMM)
ranges (Figure 2E).
Given that the information dimension studied takes a
form of > symbol (Figure 1E), we studied its behavior
using a discrimination method based on 3-D distributions. In this analysis, the high information content is
related to Alu content, whereas the low and medium
information contents are rather related to low Alu contents and other genomic structures (Figure 2F).
1.3) Multifractal map of the human genome

We examined the multifractality and Alu content across
the genomic landscape to map these relationships in
each human chromosome. The analysis reveals how
similarly these two variables behave. This is particularly
clear when the determination coefficient for the linear

Page 5 of 17

regression is calculated for all chromosomes (Figure 3,
Additional file 5). All R 2 oscillate between ~0.78 and
0.92, with the exception of chromosomes Y, 21, 19, X,
and 11. The apparent low correlation (0.24 ≤ R2 ≤ 0.76)
of these chromosomes can be explained by the presence
of some atypical chromosomic fragments: they may contain some kind of repeat (chrs. 4, 21, and Y) or present
a lack of Alu contents (chrs. 11, 12, and 19). Once these
fragments (nine in total) are removed from the analysis,
the R2 for all chromosomes improve significantly (0.78 ≤
R 2 ≤ 0.92, p < 0.05), including chromosome Y (R 2 =
0.52). The chr. 17 has the highest determination coefficient between multifractality and Alu content with chromosome Y having the lowest. With the exception of the
atypical chr. Y, these results indicate that multifractality
in each human chromosome is dependent on the content of repetitive DNA - type Alu-. Additionally, other
determination coefficients for several molecular parameters were calculated in this study (Additional file 5).
Thus, among the studied molecular parameters, Alu
shows the highest correlation with MD. A multivariate
regression analysis also showed a similar result (Additional file 3).
Given that other repetitive elements could contribute
to increase the local multifractality, five chromosome
fragments with a low number of Alus and high MD in
chromosomes 4, 21, and Y called our attention (Figure
3, asterisks, Additional file 5). We analyzed these
sequences and found many variable short repeats in tandem (VSRTs) (Additional file 6). Thus, the presence of

Figure 3 Multifractal map of the human genome. Overview between the MD (green) and Alu density (purple) across the human
chromosomes. (*): VSTRs.

Moreno et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:506
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/506

these repeats increases local multifractality but reduces
the entire chromosome multifractality for these chromosomes, as mentioned before.
1.4) Chromosomal location of the most multifractal
chromosome fragments

Human genome sequencing revealed that chromosomes
19, 16, 17, and 22 are richer in genes, CGI, and Alu elements [1]. Based on averages for ΔDq and Alus for
these chromosomes we defined a threshold for chromosome fragments as ΔDq ≥ 1.159 and Alu contents ≥
217.9 (Additional file 7). This allows to separate chromosome fragments with the highest multifractality from
those with LMM (Additional file 8). A discrimination
method based on distributions of 3-D points shows how
both groups of chromosome fragments can be easily differentiated (Figure 4A). The plot reveals that the highest
multifractality and Alu contents are observed in 1,292
fragments suggesting the existence of an abundant number of multifractal regions in the human genome with
an average multifractality around 1.24 and an average of
~305 Alus. As expected, many fragments (~29%) are
located on chromosomes 19, 17, 16, and 22, respectively
(Figure 4B, above). Similar results were obtained by
using a 3-D plot with MD-Alu-Dq(q = 1) (data not
shown). Chromosome fragments with LMM and low
Alu contents, in contrast, are situated mainly on the
other chromosomes (~86.2%), being chromosomes 4, 13,
18, 5, and Y those with the lowest multifractality (Figure
4B, below), an average multifractality of 1.0, and average
Alu of ~79.
1.5) Analyses by gene function, gene family, and gene
length

One would expect to find other molecular characteristics of the gene associated with the multifractality;
hence other related molecular parameters were examined. Several biased distributions toward high ranges of
multifractality for gene functions, cluster of orthologous
genes (KOGS), metabolic pathways (KEGGs), and number of exons were found (Figure 5A, Additional file 9).
We only found gene function information for 5,823
chromosome fragments with an average multifractality
degree (AMD) of 1.126 and median of 1.132. For example, many genes for the cell division cycle lie on chromosome fragments with an AMD of 1.203; many genes
of the major histocompatibility complex, classes I and II
are situated on fragments with AMD = 1.06; and many
members of the melanoma antigen family lie on fragments with AMD = 0.96 to mention a few.
To gain further insights into the gene function, we
focused on about 208 human gene families, consisting
of 4,614 genes [25,26]. We asked about the multifractal
genomic context for these gene families. The distributions obtained show three different multifractal behaviors (Figure 5B): low-skewed (for OR, KCN, HLA, IFN,

Page 6 of 17

KRT, CDH, and RGS), high-skewed (for ZNF, SNORA,
USP, RPS, SNORD, GTF, DHX, ALOX, and UBE2), and
“medium” for most gene families. Other gene families
can be placed within some of these categories (Additional file 10).
When multifractality is related to the information content (for example, number of exons, Figure 5A), it is
expected that the more genetic information exists, the
greater is the extent of genetic information fragmentation. To verify this assumption we looked for the average lengths of genes, exons, and introns in relation to
the RM. The three corresponding distributions show
how the average lengths decrease as multifractality
increases (Figure 5C, Additional file 11). Another
approach to validate this assumption is to observe the
number of information units (IU) (exons plus introns)
per RM. Here, the distribution shows that the number
of IUs increases when the RM increases (data not
shown).
2) Multifractal analysis by chromosome

We next explored the multifractal behavior of each chromosome. We found that the AMD and Alu content profiles have very similar behaviors (Figure 6A). This is
particularly evident when observing how well these two
variables fit (Figure 6B, Additional file 12). Following the
linear regression line, three groups of chromosomes can
be distinguished (by visual inspection): a first group
where chromosomes 19, 17, 22, and 16 exhibit the highest multifractality (and the highest Alu contents), a second group consist of chromosomes 15, 20, 1, 10, 12, 9, 7,
14, and 21 with medium multifractality, and a third
group of chromosomes 2, 11, 8, 6, Y, 3, 18, 5, 13, X, and
4 with the lowest multifractality, respectively. A similar
analysis showed that the CGI were also highly correlated
with the AMD (R2 ~0.86, p < 0.05) (Additional file 13).
We asked whether this subjective classification could
be obtained by hierarchical clustering of the complete
data set of averaged multifractal parameters, using multifractality as a similarity measure (Additional file 14). The
clustering process classified the chromosomes into three
multifractality groups (on top of Figure 6B), with among
group similarities of 0.84 and 0.4, respectively: low, medium and high confirming (in part) the visual observation.
Nearly all chromosomes (92%) lie on the consecutive,
visually identified low, medium and high sections on the
regression line. The only exceptions are chromosomes 22
and Y, which are placed in other groups.
3) Multifractal analysis by average of chromosome
regions

Analysis by chromosome region proved to be a valid
approach to study the genetic information content in
the C. elegans genome [24]. Here, we applied the same

Moreno et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:506
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/506

Page 7 of 17

Figure 4 Genomic location of the most multifractal chromosome fragments: A: Discrimination method based on three parameters. Each
chromosome fragment dataset is characterized by three quantities. The first quantity (x-axis) is the MD for each chromosomic fragment. The
second quantity (y-axis) is the density of Alu content of the chromosomic fragments. The third quantity (z-axis) is the correlation coefficient τ(q).
Blue color indicates those fragments with ΔDq ≥ 1.159 and Alu contents ≥ 217.9. B: Above, distribution for chromosome fragments with high
multifractality and below, for fragments with LMM.

approach to analyze several characteristics of the human
genome. It is known that chromosome 21, involved in
Down syndrome, shows a degree of asymmetric regionalization in the distribution of the Alu elements (Figure
3) [1,2]. We hypothesized that one part of chromosome

21 should have low multifractality and the other one
high multifractality. Indeed, the data show that the first
50% of chromosome 21 is of low multifractality (< 1.0),
whereas the other 50% has a higher multifractality (>
1.08) (Figure 7A, Additional file 15).

Moreno et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:506
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/506

Page 8 of 17

Figure 5 Distributions by gene function, gene family, and gene length: A: Gene functional distributions per RM. These distributions are
strongly significant up to 80% of the ranges. B: Percentage of gene families per RM. Gene families: CA: Carbonic anhydrase, CD: cluster of
differentiation, GPR: G protein-coupled receptors, KCN: potassium channels, OR: olfactory receptor, RPS: ribosomal proteins, SLC: solute carrier,
SNORA: small nucleolar RNA, USP: ubiquitin-specific peptidases, ZNF: Zinc fingers, C2H2-type. C: Degree of gene fragmentation per RM. AGL:
average of gene length, R2 ~0.55. AEL: average of exon length, R2 ~0.91. AIL: average of intron length, R2 ~0.74.

Other relevant characteristics are observed in some chromosome bands and arms (Figure 7A). For example, the X
chromosome, involved in X chromosome inactivation
(XCI), which is rich in LINE1 elements and poor in Alu
sequences showed a 0.95 ≤ ΔDq ≤ 1.027 (Additional file
16). The Y chromosome has two particular regions to the
Yp and Yq ends, the pseudoautosomal region and the
palindromic region, respectively [1]. We thought that the
palindromic regions should have low multifractality

because of their symmetric structure. We found, in fact,
that this region has lowered non-linearity. Moreover,
recombination rates in chromosome 8 tend to be much
higher in distal regions (around 20 Mb) [1] and the analysis
showed medium non-linearity at this region as expected
(Additional file 17). Regarding chromosome 1, rich in Alu
sequences in one of its arms [27], we found significantly
high multifractality (~1.13) at this region; in contrast, the
other three regions have a ΔDq ≤ 1.058 (Additional file

Moreno et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:506
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/506

Page 9 of 17

Figure 6 Multifractal classification for the human chromosomes: A: Distributions of the average degree of multifractality (Av. ΔDq) and Alu
content per chromosome. B: Discrimination method based on multifractal formalism in a distribution of two-dimensional points, R2 ~0.967, p <
0.05. On top: hierarchical clustering for the averaged multifractal parameters by chromosome between Dq(-20, 20) (color scale bar is indicated).
Minimum similarities are indicated near nodes and the asterisks show the only two exceptions found.

18). Similar situations can be analyzed for other chromosomes. As two opposing references we use chromosomes 4
and 19 for comparison (Additional file 19).
Antibodies to histone modifications previously linked
to active transcription, showed close correspondence to
regions rich in genes and CGI in human methaphase
epigenome [28]. We analyzed chr. 1 and found that CGI
profiles correspond well to multifractality (Figure 7B,
Additional file 20).

Discussion

We discovered a strong relationship between the multifractal parameters and part of the genetic information
coded by the human genome.
Initially, the multifractality in human genome was found
strongly dependent on the Alu contents

Herein, thousands of chromosome fragments with multifractality ranging from low to high values were

Moreno et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:506
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/506

Page 10 of 17

Figure 7 Multifractality per average of chromosome región: A: Multifractal distribution per chromosome, where each chr. region (each bar)
has an equal length. Blue color represents those chromosome regions with high averaged multifractality (ΔDq > 1.04). Degraded blue-red color
depicts medium multifractality (ΔDq ≤ 1.04). Red color: low multifractality. B: Correspondence between averages of gene, CGI (R2 ~0.62, p < 0.05)
and Alu (R2 ~0.95, p < 0.05) contents versus averaged multifractality across the human chromosome 1.

analyzed (Figure 1A-C). For all chromosome fragments,
τ(q) is a nonlinear function (Figure 1C), indicating that
the molecular structure of the chromosome fragments
has a multifractal behavior. However, in many chromosome fragments, τ(q) tends to be close to linear behavior, especially for τ(q≥2), indicating partial loss of
multifractality. These results suggest that nucleotide
fluctuations are less anti-correlated in many chromosome fragments. In fact, the fragment distribution is
biased toward low and medium multifractal values (Figure 1D), suggesting that the human genome has a large
number of regularly arranged elements, highly periodic
and not very polymorphic. This is not surprising
because the human genome has about 98.9% of noncoding sequences with a complex composition given by
introns and intergenic regions. That is, at least 55% of
this information is poorly polymorphic given that these
regions mainly consist of introns, LINEs (especially L1),
LTRs and DNA transposons [1,2]. In contrast, the
human genome also has a significant number of chromosome fragments with high multifractality (Figure 1D).
That means these regions should be rich in specific
types of sequences that are highly polymorphic and
organized in a large number of possible combinations.
When the information dimension was analyzed a dual
informational behavior confirmed such assumption (Figure 1E). Indeed, the multifractality was found to be
strongly correlated with the Alu content (Figure 2A),
which became visible when plotted against the information dimension (Figure 2F). This result is very significant
given that the Alu family is highly polymorphic [29,30]
and in a 300 kb chromosome fragment one can find Alu
elements in many combinations in up to 50% of its
length. The Alu elements are not identical and can be
classified into three major families: Alu-J, Alu-S and
Alu-Y representing the oldest, intermediate, and

youngest Alus, respectively and each family is divided
into one or more levels of subfamilies [31]. In total, ~45
subfamilies encompass the complete Alu family. We
found that multifractality was mainly dependent on the
Alu-S contents (Figure 2B), especially the Alu-Sx, an
expected result since these sequences are the most
abundant Alu members in the human genome [1]. Analysis via RM confirmed that the Alu sequences tend to
be located toward medium and high ranges of multifractality (Figure 2C) because of the high Alu content in the
human genome.
The CGI showed a moderate relationship with the
multifractality (Figure 2C, D), which might be because
more than 95% of CGI are less than 1,800 pb long [1].
Genes, exons, introns, LINES, MIR, MER and LTR
contents did not show any significant relationship with
the multifractality because most of these sequences
have a low number of members, are large and have
few polymorphisms. For example, LINE elements are
~6 kb long, more numerous than Alus and consist of
four families, being LINE-1 the most abundant family
(~17%) in the genome [32], and their density pattern is
quite uniform for most chromosomes [1]. Thus, the
combination of number of members, size and polymorphism seem to be determining characteristics for
multifractality changes. The earlier mentioned abundant number of polymorphic Alu sequences confirms
the relation between these characteristics and multifractality. In fact, an in silico comparative genomics
study between public and Celera versions of human
genome sequences identifies several hundred new Alu
insertion polymorphisms, showing that these elements
are highly polymorphics [31]. A similar behavior is
found in C. elegans where the TTAGGC repeat is
abundant in number and combinations within the
flanking sequences [24].

Moreno et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:506
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/506

Subsequently, we elaborated a multifractal map of
the human genome (Figure 3), which shows MD and
Alu density along the human chromosomes. The map
reveals that the human chromosomes contain many significant correlation structures for Alu-rich regions.
Thus, the high contents of Alu account for the high
aperiodicity and genetic variability of many chromosome
sections. A similar result in C. elegans reported changes
in multifractality related to a specific type of repetitive
DNA [24]. Additionally, the correlations for CGI are
lower but significant. However, no significant correspondence was found in regions poor in Alu sequences and
rich in LINE, MIR, MER and LTR sequences. Not all
multifractality is due to the Alu contents, many VSTRs
can also contribute to increasing local multifractality
(Figure 3, asterisks). We found very poor correspondence to the number of genes perhaps due to their low
frequency. These results, taken together, indicate that
the observed multifractality is primarily related to nonlinear distributions for those chromosome fragments
which are rich in Alu sequences, next for those with
high CGI content and in few instances, for those with
high VSRT contents.
Hundreds of highly multifractal chromosome fragments
mapped in chromosomes rich in genetic information

There were a large number of chromosome fragments
with very high multifractality (Figure 4A), mainly
located on chromosomes 19, 17, 22, and 16 (Figure 4B,
above). All of these chromosome sections, so we suggest, generate a mosaic of regions locating the genetic
information far from equilibrium [17,24], which could
be interpreted both, as a protector “shield” for the
human genome against environmental fluctuations and
as “genomic attractors” to maintain many components,
functions and processes under a “deterministic” genomic
control. In contrast, the same analysis also identified
thousands of LMM chromosome fragments (Figure 2C)
with low Alu content (Figure 4B, below) and perhaps
prone to being affected by the environment. This result
might be interpreted as some genome sections with low
nonlinearity that might have high genetic instability
associated with some particular (structural or functional)
gene property.
Several gene characteristics are related to multifractality

This is not striking since three-fourths of all genes in
the genome are associated with Alus (Figure 5A) [30].
Therefore, some gene families tend to be located preferentially within a multifractal genomic context (Figure
5B). For example, the hOR gene family lies mainly on a
low multifractal genomic context. This is due to this
family has a very periodic and repetitive structure. It is
known that the OR gene family has about 390 active

Page 11 of 17

members which were propagated on the genome by
gene duplication. Hence they share a high homology
due to their high structural homogeneity and possess
many clusters of regular characteristics; nonetheless,
their functional expression depends on a complex interplay between regulatory sequences and the environment
[33]. A similar behavior is observed in the KCN gene
family, responsible for building potassium channels for
cell communication. In contrast, the ZNF gene family,
which codes for regulatory proteins and is, therefore,
involved in many cellular functions, is located in a medium and high multifractal genomic context. For example, the ZEB2 protein involved in a chemical signaling
pathway regulates early growth and development and
obeys a pre-determinate genetic program. In addition,
these genes have a high structural inhomogeneity and
many irregular characteristics. Similar inferences might
apply for the RPS gene family, which codes for highly
conserved proteins for the ribosome, for the SNORA
machinery involved in the nuclear splicing and for USPs
that help to control the levels of many proteins in the
cell [26]. This seems to suggest that the low multifractal
genetic context might be related to information inputs
from environmental processes, and the high one to
inputs from deterministic processes. Thus, a few gene
families in the human genome might be subjected to
two types of information (or stimulus) inputs, while
most gene families seem to be subjected to a complex
regulatory interplay between epigenetic and genetic
controls.
On the other hand, the degree of gene fragmentation
by RM (Figure 5C) behaves according to the multifractal
theory: multifractality increases when the length of
exons and introns in the human genome decreases and
the number of IUs per interrupted gene increases with
multifractality, as expected.
The multifractal approach per chromosome permitted classifying the human chromosomes. This analysisvalidated the strong relationship to the Alu elements
(Figure 6) we found especially for chromosomes 19, 17,
22, and 16, which are rich in genetic information content [1,2]. Particularly chromosome 19 is by far the
most multifractal chromosome and has the highest gene
density of the whole genome. It is also unusual with
respect to its density of repeat sequences. In fact, nearly
55% of this chromosome consists of repetitive elements,
whereas chromosomes 6, 7, 14, 20, 21 and 22 all have
repeat contents ranging from 40% to 46% (the genome
average is 44.8%). This difference is due mainly to an
unusually high content of SINEs in chromosome 19 [1].
In contrast, chromosomes 13, X, and 4 have the lowest
multifractality because their Alu content is lower than
the autosomal average, they have low gene density.
Some of these chromosomes have very large “gene

Moreno et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:506
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/506

deserts” and the CGI and LINE contents are the highest
percentage among all autosomes [1,30]. A similar behavior can be observed for chromosomes 19, 17, and 4, as
reported in a recent multifractal analysis [23].
Our analysis permits classifying human chromosomes
into three multifractality groups suggesting that the
chromosome molecular structure might be organized as
a system operating far from equilibrium [24] (Figure
6B). Thus, those chromosomes with low multifractality
might be closer to equilibrium and have greater genetic
instability. If so, this would explain, why some chromosomes would be involved in some genomic disorders
(structural and numerical chromosome alterations)[34].
For example, some microdeletion syndromes have been
reported for chr. 4: Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome, chr. 5:
Cri du chat syndrome and chr. 15: Angelman and Prader-Willi syndromes. Some aneuploids can be present in
chr. 8: Syndrome of Warkany, chr. 13: Patau syndrome,
chr. 18: Edward syndrome, chr. 21: Down syndrome,
chr. X: Turner syndrome (XO), Klinefelter syndrome
(XXY), triple X syndrome and other tetra and pentaploids of chr. X. For chr. Y: XYY syndrome and Turner
syndrome. With the exception of chromosomes 21 and
Y, all were classified as chromosomes with low multifractality and are more susceptible to genetic damages
or a wrong meiotic segregation.
The multifractal approach by chromosome region reveals
different genomic scenarios (Figure 7A)

For instance, 21 chromosome regions with low multifractality might promote genetic instability during meiotic segregation in Down syndrome. Similar behaviors
might arise for chromosomes X and Y to explain XCI
and sex determination. For example, the most remarkable enrichment of repetitive sequences obtained for L1,
which accounts for 29% of the X chromosome sequence
compared to the average of only 17% [1]. Some studies
have reported significant association between L1 and
coverage and inactivation, and others have refuted this
result [35]. However, the low multifractality, especially
at the third region (AMD ~0.96) may be prone to XCI.
With regard to chromosome Y, the pseudoautosomal
region is more stable, while the palindromic (more periodic) region is unstable and more prone to producing
some genetic disorder such as the mixed gonadal dysgenesis and infertility [1,34]. On the contrary, the 8p
region in which a vast section of ~15 Mb has a strikingly high mutation rate lay on a medium multifractality
region [36]. Similar behavior can be inferred in the C.
elegans chromosome arms, rich in mutation rates [24].
A similar approach showed that the CGI and Alus
correspond well to multifractality (Figure 7B). This
result is significant because of the role that CGI play in
heritability of epigenetic states during the active

Page 12 of 17

transcription or modifications associated with active
chromatin [28].
Finally, we propose a descriptive, non linear model for
the function and organization of the human genome
(Figure 8)

Firstly, several studies have suggested that multifractal
systems might be organized as systems operating far
from equilibrium [16,17,24]. Thus, the detection of a
multifractal scaling in the human genome structure suggests that its molecular structure might be organized as
a system operating far from equilibrium, meaning that
no variable describing the state of the system shows a
regular repetition of values. The high multifractality
which strongly depends on Alu contents (and upon CGI
to a lesser degree) and is located mainly in highly aperiodic regions, takes the chromosome away from equilibrium giving greater genetic stability, protection, and
attraction of mutations (Figures 2A-C, 3F, 3, and 8C).
Thus, hundreds of regions in the human genome might
have a high genetic stability (Figures 1B-E, and 8A, B)
and the most important genetic information of the
human genome (genes) would be safeguarded from
environmental fluctuations. It is because Alu elements
(and CGI) are biased toward gene-rich regions [5].
Furthermore, it is well known that the Alu elements are
highly polymorphic [29] or highly aperiodic and that a
marked reduction of Alus is located within the interrupted genes, especially in exons [6]. Hence, a great
number of mutations fall into the flanking regions of
the coding sequences [37] and Alu elements become
effectors of gene transcription by providing new enhancers, promoters and polyadenylation signals to many
genes [38]. Based on these findings and those found in
C. elegans [24], it seems that the non-linearity might be
located on highly polymorphic genetic units that are distributed in many combinations through the genome. If
so, we inquired on how these sequences have come to
exist. Possibly, this might be explained by the fact that
the multifractal scaling in the human genome appears
to be located on fractal structures, which are mathematically created (in a deterministic way) by superposition
of seed sequences [23]. So these seeds may have been
the Alu sequences, which might have increased in number by retrotransposition, a process involving the insertion of reverse transcribed DNAs of Alu-derived
transcripts back into the genome, apparently by hijacking the LINE-1 retrotransposition machinery [31]. Thus,
multifractality may have occurred extensively in the past
by the apparent “over-transposition” of different functional units (Alus, CGI) carried by each DNA sequence.
Nowadays, it is hypothesized that the majority of transposable elements have been silenced perhaps by some
repressive mechanism [39] to protect the genome.

Moreno et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:506
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/506

Page 13 of 17

Figure 8 Summary diagram: a conceptual non linear model for the human genome: From left to right multifractality increases. In A:
multifractality profile for 9,379 chromosome fragments (from 0.79 to 1.56). In B: Figure 1D. In C above: Alu content profile for 9,379 chromosome
fragments and below Figure 2C. In D: Figure 2E. In E: Figure 5A, C. In F: Figure 5B. In G: Figure 6B.

However, our results suggest that the Alu elements may
themselves be responsible for genetic stability and protection to the genome. Thus, the human multifractal
map developed here provides a tool to identify regions
that are rich in genetic information and genome
stability.
Secondly, there is a strong tendency to increase
genetic information content when multifractality
increases and to increase gene fragmentation when multifractality increases. These results are consistent with
what the multifractal theory predicts (Figures 5A, C, and
8E). Thus, the human genome seems to be made by
many information units (interrupted genes, Alus and
CGIs) with different degrees of fragmentation (or size)
that account for the aperiodic scaling of short and long
range correlations found by other authors [14].

Thirdly, a multifractal genomic context seems to be a
significant requirement for the functional and structural
organization of thousands of genes and many gene
families, i.e., a low multifractal context seems to be
necessary for many sequences (generated by gene duplication and periodicy) to interact with environmental signals, while a high multifractal context (aperiodic) seems
to be prone (or a “genomic attractor”) to many genes;
and some (very aperiodic) gene families are involved in
deterministic and genetic processes (Figures 5A, B, and
8E, F). Thus, the highly multifractal regions would be a
guaranty to maintain a deterministic regulation control
in the genome [24], although most of the human genome
sequences can be subjected to a complex epigenetic and
genetic control as observed when the human epigenome
due to the CGI contents is related to multifractality [28].

Moreno et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:506
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/506

Fourthly, the human chromosome classification and
some chromosomic region assays may have some medical implications. That is, the structure of low non-linearity exhibited for some chromosomes (or chr. regions)
might imply an environmental predisposition to be sensible targets for structural and numerical chromosomic
alterations (Figures 6, 7, and 8G). In fact, the loss of
non-linearity is associated with failure or alterations of
many vital systems close to equilibrium [17,40,41]. Additionally, the sex chromosomes must have low multifractality to maintain the sexual dimorphism and likely the
XCI.
All these fractal and biological arguments might
explain why the Alu elements are shaping the human
genome in nonlinear manner. We believe that applying
comparative multifractal genomics among many human
genomes and other model organisms can help to
respond to how the genome came to exist.

Conclusions
We report evidence for multifractality in the human
genome. We identified thousands of chromosome fragments with low, medium and high multifractality,
which can be translated in terms of variable genetic
stability. Using these fragments we demonstrated -by
different approaches- that changes in multifractality
depend strongly on changes in contents of Alu
sequences. The generated multifractal map of the
human genome allows discussing the multifractal context in which thousands of genes and repetitive
sequences lie. Thus, the Alu elements (and CGI) are
non-linearity shapers and protectors of the genetic
information of the human genome.
Likewise, the averaged multifractality permitted analyzing chromosome regions and classifying human chromosomes into three groups. This non-linear
classification has significant medical implications
because it is able to explain some chromosomal disorders, among other genomic particularities.
All of these findings help to propose a useful and integrative conceptual non-linear model to discuss and
quantify the structural variation and nonlinear organization of the human genome.
Methods
Databases, sequences, and multifractal approaches

The Hs_refseq human genome sequence build 36.2 was
downloaded from the NCBI web site [42]. Three multifractal approaches were followed in this study: 1) By
chromosome fragment, 2) by chromosome, 3) by average of chromosome regions. In the first approach, we
tested several fragment sizes of DNA sequence and we
found 300 kb was an adequate length to be analyzed.
This selection was based on several criteria such as

Page 14 of 17

percentage of discarded genome, average gene size, gene
family, genetic and multifractal context, and scale independence for chromosome fragment size (Data not
shown). Nevertheless, other sizes could have been taken
into account. Subsequently, the contig order for each
chromosome was defined according to the contig files at
the 36.2 version and each contig was divided into fragments of 300 kb. That resulted in 9,389 fragments,
representing 2,816,700 kb. It is about 98.6% of the
whole human genome, discarding about 1.4% of the
genome. Another ten chromosome fragments were
removed from the analysis, because of an excessive
number of Ns and lack of annotation, leaving 9,379
chromosome fragments (Additional file 1). By using
these fragments, five types of analyses were implemented: analyses of multifractal parameters, analyses of
molecular parameters, multifractal map of the human
genome, chromosomal location of the most multifractal
chromosome fragments, and analyses by gene function,
gene family, and gene length. In the second approach,
the resulting fragments per chromosome were averaged
for multifractality to obtain a measure for each chromosome. In the third approach some chromosomes with
some structural particularities were studied. Here, the
resulting fragments per chromosome from the first
approach were divided into four regions (or 27 for chr.
1) and averaged to evaluate the multifractality of each
chromosome region.
Molecular parameters and chaos game representation

The (G+C) contents and Ns were counted for each
DNA fragment of 300 kb by a script written in Python.
Likewise, several molecular parameters were counted
from different files: CGI from seq_cpg_islands.gz file,
Alu (Y, S, J), LINEs, MIRs, MERs and LTRs from seq_repeat.md.gz file, genes from seq_gene.md.gz file, exons
and introns from gbk.gz file, SNPs from seq_snp.md.gz
file, and the number of gene functions from rna.q file.
All these files were downloaded from NCBI human
build 36.2. KEGG(ftp://ftp.genome.jp/pub/kegg/pathway/
organisms/hsa/), and KOGs (ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/pub/
COG/KOG/) were analyzed. As control, we compared
some molecular parameter profiles (G+C and Alus) with
those reported in literature [2].
Subsequently, the CGR was implemented according to
methods in [43,44]. Figure 1A shows an example of a
CGR.
Multifractal analysis and discrimination analyses

A fractal is a geometric fragmented figure whose parts
are an approximate scaled copy of the whole figure, i.e.,
the figure possesses self-similarity. The fractal dimension
D of the figure is basically the scaling rule the figure
obeys. Generally, a power law is supposed:

Moreno et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:506
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/506

Page 15 of 17

N(E)∞E−D

where N(E) is the number of equal parts required to
cover the figure when a scaling factor of E is applied.
The power law allows to calculate the fractal dimension
as
D = ln (N (E)) ln (E)

The fractal dimension obtained by the box-counting
algorithm covers the figure with disjoint boxes of size ε
= 1/E and counts the number of required boxes. Multifractal analysis is used, when multiple scaling rules
apply. In this case, not one but a spectrum of fractal
dimensions Dq, for all integer q, are evaluated [24,44].
Generalizing the box-counting algorithm to the multifractal case, Eq. (1) is obtained:
ln
Dq (ε) =

Mi
i
M0
ln (ε)

q

(1)

1
q−1

where the number M i of points that fall in the i-th
grid box is determined and related to the total number
M0 and εis the box size.
The multifractal spectrum is obtained as the limit:
Dq = lim Dq (ε)

(2)

ε→∞

Variation of the integer q allows to emphasize different regions and discriminate their fractal behavior: Positive q values emphasize dense regions; a high Dq stands
for richness in structure and properties in these regions.
Negative q values emphasize sparse regions; a high Dq
indicates much structure and properties in these
regions. In real world applications, the limit Dq is easily
approximated from data by a linear fit: transformation
of Eq. (1) yields
q

ln Mi

q

= Dq (ε) q − 1 ln (ε) + q − 1 ln M0

(3)

which shows that ln(Miq) for fixed q is a linear function in ln(ε), therefore Dq can be evaluated as slope of
the fitted relationship between ln(Miq) and (q - 1)ln(ε)
[11]. We used this box-counting method for the multifractal spectrum estimation of CGR points and the corresponding analysis according to [10,45].
Directly from the multifractal dimension Dq, the correlation exponent τ(q) is derived asτ(q) = (q -1)Dq. The
degree of multifractality, ΔDq, is the difference between
maximum and minimum values of Dq: ΔDq = Dqmax Dqmin [17,46]. When ΔDq is high, the multifractal
spectrum is rich in information and highly aperiodic;
when ΔDq is small; the resulting dimension spectrum is
poor in information and highly periodic. For each

chromosome the number of Alu versus the MD per
fragment were plotted. Discrimination analyses were
performed using 2-D and 3-D plots, with combined
molecular and multifractal parameters.
Statistics analyses

The whole data set and each set of chromosome fragments per chromosome were analyzed by simple and
multivariate regressions using the PASW statistics 18
software, to determine the goodness of the fit of several
molecular parameters versus MD [47]. For multivariate
regression of ΔDq the data were normalized (values
between 0 and 1). In each chromosome we determined
the 5 variables with highest coefficient absolute values
and the most relevant ones were considered. For some
molecular parameters, their RM at a 95% of occurrence
level was analyzed. And to classify the human chromosomes, a clustering analysis was generated by using the
Hierarchical Clustering Explorer version 3.5 program
(HCE3.5) [48]. The clustering tree was generated by
using the following parameters: row by row normalization by control, complete linkage method and Person’s
correlation coefficient.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Multifractal and molecular parameters for whole
human genome. The file contains the Hs_refseq human genome
sequence build 36.2 divided by fragments of 300 kb and multifractal and
molecular parameters for 9,379 human chromosome fragments. All REs:
All repetitive elements.
Additional file 2: τ(q) parameters for the human genome. The file
contains theτ(q) parameters for 9,379 human chromosome fragments.
Additional file 3: Multivariate analysis per chromosome. The file
contains a significant multivariate analysis per chromosome: consolidated
components.
Additional file 4: Multivariate analysis for all genome. The file
contains a significant multivariate analysis for all genome.
Additional file 5: Determination coefficients per chromosome. The
file contains determination coefficients per chromosome between the
MD versus several molecular parameters. NCFs: Number of chromosome
fragments. NRCF: Number of removed chr. fragments. R2 are indicated as
R^2. The seventh column shows the corrected R2 when nine data (sixth
column) from the second column are removed from the analyses. (r): for
1 or 2 chromosomic fragments, few Alu content and high multifractality
and (0): for 1 chromosomic fragment without Alu content. *: See Figure
3. All REs: All repetitive elements.
Additional file 6: VSTRs sequences. The file contains chromosome
fragment sequences with VSRTs for chromosomes 21 and Y.
Additional file 7: The most multifractal chromosome fragments in
the human genome. The file contains genomic location of the most
multifractal chromosome fragments.
Additional file 8: Chromosome fragments with LMM. The file
contains a threshold definition and genomic location for the
chromosome fragments with LMM.
Additional file 9: Gene function versus RM. The file contains the
analyses by gene functions, KEGGs, KOGs and exons versus RM.
Additional file 10: Gene family versus RM. The file contains the
analysis of gene family versus RM.

Moreno et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:506
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/506

Additional file 11: Gene length versus RM. The file contains the
analysis of gene length versus RM.
Additional file 12: Averaged multifractality versus Alus. The file
contains averaged ΔDq versus averaged Alus per chromosome.
Additional file 13: Averaged multifractality versus CGI. The file
contains averaged ΔDq versus averaged CGI per chromosome.
Additional file 14: Multifractality and hierarchical clustering
analysis. The file contains the averaged multifractal parameters per
chromosome for hierarchical clustering analysis.
Additional file 15: Chr 21 multifractal analysis by regions. The file
contains multifractal parameters by averaged region of chromosome 21.
Additional file 16: Chrs X and Y multifractal analyses by regions.
The file contains multifractal parameters by averaged region of
chromosome X and Y.
Additional file 17: Chr 8 multifractal analysis by regions. The file
contains multifractal parameters by averaged region of chromosome 8.
Additional file 18: Chr 1 multifractal analysis by regions. The file
contains multifractal parameters by averaged region of chromosome 1.
Additional file 19: Chrs 4 and 19 multifractal analyses by regions.
The file contains multifractal parameters by averaged region of
chromosomes 4 and 19.
Additional file 20: Averaged CGI versus multifractality of chr. 1. The
file contains averaged CGI versus averaged multifractality of chromosome
1.

Page 16 of 17

Authors’ information
Pedro A. Moreno was formerly a graduate student at University of Houston
and is currently an assistant professor at the Universidad del Valle (http://
eisc.univalle.edu.co). He teaches courses in bioinformatics, molecular biology,
and information technologies. Pedro has participated in several researches
working with biologists, mathematicians, and engineers in molecular
biology, bioinformatics, metagenomics, fractal geometry and is currently an
advisor for many students at the University. He pioneered bioinformatics
research in Colombia with fractal geometry studies applied to biological
problems. Patricia E. Vélez is a professor at Universidad del Cauca and
Director of the BIMAC Group (http://bimac.unicauca.edu.co) and she has
been pioneered in leadership several researches on breast cancer, human
genetics, bioinformatics, and fractal geometry applied to genetics problems.
Ember Martínez is a graduate student and professor at Universidad del
Cauca. Luis E. Garreta is a doctoral student at Universidad del Valle. Néstor
M. Díaz is a graduate student and professor at Universidad del Cauca. Siler
Amador is a professor at Universidad del Cauca. Irene Tischer is a professor
at Universidad del Valle and Director of the Laboratorio de Bioinformática.
José M. Gutiérrez was formerly a post-doctoral associate at Cornell
University and is currently a professor at Universidad de Cantabria, Spain.
Ashwinikumar K. Naik is a medical doctor and bioinformatician in
Bangalore and participated in the human genome sequencing in Celera
Genomics. Fabian Tobar is a doctoral student and bioinformatician at
Laboratorio de Bioinformática, Universidad del Valle. Felipe Garcia was
formerly a postdoctoral associate at Harvard University. He is currently a
professor at the Universidad del Valle and Director of the Laboratory of
Molecular Biology and Microbiology.
Received: 13 April 2011 Accepted: 14 October 2011
Published: 14 October 2011

Abbreviations
CGR: Chaos Game Representation; MD or ΔDq: multifractality degree; RM:
range of multifractality; AMD: average of multifractality degree; LMM: low
and medium multifractality; GCI: CpG islands; XCI: X chromosome
inactivation; chr.: chromosome.
Acknowledgements
We gratefully acknowledge the Departamento Administrativo de Ciencia,
Tecnología e Innovación - COLCIENCIAS of the Republic of Colombia for
supporting this project with Biotechnology Research Grant (#1103-12-16765).
Thanks to Dr. Alberto Bohorquez and Dr. Heiber Cárdenas for their
comments and suggestions. Finally, thanks to the Universidad del Cauca by
the computer facilities and Escuela de Ingeniería de Sistemas y
Computación at Universidad del Valle for the financial support for
publication.
Author details
Escuela de Ingeniería de Sistemas y Computación, Universidad del Valle,
Santiago de Cali, Colombia. 2Profesora del Departamento de Biología,
FACNED, Universidad del Cauca, Popayán, Colombia. 3Escuela de Ciencias
Básicas. Facultad de Salud, Universidad del Valle, Santiago de Cali, Colombia.
4
Departamento de Sistemas, Universidad del Cauca, Popayán, Colombia.
5
Instituto de Física de Cantabria, Universidad de Cantabria-CSIC, Santander,
España. 6Vaatsalya HealthCare Solutions Pvt Ltd, Bangalore, India.
1

Authors’ contributions
PAM conceived the research idea, participated in its design, execution,
coordination, and drafted the manuscript. PEV helped to discuss, execute
and draft the manuscript. EM carried out part of the writing of scripts in java
for multifractal analysis and wrote part of the phyton code for molecular
parameter counting. LG participated in setting up a bioinformatics server for
processing and maintaining the databases. NMD and SA were responsible
for security issues in informatics, web site technology (http://bimac.unicauca.
edu.co) and mathematical approaches. IT was involved in the mathematics
and statistical analyses and helped to discuss the manuscript. JMG verified
the equations and java code for multifractal analysis. AKN helped to discuss
the human genome characteristics. All previous authors are part of the
research grant approved by COLCIENCIAS. FT and FG participated in the
gene analyses. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

References
1. Lander ES, Linton LM, Birren B, Nusbaum C, Zody MC, Baldwin J, Devon K,
Dewar K, Doyle M, FitzHugh W, Funke R, Gage D, Harris K, Heaford A,
Howland J, Kann L, Lehoczky J, LeVine R, McEwan P, McKernan K,
Meldrim J, Mesirov JP, Miranda C, Morris W, Naylor J, Raymond C, Rosetti M,
Santos R, Sheridan A, Sougnez C, et al: Initial sequencing and analysis of
the human genome. Nature 2001, 409:860-921.
2. Venter JC, Adams MD, Myers EW, Li PW, Mural RJ, Sutton GG, Smith HO,
Yandell M, Evans CA, Holt RA, Gocayne JD, Amanatides P, Ballew RM,
Huson DH, Wortman JR, Zhang Q, Kodira CD, Zheng XH, Chen L, Skupski M,
Subramanian G, Thomas PD, Zhang J, Gabor GLMiklos, Nelson C, Broder S,
Clark AG, Nadeau J, McKusick VA, Zinder N, et al: The sequence of the
human genome. Science 2001, 291:1304-51.
3. International human genome sequencing consortium: Finishing the
euchromatic sequence of the human genome. Nature 2004, 431:931-45.
4. Levy S, Sutton G, Ng PC, Feuk L, Halpern AL, Walenz BP, Axelrod N,
Huang J, Kirkness EF, Denisov G, Lin Y, MacDonald JR, Pang AW, Shago M,
Stockwell TB, Tsiamouri A, Bafna V, Bansal V, Kravitz SA, Busam DA,
Beeson KY, McIntosh TC, Remington KA, Abril JF, Gill J, Borman J,
Rogers YH, Frazier ME, Scherer SW, Strausberg RL, et al: The diploid
genome sequence of an individual human. PLoS Biol 2007, 5:e254.
5. Versteeg R, van Schaik BDC, van Batenburg MF, Roos M, Monajemi R,
Caron H, Bussemaker HJ, van Kampen AHC: The human transcriptome
map reveals extremes in gene density, intron length, GC content, and
repeat pattern for domains of highly and weakly expressed genes.
Genome Research 2003, 13:1998-2004.
6. DeCerbo J, Carmichael GG: SINEs point to abundant editing in the
human genome. Genome Biology 2005, 6:216.
7. The 1000 genomes project consortium: A map of human genome
variation from population-scale sequencing. Nature 2010, 467:1061-1073.
8. Moreno PA, Vélez PE, Burgos JD: Biología molecular, genómica y postgenómica. Pioneros, principios y tecnologías Editorial Universidad del Cauca:
Popayán; 2009.
9. Restrepo S, Pinzón A, Rodríguez-R LM, Sierra R, Grajales A, Bernal A,
Barreto E, Moreno PA, Zambrano MM, Cristancho M, González A, Castro H:
Computational biology in Colombia. PLoS Comput Biol 2009, 5(10):
e1000535.
10. Mandelbrot B: La geometría fractal de la naturaleza Tusquets editores:
Barcelona; 1982.

Moreno et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:506
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/506

11. Peitgen H-O, Jürgen H, Saupe D: Chaos and fractals: New frontiers of science
Springer-Verlag: New York Ins; 1992.
12. Voss R: Evolution of long-range fractal correlations and 1/f noise in DNA
base sequences. Phys Rev Lett 1992, 68:3805-8.
13. Provata A, Oikonomou T: Power law exponents characterizing human
DNA. Phys Rev E Stat Nonlin Soft Matter Phys 2007, 75:056102.
14. Carpena P, Bernaola-Galván P, Coronado AV, Hackenberg M, Oliver JL:
Identifying characteristic scales in the human genome. Phys Rev E 2007,
75:032903.
15. Stanley HE, Meakin P: Multifractal phenomena in physics and chemistry.
Nature 1988, 335:405-409.
16. Meneveau C, Sreenivasan KR: Simple multifractal cascade model for fully
developed turbulence. Phys Rev Lett 1987, 59:1424-1427.
17. Ivanov PCh, Nunes LA, Golberger AL, Havlin S, Rosenblum MG, Struzikk ZR,
Stanley HE: Multifractality in human heartbeat dynamics. Nature 1999,
399:461-465.
18. Yu ZG, Anh V, Lau KS: Measure representation and multifractal analysis of
complete genomes. Phys Rev E Stat Nonlin Soft Matter Phys 2001,
64:031903.
19. Yu ZG, Anh V, Lau KS: Multifractal and correlation analyses of protein
sequences from complete genomes. Phys Rev E Stat Nonlin Soft Matter
Phys 2003, 68:021913.
20. Zhou LQ, Yu ZG, Deng JQ, Anh V, Long SC: A fractal method to
distinguish coding and non-coding sequences in a complete genome
based on a number sequence representation. J Theor Biol 2005,
232:559-567.
21. Yu ZG, Anh V, Lau KS, Zhou LQ: Clustering of protein structures using
hydrophobic free energy and solvent accessibility of proteins. Phys Rev E
Stat Nonlin Soft Matter Phys 2006, 73(3 Pt 1):031920.
22. Yang JY, Zhou Y, Yu ZG, Anh V, Zhou LQ: Human Pol II promoter
recognition based on primary sequences and free energy of
dinucleotides. BMC Bioinformatics 2008, 9:1-13.
23. Provata A, Katsaloulis P: Hierarchical multifractal representation of
symbolic sequences and application to human chromosomes. Phys Rev E
Stat Nonlin Soft Matter Phys 2010, 81:026102.
24. Vélez PE, Garreta LE, Martínez E, Díaz N, Amador S, Tischer I, Gutiérrez JM,
Moreno PA: The Caenorhanditis elegans genome: a multifractal analysis.
Genet and Mol Res 2010, 9(2):949-965.
25. HUGO. [http://www.hugo.org].
26. Genetics home reference. [http://ghr.nlm.nih.gov/geneFamily].
27. Bolzer A, Kreth G, Solovei I, Koehler D, Saracoglu K, Fauth C, Müller S, Eils R,
Cremer C, Speicher MR, Cremer T: Three dimensional maps of all
chromosomes in human male fibroblast nuclei and prometaphase
rosettes. PLoS Biology 2005, 3:e157.
28. Terrenoire E, McRonald F, Halsall JA, Page P, Illingworth RS, Taylor AMR,
Davison V, O’Neill LP, Turner BM: Immunostaining of modified histones
defines high-level features of the human metaphase epigenome.
Genome Biology 2010, 11:R110.
29. Roy-Engel AM, Carroll ML, Vogel E, Garber RK, Nguyen SV, Salem A-H,
Batzer MA, Deininger PL: Alu Insertion Polymorphisms for the Study of
Human Genomic Diversity. Genetics 2001, 159:279-290.
30. Grover D, Mukerji1 M, Bhatnagar P, Kannan K, Brahmachari SK: Alu repeat
analysis in the complete human genome: trends and variations with
respect to genomic composition. Bioinformatics 2004, 20:813-817.
31. Wang J, Song L, Gonder MK, Azrak S, Ray DA, Batzer MA, Tishkoff SA,
Liang P: Whole genome computational comparative genomics: A fruitful
approach for ascertaining Alu insertion polymorphisms. Gene 2006,
365:11-20.
32. Myers JS, Vincent BJ, Udall H, Watkins WS, Morrish TA, Kilroy GE,
Swergold GD, Henke J, Henke L, Moran JV, Jorde LB, Batzer MA: A
Comprehensive Analysis of Recently Integrated Human Ta L1 Elements.
Am J Hum Genet 2002, 71:312-326.
33. Tobar F, Moreno PA, Vélez PE: Highly conserved regions in the 5’ region
of the human olfactory receptor genes. Genet and Mol Res 2009,
8:117-128.
34. Nussbaun RL, McInnes RR, Willard HF: Thompson and Thompson Genetics
and Medicine USA: Sounders Elsevier; 2007.
35. Ross M, Grafham DV, Coffey AJ, Scherer S, McLay K, Muzny D, Platzer M,
Howell GR, Burrows C, Bird CP, Frankish A, Lovell FL, Howe KL, Ashurst JL,
Fulton RS, Sudbrak R, Wen G, Jones MC, Hurles ME, Andrews TD, Scott CE,
Searle S, Ramser J, Whittaker A, Deadman R, Carter NP, Hunt SE, Chen R,

Page 17 of 17

36.

37.
38.
39.

40.
41.
42.
43.
44.

45.

46.
47.
48.

Cree A, Gunaratne P, et al: The DNA sequence of the human X
chomosome. Nature 2005, 434:251-252.
Nusbaum C, Mikkelsen TS, Zody MC, Asakawa S, Taudin S, Garber M,
Kodira CD, Schueler MG, Shimizu A, Whittaker CA, Chang JL, Cuomo CA,
Dewar K, FitzGerald MG, Yang X, Allen NR, Anderson S, Asakawa T,
Blechschmidt K, Bloom T, Borowsky ML, Butler J, Cook A, Corum B,
DeArellano K, DeCaprio D, Dooley KT, Dorris L III, Engels R, Glöckner G, et al:
DNA sequence and analysis of human chromosome 8. Nature 2006,
439:139-143.
Krane DE, Raymer ML: Fundamental concepts of bioinformatics San Francisco:
Benjamin cummings; 2003.
Häsler J, Strub K: Alu elements as regulators of gene expression. Nucl
Acids Res 2006, 34:5491-5497.
Huda A, Mariño-Ramírez L, Jordan IK: Epigenetic histone modifications of
human transposable elements: genome defense versus exaptation.
Mobile DNA 2010, 1:1-12.
Goldberger AL: Non-linear dynamics for clinicians: chaos theory, fractals,
and complexity at the bedside. Lancet 1996, 347:1312-1314.
Burgos JD, Moreno-Tovar P: Zipf-scaling behavior in the immune system.
Biosystems 1996, 39:227-232.
NCBI. [http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov].
Jeffrey HJ: Chaos game representation of gene structure. Nucl Acids Res
1990, 18:2163-2175.
Yu ZG, Anh V, Lau KS: Chaos game representation of protein sequences
based on the detailed HP model and their multifractal and correlation
analyses. J Theor Biol 2004, 226:341-348.
Halsey TC, Jensen MH, Kadanoff LP, Procaccia I, Shraiman BI: Fractal
measures and their singularities: The characterization of strange sets.
Phys Rev A 1986, 33:1141-1151.
Dewey TG, Strait BJ: Multifractals, encoded walks and the ergodicity of
protein sequences. Pac Symp Biocomput 1996, 216.
PASW Statistic 18. Chicago. [http://www.spss.com/statistic/].
Hierarchical Clustering Explorer version 3.5. [http://www.cs.umd.edu/hcil/
hce/].

doi:10.1186/1471-2164-12-506
Cite this article as: Moreno et al.: The human genome: a multifractal
analysis. BMC Genomics 2011 12:506.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
