<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Evolution of anterior Hox regulatory elements among chordates</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:330. doi:10.1186/1471-2148-11-330"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Alfonso Natale"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Natale et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:330
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/330

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Evolution of anterior Hox regulatory elements
among chordates
Alfonso Natale1†, Carrie Sims2†, Maria L Chiusano3, Alessandro Amoroso1, Enrico D’Aniello1,6, Laura Fucci4,
Robb Krumlauf2,5, Margherita Branno1 and Annamaria Locascio1*

Abstract
Background: The Hox family of transcription factors has a fundamental role in segmentation pathways and axial
patterning of embryonic development and their clustered organization is linked with the regulatory mechanisms
governing their coordinated expression along embryonic axes. Among chordates, of particular interest are the Hox
paralogous genes in groups 1-4 since their expression is coupled to the control of regional identity in the anterior
nervous system, where the highest structural diversity is observed.
Results: To investigate the degree of conservation in cis-regulatory components that form the basis of Hox
expression in the anterior nervous system, we have used assays for transcriptional activity in ascidians and
vertebrates to compare and contrast regulatory potential. We identified four regulatory sequences located near the
CiHox1, CiHox2 and CiHox4 genes of the ascidian Ciona intestinalis which direct neural specific domains of
expression. Using functional assays in Ciona and vertebrate embryos in combination with sequence analyses of
enhancer fragments located in similar positions adjacent to Hox paralogy group genes, we compared the activity
of these four Ciona cis-elements with a series of neural specific enhancers from the amphioxus Hox1-3 genes and
from mouse Hox paralogous groups 1-4.
Conclusions: This analysis revealed that Kreisler and Krox20 dependent enhancers critical in segmental regulation
of the hindbrain appear to be specific for the vertebrate lineage. In contrast, neural enhancers that function as Hox
response elements through the action of Hox/Pbx binding motifs have been conserved during chordate evolution.
The functional assays reveal that these Hox response cis-elements are recognized by the regulatory components of
different and extant species. Together, our results indicate that during chordate evolution, cis-elements dependent
upon Hox/Pbx regulatory complexes, are responsible for key aspects of segmental Hox expression in neural tissue
and appeared with urochordates after cephalochordate divergence.

Background
In all the animal species from insects to vertebrates Hox
genes play a key role in determining anterio-posterior
(AP) identities. The clustered organization and spatiotemporal colinearity of expression of Hox genes in many
species are believed to be important for their functional
roles [1]. The availability of genomic sequences from an
increasingly large number of species has shed light on
many aspects of the evolution of Hox gene organization.
However, this data has also opened new questions on
* Correspondence: annamaria.locascio@szn.it
† Contributed equally
1
Laboratory of Cellular and Developmental Biology, Stazione Zoologica
Anton Dohrn, Villa Comunale, Naples, Italy
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

the origin of Hox genes and on the mechanisms that
controlled their evolution [2,3]. A single set of Hox
genes is present in all invertebrates and non-vertebrate
chordates analysed so far. Two rounds (2N) of genomewide duplication led to the formation of four Hox clusters seen in most vertebrates, while an additional (3N)
round of duplication and divergence in ray finned fishes
has led to seven or eight Hox clusters [3].
Recent genomic analyses have demonstrated that only
vertebrates have a compact and well organized Hox
cluster, while most of the other chordates and invertebrates analysed so far have “an intact but disorganized, a
split or an atomized cluster” with a highly variable gene
number [2]. Echinoderms have a single Hox cluster that
has undergone significant rearrangements of the

© 2011 Natale et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Natale et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:330
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/330

member gene positions. The sequencing of the genome
of Strongylocentrotus purpuratus revealed a large Hox
cluster with eleven genes that have undergone rearrangements of transcriptional orientation and gene order.
The Hox5 gene is the most 3’ gene and the Hox1-3 lie
near the members of the cluster expressed in posterior
regions [4]. The cephalochordate amphioxus has a single
and intact cluster quite similar to compact vertebrate
organization and the Hox1, 2, 3, 4 and 6 genes show
both temporal and spatial colinearity of expression
along the anteroposterior axis of the developing neural
tube [5,6]. Nevertheless, there has been a further expansion of the 5’ genes generating a total of fifteen paralogous groups [7-9]. Urochordates have nine Hox genes
and both the larvacean Oikopleura dioica and the ascidian Ciona intestinalis species have lost Hox genes of
the central paralogous groups [10-12]. It has been suggested that rapid embryogenesis and a simplification in
body organization are at the basis of the breakdown of
central Hox genes in these organisms.
Oikopleura has completely lost the clustered organization of Hox genes while still maintains some anteroposterior colinearity in the notochord, neural tube, tail
muscle and epidermis [12]. In Ciona, only some of the
nine Hox genes correspond to the Oikopleura complements and they are located on two chromosomes and
interspersed with many other unrelated genes. There is
no evidence for temporal colinearity, however spatial
colinearity is partially maintained [13]. In particular,
CiHox1, CiHox3, CiHox10, CiHox5 and CiHox12 exhibit
a spatially coordinated and restricted pattern of expression along AP axis of the central nervous system at the
level of the visceral ganglion and nerve cord, which are
considered homologous to vertebrate hindbrain and
spinal cord respectively [13-16]. The other Ciona Hox
genes (CiHox2, CiHox4 and CiHox13) appear to have
lost their function in development of the nervous system
and are associated the roles in other tissues such as
mesenchyme. The Ciona Hox2 gene, unlike its vertebrate counterparts, has lost any evidence of spatio-temporal colinearity and is expressed only at the larva stage,
in trunk lateral cells [13].
Both ascidians and amphioxus lack a segmented hindbrain but the restricted expression patterns of anterior
Hox genes and of other molecular markers show clear
homologies with vertebrates in nervous system patterning [6,13-15]. Vertebrate Hox genes exert a fundamental
role in hindbrain formation and segmentation [17,18].
They show sharp and nested anterior limits in the
rhombencephalon and each Hox gene has a specific and
different expression profile [19]. These expression profiles are temporally and spatially defined through the
combined action of different regulatory elements. Regulatory studies in the vertebrate hindbrain have

Page 2 of 19

demonstrated that different combinations of cis-elements and regulatory components are used to establish
and maintain segmental Hox expression domains during
development.
Trying to understand which of the cis-regulatory modules that control and modulate Hox genes expression
may be common to all chordates and which ones
appeared only in specific lineages represents an interesting challenge. Gene duplication and divergence provides
an opportunity to acquire new genetic material that during evolution will permit diversification and appearance
of new structures.
All chordates are characterized by the same body plan
with a dorsal hollow neural tube, a notochord and lateral muscles but the very rudimentary cephalic structures typical of protochordates evolved and led to the
appearance of a considerable number of innovations in
vertebrates. Vertebrates unlike the other chordates are
characterized by the neural crest, placodes and a complex brain [20].
Hox genes played a key role in the morphological evolution of these structures. They control the correct segmentation patterning of these structures and define
their antero-posterior identity. From an evolutionary
point of view, the duplication and subsequent divergence of Hox genes are believed to have contributed to
the formation of the vertebrate innovations. In particular, changes in gene regulatory regions are considered a
driving force for the evolution of more complex body
plan structures [9].
Studies by phylogenetic footprinting have identified
conserved noncoding regions but often large phylogenetic distances make it difficult to establish the real significance of the results obtained. The sequencing of the
Hox cluster of the european amphioxus Branchiostoma
lanceolatum and its comparison with the other clusters
of the amphioxus Branchiostoma floridae and vertebrates permitted, at least in part, to overcome the phylogenetic distances and to identify several putative
regulatory regions [8,21]. Nonetheless, further characterization of these sequences will be necessary to establish
their biological significance. Amphioxus Hox1-3 regulatory elements tested in mouse and chicken embryos
revealed the presence of conserved neural elements
adjacent to the AmphiHox1 and AmphiHox3 genes
dependent upon retinoic signalling for activity [22,23].
These control regions contained retinoic acid response
elements (RAREs) of the DR5-type located at the 3’ end
of AmphiHox1 and at the 5’ end of AmphiHox3 which
are responsible for expression of these genes in vertebrate neural crest and neural tube from rhombomere 6
to posterior without any specific segmentation [22,23].
This is consistent with data showing that the endogenous AmphiHox1 and AmphiHox3 genes respond to

Natale et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:330
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/330

retinoic acid [5,24,25]. Retinoic acid excess directly
induces altered expression of these genes in gastrula
embryos [25]. Furthermore, these results also demonstrated that AmphiHox1, like its vertebrate counterparts
Hoxa1 and Hoxb1, is a direct target of retinoid signalling in the nervous system [5,24]. Among chordates, the
sensitivity to retinoic acid seems to be less conserved in
urochordates. The larvacean Oikopleura lacks genes of
the retinoic acid pathway and does not show any
homeotic posteriorization after RA treatment [26]. In
the ascidian Ciona intestinalis, only CiHox1 clearly
responds to exogenous retinoic acid and it has an RA
responsive element for its epidermal expression but it
seems to lack RAREs at its 3’ end controlling neural
expression [22,27-29].
Regulatory and mutational analyses in mice and other
vertebrate species have shown that Krox20 and Kreisler
transcription factors play crucial roles in the process of
hindbrain segmentation by regulating rhombomere (r)specific expression of the Hoxa2, Hoxa3, Hoxb2 and
Hoxb3 genes [17,30-33]. However, regulatory analyses of
the AmphiHox1-3 loci suggests that Krox20 and Kreisler
dependent neural elements have not been conserved in
amphioxus [23]. Previous studies on the Ciona CiHox3
gene and its neural specific regulatory element(s)
revealed a similar divergence of Krox20 and Kreislerdependent Hox3 control elements between vertebrates
and ascidians, but showed that a certain degree of conservation exists with respect to Hox response elements
capable of mediating auto- or cross-regulatory inputs
from Hox genes [15]. This is interesting because in vertebrates, following initial activation by transient inputs
from retinoids, Krox20 and/or Kreisler, the segmental
expression of Hoxb1, Hoxb2, Hoxa2 and Hoxa3 are
maintained through separate cis-modules by positive
auto- and cross-regulatory loops, that involve interactions between Hox proteins and the Meis/Prep and Pbx
co-factors. For example, the murine Hoxa3 and Hoxb3
genes are first activated in r5 and r6 under the control
of an enhancer with conserved Kreisler binding sites
[31,32], while in later stages only Hoxa3 is maintained
in r5 through an auto-regulatory loop dependent upon
conserved Hox/PBC sites [31]. Similarly, following activation of Hoxa1 and Hoxb1 by retinoids, the expression
of Hoxb1, Hoxb2 and Hoxa2 in r4 is achieved by a series
of auto- and cross-regulatory enhancers under the control of dimeric and trimeric Hox/Pbx/Prep complexes
[34-37]. These studies illustrate that auto-and cross-regulatory inputs from Hox genes themselves are an important component of Hox regulation.
To investigate how cis-regulation of Hox genes changed and evolved in the chordate lineage, we have used
regulatory analyses in Ciona and vertebrates to analyse
and compare various Hox regulatory regions of three

Page 3 of 19

chordate species, amphioxus, ascidian and mouse. In
particular, we focused our attention on the elements
controlling anterior Hox genes expression in the nervous
system because the CNS is the territory where major
structural differences can be observed in these chordate
organisms and it is also the only one where anterior
Hox genes of all three species are expressed during
embryonic development. We identified several new control regions in Ciona and our results indicate that during chordate evolution, cis-elements dependent upon
Hox/Pbx regulatory complexes, are responsible for key
aspects of segmental Hox expression in neural tissue
and appeared with urochordate after cephalochordate
divergence. However, segmental regulation in the vertebrate hindbrain mediated by factors such as Kreisler and
Krox20 appears to be specific for the vertebrate lineage.

Results
To enable evolutionary comparisons to probe the degree
of conservation of Hox regulatory elements directing
anterior neural expression in mouse, amphioxus and
Ciona we selected a series of Hox rhombomere-specific
enhancer elements characterized in mouse embryos for
their ability to specifically direct segmental expression of
Hox genes in paralogous groups 1, 2, 3 or 4. In particular, we examined two Hoxb1, a Hoxb2, a Hoxa2, a
Hoxa3 and a Hoxd4 enhancer. Each enhancer contains a
different set of the Krox20, Kreisler, Pbx/Meis and
RARE binding sites, whose characteristics are indicated
in Figure 1[31,35,37-40].
All the Hox1, Hox2 and Hox3 amphioxus genomic
fragments tested by Manzanares et al. [23] in mouse
and chicken embryos have been chosen as representative
of anterior Hox genes regulatory elements of cephalochordates (Figure 1).
We then needed to map and identify functional elements in Ciona. Towards this end we performed transcriptional assays to scan for fragments in and around Hox
genes in paralogy groups 1-4 capable of directing reporter
activity in Ciona embryos. We identified four cis-elements
as described below (marked by red *, Figure 1).
CiHox1 regulatory elements

A genomic sequence of about 20 kb encompassing
CiHox1 and the two non-Hox adjacent genes (Hex and
Fox) was obtained from the JGI genome sequencing
project of Ciona intestinalis [41] and was analysed by
the Nix programme of the UK Human Genome mapping project (HGMP). The resulting CiHox1 gene structure was used to generate a series of five genomic
fragments extending through the intergenic region
downstream of Hex through CiHox1 to the start of Fox
adjacent genes (Figure 1). The fragments were cloned
into a reporter vector containing LacZ as reporter gene

Natale et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:330
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/330

Page 4 of 19

Figure 1 Genomic organization of the mouse, amphioxus and Ciona anterior Hox regulatory elements assayed by transgenesis in
Ciona or vertebrate embryos. Ciona positive regulatory fragments are evidenced by a red asterisk while the black asterisk indicates location of
CiHox3 enhancer.

and CiHox3 0.2 as the basal promoter [15]. These constructs were electroporated into Ciona embryos to identify putative CiHox1 enhancer elements with regulatory
potential by staining for LacZ reporter gene expression
in embryos at tailbud and larva stages. The genomic
regions 1UP2.1, 1UP3.0 and 1D1.7 did not give any specific LacZ activation (data not shown). In contrast, fragments 1UP2.4 and 1intro3.6 appear to recapitulate the
expression profiles of the endogenous CiHox1 gene (Figures 2A-F). In particular, endogenous CiHox1 is
expressed in the epidermis and CNS at the junction
between the trunk and the tail at tailbud stage (Figure
2E) and in the corresponding epidermis, visceral ganglion and anterior caudal neural tube at larva stage (Figure 2F). The construct 1UP2.4, extending from position
-2924 to -573 at the 5’ end of the gene, activates LacZ
expression in the epidermis at the junction between the

trunk and the tail at both tailbud and larva stages (Figures 2A, B) and recapitulates CiHox1 endogenous epidermal expression (Figures E, F). This construct also
recapitulates CiHox1 expression in the corresponding
CNS, at level of the visceral ganglion and anterior caudal neural tube, but only at larva stage (Figure 2B).
There is a specific but ectopic domain of LacZ expression in the most anterior part of the CNS that can be
observed at tailbud stage (Figure 2A) and in the sensory
vesicle at larva stage (Figure 2B).The construct
1intro3.6, containing a genomic fragment encompassing
the second intron of CiHox1 is responsible for early and
late activation in the CNS, recapitulating endogenous
CiHox1 neural expression at both tailbud and larva
stages. In particular, its expression was observed in the
dorsal nerve cord at the junction between the trunk and
the tail at tailbud stage (Figure 2C) and in the visceral

Natale et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:330
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/330

Page 5 of 19

Figure 2 Expression territories of CiHox1, CiHox2 and CiHox4 positive cis-elements. A-D) LacZ expression of constructs 1UP2.4 and
1intro3.6 in electroporated embryos at tailbud and larva stages. E, F) CiHox1 endogenous expression profile by whole mount in situ hybridization
at the same embryonic stages. LacZ and endogenous CiHox1 are both expressed in the epidermis and CNS between the trunk and the tail at
tailbud (A, C, E) and larva (B, D, F) stages. Construct 1UP2.4 shows also ectopic expression in the sensory vesicle (A, B). G, H) Reporter gene
expression of construct 2D3.1 in the future palps at tailbud stage (G) and in the palps, sensory vesicle at larva stage (H). I, J) LacZ expression of
construct 4UP2.1 in the anterior CNS and mesenchymal pockets at tailbud (I) and only in the mesenchymal pockets at larva stage (J). K, L) whole
mount in situ hybridization of CiHox4 gene in the mesenchymal pockets of embryos at the same developmental stages. White arrows indicate
LacZ expression corresponding to the endogenous gene expression. Anterior is on the right and posterior on the left. All the embryos are on a
dorsal view, except A, C and E that are on a lateral view.

Natale et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:330
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/330

ganglion and anterior neural tube at larva stage (Figure
2D). At this stage, an ectopic signal was also visible in
the sensory vesicle. The analysis of a series of progressively deleted fragments of these two constructs (Figures
3A, D), identified a 0.8 kb DNA fragment (1UP0.8) able

Page 6 of 19

to activate reporter gene expression in the same territories of 1UP2.4 construct and specifically, in the epidermis of tailbud and larva embryos and in the CNS of
larva embryos (Figures 3B, C). The second fragment of
1.7 kb (1intro1.7) reproduces 1intro3.6 construct and

Figure 3 Summary of 1UP2.4 and 1intro3.6 deletion constructs and of their activity in transgenic Ciona embryos. A, D) On the left
schematic representation of 1UP2.4 (A) or 1intro3.6 (D) constructs and their deleted constructs. The restriction sites used for the preparation of
the transgenes are also indicated (P, PstI; S, SmaI; X, XbaI). Right side, constructs names and the tissues where the reporter gene is expressed.
The number of crosses is indicative of days of staining. B, C) Expression of 1UP0.8 construct in the same territories of the endogenous CiHox1
gene in the epidermis of tailbud (B) and epidermis and CNS of larva embryos (C). E, F) Nervous specific expression of 1intro1.7 construct at
tailbud (E) and larva (F) stages corresponding to endogenous neural expression of CiHox1. Anterior is on the right; B, C, E, lateral view; F, dorsal
view.

Natale et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:330
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/330

thus nervous specific CiHox1 expression at the junction
between the trunk and the tail at both tailbud and larva
stages (Figures 3E, F). These results clearly indicate that
the 1UP0.8 fragment, located 5’ of the CiHox1 gene,
contains the regulatory elements controlling its expression in the epidermis at tailbud and larva stages and in
the CNS at level of visceral ganglion and anterior nerve
cord only at larva stage. The genomic region of 1.7 kb
located in the second intron of CiHox1 (1intro1.7) is
responsible for both early and late activation of the
CiHox1 gene in the nervous system.
CiHox2 and CiHox4 regulatory elements

A genomic region encompassing the CiHox2, CiHox3
and CiHox4 genes was also analysed by using the same
enhancer scanning strategy and reporter vectors adopted
above for CiHox1. The ten fragments analysed lie
between two adjacent non-Hox genes, and extend from
the end of GST-1, located 5’ of CiHox4, to the start of
Stac, located 3’ of CiHox2 (Figure 1). Previous analyses
from our group examined the regions surrounding
CiHox3 and identified an 80 bp element located at the
5’ end of CiHox3 (indicated by an asterisk in Figure 1).
This element is capable of mediating neural specific
reporter expression [15] at level of the sensory vesicle
and visceral ganglion (Table 1) and this last signal
reproduces endogenous CiHox3 expression.
Among the four genomic fragments of CiHox2 tested,
only construct 2D3.1, located 3’ of the gene, is able to activate reporter gene expression in the future palps of the
embryo at tailbud stage (Figure 2G) and in the palps and
CNS, at level of the sensory vesicle, at the larva stage (Figure 2H). This construct also activates reporter expression
in tail muscles, but this pattern of staining is highly
Table 1 Neural territories of expression of positive Ciona,
amphioxus and mouse Hox cis-elements
Name

Species

Expression in Ciona

Expression in
Vertebrate

1UP1.4

C.
intestinalis

SV VG NC -

-

r4

1intro1.7 C.
intestinalis

SV VG NC -

-

hindbrain

2D0.8

C.
intestinalis

SV VG -

Ph TSN -

1CiHox3 C.
intestinalis

SV VG -

-

-

r4 r6/NC

4UP1.3

C.
intestinalis

SV -

-

-

-

2B

B. floridae

SV VG -

mb1

M.
musculus

SV -

NC -

-

ma3

M.
musculus

-

-

TSN r5/r6 NC

-

-

Ph TSN V,VIII ganglia

-

Page 7 of 19

variable among the embryos and has been considered not
specific. The expression profile of construct 2D3.1 does
not recapitulate that of the endogenous CiHox2 gene,
which is expressed only at larva stage in the trunk lateral
cells [13]. This suggests that additional fragments may
work to restrict its activity or that these cis-elements
located 3’ of CiHox2 might function on the adjacent nonHox Stac gene. To probe this latter possibility, we performed whole mount in situ hybridization experiments on
embryos at tailbud and larva stages in order to establish
Stac gene expression profiles. Stac is expressed in the epidermis at larva stage and is not expressed at tailbud stage
(data not shown). Thus, Stac expression is completely different from that of CiHox2 gene and the pattern of reporter staining mediated by construct 2D3.1.
To further investigate the regulatory potential of region
2D3.1, to specifically activate gene expression in the Ciona
CNS we generated a deletion series (Figure 4A) and scored
for reporter activity (Figures 4B-D). This analysis led to
the identification of a 0.5 kb DNA fragment (2D0.5) which
not only reproduces the expression profile of fragment
2D3.1 in the sensory vesicle and the palps, but also activates LacZ expression in the pharynx, the visceral ganglion
(Figure 4D) and tail sensory neurons (TSN) (Figure 4C,
Table 1). These results suggest that 2D3.1 contains an
enhancer region capable of activating expression in neural
and other tissues in combination with a repressor element
that partially blocks its activity. Other repressor regions
might reside in flanking regions of 2D3.1 and serve to
further restrict the potential of the enhancer in generating
the endogenous pattern of CiHox2 expression.
To screen for the regulatory element(s) responsible for
CiHox4 expression we tested six fragments, two located
at the 5’ end of the gene and four located at the 3’ end
(Figure 1). Of these regions, only 4UP2.1, located just
upstream of the CiHox4 coding sequence, is able to activate LacZ expression. We observed staining specifically
in the mesenchymal pockets (Figures 2I, J) which reproduces the CiHox4 expression profile at tailbud and larva
stages, as revealed by in situ hybridization experiments
(Figures 2K, L). Furthermore, this construct is also able
to activate expression in the most anterior central nervous system at tailbud stage (Figure 2I). Deletion analysis of the sequence contained in construct 4UP2.1 has
identified a 0.8 kb region (4UP0.8) responsible for this
regulatory activity (Figure 4E). This 4UP0.8 fragment
reproduces the expression profile of construct 4UP2.1
both in the anterior CNS and in the mesenchymal pockets at tailbud stage (Figure 4F) and only in the mesenchymal pockets at larva stage (Figure 4G).

r4

Amphioxus anterior Hox regulatory elements in Ciona

To begin our functional comparisons between Ciona,
amphioxus and mouse, we first tested by electroporation

Natale et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:330
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/330

Page 8 of 19

Figure 4 Cis-regulatory activity of the 2D3.1 and 4UP2.1 deletion constructs. A) Schematic representation of 2D3.1 deleted fragments and
of their expression in Ciona embryos at tailbud and larva stages. B) Construct 2D0.5 is active in the palps and sensory vesicle, as for construct
2D3.1, and also in the caudal sensory neurons (C), in the pharynx and visceral ganglion (D). E) Summary of 4UP2.1 deletion constructs and of
their activity in transgenic Ciona embryos at tailbud and larva stages. F, G) 4UP 0.8 construct is expressed in the anterior CNS at tailbud stage (F)
and in the mesenchymal pockets at both tailbud and larva stages (F, G). E, EcoRI; H, HindIII; RV, EcoRV; X, XbaI.

Natale et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:330
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/330

in Ciona embryos all the amphioxus genomic fragments
tested by Manzanares et al. [23] in mouse and chicken
embryos (Figure 1). We prepared a series of constructs
containing the amphioxus 1A, 1B, 1C, 2A, 2B, 2C, 3A,
3B and 3C genomic elements, together with LacZ reporter vectors using either human b-globin or Ciona
CiHox3 0.2 [15] as basal promoters. These two basal
promoters work both in Ciona embryos with the difference that the human b-globin is more efficient in gene
activation but gives also more non-specific staining in
the mesenchyme in comparison to the CiHox3 0.2 element (personal unpublished information).
The majority of the amphioxus control regions, which
function in mouse and chick embryos [23], do not display

Page 9 of 19

regulatory activity in Ciona. The only amphioxus element
that gave a positive result in Ciona is construct 2B. This
construct contains a 5.6 kb amphioxus genomic region
encompassing the 5’ end of Hox2, its coding region and
part of its 3’ end (Figure 1). As also reported by Wada et
al. [42], this element leads at tailbud stage to the activation
of LacZ in the most anterior part of the embryo in the
precursors of the palps, sensory vesicle and pharynx (Figure 5A). We also observed expression in the notochord
cells not previously reported. At larva stage construct 2B
is specifically active in the corresponding anterior territories observed at tailbud stage (Figure 5C). We also
observed in a high percentage of electroporated larvae a
clear expression in the tail sensory neurons (Figure 5E).

Figure 5 Analysis of the amphioxus 2B regulatory element in Ciona embryos. Expression mediated by amphioxus 2B element in anterior
nervous system, pharynx (black arrow) and palps in tailbud (A) and larva (C) embryos is very similar to Ciona construct 2D0.8 expression at the
same developmental stages (B, D). Amphioxus 2B is also active in notochord cells at tailbud stage (B) and in the tail sensory neurons at larva
stage (E, white arrows).

Natale et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:330
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/330

Page 10 of 19

This expression profile of the amphioxus 2B element
is very similar to that obtained with the Ciona 2D0.8
construct (Figures 5B, D). Constructs 2D0.8 and 2B at
tailbud stage have similar activities in the palps precursors and anterior CNS (Figures 5A, B) and, at larva
stage, both fragments are able to activate reporter gene
expression in the palps, the pharynx and the sensory
vesicle (Figures 5C, D). The amphioxus 2B fragment
contains two Ets binding sites located at the 3’ end of
the amphioxus Hox2 gene that are responsible for its
expression in these territories [42]. It is interesting to
note that the Ciona 2D0.8 fragment is located at the 3’
end of the Hox2 gene, suggesting that these regulatory
elements may be related and already present in the
common ancestor to cephalochordates and urochordates. For sequence comparison of these two fragments
see below the paragraph of “in silico analyses”.

smaller fragments (Figure 6C). The region ma3A contains the KreislerA site and a single Hox/Pbc-A motif,
while the ma3P region contains the adjacent Hox/Pbc-B
motif, the Prep/Meis and the posterior elements. Positive results have been obtained only following electroporation of the ma3P construct and it reproduces the
results obtained with ma3 in the tail sensory neurons
(Figure 6F). Thus, the Kreisler motif is not necessary for
activity and the posterior element is the most probable
candidate to explain this expression in caudal sensory
neurons. Even though this profile does not recapitulate
any typical Hox expression, it is to note that also the
Ciona 2D0.5 and amphioxus 2B fragments are expressed
in this territory. Again this result indicates the presence
of conserved elements among the Hox genes of chordates. Looking for common binding sites, an in silico
analysis of these sequences has been done, see below.

Mouse Hox enhancers in Ciona

Ciona Hox regulatory elements in chicken

Next we tested in Ciona embryos a series of Hox rhombomere-specific enhancer elements characterized in
mouse embryos for their ability to specifically direct segmental expression of Hox genes of paralogous groups 1,
2, 3 or 4 and, as shown in Figure 1, containing a different set of the Krox20, Kreisler, Pbx/Meis and RARE
binding sites [31,35,37-40]. Among these elements only
two of them were capable of mediating reporter staining
and only at the larva stage (Table 1). One, mb1 construct, is a 650 bp mouse Hoxb1 enhancer, located at
the 5’ end of the gene (Figure 1), which serves as a Hox
response element through three cooperating repeats
recognised by the Hox/Pbx complexes. In vertebrates,
this Hoxb1 enhancer activates expression specifically in
rhombomere 4 and its associated neural crest cells [35].
In Ciona embryos, construct mb1 activates LacZ expression at larva stage in the posterior part of the sensory
vesicle and in the most anterior part of the caudal
neural tube (Figure 6A). This expression profile is very
similar to that observed with the endogenous CiHox1
gene (Figure 6B) indicating that the mouse element
recapitulates the major part of endogenous CiHox1
expression in the nervous system.
The construct ma3 is also active in Ciona larvae
(Table 1). It contains an enhancer located 5’ of the
mouse Hoxa3 gene with five binding motifs for Kreisler,
Hox/Pbx and Prep/Meis complexes (Figure 6C) [31]. In
Ciona embryos, the mouse Hoxa3 enhancer, activates
reporter gene expression at larva stage in the peripheral
nervous system and specifically in the tail sensory neurons (Figure 6D). A transversal section of an electroporated larva, clearly shows the position of the stained cell
on the surface of the tail (Figure 6E). To determine
which of the motifs are important for this activity, the
ma3 regulatory sequence, has been subdivided into two

To test whether the Ciona regulatory elements could
function with vertebrate transcriptional machinery, the
genomic fragments active in Ciona CNS and contained
in the 1UP1.4, 1intro1.7, 2D0.8 and 4UP1.3 constructs
were tested by electroporation in developing chicken
embryos. A series of experiments using embryos at different stages of development revealed that constructs
2D0.8 and 4UP1.3 were not functionally active while
1UP1.4 and 1intro1.7 were able to direct LacZ reporter
expression in chicken CNS. In particular, the 1UP1.4
fragment directed positive LacZ expression specifically
in rhombomere 4 in chicken embryos at HH stage 8-10
(Figure 7A). This is interesting because enhancers from
the mouse Hoxb1, Hoxb2 and Hoxa2 genes which are
highly conserved in vertebrates and capable of directing
reporter expression in an r4-restricted manner have
been shown to serve as Hox response elements dependent upon the binding of Hox/Pbx and Meis complexes.
Sequence analysis of the 1UP1.4 region indicated the
presence of multiple Hox/Pbx and Meis consensus binding sites suggesting that it too might function as a Hox
response element (see below the “in silico analyses”
paragraph). Therefore, we tested the ability of the
1UP1.4 region to respond to ectopic expression of
Hoxb1. As a positive control, in parallel we performed a
similar trans-activation experiment using the mouse r4
enhancer region mb1, which was previously shown to
contain Hoxb1/Pbx/meis elements responsible for
directing expression in r4 (Figure 7C and [35]). We
found that ectopic expression of Hoxb1 is able to
expand reporter expression mediated by both 1UP1.4
and mb1 throughout the entire hindbrain (Figure 7B).
This result indicates that the 1UP1.4 region contains a
conserved Hox/Pbx regulatory element that mediates a
response to group 1 Hox proteins.

Natale et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:330
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/330

Page 11 of 19

Figure 6 Analysis of the mouse mb1 and ma3 regulatory elements in Ciona embryos. A) Lateral view of a transgenic Ciona embryo at
larva stage showing mb1 expression in the sensory vesicle and anterior nerve cord. B) This latter territory (arrow) corresponds to that of the
endogenous CiHox1 gene. C) Schematic representation of mouse ma3 deleted fragments and their corresponding activity. D) Lateral view of a
transgenic larva electroporated with construct ma3, showing expression in a couple of tail sensory neurons. E) Transverse gelatin section at level
of the tail sensory neuron marked by ma3. F) The mouse ma3P construct shows the same expression of the ma3 construct in the tail sensory
neurons.

The 1intro1.7 region was the other Ciona regulatory
element active in the chicken hindbrain, but domains of
expression were not rhombomere specific. As shown in
Figure 7E, it is expressed in a variable manner along the
whole rhomboencephalon but for the purpose of

comparison with the 1UP1.4 region we tested its ability
to mediate a Hox response. Ectopic expression of Hoxb1
did not induce changes in its patterns of reporter
expression mediated by the 1intro1.7 region (Figure 7F).
This suggests that the 1intro1.7 region contains an

Natale et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:330
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/330

Page 12 of 19

Figure 7 The activity of Ciona CiHox1 cis-elements in transgenic chicken embryos. A-B) Dorsal view of chicken embryos electroporated
with 1UP1.4 construct with 1UP1.4 plus Hoxb1 expression constructs. 1UP1.4 activity is restricted to rhombomere 4 (A) and is expanded by
Hoxb1 overexpression (B). C) As control, the mouse mb1 element is expressed in r4. D) Hoxb1 overexpression induces mb1 expanded activation
in the whole hindbrain. E, F) Chicken embryos showing 1intro1.7 construct expression in the rhomboencephalon. F) 1intro1.7 activity is not
influenced by Hoxb1 overexpression.

Natale et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:330
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/330

Page 13 of 19

unknown but conserved specific regulatory potential
which is not Hox/Pbx dependent and thus different
from that of the 1UP1.4 DNA fragment. It could be a
neural RARE element that Kanda et al. (2009) hypothesized be present in this genomic region [29].
In silico analyses of Ciona, amphioxus and mouse
regulatory sequences

By using the Ciona, amphioxus and mouse regulatory
sequences, we performed an in silico analysis to identify
similarity with potential binding sites for known transcription factors included in the Transfac Professional
Database 11.4 [43]. In this analysis we considered the
sequences listed in Table 1. In particular, we considered
the Ciona 1UP1.4, 2D0.8 and 4UP1.3 and the mouse
mb1 and ma3 sequences tested in this work, we also
included the mouse mb2, ma2 and mb1RARE that did
not show any expression in Ciona embryos and the
CiHox3 fragment of 2.3 kb (1CiHox3), studied by Locascio et al. [15] and active in Ciona sensory vesicle and
visceral ganglion. We first determined the potential
binding sites for different classes of transcription factors
present in each sequence identifying similarity to varied
consensus patterns belonging to each class. Then we
identified those consensus sequences belonging to common classes of TF binding sites using an “in house” program to process the results obtained by the similarity
search approach [32]. In particular, we grouped these
sequences on the basis of common expression profiles
in Ciona or vertebrate embryos (Table 1). We compared
all the sequences that are active in Ciona sensory vesicle
(1UP1.4, 2D0.8, 1CiHox3, 4UP1.3 and the mouse mb1).
The binding sites that are common to all of them have
been extracted (see Additional File 1: Table S1). We,
then, analyzed the other mouse regulatory sequences
not active in the sensory vesicle for the presence of the
same binding sites. As shown in Table 2 after grouping
all the binding sites belonging to the same class of transcription factor, only four binding sites are common to
all the genomic fragments active in the sensory vesicle
(white background). Furthermore, GR, HSF and LEF-1
sites are also present in the other mouse sequences that
are not active in Ciona sensory vesicle (grey

background). The only binding site common to all the
sequences expressed in the sensory vesicle, but not
detected in the other regulatory elements is Pax6. Pax6
is a transcription factor expressed in the sensory vesicle
of Ciona embryos but it does not seem to be involved
in Hox gene regulation. It is possible that the position of
the Pax6 binding sites in regions that exert primary
roles in controlling the expression profile of these Hox
genes has led to their conservation in Ciona and
vertebrates.
When analyzing the binding sites common to
amphioxus 2B and Ciona 2D0.5 elements, we identified
several Ets sites in the 2B sequence. However, these
motifs were not detected in the 2D0.5 sequence when
minimizing the error rates for both the false positive
and the false negative matches. Therefore we reanalysed
the 2D0.5 sequence using different parameter settings
[43]. In this case, the Ets binding sites were now
detected in the 2D0.5 fragment but, the Ets identified
on the 2B sequence do not correspond to the region
characterized as functionally active [42]. We then compared these two sequences considering non redundant
patterns as parameter settings but, again, the patterns in
the 2B sequence do not correspond to the functional
Ets sites.
These results suggest that non canonical Ets sites are
present in the 2B sequence and that, despite the perfect
coincidence of expression of the Ciona and amphioxus
Hox2 genomic fragments, the low levels of sequence
conservation do not permit the unambiguous identification of the corresponding functional sequence(s) in the
Ciona 2D0.5 element.
The expression of Ciona CiHox1 (1UP1.4) and CiHox3
(1CiHox3) regulatory sequences in rhombomere 4 of
transgenic vertebrates reproduced the profile of Hox/
Pbx regulatory complexes common to mouse mb1, mb2
and ma2 enhancers. We then, searched these Ciona
sequences for possible Hox/Pbx/Meis binding sites and
compared them with that of mouse r4 specific elements
present in the mb1, mb2 and ma2 elements. We then,
also analyzed and compared the regulatory sequences
not specifically active in rhombomere 4 (see Additional
File 2: Table S2). This analysis identified several

Table 2 Binding sites common to all the regulatory sequences active in sensory vesicle
Binding site

1UP1.4

4UP1.3

2D0.8

1CiHox3

mb1

mb2

ma2

ma3

mb1
RARE

GR

2

3

4

3

1

4

2

0

1

HSF

2

5

5

2

3

2

2

1

0

LEF1

2

1

1

1

2

3

0

1

1

Pax6

8

4

3

5

1

0

0

0

0

Ciona and mouse regulatory sequences active in the sensory vesicle (bold character) compared with the dataset not expressed in the sensory vesicle (light
character).

Natale et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:330
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/330

Page 14 of 19

conserved and significant binding sites. The majority of
them are not specific for the sequences expressed in
rhombomere 4, but are also present in the other
sequences analyzed. Interestingly, as shown in Table 3
among all the Pbx and Meis binding sites identified, the
Pbx and Pbx-1b (bold) could be of particular relevance.
They are, in fact, responsible for mouse Hoxb1 specific
expression in rhombomere 4 [35,37] and are present in
both the 1UP1.4 and 1CiHox3 sequences but are absent
in the 1intro1.7 sequence that is not active in r4.

Discussion
Genome sequencing from a variety of vertebrate and
invertebrate organisms revealed that the evolution of
more complex structures is mostly due not only to the
increase in gene numbers but also to the acquisition of
novel regulatory circuits and as consequence of novel
functions by preexisting genes [20]. Under this view, the
conservation or modification of cis-regulatory elements
controlling genes that exert primary roles during
embryonic development can help to explain how vertebrate innovations have been acquired. Of particular
interest is to study the genes involved in the formation
of anterior neural structures where the major differences
can be observed between vertebrates and other chordates. Vertebrates are characterized by both morphologic and genetic key characters of the cephalic structures
and try to understand the mechanisms that led to the
evolution of these neural structures in the chordate lineage represents an intriguing challenge.
We have compared neural specific regulatory elements
of the anterior Hox genes from three different chordate
species, the cephalochordate amphioxus, the urochordate Ciona intestinalis and the vertebrate mouse to
begin to understand the mechanisms that led to the
evolution of neural structures in the chordate lineage. In
this study we have identified and characterized cis-regulatory regions implicated in controlling the neural
expression of Ciona Hox genes from paralogous groups
1-4. Together with our previous work on CiHox3 [15],
we find evidence for 5 regulatory regions that appear to
recapitulate most of the endogenous expression patterns
for CiHox1, CiHox3 and CiHox4 (Figures 1, 2) and are

specifically active in the nervous system. We made
direct comparisons of cis-regulatory regions from the
Ciona, amphioxus and mouse Hox genes in paralogous
groups 1-4 to explore the degree to which their cis-regulatory information has been conserved during evolution. We experimentally tested the ability of various
anterior Hox regulatory elements from amphioxus and
mouse to function in Ciona embryos and Ciona fragments to work in vertebrate embryos. This strategy permitted the identification of conserved sequences and
apparently non conserved sequences that were able to
elicit the same functions in different species. In addition,
this functional comparison permitted the identification
of regulatory regions that would have been impossible
to identify only on the bases of sequence comparison.
Our findings lead to several general observations that
have interesting implications for understanding mechanisms that underlie the control of Hox expression in generating regional characteristics in the anterior nervous
system. These issues will be discussed below.
Cis-regulatory modules that receive input from transcription factors, such as Krox20 and Kreisler, play key
roles in mediating segment-specific activation of Hox
genes in the vertebrate hindbrain. These elements have
not been identified by in silico analysis in Ciona and
amphioxus Hox1-3 regulatory regions. Furthermore, the
mouse Krox20 and Kreisler enhancers present in ma2,
mb2 and ma3 fragments were not functionally active in
Ciona embryos. The same situation occurred with the
mouse Hoxa3 and Hoxb3 enhancers tested by Locascio
et al. [15], where the Kreisler sites have not been recognized by the Ciona regulatory machinery. These results,
together with the observation that amphioxus anterior
Hox genomic fragments are not able to reproduce in
mouse and chicken embryos any Kreisler or Krox specific expression profile [23], indicate that this mode of
activating early Hox expression in the anterior CNS is
not present in Ciona or amphioxus and is specific for
the vertebrate lineage. It appears that Ciona, amphioxus
and vertebrates utilize different sets of factors from each
other to initiate or establish their early domains of Hox
expression, which may reflect differences in their respective embryogenic processes. However, it is possible that

Table 3 Pbx and Meis binding sites in Ciona and mouse regulatory sequences
Binding site

1UP1.4

4UP1.3

2D0.8

1CiHox3

1intro1.7

mb1

mb2

ma2

ma3

mb1RARE

pbx-1b

3

1

2

3

0

2

2

1

0

0

Pbx-1

7

3

2

4

2

1

3

1

4

0

Pbx

1

1

0

1

0

4

1

2

0

0

MEIS1A

2

2

1

6

1

0

4

1

3

0

MEIS1

0

1

0

2

0

0

4

1

0

0

MEIS1B

0

0

0

0

0

0

1

0

0

0

With light characters are indicated the regulatory sequences that do not contain or do not show functionally active Pbx/Meis elements.

Natale et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:330
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/330

there are some overlaps in the signalling pathways that
directly initiate Hox expression or different upstream
factors that in turn activate Hox expression in Ciona,
amphioxus and vertebrates. For example, retinoid signalling directly activates vertebrate group 1 and group 4
Hox genes through RAREs positioned near the genes
[40,44-46], and AmphiHox1 contains RAREs that activate its expression [22,23]. AmphiHox1, 2, 3 and 4 collinear expression in the CNS has been demonstrated to
be controlled by RA-signalling [5]. Furthermore,
amphioxus Hox regulatory elements studied in mouse
and chicken embryos evidenced the existence of conserved retinoic acid dependent neural elements [22,23].
In Ciona, only an epidermal RARE element has been
identified in the CiHox1 gene [29] and we have not
found RAREs in the nervous specific regulatory regions
of Ciona CiHox1-4 genes. In addition, mouse RARE elements contained in the mb1RARE and md4 fragments
do not direct reporter expression in Ciona (data not
shown). This is consistent with reports that Ciona
embryos may have a very reduced ability to respond to
retinoic acid [22,27,28]. In vertebrates, retinoid, FGF
and Wnt signalling can all serve as posteriorizing influences to modulate Hox expression, and the relative
degree to which any one or combination of these pathways contribute to Hox regulation can vary between
species. Therefore, it will be important to assess the
degree to which inputs from these three pathways may
be implicated in regulating initial Hox expression in
Ciona, amphioxus and vertebrates.
Despite the differences in activation of Hox expression,
our analyses indicate that auto- and cross-regulatory
inputs from Hox genes themselves is a conserved
mechanism for maintaining patterns of Hox expression
only in Ciona but not in amphioxus embryos. Regulatory
regions from CiHox1 and CiHox3, which recapitulate
endogenous Ciona expression, serve as Hox response elements. The Ciona CiHox1 (1UP1.4) and CiHox3
(1CiHox3) regulatory sequences when tested in mouse
and chicken embryos generate reporter expression in
rhombomere 4 in a manner similar to the mouse mb1,
mb2 and ma2 enhancers (Table 1). These three mouse
enhancers have been shown to serve as Hox response elements dependent upon the binding of Hox/Pbx and Meis
complexes. Furthermore, when the mouse mb1 enhancer
is tested in Ciona it directs reporter expression in a pattern similar to endogenous CiHox1 expression (Figures
6A, B). We experimentally demonstrated that Ciona
1UP1.4 expression is under the control of Hoxb1/Pbx
regulatory complexes (Figures 7A, B). Furthermore, in
silico comparison of the Ciona sequences reveals multiple Hox/Pbx/Meis binding sites, similar to those found in
the r4 specific regulatory elements from mouse (Table 3).
As control, we also analysed the other mouse enhancers

Page 15 of 19

tested in this study that do not contain functional Hox/
Pbx binding sites and the Ciona elements that are not
expressed in rhombomere 4 (grey background). Together,
these data underscore the important and conserved role
that auto and cross-regulation plays in regulating Hox
expression in the Ciona nervous system. Since Hox proteins can serve to both activate and repress activity, such
Hox response elements might be integrating inputs from
multiple Hox genes to maintain their restricted patterns
following initial activation by different upstream factors.
Most of the amphioxus Hox1-3 regulatory sequences
tested in Ciona embryos did not work at all. The 2B fragment, the only one active in Ciona embryos, directed
expression in the anterior CNS but not in a manner reminiscent of a segment specific profile that is typical of Hox/
Pbx regulatory complexes. These amphioxus elements
have also been tested in vertebrates, but again, none of
them was able to direct any r4 or segment specific expression in chicken or mouse embryos [23]. Despite the lacking of specific experiments with amphioxus Hox1-3
elements and Hox/Pbx complexes, considering the evolutionary position of cephalochordates at the base of chordate origin, these results seem to indicate that this auto
and cross-regulatory mechanism is not present in cephalochordates and thus appeared later in evolution after their
divergence but before the appearance of urochordates.
Among all the Hox genomic fragments tested by electroporation it is evident that the Ciona 1UP1.4, 2D0.8,
4UP1.3, 1CiHox3 and mouse mb1 genomic fragments
contain regulatory elements specifically active in the
CNS of Ciona embryos at level of the sensory vesicle or
of its precursors (Table 1). This expression is not specific to any Ciona Hox gene and illustrates the presence
of multiple elements interspersed among all the anterior
Ciona Hox genes and conserved up to vertebrates. The
in silico analysis of these genomic fragments showed
that a particular Pax6 binding site is present in all these
sequences. All the other Ciona and mouse fragments
that fail to direct reporter expression in the Ciona sensory vesicle lack this recognition sequence, suggesting
that it is important for regulatory activity.
Pax6 in Ciona embryos, is expressed in the sensory
vesicle and in its precursors at tailbud stage [47] and is
therefore a good candidate to explain the common
expression profile of these Ciona and mouse elements.
Considering that the sensory vesicle does not correspond to any Ciona Hox specific territory of expression,
these elements may become active only when extracted
from their natural context, suggesting that repressor elements in the genes normally silence these elements.

Conclusions
We have compared the activity of four Ciona cis-elements located near the CiHox1, CiHox2 and CiHox4

Natale et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:330
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/330

genes and of a CiHox3 element previously identified [15]
with the amphioxus Hox1-3 elements and a series of
mouse neural specific enhancers from Hox paralogous
groups 1-4 which direct segmental expression in the
developing hindbrain. The regulatory potential of all
fragments were tested in transgenic Ciona embryos and
in addition the Ciona CiHox1, CiHox2 and CiHox4 elements have been assayed in chicken embryos for their
ability to be recognised by the vertebrate transcriptional
machinery.
We found that segment-specific neural enhancers
from mouse Hox2 and Hox3 genes dependent upon
Krox20 and kreisler for activity are not functional in
Ciona. Using the regulatory regions functionally identified in Ciona and chicken embryos, we used sequence
analyses to compare the enhancer fragments located in
similar positions which generated related expression
profiles. This approach revealed that some enhancers
serve as Hox response elements through the action of
Hox/Pbx binding motifs. Hence, these enhancers contain cis-elements able to reproduce or maintain the segmental expression patterns typical of Hox genes through
cross- and auto-regulatory influences of the Hox proteins themselves. This component of Hox regulation has
been conserved during chordate evolution and the functional activity reveals that the cis-elements are recognized by the regulatory components and mechanisms of
different and extant species.
In summary, our study together with previous studies
on chordate retinoic acid dependent regulatory regions
[22-24,29] suggests that, during Hox cluster evolution,
retinoic acid responsive elements were already present
in the basal chordate ancestor. They have been maintained from amphioxus to vertebrate [22,24] but extremely reduced and restricted to epidermal tissues in
urochordates [22,29]. Auto- and cross-regulatory elements, that direct segment specific expression in the
CNS under the control of Hox/Pbx and Prep/Meis complexes seem to be not present in amphioxus and may
have appeared later with urochordates. These have then
been conserved in vertebrates, although accompanied
with extensive rearrangements and modifications.
Finally, the Krox20 and Kerisler/Mafb responsive elements responsible for early Hox gene activation and for
highly specific and coordinated expression in vertebrate
hindbrain seem to have evolved along the chordate lineage after urochordates divergence.

Methods
Ascidians and embryos

Ciona intestinalis adults were collected in the Bay of
Naples and cultured by the Marine Resources for
Research Service of the Stazione Zoologica. Embryos
were raised in filtered sea water at 16°-18°C and samples

Page 16 of 19

at appropriate stages of development were fixed for
whole mount in situ hybridization in 4% paraformaldehyde and dehydrated in ethanol series.
Ascidians are non-vertebrate chordate animals and
according to the European committement their manipulation does not need any ethic committee approval.
All experimental work involving vertebrate animals
was performed according to a project and procedures #
2010-0062 approved by the Stowers Institute Animal
Care and Usa Committee (IACUC).
Preparation of Ciona constructs

The basic electroporation vectors were pBlueScript II KS
containing the lacZ and SV40 polyadenylation
sequences downstream of the human b-globin or the
CiHox3 0.2 basal promoters [15]. The CiHox1 genomic
fragments 1UP2.4, 1intro3.6 and 1D1.7 were amplified
by PCR using as template the cosmid clone
MPMGc119H2170 isolated from a cosmid library prepared by the Reference Library Database [48]. The fragments 1UP2.1 and 1UP3.0 were obtained by digestion
from the same cosmid clone by using the XbaI-SmaI
and EcoRI-HindIII restriction enzymes respectively.
The genomic fragments 2UP4.2 and 2D3.1 were
obtained by digestion of the cosmid clones
MPMGc119C0437 and MPMGc119L0224. The fragments 2UP2.2 and 2D1.4 were amplified by PCR from
the same cosmid clones.
Among the genomic fragments of CiHox4 gene, only
the 4UP 3.4 and the 4D2.7 were obtained by digestion
of the cosmid clones MPMGc119D1338 and
MPMGc119B114 respectively. All the other fragments,
4UP2.1, 4D1.2, 4D3.4 and 4D3.7, were amplified by PCR
using the same cosmid clones as template.
All the deleted fragments were obtained by digestion
or PCR amplification of the corresponding larger
fragments.
All the constructs have been controlled by sequence
analysis prior to use. Further information on the constructs and the oligonucleotide sequences used for PCR
amplifications are available upon request.
Preparation of mouse and amphioxus constructs

All the mouse genomic fragments corresponding to: the
EcoRI-HaeIII insert of construct #15 [35] and the
EcoRV-HindIII insert of construct #9 [39] of the Hoxb1
gene; the BglII insert of construct #1 of the Hoxa2 gene
[38]; the BamHI-EcoRI insert of 2.1 kb of the Hoxb2
gene [37]; the EcoRV-AvaII insert of construct #1 of the
Hoxa3 gene; the insert of construct #16 of the Hoxd4
gene [40], were cloned in the basic electroporation vectors described in “preparation of Ciona constructs”.
The amphioxus genomic fragments corresponding to
the 1A, 1B, 2A, 2B, 2C, 3A and 3B constructs [23] were

Natale et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:330
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/330

prepared as described for the mouse fragments. As for
the Ciona constructs also all the mouse and amphioxus
constructs have been controlled by sequence analysis
prior to use.
Ciona embryo electroporation

All the constructs purified on CsCl gradient were electroporated into dechorionated and fertilized Ciona eggs
and assayed for LacZ expression as described [15]. Each
construct has been assayed at least five times in separated experiments and hundreds of Ciona embryos have
been analysed in each experiment. LacZ staining has
been considered specific when reproducing always the
same pattern in at least 80% of positive embryos while
has been considered unspecific when the expression was
so variable that it was not possible to define its extension in a given territory. LacZ expression that did not
reproduce endogenous gene expression has been termed
ectopic. In all the diagrams the double plus indicates a
signal that appears in less than 24 hours of b-galactosidase staining, while the single plus indicates a signal
visible after more than 24 hours.
The Ciona CiHox3 0.2 basal promoter sequence is not
able alone to activate any LacZ expression. The human
b-globin basal promoter activates ectopic LacZ expression only in the mesenchyme.
Gelatin embedded sections were performed as
described [49]. Embryos and sections were photographed by using a Zeiss AxioImager M1 microscope.

Page 17 of 19

In silico analysis

We analysed the potential binding sites for transcription
factors using the Match tool [55]. Match uses a library
of mononucleotide weight matrices from the database
TRANSFAC 11.4 professional [43]. We used the cut-off
to minimize the error rates of both the false positive
and false negative matches. To do so, the software computes the number of matches found in promoter
sequences for each matrix using a cut-off allowing 10%
of false negative matches (minFN10). This number is
defined as 100% of false positives. The sum of corresponding percentages for false positives and false negatives is then computed for every cut-off ranging from
minFN10 to minFP. We refer to the cut-off that gives
the minimum sum as minSum cut-off.
The analyses were performed using an “in house” software developed by the CAB group [56] of the University
of Naples “Federico II”. The software permits the reconciliation of the results from the Match tools and the
detection of common binding sites among sequences.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Table S1. Binding site consensus common to all
the regulatory sequences active in sensory vesicle. List of the specific
binding site consensus together with the transcription factor classes they
belong to and their occurrence in the Ciona and mouse regulatory
sequences.
Additional file 2: Table S2. Pbx and Meis consensus binding sites in
Ciona and mouse regulatory sequences. Distribution of binding sites
consensus from the Pbx and Meis classes in the Ciona and mouse
regulatory sequences.

Chicken embryo electroporation

In ovo electroporation of chicken embryos was performed as previously described [50] and [51]. Plasmid
DNA, prepared from BGZ40 [34] containing Ciona fragments, was co-injected with Fast Green and CMV-GFP
control plasmid (2.5 μg/ul) into the neural tube of Hamburger-Hamilton (HH) stage 4 or 8-10 chicken embryos.
Embryos were electroporated with DNA, allowed to
develop in ovo for an additional 18-20 hours, and
viewed under a fluorescent dissecting microscope to
screen for GFP expression, indicating successful electroporation and expression. Embryos showing GFP expression were stained for b-galactosidase activity. Coelectroporations were performed as described above
with the Hoxb1 expression vector added at a final concentration of 2.5 μg/μl. The mouse mb1 region was
used as a positive control for these experiments [52].
In situ hybridization

The CiHox1, CiHox4 and Stac cDNA clones were from
the Ciona gene collection of the Ghost Database, ID:
citb014p24, ciad029a11 and ciad017p01 respectively
[53]. Whole mount in situ hybridizations were performed as described [54].

List of abbreviations
CNS: central nervous system; e: epidermis; mp: mesenchymal pockets; nc:
nerve cord; ns: nervous system; p: palps; ph: pharynx; sv: sensory vesicle; tlc:
trunk lateral cells; tsn: tail sensory neurons; vg: visceral ganglion.
Acknowledgements and Funding
We would like to thank Francesco Maione and Francesca Russo for
participation in constructs preparation. We thank the Molecular Biology
Service of the Stazione Zoologica for sequences, oligonucleotides and other
technical support. Part of this work was support by research funds from the
Stowers Institute for Medical Research awarded to Robb Krumlauf.
Author details
Laboratory of Cellular and Developmental Biology, Stazione Zoologica
Anton Dohrn, Villa Comunale, Naples, Italy. 2Stowers Institute for Medical
Research, Kansas City, MO 64110, USA. 3Department of Soil, Plant,
Environmental and Animal Production Sciences, University of Naples
“Federico II”, Via Università 100, Portici, Italy. 4Department of Structural and
Functional Biology, University of Naples “Federico II”, Via Cinthia, Naples, Italy.
5
Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Kansas University Medical School,
Kansas City, KS 66160, USA. 6Molecular Cardiovascular Biology, MLC 7020
Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, 3333 Burnet Avenue,
Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.
1

Authors’ contributions
AN, AM and ED prepared all the Ciona constructs and AN also performed
the electroporation experiments in Ciona embryos. CS performed all the
experiments in chicken embryos and MLC was responsible for the in silico

Natale et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:330
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/330

analyses. MB and LF discussed the results, RK directed the studies in chicken
embryos and supervised manuscript organization and revision, AL
coordinated the project and wrote the manuscript. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript.
Received: 20 June 2011 Accepted: 15 November 2011
Published: 15 November 2011
References
1. Krumlauf R: Evolution of the vertebrate Hox homeobox genes. Bioessays
1992, 14(4):245-252.
2. Duboule D: The rise and fall of Hox gene clusters. Development 2007,
134(14):2549-2560.
3. Ferrier DE: Evolution of Hox complexes. Adv Exp Med Biol 2010,
689:91-100.
4. Cameron RA, Rowen L, Nesbitt R, Bloom S, Rast JP, Berney K, ArenasMena C, Martinez P, Lucas S, Richardson PM, Davidson EH, Peterson KJ,
Hood L: Unusual gene order and organization of the sea urchin Hox
cluster. J Exp Zool B Mol Dev Evol 2006, 306B(1):45-58.
5. Schubert M, Holland ND, Laudet V, Holland LZ: A retinoic acid-Hox
hierarchy controls both anterior/posterior patterning and neuronal
specification in the developing central nervous system of the
cephalochordate amphioxus. Dev Biol 2006, 296(1):190-202.
6. Wada H, Garcia-Fernandez J, Holland PWH: Colinear and segmental
expression of amphioxus Hox genes. Dev Biol 1999, 213(1):131-141.
7. Minguillón C, Gardenyes J, Serra E, Castro L, Hill-Force A, Holland P,
Amemiya C, Garcia-Fernàndez J: No more than 14: the end of the
amphioxus Hox cluster. Int J Biol Sci 2005, 1(1):19-23.
8. Amemiya CT, Prohaska SJ, Hill-Force A, Cook A, Wasserscheid J, Ferrier DE,
Pascual-Anaya J, Garcia-Fernandez J, Dewar K, Stadler PF: The amphioxus
Hox cluster: characterization, comparative genomics, and evolution. J
Exp Zool B Mol Dev Evol 2008, 310(5):465-477.
9. Holland LZ, Albalat R, Azumi K, Benito-Gutierrez E, Blow MJ, BronnerFraser M, Brunet F, Butts T, Candiani S, Dishaw LJ, Ferrier DE, GarciaFernandez J, Gibson-Brown JJ, Gissi C, Godzik A, Hallbook F, Hirose D,
Hosomichi K, Ikuta T, Inoko H, Kasahara M, Kasamatsu J, Kawashima T,
Kimura A, Kobayashi M, Kozmik Z, Kubokawa K, Laudet V, Litman GW,
McHardy AC, et al: The amphioxus genome illuminates vertebrate origins
and cephalochordate biology. Genome Res 2008, 18(7):1100-1111.
10. Spagnuolo A, Ristoratore F, Di Gregorio A, Aniello F, Branno M, Di Lauro R:
Unusual number and genomic organization of Hox genes in the
tunicate Ciona intestinalis. Gene 2003, 309(2):71-79.
11. Wada S, Tokuoka M, Shoguchi E, Kobayashi K, Di Gregorio A, Spagnuolo A,
Branno M, Kohara Y, Rokhsar D, Levine M, Saiga H, Satoh N, Satou Y: A
genomewide survey of developmentally relevant genes in Ciona
intestinalis-II. Genes for homeobox transcription factors. Dev Genes Evol
2003, 213(5-6):222-234.
12. Seo HC, Edvardsen RB, Maeland AD, Bjordal M, Jensen MF, Hansen A,
Flaat M, Weissenbach J, Lehrach H, Wincker P, Reinhardt R, Chourrout D:
Hox cluster disintegration with persistent anteroposterior order of
expression in Oikopleura dioica. Nature 2004, 431(7004):67-71.
13. Ikuta T, Yoshida N, Satoh N, Saiga H: Ciona intestinalis Hox gene cluster:
Its dispersed structure and residual colinear expression in development.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2004, 101(42):15118-15123.
14. Gionti M, Ristoratore F, Di Gregorio A, Aniello F, Branno M, Di Lauro R:
Cihox5, a new Ciona intestinalis Hox related gene, is involved in
regionalization of the spinal cord. Dev Genes Evol 1998, 207(8):515-523.
15. Locascio A, Aniello F, Amoroso A, Manzanares M, Krumlauf R, Branno M:
Patterning the ascidian nervous system: structure, expression and
transgenic analysis of the CiHox3 gene. Development 1999,
126(21):4737-4748.
16. Locascio A, Ristoratore F, Spagnuolo A, Zanetti L, Branno M: Genetic
perspectives on the ascidian central nervous system. Inv Surv J 2009,
6(1S):S35-S45.
17. Maconochie M, Nonchev S, Morrison A, Krumlauf R: Paralogous Hox genes:
function and regulation. Annu Rev Genet 1996, 30:529-556.
18. Lumsden A: Segmentation and compartition in the early avian hindbrain.
Mech Dev 2004, 121(9):1081-1088.
19. Kessel M, Gruss P: Homeotic transformations of murine vertebrae and
concomitant alteration of Hox codes induced by retinoic acid. Cell 1991,
67(1):89-104.

Page 18 of 19

20. Shimeld SM, Holland PW: Vertebrate innovations. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2000, 97(9):4449-4452.
21. Pascual-Anaya J, D’Aniello S, Garcia-Fernandez J: Unexpectedly large
number of conserved noncoding regions within the ancestral chordate
Hox cluster. Dev Genes Evol 2008, 218(11-12):591-597.
22. Wada H, Escriva H, Zhang S, Laudet V: Conserved RARE localization in
amphioxus Hox clusters and implications for Hox code evolution in the
vertebrate neural crest. Dev Dyn 2006, 235(6):1522-1531.
23. Manzanares M, Wada H, Itasaki N, Trainor PA, Krumlauf R, Holland PWH:
Conservation and elaboration of Hox gene regulation during evolution
of the vertebrate head. Nature 2000, 408(6814):854-857.
24. Holland LZ, Holland ND: Expression of AmphiHox-1 and AmphiPax-1 in
amphioxus embryos treated with retinoic acid: insights into evolution
and patterning of the chordate nerve cord and pharynx. Development
1996, 122(6):1829-1838.
25. Koop D, Holland ND, Semon M, Alvarez S, de Lera AR, Laudet V, Holland LZ,
Schubert M: Retinoic acid signaling targets Hox genes during the
amphioxus gastrula stage: insights into early anterior-posterior
patterning of the chordate body plan. Dev Biol 2010, 338(1):98-106.
26. Canestro C, Postlethwait JH: Development of a chordate anteriorposterior axis without classical retinoic acid signaling. Dev Biol 2007,
305(2):522-538.
27. Nagatomo K, Fujiwara S: Expression of Raldh2, Cyp26 and Hox-1 in
normal and retinoic acid-treated Ciona intestinalis embryos. Gene Expr
Patterns 2003, 3(3):273-277.
28. Ishibashi T, Usami T, Fujie M, Azumi K, Satoh N, Fujiwara S:
Oligonucleotide-based microarray analysis of retinoic acid target genes
in the protochordate, Ciona intestinalis. Dev Dyn 2005, 233(4):1571-1578.
29. Kanda M, Wada H, Fujiwara S: Epidermal expression of Hox1 is directly
activated by retinoic acid in the Ciona intestinalis embryo. Dev Biol 2009,
335(2):454-463.
30. Nonchev S, Maconochie M, Vesque C, Aparicio S, Ariza-McNaughton L,
Manzanares M, Maruthainar K, Kuroiwa A, Brenner S, Charnay P, Krumlauf R:
The conserved role of Krox-20 in directing Hox gene expression during
vertebrate hindbrain segmentation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1996,
93:9339-9345.
31. Manzanares M, Bel-Vialar S, Ariza-McNaughton L, Ferretti E, Marshall H,
Maconochie MM, Blasi F, Krumlauf R: Independent regulation of initiation
and maintenance phases of Hoxa3 expression in the vertebrate
hindbrain involve auto- and cross-regulatory mechanisms. Development
2001, 128(18):3595-3607.
32. Manzanares M, Cordes S, Kwan CT, Sham MH, Barsh GS, Krumlauf R:
Segmental regulation of Hoxb-3 by kreisler. Nature 1997,
387(6629):191-195.
33. Manzanares M, Nardelli J, Gilardi-Hebenstreit P, Marshall H, Giudicelli F,
Martinez-Pastor MT, Krumlauf R, Charnay P: Krox20 and kreisler co-operate
in the transcriptional control of segmental expression of Hoxb3 in the
developing hindbrain. Embo J 2002, 21(3):365-376.
34. Ferretti E, Marshall H, Popperl H, Maconochie M, Krumlauf R, Blasi F:
Segmental expression of Hoxb2 in r4 requires two separate sites that
integrate cooperative interactions between Prep1, Pbx and Hox
proteins. Development 2000, 127(1):155-166.
35. Popperl H, Bienz M, Studer M, Chan SK, Aparicio S, Brenner S, Mann RS,
Krumlauf R: Segmental expression of Hoxb-1 is controlled by a highly
conserved autoregulatory loop dependent upon Exd/Pbx. Cell 1995,
81(7):1031-1042.
36. Tumpel S, Cambronero F, Ferretti E, Blasi F, Wiedemann LM, Krumlauf R:
Expression of Hoxa2 in rhombomere 4 is regulated by a conserved
cross-regulatory mechanism dependent upon Hoxb1. Dev Biol 2007,
302(2):646-660.
37. Maconochie MK, Nonchev S, Studer M, Chan SK, Popperl H, Sham MH,
Mann RS, Krumlauf R: Cross-regulation in the mouse HoxB complex: the
expression of Hoxb2 in rhombomere 4 is regulated by Hoxb1. Genes Dev
1997, 11(14):1885-1895.
38. Maconochie MK, Nonchev S, Manzanares M, Marshall H, Krumlauf R:
Differences in Krox20-dependent regulation of Hoxa2 and Hoxb2 during
hindbrain development. Dev Biol 2001, 233(2):468-481.
39. Marshall H, Studer M, Popperl H, Aparicio S, Kuroiwa A, Brenner S,
Krumlauf R: A Conserved retinoic acid response element required for
early expression of the homeobox gene Hoxb-1. Nature 1994,
370(6490):567-571.

Natale et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:330
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/330

Page 19 of 19

40. Morrison A, ArizaMcNaughton L, Gould A, Featherstone M, Krumlauf R:
HOXD4 and regulation of the group 4 paralog genes. Development 1997,
124(16):3135-3146.
41. The Ciona intestinalis genome project. [http://genome.jgi-psf.org/Cioin2/
Cioin2.home.html].
42. Wada H, Kobayashi M, Zhang SC: Ets identified as a trans-regulatory
factor of amphioxus Hox2 by transgenic analysis using ascidian
embryos. Dev Biol 2005, 285(2):524-532.
43. Matys V, Kel-Margoulis OV, Fricke E, Liebich I, Land S, Barre-Dirrie A, Reuter I,
Chekmenev D, Krull M, Hornischer K, Voss N, Stegmaier P, LewickiPotapov B, Saxel H, Kel AE, Wingender E: TRANSFAC and its module
TRANSCompel: transcriptional gene regulation in eukaryotes. Nucleic
Acids Res 2006, , 34 Database: D108-110.
44. Studer M, Gavalas A, Marshall H, Ariza-McNaughton L, Rijli F, Chambon P,
Krumlauf R: Genetic interaction between Hoxa1 and Hoxb1 reveal new
roles in regulation of early hindbrain patterning. Development 1998,
125:1025-1036.
45. Dupé V, Davenne M, Brocard J, Dollé P, Mark M, Dierich A, Chambon P,
Rijli F: In vivo functional analysis of the Hoxa1 3’ retinoid response
element (3’ RARE). Development 1997, 124:399-410.
46. Nolte C, Amores A, Nagy Kovacs E, Postlethwait J, Featherstone M: The role
of a retinoic acid response element in establishing the anterior neural
expression border of Hoxd4 transgenes. Mech Dev 2003, 120:325-335.
47. Irvine SQ, Fonseca VC, Zompa MA, Antony R: Cis-regulatory organization
of the Pax6 gene in the ascidian Ciona intestinalis. Dev Biol 2008,
317(2):649-659.
48. Burgtorf C, Welzel K, Hasenbank R, Zehetner G, Weis S, Lehrach H: Gridded
genomic libraries of different chordate species: a reference library
system for basic and comparative genetic studies of chordate genomes.
Genomics 1998, 52(2):230-232.
49. Locascio A, Manzanares M, Blanco MJ, Nieto MA: Modularity and
reshuffling of Snail and Slug expression during vertebrate evolution.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2002, 99(26):16841-16846.
50. Itasaki N, Bel-Vialar S, Krumlauf R: ’Shocking’ developments in chick
embryology: electroporation and in ovo gene expression. Nat Cell Biol
1999, 1(8):E203-207.
51. Inoue T, Krumlauf R: An impulse to the brain–using in vivo
electroporation. Nat Neurosci 2001, , 4 Suppl: 1156-1158.
52. Tümpel S, Cambronero F, Ferretti E, Blasi F, Wiedemann LM, Krumlauf R:
Expression of Hoxa2 in rhombomere 4 is regulated by a conserved
cross-regulatory mechanism dependent upon Hoxb1. Dev Biol 2007,
302(2):646-660.
53. Satou Y, Kawashima T, Shoguchi E, Nakayama A, Satoh N: An integrated
database of the ascidian, Ciona intestinalis: towards functional
genomics. Zoolog Sci 2005, 22(8):837-843.
54. Caracciolo A, Gesualdo I, Branno M, Aniello F, Di Lauro R, Palumbo A:
Specific cellular localization of tyrosinase mRNA during Ciona intestinalis
larval development. Dev Growth Differ 1997, 39(4):437-444.
55. Kel AE, Gossling E, Reuter I, Cheremushkin E, Kel-Margoulis OV,
Wingender E: MATCH: A tool for searching transcription factor binding
sites in DNA sequences. Nucleic Acids Res 2003, 31(13):3576-3579.
56. Chiusano ML: The Computer Aided Biosciences group.[http://www.cab.
unina.it/].
doi:10.1186/1471-2148-11-330
Cite this article as: Natale et al.: Evolution of anterior Hox regulatory
elements among chordates. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011 11:330.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
