<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Premature terminator analysis sheds light on a hidden world of bacterial transcriptional attenuation</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Genome Biology 2010, 11:R97. doi:10.1186/gb-2010-11-9-r97"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Magali Naville"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Naville and Gautheret Genome Biology 2010, 11:R97
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/9/R97

RESEARCH

Open Access

Premature terminator analysis sheds light on a
hidden world of bacterial transcriptional
attenuation
Magali Naville, Daniel Gautheret*

Abstract
Background: Bacterial transcription attenuation occurs through a variety of cis-regulatory elements that control
gene expression in response to a wide range of signals. The signal-sensing structures in attenuators are so diverse
and rapidly evolving that only a small fraction have been properly annotated and characterized to date. Here we
apply a broad-spectrum detection tool in order to achieve a more complete view of the transcriptional attenuation
complement of key bacterial species.
Results: Our protocol seeks gene families with an unusual frequency of 5’ terminators found across multiple
species. Many of the detected attenuators are part of annotated elements, such as riboswitches or T-boxes, which
often operate through transcriptional attenuation. However, a significant fraction of candidates were not previously
characterized in spite of their unmistakable footprint. We further characterized some of these new elements using
sequence and secondary structure analysis. We also present elements that may control the expression of several
non-homologous genes, suggesting co-transcription and response to common signals. An important class of such
elements, which we called mobile attenuators, is provided by 3’ terminators of insertion sequences or prophages
that may be exapted as 5’ regulators when inserted directly upstream of a cellular gene.
Conclusions: We show here that attenuators involve a complex landscape of signal-detection structures spanning
the entire bacterial domain. We discuss possible scenarios through which these diverse 5’ regulatory structures may
arise or evolve.

Background
Transcription of protein-coding genes does not always
lead to the production of full length mRNAs. In both
eukaryotes and bacteria, transcriptome analysis is revealing high levels of short transcripts that result from either
unsuccessful initiation events or premature termination
[1-4]. In eukaryotes, the functions of such events remain
unelucidated, except for a few cases [5], and abortive
transcription is still largely considered as transcriptional
‘noise’. In Bacteria however, a form of abortive transcription known as transcription attenuation has emerged as
an important regulatory strategy. The basic principle of
transcriptional attenuation is the folding of the RNA
transcript into either of two alternative structures, one of
them corresponding to a Rho-independent terminator.
* Correspondence: daniel.gautheret@u-psud.fr
Université Paris-Sud, CNRS, UMR8621, Institut de Génétique et Microbiologie,
Bâtiment 400, F-91405 Orsay Cedex, France

The expression/repression decision occurs through a
sensing system located between the promoter and the
first start codon of the operon, and depends on interactions modulated by a variety of signals. The type of signal
detected is commonly used to classify attenuators into
major families: riboswitches bind small metabolites [6-8],
T-boxes bind tRNAs [9,10], and other types of 5’ leaders
respond to protein factors [11-13] or temperature
[14-16]. The triggering signals, by reflecting the global
physiological state of the cell, enable a continuous monitoring of operon expression requirements.
A number of computational strategies have been proposed for attenuator prediction. The most general
approaches consist of the identification of mutually
exclusive RNA secondary structures [17,18], with the
limitation that they miss non-hairpin anti-terminators
such as riboswitches whose anti-terminator corresponds
to a much larger secondary structure. Other and more

© 2010 Naville and Gautheret; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Naville and Gautheret Genome Biology 2010, 11:R97
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/9/R97

specific studies have been devoted to the screening of
particular classes of attenuators, such as riboswitches
[19-21], T-boxes [9] or leader peptide systems [22].
These screening strategies use either covariance models
[19,20] or descriptors combining sequence and structure
motifs [23], which are designed to detect conspicuous,
class-specific signatures. Signatures can be, for instance,
an RNA fold, a conserved sequence, or the presence of
a short ORF [22]. Such screens based on sequence or
structure recognition identify highly conserved members
of a family and, eventually, closely related variants. For
instance, five distinct riboswitch families have been
described that all sense S-adenosyl methionine (SAM I
[24-26], SAM II [27], SAM III [28], SAM IV [29] and
SAM V [30]).
In bacterial species, up to 10% of operons may be
regulated by transcription attenuation [17]. In agreement with this assessment, we showed in a previous
study [31] that a mean of 1.6% of all bacterial genes
could be subject to attenuation, with a maximum of
2.6% in Firmicutes. However, knowledge on transcriptional attenuation is unevenly distributed: almost none
of the predicted attenuators in phyla such as Chlamydiae or Acidobacteria have associated functions, whereas
16% are already annotated in Firmicutes. As previous
attenuator screens were mostly based on similarity
searches, known families often present a marked homogeneity and lack many evolutionarily isolated instances.
Moreover, they exclude entire classes of elements that
are either too short or too variable to produce signatures strong enough for a similarity search.
To fully explore the variety of attenuation systems, we
need strategies that do not rely initially on sequence or
structure homology. We developed a protocol that first
screens all potential Rho-independent terminators in the
5’ region of genes in multiple bacterial genomes and, in
a second stage, extracts significant elements using two
types of procedures: a synteny-based procedure that
seeks gene families with unusually frequent 5’ terminators; and a non-syntenic procedure that seeks sequences
conserved among multiple putative terminators. Synteny
analysis alone was able to pick up every class of known
attenuation system, which are generally the most widespread, while allowing the prediction of numerous new
instances. A major benefit of this strategy lies in the
evolutionary insight it provides on attenuator families,
as we illustrate below for five families of particular interest found throughout the 302 species surveyed. We
further characterized new attenuators, in particular in
Escherichia coli and Bacillus subtilis, using sequencebased analysis. Our results demonstrate that attenuator
characterization can be largely improved even in widely
analyzed model species.

Page 2 of 17

Results and discussion
5’ terminators are less stable than 3’ terminators and
unevenly distributed among species

We combined two methods for Rho-independent terminator prediction using either position weight matrices
[32] or descriptors [33] to detect potential terminators
in the 5’ and 3’ UTRs in 302 bacterial genomes (see
Materials and methods for details). As already documented [34], the overall usage of Rho-independent terminators fluctuates among species, with a maximum in
Firmicutes (approximately 2,689 predictions in Bacillus
cereus) and a minimum in Actinobacteria (30 predictions in Nocardioides sp.) or in certain atypical species
such as the proteobacteria Ehrlichia ruminantium (8 predictions), an obligate intracellular pathogenic organism.
Controls performed using randomized UTR sequences
indicate a low false positive rate in both 5’ and 3’ UTRs
(2.3% and 2.5%, respectively; see Materials and methods). Based on experimentally verified B. subtilis operons, we estimate that our protocol would retrieve about
88% of 3’ terminators [35].
To identify putative attenuators, we applied additional
filters to the set of 5’ terminators, based on orientation
and distance relative to flanking genes. In our set of 302
bacterial genomes, this led to the identification of
15,930 putative attenuators, 1,004 of them overlapping
sequences previously annotated as ORFs encoding short
hypothetical proteins. In B. subtilis, this protocol
detected 32 of 57 (56%) known attenuation systems
(riboswitches, T-boxes and other elements).
Terminators found in 5’ UTR regions are thermodynamically less stable than 3’ terminators (average folding
free energy of -16.5 kcal versus -20.2 kcal/mol, P < 2e16) and their average stem length is slightly shorter (7.0
versus 7.6 bp, P < 2e-16). As seen above, this difference
cannot be imputed to a higher false discovery rate in 5’
UTR, although it is in agreement with expected properties of structures that must fold alternatively; all known
5’ regulatory terminators allow an alternative readthrough, which is not the case for 3’ terminators. Interestingly, 5’ terminators do not seem to be evolutionarily
more conserved in sequence than 3’ terminators. Analyzing data from a recent screen for non-coding conserved elements in bacteria [36], we observed that 58%
of 5’ terminators, versus 66% of 3’ terminators, overlap a
conserved region. This suggests that 5’ terminators are
not associated with conserved sequences more often
than canonical terminators.
Synteny analysis reveals more than 50 gene families
subject to frequent attenuation control

We classified 5’ terminators based on homology relationships between downstream genes, an operation that

Naville and Gautheret Genome Biology 2010, 11:R97
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/9/R97

amounts to seeking syntenic attenuator/gene pairs. This
method is related to that of Merino and Yanofsky [17],
who sought over-represented families of orthologous
genes flanking putative attenuators. These authors
defined attenuators based on mutually exclusive stems,
while we look for single terminator motifs. In principle
our approach should be more sensitive to transcriptional
attenuators as some achieve their alternative state
through contacts with external factors and do not
require stable alternative base pairing. On the other
hand, Merino and Yanofsky were able to detect translational attenuators, which we do not detect here.
To identify protein families showing a greater propensity for regulation by transcriptional attenuation, we
used the Hogenom database of gene families [37] and
ranked families based on numbers of 5’ terminators. In
a first procedure, we scored gene families according to
absolute numbers of predicted attenuators across all
species without any consideration of gene family size,
which favored large families of paralogs (Table S0 in
Additional file 1). To avoid bias towards large paralog
families, we used a second scoring procedure where
gene families were ranked according to their frequencies
and species distribution (Figure 1). The significance of
attenuator enrichment was confirmed independently for
each family. Scores, P-values and family information are
shown in Table S1 in Additional file 1. Our syntenybased scoring eliminates over 90% of the false positives
corresponding to terminators of independent small RNA
genes. While 2.2% (343 elements) of the total 15,930
predicted 5’ terminators map to annotated small RNAs,
this fraction is reduced to 0.16% (3 out of 1,845) when
considering only attenuator candidates from the 65
high-ranking families. Therefore, although some terminators of independent RNA genes are included in our
initial screen, most of them are dismissed when we consider high-scoring gene families. Finally, we analyzed
sequence conservation to detect possible functional elements associated with attenuators. To this aim, we performed pairwise sequence comparison of the terminator
regions, followed by hierarchical clustering. Attenuator
elements harboring a sequence conserved in at least two
species are listed in Table S2 in Additional file 1 for the
first 30 attenuator families.
We assessed prior knowledge of attenuator regulation in
each gene family through a systematic literature survey
and comparison to the Rfam RNA family database [38]
and to the RegulonDB database of E. coli transcriptional
networks [39]. The high incidence of known terminator
systems among high-ranking families in Figure 1 underscores the specificity of our detection method. Forty-two
out of 65 high-ranking families (65%) were already
described as attenuator-regulated in at least one species,
covering virtually all known classes of attenuator

Page 3 of 17

systems (Figure 1). This proportion reaches 100% for
the first 20 families. Within known attenuator families,
however, a large fraction of elements were not described
previously: 67% of elements are unannotated in the top
30 families. Furthermore, several major families of
attenuators are essentially uncharacterized: 27 out of 65
are completely uncharacterized or are less than 1% characterized. In the following sections we describe five previously uncharacterized attenuator families, selected
either because they are particularly widespread or functionally interesting or because they display intriguing
phylogenetic patterns.
The rimP-leader: the most ubiquitous transcription
attenuator

The rimP gene ranks first in our list of genes most often
regulated by attenuation (Figure 1). rimP, previously
known as yhbC in E. coli and ylxS in B. subtilis, encodes
a protein recently shown to be involved in 30S ribosomal subunit maturation [40]. It is the first gene of an
operon encompassing the nusA and infB genes, which
are present in almost all bacteria. While infB encodes
the translation initiation factor IF-2, the NusA protein is
characterized as a transcriptional pausing, readthrough,
termination and anti-termination factor, and is shown to
participate in the Rho-dependent anti-termination complex [41].
Analysis of predicted attenuators in rimP-nusA-infB
operons (Figure 2b) revealed the presence of a short and
highly conserved motif corresponding to the terminator,
the ‘rimP-leader’, but gave no evidence of larger conserved elements characteristic of riboswitches, T-boxes
or ribosomal protein-dependent attenuators. The terminator stem contains an unusual highly conserved GGGc
(...)gCCC motif. We were unable to detect such a
conserved motif in any other 5’ or 3’ terminator, suggesting this sequence signature is specific to the rimPleader. We could find, however, the same motif along
with the downstream U-stretch in many 5’ UTRs of
rimP-nusA-infB operons where no terminator structure
was detected (Supplementary data 1 in Additional file
1). These additional motifs were missed because the
potential hairpin was too short for detection with our
programs, consistent with our previous observation that
regulatory terminators are less stable than regular terminators. The distance separating the terminator from the
gene start varies between 4 and 130 nucleotides, and
may consequently encompass the ribosome-binding site
(RBS). In several Gammaproteobacteria (listed in Supplementary data 1 in Additional file 1), the rimP-leader
appears more complex, with a second terminator found
in tandem and upstream of the former (Figure 2a), and
presenting a clear potential anti-terminator structure.
Interestingly, this terminator presents a CCCg(...)
cGGG motif, inverse to the downstream motif.

Naville and Gautheret Genome Biology 2010, 11:R97
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/9/R97

Page 4 of 17

Figure 1 Sixty-five families of genes most frequently controlled by attenuation. For each gene family described on the left, the histogram
bar shows the fraction of candidates already described in the Rfam database or in the literature. The green curve corresponds to the cumulated
portion of families with at least one described candidate, from the first family to the 65th. The red curve indicates the absolute number of
candidates in each family.

Naville and Gautheret Genome Biology 2010, 11:R97
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/9/R97

Page 5 of 17

Figure 2 The rimP-leader. Highlighted boxes indicate putative ribosome binding sites. (a) rimP-leader identified in several
Gammaproteobacteria (listed in Supplementary data 1 in Additional file 1), composed of a putative termination/antitermination structure (shown
by thick arrows under the sequence) followed by the general rimP-leader motif described in the text. (b) rimP-leader found in the majority of
species, including Firmicutes and Gammaproteobacteria. This leader sequence consists of a hairpin that is G-rich on its 5’ arm and C-rich on its 3’
arm, followed by the T-stretch characterizing Rho-independent terminators. The black arrow indicates the transcription start site recently
detected by deep sequencing [46]. Sequence logos were produced using Weblogo [81].

High sequence conservation in the rimP-leader terminator stem and the absence of any visible antiterminator
structure argue for regulation involving a termination or
anti-termination protein that can specifically recognize a
nucleic-acid motif [12,13]. If feedback control by RimP,
now known to interact with rRNA [40], may be
hypothesized, the best candidate for this direct interaction is probably the NusA protein, the expression of
which was shown 25 years ago to repress expression of
the operon [42,43]. NusA contains an amino-terminal
domain that interacts with RNA polymerase, an S1
domain frequent in RNA-associated proteins, and two
RNA-binding K homology (KH) domains [44]. It was
already shown to be involved in the attenuation of the
Trp, His and S10 operons [45] by interacting with the
upstream arm of the terminator hairpin, but the RNA
motif we describe here was not observed in these
instances.
While this manuscript was under review, a deep
sequencing study of 5’ regulators in B. subtilis [46]
observed that transcripts encoding certain core transcription elongation subunits, including ylxS (that is,
rimP), appear to contain a long 5’ leader region. The
authors suggested these regions may contain elements
regulating the associated genes. The 180-nucleotide leader they observed by deep sequencing in B. subtilis
rimP transcripts indeed covers the attenuator we predict
for this gene (Figure 2).

The rpsL-leader: a multiform ribosomal protein leader

The rpsL gene also appears at the top of the list of
genes frequently regulated by transcriptional attenuation
(Figure 1). Like rimP, it belongs to an operon of largely
conserved genes, rpsL and rpsG, encoding the ribosomal
proteins S12 and S7 respectively, and fusA and tufA,
encoding the elongation factors EF-G and EF-Tu,
respectively. Sequence-based clustering allowed us to
identify variants among the different ‘rpsL-leaders’
(Table S2 in Additional file 1). We derived consensus
structures for several of these elements and were able to
find potential alternative antiterminator structures in
each case (Figure 3).
The translation of rpsL and rpsG was already shown
to be controlled by S7, the product of rpsG, in E. coli
[47], and Merino and Yanofsky [17] predicted putative
transcription attenuators upstream of rpsL in 24 species.
However, their results scantly overlap our own predictions: we have only four common candidates, while we
scanned 22 of their 24 species. The occurrences we
missed with our protocol involved non-canonical terminators (with a long, GC-poor and/or bulged hairpin), or
terminators that were too far from the ATG to meet
our distance filter (8 of 18 cases).
The persistence of an attenuator element upstream of
rpsL in widely divergent species argues for a common
origin. However, we found no globally conserved feature, neither in sequence nor in structure, associated

Naville and Gautheret Genome Biology 2010, 11:R97
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/9/R97

Page 6 of 17

Figure 3 The rpsL-leader. Representative structures are shown for reference species, each corresponding to the consensus terminal structure of
elements found in closely related species. Boxes indicate terminator T-stretches. Black arrows indicate putative anti-terminator structures. (a) Elements
found upstream of the rpsL gene in Listeria, Xanthomonas, Pseudomonas and Rickettsia genera. (b) rpsL-leader found upstream of the gene fusA in
streptococci.

with this attenuator. This probably explains why no
common structure has been proposed for the rpsLleader previously. In the Streptococcus genus, we found
no attenuator upstream of rpsL, contrary to Merino’s
analysis, which found one (this terminator is too far
from the ATG codon (189 nucleotides) to satisfy our

distance filter). However, we found a candidate further
downstream between rpsG and fusA in streptococci (Figure 3b). It is possible that two similar elements are present in this operon, since Meyer et al. [48] found two
similar RNA structures upstream of rpsL and fusA in the
Proteobacteria Candidatus Pelagibacter ubique. This

Naville and Gautheret Genome Biology 2010, 11:R97
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/9/R97

would be consistent with co-regulation of the two genes.
The element identified in [48], however, does not meet
our terminator criteria and does not present any common
sequence feature with any of our predicted attenuators.
Is the structure and sequence diversity in rpsL-leaders
compatible with an interaction with the same S7 protein
partner in all species? The highly flexible RNA binding
portion of S7 [49] could tolerate some variation in RNA
targets or, alternatively, the leader may bind different
protein partners. In the current view of ribosomal protein leaders, each leader family displays a characteristic
motif that mimics corresponding binding sites in ribosomal RNA. This view may be too restrictive and the
example of rpsL suggests that the modalities of interaction may differ across distant phyla.
ABC-leaders: conferring specificity to regulatory elements

ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporters constitute one of
the largest and most ancient protein families, with hundreds of paralogs transporting a wide variety of substrates
across the plasmic membrane, including ions, amino acids,
lipids and drugs [50,51]. In Bacteria, these multiproteic
complexes are encoded by operons comprising genes for
ATPase, permease and periplasmic components. A number of them were shown to be regulated by transcriptional
factors [52], whereas very few are known to be subject to
transcriptional attenuation [53]. ABC transporters do not
appear in Figure 1, where scores are weighted for family
size; however, this family presents the highest absolute
number of genes regulated by attenuation (Table S0 in
Additional file 1), with a total of 205 candidates in our
study, and an enrichment P-value of 8.8e-05. Further scrutiny of these candidates is important because of the great
diversity of transporters and potential variability of regulatory elements controlling them. We found different
sequence motifs associated with these ‘ABC-leaders’ (listed
in Table S3 in Additional file 1).
Figure 4 shows five ABC-leaders associated with transporters of either known (Figure 4a-d) or unknown
(Figure 4e) substrates. Each is able to form an antiterminator structure and the conserved sequence/structure
motif (see alignments in Supplementary data 2 in Additional file 1) suggests that it responds to a unique substrate. The candidate shown in Figure 4c is a probable
T-box, but the other candidates do not resemble any
known cis-regulator. Their regulatory mechanisms thus
remain to be determined. The size of the conserved
structure is sufficient to form an aptamer that could
directly detect a substrate, thus defining new classes of
riboswitches; however, we cannot exclude an indirect
regulation involving a protein factor. Indeed, a number
a RNA-binding proteins target palindromic RNA [12,13]
that may also act as a terminator hairpin.
The analysis of such a multiple paralog family raises
interesting evolutionary questions on the origin of

Page 7 of 17

associated attenuators, that is, whether they all derive
from an ancient attenuator that would have regulated
the ancestral ABC transporter, or if certain genes of this
family tend to ‘attract’ attenuators for their regulation.
The relatively low proportion of attenuated ABC transporter genes and the ability of attenuators to ‘hop’ from
one gene to another (see below) argue for the second
hypothesis.
Regulators of the hisS genes: switching between sensing
systems

Syntenic attenuation systems do not necessarily use the
same sensing system. There are well known examples of
switches from a T-box or a riboswitch in certain species
(for example, Firmicutes) to a leader peptide in others
(for example, Proteobacteria) [9,10]. Our protocol,
which does not require a conserved RNA sequence or
structure, is well suited to detect such exchanges, and at
least five are present in our list of frequently attenuated
genes (Figure 1).
A particularly striking case of switch between sensing
systems is provided by the hisS gene (Figure 5). In the
Bacillus genus, hisS, encoding the histidyl-tRNA synthetase, has been long known to be regulated by a T-box,
like many other tRNA synthetases [9]. This gene, however, underwent two successive duplications: a recent
one that appears specific to bacilli, and a more ancestral
one that occurred before divergence of the Proteobacteria and Firmicutes. Interestingly, all three paralogs
now found in bacilli are predicted to be regulated by a
different type of attenuator, as shown in Figure 5. In
addition to the known hisS T-box, we found novel
attenuators upstream of hisS* (the Bacillus hisS paralog)
and hisZ, encoding an ATP phosphoribosyltransferase
regulatory subunit.
We performed a sequence-based clustering of the 5’
UTR regions in the hisS family to identify sets of related
motifs (Figure 5). The 5’ UTRs of hisZ and of hisS* have
highly similar sequences that include short ORFs
encompassing a stretch of histidine codons. This
strongly argues for the presence of a histidine leader
peptide regulating both genes. To our knowledge, no
leader peptide system had been shown to exist outside
of Proteobacteria [22] and Actinobacteria [54], if we
exclude the atypical ermC leader [55] that controls
translation and has no amino acid specificity but senses
a global slowdown in translation. This result thus
strengthens the evolutionary relevance of leader peptide
systems and expands the range of RNA-based regulation
in Gram-positive bacteria.
Leader peptides may have spread to Firmicutes by
horizontal transfer. However, we may also hypothesize
that short reading frames may have emerged repeatedly
from random sequences, especially in the favorable cellular environment of species such as those in the

Naville and Gautheret Genome Biology 2010, 11:R97
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/9/R97

Page 8 of 17

Figure 4 ABC-leaders. (a) The ABC-leader found upstream of the potABCD operon, encoding a spermidine/putrescine import system, in the
Gammaproteobacteria Haemophilus somnus and Pasteurella multocida. (b) The ABC-leader found in the lactobacilli Lactobacillus gasseri and
Lactobacillus johnsonii, upstream of a multidrug export system operon. (c) The T-box found in the Firmicutes Enterococcus faecalis and
Lactobacillus sakei, upstream of genes for metal ion and methionine transporters, respectively. (d) The ABC-leader found in bacilli upstream of an
alkanesulfonates transporter operon. (e) The ABC-leader found in bacilli 15-nucleotides upstream of a transporter of unknown specificity.
Candidates are represented using the same conventions as in Figure 3.

Firmicutes phylum. In support of convergent evolution,
no similarity in the non-coding or leader peptide
sequence is observed between the Firmicutes and Proteobacteria. That the two hisS gene duplications are
observed only in certain Firmicutes species suggests a
recent event: a gene resulting from the first duplication
may have evolved or captured an attenuation system
(for example, from a Gram-negative bacteria) before
undergoing a second duplication.
Sequence analysis of hisS attenuators also reveals a
T-box element in Lactobacillales (Figure 5a). Furthermore, we observed one possible horizontal transfer of
attenuator elements from Firmicutes to Gammaproteobacteria: an unknown proteobacterial attenuator, which
corresponds to a sequence encompassing a putative
short ORF, clearly resembles Firmicute T-boxes (Figure
5c, red box). This illustrates the remarkable lability of
attenuator elements, which can be acquired from other
species and subsequently evolve to fit the preferred regulatory mechanisms of their new host.

The related greA- and rnk-leaders

The greA/rnk gene family ranks seventh in our list of
genes frequently regulated by attenuation. Although the
propensity of greA/rnk genes for transcriptional attenuation was detected previously [17], experimental evidence
for an E. coli greA attenuator is recent [4]. The gene
family includes two major paralogs, greA, which encodes
a transcription elongation factor, and rnk, which
encodes a regulator of nucleoside diphosphate kinase.
We found attenuators upstream of these genes in species ranging from Proteobacteria to bacilli and Clostridia. In several species, we identified attenuators in both
genes. Figure 6 shows the result of a sequence-based
clustering of greA/rnk attenuators and secondary structure models for different sequence clusters. In each case,
we were able to detect a clear antiterminator structure;
however, no common feature could be detected between
the greA- and rnk-leaders.
Very interestingly, the limited experimental evidence
available on these two putative cis non-coding RNAs

Naville and Gautheret Genome Biology 2010, 11:R97
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/9/R97

Page 9 of 17

Figure 5 Regulators of the hisS gene family. The dendrogram on the right represents a hierarchical clustering of candidate attenuator
sequences. Clusters of conserved sequences defined by a threshold E-value of 10-4 are framed. Blue frames highlight three groups of paralogs
found in bacilli. Dotted frames indicate candidates previously annotated as short hypothetical proteins (’sORF’). (a) A T-box found upstream of
hisS in lactobacilli. (b) Histidine leader peptide identified in bacilli upstream of two paralogs of hisS. (c) A T-box found upstream of hisS in bacilli
and other species, including isolated Gammaproteobacteria and Chlorobia.

argues for a second mechanism in trans. Potrykus et al.
[4] showed that overexpression of the short form of the
greA transcript, released after attenuation has occurred,
leads to repression of several genes. Furthermore, an
intergenic region corresponding to the rnk-leader was
found in a systematic screening [56] to co-immunoprecipitate with Hfq, a conserved bacterial protein known
to facilitate interaction between small RNAs and their
target mRNA. Although leaders doubling as trans-acting
RNAs is a recent and, for the time being, rare finding
[57], we may have found here two such cases with the
greA- and rnk-leader families.

‘terminator clusters’. We describe here results obtained
in the Enterobacteria (13 species) and Bacillus (8 species) subfamilies. Surveyed species are listed in Table S6
in Additional file 1. We identified a total of 192 and 270
terminator clusters in Enterobacteria and bacilli, respectively. We distinguished clusters based on the nature of
downstream genes. Clusters involving only orthologous
genes overlap the previous analysis and are given in
Tables S4 and S5 in Additional file 1. We focus below
on clusters involving several non-orthologous genes or
groups of genes present in a single or a few related
species.
’Mobile attenuators’ associated with transposable elements

Identification of attenuator ‘regulons’

The term ‘regulon’ or ‘modulon’ [58] has been coined to
describe a set of genes subject to a common regulatory
element. We analyzed attenuator regulons involving
members of one or more gene families. To this intent,
we compared sequences surrounding predicted 5’ terminators across all genes with no consideration for orthology in a set of related species. We then clustered similar
5’ sequences based on pairwise distances in so-called

Forty-six terminator clusters in Enterobacteria and 96
clusters in bacilli are associated with transposable elements. We describe them as ‘mobile attenuators’. Terminator sequences in these clusters show a high level of
conservation, consistent with an origin from transposable elements of recent dissemination. They fall into
two classes. The first class (Figure 7a) corresponds to
terminators located upstream of transposases or other
insertion sequence (IS)-related genes and is mainly

Naville and Gautheret Genome Biology 2010, 11:R97
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/9/R97

Page 10 of 17

Figure 6 The greA- and rnk-leaders. (a) The rnk-leader identified upstream of rnk in Pseudomonas. (b,c) The rnk-leader and greA-leader
identified in Enterobacteria, upstream of rnk and greA, respectively. (d) The greA-leader identified upstream of greA in bacilli. (e) The rnk-leader
identified upstream of rnk in Yersinia. Candidates are represented using the same conventions as in Figure 3.

species-specific. Of note, transposase or IS-related genes
also rank high in the list of frequently attenuated gene
families, when no normalization for family size is
applied (Table S0 in Additional file 1). These genes
belong to transposon families such as ISBma2 (mainly
present in the Betaproteobacteria Burkholderia mallei,
in Bacillus thuringiensis and in the Clostridia Symbiobacterium thermophilum, Thermoanaerobacter tengcongensis and Clostridium novyi), IS3/IS2/IS600/IS1329/
IS407A (found sporadically in all phyla) and ISL3
(mainly present in different Firmicutes species). The second class of mobile attenuators (Figure 7b) represents
families of related transposon-borne sequences located
immediately upstream of different, unrelated cellular
genes.

The emergence of mobile attenuators can be explained
by the structure of the IS containing both 3’ and 5’ transcription terminators [59,60] (Figure 7). Terminators of
the first class correspond to IS 5’ terminators, whose
function is to limit transposon proliferation when
inserted in a coding region under control of an active
promoter. Such transposition events would be deleterious for the host, and consequently for the element’s
own survival. Clusters of conserved attenuators located
upstream of unrelated genes (Figure 7b) may correspond
to 3’ terminators of ISs. The significant proportion (25
to 35%) of conserved terminator clusters that result
from IS transposition suggests they have a significant
impact in genome evolution, particularly in terms of
regulation. The possible pseudogenization of transposed

Naville and Gautheret Genome Biology 2010, 11:R97
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/9/R97

Page 11 of 17

Figure 7 Mobile elements and the emergence of new attenuators. (a) 5’ terminators detected upstream of transposase or insertion
sequence (IS)-related genes correspond to intrinsic IS 5’ elements that prevent expression of the IS when it is inserted in a transcribed region.
(b) ISs also contain intrinsic 3’ terminators that terminate transcription of the 3’-most IS genes. When IS-related genes undergo
pseudogenization, some 3’ terminators may remain active as attenuators of downstream cellular genes (exaptation). As IS insertion may occur at
nearly random genomic sites, similar attenuator candidates may be found upstream of totally unrelated genes.

genes may allow exaptation of their 5’ and/or 3’ terminators and give birth to new regulatory elements
(Figure 7b). It should be noted that this exaptation of
transposable elements for regulatory functions is probably a universal mechanism, as several instances are
already described in eukaryotic genomes [61,62].
Non-insertion sequence related regulons

Ten terminator clusters in Enterobacteria and 23 in
bacilli are found in different species associated with the
same set of non-homologous genes. They may therefore
constitute attenuator regulons (Tables S4 and S5 in
Additional file 1). Several known riboswitches fall in this
class (15 out of 23 clusters in bacilli), which is consistent with the ability of riboswitches to occur upstream
of unrelated genes from distant species. Analysis of
these clusters thus seems promising for the identification of new regulons, although this class also contains
sequences from repeated elements. For instance, the largest cluster detected in Enterobacteria (Figure 8)
involves elements conserved upstream of the gatY, rbfA,
cvpA and, in some cases, mscS, dppB, yidB and sbp
genes. Several members of this cluster present significant similarities with the rtT transcript identified by
Bösl and Kersten [63], a by-product of the tyrT operon
that could have a role in stringent response, supporting
the biological significance of these candidate attenuators.

Interestingly, we found these highly conserved elements
to belong to bacterial interspersed mosaic elements
(BIMEs) [64]. Even though this is a repeated element, it
probably constitutes a bona fide attenuator as well.
Indeed, BIMEs have been shown to act as bidirectional
transcription terminators [65] and to induce transcriptional attenuation when placed upstream of a tRNA
reporter gene [66]. The high conservation of these
repeats, both in sequence and physical location, among
Enterobacteria supports an exaptation scenario, possibly
as an attenuator system. A second large attenuator cluster involving the genes artJ, ygdL, yhfZ and yijO was
also found to correspond to BIMEs (Table S4 in Additional file 1).
Clusters of attenuators located upstream of different
genes suggest coexpression, and therefore functional
relationships between these genes. In bacilli, an interesting such element, which we called the ‘vanR-leader’, was
found upstream of a gene encoding a flavin oxidoreductase and of the vanR gene, encoding a TCS transcription
factor involved in vanillate catabolism (Figure 9; alignment in Supplementary data 3 in Additional file 1), suggesting a concerted regulation of these two genes.
Another common element is found upstream of a sulfonate ABC transporter operon and upstream of an
unknown gene. Its involvement in sulfonate metabolism

Naville and Gautheret Genome Biology 2010, 11:R97
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/9/R97

Page 12 of 17

Figure 8 A possible attenuator based on bacterial interspersed mosaic elements (BIMEs). A conserved element found before the gatY,
rbfA and cvpA genes in Enterobacteria, corresponding to BIMEs. Blue frames indicate terminators, black frames indicate possible anti-terminators.
Conservation of these repeats in sequence and position argues for their utilization as attenuator elements.

may consequently be hypothesized (alignment in Supplementary data 3 in Additional file 1). Finally, a cluster
of related attenuators, which we named ‘fabH-leaders’,
involves elements upstream of the fabH gene, involved
in fatty acid metabolism, and upstream of genes encoding a DNA binding protein, for which an association
with the same pathway would be interesting to test
(alignment in Supplementary data 3 in Additional file 1).

Conclusions
Broad-spectrum detection techniques are required to
capture a larger fraction of attenuator diversity

In this study we apply a detection protocol that is able
to capture a large spectrum of 5’ regulatory sequences.
Analysis of associated genes allowed us to list genes

most frequently controlled by attenuation, and to
further describe their attenuators. While previous computational screens based on sequence/structure homology were successful at identifying many distinct
elements such as T-boxes or riboswitches [9,10,19-21],
they tend to suggest a discrete occurrence of specific
elements, while the reality looks more as a continuous
landscape of evolving elements that explore all possible
sensing systems offered by 5’ UTR regulation. An illustration of this diversity is provided by the extensive analysis released by Weinberg et al. [67], who screened all
available bacterial genomes for structured RNA and
unearthed more than a hundred new significant motifs,
most of which are probable cis-regulators. Strikingly,
none of these motifs overlaps our major attenuator

Figure 9 The vanR-leader. This element is conserved in bacilli, upstream of genes encoding a flavin oxidoreductase and a TCS DNA binding
element (VanR). Candidates are represented using the same conventions as in Figure 3.

Naville and Gautheret Genome Biology 2010, 11:R97
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/9/R97

families in Figure 1. Indeed, many of the sensing systems used by attenuators do not involve an RNA structure or evolve too rapidly to be caught by conservation
analysis. Here we captured them using a simple terminator motif that, although it is not present in all cisregulatory RNAs (some use translational control or
cryptic terminators), was able to detect a variety of elements not represented in current databases or literature.
An obvious limitation of our protocol is that it misses
cases of Rho-dependent termination. However, only one
instance of a Rho-dependent terminator-based attenuator has been described to date, in E. coli [68]. We can
furthermore hypothesize that regulation more likely uses
Rho-independent structures, which do not need any
additional protein to function and thus may be more
responsive to external challenges. Another limitation of
computational attenuator detection is that it cannot
unambiguously discriminate attenuators from independent non-coding RNAs when the later meet all search
criteria (that is, if they are terminated by a Rhoindependent structure and located directly upstream of
a gene in the same orientation). The main non-experimental clue to this question could lay in the synteny conservation between different strains: linkage of attenuator
element and flanking gene strongly argues in favor of a
cis-acting element. However, as some trans-acting small
RNAs tend to retain their physical location for co-regulation reasons, no absolute rule can be drawn.
Our analysis should result in a better annotation of
bacterial intergenic regions. It is likely, for instance, that
many short ORFs currently annotated as hypothetical
proteins and located upstream of operons, which we
purposely considered as intergenic sequences, will turn
out to be leader peptides or other attenuation systems.
Indeed, among the top 30 families of Figure 1, 14 candidates from 8 different families were previously annotated as short hypothetical proteins, which was probably
erroneous.
A harvest of mobile terminators and clues for possible
exaptative scenarios

From an evolutionary viewpoint, it is interesting that
unrelated organisms may use different sensing systems
to regulate the same genes. We observed such interchanges in most of the families we studied. A recurrent
scenario that was previously documented is the switch
between a T-box in Firmicutes and a leader peptide in
Proteobacteria [9,10]. One of our noticeable finding,
however, is the presence of ‘regular’ leader peptides in
Firmicutes, replacing T-boxes.
Interestingly, we noticed a tendency for RNA-binding
protein genes to be more often regulated by attenuation
than other genes: while about 5% of B. subtilis operons
present a predicted attenuator, this proportion reaches

Page 13 of 17

14% among operons encoding at least one RNA-binding
protein (data not shown). As several RNA-binding proteins are now shown to regulate their own expression at
the transcriptional level (for example, ribosomal proteins
[11], PyrR [12] or E. coli threonyl-tRNA synthetase [69]),
it is tempting to postulate that many other RNA-binding
proteins may harbor such dual-functionality, as illustrated in Figure 10a. In the same way, DNA-binding
factors tend to regulate their own expression at the
DNA- level (Figure 10b) [70,71]. It is tempting to consider possible evolutionary shifts between these two
models. A number of attenuator elements identified in
this study were previously assigned to palindromes
interacting with transcription factors at the DNA level
(MarR- or LysR-binding sites for instance). The switch
from one system to another is conceivable with the
emergence of a second transcription start site upstream
or downstream of the palindrome sequence. Such tandem transcription start sites are quite frequent [72,73]
and may give rise to bifunctional elements acting both
as terminator and transcription factor binding sites (Figure 10) and possibly interacting with two different protein partners. It would be interesting to test such a
hypothesis. Other potentially bifunctional terminators
would involve sequestration of a RBS by the terminator
hairpin, inducing a concerted transcriptional and translational attenuation. While no such case has been
experimentally demonstrated to date, it is noticeable
that 18 candidate attenuators in E. coli are located
under 15 nucleotides from the start codon, three of
which are annotated as RBS-sequestrator in the RegulonDB database [39]. A switch from one system to the
other is therefore a realistic hypothesis.

Materials and methods
Identification of putative elements involving a Rhoindependent terminator

Genome sequences and ORF annotations were retrieved
from the National Center for Biotechnology Information
(NCBI) database. The list of analyzed species and corresponding GenBank IDs is presented in Table S7 in
Additional file 1. In a first stage, we looked for Rho-independent terminators in intergenic regions, as well as in
regions encompassing short ORFs (<200 nucleotides)
encoding hypothetical proteins as well as leader peptides
(considered as a particular case of transcriptional attenuation), so as to potentially reannotate some of them. A terminator search was carried out using a combination of
ERPIN [32] and RNAMOTIF [33]. ERPIN is a profile
detection algorithm that takes as input a structure-annotated alignment. Here we used a training set of 1,200 terminator sequences from B. subtilis and E. coli. For the
RNAMOTIF search, we used the descriptor of Lesnik
et al. [74]. This descriptor consists essentially of a 4- to

Naville and Gautheret Genome Biology 2010, 11:R97
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/9/R97

Page 14 of 17

Figure 10 Models for the evolution of self-regulation by RNA- and DNA-binding proteins. (a) RNA-binding protein. Among other cellular
functions involving interactions with RNA molecules, RNA-binding proteins often regulate their own expression by interacting with the 5’ UTR of
their mRNA. In the case of transcriptional attenuation, the transcription start site in the DNA is followed by a palindrome corresponding to the
terminator. Emergence of an additional transcription start site downstream of the terminator palindrome could give birth to a new transcription
factor binding site. (b) DNA-binding protein. These proteins (mainly transcriptional factors) often regulate their own expression through
interaction with a palindromic DNA sequence in the promoter. Emergence of an additional transcription start site upstream of this transcription
factor binding site palindrome could give birth to a new transcriptional attenuator.

18-bp helix, a 0- to 2-nucleotide spacer and a 12nucleotide T-rich region. Parameters and input files for
each program are given in Supplementary data 4 in Additional file 1. In this study, terminators were first sought
using ERPIN, and in a second stage using RNAMOTIF
when ERPIN was not able to detect any motif. In tests
conducted with randomized terminator sequences, the
combination of these two programs produced, on average,
47 false positive hits per 1,000 intergenic regions of size
115 nucleotides [35]. In this study, we further compared
the specificity of terminator detections in 5’ and 3’ UTR
sequences by generating, for each predicted terminator,
two sets of 100 randomized sequences of the same dinucleotide composition as 5’ and 3’ UTRs, respectively,
and applying our prediction protocol to each set.
To be considered as candidate attenuators, terminators
had to be in the same orientation as the downstream
gene and at a suitable distance to avoid incorporation of
canonical 3’ terminators (from the upstream gene or
from an undetected non-coding RNA present in the
intergenic region). To this effect, terminators located at a
distance ratio (that is, the ratio of the distance from the
downstream gene to the distance from the upstream
gene) greater than 1:1 or further than 300 nucleotides
from the first codon of the downstream gene were discarded. Final predictions are listed in Table S8 in Additional file 1.
Annotation of attenuator candidates and genes

Attenuator candidates were defined as the sequences
from the limit of the upstream gene - or a maximum of

200 nucleotides - to the position immediately 3’ of the
terminator. Candidates were assigned to Rfam 10.0 [38]
families by similarity search using Blast [75] with the following parameters: -p blastn, -G 2, -E 1, -W 7, -e 0.0001.
Hits were retained if the match covered more than 50%
of the full length of the Rfam entry. Candidates that failed
to match a Rfam family with Blast were further submitted
to covariance search using the rfam_scan.pl script provided on the Rfam web site [38]. Attenuator candidates
that could not be annotated using these methods were
submitted to a literature search based on the function of
the downstream gene, or searched in the RegulonDB [39]
for E. coli candidates. We assigned functions to bacterial
genes using BlastP against the Hogenom database [37]
and retrieving the corresponding Hogenom IDs.
Hogenom family scoring

Each Hogenom family of homologous genes [37] was
scored in two ways. The absolute score was defined as
the absolute number of predicted attenuators upstream
of all genes in the family across all 302 species (Table S0
in Additional file 1). The normalized score was computed
as follows: for a given Hogenom family, the number of
candidates in each species was normalized by the total
number of genes in this species for this family. These single-species scores were then summed across all species.
Lastly, in order to favor evolutionarily parsimonious distributions, we arranged single-species scores in a phylogenetic order and weighted consecutive non-zero scores
by a factor of +0.1 times the length of the non-zero
stretch. We confirmed the statistical significance of the

Naville and Gautheret Genome Biology 2010, 11:R97
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/9/R97

Page 15 of 17

enrichment of 5’ terminators in each Hogenom family
using Fisher’s exact tests with the following values: number of genes in the Hogenom family; total number of
genes assessed; number of genes with 5’ terminators in
the Hogenom family; total number of genes with 5’
terminators.

Abbreviations
ABC: ATP-binding cassette; BIME: bacterial interspersed mosaic element; bp:
base pair; IS: insertion sequence; ORF: open reading frame; RBS: ribosomebinding site; TCS: two-component system; UTR: untranslated region.

Clustering of attenuator sequences

Received: 12 April 2010 Revised: 11 August 2010
Accepted: 29 September 2010 Published: 29 September 2010

For sequence analysis, we extracted regions around
putative Rho-independent terminators, from the limit of
the upstream gene (or a maximum of 200 nucleotides)
to the position immediately 3’ of the terminator. The
distance between two sequences was defined as the
inverse of the best hit score obtained by Blast/bl2seq
[75]. We then performed hierarchical clustering from
the distance matrix using the ‘hclust’ procedure from
the R package [76]. Clusters were defined by pruning
the tree at a height of 0.038 (corresponding to an
E-value of approximately 10-4) determined empirically
so as to cluster exclusively elements known to belong to
the same family. For each cluster, we performed a multiple sequence alignment using ClustalW [77] followed
by consensus structure prediction with the RNAalifold
program [78].
RNA alignments and structures were refined and analyzed using the Ralee Emacs extension [79]. RNA structures were drawn using the Varna applet [80].

Additional material
Additional file 1: Supplementary tables and figures. Table S0: gene
families showing the highest absolute numbers of attenuator candidates.
Table S1: genes most frequently regulated by attenuation in bacteria
(normalized by family size). Table S2: list of sequence clusters observed in
the 30 gene families most often regulated by attenuation (tabulationseparated). Table S3: sequence clusters obtained among candidates
upstream of ABC-transporter genes. Table S4: complete list of clusters
obtained by analyzing all candidates from enterobacterial species listed
in Table S6. Cluster classes: ‘a’, clusters including only orthologous genes.
‘b’, clusters including only non-orthologous genes, sometimes from a
single species; ‘c’, ‘super-clusters’ containing several sets of orthologous
genes. Table S5: complete list of clusters obtained by analyzing all the
candidates of Bacillus species listed in Table S6. ‘a’, clusters including only
orthologous genes; ‘b’, clusters including only non-orthologous genes,
sometimes from a single species; ‘c’, ‘super-clusters’ containing several
sets of orthologous genes. Table S6: list of species analyzed for the
identification of attenuators ‘regulons’. Table S7: complete list of analyzed
species, along with GenBank identifiers of corresponding DNA molecules
and clade. Table S8: complete list of attenuators predicted in 5’ UTR of
genes, using the protocol described in [31] (tab-delimited table).
Supplementary data 1: list of rimP-leaders from Gammaproteobacteria; list
of rimP-leaders from other species; list of intergenic regions where no
terminator could be detected, but showing sequence similarity to
putative attenuators. Supplementary data 2: Stockholm alignments of the
five ABC-leaders shown in Figure 4. Supplementary data 3: lists and
Stockholm alignments of attenuator ‘regulons’ (candidates present
upstream of several non-homologous genes) in Firmicutes.
Supplementary data 4: parameters, commands and descriptor files used
for terminator prediction.

Authors’ contributions
MN and DG both contributed to the experimental design, data analysis and
writing of the manuscript. MN performed the experiments.

References
1. Nagalakshmi U, Wang Z, Waern K, Shou C, Raha D, Gerstein M, Snyder M:
The transcriptional landscape of the yeast genome defined by RNA
sequencing. Science 2008, 320:1344-1349.
2. Taft RJ, Glazov EA, Cloonan N, Simons C, Stephen S, Faulkner GJ,
Lassmann T, Forrest AR, Grimmond SM, Schroder K, Irvine K, Arakawa T,
Nakamura M, Kubosaki A, Hayashida K, Kawazu C, Murata M, Nishiyori H,
Fukuda S, Kawai J, Daub CO, Hume DA, Suzuki H, Orlando V, Carninci P,
Hayashizaki Y, Mattick JS: Tiny RNAs associated with transcription start
sites in animals. Nat Genet 2009, 41:572-578.
3. Jacquier A: The complex eukaryotic transcriptome: unexpected pervasive
transcription and novel small RNAs. Nat Rev Genet 2009, 10:833-844.
4. Potrykus K, Murphy H, Chen X, Epstein JA, Cashel M: Imprecise
transcription termination within Escherichia coli greA leader gives rise to
an array of short transcripts, GraL. Nucleic Acids Res 2010, 38:1636-1651.
5. Neil H, Malabat C, d’Aubenton-Carafa Y, Xu Z, Steinmetz LM, Jacquier A:
Widespread bidirectional promoters are the major source of cryptic
transcripts in yeast. Nature 2009, 457:1038-1042.
6. Coppins L, Hall KB, Groisman EA: The intricate world of riboswitches. Curr
Opin Microbiol 2007, 10:176-181.
7. Henkin TM: Riboswitch RNAs: using RNA to sense cellular metabolism.
Genes Dev 2008, 22:3383-3390.
8. Dambach MD, Winkler WC: Expanding roles for metabolite-sensing
regulatory RNAs. Curr Opin Microbiol 2009, 12:161-169.
9. Vitreschak AG, Mironov AA, Lyubetsky VA, Gelfand MS: Comparative
genomic analysis of T-box regulatory systems in bacteria. RNA 2008,
14:717-735.
10. Gutiérrez-Preciado A, Henkin TM, Grundy FJ, Yanofsky C, Merino E:
Biochemical features and functional implications of the RNA-based Tbox regulatory mechanism. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 2009, 73:36-61.
11. Nomura M, Yates JL, Dean D, Post LE: Feedback regulation of ribosomal
protein gene expression in Escherichia coli: structural homology of
ribosomal RNA and ribosomal protein mRNA. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
1980, 77:7084-7088.
12. Bonner ER, D’Elia JN, Billips BK, Switzer RL: Molecular recognition of pyr
mRNA by the Bacillus subtilis attenuation regulatory protein PyrR. Nucleic
Acids Res 2001, 29:4851-4865.
13. Amster-Choder O: The bgl sensory system: a transmembrane signaling
pathway controlling transcriptional antitermination. Curr Opin Microbiol
2005, 8:127-134.
14. Narberhaus F, Waldminghaus T, Chowdhury S: RNA thermometers. FEMS
Microbiol Rev 2006, 30:3-16.
15. Waldminghaus T, Gaubig LC, Narberhaus F: Genomewide bioinformatics
prediction and experimental évaluation of potential RNA thermometers.
Mol Genet Genomics 2007, 278:555-564.
16. Chowdhury S, Maris C, Allain FH, Narberhaus F: Molecular basis for
temperature sensing by an RNA thermometer. EMBO J 2006,
25:2487-2497.
17. Merino E, Yanofsky C: Transcription attenuation: a highly conserved
regulatory strategy used by bacteria. Trends Genet 2005, 21:260-264.
18. Liubetskaia EV, Leont’ev LA, Gel’fand MS, Liubetskii VA: [Search for
alternative RNA secondary structures regulating expression of bacterial
genes]. Mol Biol (Mosk) 2003, 37:707-716.
19. Barrick JE, Corbino KA, Winkler WC, Nahvi A, Mandal M, Collins J, Lee M,
Roth A, Sudarsan N, Jona I, Wickiser JK, Breaker RR: New RNA motifs
suggest an expanded scope for riboswitches in bacterial genetic control.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2004, 101:6421-6426.

Naville and Gautheret Genome Biology 2010, 11:R97
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/9/R97

20. Barrick JE, Breaker RR: The distributions, mechanisms, and structures of
metabolite-binding riboswitches. Genome Biol 2007, 8:R239.
21. Yao Z, Barrick J, Weinberg Z, Neph S, Breaker R, Tompa M, Ruzzo WL: A
computational pipeline for high-throughput discovery of cis-regulatory
noncoding RNA in prokaryotes. PLoS Comput Biol 2007, 3:e126.
22. Vitreschak AG, Lyubetskaya EV, Shirshin MA, Gelfand MS, Lyubetsky VA:
Attenuation regulation of amino acid biosynthetic operons in
proteobacteria: comparative genomics analysis. FEMS Microbiol Lett 2004,
234:357-370.
23. Chang TH, Huang HD, Wu LC, Yeh CT, Liu BJ, Horng JT: Computational
identification of riboswitches based on RNA conserved functional
sequences and conformations. RNA 2009, 15:1426-1430.
24. Grundy FJ, Henkin TM: The S box regulon: a new global transcription
termination control system for methionine and cysteine biosynthesis
genes in gram-positive bacteria. Mol Microbiol 1998, 30:737-749.
25. Epshtein V, Mironov AS, Nudler E: The riboswitch-mediated control of
sulfur metabolism in bacteria. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2003, 100:5052-5056.
26. Winkler WC, Nahvi A, Sudarsan N, Barrick JE, Breaker RR: An mRNA
structure that controls gene expression by binding Sadenosylmethionine. Nat Struct Biol 2003, 10:701-707.
27. Corbino KA, Barrick JE, Lim J, Welz R, Tucker BJ, Puskarz I, Mandal M,
Rudnick ND, Breaker RR: Evidence for a second class of Sadenosylmethionine riboswitches and other regulatory RNA motifs in
alpha-proteobacteria. Genome Biol 2005, 6:R70.
28. Fuchs RT, Grundy FJ, Henkin TM: The SMK box is a new SAM-binding RNA
for translational regulation of SAM synthetase. Nat Struct Mol Biol 2006,
13:226-233.
29. Weinberg Z, Regulski EE, Hammond MC, Barrick JE, Yao Z, Ruzzo WL,
Breaker RR: The aptamer core of SAM-IV riboswitches mimics the ligandbinding site of SAM-I riboswitches. RNA 2008, 14:822.
30. Poiata E, Meyer MM, Ames TD, Breaker RR: A variant riboswitch aptamer
class for S-adenosylmethionine common in marine bacteria. RNA 2009,
15:2046-2056.
31. Naville M, Gautheret D: Transcription attenuation in bacteria: theme and
variations. Brief Funct Genomic Proteomic 2009, 8:482-492.
32. Gautheret D, Lambert A: Direct RNA motif definition and identification
from multiple sequence alignments using secondary structure profiles. J
Mol Biol 2001, 313:1003-1011.
33. Macke TJ, Ecker DJ, Gutell RR, Gautheret D, Case DA, Sampath R: RNAmotif,
an RNA secondary structure definition and search algorithm. Nucleic
Acids Res 2001, 29:4724-4735.
34. de Hoon MJ, Makita Y, Nakai K, Miyano S: Prediction of transcriptional
terminators in Bacillus subtilis and related species. PLoS Comput Biol 2005,
1:e25.
35. Naville M, Ghuillot-Gaudeffroy A, Gautheret D: ARNold: a web tool for the
prediction of Rho-independent transcription terminators. RNA Biol 2011.
36. Marchais A, Naville M, Bohn C, Bouloc P, Gautheret D: Single-pass
classification of all noncoding sequences in a bacterial genome using
phylogenetic profiles. Genome Res 2009, 19:1084-1092.
37. Dufayard JF, Duret L, Penel S, Gouy M, Rechenmann F, Perrière G: Tree
pattern matching in phylogenetic trees: automatic search for orthologs
or paralogs in homologous gene sequence databases. Bioinformatics
2005, 21:2596-2603.
38. Gardner PP, Daub J, Tate JG, Nawrocki EP, Kolbe DL, Lindgreen S,
Wilkinson AC, Finn Rd, Griffiths-Jones S, Eddy SR, Bateman A: Rfam:
updates to the RNA families database. Nucleic Acids Res 2009, 37:
D136-140.
39. Gama-Castro S, Jimenez-Jacinto V, Peralta-Gil M, Santos-Zavaleta A,
Peñaloza-Spindola MI, Contreras-Moreira B, Segura-Salazar J, MuñizRascado L, Martinez-Flores I, Salgado H, Bonavides-Martinez C, AbreuGoodger C, Rodriguez-Penagos C, Miranda-Rios J, Morett E, Merino E,
Huerta AM, Trevino-Quintanilla L, Collado-Vides J: RegulonDB (version 6.0):
gene regulation model of Escherichia coli K-12 beyond transcription,
active (experimental) annotated promoters and Textpresso navigation.
Nucleic Acids Res 2008, , 36 Database: D120-124.
40. Nord S, Bylund GO, Lövgren JM, Wikström PM: The RimP protein is
important for maturation of the 30S ribosomal subunit. J Mol Biol 2009,
386:742-753.
41. Beuth B, Pennell S, Arnvig KB, Martin SR, Taylor IA: Structure of a
Mycobacterium tuberculosis NusA-RNA complex. EMBO J 2005,
24:3576-3587.

Page 16 of 17

42. Plumbridge JA, Dondon J, Nakamura Y, Grunberg-Manago M: Effect of
NusA protein on expression of the nusA,infB operon in E. coli. Nucleic
Acids Res 1985, 13:3371-3388.
43. Nakamura Y, Plumbridge J, Dondon J, Grunberg-Manago M: Evidence for
autoregulation of the nusA-infB operon of Escherichia coli. Gene 1985,
36:189-193.
44. Shibata R, Bessho Y, Shinkai A, Nishimoto M, Fusatomi E, Terada T,
Shirouzu M, Yokoyama S: Crystal structure and RNA-binding analysis of
the archaeal transcription factor NusA. Biochem Biophys Res Commun
2007, 355:122-128.
45. Worbs M, Bourenkov GP, Bartunik HD, Huber R, Wahl MC: An extended
RNA binding surface through arrayed S1 and KH domains in
transcription factor NusA. Mol Cell 2001, 7:1177-1189.
46. Irnov I, Sharma CM, Vogel J, Winkler WC: Identification of regulatory RNAs
in Bacillus subtilis. Nucleic Acids Res 2010.
47. Saito K, Mattheakis LC, Nomura M: Post-transcriptional regulation of the
str operon in Escherichia coli: Ribosomal protein S7 inhibits coupled
translation of S7 but not its independent translation. J Mol Biol 1994,
235:111-124.
48. Meyer MM, Ames TD, Smith DP, Weinberg Z, Schwalbach MS,
Giovannoni SJ, Breaker RR: Identification of candidate structured RNAs in
the marine organism ‘Candidatus Pelagibacter ubique’. BMC Genomics
2009, 10:268.
49. Robert F, Gagnon M, Sans D, Michnick S, Brakier-Gingras L: Mapping of the
RNA recognition site of Escherichia coli ribosomal protein S7. RNA 2000,
6:1649-1659.
50. Davidson AL, Dassa E, Orelle C, Chen J: Structure, function, and evolution
of bacterial ATP-binding cassette systems. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 2008,
72:317-364.
51. Moussatova A, Kandt C, O’Mara ML, Tieleman DP: ATP-binding cassette
transporters in Escherichia coli.. Biochim Biophys Acta 2008,
1778:1757-1771.
52. Grkovic S, Brown MH, Skurray RA: Regulation of bacterial drug export
systems. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 2002, 66:671-701.
53. Ohki R, Tateno K, Takizawa T, Aiso T, Murata M: Transcriptional termination
control of a novel ABC transporter gene involved in antibiotic resistance
in Bacillus subtilis. J Bacteriol 2005, 187:5946-5954.
54. Seliverstov AV, Putzer H, Gelfand MS, Lyubetsky VA: Comparative analysis
of RNA regulatory elements of amino acid metabolism genes in
Actinobacteria. BMC Microbiol 2005, 5:54.
55. Gryczan TJ, Grandi G, Hahn J, Grandi R, Dubnau D: Conformational
alteration of mRNA structure and the posttranscriptional regulation of
erythromycin-induced drug resistance. Nucleic Acids Res 1980, 8:6081-6097.
56. Zhang A, Wassarman KM, Rosenow C, Tjaden BC, Storz G, Gottesman S:
Global analysis of small RNA and mRNA targets of Hfq. Mol Microbiol
2003, 50:1111-1124.
57. Loh E, Dussurget O, Gripenland J, Vaitkevicius K, Tiensuu T, Mandin P,
Repoila F, Buchrieser C, Cossart P, Johansson J: A trans-acting riboswitch
controls expression of the virulence regulator PrfA in Listeria
monocytogenes. Cell 2009, 139:770-779.
58. Rodionov DA: Comparative genomic reconstruction of transcriptional
regulatory networks in bacteria. Chem Rev 2007, 107:3467-3497.
59. Davis MA, Simons RW, Kleckner N: Tn10 protects itself at two levels from
fortuitous activation by external promoters. Cell 1985, 43:379-387.
60. Beuzon CR, Marques S, Casadesus J: Repression of IS200 transposase
synthesis by RNA secondary structures. Nucleic Acids Res 1999,
27:3690-3695.
61. Bejerano G, Lowe CB, Ahituv N, King B, Siepel A, Salama SR, Rubin EM,
Kent WJ, Haussler D: A distal enhancer and an ultraconserved exon are
derived from a novel retroposon. Nature 2006, 441:87-90.
62. Lowe CB, Bejerano G, Haussler D: Thousands of human mobile element
fragments undergo strong purifying selection near developmental
genes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2007, 104:8005-8010.
63. Bösl M, Kersten H: A novel RNA product of the tyrT operon of Escherichia
coli. Nucleic Acids Res 1991, 19:5863-5870.
64. Gilson E, Saurin W, Perrin D, Bachellier S, Hofnung M: The BIME family of
bacterial highly repetitive sequences. Res Microbiol 1991, 142:217-222.
65. Gilson E, Rousset JP, Clément JM, Hofnung M: A subfamily of E. coli
palindromic units implicated in transcription termination? Ann Inst
Pasteur Microbiol 1986, 137B:259-270.

Naville and Gautheret Genome Biology 2010, 11:R97
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/9/R97

Page 17 of 17

66. Espéli O, Moulin L, Boccard F: Transcription attenuation associated with
bacterial repetitive extragenic BIME elements. J Mol Biol 2001,
314:375-386.
67. Weinberg Z, Wang JX, Bogue J, Yang J, Corbino K, Moy RH, Breaker RR:
Comparative genomics reveals 104 candidate structured RNAs from
bacteria, archaea and their metagenomes. Genome Biol 2010, 11:R31.
68. Konan KV, Yanofsky C: Rho-dependent transcription termination in the
tna operon of Escherichia coli: Roles of the boxA sequence and the rut
site. J Bacteriol 2000, 182:3981-3988.
69. Romby P, Springer M: Bacterial translational control at atomic resolution.
Trends Genet 2003, 19:155-161.
70. Schell MA: Molecular biology of the LysR family of transcriptional
regulators. Annu Rev Microbiol 1993, 47:597-626.
71. Martin RG, Rosner JL: Transcriptional and translational regulation of the
marRAB multiple anibiotic resistance operon in Escherichia coli. Mol
Microbiol 2004, 53:183-191.
72. Toledo-Arana A, Dussurget O, Nikitas G, Sesto N, Guet-Revillet H,
Balestrino D, Loh E, Gripenland J, Tiensuu T, Vaitkevicius K, Barthelemy M,
Vergassola M, Nahori MA, Soubigou G, Régnault B, Coppée JY, Lecuit M,
Johansson J, Cossart P: The Listeria transcriptional landscape from
saprophytism to virulence. Nature 2009, 459:950-956.
73. Mendoza-Vargas A, Olvera L, Olvera M, Grande R, Vega-Alvarado L,
Taboada B, Jimenez-Jacinto V, Salgado H, Juárez K, Contreras-Moreira B,
Huerta AM, Collado-Vides J, Morett E: Genome-wide identification of
transcription start sites, promoters and transcription factor binding sites
in E. coli.. PLoS One 2009, 4:e7526.
74. Lesnik EA, Sampath R, Levene HB, Henderson TJ, McNeil JA, Ecker DJ:
Prediction of Rho-independent transcriptional terminators in Escherichia
coli. Nucleic Acids Res 2001, 29:3583-3594.
75. Altschul SF, Gish W, Miller W, Myers EW, Lipman DJ: Basic local alignment
search tool. J Mol Biol 1990, 215:403-410.
76. R Development Core Team: R: A Language and Environment for
Statistical Computing. 2009 [http://www.R-project.org].
77. Larkin MA, Blackshields G, Brown NP, Chenna R, McGettigan PA,
McWilliam H, Valentin F, Wallace IM, Wilm A, Lopez R, Thompson JD,
Gibson TJ, Higgins DG: ClustalW and ClustalX version 2. Bioinformatics
2007, 23:2947-2948.
78. Bernhart SH, Hofacker IL, Will S, Gruber AR, Stadler PF: RNAalifold:
improved consensus structure prediction for RNA alignments. BMC
Bioinformatics 2008, 9:474.
79. Griffiths-Jones S: RALEE - RNA ALignment editor in Emacs. Bioinformatics
2005, 21:257-259.
80. Darty K, Denise A, Ponty Y: VARNA: Interactive drawing and editing of the
RNA secondary structure. Bioinformatics 2009, 25:1974-1975.
81. Crooks GE, Hon G, Chandonia JM, Brenner SE: WebLogo: A sequence logo
generator. Genome Res 2004, 14:1188-1190.
doi:10.1186/gb-2010-11-9-r97
Cite this article as: Naville and Gautheret: Premature terminator analysis
sheds light on a hidden world of bacterial transcriptional attenuation.
Genome Biology 2010 11:R97.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
