<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Plant centromeric retrotransposons: a structural and cytogenetic perspective</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Mobile DNA 2011, 2:4. doi:10.1186/1759-8753-2-4"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Pavel Neumann"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Neumann et al. Mobile DNA 2011, 2:4
http://www.mobilednajournal.com/content/2/1/4

RESEARCH

Open Access

Plant centromeric retrotransposons: a structural
and cytogenetic perspective
Pavel Neumann1*, Alice Navrátilová1, Andrea Koblížková1, Eduard Kejnovský2, Eva Hřibová3, Roman Hobza2,
Alex Widmer4, Jaroslav Doležel3, Jiří Macas1

Abstract
Background: The centromeric and pericentromeric regions of plant chromosomes are colonized by Ty3/gypsy
retrotransposons, which, on the basis of their reverse transcriptase sequences, form the chromovirus CRM clade.
Despite their potential importance for centromere evolution and function, they have remained poorly
characterized. In this work, we aimed to carry out a comprehensive survey of CRM clade elements with an
emphasis on their diversity, structure, chromosomal distribution and transcriptional activity.
Results: We have surveyed a set of 190 CRM elements belonging to 81 different retrotransposon families, derived
from 33 host species and falling into 12 plant families. The sequences at the C-terminus of their integrases were
unexpectedly heterogeneous, despite the understanding that they are responsible for targeting to the centromere.
This variation allowed the division of the CRM clade into the three groups A, B and C, and the members of each
differed considerably with respect to their chromosomal distribution. The differences in chromosomal distribution
coincided with variation in the integrase C-terminus sequences possessing a putative targeting domain (PTD).
A majority of the group A elements possess the CR motif and are concentrated in the centromeric region, while
members of group C have the type II chromodomain and are dispersed throughout the genome. Although
representatives of the group B lack a PTD of any type, they appeared to be localized preferentially in the
centromeres of tested species. All tested elements were found to be transcriptionally active.
Conclusions: Comprehensive analysis of the CRM clade elements showed that genuinely centromeric
retrotransposons represent only a fraction of the CRM clade (group A). These centromeric retrotransposons
represent an active component of centromeres of a wide range of angiosperm species, implying that they play an
important role in plant centromere evolution. In addition, their transcriptional activity is consistent with the notion
that the transcription of centromeric retrotransposons has a role in normal centromere function.

Background
Long terminal repeat (LTR) retrotransposons represent
a common class of mobile genetic elements in eukaryotic genomes [1-7]. Because of their replicative mode
of transposition based on an RNA intermediate, they
compose the majority of the DNA of many eukaryotic
genomes. They are particularly abundant in plant genomes and are intimately involved in the evolution of
genome structure and size [8,9]. Plant retrotransposon
families differ considerably from one another, not only
* Correspondence: neumann@umbr.cas.cz
1
Biology Centre of the Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, Institute
of Plant Molecular Biology, Branišovská 31, České Budějovice CZ-37005,
Czech Republic
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

with respect to their sequence and structure but also
with regard to their chromosomal distribution. Thus,
while some plant retrotransposon families are essentially randomly dispersed, others are concentrated in
distinct chromosomal regions [10,11]. Among the latter category are the centromeric retrotransposons,
which accumulate preferentially in the centromeric
region. (Note that the term “centromeric” is used hereinafter to refer to both the centromeric and pericentromeric regions, as these are difficult to distinguish from
one another.) They usually accompany arrays of satellite DNA, which are the dominant centromeric
sequences in most species [12]. However, centromeres
of some species, such as wheat [13], are dominated by
centromeric retrotransposons.

© 2011 Neumann et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Neumann et al. Mobile DNA 2011, 2:4
http://www.mobilednajournal.com/content/2/1/4

A number of centromeric retrotransposons have been
fully characterized in grass species: specifically, RIRE7
and CRR in rice (Oryza sativa) [14-17], CRM in maize
(Zea mays) [18,19], CRW in wild einkorn wheat (Triticum boeoticum) [13], CRS in sugar cane (Saccharum
officinarum) [20], Bilby in cereal rye (Secale cereale) [21]
and Cereba in barley (Hordeum vulgare) [22,23]. In sorghum (Sorghum bicolor), pHind22 and pSau3A9 have
been partially characterized [24]. Equivalent elements
extracted from dicotyledonous species include Beetle1
(sugar beet, Beta vulgaris) and Beetle2 (wild beet, Beta
procumbens) [25,26] as well as CRA (Arabidopsis thaliana, hereinafter referred to as At) [27,28]. Their phylogeny, based on their reverse transcriptase (RT)
sequences, reveals that they are chromoviruses (Chromoviridae), a lineage of Ty3/gypsy retrotransposons possessing an integrase chromodomain [27,29,30]. Further
classification of chromoviruses has shown that these
centromeric retrotransposons form a phylogenetically
distinct clade designated CRM [27,29,30]. Although the
chromoviruses are widespread within eukaryotic genomes, CRM elements are specific to plants, both angiosperms and gymnosperms [27]. Few of these elements
have been described in any detail, and little is known of
their chromosomal distribution. Thus it remains unclear
both whether all CRM elements are in reality centromeric retrotransposons and how widespread the genuine
centromeric retrotransposons are in plant genomes.
The most distinctive structural feature of a centromeric retrotransposon is the presence of an integrase
chromodomain, which is widely assumed to ensure correct targeting to the centromeric region [30]. Although
chromodomains are present at the integrase C-terminus
in all chromoviruses, their sequence is highly polymorphic [27,29-31]. On the basis of their similarity to
cellular chromodomains (for example, those present in
HP1 or Swi6 proteins), chromovirus chromodomains
have been classified into types I and II and a CR motif
[31]. Types I and II chromodomains have sequence and
structural similarity both to cellular chromodomains
and to each other. However, while the type I chromodomains contain all three aromatic residues known to
recognize methylated lysine on histone H3 (H3K9), type
II chromodomains lack the first and usually also the last
of these residues. Unlike all other plant chromoviruses
which include a type II chromodomain, centromeric retrotransposons possess a CR motif, which is key for the
recognition of centromeric chromatin [31]. Although
the CR motif is found at the position corresponding to
a chromodomain, Gao et al. [31] showed that it has
neither sequence nor structural similarity to types I and
II chromodomains, suggesting that it is not a genuine
chromodomain. For this reason, all sequences found at
the position of a chromodomain are collectively referred

Page 2 of 16

to hereinafter as putative targeting domains (PTDs).
Although the CR motif’s interacting partner has yet to
be identified, it has been established that, unlike the
type I chromodomains, it involves neither a dimethylated nor a trimethylated form of histone H3 lysine 9
(H3K9me2, H3K9me3) [31].
Circumstantial evidence suggests that centromeric
retrotransposons have been influential in the evolution
of centromeres, as well as in their structure and function. Their transpositional activity contributes to high
evolutionary dynamics of centromeres by generating
new insertions, which may be further subjected to illegitimate and unequal homologous recombination
[32,33]. Transcription driven by centromeric retrotransposon promoters has been proposed to underlie the
substitution of histone H3 by CenH3 (centromere-specific variant of histone H3 which is essential for the
establishment and maintenance of centromere function
and kinetochore assembly) [12]. As the RNA component of maize centromeric chromatin includes CRM
retrotransposon transcripts, it has been suggested that
centromeric retrotransposons are also important determinants of the structure of centromeric chromatin
[34]. Because transcripts of CRR elements are processed by the RNA interference (RNAi) machinery of
rice, Neumann et al. [35] proposed that these elements
play a role in RNAi-mediated formation and maintenance of centromeric chromatin. However, as yet there
have been no systematic attempts to investigate the
function of centromeric retrotransposons in centromere activity, largely because of a lack of sufficient
representatives to build a generalized picture that is
valid across a spectrum of plant species. Thus, here we
set out to produce a comprehensive survey of plant
CRM retrotransposons. We have analyzed their
nucleotide and protein sequences, with a goal of illuminating their structure, diversity, type of PTD, chromosomal distribution and transcriptional activity.

Results
Identification of putative centromeric retrotransposon
sequences

The in silico search for CRM elements detected 145
novel elements, which fell into 63 families on the basis
of species of origin and sequence similarity. An additional three families were identified from the sequence
contigs assembled from the 454 derived sequences of
pea and white campion. In addition to the sequences
described in the literature, we gathered 190 elements
representing 81 different retrotransposon families and
distributed across 33 plant species belonging to 12 plant
families (Figure 1; see also Additional file 1: Origin and
structural features of sequences used in this work, and
Additional file 2: CRM sequences used in this study).

Neumann et al. Mobile DNA 2011, 2:4
http://www.mobilednajournal.com/content/2/1/4

Page 3 of 16

Figure 1 Diversity of CRM families and their species of origin. (A) Neighbor-joining tree inferred from a comparison of reverse transcriptase
(RT) domain sequences. The non-chromovirus element Tat4-1 was used as an outgroup, while members of the Tekay, Reina and Galadriel clades
were included as representatives of other plant chromoviruses. Alignment of the RT domains is provided in Additional file 3: Alignment of RT
domains. On the basis of differences at the C-terminus of integrase, the CRM families were divided into groups A, B and C (Figure 3). Previously
described CRM members are shown in purple (see also Additional file 1: Origin and structural features of sequences used in this work). Families
with confirmed centromeric localization are marked with orange stars (fluorescence in situ hybridization results) or green stars (in silico
localization). Families having a dispersed chromosomal distribution are labeled with orange or green hexagons. Bootstrap values are shown only
for the major nodes. Elements belonging to the Tekay, Reina and Galadriel clades are listed in Additional file 1: Origin and structural features of
sequences used in this work. It should be noted that because of the limitations of the neighbor-joining method and the lack of representatives
from a wider range of evolutionarily distant species, the tree topology may not fully reflect real phylogenetic relationships between different
groups of CRM elements. (B) Taxonomy classification of the species containing the CRM elements. Dates of divergence between major groups
of plants are from the work by Chaw et al. [105]. The names of CRM families present in the species are shown in brackets.

Neumann et al. Mobile DNA 2011, 2:4
http://www.mobilednajournal.com/content/2/1/4

The phylogenetic analysis of representatives of each of
the families, based on their RT domain sequence, clustered all the de novo sequences with previously identified CRM members (Figure 1A; see also Additional file
3: Alignment of RT domains). The same result was
obtained by extending the analysis to a comparison of
integrase and whole polyprotein sequences, confirming
the appropriateness of the RT domain sequence (data
not shown).
Elements belonging to the CRM clade are variable at their
integrase C-terminus

The integrase protein is probably critical for the correct
targeting of the centromeric retrotransposons to the
centromere region. Most of the CRM integrases possessed a zinc finger with an HHCC motif at its N-terminus and a core domain containing the D,D(35)E motif
around the active site (Figure 2). Between the core
domain and the C-terminus, which presumably includes
the DNA binding region and PTD, sequence divergence
prevented full alignment. While the putative DNA binding region contained several strongly conserved amino
acid residues, the PTDs and their flanking sequences
were variable. Surprisingly, this also applied to the CR
motif, which was relatively well conserved in previously
described elements, except for Beetle1 and Beetle2
[26,31]. Of 81 CRM clade families, only 50 showed similarity to the CR motif. The integrases of the remaining
families either possessed a type II chromodomain in
place of the CR motif or lacked a PTD of any type. On
the basis of the presence or absence and type of PTD,
the elements were divided into three groups (Figures 1A
and 3).
Group A members possessed the CR motif, although
in a few cases the motif was significantly altered (Figure
3). Apart from Beetle1 and Beetle2, the most mutated
CR motifs occurred in SilL1 and SilL2. Comparison of
these elements with 454 sequencing-generated reads
containing partial sequences of SilL1 and SilL2 showed
high protein similarity in this region, suggesting that the
altered sequences of the CR motif in these subfamilies
were most likely due not to mutations in the two analyzed sequences but rather to a real divergence of these
families from other elements belonging to group A.
Integrase sequences of the group B elements lacked
any PTD, and they terminated shortly beyond the conserved glycine-proline-tyrosine/phynelyalanine (GPY/F)
motif [36,37] (Figure 3). To confirm that the absence of
PTD was not an in silico translation error, evidence for
the presence of the CR motif or the type II chromodomain typical for all other plant chromoviruses was
sought within predicted polypeptides translated in all
possible reading frames. Although these searches
involved using the BLASTP, RPS-BLAST and MAST

Page 4 of 16

programs (National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI), http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/) to maximize
sensitivity, the results were consistently negative.
Together with their intact coding region and the similarity shown by the polyprotein termini, the evidence
therefore strongly suggested that these groups of chromoviruses encode neither the type II chromodomain
nor the CR motif.
Elements encoding the type II chromodomain were
defined as group C (Figure 3). Similarly to other plant
chromovirus clades (Tekay, Reina, Galadriel), the chromodomain of group C elements lacked the conserved
aromatic cage residues known to interact with methylated H3K9. It should be noted that among members of
this group were found all gymnosperm sequences, some
of which were highly similar to the partial chromodomain-lacking sequence of the Spdl element [GenBank:
AF229251] [38], present in white spruce (Picea glauca)
and classified as a CRM member by Gorinsek et al. [27].
Structural features of the CRM elements

The range in size of the complete CRM elements was
approximately 5.1 to 10.2 kbp. They were flanked by
two LTRs ranging from 299 to 1,225 bp. The LTR termini featured the highly conserved inverted repeat motif
5’-TGATG/CATCA-3’. Upon insertion, CRM elements
generated a 5-bp target site duplication, the sequence of
which varied substantially from insertion to insertion.
Thus these elements do not appear to target specific
sequences in the genome. The age of the insertions ranged from 0 to 6.7 million years ago (see Additional file
1: Origin and structural features of sequences used in
this work), demonstrating the recentness of insertion
activity of CRM elements. The 5’ LTR was followed by a
primer binding site, while the 3’ LTR was preceded by a
polypurine tract (Figures 4A and 4B). Although the primer binding site of all CRM subfamilies was complementary to 12 to 18 nucleotides at the 3’ end of
tRNA Met, its sequences were only partially conserved,
corresponding to various types of tRNAMet (Figure 4B).
The polypurine tract ranged in length from 4 to 13 bp,
and its sequence in group A elements was highly similar
even between distantly related species (Figure 4B; see
also Additional file 1: Origin and structural features of
sequences used in this work). The A-rich stretch within
the 5’ UTR, common to many rice CRRs [17], was present in a number of group A elements (including those
present in dicotyledonous species), which suggests its
likely importance as a structural feature. However, it
was absent in most members of groups B and C. The
polyprotein region extended into the 3’ LTR in all group
A elements, but only in a few elements of groups B and
C (Figure 4A). Although the coding sequence was interrupted by nonsense codons and/or frame shifts in many

Neumann et al. Mobile DNA 2011, 2:4
http://www.mobilednajournal.com/content/2/1/4

Page 5 of 16

Figure 2 Graphical representation of the conserved portion of the integrase protein sequence. Integrase sequences extracted from CRM,
Tekay, Reina and Galadriel chromoviruses aligned using the Muscle program are shown as sequence logo plots [96]. CRM clade members are
shown in the upper part of the figure, and those from the other clades are shown in the lower part. Despite the overall high level of sequence
similarity, several amino acid residues are conserved only within the CRM clade. The HHCC and DD35E motifs are indicated by green and red
stars, respectively.

elements, it seemed to be organized as a single open
reading frame in the intact autonomous elements. The
putative polyprotein sequences contained all the
domains necessary for replication and integration (gag,
protease, RT, RNase H and integrase) (Figure 4A),
showing a pronounced level of similarity between elements (Figure 4C). A relatively high level of similarity
was also found between nucleotide sequences of the elements (see Additional file 4: Dot plot comparison of
full-length CRM elements).
Not all retrotransposon families within the CRM clade are
accumulated in centromeres

Although the elements described above formed a welldefined phylogenetic clade, it remained to be established whether they were all preferentially localized in

centromeric regions. The chromosomal distribution of
selected families was investigated both experimentally
by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) and computationally in those species in which the whole genome sequence was available. A centromeric FISH
signal was observed for all of the group A sequences
tested (including PiSat1 in pea, SilL1 and SilL2 in
white campion and PopT2 in black cottonwood) (Figure 5). A weak MedT1/2 centromeric signal was
observed in barrel medic (data not shown). No detectable VitV2 FISH signal was obtained in grape, a result
ascribable to a copy number of only approximately 50
per haploid genome, according to both a dot blot
hybridization experiment and an in silico search of the
whole grape genome sequence. The distribution of rare
VitV2 copies in the whole genome sequence was

Neumann et al. Mobile DNA 2011, 2:4
http://www.mobilednajournal.com/content/2/1/4

Page 6 of 16

Figure 3 Alignments of sequences at the C-terminus integrase. Group A elements possess a CR motif with several strongly conserved
amino acid residues near the N-terminus. These residues are not present in Beetle1, Beetle2 or SilL1, but are well conserved in the grass species
elements (see bottom part of the alignment). The numbers between two aligned blocks specify the number of amino acid residues not shown.
No putative targeting domain (PTD) is encoded by group B elements. The type II chromodomain of group C elements shares sequence similarity
with Tekay, Galadriel and Reina clade members. The dotted line above each alignment marks a region conserved among all plant chromoviruses.
The arrow shows the portion of the integrase lying within the 3’ long terminal repeat(LTR). Asterisks indicate stop codons at the end of each
open reading frame. A highly conserved GPY/F motif [36,37] is indicated by a black trapezoid above the beginning of each alignment.

essentially random (data not shown), but it must be
borne in mind that published chromosome sequences
are still incomplete and the position of the centromeres is as yet ill-defined [39].
Surprisingly, we demonstrated by FISH with MusA1 in
banana that even elements lacking PTD (group B members) can be preferentially accumulated in centromeres
(Figure 5F). At elements CRA5 and CRA6, other representatives of group B, were also found in centromeres,

but it should be mentioned that they have only a few
copies in the genome (data not shown).
On the other hand, two tested representatives of
group C showed dispersed distribution along chromosomes. The distribution of VitV1 elements in the current genome assembly appeared random (data not
shown), a result which could not be validated cytogenetically, as the copy number of this element is too low
(100 to 500 copies per haploid genome). When FISH

Neumann et al. Mobile DNA 2011, 2:4
http://www.mobilednajournal.com/content/2/1/4

Page 7 of 16

Figure 4 Structural analysis of CRM elements. (A) Polyprotein coding (white boxes), noncoding (gray boxes), putative targeting domain (PTD)
(hatched boxes) and long terminal repeats (LTRs) (arrowed). Pbs, primer binding site; ppt, polypurine tract; aaa, A-rich stretch. The group A
member coding region extends into the 3’ LTR, which encodes the CR motif. Group B elements lack any PTD. Group C possesses a type II
chromodomain-coding domain which terminates close to the 5’ end of the 3’ LTR. The graph is not drawn in proportion to segment lengths in
base pairs. (B) Most elements share TGATG and T/CATCA inverted repeats at, respectively, the 5’ and 3’ end of the LTR. The primer binding site
complementary to the 3’ end of tRNAMet differs in sequence between various families. Group A elements contain highly conserved polypurine
tract sequences. (C) A protein similarity plot shows that the CRM polyproteins are highly conserved, varying mainly within their C-terminal PTD
regions. Individual polyprotein domains: GAG, capsid domain, similar to pfam37032; ZF, nucleocapsid GAG protein zinc finger; PRO, protease; RT,
reverse transcriptase RNase H; IN, integrase; PTD, putative targeting domain.

was attempted in Norway spruce using a probe which
shared 96% and 94% identity with white spruce Spdl
and PicG1 sequences, respectively, the hybridization signal was dispersed along the whole length of all chromosomes (Figures 5G and 5H), unlike the pattern
generated after probing with the centromeric satellite 2F
[40] used to label centromeric regions (data not shown).
The same in silico strategy was extended to investigate
the intrachromosomal distribution of elements belonging to other chromovirus clades represented in the

complete At and rice genome sequences. While nonCRM chromoviruses are concentrated in the centromeric region of At, those in rice appear to be dispersed
throughout the genome (data not shown) [31]. The distinct chromosomal distribution of rice and At type II
chromodomain-containing chromoviruses, in combination with our own unpublished findings from preliminary experiments performed in other species as well as
other data in the literature, suggest that the distribution
of the elements may correlate with genome size.

Neumann et al. Mobile DNA 2011, 2:4
http://www.mobilednajournal.com/content/2/1/4

Page 8 of 16

Figure 5 Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH)-based visualization of the intrachromosomal distribution of chromoviruses. (A) Pea
chromosomes hybridized with PiSat1 (group A). (B and C) Black cottonwood interphase nucleus and metaphase chromosomes hybridized with
PopT2 (group A). Note that most of the signal is associated with chromocenters (bright 4’,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI)-stained spots in the
interphase nucleus). Three metaphase chromosomes were enlarged to allow a clearer localization of PopT2 to the centromeric region (C1-C3).
(D and E) White campion chromosomes hybridized with SilL1 and SilL2 (group A). (F) Banana chromosomes hybridized with MusA1 (group B).
Since all of the banana chromosomes are metacentric or submetacentric, signals located around the center of the chromosome are taken to
reflect loci near or within the centromere. Three of the chromosomes with identifiable centromeres were enlarged (F1-F3). (G and H) Norway
spruce chromosomes counterstained with DAPI and hybridized with a Spdl-like sequence (group C). (I) Pea chromosomes hybridized with
Peabody (Tekay clade). Positive hybridization signals are shown in green, and DAPI-counterstained DNA appears in red.

Neumann et al. Mobile DNA 2011, 2:4
http://www.mobilednajournal.com/content/2/1/4

Therefore, we also carried out FISH based on a fragment of the pea retrotransposon Peabody, which is the
most abundant chromovirus family (Tekay clade) in this
species, with a copy number of about 10,000 per haploid
genome (4,300 Mbp/1C) [41-43]. The hybridization signal covered every chromosome almost uniformly,
although it was absent from secondary constrictions and
major heterochromatic blocks (Figure 5I).
Elements possessing the CR motif are common in the
angiosperms

As the search for novel CRM retrotransposons was aimed
only at full-length sequences predicted by the LTR_Finder program (http://tlife.fudan.edu.cn/ltr_finder/), it
excluded partial elements. An attempt was made to
widen the search by trawling GenBank for species not
identified by the initial search, querying with a set of all
polyprotein domains extracted from the chromovirus elements shown in Figure 1A. This generated a set of >100
sequences showing >70% identity to CRM representatives
(data not shown) and originating from both angiosperm
and gymnosperm species. The angiosperm sequences
were related to representatives of all three groups. However, all of the gymnosperm sequences were of the group
C type. While the C-terminal portion of the integrase
gene bearing the CR motif was present in a broad range
of angiosperm species, it was not detected in any nonangiosperms. Thus, group A elements are either angiosperm-specific or have not been sequenced yet in
gymnosperms.
The CRM elements are transcribed

A growing body of evidence suggests that noncoding
transcripts derived from centromeric repetitive DNA, as
well as small RNA produced via their RNAi-mediated
degradation, are important for the proper function of
the centromere [34,44,45]. When reverse-transcriptase
polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) was performed to
assay the transcriptional activity of a number of centromeric retrotransposon families, amplicons of the appropriate length were recovered in every case. Thus,
transcriptional activity appears to be a general feature
of centromeric retrotransposons (Additional file 5:
Transcription of centromeric retrotransposons). A database search for small RNA sequences in At [46], barrel
medic [47] and black cottonwood [48], as well as in pea
(using an in-house database) identified small RNA
sequences matching CRM clade elements in each of
these species. With the exception of black cottonwood,
for which very little sequence data were available (about
27,000 sequences, 14 of which were identical to PopT
retrotransposons), >100 distinct small RNA sequences
per species were identified. The abundance of particular
small RNA was estimated on the basis of the frequency

Page 9 of 16

with which they occurred in each library, and this
proved to be very low: only one or a few per tens of
thousands to several million (data not shown). The global frequency of small RNA was low as well, especially
in pea and barrel medic (respectively, 8 and 13 transcripts per quarter million, TPQ). The highest global
frequency was found in At siliques (449 TPQ; see Additional file 5: Transcription of centromeric retrotransposons). The size range of these small RNA was 18 to 27
nt, but most were 24 nt (Additional file 5: Transcription
of centromeric retrotransposons), and they originated
from throughout the whole element sequence. In At,
centromeric retrotransposon small RNA were represented in four different tissues, suggesting that they are
constitutively transcribed and that RNAi is involved in
their processing. A similar number of small RNA
sequences were also present in At mutant lines in
which the activity of various RNAi genes was disrupted
(Additional file 5: Transcription of centromeric
retrotransposons).

Discussion
The classification of CRM retrotransposons

Since centromeric retrotransposons have been classified
as belonging to the chromovirus CRM clade [27,29,30],
it was expected that the elements identified here would
be largely concentrated in the centromeric region.
Although the members of the CRM clade are taken as
being the most highly conserved of the plant chromoviruses [27], the present data showed that they do vary
sufficiently to allow for their subdivision into three
groups distinguished with respect to the structure of
their integrase C-termini (Figure 3). The CR motif,
shown by Gao et al. [31] to be particularly well conserved, was indeed present in most of the group A
members, but was lacking in those from groups B and
C. Group C elements possessed a type II chromodomain
in the place of the CR motif, while those in group B
appeared to lack any kind of PTD. Although real phylogenetic relationships between elements from different
groups remain to be resolved, the presence of the type
II chromodomain in group C elements probably reflects
an evolutionary divergence between the CRM and the
other plant chromovirus clades from a common ancestor possessing this type of PTD. On the other hand,
group B elements probably derived from those belonging to groups A and/or C either by deletion of PTDcoding region or by successive accumulation of
mutations.
CRM clade members are not confined to the centromeric
region of plant chromosomes

Although they appeared to be phylogenetically closely
related to one another, CRM clade members were not

Neumann et al. Mobile DNA 2011, 2:4
http://www.mobilednajournal.com/content/2/1/4

universally localized to the centromeric region of the
chromosome. The Spdl-like sequence (group C) in particular was dispersed over the whole length of the Norway spruce genome. A second CRM clade member with
this type of genomic distribution was VitV1 (group C),
although the evidence supporting its dispersed nature
has relied entirely on an assembly of the grape genome
known to be as yet incomplete [39]. Such an intrachromosomal distribution is consistent with that of other
chromovirus non-CRM families containing the same
type of PTD, such as Peabody in pea (Figure 5I) and a
Peabody-like sequence in white campion [49]. On the
other hand, group B elements, although they lack a
PTD, tended to be concentrated in the centromeric
region. Whether this has come about because of a PTDindependent targeting mechanism or whether group B
elements accumulate in the centromeric region via some
other process remains unclear.
What makes centromeric retrotransposons centromeric?

The general assumption is that the PTD is responsible
for the targeting of centromeric retrotransposons to the
centromeric region. Experimental evidence for this targeting by the CRM PTD has been generated in At [31].
Chromatin immunoprecipitation-based experiments
have demonstrated that centromeric retrotransposons
are associated with histones CenH3 and H3K9me2
[13,17,19,35,50] and are depleted in the euchromatic
fraction marked with H3K4me2 [35]. While the interaction with CenH3 has yet to be tested, it has been
demonstrated that the CRM PTD does not interact with
H3K9me2 [31]. Provided that the integrase C-terminus
ensures centromere-specific integration, it is reasonable
to assume that the CR motif is a key component of the
targeting process, since this is the sole relatively wellconserved portion of an otherwise rather variable
sequence (Figure 3). This line of argument is challenged, however, by the centromeric localization of
plant Ty3/gypsy retrotransposons lacking the CR motif.
These include CRM group B members in addition to, in
At at least, representatives of three major Ty3/gypsy retrotransposon lineages, two of which (Tat and Athila)
lack any sort of PTD [51,52]. Some chromoviruses possessing the type II chromodomain, especially those
belonging to the Tekay clade, are concentrated in the
centromeric regions of At [31] and banana [53]. In contrast, chromoviruses possessing type II chromodomains
are dispersed along the chromosome arms in rice [31].
Peabody (Tekay clade) and PIGY (Athila lineage) elements are both highly dispersed in pea [54] (Figure 5I).
Relatives of these two families are also dispersed in
white campion [49]. Thus, while centromeric localization is the norm for elements possessing the CR motif,
that of elements from lineages or clades lacking the CR

Page 10 of 16

motif is less predictable, although there is a tendency
for their dispersion to be favored in large genomes. Heterochromatin in small genomes, as defined by the presence of methylated H3K9, is localized principally in the
centromeric region, while in larger genomes, heterochromatic sites occur along the length of the chromosomes [55]. As a result, the apparently inconsistent
intrachromosomal distribution of elements with particular types of PTD may simply reflect the contrasting distribution of heterochromatin. A consequence of this
model is that elements possessing the CR motif must be
able to recognize a centromeric chromatin-specific
mark, while those with a type II chromodomain recognize a mark specific to heterochromatin more generally.
No experimental evidence is available yet to either support or refute this notion, nor has any mechanism been
suggested which can explain the colonization of the
centromeric regions by elements that lack a PTD. However, a previous study of At showed that the accumulation of retrotransposons in centromeres may be the
result of not only targeting but also purifying selection
from centromere distal regions [51]. For the time being,
therefore, we suggest that the term “centromeric retrotransposons” be reserved for group A elements, because
only these are likely to actively target the centromeric
region.
How widespread are the centromeric retrotransposons?

The present data show that CRM retrotransposons are
widespread among seed plants. However, representatives
of groups A and B were present in the angiosperms
(both mono- and dicotyledonous species), but not in the
gymnosperms and evolutionarily older species, such as
the moss Physcomitrella patens, the genome of which
has recently been sequenced [56,57]. All CRM elements
with confirmed centromeric localization belong to one
or the other of these two groups. Thus, genuinely centromeric retrotransposons are either angiosperm-specific
or are yet to be discovered in the other groups of plants.
The gymnosperm CRM elements that we have identified
belong to group C and are noncentromeric. Note that
the Pinus pinaster pPpgy1 sequence was wrongly cited
by Gorinsek et al. [27] as being centromeric ([58] and J.
S.P. Heslop-Harrison, personal communication), and we
believe that it is more likely to be a member of another
chromovirus clade. Some insertions have proven to be
very recent. The maintenance of transpositional activity
suggests that CRM clade members are probably not all
mere relics of earlier activity. The degree of amplification in the host genome differs from retrotransposon
family to retrotransposon family. For instance, the copy
number of At CRA is small, while that of the Norway
spruce Spdl-like sequence reaches 50,000 to 100,000.
A combination of published data for rice and maize

Neumann et al. Mobile DNA 2011, 2:4
http://www.mobilednajournal.com/content/2/1/4

[17,28], along with the present data relating to banana,
white campion, pea, grape and black cottonwood, indicates that the copy number of group A and B members,
which is in the range of hundreds to a few thousand, is
lower than that achieved by at least some group C
families.
The role of centromeric retrotransposons in centromere
function

Whether centromeric retrotransposons play any role in
centromere function is of fundamental interest. One
possibility is that they are merely parasitic and target
the centromeric region to escape negative selection
against insertions in distal regions of the chromosome
[31]. The opposing hypothesis holds that they play a
positive role in centromere function [59], in which case
their targeting is also beneficial to the host. Centromeric
sequences are polymorphic, yet the centromere represents a functionally highly conserved cytological structure [12,60]. Most centromeric sequences are repetitive
in nature. While centromeric satellites evolve rapidly at
the sequence level (to the extent that they are largely
species-specific) [61-63], centromeric retrotransposons
appear to evolve more slowly. However, as the centromeres are assumed to be determined more epigenetically
than genetically [64], it is unlikely that the centromeric
retrotransposon sequence itself can be a direct determinant of centromere identity and function. Instead, it is
probable that these repetitive sequences help to produce
a conducive genomic environment for the establishment
of centromeric chromatin. The promoters of centromeric retrotransposons may be important not only for
their own transcription but also for the transcription of
adjacent sequences as suggested by Jiang [12]. While it
remains to be confirmed that their transcription is
required for the deposition of CenH3 into the centromere, it does seem clear that transcripts of centromeric
repeats do play some role in determining the integrity
of centromeric chromatin and pericentromeric heterochromatin [45,65-67]. CRM element transcripts remain
bound to CenH3 chromatin, suggesting that they have a
stabilizing role in the structure of the maize centromere
[34]. All centromeric retrotransposons tested to date are
actively transcribed [26,34,35] (Additional file 5: Transcription of centromeric retrotransposons), so it is reasonable to suggest that their function is similar to that
of CRM. The outer centromeric repeats in the pericentromeric heterochromatin of fission yeast (Saccharomyces pombe) are required for the RNAi-mediated
formation of heterochromatin necessary for the establishment of CENP-A (a synonym for CenH3) chromatin
in the core domain [44,68]. A portion of the centromeric retrotransposons is also associated with the heterochromatin mark H3K9me2, and at least some of

Page 11 of 16

their transcripts are processed via the RNAi pathway
[35]. However, although the dependence on RNAi of
both heterochromatin formation and centromere function has been demonstrated repeatedly [69-77], defective
cell division has not as yet been associated with RNAi
mutants in plants [78]. As the production of small RNA
derived from centromeric retrotransposon transcripts
was not compromised in RNAi mutants (Additional file
5: Transcription of centromeric retrotransposons), the
absence of this predicted phenotype in these mutants
may reflect a sufficient level of redundancy in the RNAi
machinery. However, considering the very low frequency
of small RNA sequences, we cannot exclude the possibility that they are merely an artefact of high-throughput
sequencing. Therefore, it remains an open question both
whether RNAi plays an important role in the regulation
of centromeric retrotransposons and whether it is
required for normal centromere function in plants.

Conclusions
Although centromeric retrotransposons were classified
as a CRM clade of chromoviruses, our results show that
genuinely centromeric retrotransposons represent only a
fraction of this clade, which is referred to as group A in
this paper. All tested elements from this group have
centromeric localization, and most of them contain the
CR motif at the C-terminus of their integrase. This
motif is crucial for centromere targeting, and its
N-terminal part is relatively well conserved even among
evolutionarily distant species. Some chromoviruses containing altered sequences of the CR motif or lacking the
CR motif also have centromeric localization. It remains
unclear, however, whether their localization in centromeres is a result of centromere targeting or some other
mechanisms.
The genuinely centromeric retrotransposons are present in both major angiosperm groups (mono- and dicotyledonous species), but have not been found in the
gymnosperms and evolutionarily older species. They
represent the only relatively conserved component
within highly diverse sequences of plant centromeres.
Their transpositional activity contributes to high evolutionary dynamics of centromeres by generating new
insertions which may be further subjected to illegitimate
and unequal homologous recombination. In addition,
their transcriptional activity is consistent with the notion
that the transcription of centromeric retrotransposons
has a role in normal centromere function.
Methods
Plant material

Seeds of pea (Pisum sativum) cv. Carrera were obtained
from Osiva Boršov (Boršov nad Vltavou, Czech Republic). Seeds of barrel medic (Medicago truncatula) cv.

Neumann et al. Mobile DNA 2011, 2:4
http://www.mobilednajournal.com/content/2/1/4

Jemalong were obtained from the Crop Research Institute (Prague-Ruzyně, Czech Republic). Seeds of white
campion (Silene latifolia) were obtained from the Institute of Biophysics (Brno, Czech Republic). Seeds of Norway spruce (Picea abies) were harvested from natural
stands at Strážkovice, Czech Republic. Banana (Musa
acuminata cv. Calcutta 4 ITC 0249) plants were
received from the International Transit Centre, Katholieke Universiteit (Leuven, Belgium), and grape (Vitis
vinifera) cv. Pinot Noir plants were obtained from N.O.
S. (Nepomuk, Czech Republic). Black cottonwood
(Populus trichocarpa) cuttings were a gift from the Silva
Tarouca Research Institute for Landscape and Ornamental Gardening (Průhonice, Czech Republic).
In silico discovery of centromeric retrotransposons and
sequence analysis

The in silico search strategy depended on the reliable
discrimination of CRM chromoviruses from other LTR
retrotransposons on the basis of their RT domain protein sequence [27,79]. Thus, all green plant (Viridiplantae) sequences available in the GenBank database were
queried with the RIRE7 RT domain using TBLASTN
[80,81], with an e-value threshold of 1 e -5 . Rice
sequences were excluded because the CRR elements
have already been well characterized [17]. Full-size elements were identified among the resulting hits using
LTR_Finder [82]. Elements from different species, elements which could not be aligned with the others over
the whole length of their sequencesand elements sharing
less than 70% similarity in the LTR were classified as
distinct families. The relaxed TBLASTN stringency generated a diverse set of full-length retrotransposons containing elements from various Ty3/gypsy lineages, and
BLASTX was applied to compare their sequences with a
comprehensive database of RT domains extracted from
all the major groups of plant Ty3/gypsy retrotransposons (data not shown). Only elements which had the
best hits for some of the previously described CRM
members were retained. As the best hit-based criteria
could theoretically have resulted in the selection of
chromovirus elements related to, but not necessarily
falling within, the CRM clade, a phylogenetic analysis
was carried out to clarify the relationships between the
various elements. An additional search was conducted
of 454-originated sequence data obtained from pea [42],
white campion (J. Macas, E. Kejnovský, P. Novák, P.
Neumann, A. Koblížková, B. Vyskot, unpublished data)
and banana [53]. Contigs assembled from these
sequence reads according to the method described by
Macas et al. [42] were used to identify RT domains as
delineated above. De novo full-length or nearly fulllength sequences of these elements in white campion
and pea were obtained from, respectively, bacterial

Page 12 of 16

artificial chromosome (BAC) clones and sequenced
amplicons. Banana full-length elements corresponding
to 454-generated sequences were already represented in
GenBank. Although for the majority of the similarity
searches we used TBLASTN, some searches were performed at the protein level using programs implemented
in either HMMER [83,84] or MEME [85,86]. Sequence
analysis was conducted using software within the
EMBOSS or Staden packages [87,88], multiple alignments were performed using Clustal X [89] or Muscle
[90] software, and pairwise ones were performed using
the Stretcher program [91]. Protein domains were identified by searching the Conserved Domains Database
with RPS-BLAST [92], and by searching a local database
with BLASTP and BLASTX [81]. Phylogenetic analyses
relied on a neighbor-joining method using observed evolutionary distances implemented in the SeaView program [93]. Bootstrap values were calculated from 1,000
replications. Phylogenetic trees were drawn and edited
using the iTOL [94] and FigTree [95] programs. The
timing of individual insertion events was estimated on
the basis of comparisons between 5’ and 3’ LTRs as
described by Liu et al. [13]. Sequence logos were generated using the WebLogo tool [96]. The distribution of
BLAST hits across the whole genome sequence was
visualized using the NCBI MapViewer [97]. Small RNA
sequences originating from centromeric retrotransposons were identified using BLASTN searches.
PCR, cloning, sequencing and hybridization

The sequences of all the PCR primers used for retrotransposon amplification and cloning are listed in Additional file 6: PCR primer sequences and targets. Longer
fragments were amplified using LA DNA polymerase
(Top-Bio, Prague, Czech Republic). Each 30 μl of PCR
contained 1 × PCR buffer, 0.2 mM deoxyribonucleotide
triphosphate (dNTP), 0.3 μM concentrations of each primer, 2% (wt/vol) dimethyl sulfoxide, 0.3 U of LA DNA
polymerase and 150 ng of template. The reaction profile
included 35 cycles of 15 seconds at 94°C, 30 seconds at
60°C, and 7 minutes at 68°C, preceded by initial denaturation step (94°C for 60 seconds) and followed by a
final extension step (10 minutes at 68°C). Shorter fragments were amplified using Platinum Taq DNA Polymerase (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA). Here each
25 μl of PCR contained 1 × PCR buffer, 0.2 mM dNTP,
0.2 μM concentrations of each primer, 1.5 mM MgCl2,
1 U of Platinum Taq DNA Polymerase and 5 ng of template. The reaction profile included 35 cycles of 30 seconds at 94°C, 30 seconds at 55°C, and 1 to 3 minutes at
72°C, preceded by initial denaturation (3 minutes at 94°
C) and followed by a final extension step (10 minutes at
72°C). All PCR products were cloned into the pCR4
TOPO plasmid (Invitrogen). The resulting clones were

Neumann et al. Mobile DNA 2011, 2:4
http://www.mobilednajournal.com/content/2/1/4

either fully (cID58-2 and cID58-6) or partially
sequenced to verify that they contained the intended
insert. The sequences of the two fully sequenced inserts
have been deposited in GenBank [GenBank:GU136551
and GenBank:GU136552]. A complete list of the clones
used in this work is provided in Additional file 6: PCR
primer sequences and targets.
A set of 20,000 white campion BAC clones (A. Widmer, unpublished data) was spotted onto a filter and
screened by independent hybridizations with a-[ 32P]dATP-labeled cID51-1 and cID51-2 (Prime-It II Random Primer Labeling Kit; Stratagene, La Jolla, CA,
USA). The hybridization method used was the one
described by Yang et al. [98], which was followed by a
high-stringency wash in 0.1 × saline-sodium citrate
(SSC) buffer and 0.1% sodium dodecyl sulfate at 65°C.
Clones hybridizing strongly with both probes were isolated, and the presence of centromeric elements was
verified by PCR. BAC clone BAC105E4 was sequenced
using GS FLX technology (454 Life Sciences/Roche,
Branford, CT, USA) to a depth of 20 × at GATC Biotech AG (Konstanz, Germany). Reads (mean length,
250 bp) were assembled into contigs using CAP3 [99].
The sequences of the SilL1 and SilL2 retrotransposons
present in this BAC clone have been deposited in GenBank [GenBank:GU136549 and GenBank:GU136550].
Copy numbers were estimated for the Spdl-like
sequence (clones cID79-1 and cID81-4), VitV1 (cID73-4
and cID74-1), VitV2 (cID91-2) and VitV3 (cID90-10) as
described elsewhere [43]. These estimates were based on
the published 1C genome sizes of grape (0.43 pg [100])
and Norway spruce (18.6 pg [101]).
Fluorescence in situ hybridization

Root meristems were obtained from young seedlings
(barrel medic, Norway spruce, pea, white campion) or
plants (banana, black cottonwood, grape). The accumulation of meristematic cells at metaphase for banana, pea,
Norway spruce and white campion was carried out following the methods described by, respectively, Doleželová et al. [102], Neumann et al. [43], Űberall et al. [103]
and Kejnovský et al. [11], while for the remaining species,
mitotic metaphases were accumulated by treatment of
the roots with 2.5 μM amiprophos-methyl (in 1 × Hoagland’s solution) for 2 hours at room temperature. Mitotic
spreads of barrel medic, Norway spruce, pea, black cottonwood and grape chromosomes were made using a
conventional squashing method, followed by RNase A
and pepsin treatment [104]. FISH probes for these species were labeled by nick translation incorporation of biotin-deoxyuridine triphosphatase (biotin-dUTP) [104] into
a plasmid containing a retrotransposon insert. The following clones were used as sources of FISH probes:
cID58-2 (PiSat1), cID64-3 plus cID68-2 (MedT1,

Page 13 of 16

MedT2), cID79-1 plus cID81-4 (Spdl-like sequences),
cID85-11 (PopT2), cID91-2 (VitV2), cID90-10 (VitV3),
cID73-4 plus cID74-1 (both VitV1) and Psat32 (partial
sequence of the Peabody retrotransposon [43]). FISH
hybridization was performed overnight at 28°C, followed
by a posthybridization wash first in 2 × SSC at 32°C for 5
minutes and then in 50% (vol/vol) formamide in 2 × SSC
at 32°C for 10 minutes. Biotinylated probes were detected
as described by Leitch et al. [104] using fluorescein-avidin DN and biotinylated anti-avidin D. Chromosomes
were counterstained with 4’,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole.
Images were captured with a DS-Qi1Mc cooled camera
(Nikon, Tokyo, Japan) and analyzed using NIS Elements
3.0 software (Laboratory Imaging, Prague, Czech Republic). For white campion, chromosome preparation, probe
labeling, hybridization and signal detection followed the
methods described by Kejnovský et al. [11]. Probes consisting of SilL1 and SilL2 LTR fragments were amplified
from BAC105E4 (for primer sequences, see Additional
file 6: PCR primer sequences and targets). Chromosome
preparations of banana and the subsequent hybridization
and signal detection procedures followed the methods
described by Doleželová et al. [102]. The MusA1 probe
was PCR-labeled with biotin-dUTP from a template of
clone cID53-1 DNA.
RT-PCR

Total RNA was isolated from leaves using TRIzol reagent
(Invitrogen) and treated with DNase I (Ambion, Austin,
TX, USA). First-strand synthesis was achieved using a
SuperScript III First-Strand Synthesis System for RTPCR kit (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer’s
recommendations and employing random hexamers as
primers. A sample of 5 ng of the resulting cDNA was
used as a template for 25 μl of PCR containing 1 × PCR
buffer, 0.2 mM dNTP, 0.2 μM concentrations of each primer, 1.5 mM MgCl2 and 1 U of Platinum Taq DNA Polymerase (Invitrogen). The amplification regime included
35 cycles of 30 sec at 94°C, 50 sec at 55°C, and 1-3 minutes at 72°C, preceded by initial denaturation (3 min at
94°C) and followed by a final extension step (10 min at
72°C). All relevant primer sequences are given in Additional file 6: PCR primer sequences and targets.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Origin and structural features of sequences used
in this work. (A) Origin and (B) sequence and structural features of CRM
clade chromoviruses. (C) Elements belonging to the Tekay, Reina and
Galadriel clades.
Additional file 2: CRM sequences used in this study.
Additional file 3: Alignment of reverse transcriptase domains.
Additional file 4: Dot plot comparison of full-length CRM elements.
The elements are ordered according to group and plant family. Each
family is represented by one element.

Neumann et al. Mobile DNA 2011, 2:4
http://www.mobilednajournal.com/content/2/1/4

Additional file 5: Transcription of centromeric retrotransposons. (A)
Reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) analysis using
primer pairs amplifying the RT coding domain (see Additional file 6, PCR
primer sequences and targets). The three templates shown are reversetranscribed RNA (+), nontreated RNA (-) and genomic DNA (g). (B) Size
distribution of centromeric retrotransposon-derived small RNA. (C) The
abundance of centromeric retrotransposon-derived small RNA in various
tissues and in Arabidopsis thaliana RNA interference mutants. Data
recovered from two different Gene Expression Omnibus accessions
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/) are indicated by black or gray
columns. Columns containing data obtained from RNAi mutants are
indicated by hatched bars, and the identity of the defective genes is
indicated. The small RNA abundance was normalized against the total
number of small RNA. TPQ, number of occurrences per quarter million.
Additional file 6: Polymerase chain reaction primer sequences and
targets.

Page 14 of 16

6.
7.

8.
9.

10.

11.

12.
13.

Acknowledgements
This research was financially supported by grants from the Academy of
Sciences of the Czech Republic (KJB500960802 to PN and AVOZ50510513 to
JM), the Ministry of Education, Youth and Sport of the Czech Republic
(LC06004 to JM and JD) and the Czech Science Foundation (522/09/0083 to
RH). We thank H. Štěpančíková and J. Látalová for their excellent technical
assistance and Dr J. Weger (The Silva Tarouca Research Institute for
Landscape and Ornamental Gardening, Průhonice, Czech Republic) for his
provision of black cottonwood cuttings.
Author details
Biology Centre of the Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, Institute
of Plant Molecular Biology, Branišovská 31, České Budějovice CZ-37005,
Czech Republic. 2Institute of Biophysics of the Academy of Sciences of the
Czech Republic, Královopolská 135, Brno CZ-61265, Czech Republic.
3
Laboratory of Molecular Cytogenetics and Cytometry, Institute of
Experimental Botany of the Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic,
Sokolovská 6, Olomouc CZ-77200, Czech Republic. 4ETH Zurich, Institute of
Integrative Biology, Universitätstrasse 16, CH-8092 Zürich, Switzerland.
1

Authors’ contributions
PN and JM designed the study. PN carried out bioinformatics analyses and
participated in some experiments. JM, EK, JD and EH were involved in 454
sequencing. JM processed sequence data from 454 sequencing. AN carried
out fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) experiments in pea, black
cottonwood, barrel medic, grape and Norway spruce. EK and EH carried out
FISH in white campion and banana, respectively. AK participated in cloning
and sequencing experiments. AW constructed the bacterial artificial
chromosome (BAC) cloning library of white campion. RH and EK screened
the BAC library and sequenced the BAC clone BAC105E4. PN and JM drafted
the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

24.

Received: 8 October 2010 Accepted: 3 March 2011
Published: 3 March 2011

25.

References
1. Arkhipova IR: Transposable elements in the animal kingdom. Mol Biol
2001, 35:157-167.
2. Bennetzen JL: The contributions of retroelements to plant genome
organization, function and evolution. Trends Microbiol 1996, 4:347-353.
3. Deininger PL, Batzer MA: Mammalian retroelements. Genome Res 2002,
12:1455-1465.
4. Hirochika H, Hirochika R: Ty1-copia group retrotransposons as ubiquitous
components of plant genomes. Jpn J Genet 1993, 68:35-46.
5. Kumekawa N, Ohtsubo E, Ohtsubo H: Identification and phylogenetic
analysis of gypsy-type retrotransposons in the plant kingdom. Genes
Genetic Syst 1999, 74:299-307.

26.

27.
28.

29.
30.

Suoniemi A, Tanskanen J, Schulman AH: Gypsy-like retrotransposons are
widespread in the plant kingdom. Plant J 1998, 13:699-705.
Wöstemeyer J, Kreibich A: Repetitive DNA elements in fungi (Mycota):
impact on genomic architecture and evolution. Curr Genet 2002,
41:189-198.
Feschotte C, Jiang N, Wessler SR: Plant transposable elements: where
genetics meets genomics. Nat Rev Genet 2002, 3:329-341.
Vitte C, Panaud O: LTR retrotransposons and flowering plant genome
size: emergence of the increase/decrease model. Cytogenet Genome Res
2005, 110:91-107.
Balint-Kurti PJ, Clendennen SK, Doleželová M, Valárik M, Doležel J,
Beetham PR, May GD: Identification and chromosomal localization of the
monkey retrotransposon in Musa sp. Mol Gen Genet 2000, 263:908-915.
Kejnovský E, Kubát Z, Macas J, Hobza R, Mráček J, Vyskot B: Retand: a novel
family of gypsy-like retrotransposons harboring an amplified tandem
repeat. Mol Genet Genomics 2006, 276:254-263.
Jiang J: A molecular view of plant centromeres. Trends Plant Sci 2003,
8:570-575.
Liu Z, Yue W, Li D, Wang R, Kong X, Lu K, Wang G, Dong Y, Jin W, Zhang X:
Structure and dynamics of retrotransposons at wheat centromeres and
pericentromeres. Chromosoma 2008, 117:445-456.
Bao W, Zhang W, Yang Q, Zhang Y, Han B, Gu M, Xue Y, Cheng Z: Diversity
of centromeric repeats in two closely related wild rice species, Oryza
officinalis and Oryza rhizomatis. Mol Genet Genomics 2006, 275:421-430.
Cheng ZK, Dong FG, Langdon T, Shu OY, Buell CR, Gu MH, Blattner FR,
Jiang JM: Functional rice centromeres are marked by a satellite repeat
and a centromere-specific retrotransposon. Plant Cell 2002, 14:1691-1704.
Kumekawa N, Ohmido N, Fukui K, Ohtsubo E, Ohtsubo H: A new gypsytype retrotransposon, RIRE7: preferential insertion into the tandem
repeat sequence TrsD in pericentromeric heterochromatin regions of
rice chromosomes. Mol Genet Genomics 2001, 265:480-488.
Nagaki K, Neumann P, Zhang DF, Ouyang S, Buell CR, Cheng ZK, Jiang JM:
Structure, divergence, and distribution of the CRR centromeric
retrotransposon family in rice. Mol Biol Evol 2005, 22:845-855.
Nagaki K, Song J, Stupar RM, Parokonny AS, Yuan Q, Ouyang S, Liu J,
Hsiao J, Jones KM, Dawe RK, Buell CR, Jiang J: Molecular and cytological
analyses of large tracks of centromeric DNA reveal the structure and
evolutionary dynamics of maize centromeres. Genetics 2003, 163:759-770.
Zhong CX, Marshall JB, Topp C, Mroczek R, Kato A, Nagaki K, Birchler JA,
Jiang JM, Dawe RK: Centromeric retroelements and satellites interact
with maize kinetochore protein CENH3. Plant Cell 2002, 14:2825-2836.
Nagaki K, Murata M: Characterization of CENH3 and centromereassociated DNA sequences in sugarcane. Chromosome Res 2005,
13:195-203.
Francki MG: Identification of Bilby, a diverged centromeric Ty1-copia
retrotransposon family from cereal rye (Secale cereale L.). Genome 2001,
44:266-274.
Hudakova S, Michalek W, Presting GG, ten Hoopen R, dos Santos K,
Jasencakova Z, Schubert I: Sequence organization of barley centromeres.
Nucleic Acids Res 2001, 29:5029-5035.
Presting GG, Malysheva L, Fuchs J, Schubert I: A TY3/GYPSY
retrotransposon-like sequence localizes to the centromeric regions of
cereal chromosomes. Plant J 1998, 16:721-728.
Miller JT, Dong F, Jackson SA, Song J, Jiang J: Retrotransposon-related
DNA sequences in the centromeres of grass chromosomes. Genetics
1998, 150:1615-1623.
Gindullis F, Desel C, Galasso I, Schmidt T: The large-scale organization of
the centromeric region in Beta species. Genome Res 2001, 11:253-265.
Weber B, Schmidt T: Nested Ty3-gypsy retrotransposons of a single Beta
procumbens centromere contain a putative chromodomain. Chromosome
Res 2009, 17:379-396.
Gorinsek B, Gubensek F, Kordis D: Evolutionary genomics of
chromoviruses in eukaryotes. Mol Biol Evol 2004, 21:781-798.
Sharma A, Presting GG: Centromeric retrotransposon lineages predate the
maize/rice divergence and differ in abundance and activity. Mol Genet
Genomics 2008, 279:133-147.
Gorinsek B, Gubensek F, Kordis D: Phylogenomic analysis of
chromoviruses. Cytogenet Genome Res 2005, 110:543-552.
Kordis D: A genomic perspective on the chromodomain-containing
retrotransposons: chromoviruses. Gene 2005, 347:161-173.

Neumann et al. Mobile DNA 2011, 2:4
http://www.mobilednajournal.com/content/2/1/4

31. Gao X, Hou Y, Ebina H, Levin HL, Voytas DF: Chromodomains direct
integration of retrotransposons to heterochromatin. Genome Res 2008,
18:359-369.
32. Ma J, Wing RA, Bennetzen JL, Jackson SA: Plant centromere organization:
a dynamic structure with conserved functions. Trends Genet 2007,
23:134-139.
33. Wu J, Fujisawa M, Tian Z, Yamagata H, Kamiya K, Shibata M, Hosokawa S,
Ito Y, Hamada M, Katagiri S, Kurita K, Yamamoto M, Kikuta A, Machita K,
Karasawa W, Kanamori H, Namiki N, Mizuno H, Ma J, Sasaki T, Matsumoto T:
Comparative analysis of complete orthologous centromeres from two
subspecies of rice reveals rapid variation of centromere organization
and structure. Plant J 2009, 60:805-819.
34. Topp CN, Zhong CX, Dawe RK: Centromere-encoded RNAs are integral
components of the maize kinetochore. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2004,
101:15986-15991.
35. Neumann P, Yan H, Jiang J: The centromeric retrotransposons of rice are
transcribed and differentially processed by RNA interference. Genetics
2007, 176:749-761.
36. Lloréns C, Fares MA, Moya A: Relationships of gag-pol diversity between
Ty3/Gypsy and Retroviridae LTR retroelements and the three kings
hypothesis. BMC Evol Biol 2008, 8:276.
37. Malik HS, Eickbush TH: Modular evolution of the integrase domain in the
Ty3/Gypsy class of LTR retrotransposons. J Virol 1999, 73:5186-5190.
38. L’Homme Y, Séguin A, Tremblay FM: Different classes of retrotransposons
in coniferous spruce species. Genome 2000, 43:1084-1089.
39. Jaillon O, Aury JM, Noel B, Policriti A, Clepet C, Casagrande A, Choisne N,
Aubourg S, Vitulo N, Jubin C, Vezzi A, Legeai F, Hugueney P, Dasilva C,
Horner D, Mica E, Jublot D, Poulain J, Bruyère C, Billault A, Segurens B,
Gouyvenoux M, Ugarte E, Cattonaro F, Anthouard V, Vico V, Del Fabbro C,
Alaux M, Di Gaspero G, Dumas V, French-Italian Public Consortium for
Grapevine Genome Characterization, et al: The grapevine genome
sequence suggests ancestral hexaploidization in major angiosperm
phyla. Nature 2007, 449:463-467.
40. Sarri V, Minelli S, Panara F, Morgante M, Jurman I, Zuccolo A, Cionini PG:
Characterization and chromosomal organization of satellite DNA
sequences in Picea abies. Genome 2008, 51:705-713.
41. Bennett MD, Leitch IJ: Angiosperm DNA C-values database (release 7.0,
Dec. 2010). [http://www.kew.org/cvalues/].
42. Macas J, Neumann P, Navrátilová A: Repetitive DNA in the pea (Pisum
sativum L.) genome: comprehensive characterization using 454
sequencing and comparison to soybean and Medicago truncatula. BMC
Genomics 2007, 8:427.
43. Neumann P, Nouzová M, Macas J: Molecular and cytogenetic analysis of
repetitive DNA in pea (Pisum sativum L.). Genome 2001, 44:716-728.
44. Folco HD, Pidoux AL, Urano T, Allshire RC: Heterochromatin and RNAi are
required to establish CENP-A chromatin at centromeres. Science 2008,
319:94-97.
45. Wong LH, Brettingham-Moore KH, Chan L, Quach JM, Anderson MA,
Northrop EL, Hannan R, Saffery R, Shaw ML, Williams E, Choo KHA:
Centromere RNA is a key component for the assembly of
nucleoproteins at the nucleolus and centromere. Genome Res 2007,
17:1146-1160.
46. Gustafson AM, Allen E, Givan S, Smith D, Carrington JC, Kasschau KD: ASRP:
the Arabidopsis Small RNA Project Database. Nucleic Acids Res 2005, 33:
D637-D640.
47. Szittya G, Moxon S, Santos DM, Jing R, Fevereiro MPS, Moulton V, Dalmay T:
High-throughput sequencing of Medicago truncatula short RNAs
identifies eight new miRNA families. BMC Genomics 2008, 9:593.
48. Barakat A, Wall PK, DiLoreto S, dePamphilis CW, Carlson JE: Conservation
and divergence of microRNAs in Populus. BMC Genomics 2007, 8:481.
49. Čermák T, Kubát Z, Hobza R, Koblížková A, Widmer A, Macas J, Vyskot B,
Kejnovský E: Survey of repetitive sequences in Silene latifolia with respect
to their distribution on sex chromosomes. Chromosome Res 2008,
16:961-976.
50. Houben A, Schroeder-Reiter E, Nagaki K, Nasuda S, Wanner G, Murata M,
Endo TR: CENH3 interacts with the centromeric retrotransposon cereba
and GC-rich satellites and locates to centromeric substructures in barley.
Chromosoma 2007, 116:275-283.
51. Pereira V: Insertion bias and purifying selection of retrotransposons in
the Arabidopsis thaliana genome. Genome Biol 2004, 5:R79.

Page 15 of 16

52. Peterson-Burch BD, Nettleton D, Voytas DF: Genomic neighborhoods for
Arabidopsis retrotransposons: a role for targeted integration in the
distribution of the Metaviridae. Genome Biol 2004, 5:R78.
53. Hřibová E, Neumann P, Matsumoto T, Roux N, Macas J, Doležel J:
Repetitive part of the banana (Musa acuminata) genome investigated by
low-depth 454 sequencing. BMC Plant Biol 2010, 10:204.
54. Neumann P, Požárková D, Koblížková A, Macas J: PIGY, a new plant
envelope-class LTR retrotransposon. Mol Genet Genomics 2005, 273:43-53.
55. Houben A, Demidov D, Gernand D, Meister A, Leach CR, Schubert I:
Methylation of histone H3 in euchromatin of plant chromosomes
depends on basic nuclear DNA content. Plant J 2003, 33:967-973.
56. Novikova O, Mayorov V, Smyshlyaev G, Fursov M, Adkison L, Pisarenko O,
Blinov A: Novel clades of chromodomain-containing Gypsy LTR
retrotransposons from mosses (Bryophyta). Plant J 2008, 56:562-574.
57. Rensing SA, Lang D, Zimmer AD, Terry A, Salamov A, Shapiro H,
Nishiyama T, Perroud PF, Lindquist EA, Kamisugi Y, Tanahashi T,
Sakakibara K, Fujita T, Oishi K, Shin-I T, Kuroki Y, Toyoda A, Suzuki Y,
Hashimoto S, Yamaguchi K, Sugano S, Kohara Y, Fujiyama A, Anterola A,
Aoki S, Ashton N, Barbazuk WB, Barker E, Bennetzen JL, Blankenship R, et al:
The Physcomitrella genome reveals evolutionary insights into the
conquest of land by plants. Science 2008, 319:64-69.
58. Friesen N, Brandes A, Heslop-Harrison JSP: Diversity, origin, and
distribution of retrotransposons (gypsy and copia) in conifers. Mol Biol
Evol 2001, 18:1176-1188.
59. Slotkin RK, Martienssen R: Transposable elements and the epigenetic
regulation of the genome. Nat Rev Genet 2007, 8:272-285.
60. Hall AE, Keith KC, Hall SE, Copenhaver GP, Preuss D: The rapidly evolving
field of plant centromeres. Curr Opin Plant Biol 2004, 7:108-114.
61. Henikoff S, Ahmad K, Malik HS: The centromere paradox: stable
inheritance with rapidly evolving DNA. Science 2001, 293:1098-1102.
62. Houben A, Schubert I: DNA and proteins of plant centromeres. Curr Opin
Plant Biol 2003, 6:554-560.
63. Nagaki K, Walling J, Hirsch C, Jiang J, Murata M: Structure and evolution of
plant centromeres. Prog Mol Subcell Biol 2009, 48:153-179.
64. Dawe RK, Henikoff S: Centromeres put epigenetics in the driver’s seat.
Trends Biochem Sci 2006, 31:662-669.
65. Carone DM, Longo MS, Ferreri GC, Hall L, Harris M, Shook N, Bulazel KV,
Carone BR, Obergfell C, O’Neill MJ, O’Neill RJ: A new class of retroviral and
satellite encoded small RNAs emanates from mammalian centromeres.
Chromosoma 2009, 118:113-125.
66. Maison C, Bailly D, Peters AHFM, Quivy JP, Roche D, Taddei A, Lachner M,
Jenuwein T, Almouzni G: Higher-order structure in pericentric
heterochromatin involves a distinct pattern of histone modification and
an RNA component. Nat Genet 2002, 30:329-334.
67. Muchardt C, Guillemé M, Seeler JS, Trouche D, Dejean A, Yaniv M:
Coordinated methyl and RNA binding is required for heterochromatin
localization of mammalian HP1α. EMBO Rep 2002, 3:975-981.
68. Kagansky A, Folco HD, Almeida R, Pidoux AL, Boukaba A, Simmer F,
Urano T, Hamilton GL, Allshire RC: Synthetic heterochromatin bypasses
RNAi and centromeric repeats to establish functional centromeres.
Science 2009, 324:1716-1719.
69. Cam HP, Sugiyama T, Chen ES, Chen X, FitzGerald PC, Grewal SIS:
Comprehensive analysis of heterochromatin- and RNAi-mediated
epigenetic control of the fission yeast genome. Nat Genet 2005,
37:809-819.
70. Deshpande G, Calhoun G, Schedl P: Drosophila argonaute-2 is required
early in embryogenesis for the assembly of centric/centromeric
heterochromatin, nuclear division, nuclear migration, and germ-cell
formation. Genes Dev 2005, 19:1680-1685.
71. Durand-Dubief M, Bastin P: TbAGO1, an Argonaute protein required for
RNA interference, is involved in mitosis and chromosome segregation in
Trypanosoma brucei. BMC Biol 2003, 1:2.
72. Fukagawa T, Nogami M, Yoshikawa M, Ikeno M, Okazaki T, Takami Y,
Nakayama T, Oshimura M: Dicer is essential for formation of the
heterochromatin structure in vertebrate cells. Nat Cell Biol 2004,
6:784-791.
73. Kanellopoulou C, Muljo SA, Kung AL, Ganesan S, Drapkin R, Jenuwein T,
Livingston DM, Rajewsky K: Dicer-deficient mouse embryonic stem cells
are defective in differentiation and centromeric silencing. Gene Dev 2005,
19:489-501.

Neumann et al. Mobile DNA 2011, 2:4
http://www.mobilednajournal.com/content/2/1/4

74. Pal-Bhadra M, Leibovitch BA, Gandhi SG, Rao M, Bhadra U, Birchler JA,
Elgin SCR: Heterochromatic silencing and HP1 localization in Drosophila
are dependent on the RNAi machinery. Science 2004, 303:669-672.
75. Pidoux AL, Allshire RC: The role of heterochromatin in centromere
function. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 2005, 360:569-579.
76. Provost P, Silverstein RA, Dishart D, Walfridsson J, Djupedal I, Kniola B,
Wright A, Samuelsson B, Rådmark O, Ekwall K: Dicer is required for
chromosome segregation and gene silencing in fission yeast cells. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 2002, 99:16648-16653.
77. Volpe T, Schramke V, Hamilton GL, White SA, Teng G, Martienssen RA,
Allshire RC: RNA interference is required for normal centromere function
in fission yeast. Chromosome Res 2003, 11:137-146.
78. May BP, Lippman ZB, Fang Y, Spector DL, Martienssen RA: Differential
regulation of strand-specific transcripts from Arabidopsis centromeric
satellite repeats. PLoS Genet 2005, 1:e79.
79. Lloréns C, Futami R, Bezemer D, Moya A: The Gypsy Database (GyDB) of
mobile genetic elements. Nucleic Acids Res 2008, 36:38-46.
80. Altschul SF, Gish W, Miller W, Myers EW, Lipman DJ: Basic local alignment
search tool. J Mol Biol 1990, 215:403-410.
81. Altschul SF, Madden TL, Schaffer AA, Zhang JH, Zhang Z, Miller W,
Lipman DJ: Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new generation of protein
database search programs. Nucleic Acids Res 1997, 25:3389-3402.
82. Xu Z, Wang H: LTR_FINDER: an efficient tool for the prediction of fulllength LTR retrotransposons. Nucleic Acids Res 2007, 35:W265-W268.
83. Durbin R, Eddy SR, Krogh A, Mitchison GJ: Biological Sequence Analysis:
Probabilistic Models of Proteins and Nucleic Acids Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press; 1998.
84. Eddy SR: A probabilistic model of local sequence alignment that
simplifies statistical significance estimation. PLoS Comput Biol 2008, 4:
e1000069.
85. Bailey TL, Elkan C: Fitting a mixture model by expectation maximization
to discover motifs in biopolymers. Proc Int Conf Intell Syst Mol Biol 1994,
2:28-36.
86. Bailey TL, Gribskov M: Combining evidence using p-values: application to
sequence homology searches. Bioinformatics 1998, 14:48-54.
87. Rice P, Longden I, Bleasby A: EMBOSS: the European Molecular Biology
Open Software Suite. Trends Genet 2000, 16:276-277.
88. Staden R: The Staden sequence analysis package. Mol Biotechnol 1996,
5:233-241.
89. Larkin MA, Blackshields G, Brown NP, Chenna R, McGettigan PA,
McWilliam H, Valentin F, Wallace IM, Wilm A, Lopez R, Thompson JD,
Gibson TJ, Higgins DG: Clustal W and Clustal X version 2.0. Bioinformatics
2007, 23:2947-2948.
90. Edgar RC: MUSCLE: multiple sequence alignment with high accuracy and
high throughput. Nucleic Acids Res 2004, 32:1792-1797.
91. Myers EW, Miller W: Optimal alignments in linear space. Comput Appl
Biosci 1988, 4:11-17.
92. Marchler-Bauer A, Anderson JB, DeWeese-Scott C, Fedorova ND, Geer LY,
He S, Hurwitz DI, Jackson JD, Jacobs AR, Lanczycki CJ, Liebert CA, Liu C,
Madej T, Marchler GH, Mazumder R, Nikolskaya AN, Panchenko AR, Rao BS,
Shoemaker BA, Simonyan V, Song JS, Thiessen PA, Vasudevan S, Wang Y,
Yamashita RA, Yin JJ, Bryant SH: CDD: a curated Entrez database of
conserved domain alignments. Nucleic Acids Res 2003, 31:383-387.
93. Gouy M, Guindon S, Gascuel O: SeaView version 4: a multiplatform
graphical user interface for sequence alignment and phylogenetic tree
building. Mol Biol Evol 2010, 27:221-224.
94. Letunic I, Bork P: Interactive Tree Of Life (iTOL): an online tool for
phylogenetic tree display and annotation. Bioinformatics 2007, 23:127-128.
95. FigTree. [http://tree.bio.ed.ac.uk/software/figtree/].
96. Crooks GE, Hon G, Chandonia JM, Brenner SE: WebLogo: a sequence logo
generator. Genome Res 2004, 14:1188-1190.
97. Map viewer. [http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/mapview/].
98. Yang H, McLeese J, Weisbart M, Dionne JL, Lemaire I, Aubin RA: Simplified
high throughput protocol for northern hybridization. Nucleic Acids Res
1993, 21:3337-3338.
99. Huang X, Madan A: CAP3: a DNA sequence assembly program. Genome
Res 1999, 9:868-877.
100. Lodhi MA, Reisch BI: Nuclear DNA content of Vitis species, cultivars, and
other genera of the Vitaceae. Theor Appl Genet 1995, 90:11-16.
101. Siljak-Yakovlev S, Cerbah M, Coulaud J, Stoian V, Brown SC, Zoldos V,
Jelenic S, Papes D: Nuclear DNA content, base composition,

Page 16 of 16

102.

103.

104.
105.

heterochromatin and rDNA in Picea omorika and Picea abies. Theor Appl
Genet 2002, 104:505-512.
Doleželová M, Valárik M, Swennen R, Horry JP, Doležel J: Physical mapping
of the 18S-25S and 5S ribosomal RNA genes in diploid bananas. Biol
Plantarum 1998, 41:497-505.
Űberall I, Vrána J, Bartoš J, Šmerda J, Doležel J, Havel L: Isolation of
chromosomes from Picea abies and their analysis by flow cytometry. Biol
Plantarum 2004, 48:199-203.
Leitch AR, Schwarzacher T, Jackson D, Leitch IJ: In situ Hybridization Oxford,
UK: BIOS Scientific; 1994.
Chaw SM, Chang CC, Chen HL, Li WH: Dating the monocot-dicot
divergence and the origin of core eudicots using whole chloroplast
genomes. J Mol Evol 2004, 58:424-441.

doi:10.1186/1759-8753-2-4
Cite this article as: Neumann et al.: Plant centromeric retrotransposons:
a structural and cytogenetic perspective. Mobile DNA 2011 2:4.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
