<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Ethnobotany genomics - discovery and innovation in a new era of exploratory research</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Journal of Ethnobiology and Ethnomedicine 2010 6:2. doi:10.1186/1746-4269-6-2"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Steven G Newmaster"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Newmaster and Ragupathy Journal of Ethnobiology and Ethnomedicine 2010, 6:2
http://www.ethnobiomed.com/content/6/1/2

RESEARCH

JOURNAL OF ETHNOBIOLOGY
AND ETHNOMEDICINE

Open Access

Ethnobotany genomics - discovery and
innovation in a new era of exploratory research
Steven G Newmaster*, Subramanyam Ragupathy

Abstract
We present here the first use of DNA barcoding in a new approach to ethnobotany we coined “ethnobotany
genomics”. This new approach is founded on the concept of ‘assemblage’ of biodiversity knowledge, which
includes a coming together of different ways of knowing and valorizing species variation in a novel approach seeking to add value to both traditional knowledge (TK) and scientific knowledge (SK). We employed contemporary
genomic technology, DNA barcoding, as an important tool for identifying cryptic species, which were already
recognized ethnotaxa using the TK classification systems of local cultures in the Velliangiri Hills of India. This
research is based on several case studies in our lab, which define an approach to that is poised to evolve quickly
with the advent of new ideas and technology. Our results show that DNA barcoding validated several new cryptic
plant species to science that were previously recognized by TK classifications of the Irulas and Malasars, and were
lumped using SK classification. The contribution of the local aboriginal knowledge concerning plant diversity and
utility in India is considerable; our study presents new ethnomedicine to science. Ethnobotany genomics can also
be used to determine the distribution of rare species and their ecological requirements, including traditional ecological knowledge so that conservation strategies can be implemented. This is aligned with the Convention on Biological Diversity that was signed by over 150 nations, and thus the world’s complex array of human-naturaltechnological relationships has effectively been re-organized.
Introduction
Ethnobotany genomics is a novel approach that is
poised to lead botanical discoveries and innovations in a
new era of exploratory research. The concept for this
new approach is founded on the concept of ‘assemblage’
of biodiversity knowledge, which includes a coming
together of different ways of knowing and valorizing
species variation in a novel approach seeking to add
value to both traditional knowledge (TK) and scientific
knowledge (SK). Ethnobotany genomics draws on an
ancient body of knowledge concerning the variation in
the biological diversity that surrounds different cultures;
combined with modern genomic tools such as DNA
barcoding it also explores the natural genetic variation
found among organisms. This genomic variation is
explored along a gradient of variation in which any
organism inhabits. We present here the first introduction to ethnobotany genomics including some background and several case studies in our lab, which define
* Correspondence: snewmast@uoguelph.ca
Botany Division, Centre for Biodiversity Genomics and Biodiversity Institute of
Ontario Herbarium, University of Guelph, Guelph, Ontario, Canada

an approach to this new discipline that may evolve
quickly with new ideas and technology. The motivation
for this new approach is a quest to understand how the
diversity of life that surrounds us can serve society-atlarge with nutrition, medicine and more.
Ethnobotany implicitly embodies the concept of interdisciplinary research. The term “ethnobotany” is derived
from ethnology (study of culture) and botany (study of
plants); it is the scientific study of the relationships that
exist between people and plants. Historically, ethnobotanists documented, described and explained the complex
relationships between cultures and their utility of plants.
This often included how plants are used, managed and
perceived across human societies as foods, medicines,
cosmetics, dyes, textiles, building materials, tools, clothing or within cultural divination, rituals and religion.
Much of this research assumes that TK can be imposed
upon a SK classification of living things. We suggest
that this is a biased approach and call for a more unified
approach that includes concept of ‘assemblage’ [1] a
coming together of different ways of knowing and valorizing biological variation. This novel approach seeks to

© 2010 Newmaster and Ragupathy; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Newmaster and Ragupathy Journal of Ethnobiology and Ethnomedicine 2010, 6:2
http://www.ethnobiomed.com/content/6/1/2

add value to both aboriginal knowledge and modern
science such as biodiversity genomics (DNA barcoding)
to understanding diversity as they work together to
potentially create new knowledge. Exploring the ways in
which these different knowledge practices are worked
together as ‘useful knowledge’ [2] will show how such
inquiries contribute to the common aim of the protection of cultural and biological diversity [3]. An interdisciplinary approach such as this will respond to the
increasing urgent global imperatives to conserve both
cultural and biological diversity as urged by the Convention of Biological Diversity [4], UNESCO’s ‘Man and
Biosphere Programme’ and the Declaration on the
Rights of Indigenous People (2007).
There is a global effort to expedite the documentation
and understanding of the planet’s natural diversity and
the scientific underpinnings of different biological classification systems [5,6]. This includes studies that have
documented aboriginal classification systems for plants
and animals [7-10]. Our understanding of ethnobiological classification has recently advanced and is more
complex that originally thought. TK often includes multiple mechanisms of classification [11,12] that goes
beyond morphology and includes sensory perception,
ecology and utilitarian characters [5,13-18]. This presents an impediment to utilizing these ancient classification systems for interpreting biodiversity because they
are very complicated, which requires a great deal of
time to fully comprehend, reconstruct and utilize.
Ethnobotany genomics engages modern tools that can
overcome taxonomic impediments to exploring biodiversity. Contemporary Biodiversity Genomics includes
intense sampling of organisms at different taxonomic
levels for the same genomic region (DNA barcode) [19].
This provides a link between variation in taxa, sequence
evolution and genomic structure and function, providing
a good estimate of the evolutionary process. The
approach integrates “Genomic Thinking” (high-volume,
high-throughput) with the natural variation encountered
in ecosystems to explore biological diversity. The recent
development and application of DNA-based approaches
enables biodiversity genomics and the development of
new areas of research such as ethnobotany genomics.
DNA barcoding is a critical technique employed in
biodiversity genomics. Hebert et al. [19] developed DNA
barcoding as a method of species identification and
recognition in animals using specific regions of DNA
sequence data [20]. He has developed barcoding in animals, which is well documented and can be reviewed
online via the Canadian Barcode of Life [21] and the
Consortium for the Barcode of Life [22]. Although the
difficulties of plant barcoding have been debated
[23-26], detailed studies [27-37] have demonstrated the
utility of barcoding as an effective tool for plant

Page 2 of 11

identification. Recently DNA barcoding has been used
as a modern genomics tool for identifying cryptic plant
species [28-30,33,34]. The applications to Ethnobiology
are discussed for the first time in the literature in this
paper.
The goal of this paper is to introduce a unified
approach to exploring biodiversity that draws on different knowledge systems. These systems include both traditional knowledge (TK) and scientific knowledge (SK).
The later utilizes DNA barcoding, as a modern identification technique to assess inter/intraspecific genetic variation among taxa, all of which is in-trenched in alpha
taxonomy. We use two case studies (Ethnobotany genomics of Biophytum and Tripogon) to present this
approach as examples that other research labs might
model, contributing to the assemblage of a larger body
biodiversity knowledge, which includes TK and SK and
perhaps creates new knowledge in the process.

Materials and methods
Study Area

The study site (longitude 6° 40’ to 7° 10’ E and latitude
10° 55’ to 11° 10’ N) is located within the Velliangiri
holy hills, which forms a major range in the Western
Ghats in the Nilgiri Biosphere Reserve. The research
was conducted among seven hills with altitudes ranging
from 520 m - 1840 m, which is bordered by the Palghat
district of Kerala on the western boundary, the plains of
Coimbatore district to the east, the Nilgiri mountains to
the north, and the Siruvani hills on the southern
boundary.
Ethnobotany Surveys

Floristic explorations were made within respective study
areas within India [18,29,33,38-41]. Collections were
made from April 2004-January 2009 and included all
seasons in order to collect any ephemerals or specialized
phenotypes. Six collections or “specimens” from each
population were collected, labelled with locations and
collection numbers for of 19 Biophytum species (Figure
1) and 12 Tripogon species (Figure 2). Corresponding
field data included details of the specimens (habit,
flower colour, phenology and presence or absence of
latex) and environmental variables (habitat, latitude,
longitude, altitude, soil type and plant associations).
Multiple populations were sampled along transects separated by 2 km in order to insure that we were collecting
distinct populations and not vegetative colonies. This
also accounted for local morphological variants within
the different ecosites. The survey used is that of earlier
methodologies [12,18,33,41] to identify local experts in
traditional botanical knowledge. We interviewed over
120 informants from which we selected 80 informants.
Vouchers were collected and labelled for all taxa identified (Figure 3). The data were gathered in a series of

Newmaster and Ragupathy Journal of Ethnobiology and Ethnomedicine 2010, 6:2
http://www.ethnobiomed.com/content/6/1/2

Page 3 of 11

Figure 1 Classification tree from DNA barcoding sequence data (rbcL, matK and trnH-psbA + 41 quantitative variables) of 19
Biophytum species and varieties including three new species (dotted boxes; grey boxes outlines intraspecific variation recognized as
ethnotaxa).

Newmaster and Ragupathy Journal of Ethnobiology and Ethnomedicine 2010, 6:2
http://www.ethnobiomed.com/content/6/1/2

Page 4 of 11

Figure 2 Classification tree from DNA barcoding sequence data (rbcL, matK and trnH-psbA) of 12 Tripogon species one new species
(dotted boxes; grey boxes outlines intraspecific variation recognized as ethnotaxa).

Newmaster and Ragupathy Journal of Ethnobiology and Ethnomedicine 2010, 6:2
http://www.ethnobiomed.com/content/6/1/2

Page 5 of 11

Figure 3 Conducting survey with informant, Vadaman Chakkan Palanisamy.

structured, semi-structured and unstructured interviews,
and participatory approach regarding plant uses, identification, and nomenclature. To elucidate cultural domains
and determine differences in knowledge or taxonomy
among aboriginals, a cross check was made with other
aboriginal respondents by using various research protocols such as free recall lists, pile sorts, and consensus
analysis.
Plant Vouchers

Plant samples were collected from the aboriginal community and preserved for both herbaria and DNA barcode analysis (Figure 4). Leaf, stem and flower parts
collected in situ were fixed in silica gel, FAA (50% ethanol, 5% acetic acid, 10% formalin, 35% water) and stored
in 70% ethanol for morphological study ex situ. Herbarium specimens were prepared as per Jain and Rao’s [42]
manual and deposited in the herbarium of Kongunadu
Arts and Science College, Coimbatore. The isotypes of
new taxa and other taxonomically significant plant species were deposited at Madras Herbarium (MH), Southern Circle, Botanical Survey of India, Coimbatore and
Ontario Agricultural College (OAC) Herbarium, Biodiversity Institute of Ontario, University of Guelph,
Canada.
Identification Analysis

Calculation of a Consensus Factor (Fic), and pile sorting
relative frequency (RF) was used to test homogeneity of
knowledge (SK & TK) in identifying specimens, revealing cryptic taxa or limitations of the classification

without the use of molecular data. Voucher samples collected from five collection sites were systematically identified by the taxonomists and aboriginal informants. The
relative frequency (RF) of each specimen from the interviews were calculated to determine a quantitative value
for choosing a plant name (latin binomial or aboriginal
ethno-taxon) from the pool of collected vouchers and
placing it in a species concept [12]. RF is the simple calculation of the percentage of specimens associated with
a taxon when taxonomists or aboriginal informants are
presented with a pool of vouchers and asked to perform
“pile sort”. Trotter and Logan [43] provide the calculation of a Consensus Factor [Fic = Nur-Nt/(Nur-1)],
which is adopted to evaluate the degree of partition into
categories [44]. We have adopted this to include ‘aboriginal utility’ by the aboriginal informants [33,18,39,41],
where Nur is the number of use-reports of informants
for particular category (TK plant use) factor, where a
use-report is a single record for use of a plant mentioned by an individual, and Nt refers to the number of
species used for that particular category for all informants [18].
DNA Barcoding

Three DNA regions (rbcL, matK and trnL-F) were
selected based on the previous plant barcoding studies
[27,30,35,36]. We isolated total genomic DNA from
approximately 10 mg of dried leaf material from each
sample using the kit, NucleoSpin® 96 Plant II
(MACHEREY-NAGEL). Extracted DNA was stored in

Newmaster and Ragupathy Journal of Ethnobiology and Ethnomedicine 2010, 6:2
http://www.ethnobiomed.com/content/6/1/2

Page 6 of 11

Figure 4 Collecting Bare foot in the Velliangiri holy hills.

sterile microcentifuge tubes at -20°C. The selected loci
were amplified by PCR on a PTC-100 thermocycler
(Bio-Rad). DNA was amplified in 20 μl reaction mixtures containing 1 U AmpliTaq Gold Polymerase with
GeneAmp 106PCR Buffer II (100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.3,
500 mM KCl) and 2.5 mM MgCl2 (Applied Biosystems,
Foster City, CA), 0.2 mM dNTPs, 0.1 mM of each primer (0.5 mM for matK), and 20 ng template DNA.
Amplified products were sequenced in both directions
with the primers used for amplification, following the
protocols of the University of Guelph Genomics facility.
Products from each specimen were cleaned using Sephadex columns and run on an ABI 3730 sequencer
(Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA). Bidirectional
sequence reads were obtained for all the PCR products.
Sequences were assembled using Sequencher 4.5 (Gene
Codes Corp, Ann Arbor, MI), and aligned manually
using Bioedit version 7.0.9. The sequences were used in
combination with the morphometric analysis to produce
classification trees.
Morphometric Data Collection and Analyses

Morphological data variables, were recorded for all specimen collections. A matrix of specimens and morphological characters were used in a multivariate phenetic
analysis. Canonical ordination was used to detect groups
of specimens and to estimate the contribution of each
variable to the analysis. A cluster analysis was used to
classify the specimens because it is better at representing distances among similar specimens [45]. Cluster

analysis was carried out using NTSYS [46]. A distance
matrix was generated from the specimens and characters using an arithmetic average (UPGMA) clustering
algorithm and standardized data based on average taxonomic distance subjected to the unweighted pair-group
method. The resulting distance matrix from the cluster
analysis used in combination with the sequence data
above to produce classification trees.

Results and Discussion
Biophytum Ethnobotany Genomics

The genus Biophytum DC. (ca. 80 species, Oxalidaceae)
is predominantly pantropical to subtropical in distribution [47]. Biophytum is one of only eight genera in three
families of flowering plants (Lythraceae, Oxalidaceae,
and Potederiaceae) that are tristylous [48]. The genus is
poorly studied with limited floristic treatment in Knuth’s
[49] monograph of Oxalidaceae, which was later revised
by Veldkamp [50]. The genus has been confused with
that of Oxalis. Linnaeus described Oxalis sensitiva [51],
from a neotype later classified as Biophytum sensitivum
(L.) DC. Veldkamp [52] noted that the genus Biophytum
appears to be first described in a treatise by Acosta [53],
which later appeared with a plate in Clusius’ treatment
(1605) of Herba viva. A brief narrative of the historical
nomenclature on Biophytum of the old world is provided by Veldkamp [52]. Veldkamp [52] states that there
is no comprehensive treatment of the genus, which contains many undescribed species.

Newmaster and Ragupathy Journal of Ethnobiology and Ethnomedicine 2010, 6:2
http://www.ethnobiomed.com/content/6/1/2

The contribution of the local aboriginal knowledge
concerning variation in Biophytum within India is considerable. India has a high diversity of Biophytum; the
Biophytum flora of India is currently represented by 17
species and two varieties of which four species are endemic, representing taxa that are in need of conservation
status and protection [54]. Recent floristic surveys are
reporting considerable diversity within protected religious areas in India, some of which preserve a significant portion of the Biophytum flora [55,18,33]. All 19
species and varieties of Biophytum in this study are
found in the Western Ghats, which is part of Nilgiri
Biosphere Reserve (NBR) in Tamil nadu. The Velliangiri
hills of India are also known for their rich anthropogenic diversity. The aboriginals living in the Velliangiri
hills are the “Malasars, Mudhuvars and Irulas”
[11,12,18,33,41]. They have accumulated extensive ethnobotanical knowledge by their long association with
their diverse, local flora [38]. In our floristic study
within the Velliangiri hills we recorded 177 plants,
which are used by the local people for various purposes
[12,18]. These aboriginals recognize plants of the genus
Biophytum ("thottal sinungi”, trnsl. ‘touch me not’) naming and identifying many ethnotaxa including an ecological knowledge of them [11,12,38]. It is this TK that
provided clues to the identity of several new species
[29,55] while working with the aboriginals in the Velliangiri hills. The respective classifications of the genus
Biophytum using both SK and TK are not homogeneous. Taxonomists identified taxa with 84% (RF) accuracy, while the Aboriginal informants identified the
same specimens with 97% (RF) accuracy [38]. Consensus
factors were high (Fic = .94-.99) and not partitioned
among the Aboriginal informants. The TK classification
recognizes considerable fine scale variation among Biophytum samples (Figure 1). The TK classification of Biophytum is hierarchical, employing several TK
classification characters; morphology, ecology, experience, gestalt and utility including 4 secondary classification mechanisms (e.g., nutritional, medicinal, technical
or ritual). Interestingly these new species corresponded
to unique aboriginal taxa with respective nomenclature
and medicinal use [29,30,12,33,18,41].
DNA barcoding validated three new cryptic species to
science that were previously recognized by TK classifications of the Irulas and Malasars. These species include
1) ‘Vishamuruchi’ (translation - detoxification of the
poison; Biophytum coimbatorense sp. nov.), which is
used as an antidote for poisonous scorpion bites, 2)
‘Thear chedi’ (translation - Chariot umbrella; Biophytum
tamilnadense sp. nov) is used as a bait plant for fish and
crab and 3) ‘Idduki poondu’ (translation - between the
rock; Biophytum velliangirianum sp. nov.) is used for
curing ear aches. A Classification tree from DNA

Page 7 of 11

barcoding sequence data (rbcL, matK and trnH-psbA +
41 quantitative variables) resolved 19 Biophytum species
and varieties including the three new species (Figure 1).
DNA barcoding discriminated the cryptic ethnotaxa Biophytum coimbatorense sp. nov. (’Vishamuruchi’) from
the morphologically similar species of B. longipedunculatum Govind. (’Thotal sinungi’). Amplifications were
highly specific with a clear background in the agarose
gel. Although there were no differences in the rbcL or
atpF sequences for these two cryptic species, the matK
and more variable non-coding spacer regions such as
trnH-psbA sequences were consistently different. Several
segregating sites in the matK sequences are found consistently among the five distant populations. Several
other studies [30,36] have also found that closely related
species are not distinguished by several plastid regions
like rbcL or atpF.
Ethnobotany genomics is currently being used to
determine the distribution of rare species and their ecological requirements, including traditional ecological
knowledge so that conservation strategies can be implemented. We are currently conducting further research
on more species in the genus Biophytum in collaboration with several other aboriginal cultures in order to
resolve species concepts within the world distribution
and provide a phylogeny for the genus. Combined with
a further biological and ecological data this information
will contribute to conservation initiatives at a global
scale.
Tripogon Ethnobotany Genomics

The genus Tripogon Roem. & Schult. consists of nearly
40 species in tropical and subtropical regions [56-58].
The diversity of this genus of grass has been described
thoroughly within the catalogue of world grasses by
Peterson et al. [59], a revision of African species of Tripogon [60,61], the description of new species of Tripogon from Africa [62], a summary of grass genera
worldwide [56], an online world grass flora by [58], and
nomenclature changes by Veldkamp [63]. Rúgolo de
Agrasar & Vega [64] reported that Indo-Asia constitutes
the centre of diversity for this genus, with 23 species of
which 16 species are native to China and 21 species
including eight endemics are native to India [29]. Most
of what has been published within the Indian flora and
includes three new species of Tripogon[65-67,29].
We recently discovered a new species of Tripogon (T.
cope Newm.) during an ethnobotany genomics study in
the Nilgiri Biosphere Reserve, Western Ghats, India
[29]. We worked with aboriginal informants who are
members of the local hill tribes (Irulas and Malasars).
The informants revealed ethno taxa that we later confirmed to be a new species. The ability of our field taxonomists and the Hill Tribe informants to identify
species in the genus Tripogon was high, but the

Newmaster and Ragupathy Journal of Ethnobiology and Ethnomedicine 2010, 6:2
http://www.ethnobiomed.com/content/6/1/2

respective classifications of SK and TK are not homogeneous. Our taxonomists identified seven taxa from the
40 specimens with 96% (RF) accuracy among individuals. Aboriginal informants identified eight taxa from
the same 40 specimens with 98% RF among the informants. A closer investigation of the voucher samples
revealed that what we called T. wightii the informants
split into two distinct ethnotaxa; ‘Sunai pul’ and ‘Kattai
pul’. The TK classification of Tripogon is hierarchical,
employing several TK classification characters; ecology,
experience, gestalt and utility including 4 secondary
classification mechanisms (e.g., nutritional, medicinal,
technical or ritual). An additional TK character used to
distinguish ‘Sunai pull’ was that it is a ‘hot’ plant (see
discussion below).
The cryptic ethnotaxa ‘Sunai pul’ and ‘Kattai pul’ have
utility in the local hill tribes. Our ethnobotany surveys
concluded that there was no partition of Fic among the
‘Malasars and Irulas’. High consensus factors (0.95-0.99)
confirmed that seven of the ethnotaxa are commonly
used for a variety of purpose: snake hunting, fodder for
domesticated animals and thatching. The new cryptic
ethnotaxa ‘Sunai pul’ is a unique grass which is very
important to both cultures with ritualistic and economic
utility. ‘Sunai pul’ was not distinguished by the SK classification with vouchers lumped within the taxonomy of
Tripogon wightii, which was labelled as ‘Kattai pul’
within the TK classification.
Further research validated that the cryptic ethnotaxa
‘Sunai pul’ was indeed a new species. Morphometric
[29] and genetic studies [33] confirmed that the cryptic
ethnotaxa ‘Sunai pul’ (Tripogon cope Newm.) was distinct from the morphologically similar species of Tripogon wightii (’Kattai pul’). We looked at herbarium
vouchers and found that the close resemblance of T.
cope to T. wightii has resulted in misidentifications by
taxonomists during previous botanical surveys. Although
the hill tribes can easily identify these species, these
cryptic species are only differentiated by minor floral
characters; slight variation (1 mm) in the rachilla internodes and the number (1-3) of awns at the lemma apex.
The local aboriginal classification systems species are
clearly discriminated by different life cycles. We grew
the plants in the greenhouse and found that ‘Sunai pul’
(T. cope) is an annual and ‘Kattai pul’ (T. wightii) is a
perennial. We also used DNA barcoding to discriminate
the new species (Fig 2). Our classification tree from
DNA barcoding sequence data (rbcL, matK and trnHpsbA) clearly distinguished the 12 Tripogon known species from T. cope (Fig. 2). Intraspecific variation within
the classification tree are recognized by the hill tribes as
ethnotaxa of which ‘Sunai pul’ (T. cope) and ‘Kattai pul’
(T. wightii) are clearly differentiated. The DNA amplifications were highly specific with a clear background in

Page 8 of 11

the agarose gel. The matK and trnH-psbA sequences
had several segregating sites in sequences that were
found consistently among the distant populations. There
is a gross interspecific variation (p-distance 0.00234) and
no intraspecific variation among T. cope and T. wightii.
Interspecific variation among all eight species ranged
from (p-distance 0.002-0.003). Intraspecific p-distance
was 0.00 for all regions within all eight species.

Conclusion
Although there are many descriptive qualitative surveys
of TK, few studies consider aboriginal classifications
with respect to TK [12,33,18,41]. These studies have
revealed novel ethnomedicine such as in Ragupathy et
al. [39] whom discovered that cryptic ethnotaxa such as
‘Modakathon’ (Cardiospermum halicacabum - balloon
vine) is part of the daily healthy life style used by several
aboriginal cultures to control joint pain. In many cultures Cardiospermum halicacabum is harvested in backyards for both medicinal and food value. In fact, it
provides an income supplement for some families from
impoverished communities of third world countries.
The paradox is that weed scientists have described balloon vine as a poisonous, noxious weed, which should
be eradicated from the globe. Ragupathy et al. [18] identified several ethnotaxa of which one is a traditional
cure to a common ailment, rheumatoid arthritis.
In both of the case studies we presented there is considerable TK associated with the new species to science,
which are traditional ethnotaxa. ‘Vishamuruchi’ (Biophytum coimbatorense sp. nov.) is a detoxification for poisonous scorpion bites. The juice or extract of roots and
rhizosphere is made into fine powder that is applied to
a scorpion bite. A closely related cryptic species not differentiated by the taxonomist, ‘Thotal sinungi’ (translation - touch me not; B. longipedunculatum) is used to
alleviate a soar throat; the leaves are squashed in the
palms of their hands to extract the juice, which is
dropped into the ear three times a day for three days
with immediate results within in a few hours. ‘Thear
chedi’ (Biophytum tamilnadense sp. nov) is bait plant
for fish and crab. The Irulas collect fresh plants from
the forest and tie them in bundles weighing about 1 kg.
They bring 2-3 bundles to the pond and throw them
into the water and wait. As soon as they see that fish
are gathering near the bundle they throw their fishing
net and harvest the catch. Later, crabs will inhabit the
area around the bundle and can be gathered for food.
‘Idduki poondu’ (Biophytum velliangirianum sp. nov.)
grows in small pockets at high elevations and is a
remedy for ear aches. The preparation is similar to that
of ‘Thotal sinungi’ (B. longipedunculatum).
The new grass species in our study has considerable
utility to the hill tribes. In our study we found that the

Newmaster and Ragupathy Journal of Ethnobiology and Ethnomedicine 2010, 6:2
http://www.ethnobiomed.com/content/6/1/2

‘Malasars and Irulas’ classified Tripogon taxa into eight
ethnotaxa of which seven are used for similar utility;
cattle and goat feed or thatching. However, the aboriginal informants recognized a common grass as ‘Sunai
pul’ (T. cope) that is clearly differentiated by them from
another grass ‘Kattai pul’ (T. wightii). The etymology for
‘Kattai pul’ refers to a cold, hard and stout grass that
lives for many seasons and is used for cattle and goat
feed as many other common grasses. ‘Sunai pull’ is a
very special species to these cultures. The etymology for
‘Sunai pull’ refers to the hot, bushy, hairy snake grass
that lives for only one monsoon season. While working
in the field, the Irulas informants first introduced us to
‘Sunai pull’ with a warning. “Do not step near ‘Sunai
pull’ because this is where the cobra seeks shelter. In
fact, the local Irulas snake catchers come into the hills
to catch cobras among the patches of ‘Sunai pull’. They
told us that ‘Sunai pull’ is hot, or gives of heat and that
the snakes like to sleep there. Snake catching is viable
part of the economy of several local villages because the
demand for snake venom and skins. The extracted
venom is purified, frozen and then freeze-dried to make
the pure venom powder that is used by government
laboratories for the production of anti-venom serum. To
produce just one gram of pure cobra venom, 10 snakes
are needed, while to produce the same amount of the
saw-scaled viper venom the Irulas have to catch 750
snakes. A gram of the venom can cost up to $1,500
(USD) for some species of vipers. The snake skin is
used to make cosmetics and industry representatives
(often from export companies) come to the remote villages to buy skins from the Irulas. The importance to
theses aboriginal cultures is apparent; the recognition by
modern science is lagging behind because of taxonomic
impediments.
DNA barcoding may provide an important tool for
identifying cryptic species and validating ethnotaxa. One
of the greatest utilities of barcoding is its use in overcoming taxonomic impediments; identifying cryptic
materials such as unknown leaves, roots, etc. Barcoding
was used in the study of nutmeg [29] to identify species
in the Myristicaceae that are primarily separated by
androecium characters in small, short-lived flowers that
are only available for two weeks of the year. This study
identified several crytic taxa including population level
differences in Compsoneura associated with ecotypic differences and vicariance, suggesting several new cryptic
species. DNA barcoding is a tool that ethnobiologists
can employ to 1) validating ethnotaxa, 2) help overcoming hurdles of ambiguity, 3) gain credibility in science,
and 4) stimulate new theory on understanding, preserving biological and cultural diversity.
We have initiated further ethnobotany genomic studies in other cultures to develop theoretically

Page 9 of 11

sophisticated insights concerning the encounter between
‘local’ and ‘scientific’ approaches to biodiversity knowledge. These will further contribute to a body of research
on the social, cultural and political underpinnings biodiversity science; our understanding of the natural variation that surrounds us. Furthermore, the research will
add to a unifying global effort to speed up the documentation (via DNA barcoding) and understanding of
the planet’s biodiversity, while concurrently respecting
cultural heterogeneity as a vital component of biological
diversity. This is aligned with the Convention on Biological Diversity [4] that was signed by over 150 nations,
and thus the world’s complex array of human-naturaltechnological relationships has effectively been reorganized.

Consent
Written informed consent was obtained for publication
of accompanying images. A copy of the written consent
is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this
journal.
Acknowledgements
This project is funded by a SSHRC Standard Research Grant to Dr
Newmaster, the Canadian Foundation for Innovation, and the financial
support of the Shastri Indo-Canadian Institute. We would like to thank Dr. V.
Balasubrmaniam and Dr. M. Murugesan at the Kongunad Arts and Science
College, Coimbatore, India offered valuable time to time help and advice
regarding Biophytum and Tripogon ethnotaxa and members of the
Biodiversity Institute of Ontario Herbarium: Jose Maloles for editing an earlier
version and Dr. Aron Fazekas and Royce Steeves for their assistance at our
Centre for Biodiversity Genomics, University of Guelph.
Authors’ contributions
SGN conceived and designed the study, carried out analysis and writing of
the manuscript. SR carried out the field and lab work, contributed to the
study design and writing of the manuscript. both authors read and
approved the final manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 4 June 2009
Accepted: 26 January 2010 Published: 26 January 2010
References
1. Watson-Verran H, Turnbull D: Science and other indigenous knowledge
systems. Handbook of Science and Technology Studies London and New
Delhi: Sage PublicationsJasanoff S, Markle G, Petersen J, Pinch T 1995.
2. Strathern M: Useful Knowledge. The Isiah Berlin Lecture. University of
Manchester, Brunswick, UK Sunil CN, Pradeep AK (2001) Another new
species of Tripogon (Poaceae) from India. Sida 2005, 19:803-806.
3. Biber-Klemm S, Cottier T: Rights to plant genetic resources and Traditional
knowledge: Basic issues and prospective Oxfordshire: Nosworthy Way 2006.
4. CBD: Sustainable use is defined under Article 2 of the Convention on
Biological Diversity. 31 International Legal Materials; Rio de Janeiro 1992,
818.
5. Ellen R: Indigenous Environmental Knowledge and its Transformations:
Critical Anthropological Perspectives. Amsterdam and Routledge, London:
Harwood AcademicParkes P, Bicker A 2000.
6. Sillitoe P, Bicker A, Pottier J: Participating in Development: Approaches to
Indigenous Knowledge London: Routledge 2002.

Newmaster and Ragupathy Journal of Ethnobiology and Ethnomedicine 2010, 6:2
http://www.ethnobiomed.com/content/6/1/2

7.
8.

9.
10.
11.
12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.
21.
22.
23.

24.

25.

26.
27.

28.

29.

30.

31.
32.

Berlin B: The relation of folk systematics to biological classification and
nomenclature. Annual Review of Ecological and Systematics 1973, 4:259-271.
Ellen R: The Cultural Relations of Classification: An Analysis of Nuaulu Animal
Categories from Central Seram Cambridge, Massachusetts: Cambridge
University Press 1993.
Atran S: Itzaj Maya folk biological taxonomy. Folk Biology Cambridge,
Massachusetts: The MIT PressMedin DL, Atran S 1999, 119-204.
Brown CH: Folk classification: An introduction. Ethnobotany: A Reader
Norman, Oklahoma: University of Oklahoma PressMinnis PE 2005, 65-68.
Newmaster SG, Ragupathy S, Ivanoff RF, Nirmala CB: Mechanisms of
Ethnobiological Classification. Ethnobotany 2006, 18(1,2):4-26.
Newmaster SG, Ragupathy S, Balasubramaniam NC, Ivanoff RF: The Multimechanistic Taxonomy of The Irulas In Tamil Nadu, South India. Journal
of Ethnobiology 2007, 27:31-44.
Begossi A, Clauzet M, Guarano L: Are biological species and high-ranking
groups real? The ethnotaxonomy of fish on the Atlantic Forest coast of
Brazil. 20th Meeting of the Society for Human Ecology Salt Lake City, Utah
2005.
Ellen R: A test of the applicability of general principles of ethnobiological
classification to fungi: a nuau [abstract]. The Tenth International Congress
of Ethnobiology, Chiang Rai, Thailand 2006.
Mourão JS, Araújo HFP, Almeida FS: Ethnotaxonomy of mastofauna as
practiced by hunters of the municipality of Paulista, state of ParaíbaBrazil. Journal of Ethnobiology and Ethnomedicine 2006, 2(19):1-7.
Lampman AM: General principles of Ethnomycological classification
among the Tzeltal Maya of Chiapas, Mexico. Journal of Ethnobiology 2007,
27(1):11-27.
Souza PS, Begossi A: Whales, dolphins or fishes? The ethnotaxonomy of
cetaceans in São Sebastião, Brazil. Journal of Ethnobiology and
Ethnomedicine 2007, 3:9.
Ragupathy S, Newmaster SG, Murugesan M, Velusamy B, Huda M:
Consensus of the ‘Malasars’ traditional aboriginal knowledge of
medicinal plants in the Velliangiri holy hills, India. Journal of Ethnobiology
and Ethnomedicine 2008, 4(8):1-14.
Hebert PDN, Cywinska A, Ball SL, DeWaard JR: Biological identification
through DNA barcodes. Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological
Sciences 2003, 270:313-321.
Ratnasingham S, Hebert PDN: BOLD: the Barcode of Life Data System.
Molecular Ecology Notes 2007, 7:355-364.
Canadian Barcode of Life. http://www.bolnet.ca.
Consortium for the Barcode of Life CBOL. http://www.barcoding.si.edu.
Chase MW, Salamin N, Wilkinson M, Dunwell JM, Kesanakurthi RP, Haidar N,
Savolainen V: Land plants and DNA barcodes: short-term and long-term
goals. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences
2005, 360:1889-1895.
Kress WJ, Wurdack KJ, Zimmer EA, Weigt LA, Janzen DH: Use of DNA
barcodes to identify flowering plants. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences, USA 2005, 102:8369-8374.
Cowan RS, Chase MW, Kress WJ, Savolainen V: 300 000 species to identify:
problems, progress, and prospects in DNA barcoding of land plants.
Taxon 2006, 55:611-616.
Pennisi E: Wanted: a barcode for plants. Science 2007, 318:190-191.
Newmaster SG, Fazekas AJ, Ragupathy S: DNA barcoding in the land
plants: evaluation of rbcL in a multigene tiered approach. Canadian
Journal of Botany 2006, 84:335-341.
Newmaster SG, Ragupathy S, Janovec J: A Botanical Renaissance: State-ofthe-art DNA Barcoding Facilitates an Automated Identification
Technology (AIT) System for Plants. International Journal of Computer
Applications in Technology 2009.
Newmaster SG, Velusamy B, Murugesan M, Ragupathy S: Tripogon cope, a
new species of Tripogon (Poaceae: Chloridoideae) in India with a
Morphometric analysis and synopsis of Tripogon in India. Systematic
Botany 2008, 33(4):695-701.
Newmaster SG, Fazekas AJ, Steeves R, Janovec J: Testing Candidate Plant
Barcode Regions in the Myristicaceae. Molecular Ecology Resources 2008,
8:480-490.
CBOL Plant Working Group: A DNA barcode for land plants. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences USA 2009, 106(31):12794-12797.
Kress J, Erickson DL: Plant DNA barcodes and a community phylogeny of
a tropical forest dynamics plot in Panama. Proceeding of the National
Academy of Sciences, USA 2009, 106:18621-18626.

Page 10 of 11

33. Ragupathy S, Newmaster SG, Velusamy B, Murugesan M: DNA barcoding
discriminates a new cryptic grass species revealed in an ethnobotany
study by the hill tribes of the Western Ghats in southern India. Molecular
Ecological Resources 2009, 9(Supp l):172-180.
34. Newmaster SG, Ragupathy S: Testing Plant Barcoding in a Sister Species
Complex of Pantropical Acacias (Mimosoideae, Fabaceae). Molecular
Ecological Resources 2009, 9(Suppl 1):172-180.
35. Fazekas AJ, Kesanakurti PR, Burgess KS, Percy DM, Graham SW, Barrett SCH,
Newmaster SG, Hajibabaei M, Husband BC: Are plant species inherently
harder to discriminate than animal species using DNA barcoding
markers?. Molecular Ecological Resources 2009, 9:130-139.
36. Fazekas AJ, Burgess KS, Kesanakurti PR, Percy DM, Hajibabaei M,
Graham SW, Husband BC, Barrett SCH, Newmaster SG: Assessing the utility
of coding and non-coding genomic regions for plant DNA barcoding.
PLOS ONE 2008, 3:1-12.
37. Lahaye R, Bank van der M, Bogarin D, Warner J, Pupulin F, Gigot G,
Maurin O, Duthoit S, Barraclough TG, Savolainen V: DNA barcoding the
floras of biodiversity hotspots. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences USA 2008, 105:2923-2928.
38. Newmaster SG, Murugesan M, Ragupathy S, Nagaraj N, Velusamy B:
Ethnobotany Genomics study reveals three new species from the
Velliangiri Hills in the Nilgiri Biosphere Reserve, Western Ghats, India.
Ethnobotany 2009, 21:1-28.
39. Ragupathy S, Newmaster SG, Gopinadhan P, Newmaster C: Exploring
Ethnobiological Classifications for Novel Alternative Medicine: a case
study of Cardiospermum halicacabum L. (Modakathon, Balloon Vine) as
a traditional herb for treating rheumatoid arthritis. Ethnobotany 2008,
19:1-20.
40. Newmaster GS, Ragupathy S: Ethnobotany Genomics - Use of DNA
Barcoding to Explore Cryptic Diversity in Economically Important Plants.
Indian Journal of Science and Technology 2009, 2(5):2-8.
41. Ragupathy S, Newmaster SG: Valorizing the ‘Irulas’ traditional knowledge
of medicinal plants in the Kodiakkarai Reserve Forest, India. Journal of
Ethnobiology and Ethnomedicine 2009, 5(10):1-13.
42. Jain SK, Rao RR: A Handbook of field and Herbarium Methods. New Delhi:
Today and Tomorrow’s Printers & Publishers 1977.
43. Trotter R, Logan M: Informant consensus: a new approach for identifying
potentially effective medicinal plants. Plants in indigenous medicine and
diet: biobehavioural approaches New York: Redgrave PublishersEtkin NL
1986, 91-112.
44. Heinrich M: Ethnobotany and its role in drug development. Phytotherapy
Research 2000, 14:479-488.
45. Sneath P, Sokal R: Numerical taxonomy San Francisco, California: W.H.
Freeman 1973.
46. Rohlf F: NTSYS: Numerical Taxonomy and Multivariate Analysis System, Version
2.1 New York: Exeter Software 2000.
47. Lourteig A: Flora of Panama. Part IV. Family 84. Oxalidaceae. Annals of the
Missouri Botanical Garden 1980, 67:823-850.
48. Weller SG: Evolutionary modifications of tristylous breeding systems.
Evolution and Function of Heterostyly Berlin: Springer-VerlagBarrett SCH 1992,
247-272, Monogr. Theor. Appl. Genet. 15.
49. Knuth R: Oxalidaceae. Das Pflanzenreich Regni vegetalis conspectus IV Verlag
von. HR Engelmann, Berlin IVEngler HGA 1930, , 130: 391-417.
50. Veldkamp JF: Oxalidaceae. Flora Malesiana van Steenis CGGJLeiden Ser
1971, 1(7/1):162-164.
51. Linnaeus C: Species plantarum.. Stockholm 1753, 1, 434.
52. Veldkamp JF: Notes on Biophytum (Oxalidaceae) of the Old World. Taxon
1989, 38(1):110-116.
53. Acosta C: Tractado de las drogas, y medicinas de las Indias Orientales
Burgos. Portuguese Edition Walter J 1964, 1578:147-148.
54. Manna MK: Oxalidaceae (Biophytum DC.). Flora of India, (MalpighiaceaeDichapetalaceae) Calcutta, India: Botanical Survey of IndiaHajra PK, Nair VJ,
Daniel P 1997, 4:231-255.
55. Murugesan M, Ragupathy S, Balasubramaniam V, Nagarajan N,
Newmaster SG: Three new species of the genus Biophytum DC.
(Oxalidaceae-Geraniales) from Velliangiri hills in the Nilgiri Biosphere
Reserve, Western Ghats, India. Journal of Economic Taxonomic Botany
2009, 10-26.
56. Watson L, Dallwitz MJ: The grass genera of the world: descriptions,
illustrations, identification, and information retrieval; including
synonyms, morphology, anatomy, physiology, phytochemistry, cytology,

Newmaster and Ragupathy Journal of Ethnobiology and Ethnomedicine 2010, 6:2
http://www.ethnobiomed.com/content/6/1/2

57.

58.
59.

60.
61.
62.
63.
64.

65.
66.
67.

Page 11 of 11

classification, pathogens, world and local distribution, and references.
1992http://delta-intkey.com, (Revised version: 28th November 2005.
Peterson PM, Webster RD, Valdes Reyna J: Genera of new world
eragrostideae (Poaceae: Chloridoideae). Smithsonian Contributions to
Botany 1997, 87:1-50.
Clayton WD, Harman KT, Williamson H: Grassbase - the Online World
Grass Flora. 2006http://www.kew.org/data/grasses-db.
Peterson PM, Soreng RJ, Davidse G: Catalogue of new world grasses
(Poaceae): II. Subfamily Chloridoideae (Tripogon p. 231). Contributions
from the United States National Herbarium 2001, 41:1-255.
Phillips SM, Launert E: A revision of the African species of Tripogon Roem.
and Schult. Kew Bulletin 1971, 25:301-322.
Phillips SM: Flora of Tropical East Africa, Gramineae (Part 2) London: Crown
AgentsClayton WD, et al 1974, 288-294.
Cope TA: Some new Arabian grasses II. Kew Bulletin 1992, 4:655-664.
Veldkamp JF: Name changes in Agrostis, Arundinella, Deyeuxia,
Helictotrichon, Tripogon (Gramineae). Blumea 1996, 41:407-411.
Rúgolo de Agrasar ZE, Vega AS: Tripogon nicorae, a new species and
synopsis of Tripogon (Poaceae: Chloridoideae) in America. Systematic
Botany 2004, 29(4):874-882.
Naik VN, Patunkar WB: Two new grasses from Marathwada. Bulletin of the
Botanical Survey of India 1973, 15(1-2):157-158.
Sreekumar PV, Nair VJ, Nair NC: Tripogon anantaswamianus - a new grass
from Kerala, India. Bulletin of the Botanical Survey of India 1983, 25:185-187.
Sunil CN, Pradeep AK: Another new species of Tripogon (Poaceae) from
India. Sida 2001, 19:803-806.

doi:10.1186/1746-4269-6-2
Cite this article as: Newmaster and Ragupathy: Ethnobotany genomics discovery and innovation in a new era of exploratory research. Journal
of Ethnobiology and Ethnomedicine 2010 6:2.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
