<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Analysis of long branch extraction and long branch shortening</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Genomics 2010, 11:S14. doi:10.1186/1471-2164-11-S2-S14"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Timothy OConnor"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
O’Connor et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11(Suppl 2):S14
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/S2/S14

RESEARCH

Open Access

Analysis of long branch extraction and long
branch shortening
Timothy O’Connor1*, Kenneth Sundberg2, Hyrum Carroll2, Mark Clement2, Quinn Snell2
From The 2009 International Conference on Bioinformatics & Computational Biology (BioComp 2009)
Las Vegas, NV, USA. 13-16 July 2009

Abstract
Background: Long branch attraction (LBA) is a problem that afflicts both the parsimony and maximum likelihood
phylogenetic analysis techniques. Research has shown that parsimony is particularly vulnerable to inferring the
wrong tree in Felsenstein topologies. The long branch extraction method is a procedure to detect a data set
suffering from this problem so that Maximum Likelihood could be used instead of Maximum Parsimony.
Results: The long branch extraction method has been well cited and used by many authors in their analysis but
no strong validation has been performed as to its accuracy. We performed such an analysis by an extensive search
of the branch length search space under two topologies of six taxa, a Felsenstein-like topology and Farris-like
topology. We also examine a long branch shortening method.
Conclusions: The long branch extraction method seems to mask the majority of the search space rendering it
ineffective as a detection method of LBA. A proposed alternative, the long branch shortening method, is also
ineffective in predicting long branch attraction for all tree topologies.

Background
Due to its speed and simplicity, one of the most common methods used in phylogenetics is Maximum Parsimony [2] (MP). MP is based on the principle of the
Occam’s razor, which means the simplest explanation
for any phenomenon is the most probable. Under this
principle parsimony makes the claim of using few if any
assumptions, and while this has been disputed, MP’s
model is much more simple with far fewer parameters
than many other phylogenetic methods. Three major
problems have been cited with MP, stemming from this
assumption of simplicity. Many authors have argued
that parsimony has under parameterized the problem,
then the claim was made that it over parameterizes the
problem [3]. The third problem is that of Long-Branch
Attraction (LBA).
LBA is the foundation for many of the arguments
against the use of MP in phylogenetics. One foundational
study showed that MP can be positively misleading when
* Correspondence: timothydoconnor@gmail.com
1
Department of Zoology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 3EJ, UK
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

two non-sister taxa have long branches compared to the
rest of the tree [4]. This bias has then been reiterated in a
number of other simulated and empirical studies (see
Bergsten [5] for an in-depth review of the current debate
on LBA). The crux of the problem is that long branches,
whether sister taxa or not, are claded or grouped
together, creating scenarios where the MP method will
consistently be incorrect. This has the potential to occur
often, when given enough evolutionary time because
multiple sites will differentiate from each other. Since
there is a finite set of characters, (i.e. A,C,G,T for DNA)
the two sequences will have many sites with matching
characters. As more evolutionary time passes, fewer of
these sites will be due to a common ancestor or homology, and more of them will be due to the random use of
the same nucleotide. This non-homologous yet similar
sequence of characters adds noise to the phylogenetic
signal. This problem is not unique to parsimony but parsimony suffers from it more extensively than Maximum
Likelihood (ML) [6-10].
LBA has been found in many real world examples,
one review found 112 examples in a search on the Web

© 2010 O’Connor et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

O’Connor et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11(Suppl 2):S14
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/S2/S14

of Science [5]. This illustrates the need for a method
that can accurately evaluate if a phylogenetic analysis is
suffering from LBA. Some methods have been designed
in an attempt to fill this gap including: “methodological
disconcordance, RASA, separate partition analysis, parametric simulation, random outgroup sequences, longbranch extraction, split decomposition and spectral
analysis.” [5] Many of these current methods have been
shown to be ineffective or reliant on morphological
data. Reliance on morphological data is effective but creates problems due to the difficulty in gathering and
sampling this kind of data, so many researchers rely
exclusively on molecular data. Long Branch Extraction
(LBE), also referred to as Long Branch Abstraction, was
developed by Siddall, Whiting, and Pol as a method to
detect LBA. LBE relies on the assumption that if there
are two long sequences, removing one of them should
move the other to its correct place in the tree, and if
this location is different than its original location, the
dataset suffers from from LBA [1,9]. In [5] Bergsten proposes a six step method to detect LBA based on the
LBE method. These steps are:
1. If, after completing a full parsimony search you
obtain a tree with a questionable grouping of a certain
taxa that appears basal and makes the formal classification polyphyletic, suspect LBA.
2. Exclude the outgroup and re-run the analysis: does
the questionable taxa form a monophyletic clade of the
formal classification?
3. Return the outgroup and remove the questionable
taxa and re-run the analysis: does this root the tree differently then in step 1 (later compare to step 4 and 5 as
well)?
4. Return the questionable taxa and reanalyze the data
set by separating the gene information from the morphological data: does the morphological data form a
monophyletic group of the formal classification while
the gene data place the questionable taxa basal in the
tree?
5. Analyze the gene data using a method that takes
into account branch lengths, (i.e. Bayes or Likelihood):
does this method form a monophyletic group of the formal classification?
6. Using the same analysis of step 5: are the branch
lengths of the questionable taxa and the outgroup some
of the longest in the tree?
If you can answer yes to all the previous questions,
LBA is the least refuted hypothesis. We have chosen to
automate this technique with a few modifications and
evaluate it on a series of synthetic data with six taxa
under a variety of branch lengths with verified LBA.
The six taxa synthetic data sets were used for two
main reasons. Six taxa data sets are small enough to be
calculated in reasonable time but large enough for the

Page 2 of 9

LBE method to work. This gave us an a priori knowledge as to which trees were suffering from long branch
attraction.

Methods
Synthetic data sets

To evaluate long branch extraction, datasets that allow
for extraction of long branches and differentiation of
topological location are necessary. We chose to perform
the analysis using six taxa in a star shape for consistency
and comparability to the more prevalent studies using
four taxa cases of the Felsenstein and Farris (or reverseFelsenstein) zone topologies [6,11] (see Figure 1). These
scenarios present problems to phylogenetic methods
because of the challenge to some assumptions they
make. For example, parsimony assumes similar characters to be derived from a common ancestor, but with
long non-sister branches there is a great probability that
the two sequences are really analogous, meaning they
have converged to the same character independently.
Parsimony generally puts longer branches together in a
four taxa case and here the same or similar problems
have been preserved.
To produce these data sets we used the program
Dawg [12] under a General Time Reversible (GTR)
[13-15] model of evolution. We used similar parameters
as those found in the examples included with the program and explored a range of branch lengths. The
lambda value of 0.1 was used for the indel evolution
rate and can be interpreted as one indel for every ten
substitutions. The sequence length was set to 2000 as
this gives a reasonably sized sequence to allow for the
expected value of any simulation to be seen. The
nucleotide frequencies for the simulation were set to
0.2, 0.3, 0.3, and 0.2 for A, C, T, and G respectively with
substitution parameters set to 1.5, 3.0, 0.9, 1.2, 2.5, and
1.0 for AC, AG, AT, CG, CT, GT respectively. These
settings were chosen based on examples given with the
Dawg program.
Dawg generated data sets for trees under both topologies where the a and b branch lengths were varied from
a branch length of 0.1 to 2.0, incremented by 0.1. A
branch length of one is interpreted to mean that each
site is expected to have one substitution from the internal node under the GTR definition of branch length.
For each permutation of a and b branch lengths we ran
100 replicates to get a percentage of matches between
the two methods. This created a total of 40,000 data
sets for each topology.
Evaluation of LBA area

Each data set was then analyzed by comparing the best
parsimony tree from an exhaustive search. With six taxa
this means scoring all 105 possible trees to find the best

O’Connor et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11(Suppl 2):S14
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/S2/S14

Page 3 of 9

The tree that MP returned from the heuristic search
was then analyzed using LBE.
Steps of LBE

To perform LBE, the target tree, in our case the resultant heuristically derived parsimony tree, and data set
are given as parameters along with a list of outgroup
taxa and questionable taxa to our Java version of LBE.
Of the two b branches, one was selected as the questionable taxa while the other was selected as the
outgroup.
The first step of LBE is to remove the outgroup from
the tree and the data set and rerun a parsimony search.
The second step is to add the outgroup back and
remove the questionable taxa. To increase the sensitivity, according to the recommendations of Bergsten (see
“Concluding discussion: suggestions” from [5]) we
included a third step where the original data set was
evaluated under a branch length estimator method. We
used Maximum Likelihood, and the resultant tree was
compared to the original parsimony tree. If at any step
the tree found by the re-ran search is the same as the
original tree, minus the removed taxa in the first two
steps, then LBA is no longer suspected and the search is
terminated. If instead it passed through all of the steps,
the branch lengths of the outgroup and the questionable
taxa were compared to the rest of the branch lengths. If
they were in the top quartile they were considered long
branches. Having passed through each step or test, the
least disputed hypotheses based on molecular data
would be LBA.

Results and discussion
Areas under LBA

Figure 1 The Felsenstein-like and Farris-like topologies used to
simulate the data. The six taxa star shape Felsenstein-like and
Farris-like topologies.

one. This best tree was then compared to the parsimony
tree and the percentage of the trials out of 100 that the
two matched was recorded. Then for each of the permutations of a and b we generated a new set of 100 data
sets and performed a heuristic TBR parsimony search.
All scoring and searching was done with PAUP* [16].

To detect the areas most effected by LBA, we ran an
analysis of the six taxa data sets (see section ) over a
range of branch lengths and with two scenarios for the
position of the long branches (see Figure 1). Figure 2
shows where the location of LBA, as the black region
when the b branches are long and the a branches are
shorter under the Felsenstein-like topology. As a control, the Farris-like topology shows how the parsimony
bias can be perceived as increased accuracy under the
same permutations of branch length. In these figures,
the darker the color means the less amount of time the
MP analysis and the correct topology were in accordance. In other words, the yellow areas are regions
where MP always returned the correct topology (i.e. 100
out of 100 trials) and the black areas are where MP
never returned the correct topology. The gradient
obviously then covers the percentage of time at intermediate levels of accuracy. What is also interesting to
note is the extreme cut off between the areas of correct
prediction and those that are incorrect, especially when

O’Connor et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11(Suppl 2):S14
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/S2/S14

Page 4 of 9

This analysis served as a search space basis for where
LBA should be detected. By comparing the differences
between the Felsenstein-like and Farris-like topologies it
is clearly visible which areas should be detected. When
analyzed with ML these regions do not appear but the
loss of signal is still present (see Figure 4). The comparison of both the topologies and the ML method adds
further descriptive details and confidence to the search
space we are examining.
LBE is not functioning as theory predicts

Figure 2 Maximum Parsimony and the Felsenstein topology
Percentage of runs that MP identifies the true tree under the
Felsenstein-like topology. Trees found in the upper left corner (the
dark black area) suffer from LBA. The dark outer edge is where the
signal is lost from too long of branches.

examining the Felsenstein-like topology of Figure 2. This
very black region essentially shows the Felsenstein zone
or the conditions under which parsimony suffers from
LBA. Figure 3 shows the results for Parsimony under
the Farris topology.
One problem with most phylogenetic algorithms is the
loss of detectable signal with extremely long trees. The
length of the tree is the sum of all the branch lengths it
has and those with an extreme length or long trees are
difficult to decipher. This problem is clearly visible
when examining the upper right of the figures under
both topologies. We hypothesis that as the branch
lengths get longer the percentage correct will converge
to 0.95% as this is a random guess out of the 105 possible topologies.

Figure 3 Maximum Parsimony and the Farris topology
Percentage of runs that MP identifies the true tree under the Farrislike topology. Note the large area predicted correctly by MP; this is
the area where the sister taxa have long branches and are correctly
placed together based on MP’s bias.

For a method to accurately detect LBA, it needs to discern between these two types of topologies and find the
area of LBA. The region found by searching the branch
length space should be the same predicted by LBE. Surprisingly this was not the case.
As is seen in Figures 5 and 6, LBE seems to completely
miss the area it is intended to detect (the upper left corner). For a more in depth investigation we analyzed the
data by examining specific scenarios that should show
extreme LBA. In the majority of cases examined, the parsimony trees outputted in the LBA zone really did suffer
from LBA as predicted, but the method failed to recognize it and the short sister taxa of the removed taxa was
incorrectly grouped with the other long branch.
Further, LBE predicted LBA under the Farris-like
topology, where we know a priori that the data set does
not suffer from LBA. A few inconsistent categorizations
would be understandable because no method is perfect.
But this situation, where similar branch lengths give
similar conservative predictions under both topologies,
calls into question what the method is actually
predicting.

Figure 4 Maximum Likelihood and the Felsenstein topology
Percentage of runs that ML identifies the true tree under the
Felsenstein-like topology. Notice that the area of high accuracy is
much larger and covers most of the LBA region. ML is not as
susceptible to LBA.

O’Connor et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11(Suppl 2):S14
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/S2/S14

Page 5 of 9

any permutation of a and b as suffering from LBA.
When the steps that use branch length estimation (i.e.
ML) are removed, the LBE method categorizes
more areas with a greater percentage of LBA, (45% in
Figure 7) but looses its conservative nature with
respect to areas that have lost signal. In this case, it
inaccurately predicts a large area that had previously
been defined as having lose of signal as having LBA be
the least refuted hypothesis.
Why it may not work

Figure 5 Long Branch Attraction and the Felsenstein topology
Felsenstein-like topology. The color gradient represents the
percentage of trees that were not predicted to have LBA.

It is consistently classifying the wrong area of the Felsenstein-like topology as LBA and the same area of the
Farris-like topology. In reality, this is an area suffering
from loss of signal. But even in other areas of loss of
signal, i.e. the lower right corner of Figure 2, it is classifying it as not having any LBA. Even though this is technically correct the loss of signal should produce a
random-like result in the prediction of LBA, not an
extremely confident vote that it is not suffering from
LBA. Keeping in mind the method is detecting LBA as
the least refuted hypothesis, it seems odd that the only
area detected as having LBA is not actually suffering
from it and those areas that are suffering from LBA
have inconsistent results.
What is more bothersome is that the LBE does not
seem to consistently categorize based on specific
examples of branch length. Under the full method of
LBE with the branch length step included (see section
), the method only categorizes a maximum of 25% of

Figure 6 Long Branch Attraction and the Farris topology Farrislike topology. There should be no detection of LBA in this scenario
because the long-branches are sister taxa.

Siddall and Whiting make the claim that, “... if each of
the two branches individually group in precisely the
same place as the other when they are allowed to stand
alone in an analysis, one can hardly argue that they are
attracted to this placement by the absent branch. [1]”
While this seems logical, one needs to remember that a
common way to avoid LBA in the first place is to add
additional taxa to break up long branches [17,18]. One
possible reason that extracting taxa doesn’t work to
detect LBA is that parsimony is sensitive to the removal
of taxa, creating artificial long branches in the reran
analysis. In the case of our analysis, removing a taxa
would still be classified as not LBA because it created
an artificially long branch consisting of a full a branch
along with a half a branch. This then would attract
either the original long branch taxa and it would look
the same as the original LBA tree and then be rejected
as LBA. In other words the extraction creates a problem
with sampling, not splitting up longer branches by adding taxa, a typical pitfall when dealing with LBA. The
long branch is not being attracted by the excluded long
branch but it is being attracted to the extended branch
caused by not breaking it up. This creates a double

Figure 7 Long Branch Extraction without branch length
estimation Felsenstein-like topology. This was a reanalysis without
the third step, which looks at a branch length estimator ML. The
detection is further biased and the area with less signal is confused
with LBA.

O’Connor et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11(Suppl 2):S14
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/S2/S14

error and deceives the procedure into thinking it is not
a case of LBA
We can thus split the branch length search space into
three major areas: the area masked by the ML step (I),
the area misled by the artificially long branch (II), and
the area that is correct until it reaches a point of loss of
signal (III), as seen in Figure 8. Area I can be seen by
comparing Figure 5 and Figure 7. The deciding factor
when the branch lengths are a ≥ b is the final step that
estimates the percentile of the outgroup and questionable taxa are among the top 25%. But we know, based
on the design of our experiment, that this will not be
the case in this area and so the detection or confusion
that it is LBA is masked artificially. This mask is
removed when we remove this final step from the analysis, as is seen in Figure 7 and the area looks like a continuation of a loss of signal area.
Area II is much more hypothetical but seems to fit the
data reasonably well. When examining Figures 5 and 6
there is a noticeable but rough line at about y = –2 * x
+ 2. We hypothesis that the shape of this line is a function of the branch lengths. This area is obviously crucial
as seen in Figure 5 because it is the area suffering from
LBA. In other words, the predictive power of LBE is
being masked by this artificial long branch in the exact
area needed for accurate prediction of LBA. This triangle directly corresponds to the areas under LBA, thus
making the technique inadvisable.

Figure 8 Hypothetical explanation of branch length search
space Hypothetical explanation of branch length search space. I)
This area is caused by the ML step predicting the b branches not
being in the highest quartile, the top 25%. This is caused by a ≥ b.
II) This area is created as a result of the artificial long branch created
by extracting a taxa. This also masks the area important for LBA. IIIa)
This area still has phylogenetic signal but is unambiguously not LBA.
It is correctly identified by LBE but is not an area of interest. IIIb)
The phylogenetic signal in this area has been lost to both MP and
ML.

Page 6 of 9

Finally, area III is where the LBE method is actually
mostly correct or the area not suffering from some
other artifact. Unfortunately, this area is not suffering
from LBA but eventually it losses phylogenetic signal. It
is the most clearly seen in Figure 4 where ML can
determine to a greater extent the phylogenetic signal. At
approximately the same point LBE makes incorrect predictions because of the loss of signal. This area is not
under a LBA bias for MP and so is correctly labeled as
not having LBA but this is not informative. This really
does not add a lot of strength to the procedure because
it is already unambiguous.
Long branch shortening

Due to the problems associated with Long Branch
Extraction, an alternate approach could be used. Rather
than removing the suspected long branch that would
cause changes in the overall phylogeny, a series of iterative steps are taken to shorten the branch to diminish
the phylogenetic signal being sent from the questionable
branch and then see if that changes the phylogeny. If
the phylogeny changes, long branch attraction is
suspected.
Assuming the questionable taxon (qtaxa) falls basal in
the MP analysis and is suspect (this is similar to step 1
of LBE), LBS performs the following three step test:
1. Rather than sampling from all the other taxa, construct the ancestral sequence to all taxa excluding the
outgroup and qtaxa. With this sequence, you have the
combined signal of all the other taxa, or a summary of
that clade.
2. Using the constructed sequence and the questionable taxa, hybridize the two in a random fashion. We
are not implying crossing over, albeit that should be
tested as well, but using a binomial distribution, characters are exchanged between the sampled ancestor and
the suspected long branch ataxa. This causes the branch
to be shortened by reducing the differences between the
taxon and its hypothetical ancestor. However, since this
ancestor is unknown, the characters for the questionable
taxon are modified by sampling from the hypothetical
ancestor. In Figures 9, 10, 11, 12, different sampling frequencies were used. A sampling frequency of 30%
means that a random 30% of the target taxon characters
are modified.
3. Re-run the analysis with the hybridized sequence
included in place of the qtaxa. If the taxa moves after
reducing its own signal and adding some signal from
the monophyletic clade you have some evidence of LBA
The parameter or probability of switching in the binomial distribution is increased and steps 2 and 3 are
repeated until either the probability reaches 1 or consistently (i.e. multiple runs) shows the hybridized qtaxa
clading with the hypothetical clade.

O’Connor et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11(Suppl 2):S14
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/S2/S14

Page 7 of 9

Figure 9 Long Branch Shortening using 0% Sampling
Frequency Long Branch Shortening using different sampling
frequencies. Black indicates an incorrect diagnosis from LBS while
gray indicates LBS successfully determined whether or not long
branch attraction was present in the resulting phylogeny.

Figure 11 Long Branch Shortening using 60% Sampling
Frequency Long Branch Shortening using different sampling
frequencies. Black indicates an incorrect diagnosis from LBS while
gray indicates LBS successfully determined whether or not long
branch attraction was present in the resulting phylogeny.

One of the weaknesses of such an approach is the
lack of an absolute answer. You don’t get a final
answer of yes or no (as to whether LBA is occurring)
but added evidence that there is a problem. This evidence comes in the form of a probability or percentage

of the branch that needs to be shortened to form the
monophyletic clade. If the probability comes out high,
0.9 to 1.0, you can be fairly sure that LBA is not
occurring that that there is strong phylogenetic signal
supporting the current position in the phylogeny. If it

Figure 10 Long Branch Shortening using 30% Sampling
Frequency Long Branch Shortening using different sampling
frequencies. Black indicates an incorrect diagnosis from LBS while
gray indicates LBS successfully determined whether or not long
branch attraction was present in the resulting phylogeny.

Figure 12 Long Branch Shortening using 90% Sampling
Frequency Long Branch Shortening using different sampling
frequencies. Black indicates an incorrect diagnosis from LBS while
gray indicates LBS successfully determined whether or not long
branch attraction was present in the resulting phylogeny.

O’Connor et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11(Suppl 2):S14
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/S2/S14

is very low, then long branch attraction has occurred
and is causing an incorrect tree to be inferred. This
evidence can help the researcher to understand if the
questionable taxa (qtaxa) is sending a strong signal to
be in the current location or a weak one. A weak signal implies that the location is inferred only because of
analogous evolution and not homology. This implication can then be interpreted as the determination or
detection of LBA.
In Figures 9, 10, 11, 12, dark black indicates regions
where Long Branch Shortening(LBS) fails to predict
whether long branch attraction is occurring. Gray areas
indicate regions where LBS successfully determined
whether or not long branch attraction was present in
the resulting phylogeny. With a 0% sampling frequency
(Figure 9), the target taxon is not modified at all and
thus the phylogeny does not change. LBS then reports
that no LBA exists anywhere. In this case, the Felsenstein Zone (the black region in the upper left portion of
the graph) is clear and LBS is unable to detect long
branch attraction. As the sampling frequency increases,
the target taxon becomes more like the clade and LBS is
more able to detect long branch attraction in the Felsenstein Zone. However, this comes at a price. The region
where there is no long branch attraction is now
reported incorrectly (the lower left portion of the
graph). This is due to the fact that the target taxon has
become so much more like the other taxa that at 90%
sampling (Figure 12), long branch attraction is always
reported because the target taxon always moves; resulting in a different phylogeny.

Page 8 of 9

Figure 13 Parsimony vs. Likelihood using 4 taxa Comparison of
Parsimony and Maximum Likelihood using a 4 taxa Felsenstein
Zone tree.

Conclusions
Long Branch Extraction(LBE) and Long Branch Shortening(LBS) are not reliable methods for detecting Long
Branch Attraction(LBA) and should not be used in phylogenetic inquiries about LBA. Under a variety of branch
lengths for six taxa synthetic data sets LBE incorrectly
and inconsistently predicts LBA because of its inability
to distinguish between artificially created long branches
and the correct tree topology. The artificial long branch

Maximum parsimony and maximum likelihood

Lastly, as this paper addresses algorithms to detect
regions where Maximum Parsimony would report the
incorrect tree, it is important to compare Maximum
Parsimony and Maximum Likelihood in terms of the
best scoring tree versus the true phylogeny. Figures 13
and 14 address this question. In the figures, dark areas
indicate topologies where Maximum Likelihood and
Maximum Parsimony generated the same phylogeny. In
the gray regions, Maximum Likelihood generated the
correct phylogeny while Maximum Parsimony failed
and in the white regions, Maximum Parsimony generated the correct phylogeny and Maximum Likelihood
failed. This shows that in the region where there is not
much phylogenetic signal (the upper right region) both
methods are equally likely to generate the correct tree.
In the region near the Felzenstein Zone, Maximum
Likelihood is able to generate the correct phylogeny but
only for a small additional part of the region. Much of
the Felsenstein Zone is still unable to be determined in
both the 4 and 6 taxa cases by either Parsimony or
Likelihood.

Figure 14 Parsimony vs. Likelihood using 6 taxa Comparison of
Parsimony and Maximum Likelihood using a 6 taxa Felsenstein-like
Zone tree.

O’Connor et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11(Suppl 2):S14
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/S2/S14

is created by the removal of the outgroup or questionable taxa branch creating a sister taxa that is artificially
long, having removed the taxa that would break up its
long branch. An additional problem is that the ML step
masks a large area of the branch length space not giving
the method the specificity that is needed to be effective.
This was shown by an in depth search over two topologies, the Felsenstein-like topology that is easily susceptible to LBA and the Farris-like topology in which the
long branches are correctly grouped together. The
results support our conclusion that LBE is ineffective in
detecting LBA.
LBS is not effective because it incorrectly estimates
the sequence present at the ancestral node. Statistical
sampling of the other sequences artificially causes the
target taxon to appear like all the taxa rather than shortening its branch. This results in a loss of accuracy in the
detection of LBA.
Both LBE and LBS suffer from a secondary effect.
When a branch is extracted from the phylogeny or shortened, other branches are free to become the longest
branch and will potentially draw other similarly long
branches away from their correct locations. Both Maximum Likelihood and Maximum Parsimony are subject
to LBA in Felsenstein topologies and Likelihood provides superior results in only a small part of the Felsenstein Zone.

Page 9 of 9

4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.

11.
12.
13.
14.

15.
16.

17.
18.

Felsenstein J: Cases in which Parsimony or Compatibility Methods Will
be Positively Misleading. Systematic Zoology 1978, 27(4):401-410.
Bergsten J: A review of long-branch attraction. Cladistics 2005,
21(2):163-193.
Huelsenbeck J, Hillis D: Success of Phylogenetic Methods in the FourTaxon Case. Systematic Biology 1993, 42(3):247-264.
Huelsenbeck J: Performance of Phylogenetic Methods in Simulation.
Systematic Biology 1995, 44:17-48.
Hillis D, Huelsenbeck J, Cunningham C: Application and accuracy of
molecular phylogenies. Science 1994, 264(5159):671.
Pol D, Siddall M: Biases in Maximum Likelihood and Parsimony: A
Simulation Approach to a 10-Taxon Case. Cladistics 2001, 17(3):266-281.
Swofford D, Waddell P, Huelsenbeck J, Foster P, Lewis P, Rogers J: Bias in
Phylogenetic Estimation and Its Relevance to the Choice between
Parsimony and Likelihood Methods. Systematic Biology 2001,
50(4):525-539.
Siddall M: Success of Parsimony in the Four-Taxon Case: Long-Branch
Repulsion by Likelihood in the Farris Zone. Cladistics 1998, 14(3):209-220.
Cartwright R: DNA assembly with gaps (Dawg): simulating sequence
evolution. Bioinformatics 2005, 21(3):31-38.
Tavare S: Some probabilistic and statistical problems on the analysis of
DNA sequences. Lect. Math. Life Sci 1986, 17:57-86.
Lanave C, Preparata G, Sacone C, Serio G: A new method for calculating
evolutionary substitution rates. Journal of Molecular Evolution 1984,
20:86-93.
Rodriguez F, Oliver J, Marin A, Medina J: The general stochastic model of
nucleotide substitution. J Theor Biol 1990, 142(4):485-501.
Swofford DL: PAUP*. Phylogenetic Analysis Using Parsimony (* and
Other Methods). Version 4. Sunderland, Massachusetts: Sinauer Associates
2003.
Graybeal A: Is It Better to Add Taxa or Characters to a Difficult
Phylogenetic Problem? Systematic Biology 1998, 47:9-17.
Hillis D: Taxonomic Sampling, Phylogenetic Accuracy, and Investigator
Bias. Systematic Biology 1998, 47:3-8.

doi:10.1186/1471-2164-11-S2-S14
Cite this article as: O’Connor et al.: Analysis of long branch extraction
and long branch shortening. BMC Genomics 2010 11(Suppl 2):S14.

Acknowledgements
This project was supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant
No. 0120718 and by the Brigham Young University Office of Research and
Creative Activity. Publication of this supplement was made possible with
support from the International Society of Intelligent Biological Medicine
(ISIBM).
This article has been published as part of BMC Genomics Volume 11
Supplement 2, 2010: Proceedings of the 2009 International Conference on
Bioinformatics & Computational Biology (BioComp 2009). The full contents of
the supplement are available online at http://www.biomedcentral.com/14712164/11?issue=S2.
Author details
1
Department of Zoology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 3EJ, UK.
2
Department of Computer Science, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah
84602, USA.
Authors’ contributions
All authors designed, analyzed, implemented and tested the proposed
algorithm. Each author contributed equally in writing the paper. All authors
read and approved the final manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Published: 2 November 2010

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges

References
1. Siddall M, Whiting M: Long-Branch Abstractions. Cladistics 1999, 15:9-24.
2. Camin J, Sokal R: A Method for Deducing Branching Sequences in
Phylogeny. Evolution 1965, 19(3):311-326.
3. Goloboff P: Parsimony, likelihood, and simplicity. Cladistics 2003,
19(2):91-103.

• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
