<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Use of 16S ribosomal RNA gene analyses to characterize the bacterial signature associated with poor oral health in West Virginia</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Oral Health 2011, 11:7. doi:10.1186/1472-6831-11-7"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Joan C Olson"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Olson et al. BMC Oral Health 2011, 11:7
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6831/11/7

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Use of 16S ribosomal RNA gene analyses to
characterize the bacterial signature associated
with poor oral health in West Virginia
Joan C Olson1*, Christopher F Cuff1, Slawomir Lukomski1, Ewa Lukomska1,2, Yeremi Canizales3, Bei Wu4,
Richard J Crout5, John G Thomas6, Daniel W McNeil7, Robert J Weyant 8, Mary L Marazita9,10, Bruce J Paster11,12,
Thomas Elliott1

Abstract
Background: West Virginia has the worst oral health in the United States, but the reasons for this are unclear. This
pilot study explored the etiology of this disparity using culture-independent analyses to identify bacterial species
associated with oral disease.
Methods: Bacteria in subgingival plaque samples from twelve participants in two independent West Virginia
dental-related studies were characterized using 16S rRNA gene sequencing and Human Oral Microbe Identification
Microarray (HOMIM) analysis. Unifrac analysis was used to characterize phylogenetic differences between bacterial
communities obtained from plaque of participants with low or high oral disease, which was further evaluated
using clustering and Principal Coordinate Analysis.
Results: Statistically different bacterial signatures (P < 0.001) were identified in subgingival plaque of individuals
with low or high oral disease in West Virginia based on 16S rRNA gene sequencing. Low disease contained a high
frequency of Veillonella and Streptococcus, with a moderate number of Capnocytophaga. High disease exhibited
substantially increased bacterial diversity and included a large proportion of Clostridiales cluster bacteria
(Selenomonas, Eubacterium, Dialister). Phylogenetic trees constructed using 16S rRNA gene sequencing revealed that
Clostridiales were repeated colonizers in plaque associated with high oral disease, providing evidence that the oral
environment is somehow influencing the bacterial signature linked to disease.
Conclusions: Culture-independent analyses identified an atypical bacterial signature associated with high oral
disease in West Virginians and provided evidence that the oral environment influenced this signature. Both
findings provide insight into the etiology of the oral disparity in West Virginia.

Background
West Virginians have the worst oral health in the
nation, with almost twice the national average (48.2%)
of adults aged 65 or more having all their natural teeth
extracted [1]. These statistics become more alarming
knowing that infections of the oral cavity have been
associated with chronic diseases, such as diabetes, cardiovascular disease and atherosclerosis [2-4]. Neither the
origin of poor oral health in West Virginia nor its
* Correspondence: jolson@hsc.wvu.edu
1
Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Cell Biology, West Virginia
University, Morgantown, WV, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

relationship with systemic disease is understood. Central
to this problem is a determination of the microbial
populations responsible for oral infections. Historically
this has been difficult because of the complexity of the
microbiome within oral biofilms, and difficulties in cultivating bacteria obtained from the oral environment.
Biofilms can play either a protective (probiotic) or
pathogenic role in oral health depending upon their
microbial composition. Oral biofilms are initiated by
colonization of probiotic Gram-positive cocci, primarily
streptococci, adhering to the tooth surface, along with
coaggregating Actinomyces and Veillonella [5]. Coaggregation is a common property in plaque development,

© 2011 Olson et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Olson et al. BMC Oral Health 2011, 11:7
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6831/11/7

and early colonizing bacteria are bridged through bacteria, such as fusobacteria, to late colonizers. The ecological succession of microbial populations from early
colonizing Gram-positive cocci to late colonizing Gramnegative anaerobes of diverse morphotypes leads to a
shift in biofilm composition that correlates with the
appearance of gingivitis and periodontitis [6]. Specific
organisms have been linked with oral diseases. Dental
caries occurs as a result of a shift in the biofilm community towards acidogenic and acid-tolerant bacteria, specifically Streptococcus mutans and lactobacilli [7]. In
subgingival plaque, Porphyromonas gingivalis, Tannerella forsythia and Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans have been strongly associated with periodontal
disease [8,9]. Until recently, associations of microbes
with oral disease have been based on in vitro cultivation.
As it is now recognized that only about 60% of the species in oral biofilms are cultivable [10], the use of culture-independent analyses has led to a new level of
understanding of oral associated microbes [11].
Molecular analyses of periodontal microflora had not
previously been used to examine the bacterial profile of
subgingival plaque of West Virginians. The goal of this
study was to use 16S rRNA gene analyses to gain insight
into the etiology of the oral health disparity observed in
this population. In this preliminary study we were able
to identify significantly different 16S rRNA bacterial
phylogenetic signatures in plaque from individuals having high or low oral disease, and the high disease signature was evident in two independent populations that
span a wide range of age groups. Overall we found that
communities rich in Veillonella and streptococci shifted
to communities rich in Selenomonas and other Clostridiales in association with a decline in oral health, potentially linking an atypical bacterial signature with oral
disease in West Virginians. The finding that an atypical
bacterial signature may be linked to oral health disparities observed in West Virginia highlights the need for
further analyses of bacterial species associated with high
and low oral disease in this population in order to
understand the origin of this disparity.

Methods
Subject populations

Subgingival plaque samples used in this study were
obtained in conjunction with two research projects conducted in West Virginia. Plaque from an age 23 to 48
population was obtained through the Center for Oral
Health Research in Appalachia (COHRA study), a partnership between West Virginia University and University
of Pittsburgh examining genetic, epidemiologic, microbiological, and behavioral factors contributing to oral
health. Plaque from an older population was obtained
through the Oral Health Disparities Among Elders With

Page 2 of 9

and Without Cognitive Impairment (Cognitive study),
performed in collaboration with the West Virginia
University School of Dentistry and the Center on Aging.
We chose to include subjects from two independent
West Virginia population pools (median age 23-48 or age
>70) in our study to help extend an understanding of the
relevance of our findings to a broad sample of the West
Virginian population. Being funded as a pilot project,
relatively few subjects from each group were able to be
analyzed. All procedures were performed using Institutional Review Board approved protocols.
Subject evaluations

Criteria for oral health evaluation, methods of plaque
collection from participants, and calibration of researchers in the COHRA project have been previously
described [12]. Our study examined subgingival plaque
from seven COHRA participants, which was obtained
from four first molars (#3, 14, 19 and 30). These same
sites were assessed for probing depth (PD), recession
and bleeding on probing (BOP), as summarized in
Table 1. Caries assessment was based on the coronal
tooth surfaces, and teeth were classified as sound,
decayed, filled or missing. Percent sound teeth for each
participant is reported in Table 1. The oral status of
COHRA study subjects was determined based on periodontal examinations (bordered by dashed lines in
Table 1): low disease defined as <3.5 mm PD, 0-25%
BOP sites; high disease defined as >4.5 mm PD, 100%
BOP sites. Subgingival plaque was sampled using a curette, suspended in 100-500 μl TE (10 mM Tris, pH 7.5,
1 mM EDTA) containing 20% glycerol and stored at
-70°C until processing. Multiple specimens from individual participants were pooled for analyses.
Cognitive study participants were selected based on:
1) age 70 years and older, 2) resident of West Virginia,
3) community-living, and 4) dentate (having at least
four natural teeth). Oral evaluations were performed by
calibrated researchers using guidelines and protocols
from the National Health and Nutrition Examination
Survey (NHANES IV) [13]. Subgingival plaque samples
were collected using sterile periodontal curettes from six
sites as follows: the buccal surface of the most anterior
molar in each quadrant, and the buccal surface of #11
and #31. Plaque samples were stored and pooled for
analyses as above. Criteria for periodontal evaluation in
the Cognitive study included PD, gingivitis and calculus.
Caries evaluation included type of dentures and percent
sound, missing, filled, decayed or crowned teeth. Both
evaluations are reported in Table 2. The oral status of
Cognitive study subjects was determined based on caries
examinations (bordered by dashed lines in Table 2): low
disease defined as >60% sound/filled teeth present; high
disease defined as >40% teeth missing or decayed.

Olson et al. BMC Oral Health 2011, 11:7
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6831/11/7

Page 3 of 9

Table 1 COHRA study clinical evaluations
Patient code

DB

DC

DF

DL

DG

DI

DA

Age

30 y

23 y

32 y

32 y

48 y

40 y

35 y

Sex

F

F

M

F

M

M

F

Race

White

Afr/Am

White

White

Mixed

White

White

Smoker

No

No

Sometimes

No

Yes

Yes

Sometimes

Probing depth (mean mm/site)

< 3.5

< 3.5

4.5

4.5

5.2

5.2

5.2

Recession (% positive/site)
Bleeding on probing (% of sites)

0
25

0
0

0
100

25
100

0
100

75
100

100
100

Periodontal1
(Measured at 4 sites: 3,14,19,30)

Gingivitis - localized

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

generalized

0

Yes

Yes

0

0

0

0

hyperplasia

0

0

0

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Caries
Dentures (lower/upper)

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

Sound teeth (% of 28 teeth)

64.3

78.6

92.9

53.6

78.6

67.9

50

1

Dashed lines border clinical parameters used to determine the oral status of COHRA study participants.

universal forward and reverse primers, 5 μl 10X platinum PCR buffer, 1.5 mM MgSO4, 0.2 mM dNTPs and
0.5 μl Platinum TAQ DNA Polymerase High Fidelity
(Invitrogen, Life Technologies Corp, Carlsbad, CA). PCR
conditions were: 94°C for 4 minutes, followed by 30
cycles of 94°C for 45 seconds, 60°C for 45 seconds and
72°C for 90 seconds, with a final extension at 72°C for
15 minutes. PCR products were analyzed by 0.8%

DNA extraction and 16S rRNA gene sequence analysis

DNA was extracted and purified from subgingival plaque using the UltraClean Soil DNA Isolation Kit (MO
Bio Labs, Carlsbad, CA). The 16S rRNA gene was PCR
amplified using the universal bacterial 16S rRNA primers (forward, 5’-GAGTTTGATYMTGGCTCAG,
reverse, 5’-GAAGGAGGTGWTCCADCC [14]). Each
PCR reaction contained 1 μl purified DNA, 0.4 μM
Table 2 Cognitive study clinical evaluations
Patient code

DT

DQ

DV

DAA

DZ

Age

74

93

77

91 y

77 y

Sex

F

F

M

F

F

Race

Afr/Am

White

White

White

White

Smoker

No

No

No

Yes

No

(Number of teeth probed)
Probing depth (mean

22

26

22

nd1

10

Periodontal

mm/site)

3.01 ± 0.53

1.98 ± 0.71

2.45 ± 0.55

nd

1.66 ± 0.41

Gingivitis (% positive sites)

68.2

4.5

9.1

nd

80

Calculus (% positive sites)

0

0

4.5

nd

30

Caries
Dentures (lower)

Partial

0

0

0

0

0

Partial

Partial

Full

Tooth index (% of 32 teeth)
Sound

59.4

31.3

40.6

37.2

21.9

Missing

31.3

15.6

31.3

40.6

65.6

Filled

6.25

40.6

18.8

15.6

9.4

Decayed

3.1

0

0

6.3

3.1

Crown
1

0

Dentures (upper)

0

12.5

9.4

0

0

No periodontal examination data was acquired for DAA.
Dashed lines border clinical parameters used to determine the oral status of Cognitive study participants.

2

Olson et al. BMC Oral Health 2011, 11:7
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6831/11/7

agarose gel electrophoresis, and reactions yielding products of ~1500 bp were cloned using the TOPO TA
Cloning Kit for Sequencing (Invitrogen). Ligation products were electroporated into Escherichia coli (TOP10
Chemically Competent cells, Invitrogen), and transformants were incubated in 250 μl SOC medium (2% tryptone, 0.5% yeast extract, 10 mM NaCl, 2.5 mM KCl,
10 mM MgCl 2 , 10 mM MgSO 4 , 20 mM glucose) for
1 hour at 37°C, prior to plating on LB agar containing
50 μg/ml kanamycin and a 25 μl overlay of 2% X-gal.
Following incubation overnight, ~100 colonies containing inserts (white colonies) were isolated from each
sample and cultured at 37°C overnight in 96 well plates
containing LB broth with 50 μg/ml kanamycin. A 2 μl
volume of bacterial culture from each well was PCR
amplified using M13 primers (forward, 5’-TGTAAAACGACGGCCAGT, reverse 5’-CAGGAAACAGCTATGAC). Reactions contained 0.2 μM of each primer, 5 μl
10X Qiagen PCR buffer (Qiagen, Valencia, CA), 0.2 mM
dNTPs and 0.2 μl Taq DNA polymerase (Qiagen). PCR
conditions were: 94°C for 4 minutes, followed by 30
cycles of 94°C for 45 seconds, 52°C for 45 seconds and
72°C for 90 seconds, with a final extension at 72°C for
15 minutes. PCR products from each well were examined by electrophoresis, and products of the appropriate
size were sequenced by a commercial facility (SeqWright, Houston, TX).
16S rRNA gene sequence analysis

Each DNA sequence was scanned for a single segment
of the original primer sequence (ATCAAACT) between
bp 440 and 520 to identify the 16S rRNA gene and to
help exclude chimeras. The initial part of each sequence
containing uncalled bases (N) was removed, the distal
part (vector sequence) was trimmed at the primer, and
the sequence was reversed to standard orientation.
Nucleotide sequences generated in this study have been
deposited in GenBank, accession numbers HQ894465 HQ895588.
Sequences were classified by BLASTN analysis against
both a local database and the GenBank non-redundant
(nr) database. The local database was assembled in an
interative process: if a new experimental sequence did
not match with >98% identity, a new database was
assembled adding matching type sequences obtained
from GenBank and the Ribosomal Database Project
(RDP) [15]. The current local database contains 375
sequences organized into 122 ‘groups’. Each group contains closely related sequences and has been validated to
be non-overlapping by BLAST analysis of individual
groups against the entire database. This approach provided a level of detail that was informative for classifying
bacterial sequences. Software used in sequence analyses
included: 1) BLAST, using the NCBI server [16] with

Page 4 of 9

results formatted as XML; 2) UniFrac, using its server
[17,18]; 3) phylogenetic tree construction, using the
RDP server; 4) local BLAST, using the ‘legacy’ executable blastall from NCBI [19]. Other software run locally
included: R [20] and the Analysis of Phylogenetics and
Evolution (APE) package for constructing and plotting
phylogenetic trees and plotting the Principal Coordinate
Analysis (PCoA); ClustalW2 [21] and Muscle [22] for
multiple sequence alignment; and Python [23] to
automate steps in analyses and produce the heatmaps
(generated using matplotlib).
Human Oral Microbe Identification Microarray (HOMIM)
analysis

For HOMIM 16S rRNA gene microarray analysis, purified DNA from subgingival plaque samples was sent to
the HOMIM Core Facility at the Forsyth Institute
(Boston, MA). This facility offers high throughput
analysis of ~300 of the most prevalent oral bacterial species and provides a comprehensive report of bacterial
profiles within DNA samples [24].

Results and Discussion
Identification of bacterial populations in subgingival
plaque that differentiate individuals with high or low oral
disease in West Virginia

Previous studies found bacterial species in the ‘red complex’ to be strongly linked to periodontal disease [25]. To
examine if these same bacteria were associated with oral
disease in West Virginia, we used 16S rRNA gene sequencing to characterize bacteria in subgingival plaque of
COHRA participants diagnosed as having low or high oral
disease based on periodontal examinations (Table 1,
bordered by dashed lines). Analyses were performed in
96-well plate format, and due to the relatively high cost of
DNA sequencing, our practical goal was to sequence 96
clones per sample, realizing that we would not be able to
detect bacterial types present at low frequency. In actuality
the number of clones sequenced per sample ranged from
55 to 133, with low numbers relating to difficulties obtaining high quality sequences for some samples. Sequences
obtained were analyzed by BLAST against the GenBank
database that includes all known bacterial 16S rRNA gene
sequences, and against a local database that facilitated
classification of bacterial ‘types’ based on ≥95% sequence
identity. Subsequent evaluation of sequence data using the
Human Oral Microbiome Database (HOMD) BLAST server [26] yielded nearly identical results, except for a few
changes caused by reclassification of Clostridiales type
strains, which affected some assignments to Eubacterium
and Lachnospiraceae.
The initial phase of sequencing examined 2 low (DB
and DC) and 5 high (DF, DL, DG, DI, DA) disease
COHRA participants. An additional low disease sample

Olson et al. BMC Oral Health 2011, 11:7
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6831/11/7

(DM), evaluated based on periodontal criteria, was
obtained through the West Virginia University Dental
Clinic and served as a non-COHRA low disease control.
The percentage of a bacterial type in each sample relative to the total number of clones sequenced (indicated
at the bottom of each column) is shown in the heatmap
in Figure 1. As previously reported [6], increased bacterial diversity was evident in plaque from individuals diagnosed with high oral disease. However, unexpectedly a
large number of high disease bacterial types were classified in the Clostridiales cluster (Selenomonas, Eubacterium, Dialister), which were completely absent from low
disease plaque. Also notable in high disease was the low

Page 5 of 9

frequency of bacterial types traditionally linked to periodontitis (Porphyromonas, Tannerella, Treponema and
Aggregatibacter). Plaque from low disease exhibited a
distinctly different bacterial population, including mainly
Streptococcus and Veillonella with a moderate number
of Capnocytophaga. The bacterial diversity in low disease COHRA samples was highly consistent with a
recent study, which identified Streptococcus, Veillonella
and Capnocytophaga in 100% of the plaque samples
obtained from individuals with healthy oral cavities [27].
Thus, while bacteria associated with oral health in West
Virginia was highly reflective of other regions in the
United States, an atypical pathogenic phylogenetic

Figure 1 Identification of bacterial populations in subgingival plaque of West Virginians. Bacterial composition in plaque samples was
determined using 16S rRNA gene sequencing in 2 low and 5 high oral disease COHRA participants, ranked based on periodontal exams, and 5
Cognitive study participants, ranked based on caries index. DM is a low periodontal disease control sample obtained through the West Virginia
University Dental Clinic. Each numbered box indicates the percentage of clones of the type-specific bacterial 16S rRNA gene relative to the total
number of clones sequenced, which is indicated at the bottom of each column. The color of the box reflects observed counts.

Olson et al. BMC Oral Health 2011, 11:7
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6831/11/7

Page 6 of 9

signature that includes Selenomonas and other Clostridiales cluster bacteria appeared to be associated with
the decline in oral health in West Virginia.
COHRA study participants ranged in age from 23 to
48, and Cognitive study participants (ages 73 to 93) provided a means of assessing how bacterial types related
to tooth status later in life. The periodontal health of
the 5 Cognitive study participants included in this study
was exceptionally good, as evident in probing depths of
3 mm or less, shown in Table 2. However, as expected
for this age, considerable variation was observed in caries health (Table 2, bordered by dashed lines), with DT
having the highest percentage of sound teeth, and DAA
and DZ having the highest percentage of missing/
decayed teeth. Examination of bacterial types in subgingival plaque of DT revealed mainly Veillonella, Streptococcus and Capnocytophaga (Figure 1), as observed for
low disease COHRA participants. In comparison, DAA
and DZ had bacterial patterns that included increased
diversity and species richness of Selenomonas, Eubacterium and Dialister, in addition to many of the other bacterial species observed in high oral disease COHRA
participants. These data are consistent with the bacterial
signature of aged West Virginians with tooth loss being
similar to that of younger West Virginians with periodontal disease.
Statistical analyses of bacterial types identified in
subgingival plaque

Unifrac analysis [17], which takes into account phylogenetic distances, has become the method of choice for
analyzing differences between microbial communities
and was used in our studies to provide statistical validation of differences in low and high disease plaque environments. The method requires a rooted phylogenetic
tree as input, and we used the RDP server to generate
the tree, which is especially suited for rRNA alignments
as it employs Infernal [28] that is guided by predicted
secondary structure. The tree was constructed by the
neighbor-joining method [29], using APE in R. It was
rooted by including Thermotoga maritima SL7 as an
outgroup. The Unifrac algorithm was used to compute
the unique fraction of branch length for each sample.
These results (which are phylogenetic distances separating the individual samples) were analyzed using cluster
analysis (UPGMA) and PCoA and ignored duplicate
sequences. As shown in Figure 2A, PCoA separated low
disease from diseased samples into two clusters along
the first eigenvector. Cluster analysis also split low disease and diseased samples into different clades, with
sample DT (labeled T in Figure 2), the least diseased
sample based on caries outcome in the Cognitive study,
splitting to the low disease clade. Support for the clusters was evaluated by jackknife tests (1000 replicates;

Figure 2 Statistical analyses of bacterial populations in low
and high disease plaque. A) Principal coordinate analysis of
bacterial communities from subgingival plaque of West Virginians
with low oral disease (blue) as compared to plaque of West
Virginians with varying degrees of oral disease (red). B) The Unifrac
algorithm was used to compute the unique branch length for a
given sub-sample. Cluster analysis split low (blue) and diseased
samples (red) into different clades. Support for the clusters was
evaluated by jackknife tests (1000 replicates). T was the least
diseased sample in the Cognitive study, as ranked in Table 2. The
‘D’ has been removed from sample notations in these figures for
clarity.

Figure 2B). When analyses were again performed with
all the sequences relabeled as diseased or healthy, Unifrac analysis found the two environments to be statistically different (P < 0.001), whether or not duplicate
sequences were considered.
Analysis of the bacterial populations in plaque using
HOMIM analyses

Since rRNA gene sequencing revealed an unexpected
bacterial signature in plaque of West Virginians with
high oral disease, we asked whether this pattern could
be detected using an alternative method of 16S rRNA

Olson et al. BMC Oral Health 2011, 11:7
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6831/11/7

gene analysis, HOMIM. In HOMIM, multiple primers
are initially used to amplify 16S rRNA genes within a
DNA sample, which are then assayed for the presence
of specific 16S rRNA genes using probes designed to
optimize detection of 272 different bacterial species [30].
Unlike 16S rRNA sequencing, which allows quantification of the frequency of bacterial clones, the read-out
for HOMIM is a relative signal intensity for each
detected 16S rRNA sequence on a scale from 0 to 5. In
our studies HOMIM results are presented as the sum of
the signals for all oral taxa within each genus. Comparisons of HOMIM and DNA sequence analyses of plaque
samples from 4 low disease (DB, DC, DM, DT) and the
5 highest disease (DA, DI, DG, DZ, DAA) participants
in our study are shown in Figure 3. HOMIM analyses of
plaque from low disease detected a high frequency of
Veillonella, Streptococcus and Capnocytophaga, closely
paralleling results of 16S rRNA sequencing (Figure 3A).
Less prevalent bacterial types detected in 16S rRNA
sequencing, such as Gemella, Fusobacterium, Actinomyces, Granulicatella, Neisseria and Haemophilus, were

Page 7 of 9

confirmed by HOMIM. Additional bacterial types, presumably at too low a frequency to detect by sequencing,
were also detected in low disease by HOMIM, the most
evident of which were Campylobacter, Prevotella, Leptotrichia, Lautropia and Aggregatibacter. These results
highlight differences that can be observed between DNA
sequencing and HOMIM due to methodologies
employed in HOMIM that can increase the sensitivity of
detection of specific bacterial species by 10 fold.
In plaque from individuals with high disease, HOMIM
analyses confirmed the presence of genera from the
Clostridiales order, including Selenomonas, Eubacterium
and Dialister (Figure 3B). Notably, as with sequencing
data, bacteria in the ‘red complex’ were either absent or
present at low levels in HOMIM analyses. As with low
disease plaque, disproportionately higher signals for certain bacteria, specifically Campylobacter, Prevotella and
Leptotrichia, were observed in HOMIM analysis as compared with sequencing, again explained by the increased
sensitivity of microarray detection methodologies.
Importantly, conclusions from HOMIM analyses

Figure 3 Comparison of 16S rRNA gene analyses using sequencing and HOMIM. The frequency of bacterial types (by percentage),
determined by 16S rRNA sequencing, of 4 plaque samples from low disease and 5 plaque samples from high disease West Virginians, ranked
based on criteria defined in Materials and Methods, was compared with the microarray signal intensity obtained from the same samples in
HOMIM analyses. Bacterial types above the red line were more frequent in low disease.

Olson et al. BMC Oral Health 2011, 11:7
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6831/11/7

confirmed those from 16S rRNA sequencing, and identified increased genus richness and high intensity signals
for Selenomonas, Eubacterium and Dialister in association with a decline in oral health.
Origin of bacterial types in high disease plaque

Phylogenetic trees of bacterial types developed using 16S
rRNA sequencing also provided insight into the origin of
bacterial signatures associated with high oral disease. For
example, comparisons of 16S rRNA gene sequences
revealed that diverse Selenomonas spp. were actually
repeated colonizers of the high disease oral environment.
The 16S rRNA tree represented in Figure 4 shows the
broad diversity of Selenomonas phylotypes recovered in a
single plaque sample from a high disease subject (DA). In
contrast, the same clade in a sample from a low disease
subject (DB) contained only low diversity Veillonella phylotypes. The order Clostridiales has its phylogenetic
assignment in the Firmicutes (typically Gram-positive),
but it includes a large family, the Veillonellaceae, which
are obligate anaerobes that stain Gram-negative due to a

Figure 4 Phylogenetic trees of Selenomonas and Veillonella
isolated from individual plaque samples. 16S rRNA gene
sequences from a single high disease plaque sample (DA, red text)
and a single low disease plaque sample (DB, blue text) were used
to generate phylogenetic trees of Selenomonas and Veillonella,
respectively. The x-axis indicates percent difference in 16S rRNA
gene sequence. The separated clusters of Selenomonas show that
this population descended from independently colonizing but
phylogenetically related bacteria. Veillonella from DB exhibited
limited diversity.

Page 8 of 9

porous pseudo-outer membrane. Low disease Veillonella
have nearly identical sequences typical of a single species
(> 97% 16S rRNA gene sequence identity), as represented
in Figure 4. In our studies, we found the tight cluster of
Veillonella observed in low disease was replaced in plaque
from high disease by a broad expansion of other members
of the family Veillonellaceae, such as Selenomonas and
Dialister. At the same time in high disease there was an
expansion of Gram-positives from the order Clostridiales,
primarily in the families Eubacteriaceae and Lachnospiraceae. The breadth of this bacterial group is large (minimum ~85% identity), and this allowed us to recognize that
Clostridiales were repeated colonizers in plaque of individuals having high oral disease, as represented by the phylogenic diversity of Selenomonas in Figure 4. This finding
is significant because it highlights the role of the oral
environment (as opposed to in situ evolution due to horizontal gene transfer) in the generation of bacterial signatures associated with high oral disease in West Virginia.

Conclusions
The etiology of the poor oral health leading to the high
tooth loss statistics in West Virginia is unknown. The
goal of this study was to gain insight into this problem
using 16S rRNA gene analyses to characterize the bacterial species in subgingival plaque of West Virginians having high oral disease. The most striking finding of our
analyses was the predominance of Clostridiales cluster
bacteria, including genera such as Selenomonas, Eubacterium and Dialister, in plaque of West Virginians having
high oral disease. The oral microbiota is complex and
dynamic, which compromises conclusions derived from
this preliminary study, but factors that strengthen our
interpretation that an atypical bacterial signature contributes to the oral health disparity in West Virginia
include: 1) characterization of similar microbiological
patterns in high and low disease plaque using of two
methods of 16S rRNA gene analysis, and 2) detection of
a similar relationship between bacterial types and oral
disease in two separate West Virginia populations. The
breadth of the Clostridiales also allowed us to recognize
that bacteria linked to oral disease were repeated colonizers of individuals with high disease, suggesting a functional relationship between the disease environment and
these disease-associated bacteria. The possibility that an
atypical bacterial phylogenetic signature might be linked
to the decline in oral health in West Virginia is a novel
idea and may prove integral to understanding the etiology of the dental problems in this state. The results from
this pilot project highlight the need for an expanded
study that uses culture independent approaches to analyze bacterial populations in a larger number of West
Virginians having low or high oral disease to confirm the
relationship between bacterial profiles and disease. The

Olson et al. BMC Oral Health 2011, 11:7
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6831/11/7

knowledge derived from such a study has the potential of
being applied to the development of targeted intervention
strategies that modify environmental factors to preclude
colonization by disease-associated bacteria.
List of Abbreviations
APE: Analysis of Phylogenetics and Evolution; BOP: bleeding on probing;
COHRA: Center for Oral Health Research in Appalachia; HOMIM: Human Oral
Microbe Identification Microarray; HOMD: Human Oral Microbiome Database;
NHANES: National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey; nr: nonredundant; PCoA: Principal Coordinate Analysis; PD: probing depth; RDP:
Ribosomal Database Project; rRNA: ribosomal RNA; UPGMA: Unweighted Pair
Group Method with Arithmetic Mean; WVU: West Virginia University.
Acknowledgements
We thank Sara Owen, a WVU summer INBRE student, who helped with 16S
rRNA gene analyses. Her efforts were supported by NIH grant 5P20RR016477
to the West Virginia IDeA Network for Biomedical Research Excellence. 16S
rRNA gene analysis performed in this study was funded by the West Virginia
University Health Sciences Center Internal Grants funding program, and the
West Virginia University School of Dentistry. The COHRA study was
supported by a grant from the National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial
Research (NIDCR) (R01-DE014899; MLM, RJC, DWM, RJW). The Cognitive
study was supported by a grant from the NIDCR (R21-DE016970; BW, RJC).
Author details
1
Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Cell Biology, West Virginia
University, Morgantown, WV, USA. 2Health Effects Laboratory Division, CDC,
NIOSH, Morgantown, WV, USA. 3School of Dentistry, West Virginia University,
Morgantown, WV, USA. 4School of Nursing, Duke University Medical Center,
Durham, NC, USA. 5Department of Periodontology, School of Dentistry, West
Virginia University, Morgantown, WV, USA. 6Department of Pathology, West
Virginia University, Morgantown, WV, USA. 7Department of Clinical
Psychology and Clinical Professor of Dental Practice and Rural Health, West
Virginia University, Morgantown, WV, USA. 8Department of Dental Public
Health and Information Management, University of Pittsburgh, School of
Dental Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. 9Center for Craniofacial and Dental
Genetics, Department of Oral Biology, School of Dental Medicine, University
of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA. 10Department of Human Genetics, Graduate
School of Public Health, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
11
Department of Molecular Genetics, The Forsyth Institute, Cambridge, MA.
12
Department of Oral Medicine, Infection and Immunity, Harvard School of
Dental Medicine, Boston, MA, USA.
Authors’ contributions
JCO organized the project and drafted the manuscript. CFC assisted with
project organization and drafting of the manuscript. SL developed 16S rRNA
gene amplification and cloning methods. EL performed 16S rRNA gene
amplification and cloning. YC organized Cognitive study clinical data. BW
organized acquisition of specimens and clinical data for the Cognitive study.
RJC organized the alignment of our project with the COHRA and Cognitive
studies and assisted with clinical analyses and project development. JGT
organized and facilitated acquisition of COHRA subgingival plaque samples.
DWM assisted with the design of the COHRA and Cognitive studies and
with the acquisition of clinical samples. RJW and MLM assisted with the
design of the COHRA project and organization of clinical data. BJP
performed HOMIM analyses and helped with developing methods and
analyses of 16S rRNA gene sequences. TE performed all 16S rRNA sequence
data analyses. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Competing interests
BJP is the director of the HOMIM Core Facility at The Forsyth Institute, which
performed the bacterial microarray analyses.
Received: 16 September 2010 Accepted: 1 March 2011
Published: 1 March 2011

Page 9 of 9

References
1. StateMaster.com. [http://www.statemaster.com/graph/
hea_ora_hea_los_of_nat_tee-health-oral-loss-natural-teeth].
2. Taylor GW, Burt BA, Becker MP, Genco RJ, Shlossman M, Knowler WC,
Pettitt DJ: Severe periodontitis and risk for poor glycemic control in
patients with non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. J Periodontol
1996, 67:1085-1093.
3. Beck J, Garcia R, Heiss G, Vokonas PS, Offenbacher S: Periodontal disease
and cardiovascular disease. J Periodontol 1996, 67:1123-1137.
4. Niedzielska I, Janic T, Cierpka S, Swietochowska E: The effect of chronic
periodontitis on the development of atherosclerosis: review of the
literature. Med Sci Monit 2008, 14:RA103-106.
5. Nyvad B, Kilian M: Microflora associated with experimental root surface
caries in humans. Infect Immun 1990, 58:1628-1633.
6. Marsh PD: Microbial ecology of dental plaque and its significance in
health and disease. Adv Dent Res 1994, 8:263-271.
7. Selwitz RH, Ismail AI, Pitts NB: Dental caries. Lancet 2007, 369:51-59.
8. Genco R, Kornman D, Williams R, Offenbacher S, Zambon J, Ishikawa I,
Listgarten M, Michalowicz B, Page R, Schenkein H, et al: Consensus report:
periodontal diseases; pathogenesis and microbial factors. Ann Periodontol
1996, 1:926-932.
9. Zambon JJ: Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans in human periodontal
disease. J Clin Periodontol 1985, 12:1-20.
10. Paster BJ, Olsen I, Aas JA, Dewhirst FE: The breadth of bacterial diversity in
the human periodontal pocket and other oral sites. Periodontol 2000 2006,
42:80-87.
11. Armitage GC: Comparison of the microbiological features of chronic and
aggressive periodontitis. Periodontol 2000 2010, 53:70-88.
12. Polk DE, Weyant RJ, Crout RJ, McNeil DW, Tarter RE, Thomas JG,
Marazita ML: Study protocol of the Center for Oral Health Research in
Appalachia (COHRA) etiology study. BMC Oral Health 2008, 8:18.
13. Wu B, Goederesis E, Crout R, Plassman PL, DiNapoli E, McNeil DW, Weiner MA,
Boone M, Wiener RC, Kao EC, et al: Recruitment of rural and cognitively
impaired elders for dental research. Spec Care Dentist 2010, 30:193-199.
14. Colombo AP, Boches SK, Cotton SL, Goodson JM, Kent R, Haffajee AD,
Socransky SS, Hasturk H, Van Dyke TE, Dewhirst F, et al: Comparisons of
subgingival microbial profiles of refractory periodontitis, severe
periodontitis, and periodontal health using the human oral microbe
identification microarray. J Periodontol 2009, 80:1421-1432.
15. Ribosomal Database Project. [http://rdp.cme.msu.edu/].
16. BLAST NCBI server. [http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/blast/Blast.cgi].
17. Lozupone CA, Hamady M, Knight R: UniFrac–an online tool for comparing
microbial community diversity in a phylogenetic context. BMC
Bioinformatics 2006, 7:371.
18. UniFrac server. [http://mim.forsyth.org/bacteria.html].
19. Legacy executable blastall from NCBI. [ftp://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/blast/
executables/release/LATEST/].
20. R. [http://www.r-project.org/].
21. ClustalW2. [http://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/clustalw2/index.html].
22. Muscle. [http://www.drive5.com/muscle/].
23. Python. [http://www.python.org/].
24. Forsyth Microbial Identification Microarray Service. [http://mim.forsyth.org/].
25. Socransky SS, Haffajee AD, Cugini MA, Smith C, Kent RLJ: Microbial
complexes in subgingival plaque. J Clin Periodontal 1998, 25:134-144.
26. HOMD BLAST server. [http://www.homd.org].
27. Bik EM, Davis Long C, Armitage GC, Loomer P, Emerson J, Mongodin EF,
Nelson KE, Gill SR, Fraser-Liggett CM, Relman DA: Bacterial diversity in the
oral cavity of 10 healthy individuals. ISME J 2010, 4:962-974.
28. Infernal. [http://infernal.janelia.org/].
29. Saitou N, Nei M: The neighbor-joining method: a new method for
reconstructing phylogenetic trees. Mol Biol Evol 1987, 4:406-425.
30. Human Microbe Identification Microarray Bacterial Species. [http://mim.
forsyth.org/bacteria.html].
Pre-publication history
The pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed here:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6831/11/7/prepub
doi:10.1186/1472-6831-11-7
Cite this article as: Olson et al.: Use of 16S ribosomal RNA gene
analyses to characterize the bacterial signature associated with poor
oral health in West Virginia. BMC Oral Health 2011 11:7.

</pre>
</body>
</html>
