<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Non-homologous isofunctional enzymes: A systematic analysis of alternative solutions in enzyme evolution</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Biology Direct 2010, 5:31. doi: 10.1186/1745-6150-5-31"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Marina V Omelchenko, Michael Y Galperin, Yuri I Wolf, Eugene V Koonin"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 8.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 7.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Omelchenko et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:31
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/31

Open Access

RESEARCH

Non-homologous isofunctional enzymes: A
systematic analysis of alternative solutions in
enzyme evolution
Research

Marina V Omelchenko, Michael Y Galperin*, Yuri I Wolf and Eugene V Koonin

Abstract
Background: Evolutionarily unrelated proteins that catalyze the same biochemical reactions are often referred to as
analogous - as opposed to homologous - enzymes. The existence of numerous alternative, non-homologous enzyme
isoforms presents an interesting evolutionary problem; it also complicates genome-based reconstruction of the
metabolic pathways in a variety of organisms. In 1998, a systematic search for analogous enzymes resulted in the
identification of 105 Enzyme Commission (EC) numbers that included two or more proteins without detectable
sequence similarity to each other, including 34 EC nodes where proteins were known (or predicted) to have distinct
structural folds, indicating independent evolutionary origins. In the past 12 years, many putative non-homologous
isofunctional enzymes were identified in newly sequenced genomes. In addition, efforts in structural genomics
resulted in a vastly improved structural coverage of proteomes, providing for definitive assessment of
(non)homologous relationships between proteins.
Results: We report the results of a comprehensive search for non-homologous isofunctional enzymes (NISE) that
yielded 185 EC nodes with two or more experimentally characterized - or predicted - structurally unrelated proteins. Of
these NISE sets, only 74 were from the original 1998 list. Structural assignments of the NISE show over-representation of
proteins with the TIM barrel fold and the nucleotide-binding Rossmann fold. From the functional perspective, the set of
NISE is enriched in hydrolases, particularly carbohydrate hydrolases, and in enzymes involved in defense against
oxidative stress.
Conclusions: These results indicate that at least some of the non-homologous isofunctional enzymes were recruited
relatively recently from enzyme families that are active against related substrates and are sufficiently flexible to
accommodate changes in substrate specificity.
Reviewers: This article was reviewed by Andrei Osterman, Keith F. Tipton (nominated by Martijn Huynen) and Igor B.
Zhulin. For the full reviews, go to the Reviewers' comments section.
Background
The recent efforts in genome sequencing of organisms
that inhabit a variety of environments, from deep-sea
hydrothermal vents to Antarctic ice, revealed a surprising
biochemical unity of these organisms, that is, the uniformity of the key gene expression mechanisms and metabolic pathways, and the enzymes that catalyze them.
However, in certain cases, the same biochemical reaction
is known to be catalyzed by two or more enzymes that
* Correspondence: galperin@ncbi.nlm.nih.gov
1

National Center for Biotechnology Information, National Library of Medicine,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20894, USA

share no detectable sequence similarity with each other
[1,2]. Although this apparent lack of sequence similarity
often can be attributed to the rapid divergence of homologous protein sequences during evolution [3], some of
the alternative enzymes catalyzing the same biochemical
reaction have been found to adopt different structural
folds and therefore must have evolved independently.
Enzymes that catalyze the same reaction are often
referred to as analogous, as opposed to homologous [46]; it is probably more accurate to explicitly denote them
Non-homologous ISofunctional Enzymes (NISE), and
hereinafter we adopt this notation. One of the best-

Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
© 2010 Omelchenko et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Com-

BioMed Central mons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Omelchenko et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:31
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/31

known cases of NISE is superoxide dismutase whose 3
principal forms, Cu/Zn-, Mn/Fe-, and Ni-dependent, are
all structurally distinct [2,7,8] and there is evidence for
the existence of yet another, fourth form [9].
In a previous study, in the early days of genome
sequencing, we performed a systematic search for potential NISE by identifying all protein sequences listed in
GenBank that, although assigned the same 4-digit
Enzyme Commission (EC) numbers, had no detectable
sequence similarity with each other [6]. Wherever possible, the independent origin of candidate NISE was validated by assigning them to distinct structural folds. As a
result, apparently unrelated sequences were found for 105
EC nodes out of the 1709 nodes represented at that time
in GenBank (see Additional file 1, Table S1). However,
pairs of crystal structures confirming that two or more
distinct forms of an enzyme indeed had different 3D folds
were available only for 16 EC nodes. In 18 more cases,
distinct folds for different enzyme isoforms were inferred
on the basis of their sequence similarity to proteins with
known 3D structures. For the rest of the EC nodes identified as potential NISE on the basis of the lack of detectable sequence similarity to each other, the structural
relationships remained inaccessible, so there was no
definitive proof of their evolutionary independence.
Our 1998 study suggested that NISE could be far more
widespread than previously thought and paved the way to
further recognition of candidate NISE catalyzing a variety
of metabolic reactions [3,10,11]. However, subsequent
structural studies showed that some of the pairs of
enzymes, initially predicted to be NISE, actually included
distantly related proteins. For example, the apparent lack
of sequence similarity between bacterial and eukaryotic
glutathione synthetases proved to be due to a circular
permutation in the latter structure [12]. In addition,
improved methods for protein sequence comparison
made it possible to identify subtle sequence similarities
between some of the candidate NISE that appeared to be
indicative of their common origin.
The goal of the present study was to make use of the
vastly expanded sequence and structural data that are
currently available, to generate a comprehensive list of
NISE and to obtain insights into the evolution of alternative solutions for the same reaction through comparison
of the phyletic patterns of their distribution. In the years
elapsed since our 1998 analysis, several studies explored
various groups of alternative enzymes catalyzing the
same biochemical reaction, including those belonging to
the same protein (super)families [13,14]. Here, we focus
on enzyme variants that possess (or could be inferred to
possess) different structural folds and therefore appear to
be evolutionarily unrelated (bona fide NISE).

Page 2 of 20

Results
Update of the original list of non-homologous
isofunctional enzymes

The previous analysis [6] identified 105 EC nodes (individual biochemical reactions) that included predicted
analogous enzymes (NISE, under the present notation).
Of these, previously characterized different folds were
available for 16 EC nodes, thus validating 16 sets of NISE.
For 13 of these 16, there were two isoforms with distinct
structural folds. The remaining 3 enzymes, namely chloroperoxidase, cellulase and lichenase, were represented
by 3 distinct folds each [6]. During the past 12 years,
progress in structural genomics resulted in a rapid
growth of the number of solved protein structures [15,16]
including structures of many candidate NISE. As a result,
comparison of many putative NISE pairs could be put on
a solid structural footing. A re-analysis of the previously
defined set of 105 EC nodes revealed 61 additional nodes
of bona fide NISE that were represented by two or more
versions with distinct folds (Additional file 1, Table S1).
These sets of NISE included 17 cases with 3 distinct folds,
4 cases with 4 folds, and one instance where the same
activity (protein-tyrosine-phosphatase, EC 3.1.3.48) was
represented by 5 structurally distinct forms (Table 1).
Of the previously reported 16 EC nodes corresponding
to apparent NISE, where the three-dimensional (3D)
structures were available for both forms, one case, βgalactosidase, EC 3.2.1.23, proved to be in error as catalytic domains of both forms (PDB entries 1BGL and
1GOW, respectively) had the TIM-barrel [βα)8] fold.
Among the 18 additional cases of candidate NISE, prediction of distinct structural folds for two enzyme forms
proved correct for 15 pairs. In two instances, the two isoforms turned out to possess the same fold, and one case
(protochlorophyllide reductase, EC 1.3.1.33) had to be
eliminated because the light-dependent and light-independent forms of this enzyme (PDB entries 3MIN and
1HDU, respectively) employ different electron donors
and so, technically, catalyze different reactions.
Altogether, in 28 cases from the original list of 105 (predicted) NISE, the purported unrelated enzymes proved to
belong to the same fold and even the same structural
superfamily (Additional file 1, Table S1). Some of these
cases revealed interesting evolutionary histories, such as,
for example, the aforementioned circular permutation in
the glutathione synthase (EC 6.3.2.3) structure [12] or the
early divergence of the prokaryotic and eukaryotic versions of the FAD synthetase (EC 2.7.7.2) that was recently
analyzed in detail by Grishin and coworkers [17]. For
these enzymes, despite their apparent common origin,
different isoforms showed little sequence similarity to
each other, so their homology could be recognized only

Omelchenko et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:31
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/31

Page 3 of 20

Table 1: Distribution of non-homologous isofunctional enzymes among enzyme classes
Enzyme class

Enzyme nodes

Enzyme nodes

in ENZYMEa

in KEGGa

Sequences
with EC
numbers

EC nodes with analogous
enzymes

Two classes
of enzymes

Fraction of
the EC nodes

Three or
more classes

Oxidoreductases (EC 1)

1343 (625)

575

98,166

31

5

5.8%

Transferases (EC 2)

1296 (683)

625

150,596

24

2

3.8%

3)c

930c (441)

427c

81,538

76

11

19.7%d

Lyases (EC 4)

469 (235)

210

45,074

15

3

7.7%

Isomerases (EC 5)

177 (106)

100

30,429

15

2

16.0%e

Ligases (EC 6)

148(97)

104

44,829

1

0

1.0%

Total

4,363
(2,187)

2,041

450,632

Hydrolases (EC

185

4.4%

a - Only the EC nodes containing all 4 digits were considered; the numbers of EC nodes with at least one assigned protein sequence are shown
in parentheses
b - From the in KEGG database, based on a set of 718 complete genomes
c - Peptidases (EC 3.4.x.x) were excluded from the analyzed set
d - EC nodes with analogous enzymes are overrepresented (p < 1 × 10-12)
e - Overrepresentation of EC nodes with analogous enzymes is not statistically significant (p ~ 0.08).

through structural comparisons. For the rest of the 28
"failed" cases, thanks to the improvements in sequence
analysis methods and the growth in the number of
diverse protein sequences in the public databases,
sequence searches revealed significant similarity and
common motifs suggesting a common origin for the
respective isoforms.
Several additional pairs of enzymes failed to qualify as
NISE after they were found to catalyze different reactions. For example, HAD1_PSEUC and HADD_PSEPU,
two 2-haloalkanoate dehalogenases from Pseudomonas
sp. (PDB entries 1QQ5 and 3BJX, respectively), although
initially assigned to the same EC 3.8.1.2, exhibit different
stereo-specificities, which prompted assignment of the
latter form to the new EC 3.8.1.9. Likewise, two ubiquitin
thiolesterases, represented by UBP5_HUMAN and
STALP_HUMAN (PDB entries 2G43 and 2ZNR, respectively), despite having the same EC 3.1.2.15, actually possess distinct activities, cleaving polyubiquitin chains
linked, respectively, through Lys-48 and Lys-63 residues
of ubiquitin [18]. In two instances, erroneous assignments of enzyme pairs as NISE were due to the heteromeric, multi-subunit structures of one or both isoforms.
For example, yeast sulfate adenylyltransferase
MET3_YEAST (EC 2.7.7.4) is structurally unrelated to
the CysN subunit of the sulfate adenylyltransferase from
E. coli, but is closely related to the CysD subunit of the
same enzyme. Finally, despite all the effort to include only
proteins with proven enzymatic activity [6], one of the

105 cases included a wrong entry, putative catechol oxidase DXA2_DROME [19], which was later re-annotated
as the 26S proteasome regulatory subunit 3 (UniProt
entry P25161, PSMD3_DROME). Erroneous assignments
of the last two kinds, those caused by the presence of
multiple subunits and those caused by experimental
errors, are a common problem complicating any search
for NISE; the only remedy seems to be a careful case by
case analysis (see below).
New approaches to the identification of non-homologous
isofunctional enzymes

To obtain a comprehensive list of NISE (Additional file 2,
Table S2), we combined several search strategies to connect protein sequences with the reactions they catalyze.
First, all Swiss-Prot entries with the same EC number
were clustered by sequence similarity and those EC nodes
that yielded more than one cluster were further analyzed.
As part of this approach, we examined the EC nodes that
have been assigned two or more profiles in the PRIAM
database [13].
To cover new enzyme sequences emerging from wholegenome sequencing efforts, the same approach was
applied to the KEGG database [20], which assigns EC
numbers to genome-derived protein sequences using a
custom algorithm [21,22]. The statistics of protein clustering are presented in Figure 1 and Tables S3 and S4 in
Additional File 3. The second approach used the KEGG
collection of enzymatic reactions to identify enzymes

Omelchenko et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:31
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/31

Page 4 of 20

Number of EC nodes

10000

1000

100

10

1
1

10

100

Number of clusters in EC node

Figure 1 Clustering results for the enzymes with four-digit EC
numbers represented in the ENZYME (squares) and KEGG (diamonds) data sets.

that, while having different substrate specificities and
hence different EC numbers, are capable of catalyzing the
same reaction. To this end, we examined the clustered
protein sequences assigned to any reaction that corresponded to two or more EC nodes. All cases where the
same reaction was associated with more than one EC
node were manually analyzed.
The new compendium of non-homologous isofunctional
enzymes

The final list of NISE, obtained after a detailed case-bycase analysis, includes 140 confirmed EC nodes where
the presence of two or more distinct forms is supported
by a comparison of their 3D structures that revealed different folds (Additional file 2, Table S2). In additional 45
EC nodes, pairs of candidate NISE were inferred to be
structurally distinct on the basis of the analysis of their
predicted structures (Additional file 2, Table S2). In one
instance, neither of the two forms of 4-methyl-5-(2hydroxyethyl)thiazole phosphate synthase (commonly
referred to as thiazole synthase) described in the literature (bacterial ThiG and the yeast THI4) had been
assigned an EC number [11].
In addition, we identified 26 tentative cases for which
the NISE status, although likely, could not be confirmed
(see Additional file 2, Table S2). Again, one case came
from literature searches: the EC number 2.7.1.31, initially
assigned to glycerate 3-kinases, was found to include also
glycerate kinases that produce 2-phosphoglycerate
[23,24]. Finally, there were 10 cases where two structurally unrelated enzymes could catalyze the same biochemical reaction but had been assigned different EC
numbers, usually based on differences in substrate specificity. These pairs of enzymes are listed in a separate section of the Table S2 (Additional file 2) but were not
included in any further analyses.

The 186 EC nodes with confirmed or predicted NISE
represent approximately 8.5% of all analyzed EC nodes;
only 73 of these were present in the previously published
list [6]. As noted previously [6], NISE could be found in
all 6 classes of enzymes recognized in the EC (Table 1).
Hydrolases (EC 3) were overrepresented among NISE
whereas transferases (EC 2) were underrepresented
(Table 1, Figure 2). The fractions of NISE from the other
four enzyme classes were as expected considering the
total counts of the EC nodes in those enzyme classes
(Additional file 3, Table S5).
The majority of the NISE were represented by two
unrelated forms, although some were found (or predicted) to possess three or more distinct forms (Table 2).
The greatest number of NISE represented by three or
more different structures was found among hydrolases,
followed by oxidoreductases (Table 1). Among glycoside
hydrolases, catalytic domains of cellulase and licheninase
are represented by the same 3 folds which in the SCOP
database [25] are referred to as, respectively, TIM beta/
alpha-barrel, alpha/alpha toroid and concanavalin A-like
lectins/glucanases. Cellulase was also represented by at
least two additional folds (Table 2). Other enzymes with
multiple non-homologous isoforms include acid phosphatase, protein-tyrosine-phosphatase, adenylate cyclase,
and DNA-(apurinic or apyrimidinic site) lyase, as well as
such enzymes as catalase, peroxidase, peroxiredoxin,
chloride peroxidase, and superoxide dismutase that participate in defense against reactive oxygen species (ROS)
(Table 2).
Functional distribution of the NISE among the COG
functional categories [26] reflected the abundance of
COGs in each category (Figure 3). The only statistically
100%

80%

60%

40%

20%

0%

Analogs

All enzymes

Figure 2 Distribution of non-homologous isofunctional enzymes
among various enzyme classes. The fraction of EC nodes of each
class that contain NISE (left column) as compared with the fraction of
EC nodes from each class in the complete set of 2181 EC nodes that
containing more than one protein sequence (right column). The EC
classes are ordered from the bottom: EC1, blue; EC2, red; EC 3, green;
EC4, magenta; EC5, cyan; EC6, orange.

Omelchenko et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:31
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/31

Page 5 of 20

Table 2: Enzymes with multiple structurally distinct, non-homologous isoforms
Enzyme name (EC)

Example (SwissProt)

Structure (PDB)

Fold names in SCOP
(abbreviated)

Acid phosphatase (EC 3.1.3.2)

PPA6_HUMAN

1NDH

Phosphoglycerate mutase-like

APHA_ECOLI

1N8N

HAD-like

PPA_ZYMMO

1D2T

Acid phosphatases

PPA5_HUMAN

1UTE

Metallo-dependent
phosphatases

PPAC_HUMAN

5PNT

Phosphotyrosine protein
phosphatases I

PHOA_PENCH

n/a

n/a

GUNA_CLOCE

1EDG

TIM beta/alpha-barrel

GUNA_PSEFL

1UT9

Alpha/alpha toroid

GUN1_STRHA

2BOD

7-Stranded beta/alpha barrel

GUN_ASPAC

1KS4

Concanavalin A-like lectins/
glucanases,

GUNM_CLOTM

2FVG

Phosphorylase/hydrolase-like

GUNE_RUMFL

1L0H

Predicted acyl carrier proteinlike

SODF_ECOLI

1ISA

Fe,Mn superoxide dismutase
(SOD)

SODC_ECOLI

1ESO

Immunoglobulin-like betasandwich

SODN_STRSO

1Q0D

Four-helical up-and-down
bundle

NEC1_NICLS

2ET7

Double-stranded beta-helix

PRP1_ECOLI

1G5B

Metallo-dependent
phosphatases

PRPC_BACSU

1TXO

PP2C-like

CTDS1_HUMAN

1TA0

HAD-like

DUS19_HUMAN

1M3G

Phosphotyrosine protein
phosphatases II

PTPA_STRCO

1U2P

Phosphotyrosine protein
phosphatases I-like

PTPRD_HUMAN

2FH7

Phosphotyrosine protein
phosphatases II

MPIP3_HUMAN

1QB0

Rhodanese/Cell cycle control
phosphatase

YWQE_BACSU

2ANU

Predicted 7-stranded beta/
alpha barrel

EYA3_MOUSE

1JUD

Predicted HAD-like

END3_ECOLI

2ABK

DNA-glycosylase

APEX1_HUMAN

1E9N

DNase I-like

Cellulase
(EC 3.2.1.4)

Superoxide dismutase
(EC 1.15.1.1)

Phosphoprotein (Ser)
phosphatase
(EC 3.1.3.16)

Protein-tyrosine phosphatase
(EC 3.1.3.48)

DNA-(apurinic or apyrimidinic
site) lyase (EC 4.2.99.18)

Omelchenko et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:31
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/31

Page 6 of 20

Table 2: Enzymes with multiple structurally distinct, non-homologous isoforms (Continued)
APN1_YEAST

2ACA

CYTH-like phosphatases

1YRU

EF Hand-like

n/a

n/a

IPYR_ARATH

1TWL

OB-fold

1WPM

DHH phosphoesterases

2HDO

HAD-like

AVP1_ARATH

n/a

Integral membrane protein, H+transporting

CATA_HUMAN

1QQW

Heme-dependent catalaselike

CATA_ECOLI

2FXG

Heme-dependent
peroxidases

MCAT_LACPL

1JKU

Ferritin-like

PRDX6_MOUSE

1PRX

Thioredoxin fold

PERM_HUMAN

1MYP

Heme-dependent
peroxidases

YCDB_ECOLI

2d3q

Ferredoxin-like

PRXC_PSEPY

1A88

Alpha/beta-hydrolases

PRXC_CURIN

1VNC

Acid phosphatase

PRXC_CALFU

2CPO

EF Hand-lik

TDXH_AERPE

2E2G

Thioredoxin fold

AHPD_MYCTU

1KNC

AhpD-like

OSMC_ECOLI

1NYE

OsmC-like

GUB_NICPL

2CYG

TIM beta/alpha-barrel

GUB_BACSU

1GBG

Concanavalin A-like lectins/
glucanases,

GUB_BACCI

Licheninase
(EC 3.2.1.73)

P-loop NTPases

PPAX_BACSU

Peroxiredoxin
(EC 1.11.1.15)

1CS4

PPAC_BACSU

Chloride peroxidase (EC
1.11.1.10)

CYA1_HUMAN

CYAA_ECOLI

Peroxidase
(EC 1.11.1.7)

MutM-like DNA repair proteins

CYAA_BORPE

Catalase
(EC 1.11.1.6)

1K82

O69199_AERHY

Inorganic pyrophosphatase
(EC 3.6.1.1)

TIM beta/alpha-barrel

FPG_ECOLI
Adenylate cyclase (EC 4.6.1.1)

1QTW

1V5C

Alpha/alpha toroid

significant deviation from this pattern was the overrepresentation of enzymes involved in defense against oxidative stress and in DNA repair (Additional file 3, Table S6).
The greatest number of confirmed and predicted NISE
was associated with carbohydrate metabolism (Figure 3).
Other functional classes that were relatively well repre-

sented among NISE included amino acid metabolism,
lipid metabolism, nucleotide metabolism, and energy
production and conversion. Non-homologous isofunctional enzymes were found in many metabolic pathways
such as glycolysis/gluconeogenesis, purine biosynthesis,
and pentose phosphate pathway. However, the distribu-

Omelchenko et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:31
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/31

Page 7 of 20

40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0

C

E

F

G

H

I

J

K

L

M

O ess
str
ox

P

Q

R

T

Figure 3 Distribution of non-homologous isofunctional enzymes
by COG functional categories. For each category, the left (blue) column shows the absolute number of EC nodes with NISE, and the right
(red) column shows this number as a percentage of all EC nodes assigned to that category. COG functional categories are as follows: C energy production and conversion, E - amino acid transport and metabolism, F - nucleotide transport and metabolism, G - carbohydrate
transport and metabolism, H - coenzyme metabolism, I - lipid metabolism, J - translation, ribosomal structure and biogenesis, K - transcription, L - DNA replication, recombination and repair, M - Cell envelope
biogenesis, outer membrane, O - posttranslational modification, protein turnover, chaperones, ox stress - defense from oxidative stress, P inorganic ion transport and metabolism, Q - secondary metabolites
biosynthesis, transport and catabolism, R - general function prediction
only, T - signal transduction.

tion is patchy, that is, NISE are scattered among different
metabolic pathways, with not a single pathway identified
in which all reactions would be catalyzed by multiple
non-homologous isoforms.
The over-representation of NISE in pathways involved
in protection against ROS appears to support the idea of
Doolittle who referred to some of the NISE as "second
edition" enzymes [27] that evolved relatively late as adaptations to new environments such as, for example, the
oxygen-rich atmosphere.
Structural features of non-homologous isofunctional
enzymes

Inspection of the structural properties of NISE reveals a
large variety of fold combinations that result in structurally distinct isoforms (Additional file 2, Table S2). However, several folds, most conspicuously, the TIM (β/α)8barrel fold that is seen primarily among hydrolases, were
statistically over-represented among the NISE (Table 3
and Additional file 3, Table S7). The second most common fold was the NAD(P)-binding Rossmann fold that is
seen primarily among oxidoreductases but is not statistically over-represented because of its overall high abundance. In 11 instances, pairs of NISE consisted of
representatives of the TIM-barrel and Rossmann folds.
The over-representation of TIM-barrels among analo-

gous enzymes is consistent with the extraordinary biochemical versatility of this symmetrical domain resulting
in its ability to catalyze a broad variety of biochemical
reactions [28,29].
In contrast, other fold combinations rarely form pairs
of NISE (Additional file 2, Table S2). Parallel utilization of
the same folds is seen mostly when their representatives
catalyze similar reactions. For example, non-homologous
isofunctional L-lactate dehydrogenases (EC 1.1.1.27) and
malate dehydrogenases (EC 1.1.1.37) feature the same
fold pairs, namely, the L-sulfolactate dehydrogenase-like
fold and a combination of the NAD(P)-binding Rossmann-fold with a LDH C-terminal domain. The same
pattern is seen among proteins that participate in defense
against oxidative stress. In particular, the heme-dependent peroxidase fold is responsible for one of the two (or
three) non-homologous isoforms of catalase, peroxidase
and cytochrome c peroxidase, whereas the ferredoxinlike fold is found in a peroxidase and a heme oxygenase.
These observations are compatible with our previous
conclusion [6] that the most common route for the origin
of NISE enzymes is recruitment of an existing enzyme
that catalyzes a closely related reaction through a relatively minor change in substrate specificity or the catalytic mechanism (see also [30]).
An example of such an evolutionary development is
seen on Figure 4, which shows the phylogenetic tree of
two carbohydrate kinase families that include nonhomologous gluconate kinases (EC 2.7.1.12). One of
these families (Figure 4A), referred to as the FGGY family
of carbohydrate kinases in Pfam [31], includes enzymes
with experimentally demonstrated kinase activities
towards various C3-C7 substrates, such as glycerol (EC
2.7.1.30), erythritol (EC 2.7.1.27), rhamnulose (EC
2.7.1.5), ribulose (EC 2.7.1.16, 2.7.1.47), D-xylulose (EC
2.7.1.17), L-fuculose (EC 2.7.1.51), L-xylulose (EC
2.7.1.53), and sedoheptulose (EC 2.7.1.14). Glycerol
kinase has the simplest substrate in this group and catalyzes a reaction of glycerol metabolism that is common to
bacteria, archaea, and eukaryotes; this enzyme is widespread in representatives of all three domains of life.
Other kinases of this family participate in various reactions of sugar metabolism and show more narrow phyletic distributions. Glycerol kinase might represent the
ancestral form that subsequently evolved to accommodate new substrates while retaining the overall structural
fold and the reaction mechanism. The second form of
gluconate kinase comes from an even larger, P-loop
kinase family [32] (Figure 4B) which includes, among others, shikimate kinase (EC 2.7.1.71, see below), phosphoribulokinase (EC 2.7.1.19), adenylylsulfate kinase (EC
2.7.1.25), and a variety of nucleotide/nucleoside kinases,
such as cytidylate kinase (EC 2.7.4.14), guanylate kinase
(EC 2.7.4.8), adenylate kinase (EC 2.7.4.3), and thymidy-

Omelchenko et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:31
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/31

Page 8 of 20

Table 3: Protein folds most commonly found among non-homologous isofunctional enzymes
Fold

EC1

EC2

EC3

EC4

EC5

EC6

Total

Total number of
folds per EC
class

46

39

87

34

36

2

TIM beta/alphabarrel

10

2

29

7

3

-

51*

NAD(P)-binding
Rossmann-fold

20

-

5

2

1

-

28

Alpha/beta
hydrolases

1

3

8

-

-

-

12*

Ribonuclease Hlike motif

-

3

9

-

-

-

12*

Metaldependent
phosphatases

-

-

11

-

-

-

11*

Alpha/alpha
toroid

-

-

6

3

1

-

10*

Flavodoxin-like

4

1

4

1

-

-

10

P-loop
containing
NTPases

1

7

-

1

-

-

9

HAD-like

-

-

7

1

-

-

8

Ferredoxin-like

3

3

-

1

1

-

8

* - These folds are over-represented among the NISE (p < 0.05).
EC1, oxidoreductases; EC2, transferases; EC3, hydrolases; EC4, lyases; EC5, isomerases; EC6, ligases.

late kinase (EC 2.7.4.9). It appears that in each case, gluconate kinase was recruited from a family of enzymes
(kinases) that catalyze the same chemical reaction (phosphorylation) with closely related substrates.
Phyletic distribution of non-homologous isofunctional
enzymes

The distribution of most NISE across the three domains
of life is patchy and devoid of obvious regularity. Nevertheless, several NISE do show complementary phyletic
patterns (Table 4), where the two isoforms are restricted
to non-overlapping or minimally overlapping subsets of
lineages. For example, the recently described "archaeal"
form of shikimate kinase, a member of the GHMP kinase
family [33], is indeed found exclusively in archaea,
whereas the well-known "bacterial" form of this enzyme,
a member of the P-loop NTPase superfamily, is found in
bacteria and eukaryotes (Table 4).
Similarly, the bacterial and eukaryotic forms of diacylglycerol kinase appear primarily in the respective lineages
and are missing from all archaeal genomes sequenced to
date. The exceptions to this pattern include the presence
of the soluble "eukaryotic" form in a limited number of
bacteria, mostly firmicutes, and the discovery of the bac-

terial-like membrane-embedded form encoded in the
cyanobacterium-like plastid of the cercozoan "green
amoeba" Paulinella chromatophora and in the unfinished
genome of castor bean (in the latter case, a bacterial contamination remains to be ruled out). Several other
enzyme forms, such as class I lysyl-tRNA synthetase and
cupin-type glucose-6-phosphate isomerase, originally
described in archaea [34-37], are also found in certain lineages of bacteria (Table 4).
A comparison of the phyletic distributions of the
enzymes that participate in defense against ROS revealed
an abundance of distinct forms of these enzymes in bacterial and eukaryotic (particularly plant) genomes as
opposed to a much lower diversity in archaea (Additional
file 3, Table S7). The most common iron-dependent
superoxide dismutase is universally present in bacteria,
eukaryotes, and is also seen in some archaea. The copper/
zinc-dependent form of superoxide dismutase is widespread in bacteria and eukaryotes as well, but among
archaea its presence is limited to a few aerobic halophiles.
The third form, nickel-dependent superoxide dismutase,
is unique to bacteria, and is found primarily in actinobacteria and cyanobacteria, and accordingly, in plastids of

Omelchenko et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:31
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/31

Page 9 of 20

A
Sedoheptulose kinase, EC 2.7.1.14
Erythritol kinase
EC 2.7.1.27

Ribulose kinase
EC 2.7.1.16

L-xylulose kinase
EC 2.7.1.53

100

Rhamnulose kinase
EC 2.7.1.5
100

96

100

100

D-xylulose kinase
EC 2.7.1.53

100

79
70 76

100
100
100

Fuculose kinase
EC 2.7.1.51

Gluconate kinase
EC 2.7.1.12

100

Glycerol kinase
EC 2.7.1.30

0.5

B
Adenylylsulfate kinase
EC 2.7.1.25
Gluconate kinase
EC 2.7.1.12

100
97

Guanylate kinase
EC 2.7.4.8

100
100

Cytidylate kinase
EC 2.7.4.14
0.5

Thymidylate kinase
EC 2.7.4.9

93
90

100

Adenylate kinase
EC 2.7.4.3
Shikimate kinase
EC 2.7.1.71

Figure 4 Phylogenetic trees of two non-homologous gluconate kinases and related enzymes. A. Carbohydrate kinases of the FGGY family. B.
Carbohydrate and nucleoside kinases of the AAA family. Annotation of each group includes the functional assignment (the substrate and EC node)
of the experimentally characterized member(s) and the phylogenetic distribution of its close homologs.

Omelchenko et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:31
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/31

Page 10 of 20

Table 4: Distinct phyletic patterns of non-homologous isofunctional enzymes
Enzyme (EC)

249

3

47

32

0

1

6

0

3

HMOX1_HUMAN

134

0

41

36

0

0

AROL_ECOLI

553

9

28

0

39

0

KDGL_ECOLI

404

0

0

23

0

59

F16PA_ECOLI

268

5

54

307

4

2

Q8U359_PYRFU

19

37

0

CYNT_ECOLI

414

17

35

CAH_METTE

211

32

10

CAH1_HUMAN

88

0

40

G6PI_HUMAN

547

10

58

G6PI_THELI

11

13

0

SYK1_ECOLI

551

15

63

SYK_AERPE

Lysine---tRNA ligase
(EC 6.1.1.6)

62

F16P_BACSU

Glucose-6-phosphate
isomerase (EC 5.3.1.9)

23

DGKG_HUMAN

Carbonic anhydrase
(EC 4.2.1.1)

526

AROK_METJA

Fructose
bisphosphatase
(EC 3.1.3.11)

SODF_ECOLI

ISDI_STAAR

Diacylglycerol kinase
(EC 2.7.1.107)

Instances in
eukaryotes (out of
63)

NEC1_NICLS

Shikimate kinase
(EC 2.7.1.71)

Instances in archaea
(out of 48)

SODN_STRSO

Heme oxygenase
(EC 1.14.99.3)

Instances in bacteria
(out of 607)

SODC_ECOLI

Superoxide dismutase
(EC 1.15.1.1)

Examples

91

36

0

The data are from the ortholog tables in the KEGG database [20], supplemented with the results of iterative BLAST searches against the NCBI's
Reference Sequence database [56].

green algae and diatoms. The fourth superoxide dismutase, a manganese-dependent cupin-type enzyme
related to oxalate oxidase [9], appears to be encoded only
in land plants. Likewise, most archaea encode a single
form of peroxidase and chloride peroxidase (Additional
file 3, Table S8).

Non-homologous isofunctional enzymes and genome size

Previously, we analyzed the involvement of NISE in the
key reactions of central metabolism [3,10] and concluded
that the presence of NISE correlates with the genome
size: microorganisms with small genomes typically
encode a single form of any enzyme whereas organisms
with larger genome size often carry the genes for two or

Omelchenko et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:31
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/31

more non-homologous isoforms [6]. These observations
were confirmed on the larger set of NISE and the much
larger set of complete genome sequences analyzed here
(Figure 5). The total number of predicted enzymes with
assigned EC numbers positively scales with the genome
size, with an exponent of approximately 0.7, slightly lower
than reported for metabolic enzymes in the studies on
universal scaling behavior of different functional classes
of proteins [38,39]; the exponent for prokaryotes is
slightly greater than that for eukaryotes but the difference
is not statistically significant (Figure 5A). The number of
NISE pairs encoded in any given genome scales with the
genome size substantially steeper than the total number
of enzymes in prokaryotes but somewhat less steeply in
eukaryotes (Figure 5B). These observations seem to
reflect, mostly, the metabolic versatility of free-living bacteria, particularly, those that inhabit complex environments. In these organisms, the partial redundancy and
specialization of enzymes appear to grow faster than linearly with the genome size.

Discussion
Functional, structural and evolutionary patterns of nonhomologous isofunctional enzymes

This study expanded the previously delineated list of
NISE [6] and, more importantly, put the phenomenon of
utilization of multiple, non-homologous enzymes for
catalysis of the same reaction on a firm structural footing.
In the previous study, the sets of NISE, for which the existence of two or more distinct folds (the ultimate proof of
the lack of homology), could be demonstrated directly
was a small minority but this fraction changed to majority
in the present study thanks to the advances of structural
biology in general and structural genomics in particular.
The present analysis detected non-homologous isoforms
for approximately 8.5% of the enzymes included in the EC
system. This is the low bound for the spread of NISE
among enzymes because a considerable number of proteins that show varying degrees of evolutionary conservation but have not been biochemically characterized [40]
are likely to be non-homologous isoforms of known
enzymes. Thus, the fraction of non-homologous isoform
sets among enzymes is likely to be close to 10%, by any
account a widespread, substantial phenomenon.
We examined the distributions of NISE across several
planes of biological diversity including classes of
enzymes, biochemical pathways, protein folds, and phylogenetic lineages. The overall conclusion that does not
seem to be particularly surprising (see, e.g. [41]) is the
patchiness of the distribution of NISE and the paucity of
strong trends. Nevertheless, several distinct patterns are
supported statistically and deserve attention.
Non-homologous isofunctional enzymes are notably
more common among hydrolases than in other EC

Page 11 of 20

classes. Evolutionary invention of unrelated catalysts for
the same reaction seems to be relatively easy in this class
of enzymes because one of their substrates is the universal small molecule (H2O), and the hydrolysis reaction typically does not require any coenzymes.
In the structural space, TIM-barrels are significantly
over-represented among the NISE. This observation is
compatible with the remarkable biochemical versatility of
the TIM-barrel stemming from its symmetry that allows
accommodation of different activities and substrate specificities through limited structural change.
Non-homologous isofunctional enzymes are represented in a great variety of biochemical pathways and systems, typically, in one or two reactions of a pathway.
Against this overall patchy background, the excess of
NISE in systems of defense against ROS is remarkable. It
is tempting to speculate that in this case the emergence of
analogous enzymes was driven by a powerful selection
pressure in the face of the rapid oxygenation of the earth
atmosphere. This pressure apparently triggered independent evolution of several distinct solutions for the set of
relatively simple reactions that are required for ROS
detoxification.
Non-homologous isofunctional enzymes are found in
all major lines of cellular life. However, they show a
superlinear scaling with genome size in bacteria but not
in eukaryotes and accordingly appear to be most abundant in biochemically complex bacteria with large
genomes. Detailed phylogenomic analysis of individual
sets of NISE reveals evidence of "evolutionary tinkering"
[42] that is pervasive in genome evolution. Non-homologous isoforms of enzymes seem to be recruited from preexisting enzymes with related activities and specificities
following duplication or horizontal transfer (apparently,
the principal route of innovation in prokaryotes [43,44],
where NISE are most common) of the respective genes.
The recurrence of certain folds, such as the TIM-barrel,
the Rossmann-fold or the alpha/beta hydrolase domain,
in the sets of NISE reflects the biochemical versatility of
these domains because of which they are, in a sense, "preadapted" for evolution of NISE. For instance, if an alphabeta hydrolase exists with a specificity for a particular
hydrolytic reaction, it will only take a small modification
of a TIM-barrel with a related hydrolytic activity to
evolve a pair of NISE.
Non-homologous isofunctional enzymes and enzyme
classification

Starting from the first enzyme classification schema
devised by Dixon and Webb [45] and adopted by the
Enzyme Commission of the International Union of Biochemistry [46], "enzymes are principally classified and
named according to the reaction they catalyze" [47]. Further, "a certain name designates not a single enzyme pro-

Omelchenko et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:31
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/31

Page 12 of 20

100

10000

B

0.77

y = 1.2x
R2 = 0.74

1000

y = 1.73x0.67
R2 = 0.63
100

10
100

1000

10000

100000

Analogous enzymes

Encoded enzymes

A

y = 3E-05x1.47
R2 = 0.60

10

y = 0.08x0.51
R2 = 0.44
1

0.1
100

1000

10000

100000

Figure 5 Dependence between the genome size (the total number of encoded proteins) and the number of encoded enzymes. A. The total
number of encoded enzymes with assigned four-digit EC numbers. B. The number of encoded non-homologous isofunctional enzymes. Prokaryotic
genomes are indicated with diamonds, eukaryotic genomes are indicated with squares. The best fit lines were calculated separately for prokaryotes
(blue) and eukaryotes (red).

tein but a group of proteins with the same catalytic
property". The EC code numbers consist of four elements
which specify, respectively, the enzyme class, subclass
(the bond broken or hydrolyzed, the group transferred,
etc.), sub-subclass (usually the nature of the substrate),
and the serial number of the enzyme in the respective
sub-subclass [47]. For the past 50 years, this nomenclature provided a solid basis for biochemical research and
was able to accommodate and classify a variety of newly
discovered enzymes. The EC system proved to be an
indispensable tool for largely automated assignments of
enzymatic functions to the numerous protein sequences
encoded in the sequenced genomes of various, often
poorly studied, organisms [48]. However, it is important
to note that this classification is function-based, not
sequence- or structure-based, and a substantial number
of EC nodes are still not assigned a single protein
sequence [49] (see Table 1). The strict reliance on substrate specificity is also a cause for certain confusion
when the EC numbers are used to map reactions on the
metabolic map. As an example, oxidation of D-glucose to
D-glucono-1,5-lactone, catalyzed by the NAD+-dependent glucose dehydrogenases (EC 1.1.1.118), could also
be listed under alcohol dehydrogenase (EC 1.1.1.1) and
aldose dehydrogenase (EC 1.1.1.121), as well as under
NADP+-dependent (EC 1.1.1.47), FAD-dependent (EC
1.1.99.10), or PQQ-dependent (EC 1.1.5.2) glucose 1dehydrogenase. The EC approach also becomes problematic when the substrates are complex (e.g. proteins) or
unknown. This complication has been recognized and

successfully dealt with in the case of peptidases (EC
3.4.x.x [50,51]) but remains a problem for various protein
kinases and protein phosphatases, which are known to be
highly specific for their targets but are currently lumped
together under the same EC nodes. It is hardly surprising
that phosphoprotein (Ser) phosphatase (EC 3.1.3.16) and
protein-tyrosine phosphatase (EC 3.1.3.48) made our list
of enzymes with the largest numbers of (predicted) unrelated folds (Table 2). The same problem is expected to
arise in the case of "house-cleaning" enzymes that hydrolyze specific non-canonical NTPs and other cellular
waste products [52] but are usually characterized based
on their side activity towards canonical sugars and/or
NTPs [53].
Non-homologous isofunctional enzymes add a further
complication to the EC classification schema. Although
the existence of alternative forms of fructose bisphosphate aldolase, phosphoglycerate mutase and superoxide
dismutase has been known for many years, recent studies
have led to a dramatic increase of the number of such
cases [13,14], including many where alternative enzyme
forms have been unequivocally shown to adopt distinct
structural folds (Table 1 and Additional file 2, Table S2).
According to the general rules of the EC classification,
enzyme isoforms that catalyze the same reaction do not
qualify for different EC nodes [47]. Nevertheless, it seems
reasonable to consider expanding the EC system by officially recognizing the notion of a "class" within an EC
node, such as, for example, superoxide dismutase (EC
1.15.1.1) class I, class II, and so on. We hope that the pres-

Omelchenko et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:31
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/31

ent study, along with other related projects [13,14], could
help in this regard.
Despite the fuzzy character of certain EC nodes, such
as acid phosphatase (EC 3.1.3.2) or NADH dehydrogenase (EC 1.6.99.3), the EC-based approach is an estimate
of the lower bound of the number of NISE. This approach
leaves out many enzymes that catalyze similar biochemical reactions but differ in the nature of the phosphoryl
donor (ATP, GTP, or pyrophosphate) or the electron
acceptor (NAD+, NADP+, or both) and accordingly have
been assigned different EC numbers. Conversely, it cannot be ruled out that detailed study of reactions catalyzed
by enzymes that are currently assigned the same EC number reveals differences in substrates, cofactors or mechanisms that will eventually justify their classification to
different EC nodes. Thus, not surprisingly, the NISE represent a moving target although we believe that the above
estimate of approximately 10% NISE among enzymatic
reactions is reasonably robust.

Conclusions
Sets of evolutionarily unrelated, non-homologous isofunctional enzymes were detected for a substantial fraction (up to 10%) of biochemical reactions, and adequate
description of these enzymes is important for the practical tasks of metabolic reconstruction and enzyme classification. Beyond this practical importance, NISE represent
a major evolutionary phenomenon: their existence shows
that, at least, for numerous and diverse biochemical problems, evolutionarily unrelated solutions can evolve. A
crucial corollary of this finding is that the role of convergence in the evolution of proteins is at best very limited,
and whenever enzymes with same fold catalyze the same
reaction, they most likely have a common origin, even in
the absence of significant sequence similarity. Conversely,
an interesting subject for structural and functional studies is the search for subtle similarities between NISE that
might allow them to accommodate the same substrates
and catalyze the same reaction.
Methods
Identification of NISE was performed using 3 methods.
The principal approach again relied on the Enzyme Commission (EC, [47] numbers, where each complete EC
number (node) specifies one particular biochemical reaction. Accordingly, NISE were identified as pairs of
enzymes that had been assigned the same EC number but
showed no detectable sequence similarity to each other.
The second approach focused on apparently unrelated
proteins with different EC numbers that were marked as
catalyzing the same biochemical reaction in the KEGG
database [20]. In addition, potential NISE were identified
through text searches using keywords "analogous
enzymes", "enzyme class" etc.

Page 13 of 20

The EC-based analysis used protein sequences from the
ENZYME [54] and KEGG databases. The KEGG database was used to track enzyme distribution in 718 completely sequenced genomes from 63 eukaryotes, 48
archaea and 607 bacteria (for the complete list, see Additional file 3, Table S9). The ENZYME database [55] was
used as the source of information about the enzymatic
activities demonstrated for proteins from organisms that
might not have completely sequenced genomes.
All GenBank gene identification numbers (GIs) for proteins with assigned four-digit EC numbers in the KEGG
and ENZYME databases were collected and their
sequences were extracted from the NCBI Protein database [56]. Sequences containing fewer than 60 amino acid
residues were discarded as these typically were fragments
of proteins. Sequences that had been assigned two or
more EC numbers were included in the analyzed set
under each of these EC numbers. The initial combined
set contained 2637 unique EC nodes (excluding proteases, see Additional file 3, Table S3). The EC nodes represented by single proteins (456 in total) were removed
from the analyzed set, as were 4 EC nodes that represented large multi-subunit complexes (DNA-directed
DNA and RNA polymerases, NADH dehydrogenase
complex, and H+-transporting ATPase). The final set
used for sequence clustering included 2177 EC nodes.
BLASTP searches [57] were performed for each protein
with a particular EC number against all other proteins
with the same EC number. Single-linkage clustering was
performed with the expectation value cut off of 0.01. The
EC nodes were then sorted according to the number of
sequence clusters associated with each of them. Most of
the EC nodes (1397 of the 2177) were represented by single sequence clusters and were not analyzed further. At
the next step, we identified and removed from further
analysis 106 EC nodes that were represented by two or
more sequence clusters but each cluster corresponded to
a separate subunit of a heteromeric multi-subunit
enzyme, as judged by UniProt, COG and/or CDD annotations of representatives of these clusters. The resulting
set of candidate NISE consisted of 674 EC nodes represented by two or more sequence clusters. Members of
every single-linkage cluster were searched against the
PDB sequence subset of the NCBI protein database [56],
the first three hits were collected and checked for SCOP
fold annotations, where available. Clusters whose representatives produced reliable hits into PDB entries within
the same SCOP fold were discarded and the corresponding EC nodes were removed from the analyzed set. Those
sequence clusters that contained proteins with the PDB
hits assigned to different SCOP folds (or those with no
reliable PDB hits) were searched against Swiss-Prot and
the results were manually analyzed.

Omelchenko et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:31
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/31

In the course of the manual analysis, the EC nodes were
assumed to harbor NISE if representatives of different
single-linkage clusters for the same EC node had reliable
hits (i) to the UniProtKB\SwissProt [58] and ENZYME
[54] database entries with verified (and identical) enzymatic activity, and (ii) to the PDB entries that the SCOP
[25] and/or CATH [59] databases assigned to different
folds. The sequences without reliable PDB hits were
assigned to SCOP folds using the SUPERFAMILY database [60]. Those PDB entries not listed in SCOP were
assigned to SCOP folds using the Sequence-structure
matching (SSM) tool [61].
The final refinement of the data set included manual
elimination of protein sequences that did not satisfy the
criteria for NISE, primarily proteins with apparently
incorrectly assigned EC numbers or undocumented
enzymatic activity (see [6] for additional details). The patterns of taxonomic distribution of the NISE were
obtained from the KEGG assignments for 718 sequenced
genomes [20].
The second approach was used to identify NISE that
can catalyze the same biochemical reaction but have been
assigned different EC numbers based on differences in
substrate specificity (broad versus narrow), cofactor
requirement, or physico-chemical parameters, e.g., the
optimal pH. We downloaded the list of all 6564 KEGG
reactions and selected those 308 of them that could be
catalyzed by two or more enzymes with different fourdigit EC numbers supported by at least a single protein
sequence. For these EC numbers, lists of all structures
(PDB IDs assigned in KEGG) were collected whenever
possible and checked for fold assignments in the SCOP
database. For the EC nodes without structural assignments in KEGG, selected representatives of single-linkage clusters obtained previously for each EC node were
searched against PDB, and SCOP folds were assigned
using the SUPERFAMILY database. Pairs of EC nodes
whose representatives were assigned different folds but
experimentally demonstrated to catalyze the same enzymatic reactions were added to the list of analogous
enzymes.
Statistical significance of over- or under-representation
of enzyme classes, functional groups and folds among the
NISE was evaluated using the chi-square test (p < 0.05
was considered significant). Maximum-likelihood phylogenetic trees were constructed using the TreeFinder program [62] by optimizing a default starting tree
constructed using the neighbor-joining method with the
Whelan and Goldman (WAG) empirical model of substitutions [63]. The complete listing of the NISE identified
in this study (Additional file 2, Table S2) is available

Page 14 of 20

online
at
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
Complete_Genomes/AnalEnzymes.html.

List of abbreviations
EC: Enzyme Commission; 3D: three-dimensional.
Reviewers' comments
Reviewer 1: Andrei Osterman, Bioinformatics and Systems
Biology Program, Sanford-Burnham Medical Research
Institute, La Jolla, California, USA

Reviewer 1
An insightful and thorough study by Omelchenko et al.
brings our attention to one of the most fascinating
aspects of enzyme evolution, prolific existence of protein
families encoding non-homologous isofunctional
enzymes. Authors provided a new census of well-documented cases of such "analogous" enzymes revealing that
this phenomenon is much more widespread than could
have been expected in the early days of genomics. This
new study was largely facilitated by advents of genome
sequencing and structural genomics, which helped to
correct some of the conclusions in their earlier analysis,
especially with respect to distant homologs. A well-dosed
combination of the elegantly designed automated analysis
with manual case-by-case investigation allowed authors
to generate a unique and highly useful dataset provided in
the Supplementary Materials. By applying stringent criteria (distinct folds) Omelchenko et al. concluded that at
least 1/10 of all enzymes with presently assigned complete EC numbers could have emerged in evolution more
than once. Such a high level of evolutionary redundancy
is quite remarkable. Another notable conjecture based on
the detailed analysis of this data is that the evolution of
analogous enzymes appears to be largely driven by
recruitment from distinct structural families (folds) featuring similar reactions. It provides another vivid illustration of the patchwork pathway evolution hypothesis of R.
Jensen [41]. Abundance of non-homologous isozymes in
prokaryotes was shown to correlate with the genome size
and their distribution among various folds reflects functional versatility of popular folds (such as TIM barrel and
Rossmann fold). This analysis sets a stage for further
analysis of interrelationships between evolutionary
redundancy and the types of catalyzed chemical reactions. Overall, this study contributes to our appreciation
of the abundance of alternative solutions for the same or
similar functional tasks that have emerged in course of
evolution. In addition to its fundamental importance, this
awareness as well as the captured specific knowledge
would impact a number of applications in genomics
(functional annotations and metabolic reconstruction),

Omelchenko et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:31
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/31

bioengineering (directed enzyme/pathway evolution) and
drug discovery (identification of selective drug targets).
Authors' response: We thank the reviewer for these kind
comments
Reviewer 1
"Analogous enzymes": outside of juxtaposition (analogous vs homologous) this term may be somewhat misleading. For example, if I'd hear that "these two enzymes
are analogous" (outside of context of your paper title,
which is helpful), I would think that the meaning is that
these are two enzymes (homologous or not) catalyzing
similar (analogous) but not identical reactions (e.g. glucokinase and mannokinase). What you mean in fact is
"non-homologous isofunctional" enzymes (or "nonhomologous isozymes"). You actually made a step
towards better term in "analogous isoforms".
Authors' response: We agree. Actually, we found these
comments so insightful and relevant that the phrase 'analogous enzymes' was replaced with 'non-homologous isofunctional enzymes' (NISE) throughout.
Reviewer 1
How did you deal with multifunctional/multidomain
enzymes (such as RibF and such). I understand that they
could be handled similarly but it might be worth mentioning in "methods"? Similar question, how do you deal
with intrinsically multisubunit (heterooligimers) monofunctional enzymes? For example, how would you treat
our newly discovered three-subunit L-LDH (former
YkgEFG [64]) vs LldD? The complexity is when the actual
roles of subunits (as well as cofactors) are not yet clear (I
guess you would skip us for the lack of EC number anyways?).
Authors' response: In the revised articles, we added to
the Methods a sentence on handling multifunctional (and
multidomain) enzymes that have been assigned two or
more EC numbers. As for multi-subunit enzymes, these
were removed from the automatically processed set but
typically re-examined in the course of manual analysis.
The new L-lactate dehydrogenase [64]was missed because
its EC 1.1.1.27 already had been listed among the NISE
owing to the presence of the Rossmann-fold and the L-sulfolactate dehydrogenase-like fold proteins.
Reviewer 1
You seem to be using quite a high hierarchical level
(fold) to define "analogy". It is fine and safe. However, as
far as I know popular folds (e.g. TIM) may be shared by
proteins that are perceived to be evolutionary unrelated
(non-homologous). This apparently reflects convergent
evolution in the fold space (some folds simply emerge and
stick with higher probability?). Is that true? If yes, then
you may be underestmating a number of genuine analogous (in the evolutionary sense) pairs?
Authors' response: This is a very interesting and thorny
point. Indeed, it is the case that distinct forms of the same

Page 15 of 20

fold, especially, in the case of versatile, abundant folds like
the TIM barrel, are often considered non-homologous.
From that perspective, by considering solely distinct folds,
we might be underestimating the total number of nonhomologous enzyme pairs. However, we are not sure that
claims of convergent emergence of the same fold are valid.
Of course, this is a fundamental issue in evolution of proteins that we would not attempt to solve in this paper
which is dedicated to a different aspect of biochemical evolution. Moreover, even structures assigned to different
folds might still be evolutionarily related (e.g. [65,66]),
which would lead to an overestimation of the number of
'truly non-homologous' enzymes. All in all, we believe that
requirement that alternative enzyme isoforms had distinct
folds to be considered non-homologous provides a reasonable and straightforward approach to the search for NISE.
A more permissive approach to the identification of alternative enzyme isoforms has been recently used by others
[14].
Specific comments

Reviewer 1
"Likewise, two ubiquitin thiolesterases, ... actually possess distinct activities, cleaving polyubiquitin chains
linked, respectively, to Lys-48 and Lys-63 residues [18]." I
either miss something or disagree. If, indeed, the only difference is the position of the polyubiquitinilated lysine in
substrate protein, they should be considered analogous.
Same deal with any enzymes involved in PTMs or processing of biopolymers, kinases, proteases and so forth.
There is no straightforward way to encode their "sitespecificity", therefore, in my opinion, for this type of analysis even trypsin and chymotrypsin should be considered
as one: "serine endopeptidase of the chymotrypsin family".
Authors' response: The original language was indeed
imprecise. The Lys-48 and Lys-63 residues are amino acid
of ubiquitin not of the ubiquitinated protein substrate.
The sentence is corrected to reflect this fact in the revised
manuscript. The respective polyubiquitin chains are distinct molecules, so the two thiolesterases, probably, should
not be in the list of NISE.
Reviewer 1
I notice that you have missed one of the FGGY kinases:
RbtK - D-ribulokinase (EC 2.7.1.47). I disagree that
"...Glycerol kinase ...catalyzes a reaction of lipid metabolism..." It is primarily catabolism of glycerol in bacteria.
Just skip this statement or be more inclusive.
Authors' response: Corrected: we included EC 2.7.1.47
in the text (but not in the figure) and changed 'lipid
metabolism' to 'glycerol metabolism'.
Reviewer 1
The sentence "It appears that in each case, gluconate
kinase was recruited from a family of kinases with activi-

Omelchenko et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:31
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/31

ties toward closely related substrates." is not incorrect but
I feel that it puts emphasis in a wrong place. The key is
that recruitment happens from families with the same
type of chemical reaction (e.g. phosphorylation). Similar
or dissimilar substrate is (a) an ambiguous notion (is adenylsulfate similar to gluconate?) and (b) not that important (glycerol and gluconate are distinct enough). How
about referring to classic "patchwork hypothesis" of
Jensen in this discussion? We actually provided a penny
to it in our Science paper [67].
Authors' response: We agree, corrected.
Reviewer 1
Discussion of patchy distribution is hard to appreciate
without bringing up the issue of HGT. Have you examined patchy "analogous enzymes" (especially between
Archaea and Bacteria) as a possible outcome of HGT?
Authors' response:We agree that the patchy distribution of analogous enzymes is most likely a consequence of
rampant horizontal gene transfer [43], and this is explicitly mentioned in the text:"Non-homologous isoforms of
enzymes seem to be recruited from pre-existing enzymes
with related activities and specificities following duplication or horizontal transfer (apparently, the principal route
of innovation in prokaryotes [43,44], where NISE are most
common) of the respective genes." More specific and
detailed analysis of the origins of NISE sets is of definite
interest but beyond the scope of this paper.
Reviewer 1
In the first paragraph of Discussion, you mention that
you use "distinct folds (as) the ultimate proof of analogy",
which is fine. However, you could mention that it might
be another cause for underestimation of the extent of
analogy among enzymes. Likewise, in addition to
enzymes that "have not been biochemically characterized" there are also enzymes that were characterized but
have not made it to EC nomenclature (or/and public
databases like KEGG - just wonder whether you even
thought of using SEED for metabolic enzymes, you could
find a few interesting cases on top of what you have).
Authors' response: We have not used SEED in this work
but hope to employ it in the next phase of this project. We
have performed a literature search for potential cases of
analogous enzymes but that search was not comprehensive.
Reviewer 1
"...recruited from pre-existing enzymes of related specificities..." - same comment. Not wrong but wrong emphasis. Chemistry (type of reaction) is clearly more
important for recruitment than "substrate specificity". In
the extreme case of "retrograde concept" one would
expect glucose isomerase to be recruited from hexokinase family, which is not the main route.
Authors' response: We agree, changed to 'activities and
specificities'.

Page 16 of 20

Reviewer 1
"This has been recognized and successfully dealt with
in the case of peptidases (EC 3.4.x.x. [50,51]) but remains
a problem for various protein kinases and protein phosphatases..." I disagree with this view and interpretation (I
already expressed it about proteases), but I won't argue. I
am sure that plurality of protein kinases and phosphatases is driven by other factors (including "simplicity"
of reaction and high "demand" in regulatory networks).
Authors' response: We believe that the disagreement
here, if any, is semantic rather than substantial. From the
purely operational point of view, we are interested whether
there are multiple unrelated isoforms that are capable of
acting on the same substrate and performing the same biochemical reaction. We agree with the reviewer's view on
the driving factors behind the observed plurality of kinases
and phosphatases.
Reviewer 1
In Conclusions, it is important to choose words carefully to make the message clear. For example: "Sets of
analogous, unrelated enzymes were detected for a substantial minority..." I would say at least "Sets of analogous,
evolutionary unrelated enzymes (nonhomologous isoforms) were detected for a substantial fraction (up to
10%)".
Authors' response: Changed as suggested.
Reviewer 1
"...unrelated mechanistic solutions can evolve".
Although this claim is not incorrect, it cannot be directly
deduced from the existence of "analogous enzymes". As
an example, chymotrypsins and subtilisins are both serine
proteases (eg they run the same mechanism) while having
distinct folds and evolutionary origin. I mean this claim
would require a separate analysis of mechanisms. The
only solid claim is that the same chemical solutions (with
the same or distinct mechanisms) can evolve independently (functional, but not necessarily mechanistic) convergence.
Authors' response: We agree, changed to 'evolutionarily
unrelated solutions'.
Reviewer 2: Keith F. Tipton, School of Biochemistry and
Immunology, Trinity College, Dublin, Ireland (nominated
by Martijn Huynen)

This a welcome update of the paper on analogous
enzymes published by these authors in 1998. It contains
much useful information and analysis. The supplementary Table S2, also available on-line, is particularly valuable. Some points that the authors should consider are
listed below.
Reviewer 2
By concentrating on catalytic function in their discussions of evolutionary pressure, the authors may be missing the fact that an increasing number of enzymes are

Omelchenko et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:31
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/31

now recognized to be multifunctional (sometimes also
called "moonlighting") proteins, with alternative, distinct,
functions that may also be species-specific. Lists of several of these have been published (e.g., [68-70]). This
indicates that the evolutionary pressures may be more
complicated. The authors might consider referring to
such complexities, perhaps in the context of their statement that "the existence of analogy shows that, at least,
for numerous and diverse biochemical problems, unrelated mechanistic solutions can evolve".
Authors' response: Moonlighting is a very interesting
phenomenon that is, however, only tangentially related to
the issue of NISE (analogous enzymes). The very definition
of "moonlighting proteins" as those that "have two different
functions within a single polypeptide chain" [68,71]refers
primarily to enzymes having additional non-enzymatic
functions (e.g. transcriptional regulator, membrane receptor, growth factor, structural component, and so on). The
above-cited reviews mention a single example of an
enzyme with two entirely different enzymatic activities,
the monomer of glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase supposedly acting as uracil-DNA glycosylase [72],
which still remains controversial [73]. In contrast, multifunctional enzymes [74]usually turn out to consist of two
or more different domains. In all these examples of "multitasking", the evolutionary constraints are very different
from those encountered by non-homologous enzymes that
evolved to catalyze the same biochemical reaction.
Reviewer's comment to the authors' response: The
problem of 'moonlighting' is surely that the evolutionary
pressures on the alternative, non-enzymic, function(s)
may be different from those on the catalytic function and
thus cannot be ignored when considering the pressure on
the catalytic function. Of course, much of the literature
assumes that the catalytic function is the main one, but in
some cases this may be doubtful.
Reviewer 2
There are also cases of catalytic promiscuity where an
enzyme catalyses distinct types of reaction (see e.g., [75]).
If the reactions are sufficiently different, this should
result in different EC numbers being assigned to the same
protein. Furthermore, there are multifunctional proteins
to catalysing different steps of an overall process, such as
tryptophan synthase (EC 4.2.1.20) in some species. Thus,
both 'one-to many' and 'many-to-one' relationships
between EC numbers and proteins are possible. The former represents a problem, which the authors rightly
point out, remains to be resolved for families such as the
protein kinases, where a recognised enzyme, such as
PKC-alpha may have several distinct substrates (see [76])
and one protein substrate may be phosphorylated by
more than one kinase.
Authors' response: Catalytic promiscuity, when alternative chemical reactions take place in essentially the

Page 17 of 20

same active site, is an important factor in enzyme evolution ([75,77,78]and references therein). As discussed
above, we believe it to be a major source of NISE.
Reviewer 2
As the authors recognise, the EC classification system
is, or should be, solely based on the overall reaction catalysed. As such it is neither concerned with proteinsequence nor mechanistic differences and it is, perhaps,
not surprising to find different proteins catalysing the
same reaction. In this context, the suggestion "Nevertheless, it seems reasonable to consider expanding the EC
system by officially recognizing the notion of a "class"
within an EC node, such as, for example, superoxide dismutase (EC 1.15.1.1) class I, class II, and so on", might be
clarified, since it would constitute a departure from the
strict reaction-catalysed criterion and could risk detracting from its present utility. The authors should clarify
what "classes" they propose should be included; would it
be all analogous and homologous enzymes encompassed
by each EC number? In some cases such material may be
dealt with, more adequately, by complementary databases, which rely on the EC system. For enzymes that
have different mechanism of action, the problem might
best be resolved through systems such as the MaCiE
(Mechanism, Annotation and Classification in Enzymes)
database [79] or its offshoot Metal MACiE [80]. However,
although MACiE does deal with the different mechanisms of the class I & II aldolases (EC 4.1.2.13), only the
Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase is listed in these databases
at present.
Authors' response: Adding the notion of a "class" to the
EC system is only one of a number of possible ways to deal
with NISE. Having supplementary specialized databases
of enzyme mechanisms, such as MACiE [79,80], or
sequence-based profiles, such as PRIAM [13]would be less
intrusive but would force the users to rely on those outside
sources for important information on the diversity of the
enzymes in each EC node. This work identified NISE for
almost 8% of all EC nodes, and many more EC nodes
include divergent enzyme isoforms that still belong to the
same superfamilies [13,14]. Given the scope of the problem, we felt that it should be brought to the attention of
Prof. Tipton and other members of the Enzyme Commission.
Reviewer 2
The authors refer to the "strict reliance on substrate
specificity" being "a cause for certain confusion when the
EC numbers are applied to mapping reactions on the
metabolic map" and give the example of the enzymes that
could catalyse the oxidation of D-glucose. It is not clear
why they regard this as a problem. Surely it is beneficial to
be able to find all the enzymes that may contribute to a
metabolic process? As, for example, in the approach
adopted by Reaction Explorer [81], and then to investi-

Omelchenko et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:31
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/31

gate the extents to which each does contribute to it, if at
all?
Authors' response: Although we agree in principle, the
decision on whether a certain pathway is operational in a
certain organism often hinges on the presence or absence of
a small group of pathway-specific enzymes [82]. In such
cases, non-critical application of EC numbers may lead
researchers to an erroneous assertion of the presence - or
absence - of a given reaction (and hence the whole pathway) in the given genome.
Reviewer 2
A problem, which the authors touch upon, is that of
broad-specificity enzymes, such as alcohol dehydrogenase (EC 1.1.1.1) and monoamine oxidase (EC 1.4.3.4),
where the reaction is described in general terms, with little no indication of all the substrates that may be
involved. Such information, where known, can be found
in the BRENDA database [83]. Similarly, the Enzyme List
does not aim to give detailed species information, since
that can also be found in the BRENDA database.
Authors' response: Although we agree, we have to note
that this arrangement makes the BRENDA database the
sole provider of this critically important information. In
our opinion, the EC system might benefit from inclusion of
this type of data.
Reviewer's comment to the authors' response:
BRENDA is not the only source of specificity data and I
did not intend to imply that it was. KEGG also gives such
information. We collaborate closely with both databases,
and take the view that if they are doing a good job, why
should we want to duplicate them?
I am still not clear what you may have in mind by 'adding a class'. We have received many suggestions in the
past for additional EC digit to cover several diverse areas,
including mechanism, medically-relevant enzymes,
enzymes from different species, isoenzymes etc. So far we
have decided that this would not be helpful. The alternative might be adding a 'NISE' field to each entry but, as
mentioned above, a direct link to the corresponding
PRIAM page might be more helpful.
Reviewer 3: Igor B. Zhulin, University of Tennessee - Oak
Ridge National Lab., Oak Ridge, Tennessee, USA

This paper extends the authors' previous work identifying
analogous enzymes more than a decade ago. The authors
expanded their search methods by utilizing both the
Swiss Prot database and the KEGG database to better
associate proteins with enzymatic activity. By the author's
own admission, no strong trends were observed in the
dataset, but they were able to identify a few very interesting patterns, including enrichment of analogous enzymes
among glycoside hydrolases, enzymes involved in oxidative stress relief, and among the TIM Barrel and NAP(P)-

Page 18 of 20

binding Rossmann structural folds. As expected, the
authors find that the number analogous enzymes scales
with increasing genome size. The authors discuss the
evolutionary origins of some of the trends noted above, as
well as the limitations imposed on their identification
schemes by the EC numbering system itself. Overall, I do
like this paper a lot, especially because in my lab we have
recently become interested in one particular family of
analogous enzymes. So, I enjoyed looking at a bigger picture, while picturing our own work in its context.
The analysis scheme employed is straightforward and
utilizes proven bioinformatic methodology. The authors
appear to utilize conservative criteria for inclusion of data
for the analysis, so the results are likely to under-predict
rather than over-predict analogous enzymes. The results
greatly expand the listing of analogous enzymes and the
extensive supplementary material provides useful information for specialist interested in any particular family of
enzymes.
The inclusion of numerous genomes through the use of
the KEGG database allowed analysis of analogous
enzymes to be conducted on a sufficient scale to give a
fairly good approximation of the their relative abundance
and the importance of analogous inventions during evolution. The coverage of structural information, sequence,
and biological information seems to be such that the
boundaries for the proportion of analogous enzymes
(~10% of the EC nodes) seem unlikely to significantly
change with future genome sequencing.
Lack of true novelty in this analysis is a minor quibble,
as it generated a useful resource in and of itself and the
specific cases highlighted are of interest in a number of
fields. The use of EC number annotations may be suspect
in some cases where the traditional sequence similarity
based annotation methods are unreliable or where the EC
definitions are inadequate. I can offer a couple of examples, where we happened to dig around a little bit. For
instance, Table S1 lists a couple of cellulases (entries #78
and #91) in glycoside hydrolase families 10 and 11. It
appears that there are no experimentally defined cellulases in these families, and enzymes shown are putative
xylanases. It also might be just a matter of semantics,
since these enzyme are likely to be hemicellulases (technically could be called cellulases, I guess). Anyway, the
authors are fully aware of the limitations imposed and
there is no way to verify available experimental evidence
for each and every entry in such a large-scale effort. The
vast majority of the enzymes included in the study are
readily identified by sequence similarity based annotations, so the conclusions as a whole are sound.
Authors' response: We fully agree with these comments.

Omelchenko et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:31
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/31

Additional material
Additional file 1 Supplementary Table S1. An update to the 1998 listing
of analogous enzymes. Predicted analogous enzymes pairs from the 1998
list that have been removed from the new list are highlighted in yellow. The
EC numbers are hyperlinked with the ENZYME database entries, examples
are linked to UniProt, structures - to PDB, folds - to SCOP, families - to Pfam,
and references - to PubMed.
Additional file 2 Supplementary Table S2. A new listing of analogous
enzymes. The EC numbers are hyperlinked with the ENZYME database
entries, protein entries are linked to the NCBI protein database and UniProt,
PDB entries - to PDB, SCOP folds - to SCOP, protein superfamilies - to SUPERFAMILY, protein families - to Pfam, and references - to PubMed.
Additional file 3 Supplementary Tables S3-S9
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors' contributions
All authors analyzed the data, wrote and revised the paper and approved the
final version of the manuscript.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Intramural Research Program of the National
Library of Medicine at the National Institutes of Health. Funding to pay the
Open Access publication charges for this article was provided by the NIH Intramural Research Program.
Author Details
National Center for Biotechnology Information, National Library of Medicine,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20894, USA
Received: 13 April 2010 Accepted: 30 April 2010
Published: 30 April 2010
© 2010 Omelchenko etarticle distributed under theLtd. of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
This is an Open Access from: http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/31
Biology Directavailable al; licensee BioMed Central terms
article is 2010, 5:31

References
1. Doolittle RF: Convergent evolution: the need to be explicit. Trends
Biochem Sci 1994, 19:15-18.
2. Stallings WC, Powers TB, Pattridge KA, Fee JA, Ludwig ML: Iron superoxide
dismutase from Escherichia coli at 3.1-Å resolution: a structure unlike
that of copper/zinc protein at both monomer and dimer levels. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 1983, 80:3884-3888.
3. Koonin EV, Galperin MY: Sequence - Evolution - Function.
Computational Approaches in Comparative Genomics. Boston: Kluwer
Academic Publishers; 2002.
4. Fitch WM: Distinguishing homologous from analogous proteins. Syst
Zool 1970, 19:99-113.
5. Florkin M: Concepts of molecular biosemiotics and of molecular
evolution. In Comprehensive Biochemistry Volume 29A. Edited by: Florkin
M, Stolz EH. Amsterdam, the Netherlands: Elsevier; 1974:1-124.
6. Galperin MY, Walker DR, Koonin EV: Analogous enzymes: independent
inventions in enzyme evolution. Genome Res 1998, 8:779-790.
7. Richardson J, Thomas KA, Rubin BH, Richardson DC: Crystal structure of
bovine Cu, Zn superoxide dismutase at 3 A resolution: chain tracing
and metal ligands. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1975, 72:1349-1353.
8. Wuerges J, Lee JW, Yim YI, Yim HS, Kang SO, Djinovic Carugo K: Crystal
structure of nickel-containing superoxide dismutase reveals another
type of active site. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2004, 101:8569-8574.
9. Carter C, Thornburg RW: Tobacco nectarin I. Purification and
characterization as a germin-like, manganese superoxide dismutase
implicated in the defense of floral reproductive tissues. J Biol Chem
2000, 275:36726-36733.
10. Galperin MY, Koonin EV: Functional genomics and enzyme evolution.
Homologous and analogous enzymes encoded in microbial genomes.
Genetica 1999, 106:159-170.
11. Morett E, Korbel JO, Rajan E, Saab-Rincon G, Olvera L, Olvera M, Schmidt S,
Snel B, Bork P: Systematic discovery of analogous enzymes in thiamin
biosynthesis. Nat Biotechnol 2003, 21:790-795.
12. Polekhina G, Board PG, Gali RR, Rossjohn J, Parker MW: Molecular basis of
glutathione synthetase deficiency and a rare gene permutation event.
EMBO J 1999, 18:3204-3213.

Page 19 of 20

13. Claudel-Renard C, Chevalet C, Faraut T, Kahn D: Enzyme-specific profiles
for genome annotation: PRIAM. Nucleic Acids Res 2003, 31:6633-6639.
14. Otto TD, Guimaraes AC, Degrave WM, de Miranda AB: AnEnPi:
identification and annotation of analogous enzymes. BMC
Bioinformatics 2008, 9:544.
15. Chandonia JM, Brenner SE: The impact of structural genomics:
expectations and outcomes. Science 2006, 311:347-351.
16. Terwilliger TC, Stuart D, Yokoyama S: Lessons from structural genomics.
Annu Rev Biophys 2009, 38:371-383.
17. Huerta C, Borek D, Machius M, Grishin NV, Zhang H: Structure and
mechanism of a eukaryotic FMN adenylyltransferase. J Mol Biol 2009,
389:388-400.
18. Vong QP, Cao K, Li HY, Iglesias PA, Zheng Y: Chromosome alignment and
segregation regulated by ubiquitination of survivin. Science 2005,
310:1499-1504.
19. Pentz ES, Wright TR: Drosophila melanogaster diphenol oxidase A2:
gene structure and homology with the mouse mast-cell tumtransplantation antigen, P91A. Gene 1991, 103:239-242.
20. Kanehisa M, Araki M, Goto S, Hattori M, Hirakawa M, Itoh M, Katayama T,
Kawashima S, Okuda S, Tokimatsu T, Yamanishi Y: KEGG for linking
genomes to life and the environment. Nucleic Acids Res 2008,
36:D480-D484.
21. Kotera M, Okuno Y, Hattori M, Goto S, Kanehisa M: Computational
assignment of the EC numbers for genomic-scale analysis of enzymatic
reactions. J Am Chem Soc 2004, 126:16487-16498.
22. Yamanishi Y, Hattori M, Kotera M, Goto S, Kanehisa M: E-zyme: predicting
potential EC numbers from the chemical transformation pattern of
substrate-product pairs. Bioinformatics 2009, 25:i179-i186.
23. Hubbard BK, Koch M, Palmer DR, Babbitt PC, Gerlt JA: Evolution of
enzymatic activities in the enolase superfamily: characterization of the
(D)-glucarate/galactarate catabolic pathway in Escherichia coli.
Biochemistry 1998, 37:14369-14375.
24. Kehrer D, Ahmed H, Brinkmann H, Siebers B: Glycerate kinase of the
hyperthermophilic archaeon Thermoproteus tenax: new insights into
the phylogenetic distribution and physiological role of members of the
three different glycerate kinase classes. BMC Genomics 2007, 8:301.
25. Andreeva A, Howorth D, Chandonia JM, Brenner SE, Hubbard TJ, Chothia
C, Murzin AG: Data growth and its impact on the SCOP database: new
developments. Nucleic Acids Res 2008, 36:D419-D425.
26. Tatusov RL, Galperin MY, Natale DA, Koonin EV: The COG database: a tool
for genome-scale analysis of protein functions and evolution. Nucleic
Acids Res 2000, 28:33-36.
27. Doolittle RF, Feng DF, Johnson MS, McClure MA: Relationships of human
protein sequences to those of other organisms. Cold Spring Harbor
Symp Quant Biol 1986, 51:447-455.
28. Wierenga RK: The TIM-barrel fold: a versatile framework for efficient
enzymes. FEBS Lett 2001, 492:193-198.
29. Nagano N, Orengo CA, Thornton JM: One fold with many functions: the
evolutionary relationships between TIM barrel families based on their
sequences, structures and functions. J Mol Biol 2002, 321:741-765.
30. Jensen RA: Enzyme recruitment in evolution of new function. Annu Rev
Microbiol 1976, 30:409-425.
31. Finn RD, Tate J, Mistry J, Coggill PC, Sammut SJ, Hotz HR, Ceric G, Forslund
K, Eddy SR, Sonnhammer EL, Bateman A: The Pfam protein families
database. Nucleic Acids Res 2008, 36:D281-D288.
32. Leipe DD, Koonin EV, Aravind L: Evolution and classification of P-loop
kinases and related proteins. J Mol Biol 2003, 333:781-815.
33. Daugherty M, Vonstein V, Overbeek R, Osterman A: Archaeal shikimate
kinase, a new member of the GHMP-kinase family. J Bacteriol 2001,
183:292-300.
34. Ibba M, Morgan S, Curnow AW, Pridmore DR, Vothknecht UC, Gardner W,
Lin W, Woese CR, Söll D: A euryarchaeal lysyl-tRNA synthetase:
resemblance to class I synthetases. Science 1997, 278:1119-1122.
35. Ibba M, Bono JL, Rosa PA, Söll D: Archaeal-type lysyl-tRNA synthetase in
the Lyme disease spirochete Borrelia burgdorferi. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
1997, 94:14383-14388.
36. Verhees CH, Huynen MA, Ward DE, Schiltz E, de Vos WM, Oost J van der:
The phosphoglucose isomerase from the hyperthermophilic archaeon
Pyrococcus furiosus is a unique glycolytic enzyme that belongs to the
cupin superfamily. J Biol Chem 2001, 276:40926-40932.

Omelchenko et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:31
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/31

37. Hansen T, Oehlmann M, Schönheit P: Novel type of glucose-6phosphate isomerase in the hyperthermophilic archaeon Pyrococcus
furiosus. J Bacteriol 2001, 183:3428-3435.
38. van Nimwegen E: Scaling laws in the functional content of genomes.
Trends Genet 2003, 19:479-484.
39. Molina N, van Nimwegen E: Scaling laws in functional genome content
across prokaryotic clades and lifestyles. Trends Genet 2009, 25:243-247.
40. Galperin MY, Koonin EV: 'Conserved hypothetical' proteins:
prioritization of targets for experimental study. Nucleic Acids Res 2004,
32:5452-5463.
41. Jensen RA: Evolution of metabolic pathways in enteric bacteria. In
Escherichia coli and Salmonella: cellular and molecular biology Edited by:
Neidhardt FC, Curtiss III R, Ingraham JL, Lin ECC, Low KB, Magasanik B,
Reznikoff WS, Riley M, Schaechter M, Umbarger HE. Washington, D.C.: ASM
Press; 1996:2649-2662.
42. Jacob F: Evolution and tinkering. Science 1977, 196:1161-1166.
43. Pal C, Papp B, Lercher MJ: Adaptive evolution of bacterial metabolic
networks by horizontal gene transfer. Nat Genet 2005, 37:1372-1375.
44. Koonin EV, Wolf YI: Genomics of bacteria and archaea: the emerging
dynamic view of the prokaryotic world. Nucleic Acids Res 2008,
36:6688-6719.
45. Dixon M, Webb EC: Enzymes. London, New York: Longmans, Green & Co.
and Academic Press; 1958.
46. Report of the Commission on Enzymes of the International Union of
Biochemistry. Oxford: Pergamon Press; 1961.
47. Enzyme Nomenclature 1992: Recommendations of the Nomenclature
Committee of the International Union of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology on the Nomenclature and Classification of Enzymes by the
Reactions they Catalyse. San Diego, California: Academic Press; 1992.
48. Yamanishi Y, Vert JP, Kanehisa M: Supervised enzyme network inference
from the integration of genomic data and chemical information.
Bioinformatics 2005, 21(Suppl 1):i468-i477.
49. Karp PD: Call for an enzyme genomics initiative. Genome Biol 2004,
5:401.
50. Barrett AJ, Rawlings ND: 'Species' of peptidases. Biol Chem 2007,
388:1151-1157.
51. Rawlings ND, Barrett AJ, Bateman A: MEROPS: the peptidase database.
Nucleic Acids Res 2010, 38:D227-D233.
52. Galperin MY, Moroz OV, Wilson KS, Murzin AG: House cleaning, a part of
good housekeeping. Mol Microbiol 2006, 59:5-19.
53. Kuznetsova E, Proudfoot M, Sanders SA, Reinking J, Savchenko A,
Arrowsmith CH, Edwards AM, Yakunin AF: Enzyme genomics:
Application of general enzymatic screens to discover new enzymes.
FEMS Microbiol Rev 2005, 29:263-279.
54. Bairoch A: The ENZYME database in 2000. Nucleic Acids Res 2000,
28:304-305.
55. ENZYME database [ftp://ftp.expasy.org/databases/enzyme]
56. Sayers EW, Barrett T, Benson DA, Bryant SH, Canese K, Chetvernin V,
Church DM, DiCuccio M, Edgar R, Federhen S, Feolo M, Geer LY, Helmberg
W, Kapustin Y, Landsman D, Lipman DJ, Madden TL, Maglott DR, Miller V,
Mizrachi I, Ostell J, Pruitt KD, Schuler GD, Sequeira E, Sherry ST, Shumway
M, Sirotkin K, Souvorov A, Starchenko G, Tatusova TA, Wagner L, Yaschenko
E, Ye J: Database resources of the National Center for Biotechnology
Information. Nucleic Acids Res 2009, 37:D5-D15.
57. Altschul SF, Madden TL, Schaffer AA, Zhang J, Zhang Z, Miller W, Lipman
DJ: Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new generation of protein
database search programs. Nucleic Acids Res 1997, 25:3389-3402.
58. The UniProt Consortium: The Universal Protein Resource (UniProt) 2009.
Nucleic Acids Res 2009, 37:D169-D174.
59. Cuff AL, Sillitoe I, Lewis T, Redfern OC, Garratt R, Thornton J, Orengo CA:
The CATH classification revisited--architectures reviewed and new
ways to characterize structural divergence in superfamilies. Nucleic
Acids Res 2009, 37:D310-D314.
60. Wilson D, Pethica R, Zhou Y, Talbot C, Vogel C, Madera M, Chothia C,
Gough J: SUPERFAMILY--sophisticated comparative genomics, data
mining, visualization and phylogeny. Nucleic Acids Res 2009,
37:D380-D386.
61. Krissinel E, Henrick K: Secondary-structure matching (SSM), a new tool
for fast protein structure alignment in three dimensions. Acta
Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr 2004, 60:2256-2268.

Page 20 of 20

62. Jobb G, von Haeseler A, Strimmer K: TREEFINDER: a powerful graphical
analysis environment for molecular phylogenetics. BMC Evol Biol 2004,
4:18.
63. Whelan S, Goldman N: A general empirical model of protein evolution
derived from multiple protein families using a maximum-likelihood
approach. Mol Biol Evol 2001, 18:691-699.
64. Pinchuk GE, Rodionov DA, Yang C, Li X, Osterman AL, Dervyn E,
Geydebrekht OV, Reed SB, Romine MF, Collart FR, Scott JH, Fredrickson JK,
Beliaev AS: Genomic reconstruction of Shewanella oneidensis MR-1
metabolism reveals a previously uncharacterized machinery for lactate
utilization. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2009, 106:2874-2879.
65. Sadreyev RI, Kim BH, Grishin NV: Discrete-continuous duality of protein
structure space. Curr Opin Struct Biol 2009, 19:321-328.
66. Alva V, Remmert M, Biegert A, Lupas AN, Söding J: A galaxy of folds.
Protein Sci 2010, 19:124-130.
67. Zhang Y, Thiele I, Weekes D, Li Z, Jaroszewski L, Ginalski K, Deacon AM,
Wooley J, Lesley SA, Wilson IA, Palsson B, Osterman A, Godzik A: Threedimensional structural view of the central metabolic network of
Thermotoga maritima. Science 2009, 325:1544-1549.
68. Jeffery CJ: Moonlighting proteins--an update. Mol BioSyst 2009,
5:345-350.
69. Gancedo C, Flores CL: Moonlighting proteins in yeasts. Microbiol Mol Biol
Rev 2008, 72:197-210.
70. Huberts DH, Klei IJ van der: Moonlighting proteins: An intriguing mode
of multitasking. Biochim Biophys Acta 2010, 1803:520-5.
71. Jeffery CJ: Moonlighting proteins. Trends Biochem Sci 1999, 24:8-11.
72. Meyer-Siegler K, Mauro DJ, Seal G, Wurzer J, deRiel JK, Sirover MA: A
human nuclear uracil DNA glycosylase is the 37-kDa subunit of
glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
1991, 88:8460-8464.
73. Caradonna S, Ladner R, Hansbury M, Kosciuk M, Lynch F, Muller S: Affinity
purification and comparative analysis of two distinct human uracilDNA glycosylases. Exp Cell Res 1996, 222:345-359.
74. Kirschner K, Bisswanger H: Multifunctional proteins. Annu Rev Biochem
1976, 45:143-166.
75. Copley SD: Enzymes with extra talents: moonlighting functions and
catalytic promiscuity. Curr Opin Chem Biol 2003, 7:265-272.
76. Diella F, Cameron S, Gemund C, Linding R, Via A, Kuster B, Sicheritz-Ponten
T, Blom N, Gibson TJ: Phospho.ELM: a database of experimentally
verified phosphorylation sites in eukaryotic proteins. BMC
Bioinformatics 2004, 5:79.
77. Gerlt JA, Babbitt PC, Rayment I: Divergent evolution in the enolase
superfamily: the interplay of mechanism and specificity. Arch Biochem
Biophys 2005, 433:59-70.
78. Vick JE, Gerlt JA: Evolutionary potential of b/a8-barrels: stepwise
evolution of a "new" reaction in the enolase superfamily. Biochemistry
2007, 46:14589-14597.
79. Holliday GL, Almonacid DE, Bartlett GJ, O'Boyle NM, Torrance JW, MurrayRust P, Mitchell JB, Thornton JM: MACiE (Mechanism, Annotation and
Classification in Enzymes): novel tools for searching catalytic
mechanisms. Nucleic Acids Res 2007, 35:D515-D520.
80. Andreini C, Bertini I, Cavallaro G, Holliday GL, Thornton JM: Metal-MACiE:
a database of metals involved in biological catalysis. Bioinformatics
2009, 25:2088-2089.
81. O'Boyle NM, Holliday GL, Almonacid DE, Mitchell JB: Using reaction
mechanism to measure enzyme similarity. J Mol Biol 2007,
368:1484-1499.
82. Paley SM, Karp PD: Evaluation of computational metabolic-pathway
predictions for Helicobacter pylori. Bioinformatics 2002, 18:715-724.
83. Chang A, Scheer M, Grote A, Schomburg I, Schomburg D: BRENDA,
AMENDA and FRENDA the enzyme information system: new content
and tools in 2009. Nucleic Acids Res 2009, 37:D588-D592.
doi: 10.1186/1745-6150-5-31
Cite this article as: Omelchenko et al., Non-homologous isofunctional
enzymes: A systematic analysis of alternative solutions in enzyme evolution
Biology Direct 2010, 5:31

</pre>
</body>
</html>
