<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Genomic insights into Wnt signaling in an early diverging metazoan, the ctenophore Mnemiopsis leidyi</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="EvoDevo 2010, 1:10. doi:10.1186/2041-9139-1-10"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Kevin Pang"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Pang et al. EvoDevo 2010, 1:10
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/10

RESEARCH

Open Access

Genomic insights into Wnt signaling in an early
diverging metazoan, the ctenophore Mnemiopsis
leidyi
Kevin Pang1, Joseph F Ryan2, NISC Comparative Sequencing Program3, James C Mullikin2, Andreas D Baxevanis2,
Mark Q Martindale1*

Abstract
Background: Intercellular signaling pathways are a fundamental component of the integrating cellular behavior
required for the evolution of multicellularity. The genomes of three of the four early branching animal phyla
(Cnidaria, Placozoa and Porifera) have been surveyed for key components, but not the fourth (Ctenophora).
Genomic data from ctenophores could be particularly relevant, as ctenophores have been proposed to be one of
the earliest branching metazoan phyla.
Results: A preliminary assembly of the lobate ctenophore Mnemiopsis leidyi genome generated using nextgeneration sequencing technologies were searched for components of a developmentally important signaling
pathway, the Wnt/b-catenin pathway. Molecular phylogenetic analysis shows four distinct Wnt ligands (MlWnt6,
MlWnt9, MlWntA and MlWntX), and most, but not all components of the receptor and intracellular signaling
pathway were detected. In situ hybridization of the four Wnt ligands showed that they are expressed in discrete
regions associated with the aboral pole, tentacle apparati and apical organ.
Conclusions: Ctenophores show a minimal (but not obviously simple) complement of Wnt signaling components.
Furthermore, it is difficult to compare the Mnemiopsis Wnt expression patterns with those of other metazoans.
mRNA expression of Wnt pathway components appears later in development than expected, and zygotic gene
expression does not appear to play a role in early axis specification. Notably absent in the Mnemiopsis genome are
most major secreted antagonists, which suggests that complex regulation of this secreted signaling pathway
probably evolved later in animal evolution.

Background
The overwhelming majority of phylogenetic studies identify four clades of metazoan animals that branched off
before the origin of the Bilateria. These include cnidarians (corals, sea anemones and ‘jellyfish’), poriferans
(sponges), placozoans (Trichoplax) and ctenophores
(comb jellies) (Figure 1A). Often referred to as ‘basal
metazoans’, ‘diploblasts’ or non-bilaterians, these four
clades display radically different adult body plans and
developmental programs from one another. The exact
relationship of these early-branching taxa to one another
remains contentious. Although morphological data
* Correspondence: mqmartin@hawaii.edu
1
Kewalo Marine Laboratory, Pacific Biosciences Research Center, University of
Hawaii at Manoa, Honolulu, HI, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

suggest that poriferans and placozoans were the earliest
metazoan lineages, followed by cnidarians and then ctenophores (Figure 1B) [1,2], molecular studies have led to
a number of different hypotheses regarding early animal
evolution. Studies using 18S ribosomal RNA have suggested that sponges were the earliest branch, followed by
ctenophores, thereby making them more basal compared
with the classification based on morphological studies
(Figure 1C) [3-6]. With the dawn of phylogenomics, the
position of the ctenophores has continued to be contentious. The ctenophores have been positioned as sister to
all other metazoans (Figure 1D) [7,8], grouped with the
cnidarians in a clade known as the Coelenterata (Figure
1E) [9], and considered sister to the clade comprising
Bilateria, Placozoa and Cnidaria (Figure 1F) [10]. Additionally, a combined morphological and phylogenomic

© 2010 Pang et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Pang et al. EvoDevo 2010, 1:10
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/10

Page 2 of 15

Figure 1 Non-bilaterian animal relationships. (A) Representative images of non-bilaterian animals, Ctenophora (Mnemiopsis leidyi), Cnidaria
(Nematostella vectensis), Placozoa (Trichoplax adhaerens) and Porifera (Dysidea spp.). Photos courtesy of William E. Browne and Eric Roettinger. (BG) Alternate hypotheses on early animal evolution and the placement of the ctenophores, based on (B) morphological data, (C) 18S ribosomal
RNA results, (D-F) different phylogenomic analyses and (G) a combined morphological and phylogenomic approach.

analysis has even suggested a monophyly of the basal
metazoans in the clade ‘Diploblastica’, which is sister to
the Bilateria (Figure 1G) [11]. As yet, there is very little
consensus as to the placement of Ctenophora in the animal tree of life.
Fortunately, genomic data (gene content and complexity) and information on overall genomic structure can
prove useful in resolving the relationship of these clades
to one another. The genomes of the anthozoan cnidarian Nematostella vectenis [12], the hydrozoan cnidarian
Hydra magnipapillata [13], the placozoan Trichoplax
adhaerens [14] and the sponge Amphimedon queenslandica [15] have already proven to be invaluable resources
in the effort to understand the genomic makeup of the
earliest metazoans. Along with data from other sponges
[16], the genomic data from choanoflagellates [17,18]
(the sister group of metazoans) have provided significant
insight into the molecular complexity present in the
closest extant unicellular ancestor of animals. Nonetheless, the available data from ctenophores (that is, the
modest expressed sequence tag (EST) sets from two species, Mnemiopsis leidyi and Pleurobrachia pileus) is far
from sufficient to resolve the placement of this enigmatic lineage.
Unlike the other non-bilaterians, ctenophores display a
stereotypical developmental program (Figure 2A), with a
well-studied cell lineage [19,20]. The first two cleavages
are equal and meridional, whereas the third cleavage is
unequal and oblique. At this stage, the eight macromeres divide unequally to give off micromeres at the

future aboral pole. Many of the early blastomeres in ctenophore embryos display a precocious determination of
cell fate that is consistent with segregation of cytoplasmic determinants, although some inductive interactions
are known to occur [21]. Unfortunately, no good molecular candidates for cell fate specification determinants
have been identified in ctenophores. The primary adult
body axis, the oral–aboral axis, is established at the time
of the first cleavage [22] and early cleavages are important for localizing developmental potential [23]. The
oral-aboral axis of larval (or cydippid) and adult ctenophores is demarcated by the mouth at the oral pole and
the apical sensory organ at the aboral pole (Figure 2B).
Additionally, there are two planes of rotational symmetry: the tentacular plane, which passes through the two
tentacles, and the oesophageal or sagittal plane, which is
perpendicular to the tentacular plane. Ctenophores also
possess complex features, such as a well-developed muscular system composed of non-epithelial muscle cells
and a nervous system that comprises sensory cells and a
subepidermal nerve net [reviewed in [24]].
Although ctenophores have proven to be exceptional
experimental embryological material, very little is known
about the identity of the exact genes and proteins
involved in specifying the body axes. To date, work on
ctenophores has focused mainly on different families of
transcription factors, including Sox [25], Fox [26], T-box
[27] and Homeobox [28,29], yet nothing is known about
the cell signaling pathways. Bilaterian model systems
have identified a limited number of cell signaling

Pang et al. EvoDevo 2010, 1:10
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/10

Page 3 of 15

Figure 2 Ctenophore development and body plan. (A) Early cleavage from egg to 60-cell stage, based on Martindale and Henry [20] and
others. The top row shows the view from the aboral (or vegetal) pole and the bottom row shows the lateral view, with the oral pole at the
bottom. The first two divisions are equal and meridional, and the third cleavage is unequal and oblique, giving rise to middle (M) and end (E)
macromeres. Subsequent divisions are unequal, with micromeres given off at the aboral pole. (B) Basic ctenophore body plan, as shown during
the cydippid stage. The oral pole is the location of the mouth, which opens to the pharynx. The pharynx leads internally to the gut and
endodermal canals (yellow). Also shown are paired tentacle bulbs (from which the tentacles grow), the eight comb rows, and the apical sensory
organ located at the aboral pole.

pathways, including the Wnt/b-catenin, TGF-b, Hedgehog, Notch, receptor tyrosine kinase, and Jak/STAT
pathways. These pathways generally involve an extracellular (and often diffusible) ligand, transmembrane receptor,
intracellular signal transduction/amplification system and,
interestingly, a system of antagonists that can be used to
further regulate informational content. These systems are
used repeatedly in different tissues throughout the life
history of organisms [30], with the basic elements of these
systems arising early in animal evolution [31].
In this study we examined the Wnt/b-catenin signaling pathway in the ctenophore Mnemiopsis leidyi
(Figure 3). In this pathway, the absence of a Wnt ligand
results in the shunting of cytoplasmic b-catenin into a
‘destruction complex’ of axin, adenomatous polyposis
coli (APC) and glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK-3) [32].
GSK-3 phosphorylates specific residues in the amino

terminus of b-catenin, thereby targeting b-catenin for
degradation via ubiquitination. T-cell-specific transcription factor/lymphoid enhancer binding factor (TCF/LEF)
interacts with the repressor Groucho to suppress specific
target genes. When the Wnt ligand is present, it activates
the signaling cascade by first binding to the seventransmembrane receptor Frizzled (Fzd). Along with a coreceptor, lipoprotein receptor-related protein 5/6 (LRP5/
6), Wnt binding results in the phosphorylation of Dishevelled (Dsh), thereby activating it. Dsh inhibits GSK-3
activity, which allows active, non-phosphorylated bcatenin to accumulate in the cytoplasm. Increasing levels
of cytoplasmic b-catenin promotes translocation to the
nucleus, where it interacts with TCF/LEF (and other
cofactors) to enhance transcription of target genes.
Recent work in a number of cnidarian species has shown
that the Wnt pathway is evolutionarily highly conserved

Pang et al. EvoDevo 2010, 1:10
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/10

Page 4 of 15

Figure 3 Overview of Wnt/b-catenin signaling Ctenophore pathway. (A) When Wnt signaling is inactive, cytoplasmic b-catenin protein is
bound by the ‘destruction complex’ of axin, glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK-3) and adenomatous polyposis coli (APC). While sequestered, GSK3 phosphorylates b-catenin, which targets b-catenin for ubiquitination and degradation. (B) In the presence of a Wnt ligand, the pathway is
activated. Wnt binds to the seven-transmembrane receptor Frizzled and its co-receptor lipoprotein receptor-related protein 5/6 (LRP5/6), which
causes Dishevelled (Dsh) to be activated. Dsh inhibits GSK-3, thereby allowing b-catenin to accumulate in the cytoplasm. Eventually, b-catenin
gets translocated to the nucleus, where it interacts with the transcription factor T-cell-specific transcription factor/lymphoid enhancer binding
factor (TCF/LEF) to activate target genes. The diffusible antagonists (Secreted Frizzled-related (Sfrp), Dickkopf (DKK), Wnt Inhibitory Factor (WIF)
and Cerberus (CER)) can modulate Wnt activity by preventing the binding of Wnt to its receptors.

and plays important roles in axis and cell fate specification [33-40]. Work in the sponge Amphimedon has
shown polar localization of a Wnt ligand, suggesting a
role in axial specification [41]. In another species of
sponge, Oscarella lobularis, Wnt/b-catenin signaling
has been implicated in adult epithelial patterning and
ostia formation [42]. Some components of this pathway
are known to be present in Trichoplax [14,31], but
their expression patterns and function are not yet
known.
We recently used next-generation technologies to
sequence the genome of the lobate ctenophore Mnemiopsis leidyi, in an effort to better understand early
animal evolution. In this paper, we look at one particular aspect, the evolution of the canonical Wnt signaling
pathway. We found a near-complete Wnt signaling
pathway present, including four Wnt ligands. However,
part of the ‘destruction complex’ appears to be incomplete, and many Wnt antagonists are not recognizable in
the genome. In situ hybridization studies showed that
transcripts for all four Wnt genes are detected relatively
late in development in discrete domains of the developing tentacles and apical organ.

Results
Wnt/b-catenin pathway

A preliminary assembly of the genome of the lobate ctenophore Mnemiopsis leidyi, totalling 156 megabases in
5,100 scaffolds was generated by the National Institutes
of Health (NIH) Intramural Sequencing Center using
454 and Illumina sequencing techniques. Using reciprocal BLAST searches of the Mnemiopsis genome, reverse
transcriptase PCR cloning, and subsequent phylogenetic
analyses, we identified and isolated nearly all of the
essential members of the canonical Wnt/b-catenin
signaling pathway (Table 1).
The four non-paralogous Wnt genes identified in the
Mnemiopsis genome were cloned by rapid amplification
of cDNA ends (RACE) PCR, using mixed-stage embryonic cDNA. Phylogenetic analyses including the
sequences of Wnt genes from representative taxa having
fully annotated genomes showed moderately strong support for the ctenophore Wnt genes grouping in the
Wnt6, Wnt9 and WntA families (Figure 4A). The fourth
Wnt gene MlWntX does not group with any of the
recognized Wnt families. It should be noted that the
ctenophore Wnt genes tend to be somewhat more

Pang et al. EvoDevo 2010, 1:10
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/10

Page 5 of 15

Table 1 Wnt/b-catenin pathway members present in the Mnemiopsis leidyi genome
Gene namea

Mle scaffold or accession number

Pfam domains

E valueb

Human hitb

-46

NP_110388.2: Wnt4

WntA

HM448813

Wnt

7e

Wnt6

HM448814

Wnt

5e-48

NP_006513.1: Wnt6

-59

CAA96283.1: Wnt13

Wnt9

HM448815

Wnt

7e

WntX

HM448816

Wnt

4e-56

NP_110388.2: Wnt4

b-catenin

HM448817

ARM(12)

2e-109

BAG70078.1: Beta-catenin

-67

AAB65244.1: DSH3

Dishevelled (Dsh)

HM448818

DIX, PDZ, DEP

8e

FrizzledA

HM448819

Fz, Fri 7TM

2e-89

NP_003498.1: Frizzled7

FrizzledB

HM448820

Fz, Fri 7TM

5e-34

NP_003498.1: Frizzled7

c

HM448821

Fz

9e

TCFd

HM448822

HMG

2e-51

CAB97214: TCF4

Pygopus

HM448823

PHD zinc finger

3e-17

CAB43209.1: Pygo2

Chibby

HM448824

3e-6

CAQ07904.1: Chibby1

Sfrp

-20

-24

AAD41636.1: Frizzled1

NP_073736.2: Porc isoA

Porcupine

HM448825

Transmembrane

2e

DIXDe

HM448826

DIX

9e-17

AAH41626.2: DIXDC1

LRP5/6f

c600800006.Contig20

EGF(2), LY, EGF, LY(4), EGF

5e-27

BA3305.1: LRP5

g

-156

GSK-3

c606000111.Contig2

Ser/Thr kinase

4e

APCh

c408602200.Contig1

ARM(2)

2e-17

NP_001139628.1: GSK-3 beta
AAF01784.1: APC2

CK1i

c608300381.Contig1

Ser/Thr kinase

3e-127

EAW61775.1: CK1

-106

CAA56710.1: CK1

c607500101.Contig1

Ser/Thr kinase

9e

Tankyrase

c606800096.Contig3

ANK(10), SAM, PARP, C2

0.0

NP_003738.2: Tankyrase-1

CBPj

c601400002.Contig7

ZnF, KIX, BROMO, DUF906, ZnF

0.0

AAC51770.1: CREB-binding protein

Groucho/TLEk

c601900005.Contig5b20

WD40(6), LDLa(3), transmembrane

4e-108

AAH43247.1: TLE3

Wntless/evi

c607300052.Contig1

Lzic/Icat

c606200080.Contig2

transmembrane

1e

-11

1e-20

BAC11072.1: wntless
NP_115774: LZIC

a

Provisional gene names and scaffolds of Mnemiopsis Wnt pathway members, along with GenBank Accession numbers of those cloned.
b
Also listed is the best human BLAST hit with corresponding E value.
c
Sfrp = Secreted Frizzled-related;
d
TCF = T-cell-specific transcription factor
e
DIXD = DIX domain containing protein
f
LRP = lipoprotein receptor-related protein
g
GSK-3 = glycogen synthase kinase 3
h
APC = adenomatous polyposis coli
i
CK1 = casein kinase 1
j
CBP = CREB binding protein
k
TLE = transducin-like enhancer of split

divergent than other animal genomes, as evidenced by
their longer branch lengths in our phylogenies, and this
is consistent with previous analyses of homeobox genes
([29] and Ryan et al, submitted). In addition, except for
MlWnt6, the support for the other Wnt genes is relatively low. When phylogenetic analyses included additional non-bilaterian taxa (such as Amphimedon,
Oscarella and Trichoplax), family-level classification of
some Mnemiopsis sequences showed variation, perhaps
due to artifacts caused by long branch attraction (see
Additional file 1). The genomic complement of Wnt
genes varies greatly across the Metazoa; however, there
are 13 well-supported and described families, with a few
orphans [40,43]. The four Mnemiopsis Wnt genes are

comparable in number with Amphimedon and Trichoplax, which both possess three, whereas cnidarians and
bilaterians possess nearly the full complement of Wnt
genes [35,43].
Each Mnemiopsis Wnt gene has a predicted signal
peptide at the 5’ end. MlWntA, MlWnt9 and MlWntX
have the 24 conserved cysteine residues, whereas
MlWnt6 has only 22. Comparison of the coding regions
with that of genomic data reveals two important intron
positions (Figure 5A) that are well conserved across all
metazoan Wnt genes analyzed to date [43]. These correspond to introns 3 and 5 in MlWntA, MlWnt6 and
MlWnt9, and to introns 2 and 4 in MlWntX. In the current assembly, none of the Wnt genes are on the same

Pang et al. EvoDevo 2010, 1:10
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/10

Page 6 of 15

Figure 4 Wnt gene orthology. Bayesian analysis to determine orthology of Mnemiopsis Wnt genes. Shown is a consensus tree of four
independent runs of 5 million generations each. Posterior probability support is shown at each node, as well as maximum likelihood (PhyML
with WAG model) bootstrap support (posterior probability/ML bootstrap). Asterisks at each node indicate ≥ 99%. support. A dash (-) indicates
that the node was not supported by maximum likelihood analyses. Mnemiopsis Wnt genes are shown shaded and marked with arrows. Ate =
Archaearanea tepidariorum; Bfl = Branchiostoma floridae; Cte = Capitella teleta; Hsa = Homo sapiens; Mle = Mnemiopsis leidyi; Nve = Nematostella
vectensis; Pdu = Platynereis dumerilii; Sko = Saccoglossus kowalevskii; Spu = Strongylocentrotus purpuratus; Tca = Tribolium castaneum.

Pang et al. EvoDevo 2010, 1:10
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/10

Page 7 of 15

Figure 5 Wnt gene structure and domains of Wnt pathway members. (A) Intron-exon structure of the four Mnemiopsis Wnt transcripts that
were cloned. Turquoise shading indicates the coding region and the diagonal lines show the 5’ and 3’ untranslated regions. The start (ATG) is
indicated, and the vertical lines represent intron positions. The conserved intron positions are marked with arrows. (B) Predicted protein domains
present in the other Wnt components that were cloned out. Specific domains and other regions of interest are colored and named.

scaffold, so there is no evidence of genomic linkage.
MlWntA is currently on a 182 kb scaffold, spanning
positions 64,343 to 70,583, with predicted genes 4 kb
upstream (highest BLAST hit was XP_001624925.1) and
10 kb downstream (XP_002018102). MlWnt9 is on a
283 kb scaffold, spanning 131,863 to 139,362, with adjacent genes located 4 kb upstream (XP_001620894.1) and
12 kb downstream (XP_002755989.1). MlWntX is on a
285 kb scaffold, region 26,134 to 12,946, with no genes
detected downstream and the closest hit 12 kb upstream
(ZP_03967055). MlWnt6 is currently on a 48 kb contig
with no other genes predicted, spanning the region
35,863 to 8,886. Extrapolating, the closest possible distance between any two genes is 20 kb.
Receptors and downstream components of the Wnt
signaling pathway

In addition to the four Wnt ligands, the Mnemiopsis genome contains the receptors Fzd and LRP5/6 (Table 1).
We were able to clone and identify two Fzd genes
(MlFzdA and MlFzdB), both containing the extracellular
Frizzled cysteine-rich domain (CRD), which binds Wnt
ligands, and the transmembrane domain (Figure 5B).
MlFzdA also has a signal peptide and the intracellular
KTXXXW motif (KTASNW), which is thought to bind
the PDZ domain of Dsh and is therefore required for
canonical Wnt signaling [44]. MlFzdB does not appear to
have the signal peptide or the KTXXXW motif based on
cloned RACE PCR fragments. There was only a single
LRP5/6 identified in the genome.
For functional canonical Wnt signaling, key intracellular components of the pathway are required. In Mnemiopsis, there are single genes encoding Dishevelled
(MlDsh) and b-catenin (MlBcat). MlDsh contains all
three key domains found in Dishevelled proteins of
other animals (DIX, PDZ and DEP) (Figure 5B). The

full-length MlBcat sequence was cloned from a mixed
stage cDNA template. Similar to b-catenin from other
metazoans, there is a highly conserved GSK-3 phosphorylation site and a conserved N-terminal motif
(Figure 5B). Centrally, there are 12 armadillo repeats
that are clearly detectable but widely divergent compared with other metazoan sequences. Surprisingly,
based on the homology of predicted protein sequences,
MlBcat appears to lack both C-terminal motifs (motifs
A and B), which are thought to serve as transactivational
domains [45]. When Wnt signaling is inactive, the
‘destruction complex’, composed of axin, APC and GSK3, binds cytoplasmic b-catenin and targets it for degradation [32]. Although we found a clear GSK-3 ortholog,
in silico searches found only a partial match to APC
(low similarity to armadillo repeat domain and lacking
all other domains) and did not find any evidence of
axin. It is known that GSK-3 can phosphorylate
b-catenin without requiring the other members of the
complex [46]. We did find that the transcription factor
TCF/LEF (MlTcf), the binding partner of stabilized
nuclear b-catenin, is required for the activation of
downstream target genes. MlTcf contains the b-catenin
binding domain at its amino terminus and also contains
the the Sox-Tcf high mobility group domain, which
binds DNA (Figure 5B).
Although we found Wnt pathway genes from all parts
of the pathway, including ligand modification/secretion,
receptors and other membrane-associated proteins, and
cytoplasmic and nuclear factors (Table 1; see Additional
file 2), we failed to identify the important antagonists
Dickkopf (DKK), Wnt Inhibitory Factor (WIF) and Cerberus (CER), which are characteristic of bilaterian Wnt
signaling. We were able to identify a possible Secreted
Frizzled-related gene (MlSfrp) that may be involved in
regulating Wnt signaling; it contains the extracellular

Pang et al. EvoDevo 2010, 1:10
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/10

Frizzled CRD but not the transmembrane domain (Figure 5B). Unlike bilaterian Sfrp, MlSfrp lacks a Netrinlike (NTR) domain.
Wnt/b-catenin expression patterns

We examined the mRNA expression patterns of key
components of the Wnt signaling pathway by wholemount in situ hybridization. All four Wnt genes are
detected at relatively late stages of development after
gastrulation. MlWnt9 is detected the earliest, at about 3
to 4 hours post-fertilization (HPF) in four rows of cells
in the aboral ectoderm derived from micromeres born
at the vegetal pole (Figure 6A). As development proceeds, these cells form four clusters within the forming
tentacle bulb, which appear to approach the aboral midline and fuse into two groups. Similarly, MlWntA is
expressed in four groups of cells in the anlage of the
tentacle apparati, beginning at about 9 HPF (Figure 6B).
These cells are located below the surface ectoderm and
are adjacent to the forming tentacle bulb, in the most
lateral regions. In comparison with the MlWnt9+ cells,
these are located slightly deeper below the surface and
are positioned more towards the distal extremes of the
tentacular axis.
Whereas MlWntA and MlWnt9 are primarily
expressed in small regions of the tentacle bulb, the
other two Wnt genes are associated with the apical sensory organ and its surrounding regions. The apical

Page 8 of 15

organ is primarily a gravity-sensing organ [47], although
it possibly also acts as a photoreceptor [48], and it is
highly innervated, as evidenced by ultrastructural analysis [24]. MlWnt6 is expressed in the apical organ floor,
primarily in a central region along the tentacular plane
(Figure 6C). There is also faint diffuse expression of
MlWnt6 within the tentacle bulb. MlWntX is expressed
in a region surrounding the floor of the apical organ,
except for two areas in the pharyngeal plane, where it is
excluded (Figure 6D). There is also expression in cells
of the ciliated groove, the ciliated connection pathway
between the gravity-sensing cells of the apical organ,
and the locomotory comb rows.
To understand to which cells these Wnt ligands are
signaling, we also looked at the expression patterns of
the Frizzled-related genes and other intracellular components (Figure 7). MlFzdA is expressed maternally, in
cleavage stages, and through gastrulation in a uniform
manner (Figure 7A). After gastrulation and through
cydippid formation, expression becomes concentrated
primarily in the pharynx, tentacle bulb, and two ectodermal domains between the comb rows in the sagittal
plane. MlFzdB, which lacks the intracellular motif, is
initially expressed after gastrulation in the ectoderm
(Figure 7B). However, later in development, most of the
ectodermal expression is downregulated (except in the
pharynx), and there is an additional expression domain
in the muscle cells that connects the two tentacle

Figure 6 Wnt gene expression during development. Whole- mount in situ hybridization analyses of all Wnt genes during development. The
timeline at the top depicts hours post-fertilization (HPF). All images are oriented laterally, unless otherwise specified (aboral). For lateral views,
the oral pole is at the bottom and aboral pole at the top, with an asterisk (*) marking the blastopore/mouth. For the aboral views, the tentacular
plane is horizontal and the sagittal plane vertical. Gene expression is detected colorimetrically and shown by the blue/purple staining. (A)
MlWnt9 is first detected after gastrulation in four aboral regions of the future tentacle bulb (arrows). After approximately 9 HPF, these four
groups of cells converge along the tentacular plane and form two groups of cells within the tentacle bulb. (B) MlWntA is also expressed in four
groups of cells of the forming tentacle bulb, slightly more internal than MlWnt9. It remains expressed in these four groups of cells at the
periphery of the tentacle bulb. (C) MlWnt6 is expressed in both the tentacle bulb and the floor of the apical organ (ao). The tentacular staining is
fainter in the cydippid stage; however, the apical organ staining remains prominent. (D) MlWntX is expressed both in the apical organ floor and
in the ciliated groove (cg), which is the structure that connects the apical organ to the individual comb rows.

Pang et al. EvoDevo 2010, 1:10
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/10

Page 9 of 15

Figure 7 Expression of Wnt pathway components. Whole-mount in situ hybridization of other members of the Wnt pathway, including (A)
MlFzdA, (B) MlFzdB, (C) MlSfrp, (D) MlDsh, (E) MlBcat and (F) MlTcf. The timeline above the images denotes the different stages of embryos
below, from 0-3 hours post-fertilization (if applicable) to 24 HPF or the cydippid stage. Unless noted, all images are lateral views, with the asterisk
marking the blastopore or mouth. Blue/purple staining shows where the genes are expressed. (A) MlFzdA is detected uniformly from egg,
through early cleavage stages and gastrulation. From 9 HPF onward, it is expressed mainly in the tentacle bulb (arrows) and pharynx (ph). (B)
MlFzdB is not detected until 3-4 HPF in cells of the ectoderm (ec). At 5-6 HPF, it is expressed in the tentacle bulb and around the blastopore, in
cells that will invaginate to form the pharynx. Later, it is additionally expressed in the trans-tentacular muscle (white arrow), which connects the
two tentacles. (C) MlSfrp is expressed in the invaginating pharynx and in the presumptive mesoderm (mes). This mesodermal expression
becomes confined to two regions of the tentacle bulb, which becomes barely detectable in the cydippids. The pharyngeal expression is also not
detected in cydippid stages. (D) MlDsh is expressed uniformly from egg to cydippid stages. (E) MlBcat is first detected after gastrulation (about 4
HPF) in ectodermal cells around the blastopore. This blastoporal expression continues however, at 6 HPF there is MlBcat expression everywhere,
except in the cells that form the comb plates (arrowheads). (F) MlTcf is expressed primarily in the ectoderm after gastrulation but excluded from
cells that form the comb plates. At cydippid stages, it is expressed in discrete regions of the apical organ floor (ao) and in the tentacle bulbs.

apparati. The Secreted Frizzled-related gene, MlSfrp, is
expressed after gastrulation in the pharynx and also in
the mesoderm, which becomes two diffuse regions of
the tentacle bulb (Figure 7C). By the cydippid stage,
only faint tentacle bulb staining can be detected.
The key Wnt modulator MlDsh is expressed maternally
in a uniform pattern and throughout development in
almost all cells (Figure 7D). By contrast, MlBcat is first
detected during mid-gastrulation, and is localized to the
region surrounding the blastopore (Figure 7E). However,
the blastopore, which corresponds to the animal pole and
the future location of the mouth, is already fully formed,
and the endodermal macromeres have already been internalized by the time zygotic transcripts are detectable. The
cells that express MlBcat remain on the surface, and
expression is not seen in endodermal precursors. We are
not able to detect any transcripts before this stage by in
situ hybridization; however, we cannot rule out that there

are low levels of expression or maternally deposited protein present. As development proceeds, MlBcat is
expressed almost ubiquitously in both the ectoderm and
the endoderm. The only region in which it is not
expressed (or is expressed at low levels) is in the cells
that form the comb plates. It is possible that this widespread expression is due to the role of b-catenin in cell
adhesion. The onset of MlBcat expression occurs earlier
than that of all four Wnt genes and, in contrast to the
expression of MlBcat, which is initially localized to the
oral (animal) pole, all four Wnt genes are localized primarily to the aboral (vegetal) pole of the embryo. Finally,
the transcription factor MlTcf is expressed after gastrulation diffusely in the ectoderm and more intensely around
the blastopore (Figure 7F). Similar to MlBcat, it also is
not expressed in cells that form the comb plates. Late
expression of MlTcf is confined to individual cells of the
apical organ and parts of the tentacle bulb.

Pang et al. EvoDevo 2010, 1:10
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/10

Discussion
To date, existing studies have offered only a partial view
of a limited number of gene families in ctenophores
[25-29,49-51]. Using next-generation sequencing, we
were able to investigate complete gene families and signaling pathways in the ctenophore Mnemiopsis leidyi.
Although results from full genome analyses of gene
families are not yet available, we examine in this paper
the comprehensiveness of an important developmental
signaling pathway: the Wnt/b-catenin pathway. To
ensure that the genomic searches were complete and
that false negatives were minimized, we examined the
published 15,752 Mnemiopsis ESTs and found that there
was a match of approximately 97 to 99% to genomic
contigs, depending on stringency conditions (data not
shown), suggesting that our genomic sequencing is fairly
complete.
Ancestral metazoan gene complement

When compared with other animals (Table 2), Mnemiopsis appears to have a Wnt complement that is more
similar to poriferans (3 genes) and Trichoplax (3) than
to cnidarians and bilaterians (7-20), which have up to 13
distinct Wnt family members. This suggests that the
expansion of Wnt genes occurred after the divergence
of ctenophores, poriferans and Trichoplax, and that this
expansion was nearly complete in the cnidarian-bilaterian ancestor. However, if Trichoplax is the sister group
of bilaterians [10], this would suggest a significant loss
of Wnt genes in the placozoan lineage. The uncertainty
of assigning orthology of sponge Wnt genes [42] and to
some of the ctenophore genes makes it difficult to
unequivocally determine the evolutionary history of the
Wnt gene family. Wnt genes have yet to be found in
any non-metazoan (including choanoflagellates), indicating that these ligands are likely to be specific to metazoans. There is not enough phylogenetic information to
ascertain the branching order within the Wnt family;
however, there is moderate support for the groupings of
Wnt1 and 6, Wnt2 and 7, Wnt4 and 11, and Wnt9 and
10, based on our own analyses (Figure 4) and on those
performed by others [40,43], suggesting these families
resulted from early duplications.
Core components of the Wnt pathway are present in
all non-bilaterians (Table 2) [31], suggesting the existence of functionally active signaling at the base of the
animal tree of life. Many genes in the Wnt pathway
appear to be animal-specific novelties. However, proteins containing Armadillo repeats (such as those in
b-catenin) are found in all eukaryotes; these proteins
have cytoskeletal functions in fungi and protists, and are
involved in intracellular signaling in plants [52]. Certain
pathway components are also present in organisms such

Page 10 of 15

as the slime mold Dictyostelium, which contains a
b-catenin-like gene called aardvark, a GSK-3 homolog
and Frizzled-like receptors [53,54]. Aardvark has 10
armadillo repeats (compared with 12 in b-catenin),
potential N-terminal GSK-3 phosphorylation sites, and
no C-terminus motifs. Functional work has shown aardvark to have roles in both adherens junctions and cell
signaling (in the form of stalk formation); however this
is independent of GSK-3 activity [55]. All other
metazoan b-catenin proteins examined to date have the
two C-terminus motifs (A and B) that are thought to be
transactivational domains, except for Caenorhabtidis elegans, which seems to have lost or modified them [45].
Thus, depending on the phylogenetic positions, ctenophores either lost these two motifs or they evolved after
the ctenophore divergence. Additionally, bilaterian
b-catenins also have other C-terminal motifs, which
appear to be lineage-specific innovations.
The lack of certain Wnt pathway components in Mnemiopsis that are present in other non-bilaterians is an
intriguing result. For instance, axin is found in Amphimedon, Trichoplax, Nematostella and bilaterians, but
appears to be missing from Mnemiopsis (Table 2).
Whether this gene appeared after ctenophores diverged
from later metazoan lineages or was lost in the Mnemiopsis lineage is not yet clear. Likewise, there seems to
be a paucity of diffusible antagonists in Mnemiopsis,
Amphimedon and Trichoplax. Whereas Amphimedon
has several Sfrp-like genes [15,31], Mnemiopsis has only
a single Sfrp; however, in both species the netrin
domain is lacking. A DKK ortholog has been reported
only for the sponge Oscarella carmela [18], as well as
cnidarians and deuterostomes [56]. Trichoplax does not
appear to have any of the known antagonists. Whereas
DKK appears to be relatively ancient and lost in the
protostome lineage, WIF is probably a bilaterian novelty
and CER is only found in vertebrates. It is likely that
antagonists were relatively recent additions to the pathway, providing an extra mechanism to control the activity. Alternatively, there could be additional novel
antagonists in Mnemiopsis or in the other early lineages,
whose identities can only be discovered through functional experiments.
Based on the gene content observed in the earlybranching phyla, we can begin to deduce the key steps
that led to the complexity observed in the bilaterian
Wnt signaling pathway. It appears that the core components were present in the metazoan ancestor, including
a Wnt ligand, Frizzled receptor, Dsh and b-catenin.
Before the cnidarian-bilaterian ancestor developed, a
series of duplication and divergent events, especially
among the Wnt genes themselves, led to significant
expansion of the components in the pathway. This

Pang et al. EvoDevo 2010, 1:10
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/10

Page 11 of 15

Table 2 Wnt/b-catenin pathway evolution
Eukaryotea

Mnemiopsis

Amphimedon

Trichoplax

Nematostella

Drosophila

Homo

Wnt (total)

-c

+ (4)

+ (3)

+ (3)

+ (14)

+ (7)

+ (20)

Frizzled

+d

+

+

+

+

+

+

b

e

LRP5/6

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

Dishevelled

-

+

+

+

+

+

+

b-catenin

*f

+

+

+

+

+

+

Axin

-

-

+

+

+

+

+

APCg

-

*

*

+

+

+

+

GSK-3h

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

CK1

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

TCF/LEFjk

-

+

+

+

+

+

+

Groucho

-

+

+

+

+

+

+

Sfrpl

-

+

+

-

+

+

+

i

m

n

DKK

-

-

+

-

+

-

+

WIFo

-

-

-

-

-

+

+

CERp

-

-

-

-

-

-

+

Refers to non-metazoan eukaryotes. Frizzled (including EAL71080), b-catenin (AAG17931), CK1 (AAD01192) and GSK-3 (P51136) are present in Dictyostelium. LRP5
is reported from Aspergillus (CAK47340). Other taxa include genome scans of Mnemiopsis leidyi (Ctenophora), Amphimedon queenslandica (Porifera), Trichoplax
adhaerens (Placozoa), Nematostella vectensis (Cnidaria) and the bilaterians Drosophila melanogaster and Homo sapiens.
b
Numbers represent total number of Wnt genes, other rows present presence, absence or partial matches.
c
Plus sign indicates absence.
d
Minus sign indicates presence
e
LRP = lipoprotein receptor-related protein
f
Asterisk represents partial match.
g
APC = adenomatous polyposis coli
h
GSK-3 = glycogen synthase kinase 3
i
CK1 = casein kinase 1
j
TCF = T-cell-specific transcription factor
k
LEF = lymphoid enhancer binding factor
l
Sfrp = Secreted Frizzled-related
m
DKK = Dickkopf
n
DKK has been reported in Oscarella carmela (EB741373) but not in Amphimedon queenslandica.
o
WIF = Wnt inhibitory factor
p
CER = Cerberus
a

expansion, coupled with the origin of the Wnt antagonists DKK, WIF and CER was probably the catalyst for
the acquisition of additional roles of the pathway.
Based on gene content and diversity, our results are
incongruent with a sister relationship between cnidarians and ctenophores (that is, the Coelenterata hypothesis). Firstly, in our phylogenies the genes of
ctenophores do not group closely with those of cnidarians. Moreover, if cnidarians and ctenophores were sister phyla, a tremendous amount of gene loss (including
the loss of multiple Wnt ligands, axin and DKK) would
have been required in the Mnemiopsis lineage. These
results are consistent with previous analyses of homeobox and nuclear receptor gene families (Ryan et al.,
submitted; Reitzel et al., submitted) in rejecting the
Coelenterata hypothesis. Unfortunately, the comparison
of Wnt signaling components between Mnemiopsis,
Amphimedon and Trichoplax is not sufficient to identify
the relationships between Ctenophora, Porifera and

Placozoa. Additionally, it is not known how well Mnemiopsis represents the ancestral ctenophore gene complement, therefore data from other ctenophores would
be of great benefit.
Expression patterns

In Mnemiopsis, all of the Wnt genes are expressed at
the aboral (vegetal) pole in a striking pattern that suggests they are playing some role in patterning the body.
However, they are expressed at such a late stage in
development that many cell fates have already been specified. The expression patterns of the Wnt genes in the
apical organ and tentacle bulb would suggest they might
be involved in neural specification. In cnidarians, it has
been suggested that Wnt genes expressed in staggered
ectodermal and endodermal domains are patterning the
oral-aboral axis in a ‘Wnt code’ [35,56]. By contrast,
most of the Wnt genes in Nematostella are primarily
expressed at the oral pole, whereas in Mnemiopsis, they

Pang et al. EvoDevo 2010, 1:10
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/10

are expressed at the aboral pole. In the sponge Amphimedon, a Wnt gene is expressed at the posterior pole of
the swimming larvae [41]. A major similarity is that
Wnt genes appear to be expressed at the posterior pole
of most animals [57,58]. Mnemiopsis locomotes primarily with the oral end to the front (as do most ctenophores), as this aids in feeding; however, they are
capable of moving in both directions. Cnidarians, such
as Nematostella, swim in the direction of the aboral
end, as this is the location of their apical tuft. The
observed Wnt expression patterns could suggest that
the aboral pole of ctenophores corresponds to the posterior pole of bilaterians.
It is difficult to determine whether the Wnt/b-catenin
pathway is functioning early in development based on in
situ expression patterns alone. Whereas MlFzdA and
MlDsh are both expressed maternally and persist
through early cleavage, MlBcat and the Wnt genes are
not expressed until after gastrulation. Furthermore,
whereas the Wnts are detected primarily at the aboral
pole, MlBcat is initially expressed at the oral (or animal)
pole. Either this pathway is not involved in early axis
specification or there may be a maternal b-catenin protein that is functioning before onset of zygotic expression. Protein localization (particularly that of b-catenin)
would help to determine whether the pathway is
involved in axial patterning; however, we have not generated an antibody to b-catenin and have yet to find one
that crossreacts. Because MlBcat appears to lack transactivational domains (at least as determined by sequence
comparison), further experiments are necessary to determine whether it can actually function as a transcriptional activator. Attempts to activate Wnt signaling via
GSK-3 inhibition (for example, with lithium chloride or
alsterpaullone treatments) have not produced any
obvious phenotype [Pang K, personal observation].
Functional experiments to knock down gene expression
(morpholino antisense oligonucleotides or dominant
negative constructs) would provide much-needed insight
into whether canonical Wnt signaling is actually active
in the developing embryo.

Conclusions
The canonical Wnt signaling pathway evolved at the
base of the animal tree of life. We searched through the
genome of the ctenophore Mnemiopsis leidyi, and identified most of the components of this well-known developmental signaling pathway. Conspicuously absent from
ctenophores is axin, a member of the ‘destruction complex’, which is present in all other animals. Wnt antagonists also appear to be lacking or scarce in early
diverging metazoans, with Sfrp present only in ctenophores, sponges and cnidarians, and DKK present only
in sponges and cnidarians, with vertebrates possessing

Page 12 of 15

the entire array of Wnt antagonists (Sfrp, DKK, WIF
and CER). Wnt genes evolved early in animal evolution,
but did not radiate and diversify until the CnidarianBilaterian ancestor. However, it is also not clear if Wnt
signaling has direct effects on the regulation of gene
expression in ctenophores, as key transactivational
domains in a downstream target of the Wnt pathway,
b-catenin, appear to be absent, and pharmacological
treatments that lead to the stimulation of b-catenin
activity in other metazoans produce no visible phenotype with these.
Although most of the canonical Wnt pathway components are present, their mRNA expression patterns
would suggest that this pathway is not involved in early
axis specification in Mnemiopsis. Both the late expression patterns (after the axes have been specified) and
the expression of Wnt and b-catenin at opposite poles
of the embryo suggest that this pathway may not
required for fate specification. The rapid development of
ctenophores could imply that asymmetric segregation of
maternally loaded protein, rather than zygotic gene
expression, is responsible for precocious cell fate specification in these embryos. Further genomic, expression
and functional analyses are necessary to determine what
genes and/or determinants are involved in axis specification in this unique early diverging animal lineage. Moreover, once the Mnemiopsis axial patterning system has
been deciphered, it will become increasingly important
to reach a consensus regarding the branching position
of Ctenophora relative to other early-branching metazoans to place this unique developmental program within
a phylogenetic context.

Materials and methods
Animal collection and gene expression

Mnemiopsis leidyi adults were collected (from Eel Pond
or the NOAA Rock Jetty, Woods Hole, MA, USA) during the months of June and July and spawned as previously described [59]. RNA was extracted from
embryos at regular intervals from fertilization to 36
hours (TRI Reagent; Molecular Research Center, Cincinnati, OH, USA) [59]. RNA was reverse transcribed to
generate cDNA (SMART RACE cDNA Amplification
Kit; BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA, USA). This cDNA
was used as template to isolate the genes of interest.
The following genes were isolated and fully sequenced,
and are described in this paper: MlWntA (HM448813),
MlWnt6 (HM448814), MlWnt9 (HM448815), MlWntX
(HM448816), MlBcat (HM448817), MlDsh (HM448818),
MlFzdA (HM448819), MlFzdB (HM448820), MlSfrp
(HM448821) and MlTcf (HM448822). Additionally
sequences were isolated for MlPygopus (HM448823),
MlChibby (HM448824), MlPorc (HM448825) and
MlDIXD (HM448826).

Pang et al. EvoDevo 2010, 1:10
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/10

For whole-mount in situ hybridization, embryos were
fixed at various stages from freshly collected uncleaved
embryos (0 HPF) to cydippids (24 to 36 HPF). They
were stored in methanol at -20°C until used. Digoxygenin-labeled riboprobes (0.1 ng/ul) (Ambion/Applied
Biosystems, Austin, TX, USA) were hybridized for 48
hours at 60°C, and detected using an alkaline phosphatase-conjugated antibody (Roche Applied Science,
Indianapolis, IN, USA) and the colorimetric substrate
nitro-blue tetrazolium (NBT)/5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolylphosphate (BCIP) [59]. After detection, specimens were
washed with phosphate-buffered saline and transferred
through a glycerol series up to 70% glycerol. They were
then mounted, viewed under a compound microscope
(Zeiss Axioskop 2, Jena, Germany), and imaged using a
digital imaging system (AxioCam HRc with Axiovision
software; Zeiss). Color balance and brightness were
adjusted using Photoshop software (Adobe Systems Incorporated, San Jose, CA, USA). The only modification to the
in situ protocol was a change in acetic anhydride treatment
(treated in 0.1 mol/L triethanolamine rather than 1% w/v)
(for most recently updated protocols, contact the authors).
All in situ images presented here and additional developmental stages and/or views, are available online via the
comparative gene expression database, Kahikai http://
www.kahikai.com.
Genome sequencing and searches

Mnemiopsis genomic DNA was collected from the self-fertilized spawning of two separate adult animals. One pool
of genomic DNA was used to construct a library for 454
sequencing and the other used for Illumina paired-end
sequencing. The 454 sequencing resulted in 8.1 million
reads (2.7 Gb), which were assembled into contigs using
the Phusion assembler [60]. The Illumina run resulted in
2.8 million paired end reads, which combined with the
454 data, was used to generate 5,100 scaffolds (scaffold
N50 of 187 kb), resulting in a total coverage of ~50×.
The Mnemiopsis genome was scanned in silico for
genes of interest using a reciprocal BLAST approach.
Human, frog, Drosophila and Nematostella orthologs
were used as queries for TBLASTN searches. Candidate
matches were then used in BLASTP searches of the
human genome to find the closest hit. If the closest
match was not the original ortholog or if the E-value
was greater than 0.001, then it was coded as being
absent from the genome. A gene model was created by
scanning the genomic region using Genscan [61]. This
predicted protein sequence was then searched for conserved Pfam domains using SMART [62]. For certain
genes of interest, gene-specific primers were designed
for RACE PCR (MacVector, Cary, NC, USA). RACE
PCR fragments were then conceptually spliced and

Page 13 of 15

aligned back to genomic contigs for comparison of
exon-intron boundaries, using Sequencher (Gene Codes,
Ann Arbor, MI, USA).
Phylogenetic analyses

The Mnemiopsis predicted amino acid sequences were
aligned with the sequences of other organisms. The predicted domains or regions of interest were trimmed and
aligned using Muscle, then corrected by hand for alignment errors (see Additional file 3, Additional file 4).
Bayesian phylogenetic analyses were performed using
MrBayes 3.1.2 [63] using the ‘mixed’ amino acid model
with four independent runs of 5 million generations
each, sampled every 100 generations with four chains. A
summary consensus tree was produced in MrBayes from
the last 49,000 trees of each run (196,000 trees in total),
representing 4,900,000 stationary generations. Posterior
probabilities were calculated from this consensus. Maximum likelihood analyses were performed using PhyML
[64], using the WAG model with 1000 bootstraps.
Alignments and nexus files are available upon request.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Bayesian consensus tree with sponge sequences.
Bayesian consensus tree including sponge and Trichoplax Wnt sequences.
Mnemiopsis genes are marked by arrows and shaded in red, and sponge
and Trichoplax sequences are marked by asterisks. Taxa abbreviations are
as follows: Aqu = Amphimedon queenslandica; Ate = Archaearanea
tepidarium; Bfl = Branchiostoma floridiae; Cte = Capitella teleta; Hsa =
Homo sapiens; Lgi = Lottia gigantea; Mle = Mnemiopsis leidyi; Nve =
Nematostella vectensis; Pte = Archaearanea tepidariorum; Sko =
Saccoglossus kowalevskii; Spu = Strongylocentrotus purpuratus; Tad =
Trichoplax adhaerens; Tca = Tribolium castaneum.
Additional file 2: Genomic contigs of Wnt pathway components.
Text file containing genomic contigs of additional Wnt components that
were identified in silico. Also listed are the Genscan predictions of protein
sequences.
Additional file 3: Alignment used in Figure 4. Nexus/text file of
alignment used for analyses in Figure 4.
Additional file 4: Alignment with additional taxa. Nexus/text file of
alignment used for analyses in Additional file 1.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by an NSF Graduate Research Fellowship to KP,
NASA and NSF grants to MQM, and the Intramural Research Program of the
National Human Genome Research Institute (National Institutes of Health).
We thank Alice Young, Brian Schmidt, Natalie Gurson, Richelle Legaspi and
Betsy Novotny, who were involved with the Mnemiopsis genomic
sequencing at NISC. This manuscript was greatly improved due to the many
discussions and comments from members of the Martindale Lab. Special
thanks to William E. Browne and Eric Roettinger for images in Figure 1A, and
the Embryology Course at the Marine Biological Laboratory (Woods Hole,
MA) for summer research space.
Author details
1
Kewalo Marine Laboratory, Pacific Biosciences Research Center, University of
Hawaii at Manoa, Honolulu, HI, USA. 2Genome Technology Branch, National
Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,

Pang et al. EvoDevo 2010, 1:10
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/10

Page 14 of 15

MD, USA. 3NIH Intramural Sequencing Center, National Human Genome
Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
Authors’ contributions
KP designed the study, performed the genome search and phylogenetics,
isolated genes, performed expression analyses, and drafted the manuscript.
JFR performed the genome search and phylogenetics. NISC performed
sequencing. JCM assembled the Mnemiopsis genome. ADB helped to
design the study and helped in manuscript preparation. MQM participated
in study design and manuscript preparation. All authors read and approved
the final manuscript.

14.

15.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 4 June 2010 Accepted: 4 October 2010
Published: 4 October 2010
References
1. Nielsen C, Scharff N, Eibye-Jacobsen D: Cladistic analyses of the animal
kingdom. Biol J Linn Soc 1996, 57:385-410.
2. Zrzavy J, Mihulka S, Kepka P, Bezdek A, Tietz D: Phylogeny of the Metazoa
based on morphological and 18S ribosomal DNA evidence. Cladistics
1998, 14:249-285.
3. Collins AG: Evaluating multiple alternative hypotheses for the origin of
Bilateria: an analysis of 18S rRNA molecular evidence. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 1998, 95:15458-15463.
4. Kim J, Kim W, Cunningham CW: A new perspective on lower metazoan
relationships from 18S rDNA sequences. Mol Biol Evol 1999, 16:423-427.
5. Podar M, Haddock SHD, Sogin ML, Harbison GR: A molecular phylogenetic
framework for the phylum Ctenophora using 18S rRNA genes. Mol
Phylogenet Evol 2001, 21:218-230.
6. Wallberg A, Thollesson M, Farris JS, Jondelius U: The phylogenetic position
of the comb jellies (Ctenophora) and the importance of taxonomic
sampling. Cladistics 2004, 20:558-578.
7. Dunn CW, Hejnol A, Matus DQ, Pang K, Browne WE, Smith SA, Seaver E,
Rouse GW, Obst M, Edgecombe GD, Sorensen MV, Haddock SHD, SchmidtRhaesa A, Okusu A, Kristensen RM, Wheeler WC, Martindale MQ, Giribet G:
Broad phylogenomic sampling improves resolution of the animal tree of
life. Nature 2008, 452:745-750.
8. Hejnol A, Obst M, Stamatakis A, Ott M, Rouse GW, Edgecombe GD,
Martinez P, Baguna J, Bailly X, Jondelius U, Wiens M, Werner E, Muller G,
Seaver E, Wheeler WC, Martindale MQ, Giribet G, Dunn CW: Assessing the
root of the bilaterian animals with scalable phylogenomic methods. Proc
R Soc B 2009, 276:4261-4270.
9. Philippe H, Derelle R, Lopez P, Pick K, Borchiellini C, Boury-Esnault N,
Vacelet J, Renard E, Houliston E, Queinnec E, Da Silva C, Winicker P, Le
Guyader H, Leys S, Jackson DJ, Schreiber F, Erpenbeck D, Morgenstern B,
Worheide G, Manuel M: Phylogenomics revives traditional views on deep
animal relationships. Curr Biol 2009, 19:706-712.
10. Pick KS, Philippe H, Schreiber F, Erpenbeck D, Jackson DJ, Wrede P,
Wiens M, Alie A, Morgenstern B, Manuel M, Worheide G: Improved
taxonomic sampling noticeably affects non-bilaterian relationships. Mol
Biol Evol 2010, 27:1983-7.
11. Schierwater B, Eitel M, Jakob W, Osigus H-J, Hadrys H, Dellaporta SL,
Kolokotronis S-O, DeSalle R: Concatenated analysis sheds light on early
metazoan evolution and fuels a modern “Urmetazoon” hypothesis. PLoS
Biol 2009, 7:e1000020.
12. Putnam NH, Srivastava M, Hellsten U, Dirks B, Chapman J, Salamov A,
Terry A, Shapiro H, Lindquist E, Kapitonov VV, Jurka J, Genikhovich G,
Grigoriev IV, Lucas SM, Steele RE, Finnerty JR, Martindale MQ, Rokhar DS:
Sea anemone genome reveals ancestral eumetazoan gene repertoire
and genomic organization. Science 2007, 317:86-84.
13. Chapman JA, Kirkness EF, Simakov O, Hampson SE, Mitros T, Weinmaier T,
Rattei T, Balasubramanian PG, Borman J, Busam D, Kisbennett K,
Pfannkoch C, Sumin N, Sutton GG, Viswanathan LD, Walenz B,
Goodstein DM, Hellsten U, Kawashima T, Prochnik SE, Putnam NH, Shu S,
Blumberg B, Dana CE, Gee L, Kibler DF, Law L, Lindgens D, Martinez DE,
Peng J, Wigge PA, Bertulat B, Guder C, Nakamura Y, Ozbek S, Watanabe H,
Khalturin K, Hemmrich G, Frank A, Augustin R, Fraune S, Hayakawa E,
Hayakawa S, Hirose M, Hwang JS, Ikeo K, Nishimiya-Fujisawa C, Ogura A,

16.

17.

18.

19.
20.

21.

22.
23.
24.

25.

26.

27.
28.

29.
30.
31.
32.
33.

Takahashi T, Steinmetz PRH, Zhang X, Aufschnaiter R, Eder MK, Gorny AK,
Salvenmoser W, Heimberg AM, Wheeler BM, Peterson KJ, Bottger A,
Tischler P, Wolf A, Gojobori T, Remington KA, Strausberg RL, Venter JC,
Technau U, Hobmayer B, Bosch TCG, Holstein TW, Fujisawa T, Bode HR,
David CN, Rokhsar DS, Steele RE: The dynamic genome of Hydra. Nature
2010, 464:592-596.
Srivastava M, Begovic E, Chapman J, Putnam NH, Hellsten U, Kawashima T,
Kuo A, Mitros T, Salamov A, Carpenter ML, Moreno MA, Kamm K,
Grimwood J, Schmutz J, Shapiro H, Grigoriev IV, Buss LW, Schierwater B,
Dellaporta SL, Rokhsar DS: The Trichoplax genome and the nature of
placozoans. Nature 2008, 454:955-960.
Srivastava M, Simakov O, Chapman J, Fahey B, Gauthier ME, Mitros T,
Richards G, Conaco C, Dacre M, Hellsten U, Larroux C, Putnam NH,
Stanke M, Adamska M, Darling A, Degnan SM, Oakley TH, Plachetzki DC,
Zhai Y, Adamski M, Calcino A, Cummins SF, Goodstein DM, Harris C,
Jackson DJ, Leys SP, Shu S, Woodcraft BJ, Vervoort M, Kosik KS, Manning D,
Degnan BM, Rokhsar DS: The Amphimedon queenslandica genome and
the evolution of animal complexity. Nature 2010, 466:720-726.
Nichols SA, Dirks W, Pearse JS, King N: Early evolution of animal cell
signalling and adhesion genes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006,
103:12451-12456.
King N, Carroll SB: A receptor tyrosine kinase from choanoflagellates:
molecular insights into early animal evolution. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2001, 98:15032-15037.
King N, Westbrook MJ, Young SL, Kuo A, Abedin M, Chapman J,
Fairclough S, Hellsten U, Isogai Y, Letunic I, Marr M, Picus D, Putnam N,
Rokas A, Wright KJ, Zuzow R, Dirks W, Good M, Goodstein D, Lemons D,
Li W, Lyons JB, Morris A, Nichols S, Richter DJ, Salamov A, Sequencing JG,
Bork P, Lim WA, Manning G, Miller WT, McGinnis W, Shapiro H, Tijian R,
Grigoriev IV, Rokhsar D: The genome of the choanoflagellate Monosiga
brevicollis and the origin of metazoans. Nature 2008, 451:783-788.
Reverberi G, Ortolani G: On the origin of the ciliated plates and of the
mesoderm in the ctenophores. Acta Embryol Morph Exp 1963, 6:175-190.
Martindale MQ, Henry JQ: Intracellulular fate mapping in a basal
metzoan, the ctenophore Mnemiopsis leidyi, reveals the origins of
mesoderm and the existence of indeterminate cell lineages. Dev Biol
1999, 214:243-257.
Henry JQ, Martindale MQ: Multiple inductive signals are involved in the
development of the ctenophore Mnemiopsis leidyi. Dev Biol 2001,
238:40-46.
Freeman G: The establishment of the oral-aboral axis in the ctenophore
embryo. J Embryol Exp Morph 1977, 42:237-260.
Freeman G: The role of cleavage in the localization of developmental
potential in the ctenophore Mnemiopsis leidyi. Dev Biol 1976, 49:143-177.
Hernandez-Nicaise ML: Ctenophora. In Microscopic Anatomy of Invertebrates:
Placozoa, Porifera, Cnidaria and Ctenophora. Edited by: Harrison FW, Westfall
JA. New York: Wiley; 1991:2:359-418.
Jager M, Queinnec E, Chiori R, Le Guyader H, Manuel M: Insights into early
evolution of SOX genes from expression analyses in a ctenophore. J Exp
Zool B Mol Dev Evol 2008, 310:650-667.
Yamada A, Martindale MQ: Expression of the ctenophore Brain Factor 1
forkhead gene ortholog (ctenoBF-1) mRNA is restricted to the
presumptive mouth and feeding apparatus: implications for axial
organization in the Metazoa. Dev Genes Evol 2002, 212:338-348.
Yamada A, Martindale MQ, Tochinai S: Surprisingly complex T-box gene
complement in diploblastic metazoans. Evol Dev 2007, 9:220-230.
Derelle R, Manuel M: Ancient connection between NKL genes and
mesoderm? Insights from Tlx expression in a ctenophore. Dev Genes Evol
2007, 217:253-261.
Pang K, Martindale MQ: Developmental expression of homeobox genes
in the ctenophore Mnemiopsis leidyi. Dev Genes Evol 2008, 218:307-319.
Pires-daSilva A, Sommer RJ: The evolution of signalling pathways in
animal development. Nat Rev Genet 2003, 4:39-49.
Richards GS, Degnan BM: The dawn of developmental signalling in the
Metazoa. Cold Spring Har Symp Quant Biol 2009, 74:81-90.
Logan CY, Nusse R: The Wnt signalling pathway in development and
disease. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 2004, 20:781-810.
Hobmayer B, Rentzsch F, Kuhn K, Happel CM, von Laue CC, Snyder P,
Rothbacher U, Holstein TW: WNT signalling molecules act in axis
formation in the diploblastic metazoan Hydra. Nature 2000,
407:186-189.

Pang et al. EvoDevo 2010, 1:10
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/10

34. Wikramanayake AH, Hong M, Lee PN, Pang K, Byrum CA, Bince JM, Xu R,
Martindale MQ: An ancient role for nuclear beta-catenin in the evolution
of axial polarity and germ layer segregation. Nature 2003, 426:446-450.
35. Kusserow A, Pang K, Sturm C, Hrouda M, Lentfer J, Schmidt HA, Technau U,
von Haeseler A, Hobmayer B, Martindale MQ, Holstein TW: Unexpected
complexity of the Wnt gene family in a sea anemone. Nature 2005,
433:156-160.
36. Momose T, Derelle R, Houliston E: A maternally localised Wnt ligand
required for axial patterning in the cnidarian Clytia hemisphaerica.
Development 2008, 135:2105-2113.
37. Amiel A, Houliston E: Three distinct RNA localization mechanisms
contribute to oocyte polarity establishment in the cnidarian Clytia
hemisphaerica. Dev Biol 2009, 327:191-203.
38. Lee PN, Kumburegama S, Marlow HQ, Martindale MQ, Wikramanayake AH:
Asymmetric developmental potential along the animal-vegetal axis in
the anthozoan cnidarian, Nematostella vectensis, is mediated by
Dishevelled. Dev Biol 2007, 310:169-186.
39. Teo R, Mohrlen F, Plickert G, Muller WA, Frank U: An evolutionary
conserved role of Wnt signalling in stem cell fate decision. Dev Biol 2006,
289:91-99.
40. Lengfeld T, Watanabe H, Simakov O, Lindgens D, Gee L, Law L, Schmidt HA,
Ozbek S, Bode H, Holstein TW: Multiple Wnts are involved in Hydra
organizer formation and regneration. Dev Biol 2009, 330:186-199.
41. Adamska M, Degnan SM, Green KM, Adamski M, Craigie A, Larroux C,
Degnan BM: Wnt and TGF-beta expression in the sponge Amphimedon
queenslandica and the origin of metazoan embryonic patterning. PLoS
One 2007, 2:e1031.
42. Lapebie P, Gazave E, Ereskovsky A, Derelle R, Bezac C, Renard E, Houliston E,
Borchiellini C: WNT/beta-catenin signalling and epithelial patterning in
the homoscleromorph sponge Oscarella. PLoS One 2009, 4:e5823.
43. Cho SJ, Valles Y, Giani VC, Seaver EC, Weisblat DA: Evolutionary dynamics
of the Wnt gene family: a lophotrochozoan perspective. Mol Biol Evol
2010, 27:1645-58.
44. Huang HC, Klein P: The Frizzled family: receptors for multiple signal
transduction pathways. Genome Biol 2004, 5:234.
45. Schneider SQ, Finnerty JR, Martindale MQ: Protein evolution: structurefunction relationships of the oncogene beta-catenin in the evolution of
multicellular animals. J Exp Zool B Mol Dev Evol 2003, 295B:25-44.
46. Yost C, Torres M, Miller JR, Huang E, Kimelman D, Moon RT: The axisinducing activity, stability, and subcellular distribution of β-catenin is
regulated in Xenopus embryos by glycogen synthase kinase 3. Genes Dev
1996, 10:1443-1454.
47. Tamm SL: Ctenophora. In Electrical Conduction and Behavior in “Simple”
Invertebrates. Edited by: Shelton GAB. Oxford: Clarendon; 1982:266-358.
48. Horridge GA: Presumed photoreceptive cilia in a ctenophore. Quart J Micr
Sci 1964, 105:311-317.
49. Martinelli C, Spring J: T-box and homeobox genes from the ctenophore
Pleurobrachia pileus: comparison of Brachyury, Tbx2/3 and Tlx in basal
metazoans and bilaterians. FEBS Lett 2005, 579:5024-5028.
50. Jager M, Queinnec E, Houliston E, Manuel M: Expansion of the SOX gene
family predated the emergence of the Bilateria. Mol Phylogenet Evol 2006,
39:468-477.
51. Hoshiyama D, Iwabe N, Miyata T: Evolution of the gene families forming
the Pax/Six regulatory network: isolation of genes from primitive
animals and molecular phylogenetic analyses. FEBS Lett 2007,
581:1639-1643.
52. Coates JC: Armadillo repeat proteins: beyond the animal kingdom. Trends
Cell Biol 2003, 13:463-471.
53. Grimson MJ, Coates JC, Reynolds JP, Shipman M, Blanton RL, Harwood AJ:
Adherens junctions and β-catenin mediated cell signalling in a nonmetazoan organism. Nature 2000, 408:727-731.
54. Prabhu Y, Eichinger L: The Dictyostelium repertoire of seven
transmembrane domain receptors. Euro J Cell Biol 2006, 85:937-946.
55. Coates JC, Grimson MJ, Williams RSB, Bergman W, Blanton RL, Harwood AJ:
Loss of the β-catenin homologue aardvark causes ectopic stalk
formation in Dictyostelium. Mech Dev 2002, 116:117-127.
56. Lee PN, Pang K, Matus DQ, Martindale MQ: A WNT of things to come:
evolution of Wnt signalling and polarity in cnidarians. Semin Cell Dev
2006, 17:157-167.
57. Yamaguchi TP: Heads or tails: Wnts and anterior-posterior patterning.
Curr Biol 2001, 11:R713-R724.

Page 15 of 15

58. Petersen CP, Reddien PW: Wnt signalling and the polarity of the primary
body axis. Cell 2009, 139:1056-1068.
59. Pang K, Martindale MQ: Comb jellies (Ctenophora): a model for basal
metazoan evolution and development. In Emerging Model Organisms.
Edited by: Crotty DA, Gann A. Cold Spring Harbor: Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory Press; 2009:1:167-195.
60. Mullikin JC, Ning Z: The Phusion assembler. Genome Res 2003, 13:81-90.
61. Burge C, Karlin S: Prediction of complete gene structures in human
genomic DNA. J Mol Biol 1997, 268:78-94.
62. Letunic I, Doerks T, Bork P: SMART 6: recent updates and new
developments. Nucleic Acids Res 2009, 37:D229-232.
63. Rohnquist F, Huelsenbeck JP: MrBayes 3: Bayesian phylogenetic inference
under mixed models. Bioinformatics 2003, 19:1572-1574.
64. Guindon S, Gascuel O: A simple, fast, and accurate algorithm to estimate
large phylogenies by maximum likelihood. Syst Biol 2003, 52:696-704.
doi:10.1186/2041-9139-1-10
Cite this article as: Pang et al.: Genomic insights into Wnt signaling in
an early diverging metazoan, the ctenophore Mnemiopsis leidyi. EvoDevo
2010 1:10.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
