<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Assessing the structural conservation of protein pockets to study functional and allosteric sites: implications for drug discovery</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Structural Biology 2010, 10:9. doi: 10.1186/1472-6807-10-9"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Alejandro Panjkovich, Xavier Daura"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 8.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 7.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Panjkovich and Daura BMC Structural Biology 2010, 10:9
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6807/10/9

Open Access

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Assessing the structural conservation of protein
pockets to study functional and allosteric sites:
implications for drug discovery
Research article

Alejandro Panjkovich1 and Xavier Daura*1,2

Abstract
Background: With the classical, active-site oriented drug-development approach reaching its limits, protein ligandbinding sites in general and allosteric sites in particular are increasingly attracting the interest of medicinal chemists in
the search for new types of targets and strategies to drug development. Given that allostery represents one of the most
common and powerful means to regulate protein function, the traditional drug discovery approach of targeting active
sites can be extended by targeting allosteric or regulatory protein pockets that may allow the discovery of not only
novel drug-like inhibitors, but activators as well. The wealth of available protein structural data can be exploited to
further increase our understanding of allosterism, which in turn may have therapeutic applications. A first step in this
direction is to identify and characterize putative effector sites that may be present in already available structural data.
Results: We performed a large-scale study of protein cavities as potential allosteric and functional sites, by integrating
publicly available information on protein sequences, structures and active sites for more than a thousand protein
families. By identifying common pockets across different structures of the same protein family we developed a method
to measure the pocket's structural conservation. The method was first parameterized using known active sites. We
characterized the predicted pockets in terms of sequence and structural conservation, backbone flexibility and
electrostatic potential. Although these different measures do not tend to correlate, their combination is useful in
selecting functional and regulatory sites, as a detailed analysis of a handful of protein families shows. We finally
estimated the numbers of potential allosteric or regulatory pockets that may be present in the data set, finding that
pockets with putative functional and effector characteristics are widespread across protein families.
Conclusions: Our results show that structurally conserved pockets are a common feature of protein families. The
structural conservation of protein pockets, combined with other characteristics, can be exploited in drug discovery
procedures, in particular for the selection of the most appropriate target protein and pocket for the design of drugs
against entire protein families or subfamilies (e.g. for the development of broad-spectrum antimicrobials) or against a
specific protein (e.g. in attempting to reduce side effects).
Background
Molecular processes in the living cell are coordinated and
executed under tight regulation. Proteins play a fundamental role in almost all biological processes, and their
overall activity is regulated at different levels [1]. At a first
level, the concentration of a particular protein in the cell
is regulated through its synthesis rate (gene expression)
and its degradation rate. At another level, mechanisms
* Correspondence: xavier.daura@uab.cat
1

Institute of Biotechnology and Biomedicine (IBB), Universitat Autònoma de
Barcelona (UAB), Bellaterra, E-08193, Spain

Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

act on the protein molecule itself through covalent modifications or non-covalent binding of small ligands or
other molecules. These regulatory mechanisms are not
only essential for the proper functioning of the molecular
processes that maintain life, but are also responsible for
cross-signaling and regulation processes between an
organism and its environment.
Many metabolic enzymes, signalling proteins and transcription factors, among others, are regulated allosterically. Allosteric regulation has been studied for more than
50 years and it is considered the most powerful and common way to regulate protein activity [2]. However, for

© 2010 Panjkovich and Daura; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative

BioMed Central Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Panjkovich and Daura BMC Structural Biology 2010, 10:9
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6807/10/9

most known cases of allosterism, the atomic details that
explain the functional relationship between distant sites
on the same protein molecule have not been elucidated
[3,4].
Many pharmaceutical compounds act through allosteric regulation, as seen in the case of paclitaxel (Paxol), a
cancer therapeutic drug that regulates tubulin polymerization allosterically [5,6]. Even though active sites represent the classic drug-target pocket (e.g. Aspirin and
cyclooxygenase), allosteric sites present advantages over
active sites in the context of drug design. Enzymatic
activity usually involves charged transition states and the
substrates are not always drug-like. Thus, orally active
inhibitors that complement these sites can be very difficult to obtain. Moreover, allosteric sites may allow the
discovery of not only novel drug-like inhibitors, but activators as well [2,3].
In this context, predicting allosteric sites computationally is of great interest. Allosteric sites have been predicted using structural information [7] and phylogeny [8].
Recently, methods have been developed in order to model
or predict the relationship between allosteric and active
sites [9-11]. These methods represent an important step
forward in the understanding of allosterism. However,
these studies are limited by the low quantity of readily
available data on allosteric sites. As stated by Thornton
and collaborators in their recent review [4], this is due in
part to the lack of a formal database that organizes and
stores knowledge on allosteric proteins and the corresponding mechanisms.
To unveil common patterns underlying allosterism,
given that these exist, a large-scale study using structural
and sequence data would be necessary. However, given
the present scenario of scarce allosteric-site data, we
decided to perform a large-scale analysis of protein
ligand-binding pockets, as these represent potential locations of functional and allosteric or regulatory sites. Our
approach is supported by the concept that besides naturally ocurring allosteric sites, serendipitous sites -having
no natural ligand but effectively being an allosteric site
given an appropriate ligand- may be of great pharmacological interest [2]. Examples of previously unknown
allosteric sites discovered on already solved protein structures [12,13] support the idea that orphan or serendipitous allosteric sites exist which may lack a known natural
effector, but provide an excellent opportunity for drug
discovery approches such as virtual screening. Hardy and
Wells also suggest that the large amount of 'crystallization
artifacts' present in the Protein Data Bank (PDB) [14],
such as ligands co-crystallized in unexpected binding
sites, could hint the presence of previously unknown
allosteric sites [2].
A large database of protein structures and associated
small-molecule ligands is available [15] and has been used

Page 2 of 14

to predict ligand-binding sites by homology [16]. However, small-molecule ligands are not always easy to cocrystallize and we did not want to limit our study to only
such cases. In this context, ligand-binding sites can be
computationally predicted from structure alone with reasonable accuracy [17-20]. To our knowledge, ligand-binding pockets as predicted directly from structure [19] have
not been studied or characterized at large-scale yet, even
though they represent the potential location of yet
unknown effectors [2].
Functional pockets in proteins have been previously
characterized in terms of their flexibility [21,22], evolutionary conservation [21,23] and electrostatic potential
[24] and these characteristics have been used to predict
their presence and location in the protein structure [23].
Evolutionary conservation is a common characteristic of
biologically functional sites. However, until now it has
been exploited solely at the sequence level [23]. Although
sequence and structural conservation correlate, structure
is closer to function and may be conserved even in the
lack of a sequence-level signal [25]. Despite this, to our
knowledge, an approach based on the structural conservation of protein pockets has not been previously used.
Here, we introduce a simple methodology to study pockets at the protein family level, consisting in the identification of pockets present in equivalent positions across
different structures of the same protein family. To parameterize the method, we used protein pockets that
matched known active sites, as these are well annotated
[26,27]. Once parameterized, we applied the method to
all protein structures available in the PDB [14], leading to
the identification of protein pockets for thousands of different protein families [26]. Next, we compared the levels
of structural conservation with other pocket characteristics estimated on the same protein families, such as
sequence level conservation, backbone flexibility and
electrostatic potential.
In the following sections we also discuss the results of
this analysis for a small set of biological examples which
illustrate the relevance of structural conservation in
studying protein functional and regulatory sites. Finally,
we perform an estimation of the amount of potentially
paired regulatory and functional sites that may exist in
the entire data set.

Results and Discussion
Initial structural data set

To acquire a large-scale perspective on the conservation
of protein pockets, we gathered all available protein
structures from the Protein Data Bank (PDB) [14]. We
applied a set of filtering criteria to ensure the quality and
relevance of the structural data before grouping the
structures by protein families, as defined by the Protein
families database (Pfam) [26]. To partially cope with the

Panjkovich and Daura BMC Structural Biology 2010, 10:9
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6807/10/9

inherent bias present in the PDB, where proteins tend to
be over- or under-represented [28], we selected a set of
representative structures for each protein family (see
Methods). The final data set covered 4,258 different Pfam
protein families and was composed of a total of 22,312
distinct protein structures (maximum 95% sequence
identity), on which we predicted the location of 167,648
putative ligand-binding pockets by means of the LIGSITEcs program [19].
Identifying equivalent pockets across different protein
structures

The first step to estimate the structural conservation of
protein pockets was to identify those that appeared at
equivalent positions in different structures of the same
family. Briefly, for each protein family the pockets predicted for a representative set of structurally aligned proteins [29] were clustered following the approach
described in the Methods section. The clustering method
requires a threshold distance to select equivalent pockets
across superimposed structures. After visual inspection
of preliminary results, we observed that this parameter
would be related to the structural fluctuation present in
each protein family. We decided to use known active sites
as a reference to define this parameter, as we were able to
map a total of 8,046 pockets (covering 319 distinct protein families) to Pfam-annotated or predicted active-site
residues unambiguously (see Methods). If the active site
is well conserved across the whole protein family, an ideal
clustering method would include all active sites of the different structures in the same cluster (true positives),
without including any non-active site pockets (false positives). After benchmarking a range of different values (see
Table 1), we defined the family-specific distance threshold to be 2.0 Å plus the average RMSD observed when
superimposing the representative structures of the pro-

Page 3 of 14

tein family. This approach showed a good compromise
between true positives (including an average of 76.5% of
all active sites) and false positives (including 8.95% of
non-active site pockets), as shown in Table 1. For the
families included in this study, the average value observed
for the family-specific threshold was 4.5 Å.
Assessing the structural conservation of pockets on protein
families

After parameterizing the clustering method using active
sites as reference, we applied it to all protein families having at least 5 representative structures in the data set (a
total of 1,128 protein families satisfied this requisite). We
then analyzed the resulting clusters of pockets in terms of
the percentage of representative structures covered by
each cluster. A very well conserved pocket would be
expected to appear in all representative structures of the
protein family, i.e. 100% coverage. Thus, this coverage can
be taken (and will be taken throughout this study) as a
measure of the pocket's structural conservation within
the protein family. This analysis was performed, for each
family, for the first three clusters and for the cluster containing the largest amount of active sites (active-site cluster). The results are illustrated in Figure 1. Note that
cluster ranking is based on average pocket size and coverage as described in the Methods, and that the active site
cluster overlaps with the 1st, 2nd and 3rd clusters in 117,
38 and 13 families, respectively.
According to the histograms in this figure, the higher
the coverage of the active site cluster the higher its frequency in the ensemble of families. This, which should be
expected for pockets that are functionally relevant at the
family level, is also applicable to the distribution of cluster 1 but not to those of clusters 2 and 3. Yet, the coverage
distributions of clusters 2 and 3 suggest that they could be
important at a sub-family level, remaining compatible

Table 1: Parameterization. Performance of the clustering algorithm when grouping known active sites.
Fixed distance value (Å)

% total active sites

% non active sites

0.0

59.60

4.46

1.0

69.89

5.31

2.0

76.47

8.95

3.0

79.13

13.67

4.0

82.78

17.30

5.0

83.50

23.04

6.0

86.71

27.90

7.0

87.43

34.68

8.0

87.62

41.97

9.0

88.24

49.59

10.0

89.29

56.87

Panjkovich and Daura BMC Structural Biology 2010, 10:9
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6807/10/9

Page 4 of 14

and electrostatic potential [24]. These parameters may be
useful in distinguishing pockets that are conserved
because of their biological function from pockets that are
conserved because of structural restraints.
Comparison with other pocket characteristics
Sequence conservation

Figure 1 Structural conservation. Histograms displaying protein
family coverage of different pocket clusters, for a total of 1,128 protein
families with five or more representatives in the data set.

with an allosteric function which may have different faces
within the same protein family. In global terms, the average coverage of the first cluster or most conserved pocket
of the 1,128 protein families analyzed is 85%. Of these
1,128 protein families, 398 (35%) show at least one pocket
cluster that covers 100% of the protein-family representatives, while 884 (78%) present a pocket cluster that covers
at least 75% of the protein family.
These results show that for the majority of the protein
families analyzed there is at least one pocket with high
levels of structural conservation. We expected a high frequency of conserved pockets among enzymes, but not all
protein families in the data set have been annotated with
a biological activity that is related to a pocket in the protein structure. A structurally conserved pocket whose
biological function has not been described is an optimal
candidate for further computational and experimental
analysis. For example, in the context of drug design and
discovery, the information on whether a pocket on the
target protein is structurally conserved or not may be
useful when designing a wide-spectrum or a specific
drug, respectively, and in choosing the appropriate
ligand-binding site for virtual screening. Clearly a pocket
that is very well conserved at the structural level may not
necessarily have functional properties but be the consequence of structural restraints common across the protein family. Nevertheless, it may still be of interest to
explore its possible exploitation as a serendipitous allosteric site for a therapeutic application [2].
Before further exploring these possibilies, we analyzed
the degree of correlation between structural conservation
and other properties often used for the characterization
of protein pockets, such as evolutionary conservation at
the sequence level [18,21,23], protein flexibility [21,22]

Biologically relevant residues tend to be conserved at the
sequence level [30]. In this context, the degree of conservation of the residues defining a protein cavity may be
taken as a measure of the cavity's conservation [18-20].
The statistical significance of this measure can be then
tested by comparing the levels of sequence conservation
in the pocket and in the rest of the protein (see Methods).
Although structure is in general more conserved than
sequence [25], the two characteristics are related. To analyze the relationship between sequence and structural
conservation for pocket clusters across protein families,
we quantified sequence conservation as the percentage of
pockets in the cluster that are significantly conserved at
the sequence level. The structural and sequence conservation values for clusters 1 to 3 of all protein families with
at least five representative structures are compared in the
left panel of Figure 2. It is shown that there is a relatively
small correlation between sequence conservation and
structural conservation of the pockets, with the highest
density (62% of the population) at the 0-5% sequenceconservation end of the distribution. Yet sequence conservation is clearly peaked also at the 95-100% end (12%
of the population), indicating that in general structurally
conserved pockets (pocket clusters) may be well conserved at the sequence level, or not at all, leaving few
cases in between.
One may argue that pocket clusters displaying high
sequence and structural conservation may match biologically functional pockets across the protein family, while
clusters displaying only structural conservation may
often play a purely structural role. In relation to this, and
giving the conservation percentages the right context, it
should be noted that a large proportion of the protein
families included in this analysis may not present a biological activity that is related to a particular pocket in the
structure. Nevertheless, some pockets may be biologically relevant, despite a lack of sequence conservation. An
example of this is given by L-lactate dehy-drogenase
(LDH), for which the allosteric site [31] is very well conserved at the structural level (89.8%), but shows no signal
of sequence conservation (0.0%) in this analysis. We
describe the LDH case in further detail below.
As discussed above, pockets that are conserved at the
structural level but have not been previously described as
ligand-binding sites may be evaluated as potential orphan
or serendipitous allosteric sites and targeted for drug discovery and design. The low sequence conservation we

Panjkovich and Daura BMC Structural Biology 2010, 10:9
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6807/10/9

Page 5 of 14

Figure 2 Sequence conservation. Two-dimensional histograms comparing structural and sequence conservation for pocket clusters of the different
families in our data set. The left panel displays the values for pocket clusters 1 to 3 of 1,128 distinct protein families and the right panel shows the
distribution for clusters containing the majority of active sites for 229 protein families. Only families with at least five representative structures are included in the analysis.

observed in many of the structurally conserved pockets
indicates that even though the pocket is detected in the
same location, the residues defining the pocket are not
under direct evolutionary pressure and may vary in type.
This variation in residue composition could aid the
design of highly specific drugs that would bind only certain members of the protein family.
We performed the same distribution analysis for pocket
clusters that included the largest amount of active sites in
the corresponding protein families, with results displayed
in the right panel of Figure 2. In this case, the largest population corresponds to high levels of both sequence and
structural conservation, as expected, although numerous
exceptions appear in this set as well. Some exceptions rise
because not all members of a given Pfam protein family
may be enzymatically active (e.g. Globin).
Note that the level of sequence conservation of each
cluster is estimated from its member pockets and is independent of the weight of the cluster in the set of familyrepresentative structures. A sequence conservation of
100% means that every single pocket in the cluster is significantly conserved at the sequence level, although the
cluster may only cover half of the protein family, i.e. 50%
structural conservation. This is also valid for the flexibility and electrostatic-potential analyses described below.
Flexibility

Protein function is fundamentally linked to dynamics. In
this context, the properties of a protein's ligand-binding
site are to an important extent a function of the site's flexibility, entropy being an essential component of the free
energy of binding. Thus, relatively small changes in flexibility often have a large effect on ligand-binding affinites

[32]. Moreover, some allosteric sites regulate protein
function by modifying the protein's flexibility upon ligand
binding [2,9,33].
Flexibility may be estimated on a residue basis from
structural B factors. This has been previously used, for
example, to show that active sites tend to be more rigid
than the rest of the enzyme structure [21,22].
We analyzed the flexibility of residues forming part of
pockets and determined if they showed significantly
higher or lower values of flexibility than the rest of the
protein's backbone, classifying them as 'flexible' or 'rigid',
respectively, as described in the Methods section. We
then compared the percentage of significantly rigid or
flexible pockets found in the different pocket clusters
with their structural conservation. The results are illustrated in Figure 3. These results show very few cases
where pockets are significantly more flexible than the rest
of the protein, and these few cases (clusters 1-3, left
panel) tend to be poorly conserved in terms of structure.
However, the structural conservation of a very flexible
pocket would be probably hard to quantify by our
method, given that a large degree of structural variation
would to some extent impede its detection across different proteins of the same family. Even in average cases,
member pockets of the same cluster can display large differences in shape and volume, as seen in the case of LDH
described below.
The lower panels of Figure 3 show a wide distribution
of significantly rigid pockets. This means that within a
family, the levels of flexibility for the same pocket may
differ from structure to structure considerably. These
results were expected to a certain level, since flexibility

Panjkovich and Daura BMC Structural Biology 2010, 10:9
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6807/10/9

Page 6 of 14

Figure 3 Flexibility. Two-dimensional histograms comparing structural conservation and flexibility for pocket clusters of the different families in the
data set. The panels on the left display the values for pocket clusters 1 to 3 of 1,128 distinct protein families and the right panels show the distribution
for clusters containing the majority of active sites for 229 protein families. The top panels show the percentage of pockets that were significantly flexible when compared to the rest of the structure, while the bottom panels show the percentage of pockets found to be significantly rigid (less flexible)
than the rest of the corresponding protein structure. These plots only include protein families with at least five representative structures.

may vary under different experimental conditions of
structure determination and it may as well be modified by
the presence of bound ligands or other proteins [32]. In
the case of active site pocket clusters, the lower-right
panel of Figure 3 displays a stronger signal for structural
conservation than for rigidity.
Protein flexibility is a major issue for ligand virtual
screening and design [34]. Although key residues in
active sites, such as those involved in catalysis, tend to be
rigid [21,22], they coexist with regions of high flexibility,
which are necessary to allow for ligand exchange. When
searching for other possible ligand-binding sites for the
screening and design of effector molecules, one will usually target pockets that are sufficently flexible that bind-

ing will not be blocked by high free-energy barriers
(involving conformational rearrangements) but at the
same time sufficiently rigid that computational docking
will be reliable and that there will not be a sizable
entropic penalty due to a potentialy large loss of flexibility
upon ligand binding (which would need to be compensated enthalpically for effective binding). The analysis
shown here might provide a basis to select structurally
conserved pockets with specific flexibility properties.
Electrostatic potential

The electrostatic potential, as estimated by solving the
Poisson-Boltzmann equation for protein structures with
force-field-based charge distributions [35] has been previously used to characterize and predict enzymatic active

Panjkovich and Daura BMC Structural Biology 2010, 10:9
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6807/10/9

sites [24]. For each pocket in the data set we estimated the
electrostatic potential at the pocket's center of mass as
described in the Methods section and computed the average value over the pockets for each of the first three
pocket clusters in every protein family. The combined
distribution of average electrostatic potential and structural conservation of pocket clusters is shown in Figure 4.
Clearly, this property does not correlate either with structural conservation. Most values cluster between -5 and
2.5 kT/e, even for active site pockets. However, this measure is probably the least conserved across the different
pockets of a given cluster. In fact, for 42.4% of the pocket
clusters included in the left panel of Figure 4, the standard deviation is larger than the average absolute value. It
appears that the pocket's electrostatic potential, as estimated here, is largely protein specific, and that this measure is hard to extrapolate across the different proteins in
a family. Nevertheless, the values of electrostatic potential can still be used in refining the selection of pockets
for drug-screening procedures, given that drug-like
ligands may be easier to find for more neutral sites than
for strongly charged or polarized pockets [2]. These values could also be used to distinguish putative active sites
from allosteric sites in the lack of proper annotation (see
PIG-L below).
Biological examples

To complement the large-scale perspective presented
above we analyzed a few protein families in more detail.
The examples described below emphasize the relevance
of structural conservation in the study of allosteric and
functional protein pockets.

Page 7 of 14

L-lactate dehydrogenase

L-lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) catalyzes the reduction of
pyruvate by NADH to L-lactate in the last step of glycolysis. Certain bacterial LDHs, in contrast to their mammalian counterparts, display allosteric regulation by fructose
1,6-bisphosphate (FBP) [36]. Iwata and co-workers solved
the structure of LDH ([PDB:1LTH]) in both active (R) and
inactive (T) states, co-crystallized with the allosteric activator [31]. The Ldh_1_C domain in the R state (relaxed or
active) of LDH is displayed in Figure 5A with the bound
allosteric activator and pocket clusters 1, 2 and 4, as calculated for this family. Figures 5B-F show examples of
distinct member pockets matching cluster 1 in the LDH
protein family.
The active site in this protein matches pocket clusters 2
and 4. Both clusters are very well conserved at the
sequence level with, respectively, 92.1% and 77.8% of the
included pockets being significantly conserved. These
active-site pockets are also well conserved at the structural level: cluster 2 appears on 75.5% of the representative structures while cluster 4 appears on 65.3% and,
when considered together, at least one of them appears
on 94% of the protein family. Interestingly, the pocket
cluster with the highest structural conservation (cluster
1), corresponds to the allosteric site (Figure 5). In this
case the allosteric cluster covers the majority of representative structures for this family (89.8%). However, the
average sequence conservation signal is very low (-0.12)
and we found none of the 51 pockets included in this
cluster to be significantly conserved at the sequence level.
This means that an evolutionary analysis based purely on
sequence information would not find this site to be signif-

Figure 4 Electrostatic potential. Two-dimensional histograms comparing structural conservation and electrostatic potential for pocket clusters of
the different families in the data set. The panels on the left display the values for pocket clusters 1 to 3 of 1,128 distinct protein families and the right
panels show the distribution for clusters containing the majority of active sites for 229 protein families. These plots only include protein families with
at least five representative structures.

Panjkovich and Daura BMC Structural Biology 2010, 10:9
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6807/10/9

Page 8 of 14

Figure 5 LDH pocket clusters. A) LDH structure ([PDB:1LTH], chain R, residues 150-317 which correspond to Pfam Ldh_1_C domain). Pocket clusters
are displayed as the centers of mass of member pockets in 'spheres' representation (cluster 1: red, 2: green, 4: blue). The allosteric effector fructose 1,6bisphosphate is displayed in 'sticks' representation next to cluster 1. Clusters 2 and 4 match the active site of LDH, while cluster 1 matches the allosteric
site. B) Member pocket of cluster 1, found in structure [PDB:1SOV]. The center of mass of the pocket is displayed in 'spheres' representation while the
volume of the actual cavity is shown in 'mesh' representation, both in orange color. C) The member pocket displayed in 'B' is shown in its relative
position to the allosteric site cluster 1. Cluster 1 is shown in semi-transparent red 'surface' representation, similar as in A). D) The cluster 1 member
pocket of [PDB:1SOV] displayed in orange in its relative position to other member pockets of the same cluster 1. The member pocket in purple was
predicted on structure [PDB:1MLD], while the blue 'sphere' represents the center of mass of the member pocket found in yet another structure
([PDB:2A92]). F) Detail on the shape of the member pocket found in structure [PDB:2A92]. Structural orientations were kept constant (after protein
backbone superimposition) to illustrate the varied shapes and volumes that member pockets of a single pocket cluster may display.

ically conserved, while the structure-based approach
points it out as the most conserved pocket in this protein
family.
The allosteric site cluster is remarkable in terms of flexibility as well, with 81.2% of included pockets being significantly rigid (see Methods). In the case of PDB entry
[PDB:1LTH], there is a clear difference in the global flexibility values we calculated for the R (0.43) and T (-0.56)
structures of the protein, corresponding to the active and
inactive states, respectively. However, the allosteric site
pocket shows consistently low values, -0.52 and -0.93 for
R and T, respectively, with both pockets being significantly rigid according to the statistical test (p-values of
0.0008 and 0.0012, respectively). The active site in
[PDB:1LTH] shows no significant differences in terms of
flexibility when compared to the rest of the structure,
although as expected, differences between the T and R
states are also observed. The rigidity of the active site
pockets through the whole family is not clear from the
data, as 69.4% and 25.7% of the pockets are significantly
rigid for clusters 2 and 4, respectively.
In the [PDB:1LTH] entry, the estimated electrostatic
potential for the allosteric and active site have different
values, with 1.22 and -8.09 kT/e, respectively, for the R
state and similar values for the T state (1.36 and -5.73 kT/

e respectively). This case matches the concept that active
sites may bind more polar or charged molecules, while
the allosteric site may bind more drug-like ligands [2].
When averaging these values over the corresponding
member pockets, the standard deviation is close in magnitude to the values obtained, being 2.04 kT/e for the
allosteric site cluster and -3.73 kT/e for the active site
cluster 2. As discussed above, the electrostatic potential
estimations tend to vary largely from structure to structure and thus are hard to extrapolate across the different
proteins in a family.
Briefly, in this protein family we found the active site to
match expected characteristics of biologically relevant
pockets, being very well conserved both in terms of
sequence and structure. The allosteric site, despite being
very well conserved in terms of structure, does not
appear to be conserved at the sequence level.
ADP Ribosylation factor 1

ADP-ribosylation factors (ARFs) are essential and ubiquitous in eukaryotes, being involved in vesicular transport
and functioning as activators of phospholipase D and
cholera toxin [37]. ARF activity is regulated by the binding and hydrolysis of GTP. The atomic structure
[PDB:1HUR] shows the allosteric regulator bound to the
protein [37], matching the position of cavity clusters 1

Panjkovich and Daura BMC Structural Biology 2010, 10:9
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6807/10/9

Page 9 of 14

Table 2: Arf pocket clusters.
Cluster

structural
conservation (%)

sequence
conservation (%)

% flexible

% rigid

1

62.5

2

87.5

100.0

0.0

63.6

0.0

14.3

14.3

3

81.3

100.0

0.0

76.9

4

43.8

14.3

42.9

42.9

5

93.8

100.0

0.0

60.0

Properties of the principal pocket clusters of the Arf protein family. The structural conservation corresponds to the percentage of
representative structures where a pocket of this cluster is present, the sequence conservation represents the percentage of pockets that are
significantly conserved at the sequence level. The last two columns correspond to the percentages of significantly flexible or rigid pockets
detected in the corresponding cluster.

and 3 as displayed in Figure 6. Both clusters matching the
allosteric site show high levels of structural and sequence
conservation as summarized in Table 2. These clusters
also tend to be rigid, with clusters 1 and 3 having 63.6%
and 76.9% of their pockets significantly rigid, respectively.
Cluster 1 matches the pyrophosphate group of GDP
and the Mg ion as displayed in Figure 6. This cluster covers 62.5% of the representative structures of this protein
family and we found all of the included pockets to be significantly conserved at the sequence level. The numbers
for cluster 3 are similar, as 100% of its pockets are signifi-

Figure 6 Arf pocket clusters. Human ADP-Ribosylation factor 1 structure ([PDB:1HUR], chain A which corresponds to Pfam Arf domain). The
first five pocket clusters of this protein family are displayed by showing
the centers of mass of the member pockets in 'spheres' representation
(cluster 1: red, 2: green, 3: orange, 4: blue, 5: purple). The allosteric activator GDP is displayed in 'sticks' representation next to cluster 1, the
Mg ion is colored yellow. Cluster 1 matches the pyrophosphate group
of GDP and cluster 3 matches the pyrimidine-imidazole region of the
allosteric ligand.

cantly conserved at the sequence level and are detected
on 81.3% of the representative structures of this protein
family. This cluster matches the pyrimidine-imidazole
part of GDP as displayed in Figure 6.
We do not know the biological function, if any, of the
pockets represented by the rest of the clusters displayed
in Figure 6. Although cluster 2 shows a high level of structural conservation covering 87.5% of the family, the
pocket is not significantly conserved at the sequence
level. Another interesting cluster is number 5, which
appears on 93.8% of the structures and has a sequence
conservation of 100%. This cluster is also rigid, with 60%
of its pockets being significantly rigid, similarly to the
clusters matching the allosteric site. It is interesting that
cluster 4 shows almost half of its pockets to be significantly rigid and the other half to be significantly flexible
as indicated by the values in Table 2. Initially we thought
that this could be related to co-crystallized ligands affecting the flexibility of particular pockets through binding,
but none of the analyzed structures presented a ligand in
this position. We compared two structures corresponding to this family, namely PDB entry [PDB:1Z6X] (where
the corresponding pocket is significantly flexible) and
[PDB:1FZQ] (where the pocket was found to be sig-nificantly rigid). The rigid pocket in [PDB:1FZQ] was located
next to an α-helix, while the same region in [PDB:1Z6X]
lacked secondary structure presenting a loop-like conformation. It is remarkable that a pocket may be consistently
found in two structures of the same family in a region
with diverse secondary structure arrangements and levels
of local backbone flexibility. Given that flexibility plays an
important role in binding affinity [32], structurally conserved pockets may present distinct binding dynamics
that can be exploited in the design of highly specific
drugs.
Prediction of allosteric sites

The idea that yet undiscovered allosteric sites may be
found in already solved structures has been mentioned in

Panjkovich and Daura BMC Structural Biology 2010, 10:9
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6807/10/9

Page 10 of 14

a review by Hardy and Wells [2], in which they show various examples of previously undescribed allosteric sites
found by serendipity. This concept, along with the few
cases we examined in detail, prompted us to estimate the
number of putative allosteric sites that may be found in
the structural data set. We defined a simple estimator
that consisted in scanning the data set for pairs of pocket
clusters that are conserved at the structural level and are
at least 8 Å appart (centroids distance). We performed
this analysis on 1,128 protein families for which we had at
least 5 representative structures. The results are presented in Table 3. A surprisingly large percentage of protein families (90.6%) presents at least one pair of pocket
clusters that are both structurally conserved and at least 8
Å apart. A smaller fraction (54%) of protein families displays also a sequence conservation signal. If we also
require one of the pockets to match active site annotations [38], the numbers are smaller but relatively large, i.e.
for the total of 258 protein families in the database with
an active site annotation, 207 (80.2%) present another
structurally conserved pocket that is located at a distance
of at least 8 Å.
For example, we found such a pair of pocket clusters on
the structures corresponding to the PIG-L Pfam family.
One of theses structures ([PDB:1Q7T]) corresponds to
MshB from Mycobacterium tuberculosis and is considered a potential therapeutic target [39]. This protein lacks
active site annotation in Pfam [38] or in the Catalytic Site
Atlas [27]. However, the group of Baker et al. localized
the active site when determining the protein's structure
[39]. The active site predicted by Baker and co-workers
matches cluster 2 in our predictions and is highly conserved both at the structure (100%) and sequence (80%)
levels. Cluster 1 in this family is represented in all structures, although it shows no sign of sequence conservation. In the solved structure, it appears close to the
location of a ligand referred to as a crystallization artifact

[39]. Moreover, while the active-site-matching cluster
shows a strong average electrostatic potential of -7.89 kT/
e, cluster 1 presents a much more neutral average value of
-1.23 kT/e. Cluster 3 presents also high levels of structural conservation (80%) and, in addition, of sequence
level conservation (75%). Both clusters 1 and 3 would be
interesting candidates for virtual screening in the search
for an allosteric effector ligand.
On the large-scale perspective, the large amounts of
putative allosteric sites we have counted may be an overestimation. Many of these cases may represent pockets
that are merely the consequence of structural or functional requirements in other regions of the protein. It
would be interesting to test for functional links between
these regions [8,11]. However, many protein families do
not necessarily perform functions that are associated to a
certain pocket, such as the ADP Ribosylation factor discussed above. In these cases, it would not be necessary to
find a pair of conserved pockets at a certain distance,
since the regulatory site may be a pocket while the protein activity itself may not take place via such a structural
feature.

Conclusions
We have developed a simple methodology to estimate the
structural conservation of protein pockets, based on their
position and size, and have applied it to the large amount
of publicly available structural data, covering 4,258 distinct protein families and 22,312 protein structures. The
analysis reported here indicates that the presence of
structurally conserved pockets is a common feature
across protein families and, in some cases, is accompanied by distinctive pocket characteristics in terms of
sequence conservation, flexibility or electrostatic potential. Although correlations between the latter properties
and structural conservation appear to be low in general,
there is, as expected, a higher correlation between pocket

Table 3: Pairs of conserved distant pocket clusters, allosteric sites prediction.
Conservation thresholds (%)

# protein
families

structural

sequence

total

sequence
conserved*

active site match

both

50

50

1,022

614

207

165

50

75

1,022

484

207

136

75

50

434

264

93

76

75

75

434

207

93

61

Protein families for which we found a pair of structurally conserved pocket clusters at least 8 Å appart of each other. We used 50% and 75%
as the structural conservation thresholds for each pocket cluster in each pair combined as shown in the first column with the sequence
conservation threshold. *At least one of the pocket clusters was found to have at least 50% or 75% of its pockets significantly conserved at
the sequence level. These results cover 1,128 protein families for which we had at least 5 representative structures.

Panjkovich and Daura BMC Structural Biology 2010, 10:9
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6807/10/9

structure and sequence conservation for active sites than
for other types of annotated or putative ligand-binding
pockets. Conserved pockets that lack annotation may
represent new opportunities for drug discovery
approaches such as virtual screening. In antimicrobialdiscovery projects, for example, knowledge of the extent
to which a putative ligand-binding site is present across a
given protein family (i.e. orthologous proteins in a range
of species or genuses) can be applied to the design of
broad-spectrum drugs, as well as in dealing with drug
toxicity, given that an ideal binding site for an antimicrobial would be present in proteins across many pathogenic
species but not in a human homolog. In turn, additional
pocket properties such as those considered here may be
used for fine selection among pockets with the required
level of structural conservation. Thus, we have shown
specific examples illustrating that sequence conservation
and electrostatic potential may be in some instances used
to distinguish active sites from allosteric sites, the latter
having a lower sequence-conservation signal and a more
neutral potential in these examples. The data generated
in this study is available upon request.

Methods
Structural data set

We organized the large number of structures available at
the Protein Data Bank (PDB) [14] in protein families by
querying all protein sequences, derived from the atomic
coordinates of PDB entries, against the Pfam database
(release 23.0) [26]. We performed all sequence-based
queries by means of the HMMER software suite [40].
To ensure the quality of the structural data and its relevance to our study, we applied a set of filtering criteria.
We evaluated the stereochemistry of protein structures
using the PROCHECK program [41] and removed from
our data set entries with a G-Factor value lower than 1.00. In the case of structures solved by crystallographic
techniques, we also required a resolution of at least 3.0 Å.
Entries not solved by Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
(NMR) lacking a resolution value were discarded, independently of the technique used. We also discarded Pfam
entries of type 'Motif' or 'Repeat', keeping only types
'Family' and 'Domain' that were assigned to structural
regions spanning at least 30 residues.
All structures in our data set were parsed and organized
according to the Pfam entry they were assigned to. However, given the bias present in the PDB [28], a protein
family would be poorly represented by a redundant set
containing all related structures. To partially remediate
this, we clustered the structures in each Pfam entry
according to sequence identity (95%) using completelinkage hierarchical clustering. For each of the obtained
clusters, the structure with the best resolution was chosen as the group representative.

Page 11 of 14

Predicting ligand-binding pockets at the protein-family
level

To compare the spatial positions of potential ligand-binding pockets in different structures of the same protein
family, we first superimposed the representative structures to a common reference by means of the MAMMOTH program [29]. The protein with the longest
sequence in the family was taken as reference for the
structural fit. If length alone failed to select a single reference structure, we used resolution as the second selection
parameter.
We proceeded to predict putative ligand-binding pockets on the fitted structures using the LIGSITEcs program
[19]. Residues were assigned to pockets according to a
common distance criterion, which includes all residues
within 8 Å of the pre-calculated pocket's center of mass
[19]. Note that the standalone version of the LIGSITEcs
program we used is different from the LIGSITEcsc version also mentioned in [19], as the former does not incorporate residue conservation as a parameter.
At this point, for each protein family we had a group of
superimposed representative protein structures for which
the location of putative ligand-binding pockets had been
predicted. We then grouped together pockets found consistently in the same position in different representative
structures of the same protein family using the clustering
method described below. The calculated clusters were
finally ranked according to the average size of their member pockets and the percentage number of family representatives featuring the pocket (coverage).
Clustering of pockets

We clustered putative ligand-binding pockets found in
different representative structures, previously superimposed, of a protein family using a modified version of a
previously described clustering algorithm [42]. In this
case, the elements to cluster are the centers of mass of
pockets and the metric used to define distances between
elements is the Euclidean distance. The clustering algorithm makes no distinction between pockets belonging to
different, superimposed structures or to the same structure. Given that the degree of structural diversity among
representatives of a protein family varies across protein
families, the threshold to the metric for the definition of
neighbor elements was chosen to be family specific, as
described in the Results section. Unlike the previous
implementation of the algorithm, cluster selection is not
made by straight neighbor counting but by the sum of
neighbor pocket sizes, as predicted by LIGSITEcs [19].
The algorithm outline is as follows: (1) the center of
mass of each predicted pocket (element) in the set of representative structures of a protein family is assigned a
parameter corresponding to the size of the pocket; (2) the
Euclidean distance between every pair of elements is cal-

Panjkovich and Daura BMC Structural Biology 2010, 10:9
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6807/10/9

Page 12 of 14

culated; (3) a threshold distance is applied to identify the
neighbors of each element in the family; (4) each element
is scored by the sum of its size parameter with those of all
its neighbors; (5) the element with the highest score is
chosen as the center of a cluster, which is formed by all its
neighbors; (6) the members of the selected cluster are
removed from the pool of elements and the procedure is
repeated until the pool is empty; (7) clusters are ranked
according to their score, calculated as
n
∑ c size i
Score c = Strc * i =1
nc

(1)

structure by applying the Wilcoxon-Mann-Whitney nonparametric test. We defined as significant those cases
where the p-value <= 0.05.
Electrostatic potential

We estimated the electrostatic protential at the center of
mass of the protein ligand-binding pockets by means of
the DELPHI software suite [35], which provides finitedifference solutions to the Poisson-Boltzmann equation.
First, we added hydrogen atoms to each structure in our
data set using the REDUCE program [44], then proceeded to estimate the electrostatic potential by means of
the DELPHI program, with default parameters.
Protein backbone flexibility

where Scorec is the cluster's score, nc is the number of
pockets in the cluster, sizei is the size of member pocket i
and Strc is the cluster's coverage of the protein family or
structural conservation, as described in Results. Strc is
computed by
n
Strc = 100 * r
m

We estimated protein backbone flexibility from normalized B factors as previously described [21,22,45]. For each
Cα atom in the structure, the flexibility is equivalent to its
B factor after normalization by equation 3.
B’ =

(2)

where m is the total number of representative structures for the corresponding protein family and nr is the
number of representative structures with at least one
pocket present in the cluster.
Sequence conservation

There are multiple methods to estimate sequence conservation starting from a multiple sequence alignment
(MSA) [30]. We estimated the degree of positional conservation for every residue in our structure data set by the
following procedure: (1) We aligned all sequences in the
Pfam 'full' MSA [26] using the HMMALIGN program
[40] and the corresponding HMM profile. (2) We computed the entropy of each position of the alignment by
means of the AL2CO program [30], activating the program option that weights each sequence to partially compensate MSA composition bias [43]. (3) The entropy
values for each position in the MSA were inverted (higher
score means higher degree of conservation) and normalized by the observed standard deviation. (4) For each
Pfam entry we stored the conservation scores obtained
using the HMM profile positions as a reference. (5) We
aligned each of our structures to the corresponding
HMM profile and assigned the previously computed conservation scores to each residue.
To test if a pocket was significantly conserved at the
sequence level, we compared the sequence conservation
values obtained for all the residues within 8 Å of the center of mass of the pocket with those for all residues in the

(B−< B >)
s (B)

(3)

where < B >is the average over all Cα atoms in the
structure and σ (B) is the standard deviation. We then
define a residue's relative backbone flexibility as the B'
value of its Cα.
For NMR entries, which lack B factors, we calculated
the root-mean-square fluctuation (RMSF) of each Cα
atom over the ensemble of NMR models [46]. RMSF values may be in turn converted to pseudo B factors [47], by
B=

8*p 2
* RMSF 2
3

(4)

We tested for pockets that differed significantly from
the complete structures in terms of their flexibility. For
each pocket in each structure, we compared the values
obtained for residues within 8 Å of the center of mass of
the pocket to those for all residues in the structure by
applying the Wilcoxon-Mann-Whitney non-parametric
test. If the values for the pocket were significantly higher,
we marked the pocket as 'flexible' and if they were significantly lower, we marked the pocket as 'rigid'. We defined
as significant those cases where the p-value <= 0.05.
Mapping active site residues to pockets

Active-site residue predictions by Pfam [38] usually
involve between one and three residues. We combined
this sequence level information with the structural prediction of pockets on protein structures by mapping
active sites to predicted pockets. For each structure, we
marked as active site the pocket that included the majority of predicted active site residues.

Panjkovich and Daura BMC Structural Biology 2010, 10:9
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6807/10/9

In many cases, more than a single pocket contained one
or more active site residues. We marked these cases as
ambiguous, to distinguish them from cases where the
mapping was unambiguous, i.e. all active site residues
contained in a single pocket.
Authors' contributions
XD and AP conceived the study and wrote the manuscript. AP carried out the
computational work. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Acknowledgements
We thank Juan Cedano, Francisco Melo, Amelie Stein, Roberto Mosca, Roland
Pache and Dunja Urosev for helpful comments and technical advice. This project is supported by funding under the Seventh Research Framework Programme of the European Union (ref. HEALTH-F3-2009-223101). AP
acknowledges the FPU Scholarship from MICINN, Spanish Gov.
Author Details
1Institute of Biotechnology and Biomedicine (IBB), Universitat Autònoma de
Barcelona (UAB), Bellaterra, E-08193, Spain and 2Catalan Institution for
Research and Advanced Studies (ICREA), Barcelona, E-08010, Spain
Received: 2 January 2010 Accepted: 31 March 2010
Published: 31 March 2010
© 2010 Panjkovich andfrom: 10:9
This is an OpenBiology 2010, http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6807/10/9
BMC article is available article distributed under Central Ltd. the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
Structural Access Daura; licensee BioMed the terms of

References
1. Pardee AB: Regulatory molecular biology. Cell Cycle 2006, 5(8):846-852.
2. Hardy JA, Wells JA: Searching for new allosteric sites in enzymes. Curr
Opin Struct Biol 2004, 14(6):706-715.
3. Cui Q, Karplus M: Allostery and cooperativity revisited. Protein Sci 2008,
17(8):1295-1307.
4. Laskowski RA, Gerick F, Thornton JM: The structural basis of allosteric
regulation in proteins. FEBS Lett 2009, 583(11):1692-1698.
5. Han Y, Malak H, Chaudhary AG, Chordia MD, Kingston DG, Bane S:
Distances between the paclitaxel, colchicine, and exchangeable GTP
binding sites on tubulin. Biochemistry 1998, 37(19):6636-6644.
6. Mitra A, Sept D: Taxol allosterically alters the dynamics of the tubulin
dimer and increases the flexibility of microtubules. Biophys J 2008,
95(7):3252-3258.
7. Freire E: Can allosteric regulation be predicted from structure? Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2000, 97(22):11680-11682.
8. Lockless SW, Ranganathan R: Evolutionarily conserved pathways of
energetic connectivity in protein families. Science 1999,
286(5438):295-299.
9. Balabin IA, Yang W, Beratan DN: Coarse-grained modeling of allosteric
regulation in protein receptors. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2009,
106(34):14253-14258.
10. Kidd BA, Baker D, Thomas WE: Computation of conformational coupling
in allosteric proteins. PLoS Comput Biol 2009, 5(8):e1000484.
11. Daily MD, Gray JJ: Allosteric communication occurs via networks of
tertiary and quaternary motions in proteins. PLoS Comput Biol 2009,
5(2):e1000293.
12. Hardy JA, Lam J, Nguyen JT, O'Brien T, Wells JA: Discovery of an allosteric
site in the caspases. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2004, 101(34):12461-12466.
13. Morita K, Kawana K, Sodeyama M, Shimomura I, Kagechika H, Makishima
M: Selective allosteric ligand activation of the retinoid X receptor
heterodimers of NGFI-B and Nurr1. Biochem Pharmacol 2005, 71(12):98-107.
14. Berman HM, Westbrook J, Feng Z, Gilliland G, Bhat TN, Weissig H,
Shindyalov IN, Bourne PE: The Protein Data Bank. Nucleic Acids Res 2000,
28:235-242.
15. Stuart AC, Ilyin VA, Sali A: LigBase: a database of families of aligned
ligand binding sites in known protein sequences and structures.
Bioinformatics 2002, 18:200-201.
16. Marti-Renom MA, Rossi A, Al-Shahrour F, Davis FP, Pieper U, Dopazo J, Sali
A: The AnnoLite and AnnoLyze programs for comparative annotation
of protein structures. BMC Bioinformatics 2007, 8(Suppl 4):S4.
17. Brady GP, Stouten PF: Fast prediction and visualization of protein
binding pockets with PASS. J Comput Aided Mol Des 2000, 14(4):383-401.

Page 13 of 14

18. Glaser F, Morris RJ, Najmanovich RJ, Laskowski RA, Thornton JM: A
method for localizing ligand binding pockets in protein structures.
Proteins 2006, 62(2):479-488.
19. Huang B, Schroeder M: LIGSITEcsc: predicting ligand binding sites using
the Connolly surface and degree of conservation. BMC Struct Biol 2006,
6:19.
20. Huang B: MetaPocket: a meta approach to improve protein ligand
binding site prediction. OMICS 2009, 13(4):325-330.
21. Bartlett GJ, Porter CT, Borkakoti N, Thornton JM: Analysis of catalytic
residues in enzyme active sites. J Mol Biol 2002, 324:105-121.
22. Yuan Z, Zhao J, Wang ZX: Flexibility analysis of enzyme active sites by
crystallographic temperature factors. Protein Eng 2003, 16(2):109-114.
23. Nicola G, Smith CA, Abagyan R: New method for the assessment of all
drug-like pockets across a structural genome. J Comput Biol 2008,
15(3):231-240.
24. Bate P, Warwicker J: Enzyme/non-enzyme discrimination and
prediction of enzyme active site location using charge-based
methods. J Mol Biol 2004, 340(2):263-276.
25. Chothia C, Lesk AM: The relation between the divergence of sequence
and structure in proteins. EMBO J 1986, 5(4):823-826.
26. Finn RD, Tate J, Mistry J, Coggill PC, Sammut SJ, Hotz HR, Ceric G, Forslund
K, Eddy SR, Sonnhammer ELL, Bateman A: The Pfam protein families
database. Nucleic Acids Res 2008:D281-D288.
27. Porter CT, Bartlett GJ, Thornton JM: The Catalytic Site Atlas: a resource of
catalytic sites and residues identified in enzymes using structural data.
Nucleic Acids Res 2004:D129-D133.
28. Xie L, Bourne PE: Functional coverage of the human genome by
existing structures, structural genomics targets, and homology
models. PLoS Comput Biol 2005, 1(3):e31.
29. Ortiz AR, Strauss CEM, Olmea O: MAMMOTH (matching molecular
models obtained from theory): an automated method for model
comparison. Protein Sci 2002, 11(11):2606-2621.
30. Pei J, Grishin NV: AL2CO: calculation of positional conservation in a
protein sequence alignment. Bioinformatics 2001, 17(8):700-712.
31. Iwata S, Kamata K, Yoshida S, Minowa T, Ohta T: T and R states in the
crystals of bacterial L-lactate dehydrogenase reveal the mechanism for
allosteric control. Nat Struct Biol 1994, 1(3):176-185.
32. Teague SJ: Implications of protein flexibility for drug discovery. Nat Rev
Drug Discov 2003, 2(7):527-541.
33. Daily MD, Gray JJ: Local motions in a benchmark of allosteric proteins.
Proteins 2007, 67(2):385-399.
34. Carlson HA: Protein flexibility and drug design: how to hit a moving
target. Curr Opin Chem Biol 2002, 6(4):447-452.
35. Rocchia W, Sridharan S, Nicholls A, Alexov E, Chiabrera A, Honig B: Rapid
grid-based construction of the molecular surface and the use of
induced surface charge to calculate reaction field energies:
applications to the molecular systems and geometric objects. J
Comput Chem 2002, 23:128-137.
36. Garvie EI: Bacterial lactate dehydrogenases. Microbiol Rev 1980,
44:106-139.
37. Amor JC, Harrison DH, Kahn RA, Ringe D: Structure of the human ADPribosylation factor 1 complexed with GDP. Nature 1994,
372(6507):704-708.
38. Mistry J, Bateman A, Finn RD: Predicting active site residue annotations
in the Pfam database. BMC Bioinformatics 2007, 8:298.
39. McCarthy AA, Peterson NA, Knijff R, Baker EN: Crystal structure of MshB
from Mycobacterium tuberculosis, a deacetylase involved in mycothiol
biosynthesis. J Mol Biol 2004, 335(4):1131-1141.
40. Eddy SR: Profile hidden Markov models. Bioinformatics 1998,
14(9):755-763.
41. Laskowski RA, Rullmannn JA, MacArthur MW, Kaptein R, Thornton JM:
AQUA and PROCHECK-NMR: programs for checking the quality of
protein structures solved by NMR. J Biomol NMR 1996, 8(4):477-486.
42. Daura X, Gademann K, Jaun B, Seebach D, van Gunsteren WF, Mark AE:
Peptide Folding: When Simulation Meets Experiment. Angewandte
Chemie International Edition 1999, 38(1-2):236-240.
43. Henikoff S, Henikoff JG: Position-based sequence weights. J Mol Biol
1994, 243(4):574-578.
44. Word JM, Lovell SC, Richardson JS, Richardson DC: Asparagine and
glutamine: using hydrogen atom contacts in the choice of side-chain
amide orientation. J Mol Biol 1999, 285(4):1735-1747.

Panjkovich and Daura BMC Structural Biology 2010, 10:9
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6807/10/9

45. Carugo O, Argos P: Accessibility to internal cavities and ligand binding
sites monitored by protein crystallographic thermal factors. Proteins
1998, 31(2):201-213.
46. Wilmanns M, Nilges M: Molecular replacement with NMR models using
distance-derived pseudo B factors. Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr
1996, 52(Pt 5):973-982.
47. Willis BTM, Pryor AW: Thermal vibrations in crystallography Cambridge
University Press; 1975.
doi: 10.1186/1472-6807-10-9
Cite this article as: Panjkovich and Daura, Assessing the structural conservation of protein pockets to study functional and allosteric sites: implications
for drug discovery BMC Structural Biology 2010, 10:9

Page 14 of 14

</pre>
</body>
</html>
