<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>1477-7827-2-41.fm</title>
<meta name="Author" content="csproduction"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 7.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 5.0.5 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Reproductive Biology and
Endocrinology

BioMed Central

Open Access

Review

Derivation and characterization of monkey embryonic stem cells
K-Y Francis Pau* and Don P Wolf
Address: Primate Embryonic Stem Cell Program, Division of Reproductive Science, Oregon National Primate Research Center, Oregon Health &
Science University West Campus, Beaverton, Oregon, USA
Email: K-Y Francis Pau* - pauf@ohsu.edu; Don P Wolf - wolfd@ohsu.edu
* Corresponding author

Published: 16 June 2004
Reproductive Biology and Endocrinology 2004, 2:41

doi:10.1186/1477-7827-2-41

Received: 12 March 2004
Accepted: 16 June 2004

This article is available from: http://www.rbej.com/content/2/1/41
© 2004 Pau and Wolf; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article: verbatim copying and redistribution of this article are permitted in all
media for any purpose, provided this notice is preserved along with the article's original URL.

Abstract
Embryonic stem (ES) cell based therapy carries great potential in the treatment of
neurodegenerative diseases. However, before clinical application is realized, the safety, efficacy and
feasibility of this therapeutic approach must be established in animal models. The rhesus macaque
is physiologically and phylogenetically similar to the human, and therefore, is a clinically relevant
animal model for biomedical research, especially that focused on neurodegenerative conditions.
Undifferentiated monkey ES cells can be maintained in a pluripotent state for many passages, as
characterized by a collective repertoire of markers representing embryonic cell surface molecules,
enzymes and transcriptional factors. They can also be differentiated into lineage-specific
phenotypes of all three embryonic germ layers by epigenetic protocols. For cell-based therapy,
however, the quality of ES cells and their progeny must be ensured during the process of ES cell
propagation and differentiation. While only a limited number of primate ES cell lines have been
studied, it is likely that substantial inter-line variability exists. This implies that diverse ES cell lines
may differ in developmental stages, lineage commitment, karyotypic normalcy, gene expression, or
differentiation potential. These variables, inherited genetically and/or induced epigenetically, carry
obvious complications to therapeutic applications. Our laboratory has characterized and isolated
rhesus monkey ES cell lines from in vitro produced blastocysts. All tested cell lines carry the
potential to form pluripotent embryoid bodies and nestin-positive progenitor cells. These ES cell
progeny can be differentiated into phenotypes representing the endodermal, mesodermal and
ectodermal lineages. This review article describes the derivation of monkey ES cell lines,
characterization of the undifferentiated phenotype, and their differentiation into lineage-specific,
particularly neural, phenotypes. The promises and limitations of primate ES cell-based therapy are
also discussed.

Review
Embryonic stem (ES) cells were first derived from the
inner cell mass (ICM) of inbred mouse embryos in 1981
by Martin [1] and Evans and Kaufman [2]. Recently, ES
cells were successfully derived from non-human primate
and human embryos [3-5]. The National Institutes of
Health listed 64 human ES cell lines available for research
in 2001 [6]; however, only a few had been characterized

and studied. Similarly, less than 7 of the more than 20
monkey ES cell lines have been well characterized apart
from establishing pluripotency and genetic stability
[3,4,7-9]. Even in the mouse, most ES cell studies have
been performed with a single inbred mouse cell line
(strain 129). The extent of diversity among primate ES cell
lines is currently unknown.

Page 1 of 11
(page number not for citation purposes)

Reproductive Biology and Endocrinology 2004, 2:41

Primate and mouse ES cells are similar in their ability to
self-renew and differentiate into cells representing all
three embryonic germ layers [see [10-14] for review]. They
are different in cell/colony morphology, growth requirements and molecular signatures defining various developmental stages. For example, leukemia inhibiting factor
(LIF), a component of the LIF-gp130-STAT3 signaling
pathway [12], is able to sustain undifferentiated murine,
but not primate, ES cell growth [13]. Thus, primate ES
cells are routinely cultured on a mouse feeder layer, i.e.,
mitotically suppressed mouse embryonic fibroblasts. The
use of feeder cells greatly limits the scaled up production
of undifferentiated primate ES cell populations and the
potential contamination by mouse cells is a safety concern
when considering transplantation.
Safety is one of the most important issues for ES cell-based
therapy. In addition to mouse cell contamination, tumor
formation or other somatic cell transformations from
grafted ES cell progeny must be considered. The likelihood of transplanting pluripotent ES cells as a therapeutic
approach is low because of this problem. In contrast, their
differentiated progeny, which also survive and integrate
well in host tissues, are unlikely to form tumor cells.
Although differentiated ES cell progeny can be produced
in large quantity, enrichment and purification of the
desired phenotypes for transplantation must be ensured.
Clearly, the efficacy of ES cell-based transplantation must
be tested rigorously with each and every phenotype, preferably in non-human primate models.

Derivation of monkey ES cell lines
Existing primate ES cell lines have not been directly compared by different laboratory groups. A comparative
undertaking is important for several reasons. First, it helps
to standardize a protocol with simplified growth requirements for primate ES cell lines, or to derive a primate ES
cell line that replicates faster, is more amenable to subcloning and can be maintained in the absence of feeder
layers or conditioned medium. Second, it characterizes
cell line-specific developmental potential for studies of
primate development or in drug discovery. Finally, it is
prudent for investigators to characterize several lines
before transplantation efforts begin. The quality of ES
cells among different cell lines, especially the ability to
self-renew and differentiate into a desired lineage, must be
ascertained, at least by in vitro assessment, before selection
for transplantation studies.
Rhesus monkey ES cell lines are available (contact:wolfd@ohsu.edu) (Table 1) with eight "R" cell lines
(4 male and 4 female) derived from in vivo flushed blastocysts [3] and seven cell lines derived from in vitro produced blastocysts (ORMES-1 to -7). The latter are under
development at Oregon National Primate Research

http://www.rbej.com/content/2/1/41

Center (ONPRC) [9]. Briefly, day 9 fully expanded blastocysts were treated with a rabbit anti-rhesus spleen cell
antiserum (provided by Dr. James Thomson, Wisconsin
NPRC) for 3 h followed by exposure to a guinea pig complement for 30 min [3,15]. This "immunosurgery" procedure [15] effectively destroyed all trophoblastic cells,
exposing the ICM. After remnants of the trophoblastic
layer were cleared, individual ICM cells were plated onto
mouse feeder layers in ES cell medium. The expanded colonies were dissociated into small clumps of cells and
replated onto new feeder layers. After the first passaging,
colonies with ES cell-like morphology were selected for
propagation, characterization and storage. Most lines
(Table 1) are karyotypically normal with a diploid set of
42 chromosomes, however, ORMES-1 and -2 are stable,
balanced translocations (12,17 and 4,19, respectively;
denoted [t]). One ES cell line (366.4) has been stably
transfected with a reporter gene, eGFP, by Dr. James
Thomson. This eGFP-366.4 line has been enriched for
GFP positive cells by fluorescence-activated cell sorting
(FACS) in our laboratory. The pluripotent potential of
several lines has been tested in vivo following teratoma
formation in severely compromised immunodeficient
(SCID) mice or in vitro forming embryoid bodies (EB),
nestin-positive progenitor cells (NPC) and various glial
and neuronal phenotypes (see below).

Characterization of undifferentiated primate ES
cells
Primate ES cells are routinely cultured on mouse feeder
cells because the molecular pathway and the key molecules required to maintain pluripotency are unknown.
Our laboratory has adopted a manual method to select
undifferentiated monkey ES cells for propagation and differentiation studies [16]. The procedure can enrich a monkey ES cell population to near homogeneity as indicated
by the high percentage of cells expressing several pluripotent ES cell markers (Table 2). This unique repertoire of
markers includes the stage-specific embryonic antigens
(SSEA) 3 and 4, glycoproteins TRA-1-60 and TRA-1-81,
specific enzymes such as alkaline phosphatase and telomerase, and transcriptional factors Oct4, Rex1 and GDF-3
that are rapidly down regulated upon differentiation
[17,18]. The expression of markers such as SSEA-1 or Sox1 in primate ES cell populations indicates that some of
cells may have undergone differentiation. While none of
these markers alone carries absolute predictive value for
pluripotency, their presence as a group is highly informative (Table 2).
The ultimate identification of, and hence ability to compare, pluripotent ES cell lines might be based on genome
wide expression analysis. By applying DNA microarray
technology, a set of "stemness" genes has been tentatively
identified in different murine stem cell populations

Page 2 of 11
(page number not for citation purposes)

Reproductive Biology and Endocrinology 2004, 2:41

http://www.rbej.com/content/2/1/41

Table 1: Availability and characterization of rhesus monkey ES cell lines

Cell Line

Karyotype

Passages

Differentiation Potential

R366.4
R394.2
R475
R278.5
R420
R367B
R460
R456
ORMES-1
ORMES-2
ORMES-3
ORMES-4
ORMES-5
ORMES-6
ORMES-7
GFP-366.4

42 XY, normal
42 XX, normal
42 XX, normal
42 XY, normal
42 XX, normal
42 XY, normal
42 XY, normal
42 XX, normal
42 XY, 12/17 t
42 XY, 4/19 t
to be determined
to be determined
to be determined
42 XX, normal
to be determined
42 XY, normal

6 to 60
3 to 39
5 to 16
3 to 18
3 to 16
2 to 8
4 to 8
3 to 7
2 to 30
2 to 16
2 to 10
2 to 10
2 to 10
2 to 10
2 to 10
47 to 57

Teratoma, EB, NPC, glial and neuronal phenotypes
Teratoma, EB, NPC, glial and neuronal phenotypes
Teratoma
Teratoma
Teratoma
Teratoma
Teratoma
Teratoma
EB, NPC, glial and neuronal phenotypes
EB, NPC, glial and neuronal phenotypes
to be determined
to be determined
to be determined
to be determined
to be determined
EB, NPC, glial and neuronal phenotypes

Table 2: A conventional marker panel for identifying undifferentiated monkey ES cells

ES Cell Markers

Description

ES Cell Specificity

SSEA-3
SSEA-4
TRA-1-60
TRA-1-81
Oct4
APtase
Rex1
GDF-3
Control markers
SSEA1
AFP
CTn-1
Sox1
HCG

embryonic stage-specific; glycolipid surface antigen
embryonic stage-specific; glycolipid surface antigen
keratan sulphate-associated cell surface antigen
keratan sulphate-associated cell surface antigen
POU-domain transcription factor
alkaline phosphatase
transcription factor
growth-differentiation factor 3

Primate only
Primate only
Primate only
Primate only
Mouse and Primate
Mouse and Primate
Mouse and Primate
Mouse and Primate

embryonic stage-specific; glycolipid surface antigen
alpha fetoprotein, endoderm
cardiac troponin-1, mesoderm
transcription factor, ectoderm
human chorionic gonadotropin; trophectoderm

Mouse only
Mouse and Primate
Mouse and Primate
Mouse and Primate
Primate only

[19,20]. A similar approach has been initiated in parthenogenetic monkey ES cells [21]. Extending the analysis to
genes that are up- or down-regulated upon differentiation
[22-24] allows identification of putative genes associated
with pluripotency that, in turn, could lead to the isolation
of factors critical to the propagation of undifferentiated ES
cells in a defined medium without the confounding contamination of serum or feeder cells.

Differentiation of monkey ES cells
Primate ES cells spontaneously differentiate when cultured in serum-containing medium but in the absence of
feeder cell support. This process is hastened by aggregating ES cells in hanging drops, in suspension or in overgrowth cultures [25]. In all cases, ES cells retain the ability
to differentiate into phenotypes representing the three

embryonic germ layers. In general, the hanging drop or
suspension approach is appropriate when chemicals are
used to induce lineage-specific differentiation. This is primarily because both approaches result in the formation of
pluripotent embryoid bodies (EBs), spherical ES cell
aggregates. EBs form within days, allowing chemical
induction to occur early in differentiation without the
interference of serum or feeder cells. In contrast, the overgrowth approach usually takes weeks, enabling the selection of lineage-specific cells by morphological
assessment. For example, one interesting possibility based
on studies conducted in mice is the derivation of gametes
from ES cells. ES cell-derived gonadal germ cells were
obtained either by prolonged culture of overcrowded ES
cells forming primitive oocytes [26] or by EB formation
and induction forming spermatogonial cells [27,28].
Page 3 of 11
(page number not for citation purposes)

Reproductive Biology and Endocrinology 2004, 2:41

http://www.rbej.com/content/2/1/41

Note that it is unknown whether the gender orientation of
ES cell differentiation is genetically determined and/or
protocol-dependent. Certainly, epigenetic influences,
including cell-to-cell and cell-to-molecule interactions at
critical times, can bias ES cell differentiation toward a single lineage. It has been postulated that ES cells in culture
will differentiate toward the neural lineage by default
[29], i.e., without genetic or epigenetic influences. In practice, spontaneous differentiation of ES cells rarely produces cells of a single lineage, although the proportion of
neural cells may be greater than other lineage-specific
cells.

TH+ phenotype was slightly increased by supplementing
L-Dopa in the N2 medium (Fig. 1G). After continued culture without FGF2 for 4–8 weeks, some neuronal cells
expressed markers of mature neurons such as alpha-nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (Fig. 1H) and estrogen receptor-beta (Fig. 1I). Thus, FGF2 removal alone is very
effective in differentiating nestin+/Musashi1+ progenitor
cells into neuronal phenotypes, predominantly toward
the serotonergic lineage. Either this neural selection protocol limits TH+ phenotype differentiation or this process
requires epigenetic influences other than FGF2 removal
alone.

In our laboratory, monkey ES cell-derived EBs have been
induced and differentiated into glial and neuronal phenotypes (ectodermal lineage) [16] as well as insulin-producing, pancreatic beta cell-like phenotypes (endodermal
lineage) [see companion article by Dr. Linda Lester]. We
have also identified cardiomyocytes (mesodermal lineage) after spontaneous differentiation of a monkey ES cell
line (ORMES-2) [unpublished observation]. Here, we
focus on the neural differentiation of monkey ES cells.

Based on the evidence that local environmental cues in
the adult brain can direct progenitor cells to differentiate
into host tissue-specific phenotypes [31-33], monkey ES
cells (from the ORMES-1 line) were subjected to neuronal
differentiation in the presence of crude extracts isolated
from adult monkey striatal tissues at the time of FGF2
removal. The striatum, a forebrain structure responsible
for movement coordination, contains dopaminergic neuronal terminals whose cell bodies are located in the midbrain. Control cells were supplemented either with
cerebral cortical extracts or with nothing. The cells were
cultured under these conditions for 2–4 weeks. Medium
and extracts were refreshed daily. Cells in the cultures supplemented with extracts appeared more widely spread and
greater in numbers within 2 weeks (data not shown). Cell
morphology was distinct among the 3 groups (Fig. 2A,2C
and 2E). Many cells expressed the neuronal filament Tuj
(Fig. 2B,2D and 2F). More TH+ neuronal cells were
observed in the culture supplemented with striatal tissue
extracts (Fig. 2F) compared to the culture with cortical
extracts (Fig. 2D). Only a few cells stained positive for TH
without extract supplement (Fig. 2B). These results support the concept that the striatum contains the chemical
cues required to direct the differentiation of monkey ES
cell-derived nestin+ progenitor cells into TH+ neuronal
cells.

Neuronal differentiation by neural induction and selection
Following a neural selection protocol [30], monkey ES
cells aggregated in suspension culture formed EBs in
serum-containing medium within several days (Fig. 1A).
After EBs were cultured in the serum-free N1 medium for
7–10 days, they were maintained in a N2 medium supplemented with FGF2 for two weeks and plated onto polyornithine/laminin surfaces [see ref. [16] for detailed
methods]. Immunostaining for neural progenitor markers
showed that >90% of cells in the population were nestin+
and Musashi1+ (Fig. 1B). These results indicate that the
neural selection protocol effectively eliminated cells of
non-neural lineages, allowing cells to differentiate into
neural progenitors that maintain their differentiated characteristics for extensive periods. Neural progenitor cells
can be preserved by low temperature storage. For neuronal phenotype differentiation, nestin+/Musashi1+ progenitor cells were dissociated into small clumps, plated onto
polyornithine/laminin-coated surfaces, and cultured in
N2 medium without FGF2 supplement (i.e., FGF2
removal and adherent culture) for 2–8 weeks. The differentiated cells exhibited numerous neuronal processes, as
corroborated by the detection of the neuronal markers
TujIII, NeuN or MAP2 (Fig. 1C). They also expressed neurotransmitter markers, i.e., tryptophan hydroxylase (TPH,
the rate-limiting enzyme for serotonin synthesis, Fig. 1D),
choline acetyltransferase (ChAT, the rate-limiting enzyme
for acetylcholine synthesis, Fig. 1E), and tyrosine hydroxylase (TH, the rate-limiting enzyme for catecholamine
synthesis, Fig. 1F). The percentage of TPH+, ChAT+ and
TH+ phenotypes in the differentiated population was estimated at >90%, >50% and <3%, respectively. Yield of the

A conceptually different method for TH+ neuronal differentiation is to direct pluripotent ES cells into primitive
neuroectoderm-like precursor cells by stromal cell (i.e.,
PA6 cells) co-culture [34], HepG2 cell-conditioned
medium [35], or adherent culture [36]. Monkey neuroectoderm-like, precursor cell populations contain nearly
homogenous nestin+ and Musashi1+ progenitor cells that
can be differentiated into neuronal phenotypes [37].
Sequential additions of growth factors necessary for
embryonic midbrain development, i.e., sonic hedgehog
(SHH), FGF8, FGF2, brain-derived neurotrophic factor
(BDNF) and ascorbic acid, enrich mouse TH+ cell populations to >50%. These TH+ cells exhibit midbrain
dopaminergic neuronal properties [38]. Transplantation
of enriched dopaminergic neurons into the striatum of 6-

Page 4 of 11
(page number not for citation purposes)

Reproductive Biology and Endocrinology 2004, 2:41

A

D

G

EBs

B

TPH/DAPI

http://www.rbej.com/content/2/1/41

E

NeuN/TH

H

Nestin/Musashi1

ChAT/DAPI

ChAT/ 4-NAchR/NeuN

C

TujIII/DAPI

F

TH/MAP2

I

ER

hydroxylase (TPH, neuronal cells expressing the neural filament TujIII panel A), progenitor cells expressing and G)
musashi1 differentiation D), choline acetyltransferase (ChAT, panel E) and tyrosine neurotransmitter enzymes tryptophan
Neuronal (panel B),panel of monkey ES cells into embryoid bodies (EBs,(panel C) andhydroxylase (TH, panel Fnestin and
Figure 1
Neuronal differentiation of monkey ES cells into embryoid bodies (EBs, panel A), progenitor cells expressing nestin and
musashi1 (panel B), neuronal cells expressing the neural filament TujIII (panel C) and neurotransmitter enzymes tryptophan
hydroxylase (TPH, panel D), choline acetyltransferase (ChAT, panel E) and tyrosine hydroxylase (TH, panel F and G). Receptors of mature neurons such as α4-nicotinic receptors (panel H) and estrogen receptor β (panel I) were also observed. The
image in panel A was taken directly from an inverted microscope. Images in panels B-H were taken after fluorescence-based
immunocytochemistry. The image in panel I was taken after staining with the classic, non-fluorescent procedure using biotinylated antiserum and diaminobenzidine in the presence of nickel sulfate (shown in dark brown or black). Scale bars, when
applied, are equivalent to 40 µm.

hydroxy-dopamine (6-OHDA)-lesioned mice or rats,
rodent models of Parkinson's disease exhibiting
dopamine-dependent deficiency in symmetrical movement, alleviated apomorphine-induced movement asymmetry [38-41].

Glial cell differentiation after adherent culture of nestin+/
Musashi1+ progenitor cells
The majority of monkey ES cells subjected to the neural
selection protocol differentiate into neuronal cells. However, approximately 10–15% of cells in the differentiated
Page 5 of 11
(page number not for citation purposes)

Reproductive Biology and Endocrinology 2004, 2:41

http://www.rbej.com/content/2/1/41

A

B

C

D

E

F

Figure 2 differentiation of monkey ES cells under the influence of monkey brain tissue crude extracts
Neuronal
Neuronal differentiation of monkey ES cells under the influence of monkey brain tissue crude extracts. Images were taken
before (live) and after (fixed) immunostaining for TH (green) and TujIII (red). Co-expression of TH and TujIII appears in yellow.
Cell nuclei were counterstained with DAPI (blue). A and B, without extracts; C and D, with cortical extracts; E and F, with striatal extracts. Scale bars are equivalent to 50 µm.

Page 6 of 11
(page number not for citation purposes)

Reproductive Biology and Endocrinology 2004, 2:41

population express the glial cell marker, glial fibrillary
acidic protein (GFAP) [16], suggesting that a subpopulation of phenotypes retains the characteristics of the glial
lineage. In a separate experiment, nestin+/Musashi1+ progenitor cells were produced by neural selection of monkey
ES cells in overcrowding cultures. During the expansion
phase (prior to differentiation), nestin+/Musashi1+ progenitor cells were plated onto adhesive culture dishes and
maintained in the N2 medium supplemented with FGF-2
for up to 6 months. Throughout this period, cells, apparently originated from the nestin+/Musashi1+ progenitor
cells, attached to the surface of the culture dish and multiplied. The morphology and growth pattern of these cells
(Fig. 3A) bear resemblance to Schwann cell outgrowths
from cultured nerve explants isolated from perinatal monkeys [42]. When isolated and plated onto separate dishes,
these ES-derived cells formed monolayers, aggregated cell
bundles and floating spherical bodies, especially on
laminin-coated surfaces (Fig. 3B). Since Schwann cells are
characterized by genes such as p75, S-100, GFAP, O4,
GalC, SCIP, MBP, PLP and P0) [[43] for review; also see
Fig. 4], we examined the expression of these markers in
the differentiated cells and cell aggregates by immunocytochemistry and RT-PCR. The differentiated population
contained phenotypes expressing nearly all tested markers
of Schwann cells (Fig. 3C,3D). Of particular interest is the
expression of myelin-associated proteins, MBP and PLP,
in these glial phenotypes (Fig. 3E,3F). The expression of
myelin proteins has also been reported in phenotypes
derived from neuronal differentiation of human ES cells
[44].
While the identity and function of monkey ES cell-derived
glial progeny remain to be elucidated, they represent a
mixture of phenotypes expressing markers typical of specific stages of Schwann cell development (Fig. 4). These
markers can be divided into 3 major groups. The first
group of genes and proteins, including p75, GFAP and
SCIP, has a temporal expression pattern, starting during
the development of immature Schwann cells and terminating in mature, myelinating cells. The second group
contains S100, O4 and GC, which are expressed during
the progenitor or immature stage. The expression of these
genes and proteins continues in mature, myelinating
Schwann cells. The third group includes myelin-associated genes and proteins such as MBP and PLP that are
expressed only in the mature, myelinating Schwann cells.
As shown in Fig. 4, monkey ES cell-derived glial phenotypes expressed protein markers indicative of all 3 major
Schwann cell developmental stages. The expression of several gene markers has been confirmed by RT-PCR (Fig. 4,
insert), including p75, GFAP, MBP and PLP. The expression of endothelin receptor A (edtlRA) and integrin β1
(itgβ1), molecules that may play important roles in
Schwann cell maturation and adhesion [43], was also

http://www.rbej.com/content/2/1/41

observed. Quantification of marker expression in these
monkey ES cell-derived Schwann cell phenotypes, i.e.,
counting the number of cells expressing each marker, was
not performed. To delineate the temporal pattern of gene
and protein marker expression will require a chronological study based on a quantitative assay. Nevertheless, the
results demonstrate that monkey ES cells can be differentiated into a mixture of phenotypes that can be classified
as cells in the Schwann cell lineage, including those
expressing myelinating proteins. Such phenotypes have
the potential to be enriched, defined, and developed into
a suitable cell source for studying the safety, efficacy and
feasibility of replacement therapy with myelinating cells
in animal models of demyelinating disorders, such as
multiple sclerosis and spinal cord injuries [45-52].

Perspectives and limitations of ES cell research
and applications
Since the isolation of human ES cells [5], we have witnessed an explosion in ES cell research based on the
expectation that these cells will become a valuable source
for replacement therapy to cure cellular degenerative diseases. At the same time, adult stem cells isolated from various tissues carry similar expectations for regenerative
medicine, given that de-differentiation (from tissue-specific stem cells to pluripotent stem cells) and trans-differentiation (between tissue-specific stem cells) become
possible [53-55].
ES cell-based therapy is a viable approach to cure degenerative conditions such as Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's
disease, multiple sclerosis, spinal cord injury, diabetes
and cardiac dystrophy, to name a few. The road to achieve
these goals will be long, and the challenge ahead is daunting. Some of the more immediate limitations in primate
ES cell research and applications include the following:
(1) The optimization of undifferentiated ES cell culture is
key to standardize successful culture of undifferentiated
primate ES cells and to scale-up the production of differentiated progeny for transplantation. The solution may
rely on the discovery of "stemness" genes and their signaling pathways. This requirement cannot be circumvented
by using mouse feeder cell-conditioned medium [56] or
human cell co-cultures [57], but these alternatives are
helpful in animal research. A feeder layer- and serum-free
culture system for human ES cells employing a combination of serum replacement and growth factors [58] has
been reported. Validation of this method in different primate ES cell lines will be valuable. Methods to quantitatively identify and isolate undifferentiated ES cells from
spontaneously differentiated phenotypes during culture
must be established. Moreover, the quality of pluripotent
ES cells over multiple passages, such as chromosomal normalcy and differentiation potential, must be maintained.

Page 7 of 11
(page number not for citation purposes)

Reproductive Biology and Endocrinology 2004, 2:41

A

http://www.rbej.com/content/2/1/41

B

C

S100/GFAP/DAPI

E

MBP/GC/DAPI

F

PLP /MAP2C

Figure 3
Differentiation of monkey ES cells into glial phenotypes
Differentiation of monkey ES cells into glial phenotypes. Panel A, morphology in culture; Panel B, aggregated glial cell bundles
and spheres cultured on laminin-coated glass coverslips; Panel C, expression of Schwann cell markers S100 and GFAP; Panel D,
expression of Schwann cell markers GFAP and p75 (NGFR); Panel E, expression of myelin protein MBP and Schwann cell
marker GC; Panel F, expression of myelin protein PLP and neuronal marker MAP2C. Panel G shows the temporal pattern of
Schwann cell molecular signatures during development and a mixture of glial phenotypes derived from monkey ES cells
expressing these Schwann cell markers as determined by immuocytochemistry (panel H) and RT-PCR (panel I).

Page 8 of 11
(page number not for citation purposes)

Reproductive Biology and Endocrinology 2004, 2:41

Neural crest
stem cells

Schwann cell
progenitor

http://www.rbej.com/content/2/1/41

Immature
Schwann
cell

Non-myelinating Pre-myelinating
Schwann cell
Schwann cell

Myelinating
Schwann cell

NGFR
(p75)
p75

S100
S100

O4
O4

GC

GFAP
GFAP

SCIP
SCIP

MBP
PLP
MBP

PLP

Figure 4
A schematic presentation of Schwann cell markers expressed during various developmental stages
A schematic presentation of Schwann cell markers expressed during various developmental stages. These markers are tentatively divided into 3 groups. Group 1 are genes and proteins, including p75, GFAP and SCIP (shown in blue), that express temporally during the development between immature Schwann cells and matured, myelinating cells. Group 2 markers include
S100, O4 and GC (shown in red) that express during the progenitor or immature stages and continue into matured, myelinating Schwann cells. Group 3 markers include myelinating genes and proteins such as MBP and PLP (shown in green) that express
only in the mature stage of myelinating Schwann cells. Monkey ES cell-derived glial phenotypes formed cell bundles and aggregates that expressed markers of all 3 groups (shown in immunofluorescence green images; nuclei were counter-stained with
DAPI in blue color), except GC, which expressed in some, but not all, samples (image not shown). The insert shows gene
markers detected by RT-PCR in these monkey ES cell-derived glial phenotypes.

(2) A characterization and comparison among primate ES
cell lines is essential to define line specificity. The full
potential of ES cell applications can not be realized by a
few cell lines studied by a small number of laboratories. A
concerted effort to create an ES cell bank with well-characterized cell lines and standardized culture procedures for
distribution to scientists will greatly facilitate primate ES
cell research. Creating new monkey ES cell lines for unbiased characterization should provide invaluable information about ES cell line diversity that is unable to be

performed at the present time in the United States with
federal funding on human ES cell lines.
(3) Phenotype-specific differentiation and enrichment
protocols are critical to the application of ES cells for therapy. Differentiation protocols derived from mouse ES cell
research must be applied to primate ES cells as soon as feasible, as it is most certain that modifications will have to
be made to overcome species differences. Enrichment of
the desired phenotype for transplantation will probably

Page 9 of 11
(page number not for citation purposes)

Reproductive Biology and Endocrinology 2004, 2:41

be essential, with the quality of primate ES cells or progeny ensured after enrichment.
(4) Genetic manipulations such as functional gene knockins, including disease-specific genes, differentiation-promoting genes and immunocompatible genes are highly
desirable. Recent success in gene transfer by homologous
recombination [59] and lentiviral vectors [60] is encouraging, but these procedures need to be applied to other
cell lines, by other laboratories, and improved for better
efficiency. The quality and potential of genetically modified primate ES cells should be tested rigorously in animal
models.

http://www.rbej.com/content/2/1/41

ies, particularly in nonhuman primate models, are critical
steps to understand the safety, feasibility and efficacy of ES
cell-based therapy for the treatment of neural degenerative diseases.

Acknowledgements
We thank team members of the ONPRC Embryonic Stem Cell Program,
Dr. Shoukhrat Mitalipov, Dr. Hung-Chih Kuo, Dr. Ugur Salli, Maria Centeno, Christine Gagliardi, Terrie Graves, Lisa Clepper, Caryn EriksonHyatt, and Candace Pau, for their contributions in the studies reported in
this review. We also thank Julianne White for secretarial support. These
studies were supported by NIH grants RR-00163, HD-18185, RR-15159
and NS-41601.

References
(5) Development of animal models for transplantation
studies is a crucial step toward successful clinical applications. In many cases, results using rodent models cannot
be translated to human patients. Currently there are no
discriminative non-human primate models of cellular
degenerative diseases because gene-knockout and cloning
procedures in the monkey are both time consuming and
technically challenging. A few experimental models, such
as MPTP-induced hemiparkinsonian monkeys [61], are
therefore extremely valuable for ES cell-based therapeutic
studies. The development of additional disease models
with nonhuman primates is urgent.

Conclusions
At least 15 rhesus monkey ES cells lines are available at the
Oregon National Primate Research Center. These cell lines
have been characterized by their chromosomal normalcy,
growth patterns and differentiation potential. The
pluripotency of undifferentiated monkey ES cells is
defined by a panel of molecular signatures that include
embryonic surface antigens, enzymes and transcriptional
factors. Highly purified nestin+/Musashi1+ progenitor
cells can be produced by a neural selection protocol.
These progenitor cells are multipotent, if not pluripotent,
capable of differentiating into insulin-producing
endodermal cells, various neuronal phenotypes and glial
cells expressing Schwann cell markers and myelinating
proteins. Differentiation into certain populations, such as
the serotonergic phenotypes, is induced by the selection
protocol. Differentiation into other lineages, such as the
dopaminergic phenotypes, is either inhibited or requires
additional epigenetic influences such as those present in
extracts of the dopaminergic striatum. However, enrichment of dopaminergic phenotypes by directional differentiation of mouse ES cells followed by appropriate growth
factor induction has been successful. The potential exists
for the differentiation and enrichment of monkey ES cells
into dopaminergic neurons or myelinating glial phenotypes that serve as suitable cell sources for transplantation
studies in animal models of Parkinson Disease, multiple
sclerosis and spinal cord injury. Such translational stud-

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

8.

9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.

18.
19.
20.

Martin GR: Isolation of a pluripotent cell line from early
mouse embryos cultured in medium conditioned by teratocarcinoma stem cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1981, 78:7634-7638.
Evans MJ, Kaufman MH: Establishment in culture of pluripotential cells from mouse embryos. Nature 1981, 292:154-156.
Thomson JA, Kalishman J, Golos TG, Durning M, Harris CP, Becker
RA, Hearn JP: Isolation of a primate embryonic stem cell line.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1995, 92:7844-7848.
Thomson JA, Kalishman J, Golos TG, During M, Harris CP, Hearn JP:
Pluripotent cell lines from common marmoset (Callithrix
jacchus) blastocysts. Biol Reprod 1996, 55:254-259.
Thomson JA, Itskovitz-Eldor J, Shapiro SS, Waknitz MA, Swiergiel JJ,
Marshall VS, Jones JM: Embryonic stem cell lines derived from
human blastocysts. Science 1998, 282:1145-1147.
Human embryonic stem cell lines approved for research by
the United States government [http://stemcells.nih.gov/registry/
]
Suemori H, Tada T, Torii R, Hosoi Y, Kobayashi K, Imahie H, Kondo
Y, Iritani A, Nakatsuji N: Establishment of embryonic stem cell
lines form Cynomolgus monkey blastocysts produced by IVF
or ICSI. Dev Dyn 2001, 222:273-279.
Cibelli JB, Grant KA, Chapman KB, Cunniff K, Worst T, Green HL,
Walker SJ, Gutin PH, Vilner L, Tabar V, Dominko T, Kane J, Wettstein
PJ, Lanza RP, Studer L, Vrana KE, West MD: Parthenogenetic stem
cells in nonhuman primates. Science 2002, 295:819.
Kuo H-C, Mitalipov SM, Wolf DP: The derivation of embryonic
stem (ES) cell lines in non-human primates [abstract]. Biol
Reprod 2003, 68(suppl 1):303.
Robertson EJ: Embryo-derived stem cell lines. In Teratocarcinomas and embryonic stem cells: A practical approach Edited by: Robertson
EJ. Washington DC: IRL Press; 1987:71-112.
Burdon T, Smith A, Savatier P: Signalling, cell cycle and pluripotency in embryonic stem cells. TRENDS Cell Biol 2002,
12:432-438.
Thomson JA, Marshall VS: Primate embryonic stem cells. Curr
Top Dev Biol 1998, 38:133-165.
Pera MF: Human pluripotent stem cells: a progress report.
Curr Opin Genet Dev 2001, 11:595-599.
Eiges R, Benvenisty N: A molecular view on pluripotent stem
cells. FEBS Lett 2002, 529:135-141.
Solter D, Knowles BB: Immunosurgery of mouse blastocyst.
Proc Natl Acad Sci (USA) 1975, 72:5099-5102.
Kuo H-C, Pau K-YF, Yeoman RR, Mitalipov SM, Okano H, Wolf DP:
Differentiation of monkey embryonic stem cells into neural
lineages. Biol Reprod 2003, 68:1727-1735.
Henderson JK, Draper JS, Baillie HS, Fishel S, Thomson JA, Moore H,
Andrews PW: Preimplantation human embryos and embryonic stem cells show comparable expression of stage-specific
embryonic antigens. Stem Cells 2002, 20:329-337.
Niwa H, Miyazaki J, Smith AG: Quantitative expression of Oct-3/
4defines differentiation, dedifferentiation or self-renewal of
ES cells. Nat Genet 2000, 24:372-376.
Ramalho-Santos M, Yoon S, Matsuzaki Y, Mulligan RC, Melton DA:
"Stemness:" Transcriptional profiling of embryonic and
adult stem cells. Science 2002, 298:597-600.
Ivanova NB, Dimos JT, Schaniel c, Hackney JA, Moore KA, Lemischka
IR: A stem cell molecular signature. Science 2002, 298:601-604.

Page 10 of 11
(page number not for citation purposes)

Reproductive Biology and Endocrinology 2004, 2:41

21.

22.
23.
24.

25.
26.

27.
28.
29.
30.

31.

32.

33.
34.

35.

36.
37.

38.

39.

40.

Vrana KE, Hipp JD, Goss AM, McCool BA, Riddle DR, Walker SJ,
Wettstein PJ, Studer LP, Tabar V, Cunniff K, Chapman K, Vilner L,
West MD, Grant KA, Cibelli JB: Nonhuman primate parthenogenetic stem cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci (USA) 2003,
100:11911-11916.
Kelly DL, Rizzino A: Microarray analysis of genes regulated during the differentiation of embryonic stem cells. Mol Reprod Dev
2000, 56:113-123.
Du ZW, Cong HC, Yao Z: Identification of putative downstream genes of Oct-4 by suppression-subtractive
hybridization. Biochem Biophy Res Comm 2001, 282:701-706.
Tanaka TS, Kunath T, Kimber W, Jaradat SA, Stagg CA, Usuda M,
Yokota T, Niwa H, Rossant J, Ko MS: Gene expression profiling
of embryo-derived stem cells reveals candidate genes associated with pluripotency and lineage specificity. Genome Res
2002, 12:1921-1928.
O'Shea KS: Embryonic stem cell models of development. Anat
Rec 1999, 257:32-41.
Hubner K, Fuhrmann G, Christenson LK, Kehler J, Reinbold R, De La
Fuente R, Wood J, Strauss JF 3rd, Boiani M, Scholer HR: Derivation
of oocytes from mouse embryonic stem cells. Science 2003,
300:1251-1256.
Toyooka Y, Tsunekawa N, Akasu R, Noce T: Embryonic stem cells
can form germ cells in vitro. Proc Natl Acad Sci (USA) 2003,
100:11457-11462.
Geijsen N, Horoschak M, Kim K, Gribnau J, Eggan K, Daley GQ: Derivation of embryonic germ cells and male gametes from
embryonic stem cells. Nature 2004, 427:148-154.
Munoz-Sanjuan I, Brivanlou AH: Neural induction, the default
model and embryonic stem cells. Nat Rev Neurosci 2002,
3:271-280.
Okabe S, Forsberg-Nilsson K, Spiro AC, Segal M, McKay RDG:
Development of neuronal precursor cells and functional
postmitotic neurons from embryonic stem cells in vitro.
Mech Dev 1996, 59:89-102.
Snyder EY, Deitcher DL, Walsh C, Arnold-Aldea S, Hartwieg EA,
Cepko CL: Multipotent neural cell lines can engraft and participate in development of mouse cerebellum. Cell 1992,
68:33-51.
Shihabuddin LS, Hertz JA, Holets VR, Whittemore SR: The adult
CNS retains the potential to direct region-specific differentiation of a transplanted neuronal precursor cell line. J Neurosci
1995, 15:6666-6678.
Whittemore SR, Snyder EY: Physiological relevance and functional potential of central nervous system-derived cell lines.
Mol Neurobiol 1996, 12:13-38.
Kawasake H, Mizuseke K, Nishikawa S, Kaneko S, Kuwana Y, Nakanishi S, Nishikawa SI, Sasai Y: Induction of midbrain dopaminergic
neurons from ES cells by stromal cell-derived inducing
activity. Neuron 2000, 28:31-40.
Rathjen J, Haines BP, Hudson KM, Nesci A, Dunn S, Rathjen PD:
Directed differentiation of pluripotent cells to neural lineages: homogeneous formation and differentiation of a neurectoderm population. Development 2002, 129:2649-2661.
Ying QL, Stavridis M, Griffiths D, Li M, Smith A: Conversion of
embryonic stem cells into neurectodermal precursors in
adherent monoculture. Nat Biotechnol. 2003, 21:183-186.
Calhoun JD, Lambert NA, Mitalipova MM, Noggle SA, Lyons I, Condie
BG, Stice SL: Differentiation of rhesus embryonic stem cells to
neural progenitors and neurons. Biochem Biophys Res Commun
2003, 306:191-197.
Barberi T, Klivenyi P, Calingasan NY, Lee H, Kawamata H, Loonam K,
Perrier AL, Bruses J, Rubio ME, Topf N, Tabar V, Harrison NL, Beal
MF, Morre MAS, Studer L: Neural subtype specification of fertilization and nuclear transfer embryonic stem cells and application in parkinsonian mice. Nat Biotechnol 2003, 10:1200-1207.
Bjorklund LM, Sanchez-Pernaute R, Chung S, Andersson T, Chen IYC,
McNaught KStP, Brownell A-L, Jenkins BG, Wahlestedt C, Kim KS,
Isacson O: Embryonic stem cells develop into functional
dopaminergic neurons after transplantation in a Parkinson
rat model. Proc Natl Acad Sci (USA) 2002, 99:2344-2349.
Kim JH, Auerbach JM, Rodriguez-Gomez JA, Velasco I, Gavin D,
Lumelsky N, Lee SH, Nguyen J, Sanchez-Pernaute R, Bankiewicz K,
McKay R: Dopamine neurons derived from embryonic stem
cells function in an animal model of Parkinson's disease.
Nature 2002, 418:50-56.

http://www.rbej.com/content/2/1/41

41.

42.

43.
44.
45.

46.
47.
48.

49.

50.

51.

52.
53.
54.
55.
56.
57.
58.
59.
60.
61.

Isacson O, Bjorklund LM, Schumacher JM: Toward full restoration
of synaptic and terminal function of the dopaminergic system in Parkinson's disease by stem cells. Ann Neurol 2003,
53(suppl 3):S135-S148.
Avellana-Adalid V, Bachelin C, Lachapelle F, Escriou C, Ratzkin B,
Baron-Van Evercooren A: In vitro and in vivo behaviour of NDFexpanded monkey Schwann cells. Eur J Neurosci 1998,
10:291-300.
Jessen KR, Mirsky R: Signals that determine Schwann cell
identity. J Anat 2002, 200:367-376.
Reubinoff BE, Isykson P, Turetsky T, Pera MF, Reinhartz E, Itzik A,
Ben-Hur T: Neural progenitors from human embryonic stem
cells. Nat Biotechnol 2001, 19:1134-1140.
Brustle O, Jones KN, Learish RD, Karram K, Choudhary K, Wiestler
OD, Duncan ID, McKay RD: Embryonic stem cell-derived glial
precursors: A source of myelinating transplants. Science 1999,
285:754-756.
Fawcett J: Repair of spinal cord injuries: where are we, where
are we going? Spinal Cord 2002, 40:615-623.
Tontsch U, Archer DR, Dubois-Dalcq M, Duncan ID: Transplantation of an oligodendrocyte cell line leading to extensive
myelination. Proc Natl Acad Sci (USA) 1994, 91:11616-11620.
McDonald JW, Liu XZ, Qu Y, Liu S, Mickey SK, Turetsky D, Gottlieb
DI, Choi DW: Transplanted embryonic stem cells survive, differentiate and promote recovery in injured rat spinal cord.
Nat Med 1999, 5:1410-1412.
Cao Q, Zhang YP, Howard RM, Walters WM, Tsoulfas P, Whittemore SR: Pluripotent stem cells engrafted into the normal or
lesioned adult rat spinal cord are restricted to a glial lineage.
Exp Neurol 2001, 167:48-58.
Mitome M, Low HP, van den Pol A, Nunnari JJ, Wolf MK, BillingsGagliardi S, Schwartz WJ: Towards the reconstruction of central
nervous system white matter using neural precursor cells.
Brain 2001, 124:2147-2161.
Takami T, Oudega M, Bates ML, Wood PM, Kleitman N, Bunge MB:
Schwann cell but not olfactory ensheathing glia transplants
improve hindlimb locomotor performance in the moderately contused adult rat thoracic spinal cord. J Neurosci 2002,
22:6670-6681.
Kwon BK, Tetzlaff W: Spinal cord regeneration: from gene to
transplants. Spine 2001, 26:S13-S22.
Weissman IL, Anderson DJ, Gage F: Stem and progenitor cells:
origins,
phenotypes,
lineage
commitments,
and
transdifferentiations. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 2001, 17:387-403.
Herzog EL, Chai L, Krause DS: Plasticity of marrow-derived
stem cells. Blood 2003, 102:3483-3493.
Gurdon JB, Byrne JA, Simonsson S: Nuclear reprogramming and
stem cell creation. Proc Natl Acad Sci (USA) 2003,
100:11819-11822.
Xu C, Inokuma MS, Denham J, Golds K, Kundu P, Gold JD, Carpenter
MK: Feeder-free growth of undifferentiated human embryonic stem cells. Nat Biotechnol 2001, 19:971-974.
Amit M, Margulets V, Segev H, Shariki K, Laevsky I, Coleman R, Itskovitz-Eldor J: Human feeder layers for human embryonic stem
cells. Biol Reprod 2003, 68:2150-2156.
Amit M, Shariki C, Margulets V, Itskovitz-Eldor J: Feeder layer- and
serum-free culture of human embryonic stem cells. Biol
Reprod 2004, 70:837-845.
Zwaka TP, Thomson JA: Homogous recombination in human
embryonic stem cells. Nat Biotechnol 2003, 21:319-321.
Ma J, Ramezani A, Lewis R, Hawley RG, Thomson JA: High-Level
Sustained Transgene Expression in Human Embryonic Stem
Cells Using Lentiviral Vectors. Stem Cells 2003, 21:111-117.
Bankiewicz KS, Eberling JL, Kohutnicka M, Jagust W, Pivirotto P, Bringas J, Cunningham J, Budinger TF, Harvey-White J: Convectionenhanced delivery of AAV vector in parkinsonian monkeys:
In vivo detection of gene expression and restoration of
dopaminergic function using pro-drug approach. Exp Neurol
2000, 164:2-14.

Page 11 of 11
(page number not for citation purposes)

</pre>
</body>
</html>
