<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>A widespread peroxiredoxin-like domain present in tumor suppression- and progression-implicated proteins</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Genomics 2010, 11:590. doi:10.1186/1471-2164-11-590"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Krzysztof Pawowski"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Pawłowski et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:590
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/590

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

A widespread peroxiredoxin-like domain present
in tumor suppression- and progression-implicated
proteins
Krzysztof Pawłowski2,4*, Anna Muszewska1, Anna Lenart2, Teresa Szczepińska2, Adam Godzik3, Marcin Grynberg1*

Abstract
Background: Peroxide turnover and signalling are involved in many biological phenomena relevant to human
diseases. Yet, all the players and mechanisms involved in peroxide perception are not known. Elucidating very
remote evolutionary relationships between proteins is an approach that allows the discovery of novel protein
functions. Here, we start with three human proteins, SRPX, SRPX2 and CCDC80, involved in tumor suppression and
progression, which possess a conserved region of similarity. Structure and function prediction allowed the
definition of P-DUDES, a phylogenetically widespread, possibly ancient protein structural domain, common to
vertebrates and many bacterial species.
Results: We show, using bioinformatics approaches, that the P-DUDES domain, surprisingly, adopts the
thioredoxin-like (Thx-like) fold. A tentative, more detailed prediction of function is made, namely, that of a 2-Cys
peroxiredoxin. Incidentally, consistent overexpression of all three human P-DUDES genes in two public
glioblastoma microarray gene expression datasets was discovered. This finding is discussed in the context of the
tumor suppressor role that has been ascribed to P-DUDES proteins in several studies. Majority of non-redundant PDUDES proteins are found in marine metagenome, and among the bacterial species possessing this domain a
trend for a higher proportion of aquatic species is observed.
Conclusions: The new protein structural domain, now with a broad enzymatic function predicted, may become a
drug target once its detailed molecular mechanism of action is understood in detail.

Background
One of the challenges of the “post-genomic era” in biology is the elucidation of molecular functions of hundreds of protein-coding genes which are known to be
active in disease-related biological processes, but the
nature of their role remains elusive. Such proteins,
although often advertised as “potential therapeutic targets”, are very difficult to exploit as such. Functional
prediction of uncharacterised proteins often gains from
focusing on sequence regions not easily assigned to
known structural domains. Here, we present a novel
thioredoxin-like fold protein family.
* Correspondence: k.pawlowski@nencki.gov.pl; greenb@ibb.waw.pl
1
Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics, PAS, Pawińskiego 5A, 02-106
Warsaw, Poland
2
Nencki Institute of Experimental Biology, PAS, Pasteura 3, 02-093 Warsaw,
Poland
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

Initially, the analysis involved three vertebrate proteins,
characterised originally by the presence of coiled-coil
domain (CCDC80) and sushi and Hyr repeat domains
(SRPX and SRPX2). Genes encoding these proteins were
identified in various pathological conditions in humans,
rodents and, in one case, in chicken. First reports on the
SRPX gene (a.k.a. DRS, ETX1) initially linked it to Xlinked retinitis pigmentosa [1,2], and also identified it as a
gene downregulated by v-src [3]. Furthermore, it has
been found that SRPX suppressed v-src transformation
without effect on cell proliferation [4]. SRPX2, a paralogue of SRPX, was originally discovered as a “sushi-repeat
protein upregulated in leukemia” and named accordingly
(SRPUL) [5]. Rat CCDC80 (a.k.a. URB, DRO1, SSG1,
equarin, CL2) was identified as a protein upregulated by
b-estradiol (E2) in rat mammary tissue and associated
with carcinogenesis [6]. The CCDC80 (URB) protein was
also identified as upregulated in adipose tissue of mice

© 2010 Pawłowski et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Pawłowski et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:590
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/590

deficient in bombesin receptor subtype-3 [7]. The
chicken CCDC80 (equarin) was found in eye lens where
it is involved in formation of the eye [8].
The similarity of the C-terminal regions of SRPX and
SRPX2 proteins, referred to herein as P-DUDES domain,
to the three repeat regions in CCDC80 was noticed
early on [6,8]. Although the sequence similarity of the
P-DUDES domains in SRPX, SRPX2 and CCDC80 has
been discussed on many occasions, the biological functions of these proteins were usually not considered
together, since no functional features were recognized
within the mutually similar sequence regions. In addition, it has been explicitly stated that SRPX and
CCDC80 were not functionally related [6]. In our work,
we described not only the vertebrate examples of the
domain, named by Bommer et al., DUDES (DRO1-URBDRS-Equarin-SRPUL) [9], but also the many prokaryotic
homologs. This is why we decided to rename the
domain to P-DUDES (Prokaryotes-DUDES).
In recent years, more reports on P-DUDES proteins
appeared, bringing the attention to differential expression of SRPX, SRPX2, and CCDC80 genes in various
developmental processes and in various tumors (see
Table 1). In general, SRPX2 was reported as overexpressed in cancer while SRPX and CCDC80 were identified as downregulated in malignant conditions. The two
latter genes were described as tumor suppressors, and

Page 2 of 18

some relevant tumor suppression mechanisms were
proposed.
The P-DUDES gene with links to cancer most broadly
documented is SRPX. It was found to be downregulated
in malignant pulmonary neuroendocrine tumors [10]
whereas its downregulation was correlated with the
malignancy of the tumor (most downregulation
observed in tumors is related to shortest survival time).
Of note, 30% of SRPX knock-out mice developed various
tumors: lymphoma, lung cancer, hepatoma, sarcoma
[11], while no tumors appeared in the control wild-type
mice. The proposed mechanism of tumor suppression
by SRPX is induction of apoptosis. Ectopic expression of
the SRPX protein induced apoptosis in human cancer
cell lines. Both the P-DUDES and the sushi repeat
regions were necessary for apoptosis induction, and
SRPX activated caspases-12, -9, and caspase-3 [12].
Reintroduction of SRPX into lung cancer cell line from
SRPX knock-out mice led to the suppression of tumor
formation, accompanied by enhanced apoptosis [11].
SRPX-mediated apoptosis was correlated with the suppression of tumor formation [11].
However, the tumor suppression mechanism mediated
by SRPX is more complicated than solely that of apoptosis induction, since a recent report shows that this gene
is involved in the maturation process of autophagy
induced by low serum, as studied in SRPX knock-out

Table 1 P-DUDES gene expression in cancer and cancer models
gene

direction tissue

mechanism proposed

reference

CCDC80 DOWN

rat epithelial cells neoplastically transformed by b-catenin.

CCDC80 DOWN

thyroid neoplastic cell lines and tissues

CCDC80 DOWN

colon and pancreatic cancer cells.

SRPX

DOWN

highly malignant human pulmonary neuroendocrine tumors.

[10]

SRPX

DOWN

prostate carcinomas.

[89]

SRPX

DOWN

colorectal neoplasms.

[90]

SRPX

DOWN

lung adenocarcinomas.

[91]

SRPX

DOWN

colon adenocarcinomas.

[92]

SRPX

DOWN

endothelial cells, myeloma

[93]

SRPX

DOWN

stromal fibroblast cells from liver metastases of colorectal
cancer

[94]

SRPX

NA

SRPX knock-out mouse embryonic fibroblasts

involvement in the maturation process of
autophagy

[13]

SRPX

NA

malignant tumors including lymphomas, lung
adenocarcinomas and hepatomas

Tumors appear in SRPX-knock out mice

[11]

SRPX

NA

human cancer cell lines.

apoptosis induction in human cancer cell lines;
both the P-DUDES and the sushi regions necessary

[12]

SRPX2

NA

endothelial cells

mediator of angiogenesis

[20]

SRPX2

NA

SRPX2

UP

gastric cancer

SRPX2

UP

pro-B leukemia cells

[9]
[14]
mediates growth inhibition

ligand for uPAR
enhancing cellular migration and adhesion through
FAK signaling

[9]

[19]
[16,17]
[5]

Pawłowski et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:590
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/590

mouse-derived fibroblast cultures [13]. Thus, P-DUDES
proteins may mediate both apoptosis and autophagy
which suggests for its broader function.
Similarly to SRPX, the CCDC80 gene was found to be
downregulated in colon and pancreatic cancer cells, and
also downregulated in cell lines by multiple oncogenes
(b-catenin, g-catenin, c-myc, h-ras, k-ras, and GLI) [9].
Furthermore, CCDC80 downregulation was seen in
human thyroid neoplastic cell lines and tissues [14]. In a
manner somewhat reminiscent of SRPX, CCDC80 was
found to suppress anchorage independent growth and
sensitize cells to anoikis and CD95-induced apoptosis.
Interestingly, CCDC80 protein is localised to endothelial
cells of the vasculature of the tumors [6] which may
suggest a role in angiogenesis for CCDC80. Of implication to a role in cancer is the observation that mouse
CCDC80 is involved in assembly of extracellular matrix
and mediates cell adhesiveness [15].
In contrast to the two other P-DUDES genes (SRPX
and CCDC80) that are almost always downregulated in
cancer, the SRPX2 gene was reported to be overexpressed in gastric cancer [16], see also Table 1. Of note,
prognosis in gastric cancer is related to SRPX2 expression (patients with unfavorable prognosis had significantly higher SRPX2 expression than those with more
favorable one [16]). It has been suggested that SRPX2
might be treated as a prognostic biomarker associated
with a malignant gastric cancer phenotype [17]. Recent
studies have shown that SRPX2 overexpression significantly enhanced cellular migration and adhesion [16]. It
was also demonstrated that these cellular features
caused by SRPX2 overexpression are dependent on the
focal adhesion kinase (FAK, PTK2) signalling pathway
and that SRPX2 overexpression increased phosphorylation of FAK at the autophosphorylation site Y397, and
at the activation loop site Y596-Y597 [16]. The FAK
kinase plays a crucial role in tumorigenesis, cancer progression and metastasis [18].
The SRPX2 protein was also discovered to be a ligand
for plasminogen activator receptor (UPAR), a key molecule involved in invasive migration of angiogenic
endothelium [19]. SRPX2 protein was shown to interact
with extracellular domains of UPAR, and to bind the
UPAR on cell surfaces [19]. SRPX2 was also found to
interact with the protease cathepsin B (CTSB) and the
metalloproteinase ADAMTS4 which are components of
the extracellular proteolysis system. Thus, SRPX2 may
be involved in regulating the proteins involved in the
proteolytic remodeling of the extracellular matrix [19].
SRPX2 gene was strongly upregulated in angiogenic
endothelial cells as compared to resting ones, and silencing the SRPX2 delayed angiogenesis [20].
Apart from cancer-related roles, SRPX2 is implicated in
neurological disorders. Two non-synonymous mutations

Page 3 of 18

in SRPX2 are known. Y72S, located in the first sushi
domain, is associated with mental retardation, rolandic
epilepsy and perisylvian polymicrogyria [21]. A gain-ofglycosylation mutation, N327S, located in the P-DUDES
domain, close to its N-terminus, is associated with rolandic epilepsy, oral and speech dyspraxia and mental retardation [21]. Thus, the role of SRPX2 in disorders of the
speech cortex may involve regulation of proteolytic
remodeling of the extracellular matrix [19].
The “clan” of thioredoxin-like (Thx-like) proteins is a
large and diverse group sharing the common structural
domain, and catalyzing related redox reactions using
conserved cysteine residues [22]. Typical reactions for
Thx-like proteins include disulfide bond formation and
reduction, protein glutathionylation/deglutathionylation
and hydroperoxide reduction. Notably, several groups of
Thx-like proteins lack one or both cysteines from the
archetypic CxxC motif common to most thioredoxinlike molecules.
In this paper, we first present the Thx-like structural
prediction for the P-DUDES family. Then, we discuss
the relevance of the structure predictions for their predicted molecular function. Furthermore, we analyse the
characteristics of the bacterial species possessing the PDUDES domain proteins. We also summarise the available functional relationship information for the human
P-DUDES as well as the available data on cancer-related
P-DUDES expression differences, and present evidence
on the P-DUDES link to glioblastoma progression.

Results
Identification of the P-DUDES domain

The regions of similarity common to the three PDUDES proteins, as identified by several authors (e.g.
[9]), were explored in order to elucidate their potential
relationship with sequences of known functions. Since
PSI-BLAST searches starting from the human P-DUDES
domain sequences yielded significant similarity to
known peroxiredoxins structures within 3-7 iterations
(see Table 2), we sought to survey P-DUDES and similar
proteins in the sequence “hyperspace”. To this end, the
Saturated BLAST procedure was employed with the Cterminal part of the human SRPX protein [Swiss-Prot:
P78539], region 305-464, as query, using the standard
parameters [23] (see Methods for details). This procedure, which performs a cascade of PSI-BLAST searches,
using representative significant hits as queries in subsequent Saturated BLAST iterations, yielded after seven
iterations 4721 “hit” sequences from the nr and env_nr
databases. Since such a search can easily “drift out” of
the original (P-DUDES) sequence family, the hit
sequences were checked for presence of proteins that
could be assigned to already known structural domains
using the well-established Pfam domain classification

Pawłowski et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:590
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/590

Page 4 of 18

Table 2 Significance scores for structure predictions for selected P-DUDES domains
PSI-Blast hits in the PDB database
domain

First PDB hit (PDB ID)

iteration

E-value

CCDC80-II

2h01|A, Plasmodium yoelii Thioredoxin Peroxidase I

4

4e-05

CCDC80-I

3drn|A, Sulfolobus sulfataricus Bcp1

6

8e-08

CCDC80-III

2h01|A

3

2e-04

SRPX

3drn|A

4

4e-04

SRPX2

3drn|A

3

0.004

FFAS hits in the PDB database. Z-score below -9.5 means significant similarity (less than 3% of false positives)[27]
domain

First PDB hit (PDB ID)

Sequence identity

Z-score

CCDC80-II

3drn_A

12

-35.5

CCDC80-I

3drn_A

11

-18.6

CCDC80-III

3drn_A

9

-40.1

SRPX

3drn_A

10

-30.3

SRPX2

3drn_A

15

-35.7

HHpred hits in the PDB database
domain

First PDB hit (PDB ID)

E-value

CCDC80-II

3drn_A

0.00093

CCDC80-I

3drn_A

0.00081

CCDC80-III

2h01_A

1.1E-20

SRPX

3drn_A

0.0011

SRPX2

3drn_A

0.00018

system [24] that distinguishes protein domain families,
sometimes grouped in “clans”. In the total hit sequence
population, majority was easily assigned (using HMMER
on the Pfam database) to one or more of several Pfam
families of the thioredoxin-like clan: AhpC/TSA
(PF00578, 4162 sequences), redoxin (PF08534, 2515
sequences), SCO1/SenC (PF08534, 366 sequences), Glutathione peroxidase (PF00255, 11 sequences) and
DUF899 (PF05988, 1 sequence). Some proteins were
given overlapping assignments to two or more similar
Pfam domains. The hit set included ten proteins of
known structure, mostly peroxiredoxins. Among the
first proteins of known function encountered during
the PSI-BLAST searches, Sulfolobus sulfataricus bacterioferritin comigratory protein-1 (Bcp1) and Plasmodium
yoelli Thioredoxin Peroxidase I were found (see
Table 2). These proteins belong to the thioredoxindependent peroxidase family (AhpC-TSA) and were
shown to preserve their function due to the crucial
cysteine (Cys45) residue [25]. Out of 4721 “hit”
sequences, 559 had no significant Pfam family assignment (HMMER E-value below 0.01). These, after the
removal of redundancy at 70% sequence identity threshold, yielded a set of 145 sequences which was treated as
a representative set of the P-DUDES domain. Strikingly,
out of the 145 sequences, those with assigned organism
of origin belonged to two phylogenetic groups: Bacteria
(58 sequences) and Vertebrata (32 sequences). The rest

(65 sequences) were assigned to marine metagenome, i.
e. environmental samples from Sargasso Sea [26], and
thus it cannot be ruled out that other phylogenetic
groups, e.g., Archaea, possess proteins with a P-DUDES
domain. The bacterial P-DUDES proteins included
representatives of alpha-, beta- and gamma Proteobacteria, Cyanobacteria, high GC bacteria, and the Bacteroidetes/Chlorobi group (CFB group) of Eubacteria.
In order to ascertain fold prediction for the P-DUDES
domain, the FFAS03 [27] method was employed, yielding significant and consistent prediction of thioredoxinlike superfamily (c.47.1) in the SCOP database (see
Table 2). Also, HHPred [28] decidedly ascribes the PDUDES family to the same SCOP superfamily (see
Table 2). More specifically, the FFAS03 and HHPred
structure prediction methods consistently flagged the
peroxiredoxin (AhpC/TSA) family proteins as the closest
structural matches for the P-DUDES domain. It has to
be borne in mind that structural predictions are not
automatically extendable to function predictions. Thus,
functional meaning of the structural assignment for
P-DUDES proteins will be discussed further down.
Recently, Atkinson and Babbitt [22], presented a thorough survey of the thioredoxin-like clan members using
a graph representation of pairwise sequence similarities.
Here, their Thx census is being extended into predicted
novel member families. The relationship of the PDUDES family to the Thx clan was visualized using a

Pawłowski et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:590
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/590

similar approach, the CLANS algorithm [29]. The Clans
graph visualizes PSI-BLAST-detected significant similarities. Notably, P-DUDES appears as a bona fide “fringe”
member of the clan, with strong links to central families
(Redoxin, AhpC/TSA), but also a number of other
families (19 out of 36) - see Figure 1. Incidentally, examination of distant FFAS sequence assignments for PDUDES allowed us to classify several other Pfam
domains (DUF929, DUF1094, DUF1462, DUF2847,
DUF1223, ArsD, DUF2703, DUF3088 and TrbC_Ftype)
as members of the thioredoxin-like clan not recognized
as such in the recent Pfam 24.0 database release (see
Table 3). Four out of these families have not, to our
knowledge, been identified as thioredoxin-like before
(DUF929, DUF2703, DUF3088 and TrbC_Ftype). The
placement of these “novel Thx” domains in the CLANS
graph is relatively central. Most of these are families of
single-domain proteins of unknown function found in
Bacteria or Archaea. DUF1223 is also found in fungi
and plants. ArsD is present in bacterial “Arsenical resistance operon trans-acting repressors”, that act as
arsenium metallochaperones [30]. Interestingly, a related
detoxification system uses another Thx-like domain,
ArsC, an arsenate reductase that uses reduced glutathione [31]. TrbC_Ftype domain is found in bacterial
“Type-F conjugative transfer system pilin assembly proteins” [32]. DUF2703 is found fused together with two

Page 5 of 18

other related domains (ArsD and MOCO sulfurase Cterminal) that support its oxidoreductase function predicted herein. The new Thx-like domains were assigned
by significant or borderline, but consistent, HHPred and
FFAS predictions, and some were also supported by
structure comparison for recently solved structures (see
Table 3).
Domain structure of the P-DUDES proteins

The vertebrate P-DUDES proteins are multidomain, possessing one (SRPX and SRPX2) or three (CCDC80) PDUDES domains (see Figure 2). The three genes appear
to be conserved in all vertebrates for which full genome
information is available, although in fishes (e.g. Danio
rerio, Tetraodon nigroviridis) there are three distinct
paralogues of the CCDC80 gene. The similarities of vertebrate P-DUDES domains (see the phylogenetic tree in
[Additional file 1: Supplementary Fig. S1]) suggest that
a), the common ancestor of vertebrates had a duplicated
SRPX-like gene (all vertebrates analysed have orthologues
of both human SRPX and SRPX2) and b) the common
ancestor of vertebrates had at least one CCDC80-like
gene. P-DUDES domains appear to be absent from nonvertebrate chordates, and all other metazoans.
The SRPX and SRPX2 proteins possess three CCP
(complement control protein) modules (also known as
short consensus repeats SCRs or sushi repeats, Pfam

Figure 1 Diagram (Clans) showing relationships between P-DUDES proteins and 27 different Pfam families of the Thioredoxin-like
clan. Dots (nodes) represent sequences, and lines (edges) represent significant PSI-BLAST similarities. Light green: P-DUDES, yellow: TrbC, pink:
DUF2703, light blue: ArsD, orange: AhpC/TSA and Redoxin, magenta:DUF929, red: Thioredoxins, dark green: Glutaredoxin, khaki: GST_N, dark blue:
DUF3088

Pfam
domain

Top PDB hit (PDB ID)

pvalue

Top Scop hit pvalue

Top Pfam hit

ArsD

3ktb_A Arsenical resistance operon transacting repressor

DUF929

1fo5_A Thioredoxin

DUF1094

3fhk_A YphP disulfide isomerase

0 d1f9ma
c.47.1.1

DUF1223

2axo_A Hypothetical protein

0 d2axoa1
c.47.1.19

0 pfam00462 Glutaredoxin

7.5E-08 Structure known, 2axo, classified as Thx in Scop

DUF1462

1xg8_A Hypothetical protein

0 d1xg8a
c.47.1.17

0 pfam05768 DUF836 Glutaredoxin-like

1.5E-05 Structure known, 1xg8, classified as Thx in Scop

DUF2703

1ilo_A Conserved hypothetical protein

DUF2847

3iv4_A Putative oxidoreductase

DUF3088

3ir4_A Glutaredoxin 2

TrbC_Ftype

1dby_A Chloroplast thioredoxin

0 d1iloa c.47.1.1 8.7E-10 pfam00462 Glutaredoxin
0.00015 d1fo5a
c.47.1.1

Comment

9.2E-07 Structure known, 3ktb, has Thx fold, as seen by
Fatcat and Vast

0.00021 PF00085 Thioredoxin

0.00026

8.8E-06 pfam09085 Adhes-Ig_like pfam00085
Thioredoxin

1.3E-05 Structure known, 3fhk, has Thx fold as stated by
0.00035 the authors

8.6E-06 d1iloa c.47.1.1 1.7E-05 PF03135 CagE_TrbE_VirB pfam00462
Glutaredoxin
0 d1ep7a
c.47.1.1

pvalue

Pawłowski et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:590
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/590

Table 3 Similarity between known thioredoxins and the novel Thx-fold families

0.00024
0.00061

1.8E-10 pfam00085 Thioredoxin

2.1E-08 Structure known, 3iv4, has Thx fold, as stated by
the authors

1.6E-06 d1k0ma2
c.47.1.5

1.6E-06 PF02798 GST_N

0.00012

6.7E-07 d1dbya
c.47.1.1

5.8E-07 PF00085 Thioredoxin

4.1E-06

Similarity scores (HHPred) supporting similarity between thioredoxins
and the nine novel Thx-fold families ArsD, DUF929, DUF1094, DUF1223, DUF1462, DUF2703, DUF2847, DUF3088 and TrbC_Ftype.

Page 6 of 18

Pawłowski et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:590
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/590

Page 7 of 18

P-DUDES

CCP CCP

P-DUDES

HYR

CCP

P-DUDES

P-DUDES

Phosphatase

P-DUDES

CCDC80

P-DUDES

SRPX, SRPX2
Prokaryotes
Congregibacter

Figure 2 Diagram showing domain composition of representative P-DUDES proteins

identifier PF00084), each approximately 60 amino acid
residues long [33]. Sushi repeats are common in two
groups of proteins. In selectins, membrane-bound proteins involved in inflammation, sushi are extracellular
and most probably take part in mediation of blood cells
movement on inflammation-activated endothelium [34].
Sushi repeats are also abundant in various complement
system proteins [35]. In between the second and the
third sushi module in SRPX, the hyalin repeat (Hyr,
Pfam identifier PF02494) can be found which is supposed to be involved in cell adhesion [36]. The arrangement of several sushi repeats seen in SRPX and SRPX2,
is also present in selectins. Similarity between SRPX-like
proteins and selectins is relatively high, for example,
human SRPX and E-selectin share 25% identical residues
over 269 positions. The co-occurrence of sushi and Hyr
domains suggests that SRPX proteins are located extracellularly. This is in accordance with the experimental
data on extracellular expression of the P-DUDES proteins (see the Introduction section).
The search for short, nearly exact sequence matches
using the threonine-rich low-complexity region of
chicken CCDC80 (equarin, residues 328-395) as query
revealed the similarity to a secreted protein (low density
lipoprotein receptor-related protein 8). This suggests the
involvement of this sequence in extracellular matrix
attachment. The CCDC80 lysine-rich region (residues
495-610) is predicted to be a coiled-coil structure [37].
More broadly, the central region of human CCDC80,
approximately the residues 300 to 600, between the first
and second P-DUDES domains is predicted to be disordered [38]. Thus, in CCDC80, between P-DUDES
domain 1, 2 and 3 there seems to be a large, flexible or
disordered linker domain that may allow extensive interactions between the covalently linked domains.

The non-vertebrate P-DUDES proteins (bacterial and
metagenomic ones) are typically shorter, single domain
molecules, with just one exception (see Fig 2). In Congregibacter litoralis KT71 protein [GenBank:88706344],
a P-DUDES domain is found at its C-terminus, together
with a calcineurin-like phosphoesterase domain (Pfam
Metallophos, PF00149 [39]). A similar arrangement
involving an AhpC-TSA (peroxiredoxin) domain
together with a calcineurin-like phosphoesterase domain
is found in the bacterium Chitinophaga pinensis DSM
2588 protein, [GenBank:256420021]. Such an arrangement of two enzymatic domains, although not studied
experimentally, suggests the possibility of mutual regulation of the two enzymes.
Out of the 145 representative P-DUDES domain
sequences, vast majority (including all vertebrate proteins) were predicted to be extracellular (TMHMM program). Approximately half of the proteins (again
including all vertebrate ones) had signal peptides as predicted by the SignalP algorithm [40].
Structure models of the P-DUDES domain

Secondary structure predictions, and sequence alignments to known Thx-like structures produced by structure prediction methods show that the P-DUDES
domains are composed of four beta strands forming a
central beta sheet, and three or four alpha helices. In
terms of the thioredoxin fold nomenclature of Atkinson
and Babbitt [22], which is a modified version of that of
Qi and Grishin [41], P-DUDES domain secondary structure order is as follows: b-1, a-1, b-2, a-2, b-3, b-4, a-3.
These secondary structure elements form the core of a
typical thioredoxin-like fold protein [41]. Many bacterial
and metagenomic P-DUDES sequences lack most or all
of the helix a-2, which is also absent in some Thx-like

Pawłowski et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:590
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/590

structures. Also, vertebrate P-DUDES proteins differ in
the length of the a-2 region, with SRPX and SRPX2
having the shortest, and CCDC80 domain 3 having the
longest a-2 region. The Thx-like fold proteins are
known to vary in their structures around the typical
“classic” arrangement, and exhibit even cases of circular
permutations of secondary structure elements, where a
region from the N-terminus of a protein may be
“moved” to the C-terminus or vice versa [41]. As seen
in the multiple sequence alignment in Figure 3, the central region of the alignment (columns 60-110) is of variable length and poorly alignable. In the typical
peroxiredoxin template used herein for P-DUDES structure modeling (1we0), this region includes the helix
alpha-3, an “extra” beta strand that extends the central
beta sheet, and a short “extra” alpha helix. This whole
stretch of the polypeptide chain forms a large “loop” on
the periphery of the central fold (mainchain of residues
73 and 116 approach each other to within 6 Å). In PDUDES domains of SRPX/SRPX2 and all microbial
sequences, this region is short (approx. 10-20 residues)
and in some marine metagenomic P-DUDES proteins it
is missing altogether. Thus, the poorly alignable region
of P-DUDES can be seen as “dispensable” to the structure. In support, for the vertebrate P-DUDES sequences,
the central sequence region obtains highest scores for
the disordered state prediction (data not shown).
From among the many possible structure modeling
templates, three were selected: “Uncharacterized Conserved Protein”, Geobacillus kaustophilus [PDB:2ywi],
“AhpE, a 1-Cys Peroxiredoxin”, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, [PDB:1xvw] and “Peroxiredoxin (Ahpc)”, Amphibacillus xylanus, [PDB:1we0]. These templates had both
favorable FFAS score for sequence comparison with the
P-DUDES domains, indicating reliable structural similarity, and possessed a cysteine residue at the C-terminus
of the peroxiredoxin domain, which serves the function
of a “resolving cysteine” in the peroxiredoxin catalytic
mechanism [42]. Since the cysteine at the C-terminus is
a characteristic feature of the P-DUDES domain (also
see discussion further below), it was supposed that it
may be a factor in the catalytic mechanism. Also, the
templates representing both types of peroxiredoxin
dimer interfaces were chosen (see below). The three
modelling templates belong to the AhpC/TSA Pfam
family. A series of 15 structure models were built,
including models of all five human P-DUDES domains,
multiplied by the three templates chosen.
Since, most known peroxiredoxins function as homodimers or higher order multimers of homodimers [43],
P-DUDES domain structural models were built as such
homodimers. Two basic dimeric arrangements are
known for peroxiredoxins, so called “A-type” and “Btype” interface forms [43]. Two of the templates

Page 8 of 18

exhibited “type-A” interface, whilst the third one (1we0)
- the “type-B” one. In the “B-type” interface, the beta-4
strands of the two monomers form an “edge to edge”
association, making up an extended 8-stranded betasheet. In the “A-type” interface, the dimer interface is
made-up mostly by residues from helices alpha-1 and
alpha-3. However, model quality parameters (Modeller
and MetaMQAP, see Methods section) were not sufficient to select a preferred model out of the alternative
P-DUDES dimer models.
Although we present structure models of P-DUDES
domains in dimeric arrangements as speculative ones,
comparing the alternative dimeric arrangements, for the
SRPX2 protein Western blot data suggest the presence
of a dimer alongside with the monomer in the extracellular medium [16].
The relevance of the structure predictions for molecular
function

The sequence similarity of P-DUDES to peroxiredoxins
and to bacterial comigratory proteins (BCPs), in particular, may reflect only the general fold similarity because
the cysteine residue, important for peroxiredoxin function is not conserved in the P-DUDES domain. However, 53 out of 145 analysed P-DUDES domains,
including all vertebrate ones, possess a conserved
cysteine residue, present also in Mycobacterium, Cyanothece, all the analysed Vibrionales, and a number of
metagenomic sequences (see Figure 3 and [Additional
file 1: Suppl. Fig. S2]). Although this cysteine is shifted
by 12 and 15 residues, relative to the two cysteines in
the classic thioredoxin-like active site motif CxxC, we
hypothesize that the P-DUDES conserved cysteine may
be the peroxidatic residue (CysP). Also, a second
cysteine, located at the C-terminus of the P-DUDES
domain is strictly co-conserved with the putative peroxidatic one (see Figure 3). The Fisher’s exact test p-value,
which estimates the significance of the co-occurrence of
the two cysteine residues, is less than 10-10 . Thus, we
hypothesize that the C-terminal cysteine in P-DUDES
may serve the role of the resolving cysteine (CysR) [42].
This residue is used in “typical 2-Cys peroxiredoxins” to
restore the starting state of CysP [44].
The putative peroxidatic cysteine of the P-DUDES
domain is located within a C-x(4)-R motif (see logo in
[Additional file 1: Suppl. Fig. S3]), whereby the Arg residue is even more conserved than the cysteine itself. As
discussed by Poole and colleagues, an arginine close to
the peroxidatic cysteine may stabilize the active site
thiolate anion [42]. However, distance between the Arg
Nε and the Cys Sg atoms in our models of P-DUDES
domains is on the order of 16 Å (Ca-Ca distance is on
the order of 10 Å), which makes a direct interaction
between Arg and Cys-bound substrate less likely.

Pawłowski et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:590
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/590

Page 9 of 18

Figure 3 Sequence alignment (Muscle) of selected P-DUDES domains together with selected known peroxiredoxins added, among
them the templates used in structure modeling. Secondary structure, as determined in the 1we0 structure, indicated. For a complete version
of this alignment, see [Additional file: Suppl. Fig. S2].

Pawłowski et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:590
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/590

Hence, the function prediction of peroxiredoxins for
P-DUDES domains is supported by a) the significant
sequence similarity to peroxiredoxins, and b) the frequent presence of a conserved pair of Cys residues.
However, this prediction is speculative. The first conserved P-DUDES Cys residue is located at a different
location than the “classic” peroxidatic cysteine of peroxiredoxins. The former is in the C-terminal part of helix
a-1 or in a loop between a-1 and the strand b-2, while
the latter - at N-terminus of helix a-1 or in a loop
between the strand b-1 and the helix a-1 [44]. Thus,
the putative catalytic cysteine of P-DUDES domain is
exposed on a different “face” of the molecule than the
typical thioredoxin active site cysteine.
Also, the monomer surface in the vicinity of CysP in
the structure models of P-DUDES is rather convex (see
[Additional file 1: Suppl. Fig. S4]), not allowing for a
typical substrate-binding cleft. Yet, a cleft formed by a
rearranged C-terminus of the P-DUDES molecule or by
the other P-DUDES chain in a dimer might be plausible.
Moreover, the structure models built using templates
identified by remote sequence similarity relationships (in
this case, 9-15% identical residues over 140 positions)
are of an illustrative rather than predictive nature, and
the fine features of the molecular surface cannot be
treated with certainty [45].
The CxxxxR motif does exhibit some conserved features, it can be summarised more precisely as a regular
expression Cx[LIFM][DE][DE]R, where square brackets
indicate alternative residues at a position. As observed
in P-DUDES models, the sidechains of Asp or Glu residue at position 5 in the motif can stabilize the Cys residue by a hydrogen bond to the cysteine SH group, and
itself be stabilized by a salt bridge to the Arg residue at
position 6 in the motif.
The molecular surface near the presumed CysP catalytic residue in human P-DUDES proteins is not formed
of strictly conserved residues, and its electrostatic potential or lipophilic “potential” [46] are not conserved (see
[Additional file 1: Suppl. Fig. S4]). Some hydrophobic
surface segments are formed near CysP by Leu residues
at position 5 in the CxxxxR motif or by aromatic Phe/
Tyr residues preceding the CysP. In addition, some
areas of negative potential are formed by the acidic residues at positions 2 or 5 in CxxxxR. However, even in
the small group of five human P-DUDES domains, these
features are not conserved. In contrast to P-DUDES, at
the active site of peroxiredoxin from Aeropyrum pernix
K1, with peroxide H 2 O2 bound [47], the surface near
the CysP has a positive electrostatic potential, which is
brought by an Arg residue distal in sequence. The peroxide molecule interacts with CysP, and with backbone
amine groups, as well as with sidechain of a Thr residue
located 3 positions before CysP.

Page 10 of 18

Furthermore, for the second conserved P-DUDES
cysteine residue, the distance to the presumed catalytic
cysteine is prohibitive for direct interaction (on the
order of 25Å), but a structural rearrangement can be
imagined, including either the C-terminal helix and tail,
or the corresponding region from the other chain.
Variable location of the active site peroxidatic cysteine
in thioredoxin fold proteins has been noted before [48],
however this variation involved shifts of a few residues
close to the N-terminus of helix a-1. In the P-DUDES
family, besides the “typical P-DUDES cysteine location”
at the C-terminus of helix a-1, several alternative
cysteine locations are found, allowing a hypothesis that
other ways of arranging active sites are also possible in
the P-DUDES structural framework, and also providing
speculative “intermediate” solutions, between the “classic
Thx” and “classic P-DUDES” locations. These include
Cys locations in the loop b-1/a-1, at the N-terminus of
helix a-1, at the N-terminus of strand b-1, and within
the strand b-2. All these alternative Cys locations are
found in proteins from marine metagenomes lacking the
CxxxxR motif. An example of a thioredoxin fold proteins, where the active site has been “shifted” away from
the canonical CxxC location at the N-terminus of helix
a-1, are glutathione transferases [49-51] in which the
active site residue varies between tyrosine, serine and
cysteine [52,48]. In the recent exhaustive survey of
thioredoxins-like fold proteins, Atkinson and Babbitt
[22] noted that 22% of Thx-fold sequences had none of
the two archetypical catalytic Cys residues conserved.
Most of these belonged to the glutathione transferase
(GST_N) family.
In summary, the hypothesis that the CxxxxR motif in
P-DUDES is responsible for the peroxiredoxin function
is far from being proven. Two alternatives can be envisaged. Firstly, P-DUDES proteins may not serve the oxidoreductase function, in contrast to the overwhelming
majority of the Thx-like fold proteins. Secondly, oxidoreductase function in P-DUDES may be mediated by
residues other than the CxxxxR motif, for example the
[DN]xx[YF] motif that aligns perfectly with the CxxC
active site motif of thioredoxins in HHPred analysis.
This may be plausible, since in tyrosine-type glutathione
transferases, the catalytic residue is a tyrosine, although
the mechanism of its interaction with glutathione is not
fully understood [48].
Conserved sequence motifs and dimeric structure

The proteins of the P-DUDES family exhibit similarity
to the atypical 2-Cys peroxiredoxins, whereas most
often the active unit is a dimer, and the CysP-CysR
interaction is of intermolecular type. This is, most likely,
also the case for P-DUDES domains, since in the model
of a typical P-DUDES domain the distance between the

Pawłowski et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:590
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/590

Sg atoms of CysP and CysR is on the order of 25 Å (see
Figure 4). The intermolecular distances between CysP
and CysR in alternative dimer models are also large
(more than 25 Å); however, the models are not accurate,

Page 11 of 18

and peroxiredoxins are known to undergo substantial
conformational rearrangements upon transitions
between the reduced and oxidised forms. It is noteworthy that all three P-DUDES domains in CCDC80

Figure 4 Structure models of P-DUDES domains from human SRPX in dimeric arrangement. Colouring is by MetaMQAP score that reflects
predicted model accuracy: blue - high accuracy, red: low accuracy. Putative Cys-P (yellow) and Cys-R (green) residues shown. Models were built
using the following templates: 1xvw (top), 2ywi (center), 1we0 (bottom). The latter is a “B-type” dimer, the others are “A-type” dimers.

Pawłowski et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:590
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/590

proteins have retained their putative catalytic Cys residues. A hypothesis could be that they function as a
functional “hetero-trimer” of subunits, possibly as a part
of a larger multimer. This would be remotely reminiscent of a “pentamer of dimers” arrangement seen for
most bacterial peroxiredoxins [43].
Besides the CxxxxR motif (residues 367-372 in human
SRPX sequence numbering) and a putative resolving
cysteine at the C-terminus, other conserved P-DUDES
sequence features include: arginine at the N-terminus of
strand b-1 (R34), an aspartate and a lysine between
strands b-3 and b-4 (K426, usually within a GxDGxxK
motif, res. 420-426), and an IDxxxxRxxE motif (res.
442-451), often more specifically IDxMPMRxxE, in the
region covering helix a-3 (see Figure 3 and sequence
logos in [Additional file 1: Suppl. Fig. S3]).
The plausibility of three different modeling templates
could be judged by the extent of the inter-chain interface, the presence of conserved motifs on the interface,
and the physico-chemical features of the surface (see
[Additional file 1: Suppl. Fig. S5, Suppl. Fig. S6]). In the
case of P-DUDES proteins, the inter-chain interface
does not differ significantly between the alternative
dimeric arrangements. The B-type dimer interface (template 1we0), that has the b-4 strands of the two chains
paired, thus forming an intermolecular eight-stranded
sheet, buries 1800-2400 Å2 of protein surface in models
of various human P-DUDES domains. The other A-type
dimer interface (template 2ywi), formed mostly by
helices a-1 and a-3, buries 800-1600 Å2.
Consurf analysis of sequence conservation mapped on
protein surface (see [Additional file 1: Suppl. Fig. S7])
shows that the evolutionarily most conserved surface
features in the dimer interface of the SRPX/2ywi model
(model of SRPX built on the 2ywi template) are L432 of
strand b-4, R372 of the CxxxxR motif in the a-1/b-2,
and D443 and R448 of the IDxxxxRxxE motif in helix
a-3. The latter motif contributes a conserved interchain salt bridge R448-E451. Conserved surface features
in the interface of the SRPX/1we0 model are limited to
K426, R428 and L432, both in the strand b-4, and R448
in helix a-3, and the conserved inter-chain hydrophobic
interaction F445-L447.
In the examination of the physicochemical properties
of alternative dimer interfaces (see [Additional file 1:
Suppl. Fig. S5]) no consistent electrostatic potential pattern could be observed for the five human P-DUDES
domains in either dimer type model (A or B). The lipophilic “potential” maps for the two interfaces consistently shows hydrophobic patches, originating mostly
from helix a-3, with more lipophilic character seen in
the B-type interface (models on 1we0 template).
In summary, judging from interface size, presence of
conserved residues on the interface surface, and physical

Page 12 of 18

features of the surface, the B-type interface seems to be
slightly more probable. However, this remains to be
confirmed experimentally. Moreover, although dimer is
the prevalent form among known peroxiredoxin structures, it cannot be ruled out that P-DUDES domains
function as monomers or different multimers.
Bacterial P-DUDES domain proteins

The spread of P-DUDES domains into evolutionarily distant bacterial taxa precludes a definite statement regarding the origin of the group (see Figure 5). Interestingly,
although majority of the marine metagenomic P-DUDES
sequences do group with alpha-Proteobacteria, gammaProteobacteria, and the CFB group bacteria, a substantial
cluster of marine metagenome P-DUDES sequences
group together with vertebrate domains (Figure 5). It
would be tempting to speculate about the taxonomic
identity of the latter metagenomic cluster. A similar picture is obtained when the tree is constructed using a different multiple alignment method, Promals vs Muscle,
and a different phylogenetic tree construction algorithm,
BioNJ vs PhyML (data not shown). Overall, the phylogenetic tree of the representative P-DUDES domains does
group the sequences accordingly to their taxonomic
assignment. Such a phylogenetic distribution of PDUDES genes may reflect several alternative evolutionary
histories (see Discussion section).
The P-DUDES-possessing bacteria were checked for
habitat and lifestyle preferences. No obvious trends were
observed for the whole P-DUDES group or for the subgroup of P-DUDES bacteria with the presumed peroxidatic Cys residue conserved. Yet, the “Cys subgroup”
had a higher proportion of aquatic species than the rest.
Most P-DUDES species were mesophilic, and a minority
was pathogenic with a diverse host range including
humans, insects and corals. The only significant difference between the Cys subgroup and the rest of PDUDES bacteria was oxygen requirement, “Facultative”
and “Aerobic”, respectively (Fisher’s Exact Test p-value
= 0.008).
STRING [53] analysis did not show any co-expression
conservation. Likewise, analysis of genomic environments of the P-DUDES bacterial species did not yield
strong clues as to the functional roles of the P-DUDES
family.
Evidence for the P-DUDES link to glioblastoma
progression

In many cancer-related microarray experiments (see
Introduction section), P-DUDES genes showed diverse
expression changes, although most often SRPX and
CCD80 were downregulated whereas SRPX2 was upregulated. Because of the peroxiredoxin functional hypothesis
and cancer-related changes observed, we speculated that

Pawłowski et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:590
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/590

Page 13 of 18

Figure 5 Phylogenetic tree (PhyML) of 145 representative P-DUDES domains. Coloured according to taxonomic group of origin (inner pie
chart, brown: vertebrate, grey: marine metagenome, red: gamma-proteobacteria, pink: high-GC group bacteria, blue: CFB group bacteria,
turquoise: Cyanobacteria, yellow: beta-proteobacteria, green: alpha-proteobacteria) and presence of the presumed active site cysteine residues
(outer ring, yellow : “typical” P-DUDES (Cys-P, Cys-R) arrangement, brown: ICK motif instead of CysP, green: KCR motif, pink: KCV motif,
aquamarine: TCY motif). Branches with support values > 0.8 are marked with grey circles.

P-DUDES proteins might be involved in a common biological mechanism. Furthermore, we speculated that
common function might be detectable in an environment
or situation where all three genes would exhibit similar
behaviour. Thus, we used the Gene Chaser tool [54] to
search for microarray experiments where all three human
P-DUDES genes would show similar expression changes.
The only disease-related datasets where all the three

P-DUDES genes showed significant and consistent
expression changes (as determined by q-values in GeneChaser) were two glioblastoma expression datasets
GDS1813 and GDS1962 [55,56]. Comparisons considered
here involved samples classified as “normal vs glioblastoma” and “non-tumor vs glioblastomas” in the datasets
GDS1813 and GDS1962, respectively. The fold changes
in the two experiments were: 4.6 and 5.6 for SRPX, 10.6

Pawłowski et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:590
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/590

and 2.5 for SRPX2, 10.2 and 5.5 for CCDC80, with
Student t-test p-values between 0.005 and 1.5E-08 (See
[Additional file 1: Suppl. Fig. S7]). Recently, Park and colleagues [57] offered a meta-analysis of four diverse glioblastoma microarray studies. SRPX2 is found among
their top regulated genes, (q-value 0.0069, average fold
change glioma vs normal: 2.4).
Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) has
recently gained attention as one of the hallmarks of the
transition from localized tumors to metastasing malignancies, whereas the loss of attachment, loss of cell
polarity, increased migratory and invasive properties are
important features [58], [59]. Recently, Phillips and colleagues [60], analysed subclasses of glioblastomas and
found that a tumor sample set termed “mesenchymal
subset” had high expression of genes negatively correlated to patient survival. This was one of a number of
studies which argued that in glioblastoma, expression
profiles predict survival better than histological classifications [61]. Our analysis shows that SRPX and SRPX2
differ in expression between the mesenchymal subset
and the rest of glioblastoma samples (subsets as defined
by Phillips et al. [60], fold changes 1.7 and 2.4, respectively, t-test p-values 5.5E-4 and 1.5E-7, respectively).
Incidentally, the Phillips paper [60], points out the similarity of the mesenchymal glioma subset to a number of
tissues (bone, synovium, smooth muscle, endothelium,
dendritic cells). These are the same tissues that normally
express P-DUDES genes (as seen in the Symatlas database, data not shown) [62].
Recently, Iavarone and co-workers [63] elucidated
transcriptional network of genes involved in mesenchymal transformation of brain tumors. They computed a
“worst prognosis group” of genes, and found that it displayed “mesenchymal features”. This set included
SRPX2, as significantly linked to poor glioblastoma prognosis (t-test p-value 0.024).
A putative signalling pathway linking SRPX2 to the
cancer regulator kinase FAK may be elucidated using
Ingenuity IPA tools. Since overexpression of SRPX2 was
shown to lead to an increase in FAK phosphorylation
[16], IPA relationship database was queried for kinases
that had direct interactions with both FAK (PTK2) and
any of known SRPX2 interactors (PLAUR, CTSB and
ADAMTS4). The five kinases thus found: LYN, FYN,
FGR, PDGFRB, EGFR can be candidates for mediators of
SRPX2-regulated FAK phosphorylation. Two of these
(PDGFRB and EGFR) are implicated in glioblastoma [64].
Altogether, the various expression studies discussed
and analysed here, support the role of P-DUDES genes
and proteins in cancer, and specifically link it to glioblastoma. More specifically, we postulate here that
P-DUDES proteins are involved in the EMT and may be

Page 14 of 18

involved in regulation of the interactions between the
cell and the extracellular matrix.

Discussion
We have demonstrated that the P-DUDES family is a
large group of vertebrate and bacterial proteins. We
have predicted a thioredoxin-like fold for these proteins,
and described the possible specific function of a peroxiredoxin. We noted that despite similarity to 2-Cys peroxiredoxins, a different active site arrangement has to be
present for the enzymatic activity. Although found in
many bacterial species, a P-DUDES domain containing
gene is probably not an “essential” gene, since it is often
missing from a species within a genus possessing PDUDES. For example, it is present in several Pseudomonas species, but absent from Pseudomonas aeruginosa.
Likewise, P-DUDES is present in Mycobacterium gilvum,
but absent from Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Yet, some
alpha-proteobacterial genomes (Roseovarius sp.
HTCC2601 and Sagittula stellata E-37) harbour two PDUDES genes sharing as little as 33% and 36% protein
sequence identity, respectively.
Adding to P-DUDES involvement in cancer reported
by many authors, with opposite expression changes
cited for different genes and different pathologies, we
discovered its involvement in glioblastoma, and specifically the link to epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition.
This is consistent with a role in regulating the interactions of the cell with the extracellular matrix that is one
of conclusions of our systems biology analysis of expression data, and has been reported previously.
It has been previously discussed [44] that peroxiredoxins serve two main functions - one in stress defense, and
another in physiological peroxide signalling that involves
an array of enzymes of various specificities and sensitivities. It is tempting to speculate that P-DUDES domains
provide those “yet unidentified peroxide sensors” [65]
and possibly couple peroxide or similar substrate turnover to interactions with other effector proteins that are
carried out employing the non-enzymatic domains of PDUDES proteins (Sushi, Hyr, coiled-coil).
In eukaryotes, reactive oxygen species is not only
defended against as a toxic threat, but hydrogen peroxide is also a signalling molecule. Many proteins,
enzymes, channels, etc., are redox-regulated [66]. The
enzyme Peroxiredoxin 3 (PRDX3) regulates apoptosis
signalling by mitochondria [67]. Another precedent for
possible P-DUDES involvement in cancer progression is
the human peroxiredoxin 1(PRDX1) that controls neuronal differentiation by thiol-redox-dependent activation
of the GDE2 protein [68].
Interestingly, Szepetowski and co-workers have recently
identified SRPX2 as one of the putative interactors of

Pawłowski et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:590
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/590

ERP44 (TXNDC4) [19]. ERP44 is a protein containing
three thioredoxin domains, residing in the endoplasmic
reticulum. The role of ERP44 is that of a protein disulphide isomerase involved in oxidative protein folding and
assembly within the secretory pathway [69]. In the context
of well-known, functionally-relevant multimerisation of
peroxiredoxins, interaction of a predicted peroxiredoxin
domain protein, SRPX2, with an established oxidoreductase of similar fold, ERP44, may suggest involvement of
SRPX2 in redox-dependent regulation of the secretory
pathway.
The discovery of P-DUDES domains has an interesting
evolutionary implication. The presence of rather few
P-DUDES genes scattered in the space of sequenced prokaryotic and eukaryotic genomes suggests that it has been
the subject of the horizontal gene transfer (HGT). An intuitive conclusion would be that the bacterial P-DUDES genes
were ancestral, most probably originating from alpha-Proteobacteria. This hypothesis is supported by the relative
commonness of P-DUDES genes in this clade, and also by
the presence of pairs of P-DUDES genes exhibiting low
sequence identity in some alpha-proteobacterial genomes.
Such gene pairs, not observed in other bacterial phyla, suggest ancient gene duplication events. Subsequently, after the
spread of P-DUDES genes to other bacterial phyla by Mendelian inheritance and/or HGT, at some point they were
introduced to the common ancestor of the vertebrates. The
internal fusion events found in eukaryotic genomes would
be a natural consequence of such an evolutionary path.
Another point that may reinforce such a phylogeny is
related to ecological niches in which P-DUDES microbes
live and specifically the fact that vast majority of P-DUDES
genes come from marine metagenomes and marine bacteria. HGT from marine bacteria to marine facultative
pathogens and later to vertebrates seems to be a possible
way of inheritance of P-DUDES by vertebrates. However,
such an evolutionary history is just a hypothesis, and other
evolutionary origin possibilities cannot be completely
excluded, e.g. ancient origin of the P-DUDES domain followed by the widespread gene loss, or the independent gain
of this domain in bacteria and vertebrates.

Conclusions
It is always a challenge to turn a structure prediction
into a function prediction with specific experimental
validation suggestions. It is even a greater challenge to
extend a molecular function prediction into a biological
process prediction. The former is usually linked to protein structure, the latter not much so. Here, we endeavoured to complement structure predictions with the
analyses of phylogeny, microbial habitat and lifestyle,
and disease-related expression datasets in order to gain
insight into the possible roles of the peroxiredoxin function postulated for P-DUDES genes. Nevertheless, the

Page 15 of 18

ultimate answers will only be provided by experiments,
both biochemical and biological. The former will involve
validation of the molecular peroxiredoxin function,
including substrate identification, the latter may employ
functional analyses, e.g. knock-down and overexpression
analyses combined with various stimuli.

Methods
Identification of the P-DUDES domain, structure
prediction, sequence analysis

For remote homology identification, PSI-BLAST
searches were executed using the standard parameters
on the nr and env_nr databases at NCBI as of January
2009. Saturated BLAST [23] searches used five iterations
of PSI-BLAST on nr and env_nr databases, BLAST
expect value 0.001 and redundancy threshold for selection of representative sequences set to 60% identity as
criteria for seed selection. For Pfam domain assignments, HMMER2 on the Pfam database as of January
2009 were used. The P-DUDES proteins were rechecked using HMMER3 on the Pfam database as of
October 2009.
For survey of similarities within the thioredoxin-like
clan, the CLANS algorithm [29] was ran on a set of
sequences including a) all the Pfam “seeds” from the 27
families of the clan (CL0172), b) the 145 representative
P-DUDES domains, c) all the Pfam “seeds” from the
Pfam families DUF929, DUF1094, DUF1462, DUF2847,
DUF1223, ArsD, DUF2703, DUF3088 and TrbC_Ftype
that were assigned by us to the CL0172 clan. CLANS
was run with five iterations of PSI-BLAST, using the
BLOSUM45 substitution matrix and inclusion threshold
0.001. For the graph, similarity relations with significance of p-value less than 0.001 were considered. Transmembrane region predictions were achieved by the
TMHMM and MEMSAT servers [70,71]. The Jpred and
PsiPred servers were used to predict the secondary
structure of the P-DUDES domains [72,73]. Multiple
alignments of the P-DUDES domain were built using
the PROMALS [74] and MUSCLE programs [75]. The
former includes the predicted secondary structures in
the buildup of the alignment, and both employ remote
homologues of the aligned sequences. For the multiple
alignments, N- and C-terminal regions that could not be
aligned to human P-DUDES proteins were removed
from the bacterial P-DUDES proteins.
For structural prediction, the three methods used were
FFAS3 [76], that uses sequence profile-to-profile comparison, HHPRED [28] that employs HMM-to-HMM
comparison, and Phyre [77], a metaserver that employs
a number of prediction methods.
Phylogenetic analyses were performed using the phylogeny.fr server [78], employing the maximum likelihood
method PhyML, with the Approximate Likelihood-Ratio

Pawłowski et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:590
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/590

Test (aLRT) for branch support. The trees were constructed using Muscle multiple sequence alignments for:
a) human and Danio rerio P-DUDES domains, b) for
the set of 145 representative P-DUDES domains supplemented by all Gallus gallus and D. rerio domains. The
sequence variability was displayed as sequence logos
using the WebLogo server [79]. Disordered structures
were predicted by the DisEMBL server [38].
Structure models of the P-DUDES domain

Sequence alignments produced by the FFAS03 structure
prediction method were used to construct 3D structure
models by the program MODELLER [80] using the standard procedures: multichain for dimers and model single
for monomers. The models were energy-minimised using
the Schrodinger OPLS_2005 force-field. Out of seven
models presented by MODELLER, the one with most
favourable molpdf score was selected for further analysis.
The MetaMQAP server [81] was used to estimate the
correctness of a 3D model using a number of mode quality assessment methods in a meta-analysis.
For the calculation of molecular surfaces, electrostatic
potentials, and lipophilic potentials, the Vasco program
was used using standard parameters [46]. Accessible
surfaces were calculated using the Proface server [82].
For the analysis of conservation of surface features, the
Consurf server was used [83], using five PSI-BLAST
iterations, homologue detection from Uniprot, and a
maximum of 100 homologues.
Analysis of microbial P-DUDES domains

Habitats and lifestyles of bacterial P-DUDES proteinpossessing organisms were collected from the Microbial
Genomes resource within Entrez Genome Project database at NCBI. Analysis of genome environments of the
P-DUDES bacterial species was performed using SEED
[84,85], MicrobesOnline [86] and Integrated microbial
genomes (IMG) [87]. Gene co-expression was studied
using the STRING [53] tool.
Expression and biological relationship analysis

For the identification of microarray experiments with
similar expression patterns of human P-DUDES genes,
the GeneChaser tool was used [54]. The chosen glioblastoma-related microarray gene expression datasets
(GDS1813, GDS1962 [55,56]) were downloaded from the
Gene Expression Omnibus database at NCBI [88]. Genes
in the GDS1813 dataset were filtered by requiring a “present” flag in at least 30 out of 52 samples. For the calculation of fold changes and genes correlated to the
P-DUDES genes, as well as for gene expression data
visualizations, Tibco Spotfire DecisionSite for Functional
Genomics software was used (Tibco, Palo Alto, CA, USA,
http://spotfire.tibco.com/). Fold changes were defined as

Page 16 of 18

ratios of mean expression values for glioblastoma versus
normal brain samples. The significance of fold changes
was estimated by the Student’s t-test. In Fig. S7 [Additional file 1: Suppl. Fig. S7], expression fold change values
above 2 or below 0.2, and t-test p-values better that 0.01
were required for both the comparisons.

Additional material
Additional file 1: “PDUDES_Suppl_File” contains Supplementary
Figure legends and all seven Supplementary Figures (S1-S7).
Supplementary Fig. S1. Phylogenetic tree of representative vertebrate PDUDES domains. Supplementary Fig. S2. Sequence alignment of
representative P-DUDES proteins together with selected known
peroxiredoxins. Supplementary Fig. S3. Sequence logo for selected PDUDES domain regions. Supplementary Fig. S4. Surfaces near putative
peroxidatic cysteine residue coloured by lipophilic potential or by
electrostatic potential. Supplementary Fig. S5. Putative interaction
surfaces of the P-DUDES domains from human SRPX, SRPX2, CCDC80
proteins, coloured by lipophilic potential or by electrostatic potential.
Supplementary Fig. S6. Putative interaction surfaces of the P-DUDES
domain from the human SRPX protein, coloured by sequence
conservation among homologues. Supplementary Fig. S7. P-DUDES gene
expression changes for two glioblastoma datasets.

List of abbreviations
HGT: Horizontal Gene Transfer; Thx: Thioredoxin; EMT: epithelial-tomesenchymal transition.
Acknowledgements
We thank the anonymous reviewers for their valuable comments and
suggestions. K. P., A. L. and T. S. were supported by the Polish Ministry of
Science and Higher Education grant N N301 3165 33. M. G. and A. M. were
supported by the Polish Ministry of Science and Higher Education grants N
N303 0178 33 and N N401 3126 33. A. G. was supported by NIH grant R01
GM087218.
Author details
1
Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics, PAS, Pawińskiego 5A, 02-106
Warsaw, Poland. 2Nencki Institute of Experimental Biology, PAS, Pasteura 3,
02-093 Warsaw, Poland. 3Sanford|Burnham Medical Research Institute, 10901
N. Torrey Pines Rd., La Jolla, CA 92037, USA. 4Warsaw University of Life
Sciences, Nowoursynowska 166, 02-787 Warsaw, Poland.
Authors’ contributions
MG discovered the P-DUDES similarity to peroxiredoxins. MG, KP, AM, TS,
and AL carried out the bioinformatics analyses. MG, AG and KP conceived
the study, and participated in its design and coordination. MG and KP
drafted the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Received: 24 May 2010 Accepted: 21 October 2010
Published: 21 October 2010
References
1. Dry KL, Aldred MA, Edgar AJ, Brown J, Manson FD, Ho MF, Prosser J,
Hardwick LJ, Lennon AA, Thomson K, et al: Identification of a novel gene,
ETX1 from Xp21.1, a candidate gene for X-linked retintis pigmentosa
(RP3). Hum Mol Genet 1995, 4(12):2347-2353.
2. Meindl A, Carvalho MR, Herrmann K, Lorenz B, Achatz H, Lorenz B,
Apfelstedt-Sylla E, Wittwer B, Ross M, Meitinger T: A gene (SRPX) encoding
a sushi-repeat-containing protein is deleted in patients with X-linked
retinitis pigmentosa. Hum Mol Genet 1995, 4(12):2339-2346.
3. Pan J, Nakanishi K, Yutsudo M, Inoue H, Li Q, Oka K, Yoshioka N, Hakura A:
Isolation of a novel gene down-regulated by v-src. FEBS Lett 1996, 383(12):21-25.

Pawłowski et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:590
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/590

4.
5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.
19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

Inoue H, Pan J, Hakura A: Suppression of v-src transformation by the drs
gene. J Virol 1998, 72(3):2532-2537.
Kurosawa H, Goi K, Inukai T, Inaba T, Chang KS, Shinjyo T, Rakestraw KM,
Naeve CW, Look AT: Two candidate downstream target genes for E2AHLF. Blood 1999, 93(1):321-332.
Marcantonio D, Chalifour LE, Alaoui-Jamali MA, Alpert L, Huynh HT: Cloning
and characterization of a novel gene that is regulated by estrogen and
is associated with mammary gland carcinogenesis. Endocrinology 2001,
142(6):2409-2418.
Aoki K, Sun YJ, Aoki S, Wada K, Wada E: Cloning, expression, and mapping
of a gene that is upregulated in adipose tissue of mice deficient in
bombesin receptor subtype-3. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2002,
290(4):1282-1288.
Mu H, Ohta K, Kuriyama S, Shimada N, Tanihara H, Yasuda K, Tanaka H:
Equarin, a novel soluble molecule expressed with polarity at chick
embryonic lens equator, is involved in eye formation. Mech Dev 2003,
120(2):143-155.
Bommer GT, Jager C, Durr EM, Baehs S, Eichhorst ST, Brabletz T, Hu G,
Frohlich T, Arnold G, Kress DC, et al: DRO1, a gene down-regulated by
oncogenes, mediates growth inhibition in colon and pancreatic cancer
cells. J Biol Chem 2005, 280(9):7962-7975.
Shimakage M, Kodama K, Kawahara K, Kim CJ, Ikeda Y, Yutsudo M, Inoue H:
Downregulation of drs tumor suppressor gene in highly malignant
human pulmonary neuroendocrine tumors. Oncol Rep 2009,
21(6):1367-1372.
Tambe Y, Yoshioka-Yamashita A, Mukaisho K, Haraguchi S, Chano T, Isono T,
Kawai T, Suzuki Y, Kushima R, Hattori T, et al: Tumor prone phenotype of
mice deficient in a novel apoptosis-inducing gene, drs. Carcinogenesis
2007, 28(4):777-784.
Tambe Y, Isono T, Haraguchi S, Yoshioka-Yamashita A, Yutsudo M, Inoue H:
A novel apoptotic pathway induced by the drs tumor suppressor gene.
Oncogene 2004, 23(17):2977-2987.
Tambe Y, Yamamoto A, Isono T, Chano T, Fukuda M, Inoue H: The drs
tumor suppressor is involved in the maturation process of autophagy
induced by low serum. Cancer Lett 2009, 283(1):74-83.
Visconti R, Schepis F, Iuliano R, Pierantoni GM, Zhang L, Carlomagno F,
Battaglia C, Martelli ML, Trapasso F, Santoro M, et al: Cloning and
molecular characterization of a novel gene strongly induced by the
adenovirus E1A gene in rat thyroid cells. Oncogene 2003, 22(7):1087-1097.
Manabe R, Tsutsui K, Yamada T, Kimura M, Nakano I, Shimono C, Sanzen N,
Furutani Y, Fukuda T, Oguri Y, et al: Transcriptome-based systematic
identification of extracellular matrix proteins. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008,
105(35):12849-12854.
Tanaka K, Arao T, Maegawa M, Matsumoto K, Kaneda H, Kudo K, Fujita Y,
Yokote H, Yanagihara K, Yamada Y, et al: SRPX2 is overexpressed in gastric
cancer and promotes cellular migration and adhesion. Int J Cancer 2009,
124(5):1072-1080.
Yamada Y, Arao T, Gotoda T, Taniguchi H, Oda I, Shirao K, Shimada Y,
Hamaguchi T, Kato K, Hamano T, et al: Identification of prognostic
biomarkers in gastric cancer using endoscopic biopsy samples. Cancer
Sci 2008, 99(11):2193-2199.
Zhao J, Guan JL: Signal transduction by focal adhesion kinase in cancer.
Cancer Metastasis Rev 2009, 28(1-2):35-49.
Royer-Zemmour B, Ponsole-Lenfant M, Gara H, Roll P, Leveque C, Massacrier A,
Ferracci G, Cillario J, Robaglia-Schlupp A, Vincentelli R, et al: Epileptic and
developmental disorders of the speech cortex: ligand/receptor interaction
of wild-type and mutant SRPX2 with the plasminogen activator receptor
uPAR. Hum Mol Genet 2008, 17(23):3617-3630.
Miljkovic-Licina M, Hammel P, Garrido-Urbani S, Bradfield PF, Szepetowski P,
Imhof BA: Sushi repeat protein X-linked 2, a novel mediator of
angiogenesis. Faseb J 2009.
Roll P, Rudolf G, Pereira S, Royer B, Scheffer IE, Massacrier A, Valenti MP,
Roeckel-Trevisiol N, Jamali S, Beclin C, et al: SRPX2 mutations in disorders
of language cortex and cognition. Hum Mol Genet 2006, 15(7):1195-1207.
Atkinson HJ, Babbitt PC: An atlas of the thioredoxin fold class reveals the
complexity of function-enabling adaptations. PLoS Comput Biol 2009,
5(10):e1000541.
Li W, Pio F, Pawlowski K, Godzik A: Saturated BLAST: an automated
multiple intermediate sequence search used to detect distant
homology. Bioinformatics 2000, 16(12):1105-1110.

Page 17 of 18

24. Finn RD, Mistry J, Tate J, Coggill P, Heger A, Pollington JE, Gavin OL,
Gunasekaran P, Ceric G, Forslund K, et al: The Pfam protein families
database. Nucleic Acids Res 2009.
25. Jeong W, Cha MK, Kim IH: Thioredoxin-dependent hydroperoxide
peroxidase activity of bacterioferritin comigratory protein (BCP) as a
new member of the thiol-specific antioxidant protein (TSA)/Alkyl
hydroperoxide peroxidase C (AhpC) family. J Biol Chem 2000,
275(4):2924-2930.
26. Venter JC, Remington K, Heidelberg JF, Halpern AL, Rusch D, Eisen JA,
Wu D, Paulsen I, Nelson KE, Nelson W, et al: Environmental genome
shotgun sequencing of the Sargasso Sea. Science 2004, 304(5667):66-74.
27. Jaroszewski L, Rychlewski L, Li Z, Li W, Godzik A: FFAS03: a server for
profile–profile sequence alignments. Nucleic Acids Res 2005, , 33 Web
Server: W284-288.
28. Soding J, Biegert A, Lupas AN: The HHpred interactive server for protein
homology detection and structure prediction. Nucleic Acids Res 2005, , 33
Web Server: W244-248.
29. Frickey T, Lupas A: CLANS: a Java application for visualizing protein
families based on pairwise similarity. Bioinformatics 2004,
20(18):3702-3704.
30. Lin YF, Yang J, Rosen BP: ArsD: an As(III) metallochaperone for the ArsAB
As(III)-translocating ATPase. J Bioenerg Biomembr 2007, 39(5-6):453-458.
31. Kaur S, Kamli MR, Ali A: Diversity of arsenate reductase genes (arsC
Genes) from arsenic-resistant environmental isolates of E. coli. Curr
Microbiol 2009, 59(3):288-294.
32. Lawley TD, Klimke WA, Gubbins MJ, Frost LS: F factor conjugation is a true
type IV secretion system. FEMS Microbiol Lett 2003, 224(1):1-15.
33. Norman DG, Barlow PN, Baron M, Day AJ, Sim RB, Campbell ID: Threedimensional structure of a complement control protein module in
solution. J Mol Biol 1991, 219(4):717-725.
34. Larigan JD, Tsang TC, Rumberger JM, Burns DK: Characterization of cDNA
and genomic sequences encoding rabbit ELAM-1: conservation of
structure and functional interactions with leukocytes. DNA Cell Biol 1992,
11(2):149-162.
35. Kirkitadze MD, Barlow PN: Structure and flexibility of the multiple domain
proteins that regulate complement activation. Immunol Rev 2001,
180:146-161.
36. Wessel GM, Berg L, Adelson DL, Cannon G, McClay DR: A molecular
analysis of hyalin–a substrate for cell adhesion in the hyaline layer of
the sea urchin embryo. Dev Biol 1998, 193(2):115-126.
37. Lupas A, Van Dyke M, Stock J: Predicting coiled coils from protein
sequences. Science 1991, 252(5009):1162-1164.
38. Linding R, Jensen LJ, Diella F, Bork P, Gibson TJ, Russell RB: Protein disorder
prediction: implications for structural proteomics. Structure 2003,
11(11):1453-1459.
39. Aravind L, Koonin EV: Phosphoesterase domains associated with DNA
polymerases of diverse origins. Nucleic Acids Res 1998, 26(16):3746-3752.
40. Bendtsen JD, Nielsen H, von Heijne G, Brunak S: Improved prediction of
signal peptides: SignalP 3.0. J Mol Biol 2004, 340(4):783-795.
41. Qi Y, Grishin NV: Structural classification of thioredoxin-like fold proteins.
Proteins 2005, 58(2):376-388.
42. Poole LB: The catalytic mechanism of peroxiredoxins. Subcell Biochem
2007, 44:61-81.
43. Karplus PA, Hall A: Structural survey of the peroxiredoxins. Subcell
Biochem 2007, 44:41-60.
44. Hall A, Karplus PA, Poole LB: Typical 2-Cys peroxiredoxins–structures,
mechanisms and functions. Febs J 2009, 276(9):2469-2477.
45. Zhang Y: Protein structure prediction: when is it useful? Curr Opin Struct
Biol 2009, 19(2):145-155.
46. Steinkellner G, Rader R, Thallinger GG, Kratky C, Gruber K: VASCo:
computation and visualization of annotated protein surface contacts.
BMC Bioinformatics 2009, 10:32.
47. Nakamura T, Kado Y, Yamaguchi T, Matsumura H, Ishikawa K, Inoue T:
Crystal Structure of Peroxiredoxin from Aeropyrum pernix K1
Complexed with its Substrate, Hydrogen Peroxide. J Biochem 2009.
48. Atkinson HJ, Babbitt PC: Glutathione transferases are structural and
functional outliers in the thioredoxin fold. Biochemistry 2009,
48(46):11108-11116.
49. Hayes JD, Flanagan JU, Jowsey IR: Glutathione transferases. Annu Rev
Pharmacol Toxicol 2005, 45:51-88.

Pawłowski et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:590
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/590

50. Allocati N, Federici L, Masulli M, Di Ilio C: Glutathione transferases in
bacteria. Febs J 2009, 276(1):58-75.
51. Sheehan D, Meade G, Foley VM, Dowd CA: Structure, function and
evolution of glutathione transferases: implications for classification of
non-mammalian members of an ancient enzyme superfamily. Biochem J
2001, 360(Pt 1):1-16.
52. Frova C: Glutathione transferases in the genomics era: new insights and
perspectives. Biomol Eng 2006, 23(4):149-169.
53. von Mering C, Huynen M, Jaeggi D, Schmidt S, Bork P, Snel B: STRING: a
database of predicted functional associations between proteins. Nucleic
Acids Res 2003, 31(1):258-261.
54. Chen R, Mallelwar R, Thosar A, Venkatasubrahmanyam S, Butte AJ:
GeneChaser: identifying all biological and clinical conditions in which
genes of interest are differentially expressed. BMC Bioinformatics 2008,
9:548.
55. Sun L, Hui AM, Su Q, Vortmeyer A, Kotliarov Y, Pastorino S, Passaniti A,
Menon J, Walling J, Bailey R, et al: Neuronal and glioma-derived stem cell
factor induces angiogenesis within the brain. Cancer Cell 2006,
9(4):287-300.
56. Bredel M, Bredel C, Juric D, Harsh GR, Vogel H, Recht LD, Sikic BI:
Functional network analysis reveals extended gliomagenesis pathway
maps and three novel MYC-interacting genes in human gliomas. Cancer
Res 2005, 65(19):8679-8689.
57. Dreyfuss JM, Johnson MD, Park PJ: Meta-analysis of glioblastoma
multiforme versus anaplastic astrocytoma identifies robust gene
markers. Mol Cancer 2009, 8:71.
58. Thiery JP, Acloque H, Huang RY, Nieto MA: Epithelial-mesenchymal
transitions in development and disease. Cell 2009, 139(5):871-890.
59. Hollier BG, Evans K, Mani SA: The epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition
and cancer stem cells: a coalition against cancer therapies. J Mammary
Gland Biol Neoplasia 2009, 14(1):29-43.
60. Phillips HS, Kharbanda S, Chen R, Forrest WF, Soriano RH, Wu TD, Misra A,
Nigro JM, Colman H, Soroceanu L, et al: Molecular subclasses of highgrade glioma predict prognosis, delineate a pattern of disease
progression, and resemble stages in neurogenesis. Cancer Cell 2006,
9(3):157-173.
61. Nutt CL, Betensky RA, Brower MA, Batchelor TT, Louis DN, StemmerRachamimov AO: YKL-40 is a differential diagnostic marker for histologic
subtypes of high-grade gliomas. Clin Cancer Res 2005, 11(6):2258-2264.
62. Su AI, Wiltshire T, Batalov S, Lapp H, Ching KA, Block D, Zhang J, Soden R,
Hayakawa M, Kreiman G, et al: A gene atlas of the mouse and human
protein-encoding transcriptomes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2004,
101(16):6062-6067.
63. Carro MS, Lim WK, Alvarez MJ, Bollo RJ, Zhao X, Snyder EY, Sulman EP,
Anne SL, Doetsch F, Colman H, et al: The transcriptional network for
mesenchymal transformation of brain tumours. Nature 2009.
64. Boado RJ: RNA interference and nonviral targeted gene therapy of
experimental brain cancer. NeuroRx 2005, 2(1):139-150.
65. Stone JR, Yang S: Hydrogen peroxide: a signaling messenger. Antioxid
Redox Signal 2006, 8(3-4):243-270.
66. Veal EA, Day AM, Morgan BA: Hydrogen peroxide sensing and signaling.
Mol Cell 2007, 26(1):1-14.
67. Chang TS, Cho CS, Park S, Yu S, Kang SW, Rhee SG: Peroxiredoxin III, a
mitochondrion-specific peroxidase, regulates apoptotic signaling by
mitochondria. J Biol Chem 2004, 279(40):41975-41984.
68. Yan Y, Sabharwal P, Rao M, Sockanathan S: The antioxidant enzyme Prdx1
controls neuronal differentiation by thiol-redox-dependent activation of
GDE2. Cell 2009, 138(6):1209-1221.
69. Anelli T, Alessio M, Bachi A, Bergamelli L, Bertoli G, Camerini S, Mezghrani A,
Ruffato E, Simmen T, Sitia R: Thiol-mediated protein retention in the
endoplasmic reticulum: the role of ERp44. Embo J 2003, 22(19):
5015-5022.
70. Jones DT: Improving the accuracy of transmembrane protein topology
prediction using evolutionary information. Bioinformatics 2007,
23(5):538-544.
71. Sonnhammer EL, von Heijne G, Krogh A: A hidden Markov model for
predicting transmembrane helices in protein sequences. Proc Int Conf
Intell Syst Mol Biol 1998, 6:175-182.
72. Cole C, Barber JD, Barton GJ: The Jpred 3 secondary structure prediction
server. Nucleic Acids Res 2008, , 36 Web Server: W197-201.

Page 18 of 18

73. Ward JJ, McGuffin LJ, Buxton BF, Jones DT: Secondary structure prediction
with support vector machines. Bioinformatics 2003, 19(13):1650-1655.
74. Pei J, Grishin N: PROMALS: towards accurate multiple sequence
alignments of distantly related proteins. Bioinformatics 2007.
75. Edgar RC: MUSCLE: a multiple sequence alignment method with reduced
time and space complexity. BMC Bioinformatics 2004, 5:113.
76. Rychlewski L, Jaroszewski L, Li W, Godzik A: Comparison of sequence
profiles. Strategies for structural predictions using sequence information.
Protein Sci 2000, 9(2):232-241.
77. Bennett-Lovsey RM, Herbert AD, Sternberg MJ, Kelley LA: Exploring the
extremes of sequence/structure space with ensemble fold recognition in
the program Phyre. Proteins 2008, 70(3):611-625.
78. Dereeper A, Guignon V, Blanc G, Audic S, Buffet S, Chevenet F, Dufayard JF,
Guindon S, Lefort V, Lescot M, et al: Phylogeny.fr: robust phylogenetic
analysis for the non-specialist. Nucleic Acids Res 2008, , 36 Web Server:
W465-469.
79. Crooks GE, Hon G, Chandonia JM, Brenner SE: WebLogo: a sequence logo
generator. Genome Res 2004, 14(6):1188-1190.
80. Sali A, Blundell TL: Comparative protein modelling by satisfaction of
spatial restraints. J Mol Biol 1993, 234(3):779-815.
81. Pawlowski M, Gajda MJ, Matlak R, Bujnicki JM: MetaMQAP: a meta-server for
the quality assessment of protein models. BMC Bioinformatics 2008, 9:403.
82. Saha RP, Bahadur RP, Pal A, Mandal S, Chakrabarti P: ProFace: a server for
the analysis of the physicochemical features of protein-protein
interfaces. BMC Struct Biol 2006, 6:11.
83. Glaser F, Pupko T, Paz I, Bell RE, Bechor-Shental D, Martz E, Ben-Tal N:
ConSurf: identification of functional regions in proteins by surfacemapping of phylogenetic information. Bioinformatics 2003, 19(1):163-164.
84. Overbeek R, Begley T, Butler RM, Choudhuri JV, Chuang HY, Cohoon M, de
Crecy-Lagard V, Diaz N, Disz T, Edwards R, et al: The subsystems approach
to genome annotation and its use in the project to annotate 1000
genomes. Nucleic Acids Res 2005, 33(17):5691-5702.
85. DeJongh M, Formsma K, Boillot P, Gould J, Rycenga M, Best A: Toward the
automated generation of genome-scale metabolic networks in the SEED.
BMC Bioinformatics 2007, 8:139.
86. Dehal PS, Joachimiak MP, Price MN, Bates JT, Baumohl JK, Chivian D,
Friedland GD, Huang KH, Keller K, Novichkov PS, et al: MicrobesOnline: an
integrated portal for comparative and functional genomics. Nucleic Acids
Res 2010, , 38 Database: D396-400.
87. Markowitz VM, Chen IM, Palaniappan K, Chu K, Szeto E, Grechkin Y,
Ratner A, Anderson I, Lykidis A, Mavromatis K, et al: The integrated
microbial genomes system: an expanding comparative analysis resource.
Nucleic Acids Res 2010, , 38 Database: D382-390.
88. Barrett T, Troup DB, Wilhite SE, Ledoux P, Rudnev D, Evangelista C, Kim IF,
Soboleva A, Tomashevsky M, Marshall KA, et al: NCBI GEO: archive for
high-throughput functional genomic data. Nucleic Acids Res 2009, , 37
Database: D885-890.
89. Kim CJ, Shimakage M, Kushima R, Mukaisho K, Shinka T, Okada Y, Inoue H:
Down-regulation of drs mRNA in human prostate carcinomas. Hum
Pathol 2003, 34(7):654-657.
90. Mukaisho K, Suo M, Shimakage M, Kushima R, Inoue H, Hattori T: Downregulation of drs mRNA in colorectal neoplasms. Jpn J Cancer Res 2002,
93(8):888-893.
91. Shimakage M, Takami K, Kodama K, Mano M, Yutsudo M, Inoue H:
Expression of drs mRNA in human lung adenocarcinomas. Hum Pathol
2002, 33(6):615-619.
92. Shimakage M, Kawahara K, Kikkawa N, Sasagawa T, Yutsudo M, Inoue H:
Down-regulation of drs mRNA in human colon adenocarcinomas. Int J
Cancer 2000, 87(1):5-11.
93. Ria R, Todoerti K, Berardi S, Coluccia AM, De Luisi A, Mattioli M, Ronchetti D,
Morabito F, Guarini A, Petrucci MT, et al: Gene expression profiling of
bone marrow endothelial cells in patients with multiple myeloma. Clin
Cancer Res 2009, 15(17):5369-5378.
94. Nakagawa H, Liyanarachchi S, Davuluri RV, Auer H, Martin EW Jr, de la
Chapelle A, Frankel WL: Role of cancer-associated stromal fibroblasts in
metastatic colon cancer to the liver and their expression profiles.
Oncogene 2004, 23(44):7366-7377.
doi:10.1186/1471-2164-11-590
Cite this article as: Pawłowski et al.: A widespread peroxiredoxin-like
domain present in tumor suppression- and progression-implicated
proteins. BMC Genomics 2010 11:590.

</pre>
</body>
</html>
