<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>A proteogenomic update to Yersinia: enhancing genome annotation</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Genomics 2010 11:460. doi:10.1186/1471-2164-11-460"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Samuel H Payne"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Payne et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:460
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/460

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

A proteogenomic update to Yersinia: enhancing
genome annotation
Samuel H Payne*, Shih-Ting Huang, Rembert Pieper

Abstract
Background: Modern biomedical research depends on a complete and accurate proteome. With the widespread
adoption of new sequencing technologies, genome sequences are generated at a near exponential rate,
diminishing the time and effort that can be invested in genome annotation. The resulting gene set contains
numerous errors in even the most basic form of annotation: the primary structure of the proteins.
Results: The application of experimental proteomics data to genome annotation, called proteogenomics, can
quickly and efficiently discover misannotations, yielding a more accurate and complete genome annotation. We
present a comprehensive proteogenomic analysis of the plague bacterium, Yersinia pestis KIM. We discover nonannotated genes, correct protein boundaries, remove spuriously annotated ORFs, and make major advances
towards accurate identification of signal peptides. Finally, we apply our data to 21 other Yersinia genomes,
correcting and enhancing their annotations.
Conclusions: In total, 141 gene models were altered and have been updated in RefSeq and Genbank, which can
be accessed seamlessly through any NCBI tool (e.g. blast) or downloaded directly. Along with the improved gene
models we discover new, more accurate means of identifying signal peptides in proteomics data.

Background
Yersinia pestis, a Gram-negative bacterium, is the causative agent of the bubonic and pneumonic plague. The
pathogenic lifestyle of this microbe involves two distinct
life stages, one in the flea vector, the other in mammalian hosts, primarily rodents [1]. Y. pestis recently speciated from Y. pseudotuberculosis, acquiring two
pathogenic plasmids and a chromosomal pathogenicity
island. Seven Y. pestis genomes have been sequenced to
completion, along with five other Yersinia sequences.
Numerous other Yersinia have been sequenced to draft
quality.
Genome annotation is often divided into two sequential phases, finding genes and assigning function. Most
prokaryotic genome annotation pipelines consist of
automated gene finding, corroborated by limited homology comparisons. As such they lack any experimental
validation of primary structure. Fundamentally, an accurate primary structure implies finding the correct start/
stop of the gene, which may be erroneously predicted
* Correspondence: spayne@jcvi.org
J Craig Venter Institute, 9704 Medical Center Drive, Rockville, MD 20850, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

for 20% of genes in some bacterial and archaeal genomes [2,3]. But it also includes recognizing any true
frame-shifting events, which must be delineated from
sequencing errors or recent degeneration into a
pseudogene.
A second benchmark for accurate primary structure is
determining the mature protein sequence. Protein cleavage events (e.g. N-terminal export signal peptides,
C-terminal LPXTG cell wall anchorage motifs) are particularly valuable clues for protein localization in the prokaryotic cell. Similarly, identifying differences between a
mature virulence-associated protein and the nascent
pre-protein can add valuable information as to how
such a protein assumes its biological role in pathogenesis. Furthermore, modifications to amino acids (e.g.,
phosphorylation) implicate a protein in distinct and
often transient biological processes (e.g. regulation of
gene expression). None of these mature protein events
are observable in DNA sequencing. They must be
observed on the protein level.
A genome’s annotation should be a dynamic working
hypothesis, improved over time as understanding and
knowledge increase [4,5]. Peptides observed from

© 2010 Payne et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Payne et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:460
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/460

MS/MS experiments are an orthogonal data type from
the DNA-centric evidences commonly used to predict
protein-coding sequences (e.g. sequence homology, EST
mapping, nucleotide and codon frequency metrics, etc.).
Protein prediction using these extrinsic evidences, called
proteogenomics, yields a more complete and accurate
protein-coding catalog [6,7]. Specifically, proteogenomics
can determine reading frame, translational start and stop
sites, and the validity of short ORFs. In a variety of
organisms, new insights from proteogenomics have consistently improved genome annotation [8-12].
In this work, we present a comprehensive proteogenomic analysis Yersinia pestis KIM. We discover nonannotated genes, correct the protein coding sequence of
several of genes, remove many spuriously annotated
ORFs, and make major advances towards accurate identification of signal peptides. Corrections have been
updated in the RefSeq annotation of the genome
(NC_004088). Through NCBI’s peptidome, we have
linked our experimental data directly to the genome
annotation. Finally, we translate these improvements
across other Yersinia genomes, to update annotation for
the two other human pathogenic species.

Results and Discussion
Correcting Annotation Errors

Following the data path outlined in the Methods (Figure 1),
~15 million MS/MS spectra from Yersinia pestis KIM were
searched by Inspect and PepNovo against the six-frame
translation of the genome. Confident peptide/spectrum
matches were mapped onto the genome sequence, and
used to infer annotation improvements. In total, we report
30,994 peptides mapping to 1302 proteins when requiring
2 peptides per protein. 1277 proteins (31% of the proteome)

Figure 1 Proteogenomics Pipeline. MS/MS spectra and a protein
sequence database are input for spectral identification by the
Inspect program, which produces peptide/spectrum matches. PSM
from Inspect are rescored with PepNovo, and filtered to an
approximate 5% pvalue. Peptides are mapped onto the genome,
with an additional layer of ORF-level filtering. Finally, peptides are
compared to existing annotation. If peptide evidence shows an
erroneous protein annotation, the correction is submitted to NCBI.

Page 2 of 10

contain at least 1 uniquely mapping peptide. Of the 25
proteins lacking a unique peptide, the vast majority are an
active transposase (IS285). The finding of an active transposon is intriguing given than transposons have been proposed as a driving force of Y. pestis genome evolution since
its recent divergence from Y. pseudotuberculosis [13].
By mapping the proteomic data onto the genome, we
are able to objectively determine the quality of the genome annotation. When peptides map outside of predicted proteins, there are two categories of annotation
improvement. If the open reading frame lacks a predicted protein, the observed peptides are evidence for a
novel gene. If the ORF contains a predicted protein and
peptides map upstream, they are evidence for a 5’ extension and new start site. Both of these situations necessitate an update to the genome annotation. Working with
the RefSeq curators at NCBI, all of the instances discussed below have been updated, and can be accessed
seamlessly through any NCBI tool (e.g. blast) or downloaded directly.
We find four ORFs which lack protein annotation, but
have at least two uniquely mapping peptides (Figure 2).
Three are easily recognizable proteins: major outer
membrane lipoprotein between y1943 and y1944, two
cold-shock proteins between y1817 and y1818 and
y2562 and y2563. We also report an apparent Yersinia
specific protein between y2035 and y2036. This protein,
now named y5001, lacks homology to any currently
described protein domain, and has no significant blast
hits outside of the Yersinia genus. Finally, y3734 is predicted to be a pseudogene, an ABC transporter disrupted by insertion elements, indels, and nonsense
mutations (Additional File 1, Figure S1). These mutations destroy several functionally relevant motifs, and
almost certainly preclude proper biochemical function.
However, we find two peptides mapping to the n-terminus of the region, providing evidence for its translation
and presence in the cell.
The second major class of proteogenomic correction
is start site annotation. Yersiniabactin thioesterase is an
enzyme participating in the biosynthesis of a siderophore important for iron acquisition from the host. In
our proteomics data we observed several peptides
upstream of the current start for this gene, which
required a 44 residue extension. Similarly, numerous
peptides found upstream of the Y. pestis specific protein
y0291 pointed to a 40 amino acid extension. Its lack of
homology to any known domain and narrow taxonomic
distribution demonstrate the utility of proteomic involvement in gene prediction. A third gene, y2368, highlights a subtle ramification of erroneous start sites,
which is that functional elements within the n-terminus
are obscured. y2368 is annotated simply as a ‘periplasmic protein’ with a CDD iron transport domain

Payne et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:460
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/460

Page 3 of 10

Figure 2 Finding Unannotated Proteins. (A) 700 bp genomic region between Y. pestis KIM proteins y1943 and y1944 lacked any annotation.
Three proteomically identified peptides (boxed sequences) map to this region on the reverse strand. (B) Alignment of the open reading frame
with homology to two other major outer membrane lipoprotein sequences. Peptides from proteomics data are bolded.

(cl01377). As expected we found this protein to be
highly enriched in periplasmic as compared to cytoplasmic fractions [14], yet the n-terminus lacked localization
motifs, e.g. a signal peptide. Six peptides mapped
upstream of the annotated start site (Figure 3). Manual
inspection of the region immediately upstream from
these peptides found a strong signal peptide sequence
motif.
Two proteins with erroneous start sites are special
cases and widely mispredicted in bacterial genomes.
Peptide chain release factor II, prfB, often contains a
ribosomal +1 frame shift. As with the KIM genome,
erroneous annotations of this protein typically contain
only the c-terminal ORF but exclude the true n-terminus (Additional File 1, Figure S2). Our proteogenomics
pipeline recognized peptides in both ORFs and the two
were stitched together. We also found peptides
upstream of infC, protein chain initiation factor IF-3,
which utilizes an ultra-rare start codon ATT [15].
Signal Peptides

Proteins exported from the cytoplasm through the Secdependant pathway contain a short sequence essential
to targeting and export (Figure 4). The ~20 residue
motif, or signal peptide, is located at the n-terminus of
the full-length protein. The signal peptide helps target
the protein to the membrane, where it is temporarily
anchored by a patch of hydrophobic residues. A three
amino acid motif following the hydrophobic patch is

recognized by the signal peptidase enzyme; the protein
is cleaved and the c-terminal portion of the protein is
released into the periplasm. The signal peptide, still
anchored in the membrane is rapidly degraded by the
signal peptide peptidase. The Sec-dependent pathway is
separate from other export pathways, such as the Type
III secretion system. Signal peptides are also present in
proteins exported through the Twin Arginine receptormediated pathway, but are typically longer and include
an additional motif prior to the hydrophobic patch.
Proteolytic cleavage of proteins in vivo can be recognized by proteomics by their atypical peptide endpoints.
Spectra used in this report were generated from proteins
digested with trypsin. Thus, we expect most identified
peptides to be fully tryptic. Previously Gupta and colleagues postulated that signal peptides could be discovered
simply by identifying non-tryptic peptides [16]. In their
analysis, if the first observed peptide in a protein had a
non-tryptic n-terminus and was within 17-55 residues of
the start site, then it was a considered evidence of signal
peptide cleavage. 202 Yersinia proteins fulfill these two
requirements. We extend Gupta’s criteria to include critical biological motifs within the signal peptide: the
hydrophobic patch and cleavage motif [17]. Filtering out
proteins lacking these new requirements, we report 82
proteins with observed signal peptide cleavage (Additional File 2, Table S1). These proteins also contain
other common signal peptide features: prevalence of LL
doublets and early basic residues. Furthermore, we

Payne et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:460
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/460

Page 4 of 10

Figure 3 Correcting Start Site Assignment. Y. pestis KIM putative membrane protein y2368. (A) 6 peptides map upstream of the currently
predicted start site. Sequence upstream of the peptides includes elements of a classical signal peptide: early basic residues, hydrophobic patch,
and the 3 residue motif immediately before cleavage (see ref 17) (B) Alignment of the upstream region showing sequence conservation,
peptides bolded.

noticed that the hydrophobic patch had a similar placement within the signal peptide for all validated proteins
(Figure 4B). This location is consistent with the patch’s
structural purpose, i.e. membrane anchoring and exposure of the cleavage motif at an appropriate distance
from the membrane. Finally, we report that many of the
sequences contain not simply early basic residues but
contain Met-Lys as the first two residues in the protein
sequence. 34 of the 82 proteins start in this manner. An
additional 15 have Met-Lys internally which could be
the true start, if this trend is seen as a general pattern.
Twenty proteins contain signal peptides longer than
30 residues, which is atypical. When we compared these
sequences to close homologs within the gamma-proteobacteria, 13 of them could be better predicted at an
alternative start site downstream of the current annotation. This shorter version of the protein would not only
have better agreement with homologous genes, but also
the characteristics of signal peptides noted above (not
just length). An additional four long signal peptides
appear to contain the twin arginine motif, which are
characteristically longer than those exported through
the Sec-dependent pathway.
The set of secreted proteins within a genome is often
computationally predicted. To compare our proteomic
observations to such predictions, we ran signalp on all
proteins in the genome. We plot the score for proteomically validated signal peptide containing proteins against
the background of signalp’s score distribution (Figure
4C). We also plot proteomically rejected signal peptide
containing proteins (see Methods). The proteomically

observed and rejected proteins separate very clearly,
with the positive set scoring well above the suggested
cutoff. Furthermore, proteomics and signalp generally
agree on the exact residue of cleavage.
Dubious Genes

In the Yersinia pestis KIM genome, there were over 200
genomic loci with a >50 bp overlap between two protein
coding genes. Such a substantial overlap is unusual,
especially considering that 10% of the proteome (~400
proteins) falls into this category. We viewed these conflicted loci as unlikely to be correctly annotated. For the
46 loci covered by proteomics, we manually reviewed
the evidence supporting the existence of either gene. 38
loci contained a dubious gene (Figure 5). In over half of
the instances, the loci contained genes with 100%
sequence overlap. The equivocal nature of dubious
genes was witnessed by narrow phylogenetic distribution, poor and seemingly random sequence conservation, and weak computational justification noted in the
original genome submission (see Methods). The remaining 8 loci were in conflict due of an overly extended
5′ on one or both of the genes (Figure 5C). Working
with RefSeq curators at NCBI, the dubious genes have
been removed. Analysis of the remaining ~150 conflicted loci is being addressed in future work.
Improvement of Related Genomes

As a final step in our analysis, we used our proteomics
data to improve the annotation of other Yersinia genomes. Published in 2002, KIM was the second annotated

Payne et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:460
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/460

Page 5 of 10

Figure 4 Signal Peptide Identification. (A) Y. pestis KIM znuA, a periplasmic zinc transporter is shown with the key elements of a signal
peptide. The left graph inset is a hydropathy plot showing a stretch of hydrophobic residues (positive values). The cleavage is marked by ‘|’
between ASA (the signal peptidase recognition motif) and AV (the beginning of the mature protein). Peptides observed in our dataset are
marked with boxes. (B) Hydropathy plots from putative signal peptides with a hydrophobic patch, and without. Note that for signal peptides
with a patch (left) there is a clear preference for the location of the motif - see discussion in the text. (C) Comparison of signalp scores with
proteomic observation. The score of all proteins in plotted in blue. The score of proteins confirmed as containing a signal peptide is in red. The
score of proteins rejected by proteomics is in green.

Yersinia and served as a source for subsequent genome
projects [18]. Thus errors in KIM’s annotation are likely
to show up in other genomes. We created one-to-one
orthology maps for proteins from 21 Yersinia genomes,
and used our peptide mappings from the KIM dataset
to evaluate gene models. Transferring proteogenomic
improvements is complicated by both legitimate

differences between strains/species, but also artifacts
from sequencing and assembly. Our approach was to be
conservative, and only change gene models where the
evidence was clear.
We started with the removal of dubious genes, resulting in the deletion of 46 accessions. Remembering that
each dubious gene was part of a conflicted locus, we

Payne et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:460
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/460

checked to make sure that the true gene was present. At
two loci we found that the true gene was missing,
excluded from the original annotation by the dubious
gene. We created new gene models for each of these.
Three additional new genes were created, arising from
the transitive annotation of the novel KIM genes. The
two cold shock proteins were missing from Y. pseudotuberculosis IP 31758. The major outer membrane lipoprotein, lpp, was missing from Y. pestis Pestoides F.
To correct start sites in other Yersinia genomes, we
applied the n-terminal most peptide from a gene in
KIM to members of its ortholog set. If an ortholog was
too short to include this peptide, we tested whether an
extension could be made to accommodate. In 43
instances, this extension was trivial - clear homology up

Page 6 of 10

to and including the start codon. For 22, an extension
could not be made due to indels or mutations shortening the reading frame. Finally, 10 were difficult cases
where we could extend the reading frame to an
upstream start codon, but homology was unclear. In
these cases, we did not alter the genome annotation.
This was particularly problematic in Y. enterocolitica,
which is the most divergent genome used in our
comparison.

Conclusions
Each primary genome annotation is unique. From parameters and cutoffs, to pragma or data sources, the differences between genome annotation pipelines are nontrivial. When the number of places producing genome

Figure 5 Overlapping Genes. (A) At 3.44 M on the KIM chromosome, a locus showing a dubious gene (y3136) overlapping two real genes,
both of which have strong proteomic evidence (peptides boxed above the gene, showing orientation). Note that y3135 is completely
overlapped by the dubious gene. (B) At 3.15 M two predicted proteins overlap by 206 nucleotides. There is strong proteomics evidence for the
existence of glutaredoxin 1 (14 peptides), and no support for the hypothetical protein on the opposite strand. (C) At 4.04 M leuB and leuC have
an overlap of 67 bp. An alignment of non-redundant leuC sequences from enterobacteria shows that the KIM version is predicted to be longer
than any other close homolog.

Payne et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:460
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/460

annotation is taken into consideration, the disparities
become ever greater. When annotations disagree, there
is rarely experimental proof as to which is right. Proteogenomics is a fast and effective way of improving genome annotation. By comparing experimental proteomics
data with a genome annotation, we root ourselves in the
observed proteome. In Y. pestis KIM, we show several
instances of misannotation. As an isolated event, a few
misannotations here or there may not seem overly significant. But as we have shown, misannotation is multiplied in future genomes.
Given the size of our data, we were somewhat surprised to find only four novel genes and five misannotated start sites. There are three potential explanations
for this. First, gel-based proteomics is inherently limited
in its sampling depth, as compared to the MudPIT
experimental set up. This reason is not entirely satisfactory, as we report coverage for >30% of the proteome.
Second, Yersinia is closely related to E. coli and thus
benefits from its well curated genome. Finally, and most
importantly, we note the tendency for overprediction
within the annotation. This is evidenced by the extreme
number of overlapping genes (many of which were proven to be dubious) and the frequent occurrence of
genes which are longer in KIM than their homologs in
other genomes. As proteogenomics relies on underprediction to find corrections (meaning that we identify a
region of the genome which is not predicted to be coding but should be), this tendency diminishes our power
for annotation improvement. Yet we are still able to significantly improve and enhance the annotation, especially by incorporating our data back to public
repositories.
Misannotated start sites are regularly found in proteogenomic surveys. As reported by Salzberg [19], genomes
annotated before 2006 had a ~ 20% error rate for start
site assignment. The five cases discovered here highlight
necessity of protein-based genome annotation, and the
difficulties surrounding purely computational predictions. The most difficult situation to automate is the
usage of exceptional or rare start codons. Our example
here is IF-3 which utilizes the ATT codon, and has been
found misannotated in other proteogenomics reports
[16]. We note that this rather fundamental gene is mispredicted in most enterobacterial genomes. The full
extent of rare start codon usage is not known, although
a recent report proposed several new rare codons in
Deinococcus [20]. A second category of difficult genes
are those unique to a genus or species, often the more
biologically interesting set of proteins. Without broad
sequence distribution across taxa, comparative genomics
is not effective. A final case is programmed ribosomal
frame-shifts, such as prfB. In the Yersinia genus, prfB is
annotated in two predominant forms, a full length

Page 7 of 10

protein, and one which lacks ~60 amino acids from the
n-terminus (Additional File 1, Figure S2). The +1 frame
shift required to maintain proper reading frame is simply not considered in most annotations.
Our analysis of the observed proteome reveals the difficulties surrounding the annotation of pseudogenes.
Whether shortened by nonsense mutations or disrupted
by indels, pseudogene annotation is inconsistent. In our
orthology clusters, we observed genes split into multiple
ORFs variously annotated as a truncated protein, pseudogene, unannotated, or a protein without comment.
Second, we highlight the implication of marking a
region as a pseudogene, which gives the impression that
this genomic locus should be ignored. However both
here and elsewhere [21] proteomics has revealed that
many pseudogenes are ‘alive’ - translated and present in
the cell. The truncated ABC transporter y3734 observed
here almost certainly does not have the expected function. How should annotation transparently and concisely
express the evidences and caveats for this phenomenon?
As we mapped peptides onto the genome, we noticed
that some loci contained multiple gene predictions with
substantial overlap. 80% of the time, this was caused by
the prediction of a dubious gene, which we have
removed from the annotation. Unfortunately, these
dubious genes polluted public repositories, acting as a
source for future annotations. As we sorted through the
conflicted loci, we discovered two additional problems
which hamper exclusively computational genome annotations. In 24 loci where one gene was completely overlapped by another (Figure 5A), six times the smaller
gene was the true gene. This presents a problem for
some gene calling pipelines, where the longest ORF in a
region is selected to the exclusion of other overlapping
gene possibilities, which in these cases includes the true
gene. Second, we observed seven loci where the overlapping genes are both hypothetical. In such situations,
proteomics can provide experimental validation to
unambiguously determine the correct gene model.
Aside from highlighting annotation errors, proteogenomics can supplement annotation by providing valueadded information about the mature functional protein.
In our effort to reliably observe proteolytic cleavage
events in proteomic data, we have introduced the new
requirements for validating signal peptide cleavage. By
filtering out proteins lacking a hydrophobic patch and
the signal peptidase cleavage motif, we remove many
spurious assertions. Unlike previous reports, we do not
find a great discordance in the proteins identified by
proteomics and computational predictions. Studies in
Shewanella found 28% of proteins observed by proteomics are missed by signalp, and 26% of computational
predictions are refuted by proteomics [16]. Our results
are much more tempered, with 8% false-negatives and

Payne et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:460
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/460

< 1% false-positives. There are two likely causes for the
differences in our findings: the phylogenetic differences
between Yersinia and Shewanella and new filters introduced in this work. The large excess of false-positives in
Shewanella (i.e. proteins predicted by signalp but refuted
by proteomics) may be attributable to the training set of
proteins used for signalp, which is heavily overrepresented by enterobacteria (e.g. E. coli). Yersinia, another
enterobacterium, is very closely related to E. coli and is
more similar to data in the training set. The excess of
false-negatives in Shewanella (i.e. proteins found by proteomics but not by signalp) may be a result of either
distant phylogeny or the more liberal filters used to
identify signal peptides.
Finally, we leverage comparative genomics and apply
our data to 21 neighboring genomes, where we correct
over 140 gene models. Instead of heuristics or a democratic voting scheme, we rely on experimentally validated protein sequences allowing us to confidently
annotate orthologs across the genus. The heterogeneity
of protein lengths in these orthologs highlights some of
the difficulties surrounding comparative genomics and
pangenomics. Although the sequences of Y. pestis are
90-95% identical, computational artifacts of the annotation process lead to several large differences between
the protein calls. Furthermore, we saw diversity in the
annotation of proteins split into multiple ORFs as mentioned above. All of these lead to inconsistency which
can hamper a comparative genomics pipeline.

Methods
Mass Spectrometry Data

Spectra used in this report have been previously published. Briefly, the Pathogen Functional Genomics
Resource Center (PFGRC) at JCVI generated ~15 million spectra from Y. pestis KIM 6+. Cell lysates were
fractionated into cytoplasm, membrane and periplasmic
components, and then run on 2 D gels, with spectrum
acquisition on a Thermo LTQ [14,22,23]. All spectral
data has been uploaded to NCBI’s Peptidome http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/peptidome/.
Data Processing

Our pipeline can be divided into distinct steps, with the
overall goal of mapping peptides onto the genome and
then inferring genome annotation (Figure 1). The first
step is to prepare protein sequence databases by translating the RefSeq DNA into all six frames: genome
NC_004088, and plasmids NC_004836, NC_004837,
NC_004838. We do not make any restriction of open
reading frames (ORFs). For example, we do not require
a minimum length or the presence of a start codon. In
addition to these Yersinia sequences, we append common contaminants (trypsin and keratin) to the database.

Page 8 of 10

To finish database preparation, we create a decoy database by shuffling each sequence [24].
We use the Inspect software to match spectra to peptide sequences from the protein database [25]. Search
parameters: 25 tags/spectrum, cysteine + 57 fixed modification, and 3.0 Da parent mass tolerance. Following
Inspect, we rescore peptide/spectrum matches (PSMs)
with PepNovo [26]. We assign a p-value to PSMs based
on the score distribution of hits to the target and decoy
databases and set a 5% local false-discovery rate cutoff
[21]. PSMs passing the cutoff are mapped back to their
genomic ORF, and subjected to protein-level filters. To
leverage the gel-based nature of our experimental set
up, we extend the common 2 peptide heuristic to
require 2 peptides per protein per gel spot. Manual
inspection of the remaining PSMs (now grouped to
their ORFs and reported as proteins) revealed a category
of questionable results. We noticed PSMs mapping to
low sequence-complexity regions, with significant overrepresentation of small amino acids (e.g. glycine or alanine). We believe that such sequences are likely to
match noise spectra because the small mass allows for
spurious peak matching. We also noticed that none of
the PSMs in these objectionable clusters are tryptic. As
trypsin was used to generate peptides for the experiment, we reject ORFs that lack any tryptic PSMs.
Proteogenomic Improvement

We use PSMs passing the above filters to improve the
RefSeq annotation of NC_004088 in three ways: adding
novel gene models, correcting the start site of current
models, and deleting dubious protein predictions. The
updated KIM genome can be accessed seamlessly
through any NCBI tool (e.g. blast) or downloaded
directly ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/genomes/Bacteria/Yersinia_pestis_KIM_10_uid288/. We create a new gene
model (novel gene) when at least 2 PSMs uniquely map
to an ORF that lacks any protein annotation. We examine start sites when PSMs map upstream of and in
frame with a current protein prediction. Through manual inspection, we adopted a simple heuristic, that the
peptide supporting an extension must contain at least
two amino acids upstream of the currently annotated
start. With only a single amino acid upstream, it was
possible for the amino acid to have the same mass as
common modifications (e.g. glycine and carboxyamidomethyl (CAM) modification have a mass of 57).
We found many peptides which mapped to genomic
loci containing multiple protein predictions. A closer
inspection revealed that these loci often contained proteins with significant overlap. We marked genomic
regions containing two or more genes with a 50 bp
overlap as potentially in conflict. In our initial analysis,
we divided conflicted loci into three categories defined

Payne et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:460
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/460

by the relationship of the overlapping genes: convergent,
divergent, unidirectional [27]. This delineation is attractive, because divergent and unidirectional overlaps can
potentially be resolved by shortening one or both genes
to remove the overlap. However, the extreme length and
multiplicity of overlaps (some proteins overlapped two
or three others) rendered this classification system awkward. Through visual analysis, we categorized conflicting
loci according to the extent of overlap: 100% overlap,
> 80% overlap, > 50% overlap, and < 50% overlap. It
then became clear that in most instances, one of the
overlapping genes was dubious and should simply be
deleted.
When both genes had proteomic evidence, we asserted
that both genes are real. In these instances, one or both
of the genes was always overpredicted, i.e. was longer
than homologs from other genomes. After correcting for
this, the genes no longer overlapped in their coding
regions. When only one gene had proteomic evidence,
we tested whether the unobserved protein was a legitimate gene. Equivocal genes were determined using the
following criteria. First, their extended sequence overlap
(to a gene with proteomic support) is atypical, especially
considering that many of them are completely contained
within another protein’s coding region. Second, they
were sporadically predicted in bacterial genomes with
poor and uncharacteristic conservation, while the proteomically supported gene had more compelling
sequence conservation, was more consistently annotated
within the genus/family, and had a generally broader
phylogenetic distribution. Third, most of the dubious
genes were short (median 95, mean 108). We note that
100 amino acids is the minimum for many genome
annotation projects. We finally note that, if present, the
computational evidence for asserting the equivocal gene
in the original genome submission was weak (e.g. low
sequence identity over short regions to phylogenetically
distant organisms). Therefore, we term the equivocal
gene as dubious, and have deleted it from the
annotation.
Mature Protein Annotation

To report a protein as containing a signal peptide, we
started with proteins where the first observed peptide
was not tryptic on its n-terminus, and was within 15-50
amino acids of the predicted start site [16]. Trypsin cuts
after Arg and Lys; if the residue before the peptide is not
Arg or Lys, then the peptide has a non-tryptic n-terminus. The region between the initial methionine and the
first observed peptide is thus the putative signal peptide.
We filtered this set using previously recognized signal
peptide characteristics [17]. We required a hydrophobic
patch of at least 8 amino acids, using the standard KyteDoolittle hydropathy index. We then examined the signal

Page 9 of 10

peptide terminus for the expected AxB cleavage motif
(where A = [Ile, Val, Leu, Ala, Gly, Ser], B = [Ala, Gly,
Ser]). Signal peptides matching these two criteria were
considered validated by proteomics.
We ran signalp v3.0 on all proteins in the genome
[28]. Proteins listed as containing a computationally predicted signal peptide are those with a D-score above
0.43 as recommended. When comparing signalp against
proteomic evidence for signal peptide presence, we simply look gene by gene, whether proteomics or signalp or
both list the protein as containing a signal peptide (and
at the site of cleavage). Proteins with proteomic validation which have a signalp score below 0.43 were viewed
as computational false-negatives. Conversely where peptides localize 5′ of the signalp predicted cleave site (at
least 4 residues upstream), we viewed these as computational false-positives.
Proteogenomic Improvements in Other Genomes

We created orthology clusters of all genes in the 12
complete Yersinia genomes with the Sybil program [29].
Peptides observed in the KIM dataset were mapped
onto the appropriate columns of an aligned cluster, and
genome annotation improvements were inferred from
this. For example, if a gene model in genome A was
shorter than the orthologous member of the KIM genome, and peptide evidence from KIM mapped to the
uncalled region, we checked for the ability to move the
start site upstream in genome A. When genome
improvements were possible (e.g. not precluded by stop
codons) they were made and submitted to RefSeq. The
same process was performed for the 9 Genbank annotations owned by JCVI. A list of all altered genes is presented in Additional File 3, Table S2. We are actively
pursuing the ability to edit other genome annotations in
collaboration with the genome owners.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Supplementary Figures. This file contains
supplementary figures S1 and S2. S1 is an image of a misannotated
pseudogene. S2 is an image of prfB, which utilizes a programmed
ribosomal frame shift.
Additional file 2: Supplementart Table S1, Signal Peptide Proteins.
This file contains information for all the proteins reported here as
containing a signal peptide as observed by proteomics.
Additional file 3: Supplemental Table S2, All Protein Changes. This
file contains a list of all gene models altered, and what was altered.

Acknowledgements
We wish to thank Jason Inman and Erin Beck for their assistance in the
ortholog cluster creation. We wish to thank Bill Klimke at NCBI for assistance
with RefSeq integration. SHP is funded by an NSF microbial genome
sequencing grant (EF-0949047). Proteomic analysis of Yersinia pestis KIM6+
was supported by the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases,

Payne et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:460
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/460

National Institutes of Health, under contract No. N01-AI15447. Additional
funding provided by National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Disease
contract HHSN266200400038C.
Authors’ contributions
SHP designed the study, participated in the analysis and drafted the
manuscript. SH participated in the analysis and generated the mass
spectrometry data. RP participated in the analysis and coordination. All
authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Received: 29 January 2010 Accepted: 5 August 2010
Published: 5 August 2010
References
1. Brubaker RR: Yersinia pestis. Molecular Medical Microbiology London, UK:
Academic PressSussman M 2002, 3:2033-2058.
2. Aivaliotis M, Gevaert K, Falb M, Tebbe A, Konstantinidis K, Bisle B, Klein C,
Martens L, Staes A, Timmerman E, Van Damme J, Siedler F, Pfeiffer F,
Vandekerckhove J, Oesterhelt D: Large-scale identification of N-terminal
peptides in the halophilic archaea Halobacterium salinarum and
Natronomonas pharaonis. J Proteome Res 2007, 6:2195-2204.
3. Gallien S, Perrodou E, Carapito C, Deshayes C, Reyrat JM, Van Dorsselaer A,
Poch O, Schaeffer C, Lecompte O: Ortho-proteogenomics: Multiple
proteomes investigation through orthology and a new MS-based
protocol. Genome Res 2009, 19:128-135.
4. Gaasterland T, Oprea M: Whole-genome analysis: annotations and
updates. Curr Opin Struct Biol 2001, 11:377-381.
5. Ouzounis CA, Karp PD: The past, present and future of genome-wide reannotation. Genome Biol 2002, 3, COMMENT2001.
6. Mann M, Pandey A: Use of mass spectrometry-derived data to annotate
nucleotide and protein sequence databases. Trends Biochem Sci 2001,
26:54-61.
7. Ansong C, Purvine SO, Adkins JN, Lipton MS, Smith RD: Proteogenomics:
needs and roles to be filled by proteomics in genome annotation. Brief
Funct Genomic Proteomic 2008, 7:50-62.
8. Link AJ, Robison K, Church GM: Comparing the predicted and observed
properties of proteins encoded in the genome of Escherichia coli K-12.
Electrophoresis 1997, 18:1259-313.
9. Dandekar T, Huynen M, Regula JT, Ueberle B, Zimmermann CU,
Andrade MA, Doerks T, Sánchez-Pulido L, Snel B, Suyama M, Yuan YP,
Herrmann R, Bork P: Re-annotating the Mycoplasma pneumoniae
genome sequence: adding value, function and reading frames. Nucleic
Acids Res 2000, 28:3278-3288.
10. Jungblut PR, Müller EC, Mattow J, Kaufmann SH: Proteomics reveals open
reading frames in Mycobacterium tuberculosis H37Rv not predicted by
genomics. Infect Immun 2001, 69:5905-5907.
11. Jaffe JD, Stange-Thomann N, Smith C, DeCaprio D, Fisher S, Butler J,
Calvo S, Elkins T, FitzGerald MG, Hafez N, Kodira CD, Major J, Wang S,
Wilkinson J, Nicol R, Nusbaum C, Birren B, Berg HC, Church GM: The
complete genome and proteome of Mycoplasma mobile. Genome Res
2004, 14:1447-1461.
12. Wei C, Peng J, Xiong Z, Yang J, Wang J, Jin Q: Subproteomic tools to
increase genome annotation complexity. Proteomics 2008, 8:4209-4213.
13. Chain PS, Hu P, Malfatti SA, Radnedge L, Larimer F, Vergez LM, Worsham P,
Chu MC, Andersen GL: Complete genome sequence of Yersinia pestis
strains Antiqua and Nepal516: evidence of gene reduction in an
emerging pathogen. J Bacteriol 2006, 188:4453-4463.
14. Pieper R, Huang ST, Clark DJ, Robinson JM, Parmar PP, Alami H, Bunai CL,
Perry RD, Fleischmann RD, Peterson SN: Characterizing the dynamic
nature of the Yersinia pestis periplasmic proteome in response to
nutrient exhaustion and temperature change. Proteomics 2008,
8:1442-1458.
15. Sacerdot C, Fayat G, Dessen P, Springer M, Plumbridge JA, GrunbergManago M, Blanquet S: Sequence of a 1.26-kb DNA fragment containing
the structural gene for E.coli initiation factor IF3: presence of an AUU
initiator codon. EMBO J 1982, 1:311-315.
16. Gupta N, Tanner S, Jaitly N, Adkins JN, Lipton M, Edwards R, Romine M,
Osterman A, Bafna V, Smith RD, Pevzner PA: Whole proteome analysis of
post-translational modifications: applications of mass-spectrometry for
proteogenomic annotation. Genome Res 2007, 17:1362-1377.

Page 10 of 10

17. Perlman D, Halvorson HO: A putative signal peptide recognition site and
sequence in eukaryotic and prokaryotic signal peptides. J Mol Biol 1983,
167:391-409.
18. Deng W, Burland V, Plunkett G, Boutin A, Mayhew GF, Liss P, Perna NT,
Rose DJ, Mau B, Zhou S, Schwartz DC, Fetherston JD, Lindler LE,
Brubaker RR, Plano GV, Straley SC, McDonough KA, Nilles ML, Matson JS,
Blattner FR, Perry RD: Genome sequence of Yersinia pestis KIM. J Bacteriol
2002, 184:4601-4611.
19. Salzberg SL: Genome re-annotation: a wiki solution? Genome Biol 2007,
8:102.
20. Baudet M, Ortet P, Gaillard JC, Fernandez B, Guérin P, Enjalbal C, Subra G,
de Groot A, Barakat M, Dedieu A, Armengaud J: Proteomic-based
refinement of Deinococcus deserti genome annotation reveals an
unwonted use of non-canonical translation initiation codons. Mol Cell
Proteomics 2009.
21. Castellana NE, Payne SH, Shen Z, Stanke M, Bafna V, Briggs SP: Discovery
and revision of Arabidopsis genes by proteogenomics. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 2008, 105:21034-21038.
22. Pieper R, Huang ST, Robinson JM, Clark DJ, Alami H, Parmar PP, Perry RD,
Fleischmann RD, Peterson SN: Temperature and growth phase influence
the outer-membrane proteome and the expression of a type VI
secretion system in Yersinia pestis. Microbiology 2009, 155:498-512.
23. Pieper R, Huang ST, Clark DJ, Robinson JM, Alami H, Parmar PP, Suh MJ,
Kuntumalla S, Bunai CL, Perry RD, Fleischmann RD, Peterson SN: Integral
and peripheral association of proteins and protein complexes with
Yersinia pestis inner and outer membranes. Proteome Sci 2009, 7:5.
24. Elias JE, Gygi SP: Target-decoy search strategy for increased confidence
in large-scale protein identifications by mass spectrometry. Nat Methods
2007, 4:207-214.
25. Tanner S, Shu H, Frank A, Wang LC, Zandi E, Mumby M, Pevzner PA,
Bafna V: InsPecT: identification of posttranslationally modified peptides
from tandem mass spectra. Anal Chem 2005, 77:4626-4639.
26. Frank AM: A ranking-based scoring function for peptide-spectrum
matches. J Proteome Res 2009, 8:2241-2252.
27. Rogozin IB, Spiridonov AN, Sorokin AV, Wolf YI, Jordan IK, Tatusov RL,
Koonin EV: Purifying and directional selection in overlapping prokaryotic
genes. Trends Genet 2002, 18:228-232.
28. Bendtsen JD, Nielsen H, von Heijne G, Brunak S: Improved prediction of
signal peptides: SignalP 3.0. J Mol Biol 2004, 340:783-795.
29. Crabtree J, Angiuoli SV, Wortman JR, White OR: Sybil: methods and
software for multiple genome comparison and visualization. Methods Mol
Biol 2007, 408:93-108.
doi:10.1186/1471-2164-11-460
Cite this article as: Payne et al.: A proteogenomic update to Yersinia:
enhancing genome annotation. BMC Genomics 2010 11:460.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
